
      
         
            
            
            A REFVTATION OF SVNDRY REPREHENSIONS, CAVILS, AND FALSE ſleightes, by which M. Whitaker laboureth to deface the late Engliſh tranſlation, and Catholike annotations of the new Teſtament, and the booke of Diſcouery of heretical corruptions.
            By WILLIAM RAINOLDS, Student of Diuinitie in the Engliſh Colledge at Rhemes.
            
               2 Timoth. 3. v. 8, 9.
               As Iannes and Mambres reſisted Moyſes, ſo theſe alſo reſist the truth, men corrupted in minde, reprobate concerning the fayth. But they ſhal proſper no further. For their folly ſhal be manifeſt to al, as theirs alſo vvas.
            
            
               Veni & vide. Come and ſee.
               Iohn. 1. v. 46.
               
            
            Printed at PARIS, the yere 1583.
         
         
            
            
            THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
            
               BEING appointed by thoſe vnder whoſe gouernement I haue put my ſelfe, and to whoſe direction I haue willingly committed whatſoeuer facultie or abilitie is in me, for the benefite of our countrie and reducing to the fold of Chriſts Catholike church the ſoules of our poore countrymen ſo miſerably ſeduced: appointed I ſay by ſuch my Superiors to examine and anſwere M. W. booke of Antichriſt, firſt & principally ſo far forth as touched this Seminarie, that is, the Tranſlation of the new Teſtament lately publiſhed, with the Annotatiōs thereof, and M. Martins Diſcouerie of their heretical corruptions, next and afterward the other argument concerning Antichriſt: I confeſſe my ſelf to haue bene ſo loth to take the matter in hand, as ether my duetie and obedience ſuffered, or the loue and charitie of my countrymen and brethren permitted.
            One reaſon was, becauſe I ſawe many in this ſocietie, for good zeale

and forwardnes, as willing, and for ripe knowledge in diuinitie more able, to vndertake and diſpatch a greater matter then that. An other reaſon was, becauſe I thought I could not without ſome iniurie done to Catholikes,Contra Sand. pa. 5. in fine. diſpute againſt that ſauage & barbarous paradox, making ſometime the order & ſucceſsiō of Popes to be Antichriſt, as M.Ib. pa. 6. in principio. VV. doth in one page, ſometime the whole Catholike and vniuerſal Church vvhereof the Pope is head, to be Antichriſt,
               M.W. knoweth not wel what that Antichriſt is, againſt whom he writeth. as he affirmeth within 5. lines after: ether of which in the iudgment of any Catholike, is as notorious and palpable a lie, as any of Lucians True Hiſtories. So that, as if a man would with ſage reaſons go about to diſproue ſome of thoſe toies which he reporteth,Lucian de vera hiſtoria. lib. 1. As that his ſhip being taken vp with a ſtrong wind, & caried in the ayre ſeuen dayes & ſeuen nights, thē arriued at an Iland in the middeſt of the ayre, where he ſaw a terrible battayle fought, and many a thouſand ſlayne, and yet the field whereon both camps pitched was nothing els but the web or weauing of ſpiders, which is not to be marueiled at, ſpiders being as big there as prety Ilandes are with vs here:Cyclades. that

afterward he came to a land where mē tooke their eyes out of their heads at night time, or otherwiſe whē they meāt not to vſe them, & put them vp in caſes, at other conueniēt ſeaſons they tooke them out thence & put them on againe: & ſuch like ſtuffe, of riuers of wine; & ſeas of milke, and Ilands of cheeſe &c. as if (I ſay) a mā would go about with ſober reaſons to refute theſe reports, he ſhould thereby note his auditory of ſmale wit & diſcretion, who needed helpe to find out ſuch incredible fables:Lucians hiſtorical verities & the Proteſtants Euangelical verities are of like nature and probabilitie. the very like is to be deemed of this idle inuention concerning Antichriſt in the iudgment of al Catholikes: Lucians fables being no more falſe, vnreaſonable, and vnprobable againſt nature and philoſophie, then this deuiſe is peeuiſh, lying, abſurd, vncredible and vnpoſsible, againſt Chriſtian faith and diuinitie.
            A greater reaſon was,Much good time ſpent in reading or refuting heretical bookes. for that I vtterly abhorred in the middeſt of my courſe of ſtudies and better exerciſes, to ſpend any good houres ether in reading or refuting heretical bookes, which neuer edifie to vertue, deuotion and ſaluation, but diſtract mens mindes from the meditation of al

ſuch religious ſpiritual and heauenly exerciſe, and fil their heads only with contentions, diſputes, and brawles of wordes,1. Tim. 6. 
               Pugnis verborum, as the Apoſtle calleth them,Tertul. de praeſcript. the end where of (as Tertullian of old noted) is commonly no other, but to wearie our ſelues, offend the readers, and exaſperate the aduerſarie, whoſe proud ſpirite of contempt and contradiction is lightly incorrigible. And of this I make the more ſure reckening, if at this preſent I write ought againſt our Engliſh aduerſaries, becauſe by certaine experience of things paſt, I ſee aſſuredly what muſt be looked for in time to come.Heretikes are generally proude and ignorāt. 2. Timoth. 6. v. 4. For as they paſſe other common heretikes, in pride, arrogancie, and good opinion of them ſelues, and the ſame ioyned with intolerable ignorance, euen in the firſt principles of our religion, ſo for this reaſon they bluntly daſh into any kind of abſurditie,
                  W. contra Sand. pag. 250.
                  See after chap. 7. pag. 130.131. Whit. contra Camp. pag. 154. Ibi pag. 153.
                be it neuer ſo foule and blaſphemous. As, that the image of Chriſt is as very an Idol, as the image of Venus or Iupiter: that S. Peter vvas neuer at Rome: that Chriſt is not begottē of the ſubſtāce of his father: that he is, not god of god the father, but god of him ſelfe: that he was a Priest

and offered ſacrifice to his father according to his diuinitie.
               Fulke con. Mart. pag. 64, 65. in ſine. Supra. pa. 4. vvherevnto may be added that The ſucceſsion of popes is Antichriſt, or if that like you not, then that The vniuerſal Church is Antichriſt.
               A ſtrange propoſition to ſay, the church is Antichriſt. ſuch ſtrange articles in our religion, that Chriſtian men ought rathet to ſtop their eares and ſhut vp their eyes from hearing them or reading them, then expect any anſvver or refutation of them. And vvho vvould not be greued to put pen to paper, whē he knoweth he ſhal be troubled vvith multiplicatiō of ſuch vnreaſonable aſſertions? of ſuch old, rotten, & execrable hereſies? ſuch propoſitions, as euery Chriſtian man naturally doth abhor, al aū
               cient ſtories & monuments vniuerſally vvithout exception reiect and refel, al aūcient churches and coūcels ſince the time of Arrius vvith one vniforme conſent haue accurſed & cōdemned.
            But the chiefe and maine cauſe why I moſt of al lothed this maner of writing, vvas,In the Proteſtants faith there is no cercertaintie. becauſe I find in our aduerſaries doctrine no kind of ſtay or aſſurance, no maner of certaintie or ſtedfaſtnes, their vvhole faith being like Maie flovvers, for ſome few monethes or yeres floriſhing and in eſtimation,

vvhich vvithin a ſhort ſpace after wythereth avvay, & is of them ſelues neglected, changed, and forſaken. And thē vvhereas to diſpute ſeriouſly of any matter, requireth ſome certaine groū
               des, fountaines, or heads of diſputation, vvherevnto euery man of learning ought to ſtand,In their writing and diſputing there is no ground. as we ſee in al other ſciences, of Logike, Philoſophie, Law, any kind of learning humane or diuine, theſe men haue quite remoued and aboliſhed al ſuch, and haue brought the whole courſe of their diuinitie, to an idle, loſe, vaine, & fantaſtical kynd of talking, conſiſting moſt in denial of principles of religion, where he is counted beſt diuine, that can maintaine talke longeſt: he is counted to beare the bel away, that moſt arrogantly can preferre him ſelf before al other, be they few or many, old or new, particular Synodes or general Councels, yea many times & commonly before the vniuerſal and Catholike Church, the holy ſcriptures, and Spirite of God him ſelf. So that as the firſt of theſe two, that is, their mutability in faith, withdraweth me frō al dealing with them, as men altogether irreligious, vnchriſtian and godles,

ſo the ſecond, that is, the want of al ſound arguments of diſputation, as much diſcourageth me from writing vnto them, as men altogether vngroū
               ded, vnlearned, & contentious, ſuch as loue to mainteine an endles talke of al things, but haue no order or forme to cōclude & reſolue of any thing.That the Proteſtantes haue no certaine fayth. Theſe two partes I wil declare and make manifeſt by a fevv examples.
            
                In England, what point of religion
is by ſtatute more carefully prouided for, by ſeueritie of puniſhment more vrged, by preaching or writing more aduaunced,The Prince ſupreme head of the church. by al meanes poſsible more beaten in to the heads of the ſubiectes, then the Princes ſupremacie in cauſes eccleſiaſtical? for denial whereof ſo many true and faithful ſubiectes in our memory haue ſuffered death. Yet on the cōtrary ſyde, the ſubiectes of Scotland were wel allowed to reſtraine,The Prince not ſupreme head of the church. or (to ſpeake playnly) to keepe in captiuitie their owne Soueraine, for intermedling in the Churches affaires, as appeareth by their Iuſtification not long ſithence publiſhed in their language, where the author thereof, and the miniſters vſe theſe wordes: The diſcipline of the kirke was openly impugned

vvhen as the king by the perſvvaſion of the enemies of the kirke vvas induced to make him ſelf and his priuie councel iudges in the cognition of matters mere eccleſiaſtical,
               A declaration of the iuſt &c. Printed by ſpecial commaundement and licence 
                     •
                  no 
                     •
                  532. 
               and concerning the doctrine of the preachers, and to take vpon him vvhatſoeuer iuriſdiction the Pope vſurped there in of old, yea and more ouer to diſcharge the general aſſembly & al paſtors vvithin this realme to proceede to the ſentence of excommunication, alſo to ſuspēd the ſame. At the last ſome preachers haue bene ſtopped by commaundement &c. This is the faith & goſpel in Scotland, and in England how freely the Puritanes inueigh againſt that ſpiritual primacie, let their bookes cōmonly printed teſtifie, namely the great volume of M. Cartewright againſt D. Whitg. wherein at large he diſcourſeth that that part of the Engliſh faith pag. 411. carieth with it infinite abſurdities,Cart. in his ſecond reply. 
               412. is againſt the doctrine of the Apoſtles, 413. monſtruous in diuinitie, 414. iniurious to Chriſt, againſt the primitiue and Apoſtolike Church, and the vvritten word of God,Ibi. 419 yea vvhere he pronounceth boldly, that whiles the common proteſtantes of England go about to gratifie princes with this ſpoile of Chriſt, they leaue thē no place in the Church

of Chriſt.
            
                Touching the doctrine of baptiſme,
then which nothing is more neceſſary, as being the gate of al other ſacramēts, and the firſt entrance of chriſtianitie,Communion booke in the forme of publike baptiſme. the Communion bookes commonly printed cōmend and allow this faith, That by that ſacrament children be regenerate, and graffed in to the body of Chriſtes congregation,
               Baptiſme remitteth ſinnes. 
               and made partakers of the death of our Sauiour. And the miniſter chargeth the people preſēt not to doubte, but earneſtly to beleeue, that Chriſt vvil ſauorably receaue thoſe preſent infants vvith the armes of his mercie, that he vvil geue vnto them the bleſſing of eternal life, and make them partakers of euerlaſting ioye.
               
                  Baptiſme remitteth not ſinnes.
                  Tower diſputatiō the ſecond day.
                Yet cōtrarywiſe in the Tovver diſputation the doctors there teach That al thoſe vvhich are baptiſed, are not the ſonnes of God, becauſe they haue not al the ſpirite of adoption: and children bapt
                     •
                  ſed if they be not gods elect, baptiſme can not make them his children, and ſo many dying immediatly after baptiſme are notwithſtāding aſſuredly damned.
            
                The Communion booke turned
into latin and printed at London by Thomas Vautrollerius the yere 1574 Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis,
               
wherein they would ſeeme to notifie their faith to the reſt of Chriſtendome, touching priuate baptiſme miniſtred in houſes by lay men or womē in caſe of neceſſitie, willeth al men to aſſure them ſelues that a child after that ſort is lawfully and perfitly baptiſed. And touching the parties miniſtring that ſacrament it ſaith,Priuate baptiſme allowed. 
               Ego vos certiores facio, quod rectè praeſtitiſtis officium veſtrum in bacre etc. I aſſure you, you haue vvel performed your duety in this matter, and kept a right order in the baptizing of this infant, vvho being borne in original ſinne, and the vvrath of God, novv by the lauer of regeneratiō in baptiſme, is aſcribed into the nūber of Gods children,
               
                  Priuate baptiſme diſallowed.
                  M. W. contra Sander. pag. 276.278
                
               and made heyre of eternal life. Yet M. VVhitaker in this booke teacheth the contrary, and ſaith it is the hereſie of the Pepuſians and Marcionites, to permit womē ſuch authoritie, euen in caſe of neceſſitie, which he calleth fained and imaginarie,Ficta quaedam neceſſitas. thereby ſignifying plainly, that he beleeueth with the Anabaptiſtes that baptiſme is not neceſſarie for the waſhing away of original ſinne. And the Communiō booke alſo, imprinted three yeres after, vz, the yere 1577 by Richard Iugge printer to the Quenes Maieſtie Cum

priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis,
               Great difference and cōtrarietie in the Communion bookes. drawing neere to the doctrine of the Anabaptiſtes and the practiſe of the church of Geneua, where ſuch priuate baptiſme is vtterly diſliked & quite aboliſhed, altogether leaueth out that whole Tracte of priuate baptiſme.
            
                The ſame firſt booke publiſhed in
latin, touching the ſacramēt of Confirmation, containeth this good & catholike doctrine, that Confirmatio illis adhibetur qui iam baptizati ſunt,
               The ſacramēt of confirmation admitted. 
               vt per impoſitionem manuum et orationem, vires et defenſionem accipiant contra omnes inſultus peccati, mundi, et diaboli. Confirmation is applied to them vvhich are novv baptized, that by impoſition of hands and praier, they may receaue ſtrength & defenſe againſt the inuaſions of ſinne, the vvorld, and the deuil.
               Refuſed. In the later Communion booke, theſe wordes, as likewiſe the whole Tracte appertaining to Cōfirmation is cleane omitted. The reaſon whereof can be no other, then that the Church of England in this point hath altered her faith, and ioyneth more neerely then heretofore, to the order of Geneua where (as witneſſeth M. Cart.T.C. pa. 174, apud Whitg. pag. 785.) though it were ſomtimes allowed, yet afterwardes vpon better

aduiſe, M. Caluin cheefe Superintendent there, thruſt it cleane out of the church.
            
                Touching the article of Chriſtes deſcending into hel,Chriſt deſcended into hel. the Communion booke and Creede turned into ryme and ſung commonly in their congregations, beareth the word in hand, that they beleeue as doth the Church catholike:Chriſt deſcended not into hel. Carlile. yet others by publike writing and diſputation refelling that article, geue vs iuſt occaſion to ſuppoſe, that they beleeue vvith Caluin in that point,Caluin Inſtit. aedit. anno. 1553. ca. 7 ¶. 28. et in poſtre. aeditione. l. 2. c 16. ¶. 9. vvho acknovvlegeth no other deſcent of Chriſt into hel, but his paine vpon the Croſſe, vvhere yet aliue he vvas damned in ſoule, or (as he ſpeaketh) ſuſtayned the paines of a damned spirit vvithout any difference, but that his torments were not eternal, as theirs are.
            
                In their Communion they ſing and ſay publikely,Chriſts diuinitie graunted. 
               That Chriſt is the only begotten ſonne of God, begotten of his father before al vvorldes, God of God, light of light, very God of very God, of one ſubſtance vvith the father.
               Chriſts diuinitie denyed M. Whit. contra Campian. pag. 25.2.153.154. Yet M.W. defending the Autotheiſme of Caluin, and affirming Chriſt to be begotten not of his fathers ſubſtance but of his perſon,

and to be God of him ſelfe▪ not God of God, beſides the abominable hereſie vvhich in ſo ſayng he maintaineth, he alſo manifeſtly gainſaith the publike confeſsion vvhich in their Communion booke they ſeeme to holde.
            
                In Germany it is lawful for the Lutheranes
to take armes,Sleid. Co
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ 17. an. 1546. and wage battayle, and bid defiance, and renounce al obediēce to the Emperour:Rebellion againſt princes iuſtified and commended. likewiſe for the Gewes in Flanders, & the Hugonots in France againſt their ſeueral princes: and the principal diuines, yea Luther him ſelf, that Elias,Ibidem lib. 8. an. 1531. fol. 124. Apoſtle and Euangeliſt, after long deliberation wel liked that the Proteſtants ſhould in warlike maner bande them ſelues againſt the Emperour,Ibid. lib. 22. an. 1550. fol. 411. and thoſe that died in ſuch warres were of the chiefe preachers accounted for Saintes and martirs. And it was reſolued by al the ſtates Eccleſiaſtical and Temporal of the Lutheran religiō againſt Charles the Emperour,Sleid. li. 18 anno 1546 fol. 320. that Quia religioni molitur exitium atque libertati, cauſam praebet, cur ipſum oppugnemus bona conſcientia. Cū enim in eum caſum res deuenit, licet reſiſtere, ſicut & ſacris & prophanis hiſtoriis demonſtrari poteſt. Becaue the Emperour intendeth

the ouerthrovv of religion and libertie, he geueth vs cauſe to vvarre againſt him vvith ſafe conſcience. For vvhen the matter cōmeth to that iſſue, it is lavvful to reſiſt, as it may be proued both by ſacred and prophane ſtories.
               Beza ad D. Elizabeth. Angl. Regi. in praefat. noui teſtament. aedit. 1565. And Beza in his epiſtle to the Quenes maieſtie, holdeth thoſe Frēch Proteſtants who died in warre againſt their king, for Saints & Martirs, vvho by their bloud conſecrated happely to God the firſt foundation of Chriſtian religion, vvhich vvas then to be reſtored in Fraunce. And vvhat preacher vvas there in England of any name, vvho in publike ſermons commended not their cauſe, as iuſt, agreable to al lavves humane and diuine, and therefore in al reſpectes allovvable.Fox Actes and monumentes. pa. 250.255.257 Likevviſe M. Fox doth extolle and magnifie the moſt barbarous and Turkiſh factes committed by the Bohemiā heretikes, rebelling againſt their Prince for the goſpel and religion of Iohn Huſſe. For whereas the Emperour Sigiſmund being then in Germanie had ſaid,Ibi. pa. 251.252. 
               That he vvould ſhortly come into Bohemia, and rule the kingdome after the ſame order as his father Charles had done before him: the Huſsites or Proteſtantes (I vſe M. Foxes ovvne vvordes) vnderſtanding thereby

that their ſect and religion ſhould be vtterly baniſhed, vvhich vvas not begonne during the raigne of the ſaid Charles, they rebelled out of hand,
               a pa. 250. ad 260. which rebelliō in his whole ſtorie he much cōmendeth. So that the Lutheranes of Germany m
                  •
               y lawfully take armes againſt their Emperour for defenſe of Lutheraniſme, and the Caluiniſtes of Frāce may warre againſt their King to bring into that realme the religion of Caluine, and the Huſsites of Bohem
                  •
               a may rebelle againſt their ſoueraine Prince for the religion of Iohn Huſſe and Hierom of Prage,
               Vbi ſupra. pag. 250. far more differing from the Proteſtante then from the Catholike,Ibi. pag. 260 and by like right and reaſon euery other ſect may do the like for furthering & increaſing their ſeueral faithes and religions And yet in England, in
                  •
               ocent men, who neuer in fact attempted ought, and neuer in word approued any ſuch diſloyaltie againſt the Princes eſtate, being drawē by craftie circumuention to ſay, that in certaine caſes, as if the Prince ſhould fal to profeſſiō of Arrianiſme, Turciſme or Atheiſme, the ſub
                  •
               ecte might vvithdravv his obedience, vvere therevpon defamed for heynous traytours, and the ſame imagined ſuppoſal publiſhed

at the time of their death as a matter deſeruing moſt extreme puniſhment.
            
                In Quene Maries time, the Engliſh Proteſtants retired to Geneua ſet out ſundry bookes,
                  Gilbie. Goodman &c.
                  Womē may beare no rule ouer men in matters temporal.
                  The bo
                        •
                     kes were p
                        •
                     inted at Geneua, the yere 1558.
                wherein by manifold textes of ſcripture both of the old teſtament & the new, they excluded womē frō al regiment & Princely iuriſdiction euen in matters temporal, which they accounted & called monſtruous, vnnatural, againſt the law of God and man, and therefore in no wiſe to be ſuffered. Yet al this notwithſtanding, the next yere folowing,yere 1559. the ſame men found it agreable to al ſcripture and al lawes,Women may beare rule ouer men, in al matters temporal and ſpiritual. that a woman might haue ſupreme authoritie, not only in matters temporal and ciuil, but alſo in ſpiritual and eccleſiaſtical, and by terrible puniſhmēt euen of extreme and exquiſite death were content to bynde the ſubiectes generally to this point of beleefe, yet with this diſtinction, that the Nobilitie and Barons of the realme ſhould be exempted from the ſame. as though they might haue a faith d
                  •
               uers from others of the ſame realme, or one and the ſelfe ſame faith, might be neceſſarie and not neceſſarie, true and falſe, enlarged and reſtrained, according to the

diuers degrees of nobilitie and cōmunaltie.
            
                Briefly concerning the whole forme
of their eccleſiaſtical Seruice,The Communion booke in the beginning before morning praier. in the firſt Communion booke it is thus appointed, that The miniſter at the time of the Communion, and at al other times in his miniſtratiō,
               Copes and ſuch like ornaments approued. 
               ſhal vſe ſuch ornamentes in the church, as vvere in vſe by authoritie of Parlament in the ſecond yere of the reigne of King Edvvard the ſixt. I appeale now to the knowledge of euery man,Cōdemned. how wel that acte of Parlament is obſerued through out the realme, in how many Cathedral or pariſh churches thoſe ornamentes are reſerued, whether euery priuate miniſter by his owne authoritie in the time of his miniſtration diſdaine not ſuch ornamentes, vſing only ſuch apparel as is moſt vulgar & prophane.
            
                I omit other particular differences
of feaſtes, of holy daies,General chaunges and contrarieties in faith. of croſsing in baptiſme, of communicating the ſicke &c. in which their continual alteration is wel knowen by their dayly practiſe, and their verie Communion bookes printed in diuers yeres. Only I wiſh the reader of his owne wiſedom and conſideration, to marke

the general chaunges, which from time to time our realme hath fallen into,Fo
                     •
                   actes & monumētes pag. 586. ſince this ſchiſme firſt began there. In the later yeres of king Henry the eight, we were touch
                  •
               ng many pointes Catholikes, as the Parlament hold
                  •
               n the yere 1540 doth teſtifie, wherein by authoritie of Parlament theſe articles were accorded and agreed vpon.
            
               Real preſence.
               That there is the real preſence of Chriſtes natural body and bloud in the moſt bleſſed ſacrament, vnder the formes of bread and v
                     •
                  yne.
            
            
               Communiō in one kynd
               That the Communion in both kindes is not neceſſarie ad ſalutem, by the lavv of God, to al perſons.
            
            
               Mariage of prieſts vnlawful.
               That prieſtes after the order of prieſthod by the lavv of God may not marry.
            
            
               Vowes of chaſtitie.
               That vovves of chaſtitie or vvydovvhead made to God aduiſedly, ought to be obſerued by the lavv of God.
            
            
               Priuate maſſe.
               That priuate Maſſes are to be continued and admitted in the kinges Engliſh church, & congregation, as vvhereby good chriſtian people do receaue both many and goodly conſolations and benefites, and it is agreable alſo to Gods lavv.
            
            
               Auricular confeſsion.
               That auricular Confeſsion is expedient and neceſſary to be retained and continued, vſed, and frequented, in the church of God.
               
In the ſame Parlament and by the ſame authoritie Euery man ſayng, publiſhing,
               Theſe articles were according to the law of God in king Henries time. 
               preaching, teaching, affirming, declaring, diſputing, arguing or holding opinion againſt the firſt of theſe articles, is adiudged a manifeſt heretike. &c.
               Ibi. pag 587 miſbeleuers in the other, are with great rigor corrected and reformed.
            This was the ſtate of religion left by king Henry,The ſame articles were contrarie to the law of God in king Edwards time. after whoſe death in the time of his ſonne, vpon very 
                  •
               ight occaſion was quite diſanulled al this that the father had by parlament Actes and ſtatutes ſo carefully eſtabliſhed.Fox vbi ſu. in hiſtoria Cranmeri pag. 1473. For ſtreight vpon his fathers funerals king Edward (ſaith M. Fox) being but a child (of nine or ten yere) by the inſtinct of his vncle the Lord protector and Cranmer,
               A realme pitifully ordered, where a chyld of 9 yeres old may by order of law ouerthrow al religion. Chaunge vpō chaūge. 
               by conſent of parlament did firſt aboliſh theſe ſix articles, and then ſet forth a ſecond booke of Reformation, and after that a third (as the religion had dayly more encreaſe) more perfite then the firſt, vnder the title and authoritie of his name. After which ſort the Zuinglian religion being placed, with much diſſenſion and alteration held out for the time of that Prince, and was of the next, with like authoritie of Parlamēt reiected & aboliſhed. But being reſtored againe,

in the beginning of the Q. Maieſties reigne, from that tyme hetherto how the body of the realme hath more and more degenerated from that Zuinglianiſme to Puritaniſme, which (as D. Whitg.D. Whitg. Defenſ
                     •
                  a pa. 31. vſque ad 51. wel proueth) is the very next degree to Anabaptiſme, what infinite numbers in euery ſhyre (as their owne writers record) are ioyned to t
                  •
               e Familie of loue, which is a mere abnegation of Chriſtianitie, what ſwarmes of Atheiſtes haue ſprung vp, with which (as D.Ibi. pag. 178 Whig. telleth vs) their Engliſh congregation is r
                  •
               pleniſhed, this I leaue to the knowledge, remembrance, experience, and eye ſight of the diſcrete reader.
            If I ſhould note the varietie and difference betwene our Proteſtantes,Infinite difference betwene our Engliſh proteſtants and thoſe of other nations. and the Proteſtantes of other nations, as of Germany, Polonia, Zuitzerland, and France, I ſhould neuer make an end, becauſe moſt true it is, there is no one article of faith, ether touching the bleſſed Trinitie, Chriſtes incarnation and paſsion, reſurrection, & aſcenſiō, touching the perſon of the holy Ghoſt, or touching his office: there is no one ſacrament, as the Euchariſt, Baptiſme, Forgeuenes of ſinnes in penance,

confeſsion of ſinnes to a prieſt, Holy orders: there is no one rite or ceremonie ether touching gouernement or di
                  •
               cipline of the church, wherein they diſagree not.
            Theſe few examples, which I haue brought, conteining matters of ſuch weight, That princes are heads of the church and are not: that baptiſme remitteth ſinnes and remitteth not: that priuate baptiſme is lawful and vnlawful: Confirmation allowed and diſallowed: Chriſts deſcending into hel graunted and denied: that he is God of his father, and yet is God of him ſelf: that al kinds of Religions may for their conſcience ſake take armes againſt their prince, yet Catholikes may not in any caſe or for any cauſe make ſuppoſal of ſuch a matter: that women are barred by the law of God from exerciſing authority ouer men euen in matters ciuil, and ag
                  •
               ine, that women by the law of God haue ſupremacy ouer the cleargy, biſhops and archbiſhops, euē in matters moſt diuine & ſpiritual: that copes and ſuch like ornamentes are to be vſed in church ſeruice, and are to be aboliſhed and burned as monumentes of Idolatrie:

that by like authoritie of parlaments, diuers and contrary faithes are confirmed and ratified: Theſe few examples, I ſay, al appearing manifeſtly in the practiſe and behauiour of one litle Iland, and in the compaſſe of a few yeres, al notoriouſly to be ſeene in peruſing a few engliſh bookes and writers, declare ſufficiently how true that is which D.Whit. Def. Tract 1. p. 74 Whiteg. aff
                  •
               rmeth of the Puritans, and we find as true in all ſortes of Proteſtants,A rule moſt aſſured. that commonly ſuch as once diuide them ſelues from the Church, fal from errour to errour vvithout ſt
                     •
                  y: they declare ſufficiently, how true that is which I affirme, 
                  ••
               at theſe mē haue no certaintie or ſtabili
                  •
               ie of faith, & therfore hard it is fo
                  •
                vs to know, what to ref
                  ••
                or diſpute a
                  •
               a
                  •
               nſt, whereas we find ſuch continu
                  •
               l chaunge and varietie.
            Yet al this notwithſtanding, albeit they haue one faith for Germany, an other for Eng
                  •
               and, and in England, one for the South, an other for the North, one for the fathers reigne, an other for the ſonnes, one for the brother, an other for the ſiſter: and vnder the 
                  •
               ame Prince, one for the beginning of her reigne, an other for the time enſuing,

one for the nobilitie, an other for the commonaltie, one for the publike church, another for their priuate houſes, one in their Cōmunion booke, an other in their ſeueral writinges: although they haue Annuas and menſtruas ſides as S. Hilary and S. Baſil ſaid of the Arrians, euery yere and ſomtimes euery moneth a new faith, yet gladly could we deuoure the paine to finde out and learne ſuch their yerely & monethly faithes, that by refelling them we might ſaue thoſe chriſtian ſowles, which through the ſame, monethly & dayly and hourely, periſh euerlaſtingly had we not a far greater d
                  •
               fficultie in learning out what maner of argumentes are of force and allowable amongſt them for refu
                  •
               ing of the ſame.
            Among Catholikes, in al ſcholes and Vniuerſities, in al bookes & writings,Groundes or heads of diſputation argumentes drawen from the ſcriptures of God, from the Traditions of the Apoſtles, from the Authoritie of the Catholike Church, of general Councels, of the auncient Doctors & fathers, of the ſupreme Paſtors of the Church geuing ſentence definitiue in any controuerſie, theſe al and ſingular are of ſuch weight and eſtimation, that

ech one cōuinceth the aduerſarie part, and no Catholike dare euer reſiſt or oppoſe him ſelf, if he heare the voice and ſentence of any one of al theſe, and beſides theſe, other argumentes in diuinitie we can not poſſ
                  •
               bly deuiſe any. Vſe any of al theſe in diſputation with the Proteſtant,In the proteſtants writing or diſputing there is no groūd. he careth not for them, nether wil be bound to them farther then it liketh his owne luſt and fanſie.
            
                Approue the Inuocation & helpe of Angels by the authoritie of Tobias, the free wil of man by the booke of Eccleſiaſticus,Scripture denyed. Whit. contra Camp. pag. 17. they anſwere, Litle care vve for the example of Raphael the Angel mentioned in Tobie, nether acknovvledge vve thoſe ſeuē Angels vvhereof he ſpeaketh. As litle accompt make I of the place of Eccleſiaſticus, nether vvil I beleeue the freedom of mans vvil, though he affirme it a hundred times.
               Traditions of the Apoſtles denyed. 
                And as for the Traditions of the Apoſtles beſides the written word, it is their very profeſsion to contemne them. and who is there of them al that euer wrote any booke of c
                  •
               mmon places,General Councels denyed. who hath not a large treatiſe particularly againſt them.
            
                Alleage againſt thē general Councels, they anſwere,T.C. pag. 16. apud. D. Wh. Tract. 2. p. 95 
               If this be a ſufficient profe to ſay, ſuch a Coūcel decreed ſo, ſuch a doctor

ſaid ſo,
               Of this ſee more chap. 3.5.7.17. & after in the praeface. 
               there is almoſt nothing ſo true but I can impugne, nothing ſo falſe but I can make true. and vvel aſſured I am, that by the
                     •
                  r meanes the principal groundes of our faith may be ſhaken.
            
            
                Alleage the auncient fathers, not one or other,Auncient doctors of the Catholike Church denyed. Whit. cōtra Sand. pa. 92. but al together affirming one
and the ſelf ſame thing, they anſwere, If you argue from the vvitneſſe of men, be they neuer ſo learned and auncient, vve yelde no more to their vvordes in cauſe of faith and religion, then vve perceaue to be agreable to ſcripture.
               then we perceaue to be agreable to ſcripture. 
               Nether thinke you your ſelf to haue proued any thing, although you bring againſt vs the vvhole conſent and ſvvarme of fathers,
               Si vel intogrum patrū Senatum in nos commoueris. D. Whitg. Trac. 2. p. 112 
               except that vvhich they ſay, be iuſtified not by the voice of men but of God himſelf. And it is their common maner as to make ſmale accompt of any author that is againſt them, ſo leaſt of al of the old auncient fathers whom ſome of them are not aſhamed in moſt deſpiteful ſort to cal Pillorie doctors.
               The aunci
                     •
                  t fathers pillorie doctors.
            
            But this their behauiour towards the auncient fathers and Doctors that be of our Church may ſeeme in the iudgement of many to ſtand with reaſon. For why (may it be ſaid) ſhould they be bound to our Auſtins, Hierōs. and Cyprians, more then we wil be

                
                bound to their Luthers,New Euangeliſtes Apoſtles & doctors of their owne church denyed. Caluins and Melanchthons? At the leaſt then (ſay we) they ought to be ruled by doctors of their owne, ſuch as they cal and honour for D Whitg. defenſ. &c. Tract. 4 c 
                     ••
                  . p. 230. Vide ibid. pa. 217. 
               Apoſtles & Eua
                     •
                  ge
                     •
                  iſtes of their new church and beleefe. Yet when the authoritie of ſuch is preſſed againſt them, it weigheth no deeper, then of thoſe other, whom they cal pillorie doctors. For how freely contemne they Martin Luther? how freely reiect they Hulderike Zuinglius? VVe receaue M.
               Vbi ſupra Tract 2. c. 4. pag. 111. 
               Caluin (ſaith T.C.) and vveigh of him, as of the notableſt inſtrument that the lord hath ſt
                     •
                  rred vp for the purging of his churches, and reſtoring of the playne and ſincere interpretation of the ſcriptures, vvhich hath bene ſince the Apoſtles time. And yet vve do not ſo reade his workes, that vve beleeue any thing to be true, becauſe he ſaith it, but ſo far as vve cā eſteeme,
               So far as we 
                     •
                  an eſteeme 
               that that vvhich he ſaith doth agree vvith the Canonical ſcriptures. The very ſelf ſame anſwere geueth the contrary part, whē the ſame mans iudgement is obiected againſt him. I reuerence M. Caluin (ſaith D.W.) as a ſingular man,
               Ibi. Tract. 3. ca. 7. pa. 201. 
               and a vvorthy inſtrument in Chriſtes church. But I am not ſo vvholy addicted vnto him that I vvil contemne other mens iudgmentes in diuers points not

fully agreing vvith him &c.
               When as in my opinion 
               vvhen as in my opinion they come neerer to the true meaning and ſenſe of ſcripture then he doth.
            
            And becauſe the courſe of this new diuinitie is now brought to reſt moſt of al on the credit of theſe reuerēd fathers and doctors,A great fal in diuinitie from the authoritie of Saintes, to the authoritie of theſe Maiſters. and in ſteede of the auncient forme of alleaging▪ T. us ſaith S. Chryſoſtom, thus S. Auguſtin, thus S. Baſil, the faſhion is now to alleage, Thus ſaith M. Ca
                  •
               uin, thus M. Bucer, thus M. Bullinger: therefore thorough varietie ſomewhat to avoyde tediouſnes, and not greue to much the eares of their auditors by flat denyal, diuers wayes and reaſons haue they, to paſſe ouer when they pleaſe the authoritie of ſuch their owne doctors and maiſters. One way and the ſame very playne is to refuſe them, becauſe they were men. As for example. If you preſſe me vvith M.
               Ibid. pa. 291 
               Martyrs and M. Bucers authoritie, I firſt ſay they vvere men, and therefore though othervviſe very vvatchful, yet ſuch as ſlept ſomtymes. A ſecond way is, becauſe they had ſome other error, as, M. Bucer (you ſay) allovveth priuate baptiſme,
               Ibid. Tract. 9 pag. 522. 
               and conſequently the baptiſme by vvomen. It may be, that as M. Bucer although othervviſe

very learned hath other groſſe abſurdities, ſo he may haue that. A third, becauſe ſome other doctor of as good credite and eſtimation, is of a contratie opinion.Ibi. Tract. 1. pag. 67. as, M. Muſculus a learned man is of your iudgement. and M. Caluin as learned as he, and diuers other are of that iudgment that I haue alleaged. This is no great profe on your ſide, nor reprofe of ours. A fourth and the ſame moſt ſure, is to chalenge the libertie of the goſpel, and therefore not to admitte their verdict but at pleaſure.Vbi ſupra Tract. 10. c 6. pag 549. as, Touching M. Bucers, M. Bullingers & Illyricus allovvance of holy daies, if they allovv them in ſuch ſort as M. Doctor vrgeth, then that good leaue vvhich they geue the Churches to diſſent from thē in that point, I do take it graunted vnto me being one of the ſame church. Although as touching M.
               It is to obſerued that proteſtants ſeldome abyde 35 yeres in one opiniō. 
               Bullinger, it is to be obſerued that ſince the time he wrote ſo, there are aboue 35 yeres, ſince vvhich time although he hold ſtal, that the feaſtes dedicated vnto the lord, as of the Natiuitie, Eaſter and Pentecoſt may be kept, yet he denieth flatly that it is lavvful to keepe holy the dayes of the Apoſtles.
            
            
               
               Martyrs of their owne faith and goſpel denyed.If theſe ſerue not the turne, a man would thinke their martyrs, thoſe who were ſo ful of the ſpirite, that they willingly ſhead their bloud and ſuffered

death by fier for conf
                  •
               irmation of their faith, theſe mens teſtimonie ſhould be irrefragable, for iuſtifying of thoſe pointes eſpecially for which they loſt their liues. But nether want they their old ordinary meanes to ſhift of the authoritie of theſe martyrs were they neuer ſo glorious.D. VVhitg. Tract. 21. c. 1. pag. 710. 
               For although they vvere excellent perſonages (ſay they) yet their knovvledge vvas in part, and although they brought many thinges to light, yet they being ſent out in the morning, or euer the ſunne of the gospel vvas riſen ſo high, might ouerſee many thinges, vvhich thoſe that are not ſo ſharpe of ſight as they vvere, may ſee &c. And if they had died for this or that article,
               Martyrs may not take frō any proteſtant his libertie to be ſupreme iudge. 
               yet the authoritie of their martyrdome could not take avvay from vs this libertye, that vve haue to enquire of the cauſe of their death. Martyrs may not be ſaid to ſeale their errors vvith their bloud, or vvith the glory of their martirdome preiudice thoſe which vvrite or ſpeake againſt their errors. For this is to oppoſe the bloud of men to the bloud of the ſonne of God.
            
            
                What remayneth now for the laſt caſt,
Whole churches of their owne religion denied. but the maieſtie not of one or other doctor, or of a few martyrs, but of great and ample reformed churches, as of

France of Germany, of Zurike or Geneu
                  •
               ? & yet euen theſe alſo, paſſe with like maner of anſwere. And they haue as general a rule to reiect ſuch, as they haue the pooreſt doctor that commeth in their way. As for exaple, when other reformed churches are brought to reforme the diſorders of the Engliſh church,Ibi. Tract. 9. ca. 1. pa. 481. 
               To vvhich reformed church (ſaith the anſvverer) vvil you haue the church of England framed? or vvhy ſhould not other reformed churches as vvel frame them ſelues vnto vs? For vve are as vvel aſſured of our doctrine,
               Al proteſtāt churches be they neuer ſo contrary are aſſured of the truth. 
               and haue as good groundes & reaſons for our doing as they haue, except you vvil bring in a nevv Rome, appoint vs an other head church, and create a nevv Pope, by vvhom vve muſt be in al thinges directed.
               Ibid cap. 2. pag. 491. And againe. I haue told you, and novv I tel you againe, that there is no cauſe, vvhy this church of England, ether for truth of doctrine, ſinceritie of publike diuine ſeruice, and other policie, ſhould geue place to any church in Chriſtendome.
               Ib. Tract 20. pag. 704. 
               England is not bound to the example of ether France or Scotland, I ſay truely, that vve are not bound to their examples.
            
            Theſe be al the places and corners of argumentes, vvhich 
                  •
               n their diuinitie by any ſearch vve can find out.

For although they haue amongſt them Popes, I meane ſuch miniſters as affect and vſurpe Papal and more then Papal authoritie, as the Orthod. cō
                  feſſ. Eccleſ. Tigur. fol. 105.106.107 Tigurines againſt Luther, and Cal. admonitio. tertia ad Weſtpha. p. 114. Zuin. tom 2 in Exegeſi ad Luth. fo 327 other Zuinglians againſt the Lutherans commonly inueigh for ſuch arrogant behauiour, and Hiſto de la vie de Calu. &c. chap. 12. the gouernours of Berna being them ſelues Sacr
                  •
               mentaries vſed to cal Caluin Pope of Geneua for his lordlyn
                  •
               s and ſway which there he bare, and Calu. vbi ſupra. pag. 5. Caluin writeth of Ioachim Weſtphalus, that in ſending forth condemnations and excommunications againſt the churches of his ſect, he paſſed al the Popes officers, Omnes Papae ſcribas et datar
                     •
                  os ſuperat, and the Collo. Altemburgenſe fol. 404. Germane Lutheranes of one faſhion, accuſe their felow Lutherans of an other faſhion, that they play the Popes, and practiſe ouer them a nevv dominion of Antichriſt,
               Nouum Antichriſti dominium. Redolent Papatum. Ibi. fol. 535. and that al their doings ſauour of a very Papacie, and the Puritanes commonly name the Archbiſhop of Canterbury the perie Pope of England,
               Apud D.W. Tract. 18. pa. 685. and Ibi. Tract. 11. pag. 559. D. Whitgift ſheweth wel, that euery Puritane miniſter laboureth to haue in and ouer his owne pariſh more then Papal iuriſdiction, yea,Ibi. pag. 560. that they ſeeke to tranſfer the authoritie both of Pope, Prince,

Archbiſhop, 
               In ſtede of one true lawful Pope the proteſtants haue many tirannical popes 
               and Biſhop, to them ſelues, & bring the prince and nobilitie into a very ſeruitude, ſo as the Proteſtant churches want no Popes, but haue them after an other ſort, and in far more abundance then haue the Catholikes: yet becauſe theſe Popes of theirs differ nothing from the doctors, of whom before I haue ſpoken, no ſeueral or diſtinct kind of argument can be drawen from their primacie.
            
               The proteſtants can neuer haue any general Councel.And as for general Councels, ſo far are they from euer hauing any, that I verely ſuppoſe, they can not ſo much as in their fanſie and imagination conceaue how any one ſhould be euer gathered. For hauing no one head amōgſt them who ſhould take order for any ſuch aſſembly, hauing no conſent and vnitie among the members who ſhould labour to the helping forward of ſuch a cōpany, being diuided into ſo many churches, ſectes, and congregations, they can neuer reſolue, ether who ſhould be the Preſident in ſuch a Coūcel, or who ſhould be the actors or diſputers, or of what ſtrength the Canons ſhould be, or who ſhould haue the execution of them. And when al cōmeth to al, the libertie of

the goſpel which maketh euery man iudge of other fathers, doctors, and auncient Councels, wil geue like freedom to euery particular man, to take like iudgement and controle ouer the fathers of ſuch a Councel.
            Wherefore theſe being al the meanes and waies which we haue to reaſon or write againſt them, and theſe being their faſhions of anſwering, as we find in euery Germane, Zuitzer, or French Proteſtant, albeit for the readers eaſe and more facility of iudgement I haue exemplified the ſame by two or three of our Engliſh writers, ſuch as I take to be common in moſt mens hands, if now a man liſt to draw theſe their anſweres into a certaine methode, we ſhal find that they containe for euery vnlearned & bold 
                  •
               angler, an vniuerſal forme and art of reiecting whatſoeuer Theological argument he may be preſſed withal,The proteſtants maner of anſwering, & reducing al to their owne ſingular arbiterment. and of reducing the ſupreme concluſion and reſolution to his owne ſingular fanſie and wilfulnes. Againſt many bookes of Scripture he is taught to ſay, that they are ſuperſtitious, and therefore he vvil not beleeue vvhat they teach, though it be affirmed in them a hundred times. Againſt Coūcels,

that they are not to be admitted, becauſe by them the principal groundes of his faith are ſhaken. Nether yet the auncient doctors, vnto whom he yeldeth no more in cauſe of faith and religion, then him ſelf perceaueth to be agreable to ſcripture. And touching the late doctors and writers of his owne church and goſpel, although in courtly and honorable termes he magnifie them far aboue the other, yet nether to their iudgment wil he ſtand, farther then he can eſteeme that which they teach, to agree with the canonical ſcripture, when as in his opinion they geue the true ſenſe and meaning thereof. And vvhereas to refuſe any, it is ſufficient to ſay, that he vvas a man, or, he had ſome other error, or, ſome other is of a contrary iudgement, which neuer wanteth amongſt doctors guided by ſo contrary ſpirites, or, they geue the churches leaue to diſſent from them, vvhich I take graunted vnto me being one of the ſame church, vvho can be ſo ſimple as to be tyed to one or other doctor, hauing ſo manifold reaſons to refuſe them al? And as for their martyrs, whoſe names ſhould be moſt reuerend, and iudgement moſt weighty, they alſo are reduced in to the ſame

order and obedience with the reſt. For their martyrdom may not take avvay, from the Proteſtant, this libertie that he hath to enquire of the cauſe of their death, or preiudice him in ſpeaking against their errors. for this is to oppoſe the bloud of men, to the bloud of the ſonne of God. And thoſe martyrs being ſent out in the morning before the ſunne of the Gospel vvas riſen ſo high,
               An apt compariſon, declaring that the proteſtāts nether haue, nether can haue any ſtay in their religion. ouerſaw many thinges, which theſe men ſee now, which liue as it were at noonetide, in the moſt cleare beames & light of the ſame goſpel. Which compariſon expreſsing moſt ap
                  •
               ly their continual proceeding and running forward to new pointes and articles of faith, al
                  •
               o before hand inſtructeth their after cōmers to keepe on the like courſe, which they ſee theſe their predeceſſors to haue begōne. For as thoſe Proteſtants, who liued twenty yeres ſince, and bragged then of the cleare light of the goſpel, are now caſt backe by theſe men in to a darkſome kynd of twylight, vnto whō the ſunne was not yet riſen: ſo the poſteritie who ſhal liue ten or twēty yeres after theſe, are by like example informed to turne ouer this preſent age, vnto that obſcuritie of the day dawning, and chalenge

vnto them ſelues the brightſomnes of the noone light. And the ſame may euery age and ſect ſay, as it marcheth farther & farther on in newnes of hereſie. & laſt of al, the authoritie of whole Churches and prouinces is as lightly ſhaken of as any of the reſt, for ſo much as England is not bound to folovv France or Germany, more then France or Germany is bound to folovv England & ech Sect of Protestants is as vvel aſſured of his doctrine, and hath as good groundes and reaſons for it as hath any other. & to chalēge ſuch authoritie to the church of any prouince, is to bring in plaine papiſtry and make that Church, Romiſh and Antichiſtian.
            
               The proteſtants of our age, in bold denyal of al things far exceede the heretikes of auncient time.Iudge thou now (Chriſtian reader) what hold or ſtay we haue in diſputing with theſe felowes, whom thou ſeeſt to caſt away and refuſe al groundes of diſputation, ſuch as are vſed ether in our church or in their owne: and how far theſe men be growē to a headſtrōg deſperatnes beyond the maner of al the aūcient heretikes. For when S. Auſtin and the old fathers had to diſpute with ſuch, as Donatiſtes, Arriās, Manichees, Pelagians, and others, they vrged them with the authoritie of Aug. de vtil. cred. ca. 17. contra epiſ. Fundament. ca. 4 contra Creſcon. li 4. cap. 61. & alibi paſsim Gods

Church, with the iudgement of the Auguſt. de pec. orig. li. 2. cap. 7.8.9. epiſt. 90.92.95.106.157. vide Poſsid. in vita Aug. lib. 1. ca. 18. Sea Apoſtolike, the Aug. epiſt. 165.166. & Pſal. contra partem Donati Tom. 7. in principio Succeſſion of biſhops in the ſame, with the determination ofAug. cōtra 
                     •
                  ulian. lib. 3 c. 1. con Donatiſt. lib. 4. cap. 7. general Councels, finally with the name Aug. cont. epiſ. Funda. ca. 4▪ & Trac. 32. in loan. Catholike, and that which was ſo called of al men, and the heretikes ſeemed to be moued therewith and acknowledge ſuch maner of argument. But the heretikes of our time contēning impudently al theſe, Church, Sea Apoſtolike, Succeſſion of biſhops, general Councels, and whatſoeuer els may be inuented, are come ſo far, that they now deſpiſe and treade vnder foote the name See Beza in praef. teſt. noui an. 1565. dicat. princ. Condenſi. and Muſculus in praefatio. Io corum communium. 
               Catholike, which the Apoſtles by diuine wiſdome found out, and by their Creede ſanctified & appropriated to true Chriſtiās, members of Chriſts only, Catholike, and Apoſtolike Church. in ſo much that in the ſinode holdē at Altemburg betwene the Diuines of the Palſgraue of Rhene and the Duke of VVirtemberg, when one part brought forth a text of Luther againſt the aduerſaries, they peruſing the place at large,The proteſtants at defiāce with the name Catholike. and finding there the word (Catholike) ſtreightwaies reiect the whole as corrupt and counterfaite, becauſe Luther was neuer vvont to vſe that vvord. Iſta

verba (catholicè intellecta) non ſapiunt phraſin Lutheri,
               Colloq. Altemb. in reſ. ad excuſat. corrup. fol. 154. ſay they, and vpon this only reaſon conclude that booke not to haue bene made by him.
            And yet would to God our aduerſaries could be content to yelde to the very ſcriptures them ſelues,The proteſtants admit not the very ſcriptures. ſuch peeces I meane and bookes as they leaue vnto vs, and hetherto with vs acknowledge for Canonical VVou
                  •
               d to G
                  •
               d they could frame them ſelues humbly to admitte ſuch ſcriptures, when of thē ſelues they are playne for vs & againſt them. For ſo ſurely bu
                  •
               ld
                  •
               d is the Catholike cauſe, that by ſuch helpe ſhe is able ſufficiently to defend her ſelfe and confound the aduerſaries. But whereas beſides the re
                  •
               uſal of al the forenamed witneſſes both of our church and of their owne, as though none euer beſydes them ſelues in particular, no Saint or man ether in heauē or earth, had wit, learning, or grace, whereas (I ſay) beſides al this they expound the ſame ſcriptures by plaine partialitie, fantaſie, & frenſye, whereas they make them ſelues the only arbiters, both what bookes are Canonical, what Apocriphal, and which is the true ſenſe of them, whereas in examining

the ſenſe they runne ſometime from greeke to latin, ſometime from l
                  •
               tin to greeke, ſometimes vrge one or other greeke example againſt innumerable latin, ſometimes proſſe one or other fathers reading againſt al greeke, commonly corrupt the ſenſe both of latin and greeke,See after cha. 13. & 14. & ſticke only to certaine heretical verſions made by their maiſters in fauour of their ſeueral hereſies: whereas they are growē to ſuch extreme folly, hardnes, & impudency, it may ſeeme nothing els but waſt of vvords to deale vvith men▪ whom contention, pride, ignorance, malice and obſtinacie againſt the Church and her paſtors hath ſo pitifully blinded.
            Novv if I may vvith the readers patience deſcend from this vvhich I ſpeake generally of the Engliſh proteſtants, to apply the ſame more ſpecially vnto the party vvhoſe booke I haue to examine, it ſhal both iuſtifie more clearly that which hetherto hath bene ſaid touching their irreligion & want of faith, and withal ſet forth the practiſe of thoſe proud and arrogant rules of anſwering, which I before haue noted, and beſides ſhew what ſtuffe is contained in his booke of

Antichriſt, wherein he ſo vainely and inſolently triumpheth.
            It hath bene an old diſeaſe of auncient heretikes, firſt of al to inuade the cheefe paſtors of the church, that they being remoued from the gouernment, them ſelues might more freely ſpoyle the flocke,Ciprian epiſt. 55. as witneſſeth S. Cyprian. And for like reaſon their maner hath bene more malitiouſly to barke at the Sea Apoſtolike,Aug. de vtilit. cred. cap. 17. as ſaith S. Auſtin. In this, as in many other mad partes the heretikes of our age haue not only matched,How the proteſtants fel to cal the Pope Antichriſt. but alſo far ſurmounted the heretikes of auncient time. For when as vpon their firſt breach from the church, & ſpreading of this new hereſie, they were reproued by their cheefe paſtor and gouernor: vpon malice, and ſpite, and deſire of reuenge, they braſt forth into this rayling, to cal him Antichriſt, not meaning for al that to cal him Antichriſt in ſuch a ſēſe, as the church and faith of Chriſtian men vnderſtandeth, vvhen vve ſpeake of Antichriſt vvhich ſhal come in the end of the vvorld, and of vvhom S. Paule to the Theſſalonians,2. Theſſ. 2. and the ſcriptures in ſome other places ſpecially do meane, but in ſuch a general ſenſe, as S. Iohn

intendeth whē he ſaith,1. Iohn. 2. v. 18. Ibi. 5. v. 2.3. that novv there are many Antichriſtes. and vvho ſo denieth Chriſt to haue come in fleſh, he is Antichriſt. But the later Proteſtants going beyond their maiſters (as commonly it fareth in euery hereſie) to make their cauſe more plauſible, and iuſtifie their ſchiſmatical departure from the church more aſſuredly, haue taken vp the propoſition in the more extreme and deſperate ſenſe, and now hold the Pope of Rome to be that ſingular Antichriſt, of whom S. Paule and ſome other of the Apoſtles foreprophecied. This wicked, and ſhameles aſſertion being refuted at ſundry times and of ſundry men, namely of D. Sanders, not only as falſe & vnprobable, but alſo as heatheniſh & vnpoſſible, M. Whitaker hath now taken vpon him to make a reply againſt his argumentes and maintaine that former aſſertion of his brethren:The forme and maner of M. W. anſwering. but after ſuch a ſort, as partly argueth in him want of al religiō and conſcience, partly declareth him to haue deepely impreſſed in his harte a vvonderful pride and cōtempt of al others, a principal note and marke of Antichriſt. And to beginne vvith the later, I vvil

ſhortly runne ouer one or tvvo of the firſt demonſtrations, and M. W. anſvveres framed there vnto.
            Firſt of al D. Sanders diſputeth, that the ſucceſsion of the Romane biſhops can not be Antichriſt, becauſe Antichriſt is one man, vvhich he confirmeth by ſundrie good teſtmonies of ſcripture, vvherevnto he ioyneth the vniuerſal conſent of al the auncient fathers.Pag. 2. His vvordes are, Denique omnes ſancti patres,
               Al the fathers vniuerſally, folowing ther in the tradition of the Apoſtles, ſay that Antichriſt is one certaine man. 
               Graeci, Latini, Syri, quiper tot ſaecula vel in Oriente, vel in Occidente vel in Aquilone, vel in Meridie vixerunt, ſecundùm fidem & traditionem ab Apoſtol
                     •
                  s acceptā, de Antichristo locuti ſunt velut de hom
                     •
                  ne vno. Briefly al the holy fathers, Greeke, Latin, Syrian, vvho for ſo many ages liued ether in the Eaſt, or VVeſt, or North, or South, according to the faith and tradition receaued from the Apoſtles, haue ſpoken of Antichrist as of one man. VVhat is M. VV. anſwere to this?pag. 21. After certaine cauils made to the places of ſcripture, thus at a clappe, he diſchargeth the fathers writing according to the faith which they receaued of Apoſtles. VVe repoſe no ſuch confidence in the fathers vvritings, that vve take any certaine profe of our religion from them,
               They al erre 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſo ſayng. 
               becauſe vve place all our

faith and religion, not in humane but in diuine authoritie. If therefore thou bring vs, vvhat ſome one father hath thought,
               Patr
                     ••
                   etiā ſimul vniuerſi. 
               or vvhat the fathers vniuerſally al together haue deliuered, the ſame except it be approued by testimonies of ſcriptures, it auaileth nothing, it gaineth nothing, it conuinceth nothing. For the fathers are ſuch vvitneſſes, as they alſo haue neede of the ſcriptures to be their vvitneſſes.
               Al the fathers wāted wit and learning, in compariſon of the proteſtants. 
               If deceaued by error they geue forth their testimonie diſagreing from ſcriptures, albeit they may be pardoned erring for vvant of vviſedome, vve can not be pardoned, if becauſe they erred, vve alſo vvil erre vvith them. The fathers for the most part thought that Antichrist ſhould be but one man. but in that as in many other things they erred, ether becauſe they yelded to much to the common opinion concerning Antichrist, ether becauſe they vveighed not the ſcriptures ſo diligently as they ought, &c.
               A ſpecial marke of Anchriſt. In theſe his vvordes (Chriſtian reader) thou maiſt ſee the very image & principal part of Antichriſt. For preferring him ſelf before the vniuerſal primitiue Church of al the fathers then vvriting and expounding the ſcriptures, & teaching Antichriſt to be one man, According to the faith receaued of the Apoſtles, he manifeſtly preferreth him ſelf before

the holy Ghoſt the ruler and dir
                  •
               
               ctor of the Apoſtles and that Apoſtolical Church, according to Chriſtes moſt aſſured & infallible promiſe. & vvhat is this els, but to extolle him ſelfe aboue God,2. Theſſ. 2. v. 4. 
               Super omne quod dicitur Deus, vvhich is one of the ſpecial markes of Antichriſt? And yet this Antichriſtian arrogancy in treading vnder his feete al fathers, al churches, al antiquitie, is the very maine groūde of al the reſt of his anſweres. As for example.
            
               Pag. 25.M.D. Sanders ſecond demonſtration is this. The Church of Rome can not poſsibly be the Seate of Antichriſt,The ſecond demonſtration, that the ſucceſſiō of Popes can not be Antichriſt. becauſe it is that Seate, vvhich hath moſt faithfully kept, & diligently enlarged the faith of Chriſt, againſt al Antichriſtes. This he proueth by S Ignatius, S. Policarpus, S. Ireneus, Tertullian, Origen, SS. Cyprian, Athanaſius, Ambroſe, Hierom, Optatus, Auſtin, Ciril, Proſper, Gregory, &c. by al good and learned vvriters that floriſhed vvithin the firſt ſix hundred yeres. That it cō
               tinued the ſame faith, and departed not from it in any point the laſt nyne hundred yeres, he proueth by S. Iſidorus, by Theodorus, by S. Beda, Regino,

S. Lanfrancus, Rupertus, S. Bernard, the general Councels of Laterane, of Lions, of Vienna, of Conſtance, of Florence, the moſt ſufficient authoritie that cā be alleaged in the vvorld.The āſwere Now vvhat is M.VV. anſvvere to this?pa. 35.36.37 38.39.40.42.43. The fathers of the firſt ſix hundred yeres he graunteth to haue ſpoken truely, for ſo much as al this vvhile that Church was very pure & excellent,
                  Marke this wel.
                  A veritie manifeſt & confeſſed.
                and maintained inuiolably the faith deliuered by the Apoſtles S. Peter, and S. Paule, and briefly vvas of al other Churches moſt notable and floriſhing, omnium eccleſiarum praestantiſsima florentiſsimaquè.
               pag. 4
                     •
                  . But touching the later nyne hundred yeres he maketh ſo great a difference,pag. 32: as betvvene the hovvſe of God and a den of theeues, betvvene a liue man,
               pag. 33. 
               and a dead carcas. Thus he ſpeaketh. Although the auncient Romane Church receaued Christ most of al, and thoſe that vvere in the ſocietie of the Romane Church defended the Chriſtian faith most valiantly, yet theſe prayſes appertaine nothing to the preſent Romane Church vvhich refuſeth Chriſt him ſelfe, & furiouſly aſſaulteth the Chriſtian faith. I am vides, Sandere, tuae demēſtrationi ſecurim eſſe inflictam, quando a prima eccleſia Romana quae fuit optima et puriſsima

tuam hanc diſtinguo &c. Novv thou ſeeſt M. Sanders thy demonſtration knocked on the head vvith a hatchet, vvhereas from the firſt Romane church,
               A falſitie euident which neuer was & neuer wil be proued. 
               vvhich vvas beſt and pureſt, I diſtinguiſh this thy Romane church vvhich a man may truly ca
                     •
                   the ſynagoge of Satan.
            
            Now this being in deede the very hatchet of his anſvvere (as he calleth it) and vvhereby he choppeth of the necke of D. Sanders demonſtration, and vvhich therefore it principally ſtandeth him in hand to proue, let the reader conſider, if he bring any probabilitie, any argument, ſtorie, father, Councel, authoritie, any kind of reaſon other then his ovvne naked and peeuiſh aſſeueration. Only he varieth as boyes in grammar ſcholes, that his aſſertion by many pretie phraſes,Beggerly ſtuffe. as that Rome is degenerated into a baſtard faith.
               pag. 34. pag. 35. pag. 3
                     •
                  . that our Popes are altogether vnlike to the auncient Popes. that novv there is an other forme of faith in Rome, an other religion.
               pag. 37. that our Popes poſſeſſe the ſame place vvith thoſe auncient,
               pag. 38. 
               but haue loſt their faith many hundred yeres ſince. that in the Romane church novv nothing remayneth of old Rome beſides the name. that of old,
               pag. 40. 
               ſoueraine vvas the authoritie of the

Romane Sea amongſt al people, both for the goodlynes of the citie, and puritie of religion and conſtancie of the men. but novv none of theſe thinges remayneth &c. Thus in euery page welnye he affirmeth, & ſayth, & telleth vs againe & againe, that thus it is departed, and thus it is degenerated, and thus it hath altered the faith, and is become the ſynagoge of Antichriſt. Againſt vvhich ridiculous and childiſh babling, vvhen his aduerſary obiecteth thoſe Confeſſors, Martirs, Hiſtoriographers & Sayntes,Reaſon. that liued ſince S. Gregories time, together vvith the general Councels the very flovver of Chriſtianitie, he vvith one railing blaſt turneth them al a ſide,Rayling. pag. 44. ſayng he admitteth them not, becauſe they al, more or leſſe receaued the marke of the beaſt. Aſke him a reaſon why he ſo rayleth, conſider what authoritie he oppoſeth againſt theſe, reaſon thou findeſt none, authoritie thou findeſt none. Only as kings and princes ratifie their edictes and Proclamations with their owne only name Teſte meipſo, ſo this man confirmeth his anſweres with the ſole authoritie of Guilielmus VVhitakerus, which being put in the fronte of euery anſwere, is in deede the very pith

and effect of al the anſweres folowing.
            And therefore whereas he ſaith If vve ſhal receaue for vvitneſſes al thoſe men 
                     〈◊〉
                   to Antichriſt,
               Ibid. pa. 44. 
               vve ſhal neuer haue end of contending,
               If other kinds of proteſtants vſe the like libertie, no hereſie can euer be repreſſed. I ſay if it may be lawful for euery heretike thus to deare, with ſuch wodden or lea
                  •
               en hatchers to cut of the ſynewes of ſuch ſtrong and forcible demonſtrations, thus ſo anſweare reaſon with rayling, and graue authoritie with Luciferlike arrogancy, if the Trin
                  •
               tariās, Lutherans, Anabaptiſtes, or Arriās, may haue like libertie to auoyde the whole army of Chriſtes Catholike Church: Arrianiſme wil neuer be rooted out, Lutheraniſme wil neuer haue end, the Anabaptiſtes and Trinitarians can not poſſibly be mayſtred, the worſt of theſe being able to ſay for him ſelfe at the leaſt as much as doth the Zuinglian in defence of his Zuinglianiſme.
            
               The third demonſtration.And this is the verie forme, faſhion, maner, and ſubſtance of his anſwere to the next demonſtration. where to S.Ibid. pag. 54. Auſtin and S. Hierome, reaching Peters chayre and ſucceſsion of Prieſts in that Sea to be the very rocke vvhich the proud gates of hel
                     •
                   ouercome nor, which thing they affirme vpon manifeſt warrant

of Chriſtes wordes,Matth. 16. Luc. 22. See the annotations in the new Teſt. vpon theſe places. he anſwereth vpon warrant of his owne vvord, that that ſucceſsion of prieſtes is not the rocke, & the gates of hel haue prevayled againſt that church, ſo as the faith vvhich ſomtimes floriſhed there, novv appeareth no vvhere in it,
               Pag. 61.62. 
               & long ſince is departed into other places. Whereas D. S. repl
                  •
               eth, this to be falſe, and and that church euer to haue reteyned the ſame true faith, and neuer to haue brought in any hereſie or made any chaunge of doctrine, vvhich he proueth by al hiſtoriographers that euer liued in the church, Euſebius, Proſper, Beda,Pag. 54. Regino, Marianus Scotus, Schafnaburgenſis, Zonaras, Nicephorus, Ced
                  •
               enus, Sigebertus, Gotfridus, Viterbienſis, Trithemius and many others, againſt them al this only cenſure he oppoſeth, Historias veſtras Sandere non moramur, vve regard not M.
               pag. 6
                     •
                  . 
               Sanders your ſtories, and yet him ſelfe for his ovvne ſide b
                  •
               ingeth not ſo much as one ſtory. So that againſt ſcriptures reaſon, councels, fathers old and nevv, hiſtoriographers, al kynd of vvriters, him ſelfe euer cometh in as an omnipotent and vniuerſal Apoſtl
                  •
               , Doctor, Father &c. as though in his only vvord conſiſted

more pith, then vvas in al mens that euer liued ſince Chriſtes time.
            And now ſomwhat farther to deſcrie the incredible vanitie, folie, pride and ſelfe loue of the mā,The impoſſibilitie of M. W. paradox, that the Pope is Antichriſt. let the reader note the groſſe and barbarous impoſsibilitie of that paradox, vvhich by this his ſupreme authoritie he vvould defend. He graunteth the Church of Rome, to haue bene pure, godly & chriſtian, for ſix hundred yeres after Chriſt, as before hath bene declared. VVhen then grew it to be ſo impure, wicked; and Antichriſtian? ten yeres after. For thus he writeth:pag. 66. 
               Six hundred and ten yeres after Chriſt or there about, Bonifacius the third gouerned the Romane church. VVhat vvas he? to anſvvere truly, very Antichriſt. In which wordes ioyned together, thus much he ſaith in effect, That whereas within the ſpace of ten or twelue yeres before, the Romane church was religious and euangelical, in ſuch ſenſe as they vnderſtand it, that is, abhorred the Popes vniuerſal iuriſdiction as Antichriſtian, and limited his power within the precinctes of his owne Patriarkſhip, reuerenced euery prince as ſupreme head of the church within his owne dominion,

deteſted the ſacrifice of the maſſe as iniurious to the death of Chriſt, acknowledged no iuſtification but by only faith, allowed mariage of prieſtes and religious perſons as agreable to the libertie of the goſpel, held for ſacramentes none other but Baptiſme & the Euchariſt, and Baptiſme an only ſigne not remitting ſynnes, and the Euchariſt a ſole figure, from which the truth of Chriſtes body was as far diſtant as heauen is from earth, and ſo forth according to the reſt of the articles of their reformed faith: within the decourſe of ſo few yeres, al theſe thinges were turned vpſide downe, & the contrary faith planted in ſteede thereof. That is, the Romane church of late ſo ſound and perfite, ſodaynly became moſt corrupt and impure. ſhe approued the vniuerſal authoritie of the Romane Biſhop, and appointed no boundes or limites to his iuriſdiction, which was mere Antichriſtian. ſhe tooke from Princes their Supremacie, ſhe brought in the ſacrifice of the maſſe, and highly aduaunced it againſt the death and ſacrifice of Chriſt. ſhe acknowledged iuſtification to proceede not of only faith, but of workes

alſo. ſhe eſtabliſhed the ſingle life of prieſtes and votaries, and condemned their mariages as ſacrilegious and execrable.A wonderful chaunge vpon the ſudden in al the Chriſtiā world▪ and yet more wonderful that no man ſhould note it. for two ſacramentes ſhe admitted ſeuen. to baptiſme ſhe attributed remiſsion of ſinnes, and in the Euchariſt ſhe beleeued the real and ſubſtantial veritie of Chriſtes preſence, & ſo forth according to the articles of Catholike religion, or papiſtrie, as theſe men terme it.
            Now whereas thus much is compriſed in their paradox of making the ſucceſsion of the Romane biſhops Antichriſt, whereas ſuch weight lieth in the matter, which of it ſelfe to common intendement is ſo abſurd, vnreaſonable and in deede vnpoſsible, whereas we alſo bring forth Fathers, Councels, and Doctors auouching the contrary gather thou (Chriſtian reader) whether vve haue not iuſt cauſe vtterly to diſcredite them in this ſo blunt, & ſenſles aſſertiō, vntil we ſee their Chronicles, their monumēts, their ātiquities, ſome maner warrāt beſides their owne in a matter of ſuch importance. Whereas they allow vs no ſuch, and yet chalenge to be credited vpon their owne vvord, aſſure they ſelfe (reader) their dealing

in this behalfe is not only fooliſh, vnlearned, and ignorant, but alſo inhumane, furious and diabolical.
            Notwithſtanding whereas M.W.That the Romane Church of the later thowſand yeres hath not chaunged the faith which ſhe had the firſt fiue hūdred. beſides thoſe former profes which to any indifferent man may ſeeme more then ſufficient, requireth of vs farther declaratiō, that in theſe later ages the Romane church hath not departed from that faith, which in her firſt time ſhe profeſſed, to content him (if any thing m
                  •
               y content him) and make more euident the inuincible equitie of the Catholike cauſe, I wil proue the ſame by ſuch 
                  •
               iſtoriographers, as him ſelfe (I truſt) wil allow for vpright, and nothing fauorable to our cauſe. Thoſe witneſſes I meane to be, firſt of al him ſelfe, and then, Iohn Calum, Peter Martyr, Martin Luther, Flacius Illyricus, with ſuch other pillers & founders of his owne congregation. Out of him ſelf this I gather. That to haue bene the true and Chriſtian faith, which the Romane church ma
                  •
               ntained the firſt fiue hundred yeres,Before pag. 47. at what time that church vvas muſt pure & excellent, & preſerued inuiolabl
                     •
                   the fa
                     •
                  th deliuered by S. Peter and S. Paule. This propoſition is commonly found almoſt in euery page

of M.W. anſwere to the ſecond Demō
               ſtration. Out of the other, Caluin, Luther &c. this I gather, that the Romane church in her firſt & primitiue puritie maintained and beleeued the Popes Supremacie, the ſacrifice at the maſſe, the ſame to be auailable for the dead, prieſthode, the real preſence &c. no leſſe then we do now.Chap. 4.7.10.11. This thou ſhalt find witneſſed by their ſeueral confeſſions, and approued at large hereafter in places conuenient. The concluſion hereof riſing is this, firſt that theſe are no pointes of falſe or Antichriſtiā doctrine, but ſuch as Peter & Paule taught the primitiue Romane church. Next that the later Romane church hath not departed from the former, but hath kept inuiolably the ſelf ſame faith without chaunge or alteration. And ſo the falſe ſuppoſal whereupon this booke ſtandeth, being by ſuch euidēce refuted, the reſt of the building muſt needes come to ground.
            
               Cal. inſti. li. 4. c. 18. ¶ 18. Omnes reges terrae & populos, à ſummo vſque ad nouiſsimum 
                     •••
                  briauit.Now I ſay farther, that this point which M.W. taketh for a moſt certaine and cleare veritie, that is, the fal of the vniuerſal church (for after the fal of the Romane church, they can ſhew none that ſtoode, and it is their general

both preaching and writing, that ſhe corrupted the whole world with her errors) and her apoſtaſie from Chriſt theſe later hundred yeres,To affirme with the proteſtants that the vniuerſal church hath failed, is to deny Chriſts incarnation and al ſcripture. vpon which (as I haue ſaid) dependeth the verie ſubſtance of this his booke, is an abſurditie in Chriſtian religion, ſo foule, monſtruous, and abominable, that it can not be defended of any man, except he firſt of al deny the very incarnation of Chriſt, his preaching, his death and paſsion, his eternal kingdome & prieſthod, the ſending of the holy Ghoſt, the entier ſumme of all whatſoeuer hath bene written by the Apoſtles, or foretold by the prophetes. For to what end was Chriſtes incarnation,Oſe. 2. v. 19.20. Eph. 5. f. g. but to ioyne him ſelfe vnto a Church, from which he would neuer be ſeparated? To what end was his preaching but to erect and inſtruct ſuch a Church?Ioā 17. v. 19. Eph. 2. v. 14. &c. To what end his death and paſsion, but to redeeme & ſanctifie ſuch a Church, & leaue vnto it an euerlaſting remedie to blot out her ſinnes and offences? How is he an eternal king,Pſ. 2. v. 6. 1 Tim. 6. v. 15. Hebr. 7. who hath not an eternal people obeyng him and obſeruing his lawes? how an eternal prieſt, whoſe prieſthod and ſacrifice for ſo many hundred yeres was applied to

none, & auailed for none? and to what pu
                  •
               poſe was the holy Ghoſt ſent,Act. 2. Iôā. 24. v. 16. but to remayne vvith the church for euer, and leade her into al truth? And vvhat is the ſumme of the goſpels, but a declaration that Chriſt by him ſelf, by the holy Ghoſt,Mat. ca. 28▪ v. 20. Marc. 4. v. 32 1. Cor. 11 v. 26. Mat. 5 v 14.15. 1. Tim. 3. v. 15 Luc. 24. v. 47 Act 15. 2. Timoth. 3 v. 9. Epheſ. 4. b c by his Apoſtles, founded ſuch a church, in vvhich his wil ſhould euermore be openly preached, his ſacramentes rightly euermore miniſtred, true faith and religion alvvaies preſerued, a certain vvay for conuerting infidels to the faith, for cōfuting errors and hereſies be continued, and al true Chriſtiās maintained by lawful paſt
                  •
               rs in vnitie of his true faith againſt al blaſtes of vaine doctrine, euen vntil his coming to the general iudgement. Finally that ſuch a citie and common welth it ſhould be, ſo cōſtant, ſo ſtrōg, ſo vnmoueable,Mat. 10. v. 17 Mat. 16 v 18. Apoc. 20. v. 9. that it ſhould vpholde the glorie and name of Chriſt, 
                  •
                gainſt Princes, againſt Potentates, againſt Kings and Emperours, againſt al the force of the world & the deuil, though they al with might and mayne applyed their whole power to the ſuppreſsing and rooting out of it.
            And the ſelf ſame is the effect of al the auncient Prophetes, that the preachers

of Chriſtes catholike church ſhould neuer ceaſe day nor night to preach the truth:Eſa. 62 v. 6. that howſoeuer darknes couered al other nations,Eſa. 60 v. 2.3. yet the light there of ſhould neuer be extinguiſhed: that the ſpirite of God and truth of doctrine ſhould neuer depart from it,Ibid. v. 20. c. 62. v 4. c. 59. verſ. 21. but remayne in it frō one generation to an other euen for euer: that it ſhould neuer be brought in to a narow roume,Ibi. c 60. a▪ b▪ & ca 2. v 2. Pſal. 2. v. 8. & pſal. 71. v. 8.11.17. as was the ſynagoge of the Iewes, but ſhould be diffunded thorough al prouīces of the earth: that the courſe of heauen, of the ſunne, of day and night ſhould rather faile,Ierem 33 c. d. e. pſal 88. v. 34.35 &c. then prieſts and preachers of the new teſtament: that albeit other monarchies had an end & were altered, as the Aſſyrians, the Perſians, the Macedonians, the Romanes, yet this ſhould neuer ſuffer any ſuch a teration,Daniel 2. v. 44. but ſhould ſtand vnchange
                  •
               ble for euer. Wherefore to affirme that this Church hath failed, is to affirme, that Chriſt, his Apoſtles, & Prophetes, are al liers, that what ſoeuer is written in the old and new teſtamēt, is all vaine and fabulous.
            For touch
                  •
               ng the ſtraunge deuiſe of an inuiſible church,Tower diſputations, the ſecond day. which ſome of them haue of late imagined, it is nothing

els,The inuiſible church a poetical fanſie. but a mere poetical fanſie: a fanſie vvhich conſiſteth only vpō their ovvne vvord and credite, for profe vvhereof they neuer yet brought any ſcripture, coūcel, father, doctor, chronicler, or writer, nor euer ſhal be able: a fanſie by which any ſect neuer ſo horrible, may defend them ſelues to be a Church as wel as they: a fanſie framed and patched together of mere contrarieties and contradictions: a fantaſtical opiniō which being long ſince abandoned of the learned proteſtants in other countries as moſt vvicked and peſtilēt, is novv (I knovv not vpon vvhat miſerie and neceſsitie) receaued of our Engliſh Diuines.Melanch. in locis com. c. de Eccleſia aedit. 1561. 
               VVhenſoeuer vve thinke of the church (ſaith Melanchthon) let vs beholde the company of ſuch men as are gathered together, vvhich is the viſible church: nether let vs dreame, that the elect of God are to be found in any other place, then in this viſible ſocietie. For nether vvil God be called vpon or acknovvledged, othervviſe then he hath reuealed him ſelf, nether hath he reuealed him ſelf els vvhere, ſaue only in the viſible church,
               The ſcripture knoweth no church but the viſible. 
               in vvhich only the voice of the gospel ſoundeth. Nether let vs imagine of any other inuiſible church, but let vs knovv, that the voice of the gospel must

ſound openly amongst men, according as it is vvritten Pſal. 18, Their ſound is gone forth in to al the earth. Let vs knovv, that the miniſtery of the goſpel must be publike, and haue publike aſſemblies, as it is ſayd Epheſ. 4. Let vs ioyne our ſelues to this company, let vs be citizens and members of this viſible congregation, as vve are commaunded in the 25. and 83. Pſalme. VVhich places and other the like, ſpeake not of Platoes Idea, but of a viſible church, &c.
               Idem in praefat. lib. Corpus doctrinae Chriſtianae in Eccleſiis Saxon. & Miſnicis principis elector
                     •
                  s Saxon. impreſſ. Lipſiae anno 1561. Vide eundē in Repetit. Confeſ. Auguſt. offerendae Sinodo
                     •
                   Tridentinae anno. 51. ca. de eccleſia. Et in reſp. ad impios articulos Bauaricae Inquiſitio, queſt. 3. And in ſundry other places refelling this mad fanſie, he euer concludeth, Neceſſe eſt fateri eſſe viſibilem Eccleſiam, de qua filius Dei, &c. It is of neceſsitie that vve confeſſe a viſible church, whereof the ſonne of God ſaith, Matth. 18, Dic eccleſiae, Tel the church, & vvhereof Paule ſaith 1. Cor. 4, VVe are made a ſpectacle to the vvhole vvorld, to angels, and to men. VVhat a ſpectacle I beſeech you is that vvhich is not ſeene? and whereunto tendeth this monſtruous ſpeach, vvhich denieth the viſible church? Delet omnia testimonia antiquitatis, abolet iudicia, facit 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
infinitam, & illam Cyclopum politiā, in qua
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
vt eſt apud Euripidem. It aboliſheth al teſtimonies of antiquitie, it taketh avvay al iudgementes, it cauſeth an endles confuſion,
               The proteſtants inuiſible church 
               and induceth a common vvelth of vnruly ruffians or Atheiſts, vvherein no

one careth for an other.
            
            
               Calv. inſtitut. lib. 4. ca. 1. ¶ 2. No ſaluatiō out 
                     •
                  f the viſible church. And Caluin interpreteth the article of our creede, Credo Eccleſiam Catholicā, of the Catholike viſible Church. & ſaith furthermore, that the knowledge therof is ſo neceſſary, that there is no hope of life by grace in this world, except we be conceaued, brought forth, nouriſhed, a
                  •
               d ruled by her, ſo long as we liue.Ibid. ¶ 4. 
               Adde quod extra eius gremium nullae eſt ſp
                     •
                  randa peccatorū remiſsio, neque vlla ſalus, teſte Ieſai. c. 37. verſ. 32. Ioel. ca. 2. v. 32. Ezechiel. ca. 13. v. 9. pſal. 106. v. 4. Adde here vnto that out of the lap of this (viſible church) no pardon of ſynnes is to be hoped for, nor any ſaluation, as vvitneſſe Iſaie, Ioel, Ezechiel, and the Prophete Dauid.
            
            
               Oecolāp. in Iſa. c. 2. v. 2.And Oecolāpadius writing vpō the Prophete Iſaie, and thoſe wordes, ca. 2. Fluent ad eum omnes gentes, Create is the dignitie (ſaith he) of the Chriſtian church aboue the ſynagoge of the Ievves, in that it ſhal be moſt populous, and of al nations, ſundry ſhal ioyne them ſelues vnto it abundantly. VVherefore let the Ievves be aſhamed, vvhich thinke them ſelues alone to be the ſonnes of Abraham. Avvay with the Montaniſtes, vvhich ſay that they alone haue receaued the holy Ghoſt. Confounded

be the Donatiſtes &c. hovv much ſhould vve vvithdravv and take from the church catholike, if vve beleeued theſe men?
               Idem in Ieremiam ca. 33. v. 29. And againe vpon Ieremie. God here ſpeaketh of the eternitie of Chriſtes kingdome, and ſvveareth that as his league is ſtedfaſt with the ſunne and moone, vvith ſommer and vvynter, vvith day and night,
               Kinges and Prieſtes neuer fayle in the church. 
               ſo alſo he vvil performe that vvhich he promiſed to Chriſt, that he ſhal haue kinges and prieſtes, and that for euer, and that not a fevv, but as the ſtarres of heauen and the ſand of the ſea, both for their dignitie and puritie, and alſo for their multitude. The like wordes he hath, and confirmeth the ſame by ſundry places of ſcripture, in Iſai. ca. 64 v 13. Daniel. ca. 2. v. 44. Zachar. ca. 2. v. 1.2.3. et ca. 7. v. 13.14.15. et ca. 12. v. 6.7.
            And Illyricus gathereth very wel out of the firſt chap. of S. Matth.Illyr. gloſſa in Math. ca. 1. v. 1. Some ſuch ſtories of the Proteſtantes church, what ſtate it had 600. or 700 yeres agoe, were worth the ſeing. that the true church in the middeſt of al perſecut
                  •
               ōs, deſtructions of cities. Cō
               mon welthes, and peoples, is not only preſerued miraculouſly by gods ſpecial ayde & protection, but alſo Oſtendit iſta ſeries (ſaith he) eccleſiam et religionem verā habere certas hiſtorias ſuae originis et progreſſus. This genealogie proueth, that the true church and religion hath aſſured

hiſtoryes of her beginning and encreaſe.
               Brēt. in Luc. c. 17. hom. 19 Lauath. in Ezechiel ca. 20. v. 39.40. Luth. Tom. 4 in Iſa. ca. 9. &c. 52. & 53. & 60. Bul. in Apo. Concio. 62. & 87. 
               I paſſe ouer very many places of theſe and other learned Proteſtantes, Brentius, Lauatherus, Luther, Bullinger, who in their Commentaries vpon the ſcriptures refel this ſauage opinion of our engliſh Proteſtants, by infinite and the ſame very euident places of ſcripture.
            And wonder it were (if any thing were wonderful in men forſaken of God, and geuen ouer to their ovvne ſenſe) hovv theſe men do not perceaue, yea and feele the moſt ſenſible contradiction, which diſputing of this queſtion, and of Chriſtes real preſence in the ſacrament, they runne into. For here they charge vs, that we take from Chriſt the truth of his body and deny his incarnation,Notable forgetfulnes and contradiction. becauſe we ſay it is inuiſible and not circumſcribed with a certaine place, which they ſay are proprieties ſo eſſential to humane nature, that the very glorified body of our Sauiour remayneth not a body, if it wante them. Of this argument M. VV. inſulteth and triumpheth in this booke, Hoc argumentum (ſaith he to M, Martin) impetus tuos non pertimeſcit,
               See after pa. 177.178 
               This argument

feareth not your forces. Yet talking of the Church militant, which conſiſteth of a number of bodies, by nature, mortal, by eſſential proprietie, viſible and bound to a certaine place, by Chriſtes ordinance diſperſed thorough al quarters of the world,After pa. 349.350. this Church (they ſay) was a true church, and yet inuiſible, conſiſted of Emperours, Prieſts, nations and peoples, and yet circumſcribed with no certaine place, appearing in no certaine citie, prouince, or kingdome: ſo tying moſt ethnically, the glorious, celeſtial, deified and ſupernatural body of Chriſt, to the baſe rules of corruptible philoſophie, from which they exempt the mortal bodies of men, which by the law of God and nature are ſubiect therevnto.
            But to returne to the fal of the vniuerſal Church, vpō the ruines whereof M.W. booke in particular,Cal libel. de neceſsit. reformandae eccleſiae. & this new congregation in general is buylt and ſtandeth, the iſſue of that doctrine is no other, nether poſsibly can be, but a flat abnegation of Chriſt & Chriſtianitie, as the writings of our aduerſaries ioyned with their practiſe declare abundantly to al thoſe, who lyſt to open their eyes and take a litle paines to learne

that which ſo deepely it importeth them to know.
            
               To ſay that the church hath fayled, is to make Chriſt a lyer and deceauer.And to this purpoſe notable is the ſtorie of Dauid George the Hollander, who being expelled from the low countries for the Sacramentarie hereſie, and for the ſame cauſe honorably receaued and intertained by them of Baſile being then of the ſame religion,ab an. 1544. ad 1556. and many yeres wel eſteemed of in that citie, after proceeded ſo far in the goſpel, that he tooke to him ſelf the name and office of Chriſt, and accompted our Sauiour for a ſeducer and deceauer, and ſecretly drew many to his opinion. For which cauſe, three yeres after his death,Yere 1559. The ſtorie of Dauid George ſet forth by them of Baſile. the rulers of that Citie tooke the body out of his graue and burned it, and withal ſet out the whole ſtorie of his life, fayth, and death, and the reſt appertaining to his condemnation and their owne defence. This man by what reaſon principally was he lead into that Turkiſh madnes? forſooth his cheefe reaſon was this, as in the ſame booke appeareth.If Chriſt had bene the true Meſsias, his church had neuer fayled. If that Chriſt had bene the true Chriſt, then the Church erected by him ſhould haue continued for euer. But now we ſee, and it is manifeſt,

that the Romiſh biſhop, that Antichriſt, hath ſurpreſſed and ouerthrowen many hundred yeres ſince the church, which that Chriſt erected. Hereof it foloweth, that he was not the true Meſsias, but a lying maiſter and a falſe prophet.
            And Sebaſtianus Caſtalio in the preface of his bible dedicated to king Edward, what doth he els, but cloſely deny Chriſt to be the true Meſſias, when vpon this very ground of the churches fal, he thus diſcourſeth.Caſtalios diſcourſe that Chriſt is not the true Meſsias. Firſt he laieth for a foundation, the excellencies and prerogatiues of the church which ſhould be eſtabliſhed by the Meſsias, as her quietnes and vnitie in religion deſcribed by Michaeas, cap. 4. That the earth ſhould be ſo repleniſhed vvith the knovvledge of our Lord, as the ſea is vvith vvaters. Eſai 11. And againe cap. 60. VVhereas thou were forſaken, enuied and vnfrequented, I vvil make the (ſaith God) to ariſe into an euerlasting height, ſo as thou ſhalt ſucke the milke of other nations and the breſtes of princes, and thou ſhalt knovv that I thy God am thy ſauiour and defender.
               The light of the church ſhal neuer be extinguiſhed. 
               Thy ſunne ſhal no more go dovvne, nor thy moone leeſe her light, for our lord ſhal be thy light which euer ſhal cō
                  tinue.
               
After this ſort much more he hath touching the churches happy eſtate and continuance, as before hath bene noted. Then looking to the effect and accompliſhment of theſe promiſes according to Proteſtantes learning and iudgement,Quò magis libros ſacros conſidero, eo minus hactenus praeſtitum video. vtcumque illa oracula intelligas. he proteſteth expreſſely, that this excellencie and felicitie promiſed to the church of Chriſtians by the cōming of Meſsias, the more he conſidereth the ſcriptures, the leſſe he findeth the ſame as yet to haue bene performed, howſoeuer a man vnderſtand thoſe places alleaged. Whereof he frameth this argument. Equidem aut haec ſutura eſſe fatēdum eſt, aut iam fuiſſe, aut deus accuſandus mendacit. Quod ſi quis fuiſſe dicet, quaeram ex eo, quādo fuerint. Si dicet Apoſtolorum tempore, quaeram, cur nec vndiquaque perfecta fuerit, et tam cito ex
                     •
                  
                  leuerit dei cognitio ac pietas, quae et aeterna et marinis vndis abundantior fuerat promiſſa.
               An argumēt worthy to be conſydered. 
               Truly vve muſt confeſſe, ether that theſe thinges ſhal be performed hereafter, or haue bene already, or God is to be accuſed of lying. If a man anſvvere me, that they haue bene performed, I vvil demaund of him, vvhen? If he ſay, in the time of the Apoſtles, I vvil demaund hovv it chaunceth, that nether thē the knovvledge of God

and true religion vvas altogether perfite, and aftervvardes in ſo ſhort a ſpace vaniſhed avvay, vvhich vvas promiſed to be eternal, and more abundant then the fluddes of the ſea.
            
            Which argument of his, if we marke wel, and euery part thereof, it is eaſely perceaued, that he concludeth thoſe thinges not to haue bene performed in the Church of the new teſtamēt, which al prophetes foretold ſhould be performed at the comming of the Meſſias. For whereas he driueth the ſumme of al to one of theſe three neceſſary conſequentes, ether that God is a lyer, ether that the Church erected by Chriſt ſhould euer ſtand in the ſight of the world, and euer floriſh with moſt abundāt knowledge of the wil of God, or that ſuch a Church ſhal be founded hereafter by the Meſsias: and then remoueth the firſt, which the nature of euery man abhorreth to heare, then denieth the ſecond, according to the general ſcope of the proteſtants doctrine, which affirmeth the Church for theſe thouſand yeres paſſed to haue bene drowned in palpable darkenes, ſuperſtition, and idolatry, what remaineth but to approue the third, vz, that

the things foretold to be wrought by the Meſſias, are not yet accompliſhed, but ſhal be hereafter. which is as much as in euidēt termes to ſay, that the Meſſias is not yet come, or Chriſt is not the true Meſſias, who hath performed nothing of that which was his part and office according to the oracles of the Prophetes.
            
               
                  Caluin in Daniel. ca. 2. v. 44. Lut. To. 7. li. de Iudaeis. &c.
                  The Proteſtants vnder pretence of more puritie, driue men to Iudaiſme and Turkery.
               This if I would proſequute at large by ſhewing into vvhat ſtraightes, and ſhameful and miſerable ſhiftes ſome principal Proteſtants, for example Caluin and Luther diſputing vvith the Iewes haue bene brought, by reaſon of this deteſtable ſuppoſition, that the church ſo many hundred yeres hath failed, the reader could not but abhorre and deteſt euen to the gates of hel this damnable hereſie, which vpon pretenſe of reforming the church and making al thinges pure and perfite, doth in deede ioyne with the Turkes and Iewes, and thruſt men headlong to the very denial of Chriſtes Incarnation. And moſt certaine it is, we can neuer againſt the Iewes maintayne Chriſt to be the true Meſsias, if we put this paradox of the Proteſtants to be true, that Chriſtes church within

ſo few yeres after his departure was ſuppreſſed & trode vnder foote by the Pope. And this one reaſon, to paſſe by al other, wil iuſtifie the ſame to their eternal confuſion: that whereas by the incarnation and cōming of Chriſt the church of Chriſtians ſhould be enlarged infinitely in al kingdomes,Eſa. 49. per tot. ca. 2. v. 3.4. prouinces, and cities, aboue the ſinagoge of the Iewes,Eſa. 54. v. 1. cal. 4. v. 27. ſee before pag. 59 which after that time ſhould be narrow, contemptible, remayning in a few, and nothing comparable to that other, by the Proteſtants faith this is turned cleane contrarie. For in any age or time of theſe later thovvſand yeres, it is eaſie to ſhew by ſufficient authoritie of cronicles & hiſtories, that the Ievves haue had their knovven and viſible ſinagoges in the moſt notable places and prouinces of the vvorld, in Greece, in Conſtantinople, in Germanie, in Mantua, in Venice, in Paris, in England, in Spaine in Portugal: vvhereas for many ages they can not name vnder the cope of heauen any kingdome, prouince, citie, tovvne, village, houſe or ſheepecote, where the church of chriſt hath appeared, if we eſteeme the ſame according as they now by their preaching and

writing deſcribe it.
            And therefore whereas M. W. obiecteth commonly, that Doctor Sanders denying the Pope to be Antichriſt and defending that an other ſhal come hereafter,The end of M.W. doctrine touching Antichriſt. withdraweth men from conſideration of the true Antichriſt to a falſe and fayned one, on the contrary ſide let the reader take this for a veritie as certaine and ſure as the Goſpel, that he and his, vpon ſuch pretenſe of a falſe and imagined Antichriſt, of late daies conceaued and brought forth in the fātaſtical braines of a few heretical miſcreantes, vpon pretenſe of bringing men a neerer way to heauen then euer their forefathers went, vpon pretenſe of framing a church more pure, more ſincere, more perfite & Apoſtolical then was in the world before, I ſay, vpon theſe falſe and lying reaſons, they withdraw men frō the only true, auncient, Catholike & Apoſtolike church, wherein they were baptiſed, to their manifold, ſcattered, & diuided apoſtatical congregations: they leade men out of the way where only ſaluarion is to be looked for, and place them there, where remaining they are moſt certaine and

aſſured of euerlaſting damnation of body and ſoule. Yea as appeareth by the courſe of their doctrine, the drift of their preaching and writing, and experiment of their brethren, vnder the veile and ſhadow of this their Antichriſtian doctrine, they induce mē to beleeue that al ſcripture is falſe, that the prophetes were lyers, that the Apoſtles were deceauers, that Chriſt was a falſe teacher and ſeducer, & not the Meſsias deſcribed by the prophetes, that Iudaiſme ſtandeth vpon better groundes then Chriſtianiſme: which concluſion they can neuer avoyde, except firſt they abandon and reuoke this their doctrine of Antichriſt ſuppreſsing the Church, as falſe and execrable.
            And as for the Popes of Rome, whom this man wil needes haue to be Antichriſt,If the Pope of Rome be Antichriſt, there be many worſe Antichriſt
                     •
                   in the world this I dare ſay boldly and ſtand to the arbitrement of any reaſonable and indifferent Proteſtant that by experience knoweth Rome, and England, the demeanure of the biſhops who of late haue gouerned there, as for example, Pius 4. Pius 5. and Gregorius 13. and our Superintendents, who in the ſame tyme haue ruled in

England. Let Antichriſt be deſcribed in ſuch ſort and with ſuch qualities as the ſcripture deſcribeth him. Afterward let there be laid in equal balance that which the world knoweth by publike vew and experience to haue bene in the foreſaid biſhops, their feare of Gods iudgement teſtified by their whole order of life, their much praier, their infinite almes, their iuſtice towards al, their ſingular care to remedie the vvoundes of the Chriſtian vvorld, and gather into one the ſcattered flocke of Chriſt, vvherein they haue ſpared no trauail or charges. Lay vvithal the publike and knovven loſenes in many of our Engliſh Superintē
               dents, the contempt of Gods iudgementes, ſo much as may be gathered by their external behauiour & maner of liuing, their oppreſsiō of the poore, their infinite auarice, their few prayers, their lightnes, their carnalitie, and whatſoeuer els is better knowen to the people where they liue then to me: let theſe thinges I ſay be weighed by the iudgement of any reaſonable Proteſtant, and I doubt not but he wil conf
                  •
               ſſe, that if in the tyme of the forenamed Popes, the Sea of Rome was

poſſeſſed of Antichriſt, in the ſame ſeaſon many biſhops Seas in England were poſſeſſed of double and triple Antichriſts.
            I come now to ſpeake of the ſecōd part, vz, the want of religion and conſcience which M. W. ſheweth in this his anſwere, wherein I muſt be the ſhorter, becauſe I haue ſtayd ſomewhat long in the firſt. His want of cōſcience as in ſundry other pointes, ſo in this I note eſpecially, that whereas he pretendeth to ſet downe M. D. Sanders arguments fully and entierly, and ſo to frame his anſwere accordingly, he in many and the ſame of beſt moment performeth nothing leſſe then that which he moſt pretendeth.
            M. Iewel amongſt many falſe practiſes, vſed this as one very apt to beguile the ſimple, and whereby I thinke at this preſent very many learned men are deceaued. That is,M. Iewels maner of anſwering D. Harding. frō the diſcourſe of his aduerſary, he would cut out & remoue frō the ſight of the reader, the principal ſtrength, were it Scripture, Councels, Fathers, or reaſō, whereby the aduerſary iuſtified his cauſe, & after ſhufle vp ſome od talke & impertinent allegatiōs againſt the reſt. For exāple

let the Defence of the Apologie of the Engliſh church ſerue, vvhere there is no matter ſeriouſly handled, from the firſt beginning to the laſt line of the booke, but the very pith and moſt forcible partes,He leaueth out the beſt part of D. Hardings booke. as it vvere the ioyntes and ſinevves are thus taken avvay and left out of the booke: ſometime vvhole and many pages together, ſometime half pages, ſometime fovver or fiue lines in a ſide, ſometime vvhole ſentences or peeces of ſentēces, according as he thought requiſite for the bettering of his cauſe, and diſgracing of his aduerſarie: & yet notvvithſtanding, he peeceth and patcheth vp the reſt, as though it vvere the ful and perfite diſcourſe of D. Harding. This is as much as if ſome bragging Thraſo appointed to combat vvith his enemy, ſhould at the time of fight, cauſe his enemy to be tied vp in priſon, and ſhevve his chiualry vpon a man made of cloutes. this is in ſteede of a body, to fight with a ſhadovv. I vvil not exemplifie this by any particularitie, becauſe I can aſſure the reader by certaine experiēce, let him in that booke fal vpon vvhat place he liſt, he ſhal hardly miſſe an example.
            
               This very practiſe hath M.W. learned of him, and putteth it in vre in this his anſwere to D. Sanders demonſtrations. For whereſoeuer D.S.An vnconſcionable way of anſwering. diſputeth moſt firmely out of ſcriptures and reaſons grounded there on, & multitude of fathers agreing in the expoſition of the ſcriptures, whereſoeuer he preuē
               teth the cauils of the aduerſaries and foreſtoppeth the common arguments which they make for the cōtrary parte, there M. W. diligently and carefully taketh order to cut and leaue out al ſuch peeces, that he may haue the more libertie to runne at randon, and talke his pleaſure of the reſt. So for example,Apud. Sander. pa. 764. in the ſeuenth demonſtration he leaueth out in the middle, almoſt halfe a ſide of D. Sanders, a pece of very good importance for the fortifying of his argument. In the tenth demonſtration where D. Sanders preuenteth and anſwereth their obiections,Sander. pa. 767. and where in deede he fully cōfuteth before hand the ſubſtance of M. W. replie,Ibid. pag. 770.771. there a whole page is leaft out. And the ſelf ſame part he plaieth in the thirtenth demonſtration, leauing out almoſt two entier pages where in like maner his replie was before hand thoroughly diſcharged.

So in the ſixtenth demonſtration he omitteth almoſt a ſide of the argument,
                  
                     ••
                  g. 774. where D. Sanders conuinceth the Proteſtants of contradiction to them ſelues, and proueth them to play the part of Antichriſts for corrupting the verie letter of ſcripture at their pleaſure.
            And to paſſe by the like falſe demeanure in other places, and to make a litle ſtay vpon one only example, in the 36 demonſtratiō he ſo wickedly behaueth him ſelfe, as the reader can neuer otherwiſe iudge of him, then that he is a mā wicked, vnconſcionable, without al feare, of God. or regard of man, geuen only to continue talke and ſerue the time, without any care to ſearch out the truth. D. Sanders there diſputeth thus. Chriſt inſtituted a true & real ſacrifice at his laſt ſupper. This he proueth by ſcriptures, reaſons drawen out of the ſcriptures, & fathers interpreting the ſcriptures. This ſacrifice Antichrist ſhal abrogate & take avvay. This he proueth alſo by fathers expoūding the ſcriptures, and gathering ſo much of Daniels Prophecie. Theſe be the parts of which he concludeth the Pope not to be Antichriſt, who taketh

not away that ſacrifice,Vnreaſonable mangling. corrupting, and falſifying. but defendeth & wel alloweth it. Nowhere wōderful it is to note, what mangling, and defacing, and peecing, and patching he vſeth in ſetting downe this demōſtratiō. In the firſt paragraph of D.Apud Sander. pa. 785. Sanders fiue lines he leaueth out, wherein is compared the ſtate of the Iewes and Chriſtians touching the law and ſacrifice. Then ſhufling in fower lines, he furthwith leaueth out almoſt a whole ſide of a leafe, where D.S. by good reaſons, conference of Scriptures, and fathers, proueth the Maſſe to be the ſacrifice of the new teſtament. and then putting in one line of S. Ireneus cited by D.S. and leauing out many lines folowing of the ſame author, and pertaining as much to the matter, omitting withal D.S. diſcourſe therevpon, he furthwith ioyneth an other place of S. Ireneus cited likewiſe by D.S. but after his maner cutting of at the leaſt the one halfe: and omitting D.S. argument therevpon, as alſo a notable place of Hippolitus the Martyr (writing, that in the time of Antichriſt the holy churches ſhal be like vnto poore cottages, and the pretious body and bloud of Chriſt ſhal not be extant in

thoſe daies, the Maſſe ſhal be aboliſhed &c. al which he ſaith is nothing to the purpoſe) whereas D. S. bringeth in a large place of S. Hierom, he ſetteth downe one peece of a line, and leaueth out ten times as much enſuing, and the ſame moſt to the purpoſe. And finally vſing the like treachery tovvards S. Chryſoſtom (cited as the reſt by D. S.) from vvhom he croppeth the greater part and the moſt neceſſary, thus he maketh vp his anſvvere to the 36. demonſtration.
            And that the reader imagine not the places of thoſe fathers, S. Ireneus, S. Hierom, & S. Chriſoſt. to be ydle & needeles, let him know, that they are ſuch, as whereby D. Sanders proueth directly one of his principal propoſitions,Apud Sand. pag. 789. that Antichriſt ſhal abrogate & take away the ſacrifice of the nevv teſtament according to the prophecie of Daniel. Finally in the 38 demonſtration where the argument is framed, that the beſt princes haue alwaies fauoured the Sea of Rome, as Conſtantinus Magnus, Theodoſius, Martianus, Carolus Magnus, Ludouicus Pius, &c. & perſecutors, tyrannes, and wicked princes haue moſt diſhonoured it, as

Conſtantius, Iulianus, Valens, Anaſtaſius, Theodoricus &c. the anſwere is made, by cutting away al this out of the booke, and thruſting in a tale of a tub, that Cardinals & biſhops be kings who much honour the Pope.
            This maner of anſwering is not to ſearch out the truth, as becometh Diuines, or to bring men into the right way, as is the dutie of Chriſtians, but only to keepe mens heads in muſing & expectation of new bookes, to make them miſpend their time, to keepe the printers occupied, and as it were to walke and talke on a ſtage for no other purpoſe but to paſſe away the time. This is truly to be Carnifex papiri, A murderer of paper,
               Illyr. as Illyricus cōmonly calleth the Zuinglians. this is in deede to be Miſerabilis librifex,
               Luther. 
               A miſerable bookevvright, as Luther malapertly nameth king Henry, a learned prince and of famous memory. This is thoroughly to approue and iuſtifie that which Luther in the beginning, ſentenced againſt Zuinglius and Oecolampadius the fathers of the Sacramentarie Goſpel, & vvhich frō thē (as it may ſeeme) hath deſcended to their poſteritie.Luther. To. 7. Defenſio &c. contra fanaticos sacramentariorum ſpiritus. fo. 381. 
               Iſti boni ſpiritus (ſaith he) ſi parū admodū
                  
rethoricantur &c. Theſe good (ſacramētarie) ſprites if they can a litle play the Rhetocians, though they touch not any one argument, yet thinke they of them ſelues that they haue anſvvered the matter paſſing vvel & ſayd much to the purpoſe, et putant cauſam ſuam conſiſtere in ſcriptione multorum librorū, et in cōmaculatione pap ri. and they ſuppoſe that their cauſe ſtādeth in vvriting of many bookes & blotting of much paper.
            
            And no doubt it proceeded of ſome like crafte, that M.W. againſt vs & our Engliſh tranſlation of the Teſtament, wrote his reprehenſion in latin, to the end pardy, that nether our common countrimen vnderſtanding only the Engliſh, ſhould know thoſe faultes which he reproueth in latin, nor ſtraū
               gers vnderſtāding only his latin, know how iuſtly he refelleth that which was written in Engliſh. Whereby notwithſtanding he might obtayne thus much, that both ſortes ſhould heare tel of ſome errors noted and refuted, but what they were, and how wel, how truly and ſubſtantially the refutation was made, nether the one nor the other ſhould be able to examine, much leſſe to iudge: the reſt that vnderſtand both tonges (vvho only may eſpie his vniuſt

accuſations, defaultes, and ignorances) being not ſo many, nor alwaies ſo diligent, nor at any time ſo free, as to compare his latin pretenſed reprofe vvith the truth ſet dovvne in Engliſh. For ſo much as the aduerſaries novv againſt their old pretenſe of honoring and allovving holy ſcriptures,The Proteſtants forbid the reading of ſcripture. cruelly puniſh the readers and keepers of them, & ſpoile men of the nevv Teſtament it ſelf: the tranſlation and notes vvhereof they ſhal neuer be able to reproue, as vve inuincibly to the eternal ſhame of hereſie haue reproued theirs. And yet theſe men that vvil not ſuffer our tranſlation to be read of ſuch as vnderſtand it,See after pa. 459. with fayned hypocriſie proteſt that it nothing harmeth their cauſe, and wiſh that ſtraungers could reade it alſo.
            Theſe (Chriſtian reader) are the falſe fleightes, of lying, of diſſembling, of bragging, of remouing groundes of diſputation, of denying ſundry principal partes of faith, of continual altering their faith, of preferring thē ſelues before al men, of taking to them ſelues in particular, the ſupreme iudgement both of al ſcriptures, & the true ſenſe thereof, theſe be the difficulties,

which may diſſuade and withdraw any man from writing or diſputing againſt ſuch ſophiſtical wranglers. yet becauſe we may not vpō any loth ſomnes in our owne behalfe, or loſt labour in reſpect of thē, omit to do good to others, whō we may any waye profite, here thou haſt ſo much as appertaineth to the defence of the Diſcouerie, of the Tranſlation, and Annotations of the new teſtament. The reſt ſhal folow hereafter, if thoſe who haue the regiment of my life & ſtudies, ſhal thinke the tyme not euil ſpent, in refelling ſo vnſeemely, ſo vnprobable, and vnchriſtian an argument.
         
         
            AN ADVERTISMENT TO THE READER.
            
               WHEREAS of late in the Tower diſputations we haue ſeene that learned and holy man F. Campian, ſo much diſgraced both in priuate ſpeach and publike writing, becauſe in citing a place of Luther touching S. Iames epiſtle, he miſſed the print wherin the place was to be founde, the later editions of his workes differing notably from the

former,The heretikes alter their workes continually. which chopping & chaunging is cōmon to the moſt heretical writers of our time: for feare of like inconuenience, I haue thought it good amongſt many, to note the print of certaine bookes, which in this treatiſe are oftē times alleaged. Know thou therefore (Chriſtiā reader) that in citing Luther, I alwaies meane the print of Wittēberg ſet forth by Melanch. in diuers yeres, the ſecond Tome the yere 1551. the fift 1554. the ſeuenth 1557. In citing Zuinglius I meane his workes as they were ſet forth after his death by his ſonne in law Rodolphus, without name of place or printer. M. Foxes Actes and Monumentes, I vnderſtād as they were printed the yere 1563 by Iohn Day. Bezaes notes vpon the new teſtament I meane as they were printed at Geneua, the yere 1556. Sleidan I cite after the printe of Straſburg the yere 1566. Caſtalios bible, after the printe of Baſile, the yere 1556. Caluins Inſtitutions, as he laſt of al digeſted them into bookes and chapters, and printed them at Geneua. Thus generally, except I note otherwiſe in the margent. Other bookes which haue not ſo much varietie (although ſome be in more prints

then one) be they latin or engliſh, I commonly note not only according to the chapter, but alſo according to the page or leafe, as I do alſo the forenamed, that thou maiſt with ſo much the more facilitie finde out the places quoted, and ſo better iudge of the matter rreated.
            Next, whereas ſome are offended with vs, for that in writing or ſpeaking of them,Of the name, Proteſtants and Sacramentaries. we vſe the names of Sacramentaries, Zuinglians or Caluiniſtes, Puritanes, and Parlament Proteſtantes, which they ſay are odious nicknames found out of vs,Ful. in the Anſwere to M. Martins preface. pa. 17. and therefore one of their writers of late chargeth vs in ſpeaking of them to vſe no other names then Chriſtians and Catholikes: for our diſcharge herein thus much I muſt ſignifie vnto thee, that if ether truth & learning would beare vs vſing ſuch termes as they require, or any reader ether Catholike or Proteſtant vnderſtand vs, we would moſt gladly for loue of the truth and their contentation ſo ſpeake and write. But now conſider thou how intolerably ſuch ſpeaches would ſoūd in the eares of any indifferent reader. I haue occaſion ſometimes to produce Luther

writing Contra fanaticos Sacramētariorū ſpiritus, againſt the fanatical ſpirites of the Sacramentaries, ſometimes Contra Zuinglium et diſcipulos eius, againſt Zuinglius & his diſciples, ſometime D. Whitgift againſt the Puritanes, (for ſo he calleth them) ſometimes the Puritanes againſt him and ſuch as maintaine the Cōmunion booke and religion of England, in ſuch ſort and ſo far forth as is approued by Acte of parlament. Now citing theſe writers how can we cite them without a lie, if we cited them in other wordes then themſelues vſe? If I ſaid Luther in his booke againſt the fanatical ſpirites of the Chriſtians & Catholikes, or, D. VVhitg. in his Defenſe againſt the Chriſtians and Catholikes, who could ether perceaue what I meant, or who would not iudge that I did them great iniury in making them to write againſt Chriſtians, which none do but Iewes & Turkes, or againſt Catholikes vvhich none do but heretikes and Apoſtataes. And marueil it is, that the name of Proteſtātes is novv grovven into ſo great diſlike, vvhich hitherto hath bene ſo magnified in bookes, pulpits, and ordinarie phraſe of talke, and vvhich M.Pag. 653. & 1717. Fox in his huge volume of Actes and Monumentes

alvvayes vſeth as moſt proper to their goſpel, & maketh it oppoſite ſometimes to Papiſtes, ſomtimes to Catholikes, which he vſeth for one.
            But the truth is, thoſe that profeſſe the Engliſh faith and religion,Thoſe that profeſſe the Engliſh religion, are not Catholikes. ether haue no name at al to be knovven by but the common name of heretikes, vvhich is to general, and vvould be to odious, or their moſt propre name is Zuinglians or Sacramentaries. For to cal them Catholikes and Chriſtians, beſides that it is falſe and ridiculous, and may vvith like probabilitie be chalenged of euery other kind of ſecte, Lutheran,Brentius et Lutherani paſsim. See before. pa. 39. Brentian, Arrian, Puritan, beſides that their greateſt vvriters mocke and ſcorne at the name Catholike as Popiſh and ſuperſtitious, beſides this I ſay, it expreſſeth not that particular religion, in vvhich they differre from the reſt of the Chriſtian vvorld, for vvhich vve vvrite againſt them, and for vvhich the Lutheranes oppoſe thē ſelues againſt them, and vvhich by their name ought ſpecially to be ſignified.
            
               Nor Proteſtants.The name of Proteſtantes, which commonly they vſurpe, is wrongfully chalenged of them, as which duely &

only belongeth to the Lutheranes,Sleidan. li. 6 fol. 102.101.109. who for oppoſing them ſelues againſt the decrees of the Empyre & Emperour touching Catholike religion, and proteſting that they would ſtand in defence of their owne, according to the Confeſsion exhibited at Auſpurg, were firſt for their ſo doing and proteſting, named Proteſtantes, as much to ſay, as men that ſtood and proteſted againſt the Catholike faith for their priuate, in ſuch ſort as hath bene noted. From which Confeſsion of theirs as likewiſe from al other communion,Ibid. lib. 7. fol. 110. et 114. et lib. 8. fol. 128.131. thoſe of the Engliſh religion, vvere by the name of Zuinglians expreſly excluded.
            And briefly, that no other name can be duely applied vnto them beſides the name of Zuinglians, by this reaſon it may playnely appeare.Thoſe of the Engliſh fayth, are moſt properly called Zuinglians, or Sacramentaries. When they brake from the reſt of the Chriſtian vvorld, vvhich they ſay vvas couered vvith palpable darkenes, and betooke them ſelues to that light of the goſpel, vvhereof novv they ſo much brag and boaſt, vvho vvas their maiſter, ringleader, and Apoſtle therein, but Huldericus Zuinglius? So much they vvrite moſt euidently in the Apologie

of their Engliſh church.Apol. Eccleſiae Anglicanae. d. 
                     •
                  . 
               In the middeſt of that darknes (ſay they) thoſe most excellent men, Martin Luther, and Hulderike Zuinglius ſent from God to illuminate the vvhole vvorld, first came to the Goſpel. Miſsi à Deo ad illustrandum terrarum orbem, primū acceſſerunt ad Euangelium. Now whereas them ſelues & al other, name thoſe goſpellers which folow Luthers ſenſe and interpretation, by the name of Lutherans, they vvho prefer Zuinglius before Luther, and profeſſe them ſelues to haue receaued the light of the Goſpel from him, hovv ſhould they be called but Zuinglians? not only for like reaſon, vvhich hath bene vſed in al times and ages from the firſt beginning of the primitiue Church, vvhere the Sectemaiſters haue geuen appellation to their after-commers, as in Marcion, Valentinus, Carpocrates, Nouatus & the reſt, but much more and eſpecially becauſe them ſelues chalenge him for their maiſter in their particular faith and religion. And therefore it can not be avoided, but as Luthers ſcholers, are called Lutherans, ſo Zuinglius diſciples ought of like right to be called Zuinglians.
            
            And to end this quarel, our aduerſaries

them ſelues who haue written of theſe matters, ſhal ſerue to quite vs of al fault. M. Fox in his ſtorie when ſoeuer he ſpeaketh of that ſect vvhich him ſelf beſt-liked,
                  Proteſtants Huſsites. Goſpellers. See before pa. 16.
                  Actes and monumentes pa. 901.902.
                  Ibid pa. 993. aeditionis poſtremae. Sacramentaries.
                  Lutherans. Zuinglians. Theſe names them ſelues vſe, beſides a more general name vſed and confirmed by Act of Parlament. see before pag 21. Sleid. lib. 8. fol. 128.131.133. et lib. 9. fol. 150. Ibid. lib. 7. fol. 107. et lib. 20. fol. 368. lib. 21. fol. 382.390 ibid. lib. 5. fol. 75.78.
                ordinarily calleth them, ſometime Proteſtants, ſometime Huſsites, ſometime at large, men forward in promoting the proceedings of the goſpel, ſometime more briefly, Goſpellers. And writing preciſely of the diuiſion betvvene Luther and Zuinglius he ſaith, VVith Luther in the opinion of the Sacrament conſented the Saxons: vvith the other ſide of Zuinglius, vvent the Heluetians and as time did grow, ſo the diuiſion of theſe opinions increaſed in ſides, and ſpread in farther realmes and countries, the one part being called of Luther, Lutherans, the other hauing the name of Sacramentaries. So in Sleidan vve haue very common the name of Zuinglians and Sacramentaries, as likewiſe he calleth the other part Lutherans, and their religion Lutheraniſme, and euen ſo they termed them ſelues. It were tedious to iuſtifie this out of Luther, Zuinglius, & eſpecially al hiſtorigraphers of our age. And in truth it is much like, as if a man ſhould light a candle at noone-tide. Wherefore in this we muſt deſyre our aduerſaries

to beare with vs, if we ſpeake not only as al Catholikes, but as al Proteſtants, as Luther, as Sleidan, as M. Fox, as generally al writers in their bookes and volumes are accuſtomed to ſpeake, and as the world of thē hath learned, and as the aduerſaries them ſelues by al reaſon induce vs to ſpeake, and as of neceſsitie we muſt ſpeake, if we wil ſpeake and be vnderſtoode.
            Touching any other fault, I ſhal be ready ether to defēd it, or to correct it. to correct it, if it be noted againſt me iuſtly, to defend it if it be obiected vndeſeruedly. & this I proteſt not only in words, as cōmonly do al Proteſtantes, but in ſimplicitie of truth, as meaning to performe the ſame. And therefore willingly I ſubmit what ſo euer I haue written, to the iudgment of al Catholikes, ſymply and with out exception to whom iudgment of theſe matters appertaineth. to the iudgment of al Proteſtants, euen of M. W. him ſelfe, ſo far furth as he ſhal geue cenſure of it and refel it by the written word of God, expounded according to the analogie of faith.
         
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
            
               Chap. I. Of Luthers contemning S. Iames his Epiſtle and calling it ſtramineam. Pag. 1.
               Chap. II. Of the Canonical ſcriptures, and that the Engliſh cleargie in accepting ſome and refuſing others, are lead by no learning or diuinitie, but by mere opinion & fantaſie. Pa. 19.
               Chap. III. How M.W. defendeth Luther preferring his priuate iudgement before al auncient fathers and Doctors. Pag. 42.
               Chap. IIII. Of prieſthod, and the ſacrifice continued after Chriſt in the ſtate of the new teſtament, and that it derogateth nothing from Chriſt. Pa. 56.
               Chap. V. Of Penance, and the value of good workes touching iuſtificatiō and life eternal. Pag. 82.
               Chap. VI. How vnreaſonably M.W. behaueth him ſelf, in reprouing and approuing the auncient fathers, for their doctrine touching good workes. Pag. 114.
               Chap. VII. Of M. Iewels challenge renewed by M. W. and the vanitie and falſhod thereof. Pag. 129.
               
                  Chap. VIII. Of Beza corruptly trāſlating a place of ſcripture Act. 3. and of the real preſence. Pag. 169.
               Chap. IX. Wherein is refelled M.W. anſwere to certaine places of S. Chryſoſtom touching the real preſence and ſacrifice. Pag. 203.
               Chap. X. Of the place in S. Lukes Goſpel cap. 22. corrupted by Beza. Pag. 231.
               Chap. XI. M.W. general anſwere to the booke of Diſcouerie. and of the notable impietie committed by the tranſlators of the Engliſh Bibles. Pag. 260.
               Chap. XII. M. W. reaſons againſt the latin bible are anſwered: and the ſame bible is proued to be in ſundrie places more pure & ſincere then the hebrue now extant. Pag. 280.
               Chap. XIII. Of the puritie of our latin teſtament in reſpect of the greeke copies now extant. Item a compariſon of our tranſlator with other of this age, with an anſwere to thoſe obiections which M. W. deuiſeth againſt him. Pag. 360.
               Chap. XIIII. That to leaue the ordinarie tranſlation of the bible appointed by the Church, and to appeale to

the hebrue, greeke, and ſuch new diuers tranſlations as the proteſtants haue made, is the very way to Atheiſme and Infidelitie. Pag. 406.
               Chap. XV. How M.W. inueigheth againſt the new teſtament lately ſet forth in this college, with a cleare refutation of ſuch faultes as he findeth in the tranſlation thereof. Pag. 443.
               Chap. XVI. A defence of ſuch faultes as are found in the Annotations of the new teſtament. Pag. 474.
               Chap. XVII. Of certaine blaſphemies contained in the Annotations. pag. 527.
               The Concluſion. Pag. 548.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A REFVTATION OF M. WHITAKERS REPREHENSION OF THE LATE ENGLISH TRANSLAtiō and Catholike Annotations of the new Teſtament, and of the booke of Diſcouery of hereticall corruptions.
         
            CHAP. 1. Of Luthers contemning S. Iames his Epiſtle and callinge it STRAMINEAM.
            
               AMONG ſundrie cōtrouerſies rayſed by the Proteſtants in our dayes, one and that of greate weyght and conſequence, is the Canon of holy Scriptures, that is, what bookes are to be admitted into diuine and ſupreme authoritye, and as certaynlye wrytten by inſpiration of the holy Ghoſte to be receaued without any doubte or contradiction. In examininge which queſtion, the behauiour of our aduerſaries deſerueth diligent conſideration. For as in the beginning, they much prayſed the Fathers, Church, & Councels of the firſte fiue hundred yeares,

not for any reſpecte or reuerence they bare vnto them,The proceding of the new goſpel. but by ſo doinge to diſcountenance and thruſt out of credite, the Fathers, Church and Councels of the later thowſand, by whom they ſaw moſt euidently their hereſies to haue bene condemned: ſo not long after, for lyke purpoſe, they made vaūt of the ſcriptures, agaynſt thoſe very firſt and moſte auncient Fathers, not for any iuſte honor or regarde which they had of the ſcriptures, but by that meanes to diſgrace the Fathers, and eaſe them ſelues of anſwering their authoritye, when ſoeuer they ſhould be preſſed therewith. For that in deede they accompte not of the very ſcriptures more then of the Fathers, but turne them ouer for vs to defende no leſſe then the Fathers, time and experience hath ſhewed, their publike wrytinges profeſſe (as by that which hereafter enſueth, ſhall manifeſtly appeare) and M. Whitaker though in worde he would fayne diſſemble the matter, yet in facte and truth playnly declareth ſo much. which being ſo, let the Chriſtian Reader as in other things, ſo in this eſpecially note the proceeding of that which theſe men call the goſpell, the

groſſe impietie wherevnto it tendeth, and in to what open profeſſion of infidelitie in a ſhorte ſpace it is likely to breake out, which in the compaſſe of ſo few yeares is growen to ſuch a head, that now already they dare as boldly call in queſtion and deny partes of the holy ſcriptures, as not long ſithence they made the like quarels againſt the wrytings of the auncient Fathers. Let the Chriſtian Reader note I ſay, not their wordes, but their doinges, not their coūterfeit diſſimulatiō in ſpeach & pulpit ſometyme vſed, but their euident practiſe, reaſons & aſſeuerations publiſhed in bookes, confirmed by arguments, deduced by neceſſarie coherence from their doctrine, and many wayes expreſſed by them ſelues in ſundry their Cōferences, Inſtitutions, and diſputations, and he ſhall eaſely perceaue our aduerſaries after denyall of the Fathers, Councels, Tradition, and the authoritie of the Church Catholike, now at this preſent to ſtand vpon lyke deniall of the written worde, the Apoſtles & Prophets, ſo as they leaue no one ground whereupon a chriſtian man can reſt his fayth, or ſtay him ſelfe. Thus much I gather not onely by the

writinges of ſundry other Proteſtants whereof ſome I ſhall touch hereafter, but euen of M. Whitakers diſcourſe in defence of Luther about S. Iames Epiſtle. whoſe words and reaſons for this purpoſe and the Readers better intelligence, I will ſett downe and proſequute ſomewhat the more at large.
            And firſte of all concerning S. Iames his Epiſtle, M. Martin reproueth M. Whitaker for denyinge that Luther called that Epiſtle ſtramincam, and in ſo cleare a caſe charged Father Campian with a notorius lye. It is eaſie to geſſe (ſayth M.W.In prefat. pag. 2.) vvhat a fellovv vve ſhall fynde you in the reſte, vvho are not aſhamed in the very beginning to lye ſo egregiouſly. When F. Campian replyed that it was in ſome one of Luthers firſt editions, though otherwyſe altered in the later:In reſponſ. ad epiſto. Campiani. nether ſo ſayth M.W. Praefationem illam purgatam eſſe dixiſti, quam tamen conſtat nullo vnquam verbo mutatam eſſe. You ſaye that preface vvas corrected, vvhereas it is certayne that there vvas neuer anye vvorde changed in it. Now this being the faulte which M. Martin layeth to M. W. ſee how wel he defendeth himſelfe. Firſt, becauſe after he had read ouer all Luthers prefaces vpon the new Teſtament

(as he ſayth) he found none ſuch, there of he inferreth:prefa. pag. 2. 
               He is not to be accounted impudent (as you call me,) vvho denieth that to be true vvhich he knovveth not to be true, but he that to deceaue others defendeth that as falſe vvhich he knovveth to be moſt true. but I am ſo farre from acknovvledging this to be true, that I neuer thought it to be more falſe then I thinke it novv. I will not wrangle vpon the definition of impudency but whether this dealing be not moſte ſhameleſſe and deteſtable in a Chriſtian, let any man of indifferencie iudge.
            
                Firſt it can not be excuſed of groſſe
and inſolente boldneſſe and raſhneſſe, vpon the vew of one onely edition to deny ſo peremptorily a thing obiected ſo often,The Heretikes corrupt their ovvne vvryters. by ſo many learned men of name, and for ought I coulde yet reade or heare, neuer denyed by the Lutherans: eſpecially, whereas withall nothing is more notorious,  then the manifold
alteratiōs which Melanchton and thoſe of VVittenberge haue made in Luthers works, corrupting, deprauing, putting in, and taking out, ſo much and ſo far forth, as pleaſed their chāgeable humor: where of the zealous Lutherans in a ſynode holden at Altemburg,
               
by procurement of the Duke of Wirtemberg,Anno 1568. Colloq. Alt. in reſpo. ad excuſa. cor. fol. 227. and Palſgraue of Rhene, lamentably complayne. Electorales (ſay they) Lutheri ſcripta enormiter quám faediſſimé deprauant, ita vt poſt obitū Lutheri &c. The Diuines of the Prince Elector, do moſt filthely and beyonde all meaſure depraue Luthers vvrytings, ſo as ſince Luthers death there haue not bene more foule corrupters of Luthers bookes. In the ſame Councel many times they fal into this argumēt, and each ſide in moſt ſpitefull termes obiecte to others this faulte, as may be ſeene, if you liſte to peruſe the pages here noted in the margent. And in fine there is promiſe made,2. Reſpō. ad Hipothe. a fol. 284. ad fo. 290. & fo. 353.355.441 442.443.526. as a matter of great importance, and one of Hercules labours, that the Duke of Saxonie will cauſe Luthers workes to be printed without corruption. Illuſtriſſimus Dux Saxoniae,
               Ibi. Saxoni. ad reſponſ. de difceſſ. fo. 539.540. 
               curabit tomos Lutheri ſine deprauatione typis excudi. which notwithſtāding is perhaps a harder thing thē the Duke of Saxonie can perfourme, though his power were much greater then it is. What ſpeake I of the Lutherans, with whom Luthers wordes be autenticall and litle inferior to ſcripture, whereas the very Caluiniſts, and that in Geneua,
               
where Caluin is all in all, yet notwithſtanding haue in their prints corrupted Luthers works. whereof Ioachim.
               Vveſtphalus in apologia contra calū. Cal. ca. 46. pag. 458. 
               VVeſtphalus a Lutheran thus wryteth in his Apologie againſt the ſlanders of Caluin. I Marueil much (ſayeth he) that Caluin keeping ſuch a doe about this one vvord, could not ſee the moſt filthy mutations and corruptions of the diuine commentarie of D.
               The vvorks of Luther corrupted by the Caluiniſtes in Geneua. 
               Luther vpon the epiſtle to the Galatians, and tranſlated into French, and printed at Geneua. In one place ſome vvordes are taken avvay, in an other many mo, ſome vvhere vvhole paragraphs are lopte of.
               Detruncaeti. 
               in the expoſition of the ſixte chapter, tvvo pages and an halfe are lefte out. vvhere Luther doth reproue the Sacramentaries, there eſpecially thoſe falſifiers tooke to them ſelues libertie to mutilate, to take avvay, to blotte out and change. ſome vvhere they remoue the name of Sacramentaries, at other tymes they haue put in vvordes ſuch as pleaſed them. and that this vvas done at Geneua vvithout Caluins knovvledge, it is not very lykely.
            
            
                And touching this very place wherof
we treate, when Coclaeus obiected it to Bullinger, as now M. Martin did to M. W. he anſwered, (not denyinge that which was ſo publyke and notorious) but, Guperem Lutherum ſobrié magis, modeſtaus

& circumſpectius &c.
               Bull reſp. ad Cocle. ca. 3. 
               I vvoulde to God Luther had iudged and geuen his ſentence more ſoberlye, diſcreetelye, and circumſpectly of Sainte Iames his Epiſtle, and the Apocalips of Sainte Iohn; and certayne other.
            
            
                Add we herevnto M. W. owne confeſſion ſet downe in this preface.Pag. 4. 
               I confeſſe (ſayth he) that Luther hath vvritten in a certen place, that Iames his Epiſtle is not to be compared vvith the Epiſtles of Peter and Paule, and that in compariſon of them it may be iudged an epiſtle made of ſtravv. Which a man would thinke were ſufficiente to cleare M. Martin and M. Campian, and to condemne Luther and M. Whitaker. For how or in what compariſon coulde Luther ſo ſpeake, but onely to diſgrace that epiſtle, & in reſpect of other ſcripture to make it light and contemptible: that is, not to make it ſcripture at all. For if he thought it to proceede from the holy Ghoſt as did the bookes of the Prophets, the Goſpels, and Epiſtles of Sainte Paule, how coulde he without intollerable iniurye done to the holy Ghoſt ſo debaſe that wryting, which he beleeued to proceede from his diuine inſpiration.Ibid. But M. Whitaker replyeth: That vvorde albeit I defende not,

yet iuſtly may I ſay that Luther is iniuried vvhen he is accuſed to haue reiected as made of ſtravv that epiſtle, and playnely and ſimply to haue named it ſo, vvhereas he called it ſo in compariſon: eſpecially vvhereas theſe vvordes are not founde in the bookes of later printes. and excepte I by chaunce had happened vpon a moſt auncient edition, I might haue ſought long inough in the later.
               Manifeſt contradiction. Confeſſe you then that there hath bene ſuch choppinge and changinge in Luthers workes, that the one differ ſo far from the other, & namely in this very point? How ſtandeth this now with your former bold aſſeueration: It is certaine, there vvas neuer any one vvorde changed therein? And what reaſon haue you better to credit theſe later printes ſett furth by Luthers ſcholers, then the auncient ſet furth by the maiſter and author Luther him ſelfe.
            
                But to end this matter, may it pleaſe
you to reade Father Duraeus,
               Duraeus fol. 8. there ſhall you be informed in what print and edition of Luther,S. Iames epiſtle denyed by the Proteſtāts. theſe wordes are to be reade, to wit, not in the later of VVittē
                  berg corrected and corrupted by the ciuill Lutherans, but in the more auncient of Iena, a Citie in religion lutheriſh to, but yet after a more exacte and preciſe

order then are thoſe other. There may you finde that Pomerane a greate Euangeliſt among the lutherans, touchinge S. Iames Epiſtle wryteth thus. Fayth vvas reputed to Abraham for iuſtice. by this place thou mayeſt note the error of the epiſtle of Iames,
               Pomeran. ad Rom. ca. 8. 
               vvherein thou feeſt a vvicked argument. beſides that he concludeth ridiculouſly, he citeth ſcripture againſt ſcripture, vvhich thing the holy Ghoſt can not abyde: vvherefore that epiſtle may not be numbred amongeſt other bookes, vvhich ſet foorth the iuſtice of fayth. There may you finde Vitus Theodorus preacher of Norimberg in hye Germanie,In Annot. in 
                     •
                  o. Teſt. pag. v
                     •
                  i. wryting thus. The epiſtle of Iames, and Apocalips of Iohn, vve haue of ſet purpoſe lefte out,
               S. Iames epiſtle & the Apocalips lefte out of the Proteſtants bibles. 
               becauſe the epiſtle of Iames is not onely in certayne places reprouable, vvhere be to much aduaunceth vvorkes agaynſt fayth, but alſo his doctrine through out is patched together of dyuers peeces, vvhereof no one agreeth vvith an other. Vnto theſe you may add for your better ſatiſfaction the iudgement of the Centuries, noted by F. Campian though not touched by you.C
                     ••
                  . 1. li. 2. c. 4. colum. 54. They ſay, that the epiſtle of Iames much ſvvarueth from the analogie of the Apoſtolicall doctrine, vvhereas it aſcribeth iuſtification not to onely fayth but to vvorks, and calleth the lavv, a lavv of libertie. And in the next

booke:Cent. 2. ca. 4. colum. 71. 
               Againſt Paule and againſt all ſcriptures, the epiſtle of Iames attributeth iuſtice to vvorkes, and peruerteth as it vvere of ſet purpoſe, that vvhich Paule diſputeth Rom. 4. out of Geneſ. 15. that Abraham vvas iuſtified by onely fayth vvithout vvorkes, and affirmeth, that Abraham obteyned iuſtice by vvorkes.
               Luther. 10.5. in 1. Pc. ca. 1. You may add Luther him ſelfe in his commentarie vpon S. Peter. ep. 1. ca. 1. fol. 439.440. in the common edition of Wittemberg, where after he hath geuen many rules taken from his owne licentious doctrine, wherby to diſcerne the true and canonicall ſcriptures from falſe and Apocriphal, of them al thus he concludeth. pa. 442. Atque inde etiam facile diſcitur epiſtolam D. Iacobi nomine inſcriptam, handquaquam Apoſtolicam eſſe epiſtolam: nullum enim prope elementum in ea de his rebus legis. Hereby vve eaſely learne, that it is no Apoſtolical Epiſtle, vvhich goeth in S. Iames his name: for there is in it no letter or title of theſe matters: that is, of onely fayth, confidence, reſurrection &c. whereby we muſt eſteeme of true & canonical ſcriptures. And that this fault
lye not altogether vpon Luther and the lutherās, VVolfg. Muſculus, a famous wryter amongſt the Zuinglians, vpon lyke reaſon pronounceth lyke ſentence. They

obiect vnto vs (ſayeth he) the place of Iames.
               Muſcu. in locis cōmu. ca. de luſti. num. 5. pag. 271. 
               but he vvhatſoeuer he vvere, though he ſpeake othervviſe then S. Paule, yet may he not preiudice the truth. And after he hath at large ſhewed the diſagreemente betweene thoſe two Apoſtles, thus he breaketh forth into the open reproch of S. Iames. VVherefore he (S. Iames) alleageth the example of Abraham nothinge to the purpoſe, vvhere he ſayeth, vvilte thou knovv ô vayne man, that fayth vvithout vvorkes is dead? Abraham our Father vvas he not iuſtified by vvorkes vvhen he offred his ſonne Iſaak? He confoundeth the vvord, fayth. hovv much better had it bene for him, diligently and playnely to haue diſtinguiſhed the true and properlye Chriſtian fayth, vvhich the Apoſtle euer preacheth, from that vvhich is common to Ievves and Chriſtians, Turks and Diuels, then to confound them both, and ſet dovvne his ſentence ſo different from the Apoſtolicall doctrine, vvhereby as concluding he ſayth: you ſee that a man is iuſtified by vvorkes, and not by fayth alone, vvhereas the Apoſtle out of the ſame place diſputeth thus &c. And after he hath made S. Paule ſpeake as he thinketh beſt, he inferreth: Thus ſayeth the Apoſtle of vvhoſe doctrine vve doubt not. Compare me novv vvith this argument of the Apoſtle, the concluſion of this Iames: A man therfore

is iuſtified by vvorks and not by fayth only, and ſee hovv much it differeth, vvhereas he ſhould more rightly haue cōcluded thus &c. In which diſcourſe the Reader may ſee that he not onely contemptuouſly refuſeth to call him an Apoſtle, and euer nameth him as oppoſite to the Apoſtle, but alſo that he refuteth him as making falſe arguments, and taketh vpon him to be his maiſter, and as it were calling him ad ferulam, checketh and controwleth him for a corrupter of ſcripture, miſapplying the word of God, and wickedly pullinge downe that which S. Paule had ſo wel built vp.
            All which beinge ſo plaine, euident, and manifeſt, and the worde, ſtraminea found out at length, & acknowleged by M.VV. a man wold thinke all this matter ended, and that egregious lye fathered vpon M. Campian, turned vpon M.VV. head, & withall M. Campians firſt reaſon iuſtified, wherein he burdened the Proteſtantes with denial of the holy ſcriptures. And yet M. VV. yeldeth not, but like a valiant ſoldiar is ſo farre from geuinge ouer, that he purſueth his aduerſarie ſtill, as though he had the better of him and wh
                  •
               e ſo? or how can he poſsiblie defend

him ſelf? forſoothe, becauſe Luther non plane & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
ſtramineam appellauit:
               pag. 4. 
               Luther ſayed not playnlye and ſimplye that it vvas ſtravven, or made of ſtravve, but in compariſon of Sainte Peter, and Sainte Paules Epiſtles. I beleeue in deede: Nether did F. Campian or M. Martine ſaye ſo, or any wiſe man els for although he were as madde and ſhameleſſe in his aſſertions, as euer was heretike, yet to haue termed that epiſtle 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               ſtramineam, ſimplye made of ſtravve, or any otherwiſe then to haue ſignified the vnworthynes of the ſame in reſpect of holie ſcriptures, (and in that ſort, it is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
a worde of blaſphemous contempt) had bene as wonderful, as 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
to haue affirmed that is was made of woode, or morter.
            And here in the verie fronte and beginning, let the reader note in M.VV. the liuely paterne of a perfecte wrangler, maintaininge a continuall bablinge vppon wordes, and neuer drawing nigh to the pointe. Father Campians and M. Martins charge vppon them beinge euidente, that they contemne the written worde, as is proued by Luther,
               M.VV. notable vvranglinge. 
               M.VV. knowinge not wel what to ſay, runneth he knoweth not whether,

vp and downe, and aboute, forwarde, and backward, now grauntinge, and by and by recalling: ſo that in the compaſſe of one leafe, in one plaine matter, he hath more contrary windinges and turnings, then a graue and ſober man could be driuen vnto, in the wryting of a large volume.  Firſt there is no
ſuche thinge, and F. Campian lyeth egregiouſly. nowe him ſelfe hath founde it out.  then there was neuer a worde
chaunged in Luthers preface. now the later editions differ much from the former.  againe, Luther calleth it not ſimpliciter
ſtramineam, but in reſpect of S. Paules epiſtles, and S. Peters.  If this
ſerue not the turne, then I require you (ſaith he), to bring forth the other wordes that folow, arida, tumida, contentioſa, or els this of ſtraminea is no great matter. yet one fetche more. 
               Although
I vvil not defend this of Luthers, yet you haue iniuried him, in ſaying that he called it omnino ſtramineam, altogether made of ſtravv. looke (ſaith M. Martin) in Illyricus and there you ſhall finde the matter graunted. I haue ſo done (ſaith M.VV.pag. 3.) & let me be counted impudent, yf you finde this vvord there. Thus muche I graunt, Illyricus ſaith that Luther rehearſeth graue cauſes,

vvhy this epiſtle ought not to be eſteemed for a vvriting of Apoſtolicall authoritye.  But vvhat is this to the purpoſe? as though he that denieth the epiſtle to be apoſtolical, termeth yt ſtramineam, made of ſtravv. This is a copie of M.VV. vayne in wryting, firſt to deny the matter be it neuer ſo euident, and whē the matter is cōfeſſed thē to cauil vpon ſyllables, and when matter, and forme, & the verie ſyllables are founde, yet to yelde to nothing, but to keepe the pen or tounge walking: as though in this point lyke verball grammarians and ridiculous ſophiſters, we principallie hunted after theſe ſyllables ſtra mi ne am (which neuertheleſſe are found) and not as ſtudents & ſearchers of truth in diuinitye, ſoughte out firſt and cheeflie, whether by theſe and the lyke contemptible ſpeeches, the aduerſarie laboured to diſgrace & deface that Apoſtolical writing, and ſo impiouſlie to auoyde ſuche authoritie, when he ſhould be preſſed therewith.
            Wherefore to draw to ſome iſſue, howſoeuer Luther 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
called it ſtramineam or called it not, or whether he ſpake ſo in reſpect of the matter of the epiſtle, or the forme, or by way of compariſon with S. Paule, or whatſoeuer

other quidditie M.W. ether now hath or hereafter ſhall deuiſe, if Luther did yt 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
to deface the epiſtle, which M.VV. denieth not, and to diſpoſſeſſe it of Canonicall authoritie as the thing it ſelf ſpeaketh, if by his example the Germane Diuines & churches altogether contemne it, if vppon Luthers ſentence Illyricus pronounce,Illirieus in praefa. Iac. that Luther in his praeface rendereth great cauſes, vvhy this epiſtle oughte in no caſe to be accounted for a vvriting of Apoſtolicall authoritie, vnto vvhich reaſons I thinke euerie godlie man and not geuen to contention ought to yeld, if Pomerane ſay, the vvriter thereof maketh a vvicked argument & concludeth ridiculouſlie, if Vitus Theodorus thruſt it cleane out of the booke, if the Centuries affirme that it ſvvarueth from the Apoſtolicall doctrine, and teacheth cleane contrarie to S. Paule and all ſcriptures, if Luther flatly & expreſly deny it to be Apoſtolical, and affirme it to conteyne no one title or letter of ſuch matter as the Apoſtels are wont to hādle, if Wolfgāgus Muſculus vſe him ſo contemptuouſlie, as though he were ſome poore raſcall not worth the naming, and teache him what he ſhould ſay, and ſette him to ſchole: this being euident, then F. Campions concluſion

ſtandeth ſtrong,Had it not bene a goodly matter & vvorthy the labour of ſuch greate men in the Tovver diſputations, to diſcuſſe vvhether Luther called S. I
                     •
                  mes Epiſtle ſtramine
                     •
                  , made of ſtravve, ſimply or ō
                  ly in compariſon? that Luther with his complices contemne that parte of ſcripture, howſoeuer he calleth it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
ſtrawen or wodden And therefore ether let M. VV. lyke a good childe confeſſe with Luther, Cont. Campi. pag. 198.
               vvhom gladlie he vvorshippeth as his father, and vvith the Lutherans, vvhom he embraceth as his moſt deere brethren in Chriſt, that this epiſtle is no more worth then his father and brethren make of it, or if he miſlike ſuch conſanguinitie (as ſure I am they abhorre him) let him then deteſt them as profane and wicked men, who ſo impiouſlie reiecte the written worde of God, that is, the foundation, as they ſay. whereon is buylte their newe congregation. and ſo may the reader note downe one more capital and ſubſtantiall point of diſſenſion betwene thoſe two churches lutheran & zuinglian, then he
                  •
               herto he hath conſ
                  •
               dered. although nether can he ſo doe preciſely, but rather note it as a diuiſion amonge the zuinglians alſo, for ſo muche as it appeareth by Muſculus, that the Zuinglians of Suitzerlād, no leſſe then the Lutherās of Germanye, diſagree from the Engliſhe churche in their Canon of ſcripture, yea the Engliſhe church within

it ſelf, as ſhal appeare in the nexte chapiter.
         
         
            CHAP. II. Of the Canonical ſcriptures, and that the Engliſh cleargie in accepting ſome and refuſinge others, are ledde by no learning or diuinitie, but by mere opinion and fantaſie.
            
               AFTER S. Iames foloweth a queſtiō propoſed by M. Martin,
               Pag. 4. how it chaūceth that the Engliſh church doth admit S. Iames epiſtle which ſometime was not admitted, and yet wil refuſe Tobias, Eccleſiaſticus, & the books of Machabees, which were no farther diſproued, then that of S. Iames. The reaſon in truth is, & the ſame in effecte geuen by M.VV.
               Whit. cont. Camp. pag. 17.1
                     •
                  .19. becauſe theſe later contayne ſuch proofe of the Catholyke religion, as by no ſophiſticatiō can be eluded. S. Iames they thinke is not ſo flat, but ſhifts they haue to ridde their handes of him well inough. So much writeth Caluin. Some there are, that thinke this epiſtle not vvorthie of authoritie,
               Cal. in argument. ep Ia. 
               but I becauſe I ſee no ſufficiente cauſe vvhy it ſhould be reiected,
               The Heretikes ſit in iudgemente vpon the ſcriptures, & allovv & diſallovve as they find moſte fit for their ſectes. 
               gladly vvithout controuerſie embrace it. for vvhereas the doctrine of

free iuſtification ſemeth to be refuted in the ſecond chapiter, in his place I shall eaſelie anſvvere that matter. As if he had ſayd, that therefore he admitted it, becauſe he had found out a quidditie to auoide that hard obiection agaynſt only faith. which anſwere notwithſtāding becauſe it is falſe, peeuiſh, ſophiſtical, and cannot abide the tryall, as wel proueth Illyricus, Pomerane & Muſculus, they therfore thought the other way more cleanlie, rather vppō pretēce of ſome doubte made in the primitiue churche, cleane to ſhake it of with the reſt, then vppon a vaine toy which muſt in fine ſhame it ſelfe, make hazard of their ſolifidian iuſtificatiō, which muſt needes come to the grounde, if this Apoſtle retaine his old credite. This I ſay in deede is the reaſon, but becauſe thus to haue ſpoken plainlie, had geuen a ſure demonſtratiō to the reader, that they make no more account of ſcriptures then of fathers, no more reckning of Iames or Peter, then of Gregorie or Auſtin if they be againſt their conceaued hereſies, therefore M. VVhit. ſemeth to ſhape a more cleanlie anſwere, and this yt is.
            
               Whit. pag. 5.
               All the church (ſaith he) reproued not the epiſtle of Iames, and they that reproued it

vvere moued ſo to doe by no ſure reaſons:
               The reaſon why the engliſh cleargie admitte ſome books of ſcripture and refuſe others. 
               but theſe bookes vvhich you name, Tobias, Eccleſiaſticus, the Machabees, the vvhole churche of old reiected: nether vvere they vvritten in the Hebrevv tounge, vvhereas no bookes of the old teſtament vvere Canonicall but onlie thoſe, vvhich the lord commended to the old churche. Two reaſōs he ſeemeth to geue, the firſt that no bookes in the olde Teſtamēt are Canonicall but ſuch as were written in the Hebrew, the proofe wherof conſiſting onlie in M.VV. authoritie without ether reaſon, or probabilitye, or Doctor, or Councell, if I oppoſe againſt him S. Auguſtine with the catholike churche of that age,Aug. de doct chri. li. 2. c. 8. I truſt the reader wil not greatlie ſtagger which ſyde he ought to take.A ca. 2. verſ. 4. vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad finem 7. ca. and if this reaſon hold, I marueile what shall become of Daniel, a great parte wherof is held of them for Canonical, & yet is not writtē in the Hebrew. His other argument is of more force, that the vvhole primitiue church refuſed the bookes of Machabees,
               Pag. 5. 
               Iudith, & Tobie: but certaine onlv, & that vppon no good reaſon refuſed S. Iames. Theſe two partes if he proue, and ſhew this difference, he ſayth ſomewhat, & I wil be of iudgement as he is. if not (whereof I aſſure my ſelf) then as before,

ſo here ſtyll, luſt and fantaſie ruleth them in mangling thus the ſcriptures, not reaſon & diuinytie. let vs ſee how he proueth that the whole churche reiected the former. S. Hierom ſayth, the church readeth the bookes of Iudith, Tobias, & the Machabees, but reckeneth thē not amongſt canonicall ſcriptures. This for them. how may we fynd now, that not the whole churche but ſome particuler men, and they not vppon any good reaſon refuſed S. Iames? For this part we muſt credit M.VV. vppon his worde. for beſyde his worde, reaſon or coniecture he yeldeth none, but cōtrariwiſe to diſproue this his diſtinction, and approue that without reaſon or conſcience, he and his fellowes haue made choyſe of the one with condemnation of the other, thus to do M.VV. him ſelfe miniſtreth vs mattet abundant. for thus he wryteth in his firſt booke in iuſtifiynge frier Luther againſt S.Contr. Cāp. pag. 9. vide ibi pa. 10.12 Iames. Luther vvas not ignorante vvhat the aunciente church iudged of Iames his epiſtle. Euſebius doubted not to vvrite of that epiſtle expreſslie, I vvold have all men to knovv, that the epiſtle vvhich is aſcribed to Iames, is a baſtarde epiſtle. vvhat could be writtē more plainly? but perhaps Euſebius pleaſeth you not. geue me a reaſō vvhy.

heare then Hierome, vvhom you knovv to have bene a Prieſt of the Romane Church. The epiſtle of Iames is auouched to have bene ſet forth by ſome other in his name. the one affirmeth it to be a counterfeite, the other ſaith, it is ſuppoſed to have bene published not by the Apoſtle, but by ſome other. vvhy then are you angrie vvith Luther, vvhom you ſee not ſuddenlie or rashlie firſt to have begon to doub
                     •
                  e of that epiſtle, but therein to folovve the iudgement & 
                     ••
                  ſtimonie of the auncient Church? Let vs now ioyne together theſe two proofes of M. VV.
               M. VV. reaſons make moſt againſt him ſelfe. with conſideration what thence is and muſt be deduced, to wit, the cauſe why the Engliſhe congregatiō admittinge S. Iames, hath reiected thoſe other, and we ſhall ſtraightwaies finde, not only that he ouerthroweth himſelf (which is a comō tricke amōgſt ſuch good writers) but alſo concludeth the contrarie of that which here he pretēdeth. The Church readeth the bookes of Iudith, Tobie and the Machabees, ſaith S. Hierome, but reckeneth them not amongſt the Canonicall ſcriptures. In that the Church at ſolemne times read them, it is a great argumente that ſhe much honoured them, although ſhe admitted them not as then vniuerſallie into that higheſt roome of ſupreme authoritye. But

of S. Iames we heare not ſo much, but contrariwiſe Euſebius directlie affirmeth (if M. VV. ſaie true) and iudgeth, & wold all other men ſo to iudge, that that epiſtle of S. Iames is a falſe and baſtard epiſtle. and Hierome, a prieſte after the order of the Romane Church, (and not a miniſter after the faſhion of the Engliſh congregation) is brought to proue the ſame. Who ſeeth not now what greate difference there is betweene theſe two verdits geuen in by theſe auncient fathers. the firſt being read in the Church, had a degree to Canonicall ſcriptures, the later had no ſuch. Of the firſt he bringeth in S. Hierome ſaynge onlie that as then it was not acknowledged for Canonical. he bringeth in S. Hierome to ſaie as much of the ſecond, and for a ſurcharge he ioyneth Euſebius, directlie affirming it to be a baſtard epiſtle, and withall wiſhinge all men ſo to iudge of it: him ſelf inferreth that Luther in his raſhnes which we condemne, folowed the iudgement and teſtimonie of the aunciēt & primitiue Church. he affirmeth farther as a general principle, & namely treatinge of this epiſtle: Quod principio ſtatim non habet diuinam authoritatem,
               pag. 5. 
               non poteſt tempore & hominum approbatione

fieri diuinum. That vvhich at the firſt hath not preſentlie diuine or canonicall authoritye (as in their opinion S. Iames had not) can not be made canonicall by the approbation of men. yet now of theſe, he wold haue vs learne this diſtinction, that the primitiue Church vniuerſallie reiected the bookes of Iudith, Tobie, & the Machabees, & ſome onlie, and thoſe without iuſt cauſe, refuſed S. Iames epiſtle: and therefore that the Engliſh congregation hath done verie diſcretelie, to authorize the one, & diſauthorize the others. let him not playe to much the Sophiſter, but anſwere as becōmeth a Diuine, & ſaue him ſelf in this, frō opē folie & contradiction, & he ſhall ſhew more wiſedome & learning thē hetherto he hath geuen vs occaſion to deeme in him.
            And that he may the better waye the veritie and ſubſtance of his aunſwere,The ſumme of the Tower diſputation touching the ſcriptures. and the reader haue occaſion to conſider, what a variable & tottering goſpel theſe men preache, and how iuſtlie we obiect to them, that at their pleaſure they make hauocke of ſcripture: I will laye to M.VV. reaſoning, the effecte of the late diſputation had in the Tower with F. Campian touching this pointe.

This they make the mayne grounde of their whole argamēt.The fourth dayes conference. 
               Thoſe bookes vvhich olde fathers and Councels haue not receaued for canonical, & bookes to ground our faith vpon, them can not nev
                     •
                   me
                     •
                  , nor the Tridentine Councel make canonical. This propoſition ſtand
                  •
               ng for good which they ſo confidentlie vrge,Whit. pref. pag. 4. & 5. & con. Camp. Pa. 
                     •
                  0. and M.VV. thinketh y
                  •
                moſte aſſured, let vs ſee vppō this rule what waſte they make of the ſacred bookes. vppon that ground thus they buylde, or rather pull downe. Aug. li. 2. cap. 8. de doct Chriſtiana leaueth out Baruch, and the tvvo laſt bookes of Eſdras. Hierom in his preface vppon the booke of Kinges, ſaith, that Sapientia Salomonis, Ieſus the ſonne of Sirach, Iudith and Tobias, are not in the Canon. Euſebius in his ſic
                     •
                  e booke and 18. chapiter (it is the 19.) leaueth out the third and fourth of Eſdras, Tobias, Iudith, Baruch, Sapientia, Eccleſiaſticus, and the bookes of Machabees. and concerning the epiſtle to the Hebrevves, though him ſelfe ſay plainly it is S. Paules, yet he confeſſeth that many haue doubted thereof. alſo cōcerning the ſecond epiſtle of S. Peter, he ſaith it vvas doubted of many, & ſo of ſome, vvere the laſt tvvo epiſtles of Iohn. The ſame Euſebius li. 4. ca. 26. (it is 25.) speaketh of Melito bishop of Sardis, vvho reckening vp the volumes of the old teſtament,

omitteth Eſdras, Tobie, Heſter, Iudith, Baruch, VViſdome, Sirach, the bookes of Machabees. And the Coūcel of Laodicea omitteth Lukes gospel & the Apocalyps. you ſee therefore that theſe olde Fathers, haue leaſte theſe books out of the canon, & yet vvere not called heretikes nor blaſphemers. Thus farre they. Afterwards they define thoſe to be not Canonical but Apocriphal,
               Ibi. A. 2.
                     •
                  . 
               that are not in the (auncient) Canon receaued and allovved to haue proceeded vndoubtedly from the holy Ghoſt. and thoſe Apocriphal are forbid to be read. and though they may be read for moral leſsons, yet not for matters of religion. Afterward the ſame argument is reſumed againe, and eſpecially that parte vrged,Ibi. 3. b. 8. that the Councel of Laodicea leaueth out thoſe former bookes, in the olde Teſtament, Tobias, Iudith, the booke of vviſdome, Eccleſiaſticus. and in the nevv Teſtament, Luke, and the Apocalyps. And when F. Campian anſwered, that that Councel was but particuler, reply was made, that the Councel vvas prouincial, and farther confirmed by the ſixte general Councel holden in Trullo, Conſtantine being preſidēt, as Bartholomeus Carāza vvriteth, fol. 71. And therefore vve may leaue out of the canon Tobie, Iudith &c. vvhich your Councel of Trent thruſt in as autentical. Hetherto your brethren in the fourth

dayes conference.The firſte dayes conference in the Tower. D. 1.2. In the firſt day, vpon like warrant they recken amongſt Apocryphal bookes, that which you labour ſo much to ſaue, S. Iames, which there is called a counterfeit or baſtard epiſtle, by iudgement of Euſebius. Item, the epiſtle of Iude, the later of Peter, the ſecond and thirde of Iohn. And againſt theſe they alleage Euſebius▪ Hierome, Epiphanius, and the Councell of Laodicea, confirmed as they ſay there againe, by the general Councel holden in Trullo. And yet (ſuch is their inconſtancie) in the ſame place, ſome of theſe, in worde they profeſſe to receaue, but only as at pleaſure, of curteſie and liberalitie, not as of fayth, dutie, and neceſſitie. For the ſumme of all commeth to this, and it is the effect of that diſputation.
            Such bookes as of olde haue bene doubted of, we are not bound to admit for Canonical, but may refuſe now.
            Theſe particuler bookes here named, haue bene doubted of in olde time: ergo theſe bookes we are not boūd to admit for Canonical, but may refuſe them now.
            This being your reaſon, and the ſame ſo manifeſtly approued by them and you, out of the ſame, for our preſente

purpoſe againſt you this I note.  Firſt how iuſtly we accuſe you for defacing
and renting out ſo many parcels and whole bookes of ſcripture.Sundrye bookes of the ſcripture denied by the proteſtantes.
            
            
               In the olde Teſtament. 
               Tobias.
               Iudith.
               Heſter.
               Baruch.
               The booke of Wiſdome.
               Eccleſiaſticus.
               The two bookes of the Machabees.
            
            
               In the nevv Teſtament.
               S. Lukes Goſpel.
               The Epiſtle to the Hebrewes.
               The Epiſtle of Saint Iames.
               The 2. of S. Peter.
               The 2. & 3. of S. Iohn.
               S. Iude.
               The Apocalyps.
            
            Vnto theſe, partly your ſelues in your common bibles, partly your brethren ioyne certayne other peeces, both of the olde Teſtament and of the new: as The prayer of Manaſſes. Paralip. lib. 2. The ſonge of the three children. The ſtory of Bel. Canticum canticorum. and a parte of S. Iohns Goſpel. ſome of theſe held for canonicall theſe fiftene hundred yeares, ſome theſe twelue hundred, all aboue a thouſand.
            
                Nexte your diſtinction of the vvhole
Church, and ſome of the Church, were it true, as it is moſt falſe, is vtterly refuted by theſe your owne doctors: for by

their ſentence, whatſoeuer hath bene doubted of not onely in the whole Church, but in a part (for they goe not about to proue that theſe were doubted of in the whole Church, and leaſte of all S.
               S. Lukes goſpel doubted of. 
               Lukes Goſpell) that may you doubte of, and number amongſt the bookes Apocriphal: and both you and they proue as ſubſtantially that S. Iames was doubted of, as you proue the ſame of Iudith, Heſter, the Machabees or any other. ſauing that they fowly ouerreach them ſelues when they affirme that S. Lukes Goſpell with thoſe other, was leaft out and not receaued for Canonical in the Prouincial Councel of Laodicea, and the ſame confirmed by a general Councel afterward.
            
                Then commeth to my remembrāce your profoūd argumēt againſt M. Campian in defence of Luther. Luther deſpiſeth S. Iames his epiſtle ſaith M. Campian.Contr Cāp. pag. 9, you anſwere. Bene habet, crimen hoc omne Iacobi epiſtolam attingit &c. That goeth vvell. All this fault toucheth only Iames epiſtle. Luther doth not in a vvorde violate Matthevv, Marke, Luke, or Iohn, nor Paule, nor Peter:
               exagitat. 
               only he ſomevvhat ſhaketh vppe Iames epiſtle. A deepe reaſon: as though S. Iames beinge canonical ſcripture

were not to be eſteemed as honorably, and violated as litle as S. Peter,
               The open way to deny al ſcripture. or any of the other. and as though he in ſo writing, and you in ſo defendinge, doe not lay the way open to ſhake of and violate all the reſte as wel as that. For now if a man burden you with the refuſal of S. Luke, your defence is already prouided. bene habet, al goeth vvel. Al this faulte toucheth only S. Luke. Our doctors doe not in a vvorde violate Matthevv, Marke, Iohn, nor Paule, nor Peter, only vve ſomevvhat ſhake vp Lukes Gospel, and ſo peece-meale til none be leafte, you may and will ſhake out one after an other, & ſtil, Bene habet, all goeth vvell, vntill you fall to open profeſsion of Atheiſme, in the broade way whereof, you are farre & wel gone already.
            
                Fourthlye, becauſe in the end of your
preface yow bragge ſo much of your forefathers,pag. 24. that they haue euer vāquiſhed ours, here you put vs in mind what forefathers thoſe are.Aug. de hereſi
                     •
                  . hereſi. 53. Epiph. here. 75. Hetherto your forefathers were knowen to be, Aerius in denying prayer & ſacrifice for the dead, Vigilantius of whom yow learned to condemne the inuocatiō of Saintes,Hiero. cont. Vigilanti. & Io
                     •
                  iniat. & honor done to them in the Church, Iouinian in breaking vowes of chaſtitie

deliberatelye made to God, and making the ſtate of matrimonye, touching merite, equal in the ſight of God with the ſtate of virginitie & continentie. Which men notwithſtanding were forced to yeld to our forefathers, S. Epiphanius,
               The proteſtantes as in ſūdry other partes of their doctrine, ſo in denying certaine books of ſcripture, imitate the aunciēt heretikes. S. Hierom, and S. Auguſtine as hetherto al Chriſtendom is witnes, and therefore were not ſuch victorious capitaynes as you woulde make them. In this place as though your purpoſe were to ouerbeare vs with number, and make your armye ſo much the more ſtronge, you multiplye and ſet in ranke againſte vs more fathers. For whereas you ſo blaſphemouſlye ſpeake of the booke of Iudith,The 4. daies conference. 
               that it is far vnvvorthy to be called ſcripture, and yet match S. Luke and the Apocalyps with it, whereas you ſaye moſt plainlye of theſe and al the forenamed bookes, that yow are not bound to admit them but may refuſe them, that they be read for moral leſſons not for matters of religion, you ſimplye diſallow for canonical thoſe two bookes. And who are your fathers herein, but thoſe auncient Archheretikes Marcion and Cerdon,
               Epiph. here. 42. & thoſe other for ther brutiſhnes called Alogi or Bruti.
            
            In which your doinge as the reader

               
may eaſely perceaue how yow trotte
forwarde to playne Apoſtaſie from Chriſte, by callinge now the verye Goſpel into queſtiō: ſo why we ſhould number you amongeſt thoſe olde Brutishe heretikes,Epiph. her. 51. your ſelues yeald vs more abūdāt reaſō, thē our fathers had in calling them by that name. For your ſelf M.VV. cōfeſſe and proue your doctors and maiſters to be the moſt ſenſles and brutiſhe creatures that euer wēt on the earth. For, to auoide directe anſweringe to the queſtion propoſed you,W. contra Cam. p. 28. 
               hovv you knovv the bookes vvhich you call ſcripture, to be heauenlye and penned by diuine inspiration, that is, by vvhat teſtimonie you knovv thoſe vvritinges to be canonical or holye vvhich be ſo called, you ſay, and I vvith as good reaſon vvill demaund of you hovv you knovve the ſunne to be the ſunne, or hovv you aſſure your ſelf that God is God. for vve knovv as aſſuredlye that theſe are the holy ſcriptures cōmēded by God to his Church, vvritten by the Prophetes and Apoſtles, and deliuered by diuine authorytie, as vve knovv the moone to be the moone, or (at a vvord) any other thinge, vvhatſoeuer vve comprehend by moſt certaine knovvledge: and this anſvvere Caluine alſo geueth you. And this anſwere I admitte from you and Caluine,Inſti. li. 1. ca. 7. ¶. 4 and

hereof I conclude that you are more trulye called Alogi and brutiſhe,The proteſtants refuſing the authoritie of the church, can neuer geue reaſon how they know ſome bookes and not other, to be canonical ſcripture then were thoſe other auncient heretikes. For was there euer in the worlde, any ſo notable a Choraebus or Grillus hauinge the ſhape of man, that fell at brawlinge & diſputinge with his friēdes, whether the ſunne which we ſee, were the ſūne, or the moone, the moone, as you do againſt Luther, & your churches againſt the Lutheranes, whether S. Iames epiſtle be canonical? then yf you thinke right, (as I truſte you wil ſpeake wel of your ſelfe) with the ſame breath you condemne your father Luther, and your brethren the Lutheranes, for the verieſt ſottes and ſtockes that euer liued: for they know not the moone, they know not the ſunne, which to you ſhineth ſo bright & cleare. And to oppoſe your ſelf vnto your brethrē at home, and to your owne ſelf, how ſay you to S. Luke, to the epiſtles of S. Peter, Iude, Iohn, & the Apocalyps, be they canonical or no? yf you ſay yea, as I thinke you will, (or at the leſt,Cont. Campian. pag. 9. that was your opinion in September laſte, as your booke ſheweth) then your doctors now denyinge the ſame, you ſee what is to be concluded, that one parte of you is as wiſe as thoſe

former, who know not the ſunne from the moone. Yf you denie, and be of their iudgmente, as it may be very wel, your faith beinge as mutable as is the moone, yet ſo you proue your ſelf no wiſer then they, who in ſo ſhorte ſpace haue fallē out with your ſelf & altered your iudgmēte, and now eſteeme that for apocriphal, which then was to yow canonical, that is, now iugde that to be the moone, which then you thought to be the ſunne. Our lorde geue his people grace to thinke of you as you proue your ſelues, that is, ſo fantaſtical & inconſtant, that you know not what to ſay: and whyles you ſeeke to keepe your ſelfe aloofe from the Catholike churche, the ſure piller & groūde of tru
                     •
                  he,
               I. Tim. 3. v. 15. you plunge your ſelues ouerhead and eares, in ſuch foule abſurdities, as neuer did heretikes before you.
            
                For what is the reaſon of al this?
becauſe beſydes the written word or ſcripture, yow wil not acknowledge any traditiō of the Church, wherevnto by this queſtion yow are enforced of neceſsitie.The proteſtats refuſing the churche, beleeue not the ſcriptures. For if we are bound to beleeue certaine bookes, as for example the Goſpel of S. Matthew, S. Marke, S. Iohn, and S. Paules Epiſtles to be

Canonical, that is heauēly and pēned by diuine inspiration, and yet the ſame can not be proued by ſcripture, thē cleare it is that we are bound to beleeue ſomewhat which by ſcripture cā not be proued, and ſo the tradition of the Church is eſtabliſhed. And marueyle it is that yow perceaue not, how groſly yow ouerthwart your ſelf, and plainly refel that, which yow would ſeeme moſt earneſtly to confirme. For if yow march your beleefe of ſcripture, with knowledg of the Sunne and Moone, and ſuch like as are knowen by only ſenſe & the light of nature:See after chap. 16. then you deny it to be any article of your faith. For theſe two, are directly oppoſite: and the apoſtle confirmeth this reaſon, whē he defineth faith to come by hearing,
               Rom. 10. ver. 17. and hearing by the vvord of God. ergo fides ex auditu, auditus per verbū Dei. And therefore if you beleeue, not with humaine faith, as yow beleeue Tuſculanes▪ queſtions to haue bene written by Cicero, but with Chriſtian & diuine faith, as yow beleeue Chriſt to be your ſauiour, if thus you beleeue the Goſpel which beareth S. Matthews name, as likewiſe that of S. Marke, and S. Iohn, to haue bene written by them: then yow beleeue ſo, becauſe ſo yovv

haue heard it preached,
               1. Cor. 15. ver. 11. and ſo yovv haue receaued. and conſequently by the Apoſtles authoritie, that verie matter ſo preached vnto yow is the vvord of God. which word of God whereas yow find not in the ſcriptures,Somewhat is the word of god beſides ſcripture. hereof it foloweth manifeſtly, that ſomewhat is the vvord of God which is not ſcripture. and therefore yow and your fellowes beleeuing only ſcripture, beleeue not al the vvord of God, but only a peece thereof. and ſo did the worſte heretikes that euer were, yea ſo do at this day the verie Turkes and Mahometanes.
            
                But to end this ſpecial matter with
yow M. VV. touching your diſtinction betweene S. Iames, and Tobias, Iudith, the Machabees, &c. where you make this to be the difference, that S. Iames vvas refuſed but of a fevv, and the other generally of the vvhole Churche, tota Eccleſia repudiauit ſay you, for declaration of your truth herein, I referre you to the moſte euident teſtimonies of the ſame auncient Churche. S.
               Aug. de doc. Chriſ. l. 2. ca. 8. 
               Auguſtine ſetting downe the Canonicall ſcriptures as they were read and beleeued in his time, placeth S. Iames I cōfeſſe in order with the Goſpels, & Pauls epiſtles: yet not excludīg thoſe other, but in the ſelfe ſame place

numbringe Tobie, Iudith, and the Machabees with the bookes of Moſes and the Prophetes. his (ſaith he) 44. libris, veteris teſtamēti terminatur authoritas. In theſe fourtie and foure bookes, is concluded the authoritie of the old teſtament. Likewiſe the Councel of Carthage approueth for Canonicall S.
               Con. Cart. 4. ca. 47. 
               Iames, but in the ſame Canō it approueth as far the other forenamed and teacheth of them as directlie as of the other, that they are Canonicall ſcriptures. Somewhat before S. Auguſtines daies, they were not by publike decree of the Church receaued, as appeareth by S.
                  Con. Laod. can. 59.
                  The epiſtle of S. Paule to the hebrewes, as much doubted of in the primitiue Churche, as that of S. Iames. and b
                        ••
                     n, as much as thoſe books of the olde teſtament which the proteſtants reiect.
                  Hier. in Eſai cap. 6. et 8.
                Hierome and the Councel of Laodicea, but then, when there was as greate doubte of. S. Iames epiſtle, S. Paule to the Hebrewes, and the Apocalyps. touchinge the firſt, it is manifeſt by that which hath bene ſaid by you and your felowes. Of the ſecōd, there was more queſtion then of the firſt, and S. Hierome ſeldome citeth it, but he geueth a note, ſignifyinge that it was not in his time taken for Canonical. In the Epiſtle to the Hebrevves, vvhich the cuſtome of the Latine Church receaueth not, (ſaith he) it is thus vvritten. Againe. the bleſſed Apoſtle, in his Epiſtle to the Hebrevves,
               Latina co
                     •
                  
                  ſuetudo. 
               although the cuſtome of the Latin Church receaueth it not amongst

Canonicall ſcriptures. Againe.Idē in Hier. cap. 31. 
               this authoritie the Apoſtle Paule vſed, or vvhoſoeuer he vvere that vvrote that Epiſtle. In catalogo he ſaith, that euen vnto his time,
               Hiero. in Catalogo. Caius. 
               it vvas not accounted the vvritinge of Paule: and that Caius an auncient writer denyeth it to be his. and in his epiſtle to Paulinus ſette before the Bible, he ſaith, that a plaeriſque extra numerum ponitur. of the more part it is put out of the nūber of Paules vvritinges. The like might be declared by S. Cipriā, Lactantius, Tertullian, Arnobius, and S. Auſtine, if it were needefull. and the Apocalyps was yet more doubtful then ether of theſe two, & as wee ſee by the Councel of Laodicea, leafte oute of the rolle of Canonicall writinges,Cōei. Laod. can. 59. when both the other of S. Iames and S. Paule were put in. Wherefore, as falſe that is which M.VV. conſtantlie auoucheth of the auncient Church, touchinge the ſeueringe of theſe ſacred volumes, ſo hath he not yet, nor euer ſhalbe able with reaſon to ſatisfie M. Martins demaund, why they of England haue cō
               deſcēded to admit the one rather then the other.
            And here the reader may conſider & eſteeme as it deſerueth, of that glorious 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
which in fine he ſingeth

to him ſelf, ſettinge the crowne of triumphe vppon his owne head and his felowes.Pap. 24. M.VV. brag of cōfuting the catholike doctrine, vayne and impoſsible. 
               Nothing (ſaith he) is novv more vulgar then the Papiſts arguments againſt vs. Quicquid afferri a quoquam potuit, vidimus, diluimus, protriuimus. vvhat ſo euer could be ſaid of anie of them al, vve haue ſeene it, refelled it, and trode it vnder foote: he may conſider I ſaie, how like this man and his companions are to worke ſuch maiſteries, who as yet knowe not what thoſe weapons are, which they ſhould vſe in atchiuing ſuch conqueſts. For whereas they vaunt to doe this by the written worde, & yet are not reſolued amōgeſt them ſelues what that written word is, and how farre it extendeth, it is as fantaſtical a parte to bragge of victorie, as if a mad man ſhould rūne into the field to ſlea his enemie, and when he commeth there, knoweth not with what weapon to begin the fight. Wherefore wel may he, and his felowes heare and ſee the Catholike doctrine, as Eſai ſpeaketh of the Iewes concerninge the doctrine of Chriſt,Mat. 13. v. 14 
               hearing shal you heare & shall not vnderſtand, and ſeeing shal yovv ſee and yovv shall not ſee, and wel may they treade it vnder theire feete, as our Sauiour parabolically foreſpake that heretikes

wold doe, when he ſaid:Mat. 7. v. 6. 
               Nolite proiicere margaritas ante porcos, ne forte conculcēt eas pedibus ſuis, but to refel, confute, & ſuppreſſe it, that is no more poſſible, then that Chriſt ſhould be falſe of his worde and promiſſe,Mat. 16. Luc. 22. 
               that the gates of hell shall not preuaile againſt it. And whereas it hath cōtinued by the proteſtāts cōmon graūt, aboue a thouſand yeares, in truth, euer ſince Chriſt his paſsion, againſt other maner of tempeſts then theſe are, heretikes of excellēt learning, hereſies of maruelous ſubtilitie, moſt mightie Emperours, rulers of the worlde: now to imagine that it maie be vanquiſhed of theſe groſſe and contrarie hereſies, fortified with no maner of learning, wherof manie are ſo baſe, that men euē by the light of nature abhorre thē, hauing nothing to mainteine thē ſelues, but onlie a vaine challēginge of the Spirite, and bold crakinge of the vvord of the Lord, which a parrat cā doe with a litle inſtruction as well as they, thus I ſaie to talke, were more fit for Paſquillus Eſtaticus, or a ſicke man whē he raueth, than a ſober Diuine, that wayeth what he ſpeaketh.
         
         
            
            CHAP. III. Hovv M. VV. defendeth Luther preferring his priuate iudgment before all auncient fathers and Doctors.
            
               NEXT commeth in againe frier Luther, whō 
               M. Martin accuſed for ſaynge that he eſteemed not a thouſande Auguſtines, Cipriās, & Churches, whē they are againſt him. That the reader may better carie awaie the matter, I wil firſt put downe Luthers wordes where vpon this controuerſie ſtandeth, after it ſhal be eaſier to iudge how aptlie M. VV. defence is framed. The wordes of Luther,
               Luther tom. 2. contr. Regem Angl. fol. 342. are in his booke written againſt King Henrie the eight her Maieſties father, and are theſe. But I (ſaith he) againſt the ſaynges of fathers, of men, of Angels, of deuels, ſet not old cuſtome, not multitude of men,
               The cōmon vaine & ſpirit of euerie Secte of proteſtants. 
               but the vvord of the onlie eternall maieſtie, the Gospel. here I ſtand, here I ſit, here I glorie, here I triumphe, here I inſult ouer Papiſts, Thomiſts, Henriciſts, Sophiſts, and all the gates of hell, much more ouer the ſaynges of men, be they neuer ſo holie. Gods vvorde is aboue al, the diuine maieſty maketh for me, ſo as I paſſe not, if a thouſād Auſtines, a thouſand Ciprians,
               Henricianae eccleſiae. 
               a thouſand Kinge-Harrie Churches

ſtoode againſt me. God can not erre or deceaue. Auſtine, Ciprian, and likevviſe all other elect might erre, & they haue erred. here anſvvere maiſter Harrie, here plaie the mā. I cōtene thy lies, I feare not thy threates, here thovv ſtādeſt aſtonished like a ſtock &c. Theſe are the wordes with which M. Martin findeth faulte. M.VV. defendeth them thus.Pag. 6. 
               If Luther had preferred him ſelf before all fathers & Churches, he vvere not to be borne vvithal. but this Luther neuer challenged to himſelf. But in ſome cauſes, Luther might eſteeme more his ovvne iudgement, then the authoritie of Auſtine, or Ciprian, or a thouſand Churches. For if that vvhich Luther taught, vvere agreable to Gods vvord, Luthers iudgment vvas to be preferred, before all the contrary iudgments of all men liuinge.
            
            Before I enter into the examination of this anſwere, let me demaunde this one thinge in courteſie of you M.W. what the reaſon is,Luthers extreme hatred againſt the Sacramentaries & Zuinglians. whie you ſo buſilie and eagerlie defende Luther, be his wordes neuer ſo ſtrange, or fanatical. or whie is the Pope Antichriſt for reſiſting your Goſpel, whereas Luther you aduaunce, if not into the place of Chriſt, yet at leaſt amonge the number of his Apoſtles. Did the Pope of Rome euer perſequute your zuinglian

goſpel,Cle
                     •••
                  ius a Zuinglian made a booke intituled, victoria venitatis & 
                     •
                  uti
                     •
                  a papa
                     •
                  us Saxonici. an. 1561 with more deadly hatred, then did that pope of Saxonie? Did he not from the verie beginning, to his later breath, holde you and your brethren, for moſt damnable wretches, and profeſſed enemies of the eternall teſtament of Chriſt? Are you ignorant, how for this cauſe, he wrote whole volumes agaynſt your firſt Apoſtle Zuinglius?Confeſſ. orthodox. Eccleſ. Tig
                     •
                  r. tractat. 3. 
                     •
                  o. 108. Read you neuer the Confeſſion of your brethrē of the Tigurine church where thus they complaine? Lutherus ſtatim ab initio, m
                     •
                  rdere, furere, conuitiari, & bacchari coepit &c. Luther preſently at the beginning, began to byte, to play the mad man, to raile and rage, and beſides this, he filled his bookes vvith the horrible names of Deuils, Sectaries, Sprites, mad men: and vvhatſoeuer ſlaunders came to his minde,
               Immaniter contra nos expuit. 
               he caſt them out agaynſt vs outragiouſly. Complaine they not in the preface of that Confeſſion, that he inueigheth againſt them as againſt obſtinate heretikes,
               Ibid. in prefat. fol. 3.
                     •
                  . 
               and ſuch as are guiltye to themſelues of all impietie, as prophaners of the Sacraments, and the moſt vyle and peſtilent men that goe on the ground? He proſcribeth and condemneth firſt of al the faithful doctors and miniſters of God, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, and their diſciples vvhereſoeuer they be: all frindſhip and communion vvith vs, he

compteth vvicked & abominable: and vvhat ſoeuer commeth frō vs, be it letters, be it bookes, be it ſalutations, be it benedictions, he vvill not only not reade, but he vvill not ſo much as vouchſafe to looke vppon them, or heare them ſpoken of: ſo farre forth,
                  Lauatie
                        •
                     . in hiſtoria Sacram. fol. 32.
                  Luther rei
                        •
                     cteth the bible tranſlated by the Zuinglians, how much more ought catholiks to auoyded the ſame?
                that when Eroſchouerus the zuinglian printer of zuricke ſent him a bible trāſlated by the diuines there, Luther ſent it him backe againe with this greetinge, that he ſhould not ſend him anie thinge that proceeded from the miniſters of the Tigurine church. for he vvould haue no dealinge vvith them, nether vvoulde he receaue or reade their bookes: for the churches of God could not communicate vvith thē. Yea, he proteſteth that he had rather ſuſteine a hundred ſeueral deathes, then to become of your opinion, or ſhew any coūtenance of bearing fauour to it.In cōfeſsio. Tigur. vers supra fo. 30. 
               The Lord defend (ſayth he) that I vvittingly and vvillingly by the authority of my name, ſhould couer or confirme the verie leaſt error of the fanatical Sacramētaries. Nam vel centies laniari aut igne comburi mallē &c. For I had rather be torne in peeces or burnt vvith fier a hū
                  dred times, thē to folovv the opinion, and agree in doctrine, vvith zvvinglius, Oecolampadius, & the reſt of thoſe miſerable, vnfortunate, fanatical men. Finally, know you not M. W. that thus he began, thus he went foreward,

thus he continued, thus he ended his daies, dyinge ſuch a mortal enemye to you, that he ſeemed to make his h
                  •
               
               tred and deteſtation of your church and goſpel, a peece of his iuſtificatiō before Chriſte? as in his laſt Confeſſion made a litle before his death, and recorded in the foreſaid Confeſſion of Zurake it appeareth.Confeſ. Tigur. tract. 3. fol. 108. 
               Ego qui iam ſepulchro vicitus obambulo, hoc teſtimoniam et hanc gloriam ad Chriſti ſaluatoris tribunal perferam &c. I (ſaith he) that novv vvalke nye to my graue, vvill carie this teſtimonie and this glorie to the tribunal ſeate of Chriſt my Sauiour, that I haue vvith all earneſtnes, condemned and auoyded thoſe fanaticall men and enemies of the Sacrament,
               The Zuinglians condemne them ſelues in defending Luther. 
               Zuinglius, OEcolampadius, Stinckf
                     •
                  ldius, and their ſcholer, vvhether they be at Zuruke, or in vvhat place elſe ſoeuer vnder the ſ
                     •
                  nne. Thus Luther.
            If you know this Maiſter Whitaker, as you wil ſeeme to be ignorant of nothing, what maketh you ſo buſily to defend Luthers barbarous and proude vauntes, as though he were ſuch a piller, without whom your church could not ſtande? But belyke it is ſufficient, that he was an Apoſtata frier as were the founders of your goſpel, that he with you agreed in rayling at the Pope

and Sea of Rome, and ſo for his agreeing with you in theſe ſmaler toyes, you care not for his diſagreeing from you in thoſe weightie matters. Wel, be it as you liſte, and perhaps you haue more reaſon then I perceaue, otherwiſe you ſhall neuer be able to iuſtifie this demeanure in the ſight of any man endued with common ſence. Let vs heare how conningly you cure this ſtinking ſore. for nothing ſtinketh more before the face of God and man, then a poore contemptible wretch, ſo Lucifer-lyke to prefer him ſelfe before inumerable, excellent, learned, and glorious Saintes of God. What diſtinction haue you to ſaue Luthers honeſtie? Forſooth this:M.W. diſtinctiō, whē Luthers iudgemēt is to be preferred before al the Church. 
               In certaine caſes, Luther might more eſteeme of his ovvne iudgement, then of Auſtine, Ciprian, or a thouſand Churches. For if that vvhich Luther taught, vvere agreable to Gods vvord, then Luthers iudgment vvas to be preferred before the contrarie iudgment of al men and Churches. Here M. VV. thinketh he hath ſpoken much to the purpoſe, and therefore aduaunceth him ſelfe alofte. Scripturam Lutherus protulit, cuinullus mortalis reſiſtit, quaeque tandem Pontificiis decretis peſtē atque exitium afferet. Luther brought vvith him ſcripture vvhich no mortall man

can vvithſtand, and vvhich at length shall be the bane and diſtruction of the Popish decrees.
            
            That I may the better conceaue this diſtinction, and ether yelde to it if it ſtand with reaſon, or diſcouer the vanitie of it, if it fal out to be but a peeuiſh battologie of wordes as I trowe it will proue: let me require a playner explication of that parte.The folie of M.W. diſtinction. 
               Luther might vvell prefer his iudgment before a thouſand Auſtines, Ciprianes and Churches, if he ſpake vvith ſcripture. 
                Is this the meaning, that in caſe and controuerſie of religion, if a thouſand Ciprians, that is, all the Fathers teach vs one thing, and bringe ſcriptures for them, and one father Luther teach vs the contrarie, and bringe ſcriptures for him, may Luther in this caſe preferre his owne iudgement before al thoſe Fathers? if ſo, as the ſpeach it ſelfe is ſo monſtrous execrable as the deuil him ſelfe can not open his mouth into more horrible pride, ſo what hereſie, what Apoſtaſie, what Atheiſme in the church can euer be cō
               trouled, if this rule be made currante? why ſhoud Arrius yelde to the Councel of Nice? Neſtorius to the Councel of Epheſus? Macedonius to the Coūcel of Conſtantinople? ſeinge they brought

ſcriptures for them, and by this rule ought to haue preferred their priuate iudgment before thoſe byſhops, as Luther & his offpringe doe theirs, before the Councel of Trente,  or will he
ſay, that if perhaps a thouſand Auſtines and Churches teache ſome doctrine without the writtē worde of God, that is, citing no text for it, & Luther againſt the ſame, bring the written worde, that is, ſome texte of the ſcripture after his ſēſe, in this caſe, he may better eſteeme of himſelfe then of al the reſt.
            But firſt, he can neuer geue inſtance that ether the auncient fathers did ſo in their tymes, or that we do ſo now. for howſoeuer in the Councels of Nice, of Epheſus, of Chalcedon, the byſhops ſtoode much vppō the traditiō of their elders (ea que ſunt patrum teneantur,
               Cone. Chal. actio. 1. Lirine. cont haereſ. ca. 43. ſay they, ſic credere à ſanctis patribus edocti ſumus, let vs hold faſt the fayth and decrees of our fathers, thus to beleeue vve haue bene taught by our holye fathers) yet they wāted not ſcriptures, as nether did the fathers in the Councel of Trent, nor we at this day in our controuerſies with the proteſtantes. And if thoſe auncient fathers had alleaged no direct & euident place againſt Arrius, Neſtorius, Eutyches,

yet notwithſtanding, the Chriſtian people were bound to beleeue them, grounding them ſelues only vpō the Catholike & vniuerſal fayth of the churches which were before them, as they did in the queſtion of our B. Ladies perpetual virginitie. And albeit the heretike brought ſome clauſes of ſcripture for the cōtrary part, yet ought al faithful men to yeld no more credit thereto, thē to the deuil when he alleaged ſcripture againſt our ſauiour.Mat. c. 4. v. 6. becauſe, as the deuil ſo al heretikes may vſe ſcripture againſt the true ſenſe and meaning thereof:Ioan. c. 14. et 16. Epheſ. cap. 4. b. c. Eſa. ca. 59. v. 21. the vniuerſal church cā neuer teach or beleeue ſo, as by Chriſt him ſelf we are aſſured. And this caſe in effect cōmeth to one iſſue with the former. for, geue this ſcope to an heretike, that all the Biſhops, Churches & Fathers may erre & he alone, if he can alleage a text, may therefore rightly contemne al other in reſpecte of him ſelfe, as euery Sectmaiſter doth and hath done, where is the Churches quietnes? what order is there for cōtinuance of fayth? to what ende was the comminge of Chriſt? to what vſe, the ſendinge of the holy Ghoſt?  Or perhaps M. W. wil ſay, poſito per impoſsibile that all the Churches & fathers

teach againſt ſcripture,In this caſe the authoritie of the deuel as wel as of Luther is better thē all Fathers, or al the angels of heauen. Gal. 1. & Luther alone teache with ſcripture, then lo Luther maye thinke him ſelfe a better man then they all. and this is true, & this I graunte: as in like maner I confeſſe that if the heauen ſhoulde falle, we knowe what woulde folow. And yet of theſe two ſuppoſitions, the Spirit of God putteth the later to be more poſſible,Ierem. 31. g. & 33. d. that the courſe of heauen ſhal ſoner alter, then the Catholike Churche of the new Teſtamēte fal frome Chriſte to Apoſtaſie.
            
                But it may, be M.VV. wil ſay, I ſcanne
his wordes to narrowlie, his meaning is plaine, that whereas Luther bringeth ſcriptures againſt vs, that is, againſt all the Auſtines, and Ciprianes, of the Catholike Church, all the Byſhops now liuinge, he maye well truſte his owne iudgmente. if this be the meaning, yet ſtil al commeth to one ende. and whie may Luther ſo do, more then Caluine? whie Caluine, more then Muncerus? whie a Zwingliā, more then a Puritane, Anabaptiſte, or Trinitarian? Or what aſſurance hath he, more then thoſe other?Luthers iudgement with ſcripture againſt the Sacrametaries.
            
            But if Luthers iudgment bringinge ſcriptures with him, be ſo forcible againſt vs, may not we, (trow you) Lutherize

a litle after your example, and ſay the ſame againſt you? As for example.Luther to. 7. A defence of the literal ſenſe of our Sauiours wordes etc. againſt the fanatical ſprites of the Sacramē
                  taries. 
               Luther hath made a booke entituled, defenſio 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
verborum coenae, accipite & comedite, hoc est corpus meum, contra fanaticos Sacramentariorū ſpiritus. In that booke not very longe or large, yet contayninge more ſubſtāce then ſome whole volumes of his do, his principal concluſion riſinge vpon this texte of ſcripture, and grounded vpon many texts of ſcripture beſide, is, that he and his,Ibi. fol. 383. 
               vvill and maye retaine external peace and ciuil concord vvith the Zuinglians in matters temporal, but quoad ſpiritum, eos ad extremum vſque halitum deuitabimus, arguemus, & damnabimus pro idololatris, verbi Dei corruptoribus, blasphemis, & deceptoribus &c. touchinge the ſoule and matters ſpiritual, vve vvil auoide thē as long as vve haue a day to liue, vve vvil reproue and condemne them for idolaters, corrupters of Gods vvorde, blasphemers,
               The Sacramentaries enemies of the goſpell by Luthers iudgmēt cō
                  firmed with ſcripture. 
               and deceauers, and of them as enemies of the Gospel, vve vvill ſuſtaine perſecution and ſpoile of our goods vvhat-ſoeuer they ſhal do vnto vs, ſo lōge as God vvill permitte. And in the ſame leafe it foloweth immediatelye: aptlye may vve ſay to theſe men offeringe vs peace, as Chriſte ſaide to Iudas in the garden, Iudas vvith a kyſse betrayeſt

thou the ſonne of man? So this is the very peace and kiſſe of Iudas: for offeringe vs their friendſhip, they vvoulde vvithal obtaine of vs to holde our peace, and in ſilence beholde the fyers and ſlaughters, vvhereby they thruſt headlong infinite thouſandes of ſoules dovvne to hell. Here is Luthers iudgmente, and that with ſcripture. for againſte al communion with the Zuinglians, he in this place vrgeth the wordes of our ſauiour Math. 10. verſ. 34. Luk. 14. v. 26.2. Cor. 6. v. 14. Eph. 4. v. 5. May Luther now prefer his iudgmente thus qualified, before a thouſande Caluines, a thouſand Peter Martyrs, or who-ſoeuer els be the greateſt doctors of your congregatiōs, before all Zuinglian churches? Or if Luther may ſo do, may not we do the like, and thinke of you as he doth, and that by vvarrante geuen vs from your ovvne mouthe? Maye vve not ſaye to you vpon like grounde. Scripturam Lutherus protulit cui nullus mortalis reſiſtit, &c. Luther hath brought ſcripture vvhich no man can vvithſtand, and vvhich at lenght ſhal be the bane and ouerthrovve of all the Zuinglian and Caluiniſtical opinions?
            
            Now if (which is the extreme refuge) you wil ſay, that Luthers iudgmēt

againſt you is not agreable to ſcripture, and therfore not ſo deepely to be accompted of, then ſee I beſeeche you how finely and ſuttely you haue fet this matter about. for now the ſenſe of your diſtinctiō is, that whē Luther affirmeth any thing agreable to the ſcriptures, by iudgment of your ſelfe, he ought to eſteeme more of it, thē of a thouſand Auſtines, a thouſād Ciprianes, & an innumerable cōpany of catholike churches. And thus,Euerie proteſtant, ſoueraine iudge of ſcripture Coūcels. doctors, old & new. whiles you firſt geue Luther power to iudge ouer al Fathers, Doctors, and Councels, and then make your ſelf iudge ouer Luther, to approue & reproue him as you pleaſe, who ſeeth not that in fine, you make your ſelf ſupreme iudge of altas before of ſcriptures, ſo now of Fathers and Councels, old and new, Catholike and heretike, no leſſe of your owne doctors, then the auncient fathers and doctors of Chriſtes church,See the 5. chap. in the beginning. which is in deede the verie laſt refuge and extreme reſolution of all your new diuinitie.
            Finally (becauſe it greeueth me to ſpēde time in ſuch vnreaſonable pelfe) may it pleaſe you at your better leyſure, to conſider the ſenſe of this parcel, & to put it downe ſomewhat more

intelligiblie, and if you can ſo do, and ſaue your ſelfe from the note of much foly (for, from beinge an heretike by Luthers iudgment, what ſoeuer the anſwere be, you ſhall neuer ſaue your ſelfe) you ſhal performe a matter of more difficultie, then perhaps you are aware of. In the meane ſeaſon, as it ſtandeth, it carieth with it groſſe faultes, as manie welnie as it hath lines: whether you oppoſe Luther to the auncient primitiue Churche, as it ſeemeth, and as doubtleſſe he meante, or to the catholike churche of our time, whiche you woulde inferre, or to your owne deuided Zuinglian congregation, which by like ſequele doth folow, or whether you conſider Luther in this caſe, only as one principal author of your Goſpel, & ſo make this priuiledge common to him with other, or rather conſider him ſingularly by himſelfe, becauſe he was the firſt that brake the yſe, and opened the waye to this ſoule Apoſtaſie, which is now ſo far ſpread: or finally whether you thus aduaūce Luther, but euer holdinge the raynes in your owne handes, which (I weene) muſt be your laſte refuge, and final determination.
         
         
            
            CHAP. IIII. Of prieſthode, end the ſacrifice continued after Chriſt in the ſtate of the nevv teſtament, and that it derogateth nothing from Chriſt.
            
               THE difference betwene you & M. Martin aboute prieſtes, is no priuate, but a general controuerſie betweene all Catholiks and Proteſtants. your miniſter like termes of Baalites,
               pa. 7 
               and Antichriſtian ſacrificers, I cōtemne, & am cō
               tente to diſſemble. many breaths more ſtronge and ranke then this, we muſte gladly abide, or els we are not ſuch, as by Goddes mercy, we hope & profeſſe our ſelues. Comfortably ſaith our ſauiour,Mat. 10. v. 24. 
               the diſciple is not aboue his maiſter, nor the ſeruante aboue his lorde. if they haue called the goodman of the houſe Beelzebub, hovv much more them of his houſholde? therefore feare ye them not. For to comforte our ſelues withal, if we be Baalites and Antichriſtians in reſpecte of oure prieſthode, then certainly Chriſte is the capitaine Baal & Antichriſte, from whom our prieſthode deſcendeth. And that will I proue in few, principally and firſt, by your owne wordes, ſecondarilye

by manifeſte deduction out of the ſcriptures.
            A prieſt you define thus,pa. 6. Who are truly prieſts. 
               Sacerdotes ii verè & propriè ſunt qui ſacrificia faciunt, qualis fuit Aaron & Aaronis filii, & Melchiſedechus, & quem illi adumbrabant, Chriſtus. Prieſtes truly and properly are they that offer ſacrifices, ſuch as vvas Aaron, and the ſonnes of Aaron, & Melchiſedech, and Chriſte vvhom they prefigured. Thoſe that offer ſacrifice, you acknowledge to be prieſtes truly and properly, not onlye by abuſe of ſpeeche, as in this place againſte S. Auſtine you falſly cauille. In the number of ſuch prieſtes that offered ſacrifice, you reckē 
               Melchiſedec,
               Melchiſedec did ſacrifice. 
               & after him Chriſte, of vvhom Melchiſedec vvas a figure. This you woulde neuer haue ſaid, had you bene ſkilful ether in your owne diuinitie, or in the faith of the Catholike Church. for although hetherto we haue many wayes laboured, and vſed all poſsible meanes of proufe that Melchiſedec offered ſacrifice, yet we could neuer obtaine ſo much of your brethren, becauſe they wel ſaw, that therein was included the manifeſt confirmatiō of the Catholike faithe touching prieſthod, & the vtter ruine of your Geneuiā Miniſterye. For if

Melchiſedec ſacrificed, then was it in bread and wine, for other ſacrifice of his neuer man imagined, and the ſcripture proueth it inuincibly, which mencioneth that, & no other, nor by worde, ſillable, or title, geueth the leſte inſinuation of any beſides. Then how neceſſarilie it muſte folow, that Chriſte ſacrificed in like maner, and how from him, power to do the ſame is deriued vnto prieſtes of the new teſtament, this ſhal be ſhewed hereafter.
            Firſt of all, that of Melchiſedecs ſacrifice beinge moſt certaine, & of you graunted, and of vs beleeued, you ſhall here note how ſtubborne & deſperate, yea beyond al meaſure,The ſacrifice of Melchiſedec denied generally by the proteſtants though confeſſed by M. W. ſtubborne and deſperate are your felowes & maiſters, who in this ſo euidente a truth, haue hetherto reſiſted the Church, & would neuer confeſſe, that ether Melchiſedec did the one, or Chriſte the other. I wil not ſtay to proue it, becauſe you confeſſe it: only for plainer declaration, I wil touch the matter briefly. In the booke of Geneſis, where onely is deſcribed this ſacrifice, thus we reade. Melchiſedec rex Salem,
               Gen. 14. 
               proferēs panem & vinum (erat enim ſacerdos Dei altiſsimi) benedixit et. Melchiſedec king of Salem, bringinge

forth bread and vvine (for he vvas the prieſte of the moſte high God) bleſſed him, that is,Heb. c. 7. v. 6 
               Abraham. In theſe wordes, we ſee the reaſon geuen of Meſchiſedecs prieſthode, & the ſame to conſiſte in his action aboute the bread and wine, that is, in his ſacrificinge as M. .W. telleth vs. But the Proteſtātes to auoide this, into how many formes and faſhions haue they turned them ſelues? How many quirkes and falſe ſleightes haue they deuiſed? vntil in fin, they haue ronne in maner generally, to corrupte the ſacred text for auoyding of this inconuenience. In moſte of their writinges, & manye of their tranſlations, they geue the ſenſe thus: that M
                  •
               lchiſ
                  •
               d
                  •
               c kinge of Salem, brought forth bread & wine, & becauſe he was a prieſte of the moſt hygh God, therefore bleſſed Abraham. So writeth Muſculus in his common places. That part of the ſentence,
               Muſ. in loc. com. cap. de Miſſ. papiſt pa. 492. 
               (and he vvas prieſte of the moſte high God) is to be referred to that vvhich folovveth, vz, and he bleſſed him for as a kinge, he brought forth to Abraham bread & vvine, as a prieſt, he gaue him his bleſsinge. Vpon this reaſon, to make the holy texte more aptlie ſerue this heretical deuiſe, in the Engliſhe Bible it is turned thus.Bib. printed anno, 1579. 
               Melchiſedec kinge

of Salem,
               Corruption of the ſcriptures. 
               broughte forth bread & vvine, & he vvas a prieſte of the moſte high God, therefore he bleſſed him. Thus the proteſtants commonly interprete it, and to note one for al, thus writeth Caluine, in his commē
               tarie vpon the Hebrews.Cal. in. com. in epiſto. ad Heb. c. 7. v. 9 
               Prius illud quod narrat, regium, fuit, &c. That firſte thinge vvherof Moyſes ſpeaketh in the ſtorie of Melchiſedec, vvas the parte of a Kinge, to refreaſhe vvith bread and vvine, thoſe that came vveary from the fight: the bleſsinge apperteined to his prieſtly function. The difference betwene him and the aunciente fathers, in the ſame paragraph he compriſeth thus.Ibid. 
               Hereby is refuted their deuiſe vvho ſeeke out the cheefe reſemblance (betvveene Chriſt and Melchiſedec) in bread and vvine. VVe ſee the Apoſtle ſearcheth out euery particular point diligently and curiouſly: he purſueth the name of the man, the ſeate of his Kingdome, the eternitie of his life, the right of his tithes, the benediction vvhich he gaue to Abraham. In any of theſe there vvas leſſe vveight thē in the oblation. ſhal vve ſay, that the holy Ghoſt forgat himſelf, vvhē he maketh ſtay vppon theſe ſmale matters,
               Caluin reiecteth the aū
                  ciēt fathers touchinge the ſacrifice of Melchiſedec. 
               and omitteth that vvhich vvas the principal, and most perteined to the purpoſe? vvherefore I marueile the more that ſo many old Doctors of the Churche vvere poſſeſſed vvith this opinion,

that they ſtayd vpon the oblation of bread & vvine. For thus they ſay. Christ is a prieſt after the order of Melchiſedec. but Melchiſedec offered bread and vvine: ergo bread and vvine appartaine to Chriſts prieſthode. Thus far Caluin.Cal. in pſal. 110. the like he writeth in his cō
               mentarie vppon the Pſalmes. I will not ſtand to ſatisfie his marueiling, why the Apoſtle ſhould pretermitte that which the holie fathers after obſerued. In one worde this I ſay, that if he had wayed, ether the preface of the Apoſtle when he began this argument, ſaing,Heb. 5. v. 11. 
               of Melchiſedec vve haue great ſpeache, and inexplicable to vtter: or the ſame Apoſtles maner of writing & preaching at other times, to lyke auditors, or S.1. Cor. ca. 2. ver. 5. ca. 3. ver. 2. Hier. ep. 126 ad Euagri. Greg. Nazi. Hierome handling this matter, & geuing reaſon of the Apoſtles ſo doing, or S. Gregorie Nazianzene in his oration de moderatione in diſputationibus ſeruāda, or in his ſecond oration de theologia, he would perhaps eaſelie haue leaft of marueiling, and rather haue marueiled at his owne folie, who could be moued to marueile at a thing ſo reaſonable and ordinarie.
            But touching our purpoſe, let the chriſtian reader, out of Caluin note theſe two pointes. The one is, that Caluin

and the Caluiniſtes generally, find nothing wherein Melchiſedec ſacrificed, & ſo by ſacrificing prefigured the ſacrifice & prieſthode of Chriſt: The other is, that the auncient fathers and the catholike Church, acknowledge Melchiſedec to haue ſacrificed, and that in bread and wine, and by that ſacrifice to haue foreſhewed Chriſts ſacrificing in like maner, and to this ſide M. W. forſaking Caluin and the Proteſtāts ioyneth him ſelfe.Chriſt did ſacrifice at his laſt ſupper. This therefore is cleare, that Chriſt fulfilled this prefiguratiue ſacrifice of Melchiſedec: & we neuer finde it done, but only thē when he offering bread and vvine, that is (ſayth S.Cip. ep. 63. Ciprian) his ovvne bodie and bloud,
               Luke 22. 
               aftervvards ſayd to his diſciples: hoc facite in meam commemorationem, and then (as witneſſeth S.Iren. li. 4. ca. 32. Ireneus) noui Teſtamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam eccleſia ab Apoſtolis accipiens, in vniuerſo mundo offere Deo. he taught the nevv oblation of the nevv Teſtament, vvhich the Church receauing from the Apoſtles, in the vvhole vvorlde offereth vnto God.
               The ſacrifice of the Maſſe deduced directly from Chriſt by M. Whit. owne graūt. This being true, as M. W. graū
               ting ſo far as he doth, can not go backe, nor poſſiblie inuent any tergiuerſatiō, thus I frame him an argument.
            That which Chriſt did, and appointed

to be done, that may and ought to be done.
            But Chriſt at his laſt ſupper offered ſacrifice according to the order of Melchiſedec, and appointed the Apoſtles and prieſtes to do the ſame:
            Ergo the Apoſtles and prieſts may and ought to offer ſacrifice.
            The Maior is euidente, and no Chriſtian will denie it. The Minor hauing two parts, is proued touching the later, by Chriſtes expreſſe commaundemēt, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem, doe this for a commemoration of me. the former wherein lieth the difficultie, is acknowledged by M. W. for if not only Aaron, but alſo Melchiſedec offered ſacrifice, & thereby prefigured Chriſt, thē it foloweth of neceſſitie, that Chriſte offered ſacrifice, not only in bloudie maner as did Aaron, but alſo in vnbloudie and miſtical ſort, as did Melchiſedec,Pſal. 109. Heb. 7. according to whoſe order he is ſpecially named a prieſt, & ſo by perfit correſpondence, fulfilled that antecedent figure. & hereto S. Ciprian, S. Ireneus, S. Auſtine, and al the auncient fathers, accordinge to Caluines confeſſion and euident truth, geue witnes: that M. W. be not leaft poſt alone, to ſuſtaine ſo great

a burden. Of this firſt argument, I deduce one more.
            They who may and ought to offer ſacrifice, as did firſt Melchiſedec, and afterwarde Chriſte, are truly and properly, ſacerdotes.
            
            But prieſtes of the new teſtament, may and ought to offer ſacrifice in ſuche ſort.
            Ergo they are truly and properlye ſacerdotes, prieſts.
            
            The Maior is true and ſet downe in forme by M.W. the Minor is the concluſion of the laſt argumēt, and ſo proued ſufficiently alreadie: then I hope the Concluſion will ſtand. wherefore leauinge this matter for M. W. to ſcanne, and to recorde with him ſelfe, who is that Baal, founder of the prieſthode of the new teſtament, now may we vew with better iudgment, how ſubſtantially he anſwereth S.Aug. ciui. li. 20. ca. 10. Auſtines place de Ciuitate dei, where S. Auſtine doth diſtinguiſhe betweene all Chriſtians, vvho are vnproperly called prieſtes becauſe of their miſtical Chriſme and vnitie vvith Chriſte,
               Propter miſticu chriſma. 
               & others, qui proprie iam vocantur in eccleſia ſacerdotes & epiſcopi, that properlie are novv called in the Church, prieſtes and byſhops: and properlie ſuch are they by M. W. definition

which properly offer ſacrifice. M.W. āſwereth,pag. 
                     •
                  . 
               that the name (prieſt) vvas of olde tyme, after a more peculiar ſorte applied to the paſtors and miniſters that handled the vvorde and ſacramentes, but there vvas an abuſe in ſo ſpeakinge. then you agree not with S. Auſtine, who teacheth that propriè, in proprietie of ſpeach, they were ſo called. who, if they had then to execute no other prieſtly function, then haue now the Engliſhe miniſters, as M. W. ſuppoſeth, or wolde pretend, I graunte the worde prieſte could not be applied to them but as abuſiuely, as if one woulde cal a ciuil magiſtrate by that name, or one of the Quenes Readers in the Vniuerſities. For, preachinge of the worde, & miniſtringe of ſome one or other ſacramente, although in the Catholike Church it be done by prieſtes, yet properlie that is not the reaſon why they are called by that name. but the true reaſon, is that which M.W. rendereth, quia propriè offerunt ſacrificia, becauſe properly they offer ſacrifice. Now, that S. Auſtine meante of prieſtes in this ſort, & that himſelfe was ſuch a prieſte,S. Auſtine a prieſt. to paſſe ouer many pregnante and euidente places in him, for breuities ſake I refer you to the knowen ſtory of his

mothers death. Where ſhe firſte of al in her death-bed requeſteth,Aug. Cōf. li. 9. cap. 11. 
               that her ſonne vvould remember her at the altar of God. When after her death, the corps beinge brought into the Churche, and placed beſide the graue, before the tyme of burial, prayers were ſayd,
               Ibid. ca. 12. 
               & the ſacrifice of our price and redemption offered for her. when afterwarde, S. Auſtine in his moſte deuoute & zelous praier made to God for her, reckneth this to her ſinguler commendacion,Ibid, c, 13. that at her departure ſhe tooke no care for coſtlie maner of burial, or ſumptuous monumente, but only deſired to be remembred at thy altar ô Lorde, from vvhence ſhe knew vvas dispenſed that holy ſacrifice,
               Coloſſ. c. 2. 
               vvhereby vvas blotted out the handvvrittinge vvhich vvas againſte vs, vvhereby triumphe vvas obtained againſt Satan our eternal enemie. & ſtraight waies: inſpire (ſaith he) ô Lorde my God, inspire to thy ſeruants my brethren, that vvho-ſoeuer of them ſhal reade this, may haue remembrance at thy altar, of Patricius and Monica my father and mother.
            
            
               An obiectiō
               But againſte this M.W. hath an obiection, as common & plaine to them that know oughte in diuinitie as Dunſtable hye way: & anſwered before hāde abundantlie, in the annotacions of the the new teſtamente, Heb. ca. 7. v. 12.

17.23. his argument is:pa. 6. 
               I ſay there are no prieſtes of the new teſtamēt that offer ſacrifice after Chriſt, who is the eternal prieſt according to the order of Melchiſedec, & obtaineth ſacerdotiū 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
an eternal prieſthod. he hath made an end of al ſacrifices, & takē away the ſucceſsion of prieſtes, & cōmitted his church to be ruled by paſtors and doctors for euer.
            
            To beginne with the laſte where you ende, if Chriſt aboliſhed all prieſthod, and left his Church to be gouerned for euer by paſtors and doctors,The Engliſh churche ruled by Paſtors, ſuch as are no prieſtes. which were no prieſtes, had this appointemēt and ordinance of his, effect, yea or no? if no, beware what yow ſay, for litle differ you from a Iew, & a man of Mahomets religion, and weake is your faith in Chriſtes godhead, if you thinke that in ſo manie places of ſcripture, he appointed ſuch a regimente for his Church,The church of Chriſte was neuer ſo ruled. which after his departure neuer tooke effect. if yea, then ſhew vs where, or when, was his Church ſo gouerned. was it a hūdred yeares ago, before Frier Luther firſt of all in our memorie, induced this kinde of gouernment? you muſt needes ſay, no. Aſcend we then 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and ten ages, vntil S. Gregories time, was it al this while gouerned by ſuch paſtors as

you deſcribe? I wene as yet you wil ſay, ſure I am you ſhould ſay, no. For thoſe paſtors, were ſtyll prieſtes, and that in proper ſenſe, as appeareth by al ſtories. Suche were our firſt Apoſtles, the conuerters of our nation, thoſe excellent men, SS. Auguſtine, Paulinus, Laurentius, Melitus, Iuſtus &c. ſacred by the Pope of Rome, or other lawfull Biſhops in obediēce of the Sea of Rome, offering ſacrifice, liuing and dying as prieſtes:Beda in eccleſ. hiſtor. Aug.. li. 1.2.3.4. as by the goodlie ſtorie of Venerable Bede our coūtryman, you may euerie where learne. Such paſtors and prieſts they were, by whom, and vnder whoſe regiment, our Churches were firſt builded, and the eccleſiaſtical ſtate of our realme ordered: as now vnder the regiment of them that cal thē ſelues paſtors no prieſtes, and are in deede no more the one then the other, all is pulled downe and ouerthrowen. And if in anie other countrie of Chriſtendome, the churches had any other regiment, ſuch as you pretēd now in England, of paſtors no prieſtes, ſhew vs your bookes, and we wil beleeue you. But you wil ſay, from S. Gregorie vpward all was ſmooth and iumpe as it is now in the Engliſh congregation. Suppoſe

that to be true. how in the meane ſeaſō can you iuſtifie your owne ſaing,in perpetuū
                that Chriſt delyuered his Church to be gouerned for euer, by ſuche maner of paſtors. Cā Chriſtes decree be made fruſtrate for ſo many ages? Can mans iniquitye (as you in your Apologie commonlie,Aug. de vnitate eccle. c. 6.10.12.20. con. epiſtol. Parm. lib. 1. c. 1. li. 2. c. 19 con. lit. pet. lib. 2. ca. 31. cō. Creſ. grā. li. 3. c. 63.64.65. but moſt bluntlie obiect) ſtoppe the courſe of Chriſtes omnipotent and eternal prouidence? know you not how copiouſlie S. Auguſtine hath confuted this ſelf ſame ſlaūderous obiectiō in your forefathers the Donatiſtes?
            But paſſe we on. come we to the firſt fathers of the primitiue Churche. were they lay miniſters after the maner of the Engliſh congregation, that is, paſtors, no prieſtes? how dare, or can you ſay ſo? ſeing in S. Auſtine manifeſtlie you ſee a ſacrificing prieſthod:Sup. pa. 23. ſeing your ſelf acknowledge Sainte Hierome to haue bene a prieſt of the Romane Church which neuer yet approued any ſuch miniſtery as you haue inuented:Bal. act rom. pont. in Leo ne. pa. 45. Calu. lib. de ſcā. et lib. de vera eccl. reformā. ratio. inter opuſe. P. Mar. in defenſ. Eucha. con. Gardi. Par 1. obiec. 156. ſeing your greate Rabbine and ſynke of iniquitie Iohn Bale, calleth S. Leo the great and firſt of that name, in plaine termes an idolater for this cauſe: ſeing your chiefe capitayne & Apoſtle Caluine, and after him P. Martir, and before

him Huldericke Zuinglius,Zuin. to. 1. Epichir. de ca none miſſae fol. 183. affirme in generall of the fathers in the primitiue Church, that for maintenāce of the vnbloudy ſacrifice, they forced & abuſed the ſcriptures.Cal. in libel. de caena domini. and Caluine more execrable then the reſt, addeth, that the aū
               ciēt Church expreſſed the verie forme and type of the Aaronical & Leuitical ſacrificing, eo excepto, quòd panis hoſtia, loco animalis vtebantur, ſauing that inſteed of a beaſt, they vſed bread. all which proueth that in propre maner of ſpeache they ſacrificed: and therefore by your owne definitiō, in propre ſpeache were prieſtes. And finallie, doth not Illyricus with his companions, confeſſe in worde & proue by deede,Sacrifice offered by prieſts, was cō
                  mō in the primitiue church, by cōfeſſion of the aduerſaries. that ſacrifices were ordinarelie offered to God in the flower of the primitiue Church, in the middeſt of the perſequutions, for the ſoules departed, in the honor of Saintes, for general and particular neceſsities, as is now vſed in the Churche of Rome? Thus write they.Cent. 3. ca. 5. col. 138. 
               To this end, S. Cyprian in his third booke and ſixte epiſtle to the prieſtes of Rome, willeth thoſe dayes diligentlie to be noted, wherein the martyrs departed this life. In the ſame place he ſpeaketh of oblations, & ſacrifices obſerued in the memories of martyrs. Let vs be informed (ſayth Tertullian) vvhat

be thoſe dayes, vvherein our bleſſed brethren by glorious death paſſe to immortalitie, that vve here may celebrate oblations and ſacrifices in remēbrance of thē. And there is verie cōmon mētion of oblations in Tertullian. as in his booke de corona militis. vve offer ſacrifices yerelie for the dead, and for byrthdayes. S.
               pro natalitiis. 
               Cyprian ſaith, that oblations and ſacrifices vvere yerelie made in the remembrance of martyrs. lib. 3. epiſt. 6. & lib. 4. epiſt. 5. & li. 1. epiſ. 9. he ſpeaketh of ſacrifice for the dead. And to end with one ſentēce of S.Ib. c. 10. col. 247. Cyprian by them alleaged, thus they cite him. Our lord Ieſus Chriſte (ſayth S. Cipriā lib. 2. epiſt. 3.) be is the high prieſt of God the father, and ſacrifice to God the father he firſt offered, and commaunded the ſame to be done in remembrance of him. And that prieſt trulie executeth Chriſts ſteede or roome, vvho doth imitate that vvhich Chriſt did, and thē in the Church offereth he a true and full ſacrifice to God the father, if he begin ſo to offer, as he ſeeth Chriſt himſelf to haue offered. Thus aſcēding from our time vp to the primitiue, and moſt pure and vncorrupte age of the Church, yet we finde not the performance of that promiſe & order ſet by Chriſt, that his Church ſhould be gouerned by paſtors that were not prieſts.
            
               
               M. Iew. challēg touchig the ſacrifice art. 17. āſwered & confuted by the chief proteſtants of our time.And here by the waye to put you in minde, becauſe in this preface, ſo freſhlie you prouoke M Martin now departed, and renew M Iewels challenge, may it pleaſe you, being put a litle beſides his byas of comparing phraſes together (which was the verie bones and marrow of M. Iew. diuinitie) to waigh how wel you can make his challenge agree with the manifeſt confeſſions of theſe your own doctors and if it lyke you to vew Caluine in the booke before quoted,Cal. de vera eccle. reforratione. yow ſhal there find fiue Doctors within M. Iewels compaſſe, by name, S. Ireneus, Arnobius, S. Athanaſius, S. Ambroſe, and S. Auguſtine, not the leaſt or meaneſt of the fathers, ether for ātiquity, or holines, or learning reproued and checked by Caluin, for this great ouerſight forſooth, becauſe to proue the vnbloudie ſacrifice of the church (which they beleued, els would they neuer haue applied the ſcripture to confirme it) they miſinterprete and falſly applie the ſcriptures, ita vidiculè (theſe are his wordes) vt diſſentire cogat & ratio et veritas, ſo ridiculouſly, as both reaſō and truth conſtraineth me to diſſent from thē. whereas if he had lyued vntil this time, and had bene acquainted but with half

thoſe phraſes,Iewel. artic. 17. con. Hatding. which in the 17 article M. Iew. hath raked together (of which benefite by your labours he might now haue bene partaker) he neuer neded to haue runne into that deſperate vaine, of bidding plaine defiance to al the primitiue church.
            And thus much being ſpoken by the way, through occaſion of M.I. challēg renewed by you, let vs returne to conclude (if it may be) our former matter. from this age vnto the primitiue church we find not (as you ſee) paſtors without prieſts. then it foloweth, ſay we, that Chriſt neuer appointed anye ſuch. For then ſurelie in ſome age, yea, in euerie age they would haue appeared. And how you wil loſe this knot I muche doute. yet I feare, you wil take Alexanders ſworde and cut it a ſunder, and now applie that to your ſelf, which before you yelded to Luther, that when your iudgment agreeth with ſcripture, you ſet more therby, then by a thouſand Auguſtines, a thouſand Ciprians, and al the churches. If you thus ſay (as I thinke you haue nothing els to ſay) yet remember that beſides theſe many Auguſtines, and Ciprians, and churches, you haue one Chriſt ſtanding againſt

you. who promiſed and apoīted (as you confeſſe) far otherwyſe.
            But paſſe we on. what ſcripture haue yow againſt prieſtes? S. Paule, vvho ſaith that Chriſt is an eternal prieſt after the order of Melchiſedec, and hath his prieſthode 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . what gather you of this? you leaue the word in greeke, as though it were ſo much the more terrible, and able to confounde al prieſtes then if it were in latin. Our old interpreter tranſlateth it, ſempiternum, Beza, perpetuum, Caluin, immutabile, Caſtalio, nunquam tranſiturum,
               1577.1579. the Engliſhe bible of one yere, vnchangeable, of an other, euerlaſtinge. make the beſt of it, and take which you liſt, or all, if ye pleaſe. The ſenſe of the Apoſtle is eaſie inough,How the prieſthode of Chriſt is eternal aboue the Prieſthode of the law. by the compariſon which he there proſecuteth: that as Chriſt had many excellent prerogatiues aboue the prieſtes or prieſthode of Aaron, ſo amonge many other this was one, that whereas the prieſthode of Aaron paſſed from one to an other, from father to ſonne, by reaſon of death, Chriſt neuer dying but euer lyuing, neuer departeth from his prieſthode, but reteineth it for euer. To make the reader better conceaue this, which though it be many times read in

your congregations, yet is perhaps neuer or ſeldome wel vnderſtoode of the miniſter himſelfe, the prieſthode of Aaron is brieflie to be recalled to memorie. In the booke of Numbers,
               Numer. 20. God thus ſpeaketh vnto Moyſes. Take Aaron and his ſonne vvith him, and leade them into the mountaine Hor. And vvhen thou haſt taken from Aaron his (prieſtlie) veſture, thou ſhalt put it on Eleazarus, and Aaron ſhal die there. Moyſes did as our lord commaūded &c. And vvhen he had ſpoiled Aaron of his garments, he put them on Eleazarus, and Aaron died there. In this ſhort ſtorie, is noted the nature and ſtate of the leuitical prieſthode paſſing from father to ſonne, and ending in the firſt by death, in lyke ſort as any other facultie of life, or bodie, ciuil or naturall endeth. But in Chriſt it is not ſo, who euer liuing, keepeth euer his prieſthode as wel as his life, neuer departing with it to anie other, as did Aaron to Eleazarus, he to Phinees, and ſo one to an other in courſe of ſucceſſion. So that Chriſt hath 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a ſempiternall, euer laſting, vnchangeable, or vnremoueable prieſthod, far otherwiſe then Aaron and the Leuitical prieſts had.
            This being the Apoſtles reaſon and

ſenſe and word, what foloweth hereof, or what would M.W. inferre? I ſee not what may be concluded, but ether it is ſo true, that we wil neuer denye it, or it is ſo fooliſh, that he ſhould be aſhamed to mention it. if he ſay Chriſt is a prieſt for euer: we affirme no leſſe. that his prieſthod paſſeth not from him: it is our beleefe. that the force and vertue thereof endureth foreuer: we liue and die therein. and all the baptiſmes, recō
               ciliations, ſacrifice, ſacramentes, al grace, vertue, ſanctification, which is in the church Catholike, dependeth of this faith, and floweth from the eternity of this one euerliuinge prieſt and prieſthode.Chriſts prieſthode is no more againſt the office of other prieſts, then his kinglie power is againſt the office of temporal kings. But will he inferre hereof, that therefore there ought to be no other inferior prieſtes, and that this derogateth from his prieſthode? this lo, is ſo chyldiſh, that amongeſt meane learned diuines, it deſerueth rather laughter then anſweare. Chriſte is a prieſt for euer, therefore there are no prieſtes: whie, then let vs argue, Chriſt is a true man for euer, therefore we are not, or he hath a ſoule for euer, therefore we haue none, or he is a kinge for euer, therefore let vs depoſe all princes, and remoue princelie authoritie. Chriſt is our doctor,

maiſter, and teacher for euer,Mat. 23. v. 
                     •
                  .10. Heb. 1. v. 2. Iac. 3. v. 1. and ſo farewel al maiſters and doctors, & ſo the Eſchequer ſhal ſaue that, which the Q. Maieſtie beſtoweth on the Vniuerſitie readers, & finallie, becauſe Chriſt liueth for euer, therefore let vs rid our ſelues out of the way, leſt we derogate from Chriſt. For as Chriſt in moſt excel lent ſorte hath the one, that is, prieſthod ſo hath he all the reſt: bodie, ſoule, kinglie power, prophecie, to be a maiſter, doctor, and teacher. all agree to him 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , & that, eternallie, vnchangeablie, and vnremoueablie.
            But ô miſerable people, whoſe ſoules are committed to ſuch teachers, & moſt vnfortunate church, where ſuch doctors poſſeſſe the principal chaires, where the very learned mē, who ſhould be lightes to the reſt, are ſo blinded with hereſie, that they ſee not ſo much, as ether common knowledge of meane diuinitie, or the continual practiſe of ciuil policie, or their verie Communiō booke thruſteth into their eyes and cares. for how is it poſsible that a learned man hauing any ſenſe of diuinitie, ſhould be moued with this new deuiſe, hanging vpon one Greeke or Latine worde, which ſo many hūdreds of learned

fathers Greeke and Latine could neuer yet eſpie.See S. Chry. Occumen. Theophil. S. Amoroſ. S. Primaſius or any other in Heb. ca. 7. but though they knew both this particular controuerſie, and generallie all truth, by many degrees more fullie, then poſsiblie can any of theſe ſectaries or ſecte-maiſters, yet were they ſo far from anie ſuch collection, that euermore, in ſaynge and writing, in teachinge and confutinge, in lyfe and death, they practiſed the contrarie.
            And what reaſonable man caſtinge his eyes vpon the Q. maieſtie, ſhould not by and by deſcrie the vanitie of this ſophiſtication.The authority of princes cōmunicated to inferior magiſtrates without iniurie of princes, ſheweth how the power of Chriſt is communicated to prieſtes without iniurie of Chriſte. for if ſhe may conferre vpon ſome of her ſubiectes, in euerie ſhier of her realme, authoritie, and gouernemēt to rule, to impriſon, to chaſtiſe, to correct, to releaſe, to decide controuerſies, to arraygne in iudgement, to condemne and execute euen vnto death, & al this, with out empayringe or diminiſhinge her princelie authoritie, nay to the much greater ſhew & declaration thereof, for ſo much as her ſubiectes doinge theſe offices vnder her, & hauing al their power depēding of her (ſhe abſolutely rulinge, & dependinge of none) by theſe ſo manye litle riuers as it were, doe more excellētly ſet forth

the largenes of the mayne ſpringe: how much more eaſelie may we conceaue this of Chriſt, our vniuerſal and abſolute kinge and prieſt, in the regiment of his Church, that he without empairinge of his ſupreme, euerlaſtinge, and incommutable prieſthode, may communicate theſe ſacred prieſtlie functions with his miniſterial officers, for the benefite of his ſubiectes the Chriſtiā-Catholikes diſperſed thorough out the world: and ſo much the more, as in euerie holie action wrought in the Church, in euerie conſecration, in euerie ſanctification, in euerie reconciliation, in euerie baptiſme, in euerie ſacramente and ſacrifice, whatſoeuer is done to the benefite of mans ſoule, Chriſt our high prieſt hath therein a more true and effectual operation concurring with his miniſter, then hath any prince vnder the ſunne, in lyke caſe, in regiment of his owne realme.
            And if this can not ſinke into their heads, how is it,The Parlamēt yeldeth to miniſters a principal part of Chriſts prieſthode, vz. power to remit ſinnes. that they conſider not their verie Cōmuniō booke, where the Parlamēt (from whēce that booke hath his authoritie) geueth power to the miniſter, in ſome caſe to remitte ſinnes, then which, nothing is more proper to

Chriſt,The Communion booke in the viſitatiō of the ſicke. nothīg more 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , nothing more neerelie vnited to his diuine perſon. And yet thus it is appointed there. Here ſhal the ſicke perſon make a ſpeciall cō
                  feſsion, if he feele his conſciēce troubled vvith any vveightie matter: after vvhich confeſſion the priest, (that is, the miniſter) ſhall abſolue him after this ſorte. And ſo foloweth a verie forme of Abſolutiō, borowed from the vſe of our Catholike Church. Our Lord Ieſus Christ vvho hath leaſt povver to his Church to abſolue al ſinners vvhich trulie repente and beleeue in him, of his great mercie forgeue thee thine offences. And by his authoritie committed to me, I abſolue thee from all thie ſynnes, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holie Ghost. Amen.
            
            Wherefore, if ether reaſon, or ſenſe, or experience, or humanitie, or diuinitie, preuaile with M. W. he can not vpō Chriſts ſempiternall prieſthode, make any probable coniecture againſt the prieſthode of the Church, or ſay, it derogateth from Chriſt. Contrarywiſe, if he wil ſtand, ether to his owne writing, or to the iudgement of his felow-zuinglians, Martir, Bale, and Caluin, or to the proofes and teſtification of the lutheranes his brethren (for ſo he calleth)

them) Illyricus, wigandus, &c. or will admitt the vniforme conſent of the fathers in the primitiue Church, or the veritie of Chriſts promiſe, he muſt needes acknowledge, not onlie that in S. Auguſtines time, but euen from the Apoſtles time, prieſtes properlie ſo called, were paſtors & rulers of the church, and haue had their origine from Chriſt. And therfore as before, ſo here I tell him againe, that in calling them Baalites & Antichriſtians, he calleth Chriſt Baal, he calleth our Sauiour Antichriſt. And therefore, if I thought my counſaile might preuaile with ſuch prophane miniſters,Rom. 9. geuē ouer (I feare) into a reprobate ſenſe, and veſſels of damnation, I would ſay, as S. Peter ſaid to Simon Magus, Repente thee of this thy vvickednes,
               Act. 8. v. 22. 
               and pray to God, if perhaps this cogitation of thy harte may be remitted thee. For in this blaſphemous ſentence, moſt certaynly he hath troden the ſonne of God vnder foote,
               Heb. 10.29. 
               and eſteemed the bloud of the Teſtament polluted, vvherein he is ſanctified, and hath done contumely to the ſpirite of grace.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            CHAP. V. Of Penance, and the value of good vvokes touching iuſtification and lyfe eternal.
            
               NEXT in place foloweth Penance, wherein M.W. keepeth his accuſtomed, ſpeaking ſo doubtfullie and ambiguouſlie, that he ſemeth not fullie reſolued, what to affirme: yet in fine, as commonlie his maner is, he yeldeth ſufficient matter to ouerthrow him ſelfe. M. Martin here noteth him of two faultes. one, that he iniurieth the fathers: the other, that he contrarieth him ſelfe. the iniurie done to the fathers is this, that he affirmeth S.
               pag. 7. 
               Ciprian and other fathers, to haue depraued the doctrine of penance.
            
            Before he come to iuſtifie this accuſation, he falleth into a common place, common to all ſortes of proteſtā
               tes, taking to him ſelfe ſupreme iudgement ouer the fathers, & complayninge of the Catholikes, that ſo it fareth vvith them,
               pa. 7. 
               that excepte thoſe thinges may preuaile vvhich in the fathers are most corrupte or vitious,
               
                  
                     •
                  itioſifiima. 
               they are not able to maintaine their cauſe. Whereunto I anſwere, that ſo it fareth with the proteſtantes, that except

they may be ſoueraigne iudges of fathers, Councels, Church, and al, they muſt hold their peace, and ſay nothing. for this is as ſtale a tricke,Euery heretiks particular hereſy is that word of god, wherby they iudge al fathers. and currant amōgſt any ſect, as any thinge hitherto ſpoken of: to proteſt much reuerence to the fathers, whē they are not againſt the word of God, that is, againſt their cōceiued hereſies. marie thē, boldlie to ſtande with the word againſt them, and ſay they were all beetle-blynd and ſaw nothinge. for when, and wherein the fathers hold with them, then, & in ſuch matters, they were worſe then madde, & altogether voyde of common ſenſe, if they would thus inueigh againſt thē. In the laſt queſtion, preſſe them with the fathers and the primitiue Church,Note theſe errors of the aūcient Fathers. touchinge external priſthod, and the ſacrifice: it was their error, ſaith Caluin, Illyricus, Zuinglius, and Bale.concerning the Sacrifice. ſee before pa. 60.61.69.70 &c. Preſſe the ſacrilegious vowbreakers, with the conſent of the primitiue Church, for condemnation of their vnlawful mariages,P. Martyr. de votis. p. 524. 
               I knovv (ſaith Peter Martir) and declared no leſſe to my auditors in Oxford, that Epiphanius vvith manie others of the fathers,
               The vnlawful mariages of prieſtes & votaries. 
               erred in that they helde it a fynne to breake the vovv of virginitie, and they do ill to number it amongeſt the Apoſtolicall traditions.
               
Charge the Engliſh Puritanes with the conſent of Antiquitie, for obſeruation of feaſts & holy-dayes in honour of Chriſt and his Saintes. M. T. C. anſwereth.T.C. pa. 122. in D. Whitg. pa. 547. 
               VVhereas M. D. VVhiteg. citeth Auguſtine and Hierom, to proue that in the churches in their tymes, there vvere holy-daies kept beſydes the Lordes day,
               The honour of Saintes. 
               he might haue alſo cited Ignatius, and Tertullian, and Ciprian, vvhich are of greater aunciencie, and vvould haue made more for the credite of his cauſe.
               What memorie of Chriſt wil they reteyn who labour to aboliſh the day of his reſurrection. 
               for it is not to be denied, but this keepinge of holy-dayes (especially of Easter, and Pentecoſt) is verie auncient, and that theſe holy-dayes for the remembrance of Martyrs vvere vſed of long tyme. but theſe abuſes vvere no auncienter then other vvere, groſſer alſo then this, and therefore I appeale from theſe exāples, to the ſcriptures. Charge the Trinitarie Proteſtantes,The B. Trinitie. the Arians of Polonia, & Seruetus, with the Coū
               cel of Nice, and Crede of Athanaſius: the Councell of Nice (ſay they) vvas a congregation of Sophiſters,
               Beza in epiſto. theolog. epiſt, 81. Cal. con. Sernetum pa. 82 
                     •
                  91. and the Crede of Athanaſius may more iuſtlie be called the Crede of Sathanaſius. the firſt Nicene fathers vvith Athanaſius, inuented this tripartite God. they vvere all blind Sophiſters, Miniſters of the Beaſt, ſlaues of Antichriſt, and bevvitched vvith his enchauntmentes.
               
(for that the Pope is Antichriſt, in that, as in verie manie other pointes they are iuſt of M.W. faith) In like ſorte dealeth the Lutherane Vbiquitarie,The perſon of Chriſt. againſt vvhoſe monſtrous hereſie, vtterlie deſtroyng the myſterie of Chriſte Incarnatiō, vvhen Bullinger vrged the conſent of al the auncient fathers, Brentius preſētly gaue this general anſwere. The fathers altogether (in this queſtion) are of no vveight or authoritie.
               Bulling. in fundam. fir. cont. Brenti. parte 2. ca. 7. 
               They vvere taught, not in the ſchole of the holy Ghoſt, but in the ſchole of Aristotle. they vvere deceiued and blynded by Ariſtotle & humaine reaſon. of celeſtial matters, they haue childiſh imaginations, and groſſe dreames, & earthlie fanſies, and carnal conceites. Thus anſwered Brentius, and thus (ſaith Bullinger of him,) Inuenit compēdium ad omnia veterum teſtimonia reſpondēdi. A ſhorte compendious vvay hath he founde, to ſolue all places of the fathers, & thus ſayth euerie heretike touching euerie controuerſie wherein the fathers ſtād againſt him. & the ſelfe ſame way hath M.W. taken. But becauſe this way is ether to large,Mat. 7. v. 13. & therefore to daū
               gerous, as lying wide open for euerie kind of heretike that hath bene, is, or cā be: or to ſtraight, if M. W. wil make it priuate to him ſelf, and deny it to all others,

let him therfore without this preiudicate condemnation, geue reaſon whie he offereth the fathers this intolerable iniurie. for ſo it muſt be called vntill he proue the cōtrarie. his reaſons are theſe.
            
               Pag. 7.
               Penance conſiſteth not in certaine externall penalties, or in a certaine exquiſite ſeueritie of diſcipline, vvhich the Apoſtle calleth 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,l. 2. v. 23. 
               vvherebie the bodie is chaſtiſed vvith certaine voluntarie puniſhmentes, but in internal dolour conceiued through remembranco of out ſinnes, and in amendmente of lyfe. and the fathers vvhen they ſuppoſed, that by ſuch greuous penalties, their ſinnes ſhould be acquited and God pleaſed, they erred greuouſly, and ſomevvhat diminiſhed the force of Christes deathe and bloud, by vvhich onlie, our ſinnes are expiated. for pardon of ſinnes is to be expected of nothinge but of the bloud of Chriſt. In which wordes three thinges I note,  his deſcription of penance,  his reaſon prouinge the ſame,  and the ſequele or abſurditie, which he inſerreth thereof, wherein ſtoode the auncient fathers error.His deſcription of penance. 
                His deſcription of penance is partlie affirmatiue, as that he requireth internal greefe of hart and correction of life: partlie is negatiue, as that he remoueth from it all externall

chaſtiſement or diſcipline. In the firſt we agree with him. in the ſeconde, we ſay he erreth, and vnderſtādeth not the ſcriptures. As without the firſt,External diſcipline and works of penāce cōmē
                  ded both in the olde and new Teſtament. Mat. 11. v. 20. the ſecond is worth nothinge, ſo ioyne them bothe together, they greatlie pleaſe God, & are highlie commended in the Goſpel. our Sauiour when he denounced vae, to Corozain and Bethſaida ſayng, if the miracles vvrought in thee, had bene done in Tyre and Sidon, they had not onlie done penance longe agoe, but they had done it in beare-cloth & aſhes, he ſheweth this external afflictiō to be verie commendable, and to make the penance more auaylable, and withall pointeth the Iewes to their Prophetes, who willed them with ſuch external humiliatiō to proſtrate them ſelues before God, thereby the ſooner to procure his mercie.Ioel. 2. 
               Conuert ye to me (ſayth the Prophete Ioel) vvith al your hart, in faſtinge, and mourninge, and lamentation, and rente your hartes and not your garmentes, ſaith our Lorde omnipotent. In the later parte of which ſentence, as he diſproueth externall ſignes, without internall remorſe, as being hipocritical & reiected of God by the Prophete Eſaie,Eſa. 1. ſo in the firſt part coupling both toghether, he ſheweth,

what is perfect penance,Mat. 6. v. 2.5.16. as likewiſe doth our Sauiour in S. Matthew, where he condemneth that Phariſaical error. but that wickednes being remoued, the thinges in them ſelues he approueth, & calleth them the iuſtice of Chriſtians,
               Ibi. v. 1.4.6.18. who for the ſame haue their revvard vvith God. and that M. W. replie not, this to haue bene a Iewiſh ceremonie, and therefore abrogated, he may learne, if he know not, or he may remēber, if he haue forgotten, that this is a duetie morall, and therefore practiſed not onlie in the law but alſo out of the law, and before the law, and after the law, both in the tyme of nature and grace.
            Touching the lawe of nature, before the law of Moyſes, I referre him to S.Hiero. cont. Iouin. lib. 2. Hierome in his booke againſt Iouinian, partlie becauſe thoſe examples are by him wel ſet forth and vrged againſt Iouinian, partlie becauſe M.W. may withall finde, that his opinion is not new, but was of old defended by that fleſhlie heretike.
            This morall duetie grounded on the law of nature, God confirmed and eſtabliſhed by his writtē law,Num. 30. v. 13.14. 2. Reg. 12. v. 16. as we reade in the booke of Numbers. Thus, vnder the law the prophet Dauid did penāce.

Thus, out of the law,Ionae 2. the Niniuites did penance, and God approued their doinge. Thus, that wicked Kinge Achab did penance,3. Reg. 22. v. 27.28. & the ſcripture alloweth him therin. Thus in the time of grace S. Paule chaſtiſed him ſelfe,1. Co. 9. v. 27. 2. Cor. 2.6. and enioyned penance to others. The Apoſtles vſuallie enioyned faſtes, before they ordered prieſtes, as appeareth in the Actes.Act. 13. v. 2.3. & ca. 14. v. 22. This kinde of faſt and penance vſed Timothe, whē, though otherwiſe weake & feeble, he altogether abſtayned from wine, ſo far forth, that the Apoſtle S. Paule thought it needeful to appoint & require him to vſe a litle vvine,
               1. Tim. 5. v. 23. 
               becauſe of his vveake ſtomake and manie infirmites. Touchinge which place, were it not that M.W. hath already condemned the fathers as erringe in this point, I could wiſh him, quietlie and conſideratlie to reade S. Chriſoſtomes notable homelie, tom. 5. Homelia 1. ad popul. Antioche: Finallie in one worde, that true Chriſtians ſhould thus doe, that is, vſe preſcript kinde of faſtinge and diſcipline in the new teſtament, our Sauiour euidentlie foretelleth, when he ſaith in excuſe of his Apoſtles, becauſe they faſted not, as did S. Ihons diſciples, Can the children of the bridegrome mourne,
               Mat. 9. v. 15. 
               as long

as the bridegrome is vvith them? but the dayes vvil come, vvhen the bridegrome ſhal be taken avvay from them, and then they ſhal faſt. which faſt, muſt neceſſarilie be vnderſtoode of a faſt d
                  •
               ffering from that which they obſerued with Chriſt. And ſo, nether can be vnderſtood of the faſt from ſinne, for ſo Chriſt would not allow them to breake their faſt, nether of faſt, as faſt ſignifieth temperance in diet, for Chriſt neuer allowed them exceſſe or intemperance, and brieflie cā ſignifie no other faſt, but ſuch as the Church after Chriſtes departure vnto theſe dayes, hath and yet doth obſerue.
            
               Colo. 2.23.Agaynſt al this, M. W. alleageth two Greeke wordes of the Apoſtle 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
that is (accordinge to his ſenſe) ſeueritie of diſcipline in puniſhing the bodie. the Engliſh Teſtament tourneth it, ſparing the bodie. whereunto the Apoſtle oppoſeth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .Bible 1577. which in the ſame place is trāſlated ſatisfying of the fleſh. And what meaneth M.W. by this allegatiō? thinketh he that the Apoſtle diſcommendeth the firſt, and exhorteth men to the ſecond? is he ſo verie an Epicure, that he can but once imagine of S. Paule that he ſhould wiſh men to pamper vp

their bodie, and employ them ſelues to ſatiſfie the fleſh? if he meane ſo, let him ſpeake plainlie, that men may ſee to what filthines this new Goſpel tendeth. If otherwiſe, why alleageth he thoſe wordes in this place, and againſt faſting and penance? why at all alleageth he the bare wordes without a cō
               mentarie? Touchinge the ſenſe, let the reader peruſe the Annotation vpon the ſame, in the Catholike Engliſh Teſtamēt, & he ſhal quickly ſee, what pithe there is in M. W. greeke citations, with which, I know not to what purpoſe he would ſeme to illuminate his writinge. Verie wel and ſuccinctlie,Theodor. in hunc locum Theodorete geueth the ſenſe of that place otherwiſe obſcure and hard. Oportet ſua ſponte abſtinere, non tanquam ab abominandis, ſed tanquam a ſuauiſſimis. The Apoſtle meante not to withdraw men from abſtinence. they muſt abſtaine from meates and drinkes, not as from things impure and abominable, for that is Iudaical, but as from things pleaſant and delectable to the fleſh, and this is Chriſtian.
            His reaſon why he diſliketh the former workes of penance,The proteſtants commō argumēt aginſt workes of penance. is becauſe they are iniurious to Chriſts paſsion ond death, the onlie price and ſatiſfaction for ſinnes.

This argument is al one with the laſt, of prieſthode, and therefore in parte is ſatiſfied alreadie. For a ſurpluſage I adde, that theſe and the lyke reaſons, procede rather of ignorance then ought els. & therefore if he would firſt learne, what is the meaning of the Catholike Church, and all Chriſtians, he would neuer ſo idlie trouble the world with ſuch ſtuffe, nor ſo wickedlie controule the learned auncient Biſhops, and withal he might eaſe him ſelfe of ſome labour. Verie diuinelie ſaith the holie Councel.Conci. Trid. ſeſſ. 14. ca. 8. 
               This ſatisfaction vvhich vve vndertake for our ſinnes, is not ours ſo, that it is not by Chriſt Ieſus. for vve 
               2. Cor. 3.
               that of our ſelues, as of our ſelues, can do nothing, 
               philip. 4. 
               by his cooperatiō vvhich ſtrengtheneth vs, can do al things. 
               2. Cor. 2. 
               ſo man hath not vvhereof to glory, but 
               2. Cor. 10. Gal. 6. Act. 17. 
               al his gloriation is in Chriſt, in vvhom vve liue, deſerue and ſatiſfie, 
               Mat. 3. & 4. Luc. 3.10.17. 
               doing fruites vvorthie of penance, vvhich of Chriſt haue force, by him are offered to the father, and by him are accepted of the father. Thus the Councel▪ whoſe doctrine wel vnderſtoode, maketh far more for the honour of the Croſſe and bloud of Chriſt, then doth our aduerſaries, without compariſon.
            And ſurelie, ether our lucke is euill

in theſe our dayes, whoſe happe is to fal amongſt ſuch peruerſe aduerſaries, that what-ſoeuer we can do, one way or other wil gnawe at it, or els our aduerſaries lotte is ſtrange and maruelous, amongſt whom, ſcant any one can frame an argument againſt vs, but preſentlie he hath a brother of his owne, that is readie to pul him by the ſleeue, and cal him foole for his labour. M.W. reproueth the fathers, and in them, al catholikes, for that by our workes we pull from Chriſt, and diminiſh the vertue of his bloud. Contrary-wiſe,Iew. defēce of the Apologie, part. 4 ca. 19.20. ¶ 1 
               that moſt graue and learned father Iohn Brentius, (ſo M. Iewel calleth him,) inueigheth againſt vs, for that by our workes we geue to much to Chriſt, and magnifie more thē we ought, the vertue of his Croſſe. and in truth, if there were any fault in the doctrine of the Church, Brētius reaſon carieth far more probabilitie thē M.W. Thus he reaſoneth. Iactat Sotus ſe Chriſto nihil detrahere, ſed potius glorificare.
               Brentius in Apol. cōfeſ. Wirtem. ca. de contriti. 
               ſed cōtra verū eſt &c. Sotus braggeth, that he taketh nothing frō Chriſt, but rather glorifieth him. but the contrary is true, that Chriſt by him and his felovves, is iniuried vvith great cōtumely.
               Inſigni contumelia afficitur. 
               For to attribute vnto Chriſt, that not only he by his death hath deſerued the expiation of our

ſinnes,
               The Catholikes by the judgment of Brentius, honour Chriſt to much. 
               but alſo hath imparted that merite vnto our good vvorks, this is to attribute much more to Chriſt, then ether he acknovvlegeth, or the thinge it ſelfe can ſuffer. and it is comtumelie, not onlie to detract from the glorie due to any thing, but alſo to aſcribe to much praiſe and glorie to it. and the lavv of God manifeſtlie ſignifieth, that in ſeruice of God it is a ſinne to decline, not onlie to much tovvardes the lefte hand, but alſo to much tovvardes the right. Thus he. howbeit Andreas Fricius the Kinge of Poles Secretarie, a great learned and zelous Zuinglian, diſprouinge both the one and the other, both M.VV. the Zuinglian, and Brentius the Lutheran, geueth vs teſtimonie, that in this parte our doctrine is ſincere, and holdeth the iuſt and goldē mediocritie, and bendeth to much nether to the one hand, nor yet to the other.Andr. Fri. de eccleſ. lib. 4 ca. 12. for thus he writeth. Although Chriſt take not avvay all infirmitie from ſuch as be regenerate, yet renevving them by his ſpirite, and planting in them vertues of nevv life and imparting to them merite and his iuſtice, most truelie and vvith ſinguler fruite he is ſayd to liue in them.
               Non obſcuratur ſed illuſtratur, nō euacuatur 
               anh by this meanes the glory of Chriſt is not obſcured, but clarified, the Croſſe of Chriſt is not euacuated, but made more copious, the price of the bloudſhed

for vs, is not diminiſhed but increaſed,
               ſed f
                     •
                  cunda redditut, nō minuitur ſed augetur. 
               vvhereas that vvhich by his ovvne nature is not ſo great, by his goodnes is accōpted for ſuch. ſo far he, truely and according to gods word. and therefore by your warrant I may not thinke otherwiſe, if a thouſand Caluins, and thouſandes of any other proteſtantes ſhould ſtriue to perſwade me the cōtrarie. much leſſe can I be moued with ſuch ſeelie and pitifull ſophiſmes as you ſhuffle together. for thus you goe on. Atque hic inſultas, &c.
               Pag. 8. 
               And here you triumph. S. Paul ſaith, our ſuffering vvith Chriſt is neceſſarie to ſaluation, M.VV. ſaith it is a derogation to Chriſtes ſuffering. vvho (M. Martine) may not vvonder at your egregious ſubtiltie? but I anſvvere.
               Ro. 6.23. 
               heauenly lyfe and glorie, is the gift of God: ergo it is not gotten by our trauayls. and the Apoſtle calleth vs heyres of God, & coheires of Chriſt: ergo the kingdome commeth to vs freelie by inheritance and adoption in Christ. hereof it folovveth, that our ſufferinges are not the efficient cauſes of ſaluation and glorie, as you (M. Martine) fooliſhly reaſon, yet are they neceſſarily to be vndertakē of vs, except vve vvil be excluded from grace and glorie &c. if you could haue diſtinguiſhed the meanes, frō the cauſes efficiēt,
               media. 
               you vvould neuer haue reaſoned thus. Certainly M. W. if ſome aduerſary would haue

made a booke in mockerie of your diuinitie, I thinke he could not poſsiblie haue more diſgraced you, then you ſhame your ſelfe. you heape vp abſurdities together, ſo groſſe and ſo thicke one in the neck of an other, that whereas I ſhould by appointment haue gone thorough with this pamphlet in a few howres, I weene I ſhal not riddle my handes of it in many dayes.
            When Stancarus the Archheretike of Polonia,Stancarus iudgemente of Caluin & other chiefe proteſtante-wryters. began to breake from Caluine in the article of the bleſſed Trinitie, and Caluine ether through malice or ignorāce, fel into greater wickednes in that myſterie then he, and amongſt other raylinges and ſcorneful reproches obiected to him his ſtudie in Peter Lombard the Maiſter of the ſentences, Stancarus after much ſpoken in the commendatiō of that writer, comminge at length to Caluin, and the great Rabbines of your new Church, God (ſaith he) hath deliuered you vp into a reprobate ſenſe,
               Stanc. in libro de Mediatore contra 
                     •
                  ulling. P. Mart. Caluin. & Geneuenſes, k. 5. 
               ſo as you ſay, teach, vvrite and perſuade others, ſuch things as are naughtie, vvicked, and heretical. for I tel you, one Peter Lombard is more vvorth, thē a hundred Luthers, thē tvvo hundred Melancthons, then three hundred Bullingers, then foure hundred Peter Martyrs, then fiue hundred

Caluins.
               qui omnes 
                     〈◊〉
                   in mortario cōtūderētur nō exprime retur vna vn cia verae the ologiae, preſertim &c. 
               vvho al if they vvere pounded together in a morter, there vvould not be beaten out of them one ounce of true diuinitie, eſpeciallie in the articles of the Trinitie, the incarnation, the Mediator, and the Sacramentes. I wil not applie this odious compariſon, againſt the Engliſhe writers of our tyme. but this I proteſt in my cōſcience touchinge you, that I ſuppoſe neuer mā of any account, ſet penne to paper to publiſh a thinge in printe to the vew of the world, who vttered ſuch notorious ignorance, as euery where appeareth in this your diſcourſe: whether the fault be in me, that I haue not hetherto ſo narrowly examined others, as I haue now cauſe to examine you, or whether the thinge in truth be ſo as I imagine, or whether you in your other writinges vtter more ſubſtantial matter, & in this through much haſt haue ouerſhot your ſelf, as canis festinans caecos parit catulos, (& I ſee,pa, 1. that much you couet to be counted a quick diſpatcher of bookes) or whatſoeuer els may be the reaſon. for ſcarce any ſentence haue you geuen forth, which carieth not with it ſome marke to the ſhame of the maker.
            In this paragraph you cōmit as many errors as lightly you may.  For firſt,M.W. manifolde ouerſightes. you


vnderſtand not M. Martin.  Secondarily, you vnderſtand not S. Paule alleaged by him.  Thirdlie, you vnderſtand not S. Paule alleaged by your ſelfe.  Fourthlie, you vnderſtand not the ſtate of the queſtion of which you talke.  And laſt of al, you vnderſtand not your ſelfe, & the doctrine of your felowes.
            
                You vnderſtand not M. Martin, whē you make him to conclude, that good workes be the cauſes efficient of ſaluation, becauſe they be neceſſarie to ſaluation. M. Martine maketh no ſuch argument, nether hath he in that place any cauſe to talke thereof. and ſo that diſtinction of cauſae efficientes & media, is pulled in by you, to make a ſhew whē it needeth not.Diſcor. pag. 205.206. M. Martins argument is this plainly. you ſay, good workes are iniurious to Chriſtes paſsion. he proueth they are not, becauſe the ſcripture requireth them, and that, as neceſſarie to ſaluation. And how can you be ſo blynde, as not to ſee this argument. good workes are neceſſarie to ſaluation, therefore they derogate nothing from Chriſtes paſsion. for cleare it is, if they derogate from Chriſtes paſsion, they ſette vs forwardes to damnation, & helpe vs nothing towardes ſaluatiō.
            
               
                You vnderſtand not Sainte Paule
alleaged by M. Martine, when you make ſporte with the argument drawē from the Apoſtles wordes, and would ſeeme to ſhake it of ſo lightly. for though M. Martine, not talkinge of that queſtion,Life eternal the effect of good works & good workes the efficient cauſe of eternall life. Rom, 8, v, 17 which you for oſtentation of a litle ſkil now hale in, vrged not the place ſo farre as to proue workes the cauſes efficient of ſaluation, yet the place proueth it inuinciblie. for when S. Paule ſaith, vve are coheires vvith Chriſt, yet conditionallie, that is, if vve ſuffer vvith him, that vve may alſo be glorified vvith him, he ſheweth the excellēt dignitie, which in Chriſt we are called vnto beinge graffed into that vine,
               Ioan. 15. v. 5: Rom, 6, 2. 1 Cor. 12.27 2 Pet. 1. v. 4. Ioā. 17. v. 11. and made members of his bodie, and partakers of the diuine nature. he doth ſhew and deduce this, that as Chriſt our head ſuffered firſt, and thoſe his ſufferinges were not only media, meanes, but alſo cauſes efficient of his glorificatiō in ſome reſpect, ſo from him, the lyke vertue is deriued vnto vs his members. for as it behoued Christ to ſuffer, and ſo to enter into his glory,
               Luc. 24. v. 26 as he humbled him ſelfe to the death of the croſſe, propter quod,
               Philip. 2 v. 9 
               for vvhich cauſe God exalted him,Act. 14. v. 21. ſo his members by tribulations, folow where he is gone before,

and not by faith only, but alſo by patiente ſuffering,
               Heb. 6. v. 12. 
               inherite the promiſes. and ſuch ſufferinges & workes of charitie, are ſemen and fundamentum,
               2. Cor. 9. v. 6. 1. Timot. 6. v. 19. 
               the verie foundation and ſeede growing to life euerlaſting, as the Apoſtle calleth them. And in this compariſon,Heb. 12. a. cōſiſteth the dignitie of our Chriſtianitie, as in S. Paule euery where appeareth. for vvhom he hath foreknovven,
               Rom. 8.29. 
               he hath alſo predeſtinated to be made conformable to the image of his ſonne, that he might be the firſt borne in many brethrē. And albeit the ſufferings of this life wayghed in them ſelues, are ſhort and tranſitorie,Rom. 8.18. and therefore can not be condigne to the glorie to come vvhich ſhal be reuealed in vs, yet being wayghed as ryſing and wrought in vs by the ſpirite of God, ſanctified in the bloud of our Sauiour,2. Cor. 4.17. and applied to his honour, ſo this our tribulation vvhich preſentlie is momentanie and light, vvorketh aboue meaſure exceedinglie, an eternal vveight of glorie in vs. And S. Paule elſ-where moſt diuinelie conioyneth both theſe in one, ſo as a man can not deny this effect to Chriſtian mens workes, but firſt he muſt deny the ſame to the workes of Chriſt.Heb. 2. v. 9. 
               vve ſee Ieſus (ſaith the Apoſtle) becauſe of the paſſion of death, crovvned vvith glorie and honour,

that through the grace of God, he might taſt death for all. for it became him, for vvhō all thinges, and by vvhō all thinges, that had brought many children into glorie, to conſummate the author of their ſaluation, by his paſsion. for be that ſanctifieth, and they that are ſanctified, all of one. for the vvhich cauſe he is not aſhamed to call them brethren. In this diuine diſcourſe, S. Paule compriſeth the maner of Chriſtes glorificatiō, and of Chriſtians: of him as the head, of vs as the mēbers, of him as the roote, firſt begotten brother, principal, anointed with oyle of exultation prae participibus, aboue his felovves: vs as braunches,Heb. 1. v. 9. 
               Ioan. 1. v. 16 ſeconde brethren, inferior, receiuing of his fulnes. yet ſo, that we alway continue in the ſame race and courſe, according to our meaſure and proportion, and ſo are made conformes, conformable to our head,Rom. 8.29. 
               vvho is the firste borne amongſt many brethren. The ſum of al is this, that as in the place cited by M. Martin, glorification in Chriſt, ſheweth his workes to haue bene the cauſes efficient thereof, and in Chriſt, paſsion and glorification are ſo compared together, as the cauſe and the effect, and one inferreth the other: ſo in vs Chriſtians his members, compaſsion in the Apoſtles ſenſe, and conglorificatiō,
               
proueth lyke cauſe and effect, and one is concluded of the other. and this ſhal appeare more plainlie, by that which enſueth.
            
                You vnderſtand not S. Paule alleaged by your ſelfe, when of his wordes Donum Dei vita aeterna,
               Rom. 6.23. 
               eternall life is the gift of God,
               Grace taketh away the merite of worke, no more then merite of work taketh away neceſſitie & cooperation of grace. you conclude: ergo it is not gotten by our trauails. fot the Apoſtle meant nothing leſſe then any ſuch illation, which in ſo manie places he refelleth. And if theſe two, grace and vvorkes, be ſo oppoſite in Chriſtians, that one muſt deſtroy the other, then conſider I pray you the force of theſe argumentes. In feare and trembling vvorke your ſaluation, ſayth S.Phil. 2.12. Paule. ergo our ſaluation is of workes, and therefore not of grace. our afflictions and calamities ſuſteined patientlie vvorke our glorie.
               1. Cor. 4.17. ergo it is not of grace. he that ſovveth ſparinglie,
               2. Cor. 9. v. 6. 
               ſparinglie alſo ſhal reape. and he that ſovveth in bleſsinges, of bleſſinges alſo ſhall reape. that is, he that geueth almes aboundantlie, ſhall haue in heauen aboundant reward. and he that geueth leſſe, ſhal haue his reward proportionable. ergo heauen is not of grace.Mat. 25. d. 
               Come ye bleſſed (ſaith our ſauiour) receaue my Kingdome. why ſo? for what cauſe? for becauſe you haue

done the workes of charitie, you haue fed the hūgrie, harboured the ſtranger, viſited the ſick, ſuccoured the diſeaſed &c. ergo heauen is not of grace. he that is not a hearer, but a doer of the lavv,
               Iac. 1.29. 
               ſhall be bleſſed, in, or for his vvorke. ergo not by Gods grace and mercy: and ſo forth, infinite ſuch argumentes might be made after the paterne of M. Whit. and proue as wel. and yet notwithſtanding, how many ſo euer they be, be they a carte-loade, they are all wicked, and not worth a ſtraw, and no more is his. And the Apoſtle intended nothing els in ſo ſainge, but to commend the grace of Chriſt, which is the true cauſe of merite or good workes, and not to deny the value of good workes, as he might haue learned of S. Auſtine noted vpon that place in the new teſtament, were it not that he diſdaineth him,See after in the laſt chapiter towardes the end. and plainly accompteth him a ſuperſtitious and Sorbonical papiſt, for geuing that ſenſe and interpretation.
            
                And vpon theſe his good argumēts,
fourthlie I ſay M. Whit. vnderſtandeth not the ſtate of the queſtion where of he writeth. for if he had, he woulde neuer (talking of Chriſtians regenerate by the ſpirite of God) haue imagined

a contrarietie, betweene grace and vvorkes, mercy and iuſtice, inheritance and purchaſe: which, although perhaps it is not ſo eaſelie conceiued, in buying a peece of lande, yet is it not hard to be conceiued, in buyinge or procuringe heauen: no harder, then it is to beleeue, that we ſhal enioy heauen, by Gods infinite grace and mercy, & yet for al that, by right and iuſtice, becauſe Chriſt our ſauiour hath trulie and fully paid for it. and S. Paule, and S. Auſtine, of old haue many tymes notified vnto vs, the recō
               ciliation of theſe two, which to ignorant men ſeeme ſo oppoſite.
            That heauen is of grace, S. Paule cited by M.Eternal lyfe is both of grace & workes, mercie & iuſtice. W. proueth. that it is of vvorkes, any one of thoſe places ſheweth, which laſt of all I noted, and in the ſame epiſtle whence M. W. taketh his argument, the ſame S. Paule moſt euidentlie declareth, where he ſaith. In the iuſt iudgement,
               Rom. 2. 
               God vvill render to euerie man according to his vvorkes. to them truly that according to pacience in good vvorkes ſeeke glory, honour and incorruption, life eternall: but to them that are of contention, and that obey not the truth, but geue credite to iniquitie, vvrath and indignation. Tribula, tion and anguiſh vpon euerie ſoule of man

that vvorketh euill, of the Ievv firſt, and of the Gentil. but glory, honour and peace to euery one that vvorketh good, to the Ievv firſt, & to the Gentil. for there is no acceptiō of perſons vvith God. by which wordes alſo, he clearlie refuteth that diſtinctiō of media and cauſes efficient, wherein M. whit. ſeemeth well to pleaſe him ſelfe, and twiteth M. Martine with ignorance thereof. for when he layeth in indifferente balance good workes and euill, and ſo maketh one the cauſe of heauen, as the other is the cauſe of hell, to which effect the place is flat and euident, M. W. muſt be content to geue ouer that inuention, how dearely ſoeuer he eſteeme it: except he wil ſay, that ſinnes are the meanes,
               media but not the cauſe efficient of damnation.
            That heauen cometh of mercy, S.Eph. 1. et 2. Paule ſheweth at large in the firſt and ſecond chapter to the Epheſians. that it cometh of iuſtice, the ſame S.2. Tim. 4.8. Paule ſheweth, when he ſaith. There is laid vp for me a crovvne of iuſtice, vvhich our lord vvill render to me in that day, a iuſt iudge: and not only to me, but to them alſo that loue his comming. when he ſaith,Rom. 2. v. 5. 
               in iuſt iudgement God vvil render to euery man according to his vvorkes. and iuſtice requireth, that as

God ſhould puniſhe the vvicked,
               2, Theſſal. 1. v. 6.7. Heb. 6. v. 10. 
               ſo he ſhould revvard the good, & it were iniuſtice to do otherwiſe, as he ſayth to the Hebrues.
            That heauen commeth by adoption and of inheritance, M.W. ſayth it, and though he proue it not, we beleeue it, becauſe it is true. but that it is not gotten by vvorkes and trauayls, this we deny, becauſe it is falſe, and S. Paule refuteth, when he compareth the crowne of heauen,1. Cor. 9.24. brauium. to a pryce or garland, which is propoſed to wreſtlers, runners, or ſuch like, thereby declaring thus much, that as the firſt is gotten by running and labouring, ſo is the ſecond, by payne and wel working. and the ſame, our Sauiour ſignified,Mat. 11. v. 12 when he ſayd. The kingdome of God ſuffereth violence, and the violent beare it avvay.
               Mat. 5.12. Ibid. ca. 6.1. ca. 10.41. 1. Cor. 3.8. Apo 11.18 Ibid. 22.12 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
The ſcriptures teach that heauen is the repay or rewarde for good workes, as hell is for euil. The ſame is proued by that ordinarie phraſe, wherein heauen is called merces operum, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
the hyre, paiment, vvages, ſtipend or pryce of vvorks. The ſame is proued by S. Paule, whereas though the worde properly ſound in the better part, yet for truth of doctrine, he vſeth it indifferently, as well for the payment of eternall damnation, which ſinners receaue for their iniquities in hell, as the contrary payment of eternall ſaluation, which good

men receaue for their holines in heauen. So he ſaith in the epiſtle to the Hebrues:Heb. 2. v. 3. that all preuarication and diſobedience hath receaued 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , iuſte retribution and payment, as afterward in the ſame epiſtle, that Abrahā, Iſaac, Iacob, and Moyſes, for Chriſts loue ſuſteyned all affliction, hoping for 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Ibid. c. 11.26 
               iuſt retribution or paiment. and in the ſame chapter, he putteth the beleefe of this pointe, as a firſt principle in Chriſtian religion. for ſo he ſpeaketh:Heb. 11. v. 6. 
               He that commeth to God, muſt beleeue that he is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , one that vvill repay men for their good vvorkes. which point ſith you haue not yet learned, it foloweth that you are very greene, and a mere nouice in Chriſtian religion.
            And S. Auſtin (whoſe iudgement agreeing with S. Paule, I truſt you will eſteeme as wel, as before you did Luthers) in ſundrie places expounding theſe wordes of S. Paule, 2. Timoth. 4.2. Tim. 4.7. 
               My reſolution is at hand, I haue fought a good fight, I haue conſummate my courſe, I haue kepte the fayth. concerning the reſt, there is layd vp for me a crovvne of iuſtice, vvhich our lorde vvill render vnto me in that day, a iuſt iudge, neuer maketh doubte of this veritie. He vvill render (ſayth S. Auſtin)

               being a iuſt iudge.
               Aug. inter hom. 50. ho. 24. 
               for he can not deny the revvarde vvhen he ſeeth the vvorke. I haue fought a good fight, that is a vvorke: I haue conſummate my courſe, that is a vvorke: I haue kepte the fayth, that is a vvorke: there remayneth to me a crovvne of iuſtice, this is the revvard. but in the revvard, thou doeſt nothinge, in the vvorke thou art a doer, but not alone. the crovvne commeth to thee from him, the vvorke from thy ſelfe, but not vvithout his helpe.
               Aug. in pſ. 100. And agayne: VVhy vvill God render to me a crovvne of iuſtice? becauſe he is a iuſt iudge. VVhy a iuſt iudge? becauſe I haue fought a good fight, I haue conſummate my courſe, I haue kepte the fayth. therefore being iuſt, he can not but crovvne theſe thinges. By theſe vertues (ſayth the ſame doctor) imparted to vs from God,
               Idem epiſt. 52. in fine. 
               a good lyfe is ledde in this vvorlde, and lyfe eternall the revvarde thereof, is repayed in the next. for here theſe vertues are in acte, there in effecte, here in vvorke, there in revvarde, here in office, there in ende. And he doubteth not to call them the very pryce,
               Idem in pſ. 49. circa medium. et ad Dulc. qu. 4. whereby (as I may ſay) we buy heauen, with which worde you are ſo much offended.
            And that this iuſtice nothing diminiſheth gods mercy, or this purchaſe our adoption, as you very ſimply imagine, the ſame doctor in very many places

teacheth. To note one for all, explicating the place of Timothee before touched.Aug. in pſal. 100. 
               God vvill render to me (ſayth he) a crovvne at that day, a iuſt iudge. He ſaid not, he vvill geue, but he vvill render. vvhen he gaue, he vvas merciful, vvhen he ſhal render, he vvil be a iudge. becauſe mercy and iudgement ſhall I ſinge to thee ô Lorde. but forgeuing our offences, he made him ſelfe a debtour of a crovvne. there I obteyned mercy. our lord therefore is mercifull firſt, but aftervvardes he vvill render a crovvne of iuſtice. Is not a crovvne (ſayth he elſ-where,Aug. de gra. et lib. arbit. ca. 6.9·8. diſputinge this matter more at large) rendered as due to good vvorks? yet becauſe God vvorketh thoſe good vvorkes in vs, therefore he crovvneth vs in mercy &c. This may ſerue to informe you a litle in the ſtate of this queſtion. and for your further ſatiſfaction, I referre you to the Catholike new Teſtament in Engliſh, eſpecially thoſe places, whence you commonly fetch your arguments agaynſt this neceſſary parte of Chriſtian lyfe and fayth.
            
                Finallie, I ſay you vnderſtand not
your ſelf and your owne doctrine, when you write, that ſuch vvorkes, though they be not cauſes efficient of ſaluation,
               neceſſario ſubeundae 
               yet are they neceſſarily to be done, except vve vvil be excluded from grace and glorie. For how ſtā
               deth

this with your doctrine of only fayth?By makinge works neceſſary to ſaluation. M.W. ouerthroweth the Proteſt. doctrine of only faith. how wil that alone ſerue the turne, if now of neceſsitie good workes muſt come to helpe forth the matter? Thinke you, that impertinent diſtinction of cauſa efficiens, & medium can ſerue you, the whole courſe of your doctrine, whole bookes and cōmentaries of your maiſters & brethren, being againſt you? ſome there are (ſayth Flacius Illyricus) vvho drouſely vvayghing the matter,
               
                  Illyr. praefa. ad Rom. pa. 636.
                  Quidā ſomnolentius rem expendentes.
                
               thinke this to be the cōtrouerſie properlie betvvene vs & the papiſtes, vvhether good vvorks iuſtifie, or be the merite & cauſe efficient of iuſtice & life, and not vvhether they be in any reſpect, neceſſarie to ſaluation. which in deed is, (or was, when you firſt began) the verie point of the controuerſie. which he therefore defendeth, vz, that they are in no reſpect neceſſarie, by 26. moſt firme and ſtronge demonſtrations, as he calleth them, and reckeneth this your doctrine for a papiſticall error, and calleth you a nevv papiſt for putting the queſtiō as you doe.Ibidem. pa. 634.635. Theſe are his wordes. Hetherto touching the papiſtes corruption of this doctrine. novv I come to the doctrine of the nevv papiſtes, vvhich is as pernicious as the old.
               Neopapiſtae 
               they ſay, that the Apoſtle meant to exclude good vvorkes from iuſtification, non

ſimpliciter & ratione debiti, not ſimply and as due, but only as meritorious & cauſes efficient. vvhere-vpon theſe doctors or rather ſeducers, do diuers vvayes elude that propoſition of S. Paule: vve are iuſtified by faith, gratis, vvithout vvorkes, eche one according to his ovvne head, and as his priuate ſpirite ſuggeſteth to him: and moſt of thē couet diligently to mingle vvorkes, as a certain harmefull leauen vvith iuſtification & the lambe of God. And there he reckneth twelue ſuch corruptions, the laſt where of is yours, the very ſelf ſame which here you defend. againſt which he ſetteth downe the proteſtantes faith thus. But the true ſenſe of Paules vvordes is, that vvithout al merite, condition,
               Ibid. 
               or neceſsitie of our vvorkes, by only faith in Chriſt, vve are iuſtified before Christ & ſaued, ſo as our ſaluation doth in no ſort depend of our vvorkes, nether be they any vvay neceſſarie to ſaluation, &c. Scripture, Luther,
               M. Whitak. doctrine cō
                  cerning neceſſitie of good works condemned as papiſtical by the proteſtante diuines. 
               and al doctors of ſound iudgment thinke thus, of vvhich doctrine, theſe be moſt firme demonſtrations, &c. and in fine he ſaith, Iſte ipſe error, eſt omnino papiſtica corruptela articuli iuſtificationis. This verie error is altogether a papiſtical corruptiō of the article of iuſtificatiō.
            
            And if you can recal to memorie, the common argumentes gathered to your hand by euery heretike, that hath writtē
               
vpon the epiſtle to the Romanes, namely the fourth chapter, you ſhall ſoone perceiue,Arguments of the proteſtāts, prouinge good works to be neceſſary to ſaluation in no reſpecte. that your opinion and their commentaries can neuer match together. out of the mayne heape, I wil note one or two, ſuch as are moſt common to euery preacher, and found in euery booke. whereby you ſhal ſee, how by this aſſertion, you ouerthrow your whole doctrine.Illyr. vbi ſupra. 
               
               S. Paule excludeth al our boaſtinge from iuſtice and ſaluation, and that in Abraham a man moſt holie. ergo vvorkes are by no meanes, ſo much as cauſa ſine qua non, of ſaluation. othervviſe, vve ſhoud haue ſome occaſion of boaſting.
               gloriatio 
               
                   Againe, Paule him ſelfe ſeparateth his vvorkes and iuſtices ſo far from his ſaluation, that he accounteth them for traſhe and hinderances of ſaluation. If ſuch an Apostle, vvho for Chriſt and the Gospel laboured more then al the reſt, be conſtrained to caſt avvay his innumerable moſt excellent vvorkes, as traſhe and hinderances to ſaluation, hovv madly do vve ſay, that our vvorkes are neceſſarie.  Againe, all our iuſtices (ſaith Eſai ca. 64.) are as foule ſtayned clothes. & hovv can a thinge ſo filthie and diſallovved of God, do any thinge, or be neceſſary to iuſtice before God. Out of which, M.W. may of two cōcluſions, chooſe one which ſhal lyke him beſt, ether that his principall

doctors interprete S. Paule peruerſly and wickedly, when in S.Ro. 4. et 10. Philip. 3. Paules epiſtles they interprete the vvorkes of the lavv our iuſtice, legal iuſtice, I eſteemed my vvorkes dunge & durte that I might obteine the iuſtice of Christ, when I ſay they ſtil expounde theſe places of the workes of Chriſtian men, done by the grace and ſpirite of God: or els that his aſſertiō is againſt al ſenſe and reaſon, to make that neceſſarie to ſaluation, which the Prophetes & Apoſtles do ſo abaſe, ſo condemne, & make ſo filthie in the ſight of God. & of theſe two which he wil chooſe, I know not: but becauſe I thinke he wil rather cōdemne them, then deny him ſelf (for ſo long as he may be his owne iudge, the word of God ſhal be cleare on his ſide) I finallie oppoſe againſt him, as in this ſelf ſame queſtion the zelous Lutherans oppoſed againſt the cold Melanchthoniſtes, in the Councel of Altemburg,
                  Col. Altem. collat. 4. fo. 75.76.
                  They note one ſpecial printe, becauſe they ſuppoſe other printes to be corrupt.
                after manifold argumentes brought for only faith againſt any neceſſitie of workes. After al this (ſay they) vve conclude vvith that vvorthy ſainge of Luther in his firſt tome printed at VVittemberge. if vvorkes be neceſſary to ſaluation, then ſaluation can not be had vvithout vvorkes, and then vve are not ſaued by only

faith. And thus you ſee how wel you haue diſproued M. Martins ſaing, and approued your owne, ſo wel, that by verdite of your great writers, in fine you haue marred the topp and crowne of your Kingdome, your ſolifidian iuſtification, and by them for your paines are iudged to be a Papiſt, which I wiſh were true for your owne ſake.
         
         
            CHAP. VI. Hovv vnreaſonably M. VV. behaueth him ſelf, in reprouing and approuing the auncient fathers, for their doctrine touching good vvorkes.
            
               NOw come I to the third part, that is, your accuſatiō of the fathers, wherein alſo M. Martine noteth you of contradiction to your ſelf. for with what reaſon could you call them moſt holy, ſanctiſsimos, when in the ſelf ſame place you defaced them as moſt iniurious to the bloud & paſsion or Chriſt. you anſwere,Pag. 7. a litle. ſmoothing ſo much as you may the matter, and ſay, that they erred a litle, (and yet within fiue lines before, you

ſay,greuouſly 
               they erred greuouſly and diminiſhed not a litle the force of Chriſtes death & paſsion) and there error proceded rather of lacke of vvitte, then of malice. and though vve graunt that herein they erred a litle, yet in respect of yours, their errors ſeeme ether light, or none at all. Here of you conclude that vvel you might cal them moſt holy,
               pag. 9. 
               although they erred once, or vvere not ſo vviſe as they might haue bene. This is that, which in the beginninge I tolde you, that you ſpeake doubtfully, and ſtammer, & falter in your tale, & know not wel what to ſay. for to let paſſe that in one page you make it a greuous error,pag. 7. and in the next, ether none at all,pag. 8. & 9. or a verie light one, compare your cruel and bloudie wordes, whereof riſeth M. Martins reprofe, with this ſecond modification, & then let euery man iudge, what a miſerable defender you are. you ſay there,Diſcou. pag. 205. 
               that the fathers thought by their external vvorkes of penance, to pay the paines due for ſinnes, and to ſatisfie Gods iuſtice, and to procure to thē ſelues aſſured impunitie, remiſsiō, & iuſtice. that thereby they derogated,
               not a litle 
               not a litle from Chriſtes death, attributed to much to their ovvne inuentions, and finallie depraued repentance. Here you ſay, it vvas a litle error, a ſmale ouerſight, they ſlipt a litle,
               a litle
               
               and that they vvere not vvithſtanding, most holymen. You a Chriſtian M.W. & dare thus to write? you a refuter of errors, & make this a light one? had you any part ether of the ſpirite of S. Paule, S. Cipriā, S. Auſtine, or ſuch Saintes of the Catholike Church, or ſome zeale and ſenſe of your owne Goſpel and religion, how could this euer haue ſlipt out of your penne? to cal them most holy, who by your doctrine, were as far from al true holynes, as euer was Scribe or Phariſee. to cal thē 
               most holy, who had not in them the firſt ſtepp or degree where holines beginneth. for, whereas to holines, firſt of al and principally is required faith in the death and paſsion of Chriſt, then, zeale and feruour in good woorkes, to cal a man holy without the firſt, is to commend for ſtrenght and valor, a man that hath neuer a ſound ioynt, or to praiſe for eloquence ſuch a one, whoſe tongue is cutt out of his head.
            
               No good workes, no martirdome profiteth any man to ſaluatiō, out of the Cath. church.In the number of Chriſtians, & profeſſors of Chriſtianity, there haue bene from the beginning many, that haue liued very hard & ſeuere lyues, that haue beſtowed their goods amōge the poore, that after many labours, and trauails, & rare workes of extraordinarie zeale,

haue at lenght ſuffered death for the teſtimony of Chriſt. And this oftentimes chaūced in the primitiue Church, within the tyme of the firſt perſecutions before Conſtantinus Magnus.Euſeb. lib. 5. cap. 15. Niceph. li. 4. cap. 23. yet if ſuch men liued and died ſchiſmatikes, that is not beleeuing rightly in the church, did euer any true Chriſtian holde them for good & holie? If I ſpake vvith the tongue of men and angels, ſaith the Apoſtle,1. Cor. 13. 
               and knevv al myſteries, and could moue mountaines, if I beſtovved al my goods vpon the poore, and my bodie to the fier, for the teſtimonie of Chriſt, yet wanting the charitie of my brethren,1 Ioan. 3. & 4 being without eccleſiaſticall vnitie, it profiteth me nothing. wherevpon S. Ciprian:Ciprian. de vnit. Eccleſ. 
               They cānot dvvell vvith God, that be not in vnitie vvith the Church.
               Examine by this certain & ſure rule the martyrdoms & martyrologes of Lutherās Zwinglians Anabaptiſtes &c. ſette forth by M. Fox, Criſpin Hamſtedius and others. Aug. epi. 252 
               though they burne amidſt the flames & being deliuered to the fier or caſt to vvild beaſtes, ſo yeld their lyues, yet that ſhal not be to them a crovvne of faith, but a punyſhment of infidelitie. ſuch a one may be ſlaine, he can not be crovvned. he profeſſeth him ſelf ſuch a Chriſtiā, as the deuil many times pretendeth him ſelf to be Chriſt. For (as S. Auſtine ſaith) vvhoſoeuer is ſeparated from this Catholike Church, though he thinke him ſelf to liue verie commendablie, yet by reaſon of this only offence, that he is deuided from

the vnitie of Christ, (in his Catholike Churche) he ſhal not haue life (eternal) but the vvrath of God remaineth vpon him.
            
            And is al this true of men, Chriſtians by profeſsion, beleeuing rightly in euerie other article of faith, & onely erring in a ſecondarie point, againſt the viſible church, and is it not much more true, when the error runneth ſo groſſly againſt the firſt, and chief, and capital article of Chriſtianitie, and that proper and peculier part, whēce Chriſtianitie hath his name, the death and paſſion of our ſauiour, the verie hart, life, and ſoule of our religion? can a fault againſt the bodie, ſo pollute and contaminate a man, that he becometh with al his ſuppoſed holines, an infidell, vvicked, prophane, an enemy of God, and a damnable creature: and can ſuch ſacriledge againſt the head be ſo light and contemptible, that the offender remaineth notwithſtanding, faithfull, a good Chriſtiā, and moſt holie?The fowle groſſnes of that error, with which M.W. chargeth the aū
                  ciēt fathers. S. Paule in the beginning, when the law of Moyſes was not yet quite aboliſhed, nor the goſpel ſo vniuerſallie and clearlie publiſhed, ſaid of the Galatians, who would haue ioyned the law with the goſpell: O ye ſenſles Galatians,
               Galat. 3. 
               vvho hath bevvitched

you not to obey the truth?
               Ibi. ca. 5. v. 2. 
               Beholde I Paule tell you that if you be circumcided, Chriſt ſhal profite you nothing, and though an Angel of heauen teach you ſo, that is,Gal. 1. v. 8. preach you workes, wherebie you ſhould be withdrawen from Chriſt, anathema be he, that is, the curſe of God light vpon him. how thē may a Chriſtian, that ether loueth or feareth Chriſt, thus extenuate the fathers error, being by M. W. declaration, in ſubſtance, the ſelf ſame, by reaſon of circumſtance, farre more haynous, the light of the goſpel ſpread more larglie, the truth of doctrine more deepely rooted, the law more vndoubtedlie aboliſhed, and euerie part of Chriſtian religion more clearly acknowledged and profeſſed. wherefore in this, I take M. Whit. inexcuſablie, rather for a Pagane then for a Chriſtian, when he ſaith, The fathers by their penitentiall vvorkes derogated from Chriſt, and thruſting them ſelues into his roome, aſcribed to their ovvne inuentions, the ſatisfying of Gods vvrath, and remiſſion of their ſinnes, and yet for al this calleth them ſanctiſsimas, moſt holy. whereas this being true▪ they were the moſt impious and deteſtable men, that euer the ſunne ſaw.
            
               Luther in his booke aduerſusfalſò nominatum ordinem epiſcoporum, deſcribing his iuſtifiing faith, writeth thus, although wickedly, yet agreablie to his owne doctrine, and the common doctrine of the proteſtants.Luth. To. 2. fol. 322. 
               Marke me (ſaith he) vvhat is Chriſtian faith. Chriſtian faith is to beleeue, that by no vvorkes, but by onlie faith in Chriſt as thy mediatour, and by mercy in him geuen thee freely, thou art iuſtified and ſaued. Gal. 1. ſo as a man deſpaire of all his ovvne ſtrength, vvorkes, and endeuours, and depende altogether of an other mans merites, and an other mans iuſtice. Iudaical faith is to entend to be iuſtified, to blot out thy ſinnes, and be ſaued by thy ovvne ſtrength and merites. Rom. 10. by this, Chriſt is caſt avvay. To like effect he writeth in his ſecond commentarie vpon the Galatians,Luth. To. 5. in Gal. ca. 4. fol. 382. expounding theſe wordes. his qui natura non ſunt dii ſeruiebatis, ye ſerued them, vvhich by nature vvere not gods, vpon theſe words, he maketh this queſtion, and thus ſolueth it. is it all one in S. Paule, to depart from the promiſe to the lavv, from faith to vvorkes, and to ſerue gods, vvhich by nature are not gods? I anſvvere, vvhoſoeuer falleth from the article of iuſtification, he becommeth ignorant of God, and is an idolater. And therefore it is

al one vvhether he returne to the lavv, or to the vvorſhipping of idols. al is one, vvhether he be a monke, a Turke, a Ievv, or Anabaptiſt. for this article once taken avvay, there remaineth nothing, but mere error, hipocriſie, impietie, idolatrie, although in ſhevv there appeare excellent truth, vvorſhip of God, holines &c. Yea ſpeaking expreſly of the auncient fathers, and in reſpect of this ſpecial matter, he moſt wickedly, but moſt plainly, adiudgeth them to hell fier, for their wicked faith in this verie cauſe. I ſpeake not (ſaith he) againſt the papiſtes for their life, but for their faith, becauſe they vvil not come to God by only faith, but by faith and vvorkes, and therfore if the fathers thoſe old papiſtes liued now, I would ſpeake vnto thē as I do to theſe new papiſtes.Ibid. ca. 4. fol. 400. thus ſtand his wordes. Si illa facies veteris papatus, &c. if that face and forme of old papiſtrie ſtoode novv, if that diſcipline vvere obſerued novv vvith ſo much ſeueritie & rigour,
               S. Hierom. S Gregorie & S. Auſtin old papiſtes by Luthers verdit. 
               as the heremites, as Hierome, Auſtine, Gregorie, Bernard, Fraūcis, Dominike, & many others obſerued it, litle perhaps ſhould I profite by my doctrine of faith, againſt that (ſtate of papiſtrie.) yet neuertheles after the example of Paule inueighing againſt the falſe Apoſtles, in apparance moſt holy and good men, I ought

to fight againſt ſuch Iuſtice vvorkers of the papiſticall Kingdome,
               Iuſtitia
                     •
                  ios papiſtici re
                  
                     •
                  ni. 
               and ſay: though you liue a chaſt life, and vvearie your bodies vvith much exerciſe, yea though ye vvalke in the humilitie and religion of Angels, yet are ye bondmen of the lavv, of ſinne, and the deuill, ye are to be caſt out of the houſe, becauſe you ſeeke for iuſtice and ſaluatiō, by your vvorkes, and not by Chriſt. Thus Luther. and this being the general doctrine of the Proteſtantes, in al their treatiſes of iuſtification, and M. W. pretending to be of the number, ſuppoſing the fault to be true which he layeth to the fathers, if he folowed the iudgment of S. Paule, S. Ciprian, S. Auguſtine, & al Catholike Chriſtiās, he muſt needes accompt them aduerſaries of Chriſt, prophane and wicked, & caſt out eternally from the face of God: if he folowed the vniuerſal ſway of his owne doctrine,The aunciēt fathers called by Luther, Iues, idolaters, bondmen of ſinne & the deuil, for their doctrine of workes againſt only fayth. teaching only faith, and iuſtification thereby, he could not but with Luther hold them for impious, hipocrites, bondm
                     •
                  n of ſinne and the deuil, idolaters, vvithout knovvledge of God, as il as any monke, Turke, Ievv, or Anabaptiſt. And certainly no monke (except perhaps ſome Apoſtataes, as Luther him ſelf, Bucer, P. Martir, or ſuch founders of this new

Goſpel) liuing in his order, thought euer ſo ethnicallie of Chriſtes paſsion, as by M.W. iudgment S. Ciprian and thoſe fathers did. And therefore I ſee not how he ſo excuſing the fathers in this point, and calling it a light error, or none at al, cā him ſelf be excuſed from plaine Atheiſme, whether he be arraygned before his lawful Iudges, S. Paule, S. Ciprian, S. Auſtine, and their ſucceſſours Catholike Biſhoppes,Cōtra Campian. pa. 198 or before Luther that Apoſtata, vvhom he honoreth for his father, & the reſt of that cōfraternitie. except perhappes he wil pleade in his defence, that he knew not this, which is ſo cōmonly knowen to al, and ſo to quitte him ſelf of ſo foule impietie, wil condemne him ſelf of notorious ignorance. But howſoeuer he ſhift the matter, M. Martins charge ſtandeth vndiſcharged, that, to ſay, that the fathers tooke from Chriſt, & aſcribed to them ſelues the office of his mediatorſhip, ſatisfaction and remiſsion of ſinnes, and iuſtice before God, and yet to cal them most holie,
               An euident contradiction. is as plaine a cōtradictiō, as to ſay, ſuch a man ſeeth moſt ſharply, yet both his eyes are out of his head. he geueth conſaile excellēt wel in any cōtrouerſie of law, mary his head for al that, is a mile

of from his ſhoulders.
            And yet, to mende the matter, preſently and faſt vpon the former, talking of the ſame thinge, he ſtumbleth in to an other contradiction as groſſe as the other. For labouring to make our faultes more odious, and to ſeuer vs as far as may be from the fathers, thus he writeth.Ibid. pag. 8. 
               the fathers vvrite ſometimes, that it is our part to do ſatisfactiō vnto God, that God is pacified vvith our ſatisfactiō, that thereby vve promerite him, and redeeme our ſinnes: vvhich albeit they are not verie conueniently ſpoken,
               Note this interpretation. 
               yet by theſe, they vvould haue no other thinge vnderſtood or ſignified, thē that pardon of ſinnes and Gods grace, vvas to be requeſted and craued of vs, vſinge alſo thoſe external actions of penance, teares, faſtes, vvatchinges, almes: vvhich thing may appeare by Ciprian alone, in many places. most euidētly in his 55. epiſtle, in his booke againſt Demetrian, and in his ſermon de lapſis. what ſenſe you deuiſe and frame to your ſelf,S. Ciprians wordes touching workes of penance, & the merite therof, in the places noted by M. W. Epist. 55. et ſermon. de lapſis. I know not, nether ſkilleth it greatly. but ſurely the diſcourſe of S. Ciprian, and his words, be as much againſt you, as poſſibly may be deuiſed: and eſpecially in the places by you quoted. to geue the reader a taſt of your ſinceritie, thus he there writeth. By ſatisfaction and

iuſt mourning our ſinnes are redeemed, and our vvoundes by teares are cleanſed. our lord is to be prayed vnto, our lord is to be pacified by our ſatisfaction. let euerie man confeſſe his ſinnes, vvhile his confeſſion may be admitted, vvhile ſatisfaction and pardon geuen by the prieſtes, is acceptable before God. let our ſoule proſtrate her ſelf before god, and ſatiſfie him by ſorovvfulnes. let vs pacify gods vvrath and indignation, by faſting, lamentation, & mourning, as he him ſelf hath vvarned vs. The prophete Daniel by faſting endeuoured to deſerue gods fauour, and the like haue done al humble, vvel-meaning, and innocent men. Thinkeſt thou that God is ſo eaſely pacified, vvhom vvickedly thou haſt denied? Thou muſt pray and intreate him earneſtlie, thou muſt ſpend the day in mourning, the night in vvatching & lamentations. proſtrate on the ground in aſhes and hearecloth, thou muſt imploy thy ſelf vpon iuſt vvorkes,
               the doctrine of the Chriſtians in the Apoſtles tymes, & of the Cathol. Church in our tyme is al one concerninge workes of penance. 
               by vvhich ſinnes are purged, thovv muſt geue much almes by vvhich ſoules are deliuered from death. In this ſort, the faith floriſhed in the Apoſtles tyme. in this ſort the firſt faithful Chriſtians kept Chriſtes cōmaundemētes. & to be ſhort (for a great part of that treatiſe de lapſis runneth after this maner) thus he endeth the ſame. he that thus ſhal do ſatiſfaction to God &c. being heard and holpen

of God, ſhal not only deſerue pardō of him, but alſo a crovvne in heauen. Thus S. Ciprian. which how it ſhould moſt clearly make againſt ſatisfaction and workes ſatisfactorie, M.W. knoweth belike, for I, gladly profeſſe my ſelf therein to vnderſtād nothing.
            
               A manifeſt and groſſe contradiction.But graunt we the concluſion. let S. Ciprian ſpeake & meane as you would haue him. looke a litle backe, & conſider how palpably you contradicte your ſelf. for if it be most euident that S. Ciprian meante vvel, though he ſpake not ſo conueniently, if he vnderſtoode nothing els, but that vve ought to request pardon for our ſinnes at Gods hand, and craue his grace, vſing vvithal theſe externall actions of penance, faſting, vvatching,
               pag 7. 
               almes, why ſayd you immediatly before, that Ciprian vvith the other fathers, corrupted the doctrine of penance? why ſayd you, that they greuouſly erred, & ſomevvhat diminiſhed the force of the death and bloud of Chriſt, by vvhich only our ſinnes are expiated?Straung and wonderfull diuinitie. how is it not a ſenſible lye, when you ſay, that by their penitentiall vvorkes, they derogated not a litle frō Chriſtes death, & attributed to much to their ovvne inuentions? when you haue quitted thē of that ſuperſtitious opinion of merite & ſatisfaction, which commonly you obiect

to them, how can the actions ſeeme any way reproueable to any mā, except he be worſe then Epicurus or Diagoras? do theſe holie actions being done with a good minde and intent, ſuch as you now graunt to the fathers, corrupt the doctrine of repentance? doth faſting in it ſelf, derogate from Chriſtes death? doth watching detract from his paſsiō? do almeſdedes diminiſh the vertue & force of his bloud? Who euer heard ſuch ſtuffe?Libertiniſme. the end of iuſtification by only fayth. now doubtles I thinke ye wrote this in a dreame. or if ye wrote it wakinge, and aduiſedly, then are you proceeded from a common Proteſtant, and a Puritane, & become a Familiane, or mere Libertine, though I can eaſely be induced to beleeue, that this is the end, and ſo wil proue, of your commō ſolifidian iuſtification, that for a man to bewaile his ſinnes, to watch, to faſt, to pray, to geue almes, ſhal be deemed papiſtical, and derogatorie to Chriſt, and therefore in al reſpectes quite abandoned.
            Yea your ſelf proue this by as ſound an argument,Whit. in. li. contra Sander. pa. 297. as any you haue to proue the Pope, Antichriſt. for thus you diſpute in your academical oration, Anno 1582. Quid Chriſto integrum relinquunt? ſ
                     •
                   eſt Chriſtus noſter ſacerdos, et ſunt huius

ſacer dotii duae partes. altera, vt ſeſe pro nobis in vnicum perpetuúmque ſacrificium offerat, altera, vt preces pro nobis faciat, quid eſt quod pontificii Chriſtum quotidie offerūe &c. vvhat leaue the papiſtes entier to Chriſt? if Chriſt be our prieſt, and of this prieſthode there are tvvo partes, one, that for vs he offer him ſelf an only and perpetual ſacrifice, the other, that he pray for vs, vvhy then do the papiſtes offer Chriſt daylie? by which profound demonſtration, as you make vs Antichriſtes for hearing or ſaing maſſe, ſo you make your ſelf (if you be a miniſter) and your fellow-miniſters, as very Antichriſtes, for preaching ſermons, or ſaing Communion. for in them, I thinke you do not always rayle at the Pope and Catholikes, but ſometimes pray, though to ſmale purpoſe. Thē, whereas there be tvvo partes of Chriſtes prieſthode, to ſacrifice, & pray, they that pray, be iniurious to his prieſthode, and robbe Chriſt of that which by your diuinitie is proper to his perſon and office of mediation. and ſo if we be Antichriſtes for doing the firſt, needes muſt you and your comminiſters be Antichriſtes for doing the ſecond. and in deede, one is as true as the other. To auoid which miſcheefe, what way is

there, but ether to allow both, and ſo to returne to the Church (which to do our Lord ſend you grace) or with ſacrifice, to abandon prayer alſo, and all other workes of charitie, which without queſtion (as I haue ſaid) is the meaning and extreame ſcope of that paradox, we are iuſtified by onlie faith, that is by onlie fanſie and imagination. for that being ſo, what neede or vſe is there of faſting, prayer, and ſuch ſuperfluous & vnneceſſarie works, iniurious to Chriſt and derogatorie to his prieſthode, and without which, you are moſt aſſured of eternal life, by the omnipotēt power of your only faith.
            
         
         
            CHAP. VII. Of M. Ievvels challenge renevved by M.VV. and the vanitie and falſhode thereof.
            
               HAVING ſo wel acquited your ſelfe againſt the auncient fathers in the matter of penāce, in the cōcluſion thereof, vpon ſmal occaſion you renew M. Iewels old challenge, & verie fearcely prouoke M. Martin to oppugne it if he

dare.pa. 9. thus you ſay: Touching the principall partes of religion, moſt true it is, that I haue vvritten,
               in noſtris eccleſiis. 
               that the ſame faith is taught and preached in our Churches, (that is, Zuingliā not Lutherane) vvhich the moſt auncient fathers held. nether feare I to renevv that challenge of the moſt learned M. Ievvel, vvhich you haue mentioned, if you daere take it. They are in number 27 articles, vvherein conſiſteth the cheefeſt force of papiſtrie. of all theſe articles chooſe vvhich you vvil, I proteſt my ſelfe your aduerſarie in the cauſe ſo long as I liue. To perfourme ſo much as you ſay, though of your abilitie I doubt greatly, yet of your good wil, I doubte not a whit. for I ſee you ſticke at nothing, nether care what you ſay, or vnſay, deny or affirme, be it right, be it wronge, true of falſe, nothing commeth amiſſe. and many tymes you ſhew this ſkill, within the compaſſe of one page. And to go about to proue to one, who after ſo long tyme,S. Peters being at Rome denyed by M. W. moſte abſurdly, & againſt all antiquitie. and ſo many, & euident, and inuincible proofes of a matter hiſtorical, which of it ſelfe was amōg ſober men neuer doubted of (I meane, S. Peters being at Rome, and founding the Church there) yet now denyeth the ſame: to one, that had read in D. Sāders, the ſame confirmed by al maner teſtimonies

whereby ſuch a matter may be cōfirmed,Sander. Monarch. lib. 6. ca. 10. theſe are in that chapter beſides many more in other places by thoſe that thē liued & frō tyme to tyme enſued, by Papias S. Ihon the Euāgeliſts ſcholer, by Hegeſippus, by Caius, by Dioniſius biſhop of Corinth, by S. Ireneus, by Tertullian, by S. Ciprian, al theſe moſt auncient, and liuing not long after (for S. Ciprian the yongeſt is almoſt of 1400. yeares antiquitie) by S. Athanaſius, S. Hierome, S. Optatus, S. Ambroſe, S. Chryſoſtome, S. Epiphanius, S. Leo the greate, S.What proofes will content our aduerſaries, if theſe will not? Auguſtine, S. Gregorie, by Euſebius, Lactantius, Dorotheus, Oroſius, Maximus Taurinenſis, Sulpitius Seuerus, Proſper, Theodoretus, Gregorius Turonenſis, theſe al (ſauing S. Gregory the great and Turonenſis) beinge within the firſt 
                  •
               00. yeares: ſome of them alſo grounding them ſelues vppon the verie wordes of ſcripture, as Papias, Tertullian, Euſebius, and S. Hierome, the queſtion alſo being a matter of ſtorie and fact, which can not poſsiblie be knowē, but by the narration of ſuch writers as then liued, and receaued it from their elders, ſo that herein M.W. hath not that libertie to cauil, by comparinge together phraſes, & expounding literal ſpeaches by myſtical Allegories, as in the ſacrament

and other controuerſies of religion their maner is, the thinge alſo vntil our age being neuer denied by any writer of credit or eſtimation, and in our age confeſſed and proued by proteſtātes them ſelues of greateſt learning and knowledg:See Bullinger in ſerie temporum et rerum as. Luca in Act. tradit. ca. 17 to go aboute (I ſay) to proue, that Chriſt is really in the B. Sacrament (a matter more hard and intricate) to a man who knoweth this of S. Peter (a thing moſt plaine & euident) and yet after al this, and much more, ſaith notwithſtanding obſtinatlie, that Peter vvas at Rome,
               Whit. cont. Sad. pa. 203. 
               and there, vvith Paule laid the foundation of that church, no papiſt could euer yet ſhevv & proue: to me it ſeemeth labour as madly imploied,Horace. 
               vt ſi quis aſellum in campo doceat parentē currerefraenis, or if to Anaxagoras affirming ſtoutlie that the ſnow is blacke,niuem eſſe atramentū. Lactantius lib. 5. ca. 3. one would with ſage reaſons labour to perſwade that the ſnow is white. and perhaps it is not greater ſtupiditie (how ſhal I cal it) vnſenſiblenes, in him to auouch the firſt, then it were follye in an other, to labour about proofe of the ſecond.
            Wherefore leauing that thing to M. Martin him ſelf, as being fitter for a dead man to handle then a liuing, eſpecially

hauing to deale againſt you M.Of M Iewels challēg. W. who in this point ſeeme as dead and ſenſles as he, I wil for the readers inſtruction ſpeake a litle of M. Iewels challenge which you ſo magnifie. which albeit it hath bene examined ſufficientlie, and ſo, as no one thinge in my opinion, hath brought ether more ſhame to the author, or hinderance to your Goſpel, though at the firſt for a while it aſtoniſhed many, as a thing bearing great countenance of learning, vntil in tyme by learned men the viſard was pulled from it: yet ſeing you proclaime it agayne ſo couragiouſly, I wil in few wordes touch the ſubſtance and meaning of it. It conteyneth in effect 2. or 3. heretical articles, which M. Iewel dilated and parted into a great number, as it were ſome poore rag cut out into many ſhriddes, partly of pride and brauery to win among the ſimple an opinion of learning, partly of ſpite and malice againſt the Catholike church, which he ſought ſpecially to diſgrace, and which by nothing could be diſgraced more, then if ſhe held and mayntened 27.M. Iewel in his ſermon at Paules croſſe, the yere 1560. when firſte he put forth his challēg. articles the higheſt miſteries and greateſt keyes of her religion (as he termeth them) without

any authoritie, example, clauſe, or ſentence, of ether ſcripture, father, Councel, or writer, that liued within the firſt 600. yeres of the primitiue church.
            The inſolent vanitie of which bragge, to my ſeeming, is much like to that,
                  
                     •
                  iui. 
                     •
                  eca. 4. lib. 5. which T. Quintius the Romane Conſul, noted in the Embaſſadors of King Antiochus. who comming into Grece to perſwade that people to take part with Antiochus againſt the Romanes, they magnifyinge the force of Antiochus their maiſter, aduaunced infinitly the great hoaſtes which he would bringe,The true paterne and image of M. Iewels challenge. and terrified the ſimple Grecians, with ſtraunge names of men neuer heard of before. he wil bringe (ſayd they) into the field, Dahas, & M
                     •
                  
                  dos, and E
                     •
                  imaeos, and Caduſios. and touching his nauie, ſo great as no porte of Grece is able to receaue, the one parte thereof is guided by Sidonians and Tyrians, the other, by Aradians and Side
                     •
                  ians of Pamphilia, nations that haue no peere in the world, for ſkilfulnes in war by ſea. Here vnto T. Quintius replying, this king (quoth he) by theſe his embaſſadors vaunteth of clowdes of horſemen and footemen, and couereth the ſeas with his nauie. but al the matter

is verie like to a feaſt, which once mine hoſt at Chalcis made me. of whom being enterteyned at a certen tyme, when I marueyled at ſo great prouiſion, and demaunded, how ſo ſuddenly he came by ſuch varietie and ſtore of veniſon, he not ſo glorious as theſe men, ſmiling anſwered, that al was but the art of his cooke, and dyuers dreſſinge of the ſame thinge. for otherwiſe touching the ſubſtance of the feaſt, tota illa varietas et ſpecies ferinae carnis, er at ex ſue manſueto facta. al that varietie and ſhevv of veniſon, vvas made of a tame ſovv: ſo it is of theſe ſtrāge and terrible names, Dahae, Medi, Aradians, and Sidonians. for al theſe are but Sy
                  
                     •
                  ians, touching any valour that is in them, more fit to make ſlaues, then ſouldiers.
            The ſelfe ſame, may be trewly verified of M. Iewels ſo many and ſo great articles. for al that ſtraunge varietie and multiplication of particulars, is made but, as it were ex manſueto ſue, of two or three heretical propoſitions, thorough his ſkil in that kind of varying, ſo drawen forth and minced, that it muſtereth in the eye of the ignorant, as though it had great ſtore of new matter. for graū
               ting to him one, and the ſame no general

but a particular hereſie, that the Zuinglian opinion is true touching the Sacrament, that there is no real preſence, which is his fift article, thereof foloweth directlie the 6. that the body of Christ, is not in a 1000 places. the 8. that no diuine honor is due to it. the 10. that bread and vvine remaine as vvel after conſecration as before. the firſt, and 13. that there could not be any priuate or many priuate maſſes ſayd, whereas there was no maſſe at al. the 17. that Chriſt could not poſsiblie be offered in ſacrifice, whereas there was not any ſuch ſacrifice, nor the ſubſtāce thereof, in rerum natura. the 21. that Chriſtian men could not cal that, lord or God, which was nothing but bread & wine. and ſo forth many other, which a man of meane ſkil, may ſee to be as plainlye included in that one, as manie leſſe numbers are included in a greater, or many partes and qualities are neceſſarily conſequent to a perfect bodie. as on the cōtrarie ſide, put the Catholike opinion to be true, which he denieth in the tenth article, then al, or moſt of the ſame articles folow as clearly. vz. 
                  
                     Article 5 That the body of Chriſt is really, ſubſtantially, &c. in the ſacramēt. 
                     Article 6 That Chriſtes body is & may be in a thouſand places or moe at once. 
                     Article 8 That

diuine honor is due vnto it. 
                     Article 22 That a man may
cal it his Lord and God, &c. and likewiſe many of the reſt. So that in deed, that glorious challenge is altogether ſuch, as if Marciō in aunciēt tyme,Supra cap 2. or ſome of your brethren (who in this point ſeeme as verie heretikes as he) ſhould haue prouoked the Catholikes to defend S. Lukes Goſpel after this ſorte.
            
                If any learned man of my aduerſaries,
or if al the learned men aliue be able to proue, that S. Lukes Goſpel is canonical ſcripture.
            
                Or that the firſt chapter is canonical
ſcripture.
            
                Or that the ſecond chapter is canonical
ſcripture.
            
                Or that the third chapter is canonical
ſcripture.
            
                Or that the ſtorie of Marie Magdalene
cap. 7. is canonical ſcripture.
            
                Or the tale of Lazarus and the riche
man cap. 16.
            
                Or that wicked doctrine touching
the real preſence in the 22. chapter, &c.Of this ſee after chapiter 10. I am content to yeld and ſubſcribe.
            For as here, one article agreed on draweth the reſt, & one denied denieth the reſt, ſo is it in the deuiſe of M. Iewel. & therefore as Marcion, the more

particulars he had vttered, if he had run into as many ORS, as there be chap. or ſtories, or verſes, in S. Luke (which wel he might haue done by M. Iewels example) the farther he had run in that vayne, the more notably he had layd open to the world, his owne ambitious itching folie, pride, and arrogancy: the verie ſelfe ſame is to be deemed of this conceyte of M. Iewel, touching the far greater number of his articles. Three he hath of weight, and more principal then al the reſt. the primacie of the Sea Apoſtolike, the real preſence, and the ſacrifice. vnto theſe 3. let vs applie his challenge, and ſee (now he is gone) how wel you can ſupplie the office of his champion to maynteyne it.
            
               M Iewell in his ſermon as before.
               O Gregorie (ſaith he) O Auſtine, O Hierom, O Chriſoſtome, O Leo, O Dioniſe, O Anacletus, O Xiſtus, O Paule, O Chriſto if vve be deceaued, you have deceaued vs. you taught vs theſe hereſies. thus ye ordered the holy Cōmunion in your time, the ſame vve receaued at your handes, &c. None of our aduerſaries that ſtād againſt vs, are able or euer ſhalbe able to proue againſt vs any one of al theſe pointes ether by ſcripture, or by the example of the primitiue Churche, or by the old Doctors, or by the auncient general Councels. and if any man

aliue be able to proue any of theſe articles by any one cleare or playne clauſe, or ſentence, ether of ſcriptures, or of the old Doctors, or of any old general Councel, or by any example of the primitiue Church vvithin 600. yeres after Chriſt, I promiſe to geue ouer and ſubſcribe vnto him.
            
            Thus M. Iewel promiſed, and do you promiſe as much? what els and ſo longe as you haue a day to liue, you wil ſtand in defence here of. But how dare you ſay ſo? whereas litle know you what al the doctors haue written, and much leſſe know you, what books of theirs hereafter may be found. and your ſelues (if you remember) not long ſithence in your owne waſted libraries,Printed by Iohn Day. found out certaine ſtraunge ſermons in the Saxon tonge, againſt ſome knowen and confeſſed partes of religion, as you wold pretend. And how cā you ſo confidently hazard your faith (if you haue any) vpon one ſentence or clauſe of thoſe men, of whom ſundrie times you profeſſe, that they wrote clauſes, ſentences, chapters, and bookes, in defence of as groſſe errors as theſe. Remē
               ber your ſtomake againſt them, in this ſame booke. thus you write. Al our faith and religion (you meane I ſuppoſe,Cont, Sand pa. 21.
               
ſo far as it is allowed by act of Parlamēt and practiſed within the Q. dominions, for other ye defend not) is grounded not vpon humane, but vpon diuine autoritie.
               Yet M. Carterwrighte holdeth the contrarie and hath proued it in many books 
               Therefore if you bring againſt it, vvhat ſome one father hath beleeued, or vvhat the fathers al together haue deliuered,
               Patres etiam ſimul vniuerſi. 
               except the ſame be proued by teſtimonies of ſcripture it vvaygheth nothing, it proueth nothing, it concludeth nothing. for the fathers are ſuch vvitneſſes, that they alſo haue neede of ſcriptures to be their vvitneſſes. if deceaued by error, they haue ſaid ought differing from the ſcriptures, hovv ſoeuer they may be pardoned erring through vvant of vvit, vve can not be pardoned, if becauſe they erred, vve alſo vvil erre vvith them. Being thus perſwaded touching them all, how dare you venture your faith, vppon a clauſe or ſentence of any one? It is a peece of faith, far more ſure by al antiquitie, and more ſurely grounded in the hart of any catholike, that Chriſt is perfect God conſubstantial and equal to his father, then any of theſe paradoxes can be poſsiblie ſetled in your opinions, and we honour the fathers much more then you do. yet was there euer any Catholike, ſo frantike & mad, that would promiſe to ſubſcribe to Arianiſme, if out of any

father greeke or latin, within 600. yeares, any one clauſe or ſentence might be brought againſt the catholike beleefe? wherefore this verie aſſertion is a moſt ſure argument, that you haue no kind of faith. no faith (I ſay) at all nether diuine nor humane. not diuine, becauſe you would neuer ſo lightlie eſteeme it, nor vpon ſo ſmal warrant hazard it: not humane, becauſe it wel appeareth, that nether you, nether maiſter Iewel euer meant to ſtand to that, which to the world in publike writing ye haue ſo ſolemly promiſed.
            Wherefore albeit touching you affected as you are, I accompt this labour as clearly loſt, as if I ſhould water a fruitles tree,
               Iudas. v. 18. 
               tvviſe dead and plucked vp by the rootes, yet for the readers cōmoditie, that he may perceaue, how ignorant, and fooliſh, and proude, and fantaſtical, that vaunte of M. Iewels was, and how like it is that you who know much leſſe (yet comonly who more bold then ſuch?) can maynteine the quarel, and wade thorough that myre, wherein M. Iew. him ſelf ſtucke faſt, I wil ſpeake a few wordes of theſe his principal queſtions. And becauſe I couet (ſo far as may be) to cut of al occaſion

of cauilling, I wil not run to any other doctors (leſt you take exceptiō againſt them) then thoſe who are named here of M. Iewel, as his pretended maiſters in theſe hereſies. and againe out of them I wil bring nothing, but that only which I haue learned of your owne writers, and read in your owne bookes. and that againe, in ſuch ſenſe, without any alteration, as your ſelues alleage them. So that your heroical courage in anſwering, ſhal firſt be exerciſed vpon theſe your owne brethren, and what ſo euer blunted dartes you ſhal caſt againſt me, they ſhal not reach vnto me, but thorough their ſydes.
            I wil paſſe ouer Chriſt and S. Paule▪ 
               vvho taught M. Ievvel theſe hereſies, as he ſaith, which is not verie likely▪ whether he meane in ieaſt, or in earneſt: ſeing S. Paule willeth vs ſo to deteſt any kind of heretike, that after one or two warninges, we ſhould let him alone, and ſuffer him to periſhe in his ſinne,Tit. 3.10. 
               knovving that he is damned in his ovvne iudgment:Mat. 18.17. our ſauiour chargeth vs to hold them for no better then ethniks and publicanes, who ſhal oppoſe them ſelues vnto his church and therefore i
                  •
                can not be that ether of thoſe ſhould

teach you that, for which,The primacie of the Rom. church confirmed manifeſtly by thoſe fathers whom M. Iew. calleth his maiſters to the contrarie. before hand they threaten and aſſure you of damnation. But Anacletus and Xiſtus old biſſhops of the Romane church before that Sea grew to this vſurped primacie, they perhaps taught you this heriſie, that the biſhop of Rome hath no ſoueraintie ouer the reſt of biſhops, and that ſuch claime is altogether Antichriſtian. If that be ſo, then egregious lyers are your brethren the makers of the Centuries, who tel vs the cleane contrarie.Magdebur. Centur. 2. c. 7. col. 139. 
               Anacletus (ſay they) in the epiſtles vvhich beare his name, in the general regiment of churches, ſo ioyneth them together, that to the Romane churche, he attributeth primacie and excellencie of povver ouer al churches, and ouer the vvhole flocke of the Chriſtian people, and that, by the autoritie of Chriſt ſaing to Peter, thou art Peter and vpon this rocke vvil I build my church &c.
               This order was approued in the Councel of Nice cap 
                     •
                  . 
               the ſecond ſea after that, he maketh the church of Alexandria, by reaſon of S. marke ſcoler of S. Peter. The third, Antioche, becauſe S. Peter abode there, before he came to Rome. degrees of Biſhops he maketh thus. The biſſhop of Rome is placed firſt, as the ſupreme head of the church: vvho though he erre yet vvil he not haue him to be iudged of others,
               So ſay the rathers in Conc. Sin
                     •
                  
                  eſſano. 
               but to be tolerated. the ſecond place haue Patriarkes

or primates, the third, Metropolitanes, the fovrth, Archbiſhops, and aftervvard biſhops. he ſaith alſo, that certaine cities receaued primates from the bleſſed apoſtles, and from S. Clement. epiſt. 3.1. Tom. Conciliorum pa. 63. The ſame Anacletus, appointing how controuerſies in particular churches ſhould be taken vp & ended, after the order of S. Paule. 1. Cor. 5. willeth that greate matters ſhould be referred to the higher biſhops and primates,Ibid. ſee the ſame in the Councel of Cart. & Mileu. in S. Aug. epiſ. 90.91.92.93 
               but if greater difficulties ariſe, or cauſes fal out among the biſhops & primates them ſelues, let them be brought to the Sea Apoſtolike, if ſuch appealt be made. for ſo the Apoſtles ordayned by the apoinment of our Sauiour, that the greater and harder queſtiōs ſhould alvvayes be brought to the Apoſtolike Sea, vpon vvhich Chriſt builte his vniuerſal church. Mat. 16. And Xiſtus (who ſucceded not long after Anacletus) in his 2.Cent. 
                     •
                  . vbi ſupra. 
               epiſtle, nameth him ſelfe, the biſhop of the vniuerſal Apoſtolike church. and vvilleth others to appeale to the Apoſtolike Sea, as to the head.
            
            Theſe are the firſt and moſt auncient that M. Iewel findeth, of whom he learned his hereſie againſt the primacie of the Romane church. and verie aunciēt they are in deede, the one being the

fourth, the other the eight, in order frō S. Peter. But (Chriſtian reader,) was he not a good ſcholer, that of theſe maiſters could gather ſuch doctrine? of ſuch flowers, could ſucke out ſuch poyſon? or can we marueyle, if they haue a feate to peruert any thing be it neuer ſo plainelie and trulye ſpoken, who can crie out vpon ſuch fathers ſpeaking ſo roundly, & ſay, O Xiſtus, O Anacletus, you taught vs theſe hereſies, you taught vs that the biſhop of Rome for challenging primacie ouer the church, is the precurſor of Antichriſt?
            But you wil anſwere, as M. Iewel teacheth you, that theſe epiſtles be not the epiſtles of Anacletus or Xiſtus,An obiectiō anſwered. but counterfeit, and ſet forth by ſome other in their names. But what vncredible peruerſitie, and contradiction, and impudencie is this? or how can he ſo ſay? for ſaw he euer any other bookes of theirs, beſides theſe epiſtles? could he for him ſelfe, or you for him, pretēd any ſuch knowledge? moſt certaine it is, you can not. and therefore learning ought againſt the Romane Sea, from Xiſtus and Anacletus, he muſt needes learne it hence. and ſo, ether this maketh againſt the Romane Sea, which

thing by Illyricus and other your owne writers is at large refuted (and who hauinge the forehead of a man can ſay otherwyſe?) or M. Iewel in naming theſe two Popes at Paules croſſe for his maiſters in that hereſie, may be an example of a more diſſolute man, and more rechles in lying and abuſing his audience, then euer before, or perhaps euer ſithence occupied that place.
            Let vs trie ſome other of his maiſters, S. Gregorie and S. Leo, vpon whom firſt, in like maner he exclameth. and the proteſtants them ſelues, thoſe that be fartheſt gone in bold deniall of any thinge, yet denie not but the bookes and epiſtles extant in their names, were truly made and leaft vnto vs by them. And did they (trow you) teach him theſe hereſies? let vs heare vvhat they ſay,The primacy of the Romane Sea ouer all churches of Chiſtendō within the firſte 500 yeres, confeſſed & proued by the more famous and learned proteſtants. Cent. 5. ca. 7 col. 774 and that in no other vvordes and ſenſe, then thoſe forenamed your owne doctors make them to ſpeake, and point you to the bookes, epiſtles, and chapters, vvhere you ſhal find that vvhich they vvrite. The biſhops of Rome that liued in this fift age (vvithin 500 yeres after Chriſt) affirme, that the Romane church is chiefe of al others. ſo doth Leo in his ſermon de anniuerſario aſſumptionis, et epiſtola
               
89. ad epiſcopos per prouinciam Viēnenſem. The biſhops that gouerned the Romane church in that age, required of other Archbiſhops, that they ſhould make relation to them, if there fell any matter of controuerſie. ſo Leo vvriteth in his 46. epiſtle to Anatolius Archbiſhop of Conſtātinople:
               Ibi. col. 776 
               If there be any thing that doth require conſultation, vvith ſpeede let relation therof be made vnto me, that after I haue examined the matter, my diligence may apoint vvhat is to be done. Againe, epiſt. 62. he requireth of Maximus Archbiſhop of Antioche, that he acknovvledge the priuileges of the third Sea, and oftē tymes vvrite to the Sea Apoſtolike, hovv the churches there increaſe. Alſo they tooke to thē this authoritie, to reproue other biſhops, if they did ought amiſſe. they preſcribed vnto them vvhat they ſhould do, and apointed them orders in ceremonies. ſo Leo epiſt. 86. reprehēdeth Nicetas (patriarch) of Aquileia, becauſe he receaued to communiō the Pelagians, before they had condemned their error. He reprehendeth alſo the Africane biſhops in the prouince of Mauritania Caeſarienſis, for making biſhops, certaine perſōs vnlavvfully. epiſt. 87. and he rebuketh the biſhops of Germanie & Fraunce, for contemning the order of their felovvbiſhops. epiſ. 88. And vvheras Anatolius biſhop of Conſtantinople ſeemed

not to beleeue rightly of the incarnation of the ſonne of God, Leo chargeth him to put his faith in vvriting,
               Leos authoritie ouer the biſhop of Conſtantinople. 
               and ſend it to the biſhop of Rome, and therein to proteſt openly, that he vvil excommunicate that man, vvho ſo euer beleeueth or teacheth of the incarnation of Chriſt, othervviſe then is the profeſſiō of the Catholikes, and of the biſhop of Rome. epiſt. 33. So Proterius Archbiſhop of Alexandria, is reported to haue ſent letters touching his faith to Leo. epiſt. 68. And Leo, epiſt. 69. ſignifieth to the Emperour Marcianus, that Proterius is a Catholike.
               Ibi. col. 778. 
               They alſo confirmed biſhops in their biſhopriks. ſo Leo confirmed Maximus patriarch of Antioche in his biſhoprike, though he vvere made in the Councel of Epheſus, of vvhich Councel al other acts vvere abrogated. act. 7. Concil. Chalced. and that the ſame Leo confirmed to Proterius biſhop of Alexandria, the old rights of that Sea according to the Canons and (aūcient) priuileges, it is noted epiſt. 68. Leonis ad Iulianū et 69. ad Imperatorem Marcianum. Leo in his 33. epiſtle to Theodoſius, requireth that he take order, that the biſhop of Conſtantinople ſend to him a vvriting, vvherin he profeſſe to embrace the true doctrine, and to condemne al that diſſent from the ſame. Alſo they ſent abrode legates,
               Ibi. co. 779. 
               vvho in far diſtant prouinces, tooke notice of the errors of heretikes, and corrected

them. ſo Leo ſent his legates to Cōſtantinople to vvithdravv Eutiches from his error, as appeareth epiſt. 11. ca. 6. ad Flauianum. ſo he ſent legates to the Emperour, epiſt. 34. & to Epheſus, that they taking vnto them the Archbiſhop of Conſtantinople ſhould abſolue thoſe that had bene deceaued by Dioſcorus, and vvere novv content to do penance. epiſt. 44. & 46. In like maner epist. 87. ſending legates in to Africa, he cōmaundeth that Donatus a Nouatian be receaued (to communion) if he ſend to Rome, a vvritinge touching the condemnation of that error. They required alſo of Archbiſhops,
               Harde queſtions riſing in far diſtāt prouinces, referred to the Sea of Rome. 
               that if of themſelues they could not determine any thing, they ſhould ſend it to the Sea Apoſtolike, & vvithal they charged thē to receaue and obſerue their decrees made againſt heretikes. ſo Leo epiſt. 84. cap. 7. preſcribeth this order to the biſhop of Theſſalonica in Thracia, that tvvo prouincial Councels be held euery yere. & if there fal out any hard matter, and it be not decided by the iudgement of the biſhop of Theſſalonica, that it be referred to the biſhop of Rome. and cap. 11. he vvilleth that the contentions riſinge among the biſhops, be referred to him, vvith a declaration of things done in ſuch matters. The ſame Leo cōmaundeth Nicetas patriarch of Aquileia, that he cauſe al his biſhops, prieſtes, & clearks

openly to cōdemne certaine hereſies and their authors, and to approue al ſynodal decrees, vvhich the authoritie of the Apoſtolike Sea had confirmed for the rooting out of hereſie, & that they teſtifie ſo much by their ſubſcriptions. epiſt. 86.
            Many things (Chriſtian reader) of good weight & importāce I paſſe ouer, becauſe I couet to be ſhort, and theſe matters are now ſo cleare and manifeſt to men neuer ſo litle exerciſed in theſe queſtions, that I do rather marueyle & wonder at the dulnes and paſsing ether ignorance or ſhamleſnes of our aduerſaries, then greatly take care how to refute ſo ſenſible and knowen a falſhode. Yet one thing I may not pretermitte, which the foreſayd hiſtoriographers moſt euidently affirme, and by plaine demonſtration proue, and wherein the primacie of the Romane Church ſhyneth as bright,Supremacie of the Rom. Sea in general Coūcels, as before confeſſed & proued. as the ſunne at noone in a ſomers day, that is, the demeanure of the biſhop of Rome in generall Councels. in which the whole church being gathered together, if at any time or place, then, and there, this power is principally to be conſidered. And haue we any thing there, for our purpoſe? Is it poſsible that within the firſt 500. yeres,

in the aunciēt general Councels, ought ſhould be found for proofe of this ſupreme authoritie,Iewel in his defence of the Apolo. par. 2. cap. 4. & 1. 
               vvhich is plainelie contrarie to the auncient Councels, & inuaded the church vnder Phocas, many yeres after the tyme we ſpeake of, except the Apologie of the Engliſh Church, and the Proteſtantes in their writinges lye to notoriouſly?Luth. Tom. 7. lib. contta Papatum pag. 455. 
               It is verie true (ſaith Luther) and the Pope him ſelfe knovveth it vvel inough, and nothing is more manifeſt by al the decrees of the old Councels,
               The facyng of a lye. 
               and al vvritings and ſtories of al holy fathers vvhich vvere before the firſt Pope by name Bonifacius 3.Anno Domini 605. 
               that the biſhop of Romes authority vvas no greater then the authority of other biſhops.
            
            How the honor of that Apologie & Luther may be ſaued, I leaue it to M. W. but otherwyſe then as of an incredible fowle lye I can not iudge of that aſſertiō, except I would diſcredite theſe other writers, who affirme the contrarie, and proue the contrarie, & that out of moſt autentical recordes, and that by this very Leo magnus, in M. Iewels iudgement, ſo greate an enemy of this ſupremacie. For continuing there narration of the ſame Popes,Vbi ſup. col 781.782. 
               They ſummoned general Councels (ſay theſe writers) they vvere the Preſidents in general Councels, they

confirmed general Councels, and ſometimes in part, ſometimes vvholie, they diſanulled general Councels. and this is manifeſt in Leo his epiſtles and the general Councels thēſelues keapt vnder him. Epiſt. 93. ca. 17. vve haue ſent letters (ſaith he) to our brethren and felovv-biſhops of Tarraco in Spayne, of Carthage in Afrike, of Portugal and Fraunce, and haue ſommoned them to meete at a general Councel. and Leo ſent Paſchaſinus biſhop of Sicilia to be Preſident in the Councell of Chalcedon: vvhich is manifeſte in the Acts of that Councel.
               No lawful Coūcel with out approbation of the Romane Sea. 
               And the ſame Paſchaſinus the Popes vicar condemned Dioſcorus Patriarch of Alexandria, for this reaſon, becauſe he durſt hold a Councel vvithout the authoritie of the Sea Apoſtolike. and Cecropius biſhop of Sebaſtopolis, ſaith in the ſame place, vve may not call the ſecond Councel of Epheſus, by the name of a Councel, becauſe it vvas nether gathered together by the Apoſtolike authoritie, nether proceeded it orderly. in actis Concilii Chalcedonenſis. See Leo epiſt. 10. ad Flauianum, and 12. ad Theodoſium. Thus Leo condemned the ſecond Councel of Epheſus, and required an other to be gathered, epiſt. 24.25.28.30.31.32. and vvhereas Anatolius biſhop of Conſtantinople, vvould haue ſet him ſelf before the churches of Alexandria and Antioche, Leo epist. 53. vvriteth

vnto him most vehemently, and ſhevveth that to be againſt the canons of the Nicene Councel, and that he vvil not permit thoſe churches to leeſe their old prerogatiues: vvhich thing he auoucheth alſo in his epistle to Pulcheria. and there againe he rebuketh the ambition or inſolencie of that Anatolius, and ſignifieth expreſly, that he doth abrogate and diſanulle all the decrees of the biſhops there gathered together, ſo many as vvere contrarie to the rules of the Nicene Coūcel. And the Coūcel of Chalcedō
                (of 630. biſhops aſſembled out of al the world) thus vvriteth to Leo. vve beſeech you, that you vvil honour our iudgement vvith your approbation, and as vve of zeale haue put our conſent to theſe good decrees,
               Summitas tua filiis. Vbi ſup. ca. 10. col, 1262 
               ſo let your Supremacie fulfill to vs your children, that vvhich is conuenient. Finally, this principalitie of the Romane church, Leo laboureth to perſvvade in moſt of his epiſtles, as in his epiſtles to Anaſtaſius biſhop of Theſſalonica, to the biſhops of Germanie and Fraunce, to Anatolius biſhop of Conſtantinople, & in ſundrie other, vvhere very painfully he goeth about to proue, that ſingular preeminence vvas geuen to Peter aboue the other Apoſtles, and that thence roſe the diſtinction of biſhops, and eſpecially the primacie of the Romane church, and that therefore he is bound to take the care of al

churches. Thus far they. whereby we ſee, that S. Leo thought this primacy due to the church of Rome, not by decree of Emperours or Councels, but by the expreſſe ordinance of Chriſt him ſelfe in the Goſpel.
            And in all this, can M. W. fynde neuer a ſentence, clauſe, or example, for the Supremacie? thinketh he that M. Iewels grāmatical diuinitie of comparing wordes and phraſes, tempered together with a huge heape of corruptiōs & lyes, wil ſerue, in the iudgmēt of any reaſonable man, againſt ſuch a troupe of ſenſible demonſtrations, gathered & vrged to this purpoſe by his owne brethren? whē as the greate generall Coū
               cels acknowledge ſuch authoritie, the greateſt patriarchs of Conſtantinople, Antioche, Alexandria, ſubmit them ſelues to ſuch authoritie, the biſhop of Rome, a man of ſuch excellencie for learning, wiſdom, and godlines, as Leo was, exercyſeth vpon them ſuch authoritie, preſcribeth to them lawes, Canons, and decrees, gouerneth in their prouinces, and in al other, in Africa, in Mauritania, in Aegipte, in Syria, in Aſia, in Grece, in Spaine, in Fraunce, in Germanie, in al parts of the Chriſtian

world?
                  Confeſ. Geneu. cap. 7. ¶. 12.
                  Leo ſo magnified by M. Iewel, is a verie Antichriſt to Beza and the church of Geneua.
                Remembreth he not that Theodore Beza and the church of Geneua anſwere theſe places, by calling him plaine Antichriſt for vſing this authoritie? Cōſtat Leonem in epiſtolis, Romanae Sedis Antichriſtianae arrogantiam planè ſpiraſſe. It is manifeſt (ſay they) that Leo in his epiſtles doth clearly breath forth the arrogancie of that Antichriſtiā Romane Sea. & yet S. Leo in Geneua a verie Antichriſt for his writing & behauiour about the Supremacie, for the ſelf ſame matter, in England is a pure Proteſtāte. He taught M. Iewel that the authoritie of the biſhop of Rome, was no greater then the authority of any other biſhop, & of thee ô Leo, he learned this hereſie. & if he vvere deceaued, thou Leo deceauedst him. Surely it was an ouerſight, that he forgat to put in the rolle, S. Bernard, the biſhop of Rocheſter, and Sir Thomas More. For of them in this caſe he learned as much as of S. Leo, or of S. Gregorie, who notwithſtanding is an other of his maiſters. But what a froward and ouerthwart ſcholer he was, who here againe ſo blyndly miſtooke his maiſter, I thinke few of his ſchole-felowes are ignorant, and it is ſo cleare, that in truth it greueth me to ſpend tyme therein.

and therefore I refer the reader to the ſame ſtorie, vvhere he ſhal ſee a good and large treatiſe, aboundantly prouīg the ſame of S. Gregorie, vvhich novv hath bene ſhevved of S.Centuria 6.6.7. col. 425. Leo. he ſhal find there confeſſed by thoſe Proteſtants who hated the Sea of Rome as deepelie, as did ether M.W. or M. Iewel, but were not ſo extremelie hardned in face and forhead as M. Iewel was, and as M.W. muſt be, if he take vpon him the others quarel, he ſhal finde (I ſay) confeſſed by them and proued in lyke maner, that this S. Gregorie taught, that Apoſtolica ſedes eſt omnium Eccleſiarum caput.
               The church of Conſtantinople ſubiect to the Sea of Rome before Phocas or Bonifacius 3. 
               the Apoſtolike Sea (of Rome) is head of al churches. lib. 11. epiſt. 54. Indict. 6. that bothe the Emperour and Euſebius his felovv-biſhop, profeſſed that the church of Conſtantinople vvas ſubiect vnto that Sea. li. 7. epiſ. 63. indict. 2. that he cited Maximus biſhop of Salona in Dalmatia to come to Rome, there to render accompt hovv he came by that biſhoprike. lib. 5. indict. 14. epiſt. 25. he apointed the biſhop of Siracuſa to be iudge ouer the biſhop of Conſtantinople. lib. 7. indict. 2. epiſ. 64. he ſent into Spaine, one vvho ſhould reſtore Ianuarius depoſed from his biſhoprike vniuſtly. lib. 11. indict. 6. epiſt. 50. & 54. he apointeth the biſhops of Fraunce, hovv they

ſhould cal a ſynode for the rooting out of ſimonie and auarice. lib. 9. indict. 4. epiſt. 49. & ſequentibus. and thoſe thinges vvhich in the ſynode they ſhould agree on, he vvilleth ſhould be ſent to him, & ſtreightly chargeth them, that at the leaſt once in the yere they keepe a ſynode, according to the canonical decrees. lib. 7. epiſt. 110. numer. 2. And Virgilius biſhop of Arelatum or Arles, vvhom in the French church he made his Vicar and Legate, and preferred before al other biſhops, he vvilleth to ſend to him, al harder controuerſies. li. 4. ind. 14. epi. 52. The like priuilege he graunteth to Maximianus biſhop of Siracuſa in Sicilia, to be ſupreme ouerſeer of thoſe churches, and to end leſſer controuerſies and ſend the greater to him. vvhich priuilege for al that, he geueth to the perſon, not to the place. lib. 2. epiſt. 4. indict. 10. Iſychius biſhop of Ieruſalē, he biddeth to exterminate from his churches the Simoniacal hereſie. lib. 9. indict. 4. epiſt. 40. To Columbus biſhop of Numidia and the primate of that prouince he enioyneth, that he vvith other examine the cauſe of Donadeus depoſed by Victor his biſhop. and if he be guiltie, to binde him to penance, if he be guiltles, that they rebuke Victor, that he may knovv hovv vniuſtly he hath dealt. lib. 10. indict. 5. epist. 8. vvhen the biſhop of Constantinople had condemned a

priest of Chalcedon, Gregorie retracteth that ſentence, and commaundeth him being innocent to be abſolued. lib 5. indict. 14. epist. 15.16.17. Finally he affirmeth againe and proueth by ſcripture, that the Romane churche is head of al churches, caput omnium Eccleſiarum. Greg. in 4. Pſal. penitentialem, & lib. 12. indict. 7. epiſt. 32. and ſo forth, for what ſhould I ſtand vpon particulars, which are in maner innumerable there rehearſed. and by theſe writers it ſeemeth (and true it is) that his 12.Vide ibi ca. 7. pag. 425.426.427.428.429.430 &c. vntil the pag. 439. bookes of epiſtles conteyne in effect nothing els, but the exerciſe of ſuche vniuerſal iuriſdiction, practyſed by Gregorie the firſt in al Chriſtian churches, from Eaſt to Weſt, frō North to South, in far more ample maner, & with more ſhew of authoritie, then appeareth now in Gregorie the thirtenth his ſucceſſor. Theſe things I ſay and very many other of this quality, did S. Gregorie the firſt,Caluin. Inſtitut. lib. 4. ca. 7. ¶. 12.13 a man for humilitie commended of Caluin ſingularly, of Luther (who ſeeldome ſpake good of any Pope) acknowledged for a good & holy biſhop.Luth. Tom. 7. aduerſus Papatum fol. 455. And Bale ſometime an Iriſh prelate (though afterward a common miniſter) who rayleth fowly at the moſt glorious martyrs and confeſſors

Popes of that Sea before S. Gregorie, yet ſpeaking of him, attributeth this vnto him, that he was the beſt for life and learning, that euer ſat in that place.Balaeus de ſcript. Britā. cent. 1. p. 45. 
               Gregorius omnium Romanorum pontificum doctrina & vita prestantiſsimus.
            
            But againſt al theſe examples, conſiſting not onlie in plaine wordes, but much more in manifeſt deedes, factes, iudgments, corrections, iuriſdictions, appellations, excomunications, al euident practiſes of ſouerayne principalitie, M. Iewel hath a number of wordes, and they al depending of one only worde, that is, the name vniuerſal,
               VNIVERSALIS. which S. Gregorie doth ſo condemne, as he accompteth him for Antichriſt, that would be called vniuerſal biſhop. and here what a ſturre he keepeth, Paules croſſe, his replie againſt D. Cole and D. Harding, the Engliſh Apologie and the defence of the Apologie witneſſe abundantly. For this is a common ſtorebox, when ſo euer the Pope commeth in the way, ſo far forth, that in one ſide of a leafe he quoteth S.Replie againſt D. Harding pa. 226. Gregorie againſt this name, no leſſe then 19. tymes. and M. W. with his felowes, at this day ſingeth that ſong as freſhly, as though it neuer had bene heard before.

But if ether he or they regarded the ſearching out of the truth, and ſought not continual wrangling about words, they would neuer ſo blindlie haue ſnatched at one worde, againſt ſo many facts and examples of continual cuſtome, ſo many wayes teſtified and expreſſed by worde and deede. But the anſwer is eaſy, and often tymes geuen by S. Gregorie, often times repeted & propoſed by the late catholike writers. but becauſe M. W. hath nor perhaps ſeene the one, and not greatly conſidered the other, I wil geue him the ſame, and the true ſenſe of ſuch words, out of one of his owne felowes.
            
               M. Iewels & other proteſtants cō
                  mon obiection takē out of S. Gregorie againſt the ſupremacie, anſwered truly by one of their owne ſect.Andreas Fricius of Polonia, a man though bearing deadly hatred to the Pope of Rome, yet one that could be content wel inough to haue the like office amōg his Euangelical churches to keepe them in vnitie, which he thinketh otherwiſe wil neuer be, handling that matter and laing againſt him ſelf this old auncient obiection of the Proteſtants,Andreas Fricius de eccleſia. lib. 2. cap. 10. pag. 570. thus anſwereth it, & that truly. Some there be (ſayth this writer) that againſt this office (of vniuerſal ſuperintendent) obiect the authoritie of Gregorie, vvho ſaith, that ſuch a title apperteyneth to

the precurſor of Antichriſt. But the reaſon of Gregorie is to be knovven. & it may be gathered of his vvordes, vvhich he repeteth in many epiſtles, that the title of vniuerſal biſhop is contrarie, & doth gainſay the grace vvhich is cōmonly poured vpon al biſhops.
               Vniuerſall biſhop, how & in what ſenſe denyed by S. Gregorie. 
               He therefore that ſhould cal him ſelf vniuerſal biſhop, calleth him ſelf the only biſhop, and taketh biſhoply povver from the reſt. VVherefore this title he vvould haue to be reiected, vvhich is vſurped vvith the iniurie of other biſhops. Such ſentences to this purpoſe are oftentimes repeted by S.
               Saepe eiuſmodi ſentē
                  tiae iterātur a Gregorio. 
               Gregorie in many epiſtles &c. this title he doth abhorre both in him ſelfe, and in al other. ſo far of is he frō graunting the ſame to the biſhop of Conſtantinople. and vvhy ſo? becauſe biſhoply grace is generally beſtovved (from god) vpon al biſhops. and it is no reaſon that any one ſhould take to him ſelfe, that vvhich by equal right agreeth to al. This being the true meaning of ſuch places, and this being verie often times geuen by S. Gregorie him ſelfe, ſaepe et in multis epiſtolis, you ſee how iuſtly we accuſe both M. Iewel & you, of wilfulnes and blindnes. how iuſtly we obiect vnto you a verbal and talkatiue diuinitie, who could not, or would not ſee that is which ſo commonly repeted againe and

againe in ſo many epiſtles.
            
               Though S. Greg. diſliked the name Vniuerſall, yet he approued the Supremacie as agreable to the expreſſe worde of god.But maketh S. Gregorie ether in this word, or in al his words or workes, ought againſt the primacie of that church? This writer proceedeth on thus. Verumtamen ex aliis conſtat &c. notvvithſtanding by other places it is euident, that Gregorie thought, that the charge and principalitie of the vvhole church, vvas committed to Peter by the voice of our Lord. And thus much he vvrote plainely, & almoſt vvord for vvord lib. 4. epiſtola. 32. to the emperour Maurice, and confirmed it by testimonie of ſcripture. It is manifest (ſaith Gregorie) to al men that knovv the goſpel, that by the voice of our Lord, the care of the vvhole church vvas cōmitted to holy S. Peter Prince of al the Apoſtles. For to him it is ſaid, feede my ſheepe. Iohn. 21. To him it is ſaid, I haue prayed for the, that thy faith fayle not. Luc. 22. To him it is ſaid: thou art Peter and vpon this rock I vvil build my church &c.
               If charge of the vniuerſal church make the Pope Antichriſt, then our Sauiour made S. Peter Antichriſt. 
               Mat. 16. Behold he receaueth the keys of the kingdom of heauen, povver to bind and looſe is geuen to him, to him is committed the charge & principalite of the vvhole church. And yet for this cauſe Gregorie thought not that Peter vvas the forerunner of Antichrist. Thus he, prouing both by ſcripture & by reaſon, that S. Gregorie, though he

diſliked and condemned that proude name of vniuerſal biſhop, both in him ſelfe and others (as doth alſo Pope Gregorie the 13. at this day) yet he nether diſliked, nor condemned the ſupreme charge and gouernment of the church for Antichriſtian, which him ſelfe exerciſed. nether could he ſo do, except he firſt cōdemned for Antichriſtian, S. Peter the Apoſtle who receaued it, and Chriſt our Sauiour who gaue it. So tha
                  •
                M. Iew. hath hetherto ſhewed ſmal wit, learning, faith, or honeſtie, in making theſe mē, S. Gregorie, Leo, Xistus, Anacletus his maiſters in that hereſie againſt the ſupremacie, who haue not only no one word or ſillable againſt it, but contrariwiſe haue whole and long epiſtles, chapters, diſcourſes, examples, and factes, arguments, reaſons & ſcriptures to proue it. And here the reader may geſſe, how like I were to cloy him with abundance and ſtore, if I would in like ſort go thorough with the other articles, which I might do as wel, and with as great aduantage. But I wil not caſt more water into the ſea, and therefore nether wil proſequute in this order the other two queſtions, but only touch them in a word, and ſo proceede

to other matter.
            As here againſt the Pope, ſo againſt the real preſence, for the zuinglian imagination, M. Iewel likewiſe chalengeth al the fathers vnto him, namely thoſe aboue rehearſed, S. Gregorie S. Leo &c. and beſides, S. Auſtin, S. Hierom, and S. Chriſoſtome, then which I thinke he could not haue picked out amongſt al the fathers, more heauy and deadly enemies to him, touching any parte of his falſe faith, and thoſe two partes of the real preſence and ſacrifice eſpecially. For was there euer beſides this wicked man, any Luther, or Bucer, or who ſo euer was worſe then other,S. Gregorie a prieſte, vvithout all reaſon made a miniſter by M. Iewel. ſo deſperate in lying, that would ſay S. Gregorie was a miniſter, and ministred the holy communion as now is the faſhion in England? when his bookes in ſo many places, ſhew him to haue bene a prieſte, and a prieſte to celebrate maſſe, and not to minister communion? vnto whom other proteſtants commonly attribute the framing of the maſſe,Bibliand. in praefat. epiſtolarū Zuinglii & Oecolampadii. Melanct. li. 4 Chronic. in Henric. 4. fol. 186.187. becauſe of two or three rites which he ordeined therein? Whom for this cauſe, Theodorus Bibliāder ſcornfully nameth patriarcham caeremoniarum, the Patriarch of ceremonies: Melanchthō,

that he horribly prophaned the Communiō, allovving by publike authoritie the ſacrifice of Chriſtes body and bloud, not only for the liuing but alſo for the dead: Flacius Illyricus, that by miracle he cōuerted a faithles vvoman vvho beleeued not that the body of Chriſt vvas ſubſtancially in tbe Sacrament.
               Centu. 6. ca. 10. col. 678.679.682. ibi. ca. 13. col. 817.819. 
               ex Paulo Diacono. lib. 2. cap. 41.42. and that euery vvhere be doth inculcate ſacrifices and maſſe, and by diuers miracles confirmeth the ſame: againſt whom Petrus Paulus Vergerius, for authoritie, place and eſtimation, as great a Proteſtant as any in our dayes, hath written a whole booke, entituled de nugis & fabulis Papae Gregorii primi:P. Paulus Vergeri. cō
                  tra Grego. 1. and finally (to paſſe by many others) when your owne Engliſh writers proteſt him to haue bene a perfite and abſolute Papiſt, & that therefore your firſt Apoſtles and Euangeliſtes in bringing in this your Goſpel, did directly oppoſe them ſelues vnto him, and rooted out that which he and his Legate our Apoſtle S. Auſtin had planted? Gregorie the firſt (ſaith your Chronicler Iohn Bale) the yere of our lord 596.Bale. cent. 1. pag. 66.72. & centur. 8. pa. 678. 
               ſent Auſtine the monke to plante in our churches his Romane religion. But Latimer is much more vvorthie to be called our Apoſtle then Auſtine. For Auſtine brought

nothing but mans traditions,
               Marke this confeſſion. Our firſt Apoſtles were Papiſtes. 
               maſſe, Croſſes, litanies &c. vvhereas Latimer vvith the hooke of truth cut of thoſe ſuperſtitions vvhich he had planted, and caſt them out of the Lords vineyard. And doth not M. Horne the late called biſhop of Wincheſter, in playne termes reuile this glorious Apoſtle, and name him moſt ethnically a blinde buſſard,
               M. Horne againſte M. Feknam. pa. 58. becauſe he was ignorant of your Alcoran, and knew nothing els, and therefore induced our forefathers to no other Goſpel, then to the auncient Goſpel of Chriſt and religion Catholike?
            And doth the other S. Auſtin make more for you in this point of your vnbeleefe, then doth this later S. Auſtin, or S. Gregorie? I know you alleage him much more, but with what honeſtie, I had rather you ſhould heare of your owne father Luther, then of me. In my iudgement (ſaith Luther) after the Apoſtles,
               Luth. Tom. 7. defenſio verborum coenae fol. 405. 
               the church hath not had a better doctor then vvas S. Auſtin. And that holie man hovv filthilie & hovv ſpitefullie is he mangled and disfigured by the Sacramentaries,
               S. Auſtine intolerably abuſed and corrupted by the Sacramentaries. 
               that he may become a defender & patrone of their venemous, blaſphemous and erroneous hereſie? Verely as much as in me lieth, ſo long as I haue breath in my body, I vvil

vvithſtand them, and proteſt that they do him iniury. vvhich thing any man may do vvith an aſſured and confident mynde, becauſe the Sacramentaries only pul & teare his vvords into their ovvne ſenſe, prouing their applicatiō by no reaſon, but only by vayne boaſting of their moſt certaine truth. And concerning the reſt of the fathers, whereas M. Iewel affirmeth, that they all taught as he did, againſt the real preſence, Luther contrarywiſe affirmeth, that no one euer ſo taught, but euerie one taught the contrarie. Thus he writeth in the ſame booke. This truly is maruelous,
               Ibid. fo. 391. Nullus Nemo. 
               that no one of the fathers, vvhereof the number is infinite, euer ſpake of the Sacrament, as do the Sacramentaries.
               No one father was of M. Iewels opinion touching the Sacrament. 
               For none of them vſeth ſuch vvordes, there is only bread and vvine: or, the body & bloud of Chriſt is not there. Surely it is not credible, nay it is not poſsible, vvhere as they talke againe and againe of theſe things, but at ſome time, at the lest once, theſe vvordes vvould haue ſlipt out of their pen: it is only bread,
               Concordes & conſtātes vno ore. 
               or the body of Chriſt is not there corporally, or ſuch like. But they al ſpeake ſo preciſely, as though none doubted, but that there vvere preſent the body & bloud of Chriſt. They al agreably and conſtantly vvith one mouth auouch the affirmatiue, that it is there. But our Sacramentaries

can do nothing els but proclayme the negatiue, that it is not there. So Luther, prince and father of this Goſpel. and ſo that Luther,ſupra cap. 3. whoſe iudgmēt M.VV. preferreth before a thouſand Auſtines, a thouſand Ciprians, and as many churches. and ſo at the leſte, more to be eſtemed then one M. Iewel, though M.W. ſtand by him to helpe out the matter.
            But this field is ſo large, that the farther I go, the farther I may. & therefore to breake of, omitting S. Chriſoſtome, who made 6.S. Chriſoſtomes 6. bookes de ſacerdotio. bookes of prieſthode, (and neuer a one of miniſterhode,) and therefore is not lyke to be an enemy to the ſacrifice,lib. 3. which in one part of that work he ſetteth forth ſo excellētly, referring M.chap. 4. W. for the ſacrifice to that which hath bene ſayde before: for the real preſence, to that which may by occaſion be touched hereafter,chap. 8 & 9. I wil end this matter, wiſhinge the reader to carie in memorie M. Iewels challēge as an eternal example of his inexplicable impudency and raſhnes. thereby that he learne, not to be moued with the bold coūtenāces of his aftercommers, whoſe faſhion is verie commonly to looke biglie,Tower diſputation. when in deede (ſettinge a ſyde the Tower racke & Tiburne) they can do nothing:

and then to crake vnmeaſurably, when beſydes words and crakes (and lyes) they haue nothing to ſay. which to haue bene the faſhion of heretikes in his time, S. Auſtin of old noted,Aug. de vtilitate credē
                  di cap. 1. and we in our time finde true by experience. And in this preſent quarel it can not be auoyded, but ether Caluin, Luther, Beza, Peter Martir, Zuinglius, Illyricus, & Bale, principal Euāgeliſts & goſpellers be egregious lyers, who tel vs that the fathers thus taught, and thus beleeued of the Popes primacy, of the ſacrifice and real preſence: or els M. Iewel muſt take that to him ſelfe, vnto whom in deede, that qualitie was in a verie high degree an inſeparable accidēt. For in that propertie, I beleeue verely he paſſed any one heretike that euer wrote ſince Chriſts tyme.
         
         
            CHAP. VIII. Of Beza corruptly tranſlating a place of ſcripture Act. 3. and of the real preſence.
            
               WHEREFORE leauing M. Iewel, proceede we on in order to that which foloweth, that is, to Bezaes trāſlatiō of the

wordes of S. Peter Act. 3. in defending whereof, you draw neere to the vayne I looke for, and ſhew your ſelfe to be a ſcholer of him whoſe challenge you aduaūce ſo much. For you do nothing els but dally in ambiguitie of words without any regarde of truth, deceauing both your reader & your ſelf. You ſay,pag. 9. 
               vvhē Beza trāſlated, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
by this, quē oportet quidē coelo capi, vvho muſt be receaued in heauen, he did it onely to auoide ambiguitie of ſpeach, vvhich is found in the other, quē oportet coelū capere, and the ſenſe ſtil remaineth one. For vvhereas Peter vvil ſay and teach,
               How knoweth M.W. that S. Peter wil ſay ſo? 
               that neceſſarily heauen muſt receaue Chriſt vntill the times that all things be reſtored, this ſenſe Beza deliuered most faithfullie, in moſt conuenient vvordes. For if heauen ſhal receaue Chriſt, then neceſſarie it is, that Chriſt be receaued of heauen. vvhich thing cōmon ſenſe might haue taught you. For tel me I pray you M. Martin, if the ſchole receaue and conteyne you, are you not receaued & conteyned of the ſchole? Hauing obteyned thus much, you fal into an idle talke, that actiues or deponents may be rendered by paſſiues by example of Cicero, whereof no man doubteth, & then cōclude, that S. Gregorie Nazianzene doth affirme

               Chriſtū
                
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . This being the entier ſumme of your diſcourſe, gladly would I now learne of the reader, whether he vnderſtandeth hereby what you would ſay, or what you go about to proue, and reproue? forſooth, that the ſenſe in a Greke writer is not hindered, if a verbe deponent or actiue making the ſentence doubtful and applicable to diuerſe ſenſes, for playner vnderſtanding, in Latin be turned into a verbe paſsiue. For ſo did Cicero in tranſlating a ſentence of Plato, and ſo might you do in tranſlating a ſentence of S. Paule, animalis homo non percipit, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
ea quae ſunt ſpiritus. ſpiritual things are not perceaued of a carnall man. vvhere 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
a verbe deponent in Greke, is vvell expreſſed in Engliſh, by a verbe paſsiue. You ſay wel, and like a good ſcholer. But is this al that M. Martin wēt about to ſhew, and for which he found fault with Beza? Certes it is al, for ought I can cōceaue by your maner of defence. but the thing it ſelfe is far otherwiſe.How dangerous it is to reſtrayne the text of ſcripture, to the particular ſenſe of ſome one man, or Sect
            
            For firſt, although in common prophane writers, where ordinarily in wordes and phraſes there lieth no hid ſecrets or miſteries, to expreſſe doubtful Greke by vndoubtful Latin, when if

there be committed an error, it importeth not greatly, this is not ſo material: yet in the word of God, where ambiguous ſpeaking yeldeth diuers ſenſes, and perhaps bothe, or not that one which is taken, principallie entended, there, for any mā of purpoſe to reſtraine that which the holy Ghoſt hath leaft at large, it is to ſaucy and malapert, if it be not wicked and impious. For what if the meaning of Sainte Peter be here not that heauen ſhould take Chriſt, but that Chriſt ſhould take heauen, to rule and gouerne it euen to the end of the world, according as elſ-where it is ſayde. Mat. 11. v. 27. & cap, 28 verſ. 18. 
               Al things are deliuered me of my father. to me is geuen al povver in heauen & in earth. & againe, Cor. 15. v. 26. 
               thou haſt put al things vnder his feete, 
               Eph. 1. v. 20 
               ſetting him on thy right hād aboue all principalitie, and poteſtate, and povver, and domination, and euery thinge that is named, not onely in this vvorld but alſo in that to come. But you wil ſay this is a falſe ſenſe. Suppoſe it be, as perhaps it is not. wil you take vpon you by Ciceroes authority, as Beza doth oftētimes by Homers and Ouids, to limite that which the Euangeliſt hath leaft at at large? And ſee by this raſh audacitie what confuſion you bring, and what a

hotchpoch you make of the ſcriptures. Suppoſe ſome other be of my opinion, and thinke the ſenſe which I geue, to be the onely true, and yours to be the falſe. ſhal he be ſo bold to ſhut out yours, and thruſt in his owne with like neceſsitie & reſtraynt as you haue done? if ſo, then you know the Lutherans thinke as I ſay. For thus writeth Illyricus, and he writeth as it may ſeeme, directlie againſt your Beza.Illyric. in Act. cap. 3. ver. 21. 
               Some vnderſtand this place, that Chriſt is receaued or cō
                  teyned of the heauen. vvhich ſentence is againſt the ſcope of the Apoſtle, and ſhould ſet forth rather the infirmitie, then the glorie & povver of Chriſt. For ſo of angels, yea of deuils it may be ſayd, that they are receaued or cōteyned of heauē, becauſe the vvorde coelū, ſometime in the ſcripture ſignifieth the ayer. A goodlie matter. he vvho by vvitnes 
                     •
                  o the ſcripture filleth al thinges, vve vvil ſay is receaued or conteyned in a certen place, almoſt as it vvere in a priſon.
            
            Secondarily, what wicked and vncō
               ſcionable 
dealing is this, in ſpending ſo many wordes, not to ſpeake any one worde to the purpoſe, whereunto you ſhould ſpeake al, or els hold your peace & ſpeake nothing. Was not that the point of his reprehenſion, not becauſe

you gaue a paſsiue for an actiue or deponent, but becauſe you did it in this place, and did it to this end, that ſo you might ſeeme by ſcripture to exclude Chriſt frō the ſacrament? For this reaſon Beza geueth, and for this reaſon M. Martin reproueth Beza, & Bezaes corruption. and of this M.W. ſpeaketh not a worde, or if he do, it is a manifeſt falſitie. For if M. Whit. ſayng that Beza did it for that only cauſe, to auoyde doubtful ſpeach, oppoſe him ſelfe to M. Martin in this,Scripture of purpoſe falſly tranſlated againſt the real preſence. Diſcoue. pag. 257. it can not be excuſed frō a playne lye. for ſo much as in Bezaes behalfe he auoucheth that to be true, which Beza him ſelfe proteſteth to be falſe. They ſo conclude Chriſt in heauē
                (ſaith M. Martin) that he can not be on the altar. and Beza proteſteth that he ſo tranſlateth of purpoſe, to kepe Chriſtes preſence thence.
            
            
                Yet a third faulte you haue committed beſides, in iuſtifying this ſmal demie ſentence. and that is, whereas M. Martin for the better ſtrengthning of his reaſon againſt you, ioyned to it the authoritie of Illyricus and Caluin, you omit them bothe.Diſcou. pag. 257. 
               This tranſlation of Beza is ſo far from the Greke (ſaith M. Martin) that not onely Illyricus the Lutherane, but Caluin him ſelfe doth not like it. Which wodes

if you had ioyned to the reſt, if you had but named thoſe men, your ſlender reaſōs in the eyes of your reader, would forthwith haue appeared contemptible. And wel he might haue marueyled, how you durſt defend ſuch a tranſlation, which not only Illyricus a famous Lutherā, but alſo Caluin, a prince amongſt the Zuingliās, in plaine ſpeach reprehendeth. whereby a man may ſee that you ſeeke not for truth, but only to talke on, and ſerue the tyme, & abuſe the reader.
            
                And yet once againe, vnder pretēce
of a litle ſimplicitie, and moſt rude and ſimple ſophiſtrie, a fourth fault haue you made, worſe then the former, running firſt from one ſenſe to an other and then from one worde to an other.Recipitur continetur. and ſo in fine, whiles you would ſeeme to make S. Peter ſpeake clearly and plainly, you make him ſpeake falſly & heretically. whereof, forthwith I ſhal haue occaſion to treate. The place which you cite out of Nazianzene, oportet Chriſtum a coelo recipi, maketh no more for you, then doth the article of our Creede, aſcendit ad coelos, or ſedet ad dexteram patris. and I marueile what Catholike beleeueth the contrarie, and

therefore I let it paſſe.
            As ye proceede, the reaſon beginneth to appeare, why you would ſo fayne haue that forged interpretation of Beza to ſtand for good. For now you beginne to frame againſt the real preſence, argumēts drawen from natural and mathematical conditions of a bodie: whereby the reader may learne the more to deteſt and abhorre the whole race of your heretical tranſlators.Mat. 13. v. 25 For as our Sauiour ſaith, in the field of his Catholike church in the night, vvhen men vvere a ſlepe,
               Euery heretike tranſlateth the ſcripture in fauour of his hereſie. 
               his enemie came and ouerſovved cockle among the vvheate, and vvent his vvay, and ſome time paſſed, before the cockle thus ſowen appeared: in like maner theſe feedemen of the ſame aduerſarie, wicked corrupters of the good feede and worde of Chriſt, firſt fall a trāſlating of the ſcripture, with many goodlie and plauſible pretenſes, of gods honor, & the peoples commoditie, and publiſhing gods bleſſed booke &c. And ſo while no man thinketh amiſſe of them, as it were in the night and darknes, being eſpied of none, among the good ſeede of god, they mingle & ſow their owne wicked and abhommable darnel, which at

firſt is not ſeene, but in tyme ſheweth it ſelfe. For when M.W. ſo ſmoothly went away with the matter, and found fault with M. Martins ignorance for diſlyking ſo plaine a thing, when he told vs of actiues and paſsiues, that there was no difference betwene the firſt, quem oportet coelum capere, and this ſecond, quem oportet coelo capi, but that this later is more cleare and perſpicuous, who would haue ſuppoſed any great miſcheefe to haue bene hidden therein? But now, euen thereof he frameth his principal argument, to ſpoyle the church of Chriſtes real preſence. VVith like ſinceritie tranſlate the Lutherans for their Lutheriſh, the Brentians for their Vbiquitarie, the Trinitaries of Pole for their Arian, and Sebaſtianus Caſtalio for his Academical hereſie, ſprinkling heare and there many drops of poyſon, with which ſymple ſoules are daungerouſly infected, before the miſcheuous practyſe be of many diſcouered. But let vs heare M. W. argument, drawen (as he would haue vs ſuppoſe) from the former falſified text of ſcripture, but in deede from Ariſtotle and Euclide.Pa. 11. 
               If Chriſtes body (ſayth he) be natural, and of the ſame ſubſtance

that ours is,
               The zuinglians moſt vſual & plauſible argumēt againſt the real preſence. 
               then can it be conteyned but in one place, and if it be in heauen, it is not in the ſacrament. But Chriſts body is ſuch a body, conſubſtantial to ours in al things, ſauing glorie and immortalitie, and that body of Chriſt is novv conteyned in heauen, as Peter ſaith,
               Cōtinetur 
               therefore it is not in the Sacrament, much leſſe in infinite Sacraments. This argument feareth not your forces. For if Chriſts body be together in heauen and in the ſacrament, then Chriſt hath a double body or rather infinite bodies. but this is falſe. ergo that. Furthermore if Chriſts bodie be circumſcribed vvith ſome certaine place in heauen and reteyneth all properties of a true body, & the ſelfe ſame in the ſacrament be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
incircumſcript, inuiſible, &c. then contradictories maye be verified of the ſame bodye. But this can not be. therefore the other is vnpoſſible.
            
            
               Many thinges to be noted in M. W. argumēt.Of this kinde of reaſoning, which may be enlarged as far, and amplified by as many circumſtances, as ether Geometrie, or Philoſophie, or any ſenſe, ſeing, hearing, taſting, handling, or humaine reaſon, or common experiment, in the courſe of the world liſt to heape together, al depending of one principle, vvhether one body may be in dyuers places, or vvhether Chriſt be

bound to the rules and conditions of nature, many thinges I learne.
            Firſt, how much you can make of a litle, and vaunte ſo luſtely of ſuch beggerly argumentes,Greate vauntinge vpon ſmale occaſion. which being found out firſt and inuented by prentiſes and artiſans in their ſhops, thence admitted by miniſters into their pulpits, and at length receaued by ſuch as you are, in to the ſcholes for want of better ſtore, yet rather as rhetorical thē theological, rather coniectural then neceſſary, haue ſo oft tymes bene refuted by Catholikes, cōdemned by Lutherans refuſed of Caluiniſtes, & are withall as cōmon, as are the Poſtilions bootes.
            Secondarily (which before I noted) I learne how careful a Chriſtian man ought to be in dealing with you, whoſe faſhion is, of molehils to make mountaines.wicked Sophiſtrie. and if of curteſie one graunt you an inch, ſtraight waies you borow a ſpanne, and forthwith by force and violence you ſnatch an ell. For when you ſo demurely made it to be a trifle, whether a man tranſlated the wordes, quem oportet coelum capere,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               vvhom the heauens muſt receaue, or vvho muſt be receaued in heauen, and ſo caried away the later againſt the former, who would haue

thought that to haue bene ſuch a cokatrice egge, as where of ſhould proceede ſuch a peſtiferous ſerpent, that would corrupt the vniuerſal church of Chriſt, and deſtroy the faith, that hath bene ſince Chriſtes tyme.Conteyned. 
               If Chriſtes bodie be conteined in heauen as S. Peter ſaith, then is it not in the ſacrament. which collection when a man perceaueth, who before of ſimplicitie found no fault wi
                  •
               h your tranſlation, and made no conſcience whether he ſaid,Corruption of ſcripture. 
               heauen receaued Chriſt, or Chriſt vvas receaued in to heauen, he can not now forbeare, but needes he muſt ſay, that your argument is falſe, and you belye S. Peter. And this being your ſenſe, you haue corrupted the word of god, & thruſting in your owne word,Hiero. in Gal. cap. 1. haue made of it the word of the deuil. Great daūger it is (ſaith S. Hierom) to ſpeake in the church, leſte perhaps through peruerſe interpretation, of the goſpel of Chriſt, be made the goſpel of mā, or vvhich is vvorſe, the goſpel of the Deuill. And plaine it is that by this corruption & ſhuffling in conteyned for receaued, and running ſophiſtically and wickedly as you pleaſe from one to the other, you abuſe the ſcriptures & falſifie them intolerably, & make them youre owne word, not the

word of god. For S. Peter, in ſayng that heauen muſt receaue the body of Chriſt, affirmeth Chriſtes body to be conteyned in heauen, no more then S. Luke writing that Samaria receaued the vvord of God,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Act. 8. v. 14. Luc. 9. v. 48. affirmeth rhat the word of God vvas then conteyned in Samaria, which was moſt falſe. Our Sauiour ſaith in this ſelfe ſame maner. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . The like whereof he ſpeaketh in S. Matthew of receauing his Apoſtles.Mat. 10. v. 40 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . He that receaueth a child, Apoſtle, or prophete in my name, receaueth me. and he that receaueth me, receaueth him that hath ſent me. Here, who ſeeth not what impietie would folow, if we ſhould take to our ſelues M. W. libertie, and ſay, he that receaueth a child in Chriſtes name, he receaueth Chriſt, he receaueth God, that is, of him, Chriſt is conteyned, God is conteyned. And albeit here in the thinges compared together there be ſome difference, yet in the worde vſed by our Sauiour, S. Peter, and the Euangeliſte, there is no difference, and this indifferency ſhould the interpreter haue expreſſed, and ſo

would Beza haue done, had it not bene for his hereſie againſt the B. ſacra, ment.
            Thirdly I note the proceeding of your Goſpel, and learne how it goeth on according to S.2. Timoth. 3. Paules prophecie, a malo in peius from badd to worſe, from hereſie to apoſtaſie,The proceding of the new goſpel. running continually forward the verie hye way to infidelitie. When this goſpel began in England in the ende of King Henryes daies, thoſe that in other pointes were ſtarke heretikes, and the ringleaders vnto others,See M. Fox. martyrologe in Fryth and Barnes, &c. Tindale, Frith, Barnes, Cranmer, leaft it as a thing indifferēt, to beleeue the real preſence. And namely Frith (that glorious martyr) permitted euery man to iudge vvhat they liſted of the ſacrament,
               Fox Act. & monumen. edit. ann. 1563. p. 500. if ſo be the adoration thereof were taken away. His reaſon was, becauſe then there remained no more,
               The real preſence approued by M. Foxes Martyrs. 
               any poyſon that any man ought or might be afraid of. So that the real preſence to this great martyr, ſeemed no way harmful or againſt Chriſtian faith, which now to M. Whitaker is a matter ſo monſtruous, that it is againſt ſcripture, againſt faith, againſt S. Peter, and in ſteede of one Chriſt multiplieth many. And how then calleth he the

Lutherans, his brethren in Chriſt, who by this reaſon haue an other Chriſt frō him, nay a plain contradictorie Chriſt againſt him?
            But to anſwere his argument, and in this al other drawen from like principles, I demaund of M.W. whether he vrge this argument ſo, that Chriſts body by courſe of nature can not be in diuers places and receaue thoſe other contradictory qualities (as he falſlie imagineth) or that by Gods power and omnipotēcie this can not be wrought. If the firſt, then we are agreed, and then may al theſe blotted papers ſerue for ſome other purpoſe. For againſt vs and the doctrine of the church, they make nothing. And then M. VV. hath done wickedly, to moue theſe ſcruples to idle heads, whereas he ſhould rather haue ſought what Chriſts wil is. If he ſay the later, that it is aboue the reach of Gods power, where vnto his arguments tende, I replie, that he is an infidell,Many th
                     •••
                  ges in h
                     •
                   ſcripture vncredibl
                     •
                   as Chriſts preſence in the bleſſed Sacrament. and beleeueth not the firſt article of his Crede. he beleeueth not other thinges expreſly ſette downe in the ſcripture, of the ſame qualitie, as that our Lady was a Virgin whē ſhe deliuered Chriſt,Ioan. 20. verſ. 19. that he entred in to his diſciples

               ianuis clauſis, that in the burning fornace, one and the ſelfe ſame fier was ſo hotte and violente, that it ſlew thoſe that ſtode a farre of,Daniel. 3. v. 47. & 48. 
               the miniſters of the Kinge, and yet to thoſe that were in the middeſt of it, Sidrach, Miſach, and Abdenago, it was ſo cold and temperate, that it reſembled ventum roris flantem, a moyſt gale of vvinde,
               Ibid. v. 50. and harmed them nothing. which is as flat a contradiction as any he bringeth, and therefore belike, without the compaſſe of his beleefe. I ſaie againe, that he is proceeded farther in infidelitie then his maiſters, who notwithſtanding were gone far inough, and a man needed not to ouerrun them. For they hitherto were wōt to proteſt, that they neuer doubted but Chriſt could do it, mary they ſuppoſed and beleeued that he neuer meant it, and ſo made the queſtion to conſiſt in that, vvhether Chriſt vvould, not vvhether he could, as may be ſeene in M.Iewel art. 10 ¶. 9. in fine. Iewel, in the very end of his 10. article againſt M. Harding, and in many other.M. W. argumēt againſt the Sacrament the very roote of Paganiſme, & infidelity.
            
            Next let him note, that this his argument is the very ſhipwracke of Chriſtian religion, & roote of al Paganiſme, deſtroyng our redemption, deſtroyng

our reſurrection, confounding and deſtroyng al the articles of our faith, although it pretend the honor of god:Caluin contra Seruetū pag. 105. as wel writeth Caluin of Seruetus and the Anabaptiſts. For what is the firſt corner-ſtone of the Seruetan and Anabaptiſtical buylding againſt Chriſtes Incarnation? Euen that which M. W. here tendereth them, and was ſquared before to their handes by Zuinglius & the Sacramentaries. The Anabaptiſts I ſay, vrging the ſelfe ſame Philoſophical and Phiſical rules, obiect that the Papiſtes beleefe of Chriſtes Incarnatiō of the Virgin, beſides that it is baſe and attributeth to much honor to that woman, beſides this,Calu. Inſt. Lib. 2. cap. 13. ¶ 3.4. is alſo againſt the rules of Phiſicke and Philoſophie and implieth a contradiction. For, ex arte medica & Philoſophia, out of Philoſophie and Phyſicke rules, they fynd that vvomen are 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . and therefore, to ſay that Chriſte had a true humaine body as is ours, and yet of a virgin without the ſeede of man, was to ſaye he had a true humaine bodie in worde, & denie it in deed. And if M.W. waygh the matter well, he ſhal find their argument better then his, and that it toucheth more intrinſecally the eſſence and origin of our nature, to be

conceaued of the ſeede of man: & that to be formed of a virgin, is much more repugnant to nature, and ſith the beginning of the world hath bene wrought more ſeeldō, thē a body to be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
whereof he talketh ſo peremptorily, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which others of his ſecte vrge, & is more to the purpoſe, that is,
                  Petrus ſpō
                     te ſua vinclis labētibus eq: carcere proceſſit clauſo. Pauli. natali. 4. B. Felicis.
                  See the new teſtament in S. Ihon. 20. v. 19. Luc. 4. v. 29.
                not circumſcript, nor viſible, nor local, where of the firſt was practiſed in the ſelf ſame body, in his natiuitye, reſurrection & aſcenſion, and in S. Peter Actorum. 12. The ſecond is more common, and was not only in our Sauiour, whē the Iewes meante to haue throvven him dovvne headlong from the hill, and he paſsing through the middes of them went his waye, but alſo in Elizeus, when the hoſte of the King of Syria hauing him in the middes of them,4. Reg. 6. v. 17. yet ſaw him not,Notū non agnouere ſurentes. Felicemque rogāt Felixvbi cernitur & nō cernitur, ipſe nec ipſe uir eſt, cū ſit prope, lō
                  ge eſt. ignotu
                     •
                   notuſque ſuis fitciuibus idē diſcernete fide vultum credētibus. Paulin. natal. 5. B. Felicis. & in S. Felix a martir & prieſt of the citie of Nola, of whom S. Paulinus biſhop of the ſame citie writeth, that in time of perſequutiō, when the citizens, ſuch as were infidels wel acquainted with him, would haue apprehēded him, they could not ſee or diſcerne him being in the middes of them: although (which is more ſtraunge) the faithful at the ſame inſtant ſaw him, & knew him,

and perceaued in him no difference or chaunge at al. So that at one and the ſelf ſame time, he was viſible and inuiſible, knowen and vnknowen, endued with his accuſtomed figure, proportion, and lineaments, & yet altered & chaunged and ſo forth, ſubiect to other ſuch maruelous accidentes, as M.W. fondly and falſly nameth contradictions. The third is ſo far beneath the omnipotency of God, that by the vulgar opinion of Philoſophers, the firſt heauen being a perfect natural body, is notwithſtāding 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in no place, and therefore much more may we yeld this prerogatiue to Chriſt the Lord of heauen and earth, whoſe worde & wil, is the very rule & ſquyre of nature. And let M.W. ſee how vrging ſo vehemently his propoſition, Chri
                     •
                  tes body is per omnia noſtris corporibus 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
ſauing glory and immortalitye: and he hath all the propertyes of a true and humaine bodye, how he will free him ſelf from the filthy and wicked hereſies of the Ebionites & Neſtorians.Epiphan. lib. 1. Here. 30. Socrat. l. 7. ca. 32. Who vpon this general propoſition, may & muſt inferre their opinions, that Chriſt was begotten betwene our Lady & Ioſeph as other men are. they may and muſt infer, that Chriſt aſſumpted as wel the

perſon, as the nature of man: the perſonalitie, being a thing much more nylie, and eſſentially ioyned to the nature, thē are theſe accidental qualities of viſible and circumſcript, which here are obiected.
            Thirdly, I anſwere that this abſurdity was forſeene by the aūcient fathers, who for al that were neuer induced to inuēt this diſtinctiō that you haue foūd out, that is, to deny the verity of Chriſtes preſence. Let vs euermore beleeue God (ſaith S.
                  Chriſoſt. in Math. hom. 83.
                  M.W. argument reiected by the auncient fathers.
                Chriſoſtom) albeit it ſeeme abſurd to our ſenſe & cogitation that vvhich he ſaith, albeit his vvords ſurpaſſe our ſenſe and reaſon. Thus as in al things vve ought to doe, ſo eſpecially in the ſacramentes, not beholding thoſe thinges, vvhich lie before our eyes, but holding faſt his vvordes. For in his vvordes vve can not be beguiled, but our ſenſe is eaſely deceaued. Therefore ſith he ſaid This is my body, let vs beleeue it vvithout caſting any doubt, and vvith the eyes of our vnderſtanding conceaue the ſame. The lyke is vſed by diuers other fathers, which they neuer needed to haue ſpoken, nether could haue ſpoken with reaſon, had their faith bene ſo agreable to the rules of Philoſophie, as you would now make it.
            
               
                Fourthly, I ſay that your owne brethren
and maiſters,M. W. argument abhorred and condemned by the more learned proteſtants. Cent. 4. ca. 4. col. 241. though in other hereſies they agreed with you, yet in this kind of argument deteſted and abhorred you. So the Hiſtoriographers of Magdeburg, in their fourth Centurie where they proue by many authorities of S. Ambroſe, S. Hierome, S. Hilary, S. Epiphanius, S. Nazianzen, S. Baſil, and others, the verity of Chriſtes preſence, dedicating the ſame to the Quenes Maieſtie, thus they ſpeake vnto her.Ibi. in prefat. pag. 9. 
               And this (moſt excellent Quene) is not to be ouerpaſſed, that vvhereas novv there grovv euery vvhere, diuers as it vvere factions of opinions, amonge vvhich, ſome flatly by Philoſophical reaſons make voyd and fruſtrate the teſtament of our lord, ſo as they take avvay the body & bloud of Chriſt touching his preſence and communication, according to the most cleare, moſt euident, moſt true, and moſt puiſſant vvordes of Chriſte, and deceaue men vvith marueilous aequiuocation of ſpeach: principally your maieſtie hath to prouide, that the ſacramentes may be reſtored vvithout ſuch phariſaical leauē &c. And Melanchthō, whom Peter Martyr maketh equal for learning and godlines, with S.Pet. Martyr in dialog. de corpore Chriſti in loco. fol. 107 Auſtin, S. Hierom, S. Leo, & the auncient fathers, debating this matter with Oecolampadius,

               There is no care (ſaith he) that hath more troubled my mynde then this of the Eucharist.
               Lib. 3. epiſt. Zuinglii & Oecolamp. fol. 132. 
               And not only my ſelf haue vvayghed vvhat might be ſaid on ether ſyde, but I haue alſo ſought out the iudgemēt of the old vvriters touching the ſame. And vvhen I haue laid al together, I find no good reaſon, that may ſatisfye a cōſcience departing from the propriety of Chriſtes vvordes. You gather many abſurdities, vvhich folovv this opinion (as here we ſee in M.W.) but abſurdities vvill not trouble him, vvho remembreth, that vve muſt iudge of diuine matters, according to Gods vvorde, not according to Geometrie. And not far after in the ſame booke. I find no reaſon,
               Ibi. fol. 140. 
               hovv I may depart from this opinion touching the real preſence. VVell it may be, that an other opinion more agreable to mans reaſon, may pleaſe an idle mind, eſpecially if the opinion be furniſhed and commended vvith argumētes vvel handled. But vvhat ſhal become of vs intentation, vvhen our cōſcience ſhal be called to accompt, vvhat cauſe vve had to diſſent from the receaued opinion in the Church. Then theſe vvordes This is my bodie,
               Fulmina erunt. Weſtphal. in Apol. contra Caluin. c. 19. pa. 194. anno 1558. 
               vvil be thunderboltes. So Ioachimus VVeſtphalus in his Apologie againſt Caluine, anſwering this very argument, the body of man is circumſcribed in a place, therefore at one time, it can not be

but in one place, therefore not in al places vvhere the ſupper is miniſtred: Is not (ſaith, he) this Geometrical argumēt fetched frō Euclides demonſtrations, the piller and vpholder of all theſe Sacramentaries?
               Plurimos ſcripturae locos corrumpunt. 
               Doth not this vphold the building of their ſyllogiſmes, vvhich corrupt verie many places of ſcriptures? Most truly is verified of the Sacramentaries, that memorable ſaying:
               The Sacramentaries corrupt the ſcriptures. 
               Take from heretikes that vvherein they agree vvith Philoſophers, and they cannot ſtand.
               The ground of the Sacramentaries diuinitie. 
               Take from the Sacramentaries that vvhich they dravv from Philoſophie, and hovv ſmal a quantitie vvill remaine of the great volumes of al the Sacramentaries? Hovv long vvil it be, before the doctrine of Berengarius fall to the ground? VVel and truly vvrote Tertullian, that Philoſophers are the Patriarches of heretikes. For philoſophie brought forth all hereſies, and ſhe begat the error of Zuinglius.
            
            Finally,Iew. defēce of the Apolog. parte. 4 cap. 4. ¶. 
                     •
                  . becauſe the Engliſh church in their Apologie acknowledgeth Luther for a most excellent man, ſent from God to lighten the vvhole vvorld, and M. VV. ſaith that they vvorſhippe him as their father in Christ,
               M. W. argument anſwered at large by Luther. I anſwere as that excellent man of God and their father anſwered long ago. His diſcourſe being longe, I wil gather ſhortly the ſumme of it, & ſet it downe in his wordes. If M.VV. would

be better ſatisfied, I remitte him to the maine worke. Firſt, he confeſſeth this argument to be fundamentum quod habent omnium praecipuū,
               Luth. To. 7. defenſ. verborū coenae fol, 388. 
               the chief ground & foundation of the Sacramentaries. But he aſketh, 
                   vvhat ſcripture they haue, to proue that theſe tvvo propoſitions be ſo directly contrary, Chriſt ſitteth in heauen, and Christ is in the ſupper. whereas they can bring none, he concludeth, The contradiction is in their carnal imagination, not in faith or the vvord of God, vvhich teacheth no ſuch matter. 
                Next, vvhere-as Gods povver ſurpaſſeth al cogitatiō, & vvorketh that vvhich is to our reaſon incomprehenſible, and vvhich only faith beleeueth: and the ſame God ſaid, This is my body vvhich ſhal be deliuered for you, hovv can I perſvvade my conſcience, (ſaith he) that God hath nether meanes, nor abilitie to do as his vvordes ſound. 
                Then he ſheweth, that although in the mind of man, theſe thinges are contrary, yet in the mind of God, they worke no more repugnance, then Mary bringing forth in her virginitie, is againſt that vniuerſal ſentence, Increaſe and multiplye, or this propoſition, Chriſt is God, ouerthroweth this other, that Chriſt is man. Out of which thus premiſed, he falleth in to a vehement exhortatiō, that al Chriſtiās

beware of the Sacramentaries in this kind of argument,Ibid. fo. 390. for ſo much as directly thereby they draw men to Paganiſme
and infidelitie,  the principal partes of our faith being in like ſorte ſubiect to the controle of carnal reaſon & humaine philoſophie. Boni iſti Sacramentarii (ſaith he) ſua nauſea aditum parant ad Chriſtum & Deum ipſum,
               The Sacramentarie hereſie, the hye way to infidelity, & denyal of al fayth. 
               & omnes articulos abnegandum &c. Theſe good Sacramē
                  taries by their lothſomeneſſe, make a vvay to denie Chriſt, and God him ſelfe, and al articles of our faith. and truly for a great part they haue already begōne to beleeue nothing. For they bring themſelues vvithin the compaſſe of reaſon, vvhich is the right vvay to damnation. and them ſelues knovv, that theſe Ethnicall cauils, ether are nothing vvorth againſt this article, or if they cōclude ought againſt this, they do the like againſt al. For the vvord of God is fooliſhnes to mans reaſon. 1. Cor. 1. and they vvould neuer haue vttered this, if they had any regard of the ſcripture, and vvere not their harts ful of infidelitie, ſo as their mouth ſpeaketh of the abundance of their hart.
               1 bid. fo. 391. 
               The vnequal dealīg of the Sacramentaries in alleaging the fathers. 
                After this he noteth
the vnequal dealing of the Sacramentaries. This truly (ſaith he) is vvorthy of admiratiō, that none of the fathers, vvhereof there is an infinite number, did euer ſpeake

ſo of the Sacrament as do the Sacramentaries, but cleane contrary. Yet notvvithſtanding, if perchaūce they fal vpō ſome odd place in a doctor that ſoundeth tovvardes their opiniō, as vvhere S. Aug. ſaith, corpus Chriſti in vno loco eſſe poteſt, here (ſaith Luther) by reaſon of their preiudicate opinion, they ſnatch at that, & make much of it, vvhereas othervviſe, againſt the ſaings of all the fathers they are moſt ſtiffe and ſtubburne, and ſenſles, & more vnmoueable, then is any rocke amiddeſt the ſea. and though the fathers all vvith one mouth affirme, yet the Sacramentaries harden them ſelues to deny them. 
                Laſt of all againſt Zuinglius and Oecolampadius vſing in their bookes the ſelfe ſame reaſons, which M. W. vſeth here, and triumpheth ſo inſolently, he concludeth,Ibid. fo. 397 as I conclude againſt him. If theſe be the grounds and reaſons, vvhich ſhould certifie vs of truth, approue our faith, and confirme our conſcience,
               Note how deepely M. W. argumēt wayghed with Luther 
               then truly vve are in euill caſ
                     •
                  . If a man had deliuered me ſuch bookes vvithout title and name, and I knevv not othervviſe ſuch excellent and learned men to haue bene the authors of them, I ſhould ſurely haue thought, that ſome i
                     •
                  ſting Comediant,
               Hiſtrio, aut erro Macho metanus. 
               or Turkiſh vagabond had made them in deſpite and deriſion of Chriſtians. Verily I ſee not hovv they can be excuſed

vvith any probable pretence, as many other heretikes haue had. For it appeareth, that they play vvith Gods vvord, of vvilfulnes & malice.
               Frigidae nugae & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               And I thinke it can not be that ſuch cold toyes and bablinges ſhould in deede moue a Turke or a Ievv, much leſſe a Chriſtian. But that great lothſomenes and diſdaine of the ſacred ſupper, and immoderate greedines to defend their opinion, maketh them ſo mad or giddie, that vvhat-ſoeuer they take hold of, though it be but a ſtravv, yet they imagine it to be a ſvvorde or a ſpeare, and that at euerie ſtroke they kill thouſandes. This is the terrible argument ſo magnified by M. W. quod impetus noſtros non pertimeſcit, that feareth not our forces, an argument, which plucketh vp the verie rootes of Chriſtianitie, & gain ſaith many places and hiſtories of the Scripture, and maketh fruſtrate the teſtamēt of Chriſt: an argument carnal & ethnical, and for ſuch contemned of the auncient fathers, and condemned by the late heretikes of greateſt learning: an argument which Luther would neuer beleeue could proceede but from a Turke, had he not ſeene it in the bookes of ſome of the Zuinglian Sect vſurping the name of Chriſtians: ſuch an argument, as he accompteth them heretikes,

wilful and inexcuſable, who are ought moued therewith: finally, ſuch an argument, as M.W. can neuer maynteine, except withal he maynteine him ſelfe to be an Anabaptiſt, an Ebionite, and a Neſtorian.
            And thus much touching your philoſophicall reaſon. wherein I haue ſtaied ſomewhat the lōger, partly becauſe you crake ſo much of it, as though it were verie pregnant, partly becauſe it is an argument whereinto both in pulpit and writyng you gladly fall, & (becauſe it ſtandeth wel with ſenſe and reaſon) eaſely deceaue the ſimple, partly alſo becauſe it toucheth M.M. Iew. challeng touching the real preſēce artic. 5. refuted by martyrs, Confeſſors, & doctors, of his owne religion. Iewels challenge, which here is diſproued ſufficiently. except theſe great States and Euangeliſtes, ſo magnified by your ſelues, be ſo fowly ouerſeene, as ſo vehemently to auerre that, which hath no one clauſe of Scripture, Father, Councel or Doctor to vphold it. And if they do ſo in this, where they vſe ſuch heate and deteſtation, how may we credite them in any other parte of their doctrine? how may we be perſwaded, but they continually lye and deceaue vs in like ſorte? But I trowe, you wil not iudge ſo raſhly, eſpecially of Luther,

what ſoeuer you accompt of Barns, Frith, Weſtphalus, Melanchthon, and Illyricus, and thoſe auncient fathers alleaged by him and his companions. for, ſeing the whole church of England commendeth Luther for a man ſo excellent, ſent of God to geue light to the vvhole vvorld, I hope that you being but a ſimple member of thar church, wil not by defending the contrary oppoſe your ſelfe vnto him. And certaine it is you can not come from God, if you poore worme reſiſt & withſtand that excellent man, whom God ſent to be your Prophete and Euangeliſt. which is as monſtrous a caſe, as if ſome ſimple ſheepe, ſhould preſume to direct his ſkilful paſtor, ſome ignorant ſcholer, to teach his maiſter moſt learned,2. Tim. 4. or ſome Alexander a myſerable copperſmith ſhould oppoſe him ſelf againſt S. Paule, whom Chriſt had made his gouernor, and furniſhed with ſufficient giftes to inſtruct him and al the world beſides. But you haue (I feare) a general ſalue for ſuch fores, that you beleeue nether Luther, nether yet the church of England any farther then they agree with Gods worde & your owne conceite thereof. And ſo ſtill the ſupreme rule & determition

of al ſhal reſt in your owne handes.
            
               pag. 11.After your reaſons againſt the ſacrament, you bring in to like purpoſe a place out of S. Ciril that Chriſt is aſcended in to heauen, and is abſent from vs in the preſence of fleſh. vvhich if vve did not beleeue, vve vvould neuer ſay the Crede ſo oft as vve doe, nor keepe the day of Chriſtes Aſcenſiō ſo honorable and feſtiual, as you I thinke may knovv. Mary if you thinke, there is more pith in S. Cirils vvorde of abſence,
               Mat. 26. v. 11 you myght better haue obiected Chriſtes ovvne vvordes, The poore you ſhal haue alvvaies vvith you, me you ſhal not haue, but then for anſvvere I ſhould haue ſent you to the note vpon that verſe, as I do novv alſo for this, the reaſon being al one. For, that S. Ciril vvas not a Sacramentarie, appeareth moſt clearely by a large diſcours vvhich he maketh as it vvere of purpoſe againſt that maner of reaſoning vvhich you haue geuen out in this place. Thus he vvriteth. Quomodo poteſt hic nobis carnem dare &c.
               Ciril. in Ioan. lib. 4. cap. 13. 
               The Ievves aſke, hovv can he geue vs his fleſh? Thus they crye out vpon god, not vvithout great impietie, nether remember they, that vvith god nothing is impoſſible.

But let vs making great profit of their ſinnes and hauing a firme faith in theſe myſteries, neuer in ſuch diuine thinges, vtter or ſo much as thinke of ſuch doubting. for that vvord Quomodo, hovv, is Iudaical and cauſe of extreme puniſhment, And after a long and good treatiſe againſt ſuch peeuiſh fantaſtical toyes as here M.W. obiecteth for profound arguments, thus he concludeth. Yf notvvithſtanding al this, thou (Ievv) crye ſtil, hovv is this done, I folovving thy ignorāce vvill demaund of thee, hovv ſo many miracles vvere done in the old teſtament, the paſsinge ouer the red ſea, Moſes rod made a ſerpēt etc.
               To ſearch by reaſon how Chriſt is preſent in the B. Sacrament, is to deny al ſcripture. 
               vvherefore vve ought rather to beleeue Chriſt, & humbly to learne of hym, then like drunken ſots to cry out, hovv can he geue vs his fleſh, by vvhich queſtioning thou muſt needes be driuen to deny the vvhole ſcripture. In vvhich vvords vve ſee he reckeneth you amongſt the Ievves, & accompteth you neth
                  •
               r verie learned, nor much better then an Infidel, for theſe ſtout reaſons vvhich here you ſo magnifie. And Peter M. being preſſed vvith the authoritie of this Ciril,Ciril. in Ioan. lib. 10. cap 13. that Chriſt by the myſtical benediction, that is, by receauing of the Sacrament, dvvelleth corp
                     •
                  rally in vs (vvhich M. Ievvel after his maner anſvvereth

verie learnedly,Iew. art. 
                     •
                  . ¶. 10. In M.W. tranſlation fo. 414.415. though verie eaſely, by comparing it vvith an other phraſe, that corporally is as much as truly, and truly may ſignifie ſpiritually, and that is al one vvith tropically) ſaith more rudely, yet more ſincerely.Martir defenſ. ad obiect. Gard. parte 4. pa. 724. 
               The fleſh of Chriſt ſo to dvvell in vs corporally, that the ſubſtance of his body ſhould be cōmunicated vvith vs, that is (as this man interpreteth it) be mingled vvith our fleſh, it is not in any caſe to be graunted, no not if a thouſand angels, much leſſe if one Ciril ſaid it. For it can not be, that Chriſts fleſh ſhould ſo be diffunded or multiplied in infinite men and places. which ſheweth that Peter Mart. tooke not S. Ciril to be of your faith touching this article of the ſacrament.
            The place vvhich you cite out of S. Damaſcene,pag. 11. becauſe you direct me no vvhere to find it, I vvil not beſtovv the paines to ſeeke it. & being graunted, it is not much to the purpoſe, and I marueile vvhy you put it in greke as though there vvere ſome great terrible bugge in it.Damaſcene. 
               That vvhich vvas circumſcript (ſaith he) vvas circumſcript, & vncircumſcript vncircumſcript, and viſible viſible, and inuiſible inuiſible. vvhich I take to be as true, as that a ſpade is

a ſpade, and a mattock a mattock, fier is fier not vvater, and the ſunne is the ſunne and not the moone. And if you meane hereof to infer your hereſy, that therefore Chriſt is not in the ſacrament, frame you the argument, & perhaps it vvil perſvvade much.Damaſcene lib 4. de orthodoxa fide. c. 14. In the meane ſeaſon that Damaſc. vvas no more of your religion, then S. Ciril, I refer you for proufe to his books de Orthodoxa fide, vvhere,Few of the auncient fathers, argue more vehemently and directly againſt M. W. hereſie & argument prouing the ſame, then S. Ciril. and Damaſcene whom he citeth. namely in the fourth you finde a verie good and large chapter againſt your Zuinglian hereſie. & eſpecially againſt your philoſophical fanſies he diſputeth thus. If the vvorde of god be liuely & forcible, if vvhat ſoeuer our lord would, he did: if he ſaid, let light be made & it vvas made, let the firmament be made and it vvas made: if by the vvorde of god the heauens vvere eſtabliſhed, and vvith the ſpirite of his mouth all the povver of them: if heauen, and earth, and vvater-fier, and ayer and al their furniture, and man him ſelfe vvere perfited by his vvorde: if vvhen god the vvord ſo vvould, he became man and of the moſte pure and immaculat bloud of the holy virgin, framed him ſelfe fleſh vvithout the ſeede of man: can not he (in the ſacrament) make of bread, his ovvne body, and of vvine & vvater, his bloud? No mary can

he not, ſaith M.W. for that is againſt reaſon, and ſo he ſhould haue tvvo bodies, one 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the other 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
the one 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
the other 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , &c. But S. Damaſcene contēning ſuch ethnical ioyes, proceedeth & cōcludeth, that as god in the beginning ſaid, let the earth bring forth greene hearbes, and hetherto being holpen and ſtrengthened by that precept it ſo doth, ſo god ſaid, this is my body, and this is my bloud, and doe this in commemoration of me, and by his omnipotent cōmaundement it is vvrought, vvhich thing onely faith can conceaue. Hovv ſhal this be done, ſaith the B. Virgin. the Archangel Gabriel anſvvered, the holy Ghoſt ſhal come vpon thee, and the povver of the moſt high ſhal ouerſhadovv thee. And novv demaūdeſt thou, hovv bread is made the body of Chriſt, and vvine and vvater his bloud? I anſvvere in like maner, that the holy Ghoſt commeth vpon it, & vvorketh that vvhich paſſeth the capacitie of reaſon, and reach of vnderſtanding. Whereby you ſee, that hovv ſoeuer circumſcript remained circumſcript, and viſible viſible, S. Damaſcene neuer intended by ſuch viſible folies ſo to circumſcribe our f
                  ••
               th, or ſubiecte our religion to humaine reaſon, that Chriſtes preſence ſhould be excluded out of the ſacrament,

or the ſacramēt ſhould be eſteemed a Zuinglian figure, vvhich to induce you take much paine, but to very ſmale effect.
         
         
            CHAP. IX. VVherein is refelled M. VV. anſvvere to certaine places of S. Chryſoſtome touching the real preſence and ſacrifice.
            
               IN the laſt chapter vve had an example hovv ſufficiently you are vvont to cōfirme your ovvne faith by ſcripture, reaſon, & fathers: here you geue vs an example hovv ſubſtantially you anſvvere the fathers vvhich vve vſe for confirmation of our faith. Tvvo places M. Martin obiected out of S. Chryſoſtom againſt your geometrical opinion of Chriſtes body in one place. you auoyde them ſo, as you geue out plaine demonſtration, that you neuer cōſidered them in the author him ſelfe, but only tooke the anſwere at deliuery from M. Iewel without any farther ſearch. Thus you write.pag. 11. 
               To Chryſoſtom teaching that Chriſt both leaft his fleſh vvith vs, and aſcended hauing the ſame vvith him,

I anſvvere, that Chriſt placed his fleſh in heauen, and neuertheleſſe leaft vs a ſacrament of that fleſh. And our fayth enioyeth the ſame euermore preſent. For the verie ſubſtance of his fleſh, Chriſt no more leaft in earth, then Elias leaft his body, vvhen he aſcended in to heauen. For ſo Chriſoſtom vvrote a litle before, that Elias vvas aftervvardes double, there vvas an Elias aboue, and there vvas an Elias beneath. Tell me I pray you M. Martyn vvas that Elias body in earth, vvhen he leaft his cloke to Elizeus? you vvill not ſay ſo. So true it is vvhich Chriſoſtome vvriteth, that Chriſt hath left his fleſh vnto vs ſymbolically, and yet hath caried the ſame in to heauen corporally.
            
            
               Iewel. art. 6. ¶. 4.5.This is your anſwere, which I ſay, you rather allow vs (as may be thought) becauſe Maiſter Iewell applieth the ſame to the ſelfe ſame place, albeit in my opinion elſ-where he geueth you a better.Ibid. art. 10. ¶. 2. For labouring to anſwere the place of S. Ciprian de caena Domini. Panis iſte quem dominus &c. This bread vvhich our lord gaue to his diſciples, being changed not in ſhape but in nature, by the almightie povver of the vvord of Chriſt is made fleſh, after a number of phraſes alleaged againſt the other partes of this ſentēce, cōming to the laſt is made fleſh,
               
he ſheweth that nether this proueth the real preſēce, & that hyſtore of lyke phraſes. For S. Auſt. ſaith, nos Chriſti facti ſumus, vve are made Chriſtes. Leo ſaith, Corpus regenerati fit caro crucifixi, the body of the man that is regenerate, is made the fleſh of Chriſt that vvas crucified. Beda ſaith, nos ipſi corpus Chriſti effecti ſumus, vve our ſelues are made the body of Chriſt. Origen ſaith in like maner of ſpeach, ſpiritus ſanctus non in turturem vertitur, ſed colūba fit, the holy ghoſt is not changed into a turtell, but is made a doue. Thus if you had anſwered, that Chriſt departing tooke his fleſh with him really, & leaft his fleſh behinde him allegorically, that is, the Chriſtian people, his church, which S.1. Cor. 12. v. 27. Epheſ. 5. v. 23. Paul many times calleth his bodye, that had bene more probable, more to S. Chriſoſtoms diſcourſe (& you ſee what doctors you might alleage for it) thē to ſay, that Chriſt tooke away with him his fleſh really, & leaft the ſame with vs ſymbolically, that is, bread and wyne, which when we receaue at the ſupper, we remember perhaps that Chriſte had fleſh. But becauſe it was ether your chaunce or choiſe to geue vs the other, let vs ſee how handſomly you frame it vnto S. Chriſoſtoms text.
            
               The ſumme of your anſwere is, that as Helias aſcendinge leaft his cloke, which for certeine reaſons was called Elias,A commentarie cleane againſt the text. ſo our Sauiour aſcending leaft vs bread & wyne, which is a ſigne of his body, & for ſome reaſōs is likewiſe called by the name of his body, but was no more his body, thē the cloke was Elias. And are ye not aſhamed thus to dally & abuſe the reader? Or can your ignorāce be ſo groſſe, as to thinke that this is S. Chriſoſt. meaning? Or cā your reader otherwiſe deeme of you, then as of a man altogether rechleſſe what you ſay, if euer he reade the place in S. Chriſoſtome him ſelf? For ſo far of is it, that S. Chriſoſtome hath any ſuch thing, that contrarywiſe he ouerthroweth moſt ſtrōgly this your folly, and vehemently vrgeth the cleane contrary. Firſt touching Elias, he hath ſome of thoſe wordes which you alleage. As a great inheretance (ſaith he) Elizeus receaued the cloke: and truly it vvas a verie great inheritance. And aftervvardes that Elias vvas double. There vvas an Elias aboue, and there vvas an Elias beneath, meaning (as it is plaine) that he was taken vp in body & ſoule, and remained beneath in power and operation, for ſo much as by the cloke

Elizeus wrought ſtrange myracles, ſuch as Elias him ſelfe did before. And ſo S. Chriſoſtome ſaith expreſly. propterea & in coelum aſcendens, nihil aliud quā melotem diſcipulo reliquit. Therefore Elias aſcending in to heauē, leaft to his diſciple nothing els, but his cloke. And would he make a like compariſon, and ſay the ſame of our Sauiour? Let vs heare his wordes. Thus he cōmeth to ſpeake of Chriſt. quid igitur ſi vobis demonſtrauero quid aliud quod illo multo maius &c.
               Chriſoſt. homil. 2. ad pop. Antio. in fine. 
               vvhat then vvil you ſay, if I ſhevv you an other maner of thing much greater thē that, vvh
                     •
                  ch al vve haue receaued, vvho ſo euer haue bene made partakers of the holy miſteryes? Elias in deed leaft his cloke to his diſciple, but the ſonne of God aſcending leaft to vs his fleſh, And Elias did ſo, but him ſelfe being depriued of his cloke, but Chriſt both leaft it vnto vs, & aſcended hauing the ſelfe ſame vvith him. Therefore let vs not fainte in courage. For he that hath not refuſed to ſhed his bloud for vs all, and hath commun
                     •
                  cated vnto vs his fleſh and the ſelf ſame bloud againe, he vvill refuſe nothing for our ſaluation. Theſe are S. Chriſoſt. wordes, which tende to ſet forth, not a ſimilitude, but an oppoſition, not an equalitye, but a ſupereminent excellencie in

our Sauiour.The great difference betwene Elias leauing his mā
                  tel to Elizeus, and Chriſt leauing his fleſh to vs. I wil ſhew you an other maner of thing (ſaith this holy father) far greater then that of Elias. And how ſo? and wherein ſtandeth that ſo great and ſinguler difference? In this.  That Elias leaft his cloke: but the ſonne of God his fleſh, which none but the ſonne of God could doe.  Againe, Elias leauing his cloke, loſte it, and ſo was bereaft of it: but Chriſt the ſonne of God, (as a worke proper to his diuine maieſtie) both leaft his fleſh with vs in the world, and yet loſt it not, but caried the ſame fleſh with him in to heauen.  Furthermore, Elias tooke ſome paynes for the ſauing of his people, but neuer ſhed his bloud for them, much leſſe could he impart to them the ſame: for this was aboue the compaſſe or reach of humaine imbecillitie. But Chriſt both ſhed his bloud for our redemption, and againe imparted vnto vs the ſelf ſame bloud, as the ſame doctor ſayth elſwhere.Chriſoſt. in 1. Cor. ca. 10. hom. 24. 
               Quod eſt in calice, id eſt quod fluxit è latere, et illius ſumus participes. That vvhich is in the chalice, is that vvhich guſhed out of his ſide, and vve are partakers thereof.
            
            This is the moſt euident ſpeach and ſenſe of S. Chiſoſtome, and no man I

ſuppoſe can be ſo ſimple, but he may forthwith ſee, how well this matcheth with the doctrine of the catholike church, & how diſſonant it is from the preaching of your congregation: eſpecially if he know your doctrine a right and be not deceaued with your fantaſtical painted words, which you ſometymes vſe to beguile ſimple ſowles, ſeeming to aduaunce that very hyghly and magnifically, which in deed your ſelues eſteeme moſt baſely & cōtemptibly. For thinke you of your Cōmunion otherwiſe, then as of common bread and wine, withou
                  •
                al grace, vertue, or ſanctificatiō,The true opiniō of the Zuinglians, touching their Supper or Communion. with a bare figure of Chriſt abſent, which figure your ſelues cā not explicate, nor ſhal be euer able to geue reaſō, but you haue or may haue as good figures, at your common breakfaſtes diners, and ſuppers? This is your faith in that poynt, yf you be Zuinglians, and beleeue as the church of Geneua.Zuing. tom. 2. lib. de vera & falſa relig. c. de Euchariſt. fol. 212. 
               The Euchariſt (ſaith Zuinglius) or communion, or lordes ſupper, is nothing els but a cōmemoration, in the vvhich they that firmely beleeue them ſelues to be reconciled to god the father by Chriſtes death & bloud, ſett forth his liuely death, that is, praiſe it, geue thankes, and preach. And when Luther

obiected to him, that he and his felow heretikes were diuided amongſt them ſelues,Ibid. in exegeſi ad Lutherum fol. 362.363. he anſwered thus. vvhereas thou ſayſt (Luther) that there are ſectes amongeſt vs, it is falſe. both I, Caroloſtadius, & Oecolāpadius,
               Symbola tā
                  tum eſſe. the Sacrament, only a figure. 
               and the reſt auouch that the bread and vvine be only figures, mary vve ſhift the vvords of Chriſt after a diuers maner, verba diuerſimodè expedimus. And in an other booke againſt Luther, It is to be noted (ſaith he) that Paule 1.Ibi. ad Luth. Confeſ. reſponſio. duae fo. 435. & ad Matth. Rutling. fo. 155, & ad Theob. Billica. 261. The Sacrament nothing out bread. 
               Cor. 11. after the vvordes of the inſtitution, calleth it no othervviſe then bread and the cuppe. For he ſaith 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
that is, this bread of the ſupper or that bread, hunc hunc panē qui praeter panem non eſt quicquam amplius. this bread this bread I ſay, vvhich is nothing els but bread. Al which he there expreſſeth by a playne ſimilitude in this ſort.Ibi. reſponſ. duae, ad Lutherum fol. 477. 
               Behold this is the ſacramental preſence of Chriſt in this ſupper, as the Emperour or the King of Fraunce are ſaid to be in the kingdome of Naples,
               Signa. The Sacrament is no more the body of Chriſt, then a painted ſcutchion is the Quene of England or kinge of Fraunce. 
               becauſe their banners or ſignes be there, vvhereas in the meane ſeaſon, the one of them liueth in Spaine, the other in Fraūce. But the bread and vvine are no more one and the ſame thinge vvith Chriſtes body and bloud, then thoſe kinges banners be the very kinges them ſelues, becauſe they note vnto vs the maieſtie and povver of the kinges.
               
And that you cauill not, that this is not the faith of your Geneuian church, & ſo ſhrowde your ſelfe in your ordinarie cloude of wordes, whereby you ſeeme to ſpeake honorably of this ſacrament, heare you what Theodore Beza writeth, whom you extoll ſo highly. Dico impudētes eſſe calumniatores &c.
               Beza. in epi. theologicis epiſt. 1. 
               I ſay they are impudent ſlaūderers vvho imagine that there vvas euer any cōtrariety betvvene the doctrine of theſe moſt excellent men, Zuinglius, Oecolāpadius, and Caluine touching the ſacramentes. I ſay alſo, that the ſelfe ſame faith in euerie reſpecte, is propoſed and defended in the Churches of Suizzerlande, Sauoy and Fraunce, in the Flemmiſh, Scottiſh, and (as I thinke) in the Engliſh churches alſo.
            
            Wherefore this being your faith, that in the Sacrament there is nothing but bread in ſuch ſort as hath bene declared, I ſay with Zuinglius panis,
               How aptly M. W. anſwere and S. Chriſt. text matche together. 
               panis, & nihil amplius, bread, bread, and nothing els, now compare your faith with S. Chriſoſtome, and ſee how handſomlie you can patch it together. thus you muſt needes ſay.  Elias departing out of
this worlde leaft his cloke, but Chriſte leaft a thing of greater power and miracle, for he leaft vs breade and wine.

                Elias leaft his cloke and ſo loſte it, for he caried it not with him, but Chriſt aſcending leaft vs bread and wine, and tooke vp bread and wine to heauen with him.  Againe (where in Elias hath no part of cōpariſon) the bloud which Chriſt ſhed for our redemption, that he imparted vnto vs in the chalice. Here you muſt helpe me thorough, for I know not what you wil ſay, but ſure I am, one of theſe two it muſt needes be: ether that Chriſt redeemed the worlde by wine, which is the bloud of the grape, and ſo cōmunicated ſuch wine and bread with vs, and this ſtandeth iumpe with your figuratiue ſupper & Communion: or that he redeemed the worlde with his owne pretious bloud, and ſo communicated the ſame with vs in the B. Sacrament, which is our faith, mary you will none of that. In concluſion, aduiſe your ſelfe better what you write, and thinke not with ſuch balde toies to ſhake of ſuch graue authoritie. Regarde the wordes, meaning and ſcope of the author, & ſo (except you be to dul) you can not be ignorāt, but that you cleane peruert this father, & turne him quite vpſide downe. For whereas he would infinitely preferre

that facte of Chriſt leauinge the ſacrament of his body to his Chriſtians before the facte of Elias leauinge his cloke to Elizeus (for of our cōuerſinge with Chriſt in heauen by faith and vnderſtanding,M. W. quite peruerteth S. Chriſoſt. ſenſe and ſentence. here is no queſtion, & Elizeus might haue, and had no doubt his minde in heauen with Elias) by your commentarie and ſenſe, far greater was the facte of Elias then that of Chriſt.  For the cloke was a far better and more
liuely figure of Elias, then youre bread and wine is of Chriſt.  By it Elizeus receaued
greate grace & ſtrength,Chriſoſt in hoc loco. as writeth S. Chriſoſtome, as by the which he fought agaynſt the deuill and vanquiſhed him. That your bread ſhould geue any grace,zuing. to. 2. li. de peccato origin. fo. 121. et ibid. reſpon. ad D. Baltazarem. fo. 105. it is agaynſt your whole doctrine, and Zuinglius laboureth to proue it at large in ſundrie places,  callinge it papiſticall, to ſay, that any ſacrament, euen baptiſme doth aliquid momenti conferre ad ſanctificationem aut remiſſionem peccatorum, profite any iote to
ſanctifie or take avvay ſynne.
               4. Regum 2. v. 14. Elizeus by that cloke wrought ſtraunge miracles. ſo did you by your figuratiue bread neuer, nor neuer ſhall, ſo longe as the worlde ſtandeth.  Briefly, whereas Elizeus
cloke cariynge with it ſuch vertue

and power, was a thing ſurmounting the abilitie and reach of man, and could not be done but by the omnipotencie of god: your bread being nothing but a ſigne or banner, as it were a may-pole, or token of a tauerne, by Zuinglius his owne confeſsion, the king of Fraunce or Spaine can make ten thouſande as good. And the truth is, they can make much better, becauſe theirs do no harme, wheras yours leade men the hye way to damnatiō. Wherefore youre anſwere to this place of S. Chriſoſtome is to to fond and childiſh.
            And hereby we may haue a geſſe, how ſubſtanciallye you are like to deale with the next, which is taken out of the ſame father. I muſt needes write it doune ſomewhat at large, for the readers better vnderſtanding of vs both. It is in his thirde booke de ſacerdotio, where he ſetteth forth the high eſtate of the prieſtes of the new Teſtament, and that acte wherein prieſthode eſpeciallye conſiſteth, that is, the ſacrifice: thus he writeth.Chriſoſ. lib. 3. de ſacerdotio. paulò poſt initium 
               This prieſthode it ſelfe is exerciſed in earth, but is to be referred to the order and revv of thinges celeſtiall, and that for good reaſon. becauſe no mortall man, no angell, no archangell, no creature, but the

holy Ghoſt him ſelf framed this order. Terrible vvere the thinges & dreadfull, vvhich vvere before the tyme of grace in the lavv of Moyſes, as vvere the litle bells, pomegranats, pretious ſtones in the breaſt of the prieſte, the mitre, golden plate,
               The excellency of the prieſthode of the new Teſtament. aboue that of the old. 
               ſancta ſanctorum &c. But if a man conſider theſe thinges vvhich the tyme of grace hath brought to vs, he vvil iudge all thoſe thinges vvhich I called terrible and dreadfull, to be but light, and though glorious, yet not comparable vvith the glorie of the nevv teſtament, as S. Paule ſaith. This being laide before,2. Cor. 3. as it were a preface or preparatiue to that which foloweth, he then cōmeth to that place, out of which M. W. culleth certaine wordes. For (ſayth he) vvhen thou ſeeſt our Lord ſacrificed, and the prieſte earneſtlie intent to the ſacrifice, and pouring out his prayers, and the people about him imparted and made red vvith that pretious bloud,
               Intingi & rubefieri. 
               thinkeſt thou thy ſelf to conuerſe amongeſt mortall men, and remaine on the earth? And immediatly, ô miraculum, ô Dei benignitatem, ô miracle, ô ſingular goodnes of God, he that ſitteth vvith his father aboue, at the ſelf ſame moment of tyme is handled vvith all mens handes, and deliuereth him ſelf to thoſe that vvill receaue and imbrace him. and this is done

playnlie in the ſight of all men, vvithout any deceate or illuſion. Of this place M. Martin inferreth, that M.W. reaſoning, Chriſt is in heauen, ergo not in the Sacramet, is wicked & refuted by the old fathers. But M.W. replyeth, no. And I vvil geue you your anſvvere (ſayth he) out of the ſame place.
               Pag. 12. 
               for here Chryſoſtome affirmeth that vve ſee our Lord ſacrificed in the ſupper, and the people imparted and made red vvith the bloud, and that this is done in the open ſight of all that are preſente. But vvho ſeeth ether our Lord tru
                     •
                  y ſacrificed, or one droppe of bloud, vvith vvhich the people are made red, ſo as all ſee it, as Chriſoſtome vvriteth. Therefore as vve ſee Chriſt ſacrificed, and the people embrued vvith his bloud, ſo vve receaue him in our handes. In theſe vvordes, Chryſoſtome vvould both amplifie the dignitie of prieſtes, vnto vvhom Chriſt gaue povver to miniſter the Sacrament of his bodie and bloud,
               A bad way to make thē afrayde, if they vniuerſally knew & beleeued the cōtrary, 
               and make the people afrayde, that they vvhich come to this ſupper, ſhould bring vvith them godlie and religious myndes, as though they ſhould take Chriſt him ſelfe in their handes. The ſubſtance of the anſwere is this. Chryſoſtome in the ſame place ſayth: we ſee Chriſt offered, which in truth is not ſo, but by a figuratiue ſpeach: therefore when he ſaith

Chriſt is in heauen and in the Sacrament, it is not ſimplie true, but by like phraſe and figure. But whereunto then tende al theſe great wordes and perſwaſions of this father? to honour the prieſts office, and make the people afrayed. and were there prieſtes in the church in thoſe days? No. but by priestes you muſt vnderſtand m
                     •
                  nisters. and then, a ſimili, by the ſacrifice he ſpeaketh of, that is the maſſe, you muſt vnderſtand the Communiō, that is by Catholike rel
                     •
                  gion, you muſt vnderſtande hereſie, and by light, dark
                     •
                  es. But I wil go thorough the branches of this anſwere in order.
            Firſt, whereas you make that a thing moſt aſſured and certaine that no man ſeeth Chriſt offered, except you meane in your Engliſh ſupper,We ſee Chriſt offered in the church. you are greatly deceaued For in the church Catholike we ſee Chriſt offered, and that not in phraſe of ſpeach only, as the proteſtāts may be ſaid to do iniurie to Chriſt, when they abuſe his image, but in veritie and truth of doctrine. And S. Chryſoſtome with the reſt of the fathers, neuer thought or ſpake otherwiſe. How oft hath S. Chriſoſtome,Chryſoſt. in 1. Cor 10. hom. 24. 
               qu
                     •
                  d ſummo honore dignum est, id tibi 
                     •
                  n terra 
                     •
                  ſtendam. That vvhich deſerueth moſt honor,

that vvil I ſhevv thee on earth. and in the ſame place. The royal body of Chriſt is in heauē, vvhich novv in earth is ſet before thee to be ſeene. I ſhevv vnto thee, not angels, not archangels, not heauens, not heauen of heauens, but I ſhevv thee the verie Lord him ſelfe of al theſe. Perceaueſt thou not, hovv not only thou ſeeſt in earth and toucheſt, but receaueſt alſo the ſoueraine and principall thing that is? And in the ſame place. This body vvhich thou ſeeſt on the altar, the vviſe men adored in the manger. But it were tedious to note out ſuch places, which are common in euery booke. This rather I would wiſhe M. W. to vnderſtand, that where it hath pleaſed God in certaine creatures to exhibite his preſence after a more ſpecial and ſingular ſort, there in a more ſpecial and ſingular maner, truely we may & ought to beleeue that we ſee our Lord. God is by eſſence, power and operation, preſent in euerie creature, yet in ſeing a beaſt or tree,Geneſ. 32. ver. 30. we may not ſay as Iacob doth in Geneſis, vidi dominum facie ad faciem, I haue ſeene God face to face, when he wreſtled with the Angell: or as Moſes, Aaron, Nadab, and Abiu in the mount viderunt deum Iſrael ſavv the God of Iſrael,
               Exod. 24. ver. 9. 
               and vnder his feete

as it vvere a vvorke of ſapphyre ſtone, or as the prophetes many tymes ſavv God ſitting vpon his throne. Which if it be true,3. Reg. 22. ver. 19. Eſa. 6. v. 1. how much more boldlie and truely may we affirme, that we ſee Chriſt in the B. Sacrament, where we haue moſt certaine warrant, that his humanitie & diuinitie are preſente after a moſt ſingular, and effectual, and ſubſtantial maner. Our ſauiour talking with the blinde man vnto whom he gaue ſight, ſayd to him. doeſt thou beleeue in the ſonne of God?
               Ioan 9. v. 38 
               he anſvvered & ſaid, vvho is he lord that I may beleeue in him. And Ieſus ſaid to him. both thou haſt ſeene him, & he that talketh vvith thee, he it is. and forthvvith he fell dovvne and adored him. This by your opinion muſt be falſe, becauſe he only ſaw the external lineaments of a mortal man, but ſaw not, nor could ſee the ſonne of God, being him ſelf God:Ioan. 1. v. 18. 1 Tim. 6. v. 16. Exod. 33. verſ. 20. 
               and god no man hath ſeene at any tyme, and not only no man hath ſeene, but nether can ſee. for as God him ſelfe ſayth, non videbit me homo et viuet, man ſhal not ſee me and liue. Yet as Chriſt was truth it ſelf, ſo he taught truely, and by reaſon of his diuine and eternal perſon ioyned to that humanitie, the poore man ſaw the eternal ſōne of God: and ſo though after a far different

maner, thoſe prophetes and Patriarches ſaw God. And therefore to you it ſhould not ſeeme ſtraunge, if S. Chryſoſtome and the Catholikes profeſſe, that truly they ſee Chriſt offered. for moſt true it is. It ſhould ſeeme no more ſtraunge I ſay, then it was ſtraunge for Chriſt to poynte to that which he had in his handes, and gaue to his Apoſtles, and ſay withal,2. Cor. 11. 
               this which you ſee, is my bodie, and the ſame, vvhich ſhal be deliuered for you. which body deliuered for vs, if it were Chriſt, then the Apoſtles by Chriſtes demonſtration ſaw Chriſt, and in ſuch ſort as we ſee him.  So that firſt I anſwere, that your taking that for a thinge plaine and euident amongeſt vs, which is cleane contrarie & moſt falſe, proceedeth of ignorāce of the Catholike faith againſt which you write, & ſo cōuinceth you of raſhnes to refute that which you vnderſtand not.
            
                Next I ſay, that you are as ignorant in the doctrine of your brethren the Lutherans, for this they affirme as wel as we, though far more abſurdlye. For reteyninge ſtil the ſubſtance of bread & wine, yet becauſe of the real preſence, they acknowledge that bread to be the body of Chriſt, and ſo ſee the body of

Chriſte, and applie hereunto, that auncient rule of our forefathers 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and thereby adore it, and geue to it godlie honor, and beleeue that they take, receaue, and touche Chriſte him ſelfe, and accompte you, not to be their brethren, (though you ſo baſely will needes clayme their kinred) but to be brethren of the old Ethnikes & Apoſtataes, who for like beleefe ſcorned & mocked the auncient Chriſtians, as you do vs now. So Martin Luther confirming that, which in the firſt place I haue ſaid of gods exhibiting him ſelfe to vs in creatures, writeth thus.Luth. Tom. 7 ſerm. de Euchariſtia. fo. 337. 
               Although Christe be euery vvhere in all creatures, yet vve may not looke for him vvithout the vvorde. VVherefore he hath appointed vs a certayne vvay to finde him, hovv and vvhere he is to be ſought and founde. This they ſee not, nether vnderſtande, vvho ſay it is abſurd to affirme or beleeue that Christ is in bread and vvine, becauſe they vnderſtand not vvhat maner thinge the Kingdome of Christ is &c. He is moſt preſent in his vvorde, albeit he is not preſent in that ſort, as he is here in the ſacrament, by vvhich he exhibiteth to the Chriſtiās his body and bloud by the miniſterie of the vvorde ioyned in bread and vvine. And that the

old Paganes in this kinde of infidelitie were the fathers of our Zuinglian Proteſtants, he ſheweth in the ſame place writing thus.Ibid. fo. 335. 
               The devil laboureth (ſaith he) to ſup vp the egge and leaue vs the ſhell, that is,
               the zuingliā Communiō plaine bakers bread. 
               from the bread and vvine to take avvay the body and bloud of Christe, ſo that nothing remayne, but playne bakers bread. And here they mocke vs at their pleaſure, callinge vs ſhamefullie, ſarcophagos, and haemopotas, eaters of fleſh and drinkers of bloud,
               Infidels and Apoſtataes forefathers of the Proteſtants, in mocking & ſcorning the Sacrament. 
               and that vve vvorſhippe a god made of bread, as they ſay: as of old that naughtie man, & loden vvith all ſynne Auerroes ſayd. vvho ſlydinge backe from our fayth, ſlaundered and reproched the faythful Christians, ſayng that there vvas not vnder the ſunne a more vvicked people, then vvere the Chriſtians, becauſe they deuoured their ovvne God, vvhich vvickednes no people euer is read to haue committed.
               Kemnit. in exam. conc. Trident. cō
                  tra canones de Euchariſtia. And Kemnitius in his examen Concilii Tridentini, vpon this groūde of the real preſence, approueth the cuſtome of the Church in adoringe Chriſt in the ſacrament, by the authoritie of S. Auguſtine, and S. Ambroſe in Pſal. 98. by Euſebius Emiſſenus, and S. Gregorie Nazianzene, and ſaith it is impietie to do the contrarie.
            
                Thirdly, if you had bene but ſo conuerſante

in Caluine as your profeſsion requireth, you could not ſo far haue bene ouerſeene in this eaſie diſtinction knowen to Catholike, Lutheran and Zuinglian, although when Caluine wrote thus, perhaps he was more then halfe a Lutheran, and not ſo far gone in Zuinglianiſme as after. In his little booke de caena domini thus he writeth.Calu. de 
                     •
                  oena Domini inter opuſcula. 
               The bread and vvine are rightely called the body and bloud of Chriſt, becauſe they be as it vvere inſtruments, by vvhich Chriſt doth diſtribute them vnto vs, vve haue a verie apte example in a like matter. VVhen god vvould that the holy Ghoſt ſhould appeare in the baptiſme of Chriſt, he repreſented him in the figure of a doue.
               Ioan. 1. v. 32. 
               Iohn the Baptiſt rehearſing the ſtory, ſayth that he ſavve the holy Ghoſt deſcending. If vve looke narovvlie, vve ſhall finde that he ſavve nothing but a doue. For the eſſence of the holy Ghoſt is inuiſible. Yet becauſe he knevv that viſion to be no vaine figure, but a moſt certaine ſigne of the preſence of the holy ghoſt, he boldlie affirmeth that he ſavve him, becauſe it vvas repreſented in ſuch ſort as he could beare. So in the communion, vvhich vve haue in the body & bloud of Chriſt, the miſterie is ſpirituall, vvhich vve can nether ſee vvith eye, nether comprehend vvith humaine

vv
                     •••
                  . Therefore is it ſhevved vs by ſignes, yet ſo,
               The Sacrament in what ſort a figure. 
               that it is not a naked or only figure, but io
                     •
                  ned to his truth and ſubſtance. Rightlie therefore is it called the body, vvhich it d
                     •
                  th not only repreſent, but alſo exhib
                     •
                  te vnto v
                     •
                  . Thus Caluine, teachinge and prou
                  •
               nge by ſcripture, that truely we ſee Chriſt (though not in his owne forme) partly becauſe the ſacrament is a figure vvhich hath the veritie io
                     •
                  ned vvith it, and therefore may wel haue his denomination of the principal, partly becauſe beyng inconuenient ether in reſpect of gods wiſedome, or of our infirmitie, to receaue that glorious body in his owne forme (which reaſon Theophilacte, S. Damaſcene, S. Cirill, S. Chriſoſtō, and other fathers geue) god hath appoynted theſe externall ſacramentes for inſtrum
                  •
               ntes, by m
                  •
               anes whereof we m
                  •
               ght truly be made partakers of that, which otherwiſe we ſhoulde abhorre.
            But graunt we now to M.W. that it is only a phraſe of ſpeach to ſay vve ſee Chr
                     •
                  st or his body and bloud, how foloweth his reaſon, therefore it is alſo but a phraſe of ſpeach to ſaye, the body is there at all? Suppoſe a man may ſtand in argument that the Apoſtles ſeing the

humanitie of Chriſt, ſawe not the ſonne of god, ſawe not the creator of the world, will your philoſophie or diuinitie ſerue you to infer, ergo that perſon or man, whom they beheld, was not the ſonne of god? Agayne what logicke,The Proteſtāts by their analogie of faith. of euery place of ſcripture or doctor conclude what they lyſt. what wit permitteth you from one particular, to conclude as many as you liſte? It is a figure when we reade in ſcripture, god hath hands, face, noſetrils: ergo it is a figure when we reade that Chriſt tooke fleſh of the virgin. It is a figure when Chriſt ſaid, that he deſcended from heauen:Ioan. 3. ergo his aſcenſion is not true but imaginarie. It is not poſsible for vs in the height & excellencie of the diuine miſteries, and the baſenes of our vnderſtanding and barrennes of our tonge ſcarce to thinke, much leſſe to ſpeake of them, but we ſhal fall in to ſome vnproper termes, as appeareth by the whole courſe of diuinitie. From which neceſsitie, he that taketh this licence, which M. W. alloweth to him ſelfe, & from one word ſpoken figuratiuelie, at his pleaſure will deduce the like of an other, he will make Chriſtian religion as variable as is the raynebowe, as vnconſtante as the wethercocke. And yet

this loſe kinde of talking (for who can call it reaſoning) is the verie roote and mother of the Zuinglian goſpell▪ for vpon this piller was erected the ſacramentarie hereſie in Zuricke, as Zuinglius him ſelfe ſignifieth: for thus he reaſoned. When Chriſt ſayd this i
                     •
                   my body, he ſpake tropically, becauſe when Moyſes ſayd,Exod. 12. 
               the lambe is the paſouer (which notwithſtanding is a text of his owne coyning, as Luther proueth againſt him) this is a tropical ſpeache.Luther to. 7. defenſ. verborum coenae fo. 386. Agaynſt which, Luther replying and ſcorning, ſayth it is as valiant & wyſe a proufe, as if a man would argue that Sara or Rebecca brought forth children and remayned virgins, becauſe our Ladie did ſo: or that Pilate and Herode vvere tvvo glorious Apoſtles of Chriſte, becauſe Peter and Paule vvere.
            
            But ſee you not ſaith M. W. that S. Chriſoſtome is full of vehemencie and amplification? He is vehement I confeſſe,Impoſsible to interpret S. Chryſoſt. of the Engliſh Communion. & perhaps amplifieth. But wherein is he vehement, or what doth he amplifie? a lye or a truth? a truth, to witte the dignitie of prieſts, ſay you. Then there were prieſts, and ſo there was a ſacrifice by your owne definition.ſupra pa. 
                     •
                  7. and playne it is that S. Chryſoſtome ſo much advaunceth

the prieſt in regarde of the ſacrifice. Now this amplificatiō muſt riſe vpon a true grounde, othervviſe he may rather be ſaid to magnifie a lye, then to amplifie a truth. Then gather me out of S. Chriſoſt. any one truth vvhere vpon he doth thus enlarge and vſe his vehemencie. Nay conſider by your opinion and faith, vvhether almoſt euery vvorde in this place be not a lye. VVe ſee Chriſt ſayth he. that is a lye, and novv refuted by you. VVe ſee him offered, that is a lye, and a blaſphemous lye.M. Iewels 17. article. 
               The prieſt bēt earneſtly to the ſacrifice, that is a lye, for there vvas no ſuch ſacrifice within ſix hūdred yeres after Chriſt. The people receaue the pretious bloud, that is a lye,The 5. artie. for no man beleeued the reall preſence vvithin ſix hundred yeres nether. O miracle (ſaith S. Chryſoſt.) ô ſingular goodnes of god, he that ſitteth vvith his father aboue, at the ſelfe ſame momēt of tyme is receaued in the church at the prieſts hands. that is a lye,The 6. artie. for ſo ſhould the body of Chriſt at one tyme be in a thouſand places, vvhich is agaynſt M. Ievvels ſixt article, & there fore needes it muſt be falſe, ſo to ſpeake or thinke. What truth novv remayneth for S. Chryſoſtome to amplifie,

vvhereas euerie vvord he ſpeaketh beyng taken as it ſtandeth, according to your religion is falſe? Belike he m
                  •
               āt to aduaūce ſuch dealing of bread and vvine as you vſe in your congreg
                  •
               tions, and conſequently your miniſterie vvhich is promoted to ſo vvorthie a vocation. But vvhat ſentence, vvhat vvord, vvhat ſillable hath he to that purpoſ? yet graunt it be ſo. Thē your faith and religion being all one vvith S. Chriſoſtomes (as you tel vs) let your miniſters vſe ſuch amplification to their people (and you neede not to be aſhamed to borovve or learne of ſo excellent a doctor) and ſee vvhether both the people vvill not crye out vpon them as falſe prophetes, and the Commiſsioners bring them vvithin the Premunire, for preaching agaynſt the pure goſpel receaued and authoriſed by parlament. Let them preach that they offer and ſacrifice their lord and maiſter, that they are earneſt lye be
                     •
                  t to performe that dutie of prieſthode, that at their hands the peop
                     •
                  e receaue the pretious bloud of Chriſt, let ſuch preachers be brought before you M. W. as th
                  •
                publike profeſſor of diuinitie, and I appeale to your conſcience,

vvhether you vvill allovv ſuch preaching as an amplification of their m
                  •
               niſterio & not condemne it as vvicked, and deteſtable, and blaſphemous againſt the goſpel.
            
                Finally M. W. could in no place
more vndiſcreetly haue vſed this maner of anſvvere then here. For S. Chryſoſtome ſo placeth the ſacrifice of the church betvvene tvvo notorious ſacrifices,True ſacrifice in the church. and maketh the compariſon betvvene all three ſo nighly and exactly, preferring alvvayes ours by infinite degrees of excellencie, that a man vvith halfe an eye may ſee that M. W. thruſt it in rather becauſe he had ſo read in M. Ievvel, then becauſe he cōſiderately peruſed the place him ſelfe. Before the vvords pertayninge to the ſacrifice of the church, S. Chryſoſtome thus ſpeaketh of the Leuiticall ſacrifice.Chryſo. vbi ſupra. 
               All thinges vvere terrible and dreadfull about that ſacrifice and prieſthode: but if you match it vvith this ſacrifice and prieſthode, vvherein by the prieſt, our lord himſelfe is ſacrificed, all that is nothing as in the vvords ſet dovvne in the beginning appeareth. Immediately after, thus he proceedeth▪ 
               vvilt thou ſee the excellencie of this holines by an other miracles

put before thy eyes Elias and that infinite multitude aboute him, and the ſacrifice l
                     •
                  yd vpon the altar, the prophete p
                     •
                  vvring forth his prayers, ſuddenly fyer deſcending from heauen and conſuming the ſacrifice, all ſtraunge and full of admiration. Ab illis ſacris ad noſtra ſacra te transfer, from that ſacrifice turne thy ſelfe to beholde our ſacrifice, and thou ſhalt ſee that ours is far more vvonderfull and paſſing all admiration. For here is the prieſt caryinge not fyer, but the holy Ghoſt, from vvhom grace flovveth in to the ſacrifice &c. Wherefore, vvhereas he beginneth vvith a true ſacrifice, and endeth vvith a true ſacrifice, and compareth the middle vvith the extremes as a moſt true and excellent ſacrifice, and affirmeth it ſo to be, and vſeth the other tvvo for no other purpoſe, then by the abaſinge of thoſe ſacrifices to aduaūce the dignitie of this ſingular ſacrifice: for one to come now and againſt ſuch euidence, vpon one or other metephorical vvord (vvhich in ſuch diuine things can not poſsibly be auoyded) to ſay, al is metaphors, & he meāt no ſuch thing &c. it is an argument nether of witte, nor of learning nor ſhamefaſtnes, nor conſcience. it is a manifeſt ſigne of one, that nether ſeeketh

after the truth, nor careth what he ſayth, nor regardeth man, nor feareth god. but paſſe we on.
         
         
            CHAP. X. Of the place in S. Lukes Gospel cap. 22. corrupted by Beza.
            
               BEFORE you come to iuſtifie the corruption of S. Lukes Goſpel, whereof your graund Capitayne Beza is attainted, very orderly you beginne with the commendation of ſo ſingular a perſonage, ſayng that M.Pag. 12. Martin with the reſt of his aduerſaries, in reſpecte of him be but Pigmees, vvhom if he could once ſee, he vvould ſovv them vp in a bagge,
               inſutos in culcum allideret. 
               and knocke out their braynes, as Polyphemus did to Vliſſes companiōs, wherein you ſpeake perhaps truer then you are aware. For in deed, in murdering men he hath better ſkil then he hath in his bible, as cūning as you make him, whereof all Fraunce is witneſſe, vnto which he hath bene a knowen Catiline and fierbrand, and hath in deed bene the cauſe that ſome good men haue bene ſo vſed, as you threaten he would vſe

his aduerſaries,Vide orat. Pet. Frar. cō
                  tra ſectarios. item epiſt. Bezae 41. as in the ſtories of the ciuil warres of Fraunce we reade. Mary that you wiſhe ſome man to write againſt him, whoſe tonge he vnderſtandeth, as though ſuch wanted, this argueth that ether you are very ignorant, & know litle out of your owne territorie, who thinke there are none ſuch, or els that you are not his frind, who wiſhe him more enemies: whereas he hath ſtore of ſuch, more then euer he can turne him ſelfe vnto, and therefore lieth continually as it were broken in backe and wind, groueling vnder ſuch heauie burdens as he is charged withal. And although I take not vpon me to know much in his affaires (and I wiſhe withal my hart I knew leſſe) yet thus much I am aſſured of,Writers againſt Beza. that not only Catholikes of excellent fame and learning, ſome of thē renowmed Biſhops & doctors, haue written againſt him in ſuch a tonge as he wel vnderſtā
               deth, as Claudius Santeſius, Eſpenceus, Vigor, Lindanus, Franciſcus Balduinus, Michael Fabricius & his nephew Gabriel, but alſo Lutherans and Caluiniſtes haue plied him with ſuch bookes: as for example, Heſhuſius, Flacius Illyricus, Selneccerus, the Vniuerſitie

of Iena in Germanie, Sebaſtianus Caſtalio, Carolus Molineus, beſides many other Polonians, his owne ſcholers, whoſe names I know not nor liſt to learne. Theſe Pigmees and dwarfes, how litle ſo euer they were, in countries Catholike and Lutheriſh, and in many places profeſſinge Zuinglianiſme, haue ſo put out the eye and diminiſhed the eſtimation of your Poliphemus, that of the Catholikes he is knowē to haue bene but a wicked ſicophāt, of deteſtable maners, a feared conſcience,1. Tim. 4. v. 2. and meane learning, and of the Lutherans, he is accompted as ill, howſoeuer among the miniſters of England, where perhaps Luſcus may regnare inter caecos, he is eſteemed for a maruelous Euangeliſt, as it were an other Hercules or Atlas, that holdeth vp your goſpel with his ſhoulders.
            But let him be as huge as may be, as big and great as you would make him: he had neede be as great as Gargantua, or the great diuel of hell, if he beare away that which we charge him withal, though you lay to your ſhoulders to helpe him as wel as you can. M. Mar. accuſeth him that he controleth our Sauiour, ſetteth the holy Ghoſt to ſchole, &

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
correcteth the Euangeliſt. For whereas the Euangeliſt by Beza his owne confeſſion wrote one thing as vttered by our Sauiour, and therefore moſt aſſuredly our Sauiour ſpake ſo in ſubſtance and effect, and the holy Ghoſt guiding the penne and hand of the Euangeliſt endited ſo, this your great Giaunt cometh and ſhouldereth them all out, altereth quite the text, ſayth it is falſe, and geueth vs a new text of his owne.The point of this controuerſy, wel to be marked. The point of the controuerſie is this, that S. Luke auoucheth, that that vvhich was in the chalice (for to babble about the mettal of the chalice,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . is more meete for William Sommer the Kings ieſter, then for M. William Whitaker the Quenes reader) vvas the nevv teſtament in Christes bloud, or as S. Marke and S. Matthew write, in meaning and truth al one, for eaſynes of vnderſtanding, to common Chriſtians more plaine, is Chriſtes bloud of the nevv teſtament, and the ſelfe ſame (contayned in the chalice) vvas ſhedd for vs. So Beza him ſelf geueth vs the tranſlatiō in S.Beza in Mat. 26. ver. 28. Mar. 14. v. 24 Matthew and S. Marke. Hoc (poculum) eſt ſanguis meus noui teſtamenti, This (cuppe) is my bloud of the nevv teſtament, meaning by the cuppe (as him ſelf there writeth) tha
                     •
                  
                  
vvhich vvas contayned therein, vulgata & trita omnibus linguis conſuetudine loquendi. by a common kinde of ſpeach and familiar to euery language. So that M. Whitakers groſſe affectation of a litle ſubtilitie, is here more out of ſeaſon, then in lente vnguentum, or to mingle S.Rom. 9. Paules diſcourſe of Predeſtination, with a tale of Robin Hoode. The matter being wel & at large handled by M. Martin,Diſcou. ca. 1 numb. 38. c. 17. num. 10. I remitte the reader to him for more particular explication of euery parcel and circumſtance, I wil only note the concluſion, for which al this ſtirre againſt S. Luke is kept, & perhaps it is a great reaſon, why in their late conference in the Tower,See before cap. 2. they haue turned him out of his auncient authoritie, and matched him with Iudith and the Machabees, which they eſteeme litle better then Aeſopes fables.The real preſence manifeſtly proued by S. Luke. The concluſion is, that vvhereas S. Luke moſt directly affirmeth that vvhich vvas in the chalice to be the ſelf ſame bloud that vvas ſhedd for our ſinnes, hence vve confirme (as al the vvorlde may ſee) the old Catholike faith, and refute this nevv, prophane, and bakerlie Communion deuiſed by Caroloſtadius and Zuinglius. That this is the reaſon, vvhy

Beza altered the text, him ſelf confeſſeth in flat termes. Quum haec verbaſi conſtructionem ſpectemus,
               Beza in Luc. 22. v. 10. 
               neceſſario non ad ſanguinem ſed ad poculum pertineant, neque tamen de poculo intelligi poſſint &c. vvhereas theſe vvorde (vvhich is ſhedd for you) if you regard the plaine conſtruction, appertayne of neceſſitie no
                     •
                   to the bloud, but to the cuppe or chalice, and yet can not be vnderſtood of the cuppe or chalice (vvhich he ſpeaketh, preſuppoſing his hereſie to be true) therefore I haue made this alteration ſayth he. That he neuer found among all his auncient copies latin or greeke, any one reading as he tranſlateth, himſelfe alſo confeſſeth. Omnes tamen vetuſti noſtri codices ita ſcriptum habebant. Albeit I thus tranſlate, yet all our old auncient bookes had it othervviſe. that is, ſo vvritten as it is commonly read, and as the papiſtes vvould haue it.
            Wherefore this beinge his fault, that vpon priuate fanſie to ſerue his peculiar hereſie, he hath altered the very letter and text of the Goſpel, is he a Chriſtian, is he a common heretike, nay, is he not worſe then a Iew, then a Turke, then the worſt kinde of Paganes, that pretendinge the name of a Chriſtian will defende ſuche a vile caitife and

monſter, directly againſt the ſacred Euangeliſt & our bleſſed Sauiour him ſelfe? and yet forſooth becauſe this man is not only a great piller, but alſo for ſome great parte a very coyner of this nevv Goſpel, as it vvere their very Euangeliſt, (for much of their text is made by him) he muſt needes be defended, though the old Euangeliſtes go to vvracke for it. Pardon me (Chriſtiā reader) if I ſeeme ſomevvhat vehement, their dealing being ſuch, that if men held their peace, the very infātes,Luc. 19. v. 40 yea the very ſtones vvould ſpeake, as ſaith our Sauiour. And vvithal conſider thou, vvhen they vvil geue ouer thoſe barbarous Paradoxes, of feminine primacie, of baptiſme not remitting ſinnes, of their tropical bread &c. vvherein they ſtāde only againſt the Catholiks, or at the moſt, againſt vs and their brethren the Lutherans, when as they wil not geue ouer, but continevv and mainteyne their trayterous and Satanicall action commenced againſt our bleſſed Sauiour.
            But if vve may vvithout ſinne ſpend time in hearing what they haue to ſay againſt him, let vs attend M. Whitaker and waygh what he dareth vtter in

that behalfe.M.W. arguing againſt the text. of S. Luke. Pag. 13. Thus he diſputeth. The vvordes of Luke are. This cuppe is the nevv teſtament in my bloud: that is, if vve folovv M. Martins interpretation, This bloud is the nevv teſtamēt in my bloud, vvhich is ſhedd for you. vvhat ſenſe is there of theſe vvords M. Martin,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               and vvhat doubte bloud is this? See you not here a manifeſt repetition of the ſame thing riſing of your interpretation? VVherefore ſeing your ſentence is plainely abſurde, vvho vvil not rather vvith Beza ſay there is a faulte in the vvordes, or vvith Baſil reade 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Firſt of all to beginne, you ſomewhat miſreporte M. Martin in ſayng that he interpreteth, Hic ſanguis eſt nouum teſtamentum in ſanguine meo. this bloud is the nevv teſtament in my bloud. For though he deduce that by neceſſarie conſequence, yet is it an other thing to ſay he interpreteth it ſo.The real preſence. The interpretation he geueth you preciſely out of S. Chryſoſtome,Chriſ. in. 1. Cor. 10. hom. 24. 
               hoc quod eſt in calice, illud eſt quod fluxit de latere that vvhich is in the chalice, is that vvhich flovved out of Chriſts ſyde.
               Leo ſerm. 11 de paſs. The iuſt bloud is the cup which S. Luke mē
                  tioneth. which alſo S. Leo the greate very diuinelye expreſſeth. Fudit ſanguinem inſtum qui reconciliando mundo et pretium eſſet et poculū. he ſhed the iuſt bloud vvhich ſhould be both the price & the cuppe to reconcile

the vvorlde, the one in his paſsion on the croſſe, the other in the ſacramēt at his laſt ſupper. whereof though you may truly infer, that the bloud of Chriſt in the chalice, is the ſelfe ſame bloud that flowed out of the ſyde of Chriſt, as here S. Leo doth, yet talking exactly of propoſitions, you may finde a greate difference. As if a man pointing to you ſhould ſaye, this man is a Caluiniſt or heretike, he ſayth in deed, this Caluiniſt is a Caluiniſt. yet can you not deny but there is a greate difference in the propoſition. VVherefore we holde you to the wordes and ſenſe of the Euangeliſt, as your greate Rabbine ſetteth them doune. hoc eſt ſanguis mens noui teſtamenti. This (cuppe) is my bloud of the nevv teſtament, which is the ſelfe ſame without any the leaſt difference, which M. Martin geueth you out of S. Chryſoſtome. Now what haue you againſt it?Many faultes committed by M.W. in his defence of Beza. Oh ſay you it is tautologia, an abſurd repetition of the ſelfe ſame thinge, for vvhat double bloud is this?
            Firſt why lye you ſo groſſly and intolerably, as to ſay here is mention of double bloud? If I ſay, this Chriſt is Chriſt the ſonne of God, this Meſſias is the Meſſias & Sauiour of the world,

this God, is God of heauen and earth, finde you mentioned a double Chriſt, a double Meſſias, a double God, as here you finde double bloud, if we ſay, this bloud is the bloud of the new teſtament?
            
                Againe, lett the reader ſee, if you be not poſſeſſed vvith a ſprite of giddines,
               Eſa. 19. v. 14. and what a miſerable ſurgeon you are, who going about to cure Bezaes wounde, woūde your ſelfe as deepely, and whiles you endeuour to excuſe his Atheiſme and impietie, runne headlonge on the ſame rocke your ſelfe. For what is Bezaes faulte? this, that to helpe forth his Zuinglian hereſie, he corrected S. Luke in the later parte of the ſentence (ſhedde for you) and altered that accordinge to his fanſie. How doth M. W. mende this? by rayling at the firſt parte, This cuppe is the bloud of the nevv Teſtament. for this (ſaith he) is tautologia. here is double bloud. here is an abſurd ſentence. So that now betwene you and Beza, S. Luke hath neuer a worde right, Beza reprouing and mending the later parte, and you being as ſaucie with the former. Is not this well defended?
            
                Now graunt we al theſe faults of

               
                  
                     •
                  aut
                     •
                   ogia, an abſurde ſentence, an idle repetition &c. where lie theſe faults? doubtleſſe not ſo much in the Euangeliſt, who wrote them, as in our Sauiour who ſpake them. Suppoſe I ſay it ſeeme harde to your delicate and Ciceronian eares. muſt therefore Chriſt be ſett to ſchole to learne his leſſon of that fierbrande of ſedition, that ſinke & gulfe of iniquitie Theodore Beza? and what is the abſurditie you find in theſe words? mary that that vvhich vvas in the chalice vvas ſhedde for our ſinnes, and therefore conſequently, it was the real bloud of our Sauiour, which is plaine Papiſtrye and againſt our Communion booke. Is it ſo? Then to hell with your Communion booke, and you to, if that be ſo oppoſite to the Goſpel of Chriſt, & you dare mainteyne it by open checking and controling Chriſt the eternall wiſdome of God.
            
                And ſee what rouel we ſhal haue in
ſcripture,The Proteſtants by their example & practiſe, make the ſcripture more vncertaine and mutable then any wethercock if this vnchriſtian diuinitie go forward. And alwayes I deſyre the reader to remember, that I am by force conſtrayned to remaine in this baſe kinde of talkinge in ſo plaine a matter, againſt theſe enemies of Chriſt, that ſeeme to haue loſt the common

ſenſes of men. S. Iohn the Baptiſt beholding Chriſt ſaith: Ecce agnus dei, ecce quitollit peccata mundi.
               Iohn. 1. v. 29 
               Behold the lambe of God, Behold (the lambe) that taketh avvay the ſinnes of the vvorlde. Call S. Iohn to M. VVhitakers conſiſtorie, & he wil 
                  •••
               ke him recant his ſpeach. For firſt Chriſt is no lambe, becauſe he hath no woll on his backe. It is the ſelf ſame reaſon, which here is vſed againſt S. Luke, about the me
                  ••
               all of the chalice▪ Then being driuen from that, the adſurditie of tautologia ſtill remaineth. Behold this lambe is the lambe of God, what an idle ſpeache is this? what is this double lambe? therfore ſende it to Geneua to be caſt a new in Bezaes forge.Chriſo to 3. ſerm. de 
                     •
                  rin
                     •
                  tate. Gen. 19. v. 24. Victor de perſequutione Vandalic. li. 2. in ſine. Pſal. 66. The Catholiks of old time to proue diſtinction of perſons in the deitie, vſed that place of Geneſis, p
                     •
                  uit. d
                     •
                  
                  mi
                     •••
                   a
                     •
                   domino, our Lord rayned from our Lord: to proue the Trinity of perſōs, they vſed the place of the pſalme, Benedicat nos Deus Deus noſter, benedis at nos Deus. God our God bleſſe vs, our God bleſſe vs. This to a Trinitarian, is abſurda ſententia, and induceth a pluralitie of Gods. vvhereas S. Paule ſaith, vnus Deus, vnus Dom
                     •
                  nus o
                     ••
                   God,
               Epheſ. 4. 7.5. 
                     •
                  
                
               one Lord
               ▪ what remaineth thē, but that according to the arreſt of this, ſupreme

arbiter, we fall to newe caſting of the ſcripture, and ſo in ſhort ſpace (no doubt) we ſhal growe to perfectiō, that is, to the Turks Alcoran, if we be not come ſo farre already. The ſcriptures are full of ſuch abſurdities, which neuertheleſſe are abſurdities only to carnal cogitatiōs, to Sathan & Sathans miniſters:2. Co. 10. v. 
                     •
                  
                but to thē that haue learned in the ſchole of the holy Ghoſt, to ſubiect their vnderſtanding to the obedience of faith, they are nothing ſo. And M.W.If other heretikes ſhould do as Beza geueth them example. within a ſhort tyme we ſhould haue a ſtrāge Bible. if he had in him any droppe of religion & fayth, he ſhould thus thinke. Howſoeuer I can reconcile two or three Gods with one, the bloud ſhedd on the croſſe with that which was in the chalice, were it bloud or wine, let Chriſts wordes ſtande as he ſpake them and the Euangeliſt wrote them, and let vs afterward in the name of God, be we Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluiniſts, Trinitaries or Anabaptiſts, eche according to his priuate ſpirite, ſearch for the ſenſe as wel as we can. Chriſtes ſoule went downe to hell, ſaith our Creede and S. Luke. It is abſurde (ſayth Beza) and papiſticall,Actor. 2. and therefore for ſoule I haue tranſlated carcas, and for hell graue, whom in ſo doing the Engliſh congregation

approueth. That Chriſt aſcended into heauen, it is a fanſie of Ariſtotle and Mahomet ſayth Brentius,Brentius & the Vbiquitaries haue written many bookes againſt the arti
                     •
                  le of Chr
                     •
                  ſts Aſcenſion. and to the Lutherans, it is abſurda ſententia. ſhal they now leaue out that word, and put in the text, for aſcendit, euanuit or disparuit, he vanyſhed out of ſight in ſteede of he aſcended, which to them is the true and only ſenſe of the place, and which they may and ought to do by like reaſon and authoritie?
            
                But S. Baſil you ſay, readeth as you tranſlate. graunt he did ſo. but what tranſlate you?One or other father
                     •
                   reading▪ is no warrant for vs to alter the text of ſcripture. S. Baſil, or S. Luke? if S. Baſil, you haue done wel, to folovv your greeke copye. If S. Luke, then do you vvickedly to alter S. Luke vpon coniecture of one greeke doctor, all greeke copies and doctors being to the contrarie. And vvhat if S. Baſil in an other place reade otherwiſe? ſhal we not make a vviſe patching of ſcripture, if vpon euerie particular doctors citation vve alter the holie text? S. Aug. in many places, S. Bernard, and other good men dravv exhortatiōs for their frends, or monks, or people, and commonly they do it in the verie phraſe of ſcripture. yet becauſe they knitte together many ſentences of ſcriptures, that

be in diuers places, they muſt of neceſſitie adde ſome words or parcels of their owne. Nether is it material, if oftētimes they leaue out one worde or a fewe words. But if by ſuch authoritie we ſhould alter our text, we ſhould in ſhort ſpace haue ſo many texts, that in deed we ſhould haue no text, becauſe we ſhould haue no certaine text whereunto we might truſt. And why remember you not that, which in this ſelf ſame place M. Martin tolde you out of Beza, who noteth it to be the cuſtome of the auncient fathers in citing ſcriptures,Diſcou pag. 261. nu. 1
                     •
                  . 
               to alleage the ſenſe & not to ſticke preciſely vpō the words. And that therefore how ſoeuer they reade, that is no certaine rule to reforme or alter the vvordes of ſcripture.
            
            But here you make your aduantage of M. Martins words, and ſay,Whit. pa. 13. 
               if Baſil cited not the vvords, but the ſenſe of the ſcripture, thē Beza vvhen he ſo trāſlated, miſſed nothing of the ſenſe. ſo M. Martin doth novv plainly acquite Beza, vvhō before he accuſed. For if Baſils vvords geue a true ſenſe, and the interpretation of Beza and ours all agree vvith Baſils vvords, then your accuſation is falſe, that vve had corrupted the ſenſe of the ſcripture. Somewhat you ſaye, and this hath ſome appearance, more then any

thing that you haue ſayde hitherto:  yet you reache not home, and you are ouer haſty in your concluſion. S. Baſil geueth a true ſenſe I confeſſe, whether you reſpecte the particular matter whereunto he applyeth the place, or the generall doctrine of the catholike church. For his wordes are ſufficiēt for the one and the other. And ſo are the wordes in our vulgar Latin and Engliſh, and may well be taken as agreing with S.Luc. 22. v. 20 Baſil. hic est calix, nouum teſtamentum in ſanguine meo qui pro vobis fundetur. This is the chalice, the nevv testament in my bloud vvhich ſhall be ſhedde for you. And whoſoeuer readeth and taketh theſe later wordes, as referring them to the bloud of Chriſt ſhedde on the croſſe,Great difference betwene a Catholike reading indifferently one way or other, and an heretike chooſing preciſely one only way moſt ſeruing his herefie. he thinketh very well and truly and no man would euer finde fault with ſuch a ſenſe or citation, if it ſtayd there. For this nothing impayreth the other truth whereof we ſpeake, that the ſame bloud is in the chalice. But when there riſeth vp a new hereſie by one truth ouerthrowing an other, and by one part of the ſentence deſtroyng an other (as it fareth betwixt vs) this circumſtance ſo farre altereth the caſe, that the old father alleaging the text

without any thought or imagination of hereſie, did well and chriſtianlike, the new heretike enforcing the ſame in defence of hereſie, doth n
                  •
               ughtely & ſacrilegrouſly. as for example. If ſome good man as S. Baſil or S. Bernard, to induce his auditors to the loue of Chriſt, had vſed this ſentence of the Apoſtle.Tit. 3. ver. 5. 
               In this appeared the benignitie of our lord & ſauiour tovvards vs, that not by the vvorkes of iustice vvhich vve did, but of his infinite mercie he ſaued vs. This place according to the ſenſe, had bene well & trulye cited. For albeit infinite is not in the text, yet that is no hinderance to the meaning, and although I name not Chriſt god,
               In this ſort S. Peter 1. epiſt. c. 2. v. 6 citeth a place out of Eſai. 28. v. 16 yet nether that worde hindereth any thing, becauſe in a Chriſtian audience, it is all one to ſay our lord and ſauiour Chriſte, or our god and ſauiour Chriſte. But if there roſe vp ſome Neſtorian heretike, that ſhould diuide Chriſt from god, and make two perſons of this one ſauiour (from which hereſie Beza was not farre, Whit. cont. Cam. pa. 135 as you know) now this hereſie maketh that citatiō though otherwiſe good and ſound, yet not ſo perfect and abſolute, as it had bene to put in the worde god. Becauſe in this tyme, and againſt ſuch an heritike, the

place thus alleaged is more forcible, & S. Bernard erred not in citing the firſt, but this heretike playeth the verie heretike in preſsing it againſt the later. Take an other example, to make the thing more manifeſt. In S. Luke we reade that the angel thus ſpeaketh to our bleſſed Ladie.Luke. 1. v. 35 
               Spiritus ſanctus ſuperueniet in te etc. ideoque quod naſcetur ex te ſanctum, vocabitur filius dei: The holy Ghoſt ſhall come vpon thee &c. and therefore that vvhich of thee ſhall be borne holy, ſhall be called the ſonne of god. who doubteth but S. Bernard or S. Thomas, and ſome auncient copies, albeit they leaue out the wordes ex te, of thee, neuertheles meane the true and perfecte ſenſe of the place, that our Ladie through the power of the holy Ghoſt, cōceaued of her body, and brought forth the ſonne of god? Now ryſe your frindes the Ana baptiſtes, and amongeſt other hereſies ſpreade this, that Chriſt brought his fleſh from heauen, and tooke it not of our bleſſed Lady, but paſſed thorough her as water thorough a cundit pipe, or according to your auncient compariſon when you firſt began your goſpel, Chriſt was ſo in her, as ſaffron in a ſaffron bagge. And they being preſſed

with this place, anſwere as you āſwere for Beza, that the true reading is to leaue out thoſe two ſyllables ex te, and ſo the place proueth nothing. And this they would proue by better argument then you pretend any, hauing for them ſome auncient copies both greeke and latin, beſides the reading of more fathers then one. Can not you in this caſe eaſily conceaue, how thoſe fathers and writers gaue a true ſenſe and far from the Anabaptiſticall hereſie, and yet the Anabaptiſts are wicked heretiks in vrging this correction of the text? why ſo? becauſe the fathers ſpake truly, and meant entierly the full truth, although the ſenſe be not ſo full and abſolute to all purpoſes, and in euerie reſpecte. namely of this new hereſie (whereof theſe fathers neuer dreamed) as is the text it ſelfe in his naturall ſtrength and force, put downe in thoſe words and ſyllables as it was firſt by the holy Euangeliſt: the Anabaptiſtes ſpeake falſly and meane deteſtably, when by that alteration they will ſeeme to confirme their hereſie & take from the Catholike church ſo good a groūd refelling the ſame, which thoſe other fathers neuer entended.

This is your very caſe, and ſo S. Baſil meant truly and ſimply, and as a Sainte and a Chriſtian, though Beza and you deale in the ſelfe ſame matter, falſely, and ſubtilly, and as it becommeth heretikes.
            
                And yet one ſtep farther, vvhen you haue done & ſpoke al, al that ye doe & ſpeake,Bezaes corruption inexcuſable, for ought M. W. ether hath ſaid, or can ſay. is nothing to the purpoſe. For ſuppoſe ye ſin
                  •
               e many Baſils, and many greeke copies reading as you vvould haue it, yet ſhall you be neuer for al that able to iuſtifie Beza, becauſe he cōfeſſeth, vvhen he ſo tranſlated he neuer ſavv any, and therefore vvas not moued by any ſuch reading. And therfore your p
                  •
               ying & ſearching for fyg-leaues to couer his filthines,Geneſ. 3. can no more ſerue the turne, then if a man ſhould excuſe Iudas for betrayng Chriſt, by reaſon of the good, vvhich came thereby to the redemption of mankinde. Becauſe vvhatſoeuer vvas the euent of that actiō, he ſinned th
                  •
               rin damnably vvho regarded no ſuch matter, but only for malice and gayne of xxx. pence, ſold his lord and maiſter. and the ſelfe ſame is to be ſaide of this Iudas, vvhoſe honeſtie you vvould ſo fayne ſane. For vvhatſoeuer may be

the ſucceſſe of your labours in this argument, he certainely plaid therein the parte of a damnable corruptor of gods holy vvord, vvho for malice againſt the truth and loue of his hereſie, vvithout any ſuch knovvledge committed ſo ſacrilegious an acte.
            And the reaſon vvhich you make,Wh. pag. 23. helpeth the matter neuer a vvhit, but ſo muche the more diſcouereth your folly. Thus you argue.M.W. argument. 
               If by the cuppe you vnderſtande (not the cuppe it ſelfe, but) the bloud of Christe in the cuppe, is not this a trope? vvhy then are you offended vvith vs, vvhen you your ſelues graunt that there is a trope in theſe vvords? Is it lavvfull for you to inuent tropes, & is it vnlavvfull for vs to appoint one neceſſarie trope?
               The vanitie thereof. Whereunto I anſvvere, firſt that this is alſo from the purpoſe. For be your Zuinglian hereſie moſt true, as it is moſte falſe, it furthereth you nothing, nor abbettereth his raſhnes in altering the text. For vve may not make the ſcripture ſpeake euerie truth in euerie place, much leſſe may vve make it ſpeake vile hereſie in any place. Then, the forme of your reaſoning is ſo loſe, that if a man vvould ſtudie for an argument to make ſport vvithall, he could not

deuiſe one more fond and ridiculous.
            We allovv of a trope, vvhen vve interprete the cuppe to be the bloud, or the thing conteyned in the cuppe.
            Ergo vve ought to allovv your trope, in the other parte of the ſentence, that the bloud ſhed for vs, ſhould ſignifie a cuppe of vvine.
            What vvit, reaſon, probabilitie, or ſenſe, induceth you ſo to talke? vvhence riſeth the coherence and connexion of this conſequent? Is it this, becauſe in one part of the ſētence there is a trope or figure, therefore the other part is figuratiue alſo? as for example. S.Gal. 2. v. 19. Paule ſayth, by the lavv I am dead to the lavv, vvith Christ I am nayled to the croſſe.
               Rom. 6. v. 13 and agayne. VVe that are baptiſed, are buried together by baptiſme in to death vvith Chriſt. in vvhich ſentence the Apoſtle ioyneth tvvo ſeuerall truthes, in the firſt, Chriſt vvas nayled to the croſſe, and I am nayled to the croſſe vvith him. in the next, Chriſt vvas buried, and vve that are baptiſed, are buried vvith him. Novv is this your argument. S. Paule vvas nayled to the croſſe myſtically, and this a trope. ergo Chriſt vvas nayled to the croſſe in ſuch maner, and that is alſo a trope & vvhen the baptiſed are

ſayd to be buried vvith Chriſt, it is a figure. ergo that Chriſt vvas buried, is likevviſe a figure. If this be the knitting of your argumēt, you ſee vvhat pith is in it. Or is it, becauſe of one particular figure you may infer an other? then alſo you haue your aunſvvere, geuen you partly in that vvhich is hovv ſayd, partly before by your father Luther,See before pag. 220. that it is as ſubſtantiall a reaſon, as if I ſhould ſaie: Peter vvas an Apoſtle, ergo Pilate vvas an Apoſtle. the bleſſed virgin brought forth and remained a virgin, ergo Sara did ſo. Or meane you that your trope hath as good reaſō to ſupport it, as hath ours?Infinite difference betwene the figure of the Catholikes and that of the heretikes. if ſo, vve geue you infinite difference, becauſe vpon our trope, to vvitte, that the cuppe, that is, the mettall, could not be ſhed or powred out, and therefore the wordes muſt needes be vnderſtood of the thing conteyned in the cuppe, all Catholikes now liuing, all Catholikes from Chriſtes time, all heretikes though otherwiſe moſt peruerſe & obſtinate enemies of the truth, Lutherans, Zuinglians, Anabaptiſtes, of any ſecte & faſhion, all creatures indued with witt and reaſon, man woman and childe agree, and (as Beza confeſſeth)

it is a trope vulgar and vſuall to all languages and nations. But vpon your trope, where you interprete the bloud of Chriſt by wine, and refer the later part, not to that which was in the chalice, and ſo deny the reall preſence, no Catholike now liuing, no Catholike euer liuing agreed, the church of God from the beginning hath abhorred it, the very grāmat & grāmatical cōſtruction refelleth it, your owne brethren deteſte it, Luther & the Lutherans condemne it, yea the Sacramentaries them ſelues many of thē, account it a very dull and blunt euaſion, ſo far forth, that Caroloſtadius the firſt father of your Sacramentarie hereſie, (though he be not commonly ſo eſteemed) thoughte it a more cleanly expoſitiō, to ſay that Chriſt referred thoſe worde
                  •
                
               hic eſt corpus meum,
               Caroloſt, expoſition of Chriſtes words, hoc eſt corpus meum. 
               hic est ſanguis meus, to him ſelf ſittinge at the table as if Chriſt had ſayd: iccipite, manducat
                     •
                  , take ye, and eate, and be merie, for I am he that muſt die for al. And Hulderike Zuinglius that moſt excellent man ſent from God vvith Luther to lighten the vvhole vvorld, by the iudgement of your Engliſh church,Apol. Angl part. 4. ca. 4. ¶. 2. is ſo vncertaine of your trope, that he alloweth wel of this expoſition, and geueth

you good leaue to folow it, and it was allowed of many thouſand Sacramentaries beſides him. Touching Zuinglius, his wordes are euident. Caroloſtadius pius homo, &c.
               Zuing. tom. 2. in epiſt. ad Matth. Rutlin. de coena fol. 255. 
               Caroloſtadius that godly man (ſaith Zuinglius) doth interprete the vvordes of the ſupper, as though Chriſt had directed them not to the bread, but to him ſelf, ſayng, take, eate, for I vvill deliuer this body for you. This interpretation he proueth,
               Scripture applied by heretikes to proue any thing be it neuer ſo abſurd. 
               becauſe the prophetes foretell that Chriſt ſhould be crucified, &c. And after many places of ſcripture brought to proue this expoſition, he geueth in his owne iudgement thus. Ego hominis pii laudo induſtriam, de fide gratulor, hanc Caroloſtadii ſententiam qui probauer it, nos minime offendet. I commēd the diligence of this godly man, I praiſe the lord for his faith, if any man vvil folovv this his opinion, I ſhal lyke vvel of it. So that, great is the difference betwene our trope and yours, as great as is betwene our doctrine and yours, that is as great, as is betwene truth and falſhod, light and darknes, heauen and hel: and therefore except you furniſh it with better reaſons then this, your figure wil remaine a poore, beggerly, heretical ſhift, deuiſed by a few of one ſect, and contemned by many of the

ſame ſecte, and infinite of other ſectes, when ours ſhal ſtand accounted a certaine truth, not only to Catholikes & heretikes of al ſorts, but alſo to al men endewed with cōmon wit or reaſon.
            And this is all that M.W. bringeth for the defence of Beza wherein after a number of faultes, errors, ignorances, impieties, he hath ſo behaued himſelfe, that he hath lea
                  •
               t the matter worſe then he foūde it. ſo that in the next writing, he hath not ſo much to labour for Beza, ſo Lucifer like controling the Euangeliſt in one worde, as he hath to ſhift for him ſelfe, vvho in a greater peece and more important, hath ſo damnably and deteſtably thvvarted the ſame Euangeliſt and our B. ſauiour, and like a playne Atheiſt worſe then Beza; hath more defaced that firſt and principal part this is the nevv teſtament in my bloud: this ſpeach of our Lord and ſauiour he hath reproued I ſay, of 
                  
                     •
                  aur
                     •
                  
                  logia, vayne repetition, and abſurd conſequence. How much better and more honeſt had it bene for him and Beza both, to haue folowed the ſober counſaile of their father Martin Luther.Luther tom. 7. defenſio verborū coen. fo. 411. 
               I go v
                     ••
                  o (ſaith he) de iris Sacramentariis hoc ſanc ſuaderent &c. I truly would geue the doting

Sacramentaries this aduiſe,
               Luth. ſage counſel to the Sacramentaries in this caſe. 
               that ſeing they vvill needes be madde, let them play the mad men rather vvholy, then in parte. Therefore vvhereas they muſt aduenture ſomevvhat, let them make ſhort vvorke, and raze altogether out of the ſupper thoſe vvords, this is my body vvhich is geuen for yovv. For touching their faith and celebration of their ſupper, they haue no neede of theſe vvords, but it is all one, if thus they keapte it: Christ tooke bread, gaue thankes, brake it, and gaue it to his diſciples, ſayng, take, eate, do this in my remembrance. For this proueth ſufficiently, that bread is to be eaten in remēbrance of Christ. This is the vvhole and entier ſupper of the ſacramentaries. And then to vvhat end keepe they in the booke, that other ſuperfluous and vnprofitable text?
            
            Yea as though he had foreſeene this deſperate boldnes whereunto the Zuinglians are now growen, he before hand euen particularly and in the ſelf ſame words, warneth vs of theſe very reaſōs, or rather peeuiſh and ſhameles aſſertions, which Beza and M. W. throw forth for ſingular & mightie argumēts againſt this clauſe of S. Lukes Goſpel. For what is Bezaes demonſtration againſt the later part, qui pro uobis fūditur, with which he is ſo offended? forſooth

this:Beza in Luc. 2
                     •
                  . verſ. 20. 
               aut manifeſtum eſt ſolacophanes, aut potius quum haec eſſent ad marginem annotata ex Mat. & Mar. poſtea in cōtextum irrepſerunt. Ether there is ſome manifeſt fault in the Greeke, or (vvhich I ſuppoſe rather) vvhereas theſe vvords vvere noted in the margent out of Matthevv and Marke, aftervvards they creapt in to the text. And what ſaith Luther of this?Luther vbi ſupra fo. 411 Thus he ſpeaketh to the Sacramentaries. Quid inepti, nihilne conſilii habetis &c.
               Luther thought it vnpoſsible that the Sacramētaries would euer grow to ſuch abſurditie as now they defend 
               vvhat ye fooles, haue ye no vvitte? you muſt venture. Dicite verba illa primum margini aſcripta, poſtea vero ab aliquo textui inſerta, ſay that thoſe vvordes vvere firſt vvritten in the margent, and then by ſome odde felovv thruſt in to the text, and not vvritten ſo by the Euangeliſt, ſeing you haue a ſure rule to proue al this: and your rule is,
               A good rule 
               that that is not true, vvhatſoeuer ſeemeth ſuperfluous and vnprofitable vnto you. And what is M.W. argumēt againſt the firſt parte, this (cup) is my bloud of the nevv teſtament? Mary that this implyeth an abſurde ſentence, it is tautologia, an idle repetition.
               Ibid. And what ſaith Luther of this? vvhereas thoſe vvordes, that ſhevv the real preſence of the bodie and bloud, haue nought to do in the Sacramentaries ſupper, eodem modo his quoque argumentari licet, mera tautologia eſt haec verba in cana poni. They

might do very vvel here alſo to make this argument, that it is tautologia, a vaine repetition, to put theſe vvords in the ſupper, and therefore they ought not to haue any place there, vvhereas the ſupper vvithout them is deſcribed, vſed and practiſed fully and perfitly, and no man can ſhevv any reaſon or neceſſitie vvhy they ſhould be there.
            
            This is the proceeding of the Zuingliā goſpel. that which their eternal enemie ſpake in ſcorne and deriſion, as a thing ſo ridiculous & abſurd, that they would neuer admitte for ſhame, that haue theſe good felowes without ſhame now receaued in good ſooth & ſadnes. Wherfore to help them forward, if M. W. will take a litle paynes in ſearching old copies, perhaps he may finde ſome one or other, at leſt ſome aunciēt father, that readeth as Luther wiſheth thē to reade. And to geue him an entrance, let him looke in S. Baſil,Baſil. in ethic. reg. 
                     •
                  1. cap. 4. the next chapiter to that which he citeth, and he ſhall find him to reade thus. Caenantibus illis accepit Ieſus panē &c. vvhiles they vvere at ſupper, Ieſus tooke bread, and bleſſed, and brake, & gaue it to his diſciples. And then leauing out the reſt, putteth next, et hymno dicto, exierunt in montem oliuarum. and hauing ſayd an hymne, they vvent forth to

mount Oliuet. And perhaps if Beza liue to ſette forth his teſtamēt once againe, well it may be with ſome good aduiſe of ſuch brethrē, he wil leaue the words cleane out of the booke, or put in one ſyllable more (non) and ſo mende all, as he hathe done in ſome other places vpon as ſmale reaſon as this, as writeth Gabriel Fabricius: whoſe words to cō
               clude withall, I wil ſett downe in latin, becauſe you ſhal perceaue, that ſome man hath written againſt him, whoſe tonge Beza vnderſtandeth wel inough. The booke is intituled,Gabrielis Fabricii reſponſio ad Bezam Vezeliam Eceboliam. fol. 17. 
               Gabriel is Fabricii Reſponſio ad Bezam Vezeliam Eceboliam, printed at Paris an. 1567. In that booke amōgſt many other notable things, thus he writeth. Id agis, haec verba toties repetita, (hoc eſt corpus meum) perinde accipiēda eſſe ac ſi dictum ſcriptūquè eſſet, hoc non eſt corpus meum. Et fortaſſe vt tandem te expedias, et tot commentariorum plauſtra faceſsere iubeas, recurres ad talem emendationem. Et quia nostri correctores dicunt in ipſis etiā Pandectis Florentinis ſaepe deeſse negationem, tu tali artificio, ſtatim te liberes, et aduerſariis os obstruas, praeſertim cum alios multos euangeliorum locos ſimiliter ſcilicet emendaueris, partim ex coniectura, partim ex manuſcriptis (vt ais) exemplaribus. You labour to ſhevve

that thoſe vvords ſo oftē repeated (this is my body) are to be taken as though it had bene ſpoken and vvritten, this is not my body. & perhaps at length, that you may ridde your ſelfe, and diſpatch out of the vvay theſe cartloades of commentaries, you vvill flye to ſuch a kinde of correction. And becauſe our correctors ſaye, that in the very lavv bookes of Florence,
               Bezaes maner in correcting the teſtament. 
               oftentymes there vvanteth a negatiue particle, you alſo vvill vſe ſuch a ſhift to ſtoppe the mouth of your aduerſaries, eſpecially vvhereas you haue already corrected in like ſort very learnedly, many places of the goſpels, partly by coniecture, partly by hand-vvritten copies, as you tell vs. Some ſuch corrected copies if M. W. cā finde againſt the next time, it wil eaſe him of much labour & put vs to much trouble. In the meane ſeaſon, this I dare promiſe him, he ſhall neuer ſcoure his coate cleane from thoſe ſpottes with which in this defence of Beza he hath fouly ſtayned and ſoyled him ſelfe, ſo longe as the old copies of S. Lukes goſpell ſtande in force.
         
         
            CHAP. XI. M.VV. general anſvvere to the booke of Diſcouerie, and of the notable impietie committed by the tranſlatours of the Engliſh Bibles.
            
               
               AFTer theſe particular controuerſies and reprehēſions M. W. commeth now to make a general anſwere vnto M. Martyns Diſcouery, which although it be verie ſhort, yet is it verie ſweete, to the ſingular commendation of their Engliſh trāſlations. The ſumme is, that al is wel, nothing amiſſe, euery word ſtandeth right, ſo as he marueleth that M. Mart. was not aſhamed ſo notably to publiſh his owne ignorance & vnſkilfulnes to all the world. Thus he writeth.Whit. pa. 14. 
               Albeit heretofore I liked vvell our tranſlations, yet novv I loue them much more, vvhereas I ſee ſo fevv faultes, & thoſe ſo ſmale & trifling can be found out and reproued euē of our enemies. For vvhat aduerſary vvas there euer ſo blynded with malice that can not perceaue our tranſlations to be diſallovved of you, vvithout iudgment, learning, or reaſon? 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
vve tranſlate ſometimes inſtructions, ſometimes ordināces, ſometimes preceptes. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
images, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
congregation, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
an elder, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
to amend our liues, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
miſterie or ſecrete, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
thankeſgeuing, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
freely be loued, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
god is not tempted vvith euil. He muſt take and allow in like maner 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
carcas, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
graue, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
table &c.Ibid. 
               VVhat is there here that a man can find fault vvithall as not tranſlated vvel and truly? and vvho vvil not iudge him a reprehender to vvicked & importune, vvho vvhen he can finde no greater thing, for theſe faults, vvhich are none at al, pronounceth that al the vulgar trāſlations of our churches are to be reiected & condemned? Haec et iſt iuſmodi nugae, noſtra crimina ſunt. Theſe & the like trifles are our faultes. This is M.W. defence of their Engliſh tranſlatiōs, or rather a frendly aſſertiō, that al things in thē are very wel, & therefore the whole booke of the Diſcouerie is a peeuiſh deuiſe of M. Martin, proceeding only of malice, without iudgment, learning or reaſon.
            To ſhew the falſitie and malitious wickednes of the heretikes in tranſlating theſe verie wordes ſo, were to make an other booke, and it is ſo well done by M. Martin touching euery particular, notwithſtanding any replye yet made, that to hādle the ſame againe were to caſt water into the Terns, or light a candel at noone daye.  Only this will I ſay in general and proue it, that M. Whitaker in affirming thus much, ſheweth him ſelfe not only to
be voide of wit, learning and common

                ſenſe, but alſo to be void of ſhame and modeſtie,  that he litle differeth from an Atheiſt or Sadducee,  that he is more hard-faced then the moſt reprobate heretikes of this age, the worſt of his owne brethren.
            
                And firſt, what wit or learning will allow him amonge Chriſtians to tranſlate 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               an image, or amonge Pagans 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               a carcas, more then miniſter talking of the Engliſh miniſters a ſlaue or homo a dog. He wil ſay, that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
by his primitiue ſignification and deriuation may ſo ſignifie. Doth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
ſo ſignifie a carcas? But leaue we the ſecond, talke we of the firſt, and in that of al other where is like reaſon. I wil not enter in to any new or ſerious diſputatiō touching this vſing or abuſing of wordes: when, by what authoritie, and how far, ſuch mutation is neceſſarie, or allowable. Only reſting my ſelf vpon the Proteſtants common and vulgar kind of diſputing, that is, vpon the firſt and original deriuation and ſignification of Eccleſiaſtical words, I wil by manifeſt and plaine examples taken from their vſe and practiſe, ſhew how abſurd and vnreaſonable their dealing is in this behalfe. Vpon this ground, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
ſay you is wel tranſlated image, and hereupon becauſe we geue reuerence to images, which reuerence is wel expreſſed by the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
(for the diſtinction betwene 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
is nothing, ſaith M. D. Humfrey, and he refuteth it at large in his booke of M.L. Humfred. in vita Iuelli. pag. 145.146. &c. Iuels life: & the reſt of the proteſtants of that ſecte, commonly are of the ſame iudgement) therefore we are condēned of you iuſtly as Idololatrae, Idolaters for geuing honour & reuerēce to ſacred images which in greeke are called Idols. Let vs note now whether this Idolatrie turne not on your owne head. Honor not you the Quene in her images,The Proteſtants idolaters. in her cloth & chayre of eſtate, in her maces, in her ſeales and letters, in keeping holie her Natiuitie & Aſſumption to the crowne? I ſomewhat diſaduantage my ſelfe, for perhaps this in deede draweth neere to true Idolatrie. But let it paſſe with the reſt. The Proteſtantes geue honour to the images of the Quene. Images and idols are al one, ergo the Proteſtantes are idolaters. Or more briefelie and plainelie thus. Euerie prince in his realme is an image of the true god, that is, and idol of the true god. Ergo the Proteſtantes in that they

worſhip & ſerue their princes, worſhip & ſerue idols, and ſo by M.W. iudgment are Idolaters.
               Examples, wherein the Proteſtants may conſider their owne fault in prophaning eccleſiaſtical word
                     •
                  . Againe, church you ſaie is vvel expreſſed by congregation. What is congregatiō
                in greeke? 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vvhich being a vvord made Engliſh by cuſtome as vvel as congregation, it can not be any error to vſe that in place of congregation. and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in greeke, is ſuperintendent or ouerſeer in Engliſh, & both theſe tranſlations are vſed & iuſtified by your Engliſh bibles. Novv if your knovvledge be ſo good in the Engliſh as I take it, you can not be ignorant that an ouerſeer is as properlie and vſuallie expreſſed in our language by this word ſurueyer,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
ſupra videre to ſuruey. which commeth directly from ſupra videre, to ouerſee. And vvhat of al this? Forſooth that it is no error, vvhen vve talke of the byſhops of the Engliſh church or congregation, to vvhom you dedicated your latin tranſlation of M. Ievvel, if vve ſay you dedicated it to the moſt reuerend ſurueyers of the Engliſh ſynagoge. Euangelium the goſpel, in greeke you wot vvel vvhat it ſignifieth, good nevves or tidinges, and teſtamentum in hebrevv and greeke, is in Engliſh and latin couenant,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               foedus as Beza commōly trāſlateth it, inſcribing both

his Teſtaments the greater and leſſer printed the yeare 1565, Ieſu Christi nouum Teſtamentum ſiue foedus. as properly a bible is nothing els but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               a booke, for it is the ſelfe ſame vvord. If ſo, then vvhen one commeth to you, and bringeth you good nevves and tidings that a benefice is befallen yovv, yovv may ſay, he bringeth you the goſpel of a benefice, or vvhen your farmer receaueth of you a leaſe vvith a nevv couenant, he receaueth a leaſe vvith a nevv testament, and Lucians Dialogues, becauſe they are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , therefore they are a bible, almoſt as good as yours.
            But in one example to ſhevv, hovv voyde of ſenſe & vnderſtanding yovv proue your ſelfe in this diſcourſe, by like reaſon in euery reſpect as you can iuſtifie the aforeſaid vvordes, you may and muſt iuſtifie the tranſlation of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               vvaſhing, as wel as 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               thankeſgeuing, the vſe of Baal for dominus, lord, for it ſignifieth ſo preciſely in the hebrevv,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                whence commeth Baalzebub, the idol of Accaron called in contempt, yet according to the true original, and primitiue ſignification of the vvord dominus muſcae, lord of a flye 4. Reg. 1. And vvhat ſignifieth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               diabolus
               
in greeke? vvord for vvord calumniator, a ſlaunderer. And angeli 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
meſſē
                  gers, as you tranſlate it, Heb. 1. v. 7. and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
vvynde, tranſlated likewiſe ſo by yow, Ioan. 3. v. 8. and Chriſt 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               the anointed both in greeke and hebrew,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                vſed ſo by yow in ſundrie places of the bible. Theſe being all alike, ſo as you can not find any exception to diſproue any ſillable, and ſo al approued by your Engliſh tranſlations, which now you loue more then euer you did, becauſe they are found to be without al fault, let vs ſuppoſe in our grandfathers time, ſome Catholike prieſt or Byſhop in our realme to haue exhorted his people to charitie, deuotion, & reformation of their liues. Suppoſe he ſpake vnto them in this ſorte.
            I that am your prieſt & biſhop, placed in this church by the holy Ghoſt for the feeding of your ſovvles, do denounce vnto you in the name of Chriſt our Lord, that except you with more deuotion come to receaue the B. Sacrament, and performe better your promiſe made to God in baptiſme, you ſhal be bodie and ſovvle condemned to hell: your portion ſhal be with the deuils, I ſay with Beelzebub and his angels. The meaning of

this, euery Chriſtian doth know, and no doubt it might, and I thinke would moue a Chriſtian audience. Let vs now after your tranſlations, turne the ſame into the phraſe and ſtile of the new goſpel, and ſee how it wil ſound. Let vs ſuppoſe ſome of your youthful miniſters or ſuperintēdēts to make the ſame exhortatiō. Thē thus muſt it rūne.
            I that am your elder or ſurueyer and ſuperintendent, placed in this ſynagoge by the holy vvynd, for the feeding of your carcaſſes, do denounce vnto you in the name of the Anointed our Baal, that except yow with more deuotion come to receaue the thankeſgeuing, and performe better your promiſe made to God in vvaſhing, you ſhal be condemned bodie and carcas to the graue, with the ſlaunderers, I ſay with the Lord of a flye and his meſsengers. How deepely this would ſinke into the hartes of your Euangelical auditorie, let their owne conſcience be iudge. But touching you, if you continue as you here begin, and ſay, al this goeth wel, there is no fault in it, I appeale to common ſenſe whether you haue not as litle wit and capacitie, as euer man that bare the name of a Chriſtian Diuine.
            
               
                I ſay conſequently, that hereof it foloweth you haue no ſhame nor modeſtie.The abuſe of eccleſiaſtical words, the ruine of al religion. For vvhat Chriſtian, had he ether of theſe, would not at the firſt warning, reuoke or moderate ſo groſſe & filthie abſurdity, whereby muſt needes folow the contempt, and plaine euacuation of the whole Church, of the ſacramēts, of religion, of Chriſt? for if the euchariſt be rightly expreſſed by thankeſgeuing, & bapt
                     •
                  ſme by vvaſhing &c. then when a man with thankeſgeuing hath bene at a good breakefaſt, he hath bene at the euchariſt, and when one of your miniſters goeth to be vvaſſhed & trimmed at the barbers, he goeth to baptiſme. But what ſpend I words in ſuch vanitie? Shortly thus I ſay, he that can ſwalow downe ſuch Camels as theſe,Mat. 23. v. 24 and auouch ſuch tranſlations to be faultles, and vnworthy of reprehenſiō,Pag. 15. & forthwith condē
               neth the late tranſlation ſet forth in this Colledg as the moſt corrupt that euer vvas made ſithence the vvorld vvas created (for ſo he ſpeaketh) againſt which him ſelf with al his ſearch and prying obiecteth only tvvo faultes, and the ſame not in the thing nether, but both of thē riſing of his ether malice or ignorance, vvhether this mans face and forhead be

made of commō matter, and not rather of ſome harder mettal, ſuch as the Prophete Eſay deſcribeth,Eſa. 48. v. 4. 
               frons aerea frons tua, I leaue to the wiſdome of the diſcreete reader.
            
                Then that he is a very Atheiſt and
Sadducee, bringing in doubt the immortalitie of the ſowle & reſurrectiō of the body, this alſo is as cleere and manifeſt. For if this be admitted,To approue the Engliſh tranſlations is to approue plain Atheiſme & deny God. that vvhen we reade in the latin & greeke, that the ſovvle goeth to hell, the Engliſh without ſtaggering may turne it as the true meaning and ſenſe, that the carcas, or life, or ſovvle is put in the graue, and M. W. as principal profeſſor in diuinitie, by ſupreme cenſure confirme ſuch tranſlation, where ſhal we haue warrant to proue the immortalitie of the ſowle, the laſt iudgement, the place of hel, & the eternal paines thereof? See (Chriſtian reader) for thy owne ſake this corruption in the Diſcouerie,Diſcou▪ ca. 
                     •
                   nu. 1.2.3.4. where thou ſhalt find the cauſes mouing the heretikes thus to do.  And this fault is ſo palpable and monſtruous, that the very heretikes them ſelues, I ſay his owne
maiſters and brethren,Proteſtant
                     •
                  diuines againſt the Engliſh trāſlations. yea thoſe of his owne Vniuerſitie & perhaps acquaintance, find fault with his pure and faultles

bibles, and flatly pronounce that they leade men the high way to verie Atheiſme, worſe then Gentilitie, or the ſchole of Epicure.
            Caſtalio in his notes vpon the Teſtament againſt Beza, after many reaſons alleaged,Caſtal. defenſ. contra Bezam. pag. 189. concludeth, that vvhereas in our common Creed Chriſt is ſaid to haue bene firſt buried, and then to haue gone dovvne to hell, here manifeſtlie hel and the graue are diſtinguiſhed. vvherefore it vvere far better in ſuch hard and obſcure places, religiouſly to ſpeake as becommeth an interpreter of the holy Ghoſt, then vvhiles vve vvil ſeeme to knovv al thing, to ſhut vp the vvay to the truer ſenſe, if perhaps aftervvards vve aſpire to more knovvledge. And Flacius Illyricus by diligent comparing of the partes & wordes of the text, refelling at large al Bezaes fooliſh and blind argumentes,Illyric. in Clau. part. 1. in verbo infernus. pag. 598.603.604.605. ſetteth this downe as a more aſſured veritie. Non eſt dubium quin 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
Sheol, ſepulchrum, infernus, hic pro ipſiſsimo loco aeterni exitii ponatur. There is no question, but the hebrevv vvord Sheol here ſignifieth the verie place of hel.
            
            
               See D. Hum. iudgement after, in the 14. chap.But what neede I to go ſo far as Germanie for authoritie, whereas there are of your owne Vniuerſities, D. Humfrey for Oxford, & an other for Cambridge,

of which, the one refuteth learnedly your impietie, the other inueigheth eagerly againſt your paſsing impudency in this behalf: though the partie whom I meane, in any other thing ſeeme as far gone as you. Reade M. Carliles Diſputation which publikely he mainteined in your Vniuerſitie, and printed this laſt yere, directly againſt the Apoſtolike Creede, againſt Chriſts deſcending in to hel, and ſee whether he proueth not that of yow which I ſaie. In one place thus he writeth. Iob c. 33. v.
               Carlile in his booke, that Chriſt went not downe to hel. fol. 144. 22. it is ſaid, than man dravveth neere to the graue and his life to the dead. The Engliſh bibles haue. The ſovvle dravveth to the graue and life to the buriers.
               The Engliſh tranſlations draw men to thinke that Chriſts ſoule periſhed. 
               vvhat a tranſlation is this, to ſaye, that a mans ſovvle dravveth to the graue? do our ſovvles go to the graue? can a ſovvle corrupt? do not al that go to the graue putrifie? why ſhould they tranſlate the text thus? Thus he. whereof it foloweth, that our Engliſh tranſlators in ſteede of hel geuing vs the graue, & placing our Sauiours ſowle there, teach that it did corrupt and periſh. Yet M. W. ſaith, al is wel, this is no fault, although by this his owne doctors verdite, they ſay & teach that our Sauiours ſowle periſhed euerlaſtingly. Againe

Dauid pſal.
               Ibid. fo. 117. 30. geueth god thankes for his health vvhich he had recouered, and therefore ſaith. O lord, I thanke thee that thou haſt deliuered me from the graue. And this place alſo haue they (in their Engliſh tranſlations) hitherto corrupted,
               O ſingular puritie of the Engliſh Bibles. 
               depraued the ſenſe, obſcured the truth, deceaued the ignorant, and ſupplanted the ſimple. for it is Sheol vvhich they tranſlate, hel. The Geneua bible hath thus.
               Againſt the immortalitie of the ſoule. 
               Thovv haſt brought vp my ſovvle out of the graue. And the greateſt bible. Thovv haſt raiſed my ſovvle vp from the graue. VVhat a tranſlation is this? to ſay that the ſovvle is incloſed in the graue and buried vvith the body, vvhich is an impietie to imagine?
               Ibid. fo. 120. One place more I vvil note out of the ſame vvriter. Pſ. 86. vvhē Dauid vvas in great daunger of death by Saul, and deliuered, he geueth god thankes vvho had deliuered him from preſent death and from the graue. The Geneua bible tranſlateth it thus.
               So tranſlateth the Bible of the yere 1579. 
               Thovv haſt deliuered my ſovvle frō the lovveſt graue. vvherein they offend. For nether can the immortal ſovvle of man be incloſed in a graue, nether a ſpiritual thing in a corporal place. The greateſt bible tranſlateth it thus.
               The Engliſh tranſlations leade men to deteſtable errors. 
               Thovv haſt deliuered my ſovvle from the lovveſt part of hel. VVhereon they ground a deteſtable error, that they ſhould thinke that Dauid a man of perfect faith, of ſingular

vertues, and ſuch a one as vvas vvritten in the booke of life, ſhould imagine that he ether ſhould or could go to hell. Much more hath he againſt your bibles vvhich you ſo loue as being perfect and immaculate, and by verie many plaine demonſtrations proueth them to be ſo filthelie corrupted, as they rather reſemble Mahomets Alcoran, then the vvord of the holie Ghoſt, and theſe fevv (to ſay the truth) proue it ſufficiently. Wherefore vpon theſe faults and many other ſuch, common in the greateſt bible,
               Ibid, fo. 116. 
               and the bible printed at Geneua, he inferreth againſt your tranſlations and tranſlators vvith great vehemencie, more then M. Martin euer vſed, that in many places they detort the ſcriptures from the right ſenſe, they ſhevv them ſelues to loue darkenes more then light, & falſehode more then truth.
            
            Novv tovvching particulars, I thinke it needeles to ſtand vpō euerie word ſo cōfidentlie allovved by M.W. Becauſe M. Mart. ſhevveth by good reaſon the vvickednes of the heretikes in the deuiſing of them, & his reaſons ſtād as yet vnanſwered. Yet becauſe M.W. ſimple mā thinketh there is no more daūger in ſuch alteration, then if a man ſhould in

tranſlating of Plato or Zenophon vſe the like libertie, and turne 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               gratiarum actio, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               a ſecret, let him learne of Beza vvhom he ſo aduaū
               ceth,Bezaes true iudgment, what harme is like to enſue by abuſing eccleſiaſtical words. what daunger enſueth of ſuch noueltie. Beza much deteſting in others that fantaſtical and impious vanitie (though he could not perceaue the ſame in him ſelfe) thus vvriteth againſt thē. The vvorld is novv come to that paſſe,
               Beza in Act. c. 10. ver. 46. edit. anno 1556. He (or the printer) hath altered ſome part of theſe words in the later editiō an. 1565. 
               that not they only vvho vvrite their ovvne diſcourſes, refuſe the familiar & accuſtomed wordes of ſcripture, as obſcure, vnſauery, & out of vſe, but alſo thoſe that trāſlate the ſcripture out of greeke in to latin, challenge vnto them ſelues the like libertie. So as vvhiles euerie man vvil rather freely folovv his ovvne iudgemēt, then religiouſly behaue him ſelfe as the holy Ghoſts interpreter, many things they do not conuert, but peruert. For vvhich licentiouſnes and boldnes except remedy be prouided in tyme, ether I am notablie deceaued, or vvithin fevv yeres, in ſteede of Chriſtians vve ſhal become Ciceronians, (that is Gentiles) and by litle and litle, ſhal leeſe the poſſeſſion of the thinges them ſelues. In theſe vvordes Beza teacheth yovv, that this vvanton noueltie of placing ſecretes for ſacraments, and meſſengers for angels, and ambaſſadours for Apoſtles, and vvaſhing
               
for Baptiſme, and thankeſgeuing for Euchariſt, and ſo forth, vvil come to this end,Chaunge of words induceth chaūge of fayth. that in fine yovv vvil vvith the vvordes take avvay the thinges ſignified, Sacraments, Baptiſme, Euchariſt, Angels, Apoſtles, and al Apoſtolical doctrine, and ſo in ſteede of Chriſtians make vs againe Pagans. Whereof beſides his vvarning, the vvorld hath to much experience already.
            And if our deare countrymen would iudge of thinges to come, by trial and euent of thinges paſt, they muſt in their owne memorie finde and feele this to be true which Beza here telleth them. For looke what old words you haue vpon newfanglednes (as it might ſeeme) altered and taken out of the Bible by the working of Satan, thoſe verie thinges you haue remoued from the hartes of men, and caſt out of the churches which you haue inuaded. With the name prieſt, went away the office of prieſt, with the altar, that which was the proper ſeruice of God, & done at the altar. with taking away the word penance, you haue withdrawen the people from al doyng of penance, and in altering the word church, you haue cut them cleane from the church, & more eſtraunged

them from the communion of it, then ſome barbarous and faithles nations that neuer heard of Chriſt. And ſo likewiſe for thinges to come, when they ſee you pricke at the name of angels, and begin to leaue out that, and for Chriſt, to geue them the anointed, and for Apoſtles, Ambaſſadours, and for hel, a graue, let them aſſure them ſelues that your purpoſe is, to extinguiſh in them al faith and memorie of Angels, Chriſt, Apoſtles, Heauen, & Hel, and to bring thē in to the ſame lamentable ſtate wherein their aūceſters were, when by bleſſed S. Gregory then Pope, and S. Auſtin our Apoſtle, they were firſt conuerted.
            Wherefore ſeing reaſon both humaine and diuine proueth that to be true which I haue ſaid touching their notorious raſhnes in corrupting the ſcriptures,The ſumme of ſuch foule and ethnical corruptions, as by reaſon are proued and by confeſsion of the aduerſaries are graū
                  ted to be in the 
                     •
                  ngliſh tranſlatiōs. ſeing not only reaſon but alſo plaine experience confirmeth the ſame, ſeing farther the thing is ſo cleere by reaſon, and experience, and al learning, that the verie heretikes confeſſe it, whereas their owne brethren by plaine argumēts proue their ttanſlatiōs to be moſt vvicked, as vvhich labour to peruert the ſentence of the holy

Ghoſt, to detort the ſcriptures from the right ſenſe, to preferre darknes before light & falſhode before truth, to deceaue the ſimple, to induce the mortalitie of the ſovvle, to make men thinke that the ſovvle of Chriſt vvas incloſed in the graue and ſo buried vvith his body, to plant deteſtable errors, to ouerthrovv Gods eternal predeſtination, to take avvay the beleefe of hel, and cōſequently of heauen, of the extreme iudgment, and of God him ſelfe, to make vs of Chriſtians Ciceronians, that is, Ethnikes and Infidels, & with alteration of wordes to take from vs al our faith: whereas this is euident and confeſſed, and yet for al this M.VV. cometh and ſaith, al this is nothing, theſe be no faultes, if the Papiſtes can find fault vvith no other thing but ſuch toyes and trifles, I loued our tranſlations vvel before, but novv ſhal I loue them much better, haec et iſtiuſmodi nugae, noſtra crimina ſunt, theſe & the like trifles be our faultes: I can not otherwiſe iudg of him, but that he is a very Atheiſt, a plaine Sadducee, without any feeling and regard of faith and conſciēce, & as it may very wel be thought,The ſect of Libertines far ſpread. of the profeſsion of the ſect of Libertines & Academikes, who of late are ſo far

enlarged, to whom are ioyned very many of the fineſt and moſt elegant Sacramentaries, of whom he may reade in Beza, who thinke al theſe queſtions, of Chriſt & his office,
               Beza de haereticis a ciuili magiſtratu puniē
                  dis, pa 41. 
               of his cōſubſtancialitie vvith the father, of the Trinitie, of predeſtination, of freevvill, of God, of Angels, of the Supper, of baptiſme, of the being of mens ſovvles after this lyfe,
               Right Goſpellers. Theſe ſhew vs what is the true meaning of only faith iuſtifying. who thinke I ſay al theſe thinges to be but trifles & thinges indifferent and not neceſſarie to iuſtification vvhich is obteyned by fayth. For theſe good Goſpellers haue a faith, and a iuſtifiyng faith, whereby they apprehend eternal life, without father, ſonne, and holy Ghoſt, without Chriſt and his paſſion, or any of theſe other matters, which are rather ſuttle pointes of the papiſts hiſtorical faith, then of the lyuelie iuſtifying faith, wherewith theſe Euangelical brethren in al ſecuritie are warranted of the certayne fauour of God in this life, and aſſured glory in the next.
         
         
            CHAP. XII. M. VV. reaſons againſt the latin bible are anſvvered: and the ſame bible is proued to be in ſundrie places more pure and ſincere then the hebrue novv extant.
            
               
               HERE M. VV. draweth to that which is his principal ſcope in this preface, that is to deface the late Tranſlation of the new Teſtament ſet forth in this Colledge. For although he ſpend more wordes againſt M. Martins Diſcouerie, yet he ſheweth far more ſtomake againſt this. whereof before I come to ſpeake, order requireth that I examine his diſputation againſt the decree of the Tridentine Councel,Concil. Trident. ſeſsio. 4. which for veritie and ſinceritie iuſtifieth & approueth as autentical, the old common latin edition. Againſt which decree M.VV. thinketh him ſelf to haue good aduantage, and much honor he ſpeaketh of the fountaines, the greeke and hebrew originals, and much he diſgraceth our latin tranſlation & tranſlator, for differing ſo much ftom thoſe originals.
            Firſt of al before I come to his arguments,3. thinges to be noted in this queſtion. I requeſt the reader to carye in mind three thinges touching this controuerſie, vvhereby he ſhal the more vprightly & ſkilfully iudge betvvene vs and our aduerſaries.  One is, that M.
VV. diſcourſe in this common place of praiſing the fountaines, maketh againſt

him ſelf and his brethren more then againſt vs. For vvhereas they pretend to tranſlate after the greeke and hebrue, (as vve do not) and yet in ſundrie places ſvvarue from the greeke & hebrue,M.W. diſcourſe moſt againſt him ſelf. this his long idle talke conuinceth vs of no faulte, but it condemneth him and his brethren of greate and inexcuſable corruption, vvho pretending reuerence to the greeke and hebrevv, yet at their pleaſure depart frō both. And this is that vvhereof M. Mar. reproueth them in a great part of his Diſcouerie. Example vvhereof ſee thou in his preface Num. 16.17.18.23.43.44.45.46.47.48.49.50, 51. and after in euerie chapter of the booke vvelnie: and ſo much M. Mar. proteſted to them in the beginning in plaine termes,Diſcou. in prefat. nu. 39. ſayng. And if they folovv ſincerely their greeke and hebrevv text, vvhich they profeſſe to folovv, and vvhich they eſteeme the only autentical text, ſo far vve accuſe them not of heretical corruption. but if it ſhal be euidently proued that they ſhrinke from that alſo, and tranſlate an other thing, and that vvilfully, and of intention to countenance their falſe religion and vvicked opinions, making the ſcriptures ſpeake as they liſt: then vve truſt &c. And of this

firſt riſeth a ſecond note,  which I wiſh
likewiſe to be remembred, that their deflecting from the greeke, is alwaies in matter of controuerſie, and ſo diſcrieth their malicious wilfulnes. If there be any in the latin, it is no ſuch thing, but in matters (for any cōtrouerſie) mere indifferent, and ſo quiteth the tranſlatour of malice and euil meaning, and iuſtifieth his vpright and plaine ſinceritie.  And hereof enſueth the third, touching
our ſimple and plaine dealing in folowing the latin, that we decline not from the greeke or hebrue,The greeke and hebrew more aduantageable to the Catholike cauſe then the latin. Pag. 15. becauſe it more harmeth our cauſe then the latin, as the aduerſaries gladly pretend and M. W. verie confidently auoucheth, but only in reſpect of the truth it ſelf. And thus much alſo was he told in the preface of the new teſtament, to wit, that as for other cauſes vve prefer the latin,
               In prefa. noui teſtamen. 
               ſo in this reſpect of making for vs or againſt vs, vve allovv the greeke as much as the latin, yea in ſundrie places, more then the latin, being aſſured that they haue not one, and that vve haue many aduantages in the greeke more then in the latin. And this is there manifeſted by ſundrie and verie euident examples, touching traditions, prieſthode, iuſtification by workes,

the real preſence, faſting, freewil, the myſtical ſacrifice, and againſt their only faith and aſſurance of ſaluation, wherein the greeke is more pregnant for vs then the latin. Contrarywiſe let M. VV. frame againſt the Catholike religion, or any part thereof, one argument out of the ſcriptures, which we refuſe to ſtand vnto vpon this pretence, becauſe it is in the greeke and not in the latin, and I am content to excuſe him here of a lye. Otherwiſe he can neuer ſaue him ſelf from a lye, and a lye in ſight, to obiect that vnto vs, which nether he nor any of his can proue, and we before hand haue in preciſe termes warned him of it, and profeſſed, and proued the contrarie.
            And therefore, although in truth (reader) whatſoeuer he ſaith, & a great deale more, is anſwered verie ſufficiently and abundantly alreadie in the preface of the Teſtament, as thow wilt confeſſe, if it ſhal pleaſe thee with diligence to pervſe it, and I accompt it a peece of our miſerie in this time, to be matched with ſuch blunt aduerſaries whoſe maner of writing is now to cloy vs with crābe recocta, cole vvorts tvviſe, yea tē times ſodden, & nether thē ſelues can

bring any new ſtuffe, nor ſcoure more brightlie or otherwiſe mend vp their old, nor refel our anſweres & confutations made to them, but diſſembling any ſuch matter, as though it had neuer bene treated of before, vſe to runne idelly, and miniſterlike vpon a cōmon place as M. VV. doth here, which is more againſt them ſelues then againſt vs: yet becauſe it is my lotte to deale with him now the firſt time, and therefore am loth to pretermit any thing wherein him ſelf ſeemeth to put any force, I wil take his argumētes as new, and ſuppoſe that he neuer read the preface of the Teſtament againſt which he writeth, and therefore will likewiſe hereafter borow ſome part of my anſwere thence.
            Two argumentes he maketh againſt our latin tranſlation, and conſequently againſt vs for folowing the ſame in our Engliſh. The firſt is,M.W. reaſons for preferring the hebrew and greeke before the latin. that the fountaines, vz, the greeke and hebrew, are more pure thē the latin, which he proueth by certaine ſentences of S. Hierō, S. Auſtin, and S. Ambroſe. The other is one particular fault, wherein as he ſayth, the vulgar tranſlation is vniuerſallie falſe, the greeke contrarie is true.

Before his arguments he premitteth certaine interrogatories, wherein he ſeemeth to auouch (if I vnderſtand him) that only to be the word of god, which is written in the lāguage wherein firſt the holy Ghoſt by the Prophets and Apoſtles vttered it. That I miſreporte him not, I will ſet downe his wordes.Pag. 15. Thus he oppoſeth vs. Quid interpretandum ſuſcepistis? nonne ſcripturas? Quaenam vero ſunt ſcripturae?
               If the latin teſtament be not the word of god, whoſe word are their vulgar tranſlations? 
               quis neſcit dei verbum ſcriptum illud eſſe &c. VVhat tooke you in hand to interprete? not the ſcriptures? and vvhat are the ſcriptures? vvho is ignorant but that is the vvritten vvord of god, vvhich the lord committed to his church in bookes and letters? and thoſe oracles of god vvere they vttered by the holy Ghoſt in latin? or can they better or more diuinely be declared in any tonge, then that vvhich the holy Ghost vvould vſe? where vnto I anſwere, that if his queſtions haue ſuch meaning & ſenſe as the wordes beare, and may ſtand ful wel with his ſkil and knowledge, then are they not ſo much fantaſtical as phrenetical. For accounteth he nothing the vvritten vvord of god, but that vvhich is in hebrevv and greeke, and vvas vvritten by the prophetes and Apoſtles in that language?

Then vvhat meaneth he, and the reſt of his Euāgelical confraternitie ſo perpetuallie to brag, that they haue geuen vs nothing but the pure vvord of the lord, vvho haue geuen vs nothing but their ovvne contaminated tranſlations in Engliſh, French, Flēmiſh, Dutch and ſuch vulgar languages? Is this the word of God M. W? vttered the holy Ghoſt his oracles euer in Flēmiſh or Engliſh? why inſcribe yow your Engliſh teſtamente, The teſtamente of our Lord Ieſus Christ,
               An aſſertiō both fooliſh and impious. if nothing but the greeke or hebrue be the written word and teſtament of god? But let this paſſe for an example of his ſingular fooliſhnes, ſpeaking he knoweth not what. See we herein an other example of his notable impietie.The Apoſtles and Euangeliſts cited ſcripture, not according to the hebrew. Our Sauiour Chriſt, the Euangeliſtes and Apoſtles when they cited places of the old teſtament, not according to the fountaines & hebrue, but according to the Septuaginta, cited they not ſcripture?Rom. 10. v. 18. Linea corū. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               In omnem terram (ſaith the apoſtle Paule) exiuit ſonus eorum. Their ſound is gone forth in to al the vvorld. whereas in the hebrew now it is far othervviſe, and othervviſe your ſelues tranſlate it in your later bible, their line is gone forth.
               Anno 1575. although in the

bible of the yeare 1577. ye leaue the hebrew and folovv vs.Act. 13. v. 41. 
               Take heede (ſaith the ſame Apoſtle) leſt that fal vpon you vvhich is ſpoken in the Prophetes:
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Heb. in gentibus. 
               See ye contemners, and vvonder and periſh. which wordes in the hebrew are nothing ſo. Shal we ſaie this is not ſcripture,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                and the Apoſtle abuſed his audience, and according to M. VV. diuinitie muſt needes tel them a lye, when he telleth them, this ſaith the Prophete, this ſaith Eſaie, this Ieremie &c. becauſe he citeth the wordes not according to the original, but according to the tranſlation of the 70. which many times much varieth from that which we find now in the original? The Apoſtle S. Iames reprouing the prowde and loftie mindes of ſome, bringeth this text of ſcripture againſt them.Iac. 4. v. 6. 
               deus ſuperbis reſiſtit, humilibus autem dat gratiam, tranſlated in your Engliſh teſtaments thus. The ſcripture offereth more grace, and therefore ſaith. God reſiſteth the proude, and geueth grace to the humble. vvhich vvordes are taken out of the Prouerbes of Salomon,Prouerb. ca. 3. ver. 34. but not according to the hebrevv, but after the 70.Caluin. in Iacob. ca. 4. vvhich Caluin cut cleane avvay and leaft out of his tranſlation, ether for this reaſon vvhich you geue,

or becauſe (belike) they agreed not vvel vvith his proude and diſdainful ſtomake,Caluin mā
                  gleth S. Iames epiſtle. notvvithſtanding they remaine in the greeke teſtaments printed at Geneua. But by your argument he doth wel therein, and ſaueth S. Iames from a manifeſt lie, who affirmeth the ſcripture to ſpeake ſo, whereas by yow, it is no ſcripture. And then it were wel done of yow to mend your teſtaments at the next edition, and leaue out this ſo cleare a falſhode, except yow retaine it of policie, that at a neede yow may haue one more reaſon to refuſe this epiſtle, which we ſee graueleth yow ſo ſore. I wil not multiplie exāples, becauſe it is a thing moſt euident, and he knoweth litle that knoweth not this to be the common maner both of ſome Euangeliſts, & of S. Peter and S. Paule generallie, to cite the ſcripture in this ſort. VVhereof S. Paules epiſtle to the Hebrues in euerie chapter almoſt geueth proofe,1. Pet. ca. 2.3. & 5. Beza in Ioh. c. 19. v. 37. as likewyſe doth the firſt of S. Peter, and Beza graunteth the ſame of the Euangeliſts, & the auncient fathers affirme both the one & the other.Ireneus l. 3. cap. 25.
            
            And what neede I to preſſe M. W. with ſentences, whereas I may diſpute againſt him out of whole chapters

and bookes. For let vs ſuppoſe ſome part of the old teſtament to haue bene written firſt in hebrew or chaldee, as is a part of Daniel, and to haue bene tranſlated into greeke or latin, afterwardes the chaldee or hebrue to periſh, the greeke or latin to remaine: as for example we ſee in the bookes of Tobie, Iudith, and one booke of the Machabees.Hier. prefat. in Tobiam, Iudith. & li. Regum. The two firſt of which, S. Hierom tranſlated out of the chaldee, the third he found (though he tranſlated it not) written in hebrue. And the like is thought verie probably of the ſonge of the three children. Shal we now be ſo fond as to imagine, that as ſo one as the hebrue or chaldee was loſt, we loſt our ſcriptures?S. Mat. wrote the Goſpel in Hebrew. then what ſaie you to S. Matthewes goſpel, which certainly was written by him in hebrue, as witneſſeth Apud Euſeb. l 3. c. 33 Irene. li. 3. ca. 1. Euſeb. lib. 2. ca. 18. Papias, Ireneus, Euſebius, li. 5. c. 19. Pā
               tenus, l. 6. c. 19. Origenes,in argumēt. in Mat c. in catal. Sophronius,Mt. goſpel in hebrew ſet forth by Munſter and Quinquarboreus. S. Hierom and al antiquitie. Haue we not S. Matthewes goſpel, becauſe vve haue not his hebrue text? nay preſuppoſe that a goſpel of S. Matthevv in hebrue may be found, as you knovv ſuch a one is extant, and ſetting aſide the authoritie of the Church, (vvhich to yovv is nothing) no reaſon can be brought, but

yovv ought as vvel to admit that for the original, as the greeke of S. Luke and S. Iohn: yet dare yovv prefer that before the greeke, and count that the more autētical, & reforme the greeke according to that hebrue? this one example if M. VV. had the grace to conſider, and the ground hereof, it vvere ſufficient to anſvvere vvhatſoeuer he ſaith in his idle diſcourſe in praiſe of the greeke & hebrue for defacing the latin. But let vs examine his reaſon vvherein lieth the pith of this queſtiō.
            Thus he declaimeth for the puritie of the greeke and hebrue.Pag. 15. 
               VVhereas vve couet to attaine the meaning of the holy Ghoſt, hovv ſhal vve do this more aſſuredly, then if vve heare the holy Ghoſt ſpeaking in his ovvne vvordes. This is ſo cleare that the Papiſtes them ſelues confeſſe it to be neceſſarie, if ſo be the firſt original copies vvere pure & vncorrupt. For now they crie that the old teſtament in the hebrue fountaine, and the nevv teſtament in the greeke, is moſt corrupt. & vvhy ſo? vvhat cauſeth our Papiſtes ſo to refuſe the hebrue and greeke fountaine, and to hunt after the litle riuer of the latin edition? vvho doubteth, but it is done for that only reaſon, becauſe they find the fountaines to be not ſo commodious for them. For if they

had the fountaines fauorable inough, they vvould rather take thence, then from the diches and dregges of a corrupt tranſlation.
               It had bene valiantly done of M. W. by one example to haue made this conqueſt ouer vs. 
               Novv becauſe they knovv that certaine deſtruction hangeth ouer their heads, if they be called to the fountaines, therefore are they conſtrained not only to auoyde the ſpring of the pureſt and moſt holeſome vvaters, but alſo they labour to proue that the litle riuers are purer then the fountaines. Here (Reader) thou haſt many wordes and litle matter, much a doe and ſmale reaſon, much craking and boaſting of the pure fountaines, by one who from his infancie neuer dranke but of the ſtinking puddles of Geneua lake. In which diſcourſe of his, three thinges may be learned.  Firſt, that he confeſſeth of vs that we refuſe not the fountaines, but becauſe we thinke them to be corrupt. Wherein he ſaith truly, and whereby thou maiſt note, that in folowing the latin as we doe, we are lead not as they are, by fanſie and panges, but by conſcience and iudgment.  The ſecond is, that he affirmeth it as a thing without al doubt, that thus we ſay, becauſe the foūtaines be not ſo cōmodious for vs. once againe, becauſe the fountaines are not fauorable inough vnto vs. and yet once againe, becauſe

vve knovv there is no vvay vvith vs but death and deſtruction, if vve he called to the fountaines. whereof becauſe I haue ſpokē alreadie, I wil ſay no more. only this may ſerue for an example what a luſtie courage they can ſhew in bragging, and what a pretie feate they haue, in ſo few lynes to varie a lye ſo many wayes. And if M. W. had geuen but one example, wherein he by his hebrue & greeke text could ſo plage vs, and bring vs certam perniciem, aſſured deſtruction, he had done ſomewhat like a profeſſor of this new diuinitie, and it were a readie way to end al theſe controuerſies. Becauſe he doth not (and I dare warrant him he can not) for the contrarie part, that the greeke is more cōmodious and fauorable to vs then to them, ſee thou (Chriſtian reader) the preface of the new teſtament, and thou ſhalt find it iuſtified by ſundrie manifeſt examples. and touching the hebrue ſomewhat ſhal be ſpoken hereafter.  Thirdly, wherein is the ſtate of this
queſtiō, he telleth vs that the foūtaines are moſt pure and holeſome, the latin edition moſt corrupt and infected. By the fountaines he meaneth the vulgar hebrue and greeke as they are now

commonly printed, which they pretend to folow. By the latin edition, that which is vſed in the Church of Rome, and hath bene theſe thouſand yeres, and is approued by the general Councel of Trent.
            To the end thou mayſt the better iudge of that which ſhal be ſpokē, thus much muſt I warne thee of before, touching the hiſtorical knowledge of this cōtrouerſie, that whereas in S. Aug. & S. Hieroms tyme, there was maruelous varietie of new Teſtamentes in latin, whereof roſe ſome confuſion and trouble in the Church, that godly and learned man Damaſus then Pope of Rome and ruler of the Church,S. Hierom author of our commō edition of the new teſtament, and that by the Popes appointement. tooke order with S. Hierom, that he ſhould correct one before vſed, which otherwiſe was leaſt faultie, which afterwardes ſhould be commended to the Church by that ſupreme authoritie. Thus much S. Hierom ſignifieth in diuers places,In catal. in fine, & praef. in nouum teſtamentum. eſpeciallie in his preface before the new Teſtament dedicated to the ſame Pope Nouum opus (ſaith he) me facere cogis ex veteri &c. You cōſtraine me to make a nevv vvorke of an old, that I after ſo many copies of the ſcriptures, disperſed thorough the vvorld, ſhould ſit as a certaine iudge, and

determine vvhich of them agree vvith the true greeke. And afterwardes ſhewing the difficultie of ſuch a worke, how daungerous it was and ſubiect to the reprehenſions of many, he comforteth him ſelf principally with this: That thou (ſpeaking to Damaſus) vvhich art the high prieſt, doeſt commaūd it ſo to be done. Tu qui ſummus es ſacerdos fieri iubes. This vvorke vvhen S. Hierom had accompliſhed, and deliuered vp, yet nether vvas his iudgment ſo abſolutely and vniuerſally in euery part folovved, that vvithout farther ſearch and trial it was by & by approued. But at length after due examination and ſome alteration of leſſer pointes, as we find by S. Hierom him ſelf, being approued by the Pope & allowed by the Church, it grew to a more general vſage, and to be moſt frequented in publike writinges, commentaries, ſcholes, and al places of Chriſtian excerciſe. This is that which we cal the common latin edition, which, albeit it haue ſome places tranſlated obſcurely, ſome vnaptly, ſome copies corrupted by falſe writing or printing &c. yet comparing it with the greeke now extant, we ſay it is far more pure and vncorrupt, and nothing

ſo ſubiect to cauilling & wrangling by great diuerſitie of different copies.The old teſtament. The like we ſay of the old teſtament, a great part where of was tranſlated by S. Hierom by order of the ſame Pope, moſt of al corrected and brought in to eccleſiaſtical vſe: ſauing the pſalmes, which could not be done ſo eaſely becauſe thoroughout Chriſtēdom, the principal part of the Seruice in al churches conſiſted of them, and therefore could not wel be altered without much trouble and ſcandal,Aug. de doctrina Chriſtian. li. 2. ca. 13. & epi. 10 ad Hieron. as we gather by S. Auſtin, and which therefore we retaine ſtil as they were vſed in the primitiue church long before S.4. things hā
                  deled in this queſtiō
                Hieroms time according to the verſion of the 70. Touching both theſe Teſtaments tranſlated and corrected thus, we ſay.  Firſt, that againſt them M. W. in his long diſcourſe of allegations, ſpeaketh neuer a word, and ſo ſpeaketh neuer a word to the purpoſe.  Secondarely, that they are purer thē are the fountaines which we now haue, whereof this man ſpeaketh ſo much, and (for ought may appeare) vnderſtandeth but litle.  Next, that how ſo-euer ſome ſmale faultes may be found in them, abſolutely they haue no error touching ether doctrine or maners.

                Laſt of al, that to refuſe them, and appeale
from them to the greeke and hebrue as the heretikes do, is the high way to denial of all faith, to Apoſtaſie from Chriſt his religion, and ſo to plaine Atheiſme. Theſe foure pointes I wil brieflie touch in order.
            
                The firſt is, that M. VV. in al his long
talke about the fountaines ſpeaketh neuer a word to the purpoſe againſt vs,That M. W. ſpeaketh neuer a word to the purpoſe. but rather much & al againſt him ſelf. For if the fountaines were ſo pure in the times of S. Hierom and S. Ambroſe, and the church then troubled vvith the great diuerſitie of their latin bibles, reformed one to the puritie of the fountaines and originals, and vve novv find thoſe fountaines and originals differing frō that reformed bible, vvhy ſhal vve not conclude, that the fountaines haue in the meane ſeaſon bene corrupted? not ſo, ſaith M. W.More probable that the hebrew is corrupt thē the latin. but contraryvviſe, rather the latin bibles haue bene corrupted. VVhat reaſon leadeth him thus to ſpeake? vvhat probabilitie moueth him to imagine, that ſo many hundred yeres, hebrue bookes could continue vvithout error, being vvritten out by a fevv, and they for the moſt part Iewes, ignorant, enemies

of Chriſt and his Church, deſtitute of the ſpirite of God, men geuen ouer in to a reprobate ſenſe, rather then the latin publikely read, expounded by thowſandes in euerie prouince of the Chriſtian vvorld,The church warranted, that ſhe ſhould euer keepe the word of God. garded by infinite good men, by Sainctes for life, and full of the holy Ghoſt, liuing in that church vvherein properly vvas fulfilled the prophecie of Eſaie made by God to Chriſt his ſonne, & to his Catholike Church in him.Eſaie 59. 
               This is my couenant vvith them ſaith our lord▪ my ſpirit vvhich is in thee, and the vvordes vvhich I haue put in thy mouth, ſhal not depart from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy ſeede, & from the mouth of thy ſeedes ſeede ſaith our Lord, from this tyme forth for euermore. Wherein God promiſeth the Church, that ſhe ſhal be a faithful and perpetual obſeruer of his vvord and teſtament. Which vvarrant you neuer find made in like ſorte to the ſynagoge. But this notwithſtanding you perhaps prefer this ſynagoge before the Church, and Iewes before the Chriſtians, that is in effect, Moyſes before Chriſt, and therefore are content to ſpeake and thinke more honorably of them vvith vvhom you ioyne more nylie, and to

vvhom you beare a better affection▪ yet hovv ſoeuer your minde be therein, S. Hierom cōmending the hebrue fountaines in his time, maketh nothing in the world for you in theſe daies, except he ſay, that in al ages to come, the hebrue ſhould remaine ſtil pure and incontaminate, and the latin ſhould againe be corrupted, and the Church though warned by the trouble which ſhe ſuſteined in his time about that matter, yet afterwardes ſhould cōtemne ſo pretious a thing as the written word of God is, and runne in to a far greater inconuenience then before, & through extreme negligence, nether haue the latin bible true which once was reformed and made agreable to the hebrue, nor yet the hebrue bible true, by which ſhe might once againe mende and correct the latin.
            And here let the reader waigh whether we thinking of the Church as we doe,
                  Ioan. 14. & 16.
                  Praiſe of the Romaine Church, for holding faſt the true doctrine once deliuered.
                thinking of Chriſtes promiſe and the aſsiſtance of the holy Ghoſt as chriſtian faith teacheth vs, whereby we are moſt aſſuredly perſwaded that ſhe neuer erreth, nor euer can erre damnably, whether we, I ſay, haue not great reaſon to ſupport our opinion which

here we defend.Caluin. inſt. l. 4. c. 6. ¶. 26. Caluin in his Inſtitutions recounting certaine cauſes why the auncient writers ſpeake ſo reuerently and yeld ſo much to the Romane church, amongſt other putteth this for one. That vvhereas the churches of the Eaſt part and of Greece, as alſo of Africa, vvereful of tumultes and diſſenſions amonge them ſelues, the Romane church vvas more quits then other, and leſſe troubleſome. 
               Vnto this reaſon drawen from humane wiſedome, ſet the Chriſtiā reader adde Chriſtes prayer. Luc. 22. v. 32 I haue prayed &c. that thy fayth faile not. 
               For as the vveſterne people are leſſe ſharp & quick of vvit then they of Aſia and Africa, ſo much leſſe deſyrous are they of nouelties. This therefore added very much authoritie to the Romane church, that in thoſe doubtful times ſhe vvas not ſo vnquiet as vvere the other,
               Doctrinae ſemel traditae ſuit aliis omnibus tenacior. 
               and the doctrine once deliuered to her, ſhe held and retayned more faſt then did all the reſt. This grace of conſtancy in the faith and truth once receaued, when as the aduerſaries yeld to the Romane church,The Greeke church not comparable to the Romane. and reproue the Oriental and greeke church for lightnes, inconſtancie, & mutabilitie in the ſame kind, we who beleeue the ſame grace of god to haue ſtil remained, haue iuſt occaſion to thinke that ſhe was as tenax, as conſtant in preſeruing the truth of the bibles, as of other parts of religiō, wherein by Caluines verdite ſhe excelled al

churches vnder the ſunne. And if the greeke churches then, in that prime flower, were ſo mutable and incōſtant and ſo far inferior to the latin, in this reſpect eſpeciallie of holding faſt matters of religion once deliuered vnto them, with what iudgement or conſcience can we magnifie the later ages of thoſe Greekes, who much more haue deflected from the Catholike & Apoſtolike faith, haue more decayed in learning, vertue, and al good qualities, haue degenerated almoſt in to a barbariſme, and are now fallen in to ſuch miſerie, ignorance, and ſlauery, as euerie man ſeeth: much leſſe can we mention in this compariſon the Iewes Synagog, who hauing the maledictiō of god vpō them,Math. 
                     •
                  5. as many times our Sauiour foretold in the goſpel, are not only quite deſtitute of the graces of god, but alſo for the moſt part ſeeme altogether void of the giftes of nature, of vvit, iudgement, policie, and ordinarie humane diſcourſe.
            But al this vvil M.W. ſay, is but coniecture. and as probablie he diſputeth againſt it for the contrarie part, that in the hebrue and greeke there is no corruption. For if it be ſo,
               Pag. 20. 
               that the Ievves and

heretikes haue laboured ſo much herein, vvho can doubt but they haue attempted this eſpecially in theſe places and ſentences of ſcriptures, vvhich the Church of Chriſt moſt vſed for confirmation of her faith and religion? There are moſt euident teſtimonies of ſcriptures, by vvhich the Ievves and all heretikes are refuted. tel vs vvhat in them haue thoſe men peruerted, but that they remaine vnto vs ſafe and ſound. Neuer vvould other Ievv or heretike corrupt the ſcriptures, except he thought that might be to him ſome vvaie commodious for the mainteining of his monſtruous opinions. VVherefore ſeing thoſe places are ſafe by vvhich the Ievves are refelled, and the heretikes of al times are killed, this muſt needes ſeeme a fained tale, vncredible, and falſe, vvhich you bring, that the fountaines are corrupted. To ſatisfie M.W. longing, who would ſo faine know wherein the Iewes or heretikes haue falſified the bibles, I wil ſeuerally geue him examples, ſome ſithence S. Hieroms tyme, and ſome before, and acknovvledged by S. Hierom him ſelf, from whom M. W. taketh moſt in commendation of the hebrue fountaines.
            
               
               That the hebrew bibles are in ſome places corrupted.And that thoſe fountaines are ſomewhat infected, and degenerated from that puritie which they had in S. Hieroms

time and before, I proue by euident reaſon, manifeſt experimentes, & plaine confeſsions of our more learned aduerſaries. Firſt touching the hebrue, S. Hierom read and tranſlated according to the ordinarie reading and pointing of his time, Eſaie 9.Eſa. 9. 
               Puer datus est nobis, et filius natus est nobis, et vocabitur nomen eius, admirabilis, conſiliarius, Deus, fortis, pater futuri ſaeculi, princeps pacis. A child is geuen to vs, and a Sonne is borne to vs, and he ſhalbe called Admirable, a Counſeller, God, Strong, Father of the vvorld to come, Prince of peace. And in his commentarie expreſsing euerie word, he maketh no doubt of any other reading. Forſake the latin, and go to your Iewes and their hebrue fountaines now, and what find you? pro theſaur
                     •
                  , carbones. Thus. Puer datus eſt nobis, et filius natus est nobis, et vocabit nomen eius qui eſt admirabilis, conſiliarius, deus, fortis, et pater aeternitatis vel futuri ſeculi, principem pacis. VVhereby is taken from Chriſt, as principal a teſtimonie of his diuinitie, as any we find in the old teſtament. And whence cōmeth this alteratiō, but from the iniquitie of the Iewes, who haue altered the paſsiue, vocabitur,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                into the actiue, vocabit, & geuē other pointes then

were vſed or read in S.Luth. tom. 4. enarration. Eſa. cap. 9. Hieromes time. And this, Luther confeſſeth manifeſtly. Totus hic textus miſerè & ſceleratè (ſaith he) a Iudaeis eſt crucifixus &c.
               The Iewes corrupters and crucifieis of ſuch places of ſcripture as appertaine to Chriſt. 
               This vvhole text is miſerably and vilanouſlly crucified, & depraued, and corrupted by the Ievves. For as the child him ſelf vvas crucified of them, ſo by the ſame men both this place, and 
               Scriptura eius. 
               his ſcripture, (or ſcripture appertayning to him) is daily crucified. The prophete attributeth ſix names to the child and ſonne, the Ievves reade the firſt fiue in the nominatiue caſe, the ſixt in the accuſatiue, and they al expound it of Ezechias,
               4. Reg. 19. vnder whom God gaue that great victorie againſt Sēnacherib. And in the ſame place. The text ſeemeth to haue bene corrupted by thoſe that put to the points. The letters vvhether ye reade them vvith pointes or vvithout pointes are alone, and the grammer doth beare it vvel, but the Ievves moſt peſtilent men, oft tymes corrupte ſentences of the prophetes by their pointes & diſtinctions. But let it ſuffice vs that the Chaldee interpreter, and the 70. thinke as vve do.
            
            Thus Luther, condemning of vile corruption on your pure originals, & geuing withal this general rule, that the Iewes moſt peſtilent men haue no conſcience in that foule abuſing, and altering, and crucifying the ſcriptures, no more

then they had in crucifying Chriſt, and that therefore he preferreth the Septuaginta and Chaldee interpreter before al the hebrew copies. VVhich reaſon touching Luther and the Proteſtantes is nothing at al. For the Chaldee interpreter is no more the hebrevv original then is Luthers tranſlation. And the tranſlatiō of the 70. which is now extant, beſides that it is ful of diuerſitie & not of the Catholikes eſteemed to be altogether autentical, is much more of Luther and the Proteſtants condemned. For of them thus he writeth in the ſame commentarie. 70 interpretes digni ſunt odio &c. The 70.Luth. in Eſa. ca. 53. v. 11. fol. 282. 
               interpreters are vvorthie of hatred, for I can not beleeue, & it is falſe that they tranſlated and turned the bible by the holy Ghoſt: for there appeareth in them manifeſt vanitie, impietie & ſtudie to corrupt it. Thus Luther. VVhere in though he rayle to fowly, yet hereof appeareth how much he eſteemeth of the 70. And the true ground, whereby both Luther and the Proteſtants hold this ſo ſingular a peece of ſcripture againſt the Iewes, is nether the Chaldee interpreter, nor the 70. as Luther pretendeth, nor the hebrew fountaine which is worſe, but that, whereby we

retaine al ſcriptures, that is the churches authoritie and warrant, who teſtefieth vnto vs that this is the letter of the prophete, as Lyra from whom Luther borowed his anſwere teacheth. Thus he writeth. In this place of Eſaie is proued the humanitie and diuinitie of Chriſt,
               Lyra. proba. diuinitatis & humanitatis Chriſti contra Iudaeos, in fine gloſ. noui teſtamenti. 
               but the Ievves anſvvere ſayng, it is not in the hebrue, He ſhal be called, but, he ſhal cal, and ſo that vvhich directly expreſſeth the diuinitie is not referred to the child borne, but to the true god calling him, and the name of the child is put in the end of the place, that is,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               Principem pacis, prince of peace. But they that thus ſay corrupt the text. therefore vve muſt run to the tranſlations. And firſt that this is falſe, is proued by the 70. vvho tranſlate, vocabitur, he ſhal be called, and by S. Hierom. And thus it is read in the office of the maſſe vpon Chriſtemas daie, and that office for the moſt part, folovveth the trāſlation of the 70.Tranſlatiōs, truer then the original text. 
               And by this tranſlation it is cleare that the hebrue ſhould not be, vocabit, but vocabitur, as theſe vvil haue it corrupting the text. And the ſame is proued by the Chaldee tranſlation. VVhere the churches authoritie is the ſupreme groūd & ſtaye, for in deede the other cōuince nothing, as ſhal better appeare heareafter.
            An other example of like corruption,

and in as high and great a point as this, againſt the diuinitie of our Sauiour, I geue you, Ierem. 23. where S. Hierom did reade and tranſlate according to the hebrew, thus.Ierem. 23. v. 5.6. 
               Ecce dies veniunt dicit dominus, et ſuſcitabo Dauid germē iuſtum, er regnabit rex, et ſapiens erit. et hoc eſt nomen quo vocabunt eum, dominus iustus &c. as in our vulgar tranſlation. Behold the daies come ſayth our lord, and I vvil raiſe to Dauid a iuſt branch, and he ſhal raigne, as a king, and ſhal be vviſe. & this is the name by vvhich they ſhal cal him, Our iuſt lord, or, the lord our iuſtice. where the name Tetragrammaton, attributed to our incarnate Sauiour, proueth that he is the 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
or lord god of Iſrael, wherein the two natures diuine and humane appeare moſt euidently. S. Hierom in the text putteth a double reading, one after the hebrew, an other after the 70. Vpon the place,Hier. in Ier. ca. 23. v. 6. in his commentarie he writeth thus. If vve reade according to the 70, Vocauerit eū Dominus, the ſenſe is, he ſhal be called Ioſedech, a iuſt lord: if according to the hebrue, nomen eius vocabunt, then the ſenſe is, He ſhal be called the lord our iuſtice. The thing which I note, is the word, vocabunt, they ſhal cal him: which in S. Hieromes time was the

hebrevv reading, and touching Chriſt his diuinitie is of that conſequence as hath bene ſaid. In the hebrew text now, it is cleane otherwiſe, and vpon one point and letter chaunged, thus it is to be tranſlated. God (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) vvho is our iuſtice,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               ſhal cal him: whereby is loſt al the proofe of Chriſts diuinitie, which that ſo pregnant a place otherwiſe ſhould yeld. And that this fault is likewiſe committed by the like malice of the Iewes, and the true reading is to be taken from our latin tranſlation, Lyra in the place aforeſaid, ſheweth in theſe wordes. Other names of God are communicable vvith creatures, but the name Te
                     •
                  ragrammaton is not ſo,
               Lyra vbi ſupra. 
               vvhich ſignifieth the diuine eſſence, pure & ſimple in it ſelfe vvithout relation to external vvorks or creatures, and therefore vvhereas Christ is called by this name in the place of Ieremie, it folovveth that he is true God.
               The Iewes corrupt the letter of the ſcripture. 
               But the Ievves anſvvere by corrupting the letter, ſayng, that thus it is in the hebrevv, Et hoc eſt nomen eius qui vocabit eum, Dominus iustus noſter. And this is the name of him that ſhal cal him, Our iuſt lord: ſo that the name Tetragrāmaton vvhich in our tranſlatiō is turned, Dominus, is not referred to Meſſias the ſonne of Dauid, but to the true God, who called Meſsias to deliuer his people.
               
And how goeth Lyra againſt this diſtinction? ſaith he the Iewes are honeſt men, & haue kept their bibles pure and vncorrupted, and in reſpect of them, al the latin bibles are moſt contaminate, after the paterne of M. VV? Nay, far otherwiſe. notwithſtanding he knew the hebrew bibles and tong in an other maner of degree and perfection (as being him ſelfe a natural borne Iewe) then M. W. or any of his great clearkes who vaunt ſo much of a litle, yet he replieth thus. Contra iſtam ſolutionem non poteſt argui &c. Againſt this ſolution a man can not argue, but by ſhevving them that here they corrupt the true letter and deny the truth, becauſe they vvil deny Chriſts diuinitie. And this might best be done by old bibles vvhich vvere not corrupt in this paſſage and in others in vvhich mentiō is made of Chriſts diuinitie, if a man could come by any ſuch. And thus our forefathers diſputed againſt them out of this place and the like.
               Al bibles corrupt in this place. 
               And although I neuer yet ſavv any bible of the Ievves vvhich is not corrupted in this place, yet I haue heard of men vvorthie of credit by reaſon of their life, conſcience, and knovvledge, vvho haue ſvvorne that they haue ſeene it ſo in old bibles as it is in S. Hieroms tranſlation. But if a man can not get

any ſuch bibles vncorrupt, then muſt vve runne to other trāſlations, vvhich the Ievves vvith reaſon cā not deny. And the 70. reade as doth S. Hierom, as appeareth by our Eccleſiaſtical office. Here againe M. W. may ſee the foule & monſtruous corruptiō of the Iewes in theſe fountaines and originals, vniuerſally in al their hebrew bibles. Vniuerſally I ſay, for if in our daies ſome one or other print be corrected, that correction hath bene made in reſpect of the latin Church, which hath kept the truth of doctrine, & therefore preſerued the true letter, not in reſpect of the Iewes, vvho altogether (as witneſſeth Lyra) corrupted the true letter, becauſe they vvould deny Chriſts diuinitie.
            
            One exāple more I geue him in an other kynd, which neuertheles importeth vs as much as do theſe former of Chriſt his deitie. It is touching his paſſion and our redemption, and ſheweth that the Proteſtantes them ſelues eſteeme more of our tranſlatiō, not only then of al the hebrew bibles which are now currant, but alſo then thoſe that were in S. Hieroms time. And therefore to anſwere your miſapplied allegations by your owne Engliſh tranſlations, confer you your Engliſh bibles in the 53. chapter

of Eſaie, with your hebrew fountaines. Our tranſlation hath thus.Eſa. 53. v. 8. 
               Generationem eius quis enarr abit? quoniam abſciſſus eſt de terra viuentium: propter ſcelus populi mei percuſſi eum. VVho ſhal declare his generation? for he is cut of from the land of the liuing: for the ſinne of my people haue I ſmitten him. A plaine teſtmonie, that God laid vpon our Sauiour, our iniquities, which is the ſūme of the chapter: that he therefore was true man, and withal (as before is declared) that he was true God, whoſe generation was inexplicable. for ſo do the fathers cōmonly expound that parcel. So that in this one verſe, we haue the true effect of Chriſts death and paſſion, beſides his diuine and humaine nature. The 70. tranſlate it thus, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Hierom. in Eſa. ca. 53. 
               for the iniquities of my people, he vvas lead to death. The hebrew bibles in S. Hieroms time, did reade thus. Generationem &c. propter ſcelus populi mei percuſſit eos. For the ſinne of my people he ſtroke them. The hebrew bibles in our time, though in ſenſe agree, yet in reading ſeeme to differ, hauing thus:
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               A preuaricatione populi mei plaga, vel percuſſio ipſis. Becauſe of the tranſgreſſion of my people, a vvound vvas geuen to them. which inuerteth the ſenſe,

and maketh a great alteration, as euerie man may ſee. The Engliſh bible of the yere 1577.Bib. 1577. tranſlateth it: vvhich puniſhment did go vpon him for the tranſgreſſion of my people.
               1579. of the yere 1579. For the tranſgreſſion of my people vvas he plagued. And this ſenſe commonly others folow, as Caſtalio, the French, the Geneua bible &c. which is the ſenſe & word of our latin tranſlation, not of the hebrew text. Only the Engliſh tranſlator of the yere 1562.Bib. 1562. foloweth nether the 70. not greeke, nor latin, but the brainſicke fanſie of his owne head, making a mingle mangle, and thruſting in a patch of his owne.The Engliſh tranſlations adde to the text. Thus he goeth to worke. vvhoſe generation yet vvho may number? he vvas cut of from the ground of the liuing, vvhich puniſhmēt did go vpon him for the tranſgreſſion of my people, vvho in deede had deſerued that puniſhment. where in deede he deſerueth a whippe, & plaieth not only a fooliſh, but alſo a wicked part, in adding that later ſentence to the text, only becauſe he would ſeeme to come ſomewhat nye the hebrew, which for al that he toucheth not. Luther, vvho folovveth the error of the hebrew copies, exclaimeth vpō the Iewes for their old ſpitful & malicious māgling of this text

as of many other.Luther to. 4. in Eſa. c. 53. Thus he tranſlateth & cōmenteth vpon it. Propter trāſgreſsiones populi mei plaga eis. for the ſinnes of my people a vvoūd to them. This place is ſomevvhat obſcure and hard, becauſe of the novvne of the plural nūber, lamo. The 70. read pro ſua iuſtitia, vel potius malitia ductus eſt ad mortē. For his iuſtice, or rather malice he vvas lead to death. Wherein I marueile at Luthers reading of the 70. For S. Hierom citeth them far othervviſe, and far othervviſe is it in the common prints novv extāt, for ought I can find. Which agree vvith the citation of S. Hier. before noted. But proceede we on. Our interpreter (ſaith Luther, meaning the latin vſed in the Church) turneth it thus: propter peccata populi mei per cuſsi eum. For the ſinnes of my people haue I ſmitten him. An excellent ſentence, but the Grammar doth not vvel beare it. Much here are vve beholding to the deuil and to the Ievves, vvho haue not only depraued filthily, but alſo cōfoūded this as much as is poſsible, by their diuiſions. And thoſe that ſtudie hebrevv muſt note this, that the Ievves vvhereſoeuer they can, depraue the meaning of the prophete by their vvicked expoſitions, vvhere they can not do ſo, by their diſtinctions or diuiſions: as in Daniel, The 70. vveeks are abbridged, there a man vvith his fingers

may feele their corruption, vvhere they ſeparate and teare a ſunder theſe thinges that are to be ioyned,
               The Iewes corrupt the ſcripture, in deſpite of Chriſtians. 
               and al this, in deſpite of the Chriſtians. VVherefore I leaue this to thoſe that be ſtudious of the hebrevv tōge, that they marke the malice of the deuil and the Rabbines, vvhoſe only ſtudie and labour is to depraue, teare a ſunder, and turne vpſide dovvne the prophetical and Chriſtian ſenſe. In vvhich chapter againe he calleth them corruptores ſcriptorum propheticorum, corrupters of the vvritings of the prophetes. And in this one place beſides the authoritie of Luther, beſides the general rules vvhich he deduceth, vvilling vs euer to bevvare of the Rabbines and Ievves, vvhoſe vvhole ſtudie is to abuſe & deface the ſcriptures in deſpite of vs and our religion, and therefore ſmale reaſon hath M. W. to make ſo much of them as he doth:
                  
                     •
                  . maners of corruption. I note tvvo ſortes and maners of their corruption.  The firſt is, by plaine alteratiō of points and letters and ſillables. For certaine it is, our tranſlator and the 70. neuer trāſlated theſe hebrew vvordes vvhich now ſtand in this text, or as vve find in S. Hierom.  The ſecond, vvhich ſpecially Luther noteth in Daniel, is by diuiding vvordes vvhich by the prophete

vvere ioyned, vvhich is as vile and deſperate a corruption as may be. So for exāple, Seruetus auoided the authoritie of the Apoſtle S. Paule,Rom. 9. v. 5. affirming Chriſt to be God. For being vrged vvith theſe vvordes: Ex quibus eſt Chriſtus ſecundum carnem, qui eſt ſuper omnia deus benedictus in ſecula: Of vvhom (that is of the Ievves race) is Chriſt according to the fleſh, vvho is God bleſsed for euer: which contayne a ſure teſtimonie that Chriſt vvas not only man, as Seruetus vvould haue him, but alſo God moſt bleſſed, he vvel acquainted vvith Bezaes maner of correcting the teſtamēt, anſvvered after this Ievviſh tricke: that he beleeued vvith al his hart vvhat ſo euer S. Paule that elect veſſel of the Lord had vvritten.Sixtus Senenſis in bibliotheca ſancta. lib. 8. pag. 646. mary it ſeemed to him that S. Paule ſaid not ſo, and pleaded his greeke teſtament vvhere thus ſtoode that ſentence. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . of vvhom is Chriſt according to the fleſh, vvho is aboue al. And there making a ful diſtinction, then folovveth the reſt as a thankeſgeuing. The Lord be prayſed for euer. amen. And thus haue the. Ievves done in very many places of ſcripture by Luthers verdicte.
            
               Sundrie other particular errors could I note vnto thee (Chriſtiā reader) in the hebrew, had I but a peece of that inſolent vaine which many of our aduerſaries haue, and vvherein they triumphe againſt men of great and excellent learning, ſuch as of vvhom they & I ſhal (I doubt) neuer be vvorthie to be named ſcholers (example vvhereof take thou Charkes ſcornful abuſing of Father Campian in the Tower, for ignorance in ſuch trifles as theſe are) or were I diſpoſed to diſgrace the fountaines and originals, which I am not, but honour them as I may, and ſauing the euident truth and faith of Chriſt, which ſtandeth faſt and vnmoueable, though heauen and earth fall, much more though the Iewiſh Phariſees and Scribes write their text amiſſe, this cauſe & faith I ſay forepriſed, I eſteeme of them, as of things deſeruing much ſtudie and reuerence: becauſe how ſoeuer ſome groſſe errors, partly of malice, partly of ignorance, haue crept in, yet commonly and for the moſt part, the text I hold to be true and ſincere. And againe I ſuppoſe this kinde of writing can not be but tedious to the Engliſh reader, whoſe profit I principally

intend,General reaſons why the hebrue text can not be ſo ſincere as the aduerſarie would pretend. and therefore will go from theſe particularities ſo far as I may, to talke of a few reſonable & the ſame general arguments and queſtions, wherein M.W. if he haue ſome part of that wit, intelligence, and modeſtie, which a ſcholer & diuine ſhould haue, wil not I hope much ſtande againſt me.
            
                And firſt gladly would I learne of
him, what reaſon he and his fellowes haue, why they ſhould thinke the hebrew text to be ſo inuiolate, ſo ſincere, and vpright? is it becauſe of Gods promiſe and prouidence, or of mans circū
               ſpection and wiſdome? if becauſe of Gods promiſe, where finde they any ſuch? how many examples in the ſcriptures haue they to the contrarie? whole bookes of the prophetes are periſhed, bookes of ſingular cōmoditie, & made by Gods owne appointment, and they periſhed then, in that time of the ſinagoge, when Iacob vvas the peculiar people of God, and Iſrael the lot of his inheritance,
               Deut. 52. v. 9 
               Exod. 19. v. 6 when of al nations they vvere to God a holy nation, a kingly prieſthode,
               Act. 14. v· 15. when al other people vvere ſuffered to go their ovvne vvaies, & the Iewes only were in Gods ſpecial protection. For touching the bookes of the auncient prophets ſomtime

extant, and now not appearing, we reade cōmonly in the old teſtamēt. as of Num. 21. v. 14. 
               Liber bellorum domini, The booke of the vvarres of our Lord, 
               Ioſue 10. ver. 13. 2. Reg. 1. v. 18. 
               The booke of the iuſt men, 
               2. Paral. 20 v. 34. 
               The booke of Iehu the ſonne of Hanani, 
               ibid. 12. ver. 15. 
               The bookes of Semeias the prophete, and Addo: and 
               1. Reg. 10. verſ. 25. 
               Samuel vvrote in a booke the lavv of the kingdome (hovv kings ought to rule) & laid it vp before our lorde, 
               2. Paral. 9. verſ. 29. 
               and the vvorkes of Salomon vvere vvritten in the vvordes of Nathan the Prophete, and in the bookes of Ahias the Silonite, and in the viſiō of Addo the Seer,
               The Iewes haue loſt many & whole volumes of their Prophetes: much more may they leeſe or alter points, letters and ſyllables. and many other which were to long to rehearſe. VVhich entier bookes of the warres of our lord, of the iuſt, of thoſe excellent prophets, of Iehu, of Semeias, of Addo, of Samuel, of Nathan, of Ahias and others, are quite periſhed, and periſhed then, when the Iewes were ſo choſen a people, ſuch a kingdome, in ſuch order & gouernment, of Kings and princes, and Senate, & eccleſiaſtical regiment. And now when they are no people, haue no gouernment, no king, no Prieſt, no comparable regiment, may we reaſonably thinke their diuine and eccleſiaſticall bookes to haue bene ſo warelie kept, that euerie parte is ſafe, euerie parcel ſound, no points, letters or titles

loſt, al ſincere, perfit and abſolute. If the proteſtāts will claime this to them by mans wiſdome and policie, ſee how notably they contradicte themſelues. Al the biſhops, and princes,Moſt vnreaſonable abſurditie, and contradiction. and ſtates of Chriſtendome were not wiſe inough by the proteſtants opiniō, theſe thouſande yeres paſt, to keepe them ſelues in the true religion and Goſpell of Chriſt. But whereas vntil 600. yeres, (as we learne by M. Iewels chalenge) they were proteſtants and enemies of the Maſſe, of the Real preſence, of the Pope of Rome, and (as M. W. telleth vs here) vniuerſally proteſtāts quo ad praecipuas religionis partes,
               Whit. pag. 9. 
               in the principall parts of religion, they fell from that pure proteſtant-Goſpel to ſerue Antichriſt, to worſhip bread and wine for God, to adore Images, which is moſt groſſe idolatrie, in ſteed of a true bible and word of God, to haue our cō
               mon tranſlation, which is moſt impure & fulleſt of corruptiō. Al this M.W. telleth vs, and he telleth vs in this booke, and it is the common ſonge of them al. And therefore how is it credible that al this while the Iewes ſhould be ſo wiſe, ſo prudent, ſo politike, and circū
               ſpecte that they admitted no faults,

kept their bible ſo ſincere and immaculate that there only the water of life was reſerued,Whit. pa. 15. and the minde & meaning of the holie Ghoſt vvas to be found novvhere ſo aſſuredly as there: what is this but to make the Chriſtians al this while more brutiſh then beaſtes, and the Iewes almoſt equal to Angels.
            
                Againe, ſo great likenes and ſimilitude is there betwene ſome hebrew letters,Similitude of letters. that excellent learned men haue bene deceaued by miſtaking one for an other, as appeareth by comparing the olde tranſlations of the bible with the later,Hieron. in Oſee. c. 2. and S. Hierom affirmeth the ſame of the Septuaginta. This if a man would declare by examples I thinke he might gather ſome hundreds out of the pſalter. I wil note only one verſe of a ſhort pſalme which alſo may ſerue for a higher pointe. In the pſalme 109 after our tranſlation thus we reade with the Septuaginta.Pſal. 109. v. 3 
               Tecum principium in die virtutis tuae in ſplendoribus ſanctorum: ex vtero ante luciferum genuite. The Proteſtāts for the more parte (as we ſee by Marlorate,Marlorate in Pſal. 110. folowing therein Bucere, Muſculus, Caluine and Pomerane) tranſlate it thus. Populus tuus cum voluntariis oblationibus in die exercitus tui, in pulchritudine

ſanctitatis: ex vtero ab aurora tibiros adoleſcentiae tuae.
               Of the yere 1579. The engliſh bible of the laſt edition differing notably both frō olde and new, from vs and the Proteſtants, tranſlate thus. Thy people ſhal come vvillingly all the time of (aſſemb
                     •
                  ing) thine armie in holie beauty: the youth of thy vvōbe ſhal be as the morning devv. which tranſlation is fartheſt from the hebrew, fartheſt from al ſenſe and reaſon. for who would make youth to rule vvombe and ioyne them together being ſundred ſo far?Of the yere 1577. and the bible geuen out two yeres before, hath ſcant one worde like, and touching the later part is cleane oppoſite. for thus it tranſlateth In the day of thy p
                     •
                  vv
                     •
                  r ſhal the people offer thee free-vvil offeringes: the devv of thy birth is of the vvombe of the morning. there is, youth of the vvombe, and, devv of the morning: here is, devv of the birth, or youth (for that is one word in hebrew) and, vvombe of the morning. If a man would tranſlate it preciſely, vſing only the libertie to make choiſe of diuers ſignifications which the hebrew words yelde, and drawe it ſo far as the hebrew wil beare, to the ſenſe of the Septuaginta, which I take to be the beſt, then word for word thus it ſhould ſtand. Tecum principatus in die

potētiae tuae, in decoribus ſanctitatis: ab vter
                     •
                   à Lucifero tibi ros natiuitatis tuae. How euer it be framed, great difference wil riſe of neceſsitie amongſt diuers interpreters. And whence proceedeth that? one great cauſe is the diuers ſignificatiō of one word. The firſt, which the 70. turned 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , tecum, vvith thee, others, populus tu
                     •
                  s,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               thy people, is in the hebrew one word, with ſo ſmale a difference of one point, as is poſsible. The next expreſſed of the 70.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                by 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               principatus, may be as well ſignified by the hebrew, as ſpontanea oblatio. The third, which the 70.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                turned 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , S. Hierom, fortitudinis, the Proteſtants, exercitus, may truely ſignifie them al, povver, vertue, ſtrength, liberalit
                     •
                  e, and armie: and ſo aurora or Lucifer is the ſame word.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                But that which chiefely I note in this ſentence, whatſoeuer other difference was betweene the old hebrew text and the new, is the diuerſitie of ſenſe riſing through diuerſitie of reading, vpon occaſion of ſimilitude in the hebrew letters.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                as for example. The Septuaginta read in ſp
                     •
                  endoribus, or decoribus 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
in brightnes, whom commonly al the Proteſtants folow S. Hier. in mentibus, in mountaines, the difference commeth

of the likenes of two hebrew letters daleth and reſ
                     •
                  h. The laſt word, the 70. rendered by genuite, I haue begotten thee. Which word of how great ſtrength & force it is in this place, may be perceaued by vew of the Apoſtle Paules argument,Hebr. 1. v. 5. who out of that verse word proueth the eternal diuinitie of our Sauiour. S. Hierom tranſlated that word, adoleſcentiae tuae, as commonly do the Proteſtants. What is the occaſion of this difference?
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                the great likelines of two wordes: the Septuaginta read the firſt, S. Hierom the ſecond. The printes now vſed though in ſenſe folow S. Hierom, yet miſſe one of his letters, and therefore come nearer to the reading of the 70. And this verſe letter vau for iod, hath certainly made diſagreemēt in ſome other places. As where the Septuaginta read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , fortitudinem meam ad te cuſtodiam,
               Pſal. 58. v. 10 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               my ſtrength vvill I kepe to thee, and ſo S. Hierom read and tranſlated. now it is in the hebrew, fortitudinē eius,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               his ſtrength vvil I keepe to thee, to the great peruerting of the whole ſenſe and ſentence. A like error to that Geneſ. 3.Geneſ. 3. v. 15. (if it be an error, as many verie probably rather thinke it is none) ipſa conteret caput tuum
               
for ipſe or ipſum,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                about which the Proteſtants keepe ſuch a ſtur.
            
                But what ſhould I rehearſe examples of ſuch ſmale errors committed by learned men, by Rabbines, by S. Hierom, by the Septuaginta, vvhereas the proteſtants ſticke not to charge directly the verie Apoſtle S. Paule with error in this kind. For whereas S. Paule writeth, That nether eye hath ſeene, nor eare heard,
               1. Cor. 2. v. 9. 
               nether hath it entred in to the hart of man,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               vvhat God hath prepared for thoſe that loue him, iis qui diligunt illum, whereby we proue that heauen is prepared as a reward for charitie and the workes thereof, and ſo refel their mathematical ſolifidian fanſie,Pretie āſweeres & interpretations. many pretie anſweres they geue vs: as that S. Paule doth after his faſhiō very finely writhe the place.Luther in Eſa. ca. 64. Illyric. in 1. Cor. ca. 2. v. 9 So Luther, Paulus ſententiam commodè detorſit. Illyricus, That to loue, is as much as to beleeue, and ſo charitie as much as faith, and then, to be ſaued by only faith, why may we not interprete it, To be ſaued by only charitie? Qui diligunt (ſaith he) p
                     •
                  nitur pro iis, qui ad eum ſupplices fide confugiunt. Fides per effectum ſuum dilectionem declaratur. Thoſe that loue him, that is thoſe that by faith humbly flye vnto him. Faith is noted by his effect, that is charitie.
               
But Peter Martyr goeth an other way to worke, and thinketh that the Apoſtle read not right. Thus writeth he. Diligentibus ſe, habet Apoſtolus,
               Martyr in 1. Cor. ca. 2 fo. 46. 
               Propheta vero dixit expectantibus: et diſerimen agnoſcitur proueniſſe a magna ſimilitudine duorum elementorum 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
et 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
&c. The Apoſtle hath the vvord louing, the Prophet hath,
               S. Paule miſſed in reading Hebrue. 
               truſting or expecting: and it is vvel knovven that this difference grevve from the great ſimilitude of tvvo hebrevv letters 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
and 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               for ſo much as among the hebrevves the ſame verbe vvritten vvith one letter ſignifieth to truſt or expect, vvith the other, to loue vehemently, vvhich Paule folovved In which cenſure (Chriſtian reader) beſides his ſacrilegious contempt in diuinitie (wherein thou maiſt learne to care the leſſe for their condemning and railing at the fathers, when they are ſo ſawcie with this ſingular Apoſtle) beſides this prophane wickednes in diuinitie, I ſay, he fowly belieth the Apoſtle againſt al humanity. For the ſecōd word, which he obiecteth, hath no ſuch ſignificatiō: & if he meant ſome other word ſomewhat reſēbling the firſt, as other of his brethrē geſſe, yet nether cā they ſerue his turne, for ſo much as the grāmatical rules wil not beare ſuch conſtruction,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                as againſt

Eraſmus and him,Beza in 1. Cor. ca 2. v. 9. Beza hath truely noted. But graunt we to P. Martir, that which he would haue, let S. Paule, I wil not ſay indued with the holy Ghoſt ſo abundantly,The Proteſtantes attribute more to the Iewiſh ſcribes, then to S. Paule the Apoſtle. Paule that piller & foundation of the Church, ſo directed by God, as he could not erre: but only Paule brought vp from his infancy in the law of Moyſes, in cōtinual ſtudie of the law and Prophetes, at the feete of Gamaliel,Act. 22. ſo noble a ſcholemaiſter, let this Paule be deceaued in reading the Hebrew, then how intolerable is their peruerſitie, who wil not ſuffer ſo much to be iudged of the common, baſe, vulgar & ignorant ſcribes, ſo malitiouſly bent againſt Chriſt and al Chriſtianitie, as before is noted.
            
                But hovvſoeuer M. W. ſpeaketh of his fountaynes and origin
                  •
               ls, knovv thou (Chriſtian reader) that other of his ſide far more ſkilfull then he, without any contradiction acknovvledge vvhat ſoeuer I ſay.Caſtalio defenſ. ſuae trā
                  ſlatio. pag. 227. Sebaſtianus Caſtalio by occaſion defending him ſelf agaynſt ſuch a one as M. W. ſeemeth to be writeth thus. Videtur eſſe in ea opinione (ſicut et plerique omnes Iudaei, et nōnulli hac in parte Iudaizantes Chriſtiani) vt in hebraicis bibliis nullum vſque mendum irrepiſſe

putet &c.
               M.W. opinion touching the Hebrew vncorrupt, is luyſh. 
               This good felovv ſeemeth to be of that opinion (as in maner all Ievves are, and ſome Christians dravving to Iudaiſme in this reſpect) that they thinke no error euer to haue creapt into the hebrevv bibles, that God vvould neuer ſuffer that any vvord ſhould be corrupted in thoſe holie bookes: as though the bookes of the old teſtament vvere more holie then thoſe of the nevv, in the vvhich nevv, ſo many diuers readinges are founde in ſo many places, or as though it vvere credible that God had more regarde of one or other litle vvord or ſyllable, then he had of vvhole bookes, vvhereof he hath ſuffered many, I ſay not to be depraued, but to be vtterly loſt. This Iudaical ſuperſtition &c. Hetherto Caſtalio. And D.Humfre. lib. 1. de rat. interpre. pag. 178. Humfrey in his firſt booke de ratione interpretandi, ſayth. Iudaiſmus quot locos deprauauerit &c. The Ievviſh ſuperſtition, hovv many places it hath corrupted, the reader may eaſely find out and iudge.
               Lib. 2. pag. 219. And in the next booke. I like not that men ſhould to much folovve the Rabbins as many do. Nam quae Chriſtum verum Meſſiam promittunt et annūciant, ab
                     •
                  iſtis turpiſſimè c
                     •
                  nſpurcata ſunt. for thoſe places vvhich promiſe and declare Chriſt the true Meſſias, are moſt filthely depraued by them. And Conradus Pellicanus ſometime profeſſor of hebrew

in Zuricke, writing vpon the 8
                  •
                pſalme and thoſe wordes of our tr
                  •
               nſlation, Conuertuntur ad c
                     •
                  r, vvhere, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               cor, the proteſtants according 
                  •
               o the hebr
                  •
               vv prints novv, haue 
                  〈◊〉
                geſſeth vvel,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                & no doubt ri
                  •
               htly that the difference came through the great likenes of tvvo letters 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
and prefe
                  •
               reth our reading before the hebrewes & vvithal accuſeth the Iewes of al times not only ſince Chriſt, but alſo befo
                  •
               e, of n
                  •
               glig
                  •
               nce in cō
               
                  •
               e
                  •
               uing thei
                  •
                holie bo
                  •
               kes. Thus he vvriteth. The old interpreter ſeemeth to haue read one vvay,
               Pellican to. 4. in pſal. 85. verſ 9. 
               vvhereas the Ievves 
                     •
                  ovv reade an other. vvhich I ſay, becauſe I vvould not haue men thinke this to haue proceeded from the 
                     •
                  gnorance or ſl
                     •
                  uthfulnes of the o
                     •
                  d interpreter. Rather vve haue cauſe to finde fault for vvant of diligence in the Antiquaries,
               The Iewes at al tymes negligēt in conſeruing the ſcriptures. 
               and faith in the Ievves, vvho both before Chriſts comming and fithence, ſeeme to haue bene leſſe carefull of the pſalmes, then of their ovvne Talmudicall ſonges. And againe in the ſame volume, vpon that verſe of the pſalme 108. Quis deducet me in ciuitatem munitam?
               Idem ibidē in pſal 108. verſ. 11. 
               quis deducet me in Idumaeam? vvho vvill bring me in to the ſenſed citie? vvho vvill bring me in to Idumaea, vvriteth thus: The Syriake interpreter,

ether folovving, or finding out, or i
                     •
                  er
                     •
                  aſing the fables of the Ievves, tranſlateth this verſe after this ſ
                     •
                  r: vvho vvil bring me in to that vvicked Rome? vvho vvil bring me in to that Conſtantinople of the Idumeans? ſol centiouſly do the Rabbines of the Ievves abuſe their authoritie,
               In vulgo legend is legis ſuae tranſlationibus. 
               not only in their commentaries, but alſo in the tranſlations of their lavv, vvhich cōmonly are to be read, vvhereby the miſerable people reading ſo, is eaſely ſeduced. VVhere beſides our principal purpoſe, vve may learne vvithal,The Proteſtants & Iewes reſemble one the other in many pointes both of fayth and maners. that the Iewes haue one tricke of the Proteſtāts, vz, in to their bible & cōmuniō bookes or ſuch like vvherein is cont
                  •
               yned their maner of Se
                  •
               u
                  •
               ce, to thruſt beſides the text, glaunces againſt the Pope and Church of Rome: as 
                  •
               n deede the hatred of Chriſt, Chriſtianitie, and that Church, commonly runneth together. The like teſtifieth Munſter alleaging theſe vvordes of Ab
                  •
               n Ezra againſt the Chriſtians. F
                     •
                  vv there vvere that beleeued in that man,
               Munſter. in Gen. ca. 27. 
               vvhō theſe (Chriſtians) haue made their G
                     •
                  d, and vvhen Rome did beleeue in the time of Conſtantine a
                     •
                  d altered the vvhole lavv, and put in his banner the ſigne of the crucified man, by the perſvvaſiō of that Monke of Idumaea, that is the Romane biſhop (ſo Aben

Ezra expoundeth it) there vvere none through the vvorld, that obſerued that lavv, beſides a fevv Idumeans: and here of it commeth, that the kingdome of the Romanes is called the kingdome of Edom. Wherein a man may ſee and compare together the Iu
                  •
               aical and Proteſtantical vayne in rayl
                  •
               ng at the Romane Church, and thoſe that liue in the vnitie of it. To the I
                  •
               wes vve are Gentiles, to the Proteſtantes vve are Idolaters. In the Iewes ſpeach and ſenſe, it is al one to ſay, a Romane, a Catholike, or an Idumean, that is a Gentile: ſo is it in the ſpeach and ſenſe of the Proteſtantes, ſaue that in ſteede of Catholike, ſometymes they vſe the vvord, Papiſt. The Ievves peruert their diuine Seruice vvith the manifeſt abuſe of ſcripture,Where is now becom the canon of Carthage Counſel. 4. cap. 47. ſo much vrged by M. Iewel, that nothing ſhould be read or ſung in the church beſide Canonical ſcripture? againſt the Romane faith and Church: and do not our Ievviſh Proteſtantes much more? Cal to remembrance (Chriſtian reader) their Geneua, or rather Gehenna pſalmes ſung in their cōgregations, vvhere (as they tel vs) nothing ſoūd
                  •
               th but gods vvord & the Canonical ſcripture, & ſee vvhether in any old Greeke, Hebrew, Latin, or Engliſh pſalters they find praying againſt the Pope, & to be deliuered frō al Papiſtrie.

That the Pope, as wel as the Turke, vvould thruſt our of his throne,
               Bad time, & worſe reaſō. 
               our lord Ieſus Chriſt, Gods deare ſonne. vvhether in any old Creede, ether Apoſtolike, or made by Apoſtolike or honeſt men, they are taught to beleeue, releaſe & pardō of their ſinnes (vvhich is in theſe mens diuinitie, perfect & entier iuſtification) and that only by faith, as in their rim
                  •
               ng Creede vvithout rime or reaſon they ſing. Finally as the Ievviſh Rabbines thruſting once in to their peoples eares, that Rome is Edom, and the Romane an Edomite, m
                  •
               ke that al ſcrip
                  •
               ure ſpoken againſt Edom, ſoundeth againſt Rome: euen ſo the Proteſtants telling their people, that Rome is Babylon, and the Pope Antichriſt, make them forthwith beleeue, that vvhatſoeuer the ſcripture hath 
                  •
               gainſt Babylon & Antichriſt, that maketh iuſt againſt the Romane Church, the Pope and Catholikes.
            But to returne to our original matter, and to drawe to an end of this queſtion, touching the pure fountaines & originals: for plaine and euident demonſtration how true that is, I referre M.VV. to theſe two general experimē
               tes, which at his leaſure he may vew and

conſider of.  One is, the great diuerſitie of reading, which in many places of the hebrew old teſtament we find.Great varietie in the Hebrew bibles For example whereof, let him peruſe Exod. ca. 2. loſue 22, and 23. Iudic. 3. the firſt of Samuel ca. 10, 17, 22, 28. 2 Samuel 7. Eſa. 14, 33, 54, &c. and Munſters notes vpon thoſe chapters, where he ſhall find the reading and ſenſe oftentymes as far diſagreing as blacke and white. And Munſt. in his preface forewarneth the reader thereof.Munſter in praefat. bib. 
                     •
                  omi primi. 
               Sometymes (ſayth he) euen amongst the hebrvves in one ſentence I haue found diuers reading. For ſometymes diſſenſions are ſound amongst thē, ſome thinking this to be the true reading, ſome thinking contrarie.
            
            
                An other experiment is, that the hebrew printes wante now ſomewhat, which certainly was in the firſt originals. Example whereof may be the Pſalme 144.pſ. 144. which being made according to the hebrew alphabete and hauing the verſes in number anſwering to the hebrew letters, the firſt beginning with Aleph, the ſecond with Beth, the third with Gimel, &c. (as doth the Pſal.pſ. 33. 33.) & therefore ſhould certainly haue 22. verſes, as hath that other, this lacketh one verſe in al hebrew copies,

& ſo wanted it euen in S. Hieroms t
                  •
               me.The Hebrew bibles vnperfit. and euident it is, that the error is in the hebrew, where lacketh the 14. verſe which ſhould beginne with Nan, as it is very playne by the tranſlation of the 70, and by our common Pſalter.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               Fidelis Dominus in omnibus verbis ſuis, & ſanctus in omnibus operibus ſuis. Which verſe in hebrew ſhould haue begun with that letter,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                which of al the alphabete only miſſeth. So as moſt certaine it is, that the hebrew is faultie. And thus to end this matter of the hebrew fountaines & originals, I wil gather that which I haue ſaid in to a fevv concluſions & vvithal anſvvere M.VV. allegations.
            
                The firſt is, that this opinion of the
Proteſtants detracting ſo much from the latin bibles,The proteſtants opiniō iniurious to the holy Ghoſt. and yelding ſo much to the hebrevv, is Iudaical, iniurious to the Church, to the holy Ghoſt and ſtate of the nevv teſtamēt, as vvhereby they profeſſe to thinke more religiō & care of Gods word to haue bene reſident in the Iewiſh ſynagoge, thē in al the Kingdomes, Princes, Paſtors & Prouinces of Chriſtianitie, for theſe thovvſād yeres.
            
                The ſecond, that albeit S. Hierom in
his tyme ſo ſoone after the great perſecutions, the Church being troubled vvith that moſt buſye, terrible and potent

hereſie of the Arrians againſt the diuinitie of Chriſt and the holy Ghoſt,Although S. Hierom appealed from the latin to the Hebrew, yet the like reaſon is not for vs now. vvhen as yet the Canon it ſelfe comprehending the ſacred bookes of ſcriptures, by general authoritie vvas not confirmed and receaued, vvhē (as ſaith S.Auguſt. de doctr. Chriſtiana. lib, 2. ca. 11. Auſtin) there vvas in
                  •
               umerable varietie of latin trāſlations. (Qui ex hebrae
                     •
                   lingua ſcripturas in graecam verterunt, numerari poſſunt, latini autem interpretes nullo modo) and they infinitely differing among them ſelues, as in the ſame place he noteth, when for theſe cauſes there vvas not, nor vvel could be any one vniforme tranſlation approued: although at this tyme S. Hierom might iuſtly appeale from them al to the hebrew as in cōpariſon being moſt pure & incorrupt: yet nether then were the hebrew copies ſimpliciter faultles, as hath bene ſhevved by playne examples and demonſtrations, by the very Proteſtāte bibles, and by confeſsion of the beſt & learnedſt among them. and S. H
                  •
               erom,  though M. W. ſeeme to ground him ſelf moſt vpō him, acknovvledgeth ſo much.S. Hierom thought the hebrew bibles to be in ſome places corrupt and faultie. For examining tvvo places of Deuteronomie vrged by the Apoſtle S. Paule in his epiſtles, both differing in that point vvhich he moſt preſſeth, frō
               
the hebrew bibles extant in S. Hieroms daies, he reſolueth in fine, that the hebrew vvas corrupted, othervviſe then the Apoſtle read it. The one place is:Gal. 
                     •
                  . v. 1
                     •
                  . Deuter. 21. v. 23. 
               Scriptum eſt, Maledictus omnis qui pendet in ligno. It is vvritten, Curſed is euerie one that hangeth on tree. in vvhich ſhort place compared vvith the original in Deuteronomie, there is ſomevvhat to much, and ſomevvhat to litle. To much, becauſe here is omnis, euery one, and in ligno, on tree, which are not now found in the Hebrew,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                though both in the Greeke of the Septuaginta. To litle, becauſe there is in the hebrew, Elohim, which wanteth in S. Paule, maledictus Deo or Dei, curſed of God is euerie one ſo hanged. S.Hiero. in 
                     •
                  al c. 3. Hierom anſwereth thus. My iudgement herein is this, ether that the old bookes of the Hebrevves had othervviſe then they haue novv, or that the Apoſtle put the ſenſe of the ſcripture not the vvordes, or (vvhich I rather ſuppoſe) after the paſſion of Chriſt both in the Hebrevv and in our bookes, the name of God vvas added by ſome mā, that he might make vs more infamous, vvho beleeue in Chriſt accurſed of God. The other place is this. Scriptum est, Maledictus omnis,
               Gal. 
                     •
                   v. 10. Deutron. 27. v. 26. 
               qui nō permanſerit in omnibus quae ſcripta ſun
                     •
                   in libro legis, vt faciat ea. Curſed is euerie

one that abideth not in al thinges vvhich are vvritten in the booke of the lavv to do them. Where the Apoſtles argument hanging principally vpon the two wordes omnis and in omnibus, euerie one, and in al thinges, both which are in the Septuaginta, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
nether in the hebrew, he thus anſwereth the matter.Hier. in Gal. cap. 3. 
               I am vncertayne, vvhether the Septuaginta added, omnis homo, and in omnibus, or vvhether it vvere ſo in the old hebrevv, and aftervvard put out by the Ievves. Thus t
                     •
                   ſuppoſe I am moued for this reaſon, becauſe the vvordes, omnis, and in omnibus,
               The Iewes conuicted by S. Hier. of corrupting of the ſcriptures. 
               al, and in al, as neceſſary to proue that they be al accu
                     •
                  ſed, vvho are of the vvorkes of the lavv, the Apoſtle ſkilful in the hebrevv tonge, and m
                     •
                  ſt cunning in the lavv, vvould neuer haue ſo ſett dovvne, had it not bene ſo in the hebrevv. VVherefore I peruſing the hebrevv volumes of the Samaritanes found there vvritten the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
as much to ſay, as omnis ſiue omnibus, al or in al, and ſo that to agree vvith the Septuaginta. In vayne therefore haue the Ievves razed that out, leſt they ſhould ſeeme to be accurſed, vvhereas the more auncient examples of an other nation, teſtifie that it vvas vvritten ſo. Thus S. Hierom.
            
                Thirdly this I gather, that ſince S.

Hieroms time much more haue the hebrew bookes bene corrupted, and that not in ſmale ind
                  •
               fferent matters, which might better be borne, but in very hye pointes touching the diuinitie and humanitie of our Sauiour, touching his paſsion and the redemption of the world. And therefore when S.S. Hierom prayſing the hebrew bibles of his tyme, nothing iuſtifieth theſe of our time. Hierom ſpeaking of the puritie of the bibles before his birth, is applied to iuſtifie the copies written ſo many ages after his death, and ſo conſequently to iuſtifie al their new Engliſh, Flē
               miſh and Germane interpretations made according to ſome hebrew copies as they pretend, this is as iuſt as Germanes lippes, according to our engliſh prouerbe, whoſe hartes & mindes & religions we ſee to differre infinitely. This is to anſwere of chalke, when the queſtion is propoſed of cheeſe.
            
                Next this we ſee that the condition
of the hebrew tonge is ſuch, that errors are very ſoone cōmitted therein by reaſō of ſmale points of diſtinctiōs, of letters ſo nighly reſembling one an other. Wherevnto ioyne we the malice of the Rabbines. their hatred of the Chriſtians and Chriſtian religion, whom Luther confeſſeth to be as very crucifiers

of the word of Chriſt (eſpecially ſuch places as moſt appertaine to him) as they were of Chriſt him ſelfe, and that they employe their ſtudie herevnto. And if we conſider withal, how in time of the law thorough their default they loſt whole bookes & volumes of their diuine Prophetes, we ſhal fynde ſmal reaſon to moue vs to beleeue, that ſince Chriſt, they ſhould become ſo holy, and deuout, & watchful, & circumſpect, as M.VV. by commending their fountaines and originals would make them.
            
                Finally al this hath bene declared not only by plaine reaſons, factes, examples, demonſtrations, but alſo by plaine confeſsion of thoſe, whom our aduerſaries principally reuerence and honour, and in this matter were moſt ſkilful, by Munſter, by Pellicane, by Sebaſtianus Caſtalio, by Luther and ſuch others.
            And hereof may the reader eaſely learne an anſwer to that queſtiō,An argumēt commonly made for the puritie of the hebrew bibles which many frame as a matter of intricate difficultie, whē theſe corruptions ſhould come in to the hebrew bibles, whether before Chriſts time, or betwene that and S. Hieroms, or from S. Hieroms

time to vs.  Not the firſt ſay they, becauſe
thē Chriſt would haue obiected that vnto them, as he did other faultes.  Nor the ſecond, becauſe S. Hierom
had the hebrew veritie, as he oftē ſpeaketh.  Nor the third, becauſe our hebrew
bibles agree with thoſe of S. Hierom. The āſwere I ſay is eaſye,The anſwere. becauſe whether part of the three ſo euer a man take he can not miſse.  For errors grew in
thoſe bibles, ſome before Chriſt, more after Chriſt vntil S. Hieroms age, and yet more from S. Hierom afterwardes.Very probable, that Chriſt noted the Iewes for corrupting the text of ſcripture. Ioā. 21. v. 25 And wel it may be that Chriſt obiected the ſame vnto them, though it be not recorded in the Teſtament, as certaine it is, many thinges he preached vnto thē and reproued in them, whereof no written record is extant. And wel it may be that both Chriſt obiected and the Euangiliſt noted ſo much, when he writeth as ſpoken of our Sauiour, informing his Apoſtles, and reiecting the doctrine of the Scribes and Phariſees: You haue heard that it vvas ſayd to them of old, Thou ſhalt not kill. Exod. 20. v. 13.Mat. 5. v. 22. v. 28. 
               you haue heard that it vvas ſayd to them of old, Thou ſhalt not cōmitte aduoutrie. Exo. 20.32. 14. It vvas ſayd alſo, VVhoſoeuer ſhal dimiſse his vvife, let him geue her a bill of divorcement.

Deut. 24. 
                  •
               . Againe you haue heard that it vvas ſayd to them of old,
               34. 
               Thou ſhalt not commit periurie, but ſhal performe thy othes to our Lorde.
               38. 
               Exod. ca. 20. v. 7. You haue heard that it vvas ſayd, An eye for an eye, & a tooth for a tooth. Exod. 21. v. 24. You haue heard that it was ſayd,
               43. 
               Thou ſhalt loue thy neyghbour and hate thy enemy. Leuit. 19. v. 18. Where our Sauiour ioyning this later precept, Thou ſhalt hate thy enemy with thoſe other preceptes of the law & written in the law as, Thou ſhalt not kil. Thou ſhalt not cōmit aduoutrie. He that diuorceth his vvife, let him geue her a bil of diuorcement. Thou ſhalt not cōmit periurie. Thou ſhalt performe thy othe. An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: ſheweth playnly that the phariſees taught this later to be the law of god as wel as the former, & therefore no marueil if they put it vnto the law with the reſt, as by chriſts words it ſeemeth moſt lykely they did. And whether this were ſo or not, certaine it is, through the intolerable negligence and iniquitie of Prieſt,The whole law for many yeres together loſt by the Iews Prince and People, that in the tyme of Manaſſes, not one peece or parcel, but the whole law was loſt for many yeres together, as appeareth in the booke of Kinges,4 Reg. c. 22. & at length, as it were by great

chaunce was it found out againe in the tyme of Ioſias, which crime our Sauiour for ought we reade, neuer charged them with al. And therefore if likewiſe he neuer charged them with this, it were no great marueil.
            
                More corrupted might it be after
Chriſt, by how much that nation was more alienated frō the fauour of God. And S. Hierom him ſelfe acknowledgeth ſome corruption, howſoeuer in compariſon he truely accompte the hebrew moſt pure and ſincere in ſuch ſort and for ſuch reaſon as hath bene touched. And S. Iuſtinus the martyr in his cōference with Triphon, talking of the very hebrew bibles, not of the tranſlation of the 70. only, as ſome anſvvere (Ex ſcripturis quae pro confeſſis apud vos habentur teſtimonia petam,
               Iuſtinus martyr tom. 2. pag. 141. ſaith he, I vvil bring proofes of that vvhich I ſay from thoſe ſcriptures vvhich your ſelues acknovvledge for ſuch) of their corruption he geueth three examples.S. Iuſtine the Martyr conuinceth the Iewes of mangling the ſcriptures. One out of Eſdras. A ſecōd out of Ieremie. A third out of the Pſalmes. Out of Eſdras, this. Eſdras ſpake vnto the people. This Paſcha is our ſauiour & refuge.
               Eſd. 
                     •
                  . 
               And if you ſhal perſvvade your ſelues, and this ſhal enter in to your hartes, that you ſhal humble him vpon

the vvood, and after hope in him, this place ſhal not be deſolate for euer, ſaith our lord of hoſtes. But if you vvil not beleeue in him, nor heare his preaching, you ſhal become a ſcorne to the nations. which place is in like maner cited by Lactantius. Apud Eſdram ita ſcriptum eſt.
               Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 18. 
               Et dixit Eſdras ad populum. Hoc Paſcha ſaluator noſt
                     •
                  r est et refugium noſtrum &c. The place out of the prophete Ieremie is this. Ex Ieremiae reſponſis haec verba recîderūt.
               Ierem. ca. 11. 
               Ego vt agnus qui ad ſacrificandum &c. Out of Ieremies anſvveres this haue the Ievves cut avvay:
               Whole ſentences cut out of the bibles by the Iewes. 
               I as a lambe that am lead to be ſacrificed, and againſt me they deuiſed counſels ſayng, come, let vs caſt vvood vpon his bread, and let vs take him avvay from the land of the liuing, and let there be no more memorie of his name. VVhich place containeth the prophetical foreſhewing of a double veritie. Firſt of Chriſts crucifying vpon the croſſe, to which purpoſe the words are plaine.The real preſence. Then of his true preſence in the bleſſed ſacrament. for the Prophete calleth Chriſts natural body vpon the croſſe by the name of bread, in reſpect of Chriſt firſt promiſing the ſame body for euerlaſting foode to his Chriſtians in forme of bread,Ihon 6. and then after accompliſhing

the ſame promiſe by actual deliuery of the ſame body in ſuch forme at the time of his laſt ſupper.Mat. 26. And the place is ſo expoūded by the aūcient fathers,Hierom. in Ieremi. ca. 11. Tertul. in lib. contra Iudaeos. Oecolamp. in Ierem ca. 11. as for example by S. Hierom, and by Tertullian moſt euidently. And Oecolampadius in his commentarie vpō theſe wordes, cōfeſſeth it to haue bene the common ſenſe and interpretation of the auncient and Primitiue church. The third place out of the pſalmes, is this.Pſal. 95. 
               Ex nonageſimo quinto etiam Dauidis pſalmo haec pauca verba recîderunt, a ligno. Cum enim ſcriptum eſſet &c. Alſo from the nynetie and fifth pſalme of Dauid they cut avvay theſe fevv vvords, From the vvood. For vvhereas it vvas vvritten, Declare ye among the nations, that our lord hath raigned from the vvord, they leaft thus much only, Declare ye among the nations, that our lord hath raigned. Of theſe three places thus defaced by the Iewes, the firſt at this time is extant in no hebrew bibles, nor to my knowledge in any greeke tranſlation. The ſecond is in al the hebrew now corrected & reſtored by the Chriſtians. For S. Iuſtine noteth that it was not cleane aboliſhed out of al hebrew bibles, & the fault was but freſhly committed in his daies. Reſectio iſtae
               
ſaith he,Iuſtinus vbi ſupra, pa. 142 
               ex Hieremia, ad huc in quibuſdam exemplaribus quae in Iudaeorum aſſeruantur ſynagogis, ſcripta reperitur. Non enim ita diu eſt, quod haec verba recîderunt. This peece ſo cut of from Ieremie, is as yet found vvrittē in ſome of. thoſe copies that are kept in the Ievves ſynagoge. For it vvas but of late, that they cut avvay theſe vvords. By vvhich vvordes alſo it is euident that he meaneth the very hebrevv bibles, not the tranſlation of the 70. only, vvhereas he ſo preciſely nameth ſuch as vvere preſerued in the Ievves ſynagoges,
               In quibuſdā exemplaribus. 
               ſome of which retayned ſtyl that parcel, but moſt vvanted it. and manifeſt it is that the Ievves nether in our time keepe ſo honorably the tranſlation of the 70. in their ſinagoges, & much leſſe did they ke
                  •
               pe it in S. Iuſtines daies, vvhen (as appeareth by the vvhole diſcours and manifeſt vvordes of this author in this ſame place) they much more deteſted it. The third, a ligno, is vvanting in al greeke and hebrevv bibles, & is only reſerued in our eccleſiaſtical Breuiarie, & certaine Doctors, as Tertullian, Lactantius, Caſsiodorus,Auguſt. in Pſal. 9
                     •
                  . and S. Auſtin, vvho notvvithſtanding ſo readeth it, as though it vvere the common reading in the churches

of Africa in his time, and maketh no mention of any other reading, vvhere thoſe vvords ſhould be leaft out.
            
                And from S. Hieroms time vntil our
daies very probable it is, that theſe errors and corruptions haue multiplied, not only for the general and particular reaſons already touched, but for this eſpecially, that whereas ſince that time the Iewes obſtinacie, barbarouſnes, impietie, and ignorance in their owne tonge hath much increaſed, the Chriſtians notwithſtanding haue not had any great occaſion to handle much or exerciſe that language, & therefore haue had ſmaler regard to bookes written therein, without which as firſt of al, they perfectly receaued the Chriſtian faith, and planted it in theſe partes of Chriſtendome, ſo without it, haue they as perfectly continued in the ſame, and now enlarged it euen to the extreme corners of the world,Our firſt preachers & forefathers perfecte Chriſtians without hebrew bibles and without the which they haue for theſe thouſād yers liued moſt chriſtiāly as Saintes, & chriſtianly as Saintes finiſhed their tēporal liues, & after liued with Chriſt for euer.
            And now touching M. W.pag. 19.20. queſtion demaunding how the Church hath faithfully conſerued the bookes of ſcriptures, who thus findeth fault with

the hebrew bibles as corrupt, I anſwere as before,The church hath faithfully cōſerued the ſcriptures, notwithſtāding the corruption of the hebrew bibles. that the Church hath moſt faithfully conſerued the ſcriptures, albeit not in this or that tonge, which the wanton curioſitie of euery fantaſtical heretike coueteth. We haue the true word and goſpel of Chriſt, though perhaps we haue not ten words in that lāguage which our Sauiour ſpake. And then why may we not haue the law & the prophetes, though there were neuer an hebrew bible in the vvorld? Againe vnreaſonably demaundeth he of our church for hebrevv bibles vncorrupt, vvhich perhaps neuer had any ſuch, and neuer vndertooke to keepe the vvord of God in that language more then in Arabike or Syriake, no more then ſhe vndertooke to keepe S. Matthevves Goſpel in hebrevv, or S. Paules epiſtle to the hebrevves. But if ſhe deliuer faithfully to the Chriſtians,
                  
                     •
                  he office of the true Church. that vvhich ſhe receaued of Chriſt and his Apoſtles touching al parts of Chriſtian faith and religion, be it vvritten or vnvvritten, in one language or other, ſhe performeth that, vvhich Chriſt committed to her charge, and vvhich is ſufficient for the ſaluation of euery Chriſtian, and vvhereby ſhe proueth her

ſelfe to be the Houſe and Church of the liuing God,
               1. Tim. 3. verſ. 15. the ſure Piller and ground of truth, the Spovvſe of Christ,
               Eph. 5. c. and faythful mother of al Chriſtians.
            M. D.D. Whit. in the defenſe, &c. tract. 2 pag. 87. tract. 7. pag. 257.265.266.285.287.289. Whitgift thinketh it vntolerable that the Engliſh miniſters ſhould appoint, vvhat maner of apparel is cōuenient for them ſelues to vveare, vvhat ceremonies or rites ſhould be vſed in their poore Seruice. He by many arguments taketh from them al authoritie in ſuch matter, & vvil haue the vvhole Miniſterie altogether to depend & be directed by the ſuperior magiſtrates, the Quene and the Lordes of her Coū
               cel.No more reaſon that euery particular man ſhould preſcribe the church in this, then that euerie ſubiect ſhould preſcribe the prince how to rule his realme. Then hovv much more vntolerable is it, that ſome one or other ſingle miniſter ſhould appoint the vniuerſal Church & gouernours thereof, in what maner and faſhion the word of God muſt be kept, in what language, as it were in what kind of paper or parchement he wil haue it written. As if ſome buſye headed felow in a cōmon welth not contented to be ruled & preſerued by his Prince in true religion, iuſtice and quiet poſſeſſiō of his owne, ſhould farther take vpon him to preſcribe vvhat maner prieſtes, hovv qualified, and in vvhat Vniuerſitie brought vp,

ſhould preach vnto him the vvord of God, & miniſter the ſacraments: vvhat ſort of men ſhould exequute vnto him iuſtice, and examine his caſes of law: by what capitaynes, of vvhat byrth, countrie and experience, by vvhat kind of defence, open force, or ſecret policie, fight by ſea, or rather land, ſtrength of horſmen or footemen, he vvil be mainteined in peace and quietnes.
            
               The proteſtantes can not poſſibly beleue any bible deliuered them by the Cath. Church in what language ſo euer.And vvhat meaneth he to require for pure bibles in any language of our Church, vvhich he holdeth for Antichriſtian, and the prelates thereof and al other Catholikes, for members of Antichriſt. For vvhiles he thus thinketh, vvhat ſoeuer bibles, hebrevv or not hebrevv, Greeke or Arabike vve offer him, he can by reaſon yelde no more credite vnto them then to our latin, no more then to our traditions, or any other thing proceeding from vvarrant and credite of ſuch profeſſed enemies of Chriſt: as vvel and learnedly proueth S.Auguſt. de vtil. credendi ca. 14. Auſtin in his booke de vtilitate credendi. Much more agreable to reaſon & Chriſtiā diuinitie is it, for him and his to reſort to their ovvne church of elect & predeſtinate,

or hovv ſo euer he liſt to terme them, vvhich hath ſo floriſhed theſe many hundred yeres, by vvitnes of their eccleſiaſtical ſtories, by report of M. Fox in his Actes and monumentes.Fox actes & monumētes edit. 1563. pag. 44.45.91.101.102.103.108.141 140.235.251 Let him reſort to the brethren of Lions, to VVycleffe, and the VVycleffiſ
                  •
               es, to Robert Rigges, Iohn Puruey, Henry Crompe, Iohn of Chlum, Iohn Scut, William Havvlam, Richard VVich, Iohn Hus, alias Iohn Gooſe, the Huſsites and Thaborites of Bohemia and ſuch other,The proteſtantes church and ſucceſsion. vvho (as they tel vs) vvere glorious pillers, & doctors, and maintainers of their church and Proteſtant-goſpel, and like gliſtering ſtarres ſhined in the face of the Chriſtiā world. And that I tye him not to particular mē, or one only prouince of Bohemia, in many other prouinces and kingdomes of the world hath their church continued, as moſt confidently writeth D.Whit. in the defenſ. &c. tract. 8. chap. 6. pag. 465. VVhitgift againſt T. C. who framing an argument againſt the Archbiſhops authoritie drawē from this ſuppoſition, VVhat if the vvhole church be in one prouince or in one realme, vvhich hath bene,
               Act. cap. 
                     •
                  . 
               and is not vnpoſſible to be againe, M. D. VVhit. anſwereth it thus. To your ſuppoſition if the

vvhole church &c.
               How ſtandeth this with the inuiſibilitie & general, ſuppreſſion of the Church, which the Tower diſputers ſo painfully labour to proue? The ſecond days conference. 
               I ſay that if the ſkie fal you may catch larkes, as the common prouerbe is, making it as vnpoſsible a caſe to haue the church of Chriſt in one only kingdom, as it is vnpoſsible for the ſkie to fal. And preſently in the ſame page: Do you not knovv, that the church of Chriſt is diſperſed thorough the vvhole vvorld, and can not novv (after Chriſts aſcenſion) be ſhut vp in one kingdome much leſſe in one prouince, except you vvil become Donatiſtes? He that is not vvilfully blinde, may ſee in to vvhat ſtraightes you are driuē vvhen you are conſtrained to vſe ſuch impoſſibilities for reaſons. And M. VV. in this booke telleth vs,Whit. cōtra Sander. p. 47 that there neuer wanted mightie States, & Princes, and nations, who withſtoode the biſhop & Sea of Rome as they do now. Nullis temporibus defuerūt (ſayth he) nec Epiſcopi, nec Preſbyteri, nec Imperatores, nec populi &c. There neuer vvanted at any time, nether Biſhops, nether Prieſtes, nor Emperours, nor nations, nor Priuate men, vvhich had not rather be condemned of your church for heretikes, then to mainteine the Catholike communion of your Apoſtaſie. wherefore hauing ſo large a ſcope, let him repayre to that his owne church and ſucceſsion of Proteſtantes, and of them ſeeke

for the true written bible, of whom he receaueth the ſenſe and meaning of the ſame, not to our church and ſucceſsion of Catholikes, whom he chiefly condemneth for erring in the true ſenſe, and then reproueth as bitterly for corrupting the true text.
            The concluſion of al is this. if as a Chriſtian, as an obedient child of the Church, and willing to learne,A ſhort and true anſwer to M. W. demaund. if thus he demaūd of the Church for true bibles, ſhe can ſerue him with more varietie of ſuch, & in mo languages, then it wil ſtande with his eaſe to reade.Such demaunders wil neuer be ſatiſfied, nether can they, while they remain ſo mynded. Mat. 22. v. 18. Mat. 7. v. 6. If he demaund this as an heretike, as a rebellious Apoſtata, as to picke quarels and maintaine ſtrife, the Church hath nought to do with him. She anſwereth as our ſauiour anſwered the Phariſees. Quid me tentatis hypocritae? & as he taught his Apoſtles: Nolite dare ſanctum canibus. She ſendeth him to his owne ſcattered and diuided cōgregation, in to whoſe communion he hath thruſt him ſelfe, & vnder whoſe falſe banner he fighteth againſt her, vvhom the vniuerſal Chriſtian vvorld, in al times and ages vntil our daies, hath acknovvleged, for the only, true, catholike & apoſtolike church of Chriſt.
            
               And hitherto of the hebrevv fountaines and originals, vvherein I haue ſta
                  •
               ed ſomevvhat the longer, firſt of al that the reader may ſee that not vvithout iuſt cauſe I charge M.W. vvith a manifeſt lie,pag. 16. in ſaing vve flee the hebrevv, for that vve knovv it to containe the aſſured bane and deſtruction of our cauſe. He may here perceaue in part,We honour & eſteeme of the hebrew bibles notwithſtanding we alter not our fayth vpon pretence thereof. vvhat reaſon, vvhat argument, vvhat conſcience moueth the Church thus to preſcribe, and vs to folovv the Churches ordinance herein. That vve nether feare, nor contemne, nor refuſe it, but for the vnderſtāding of the true ſenſe, ſtudie and honour it as much as he, though vve hange not our faith vpon it ſo, as if the Ievves depraue a text touching Chriſts diuinitie, vve therefore vvil denie him to be God, and if they raze out the only text, that foreſhevveth the maner of his paſsion and crucifying, vve vvil not for al that geue ouer our faith, that in ſuch ſort he vvas crucifyed for vs.
            Secondarely thus I haue done to ſatisfie M· VV. d
                  •
               maund, who chalengeth vs ſo confidently, to ſhevve any error in the originals. vvho affirmeth ſo peremptorily thoſe places to be

               ſafe and vntouched, which appertaine to the proofe of our Chriſtian religion. Which how true it is he now ſeeth, if he wil beleeue ether reaſon, or his owne maiſters. Beſides that his argument is ouer ſlender, when he wil conclude thoſe originalles to be pure, becauſe there is no corruption in matters of cō
               trouerſie, as though there could be no errors, but thoſe which proceede of wilfulnes and malice againſt Chriſtian religion:The Proteſtants, partial iudges for the Iewes againſt the Chriſtians and Church Catholike. as though the Iewes could not erre by negligence, ignorance, and other humane infirmitie, by which Caluine, Beza & the reſt of that knot can imagine very many, and the ſame very groſſe errors to haue crepte in to our latin bibles. But true is the old prouerbe, Graculus graculo, Like wil to like as I haue ſaid. Of the Iewes for neare alliance and brotherhode they iudge ſo diuinely, as though they were halfe goddes, who neuer erred. ether of malice▪ ether of wilfulnes, or ignorance, or ſlowthfulnes, or want of due conſideration, or thorough any kind of like ether ſinne or imbecillitie. But of the Chriſtian Catholike Church, of the Biſhops and Paſtors, by whom they haue that peece of Chriſtianitie which

yet they retaine, they deeme moſt wickedly: them they accompt more diſſolute, more irreligious, more careles & negligent in matters diuine, then the worſt people that liue vnder the cope of heauen. Theſe in the ſame kind haue erred, both of malice, and of wilfulnes, and of contempt, and of negligence, by al maner of faulting, voluntarie & inuoluntarie, wherevnto a man may poſsibly fal.
            Thirdly, ſome reaſon mouing me thus to doe, was becauſe nether M. Martin in his Diſcouerie, much leſſe the preface of the new teſtament (handling only ſuch thinges, as were incidēt to that booke, that is, geuing reaſon why in that tranſlatiō the latin vulgar edition vvas folowed before the common greeke teſtamentes) had any occaſiō to treate of this matter. For albeit M.Diſcouer. c. 22 num 9.10.11.12▪ & in the preface nu. 39. Martin proueth errors in matters hiſtorical to be in our cōmon hebrew bibles, yet he maketh no ſtay therein but rather preſuppoſing the hebrew text to be altogether true, as the aduerſaries pretend, he ſo much the more diſcouereth their wilfulnes and peruerſitie, who in their tranſlations depart ſundrie times frō thoſe hebrew

originalls, which they ſeeme to magnifie as altogether faultles and vnſpotted.
            One principal corruption of great moment and importance he obiecteth out of the 21. pſalme,In the preface to the reader, nu. 44. and c. 22. num. 9. where the prophet ſaith in the perſon of Chriſt, They haue pearced my handes and feete, which by the Iewes being maliciouſly altered by mutation of one or other letter in to, As a lyon my hands and feete, without wit, reaſon, or common ſenſe, whereby is euacuated the beſt and cleareſt prophecie in the whole body of ſcripture touching the maner and faſhion of Chriſts crucifying, who beſides M. W. would ſo blindly haue diſſembled it, & yet ſtil ſing vs the old ſong of the pure fountaines?
            It is written that not long ſithence, certaine euangelical Anabaptiſtes lately conuerted from Iudaiſme, reading that place of S. Peter in Caſtalios tranſlation,Act. 2. v. 
                     •
                  5. 
               Ieſum Nazarenum ſceleſtis manibus comprehendiſtis, et ad palum alligatum ſustulistis, Ieſus of Nazareth you haue apprehended, and binding him to a poſt or ſtake, ſo made him avvay,
               Sixtus 
                     •
                  enenſ. in Bibliotheca ſancta. lib. 
                     •
                  . pag. 648. vpon this text fel to a great and daungerous contention among them ſelues in their congregations,

whether Chriſt were pearced hand and foote with nailes as the Church beleeueth, or were only bound hand and foote to a gibbet, as the faſhion among the Turkes is now a daies, & as the other two theeues were done to death which were crucifyed with him. And remoue the traditiō of the Church (which theſe good felowes care not for) and this place of Dauid,The Proteſtāts ſecretly begin to diſproue the Churches fayth touching the maner of Chriſts crucifying. and certainly out of the old teſtament it can not, perhaps nether out of the new, be clearely proued to a contentious heretike, that he was crucified in ſuch ſort as the truth is, and we beleeue. For as the heretikes now a daies at home in our coūtrie gladly abhorre the name of the croſſe, & al ſignes or memories there of, & both in priuate talking & publike preaching and writing,Calfh. againſt the croſſe. rather vſe the name of gallovves or gibbet: ſo others abrode in their commentaries vpon the ſcripture much vrge the ſame, and willingly take and proſecute al cōiectures and geſſes, that tende to the proofe thereof.Marlor. in Pſal. 22. v. 17 So for example Marlorate fauouring (as it plainely appeareth) Caſtalios tranſlation and the Iewiſh reading, writeth expreſſely. De foſſ
                     •
                  one manuum ac pedum Chriſti, in historia paſsionis

Chriſti, nihil memorarunt Euangeliſtae. Of pearcing Chriſts handes and feete, in the ſtorie of Chriſts paſſion the Euangeliſtes make no mention. as much to ſay, as therefore we are not bound to beleeue it. For by theſe mēs doctrine, we are bound to beleeue nothing, which is not proued by ſcripture. And the ſelf ſame affirmeth Wolf. Muſculus, vz,Muſcul. io Ma
                     •
                  . cap. 27. that the Euangeliſtes make no declaration that Chriſt ſhould be put to death in any ſuch maner. And it may wel be that M. W. accounteth this for a trifle, nether careth greatly which way Chriſt died, ſo that he confeſſe him to haue died one way or other.Bucer. in Pſal. 22. v. 17. For ſo touching this place writeth Martin Bucer that great Rabbine and Apoſtle of Cambridge Vniuerſitie in the ſacramētarie hereſie, & M.W. firſt predeceſſor in that profeſsion & chaire which he now poſſeſſeth. His wordes are theſe. Although it be novv in the hebrevv bibles, As a lyō my handes & feete, yet Felix Pratenſis vvitneſſeth, that he read, Foderunt,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               They pearced my handes and feete in a certaine commentarie, vvhere vnto the Ievves geue as much credite, as to Dauid him ſelfe. Sed cum Iudaeis ob voculam ego nunquam contend crim, But I for my part (ſaith Bucer) vvould neuer

contēd vith the Ievves for ſo trifling a vvord. And Zuinglius in his Tigurine tranſlation in deede contendeth not, but ſtriketh it quite out, and putteth in for it, Tanquam leo, As a lyon, tranſlating it more like a Iew and ſworne aduerſarie of the goſpel, then a Chriſtian. For whereas the euangeliſt writeth, applying it to our ſauiour, Os non comminuetis ex eo,
               Ioā. 19. v. 36. 
               A bone of him you ſhal not breake, he tranſlateth this place of the pſalmiſt cleane oppoſite to the euangeliſt thus,Zuing. tom. 3. in E
                     •
                  chirid. pſalmorum. Pſa. 21. 
               Concilium peſſimorum frangit manus meas et pedes meos inſtar leonis.
               The Tigurine tranſlatiō, wicked and Iuyſh againſt the crucifying of Chriſt. to like purpoſe is the tranſlation of Leo Iudae Cinzit me, 
                     •
                  cu leo manus meas, &c. 
               The aſſembly of vvicked men breaketh my handes and feete like a lion. By that wicked interpretatiō ſecretly alſo furthering the deteſtable opinion of other his brethren before touched, againſt the maner of Chriſts crucifying.
            But to let this paſſe vvhich requireth a larger diſcourſe, how ſoeuer M. W. like or diſlike the opiniō, here of I conclude, that theſe fountaines, which he calleth,Pag. 16. 
               Moſt pure and holeſome, are in manie reſpectes impure and peſtilent, and haue in them far greater errors maliciouſly thruſt in againſt matters of ſuch height, thē he and his felowes ſhal find in our latin bibles ſo long as they ſhal

be able to reade one letter in thē.The concluſion. They haue errors againſt Chriſts diuinitie, they haue errors againſt his humanitie, errors againſt his paſsion, errors againſt the force of his redemption, and many other errors againſt other partes of our religion. Theſe errors Luther him ſelf confeſſeth, Lyra a Iew borne acknowledgeth, reaſon and experience cōuinceth, S. Iuſtine to Triphon a Iew auoucheth and approueth, S. Hierom by plaine demonſtration ſheweth: and to paſſe by others, Caſtalio accompteth M.W. halfe a Iew for thinking ſo ſuperſtitiouſly, as here he pretendeth. And except he can bring better arguments, then hitherto he hath, he geueth vs occaſion to thinke him not only ſcarce halfe a Chriſtian, but alſo ſcarce halfe a wiſe man, who of ſo difficile & hard a point pronounceth ſo raſhly, ſo vnprobably, and ſo vnreaſonably. Whereof I inferre, that not ſo lightly as theſe fellowes imagine, but with great and diuine wiſdome, the general Councel autorized the aūcient latin tranſlation ſo corrected and amended, as in the Canon of the ſame Councel it is appointed: although peraduenture whē thoſe fathers ſo decreed, they intended not

this compariſon, in to which by the importunitie of our aduerſaries we are now drawen.
         
         
            CHAP. XIII. Of the puritie of our latin teſtamēt in reſpecte of the greeke copies novv extant. Item a compariſon of our tranſlator vvith al other
                  •
                of this age, vvith an anſvvere to thoſe obiections vvhich M. VV. deuiſeth againſt him.
            
               IT reſteth now that I finiſh the other two partes which as yet remaine of the laſt chapter, touchinge the exact veritie of our latin tranſlation, & the impietie in appealing from that to the greeke and hebrew. But before I come thether, reaſon requireth ſomwhat to be ſpoken of the new teſtamēt in greeke, as hath bene ſpoken of the old in hebrew. And it may be that the Proteſtantes find more fault with vs, for that at the leaſt in the new teſtamēt we leaue not our old latin and folow the greeke, in which tonge the Euāgeliſtes vvrote. To iuſtifie our doing

herein, much may ſerue of that vvhich hath bene ſaid in the laſt chapter, much more may be ſeene in the preface before mencioned of the nevv teſtament, vvhereof as I ſaid I vvil make my aduantage for breuities ſake, becauſe I perceaue this trifle riſeth and increaſeth betvvene my fingers more then ether my ſelf, or others vvould haue it. VVherefore I vvil gather to M. VV. handes the ſumme of that which is there ſpoken,The preface of the new teſtament. becauſe he ſeemeth neuer to haue read it, and after adde one or two ſhort obſeruations of mine owne & ſo paſſe away.
            Tē reaſons there ſhal he find,Reaſons to iuſtifie the latin teſtament, in cō
                  pariſon of the Greeke. why we in our tranſlation folovved rather the latin then the greeke: the tenth reaſō vvhereof may be ſubdiuided in to ten reaſons more at the leaſt, prouing the latin to be purer then the greeke, by moſt cleare examples, fortified vvith the authoritie of Tertullian, of S. Hierō, of the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie, of Caluin, of Beza, of Eraſmus, of the Engliſh tranſlations and tranſlators them ſelues. VVhich diſcourſe is concluded vvith this approbation of that excellent man Theodorus Beza.Beza in praefat. noui teſtamenti anno 1556. 
               Hovv vnvvorthely (ſaith he) and vvithout cauſe

doth Eraſmus blame the old interpreter, as diſſenting from the greeke? he diſſented I graūt from thoſe greeke copies vvhich Eraſmus had gotten,
               The greeke printes now in vſe are not ſufficiēt to diſproue the Latin teſtament. 
               but vve haue found not in one place, that the ſame interpretatiō vvhich he blameth, is grounded vpon the authoritie of other greeke copies, and thoſe moſt auncient. Yea in ſome number of places, vve haue obſerued that the reading of the latin text of the old interpreter, though it agree not ſome time vvith our greeke copies, yet is it much more cōuenient, for that it ſeemeth he folowed ſome truer and better copie. After this, folow eight other reaſons ſhewing our latin tranſlation to agree generally with the greeke or with more graue & ſufficient authoritie thē are the greeke copies now extant: after which folow many examples wherein Beza particularly chargeth the greeke copies of corruption, whom in that caſe the engliſh trāſlations folow. Al which maketh moſt euidently for vs & iuſtifieth our doing. For if in truth (euen by the confeſsion of our greateſt aduerſaries) our latin be purer then the greeke, if our latin be framed exactly though not to the vulgar greeke examples now vſual, yet to more auncient and perfect examples as Beza hath obſerued,

if the greeke teſtaments haue in them many faultes, errors & corruptions, as Beza in word auoucheth and by manifold examples ſheweth, if this be ſo true that our engliſh tranſlators them ſelues at their pleaſure leaue the greeke and folow our latin, with what face, reaſon, or conſcience, can M.W. crie vpon the pure and vncorrupt originals, which him ſelf and his maſters proue to be ſo impure and contaminated? With what honeſtie can he cal vs to the greeke, from which them ſelues depart ſo licentiouſly? Vnto theſe I wil ioyne only three ſhort obſeruations, which the diligent reader perhaps may amplifie by verie many particular examples, and ſo wil come to confer our tranſlator with our aduerſaries.
            
                The firſt may be the difference of
our greeke copies now, from the old, whereof let this be an example.Beza in Ioā, ca. 7. v. 53. Beza reiecteth the whole ſtorie of the adulterous womā whereof mentiō is made in the eight of S. Ihon. His reaſon is,Veteres illi reiecerunt. becauſe the old fathers did ſo, and it was not in the old greeke teſtaments: which he proueth by the authoritie, of S. Chryſoſtom of Theophilact, of Nonnus, and S. Hierom. and amongſt 17 old copies of Henrie

Stephen, one vvanted it, the reſt had it, but ſo,
               Beza doubteth of a part of S. Iohns goſpel. 
               that in their reading there vvas maruelous varietie. whereof he inferrteh, Tāta varietas lectionis facit vt de totius iſtius narrationis fide dubitem. This great varietie of reading maketh me to doubt of the truth of the vvhole matter. Yet notwithſtanding this cōtrarie practiſe of the old greekes and greeke teſtaments, and infinite varietie in the copies, the new printes haue it (for ought I can find) vniuerſally and agreably: and in al our engliſh teſtaments (trāſlated after the greeke) it is as canonical as any other part of S. Iohns goſpel. So that herein appeareth a great diuerſitie betwene the old greeke teſtaments and the new, and therefore daungerous it is to folowe theſe new, if we can not do it but with condēnation of the old: & yet as daungerous is it to folow the old, if we can not do it without condēnation of that which the church holdeth for a part of S. Iohns goſpel.Bez. ad Eph. 3. verſ. 14. The like noteth thae ſame writer in the epiſtle to the Epheſ. the 3. chap.In graecis no extat. a parcel whereof in S. Hierōs time VVas not in the greeke bookes, but only in the latin. but (ſaith Beza) In omnibus veteribus libris et ſcholiis quoque graecis haec particula additur. Novv it is added in al the old greeke copies & ſcholies alſo.
            
            
               
                A ſecond obſeruation may be the
raſh & vnconſiderate additions which haue bene made in the greeke text.Additions raſhly made to the greeke. an example whereof may be taken from the ſame Euangeliſt and the ende of the ſame chapter,Ioan. 8. v. 59 where in the greeke is added this peece, Exiuit e templo, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Tranſiens per medium illorum, et ſic praeteriit. touching vvhich thus writeth Beza.Beza in Ioā. cap. 8. v. 59. 
               Theſe vvords are found in verie auncient copies, but I thinke as doth Eraſmus, that the firſt part is taken out of Luke the 4. v. 30. and creapt into the text by fault of the vvriters vvho found that vvritten in the margēt, and that the later part 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
vvas added to make this chapter ioyne vvel vvith the next. And thus to thinke I am moued not only becauſe nether Chryſoſtome nether Auguſtine make any mention of this peece, but alſo becauſe it ſeemeth not to hāg together very probably for if he withdrew him ſelfe out of their ſight, hovv vvent he through the middeſt of thē? etc. & ſo forth diſputeth againſt this parte as altogether vnprobable & not likely to be true. Yet is it now generally in moſt greeke copies, how beit the engliſh tranſlators leaue it out of their teſtaments.Of the yere 1561. 1562. 1577. 1579. The reaſon I take to be, becauſe howſoeuer they bragge of

their greeke and hebrew originals, the truth is,No certaintie in the Engliſh tranſlations they tranſlate nether the one nor the other (except ſometimes ſome few words for a ſhew) but only take that, which Beza in latin deliuereth vnto them. And yet (whereof I marueil) the freſheſt tranſlation which profeſſeth to folowe Beza,anno 1580. & inſcribeth the booke thus: The Testament of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt tranſlated out of greeke by Theodore Beza, and Engliſhed by L. T. putteth this in, which Beza leaueth out and againſt vvhich Beza diſputeth ſo earneſtly that it can not be ſcripture,Scripture made Canonical & not Canonical according to Bezaes fanſie. as being contrarie to it ſelf. But for excuſe of the Engliſh translator it may be (and true it is) that Beza one yere thought thus, an other yere thought otherwiſe.
                  Of the yere 1556.
                  Of the yere 1565.
                And ſo in one Teſtament of his, held that for falſe & Apocryphal, which in an other Teſtament he gaue out & autorized as ſacred & Canonical. Vnto this place thou maiſt referre that peece which the Proteſtāts ſo gloriously ſing and ſay in the ende of the Lords praier. For thine is the Kingdome, the povver, and glorie for euer and euer. Amen. which as Eraſmus disliketh, confeſſing it notwithſtanding to be,Eraſ. in Annot. 
               In omnibus graecis exemplaribus & nulla latino, In al greeke

teſtaments and no one Latin, ſo Bullinger himſelf counteth it to be a mere patch ſowed to the reſt, by I knowe not whō, and alloweth wel of Eraſmus iudgmēt,Bulling. decade 5. ſer
                     •
                  . 5. reprouing Laurentius Valla for finding fault with the latin editiō becauſe that lacketh it. Non eſt (ſaith he) quod Laurentius Valla ſtomachetur &c. There is no reaſon vvhy Laurence Valla ſhould take the matter ſo hotely, as though a great part of the Lordes praier vvere cut a vvay. Rather their raſ
                     •
                  nes was to be reproued who durſt preſume to peece on their toyes vnto the Lords praier.
               Aſſuere ſuas nuga
                     •
                  .
            
            
                A third obſeruation may be,Parcels of importance heretically leaft out of the greeke. that
the greeke teſtaments omit vpon light occaſions, often times that which they ſhould not, and which the latin retaineth for autentical & canonical.Before cap. 10. pa. 248 Luc. 1. v. 35. Example where of may be the place before noted of the incarnatiō. Quod naſcetur ex te ſanctum, vocabitur filius dei. That (ſaith the Arch
                  •
               ngel to our bleſſed ladie) vvhich of thee ſhal be borne holy, ſhal be called the ſonne of God. In which ſentence the two ſyllables, ex te, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , what force they cary againſt the Anabaptiſts hath bene declared. Now conſider the gener
                  •
               l corruption of the greeke cop
                  •
               es in that behalf. Of them thus writeth Carolus Molineus a great

Proteſtant in his new teſtament.Carol. Molin. in nou. teſtament. part. 1. 
               I haue read, exte, in moſt aūcient bibles, of vvhich one copie I haue, printed at Lions▪ the yere 1479. and that is the old vndoubted reading. for ſo reade the old and nevv Breuiaries and Romane offices. But Eraſmus, vvhom Bucer and Bullinger folovv, ſeemeth only to haue fallen vpon a copie in this part vnp
                     •
                  rfite, the error vvhereof is ſpread a broade in many copies both greeke and latin printed at Baſil, Zuricke, Paris, and Lions, you and at Geneua alſo in the ordinarie gloſſe vpon the three firſt Euangeliſtes ſet forth the yere 1549. and 1554. but novv of late the Geneuians, eſpecially Theodorus Beza haue acknovvleged and mended this error.
               See the greeke teſtament of Baſil print of the yere 1536. 1540. 1543. Zuri
                     •
                  . 1547. Geneua 1565. 1576. how it is mended I know not, but ſure I am in the text of any greeke copie I could neuer yet for it, and Beza in his mending doth ſhew ſo notable a tricke of an Anabaptiſt as may be. In the annotations of his teſtament, he writeth of this peece wel and chriſtianly thus.Beza in teſtamēt. 1556. in Luc. 1. verſ. 35. 
               Exte, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , of thee. ſo I found it vvritten in ſome bookes of the old edition, and in the booke of Complutum, and in many places of Epiphanius. And Athanaſius in h
                     •
                  s epiſtle to Epictetus biſhop of Corinth, ſhevveth that ſo vve muſt reade. For thus vvriteth he. The Angel ſaid not ſimply that vvhich ſhalbe be borne in thee, but of

thee,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               that vve ſhould beleeue that vvhich vvas borne, by nature to haue bene formed of her. By which reaſons he proueth that to be the true reading in the greeke, the latin teſtaments generally concurring therewith.Beza furthereth the Anabaptiſtes againſt Chriſts incarnation of the bleſſed Virgin. But how now amēdeth he his teſtamēt? thus. whereas before it was in the margent of ſome greeke teſtamēts, as appeareth by the print of Iohn Criſpine the yere 1553. he leaft it cleane out both of text and margent of the greeke teſtaments which after this were printed in Geneua, as appeareth in the two prints of the teſtamēt ſet forth by Beza him ſelf the yere 1565. in greeke and latin, and the greeke teſtament printed after that by Henricus Stephanus the yere 1576. ſo that the other true reading remaineth only in the latin, which againſt an Anabaptiſt, or any other Proteſtant making no accompt of the latin, farther then it agreeth with the greeke, is nothing worth. And therefore the engliſh bible of the yere 1561. in this point drawing towards Anabaptiſme, as alſo the bible printed the yere 1577. leaueth it cleane out.
            An other error of like qualitie, though not of like quantitie and greatnes

is in the 36.C
                     •
                  rol Mol. in teſtamēt. par. 64. 
               verſe, ca. 17. of S. Luke vvhich (as the ſame man ſayth) vvanteth in Euthimius an auncient greeke vvriter & in Theophilact, and in al the copies printed at Baſile, and in the tranſlation of Zuricke, and in the bibles printed at Geneua, nether Eraſmus, nor Sanctes Pagninus, nor Bucer, nor Bullinger, nor Brentius, nor Caluin, reade it. ſed habetur in meis antiquis, et in vulgari aeditione. but it is in my old bibles, and in the vulgar edition. Hereof it riſeth, that Eraſmus in ſundrie places would leaue out verſes, becauſe they were not in his greeke copies, Beza contrariewiſe would put them in, becauſe he found them in his. For example.Mar. 11. v. 26 Of that ſentēce Mar. 11. v. 26. Quòd ſi vos n
                     •
                  n dimiſ. ritis, nec pater veſter qui in caelis eſt, dimittet vobis peccata veſtra, Eraſmus writeth,Beza in illū locum. 
               that in the greateſt number of greeke teſtaments this verſe is not read, neether in Theophilacte. Nos tamē in plarisque vetuſtis exemplaribus reperimus, atque ad
                     ••
                   in Theophilacto Romano (ſaith Beza) yet I found it in moſt of the auncient copies, & in The ephilact printed at Rome. A ſm
                  •
               le ſtudent with meane diligence may enlarge this by verie many examples, & the greeke teſtaments of our time for the greater multitude cōming through

the handes of heretical printers, ſpecially in the beginning of this tragical hereſie, miniſtreth great ſtore & varietie of cutting of, and leauing out, and ſuch like falſe practiſes.
            
                But the laſt and principal reaſon
why we prefer our latin tranſlator before al other, is this which I ſhal now ſpeake of. Flacius Illyricus finding fault with the church which was about 400. yeres after Chriſt in S. Ambroſe and S. Chryſoſtoms time, for ignorance in the hebrew tong▪ treating of this matter how the teſtament ſhould be faithfully translated,Illyric. in clau. par. 1. praefat. 
               Vnus (ſaith he) popularis meus Hieronymus linguarum egregiè peritus fuit &c. Only my countryman Hierom vvas maruelous cunning in the tōgs.
               If S Hier & the Church in his time were deſtitute of theſe helpes, is Illyricus & the reſt of that cru
                     •
                   furniſhed with them? 
               he indeuoured to illuſtrate the ſcriptures, both by his tranſlations and commentaries. But he in deede being ignorant of mans ſickenes & Chriſt the phiſition, and vvanting the keye vvhich openeth the ſcripture, that is, the difference betvvene the lavv and the goſpel, being alſo deſtitute of Chriſt vvho openeth the dore, he did litle good. The like defect vvas in Lyra not lōg before our time, vvhereas othervviſe he tooke great paines to ſetforth and expound the holy bible. Out of which cenſure this I gather, not how

arrogantly and impiously theſe men deſpiſe and contemne the principal doctors and Primitiue church, but that al ſkil & knowledge of tonges ſerueth not to make a man interprete the teſtament as he ought,Religious ſinceritie principally to be regarded in an interpreter of the ſcripture. except withal he be of ſounde religion towardes God, indued with his grace and ſpirite, voide of partialitie and affection, and with ſingle & ſincere minde coueteth to expreſſe the ſenſe and meaning of the holy Ghoſt.
            If by theſe rules we examine and ſcanne our old interpreter, we ſhal manifeſtly finde that he is to be preferred both before al the interpreters of our time whoſoeuer is counted beſt, yea put thē al together, as alſo before the greeke teſtaments which now are currant. For that his knowledge was ſufficient in the greeke tonge, and therefore erred not for want off kil, the thing it ſelf ſpeaketh, and it is confeſſed by al his and our aduerſaries, Pellicane,Our old interpreter had varietie & choiſe of good greeke copies. Beza, Caſtalio, Molineus, as ſhal appeare hereafter. That he had good ſtoare of greeke copies, & thoſe truer and perfecter then we haue commonly now, Beza likewiſe in plaine termes confeſſeth. his words are cited

before.Pag. 362. & he geueth this general rule of him, that amongſt the old greeke examples which he vſed to the furniſhing of his new teſtament, two he had which he calleth, The ſecond & the eight, vvhich lightly neuer diſagreed from our vulgar tranſlation. Vpon the firſt of S. Marke he vvriteth thus.Beza in Mar. ca. 1. verſ. 2. 
               In prophetis 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſo vve found it vvrittē in al our greeke bookes, ſauing the ſecond & the eight, in vvhich vve reade,
               Hiero. de optimo genere interpretādi. c. 3. Augu. queſt. 57. vet. & nou. teſt. Epiph. cōtra haereſes. li. 2 Chriſoſt. ca. 1. Marci. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in Iſai the prophete, and ſo did the old interpreter tranſlate the place. And that it ſhould be ſo, is proued moſt clearely by the Syriake bible, S. Hier. S. Auſtin, S. Epiphan. & S. Chryſoſt. ſpecially defending this place againſt Porphitie. Againe in S. Luke, Eiectis for as omnibus, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Bez. in Luc. cap. 8. v. 54. 
               the old interpreter reade not this, yet vve found it in al our old bookes, excepting the ſecōd and eight, quorum mirificus eſt cum vulgata editione conſenſus. Betvveene vvhich and the vulgar edition there is a vvounderful conſent.
            
            But becauſe al this ſerueth not in this diuine vvorke,The religious fidelitie & ſinceritie of our old interpreter▪
                except the minde be rightly guided and voide from al paſsions, in this parte principally our interpreter by al reaſon muſt needes be iudged ſoueraine and excellent, becauſe

liuing ſo longe before the names of Papiſts and Proteſtants vvere knovvē, he could not vnequally bend to one ſide againſt the other. and his preciſenes and religious vprigh
                  •
               nes is often times ſingularly commended by the aduerſaries them ſelues.Vetus interpres (ſaith Beza) videtur ſumma religione ſacros libros interpretatus.
               Beza in 1. c. Lucae v. 1. 
               The old interpreter ſeemeth to haue inteepreted the holy bookes vvith marue
                     •
                  ous ſinceritie and religiō. And Molineus.Molin par. 30. 
               I gerrimè a vn gari conſuetaque lectione recedo, quam etiam enixè defendere ſo
                     •
                  eo. I can verie hardly depart from the vulgar and accustomed reading, vvhich alſo I am vvont verie earneſtly to defend. And 
                  •
               o vſe one domeſtical vvitnes,Humfred. de ratione interp lib. 1. pag. 74, D. Humfrey thus ſpeaketh of him. Proprietati verborum ſatis videtur addictus vetus interpres, et quidem n
                     •
                  mis anxiè, quod tamen interpretor religione quadam feciſſe, non gnorantia. The old interpreter ſeemeth ſufficiently bent 
                     •
                  olovv the proprietie of vvords, and he doth it in deede to carefully, vvhich notvvithſtanding I ſuppoſe him to haue done not of ignorance, but of religion and conſcience. Hereby is vvel and perfitly iuſtified the ſincere and vpright dealing of our interpreter, vvhoſe fault ether is none, or if it be

any, it is this, that in folowing the exact ſignification of the greeke word, he was to ſcrupulous and carefull, to full of conſcience and religion, which is a very good fault, if it muſt be called a fault, and commended and iuſtified els where by D. Humfrey him ſelf.Humfred. ibid. pa. 175. 
               Liberius (ſaith he) in aliis prophanis licet expatiari & degredi a verbis: in canonica ſcriptura nulla licentia eſt tolerabilis. non enim conceſſum eſt homini dei linguam mutare. In prophane vvritings a man may range abrode more freely, & depart from the vvords: in canonical ſcripture no ſuch licence is tolerable. for man may not alter the tonge of God.
            
            Againſt this man ſo learned,Proteſtant tranſlators of the new teſtament al partial, in fauour of their ſeueral hereſies, and ſo al falſe & corrupt. hauing good greeke copies, & folowing them exactly and vvith ſuch religion let now any Proteſtant oppoſe any of his nevv translators, whom by manifold reaſōs, trials and experiments, I can not diſproue and plainly ſhevv, that for one error of our interpreter, he hath at leaſt a ſcore. And in reaſon hovv can it be othervviſe, vvhereas they al being here
                  •
               ikes, and ech addicted to ſome peculiar ſect (ſauing Eraſmus, vvho notvvithſtanding vvas far out of the vvay) and therefore full of pride, arrogancie,

ſelfvvil, and geuen to that partial humor vvhereof his hereſie moſt conſiſted, drew al places, eſpecially indifferent, to ſerue that veyne. Luthers excellencie in interpreting, is of the greateſt number of Proteſtāts thought very ſingular, ſo as not only the Lutherans but euen the Zuinglians geue him great praiſe,Sleid. li. 17. in fine. as vve learne by Sleidan.Brent. in Apolog. conf. Wirten. cap. de horis canonicis. 
               Habemus ſacra biblia (ſaith Brentius in the Apologie of the Wirtenberg Cō
               feſſion) a Luthero in Germanicam linguam diuino beneficio tā perſpicue cōuerſa &c. vve haue the holy bibles through the great bènefite of God turned by Luther in to the Germain tonge ſo clearely, that his tranſlatiō yeldeth to none, ether greeke or latin. Yet hovv elegāt and ſincere a translator he vvas, vve may coniecture by Emſerus,Bey viertz
                     •
                  hin hundert ketzerlycher lugē. Lindan. dubitant. dial. 1. pa. 79. vvho gathered out of his translation Fourteene hundred fovvle lyes and falſifications. But becauſe the authoritie of this man being a catholike vvayeth not much with M.W. and to vvrite out thoſe lyes vvere to fil vp a good booke, vvhich I am not diſpoſed to do at this time, to make ſhort worke, both in this & the reſt I wil ſtay my ſelf vpon the authoritie of ſuch men, as I knovv M. VV. honoreth for ſingular inſtruments of the Lord

in ſetting forth the goſpel, ſuch as he vvel knovveth, ſpeake not of partialitie but of conſcience. And vvho can iudge of Luther better then his coapoſtle Zuinglius,Luthers trāſlation ful of corruption, in fauour of Lutheraniſme. vvho is ſo far of from approuing his translation, that he accounteth him a fovvle corrupter and horrible falſifier of ſcripture to make them ſerue his heretical fanſies, and in that kinde reckeneth him for a very Arrian and Marcionite. Thus he vvriteth.Zuing. to. 2. ad Luther. lib. de ſacramēto fo. 412 
               Thou doeſt corrupt (Luther) & adulterate the vvord of God, folovving herein the Marcionites and Arrians, vvho of old vvere vvont commōly to raze out of the ſcriptures ſuch places as ſeemed to be againſt their doctrine. This fault he exemplifieth in Luthers translation thus. VVhereas theſe vvords of Chriſt, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
Iohn 6. he ſhould haue tranſlated thus, That fleſh profiteth nothing, there he leaft out the Germane article, (das, that) anſvvering the greeke article (
                     •
                  ) to the intent thoſe vvordes ſhould not preciſely and determinately be referred to the ſelf ſame fleſh, of vvhich Chriſt had ſpoken a litle before, and ſpake of ſtil, for thus he tranſlated it &c. And after many vvordes ſpent againſt Luther for his malitious vvickednes, he thus concludeth. See hovv thy caſe ſtandeth Luther,
               Ibid. fo. 143
               
               that in the eyes of al men thou art ſeene to be a manifeſt and common corrupter,
               Manifeſtus & publicus ſacrae ſcripturae corruptor & adulterator. 
               and peruerter of the holy ſcripture, vvhich thing thou canſt neuer denie before any creature. Hovv much are vve aſhamed of thee, vvho hetherto haue eſteemed thee beyonde al meaſure, and novv trye thee to be ſuch a falſe fellovv.
               Two fitte Apoſtles for ſuch a church as they erected Betvvene vvhich tvvo (moſt excellent Apoſtles of the engliſh congregation) thus chiding, I knovv not who is of vs, more to be abhorred and deteſted. whether Luther, vvho plaieth the part of an Arrian and Marcionite in mangling & defacing the ſcriptures, or Zuinglius vvho ſo eagerly ſtriueth to proue that the fleſh and humanitie, and conſequently the incarnation of our moſt bleſſed Sauiour is vvorth nothing.
            But to let that paſſe, and proceede to talke of our translators, M. W. becauſe he is a Zuinglian, therefore by likelihode reckeneth thē for more exquiſite in geuing forth their teſtamēts.No tranſlation of ſcripture made by a Zuinglian▪ can poſsibly be good. Graunt that be ſo in the iudgment of him and his companions: hovv can vve be induced ſo to thinke of them, vvhereas Luther their common father, holdeth them for moſt ignorant and fooliſh, & (to vſe his ovvne vvords) as

ſenſeleſſe and brutiſh, as is any ſtocke or beaſt, in geuing the true ſenſe of the ſcripture. who calleth them commonly touching d
                  •
               uinitie and matters theological, ſtultos, ſrolidos, ſtupi
                     •
                  os, ſtipites, aſinos,
               Ibid. apud Zuingl. fol. 388.389. 
               truncos, antichriſtos, impoſt
                     •
                  res, ſtipites, aſinino intellectu, and ſo forth many like raylinges vnworthy to be heard amōgſt the vileſt creatures that liue, much leſſe amongſt two ſuch Arch apoſtles, had they in them any parcel,Particular tranſlations of diuers proteſtātes. I wil not ſay of Apoſtolike or Chriſtian, but of ciuil or humaine grauitie. But I wil diſcend vnto ſome of their particular Teſtaments ſet forth by Zuinglians, to find out if it may be, one whic
                  •
                may be preferred before our commō. That which was ſet forth by Oecolampad us (as I ſuppoſe) and the Diuines of Baſi
                  •
               e,The tranſlation of Baſile wicked. is of many vvel allovved. And vvil you haue vs refuſe our old, a
                  •
               d take that? but Beza chargeth vs in any caſe not to do ſo, and geueth his rea
                  •
               on,Bez. in reſp. ad defenſ. & reſpōſio. Caſtalion. becauſe that Baſile tr
                     •
                  nſlatio
                     •
                   is in multis locis impia, & a ſpiritus ſancti ſententia prorſ
                     •
                  s diſcrepans, In many places vvicked, and altogether diſ
                     •
                  greing from the mind of the holy Ghoſt. Wil you vviſhe vs rather to take Caſtalio, vvhom D.Humfred. de rat. interpret. li. 1▪ pa 62 63.189. Humfrey matcheth vvith the beſt, and praiſeth his bible

               as moſt painfull, moſt diligent, moſt thorougly conferred,
               Geſner. in Bibliotheca Sebaſtia. Caſtalio. 
               examined, ſifted, and poliſhed? and Conradus Geſnerus ſimply preferreth it before al, as the beſt that vvas euer yet ſet out by the Proteſtants. Vertit biblia (ſaith he) ita diligenter ac ſū
                  ma fide ad hebraica & graeca exemplaria &c. vt omnes omnium verſiones hactenus aeditas longo poſt ſe interuallo reliquiſſe videatur. Caſt alio bath tranſlated the bible ſo diligently, and vvith ſo ſingular fidelitie according to the hebrevv and greeke, that he ſeemeth far to haue ſurpaſſed al trāſlations of al mē vvhat ſo euer haue hetherto bene ſet forth. Yet this notvvithſtanding,Beza in teſt. an. 1556. in praefat. & in Mat. c. 3. 1. Cor 1. Mat. 4. Luc. 2. Act. 8. & 10. vve can not poſsibly ſo eſteeme of it, conſidering that Beza in ſo many places of his notes condēneth it not only for falſe, corrupt & peruerſe, but alſo for peſtilēt, ſacrilegious Ethnical, & Turkiſh, ſuch a one as cōtaineth the very ſeede,The tranſlation of Caſtalio, Ethnical, & laieth open the high vvay to manifeſt Apoſtaſie frō Chriſt. To come neerer home, Caluin I ſuppoſe by M. W. iudgment ſhould ſuccede in place of our olde. but ſo ſhould vve make as euil a chaunge as if vve tooke any yet mencioned.Caluin in his tranſlatiō, altereth and addeth to the text of the goſpel. For Caluin vvhatſoeuer grace or good qualitie othervviſe he had, vvas as ſavvcie and malapert in altering the

text of ſcripture as any of his felovv ſectaries. ſo vvriteth of him, his ovvne brother Carolus Molineus.Carol. Mol. in ſua tranſ. teſtam. noui parte 11. fo. 110. 
               Caluinus in ſua harmonia textum euangelicum deſuitare facit ſurſum verſum, vt res ipſa indicat, vim infert literae euangelicae, et illam in mul tis locis tranſponit, et inſuper addit literae. Caluin in his harmony (which is the very letter of his tranſlation) maketh the text of the goſpel to leape vp and dovvne, as the thing it ſelf ſhevveth. He vſeth violence to the letter of the goſpel, and in many places cleane tranſpoſeth it, and beſides this he addeth to the text. that is, he geueth vs a text of his ovvne making.
            What remaineth for vs to do now, but to ſticke to our old, ſeing the Proteſtants them ſelues thus diſſwade vs from taking any new? But there remaineth yet one ſure felow whom I ſuppoſe M. W. could be content to ſubſtitute in place not only of our auncient edition, but of Luther, Occolampadus, Caſtalio, yea and Caluin him ſelf, that is Theodore Beza, whom the engliſh congregation ſeeme moſt to folow.Bezaes trāſlation more diſagreing from it ſelf and worſe then any of the reſt. But he muſt tel vs what teſtament? of what yere? of what date? becauſe certaine it is, that the firſt editions

d
                  •
               ffer notoriously from the middle and the middle from the later, as hath bene touched before, & of al teſtamēts ſet forth by any her
                  •
               t
                  •
               ke, no one hath bene more refuted & cōuinced of fowle and wilfull corr
                  •
               ptions▪ and that by the ver
                  •
               e heretikes them ſelues, then thoſe of Bezaes.Before c. 10. witneſſes whereof are (beſides Catholike vvriters noted before) Selneccerus the Germane, and the Vniu
                  •
               rſitie of Iena,Carol. Moli. in teſtam. part 8 13.14 21.23. Se
                  •
               aſtianus Caſta
                  •
               io in a vvhole booke, and Carolus Molineus in v
                  •
               rie many places of his not
                  •
               s vpon the nevv teſtament vvhich he ſet forth. VVhere often times he reprehendeth Caluin and Beza.Part. 26.30.40.64. often times of Beza he ſaieth, that he, de facto mutat textum. Altereth the text not only in ſenſe, but in the verie word and letter. Againe, Theod. Beza Mat.
               Part. 64.65.66.74.99. 10. v. 10. & Luc. 9, 3. defacto mu
                     •
                  at textum,
               A prety way to rocōcile places that ſeeme to diſagree. 
               vt hos ita conciliet. Sed non p
                     •
                  acet mutari textum qui ab omnibus et antiquis et recētioribus doct
                     •
                  ribus retinetur, quum ſacile cōciliari poſsint. Beza in S. Matthevv chap. 10. v. 10. and S. Luke chap. 9. v. 3. actually changeth the text, ſo to make a reconciliation betvvene the euangeliſts. But I like not that, ſo to change the text vvhich is retained of al doctors both old and

nevv, and othervviſe they may vvel be recō
                  ciled. and whether they may or may not ſurely that is a very mad way of reconciliation. And commonly that writer preferreth our vulgar editiō, before Eraſmus,
               Molin. in Luc. 17. 
               Bucer, Bullinger, Brentius, the Tigurine trāſlation, Pagnines, etiam Iohannis Caluini et omnibus aliis, yea bef
                     •
                  re Iohn Caluins to,
               Our old tranſlation better then al Proteſtāt tranſlations Carolus 
                     •
                  olincus. 
               and all other. And in the ſame place. Here Eraſmus did vvel to folovv the old edition, and it had bene better for Beza to haue done ſo to. And againe, Peccat Beza antiquam verſionem mutans, Iohānis 3. v.
               Vide ibi. in Ioan. 7. v. 35. 19 et 43. And the like is very common in Caſtalio, Beza malè reprehendit veterem interpretem.
               Caſtalio in defenſ. pag. 179.174.18
                     •
                  .183.188.198.202.206.213. 
               Melius tranſtulerat vetus interpres. Iniuſtè reprehendit veterem interpretem &c. vniuſtly and vvith out cauſe Beza reprehendeth the old interpreter. The old interpreter had tranſlated it better before. And touching Beza he ſaith,Caſtal. defenſ. tranſ. pag. 176. that to note al his errors committed in tranſlating the new teſtament, Opus eſſet nimis magno l
                     •
                  bro, It vvould require a very great booke. And hauing noted certaine faultes of Beza committed only in the firſt ten chapters of S. Matthew,
                  Ibi. pag. 182 183.
                  Bezaes innumerable corruptions in the new teſtament.
                thus he concludeth. In his decem Matthaei capitibus (in quibus tamē plurimae quae merito reprehēdere potuiſſem praetermiſi) quam prolixum paſſem

&c. I truſt I haue ſhevved ſufficiently by theſe ten chapters of S. Matthevv (in vvhich notvvithſtanding I haue omitted very many things vvhich iuſtly I might haue reprehended) vvhat a long regiſter of his errors I could gather out of his vvhole vvorke. For this is true, that oft times he erreth not only in vvords (vvhich is not ſo daungerous, and might be tolerated) but alſo in things, and the ſame moſt vvaightie: and oft times he enforceth by vvrithing not the ſentences only, but alſo the vvords of the holy vvriters to ſerue his error. So Iohn 1. v. 12. he corrupteth a moſt not able place and of greateſt moment touching freevvil &c. And in fevv to ſpeake al (for I ſhould vvrite out vvhole treatiſes & bookes, if I vvould ſhew the vile abuſing of ſcripture committed by that vvretch of damnable memorie,Before c. 10. vvhom our engliſh Proteſtantes cheefely extolle, as by M. VV. vve learne) thus much Caſtalio noteth and ſhevveth by manifolde examples,Beza then eſpecially corrupteth the text, when he thereby may moſt diſhonour Chriſt. that Beza then principally laboureth in peruerting the ſcripture, vvhē it appertaineth moſt to the benefite & vertue of Chriſts paſsion and our redemption. Thus he vvriteth vpon the 6. chapter to the Romanes, and theſe vvordes of our latin text,Rom. 6. v. 6. 
               Vt deſtruatur corpus peccati,
               
in the engliſh tranſlation, That the body of ſinne may be deſtroyed, both agreing exactly with the greeke,Caſtalio vbi ſup. pa. 192. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Beza (ſaith Caſtalio) turneth the Word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Eneruetur, may bevveakened, and reprehendeth the old interpreter, Eraſmus, and me, for tranſlating, may be deſtroyed. for this honeſt man, vvil not haue ſinne to be diſtroyed by Chriſt, but only weakened, vvherein he doth plainely diminiſh the benefite beſtovved vpon vs by Chriſt, Id quod multis aliis in locis eum facere animaduerti. vvhich thing I finde him to do in many other places.
            
            I wil not beſtowe time in diſprouing our engliſh bibles, which for the moſt part are nothing but corrupt gutters, flowing from theſe forenamed corrupt and ſtinking lakes.Engliſh trā
                  ſlations ſet forth in ſchiſme, al faultie. Yet if otherwiſe any man liſt to diſproue them al and ſingular, there is nothing more facile & eaſie. For whereas in our time ſince the goſpel (as they cal it) began in our country,King Henries bibles. we haue had three kinde of diuers bibles, vnder kinge Henrie, kinge Edwarde, and the Q.King Edwardes. Maieſtie that now is, king Henries bibles as corrupt, were corrected by king Edwarde & the duke of Somerſets appointmēt, as by comparing them is eaſie to ſee

and the Proteſtants I thinke wil not d
                  ••
               y Eduardus ſextuo (ſaith D.Humfred. de sat inter. li. 3. pa. 523. Humfrey) procerum conſi
                     •
                  is, et ſuaſu epiſcoporum, biblia emitti curauit caſtigatiora et purgatiora, ac legi publicè et omnibus in templis baberi mandauit. King Edvvard by the aduiſe of his noble men, and m
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  on of his biſhops, cauſed the bibles to be ſet forth more corrected (then vvere his fathers) and more purged of faults, and commaunded the ſame to be read publ
                     •
                  kly, and to be had in al churches.
               The bibles ſet forth in our time. Next, that the bible ſet forth by the Quenes authoritie, correct thoſe of king Edward, is ſhewed in many places of the Diſcouerie, & requireth for proofe, no more but that the reader cō
               fer one or other epiſtle of S. Paule, for examples ſake that to the Romanes,The yere when it was printed, is not put in the print. in The nevv teſtamēt of our Sauiour Ieſu Chriſt, faithfully tranſlated out of the greeke, and peruſed by the cōmaundement of the Kings M. & his honorable councel & by thē autorized, & printed
                     •
                  ly R
                     •
                  ch. Iugge, with the ſame epiſtle in The nevv teſtament of our lord Ieſus Chriſt, tranſlated out of greeke by Theodore Beza, and engliſhed by L.T. and printed by Chriſtofer Barker the yere 1580. Cum gratia et pri
                     •
                  ilegio. and now that al theſe are very falſely tranſlated, and the beſt con
                  •
               aine wicked, and horrible, and ethnical errors, this hath bene ſhewed

before at large by manifeſt demonſtration,Before c. 11. and the confeſsion of our aduerſaries them ſelues, and ſo no waies are they to be oppoſed to our bibles.
            And what can M.W. now ſay againſt vs? or whom would he haue vs to folow? Perhaps his laſt counſel is that at leaſt we ſhould our ſelues fall to tranſlate, and ſo accordinge to the original greeke, faſhion our ſelues a new teſtamēt, ſeing we can like none of theirs.Not poſsible to put forth any tranſlation more indifferent then our aunciēt. But nether may we thus do. Firſt, becauſe we beleeue our teſtament to be truer then the common greeke copies now extant, wherein as he ſeeth we ſtand, and that not without reaſon. Secondarily, becauſe we are perſwaded that had we true originals, we could neuer make a tranſlatiō in theſe partial times, more ſincere, vpright, indifferent, and freer from reprehenſiō then is this which we haue already.
            Finally and for a concluſion,Note this. let the Chriſtian reader note this,Few faultes are foūd by any proteſtants in our old tranſlation, which, by other Proteſtants are not iuſtſied. that whereas commonly euerie ſecte of our aduerſaries, in wordes & general termes findeth fault with our tranſlation, few or none of them ſhew any error or fault in particular, but lightly there is ſome one of their owne brethren

which ſtandeth with vs in defenſe of our teſtament againſt that reprehender, which no doubt proceedeth of the manifeſt ſinceritie which our trāſlator vſed, and the inuincible force of truth which ſo breaketh forth in deſpite of her aduerſaries. Laurentius Valla firſt of al carped at out common edition,Bulling. decad. 5. ſerm. 5. but his raſhnes is iuſtly reproued by Eraſmus, Bullingere, Beza, and ſundrie others. Eraſmus next fel in to that veyne,Bez. in praefatio. noui teſtamenti an. 1556. but how vnreaſonably let Beza ſpeake. Quam immeritò (ſaith he) multis in locis reprehendit Eraſmus ve
                     •
                  erem interpreteni tanquam a graecis diſſentientem? Hovv vniuſtly in many places doth Eraſmus reprehend the old interpreter as diſſenting from the greeke? Then came Luther for the Lutherans, and Caſtalio and ſome other for the Zuinglians, and euerie one had ſome tooth againſt our interpreter. But both in particular, Beza doth iuſtifie thoſe pointes, which they accounted erroneous, as may be ſeene in verie many places of his notes,Supra. Our old tranſlation better then any of the proteſtants▪ Beza. and in general, preferreth him before any interpreter that he euer ſawe. Vulgatam aedu ionem (ſaith he) maxima ex parte amplector, & caeteris omnibus antepono. The vulgar edition

I embrace for the greateſt parte, and prefer it before all other vvhatſoeuer. There remaine only certaine faultes which Beza imagineth, & which in his notes ſometime he reprehendeth, but they for the greater number, and ſuch as be ought worth, are ſo wel defended by Caſtalio, and Carolus Molineus (to let paſſe our owne writers) that if M. W. would gather in to a heape al the faultes which are obiected againſt our teſtament, and afterwardes take away thoſe which are to be taken away by the iudgment of Beza, of Caluin, of Caſtalio, of Molineus, and ſuch other Proteſtan
                  •
               s who haue ſet forth their owne new tranſlations againſt others of their brethren, I weene the number remaining would be ſo ſmale, that it would ſhame M. W. him ſelf as obſtinate as he ſeemeth, to compare with that, any of their Engliſh teſtaments which ſoeuer is moſt exquiſite.
            Wherefore to cōclude this, as before touching the hebrew, ſo here touching the greeke, and al other tranſlatiō, the reader may ſee a few rea
                  •
               ons amongſt infinite,The Councel of Trēt. vvhy the holy Councel of Trent hauing in it multitude of excellēt godly & learned men (with whō
               
to compare any, or al theſe diuided and ſcattered ſinagoges of Lutherans, Zuinglians, Anabaptiſtes, or ſuch like, were impietie and ſinne before God, and intollerable iniurie before man) decreed as in the Canōs we reade touching the old auncient tranſlation. which decree ſtandeth vpon many cleare and moſt euident reaſons, whether we compare it with the hebrew and greeke now extant, or with any of theſe new heretical verſiōs, be it of Luther, of Oecolāpadius, of Baſile, of Geneua, of Caluin, of Caſtalio, of Beza, of Molineus,The later tranſlatiōs of heretiks as likewiſe al other their procedings, are worſe then the former, according to S. Pauls prophecie, proficiētes in peius. 2. Timo. c. 3. v. 13. of the Engliſh after King Henries allowance, or King Edwardes, or that which the engliſh congregation now beſt alloweth, which of al other is the vvorſt, moſt contaminate, and moſt dravveth to Paganiſme and Atheiſme, as hath bene ſhevved. And that vve eſteeme more of our old translator then any of theſe, not only reaſon, experience, conſcience, diuinitie and humanitie requ
                  •
               reth vs ſo to do, not only our duety to the Church of God, our honour to our holy and learned forefathers, our faith in Chriſts promiſe & aſſured confidence of the aſſiſtance of his holy Spirit requireth the ſame, but

alſo in this our opinion vve are vvarranted by the manifeſt approbation of our moſt capital enemies,In approuing our old tranſlation, we are warranted by the Proteſtants thē ſelues. thoſe that haue ſome learning more then the reſt, of Luther, of Zuinglius, Caſtalio, Beza, Molineus, D. Humfrey & others, vvhō M. VV. dare not controle (as I ſuppoſe) hovv vvel ſoeuer othervviſe he thinke of him ſelf.
            And novv may I vvith more facilitie anſvvere his ſecōd reaſon, and vvherein for ſome part I grounde the exact perfection of our latin translation, & affirme, that howſoeuer ſome ſmale fault may be found in it, abſolutely it hath no error, ether touching doctrine or touching maners. For vvhy ſhould I not ſo gather, when as I ſee the aduerſarie being ſo eager, yet with al his ſearch and ſtudie findeth one only fault in it. whiche I wil ſet downe in his owne wordes, becauſe I wil not diminiſh the force of his argument.Pa. 17.18. M. W argumēt againſt the old trāſlation. 
               Very abſurdly haue you done (ſaith he) vvhen in tranſlating the teſtament in to Engliſh, you had rather fol
                     •
                  vv the latin tranſlation then the greeke original, and that ſo obſtinatly that although al the greeke examples reade othervviſe then is in your vulgar editiō, yet you prefer that before them al. I vvil geue

you one example. In 1. Cor. 15. v. 54. Paule ſaith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . This parcel in your tranſlation is omitted. for vvhat reaſon? becauſe it is not in the latin vulgar edition as they cal it. But it is in the greeke exemplars, & in the moſt auncient edition Siriake. and vvhat if Hierom read it not? yet Chryſoſtome and Ambroſe him ſelf read it, vvhich men vvhereas they liued vvith Hierom, hereof it folovveth aſſuredly, ether that Hierō dealt not faithfully here, or that his verſion vvas corrupted aftervvards. vnto which thus I anſwere.The anſwere.
            
            
                Firſt, that this omiſſ
                  •
               on if it be any, could not proceede of malice or ſet purpoſe, for ſo much as there is no loſſe or hinderance to any part of doctrine by reading as we reade. for the ſelf ſame thing is moſt clearely ſet downe in the verie next lines before. for thus ſtande the wordes.1. Cor. 15. v. 53.54. 
               This corruptible muſt doe on incorruption, and this mortal, immortalitie. And vvhen this (corruptible hath done on incorruption, and this) mortal hath done on immortalitie. where thou ſeeſt the words which I haue put downe incloſed within the parentheſis to be contained moſt expreſſely in the ſentence going before, which is in al our teſtaments, ſo that there is no harme or daū
               ger

ether to faith, doctrine, or maners, if it be omitted.
            
                Secondarely, if we prefer our latin
edition before the greeke, and thinke that peece repeated, not to be of the text, what reaſon we haue ſo to do, hath bene ſhewed in part, and Beza by his example iuſtifieth our doing. For ſo him ſelf doth more thē once. vpon S.Beza in Luc. ca. 20. v. 28. Luke he thus writeth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Omnia quae vidi exemplaria ita ſcriptum habent. Al the greeke examples vvhich I haue ſeene,
               Beza praeferreth our latin tranſlation before al greeke examples. 
               reade ſo. But the old interpreter readeth othervviſe, et rectius vt opinor, and better as I ſuppoſe. Againe in the ſame goſpel. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Haec verba deerant in omnibus vetuſtis cod
                     •
                  cibus,
               Ibi. c. 7. v. 31 
               quae tamen prorſus videntur requiri. Theſe vvordes vvanted in al the old (greeke) bookes, vvhich for al that ſeeme neceſſarie.
               Teſtament of the yere 1577, 1579. and 1580. & the Scottiſh great bible of the yere 1579. And therefore he ſupplieth his text vvith them out of our tranſlatiō, and ſo do the engliſh tranſlators, who ſeldome depart frō him but like good ſcholers turne in to engliſh, his latin.
            
                Thirdly, that it was of old in ſome
greeke copies as we reade, is plaine by S. Hier. who tranſlated thus. And why ſhould M. W. ſuſpect any vnfaithfulnes in him, ſeing he put the ſelf ſame wordes and ſenſe in the next line immediatly

going before? and that it was not corrupted ſince, appeareth by the common reading of moſt men in al later ages. And how vnlearnedly argueth he againſt S. Hierom from the authoritie of S. Ambroſe and S. Chryſoſ
                  •
               ō reading otherwiſe? Muſt therefore S. Hierom be vnfaithful, or the Church after him, becauſe S. Chryſoſtom or S. Ambroſe haue thoſe few vvordes more then he? vvhy may he not far more reaſonably, more like a logician and like an honeſt man to inuent an other part and make a better diuiſion, that ether S. Hierom dealt not faithfully, or els his greeke copies had not that peece repeated, vvhich I thinke to be moſt true & certaine.
            
                Againe vvhy ſhould he rather correct S. Hierom by S. Chryſoſtome and S. Ambroſe, then contraryvviſe th
                  •
               m by S.S. Hieroms tranſlatiōs more autē
                  tical then the reading of many doc
                  
                     •
                  ora. Hierom? vvhereas by common intendement and probabilitie, S. Hierom framing a publike tranſlation for the Church by ſupreme authoritie, had more varietie of copies and examined the ſame more narrowly, then doth ordinarily any other, vvho expoundeth the ſcripture, ether by vvay of homelies to the people, as doth S. Chryſoſtome,

or by vvay of commentarie, as doth S. Ambroſe. And truely writeth Beza, that whoſoeuer by ſuch authoritie of one or other father, would go about to alter the ordinary trāſlation, except he vſe an other maner of iudgment, wiſdome, and diligence, then we ſee vſed by our aduerſaries, he wil rather corrupt the ſcripture then correct it. And his reaſon is very good & pregnant.Beza in praefat. nou
                     •
                   teſtamen. an. 1565. 
               Neque enim (ſaith he) ſcriptores illos ſeu graecos ſeu latinos, exiſtimandum eſt quoties locum aliquem citarint, toties vel libros inſpexiſſe vel ſingula verba numeraſſe. For it is not to be ſuppoſed, that thoſe vvriters ether greeke or latin, vvhen they had to cite a place, alvvaies ether vevved the booke, or numbred the vvords. For this had bene a matter of infinite labour & not neceſſarie &c. To which infinite labour notwithſtanding, and vewing the booke, & numbring the words S. Hier. in his tranſlatiō was of neceſsitie boūd, as was nether S. Amb
                  •
               n or S. Chriſoſt.
            And yet S. Chryſoſtome maketh litle for you, if you compare wel his owne diſcourſe and text together. Nay he maketh cleane againſt you and approueth our reading. For though he haue thoſe wordes in the ſecond place

yet he hath them not in the firſt, and repeateth them not,S. Chryſ iuſtifieth our latin reading. but only once readeth them in his text according to our latin. And therunto agreeth his commētarie, & therfore qu
                  •
               te ouerthroweth 
                  •
               l that you vvould build vpon his credite. Thus they ſtande in him. For this corruptible muſt do on incorruption.
               Chryſoſt. in 1. Cor. ho. 15 
               And vvhen this corruptible ſhal do on incorruptiō & this mortal immortalitie, thē ſhal be fulfilled &c. And whereas you adde that S. Ambroſe readeth as you do,S. Ambroſe vntruly cited. you muſt pardon me, if I beleeue mine owne eyes better then your reporte. Cert
                  •
               inely S.Ambroſ. in 1. Cor. 15. Ambroſe in his commentarie vppon that place readeth as we do. So readeth S. Auſtin de ciuitate Dei, cited by S.Beda in 1. Cor. ca 15. Bede in his commentarie vpon the ſame chapter, though S. Auſtin reade alſo as M. VV. would haue it according to the greeke. And with S. Bede, and after S. Bede ſo reade the reſt of the Catholike interpreters and doctors, Haymo, Anſelmus &c.
            
                Farthermore in this verie place as I thinke▪ moſt appeareth the ſinceritie of our latin tranſlatiō. For as we keepe our text according as S. Hierom and the Church then deliuered it, ſo notwithſtanding becauſe the words ob
                  •
               octed

by M. W. are in the auncient greeke example whereof the church hath due regarde, the ſame particle is added commonly in the margent of euerie latin teſtamēt which the Church vſeth, as may be ſeene in diuers prints of Paris, Louane, and other catholike Vniuerſities. And if there be any fault in our engliſh translation, it is this, that this parcel was not added in the margēt, as it was in the latin which we folowed.
            Wherefore this proueth no corruption but rather great fidelitie in our latin teſtament, that it agreeth with S. Hierom, & conſequently the greeke examples which he interpreted, with S. Ambroſe, S. Auſtin, S. Bede, Haymo, S. Anſelmus, and the reſt of the latin writers, which in a matter not doubtful, and otherwiſe in no reſpect preiudicial to any veritie of Chriſtian profeſsion, are of that authoritie that Beza him ſelf in this caſe would not diſallow our doing. and M.VV. him ſelf alſo in iuſtifying his engliſh tranſlations for pure and perfit, doth conſequently approue and iuſtifie ours, & ſo an
                  •
               wereth 
                  •
               im ſelf in this obiection. for the later clauſe before noted 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and the lord ſaid, they haue added to their engliſh teſtaments after Beza vpon the only authorite of our latin againſt al the auncient greeke, (albeit now it is thruſt in to the cōmon greeke prints of Geneua, Baſile & Zuricke) & therefore he ſhould not be offē
               ded if we attribute ſo much to our teſtament who profeſſe to honour it, ſeing he & his felowes do as much, who profeſſe a perpetual hatred againſt it.
            And this I truſt may ſuffice for theſe few words, to quitte our teſtament of any faulte, conſidering that firſt they cōcerne not any controuerſie: thē, that the ſenſe of it is in worde and deed fully & euidētly cōpriſed in the ſame place. againe if we preferred our latin before al greeke, we do no more then doth Beza, then doth M.W. then do al the Engliſh and Scottiſh congregations in their owne pure and immaculate bibles. Laſt of al, our reading is cōfirmed not only by al the later ages of the church, theſe ſeuen or eight hundred yeres, as by S. Anſelmus, Haimo, S. Bede and others, nether only by the more aunciēt latin fathers, S. Auſtin, S. Ambroſe, S. Hierom, but alſo it was according

to the greeke copies which S. Hierō had & the ſame agreing in ſubſtāce with S. Chryſoſtome & no doubt many other, and therf
                  •
               re hath ſufficiēt ground to defend it ſelf: although vve confeſſe the other reading to be vſed of many fath
                  •
               rs, which vve therefore miſlike not, & yet raſh
                  •
               y preſume not to thruſt it in to our text. And this is the only fault and yet al the faultes vvhich M.VV. findeth in our latin teſtament.
            The reſt, he ſupplieth vvith a luſtie bragge, that there are at the leaſt,pag. 18. 
               Six hundred other, vvherein againſt the faith of al the greekes and their perpetual cōſent, the errors of the latin trāſlatiō are retained of vs. Of which reckning, I dare at firſt without any farther ſtay, ſtrike out fiue hū
               dred & yet the ſūme vvhich remaineth is ſufficiēt to conuince him of a maine lye. But for a farther refutation,pag. 20. Benedictus Ar
                     •
                  as Montanus a Catholike prieſt. he turneth vs ouer to Benedictus Arias Montanus a good prieſt, one that ſerueth in the Catholike Kinges court, and ſubmitteth al his labours to the iudgmēt & cenſure of the Vniuerſitie of Lo
                  •
               ane, and therefore very vnlike it is that ether he vvil beſtovv ſo vnfruitefully his labours, as to vvrite againſt

the Sacred Tridētine Coūcel, or that that Vniuerſitie vvil approue his endeuours if he ſhould ſo heretically employ thē. & whatſoeuer ſhal become of him hereafter, in his hebrew bibles alreadie ſet forth, we ſee that in the places before noted, he altereth not the latin according to the hebrew, but letteth it ſtand as autentical. VVhat ſpeake I of him a catholike man and a prieſt, whereas your ſelues though otherwiſe moſt obſtinate and ſtonie harted againſt the truth, yet dare not alter it according to the hebrew, but leaue it as you found it in our bibles.
            And therefore why you cal vs, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Bible-beaters. 
               bible-beaters, I wonder, and muſe what brainſicke conceite you haue therein, or what reaſon moueth you thus to raile. Becauſe we defend the ſinceritie of our bibles againſt your peeuiſh, and vnlearned, and fantaſtical, and contemptible talking (for what one tolerable argument bring you?) becauſe we defend the inheritance left vs by our forefathers, becauſe we prefer the Church & Spouſe of Chriſt before the ſinagoge of the Iewes, becauſe at their wicked appointment vve vvil not raze out ſo many

places touching our Sauiours honour and the truth of our religion, is this the cauſe why your wiſedome termeth vs Bible-beaters? Nay let the reader conſider, and the world iudge,Neuer ſince Chriſtes tyme were there ſuch manglers & defacers & corrupters of the bible as are the proteſtātes of our age. whether ſith Chriſts time or before Chriſts time, there were euer any beaters and circumciders, and gelders, and manglers, and defacers, and corrupters of thoſe holy bookes comparable to you and your ſect. Who haue rent out of the bible ſo many partes which our auncient fathers deliuered vs, and we hold faſt as ſacred and canonical. Who haue reiected out of the old teſtament ſo many entier books as I haue noted in the beginning, the prophecie of Baruch, the ſtorie of Iudith, of Tobias, of Heſter, of the Machabees and Eccleſiaſticus: who in the new teſtament haue cut out S. Paules epiſtle to the hebrews, S. Iames, one of S. Peters, two of S. Iohns, S. Iude and the Apocalips, and the whole goſpel of S. Luke. who in thoſe other which you pretend to keepe, haue lopt of great peeces, ſo many as pleaſed your arrogant and heretical ſpirit, peeces of S. Iohns goſpel, peeces of the prophete Ieremie, peeces of the

prophete Daniel, peeces of the booke of Cronicles or Paralipomenō,See example before pag. 288 beſides many leſſer parcels, pared away both in the epiſtles and goſpels, and al the reſt by your trāslations miſerably corrupted. Who by the ſame reaſon & authoritie by which you iudge and condemne theſe bookes, geue like authoritie & libertie to euerie phantaſtical miniſter to contemne and condemne the reſt.The proteſtāts lay the way open for any man to deny the ſcripture at his pleaſure For thinke you a lying reaſon may not be found againſt the goſpel of S. Iohn, as wel as againſt the goſpel of S. Luke? Or may not a man pretend as good arguments of humane ſpirit to be in the ſecond epiſtle to the Corinthians, or to Philemon, as in that of S. Iames, or to the hebrewes? Or may M. VVilliam Charke oppoſe him ſelfe againſt the vniuerſal Church of Chriſt by the mouth of thoſe moſt holy and Apoſtolical fathers gathered together in the great Coūcel of Nice,Hier. prefat. in Iudith. 
               M. Charke hath a deeper inſight in ſcripture, then al the biſhops & fathers of the great Nicene Councel. acknowledging for Canonical the booke of Iudith, and may not any other miniſter of like qualitie and learning do ſo by like example? Becauſe the booke of Tobie maketh expreſſely for the patronage of angels, may you ſay diſdainfully, VVe paſſe not for that Raphael mentioned

in Tobie,
               Whit. cōtra Camp. pa. 17 
               nether acknovvledge vve thoſe ſeuen angels vvhereof he maketh mention. Al that differeth much from Canonical ſcriptures which is reported of that Raphael, and ſauoureth of I knovv not vvhat ſuperſtition.
               Light reaſōs to diſauthorize receaued parts of ſcripture. 
               Nether vvil I beleeue free vvil although the booke of Eccleſiaſticus affirme it a hundred times &c. and may not a Lutheran, an Anabaptiſt, a Suinkſeldian ſay the like with as good countenance againſt other partes of ſcripture, which ſtand as plainly againſt their conceaued hereſies? Is Beza to be allowed,Before pag. 364. pronouncing peremptorily touching the ſtorie of the aduouterous woman in the 8. of S. Iohn, vpon the diuerſitie which is in the greeke writers and teſtaments, that ſo great difference he found in that narration, that he doubteth altogether of the vvhole ſtorie, which is as much as to take from it vtterly al authoritie Canonical, and is not euerie man els to be allovved, vpon like vvarrant geuing like cenſure vpon other partes of ſcriptures? Reade S.S. Hier. ad Edibiam quaeſt. 3. Hierom vvriting to Edibia, and ſee vvhether a part of S. Markes goſpel may not by like reaſon be called in queſtion: yea reade Bezaes notes vpon the ſixt chapter,Beza in Ioā ca. 6.18. & 19 & Luc. 22. the 18. and 19. of S. Iohn, and 22. of S. Luke

& ſee vvhether that diuine ſermon of our Sauiour and his very paſsion by ſuch argument ought not ſo to be cut out of the teſtament. The like is to be ſaid of verie many places of S. Matthew and S. Paules epiſtles. Then iudge thou Chriſtian reader whether theſe mē be not, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , bible-beaters, or rather in deede, bible murtherers. For the firſt preſuppoſeth the hauing of a bible, whereas they haue none. For that which they cal their bible and word of God,The proteſtates bible is no more a bible, then a headles mā is a man. is in deede no word of God, no bible at al. For how can a mā cal that the bible and word of God, vvhich hath in it ſo many foule and filthie corruptions, ſo many vvicked, Ethnical, and Iudaical errors, as I before haue noted in their bible by confeſsion
                  •
                of their ovvne brethren. Is that the bible of God, vvhich hath in it ſo many places maliciously peruerted againſt the eternal truth and teſtamēt of God? Can vve call him a man vvhom vve ſee to lacke head, hand, foote, hart, and other principal and eſſential partes of humane nature? and hovv then is that a bible that lacketh (for canonical) the vvritinges of ſo many Prophetes, Apoſtles, and Euangeliſtes

               S. Luke, S. Paule, S. Iames, S. Peter, S. Iohn, S. Iude ſome of which no bible euer vvanted ſince Chriſts time, nor can vvant, remaining a bible. The reſt vvere euer true ſcriptures, though not euer in al places ſo accoū
               ted, as nether was the Godhead of our Sauiour, the dignitie and office of his Apoſtles, of al and alwaies at firſt acknowledged. But al haue bene ſo accounted for theſe thouſand yeres and more, by general & prouincial councels, the great and Apoſtolike councel of Nice, of Laodicea, of Carthage, by the ſupreme paſtors of Chriſts church, by the general conſent of the ſame Catholike Church in moſt times & ages. Theſe mē therefore (good reader) folowing the ſteppes of their old fathers Marcion, Cerdon, Carpocrates, the Arrians and Manichees, deſpiſing and reiecting ſo many bookes of ſctipture, are in deede not beaters, but mā
               glers and defacers, and extreme murtherers of the bible. And that not only for this plaine and euident reaſon now geuen, but alſo for their prophane & irreligious varietie of tranſlations, whereof now in the laſt part I haue to ſpeake.
         
         
            
            CHAP. XIIII. That to leaue the ordinarie tranſlation of the Bible appointed by the Church, & to appeale to the hebrevv, greeke, and ſuch nevv diuers tranſlations as the proteſtants haue made, is the very vvay to Atheiſme & Infidelitie.
            
               IN this later parte this haue I to ſhew, that whoſoeuer taketh to him ſelf that libertie which the heretiks geue, & here M.W. moſt buſily ſtriueth for, that is, to refuſe the latin, and appeale to the greeke and hebrew, and theſe new tranſlations, which (as they beare vs in hand) are framed according to the greeke and hebrew, he taketh the high way to denial of al faith, to Apoſtaſie from Chriſt, and plaine Atheiſme. This to do, the fitteſt way were hiſtorically to declare, how certaine knowen Sects of the Proteſtants, principally vpon this very reaſon of pretending the greeke and hebrew veritie, and therefore running to infinite varietie of diuers tranſlations, and reſting in no one, haue fallen to deſpiſe al Bibles, & Scriptures, and concluded as a moſt aſſured Euangelical veritie, that nothing is certaine, but euerie man is to be left to his owne fanſie, to beleeue as he liſt. Such is the ſect of the

Swinkfeldians, Anabaptiſts, and Academikes, and it is the very drifte of Caſtalio (ſo much commended of many) in the preface of his Bible to King Edvvarde the ſixte: although he beate pretily vpon an other point much of like effect, vz, that the Meſsias promiſed in the law, is not yet come,Caſtalio in praefat. ad Edouardum ſextum Angliae regem. but vvil come hereafter according to the Iewes expectation. Thus vvriteth he. Profecto ſi verum fateri volumus, eſt adhuc noſtrum ſoeculum in profundis ignorantiae tenebris demerſum:
               A true confeſsion of a principal proteſtant. 
               cuius rei certiſſimū teſtimonium ſunt, tam graues, tam pertinaces, tā pernicioſae diſſenſiones, tam multi et irriti cōuentus de hiſce controuerſiis &c.
               
                  The proteſtate church drowned in groſſe ignorance.
                  A ſure proofe thereof.
                
               Truely if vve vvil confeſſe the truth, this our age is as yet drowned in extreme darknes & ignorāce: a moſt aſſured proofe vvhereof, are theſe ſo greuous, ſo obſtinate and ſo pernicious diſſenſions, ſo many, and the ſame ſo vnprofitable meetinges about theſe controuerſies, ſo great number of bookes euery day ſett out, and the ſame differing one from an other ſo far, as heauen differeth from earth. And proſecuting this his plaine and irrefutable argument, vvhereby he proueth the Proteſtants notvvithſtanding al their latin, greeke, and hebrevv, to be moſt ignorant in true diuinitie and matters ſpiritual, thus he addeth. For if the ſpirit

of God be one,
               The proteſtāts voyde of the ſpirite of God and al truth 
               & truth one, it muſt of neceſſitie folovv, in vvhō that one ſpirite & one truth is, that they alſo be one amōg thē ſelues, & of one iudgment in matters ſpiritual. And if the day of the moſt cleare truth (of the goſpel) ſhined vnto vs, vve vvould neuer lighten ſo many darkeſome & obſcure candles of bookes and vvritinges.
               Their light of the goſpel, is the night of the goſpel. The vvhich reaſon concluding this euangelical ſtate and age to be ful of ignorance, groſſe & groſſe againe, Craſſa, craſſa (inquā) ſaecu
                     •
                  um tenet ignorantia,
               The end of their religion is Atheiſme, eeuery mā to beleeue what he liſteth. and that there is no certaine vvay to find out the truth and come to an end of theſe controuerſies, hereof he inferreth, that euery man is to be leaft to his ovvne iudgement, & ſuffered to beleeue as he liſt. Thus he ſpeaketh,Vbi ſupra addreſsing his wordes to the king. Cum haec it a ſint, o rex, et cum aetas noſtra in tanta adhuc ignorantiae caligine caecutiat &c.
               
                  Marke this plaine confeſsion approued by ſo manifeſt reaſon, againſt their common vaunting of the cleare light of the goſpel.
                  Scripture applied to proue Atheiſme.
                
               VVhereas theſe things are ſo, O king, & vvhereas our age as yet is blinded in ſo great darkenes of ignorance, I thinke vve ought to vſe maruelous diligence, leſt by error vve offend. And if there be any controuerſies in the caſe of religion, (as there are verie many) in theſe I thinke it good that vve folovv the exāple of Iudas Machabeus & his felovves, vvho vvhen they knevv not vvhat to determine touching the altar of the perfite ſacrifice,

they layed the ſtones thereof in the mount of the temple in a conuenient place,
               1. Mach. 4. 
               vntil there came ſome Prophete, vvho ſhould declare Gods oracle, vvhat vvas to be done vvith them: or rather the example of Moyſes,
               Num. 15. 
               vnto vvhom notvvithſtanding God had in preciſe vvords geuen commaundement, that if any mā of purpoſe brake the lavv, he ſhould ſuffer death therefore, yet the man vvho gathered vvood vpon the ſabboth day, he vvould not put to death, vntil he had particularly receaued anſvvere from God ſo to do. And after many other places of ſcripture brought for this purpoſe, as Act. 5. v.Act. 5. Rom. 14. Mat. 7. 38. et 39. Rom. 14. v. 1. et 4. Mat. 7. v. 1.2. thus he concludeth. Expectemus iuſti iudicis ſententiam &c. Let vs attend the ſentence of the iuſt iudge, and employ our diligence not to condeme other men, but to prouidē that our ſelues do nothing vvhy vve ſhould be condemned. Let vs obey the iuſt iudge, and ſuffer the cockle vntil the time of harueſt, leſt vvhyle vve vvil ſeeme to be vviſer then our maiſter, perhaps vve plucke vp the good corne. For the later end of the vvorld is not come as yet, nether are vve angels, vnto vvhom that office is committed. Vnto this Atheiſme & indifferent approbation of al maner faiths & religions very many learned & ſmooth Prooteſtants are alredy growen.

and whether thoſe Atheists whereof M.D. Whitg. defen. tract. 3. c. 6. pa. 178 D. Whitgift ſaith the engliſh congregation is ful, appertaine to this order, yea or no, thē ſelues beſt know. But it not poſsible that this dayly and infinite multiplcation of contentions, ſectes and ſchiſmes, new and diuers tranſlations of teſtaments and bibles, ſhould haue any other end.The proteſtants maner of preaching, the right way to Atheiſme For (to ſpeake the truth, and paſſe ouer al the reſt) what certainetie of faith or religion can a man haue, when as he is taught to neglect at his pleaſure, al antiquitie, al ages paſt, al Synodes and Councels of fathers and doctors old and new,See the preface. and ſuſpend his religion vpon the only teſtamēt tranſlated after the new guyſe, (& interpreted after euerie mans particular new fanſie) where he findeth far more varietie, then there are colours in the raynebovv. And if M. VVhitaker ſpeaking ſo much of his pure greeke and hebrevv originals, or latin or engliſh tranſlations, ſhould be required to anſvvere directly, vvhich greeke, which hebrew he vnderſtādeth, eſpecially vvhich tranſlation latin, engliſh, Scottiſh, French, or Dutch, he meaneth, vvhen he ſo magnifieth them againſt our vulgar teſtamēt, I weene it

would put him to more trouble then he is aware of.
            But to diſaduantage my ſelf of this maner of diſcourſe, and keepe my ſelf more preciſely to the argument which I haue begone, I ſay, that to geue liberty of appealing frō one certaine latin text appointed by the general Coūcel, to diuerſe greeke, hebrew, latin, & vulgar, as the heretikes do, is the very introductiō to apoſtaſie for this reaſon:Impoſsible to do good with any kind of heretike, ſo long as he may haue libertie to flee to diuers tranſlations and interpretations. becauſe puttinge the caſe of religion to ſtand in thoſe termes, to vvhich novv the heretiks haue brought it, it cutteth avvay al perſvvaſion, al grounde, al proofe of Chriſtian faith. For how can you deale vvith any heretike to bringe him to the vvay of ſaluation? To be ſo ſhort as I may, and in one example to geue the reader occaſion to recal to memorie hundreds, vvhich he may eaſily do, ſuppoſe I had to deale vvith one of the ſect famous and vvel knovven in Germanie, by the name of Antinomi, Enemies of the lavv.
               Antinomi a ſect of proteſtants. I rather name them of Germanie then of England, although England hath ſtore of them, becauſe M.W. ſhal conſider of it more quietly. They being in other things commō Proteſtants, beleeuing

that man in matters of life eternal hath not free vvil, that he vvorketh not his ovvne ſaluation, and that good workes are of no value in that reſpect, ioyne vnto that common opinion this one conſequent. Ipſi ſtatuunt (ſayth Sleydan of them) quaecunque tandem fit hominis vita,
               Sleid. li. 12. anno. 1538. fol. 199. 
               & quantumuis impura, iuſtificari tamen eum, ſi modo promiſsionibus euā
                  gelii credit.
               The true cō
                  cluſion of only faith iuſtifying. 
               This they put as a ſure principle, that hovvſoeuer a man liue, liue he neuer ſo filthely, yet he is iuſtified, if he beleeue the promiſes of the goſpel. And this is the very concluſion of the Proteſtants cō
               mon and general doctrine of iuſtification by only faithe. Suppoſe novv I haue to draw ſuche a one from his wicked opinion,The proteſtāts maner of āſwering the Catholikes. and vvould moue him to be ether ſyncere in faith, or honeſt in life, vvhat vvay could I take vvith him.
            
                Firſt, I ſhould perhaps require him to regard the moſt graue authoritie of Chriſtes Catholike Church, vttered to him in S.Al fathers & Councels contemned Bernard, S. Gregorie, S. Auſtin, S. Hierom, and auncient ſynods of learned biſhops: the ſumme of whoſe teaching is compriſed briefely in theſe wordes of the late Councel of Trent.Concil. Trident. ſeſs. 6. cap. 9. 
               If any ſay that the vvicked man is

iuſtified by only faith, vnderſtanding it ſo, that no other thing is required that ſhould cooperate for obtaining the grace of iuſtification &c. Anathema be he. But this is nothing, for againſt a thouſand Auſtins, & a thouſand Cyprians, and as many generall Councels conſiſting of men,See before chap. 3. & in the praeface ſuch a Proteſtant is many waies armed by M. W. and his brethren. And therefore this wil not ſerue.
            
                Wel, mount we then at one ſteppe,
ouer the heads of al fathers, Councels,S. Iames refuſed. and Churches, euen to the Apoſtolical age, and ſcriptures them ſelues. there wee proue that men muſt cooperate and do good workes by the authoritie of S. Iames. But S.
               Before c. 1. 
               Iames is flat againſt S. Paule, he abuſeth ſcripture, he diſputeth ridiculouſly, he ſauoreth nothing of an Apoſtolical ſpirit, he quite ouerthroweth that which S. Pau. had wel built & therefore he is no more worth then S. Auſtin, & ſo not to be obiected.
            
                At leaſt S. Paule him ſelf is of good
authoritie, who in many places, eſpecially of his epiſtle to the hebrews, is as vehement in this, as is S. Iames, & vſeth much like arguments. That is true, and therefore without queſtion that epiſtle was neuer writen by S. Paule. ſo

ſay Beza and Caluin,Caluin & Beza in cō
                  mentar. ad Hebr. in argumento, & ca. 2. v. 3. touching the denial of the author, and touching the whole epiſtle thus ſay others. Sed quū his rationibus quibus vtitur author epiſtolae Iacobi, et epiſtolae ad Hebraeos, neque vtatur Chriſtus,
               Cent. 1. li. 2. c. 4. col. 328. 
               neque caeteri apoſtoli, et hae epiſtolae apocryphae ſunt, vt ſuo loco dictum eſt, pro stipulis iure iſta habētur. But vvhere as nether Chriſt, nor any of his apoſtles, vſe ſuche reaſons,
               S. Paules epiſtle to the hebrewes reiected. 
               as doth the author of Iames his epiſtle, & the author of the epiſtle to the hebrevves, & againe, vvhereas theſe epistles be forged & apocryphal as hath bene ſayd in place conuenient, theſe reaſons are not to be eſteemed vvorth a ſtravv,
               Iew. defēce of the Apolog. par. 4. c. 19.20. ¶ 1. ſayth Illyricus (with his colleages) one of the beſt learned men of this age, by M. Iewels verdicte.
            
                Proceede we on, let vs find out ſome text without this exception, and vvhat better then that of S.
               2. Pet. 1. v. 10 Peter. VVherefor
                     •
                   brethren labour the more,
               S. Peters ſecond epiſtle may be denyed. 
               that by good vvork you may make ſure your vocation and electi
                     •
                  
                But this is more eaſily auoyded the any of the reſt. For firſt it ſtandet
                  •
                vpō courteſie vvhether this epiſtle ſha
                  •
                be autorized or no. for being doubted of in the primitiue Church by ſome, vve may doubt of it novv.The fourth dayes conference, ſee before cha. 2. This is a caſe ruled in the Towre diſputatiōs. Againe, admitting the epiſtle for canonical, the

place auaileth nothing.A place of S. Peter refuſed, 
                     ••
                  cauſe it wāteth in many greeke pri
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  es. For notvvithſtandinge it be in al latin copies that euer vvere, & manie greeke, and therefore put in the firſt translation of the Proteſtants, as namely, that vvhich vvas appointed to be read in the engliſh church the yere 1561, and Luther otherwiſe an immortal enemie to good vvorkes, in his commentarie ſaith expreſſely, Petrus hortatur,
               Luth tom. 5. in 2 Pet. ca. 1. fol. 487. 
               vt vocationem et electionem noſtram bonis operibus certam et ſtabilem reddamus, Peter exhorteth, that vve make our vocation and election ſtable,
               Teſtament
                     •
                   of the yeres 1577.1570.1580. & the Scottiſh bible. 
               firme, and aſſured, by good vvorks, yet becauſe thoſe vvords vvant in the later greeke prints, and therefore are not put in Beza his translation, and therefore are left out in the later engliſh verſions, this text is not ſcripture, and ſo the argument taken thence is nothing vvorth. This anſvvere geueth Vergerius in his dialoges againſt that great learned man Cardinal Hoſius.Vergerius dialog. 1. de Ofio. 
                     •
                  0.27. 
               Hoſius obiecteth vnto me that Peter ſaith &c. Poſſum reſpondere illa tria verba, nempe (per bona opera) non reperiri in fonte graeco: I may anſvvere him, that thoſe three vvords (by good vvorks) are not found in the greeke foūtaine.
            
            
                Therefore leauing this, ſearch vvee
farther. And to this purpoſe, very

pregnant is the place in the firſt epiſtle of the ſame Apoſtle S. Peter, vvhere he exhorteth Chriſtians to liue as be commeth men of ſo excellent a vocation, Caſtificantes animas ſuas in obedientia charitatis,
               1. Pet. ca. 1. v. 22. 
               Purifying their ſoules by obedience of charitie,
               Ibid. v. 17. 
               remembring alvvaies that God vvithout acception of perſons iudgeth euery man according to his vvorkes. And this place at leſt conuinceth the aduerſarie, firſt, that vve haue free vvil vvorking vvith the grace of God: then that we purifie & cleanſe our ſelues frō ſinne: thirdly, that good vvorkes are neceſſarily required of Chriſtian men. For by many diuine arguments S. Peter vrgeth this cōcluſion, Vt animas noſtras caſtificemus, That vve purifie our ovvne ſoules. And againſt this epiſtle there is no exception, as being neuer doubted of, and therefore by the Proteſtants is not refuſed. And al greeke copies haue this text moſt clearely, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
& ſo translateth that man of god Luther. Caſtificantes animas veſtras per obedientiam charitatis.
               Luther tom. 5. in 1. Petri ca. 1. fo. 451. Illyricus. T
                     •
                  gurine tranſlation. & Illyricus, Qui animas veſtras purificaſtis, and the Tigurine translator hath the ſame vvords, and according to this vvas translated the teſtament in King Edvvard his time. For as much as

you haue purified your ſoules. and the firſt of the Quenes raigne.Yere 1561. 
               That ye might haue faith and hope tovvards God, euē ye vvhich haue purified your ſoules. So as this place ſtandeth ſtrong for proofe of our faith and thoſe ſeueral points which now I noted.S. Peter notably corrupted in the later proteſtants tranſlations againſt freewil & good workes. But (ſaith my Proteſtant) howſoeuer Luther or the Diuines in king Edwardes time or in other times and places read, it ſhould appeare that ether ſome greeke copies haue otherwiſe, or at leaſt our maiſters deliuer otherwiſe vnto vs. For Theodorus Beza tranſlateth it in this maner.Teſtament of the yere 1556, & 1565 
               Animabusveſtris purificatis obediendo veritati per ſpiritum. which the later bible printed by C. Barker, printer to the Q.
               yere 1579. 
               maiestie, and tranſlated according to the hebrevv & greeke, rēdereth in theſe words, Seing your ſoules are purified in obeying the truth thorough the spirit, and ſo tranſlateth the engliſh bible printed at Geneua,yere 1561. yere 1579. and ſo doth the Scottiſh printed at Edēborough: ſo that theſe words make nothing at al ether for free wil, or cooperation, or value of good works.S. Peters words cleane inuerted. Nay rather they make much for the contrary ſide againſt free wil and our working with Gods grace, and proue that in our iuſtification we worke not, but actiue

are wrought, we cleanſe not our ſelues, but are cleanſed, we are not actiue and doers,Cone. Trid. ſeſſ. 6. ca. 4. but paſsiue and ſufferers: which is the very opinion of Luther and the Proteſtants, and for ſuch condemned in the Tridentine Coūcel.
            Wherefore leauing this, and wiſhing the reader to remember by this example amongſt many, how madly and furiously our aduerſaries are bent to coyne vs a new teſtament of their owne, who trāſlate thus, hauing no greeke or latin copie in the world fauouring them, but euen in the very ſame place, when they geue vs this latin, yet there leaue they the greeke as they finde it agreable to our latin, & therefore controling them of deſperate falſificatiō, proceede wee to ſome other text cōcerning the ſame veritie: & that ſhal be out of S. Paule, who handling the fame argument and making the like exhortation, willeth the Chriſtians not to be afraid of the aduerſaries of Chriſt,
                  
                     •
                  hiſi. 1. v. 28 
               Sophiſtical quarelling. though they perſecute neuer ſo terribly, VVhich to them is cauſe of perdition, but to you of ſaluatiō. where he maketh good workes neceſſary, and ſo the cauſes of ſaluation,Beza annot in illum locum. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . as ſinnes are the cauſe of damnation. But Beza replieth, that the old interpreter was ouerſeene tranſlating ſo, Quū nuſquam fideliū
                  
afflictio dicatur ſalutis eorum cauſa, ſed teſtimonium,
               Teſtament of the yeres. 1577. 1579. 1580. 
               Becauſe the afflictiō of the faithful is neuer called the cauſe of their ſaluatiō, but the teſtimonie, and therefore he tranſlateth it, Inditium, and the engliſh tranſlators his ſcholers, a token: although the firſt teſtament before noted, tranſlate it as we do, a cauſe, & ſo doth Eraſmus,1561. 
                     •
                  ood works the cauſe of our ſaluatiō
                & ſo doth the Tigurine trāſlator. And the Apoſtle matching ſinnes with good workes, theſe leading to heauen, as the other do to hel, conuinceth the ſenſe to be ſo. & Theodoretus a greeke father gathereth ſo much of that word.Theod. in Philip. ca. 1. 
               Id enim illis exitium, vob is autem ſalutem conciliat, ſaith he, That procureth to thē deſtructiō, but to you ſaluation. And to paſſe ouer S. Primaſius, S. Hier. S. Auſt. & the other latin fathers, how falſe the reaſon of Beza is which moued him to alter the text, hath bene ſhewed els where ſufficiently.
            And our Sauiour ſheweth beſt of al other,Before ca. 5. pa. 98 & in ſequentib. when he thus ſpeaketh of Marie Magdalen, Remittuntur ei peccata multa, quoniam dilexit multum.
               Luc. 7. v. 47. 
               Many ſinnes are forgeuen her, becauſe ſhe hathe loued much. Againſt which no man liuing can cauil by greeke, hebrew, or latin, but that workes of charitie are a cauſe why ſinnes are forgeuen, and ſo a cauſe of our iuſtification and ſaluation, for ſo

ſaith and meaneth our Sauiour moſt euidently, & the latin and greeke, word for word agreeth with this engliſh, and in hebrew the Euangeliſt neuer wrote.  But Beza hath a ſhift for this alſo, thus he tranſlateth. Remiſſa ſunt peccata eius multa.
               Beza tranſl. anno 1565. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
quoniā. becauſe. The yeres 1579. 1580. 
               Nam dilexit multum. That is according to our engliſh translation, Many ſinnes are forgeuen her▪ for ſhe loued much. And what difference is there betwene theſe two translations? howſoeuer it ſeeme to thee (Chriſtian reader) the difference is as great, as is betwene our doctrine & theirs. And firſt they make a wilful fault and corrupt the text, by making a fuller pointe, then ether the greeke or latin beareth. And Beza doth ſomewhat more deſperately, who maketh a downe & ful point, thereby more diuiding and diſtracting the later parcel from the former, as though it contained not a reaſon of that which went before, as it doth, but were ſome new matter: wherein he is controled of fowle dealing, by his owne translation ſet out the yere 1556, and by the very greeke prints of 1553. Geneua, 1547. Zurick, 1536. 1540 1543. Baſile & other Germane cities, who point it as doth our latin and engliſh. But the reaſon of his and their turning

               Quoniā, in to, Nam, Becauſe, in to For,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . deſcrieth yet more their obdurate harts againſt Chriſt and his worde. For where as Chriſt by S. Lukes reporte ſaith in effect thus, becauſe ſhe loued much therefore manie ſinnes are forgeuē her, they by this peruerſion and miſpointing make a cleane different and almoſt contrarie ſenſe thus: becauſe ſhe had many ſinnes forgeuen her,Chriſts words clean inuerted. therefore ſhe loueth much, & this loue folowing was a token of the remiſsion which ſhe by only faith had obtained before: ſo turning the cauſe in to the effect, the antecedent into the conſequent, and hereby vtterly ſpilling the doctrine which Chriſt by his words and reaſon geueth, and the Church of his words & reaſon gathereth. That this is the true groūd & reaſō, why they ſo Luciferlike alter the ſpeech of Chriſt, Beza plainly cōfeſſeth. Thus he writeth. Nam dilexit. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For ſhe loued. The vulgar tranſlation and Eraſmus turne it, Becauſe ſhe loued,
               Beza in Luc. 7. verſ. 47. 
               but I had rather interprete it as I do, that men may beſt vnderſtand in theſe vvords to be ſhevved not the cauſe of remiſsion of ſinnes, but rather that vvhich enſued after ſuch remiſſion, & that by the conſequent is gathered the antecedent. And therefore they vvhich

abuſe this place to ouerthrovv free Iuſtification by only fayth, are very impudent and childiſh. wherein he ſpeaketh very truly,Intolerable pride & malice in abuſing the ſcripture, to helpe only only fayth. the words and ſenſe being ſo as he hath framed them. But if he had not plaid the part rather of a diuel then of an heretike, to alter in pointing, worde and ſenſe, the ſpeach of our Sauiour, and ſo taught him his leſſon what he ſhould ſay, it had not bene impudencie for vs thus to argue, but it had bene more then brutiſh ignorance in him to haue denied that charitie is required as wel for obtaining remiſsion of ſinnes as is faith: which both in this place our Sauiour moſt diuinely conioyneth, ſaying of charitie, Many ſinnes are forgeuen her,
               The ſenſe of Chriſts words according to the aunciēt fathers. 
               becauſe ſhe hath loued much, and adding ſtraight way, Thy faith hath made thee ſafe, goe in peace.
            
            And ſo of this text gathered al the auncient fathers, who were for al that nether impudent nor childiſh. So S. Chryſoſtom.Chryſ. hom. 6. in Mat. Sinnes purged by workes of penance & claritie, 
               As first by vvater and the ſpirit, ſo aftervvard by teares and confeſsion vve are made cleane. And he proueth it by this place. So S. Gregorie expounding the ſame place. Many ſinnes are forgeuen her,
               Greg. hom. 33. in Euāg. 
               becauſe ſhe loued much. as if it had bene ſaid expreſly, He burneth

out perfectly the ruſt of ſinne, vvhoſoeuer burneth vehemently vvith the fier of loue. For ſo much more is the ruſt of ſinne ſcoured avvay, by how much more the harte of a ſinner is inflammed vvith the great fier of charitie. And S. Ambroſe vpon the ſame words.Ambroſ. in Luc. lib. 6. c. 7. de mulicre peccatrice. 
               Good are teares vvhich are able to vvaſh avvay our ſinnes. Good are teares, In quibus nō ſolū redemptio peccatorum, ſed etiam refectio eſt iuſtorum, vvherein is not only the redemption of ſinners, but alſo the refreſhing of iuſt men. And S. Auſtin debating this ſtorie in a longe homelie ſaith.Aug. hom. 23. inter 50. 
               This ſinful vvoman the more ſhe ovved the more ſhe loued, the forgeuer of her debtes our lord him ſelfe affirming ſo, Many ſinnes are forgeuen her, becauſe ſhe loued much. And vvhy loued ſhe much, but becauſe ſhe ovved much? Quare fecit illa omnia, niſi vt dimitterentur ſibi peccata? VVhy did ſhe al thoſe offices (of vveping vvaſhing &c.) but to obtaine remiſsion of her ſinnes? I omitte other fathers, al agreing in the ſelfe ſame veritie, al making her loue to be a cauſe going before, nor only an effect or ſequele comming after the remiſsion of ſinnes. And this was the gathering of the auncient fathers, S. Chryſoſtom, S. Gregorie, S. Ambroſe, & S. Auſtin &c. who were euer reuerenced for holy and learned

fathers by the children of Chriſts Catholike Church, vntil this Chams broode and prophane generation inuaded their roomes, who now condemne them for impudent and childiſh.
            But let me with thy leaue and patience (Chriſtian reader) proſecute in one worde more, their wonderful toſſing and turning and inuerting this ſhorte ſentence of our Sauiour. And in this one allegation which I wil now produce, thou ſhalt ſee the very image of Atheiſme, of contempt of God and man, of impoſsibilitie to do any good by ſcriptures, ſo longe as this licence of framing new tranſlations is allowed. Thou ſeeſt what ſturre Beza hath kept, and to ſerue his turne, what fowle and deteſtable corruption he hath vſed. But to make vp the matter, and reconcile Chriſts words a litle better to this new ſolifidian goſpel,An example of ſingular & notorious wrangling. commeth in Wolfgangus Muſculus, with a deeper fetch after this maner. Firſt becauſe S. Lukes words be very plaine, and he can not ſo probably wrangle vpon thē in greeke, he in his owne fanſie imagineth what Chriſt ether did or ſhould haue ſpoken in hebrew.Good groū
                  des to expound and correct ſcripture vpon. Next, that fanſie he putteth to be true. and forthwith according to

the ſame he correcteth S. Luke, and ſo concludeth that al matcheth right with their Lucianical only faith. For nowe by this time, with his good helpe not one worde in effect ſtādeth as Chriſt ſpake it, at leaſt by S. Lukes reporte. Thus he diſcourſeth.Muſculus in locis cō
                  munibus ca. de Iuſtificat. num. 5. 
               Ecce (inquiunt) manifeſtò datur dilectioni remiſsio peccatorum. Ergo non ſola fides iuſtificat &c. Behold (ſay the Papiſts) remiſſion of ſinnes is attributed to loue. ergo faith alone iuſtifieth not. but vve anſvvere, that loue in this vvoman, vvas not the cauſe of remiſsion of ſinnes, but a token & declaration thereof. Remiſsiō of her ſinnes ſhe obtained by faith in Chriſt.
               Luc. 7. v. 47. 
               Therefore vvhereas Chriſt ſaith 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , The vvorde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
(as vvitneſſeth Suidas) is a Dorical vvorde, & ſignifieth not in the imperatiue, Remittantur, Remitted be they, but in the preterperfect tenſe, Remiſſa ſūt, Haue bene remitted. Next the particle 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſignifieth here, not the cauſe, but the probatiō of that vvhich is put before. Thirdly, the vvord 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
hath loued,
               Yet S. Luke tooke it otherwiſe. dilexit. 
               is an hebrew phraſe by vvhich the preterperfecttenſe is put for the preſent. For the hebrevves ſpeake thus, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
that is, becauſe ſhe hath loued much, in ſteede of, becauſe ſhe doth loue much. And plaine it is, that Chriſt ſpake not greeke or latin, but hebrevv. Therefore vvhereas

Chriſt ſaid, Many ſinnes haue bene forgeuen her, he proueth it by that which folovveth, becauſe ſhe loueth much. as if he had ſaid, That ſhe loueth me much it is no maruel, ſhe hath good occaſion ſo to do. For many ſinnes haue bene forgeuen her. So vve ſay that he hath obtained that vvhich he deſired, becauſe he is mery & laugheth: he is verie hūgrie, becauſe he eateth much &c. I wil not beſtow time in examining this anſwere▪ who told him that Chriſt vſed the preterperfecttenſe for the preſent, whereas S. Luke ſo flatly affirmeth the contrarie, or that S. Luke in this phraſe, ſo ſtrāgely affected the Dorical lāguage, with the reſt of his bold aſſertion, but wanting al reaſon of reaſonable coniecture to ſupport them. this only I wiſh thee to conſider,Note the wonderful tearing and renting of this ſhort ſentence. whether thou didſt euer ſee a litle ſentence ſo racked, and torne, as this is.
            For cōparing this ſentēce as it is novv faſhioned by them, with the ſame ſentence, as it was firſt pronounced by our Sauiour, not one word of any momēt remaineth in ſuch ſort as Chriſt vttered them. Chriſt ſaid, Many ſinnes are forgeuen her, becauſe ſhe hath loued much: now with their correction thus it is. Many ſinnes haue bene forgeuen her. For ſhe loueth

much. 
                Where firſt they rent in ſonder &
make that two, which Chriſt ioyned and ſpake as one. Then they wreſt one
of Chriſts words, & bringe it to a Dorical phraſe of ſpeach.  And by and by,
backe againe, they make the next which ſignifieth a thing paſt in greeke, to ſignifie a thing preſent by the hebrewe maner of ſpeach, which hath no preſent tenſes, the cleane contrarie whereof is auouched in the other Dorical word going immediatly before.  Afterwards
they enforce 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , not to ſignifie a cauſe antecedent, but a ſigne or effect conſequent.  And finally in al and euery of
theſe tricks, S. Lukes authoritie is vnder foote, and lieth dead. For nether Beza nor Muſculus in this toſſing and turning, euer conſider what S.No ſpirite but the ſpirite of Satā could teach the proteſtants this deſperate maner of interpretation. Luke wrote, what ſenſe the Apoſtolical Church gaue, and the holy Ghoſt in the ſame hath alwaies continued, what the very letter of the greeke requireth as now it ſtandeth: but how it may poſſibly be wreſted, if a man wil folow the ſpirit of contention, if he will fetch the pointing of the ſentence from Geneua, the meaning of one word from Dorica in one corner of the world, of an other frō Hieruſalem, of a third from

Swytzerlād, & the entier ſumme of al, from the deepe pit of hell. For excepte the deuil him ſelf ſtoode by thē, & ſuggeſted to them ſuch conſtruction, I thinke the nature of man hauing ſome regarde of honeſtie, of learning, of modeſtie, of Chriſt & his Euāgeliſts, could neuer breake forth into ſo much monſtruous abſurditie.
            Of al which this I conclude, that allowing men this libertie vnto which now by this libertine-goſpel they are driuen, I ſay, there is no poſsibilitie, to conteine men in faith, or to reduce men to faith, or to proue any parcel of Chriſtiā faith.Proteſtant ſhiftes to auoide ſcripture when it is plaine againſt thē.
                For ſetting aſide church, Doctors, Cuſtome, Councels, and reſting in the only Scriptures & priuate expoſition of the ſame, this one example geueth vs a paterne to care nothing for al ſcriptures.  For it is a maruelous flat text which a man of meane learning by one of theſe ſhiftes may not auoide, ether by refuſing it as not Canonical becauſe it is reiected novv of Proteſtants in theſe daies:  or hath bene doubted of by Catholikes in old time, vvhich cutteth of a number of bookes:  or by obiecting ſome one or other greeke example in vvhich the

vvords vvant, vvhich is eaſie to finde, heretiks of diuers ſects hauing novv the printing of moſt greeke teſtamēts, and euery one being content to fauour his proper goſpel and hereſie:  or by
producing ſome falſe tranſlation and ſticking to that, vvith ſtore of vvhich euerie prouince is peſtered: or by hunting out diuers ſignifications of the
greeke vvord, and taking that vvhich maketh moſt for his aduantage: or if that ſerue not, then by corrupting one
word, by conferring an other with the greeke of this or that dialect, a third with the Iewes, or Chaldees, or Suitzers maner of ſpeaking, and ſo patching vp a ſenſe, partly Chriſtian, partly Germane, partly Ethnical, and partly Iudaicall,  and finally, (which is al in
al) reſeruing euer to him ſelfe ſupreme iudgement of al ſenſes, interpretations, ſcriptures, and languages.
            As in this verie place whereof I ſpeake, Zuinglius folowing nether the words of the Euāgeliſt, nor ſenſe of the Church, nor Cōmentarie of the auncient fathers, nor inuention of Beza, nor any of thoſe manyfold ſhiftes of Muſculus, willeth vs rather for dilexit, to put, credidit, for charitie, faith, and then geueth vs the

meaning of Chriſts words thus.Zuing. to 4. in Luc. 7. 
               Quoniā dilexit multum. Ego puto dilectionem hic pro fide accipi,
               Propre expoſitions. dilexit, id eſt credidit. works, that is, faith. the ſunne, that is, the moone. 
               quòd tantum mihi fidit, tantum peccatorū ei remittitur. Nam poſte a dicit, ſides tua te ſaluam ſec it. Becauſe ſhe loued much. I ſuppoſe that loue is here put for faith. becauſe ſhe hath ſo great affiāce in me, ſo many ſinnes are forgeuē her. for he ſaith afterwards, thy faith hath ſaued thee, that is, hath deliuered and abſolued the from thy ſinnes. which one diſtinction anſwereth al the places that in this controuerſie vve bring out of the ſcriptures to refel their only faith.
            By theſe fevv heretical ſleights (& M. Whitaker knovveth his brethren haue many other as bad as theſe) vſed in one particular controuerſie, any man may geſſe hovv likely it is to tye an heretike hauing ſome vvitt and learning, and ſight in tonges, vvith any text that gainſaith his opinion. Hovv true vve finde by experience that vvhich Tertullian ſo many ages agoe ſpake of the heretikes of his time, and prophecied as it may ſeeme, of the heretikes of our time.vertul. de praeſcripti. num. 5. 
               Iſta haereſis non recipit quaſdam ſcripturas &c. Theſe (Zuinglian, Lutheran, Puritan, Anabaptiſt, Trinitarian &c.) heretikes admitt not ſome bookes of ſcriptures. and

thoſe vvhich they doe admit, by adding to,
               The agreement betwene the proteſtants of our time and aunciēt heretikes touching their behauiour about ſcriptures. 
               & taking from, they peruerte to ſerue their purpoſe. And if they receaue ſome bookes, yet they receaue thē not intierly: or if they receaue thē entierly after ſome ſort, neuertheleſſe they marre them by deuiſing diuers interpretatiōs. In this caſe vvhat vvil you do that thinke your ſelfe moſt ſkilful in the ſcriptures, vvhē as that which you defend, the aduerſarie denieth,
               Not poſsible to do good with an heretike hauing this liberty to diſcourſe. 
               that vvhich you deny the aduerſarie defendeth. Et tu quidem nihil perdes niſi vocem de contentione, nihil conſequeris niſi bilem de blaſphematione. And thou truely ſhalt leeſe nothing but thy vvordes in ſo contentious a brauling, thou ſhalt gaine nothinge but greefe and anger in ſeinge an heretike ſo to blaſphene.
            
            And novv if I ſhould ſhevv the like in the hebrevv, and by examples manifeſt the ſame, I ſhould trouble my ſelfe much, and the reader much more. Becauſe I muſt be driuen to talke of titles, and pointes, and rules of the Rabbines,The hebrew tonge open to infinite cauillinge, and ſo vnfie to bind a cōtentious heretike. and readings of the Maſſoreth and ſuch other obſcure matter, troubleſome for me to laie together and vvrite out, and not intelligible for a common reader. I vvil therefore put dovvne only certaine propoſitions, exemplifying thē in one or tvvo vvordes, vvhereby the learned

ſhal vnderſtand how true that is which I affirme, and the vnlearned ſhal be able to conceaue ſomwhat. I ſay therefore, that of the hebrew far leſſe hold can be taken in binding a contentious heretike then of any other language.
            
                The reaſon is, firſt becauſe their tonge hauing in it no great ſtore of words, euery word almoſt is vſed in verie diuers ſignifications,Hebrew words haue great diuerſitie of ſignifications farre more then is found in latin or greeke or many vulgar languages. and therefore if you preſſe him with one tranſlation or ſenſe, he forthwith hath ſundry and diuers ſenſes to flee vnto. Hence cōmeth that diuerſitie in the Pſal.Pſal. 54. v. 21. 54. Extendit deus manum ſuam in retribuendo, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , according to the 70. God hath ſtretched forth his hand to revvard or recompence, as the church readeth, which place the catholikes both of late and auncient times vſe to proue the reward and recompence of good workes. The engliſh bibles turne it thus. He hath laide his hands vpon ſuch as be at peace vvith him, the more common Proteſtant translation,Marlorate. as it appeareth by Marlorate, Miſit manus ſuas in paces ſuas, He hath laid his hāds vpon his peaces. This diuerſitie riſeth of

the ſame hebrew word,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
whence cō
                  meth. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                but hauing diuers ſenſes.
            
                An other reaſon is, becauſe their ſubſtantiues being in maner al deriued of
verbes, often times one ſubſtantiue may haue diuers deriuations from diuers verbes, which bringeth as great varietie as is poſsible. So the church readeth pſ. 59. Dediſti metuentibus te,
               Pſal. 59. v. 6. 
               ſignificationē vt fugiant a facie arcus. Thou haſt geuen to thoſe that feare thee, a ſigne that they flee from the face of the bovve, according to the 70. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and ſo vvas the hebrew in S. Hieroms time, as vve ſee by his translation. The Proteſtants, Luther, Bucer, Caluin, as vve ſee by Marlorate, vvil haue it, Dediſti metuentibus te vexillum, ad vexillādum propter veritatem. Thou haſt geuen to them that feare thee a flagge, to flagge for truth. the engliſh of one yere,The yere 1577. 
               thou haſt geuen a token for ſuch as feare thee that they may triūphe becauſe of thy truth, of an other,1579. 
               Thou haſt geuē a bāner to them that feare thee that it may be diſplaied, becauſe of thy truth. This differēce in one part cō
               meth of the 2. radical hebrew verbes,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                the old church, the 70. & S. Hierō folowing one, the new congregation of the Proteſtāts rather liking the other. The difference

in the other part bovv and truth no doubt came thence,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                that the old hebrew bookes had that vvorde vvritten vvith one kinde of T, the later vvith an other.
            
                Againe touching the literal ſēſe of the hebrew words what maſters ſhal we follow? The old Rabbines, Dauid Kimhi,A hard difficulty, what maſters we muſt folow touching the true ſignification of the hebrew words Aben Ezra, and ſuch other. Thus to ſay, Beza, Munſter, Caluin, Caſtalio & the Proteſtants commonly induce vs. But Maſter D. Humfrey holdeth the contrary, and not without reaſon, if we had a good pilote to rule the ſterne and containe vs in mediocritie.Humf. lib. 2. de rat. int pa. 219.320. 
               VVe ought not to credit (ſaith he) in my iudgment the Rabbines touching the very expoſition & deriuation of the hebrevv vvords. Chriſt pronoūceth of them that they are blinde, & guides of the blinde. Therefore this is not the vvay to interprete rightly, nether may vve folovv them, except vve vvil preferre darknes before light, errors before truth, doubtful things before aſſured, daungerous before ſafe, and vvicked and blaſphemous before Godly and Catholike.
               The proteſtāts folowing the Iewiſh Rabbines: tranſlate wickedly. By which rule al your new hebrew tranſlations are called in to queſtion, yea are pronounced to be darkeſome, erroneous, doubtful, daungerous, wicked, & blaſphemous.

For your beſt and greateſt tranſlators, whom did they folow in the ſenſe of the hebrew wordes but their common dictionaries? And out of whō are they drawen? looke vpon the title of Munſters.Dictionari
                     •
                   Munſteri printed at Baſile the yere 1564. 
               Dictionarium Hebraeum vltimò ab autore Sebaſtiano Munſtero recognitum, et ex Rabbinis, praeſertim ex radicibus Dauid Kimhi auctū et locuplet a tum. This hebrevv dictionarie is novv laſt renevved by Sebaſtiā Munſter, and encreaſed and enriched out of the Rabbines, eſpecially out of Dauid Kimhi. And Munſter in his tranſlations (which is accompted moſt exact to the hebrew) proteſteth that he regarded therein no Chriſtian fathers but only the Iudaical Rabbines.Munſter. in praef. bibli. tom. 1. 
               Nobis (ſaith he) in animo fuit talem parare aeditionem ſcripturae, quae per omnia hebraiſmo eſſet cōformis, ideo ſolos hebraeos cōſuluimus ſcriptores. And here perhaps I might propoſe vnto you an Inſoluble, an argument that you wil neuer aunſwere, ſauing the honour of your maiſters & doctors. Your maiſter Beza correcteth the new teſtamēt generally, and draweth the greeke citations in the ſame, and al doubtful wordes to the ſenſe of the hebrew and the Rabbines. Doctor Humfrey on the cōtrary ſide wil haue the hebrew words

of the old teſtament drawen to ſignifie as the Apoſtles cite them according to the 70. in the new teſtament, and condemneth your tranſlators for doing otherwiſe: and namely whereas in the 2. of the Actes your Engliſh bibles, after Beza tranſlate Sh
                     •
                  ol, Graue, he acknowledging that in hebrevv and according to the Rabbines, It may ſo ſignifie, & many things beſides,
               Humf. vbi ſup. pa. 225. 
               as pitt, the ſtate of the dead and damned, death, a ditch, the eaſt or birth, and hell: this laſt, ſaith he, muſt vve folovv by authoritie of the holy Ghoſt, Act 2. interpreting a place of the pſalme 15. Where you ſee one wil haue the hebrew word in the pſalme tranſlated, Hel, becauſe ſo it is in the greeke, Act. 2. the other will haue the greeke, Act. 2. trāſlated Graue, becauſe ſo may be the ſignification of the hebrevv, pſ. 15. et ſic in caeteris. vvhere, by the way you may note that your pure and vndefiled bibles, are not altogether ſo iudged by this vvriter, a man of ſuch credit and name in your cōgregation, yea that he iudgeth them corrupt in ſo great a matter as a principal article of our faith commeth vnto.
            
                And yet al this vvhich hetherto I haue ſpoken, is nothing touching the

true controuerſie vvhich is about the hebrevv originals, that is, whether vve muſt take them as novv vve haue them geuen vs vvith the ordinarie pointes and vovvels put to by the Ievves and Rabbines: or vvhether vve muſt take the conſonantes only, and put to the points or vowels by our owne diſcretion. If the firſt, then al thoſe horrible abſurdities muſt ſtande,Before chap. 12. which before I haue noted againſt Chriſts Diuinitie, Humanitie, Paſsion▪ & Incarnation. If the ſecond, then muſt the Proteſtants fal to tranſlate a freſhe: for al their bibles hitherto are litle worth, becauſe they generally (though not in euery place) haue folowed the cōmon points and vowels, according to which they frame vs their common Gloſes, Commentaries, and Dictionaries.
            
                But this very pointe is a ſea of diſputation
and writing, and therefore for a final concluſion to ſhew that the Proteſtants appealing to the hebrew vvil ſhortly fal to very plaine Atheiſme, I demaund of M. Whit. this queſtion, whether he thinke it flat Atheiſme and Turkerie to denie that Chriſt vvas borne of a virgin? I truſt he wil cōfeſſe vvith vs, that this denial is the denial

and abnegation of al Chriſtianitie. For though they care not greatly vvhether mē thinke our Lady to haue remained a virgin in Chriſts birth,Bez. in praef. Teſt. noui ann. 1565. principi Cond. dica
                  
                     •
                  i. & Molinae. in a. Luc. or after Chriſts birth, yet they ſeeme to beleeue moſt aſſuredly that ſhe vvas a virgin vvhen ſhe conceaued him. That being graunted, that this denial is plaine apoſtaſie,
                  Chriſts incarnation of the virgin can not be proued by ſcripture according to the proteſtantes maner of expounding it.
                  Mat. 1. v. 23.
                I require of him vvhat ſcripture he hath to proue that veritie? for church, Traditiō, Fathers, & ſuch other, I know he contemneth, and vve are bound to beleue nothing ſay they, but that which is in plaine ſcripture. The only place that may ſerue the turne, is the firſt of S. Matth. (for the allegories of Ezechiel conuince not) vvhere it is ſaid, Ecce virgo concipiet &c. Behold a virgin ſhal cō
                  ceaue & bring forth a ſonne. But this place proueth nothing by M. W. ovvne rule, by Bezaes common kinde of ſcanning ſuch citations, and by the Proteſtants interpretation of this place: ether becauſe the tranſlation is framed according to the 70.Before pag. 286.287. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
See Munſt. in the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                not the hebrevv, and ſo it is no ſcripture by M. W. or if it be, then 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               virgin, accordinge to the hebrew muſt ſignifie a yonge vvenche, adoleſcētula, ſiue virgo ſiue maritata by Beza his rules (and ſo ſaith Munſter) as vvel virgin

as not virgin: or becauſe the moſt preciſe Iudaical Proteſtants tranſlate it ſo, to put the matter out of doubt. So for example translateth Oecolampadius in the bibles of Baſile,Oecolamp. in Eſa. ca. 7. which Bullinger in the preface ſo much commēdeth, Ecce adoleſentula illa praegnans,
               Tranſlation Iudaical & Antichriſtian. 
               et partens filium, Beholde that yonge vvenche great vvith childe, and Munſter preciſely according to the hebrevv as he ſayth, Ecce virgo illa impraegnata, Beholde that virgin gotten vvith childe. And hovvſoeuer M. W. may cauil vpon the later, the firſt is mere Iudaical, no wayes Chriſtian,Luth. tom. 2: ad Amſdorf. de Eraſ. fol. 485. and the peruerſion rather of a monſter then of a man, as Luther pronounceth againſt Eraſmus for the like cauſe. and yet I acknovvledge according to the heretical maner of examining citations, the hebrevv vvord may beare that ſenſe vvhich Oecolāp. yeldeth, & ſo did thoſe old renegates and enemies of our religion, Aquila Ponticus,Iren. lib. 3. cap. 24. vide Euſeb. li. 5. ca. 8 Epiph. haer. 30. Iuſtin. in dialog. eum Tripho
                     •
                  e. and Theodotion translate that vvord, vpon which tranſlation aftervvards the beggerly Ebionites founded their beaſtly opinion touching the maner of Chriſts incarnation.
            And here (Chriſtian reader) I haue to requeſt thee, not ſo to interpreete

me in any thing which I haue ſpoken, as though I coueted to diſgrace the ſtudy of greeke and hebrew (as this man would haue thee to conceaue of vs) & condēned thoſe languages, which I cō
               feſſe to be great helpes to the attaining of the true ſenſe in ſūdrie places of ſcripture, & condemne my ſelfe for knowing ſo litle as I do in ether of them both.The hebrew and greeke knowledge, much aduaunced by Catholikes. And manifeſt it is, what paine the Catholiks haue taken in ſetting forth the bible moſt perfitly and diligently in the Hebrew, Chaldee, Greeke, and Arabike languages. what labour they haue taken about the Greeke tranſlation of the Septuaginta. How continually, and at this preſent, moſt honorable Prelates, and Cardinals, & other men of great name, employ them ſelues in the ſame kinde of ſtudy, to the end they may procure al helpes ſo far as is poſsible, for the perfite vnderſtā
               dinge of the ſacred ſcriptures. How in moſt Catholike Vniuerſities, mē excellent for ſkil in theſe languages, floriſh and are maintained, to the great aduauncemēt of the faith & Church Catholike: with the liſte or cataloge of whoſe names I thinke it needeles to trouble the reade
                  •
               , becauſe otherwiſe

they are wel knowen to the Chriſtian world. But this I ſay, & thou ſhalt finde it true when ſoeuer thou commeſt to examine theſe matters with that aduiſednes and maturitie of iudgement as the thing it ſelfe requireth,A man muſt haue a ſetled faith before he come to cō
                  ferre greeke and hebrew els ſhal he neuer haue any faith. Vide Aug. de Gen. ad lit. lib. 1. ca. 21. & tract. 18. in Ioan. that who ſo wil goe about to picke his faith out of the greeke and hebrew teſtaments without a ſetled and conſtant forme of faith before, and from which he muſt not be drawen by any pretenſe of greeke & hebrew, his greeke & hebrew wil neuer make him a Chriſtian, wil neuer eſtabliſh him in any true faith. Aquila Ponticus, firſt a Chriſtian, after a Iewe, was very perfect in the hebrew, and tranſlated the bible ſo, as S.Hier. ep. 138 Marcellae. & 1
                     •
                  5 Damaſo. quaeſt. 2. Hierom calleth him to his praiſe, Diligentiſsimum verborum hebraicorum interpretem, A moſt diligent interpreter of the hebrevv vvords, and yet howe good a Chriſtiā he was, is noted before. The Arrians, Trinitarians, Anabaptiſtes and Lutherans of our time,Many greate Grecians and Hebraiciās are wicked and deteſtable Chriſtians. want they greeke or hebrew? No dout their arrogancie and pride which for their greeke & hebrevv they cōceaue, is a great cauſe of their continual alteration from one hereſie to an other, as vve ſee in the ſtories of Melancthon,

Blandrata, Bernardinus Ochinus &c.
            Before vve vvere Grecians, or Hebritians, or in deede Engliſhmen, or vnderſtoode any letter of any lāguage, firſt of al vve were Chriſtiās,Firſt we muſt be ſure of our fayth we were graffed into the Catholike Church the myſtical body of Chriſt, and made members of the ſame, and by ſolemne vowe we bound our ſelues to honor, loue, reuerence, and cleaue to her as Timoth. 3. verſ. 15.the piller & firmament of truth, Epheſ. 5. verſ. 25. the ſpouſe of Chriſt, Gal. 4. v. 26. our diuine mother, 1. Pet. 3. verſ. 20.21. the arke of Noe Mat. 13. ſaepe. and kingedome of God, See before chap. 6. pag. 117. without which there is no way but death and damnation. Let vs hold this faſt, and then our greeke and hebrevv may doe vs ſome good. Let vs depart from her, talke vve ſo longe as vve liſt of our greeke and hebrevv, as S.
               Act. 8. v. 20. Peter ſayd of Simon Magus money, ſo that vvil be to vs, In perditionem, To our euerlaſtinge deſtruction, it vvil neuer doe vs good.Aug, confeſ. lib. 8. ca. 8. And as S. Auſtin ſayth, in the meane ſeaſon vvhile the vnlearned riſe & get poſſeſsion of heauē, Nos cū doctrinis noſtris ecce vbi volutamur in carne et ſanguine, We vvith our greeke & hebrevv & vvhat other learning ſo euer, ſhal alwaies be tumbling in fleſh & bloud, in continual braules

and contentions, vvhich vvil ſet vs the right vvay to hell.
         
         
            CHAP. XV. Hovv M.VV. inueigheth againſt the nevv testament lately ſet forth in this colledge, vvith a cleare refutation of ſuch faultes as he findeth in the tranſlation thereof.
            
               Here now is the place to ſpeake of our late Engliſh trāſlation ſet forth in this colledge. For though M. W. vpon paſsion and heate, diſorderlye before he had ſpoken of the originals and in reſpect of them condemned our latin, reproued vs for tranſlating according to the latin, yet to make all ſure, here againe he repeateth his former accuſatiō, and in particular chargeth vs vvith certaine faultes committed both in the teſtament it ſelf, and in the annotatiōs made vpō the ſame. His vvordes albeit they ſhevv farre more ſtomake then vvit, more malice then reaſon, and therefore are the more lothſome to reade, yet becauſe they may be an example of an heretical

ſpirit then moſt vaunting, and triumphing, and ſvvelling a high in loftines of vvordes, vvhen in deede he is vnder foote, and ſtandeth vpon no groūd at al, I vvil put them dovvne as they are. Thus he ſpeaketh.
            
               pag. 14.15.
               There is novv abrode a certaine engliſh tranſlation of the nevv teſtamēt,
               M. W. inuectiue againſt the late Catholike trāſlation of the new Teſtament. 
               ſet forth & laboured by that nevv colledge at Rhemes, to vvhich I am right gladde that our tranſlatiō is nothing like. For 
               
               1 
               ſince the firſt creation of the vvorlde, there vvas neuer found any tranſlation like to that vvhich you haue of late publiſhed, & by common iudgment commēded to your countrymen. For vvhether vve conſider the 
               
               2 
               vnaccuſtomed and monſtrous noueltie of vvordes, or 
               
               3 
               the prophane corruptions and outragious boldnes to peruert euery thing, neuer any heretikes at any time haue done more violence and iniurie to the ſacred teſtament of Chriſt Ieſus our lord. They that thus tranſlate the ſcriptures into any language as you haue done in to ours, may rightly be thought 
               
               4 
               not to haue intended that the people ſhould vnderſtand the vvil of God declared in the vvord, but that they ſhould mocke and cōtemne it. And truly 
               
               5 
               ſo farre is it that I thinke this your tranſlatiō vvil any waies harme our cauſe, that I vviſh it might be read alſo of ſtraungers,

that vvhen they conſider this your nevv kinde of tranſ
                     •
                  ation hetherto vnheard of, they might acknovvledge the madnes & deſperatnes of the Papiſtes. 
               
               6 
               It is altogether
framed according to the forme of the old latin edition.
            
            This is his accuſation of vs (good reader) vttered as thou ſeeſt in ſuch terrible vvordes, as if ſome counterfaite Aiax Maſtigophorus, or Hercules Furens, or ſome tragical Tereus or Thyeſtes, after the eating of their ovvne children, vvere raging vpon a ſcaffold. Here thou haſt, The creation of the vvorld, Vnaccuſtomed and monſtrous noueltie, Prophane corruptions, and outragius boldnes, Neuer heretikes at any time did the like violence and iniurie to the ſacred teſtament of Chriſt Ieſus, The vvord of God mocked and contemned, Madnes and deſperatnes of the Papiſtes. and ſo forth, as if we were giltie of (or himſelf as boldfaced as he is, durſt obiect vnto vs) any one of thoſe wicked, Prophane, Heretical, & Turkiſh corruptiōs, of which we haue proued him & his brethrē to haue cōmitted many. Which ſeing he doth not, nether cā do, thou maiſt vndoubtedly take this for Brutū fulmē,
               Affected hypocriſie a pange of vile hipocriſie, ſuch as when they

are diſpoſed, now and then they vſe in their pulpits to make the people imagine they haue in thē ſome dramme of religiō, whereof they are quite deſtitute. And if thou wilt know where theſe thundering termes may be truly verified, recal to memorie, not wordes, but factes, experimēts, chaūge of wordes, alterations of ſentences, oppoſitions againſt Chriſt him ſelf and the Euangeliſtes, errors Ethnical, Iudaical & Diabolical confeſſed to ſwarme euery vvhere in theſe mens nevv bibles, in thoſe very ſame, vvhich this vehement orator praiſeth as vndefiled and moſt pure. Record this Reader, & thou ſhalt find, vvhere theſe oratorial termes ſo vnaptly applied, may be ſincerely and truely beſtovved. And that vve are altogether guiltleſſe of any ſuch fault, and vvithal that he practiſeth not only manifeſt lying, but in deed very groſſe hipocriſie in this accuſation, our ovvne conſcience before Chriſt & his Tribunal-ſeate, and the vvorke it ſelf peruſed by any indifferent man acquiteth vs in the firſt, and his ovvne vvordes and vvriting in this place conuinceth him of the ſeconde.
            
               I haue ſhevved before hovv vvel the learneder proteſtants eſteeme of our latin translator, that Molineus,Before pag. 372.373.374.383. 
               Our Engliſh tranſlation folowing ſo precyſely the old latin, can not be ſo corrupt as M.W. imagineth. and Caſtalio commonly defend him againſt Beza, that D. Humfrey much commendeth his ſincere ſidelitie, that Beza acknovvledgeth him to haue vſed great conſcience and religion, and preferreth him before al other translators, Caeteris omnibus antepono, that this eager Ar
                  •
               ſtarchus, vvith al his ſtudie, malice and conference, findeth one only fault in him: and of vvhat qualitie that is, hath bene declared ſufficiētly.
            This being ſo, hovv can our engliſh translatiō poſsibly be ſo monſtruous, ſo horrible, ſo heretical, ſo outragious, &c. as this man fayneth here, of vvhich him ſelf ſaith, that it is Expreſſa tota ad veteris latinae aditionis formam,
               Pag. 15. 
               vvholy framed & faſshioned to the forme of the old latin edition, which is by the verdicte of his maiſters, ſo pure, ſo ſincere, ſo religious, and Caeteris omnibus anteponenda, Better then al other? Is it poſsible (I ſay) that this translation ſhould be ſo horrible and abſurde, being vvholy formed after the old edition, vvhich in compariſon of al other is ſo perfite & abſolute? Seeſt thou not here the very

image of old Caiphas crying out, Blaſphemy, and renting his garments when Chriſt ſpake of the iudgement, that They ſhould ſee the ſonne of man ſitting at the right hande of God,
               Mat. 27. 
               & comming to iudge in the cloudes of heauen? by vvhich kind of ſtraunge behauiour, he moued the people to thinke that he did ſo vpon great zeale of religion, vvhereas he being a Sadducee, beleeuing the ſoule to die vvith the body (to vvhich opinion Maiſter W. pure bibles leade mē the ready vvay) and therefore contē
               ning as trifles, heauen, and hel, and iudgment to come, only by that hiſtrionical diſsimulation ſought to abuſe the ſimple people, vvhen in the meane ſeaſon him ſelf cared nothing but for his owne belly commoditie, Ne forte venirent Romani,
               Ioan. 11. v. 48. leaſt perhaps the Romanes their lordes ſhould put him & his beſides their good feeding, which vnder the title and pretence of religiō they enioyed.The end of the new goſpel, carnal libertie. And he that iudgeth othervviſe of theſe carnal goſpellers, and the final ſcope of their goſpel, he much deceaueth him ſelf, and knovveth not vvhat they by their goſpel meane.
            
                And let vs vevv, vvhether the ſeueral

partes of this inuectiue be not agreable to this general intention. You haue geuen vs (ſaith he) a tranſlation of the nevv testament, ſuch a one as there vvas neuer founde the like ſince the vvorld vvas firſt created.
               The true grace of this amplifying figure. What kinde of amplificatiō is this? what figure, but of moſt groſſe and ridiculous hypocriſie? form ſubſtance thus he ſpeaketh. It is now 5000. yeres and more ſince the world was created, in which time many tranſlations of the new teſtament haue bene made: yet theſe 5000 yeres and vpward, no man euer tranſlated the new teſtament ſo prophanely and wickedly as you haue done. And is this true? and hath he examined al the tranſlations made theſe 5000 yeres? belike he hath, or els he could neuer geue his ſentence ſo peremptorily. Of the firſt 1000 yeres, or ſecond, vnder the Patriarches and vntil Moyſes, how many new teſtamēts hath he peruſed and conferred with ours? I trow not verie many. And of the third and fourth thowſande yeres vnder the Prophets hath he ſeene any more? or were there then extant any ſuch teſtaments to conferre, in compariſon of which ours is ſo far abaſed? by his

amplification it ſhould ſeeme yea, & yet of his wiſedome I truſt he wil ſay no, except he liſt to ſhew him ſelf as learned as his felow,In his ſermon printed, fo. 14. ſee the Diſcouerie pa. 178. 
               Iohn Keltridge preacher of the vvord in London, who referreth vs for the true reading & ſenſe of the A
                     •
                  e maria, to the translation of the 70. But ſuppoſe he meant of the time ſince Chriſt. what a mad kinde of ſpech is this? as if two frindes who by ſome occaſiō were ſeparated ſome few yeres, after by good hap meeting, the one ſhould thus gratulate that good day. Bleſſed be God (frind) that now I ſee you, whom I haue not ſeene theſe 5000 yeres, whereas they perhaps had not liued one quarter of ſo many weekes.
            Now let vs allow for good that Ab orbe condito,
               A moſt abſurd & falſe amplification. 
               ſince the creatiō of the vvorld, may ſignify 4000 yeres after, that is ſince the incarnatiō of Chriſt, how many translatiōs of the firſt thouſand yeres after Chriſt cā he produce, wherevpon he may colour this lying? how many of the next 500? how many vntil this later 80 yeres, wherein euery Sectmaſter hath fallē in hand with toſſing & turning the ſcriptures? But amō
               geſt thē, is there none worſe then ours?

none ſet forth by the Trinitarians, Seruetans, Arians, Anabaptiſtes, Academiks? How ſay you by ſuch a trāſlation as abuſeth the word of ſcripture againſt al auncient faith and religion, againſt Catholikes, againſt the Lutherans, againſt the learnedſt Caluiniſts, aga
                  •
               nſt Caluin him ſelf,To ſay God is author of ſynne, is to ſay, that god is a deuil. againſt the literal ſenſe of the word & whole drift of the place, & al this to make God the author and worker of ſinne, that is by Caluins expreſſe iudgment in his booke againſt the Libertines,Caluin in inſtructio. contra Libertinos. ca. 14. Deum in diabolum transformāt 
               To transforme God into a deuil & to make vs Chriſtiās worſhip in ſteede of god an idol, and ſuch an idol, Quod nobis execrabilius eſſe debet omnibus gentiū idolis, VVhich ought to ſeeme to vs Chriſtians, more abominable then al the idols of the Gentiles, vvhat ſay you to ſuch a translation?Engliſh tranſlatiōs leade men to that opinion. And ſuch translations of the new teſtament haue bene ſet forth within theſe 5000 yeres, yea ſome within theſe 5 yeres, & that in Englād, and that with authoritie, yea with the Princes priuilege, except the printers lye.
            S. Peter ſaith of the Iewes, that Chriſt is to them, Petra ſcandali,
               1. Pet. 2. v. 8. 
               qui offendunt verbo, nec credunt in quo et poſti

ſunt. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . the engliſh teſtament of king Edward, and the firſt of the Q. raigne translate it thus. They beleeue not that vvhereon they vvere ſet.
               Illyr. gloſ. in 1. Pet. c. 2. verſ. 8. 
               This is vvel to be marked (ſaith Illyricus) leaſt a man imagine that God him ſelf did put them, and (as one, he meaneth Beza, againſt the nature of the greeke vvord doth trāſlate & interprete it) that God did create thē for this purpoſe, that they ſhould vvithſtand him. Eraſmus & Caluin referring this vvord to that vvhich goeth before, interprete it not amiſſe, that the Ievves vvere made or ordeined to beleeue the vvord of God and their Meſsias, but yet that they vvould not beleeue him. For to thē belonged the promiſes, the teſtaments, and the Meſsias him ſelf, as S. Peter ſaith, Act. 2. et 3. and Paule Rom. 9. and to them vvere committed the oracles of God by vvitnes of the ſame Paule Rom. 3. thus Illyricus. Here is geuē the true ſenſe of this place according to the ſignification of the greeke word. the ſame is proued by ſcripture, by S. Peter and S. Paule. The ſame is confirmed by Caluin and Eraſmus, and by Luther in his commentaries vpon this place,Caſtalio defenſio. ſuae tranſlatio. pag 153.154.155. & more at large by Caſtalio in his annotatiōs of the new teſtamēt. Only Beza againſt al theſe, tranſlateth

it thus, Sunt immorigeri,
               Beza in 
                     •
                  . Pet. 2. v. 8. 
               ad quod etiam conditi fuerūt. They are rebellious, vvhere vnto alſo they vvere created. which wordes in his note therevpon he explicateth, That men are made, or faſhioned, framed, ſturred vp, created or ordained, not of them ſelues, (for that is abſurd) but of God,
               God createth men to ſinne, Beza. 
               to be ſcādalized at him and his ſonne our Sauiour. Christus est eis offendiculo, prout etiam ad hoc ipſum a Deo ſunt conditi, and diſcourſeth at large, & bringeth many textes to proue this ſenſe & this tranſlation. which error being of ſuch cōſequence as Caluin graunteth, that it maketh God, no God, but an idol and a deuil, any man may boldly ptonounce of ſuch a teſtament, that it is the teſtament rather of Satan then of Chriſt.
            So here is at leaſt one tranſlation worſe then ours. & are there no more? looke vpon your teſtaments of the later tranſlators, al in maner apes of Beza. in one thus you reade,Bible of the yere 1577. 
               Being diſobediente, vnto the vvhich thing they vvere ordeined, in the next, Being diſobediēt,
               the yere 1579. 
               vnto the vvhich thing they vvere euen ordeined, this is a litle worſe. and with this, word for word agreeth the later teſtament of the yere 1580, and the Scottiſh bible.
                  The yere 1580.
                  The yere 1579.
                and this is altogether the firſt Geneua

translation,Printed at Geneua the yere 1561. whom the French Geneua bible foloweth, Sont rebelles, a quoy auſsi ils ont eſtè ordonne
                     •
                  . They are rebels (againſt Christ) vvherevnto alſo they vvere ordayned.
               Caſt. defenſ. ſuae tranſlacions p. 155. 
               Atqui ſi deus creauit aliquos ad contumaciam, omnino author eſt eorum contumaciae, quemadmodum, ſi quos 
                     •
                  re
                     •
                  uit ad obedientiam, omnino author est eorū obedientiae (ſaith Caſtalio againſt Beza) But if God haue created ſome men to rebellion or diſobedience, he is author of their diſobedience, as if he haue created ſome to obedience he is truely author of their obedience.
               Al theſe tranſlations by verdicte of Caluin, make god an idol & a deuel. And ſo by verdicte not only of catholikes but alſo of your owne great doctors ſuch as are Luther, Caſtalio, Caluin, &c. and in deede by manifeſt reaſon, here haue you 7. tranſlations of the new teſtamente▪ within theſe 500, yea within theſe 50 yeres worſe then ours. For finde your any one ſo wilful and horrible an Atheiſme in ours, and hardly ſet a fier on them al. Many moe examples could I geue, but I wil not be troubleſome nor enter new diſcourſes. For conuincing this ſo groſſe and impudente a lye, let the teſtimonie of that excellent man Beza ſo commended by M. W. ſuffice, who accounteth our latine, better then that of Luther,

then that of Baſile,M.W. in his laſt ſhort ſentence, 6. refelleth & gain ſayeth whatſoeuer he hath ſayd before. then that of Eraſmus, then that of Caſtalio, then any that euer he ſaw. and conſequently our engliſh framed altogether according to that, by M. W. owne iudgment, can not be the worſt.
            The next three faultes are obiected 
only in wordes, and proued by no example, reaſon, or coniecture,The proteſtants more deſyrous of nouelty of words then euer were any heretikes. or leaſt argument in the world. Mary that he & his felowes are moſt guilty of them al, both in the Diſcouerie and annotations of the teſtament it is in many places declared. And iudge thou (reader) whether we or they loue vnaccuſtomed and monſtruous noueltie of words, we, who ſtriue ſo much as we may, to retaine the auncient words left to vs by our Apoſtles and founders, Maſſe, Biſhop, Prieſt, Baptiſme, Church, the very names of mē, Iſaie, Amos, Iuda, Hieruſalem, Ezechias, Ozias, or they who haue turned theſe in to the Supper or the Thankes-geuing, Superintendent, Miniſter or Elder, VVaſhing, Congregation. who vpon moſt childiſh affectation to ſeeme ſomwhat ſkilful in the hebrew, reduce al ſacred names to the old Iudaical ſound. As for example one of their greateſt Euangeliſts thus beginneth

his tranſlation of Eſaie. The viſion of Ieſaaiahu the ſonne of Amoz,
               Oecolam. Eſa. c. 1. v. 1. 
               vvhich he ſavv vpon Iehudah and vpon Hieruſalam in the daies of Yziiahu, Iotham, Ahhaz, Iehhizkiiahu, Kinges of Iehudah. And this is the common veyne of their preachers if they know a litle, eſpecially in that lan
                  ••
               nge. as though Petrus, Ioannes, Iacobus, Stephanus, howſoeuer they be vttered in any other tonge, Hebrew, Greeke, Latin, Spaniſh, Frēch, or Italiā were not truly & exactly expreſſed in Engliſh by Peter, Iohn, Iames, Steuin, but muſt needes be pronoūced, as they are in the firſt lāguage frō which originally they are deriued. as though a mā tranſlating ſome ſtorie out of French or Spaniſh into Engliſh, tranſlated not wel if he ſaid, Fraūcis the French King in his warres againſt the Spaniards, but muſt needes ſay, Franſois King of the Franſois in his warres againſt the Eſpanioulx: or, los Eſpan̄oles in ſuch a victorie againſt los Franceſes, in ſteede of, The Spaniards in ſuch a victorie againſt the Frenchmen. And why then do they not in the new teſtament vſe like noueltie? why for Chriſt vſe they not, Ieſchua, for our Lady, Miriā, for S. Peter, Cepha, for S. Iohn, Iochanan,

and ſo in the reſt of the Apoſtles, whereas they know that thus were they called in their proper language, as at this preſēt we ſee in S. Matthewes hebrevv Goſpel. If their ovvne eares abhor this wanton curioſitie, and their ovvne iudgment tel thē it is apiſh arrogancie, & peeviſh affectation of popular praiſe, let them confeſſe the like in pronouncing, Beltſhazzar, Nebucadnezzar, Iehuda, Iehhizkiiahu, for Baltaſar, Nabugodonoſor, Iuda, Ezechias. for the caſe is al one.
            Much more haue they committed this monſtruous noueltie in the things them ſelues,A far greater alteration and nouelty in articles of fayth. in taking away the ſacrifice of the new teſtament, like the forerunners of Antichriſt, in yelding to women and children the headſhip and ſupreme gouernement of the Church in al Eccleſiaſtical & ſpiritual matters, in abrogating fiue or ſix ſacramentes of ſeauen, in deuiſing ſuch a kind of faith, as before their time was neuer heard of,The authors and writers of ſundry bookes of ſcripture, mocked & ſcorned by the proteſtants. and is more fit for the ſchole of Epicure then of Chriſt, and ſo forth in the reſt of their negatiue irreligion.
            And as for mocking and contemning the word of God, this was neuer ſo proper & peculiar to any heretikes

before, as it is to them. For who are they that mocke at the booke of The tower diſputatiōs the 4 day. Iudith, that compare the booke of Zuingl. to. 1 art. 57. fol. 100. Machabees to Robin Hoode or Beauis of Hampton, that cal the Prophete Idem to. 3 in rhrenos Iere. fo. 384. Baruch a peeuiſh ape of Ieremie, Simia eſt non admodum ſae
                     •
                  ix Ieremiae, that accounte the epiſtle to the Magdeb. ſee before pag 414. Hebrewes Pro ſtipulis, as ſtubble, that reiecte S. Lutheranes and Zuinglianes. ſee before chap 1. Iames epiſtle as made of ſtravve, that contemne S. Lukes goſpel, that mangle many other partes of the ſcriptures, and thereby teach the contempt of them al, al ſtanding vpō like ground? Who doe this? VVe, or they? Catholikes, or Goſpellers? & to ſpeake briefly, what is their whole maner of writing,The new preaching a very mockery of ſcripture. preaching, teaching, and liuing, but a very mockerie of the goſpel of Chriſt? ſuch filthie application of holy write, as ſheweth them to vſe it for no other purpoſe but for colour and ſhrowd of their filthines. Rebuke a leacherous monke for his inceſt which he calleth Matrimonie,1. Cor. 7. v. 9. ſee the annotations vpon that chap. ô ſaith he, Better it is to mary then to burne. Require of him that he chaſtiſe his body with faſting and diſcipline for repreſſing of his beaſtly concupiſcēce: that is againſt Gods word ſaith he. For, nemo carnem ſuam odio habuit,
               Ephe. 5. v. 29 
               No man hateth

his ovvne fleſh, but loueth & cheriſheth it. when ſuch an Apoſtata is promoted amongſt you to be a ſuperintendēt,The proteſtants vſe ſcripture for a veyle 
                     〈◊〉
                   coueral filthynes. and then ſpoileth his tenants, waſteth his woods, pulleth downe his houſ
                  •••
                neuer built by him, or for him, or any of his religion▪ ſelleth away lead, tile, ſtone, and maketh mony of al, reproue him for this oppreſsion and rauin, he hath his text ready,1. Tim. 5. v. 8 
               He that prouideth not for his ovvne, and namely for them of his hovvſehold, he is vvorſe then an Infidel. Theſe interpretations & vvorſe then theſe very many ſhal you finde in Peter Martyrs booke, De votis et caelibatu.
               Pet. Mar de votis & cael. And at this preſent, what is the vniuerſal preaching of the miniſters for the moſt part, but a very mockery & ridiculous abuſe of ſcripture? what other is their cōmon writing? and M.VV. in the next chapt. wil ſhew himſelf in this kinde as very a ſcorner as the worſt.
            
                And whereas after al this he ſaith,
Truely ſo far of is it that I thinke your tranſlatiō vvil any vvayes harme our cauſe, that I vviſh the copies thereof vvere multiplied, and other men might be partakers thereof, This is as fowle a figure of hypocriſie as any hitherto touched. For if they thinke it wil no wayes hinder

their cauſe but rather benefite it, why make they ſuch buſie inquirie after it? why burne they ſuch as fal in to their hands? are they ſuch witles babes as 
                  •
               ain not ſuffer that which doth them good? Cōpare (good reader) their doinges, their preachings, their ſearchings & inquiries, with this ſpeach, and thou ſhal ſenſibly perceaue that it is nought els but a very deſperat facing out of a lye, and ſetting a bold countenance on that, which in deede pincheth them at the very hart roote. With like phraſe & character of ſhameleſſe vaūting wrote M.Iewel defence of the Apolog. part. 6. ca. 8. ¶. 1. Iewel to D. Harding. vve neuer ſuppreſſed any of your books M. Harding as you knovve, but are very vvel content to ſee them ſo common, that as novv children may play vvith them in the ſtreetes.
               Incredible impudency in bragging and lying. Thus his face ſerued him to write then when in the ſelf ſame Defence he ſuppreſſed by leauing out, the very ſubſtance of that booke which he then pretended to anſwere, when by helpe of his felow-Superintendents and other frends, euery corner of the realme was ſearched for thoſe bookes, when the portes were layed for them, Paules croſſe is witnes of burning many of them, the Princes proclamation was procured againſt them, in the Vniuerſities

by ſoueraigne authoritie, Colleges, chambers, ſtudies, cloſets, coffers, and deſkes, were ranſackt for them, when not only children were forbid to play with them, but auncient m
                  •••
                and ſtudents of Diuinitie were impriſoned for hauing of them. So that al this can be nought els but a plaine example of palpable diſsimulation & affected lying. Ad populum phaleras, when intrinſecally, they feare, and labour, and ſweate, and by exterior ſignes declare thus much, and euery day more and more miſdoubt the ruine of their Atheiſtical goſpel, which dayly the more it is knovven, the more it grovveth in horror and execration amonge honeſt natures: not only ſuch as are directed by the ſpirit of God, but euen ſuch as are ſomevvhat holpen vvith the aſsiſtance of natural wiſedome and honeſt inclination.
            But come vve to the particular crymes layde againſt vs, and vvherevpon this dreadful inuectiue is properly builded, vvhich is,The particular faultes of our Engliſh tranſlation. our corrupting the text, or departing from our latin teſtament. For as vve in examining their teſtament framed according to the greeke as they pretended, reproued

them not in their translation, nor could ſo doe reaſonably ſo long as preciſely they kept them ſelues to their greeke (for vvhether the greeke 
                  •
               a
                  •
               ere ſo to be folovved, is an other queſtion) in like maner vve propoſing to translate the latin (vvhich to vs is as autentical as the greeke to them) can not reaſonab
                  •
               y be blamed as falſe and corrupt translators, but vvhere vve haue gone aſide and leaft that original which vve pretended to translate. And if herein vve haue erred, vve gladly vvil acknovvledge our ouerſight, and are ready to amēd the ſame. And here (Reader) haſt thou ſpecially to marke, by what argument he verifieth that which he obiecteth,A terrible accuſation 
               Our prophane corruptions, our outrag
                     •
                  ous boldnes, our more violence vſed to the holy teſtamēt of Chriſt, then euer vvas vſed by any kinde of heretike ſo notorious that al the world may iudge that our intent was, To make the peop
                     •
                  e ſcorne and contemne the vvord of God. how iuſtifieth 
                  •
               e al this? by what proofe? for hitherto we haue wordes, and nothing but wordes, ſuch as euery grammar-boy can picke out of the booke which he readeth and ioyne together.

But from M. W. the Q. Maieſties reader, his auditors looke for ſounder ſtuffe then ſuch childiſh grammatical declaiming.How weakely the ſame is iuſtified. 
               Many places (ſaith he) haue I noted vvherein you haue manifeſtly erred from that your vulgar latin edition. that vvil I declare by one example, the like vvhere of I could bring forth many. Surely this is very weake to maintaine the greatnes of the accuſation thundered out before. And whereas you promiſe one example, and geue vs two, the reader may aſſure him ſelf, you would haue ſpared vs three if you had bene able. But belyke theſe, one or two, are horrible monſtrous faults, and touch matters of maruelous great height, Chriſts Diuinitie, Humanitie, Incarnation, Heauen, and Hel, ſuch as are the faults of theſe mens bibles, and ſo theſe two may ſerue in ſteed of a number. Let vs here them in M. W. owne words. In the epiſtle to the Rom. ca.
               Vbi ſupra. 13. v. 19. thus it is read 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
vvhich vvords the old interpreter turned thus, Non voſmet ipſos deſendentes, but by you they are turned othervviſe according to the greeke veritie, Not reuenging your ſelues. The like place is in Matth. 4. v. 16. vvhere theſe vvords, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Marke the greuouſnes of theſe 2. faultes. 
               the old interpreter turned, The people vvhich vvalked in darkenes, ambulauit in tenebris, as alſo in Hierom vve reade. but you folovving the greeke exemplat haue turned othervviſe and more truly: The people that ſitteth in darknes, Qui ſedes in tenebris.
            
            Thus M. VV. and this is al. And here firſt of al the reader may againe remēber how iuſt cauſe I had to charge him with affected hypocriſie for exclaming ſo tragically vpon our teſtament wherein he findeth only theſe faultes, which if they were faultes, of what weight they are, euery child may iudge. But to paſſe that ouer, let the reader ſee how blindly & fovvly he is deceiued. We haue left our latin & folovved the greeke (ſaith he) in turning Defendentes,
               Defendere is wel tranſlated to reueng. 
               Reuenging. and why ſo? hovv proueth he that vve leaue our latin? he vvil anſvvere I ſuppoſe (for reaſon him ſelfe yeldeth none) becauſe in al M. Coopers Dictionarie vve finde not, that Defendere ſignifieth To reuenge. If that be true, then belike if vve vvere maiſter Coopers ſcholers, the caſe vvould goe ſomvvhat hard vvith vs. But if he vvil vevv other Dictionaries as wel as M. Coopers, he ſhal find both

that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in greeke, in latin is truely turned by Defendere, and Defendere in latin, is vvel and properly turned in Engliſh by Reuenge. So the greeke dictionarie of Baſile printed the yere 1557. teacheth vs. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , defendo, vindico, vlciſcor, in alicuius gratiam. So the latin and french, and latin greeke & french dictionaries printed at Paris the yeres 1559.1575 1580. ſet forth by Sonnius & Rob. Stephanus teach vs, that Defendere ſignifieth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , defender, garder, et preſeruer, venger, as vvel to reuenge, as to defend, gard & preſerue. And which is to vs more then al, the dictionarie of the Church, that is, the auncient eccleſiaſtical vſe of this vvord in the ſcripture & fathers teacheth vs ſomtimes & in this place, this to be his proper & grammatical enſe, and ſo the aunciēt fathers vſed this word. So Tertullian.Tertullian contra Martionem li. 2 
               Durum videbatur populo a deo expectare defenſam edicendam poſtea per prophetam, mihi defenſam et ego defendam. It ſeemed a hard thing for the Ievviſh people (in Moyſes time) to expect reuenge from God vvhich vvas aftervvards promiſed by the prophete ſaing, To me reuenge, and I vvil reuenge. Where manifeſt it is that Defendere and defenſa, is grāmatically Reuenge
               
& To reuenge,
               Ambroſ in Rom. ca. 12. & manifeſt it is that S. Ambroſe doth not expound, but grammatically take the word Defendere, in the ſelf ſame maner, that is, to ſignifie Reuēge, euē as S. Hier. put it, or rather as I thinke leaft it, being ſo vſed by the former trāſlator. So doth Haymo, ſo doth S.Beda in Rom. 12. Bede, and maketh no ſcruple at it, but in his commentarie taken out of S. Auguſtine expreſſeth by Vindicare that, which our interpreter vttered by Defendere.
            
            And the ſame is moſt plaine by the trāſlatiō of the bible it ſelf. For whereas in other places, for example, in the ſtorie of Holofernes the greeke is, That he ſware he would, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Iudith 1. v. 12. & 2. v. 1. 
               Reuenge him ſelf of al the lāds, that doth the old interpreter vtter by Defendere.
               ca. 9. v. 2. And in the 9. chap. where Iudith praiſeth God,The yere 1579. ſaing according to the later Engliſh bible, O Lord God of my father Symeon, to vvhom thou gaueſt a ſvvord to take vengeance of the ſtrangers, the latin is, Gladium ad defenſionē abienigenarū, the greeke, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which the Engliſh bible printed two yeres before,1577. trāſlateth, A ſvvord for a defence againſt the enemies, and putteth in the margent,1562. 
               Or to reuengment. The former

bible vſeth only, Defence & not Reuēge at al, whereby it is cleare that thoſe trā
               ſlators hauing belike ſome more ſkil in the old vſe of this word thē M.W. accōpted 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
to be wel turned, ether by Reuenge, which is more proper, or by Defence, which is alſo moſt true, reſpecting the vſe of the latin, but muſt ſignifie as much as Reuēge in Engliſh, for els they trāſlated falſely. So in Eccleſiaſticus, that writer ſpeking of a father that dieth & leaueth behind him a good & wiſe ſonne, among many other benefites which he hath thereby, he reckneth this,Eccleſiaſtici 30. v. 6. that he hath leaft one who wil Defende & Reuenge him againſt his enemies, in greeke, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in our latin, Reliquit defenſorem, in the Engliſh bibles, He leaſte behind him an avenger.
               Of the yeres 1562.1577.1579. The ſame writer ſpeaking of the reuenge wrought vpon Baals Prieſtes for their Idolatrie 3 Reg. 18. calleth it,Eccleſia
                     ••
                  ici 48. v. 7. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , our latin, Iuditia defenſionis, the Engliſh bibles, Iudgment of vengeance.
            
            Many lyke wordes there are in the new teſtament, wherein if a man examine vs according to the vulgar ſignification of the word as we learned it when we were children, we can not

alwaies auoyde bl
                  •
               me.Great difference ofttimes in the ſenſe of a word, as it is vſed by eccleſiaſtical writers & prophane But if we reſpect the true vſe of the latin word in the auncient Church, he whoſoeuer blameth vs, therein much more ſhameth him ſelf. So in S. Iames, Naue
                     •
                   minanour, we translate not, Men threaten ſhippes,
               Iacob. 3. v. 4. as ſome grāmarian would perhaps imagine we ought, but ſhippes, are caried or driven. Abraham confortatus eſt fide,
               Rom. 4. v. 20. not, Abraham was comforted in faith, but, VVas ſtrengthned in faith.
               Mat. 11. v. 10.24. 
               Chriſtus exprobrauit ciuitatibus in quibus facte eſſent plurimae virtutes eius &c. quia ſi in Tyro et Sidone factae eſſent virtutes quae factae ſunt in vobis, we Engliſh not, Chriſt vpbrayded the cities wherein were done moſt of his vertues &c. but, vvherein vvere done moſt of his miracles, and becauſe if in Tyre and Sidō had bene vvrought the miracles vvhich haue bene vvrought in you. I paſſe ouer very many examples of the like qualitie and nature, in al which we geue not that Engliſh which the latin word ſeemeth at firſt to require, and yet for al that nether do we (as ſome man like M. W. may imagine) forſake our latin, and folowe the greeke, but by conference of latin with greeke, and one place with an other, and by the fathers

of the Church, and continual practiſe of the ſame, we know aſſuredly, that our enterpreter verbatim, word for word meant to expreſſe the greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in S. Iames, by his latin Minar
                     •
                  , that is, Te be driuen. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in S. Paule by Cōfortari, that is, To be ſtrengthned, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in S. Mat
                  •
               hew, by Virtutes, Miracles.
            
            And in this place it is moſt euident that our ēterpreter ſo tooke the word Defendere, and that not only becauſe we ſee his vſe in other places, but euen by conſidering the peeces of this very ſentence. Haue peace vvith al men,
               Rom. 12. v. 
               Non voſmet ipſos defendentes chariſsmi, ſed date locum irae: ſcriptum eſt enim,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
Defendentes. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
Mihi vindicta. 
               Mihi vindictā et ego retribuam, dicit dominus. Where very plaine it is by the anteced
                  •
               n
                  •
               s, by the conſequents, by the whole drift of the place, by that which he inferreth, that he meant to take Defendere in the former part, as ſignifying the ſame with vindicare in the later, where vnto if we ioyne the vſe of the ſame author in other places, the auncient ſpeach of the Church and fathers, and the very new heretical bibles, we ſhal much more eaſily per
               
                  •
               eue, that both he meant 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               Reueng
               
by Defendere, when he firſt translated the greeke into that latin, & that we truely gaue his meaning, when we turned Defendere by Reuenge, out of latin in to Engliſh. And ſo this firſt, is no Prodigious error, nor Prophane noueltie, nor Heretical contempt, nor Outragious or deſperate boldnes, nor of our parte any fault at al: but on M. W. part, it is a groſſe error, and a blind error, and foule ignorance, and great malice, and litle vvitte, to amplifie ſo outragiously a thing of ſo ſmal value if it vvere an error, and a thing of no value being no error at al.
            The other perhaps that remaineth is huge & monſtruous inough to make recompence for both. VVhat is that? forſooth vvhereas Our old editiō readeth Populus qui ambulauit in tenebris,
               A great and monſtruous fault, to trā
                  ſlate a thing more truly. 
               The people vvhich hath vvalked in darkenes, vve according to the greeke & more truly haue tranſlated, The people that ſitteth in darkenes, Populus qui ſedet in tenebris. ſo that herein at leaſt vve haue outragiouſly abuſed the people and deſperately gone about to deceaue thē, by making them reade more truly Sitting in darknes, vvhereas they ſhould haue read,

               vvalking in darkenes. And hovv can vve anſvvere this? novv in truth very hardly. For it is ſo bald a toy, as I know not vvhich vvay vvel to begin vvith it. But to ſay ſomevvhat, let me aſke him for vvhat purpoſe ſhould vve here forſake our latin and chooſe the greeke? what article, vvhat concluſiō, vvhat argument, ether for our ſelues or againſt the heretikes get vve by this alteration? Certainly he had neede to be very ſubtile that could gather any.
            Next, if I anſwered that he belyeth vs, ſome man might thinke it rudely ſpoken: but it is moſt true. For to let paſſe that his reading is quite beſide the booke (for nether S. Hierom nor any old edition that I could yet finde hath, Ambulauit, and manyfeſt it is that vve tranſlate not, Sedet, Sitteth, as any man may iudge that cā reade Engliſh) our vulgar copies had Sedebat, Sate, as we tranſlated: & that is the moſt common reading, as may be ſene, if any liſte to peruſe the common printes of Andwarp or Louayne &c. of the yeres 1563, 1564, 1565, 1569, 1570, 1574, 1577, 1580, ſet forth by Brickeman, Tiletane, Grauius, Plantine, & ſundrie others.
            
               Thirdly I adde, that here more euidently then in the laſt,The vnconſcionable demeanure of our aduerſaries. the Chriſtian reader may learne with what peruerſe, and malitious, and vnconſcionable aduerſaries we haue to deale. The words are cyted out of the Prophete Eſay thus, Vt adimpleretur quod dictum eſt per Iſaiam prophetam &c.
               Eſa. 9. v. 2. 
               Populus qui ſedebat in tenebris. The word which S. Matthew (or whoſoeuer was author of this greeke) turned,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               Sedebat, is in Iſai, Ambulabat, as alſo it is in the hebrew teſtament extant in S. Matthews name. of our vulgar teſtaments many reade according to the hebrew, Ambulabat, more, according to the greeke, Sedebat. In the ſenſe there can not be imagined any difference without manifeſt reproofe of the Euangeliſt. For cleare it is, that he citeth not the text according to the 70 who reade otherwiſe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , but tranſlated it of him ſelf, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            And to leaue the authoritie of the Euāgeliſt, plaine it is, that ether word is of ſo ſmale force in this place, that it ſkilleth not one iote whether you take the hebrew or greeke, Ambulabat, or Sedebat. yea the greateſt Proteſtants folow according to the letter, nether

the one nor the other, nether hebrew nor greeke, but put other wordes which they eſteeme in ſenſe to be equiualent: Beza,Beza, Illyricus, Caſtalio. 
               Populus poſitus in tenebris, Illyricus, Populus qui agebat in tenebris, Caſtalio, Populus in tenebris degens, &c. So that if in ether of our latin teſtaments be any error, one folowing preciſely the hebrew of the prophete, the other the greeke of the Euangeliſte, how much greater is their fault which folow nether of both? But not to ſpend time in ſo vaine a cau
                  •
               l, the truth is (reader) we folovved as I haue ſaid, the cōmon & beſt corrected printes, vvhich haue this in the text, & the other in the margent. And therfore in this alſo, note thou to vvhat beggerly ſhiftes this man is driuē, who to make ſome ſhevv of talking is glad to ſnatche at ſuch ſhadovves, to imagine faultes, to ſeyne lyes, and the ſome nothing vvorth if they were graunted.
            And theſe faultes in number of obiecting, tvvo, for any color pretence or ſhevv, one, in truth & veritie, none,Parturiu
                     ••
                   montea. are al thoſe prophane, horrible, outragious, and deſperate corruptions committed in our teſtamēt, for which he boldly pronounceth as from his

chayer of eſtate, that this 5000 yeres from the firſt creation of the vvorld (he might haue added, or 50000 yeres before) there was neuer ſet forth a new teſtament in any language, ſo ful of outragious faultes, ſo much to the contempt and irriſion of Gods vvorde, & vvherein the deſperatnes of the papiſts ſo much appeared &c. A man might ſay,Iuuenal. 
               Medici mediam pertundite venam, or, miniſter vnto him ſome phiſicke: for ſurely he ſeemeth not to be very vvel in his vvittes.
         
         
            CHAP. XVI. A defence of ſuch faultes as are found in the annotations of the nevv teſtament.
            
               FROM the tranſlation, which he impugneth by ſuch ſtrōg arguments as novv hath bene ſhewed, he proceedeth to the annotations, which he refelleth vvith like learning and vviſedome. And firſt he beginneth as before vvith a like inuectiue in theſe vvords. Nihil illis annotationibus contaminatius vnquam in lucem prodiit &c.
               Pag. 21. 
               Nothing vvas euer publiſhed a brode more corrupt then thoſe annotations.

Truely as heretofore I haue euer hated the Romane religion euen vvith al my hart, ſo ſone as I could iudge of it, ſo novv I confeſſe that I am induced by theſe mens desperatnes and importunitie to abhorre it much more. Hovv much or hovv litle he abhorreth our religion, vvere it not for regarde of his ovvne ſoule, it is not much material. For except he haue better learning in ſtore then he hath vttered yet, I truſt his great hatred againſt it wil not do it any great harme. And theſe are but vvords. And as he vpon this pretended occaſiō, conceiueth ſo euil of our faith (if he meane as he ſpeketh) ſo I knovv many, vvho hauing bene brought vp not in Catholike religion as he vvas in hereſie, but in hereſie vvith him, & continuing a long time in the ſame, and louing it vvith al their hart, comming to better iudgmēt, through the grace of God,The incredible lying & falſifications vſed by the Engliſh writers of our time, are a great motiue to the Catholike fayth. vpon conſideration of ſuch lying writers as he moſt honoreth, M. Iewel, M. Horne &c. haue bene ſo altered, that they haue deteſted his goſpel euen to hel gates: of which number I confeſſe my ſelf to be one. But this kinde of aſſeueration is common to both ſides. This rather is worth the examining, whether we

haue miniſtred him ſufficient occaſion to fall in to ſo deepe hatred of the Catholike faith, or they rather haue geuē vs iuſt cauſe in like maner to abhorre their new goſpel. This in ſome parte wil appeare by M W. diſcourſe againſt theſe Annotations.
            
               Pag. 22.Thus he proceedeth. I doubt not but vvhen this beate of the Papiſtes is ſomevvhat cooled, vviſe men vvil daily more and more diſlike that religion. For vvhen they vnderſtand ſuch things as of old vvere alvvaies accompted falſe or at leaſt ſuspected, the ſame novv to be ſet forth of theſe men as moſt true articles of the Romane religion, vvhen they conſider vvith them ſelues hovv miſerably theſe men abuſe the holy ſcriptures to moſt abſurd interpretations, it can not othervviſe bee but that they vvil diſallovv the vvhole cauſe of the Papiſts, vvhich they ſee to be ſupported vvith ſuch trifles and tales.
               Mat. 2. v. 11. 
               VVhen they heare the vviſe men vvhich came from the Eaſt to vvorſhip Chriſt to be called three kinges, vvhoſe names are Gaſpar,
               mat. 3. v. 12. 
               Melchior, Baltaſar. That Iohn Baptiſt vvas a monke and father of monkes. That vvhen S.
               Act. 7. v. 58. 
               Steuin vvas ſtoned to death a ſtone rebounded backe from his elbovv vvhich novv is kept at A
                     •
                  cona in Italie. That Elias the Theſbite is expected to come

before the later day.
            
            Vnto three heads he reduceth al the faults vvhich he findeth in the Annotations.The ſumme of M W accuſation. 
                To errors committed in matters
hiſtorical,  to faults committed in
framing arguments,  and to certaine
blaſphemies as he calleth them vttered againſt S. Paul. The firſt parte is compriſed in theſe vvords which here thou ſeeſt. The ſecond and third ſhal folovv in order. To anſvvere al that he ſaith pointe by pointe, vvhat he meaneth by aeſtus pōtificius, Heate of the Papiſts vvhich he hopeth vvil be cooled, I knovv not vvel. If he meane the zeale of good Prieſts vvho to reclaime ſome from damnation, venture their liues in England.The proteſtants maner of diſputing. although he vvith his felovv miniſters take a readie vvay to coole their heate by their ſtraūge maner of diſputing, I meane by thruſting in euery Syllogiſme a concluſion of treaſon, from Sacrament, Maſſe,Tower diſputation Tiburne diſputation. Confeſsion, Reconciliation, Church, inferring, 
                  •
               go you are traitours, and ſo enflaming the ciuil magiſtrate to anſvvere by hanging, them vvhom they cannot anſvvere by learning, yet our lord be praiſed this maner of their dealing, though it be bloodie and of

them aſſumed againſt the preaching of their firſt apoſtles and martyrs euen of neceſsitie,See M. Fox. martirologe in King Henries time. becauſe othervviſe they ſee their goſpel can not ſtand, yet I ſay, our lord be praiſed, experience ſheweth that it cooleth none, but enflameth many.Luc. 12. v. 48 
               Ignem veni mittere in terram (ſaith our Sauiour) et quid volo niſi vt ardeat? & howſoeuer our lord ſhal deale hereafter with our Countrie, whether he wil abandō it to Apoſtaſie, as he hath Aſia and Africa, or reduce it to the vnitie of his church, which he of his infinite mercie graunt, thus much aſſure your ſelf M. W. that this kinde of heate wil neuer be cooled in your daies. The plot is laid, the charges are caſt, and the matter is begonne, and we ſee and feele that Chriſt hath powred his bleſſing vpon it abundantly.
            If you meane the heate of vvriting bookes, vvith vvhich notvvithſtā
               ding you are not much troubled, the vvay to coole that heate is, ether to ā
               ſvvere them more ſubſtantially then hitherto you haue,Engliſh writers. or els not to anſvvere them at al. For ſo long as you ſet forth ſuch ſtuffe as you for your part and your late vvriters of like qualitie allovv vs, your ſelues blovve

the coales and make matter to kindle the fier, that if men vvould be ſilent, children may find ſufficient argument to proue you heretikes.
            If you imagine that our church is ſo vnconſtant that ſhe vvil in ſhort time leaue this zeale in preaching the Catholike religion,The Catholike Church built vpon a rocke. (Chriſt) and therefore in al times conſtant & vnmoueable. and thereby that your congregatiō ſhal gather ſtrength and ſtabilitie, and vviſe men vvil fal in good liking thereof, then your ignorance is great, vvho knovv nether the nature of our Catholike Church & religiō, nor of your ovvne heretical faith and congregation. Not of ours, becauſe you may learne, or remember that from Chriſts time hitherto, nether by perſecuting Emperours, nor by vndermining heretikes, othervviſe qualified thē are the Lutherās or Zuinglians of theſe days, it vvas or could euer be ſubuerted, but rather the more it vvas aſſaulted, the better irreſiſted, the more it vvas gainſaid, the more it floriſhed, & vvhē ſuttle heretikes vpō temporal fauour vvere moſt inſolent, then ſhe moſt excellently did defende her ſelf. Examples you haue of the times of S. Auguſtine againſt Pelagius & the Manichees, S. Hierō againſt Iovinian

and Vigilantius, Lanfrancus againſt Berengarius, and al the Primitiue church againſt Conſtantius, Valēs, and Arrius.The Engliſh church bu
                     •
                  lt vpon the fauour of Lords & Ladies, gentlemen and gentlewemen, and therefore euer tottering, and variable. Ignorant you are of your ovvne faith and goſpel, becauſe you may remember that nether had it euer any ſtay or ſtabilitie ſince it vvas firſt begotten, nether can it haue ſo longe as it endureth, the very pillers vvhich vnder proppe it being ſuch rottē matter, as of it ſelf quickly corrupteth & falleth in to duſt.
            
               Fox act and monumentes pag. 512 Deſyre of reuenge. Ibid. p. 592. Couetouſnes.For when in king Henries raigne it firſt ſet foote in our realme vpon occaſions which I am content to paſſe ouer, though M. Fox to the euerlaſting ſhame both of ſuch a goſpel and ſuch goſpellers, haue recorded them and committed them to eternal memorie, hovv variable a ſtate it had your elders know,Fox acts & monumēts in Henri. 8. pa. 1295. poſtremae aeditionis. & he much complaineth. Euē as the kinge vvas ruled (ſaith he) & gaue care ſometime to one, ſometime to an other, ſo one vvhile religion vvent forvvard, at an other ſeaſon as much backvvard againe, ſometime cleane altered and chaūged for a ſeaſon, as they could preuaile vvhich vvere about the kinge. So long as Q. Anne liued, the goſpel had indifferent good ſucceſſe. And not only Queenes, but very meane gē
               tlemen

and doctors of phiſicke were then able to craze your goſpel, and ſet it backward or forward as pleaſed them. For ſo much alſo is recorded in M. Foxes ſtorie in the ende of king Henries life.
            Thus writeth he. So long as Quene Anne, L. Cromvvel, B. Cranmer, M. Denny, D. Buts, vvith ſuch like, vvere about the King and could preuayle vvith him,
               Fox actes & monumēts, in the end of king Henryes lyfe▪ pag. 682. 
               vvhat organe of Chriſtes glorie did more good in the church thē he? Againe vvhen ſiniſter & vvicked counſel had gotten once the foote in, thruſting truth & veritie out of the princes eares, hovv much as religion and al good things vvent forvvard before, ſo much on the contrary ſide al reuolted backvvard againe. And this goſpel (as M. Fox calleth it) which King Henrie left eſtabliſhed as he thought moſt aſſuredly by Acte of Parlament,Continual chaunge of the Engliſh fayth. in his ſonne King Edwards daies went cleane vpſide doune. In Q. Maries daies came a new alteration. vnder the Q. Maieſtie that now is, an other cleane contrarie. And at this preſent, finde you not a general murmuring euen amongſt the Proteſtants againſt the Communion booke and ſtate of religion which in the beginning of hir Maieſties raigne was

brought in? If the Catholikes ſaid nothing, haue you not the Puritans moſt eagerly deteſting your faith, and were it not for the Princes ſword, like to diſpoſſeſſe you of chayrs and churches? And what ſtabilitie can that goſpel haue which altogether dependeth of the good allovvance of the Prince and her councel in Parlament, which we know within theſe fiftie yeres ſo often to gaine ſaid one an other. And if it ſhould pleaſe God to turne the Quenes hart to the catholike faith (for which we inceſſantly pray) vvere not the face of your religiō ſtreightvvaies altered & turned quite vpſide downe? muſt nor the inferiour partes of the body turne and frame them ſelues according to the head? would not the ſame ſtatutes which now are vniuſtly executed vpon Catholikes, without alteration of any one word, be much more iuſtly executed vpon the Miniſters & Superintendents, if ſo be they called her Maieſty Sciſmatike or Heretike? Wherefore litle reaſon haue you to imagine that wiſemen wil fall in liking of your new deuiſed fanſie, which as it altogether dependeth vpon the Fauour of Court and Courtiers, ſo

for this very reaſon, muſt needes euer remaine as chaungeable as the Court and Courtly beneuolence is.
            And your father Luther who beſt knew the nature of his children, and qualitie of your religion, geueth ſuch a ſentence of it,Luthers iudgement of the Sacramentarie religion. as I doubt not at this preſent is allowed of al the wiſeſt of our Realme, and much confirmed by your maner of writing. The arguments and reaſonings of the ſacramentaries (ſaith he) are ſuch vaine vvordes vvithout witte,
               Luther tom. 7. defenſio. verborum coenae fol. 381. 
               that I can not maruaile ſufficiently hovv learned men can be moued vvith ſuch lyes. & truly they do their matters vvith ſo fearful a conſcience,
               Trepida cō
                  ſcientia. 
               that they ſeeme to vviſh they had neuer taken them in hand. Equidē opinor ſi eis eſſet poteſtas de integro cōſulēdi, quòd nūquam inciperent. Verily I ſuppoſe if they vvere to conſulte of the matter a freſh, they vvould neuer begin their ſacramētarie hereſie. And I verely ſuppoſe, if the wiſe gouernours of our Realme who now may ſee the iſſue of your goſpel, what wickednes and iniquitie in lyfe, confuſion and Atheiſme in faith, contempt of God and man it hath brought with it, if they were now to conſult of the matter a freſh, I beleeue verily with your father Martin

Luther, that amongſt al hereſies of name at this time currant in the Chriſtiā world, they would leaſt of al haue admitted yours, as being the moſt groſſe, moſt licentious, and moſt vnprobable of al others.
            
               Faultes hiſtorical.But come we to the particular faultes hiſtorical committed by vs. Things alvvays accompted falſe or ſuſpected, vve ſet forth as moſt true articles of the Romane religiō, as that the vviſe mē vvhich came from the Eaſt, vvere 3 kinges and had ſuch names. That S. Iohn Baptiſt vvas father of monkes, That a ſtone vvith vvhich Steuen vvas ſtoned to death, is reſerued at Ancona &c. Before I come to make ā
               ſwere,Note. I wiſh the reader to carie in remembrance,  firſt the greatnes of his accuſation againſt vs, That neuer any thing came forth in print, More contaminate then theſe annotations, That vve haue ſhevved herein great deſperatenes and importunitie, That things alvvays accōpted falſe or ſuſpected, vve affirme as moſt true articles of the Romane religion &c. 
                Then what we promiſed in theſe ānotations. Touching which, in the preface of the new teſtament thus we write.In the preface fol. b. ii 
               In theſe annotations vve ſhevv the ſtudious reader, the Apoſtolike tradition,

the expoſitions of the holy fathers, the decrees of the Catholike church and moſt auncient Councels. vvhich meanes vvho ſo euer truſteth not for the ſenſe of holy ſcriptures, but had rather folovv his priuate iudgment or the arrogant ſpirit of theſe Sectaries, he ſhal vvorthely through his owne vvilfulnes be deceaued. Now vvhether part fayleth in perfourmance of that vvhich it vndertaketh, vvhether vve geue not The ſenſe of holy ſcriptures according to the Apoſtolike tradition, the expoſitions of holy fathers, or vvhether he conuince vs of Deſperatnes, and importunitie, and ſuch contamination as he threatneth, this is that vvhich the reader concerning ether ſide, hath ro note and conſider.
            Of the vviſe men thus vve ſay. Theſe three ſages,
               In Mat. 2. v. 11. 
               being principal men of their countrie, repreſent the vvhole ſtate of Princes, Kinges, and Emperours,
               Pſal. 71. Eſa. 60. 
               that vvere according to the prophecies of Dauid and Eſay to beleeue in Chriſt, to humble them ſelues to his croſſe, to foſter, enrich, adorne and defend his church: vvhere vpon it is alſo a very conuenient and agreable tradition of antiquitie,
               Chryſoſt. Theophil. Cic. de diuinat. Plin. lib. 20. 
               and a receiued opinion among the faithful, not lacking teſtimonies of auncient vvriters, and much for the honor of our Sauiour, that theſe three alſo

vvere Kings:
               Eſther. 1.13.14. 
               to vvit, ether according to the ſtate of thoſe countries, vvhere the princes vvere Magi, & Magi the greateſt about the prince: or as vve reade in the ſcriptures, of Melchiſedech King of Salem,
               Tob. 2.15. Ambro. 1. offic. ca. 12. 
               & many other Kings that dvvelt vvithin a ſmal compaſſe: or as Iobes three frendes are called Kings. Theſe are commonly called the three Kings of Colen, becauſe their bodies are there, tranſlated thither from the East countrie. Their names are ſaid to haue bene Gaſpar, Melchior, Baltaſar. In theſe wordes thou ſeeſt (reader) vpon what ground, and with what moderation we ſpeake of that matter, not preciſely auouching them to be Kinges in ſuch ſort as we commōly eſteeme of that name, but after an other ſort and ſome inferiour degree. Albeit if we affirmed them to be as great monarkes as the Kinges of Fraunce or Spaine, or the great Sophie of Perſia, we might ſo affirme for ought he bringeth to the contrarie.
            But becauſe M. W. maketh his firſt entrance with this matter, as though it were ſo abſurd, let vs ſearch out wherein lieth the great abſurditie and fault committed in this note. Is it trowe you, in that we cal them Kinges, or in that we ſaie they were three, or

in that by our reporte their names are ſayd to haue bene ſuch?That the wiſe men were king
                     •
                  . If becauſe of the firſt, let him ſhew his reaſon why that can be ſo harmeful, what it maketh againſt the honor of Chriſt, what againſt the veritie of the ſcriptures, the faith of the church, tradition eccleſiaſtical, the maners of mē, or any title, point or dependence of Chriſtianitie, and Chriſtian profeſsion. The like I affirme of the ſecond, the like of the thirde, the like of al three ioyned together. VVe cal them kinges, and why not? ſeyng the ſcripture wel beareth with that appellation, and the auncient fathers haue ſo called them many hundred yeres before vve vvere borne.Tertullian contra Marcionem. l. 3. Ciprian. ſer. de Bapt. numer. 1. Chryſ. hom. 1. ex variis in Mat. locis So Tertullian in his 3. booke againſt Marcion calleth them. ſo S. Cyprian calleth them, in his ſermon De baptiſmo et manifeſtatione Chriſti. And S. Chryſoſtom proueth by ſcripture that they vvere kinges. thus he writeth. The vviſemen offered giftes to this child Christ according as the holy Ghoſt had testified before of them, ſaing Eſai 60. They ſhal come from Saba offering gold, and frankencenſe, & pretious stone. VVe acknovvledge that the vviſe men euidently fulfilled this prophecy. Dauid quoque de

his ita teſtatur, pſal. 71. Reges Thaerſis et Inſulae munera offerent, Reges Arabum et Saba dona adducent. Dauid alſo vvitneſſeth of theſe, pſal. 71. The kinges of Thaerſis and the Iſles ſhal offer gifts, The kinges of the Arabians and Saba ſhal bring preſents. And S.Hier. in pſa. 71. Hierom applieth that text of the pſalme to them in like maner. And Tertullian againſt the Ievves vvho ſeemed vvith M. W. to enuie al this honor of Chriſt vvriteth thus. Dauid alſo ſpake of this offring of gold vvhen he ſayd,
               Tertull. cō
                  tra Iudaeos probatio. natiuit. Chriſti. 
               pſ. 71. there ſhal be geuen to him of the gold of Arabia. and againe, the kinges of Arabia and Saba ſhal bring him gifts. Nam et magos reges ſerè habuit Oriens.
               
                  Aug. ſer. 43. ad fatres in Ere.
                  Claudian. in Epigrāa. Iſidorus & Remigius apud D. Tho. in catena in Mat. 2. Theophi. in Mat. 2. Anſel. in Mat. ca. 2.
                
               For the Eaſt part had commonly ſuch vviſe men for their kinges. S. Auguſtin plainely nameth them kinges. ſo doth Claudianus, ſo doth S. Iſidorus, ſo doth S. Remigius, ſo doth Theop
                  •
               ilactus, ſo do generally the writers that haue liued in the church this later 500 yeres as we learne by S. Anſelme, who ſpeaketh De iſtis tribus regibus, Of theſe three kinges, as of a thing moſt vſual & vulgar.Geſnerus in Pādectis Vniuerſa. lib. vltimo. tit. 2. fol. 29. And Conradus Geſnerus directeth you to certaine writers who haue made treatiſes, De tribus Magis, De tribus ſanctis regibus, Of theſe three

vviſe men, Of theſe three holy kinges. And among theſe auncient and Catholike fathers to alleage one new,Zuing. to. 4. in Mat. ca. 2. Zuinglius holdeth it as very probable that they were kinges. Thus he ſpeaketh of them, writing vpon the 2 chapter of S. Matthew. Magi (ſaith he) ſunt ſapientes et aſtrorum et omnium rerum peritiſsimi. huiuſmodi homines ferè adminiſtrationi rerum publicarum adhibuerunt gentiles. Magi are vviſemen ſkilful in aſtronomy and al other matters. The gentiles made ſuch men commonly gouerners of their common vvelthes. After al which, for vs to cal them kings, how can it in any ſort be hurtful or preiudicial to any truth of Chriſtian religiō? Nay on the contrarie ſide, whoſoeuer carpeth at this, certainely he maligneth the glorie of our Sauiour, he ſecretly detracteth from his honor, and malitiouſly pincheth and ſnarleth at the auncient and Apoſtolike church, which in this ſorte witneſſed ſuch prophecies to haue bene fulfilled.
            But perhaps M. W.That the wiſe men were three. is offended at the number of three, vvhere vpon S. Auguſtine ſo ſweetely alludeth vnto the myſtery of the Bleſſed Trinitie, and that Chriſte was King, God, and

yet ſhould dye as a mortal man. This is that great corruption which ſo greueth him. But who would be greued here at, except ſome deteſtable Arian, Trinitarian, Libertine, or Anabaptiſt, againſt whoſe religion only (for ought I know) that note maketh. And touching the ſtory that they were three,Auguſt. ſer. 1 de epipha. Leo ſermo. 2.3.4.5.6.8. S. Auſtin plainely affirmeth it, Tres erant. So ſaith S. Leo the Great and firſt of that name, aboue a dozen times in his ſermons vpon the feaſt of the Epiphanie. And whereas the Euā
               geliſt ſpeaketh of them, not in the dual but in the plural number, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
fewer they could, not well be, and more we neede not to beleeue, except we ſee more reaſon thē yet appeareth.
            
               Their names.And touching the laſt part, vz, Their names are ſaid to haue bene ſuch, how could vve haue ſpoken more moderatly? For who hath heard them called by any other names? And I ſuppoſe they were not nameleſſe. And if they had names, why not Gaſpar, Melchior, Baltazar, rather then William, Iohn, and Thomas, or any other, that M. W. liſt to imagine, whereas the common opinion of our forefathers maketh for the firſt, no probabilitie or reaſon can be brought for the ſecond.

And if M. VV. beleeue that the Ievviſh Sinagoge erred not in continuing by tradition vvithout ſcripture the names of Pharaos vvicked ſorcerers, Iannes and Mambres,2. Tim. 3. v. 8. vvhy thinketh he not this much more likely, that the Church vvould keepe in remembrance the names of theſe ſuch excellent men, vvho vvith ſo great daunger came ſo farre to adore our Sauiour in his infancie, and are called Primitiae gentium, in vvhom the Church of the gētiles firſt begāne? But hovvſo euer the exacte truth be in this caſe, it is a very ſmale point of deſperatnes for vs to vvrite, that their names are ſaid to haue bene ſuch, & moſt falſe it is that we ſet this forth, as a moſt certaine article of the Romane religion: and whatſoeuer, ether in general or in ſpecial ſhal be obiected hereafter, in the meane ſeaſon the annotation grounded vpon good reaſon, gathered out of the ſcriptures, the pſalmes of Dauid, Eſai, Eſther, Tobias, beſides other authoritie ſacred and prophane, S. Ambroſe S. Chryſoſtome, Theophilact, Cicero, and Plinie, in any iudgment (I trow) is able to coūteruaile the bare worde of ſo ſeely a man as M. VV. ſhevveth him ſelf.
            
               
               Mat. 3. v. 1.Touching S. Iohn thus we ſay. Mat. 3. v. 1. Deſert. Of this vvord deſert (in greeke Eremus) commeth the name Eremitages, & Eremites, that liue a religious & auſtere life in deſerts and ſolitarie places, by the example of S.
               Monaſtical life. 
               Iohn Baptiſt, vvhom the holy doctors therefore cal the prince, and as it vvere the author of ſuch profeſſion. S. Chryſoſt. hom. 1. in Marcum. et hom. de Io. Baptiſta. Hierō ad Euſtach. de euſtod. virg. Iſid. l. 2. c. 15. de diui. off. Bernardus de excel. Io. Baptiſtae. vvherevvith the proteſtāts are ſo offended, that they ſay S.
               Magd. cent. 5. c. 6. pag. 711. 
               Chryſoſt. ſpake raſhly & vntruly. And no marueil, for vvhereas the Euangeliſt himſelfe in this place maketh him a perfecte paterne of penance and Eremitical life, for deſert or vvildernes, for his rough and rude apparel, for abſtaining from al delicate meates (according to our Sauiours teſtimonie alſo of him,
               Cent. 1. li. 1. cap. 10. Cythraeus in 3. ca. Mat. 
                     •
                  ucerus ibi. 
               Mat. 11.8. Luc. 7.33.) they are not aſhamed to peruert al vvith this ſtraunge commentarie, that it vvas a deſert ful of townes & villages, his garment vvas chālet, his meate ſuch as the countrie gaue and the people there vſed: to make him thereby but a common man lyke to the rest in his maner of lyfe: cleane againſt ſcriptures, fathers and reaſon.
               Bee Caniſ. de verbi Dei corruptelis lib. 5. c. 2.3.4 Here (Chriſtian reader) to proue that S. Iohn was a monke, thou haſt as before, reaſon plainly deduced out of

the ſcriptures, thou haſt the auncient fathers deducing the ſame with vs, S. Hierom, S. Chryſoſtom, S. Iſidorus, S. Bernard. Againſt theſe ſcriptures and aūcient Doctors,An eaſy kind of anſwering. thou heareſt the bare word of this new Doctor, who had he euer bene a good ſcholer, would neuer ſo boldly without face or forehead haue abuſed thy patience, as to oppoſe his only word againſt theſe reaſons, Doctors, and ſcriptures.
            Touching the ſtone which is reſerued at Ancona, and the comming of Elias before the day of iudgment thus we ſay, Of the firſt,Act. 7. v. 58. 
               Reade a maruelous narratiō in S. Auguſtine of one ſtone,
               Relikes & miracles in the honor of Martyrs. 
               that hitting the Martyr on the elbovv reboūded backe to a faithful mā that ſtood neere, vvho keeping & carying it vvith him, vvas by reuelatiō vvarned to leaue it at Ancona in Italie: vvherevpō a Church or Memorie of S. Steuen vvas there erected, and many miracles done after the ſaid martyrs body vvas found out, and not before. Aug. tomo 10. Ser. 38. de diuerſis. in aedit. Pariſ. Now of al theſe, miracles, Church built in memory of Martyrs, Reuelations, Stone reſerued, M. W. digeſteth wel the reſt, only he ſeemeth to wonder that a ſtone could be kept ſo long. As though that were

ſo wonderful a caſe, or there were not both in ſcripture,Hebrew. 9. verſ. 4. as Aarons rod and the Manna, and out of the ſcripture, as al Churches through Chriſtendome are witnes, many things preſerued as long time, far more vnlike to continue then ſtones, which may wel endure fifteene hundred yeres fiue times told, if they be kept as wel as that at Ancona. And whatſoeuer fault he find in the ſtorie, let him ſcoffe at S. Auſtin who ſo ſeriouſly rehearſeth it, not at vs, who refer only the reader to S. Auſtin, and ſpeake neuer a worde of our ſelues.
            
               Mat. 17. v. 11And the like I anſwere for the ſecond, of which theſe are our wordes. Chriſt diſtinguiſheth here plainly betvvene Elias in perſon, vvho is yet to come before the iudgement, and betvvene Elias in name, to vvit, Iohn the Baptiſt, vvho is come already in the ſpirit and vertue of Elias. So that it is not Iohn Baptiſt only nor principally of vvhō Malachie prophecieth (as our Aduerſaries ſay) but Elias alſo him ſelf in perſon
               ▪ which annotatiō conteineth nothing els touching this point, but the very wordes of our Sauiour and the prophete Malachie, That Elias ſhal come. which wordes when our Sauiour ſpake, S. Iohn Baptiſte,

who was Elias by ſome reſēblāce, figure, and office, was paſt and dead. This truth els where we approue by the authoritie of S. Auſt. Tract. 4. in Ioan.
               Apoc. c. 11. verſ. 3. 
               li. 1. de pec. mer. ca. 3. and the reſt of the latin Doctors. as S. Hierom ad Pammach. epiſt. 61. ca. 11. et in pſal. 20. S. Ambr. in pſal. 45. S. Hilar. can. 20. in Matth. Proſper. lib. vlt. de promiſſ. ca. 13. S. Greg. lib. 14. Moral. ca. 11. et homil. 12. in Ezech. Beda. in. 9. Marci. The Greeke fathers alſo, as S. Chryſoſt. hom. 58. in Matt. et hom. 4. in 2. Theſſ. et hom. 21. in Geneſ. et hom. 22. in epiſt. ad Hebr. Theophilact. and Oecumen. in 17. Matth. S. Daemaſ. lib. 4. de Orthodoxa fide. ca. 27. Finally by the vniuerſal conſent of al Chriſtians, where of S. Auſtin is witnes in theſe wordes. Heliam Theſbitem vltimo tēpore venturum ante iudicium,
               Aug. de ciuit. li. 20. cap. 29. 
               celeberrimū eſt in ſermonibus cordibuſque fidelium. That Elias the Theſbite ſhal come before the day of iudgement, it is a moſt notorious thing in the mouthe and hartes of faithful men. And now the Prophet foretelling ſo, our Sauiour affirming ſo, the auncient fathers both Greeke & Latin teaching ſo, faithful and chriſtian men alwaies beleeuing ſo, this is the queſtiō which I wil not diſpute but leaue it at large, and M. W. may do wel to put it to his

theſis of Antichriſt (for they are both iuſt of like probabilitie) and handle it at the next comencemēt, vz, whether we muſt rather credite him vpon his bare word telling vs one thing, or the vniuerſal conſent of Chriſtendome & the primitiue Church,Intolerable boldnes and arrogancie. riſing vpon the expreſſe wordes of the prophete and our Sauiour him ſelf, teaching vs the contrarie. And theſe touching matters hiſtorical, be the horrible faultes of our Annotations, for which he accuſeth vs of Deſperatnes, and them of ſuch abſurditie, that neuer any thing more contaminate and corrupt, vvas ſet abrode in the ſight of the vvorld.
            
            
               Faultes in making arguments.Our errors in making arguments are far more, at leaſt in number and ſhew, how ſoeuer they proue in ſubſtance and truth. I wil folow the order begone, that is, firſt particularly I wil write downe the argument which he fathereth vpon vs, then the reaſon as we gaue it out: by conference whereof▪ the indifferent reader ſhal be able to iudge ether of our ignorance, or his impudencie. Thus he procedeth. VViſe men muſt needes much more abhorre from your religion, vvhen they ſhal finde you thus to gather of the ſcriptures.

Chriſt and Peter vvalked on the vvaters.
               Whit. pa. 22 Argumēt. 1. 
               ergo the body of Chriſt may be ſhut vp in a litle bread. Our wordes are theſe.Mat. 14. v. 26 
               VVhen not only Chriſt, but by his povver Peter alſo vvalketh vpon the vvaters, it is euident that he cā diſpoſe of his ovvne body aboue nature, & cōtrar
                     •
                  e to the natural conditions thereof, as to goe through a doore, Iohn 20. to be in the compaſſe of a litle bread. Ephiphan. in A
                     •
                  nchorato. Let M. VVhitaker ſhew the reaſon why the one folovveth not as vvel as the other, vvhy he vvil more abridge Chriſts povver, and bynd him to the rules of nature in the Sacrament, then in that miraculous entring to his diſciples, or vvalking on the vvaters. A
                  •
               beit if he had aduiſedly conſidered the note, he might haue perceaued the ſame to cōſiſt, not ſo much in our collection, as in the authoritie of Epiphanius,Real preſence. vvho maketh the caſe of Chriſts being in the Sacrament ſo cleare, that he accounteth M. VV. and his felovves for their infidelitie in that behalfe, reprobates from the face of God, and ſure of eternal damnation. Excidit a gratia et ſalute, in the place before quoted.
            
               
               Peter vvalked on the waters. Ergo the Pope
of Rome hath authoritie ouer al the church.
               Mat. 14. v. 29
            
            
               This application as S. Bernard and Catholike men vſe it, is no more reprouable, then that of our Sauiour, As Moyſes exalted the ſerpent in the deſert,
               Ioan. 3. v. 14 
               ſo muſt the ſonne of man be exalted, Or that of S.cal. 4. d Paule, Abraham had tvvo ſonnes Iſmael and Iſaac, one of the bond vvoman according to the fleſh, and one of the free vvoman by promiſe. And as then he that vvas borne according to the fleſh, perſecuted him that vvas after the ſpirite, ſo novv alſo. But for a man to folovv M. VV.Scripture made ridiculous, whē it commeth to the handling of prophane men. example, and make Chriſt or S. Paule to argue after his paterne thus, The ſerpent vvas exalted in the deſert, Ergo Chriſt muſt be hanged on the croſſe, or, Abrahams tvvo ſonnes could not vvel agree, but Iſmael vexed Iſaac, Ergo the Ievves muſt vexe and perſecute the Chriſtians, this in old time vvould haue bene accounted diuinitie fit for Lucian and ſuch like ſcorners, hovvſoeuer it be novv vſed of theſe nevv goſpellers in great ſadnes. Thus ſtādeth our note. Peter (ſaith S. Bernard) vvalking vpon the vvaters, as Christ did,
               Peters primacy. 
               declared him ſelf the only vicar of Chriſt, vvhich ſhould be ruler not ouer one people, but ouer al. For many vvaters are many peoples. Bernard. lib.
               
2. de conſiderat. ca. 8. See the place, hovv he deduceth from Peter the like authoritie and iuriſdiction to his ſucceſſor the biſſhop of Rome.
            
            
               
               The good Samaritane ſaid to the hoſt,
vvhatſoeuer thou ſhalt ſupererogate,
               Luc. 10. v. 35. 
               I vvil reſtore it to the. ergo there are vvorkes of ſupererogation. This argument foloweth wel inough, and it is S. Auguſtins concluſion, not ours. This is the annotation. S. Auguſtine ſaith that the Apoſtle (1. Cor. 9.) according to this place did ſupererogate, that is, did more then he needed or vvas bound to do, vvhen he might haue required al duties for preaching the Goſpel, but vvould not. li. de op. Monach. c. 5. VVhereof it cōmeth, that the vvorkes vvhich vve doe more then precept, be called vv
                     •
                  rkes of Supererogation: and vvhereby it is alſo euident against the Protestants, that there be ſuch vvorkes. See Optatus li. 6. cont. Parm. hovv aptly he applyeth this parable to S. Paules coūſel of virginitie (1 Cor. 7.) as to a vvorke of ſupererogation.
            
            
               
               Christ vvas transfigured. ergo he geueth
vs his body in forme of bread and vvine.
               Ma
                     •
                  . 17. v. 2. This is M. VV. ſcoffing, not our arguing. we only deduce hence, that Chriſt may ſo do, as not being bound to philoſophical rules or conditions

of nature, which is cleare and manifeſt, not that for this cauſe he doth ſo, which is fooliſh and impertinent. See the firſt argument. Our wordes are. Marke in this Trāsfiguration many maruelous points. As, that he made not only his ovvne body, vvhich then vvas mortal, but alſo the bodies of Moyſes and Elias, the one dead, the other to die, for the time as it vvere immortal: thereby to repreſent the state and glorie of his body, and his Saintes in heauen. By vvhich maruelous transfiguring of his body, you may the leſſe maruel that he cā exhibite his body vnder the forme of bread and vvine, or othervviſe as he liſt.
            
            
               
               Mat. 22. v. 30 Scripture falſified.
               Saintes in heauen are like vnto Angels, becauſe they vſe not mariage. ergo they can heare the praiers of al men, & euery vvhere ſuccour vs. This conſequent conſiſteth of two partes, the one is, the falſificatiō of Chriſts reaſō, the other is like falſificatiō of our argument drawen thēce. For nether Chriſt ſaid, Saintes are like vnto Angels, becauſe they vſe not mariage, but contrarywiſe, they vse not mariage, becauſe they are like vnto Angels: nether inferre we their abilitie of hearing or ſuccouring vs, for that

falſe cauſe vvhich M. VV. aſsigneth, but becauſe they are aduaunced vnto the ſtate and condition of angels as ſayth our Sauiour, whoſe office 
                  •
               s to ſuccour and ayde men, as in the ſcripaure we find euery where, and the very Engliſh Communion booke doth teach and allow.Communiō booke, in the collect of Michelmas day. The difference is as great, as if whē one argueth thus, N. is a man, therefore he hath a head: an other ſhould inuert it after this ſort, N. hath a head, therefore he is a man. The firſt is true, as any may perceaue. the ſecond is falſe, as whereby an aſſe or a gooſe is proued to be a man. This is our note. As Chriſt proueth here, that in heauen they nether mary nor are maried,
               The Saints heare our prayers. 
               becauſe there they ſhal be as Angels: by the very ſame reaſon, is proued, that Saints may heare our praiers and helpe vs, be they neere or farre of, becauſe the Angels do ſo, and in euery moment are preſent vvhere they l
                     •
                  ſt, and neede not to be neere vs, vvhen they heare or helpe vs.
            
            
               
               Ioſeph vvrapped Chriſts body in ſindo
                     •
                  .
               Mat. 27. v. 59
               ergo Chriſts body on the altar muſt be layd in pure linnen. I know not what M. W. diſliketh in this argument, whether

the real preſence of the ſame body on the altar, which vvas in the ſepulcher, or the linnen vſed at the altar, as it was in the ſepulcher, or the relation from one to the other. Becauſe ech part is warranted in the Annotation by ſufficient authoritie, I thinke it needeles to adde any more, vntil I better know the pointe whereat he is offended. This is the note. This honour and duty done to Chriſts body being dead, vvas maruelous grateful and meritorious. And this vvrapping of it in cleane ſindon may ſignifie by S.
               S. Hiero. in hunc locum 
               Hierom, that the body of our Lord is to be vvrapped not in gold, pretious ſtones, and ſilke, but in pure linnen.
               To. 1. Conc. 
               And ſo in the vvhole Church it is obſerued by S. Silueſters conſtitutiō, that the Corporal vvherevpon our Lordes body lieth on the altar, muſt be pure and plaine linnen.
            
            
               
               The vvomē came to behold the ſepulcher. Ergo novv vve muſt goe in pilgrimage to the holy ſepulcher.
               Mat. 28. v. 1. If M.VV. enforce the word, muſt, as it ſeemeth, we confeſſe the argument foloweth not,Pilgrimage to holy places. and the argument ſo, is of his owne deuiſing, not of ours. For we bind not, nor enforce any man by this example, but they that liſt, may tary at home, and take their eaſe. Mary waying that dutie

of viſiting ſuch holy places in it ſelf, without conſtrayning or binding any to it of neceſsitie, then preſuppoſing this to be wel done by theſe holy womē, the reaſon foloweth wel thēce, to approue the like deuotion of Chriſtian people now. And this deduction is iuſtified by S. Hierom and the vniuerſal conſent of Chriſtendome in his time. The wordes of the note are. The deuoute vvomen came to viſite our Sauiours Sepulcher, and for their deuotion firſt deſerued to knovv the Reſurrection, and to ſee him riſen. The honour of vvhich Sepulcher and of the pilgrimage therevnto in the primitiue Church, S. Hierom declareth in theſe vvordes.
               In epiſt. 17. Paul. & Euſ
                     •
                  . ad Marcel. tom. 1. 
               The Iewes ſometime honoured Sācta Sanctorū, becauſe there vvere the Cherubs, & the Propitiatorie, and the Arke of the Teſtament, Manna, Aarons rodde, & the golden altar. Doth not the Sepulcher of our lord ſeeme to thee more honorable? vvhich as often as vve enter into ſo often do vve ſee our Sauiour lye in the ſindon: and ſtayng there a vvhile, vve ſee the Angel againe ſitte at his feete, and at his head the napkin vvrapped together.
               Eſa. 11. 
               The glorie of vvhoſe Sepulcher, vve knovv vvas long prophecied before Ioſeph hevved it out, by Eſay ſayng. And his reſt ſhal be honour: to vvit, becauſe

the place of our Lordes burial ſhould be honoured of al men. A
                     •
                  d at this preſent, notvvithſtanding the Turkes dominion, yet doe the religious Chriſtian Catholike me
                     •
                  n by Gods m
                     •
                  ghtie prouidence keepe the holy Sepulcher, vvhich is vv
                     •
                  thin a goodly Church, and Chriſtians come out of al the vvorld in Pilgrimage to it.
            
            
               
               Christ appeared to the tvvo diſciples in an other forme.
               Mar. 16. v. 12 
               ergo he is in the ſacrament in forme of bread. This is of like qualitie vvith the fourth, & needeth no farther anſvvere. The vvords are.Chriſt body vnder diuers formes 
               Christ though he haue but one corporal ſhape, natural to his perſon, yet by his omn potencie he may be in vvhatſoeuer forme, and appeare in the likeneſſe of any other man or creature, as he list. Therefore e
                     •
                  et no man thinke it ſtrange, that he may be vnder the forme of bread in the B Sacrament.
            
            
               
               Chriſt to the man domb and deafe ſayd, Ephpheta.Mar. 7. v. 34. ergo exorciſme is to be vſed, & the ſame vvordes to be recited in baptiſme. This ergo, is as wiſe as many of the reſt, for ab
                  •
               olutely no more neceſſarie it is to vſe, Ephpheta, in baptiſme becauſe Chriſt ſo ſpake, then it is to vſe, Eli Eli Lāmazabachthani,
               Mat. 27. v. 46 which Chriſt ſpake as wel as the other. Argument we make none, but only we note out of S. Ambroſe,

that the auncient and primitiue Church, which beſt knew which wordes & actions of Chriſt were imitable, which were not, that Church retained this word & other ceremonies vſed by our Sauiour.Aug. de Eccleſiaſticis dogma. c. 31▪ Idem de nupt
                     •
                  is, & concupiſ ē
                  
                     ••
                  a. lib. 2 ca. 18. & 29. As alſo the ſame Church vniuerſally vſed, Exorciſme, as witneſſeth S. Auſtin, which he calleth, Traditionem ve
                     •
                  uſt
                     •
                  ſs
                     •••
                  am, antiqu
                     •
                  ſsimam, undatiſsimam, in Eccleſia toto orbe diffuſa. A tradition most olde and auncient, and most grounded in the Church disperſed through the vvhole vvorld. Our vvords are. The Church doth moſt godly imitate & vſe th
                     •
                  ſe very vvordes and ceremonies of our Sauiour in the Exorciſmes before baptiſmes,Exorciſmes and other ceremonies in baptiſme. to the healing of their ſoules that are to be baptiſed, as Christ heare healed tho bodily infirmitie and the diſeaſe of the ſoule together. Ambr lib. 1. de Sacram. ca. 1.
            
               
               Luke the Euangeliſt vſed a familiar preface.
               Luc. 1. v. 3.
               ergo the author of the ſecond booke of the Machabees might deſire pardon and excuſe his ſlendernes, and yet his vvritings be Canonical. This argument foloweth wel. & M.VV. wil make many worſe before he make one better, if he take and wa
                  •
               gh the word and reaſon as they are deliuered in the Annotation. For it doth derogate as much frō the maieſtie

of the holy Ghoſt to vſe humane helpes in ſearching out the truth, as to craue pardon for the ſtile and maner of writing. And if you wil applie this note to that argumēt made againſt the Machabees,Pag. 3. and ſo much vaunted of by your deereſt brother in Chriſt. M. VV. Charke in the Towre, you ſhal finde the caſe to be like, and both S. Luke and the Machabees, touching your cenſure to ſtād vpon one grounde. Thus vrgeth he there.In the 4. daies conference. The proteſtants reaſon againſt the Machabees, is as forcible againſt S. Lukes goſpel. 
               The vvriters of ſcripture aſke not any pardon ether for the matter or for the maner. Againe, VVhatſoeuer is the vvord of the holy Ghoſt nether doth aſke, nor doth neede pardon in any reſpect. Againe, The holy Ghoſt neuer aſketh pardon of man for any thing he doth, for that vvere to bring God vnder man & make the ſpirit of God ſubiect to the allovvance or diſallovvance of ſinful fleſh. And may not al this as wel be applied againſt S. Luke? The holy Ghoſt is not ignorant, ſo as he needeth to runne to ſinful fleſh, thence to learne what Chriſt did. The holy Ghoſt can of him ſelf teach his Euangeliſtes and craueth not help of mortal mā &c. And therfore S. Luke writeth not of the holy Ghoſt, when he profeſſeth him ſelf to write by humane ayde & diligence.
            
               Much more theſe reaſons take frō vs many entier epiſtles of S. Paule.More arguments of humane ſpirit in S. Paules epiſtles thē in the booke of Machabees. Rom. 25. v. 15. For what ſhal we iudge of the epiſtle to the Romanes? Audacius autem ſcripſi vobis fratres ex parte. I haue vvritten to you brethren more boldly in ſome part. what is this but an excuſe, a very crauing of pardon? So to the Corinthians. And I vvas vvith you in infirmitie, & feare,
               1. Cor. 2. v. 3 
               and much trembling. Is the holy Ghoſt in infirmitie? in fearer doth the holy Ghoſt tremble? After, he deſireth them, To beare vvith ſome litle of his folye.
               Ibi. c. 11. v. 1.17. 
               That I ſpeake I ſpeake not according to God, but as it vvere in fooliſhnes. becauſe many glorye according to the fleſh, I alſo vvil glorye,
               Ib. c. 12. v. 11 
               Factus ſum inſipiens, vos me coegiſtis. I am become fooliſh, you haue cōpelled me. Such places many we fynde in S. Paules epiſtles, which if ſome man like M.W. and M Charke ſhould applye to the holy Ghoſt, and aſke whether the holy Ghoſt could do this or that, could glorye, could bragge, could ſpeake not according to God, could be fooliſh, the partie ſo arguing ſhould proue him ſelf litle better then a foole, & yet the argument is a pithy and wiſe as this againſt the Machabees. And I much muſe, whether it is not more againſt

the honor o
                  •
                the holy Ghoſt, to craue the praiers of ſinful fleſh,
               Rom. 15. v. 30. which implieth ſume feare of falling & humane imbecill
                  ••
               ie▪ then to excuſe the maner of the ſti
                  •
               e and writing, and in that reſpect Craue pardon of ſinful fleſh, which is a thing of farre leſſe preiudice. And yet this doth the Spirite of God almoſt in euery epiſtle of S. Paule, to the Romanes,2. Cor. 6.11. Ephe. 6., 19. Coloſ. 4.3. Theſ. 5.25. to the Corinthians, to the Epheſians, to the Coloſſians, to the Theſſalonians, &c. Thus ſtandeth the note. Hereby vve ſee, that though the Holy Ghoſt ruled the penne of holy vvriters that they might not erre,
               Sacred writers and holy Coūcels. 
               yet did they vſe humane meanes to ſearch out and find the truth of the things they vvrote of. Euen ſo doe Councels, and the Preſident of them, Gods vicar, diſcuſſe and examine al cauſes by humane meanes, the aſſiſtance of the Holy Ghoſt concurring and directing them into al truth, according to Chriſtes promiſe, 10.16.13: as in the very firſt Councel of the Apoſtles them ſelues at Hieruſalē is manifeſt Act. 15, 7. and 28. Againe here vve haue a familiar preface of the Author as to his frende, or to euery godly Reader (ſignified by Theophilus) concerning the cauſe and purpoſe and maner of his vvriting, and yet the very ſame is confeſſed scripture, vvith the vvhole

booke folovving.
               
                  The ſecond booke of the Machabees.
                  1. Mach. 2. & 15.
                
               Maruel not then if the author of the ſecond booke of the Machabees vſe the like humane ſpeaches both at the beginning and in the later end, nether do thou therefore reiect the booke for no Scripture, as our heretikes doe: or not thinke him a ſacred vvriter.
            
            
               
               The Angel vviſsheth wel to mē of good vvil,
               Luc. 2. v. 14. This is M. W. gloſe added to the text. 
               that is, thoſe vvhom God embraceth vvith his grace and mercy. ergo men haue free vvill. By this example a man may ſee what difference is betwene the old Goſpel and the new. If the wordes were 
                  •
               eaſte as in the old time they were read and vnderſtoode, the conſequent of this reaſon would haue held, and ſo S. Auguſtine gathered whom we alleage. But taking the word and ſenſe as M. W. deliuereth it, nether S. Auguſtine nor any other ſober man did or would euer haue inferred ſuch a conſequent. Our words are.Free wil. 
               The birth of Christ geueth not peace of minde or ſaluation but to ſuch as be of good vvill, becauſe he vvorketh not our good againſt our vvilles, but our vvilles concurring. Auguſt. quaeſt. ad Simplic. li. 1. q. 2. tom. 4.
            
               
               Chriſt vvent into Peters ſhippe. ergo the
vvhole church is Peters ſhippe.
               Luc. 5. v. 3. This is of like qualitie with the ſecond before

noted. It is only an allegory aptly and truly declared, the ſubſtance whereof is vſual among the auncient fathers, who cal many times the Catholike church by the name of Peters ſhipp.The Catholike Church Peters ſhip. And touching this ſpecial place, S. Gregorie maketh no queſtion,Gregor. in Iob. li. 17. c. 14. but Chriſt ſo ſignified by this fact when he made choyſe to enter into that ſhippe. Thus he writeth. Ieſus a ſcended into Peters ſhip &c. ſitting there he preached to the multitudes. Per nauem Petri, quid aliud quam commiſſa Petro eccleſia deſignatur?
               See S, Amb. in Luc lib. 4 cap. 5. Aug. quaeſt. euāg. l. 2. c. 2 
                     •
                  ed. in Luc. cap. 5. 
               By Peters ſhippe vvhat els is ſignified, but the church, vvhich vvas commited to Peter? To like purpoſe vpō the ſame place writeth S. Ambroſe, S. Auguſtine, & S. Bede. The wordes of our annotation are theſe. It is purpoſely expreſſed that there vvere tvvo ſhippes, & that one of them vvas Peters, and that Chriſt vvent into that one, and ſate downe in it, and that ſitting he taught out of that ſhippe: no doubt to ſignifie the church reſembled by Peters ſhip, and that in it is the chayre of Chriſt, and only true preaching.
            
            
               
               Barnabas laid dovvne the price of his land at the Apoſtles feete.
               Act. 4. v. 37. 
               ergo vve muſt kiſſe the Popes feete. If the Apoſtle S. Peter had not before told vs that heretiks

in the later daies eſpecially ſhould be Illuſores, mockers,
               2. Pet. 3. v. 3. and the Prophete Dauid named their general profeſſion,Pſal. 1. 
               a Chayre or ſchoole of ſcorners, Cathedrā irriſorum,
               Heretikes generally geuen to ſcorning & mocking. we might by our owne experience haue learned thus much of the Proteſtant writers of our time, who by this feate among the popular haue brought into contempt the graueſt partes of Chriſtian religion, and haue much ſhaken the obedience due both to ſpiritual and ciuil magiſtrates.Vide Brentium contra Bullinger. de manſionibus in caelo. anno 1561. fol. 22.23.35. Carlile in his booke that Chriſt deſcended not in to hel. fol. 35, 36, 37, 38, & 96, 97, 98. By this chiefely the Lutherans refel the article of Chriſtes Aſcenſion and being in heauen, as we ſee in Brētius. By this the Zuinglians refute Chriſts deſcēding into hel, as we ſee in maiſter Carlile, and diſproue the real preſence, whereof their common preachings and writings are witnes. By this as a very plauſible meane the Germane miniſters ſtirred the people againſt their Emperour Charles the fift as vve reade in Sleidan.Sleid. li. 17. pa. 311. And hovv like M. W. is vnto them for his ſmale talent, by moſt of theſe his merie concluſions it appeareth. In this preſent, hovv far his vnreaſonable collection differeth from our reaſonable admonition, the diſcrete reader may eaſely

iudge. Our vvordes are, Barnabas as the re
                     •
                  , did not only giue his goods as in vulgar almes, but in al humble and reuerent maner as things dedicated to God, he layed thē dovvne at the Apoſtles holy ſeete, as S. Luke alvvaies expreſſeth, and gaue them not into their hands.
               4. Reg. 4. v. 37. 
               The Sunamite ſel dovvne and embraced Eliſaeus feete. Many that aſked benefites of Chriſt (as the vvoman ſick of the bloudy fluxe) fel dovvne at his feete,
               Luc. 8. v. 47. Luc. 7. v. 38. 
               and Marie kiſſed his feete. Such are ſignes of due reuerence done both to Chriſt and to other ſacred perſons, ether Prophetes, Apoſtles, Popes, or other repreſenting his perſon in earth. See in S. Hierom of Epipanius Biſhop in Cypres, hovv the people of Hieruſalem of al ſortes flocked together vnto him, offering their children (to take his bleſsing) kiſsing his feete, plucking the hemm
                     •
                  s of his garment, ſo that he could not moue for the throng. Ep: 61: cap. 4. cont. error. Io. Hieroſol.
            
            
               
               The Eunuch of the Quene of AEthiopia, came to Hieruſalem to vvorſhip.
               Act. 8. v. 27. 
               ergo pilgrimages to holy places are acceptable to God. why this reaſon ſhould not be allowable, I can not geſſe. The Eunuch came a long iourney frō Aethiopia to Hieruſalem there to worſhippe God▪ and is commended for ſo doing. therefore

if we goe in like maner to Rome or Hieruſalē for like cauſe, we are not to be blamed. where is the diſſ
                  •
               militude?Pilgrimage to holy places. whence riſeth the inequalitie? what part is there not anſwerable? that man to vs, his fact to ours, his intention to ours, the beginning, continuance and ende, proportionable to ours, euery part and parcel of his doing, fully reſē
               bled in ours. If M.W. haue any hid imagination which we can not reach vnto, let him imparte it, & we wil frame him a reaſonable anſwere. The marginal note vpon the wordes of S. Luke is this. Note that this Aethiopian came to Hieruſalem to adore, that is, on pilgrimage. VVhereby vve may learne that it is an acceptable act of religion, to go from home to places of greater deuotion and ſanctification.
            
            
               
               To Chriſt is geuen a name aboue al names,
that in the name of Ieſus,
               Phil. 2. v. 
                     •
                  0. 
               al knees ſhould bovv. Ergo ſo oft as vve heare the name of Ieſus, vve muſt put of our cappes and make curteſy. For confirmation of this ergo, I ſend M. W. to M. D. Whitg. who wil eaſe me of ſome labour in this behalfe. He telleth him,D. Whit. defenſ. tract. 21. c. 7. pa. 743. 
               That this geſture of capping and kneeling at the name of Ieſus, hath continued in the Church many hundred

yeres,
               M.W. taketh parte with Iewes and Infidels againſt Chriſtians. & yeldeth this reaſō thereof, that the Chriſtians to ſignifie their faith in Ieſus and their obedience vnto him, and to confute by open geſture the vvicked opinion of the Ievves and other infidels (vvho moſt abhorred that name) vſed to do bodily reuerence at al times vvhen they heard the name of Ieſus,
               Why Chriſtians do honour at the name of Ieſus. 
               but ſpecially vvhen the goſpel vvas read, vvhich contained that glad tidings of ſaluation, vvhich is procured vnto man by Chriſt Ieſus, vvhere vpon alſo he is called Ieſus, that is a Sauiour. Hereof he inferreth, Nether cā it be againſt Chriſtianitie to ſhevv bodily reuerence, vvhen he is named, by vvhom not only al the spiritual enemies of mankind are ſubdued, but alſo the faithful be made partakers of the kingdome of heauen. Thus far he. Now if we ſhal ioyne to this reaſon, the reaſon geuen in the Annotation, that the Proteſtants gladly yelde this honour of cap and curteſie to the letters, maces,The Proteſtantes vſe more deuotion, and yelde more reuerence to the pictur of a dog and a lyon, then to the name, image or croſſe of Christ. name, ſeale, ſeate, and very many other things hauing any relation or dependence of the Q. maieſtie, of theſe two thus conferred togither, we ſhal find this to folow, and be a very good conſequent. M. VV. yeldeth leſſe honour and reuerence to the name and croſſe of Chriſt, then he

doth to the name and ſo many baſe ſignes apperta
                  •
               ning to a temporal prince: E
                  •
               go M. VV. is a very Atheiſt, one that maketh no account of Chriſt. This is the note. Name of Ieſus.
               The Proteſtants wil haue no reuerence done at the name of Ieſus.) By the like vvickednes they charge the faithful people for capping or kneeling whē they heare the name of Ieſus. As though they vvorſh
                     •
                  pped not our lord God therein, but the ſyllables, or letters, or other material elements vvhereof, the vvord vvritten or spoken conſiſteth, and al this, b
                     •
                   ſophiſtications to dravv the people from due honour and deuotion tovvard Chriſt Ieſus, vvhich is Satans drift by putting ſcruples into ſimple mens mindes about his ſacraments, his Saints, his Croſſe, his name, his image, & ſuch like, to aboliſh al true religion out of the world, and to make them plaine Atheiſts. But the Church knovveth Satans cogitations, and therefore by the ſcriptures and reaſon, vvarranteth and teacheth al her ch
                     •
                  ldren to do reuerence vvhen ſo euer Ieſus is named.
               How Catholikes honour the name of Ieſus, and other things pertaining to him. 
               becauſe Catholikes do not honour theſe things nor count them holy, for their matter, colour, ſound, and ſyllables, but for the respect and relation they haue to our Sauiour, bringing vs to the remembrance and apprehenſion of Chriſt, by ſight, hearing, or vſe of the ſame ſignes. Els vvhy make

vve not reuerence at the name of Ieſus the ſonne of Sirach, as vvel as of Ieſus Chriſt? And it is a pityful caſe to ſee theſe prophane ſubtelties of Heretikes to take place in religion, vvhich vvere ridiculous in al other trade of life. VVhen vve heare our Prince or Soueraine named, vve may vvithout theſe ſcruples doe obeiſance, but tovvardes Chriſt it muſt be ſuperſtitious.
            
            Theſe be the arguments, which he ſaith are of our making, how truely, thou maiſt now iudge. To ſpeake of them more at large and in ſpecial, ech one contayning ſo diuers matter, of Praying to Sainctes, of the Real preſence, of Peters primacie, of Pilgrimage, of Canonical ſcriptures &c. vvould amount to a great volume. Touching theſe and the like, becauſe it is growen now of late to a common veyne in writing and preaching, thus much wil I ſay in general, that M. VV. and his felowes in making ſuch ſporting concluſions, Firſt, ſhew them ſelues as ignorant in diuinitie as may be, for ſo much as hereby they geue forth plaine ſignification, that they know not the firſt rule, or principle of Chriſtian religion, they know not what Chriſtian faith meaneth. Secondarely,

that by ſo doing,Wherevnto the Proteſtants ten
                     •
                  t by ſuch ridiculous cō
                  cluſions. they inſtruct their ſcholers and auditors to make a mocke of Chriſt and his goſpel, and to ſcoffe at euery part of Chriſtianitie. Both theſe I wil ioyntly declare in a few lines. Note thou therefore (good reader) that Chriſtian faith, and the articles thereof are of this propertie and nature, that they can not be concluded or proued by any manifeſt rules of natural wiſedome and reaſon, as we find in other ſciences, Geometrie, Philoſophie, Law &c.Heb. 1. v. 1. but they reſt only vpon the authoritie of Chriſt our Sauiour and his Apoſtles, who firſt deliuered them vnto vs.Ibi. c 11. v. 1. Rom. 8. v. 24 For as the Apoſtle teacheth, Fides eſt ſubſtantia rerum ſperandarum, argumentum non apparentium. Faith is the ſubſtance or ſubſiſtence and foundation of things hoped, the argument or ſure perſuaſion of things not appearing to ſenſe, or reaſon, or humane diſcourſe. As for example. we beleeue the reſurrection of our bodies,The true nature of Chriſtian faith. not becauſe it can be confirmed by any philoſophical or logical demonſtration, (for if it could be ſo, then were it not properly an article of faith) but becauſe Chriſt and his Apoſtles ſo taught. This being the ground and eſſential

forme of faith, and of euery parte thereof, becauſe men are hardly m
                  •
               ued to beleeue things ſo vnprobable, ſo f
                  •
               r b
                  •
               yond reaſon, and againſt cōmon ſenſe, the office of Diuines is by compar
                  •
               ng theſe articles with other workes of God, ether in the creation of the world or redemption of the ſame, to declare that theſe are not ſo vnpoſsible or vncredible as men imagine, but ſuch as God hath done the like in many other, and therefore may alſo in this preſent. So our Sauiour diſputed againſt the Sadduces. Erratis non ſcientes ſcripturas,
               Marc. 12. Mat. 22. 
               neque virtutem dei &c. You erre not knovving the ſcriptures, nor the povver of God. And concerning the reſurrection of the dead, haue you not read that vvhich vvas spoken of God, ſayng I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Iſaac, and the God of Iacob? In which wordes are conteined 2 or 3 arguments to proue the reſurrection. One, that God can do it, becauſe he is of ſuch power. An other, that it is not vn
                  ••
               kely but he wil do it, becauſe he doth towardes the dead, things as hard & vnprobable as that, vz▪ that he protecteth, ſuſtaineth, and preſerueth them as their God and Sauiour, and

in that ſenſe is called the God of Abrahā, Iſaac, & Iacob, many hūdred yeres after their death. Nether of which argumētes for al that, proueth directly that the dead ſhal riſe, but that dependeth only vpon the wil and word of God reuealed in the ſcriptures, which our Sauiour doth firſt of al inſinuate.
            After like maner diſputeth S. Paule in his epiſtle to the Corinthians.1. Cor. 15. 
               If the dead riſe not againe, then in vaine is our preaching, then in vaine is your faith,
               How S. Paul. proueth the reſurrection Cor. 15. 
               then are vve the moſt miſerable men that liue, then nether Chriſt is riſen. As the graine vvhich is ſovven in the earth, dieth firſt before it riſe againe vvith ſuch fruit and commoditie as vve ſee, ſo is it in the reſurrection of our fleſh. In al which arguments there is no one that conuniceth neceſſarily, no not that which is the principal: Chriſt is riſen, therefore vve ſhal riſe, becauſe true it is, wel might Chriſt riſe, though we neuer riſe, as he truely was crucified and deſcended into hel, as we by Gods grace ſhal neuer. But the veritie of this pointe being firſt planted in the harts of Chriſtian men by Chriſts teaching and doctrine, then afterwardes theſe reaſons are good motiues to declare, that the reſurrection ſtandeth

wel with Gods prouidēce, his iuſtice, his mercy, his other workes in creating or redeeming of the world.
            The like is to be ſaid of that, wherewith M.W. maketh moſt ſport, I meane the real preſence. which if any man would directly proue by one of M.W. arguments, as, Chriſt vvas transfigured. Ergo he geueth vs his body in bread & vvine, he maketh as blynd an argumēt as did a famous Engliſh preacher, vvho in great ſadnes would proue the Engliſh Cōmunion booke to be good, becauſe in our Creede we are bound to beleeue not the Maſſe, but The communion, of Saintes. Or as did an other of like vocation, then a preacher, afterward
                  •
                a Doctor, vvho felt him ſelf much troubled in conſcience, and almoſt perſwaded that the maſſe was found in many places of ſcripture, becauſe in many ſubſcriptions of S. Paules epiſtles he found written, Miſſa eſt Corintho, Miſſa eſt Philippis, Miſſa eſt Roma, Miſſa eſt Athenis, Miſſa eſt Nicopoli. But no Catholike man was euer ſo mad, as from Chriſts transfiguration to deduce ſuch an Ergo: and abſolutely as vvel he might infer, ergo he is in euery cheſte, in euery chamber, in euery

tree, in euery mountaine, in euery peece of bread in the vvorld. But thus to 
                  •
               angle, is for Lucianes & hickſcorners, it is not for Diuines.How one part or article of faith, is applied to the confirmation of an other. Thus far only we applye ſuch reaſons. Firſt grounding our faith ſimply vpon our Sauiours wordes declared by the vniforme conſent of three Euangeliſts & S. Paule, and interpreted by the vniverſal conſent of Chriſts Catholike church in al times and ages: becauſe we find certaine carnal and fleſhly mē, lead by reaſon and ſenſe and humane conceite, offended at this article, vpon pretence of philoſophical rules, of natural qualities,Before pa. 177.178. of mathematical dimē
               ſions, as we ſee by M.VV. we ſuppoſing that they be not plaine Atheiſts (wherein perhaps ſometimes we are much deceaued, for D.Whitg. defēce againſt M. Car. Trac 3. c. 6. ¶. 4. Whitegift telleth vs that the Engliſh Church, is novv full of ſuch) by declaration and compariſon of other things which they profeſſe to holde and beleeue, ſhew them that this is not ſo vnpoſſible, or ſo vncredible, or ſo vnlikely as they pretēd, whereas ſome other points they retaine as far aboue reaſon as this. And thus far forth we applye Chriſts tranſfiguration, Chriſts walking vpon the waters,

his entring vnto his diſciples the dores being ſhut &c. to declare that his body is not bound to thoſe general rules, which nature and reaſon hath appointed to common bodies, and on vvhich is founded the greateſt part of the Zuinglian Diuinitie. And therefore as in the firſt, if a man would haue brought Chriſts or S. Paules reaſons to M. VVhitakers ergo, as thus:
            God is omnipotent. Ergo the dead ſhal riſe.
            God is the God of Abraham, of Iſaac, and Iacob. Ergo the dead ſhal riſe.
            Chriſt is riſen againe. Ergo the dead ſhal riſe.
            The Apoſtles were not miſerable fooles. Ergo the dead ſhal riſe.
            Their preaching was not in vaine. Ergo the dead ſhal riſe.
            The huſband man ſoweth corne, and it dieth before it bringeth forth fruite. Ergo the dead ſhal riſe.
            As I ſay any man framing theſe arguments of Chriſts and S. Paules wordes,The Engliſh writers teach the way to ſcorne al Chriſtian religion. were he an Ethnike, had plaied the ignorant foole, if he bare the name of a Chriſtian, had plaid the part of a wicked caytife, and an Atheiſt: becauſe true it is, euery article of

our faith is in this ſort ſubiect to ſcorne and irriſion: ſo M. W. in this caſe folowing the like example, muſt needes before God and man ſuſtaine a hard iudgement. And therefore if he ſhal be diſpoſed hereafter to write more bookes, I would wiſh him to leaue this apiſh tricke which he hath learned of M. Iewel,M. Iewel thoroughout his firſt booke againſt 
                     •
                  . Harding. who notwithſtanding got ſmal honour thereby. and ſurely if the matter were correſpondent, ſuch kinde of ieſting would better become ſome merie felow making ſport vpon a ſtage, with a furred hood & a wooddē dagger, thē either a learned biſhop, ſuch as M. Iewel tooke him ſelfe to be, or a profound Reader of diuinitie, as I thinke M.W. would gladly be accounted.
            And whereas next he ſaith. Quando has nouorum magiſtrorum &c.
               Pag. 2
                     •
                  . 
               vvhen vviſe men ſhal heare theſe interpretations & arguments of theſe nevv maiſters, if there be left in them any ſenſe, I vvil not ſay of the holy Ghoſt, but of common iudgment, they can not thinke a religion builded vpon theſe grounds, to be firme, aſſured, and better then al other, I anſwere, firſt, that he much deceaueth him ſelfe, when he calleth theſe the interpretations of new maiſters,

as he doth likewiſe after in his Antichriſtian booke where he ſaith, Nou
                     •
                   Theologi Rhemenſes &c.
               Pag. 114. Annot. in Mat. cap. 10. v. 22. 
               The nevv Diuines of Rhemes teach that the biſhops bleſsing taketh avvay venial ſinnes, where as we ſpeake not ſo of our ſelues, but vpon warrant of an old Diuine of Milan, euen S. Ambroſe whom there we cite. And here excepting the places where we vrge the very text of the Euangeliſt, euery one of the other is the interpretation of old and auncient fathers, of S. Epiphanius, S. Ambroſe, S. Hierom, S. Auſtin, S. Chryſoſtom, S. Silueſter, &c. And if theſe be new maiſters, I maruel who be old? be like M. Iewel, M. Horne, M. Fulke, M. Keltridge, M. Charke, and ſuch vvorthie doctors of your old congregation,The antiquitie of the Proteſtants church vvhich novv grovveth vvel to fiftie yeres ſtanding, if I miſrecken not my ſelfe. For M. D. Haddon a fevv yeres ſithence, in his anſvver to Oſorius made greate vaunt, that then your goſpel had continued aboue thirtie yeres (abating from that count 6 yeres) Annos pluſquam triginta, excepto ſexennii turbulentiſsime tempore.
               Haddon in fine epiſt. contra Oſori
                     •••
                  . And therefore belike novv it is come to a goodly and a reuerend antiquitie.

But as auncient as it is, many a good man liueth who knew when it was not begotten, and may liue ful wel, til it be againe dead and rotten.
            Then vvhereas you aff
                  •
               rme our religion to be built vpon theſe grounds, you folovv but the cōmon v
                  •
               yne of your felowes, that is, to belye vs: ſauing that you haue gotten perhaps a deeper habite therein, thorough to much imitation of M. Iewel.Aug. de nupt. et con cupiſ. lib, 
                     •
                  . cap. 31. In this very kinde S. Auſtin complaineth that he was much iniuried by the heretikes of his time, & ſo doth Luther that he vvas vexed by the heretikes of his age. vvhoſe authoritie I had rather vſe to you then S. Auſtins, becauſe you ſeeme to honour him more, & eſteeme him for an old father, reiecting S. Auſtin amongſt the nevv maiſters. Thus ſaith Luther to Zuinglius and Oecolāpadius & the reſt of that ſect, & thus he requeſteth of them, as we requeſt of you being of the ſame order.Luth. to. 7. defenſ. verborū coenae fol. 400. 
               Obſecramus (ſaith he) & obteſtamur vos Sacramentarios, &c. VVe deſire and beſeech you Sacramentaries,
               Debacchari 
               if hereafter you vvil needes rayle against the Lutherans or nevv papists as you cal vs, yet abſtaine from lying,
               The Zuinglians notable lyers. 
               and fayne not, nether vvrite of vs othervviſe

then vve publikely profeſſe & teach. Nam ex his quae iam diximus, patet nos non it a docere, vt hactenus de nobis impudentiſsimè mentiti estis. For by that vvhich hath bene ſpoken, it is cleare that vve teach not ſo, as hitherto you haue most impudently belyed vs.
            
            So Luther of the Zuinglians. & we leauing Luthers termes to him ſelfe, requeſt the like of our aduerſaries. If they tel vs of any fault cōmitted in the hādling of Gods myſteries, we are ready to acknowlegde and amend the ſame. If we defend any point of doctrine erroneous in their iudgement, let them refel it by Theological argument, by Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, or reaſō grounded vpon them, and vve are in quiet and orderly ſort ether to yeld to them, or ſhew them their ouerſight. If they fal to ſcoffing & ſcorning, and making ridiculous & boyſh arguments of their owne, & then ſhew their profound wiſedome in cōfuting the ſame, and withal crye out vpon the Importunitie,
               The pitiful ſhiftes of our aduerſaries. and Desperatnes of the papiſtes, as we can not but tel them of their peeuiſhnes, and laugh at ſuch miſerable ſhifts, ſo we dare aſſure them that the wiſe wil neuer be moued to

like wel of their ruinous goſpel, thorough ſuch ieſting trickes moſt vnfit for Diuines, & which are able to quayle and diſgrace a good cauſe, though it ſtoode vpon better grounds thē their goſpel yet doth, or (I hope) euer ſhal.
         
         
            CHAP. XVII Of certaine blaſphemies conteined in the Annotations.
            
               As good orators according to the rules of their art, reſerue ſome chief and principal arguments vnto the end, of purpoſe at parting to leaue a deepe impreſsion in the minde of their auditors: ſo doth M. VV. in this his inuectiue againſt vs. And increaſing ſomewhat his accuſtomed ſtyle, declaimeth terribly and laieth to our charge, not errors, or ouerſights, or meane corruptions, as are our leauing the latin and folowing the greeke, but horrible crimes, euen blſaphemies, & blaſphemies intolerable. He preſuppoſeth that wiſe men are ſomewhat moued by ſuch reaſons and perſwaſions

as he hath vſed hetherto,Pag. 23. 
               But it muſt needes be (ſaith he) that vviſe men vvil be moued much more vvhen they conſider the intolerable blaſphemie of certaine places. For anſwere whervnto, we craue no pardon of him, or the reader. But if he proue his accuſatiō, let vs ſuſtaine that iudgement, as by the law of God and man, to ſuch Intolerable blaſphemers is due. Only of the reader we requeſt indifferent audience, and then we doubt not but this ſtorme and tempeſt wil paſſe without any damage, as quietly as the reſt.
            
               Hebr. 7. v, 17.The firſt blaſphemie is this. The Apoſtle compareth together Chriſts prieſthod and the prieſthod of Melchiſedech in the epiſtle to the Hebrues,
               The firſt blaſphemy 
               vvhere he maketh no mention at al of bread or vvine, in which notvvithſtanding they vvill Chriſt chiefly to haue bene like to Melchiſedech. Here theſe men vvrite flatly, that of al thoſe things vvhich are propoſed by the Apoſtle, it foloweth not that Chriſts prieſthod is eternal, and therefore that properly Chriſt is a prieſt after the order of Melchiſedech, becauſe he inſtituted a ſacrifice of his body to be continued for euer of his prieſts. But this vvhich vvas principal, the Apoſtle in that diſputation omitted, and brought thoſe things

vvhich proue not that vvhich he meant to proue. But vvherein Chriſt vvas principally like vnto Melchiſedech, that muſt be learned not of the Apoſtle but of the Fathers, vvho haue vvritten far more aptly and properly of Chriſts eternal prieſthod then did the Apoſtle. Of this he concludeth. If they feare not to find ſome fault in the Ap
                     •
                  ſtle, and reprehend the holy ghost him ſelfe, is it marueile if our doctrine diſpleaſe them? Thus M. VV. which if it be true,The anſwere. if we thus diſgrace the Apoſtle, if we ſay he goeth about to proue a thing and proueth it not, if we refuſe to be taught of him, and prefer the Fathers before him, finally if we controle him ſo ſingular an inſtrument of the holy Ghoſt, and reprehend the holy Ghoſt him ſelfe, I can not blame M. W. if he crie out Intolerable blaſphemie. But if theſe things be ſo far of from al ſhevv of truth, that there is no colour or pretence of ſo vnmeaſurable lying, vvhat ſhould a man ſay, but ſhame to the deuil and his miniſters,Lye vpō lye vvho novv are grovvē to ſuch a paſsing impudencie. that ſo they may haue licence to lye, th
                  •
               y care not hovv groſly and palpably they lye, though they be takē with the maner, though it preſently turne

to their ovvne ſhame, though the lyes which they inuent of others, be moſt euidently, and in truth only verified of them ſelues.S. Paules epiſtle to the hebrewes reiected by the proteſtants. For vvho but they thus diſgrace this Apoſtle, and that in this epiſtle? vvho but they find fault vvith the vvriter and reprehend the holy Ghoſt, bearing vs in hand that this vvriting much differeth from other ſcriptures, much from Chriſts preaching and the other Apoſtles,Before pag. 414. 1. Cor. 3. v. 12 & therefore is to be reckened Proſtipulis, For ſtubble, good for nothing els but for the fier, for this vvould they ſignifie by that contemptible phraſe. And do not our engliſh tranſlators them ſelues in their Teſtaments leaue out S. Paules name in this epiſtle, and plainly ſay It is not like that euer he was the author of it?Bible of the yere 1579. in the preface of this epiſtle. But let this paſſe. vve vvil not vſe this kinde of defence. our vvords and ſayings defend them ſelues ſufficiently. The vvords of vvhich he gathereth this Intolerable blasphemie, ſtand thus, Heb. 7. v. 17. A prieſt for euer. Chriſt is not called a Prieſt for euer, only for that his perſon is eternal,
               How Chriſt is a prieſt for euer. 
               or for that he ſitteth on the right hand of God, and perpetually praieth or maketh interceſsion for vs, or for that the effect of his death is euerlaſting: for al this

proueth not that in proper ſignification his Prieſthod is perpetual: but according to the iudgment of al the fathers grounded vpō this deepe and diuine diſcourſe of S. Paule, and vpon the very nature, definition, and proprietie of Prieſthod, and the excellent act & order of Melchiſedec, and the ſtate of the nevv lavv, he is a Prieſt for euer according to Melchiſedecks order, ſpecially in reſpect of the ſacrifice of his holy body and bloud, inſtituted at his laſt ſupper, and executed by his commiſſion, commaundement, and perpetual concurrence vvith his prieſts, in the formes of bread and vvine, in vvhich things only the ſayd high Prieſt Melcheſedec did ſacrifice. For though S. Paule make no expreſſe mention hereof becauſe of the depth of the myſterie, and their incredulitie or feebleneſſe to vvhom he vvrote: yet it is euident in the iudgment of al the learned fathers (vvithout exception) that euer vvrote either vpon this epiſtle, or vpon the 14 of Geneſis,
               Chriſts eternal prieſthod conſiſteth in the perpetual ſacrifice of his body & bloud in the Church. 
               or the pſalme 109, or by occaſion haue treated of the ſacrifice of the altar, that the eternitie and proper act of Chriſts prieſthod, and conſequently the immutability of the nevv lavv, conſiſteth in the perpetual offering of Chriſtes body and bloud in the Church.
            
            
               VVhich thing is ſo vvel knovven to the aduerſaries of Chriſts Church & Prieſthod, &

ſo graunted,
               The proteſtants cauilling vpon particles, againſt Melchiſedecks ſacrifice & prieſthod, directly againſt the Apoſtle. 
               that they be forced impudently to cauill vpon certaine Hebrevv particles, that Melchiſedec did not offer in bread and vvine: yea and vvhen that vvill not ſerue, plainely to deny him to haue bene a prieſt: vvhich is to giue checkemate to the Apoſtle, and to ouerthrovv al his diſcourſe. Thus vvhiles theſe vvicked men pretend to defend Chriſtes only prieſthod, they in deede aboliſh as much as in them lieth, the vvhole order, office, and ſtate of his eternal lavv & prieſthod.
            
            
               Chriſts eternal prieſthod and ſacrifice in the Church is proued out of the fathers.
               Arnobius ſaith, By the myſterie of bread and vvine he vvas made a Prieſt for euer. And againe, The eternal memorie, by vvhich he gaue the ſoode of his body to them that feare him. in pſal. 109.110. Lactantius, In the Church he muſt needes haue his eternal prieſthod according to the order of Melchiſedec. Li. 14. Inſtitut. S. Hierom ep. 126. to Euagrius, Aarons prieſthod had an end, but Melchiſedecks, that is, Chriſtes & the Churches is perpetual, both for the time paſt and to come. S. Chryſoſtom therefore calleth the Churches ſacrifice, Hoſtiam inconſumptibilem, An hoſt or ſacrifice that can not be conſumed. ho. 17 in 9 Hebr. S. Cyprian, Hoſtiam qua ſublata, nulla eſſet futura religio, An hoſt vvhich being taken avvay, there could bene religion. de coena Domini

nu. 2. Emiſſenus, Perpetuam oblationem & perpetuò currentem redemptionem, A perpetual oblation and a redemption that runneth or continueth euerlaſtingly. ho. 5 de Paſch. And our Sauiour expreſſeth ſo much in the very inſtitution of the B. Sacrament of his body and bloud: ſpecially vvhē he calleth the later kind, The nevv Teſtament in his bloud, ſignifying that as the old lavv vvas eſtabliſhed in the bloud of beaſtes, ſo the nevv (vvhich is his eternal Teſtament) ſhould be dedicated and perpetual in his ovvne bloud: not only as it vvas ſhed on the Croſſe, but as geuen in the chalice. And therefore into this ſacrifice of the altar (ſaith S. Auguſtine li. de Ciuit. 17. c. 20. S. Leo ſer. 8 de Paſsione, and the reſt) vvere the old ſacrifices to be tranſlated. See S. Cyprian ep. 63 ad Cecil. nu. 2. S. Ambroſe de Sacram. li. 5. c. 4. S. Auguſtine in pſal. 33 Conc. 2. and li. 17. de Ciuit. c. 17. S. Hierom ep. 17. c. 2. & ep. 126. Epiph. haer. 55. Theodoret. in pſalm. 109. Damaſcene li. 4. c. 14.
            
               Finally if any of the fathers, or al the fathers, had either vviſedom, grace, or intelligence of Gods vvord and myſteries, this is the truth. If nothing vvil ſerue our aduerſares, Chriſt Ieſus confound them, and defend his eternal Prieſthod, and ſtate of his

nevv Teſtament establiſhed in the ſame. In vvhich vvords of ours if thou marke wel, and conferre them with his, thou ſhalt find that in this ſhort paragraph he hath povvred out together, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
a fovvle and ſtinking heape of lyes, errors, ignorances, and contradictions to him ſelfe and his brethren.
            
                For firſt, vvhere ſay vve that Of al thoſe things vvhich are propoſed by the Apostle, it folovveth not that Chriſts priesthod is eternal? ſay vve not the cleane contrarie, when vve auouch that Al the fathers gather, not of them ſelues or their ovvne vvittes, but of this deepe and diuine diſcourſe of the Apostle the eternitie of his prieſthod? Is this to vvrite flatly, that of al the things propoſed by the Apoſtle it folovveth not that Chriſts prieſthod is eternal, when we write flatly, that not one or other but al the fathers teach that eternitie, groū
                  ding them ſelues vpon this diſcourſe of S. Paule?Heretikes very blynd in the ſcripture, though they crake much of their deepe inſight in them. and hovv could they ground them ſelues vpon S. Paules diſcourſe, if no ſuch thing vvere to be foūd there? This perhaps he might haue gathered, and vve vvould haue graunted, that this deduction can hardly or neuer be perceaued of a Luther, of a Beza, of a

Stancarus, or ſuch other 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , damned in their owne iudgement,Tit. 3. v. 
                     •
                  
                vvhom for puniſhment of their Apoſtaſie from Chriſt & his Church, God hath geuen vp into a reprobate ſenſe, Vt videntes non videant, et audientes non intelligant, ſed credant mendacio,
               Rom. 1. v. 28 Luc. 8. v. 10. 2. Theſſ. 2. v 11. 
               That ſeing, they ſee not, and hearing vnderſtand not, but beleeue lyes, becauſe they would not beleeue & hold faſt the truth when they had it. but to a S. Ambroſe, to a S. Chryſoſtom, S. Primaſius, S. Beda, or any other directed by the ſpirit of God, theſe things which are propoſed by the Apoſtle miniſtred ſufficient matter to find out the eternitie of Chriſts prieſthod, as by their commentaries vpon theſe very places we learne. For albeit expreſſe mention of the Sacrifice of the Church be not here made, for reaſon geuen in the annotation, and by the Apoſtle him ſelfe, cap. 5. v. 11. yet the truth there of is inuincibly concluded out of this very diſputation, and that ſo pregnantly,See the Anotations in cap. 5. v. 11. & 7. v. 11.12 c. 9.12.15.25 c. 10. v. 2. that vvho ſoeuer denieth the Churches Sacrifice he conſequently denieth al the Apoſtles drift & argument, he denieth the vvhole ſtate of the old and nevv Teſtamēt. This therefore is the firſt maine

and capital lye, and in vvhich he inueigheth not againſt vs alone, but alſo againſt al the Fathers without exception, Arnobius, Lactantius, S. Cyprian, S. Ambroſe, S. Hierom, S. Auſtin, and the reſt named in the annotation.
            From this lye he draweth out 4 other, as that we ſay, The Apoſtle proueth not that vvhich he meant. that we prefer the Fathers before the Apoſtle, that we find fault vvith him,
               Multiplication of lyes. and finally reprehēd the holy Ghoſt. Al which is nothing els but lye vpon lye, no one of which, is or euer was, in word or ſenſe vttered, or in thought or cogitation cōceaued of vs.  No ſaith M. VVhitaker? make you not the oblation of bread and wine a principal part of Chriſts eternal prieſthod? we do ſo, with al the Fathers of Chriſts Church. Yet the Apoſtle maketh no expreſſe mention thereof. VVe graunt. Then he proueth not that which he intended. This is a lying and ignorant concluſion. lying, becauſe the Apoſtle proueth moſt abundantly his purpoſe, by ſundry other meanes though he vrge not that point: ignorant, becauſe you knovv not what the Apoſtle would conclude or wherevnto he applieth his argumēt,

which being deliuered moſt euidently in ſundrie places of the 7.7. v. 4.11.23.9. v 12.15.10 v. 2.4.5.11 9 & 10. chapter, and repeated againe and againe, I wil not h
                  •
               re make a new t
                  •
               eatiſe thereof.No time to talke of the Sacrifice of the church, whē the Sacrifice of the croſſe is not firſt beleeued. Thus much the reader that knoweth a litle diuinitie may cō
               ſider of him ſelfe, that whereas the Apoſtle dealeth againſt the Iewes who could not be content that their leuitical prieſthod, and ſacrifices of beaſtes ſhould yeld to Chr
                  •
               ſts prieſthod & ſacrifice of the Croſſe, for S. Paule diſcourſing of the infinite vertue, power & excellēcie of this aboue the former, to haue vndertaken to handle the prieſthod and ſacrifice of the Church, beſides that it was very hard to explicate, beſides that the Hebrewes were very dul to conceaue, both which reaſons he geueth in the 5. chapter, beſides that the other matter was of it ſelfe large inough, beſides al this, I ſay, to haue vrged the Iewes with this ſecondary and dependēt ſacrifice of the Church, who as it beleeued not the firſt, ſingular, and ſoueraine ſacrifice of the Croſſe, had bene as fond a part, as if a man would teach a childe to rūne before he can go, or teach him to reade before he can ſpeake, or ſet

on the roofe of the houſe, before there be ether wal built or foundation laide.
            
                At leaſt (wil M.VV. ſay) you prefer the fathers before S. Paule, and acknowledge them to write more properly and aptly of Chriſts prieſthod then doth the Apoſtle.The auncient fathers ſpeake more plainely of the church Sacrifice then doth S. Paule, without any derogation to S. Paule. This is a lye. For we are not ſo wicked, nether learne we to make any ſuch odious cōpariſons betwene diuers inſtrumēts of the holy Ghoſt. For the conſent of the vniuerſal church and al fathers, we gladly profeſſe to be the voice of the holy Ghoſt. And if al the fathers had bene ioyned in one, in S. Paules caſe and hauing to do with ſuch aduerſaries, at ſuch time, place, and other circumſtances, they would not nether could haue written more aptly and properly then did S. Paule, although afterwards they did more clearely and manifeſtly open that, which S. Paule inſinuated more cloſely and couertly, and ſo would S. Paule haue done, had he liued in their times.
            So in like ſort S. Peter in his ſermon made to the Iewes touching Chriſts glory and reſurrection, calleth him A man approued of God,
               Act. 2. v. 22. 
               by diuers vvonders

and miracles. He calleth him not God of God equal to his father. Our Sauiour in his long exhortation made to his diſciples before his paſsion, ſpeaking of his vnitie with his father,Ioan. c. 12.13▪ 14.15.16.17. expreſſeth not his cōſubſtantialitie with the father, or diuinitie of the holy Ghoſt,The councel of Nice expreſſed the conſubſtantialitie of Chriſt with his father more plainely then any Euangeliſt. ſo clearely as did afterwardes S. Athanaſius and the fathers in the Councel of Nice and Conſtantinople againſt the Arians and Macedonians. nether for al that prefer we S. Athanaſius and thoſe Councels before S. Peter and our Sauiour, nether ſay we that they ſpake more properly and aptly thereof then ether Chriſt or his principal Apoſtle, or ſuch like guegawes as this man ignorantly and maliciouſly obiecteth vnto vs. Chriſt ſpake moſt properly, perfectly, and abſolutely, according as his diuine wiſedome knevv vvas moſt conuenient for that time and audience. ſo did S. Peter, ſo did S. Paule. And yet this barreth not but the holy Ghoſt may, & ſo hath by the Church aftervvarde declared the ſame more euidently, without any derogation to Chriſt or his Apoſtles.
            Yet one ſcrupule more M. W. moueth. At leaſt this can not be denied,

                but the Fathers talke much of the oblation of bread and wine which S. Paule omitteth,
               M.W. laſt obiection. and ſo we can not ſhift our hands, but ſome ouerſight we muſt impute to S. Paule and the holy Ghoſt. Nothing leſſe.Anſwered. Or how ſoeuer by his profound ſubtilitie he thinketh to driue vs vnto this abſurditie hereafter, hitherto ſure I am, we haue vttered no word or ſillable ſo vnchriſtiā. And therefore he belieth vs in ſayng that we haue done the one or the other. And the whole matter is anſwere ſufficiently already.Anſwered by him ſelf. Yet for more ful ſatisfaction I wil anſwere M. VV. by him ſelfe. I aſke him therefore whether Melchiſedec did not ſacrifice, and by ſacrificing foreſhewed our Sauiours prieſthod according to the arder of Melchiſedec? he can not deny, for he hath graunted it in plaine termes in this very booke.before pag. 17. And yet S. Paule here maketh no expreſſe mention thereof. Then by M. VV. iudgement S. Paule omitteth ſome principal part of Melchiſedecs prieſthod apperteyning to Chriſt, and therefore if this be to find fault vvith S. Paule, & reprehend the holy Ghoſt, then M.VV. findeth fault vvith S. Paule, M. VV. reprehendeth

the holy Ghoſt.
            
            Againe,Anſwered by M. Iewel. let him recal to memorie his founder in diuinitie M. Iewel, in that booke which M. VV.Iewel in his Replie art. 1 ¶ 5. in M. W. tranſlation pag. 9. him ſelfe hath tranſlated into latin. Saith not he, that Melchiſedech by his bread and vvine ſignified the Sacrifice of the holy (Engliſh) communion (M. VV. tranſlateth it, ſacrificium ſacroſanctae Communionis) vvhere the vvhole people lifte vp their hands and harts vnto heauen, and pray & ſacrifice together? And where find you this ſacrifice of the holy Communion in al S. Paules diſcourſe? ergo by the ſame reaſon, M. Iewel alſo doth carp at S. Paule and reprehend the holy Ghoſt, who omitte The ſacrifice of your holy Communion, prefigured by Melchiſedech three thouſand yeres at leſt before ether Patriarch or Apoſtle, or doctor, or any good mā, euer heard, or thought, or dreamed of it.
            Againe,Anſwered by Illyricus Illyricus a Lutherā writeth vpon this very chapter ſomewhat more probably then ether M. VV. or M. Iewel, that Melchiſedech foreſhewed his Communion after the Lutheriſh faith,Illyric. ad Heb. c. 7. v. 
                     •
                  
                and that As Melchiſedech by bread and vvine refreſhed Abraham, ſo Chriſt the true heauenly bread refreſheth

vs to life eternal. His fleſh is true nouriſhement, and his bloud is true and healthful drinke. Ioan. 6. Luc. 22. Thus he. ſo that the Zuinglians can fetch out of Melchiſedecs ſacrifice, by their owne priuate authoritie without warrant of any ether doctor or father, the ſacrifice of their Communion, and the Lutherans can find that theirs was prefigured likewiſe: and though S. Paule mention nether of them, that is not material, ſo long as you hold your ſelf within cō
               paſſe of the Communion booke Lutheriſh or Zuinglian:Who euer ſaw ſuch foly, pride and partialitie? only when we ſay the ſame of the Communion and ſacrifice of the Church, and proue it by the authoritie of Damaſcene, of Theodoretus, of S. Hierom, S. Ambr. S. Epiphanius, S. Auſtin, S. Leo, S. Cyprian, S. Chryſoſtom, Euſebius Emiſſenus, Lactantius, Arnobius, by al antiquitie, by al fathers, by al Councels, by the vniuerſal cōſent of Chriſtendō ſince the Apoſtles time, we poore ſoules ſet S. Paule to ſchole, we prefer the fathers before him, we find fault with him, we reprehend the holy Ghoſt, we cōmit intolerable blaſphemie. I know not whether a mā may rather laugh at their peeuiſh pride, who knowing nothing,

take vpon them to controle al fathers, or wonder at their incredible partialitie, which hath ſo be reaft them of common witte and iudgement,Mat. 7. v. 3. that they can perceaue a mote (in deede no mote) in our eye, and can not feele a beame in their owne, or rather lament their Phariſaical hardnes of hart & ignorance whereto hereſie hath brought them, ſo groſſe, that nether they know the veritie of Catholike religion, nor wel vnderſtand the ſtate of their owne phantaſtical goſpel.
            One more blaſphemie he obiecteth and ſo maketh an end. His wordes are.The ſecond and last blaſphemie pag. 24. Rom. 6. v. 23 
               The like boldenes they vtter in that most goodly place of S. Paule vvhere thus he vvriteth to the Romanes, Stipendia peccati mors, donum autem Dei vita aeterna. The ſtipend of ſinne, death,
               The principal of theſe Sorboniſts (after S. Paule) is S. Auſtin. 
               but life eternal is the gift of God. Here the Sorbonists of Rhemes haue noted, that the ſequele of ſpeach required, that as he ſayd, the ſtipend of ſinne is death, ſo on the contrarie part he ſhould haue ſayd, the ſtipend of iuſtice is life eternal. And this to be true they plainely affirme, vvhereas it is manifest that S. Paule spake in this ſorte that he might leaue no place to merites, and he vſeth ſuch a vvorde as vtterly excludeth al respect of ſtipend for that vvhich is a free

gift, can in no caſe be a ſtipend, and repa
                     •
                   to merites. To anſwere this as al the reſt, there needeth nothing els but to compare our wordes with his. Thus we ſay Rom.Life euerlaſting a ſtipend, and yet grace. 6. verſ 23. The ſequele of ſpeach required, that as he ſaid, death or damnation is the ſtipend of ſinne, ſo life euerlasting is the ſtipend of iustice, and ſo it is, and in the ſame ſenſe he spake in the last chapter: That as ſinne reigneth to death, ſo grace reigneth by iustice to life euerlasting, But here he chaūged the ſentence ſomevvhat, calling life euerlasting, Grace, rather then, Revvard: becauſe the merites by vvhich vve attaine vnto life, be al of Gods gift and grace. Augustin. epiſ. 105. ad Sixtum.
            
            Becauſe the ſenſe and ſumme of the annotatiō is takē out of S. Auſtin, I wil ſet downe his owne wordes although they be ſomevvhat long, becauſe they may help the reader both to vnderſtād the truth of this point, & vvithal diſcouer M.W. notorious ignorāce. Thus vvriteth S.
               Aug. epiſt. 105. Auſtin in the place quoted. Eternal life vvhich in fine vve ſhal obteyne for euer,
               How eternal life is of grace & yet the reward of iuſtice. 
               is repayed to merites going before. & yet becauſe thoſe merites vnto vvhich it is repayed, are not gotten of vs by our ovvne abilitie, but vvrought in vs by grace, therefore life eternall is called grace, for no other reaſon,

but becauſe it is geuen gratis, not becauſe it is not geuen to merites, but becauſe thoſe merites are geuen, to vvhich life is geuen. That eternal life is called Grace, vve find in S. Paule Rom. 6. The ſtipend of ſinne is death. life eternal is the grace of God. See hovv vvarely he put theſe vvordes. For vvhen he had ſayd, The ſtipend of ſinne is death, vvho vvould not haue thought he ſhould haue ſayd most aptly and conueniently, The ſtipend of iustice is life eternall.
               Let M W. marke this, True it is. 
               And true it is. For as to the merite of ſinne death is rēdered as the ſtipēd, ſo to the merite of iuſtice Life eternal (is rendered) as the ſtipend. Vnde & merces appellatur plurimis ſanctarū ſcripturarum locis. Quod eſt autem merces operanti, hoc eſt militanti ſtipendium. Sed Apoſtolus aduerſus elationem &c. And ſo it is termed, merces, vvages, in very many places of ſcriptures. For that vvhich is called, Stipendium, Stipend, to a ſouldiar, that is called, merces, vvages, to a labourer. But the Apoſtle vſed that vvord againſt the pride of men, &c.
            
            Thus far S. Auſtin. of vvhoſe vvordes our note is only a ſhort ſūme & abbridgment, and ſo vvhatſoeuer ſport M. VV. maketh to him ſelf of the Sorboniſts of Rhemes, it nothing toucheth vs, but good S. Auſtin the Sorboniſt of

Hippo. And yet not to reſt there, S. Auſtin quitteth him ſelfe vvel inough frō that drye ieſt, vvhen he affirmeth the ſame to be taught, Plurimis ſanctarum ſcripturarum locis, In very many places of holy ſcriptures. For if they be Sorboniſts that ſay, Vita aelerna eſt ſtipendium iuſtitiae,
               Al the Prophetes, Euangeliſts & Apoſtles were Sorboniſts by M. W. iudgment. or vvhich is the ſelfe ſame, Vita aeterna eſt merces bonorum operum, then not only S. Auſtin is a Sorboniſt, vvhich to ſay perhaps you ſtreine not greatly (for in this place ſo you cal vs in word, S. Auſtin in deede) but long before him the Prophetes were egregious Sorboniſts, in whom both in ſenſe and word, this propoſition is cōmonly founde. Prou. 11. v. 18. c. 24. v. 12 Sap. 5.16. ca. 10.17. Eccleſia. 16.12. c. 51.38. Salomon was a Sorboniſt, Pſal. 61.12 Dauid a Sorboniſt, Eſa. 40.10. c. 62.11. Eſay a Sorboniſt, Ierem. 31.16. Ieremie a Sorboniſt, 1. Peter. 1.17. S. Peter a Sorboniſt, 2. Ioan. 8. Apoc. 2.23. c. 22.12. S. Iohn a Sorboniſt, Rom. 2.6. 1. Cor. 3.8. 2. Cor. 5.10. 2. Theſſ. 1. v. 6.7. S. Paule a notable Sorboniſt, who hath it more oft then the reſt, Mat. 5.12 c. 6.1 c. 10.41. c. 16.27. c. 20.8. c. 25. that I name not our Sauiour for honors ſake, who notwithſtanding in the goſpel, many times teacheth his Chriſtians, this Sorbonical concluſiō. But as for M.W. if he continue in this ſimplicitie or rather ſtupiditie, that he ſuppoſe eternal life not to be the ſtipēd of iuſtice or good workes, becauſe it is the grace or gift of God, I wil geue

him a quittance for euer deſeruing the name of a Sorboniſt.Sorbone a famous College in Paris. For I thinke there is ſcant any boy frequenting the Sorbone ſchole, that is ſo dul and ignorant as to doubte, but that heauen is the gift and grace of God, though he truſt to atteine it by his good workes,Shameful ignorance. I meane, that knoweth not how to reconcile theſe two propoſitions together, heauen is the ſtipend of good workes, and heauen is the gift of God: which in deede to euery lad wel catechiſed, is no harder, then it is to beleeue that the father is God, the ſonne God, and the holy Ghoſt God, & yet there is but one God: Chriſt is God, and yet Chriſt is man, our Lady was a mother, and yet a Virgin, our bodies are corruptible, and yet ſhal liue for euer, and almoſt any other article of our religion. But hereof I haue ſpoken more at large before,See before pag. 99.100. &c. to which place I refer the the reader. And this is the laſt intolerable blaſphemie vvhich M. W. hath found in the Annotations, common to vs vvith Chriſt him ſelf, and euery prophet, Apoſtle, Euangeliſt, Father, and good man, that ſince Chriſts time liued in the vnitie of his Church.
         
         
            
            THE CONCLVSION.
            
               AND thus haue I examined, and (I truſt) anſwered ſufficiently, whatſoeuer faultes M. W. hath found ether in the Teſtament of late ſet forth by vs, or the Annotations adioyned, or M. Martins booke of the Diſcouerie. vvherein I haue beſtowed ſomwhat longer time, then ether ſo ſmale a trifle required, or my ſelf at the beginning intended, partly for the more cleare defenſe of truth and fuller inſtruction of the reader, partly alſo becauſe in the diligent peruſing of his diſcourſe, his manifold errors and ouerſightes multiplied far beyond my expectatiō. And withal I vvould not haue him or his brethren ſo far deceaue them ſelues, as to ſuppoſe they may ſet forth againſt this Colledge, freely, hand ouer head what they liſt, without controle or gainſaing. For howſoeuer we be loth to ſpend our time in ſuch contentious diſputes, and gladly vvould imploy it otherwiſe to our better commoditie, yet the zeale of God, and honour of his Church, regard of truth, and loue of our countrimen, vvhom vve ſee ſo pitifully

ſeduced, and due obedience to Superiors, vvil and muſt enforce vs, to take ſome paines that vvay, though in part againſt our vvilles: eſpecially vvhen vve are prouoked by aduerſaries ſo inſolent and ful of brauerie in vvordes, and the ſame, moſt feeble, impotent, & vnable to performe any thing in deedes, and therefore lying verie open to receaue a blovv of any ſcholer, be he neuer ſo meane and indifferent.
            And albeit no heretical opinion can lightly be defended vvithout many foule ſhiftes and inconueniences, yet M.VV.M. W. hath vndertaken hard matters to defend. hath brought him ſelf vvithin harder ſtraightes thē any other, by reaſon of moſt ſtraunge paradoxes, which he hath taken vpon him to maintayne. for vvhat man bearing the name of a Chriſtian, vvere he othervviſe as excellent as euer vvas Cicero or Demoſthenes, can poſsibly without increaſe of infinite abſurdities, defend Luther againſt the Apoſtle S. Iames,Chap. 1. Chap. 10. Chap. 5. Beza againſt the Euangeliſt S. Luke, Illyricus againſt S. Cyprian, and al fathers of the primitiue Church. And which in truth is more falſe & wicked,M▪ Iewels chalenge, Chap. 7. more vnreaſonable and vnpoſſible then the reſt, M▪ Iewels Challenge made at

Paules croſſe againſt al men liuing, which long ſince is knowē for a mere ſhameles, proud, lying vaunt, to Catholike and Proteſtant, Lutheran and Zuinglian, learned and vnlearned, lippis & tonſoribus: and in effect notified for ſuch, by publike proclamation of the prince and Realme.
            And therefore if he finde in this treatiſe ſome wordes more ſharpe & rough thē he is vſed to heare, let him attribute that not to hatred of his perſon, whom I neuer ſaw, and for whoſe good and amendmēt in Chriſt, God is my witnes, I would refuſe no paynes, & how ſoone I may fall into his handes our Lord knoweth, but to hatred of his hereſie, and his immoderate heate & oſtentatiō vttered to colour and ſaue ſuch things as can neuer ſtand, but with open iniurie of Chriſt, diſgrace of his Apoſtles, and ruine of Chriſtian religion.
            Our aduerſaries (Chriſtian reader) are now proceeded beyond their ordinarie, beyond that which at firſt they pretended.The proceeding of our aduerſaries. They pleade not now for ſcripture againſt fathers, for the liuelie word of the Lord againſt mans traditions, which a few yeres ſithence was their common ſonge, they are

gone far beyond that note, and oppoſe them ſelues not againſt S. Hierom, S. Auſtin, S. Gregorie, but againſt the ſelf ſame ſcripture, the ſelf fame liuelie word which they ſeemed ſo to honor, againſt S. Iames, S. Paule, S. Luke, againſt the Apoſtles, and Euangeliſtes, againſt the verie Goſpel of our Sauiour. And what can be their next ſteppe but to cal Chriſt him ſelf in queſtion, to doubt whether he be the true Meſſias and redeemer of the world?Many of thē are proceeded thus far already. See the prface pa. 65.66. &c And if any of their brethren do moue that doubt (as infinite there be that do, yea that denie it vtterly) what way in the world remayneth for profe thereof, al other authoritie beſides the written word, as the old Fathers, Coūcels, Tradition, Church, being by theſe men quite abandoned, and novv the vvritten vvord it ſelf being reiected as far? and vvhat Chriſtian talking of theſe matters, and ſeing theſe horrible miſcheefes not intended in thought, ſurmiſes, cogitations, and ſecret vvhiſperings, but practiſed and put in vre by vvriting, defenſes, publike bookes, open diſputations, manifeſt violences, and moſt vniuſt murtherings of thoſe which withſtand it, who I ſay, though

he were as pacient as Iob, and as voyd of galle as the doue, but would be moued?2. Cor. 4. 
               Scriptū eſt (ſaith the Apoſtle) credidi, propter quod locutus ſum, et nos credimus, propter quod et loquimur. It is vvritten, I haue beleeued, and therefore I ſpeake, & vve alſo beleeue conſtantly & therefore we ſpeake boldy. And as ſaith S. Hierom,Hieron. ad Theophilū contra errores Ioannis Hieroſ. Nicep. li. 8. cap. 42. Mar. 2. v. 11. 
               Quod ſimpliciter creditur, ſimpliciter confitendum eſt. And if Spiridion that reuerend and auncient Biſhop, in a great aſſemblie of Biſhops were wel allowed, for that he ſharply rebuked in publike audience, an other in learning his ſuperior, in vocation his equall, who in citing a text of the goſpell, altered of finenes and curioſitie one only word, and the ſame of no great moment (grabatum, into lectulum) what rigor and vehemencie of ſpeach, deſerue not they, who in Sacramentes & chief pointes of faith, in the Sacrifice, in Baptiſme, in Prieſtes,See before chap. 11. in Biſhops, in Church, in Apoſtles, in Angels, in Chriſt him ſelf, haue made moſt prophane innouations, and reduced all to the firſt ethnical termes? But of this hitherto.
            The reſt which remaineth is only touching Luther & Caluin, whom M.

W. ſingularly commendeth, wherevnto he addeth certain ordinarie wordes of courſe, concerning him ſelf and his felowes, how heroically they haue alwaies gotten the victorie ouer vs, & our forefathers.pag 31.32. Of theſe matters ſomwhat hath bene ſpoken before, and therefore here I wil not ſay much. Luther and Caluin if they were ſuch notable good men, they finde it now, & the better they were, the better it is for them. if otherwiſe, M.W. commendation ſtandeth them in ſmale ſteede. Neuertheles certain it is, both can not be ſo excellent, as he would make thē, being continually, in opinion & faith, in word and worke, in the whole trade of their lyfe and maners, ſo oppoſite,If Luther be ſa
                     •
                  ed, al they of Engliſh religion are damned. ſo contrary, ſuch deadly enemyes, as their bookes teſtifie, & the world knoweth. And M.W. doth verie vnwyſely, ſo oft and ſo painfully to range abrode in praiſe of that man,See before chap. 3. who is ſo far abhorring from him and his ſecte, that if Luther be right, they are ſurely out of the way, if Luther be a reſtorer of the goſpel, they are enemies and deſtroyers of the goſpel, if Luther be in heauen, they continuing as they do, are certain of hel. For ſo Luther euery where

pronounceth of them.
            As for the other, I meane that vulgar bragging and boaſting, it proueth not much. It is a common itching humour of moſt kind of heretikes. Omnium haereticorum quaſiregularis eſt iſta teme ritas ſaith S.Aug. epi. 56. Auſtin. And S. Peter long before gaue it as a general marke of them,2. Pet. 2. v. 28 that they ſhal be ſuperba vanitatis loquentes, ſpeaking provvde, arrogant, & vaine thinges. Howbeit it ſeemeth in our dayes more proper in ſome ſpecial ſort to M. VV. ſect, then to any other, as iudgeth that excellent man, of whom we laſt ſpake Martin Luther,The Zuingliās proue al thing by boaſting. who reporteth of them and that by experience, that they wil ſay any thing, boaſt of any thing, confidently affirme any thing, bur proue nothing by any ſound reaſon or argument,Luther defenſ. verborum caenae fol. 405. 
               niſi gloriatione inani de certiſsima veritate, ſaue only by friuolous craking of the moſt cleare truth. And if once they fal in to that veyne, then is there no ende.Ibi. fol. 381.382. 
               In ſuis libris gloriandi finem et modum nullum faciunt. But againſt al ſuch kind of talkatiue vanitie he geueth a very general and reſolute leſſon, vvhich if I profeſſe to take from him, and commend the ſame to others, M. w. can not be offended, becauſe

he extolleh the man for ſo peerles a maiſter. And this it is.Ibid. fo. 394▪406. 
               Nemo eorum obteſtationibus et iactationibus quicquam cred at (ſaith he) Nam eos mentiri (et dupliciter mentiri) certiſsimum eſt. Let no man geue any credit to the fair ſpeaches and crakings of the Zuinglians. For moſt certaine it is that they lye and lye agayne.
            
            VVherefore (Chriſtian reader) to leaue M.VV. and returne to thee, and ſo make an ende, if thou be in iudgement Catholike, I know thou findeſt not, nor euer ſhalt finde reaſon to make thee a Proteſtant of any ſect, and leaſt of al after the Engliſh faſhion.No more reaſon to be a Zuinglian, then a Lutheran or Arrian. And if thou feele in thy ſelf any ſuch temptation, conſider aduiſedly▪ but this only, why thou ſhouldeſt encline to be of that ſide, more then to be Lutheran, a Puritan, an Anabaptiſt, a Trinitarian, and ſo furth, and thou ſhal neuer finde any probable cauſe why thou ſhouldeſt not as wel become any of theſe, as a Caluiniſt or Zuinglian. And vniuerſally to make thee deteſt all Sectes, if thou haue ſome feare of God, and regard of the iudgement to come, waygh only that which the very nature of our religion, & this treatiſe offereth to thy conſideration, and thou ſhalt eaſely

find abundant reaſon, why to reiect & forſake them al.
            Conſider the infinite difference betwene the Catholike pleading,
                  
                     •
                  nfinite dif
                  
                     ••
                  rence be
                  
                     •
                  wene the Catholike 
                     •
                  auſe and 
                     •
                  he prote
                  
                     •
                  tantes. reaſoning, and diſputing, and their perpetual wrangling, brawling, and rayling. VVe geue thee to ſtay thy ſelfe, in our time, vnitie of faith in al Chriſtiā prouinces, Churches wel gouerned and in due obedience,Church of 
                     •
                  he tyme preſent. floriſhing commō welthes quietly maintayning the doctrine which of their fathers they receaued. They geue thee infinite varietie and difference of religions, diſordered cō
               gregations, the ſheepe controling their paſtors, and ſcholers preſuming to teach their maiſters. And in the ciuil common-welth, diſobedience againſt the magiſtrate, contempt of princely authoritie, ſpoile & ruine of churches, of palaces, of al things ſacred and profane.
            In the former ages, we ſhewe thee conſent and agreement in the religion which we profeſſe,Church of the tyme paſt Biſhops, Churches, Princes, Prouinces, Peoples, al realmes Chriſtened ioyning in the ſame. They tel thee of inuiſible churches, imagined congregations, Mathematical deuiſes in the ayre, as it were Minotautes and

Hippocentaures, ſometimes chalenging to them ſelues the company of Berēgarius, VVicleff, Hus, & the like, ſometimes refuſing them as heretikes, and running per ſaltum vnto the Apoſtolical age, or the firſt 3.4. or 5. hundred yeres after Chriſt, condemning al the church folowing of ſuperſtition and Papiſtrie, and ſometimes, yea commonly condemning thoſe former ages no leſſe then the later.
            VVhen we treate of ſcriptures,Scriptures. vve geue them vnto thee ſyncerely and perfitely vvithout any cutting or paring avvay of this or that booke, or this and that peece of ſuch a booke, & al expounded vniformely by excellent Saintes, by moſt learned Doctors, by general Councels, by the moſt approued practiſe of the Catholike church in al antiquitie. They geue thee ſcriptures ſo peecemele and patchedly, that they cut of at the leaſt the third part of them, ſometimes ſentences, ſometimes peeces of chapters, ſometimes chapters, commonly entier bookes. And as for the expoſition of them, contemning al Saintes, Doctors, & Councels of antiquitie al Doctors, Fathers, and Martyrs of their

owne Congregations, they reduce the final ſcope and determination of al,Preface pa. 35.36. to This is my opinion, & this is my iudgment, and, the Doctors may not take avvay from vs our liberty to iudge of them &c.
            Conſider this intolerable wilfulnes wherevnto they are now growen, and the more they ſhew them ſelues to abhorre from al reaſon, ſtay, or moderation, the more oughteſt thou to obhorre from them. Conſider with thy ſelfe,Iudgment. that neuer the founder of any common welth, as Solon of Athenes, or Minos of Creta, was ſo brutiſh or voyd of common ſenſe, as to leaue his common welth ſo diſordered, that there ſhould be no iudges to end controuerſies, no gouernours to keepe the people in peace and tranquillitie,Neuer was there any common welth worſe ordered, thē the Church of Chriſt by the Proteſtants diuinitie. but that euery man ſhould liue according to his luſt and liking. Then how much more abominable is it for vs to imagine, that Chriſt Ieſus the eternal wiſedom of God, ſhould frame a larger common welth then euer was vnder the Sunne, diſperſed thorough al quarters & corners of the world, and yet for order & quietnes, ſhould leaue the ſame worſe policed, then was euer the leaſt citie or borough towne

whereof we reade in any ſtory. For ſo much as he bound euery one of his ſubiectes not only to liue wel, and in charitie one with an other, but alſo vnder payne of eternal damnation he bound them al to beleeue a like, and to haue the ſelfe ſame faith vnchangeably in al places, times, and ages, touching a number of articles, and yet leaft no order whereby to procure any ſuch vnitie: nay rather tooke order to driue thē into diuers & innumerable faithes, appointing ſo many ſupreme heads of churches, as there vvere ſoueraine kinges, princes, dukes, & rulers, in ſeueral kingdomes, countryes, prouinces, and cities, appointing a booke of the goſpels vvhereby they ſhould be gouerned, but leauing the expoſition of the ſame at randon in the diſcretion or rather fanſie of euery preacher and miniſter.
            Recal to memorie,No ground of the Engliſh religion. that which their owne principall writers and maiſters teach thee,See chap. 7. pag. 165. who deny not but that they leade thee an other way then any of thy forefathers wēt for theſe thouſand yeres.Chap. 4. pa. 69.70 &c. &c. 6. p. 121.122. Againe they deny not but they geue thee a faith far differing from the faith which the more auncient fathers

folowed in the firſt fiue hūdred yeres. Then whereas they praiſe vnto thee for moſt diuine and Apoſtolical, men of later memorie, thoſe who within theſe 80 yeres haue reſtored (as they cal it) the goſpel,Chap. 3. pag. 45. by thoſe mē alſo thou art earneſtly dehorted from the Sacramentarie faith, as a faith wicked, blaſphemous, and damnable. Furthermore remember that a long time they vſed to reteyne at leaſt the name and countenance of the written word, of the Goſpel, of the ſcriptures, that thoſe were altogether for them, whatſoeuer became of the Fathers, Councels, and Doctors.Chap. 1. & 2. But now that hold alſo haue they geuen ouer, cōfeſsing thereby the ſcriptures to be as plainly againſt thē as the reſt. And with what conſcience or reaſon, can any man folow ſuch blind guydes as theſe are, who profeſſe them ſelfes to folow none, but to be at plaine defiance with all Fathers and Churches of this later thouſand yeres, with al Fathers and Churches of the other fiue hundred yeres, and with the ſacred ſcriptures and Goſpel of Chriſt it ſelf? whom for theſe & other reaſons their owne doctors, maiſters, and brethren, condemne as heretikes moſt

wicked and ſacrilegious.
            God indue thee with his ſpirite, and ſend thee of his grace, that thou maiſt take the right way and folow it, that thou maiſt renounce al ſectes & hereſies, and become a true member of Chriſtes Catholike Church, without which there is no ſanctification of the holy Ghoſt, no remiſsion of ſinnes, and conſequently no hope of the fauour of God, no hope of life eternal.
            LAVS DEO.
         
      
      
         
            
            A GENERAL TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL THINGES conteyned in this booke.
            
               A
               
                  ACADEMIKES, a ſect of Proteſtants. page 279. their beleefe. pa. 280.
               
                  Antinomi, a ſecte of Proteſtāts. pa. 411.
               M. W. inuectiue againſt the Annotations of the nevv Teſtament. page 476. The ſumme thereof. pa. 477.
               
                  Annotations of the new Teſtament, vvhat they cōteine. pa. 484.485. what fault M.W. findeth in them. 484.491.
               Blaſphemie in the Annotations touching Chriſtes Prieſthod. pa. 528.529. Anſvvered. 530. vſque ad 542. blaſphemie touching merite of vvorkes. pa. 543. anſvvered, 544 &c.
               Hovv the Proteſtants fel to cal the Pope of Rome Antichriſt. in praef. pa. 42. M. W. knovveth not vvel vvhat that Antichriſt is, againſt vvhom he vvriteth. Ibid. pa. 4. The abſurditie of that aſſertion. Ibid. pa. 4. The impoſsibilitie of that opinion. 52.53.54. The end of that doctrine. 72.73.
               
                  Arguments ridiculous made by M.

W. and attributed to vs. pa. 497.498.499.502.504.510.511.513. ſuch arguments tend to make a mockerie of al faith. 516.517.521.522.523.
               
                  S. Leo the great, called Antichriſt by Beza. pa. 155.
               The firſt Apoſtles of our nation were Papistes and Maſsing priestes by the cōfeſsion of our aduerſaries. p. 165.166.
               
                  Auncient archheretikes the proteſtants forefathers in ſundrie partes of their faith. pa. 31.32.
               
                  S. Athanaſius called Sathanaſius by the heretikes. pa. 84.
               
                  S. Austin called a blind buſſard. pa. 166
               
                  S. Austin moſt filthily abuſed and mangled by the Sacramentaries. pa. 166.177. S. Austin a priest. 65. S. Austin & S. Hierom old papiſtes. 121.
            
            
               B
               
                  BEza a fierbrand of ſedition. pa. 231.
               VVriters againſt him. pa. 232. He correcteth S. Luke and our Sauiour. 233.234.236.241. and is defended by M. VV. in ſo doing. 236.237. His reaſons. 238.239. Refuted ibid. et 240.241. Refuted long ago by Luther. 257.258. how he correcteth the new Teſtament. 260.261. Bezaes fault in excuſable

for ought M. VV. ether hath ſaid, or can ſay. 250. He doubteth of a part of S. Iohns goſpel. 363.364. He furthereth the Anabaptiſtes againſt Chriſtes incarnation of the B. virgin. 368.369. See Tranſlation of ſcripture.
               
               
                  Bible-beaters pa. 400.
               
                  The Bible neuer ſo mangled by any as by the proteſtants. 400.401. Their bible is no bible. 404.405. See Scriptures.
               
               Ceremonies in Baptiſme pa. 504.505.
            
            
               C
               
                  Catholike doctrine vnpoſsible to be ouercome by any hereſie, leaſt of al by this of our time. pa. 41.
               The name Catholike, not applicable to the Engliſh religion. praef. 87.88.
               
                  Caluin condemneth the auncient fathers for approuing Melchiſedecs ſacrifice. pa. 60.61.
               
                  Caluin for the real preſence. pa. 223.
               
                  Caroloſtadius expoſition of Chriſtes wordes, Hoc eſt corpus meum. pa. 254. allovved by Zuinglius. 255.
               
                  Caſtalios tranſlation of the Teſtament. much commended by the proteſtants. pa. 380. His diſcours that Chriſt is not the Meſsias. praef. pa. 67.68.
               
                  The Church catholike after Chriſtes time is euer populous and ſpread in many nations. pa. 350. et praef. pa. 62.63. She is the ground of al faith. 442. built vpō a rocke vnmoueable. 479. No good worke or martyrdom profiteth to ſaluation out of the Catholike Church. 116.117. Infinite difference betvvene the Catholike cauſe and the Proteſtante. pa. 556.557.558.
               No ſtay in faith, out of the Catholike Church praef. pa. 24.
               To ſay that the vvhole Church hath fayled, is to deny Chriſtes incarnation. pref. p. 56.57▪58.59. to make him a lyer. ib. 66.67. to deny him to be the true Meſsias. ib. 68.69.70.71.
               The inuiſible Church a poetical fanſie pref. pa. 60. refelled by Melanchton. 60.61. by Caluin, Oecolampadius, and others. 62.63.64. the Proteſtants ſenſibly cōtradict them ſelues in deuiſing it. 64.65
               The foundation of the Engliſh Proteſtant church. pa 480.481.482. The antiquitie thereof. 524. It is ful of Atheiſtes. 410.
               
                  S. Chryſoſtom for the real preſence. p. 188.208.215.217.218. his place comparing Chriſt vvith Elias. pa. 207. It proueth

inuincibly the real preſence. a pa. 204. vſque ad 214.
               
                  S. Chryſoſt. for the ſacrifice. pa. 214.215. He is almoſt as ful of lies as words, by the proteſtants doctrine pa. 227.
               
                  S. Ciril for the real preſence. p. 198.199.200.
            
            
               D
               S. Damaſcene for the real preſence. pa. 201.202.
               
                  Dauid George vpon vvhat ground he denied Chriſt. pref. pa. 66.
               
                  Defendere is vvel tranſlated to reuenge pa. 464.465.466.467.
               
                  The Doctors of the primitiue Church condemned by euery priuate ſectarie in that vvherein they gain ſay his hereſie. pa. 82.83. by the Zuinglians for approuing the ſacrifice of Melchiſedech. pa. 60. and Maſſe pa. 69.70.71.72. and for diſallowing the mariage of prieſtes and votaries▪ 83. by the Puritanes for allovving holydaies in the honour of Chriſt & his Saintes. 84. by the Trinitarians for acknovvledging the B. Trinitie. 84. by the Lutherans for denying the Vbiquetie of Chriſts body. 85. by M. W. for their doctrine of penance and vvorkes. 82.11
                     •
                  . and for ſayng that

Antichriſt is one man. pref. pa. 44.45. See vvorkes.
               
            
            
               E
               
                  Elias cloke & the Zuinglians ſupper compared together. pa. 212.213.
               
                  Elias ſhal come before the day of iudgment. pa. 494.495.
               
                  Engliſh vvriters. 478. their maner of vvriting. 284.285.475. and diſputing 477. more abſurd then others. pref. pa. 6.7.
               Thoſe of the Engliſh religion are not Proteſtants. pref. pa. 88. they are properly called Zuinglians or Sacramentaries. ibi. 89.90.91. by vvhat names they cal them ſelues. praef. pa. 91. hovv they are called by Acte of parlament. ibi. 21.
            
            
               F
               The true meaning of Only faith iuſtifying. pa. 280.411.412. Libertiniſme the end thereof. 127.128.
               The nature of true Chriſtian faith. pa. 517.518.519. hovv one part of faith is applied to the confirmation of an other. 521.
               Eccleſiaſtical maner of faſting commeth from Chriſt and his Apoſtles. pa. 89.90.
               
                  The Zuinglians figure in Chriſts wordes touching the ſacrament pa▪ 251. The figure of the Catholikes ib. infinite difference betvvene theſe tvvo. 252.253.254.255.
               
                  Freevvil. pa. 509.
            
            
               G
               
                  Grace hindereth nothing the merite of workes. pag. 102.103.
               To ſay, God is the author of ſynne, is to ſay, God is an Idol, or a deuil. pa 451. The proteſtants ſay ſo. 451.453 454.
               
                  S. Gregorie much prayſed by the Proteſtantes. pag. 158. much rayled at by the Proteſtantes. 164. A booke written againſt him by Vergerius. 165. S. Gregorie a prieſt, without al reaſon made miniſter by M. Iewel. 164.
               The Greeke Testament more aduantageable for the Catholikes then the common latin pa▪ 283.284. Our common latin Teſtament more pure then the greeke now extant. 361.362.363. The greeke Teſtament now differeth much from the old. 363.364. Additions raſhly made to the greeke. 365.366.367. Parcels of importance left out of the greeke. 367.368.369.370.
            
            
               
               H
               
                  HEauen is of grace & vvorkes. pa. 104.105.106.107▪ 544.545. Of mercy and iuſtice. 105.106▪ 107.108.109.
               
                  Heauen muſt receaue Chriſt, Act. 3. v▪ 21 maketh nothing againſt Chriſts preſence in the ſacrament. pa. 179.180.181.193. handled at large, a pag. 170. vſque ad 175.
               
                  S. Paule to the Hebrevves as much doubted of in the primitiue church, as the epiſtle of S. Iames. pa. 38.39.
               The Apoſtles cited not ſcripture alwaies according to the hebrue pa. 287.288.289. Bookes of ſcripture written in hebrue, loſt. 290.
               S. Hierom preferring the hebrue before the latin in his time, iuſtifieth not the hebrue of our time. pa. 297.337. More probable, that the hebrue hath bene corrupted then the latin. pa. 297.298.299.300.
               
                  Corruptions in the hebrue pa. 302. in Iſai againſt Chriſts diuinitie. 303. confeſſed by Luther. 304. cōfeſſed by Lyra. 306. Item in Ieremie. 307. confeſſed and proued by Lyra. 308.309. in Iſai againſt Chriſts paſsion. 310.311. confeſſed by Luther. 312.313. item in the pſalmes. 355. folowed by the Tigurine Tranſlators.

358. and Bucer. 357. item in Daniel. 313. General reaſons why the hebrue text can not be ſo ſincere as the heretikes pretend. 317.318. &c.
               Many bookes of the Prophetes, and hiſtories of the old Teſtament, loſt. pa. 317.318.
               Great difference in the hebrue, by miſtaking one letter for an other. pa. 322.323.325.
               That the hebrue bibles are faultie, confeſſed by Caſtalio. pa. 326.327. by D. Humfrey. 327. by Conradus Pellicanus. 327. It is a Iewiſh opinion to thinke them altogether faultles. 327. They haue great diuerſitie of reading. 331.332. ſomewhat wanteth in them. 332.333.
               Although S. Hierom appealed from the latin to the hebrue, yet the like reaſon is not now. pa. 333.334. He confeſſeth and proueth the hebrue to be faultie. 334.335.336.
               An argument commonly made for the puritie of the hebrue. pa. 338.339. anſwered. 339 340. &c.
               S. Iuſtine proueth the Iewes to haue corrupted their bible. pa. 341.342.343.344.
               Hebrue knowledge much aduaunced

by Catholikes. pa. 352.440.
               The hebrue tonge much ſubiect to cauilling. pa. 431.432.433. See Rabbines.
               
               A man muſt haue a ſetled faith before he confer greeke and hebrue textes. pa. 441.442. beſt Hebritians are not beſt Chriſtians. pa. 441. our firſt Apoſtles planted perfite chriſtianitie without hebrue. pa. 345.
               Heretikes generally geuen to ſcorning▪ pa. 511.
               S. Hierom condemned as ignorant of al diuinitie. pa. 371.
            
            
               I
               S. Iames epiſtle refuſed by Luther, Lutherans, & Zuinglians. pa. 8.9.10.11.12. et 17.22.23. Caluin mangleth it. 288.289.
               
                  M. Ievvels challenge. pa. 133.138. The true image thereof. 133. vſque ad 138. It is grounded vpon no reaſon or learning. 138.139.140.141. It cōtaineth in effect only three articles, the primacie of the Sea Apoſtolike, the real preſence, and the ſacrifice. 133.136.137.138. See of them in their ſeueral places.
               
                  M. Ievvels paſsing vanitie in bragging and lying▪ pa. 460. his maner of anſvvering

D. Harding. pref. 75.76.
               Reuerence done to the name of Ieſus. pa. 513.514.515.
               
                  The Ievves corrupt the text of ſcripture. pa. 304. in deſpite of Chriſtians. 314.329. negligent in conſeruing their ſcriptures 328.329. their malice againſt the Sea of Rome. 329.330. Very probable that Chriſt reprehended them for corrupting the ſcripture. 339. See Hebrue.
               
               
                  S. Iohn Baptiſt liued a monaſtical life. pa. 492.
            
            
               K
               That the vviſe men vvhich came to worſhip Chriſt, were kings. pa. 485. vſque ad 489. that they vvere three. 489. 490. their names. 490.491.
            
            
               L
               S. Lukes goſpel called in queſtion. pa. 27.28.29.32.
               
                  Luthers vvorkes altered and corrupted by the Lutherans. pa. 5▪6.13. by the Caluiniſts. 7. He denieth S. Iames epiſtle. p. 11. his immoderate bragging. 42. his extreme hatred of the Sacramentaries. 43.44.45.46. his iudgment of their religion. 52.53.483. he refuſeth their bibles. 45. ſingularly honoured by the Engliſh church. 18.191. preferred

by M. W. before al doctors. 47. moſt abſurdly. 48.50. He derideth the Zuinglians fond arguments. 258.
               
                  Luther a ſhameful corrupter of ſcripture. 377.378.
               
                  Lucians true hiſtories. praef. pa. 4.5.
            
            
               M
               Heretical martyrs damned. pa. 117.
               
                  S. Matthevv vvrote his goſpel in hebrue. pa. 290. the proteſtants hold the greeke tranſlatiō more autentical. 291.
               The proteſtants reaſon againſt the Machabees, is as forcible againſt S. Luke & S. Paul. 506.507.508.
               
                  Melchiſedech did ſacrifice. pa. 57. graū
                  ted by M. W. denied by al other proteſtants. pa. 58.59.60. acknovvleged by the auncient fathers 60. vvhy not expreſſed by the Apoſtle. 61.537. &c.
               
                  Melanchthon for the real preſence. pa. 190.
               
                  Merite of vvorkes. See in Heauen, and vvorkes.
               
            
            
               N
               
                  Noueltie of vvords daungerous in Chriſtian religion. pa. 266.267. exemplified. 268.269. it induceth contempt

of faith. 270. and leadeth to paganiſme 276.277.278.
            
            
               O
               
                  Only faith. See Faith.
               
            
            
               P
               
                  Penance what it is by the Proteſtants doctrine. 86.90.91. It reiecteth external workes of faſting & diſcipline. ibid. which are required by the ſcripture. 87.88.89▪90. by S. Cypian and the primitiue church. 124.125. the Catholike doctrine touching the value of them 92. the Proteſtantes contradictory argument againſt them. 91. 93.94.
               
                  S. Peters being at Roome denyed moſt abſurdly. pa. 130.131.132. his primacie. 498.510.
               
                  Pilgrimage to holy places. pa. 502. 503.512.513.
               
                  Primacie of the Romane Sea proued euidently by thoſe fathers, whom M. Iewel nameth his maiſters to the contrary. pa. 143. by Anacletus and Xyſtus. 143.144. by S. Leo 146 147. S. Leo gouerneth in al partes of Chriſtē
                  dom. 147.148.149. his authoritie ouer the biſhop of Conſtantinople. 148.

he ſummoneth general Councels. 152. he is head of them. 153. no lawful Councel without his approbation. 152. This primacie is grounded vpon Chriſtes words and the Apoſtles ordinance. 143.144.153.
               S. Gregorie accompteth the Romane Church, head of al other. pa. 156.158. his authoritie ouer the biſhop of Conſtantinople. 156. ouer the biſhops of Europe, Aſia, and Africa. 156.157. 158.162.163.
               The Proteſtants common obiection taken out of S. Gregorie, anſwered. pa. 159.160.161.162. the name vniuerſal, in what ſort and ſenſe diſliked by S. Gregorie. pa. 160.161.163.
               
                  Prieſtes properly ſo called were appointed by Chriſt. pa. 64. S. Auſtin ſuch a prieſt. 64.65.66. So was S. Leo and S. Hierom. 69. The church of Chriſt was neuer ruled but by ſuch prieſts. 67.68.69. Such were the orderers of our Eccleſiaſtical ſtate, and builders of our churches in England. 68.
               S. Paules diſcourſe of Christs eternall prieſthod Hebr. 7. maketh nothing againſt the prieſthod of the church. pag. 74. vſque ad 79.
               
                  The name of Proteſtants. praef. pa. 88.90. It agreeth not properly to our Engliſh goſpellers. ibi. In their faith there is no ſtay or certaintie. praef. pa. 7.24.37. Exemplified by the Supremacie of princes. ibid 9.10. by baptiſme. 11.12. Confirmation. 13. Chriſts deſcending into hel. 14. Chriſts diuinitie. 14.15▪ Rebellion againſt princes. 15.16. Regimēt of women. 18. great difference in their Communion bookes. 11.12.13. the diuers chaunges of religion in England ſince the time of ſchiſme. 20.21.22.
               In the Protestants vvriting and disputing there is no ground. pref pa. 8. exemplified by their refuſal of ſcriptures. ibid. pa. 26. Apoſtolical Traditions and general Councels. ibi. Auncient fathers. 27. Apoſtles & Doctors of their owne. 28.29.30. Martirs and whole Churches of their owne. 30.31.32. They reduce al to priuate fanſie. 35.36.37.38. They paſſe the auncient heretikes in denial of al things. pa. 38.39. their manifold Popes. 33.34.
               
                  The forefathers of the Protestants church. pa. 349. of whom they muſt looke for the true ſcripture. 348.351. a true confeſsion of a principal proteſtant. 407. their churches voyd of al truth and

knowledge. 407.408. they perſwade Atheiſme by ſcripture. 408.409. al their preaching and writing tendeth therevnto. 410.411.428. their vaunting of the cleare light of the goſpel ſenſibly refuted. 408.
               The Proteſtants maner of anſvvering the Catholikes. pag. 412. They deny al Doctors. 413. They deny ſundry partes of ſcripture. 413.414. They pretend the greeke. 415. They falſely tranſlate the greeke. 416. They refuſe the ordinary ſenſe of the greeke. 418. They leaue & corrupte the greeke. 420. vſq. ad 427. They interprete at pleaſure greeke, latin, and euerie tong els. 429.430. their ſtraunge interpretations of ſcripture. pa. 324.382.429.430.424. of fathers. 217. Their maner of arguing. 225. of one figuratiue ſpeach, they conclude as many as they liſt. ibi. et. 226. The foly thereof. 226.251.252.
               The agrement betwene the Proteſtants of our time and old heretikes. pa. 430.431. they are moſt deſyrous of noueltie. 455.456.457. they mocke at the Prophetes and ſundry writers of ſcripture. 458. their preaching a verie mockery of ſcripture. 458.459. they proceede to infidelitie. pa. 2.3.

559.560. et pref. pa. 21.22. they make thēſelues ſupreme iudges of ſcripture & al other authoritie. pa. 54 & pref. p. 19 20. &c. they are obſtinate in what ſoeuer abſurditie they once take. 237. they honour the Iewes more thē S. Paul. 325 326. or the Church of Chriſt. 353. like to the Iewes in malice againſt the Sea of Rome. 329.330.331. they vſe more reuerence to the images of beaſtes thē of Chriſt. 514.515. Be they neuer ſo cō
                  trarie, they are all aſſured of the truth. pref. 32.
               
                  The Protestants allow all Sectes to rebelle for their ſeueral hereſies. pref. pag. 16.17.
            
            
               R
               The Rabbines of the Ievves not to be folowed in the ſenſe of the hebrue wordes. pa. 434. the Proteſtants tranſlating after them tranſlate wickedly. 434.435. They corrupt the text of ſcripture by miſpoynting it. 314.315.
               Power to Remitte ſinnes geuen to the Engliſh miniſters by act of Parlament. pa. 79.80.
               M. Iewels chalenge touching the real preſence artic. 5. anſwered pa. 182. vſque ad 196, the Zuinglians moſt vſual and

popular argument againſt it. 178. anſwered at large. 179. &c. the firſt heretikes of the Engliſh church approued it. 182. Many things in ſcripture as vncredible as that. 183.184.186. the Zuinglians argument againſt the ſacrament is the roote of Paganiſme. 184.185.193.199. It ioynerh them to the Anabaptiſtes, Ebionites, & Neſtorians. 185.187. It is reiected by the auncient Fathers. 188.198.199. Condemned by the Lutherans 189.190. anſwered at large by Luther. 191.192. he ſuppoſeth it to proceede rather from Turkes then Chriſtians. 194.195.
               In the ſacramēt, al humane & philoſophical reaſon muſt yelde to faith. p. 188.189.190.192.198.199.201.202. Scriptures and fathers for the real preſence. S. Luke. 235.236. Ieremie. 342.343. S. Chriſoſtom & S. Leo. 238. S. Ciril. 200.
               Heretikes for the real preſence. Melanchthon. 190. Weſtphalus. 190.191. Luther. 221. Caluin. 223.
               The ground of the Sacramentarie diuinitie. p. 191. The Sacramentaries, infidels. 193. Infidels, their forefathers in mocking Chriſtians for their beleefe in the ſacrament. 222. how they deale with the fathers. 193.194. no one father

euer was of their religiō. 167. See more in Supper.
               
               The ſacrament a figure ioyned with the veritie. pa. 223.224.
               The Romane Church conſtant in holding faſt the doctrine once deliuered. pa. 300.301. pure for ſix hundred yeres after Chriſt. in pref. pa. 47. It can not be proued, that ſhe euer changed her faith. ibid. 47.48.49.55.56.
            
            
               S
               Chriſt ſacrificed at his laſt ſupper. pa. 62. the ſacrifice of the Church deduced thence. 62.63. ſacrifice offered by S. Auſtin for the dead. 66. ſacrifice for the dead and in the honour of Saints was vſual in the primitiue church. 70.71. Chriſt a prieſt in reſpect of the churches ſacrifice. 530.531.532. In the church we ſee Chriſt ſacrificed. 217 218.219.220. True ſacrifice in the church. 214.215.229.230.
               Melchiſedechs ſacrifice. See Melchiſedech.
               M. Ievvels chalenge touching the ſacrifice artic. 17. anſvvered by the chiefe proteſtants. pa. 70.71.72.
               
                  Saintes heare our praiers. pa. 500.501.
               Sundry bookes & partes of ſcripture denied

by the proteſtants. pa. 26. vſque ad 32. et 401.402. they refuſing the authoritie of the church, beleeue not the ſcripture. 33.34.35.36. they open the vvay for euery man to deny vvhat he liſteth. 402.403. A part of S. Iohns goſpel doubted of. 364. S. Peters ſecond epiſtle. 441.415. the epiſtle to the Hebrues denied. ibidem. See S. Iames. S. Luke. ſcripture made ridiculous, vvhē it commeth to profane handeling. 498. ſomevvhat is the vvord of God beſides ſcripture. 36.37.
               
                  Scripture corrupted by heretikes in fauour of their hereſies. 176.177. in Geneſ. againſt the ſacrifice. pag. 59.60. in S. Peter againſt freevvil and good vvorkes. 416 417. Chriſts vvordes in S. Luke, notably corrupted for the ſame purpoſe. 420.421.422. Eſai tranſlated deteſtably agaiſtn Chriſts incarnation. 439. S. Peter corrupted to make God the author of ſinne. 451.452.453.455. S. Paul againſt Chriſts diuinitie. 315. Act. 3. againſt the real preſence. 174.179.180. againſt the immortalitie of the ſoule. 273.274. ſcripture falſly interpreted by heretikes, is the vvord of the Deuil. 180.50.
               The proteſtāts by their exāple make the text of ſcripture very vncertaine. pa.

241.242.243. one yere canonical, the next yere not. 366. It is not to be altered vpon one doctors reading. 244.245. the partialitie of heretikes chooſing preciſely one or other reading, becauſe it beſt ſerueth their hereſie. 246.247.248.249. they apply ſcripture to proue any thing be it neuer ſo vnreaſonable. 255. to proue Atheiſme 408.409.
               
                  Bookes of ſcripture faithfully kept by the church though the hebrue text be falſe. 346.347. heretikes may not preſcribe the church in what tonge to keepe them. 347.348.
               
                  Stancarus iudgement of the principal Proteſtant writers. pa. 96.97.
               The Septuaginta interpreters condemned by Luther. pa. 305.
               The Zuinglians true opinion of their Supper. p. 209. it differeth nothing from common breakfaſts. 209.210.211.213. it is no more the body of Chriſt, then a paynted ſcutchion is king of France. 210. only bread. 210.214.222. the Supper of the Sacramentaries hath no vſe of Chriſts wordes. 257. their arguments againſt the words of Chriſt in S. Luke, foretold & anſwered by Luther. 258.259.
            
            
               
               T
               
                  Tradition of the Church, neceſſary. pa. 36. S. Hierom author of the common Tranſlation of the nevv Testament vſed in the Church. p. 294.295. by appointemēt of Pope Damaſus. 294. it is approued by the Councel of Trent. 281.389. It agreeth with the auncient greeke. 372.373. commended for ſynceritie, by the Proteſtant writers. 374.375. defended by them & preferred before al nevv. 383.387.388.389. preferred before the greeke. 393. not to be corrected by the reading of ſome doctor. 394.395. M.W. argument againſt the ſame. 391.392. the anſwere. 392.393. &c.
               
                  Engliſh tranſlations of the nevv Teſtament al approued by M.W. pa. 262. his wickednes therein. 263.264. Such tranſlations leade men to Atheiſme. 271. & are condemned by the learned Proteſtants. 271.272.273.274.275.436. for Hel they trāſlate Graue, moſt wickedly. 272. thereby mouing men to thinke that the ſoule is mortal. 273.274. A briefe ſūme of damnable faultes cōmitted by thoſe tranſlators. 278.279. Engliſh Tranſlations made in ſchiſme, al naught. 385. Engliſh Tranſlations leaue the hebrue. 312. differ notably one from an other. 321.
               
                  
                  Protestante Tranſlations of the new Teſtament all partial in fauour of their peculiar hereſies. pag. 365. Luthers condemned by Zuinglius. 376.377.378. Al Zuinglian tranſlations condemned by Luther. 378.379. that of Baſile condemned by Beza. 379. item Caſtalios. 380. Caluins corrupteth the text. 381. Bezaes moſt variable and vvorſt of al other. 381.382.383.384. he then moſt buſily corrupteth ſcripture, vvhen it is moſt to the diſhonour of Chriſt. 384.385.
               M. W. inuectiue againſt the late Catholike tranſlation of the new Teſtament 444. it is mere hiſtrionical 445.446.448. in condemning it, he reproueth himſelf. 447.454.455. the hypocriſie of his accuſation. 449.450. Notable bragging and lying. 459.460.461. how weakely he iuſtifieth his inuectiue. 462.463. he obiecteth only two faults. 263.264. both falſe, and if they were true, of no importance, 464.470.472.473. What they are in particular. 464. his vnconſcionable dealing 472.473.
               What is principally requiſite in a Tranſlator of ſcripture. pa. 371.372.375.
               
                  Tranſlations more autentical then the original. pa. 290.291.306.
            
            
               
               V
               Of the name Vniuerſali
                        •
                     , See Primacie.
               
            
            
               W
               Arguments that Good vvorkes are not the cauſe of ſaluation. pa. 95. refuted at large. 99.100.101. &c.
               
                  Good vvorkes in Chriſtians are cauſe of ſaluation. pa. 99.100. vſque ad 106. & 418.421.422.423. as euil workes are cauſe of damnation. 104.105.106.107. See Heauen.
               
               
                  Good vvorkes are in no reſpect neceſſary to ſaluation by the Proteſtants doctrine. pa. 110.111.113. their argumentes prouing the ſame. 112.113.
               The fathers doctrine touching good vvorkes ſet downe by M. W. pa. 115. the wickednes thereof. 116.118.119. they are therefore condemned by Luther as verie Iewes. 120.121.122.
               M.W. notable wrangling. pa. 14.15. his manifold ouerſights. 97.98. he vnderſtandeth not the Proteſtants doctrine of only faith. 109. he commonly contradicteth him ſelf. 23.25.114.115.123.126.319. he proueth the Engliſh miniſters to be Antichriſts for ſayng Communion. 127.128. how fondly he anſwereth a place of S. Chryſoſt. 204.206.211.212. his ſtraunge aſſertion, that

only the hebrue text is ſcripture. 286.287. Refuted. 287.288.289. he calleth S. Auſtin a Sorbonist for his doctrine touching the value of good workes. p. 543.545.546. and by like reaſon al the Apoſtles and Prophetes. pag. 545.546. his arrogancie in condemning al doctors. 495.496. et praef. pag. 44.45. The ſumme of his anſwering D. Sanders conſiſteth partly in preferring him ſelf before al other, pref. pa. 42. ad 51. partly in leauing out the ſubſtance of D.S. arguments. ibid. pa. 75. vſque ad 81.
            
            
               Z
               
                  Zuinglius the Apoſtle of the Engliſh church. pref. pa. 89.90.
               
                  Zuinglians notable lyers. pag. 525.526.555. and braggers. 554. their maner of writing. pref. pa. 81.82.
            
         
         
            
            The faultes correct thus.
            Pa. 4, linea 13. for charged, reade charging. Ibidem in many copies wanteth a marginal note. Contra Campian. pag. 11.
            Pa. 41, li. 26. Eſtaticus, reade Ecſtaticus.
            Pa. 85. lin. 6. Chriſt, reade Chriſtes.
            Pa. 145. lin. 18. forth, reade forth.
            Pa. 195. l. 17. argumenr, reade argument.
            Pa. 328. li. 8. for the two hebrew letters 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , reade 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , where alſo in ſome few examples, the later hebrue word is diuided, which ſhould be ioyned.
            Some other faultes there are of like qualitie, eſpecially of one letter for an other, as ſ for f, and r for t, and in one place of ſome copies, is vvhich for vvhich is, al which, conſidering the ordinarie difficulties of printing, where ſtraungers are the workers, cōpoſitors, & correctors, (beſides other extraordinarie miſhaps) I truſt the Reader of his curteſie wil eaſely pardon. Whom I requeſt, if by reading hereof, he fynde ought for the encreaſe of his faith towardes Chriſt and his Church Catholike, euen for loue of the ſame Chriſt and Church, to help me with his prayer.
            FINIS.
         
      
   