
      
         
            
            
            ¶A ſhort Diſcourſe of mans fatall
end with an vnfaygned, Commendation of the worthineſſe
of Syr Nicholas Bacon, Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seale of
England: Who diſceaſed the xx. day of February. 1578.
            
            
               
                  ❧All fleſhe is graſſe,
                     1. Peter. 1
                   and all the glory of man is as the flower of
graſſe,
                     Iames. 1.
                   the graſſe wythereth, and the flower falleth away, but the
worde of the Lorde endureth for euer.
                     Sira. 14.
                  
               
               
                  ❧Chriſt is to vs lyfe,
                     Philip. 1.
                   and death to vs aduauntage.
            
            
               
                  SInce God hath fyxt our dayes and yeares,Sira. 17. to liue and eke to dye,
               And takes his choice of vs his ſheepe,Ephe. 1. what wight ſhal him deny?
               But that he may without reiagge his creatures take and ſaue,Rom. 8.
               
               Yea heaue them vp,Mat. 25. yea throw thē down, from life vnto the graue:
               Reioice we then among the route,Ioh. 5. which doth this thing confeſſe,
               And pray that God may haue his will,Rom. 8. he teacheth vs no leſſe.
               And thanke him to,Sam. 12. for all his giftes, and ſeeme not for to mourne,
               For that which he hath in himſelfe,Phil. 4. ſet downe ere we were borne.
               All tymes with him is not one houre,Math. 6. to age no ſubiect is:
               All ſhall decay,Sam. 12. yea heauen and earth, ſuch power and glory is his,
               Borne all to dye,Eccle. 7. and dye we muſt, all fleſh ſhall yeelde to death,
               The promiſſe made welcome the tyme,Ephe. 1. with fayth let go this breath.
               As now of late a worthy man,2. Pet. 3. by God from hence is calde,
               Who doth not dye,Mat. 24 but lyue for aye, and in the heauens is ſtalde:
               Whoſe lyfe on earth ſo well was knowne,Iame. 1. to thoſe of thankfull mynde,
               That which he did that iuſtice had,Rom. 9. that few lyke him I fynde.
               A ſubiect true,Cor. 15. in Councell graue, in ſentence briefe and ſure,
               A mynde bedect with equity, whoſe fame ſhall aye indure.
               To ritch and poore indifferent, reſpecting iuſtice cauſe,
               To mitigate extremities, he ſought and had the lawes:
               The patron of perſwaſions and enemy to all vice,
               He feared God,Pro. 1. he loud his prince, which ſhrwde him very wiſe:
               No patch of popiſh mynde in him was euer found,Rom. 13
               
               But fauoured thoſe and helpt them to,Ioh. 3. which did the trueth expound.
               Lo this I thinke of duty right, of him thus to reporte,
               To giue that thankes which I do owe, to all ſuch worthy ſorte:
               I not deny but greater Clarkes, may pen and paynte his prayſe,
               With lofty verſe heroicall, as was in Ouids dayes.
               But tell the troth, and flatter not, but ſpeake as hart doth thinke
               A rarer man not in our dayes, nor leſſe at wrong would winke:
               Then would this worthy Bacon Knight, and Lord by Princes will,
               Whoſe body's dead,Coloſ. 3 whoſe ſoule doth lyue, and fame continewes ſtill:
               And ſhall at laſt ryſe vp againe,Rom. 12 in ſhape and perfect bliſſe,
               To take rewarde with the elect,Mat. 25. which God doth count as his.
               Vnto which hap God bring vs all,Rom. 13 when hence that we ſhall wend,
               For Gods good feare,Deu. 28. 29. 30 and honeſt lyfe, doth bring a ioyfull end.
            
            
               L. Ramſey.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧Imprinted at London for Timothy Ryder.
         
      
   