
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧A confutation
of a sermon, pronoūced by M. Iuell,
at Paules crosse, the second Sondaie
before Easter (which Catholikes
doe call Passion Sondaie) Anno
Dn̄i .M.D.I.X. By Iohn
Rastell M. of Art, and studient
in diuinitie.
            
               Miror quòd tam citò transserimini,Galat. 1. ab eo
qui vos vocauit in gratiam CHRISTI,
in aliud Euangelium. &c.
            
            
               I maruell that yow be so sone caried awaie
from hym which called yow vnto the grace
of Christ, in to an other Ghospel.
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            Mores antiqui obtineant.
            
               Lett old customes preuaile.
            
            Imprinted at Antwerp by Aegidius Diest
21. Nouemb. Anno. 1564.
CVM PRIVILEGIO.
            
         
         
            
               REgi
                  •
                Maiestatis priuilegio permissum
est Iohanni Rastello artium Magistro,
& sacrae Theologiae candidato, vtiper
aliquem 
                  •
               ypographorii admissorum impunè
ei liceat imprimi curare, & per omnes suae
ditionis regiones distrahere, librum inscriptum:
A confutation of M. Iuelles sermon.
&c. Et omnibus aliis inhibitum, ne
eundem absque eiusdem Iohannis consensu
imprimant, vel alibi impressum distrah
                  •
               t,
sub poena in priuilegio contenta. Datum
Bruxellae .xvij. Nouemb. Anno. 1564.
            
               Subsig.
Facuwez.
            
         
         
            
            A PREFACE TO THE
READER.
            
               TO testifie my duetie
and seruice,
which I owe to
the Churche, and
my countrey; and
to satisfie my frē
               des
in these quarters,
whose iudgmentes I haue not to
discredit; to confute M. Iuell in sundrie
poyntes, whose challenge ys so gloriouse
and generall; and to geue faire
warning to the negligent, that false
Prophetes doe not deceaue them; to cō
               tynue
the memorie of the challenge;
which neuer can be honestlie mainteyned;
& to moue a further expectation;
which part first shall shewe her weaknesse;
to take the present tyme of speaking,
euen as there hath ben tyme of
silēce, or recompense the formar slacknesse,

by reasonable and faithfull diligēce:
to proue that M. Iuell may be answered,
by a meane scholar in diuinitie,
that he neede not to prouoke the best
of the Catholykes, which at this daye
are anywhere lyuinge: to shewe that
all thowgh, we be kept downe and oppressed,
yet we perish not for all that,
nor be vtterlie confounded: I send that
furth now, after fower yeres, which so
long before was made by me, and I
make that now commō to frindes and
to foes, which at the first I prepared
for one frind alone, to auoyde feare of
foes. He that lyketh this, let hym thā
               ke
God, and helpe me with his praiers.
He that findeth fault, lett hym shame
the dyuele, and tell me of it hardelie.
If any iust one shall be founde, (vnseen
of me and others) I trowe, it will
be omission in leauing of some thinges
vnanswered. Yet doe I answer euerie

matter, concerninge the whole some of
it, marie I was not so diligent, as to examine
euerie witnesse. And whether
I am bound so to doe, I am not yet ful
perswaded, but euer I thowght, that
it was free, to wryte and fight, after
my fasshion. Especiallie where the
number ys great, and euerie one readie
with his weapon, so that the enemie
be beaten downe, the captaine aloweth
their labors. Yet all they dyd not strike
one waye, but as they should see
their aduantage, so would they vse or
downe right blowes, or foynes, or some
other inuētions. Some writers of these
our dayes, men of great contynuance
and studie, doe late full lode owt of
scriptures and councells, iust vpon the
pates, and backes of owr common aduersaries,
Other some be more sparer,
in alleaginge of old authorities, and rather
folowe a sensible fasshion, of reasoning,

withowt boke, against them.
Againe, some will persequute, the enemie
so narowlie: that sentence by sentence,
thei examyn his trueth and fidelitie.
but some againe, doe so thinke
vpon the cheife poynt of the question:
that, for hast sake, thei let much escape,
which perchaunse, was well worth
the noting. Lett one example stand
for all. M. Iuell here in his sermon, to
proue that the people dyd cōmunicate
and receiue togeather with the preist,
all the first six hundred yeres after
Christ: beginneth with owr Saluyor,
and cummeth to the blessed Apostle,
goinge downe by S. Clement, Denyse,
Iustine, and other fathers, vntill he
stayeth at S. Gregorie, whom yet he
rekoneth for a wittnesse. But to what
purpose and conclusion? to proue forsoth,
that sole receiuinge, ys not to be
suffered, emong Christians, bycawse he

findeth, by so manie testimonies, that,
of old tyme, there were made communions.
VVell then, goe ye to, if this
be all the matter, it ys not hard or cū
               berouse,
to geue M. Iuell an answer.
Yet trulie, he shall not be answered, after
one manner by all men, but lyke as
leisure, zeale, and lerninge, abundeth
or lacketh in any one, for the purpose:
so, more or lesse, will be browght against
hym, and he that saieth lest of
all, will yet be good inough for hym.
For the lest is this,The first maner of answeringe. to grawnt his authorities,
and onlie to denie his argument
bicawse, sole receiuinge, might
be vsed in a thowsand chappells, notwithstandinge
the dailie communion,
which was then, or may be now; ordinarilie
had in parissh Churches. On
sondaies also or solempne feastes, all
might be charged to cōmunicate▪ and
when the people on other daies are other

wise occupied, the preist, might
right well doe his office, if none but
the parishe clerke, were present to serue
hym.A second manner. But some other Catholike, is
not fullie satisfyed, by ending this matter,
so quicklie, and therefore he goeth
further, in tryinge M. Iuells places,
which serue yet vnto no purpose, although
thei were truelie alleaged.
And he obiecteth agaynst Iuell (forgetting
to call hym Maister) that the
Apostle vnto the Corinthians, meaneth
not literallie, so, as Iuell taketh hym.
For,1. Cor. 11. (Tari
                     •
                   ye, one for an other)
which are the true wordes of the Apostle,
are not properlie, (he will say)
to be referred to the Sacrament, but
those other suppers, of cōmon meates,
which then emonge the Corinthians,
were not charitablie or discreetlie ordered.
He will tell hym also, that he
mistaketh Calixtus, and would say

(perchaunce) Anacletus, and that he
speaketh, onlie of the clergie, to communicate,
and not (as M. Iuell reporteth)
generallie of all the people, and so
furth in other testimonies.A third mān
                     •
                  r. Now some
third one, will passe these two, and
shewe by manie examples, that sole receiuinge
was not vnknowē, in the best
tymes and most awncient. For which
purpose he will bringe owt, Tertulliā,Tertull. ad
                     •
                  xorem Cyp. ser. 5 de la
                     •
                  . hist. trip. li. 6. c. 44
S. Ciprian, Serapion, and Satirus, with
manie other, which in this place I neede
not tell of. VVhat then shall we
saye? Trulie,Ambros. de obitu fratris. as S Paule was gladd,
to see Christ much sett furth and preached,
Siue per occasionem, and for
an other purpose,Philip. 1. 
               Siue per veritatē,
that is, vprightlie and sincerelie: so
should an honest mynd be well contented,
when a false preachers vaine tale
is confuted, be it done either lernedlie,
abundantlie, and deeplie, or meanelie,

sufficientlie, and by light passing ouer
hym. Therefore to cōclude▪ as I wrote
this for my frind, intelligiblie and familiarlie,
so I leaue it vnto the Reader.
nothinge alteringe of that manner.
If I l
                  ••
               ke sinewes and substance,
such as is in ould souldiars: by vse and
practise. strengh will grow. If indifferencie:
fauor these beginnynges. And
(as I haue sayed) I thinke it no fault
with a breth onlie (if I could) to dryue
backe an enemye. And if with a penknyfe
I diminishe his lustie b
                  •
               oude.
lett other vse the great swordes, and
piekes, which shall kyll his heresie.
Let this be my excuse, vnto the
Catholykes. let this be my
defence against the
Protestantes.
            Fare well.
 At Louanie. Nouemb. 20.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A CONFVTATION
of Maister Iuelles sermon.
            
               THe tyme & worlde
now being suche,
that there is made
no sermon or treatise
so vaine & idle,
but it findeth one
or other to print it,
and that, not without Grace & Priuilege
obtained: I doe not mistrust readie pardon
of you (my dere frinde M.N.) if I dare
write my minde vnto you, in any kinde
of disputable question. For, if my sayinges
be alowable: they may be profitable
to more then one, and be knowen of 
                  •
               undrie
persons for all the lacke of print. &
if they be not in some parte altogether
so exact and perfect: my forgetfulnes or
vnskilfulnes, may receaue better aduisement
& instruction, when they shall not
be past the amendinge, bicause they are
not auctorised Cum Gratia & priuilegio ad
Septennium. It moueth me also to write,
that whereas, according to the blessed will
& gift of God, I may perchaunce come,

before I end this life, vnto open defence
& shewing of my fayth, it shalbe therfore
profitable and necessarie, to practise with
my pen in the chambre, that, which may
be and should be openly confessed with
mouth, ether in churche or consistorie.
And further, my hart being so iustely greued,
wyth the lowd exprobration, that
the called Bishoppe of Salisburie made,
vnto all the hostes of the 
                  •
               od of Israel,
although I be but a common souldiar emong
the orders of diuines, & must therfore
kepe my place, wich is, to stand behind
so many Bishoppes, Doctors, Bachelers,
& Scholars in diuinitie, which in the
fore fronte ar sett to fight, and although
my course be not yet com, to meete with
the party hand to hand, and face to face,
yet, the harte being greued, and desire of
def
                  •
               ce arising with in me, the hand is moued,
& with such weapōs as it hath, pen,
incke, & paper, it doth what it can, to the
ouerthrow of him, which standeth vpon
his own wordes, so stedfastly. And verely
I doe thinke, if M. Iuell him selfe should
presently vnderstand, what I entend: and

should herafter see what I write, he would
be nothing at all displeased with my replying,
except perchaunce bicause I am
not cunning and learned inowgh to sett
vpō hym, which is so well prepared, that
he prouoketh the best of all the armie of
the Catholikes, and so prouoketh them,
that if they can bringe against him, but
one sentēce for example, owt of all their
armorie of coūcells, doctors, vsage of the
primitiue Church, or scripture, (that is
to say) yf thei can fasten but one blowe
vpon him, then he will yelde vtterly and
geue ouer in plaine feild, vnto them.
            Which opinion, of thinking one Catholike
to be to weake for him, yf it can entre
in to so noble a harte (as it is very harde
to kepe it owt therof) then, must he vse
som indifferency, and take no skorne, if
a M. of Art and studient of Diuinitie goe
aboute the practise, of breaking his blowes
and assertions, wheras the church of
God, so well ordered with excellent men
of learning & godlines, is constrained to
suffer, coblers, weauers, tinkers, tanners,
kardemakers, tapsters, gailers, fidlers, and

other of like professiō, not onlie to enter
into disputing with her, but also to clime
vp into pulpetes within her iurisdiction,
and to kepe the place of Priestes & ministers
of the misteries of God, before her
face. VVhich thing being tolerated (if
not alowed) in these our blessed daies, if
M. Iuell were Metropolitane of the realme,
he should not disdaine (as I think) to
be sett vpon by a verie meane scholar.
            But his wisdome is such, that he will not
marke so much, what person it is which
speaketh, as what matter it is, which shalbe
spoken: and so desirous he is (as it appeareth)
of one to encounter with him,
that, rather then he will lacke occasiō to
vtter his learning, he will suppose in his
mind one to stande against him with diuers
obiections, which he is trymlie prepared
alreadie to answer, prouided alwaies
that he wil obiect him selfe no more,
then he is able to answer. And when,
somwhat is for a fassion sake rehersed,
then for the rest, that he will triumph solempnelie,
as though all were ouercom.
VVherfore being sufficiently moued to

write, because first, so great licences ar 
graunted in these daies. then, bicause of
mine owne exercise, and also for the easing 
of my minde in this chalenge made
vnto Catholikes. and last of all, for that I 
thinke, M. Iuell him selfe would take this
matter so well, (if he did know it) that
he would nothing be offended with the
occasion, wherby he may shewfurthe his
manhood, I will therfore write, without
all sparing of him, (for who can hurt not
oneli such a Goliath, with a brason head,
but also such a preacher, with a brason
face), without all sparing therfore, will I
write, as before the face of God, and his
blessed Angells, and all holy Martirs, Cō
               fessors,
Doctors, and Bishoppes, not onely
which were six hundred yeres after the
ascension of Christ, but also which haue
ben these nine hundred yeres last passed,
in which time God was knowē, as he promised
to make his name great emong the
Gentils, and that no power, no not hell
gates them selues,Esa. 54. Psal. 
                     •
                  1. Malach. 1. Matth. 16. should preuaile against
his Catholike Church. In the sight of
this our God, and vnder the witnes of so

blessed, glorious, and diuine company, I
will declare your great florishing, to be
far from all kinde of good fighting, and
that all your talke, M. Iuell, hath more of
the worde then of the sworde, with much
mouing, and litle prouing.
            
               In the copy of a Sermon pronounced by the
Bishopp of Salisbury at Paules crosse, the second
Sonday before Easter (which is by interpretation
Passion sonday) in the yere of our
Lord. 1560. these wordes ar prefixed:

                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                     Mores antiqui obtineant.Iuell.
                     
                     Let old customes preuaile.
                  
               
            
            VVould not a man think, that the person,
which vseth such a posy in the first
side of his sermon, were one which did
much embrace old customes? How can
they be but very heretikes, which appeale
onely to the writen worde, and refuse
all other profe, which is not expressely
in the liuely scriptures of the Lorde? Behold
here is a testimony of the Councell
of Nice, alleaged and alowed, by the Bishopp
that is called of Salisbury, sett as a
golden claspe, vnto his pretious Sermon,
which he pronounced at Paules crosse,

the secōd Sonday before Easter, and it is
this, Let old customes preuaile. But where
is this saing, in all Scripture? begin at
Genesis and read to the end of the reuelatiōs
of S. Ihon, and shew the chap
               
                  •
               er
where this cōmaundemēt or counsel
is? we knowe (except your owne Prophetes
doe lye) that all thinges necessary
for saluation are writen in the boke
of life the olde and new Testament, we
reade him to be accu
                  •
               sed which addeth
or diminisheth to or from the worde of
the liuinge Lorde, we are abundantly
content wyth the Bible in Englishe,Apo. vlt. we
goe no further, then to God his owne
worde. Will yow bring vs againe to
harken to old customes? and the sentence
of the Councell of Nice, which
was but of men, shall that be our touche
stone? O Sir, when you haue caused all
Sacramentes, in a manner, and all Sacramentall
thinges to be taken away: when,
of so many externall signes and tokens,
which represented the misteries of our
saluation, so few are left: when yow haue
taken away the very orders of them,

which liued after the perfectest way of
Christ hys religion, do yow now speake
of old customes? This doth so well becom
you to speake, as a Saduce to proue
the resurrection. as an Arrian to be ruled
by tradition. as a woman to weare a mitre.
Yow would laugh or wondre at a
catholike, or (as you terme him) a papist,
if he should sett furth his work with this
title, that nothing is to be beleued,
which is not expressely in Scripture: and
shall Protestantes escape the like iudgement,
when they speake sentēces, for old
customes and vsages? But what meane
yow by this sentence: Let old customes
preuail? what is that, which is against
them, that the victory neadeth to be geuen
to them, by the arbitrement of the
noble Councell of Nice? except ther be
some battell, ther can be no victory. ther
is no preuailing, where there is no resisting.
and there must, at the lest, be two
partes, when one singularly is preferred.
I remembre well,
                  M. Iuel mistaketh the wordes of the coūcell of Nice. that these wordes: Let
old customes preuaile, are in the beginning
of the sixt Canon of the Coūcel of

Nice, where it is writen, as concerning
the iurisdiction of the Bishopp of Alexandria
and Antioch, that the old custom,
which euer before was vsed, should
continu. But in that sense, it can not
serue for a sentence, to be placed before
M. Iuell his Sermon, that, bicause the old
custome shall stand, which hath ben obserued
about the Bishopprickes of Alexandria
and Antioch, therfore absolutely
old customes should preuail. Wherfore
vnderstanding by these wordes, Let old
customes preuail, such a generall sense, as
M. Iuell would pretend, that the Councell
of Nice might vse those wordes generally:
I aske then now, what is this,
which the Councell speaketh of, Let old
customes preuaile? what might the occasion
be, of that sentēce? did it meane, that
old customes must be preferred before
new? this is not alwaies trew. Wheras
the circumstances of time, person, age,
and such like, may cause the old custome
not to be refused absolutely as nawght,
but to yeld for iust causes vnto the new.
Example wherof we haue, in washing of

feete,Io. 13. Act. 15. and abstaining from the eating of
bloud, which was a custome of old, but
in these daies, the newer, and diuers from
that, is preferred and folowed. VVell thē,
 did the Councell meane that olde customes
must ouercome new bokes and writinges?
Surely then M. Iuell, from Luther
hitherto, at one foyne, vnaduisedlie, you
haue pricked so many authors of new inuentiōs,
as haue found worke, for a number
of yeres, to a multitude of hasty printers.
But yf none of these senses please
 you, did the Councell signifye, that olde
customes must preuaile, against the pretensed
alleaging of the very Scripture it
selfe, and new doctrine of men? If this be
trew,
                  M. Iuell hinderith his owne side, by the alleging, of the Councel of Nice yea rather bicause it is trew, that
they must preuaile in deed, by your own
allegatiō of this place, you haue put that
sentēce for a defence vnto your sermon,
which being rightly vnderstāded, doth at
once ouerthrow your religiō. Consider
now therfore the state of the Church at
those daies, and the cause of that Coūcel,
if perchaunce we may finde out the sense
of these wordes, after your allegation:
            
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Let olde customes
preuaile, and 
                  •
               ere away the victory.
            Arrius was a proud new fangled man,
a disobedient person vnto his Bishopp,
which made much of him at the beginning,
before he toke harte of singularite
vpon him, and promoted him to the honorable
rome of a priest in Alexandria.
Wel may I vse the worde, honorable,
for at those dayes, priesthood was so taken
among all Christians. Alexāder then
which was Bishopp of Alexādria a very
meeke and reuerēd Father, vnderstāding
his priest Arrius to busie him selfe with
new inuentions, first gently and fatherly,
he warned him: and whē Arrius proude
harte and gloriouse, would be nothing
the better for sweete wordes and admonitions:
the wise and blessed Bishopp gathering
a Synode of his clergie iustly did
excommunicate, that singular and blasphemous
heretik. But for all the excommunicating
of the heretik, both he and
his heresy had a great sort of euill partakers
with them: so far forth, that it was
necessary, to call a generall Councell, to

the determining of the Catholike faith,
and condemning of new found learning.
In which Councell the holy fathers against
the new termes of Arrius, did principally
alleage, the traditions of the Apostles,
and customes, māners, and lawes
of the holy writers before their daies.
            And although they had Scriptures for thē
against Arrius, yet the chefest stay of
their cause, was grounded vpon the catholike
receaued faith. For herein cōsisted
the vnrulines of Arrius, that expounding
the Scriptures vntruly, according
to his owne fancy, he would not be reformed,
by the interpretation of old fathers,
and submit his faith vnto their iudgemētes.
Which yf he would haue done,
the churche of God had neuer ben so
much trobled, with that abhominable
heresy.
                  
                     •
                  rid and 
                     〈◊〉
                   for 
                     〈◊〉
                  . And that, not onely Arrius, but
al his felowes besides, were so affected towardes
them selfes and their owne deuises,
and against the expositiōs of fathers:
it appeareth plainly by an Epistle of Alexander
Bishopp of Alexandria,
                  
                     〈…〉
                   14. writen
vnto Alexander Bishopp of Constantinople,

in the which, towardes the later
end with in two leaues, these faultes
of the Arrians be declared.
            
               It is no wonder, that which I shall write (most
derely beloued) if I shew vnto you the false derogations
and defacinges, made against me and
our deuout people For they which pitch their
tentes, against the Deitie of the Sonne of God:
nothing feare they, to vse spitefull 
                     •
                  launders
against vs, for bicause they think it not meet,
to compare any of the auncient fathers with
them selues. neither doe they suffer them selues
to be matched, with those masters and teachers,
of whom we haue ben instructed from
our youth. neither doe they make any accompt
of any, which are our felow priestes where so
euer they be, as concerning the measure of wisedom:
as though they onely were wise, and
had nothing to be said against them, and were
the inuentors of new decrees, and as to which
onely those thinges are reuealed and opened,
which ar knowen to be vnderstode of no other
besides, vnder the soun. O mischeuous prid,
great madnes, furor of vaine glory, wisedom
of the deuill, which mightely hath inuaded their
most wicked mindes. The exposition of Scriptures,
which the welbeloued of God hath made,
did nothing feare them from their purpose,
the agreable reuerence, which their felow ministers

vsed towardes Christ, did nothing tame
their wildnes.
            
            Thus thē loe the Arrians, being so much
selfe minded, what better remedy might
the reuerēd fathers of Nice haue against
them, then to bring furth the former receaued
 doctrine and māner: to establish
that with their decree? For, if natural reason
shall preuaile: the Christian faith can
 not be so wel perswaded, or rather it can
not be perswaded at all. If by Scriptures
only, the treuth shalbe decided: then shal
 ther neuer be found any end, wher both
parties alleage the wordes of Scripture
for them selues.why the heretikes admit only scripture, and the fathers old customes also. Only therfor tradition,
custome, and māner, is that thing, which
killeth the heretikes hartes (and therfore
they will not be iudged but by expresse
Scripture only) and it is the thing, which
defendeth the Catholike Christians, and
therfore gladly doe they folow the waies
of the auncient fathers. VVhich thing is
plainly proued by this honorable Coū
               cell
of Nice, about which our talke is.
For, as it appeareth by the actes of the
same Councell, after long disputatiō and

learned, betwene certaine philosophers,
(hired of purpose by Arrius, in defence
of his cause) and most excellent fathers
inspired with the holy ghoste, for the
vttering of the truth: 
                  It pleased (saieth the
history) all the fathers vnto one,
                  In 
                        〈◊〉
                      Conc. Niceni 
                  that like as
it was deliuered from the holy fathers and successors
of the Apostells: so they should decree
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , (wich is to say the equality of
substance in God the Sonne with the Father)
and prouide it to be put, in the Crede of
the Church.
                Against which worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
and decree of the fathers, what did
Arrius or any of his sect afterwardes alleage,
to the reprouing therof? (And
you in the meane time (my welbeloued
frind. N.) thinke it not long which is not
vnprofitable, and chose out the tyme to
reade that quietly, which the cause requireth
that I should write plainly.) What
did the Arriās then (sayd I) argue against

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ? what was their chefest & best
reason? for soth this onely, that it was
not in Scripture. O M. Iuell, that your
eloquence had not ben born at those
daies: you would haue stode greatly against
them with your, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .

               Let old customes and manners win
and preuail. But yet you may doe good
seruice in these daies, to perswade with
the multitude of them, which take them
selues wiser then all other, which haue
ben these nine hundred yeres, and which
will beleue nothing but the writen worde
and bare letter: that olde customes
must be regarded and preferred also.
            I mislike not the saying, but it agreeth
not with your person, as I beleue. Catholikes
may, all the company of them,
alleage truly both scripture and custome.
heretikes, doe pretend Scripture
onely, and that yet not truly, but custom
they can neuer alleage at all. This we
haue receaued from the Apostells and
their successors, saith the Councell of
Nice 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , is not in all the scripture,
saieth the heretike. And as euery cuntry,
is distincted one from a nother, by
proper and peculiar language: so doth
the Catholike euer speake after the voice
of the Churche, and the heretike bableth
onely after the letter of the boke.
Reade you the fifth Chapter of the Tripartite

history the fourth boke. There
it is plaine, that Constantin the great,
did put a chaplaine of his in trust, for the
deliuery of his testament,Hist. trip. li. 4. ca. 5. to Constantius
his sonne. which chaplaine, being
in deede an Arrian, and hauing accesse
to the Emperor and acquaintance with
him, by occasion of the testament, perceauing
also the yong Emperor his mind
to be vnstable and wauering,To refuse vnwriten verities, the old w
                     •
                  nt of heretikes. what persuasion
did he vse first of all as you think?
            
               He saied (as Theodoretus testifieth) they
were to blame, which had put the worde, Consubstanciall,
among the articles of the faith.
            
            And why so? which worde (saieth he) is
not writen in all the Scripture. Loe here is
his greatest reason, and such in deed as
becometh heretikes most of all. Let vs
goe yet forward, and seke whether any
mo heretikes will vse that reason. And
where shall you more plainly find this
matter, then where the very pack of
them is gathered together. In a cōfession
of a faith, which was made at Sirmium,
Constātius him selfe being present, with
to many Arrian Bishoppes, after other

thinges, this decree foloweth.
            As for the worde (substance:) bicause,Trip. hist. lib. 5. c. 20 being
simply put furth by the fathers, it is not knowē
of the common people, and it maketh a scandalum
and offence: and bicause, neither the Scriptures
haue this worde in them: it pleaseth vs, it
should be abrogated, and hereafter no mention
at all to be made of substance in God, bicause
the Scriptures diuine, do in no place make mentiō
of the substāce of the father and the sonne.
You may see what great price they made
of this argument (it is no Scripture, ergo
no matter of faith.) bicause that in so few
lines, they doe twise repete the selfe same
reason. Which vndoutedly was then, and
is now, the very principall (but not most
surest) stay, of all vnconstant mindes. As
in the same boke againe, see what a nother
cōpany of scismatikes do speake for
them selues, against the Coūcell of Nice?
VVe (say they) which are gathered together in
Seleucia,Trip. hist. lib. 5. c. 34 which is in Isauria. we haue yesterday,
which was the fifth before the Kal. of Octobre,
geuen all diligence, according to the Emperor
his will, to kepe straitly the ecclesiastical peace,
and to thinke earnestly vpon the faith, as our
welbeloued Emperor Constātius hath cōmaunded,
according to the sainges of the prophetes
and Ghospells, and to bring furth nothing, besides

the Scriptures in the matter of the faith
Ecclesiastical. This againe doth proue my
purpose, that it is propre to the heretikes
to appeale to the scriptures onely,
bicause they are quickly condemned by
tradition, custome, and manner.
            
            To conclude therfor this place, Arrius
being so proud, as we haue said, hauing
many textes of Scripture for him: as he
vnderstood them which toke him selfe
to be best learned, the Councell of Nice
defining the cōsubstantiality of God the
Sonne with the Father: bicause they had
so receaued it from the Apostells by their
successors, the same Councell being allwaies
reproued of heretikes, for that it
defined that matter as an article of faith,
which was not in Scripture: I aske now,
what it is like that the Councell did meane,
when it should say, Let old customes
and manners preuaile? Can it well be vnderstood
otherwise, (if the wordes be
taken generally, as you M. Iuell doe alleage
them) then after this sort? that
for as much as heretikes can alleage for
them selues Scripture, and will not be

brought down from their priuat sense to
vnderstand those Scriptures, as old blessed
fathers haue interpreted them, that
herefor to make an end, and to stopp the
mo
                  •
               thes of all arrogant persons, we will
and define, that old fassions, old customes,
aunciēt interpretatiōs, and so furth,
shal preuail? For the question here in this
 Coūcel, was not, of custome & custome,
traditiō 
               & traditiō, which should preuaile:
for the Arriā did medle with no tradition,
 or former custome, or vsage. Neither
was the questiō, in cōparing former vsage
with some late writers inuention: for Arrius
would alleage no one mans writing,
taking him felfe to be better learned thē
all other. and if he would haue alleaged
his owne authority only, that had ben so
folishe and diueli
                  •
               he, that it was to be reserued
for Luther (or some other of the
priuy coūsell of Antichrist:) Wherin then
was the strife? not in those two pointes
which I haue named, but in this onely,
 that wheras Arrius would be tried by scriptures
only, and plentifully brought them
out, for a shew of his defence, and wheras

vnder the letter of the scripture, he vttered
his blasphemous sprit, and went against
the plain traditiōs, and lessons of
the Apostells and fathers of Christ his
Church. therfore (saieth the Councell)
Let old customes and māners preuaile,
               what the Councell meaneth sayng, let old customes preuaile. which
is to say, we alow scripture, and we alleage
scripture, but after that sort, that we
must not, ne will admit any thing contrary
vnto the Apostolike faith receaued,
for as concerning your text, (Sir Arrius)
where you say,Iohā. 14. Pronerb. 
                     •
                  
                
               The father is greater then I
am. And againe, God made me in the beginning
of his waies, with such like, they must
be vnderstood as our 
                  •
               decessors, maisters
and fathers haue deliuered vnto vs. neither
must you (bring you in neuer so many
places of the old or new testamēt) think
therfor, that you may conclud a sense and
meaning contrary to the old faith. Away
with this pride of yours, submit your vnderstanding
to the faith of the Churche,
leue of your new termes of extātibus and
non extantibus, receaue the 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and
cōsubstancialitie (which word although
it be not expressed in Scripture, yet it is

in tradition,) Consent and agree with
the Councell of the whole world. These
wordes loe and such like, doe expresse
truly, what the fathers should meane in
saing, Let the old customes preuaile. And
this being proued, to be the very meaning
of that worthy sentence, what hath
M. Iuell doon, in setting it before his sermon
in the first shew therof? is it put
there, to be laughed at, or to be folowed
and regarded? If to be laughed at: the
Coūcell of Nice is not so simple a thing.
If to be folowed: why are the Catholikes
reproued then, for defending auncient
traditions? and why are the heretikes
honored which will haue nothing
but 
                  •
               he bare text onely, together with
their priuat comment vpon it? If customes,
manners, fashions, vsages (call it as
you will) if they must preuaile: wherfore
doe we all this while, contend with the
Protestantes, vpon verities writen and
vnwriten, vpon traditions and vses of the
Catholike Churche? Euery boke almost
which is of common places, hath the
question of Scripture and traditiō moued

therin, which nedeth no more to be any
question, you being so well acquainted
(M. Iuell) with the Protestantes, and hauing
so great credit among them, as they
lightly can geue to such a person. For at
one worde you shall end the whole matter,
perswading them, that old customes
and fashions must preuaile, which in my
minde I thinke to be impossible, (but
nothing is hard perchaunce, to you,) for
this is clere euen in sight, the last and
third communion is preferred before the
second, the second better estemed then
the first, and if a new one come furth,
you shall (I warrant you) see it plainly
proued, that, quite against your will, and
against the Councell of Nice, the old fashions
shall not be preferred. And this
much hitherto I haue saied, as cōcerning
old customes, supposing and graunting,
that the Coūcell of Nice might vse that
sentēce, as M. Iuell alleageth it, for a generall
conclusion and determination,
whereas in very dede those wordes 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
ar onely mentioned in
the beginning of the sixt Canon as concerning

one especiall matter, about the
prerogatiue of the sees of the Bishopp of
Antioch and Alexandria, and should not
therfore be drawen vnto a generall sentence.
But we shall meet again with M.
Iuell, vpon this point, before the end, I
thinke, and therfore now, will I turne ouer
the lease, and cōsider his sainges, and
apply som answers, and infer, so well as
I can, som obiections against him.
VVhen so euer any ordre, geuen by God,
is brokē or abused,Iuell. the best redresse therof
is, to restore it againe into the state that it
first was in at the begnining.
If you take the paines leisurly to consider
the illation of this conclusion, you
shall perceaue the wordes of the blessed
Apostle vnto S. Timothe, the first epistle
& chapter, to haue in these our daies the
persons vnto whom they may and must
be applied.1. ad Tim. cap. 1. 
               
                  The end of the cōmaundemēt is
charite, which cometh out from a pure harte,
and good conscience, and vnfained faith
                        •
                      from
which certen men wandering a side, are turned
vnto vaine talke, coueting to be teachers
of the law, not vnders
                        •
                     anding, (yet) neither

the thinges which they speake, neither vpon
what thinges they make affirmatiōs
                M. Iuel
here in the wordes which I haue recited,
maketh mention of an ordre geuen
by God, and of ordre broken, and of redresse
of the same by retorn to the first
institution. In whiche sainge can he tell
what he speaketh? or what, and wherfore
he affirmeth? what ordre geuen by God,
did he talk of before, to bring in the wordes
thus, when anye ordre geuen by God is
broken? &c. In the third leafe he saith, that
S. Paule had appointed the Corinthias as
touching the Sacrament, that they shold
all eate and drink together. Doth he call
this, the ordre geuen by God? I beleue
verely, that what soeuer S. Paule appointed,
the same did come from God, as the
principall gouernour of his churche. But
for all that, there is great difference, betwixt
the cōmaundmentes expressely geuen
by God,A differēce betwen th
                     •
                   cōmandementes of god & the ordinances of men. 
               & ordres set by men as ministers
of God. For with the one kind, non
can dispence, withowte especiall licence
frō God. and in the other kinde, the heades
of the church haue the power in ther

owne handes, without further question,
to sett and remoue, plant and pull vp, as
they shal see it profitable for the present
state of the churche. Wherfore although
the blessed Apostle did neuer make such
ordres vpon his own head, as did not agree
with the will of almighty God: yet
(properly to speak) an ordre geuen by
God, is so to be taken, that, without all
exception, it must be kept and folowed,
without speciall reuelation for the discontinewing
of the same ordre. And ordres
which men appoint, may be chaunged
again by men. What then meaneth
M. Iuell by these wordes, VVhen any ordre
geuen by God is broken? and let him
plainly also shew, wherin the ordre consisted,
and who did break it? The ordre
was this, (as it appeareth by the learned
cōmentaries of the blessed fathers vpon
that .xj. chapter of the first to the Corinthians.Theoph. cap. 11. 1. ad Cor.)
On their holy daies and appointed
feastes, (according to an old custome of the
Churche) the Corinthians did vse, riche and
poore, altogether in cōmon, to eate & drink.
and that, of common meates and drinkes.
            
            
               
Which meetinges and suppers were called
in the Grek tongue 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (as other
do write) bicause of their charitable sitting
and eating together. Now (as S. Austen
writeth) after the supper ended, they
did receaue the Sacramēt. But as S. Chrisostom
thinketh, they did first receaue
the Sacrament, and then sett them selues
to supper. But were the Sacramēt receaued
after or before, and to come to Theophilactus
again, afterward, (saieth he) Dissentions
arising among them, that meruelous
or excellent manner (which had much charitie,
and not a litle Christian philosophy in
it) was taken away, & kept no longer of the
Corinthians. How was it taken away?
            Bicause they did now sitt a sondre, as, 
                  •
               
               che
by them selues, or kindredes with
kindredes, or by families, or other waies
deuided, wherby the poore folkes, which
before did put their handes freely in the
riche mens disshes, whiles they sat Christianlike
at one table together, they now
poore sowles in deede & hungrie, were
caused to 
                  •
               itt by them selues, & had no
benefit of their euen Christians plentie.

With which singularitie of the riche men
S. Paule was iustly offended, and saied,
VVhen you com together in one,
               1. Cor. 11. 
               this is not
it, to eate our Lord his supper. For euery
one of you doth take his owne supper before,
and eate. In which wordes, our Lord his
supper, is vnderstood (as Theophilactus
writeth) that meeting and eating together
of theirs, which was instituted and
receaued, as in folowing of that reuerend
and worshipfull supper of our Lord
in deed. Here vpon now, S. Paule studying
for the redresse of this ordre, among
other argumentes (by which he would
persuade them quietly, and without disdaine
or murmur to sitt together as they
were wont to doe) he bringeth in for
one principall argument, the doinges
of our Sauior in his last supper, saying,
I haue receaued of our Lord, that which I
haue deliuered vnto you,
               1. Cor. 11. and so forth.
            As if he should haue saied more plainly:
my frindes, you doe vse in your meetinges
together, to kepe separate tables
and to put away the poore from you,
throwgh a certaine cōtempt, perchaunce,

or disdaine of them. Which you are
much to blame to doe. For seing our Sauior
in his last supper geuing his owne
body to be eaten, did not make partes
thereof, and vnequall diuision, that som
should haue al, and other should goe without:
and wheras you also do receaue;
at these present suppers of your owne
that very body of his: it is to absurd that
towardes your neighbours, and brothers,
you should vse this straingenes, as
though they were not worthy to eate of
your bocherly fleshly meate with you,
or com nigh vnto your tables: which a
                  •
               
made partakers with you of the body of
our Sauior, and of the heauenly table.
            Thus then you may see, how the wordes
of S. Paule depend orderly one vpon an
other, and what the ordre was with the
breakinge of whiche he was offended.
And wher vpon then doe these wordes
of M. Iuell folow I haue receaued of the
Lord? &c.
               1. Cor. 11 But let vs now yet debate
this matter more plentifully. The ordre
once receaued was, that they should
make ther common supper all togeth
                  •
               r,

of such meates as they would bring, and
either before (as S. Chrisostom his opinion
is) or afterEpist. 118. 
                     •
                  d lanuar. (as S. Austen vnderstandeth
it) they should receaue the Sacrament.
Well this ordre is broken. But why
did you break it, o ye Corinthians? why
did ye lett either enuie, disdaine, pride,
glotome, or any other vncleane thought,
so to entre into your hartes, and so to take
place there, that wheras before, to the
maintenaunce of charitie, your tables in
the church were common: now, to the
discomforting of the simple and poore,
ye make to your selues priuate and singular
banketes? If you seeke onely for
good chere: you haue howses of your
owne meeter for that purpose, then the
church. But if nedes you wil supp in the
church, after the old fasshion: let your
meates be common vnto the rest, which
shalbe there gathered as the old fasshion
was. We see a manifest disordre, and
most lamētable. som be dronken, bicause
of to much. other be fainte, bicause of to
litle. Do ye cōtemne the church of god?
Do ye cōfound & make to blushe others

which haue nothing? But what remedie?
Mary, saith M. Iuell, let vs bring the matter
to the first ordre geuen, & correct the
abuse, by reducinge of the case vnto the
first vse thereof. Doe so then as you say.
amend this disordre of the Corinthians.
tell them what they haue to folow. shew
forth the trew fasshion, and ordre,1. Cor. 11. which
must be vsed. I haue receaued of the Lorde
(saieth M. Iuell) that thing which I also
haue deliuered vnto you. that is, that the
Lorde Ihesus in the night that he was betraied,
toke bread, &c. But to what purpose
is this? we haue shewed before, that
the disordre among the Corinthians consisted
cheifly in this, that they did one
cōtemne another, and would not sitt together
(as the old fashion was) but make
straunge one of another. for a redresse
herof (sayeth M. Iuell in the third leafe)
S. Paule calleth them back to the first originall,
               Iuell.
               and to the institution of Christ from
whence they were fallen. If this be so, tell
me I pray you, what one worde is ther
sownd▪ in the institutiō of Christ, which
maketh for sitting together or sitting a

sondre, for eating at church or eating at
home, for particular banket or common
supper? Christ his institution doth here
in consist, that,1. Cor. 11. 
               He tooke breade, he brake
breade, he gaue it vnto his disciples, and
saied, take ye, eate ye, this is my body, which
shalbe deliuered for you, doe ye this in remembraunce
of me. But our talke, is about
the reforming of a custome which
is broken, and I aske you, how you will
amend this separate manner of eating
and drinking, which the Corinthians doe
vse in the churche? I know that Christ
did take bread, did breake it, did geue it.
But answer me, how the good Christians
were wont to meet together, and
how they did vse to sitt and eate, wheras
the Apostle doth 
                  •
               ind fault with the Corinthians
for their disordre of eating in
the churche: not eating onely of our
Lord his body, (which if they did mistake,
then the wordes which you alleage
of the institution of Christ, would
serue well for that purpose) but eating of
their owne supper, which they brought
to churche with them. When you speake

of reducing thinges to their originall,
and when it is clere, that the Corinthians
in their meetinges together,
did not kepe the old custome and manner,
I looked to heare of you, not the institution
of Christ, what that was, but
the old fasshions which the Corinthians
should kepe, as for those wordes of the
institution of Christ, which S. Paule reherseth,
they are writen of him, not, as
the originall patern of the reforming the
Corinthians disordre: but in way of argument,
(as Theophilactus saieth) to
proue his principall purpose, that bicause
Christ, did not spare to geue his owne
body vnto his disciples and folowers: therfore
the riche Corinthiās should not disdaine
to admitt the poorer sort of Christians
their brethern vnto their table. for
therin was the blessed Apostle occuped, to
correct the stoutnes & singularitie which
the Corinthiās vsed then, otherwise then
it was receaued emōg Christiās. And therfore
S. Paule being mindful of his intēt &
principal matter, he cōcludeth the chapter
with these wordes: therfor my brothers
               
(saith he) when ye com together to eate:
tary and looke one for another. If any one
be hungry: let him eate at home. Shortly
therfore to conclude this matter, truth
it is, that when any disordre is com into
the churche: the first ordre, from which
the fall was made, should be reduced. The
disordre amonge the Corinthians, was,
that they did not charitably cōmunicate
together in their suppers. let this be amended.
the Apostle doth it properly,
saing. Therfore, when ye com together to eate,
tary one for another.
               
                  M. Iuel vnderstādeth not the
                     •
                   place which he brīgeth out of the first vnto the Corinthias ca. 1
                     •
                  . For so was it at the
beginning, that the Christians did meere
and sitt altogether, and eate one of an others
meate in their Churches, and either
after such their meales, receaue the Sacramēt,
or before them. All this agreeth
well. But let M. Iuel amend the disordre,
and sett euery man in his place. Let them
be called backe again
               Iuell. (saieth he) to the first
originall, and to the institution of Christ.
            
            Which answereth, as rightly to the question
proponed as if in a deliberatiō, how
the beggars & needy persons of England
might be prouided for, som great clerke

wold stand vp & solemly declare vnto vs,
vnto what valew of our currant mony the
three hūdred pence would com vnto, for
which the oyntment that was poured vpon
our Sauior his head, might haue ben
sold for, according vnto Iudas his estimation.
Or (as it is more familiar with
Englishe eares) which is the way to London?
A potte full of plūmes. Yet doe
they glory still vpon the institution of
Christ, as though those wordes, Take,
eate, this is my body, doe this in remembrāce
of me, did appoint both time, and place,
and vesture, and nombre of cōmunicantes,
and all thinges which they vse in ministring
of their what shal I cal it? (treuly
I can not tell,) and which the trew catholike
churche hath or may vse, in the
ministring, adorning, or defensing of the
Sacramēt. But let it be graunted (which
is to far absurd) that S. Paule did reduce
the Corinthiās from their disordre vnto
the first originall & institutiō of Christ,
and that he vpon the originall of Christ
his institutiō did cōclude, that one should
tary for another when they cam to eate.

How doth it now then so fal out, that according
to the redresse which the Apostle
made after the originall of Christ his
institutiō, Christian men bring not their
meates to the church, and the riche tarieth
not for the poore, and he which aboundeth,
geueth not gladly vnto him
which lacketh? And when they are wel refresshed
with cōmon meates, then receiue
the Sacramēt? Yea rather, you, which appeale
so lowdly and rudely to the institutiō
of Christ,The incons
                     •
                  anci
                     •
                   of heretikes. why do ye not washe one
anothers feete, which haue so expresse &
euident a text for it? Where is now your
originall, and where is the institution of
Christ? if both kindes be not receaued
of the laye people: O then institution of
Christ, how far ar we departed from the?
say they. And the same Christ saing,Ioan. 13. 
               I
haue geuen you an example, that like as I
haue done so should you do, and washe one
anothers feete, they are content herein
to let institution and originall both goe.
And so, like as bells do sound in diuers
mens eares diuersly, and diuersly in one
selfe same eare, as the mind is affected:

so Scripture and custome are made to
sound in these mens fancy, euen as their

                  〈◊〉
                is to haue this or that opinion to
goe forward. When it pleaseth them:

                  〈◊〉
                the bells shall goe, VVith customes of
p
                     ••
                  matiue churche, examples of good men,
testimonies of blessed Doctors. And when
so great a sound doth troble their studie,
then loe it pleaseth them to haue
one bell onely to ring, VVith nothing is to
be beleued without expresse worde of Scripture.
But now let vs goe further.
It was to be hoped, for so much as the glorious
light of the Ghospel of Christ,Iuell. is now
so mightely and so far spred abrode, that
no man would lightly misse his way, as
a
                     •
                  ore in the time of darknes, and perisshe
wilfully.
I could not but note this sentēce, bicause
it conteineth so great a bost and so small
treuth in it. For where is the glorious
light of the Ghospell now so mightely
and so far sprede abrode? and what calleth
he the darkenes of the time afore?
many new found landes, & the wild Indians
are come to the faith of Christ in

our daies: but had protestantes and heretikes
the ministery therof? or els religious
men, monkes & friers, with other
such of the catholike church?Note a most euident lye of M. Iuels. how many
partes of Italie, of Spaine, of Fraūce,
of Germany, of 
                  •
               laundres, of other contries
of Europe, doe acknowlege this glorious
light which he talketh of? Yea,
what one city can he name, in the which
it is mightely blased abrode? Frankford,
doth it wholie agree within it self in one
faith? Geneua, is it wholy ouershadowed
with this counterfaict light? In England,
or London, or in Sarum vnder his owne
preachinges, is the Ghospell gloriously
and mightely spred abrode? The kingdom
of the Ghospell of Christ, is in mens
hartes. and then, of how many hartes is
M. Iuell assured? of those very contries,
which are taken to incline to the new
lerninges, three partes, or more, shalbe

                  •
               ownd, in harte and will, Catholikes.
            And yet graunt him, that any one citie
is al
                  •
               ogether turned from Christ and his
church, so that no one Papist in harte,
shal there remaine: by & by is the Ghospell

mightely and far spred abrode? There
is no more but one Ghospell, but of
Ghospellers more then sixe kindes in euery
contrie,There is one Ghospell, but diuers Ghospellers. which the glorious light of
the Ghospell hath now oueruewed. M.
Iuell him self doth he know any one, to
be of the same faith of which he him self
is? if he agree in all pointes with any other,
how cometh that to passe? either
thei haue one master, which kepeth them
both vnder correction, that they shal not
play the wantons, but hold that, which
he teacheth: or els voluntarilie, and at
pleasure they agree. If voluntarilie and at
wil: then is not he sure of an others mind,
which may be so often tymes chainged
in euery day and howre. If they say one
thing bicause of one master and auctoritye:
let him then plainlie tell vs, the name
of that person his master. We haue
hard of Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Seruetus, Suenk feldius, of the which euery
one did crake of the glorious light of the
Ghospel of Christ, which they did beare
abrode in their lanthornes. But ther light
is not the light of the sonne, but such as

we see in great tempestes, when contrary
flashinges of lightening, com one against
an other. They did not confort and quickē
by their doct
                  •
               in▪ but destroy and burn
vp quite the grene frutes of deuotion,
and pretie. And which then of all these, is
your master & ruler? The worde of God,

                  •
               f in these dayes it be com abrode out of
darcknes, it cometh not without handes
and tongues. who then be your apostles?
If there be none:Aedant Origines Ecclesiarūsuar
                     •
                  . Lett them shew the b
                     •
                  ginninges and first rysing of theire churches. Tertull. in 
                     •
                  script. aduersus haereticos. a great maruel certenly,
to receaue so great a gift and not to
know, frō whence it cam, or who brought
it. If there be any: then must you folow
your Apostles. But they are all so wel and
highly learned, that they disdain to be any
mans scholers, as a certen Doctor and
called a bishop, perswading with one, that
he should read the Doctors with iudgement
(meaning that in deed the doctors
be plainly against them, except one take
the place of a iudge vpon him, and defyne
their verdictes, as it shall please the
world, the fle
                  •
               sh, and the diuell) vsed this
kind of reason to obtain his purpose. for
I my self (ꝙ he) do read Luther with iudgemēt.
O miserable and beggerly religiō.

euen Luther him selue, which like a morning,
is sayd to haue risen before the light
of the ghospell, for whom they blesse the
Lord, that in him he reueled his s
                  •
               ne Ih
                  •
               
               sus
Christ (os impudens) yet is he to be readen
with iudgmēt. But whose iudgemēt?
The iudgmēt of the church 
                  •
               row you? or
iudgmēt of Melanchthon, Bucer, Caluin,
or any other? no no▪ for al these are to be
readē also, with iudgmēt. And whose iudgement?
forsoth myn owne. Behold then
I pray you, is not the Ghospell mightely
spred abrode, when all this while no one
person liuing, is found on the Protestāte
                  •
               
side, which is and must be taken for an
vndouted trew preacher of the Ghospel?the Protestāte; hath no one 
                     ••
                  
                  doubted trew iudge, teacher or fayth.
Again, suppose that I haue yet no Christendom,
and that gladly I wold com to
the trew fayth, which is the trew light
of my soule: as far and as mightely as it
is spred abrode, where yet shall I find it?
Let me begin at Sarum church, and doth
that agree in al pointes with the Quenes
chappell? Let me goe vnto Geneua: and
that church, doth it agree in all articles,
with England? frō thens bring me abrode

in to Germany: and shall I see the same
preachinges vsed, as are in other countries
and cities of them which are no papistes?
how shall I, which am not yet
christened and learned, distinct the Lutheran,
Zuinglian, Anabaptist, Arrian, and
more such sectes one from an other? For
the blase of the glorious light, which you
talke of: is marred by the concurring, of
all these flames, together. Wherfor I
wonder much, at the vain hope of him,
which in these most troblesom and controuersious
times, would look that euery
man should com to the licht of the Ghospel,
which he saieth is mightely spred abrode.
wheras in deed, he him selfe which
hoped for many incummynges, doth not
yet redely know, whether he be in the
right way him self or no. and can not
proue to me, whether this which he holdeth,
be the Ghospell of Christ or no, or
counterfaicted by som Pope or other, or
by som one generall Councell or other,
from whose handes we haue receaued it.
For if it folow well, and if we may build
here vpon oure soules health, that they

haue not, 
                  •
               aythfullie expounded vnto vs
the Ghospell: as easely it may folow, that
they haue deliuered vnto vs a false Ghospell.
And if they may be trusted with the
keping of the Ghospell, and that we nothing
doubte, but they haue deliuered it
as they receaued it,Consider, whether 
                     •
                   new Ghospel & 
                     •
                  aith may with any reason be trusted. without interlining,
rasing, blotting, and corrupting of it: why
should we mistrust them, in the expounding
of the same Ghospell? If they had
so good conscience, that hauing the testament
in their keping, they are beleued
to haue suppressed or burned, or altered,
no part therof: shall we make them on
the other side, so wicked and desperate
that they would expoūd the same otherwise,
then they had receaued? And if we
doe stand by it plainly and openly, that
they wer so corrupted and blinded, that
they haue sensed and interpreted the scriptures
most vntruly, and most against the
glory of God: can we with owt feare, receaue
the testament of God and writinges
of all our health 
                  •
               rom them, and nothing
mistrust, lest they haue put in, and
put out, for their owne purpose and aduantage,

many thinges which God neuer
vttered, or which he expreslie cōmaunded?
Certainly, as mightely, as the talke of
the worde of God, and glorious light of
the ghospell is spred abrode, bicause of so
diuers sectes, which declame against the
catholick and Apostolick church: yet, if
we considre the case rightly, the very crakers
of that light, know not for all that,
in what suerty of their faith, they be them
selues. For they haue forsaken the high
way, and what by breaking of ceremonies,
what by ouerturning of monasteries,
what by false libertie of conscience, that
they may doe what they will, vnder the
name of the crosse of Christ and his passion:
they haue so crossed the wayes, and
broken down so many hedgis, and troden
downe so much good corn, & so many
faire pastures of all pietie and deuotion:
that, except they com back to the beginning
againe, they can neuer com to
good end. Whither be you posting Sir,
and please you? vnto heauen? you must
ride then a pase for company bycause by
your owne confession, these nine hundred

yeres and more, none did euer take
this way which you doe folow. But,
where will you bayt by the way? At the
signe of the booke with seuen claspes,
which is the Ghospell. Sir, then I besech
you, what call you the city where that
signe is? Mary, Geneua where Caluin
readeth. What, if Geneua be destroied,
and Caluin burned, or otherwise dead,
before you com thither? Whither will
you goe then? to the signe of the Ghospel.
And why not to Caluins successors,
which may sa
                  •
               ly deliuer you the Ghospel?
And then, Geneua being destroied, and
Caluin both, what shall the next bayting
place be, at which thei may turne in, which
look to be saued? or what shall his name
be, which is goodmā of the house? Certanly,
at this point and turning, they are
no more sure of their faith, thē I shold be
of my way to the mount Tabor, if I were
in the furthest and wildest places of all Egipt.
Bicause they wil trust none but thē
selues, and their owne wittines, and as
them selues shal cast the way, so will they
heare by leisure, what old good fathers do

say,protestātes will stand to theire owne iudgementes onlye. but yet will they folow their owne
inclinatiō, this being inowgh with them
all, for the most parte, that my mind and
sprit geueth me, this should be the way:
ergo this is likely to be the way. And again,
the sprite of God, is not in the great
scholars and high Bishops or rulers of the
world, ergo happy are we the poore and
ignorant, which haue neither lerning
neither authority.
M. Iuell complaineth that som there are
this day,
                     M. Iuell. which refuse the cōmunion and
runne headlong to the masse. wheras the
 holy cōmunion, is restored to the vse and
 forme of the primatiue church. to the sam
ordre that was deliuered and appinted by
 Christ. and after practised by the Apostles,
and cōtineued by the holy doctors and
 fathers, by the space of 
                     •
                  iue or six hundred
yeres, throughout all the catholike church
 of Christ. without exception, or any sufficient
example, to be shewed to the cōtrary.
I could make short, and say, all is lies. And
truly to make short in many places, I shal
be constrained, the matter doth so increase,
together with a iust indignation.
Which if I should folow to the vttermost,
I might write a great volume, and

yet not com to the end. But as for saying
al is lies, without prouing of it, althowgh
my negatiō be as free for me in familiar
writing, as his affirmation is for him in
open pulpetes and preaching: yet bicause
I need not to vse such extremity, I will
proue, that all together it is falsely a
                  •
               owched,
which he writeth in this forsaid sentence.
For how first doth this cōmunion
agree, with the ordre that was deliuered
by Christ? yea rather what ordre of celebrating,
did Christ deliuer, which yow
can tell of?Ioan. 13. 
               Christ did sit down with his twelue,
and after the paschall lambe eaten, he arose
again, he put of his roobes, he girded him
selfe with a linnen cloth, he poured water
into a bason, he wasshed his Apostles feet, he
satt downe again, he preached, he toke bread,
he blessed it, he brake it, he gaue it, saing,
this is my body, which shalbe deliuered for
you.Mat. 26. And likewise he toke the chalice and
blessed it. (as the Ghospell testifieth) and
at the last, many godly and comfortable
lessons being geuen, and grace ended, he
saied to his disciples,Ioan. 14. 
               arise, let vs goe hence.
I. there any more abowt the last supper

of Christ, that you can tell of? But how
many thinges more, and how many thinges
lesse hath your ordre in the communion
book?Note the Protestantes vse manie thinges ī theyr cōmunion which, are not fownd in script: to be by Christ his institutiō. What Scripture haue you
for the linnen faire cloth vpon the communion
table? Where hath Christ deliuered
vnto you, that the preist shall sta
                  •
               d
at the north side of the table? Where
found you the praiers, collectes, exhortations,
cōfessions, knelinges doune, standinges
vp, and such other fashions, as the
cōmunion book hath prescribed? I speak
nother of nor on as cōcerning the goodnes
and allowance of these thinges, but
onely I aske where you had these ordres
of Christ? For these be your wordes. that
The communion now is restored to the same
ordre, that was deliuered, and apointed
by Christ. Now, as you haue many thinges
more in your communion,Also they haue many poyntes lesse, then war doone by Christ at his last supper. as .1. then euer
you can proue by expresse Scripture, that
owre Sauior vsed in his last supper: so
haue you on the other syde, many pointes
lesse, then yow owght to haue by any
dispensation, if Christ were your perfect
example. For Christ our Sauior, as he

was at supper with his disciples, first and
formost toke bread. And how dare you
to make your boste, of the exact folowing
of the Lorde,Matt. 26. Christ toke bread in to his handes. where as you be ashamed
to take your cōmunion bread in to your
handes? I will not presse you with the
question, whi you doe not communicate
at supper tyme (which one might thinke
that you would cheifelie doe, being such
obseruars and kepers of the actions and
procedinges of Christ) but this so reasonable
and cōsequent point, that (I meane)
he which intendeth to worke about any
matter shold take it vp in to his hand, and
this thing, which Christ hym selfe hath
willed vs by his example to do (in taking
of the bread, which he minded to consecrate,
in to his holie and reuerēd handes,
why do not you remember to folow, and
why geue you not furth a general iniunction,
that euerie minister shal kepe that
ceremonie and maner? For although you
M. Iuell (as I haue heard saye) doe take
the bread in to your handes, whē you celebrate
solemply, yet thousandes there are
of your inferior ministers whose death it

ys, to be bound vnto any such externall
fasshion, and your order of celebrating
the cōmunion ys so vnaduisedlie conceiued,
that euery man is left vnto his pryuate
rule or canon, whether he will take
the bread into his handes: or lett it stand
at the end of the table. Lett it therefore
be well marked that first of all you either
forgett, or neglect, or be ashamed to folow
Christ, in taking of bread in to your
handes.
            
                It foloweth in the Ghospel that Christ
dyd blesse.Christ blessed the bread. but what dyd he blesse? vndowbtedlie
that which he toke in to his
handes. And why then doe not yow folow
Christ, in this action abowt the sacrament?
or leaue craking, that you haue
brought your cōmunion vnto that perfect
forme and absolute, at which Christ
left it vnto vs? if you will appeale in this
place vnto the Iewes, in whose tongue,
blessing, ys commonlie takē for thankes
geuing, you must then expound vnto vs
what thankes Christ dyd geue vnto the
breade. For the accusatiue case, which
is gouerned of the verbe (Benedixit, he

blessed) ys not, Deum or Apostolos, that
is, God or his Apostles, but panem, that is
bread. Therefore he blessed the bread,
and dyd not thank the bread. no he dyd
not praise the bread. in which sense (benedicere,
to blesse) ys oft tymes taken. For
how could that holie mynd of his, which
alwaies was occupyed vpon highe matters,
and which then was most especiallie
fullie and excellentlie directed vnto the
making of vnspeakable misteries, intend
the right seasonyng, or well bakyng, or
fayre lockyng, or any other thing worth
the praising, in that bread which he toke
in to his handes? yf you would or could
for your curst stomak & greatnes of hart,
folow with quietnes and charitie, the example
and māner of the wholie catholike
church, you shold make the signe of
the crosse ouer the bread, and think that
Christ hys blessinge of that creature: ys
wel, so to be vnderstanded. But as though
a thing were the worser, for the signe of
the crosse made vppon it, or as thowgh
Christ in blessing of the bread, blessed it
not in deed, but rather blessed & thanked

his father: so you 
                  •
               lee, by all meanes possible,
from all such action and gesture,
which might seem to cōmend this bread
vnto vs, and you haue rather chosen to
leaue owt all māner of blessing: then you
would be bound to ceremonies, and come
within order and canons. But whether
this agreeth with your crakes and
bostinges, that you haue brought the
supper of the Lord vnto his first order
and perfection (which you, for all that do
not blesse the bread, as you should haue
lerned by Christ his example and paterne)
lett any man iudge, which hath
but meane reason, and vnderstanding.
            Further more, it is in S. Luke, that, lykewyse
also the chalice,
               Luce. 22. (vnderstand) Christ
gaue. Which word (likewyse) I note, bycause
it importeth, that there was a certaine
especiall manner, which our Sauior
vsed in taking and geuing of bread, the
which he obserued in taking and delyuering
of the chalice. And reason, vndoubtedlie,
geueth it, that he, which at other
tymes vsed,Matt
                     •
                  . 14. most solempne and reuerend
gestures, (as in the feeding of fyue thousand

with fyue barley losses and two fisshes,
Ioan. 11. and in the raysing of Lazarus he vsed
blessing, lifting vp of eies, and lowd speakyng)
would not in such a tyme, and towardes
such a purpose, either vse a common
attentiō, either a cōmon expressing
of his intention. especiallie where as the
disciples, with whom he turned in at Emaus,
knew him in the breaking of bread,what reuerent gestures Christ vsed at his last supper
bycause he did it, after such a diuine and
solempne ceremonye, as was not vsed of
any other, such was his grace therein and
his ordenance. O Lord, how affectuouslie
did he take that bread, from the rest
which was vpon the table, of the which
bread he appoynted to make his owne
pretiouse bodye? How reuerentlie did he
looke vpp to heauen? How hartelie did
he thank his father? How abundantlie
did he blesse and halow the bread? either
by vsinge the playne signe of a crosse, or
by some other expressing of his goodnes
which he woulde to come vpon that creature?
How attentiuelie did he break it?
How hartelie did he bid them to take it?
How louingelie did he geue them to eat

it? how mightelie and vnspeakablie did
he turne and conuert it? Lyke wyse also
he toke and gaue the calice. Surelie if there
had ben no matter in the taking and handeling
of it, neither the bread (I beleue)
neither the wyne was so far frō him, but
that he might haue poynted vnto them,
with his finger, or looked at the least way
vpon them, saying, Take ye, and eate ye,
this is my bodye, this is my bloudd. Yet
to declare the singulare working of his,
which is doone in the bread and wyne,
and to make vs the more attent and close
in mynd,whi Christ vsed such reuerent gestures at this institution of the Sacrament of his bodie and bloud. by the folowinge of his owtward
gestures, he toke it: separating it
(as it were) from the reste of the lyke
graine, he blessed it: by some speciall
signe or sanctification, such as is not for
our common meates, he brake it: to represent
misticallie, the visible tearing of
his bodie, which the next day after folowed.
He gaue it: to make thē one togeather
with hym, not by faith onlie and
charitie: but in verye flessh allso and bodie.
He saied, This is my bodie, this is my
bloud: to teach them a true faith in those

misteries, and to confirme and establish
vs against the obiections, which either
heretikes or our senses,1. Cor. 11 doe make to the
discrediting of the Sacramēt. and to cō
               clud.
he said, Doe this in remembrance of
me: by which he gaue full authoritie of
consecrating vnto Priestes, and willed
them to folow his example. But can you
now (M. Iuel) proue, that you keepe all
these thinges in your communion? Remember,
I pray you, the order of it, and
consider, that the bread and wyne are
layed downe vppon your table, where it
pleaseth the sexten or the parish clark to
sett them.The new ministers abuse and lacke in celebrating Christ his last supper. And when the tyme of consecration
(if all thinges dyd procede rightlie)
cummeth, your booke apointeth, no
takyng, no blessing, no directing of the
mynd to the bread. But lyke as a man
should tell a tale: so the minister reciteth
onlie the wordes of the Apostle, and
when all is quicklie doone, he taketh the
vncōsecrated bread hymselfe and geueth
it to other, willing them to be thankfull,
and to feed vpon Christ in their hart. In
so much, that if a straunger should come

in the meane tyme whiles you be at your
cōmunion, he might wonder, why at the
end, you make so much of that bread and
cupp of wyne, with which all the seruice
long before you seemed to haue had so
litle to doe, or nothing. For neither by
taking, neither blessing, neither direct and
intentyue lookyng, it appereth that you
work any thing in the bread. And all this
not withstandyng, haue you browghte
back the cōmunion, vnto that state and
perfection, in which Christ delyuered it
vnto his Apostles. May you not be ashamed
of your vanitie, which crake of the
folowing of Christ, and condempne his
holie Catholike church, your selues neither
takyng, neither blessing, neither cō
               secrating
the bread and wyne, as Christ
hymselfe did in his last supper shew vnto
vs? Well (M. Iuell) this is one fowle
lie of yowres.
            Ther foloweth an other, namely, that
you haue the same ordre,An other lye of M. Iuells. which was practised
by the Apostles. But it appeareth
not either in the Actes of the Apostles, or
any of their epistles, what ordre of cōmunion

they had, In the Actes of the Apostles
it is writē,Act. 2. that they did breake bread
in their houses.Act. 13. and agayn, that after the
Apostles had fasted and sacrificed, they
sent furth S. Paule and Barnabas to fulfill
the holy ghostes cōmaundement, and
to preache abrode the Ghospell. But of
the ordre, which they vsed in breaking
their bread,1. Cor. 11. or in their sacrifices, nothing
is declared precisely. Again, vnto the Corinthians,
the blessed Apostle writeth,
what he receaued of our Lorde, and testifieth
therin the verity of the sacramēt,
but of the ordre, which is to be obserued,
he speaketh so litle, that he endeth that
matter with these wordes. As for the rest,
when I come my selfe, I wil set in ordre. here
be, loe, two foule ones past. ther foloweth
the third, which hath many other vnderneth
it. And that lie is, that, the holy cōmunion
is restored to the same ordre, which hath
been cōtinewed, by the holy doctors & fathers
(one) for the space of .v. or .vjC. yeres
               Manye lye
                     •
                   of M. Iuel
                     •
                   in one 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  e togeth
                     •
                  r (two)
through out all the whole Catholike church of
Christ (three) without exception or sufficient
example to be shewed to the cōtrary (fower)

               yet are there some this daye (q, he) that refuse
it, which is also the fifthe lye, if he
take this worde (some) for a small some.
Bicause in dede, ther be very many persons,
which do refuse it, and would gladlie
runne to masse,wherin the Protestātes Cōmunion agreeth not with the primitiue church and old fathers. if there were anye.
            But now to shame all these lies, I will
bring furthe a few exceptions, by which
I shall euidently proue, many thinges yet
to lacke in the Cōmunion, of the ordre,
which in the primitiue church, was vsed.
 First of all, you should torne your face
towardes the East in your cōmon prayer.Prayer toward the East. Iustinue 118. quaest.
As it doth appeare by S. Iustin the martyr
.118. quest. Bicause (saieth he) we
should reserue the most honorable thinges for
God, and by all mens iudgement, where the
sonne riseth, that is the worthiest part of the
wordle. The same also is proued by S. Athanasius
quest .37.Athan. quest. 37 Which alleageth for
that purpose the testimonies of the Psalmes
and Prophetes in answering to a Iew
& for the answering to a Gentil, he saieth
that bicause God is true light, therfor we
loke towarde the sight created, and doe
not worship the light it selfe but the maker

therof. Thirdly to a Christian this he
answereth, saing, For this cause the most
blessed Apostles did make the churche, of the
Christiās to looke towardes the East, that we
looking vnto Paradise, from whence we haue
fallen, (I meane our old cōtry and land) shold
and might desire our God and Lord to bring
vs back thither, frō whence being cast out, we
are in this banishement. And of this iudgement
also S. Basil the great, is. And saieth
It is a tradition of the Apostles.
               Basil. de 
                     •
                  . 5. cap. 27. And with
these agreeth S. Austen sayng, when we
stand to pray, we torne vnto the East.
               Lib. de ser. in monte. And
why therfore is not this ordre kept in the
communion boke but expressely rather
it appointeth the Priest to stand at the
north side of the table? Is this your continewing
in old fathers and doctors orders,
that yow be assured, no example
can be shewed to the contrary of that,
which you doe? if you say the standing
maketh no matter: suppose it to be so, &
wherfore then did you not let thinges
stand whē they were wel? or why do ye crake
before ignorant people, that you hau
                  •
               
the same ordre withowt example to the

cōtrary, which was in the primitiue church
and fiue or six hundred yeres after vsed?
            Thus, first then you stand not rightly,
no more doe ye in the rest accordingly.
For where is the water, which you should
mingle together with the wine in consecrating
the chalice? why keape you not
this auncient approued and receaued ordre?
S. Alexander Bishope of Rome the
 fifthe after S. Peter saieth:the chalice owght to be mengled with water 
               Neither wine
alone, neither water alone, but both mengled
together, ought to be offred vp in the chalice
of our Lord. as we haue receaued of our forefathers,
and reason it selfe dothe teache, bicause
both they are readen to haue gusshed
out of his side, when he suffred his passion.
            
            Item,C
                     ••
                  . Car. 3 ca. 24. the third Councell holden at Carthage,
forbideth that any thing els be offered,
then our Lord him selfe hath deliuered
and appointed, that is to say, bread
and wine mengled with water. Again, S.
Cyprian,Cyp. 
                     •
                  p. 3. lib. 2 in one whole epistle, greatly
rebuketh them, which offer vp water alone,
or wine alone. Bicause (he saieth)
that our Lorde appointed it so, that water
and wine should be mengled both together,

to signifie the ioyning of Christ,
and his Church in one.Apoc. 17 For many waters
do signifie in the Apocalipse, many people:
so that water mengled with wine,
doth well represent the people tempered
together, and vnited with Christ. How
say you? be not these witnesses sufficient
inough? they are within the fiue hūdred
yeres which M. Iuell geueth vs leaue to
considre, if perchaunce we may find any
exception to the contrarye, that the ordre
in the Englishe communion, is not
according to the perfect example of that
which it should be.
            I aske yet once again why,The signe of the crosse owght to be vsed in the communion. the minister of 
the holy cōmunion, is not commaunded
to make the signe of the crosse, when he
should consecrate? This also was an old
custome. For in S. Iames, and S. Basiles
masse, there ys
                  •
                a proper place and tyme
before sacring (as we haue called it) in
which the preist doth make the signe of
the crosse vpon the bread and wyne.
            And Tertullian sayeth,Libro de corona milit
                     ••
                  . 
               that in his tyme it
was a generall custome, to make the signe of
the crosse in the forhead at euerie comyng in

to the house, at euerie going furth in puttyng
on theire apparell, in sittyng downe at
the table, at candelltyde, at beddtyde. How
much soner then, dyd they vse that signe
in holie misteries. S. Chrisostome also an
awncient father,In demōst. aduerssusgent. to. 3. 
               the head (sayeth he) ys
not so much decked and set 
                     •
                  urth with a royall
crowne, as with the crosse. All men signe
them selues with it, 
                     •
                  mprinting it, in the most
noble part that we haue. For in the forehead
as it were vpon a piller the figure thereof
ys daylie made, so lykewise in the holie table,
so in the makinge of preistes, so againe
with the bodie of Christ in the misticall suppers,
that signe doth florishe.
               Augustin. tract. 118. in Ioannē. Vnto these .11.
fornamed witnesses lett vs take a therde
verdict of the blessed S. Austyne, which
iudgeth of the crosse in this wyse, that,
except it be putt vnto either the forheades of
the faithful, either the water with which thei
are regenerated and borne againe, wither the
oyle with which they are anointed, either the
sacrifice with which thei are norished, none of
them all ys well done. What then shall we
saye? yf M. Iuell hath not thorowghlie
readen these awncient doctors, how hardie

and hastie was he in reporting, that
his communion and his felowes ys restored
to the forme of the primitiue church, deliuered
by Christ, practised by the Apostles, cō
                  tinued
by the holie fathers? and if that he
hath readen the holie fathers, and yet cō
               tempneth
their sayinges: what credit is to
be geuen vnto his preaching, which plaieth
the hipocrite so notoriouslie? But
lett vs make other exceptions.
            In the primitiue church, altars were alowed
emong Christians,altars vsed and halowed in the primityue church. vpon which they 
offered the vnbloudie sacrifice of Christ
his bodie: Saynct Paule manifestlie saying,
we haue an altar, of which they may not
eate, which communicate with Idolls. The
councell also called Agathense, hath decreed
it, that Altars should be halowed, not
onlie with the anoynting of holie oyle, but
also the blessing of the preist.
               Concil. Agathen. se. cap. 14. Yet yowr cō
               panie
(M. Iuell) to declare what folowers
thei are of antiquytie, doe accompt it emong
one of the kyndes of Idolatrie, if
one keepe an altar stāding. And in deed,
yow folow a certayne antiquitie, not yet
of the Catholykes, but of desperate here

tikes.Optatus contra 
                     〈◊〉
                  . As Optatus writeth against the Donatistes,
saying: what ys so wicked & theewish
as to break, to rase, to remoue, the altars
of God, vpō which once you did offer? Now
if you be of no affinitie with the Donatistes,
answer, for the pulling downe of altars,
what sprite it was which moued you
there vnto?
            Againe, in the primityue church, incensing
at masse, was, of most holie men alowed
witnesses hereof, are S. Iames in his
masse, saying: O Lord 
                     •
                  hesu Christ, &c.
purge vs from all spot, and make vs to stand
pure at thy holie altar, that we may offer
 vnto the a sacrifice of prayse,Perfumes 
                        •
                     incense vsed in the pri
                        •
                     itiue churche. and receiue of
vs thy unprofitable seruātes this present perfume
for a sweet sauor, &c. S. Denise also
ys a witnes, which emong other thinges
write, cōcernyng the order of church seruice
in his dayes,Ecel. Hierarch. ca. 3 telleth, How the Byshop
after he hath ended his folie praier, vpon the
diuine altar, beginneth at it to burne incense
& so goeth rounde about the whole church.
An other witnes (to lett goe the liturgies
or masses of S. Basile and S. Chrisostome)
shal be S. Ambrose,Amb. li. I. in csp. 1. Luca. which in his cō
               templation

of the comyng of the Angel
vnto the highe preist Zacharie, sayeth,
And I wold to god, that whiles we incēse the
altars, and bring sacrifice thither, the Angel
shold stand by vs, and geue hymself to be seen
of vs. Now these testimonies M. Iuell, being
gathered out of the fiue hūdred yeres
after Christ, you were not so wyse vndoubtedlye
as you were bold, in saying
your cōmunion to be of that forme and
fashion, which the Apostles delyuered
and their next folowers receiued.
            Furthermore in the primityue church 
goodlye tapers and lightes were vsed:Lyghtes mainteined in the primitiue churche.
how read you in the old doctors? were
they not? If they were, how be you not a
shamed of the darknes, which is generallie
in you, and your cōmunion? If you
can find no mentiō of lightes in any good
auncient doctor: read then S. Augustyne
in his sermons vnto the people,August. Ser. 7. de tempor
                     •
                  
                declaring
what is the best kynd of vowe. and vttering
by that occasiō the manner of good
folke in his time, of whō, some did vowe
oyle, some wax, to keep light in the night,
some, a pall or robe, &c. Which although

he aloweth, yet these are not the best
vowes sayeth he.Paulin. in nat. 3. 
                     •
                  . Foelicis. Read also Paulinus,
which vpon S. Felix holidaye, sayeth,
Clara coronantur densis altaria lychnis.
The altars bright: Are rownde I dight,
With lampes thick sett, and light.
            Read (to be short) S. Hierome, and not
onlie read: but regard hym. Read what
he iudgeth of Vigilantius, and read what
the heretike Vigilātius iudged of churchlightes
and tapers. Did not he, lyke a singular
and blind Protestant (all be it such
then, were not called Protestantes, but
knowen well inowghe by the bare name
of heretikes) but did not he iest & tawnt
at the māner of Catholikes, askyng them
whi they lighted tapers at myd noon, the
sonne faire shinyng? and askyng further,
whether the martyrs which dwell in heauen,
neede any of our tapers, which tarye
on earth? Whose madd brayne for theis,
and other lyke sayinges,H
                     •
                  ero. aduersus Vigilantium. 
                     •
                  oan. 12. S. Hierome noted,
to require some cure and remedie,
and emong other thinges he answereth
Vigilantius with these wordes. Neither
Christ needed the oyntment (which Marye

Magdalene powred vpon hym) Nor martyrs
the light of tapers: and yet that woman
did that thing in the honor of Christ, and the
deuotion of her mynd ys taken, and who so
euer do light tapers, they haue theire reward
according to their faith. Agayn. Thorowgh
all the churches of the East, when the Ghospell
ys a reading, the tapers are lighted,
euen when the sonne now shyneth. Not trulie
to putt darknes awaie, but to shew furth
and declare a token of ioye and gladnes.
            
            For this matter therefore M. Iuell, I will
leaue you vnto holie S. Hierome, to see
whether you and he in this 
                  ••
               ynt can agree
any thing togeather. and whether
he can patientlie suffer you, after so euident
customes to the contrarie, to crake
that you haue browght the communion
vnto that forme which it had at the
begynnyng.
            Shal I make any more exceptions against
you, or haue I sayd to much allreadie for
your profite and credite emong the ignorant?
Many surelie wil think and saie
vnto them selues, that if my Lord Iuell
preached these thinges in open pulpite,

he was well aduysed before, what he
would saye, and vndoubtedlie he hath
how to answer, how so euer these papistes
alleage the Doctors. Which felowes
verilie haue to greate an opinion of the
man, and they may seeme to offend of
purpose, which wil not see most manifest
thinges, and such which are cōprehended
by the owtward and carnal senses. Many
heresies of old were verie subtile, and of
much shew of vertue, in so much, that
right lerned and good men might haue
ben deceaued in them: but the heresies of
this tyme are for the most part all, so grosse,
so vnreasonable, so vnnatural, so folish,
so much crakyng, so litle performyng,
that it ys a woūder, how any man of cō
               mon
sense, doth preferr the new before
the old religion. For, to note .ij. pointes
more, which, the church obserueth as delyuered
by the Apostles, and which the cō
               muniō
boke hath not in it, for all the bost
that is made of it, what honest hart can abide
to here those bolde wordes, that the
cōmuniō is restored to the vse and forme
of the primityue churche, when he shall

perceaue that praying to the Sainctes,
and praying for the dead,Of praying to Sainctes. which the new
Ghospellers do vtterlie neglect, was generallie
of old obserued. Is it not sayed
manie tymes and oft, in S. Basils masse,
lett vs commend our selues one an other
and all owr life,Basil. in sua Liturgia. vnto Christ owr God,
hauing in memorie, owr most holie and
vndefiled ladie the mother of God, and
allwaies virgin Marie, with all the Sainctes?
Doth he not make an expresse mention
of owr ladie, of S. Ihon the Baptist,
and of the sainct, whose memorie is kept
that daye in the churche, sayinge, Quorū
postulationibus visita nos. at whose praiers
and requestes visite vs?Chrisost. in Liturg. Doth not Chrisostome
in this article agree with Basile &
the catholike faith? O Michael (saieth he)
which art the cheife captaine of the heauenlie
armie, vnworthy we beseech the to defend
vs by thy intercessions, vnder the shadow of
thy wynges. Agayn, O ye Apostles, do your
message vnto owr mercifull God, that he
may geue vnto owr sowles remission of sinnes.
The lyke praier he maketh in effect
vnto S. Nycolas and to all the sainctes.



               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
And whereas holye Sainctes and Martirs
are mentioned in the rest of the masse,Chrisost. 
                     •
                  om. 21. in acta Apo. especiallie
yet thei are at the tyme of oblation:
for it is great honor to them, to be
named when their Lord ys present, whē
that death ys celebrated, and that dreadfull
sacrifice, and vnspeakable sacramentes.
Which was so ordinarie and common
a matter,Aug. li. de S. virgin. cap. 45. that S. Augustine in few
wordes sayeth, It is well knowen vnto the
faithfull, at what
                     •
                   place the martyrs and religiouse
women or Nunnes departed, are rehersed
at the Sacramentes of the altar.
            
            And agayne,Idem li. 22 de ciu. Dei cap. 10. 
               that we vse not to offer sacrifice
to Martirs, but that in that sacrifice
which we offer vp vnto God, the martirs in
their place & order are named. Yf yow aske,
to what purpose the catholike and true
cōmunion should vse the inuocation or
namyng of martyrs: (althowgh it be argument
sufficient against your cōmunion,
that it foloweth not the lyke maner,
which we find to haue ben receiued in
the awncient churche, yet to yelde much
herein vnto you) I say either with Chrisostome
in the place forenamed in the

that it is the Martirs honor, to be remē
               bred
in the presens of their lorde his pretiouse
bodie.Lib. 20. ca. 21. contra Faustū
                Or I saie with S. Augustine,
applying that to our purpose speciallie,
which he spake generallie of all Martirs,
that, the Christen people doe keepe the
memories and commemoration of Martirs,
with a religiouse and deuoute solemnitie,
bothe to stir vp in them selues a
folowing of them, and also to be made
partakers of their merites, and to be holpen
by their praiers. But the practise of
the primityue Church beinge euydent,
althowgh the cause of it were not knowen,
whi vse yow not in yowr communion,
an ordinarie inuocation of holie
sainctes?
            Now if in all other thinges, no oddes
betweene yow and the true church might
be espied,Praying at masse tyme for the dead. yet the praying for the dead,
was in the primityue church so laudable,
and in yowr religion it ys so hated, that
except, before iudgemēt be geauen, yow
alter in that poynt yowr communion, no
reason can beare it to be Apostolike.
            
               
Consider by your selues S. Basiles and S.
Chrisostomes masses, whether peculiar
and proper mention of the dead, be not
made in them, to obtaine God his mercie
for them?Conf. lib. 9. Remember, that S. Augustine
desireth his brothers and fathers tho
priestes, which should reade of the death
of his mother, to pray for her at the altar.
And if you will be loth to turne to
these places, and to consider them accordinglie,
I will pardon you of that labor,
trusting that one testymonie will be sufficient
vnto you, which seeke nothing,
but trueth, and are readie to folowe better
councell. The testymonie is Sainct
Chrisostomes.Chris. homil. 3. ad Philip. 
               It hath not ben decreed for
nought, by the Apostles, (sayeth he) that
in the celebration of the venerable misteries,
a memorie should be made of them, which
haue departed hense. For they knew, that
much vantage and profite did come herebie
vnto them, &c.
            
            So manie poyntes therefore considered,
which we find vsed in the primityue
churche, and which we lament to see

contemned in your vpstart church: can
you, for shame of the world, either not
folow that, if you know the state of it,
or if you doe know litle of it, so boldlie
compare your selues with it? You say,
that whithout exception and authoritie
to the contrarie, you haue the same
order and fasshion which was practised
in the auncient church, thorough Christendome,
and I doe shew you now half
a skore of iust exceptions, of noe small
maters, or hard to find, but great and easie
to be perceiued. Who therefore
might in this place and vantage against
yow, geue for God his sake which is
trueth, a iust and free sentence betweene
vs and you? Who might graunt forth
inquisitors and Iudges to sitt vpon it,
which of vs two doth folowe the church,
and which of vs two doth belie her? how
long is it that men halt on both sides?
            
               If our Lord be the God, folow hym: if Baal
be, folowe hym.
               Reg. 3. cap. 18. If Iuell say trueth, lett the
Catholikes contynue in their infamie: if
the Catholikes proue hym a lier, goe vpright,

and halt not with a false legg. This
cōmunion of yowrs M. Iuell, is no more
lyke the masse, office, or seruice, which
the Catholikes vsed in the first fyue hundred
yeares after Christ: then a fowre
crabb is lyke a sweete orenge. But as some
man might folishlie say of an other,
he is lyke King Arture the famouse, bycause
he sitteth at a rownd table, or hath
perchaunse some part of a gesture, which
(as he hath readen in Chronicles) becummed
King Arture verie well, whereas
in all kynd of manlines, he is more neerer
a ducke then a duke, so (that I may be
quietlie suffered, to cōpare thinges simple
and temporall, with those great matters
and euerlasting) these obscure Protestantes,
bycause they presume all of
them to receiue vnder both kyndes, as
Christ did vnto his Apostles onely, deliuer
them both, (as teaching them how
to celebrate that daylie sacrifice) and bicause
they will not receaue, except they
be a company of them together: loe, say
they, we be the folowers of Christ, and

his Apostles, and of the primitiue church
as far as fiue hundred yeres goe, (for there
we leaue them) and we haue the light of
the Ghospell, after so long a night of nine
hundred yeres and more, and our ordre
of the holy communion, is the same
which Christ deliuered, (o good brothers)
and the Apostles receaued, and the
Doctors and Fathers continewed, without
any exception, which can be made to
the contrary. Wheras in deede, you may
see, in how many, and how principall thinges,
they forsake quite the true ordre of
the primitiue church. But shall they be
so suffered for euer?
True it is, the Sacrament is an holy thing,
                     M. Iuell fol. 8.
the ordinance of Christ, the mystery of our
saluation. Yet, is there nothing so good, no
ordinance so holy, no mystery so heauenly,
but through the foly andx frowardnes of
man, it may be abused.
From this place forward, many leafes together,
he proueth that thinges may be
abused: and reckoneth vp certein abuses,
which haue chaunced about the Sacramētes.

and if I take him 
                  •
               ardie but in one,
he must be gilty in all, bicause he alleageth
all with like faith and integritie,
and willeth him selfe to be takē as he is,
if he be found ouercom, but in one thing
onely. First then, as concerning those,
which did baptise the dead, they ar well
reproued in the third Coūcel of Carthage,
the sixt canon. But here by the way,
I note one great vnreasonablenes in those
men, which at their pleasure, to serue
their turne, doe alleage Councells, and
will not yet obey the canons of the same
Councells. The 17. canon of this very
Councell of Carthage, forbeddeth that
no strange women, (that is to say) none,
but either mother, grandmother. Aunt by
the father or mothers side, sisters, and
brothers or sisters doughters, either such
as wer of household, before they toke ordres,
but besides these, none should dwell
together with the cleargie. And now,
priestes doe take not onely strangers to
their household seruātes, but also to their
chambre and bed felowes. The .27. Canō,

cōmaundeth water and wine both to be
vsed in the sacrifice. The .36. forbeddeth
vtterly, that any priest shold cōsecrat holy
oyle, for that was reserued to the Bishop
only, with whose leaue the priest might
cōsecrat virgins. But in these quarters of
the world, nother water in sacrifice, nother
oyle, nother virginitie with cōsecration
therof, is alowed of the Protestātes.
Reason truly it is, to take a mans whole
tale, and not to mangle an auncient Coū
               cell.
Which Councel, if they do not creditt,
why then doe they bring the testimony
of that Councell for profe of their
purpose, against which, they bere false
witnesse that it is not to be folowed?
            But to let this matter to passe: A great
abuse is attributed vnto Tertullian, and
Sainct Cypriā his tyme, a thousand foure
hundred yeres agoe, that the Christians
toke the Sacrament home with them.
            This was (
                  •
               aieth M. Iuell) an abuse, and
therfore it was broken. But who did break
it tell vs? It was broken saieth he. and
how doe ye proue this to be an abuse? it
was an abuse saieth he. And I say, it was

not. and why not my nay, as good in reasoning,
as your yea. For although the cō
               mēdation
of some person hath made you
a Bishopp, And, by order of the church,
I am a simple priest: yet as good the legges
of a larke, as the body of a kyte. If we
goe to craking (in dede it is not good,
but this yet they would constraine many
to do) I wil yeld nomore vnto his auctoritie,
then reason will require. Yet I may
iustly crake, not in my selfe, but vnder the
churches auctoritie, and in the name of
S. Cyprian and Tertullian. Was that, say
you an abuse, to carye the Sacramēt home
at those dayes, and receaue it before
other meates? I vnderstand what greueth
you in this example, of the primitiue
churche. For it proueth plainly against
you, that euen in so nigh daies
vnto Christ, ther was no necessitie to receaue
the Sacrament vnder both kindes.
And wheras the persequutiō and hatred
of Christians, was then so great, that they
could not frely meete together in any
common and open place, and so quietly
serue God, and receaue his benefices, as

they desired: can ye blame them, yf the
clergie were cōtent, to let the Christians
cary home with them, that present comfort
of their soule, (which is the body of
Ihesus Christ) to haue it alwaies in redinesse,
and to strengthen their weaknes
therwithall, if sodenly they were called
vnto martyrdom? Be you wiser then S.
Cyprian? and he writing not his priuate
fashion and māner (which might be well
inough corrected by greate counsell) but
writing of a certain fact of a woman,
which reserued the Sacrament in her
chest, wherby the custome of that tyme
and most vndoutedlye, the faith of that
tyme may be gathered, doe you reproue
the odre of the primityue church, and
haue you forgotten so sone,It was no abuse in the primitiue church to carie home the Sacrament, and receiue it alone. that old customes
must preuaile? where haue you
readen, in any old father, or doctor, or in
any generall councell, or how can you
shew it, by any treu example of the primitiue
church, that the carying home &
reseruing of the Sacrament, was an abuse?
but let vs heare what S. Cyprian writeth,
in his sermō de Lapsis.Cyp. ser. 5. De Lapsis. He proueth

                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
Wherin I confesse he did vilye and damnablye
misvse the people and cōtrary the
church. But it is to be noted, that this
Marcus went about to winne vnto him
selfe an estimation aboue all other priestes,
which could not but folow, when
that at his cōsecrating, the people should
see the wyne turned as it were in to bloud,
and that the like did not appeare, when
other Priestes did consecrat. And note,
that except the faith of the church in those
dayes, had ben, that the very bloud of
Christ, was in the mysteries of the Christians,
he could neuer haue made any to
reuerence hym the more, for that practise,
but rather to haue brought him, before
the officers of the church, and examined
him, saying: We doe beleue, that we receaue
Christ onely by faith, which faith
goeth vp to heauen, and eateth him as he
sitteth at the right hand of his father: but
this man sheweth vs, very plaine bloud in
the chalice, which is against our belefe.
And wheras this Necromanser, did turne
his craft to the pleasing of the people,

and so made bloud to appeare in the
chalice: it foloweth, that the whole people
of the church, did reioyce in the
bloud of Christ, which thei beleued to
be in the mysteries, and so he craftely
serued their faith an deuotion, that he
might winne their praise and fauor, and
that he might be pointed vnto, with, loe,
there goeth a good priest, and a blessed
man. But will yow heare more abuses?
Som take the Sacrament for a purgation,
               Iuell. 
               against
slaunder: som hang it before their
brestes for a protection. S. Benet (sayeth
he) ministred the communion vnto a woman
that was dead. Ergo what doth folow?
Ergo the sacrament may be abused.
I graunt it may be, as when wicked and
false coniures doe make it a meane to
binde the diuell, or when heretikes or infidells
tread it vnder foote, or cast it in
the fire, or pricke it with kniues to proue,
whether God his worde be trew, that
this is his body, which was deliuered for
vs. But none of your premisses almost
doth inferre rightly that conclusion.
            
               
For wherby shew you, that S. Benet did
abuse the Sacrament in ministring it vnto
a woman that was dead? All your argument
is this, Christ did not appoint,
that the Sacrament shold be hanged about
ones necke, or put in chest, or geauen
to dead women: ergo these be great
abuses. Is this in deed good reason? that
what soeuer Christ hath not expressely
willed,A n
                     •
                  wghtye argument of authoritie negatiuelie. that may not be vsed? Sir, Christ
did not bid vs, that if ther were not present
three at the least, which would receaue,
ther should be therfore no communion
that daye. Christ did not bid vs
knele downe, and say, Lorde we doe not
presume to com to this thy table trusting
in our owne merites, Christ did not bid
vs, when one chalice is supped vp, to fill
it again out of the whole potle or quart
potte. Christ did not bid vs, cary home
with vs the pieces of bread, or cantells
therof, and doe what we would with it.
Ergo these be great abuses in the cōmunion
boke. no Sir no, the truth must be
tryed by other argumentes, then these
rhetoricall repetitions and negatiues of

Christ did not appoint this, ergo it is an
abuse. especially, whereas to many doe
thinke, that Christ will be content with
no other thinges, but such onely as are
writen: as though the holy ghost, the spirite
of truth, were idle in the church all
this while. how dare you to iudge of S.
Benet his fact, the like vnto which, S. Gregory
doth alleage for a miracle, and for
a notable matter. S. Austen so wise and
blessed a man, wheras he disputeth in his
boke De Ciuitate Dei, of deathes which
som haue vsed towardes them selues, and
wheras he well remembred, that the precept
of God was,Exod. xx. 
               Thou shalt not kill, & also
remembred that the church doth honor
for martyrs certain, which did runne
into the waters, and to kepe their virginitie
lost their liues, in this so doubtfull
a case, wherin the church seamed to stand
against God, and the precept of God, to
be contraried by the holye daye of the
church, he dared not rashely to conclud,
but stoode herein, that the precept of
God must haue his force, and with what
conscience and prayse, those virgins

drowned them selues, that must be left
vnto the working of God the holy ghost,
and not curiously serched of men. for
what if they did so (sayeth he) not deceaued
as women may be,Lib. 2. de
                     •
                  c
                     •
                  uit. Dei cap. 26. but commaunded
by God, neither 
                  •
               rring therin,
but obeying? As of Sampson, it is not
lawfull for vs, to thinke any other thing.
And we therfore (sayeth he afterwardes)
come to the conscience by hearing, but
of secret thinges, we take not vpon vs
the Iudgement.The doinges of the church and of good mē are not lightlie to be iudged. Thus, Sir, it did becom
you to doe, for asmuch as you confesse
Sainct Benet for a Sainct, and wheras by
many miracles, that hath ben well knowen
vnto the church, not hastely to iudge
of the spirite of God, with whom you
are not so well acquainted, as Sainct Benet
was, but humbly and reuerently, to
heare the miracles of God in his sainctes,
and to confesse that M. Iuell doth not
know all thinges. Wher you haue it, that
Sainct Benet did geue the communion,
vnto a dead woman, I know not verely,
but Sainct Gregorye reporteth a lyke
thing of hym.2. lib. Dial. cap. 24. that a ladd of Sainct Benet

his monasterye, departing vnto his
parentes without the blessing of Sainct
Benet, and before his returne departing
also the world, after he was committed
to the earth, the next day he was cast
vp again. Wher vpon Sainct Benet, (after
mone made vnto him) sent the communion,
and willed it to be putt vpon
the brest of the lad. After which do
                  •
               e,
ther was no more troble. which thing
being so sadly writen by Sainct Gregory,
we may not well lawgh at it, and the
same finding no fault with the matter,
lett not vs murmur against the workes
and inspirations of God. In deed, it is
not for euery man so to doe, but when
so singular vertuous men, are moued
therunto, and when a great effect doth
folow, we must iudge, that God was the
author therof, and that the partie did it
not vpon his owne opinion and boldnes.
The which answer serueth also,In oratione funebri de obitu fratris sui Satyri. that we
be not to bold in condemning any one
his deuotion and faith, which vseth the
sacrament for his defence in any kind of
cause. For S. Ambrose praiseth his brother

Satyrus, which minding to goe ouer
the seas, did take of the Christiās, which
were in the shippe with him, the Sacrament,
and hanged it about his necke.
            wherevpon afterwardes, when a tempest
did rise, and breake the shippe, he committed
him self, to the defence of Christ
in hys Sacrament, and so miraculouslye
escaped drowning. And lyke as Saint Peter,
takyng comfort and strength of the
presence of Christ,Matth. 14. sayed, Lord if thou be
he, bid me com vnto the, vpon the waters,
and did walke vpon them, as vpon firme
land: so the Catholikes, which certainly
beleue, that this is he him selfe, whome
they see couered vnder forme of bread,
(although he be alwayes present) yet
they are more out of feare, when they
haue him within their handes, and reach.
And throwgh the grace which cometh
from him, they walke securely and peaceably.
As contrarie wyse vnto other,
which doubte of Christ his wordes, and
make such a sence of them, as they be
able without difficultie to attaine vnto,
saying that he is present by a certain conceiued

thowght of ours, and remembraunce
onely: I wondre not, if it seme
foly vnto such, to make any store of the
Sacrament, or to reserue it for a stay of
their wauering fayth in ieoperdies. For
what is bread but bread, and what can it
doe more then comfort the body? But
now againe, bycause in S. Benet his time,
more besides him (as M. Iuell collecteth)
did geue the Sacrament euen vnto dead
persons: ergo they certainly did confesse
a more liuely, reall, mighty, and blessed
thing therin to be, then our protestantes
will admitt. So that putting a side the
question, whether they did well therin or
no? yet this appeareth, that they toke
the Sacramēt to be as Christ hath saied,
his verye owne body, and that faith was
in the church within the fiue or six hundred
yeres after Christ, which M. Iuell
receaueth for incorrupt. 
                  But alas, what if
they,
                  Iuell. 
                  which most of all defend the masse,
them selues, find fault with the masse? as
Albertus Pigghius by name, the greatest
piller of that parte.
                First I answer, that the
church doth not take him for the greatest

piller (in so much that in three or fowre
poyntes she noteth hym to haue had his
errors) & a Catholike faith is not bownd
vnto any priuate mans opinion. But you
be accustomed to this kinde. Then I say
further, that it appeareth hereby, of what
good conscience Pigghius was, who did
not write for fauor of his side, or hatred
of the contrarye, which if he had minded,
he would neuer haue yelded one inche
vnto an heretike, which haue that māner
of stoutnesse, that if one of them denie
neuer so manifest a thing (as for example,
that S. Peter was euer at Rome: vpon
which thing all writers agree vpon, althowghe
they differ somwhat in the time)
but, as I sayed, be the thing neuer so
manifest to the contrarie of that, which
any of them doth affirme or impugne,
yet will the rest defend him in their wise,
not perchaunce in alowing the opinion,A differēce betwene the Catholikes and Protestantes assertions.
but in saing that it is a disputable questiō:
and so, that being graūted, ergo say they, it
is no mater of faith, whether the one part
or other be taken. But the catholikes, bicause
they be plaine, they doe vtter their

owne opiniō, and noting dissemble with
the
                  •
               r felowes, if it be not trew. Wherin,
they are suffered, so to reason one against
an other, that they be both of them obediēt
vnto the church, whose voice we do
harkē vnto, & not what Albertus Pigghius
saith. Thirdly thē I answer, that more beside
Pigghius cōfesse, abuses to haue crept
into the seruice of the church, as it appeareth
by the catholikes,Cap de horis Canonicis. which cōsulted vpō
reformatiō of disorders, in a certain meeting
at Ausburg. Also 
                  ••
               ofmesterus in the
expounding of the masse,what abuses are crept in to the church masse, and diuine seruice. demeth not, but
som trifles haue ben put in. but what abuses
& trifles doth he meane? forsoth, such
as be in som proses, antiphonies, repetitiōs,
and rehersalls of thinges not autētike.
which be in deed in the cōpasse of the
masse, but are the outward garment, as it
were of the body. Now, wheras you say,
that Pigghius hath found out errors and
abuses in the masse, it maketh a Catholike
man to feare by and by, lest that, either
by Pigghius opiniō, Christ his body were
not really present, or were not to be adored,
& the signe of the crosse wer not to be

vsed in the masse, or water and wine not
to be mengled, or the bread not to be
taken in the hand of the priest, when he
should cōsecrat, or least som other thing
worth the talking of, were omitted or
abused. As for a versicle, or lesson, or som
one ceremony, there may be cause perchaūce
to alter it, and yet the masse continue
neuer the worser. And therfor truly,
M. Iuell semeth vnto me, not to play
a bold part and vpright. for wheras properly
(as he can not but know, except he
be to much vnlearned) wheras I say, the
masse is properly the sacrifice of the new
law,what a masse is. in the which Christ his very owne
body is offered, by him self throwgh the
ministery of priestes, vnto God his father,
for the purging, preseruing, and beutifying
of his church: M. Iuell yet, setting
him selfe to talke against the masse. I will
not speake (sayeth he) of transubstantiation,
               A timerous bragging and vaine gloriouse weakenes of M. Iuell.
               of reall presence, of sacrifice, I am content to
disauantage my selfe at this tyme in those
thinges, but I will talke of the communion
in both kindes, of the Canon of the masse, and
of priuate masse. As who should say, it is

not good to com before the face, but I
shall angre them well inowgh, in tredding
on their heeles. It is the fashion of
mery men, when they are disposed to
spend good tyme idlely, to find fault with
the fashion of the apparel and gesture of
them, whose manners they can not reproue.
And so in this place, if they haue
any thing, to lay against the masse, lett
them reproue, either sacrifice or presence,
or one of the substantiall thinges. But
if they will make great bost, of defacing
the masse, and in effect medle with nothing,
but the circunstances therof, truly
if this be alowed, then (say I) he is no
honest mans and if I be required to proue
it, I will bid the iudge to consider his
croked nose, or halting legg. Which, as
they are no good reasons, to disproue a
mans honestie: so doth most of M. Iuell
his talke, nothing perteine to the purpose.
But M. Iuell craftelie perceiuing, that
of congruence in speaking against the
masse, it should folow, that he did speake
against the sacrifice and reall presence,
No (saieth he) I will not talke of them, I

will disauantage my selfe which is a meruelous
kind of simplicity, to seke a praise of
corage and strength in very feare and cowardnes.
This is once certaine, The sacrifice
and presence disproued, all the rest
would quicklye fall. but cōmunion vnder
both kindes, vulgar tongue, and taking
away of priuate masse (as they call it) for
a while permitted: the masse in deed is
neuer the worse, the communion in effect
is neuer the better. Yet, goe to, let vs
consider, what he sayeth against the masse,
euen in those pointes, which he hath
his most aduantage in, which all (except
adoration onely) if he could disproue,
he is nothing the neerer of his purpose,
which is to withdraw good Christians
mindes from the masse, and make them
hang vpon the Communion.
Fyrst as touching the strainge and vnknowen
tongue,
                     M. Iuell. which hath ben vsed in the masse.
S. Paul his counsell in generall is, that what
soeuer is done or sayed in the congregation,
should so be done and sayed, that the hearers
may haue comfort therby, and yelde
thankes vnto God, and say Amen.
It appeareth that the store is spent, when

such argumentes are browght forth, or
rather, that there was no store at all. For
this obiection of the vnknowen tongue,
myght haue ben vttered ouer nyght at
Euensong tyde, or early at matins in the
morning, which both seruices are in the
latin tongue, which he termeth an vnknowen
tongue. But to kepe it vnto the
masse, it is out of place and fashion. And
behold, he pretendeth to talke properlye
against the masse, & that he might so doe
the more properly,Note how properlye M. Iuel argueth against the Masse. and the more to the
purpose, he dispatched his hādes of many
other questions, and disauātaged him self,
of speaking against the real presence and
sacrifice, as who should say, I wyll onely
medle with the masse, and yet his first
obiection against it, doth serue first, against
Euensong or matins, if we should
folow the ordre of time. And by this reason
also M. Iuell, you myght haue taken
vpon you to speake against the Pater noster.
Againe, this argument is good in the
coūtrey, not in the towne, emong the lay
vnleardned people, and not in the vniuersitie
emong scholars, vnto whom the

masse is not in an vnknowen tongue.
            Also this reason may be alowed, on this
side of the seas, and not beyond sea, where
the latin tongue in many places is cō
               monly
knowen. You haue proued then,
that a simple Englishe man, should not
alow the masse, but all Latinistes and
scholars may vse the masse still. And so
the great labor, which you haue taken in
reciting of S. Paule, S. Austen, and Iustinian,
is not against the masse, but against
her cote onely. how think you (master
myne) if I shold preach among the welshmen,
and cry out to them, that the communion
is nawght, and should say, alas
good people, you lacke the frute of our
Lord his supper, and the solacing of your
selues in the remembraunce of Christ his
death, and so furth. And if I did bring
this principal reason for me, bicause it is
in a tongue vnknowen vnto them, would
you not accompt me frantik, to make
such a doe against the communion, for
the tongue onely, in which it is writen?
wold you not answer, that the cōmunion
in it self is good, but this litle missehap,

is leysurely to be amended? Euen so then
geue sentence vpon your owne argumēt,
and say,obiections against M. Iuell cōcernig his wil. that al thinges done in the church must be vnderstanded of the people. that the masse may be good
for all this, but only the tongue in which
it is vsed, is to be amended.
            Before I goe to another obiectiō of his,
I wil make som against him my self, vpon
the place of S. Paule, which he triumpheth
in. For if euery thing is to be doon
and saied so, in the congregation, that all
may vnderstand what is sayed: wherfor is 
all the Psaltar of Dauid, appointed to be
readen in the English church, wheras all
English men vnderstand not all the Psalmes?
why are ther not appointed and selected,
certain easy and licht to be vnderstanded,
but without choise, they be taken,
in ordre, as they folow? Then, how 
many of the common people are there,
which vnderstand not, the most easiest
chapter in all Scripture? for if all this while,
in so great reuelation of the Ghospell,
many yet doe not vnderstand the Lord
his praier: how should they attaine to the
Prophetes and Psalmes? Further yet, wher
singing is vsed, what shall we say, to the 
               
case of the people, which knele in the body
of the church? yea let them harken at
the chauncel dore it self, yet they shall not
 be much the wiser. Besides this, how will
you prouide, for great parishes, where a
thowsand people are? and if the person
haue but a small voice, is their coming to
the church frutelesse? how shall they all,
say Amen, which doe not all heare him?
Certainly, your wisdomes must prouide,
that first the minister haue a good voice.
and that he haue no more to his cure and
charge, then may heare him. the chauncell
shalbe well pulled down, the church
made rownd, like a Synagog of the Iues,
or like a doue howse, welshmen by them
selues, Cornishmen by them selues, Northern
men by them selues, fine Londoners
by them selues, broder speached men
by them selues. So shall all, say amen, vpon
the thinges which are readen, so shall the
 church florish. But yet, I had forgotten
one principall thing, all Scripture must
not be readen, nother of certen bokes
all chapters. and then, for the better lerned
of the parish, one chapter, and for

the poorer, an other. There would be
no end of confusion, if we should prouide,
according to this deuise, that nothing
be readen in the congregation,
but that which shalbe heard and vnderstode
of all, which are present. But the
Apostle his purpose was of an other wisedom
and discretion. For he, in the
first vnto the Corinthians, speaking of
the giftes of the holy ghost, and comparing
them together: correcteth therby
a certain vaine glory of the Corinthians,
emong whom, some were prowd,
for the gift of tongues, and thowght it
a ioyly matter, to speake in a strainge
language. But, sayeth the holy Apostle,1. Cor. 14
               Folow ye spirituall thinges, and rather couet
ye, for the gift of prophecying, which
was to expownd and open the Scriptures.
And then afterwardes, he doth
not dispraise the speaking with tonges,
but he preferreth the gift of interpretation,
and of preaching the Scriptures.
which is most trew in deed, as S. Paule
doth proue it most manifestly by the similitude
of instrumētes and trumpettes.
            
               
For if one were neuer so cunnyng in
Hebrew, Greke, and Latin, and would
shew a copy of those tonges, in open sermon
and exhortatiō: an other were more
worthye praise, and should bring more
profit vnto the hearers, which knew
but his natiue tongue onely, and would
preach therin vnto his cōtrie men, then
he the thrise better learned man, whom
none of the cumpanie could vnderstand.
wherfor properly, against such vaine glorious
men, is the meaning of Saint Paul.
which seeke rather to shew theyr cunnyng
in vsing of diuers tongues, then to
profitt the church of God, in expounding
the scriptures in that tongue which
is knowen vnto the audience. But yf a
parish priest say his seruice in the Latin
tongue, which none of the parish besides
doe vnderstand: is this priest in danger
of S. Paules wordes, which he speaketh
concerning the vse of a strainge language?
no truly. For it is written in the same
chapter of S. Paule, that he which speaketh
with tōgues, speaketh not vnto men, but vnto
God.
               1. Cor. 14 And again, He which speaketh with

tongues aedifieth him selfe. and again, if one
doe blesse and praise God with his tongue and
voice, yea although his felow be not edified
therby, yet he him selfe doth well in geuing
of thankes. Which thing being so,
they be to folish and scrupulous, which
do admit no other prayer bokes, but such
as are onely in the vulgar tongue. And
wher now is this great fault? what so euer
is done in the congregation (saieth M. Iuell)
must be so done, as the hearers may take cō
                  fort
therof. And yet, say I, one may be in
the congregation, and speake vnto God,
and praise God in a tongue vnknowen
vnto other, and be owt of blame therfor.
As S. Paule sayeth,1. Cor. 14. that he whiche speaketh
in tongues, aedifieth him selfe, and doth
well to geue thankes, altowgh another be not
aedified. And in the end of the forsayed
chapter, if ther be not an interpretor, let him
which hath knowlege in tongues, hold his peace
in the church, and speake vnto him self,
and vnto God. But where then is the fault?
onely in this truly, if in such matters, as
appertein vnto the instruction of the people,
an vnknowen strange tongue be vsed.

as in Sermons which are to be made vnto
them,why it is not necessarie the people vnderstand all diuine seruice. and exhortations. As for mattins
and masse, what so heinous crime is
committed, if the people vnderstand not
all thinges which are spoken? If the commons
of any shere, would obteine of the
Counsel of the realme, a certen benefite:
and bicause it were to much, for all the
whole shere to ride vp to London, if they
did appoint out, half a skore of honest
men, to trauell in the cōmon case, would
not the matter be browght vnto a good
end, except euerye plowghman should
heare, what those halfe skore did say vnto
the Counsell? Or if emong those halfe
skore, two were chosen by consent of the
rest, and those two should declare their
whole mindes: were all the matter dasshed
and marred, if those two m
                  •
               ns tales
were not heard of the other eight? And
yet, this is but a temporall matter, and it
is done by them which may err
                  •
                and
browght before them, which doe not see
the hart, but iudge of the externall wordes
and deedes. And yet no vprore is
made, althowgh two men declare the

message, and take to their charge, the
cause of the whole shere. How much
more then, is all safe, when the people
send their priest to almightye God, and
mainteine him with their costes, that he
should applye their sute, and speake for
them diligently? Shall a Carter or a
Gentleman, bicause he is best in the parish,
shall he com to the priest, and say,
now Sir Ihon, let vs heare, what ye pray.
We will vnderstand whether you say well
or no, we will prompt you if you say amisse,
and you shall not deceaue vs with
an vnknowen tongue? Wheras if the
priest were neuer so vnlerned, neuer so
vnreuerent, neuer so 
                  〈◊〉
               , or distracted
with cares: the deuotion of the people,
and their good will, is considered of
God. and he for his infinite mercy, and
wisedom, doth take the priest his praiers
in as great and harty a sence, as any of
the parish doth wish. These thinges being
true, is ther any hastinesse to haue
all the seruice in Englishe? Doth not
god consider the har
                  •
               is, not the priest the

embassadeur betwixt the people & God,Chrisost. lib. 3. de Sacerd.
and the Angell or messenger of God vnto
the people? shall any more then Moyses
goe vp to the hill to talke with God?Exod. 19.
should not the rest stand at the fote of
the hill trembling and quaking, lest perchaunce,
they be to malepert and draw to
nigh? O what a worlde haue we? here is
a fault found, that the Canon of the masse
is not in English, which (if it were possible)
for the reuerence of our misteries,
should be in such a kind of tongue, that
none but priestes might vnderstand it,
not bicause disdain is taken, that lay men
should vnderstand as much as priestes do,
but bicause the breaking of many arrogant
fooles hart, were to be prouided for,
in barring of their curiositie. Yet, Let all
thinges be doone in the congregation, sayeth
M. Iuell, that they maye be vnderstanded
of the people. yf all were reasonable
men, yet for reuerence sake, many thinges
were to be reserued from them, or rather
for them. But now, som be vnclean,
before whom pretious stones were not to
be cast, som be sucklinges, which can not

yet receaue hartie strong meate, other be
deintye, which can not away with common
seruice, many moe diuersites there
are to be found, and yet, as though all
were one, without distinction of age, time,
or person, it is not well, except all
thinges be doon in a common tongue.
            But how is that proued? Mary bicause S.
Paule saieth, that he had rather speake fiue
wordes, that other may be instructed
therby: then ten thowsand in a strange
an vnknowen tongue. Truth it is, and
yet S. Paule speaketh not of all seruice of
the church, but of that part onely, which
apperteineth vnto the instruction of other,
in which the strainge tongue is not
alowed. For if the speaking in tongues
(according to S. Paule) is to be vnderstanded
of daily seruice and praier,1. Cor. 14. why
doth he appoint two or three at the most
to speake in tonges and one to interpret
and expound them, wheras daily seruice
is and may be well done of more then
two or three skore? Again by their interpretation
of speaking in tongues, all seruice
must be in the mother tongue, and

women thereat may sing. But S. Paule
doth so take speaking with tongues, that
he sayeth, let women hold their tongues
in the church. One thing they might
say with good reason, that the Epistle
and Ghospell, which are appointed for
the instruction of the people, might be
readen in the mother tongue, if they
were first well translated. And yet also,
euen by Sainct Paule, if the priest were
able to expound it afterwardes, he might
read it in the masse time, in an vnknowen
tongue, to the common people. For S.
Paule doth not forbid to speake with
tongues, so that one be present which
can expound them. Ergo say they, when
none doth expounde it, ther is a great
fault committed. Goe to, let me graunt,
that all is not so exact, but that heretikes
may peeke a quarell. Who shall amend
that, which is not well? or who hath made
you controllers in the howse of God?
why doe ye not first, make a priuy exposition
of your conceit vnto the officers?
why doe ye not then, cast your heades together,
and make a most humble supplication?

why goe not you to Rome, and
confer with Peters successor, as Paule
a
                  ••
               ended to Ierusalem to Peter, and the
rest? Why doe ye not pray to God, that
he will helpe, when no peaceable request
can obteine? And if God, for som cause
knowen to him self, should differ his help,
must you take the sword into your handes,
or vsurp the auctoritye of Christ his
church, and make your selues leutenants
vnder God? And yet, it is no greater
fault, to read the Ghospell in Latin vnto
English men, then to read the same in
English vnto Welshmen. But you will
prouide hereafter, that Welshmen may
haue i
                  •
                in the mother tongue, or cause
them to learne English. How say you
then to Irishe men, Northen men, and
Cornishmen? Ther is no remedie, but
euery spech, must haue a boke of seruice,
in ther proper mother tongue.
            But yet, in the meane time, doe those
quarters, which obey the Kinges of
England, and vnderstand not the Englishe
tongue, lacke the frute of their
deuotion, whiles they be at seruice?

And shall we make folish cōplaintes, and
exclamations, that the poore welshmen
doe lacke the liuely worde of God, that
S. Paules will is broken, that the order of
the primitiue church is neglected, and
so furth, as far as our rhetorike will serue
vs, bycause they vnderstand not what
the priest sayeth? Let it be an abuse, that
the people three yeres sence, did not vnderstand
the Ghospell, but onely stode
vp at it, and bowed their knee at the name
of Ihesus, and did conceaue wonderfull
high thinges to be vnderneth the Latin
spech, and honored God in their hartes.
How much better is it now,Inconueniences by hauing diuine seruice in English. I pray
you, when the simple folke, and those
which are of the old making, vnderstand
the sentences but by halfes, and either
for lacke of attention, or dulnes of hearing,
or smalnes of voice in the reader,
doe beare very litle away: and when those
of the new making, doe herken to
mainteine talke there vpon, or to appose
the priest, or to iudge the priest, or condemne
the church of God, or to glorye
in their knowledge, deceauing them selues

and wening, that they be able to expounde
the Scriptures, which are not
able for lack of humilitye, to heare them
onely, as yet. Charitie without science,
is more to be alowed, then science, by
which charitie is greatly confounded.
            Yet for all this,the Canon of the masse owght to be secret let the epistle and the
Ghospell, be in the mother tongue, what
hath M. Iuell to doe with the Canon,
In which, the priest doth, (as Sainct Chrisostom
sayeth) stand before God,
               Chrisost. lib. 6. de Sac
                     •
                  rd. 
               as a suter
for all the whole worlde. For whom,
the people should pray, that his seruice
for them, might be acceptable, and that
he may haue good successe? What, if
they vnderstand not his spech all that
while? The quire, according to the Latine
and Greke church, is occupied in
singing the angelicall hymne of Sanctus,
Sanctus, Sanctus. Whiles the priest, prayeth
softly and closely at the altar, the
laitye were to be taught,what is the peoples office at the masse tyme to loke for the
consecrating of that body, which was
borne, circumcided, presented, with fast
debated, scorged, torne, cruci
                  •
               ied, raised
vp, and which at lenghth ascended into

heauen for their sakes. And that presence
of Christ once beleued, they shold nede
no English tongue, or sermon, for that
tyme, to bring hym vnto theyr remembraunce,
whom presentlye they know by
the infallyble fayth of the church, to be
vpon the altar. What nedeth then any
English at this point? yf one might speak
with tongues of men and Angells: yet
at the presence of those mysteries, al tongues
are to like.
            And therfore good men forsake theyr
tongues, and goe to their hart, and there
speake they after a more excellent sort,
then Latinistes, Grecians, or Hebricians
can doe. Which spech of hart, (which
soundeth in the eares of God almighty)
good people had most of all, when they
were lest busied, with the spech of bodely
tongues: with which, they vttered
mysteries, and thankes, and vowes, and
loues, and complaintes, and requestes,
and all heauenly desi
                  •
               es, and deuotions.
            Out of the pulpet, they lerned theyr
fayth
                  •
                out of the church, they talked of

God: in the chauncell, they appointed
priestes and clerkes to prayse God, and
to pray for them. at the altar, there stode
the priest alone, and there was theyr Sauior
and ours, ready for them, And after
this sort, seruice being appointed, there
remained for them, consideration of the
thinges, which were by externall signes
declared. The true religion consisteth
not in tongues, which tongues are necessarye
for learning of the faith, but faith
ones receaued and taken in the hart: the
most perfect way afterwards, of seruing
God, is, to consider in our mindes, the
greatnes of his benefites, which we comprehend
by faith. And by this reason one
plaine picture of the passion of Christ,
shall gene more deuotiō, vnto him which
alredy is faythfull,Pictures are necessarie for the faythfull people then a most eloquent
learned sermon of M. Iuell him selfe. Bicause,
the end of the sermon, is, to leaue
in my hart, and mind, a picture of Christ,
and the beginning of a picture, is, the
Image of that, which I haue printed in
my conceuing. so that I may say, where a

preacher endeth, there beginneth a painter,
and hearing of sermons, is for those
which are to be instructed, and beholdinges
of externall signes and pictures, is for
them, which loue in silence and closenes,
to practise their beleife. Wherfor,
ther is no cause to haue the Canon of the
masse in Englishe: but cause ther is, why
the lay people should be instructed, what
to think, in time of the Canon. And, again
I say, it is no greate matter, to heare
what is therin saied, but the only matter
is, to beleue, that which therin is done.
And, as at the beginning it was necessarye,
to open my eares, that the worde of
God might entre by that way into my
hart: so the worde ones by faith conceiued,
and the hart being now (throwgh
the goodnes of the holy ghost) made as
it were great with childe there with all,
I shall more euidently, behold the veritie
of God, in those mysteries (of which it
is sayed, This is my body) if eares, and
eyes, and all sense, were stopped: then,
if I should entend the proper actions of
those senses.

                  
But S. Austen saieth, in the praiers,
                     M. Iuell. which
we make vnto God, we must not chirpe like
birdes, but sing like men. ergo we must not
vse an vnknowen tongue.
Yea, with a further ergo, we must lerne
to vnderstand the English, which we read
in the congregation, which bicause thousandes
doe not receaue, therfor they be
chirpers and not speakers. Yet the Englishe
seruice doth remaine, although euery
one doth not vnderstand it.
            
               Iustinian also a Christian Emperor,
               
                  M. Iuell. 
               made a
strait constitution, that the wordes of the ministration,
should be pronounced with open
voice, that the people might say Amen. ergo
the seruice must be in English. yet for al that
we say Amen, vpon those wordes, which
we vnderstand not, when ther is no mistrust
in the faith and honesty of the person
which pronounceth them. And also,
if the people saied Amen, to the wordes
of the ministration, which I think (to
speake more plainly) are the wordes of
consecration, then doth it appeare, that
they confessed the wordes, which the
priest did speake, to be most true in them

selues. so that, when the priest pronounced
these wordes, This is my bodye, the
answering of Amen by the people, did
confirm it to be so in deed, and excludeth
quite all siguration and signification
of his bodye. Touching the second
abuse of the cōmunion, he findeth fault,
that the Sacrament is not receaued in
both kindes: of which afterward we shall
speke seperatly. And in the meane tyme
this I say, that this obiection maketh no
more against the masse, then if I should
disproue a good dish of meate, not for
any vnsa
                  •
               orines therin, but bicause the
good wife of the house, for diuers causes
doth kepe it away from the seruantes.
            For what is this against the masse, that
both kindes be not ministred, in the
which masse both kindes are consecrated,
and both kindes may be receaued, if
the masters of the house, doe thinke it
good? Were the law of M
                  ••••
               s, or the.
Ghospell of Christ, worthely to be reproued,
bicause a few onely were suffred,
to read the law and Ghospell? doth the
Sonne lese any of his light, bicause the

cloudes com betwixt our sight and him,
and kepe his beames away from vs? Suppose
then, that it were most true (which
is most false) that the Bishopes and heades
of the church, did robbe the people
of one part of the sacramēt, shall this robbery
be obiected against the masse it self,
in which both kindes are consecrated?
I graunt vnto yow, M. Iuell, that the sacrament
hath been receaued, and may be
receaued hereafter in both kindes, what
doe you conclude thervpon? ergo there
is an abuse in the masse. Why Sir, doth
the order of the masse forbed the receauing
o
                  •
               der both kindes? are not both
kindes consecrated in the masse? doe not
the priestes receaue both? Yea, but the
Bishopes and priestes deliuer vnto the
lay people one kind onely. They doe it
in deede, and for iust cawses. But a Bishopp,
or priest, is not a masse, and the
fault of men is not the fault of the seruice.The fault of men is not the fault of the seruice of God.
Reproue then the Bishopes, and speake
not against the masse. and confesse,
that the masse is autentike, and godly.

but that the ministers do not folow their
boke, which I say not, as thowgh the Bishoppes
and priestes were in deed giltie,
theyr doinges being grownded vppon
most iust causes: but to shew, that if there
were any fault, it is yet more rhetorike
then reason, to obiect that agaynst the
masse, which apperteyneth onlye vnto
the men.
The third point, that I promised to speake
of,
                     M. Iuell. is the Canon, a thing for many causes
very vain in it selfe, and so vncertain,
that no man can redely tell, on whom to
father it.
Loe, what a fault here is, no man can tell
who made the Canon of the masse, ergo
it is not to be credited. As who might
doubt, whethere the third and fowerth
bokes of the kinges were to be credited,
the proper author of them being vnknowen,
or as thowgh they were fautles
which haue denied S. Ihons reuelations,
and S. Paule to the Hebrewes, bycause it
hath been a question, whether they were
the true authors of those thinges. After
like māner of folly it is saied, no man can
redely tell, what yere of Nero his raigne,

S. Peter did come to Rome, ergo he was
neuer at Rome. which liberty of babling
ones graunted, there may be found which
shall make this quareling argument: and
say, the histories doe not agree, what yeare
of his age Christ suffered, ergo his passion
is not to be beleued. wel yet, among
all them which are named authors of the
Canon, take him which was farthest of
from Christ, and see, what a foule blank
M. Iuells cause must haue. Innocentius
tertius saieth, that it cam from the Apostles,The Canō of the masse came frō the Apostles.
that is to high, thinketh M. Iuell. Goe
to then, take him which cometh lower.
that is S. Gregory the first. who lyuing
within six hundred yeares after Christ, it
foloweth well, that the Canon of the
masse, is of great antiquitie. And now bicause
you glory, that for six hundred yeares
after Christ, there can be found nothing,
against your communion and religion,
it is easy to nombre, that the very
Canon of the Masse,
                  M. Iuell cō
                  futed by his owne report. which you speake
most against, was in those dayes vsed in
the church of Christ. Wherfor if the Apostles
made not the Canon them selues,

yet are you cōfounded, bicause they made
it, which liued within six hundred yere
after Christ, by which yeres, you are contented
to be iudged. But you wil say, that
some write, how Gregorius the third,
made the Canon, and that you beleue,
that to be most true. In deed it is the
property of your side to take all thinges
at the worst▪ for otherwise, why should
you not beleue rather, that one Scholasticus
made it before S. Grego
                  ••
               e his tyme,
as you vnderstand hym, and other
also before you, no euill men or protestantes.
Althowgh in deede it is worth
the cōsidering, whether he meaned, some
one certaine lerned man, whose name
should be Scholasticus, or els some of the
Apostles and scholars of Christ.Gregor. li. 7. epi. 63 for his
wordes be these in his epistle and answer,
made in the defence of the order of the
masse of his church, where cōcerning owr
Lordes prayer, why it is readen after the
Canon, It seemeth vnto me an vnseemelie
thing, (sayth he) that we shold saie ouer the
oblation, the praier which Scholasticus, (or

                  •
               ls as I wold translate it) which the scholar

made, and should not saye ouer the bodye
and bloud of owr Sauior the verie tradition
(meaninge the Pater noster) which he
hym selfe dyd make. But how so eue
                  •
               
it be, he which reporteth that Gregorius
tertius made the Canon, might well
inowgh write so, according to his knowledge,
and when it is writen by S. Gregory,
that one Scholasticus, or a disciple
of Christs, was the auctor therof, this is
nothīg falsified by him, which wrot afterwardes.
And likewise it may stand, that it
cam from the Apostles, as Innocētius tertius
writeth, for all that an other saieth,
that it cam from Gregorius. except perchaunce
yow will say, that one may not
read more then an other, an one see further
then an other, bothe speaking according
to their knowledge & euidēces. But
whosoeuer were the first deuiser of it, it forceth
not. sayeth M. Iuell. Yes mary Sir, for this
being proued by more auctorites of writers,
that the Canon did come from the
Apostles, or that it was extāt within. vjC.
yeares after Christ, thē it can be disproued
to be of so great antiquity, great sham it is

for vs, not to mainteine so auncient an
order of the masse, and great forgetfulnes
in you, M. Iuell, to iest at that, which
is found to haue ben receaued, within
the compasse of six hundred yeres after
Christ,Note the vncertaintie of M. Iuels mynd where to find it. of which yeres you make your selfe
so sure, that for so long space you say,
all went with you without exceptiō. But
now, if it forceth not who made the Canon
(wheras before you made the matter
so great, that it was against the scriptures,
bicause of S. Paule, which saieth, Sciocui
credidi, I know whō I haue beleiued,
as though Catolikes had not a church to
beloue, but should hang vpon the report
of historiographers) well seing then now,
it forceth not who made the Canon,
what fault haue you found in the substā
               ce
and meaning of the Canon?
            First the preist in the Canon desireth
God to blesse Christs bodie,
                  M. Iuell. as though it
were not sufficient lie blessed all readie.
            First you make a shamefull he, that the
priest desireth God to blesse Christ his
bodye. Beare it well awaye, I pray you,
and remember it that I charge you, with

makyng of an open lie, euen at your first
begynning which you make agaynst the
Canon. It is not I saye, in owr Latin and
common Canon, that the priest desireth
God the Father, to blesse Christ his bodye.
And I dare sweare for it, althowgh
you may do much in Sarum, that no missall
after the vse of Sarum, hath the lyke
as you doe speake in the begynning of
the Canon. Also if it should be saied, so,
as you report, in any part of the whole
Canon, can you proue that the Catholikes
haue prayed so, for this cause, as
thowgh Christ his bodye were not sufficientlie
blessed alreadi
                  •
               ? What a Ioannes
diuisar be you, to make so wicked and
vyle dis
                  •
               urses, vpon that which either is
not sayed at all, or hath ben spoken with
much reuerence, and great humilitie of
the parties. In deed, such lyke wordes, haue
ben vsed of the Grecians,Vide Bessanionem Card. de sacr. 
                     •
                  uch. euen after
the consecration perfected, as appeareth
by their wrytinges. But what cause alleage
they for it? Marie, thos
                  •
               , (say they)
which are in great desire of any thing,
vse to speake of that which is most sure,

as thowgh they were not sure of it, nothing
thereby mistrusting the effect, but
declaring the vehemencie, of theyr desire.
As the Prophete Dauyd, when he
had sayd:Psal. 4. 
               God my ryghtuousnes hearde
me when I called vnto hym, yet in the same
verye Psalme and verse folowing, he
addeth, Haue mercye vppon me O Lord,
and heare my prayer.
               Theodoritus in hunc Psalm. 4. 
               Loe sayeth Theodoritus,
The iust man is not satisfied in
prayer, but making his petitions, and obteyning
them, yet continueth 
                     •
                  e styll in prayer.
by which yow see, how farr a Christian
and good commentator would be, from
such deuyses, as yow M. Iuell doe make
vpon holye sayinges. But the Latin Canon,
hath no such wordes at all. neyther
before nor it after consecration, that (I
meane) God shoulde blesse Christ his
bodye. In the beginnyng of the Canon
the priest desireth God, to accept and
blesse those giftes, and presentes, and sacrifices,
or oblations of bread and wyne,
which may receiue encrease of sanctification,
and are in deede made most
holy
                  •
               , when they are turned in to the

bodye and bloud of Christ. Also, after
consecration, the priest desireth God, to
loke me
                  •
               cifullie downe, vpon those pretiouse
thinges, which are there present.
But how? not as they are in them selues
mos
                  •
                acceptable, but as they are offered.
for who can saye, that his hart is chast
and pure? and who knoweth, whether
God wil not punishe vs, when we are not
prepared rightlie, to do that office. Considering
therfor, the holines of God, and
vilenes of man, the church desireth God,
to accept owr offering of Christ
                  •
                bodie,
owr Lord▪ or (in other wordes to saye it)
to accept that bodye and those giftes offered.
But of that place M. Iuell speaketh
afterward. I conclud therefore vpon his
present wordes, that he maketh an open
lie and mani
                  •
               est. And if hymselfe was not
the maker of it, lett hym tell, of what author
he borowed it.
Further the priest saieth,
                     M. Iuell. that he offereth
and presenteth vp Christ vnto his father.
True it is, and that you may wonder the
more, not the priest onely, but all the
whole church doth offer Christ daily to

his father. For as concerning the priest,
either t
                  •
               ere is no priest among vs at all, or
we be no sinners, or we must haue a daily
sacrifice, to make our God fauorable vnto
vs. A sac
                  •
               ifice, not of thankes geuing
onelye, which the law of nature teacheth
vs to offer to our cheif Lord and Creator,
neither of calfes and shepe, as the old
law did appoint it, but a sacrifice proportionable
to a new law, and a sacrifice
worthy and meete for a new testamēt, of
Ihesus Christ. What say you then, good
Sir, if the priest of the new law and testament
offereth Christ vnto his father?
it is, say you, open blasphemy. So say they,
which worship false Godes, which they
haue made to them selues, by licentious
vnderstanding of the Scriptures, and by
cutting, hewing and pecing together of
the veritie. For wherin consisteth this
blasphemye? doe you, which are of the
church by outward shew of your degree,
and māner of behauiour, think priesthod
to be a pelting base office, as the worldly
people doe? But Chrisostom saieth,Libr. 3. de Sacerd
                     •
                  ti
                     •
                  
                
               That
priesthod so far passeth kingdom, as the soule

passeth the body: and we ought to reuerence
priestes, not only more then kinges, and princes,
but to set them forth with more honor
then our owne fathers. Or think you, that
Christ in his last supper, did not of
                  •
               er vp
him selfe to his father? But the Prophet
saieth, yea rather God, not onely saieth it,
but bindeth it with an othe, and it shall
not repent him therof,Psal. 
                     •
                  09. that Christ is a
priest for euer, according to the order of Melchisedech.
Can you saye for all this,Priestes do
                     •
                   
                  
                     •••
                  er Christ. that
priestes haue no authority to offer him?
But Chrisostom replieth saying, The holy
oblation whether Peter or Paule doe offer it
or any other priest,
               In moral. Ho
                     ••
                  l. 2. in. 1. cap. 2. epist. ad Timot. 
               of what so euer goodnes
he be, is the same, which Christ did geue, vnto
his disciples, and which priestes euen now to
these daies, doe consecrate.
               Cap. 10. ad Hebr. And S. Ambrose,
He is (saieth he) our Bishop, which offered
the sacrifice, which purged vs, the same we
also now offer vp, which then being offered,
can not be consumed. Wherfore, seing that
priestes, how so euer they be in their liues,
are honorable for the sacrifice which
they offer: And wheras Christ did offer
vp him selfe, according to the order of

Melchisedech in his last supper: and thirdly
wheras priestes do the same very thing
which our master did before, it is ignorāce
not to know these thinges, or dissimulatiō
to passe by them, it is impiety to speak
against the church, and it is blasphemy in
deed to reuile or taunt at Christ his bodi.
But yet M. Iuel
                  M. Iuell. wil proue his saing. For
contrariwise, Christ presenteth vs, and maketh
vs a swete oblation, in the sight of
God his father. Ergo (sayeth he) the priest
offereth not Christ. which is open blasphemye,
or els he should say, that he vnderstandeth
not the matter. For what
contrariety is betwen Christ,See what a reason M. Iuell bringeth. and his
church, or betwen the head and the body?
All this which I shal say, is true. Christ
offereth vp vs, Christ is the oblation it
selfe, the churche offereth Christ, and
Christ doth offer his church, and in all
this, ther is no contrarietie, witnes hereof
is S. Austen saing,Cap. 20. lib. 10. de ciuit. Dei 
               Bicause of the forme of
a seruant which he 
                     •
                  oke, Christ is also a
priest, him self being the offerer, and him
self the oblation. Of which thing, he would
the daily sacrifice of the church to be a Sacrament.

wheras he is the head of her the
body, and she the body of him the head, she
aswel being accustomed to be offered by him,
as he accustomed to be offered by her. So
that euery man may see, whith what lerning,
and truth the Canon hitherto hath
ben reproued. But let vs cōsider the rest.
More ouer,
                     M. Iuell. the priest desireth God to accept
the body of his so
                     •
                  ne Ihesus Christ▪ as he once
accepted the sacrifice of Abell, or the oblatiō
of Melchisedech. And think we, that Christ
the soune of God standeth so far in his fathers
displeasure, that he nedeth a mortal and
miserable man, to be his spokes man, to procure
him fauor?
Haue you seen a man somtimes, for wantones,
or dronkenes, or plaine 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
to fight against his owne shadow. 
                  〈◊〉
                M.
Iuel here, streketh that kind of men which
I haue not read of. and none, I think,
which beleueth in Christ, did euer dreame,
that his father was angry with him,
and that he needeth to haue, not onely a
mortal miserable man, but any most glorious
creature to speake for him. Yet
this preacher so sowndeth, as though all
the whole number of Catholikes, which
these nine hūdred yeres (by his owne cō
               fession)

vsed the Canon, haue praied to
God, for Christ his soule. Now, God haue
mercy on his sowle, which so loudly
belieth, so many blessed and lerned men.
This obiection hath in part been answered
before, yet I say now again, that the
church desireth God to loke downe vpon
his sonnes body, and to accept it,
either for vehemency of loue and deuotion,
 which causeth men to repete again
and again, that which they are sure of, or
 els, bicause all flesh is weake and vnclean,
and vnworthy to come so nigh vnto the
most high mysteries, therfore, the church
desireth, that God will accept at her handes,
and looke fauorably vpon the body
of his so
                  •
               ne, fearing lest perchaunce the
wickednes of her be such, that God turneth
away his face from her, euen at that
time, when his most dearest soune is present.
After which manner, (albeit the
Ghospell and the actes of Christ, be alwaies
liked of God) yet of som, it is saied
by the Prophet,Psal. 49. 
               VVy doest thou declare my
righteousnes, and takest my testament in thy
mouth? Which men, wel might praye, after

this sort, which M. Iuel so gretly wondreth
at, and say, Lord behold with a merciful
coūtenance the wordes of thy owne
Ghospell, and turne not away they face
from thy owne testamēt. And so likewise
that which foloweth in the Canon, that
God wold accept the sacrifice of his sonnes
bodye, as he accepted Abell, Abraham,
or Melchisedechs oblations, it is not
spoken, as M. Iuel faineth, as thowgh the
bodye of Christ were to be receaued,
no otherwise, then shepe or lambe, and
bread or wine, but the church, declareth
therin her wish, that, as concerning her
seruice, not as concerning the price of
the thinges, offered in the old time and
these daies of grace, it wold please God,
to receaue at her handes, the sacrifice of
Christ his body, so thankfully, as he receaued
the oblations of those good fathers,
And that her seruice in this part,
may be no worse vnto her,Iuell playeth the Ethny
                     ••
                  es part then those of
old time were to Abell, Abraham, and
Melchisedech. But let vs now cōsider by
this obiection, what one may do, which is
disposed, and what euil example is geuen

vnto Ethnikes by the lokes of Christians,
to speake against the Christian faith.
Arise o Lord,
               Psal. 43. 
               (sayeth the Prophet) why
doest then slepe. Remembre Dauid, o
Lord,
               Psal. 131. 
               (sayeth the same Prophet) and all
his gentlenes. and that Dauid is Christ.
            And in an other place of the Psalmes, it
is writen,Psal. 77. 
               that God did arise like one which
had ben a slepe, and like a valiant which had
well dronk of wine. Yea it ys expresslie
sayed for Christ,Psal. 19. 
               I pray God to heare the,
in the tyme of thy tribulation. and so furth
thorowgh the whole Psalme. Shall Christians
in these places, play the Ethnikes
partes, and aske, whether God be a slepe
or forgetfull, or well tipled? what doe
they meane, which pray to obteine any
thing, for Christ his sake? do they not say
in effect all this, behold, o Lord, how thy
blessed soun take flesh vpon hym for our
sakes, remembre his obediēce, remembre
the scourges, the prickes of thorne, the
nailes, the crosse, the death which he suffered,
remembre and doe not forget? how
deepe is S. Bernard, and S. Bonauentura,
and thousandes of blessed men, in the cōsideratiōs

of our Sauior his passion? what
lamentations? what questions? what wisshes?
what thoughtes haue they?in cōsecratione cer
                     •
                  i Paschalis. 
               O blessed
fault, sayeth S. Gregory, which deserued
such a redemer. what saye we, to the auncient
hymnes of the church, which are
song in the lent? the sense I remembr
                  •
               
although I keepe not all the wordes,

                  Bowe downe thy bowes o tall high tree,
                  and slake thy hard stiff graine,
                  That with soft stretching his bodye,
                  thou ease the high kinges paine.
               
what place is left for the fong of the three
children, All the workes of our Lord blesse
our Lord?
               Psal. 148. And the Psal. Praise ye our Lord,
which is in the heauens. in which Psalmes,
sonne and moon, thunder, lightning, haile,
snow, hills, fildes, riuers, seas, all beastes
of the earth, all foules of the aire, and (to
be short) all creatures are called vpon, to
praise God? may you, wisely now, obiect
and say, the moone can not heare me, the
wild beastes be neuer the soner obedient
for me, the birdes will sing no louder for
all me, with princes of the earth what is
ther to doe for me? yong m
                     •
                  n, and virgins,

old men with younglinges let them praise the
name of our Lord, and who made me an officer
to commaund so many? I will goe
no further, but breifly, will I conclude,
there was neuer kind of argument more
pernicious,How pernicious it is, godlye mens deuotions to be examined and iudged by worldlinges. then this one: to examine the
deuotions and praiers of good men, by
the rules of worldly ciuilitye, and to iest
at the homlines and hartines of Catholikes,
when they speake to God, as one
frind would vnto an other familiarly, or
whē they speake, according to the world,
childishely, or according to the nature of
thinges, absurdly, Off all which poyntes
yow may fynd examples in the boke of
Cantica Canticorum, if euer yow haue
either reade them, or can with al your wit
vnderstand them, and then to bring those
sayinges before the people, to be iudges
therof, which haue no tast almost of
heauenly thinges, it is most vaine and vnreasonable.
            Besides this he dosireth God,
                  M. Iuell. that an Angell
may come and cary Christ his bodye away,
into heauen. VVhat a fable is this, that Christ
should be born vpon an Angel, and so caried
vp away into heauen?
            
               
It is besides the person of him, which
hath ben brought vp among lerned men,
and for opinion of learning and grauity,
is called a Bishop, so to dissemble, and
so to counterfaict the vice, in making of
sporte, with a fable of his owne. And first
the Canon, is not truely Englished in this
parte which he iesteth at. For the wordes
of the Latin Canō be these,
                  M. Iuells false reporting. 
               Iube haec perferri,
per manus Sancti Angeli tui, in sublime
altare tuum. which is to say, cōmaund
o Lord these thinges to be brought, by the
handes of thy holy Angell, in to thy high altar.
Yet M. Iuell to make more sport, englisheth
perferri, to be caried away, not
to be brought or caried vp, as the truth
is. And bicause the Canon maketh mention
of the Angells handes, he fableth,
as though Christ should be caried vpō an
Angells back, or shoulders, or as though
the Catholike did meane, that Christ
should be borne vpon an Angels backe,
and caried vp away into heuen. But what
a fable is this, sayeth he? for soth a very
folish grosse fable in deed, inuented by the
diuell, and vttered by Melhoserus, and

translated in to english by M. Iuell. A folish
grosse fable I say, bicause the church
of God hath no such carnall base, vnderstanding
of the place. But desireth God,
that by the ministery of Angells, which
wait vpon vs and his misteries, he would
commaund the body of his soune our
Lord, to be caried vp, not according to
the changeing of place, but according to
his gracious acceptation of our seruice,
in to his high altar, which is heauen.
            For, thinketh M. Iuell, that when the
Angells doe cary vp, good mens almes
deades, or their praiers, or fastinges, or
teares, or any such like, in to the sight of
God, that they make those thinges vp in
fardels, and cast them vpon their backes,
and make hast to heauē warde, and there
vndoe their packes?Of spirituall thinges man must speak and think spiritually for the worde of carying
vp, soundeth in the eares of a carnall
man, as though there were changeing of
place ther about, or heuines of a burden,
or vse of armes, sholders, or back, or some
stay vpon which the cariage might rest.
which members are not in Angels, and yet
the scripture speaketh, after the fashion

of men, testifying our almes dedes, fastinges
and prayers, to be caried vp, before
the face of God in heauen, and presented
before his maiesty, by the ministery
of Angells. now if one did not vnderstand
the sense of those wordes rightly,
it were wisedom for him, to hold his
peace, rather then to vtter his grossenes,
in vnderstanding them so basely and folishelye.
Especiallye, wheras Sainct Ambrose,
so blessed and lerned a doctor, hath
like wordes vnto these, which M. Iuell
contemneth, saing in his boke, which he
made of the sacramentes:Lib. 4. de Sac. cap. 6. 
               VVe besech the,
and pray the, that thou wilt receaue this oblation,
vp to they high altar, by the handes
of thy Angells, as thou hast vouchsafed
to receaue the giftes of thy iust seruant Abell,
and the sacrifice of our patriarch Abraham,
and that which the high priest Melchisedech
offered vp vnto the. Loe Sir,
if it please you, to shew the finenes of
your witt, you may find fault with Sainct
Ambrose, and aske of your audience,
more folish then your selfe. what a tale
is this, that the oblation of the church,

should be borne vpon an Angell (on pick
packe perchaunce) and so caried vp away,
into heauen? but see the good nature of
the man? he confesseth his folies, and
saieth, he would not stand so long vpon
them, if force draue him not ther vnto.
            But what force trow ye?The Protestantes preach to please ther audience. I think (bicause
a wanton audience is most delited with
iesting against other, and bicause a grosse
audience, conceiueth thinges spoken after
a carnall sort, and thinketh that preacher
which so doth, to be a very 
                  〈◊〉
               )
that, to serue his audience, he could not
leaue of, so plausible a matter. Therfore
saieth he (after he had done his worst) I
leaue to speake farther of the Canon,
               
                  M. Iuell. 
               geuing
you occasion by these few thinges, the better
to iudge of the rest. Which wordes I note,
bicause in deed as the whole Canō might
haue ben mistrusted, if any certain faultes
had been noted in it: so when with all
his power and cunning, he hath spoken
the worst, and yet hath reproued nothing,
but his owne misunderstanding,
an imagination, which he fained to be
in the Canon, therfor we may iudge all

well of the rest, when no euill is found
in those pointes, which he toke to be farthest
from the best.
The 
                     •
                  owerth matter that remayneth to
be tow
                     •
                  hed,
                     M. Iuell. is, the adoration.
It is agreable withe the rest of their doctrine,
and it foloweth cōsequentlye, that
no bodye of Christ being in the Sacrament,
there should be no adoration vsed
at all. So that the very sure way to disproue
adoration, were, to disproue the
reall presence. Which bycause they can
not doe, against so manifest wordes of
our Sauior, therefor how so euer the matter
of the presence doth stand, yet will
they assaye to take away the worshipping
or adoring of Christ in the Sacrament.
But that is done with so light and vnfytt
argumētes, that they may serue, by changeing
of a few wordes, against all kynd
of orders in the church, and consequentlye
of owr fayth. For what is it that you
say, good master myne against adoratiō?
Christ (sayeth he) which knew best what
owght to be done,
                     M. Iuell. when he ordeyned and deliuered
the Sacramēt of hys body and bloud,

gaue no cōmaundement that any man should
fall downe to it, and worshipp it. Ergo, yowr
argumēt is this,The Protestantes condemne all voluntar
                     •
                  e seruice of God. that what so euer is not cō
               maunded
to be done, is to be left vndone.
And where then are all customes which
yow haue set so much by, as it appeereth
by the fyrst side before yowr Sermō? Also
where is it in all Scripture, that Christ cō
               maūded
his Apostles to fawle downe and
worship hym, hym selfe? The Magians, S.
Peter as he was in the bote together with
Christ,Matth. 2. Matth. 14. Matth. 20. Matth. 15. 10. 9. the mother of S. Iohn and S. Iames,
the straynge woman the Syrophaenissa,
the blind man, whō Christ healed by
tempering of his spettle and earth together,Luc. 24.
the Apostles after the resurrection: all
these fell downe and worshipped Christ.
but where read we, that he commaunded
them so to do? Is there no voluntarye seruice
of God, but that al must be obtained
by way of cōmaundemēt? It was inowgh
(I trowe) that he said to his disciples,An argument of authoritie negatiuely ys na
                     •
                  ght and protestantlyke. 
               take,
eate, this is my body, which shall be deliuered
for you. For to doubte thereof, whether
Christ his body were to be honored, it
was for them whiche doubted, whether

he were Christ or no. Christ dyd byd his
Apostles to take and eate, but he dyd not
expressely cōmaund them, to open their
mouthes, to soften the meate in the mouthe,
to lett it downe in to the stomake.
for what need was there so to do, wheras
he, which lycenseth me to eate, lycenseth
me also to vse all those meanes, by
which eatyng is performed. So in lyke
manner, owr Sauyor sayd, This is my bodye,
and this being receiued and beleued
of Christians, to what purpose was it to
say, Aryse Sirs, and fall downe before
yowr God. or to say, Adore me in yowr
hart. When the kyng doth shewe hym
selfe in his robes and croune, or when
he woulde in the dark, vtter hym selfe by
speakyng vnto the lordes of the court,
is it to be required, that he must saye precisely,
putt of yowr cappes vnto me, and
bowe downe yowr knees, or ells doth not
euerye obedyent hart straytewayes geaue
all reuerence dew vnto hys prince,
withowt further warning. By lyke reason
then, the kyng almighty hath spoken the
worde, Thys ys my bodye, by which

worde, they which are accustomed vnto
his voyce, are as sure of his presence, as
if they should see hym visiblie, and shall
we, if we are of the king his court, requyre
yet to here and see more in this case,
and may we wonder at others folyes,
which make lowe courtesie, where as they
had no commaundement? And yet, M.
Iuell, is so delited, in this kynde of argument,
which procedeth by negatiues, that
he goeth fu
                  •
               ther therein, and sayeth, S.
               
                  M. Iuell 
               Paule toke the Sacrament at Christ his handes,
and as he had taken it, he deliuered it to
the Corinthians, and neuer willed adoratiō, or
Godlie honor to be done vnto it. To which
I answer, with askyng this question, whether
S. Paule commaunded vs to stand or
kneele, to lye a long at the communion,
or sytt doune? Trulye of these thinges
there is no worde or commaundement,
what then? may any man tumble at the
communion, or leane vpon his breast or
vpon one of his elbowes, or doe what
please hym, bicause nothing is appointed
by S. Paule, as concernyng adoration?
            The English cōmunicantes them selues,

doe vse to kneele (except perchaunse in
some very stiff harted men, there be no
kneeling at all, bicause they stand in their
owne conce
                  •
               tes) But Christ and S. Paule
commaunded not kneeling, and yet
Christ knew best what he had to doe,
and S. Paule delyuered that which he receiued
of Christ. what strength then hath
this kynd of argument, to saye, Christ or
S. Paule commaunded not these thinges,
               The Protestantes argumēt. 
               ergo
they are not to be kept or beleued at all?
            
            Truly it hath so litle against the Catholykes,
that the argumēt is flatlye denyed.
So greate for all that, against the protestantes:
that it shameth all the order of
theire communion, as concernyng apparell,
place, standing, kneeling, confessyng,
thankes geuing, and such lyke. Which all,
I doe not say or think, to be repugnant
with Scripture, but I say, that as concerning
the order which there is vsed, there
ys no commaundement in Scripture, and
no comm
                  •
               undement being in Scripture
of it, ther is no iust cause or reason, wherfor
it should be regarded. Such is the
protestantes logyk. Well, if this argumēt

which runneth by negatyues, had been
good, the authorytie and name of Christ
or Sainct Paule in that behalfe had been
sufficient: but now it ys most weake and
simple, and not worth the bringing, and
yet M. Iuell will be copious in it, saying:
The old Doctors, and holye fathers of the
Church,
               
                  M. Iuell. 
               Sainct Cyprian, Sainct Chrysostome,
Sainct Ambrose, Sainct Hierome, Sainct
Augustyn, and others that receiued the Sacrament
at the Apostles handes, and, as it
may be thowght, contynued the same in such
sort as they had receiued it: neuer make mention
in any of all their bokes, of adoring or
worshipping the Sacrament. ergo &c.
            
            This ys a nowghtye lying argument.
Nawghtye, by cause, if in all their workes,
they neuer doe speake of adoring the
Sacrament, that doth not disproue the
adoration, which Christians haue euer
vsed. And lying, bycause in deed, they make
mention in their workes, of adoration.
Neuer, ys a long day (the prouerbe
ys) and also. Neuer, ys a long way.
And that those holye fathers in all their
workes (which be so manye) dyd neuer

make mention of adoring the Sacrament,
it ys largelye and lowdelye spoken.
It would haue eased me very much, if
M. Iuell in speakyng this great worde
(Neuer) and (in all their bokes) would
haue named the bokes, which he taketh
to be the proper workes of those holye
fathers. For perchaunse he taketh no
more for Sainct Cyprian, Sainct Ambrose,
Sainct Chrysostome, Sainct Hierome,
and Sainct Augustynes workes: then
hym selfe hath readen and alowed. And
by that way, he may quickly make good
his worde, if he shall according vnto his
pleasure, denye that boke to be Sainct
Ambrose, or Sainct Augustynes, in which
any mention is made of adoring the Sacrament.
But if he will be tryed by the
consent of Christendom, or by that seuere
and hardye notar of the holye fathers,
Erasmus: quicklie shall I proue,
that either M. Iuell hath not readen all
the doctors (which is in hym lykelye,) or
that he hath not well remembred them
in all places (which euery man doth, as I
suppose, generallie,) or that wittingly he

belyeth them, (which sometymes is done
lowdely in their pulpites) or that adoration
of the Sacrament, may be obserued
and found in holy Fathers wrytinges,
(which is quyte and cleane contrary vnto,
Neuer to be mentioned in them.)
            There be extant whole treatiseis, of
excellent lerned men,Adoration dew to the Sacrament as concernyng the
profe and testymony of worshipping the
hol
                  •
               e Sacrament, but one place or two
shall be as good for my purpose as a hundred,
where crakes be made, that no mention
of adoration, can euer be fownd in
any one place of old doctors. S. Chrisostome
therefor in theChrys. 
                     •
                  o. 83. in Mat. .83. homylie vpon
S. Mathew sayeth: VVe are fed with
that thing, which the Angels seeing do tremble
at, and can not loke vpon it without 
                     •
                  ear,
bycause of the brightnes which reboundeth
from it. Agayn the same blessed Doctor
in the .24.Chrys. ho. 24. in .10. cap. Matt. homylie vpon the .10. chap
                  •
               
               ter
of the first to the Corinthians sheweth
at large, that, at the least we should
doe towardes the Sacrament of the altar,
that which the Magians dyd, towardes
ow
                  •
                Sauyor lying in the maynger,

which dyd come vnto hym, with great
reuerence and horror. Which example
he repetyng in an oration of his vpon S.
Philogo
                  •
               ius, sayeth,Chrys in Ora. in Philogonti
                     •
                  n. 
               As thou doest receaue
and intertayn God here (menyng in earth)
with much honor, so will 
                     •
                  e receaue the there
(vndowbtedly in heauen) with much
glorye.
               Li 3. ca. 12. de 
                     •
                  p. Sctō. Lykewyse S. Ambrose most playnly,
reasonyng with hym self, how the Prophet
Danyd in the Psalmes willeth vs to
worshipp the footestole of God, which
by the interpretation of an other Prophet,Esa. ca. 66
ys called the earth: at the length he
concludeth: Therefor by the footstoole let
the earth be vnderstanded, and by the earth
the flesh of Christ, which also at this daye
we worship in owr misteryes, and which the
Apostles dyd worship in owr Lord Ihesus.
Marke the worde, which Sainct Ambrose
hath, That to this day, we worsh
                     •
                  pp Christ
in owr misteries. Because M. Iuel will haue
vs to ascend vp (I can not tell how) in
to heauen, to worshipp Christ there, as
thowgh there wer no 
                  •
               ote stoole of his,
that is to saie, no flesh of his in earth. For
where as S. Augustyne hath these wordes

manifestlye, (Christ toke earth of earth: for
flesh is of the earth, & he toke flesh of the flesh
of Marie: and because he walked here in that
very flesh, and gaue that very flessh vnto vs
to be eaten for owr health, and no man eateth
that flessh, except first he adore and worshyp
it: it is found owt, how such a fotestoole of owr
Lord may be adored, and that we not onlye
do not o
                     ••
                  end in worshipping it, but in not worshipping
of it we doe offend) M. Iuell doth
expoūd hym after this sort, that the eating
of hym,
               
                  M. Iuell. 
               and worshipping of hym, must ioyne
togeather, but we eate hym in heauen (sayth
he) ergo we must worshipp hym there. But
how much better doth it folow, we eate
hym on earth, ergo we must worship hym
on earth, where we eate hym: or els to
ioyne bothe sayinges togeather, we eate
hym in heauen and in earth, ergo we
must worship hym in heauē and in earth.
For as concernyng those testymonyes,
which are alleaged by M. Iuell,
                  M. Iuell. 
               that we
must lift vp owr hartes. And, Yf we be
rysen agayn with Christ,
               Coll. 3. Philip. 3. 
               let vs seeke those
thinges which are aboue. And agayne, Owr
conuersation ys in heauen. By which testimonies

he would conclud, that Christ
his body is to be sowght for, only in heauen:
verely, as the wordes doe sownd diuinelie
and trulie, so is the cōclusion inferred
very madly and miserablie. Bicause
those textes do no more disproue, Christ
his body to be on earth reallye, then they
proue owr bodies to be now reallie in
heauen. As in this short example. Owr conuersation
ys in heauen. sayeth S. Paule, and
yet, when he spake those wordes, was he
not on the earth, in presence of bodie?
Doth M. Iuels hart goe owt of his body,
when he doth lift it vp to God? Or when
I am cōmaunded to seeke those thinges
which are aboue, must I make a ladder
for my bodye, to clyme vp to heauen?
            All blessed men doe counsell, the receauers
of the Sacrament, to ascend in their
hart, to loke vp to heauen, to worshipp
Christ sittyng at the right hand of the
Father. Which, they doe not therefor
counsell, that we should not beleue owr
Sauior to be present in his misteries: but
bicause they couet to withdraw our imaginations
from all earthlines, and to geue

vs warnyng, that we doe not make rekonyng
to see with our e
                  •
               e, or perceaue by
tast or smell, or grosslye to conceiue by
any bodilye sense, the manner, of Christ
his being in the Sacrament. For euen
then also, when owr Sauior hanged visiblie
vpon the crosse, it might haue ben
well sayed to the faithfull, lift vp yowr
hartes, and ascend with your myndes, in
to heauen, not fastenyng your eyes so
much vpon this present forme, most pytiefull,
but rysing with yowr faith, to apprehend
that infinite maiestie, and diuinitie,
and wysedom, and power of Christ,
which is the glorie of his Father in heauen,
and comfort of all the holie Angells,
and thus presentlie yet now, ys
tormented and defaced vpon the earth.
As S. Augustyne sayeth very wys
                  •
               lye in
the Psalme which I haue fornamed, entreatyng
vppon the adoration of Christ
his flessh: It is the spirite, which quickeneth,
the flessh profyteth nothing.
               Aug. in Psal. 98. 
               And therefore
when thou doest bowe downe thy selfe, and 
                     •
                  al
prostrate before any such earth, (meanyng
the flessh of Christ) looke not vpon it, as

it were earth, but looke vpon that 
                     •
                  oly one,
whose fotestoole it is, which thou doest worshipp.
So that the bodye of Christ, being
present vpon the altar, bycause we are all
very prone to grosse cogitations, and sensible
loues, therefor may it be sayed most
iustly vnto vs, lift vp yowr hartes, goe vp
towardes heauen with them, there lett
yowr thowghtes be occupyed. As who
should saye: bycause (good people) yow
here, that this is his body, and yow see it
yet in a simple forme, as lying vppon an
altar, and caryed in mennes handes,The tru
                     •
                   meaning of lift vp yowr hartes. broken
also and deuyded, yow may perchaū
               se,
haue to base and lowe cogitations.
            But, I tell yow, ascend in yowr myndes,
dilate yowre hartes, and enlarge yowre
thowghtes. This is his bodye, in deed, as
he hath spoken hymself the word, which
can not be false, and this ys his bloude.
            But whose body and bloud? lyft vp yowr
hartes now, The body of the second person
in trinite, the onlye begotten of the
Father, the maker of the world, the wisedome
of God, the ouerlooker of all creatures,
good and badd, angells and diuells,

men, and beastes, the sercher of owr
                  •
               
hartes, the disposer of tymes, the iudge
of the worlde, the felicytie and ioye
of the good, the terror and feare of the
condempned. Lyft vpp yowr hartes I
saye. Thinke you that here ys present, a
bodye or flessh onlye? And that, as in diseases
some whott meates doe cumfort
the bodye, so that yow haue but a lyuely
peece of his 
                  •
               lessh onlye? Or els,
doe you conceaue the matter after this
sort, that as one f
                  •
               nde sendeth to an other
a morsell of good meate, which the
other had not: that so Christ in this banket
geueth vnto euery man a tast, or els
a portion onlye of his pretious bodye,
as it were a most excellent gyft, but yet
baser, then his sowle and diuinitie? O,
lift vpp your hartes. You must not seeke
Christ so grosselye, looke not to haue
hym so vpon the earth. Christ ys one
perfect person, God and man, maker of
all tymes, and borne according to flesh
in tyme, euerlasting lyfe, and yet putt to
most shamefull death, reignyng at the
right hand of God his father, and present

among men vpon the altar. Stick not
therefor I say vnto the body, lett not your
thoughtes and desires rest in the flessh
onlye: but goe hyer by your faith, and cō
               sider
that blessed sowle of his, so chast, patient,
wise, charitable, bright, glorious,
and yet hyer and hyer, in to the very heauens,
and aboue all heauens, beholding
and wondering, how the maker of them
all, whom thowsand thowsandes, and ten
hundred thousand thousands do wayte
vpon: ys present here for vs, to be receaued
of vs, and to incorporate vs in to
hym selue.
            This lo
                  •
                haue I spoken more largelie, bicause
M. Iuell hath no other way, to answer
S. Augustine, but to declare (as we
denye it not vnto them, but which thei
haue lerned of vs) that we must ascend
with our hartes, in to heauen, and there
honor Christ. Which being most true,
and grawnted vnto hym, he doth vntruly
and ignorantlye to say, that Christ is not
to be honored also in earth, in the sacrament
of his very bodye and bloud,
bycause he is to be honored in heauen.

For we doe not diuide Christ, and make
one Christ to be in heauē, an other to be
on earth, one bodye in heauen, an other
in earth: but men worshipp hym in heauen
one God, and the Angells worshipp
hym in the Sacrament here on earth, (as
S. ChrisostomeChrysost. lib. 3. de Sacer. proueth,) And men worship
hym, as he lieth vpon the altar: and
Angells worship hym, as he sitteth at the
right hand of God his father. And so both
Angells and men,Angels & catholike m
                     •
                  n worship Christ both in earth and in heauen. doe worshipp Christ,
both in earth and in heauen, and that, not
with two kindes of honors, one for holy
dayes, an other for working, but with one
salfe same honor and worship. The protestants
wold be seen to say much, when
they appeale so often to heauen, and receaue
Christ, sitting at the right hand of
God, as who shold saie, the papistes myndes,
goe no hyer then the priestes handes,
when he sheweth the Sacramēt vnto
them. And when they haue supposed, that
this is true, then loe they triumph, in recityng
S. Chrisostome, S. Augustyne, S.
Hierome, and then are they sorye, that
old holie fathers be not regarded. But

the answer vnto them, is readie, that they
haue sa
                  •
               ed therein very well, but nothing
to the purpose. for Catholykes doe beleue,
that they must lift vp their hartes,
and seeke for Christ in heauen, and worship
hym at the right hand of his Father
                  •
               
but protestantes denye, that Christ is reallie
present in the Sacrament, or that he
is to be worshipped therein: which I shal
disproue, a litle more.
            S. Augustyne,August. in Psal. 21. vpon the .21. Psalme: The
riche of the earth, (sayth he) haue eaten also
the bodye of their Lorde, but they haue not
been fulfylled, as the poore men were, in folowing
of Christ,
               That Christ is to be adored in the Sacrament 
               but yet they dyd worship
hym. Now, M. Iuell cōfesseth, that where
we eate Christ, there we worship Christ.
ergo these riche men, of whom the Prophet
and S. Augustyne speak, which did
eate Christ on the earth, did worshipp
hym also on the earth, for in heauen they
did not eate hym, bicause they folowed
hym not, as the poore did, which worthelie
did receaue hym. Again, how could
the gentyles haue misreported the Christians
in the primitiue church for honoring

of Ceres and Bacchus (the false
goddes ouer bread and wyne) except
they had geuen some argument thereof
in deed,Aug. li. 20 cōtr. 
                     •
                  austum, ca. 13 by reason of honoring Christ in
the Sacramēt? For if an Ethnyk shold behold
a Christian, after grace sayd, to eate
his meate sauorlie and soberlye, he could
not think, that he worshipped Ceres and
Bacchus therein. But when the panymes
hard saye, that the Christians dyd eate
the flesh of theyr God, and when they
could see nothing but bread and wyne,
which were receaued with all reuerence
and deuotion: they might not saye, that
is was onlie bread, bycause of the honor,
which at the presence thereof, the Christians
exhibited vnto it: and they could
not saye, it was the bodye of Christ, bycause,
that being yet infydells, they were
not instructed in owr misteries: it remayned
then, to think and to report, that
vndoubtedlie, Christians dyd worshipp
Ceres and Bacchus. Which proueth,
that the Sacrament was then adored and
worshipped. Besides this, it ys gathered
owt of the same blessed Doctor, that,In lib. sint. prosperi.
               
               we doe honor thinges inuisible, I meane flessh
and bloud, vnder the forme of bread and
wyne, whiche we see. And we doe not
take these two kyndes, after lyke sort, as we
dyd before the consecration: whereas we
confesse faythfullie, that before the consecration,
it is bread and wyne, which nature formed,
but after the consecration; it ys the flessh
and bloud of Christ, which blessing hath
halowed. But yet for all those testimonye,
what sayeth M. Iuell?
It is a verie now deuyse,
                     M. Iuell. 
                  (quod he) and
which as it is well knowē, came but latelie
in to the church, about .iij. hundred yeares
past, Hono
                     •
                  us being Bishop of Rome, and
cōmaunding the Sacramēt to be li
                     ••
                  ed vp,
and the people reuerentlie to bowe downe
to 
                     〈◊〉
                  . After hym Vrbanus the fowerth
appointed 
                     〈◊〉
                   holydaie of Corpus Christ, &c.
Thre
                  •
                hundred yeares are, 
                  〈◊〉
                but,
a very litle 
                  〈◊〉
                with 
                  •
               ow; when we 
                  •
               alke
of the adoration of the sacrament but
if we come to the glorious setters furch
of the new fownd Ghospell, thirtie yeares
lacking 
                  〈◊〉
                (
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   computationem
Eccelesi
                     •
                   Anglica
                     ••
                  
               ) doe 
                  •••
               ke a grea
                  ••
               
antiquitie. And then, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , or after hym

               Zuinglius, must be named fathers and Apostells,
when very blessed Bisshoppes,
Honorius, and Vrbanus, whom all Christendome
assented vnto, are named contemptuouslie
as who should say, I knew
them, whem thei did stand withowt the
church doores, and could not read any
letter in the b
                  •
               ke. But goe to, when Honorius
did commaund the adoration of
the sacrament, dyd any countrey of all
Christendome, or Cytie or godlye man,
speake agaynst it? Or when S. Vrbane apoynted
an holidaye for it, is it writen or
extant by any argument, that it was refused
 in any place? The popes, I am sure,
 were not withowt counsell. the Vnyuersities,
were not withowt great scholars.
 religious houses, and orders, were not thē
                destroyed. the holy ghost in true Catholykes
 was inuincible. the wicked spirite in
heretykes, would haue been venterous.
 a good man with the daunger of his life,
would haue spoken the trueth. an heretyke
 to wynne a fame, would not haue
passed vpon death, the dyuel also being
his comforter, and in these so manye causes

whi the trueth should not be suppressed,
is it possible, that withowt open cō
               tradiction,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
a false honor of God, should
be receiued among Christians, therough
the whole world? yf the adoration of the
Sacrament were in deed blasphemous
being so receaued, as it was in all Christēdome,
so many people runnyng headlong
(as you ween) in to their damnatiō,
did the holy ghost stirr vp no one good
man to call them back? That holy ghost,
which was promysed before, and is now
performed vnto the church of Christ,
which ys an inuincible, immortall▪ and
coaeternall God, with the father and the
soune? which geueth seuenfold graces,
and emong those seuen, one especially of
fortitude: would he suffer all his church,
to be beaten downe, and would geue
strength not so much as to one, agaynst
whom all his aduersaries, should not be
able to preuaile? In the tyme of the
synagoge, and in that night, when a
generall Idolatric was committed: our
mercifull God, euer dyd vse to raise vpp
some one Prophete, or other, whom

he would not only to speake, but whom
he would also maintein, both to speake
and to be hard: if not to the peoples profiting
(bicause of their infidelitie) yet to
their cōdemnation (bicause of his iustice
and equitie) and that posteritie of them
might know, how to feare God, and hym
alone to honor. And although Esaie, Ieremie,
and other Prophetes haue ben slain,
yet haue theyr wordes still continued in
memorie and writing▪ for who can resist
God almightie, and lett, that his will goe
not forward? And now in the tyme of grace,
when Christ liueth neuer any more to
die, when the sonn of Iustice shineth, and
men walke honestlie, as it were in the day:
is it not besides, not onlie all faith, but all
reason also, that an vniuersall Idolatrie,
should be cōmitted and authorized in the
church, and that by no prophete or preacher,
it should be presentlie controlled?
Behold, when Nicolaus, one of the seauen
first Deacons, when Arrius, Eunomius,
Martion, Donatus, or any other heretike,
did begin to spring, straitwaies the church
hath noted hym, althowgh bicause of the

violence of princes, she hath not been
able, straytewayes to oppresse it. And
were the paine neuer so greate, and the
power and number for maintenaunce of
the heresie neuer so outragious, yet God
neuer left hym selfe withowt testimonie:
and valiāt Catholykes were found, which
would not shrink in the cause of trueth,
not for the Emperour, and all his souldyars.
Athanasius the great, is alone, 
                  •
               xample
strong inowgh for all. Yea there is so
great strength in a spirite, that when a verie
true cause, is sett vpon and inuaded
by falsehode, the person whom the dyuel
doth possesse for that purpose, will vtter
hym self and be knowen, if all the worlde
fay nay, and come against hym. Example
in Luther, whom neither Pope, neither
Emperour could make to hold his peace.
And when he is dead, yet will his scholars,
althowgh they can not maynteyne
his doctrine, preserue yet his name, that
it may be sayde: Doctor Martin Luther
began to set
                     •
                   vpp the Ghospell in the yeare
of owr Lord M. D. XVII. a worthie
man, and greiuouse agaynst the pope:

All be it in the greatest matter, his scholar
was better lerned then he, and fowght against
the master. How then standeth owr case?
Vrbanus a blessed pope appointed an holyday
in the honor of the bodie of Christ
and it was ioyfullie receaued thorowgh
the whole church, without any open contradiction,
and could it be Idolatrie? No,
if it had been against the glorie of God,
not onlie it should not haue been vniuersallie
receaued, but not so much as particularlye
suffered without some euident
resistance. And there would haue ben
fownd in a thowsand religious howses,
and in vniuersities, and in wel ordered cyties,
and (I beleue) in verie meane howseholdes,
some, which rather would haue
dyed, then haue committed idolatrie.
            Especiallie, whereas it hath ben promised
vnto Iacob his seede, which is performed
in the church, Non est idolum in Iacob,
Nu. 23. there is no Idole in Iacob: and
whereas God so expresselie sayeth to vs
by Ezechiel, ca. 36. I will clense you from
all yowr Idolls. Then loe, what a shamefull
pride is this, a weake head, not agreeing

with other, not knowing hym
selfe, behind so many in yeares, aboue so
few in lerning, to make so light of the
concord of Christ his church, and of her
maiestie, that with a light worde, he dareth
to cōdemne, two blessed gouernours
of her, Honorius, and Vrbanus, with all
Bishoppes, Doctors, diuines, religious orders,
secular priestes, such which lyued in
good order al the tyme sence, and to cō
               demne
Emperour, Kynges, Princes, counselars,
with all the deuoute laytie of those
times and after? But what doth he say?
Honorius (quod he) was abowt three hundred
yeares past. why Sir, is not three hundred
yeares a faire age? This argumentA weake argument of M. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
soundeth as consequentlie, as if one stryuing
with an other, vpon a question of
lerning, would answer hym, with tussh
man, I know this better then thou, for I
am thirtie yeares yoūger then thow. Wel
Honorius was three hundred yeares past
or there about: and he was deceaued,
(say you) or he is not at the least much
to be regarded, as I can tell you for soth
by that I haue lyued these fortie yeares

or there abowt, and am now Bishop not
of Rome but of Sarum, in much wisedome
and authoritie. But may we so safelie

                  •
               lude the answer of God, and reiect
his blessed will vttered by the mowth of
holie men, that the cause it selfe shall be
accompted childeysh, bycause they, which
promoted it, were not fifteen hundred
yeares old, but men of three hundred
yeares onlie, as it were childerie of three
yeares, in respect and comparison of the
reuerend Iohn of Salisburie? It is not the
age, which maketh verities, but the word
of God, and the consent of the church,
whose voyce especiallie, ys much to be
considered. Vrhanus (saye yow) was
after Honorius.
               
                  M. Iuell. What of that? be these
later yeares so accursed, that there can
be fownd no good men in them? I fynd
no fault with Luther, bycause he is of
no antiquitie, but bycause, he addeth
thereunto, the breach of good order and
vnitie. And in Sainct Vrbanus, I doe not
so much obserue, that he made a new holy
daye, but this is much to be marked,
that all Christendome did keepe it with
                  •
               owt

any murmur, and rebellion. And
agayne, his decree dyd not make that,
which was before prophane, to be holye,
but the holines of the Sacrament,
and the enemye Berengarius, whom the
dyuel stirred agaynst it, did cause hym,
to apoynt the tyme, wherein it might b
                  •
               
celebrated and honored, with especiall
memorie. Christ his birth, was to be worshipped,
before the holidaye was thereunto
appoynted, and the consubstantialitie
of the father and the soun, was
before the concell of Nice, and when
orders begin to decay, new statutes are
made for the rapayring of them, not,
as who should saye, they were never vsed
before, but that it should not come to
passe, that they might be quite forgatten
hereafter. And therefor it is false,
that the adoration of the Sacrament, was
neuer before Honorius decree and S. Vrbanus
holidaye, of whom, by the protestantes
iudgmentes, it is to late to say,
God haue mercie on their sowles, bicause
they are allreadie cōdempned for their
idolatrie, as the heretykes can terme it.
            
               
O S. Thomas Aquinas, whose labors in
the makyng of the seruice for Corpus
Christi daye, I can not but remembr
                  •
               ,
the octaues of that feast now being present,
are thei all lost, and art thow thi self
togeather with them condempned? It
was not for a man alone, to compile out
of bothe testamentes so manye testimonyes,
for the sacrament, and so compile
them, that lyke two Cherubins, the old
should looke vpon the new, aud the new
answer the old: It was not of flesh so to
doe, but of the spirite of God. Read ouer
the antempnes, the respondes, the versicles,
of that blessed daye, and by the verie
sound and sense of them, thei declare
plainlie from whence thei proceded. The
first respond owt of the old lawe is this:
The numbre of the children of Israel,
               Exod. 12. 
               shall
offer vp a kydd, at the euening tyde of their
passeouer, and thei shall eate fl
                     •
                  sh and vnleauened
bread. The versicle answering the
same, out of Sainct Paules epistle, is this:
Christ our passeouer ys offered vp,
               1. Cor. 5. 
               therefore
lett vs eate in the vnleauened bread of sinceritie
and veritie. Againe, an other respond

is: Helias looking back,
               3. Re. 19. 
               dyd see at his head
a cake, and rysing, dyd eate and drinck: and
with the strength of that meate, he walked
vnto the hyll of God. This is the respond,
but what is there in the new testament
to answer this? It foloweth owt of Sainct
Iohn his Ghospell.Io. 6. 
               Yf any man eate of
thys bread, he shall lyue for euer. It ys writen
in Iob: The men of my tabernacle haue
sayd,
               Iob. 31. 
               who might geue vs of his flesh, that we
might be satisfied? and the respond is, that
whyles thei were at supper Christ toke bread,
and brake it,
               Matt. 26. Mar. 14. 
               and gaue it, and sayed, take ye,
and eate ye, this is my bodie. What could
haue been deuysed more agreeable and
comfortable? Then, in other partes of the
seruice, how playnelie ys the faith of the
church, in how few wordes, declared? and
how effectuallie be the effectes of the sacrament
proponed? O holie feast (sayeth
the antempne of the later euensong) in
which Christ ys receaued, the memorie of his
passion ys repeted, the mynd ys filled with
grace, and a pledge of the glorie to come, ys
geuen vnto vs. The heretykes say, that we
must remembre Christ his passion, and

that, that ys the verie some of the institution
of the Sacrament. But they forget
three partes of the whole: bycause, we
not onlie remember his passion, but we
receaue hym also in deed, and grace presentlie
ys geuen vnto vs, and a pledge of
the glorie to come hereafter. The church
tawght them, euē that veritie which thei
hold (as it appereth in the praier of corpus
Christi daye)Of Corpus Christi daye and of the seruice of that holye daye. 
               O God which hast left
vnto vs the memorie of thi passion. vnder a
wonderfull sacrament (but then she sayeth
further) Grawnt vs, we besech the, so to honor
the holie misteries of thy body and bloud,
that we may daylie feele in owr selues, the
fruct of thi redemption. So then, she grawnteth
the memorie of his passion, but she
holdeth the veritie of his bodie: she pelteth
not with God, denying this to be his
body, bicause she is cōmaunded to do this
in remembrāce of hym: but she doth best
remembre hym, when she hath the bodie
which suffered, before her. She calleth the
sacramēt, the misteries of his bodye and
bloud, & yet she doth plainelie adore and
worship his presence, which is couered. I

may seem to be to long in my seruice, but
certēlie, if we should cōsider the marueilouse
wisedome of almighty God, and the
multitude of misteries, which by the
mowth of S, Thomas, were vttered in
that matter, it were argumēt inough that
it come frō God. And is all this geare lost
now? And where as most manifest miracles,
haue testifyed vnto the world, that
our Sauyor accepteth hym, and hath takē
hym in to heauē, shal the sprite of pride &
lyeing, with one worde, cōdempne hym,
euerlastinglie? Thāked be God, that euer
the holiday was made, in the worship of
Christ his body in the sacrament. for this 
argumēt is so euidēt, that bothe he, which
can read no letter in the boke, & an other 
which wil read no good thing, & the third 
which for honest necessarie busynes, can
not well intend it, all yet be sufficientlie
warned, what to think of the Christiās sacramēt,
bicause they haue cōpted it worthie,
of an especial holiday. And wher as,
no text, can be alleaged so plaine, for adoration
(no not owt of this verie seruice
which is for corpus Christi day) but the

heretykes, will putt it owt of strength
by spirituall and misticall vnderstanding
(which wordes thei vnderstand not them
selues, but lyke smoke vanysh awaye, in
their cogitatiōs) yet the apointing of an
holydaye in honor of the sacrament, ys so
manifest an argument against them, that
they haue no other remedie, but to saye,
Vrbanus was not auncient inowgh for
them. Which holye pope, if he had wryten
a whole boke, in the prayse and honor
of the sacramēt,Isichius li. 6. ca. 22. in leui. Ambr. li. 6 de Sacra. Damas. lib. 4. cap. 14. calling it (as the holie
doctors haue done) the bread of liffe,
the bread of diuyne substance, the bread
vnited to the diuinitye, the pledge of everlasting
ly
                  ••
               e, the bodie most holie, pretiouse,
saue, inestimable, with an hundred
other such tytles, they would haue escaped
by leing or denying.
            But now, what can they saye? not onlie
S. Vrbanus,of the adoration of Christ his body p̄sent in the Sacrament. but all Christendome, not
onlie doe speake, but commaund, and
proue by sensible and visible argument,
that the very bodie of owr Sauior, is in
the Sacramēt, and that they adore it, with
a proper holidaye. But Christ (sayeth M.

Iuell) and his Apostles,
               
                  M. Iuell. 
               the holie fathers in
the primitiue church, the doctors, that folowed
them, and other lerned men, whatsoeuer
for the space of a thousand and two hundred
yeares after Christ, neuer heard of it.
Neuer? will you abyde by it?
                  M. Iuell. 
               Yea (sayeth
he) once agayne I saye, for the space of a
thowsand and two hundred yeares, after
Christ his ascension in to heauen, this worshipping
of the Sacrament, was neuer knowen
or practised, in any place, within the whole
Catholyke church of Christ, within the whole
world. Here I am at a staye, I tell yow
troth: bycause I can not tell, by which
waye I might begin to answer, so vehement
an asseueration. For were it best
(think I) to tell hym, he lyeth, and to
proue it? or to wish hym shame onlie,
and to permitt the matter to the handes
of God? or to reason with hym, as if he
were present? or what waye might I take?
I haue alleaged S. Ambrose, and S.
Augustyn before, and if those two be not
sufficient, Theodoretus sayeth, that the
misticall signes remayn in their formar substance,
and figure and forme,
               Theod. dial. 2. 
               and they may

be seen and felt as they were before, but they
are vnderstode to be those thinges which they
are made, and they are beleued and adored,
as being those thinges, which they are beleued
to be. Euthimius also sayeth, in the
64. chap. vpon S. Mathew: Lett vs so do
                     •
                  ,
in the worshipping of the misteries, not onlie
looking on those thinges,
               Euthi. cap. 64. i Mat. 
               which are sett before
vs, but beleuing, his wordes. And whereas
be sayeth, this is my bodie, this is my bloud,
lett vs obey hym, and beleue hym. Further
more Eusebius Emissenus in his fifth sermon
of Easter, he sayth, Behould, with thy
faith, honor and wonder at the holye bodye
and bloud of thy Lorde.
               Eusebius. Emis. ho. 5 
                     〈◊〉
                   pascho. But none of these
are plaine inough for M. Iuell. I doe aske
hym therefore, what S. Iames meant, in
his liturgie or masse, when that, lifting vp
the gift (which is the consecrated host)
he crieth owt holie thinges, for the holie.
            
            Yf he sayed (holie) in that respect onlye
that Christ sitteth in heauen:Iacob. in Litur. sua. why doth
he then lift vp the Sacrament? Agayne,
in S. Basile his masse,Of lyfting vp of the sacrament. at the tyme of receauing,
the Bishop lifting vp the bread,
sayeth, Looke doune o Lord 
                     〈◊〉
                   Christ

owr God, owt from thy holie tabernacle, and
come to sanctifie vs, thow which sittest aboue
togeather with thy father, and art togeather
with vs here inuisiblie. Vouchsafe, with thy
mightye hand, to geue vnto vs,
               In Missa S. Basil. 
               thy holie and
vndefiled bodie, and pretiouse bloud, and by
vs sinners, vnto the whole people. And what
meaneth S. Basile, by lifting vp the bread,
and by so deuoute a prayer, and by that
which foloweth, when, with a great voyce
he cryeth, holie thinges, for the holie?
            
            Also, how is it sayd in S. Chrisostome his
masse, that the priest, after the lyke praier
made as S. Basile hath, taketh a portion
of the host, which is on the holie paten,
and lifting it vp a litle, sayeth, holie thinges,
for the holie, the clerkes and the people
answering, one holie, one Lorde, in the
glory of God his father? But to lett these
questions goe, I will come more nerer,
and be certified of M. Iuell, whether
Christ were the very soun of allmighty
God or no? whether his bodie is to be
worshipped or no? whether he be reallye
and trulie, in the Sacrament of the faithfull?
M. Iuell denyeth, that in any place

in the whole world, twelue hundred yeares
after Christ, the worshipping of the
Sacrament was vsed. But I aske, whether
any doctor or good man, in the space of
twelue hundred yeares after Christ, did
beleue, that Christ was reallie in the Sacrament?
It can not be denyed, but that
holie men did beleue so. As S. Damascene
witnesseth,Damase. li. 4. orth. fid. sa
                  •
               eing: Bread and w
                     •
                  ne
are not the figure of the bodye and 
                     •
                  loud of
Christ,(God 
                     •••
                  bead) but the verie bodie,
indued with the Godhead: whereas our Lord
hym self sayeth, this is my bodie and not a
figure of my bodie. And lykewyse Algerus
in his booke de Sacramento altaris, is verye
manifest. And again, B
                  •••
               engarius, which
denied the veritie of Christ his bodie in
the Sacrament, and would haue nothing
but a figuratiue bodie there, he was condempned
by a generall councel, in which
Lanfrancus Bishop of Canterburye was
a cheife doer agaynst that heresie, and
wrot a boke, by name agaynst Berengarius.
Therefor it can not be denied, but
that these men, which (again I saye) lyued
within the compasse of twelue hundred

yeares, after Christ his ascension: did
verelie beleue, as the Catholykes and papistes
doe at these daies. Yf then, Lanfrancus
Archebishop of Canterburie, beleued,
that Christ was verelie and reallie
(not as Berengarius the heretyke sayed,who can saue M. luell in this place frō a pla
                     ••
                  e lye.
figuratiuelie onlie) in the Sacrament: ergo
he dyd worship our Sauior there present,
ergo a lerned blessed man hath worshipped
the Sacrament, within a thousand
two hundred yeares after Christ his
ascention, ergo some man hath made a
foule lie. Certenlie, yow can not escape
here, master myne. For if Lansrācus were 
one of that councel which condempned
Berengarius, and if Berengarius heresie 
was, that these wordes of Christ, This ys
my bodye, are no otherwyse to be taken,
then those other of his, I am the vyne, and
if no Christians hart can choose, but honor 
the bodie of his Sauyor, and if Lanfrancus 
lyued within twelue hūdred yeares
after Christ: ergo, there was honoring
of the sacrament, before three hundred
yeares last passed, and therefore the memorie
hath 
                  •
               ailed the preacher. But yet,

there was no lacke of memorie, and the
proposition dyd not escape M. Iuelles
mouth vnware, for he stowtlie repeteth
it, with. once agayn I saie, that a thousand
two hundred yeares after Christ his ascention,
the worshipping of the sacrament, was neuer
knowen. Well Syr, the presence was
knowen, if you answer, it was not: whithē
was Berengarius condempned, which
denied the presence? If it were confessed:
how could it, but be worshipped? I
had rather one should answer, that Lanfrancus
and the councell called Vercellē
                  se,
dyd not beleue the presence of Christ
in the sacrament (which were verie ignorantlie
and vntrulye spoken, thei condempnyng
Berengarius, for an heretyke)
then to saye, that for all his presence, thei
dyd not worship hym. For that is not
onlie ignorantlie, but allso wickedlie and
blasphemo
                  •
               slie spoken. Lanfrancus then
was within twelue hundred yeares next
after Christ,He lyued An. Do. 1052. and he beleued, with all the
Catholykes of that tyme, Christ to be
reallie present in the Sacrament: ergo the
worshipping of the Sacramēt, was knowē
               
within the cumpasse of the yeares, which
M. Iuell rekoneth vpon: so that all is not
the Ghospell which he spenketh.
            But will you here now a pretie coniecture
of his? for conclusion I can not call it,
which maketh to no purpose. After the
people began (sayeth he) to worship the sacrament
with godlie honor,
               
                  M. Iuell. 
               the lerned men,
and schole doctors, that then were: sawe, it
could not stand, without great daunger, and
confessed, that the ignorant sort might be leaden
in to Idolatrie. And what of this? yf
there be daunger in worshipping an host
not consecrated, how then? Shall the honor
due to Christ his bodye, be taken awaye?
In the beginnyng of your sermon,
nothing to the purpose, it was proued,
that abuses; haue crept in to the sacrament▪
would yow therefor, the sacrament
also to be abolished. yf a leud priest (with
whom you were well acquaynted, or els
you b
                  •
                light of belefe) hath ben knowen,
for manye yeares space, not to haue cō
               secrated
the host, shal honest priestes therefor,
which do consecrate, be suspected,
and the true sacrament dishonored? The

lerned men, of whom yow speak, dyd neuer
doubt, but the sacrament was to be
honored, but some of them dyd cast the
worst, saying, what if, by malice of the
priest, or other wyse, there should be no
consecration at all? how then shall we
think (sayed they) is there anye idola
                  •
               e
committed of the ignorant people? But
you suppose, they made this argument,
It may chaunce, that an host not consecrated
be lifted vp, and honored of the
people, which thing ys daungerouse: ergo
it had ben better, neuer to haue made
corpus Christi daye, or it were well
done to take awaie the sacrament. For
this must be your conclusion, to proue,
that euen by the verie scholemen, adoration
is taken awaie, or not alowed. For
if this be not proued, yow are fallen from
your matter, and you talke of scholemen,
besides all lernyng. Yet graunt that there
ys daunger (bycause the dyuel hath his
chapelaines) it is easelie remedied, euen
according vnto them, which thowght
good, that the sacrament be worshipped
vnder this cōdition, if consecration were

performed. But according to the truth,
there is no daunger at all. As I wil proue,
which yet neadeth not (because daūger or
daunger not, adoration ys due vnto the
host trulye cōsecrated) yet, for the more
plaines, I will shew, the people to be safe,
without all question. for the vulgar and
true Catholykes, allthowgh vnskilfull in
knowledg, yet stedfast in faith, when thei
beleue once, that our Sauyor left his bodie
vnto his welbeloued church, in forme
of bread, and gaue the power vnto
priestes, of consecrating the same his bodie:
or if the people be not able to make
such distinction, yet if they beleue, what
so euer the church teacheth, and if they
agree to the ordinances of her: then loe
they, in hearing of masse, and adoring the
Sacrament,the intention of the priest is not to be serched of the people. are not bound to make serch
of the intention of the priest, but vnder
this faith, that all is well done in the Catholyke
church, and that Christ is to be
worshipped vnder forme of bread, their
deuotion is harmeles vnto them, and acceptable
vnto God.Matth. 5. 
               If thy eye be simple,
sayeth owr Sauior) all thy whole bodye is
               
lightsome, and therfor, the intentiō of the
people, being good, & directed vnto that
first veritie, that Christ our Sauior hath
left his bodie vnto vs, in forme of bread:
what so euer knauerie or dyuelishnes, be
wrought of man, in some particular host,
it hurteth not the pietie, of the good and
denote people. And god, which is the sercher
of the hartes, doth receaue vnto him
selfe, that honor which they haue apointed
for him, in the Sacramēt. For they see,
the priest to reuest hym selfe, to goe to
the altar, to make crosses and signes, to
kneele downe, to shew vnto them the Sacrament,
they see the forme of bread, and
what shold they do then, but worship the
Sacramēt? Except perchaūce, any man wil
require more then a man his knowledge
in a man. For I wold aske the question, of
that scrupulouse conscience, which feareth
where no cause of feare is, and say to
hym: Good felow, why doest thow not
kneele doune, at sacring, and worship the
body of Christ? It appeareth, by thy plain
countenance and apparel, that thow fearest
not hurting of thy knee, or breaking

of thy hose, as some strayt pointed gentilmen
do leane vnto a pillar of the church,
for such lyke causes: but some ernest matter
there is, which moueth the▪ Yea for
sothe Sir, for (and if it please you, a litle
to come a side,) I heard a preacher once
say: that some priestes, do mock the people,
and do not cōsecrate the bread. And
thē, if there be no cōsecration, I heard the
same preacher say, there is no adoration
due vnto it, which thing he also proued,
owt of I can not tell, what old doctors &
lerned mens bokes. If I were therfor sure,
that the priest doth cōsecrate, I wold then
trulie, worship my maker. How then wilt
thow be sure? hath he not vestmētes vpō
hym? is he not at the altar? doth he not
al thinges as good priestes shold do? Yes,
but I wold know his intēt and meaning,
by his owne word. Why, wold his worde
quiet the? or might not he thinke one
think and speak an other? Mary therefor
(as the preacher noted) it were good, neuer
to worship Christ in the Sacrament,
for feare, least thorough the priest his dissimulatiō,
I shold haue nothing els there

but bread, and so commit idolatrie. Nay,
good felow, that was not the wysest preacher,
that euer thow hast heard: because,
sure I am, thow honorest they father and
mother, with all obedience and seruice,
(if they be a lyue) and with thy dailye
praier (if they be departed:) but art thow
sure, that they are thy father and mother,
which are sayd to be? what discretion hadest
thow, before thow were begotten?
how sayest thow then? if that preacher
shall rule the: not onlie, not thow thy selfe,
but no man at all, shall worshipp any
man or woman for father or mother. Bycause
we are not otherwyse sure of them,
but that we beleue the whole parishe,
which doth testifie it. And then, if authoritie
shall preuaile, the whole world testifyeth,
that in the masse tyme Christ is
present, in forme of bread: so that thow
needest not, to make any more question
hereof, then whether thy father, be thy
father or no. And this I speak, to declare,
that as long, as we be in the world, we
should seeke for no further profe of thinges,
than may be gathered of heering,

seeing, and other senses. And therefor,
perceauing by all externall signes, that
any priest at masse, doth as the church
hath appoynted, I should not desyre, to
creepe in to his bosome, and to withstād
or withhold the worshipping of the Sacrament,
which the church teacheth me,
vntill I know the priest his thowght and
intention. Well Sir yet▪ (would the felow
saye) albeit I must beleue, that in the Sacrament,
Christ his bodie is present, and
sould require no further profe thereof,
then the authoritye of Christ and his
church: yet, (me thinketh) the case with
vs poore people is harde, when we worship
Christ in the Sacramēt, if he be not
in the Sacramēt because of the leuden
                  ••
               
of the priest,Quis vel insanus 
                     •
                  ūculpandum putet, quieis o
                     •
                  ficia debita impenderit, quos parentes esse ere diderit, etiā si nō essent? Quis contrà, non exterminā dū iudicauerit, qui veros fortasse parentes minimè dilexerit, dum, ne fal sos diligat, metuit. August. de vtilit. credendi ad Honoratū. which made no consecration▪
No, no, good felowe, 
                  〈◊〉
                harme is
done at all vnto the. For suppose this,
(which is possible inowght, that there
wer
                  •
                one so lyke thy owne father, that 
                  〈◊〉
               
could not be discerned, which of the two,
were thy true father in d
                  ••
               d, Yf thow
shouldest honor the counterfayte, thinkyng
hym, to be thy true father, might

thy naturall father (trowest thow) iustlye
be offended there withall? or bicause thou
couldest not haue any certayn marke, in
this doubtefull case, wouldest thow honor
no father at all? They, which stand
behind a pillar in the church, or behind
their neighbours backes, or which at the
tyme of eleuatiō looke downe vpon the
grownd, doe not they worshipp (if theyr
mynd be good) Christ in the Sacramēt?
And yet they behold not that host, which
is present, ne bind themselues vnto those
singular formes, whiche they myght behold,
for the looking vp: but simplie and
plainely, they worship the true bodye of
Christ, which is vnder the forme of visible
bread, when it is rightly consecrated,
as they take the host vppon theyr parish
church to be. And if it be otherwise, it is a
pryuate and deadlye synn of the priest,
and a particular error of theires, nothing
hurting or letting the proper obiect and
staie of their fayth, vnto which their deuotion
ys caryed. And, to lett hym goe
now, with whom I seemed to talke all

this whyle, and to returne vnto M. Iuell,
the lerned men dyd, in deed, make obiection,
as thowgh there might be dawnger
in worshypping of an host vnconsecrated:
And therefor (sayeth Master
Iuell) they gaue warning of it.
               
                  M. Iuell. which
                  •
               
wordes, import so much, as if the scholemen
should saye, take heede good people,
what yow doe: yow may be poysoned,
the host may chaunse not to be consecrated,
and then,
                  M. Iuell vnderstandeth not the schole men whom he alleaged there is dawnger of
idolatrie. And so, the people should be
dimissed with scruple of conscience, as
M. Iuell vnderstandeth the scholemen,
which is nothing so▪ for the conclusion
of scholes, and answer vnto that obiection,
which Master Iuell alleageth, ys,
that the people are withowt all daunger,
in so much, that the opinion of worshypping
the Sacrament vnder a condition,
ys refused of the best lerned.
            Now, as concerning Duns and Durand
Master Iuell, reporteth of them by
these wordes. That they thowght it best,
to remoue away the bread,
               
                  M. Iuell, 
               and to bring in

transubstantiation (for it were remayned the
substance of 
               
                  〈…〉
               
and how 
                  〈◊〉
                vnto 
                  〈◊〉
               ? What is he,
which 
                  •••
               ring 
                  〈◊〉
                wordes, and knowing,
neither the places where Dun
                  •
                and
Durand say 
                  〈◊〉
                or any good lernyng besides,
wol
                  •
                not 
                  〈…〉
                Duns and Durand,
dyd so cast their heades to geather,
as thowgh they were able to bring th
                  •••
               
opinions, in to the articles of owr Crede,
and as thowgh transubstantiation were
inuented and authorised by them, and
not rather cōfirmed by the whole church
of Christ. It ys a shamefull kynd of lyeing,
when, the true orderers of Christ
his church, shall be suppressed with silens,
and when the ve
                  ••
               tyes of the Catholyke
faith, shall be attributed vnto the
disputatio
                  •
                of 
                  ••
               holemen. Sainct Thomas
indeed, hath this argument,D. Thom. 3. part. qu. 75. art. 2. 
               that it
ys agaynst the worshipping of the Sacrament,
if any crea
                     •
                  ed substance, which may
not be worshipped with godlie honor, should
be there: ergo (sayeth he) no substance of

bread remaineth. Agaynst which reason of
his, Duns and Durand both, doe argue
verie busilie. and they doe think, that the
substance of bread, might be graunted
to remain, and yet the bodye of Christ
might be worshipped in the Sacrament,
withowt all daunger of Idolatrie.Note. Therefor,
M. Iuell, as cunnyng as he maketh
hym selfe in Duns and Durād, doth so far
and fowl
                  •
               e, goe 
                  ••
               de of theyr meanyng
and opinion, that they argued the plaine
contrarie vnto that which he reporteth
of them. For, whereas he interpreteth
then sayinges after thi
                  •
                manner,Iuell. 
               that, for
au
                     •
                  yding of idolatrie in the Sacrament, the
substance of bread must be remoued: they
reason a playne contrarie way▪ and argue
(their obedience vnto the church allwayes
reserued) that for all the remayning
of 
                     •
                  read,
               Duns and Durand. 
               yet the bodie of Christ might
be in the Sacrament, and withowt daunger
honored. But they speak therein lyke scholemen,
and also lyke aduersaries of Sainct
Thomas, whose argumentes▪ whiles they
discussed to the vttermost▪ they haue fallen
some tymes in to the suspition, either

of enuie, or curiositie. And see agayne,
how litle it hangeth togeather, that,
which M. Iuell would father vpon them?
Yf there be any substance of bread in the
Sacrament,
               
                  M. Iuell. (sayeth master Iuell in his cō
               mentarie
vpon Duns and Durand) there
must be daunger of idolatrie: ergo by
transubstantiation lett vs take the substance
of bread awaye, and then will all thinges
be safe and su
                     •
                  e, and the people shall be
cleane voyde of ieopardie. But how can
this sense and conclusion seeme agreable
to a schole man? For if (as M. Iuell
hath tolde vs owt of theire writinges)
there be daunger of Idolatrie, when consecration
ys omitted, how much hath
Duns holpen the people, by bringing in
of transubstantiation, where as the substance
of breade neuer so much taken
away, yet there may lacke consecration:
and that failing, (as master Iuell weeneth)
idolatrie may be committed, and
Duns and Durand should misse of their
purpose, for which they deuysed transsubstantiation.
            Wherefore I wonder at the libertie,

which master Iuell taketh vpon hym, in
makyng, as pleaseth hym, free reportes
vpon the lerned, as thowgh they were
easie to be vnderstanded, or he had euer
great mynd to read them, or as thowgh
his report were of such authoritie, that
as he sayeth, so it must be in them.
            Now, as concerning Sainct Thomas,
which proueth that no bread doth remaine
in the Sacrament, bycause godlye
honor ys geuen vnto it, the authoritie
and present practise of the church
dyd moue hym thereunto. As though he
should saye on this wise: The church doth
geue godlie honor vnto that,Of transsubstantiation. which ys
vnder the formes of bread and wyne,
but no godlye honor ys due vnto anye
pure creature, ergo except the churche
should committ Idolatrie (which ys impossible)
no other substance besides the
body of Christ, can be conteined in the
Sacrament. In which his conclusion,
the honor, which the church gaue to the
Sacrament, was sufficient vnto hym,
to inferr, that no bread remayned, and
not his desire, to haue the Sacrament

worshipped, was the motyue and occation,
to inuent that no bread remayned.
For, to speake the trueth, the scholemen,
as they were, for the greater part, men
of excellent witt and holynes: so, thorowghe
the ghift of vnderstanding and
cumpassing weightie matters, they went
verie farr in serching owt the treasures
of all diuinitie, and yet, thorowgh the grace
of holynes, which qualified their deepe
inuentions, they allwayes submitted
their conclusions vnto the authoritie of
the Catholyke church. In so much, that if
a thowsand Dunces and Durandes, shold
so decide this question and matter, as
master Iuell reporteth of them: yet needeth
not the Catholyke, for that cause,
to be trobled, or the heretyke crake of
anye victorie, agaynst the practyse and
faith of the churche. But lett vs behold,
how master Iuell plaieth the schole man,
and vttereth such an insight in the Sacrament,
as the greatest doctors for subtilitye,
haue neuer marked throwgh their
dulnes. For vpon this, which he supposeth
Duns and Durand to saye (the Sacrament

ys to be worshipped, ergo no bread must
be remayning) he inferreth a contrarie
conclusion,
                  M. Iuell. as, that (there ys bread remayning,
ergo it must not be worshipped.)
Wherein both the argument concludeth
not, if he will folow Duns and Durand:
and the formar proposition ys hereticall,
if he would submitt his vnderstanding
vnto the Catholyke church. The argument
(I saye) and the consequence ys
nawght, bycause for soth, by his doctors
Duns and Durand the schole men, for
all the substance of bread remainyng yet
might the Sacramēt be adored and worshipped.
But that is one doctors opinion.
Then also, his antedent ys false, because
the church hath so receiued and tawght
vs, that the substance of bread ys clean
conuerted. And as concernyng master
Iuell his profes, of his antecedent, where
as he alleageth Sainct Augustyne in a sermon
of his ad insantes, saying, that which
you see vpon the table, ys bread, it doth conclud
that the other thing which we beleue
to be vnder those formes of bread is
not Christ his naturall bodye. And, I

trow, Sainct Augustyne dyd not meane
such bread to be there, as childerne spread
their butter vpon. For it is wryten by the
same blessed doctor:In lib. sent. Prosperi.
               VVe honor thinges
which we see not, that ys to saye, flessh and
bloud, in the forme of bread and wyne which
we see. The church also herselfe feareth
not, to call the Sacrament bread,why the Sacrament 
                     〈…〉
                  . which
yet condemneth all Lutherans and Zuin
gl
                  •
               ans. And she calleth the Sacrament
bread, bycause the Sacrament hath the
forme of bread, and bycause bread in the
Scripture signifyeth any foode, and bycause
Christ his bodye ys, in deede, true
bread, and bread of life, and heauenlie
bread. Therefore, bycause it ys called
bread, vpon that onlye to conclud, that
it contynueth bakers bread: it ys the argument
of thinkers, tailers, and coblers,
and not of lerned scholars.
            Then, as concerning Gelasius, which
sayeth, that the substance of bread, or nature
of wyne doe not cease to be, (in the Sacrament,)
he expowndeth hym felfe, by
that which foloweth strayt after in th
                  •
               
same sentence, adding these plaine wordes,

               But they remaine in the proprieties of
theyr nature. Which proprieties are these
folowing whitnes, thicknes, breadeth,
weight, tast, and power to norissh and
feede the bodye, with such like, which
he calleth the substance of bread and wyne,
and more playnelie the properties of
their nature. The lyke is to be answered
vnto Theodoretus, whiche sayeth, that
Christ honored the bread and wyne which we
see,
               Theodor. Dial. 2. cō
                  trahaereses 
               with the names of his bodye aud bloud,
not chainging the nature of them. (that is to
saye, the naturall proprieties, because in
all poyntes it appeereth vnto owr eye, to
be euen as it was before consecration)
but ioyning grace vnto that nature. Ouer
and aboue all this, a most true and readie
answer ys, that the faithfull doe consider
allwayes, not, what one or two doe
saye, but what the whole cumpanye of
lerned men, or the greater part doe testifye.
Agayn, before the church had expressed
it, and opened by her sentence,
the manner of Christ his being in the
Sacrament, it was no heresie (if proude
obstinacie dyd not make it) to saye that

bread remained, or that it vanished in to
nothing. Bicause both opinions dyd hold
with reall presence, and the authors of
them were contented to yeld vnto their
betters iudgement. And so, if we should
graunt vnto the heret
                  •
               kes, that which
thei do require about Gelasius or Theodoretus,
they both defending the reall
presence, it ys no small matter against the
heretykes other opinions, and it ys nothing
at all against the Catholykes. But
in these dares now, when it hath been decreed
according vnto scriptures,Concilium Lateranese and auncient
fathers, in a generall councell, that
the substance of bread is conuerted in to
the bodie of Christ: now, to denie transsubstantiatiō,
and to reuyle the decree of
the Catholike church, this is greatlie against
the faith. and this is it, which maketh
heretikes. S. Cyprian, which defended
the rebaptizing of them, whom heretykes
had baptized before, was no heretyke
in so doing, bycause the question
was not then determined by the church,
vnto whose iudgement, he submitted his
lerning and authoritie. But now, if it

should come in to an idle head, to bring
that blessed martyrs reasons, and to withstand
the Catholike church, he should do
nothing els, in wyse mens iudgementes,
but declare his owne vaine gloriouse folie.
And yet, I do not, ne will not vse this
defence, but plainelie answer, that Gelasius
and Theodoretus, doe meane well,
and speak as papistes may doe, that the
substance or naturall propertie of bread
remaineth, that is to saie, the same quantitie,
vertue and qualitie, which it had before
the cōsecration. Wherefor to conclud
the cleane contrarie, vnto Master
Iuells assertion, I saie, that neither the
auncient doctors do affirme, that the substance
of bread remaineth (vnderstanding
by substance the essentiall and internall
forme or nature of bread) neither
Duns and Durand doe saie, that if bread
remain, there is daunger of Idolatrie.
            
               Farther yet the scholemen say (quod M.
                  M. Iuell.
Iuell) that yf a man happen to worship the
accidentes of bread? Idolatrie may be done to
the sacrament: No good Syr; not to the sacrament,
but to the accid
                  •
               ntes; wherein

if fault shold be committed, it is not the
fault of the institution of Christ, but of
the silence of priestes, or simplicitie of the
people. Neither is adoration therefor to
be forbydden, but the manner of adoration
is discretelie to be opened. whiles
owr Sauior him selfe, walked visiblie vpon
the earthe, if one should haue worshipped
his verie face or garment, not able
to distinct betweene the two natures
of God and man, neither in what diuersitie
and degree, the face and the garment
appertein vnto one selfe same person,
(whereas in truth, it were idolatrie to worship
that face with godlie honor, in that
respect and consideration as it is onlie an
holie and graciouse visaige of a right excellent
and perfect man) bycause, herein
may be daunger, should we not worship
Ihesus Christ at all, or not worshipp hym
before we vnderstand the distinction betwene
Latria and Dulia, that is, honor
due and proper vnto God: and honor,
which may be geauen vnto any holy
                  •
               
creature? O miserable people (sayeth master
Iuell) that thus are lead to worshipp

they know not what. For alas, how manie
of them,
               
                  M. Iuells needles & folish pietie. 
               vnderstand these distinctions, or
care for them? How manie of them vnderstand,
after what sort accidentia be sine
subiecto? &c. But o miserable world, saye
I allso then, and alas alas, that any wyse
man should be so taken, to thinke that
what so euer ys concluded in scholes,
should be opened in the pulpites.
            Alas, alas, the churche doth teache openlye,
that the Father ys vnbegotten, the
Soune onlye begotten, the Holye ghost
proceding, and this who so euer doth
not beleue, shall not be saued. O miseserable
people, that this are lead to beleue
they know not what. For what know
they, or what care haue they, of proceding
or begetting? or how can they vnderstand
those misteries of the schole men?
as for example, Christ toke the nature of
man, he toke not the person of man, as cō
               cerning
Christ his person, God died for
man, as concerning the diuine nature,
God can not die, and he which beleueth
not those thinges shall neuer be saued.
O miserable people, that this are l
                  ••
               d to

beleue, thei know not what. for which of
them vnderstandeth the distinction, betwene
substance and person? But what
shall we saie? must the lerned men of the
church (O master Iuell) beleue no more,
then the people are able to conceiue? or
bycause the people vnderstand not, what
is accidēce, or what is substance, or what
is quantitie, or qualitie, relation, or action:
is it therefor no matter, whether it be
fysh or flesh, square or round, white or
black, worldlie or euerlasting? for the 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
this is sufficient to beleue, that Christ
is in the sacrament, vnder forme of bread
and wyne, the bread b
                  ••
               ng chainged by
his almightines, in to his bo
                  ••
               e, and the
wyne, in to his bloud: or if some can not
beare awaye all this, let hym cleane to the
Catholyke faith, and hold vp his hands
at sacring as others doe, and beleue more
excellent thinges to be present, then hym
selue can see or feele, and be content
to be reformed, if perchaunse he should be
in any error: and God will 
                  〈◊〉
                aske hym
(f
                  •
               are yow non) what ys 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ or what
is s
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  ctum, oh how is my body founded

in the Sacrament. Now yet, if the plaines
of faith doth best serue the simple man,
shall the lerned be forbydden, to serch
owt the vttermost of the misteries, and
to meditate vpon the workes of God,
praying and studying alwayes, for more
knowledge and vnderstanding? By this
kynd of reason, the studie of logyke and
philosophie ys neglected, the pryd of the
ignorant ys mainteyned, the commentes
of auncient fathers are not folowed.
And whyles master Iuell sheweth vnto
the people, which can not iudge of diuinitie,
the true but subtile conclusions of
the diuines and scholemen, and whiles he
pytieth their case, because the schole
doctors do talke of accidentia sine subiecto,
and of substantia and accidens, which the
common lay people can not vnderstand,
and where as he would make them beleue▪
that according to the conclusions of
the same scholemen, they shall neuer be
saued, except thei credit and beleue those
matters, they are made to abhor the scholes
as cruell, or to contemne them as sup
                  ••
               ssuouse.
Whe
                  •
               as the truth ys, that if

thei beleue in one some, all that which
the church teaceth, allthowgh thei neuer
aske for euerie part of it, and be not curiouse
in thinges which passe their capacitie,
they yet be owt of all daunger. O
pitiefull hart, Alas sayeth he, how manye of
the people vnderstand these distinctions? whi
Syr, no harme ys done, where it ys not required,
that thei should go to schole to
lerne them, for geue me a faithfull man,
which beleued verelie, Christ to be reallie
in the sacramēt, as the wordes of This
ys my bodie, doe sound: and there shall
need no teaching, that he kneele doune,
or knock his breast, or call for grace, or
behaue him selfe as it becummeth a creature,
in the presence of his maker. And
such a one needeth not, to be talked with
all, abowt accidens and subiectum or other
such verityes and yet misteries. But when
the priest sayeth vnto some one in the
worlde, yow must beleue that Christ ys
God, and that hys wordes be true, and
that he sayed of bread, This is my bodye
which shall be geuen for yow, which bodye,
the Catholykes haue in the Sacrament

yf a pedlar now, or pelting craftesman,
would aske, how it is his body, and make
furth straitewayes argumētes, which first
were deuised in ale howses, or shoppes,
and afterwardes receiued in some scholes,
(as in example, Christ is ascended, ergo he
is not in the Sacrament, or, can a priest make
God? or,Argumentes of the ignorant people. 
               can one body be in more places then
one, at one tyme? or, yf a mowse eate the host
doth he eate Christ his bodye?) in this case
silence (I think) were best, & ecclesiastical
correctiō for such a person were necessarie,
so that to talke to hym of accidence
and substance, it were cleane owt of the
purpose. But now if a lerned mā, and expert
in liberall sciencies, were conuented
perchaunce, and examined vpō the Sacrament
of the altar, and if he would vse the
coblers argumēt, and saye, Christ his 
                     •
                  rue
bodye is in one place, but the Sacrament is at
one tyme in a thowsand churches togeather,
ergo Christ is not in the Sacrament, here lo
                  •
               
were good occasiō, to perswade and proue
to hym the cōtrarie, bycause of the nature
of a substāce, which occupieth no place,
& so afterward to declare, that Christ

is in the Sacrament, not as in a place 
                  ••
               
               callie,
but as vnder forme of bread substantiallie,
and that, by the turnyng of
bread into hys bodye. Or, if an ethuyke
being lerned, were to be conuerted vnto
the faith, it ys for the honor of God and
his church, to proue vnto the ethnyke,
that althowgh the misterie of owr faith
doe passe all reason, yet the principles of
God his omnipotencye, and the incarnation
of Christ once beleued: they are
so agreable vnto the high wisedome of
God, that no absurditi
                  •
                or shamefulnes
shall euer be concluded of them. In these
cases then, the distinctions doe serue,
and in these occasions the church must
not be to seek, of the fynest poyntes of
all lernyng and misteries. In the serching
of which, she hath labored from Christ
his asconsiō hitherto, and dailie doth studie,
the Holighost; the scholmaster, eue
                  •
               
teaching her more and more, and euer
leauing her manye poyntes to be lerned,
vntill she come at length vnto, heauen,
where all trueth and veritie shall be most
manifest and open. Wherfor the scholemen

(as the worde it selfe doth import)
are especiallie for scholes, and they are
for lerned men, not for common pulpites
or merchantes eares, which as they be
most riche of other, so they take them
selues most wysest, and by a short waye,
looke what they can not vnderstand, that
are they readie to contempne. Now also,
if the scholemen haue manye thinges
not necessarie at all, it is no true part to
make the cause of the church and them
one. As M. Iuell here doth, which recy
               
                  •
               yng
Duns and Durand, and S. Thomas,
and Alexander, and Holcott, would make
men beleue, that the church can not
tell what to doe, bicause in certain pointes
and articles, these men varye the one
from the other. Thinkyng perchaunse
that as Lutherās must folow Luther, and
the Zuinglians clea
                  •
               e fast to Zuinglius:
so that some sect of vs must folow Duns,
some Alexander, and some S. Thomas.
            Vnto which men yet, the Catholykes are
not bownd, but as the church doth direct
them. And where the church hath
not de
                  •
               iaed some matter, there may I

holde one daye with one sense, an other
day with a contrarie, leesing nothing of
the integritye of my fayth. I perceaue,
that ys any iust matter, myght be fownd
owt against the church, it should be exaggerated,
seyng that the pryuate opinions
of certen, be turned to the defacing
of the whole catholyke fayth.
            Holcot sayeth, that it maye so chaunse,
that one should meryte by the worshypping
of the dyuel, master, Iuell thinketh it
vnpossible: Lett vs then suppose it, that
master Holcot lyeth, the church (I trew)
is not to be abhorred therfor, as thowgh
she exhorted her childerne, some tymes
to sett vp a candell before the dyuel. And
yow also M. Iuell, yf yow would remembre,
what difference there ys betwyxte
a thing done materiallye and formallye
(which termes the scholes know well
inowgh) yow would neuer haue fownd
such fault with Holcot, withowt shewing
of the particular case, in which the worshypping
of a wycked spyrite, myght be
vnto some one meritoriouse, for in deed,
yf one dyd know for certen, that Luther

or anye of hys folowers, were a verye
dyuel, in forme of a Doctor of the new
Ghospel, yow should not (loued yow the
setting furth of yowr procedinges neuer
so well) geaue anye reuerence vnto hym:
But if he seemeth vnto yow to be a third
Helias, and a man of excellent prerogatiue
in knowledge of all trueth and holines,
were he a dyuel a thousand tymes,
your brotherne would neuer condemne
yow, for geuing of reuerence vnto hym.
For when the owtward person ys mistaken,
and good wyll shewed vnto it: the
error happening, ys quickelye forgeuen,
and the inward affection ys iustlye considered.
But lett vs goe further.
            Loth I am here to 
                  ••
               pp vp and to open vnto
yow the high misteries and secretes of their
lerning,
                  M. Iuell. and the force and strength of their
reasons. Yet at this tyme, the importunitye
of them, forceth me, so to doe, &c.
            These be his wordes. But I will tell
yow Master Iuell, if yow will be ruled by
counsel, and doe as wyse and lerned men
haue done here before, neuer goe front
your purpose, and make an end of that,
which you haue taken in hand. And if any

be importunate: answer them that yow
will be at leisure an other tyme, and then
talk at large of their obiectiōs. But now
it ys owt of your purpose, to intreate of
any thing which doth not appertein vnto
the masse. But contention hath no eares,
and when al is sett, in and vpon the tong,
owt it must, that which burneth in the
stomake, althowgh it agreeth no better
then Germaines lippes, whose tongues
we see, by experience in this world, how
farr they sound one countrarye to the
other. Lothe I am (sayeth he,) which is
verye seldome in men of hys religion,
which take it for a great perfection and
zeale, not onlye to dallie with mens argumentes,
but also to deface their lyues,
and to speake the worst they can of the
highest priest in Christendom. But thankes
be vnto God, that there ys one shamefast
man in their syde. And then good
master Iuell, if in deed you be lothe (as
you seeme to speake) lett all extraordinarie
matters passe by, and folow onlye
your purpose. For why will you encumber
your selfe with the highe misteries,

misteries, and secretes of their lernyng,
the masse alone hauing sufficient argument,
to make .20. Sermons vpon it?
            Well, there ys no remedie: allthowgh
he be lothe to open the secretes of owr
lernyng, yet the importunitye of them
(sayeth he) forceth me so to doe. Wherin,
althowghe I nothing doubt, but that
he preached withowt troble, and that he
myght haue done, what he would, and
haue preached (in the lent especiallie)
of the passion, or some matter parterning
to pretie, withowt bringing of question,
or controuersie: yet lett vs suppose, that
some one was importunate, and lett vs
harken how properlye master Iuell doth
answer his appetite. But remember Sir,
that yow keepe promys, least yow be
thought to haue gone owt of your ware
for nothing, and remember that yow ryp
vp and open the high misteries and secretes
of their lernyng, not skoffyng lyke
a benchewhistler, but reasonyng lyke
a preacher.
            Fyrst then,
                  M. Iuell. to begyn with the head, marke
yow well (sayeth he) and waighe this argument.

God made two lightes in heauen, the
greater to rule the daye, the lesse to rule the
night, ergo there be two powers to rule the
world, the Pope, that resembleth the sonn, and
the Emperor, that is less then he, and likened
vnto the moone. This is an argument of theires
vsed by Innocentius tertius.
            Syr, I pray yow, before Innocentius,
who vsed this argument or conclusion?
Then I aske, whether this text of Genesis,
was the cause that the Pope should
be greater then an Emperor? yf you can
not tell what to answer to the first, you
are not skillfull inowgh in owr misteries,
how great also is your knowledge and
reading, that before Innocentius tertius,
yow dare well say, that no man euer vsed
the same verie argument or similitude?
And if to the second yow saye, that the
Sonn and Moone were the cause, for
which Christians dyd make the distinction
betweene Pope and Emperor: you
maye goe to schoole agayne, and lerne
yowr Catechisme, for any knowledge
or vnderstanding, which yow haue in secret
mysteries, whereas before Innocentius

dayes, the Pope was higher then the
Emperor, the argument of the Sonn and
Moone, being not alleaged for that purpose.
Yf yow were Cicero, and for loue
of your client, would make a pretie lye
and me
                  •
               ie, to delite my Lord the Iudge,
and deceaue therewith his circunspection
and grauitie: the Ethnykes, for your so
doing, might dispense at their pleasure,
with you, and geue that praise and name
vnto you, that you be a trym felow, of a
goodlie fyne witt and a pleasaunt, and
such a one, good Iupiter, send me (might
they say) at my need: but, emong Christians,
in so great a question as the sowle
cummeth vnto, in open pulpitt, a famouse
scholar, a Bishopp by calling, to moue
ernest expectation, as though he would
rypp vp the high misteries of the Catholike
faith, and to recyte but an argument
of Innocentius onlie, (which he rather
for garnisshing of his letters, to the Emperor,
then strength of the similitude in
it selfe and by it selfe, dyd roundelye
alleage furth vnto hym,) and to make,
as though that were the best argument,

and most secret misterie, of the papiste
                  •
               
it ys not for a sage person, matter, place,
or audience. Vnto yow M. Iuell, if one
should talke of this question, how much
the dignitie of a pope were better, then
the rome of an Emperor, he should neuer
alleage Innocentius tertius, or the glose.
Not bycause, they are to be contempned
in them selues, but rather bycause yow
doe sett so litle by them. And yet, it may
be proued vnto you, all that which Innocentius
would conclude, by the alluding
vnto the sonn and moone, which God
made at the beginnyng. Therefore I doe
graunt vnto you, that Innocentius argument
ys not of great good force against
an ethnyke and heretike, and yet I save,
the cōclusion of the church standeth, for
all that this argument may fall. But if it
were an high misterie, it could not be so
easelie lett to faile, ergo then yow haue
declared or confuted yet, no misteries of
owre religion.
            Now,of the two rulers of Christ his church on earth. that there be two states of ruling in
the church of Christ, it ys plaine by this,
that the one which is temporall, euerye

man doth see: of the other, which is spirituall,
the psalmist doth prophe
                  •
               ie, saying,Psal. 44.
               in steede of my fathers, their 
                     •
                  ounes are borne
vnto the (meanying the Apostles, and
Bishoppes their successors) them shalt
thow apoynte princes and rulers, ouer the
whole earth. And this is proued also by the
Apostle, commaunding the Bishoppes of
Ephesus, to take heede vnto them selues,
and also the whole flocke, in which the holyghost
hath sett and made you Bishoppes,Act. 20. that
yow should gouerne the churche of God,
which he hath purchased by his blond. Then
how much not only pope or prelate,The dignitie of preisthode. but
euerie simple priest ys higher and honorabler,
then the greatest Emperor of the
world, not onlie the wordes and writinges
of holie men, but their factes rather
and behauyors, doe geue an euidon
                  •
                testimonye.
As S. Martin being inuited with
much a doe vnto Maximus the Emperor
his table, and hauing the cup first geauen
vnto hym, that he should begin vnto the
Emperor, not withstandyng the exceading
great feast and honor,Sulpit. lib▪ 1. 
                     〈…〉
                  
                which was he
stowed vpon hym, by one of the cheifest

then in the world: yet he, (to teach the
Emperor a true lesson, and to proue that
his maiestie ys not the highest) began
aboue all other, vnto his chapelaine, declaryng
that he knew none there, to be
better. Of lyke corage and fortitude was
Eulogius an holye and constant priest,
which being required of the Emperor
Valens cheife officer,Trip. hist. li. 7. ca. 33. to communicate
with hym, which helde the empyre and
kyngdome (which, in owr English tongue
at these day
                  •
               s, ys to saye, Folowe the
Kynges procedinges) answered peaceablie
and gentlelie, saying, And I also haue
my part of a kyngdome and priesthode.
            
            Such men were,Hist. tri. li. 7. ca. 3
                     •
                   & li. 9. ca. 30. holye Basile, Ambrose,
Chrysostome, noble and reuerend Bisshoppes
in deede, which litle regarding
the glorie of the court and the worlde,
spared not, to tell the Emperors, their
owne, and also to shewe them that a
Bisshopp his office, ys not geuen, with
goldon crowne or purple. And not only
in theire doinges,the superiority of the 
                     〈…〉
                   the Emperour. but in writinges
also, they declared this veritie, that the
Emperor, rul
                  •
               th in the court; the Bisshopp,

in the church: the Emperor, ouer
mens goodes and bodyes,Ambros. de Sacerdotio. Chrisost. libr. 3. de Sacerd. the Bisshopp,
ouer sowles and consciencies; the
Emperor, in thinges transitorie: the Bisshopp
in thinges euerlasting.
            These conclusions being therefore true,
if Innocentius would sweetlye and misticallye
allude vnto the beginnyng of
Genesis, and saye, that the two great
lightes, which God made to rule the
daye and nyght, doe signifie the two
powers, of the spiritualtye and of the
temporaltye, of whiche the one ys so
brighter then the other, that the least of
them both yet, doth direct and guide men
in the whole worlde: is this so vnproperlie
spoken or childi
                  •••
               lie, that anye father
of this generation, may honestlie contempne
it? As, on the other syde, if there
be no strength and force in this argumēt,
is the highest misterie and secrete lerning
of the catholikes, therby vttered and cōfuted?
When frindes confer together familiarly,
many thinges come and goe, to &
fro betwixt them, which if they were examined,
by the seuere iudgemēt of some cō
               trollar,

would seeme to be spoken triflinglie.
yet consider the tyme, place, and
persons, they may stand wel inough with
charitie, my meaning is this, when Christians
write vnto Christiās, in great peace
of conscience, and silence of heresie, they
are more bold with the Scriptures, alleagi
                  •
               g
the textes of them▪ towardes their
purpose, although it be not according
to the first sense, and meanyng of the place.
Alluding (as sweet S. Bernard doth
man thousand places) vnto some historie,
verse, sentence, or other lyke thing in
them, playeing, (as I might saye) and refreshing
them selues with the Scriptures,
as 
                  •
               saac dyd play with the fayre Rebecca
his wiffe in the garden of Abimelech
the kyng, secretlye,Gen. 26. as he thowght
hym self, and honestlie, is a good and vertuous
man, louinglie yet and familia
                  •
               lye,
as with a most true and bewtifull wi
                  •
               e.
All which thinges, 
                  〈◊〉
                colerated 
                  •
               mong
frendes, and they agree wel inowgh with
cha
                  •••
                as long as they disagree not with
honestie and veri
                  •
               ie. But, when peekers
of quarell
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
               
doe appere, and heretikes begin to loure,
then in deed, other kynd of writing and
arguyng ys to be vsed, not to the vtter
disalowing of the familiar manner and
fashion (which hath his tyme and place,)
but to prouyde against the cummyng in
of strangers and enimyes, which seek onlye
how to fynd faultes with the Catholikes.
S. Paul wryting to the Corinthiās,
emong other thinges, he willed, that women
should be couered in the churche,
and emong other reasons, this was one,
which he wrote verie sadlie: Doth not nature
(sayeth he) teache yow this?
               1. Cor. 11. 
               for yow
see, that long heare ys geauen vnto a womā,
to couer herselfe withall. This now, in a
Christian man his eares, doth sownd right
well and probablie. But lett a quareller
stand agaynst hym, and saye, my masters,
Paul here hath wryten vnto yow, that
your women should not be bare headed
in the church. And why so? Loth I am, to
ripp vp the secretes of his lernyng, and
the force of his reasons. But his importunitye
dryueth me therevnto, marke ye
therefore well, and waighe this argumēt.

A woman, by nature hath long heare, ergo
they must were byggins in the church.
Should not such a skorner then, speak as
right as master Iuell doth? alleaging that
for a principall or singular argument,
which in deed, is not so? and afterward,
by disgracing of that argument, to bring
the whole matter in to question, or els
contempt? for the blessed Apostle vsed
that reason, as in waye of persuasion, and
as a probable and conuenient argument,
which if one would denie, saying, it dyd
not proue his purpose, his conclusion ys
sure for all that, where he sayeth, in the
end of that question. Yf any man seem to
be contentiouse,
               1. Cor. 11. 
               we haue no such custome, nor
the church of God. After which sort, it may
be well answered, that if Innocentius did
not therebye well proue, the superioritie
of the pope aboue the Emperor, bicause
the Sonn ys bigger then the moone, and
if there were no other reasons of force
and strength, emong the Catholykes, for
that purpose, (as contrary wyse there be
whole bokes of auncient doctors, which
preferr priestes before all other, what so

euer, creatures, for their order sake and
authoritie) yet,Ambr. & Chrisost. de Sacerd. it might be well answered
to heretykes, that, if yow be good and
cunning at iesting and lyinge, vnderstand
ye, that we haue no such custome,
neither the church of God. And so I
answer not onlie for Innocentius,A generall answer for al the reasons of Gloses or doctors which M. luell iesteth at. but
for Isidorus also, and Gerson, Bonifacius,
the Glose, and for all others, which
master Iuell rekoneth vp. That if they, lyke
good men, abundyng in their sense,
haue alleaged scripture, for prouing of
those thinges, which were vsed before
thei were borne, and if vnto contentiouse
persons, those good mens reasons are
not sufficient, yet none should be so hardie,
as to take awaye orders or articles,
generallie of the whole church receiued.
Bycause, it ys inowgh for a Christian man
to alleage, that we haue no such custome,
neither the church of God.
            Wherefor as concernyng shauen crounes,
and purple sandales, holye water,
or praying in one tong, they were neuer
taken for secrete mysteries in the
church, and if the sentences of scripture,

which holy men haue applied vnto them
doe not abundantlie proue them good,
there is no great harme taken.Of holye water. As for holye
water, althowgh that the wordes of
the Prophet Ezechiel, may verie well be
applied vnto it, where he sayeth: I will
sprinkle vpon you cleane water (which wordes
being a prophecie of the baptisme of
Christiās,Eze. ca. 36 I can not deuyse, in what parte
of the seauen deadlie synnes it may be
numbered, to speake them also by holye
water, which in one signification, doth
bring vs in remembrance of owr baptisme)
yet, graunting, that they make no
more to the purpose, then master Iuells
talke here of the supremacie, and purgatorie,
and priestes crownes, and purple
sandales, doe make against the Canon of
the masse: holie water for all that, is not
to be cast owt of the church, which was
instituted by S. Alexander Bishop of Rome,
and Martir of Christ, fowrtene hundred
yeares agoe.
            Then also, in the matters of weight, if
that,Luc. 22. 
               Ecce duo glagij hic
                     •
                  
                  ▪ behold here are two
swordes. Doth not proue the Bishopp of

Rome his both spirituall and temporall
power:
                  The Pope hath both spirituall and tempes rall power euer all Christiās, althowgh 
                     •
                  e vse not both, at all tymes. yet must yow not make hym an
Antichrist, or the temporal princes page,
and seruant. And if owr Sauyour would
not vse in his humilitye the temporall
sword and iurisdiction, yow will not therfore,
I trust, denie, that he was Lord of
Lordes and kyng of kynges. And so likewise,
he makyng his Apostle S. Peter his
leuetenant, and ruler of all Christians,
both sheepe and lambes: althowgh he put
vpp his sword in to his sheath, yet doth
it not folow, that he hath no such sword
at all. For as concernyng the spirituall
sword, no wyse heretike denyeth that vnto
the Bishop, the Scripture saying most
plainely, whose synnes you forgeue,
               Matth. 18. 
               they are
forgeuen, whose synnes yow retaine, they be
retained: But the temporall, if he will not
vse it alwaies, yow may not therefor in all
cases take it from hym. Whereas, for the
cōmoditie of the whole church (if cause
so requyre) he may as swell forbead, (concernyng
the Emperors owne person,)
that no man salute hym, or regarde hym,
as he may excōmunicate the basest man

in a whole citie, for a fault which deserueth
it. which is true, in a Christian Emperor,
that hath submitted hym selfe by
promyse vnto God, and the church: For
of them which are withowt,
               1. Cor. 5. 
               what doth it apparteine
vnto me, to iudge? doe not yow iudge
of these which are within? Therefore,
the temporall power, ys so included in
the spirituall, as a lesse figure Mathematicall,
of neuer so manie corners, ys
compassed within a circle. It ys fynche
sayed of Sainct Bernard,Bern lib. 4. de consideratione 
               Lib. 4. de consideratione,
where he speaketh of the temporall
sword, which the Pope hath in his
sheath: Ys this sword, (sayeth he) dyd perteine
vnto the by no right, when the Apostles
sayde, behold, here are two swordes: owr
Lord would not haue answered, it is inowgh,
but it ys to much. And therefor, both are the
churches, I meane, the spirituall sword and
the materiall. But the one, ys to be exercised
for the church, the other, of the church: the
one, with the priestes handes, the other with
the souldiars. But yet trulie, at the beck of
the priest, and bydding of the Emperor.
            
            A, see now master Iuel, Low much Sainct

Bernard made of that argument, which
yow think worth the lawghing at. And
this is that Bernard his testimonie, whom
yow in pulpites, doe much bring furth
agaynst the pompe and vyce of Rome,
which as he was in deed, no flatterer at
all, of the Bisshop of Rome, so much the
more, yow should alowe his testimonye,
which he hath browght furth, for the supremicie.
But, why should (Behold here
are two swordes) more offend Christian
eares, when one goeth abowt by all meanes,
for to proue and declare a veritie:
then the argument of Sainct Paule doth,Gal. 4.
where he vnto the Galathians (in disputing
of the old law and prouing it to
be voyde) telleth vs, that Abraham had
two sounes, the one by his mayde seruant, the
other by his wyfe, which (sayeth he) are
the two testamentes. Agaynst which argument,
if master Iuell should vse one of
his deepe and wittie confutations, and
bydd the people marke, with, see I pray
yow, what a worshipfull argumēt this ys,
Abraham had two sounes, and the elder,
plaied the boye with the younger, and

the good wyfe Sara, awaye (quod she)
with this old lubber, he shall not be heire
with my child: ergo, the old law, must be
thrust owt of dores: no doubt, but this
would sound so vntuneablie, in the rude
worldlie, or fyne courtlie eares of manie,
that sone they might be brought vnto irreligion,
and contempt of the Apostles
writinges.
            But let vs come nearer (sayth M. Iuel) & see
the argumēts,
                  M. Iuell. vpō which the masse is luylded.
            Yow say well, of cummyng nearer, for
hytherto you haue gone verie farr of, and
verie farr wide. Yet, what bring yow against
the fundation of the masse? I wō
               der
at the libertie of the man. he maketh
as thowgh he would ouerturne the masse,
& he talketh of nothing, but of the Latin
tongue, the corporall of lynen, the altar
of stone, the roūdnes of the bread, the
mettle of the chalice, and such like thinges,
which apperteine onlie to the comlynes,
and worship, and signification, of
some good thing, about the ministring
and consecrating of the sacrament. Are
these the thinges which yow number, emong

owr high misteries and secret lernyng?
And which you were lothe to speake
of, as thowgh there had ben some shamefull
dishonestie in the matter? Or do
yow call these thinges, the fundacions of
the masse, vpon which it was builded? Are
these the poyntes, by vttering of which,
you haue gone abowte to procure vs shame?
Grawnt vnto the Catholikes or papistes,
that which thei do bring in, by their
high misteries, secret lernyng, and strēgth
of their reasons. grawnt it, I beseech you
good master Iuell, for a while, to see what
will folowe? Trulie, no dishonor vnto
God, no diminisshing of Christ his passion,
no occation of lewdnes, no breach
of commaundement, no thing which a
quiet man shold mislike. But these thinges
will folow, which you were lothe to
ripp vpp and open, that, in the celebration,
the chalice be of siluer or gold, that
priestes wassh their handes in the masse.
that the clothes be of fyne lynen, that
the priest lift vp the paten, and loke in to
the chalice, as the angell did in to the
graue, that the priest fetch a sigth, in a

certaine place of the Canon of the masse,
and knock his breast, with remembrance
of the theife which repented hym
selfe of his wicked lyfe, with such lyke
moe, which may and doe bring manye
meanely disposed, in to the remembrance
of sundrie poyntes of Christ his passion.
O heauen and earth: what faultes be
these? How much ys master Iuell to be
estemed, for rippyng and opening of
such priuie misteries, which once being
knowen, no man woulde euer loue the
masse any more I trowe? It ys wonder
that Sainct Pawles church and steple were
not stroken with lightning from heauen,
when the fierst masse was sayed
within it, in which masse, such absurdities
as the preacher telleth vs of, were
permitted. O excellent Iuell, thow hast
not thy name for nawght. This daye,
thow hast confounded all papistes, this
daye, thow hast so ripped theire copes,
and opened their bosomes, and Englisshed
vnto vs their obseruations and rubrikes,
that they must nedes be ashamed
for euer. O the lyuing Lorde (will the

folissh saye) how haue we ben seduced
of the papistes? how much were they
them selues heauie loden with mennes
traditions? and how litle vertue was in
all their doinges, if a man should take
awaie, the number of popis
                  •
               h ceremonies?
            But alas for pitie, and phy for shame.
A lerned man and browght vp emong
honest studies, so for to abuse the ignorance
of the vnlerned and vnstedfast
people, that they should think, nothing
els, to be in the sacrifice and oblation
of the Catholikes, but an obseruation of
a strange tong, lynen cloth, altar of stone,
chalice of gold, or other such matters?
Although I would not suffer a suspect
person, to cutt my heare, and would
not trust hym with paring of my nailes,
and no man (that wyse is) permitteth
his enemie to doe with the makyng of
his apparell, or the prescribyng of a diete
and order vnto hym: yet the life it selfe,
ys an other thing, then heare, nayle, apparell,
or diete, and the heretike hath not
to meddle, with the behauyors and ceremonies

of Catholikes, althowgh the life
of owr sowle consisteth not in them: but
in the holie and relieuing Sacramentes.
What should we doe, by M. Iuells pryuie
and wise counsell? if we did putt awaie,
for his pleasur, the ceremonies, which offend
his ghostlie spirite: should we haue
nothing to putt the bread and wyne vpō,
that he findeth so great fault with an altar?
surelie, what so euer matter, the altar
had ben made of, good men would
haue sone applied, some one text, or other
to that purpose. He hath a spite against
the golden chalice: shold we drink
then without a cupp? what so euer metall,
the chalice had ben made of, great
scholars would haue shewed, some place
or other, seruing for it. And no doubt, the
thinges them selues were first vsed, for
some good cause and reason, not expressed
in writing perchaunse, but left in tradition,
which being not alwaies knowen
and manifest vnto all lerned men: they,
vpon the confidence of the trueth, and
holines which is in the churche, and also
vpon this principle, that nothing is to be

condempned which serueth vnto charitie:The traditions and ceremonies of the church, are to be receiued and continued withowt reason alleaged.
added a probable and likelie reason,
which shold make for the ceremonie receiued.
And whereas, without any reason
alleaged, euery tradition ys to be continued:
why should it be so much the worser,
bycause a reason is inuented for it?
            There ys no principall part of a man, of
whose fasshion, situation, or manner, the
philosophers did not, either geue the reason,
or seek after it, at the lest. As, why the
eyes, be placed on high? why there be
two of them, one tong seruyng vs? why
the fingers be so manye? why the thumbe
so thick and short? why the braine so
colde, sett in the head? why the hart so
hott, placed in the middle? and so fu
                  •
               the
in the rest. Yet, I am sure, they stode not
by God, when he made the world, that
bycause of the Ergo, which they had concluded,
God should make that part of
his creature, which should agree with
their reason. As (in example) the hart 
                  〈◊〉
               
hott, and some colde thing must be inuented,
to asswage the feruentnes of it,
ergo sett the colde braine directlie ouer

it: I thinke not, that any man dyd at the
begynnyng make this reason, and that
therefore God dyd answer hym, with,
yow say well gentle philosopher, it shall
be so, as yowr ergo concludeth. But
God, most wyselie and agreablie, hath
sett euerye part of vs in his order. of
which has doing, there be causes, and
reasons, more then any man can t
                  •
               ll. vpon
the inventing and serching of which
he hath sett those occupyed, which will
studie naturall philosophie, and consider
the workes of wysedome. Not so yett,
that when any man, hath geauen a proper
and probable cause, of the makyng
or disponing of any creature: that cause
which the man inventeth, should be
termed the occasion and cause of that
creature. But this doth folowe, that God
ys a wonderfull wysedome, which (allthowgh
no man should fynd fault with
his doinges, but take them as he hath
apoynted) hath prouided yet, that such
good reason, should be seen in all his workinges:
that he must be, not onlie stubburne,
but also folish, which would striue

and murmur against them.
            And so I think, for the ceremonies of
all kindes which are vsed in the church,
of which a great number haue come
from the verie Apostles, and the rest haue
ben apoynted, by them which had Apostolike
authoritye. These ceremonies
then, once receyued of the Catholykes
were kept of them for obedience sake,
which knew not the reason and occasion
of them. Then loe, the lerned men,Of the antiquitie authoritie & causes of the ceremonies of the catholike church.
hauyng good iudgemente and leisure,
and knowing that nothing hath ben rasshelye
alowed in the vniuersall Church
of the Catholikes: eyther receyued or
inuented (as God should putt in their
mindes) a probable cause of the churches
ceremonyes and traditions, and the posteritye
also woulde perchaunse, increase
theyr forefathers godlye inuentions, so
that at this day, of one ceremonie of the
churche, yow may haue three or fower
deuoute causes, wherin we must not make
folysh argumentes, of this sayeth Durand,
ergo this was the verye fundation,
of the ceremonie.
            
               
And now, lett euerie man so worke
abowt the reason of it, as he may gather
most vantage and profitt, to the sturring
vpp,The cause and institution of the whyte lynen corporall. of his deuotion. Christ was buried
in a shroude of lynen cloth, ergo the corporall
must be made of fine lynen. This argument
may be found in Siluester, quod master Iuell.
Ergo before this argument, and before
the tyme of Siluester, was not the corporall
of lynen?Beds. in cap. 25. Mar
                     ••
                  . yeas, S. Bede an auncient
father, testifieth, that holie Sixtus long
before his tyme, did make that order, that
the sacrifice of the altar should not be
exequated, neither on silk, neither on colored
cloth, but cleane white lynen onlie.
Againe,Hi
                     •
                  re. 51. 
               Babilon ys a cupp of Gold in my
hand, saieth the Lord, ergo the chalice must
be of siluer or gold. This reason master Iuell
testeth at,Of the antiquitie of 
                     〈…〉
                   in the church as the argument of master
William Durand. But, were chalices of
gold neuer vsed, before Durant made
that reason, or application? yeas, Prudē
               tius
aboue .xij. hundred yeares past,Prudent, de 
                     〈◊〉
                  . speaketh
expreshe of golden chalices, which
the Emperor would haue takē from the
Christians. VVhen Virgill sayeth, Cum faciam

vitula, he vsed facere for sacrificare, ergo
hoc facite in me
                  •
                memoriā,Iuell. 
               ys meant,
sacrifice this in remembrance of me. May we
thank Virgil then, for owr sacrifice? And
except that verse had ben espyed, would
there haue ben no priesthode at all, or
proper sacrifices of the Christians? And
yet, in the verie scriptures themselues, facere
ys vsed for sacrificare.
               13. Iud. as in the .xiij.
Chapiter of Iudges, I beseche the (sayeth
Manue to the Angell) that thow willt yelde
to my requestes, & faciamus tibi hoedum
de capris, and that we may offer vpp vnto
the a kydd of the gotes. But what neede I,
to speake further in this matter? The
truth ys verie plaine, that the thinges
themselues were vsed, before the reasons
of Siluester and Durand were alleaged.
            And therefore, it is a plaine lye to imagin
that their reasons were the fundations of
our ceremonies and orders, as who should
saye, before Durand and Siluesters dayes,
thei were neuer invented. And therefore
once to make an end of this place, these
nice felowes, which hauing no religion
yet of their owne, haue idlenes and licē
               tiousnes

inowgh, to find fault with others
pietie: they may be well compared
to the wanton dame Michol, which lookyng
owt at a window, vpon the kyng
Dauid her husband, and mislyking much
his daunsing before the arke of God allmightie,2. Reg. 6.
               O (quod she tauntinglie) how
worshippfull was my Lord this daye, discovering
hym selfe before his handmaydens?
               1. Paralip. 15.
               And (sayeth the scripture) she dispised hym
in her hart, by likelihode bycause he had
a white lynen cloth, as rochett or surplesse
vpon his backe, like a priest. And so these
now, from the windowe of their high
contemplation, or despection rather of
other, when they behold good and blessed
men, to daunce before the arke of God,
and to make in their turninges and returnynges,
the scriptures pleasantlie to
allude vnto the ornamentes of the sacrifice,
and the true manna, which is the bodie
of Christ,Are not heretikes, wantō and baren Michols, or dawghters of Saul. and perchaunse thorough
libertie of spirite, & excesse of ioye, shew
a litle their bare, O, saye these daughters
of Saul, what goodlie doctors are these,
and how cleane is their religion? See,

what golden cuppes, and altars of stone,
and fyne lynen clothes, and rowndnes of
hostes, and wasshinges of hādes, and sighthinges
of hart, and what reasons thei haue?
Behold, the Sonn and the Moone
doe rule daie and night: and againe, two
swordes be here, ergo the Pope ys better
then an Emperor, and may sitt iudge ouer
spirituall and temporall matters.
            How gloriouse loe (say thei) be these
young fathers and lordes of the church?
But what sayeth the trueth for Catholikes?
Marye, bycawse God hath chosen vs,
to be rulers of his church, and hath preferred
vs before the stowtnes of the Protestantes,
and bycause in owr arke and
church the law and the Ghospell ys conteyned,
with the authoritie to correct miscreantes,
which is the rodd of Aaron, and
the pott of heauenlie Manna, which ys
the bodie of owr Sauyor: therefor, if owr
discouering of owr selues doth greene
yow: we will not onlie, not be ashamed of
the applications of scriptures, which we
haue vsed, but we will hereafter be more
studiouse, in reading, in vsing, in expownding

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
of the scriptures, that no historie,
prophecie, battell, name of person, place,
or countrye, no hill, floud field, nothing
at all, shall escape vs, but we will bring it
vnto some good sense, allegoricall, morall,
or analogicall: we all knowe, that
Theologia mysti
                     •
                  a non est argumentis apta,
and that the sense misticall, ys not of sure
strength in reasonyng. but owr arke being
sure, and the growndes of owr religion
being well setteled, and owt of dawnger:
for the rest, we maye sing and plaie,
and be ioyfull, and harpe vpon the scripture.
In vsing of which if a curiouse 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
shal see vs discouered, or in part, naked: it
is not owr thowght, whether all thinges
sitt abowt vs so well and fynelie, that heretikes
and quarellers doe not or can not
carp at vs, but that the arke of God, be
safelie conducted in to Syon, and placed
within Hierusalem. And if this text of the
old law, (Thow shallt not bynd vpp the
mowth of thi oxe which treadeth owr thi corne.
               1. Cor. 9.)
doth not proue, that thei, which labor
in seruyng the altar, must lyue by the
altar: yet as long as church, altar, priesthode,

sacrifice, and such other thinges of
weight remaine, we will not stryue vpon
the misticall sense of euerie chapiter in
the law whether it proueth owr conclusion,
that which we think worth the alowing.
These wordes (as I trust) are reasonable,
and this ys the plaine trueth of
the matter. Not to make more ieopardie,
then the church requyreth, neither to faine
vpon the Catholikes, as that, if a Cardinall
tredd a wrie vpon his purple sandales,
or the priest at the altar remember
not the theife which hanged on the crosse
by Christ, and sigth at the remembrance
thereof; that all owr religion ys quyte ouerturned.
And this much hitherto, for
the answering of that common place of
M. Iuells, where he thowght by gathering
of certaine absurd argumētes (if the people
be iudge) and by lowd and bold crying
owt, that these were the secrete misteries
of owr religion, and that loth he was
to rip them vp, he thought to bring owr
whole religion, in to contempt and obloquie.
And now lett vs consider his last
matter, which he promysed to touche.
            
               
It can not be denyed,
                  M. Iuell. (sayeth he) but Christ in
his last supper, ordeyned a communion, and
shewed no manner taken of priuate masse.
            But, what calleth M. Iuell a priuate
masse? He craketh much of the primitiue
church, as who should saye, all antiquity
were with them. And oftentymes,
he asketh the question, where we can
fynd a priuate masse? and will not heare
vs answer, that we vpholde no priuate
masse, and that this terme of (priuate,)
hath ben inuented, but of the heretikes
them selues. For the masse in deede, is a
common function and office, to be done
of a priest, which is the legate of the people
vnto God: and God his messenger
vnto them, In which offices, he speaketh
for their necessities, bringyng vnto God,
the most noble & ryche present of Christ
his owne body, the soner to obteyne mercy
and grace at the which, not onlye the
visible parties present, but all Angels and
blessed sowles, either in heauen, or in the
way thytherward, be assistants, and doe accompany
the priest. If .20. men be standyng
by, is it common: and if thousandes

of heauenly hostes, replenysh the place
.19. of the men lackyng, is it priuate? yf
it be sayd in the open church, is it common,
and yf it be browght vnto a litle
chappell, is it priuate? what meaneth he
by this word priuate, I would fayne vnderstand?
And they answer, that, when
one alone receiueth,what the Protestantes meane by priuate masse. then it is priuate.
But is that all their reason? why then, yf
the matter hangeth vpon the nomber of
the communicantes, we shall haue as many
diuisions of common masse, as they
haue prety definitions of a priuate masse.
Three (sayeth the order of the communion boke)
myndyng to receaue, do make
a cōmunion, as three make a colledge,
(as I haue heard) with the lawiers, but
one alone maynteyneth it a colledge, by
the selfesame lawiers, ergo that masse is
not priuate, but common. and yet common
of the least, because,) yf one lacked,
there could be no cōmunion. well then,
yf three skore will cōmunicate, the nombre
encreasyng, the state of the masse, is
altered, and therfore let this be called a
masse of the common of the more. Now,

yf yow make vp three hundred, that must
nedes be, a cōmon of the greater. yf three
thousand, a cōmon of the more greater:
so that we shall haue no end, of cōmon
of the more, and common of the lesse.
How much more better is it proued, euery
masse to be equally cōmon, because
the priest is a cōmon officer, the prayers
be common, the answerer in the peoples
behalfe common,the church hath no priuate Masse but euerie one ys common. the thing offered cō
               mon,
the table common, the thankes geuyng
is common, and as it was in the Apostelles
tymes, all, in that mistery, is cō
               mon.
And these so many common thinges,
shall one peltyng reason take away,
bycawse the priest alone receiueth? And
shall the lothsomnes to heauenly thinges,
in the people, cawse that, to be priuate,
which of his owne nature, is and 
                  〈◊〉
               
no otherwise, then cōmon? Let som certayne
Bisshopp of good will and charity,
cause bei
                  ••
               es and muttons to be kylled,
and all thinges prepared, for open howsehold,
his entent beyng knowen, and the
tables spread, the vssher with lowd voyce
prouoking men to sytt downe, yf none

will vse the liberalitye of the good prelate,
maye we frelye tawnt at hym, and say,
he kepeth no howse at all, or els but a
priuate table? Yf a fayre common, lye
ioyening vnto a citye, and by common
agreement, the cattle be lett to entre in,
but three distinct monethes in the yere:
in all the rest of the nyne monethes, were
it wisely reported, to say, this ys priuate?
So may one call the seas priuate,
where no man doth trauell, and the wildernes
priuate, where no mā inhabiteth,
and the sonn priuate, yf none could come
into him, and Christes very death priuate,
yf all would be infidells. I or did euer
any p
                  ••
               est, forhead the lay people, that
they should not come to communicate?
are not the church dores open? may not
the priest, be spoken with all? ys not the
necessary matter for the Sacrament, of
lyght charge? hath not the church commaunded
vpon the payne of synn, once
at the least to receaue euery yere, because
someels would neuer com to that table?
wherby she declareth her sorow, that many
are so rechelesse in matter of their saluation,

and how glad she would be, to
haue no occasyon of continuing her decree?
And the Sacrament lying so open,
for euery man and woman, and the priest
so ready, and the seruice of the masse so
daylye, must it, (on Luthers name,) be
called pryuate, because none will cōmunicate?
Or, is the meate on the table, and
the gestes at the table, all one? and if the
gestes depart, will the disshes aryse with
them? and ys the people be singular, must
the masse be pryuate? well, yet lightely
then, vpon Easter day in parish churches,
there are no priuate masses, and so those
masses be owte of yowr reache Master
Iuell. Then put this case, that at one
priestes masse, there were som receauers,
at a
                  •
               nothers none at all, both priestes vsing
one boke and seruice, yf he which
sayeth the priuate masse, (as yow terme
it) doe naught, how do yow excuse hym,
withwhom some communicate? or yf his
masse be good, which hath certen to receiue
with hym, why shall the others be
reproued, which althowght he receyue
alone, yet he sayeth no more nor lesse,

then his felow doth? In my mind, it ys
owt of reason and purpose, to fynd fault
with the masse, because of them which
here the masse and for the slowth of the
people, to disproue the diligence of the
priest, and bicause of vnwillingnes in men,
to distroye the mysteries and pleasure of
God. But now, M. Iuel, lest he shold seme
to speke withowt authoritye, he reckoneth
vp, the institutiō of Christ, the order
which S. Paul receiuyd, the practyse of the
primitiue church for the space of six hū
               dred
yeares. And what will you proue by
all this? Mary (sayeth he) that at those
daies, there was a communion. Well we
doe graunt that in the beginnyng, the
people receiued with the priestes. But
what do yow inferr of that? ergo there
was no priuate masse, and the priest did
neuer receiue alone. I deny your argumēt
For these two thinges: the people to receiue
with the priest, and a priest yet to
receiue alone, be not contrary, but that
at these dayes, they may be both verifyed
in one church at an Easter tyme. But I
will not be so hasty with yow: & I graunt

that at the begynning the people did cō
               municate
daylye ergo the priuate masse
is naught. Well Syr, yf this be the fault, 
                  •
               t
shalbe amended with me, and I will neuer
say masse hereafter, but some shal cō
               municate
with me doth this please you?
and is the masse, which I say, in this case
allowable or no? I know what yow must
say (yf yow folow your masters), that it is
not allowable. Truly then I may well come
within yow. For yf the hauing of cō
               municantes
at my masse, doe not make
the thing perfect: neither the lacke of
them shall make it vnperfect▪ what is the
masse the better, yf three receyue with
me? No iote sayeth the heretik▪ what is it
the wo
                  •
               ser, yf none will communicate?
In no poynt, he should answer. so that to
haue or lack communicantes, is but an
accidēt vnto it, and may be absent either
present, beside the corruption of the subiect.
Therfor, yf yow could proue, that S.
Clement, S. Denys, S. Iustyne, and the
rest, did vse a contrary masse vnto owres,
yow should saye sumwhat, but now, yow
troble your self, with prouing, that many

did receiue with the priest, in the primitiue
church (which no man denieth) and
yow inferr thervpon slenderly, that priuate
masse was not then vsed▪ which nothing
auayleth. for more or lesse, all or
none, to receiue at a masse, it maketh so
litle difference, that as owr masse is nothing
the better (as yow will saye) yf all
present by, should receiue: in so by the like
conclusion, it ys nothing the worse, if
none doe cōmunicate. And as the goodnes
or naughtines of the priest, doth nothing
profit or hinder the mysteries in
themselues: so much lesse, the comming
or the goyng of the people, can withstand
the effect of God his word and wil.
Now yet, althowgh I haue not to deny
the testimonies of the fathers, which in
this part are alleaged, which are not vnknowen
vnto Catholikes, and are regarded
of them: that not withstanding, I wil
loke vpon them, and consider their faces,
most graue in the syght of Catholikes,
but not so with the Protestantes, which
some tymes geue reuerēt and humble lokes
vp towardes them, and at other tymes

with scoffes and disdaynes inowgh,
they passe lightly by them.
            Behold now,The inconstantie and uncertentie of heretikes. how much ys made of S.
Clement? whom ower Iuell putteth in
the first place, but at another tyme, how
much he will regard hym? it appeareth
manifestly by the prayse which he geueth
to hym, saying (who, as they saye, was S.
Peters scholar) I am content now. As who
should say, that Clement stand for S. Peters
scholar, but this I speake, not vpon
myne owne thinkyng so, but (as they say.)
For yf I be vrged with any testimonye of
that epistle of his, vnto S. Iames (as it
hath many popissh thinges in it) I will
answer, that I know not what felow this
Clement was, but as they say, he was S.
Peters scholar. And what then say yow of
hym,
                  M. Iuell. yf a man should aske yow? Then
foloweth S. Dionisius, an auncyent writer,
and, as some haue thowght, Disciple vnto S.
Paule, although the contrary may appeare,
by his owne wordes. well yet, lett it be marked
that Master Iuell confesseth him to
be an auncient wryter, for a certen purpose,
when we shall proue many thinges

to lack in the late setting vp of this new
religiō, which were vsed in the primitiue
church, as frankin
                  •
               ense, oyle, salt, syngyng,
crossyng, handes wasshyng, and suche like,
which Sainct Denys reckoneth vpp.
            In the third place S. Iustine is alleaged,
but to the shame of the cōmunion
in English▪ because S. Iustine maketh
mention of wine and water both, the English
order hauing wine only without water.
And agayne, yf any were absent, in S.
Iustines dayes, the sacrament was caryed
home to them, which, according to the
expresse forme of the Ghospell, and S.
Paule, should (as these men report) be receiued,
not alone at home, but in the cō
               gregation,
togeathers with other.
            After him, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine,
S. Leo, are browght in, to proue
that, which catholikes euer confessed of,
that in the primitiue church the people
did communicate with the priest, with
which thing it myght stand well inowgh,
that the priest did his office, although the
people would somtymes not communicate:
for of the dayly sacrifice, and receauing

of the priest, vsed in the old church,
S. Chrisostome sayeth in the .24 homel
                  •
               ,
vpon the first vnto the Corinthians: Doe
we not offer dayly? yes we do offer,
               Chris. homil. 24. ad 1. Cor. 
               but therby
we make a remembrance of his death.
            
            But of the slacknes of the people, S. Ambrose
sayth: It is a daily bread, why doest
thow receiue it,
               Ambr. lib. 6. de Sac. cap. 4. 
               after a yere, as the Grecian
                     •
                  
are accustomed to doe? So that, yf the
priest should tary for the people, and
they would not receyue, and if he could
not consecrate, and doe his office, except
some would cōmunicate, then had they
in Grece, in some partes thereof, but one
communion through the whole yeare,
which is to absurd and vnreasonable, and
also against S. Chrisostome,Chrisost. ad Ephes. hom
                     •
                  l. 3. ad Eph. ho.
3. where he maketh expresse mention of
frequent and oft rece
                  •
               uyng. But now see
what a reason he bringeth agaynst vs?
euen by the very masse, which is at this
daye vsed, he proueth, that priuate masse
was neuer practised. Because the prayers
and blessinges, and actions of owr masse,
do apparteyne to the plurall number, and
therfore vnto a communion, and not to

the priuate masse. Which thing, being
grawnted, it will folowe then, that the
forme of the masse is very auncyent, and
made within .v
                  •
               C. yeares of Christ, after
which tyme, priuate masse came in
place, as they seeme to say. For reason
doth geue, that vnto a priuate masse the
rulers of the church, would not haue geuen
a common forme, ergo this masse,
which at these dayes is vsed, which soundeth
of a cōmunion, was before the priuate
masse, ergo it is verie auncient, ergo
it should not be so much taunted at, as
M. Iuell hath done, in the begynnynge
of his Sermon. And further it doth appere,
that the masse hath no lacke in it
self, as the which agreeth in sence and
wordes, for more then one to receiue at
it: but only the fault is, in the people,
which will not conforme them selfes, vnto
the order of the masse.Chrisost. ho. 3. ad Ephesiot. Astat mēsa regia, adsu
                     •
                  t Ang
                     ••
                  
                  li mensae huius ministri. And yet I say
further, that the wordes of Oremus let vs
pray, and orate pro me, pray for me, be
truely sayed, when the priest alone receiueth,
bycause more are present at ouery
mass
                  •
               , then any bodelie ey
                  •
                can see. And

also, because the priest ys not a priuate
person when he is at the alter, but a common
officer of the whole church, whose
presence is allwayes vnderstanded, to be
at the office of the masse, euen as she is
present at the baptising of children, yf
neither god father nor god mother, neither
mydwife, neither parish clark, were
within he
                  ••
               ng, but only the young infant
which hath no discretion, and the priest
(or som other in tyme of necessitye) to
baptise the child, in the name of the father
the soune and the holyghost.
            Now after all this, he allegeageth the Canons
of the Apostles, a decree of Cal
                  •
               xtus,
the Dialog of S. Gregorie. O Lord
God, what faces haue these men? They
know in their owne ha
                  ••
               es, that the Canons
of the Apostles, and the Dialoges of
S. Gregory, make so much agaynst them,
that they are constrayned to repell them
both, and priuely (by your leaue) to laugh
at S. Gregory. And yet now, see what a
good countinance they beare towardes
them? But all that, which any of thes 
                  •
               ore
named witnesses do conclud, is, that in

the primitiue church the people dyd cō
               municate,
or, when they were slack and
tardye, the good Byshoppes dyd make
them, to hasten them selues, with these
wordes and like,Gregor. in dial. Chrisost. ho. 3. ad Ephesos 
               except yow communicate,
depart yow hence, yf yow be not ready, and
worthy to receiue, yow be not worthy to be
present &c. But when charitye, for all the
good mens exhortatiōs, daylie decreased,
and for all their sainges,that Christia people should oft receiue. whē very few did
receiue, should the dayly sacrifice fayle?
shold the order of Melchisedech haue his
end? should there be no priesthode any
more, because the people did not cōmuc
                  •
               te?
The rulers of Christ his church, did
exhort and wish, that men would receiue
dayly, which when they could not obtain,
they cōmaunded, that yet at the least, euery
sonday they should cōmunicate, which
after a space being greuous vnto many,
they brougth it vnto .3. principall feastes
of the yere, Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontyde.
And those .3. at length seming to
many in England (for in other countries
they keepe them,Fabian
                     •
                   Papa. and more to, vnto this
day) it was last of al enacted by the church

that he which would not receiue at Easter,Inno
                     ••
                  tius 3 Extra. de p
                     •
                  e. & remiss. 
                     •
                  a. Omnis.
hauing no necessary impediment,
should not be accompted for a Christiā.
And should we in this wicked world, haue
no oblation or seruice, betwixt Easter,
and Easter, yf in all that space, none but
priestes by them selves would receaue?
Allso doth any wise man iudge it necessary,
that in these dayes all orders be appointed,
vpon the payne of deadly synne,
which were in the primitiue church vsed?
At those dayes, by the .10 Canon of the
Aposteles, he which had not taryed at the
prayers, vntill the end of masse, and receiued
the holy cōmunion, was suspended
therefor. But now, the best of euery parish
doth come and goe at his pleasure,
and receiueth but thrise in the whole yeare,
to fulfill the act of parliament, and is
quyte owt of dawnger of so great a punishment
as suspension is to be compted.
By S. Gregory his dialoges, he should depart,
which did not communicate, and
now they which receaue not, doe tary
                  •
               
in yowr church withowt fault, vntil their
turne of receauing commeth. At those

dayes Catecumenes in the faith,Chrisost. & Basiliu
                     •
                   in suis Liturg
                     ••
                  s. and the
penitentes were cōmaunded to go furth,
and now euen those which are of a contrary
religion, are compelled to come in.
Therfor the heades of the church, haue
euer wrought wysely, easyng the rigor of
their statutes, as it should be best, for the

                  ••
               difying, and not destroying of the people.
Glad to receiue them euery day
                  •
               , if
that euery day they would come. Glad to
receiue them on sondayes, & if not th
                  •
               n,
yet thrise a yere, once at the least: or yf the
people would neuer come, shall their incredulitie
make voyde the truth of God?
            And maye not a priest enter in to the
most holy places of Sancta Sanctorum, exc
                  •
               pt
the whole parish goe in together
with hym? Therfore, grawnting that in
the primity
                  •
               e church, (when all Christians
lyued so honestly in their common
behauior, as a few doe liue in these dayes
in the monasteries) they receiued dayli
                  •
               ,
throwgh the seruentnes of ther charitie:
it standeth yet, with good reason, that if
none receiue now with the priest, the seruice
and sacrified which was in the primitiue

church, should neuer the lesse continew.
because the not receiuyng, is imputable
vnto the fault of the people, but
the order of seruice and sacrifice, hath
been receiued of Christ, the Apostles,
and their successors. And so M. Iuell yow
nede not, to cry owt, with O Gregory, O
Augustine,
               Iuell. 
               O Ierome, O Chrisostome, O Leo,
O Dionisie, O Anacletus, O Sixtus, O Paul,
O Christ. as though they haue deceiued
yow, and tawght yow schismes and d
                  ••
               
               sions,
for yow saye, if the people receiue
not, ther can be no masse at all: and the
fornamed saye, according to the state of
their tyme, that yf the people wil not receiue,
they depart and geue place. To denye
obstinathe, that yf a priest say masse,
and receiue alone, it may be auayleable,
that is an heresie. to exhort and persuade,
that the people prepare them selues, to
receiue daylie, that is the doctors saying,
and here vnto agree the Catholikes.
            And now, we are come to the place, where
the preacher doth most dilate hym selfe,
with crakyng and lying, with prouoking
of others, and enforcyng hym self,

so abundanthe, that one would loke, that
he should bring sumwhat. Yet, he talketh
so cōfusely, that I can not tel, wherwith to
begyn, som thinges, which he asketh, deseruing
no answer, other thinges, which
he denyeth, requiring whole treatises.
            They haue (saith he) herm (which is the matter
of the priuate masse) not one father, not
one doctor,Iuell. not one alowed example of the
pri
                  •••
               ue church, to make for them. I speke
not this (quod he) in vehemencie of sprite,
or heate of talke, but euen as before God, in
the way of simplicitie, and truth and therfor,
once agayne I say, that of all the wordes of
the holy Scripture, they haue not one.
            Loe, one wold think, that the Catholikes
did maynteyn, a certen thing called
a priuate masse, in despyte and contempt
of the layetie. And that this priuate masse,
were such a thing, as maketh or marreth
owr religion for euer, for which yet,
we can alleage, no Scripture, no example,
no councell, no doctor, no auncyent father.
But shal I answer breifly? the church
of Christ, hath and knoweth no priuate
masse, and therfor to what purpose is it
to requyre that she should proue it?
            
               
And although, some masses are sayed in
the mornyng,the church acknowledgeth no priuate masse. some before the King and
his Cownsell, other before the cōmons,
some where none will receiue, other where
a few are prepared therunto: yet the
masse is not diuided, among them which
haue lernyng, into mornyng masse and
hygh masse, or royall masse and low masse,
or common masse, and priuate masse,
as it were, the proper distinct kyndes of
masse: or as herit
                  •
               kes may be essentiallye
diuided, into Lutherans, Zuinglians, Anabaptistes,
and such like. But, as there
is but one naturall Soon of God, Ihesus
Christ, which toke flessh for mankynde,
and one oblation was offered by him once
for all: so there is but that one oblation,
which still contineweth, and but one
masse.
Further▪ now,Iuell. yf any lerned man, of all owr
aduersaries, or yf all the lerned men that be
alyue, be able to bring any one sufficient sentence
owt of any olde Catholike doctor, or father,
or general Coūcell, or holye Scriptures,
or any one example of the primitiue church.
The sentence is very long: the conclusion
is, that yf we can bring any proufe

agaynst them, in a nombre of articles,
which he recyteth, then will he yelde and
subscribe vnto vs. A Godes name then,
what shall we proue? Eyrst, (quod he)
that there was any priuate masse, in the whole
world, at that tyme. No, there was none
then, neither is there any now, emong the
Catholikes. Or that there was any communion
ministred vnto the people vnder one
kinde. Vnto this, what yf I should answer
no: and say, that .vjC. yeres after Christ,
the people receiued vnder both ki
                  •
               des:
owr Catholike fayth, is in no dawnger
therby, and we are not rebells, or traytors,
to the ordenance of owr Sauior, and the
primitiue church. For in a matter indifferent,
the church may folow what part
shall please her, and this receiuing in one
or both kyndes, is indifferent, as concerning
the layetie: and this is so playne, that
owr aduersa
                  ••
               es doe cōfesse it. The right
third Elias,R
                     •
                  ceiuing vnder both ky
                     •
                  des is a thing indiffer
                     •
                  ent concerning th
                     •
                   laitie. and restorer of the Ghospell,
M.D. Luther in a boke of his vnto the Bohemians,
Bycause in deed (sayth he) it were
goodlye, to vse both kindes, and Christ hath
commaunded in this poynt, nothing as necessary,

it were better, to folow peace and vnitie,
then to striue vpon the formes and kindes of receiuyng
the sacrament. Thus first thē, could
I answer safely inowgh,Receyuing vnder one kynd, 
                     ••
                  
                  wed in the primitiue church.
but I will take an
other way, and proue by good auctoritie
of fathers, & examples of antiquitie, that
within .vjC. yeares after Christ, the sacramēt
was receiued vnder one kynd. Christ
owr Sauior,Luc. 24. toke bread, brake it, and gaue
it vnto the two disciples, with whom he
turned in at Emaus: and before he did the
like with any wyne euen in the very brekyng
of the bread, he vanysshed owt of
their syght: but that bread was his body,
as S. Augustine and Theophilact doe testifye,Aug. lib. 3. de consen. euā. ca. 25. Theo. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Lucam cap. 24.
therfore was there receiuyng of
Christ his bodye vnder one kynd in the
primitiue church. I trust this testymonie
be auncient inowgh. Likewise in the .xx.
of the actes of the Aposteles, S. Paule &
the Christians came together, vpō a sonday,
to breake bread: but there is no mention
of wine, ergo they did receiue vnder
one kynde. Yf yow deny the brekyng of
bread, to be takē in that place, for the sacramēt:
besydes that lerned fathers do so
expownd it,Act. 20. the tyme it selfe, (bycause it

was the next day after the Saboth, which
is ow
                  •
                sonday) doth make it lykely, & the
latenesse of receiuing of it, is a good argument
therof also. Bycawse yf they had
com to supper, they would haue tasted
therof before midnyght, but at midnyght
the young man Eutichus fel downe from
the vpper loft, where S. Paule preached,
or talked to them, and after that the Apostle
had putt them in good comfort, that
he was not dead: then loe, he ascended agayne
and brake bread, and tasted it, and
so cōtynued his talke vntill the morning.
So that the circūstance of the day, which
the Christians kept holy, and the vnseasonablenes
of the tyme, to goe to supper
after mydnyght, sytting downe to it before
sonn sett at the least: doth proue better,
that it was the sacrament, then that it
was common bread. But yf yow deny the
argument, that, bycause only bread is named,
ergo there was no wine: remember,
I pray yow thē, your owne fashion of reasonyng,
when yow say, there is no mētion
of this or that place, of S. Augustine, Ireney,
Denys, & others, of a priuate masse:
ergo they had no suche masse as we vse.
            
               
Item there is no mention of lyfling vpp
the sacrament, or setting it vnder a canopye,
or of the solutions to schole mē
               nes
questions: ergo there must be no such
thinges at all. further then, yow doe not
denye,Libr. 2. ad vxor. Lib. de. corou
                     •
                   militis. but in Tertullian his tyme, the sacrament
of the one kynd, I meane of bread,
was caryed by the Christians home to
their howses. and receiued, at their necessities
(yf persequution or sicknes did com
vpon them) or r
                  •
               ceiued at their most leisure
and deuotion (yf there were no daū
               ger
towardes them) And playne it is,Cyp. Ser. 5 de lapsis. by
S. Cypryane, that in his tyme some caryed
the sacrament of one kynde, home also
with them. But yow answered, this to be
an abuse: well yet then, the communion
vnder one kynde, owght not to be so
straunge vnto yow: As allso yf it were an
abuse, it was in carying it home, not in takyng
it vnder one kynde.Cyp. serm. de lapsis And S. Cipryan,
yf he had vnderstode the sayinges of
Christ, so grosselye as yow doe, he would
neuer haue suffered the people, to haue
been robbed of half the sacrament, he
would neuer haue thowght any profyte

or presence to be in the one kynde, except
with the concurring of the other, &
then, he could not haue writen it, for a
greate miracle, that when a nawghty woman,
did begyn to open her chest, in the
which that holy thing of owr lorde was,
she was made a frayed,Ireneus in epist. ad beat. Vict. with fyer rysing
from thence, that she should not touch
the sacramēt with her vnworthy handes.
This would S. Ciprian neuer haue declared,
for (according vnto your myndes)
he should neuer haue beleiued it. Now,
to lett passe an auncyent custome of the
church of Rome, which was, that the sacrament
should be sent reuerently, vnto
straungers, priestes and Bishoppes, which
came to Rome: (which proued that the
sacrament was kept, and consequentlie
therfor in one kynd, bycause wyne doth
quyckely wax sowar) And that in S. Ierome
his tyme (which M. Iuell mentioneth
in the begynnyng of this sermon of his)
the sacrament was reserued, and caryed
home of some Christians: And to lett
passe, a prouision of Melciades Bishopp
and martyr, that bycause of heretikes,

(which did not all thinges rightlie) the
sacrament should be sent from church to
church (which by good reason, should
be in forme of bread) to let all these passe,Basil. ad Caesar. patritiā
               
I will rehearse onely S. Basils testimonye,
for this matter, which sayth: Ye were
superfluous, to declare, that in the tyme of
persequution no priest or deacon being present,
a man to be constrayned by necessitie, to
receyue with his owne handes the communion,
is not euyll or hurtfull. bycause that by
long custome, euen by the very vse and practyse
of thinges, this hath ben confirmed, for
they, which lead a solitary lyfe, in wildernesse,
where no priest is, kepying the Sacrament
with them, they communicate by them selues.
And in Alexandria and Aegipt, euery one of
the lay people, for the most part, hath the cō
                  munion
in his owne howse. Of which testimonye,
it is gathered, that the priest may
as well receiue alone in the church, as the
people may at home: And also, that the sacrament
was kept for the feare of death,
which seemed to be alwayes present, in
the pers
                  •
               quutiō which raged: And therfor
of goo
                  •
                lykelihode, it was kept in one

kinde, where as wyne wil sone be altered:
Now, if these reasons and authorities did
nothing proue agaynst hym, we may, by
M. Iuells leaue, vse exāples and histories:
emōg which it is a notable one, that Dionis
                  •
               s
Alexandrinus scholar vnto Origines,
reporteth of Serapiō a man of Alexā
               dria,
which lying three dayes spechelesse,
on the soweith,Eccl. hist. li. 6. ca. 44 called his dawghter vnto
hym, and willed some to be sent vnto the
priest for the sacrament. But the priest
beyng syck, he deliuered the messenger a
part therof, cōmaunding hym to dipp it
first in somwhat and to soften it, (for drie
bread goeth downe very hardly with sick
persons) & so to deliuer it to the old man
his master. And the old man after he had
receiued it, departed this world gladlye.
Owt of which exāple it is necessa
                  ••
               lie gathered,
that first the priest had in his house 
redy, before hād, the sacramēt. (which they
say, is nothing except it be straytwaies vsed)
Then that Serapiō receiued it alone,
withowt a cōmuniō (wheras except three
receiue at the lest, the
                  •
                say nothing is done,
or two, as others hold) & last of al it may

be gathered, that it was vnder one kynde,
either as most meetest to be kept, either
most safe to be caryed, or, as likewise profitable
to the sicke person, as yf both kyndes
shold haue been delyuered. A nother
exāple as notable,Ambr. in orat. sunebri de obi
                  
                     •
                  u frat. sui is, of S. Satyrus. S. Ambrose
his brother, which, before he was fullie
and perfectlie traded in owr religion,
beyng in dawnger of shipwrack, requyred
of the perfect Christiās, which were in the
same ship and dawnger with hym, to haue
that diuine sacramēt of the Christiās,
Not to sett a curiouse eye, vpon those
misteries, but to haue helpe for his fayth.
Which being geuen vnto hym, he made
it to be bound vp in a stole, and the stole
he wrapped abowt his necke, and passing
vpon no boerde or rybb of the broken
shipp, to help him selfe withall, he was safelye
and meruelouslye browght to land,
and straytwaies askyng, where the church
was, thyther he went, and receiued that
blessed Sauior, which had deliuered him
from drowning. Loe, what can we haue
more, for owr purpose, and more against
heretikes, then, that withowt the church,

the Christians had the Sacramēt, and that
it was in one kynde (except they can deuyse,
how to kepe wyne, by wrapping it
vp in a stole.) Also that it was no fantasticall 
figuratiue memory, which saued
a man from such dawngers. And that S. Satyrus 
receiued the same vnder one kynde,
in which he did beare it. Wherfore, lett
M. Iuell crake no more, before this be
answered. And lett hym be humble in
sprite, not to think, that nothing is writen,
but which he knoweth of, or to prouoke
all the lerned men this day alyue, of
which some haue writen of this matter
so much and so effectuallie, that he will
haue no leisure to reade them, and much
lesse habilitie, to answer them.
Or that the people had their common prayers
in a straunge tong,Iuell. that they vnder stode not.
I think verely, that as euery countrye was
conquered, by the preaching of the Apostles
successors. so the conquerors therof,
planted such order of seruice, as the mother
church vsed, from which they were
sent. Euen as S. Augustine, when he came
from Rome, in to this countrie of owrs,

he made not a new Englisshe seruice, or
Kentish rather, after the nature of those
quarters,Laten ser
                  
                     •••
                   was brought in to England by S. Augu
                  
                     ••
                  ne, and vsed there generallie. at which he arriued: but rathe
                  •
               
vsed the Romane fasshion and language.
neither hath it euer ben writen or testifyed,
that according to the diuersit
                  ••
               s of
speaches here in England, proper seruice
for euerye quarter therof, was prouided.
But the cōtrarie rather doth appere, that
one tong was generally vsed in their masse
and mattins. 
                  •
               uen as at these dayes,
there is no fault fownde, or ells it is no
dawngerous fault, for the Welsche men,
Cornyschemen, Northerne, and Irysh, to
vse one order of the English church, and
the longer it is suffered, the farther of it
is still from amendyng: So, what cause
is there, why that laten seruice beyng
browght into this realme, by the Pope
his goodnes, and owr Apostle S. Augustine,
the same myght not cōtinew throwgh
the realme, as it was by litle and litle, subdewed
vnto the ghospell of Christ. Especiallie
where as in these dayes fault is
fownd, with the vnknowen tong, which
people can not vnderstand, and yet the

welshemen haue no welshe communyon,
and at those blessed and quyet tymes,
there was no lack fownd at all, when the
priest and the clergye, should syng and
pray by them selues, and the people by
them selues entend their priuate deuotion.
S. Paule writing to the Romaynes,
not a forme of seruice but a verie sermon
(as it were,) wherin he entreateth of most
high, and agayne most familiar matters,
yet he write in Greik and not Latin.
            Which thing, did he, (trow yow) for the
lack of the Latin tong? no, that is not
trew, in him, which had the gift of all tonges.
Did he think, that all the Romanes,
had the knowledge of Griek, as well as
of Latin? Trulye, that was for any simple
man more meeter to think, then for the
wisedome of S. Paule. Had he forgotten
him self, beyng allwayes of that mynde,
that in the cōgregation, he would rather
speke fiue wordes, that other myght be
the better for them, then fiue thowsande
in a s
                  •
               rawnge tong? No, he thowght to
earnestly of the cause of Christ, to forgettsuch
a principall matter, as this is,

according to the heretykes declamations.
And then, in an epistle, by twentie
partes, there is more cause, to wryte in
the vulgare tong, then in a cōmon prayer,
bycause in the seruice, the quyer occupyeth
the place of the people, and answereth
in their steede: but in his epistle, none
were excepted, but,Rom. 1.
               vnto all you which
be at Rome, welbeloued of God, and faythfull,
grace be to yow (sayth he▪ 
               and peace. In
to the quyer all dyd not come in a clompe
togeather, to here what the priest did
reade, but abowte the pulpet, or other
where, all myght stand well inowgh to
here the epistle readen. And so after this
sort, I myght fynd twentie differencyes,
betwixt an order of seruice, and an epistle.
Wherfore I wonder much, that they
make such a brablyng, abowte the straū
               ge
tong. and requyre, what aucthoritie,
example or reason we haue for it, owt of
Doctor, Councell, or, Antiquitye. It is
reason, auctoritye, and proufe abundant,
for a Christian man: that, this or that
thing hath ben done or vsed vniuersallie
in the church of Christ,1. Tim. 3. were it vsed but

for one yeare onlye, bycause the church
is the pyllar of truth, and hath the holy
ghost her teacher and gouernor for euer,
and neuer hath ben suffered vtterly to haue
erred, in all her members at one tyme.
And then, wheras the latin seruice in the
Latin church hath been so long vsed in
these contreys, which vnderstode not the
latin tong, and also they confesse a very
long vse of it, yt is well inowgh proued,
that there is no dampnable error in the
matter. for what tong fownd yow, M.
Iuell, in the English church, when yow
were borne? or how long before, had the
english seruice, been left vnsayed, and the
latin entertayned, a strawnger before a
cuntreye man of owr owne? yf yow can
bryng forth the bokes, where the english
common prayers, were euer in the common
vulgare tong, and tell vs the name
but of one Bishop, which vsed it in his
diocese, yow shall make all men wonder
at your inuention, and yf, neuer, any other
but latin, hath ben vsed, yt is authorytie
and reason sufficient for all English
men, that the first cōuertors of this land,

vnto the sayth, did leaue the latin seruice
in it, nothing fearing or caring, what a
few fyne felowes would persuade to the
contrarie, after .viij. or .ix. hundred yeares
continuance. Then also, must all prayers
of necessitie, be in the common tong,
or may a few be excepted? yf yow except
any one: why should not the people here
all, and answer Amen vnto all? and especiallie
in the most secrete matters, which
haue most weight in them, and in which
the cause of the people, is most expressed?
yf all of necessitie, must be audiblye
expressed: how then doth your doctrine
agree with S. Basill, and S. Chrysostomes
masses, in the which the chief priest
prayeth secretelye at the altar, at certen
places, whiles the quyer in the meane time
syngeth? Or how could S. Ambros
                  •
               
(O worthy Byshop) how could he standing
at the alter commaund the Emperor
by his archedeacon to stand without
the Chauncell doores? Rather he shuld
haue sayd to the Emperor, in his own
person, in owr most hūble request, maye
it please your most excellent wysedome

and maiestye, to com more nere to the
altar, to here the word of God, which
doth saue our sowles, or els to cōmaunde
the altar to be pulled downe, and that a
table maye com downe to your highnes
the more commodiouslye to answer Amen,
vnto my blessing, euen, as it shall
please your maiestie, so shall it be. But
not so S. Ambrose, not so, he, which moved
not one 
                  •
               oote from the altar, but
sent his archeadeacon, not with supplication,
but with reprehension, not as to an
Emperor of the world, but as to a common
Christian, saying: O Emperour, the
inward places are appoynted for priestes
onelye,Hist. Eccl. li. 9. ca. 30. which others are not permitted,
neither to entre into, neither to touche.
Goe furth therfore, and 
                  •
               arye, for the receiuyng
of the mysteries, as others doe:
for purple maketh Emperours, and not
priestes. Vnto which, the Emperor answered
so mekely and Christianlike, that
he is more to be wondered at, for the ouercummyng
of his passions, then conquerying
of barbarous nations. But, to
my purpose, it appeareth by this distinction

of places in the church, that the
people were not suffered to here al thinges.
And therfor I conclud, that wheras
it is no necessite that all thinges be vnderstode,
which the priest in the church
sayeth, yea rather, yf thys be agaynst all
good order and discipline, there is no
necessitie, that the tong should be common
all to geather, where the hering of
the same tong, must be kept secrète.
            Or that the Bisshopp of Rome,Iuell. was then
called an vniuersall Bisshopp, or the heade
of the vniuersall church.
            I would to God, that this question of
the heade of the church of Christ, were
throughlie knowen, it would stop a great
sorte, of hastye preachers and ignorant,
which think them selues able to do much,
by cause they can speak in a matter indifferent
probablye: as communion vnder
bothe kyndes, seruice in the vulgare tong,
and such like. But, to this question of M.
Iuells, I answer, askyng him first, whether
any prince of that tyme, of which he
speaketh, did beare the title of defendor
of the faith? and if neither Constantinus,

neither Theodosius, neither any Christian
good Emperor, were precisely then
so called, shall it folow, that one may take
that title, from the kinges of England?
Many thinges may trulye be verifyed of
certen persons, which yet they doe refuse,
not as vnagreyng with their dignitie,
but as vnapt for keepyng their humilitie.
As S. Peter, S. Paule, S. Iames, and Iohn,
with all the rest of the blessed Apostles,Matth. 
                     •
                  . Psal. 44. 2. Cor. 10.
were the lightes of the world, and rulers
of the earth, and cōquerors of all power,
which would sett it selfe against Christ,
and they dyd not obserue that stile in
their writynges, neither any of their disciples
after them, which also were lightes
and gouernors of the world. Further
it ys to be considered how this worde
(vniuersall Bisshopp) is to be taken. For
yf yow meane vniuersall Bisshopp, that
besydes hym there is no other in all the
world, but that he is one for all, as the
word importeth: then also at these da
                  •
               es,
there is no vniuersall Bishop. But yf he
be called vniuersall which among all Bishoppes
is the chiefest and one ouer all,

so ys there,In what sense in vniuersall bisshop ys to be graū
                  ted and must be, one vniuersall
Bisshopp in the church of Christ. First
then, I answer, that yf none were called
vniuersal Bishop .vjC. yeares after Christ
yet the lack or not geauyng of that title,
doth not proue, that there was no such
thyng, or no supreame heade ouer the
church. And further I saye, that also in
these dayes, there is no vniuersall Bishop,
yf we take the worde, after som one fasshyon.
For in S. Gregorye his tyme (of
which place M. Iuel in his sermons doth
oft triumph) the Bishop of Constantinople
forgetting the humilitie of Christ
owr Sauyor, did much couet to be called
vniuersall Bishop: presuming, that sith he
was Bishopp of the same citie, where the
Emperour then dwelt, which was onlye
Emperour of all: that hys name, for that
place, might lykewise, with this gloriouse
title (of vniuersall Bishop) be right well
adorned. against whom S. Gregorie did
write, and speake ernestlye, cōdempning
the desyre of that gloriouse title, grownding
his argument vpon the signification
of this worde, (vniuersall.) Bicause (saith

he) in the epistle vnto Ihon, Bishopp of
Constantinople) one should seeme, to
take away the glory of Bisshoprick
                  •
               s, frō
all the rest of his brothers, which would
challenge vnto hym selfe, to be called the
vniuersall Bishop. Trew it is therfor, that
there is no Bishop vniuersall in that forte,
as who should say he were onelie a Bishopp,
but lyke as 
                  〈◊〉
                the tyme of the old
lawe,Num. 11. not onlye Moyses had the grace of
gouerning and prophecyeing, but seuentie
elders of the people of Israel, had imparted
vnto them of his spirite and dignitie,
and lyke as Moyses lost nothing of
his perfection, for all the dispensing of
some of his graces, emong
                  ••
                certen of
the elder and worthier: so the Pope ys
not so singular, but that he hath felow
Bishoppes to take part of his functiō, and
for all the multitude of his felowes in office,
he continueth in his supremacie, as a
Moys
                  •
               s aboue the septuagintes. And so,
onlye he hath not al the spirite of God,
which for the profit of the body, is distributed
in to sundrie membres, and none
yet ys equall vnto hym in superioritie of

gouernement, bycause in euerye seemelie
bodie, one part ys higher then all the rest.
Agayne, S. Gregorie, which was a most
blessed Bishopp, myghte and did iustely,
fynd fault with Iohn of Constantinople,
bicause of his prowd enterprise, although
it were graūted, that the title (vniuersal)
myght haue been verified in any one Bishop.
So in one sense, which I haue spoken
of, I grawnte that there was neuer,
and that now there is none, which is an
vniuersall Bishopp. But yet yf we vnderstand
an vniuersal Bishop so, that emong
Bisshoppes there must be one senior vnto
all the rest, and eldest brother of all,
vnder whose correction, they shall eche
one, enioye their priuileges, which the

                  •
               heife father and ruler hath appointed,
in this sense, I will proue, that there was
an vniuersall Bishopp, euer in the church
of Christ. S. Anacletus in his second epistle,
Anacletus 
                     •
                  pist. 2. 
               This holye and Apostolike church of
Rome (sayeth he) hath the primacie and
preemiinēci
                     •
                  , ouer all other churches, and ouer
the whole stock of Christ, not by the Aposte
                  
                     •
                  s,
but from owr Lorde owr Sauior, hym

selfe, as he saide hym selfe vnto S. Peter, thow
art Peter,
               Matth. 16. 
               and vpon this rocke (this Peter)
I will buyld my churche. Also S. Cipryan
declaring the returne,Cip. Cor. li. 3. ep. 11. of certen
schismatikes vnto the faith, prayseth much
those wordes of theirs, where they sayde.
VVe knowe, that Cornelius is sett vp, by almyghtye
God, and Christ owr Lorde,
               There is one supreme head in the church 
               Bishop
of the most holye Catholike church. And after
a litle space: VVe are not ignor
                     •
                  nt,
(saye they) that there must be one God,
one Christ owr Lorde, whom we haue confessed,
and one Bishop, in the catholike church.
The same blessed doctor also,Lib. 1. ep. 3. in an epistle
vnto S. Cornelius, sayth, that heresies
haue rysen of no other cause, but that the
priest of God, is not obeyed, and one priest
in the church,vice Christi iudex. to iudge as vicar of Christ, is
not r
                     •
                  garded, or thowght vpon. Then Sainct
Ambrose, wheras the whole world is godes,
1. Tim. 3. (sayth he) yet, the church is called his house,
of the which, Damasus is at this day, rector
and gouernour. Further yet S. Augustine,
in diuers places, epist. 106. epist. 93.
lib. de vtilitate credendi: calleth Rome Sedem
Apostolicam, and what is a seat Apostolike,

but that place, which may plant
and pull vp and sett and lett, and hath
his power ouer the whole world. S. Ci
                  ••
               ll
also,In lib. 
                     •
                  hesau. 
               As Christ (sayeth he) hath receiued of
his father, the scepter and rule of the church
of gentiles, which came owt of Israell a capitayne
and duke ouer all principates and powers,
ouer all that, which so euer is, so that all
thinges doe bowe downe vnto hym: so, Christ
hath committed most fullye vnto Peter, and
to no other then Peter, that which fullye is
his, and to hym alone, he hath geuen it.
And to make an end S. Gregory hym selfe,
euen in that epistle, where he speaketh
agaynst the pryde of hym, which would
be called after a new fashion (vniuersall
Bishopp.) It is clere (sayth he) vnto all
them,Lib. 4. Ep. 
                        •
                     p. 32. which know the Ghospell, that the
charge of the whole church, was committed,
by the voyce of owr Lord
                     •
                  , vnto holie, S.
Peter and chief Apostle emong all the Aposteles,
and yet (sayeth he afterwardes) he
was not called vniuersall Bishopp. Wherfor
vnto M. Iuells question, yf the name of
vniuersall Bishopp, was not in the primitiue
church: yet the thing it self was, as

               
                  〈…〉
                shewed, so that the name it selfe

                  〈…〉
                haue been vsed, in that sense, as it

                  〈…〉
                Bishopp which hath charge

                  〈…〉
                and of all the Catholike

                  〈…〉
               . But as it signifyeth hym, which

                  〈…〉
                other Bishop but hym selfe

                  〈…〉
                there neither was,

                  〈…〉
                Bishopp vniuersall.

                  
                     〈…〉
                   people were then tawghte, to

                     〈…〉
                   Christes 
                     〈◊〉
                   ys reallye, 
                     〈…〉
                  
carnail
                     •
                  e, or 
                     〈…〉
                  .
The 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               ome of God, is not in wordes,
but in power and strength, and allbeyt,
owt of hand, it could not be fownd, to
bryng a writer so auncient, as yow require,
for euery one of those termes, yet is
the cause nothing the worse: so that it
may appere,it is not well to striue vpon the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , when the thing it selfe is euident. by any meanes, that in the
Sacrament is his verye body. For I think
it would be very hard, to find, in any writing,
of old and holy doctor with in .vjC.
yeares of Christ, all these wordes, that he
take r
                     •
                  all, substantiall, corporall, carnall, &
naturall fl
                     •
                  sh
                     •
                  
                of the virgin Marie, and yet
they were instructed perfectlie, to beleue

that Christ toke owr verye flesh, and not
a figure onlye therof, as the Maniches
did euill report. And so, yf I could no
                  •
               
bring example of all the termes, which
yow would haue proued, yet yf I can cō
               clude
that the verye body, and not a fantasticall
supposed bodye, is in the sacrament,
for the wordes of carnall, reall, corporall,
substanciall, and naturall, I need
not be woefull. In the sacrament (sayeth
S. Ierome vnto Hebidia) the verye body
                     •
                  
of Christ, ys, of which bodye (sayeth Isichius
in Leu. lib 6. Cap, 22.) S. Gabriel did
say vnto the virgin, the holie ghost shall com
vpon the. It is called of S. Cyrill, lib. 3. in.
10. Cap. 37. & lib. 10. Cap. 13. the body of
lyfe it selfe, or, of naturall lyfe. Of Origene
the bodye of the worde: Of S. Chrisostome,
the body which is partaker of the diuine nature.
1. Cor. Cap. 10. Of S. Augustine,
Psal. 33. the verye crucifyed bodye, in the
which he suffered so greate thinges. Of Chris
                  •
               stome
againe. 1. Cor. Cap. 10. the body
which was nayled vpon the crosse, beaten,
wounded with spere, which was not ouercō
                  med
with death. What will a Christian

man aske more? and what neede to bring
owt the wordes, of carnall, reall, corporall,
naturall, wheras, the bodye of Christ
being present, and that body, which was
borne of the virgin Marye: it foloweth,
that it is reall and naturall, or els, we are
fallen from owr fayth, in which we beleue,
that he toke reall flesh of the blessed
virgin. And here also, where fynd you, not
onelye within .vjC. yeares of Christ, but
within .vj. and .vj. hundred, and take three
more vnto them, that the people were
taught, to beleue, that the body of Christ
is, onlye figuratiuelye, sacramētallie, significatiuelye,
tropicallie, imaginatiuelie,
in the Sacrament, to the denyall of all
presence and realitie? S. Damascene,Lib. 4. de orthodox
                     •
                   fide ca. 14. a
notable father, writing purposelye of the
sacrament of the altar, sayeth, that it is not
simple bread or fode, but vnited vnto the diuinitie,
Also hread and wyne (sayth he) is
not a figure of the bodye and bloud of Christ,
(God forbed,) but it is the very deisyed body
of owr Lorde, where as he hath sayed him
selfe, this is my body, not a figure of my body,
and not a figure of my bloud, but my bloud.
               
But M. Iuell appealeth vnto the .vjC.
yeres, next after Christ, Vnto those .vjC.
doth he appeale? Vnto those .vjC. he that
be browght, And I require hym to shew
furth, where it was euer tawght, with in
vj.C. yeares after Christ, that Christes
bodie was in the sacrament figuratiuelye
onely? Lett one sentence, example, aucthoritye,
worde, or sillable, be browght
furth, of a bodye, onelye figuratiue and
significatiue: and he shal haue the victorye.
Iuell. 
               Yea but (sayth he) the reall, corporall,
carnall, naturall presence, was not preached
or tawght, at those dayes, ergo a figuratiue
bodye onelye was beleued. And thus whiles
we stryue vpon termes onely, we spend
the tyme in a questiō not necessarie, and
he will not consider the truth, in it self,
as it is.Luc. 20. Christ sayd, this is my bodye, which
shalbe delyuered for yow. Saye the truth,
Is not this, playne inowgh? what yf he
had sayd, this is my naturall body, should
all mysbeleife on yowr part, haue ceased?
I thinke not. for these wordes (which
shalbe deliuered for yow,) do, as playnely
expresse, what bodye he meaneth, as yf

he had vsed, the worde naturall, or corporall.
what difference is in these poyntes,
M. Iuell, and the named Bishopp of
Sarum, and he, which in the yeare of owr
Lorde. 1561. preached at Paules crosse
the second sonday before Easter? and, after
this sort, yf I would proced further,
what difference were there, or how many
persons, myght I be thowght to haue
named, in the iudgement of them, which
know the state of this world? what oddes
is there, betwene fowre pens, and a
grote? what difference, betwixt the very
body of Christ, and the reall bodye? the
body borne of the blessed virgin, and the
naturall bodye? the corporall bodye, and
his very flesh? the carnall bodye, and the
bodye which was delyuered vnto death,
and hanged on the crosse, for vs? This is
not childisshnes onely, but very wantonnes,
to aske for the terme, of a corporall
and reall body, and not to be cōtent with
such a bodye, which dyed for vs: to beleue
owr eyes, yf we should see hym, and
to discredite his voyce, when we doe here
hym: not to be able to deny but this is

the bodye, which was delyuered for vs,
and yet to require, whether it be his naturall
bodye or no? And yet, bycause the
church owr mother, which in her selfe is
strong, doth condescend vnto the infirmitie
of those, which once the browght
furth, I will shew in one testimony, that
euen in playne worde corporallie, Christ
his body is geuen vnto the faythfull. And
yf copye of wordes delite M. Iuell, I will
proue also, that he is naturally in his faithfull.
S. Cyrill,Lib. 10. ca. 13. in loan. a blessed and auncyent father,
in reprouyng and confutyng a certen
Arrian, which vpon those wordes of
Christ, I am the vyne, and my father is the
husbandman,
               Ioan.15. wold inferr, that Christ and
God the father, were not of one substance,
no more then a vyne and a husbandman,
are: which Arrian also sayde, that
those wordes, I am a vyne, &c.) apperteyned
vnto the diuinitie, and not the
humanitie of Christ. S. Cyrill, (I saye) in
confuting this reason, hath these wordes:
VVe doe not denye, but we are ioyned spirituallie
vnto Christ by right fayth, a
                     •
                  d syncere
charitie: but yet, that there is no waye

of the ioyning of vs togeather, with hym,
accordyng to the flesh, that trulie we doe veterly
denye. And we say, that, to be altogeather,
besides the Scriptures. For who hath
do
                     •
                  ted, Christ, euen after this fashion (vnderstand
according to the flesh) to be the
vyne,
               1. Cor. 10. 
               and vs to be the branches, which receiue
and get lyfe from thence. Here S. Paule,
saying, that all are one bodie in Christ. For
althowgh we be many, yet in him we be one,
for all take parte of one bread. Doth he think
perchaunce (meaning the Arrian) that we
doe not know the strength, and power of the
mis
                     •
                  icall benediction? which,
               Note Corpora
                     •••
                  . 
               when it is done
in vs, 
                     〈…〉
                   not make Christ also corporallie
to dwell in vs, throwgh the communicating
of the flesh of Christ? For why are
members of the faithefull,
               1. Cor. 10. 
               the members of
Christ? know yow not (saith S. Paule) that
your members are the members of Christ?
And shal I then make the members of Christ
the members of an harlo
                     ••
                  ? God for send.
Also, owr Sauior sayeth: he that 
                     •
                  ateth my
fl
                     •
                  sh and drinketh my bloud, remayneth 
                     〈◊〉
                  
me, and 
                     •
                  in hym. whervpon, it is to be considered,
that Christ is in vs, nos onely by habitude

and fashion, that which is vnderstode
to be throwgh charitie,
               Naturall participation of Christ. 
               but also euen by naturall
participation. For, like as yf a man,
melting waxly the fyer, would so mengle it
with an other wax likewise melted, that of
them bothe, one certayne thing may seeme to
be made: so by the communicatyng of the body
and bloud of Christ he is in vs and we
are in hym. For otherwise, this corruptible
nature of owr bodye, could not be browght
vnto incorruption and lyfe, except the bodie
of natural lyfe, were ioyned togeather with it.
Doest thow not beleue me, speakyng these
thynges? geue credi
                     •
                  e then, I beseche the, vnto
Christ.
               loan. 6. 
               Verely verely I saye vnto yow,
except yow eate (sayth he) the flessh of the
soun of man, and drink his bloud, yow shall
not haue lyfe in yow, &c. In this testimonye
of S. Cyril, althowgh it be playne to
vnderstand, yet shal I put you in remembrance,
of noting two poyntes, the one,
that he sayeth, Christ to be in vs, by charitie,
but not onelye throwgh charitie,
which is, when we beleue in hym, and
long for hym, and thank hym for his benefites:
the other, that euen by naturall

participation and corporallie, and by the
naturall body of lyfe, he is in vs. Ergo, it
is false▪ to say that the receiuing of Christ
is onely by faith, and that the body which
we receiue, is onlye a figuratiue spiritual
bodye, which, heretikes haue inuented.
And on the other syde, it is trew that besydes
the spirituall receiuyng of Christ,
through
                  •
               h 
                  〈◊〉
               , there is an other kynde,
by which his naturall body, is corporallie
ioyned to owr corporall bodye, in which,
the Catholikes doe beleue. So that (to
vse the wordes of 
                  •
               . Cy
                  ••
               l, which folow in
the place forenamed) both spirituallie and
corporallie, we are b
                     ••
                  nches, and Christ is the
vyne. And yf yow aske the waye, how this
hath been, and is browghte to passe? the
same Doctor in an other place▪ declareth
it most plainelye. Corporallie (sayeth he)
the soun of God,
               Lib. 11. in lo. ca. 27. 
               throwgh the mysticall blessing
is vnited to vs, as man: but spirituallie,
as God: he is vnited vnto vs, by renewyng
owr spirite, by the grace of his spirite, vnto a
newlyfe, and vnto the partakyng of the diuine
nature. Christ therfore is the knytting
vp, of owr vnion with God, which is naturallie

vnited vnto vs, as man: vnto God
the father, as God. More authorities of
this blessed father, and of others, mygh
                  •
               
be recited, to the proufe hereof, that women,
are ioyned naturallye and corporallye,
vnto Christ: not onely by that he
toke owr nature on hym, in the vitgin
                  •
               
wombe: but also rather, bycause we eate
hys flessh, and drink hys bloud, throwgh
the strength of the misticall benediction.
But one instāce is sufficient against him,
which vniuersallie belyeth the Catholikes,
that they haue no proufe at all, to d
                  •
               
               clare
that the naturall, reall, corporall bodie
of Christ should be in the Sacramēt,
which is so vntruly reported, that the doctors
conclude, (S. Cyrill, in the place alleaged,
S. Hilarye in the .viij. boke De trivitate,
S. Gregory Nissenus in oratione catechetica,
and others in diuers places) that
except this bodye of owrs, had a lyuche
bodye, by participatiō of which, it should
be repayred: it were impossible, that it
should ryse agayne, when it were once
by death cast downe. not bycause, God
of his absolute power, were not able to

haue done it,The heretikes doe wea
                     ••
                   owr hope of the resurrection of owr flesshe. which withowt the incarnation
of his blessed soun myght haue
saued the world, but the order most wyse
and agreable once beyng lett owt, by almightye
God, that owr sowle by his spirite,
owr body by his flesh, should be properlye
preserued: now, in this order and
wisedome, he, which taketh away from
Christians a bodely reall presence, he taketh
awaye the proper and chiefest hope
of the resurrection of bodyes.
            Or that hu bodye is,
                  M. Iuell. or may be in a thousand
places, or mo
                  •
               , at one tyme.
            This question neadeth not, as many others,
which folow in the s
                  •
               rmon. First bicause 
the principall matter establesshed,
that the bodye of Christ is present, when
so euer a lawfull priest doth cōsecrate the
bread: reason doth declare her fowle solye,
to goe aboute to reproue that thing,
which by fayth we must stand vnto, bycause
of an absurditie, which should seme
to folow. Then, wheras owt of one principle 
a hundred conclusions may be deduct
                  ••
               ,
it is not necessary, that euery conclusion
be expresselie writen in the auncyent

fathers workes, or ells that we make
doub
                  •
               e of the principle, which afterwardes
I will make more playne and probable.
 Thirdlye, wheras the Catholikes
do teach, that Christ is not locally in the
Sacrament, as in a place: to aske of them,
wherby they proue that Christes body is
or may be, in a thowsand places, which
do know but of one place, which his body
(circūscriptiue) occupyeth, and yet beleue,
that he is verilye and bodylie present,
in euery consecrated host? it is quyte owt
of the purpose. Yet for all this, I wil shew
what S. Chrisostome answereth vnto the
like question, as M. Iuell moueth. which
in expounding of those wordes of Sainct
Paule to the Hebrewes,Heb. 9. & 10. ho. 17. that Christ doth
not offer vp hym selfe, oftentymes, as the
priest in the olde law, did enter in to the
most holye places euery yeare with the
bloud of beastes: How then doe we? sayth
Chrisostome, doe we not offer vpp euery
daye? we doe offer in deed, but as men, which
make a reme
                     •
                  brance of his death. And this
sacrifice is one, not manie. How is it one,
and not many? bycause, that once beyng offered,

it was offered in to the most holye places,
and this sacrifice is an example, taken
owt of that. VVe offer vp, the self same allwayes,
and not trulye, this tyme one lambe,
to morow an other, but allwayes the self same.
Therfor this sacrifice is one, other ells,
by this reason, bycause it is offered in many
places, there be many Christes. No not so,
but Christ is one euery where, both here full
and whole, and there full and whole, one bodye.
For as he, which is euery where, offered
vp, is one bodye and not many bodyes, so also
the sacrifice is one. Now, he is one Bishop,
which offered vp the sacrifice, which did make
vs cleane, the same we also now doe offer,
which at that tyme beyng offered, could not
be consumed. Yet this which we doe, is done
in remembrance, of that which was done. For
(sayth Christ) doe this in remembrance of
me, we make not an other sacrifice, as the Bishopp
did, but allwayes the same, or rather,
we make the remembrance of that sacrifice.
Therfor I conclude, that not onelye, it is
readen, emong auncyent fathers, that
Christ his body, may be, and ys, in diuers
places offered, but that the cause therof,

is, for that Christ is but one, in all dayes
and places.Note the diuersitie of making cōclusions, for the heretikes parte, or catholikes faith. And note here the diuersitie
of reasonyng betwixt heretikes and catholikes.
They say, there be many churches:
ergo by all reason ther must be many
bodyes, yf Christes verye bodye be on
the altar in euery church. The catholikes
saye with Chrisostome, there is but
one Christ: ergo no absurditie there is,
yf he be offered vp this daye, and to morrow,
and euery day, in euery place, in the
whole world. They, by the grosse numbring
vp of diuers places, would conclude
agaynst vs, that there must be many
bodyes. The Catholikes, by the beleuing
and confessing of one bodye, doe grawnt
that he is in many places, withowt diuision,
bycause the bodye is but one. They,
begyn at their senses, and according to
the reason of them, they conclude matters
of fayth. The Catholikes begyn with
fayth, and afterwardes cōmaunde silence
and quyetnes, to their senses.

                  
                     1 Or that the priest did then hold vp the Sacrament
ouer his heade.
                           M. Iuell.
                     
                     2 Or that the people did then, fall downe and
worshipp is, with godlye honor.
                     
                        
3 Or that the Sacrament was then, or now
owght to be hanged vp, vnder a canopie.
                     4 Or that in the Sacrament, after the wordes
of cōsecration, there remayneth onlye
the accidentes, and shewes, withowt
the substance of bread and wyne.
                     5 Or that the priest then diuided the Sacrament
in three partes, and afterward receiued
hym selfe alone.
                     6 Or that who so euer had sayed, the Sacrament
is a figure, a pledge, a token, or a
remembrance of Christ his bodie, had
therfor been iudged for an heretike.
                     7 Or that it was lawful then, to haue. 30. 20.
15. 10. or 5. masses sayed in one church,
in one daye.
                     8 Or that images were set vp in the churches
to thentent that the people might worship
them.
                     9 Or that the laye people were then forbedden
to read the word of God, in their
owne tong.
                  
               
Here be .9. questions, as it were .9. worthyes,
not all worth one good poynt. For
it is vnskilfullie required, that of particular
thinges any accompt should be geuen,
which are deducted, and may be more
deducted herafter, owt of the principall
conclusion. As, to shew in other examples

how vnlearned & peltyng a kind
of reasoning this is which he vseth:A verie sond kynd of interrogatories & questiōs moued by M. Iuell. I aske
hym, where he did euer read in scripture,
that Christ did crye for his mothers breast,
or that euer he lawghed, or euer dyd
were peticote, hosen, or showes, or euer
did goe in his mothers errant, or, by his
handy labor, helpe forward towardes her
finding? Which all, are credible inowgh,
(bicause he toke vpon hym owr very nature)
and all yet, are not necessary to be
wryten. Then to come to the Apostles:
where did he euer read, that in their externall
behauior, they did weare frockes
or gownes, or fower corned cappes, or
rochetes, or, that they did euer cate sodd,
roste, or bake meates, or that a company
of laye men seruātes, did folow them,
all in one lyuerye, or that at their prayers
they satt in sydes, or laye in the grownd,
or fall prostrate, or sang Te Deum, or loked
towardes the sowth, or did weare copes
of tissue or veluett, with a thowsand
more such questions? which be verie many,
and not necessarye, bycause they liued
and fared vndoubtedlie, as occasion and

cause serued, and they dyd honor God
with the best that they had. And yf they
were not so ryche, to bye tissue, I think
not therfor, that they were naked in their
seruice, and yf the church now, hath golden
copes, they must not be taken away
from her, bicause of the Apostles pouertie.
In whose dayes, as I neede not to tell,
what deckyng of the place they vsed, where
God should be honored, so reason geueth,
that they tho
                  •
               ght nothing to good
for him. Lett all thinges be done emong you
(sayeth S. Paule) honestlie and according
vnto order.
               1. Cor. 14 This is a generall principle,
with which principle in the Apostles tyme,
it did agree, that all should come, in
to one place of prayer, as in to som vpper
chamber, lofte, or parlar: and the same
conclusion agreed with Sainct Syluester,
Sainct Ambrose, S. Chrisostomes,
and other tymes folowing, whē the quyer
was appoynted for the clergye, and the
bodye of the churche for the layetie. In
the primitiue church, when persequutiōs
of Christians, dyd so much encrease,
all blacke apparell did becom the clergie

well inowgh: but afterwardes, when all
nations of the world were conuerted vnto
Christ, and Emperours browght their
glory into the church, what deadly fault
is there, yf a Cardinall weare a skarlet
robe, and a Bisshopp a whyte rochett?
            Not, yf perchaunse S Paule did trauell
in his iorneys, for the most part, on fote:
therfor, yow must sett all bisshoppes besydes
their saddelles. And yf he did pray
by the waters syde, and in priuate chambers:
yow must not therefor ouerthrow
all churches. For the principle is allwayes
one, that we must doe thinges according
vnto order. And so, the verytye is, that
Christ hath left vnto vs hys verye bodye
in the Sacrament, and this is playne by
scriptures, councells, and fathers. Which
veritye standyng: what harme is done, in
the shewyng, of that hygh mysterye vnto
the people? what difference and matter
is it, whether it be holden in one hand, or
two? lyfted vp ouer the head, or by the
turnyng of the priestes face frō the altar,
shewed vnto the people (which the Grecians
doe vse?) Againe, the veritye of his

bodye beyng present, what beast is he,
which beleiueth it, and doth not worship

                  〈◊〉
               ? And why myght it not be reserued for
sick persons? and why not then closed in
a golden or syluer box? and either, be
sett vnder a canopye, or placed otherwise
withall reuerence? Or how can he be,
but an heretike, which sayeth not, that it
is a figure or pledge, but onelye a figure,
or onelye a pledge of hys bodye? Then,
put the case, that for lack of lerning, or
for lack of proufe, one could not shew
yow examples, for those particular questiōs,
in which yow require to be answered,
the cōclusion and veritie, most playnly
beyng proued, those other thinges may
well folow afterwardes. As otherwise, yf
the matter of a canopye, or lyfting it ouer
the head, or namyng of the heretike
which sayde it was a figure onelie, if these
thinges and such like, either were not
then, or should not be alowed now: yet it
remayneth still, that in the sacrament, is
Christ his bodye, and to make playne
what body is meaned, it foloweth, which
shalbe delyuered for yow. Agayne, it is a

ver
                  •
               tie most certain, that Christ hath not
left his church without guides and gouernours,
in which be, first Apostles, then
Prophe
                     •
                  s,Ephes. 4. then Euāgelistes, after these, Pastors
and Doctors, to the perfiting of her.
Which if yow graunt, to what purpose
is any talk or brable moued, if more masses
be sayd, in one church, at one tyme:
if laye men be restrained from commenting
vpon the Scriptures: or if the host
be diuided in to three partes: or if the
laie man receiue in one kynd alone? wher
as all these thinges be such, that being
once appointed, they must nedes be obserued.
And if they neuer had ben appointed,
the veritie of the Sacramēt were
nothing thereby diminished. To what
purpose then, do I speak all this? Truly
to come at length to some end with out
aduersaries, and to geue wa
                  ••
               ing vnto
our frendes, that in all thinges, they require
that, which is materiall and nec
                  •
               ssary,
and lerne to distinct that, from thinges
indifferent in them selues▪ also to appeale
vnto the principall cōclusion, and
not to meddle with lower matters before

the principall be decided. Can you proue,
saieth M. Iuell, that it was lawfull by the
old Doctours and Councels, for the priest to
pronounce the wordes of cōsecration closely?
What then Sir? I can proue, that there
was and must be, a principall head in the
church, by whom we must be ruled, whether
he appoint the wordes closely or openly
to be pronounced. how now then?
should any wise man, and desirous of the
truth, haue talk with an heretike aboute
the open and close speaking of the priest,
which dependeth of that other question,
whether the Bisshoppes and heades of
the church, may not rule the churche of
Christ, as they shall see expedient? what
a doe is made, about the cōmunion vnder
one kynde: of prayers in the vulgar
tong: and of order in the seruice? in which
questions, the heretike hath this aduantage,
that whiles these thinges are indifferent,
he maye bring for him selfe, a probable
argumēt, and the Catholike, whatso euer
he shall bring (except he goe to
a higher questiō) he shall speak but probablye,
and so the hearer of bothe partes

can not dissalow greately, any one. But if
we wold come to that, which is the chefe
in all such indifferēt matters, and reason,
whether we shold not obey the lawfull
Bishoppes and heads: this question
concluded, would sone put to silence all
heresy, and settle well the consciences of
true Catholikes. I would faine be at an
end, and I can not. For behold, more then
a dosen interrogations do folow, which
if I doe not answer: I think that will be
the best answer, rather then to trouble
both you and my self, in opening all the
matters, which goe before and folow after,
vpon the foresaied interrogations.
But what nedeth, that I go thorough all
his interrogations and articles, whereas
if we be able, to auouche against him any
one of them all, he is content to yeld and
subscribe.
            I will shew therefor (which he demeth)
that the priest hath authoritie to offer vp
Christ vnto his father.Hebr. 5. 
               Euery Bisshop
(saieth the blessed Apostle vnto the Hebrewes)
selected and chosen out
                     •
                   of men, is
appointed for men, in those thinges which appertaine

vnto God, that he offer vp giftes and
sacrifices for sinnes. which being a generall
proposition, ergo either there be no
priests and Bishopes in the new lawe, or
els they must haue a sacrifice, which they
may offer. Which sacrifice must be of
that valew, that none may offer it but he
which is called therevnto, as Aaron was
called▪ and which sacrifice, must be according
to the order of Melchisedech,
as it is writen,Psal. 109. 
               Thou arte a priest for euer,
according to the order of Melchisedech. Of
which order, Christ our Lorde was in his
last supper, as being the priest of the gentils,
and not annoynted with visible oyle,
as the olde Bishoppes of the lawe were,
and thirdly, bycause he offred vp sacrifice
there, his owne body and bloud, not in
forme of bloud and flesh, but in forme of
bread and wine, as Melchisedeth did before.
Of which order, Christ is truly saied
to be a priest for euer (as Oecu
                  •
               enius
saieth) in respect of the priests which be
now a dayes, by meanes of whom, Christ
doth offer and also is offred. Therefore,
if allmighty God hath taken an oth, and

if it doth not repent him thereof, that
Christ is priest for euer, according to
 the order of Melchi
                  •
               edech: and if these
wordes (for euer) be verified in Christ,
thorough priestes, which be now in the
 world: and whereas Christ offred in his
last supper his very body and bloud in
formes of bread and wine (as it dyd appertayne
vnto the order of Melchisedech:)
how can it be saied,That priestes haue authoritie to offer vp Christ. that the priests
haue no authoritie to offer his bodye,
which, except it were offred, God should
seme to repent him of his oth, and to
 break it also? And further, except priestes
made out of men, should offer it, no offering
wold be at all (our Sauiour now,
according to his visible forme, being ascended
in to heauen, and there abiding,
vntill the last iudgement of the world.)
And not onely by this argument, it is
proued, that priestes may and should offer
vp Christ, but also, by the very expresse
commaundement of Christ in his
last supper, when he sayed, Do this in remembrance
of me,
               Luc. 22. which commaundement
except it had ben geuen, what man in all

the world wold haue entreprised to haue
cōsecrated the body of oure Lorde? For,
as S. Deny
                  •
                testifieth of the priests of his
time,Lib. de E
                     •
                  
                  cles. 
                     •
                  ierarchi
                     •
                  . 
               They did excuse them selues, reuerently
and Bishoplike, that they offred vp, the

                     •
                  olsome sacrifice which is farr aboue them,
trying first vnto God decently, and saying,
Thou hast sayed, Do this in my remembrance,
and then beseching him, that they maye
be made worthy, of so great a ministery and
seruice, that they maye holylye consecrat the
Sacrament. By which wordes it appereth,
that the priestes of the primitiue church,
much abashed at the excellency of their
function, did yet take har
                  •
               e of grace, to
consecrat the holsom sacrifice, because
they were commaunded so to do, by God
him selfe. In which sense also, Sainct Basil
praieth in his lyturgye and masse: Make
me, (saieth he) meete, through the power of
the holy Ghost, that I being endued with
the grace of priesthood, maye stand at this
holy table, and maye consecrat thy holy and
vndefiled body, and precious bloud. And like
wise again. For thy vnspeakable and exceding
kindnes sake, withoute all mutation and

conuersion, thou hast ben made man, and
hast ben named oure Bishop, and hast deliuered
vnto vs, the consecratiō of this seruiceable,
and vnbloudy sacrifice. And after this very
sorte, all blessed men, haue euer done, in
the church of Christ, not denying, but
that all priestes do in very dede cōsecrat
and offer vp the body of Christ: but le
                  •
               t
such an high ministery, might turne to
reproch of their rashnes, in that behalfe,
they alleage for their excuse the wordes
of Christ,In com. in 1. Cor. 10. In com. in Heb. 10. saying, Do this in remembrance
of me. Do not we offer vp Christ euery
day, sayeth S. Chrisostom? And agayne,
It is oure Bishop (Sayeth S. Ambrose)
which offred vp the sacrifice, which clensed
vs,In Psal. 38 the same offer we nowe also, which then
being offred, can not be consumed. Let vs
priestes therefor (sayeth the same blessed
man in an other place) follow as we can,
our high priest, that we maye offer vp sacrifice,
for the people, although weak in deserts,
and good dedes, yet honourable for oure sacrifice.
for although Christ nowe doth not
seme to offer, yet he is offred in earth, when
that the body of Christ is offred. Wherefor

I conclude, that it is a very lye, to saye
that it can not be found in any auncient
Doctor, that priestes haue authorite to
offer vp Christ to his father.
            Thus hauing then proued right sufficiently,
that he hath b
                  •
               lyed the church, and
the truth, for the rest of the questions,
whether we can find in the olde fathers,
the termes ex opere operato, or indiuiduum
vagum, or the questions of the applying
of the sacrifice, or of the accidents remaining,
or the case which he moueth of a
mowse: vnto all these which so roundely
and gloriously, as if the field had ben wō
               ne,
he bringeth forth all in a ray, I resist
with one awnswer: that if I could finde
them in old Doctours, yet at this tyme I
would not seke them, and if they can not
be found (as I may graūt without hinderaunce
of the Catholike faith) expressely
and plainely sett forth: yet hath he wonne
nothing, vnto his purpose. And bicause
this cōfession of myne (for what others
will fa
                  •
               e I can not tell) but yf this confession
of myne maye seme to geue somwhat
vnto M. Iuells articles, I will therefore

agayne shortely make my aunswer
more plainer. I graunt, that I finde not
within .vj.C. yeares after Christ, that ex
opere operato, and for the workes sake, sinnes
were forgeuē at the masse time. Ergo,
saieth he,Iuell. 
               the highest misteries and greatest
of your religion be broken. No Syr, not so.
for you aske whether within .vj.C. yeares
after Christ, these or these termes, were
expressed? and I aunswer no. as farr as I
know. But if you aske me, whether these
and these thinges be true, and whether
thei were beleued? I wil plainely saie, yea
and proue it plainely. But I will proue it,
by the consent of lerned men, and the
voice of the church, which hath ben sence
the .vj.C. yeares, of which you speake.
But yow will haue the proufe, to be takē
out of the .vjC. yeares, next after Christ:
or ells you will not admitt it. As though
this were your argument. what so euer
was not preached, and so lefte in writing
vjC. yeares after Christ, that is not true▪
but indiuiduum vagum was not mencioned
with in these .vjC. yeares: ergo what
so euer is proued by all lernyng, as concerning

               indiuiduum vagū, that is not true,
bicause it was not spoken within those
vjC. yeares. And as I haue made your argumēt
in indiuiduū vagū, so is it in all the
other of your articles allmost, in whiche
all, the fault which you finde, is that .viC.
yeres after Christ were passed, before they
were by the Catholikes published. Now,
if this be a good reason, then do I confesse,
that I am quyte ouercomed. But if
that otherwise, it be nothing worth: then
haue I lost nothing, in graunting, that
with in .vjC. yeares after Christ, certain,
yea most of those articles which he reciteth,
were not plainlie opened. how think
yow? if that in the ende of August, when
frutes are ripe and are tasted to be good,
yet some one sadd witted felow, would
cōdemne all the frutes in the orchard for
wild and naught, & that onlie for this cause,
that in the beginning of Aprill, no such
thinges were vpon the trees, & would in
his owne cōceyt, praise the faire moneth
of Aprill, for the shining of the Son, the
opening of the earth, the gentle raines
f
                  •
               om the cloudes, & grene ornaments of

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
the ground, which no mā wold denie: but
for all the rest of the spring and sommer,
if he wold speak few good wordes of thē,
& for anger, wold cast away all the frutes
of the haruest, should he not declare,Cant. 4. a
madd testy kinde of wisedom therein?
            And why then, I praie you, in the church
of God, which is called in Scripture, and
is in dede, his paradise and garden: will
you admitt nothing, but that which budded
forth in the .vjC. yeares after Christ,
as it were in the spring tyde or beginning
of sommer? The cōclusions of the valew
of the Sacramēt, of the applying thereof,
of the accidents, of all other such thinges,
they com out of the rote and body of the
tree, of that veritie, I meane, which saieth,
This is my body: which if you will cōtemne,
bicause they were not sprongen out
vjC. yeares after Christ, you shall be one
of the hastings, to speak the lest of you.
Where is it readen with in .vjC. yeares of
Christ, that oure blessed lady, was preached
or named, the mother of mercy, the
hand mayden of the Trinitie, the spouse
of the holy ghost, the Quene of heauen,

the Empresse of hell? yet if you beleue in
dede, and in harte, and not saye it only
frō the teeth forwarde, that she is the mother
of God, necessarely al the other titles
folow. Shal I then saie, she was not called
the Quene of heauē, or spouse of the holy
ghost, in the .vjC. yeares after Christ,
ergo she maye not be so called now, and
the greatest keye of owr religion is brokē?
yet, cōmon sense approueth, that a kinges
mother is a Quene, and not of no place,
I trow. And thus I trust, M. Iuel, hath no
cause to triumph hytherto.
            Now for the rest of thinges which do folow
vnto the end of his sermon, I haue
litle minde to declare the falsehood of
them, bicause, I am wery, of repeting so
many vntruthes of his: one he alone betrated,
being sufficient to confound his
loyl
                  •
               ty in misreporting and miscōstruing
with libertie. For what reason is this, to
saie, that therefor the papistes do not wel answer,
no masse is priuate,
               Iuell. 
               seing that in euery

                     •
                  asse euery priest doth communicat with an
other, where so euer he be: bicause, (saieth
M▪ Iuell) by this reason, there should be 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
excōmunication at all, whereas the party excōmunicated
in England, might saie, he wold
cōmunicat with the priest which saieth masse
in Calicute. For this reason doth proue our
sentēce, that wheras the man in England,
being excōmunicated, can not communicat
with the priest in Calicute: ergo the
priest of Calicute and England be of one
communion and body, so that he which
is cutt of from the one, can not remaine
in the other, and he which agreeth with
the one, agreeth with the other. Therefor,
it is not with vs M. Iuell, as it is with
you: that, if I will not be of the congregation
of Geneua, I maye go to Wittenberge,
and if I like not one citie and fraternitie,
I maye go to an other. But euen
as he, which is in the church of England
and a faithfull Catholike, is made partaker
of the Sacraments and praiers, which
be saied in Calicute: so he which is cutt
of, and separated, from any one parte and
membre of the church, he shall not leap
to Calicute, for his cōmunion, but shall
remaine quyte diuided from the body. So
that as it semeth absurd vnto you (master

myne) that an excōmunicate in England
should communicate with the priest of
Calicute, whether the priest of Calicute
will or nill: so make the like argument against
your selfe, that it must seme as absurd,
that he, which communicateth in
England, should not eke communicate
with him which is in Calicute, and then
shall it remaine that if none receiue with
the priest at the aultar in England, yet he
cōmunicateth with the priest of Calicut.
            Of the like vaine of knowleadge cometh
this other argument also:Iuell. 
               That the
name of masse was not vntill foure hundred
yeres after Christ: nor yet were the pieces and
partes of the masse as we in oure time haue
sene thē sett togeather. Ergo wat masse could
that be, that as yet, had neither her owne name,
nor her partes? As who should saie, the
masse, which was vsed of the Apostles and
their next successours, was made the worse
by Kyrie eleeson, Gloria in excelsis, Alleluia,
Credo in Deum, and Agnus Dei, with
certain most godly collects and praiers,
which haue ben added vnto the substance
of the sacrifice, which was in the Apostles

time, not as necessary, but as cōuenient
and comly. Do you not know that it is
an old and true distinction of the masse,
one which was called Catechumenorum,
which ended after the Ghospell, and an
other masse called Christianorum, which
began with the preface? what masse could
that be,
               Iuell. saie you, which as yet had nother her
name nor her partes? I answer to this, that
she had the essentiall and necessary partes
frō the beginning but the garnishing
and decking of the misteries, did folow
afterwardes. Neither doth it hurt and
hinder the nature of man, if he haue a
new or diuers cote, according to the dispositiō
of the yere. But what do I, which
saied I was wery, as I am in dede, and yet
do runne forward, with opening his faint
and vntrue reasoning? well: nowe I will
remembre my selfe better, and conclude
with one pointe, which ended, I shall take
my leaue of him and you bothe.
            In cōparing S. Iames masse and oures
together, it is a world to see, howe frely
he foloweth his rhetorike, and fo
                  •
               saketh
the verite. A figure of which rhetorike,

whiles he did maintaine, with sondry reportes
(of S. Iames masse hath this, and
their masse hath this) with this and this,
vntill I think, he was wery of speaking, to
conclude,Iuell. he sayeth: Sainte Iames masse

                     •
                  ad Christes institution, they in their masse,
haue, well nere, nothyng ells but mans inuention.
Do yow speak as yow think? is
not your communion allmost wholy peced
togeather, of the partes of the Popish
masse by you dismembred? The epistle,
the Ghospel, the collects of the sondaye,
the hymne of the Angels, the confession
of oure faith, the himne of Sanctus
Sanctus Sanctus, the saying of Agnus,
be not these so many thinges, in the masse,
and transferred in to the cōmunion?
how then hath the masse, well nere, nothing
but mans inuention, if your communion
haue Christes only institution?
I take it, that M. Iuell did speak so much,
onely to saue his honesty, lest he should
haue semed not to proue that oure masse
was cleane contrary vnto S. Iames, except
he would haue borowed this litle
lye, of the ignorance and rudenes of the

most part of his audience. But letting
the cause of oure masse to cease, hath S.
Iames masse, Christ his institution, and
hath it no mans inuention, or very litle
at all? I think, you do not meane, that
he hath nothing els but Christes institution,
but as oure masse hath, well nere,
nothing els but mans inuentiō: so by the
contrary you must meane, S. Iames masse
hath, well nere, nothing els but Christes
institution. whiche I speake for your aduauntage,
bycause it serueth better for
the Catholikes, that S. Iames masse shold
haue nothing els but Christes institutiō.
But now Sir, if S. Iames masse be so perfect
a thing in your iudgement, why did
not you translate it in to English? It had
ben a greate glory for you, to saye that
you did bring againe, the very order of
the Apostles, and so to proue your saying
true, by the masse which S. Iames hym
selfe vsed. which thing the Catholikes
graunting vnto you (that it is Sainct Iames
masse in dede,) with more glory and
surety, you might haue turned the Popish
masse, owt of the church, and haue

brought in the masse Apostolike. But
yow do not, I think, allow that masse of
Sainct Iames. Certainely then you be a
great dissembler, to speak so many faire
wordes openly of it, and in your hart to
disdaine it priuely. No mary, will you
saie, Sainct Iames in his masse had Christ
his institution. Lett vs then be tried by S.
Iames masse, whether you iustely reproue
the Catholikes masse, and extoll your
communion? In the first beginning of
Sainct Iames masse, franckincense is burned,
with a prayer thereunto appertaining.
how doth this sauour in yowr noses,
tell the truth? Further, in that masse
the priest goeth vp solemnely with deuoute
praying, the Deacon in the meane
tyme singing. Againe in an other place,
the Deacon biddeth, that none of them,
come in presence of the misteries, which
be yet to lerne the faith, or which can
not praie with the faithfull (such he meaneth
as haue not fullfilled their penaunce)
and he commaundeth the dores to be
kept. But how agreeth this with that law
of yours, which receyueth in, all sortes

without examination, and constrayneth
other, which wold not, to come in and be
present? Then yet againe, in that masse
the priest saieth, O Lorde allmighty king
of glory &c, receiue of our handes which be
sinners, this per
                     •
                  ume, as thou hast receiued
those thinges which Abel, Noe, Aaron, and
Samuell, and all thy holy ones haue offred
vnto the. Further yet in that masse, the
priest maketh the signes of the crosse, ouer
the giftes, saying vnto him selfe (Glory
be to God on highe and in earth peace, vnto
men good will) three times, and after
two other sentences, with bowing him
selfe on this side and that side, he sayeth,
Magnifie you oure Lorde with me, and lett
vs exalt his name together. Also there is in
Sainct Iames masse, a secret praier for the
priest, when he entreth with in the curteynes.
further after the consecration and
secret praiers, he saieth Hayle Marie full
of grace, our Lord is with the. &c. At the last
he breaketh the cōsecrated host, holding
the halfe in one, the halfe in his othe
                  •
               
hand. And that which is in the right hand,
he putteth in to the chalice, saying, The

vnion of the most holy bodye and precious
bloud, of oure Lorde and God and Sauiour
Thesus Christ. Then the other part, which
was in the left hand, he blesseth, and diuideth,
and putteth it in to chalices, saying,
it is vnited and sanctified, and cōsummated
in the name of the Father and Soun and
the Holy Ghost now and euer. I leaue owt
manye thinges, as praying vnto Saincts,
and also praying for the dead, oft inclinations
and bowinges, oft lifting vp the
voyce, oft speaking to hym selfe alone,
with incense agayne offred in the later
end of the masse. Which masse truly, yf
it were in english, and sayed accordingly,
it would seme more superstitious and
more full of cerimonies & gestures, then
the masse which they saye to haue nothyng,
well nere, but mennes inuention.
What memories haue these felowes,
which so frely report of S. Iames masse,
that, which they haue forgotten howe it
standeth? or yf memory faile them not,
what hartes haue they, to lye so lowdly,
and (to the shame of their communion)
to crie owt, that Saint Iames masse, hath

Christ his institution, that the people
which haue neuer reade it, heard it, or sene
it, might think it were as prety a thing
as the communion is, wheras in dede all
thinges being knowen, it vtterly confoundeth
all their craking and glory: except
they haue forgotten that incensing,
blessing, crossing, and soft speaking, and
saluting of oure blessed lady (all which
thinges are vsed in Sainct Iames masse)
doe vtterly disagree frō their positions.
whereof it foloweth, that he speaketh
much against him selfe, which praiseth so
highely that masse, whose rites and cerimonies
do turne their religion to vtter
shame and vnworthines. I praye God to
send them all better mindes, and not to
seke their owne glory, by defending of
that, which once they take in hand to
maintayne: but the honour of God and
his truth, which hath and shall continew
for euer. Amen.
            Thus then now Sir, you haue a pece
of an answer,The aucthor to his fri
                     •
                  d. vnto the stoute chalenge,
and a token of my good will toward
your beneuolence, and some example of

the exercise, in the whiche I bestow my
solitary and sorowfull time. Of which
three poyntes, although euery one separatly,
were sufficient, to haue geuen an
occasion to this my labour, and should
be available to obtaine easy pardon, for
suche thinges which may be amended by
the lerned Catholikes: yet chefely I entended
to destroy the assertions of Master
Iuell. Which if I haue not fully done,
yet all is not lost, bicause I haue other
prouided a tokē to send to my very frend,
or chosen such an exercise, where in I
was not vnfrutfully occupied. But on the
other side, if I haue attained vnto the cō
               futation
of those matters, which I know
deserue iust confusion: then haue I that,
which I principally sought for▪ and then,
as I would be content, that our frendes
should haue a sight of it: so would I not
be as
                  •
               amed, if the enemies should chaū
               ce
to find it. But who is there that is able
to saie, that this is so diligently wrought,
that it should be welcome to those which
do loue vs? or should be accepted for
probable of suche as fi
                  •
               d faulte with vs?

Well yet, how so euer it be, I put it in
to your handes, to haue and to hold, for
better for worse, vntill you see occasion,
from it to departe. Fare you well. You
know my ordinary commendations,
which I vse in all letters. Do them
at this tyme extraordinarely,
with an ouerplus, bycause
it is long, sence I wrote
laste vnto
you.
            
               Your owne I. R.
            
         
         
            
            A CONCLVSION TO
THE READER, VVITH
a challenge annexed.
            
               THVS much vnto a singular
Frind. but, to take my
leaue of the also (Reader),
and to shutt vpp all this matter, with
some cōclusion well worth the remembring,
I think it verie good and profitable,
to sett furth also a solemne challenge,
thereby to geaue owr aduersaries
an occasion, to shew furth their Scriptures,
Councells, Doctours, &c. and
to declare their deepe knowledge in
answering for themselues, whose art
we haue experience of, in deuysing of
obiections against other. Which enterpryse
and ventering of myne, as it
will be most subiect vnto their eye, and
cons
                  •
               quentlie vnto their prying and
ex
                  •
               myning: so haue I taken vnto me,
the 
                  〈◊〉
                of a perfect wyse man, and

                  〈…〉
               , which hath tawght me,

how to procede against them, that I
neede not to mistrust my boldnes. For
thus he saieth in his boke of Prouerbes,
a boke of good authoritie and instruction,Rom. 26. 
               Doe not aunswer a foole
according to his folisshnes, least
thow be made lyke vnto hym.
            
            And in the next sentence folowing:
Aunswer (saieth he) a foole according
vnto his folisshnes, that he
may not seeme to hymselfe to be
wyse. To folow now therefore, this
duble and good counsell, of not aunswering,
and yet aunswering a foole,
I will sett furth v
                  •
               to the (Reader)
two challenges, to plaie the foole with
a foole in the first of thē, that he may
beholde his artificiall wysedome, and
in the second, not to agree with hym
in his folie, because I will refuse his
waies and order. But how may one
aunswer a foole according vnto his folie,
or what hope is there of anye vantage▪
               
if that waie be taken with hym?
Marie, lyke as some madd men (I haue
heard saie) haue ben meetlie well
browght to themselues, when an other
hath stared and gaped vpon them, all
counterfaicting an owtragiouse behauyor:
so vndowbtedlie against fond
questions, it ys a profitable waye of replying,
to putt the lyke againe vnto
madd aduersaries, and cawse them to
behold the absurditie. For, as the fault
which an other maketh, doth more
sensiblie appeere vnto vs, then the lyke
of owr owne vsing, thowgh owrselues
be neerest to owrselues: so, to declare
the absurditie of the challenge, which
M. luell with much opinion of wisedome
pronounced against all Catholykes,
lett one of a lyke proportion to his,
be made furth vnto hym, that he may
cōsider, the well fauorednes of his owne
worke, when the lyke example of it,
shall greatlie mislyke hym. Now, if

there were not so good lykelyhode and
reason, why this counterfaited challenge
(so to call it) shoulde be vttered
profitablie: yet the wyseman so plainelie
either counselling or licensing vs,
To aunswer a foole according to
his foolisshnes, his authoritie ys sufficient
inowgh for me, to beare me owt
in this my doing, and to saye, that, if I
playe the foole, yowr example M. Iuell
hath moued me vnto it. I saye therfore:
            
                Yf any learned man of all our aduersaries,
or yf all the lerned men that be
alyue,A challenge made after the paterne of M. Iuells owne against the Catho
                     •
                  ikes be able to bring any one sufficient
sentence, out of any old Catholike
doctour or father, or out of any
old generall Councell, or out of the
holy Scriptures of God, or any one example
of the primitiue church, wherby
it may be clearlie and plainely proued,
that there was any drie communion
in the whole world at that tyme,
for the space of six hundred yeares after
Christ:
            
               
                Or that there should be no celebration
of the Lord his supper: except
there be a good number to cōmunicate
with the priest, that is, foure or
three persons at the least, though the
whole parisshe haue but twentie of
discretion in it:
            
                Or that any Bisshop then did sweare
by his honor, when, in his visitation
abrode in the countrie, he should warrant
his promise to some poore prisoner
priest vnder hym:
            
                Or that any bagpipers, horsecorsers,
gailers, or alebastars, were admitted
then in to the clergie without good
and long triall of their conuersion:
            
                Or that any Bisshop then, refused to
weare a whyte rochet, or to be distincted
from the laitie, by some honest
priestlie apparell:
            
                Or that any Bishopp then, not satisfyed
with the prisonyng of his aduersaries,
dyd crie out and call vpon the
princes, not disposed that waie, to put
them yet to most cruell death:
            
                Or that the communion table (yf

any then were) was remoueable vpp
and downe, hyther and thyther, and
brought at any tyme in to the lower
partes of the church, there to exequute
the Lorde hys supper:
            
            
                Or that any communion was saied
vpon good fridaie:
            
                Or that Gloria in excelsis should be
song after the communion:
            
                Or that the Sacrament was ministred
then, some tyme in loeuebread,
some tyme in wafers, and in those rather
without the name of Iesus, or the
signe of the crosse, then with it:
            
                Or that Quicun
                     •
                   vult and Crede of
Athanasius was apointed to be song
onlie vpon hygh daies and principall
feastes:
            
                Or that at the communion tyme the
minister should weare a cope, and at
all other seruice a surples onlie, or, as
in some places it is vsed, nothing at
all, besides hys common apparell:
            
                Or that the wordes of Sainct Paule,
1. Cor. 1▪ 1. shold be ordinarilie readen
at the tyme of consecration:
            
               
                Or that they vsed a cōmon and prophane
cup at the cōmunion, and not
a consecrated and halowed:
            
                Or that a solemne curse should be vsed
vpon Asshewensdaye:
            
                Or that a procession about the fieldes
was vsed in the rogation weeke,
to know therebie, rather the boundes
and borders of euerie lordeshipp, then
to moue God to mercie, and styr mens
hartes to deuotion:
            
                Or that any Bishopp then, gathered
beneuolēce of his clergie, to marye his
daughter to a gentle man or merchāt,
or to helpe hym, in the setting vp of
his howsehold:
            
                Or that the man should put the
wedding ring vpon the fourth finger
of the left hand of the woman,
and not of the right hand of her, as it
hath ben many hundred yeares contynued:
            
                Or that any man then dyd read it
in open scholes, or preach it out of
pulpites, or set it furth in print, that
Sainct Peter was neuer at Rome:
            
               
                Or that in the tyme of contagious
plagues, when, for feare of the infection,
none will communicate with
the sick person, the minister might
alonelie communicate with him, with
out breache of Christ his institution,
and that the decree (of no cōmunion
to be made withowt three at the least)
should in such cases be forgoten:
            
                Or that the people then, were called
togeather to morning prayer by ringing
of a bell:
            Yf any man alyue be able to proue any
of these articles, by any one cleare, or
plaine clause, or sentence, either of the
Scriptures, or of the old Doctours, or
any old generall Councell, or by any example
of the primitiue church, I promise,
that I will geaue ouer, and subscribe
vnto hym in that poynt. And of
this, I for my part, will not onlie not
call in any poynt (being well assured
of the trueth therein) but allso will
laye more matter to it. Wherefor beside

all that I haue said allready, I will
say further, and yet nothing so much,
as might be said, If any one of our aduersaries
be able clearlie and plainelie
to proue, by such authoritie of the scriptures,
the old Doctors, and Councels,
as I said before,
            
                That the Bishopp of Rome was called
Antichrist within the first .vjC.
yeares after Christ:
            
                Or that the people was then tawght
to beleue that the force and strength
of their faith, made Christ his bodye
present to them in the Sacramēt, and
not any vertue of wordes and consecration:
            
                Or that the residue of the Sacramēt
vnreceaued, was taken of the priest or
the parish clark, to spread ther young
childerns butter therevppon, or to
serue their owne to the with it, at their
homely table:
            
                Or that who so had said, in the Sacrament
is the true and reall bodie of
Christ and not a figuratiue body onlie

or mistical, shold ben therefor iudged
a papist, and brought vp before
high commissioners:
            
                Or that it was lawfull then to haue
but one communion, in one church,
in one daye:
            
                Or that images were then, cutt, hewed,
mangled, and reuiled, though it
were answered that they are not 
                  •
               olden
for Godes or Sainctes, but kept
only for memorial sake of Christ him
selfe or any of his faithfull:
            
                Or that Bishopes then, threw downe
Christ and his sainctes images, and set
vp their owne, their wyues, and their
childerns pictures, in their open chambers
and parlors:
            
                Or that our Sauior in his last supper
deliuered hys bodye, to many more
then his twelue Apostels:
            
                Or that 
                  •
               udas Machabeus in causing
sacrifice to be offered for the dead,
added in that point vnto the law, and
offended God, any ys no more to be
folowed in that doing, then Loth and
Dauid are in their i
                  •
               cest and adultery:
            
               
                Or that a Bishopp being a virgin at
takyng hys office, did afterwardes yet
commendablie, take a wife (so to call
an harlot) vnto hym:
            
                Or that after the first wyfes death,
which he had before holy orders receiued,
any priest toke a second or
third vnto hym, with a tot
                  •
               es quoties
the later wyfe departing left hym in
hott fiery pasiions, that he needed an
other to coole hym:
            
                Or that any preacher of those daies,Lutherus in Postiilis
moued young men and women in open
sermons not to blushe or be ashamed
of desyering the one the other,
no more then they would be ashamed
of spetting or any such naturall actiō:
            
                Or that it was at those dayes the
right way to knowledge, euery man to
read by hym self the Scriptures, and
neglect all kynd of tradition:
            
                Or that the lent, or friday, was to be
fasted, for ciuile policie, and not for
any deuotion:
            
                Or that Palmesonday was solemnised
without bearing of bowes conmonly

called palmebowes: Or that
Christmassdaye, was without a masse,
or asshewensday without asshes, or
                  •
               
Candelma
                  •
               daye without bearing of
Candels:
            
                Or that the Natiuity of S. Ihon Baptist
was kept holy and the Eue 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
and neither the natiuity neither the
assumption of owr blessed lady kept
holy, with a special fast vpon the 
                  •
               ues:
            
                Or that they did pray vnto God vpō
the feast of S. Michael, saying (gra
                     •
                  nt
that owr lisse maye be de
                     •
                  ended on earth
by them, by whom, thow art allwayes
wayted vpon in heauen) and neuerthelesse
tawght the people, that it was iniurious
to Christ and his mediation,
to aske for helpe at any others handes,
then his:
            
                Or that they should vse the signe of
the crosse in baptisme only and not
at the cōsecrating of Christ his body:
            
                Or that they were not heretikes
which threw downe altars erected vnto
Christ:
            
                Or that any Bisshopp then was maryed

vpon Asshewensday:
            
                Or that any goodman then, did write,
that the gouernement of women
was monstruous:
            
                Or that, 
                  〈◊〉
               , in these wordes, hoc est
corpus me
                     •
                  
                  ̄, y
                  •
                to be taken, for significat:
            
            
                Or that the lay people communicatyng
did take the cup one at an others
handes, and 
                  •
               ot at the priests handes
or the deacons:
            
                Or that there was any controuersie
then in religion
                  •
                which being decided
by the Bishop of Rome, the contrarie
part was not taken for heresie, and
the mainteiners of it accompted heretikes:
            
                Or that any then was put in the Calender
for a Ma
                  •••
               r, which was hanged
by iust iudgement, not for any cause
and matter of faith, but for euident
and wicked felo
                  ••
               e.
            
                Or that any ecclesiasticall persons
were depriued then of their benefices
or excōmunic
                  •
               ted owt of church
and liuyng, for that they refused to
sweare against the authoritie of th
                  •
               
               
Bishope of Rome. Or that any suche
othe was vsed to be put vnto any,
man, at that tyme:
            
                Or that any f
                  •
               yer of threescore yeares,
obteinyng afterwardes the Rom
                  •
               
of a Bishop, maried a young woman
of .xix. yeares:
            
                Or that any Bishopp then preached
to be all one, to praye on a dunghyll
and in a churche:
            
                Or that any but heretikes refused to
subscribe to a general and lawful coū
               cell,
gathered and confirmed by the
Bishop of Rome his authoritie.
            
               (These be the highest misteries,
and greatest keies of their religiō,
and without these their doctrine
can neuer be mainteyned and stād
vpright.) Yf any one therefor of all
owr aduersaries, be able to auouch any
one of all these articles, by any such
sufficient authoritie of Scriptures, doctors,
or Councels, as I haue required:
as I sayd before, so saie I now againe,
I am content to yeld vnto hym, and to

subscribe in that poynt (which I wold
neuer do, nor might do vnto an heretike,
knowing that my faith must not
hang vpon the euent of disputation,
yet seing I haue begon to playe the
foole with a 
                  •
               oole, therefor I vse this
terme of subscribing, as I do lerne it of
master Iuell.) But I am well assured,
they shal neuer be able trulye to alleage
one sentence. And because I know
u, therefor I speake it, least any happelie
should be deceaued. And thus far
furth to the imitation of master Iuell,
Factus sum insipiens, vos me coëgistis.
            
            But what now might any protestant
think of this challenge? will he not
mislike with me, that emong so manye
articles, as I reherse with great solemnitie,
so few are of weight and substance?
will he not be moued at the
very hart, that for indifferēt matters
and reasonable ceremonies, I shall require

yet, to haue their proufe, out
of the first six hundred yeares after,
Christ, and owt of generall councells,
or auncient doctours, or els make an
exclamation agaynst the keeping of
them? will it not greiue hym, that I
stick vpon termes, which can neuer be
fownd in the cumpasse of the primitiue
church, which if their principles
were true, woulde folowe yet well inowgh
of them? And that leauyng the
principle, I presse hym with the particular
word of some conclusion, will it
not anger hym? Can he take it for indifferent
dealing, that I rekon vp some
ones priuate opinion, and make as
thowgh it were the generall determination
of all the protestantes in the
world? And when I haue gathered vp
a number of articles, of which the
greater part conteineth indifferent or
simple matters, to cōclude of thē all, in
one sum, without order or distinction,

and boldlie to saye: (These be the highest
misteries, and greatest keies
of their religiō, and without these,
their doctrine can neuer be mainteined
and stand vpright) can the
protestant hearing or reading this, if
he haue any spirite of trueth or honestie,
think that I were to be trusted in
any point, with the teaching or guyding
of the ignorant? yet, I assure you,
(marke it who will) M. Iuells most
gloriouse challenge, hath no better
reason or substāce in it. for of so manye
his ors and interrogatories, to make
a shew and colour, of great copie
and store of matter, I 
                  〈…〉
                of
them, which be not, either of 
                  〈◊〉
               
poyntes and quiddities
                  •
                without 
                  •••
               
               cussing
and examinyng of which, the
Catholike faith continueth 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
                  •
               nowgh) or els about orders and 
                  〈◊〉
               
(of which the gouernours of 
                  〈◊〉
               
church, haue the making or remouing

in their discretion. Now therefor, if
this maner of owr challenge be mislyked,
I am gladd, that in aunswering
a foole accordyng to his foolishnes,
I haue geauen warnyng to the
Reader, not to make of euerie rare
thing and much praised, a Iuell, and to
be ware euer of great faces sett vpon
small and simple matters. As on the
other syde, if for M. Iuells sake and
honor, this my challenge, framed after
the example of his, shall stand for
a reasonable one and tolerable: lett me
be answered then in the particulars,
and except I doe replie againe, and
that speedelie, I with others, will yeld
vnto hym.
            Yet now, because the wyseman hath
sayed, not onlie, aunswer a foole according
to his foolishnes, but rather
and before this warned vs, with,
doe not answer a foole according
to his folisshnes, lest thow be made

lyke vnto hym: I will not therfor
rest, and staye vpon the forsaid
challenge, but come furth with an other,
full of great and principall matters:
neither will I be lyke the protestant,
and troble the reader with questions
of small importaūce, but of substanciall
and necessarie articles, concerning
the orders of this present lyfe,
or the hope of the lyfe euerlasting.
I make for the Catholikes honor this
challenge, and prouoke him that can,
to encoūter me I except none, thowgh
I lyke not all, (for who would be matched
with the bold and blind brothers,
willinglie?) but I trust, who so euer
replyeth, he shall be superintended so
wiselye, that his aunswer shall not come
against me, but with good authoritie
and priuileage. I saye therefor:
If any single one of owr aduersaries,
or they all conmunicating togeather,
can proue by any suficient testimonie,

out of Scriptures,The Catholike his Cha
                     ••
                  enge made of greate and waighti
                     •
                   artic
                     •
                  es. Doctors or Coūcells.
            
                That for the space of six hundred
yeares after Christ hys ascension (by
which hundreds onlie they would be
tryed, in examining of veritie.) It was
vnlawfull to make a vowe to God, of
chastitie, obedience, or pouertye: or
that breakers of such vowes, were estemed
aboue others, as singular witnesses
of the libertye of Christ his true
Ghospell.
            
                Or that it was abhominable then,
to make to hym any speciall sacrifice,
besides the sacrifice of owr thankes in
wordes and figures, for his benefites,
with remembrance of Christ his passion
for vs, and besides the offering of
owr sowles and bodies to the seruice
of his maiestie, with mortifiyng of
owr affections and euill desyres.
            
                Or that there was no priesthode thē,
according to the order of Melchisedech,
or that priestes haue not a singular
sacrifice, which they must offer
for the sinnes of the people.
            
               
                OR that the Baptisme,Caluin in his institutiōs, which are apoynted to be readen of the priestes of 
                     •
                  ngland which
Christ instituted, is no better
then the circums
                  ••
               sion of the old law:
            
                Or that baptisme ys a signe onlie of
owr profession, and that owr synnes
are not trulie and in deed, forgeauen
vs in it:
            
                Or that the Sacrament of Confirmation,
ys an inuention onlie of man,
and that no spirituall strength cūmeth
vnto vs, by signing of vs with holie oyle,
and imposition of the Bishoppes
handes:
            
                Or that Christ delyuered in his last
supper a figure onlie of his bodie to
be eaten of his Apostles:
            
                Or that the power of forgeauing or
reteyning sinnes, which Christ gaue
to his Apostles, and by them to laufull
priestes, ys nothing els but a comforting,
or a fearing of mens consciencies,
by the promyses or menacies of the
scriptures▪ and that in deed priestes
can not (as ministers vnder God) forgeaue
synnes and offences, which by
absolute aucthoritye ys proper vnto

God alone, and no others:
            
                Or that to confesse our sinnes to a
priest, with sorow of hart and cont
                  •
               
               tiō,
and to labor by fasting, prayeing,
almes deedes, and hard discipline, to
helpe forward towardes the makyng
vpp of a full satisfaction and perfect,
ys iniuriouse vnto Christ his passion
and merites, and a superstitiouse and
thanklesse trauaile:
            
                Or that the knowledge and vnderstanding
of scriptures ys sufficient licence
inowgh to instruct and teach
others: and that there is no such difference
betwene the clergye, and the
laytie, but that the layetie hath before
God, as good and great priesthoode
as the clergie:
            
                Or that a temporall and Christian
Prince, were he man, woman, or childe,
had then, or may haue now, the aucthoritie
of a supreame head in Christ
his churche and ouer the churche:
            
                Or that faith onlie iustifieth, after
one be baptized and sanctified:
            
                Or that all the Iustice and holines

which good men of those daies had,
or now shall haue, is but an Imputatiue
Iustice, and such as pleaseth God
to accept, but in deede ys not true and
right Iustice:
            
                Or that the keeping of the fortie
daies fast of lent, was alowed then for
temporall policie or bodylie healths
sake onlie, and had no cōmaundemēt
from Christ, or his Apostles:
            
                Or that in most extremitie and at
the verie poynt of death, aneyling of
Christians was abhorred of Christiās,
and the keeping of the Sacramēt forbydden,
which is our true viaticum
and viage prouision:
            
                OR that the calling vpon Sainctes
in heauen, was accompted then,
blasphemie:
            
                Or the setting vp of Christ his crosse,
or any holie Sancte his image, was
preached to be Idolatrie:
            
                Or that the visiting of their tumbes,
& kyssing their reliques, was thought
to be a superstitiouse vanitie:
            
                Or that the miracles worked at their

chappels, or memories, were attributed
then, at the first tydinges of them
vnto the dyuel his subteltie:
            
                OR that to pray for the sowles departed,
was thowght repugnant
vnto the Scriptures:
            
                Or that to offer sacrifice, and geaue
almes for their sowles health, was accompted
imp
                  •
               etie.
            
                Or that the last willes and testamentes,
of foūders of almes howsen, Colledges,
and Monasteries, were broken
cōcerning their temporal goodes and
legacies, and that no part thereof, dyd
come to their owne bloud and familie.
            These be such articles as are directed,
first against the proper honor and glorie
of God allmightie: secondlie, against
the grace of 
                  •
               hesus Christ, and
profit of all Christians in the world:
thirdlie against the dignitie, estimatiō,
and honor of all Sainctes: fourthlie
against the profit of the sowles departed,
by debarring their commodities,
so that in all states, worldes, and

persons, Christ thorowgh these articl
                  •
               s
ys proscribed. And againe in these
articles, the fundation, estimation,
and perfection of their Ghospell and
preaching consisteth, so that without
these, or worser then these, they could
not be so singular and vnlyke other
Christians. Y
                  •
                therefore, any of all
owr aduersaries, be able with sufficient
authoritie, to proue these articles,
or conclusio
                  •
               s of theirs, owt of the
Scriptures, vse of primityue churche,
Doctors, or Councels: either he shall

                  •
               e proued, manifestlie to misconster
a
                  •
               d misuse Scriptures, doctors or councels▪
either els he shall be praised for
his labors, and folowed with a free

                  •
               yll and submission. Lett this be the
challenge, and let vs 
                  〈◊〉
                an answer
vnto it. for, if th
                  •
                Catholykes pressed
with such questions, which for the
most part deserued no aunswer, haue
not refused to shew their faith, and

geaue reason of it vnto their aduersaries:
(allthowgh the lack of conference
with their felowes, of free
printing, and open vttering of their
bokes, might with reason haue stayed
them from their purpose, and not haue
moued to chainge their contrie for
the matter) how much more cawse
and reason ys it, that they, which are
so fauored in their procedinges, should
not lett to stand vnaunswered, such
principall questions, as are moued agaynst
them, nor goe at that tyme
backward, and 
                  〈◊〉
                from the quarell,
when most of all, they should shew
them selues, and spread furth then
eunnying and sinceritie.
            And yet if these forsaid articles are
to manye, for their leysure▪ 
               
                  〈…〉
                they
seeme to much particular▪ for their
profite, which would 
                  〈…〉
               
or yf the answering vnto 
                  〈…〉
               
he sayed to be forbydden by wyse heades:

(for a rumor may sone be made,
to faine that it serueth to a faction,
to make such challenges, and

                  •
               ombattes) Lett me be quietlie suffered
then, to speake a few wordes
and indifferent, such as to which euerie
religion must agree, yf with any
reason it will be credited.
            The heretykes (sayeth Tertullian)
make a shew of Scriptures,Libr. 
                     〈◊〉
                   praes
                     •
                  r. aduersus haereticos. and by this their boldnes, straytwayes
some they moue. Now in
the very conference it selfe and
meetyng togeather, they weerie
the stedfast and sure men, they
catche and intrapp the weake, and
the indifferent they dimisse, and

                  〈◊〉
                goe with grudges and scruple
                  •
               .
But this way must be stopped
vpp against them at the fyrst,

                  ••
               d they are not to be suffered to
dispute and reason vpon the Scriptures.
And why so? Marye, for

good cause (sayeth Tertullian.)▪
For some one here
                  •
               ye doth not
admitt certayne Scriptures, and
those which it doth alow and receiue,
it turneth vnto her purpose▪
by putting vnto them, or takyng
awaie somwhat from them.
Some againe are so presumptuouse,
and t
                  •
               ke so much vpon them,
that they will not acknowledge
that for Scripture, by which they
may be 
                  〈◊〉
                Ergo we must
not appeale vnto the Scriptures,
(sayeth he) and the triall ys not to
be apoynted in them, by which
the victorie ys either none, or vncertaine,
or not verie sure. For allthowgh
the conference vpon the
scriptures 
                  •
               hold come to that passe,
that it would leaue both syde
                  •
               
alyke
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                the order of thinges re
                  •
               quired
that to be fyrst and formost
proponed and putt furth, 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
which onlye it ys to be disputed
at this tyme. that ys to saye. Quibus
compet
                     •
                  t fides ipsa: cui
                     ••
                   sint Scripturae▪
                  
                     •
                   quo, & per quos, & quando,
& quibus sit tradita disciplina, qua
fiunt Christiani: who they are vnto
whom the faith it selfe belongeth:
whose are the Scriptures:
of whom: and by whom: and what
tyme, and vnto whom the trade
and instruction was geauen, by
which men are made Christians:
For, where it shall appere that the
much of the Christian discipline
and faith is: there shallbe the truth
of the Scriptures, and of the expositions
of them, and of all the Christian
traditiōs. This haue I Englisshed
more at large, owt of Tertullian,
that it might the better be cōsidered of

                     •
                  he (Reader) whether he speaketh reason
or no: and whether in any disputation
to be instituted, or any challenge

to be apoynted, these articles,
which Tertullian specifyeth, are not
principallie to be debated, and examined:
and whether this trade and
manner of arguing doe serue to the
mainteynyng of any stomak: which
ys so naturall (as I may saye) and so
reasonable, that yow can not deuyse a
more indifferent. To vse it therefor
to myne owne comfort and others▪ and
yet not to depart from the manner of
a challenge, therebye to recompense
owr aduersaries, I saye:
            
            
                Yf any of owr aduersaries be abl
                  •
               
to shew by any sufficient or lyklie argument
and testimonie,A most short and profitable consideration, to goe before euery chalēge or to make of it, by it selfe alone, a iust challenge. that they haue
any true Christian fayth at all among
them: (for faith cleaueth vnto
authoritie, which they can neuer shew
for them selues, &c.
            
                Or that the Scriptures haue ben delyuered
vnto them, or that they are
the right keepers of them:
            
                Or yf they can tell from whom they

haue receiued their Ghospell, other
then papistes:
            
                Or by what successors, from the
fyrst, eyther maker, or cheife preacher
of theire Ghospell, it hath come
vnto them:
            
                Or at what tyme, they receiued it:
            
                Or yf they can shew but the fundacions
onlye, or proportion of some
churche, howse, communion table,
communion boke, or any other
thing neuer so smal, by which it might
be gathered, that a true an Apostolyke
religion was extant to be seen
within the six hundred yeares after
Christ, as voyd of ornamentes, ceremonies,
reuerence, distinction of places,
and dignityes, Sacramentes, and
solemnities parteyning to Sacramentes,
as theirs ys:
            These are the most best and 
                  〈◊〉
               
questions, for the capacitye of a
sensible man, and most meetest to be
asked of these greate folowers of Antiquitie
(as they saye them selues.)
            
               
Yf therefore any of owr aduersaries,
can name, eyther the places, or the
persons, where their religion stode of
old tyme, or from whom, by 
                  〈◊〉
               
descent, it hath come to theyr churches,
and ministers: I promyse f
                  ••
               
my selfe, and others allso: eyther to
proue their predecessors heretikes, or
to yeld with a good will to their succession,
yf they bring it downewarde
from any Apostle.
            I haue sayed: And in the mea
                  •
               
while, vntill theyr aunswer be deuised:
I will contynue in that fayth,
which lawfull Bisshoppes of England
receiued of Sainct Augustyne a monke,
and owr Apostle, which, by the
allmightie power of God, conuert
                  ••
               
owr realme from Idolatrie to Christianitie:
which receiued his faith of
Sainct Gregorie the greate, and the
first of that name: And Sainct Gregorie
lerned it of his predecessor Pelagius

the second: Pelagius agayne
receiued it of Benedictus the first:
from Benedictus then we goe vpward
to loannes .III. to Pelagius .I. to Vigilius,
to Siluerius, to Agapetus, to Ioannes
the second, to Bonifacius the second,
to Fo
                  •
               lix the first, to Ioannes .I.
to Hormisda, to Symmachus, to Anastasius
the second, to Gelasius, to Faelix
III to Simplicius, to Hilarius, to
Leo .I. to Sixtus .III. to Caelestinus,
to Bonifacius .I. to Zozimus, to Innocentius,
to Anastatius .I. to Siricius,
to Damasus, to Faelix the second, to
Liberius, to 
                  〈◊〉
               , to Marcus, to Siluester,
to Melchiades, to Eusebius, to
Marcellus, to Marcellinus, to Cai
                  •
               s,
to Eut
                  ••
               hiamus, to Faelix .I. to Dionisius,
to 
                  •
               ixtus the second, to Stephanus
I. to Lucius, to Cornelius, to Fabianus,
to Antherus, to Pontianus, to
Vrbanus, to Calistus, to Zepherinus,
to Victor, to Eutherius, to Soter, to

Anicetus, to Pius, to Higinus, to Telesphorus,
to Sixtus, to Alexander,
which was the first that apointed making
of holywater, which receaued th
                  •
               
Catholike faith of Euaristus, which
receaued it of Anacletus, which receaued
it of Clemens, which receaued
it of Sainct Peter, which receaued it of
Christ, which is God most true and
blessed for euer. Amen. Fare well.
            
               Rom. 16.
               Deus autem pacis conterat
Sathanam sub pedibus
vestris velociter.
            
            Quoniam viri S. Theologiae peritissimi Angli
apud me side dignissimi, perlegerunt
hunc librum Iohannis Rastelli, & per omnia
catholicum esse censent, dignum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
qui typis excusus à popularibus eius Prouintiae
nempe Anglicanae legatus. pu
                  •
               o ipsum
tutò posse imprimi. Ita testor Cunerus
Petri de Brouwershauen Louanij
Pastor S. Petri indignus .11. Nouem. 1561
         
         
            
            A Table of the cheefest
matters.
            
               THE occasion of the Councell
of Nice. Folio. 6.
               The pride of heretikes, and old
wont of refusing vnwriten verities. fo. 9.
               That the new ghospellers must
needer disagree emong them
selues. 20.
               The Englishe order of communion
and seruice, doth not folowe
iust the example of Christ and
his Apostles, but hath in some
partes more, in some lesse, as
In takyng of bread in to their handes,
when they should consecrate. 25
               ¶In blessing of bread.
In takyng the chalice lykewyse. 26
               The order of the Englisshe seruice
agreeth not with the primityue
church, as
I
                     •
                   praying towardes the East. 29
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  n mengling of wine and water togeather
in the chalice. 30
               In vsing the signe of the crosse in
the misteries. 31
               In erecting of Aultars. 32
               In burning of incense. ibidem.
               In lichtes and tapers. 33
               In praying to Sainctes. 35
               In praying for the soules departed. 36
               Of seruice in the mother tong.
50. &. 132
               Of the sacrifice of Christians. 63
               Of adoration. 73
               A generall aunswer to the skoffing
of heretykes, agaynst the similitudes
and allusions, which Catholykes
haue vsed. 108
               Of priuate Masse. 119
               Of receiuing in both kyndes. 228
               Of the title of vniuersall Bisshope. 136
               Of the reall and corporall presence
of Christ in the Sacrament. 139
               
                  
That priestes haue authoritie to
offer Christ. 150
               A generall aunswer to the particular
questions which M. Iuell
moueth. 153
               Folish collections and argumentes
of M. Iuells, Fol. 59. 64. 65. 70.
76. 82. 94. 99. 116. 121. 146. 152.
154. 155.
               Notable lyes of M. Iuells. Fol. 23.
61. 68. 72. 86. 94. 151. 156. 158.
            
            
               In the Challenge.
               Tertullians rules to be obserued in
euerye disputation, and challenge
appoynted: Fol. 173. &. 174.
            
         
         
            
            ¶Faultes escaped in the printing.
            
               
                  
                     Fol
                     Fa.
                     Linea.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     7.
                     2.
                     7.
                     to establisshe
                     and to establis
                           •••
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     8.
                     1.
                     20.
                     sayed
                     saie.
                  
                  
                     16.
                     2.
                     5.
                     gaue it
                     gaue, (without, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     26.
                     1.
                     13.
                     lockyng
                     lockyng.
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     35.
                     2.
                     26
                     in the (put it out)
                      
                  
                  
                     40
                     1.
                     11.
                     great
                     greater.
                  
                  
                     lb.
                     1.
                     17.
                     odre
                     order.
                  
                  
                     43.
                     1.
                     19.
                     coniures
                     coniurers.
                  
                  
                     53.
                     1.
                     26.
                     hartis, not
                     hart, is not.
                  
                  
                     56▪
                     
                     2.
                     11.
                     lyke
                     litle.
                  
                  
                     66.
                     2.
                     1.
                     lokes.
                     bokes.
                  
                  
                     lb.
                     2.
                     20.
                     take.
                     toke.
                  
                  
                     80.
                     2.
                     6.
                     posteritie
                     the posteritie.
                  
                  
                     82.
                     2.
                     10.
                     childeri
                           •
                        .
                     childerne.
                  
                  
                     92.
                     1.
                     12.
                     sould
                     should.
                  
                  
                     96.
                     1.
                     16.
                     antedent
                     antecedent.
                  
                  
                     lbi.
                     1.
                     23.
                     doth cōclud
                     doth not concl
                           •
                        d
                  
                  
                     lbi.
                     2.
                     19.
                     thinkers
                     tinkers.
                  
                  
                     99.
                     2.
                     26.
                     founded
                     founde.
                  
                  
                     122.
                     1.
                     9.
                     i
                           •
                         so
                     euen so.
                  
                  
                     133.
                     1.
                     11.
                     write
                     wrote.
                  
                  
                     144.
                     2.
                     10.
                     circūscriptiue
                     circūscriptiuelie▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Ibid.
                     1.
                     12.
                     host?
                     host:
                  
                  
                     155.
                     1.
                     13.
                     one
                     our.
                  
                  
                     156.
                     2.
                     11.
                     your
                     our.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  In the Challenge.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        60.
                     in the mergent,
                     Rom. 26.
                     Prouer. 26
                  
               
            
            
         
      
   