
      
         
            
            
            A MIRROVR
of Monsters:
            Wherein is plainely described the
manifold vices, & spotted enormities, that are caused
by the infectious sight of Playes, with the
description of the subtile slights of Sathan,
making them his
instruments.
            Compiled by Wil. Rankins.
            Magna spes est inferni.
            Séene and allowed.
            
            AT LONDON
Printed by I. C. for T. H. in
Anno. Do. 1587.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A MIRROVR
of Monsters.
            MAGNA SPES
est inferni.
            
               DEsirous in youth (not satisfied
with Maps) to confer the
nature of my natiue soile,
with the common condition
of other countries, I found it
a sprig, budding from the withered
plant of vertue, by equall
comparison of contraries,
to decerne good from
bad: and choosing accordinglie
with sinceritie to imbrace the one,A troubled mind is tossed with worldlie waues. and auoid the
pernicious path of the other. Trauelling thus in mind,
and tossed with worldlie waues, as my bodie was indangered
in the billowes of the raging sea, whereby
occasioned to behold manis countries (though I continued
in none) I noted their manners so farre as my
capacitie could conceiue, or the shortnesse of my abode
instruct me in the same.The happinesse of England.
            
            At the last, happilie (or rather by the deuine powers)
as I may terme it, I arriued in a countrie named Terralbon,
situate in the Westerne parts, and conteined
in the compasse of Europa, the onelie report whereof
was sufficient to win a mind perticularlie led in securitie
in h
                  •
               s owne natiue countrie, to be an eye witnesse
to the rarenesse of that peaceable place. So godlie in
gouernement, so politique in procéedings, so walled for
warre, and fortified with fréends, that it is hard to be

censured▪ whether the place be more blessed, for the
plentie of all things, necessarie for a flourishing commonwealth,
or for the tranq
                  ••
               llous peace it continuallie
enioieth, at both which all christendome woonders,
and wisheth (as a head to their flowing streames)
that plentie of 
                  •
               ile and wine, store of milke and honie,
anoint the heads and chearish the hearts of such happie
gouernours.
            Amongst which blessed benefits,That place is said to be celestiall where a vertuous prince ruleth the realme. and heape of celestiall
graces, there is aboue the rest a most vertuous
and godlie princesse, whose fame spreddeth to infidels,
whose noble vertues are woondered at amongst the
Heathen, whose peaceable gouernement Pagans doo
adore,Vrged contrarie to nature, a woolfe should tremble at a lambe: but such is the force of vertue to compasse impossibilities in the iudgement of man. no lesse feared of forren enimies, then beloued
of naturall subiects. At whose clemencie (but a Lambe)
the Woolfe dooth tremble, nor dareth the Fox barke on
the 
                  •••
               unts of Terralbon, where Saba beholdeth the
f
                  •
               eding of hir Lambes.
            This blessed Ladie, whome God hath annointed,
whome Angels doo guide, and Archangels defend from
the secret sting of the Aspis, that lurketh vnder the
lips of the vngodlie, is adorned with so manie vertu
               
                  •
               us
gifts of the mind,God deliuereth a vertuous prince from the wicked conspiracies of the vngodlie. Vertue and wisdome shall neuer waine. that the rudenesse of my quill
would rather diminish the full and fertile spring of hir
flourishing praises, then m
                  •
               rltorious
                  •
               ie commend the
singularitie of the same, onelie this maye I say, Sacra
est Regina, iusta diserta po
                     •
                  ens, What wanteth there
then (obiect what may be) to saye shée is sacred, iust,
wise, and mightie, the fulnesse whereof furnishing the
heauens shall neuer waine.
            But yet speake I mor
                  •
                largelie of the famous
state of hir Terralbon.
               The corruption of our age, that vice must needs be coupled with vertue. In whose flour
                  •
               shing fields amongst
the statelie trées cleaueth consuming Caterpillers,
and as the tallest Caedar hath his water boughes,
and winters blasts (were it of Libanus) the swéete
Rose his prickes and concealing Canckers (grew it in

Paradise) the cleanest streame his mud, and grauell
stones (sproong it from the head of Ganges.) So Terralbon
hath places and people beyond the view of vertue,
yet by regard to be redressed, and care cleane to be
confounded, such as liue by others losse, laughes, at others
languishing,Plaiers are Caterpillers and Canckers, that cleaue to the braunches of forward wits. florish by others fading, sing at others
sorrow, consuming caterpillers cleauing to forward
branches, canckers that canterize Roseall youth,
and muddie motes that trouble the cléerest springs:
so may I terme them, whose Tearme hath continued
too long a time. What men are these? (naie rather
monsters) that thus corrupt so swéete a soile:They are Monsters. such are
they, as in outward shew séeme painted sepulchres, but
digge vp their déeds, and finde nothing but a masse
of rotten bones.
            Some terme them Comedians, other some Players,
manie Pleasers,They colour their vanitie with humanitie. but I Monsters, and whie Monsters?
Bicause vnder colour of humanitie, they present
nothing but prodigious vanitie. These are wels
without water, dead branches fit for fuell, cockle amongst
corne, vnwholesome wéedes, amongst swéete
hearbes, and finallie, féends that are crept into the
worlde by stealth, and holde possession by subtill inuasion.
            But some of their societie may fortune to obiect,
that I chatte beyond my charge, and speake more than
probabilitie or ground (of searched and experienced
troth,) naye will not sticke to saie. I am malicious
without measure, proud with presumption, and alledge
more then I dare auouche, to speake against
them that are priuiledged by a Prince, naye more
sworne seruants to the annointed, allowed by Magistrates,
& commended by many.The coate of a prince cannot alter the condition of the corrupted. I easilie answer: Most
men liked the masking Apes of Aegypt, whose golden
cotes, could not couer their brutish states, for Simia simia
erit etiam si aurea gestet insignia. Nor can the coate

of a mightie and puissant prince, priuiledge a subiect to
wander in error,The coate of a prince cannot alter the condition of the corrupted. naie to build their habitations vnder
the Caeders of Saba. Princes are as Gods, and may
command, subiects inferior creatures, and must not offend.
What reason hath the foote to saie, my head recreates
himselfe with pleasure,A subiects selfewill must not be grounded on the pleasure of a Prince. therefore may I walke at
leasure, for this is no consequent: The Prince must
be pleased, therefore the subiect be diseased. For that
is poison to some, which is medicinable to other, and
of a perticular good, by abuse maye spring a generall
euill.Abuses are no vses.
            
            But set we aside this cauelling obiector, and view
we more narrowlie from what spring these serpents
first suckt their vnsauerie sap (for men doo then transforme
that glorious image of Christ,Plaiers transforme their bodies which is the image of Christ into the shape of brute beasts. into the brutish
shape of a rude beast, when the temple of our bodies
which should be consecrate vnto him, is made a stage
of stinking stuffe, a den for théeues, and an habitation
for insatiate monsters.) First they are sent from their
great captaine Sathan (vnder whose banner they
beare armes) to deceiue the world,They are sent from Sathan. to lead the people
with intising shewes to the diuell, to seduce them to
sinne,They are the members of Sathan to practise for him in the kingdome of this world. and well tuned strings, to sound pleasing melodie,
when people in heapes daunce to the diuell. But
rather séeme they the limbs, proportion, and members
of Sathan.
            First are they his head that studie to deceiue the
people with intising shewes, which (if Hydraes) the
sword of iustice might soone cut. They are his toongs,
which roare out pleasing (but yet damnable) tales into
the ears of the people,Iustice may breake the ioints of Sathan. easilie puld out by Iustice. They
are his armes that stretch out ot catch the poeple within
the compasse of his chaine, whose ioints Iustice may
breake. They are his clouen féet that plod in damned
paths, in whose steps spring vp sundrie séeds of deadlie
desires. Such are they, and such will they be (as long as

they be.)Plaiers began to prophane the Sabaoth. When first these monsters came into Terralbon,
such was their proud presumption, that they feared
not to prophane the Sabbaoth, to defile the Lords
daie, to scoffe at his word, and to stage his wrath. But
when the King of kings sawe his scepter broken, his
crowne trode vnder the féete of the vngodlie, his
roabes rent, naye the glorie of his Sonne darkened
with the head of this monstrous Beast:Bearish garden fell vpon the prophaners of the Sabbaoth. he stretched
out his mightie arme, and with the rod of his Iustice
brused the bones of them that prophaned his Sabaoth,
defiled his sacred daye, and scoffed at his holie word.
Then Iustice pulled off hir vaile, & with a cleare foresight
(beholding the same) so ordained it, that these
monsters dare no longer roare on the Sabaoth of the
Lorde.
            What sight then so bleared with fond affection,Selfe-will may be blinded with affection. but
may easilie decerne, Sathan brought them into the
world, nurssed them in the world, and nourisheth them
in the world, instructs them in the world, and will destroye
them in the world, except in time they shadow
themselues vnder the wings of Angels. For as the
power of God is inscrutable,Repentance may reclaime them to the mercie of God. so is his mercie manifold,
his wrath inkindled, is quenched with petition, humilitie,
and a repentant soule. Such is his power, such is
his vnspeakeable mercie. In which my incepted course,
I am to desire the reader, that I may referre his pacient
aduise to this consequent, conteining the summe of
my Mirror: wherein if it please him to read with deliberation,
and ponder with iudgement, he shall find
such as I promised to be faithfullie performed. Wherin
is conteined the perfect description of such enormities
and heinous offences, that these monsters continuallie
carrie with them, easie to be decerned in the darke
without a candle, were they couered with the obscurest
cloude to hide their hydeous shapes. For spitting fier
from their mouthes, they are to be discouered by their

déedes.
            In this countrie of Terralbon, whereof I haue somwhat
spoken, is a place famous for filthinesse, well
knowne of manie, for the most part noted of all, whose
name as necessarie we must not forget:By interpretatiō from the Greeks Hollow well. called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
a place well scituate in sinne, senced with frawde, built
by briberie, whose pathes are well beaten, as the perfect
waie to wickednesse, the entrie easie, for lesse price
then I
                     •
                  das bought his damnation, where my selfe luld
in the lap of Securitie,A man may buie his damnation there for two pence not long since was brought a
sléepe by Carelesse cogitations▪ where either by the
nature of the place (whether inchanted by charmes) or
by my owne darkesome disposition (ignorant of mine
owne harmes) I know not, but there restlesse I rested
without regarde, and plunged my selfe in the depth
of follie.
            This Laborinth, where lodged these monstrous
Minotaures, had many winds, and turnes fit for a mind
(as they terme it) Malecontent, to walke neuer content:The grace of God may guide anie man from this monstrous Laborinth of Plaies.
wherein viewing manie things able to intice a
pleasant eye to beholde, or an open eare to delight, by
the line of grace, at length I got out, when I vowed to
my guide vnspotted loue, heartie zeale, & continuall
praise, that brought a soule almost sunke in sinne to
the brinke of mercie. Wherein (as our prouerbe saith)
none can better describe the furie of fier, then he which
hath béene scorched with the flame) I shall tell you
of things strange to consider, but more strange to
behold, no lesse true then strange, yet not so strange
as damnable.
            In this place 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                not long since was solemnized
a marriage, betwéene two ancient and amiable
louers, hauing long liued in 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (and yet but
yoong) in so much that by the common consent of the
whole inhabitants, nothing was more talkt off, prouided
for, nor more diligentlie waited on then those

loyall louers of no small authoritie,Pride and Leacherie caused by Plaiers. named Fastus
and Luxuria. The one hath reigned Rector, since the
first foundation of that blessed building. The other as
Ladie of the world, (in that Pallace best beséeming
hir state) striueth to rule in the hearts of most men,
This marriage determined by Destinie,The diuell is adored as God amongst them, whome they make their idoll as the Isralits did by their golden calfe in Horebbe or rather by
the infernall powers, 
                  〈◊〉
                there rule all, and serue for
Calues to worship in Horebbe, was began by Mischéefe
(one of the states of that Stage) and shall end
by Beggerie, that hath alreadie obteined the reuertion
of that office, so time the ender of all things hath
concluded.
            Which when I viewed, with great desire to beholde
the end (as the seaf
                  ••
               ing Sailer séeing himselfe
in danger to lose his life▪ 
               
                  •
                wisheth himselfe at his voiage
end.) So sought I (for feare I should sinke) to get
me from this painefull Pallace, yet loth to leaue it till
time led me to the finall conclusion I determined (as I
liked the chéere) to take part of the banket. Which I
will describe in such order as I found it.
            And first to shew you how finelie the Ladie trickt vp
hir selfs to méet the Bridegrome in the chappell Adulterinum,
               They thinke their buildings so strong, that God cannot destroie them.
firmelie built for falling, vnderpropt with pillers
that Sampson cannot bend: néere adioining to

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , least the Bride should wet hir féet in going too
farre, whose nicenesse in the morning I may not omit.
            Rising from hir bed of Securitie, hanged with Curtins
of Carelesnes,Lecherie spendeth hir time, in thinking best to please. with valances of Uanitie, she dressed
hir head with such costly Calles, Earings, Iewels,
Per
                  •
               wigs & Pearls, as if for varietie of attire, she had
a store house of trumperie. Nor was there any thing
left vndone, but that which should be doone. Amongst ye
rest to make hir séeme more amiable to hir best beloued
shée painted hir faire face wt spots of shadowed modestie:
not frō 
               Apelles shop, whose colours are coūterfeit,
nor yet from Zeuxes famous in portratures. But sent

from Proserpina wife to Pluto. A welwisher to this
wedlocke: better coulours then Psyches carried to
Venus quicklie decaied, but these last longer then they
should. After shée had hanged at hir eares manie costlie
fauours of follie farre set from the Indians of Anglia,
               Wherein is noted the pride that is caused by plaiers, the beholders framing themselues to their leude life.
she embrodered hir haire with embossed brouches of
beastlie desire, then gazing in hir glasse of vaineglorie,
shée concluded as fine as may be.
            Hir handmaid Concupiscence readie to attend the
pleasure of hir Ladie, cloathed hir in a coate of Sattin
of subtiltie, when shée séemed vnto hir selfe a second
Narcissus, for beautie, fauour, and louelie lookes. Shée
loued not to be praised, for that was vaine, if Concupiscence
had said Iupiter in hi
                  •
                deitie might behold hir,
then might you decerne the shamelesse bloud striue to
appeare in hir immodest face.
            Now wanted there nothing that this Ladie might
be led (as the custome is of brides) to the chappell Adulterinum,
               The Theater & Curtine may aptlie be termed for their abhomination, the chappell Adulterinum.
               
but onelie this: shée wished for some of
Medeas charmes, that she might continuallie be young
for the loue of hir Lord. Now goeth shée led to the chappell
by secure sufferance, Licentia enim fenestram ad nequitiam
aperit. Where we will leaue the bride attending
the comming of hir Lord. And returne to describe
the manner of his state.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                could hardlie conteine the magnificence of
this mightie man, had it not béene determined by the
prouident appointers, who wiselie foresawe that the
maiestie of the place, agréeing with the state of this
marriage,Men are verie easilie seduced to wickednesse. was fit to receiue them. For as the
statelie Piramides in Greece, as the adamant drewe
men with desire from farre to behold the same. So no
lesse famous for report of practise, cunning in all things
and brauerie of building, is the castell of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
Whether men striue to go first to possesse a place to behold
their pageants.
            
               
This King (as I may terme him) for that he raigneth
ouer the harts of most men, to immitate Mars,
               Pryde raigneth as a king ouer the harts of mē. to
whom sometimes hee sent his seruice: thought it best
in compleat Armor richlie wrought in martiall maner
to march to the Chappell. Then againe he séemed not
so content,The variable minde of pryde, how he may be best attyred to please. but in milder maner in honor of Hymaeneus
to carry Torches by day light, to adde (as he thought)
more glorie to the day. This mis
                  •
               ikt him more then
the rest, béeing ye common custome of euery Swaine to
offer Incense to Hymaeneus But this in coniecture better
fitted his purpose, to imitate Pyrithous with cups
of wyne to honor Bacchus, and to sprinckle the Chappell
with y• sweet sacrifice. But that in a while séemed
too prophane, and better befiting the Country Chorle.
            Whilst thus he bethought himselfe, crauing counsel
of his confederates,Chiefly to please his Lady Lechery, he thus cont
                     •
                  
                  ded with himselfe. to solemnize his marriage with as
much honor as might be. As well to please the brauerie
of his bryde, as to féede his priuate humor, there
crept into his head this conceit. It was not thought amisse,
amongst them, for that Venus was the Goddesse,
they did most adore Sceleratis Dea, pijs verò D
                     •
                  mon.
Though (least séeming too carped) they sometimes called
on Mars to carry Cupid on their shoulders: adding
thereby honor to Venus.
               Lust lyueth and flourisheth amongst Players. As the Apul
                     •
                  ians vsed to carry
theyr lying Goddesse Syria, to deceiue the people
with vaine prophesies, which accordingly was straight
performed.
            For this noble Lord, béeing mounted on his statelie
Courser, nothing inferior to Bucephalus, he rode with
no lesse royaltie, then when Aeneas hunted with Dido,
sauing that his Dido was not present, béeing otherwise
busied in the Chappell Adulterinū, set forward
to the same place, this manner they obserued to carrye
theyr God.Lust is honored as a God.
            
            First they caused some Lysippus to carue him out of

Alablaster, so exquisite as might be. Phidias sette colours
vpon his face, best fitting their fancie. Then they
caused him to be cloathed in light Taffata 
                  •
               tte for carriage,
in collour white, though some what different frō
the Gods condition.
            Next Curiositie crowned him with Mirtle, made
in a Garland,They offer theyr soules as Sacrifice to lust. stuck full of Roses, and waxed his wings
with Oyle of Narde, and Spike of the swéetest sauour:
in the one hand he carryed a Darte, in the other a firebrand,
whereby they present the puissance of his power.It raigneth but in the harts of wicked men.
This God by the greater, is but limitted his authoritie.
Malorum nisi animos occupat. Further he claimes
no title of gouernment. But these men liue in his land
and therefore must be ruled by hie might, yéelding hys
Image the honour due to hys person,They are superstitious. they caryed thys
God vpon theyr shoulders to the Chappell. To honour
whose comming,Drummes and Trumpets to calmenne to Plaies. the Banners were displayed, the
Drummes strooke vppe, and the Trumpets sounded.
            Béeing now in the Chappell, the Bridegrome shewed
that curtesie to his Bride, which the custome craued.
Then clarkly Confusion knitte them in one, and
married this couple together, insomuch that they are
no longer two,Take away the cause and the effect ceaseth. but one, continually to inhabit ye courtly
Castle of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the fée simple whereof they holde
as long as the building lasteth. But pull downe their
building,Sathan woulde not haue hys members cut off. and theyr honor decayeth. Therefore beware
to offend the Serpent by hurting his head.
            Béeing thus wedded together, with all the pompe
that might bee, and honour expedient for such an
exployt, with wine of the best in the honor of Bacchus,
Wafers for Ceres, Laurell for Apollo, Torches for
Hymaeneus, and Cupid for Venus. Least hee shoulde
séeme partiall in his Sacrifice to dedicate his seruice to
one, and not to all: And so purchase displeasure of some
of the Gods. With this manner of reuerence he returned
to his Castle. Where I must shewe you the rest

that remaineth.
            By this time Fame (that bringeth abroad secrets
digged from the very depth of darknes) had manifested
to most menne the manner of this marriage, and proclaimed
as well the estate, as then vnknowne, as the
future happines should therby insue,Players by sticking of their bils in Londō, defile the streetes with their infectious filthines. so farre foorth that
the stréetes of Terralbon were stuck with their bylles,
and almost euery post was a witnes to these pompous
procéedings. Which doone, the nature of most menne
béeing desirous of nouelties, and gréedy of newes. Like
heardes of Goates they flocked with desire to féede in
that pleasaunt pasture, where like young Kiddes they
wantonly disported themselues in these pleasant Meadowes,Most mē thinke theyr pleasure will not turne to payne.
and grazing tenderly on the Gréene grasse, they
déemed it rather a Celestiall Paradise then an habitation
of hell houndes. Such is the nature of man, to call
good euill, and euill good.Folly so bleareth mens eyes, that they take playes to be profounde Scripture. Then Folly that stretcheth
forth her winges to shaddow the sences of the besotted,
to the intent that their swollen eyes should not beholde
theyr deformed mindes: chose out pathes, erected places,
and built Skaffoldes in 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for hys darlings
to behold these daintie deuises. When they preparing
theyr thirstie eares,Playes make mē sin against theyr owne soules. enclyning to harken to the
trompe of Defame, were soone sommonde to the perill
of this place, and addressed in compleat sin to beare
Armes against theyr owne soules. Where humaine
mindes might easilie behold Uertue dismembred,Vertue is defaced amongst Plaiers. her
Towers throwne downe, her bulwarks battered, her
walls wasted, her stately buildings beatē downe with
these barbarous minded mates: her Trées bereft of
leaues, and now against Nature inhabited rather by
beasts of the field, and foules of the ayre, then by the
mindes of men, such enmitie is there sworne betwéene
Uertue and Follie.
            But nowe returne we to our former charge, to tell
without tediousnes the brauery of theyr banquet. By

thys time were they returned to theyr Castle, no ceremonie
ouerslipt behoofull for the same.The exercise that some practise at Playes. Where with
amorous embracings, loouing lookes, and swéete salutations
the Bryde & Bridegroome gréeted one an other.
Like as Mars when he hadde beene wearied with warlike
exployts, vsed to entertaine his Lady Venus, when
contrary to theyr lyking vnlookt for, they were taken
in a Nette. No lesse was theyr loue.
            After setting themselues downe in a Chayre of vnchaste
thoughts, hande in hand they beganne to parle,
whose secret talke as vnnecessary or immodest I omit,
but let them iudge that know and meane to admonish
themselues by this Mirrour.The honor they owe to lust. The Parlour of payne
was prouided for them and theyrs, there to feast till
they surfetted, to drinke till Bacchus bidde them stay,
and to disport themselues in honor of Cupid, whose Image
was erected in a place of purpose built, paynted
with coy conceits, and couered with costly colours.
Which place béeing somewhat néere a windowe,How God laugheth to scorne the folly of these menne. was
sometime shaken with a Northren wynde, when the
God made them admire by hys moouing, whether hée
were discontent, desirous to be amongst them, or wyth
hys nodding silence by signes chéered his seruaunts.
            Their seruaunts, with no lesse diligence then beséemed
theyr obedience,These are doore keepers, & boxeholders at Playes Tartara is taken for hell. prouided for the banquet such rare
confections as theyr Lorde and Ladye were wonte to
loue, who béeing sette at theyr Table Tartara, compact
by a cunning Carpenter, with theyr fréends fickle folly,
leude laughter, and filthy fornication, were serued
as foloweth.
            A crue of counterfait companions, such as sometimes
were banisht the Theaters at Rome, for presenting
the vilenes of Venetian Curtizans,Players were banished frō Rome for theyr beastlie enormities. with theyr
wanton words, and paltry parasites with Apish toyes,
were appoynted to serue in thys balefull banquer, to
please the better, as wel to dissemble disposition as outwarde

habit:How they transforme themselus so far to the condition of euerie man, that there is no vice but they are well seene i
                     •
                   the same. some trans-formed themselues to Roges,
other to Ruffians, some other to Clownes, a fourth to
fooles, in the fift place Louers and Leachers, nor feared
the wyldie Woolfe to play fast and loose with the Lyon
in the wyldernes of these brutish Beastes. So well
these loyterers liked these pleasant pastimes, yt in short
time they grewe exquisite in these exercises, and singuler
in these subtill sleights, as if in derision of nature to
scoffe theyr maker, they were more cunning then their
Creator. The Roges were ready, the Ruffians were
rude,Players ought not amidst 
                     〈◊〉
                   folly present the persons of Princes. theyr Clownes cladde as well with Country condition,
as in Ruffe russet, theyr Fooles as fonde as
might be, theyr Louers and Leachers leude at the least
sauing that the Woolfe marde hys imitation with the
Lyons clawe, whose skynne payd ransome for his sawcie
spéeche.
            Fyrst Presumption cloathed inaspyring Purple,
brought in a dayntie dysh of damnable desires, and set
it on the Table Tartara. Next Contempt brought in
conficts of continuall care,Their counterfaite cogging. with counterfeit curtesie of
an humble hart. Hi enim externa specie sunt humiles animis
verò fastidiosi.
               The manner of theyr balefull banquet
                     •
                  e. Then followed Subtiltie with sucket
of sighes, and shamefull sorrowes, thus followed
they, till in order euery dishe, after the best manner
that might, was solemnely sette before thys company,
with such cost, as the like in Terralbon hath not often
béene séene.
            Then drinking of the wyne of forgetfulnes,Playes make thē forgette GOD. which
séemed vnto them more swéete then Nectar, and farre
more pleasant then Manna from Heauen, to digest the
diuersitie of theyr daintie dyshes, they tempered theyr
tongues, and outward gesture with such talke, that
theyr action might be vniforme to the rarenes of theyr
banquette, which was such, and so great together, with
the coniunction of this couple,Sathan reioyceth at the wickednes that the Ruler of the infernall
powers, Pluto himselfe conceyued such ioye

thereat, that he deuised by what meanes hee might best
congratulate these loyal Louers, thereby to expresse
howe well he likt of thys wedlock.
            
               Proserpina put into hys head, the wonted custome
of worldlings. That when Loue linked any together,
theyr study was to consummate theyr mariage wyth
Maskes,Common enormities at weddings when the espoused ought to reioyce in GOD. mummeryes, and other such shewes, as might
cause lyking in the Louers, and bréede a continuall content
in the beholders. Shée therefore counselled pluto
to send to Fastus and Luxuria,
               They cloak theyr villany with visards of good pretence. a Maske 
                  •
               hose from the
most famous fellowes of all hys dominion, with visards
to vale theyr vices, and apparell to couer theyr
deformed conditions.
            Thys séemed so pleasing to pluto, that with hys
Charmed Mace, wherewith hee inflicts the guilty conscience
of his carelesse creatures, from the déepest dungeons,
and hollow va
                  •
               tes of hys infernal prison, béeing
bound with the Chaynes of dyrefull Death,The reward of wickednes. with
a maiestie no lesse terrible then to be trembled at, with
a voyce as when the wynde entred the vautie and hollow
earth, with roaring noyse, ouerturnd the presumptuous
Tower of Babell,
               The deuill ruled the harts of those mē that builded the Towre of Babell. erected to dare the King of
Kinges, and to viewe the reache of hys raygne. Hee
called hys Porter wyth hys thréefolde barke, whose
commaund béeing at a becke, caused hym forthwyth to
obey, to whom he gaue the keyes of hys pittilesse pryson,
to sette at liberty for a season, these Maskers that
ensue.
            Thys dyrefull Dogge, whose triple head was to be
feared of the beholders, was of no lesse force in his regiment,The fearefulnes of hell.
then the head of the Monster Gorgon, that
trans-formed the beholders into a stone. Who taking
the keyes gyuen to hys charge by hys Lorde and maister,
entred the Dungion where 
                  •
                damned soules were
inflicted wyth vnspeakeable torments.
            First opening a vastye vaute of huge, and massye

substaunce, whose stincke was able to infecte a mortall
man, repleate with lothsome wormes, and hidious
Serpents, with venemous Snakes and hyssing Adders,
with foule blacke swealth and foggy mist, forming
a Chaos of congered substaunce, ouer which
flyeth no Foule but presently dyeth with the infectious
stinck of this hidious hole,Idlenes is the roote of mischiefe, and therefore deserueth a torment in hell. he called forth Idlenes, from
his boyling Caldron of insatiate liquor, thereunto enioyned
by sathan himselfe for rewarde of his wickednes,
in whose steppes, who so treades, shalbe pertaker
of his payne, whose woe neuer wasteth, whose care
consumes, but neuer endes. Such is the payne of Idlenes,
the roote of mischiefe, and originall of vices, from
whence the rest, somewhat inferior to this, doo budde
and blowe, whose nature I must describe, to the intent
you may the better iudge of the iustnes of hys
reward, and inflicted torment.
            Diuine Plato,
               The description of Idlenes. amongst all other of hys learned
lessons (for which he deserueth to be honored of al ages)
hath bréefely sette foorth, to al such as meane to be warned
by his wysedome. That no idle person meriteth any
good reward, wherein he iustly reprooueth such, as
reicecting the care of vertue, and refusing paynes (which
must be endured before wee can obtayne the possession
of wysedome, and honor) doo gyue themselues ouer to
idlenes, and couet rather to walke in the open & broade
pathe of pleasure (the ende whereof is wretched misery▪
deceiued with the false delight of a poysoned swéet)
then to follow the hard and narrowe way of Uertue,
conducting them to the plotte of ioy and heauenly happines.
Pythagoras Y might warne men to auoyde such
folly.Idlenes maketh a man forget God▪
                But the infection of this vice is so contagious,
that as the Ryuer Laethes maketh hym that drynketh
therof, presentlie to forget his own condition & former
déedes, so this damnable vice of idlenes, so besotteth the
sences, and bewitcheth the myndes of menne,

as they remembred not the profitable fruites of vertuous
labor.The idle manne deserueth no rewarde. Nor will sée that ye bitternes of Gall maketh
the taste of Honny more pleasaunt. The cowardly
Souldier that feareth to skale his enemies Forte, deserueth
not any part of the spoyles. Nor wyll reason
consent that the sléeping Senator, shall according to the
Romaine custome, be crowned with Laurell. Iustice,
in token that she hateth Idlenes (whose blindnes might
excuse leasure) is painted with a payre of ballaunce in
one hand, exercised with waights, a sword in the other
to cut downe vice, and abal at her féete to exercise those
partes, thereby noting that no parte of Uertue shoulde
be secure.
            So hatefull was this vice to Heathen Princes,Idlenes was hated amongst Heathen meane. that
liued in former ages, that the Emperor Domitian was
sayd to catch Flyes. The Persian Kinges sometimes
shaued sticks. And Phillip of Macedon, fearing hee
should be ouercome with sléepe, had continually a ball
of brasse in his hand, with a bason by of the same mettall,
that when forgetfulnes caused him to sléepe, hys
nodding head forcing the ball from his hande, hée was
thereby awaked, so hatefull séemed idlenes to this puissaunt
Prince.
            Surely the prouidence of God manifesteth howe sorely
he is displeased with idlenes,The idle man is punished with ignorance, beggery and a miserable ende. when as he punisheth
such as delight therein with ignoraunce, beggerie,
and a miserable ende. But contrariwise, howe
much he tendereth such as are addicted to vertuous studie,
it appeareth,Diligēce is crowned with vnderstanding. in that he crowneth them with vnderstanding
and honor. This is the guerdon of warie
diligence, that, the rewarde of blinde and lothsome
sloth.
            What mooued Lycurgus to make a Law,Lycurgus lawe against idlenes. that no
youth in Lacedemon, shoulde receiue any sustenaunce,
before he had giuen account to haue doone some worke
profitable to the common wealth. But because he abhorred

idlenesse,Themistocles renowned for his vertuous labour. as the spoile of yoong men, and nursse
of wickednesse? What made Themistocles so renowned,
but bicause he could net sleepe quietlie in the
night, for desire he had to trauaile for the increase of honour
and knowledge.
            Euen as in the games of Olympia none receiued
any reward of glorie,The Games of Olympia ordeined rewards for labour. but such as fought manfullie.
And as the lasie husbandman lurking at home, and
leauing his ground vntild, hath for his reward in har
               
                  •
               est
nought else but wéedes and brambles.The lasie husbandman gathereth weeds. Or as the
Merchant, who to lead a secure life at home, neuer
ventereth the danger of the seas abroad, maketh small
gaine of his marchandize: so idlenesse weakeneth the
sences and members of men,Idlenesse neuer profiteth his countrie. that they shall neuer be
able to profit their countrie or themselues, either by
conquest to get renowne, by sowing the ground, to
reape desired profit, or by venturing their liues on the
seas, inritch their cosers, and increase their credit. For
he that delighteth in the swéete sauor of Roses, must
not refuse them bicause of their prickels.
            Consider if Aristotle had giuen his minde to idlenesse,Aristotle by learning and labour came to honor.
hée had neuer ascended to so high a degrée of learning
and honour, as to be tearmed Princeps Philosophorum,
Cicero had neuer deserued to be called Pater
Patriae, but by shunning idlenesse.Cicero was called the father of his countrie. Remember what
honour poore Cleanthes got,Cleanthes diligence. who all night accustomed
to carrie water, that in the daye he might haue maintenance
to studie the liberall Sciences.
            How came Alexander to be conqueror of the world,
but by flying idlenesse? Idlenesse might haue hindered
Hercules in accomplishing his haughtie and honourable
labours? But that his manlie brest was neuer possest
with such an ignoble mind. Vlisses detesting the
delaies of idlenesse, in a moment finished the ten years
warre betwixt the Graecians and the Troians. Apelles
had neuer prooued so cunning a Painter, if he had

not euerie day drawne a line with his pensile, Wiselie
therefore said the Gréekes, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               Quisquis en
                     •
                  m dur
                     •
                  s casus virtu
                     •
                   is amore
               Vicere
                     •
                  ,The Gods sell honor for labor. Ille sibi laudemque decusque parabit.
               At qui Desidiam luxumque seq
                     •
                  etur 
                     •
                  nertem.
               Dam fugit opposi
                     •
                  os, incauta m
                     •
                  nte, labores
               Turpis in
                     •
                  psque si
                     •
                  ul miserabile transigit aeuum.
            
            How accurssed then are those who neither diswaded
with the examples of times passed, nor deterred with
the view of our owne age, ouergrowne with this vi
                  •
               e
like a fertile péece of ground, for want of wéeding choked
with tares, will not themselues too good in
the commonwealth,The nature of the currish dog. but séeke by their vitious example
to defile other. As the Dog whose currish nature will
neither permit the sillie horsse to eate haye, nor yet
himselfe féed in the manger
                  •
                such horsses would be
bound with chaines to Plough in the furr
                  •
               wes of Labor,
or else their bodies taught to indure paines on the
earth, to saue themselues frō Idlenesse torture in hell.
            Of which sort of men (the more to be lamented)
are these Players,Plaiers are ministers of Idlenesse. who doo not onelie exercise themselues
in all kind of Idlenesse, but minister occasion to
manie to incurre the like, if then (as sure it is) idlenesse
be the root of euill, and these men the root of Idlenesse,
it were pittie but such a root should be fuell for the fier,Commit the roote to the fier.
to the intēt the branches may florish no longer. Therfore
séeing Idlenesse is so vile a vice, and so much detested
both in the sight of God and man, as the onelie
enimie to vertue,The iust punishment of Idlenesse. vniustlie was hée not punished in
that boyling lake, and filthie fórnace of all abhomination,
to whose description I must returne againe, to
set foorth his miserie agréeable to his merit, and place
him the chéefe masker in this marriage before spoken
of. Whose shape must néeds,Idlenesse couer
                     •
                   his deformitie. in respect if marcheth amongst
men, hauing some vale to couer his deformitie

least being easilie decerned, it be not so well allowed,
especiallie, since that the nature of men (though not so
soone deceiued) with plaine inormities) is quick
                  •
               lie seduced
with coloured pretences,This maske
                     •
                   must haue a vi
                     •
                  ard. and as these maskers
(as custome requireth) cease not to séeke the fairest visards
to couer their foule faces, the better to smoothe
the poison that lurketh in their minds:Honest recreatiō is a visard for Idlenesse. So Idlenesse
least his filthie spots should bewraye the foulenesse of
his face, dooth couer the same with the vizard of Honest
recreation,Plaiers are ministers of Idlenesse. so farre, that minds seduced by selfe-will
to ignorance, can hardlie say this is Idlenesse. As if it
shold be said Plaies are Honest recreation, and therefore
plaiers are not ministers of Idlenesse. They that
persecuted Christ and his members were not idle, but
how well imploide let reuerent minds cenceiue.The Temple of God defiled. The
money changers that made the temple of God a den of
théeues, were not idle. Sathan when he tempted Christ
was not idle. They that stoned Steuen were not idle,
but farre better had it beene for these men to haue slept
securelie in their droonken desires, armed in idlenesse,
then to haue bin ministers of such monstrous matters.
For far better is it to sléepe with Peter, then to wake
with Iudas: to be dronke with Lot, then busied with
Dinah: to be gazing with Dauid on the top of a Tower,
though Bethsaibe causd him to sin, then with Caine
to incur the wrathfull indignation of the Almightie.
            If these men then (though they be not idle) be ill imploid,Their honest recreation is prooued cusled damnation.
what is their honest recreation, but curssed damnation,
when they wake with Iudas, dallie with Dinah,
and kill with Caine, practising all things prohibited
by the lawes of God, and disanulled by nature hir
selfe, then must we néeds conclude, that this visard is
counterfeit like the cormorant O
                     •
                  teriche, whose feathers
are faire, but hir flesh rancke, what other thing
is Idlenesse then, but the roote of euill, and originall
of sinne, & this visard of so curssed a masker, counterfeit

to couer deformitie, flie therefore this as most damnable,
that as a deceitfull seducer.Flie Idlenesse.
            
            Idlenesse masking after this maner, with all things
necessarie prouided by his maister, especiallie not forgetting
his visard of honest Recreation, is appointed
formost, as well deserues his dignitie.Flatterie comes from hell, being the second masker. Next from a
lake, little inferior in lothsomnesse to the other, this
porter fetcht Flatterie, to place him the second in the
same charge, which Idlenesse had vndertaken, whose
plague was little inferior to the other, especiallie, considering,
that he was a branche sprong from the same
tr
                  •
               e,Flatterie a brāch of Idlenesse. for what other thing may we expect then impossibilitie,
to gather Grapes of Thornes, or Figs of Thistels,
the taste of this frute depriuing a man of his sences,
I will set downe physicke for him which hath alreadie
tasted thereof, and admonitions to the willing
to eschue the same.
            Of all the stinking wéeds that choke swéet flowers
growing in the garden of a florishing commonwealth.The description of flatterie.
I find none sooner rooted nor more p
                  •
               stilent then the
sensuall séed of flatterie, whose branches spred, and are
nourished with the moist sappe of traiterous deuises,The faire shew of Flatterie.
whose leaues are fresh and gréene, and whose blossoms
ga
                  •
               e and gorgious to dazle their eyes, which peraduenture
might decerne the secret poison & hidden harmes,
that lurketh vnder the deadlie shadowe of so beautifull
a trée. The fruits whereof in outward shew pretend
loue,The nature of Flatterie. and by the swéet melodie of sugred words, banish
all feare of mistrust, but inwardlie they are filled with
hatred, contempt, and vnnaturall reuenge.
            Flatterie, by his golden pretence of vnfaigned affection,
entrappeth the simple, betraieth the innocent,
corrupteth iustice, and peruerteth the wise, and good
disposition to vnciuill brutishnesse. What may be more
contrarie to the ground of humaine societie (which is
faith in words and constancie in our déeds) then this

pernitious vice of Flatterers, which séeme to be that
they are not, and are that they séeme not to be, whose
face is fréendlie, whose toong deceitfull, and whose lips
are smoothe to giue kisses with Iudas.
               Iudas kisses seeme freendlie. What shaddoweth
vice with the colour of vertue but flatterie? what
maketh men suppose themselues in surest safetie (when
they are in greatest danger)Flatterie shadoweth vice with the colour of vertue. but fawning Parasites?
what vrgeth to securitie a soule drowned in sinne, but
the pleasant baite of flatterie? what disquieteth the
peaceable estate of a countrie well gouerned, but
hearkening to a glosing toong? what pricketh the desire
of youth to be lewde, but soothing Subtiltie? what
is the spoile of so manie godlie matrones and chaste
virgins, but rash trust to flie, and subtill dealings.
            But it maye be hée which is well furnished with
this damnable qualitie,Flatterie a Gnatonical
                     •
                   exercise and whose delight consisteth
onelie in flatterie, will obiect, that by this Gnatonicall
kind of exercise, his calling is eleuated, his credit aduanced,
and his wealth well augmented, therefore the
best kind of fowling. Oh hainous practises, oh diuelish
opinion, and oh thrice curssed man, which in contempt
of God and his lawe, studieth to thriue by losse of his
owne soule.
            In vaine is the building where the Lord is not the
foundation, haplesse are those attempts, that are not
measured by the line of Grace, and curssed is the séed
sowne in iniquitie. For the Lord is truthe it selfe,
and such as resist the truthe, resist the high maiestie of
God.The reward of the simple. Happie then are the simple, whose waies are
righteous, whose heart abhorreth flatterie and deceit,
him the Lord shall annoint with that precious oyle of
Aaron, and on his head powre downe the heauenlie
dew of euerlasting felicitie, his trée shall be planted by
the water side, his leafe shall neuer wither, and his
fruite continuallie 
                  ••
               rish.
            
               
Let vs therefore beware of such pernitious Gnatonists,
               Admonition to beware.
who taking vs fréendlie by the one hand, haue in
the other a naked blade to shed our bloud, and smiling
in our faces, séeke to betraie our soules, farre woorsse
I iudge them then open enimies, for of these we may
beware, the other we feare not.
            Touching which point I hepe it shall not séeme absurd,
to rehearse a pleasant fable, the words whereof
(though fained) yet the effect presenteth a sence of true
meaning.
            The Sheapheard s
                  •
               metime (belike wearied with
his charge,A fable of a secr
                     •
                  t enimy vnder pretence of friendship. and desirous to recreate his paine with
some pleasure) committed the kéeping of his flocke to
the diligent suruey of his Dogge, whome bicause he
thought a profitable seruant, he fed euerie daie with
good meat, but the Dogge like a currish creature, not
content with his fare at home, oft times spoiled a
shéepe abroad, the better to satisfie his insatiat appetite,
which the Sheapheard perceiuing, contrarie to his
woonted manner, not like a fréend but a foe, came and
would haue hanged him.
                  
                     •
                  latteries 
                     •
                  mooth tale. Alas quoth the Dogge why
are you desirous to destroye me, I am your fréend, and
one of your houshold seruants, rather extend such crueltie
on the Woolfe, who dailie lyeth in waite to deuoure
your flocke by me vigilantlie protected,A flatterer hurting priuilie, is woorse then an open enimie. nay sayd
the Sheapheard, I déeme thée more worthie death,
for his déeds declare him to be my open enimie, but
thou vnder the coulour of fréendship, and deceitfull diligence,
doost euerie day diminish my shéepe.
            Hereby may we decer
                  •
               e, that farre more heinous
is theyr faulte, and greater their punishment, which
vnder pretence of humaine curtesie, doo vs iniurie.
We see then that all is not golde that glistereth, nor
euerie one to be estéemed a fréend that speaketh faire,
the deadest water hath the déepest chanell, from the

finest Flower is gathered as well poison as Honye.The teares of the Crocodyle▪
               
The pittifull teares of the dissembling Crocodyle, are
quickelie turned to outrage and sauage crueltie. So
flattering mates, carrie Suger in their mouthes, and
Gall in their hearts,The flatterie of the Crocodyle. their teares are full of tyrannie,
and theyr sighes seasoned with barbarous seueritie.
            They cleaue to the coates of highest in authoritie,Flatterers are like Iuie.
not vnlike the Iuie, which créepeth vp the bodye
of the mightie Oke, and being come vnto the toppe
thereof, ouershadoweth his boughes with his twined
branches.
            The many mischéefes that insue by flatterie, would
fill whole volumes, and my skill vnable to decipher
them. Yet that the weakest capacitie maye conceiue
how mortall the effect is of so vile a cause. I iudge it
not impertinent to vnfolde an example or two of ancient
memorie.
            If the flattering toong of subtile Synon,
               Synons subtiltie confounded Troye. had béene
cut off, before it song swéet hermonie of pleasing tales,
into the eares of the credulous Troians, then had that
famous Cittie neuer felt the force of fire, then had
not the sillie men, like Sheepe béene slaughtered
in theyr beds, nor then had not the flourishing estate
of aged Pryamus béene crossed with a miserable
ende.
            If Aristippus famous in that Arte,Aristippus a flattering Philosopher. had béene banished
the Courte and confines of Cor
                     ••
                  th, then had
not the noble mind of Dionifyus béene infected with so
great tyrannie, whose hands still bathed themselues
in the bloud of guiltlesse soules.Flatterie corrupteth the minds of Princes. For flatterie corrupteth
the mindes of Princes, dismembreth their authoritie,
and wasteth theyr treasure. We reade
that Thymon a Noble man of Athens,
               Thymon, miserable by Flatterie. who by enterteining
a crew of soothing seruants, became

of a wealthie courtier, a poore labourer.
            
               Antisthenes that learned Philosopher,Antisthenes his opinion of Flatterers. was woont
to saye, that he had rather haue croking Rauens in
the house with him, then clawing Parasites, for Rauens
saide hée deuoure but the dead carcase, but flatterers
eate vp bodie and soule aliue.Crassus murdered by the flatterie of Carenus. Crassus was murthered
amongst the Parthians by flattering Carenus,
Brutus and Cassius that soothed Caesar in all his actions
were the first men that wounded him in the Senate.
            
               Thimandra the harlot by hir alluring inticementsThimandra ouer came Alcibiades a vertuous Prince by flatterie.
reteined that noble and vertueus Prince Alcibiades
so long in hir companie, that his enimies so néere approached,
as they set fire on the house wherein he lay
                  •
               
luld in the lap of that filthie strumpet, and then constreined
vnarmed to venture foorth, was without resistance
murdered.
            But this wéede should quicklie wither, and this
sect be soone defaced,Princes must punish flatterers. if Princes would punish them,
Nobles reiect them, and generallie all men abhorre
them.
            The wise Prince Augustus the emperor so much detested
flatterie,Augustus detested flatterie. that he loathed anye of his seruants
should knéele vnto him. Tyberius would not be called
Lord,Tyberius abhorred flatterie. for feare such titles of dignitie should puffe
vp his mind,Cato Censor banished flatterers. and fill him with ambition. Cato Censor
banished from Rome certeine Athenian Orators,
least by their pleasing spéeches they might peruert the
people.Tymagoras punished for flatterie. Notable is that example of Tymagoras, who
being sent Ambassador to King Darius, for that he flattered
him, was at his returne beheaded by his owne
countrimen.
            Let vs therefore arme our selues against the damnable
enticinges of these hellish féendes,Vlisses policie to suoide flatterie. with the wyse
regard of prudent Vlisses, (who for feare least he shold

be mooued with the pleasant harmonie of singing Syrens,
bound himselfe and his Mates, to the mast of their
Shippe. And let vs inuent such remedies, to preuent
the deceypt of these Flatterers, as we reade that young
Egiptian did,The young Egiptian refelled flattery. whose witte and gracious demeanour,
obtained s
                  •
               ch fauour in the sight of Valerius, that persecutor
of Christians, that béeing loth to spill his bloode,
and hauing assayed all meanes possible to remooue the
fayth of Christ grounded in his hart, (but all in vaine)
at last caused a sumptuous Chamber to bee prepared,
with all kind of swéete sauours, and costly furniture, a
Bedde of Downe,The flattery of a Con
                     •
                  ubine. and Clothes richly wrought with
Golde, in which he placed him, and by his side, the fayrest
C
                  •
               ncubine in all his Courte, with her embracings
and swéete perswasions to alter his opinion: but hee,
séeing himselfe mightily assayled by the power of deadlie
delight,The Egiptian bitte of his owne tongue. least the frailety of flesh should assent, sodainly
bitte of his owne tongue, the intollerable gréefe
whereof, so quayled the heate of pleasure, that as before,
so still, he continued the faythfull seruaunt of hys
Sauiour.
            What is he then whose minde is not altogether
drenched in this puddle of sinne, séeing himselfe thus
endaungered to loose the libertie of his soule,Flatterers Sicophants. but wyll
sh
                  ••
               nne the snares of these flattering Sicophants, and
so whette their tong
                  •
               es with good admonitions, that
they shal be as sharpe Ares, to cutte downe those deadlie
braunches, and rather sende them to the fire, then
preserue them for building.
            Let the wyse then infence their mindes, with such
graue aduice, and bulwark theyr soules with godly examples,
that though Flattery be sent from sathan himselfe,Sathan a cruell enemie to man.
a cruell enemie to mankinde, yet hys force may
represent the weakenes of a Réede, with the breath of
ones mouth to be wagged euery way.
            Of which sorte of men are these Players, who

pynne Cushions vnder the elbowes of young wits,Players are flatterers. to
make them snorte in securitie, & present before theyr
eyes, as well in life as continuall exercise, such inchaunting
Charmes, and bewitched wyles, to alienate theyr
mindes from vertue,The inconuenience of Playes. that hard wyll it be for a wit well
stayde to abyde the same. But onely by this meanes to
eschew the cause, that the effect may cease, viewe not
theyr exercise, and then fall not to theyr vice, abandon
theyr presence, then ceaseth theyr power, blowe not
with the bellowes of desire,Sathan sendeth in vaine to the admonished. then ceaseth the furye of
theyr flame. That sathan may sende in vaine, and this
masking mate for all his visarde of humaine curtesie to
couer the pretence of his comming, be descerned by the
regard of reason.
            This damned féende, attyrde to bee the seconde in
thys Maske,Humaine curtesy the visarde of flattery. appointed to seduce mens seules, had for
hys Uysarde appointed humaine curtesie, the colloure
whereof is such, as would deceiue a good eye sight, yea
though be were skilled in the arte of paynting.
            How shall we then know this visarde to auoyde the
perill.Howe to descerne flattery frō curtesy & so to discouer his painted face. Thus compare the nature of flattery, and the
manners of humaine curtesie together, and then may
we easily descerne if they assent. Againe, flattery sayth
filthy fornication is but a youthfull delight, humaine
curtesie admonisheth vs, and sayth it is damnable desire.
Flattery sayth, that murder is a mind impatient
of wrong,Flattery vpholdeth wickednes. humaine curtesie saith, God hath abhorred it
from the beginning. Flattery saith Playes are pleasaunt,
honest,Playes are per
                  
                     •
                  itious. and allowable, humaine curtesie sayth,
Playes are pernicious, vile, and reprochefull.
            Such is the nature of flattery, and such is the
condition of humaine curtesie: Let then secureles
menne say, that humaine curtesie is but a couert for
flattery, and that flattery so vailde is playne hipocrisie,
thus may it be descerned, vice, and vertue, flattery and

humaine curtesie be two contraries.
            Easily then is white discerned from blacke,To descerne the one frō the other a vile
offence from a godly pretence, saluation from damnation,
and flattery from humaine curtesie. Let the
eyes then be 
                  •
               essengers to the hart, and say flattery is
crowned with curtesie,The falshood of flattery. the Woolfe lurketh in the
skynne of the 
                  •
               illye Lambe, to deceiue the shéepe
                  ••
               lde
of Christ.
            The next that was déemed fitte to possesse a place
in thys Pagea
                  •
               nt, was Ingratitude, whose manners
as monstrous, is accounted one of the deadlye
braunches of that reprobate roote,Cerberus bringeth Ingratitude from hell. whom Cerberus
(obseruing our course to continue) fetcht from hys
place, a puddle no lesse filthy then the reste, a hole hydious,
full of stincking vapours, tortures and torments
to inflict hys soule, and wormes of bitter ball to gnaw
hys conscience. Whose terriblenes was such, that
vnneth might mortall eyes be able to endure so sorrowful
a sight, allowing him the thyrd Masker to make vp
this melody, whose collours I must descry, to make
hym the better knowne to the worlde, that no vertuous
mynde bée ouer shadowed wyth so vile vice.
            Fréendshyppe, the bande wherewith menne are
lincked in loue,The description of Ingratitude. and knytte with a firme knott of loyall
fayth, the force wherof erecteth Common weales,
compasseth Citties, inuenteth Laws, and so tempereth
the nature and effects of menne, as they willingly submitte
themselues to the soueraignty of our supreme
Gouernour, hath no greater an aduersary then Ingratitude.
            For as the one gathereth together, so the other
scattereth abroade, as the one buildeth, so the other
causeth ruine, and vtter ouerthrowe. As the one is
the originall of good orders, so the other confoundeth
all thinges wyth disorder.
            
               
It so much restrayneth the power of Nature, which
is alwayes vpright, and indifferent, that it blindeth her
with a desire to cou
                  •
               t what may be hadde, and a negligent
regard what should be doone.Ingratitude hath the eyes of Argos. It hath the eyes of
Argos, to gase euery way for promotion, but blinde to
remember whence sprong preferment.Ingratitude hath the handes of Briarius. It hath the
handes of Briarius, ready to receiue commoditie, which
way soeuer it is offered, but like senceles partes benummed
when restitution is expected.
            Ingratitude with the Cormoraunt deuoureth all,
but féedeth n
                  •
               ne,Ingratitude like the Cormorant. loues to be pittied, yet hateth compassion,
béeing made happy, thinkes not on others miserie:
Exempt from mourning, sayeth none shed teares.
At liberty, forgetteth bondage: and aduaunced to authoritie,
disdaineth the meane condition of inferioritie.
Whose tyranny is such, as wyll affoords death for life,
hate for loue, and iniury for a benefite, fraude for faith,
and treason for trust.
            If we aske why so many Princes doo dayly exclaime
vpon Trayterous and disloyal Subiects,Princes exclaime on ingratitude. they wyll answere,
for ingratitude. If we demaund why the kinde
Parent breaketh his hart with sighes,The father exclaymeth on a thankles sonne. and consumeth
hys dayes in sorrow, hys aunswere wyl be, for a gracelesse
and vnthankfull Chylde. If wee séeke the cause
why Magistrates lament theyr labour,Citizens vnthankfull. it is for the vnthankfull
mindes of lewde Cittizens.
            Lastly, we may soone imagine what mooueth Masters
to repent theyr fauour showne towards vnthankfull
Seruaunts.Seruaunts vngratefull to their Maisters. But as he which forgetteth the benefite
of a good turne, reapeth no other fruite in his barren
fielde of ingratitude but hate, and reproche, so contrariwyse,
a minde detesting to be drowned in y• blacke
poole of Obliuion, receiueth the good rewardes of loue
and lasting honor.
            
               Cicero setting downe the ready way to happines,Cicero teacheth to be thankfull.
amongst such duties as are required in a perfect Man,

findeth none more necessary then to be thankfull. For
sayth he, if with Hesiodus we be commaunded to restore
such thinges as wee receiued for our owne vse,
with greater measure and more plenty, what shall w
                  ••
               
then doo, being prouoked by vndeserued curtesie?
            Ought we not like fruitfull groundes yéelde more
a thousand folde,The fruit of a gratefull minde. then we receiued? for if we doubt not
to expresse the loue of a willing hart, towardes those of
whom we hope for some benefit, how much more ought
we to be thankfull to those, which alreadye haue bountifully
pleasured vs, and by whom we haue béene great
lie profited. Two wayes are we sayd to be liberall in
giuing, and requi
                  •
               ing that which was gyuen. The
one consisteth in our owne power, the other no good
manne may neglect. Pernitious therefore is thys
monstrous ingratitude, & whatsoeuer he be, in whose
hart it is firmely established, and thorowly grounded,
he is farre inferior in glory, nature, or condition, to a
sauage and brutish Beast.An vngratefull man is worse thē a brutish beast. For as the venimous broode
of the Uiper, doth destroy her damne that did nourishe
her: or the cruel Tyger, that kylleth the olde Tygresse
that brought her to life,Ingratitude like to a Viper. so doth the vngratefull person,
not onely enuenome his benefactor or reléeuer, wyth
poysoned ingratitude, but likewise séeke to kill him
that saued his life, destroye him that nourished him,
and let him perrish for reliefe, that whilom saued him
from daunger.
            And as the vngratefull minde of the Snake (when
the Husbandman saued hys life from the Snow,The ingratitude of the husbandmans Snake. and
cherished him by hys fire, appeared by stinging hym
with hys venemous féeth: So, whatsoeuer he be, yt eyther
nourisheth an vngratefull man, or cherisheth him,
euē so far as life or death can extend, he wil requite him
wyth ill for hys good, and wyth despight for hys former
fauour.He is compared And to nothing better may an vngrateful man
be compared (though it be somewhat familiar) then to

a dogge,aptly to a dogge. that when his master offered him meate, for
rewarde bitte him by the fingers.
            Howe lothsome may thys vice appeare in the
Carthagenians,
               Carthagenians were vngratefull to Han
                     •
                  iball. who most vniustly, & against all good
descrte banished theyr noble and victorious Captaine
Hanniball (whose déedes, had he deserued death, had
béene sufficient to haue pleaded for life) by whose continuall
toyle in bloody conflicts, valiant exploytes, and
excelient atchieuings, euen from hys youth, increased
theyr confines, aduaunced theyr honor, endoubled theyr
dominions, and almost quite extinguished she furious
flame of theyr daring enemies the Romaines.
            And much doo I bewayle, that noble Emperour
Augustus Caesar,
               Augustus Caesar slayne in the Senate. who for all his gratious benefites,
plentifully powred vppon the Common wealth of
Rome, at last was recompenced by vile ingratitude,
wyth the reward of foure and twenty woundes, whose
damned daggers wyll wytnesse against their vngratefull
mindes.
            
               Rosilius,
               Rosilius cut the throat of Cicero that vile vngratefull wretch, whome
Cicero by the rhetoricall force of hys eloquence, hadde
fréed from the hate, and death pretended by the Lawes
of Rome, most villanously wyth hys owne hands, with
butcherly blade did cut hys aged throate.
            My hart lamenteth wyth remorse, to thinke howe
that Tyrant Nero,
               Nero butchered him mother and Scholemaister Seneca. spared not to bathe hys handes in
the luke-warme bloode first of his owne naturall mother,
& next of hys learned Maister Seneca, who was
alwaies ready by arte to haue suppressed his vice being
then but gréene, had not nature ordeined him to so damnable
a life.A pesaunt ready to execute Ca
                     •
                  o whose life he saued. Who was so ready to execute Cato Maior,
béeing by law condemned to die, for the supposed
death of the young Emperor Octauius, as that wretched
pesaunt, whose throate not long before he deliuered
from the strangling haltar.Cyclops killed king Ninus. No lesse monstrous
then the rest, was the vngratefull mind of Cyclops, bastarde

son to Ninus, king of Babilon, who hauing disinherited
his lawfull son and heire, (a Prince no lesse
vertuous then puissaunt) onely to crowne him King,
(and yt whilst nature yet permitted himselfe to raigne)
was afterwards by him, most trayterously murthered
in hys bedde. So soone had his aspiring mind vngratefully
forgot, hys duetie and allegiance to so gracious a
Soueraigne. But leaue we prophane Histories, and
looke a while into the sacred Booke of God, where wée
may consider the harror of this vice, by the manifolde
examples.
            The Isralites,
               The Isralites vngratefully tempted GOD. after our mighty God had deliuered
them from the bondage of Egypt, and guided them by
night with a Piller of fire, and in the day shadowed
them wyth a Clowde, deuiding the Seas for theyr
safe passage, raigning Manna from Heauen to féede
them, and sending streames of water out of the harde
Rockes, yet such was their ingratitude, as they not
onely forgetting hys gracious benefits, repined at hys
prouidence, but with theyr grudging mindes tempted
his diuine maiestie, for which, such was his wrathe
conceiued against theyr vnthankfulnes, that (but for
his seruaunt Moyses sake) he would worthily haue banished
them the Lande of promise.Dauid & Saul. After that Dauid
that kingly Prophet, and annoynted of God, had diuers
times so néerely approched the presence of his deadly
enemie Saul, as without resistaunce hee might easilie
haue bereaued him of life, but spared him, was notwithstanding
continually pursued by Saul (as a witnesse of
his vngrateful mind) who sought the death of him that
spared his life. So many are ye examples written in the
holy scriptures, as wold 
                  〈◊〉
                whole volumes of admonitions,
for an vngrateful person to auoide this vice.Examples shewed by bruite be
                     •
                  stes to auoid ingr
                     •••
                  de. By so
much ought this vice to be accoūted detestable amongst
mē, by howe much it is lothed of brute beasts thēselues,
for profe of which Aulius Gellius writeth this example.Androgeo 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            One Androgeo, a slaue to a Romaine Senator,
               
weary of the yrkesome cruelty of hys Lord,Senator of Rome ran from
him, and liued as one forlorne amongst wylde Woods,
and hydious Mountaynes. One day amongst the rest,
sore wearied with trauaile and heate of the parching
Sunne, he entered into a Caue to rest, and ease hys
weary limbs, whither (when he had slept a while) came
a monstrous and ougly Lyon,The grateful dispositiō of a cruel Lyon. whose sight so appalled
him, that he expected nought cls but present death.
But the Lyon not minding to hurte, but séeking for
helpe at hys hande, (contrary to nature) came gentlye
to him, layde hys heade in his lappe, and helde out hys
foote with pittiful gronings, in so much, that Androgeo
(setting feare aside) mooued with compassion,Androgeo pulled a thorne frō the Lyons foote. diligently
serched for that wound that so much molested him,
and at last, perceiuing a Thorne déepely pearced in the
bottome of hys foote, he gladly pulde it out, and eased
the Lyon of hys payne, for which déede, the Lyon not
onely defended him from the harmes of other Sauage
beastes, but euery day brought hym store of victualls to
relieue hys néedy want. But Androgoe weary of hys
solitary life,Androgeo taken by his maister. and desirous to trauayle further for better
fortune, was (by wandring out of his way) vnhappyly
apprehended, and brought backe to his cruell Maister,
who prosecuting the Romish lawe,Androgeo condemned to die. condemned him to
be deuoured of Lyons. And béeing throwne into the
Denne amongst them. It happened that that Lyon,
whose foote he lately healed, was ready as the reste,
with their gréedy chaps to haue torne him péecemeale,
but that he remembred as well hys fauor, as the fréendshippe
in curing of hys wounded foote,The Lyon gratefully s
                     •
                  ueth his life. and therefore
not onely fauned on him, but saued hym from the tearing
tuskes of those insatiate Lyons. At whose gratefull
remembraunce, as well the young Babes, as the
aged Senators of Rome admired: and therefore ordeyned
a Law inuiolable to theyr posteritie, that such as
encurred the blame of ingratitude, should without remorce

die that death which was once ordeined for Androgeo.
A shame is it therefore to humanitie,Beasts teach men to be gratefull. that brutish
beasts, wanting reason, should instruct men to be
gratefull to their benefactors. But such is the nature
of some men, that those gifts of reason and vnderstanding,
which God hath bestowed on them, (thereby to
make them excell all other creatures) they conuert by
their vicious life, and vngodlie inclination, to the vnreasonable
scence of brutish beasts.
            Of which sort are these Plaiers,Plaiers are vngratefull vipers. that like the Uiper
forget them that féedes their venom with their poison,
thereby to increase their stings, and to hurt the world
which they are borne to offend, and vngratefullie reward
them, that will spend their time for their profit,
labour for their lust, and painefull trauaile to please
them, whose pleasure as poison spreddeth it selfe into
the vaines of their beholders, representing the filthie
poole of Auernus, which striketh dead those which
come within the sente of the same.They are like the poole of Auernus. For none of the
beasts of the field dare drinke in the riuer after the dragon,
except the Unicorne purge the same from poison
with hir horne, such is the infectious poison of these
men, and such danger is it to be néere the view of their
vitious exercise, he therefore that feares the sting, let
him auoide the hissing of the harmefull Adder.Flie the hissing of the Adder. This
masker readie with a trice to performe his office, amongst
the rest wanting nothing but his visard, which
he may not misse, least he misse of his purpose, was not
so soone thought vpon as presentlie prouided. Then
with pretended shadowes to couer so deformed a substance,Ingratitude masketh vnder the visard of hurting harmes.
to the intent his face might not be knowne by
his leopord like spots (the markes of Sathan) he masked
vnder the vizard of Hating harmes, to delude those
which thorow an ignorant spirit are no lesse willing
to follow his vice, then he is readie to seduce them to
the same. Such is the nature of those Plaiers, whether
grounded by nature,Plaiers were the same maskes. or insinuated by some preposterous

education I know not, but when the chéefe of
their mischéefe is put in practise,More vnnaturall are they then the Tygre. they hate harmes,
when in effect they deceiue themselues, more vnnaturall
then the cruell Tygre, yet hate they harmes, and
loth are they to doo good to one man to whome they are
all most bound, least they should hurte another, ther vnto
enioined by their vertue of ha
                  •
               ing harme. And thus
farre doo I persuade my selfe, that nature hath marked
these men with such monstrous markes, that they
would neglect the goods of their dearest fréends, by
pretending that they hate harmes, and therefore are
loth to doo good to one, least it should hurt another.
            But some man will not sticke to obiect,Ingratefull minds are not humaine. that such
minds as I talke of cannot be humaine, therefore doo I
much iniurie those men, to censure so hardlie vpon
bare suppositions, for there is no man so vngratefull,
but if he can doo good without preiudice to himselfe, or
disparagement to his owne estate, to another his benefactor,
he will doo it.
            I answer héerevnto that this obiector is deceiued.They will doo good to none of their benefactors, least they hurt other.
for such is the vnpartiall sinceritie of these mens
minds, that they are loth to doo good to some, yea their
helpers, and chéefe coadiutors, least they should hurt
another, and so thereby endammage their owne credits,
and be found such as they are not, but what they
are, if men delight not to sit in darkenesse, which comprehendeth
their hearts, or would see that which easilie
they might,They are exquisit in all kind of vice. they shall sée no vice either commonlie
vsed at home, or brought as rich marchandize from forren
countries, but they will be as exquisite in the same
as if nature had honoured them so much, as they should
haue béene the first inuentors of such notable actions.
            Amongst which Ingratitude is no lesse loued amongst
them,What Ingratitude is, then that which is most f
                  •
               mous of all,
for qualities or good deserts. And the rather for that so
manie examples out of holie scriptures, are presidents
for those men to doo the like, for that which God punisheth

they delight in,Their examples hurt more then venome of the Dragon. to whose protection I commit
them, to amend them, or else to end them, whose examples
hurt more then the venemous Dragon dooth
with hir poison.
            Ingratitude the third masker is thus set out by
their lewd and chéefe domination, after such order as
alreadie I haue told. Next to make vp a fourth, was
brought vp by y• hellish kéeper Ougly dissention,Ouglie Dissention. whose
eies sparkled with fier in token that his heart was inflamed
with hate, still gnashing his filthie téeth, and biting
his lips, in token that his head was exercised in
all kind of villanous exploits. In his hands he bare
two fire brands, wherewith he inflicted and scourged
his owne miserable carcase,Dissention tormenteth himselfe with fier brands. hauing no other to exercise
the infamie of his arte, which addeth such torture
to his tormented bodie, and such anguish to his vexed
soule, that there appeared in his face such tyrannie, as
if he onelie were the man to confound with mischéefe
the whole world. And soothe to saye, such is the ambition
of dissention, that it setteth Princes at debate,
kings at warre, and commonwealths are wrackt and
rent by the outrage of this hellish féend, the wretchednesse
of which vice I will note, to the intent the wise
may auoide the same.
            This pernitions vice of dissention so barketh continually
at peace and vertuous procéedings,Dissention barketh at Peace. that where
his currish qualities are, there ciuill gouernement is
cleane dashed, pollicie preuented, vertue extinguished,
happie estate inthralled, & finallie all floorishing things
so confounded, that it rather representeth a wildernesse
inhabited of hideous and sauadge beasts, then a commonwealth
gouerned by wisemen, or a people surprised
with lawe and equitie.
            So venemous are the téeth of this barking Dogge,This barking Dog hath venemons teeth.
that wheresoeuer hee biteth hee leaueth behinde him
extirpation, continuall Iarres, contempt of equalitie,
and an aspiring minde of superioritie, naye

such is it, that in what common wealth so euer it be,
héeretofore florishing, naught now is to be expected, but
ruine, desolation, mourning and wringing of hande,
with no lesse pittifull outerie,A pittifull crie when Babylon was fallen. then when it was sayde
great Babilon is fallen. For euen as the ship that is
tossed with suddeine tempests in the raging sea, when
his masts are shiuered, his sailes rent, & his tacklings
torne, so farre that the maister himselfe is past all hope
of safetie, and expecteth nought but present death. So
dissention raigning in the harts of men,What d
                     •••
                  ention procureth, procureth such
hurlie burley, & outragious swelling of puffed minds,
as present nothing but slaughter, bloudshed, and most
vnspeakeable massacres. No otherwise then the thunder
of angrie Iupiter, dooth dissention terrifie the most
couragious minds, and make the pillers of the whole
earth to tremble.
            The better to explaine the nature of so damnable a
furie,The fruits of examples. it shall not be amisse to consider the fruits of manie
excellent examples. Amongst which I find none
more effectuall to diswade the rest from this mischéeuous
contention, then that was fostered betwixt the
founders of Rome,Romulus and Remus. 
               Romulus and Remus, whose dissention
was so great, inflamed with furie, that no
sparke of reason or good order might extinguish the
same, before the curssed hand had shed the quiltlesse
bloud of the other, so farre dooth dissention incense men,
that they forget both loue and nature.Catiline his dissētious mind. How did the dissentious
minds of Catiline and his confederates, dismay
the whole state of Rome with their brutish conspiracies,
so that had not Cicero imploide his graue
counsell, and approoued wisedome in timelie season,
Rome had béene ruinated, and those sauadge men like
wool
                  •
               es had rent the bowels of their natiue countrie.
That Gretian mirror Aiax,
               Aiax & Vlisses. by the dissention that was
betwixt him and Vlisses, so farre forgot reason, that he
most vnnaturallie murthered himselfe▪
            
            What incurable dissention was that caused betwixt

               Me
                     •
                  elaus and Paris,
               Menel
                     •
                  u
                     •
                   and Paris at vile dissention. that the flames thereof gaue so
large a blaze, as both Greece and Troye thereby were
almost quite consumed. Strabo setteth downe a notable
example of a fellow that not onelie sowed dissention
at his owne natiue home,Function a dissentious wretch. but abroad made it a
practise to set Kings at dissention. One Fun
                     •
                  stion subiect
to Horatius, hauing lewdlie spent his liuing, and
therefore not regarded of the King as he would, went
to Morettus heyre vnto the crowne, and informed him
that the king his vncle fearing his aspiring minde, did
intend to send for him and commit him to prison, with
a pretence of a supposed treason, who vnkindlie taking
the supposed ill of the king his vnckle, gathered a mightie
armie to contend with him, and rewarded Funestion
with the charge of two hundred men, who liking
not his reward, disdeining the same, came backe to the
king, and informed him of the disobedience and pretended
treason of Morettus, which caused the king to leauie
an armie, and to méete his kinsman, who hauing
spent much money, munition, and men, and wearied
with warres. Fun
                     •
                  stion makes a mutinie in the kings
campe, and carieth awaie fiue thousand of his best men
and came to an Iland called Taxos, informing the king
that the two kinsmē were confederat to come together
against him, and beat him out of his countrie, who presentlie
fortified himselfe, & rewarded Fun
                     •
                  stion bountifullie,
giuing him the charge of his men at armes.
But he forgetting the King, fell in loue with the
Quéene, and bicause shée would not consent, accused hir
of adulterie to the King, but such was the iudgement
of God to confound this dissentious wretch, that he
was suddenlie kilde with a thunderboult. Such is the
vpright iudgement of God, that he will not permit anie
dissentious person to liue vpon the earth vnpunished.
            Most terrible and to be lamented is that Britaine
example of the two brothers,The example of Dissention betweene Porter and Ferre
                     •
                  . 
               Po
                     •
                  rex and Ferrex, whose

dissentious minds caused Porrex to kill his brother
being a king, and vrged the Quéene Videna for reuenge
to kill hir naturall sonne Porrex, who afterwarde
was by hir subiects iustlie murthered, for the
death of that most vertuous Prince.
            Almightie God in the sacred scriptures hath set
downe, how much he loatheth this heinous offence
committed against his deuine maiestie, by the punishment
which he allotted to proud Hammon,
               Wicked Hammon dissentious with Mardocheus. that he
was hanged on the selfe same gallowes his dissentious
minde caused to be erected for Mardocheus, so falleth
it out that the dissentious fall into the pits they digged
for others, and their owne mischéefe reboundeth vpon
their owne hatefull heads.
            These be the thornie fruits of Dissention, procéeding
from the choaked thoughts of ambitious minds,Dissention his punishment cannot aptlie be described.
worthilie therefore was this deuouring dogge plagued
in hell with the furious flames of neuer quenching
fire, as he was a wicked instrument to inflame mens
hearts vpon earth, Brymstone, Pitch, and Tarre, continuallie
burne the neuer wasting bodie of dissention
with such furie, as his least paine is vnpossible to be
aptlie described.
            This vile vice raigneth likewise amongst Plaiers
with no lesse authoritie then Belzebub reigneth in
hell: for such is their dissentious mindes, that like
Dogges striuing at a bone, they gnarre one at another,
one hateth another, and séeke by all means possible to
worke mischéefe by their dissentious minds. But these
matters can they finelie cloake, with the visard of
fréendlie fauour,Their visard is Freendlie fauor. and coulour their pretences with loue
they owe to them, they set them at debate, the selfe
same visard that s
                  •
               rued Dissention to maske vnder.
            For when it maye be said by their mischéeuous
mindes, they set other together by the eares, they can
colour it by saying, they were my fréends, and therfore
was I loth to sée them so much backbite one another.

Thus doo these dissentious persons paint their pretences
with fine coloures,They paint their pretences with fine colours. to the intent the simple may not
perceiue their damnable drifts, but be ouercome with
their subtile sleights, and cleanlie conueiance of their
pure pract
                  •
               ses.
            But tell me how 
                  •
               an that be fréendlie fauour,Their visard of Freendlie fauo
                     •
                  . that
when they haue procured by their reports dissention
to acrue amongst anie, they disport themselues in their
harmes, laugh at their dangered practises,They laugh at mischeefe. in séeking to
entrappe one another by secret inuasion, so dooth dissention,
laughing at mischéefe, and sorrowing at others
fréendship, drinking bloud to quench his insatiate thirst
with the gréedie desire of the deuouring Lion. But
well did this visard of fréendlie fauour become Dissention
to auoide suspect of his inward ils, and to shadow
the deformitie of externall harmes. Therefore was he
verie aptlie placed the fourth masker to congratulate
so famous a mariage.
            For the fift place Cerberus brought foorth out of a
filthie den,Blasphemie commeth from hell. (wherein was bound damnable beasts and
vipers to adde torments) the most wicked and pernicious
helhound Blasphemie, who spends his time in
throwing out throbbes of damnable desires, and breathing
out mischiefe that lurketh in his inward heart,
and bellowing out the beastlie blasphemie of his inward
minde, féedeth vpon his one soule, and sitteth
gnawing the bones of his owne flesh, bound there with
pinching yrons of euerlasting wrath.
            For so great is the iudgement of God towards the
blasphemers of his name,The great iudgement of God. that he permitteth the diuell
to haue power to place them in the verie déepest
nooke of his hollowe migne, where no punishment
so perrilous but is executed on them, no gréefe so
great but possesseth them, no tormente so terrible
but is inflicted on them.The maiestie of God suffereth hell to punish the wicked. And what so euer hell
it selfe can deuise, to torture and torment so damnable

a creature, the maiestie of God will permit,
though his mercie be great, yet his celestiall word is
past, that no wretch which blasphemeth his name shall
liue, but perish in the indignation of his wrath. For as
the Maiestie of God is impacient of any aspiring mind
to be partaker of his deitie,The maiestie of God is impatient of blasphemie. so dooth hée with a sharpe
whippe scourge those blasphemers, that attribute anie
dignitie belonging to heauen his head, or the earth his
footstoole to any other but himselfe, his honor will not
be defaced, his maiestie mangled, and his holie name
blasphemed.
            For when that blasphemous wretch Herod
               Blasphemous Herod. in a solemne
oration before his subiects, attributed the honor
to himselfe, when the people affirmed him to be a God,
and of heauenlie power, he was pres
                  •
               ntlie by his maiestie,
stricken downe dead in his chaire, as an example
to terrifie the rest of that qualitie. Peruse the Pageant
of Popes,The Pageant of Popes. and there shall you find for the most part
of all those that tooke vpon them (without sinne) the inscrutable
power of God to forgiue sinne,The inkindled wrath of God against blasphemers. that none of
them but perished by the iudgement of God, with one
sparke or other of his inkindled wrath.
            The monster Arius that affirmed himselfe to be
Messias,
               The punishment of Arius. and tooke vpon him the Maiestie of God, supposing
his throne to be the heauenlie seat of his Maiestie,
then the mightie Iehoua inkind
                  •
               ed his wrath, and
sent wormes to deuoure the guts of this Arius, with
such intollerable gréefe, that his miserable carcase was
eaten to péeces. Euen as God sent his wormes, frogs,
& venemous beasts vpon the blaspheming Egyptians,
when curssed Pharao and his hoast,Pharao plagued for blasphemie. with his power of
horssemen and chariots, of force were ouerthrowne in
the sea, when his blasphemous toong said: What is
God that I shold obey him, or what is the Lord of hosts
that I must heare him: the Israelits by the sundry punishments
of God, knew what it is to blaspheme his
heauenlie name.
            
               
And Dionisius Aropagita,
               Dionisius Aropagita a blasphemer. for blaspheming the name
of God, suddainly sunck into the earth, whose tongue at
that instant ceased not to say: What can this God doo
vnto me, or who is he that I ought to honor? The vnhappy
wife of Iob,
               Iobs blasphemous wyfe. that willed him to curse God & die,
with her children, and all the rest of her substance, was
suddainly wasted and consumed. What men then are
giuen ouer into so reprobate a sence, that will not cease
séeing the wrath of God so heauie vppon the blasphemers
of his name,The wrath of God vpon blasphemers. but will take example by such hurts
least they themselues bee presented as Actors in thys
Tragedy.
            For when God looketh downe from Heauen, and
beholdeth any exercised to blaspheme his name, or
breathe from their swelling harts hatefull words vpon
his diuine maiestie, he stretcheth out the mighty arme
of his power,Angels powre forth Gods wr
                     •
                  th vpon the wicked. and commandeth his ministers the Angels
to powre foorth whole vials of wrath and bloode
vpon those accursed caytifes. What were those where
the Locusts did deuoure, but the blasphemers of ye maiestie
of God. And the Reuelation witnesseth, that those
whom the Angel marked with his pen on the forehead
for the elect of God, were saued: the other, béeing blasphemers
of his name, were bound in the pitte of darknes.
Why was that mighty Captaine Holofernes
               Holofernes hys blasphemy. gyuen
ouer into the handes of a woman, but for blaspheming
the eternall maiestie of God? So much dooth
God hate thys blasphemie, that he hath not onely punished
such which haue blasphemed his owne name, but
such as haue derided the name of his Prophets. As whē
the holy Prophet Elias preached the message of ye Lord,
and young Infants mocked him, calling him baldpate,
he cursed them,The Children 
                     •
                  o Elias. when Beares came out & deuoured thē,
according to ye saying: the posterity of blasphemers shal
perrish for euer.Gods indignation is heauy to beare. Such is the monstrous condition of
this blasphemy, that nothing sooner doth inkindle the
wrathe of God, nor maketh him more terrifie the inhabitants

of the earth, when the heate of his indignation
and anger causeth the Heauens to melt, and droppe reuenge
vpon the heads of all blasphemous wretches.
Woorthely therefore was blasphemy punished thus in
hell. Many and terrible examples of our owne present
age,Examples of late dayes for blasphemy are many hath of late béene doone amongst vs, which I wyll
omitt, because I hope their remembrance is not cleane
extinguished, and that so lately doone, cannot be so soone
forgot. Of which sort of men in the chiefe place, may be
placed Players,Players are blasphemers of God. when they take vpon them the persons
of Heathen men, imagining themselues (to vaineglory
in the wrath of God) to be the men whose persons they
present,Players vainglory in the wrath of God. wherein, by calling on Mahomet, by swearing
by the Temples of Idolatry dedicate to Idols, by calling
on Iupiter, Mars, Venus, & other such petty 
                  •
               ods,
they doo most wickedly robbe God of his honour,They blasph
                     •
                  eme his name. and
blaspheme the vertue of his heauenly power. Oh men
in worse condition then brutish beasts, yet can they couer
theyr deformitie in thys poynt with the Masker
blasphemy, in shrouding themselues vnder the visarde
of godly learning.They shroude themselues vnder the visa
                     •
                  de of godly learning. And that this is no blasphemy, but
the opinion of the learned, conformable to the former
manners of men, which makes thē confirme their
soules to damnation. What collour I pray of godly learning
can be in this, when they approche the deuill so
néere in condition,They present the deuill in shape and condition. that they can cunningly present hys
person, and nothing can there be so damnable, eyther in
Heathen, Pagans or Infidels, but they can present the
same, in as ample manner as if it were then in dooing.
Trust me, I am sure that these men more offende God
by deriding him with these beastly sacrifices,Their sacrifice is beastly. then those
men which did first commit such censuall, and vnnaturall
déedes. No doubt but there is amongst thē can play
Iudas,
               Some c
                     •
                  n play Iudas. as naturally as if he were the very man that betrayed
Christ,They crucifie Christ a newe. & verily think yt the visarde of godly learning,
is so far from good liuing, that vnder these pretended
collours, these goodlesse men crucifie Christ a newe,

when they thus séeke to deface his glory, to mangle hys
members, and rent in péeces his sacred body. What other
thing is it, when in the midst of all theyr villanie,
they make inuocations to his maiesty,They mock God with theyr inuocations. and ballet wyth
beastly traditions of men, termes of pompous pryde
the magnanimity of his powre. What other thing is
it,Commit them to their owne consideration. then to scorne his wrath, rent his members, and blaspheme
his name. Consider then of this, and find what
I haue sayd.
            This Masker blasphemy thus wel prouided, but
that his visard was scarce currant, masketh amongst
the rest of his mates. The sixt Masker,The sixt Masker, Impudency. (which must be
last to obseru
                  •
                a decorum in theyr taske) was Impudencie,
whose brasen face shameth the beholders, and
whose gracelesse mēbers no wise man but hateth. Him
Cerberus fette from his hellish habitation, vpon whose
body was written the names of all kind of vices, acceptable
to sathan, and hatefull to 
                  •
               od, as if there were
the man whose markes bewrayed his condition, yet
neuer shamed he to shew his face.
            This Impudency is of ancient authority amongst
many,Of auncient authoritie. and rather taken for a noble mind, or an audatious
hart, then an impudent and shameles vice. Such
was the pleasure that almighty God conceiued in thys
audacity, that he plagued the offenders with more then
ordinary punishment. Iezabell, that accursed and impudent
Quéene, for her shameles & vnséemely behauiour,
was iustly by the rigorous iudgment of God, deuoured
of dogs. When it was spoken by the mouth of
the Prophet, the dogs shall lick the bloode of Iezabell
               Impudent Iezabell. in
the fieldes of Israel. No lesse shameles was the lust, and
the accusation impudent, which ye wicked Iudges maintained
by ye chaste Susanna,
               The shamele
                     •
                   Iudges. when God by his mightie
power, by raysing vp young Daniel, confounded theyr
impudency, & deliuered them into the handes of men, to
be destroyed with ye same stones that were prouided for
that chaste Lady. The impudent lust of Tarquine who

ceased not to pursue the chaste Lucrece euen to ye death
cost him the price of his kingdome,The impudent lust of Tarquin. banishment frō hys
Country, and afterward a miserable ende. The Reuelation
describing the whore of Babilon sitting on the
seauen headed Dragon,The whore of Babilon. wt a cup of poyson in her hand,
calleth her shameles and impudent.
            The impudency of the Damsels mother yt tempted
Herod,
               Herode. to aske the head of Iohn, and causde it to bee
cut off, was little inferior to the other, such instrumēts
by wickednes, God rayseth vp to try his elect, but yet
thryce woe be to them that are made the instruments
of Gods wrath, and vnhappy are they by whom God
layeth his crosse vpon his children, eyther gently to correct
them,A womans impudency. or mildly to try them. What impudency was
that of the mother in the Gospell, to demaund of Christ
that her two sons might sit in his kingdom, the one vpon
his right hand, the other on his left. No lesse rediculous
then that, was a prophane poynt of Aristodemus,
whom when the king Antigonus aduaunced to hygh
preferment of his counsell,Aristodemus to Antigonus. béeing but a base Cookes
sonne, hee shamed not but impudently perswaded hym
not to be liberall, then which there cannot be a greater
blot to the fame of a royall Prince. If Princes then,
the Uizegerents of God,Princes are vizegerents of God. would punish such impudent
wretches as insert themselues into their secrets to vndermine,
nor shame to fleare in the face of a Prince,
bedecked with modesty, (though the poysoned bayte of
treason lurketh in theyr harts.) No doubt but this vice
should be lesse practised, and vertue sooner embraced.
Worthily then deserued thys impudency her continuall
torment in hell,Impudency is tormented in hell. in whose fruit appeareth the pathe
of shameles, and impudent enormities. The visard appointed
for thys hellish féende, was called modest audacity,Theyr visarde is modest audacitie
wherin Players doo much delight, for albeit theyr
impudency appeares so openly, yt euery man by theyr
continuall practise doth decerne theyr visard to bee rather
immodest impudency, yet so currantly can they

carry it away, that he with his Net as expert as themselues,
is counted but a shéepe, a simple sot, and a playne
Innocent.The opinion of Players. But on the contrary, he that can sette vpon
eche vice a face of brasse, & with his countenaunce beare
out the matter, that is the fellow can doo all, and he it is
that shalbe counted the modest audacious man.
            With what tyranny doth vice then hold possession of
these mens harts, when theyr eyes are so obstinatlie
blinded that they decerne not good from bad,They are singuler in sinne. but headlong
runne into theyr owne destruction, called mischiuous
exercises honest recreations: when such it is as
presenteth murders, mischiefes, adulteryes, ingratitude,
idlenes, dissention, impudencie, and all kynde of
villany, that eyther can be thought vpon or practised in
a Common wealth, I wish these men not to sooth them
selues in theyr folly, but to repent in time. This
Maske thus ended, wyth visardes accordingly appointed,
there were certaine petty fellows ready, as ye custome
is in Maskes, to carry Torches,The Torch-bearers. to inflame the
harts, and inkindle theyr mindes to contende with vertue,
and wholy to be guided and lighted by vice. Whose
names are these,What they are Unthriftines, Deceitfull diligence,
Secrete hate, Insolent contempt, Mallice, and Makebate,
whose visards are these, an honest minde, good
husbandry, a humble hart, good regard, temperaunce,
and contempt of the world, whose Torches as I sayde,
are the firebrands of sathan,Theyr Torches are the firebrāds of sathan. to conduct menne to hell,
whose way is plaine and broad, without let or hinderaunce.
Not one of these Torch bearers but are as wel
knowne amongst Players,They are known amongst Players and theyr vices put in 
                  •
               re,
to make theyr practise known, as wel as sathan knoweth
his owne, and can cull out these Mates which are
vnder the cōpasse of his regiment. This pleasing Mask
béeing thus prepared, with a few words gyuen them in
charge from their master Belzebub,Belzebub sendeth thē to Fastus & Luxuria▪
                thither were they
sent, to the place appointed to 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . to Faustus and
Luxuria, and to gréefe them from theyr king, with that

gift. Whether when they were come, with entertainement
no lesse pompous then the mariage was solemnized.
Fastus, to the intent his education might appeare
correspondent to his comely person, welcommed them
wyth these wordes. This curteous fauour, renowned
seruaunts to our mighty King,The Oration of Fastus. sent from him, worketh
a meanes to redouble y• former duety which we oughte
him, and although the vnworthines of our estate, could
not admit the presence of his person, yet doth our harts
so much honor him (whose power is great) that we cō
               tinually
with vehemency of spirit, call vpon his name.
Neither as iustice wylled, hitherto hath wanted any thing
that might pleasure vs, or glorifie the worthy title
of hys dignitie. But at thys instant, considering the
generall ioy, that wee and our seruaunts haue receiued
by the swéete contentation, and solemnizing of the mariage
betwéene my Lady, and mee, my good Lorde hath
héerein amplified my former reuerence, and sharpened
in my minde a déeper desire to procéede in hys obedience,
then héeretofore hath euer béene inserted in my
hart. Certify him therfore I pray at your returne, that
wherein duety may gratifie or requite thys large benefite
and fauour, it shalbe extended to the highest degrée.
Therefore, for the loue I beare you, sent frō my Lorde,
you are hartily welcome to my Castle of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . After
he had ended his spéech, his Lady Luxuria, spake as
followeth.
            My Lord and espoused husband Fastus,
               The Oration of Luxuria. (you inhabitants
of y• infernal world) hath already showne you the
zeale of his louing hart, the Simpathy of whose minde,
consisteth in my selfe, that whatsoeuer he shall séeme to
allowe, of duety & loue I beare him, besides the fauor I
owe vnto you, confirmeth the same in me, so farre, then
wherein the power, or duetifull seruice of a sillye woman
consisteth, or may offer requitall, let it be expected,
for duety wylls so much, and your curtesie commandes
no lesse, you are therefore hartily welcome to our Castle

               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            After these seuerall Orations were ended, a suddaine
ioy was striken in the harts of the beholders,The wicked ioy in sinne. as
well by reason of these spéeches, as to view the manner
of the Maske, wherein they receyued such contentation
by how much more it came vnlooked for, that they were
almost dryuen into an extasie, such was the ioy they
conceiued thereof. When Fastus and Luxuria, and the
rest of the company hadde well recreated theyr minds
with dauncing and disporting amongst these Maskers
beholding them at large (whose custome was not to
speake) they commaunded them to be ledde into ye Hall
of Misery,Theyr banquet in the Hall of misery. and there to be feasted with delicate dyshes,
of continual vexation, guilty conscience, worlds of woe,
and neuer dying torments. where drinking of the accursed
wine of forgetfulnes, they returned to Sathan
from whence they came.
            Sith then such is the wicked exercise of these Players,
gyue me leaue a word or two to tell you in exhortation,
how happy it is to auoyd theyr presence, and to
banish them from the entrayles of theyr harts.
            Whatsoeuer is contrary to the word of God,Playes are contrary to the word of God. is not agréeable
with God, Playes are contrary to the word of
God, therefore agrée they not wyth God. First GOD
with hys owne sacred mouth hath pronounced, yt whatsoeuer
procéedeth from the wicked nature of ma
                  •••
               , is
vnperfect, pollute, and defiled, such then are Playes, vnperfect,Faigned colours.
pollute and defiled. Why then should the nature
of man be so blinded with error, as to runne desperately
into the damnable sincke of sinne, (or as they
terme it) in séeking to expell the mischiefe of Melancholy,
doo runne into a thousand miseryes, and whatsoeuer
he be that féeleth himselfe surprised with thys
passion, shall find that pleasure doth increase the same,
and Playes rather enflame the fury therof, thē quench
the flame by any rest. But whatsoeuer he be that féeleth
thys passion of melancholy, to haue fast holde of his

hart, shall by no meanes sooner expell the same,A medicine for melancholy. then
by reading of the Scriptures, conferring the mercyes
of God wyth his sinfull soule, and by firing still before
his eyes, the bitternes of that passion of Christ, endured
for vs, who was bounde to sette vs free from sathan,
scourged to ridde vs from strypes, derided to deliuer
vs from the scorne of the deuill, crowned wyth
thornes to glorify vs with a crowne of maiestie, and finally
for vs, shed his most precious bloode, yea for vs
vnworthy wretches, that rather flye to vanities to vnloade
our heauy harts, then come to him to be vnladen
of our bonde, whose worde (swéeter then the hony or
the hony combe) calleth vs that are gréeued. When
he sayth: Come vnto me all yée that are heauye & loaden,The conclusion.
and I wyll ease you of your burden. What canne
we haue more of so swéete a Sauiour. Eschew therefore
thys euill to wynne heauen, treade thys mischiefe
vnder féete, to be extolled into heauen, and finally say,
Lorde graunt vs heauen. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   