
      
         
            
            
            AN EXPOSITION OF CERtaine difficult and obſcure words, and termes of the Lawes of this Realme, newly ſet forth & augmented, both in French & Engliſh, for the help of ſuch yong Students, as are deſirous to attaine to the knowledge of the ſame.
            AT LONDON Printed by th'Aſsignee of Charles Yetſweirt Eſq. deceaſed.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
            1595.
         
         
            
            
            The Table.
            
               A.
               
                  ABatement de briefe 
                        •
                     n plaint fol. 1. a
               
                  Abatement en terres fol. 1. b
               
                  Abbot fol. 2. a
               
                  Abbettors fol. 2. b
               
                  Abeyance fol. 3. a
               
                  Abiſherſing fol. 4. a
               
                  Abiuration fol. 4. a
               
                  Abridgement de plaint ou demand fol. 5. b
               
                  Accedas ad Curiam fol. 6. a
               
                  Acceptance fol. 6. a
               
                  Acceſſories fol. 6. b
               
                  Action fol. 7. b
               
                  Action perſonals fol. 7. b
               
                  Action reals fol. 7. b
               
                  Action populer fol. 8. a
               
                  Action mixt fol. 8. b
               
                  Action del briefe fol. 9. a
               
                  Action ſur le caſe fol. 9. a
               
                  Action ſur le ſtatute fol. 9. b
               
                  Accompt fol. 10. a
               
                  Accord fol. 10. b
               
                  Acquital fol. 10. b
               
                  Acquitance fol. 11. b
               
                  Actes fol. 12. a
               
                  Additions fol. 12. a
               
                  Adiournement fol. 12. a
               
                  Admeaſ. de dower fol. 12. a
               
                  Admeaſ. de paſture fol. 12. b
               
                  Adminiſtrator fol. 14. a
               
                  Admiral fol. 15. a
               
                  Ad quod dampnum fol. 15. a
               
                  Aduowſon fol. 15. b
               
                  Age prier fol. 15. b
               
                  Agreement fol. 16. b
               
                  Aide fol. 18. a
               
                  Aide de Roy fol. 18. b
               
                  Aiel fol. 19. a
               
                  Alien fol. 19. b
               
                  Alienation fol. 19. b
               
                  Ambidexter fol. 19. b
               
                  Amendment fol. 20. a
               
                  Amercement fol. 20. a
               
                  Amercement roial fol. 20. b
               
                  An, iour, & waſt fol. 20. b
               
                  Annuitie fol. 21. a
               
                  Appeal fol. 21. a
               
                  Appellant fol. 21. b
               
                  Appellor fol. 21. b
               
                  Appendant & appurtenant fol. 21. b
               
                  Apportionment fol. 22. a
               
                  Appropriations fol. 22. b
               
                  Approuements fol. 24. a
               
                  Arbitrement fol. 24. a
               
                  Arreſt fol. 24. b
               
                  Arrerages fol. 25. a
               
                  Aſſets fol. 25. a
               
                  Aſſignee fol. 26. a
               
                  Aſſiſe fol. 26. 
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Aſſiſe de darrain preſ. fol. 27. b
               
                  Aſſ. de Mortdanceſt. fol. 27. b
               
                  Attainder fol. 27. b
               
                  Attaint fol. 28. a
               
                  Atturnement fol. 28. b
               
                  Audita querela fol. 28. b
               
                  Auerrement fol. 29. a
               
                  Auerpeme fol. 29. a
               
                  Auncient demeſne fol. 29. a
               
                  Auowrie fol. 29. b
            
            
               B.
               
                  ¶ Baile fol. 30. a
               
                  Bailement fol. 30. b
               
                  Bailife fol. 30. b
               
                  Ba
                        •
                     berind theefe fol. 31. a
               
                  Bargaine & ſale fol. 31. a
               
                  Barre fol. 31. b
               
                  Baſe fee fol. 31. b
               
                  Baſtard fol. 32. a
               
                  Battaile fol. 32. b
               
                  Bigamie fol. 32. b
               
                  Blodwit fol. 33. b
               
                  Boote fol. 33. b
               
                  
                     Broodhalfpenie fol. 34. a
               
                  Burgage fol. 34. a
               
                  Burghbote fol. 34. a
               
                  Burghbrech fol. 34. b
               
                  Burghengliſh fol. 34. b
               
                  Burglarie fol. 34. b
            
            
               C
               
                  ¶ Capias fol. 35. a
               
                  Caruage fol. 35. a
               
                  Certification in aſſ. fol. 35. a
               
                  Certiorary fol. 35. b
               
                  Ceſſion fol. 36. a
               
                  Ceſſauit fol. 36. a
               
                  Challenge fol. 37. a
               
                  Champertie fol. 37. b
               
                  Champertors fol. 38. a
               
                  Charge fol. 38. a
               
                  Charters fol. 38. a
               
                  Chattels fol. 38. b
               
                  Childwit fol. 38. b
               
                  Chimin fol. 38. b
               
                  Choſe in action fol. 39. a
               
                  Cinque Portes fol. 39. b
               
                  Circuit de action fol. 39. b
               
                  Claime fol. 40. a
               
                  Clergie fol. 40. b
               
                  Clerke attaint fol. 40 b
               
                  Clerke conuict fol. 41. a
               
                  Colour fol. 41. a
               
                  Colour de office fol. 42. a
               
                  Colluſion fol. 42. b
               
                  Common ley fol. 43. a
               
                  Common fol. 43. b
               
                  Condition fol. 45. a
               
                  Confirmation fol. 46. b
               
                  Confiſcate biens fol. 47. b
               
                  Conſpiracie fol. 47. a
               
                  Cuſtome fol. 47. a
               
                  Conſultation fol. 47. b
               
                  Continual claime fol. 47. b
               
                  Counterplee fol. 48. a
               
                  Contract fol. 48. b
               
                  Contra formam collationis fol. 49. a
               
                  Contra formam feoffamenti fol. 49. b
               
                  Contributione fac. fol. 50. a
               
                  Conuſance fol. 50. a
               
                  Corodie fol. 50. b
               
                  Coroner fol. 51. b
               
                  Corporation fol. 52. b
               
                  Corps politique fol. 53. a
               
                  Corruption de ſank fol. 53. a
               
                  Co
                        •
                     ooage fol. 53. b
               
                  Couenant fol. 54. a
               
                  Couerture fol. 54. a
               
                  Couin fol. 54. b
               
                  Cui in vita fol. 54. b
               
                  Cui ante diuortium fol. 55. a
               
                  Curteſie dengleterre fol. 55. a
            
            
               D.
               
                  ¶ Dammage feſant fol. 55. a
               
                  Danegeld fol. 55. b
               
                  Darrem preſentment fol. 56. a
               
                  Deane & Chapter fol. 56. a
               
                  Decies tantum fol. 56. a
               
                  Declaration fol. 56 b
               
                  Dedimus poteſtatem fol. 57. b
               
                  Defendant fol. 57. b
               
                  Defence fol. 57. b
               
                  Demandant fol. 58. a
               
                  Demeanes fol. 58. b
               
                  Demy ſank fol. 59. a
               
                  Demurrer fol. 59. a
               
                  Denizen fol. 59. b
               
                  Deodand fol. 59. b
               
                  Departure de ſon plee ou matter fol. 60. a
               
                  Departure in diſpite del Court fol. 60. a
               
                  Deputie fol. 60. b
               
                  Dette fol. 60. b
               
                  Deuaſtauerunt bona reſta
                     
                        •
                     oris fol. 61. a
               
                  
                     Deuiſe fol. 61. b
               
                  Diem clauſit extrem̄
                   fol. 65, a
               
                  Diſcent fol. 65. b
               
                  Diſclaimer fol. 66. a
               
                  Diſcontinuance fol. 66. a
               
                  Diſmes fol. 66. b
               
                  Diſparagement fol. 67. a
               
                  Diſſeiſin fol. 67. b
               
                  Diſſeiſin ſur diſſeiſin fol. 68. a
               
                  Diſſe
                        •
                     ſor & diſſeiſee fol. 68. a
               
                  Diſceit fol. 68. a
               
                  Diſtres fol. 68. b
               
                  Diuorce fol. 70. b
               
                  Donor & Donee fol. 70. b
               
                  Double plee fol. 70. b
               
                  Dower fol. 71. a
               
                  Droit fol. 72. a
               
                  Droit dentrie fol. 72. a
               
                  Dum non fuit compos mē
                     tis fol. 72. a
               
                  Dum fuit infra etat
                        •
                     
                   fol. 72. b
               
                  Dures fol. 72. b
            
            
               E.
               
                  ¶ Eiectione firme. fol. 73. a
               
                  Eiectment de Gard fol. 73. a
               
                  Eire Juſtices fol. 73. a
               
                  Elegit fol. 73. a
               
                  Embraceor fol. 75. b
               
                  Encrochment fol. 75. b
               
                  Enheritance fol. 76. a
               
                  Entre fol. 76. b
               
                  Entruſion fol. 79. b
               
                  Equitie fol. 79. b
               
                  Error fol. 81. a
               
                  Eſcape fol. 81, b
               
                  Eſcheat fol. 82. b
               
                  Eſcuage fol. 83. a
               
                  Eſplees fol. 83. b
               
                  Eſſoine fol. 84. a
               
                  Eſtoppel fol. 84. b
               
                  Eſtrangers fol. 85. b
               
                  Eſtray fol. 86. a
               
                  Eſtrepement fol. 86. a
               
                  Etate probanda fol. 86, b
               
                  Excommen gem̄t fol. 86. b
               
                  Exchange fol. 87. a
               
                  Execution fol. 87. b
               
                  Executor fol. 88. a
               
                  Exigent fol. 88. b
               
                  Ex parte talis fol. 89. a
               
                  Ex graui querela fol. 89. a
               
                  Extinguiſhment fol. 89. a
               
                  Extortion fol. 89. b
            
            
               F.
               
                  ¶ Failer de record fol. 90. a
               
                  Fait fol. 90. b
               
                  Farme fol. 94. b
               
                  Faux impriſonment fol. 95. a
               
                  Fee ferme fol. 95. a
               
                  Fee ſimple fol. 95. a
               
                  Feoffement fol. 95. b
               
                  Feoffor & Feoffee fol. 95. b
               
                  Fealtie fol. 96. a
               
                  Felonie fol. 96. a
               
                  Firebote fol. 96. b
               
                  Fledwit fol. 96. b
               
                  Flemeſwite fol. 97. a
               
                  Fletwit fol. 97. a
               
                  Forſtal fol. 97. a
               
                  Forſtaller fol. 97. a
               
                  Franchiſe roial fol. 97. b
               
                  Frankalmoigne fol. 97. b
               
                  Frank fee fol. 98. a
               
                  Fieri facias fol. 98. b
               
                  Fine fol. 99. a
               
                  Formedon fol. 98. b
               
                  Frankmariage fol. 100. a
               
                  Franktenement fol. 101. a
               
                  Freſhſuit fol. 101. b
            
            
               G.
               
                  ¶ Gager deliuerans fol. 102. a
               
                  Garrātie des ch
                        •
                     es fol. 102. b
               
                  Garrantie fol. 103. a
               
                  Garrantie fol. 105. a
               
                  
                     Gard fol. 105. b
               
                  Gardein fol. 106. a
               
                  Garniſhment fol. 107. a
               
                  Gauelet fol. 107. a
               
                  Gauelkind fol. 108, b
               
                  Geld fol. 109, b
               
                  Graund Cape fol. 109, b
               
                  Grand Serieantie fol. 109, b
               
                  Girthbrech fol. 110, b
            
            
               H
               
                  ¶ Habere fac̄ ſei
                        •
                     
                   fol. 110, b
               
                  Hangwit fol. 111, a
               
                  Hariot fol. 111, a
               
                  Heybote ou Hedgebote fol. 111, b
               
                  Hidage fol. 112, a
               
                  Hotchpot fol. 112, a
               
                  Homage fol. 113, a
               
                  Homage an̄ceſtrel fol. 113, a
               
                  Homeſoken fol. 113, b
               
                  Homicide fol. 114, a
               
                  Hornegeld fol. 114, a
               
                  Houſebote fol. 114, a
               
                  Hundred fol. 114, b
               
                  Hundredum fol. 115, a
            
            
               I
               
                  ¶ Ideot fol. 115, a
               
                  Idemptitatenom̄
                   fol. 115, b
               
                  Ieofaile fol. 116, a
               
                  Illoial aſſemblie fol. 116, b
               
                  Imparlance fol. 116, b
               
                  Impriſonment fol. 117, a
               
                  Infangtheefe fol. 117, a
               
                  Information fol. 117, b
               
                  Iointenants fol. 117, a
               
                  Indicauit fol. 119, a
               
                  Ioynture fol. 119, a
            
            
               L
               
                  ¶ Larcenie fol. 120, a
               
                  Laſtage fol. 120, b
               
                  Leaſes fol. 120, b
               
                  Leſſor & Leſſee fol. 121, a
               
                  Leuāt & touchant fol. 121, a
               
                  Ley fol. 121, b
               
                  Libertate ꝓbanda fol. 122, b
               
                  Liuerie de ſeiſin fol. 122, b
               
                  Lotherwit fol. 124, a
            
            
               M.
               
                  ¶ Maihem fol. 124, a
               
                  Mainpriſe fol. 125, a
               
                  Mannor fol. 125, a
               
                  Mamuniſſion fol. 125, b
               
                  Maximes fol. 126, a
               
                  Mainour fol. 126, b
               
                  Maintenance fol. 127, a
               
                  Meſne fol. 127, a
               
                  Miſpriſion fol. 127. b
               
                  Monſtrans de faits ou Records. fol. 128. a
               
                  Mortdaunceſter fol. 128. b
               
                  Monſtrauerunt fol. 128. b
               
                  Mortgage fol. 129. b
               
                  Moderata miſeriē
                   fol. 130. b
               
                  Mortmaine fol. 130. b
               
                  Mulier fol. 131. a
               
                  Murder fol. 132. a
            
            
               N.
               
                  ¶ Natiuo habendo fol. 132. a
               
                  Ne admittas fol. 132. b
               
                  No
                        •
                      omittas &c. fol. 132. b
               
                  Negatiua preignās fol. 133. a
               
                  Neiniuſte vexes fol. 134. a
               
                  Niefe fol. 134. a
               
                  Nihil dicit fol. 135. a
               
                  Niſi prius fol. 135. a
               
                  Nomination fol. 135. a
               
                  Nonabilitie fol. 135. b
               
                  Nude contratt fol. 135. b
               
                  Nuſans fol. 136. a
               
                  Nuper obiit fol. 136. b
            
            
               O.
               
                  ¶ Oredelf fol. 136. a
               
                  
                     Outfangtheefe fol. 136. b
               
                  Oweltie fol. 137. a
               
                  Oyer de Recordes & faits fol. 137. a
               
                  Oier & terminer fol. 137. b
            
            
               P.
               
                  ¶ Pape fol. 138. a
               
                  Per que ſeruitia fol. 138. b
               
                  Parceners fol. 138. b
               
                  Partition fol. 139. b
               
                  Parties fol. 141. a
               
                  Patron fol. 141. b
               
                  Perquiſites fol. 142. a
               
                  Perambula
                        •
                     
                     ̄ fa. fol. 142. a
               
                  Petit Cape fol. 142. b
               
                  Petit Serieantie fol. 143. a
               
                  Plaintife fol. 143. a
               
                  Pleading fol. 143. a
               
                  Poſt diſſeiſin fol. 143. b
               
                  Poſſeſſion fol. 143. b
               
                  Pound fol. 144. a
               
                  Preamble fol. 144, a
               
                  Premunire fol. 144, b
               
                  Precipe in capite fol. 145, a
               
                  Preſcription fol. 145, b
               
                  Preſentment fol. 146, a
               
                  Pretēſed droit &c. fol. 146, a
               
                  Priuities &c. fol. 146, b
               
                  Priuiledges fol. 147, b
               
                  Proces fol. 148, a
               
                  Prochein Amy fol. 149, a
               
                  Procedendo fol. 150, a
               
                  Prohibition fol. 150, a
               
                  Protection fol. 150, b
               
                  Proteſtation fol. 151, b
               
                  Purchaſe fol. 152, b
            
            
               Q.
               
                  ¶ Quale ius fol. 152, b
               
                  Quare eiecit infra terminum fol. 153, a
               
                  Quare impedit fol. 153, a
               
                  Quare incumbrauit fol. 153, b
               
                  Q. intruſit matrimonio nō ſatiſfacto fol. 154, a
               
                  Quare non admiſit fol. 154, a
               
                  Quarentine fol. 154, b
               
                  Quid iuris clamat fol. 154, b
               
                  Quinzime fol. 155, a
               
                  Quod ei deforceat fol. 155, b
               
                  Q. permittat fol. 156, a
               
                  Quo iure fol. 156, a
               
                  Quo minus fol. 156, a
               
                  Quo warranto fol. 156, b
            
            
               R.
               
                  ¶ Rationabil 
                     diui
                           •
                        
                     
                   fol. 156, b
               
                  Reddiſſſeiſin fol. 157, a
               
                  Regrator fol. 157, a
               
                  Reioynder fol. 157, a
               
                  Releaſe fol. 157, b
               
                  Reliefe fol. 158, a
               
                  Remainder fol. 158, b
               
                  Remitter fol. 159, a
               
                  Rents fol. 160, a
               
                  Repleuin fol. 165, a
               
                  Replication fol. 165, b
               
                  Repriſes fol. 166, a
               
                  Receit fol. 166, a
               
                  Reſcous fol. 166, a
               
                  Reſeruation fol. 166, b
               
                  Retraxit fol. 167. a
               
                  Reeue fol. 167, b
               
                  Reuerſion fol. 168, a
               
                  Riot fol. 168, b
               
                  Robberie fol. 168, b
               
                  Rout fol. 168, b
            
            
               S.
               
                  Sake fol. 169, a
               
                  Scire facias fol. 169, a
               
                  Scot fol. 170, a
               
                  Seruice de chiualer fol. 170, a
               
                  
                     Shewing fol. 170, a
               
                  Soke fol. 170, b
               
                  Sokmains fol. 170, b
               
                  Socage fol. 172, a
               
                  Summons ad warrantizandum fol. 173, a
               
                  Spoliation fol. 173, a
               
                  Stallage fol. 174, a
               
                  Suit Couenant fol. 174, a
               
                  Suit cuſtome fol. 174, b
               
                  Suit reall fol. 174, b
               
                  Suit ſeruice fol. 175, a
               
                  Statute marchant fol. 175. a
            
            
               T.
               
                  ¶Taile fol. 176, a
               
                  Taile ap̄s poſſ▪ &c. fol. 177, a
               
                  Taxe & Tallage fol. 177, b
               
                  Tenure in capite fol. 177, b
               
                  Terme dans fol. 177, a
               
                  Teſtament fol. 178, a
               
                  Them fol. 179, a
               
                  The
                        •
                     tbote fol. 179, a
               
                  Title fol. 179, b
               
                  Title dentrie fol. 179, b
               
                  Toſſe fol. 180, a
               
                  Treaſon fol. 181, a
               
                  Treaſure troue fol. 181, a
               
                  Turne del V
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     nt fol. 181, 
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               V.
               
                  ¶View fol. 181, b
               
                  Vi laica remouēda fol. 182, a
               
                  Villenage fol. 182, b
               
                  Viſcont fol. 185, a
               
                  Volunt fol. 186, a
               
                  Voucher fol. 187, a
               
                  Vſes fol. 187, b
               
                  Vſurie fol. 188, a
               
                  Vtlagarie fol. 188, b
               
                  Vtrum fol. 189, 
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               W.
               
                  Wai
                        •
                     e fol. 190, a
               
                  Wa
                        ••
                     e fol. 190, b
               
                  Warwit fol. 191, a
               
                  Waſt
                        •
                     
                   fol. 191, a
               
                  Wreck fol. 191, b
               
                  Withernam fol. 192, a
               
                  Warren fol. 192, a
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               Termes of the Law.
               
                  1 Abatement of a writ or plaint.
                  
                     ABatemēt of a writ or plaint, is when an actiō is broght by writ or plaint, wherein is lacke of ſufficient and good matter, or els the matter alledged is not certainly ſet downe, or if the plaintife or defendant, or place are miſnamed, or if there appeare variance betwéene the writ and the ſpecialtie or recorde, or that the writ or the declaration be vncertaine, or for death of the plaintife or defendant and for diuers other like cauſes, then vpō thoſe defaults, the defendant may pray, yt the writte or plaint may abate, that is to ſay, that the plaintifs ſuit againſt him, may ceaſe for that time, & that he ſhal begin again his ſuit, and bring a newe writ or plaint if he be ſo diſpoſed to doe. But if the defendant in any action plede a matter in barre, for to adnull the

action for euer, he ſhal not come afterwards to plede in abatement of the writ, but if after it appere in ye record, that there is ſome matter apparant, for the which ye writ ought to be abated, then ye def. or any perſō as a frind to ye court may well plede & ſhewe yt in arreſt of iudgement.
                  
                     See the titles of writ, Miſnoſmer & Variance in the Abridgements, and the book called the Digeſts of writs, in which it is very well entreated, eſpecially of theſe matters.
               
               
                  Abatement in lands.
                  
                     ABatement in lands or tenemēts is whē a mā
                     
dieth ſeaſed of lāds or tenements, & one yt hath no right entreth into ye ſame lands or tenemēts before y• heire maketh his entry, this entry of him is called an abatement, & he an Abator. But if the heire enter firſt after ye death of his aunceſtor, & the other enter vpon y• poſſeſſion of y• heire, this entry of him is a diſſeiſin to the heire. Look in ye book of entries 
                        •
                     o. 63. c. & 205. d. & 519. c. where this word Abatement is called in latin, Intruſio, And I think it better to cal it in latin Interpoſitio, or Intratio per interpoſitionem, to make a difference betwéene this worde & intruſion after y• death of the tenāt for life.
               
               
                  3 Abbot.
                  
                     ABbot was y• ſoueraigne head, or chiefe of thoſe houſes, which when they ſtood were called Abbies, & this Abbot together wt ye monks of ye ſame houſe, who were called y• couent made a corporation: ſuch a ſoueraigne of any ſuch houſe ſhal not be charged by y• act of his predeceſſor,

if it be not by cōmon ſeale or for ſuch things which commeth to the vſe of his houſe. Alſo an abbot ſhall not be charged for the det of his Monke before his entre in religion, though the creditor hanc an eſpecialtie thereof, except that it haue come to the vſe of his houſe, but the executors of the Monke ſhalbe charged therewith.
                  Look for this in the Abridgments the ſame title vnder which you ſhall ſée that ſome of thē were electiue, ſome preſētatiue, And how they were made gouernors, and their authoritie, and in this title are alſo comprehended all other corporations ſpiritual, as Prior and his couent friers and Canons, Deane & Chapter.
               
               
                  ¶ Abbettors.
                  
                     ABbettors are in diuers caſes diuerſly takē one kind of abbettors are they y• maliciouſly wtout iuſt cauſe or deſert do procure other to ſue falſe appeals of murther or felonie againſt men to the intēt to trouble & greue them, and

to bring them to infamy & ſlaunder. Abbetiours in murders, are thoſe that command, procure, counſell or comfort others to murther. And in ſome cas ſuch abbettors ſhal be taken as principals, and in ſome caſe but as acceſſories. So in other felomes. And their preſence at the deed doing, & their abſēce maketh a difference in the caſe. There are abbettors alſo in treaſon, but they are in caſe as principals, for in treaſon there are no acceſſories.
                  Looke more in the booke called the Plees of the Crown made by the right worſhipfull Iudge Sir W. Stamford in the titles of Acceſſories & damages in appeale.
               
               
                  5 Abeiance.
                  
                     ABeiance is whē a leaſe is made for terme of life, the remainder to the ryght heires of I. S. which I. S. is liuing at the time of the graunt, Now by this graunt the remainder paſſeth from the grauntor preſent
                        •
                     e, yet it veſteth not preſently,

nor taketh hold in the grantée, that is to fay, the right heire of I. S. but is ſaid to be in abeyance or els as the Logiciens terme it in power, or in vnderſtāding, and as we ſay in the cloudes, that is to wit, in the conſideration of the law, That if I. S. dye hauing a right heir, & liuing the leſſée for life, then this is a good remainder, & now veſteth & commeth into the right heire in ſuch ſort, as that he may graunt, forfait or otherwiſe diſpoſe y• ſame, & ceaſeth to bée any more in Abeiāce, for that there is one now of abilitie to take it becauſe that I. S. is dead, & hath left a right heire in life, which could not be liuing I. S. for y• during his life none could properly be ſaid his heire. Alſo if a man bée Patron of a Church, and preſenteth one to y• ſame. Now is the fée of the landes and tenementes perteyninge to the rectorie in the parſon, but if the parſon die and the Church is become void, then is the

fée in abeyaunce, vntill there be a newe Parſon preſented, for the patron hath not the fée, but onely the right to preſent, and the fée is in the incumbēt that is preſented, & after his death, it is in no body but in abeyance, till there be a new incumbent as is aforeſaid.
                  Sée Lit. his 3. booke cap. 11. fol. 145. And Park. fol. 12.
               
               
                  6 Abisherſing.
                  
                     ABisherſing (& in ſome copies Miſherſing) yt is to be quit of amerciamēts before whō ſoeuer of tranſgreſſion proued.
               
               
                  7▪ Abiuration.
                  
                     ABiuration is an oth that a man or woman ſhall take w
                        •
                     ē they haue committed felony, & flie to the Church or churchyard, or to any other place priuiledged for ſafegarde of their liues, chooſing rather perpetual baniſhment out of the realm, thē to ſtād to the law & to be tried of the felony, in which caſe befor the Coroner he ſhalmake ſuch cōfeſſion, which may

make a ſufficient inditement of felony, then the coroner at the comon law ſhall make him to forſwere the Realme, & ſhal aſſigne him to what Port he ſhal goe, & ſhal ſweare him y• he go not out of the high way, & yt he ſhoulde not abide at the port (if he may haue good paſſage) but one flood & one ebbe, & if he cannot haue paſſage, then he ſhall go euery day during xl. daies in the ſe
                        •
                      to the knees, but if ſuch a felon as abiureth go out of the hie way & flieth to another place, if he be taken he ſhalbe brought before the iudge & there ſhal haue iudgement to be hā
                     ged. But if he which ſo praieth the priuiledge wil not abiure, then he ſhall haue the priuiledge for xl. daies, & euery man may giue him meate & drinke. But if any giue him ſuſtenance after xl. daies although it be his wife▪ ſuch giuing is felony. Alſo he that doeth abiure ſhall be deliuered from one Conſtable to another, & from one frāches to another, til

that hee come to his port, and if the Conſtable will not receiue him, he ſhalbe grieuouſly amerced. Look the othe in the Treatiſe de Abiuratione Latronū.
                  
                  And this law was inſtituted by S. Edward the Confeſſor, a king of this Realme before the Conqueſt, and was grounded vpon the law of mercie, & for the loue & reuerence no doubt that he & other his ſucceſſours did beare vnto the houſe of God, or place of prayer and adminiſtration of his woord & ſacramēts, which we call the Church. Note this law is now changed by the ſtatutes 21. H 8. ca. 2 22. H. 8. ca. 14. and 32. H. 8. cap. 12. by which it appeareth, that he at this day ſhall not abiure the Realm, but al his libertie of this Realm, and al his liberall and frée habitations, reſorts and paſſages from all places of this Realme, to one certaine place in this realm therto limitted by 32. H. 8. ca. 13 & 33. H. 8. ca. 15. Looke more in Stamf. li. 2. ca. 10.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Abridgement of a plaint or demaund.
                  
                     ABridgement of a plaint or demaund is where one bringeth an aſſ. writ of dower, writ of ward or ſuch like where ye writ of Aſſiſe is, De libero ten̄to, as in a writ of dower, the writ is, Rationabilē dotē quae eā contingit de libero tenemento w. her huſbād And in a writ of ward the writ is Cuſtod' terrarū & heredis &c. & the plaintife or demaundant, demaundeth diuers acres or parcels of land, & the tenaunt pleadeth Nontenure, or iointenancy or ſome other ſuch like plee, to parcell of the land demaunded in abatement of the writ, then the plaintife or demādant may abridge his plaint or demand to that parcell, y• is to ſay, he may leaue out that parte & pray that the tenaunt ſhall anſwere the reſt to which he hath not yet pleaded any thing. The cauſe is for y• in ſuch writs, the certainty is not ſet downe, but the demād rūneth generally, de libero tenemento, & notwithſtanding

the demandant hath abridged his plaint or demand in part; yet the writ remaineth good ſtill de libero tenemento for y• reſt.
               
               
                  9 ¶ Accedas ad Curiam.
                  
                     ACcedas ad Curiam is a writ directed to the ſhirife, commanding him to go to ſuch a court of ſome lord or franchiſe where a plaint is ſued, for taking of beaſts as a diſtreſſe, or any falſe iudgmēt is ſuppoſed to bee made in any ſuite which hath been in ſuch a court which is not a court of record, and that the ſhirife ſhal there make record of the ſaide ſuite in preſence of the ſuitors of the ſame Court, and of foure other knights of the Countie, and certifie into the kings court, and at that day that is limitted in the writ.
               
               
                  10 ¶ Acceptance.
                  
                     Acceptāce is a taking in good part, & as it were an agréeing vnto ſome act done before, which might haue bin vndon & auoided (if ſuch acceptance had

not bin) by him or them that ſo accepted, As for example: if a Biſhop before primo Eliz. leaſe part of the poſſeſſions of his Biſhopricke for terme of yéeres reſeruing rent and dyeth, and after an other is made Biſhop, who accepteth, that is to ſay, taketh or receiueth the rent when it is due and ought to be paied, now by this acceptaunce the leaſe is made perfect and good, which els the new biſhop might verie well haue auoided & made fruſtrate.
                  The like law is, if a mā & his wife ſeiſed of land in the right of the wyfe 
                        •
                     oine or make leaſe by 
                        •
                     effment in déede reſeruing rent, and the huſband dyeth, ſhée accepteth or receyueth the rent, by this the feoffement or leaſe is made perfect and good, & ſhal barre her to bring her writ called Cui in vita.
                  
               
               
                  Acceſsories.
                  
                     ACceſsories are in two ſorts, theone before the offence, the other after the offence is done, Acceſsorie
                     
before the fact or offence is he that commandeth or procureth an other to doe felonie, & is not there preſent himſelfe when the other doth it, but if hée be preſent then hee is alſo principal. Acceſſorie after the offence is hee that receiueth, fauoureth, a
                        ••
                     eth, 
                        •
                     ſſiſteth or comforteth anie mā that hath don any murder or felony whereof hee hath knowledge, ſuch an acceſſorie ſhalbe puniſhed, and ſhal haue iudgement of life and member aſwell as the principall which did the felonie: but ſuch an acceſſorie ſhal neuer be put to that till the principall bee attaint or conuict, or bee outlawed thereupon. But a women in ſuch caſe ſhal not be acceſſorie for helping her huſband: in great or high Treaſon aſwell the commāders as the aſſiſters & receiuers after be alwais principals.
                  Alſo one may be acceſſorie to an acceſſorie, as if one feloniouſly receiue an other that is acceſſorie to felonie, there the receiuer

is an acceſſorie.
                  
                     See more of acceſſorie in the ſaid Booke of Plees of the Crown the firſt booke, cap. 44. 45. 46. 47. 98. 49. & 50.
               
               
                  ¶ Action.
                  
                     ACtion is the forme of a ſuit giuen by the lawe to recouer a thing, as an action of debt and ſuch like.
                  
                     See the Lexicon of the lavv for action.
               
               
                  Actions perſonals.
                  
                     Actiōs perſonals be ſuch actions wherby a man claimeth debt or other goods and chattels, or damage for them, or damages for wrong don to his perſon, and it is properly that which in the Ciuill law is called Actio in perſonam, which is brought againſt him, who is bound by couenant or default to giue or grant anie thing.
               
               
                  ¶ Actions reals.
                  
                     ACtiōs reals be ſuch actions whereby the demandant claimeth title to

any lands or tomments, rents or commons, in fée ſimple, fée taile, or for terme of life.
               
               
                  15 ¶ Action popular.
                  
                     ACtion populer is an action which is giuē vpon the breach of ſome penal ſtatute, the which action euery man that will may ſue for himſelfe & the Quéene, by information or otherwiſe, as y• ſtatute alloweth, and the caſe requireth. And of theſe actions there be an infinite nūber, but one for example is: when any of the Iury that are impanelled & ſworn to paſſe betweene partie and party indifferently, do take any thing of the one ſide or other, or of both parties to ſay their verdicts on that ſide, then any man that wil within the yeere next following the offence made, may ſue a writ called Decies tantum, againſt him or them that ſo did take to giue his verdict, & becauſe yt this action is not giuen to one ſpecially, but generally to any of the Q. people as

will ſue, it is called an Action populer, but in this caſe when one hath begun to purſue an actiō, no other may ſue it, and in this as it ſeemeth this doth varie from an action populer by the Ciuil law.
               
               
                  Action mixt.
                  
                     Action mixt is a ſuit giuen by the law to recouer the thing demanded, and alſo damages for the wrong done, as in Aſſiſe of Nouel diſſeſ. the which writ (if the diſſeiſor make a feoffement▪ to an other) the diſſeiſée ſhall haue againſt the diſſeiſor & the feffee or other land tenāt, & therby ſhall recouer his ſeiſin of the land & his damages for the mean profits, & for the wrong done vnto him. And ſo is an actiō of waſt & Quare imp. But an action of Detinu is not called an actiō mixt although by it the thing withheld is demanded, & ſhalbe recouered if it may be found, & damages for y• withholding, & i
                        •
                      it cānot be foūd, then damages for

the thing and the reteyning. But that is called onely an action perſonall, becauſe that it ſhould bee brought only for goods & chattels.
               
               
                  17 Action of a writ.
                  
                     ACtion of the writ, is a phraſe of ſpéech vſed when one pleadeth ſome matter▪ by which he ſheweth that the plaintife had no cauſe to haue the writ which he brought, & yet it may be, that he may haue another writ or action for the ſame matter: ſuch a plée is called a plée to the action of the writ, whereas if by the plee it ſhould appeare, that the plaintife hath no cauſe to haue any action, for the thing demaunded, then it ſhal bée called a plée to the action.
               
               
                  18 Action vpon the caſe.
                  
                     ACtion vpon the caſe, is a writ brought againſt one for an offence done wtout force, as for not per forming promiſe made

by the defendant to the plaintife or for ſpeaking of wordes, by which the plaintife is defamed, or for other miſdemeanor or diſceit, where the whole caſe ſhall be contained in the writ.
               
               
                  Action vpon the ſtatute.
                  
                     ACtion vpon the ſtatute is a writfoūded vpon any ſtatute, where by any ſtatute an action is giuen to one in any caſe where no action was before: As where one committeth periurie to the preiudice of another, he which is indamaged ſhal haue a writ vpon the ſtatute and his caſe, And the difference between action vpon the ſtatute and action Populer is, that where the ſtatute giueth the ſuite or action, to the partie grieued, or otherwiſe to one perſon certaine, that is called action vpon the Statute: But where by the ſtatute aucthoritie is giuen to euery one that will

to ſue, that is termed action Populer.
               
               
                  Accompt.
                  
                     ACcompt is a writ and it lyeth where a Bailife or a Receiuer to any Lorde or other man, which ought to render accompt, will not giue his accompt, then hee to whom the accompt ought to bee giuen, ſhall haue this writte. And by the Statute of weſtminſter 2. Chapter 10. if the Accomptant bee found in arrerages, the Auditours which bee aſſigned to him, haue power to award him to priſon there to abide till he haue made agréement to the partie, But if the Auditours will not allowe reaſonable expence and coſtes, or if they charge him with mo
                        •
                      receites then they ought, then his next friend that will ſue for him, ſhal ſue a writte of Ex parte talis out of the Chancery directed to the Shirife to

take foure mainpernors to bring his bodie before the Barons of the Exchequer at a certain day▪ and to warne the Lorde to appeare there at a certaine day.
               
               
                  Accord.
                  
                     ACcord is agréemēt betwéen two at the leaſt to ſatiſfie an offence that the one hath made to the other, when a man hath done a treſpas, or ſuch like vnto another, for the which hee hath agréed with him, to ſatiſfie and content him with ſome recompence, which if it be executed and perfourmed, then becauſe that this recompence, is a full ſatiſfaction for the offēce, it ſhall be a good barre in the law, if the other after y• accord performed ſhould ſue againe any action for the ſame treſpas.
                  Note that the firſt is properly called an accord, the other a contract.
               
               
                  Acquitall.
                  
                     ACquital is where ther is a Lorde, me
                        •
                     ne, and

tenant, & the tenant holdeth of the me
                        ••
                     e certaine landes or tenements in frankalmoigne, frākmariage or ſuch like, and the meſne holdeth ouer alſo of the lord paramount, or about him. Now ought the meſne to acquit or diſcharge the tenant of all & euery manner of ſeruice, that any other wold haue or demaunde o
                        •
                      him concerning the ſame lands or tenements, for that the tenant muſt doe his ſeruice to the meſne onely, and not to diuers Lords for one tenement or parcel of land. The ſame law is where there is one Lord, meſne, and tenant as aforeſaid, & the meſne graunteth to the tenaunt (vpon the tenure made betwéen them) to acquite and diſcharge him of all rents, ſeruices, and ſuch like, This diſcharge is called acquitall.
                  Like lawe is if the tenant holdeth of his meſne by like ſeruices, as the meſne holdeth ouer of the lord, & the tenant doeth or paieth his ſeruices to the

meſne, but the meſne doth not his ſeruices to y• chief lord, wherefore he diſtreineth the beaſtes of the tenaunt▪ In this caſe the meſne for the equalnes of the ſeruices ought to acquit the tenant of the ſeruice due vnto the Lord.
               
               
                  Acquitance.
                  
                     ACquitāce, is a diſcharg in writing of a ſumme of money, or other duetie which ought to bée payd or done: As if one bée bound to pay money vpon an obligation, or rent reſerued vppon a leaſe or ſuch like, and the partie to whom the money or dutie ſhould bée paide or done, vpon the receite thereof, or vpon other agréement betwéene them had, maketh a writing or bill of his hande, in diſcharge therof, witneſſing that he is paid, or otherwiſe contented, and therefore doth acquit and diſcharge him of the ſame, which acquitance is ſuch a diſcharge & barre in the law, that he cannot demand and recouer that ſumme or duty againe

contrary thereunto if he ſhew the acquitance.
                  This worde differeth frō thoſe which in the ciuil law be called Acceptitatio, or Apocha, becauſe Acceptitatio may bée by word without writing, & is nothing but a fayned payment and diſcharge, though no paimēt be had, And Apocha is a writing witneſſing the paiment or deliuerie of money which diſchargeth not vnles the money be paid.
               
               
                  24 Actes.
                  
                     ACtes of parliament, are poſitiue Lawes which conſiſt of two partes, that is to ſay of the wordes of the Acte, & of the ſence thereof & they both ioined together make the law.
               
               
                  Additions.
                  
                     ADdition, is that which is giuen vnto a man ouer and beſides his proper name & ſirname, that is to ſay, to ſhew of what eſtate or degree or myſterie hée is, and of what Towne or Hamlett or Countie.
                  
                     Additions of eſtate are theſe, yeoman, gentleman, Eſquire and ſuch like.
                  Additions of degrée are thoſe that we call names of dignitye as Knight, Er
                        •
                     e, Marques & Duke.
                  Additions of miſterie are ſuch, ſcriuener, painter, maſon, carpenter, tailor, ſmith, and ſo all other of like nature, for miſtery is the craft or occupation whereby a man getteth his liuing.
                  Additions of towns as Sale, Dale, and ſuch others, & ſo of the reſt.
                  And where a man hath houſhold in two places he ſhalbe ſaid to dwell in both of them ſo that his addition in one of them doth ſuffice.
                  By the ſtatute the firſt yéere of H. the 5. & Chapter the 5. it was ordeined that in ſutes or in actions where proces of v
                        •
                     lagary lyeth, ſuch addityons ſhould be to the name of the def. to ſhew his eſtate myſterie and place where he dwelleth, and that ſuch writs ſhall abate, if they haue not ſuch additions,

if the defendant take exception thereto, but they ſhall not abate by the office of the Court.
                  Alſo Duke, Marques, Earle, or Knight, bée none of that addition but names of dignitie, which ſhould haue bin giuen before the Statute.
                  And this was ordeined by the ſaid Statute made in the firſt yeare of king H. the 5. Cap. 5. to the intent, that one man might not bée gréeued nor troubled by the v
                        •
                     larie of an other: but that by reaſon of the certaine addition, euery man might be certainly knowen and beare his owne burden.
               
               
                  26 Adiournement.
                  
                     ADiournement is when any Court is diſſolued & determined and aſſigned to be kept againe at another place or time, and me thinketh is compounded of two words (ad) or (al) and iour.
                  
               
               
                  27 Admeaſurement de Dower.
                  
                     ADmeſuremēt de dower is a writ, and it lyeth

where a womā is indowed by an infaunt, or by a gardein of more then ſhée ought to haue, the heire in ſuch caſe ſhall haue this writ, by the which y• woman ſhall be admeaſured, & the heire reſtored to the ouerplus. But if one abate, y• is to ſay, one which hath right entreth after the death of the huſbād, & endowe the wife of him which is dead, of more then ſhe ought to haue, the heire ſhall not haue this writ, but aſſiſe of mortdaficeſter againſt the woman, & if ſhe plede that ſhe was endowed of the land as of the fréeholde of her huſbād, the heire ſhal ſhew how ſhe was endowed by the abator & that ſhée had more then ſhée ought to haue, & ſhal pray that hée may be reſtored to the ſurpluſage, and if it be found he ſhal be reſtored.
               
               
                  Admeaſurement de paſture.
                  
                     ADmeaſurement de paſture is a writ & it lieth where many tenāts haue common appendant in an other ground & one ouerchargeth

the cōmon with manie beaſts: Thē the other cōmoners may haue this writte againſt him, & alſo it may be brought by one commoner onely, but then it behoueth to bee brought againſt all the other cōmoners, & againſt him that ſurcharged, for y• all the commoners ſhal be admeaſured.
                  And this writ lieth not againſt him, nor for him y• hath common appurtenant or common ingroſſe, but thē which haue common appēdant, or commō by cauſe of viſinage.
                  
                     See the diuerſitie of all theſe cōmons afterwards
                  Alſo this writ lieth not for the Lorde, nor againſt the lord, but the lord may diſtrain the beaſts of the tenāt that be ſurpluſage. But if y• lord ouercharge the common▪ the commoner hath no remedie by the common law, but an Aſsiſe of his common.
               
               
                  29 Adminiſtrator.
                  
                     ADminiſt. is he to whom the ordinary cōmitteth the adminiſtration of the

goods of a dead man for default of an executor, and an action ſhall lie againſt him and for him as for an executor, & he ſhalbe charged to the value of the goods of the dead man and no further, if it bee nor by his ow̄ne falſe plée, or for that that he hath waſted the goods of the dead: but if▪ the adminiſtrator die, his executors bee not adminiſtrators, but it behoueth the Ordinarie to cō
                     mit a new adminiſtration: but if a ſtranger that is not adminiſtrator nor executor take the goods of the dead, & adminiſter of his own wrong, he ſhalbe charged & ſued as an executor, and not as adminiſtrator in any action that is brought againſt him by anie creditor. But if the ordinary make a letter ad Colligēdū bona defuncti, he that hath ſuch a letter is not adminiſtrator, but the action lyeth againſt the Ordinary aſwel as if he tooke the goods to his own hand, or by the hand of any of his ſeruants by any other commandemēt.
               
               
                  
                  30 ¶ Admirall.
                  
                     ADmirall is an officer vnder the Quéene, yt hath authority vpon the Sea onely to ſée the nauy prepared and maintained to ſuppreſſe and chaſe away robbers and rouers, and to iudge of contracts, betwéene partie & partie, concerning things done vpon & beyond the ſeas, and for that purpoſe hath his courte called the Admiraltie. Hee may cauſe his Citation to be ſerued vpon the land & take the parties bodie or goods in execution vpon the land.
                  And alſo he hath cogniſance of the death or maihem of a man committed in any great ſhip fléeting in great riuers in the realm, beneath ye bridges of the ſame next the ſea.
                  Alſo to arreſt ſhips in the great ſtreames for the voyages of the Quéene & Realme, and hath iuriſdiction in the ſaid ſtremes during the ſame viages.
               
               
                  31 ¶ Ad quod dampnū.
                  
                     AD quod dampnum is a writte which ought to

be ſued before the K. grāt certaine liberties: As a faire, market, or ſuch like which may be preiudicial to others. And by it ſhall be inquired if it ſhould be a preiudice to grant thē, and to whome it ſhall be preiudicial, and what preiudice ſhal come thereby.
               
               
                  ¶ Aduowſon.
                  
                     ADuovvſon is where a man & his heires haue right to preſent their clerk to the Ordinarie to a parſonage, or other ſpirituall benefice when it becommeth void. And he which hath ſuch right to preſent is called Patron.
               
               
                  ¶ Age prier.
                  
                     AGe prier is whē an actiō is brought againſt an infant of lands which hee hath by diſcent, there he ſhal ſhew the matter to the court, & ſhal pray that the action may ſtay til his full age of xxi. yeres, & ſo by award of the Courte the ſuit ſhal ſurceaſe.
                  But in a writ of dovver and in Aſſiſe, and alſo in ſuch actions wher the infant

is ſuppoſed to come to the land demanded by his owne wrong, he ſhall not haue his age.
                  Alſo note wel that there be many diuerſities of ages, for the Lorde ſhall haue aide of his tenant in Socage for to marie his daughter, when ye daughter of the Lorde is of the age of ſeuen yeeres. And alſo ayde for to make his ſonne and heire knight, when hee is of the age of ſeuen yeeres. Alſo a woman which is maried at the age of ix. yeeres, if her huſbande die ſeiſed ſhall haue Dower, and not before nine yeres.
                  Alſo xiiii. yeeres is the age of a woman that ſhee ſhal not be in ward if ſhee were of ſuch age at yt time of the death of her aunceſtor, but if ſhe were within the age of xiiii. yeres, & in ward of the Lord, then ſhe ſhalbe in ward till the age of xvi. yeres. And alſo xxi. yeres is the age of the heir male to be in ward, & after y• out of ward. And alſo it is y• age of male & female to ſue & to be ſued of

lands which they haue or claime by diſcent, and to make al maner of cōtracts and bargains, and not before: but if ſuch an infant within ye age of 21. yeeres giue his goods & the donée take them, the infaunt may haue action of treſpas; but otherwiſe it is if he deliuer them himſelfe.
               
               
                  Agreement.
                  
                     AGreemēt, is after this ſort defined or expounded in Maſter Plovvdens commentaries. Aggreamentum is a worde compounded of two wordes, namelie, of Aggregatio & Mentium, that is to ſay, agréement of mindes, ſo that agréement is a conſent of mindes in ſome things done or to be done, and by drawing together of the two wordes, Aggregatio and mentium, & by the haſtic and ſhorte pronouncing of thē they bee made one worde, to witte, Aggreamentum, which is no other thing then a ioyning, putting, cupling and knitting together of two or moe

mindes in ani
                        •
                      thing done or to bee done. (Sée after in teſtament) And this agréement is in thrée manners.
                  The firſt is an agréement executed already at the beginning.
                  The ſecond is an agréement after an acte done by another, and is an agréement executed alſo.
                  The third is an agréement executory or to be don in time yet to come.
                  The firſt which is an agreement executed already at the beginning is ſuch▪ whereof mention is made in the ſtatute of 25. Edw. 3. cap. 3. of clothes in the 4. ſtatute, which ſaith That the goods and things bought by foreſtallers, being therof attainted shalbe forfaire to the Queen, if the buyer thereof haue made gree with the ſeller. In which caſe y• word (Grée) which is otherwiſe called agreement, ſhall be vnderſtoode agréement executed, that is, payment for the things.
                  The ſecond maner of agréemēt is where one doth

a thing, or act; & another agrées or aſſents thereto afterwardes as if one doe a diſſeiſin to my vſe, & afterward I agre to it, nowe I ſhall be a diſſeiſor from the beginning, and ſuch agrement is an agréement after an act done.
                  The third agréement is when both parties at one time are agreed that ſuch a thing ſhalbe done in time to come, and this agréement is executorie in as much as the thing ſhall be done after, and yet there, their minds agréed at one time. But becauſe the performance ſhalbe afterward and the thing vpon which the agréement was made remaines to bee done, that agréement ſhalbe ſaid executorie. And that the ſtatute of 26. H. 8. cap. 3. doth proue where it ſaith, that euery vicar, parſon & ſuch like &c. before their actuall poſſeſſion, or medling wt the profites of their benefices ſhall ſatiſfie, contēt &c. or agrée to paye to the Q. the firſt fruits &c. and if any ſuch parſon or vicar, &c. enter in actuall poſſeſſion,

&c. this agréement is to be vnderſtoode executory as the common vſe proues, for it is vſed that hee with one or two with him doe make two or three obligations for it to bee paied at certaine daies after, and this agreement executorie is deuided into tw̄o points. One is an agreement executorie which is certaine at the beginning, as is ſaid laſt before of the firſt fruits.
                  The other is where the certaintie doth not appeare at the firſt, and the parties are agreed that the thing ſhall be performed or paide vpon the certaintie knowē as if one ſell to another all his wheate in ſuch a taſſe in his barne vnthreſhed, and it is agréed betwéene them that he ſhall paie for euery buſhel xii▪ d. when it is threſhed, cleaned and meaſured.
               
               
                  35 ¶ Ayde.
                  
                     AYde, is when tenaunt for terme of life▪ tenaunt in dower, tenant by curteſie, or tenant in taile after poſſibilitie of iſſue extinct

is impleaded then for that they haue no eſtate but for terme of life, they ſhall pray in ayde of him in the reuerſion and proces ſhall bee made by writ againſt him, to come & plead with the tenant in the defence of the land if hee will, but it behooueth that they agree in the plée, for if they vary, the plee of the tenant ſhall be taken and then the aide prayer is void, but if hee come not at the ſecond writ, then the tenaunt ſhall anſwere ſole.
                  Alſo tenant for terme of yeeres, tenant at will, tenant by Elegit, and tenant by ſtatute merchant, ſhall haue aide of him in the reuerſion, and the ſeruant & bayly of their maſter, when they haue done anie thing lawfully in ye right of their maſter, ſhal haue aide.
               
               
                  ¶ Ayde de Roy.
                  
                     AIde of the king, is in like caſe as it is ſaide before of a common perſon, and alſo in many other caſes where the king may haue loſſe, although that the tenaunt bee tenaunt in fée

ſimple hee ſhall haue aide, As if a rent be demaunded againſt the kings tenaunt, which holdeth in chiefe, he ſhal haue aid and ſo he ſhall not of a common perſon.
                  And where a Citie or Borough hath a fée farme of the king, and any thing be demaunded againſt thē which belongeth to the fée farme, they ſhal haue ayde for the loſſe of the king.
                  Alſo a man ſhall haue aide of the King in the ſteede of voucher. Alſo the Kings Bailife, the Collector, and Purueyour ſhall haue ayde of the King, as well as the officers of other perſons.
               
               
                  ¶ Ayle.
                  
                     AYle is a writ which lyeth where lande diſcendeth from the graundfather to his nephews▪ s. the ſonne or daughter of the ſonne of the graundfather, the father being dead before the entrie by him, and one abateth, the heire ſhall haue againſt the abator this writ.
               
               
                  
                  Alien.
                  
                     ALien is he whoſe father and himſelfe were both borne out of the Queenes legeance, and if ſuch an alien being none of the Q. enemies, but an aliē friend come and dwell here in England and haue iſſue, this iſſue is not alien but Engliſh. So if an Engliſh man go ouer the ſeas with the Quéenes licēce and there hath iſſue, this iſſue is no alien.
               
               
                  Alienation.
                  
                     ALienation, is as much to ſaye, as to make a thing another mans, or to alter or put the poſſeſſiō of lands or other thing from one man to another.
               
               
                  Ambidexter.
                  
                     AMbidexter, is hee that when a matter is in ſuit betweene men, taketh money of the one ſide and of the other, either to labor the ſuit or ſuch like, or if he be of the Iury, to ſaye his verdict.
               
               
                  Amendement.
                  
                     AMendement, is whē errour is in the Proces,

the Iuſtices may amend it after iudgement. But if there bee errour in giuing of iudgement, they may not amend it, but the partie is put to his writte of error. And in many caſes where the default appeareth in the clarke that writ the Record it ſhall be amēded: But ſuch things as come by information of the party as the towne, miſtery, and ſuch like, ſhal not bee amended, for hee muſt informe true vpon his perill.
               
               
                  42 Amercement.
                  
                     AMercement, moſt properly is a penaltie aſſeſſed by the piers or equales of the party amerced, for an offence done, as for lack of ſuit of Court, or for not amending of ſome thing that he was appointed to redreſſe by a certaine time before, or for ſuch like cauſe, in which caſe, the partie which offēdeth putteth himſelfe in the mercy of the king or Lorde, and thereupon this penaltie is called Amercement.
               
               
                  
                  Amercement royall.
                  
                     AMercement royall, is when a Shirife, Coroner or other ſuch Officer of the Queene is amerced by the Iuſtices for his abuſe in the office, ſéeke if it ſhall not be ſaid a fine.
               
               
                  An, iour & waſt.
                  
                     AN, iour & waſt, is a forfaiture whē a man hath committed petit treaſon, or felony, and hath landes which he holdeth of ſome comon perſon, which ſhall be ſeiſed for the Quéene, and remaine in her hands by the ſpace of one yéere & a day next after the attainder, and then the trées ſhalbe digged vp, the houſes ſhalbee raſed & pulled downe, and the paſtures & meadowes 
                        •
                     yred and plowed vp, ſo yt he to whome the lande ſhould come by eſchete or forfaiture do not redeeme it of the King, a thing the more to greeue the offenders and terrifie others to fall into the like, in ſhewing how the lawe doth deteſt their offence ſo farre foorth as that it doth execute iudgement &

puniſhmēt euen vpō their dumme & dead things.
               
               
                  45 Annuitie.
                  
                     ANnuitie, is a certaine ſumme of money granted to another in fée ſimple, fée taile, for terme of life, or for terme of yéeres, to receiue of the grauntor or of his heires, ſo that no fréeholde is charged therewith, whereof a man ſhall neuer haue aſſiſe nor other action, but a writ of Annuitie, and it is none aſſets to the heire of the grauntée to whome it ſhall diſcend.
               
               
                  46 Apppeale.
                  
                     APpeale, is where one hath done murder, robbery or mayhem, then the wife of him that is ſlaine ſhal haue an action of appeale againſt the murtherer, but if he haue no wife then his next heire male ſhall haue the appeale at any time within a yéere and a day after the déede, And alſo he that is ſo robbed or mayhemed ſhal haue his appeale, and if the defendant be acquited, he ſhall

recouer damages againſt the appellor and thabbettors, and they ſhal haue the impriſonment of a yeere and ſhall make fine to the King. An appeale of maihem is in manner but a treſpas, for hee ſhall recouer but damages.
               
               
                  ¶ Appellant.
                  
                     Appellant, is the plaintife in the appeale.
               
               
                  ¶ Appellour.
                  
                     APpellour or Approuer, is he who hath committed ſome felonie which he confeſſeth and nowe appealeth or approueth, that is to ſay, accuſeth others which were coadiutors or helpers with him in doing the ſame or other felonies, which thing he wil approue and therefore is called in latine probator.
                  
               
               
                  Appendant & appurtenant.
                  
                     Appendant & appurtenāt, are things that by time of preſcription haue belonged, appertained, and are ioyned to another principall thing, by which

they paſſe and go as acceſſarie to the ſame principal thing, by vertue of theſe woordes Pertinentijs: as landes, aduowſons, commons, piſcaries, wayes, courtes, and diuers ſuch like, to a mannor, houſe, office, or ſuch others.
               
               
                  50 Apporcionment.
                  
                     APporcionment is a deuiding into partes of a rent (which is deuidable and not intier or whole) & foraſmuch as the thing out of which it was to be paied is ſeperated and deuided, the rent alſo ſhal be deuided hauing reſpect to the partes. As if a man haue a rent ſeruice iſſuing out of landes, and he purchaſeth parcell of the land, the rent ſhalbe apportioned, according to the value of the land.
                  So if a man hold his lande of an other by homage, fealtie, eſcuage, and certain rent, if the Lord of whom the lande is holden purchaſe parcel of the land the rēt ſhal be apportioned.
                  Alſo if a man let landes for yéeres reſeruing rent, and after a Stranger recovereth

part of the lande, then the rent ſhal be apportioned, that is to ſay deuided, & the leſſée ſhal pay hauing reſpect to that which is recouered, and to that which yet remaines in his handes according to the value.
                  But a rent charge cānot be apportioned, nor things that are entier: As if one hold land by ſeruice to pay to his Lord yéerely at ſuch a feaſt, a Horſe, a Hauke, a Roſe, a cherie, or ſuch like, there if the Lord purchaſe parcell of the land, this ſeruice is gone altogether, becauſe a Horſe, a Hauke, a Roſe, a cherie, and ſuch other cannot be deuided, ſeuered, or apportioned without hurt to the whole.
               
               
                  Appropriations.
                  
                     APpropriatiōs were whē thoſe houſes of the Romiſhe Religion, and thoſe Religious perſons, as Abbots, Priors, and ſuch like, had the aduowſon of any parſonage to them and to their ſucceſſors, and obtayned licence of their

holy father the Pope, and of the Ordinarie & King, that they themſelues, and their ſucceſſors from thēce foorth ſhould bée parſons there, and that it ſhall bée from thence foorth a vicarage, and that the Vicar ſhall ſerue the cure. And ſo at the beginning Appropriations were made onely to thoſe perſons ſpirituall that could miniſter the Sacraments, and ſay deuine ſeruice, as Abbots, Priors, Deanes, and ſuch like. After by a little and little they were inlarged & made to other, as namely to a Deane and Chapter, which is a body corporate conſiſting of many, which body together could not ſay deuine ſeruice, and that more was to Nunnes that were Prioreſſes of ſome Nunrie, which was a wicked thing, inſomuch as they could neither miniſter Sacramentes nor preach, nor ſay diuine ſeruice to the pariſhioners.
                  And all this was vpon pretence of hoſpitalitie & maintenance thereof. And to ſupplie theſe defectes

a vicar was deuiſed, who ſhould bée Deputie to the Priores, or to the Deane and Chapter, and alſo at the laſt to the ſaid Abbots and others to ſay deuine ſeruice, & ſhould haue for his labour but a little portion, and they to whom the appropriations were made ſhoulde retayne the great reuenues, and they did nothing for it, by meanes whereof hoſpitalitie decayed in the place where it ought to haue béen chiefly maintained, namely in the pariſhe where the benefice was, and where the profits did grow, & ſo it continueth to this day, to the great hinderance of learning, to the impoueriſhment of the miniſterie, and to the infamie of the Goſpel and profeſſors thereof.
                  The Vicar ſhall haue certaine portion of the benefice, and the Abbot and the Couent ſhall bée parſons and ſhall haue the other profits: This is called Appropriation, & then the Abbot & Couent ſhall bée parſons imparſonées. But ſuch Appropriation

may not bée made to begin in the life of the parſon without his aſſent.
                  But if ſuch aduowſons of the parſonage bée recouered by ancient title, then the Appropriation is adnulled. And it is called appropriation, for that they hold the profites to their owne proper vſe.
               
               
                  52 Approuement.
                  
                     APprouement is where a man hath common in the Lordes waſt ground, & the Lord incloſeth parte of the waſt for himſelf, leauing neuertheleſſe ſufficient common with egreſſe and regreſſe for the commoners: This incloſing is called approuement.
               
               
                  53 Arbitrement.
                  
                     ARbitrement is an award, determination or iudgement, which one or moe maketh at the requeſt of two parties at the leaſt, for, & vpon ſome debt, treſpaſſe, or other controuerſie had betwéene the ſaid parties. And this is called in Latin Arbitratus and Arbitrium,
                     
and they that make the award or arbitrement are called Arbitri, in Engliſh Arbitrators.
               
               
                  Arreſt.
                  
                     ARreſt is when one is taken and reſtrayned from his libertie. None ſhalbe arreſted for dette, treſpaſſe, detinue, or other cauſe of action, but by vertue of a precept or commaundement out of ſome Court. But for Treaſon, Felonie, or breaking of the peace, euery man hath aucthoritie to arreſt without warrant or precept. And where one ſhalbe arreſted for felonie, it behooueth that ſome felonie be done, and that he bée ſuſpected of the ſame Felonie, or otherwiſe hée may haue agaynſt hym that ſo dyd arreſt hym, a writte of falſe impriſonment. And when anie man ſhall bée arreſted for Felonie, hée ſhalbée brought to the Gayle, there to abide vntill the next Seſſions for to bée indicted, or for to be deliuered by Proclamation.
               
               
                  
                  55 Arrerages.
                  
                     ARrerages are duties behinde vnpaide after the dayes and times in which they were due, and ought to haue béene payd whether they be rent of a manor or any other thing reſerued.
               
               
                  56 Aſſets.
                  
                     ASſets is in two ſortes, the one called (aſſets per diſcent) the other (aſſets enter maines.) Aſſets per diſcent is where a man is bound in an obligation, & dieth ſeyſed of lands in fée ſimple, which deſcēd to his heire, then his land ſhalbe called aſſets, that is to ſay, enough or ſufficient to pay the ſame debt, and by that meanes the heire ſhall bée charged as far as the land ſo to him diſcended will ſtretch. But if he haue aliened before the Obligation be put in ſuite he is diſcharged.
                  Alſo when a man ſeyſed of landes in tayle, or in the right of his wife alieneth the ſame with warrantie, and hath in value as much landes in

fée ſimple, which diſcendeth to his heire, who is alſo heire in taile or heire to the woman. Now if the heire after the deceaſe of his anceſtor bring a writ of Formedon, or ſur cui in vita, for the lād ſo aliened, then he ſhall bée barred by reaſon of the warrantie and the land ſo diſcended, which is as much in value as that was ſolde, and ſo thereby hée hath receyued no preiudice, and therefore this lande is called Aſsets per diſcent.
                  
                  
                     Aſsets enter maines is whē a man indebted, as before is ſaid, maketh executors, and leaueth to them ſufficient to pay, or ſome cōmodity or profite is come vnto them in right of their teſtatour, this is ſaid aſſets in their hands.
               
               
                  Aſsignee.
                  
                     ASſignee is hée to whom a thing is appointed or aſſigned to bée occupied, paide or done, & is alwaies ſuch a perſon, which occupieth or hath the thing ſo aſſigned in his owne right and for himſelfe,

and of aſſignes there bée two ſortes, namely, Aſſignee in déed and Aſſignée in law. Aſſignée in déede is when a leas is graūted to a man, or to his aſſignes or without thoſe wordes, aſſignes, and the grauntée giueth graunteth or ſelleth the ſame leaſe to an other, he is his aſſignée in déede. Aſſignée in 
                        •
                     awe is euery executor named by the teſtator in his teſtament, As if a leaſe be made to a man and to his aſſignes (as is aforeſaid) & he maketh his executors and dieth without aſſignement of the leas to any other, Now the executors ſhall haue the ſame leaſe, becauſe they are his aſſignes in law. And ſo it is in other caſes.
               
               
                  58 Aſſiſe.
                  
                     ASſiſe is a writ and it lieth where any m
                        •
                     n is put out of his landes, or tenementes, or of anie profite to bee taken in a certaine place and ſo diſſeiſed of his fréehold. Fréeholde to anie manne is where he is ſeiſed o
                        •
                      lands and tenementes or profite to bée taken in fée ſimple,

fée tayle, for terme of his owne life or for terme of an other mans life. But the tenaunt by Elegit, tenaunt by ſtatute marchant and Statute ſtaple may haue aſſiſe, howbeit that they haue no fréehold and this is ordeined by diuerſe ſtatutes.
                  Alſo in an aſſiſe it is néedfull alwaies that there be one diſſeyſor and one tenant or otherwiſe the writ ſhall abate.
                  Alſo where a man is diſſeyſed and recouereth by aſſiſe of nouel diſſeiſin and afterwarde is againe diſſeiſed by the ſame diſſeiſor, hée ſhall haue againſt him a writte of rediſſeiſin directed to the Sherife to make inquiſition, and if the rediſſeiſin bée founde hée ſhall be ſent to pryſon. Alſo if one recouer by aſſiſe of Mortd. or by other iurie or default or by reddition, and if he bée an other time diſſeyſed, then hée ſhall haue a writte of Poſt diſseiſin, and he which is taken and impriſoned for rediſſeiſin ſhall not bée deliuered without ſpeciall

commaundement of the King. Sée the Statutes thereof Merton cap. 3. Marlebridge cap. 8. And weſtminſter 2. Chapter 26. There is alſo an other Aſſiſe called Aſsiſe of Fresh force, & lieth where a man is diſſeyſed of tenementes which are diuiſible, as in the Citie of London or other Boroughs or Townes that be Fraunchiſes, then the defendaunt ſhall come into the Court of the ſaid Towne and enter his playnt, and ſhall haue a writ directed to the Maior or Baylifes &c. and thereupō ſhal paſſe a Iurie in manner of aſſiſe of nouel diſſeiſin. But it behooueth that he doe enter his plaint within fortie dayes as it is ſaid or otherwiſe he ſhalbe ſent to the common law. And if the Officers delay the execution, then the plaintife ſhall haue an other writ to haue execution, And a Sicut alias, and a Pluries &c. Sée Litt▪ cap. Rents, Aſſiſe is a worde of two ſignifications.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Aſſiſe de darraine preſentment.
                  
                     ASſiſe de darraine preſentment, look therof after in y• title Quare impedit
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Aſsiſe de Mortdanceſter.
                  
                     ASſiſe de Mortdanceſter, looke thereof in the title Coſinage.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Attainder.
                  
                     ATtainder, is a conuictiō of any perſon of a crime, or faulte whereof hee was not conuict before, as if a man haue committed felony, treaſon, or ſuch like, and thereof is indicted, arraigned and found guiltie and hath iudgement, then hee is ſaid to be attainted, and this may bee two waies, the one vpon apparāce, the other vpon default, the attainder vpon apparance is by confeſſion battaile or verdict, the attainder vpon default is by proceſſe vntill he be outlawed.
               
               
                  ¶ Attaint.
                  
                     ATtaint, is a writ and lieth where falſe verdict is giuen by twelue men, &

iudgement giuen thereon, that the partie agaynſt whome they haue paſſed, ſhall haue a writ againſt the twelue men, and when they be at iſſue it ſhall bee tried by xxiiii. Iurors, and if the falſe verdict be found, the twelue men be attaint, and then the iudgement ſhall bee, that their meddowes ſhall be ayred, their houſes broken downe, their woods turned vp, and all their landes and tenemēts forfaited to the king, but if it paſſe againſt him that brought that attaint, he ſhall be impriſoned and grieuouſly raunſomed at the kinges will. Sée the ſtatute 23. H. 8. cap. 3. Attaint alſo is when iugemēt is giuē in Treaſon or Felonie.
               
               
                  63 Attournement.
                  
                     ATtournement, is when one is tenaunt for terme of life, and he in reuerſion or remainder granteth his right or eſtate to another, then it behoueth the tenant for terme of life to agree thereto, and this agreement is called an Attournment,

for if he in the reuerſion graunt his eſtate and his right to another, if the tenant for terme of life atturne not, nothing paſſeth by the graunt.
                  But if it be graunted by fine in Court of record hee ſhalbe cōpelled to atturne, And looke thereof after in the title Quid iuris clamat, looke more of this in Littleton Lib. 3. chap. 10.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Audita quaerela.
                  
                     AVdita quaerela, is a writ and it lieth where one is bounde in a Statute marchant, ſtatute Staple or Recogniſance, or where iudgemēt is giuen againſt him for debt and his bodie in execution thereupon, thē if hee haue a releaſe or other matter ſufficient to be diſcharged of execution but hath no day in Court there to pleade it, then hee ſhall haue this writte againſt him which hath recouered, or againſt his executors.
               
               
                  ¶ Auerment.
                  
                     AVerment, is where a man pleadeth a plée in abatment

of the writ or bar of y• action, which he ſaieth he is readie to proue as the court will awarde, this offer to proue his plee is called an Auerment.
               
               
                  66 ¶ Auerpeny.
                  
                     AVerpenie, that is to bee quit of diuers ſummes of money for the kings Auerages.
               
               
                  67 Auncien demeſne.
                  
                     Auncien demeſne are certaine tenures holden of thoſe Manors that were in the hands of Saint Edward the confeſſor, and the which he made to be written in a Booke called Domes daie, Sub titulo Regis, and all the landes holden of the ſaid Manors bée auncien demeſne, and the tenaunts ſhall not bee impleaded out of the ſaide Mannors, and if they be, they may ſhew the matter and abate the writ, but if they anſwere to the writ, and iudgement be giuen, then the landes become franke fée for euer. Alſo the tenaunts in auncient demeſne, be frée of tolle for all

things concerning their ſuſtenance and huſbandry in auncien demeſne, and for ſuch landes they ſhall not bee put or impanelled vpon any inqueſt. But all the landes in auncien demeſne, that are in y• kings hands, bee franke fee and pleadable at the Common lawe. See more after in the title Sokemans.
               
               
                  Auowrie.
                  
                     AVowrie, is where one taketh a diſtreſſe for rēt or other thing, and the other ſueth repleuin, then he that hath taken it ſhall iuſtifie in his plée, for what cauſe he tooke it, and if he tooke it in his owne right hee ought to ſhewe that, and ſo auowe the taking, & that is called his auowry: but if he tooke y• in or for the right of another, then when hee hath ſhewed the cauſe, hee ſhall make conuſance of the taking, as bailie or ſeruaunt to him in whoſe right hee did take it.
               
            
            
               
               B.
               
                  69 Baile.
                  
                     BAile, is when a man is taken or arreſted for felonie, ſuſpition of felonie, indicted of felonie, or any ſuch caſe, ſo that he is reſtrained of his libertie. And being by law baylable, offereth ſurety to thoſe which haue authoritie to ba
                        •
                     le him, which ſuerties are bound for him to the Quéenes vſe in a certaine ſumme of money, or bodie for bodie, that hee ſhall appeare before the Iuſtices of Gaole deliuerie at the next Seſſions &c. Then vpon the bondes of theſe ſuerties, as is aforeſaid, he is bailed, that is to ſaye, ſet at libertie vntil the day appointed for his appearance.
               
               
                  Bailement.
                  
                     BAilement, is a deliuerie of things whether it be of writings, goods or ſtuffe to another, ſometimes to be deliuered back to the bailor, that is to ſaye

to him that ſo deliuered it, ſometimes to the vſe of the bailife, that is to ſaye, of him to whome it is deliuered, and ſometimes alſo it is deliuered to a thirde perſon, this deliuerie is called a bailement.
               
               
                  Bailife.
                  
                     BAilife is an officer that belongeth to a mannor, to order the huſbandrye, and hath auctoritie to paye quite rents iſſuing out of the mannor, fell trees, repaire houſes, make pales, hedges, diſtraine beaſtes dooing hurt vpon the ground, and diuers ſuch like.
                  This officer is he whom the auncient Saxons called a Reeue, for the name Bailife was not yet knowen amongſt them, but came in with the Normans, and is called in Latin Villicus.
                  
               
               
                  Back berind theefe.
                  
                     BAck berinde theefe is a theefe that is taken with the maner, that is to ſay, hauing that found vpon him (being followed

with the hue and crie) which hee hath ſtollen, whether it be money, lynnen, wollen, or other ſtuffe, but it is moſt properly ſaid, when he is taken carying thoſe things that he hath ſtollen in a bundell or fardel on his backe.
               
               
                  73 Bargaine and ſale.
                  
                     Bargaine and ſale is whē a recompence is giuen by both the parties to the bargaine: as if one bargain and ſell his land to an other for money, heere the land is a recompēce to him for the money, & the money is a recompence to the other for the land, & this is a good contract & bargaine, and fee ſimple paſſeth notwithſtanding hee doeth not ſaye to haue and to hold the land to him and to his heires. And by ſuch a bargaine and ſale landes may paſſe without liuerie of ſeiſin, if the bargaine & ſale be by déede indented, ſealed & inrolled, either in the countie where the land lieth, or in one of the Q. courts of record at weſtminſter wtin vi. moneths

next after the date of the ſame writing indented, according to the ſtatute in that behalfe made in the 27 peere of H. 8. ca 16.
               
               
                  Barre.
                  
                     BArre, is when the defendant in any action pleadeth a plee which is a ſufficient aunſwere, and that deſtroyeth the action of the plaintife for euer.
               
               
                  Baſe fee.
                  TO hold in Fee baſe, is to holde at the wil of the Lorde.
               
               
                  Baſtardie.
                  
                     BAſtardie, is hee that is borne of any woman not married, ſo that his father is not knowen by the order of the lawe, and therefore he is called the childe of the people.
                  But by the law of the Romiſh Church, if one get a child vpon a woman which childe is borne out of wedlocke, and after hee marrie the ſame woman, then ſuch a childe ſhall bee ſaide Mulier, and not baſtarde.
                  
                     But by the law of England he is a baſtarde, and for that cauſe when ſuch ſpecial baſtardie is alleaged, it ſhalbee tryed by the countrey, and not by the Biſhop. But generally baſtardie alleaged ſhalbee tryed by the certificate of the Biſhop.
                  And if a woman be great with childe by her huſband who dyeth, and ſhee taketh an other huſbande, and after the chylde is borne, this chylde ſhal be ſaid the childe of the firſt huſbande. But if ſhee were priuily with childe at the time of the death of her firſt huſbande, then it ſhalbe ſaid the child of the ſecond huſband. But inquire farther and ſee the opiniō of Thorp 21. E. 3. 39
                  Alſo if a man take a wi
                        •
                     e which is great with child by another that was not her huſband, and after the childe is borne within the eſpouſels, then it ſhall bee ſaid the childe of the huſband, though it were borne but one daye after the eſpouſels ſolemniſed.
               
               
                  
                  Battaile.
                  
                     BAttaile is an auncient trial in our lawe, which the defendant in an appeal of murder, robberie, or felonie may chuſe, that is to ſay, to fight with the appellant, for proofe whether he be culpable of the felonie or not: which combate, if it fall out ſo well on the part of the defendant that he doth vanquiſh the appellant, he ſhal go quit & barre him of his appeal for euer. But if one be indicted of felony, & an appeal is brought vpon y• ſame indictment, there the defendant ſhall not wage battaile: battaile alſo may be in a writ of right.
               
               
                  Bigamy.
                  
                     BIgamy, was a counterplea (deuiſed at y• councel of Lions, vpon miſlike of ſecond mariage) to be obiected when the priſoner demaundeth the benefite of the clergye, to wit his booke, as namely to ſay, that he which demandeth the priuiledge of the clergy, was maried to ſuch a woman, at ſuch a place,

within ſuch a dioceſſe, and that ſhee is dead, and that hee hath married another woman within the ſame dioces or within ſome other dioces, and ſo is Bigamus. Or if he haue béen but once maried, then to ſaye, that ſhee whome hee hath married, is or was a widowe, that is to ſaye, the left woman of ſuch a one &c. which thing ſhall be tryed by the Biſhop of the Dioces where the mariages are alleadged. And being ſo certified by the Biſhop, the priſoner ſhall looſe the benefite of the clergie. But at this day by force of the acte made in An. 1. E. 6. ca. 12. this is no plea, but that he may haue his clergie that notwithſtanding.
                  So is Brook titulo clergie placito 20▪ to the ſame purpoſe. And hereupon if you bee deſirous to ſée what reaſons they haue that perſwade againſt ſecond marriages, read amōg many others Frances Petrarche of remedies for both fortunes, the firſt booke & lxxvi. Dialogue,

intituled of ſecond marriage, which Booke now of late Maſter Thomas Twyne, hath very well▪ & with good grace (as they that can iudge do ſay) trā
                     ſlated out of Latin into Engliſh, and moſt aptly called it Phiſicke againſt fortune.
               
               
                  Bloodwit.
                  
                     BLoodwit, that is, to bée quit of amercementes for bloudſhedding, and what pleas are holden in your court, you ſhall haue the amercementes thereof comming, becauſe (wit) in Engliſh is miſericordia in Latin.
               
               
                  Boote.
                  
                     BOote, is an old worde, & ſignifieth helpe, ſuccor, ay
                        •
                     t or aduantage, and is commonly ioyned with an other worde, whoſe ſignification it doth augment, as theſe, bridgboot, burghboot, fireboote, hedgeboot, plowboote and diuerſe others ſuch like, for whoſe ſignifications look in their proper titles.
               
               
                  
                  81 Broodhalpeny.
                  
                     BRoodhalpeny, in ſome copies, broodhalbeny, that is to be quit of a certaine cuſtome exacted for ſetting vp of tables.
               
               
                  82 Burgage.
                  
                     TO hold in Burgage, is to hold as if ye Burgeis holde of the King, or of another lord landes or tenements, yeelding to him a certain rent by ye yere, or els there, where an other man then burgeis holdeth of any lord lands or tenemēts in burgage yéelding to him a certaine rent by yeere.
               
               
                  83 Brugbote.
                  
                     BRugbote (and in ſome copies Bridgbote) that is to bee quit of giuing aide to the repayring of bridges.
               
               
                  84 Burghbote.
                  
                     BVrghbote, that is to be quite of giuing ayde to make a Borough, cattell, citie, or walles throwne downe.
               
               
                  
                  Burghbrech.
                  
                     BVrghbrech, that is to be quit of treſpaſſes done in Citie or Borough againſt the peace.
               
               
                  Burgh Engliſh:
                  
                     BVrgh Engliſh, or Borough Engliſh, is a cuſtome in ſome ancient borough, that if a man haue iſſue diuers ſonnes & dyeth, yet the yongeſt ſonne only ſhal inherite and haue all the lands & tenements that were his fathers, whereo
                        •
                      hee dyed ſeiſed within the ſame burgh by diſcent, as heire to his father by force of the cuſtome of the ſame borough.
               
               
                  Burglarie.
                  
                     BVrglarie, is when one breaketh & entreth into the houſe of another in the night with felonious intent to robbe or kill, or to doe ſome other felony, in which caſes although hee carrie away nothing, yet is it felony▪ for which hee ſhall ſuffer death. Otherwiſe it is, if it bee in the day time, or that hee

breake the houſe in the night, and enter not therin at that time.
                  But if a ſeruaunt will conſpire with other men to robbe his Maſter, & to that intent he openeth his Maſters doores and windows in y• night for them, that they come into the houſe by that way, this is Burglarie in the ſtrangers, and the ſeruant is a thee
                        •
                     e but no Burglar. And this was the opinion of the right worſhipfull ſir R. Manwood knight, moſt worthie Lord
                        •
                      chiefe Baron of the Eſchequer, at the quarter Seſſions holden at Canterbury in Ianuary 1579. 21. Eliz.
               
               
                  88 Capias.
                  
                     CApias, looke for that after in the title Proces.
               
               
                  89 Caruage.
                  
                     CAruage, that is, to bee quite if the king ſhall taxe al his land by carues. Note that a Carue of land is a Plow land.
               
               
                  90 Certification of aſsiſe.
                  
                     CErtification of Aſſiſe of nouel diſſeiſin, is a

writ, and lieth where the Batlife of the tenant pleadeth no wrong, &c. & loſeth by the Aſſiſe, then if the tenant haue a releaſe or other writing to plead hée ſhall haue this writ, and the firſt Iurors ſhall bée warned to appeare before the Iuſtices and the parties alſo, then if it may be found that the releaſe or writings are true & good, hée that recouered in the Aſſiſe ſhall yéelde double dammages, and ſhall loſe the land.
               
               
                  Cerciorari.
                  
                     CErciorari, is a writ and it lieth where one is impleaded in a baſe court, that is of record, and he ſuppoſeth that he may not haue equall Iuſtice there, then vpon a bill in the Chancery compriſing ſome matter of conſcience he ſhall haue this writ to remoue all the Record in the Chancery & there to be determined by conſcience, but if he proue not his bill, then the other partie ſhall haue a writ of Procedendo, to ſend againe the Record into the

baſe court, & there to be determined. And it lieth in many other caſes, for to remoue records for the king as indictments and other.
               
               
                  92 Ceſsion.
                  
                     CEſsion is when an Eccleſiaſticall perſō is created Biſhop, or whē a parſon of a parſonage taketh another benefice without diſpenſation or otherwiſe not qualified &c. In both caſes their firſt benefices are become void, & be ſaid to become void by ceſſion, and to thoſe that hée had who was created biſhop, The king ſhall preſent for the time whoſoeuer be patron of thē. And in y• other caſe the patrō may preſēt.
               
               
                  93 Ceſsauit.
                  
                     CEſsauit, is a writ, and it lyeth where my verie tenant which holdeth of mée certaine lands and tenements, yéelding certaine rent by the yere, & the rent is behind not paid by two yeres, and no ſufficient diſtreſſe may be found vpon the lande, then I ſhall recouer the lande, but if the

tenant come into the court before iudgement giuen, and tender the arrerages and dammages, and finde ſuertie, that he ſhall ceſſe no more in payment of the ſayde rent, I ſhalbe compelled to take the arrerages and the damages, and then the tenaunt ſhall not looſe the lande. Alſo the heire may not maintayne this writte for the ceſſer made in the time of his anceſtor, Alſo this writ lieth not but for Annuei
                        •
                      ſeruice as rent and ſuch other and not for homage and fealtie.
                  Alſo there is an other writ called Ceſſauit de cā
                        taria, and it lieth where a man giueth land to a houſe of religion to finde for his ſoule and his aunceſtors, and his heires, yéerely a Lampe in the Church, or to ſay deuine ſeruice or to féede the poore, or other almes, or ſome other thing to doe, then if the ſaid charge be not done in two yéeres, then the donor or his heirs ſhal haue this writ againſt whoſoeuer holdeth the thinges giuen alter ſuch

ceſſure. Sée the Statute w. 2. cap. 41.
               
               
                  94 Challenge.
                  
                     CHallenge, is where Iutors appeare to trie an iſſue, then if any of the parties ſuppoſe that they are not indifferent they may there challenge and refuſe them.
                  There be diuers challenges, one is challenge to the array, yt other to the polls.
                  Challenge to tharray, is when the panell is fauorably made by the Shirife or other officer.
                  Challenge by polies are ſome principall and ſome by cauſe as they call it.
                  Principall, is when one of the Iurors is the ſonne, brother or couſin, to the plaintife or defendāt, or tenant to him or that he hath eſpouſed the daughter of the plaintife, and for thoſe cauſes he ſhal be wtdrawen.
                  Alſo in a plée of the death of the man and in euerie action real and in actions perſonall, if the debt or dammages amount to fortie markes it is a good challenge, that hée cannot

diſpend xl. s. by the yéere of fréehold.
                  Challenge by cauſe, is where the party doeth alleage a matter which is no principall challenge, as that the Sonne of one of the Iurors hath eſpouſed the daughter of the plaintife, and then hée doth conclude, and therefore hée is fauorable, which ſhall bée tried by others of thenqueſt, whether he be fauorable or indifferent, and if they ſay, y• he is fauorable and not indifferent, then he ſhalbe drawen out, otherwiſe he ſhalbe ſworne.
                  Alſo a felon that is arraigned may challenge xx. Iurors peremptory without any caſe, and that is in fauour of life, and as many as he will with cauſe, but then it ſhall bee tried if for ſuch cauſe he be indifferent or not.
               
               
                  Champertie.
                  
                     CHampertie is a writte and lyeth where two men bée impleading, and one giueth the halfe or part of the thing in plée to a Straunger for to maintain

him againſt the other, then the partie gréeued ſhal haue this writ againſt the ſtraunger. Sée the Statute Articuli ſuper Chartas cap. 11.
                  
               
               
                  96 Champertors.
                  
                     CHampertors be they that moue plées and ſuites, or cauſe to bee moued by their owne or others procurement, and ſue them at their owne coſtes, to haue part of the lands, or gaines in variance.
               
               
                  97 Charge.
                  
                     CHarge is where a man graunteth a rent iſſuing out of his ground, and that if the rent be behind, it ſhalbe lawfull for him, his heires and aſſignes to diſtrayne till the rent bée payed, this is called a rent charge. But if one graunt a 'rent charge out of the land of an other, and after purchaſe the lād, the grant is void.
               
               
                  98 Charters.
                  
                     CHarters of landes are writings, déeds, euidē
                     ces, & inſtrumēts, made frō one man to an other, vpon

ſome eſtate cōueied or paſſed betweene them of lands or tenements ſhe wing the names, place and quantity of the land, the eſtate, time & maner o
                        •
                      the doing therof, the parties to the eſtate deliuered & taken, the witneſſes preſent at the ſame, with other circumſtances.
               
               
                  Chattels.
                  
                     CHattels, are in two ſorts that is to ſay, chattels reals and chattels perſonels, Chattels reals are leaſes for yeeres, wards, & to hold at will.
                  Chattels perſonels are all moueable goods, as money, plate, houſhold ſtuffe, horſes, kyne, corne, and ſuch like.
               
               
                  Childwit.
                  
                     CHildwit, that is, that you may take a fine of your bondwoman, defiled and begotten with childe without your licence.
               
               
                  Chimin.
                  
                     CHimin, is the high way where euery man goeth which is called via Regia, and yet the King hath no

other thing there but the paſſage for him & his people, for the freeholde is in the Lords of the ſoyle, and all the profit growing there, as trees and other things.
               
               
                  102 Thing in action.
                  
                     THing in action, is when a mā hath cauſe, or may bring an action for ſome duetie due to him, as an action of debt vpon an obligation, annuitie, rente, couenant, warde, goods, treſpas or ſuch like, and becauſe that they are things whereof a man is not poſſeſſed, but for recouerie of them is driuen to his action, they are called Thinges in action. And thoſe things in action that are certaine, the Quéene may graunt, and the grantée may vſe an action for them in his owne name on
                        •
                     lie. But a common perſon cannot graunt his thing in action, nor the Quéene her ſelfe cannot graunt her thing in action which is vncertain, as treſpaſſe and ſuch like.
               
               
                  
                  Cinque ports.
                  
                     CInque ports, be certaine hauen townes, fiue in number, to which haue béen graunted long time ſince many liberties (that other porte townes haue not) and that firſt in the time of King Edwarde called the Confeſſor (who was before the conqueſt) and hath béene increaſed ſince, and that chiefly in the daies of the thrée Edwards, the firſt, the ſecond, and third (ſince the Conqueſt) as appeareth in the booke of Domeſday, and other olde Monuments, which in this work ſhould be too long to recite.
               
               
                  Circuitie of action.
                  
                     CIrcuitie of action, is whē an action is rightfully brought for a duetie, but yet about the buſhe, as it were, for that it might as well béen otherwiſe aunſwered and determined, and the ſuite ſaued, and becauſe that the ſame action was more then needefull, it is called circuitie of action: As if a man grant a rent charge of x. pounde

out of his manor of Dale, and after the Grauntee diſſeiſeth the grauntor of the ſame mannor of Dale, and hee bringeth an Aſſiſe and recouereth the lande, and xx. pound dammages, the which xx. pound being paied, the grauntee of the rent ſueth his action for x. pounde of his rent due during the time of the diſſeiſin, which if no diſſeiſin had bin he muſt haue had, This is called circuitie of action, becauſe it might haue béen more ſhortly anſwered, for whereas the grantor ſhould receiue xx. pound damages, and pay x. poūd rent, he might haue receiued but the x. li. onely for the damages▪ and the grauntée might haue cut
                        •
                     e off and kept backe the other x. li. in his handes by waie of detainer for his rent, and ſo thereby might haue ſaued his action.
               
               
                  105 Claime.
                  
                     CLaime, is a challenge by any man of the propertie or ownerſhip of a thing which he hath not in poſſeſſion, but that which is

withholden frō him wrōgfully.
               
               
                  Clergie.
                  
                     CLergie, is an auncient libertie confirmed in diuers parliaments, And it is when a man is arraigned of felonie or ſuch like before a temporall Iudge &c. and the priſoner praieth his Clergie, that is to ſay, to haue his Booke, which in auncient time was as much as if hee deſired to be diſmiſſed from the temporal iudge, and to bee deliuered to the Ordinarie to purge himſelfe of the ſame offence. And then the Iuoge ſhall command the Ordinarie to trie if he can reade as a Clerke in ſuch a Booke and place as the Iudge ſhall appoint. And if the Ordinarie certifie the Iudge that he can, then the priſoner ſhall not haue iudgement to looſe his life. See Stamford. lib. 2. cap. 41. and ſéeke the ſtatute 18. Eliz. cap. 7.
               
               
                  Clerke Attaint.
                  
                     CLerke Attaint, is hee which praieth his clergie

after iudgement giuen vpon him of the Felonie, and hath his clergy allowed, ſuch a clerke might not make his purgation.
               
               
                  108 Clerke Conuict.
                  
                     CLerke conuict, is hee which praieth his clergie before iudgement giuen vpon him of the felonie, and hath his Clergie to him granted, ſuch a clerke might haue his purgation. Note that this purgation was made, when hee was diſmiſſed to the ordinarie, there to bee tried of the enqueſt of clerkes. And therfore now by the ſtat. of 18 El. c. 7. no ſuch is put to the Ordinarie.
               
               
                  109 Colour.
                  
                     COlour, is a fained matter, which the defendant or tenāt vſeth in his barre when an action of treſpas or an aſſiſe is brought againſt him, in which hée giueth the demaundant or plaintife a ſhewe at the firſt ſight, that hee hath good cauſe of action, where in trothe it is no iuſte cauſe, but only a colour and

face of a cauſe: and it is vſed to the intent that y• determination of the action ſhould be by the Iudges, & not by an ignorant Iurie of xii. men. And therefore a colour ought to bee a matter in law or doubtfull to y• common people: as for example, A. bringeth an aſſiſe of land againſt B. and B. ſaith that hee himſelfe did let the ſame lande to one C. for terme of life, and afterwarde did graunt the reuerſion to A. the demandant and after C. the tenāt for terme of life died, after whoſe deceaſe, A. the demandant claiming the reuerſion by force of y• grant (wherto C. the tenant for life, did neuer atturne) entred, vpon whome B. entred, againſt whom A. for that entre, brings this aſſiſe &c. This is a good colour becauſe the common people, thinke that the land will paſſe by the graunt without Atturnement, where inde
                        ••
                     r it will not paſſe, &c.
                  Alſo in an action of treſpaſſe, colour muſt bee giuen, and of them are

an infinite number, one for example: in an action of treſpaſſe for taking away the plantifes beaſts the defendant ſaith, that before the plaintife had any thing in them▪ hee himſelfe was poſſeſ
                        •
                     ed of thē as of his proper goods, & deliuered them to A. B. to deliuer them to him againe, when &c. And A. B. gaue thē vnto the plaintif, and the plaintife ſuppoſing the propertie to be in A. B. at the time of the gifte, tooke them, and the defendant tooke them from the plaintife, whereupon the plaintife bringeth an action, this is a good colour and a good plea. Sée more hereof in the Dialogues betwéene the Doct. and ſtud. lib. 2. cap. 13.
               
               
                  110 Colour of office.
                  
                     COlour of office, is alwaies takē in the worſt part, and ſignifieth an acte euill done by the countenance of an office, and it beareth a diſſembling face of the right office, whereas the office is but a vaile to the falſehood, and the

thing is groūded vpō vice, and the office is as a ſhadowe to it. But by reaſon of the office, and by vertue of the office are taken alwaies in the beſt part, and where the office is the iuſt cauſe of the thing and the thing is purſuing y• office.
               
               
                  Colluſion.
                  
                     COlluſion, is where an action is brought againſt another, by his own agréement if the plaintife recouer, th
                        •
                     n ſuch recouery is called by Colluſion, and in ſome caſes the colluſion ſhall bee inquired of as in Qu
                           •
                        re impedit, and Aſſiſe and ſuch like, which any corporation or bodie politique bringeth againſt an other to the intent to haue the lande or aduowſon, wherof the writ is brought into Mortmaine. But in auowrie nor in an
                        •
                     e action perſonal, the colluſion ſhall not be enquired. Sée the Statute w. 2. chapt. 32. which giueth the quale ius and inquirie in ſuch caſes.
               
               
                  
                  Common ley.
                  
                     COmmon lawe, is for the moſt parte taken three wa
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     s, Firſt, for the laws of this Realme ſimplie, without anie other, as cuſtomarie lawe, ciuill law, ſpiritual lawe, or wha
                        •
                     ſoeuer elſe lawe ioyned vnto it, as when it is d
                        •
                     ſpu
                        •
                     ed in our lawes of Englande, what ought of right 
                        •
                     o be determined by the commō lawe, and what by the ſpirituall Lawe, or Admiral
                        •
                      Court, or ſu
                        •
                     h like.
                  Secondarily it is taken for the kings Courtes▪ as the Kings Bench or common place, on
                        •
                     lie to ſhewe a difference between them and the baſe Courtes, as cuſtomarie courtes, Court Barons, County courtes, p
                        •
                     powders and ſuch like, as when a plée of lande is remooued out of auncient demeſne, becauſe the land is franke fee and pledable at the Common Lawe, that is to ſaye, at the Kinges Courte, and not in Auncient demeſne, or in anie other baſe Court.
                  Thirdly, and moſt vſually

by the common lawe is vnderſtood, ſuch lawes as were generally taken and holden for lawe before any Statute was made to alter the ſame, as for example, Tenant for l
                        ••
                     e nor for yeres, were not to bee puniſhed for doing waſt at the common law, til the ſtatute of Glouceſter, ca. 5. was made which doth giue an actiō of waſt againſt them. But tenant by the curteſie and tenant in dower were puniſhable for waſt at the common law▪ that is to ſaye, by the vſuall and common receiued lawes of the Realme before the ſaide ſtatute of Gloc. was made.
               
               
                  Common.
                  
                     COmmon, is the right, that a man hath to put his beaſts to paſture, or to vſe & occupy the grounde, that is not his owne.
                  And note that there be diuers commons, that is to ſaye, common in groſſe, common appendant, common appurtenant, and comon becauſe of neighborhood.
                  
                     Common in groſſe is where I by my deede grant to another that hee ſhall haue common in my lande.
                  Common appendant is where a man is ſeiſed o
                        •
                      certaine lande, to the which he hath common in anothers ground, and all they that ſhall bee ſeiſed of the land haue y• ſaid common onely for thoſe beaſts which compaſt that lande to which it is appendant, excepting geeſe, goates & hogges.
                  And alwayes this common is by preſcription and of common right, and it is appendaunt to erable lande onely, and not to any other lande or houſe.
                  Common appurtenant is in the ſame manner, as common appendant. But it is with all manner of beaſtes, as well hogges, goates and ſuch like as horſes, kine, oxen, ſheepe, and ſuch as compaſt the ground. And this common may bee made at this day, and may bee ſeuered from the lād to which it is

appurtenant, but ſo can not Common, appendant.
                  Common becauſe of neighborhood is where y• tenants o
                        ••
                     . Lords which be ſeiſed of two townes, where one lyeth nigh another, & euery of them haue vſed from the time whereof no minde runneth, to haue common in the other towne with all manner of beaſtes comminable.
                  But the one may not put his cattel in the others ground, for ſo they of the other towne may diſtraine them Damage feſant, or may haue an actiō of treſpas, but they may not put thē into their owne fields, and if ſo they ſtraye into the fieldes of the other towne, they there ought to ſuffer them, And the inhabitants of the one towne ought not to put in as many beaſtes as they wil, but hauing regard to the inhabitants of the other town, for otherwiſe it were no good neighborhood, vpon which all this matter doth depend.
               
               
                  
                  114 Condition.
                  
                     COndition, is a reſtraint or bridle annexed and ioyned to a thing, ſo that by the not performance or not doing thereof the partie to the condition ſhal receiue preiudice and loſſe, and by the perfourmance and dooing of the ſame commoditie and aduauntage.
                  And all conditions are either Conditions actuall and expreſſed, which bee called conditions in déede, or els they bee conditions implyed or couert, and not expreſſed, which are called Conditions in Law.
                  Alſo all conditions are either Conditions precedent and going before the eſtate, and are executed, or els ſubſequent and following after the eſtate & executorie.
                  The Condition precedent doth get and gain the the thing or eſtate made vpon condition by the performence of the ſame.
                  The Condition ſubſequent doeth kéepe & continue the thing or eſtate

made vpon condition by the performance or y• ſame.
                  Actuall and expreſſe condition, which is called a condition in déede, is a condition knit and annexed by expreſſe words to the feoffement, leaſe or grant, eyther in writing or without writing. As if I infeoffe a man in landes reſeruing rent, to be paid at ſuch a feaſt, vpon condition, that if the feoffée faile of payment at the day, that then it ſhalbe lawfull for me to reenter.
                  Condition implied or couert and not expreſſed, which is called a condition in lawe, is when a man graunteth to an other the office to be kéeper of a Parke, Steward, Beadle, Baylife, or ſuch lyke for terme of lyfe, and though there be no condition at all expreſſed in the grant, yet the lawe ſpeaketh couertly of a condition, which is, that if the grauntée do not execute all pointes appertayning to his office, by himſelfe or his ſufficient deputie, then it ſhall bée lawfull to the

grauntor to enter and diſcharge him of his off
                        •
                     ce.
                  Condition precedent and going before is, when a leaſe is made to one for life vpon condition, that if the leſſée for life will pay to the leſſor xx. li. at ſuch a day, that then hee ſhall haue fee ſimple, héere the condition precéedes and goeth before the eſtate in fee ſimple, and vpon the performance of the condition doth get and gaine the fée ſimple.
                  Condition ſubſequent and comming after, is whē one granteth to I. S. his manor of Dale in fee ſimple vpon condition, that the grauntee ſhall paye to him at ſuch a day xx. pound or elſe that his eſtate ſhall ceaſe, heere the condition is ſubſequent and following the eſtate in fée ſimple, and vpon the performance thereof deoth kéepe & continue the eſtate.
                  
                     See more of this in Littleton lib. 3. ca. 5. And Perkins in the laſt title of Cō
                     ditions.
               
               
                  
                  Confirmation.
                  
                     COnfirmation is when one which hath right to anie landes or tenements maketh a déede to an other which hath therof the poſſeſſion or ſome eſtate with theſe wordes, Ratificalle, approbaſſe, confirmaſſe, with intent to inlarge his eſtate, or make his poſſeſſ
                        •
                     on perfect and not defeſible by him that maketh the confirmation, nor by any other that may haue his right.
                  Whereof ſée more in Littleton lib. 3. cap. 9. of Confirmations.
               
               
                  Confiſcate goodes.
                  
                     COnfiſcate goodes are goods to which the lawe entitleth the Queene whē they are not claymed by anie other. As if a man be indicted that he feloniouſlie ſtole the goodes of I. S. where in trueth they are his owne goodes, and they are brought into the Court againſt him as a maineur, and then hée is demaunded what he ſaieth to thoſe goods, and he denieth them, now by this denying

of them, he ſhall looſe thoſe goods, although that afterward he be acquited of the felonie, and ſo mother like caſes.
               
               
                  117 Conſpiracie.
                  
                     COnſpiracie is a writ and it lyeth where two or more knit themſelues together by oth, couenant, or other maner of aliāce, that euery one ſhall helpe other for to indict or appe
                        •
                     le any man of felonie, then hee which is by ſuch maner indicted or appealed ſhall haue this writ, But this writ lieth not againſt the indictors.
                  Sée more herof in Stamford lib. 3. cap. 12.
                  
               
               
                  118 Cuſtome.
                  
                     CVſtomes and ſeruices is a writ, and lieth where I or my aunceſtors after the limitatiō of aſſiſe, were not ſeyſed of the cuſtomes or ſeruices of my tenant before, then I ſhall haue this writ to recouer thoſe ſeruices.
                  Alſo the tenaunt may haue this writ againſt his Lord, but after that the tenant hath declared, the

Lorde ſhall defende the wordes of the declaration and replying ſhall ſay, that hée diſtrayned not for the cuſtomes whereof the declaration is, and then he ſhall declare all the declaration of the cuſtomes and ſeruices, and then the tenant who was plaintife ſhal become defendant, and ſhall defende by battaile or great aſſiſe.
               
               
                  Conſultation.
                  
                     COnſultatiō, Looke therfore after in the title of Prohibition.
                  
               
               
                  Continual claime.
                  
                     COntinual claim is wher a man ha
                        •
                     h right to enter into certaine landes where of an other is ſeiſed in fée ſimple or fée tayle, and hee dare not enter for feare of death or beating, but approcheth as nigh as he dare, & maketh claime thereto within the yeare and day before the death of him that hath the landes, if after hee which hath the lande die ſeiſeo, & his heire is in by diſcent, yet he that maketh ſuch claime may enter vpon the h
                        •
                     ire notwithſtanding

ſuch diſcent, for that that he hath made ſuch cōtinuall claime: But it behoueth that ſuch claim alwayes be made within the yéere & the day before the death of the tenant, for if ſuch a tenant doe not die ſeyſed within a yeere and a day after ſuch claime made, and yet he that hath right dare not enter, then it behoueth him that hath ſuch right to make an other claime within the yéere & day after the firſt claime, & after ſuch ſecond claime to make ye third claime within the yeere and day, if hée will be ſure to ſaue his entre. But if the diſſeiſor die ſeyſed within the yeere and day after the diſſeiſin, and no claime ma
                        •
                     e, then the entre of the diſſe: ſée is takē away, for the yéere and day ſhall not be taken from the time of the title of the entre to him growē, but only frō the time of y• laſt claime by him made as is aforeſaid. See more hereof in Littleton 
                           •
                        ib. 3 cap. 7.
                  
               
               
                  Counterplee.
                  
                     COūterplee is where one bringeth an action, & the

tenāt in his anſwere & plée voucheth or calleth for any man to warrāt his title, or praieth in aid of an other, which hath better eſtate then he, as of him that is in the reuerſion, or if one that is a ſtranger to the action, come and pray to be receiued, to ſaue his eſtate, if the demaundant replie thereto, & ſhew cauſe that he ought not ſuch a one to vouch, or that he ought not of ſuch a one to haue ayd, or that ſuch a one ought not to be receiued, this plée is called a counterplee to the voucher, aid, or reſceit, as the caſe is, but if the voucher be allowed, and when vouche commeth in, and demādeth what cauſe the tenant hath, and the tenant ſheweth his cauſe & the vouche pleed to anie thing to auoid the warrā
                     tie, that is called a counterplee to the warrantie.
               
               
                  Contract.
                  
                     COntract, is a bargaine, or couenant betweene two parties, where one thing is giuen for another which is called, Quid pro
                     
                     quo, as if I ſell my houſe for money, or if I couenant to make you a leaſe of my mannor of Dale in conſideration of twentie pound that you ſhal giue me, theſe are good contractes, becauſe there is one thing for an other, but if a man make promiſe to me, that I ſhall haue twentie ſhillinges, and that he will bée debtor to mée thereof, and after I aſke the twentie ſhillings, and hée will not deliuer it, yet I ſhall neuer haue any action to recouer this twē
                     tie ſhillinges, for that that this promiſe was no contract but a bare promiſe. And ex nudo pacto non oritur actio, but if any thing were giuen for the twentie ſhillinges though it were not but to the value of a peny, then it had béene a good contract.
               
               
                  123 Contra formam collationis.
                  
                     COntra formam collationis, is a writte, and it lyeth where a man had giuen landes in perpetuall almeſſe to any of the late houſes of Religion, as to

an Abbot, and to the couent or other Soueraigne, or to the war
                        •
                     en or Maſter of any Hoſpitall, and his couent to find certaine poore men, and to doe other diuine ſeruice, if they alien the landes, then the donour or his heires, ſhall haue the ſaide writ for to recouer the lande, but this writte ſhall bée alwaie brought againſt the Abbot or his ſucceſſour, and not againſt the alien, although that he be tenaunt, but in all other actions where a man demaundeth freeholde, the writ ſhall be brought againſt the tenant of the land. See the Statute w. 2. cap. 41.
               
               
                  Contra formam feoffamenti.
                  
                     COntra formā feoffamē
                        ti, is a writte, and it lyeth where a man before the Statute of, Quia emptores terrarum, which was made Anno 18. Edw. infeoffeth an other by deede to do certaine ſeruice if the feoffour or his heires diſtraine him to doe other ſeruice then is compriſed

in the déede, then the tenaunt ſhall haue this writ, commaunding him that he diſtraine not him to doe other ſeruice, that is not compriſed within the déed, but this writ lieth not for the plaintife which claymeth by purchaſe from the firſt feffée: but for ſuch plaintife as cloymeth as heire to the firſt feffée.
               
               
                  125 Contributione facienda.
                  
                     COntributione facienda, is a writ, and it lyeth where there are diuerſe Parceners, and hée which hath the part of the eldeſt doth make all the ſuite to the Lord, the other ought to make contribution to him, and if they will not, he ſhall haue againſt them the ſaide writ.
               
               
                  126 Conuſance.
                  
                     COnuſance of Plée, is a Priuiledge that a Citie or Towne hath of the Kings graunt t
                        •
                      hold plee of all contractes, and of landes within the precincte of the Franches, and that when any man is

impleaded for anie ſuch thing in the Court of the King at Weſtminſter, the Maior and Baylifes of ſuch frāchiſes or their Atturney may aſke Conuſance of the plée, that is to ſay, that the plée and the matter ſhall bee pleaded & determined before them. But if the Court at Weſtminſter be lawfully ſeyſed of the plée, before Conuſance be demaunded, then they ſhall not haue Conuſance for that ſuite, becauſe they haue negligently ſurceaſed their time of demaunde thereof, but this ſhall bee no barre to them to haue Conuſance in an other action, for they may demaund Conuſance in one action, and omit it in an other action at their pleaſure.
                  And note that Conuſaunce lyeth not in preſcription, but it behooueth to ſhew the Kings letters patents for it.
               
               
                  Corodie.
                  
                     COrodie is an allowance of meate, bread, drinke, money, clothing, lodging, and ſuch like thinges neceſſarie

for ſuſtenance, It is ſomtimes certein where the certeinty of thinges is ſet downe, ſometimes vncerteine where the certeintie of thinges is not ſett downe which he ſhal haue, And ſome of them began by grant made by one man to another, and it may bée for life, yeres, in taile, or in fée, and ſome Corodies are of common right as euerie founder of Abbies, Priories, nunries & other houſes of religion, had aucthoritie to aſſigne ſuch in the ſame houſe, whē they were ſtanding for father, brother Coſin or other man that he would appoint, ſhould take it, if it were a houſe of Monkes, and 
                        ••
                     he were founder of a houſe of nuns or women, then for his Mother, Siſter, coſin or other womā that he would direct thether, and alwaies this was prouided for, that he that had Corodie in a houſe of Monkes might not ſende a woman to take it. Nor where Corodie was due in a Nunrie, there it was not lawful to appoint a man to receive

the ſame, for in both caſes ſuch preſentation was to bee reiected, And this corodie was due aſwell to a common perſon that was foūder, as where the Kinge himſelfe was founder, but where the houſe was holden in frankalmoigne, there the tenure it ſelfe was a diſcharge of corodie againſt all men, excent it were afterwarde charged voluntarily, as when the king would ſend his writ to the abbot for a corodie, for ſuch a one whō they admit, there the houſe ſhould be thereby char̄ged for euer, whether the king were founder or not, See the writ of Corod. hab. in Fitz Natura br. fol. 230.
                  
               
               
                  Crowner.
                  
                     CRowner, is an anciēt officer of truſt and of great aucthority ordained to be a principal cōſeruator, or keper of the peace to beare record of the Plces of y• 
                     Crown and of his owne ſight and of diuers other thinges manie in number &c. and therefore in Kinge Edward the firſt daies this

Statute following was made foraſmuch as meane men and vndiſcréete nowe of late are commonly choſen to the office of the Coroner, where it is requiſite that wiſe men lawfull & able ſhoulde occupie ſuch offices, It is prouided that through al ſhires ſufficient men ſhoulde bee choſen to bee Coroners, out of the moſt wiſe and diſcréeteſt Knights which beſt kn
                        •
                     w coulde and woulde attend this Office, and which faithfully made and repreſented the Plées of the Crowne.
                  And although the Letter of this ſtatute bee not preciſely obſerued, yet at the leaſt the intent ſhould bee followed as 
                        ••
                     ghe as 
                        ••
                     ought bee, that for the default of Knights, Gentlemē furniſhed with ſuch qualities as the Statute ſetteth downe (of which ſort there be many) might be choſen with this addition that they be vertuous & good knowen Chriſtians. Sée hereof in the writ de Coronatore eligendo in Fits Natura breuiū fol. 1
                           •
                        3.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Corporation.
                  
                     COrporation, is a permanent thing that may haue ſucceſſion. And it is an aſſembly and ioinyng together of manie into one felowſhip, brotherhoode and minde, whereof one is head and chiefe, the reſt are the bod
                        •
                     e, and this heade and bodie knitte together make the Corporation. And of Corporations ſome are called ſpirituall and ſome Temporall, and of thoſe that are Spirituall, ſome are corporations of dead perſons in Lawe, and ſome otherwiſe, and ſome ar
                        •
                      by the authoritie of the King onelie, and ſome haue been of a mixte authoritie. And of thoſe that are tēporall ſome are by the authority of the King alſo, And ſome by the Common Lawe of the Realme.
                  Corporation Spiritual and of dead perſons in the Lawe, is where the corporation conſiſteth of an Abbot and couent, and theſe had beginning of the king, and the man of Rome whē he had to doe here.
                  
                     Corporation ſpirituall, and of able perſons in law is where the Corporation cōſiſteth of a Dean, Chapter, Maſter of a Colledge or Hoſpitall, and this corporation had beginning of the king onely.
                  Corporation tēporal by the king is where there is a Maior & Comminaltie.
                  Corporation temporall by authoritie of the Common Law is the aſſemblie in Parliament, which conſiſteth of the Quéene the head of the corporation, and of the Lords ſpirituall and temporal, & the commons of the realme, the badie of the corporation.
               
               
                  130 Bodies politike.
                  
                     BOdies politike, are Biſhops, Abbots, Priors, Deanes, Parſons of churches and ſuch like which haue ſucceſſion in one perſon onely.
               
               
                  131 Corruption of blood.
                  
                     COrruption of blood, is when anie is attaynted of Felonie or Treaſon, then his blood is ſaid to be

corrupt, by meanes wherof his children nor anie of his blood cānot be heirs to him or to any other aunceſtor, for which they ought to claim by him. And if he were a noble or gentleman before, he & all his children therby are made vnnoble & vngētle, hauing regard to the nobility or gentrie they claim by their father, which cannot bee made whole againe without authoritie of Parliament.
               
               
                  Coſinage.
                  
                     COſinage, is a writte, and it lyeth where my great Grandfather, my Grandfathers Graundfather, or other coſin dieth ſeiſed in fée ſimple, and a ſtranger abateth, that is to ſay, entreth into the lands, then I ſhall haue againſt him this writte, or againſt his heire, or his alienee, or againſte whomſoeuer that commeth after to the ſeide landes. But if my Grandfather die ſeiſed and a ſtrā
                     ger abateth, then I ſhall haue a writte of Aiel, But if my father, mother, brother, ſiſter, vncle or aūt, die

ſeiſed, & a ſtranger abateth; then I ſhal haue an Aſſiſe of Mortdanceſter.
               
               
                  133 Couenant.
                  
                     COuenant, is an agreement made by déede in writing & ſealed betweene two perſons, where euery of them is bounden to the other to performe certaine couenants for his parte, The one of them holdeth not his couenāt but breaketh it, then hee which therof feeleth himſelf grieued, ſhal haue thereupon a writ of Couenant.
                  And note well that no writ of Couenant ſhalbee maintenable without eſpecialtie, but in the Citie of London, or in ſome other ſuch place priuileged by cuſtome and vſe.
               
               
                  134 Couerture.
                  
                     COuerture, is when a mā and a woman are married together, now whatſoeuer is done concerning the wife in the time of the continuance of this mariage betweene them is ſaid to be done during the couerture, and the wife is

called a woman couert.
               
               
                  
                     COuin, is a ſecret aſſent determined in the harts of two or more, to the preiudice of any other: As if a tenant for terme of life, or tenant in 
                        •
                     aile will ſecretely conſpire with another, that the other ſhal recouer againſt the tenant for life the lande which hee holdeth &c. in preiudice of him in the reuerſion.
               
               
                  Cui in vita.
                  
                     CVi in vita, is a writ, and it lyeth where a man is ſeiſed of landes in fee ſimple, or fée taile, or for terr
                        •
                     e of life in the right of his wife, & alieneth the ſame land and dieth, then ſhee ſhal haue the ſaide writ for to recouer the land.
                  And note well that in this writ her title muſt be ſhewed whether it be of y• purchaſe of the woman, or of the heritage of y• womā. But if the huſband alien the right of his wife, & the huſband and the wife dye, the wiues heire may haue a writ of ſur Cui iu vita.
                  
               
               
                  
                  137 Cui ante diuortium.
                  
                     CVi ante diuortium is a writ, & it lyeth in like manner, when ſuch alienation is made by the huſband of the wiues lande & after deuorce is had betweene them, then the woman ſhal haue this writ, & the write ſhall ſaye, to whō ſhee before the deuorce might not gainſay.
               
               
                  138 Curteſie of England.
                  
                     CVrteſie of Englande, is where a man taketh a wife ſeiſed in fée ſimple or fée taile generall, or ſeiſed as heire of the taile eſpeciall, and hath iſſue by the wife male or female, bée the iſſue dead or in life, if the wife dye, the huſbande ſhall hold the land during his life by the law of England: And it is called tenāt by the Curteſie of England, becauſe that this is not vſed in no other realm but onely in England.
               
            
            
               D.
               
                  139 Damage feſant.
                  
                     DAmage feſant, is when a ſtraungers beaſtes

are in another mans ground without lawfull aucthoritie or licence of the tenant of the ground, and there do feede, tread, and otherwiſe ſpoyle y• corne, graſſe, woods, or ſuch like: In which caſe the tenant whom they hurt may therfore take, diſtraine, and impound them, aſwell in the night as in the day. But in other caſes, as for rent and ſeruices and ſuch like, none may diſtraine in the night ſeaſon.
               
               
                  Danegelde.
                  
                     DAnegelde, that is to be quite of a certaine cuſtom which hath runn ſom times, which the Danes did leuie in England.
                  This began firſt in the time of King Etheldred, who being ſore diſtreſſed by the continuall inuaſion of the Danes, to purchaſe peace, was compelled to charge his countrey & people with importable payments, for hee firſt gaue them at fiue ſeuerall payments 113000. li. and afterwards graunted them

48000 pounds yearely.
               
               
                  141 Darr preſentment.
                  
                     DArrein preſentm̄t, Look therefore after in the title Quare impedit.
                  
               
               
                  142 Dean & Chapter.
                  
                     DEane & Chapter, is a bodie corporate ſpirituall conſiſting of manye able perſons in lawe, as namely the Deane (who is chiefe) and his Prebendes, and they together make the corporation. And as this corporation may ioyntly purchaſe lāds and tenements to the vſe of their church and ſucceſſors. So likewiſe euery of them ſeuerally may purchaſe to the vſe of himſelfe and his heires.
               
               
                  143 Decies tantum.
                  
                     DEcies tantum, is a writ, and lyeth where a iurour in any inqueſt, taketh money of the one parte or other to giue his verdict, then he ſhall pay tenne times as much as he hath receiued, & euery one that will ſue may haue an action, and ſhall haue

the one halfe, and the king the other halfe. But if the king in ſuch caſe releaſe by his pardon to ſuch a iurour, yet that ſhall bee no barre againſt him that bringeth the action, but that he ſhall recouer the other halfe, if his action bée commenced before the pardon of the King, but if the pardone bee before any action, it is a barre againſt all men, And the ſame law is of all other actions populer, where one partie is to the king, & the other to the partie that ſueth. Alſo the embr
                        •
                     cers which procure ſuch inqueſtes ſhalbe puniſhed in the ſame manner. And they ſhal haue the impriſonment of a yéere, but no iuſtice ſhall inquire thereof of office, but onely at the ſuite of the partie.
               
               
                  Declaration.
                  
                     DEclaration, is a ſhewing in writing of the griefe and complaint of the demaundant or pleintife againſt the tenant or defendaunt, wherein he

ſuppoſeth to haue receiued wrong, & this declaration ought to be plaine and certaine, both becauſe it impeacheth the defendant or tenant and alſo compelleth him to make anſwere therto. But note that ſuch declaration made by the demaundaunt againſt the tenaunt in an action Reall, is properly called a Count.
                  Note that y• Count or declaration ought to conteine demonſtration, declaration, & concluſion. And in demonſtration are contained ii
                        •
                     . things, (that is to ſay) who him complaineth and againſt whome, 
                        •
                      for what matter, & in the declaration what ought to be compriſed, how and in what manner the action roſe betwéene the parties, and when and what daye, yere and place, & to whome the action ſhalbe giuen.
                  And in the concluſion he ought to auerre & profer to prooue his ſuit, and ſhewe the damage which he hath ſuſteined by the wrong done vnto him.
               
               
                  
                  Dedimus poteſtatem▪
                  
                  
                     DEdimus poteſtatem▪
                      is a writ, & it lieth where a man ſu
                        •
                     th in the kinges Court, or is ſue 
                        〈…〉
                      may not well trauell
                        •
                      then he ſhall haue thi
                        •
                      writ directed to ſome Iuſtice o
                        •
                      other diſcreete perſon in the countrie to g
                        〈…〉
                      him power to admitte 
                        •
                     ome 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                      for his Atturney, or to ſeiue a 
                        〈…〉
                     e, or to take his cō
                     feſſion or his aunſwere, or other examination as the matter requireth.
               
               
                  Defendant.
                  
                     DEfendant, is he that is ſued in action perſonall, and he is called tenant in an action Reall.
               
               
                  Defen
                        •
                     e.
                  
                     DEfence, is that which the defendant ought to make immediatly after the count or declaration made, that is to ſay, that he defe
                        •
                     deth al the wrong, force, and dammage, where and when he ought, and then to proceede farther

to his plee, or to unparie.
                  And note, that in ſo much that hee deſendeth the force and wrong hee doeth excuſe himſelfe of the wrong againſt him ſurmiſed, and maketh him partie to the plee, and in ſo much that hee defendeth the dammage, he affirmeth the partie plaintif
                        •
                      able to be anſwered vnto.
                  And for the reſidue of the defence, hee accepteth the power of the Court to heare and determine their plées of this matter. For if hee will pleade to the Iuriſdiction, hee ought to omitte in his defence theſe wordes (ou & quant il deuera.) And if hee will ſhewe any diſhabilitie▪ in the plaintife, and demaund iudgement, if the partie▪ ſhal bee aunſwered vnto, then hee ought to omitte the defence of the dammage.
               
               
                  Demaundant.
                  
                     DEmaundant▪
                      is hee that ſueth or complayneth in an Action Real
                        •
                      for

title of land, and he is called plaintife in an aſſiſe, & in 
                        •
                     n action perſonall as in an action of debt, treſpaſſe, deceit, det
                        ••••
                      and ſuch like.
               
               
                  Demaines,
                  
                     DEmaines, or demeſnes generallye ſpeakinge according to the lawe, be all the partes of anye mannor which bee not in the handes of 
                        ••••
                     holders of eſtate of enheritance, though they bee occupyed by copyholders, leſſe
                        •
                     s for yéeres, or for life, as well as tenaunt at will: But eſpecially to ſpeake, demaines according to the common ſpeeche bee onely vnderſtoode the Lords chiefe manor place, which he & his aunceſtours haue from time out of mynde, kept in their owne hands, and haue occupyed the ſame, together with all buildinges and houſes whatſoeuer, alſo the meadowes, paſtures, woods, errable lande, and ſuch lyke, therewith occupyed.
               
               
                  
                  150 Halfe Blood
                  
                     HAlfe Blood is when a man marieth a wyfe▪ and hath iſſue by her a ſonne or daughter, and ſhe dieth and then hée taketh an other woman and hath by her alſo a Sonne or daughter, Now theſe two Sonnes are after a ſorte brothers, or as they are termed halfe brothers, or brother of the halfe blood, that is to ſay, brother by the fathers ſide, becauſe they had both one father and are both of his blood, and not brothers at all by the mothers ſide, nor of blood ne kin that way, and therefore the one of them cannot bée heire to other, for he that will clayne as heire to one by 
                        ••
                     ſ
                        •••
                      muſt bée of whole blood to him from whom he claymeth, In the ſame maner it is 
                        ••
                      a woman haue diuers iſſues by diuers huſbands▪ who are called brothers by one mother.
               
               
                  151 Demurrer.
                  
                     DEmurrer is when anie action is brought & the defendent pleadeth a plée,

to which the plaintife anſwereth, that hée will not anſwere, for that it is not a ſufficient plee in the law, 
                        •
                      ſhe defendant ſaith to the contrarie, that it is a ſufficient plee, and thereupon both parties do ſubmit the 
                        •••
                     ſe to the iudgement of the court; then that is called a Demurrer.
               
               
                  Denizen.
                  
                     DEnizen, is where an a
                     
                        ••
                     en borne becommeth the Kings ſubiect, and ob
                     
                        •••
                     neth the Kings letters Pat
                        •
                     n
                        ••
                     s for to enioy all priuiledges as an Engliſh man, but if one bée made Denizen he ſhall pay cuſtomes and diuers other 
                        •
                     ing
                        •
                      as aliens, as it app
                        ••••••
                      by diuers ſtatutes thereof 
                        〈…〉
                     .
               
               
                  Deodande.
                  
                     DEodande, is when anie man by miſfortune is ſlayne by a Horſe or by a cart, or by any other thing that mooueth, then this thing that is cauſe of his death, and which at the time of his miſfortune did moue, ſhalbe forfait to the

king, & that is called Deodande, and that pert
                        •
                     meth to the kings Almener for to diſpoſ
                        •••
                      almes & déeds of charitie.
               
               
                  154 Departure from a plee or matter.
                  
                     DEparture from his plee or matter, is where a mā pleadeth a plée in barre, and the plaintife replieth thereto, and hée after in his reioynder, pleadeth or ſheweth an other matter, contrarie, to his firſt plée that is called a 
                        •
                     eparture from his darre &c.
               
               
                  155 Departure in diſpite of the Court.
                  
                     DEparture in diſpite of the Court, is when the tenant or defendant appeateth to the action brought againſt him, and hath a day ouer in the ſame Terme▪ or is called after, though hée had no day giuen him▪ ſo that it 
                        •
                     ée in the ſame terme if he doe not appeare but makes default, it 
                        •
                     s a Departure in diſp
                        ••
                     e of the Court, and therefore hee ſhalbe condempned.
               
               
                  
                  Deputie.
                  
                     DEputie is he that occupieth in an other m
                        •
                     ns right, whether it 
                        •
                     e office or anie other thing 
                        •
                     ls, and his forfaiture or miſdemeanor ſhall cauſe the officer or him whoſe deputie 
                        •
                     e is to looſe hi
                        •
                      office o
                        •
                      thing. But a m
                        •
                     n cannot make his deputie in all caſes except the graunt ſo bée: as if it bée with theſe or ſuch like wordes to exerciſe or vſe by himſelfe or his ſufficient deputie, or i
                        •
                      the wordes goe further to himſelfe or his deputie, or the deputie of his deputie, then he may make a deputie, and his deputie alſo may make a deputie, or 
                        •
                     ls not.
               
               
                  Debte.
                  
                     DEbte is a writte, and it lieth where anie ſumme of money is due to a man by reaſon of accompt, bargaine, contract, obligation▪ or other eſpecialtie, to bée payed at a certaine day, at which day bée 
                        ••
                     y
                        •
                     th not, then 
                        •
                     e ſhall haue this writ. But if any ſumme of money bée due to 
                        •••
                      Lord by his tenaunt for

any rent ſeruice, the Lord ſhall neuer haue action of debte, but it behoueth alwaie to diſtraine. Alſo for rent charge or rent ſecke, which anie man hath for life, in taile, or in 
                        •
                     ée, he ſhal not haue any action of debt as long as the rent continueth, but his executors may haue an action of debt for the arrerages of any of the ſaid rentes due in the life of their teſtator, by the ſtatute 32. H. 8. cap. 37.
                  But for the arrerages of rent reſerued vpō a leaſe for terme of yéeres, the leſſor is at his electiō to haue an action of debt, or for to diſtraine: But if the leaſe be determined, then he ſhal not diſtraine after for that rent.
                  But 
                        •
                     ée muſt haue an action of debt for the arrerages.
               
               
                  158 Deuaſtauerunt bona teſtatoris.
                  
                     DEuaſtauerunt bona teſtatoris is when the executors will deliuer the legacies that their teſtator hath giuen, or make reſtitution for wrong
                        ••
                      done

by him, or pay his de
                        •••
                     s due vpon contractes, or other debtes vpon ſpecialties, whoſe dayes of payment are not yet come &c. And kéepe not ſufficient in their handes to diſcharge thoſe debts vpon recordes or ſpecialties, that they are compeliable formerly by the law to ſatiſfie, then they ſhalbe cōſtrained to pay of their owne goods thoſe duties, which at the firſt by the lawe they▪ were compelled to pay, according to the value of that which they deliuered or payed by compulſion, for ſuch payments of debts, or deliuery of legacies, as is aforeſaid, before debtes payed vpon ſpecialties▪ or recordes, whoſe daies o
                        •
                      paymēt ar
                        •
                      alreadie come▪ are accompted in the lawe a waſting of the goodes of the teſtator, aſmuch as if they had giuen them awa
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ without cauſe, or ſold them and conuerted them to their owne vſe.
               
               
                  Deuiſe.
                  
                     DEuiſe is where a man in his teſtament, giueth

or b
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •••
                     theth his goods or his landes to another after his deceaſe. And where ſuch deuiſe is made of goods, i
                        •
                      the executors will not deliuer the goods to th
                        •
                      deuiſée, the d
                        •••
                     ſée hath no remedie by the cō
                     mon-law▪ But i
                        •
                      behoueth h
                        ••
                      to haue a Citation againſt the executors o
                        •
                      the teſtator to appeare before the ordinary, to ſhew wh
                        •
                      he performeth not the will of the teſtator, for the deuiſee may not take the lega
                     
                        ••
                     e and ſerue himſelfe, but it muſt be deliuered to him by the executors.
                  But by the common-law if a man bee ſole ſeiſes of landes in his demeſne as of 
                        •
                     ee, & demſeth the lands by teſtament, this deuiſ
                        •
                      was void, vnles the lands were in a Citie or borough where landes 
                        ••
                      deuiſable by cuſtom: But if any man were en
                        ••
                     o
                        ••
                     ed to the vſe of another and his heires, and he to whoſe vſe hee was ſo ſeiſed did make 
                        〈…〉
                      of his lands, this deuiſe was good, though it be not in a Towne where landes are deuiſable.
                  
                     Alſo if any man deuiſe lands in Citie Towne, or Borough deuiſable, and the deuiſor dyeth, if his heire or anie other abate in the landes, then the deu
                        •
                     ſ
                        ••
                      ſhall haue a writte of Ex graui querela: But this writte ſhall neuer hee pleded before the Kinges Iuſtice, but alwaies before the Maior or Bailifes in the ſame towne.
                  And here to the ende to ſhew how much the lawes of this Realme, and the wiſe diſcr
                        ••
                     te Iudges of the ſame, who are the interpreters of the lawe, doe 
                        •
                     auor wils & teſtaments, and ſo deuiſes in yeelding to there ſuch a reaſonable conſtruction, as they think might beſt agree with the mindes of the dead, conſidering that willes and teſtaments are for the moſt parte, and by common intendement made when the teſtator is nowe very ſicke, weake, and paſts all hope of recouerie, fo
                        •
                      it is a receiued opinion in the Countrey among moſte, that if a man ſhould chaunce to bee ſo wiſe

as to make his will in his good health, when hee is ſtrong of good memory, and hath tune and leaſure, and might aſke counſell if any doubt were of the learned that then hee ſhould not liue long after, and therefore they deferre it, to ſuch time, whē as it were more conuenient to applie themſelues to the diſpoſitions of their ſoules, then of their landes or goods except it were that by the freſh memorie, and recitall of them at that time, it might bee a cauſe to putte them in minde of ſome of their goods or Landes falſely gotten, and ſo moue them to reſtitution &c. And at that time the penning of ſuch willes are commonly committed to the Miniſter of the Pariſh, or to ſome other more ignorant then hee who knoweth not what wordes are neceſſarie to make an eſtate in fée ſimple, fée taile▪ for terme of life or ſuch like beſides manie other miſchiefes: I will therefore here ſette downe ſome of

thoſe caſes, that are moſt common in ignorant mens mouthes, & do carrie by the wiſe interpretations of the Iudges, as is aforeſaid a larger and more fauourable ſence in willes then in déedes.
                  Firſt therefore if one deuiſe to I. S. by his will al his landes & tenements, here not only al thoſe lāds that he hath in poſſeſſiō do paſſe, but alſo thoſe that he hath the reuerſion of by vertue of theſe wordes tenements.
                  And if lands be deuiſed to a man to haue to him for euer, or to haue to him and his aſſignes, in theſe two caſes the deuiſe ſhall haue a fée ſimple. But if it be giuen by feoffement in ſuch maner▪ he hath but an eſtate for terme of life. Alſo if a man deuiſe his landes to other, to giue, ſell or doe therewith at his pleaſure or will, this is fée ſimple.
                  A deuiſe made to one 
                        •
                      to his heires malas doth make▪ an eſtate taile▪ but i
                        •
                      ſuch wordes be put in a déede of feoffemēt it ſhall b
                        •
                     
                     
taken a fée ſimple, becauſe it doth not appeare of what bodie the heires males ſhal be begotten. If lands bee giuen by déed to I. S. and to the heires males of his body &c. who hath iſſue a daughter, who hath iſſue a ſonne, and dieth, there the land ſhal returne to the donour, and 
                        •
                     he ſonne of the daughter ſhall not haue it, becauſe hée cannot conuei
                        •
                      himſelfe by heires males, for his mother is a let thereto, but otherwiſe it is of ſuch a deuiſe, for there the ſonne of the daughter ſhal haue it rather then the will ſhalbe voide.
                  If one deuiſe to an infant in his mothers bellie, it is a good deuiſe, otherwiſe it is by feoffement, graunt, or gifte, for in thoſe caſes there ought to be one of abilitie to take preſently or otherwiſe it is voide.
                  A deuiſe made in fée ſimple wtout expreſſe words of heirs, is good in fée ſimple.
                  But if a deuiſe be made to I. N. hee ſhall haue the lande but for terme of life, for thoſe wordes will carie no greater eſtate.
                  
                     If one will that his ſon I. ſhal haue his land, after the death of his wife, here the wife of the deuiſor ſhal haue the land firſt for term of life. So likewiſe if a man deuiſe his goods to his wife, & that after the deceaſe of his wife, his ſon & heire ſhal haue the houſe, where the goods are, there the ſonne ſhall not haue the houſe during the life of the wife, for it dooth appeare that his intent was, y• his wife ſhould haue the houſe alſo for terme of her life, notwithſtanding it were not deuiſed to her by expreſſe words.
                  If a deuiſe bée to I. N. and to the heires females of his bodie begotten, after the deuiſes hath iſſue a ſonne & daughter, and dieth, here the daughter ſhall haue the land & not the ſon, and yet he is the moſt worthy perſon, & heire to his father, but becauſe the wil of the dead is, y• the daughter ſhould haue it, lawe and conſcience wil ſo alſo.
                  And herein the verie heathens were preciſe as appeareth by thoſe verſes

of Octauius Auguſtus, which Donatus reporteth hee made after y• 
                     Virgil at his death, gaue cōmandement, that his books ſhould bee burnt, becauſe they were imperfect, and yet ſome perſwaded that they ſhould be ſaued, as indéede they happily were, to whō hee anſwered thus: but faith of lawe muſt néedes be kept and what laſt will doth ſay, And what it doth commaund bee done, that néeds we muſt obey.
               
               
                  160 Diem clauſit extremum.
                  
                     DIem clauſit extremum, is a writ, & it lieth wher the Kinges tenaunt, that holdeth in chiefe, dieth, this writte ſhall bee directed to the eſchetour to enquire of what eſtate hee was ſeiſed, and who is next heire, and his age and of the certaintie of the land, and of what value the land is, and of whome it is holden, and that inquiſition ſhalbe returned into the Chancerie, which is cōmonly called: The office after the death of that perſon.
               
               
                  
                  Diſcent.
                  
                     DIſcent, is in 2. ſortes, either lineal or collateral.
                  Lineal diſcent is when a diſcent is conueied in the ſame line of the whole blood, as grandfather, father, ſonne, ſonnes ſonne, and ſo downward.
                  Collaterall diſcent, is out in another branch from aboue of the whole blood, as grandfathers brother, fathers brother, and ſo downeward.
                  Note that if one die ſeiſed in fée, or in taile of lande in which another hath right to enter, and that diſcendeth to his heire, ſuch diſcent ſhal take away the entrie of him which hath right to enter, for that that the heire hath them by diſcent from his father, & ſo came vnto thoſe tenemēts by the doing of the lawe, and he that had right can not put him out by entring vppon him, but is put to ſue his writ to demaund the land according to; the nature of the title. See heereof in Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 6. and ſtatute, 32. H. 8. cap. 33.
               
               
                  
                  162 Diſclaymer.
                  
                     DIſclaimer, is where the Lorde diſtraineth his tenant; and hee ſueth a repleuin, and the lord anoweth the taking by reaſon that hee holdeth of him, if the tenaunt ſay that he diſclaimeth to hold of him, this is called a diſclaimer, and if the lord thereupon bring a writ of right ſur diſclaymer, and it be foūd againſt the tenant hee ſhall loſe his land. Alſo if one bringeth a precipe againſt two other for the land, and the tenant diſclaimeth and ſaith, that hee is not thereof tenaunt, neither claymeth any thing therein, then the other ſhal haue y• whole land. But if the Precipe be brought againſt one alone, and hee diſclaimeth as is aforeſaid, the writte ſhall abate, and yet the demaundant maie enter unto the lande and holde it in his rightfull eſtate; although his entrie was not lawfull.
               
               
                  163 Diſcontinuance.
                  
                     Diſcontinuance, is when a man alienateth to an other, Landes or tenements,

and dieth, & another hath right to y• ſame lande, and may not enter into thē becauſe of this alienation, as if an Abbot alien the landes of his houſe to another in fee, or fée taile, or for terme of life, or if a man alien the landes that hee hath in the right of his wife, or if tenaunt in the taile alien the landes giuen to him and to the heirs of his body, then ſuch alienations bee called Diſcontinuance, for ſuch eſtates paſſe alwaie by liuerie and ſeiſin, & in theſe caſes the ſucceſſour of the Abbot or the woman after the death of her huſbād or the iſſue in the taile after the death of the tenant in taile may not enter, but euerie of them is put to his action. Sée more hereof in Littletō lib. 3. cap. 11. and 32. H. 8. cap. 28. which taketh away diſcontinuaunces by the huſbande ſeiſed in right of his wife.
               
               
                  Tithes.
                  
                     TIthes, are the tenthe parts of any thing, but properly of thoſe thinges

which doe increaſe, which for the moſt part do belong to miniſters of the church for their maintenance, and they be in thrée ſorts deuided, to wit Predial tithes, Perſonall tithes, & Mixte tithes, Prediall tithes are tithes that bee paied of thinges that come of the ground only, as corne, hay, fruits of Trées and ſuch like.
                  Perſonall Tithes are Tithes to be paied of ſuch profits as come by the labour and induſtrie of mans perſon, as by buying, ſelling, gaines of Merchandize, and of handicraftes men, labourers and ſuch as worke for hire, as carpenters, Maſons and ſuch like.
                  Mixt tithes are tithes of calues, lambs, pigs, and ſuch like, y• increaſe partly of the ground that they bee fed vpon and partly of the kéeping induſtrie and diligence of the owner.
               
               
                  165 Diſperagement.
                  
                     DIſperagemēt, is a ſhame diſgrace or villany done by the gardeine in Chiualrie

to his ward in Chiualrie being within age by reaſon of his mariage.
                  As when the gardeine doeth marrie his warde within age of xiiii. yeres, & within ſuch time as hee cannot conſent to mariage, to a bond woman, or to the daughter of one that dwelt in a borough (which is to be vnderſtood, ſuch whoſe fathers profeſſe handicrafts, & thoſe baſer artes of buying & ſelling, to get their liuing by) or to one that hath but one foote, or one hand, or is laine or deformed; or hath ſome horrible diſeaſe, as the leproſie, french pockes, falling ſicknes or ſuch like, or maryeth him▪ to a woman that is paſt childebearing, & diuers ſuch other, then vpon the complaint made by the frinds of ſuch heire, the Lord or gardeine ſhall looſe the wardſhip, and the profits during the nonage of the heire for the ſhame done vnto him. See Littlet lib. 2. cap. 4.
                  
               
               
                  Diſſeiſin.
                  
                     DIſſeiſin, is when a man enters into any landes

or tenementes where his entry is not lawfull, and putteth him out, that hath the fréehold.
               
               
                  167 Diſſeiſin vpō diſſeiſin.
                  
                     DIſſeiſin vpon diſſeiſin, is when the diſſeiſour is diſſeiſed by another.
               
               
                  168 Diſſeiſor and diſſeiſee.
                  
                     DIſſeiſor, is which putteth any man out of his land without order of the law, & diſſeiſée is he that is ſo put out.
               
               
                  169 Diſceit.
                  
                     DIſceit, is a writ, & it is ſometime originall, and ſometime iudiciall, but when it is originall, it lyeth wher any diſce
                        •
                     t is d
                        •
                     n to a man by another, ſo y• hee hath not ſufficiently perfourmed his bargaine or not perfourmed his promiſe, then b
                        •
                     e that is in ſuch manor diſceiued ſhall haue this writ.
                  Alſo when this writ is iudicial, it lyeth where a Scire fac. is ſued out of any Record againſt a man, and the Shirife returneth,

that hee is warned where he was not warned, or where a Praecipe quod reddat of a plée of lands, or a Q
                           •
                        impedit of the preſenting to a church, is ſued againſt one, & the ſhirife returneth that he is ſummoned, where he was not ſū
                     moned, by which diſceit & falſe returne the demaundāt recouereth in y• plaint, then the party grieued ſhal haue this writ againſt him that recouered, & againſt the ſummoners, & againſt the ſhirife, then the writt ſhalbee directed to the Coroners of the ſame countie, if hee continue ſhirife that made the retorne.
               
               
                  Diſtreſſe.
                  
                     DIſtreſſe, is the thinge which is taken and diſtrained vpon any land for rent behind, or other duty, or for hurt done although that the propertie of the thing belongeth to a ſtrā
                     ger: But if they be beaſtes that belong to a ſtranger, it behooueth y• they were leuant or couchant vpon y• ſame ground, y• is to ſaye,

that the beaſtes haue béen vpon the ground certaine ſpace, that they haue them ſelfe well reſted there, or els they be not diſtrainable for rent or ſeruice.
                  And if one diſtraine for rent or other thing without cauſe lawfull, then the partie grieued ſhall haue a repleuin and vpon ſuretye found to purſue his action ſhall haue the diſtreſſe to him deliuered again. But there bee diuers thinges which be not diſtrainable, viz. another mans gowne in the houſe of a tailor, or cloth in the houſe of a fuller, ſhéereman or weauer, for that they bee common artificers, & that the common preſumption is, that ſuch things belong not to the artificer, but to other perſons which put them there to be wrought,
                  Alſo vitail is not diſtreinable nor corne in ſheues, but if they be in cart, for y• that a diſtreſſe ought to be alway of ſuch things wher of the ſhirife may make repleuin, & deliuer againe in as good caſe as it was at the time of the taking.
                  
                     A man may diſtraine for homage & fealtie, & eſcuage, & other ſeruices & for 
                        •
                     ines and amerciamentes which bee aſſeſſed in a Leete, but not in a Court baron. And alſo for dammage feaſant, that is to ſay, when hee ſyndeth the beaſtes or goods of any other doing hurt or cumbring his ground. But a man may not diſtraine for any rent or thing due for any lande, but vpon the ſame land that is charged therewith: But in caſe where I come to diſtrain, and the other ſeeing my purpoſe chaſeth y• beaſtes, and beareth the thing out, to the intent that I ſhall not take it for a diſtreſſe vpon the ground, then I may well purſue, and if I take it preſently in y• high way, or in anothers ground, the taking is lawfull aſwell there as vpon the land charged, to whom ſoeuer the propertie of the goods be.
                  Alſo for fines & amerciaments which be aſſeſſed in a léete, one may alway take the goods of him that

is ſo amerced, in whoſe groūd ſoeuer they be within the iuriſdiction of the Court as it is ſaid. And when one hath taken a diſtreſſe, it behooueth him to bring it to the common pound, or elſe he may keepe it in an open place, ſo that hee giue notice to the partie, that hee (if the diſtres be a quicke beaſt) may giue to it foode, and then if the beaſt die for default of food, hee that was diſtrayned ſhalbe at the loſſe, and then the other might diſtraine againe for the ſame rent or duitie. But if hee carrie the diſtres to a holde, or out of the Countie, that the Shirife may not make deliuerance vpon the repleuin, then the par
                        •
                     y vpon the returne of the Shirife, ſhall haue a writte of Withernam dyrected to the Shirife, that hee take as many of his beaſtes, or as much goodes of the other in his kéeping, till he hath made deliuerance of the firſt diſtres. And alſo if they bée in a forſlet or Caſtel, the ſhirife may take with him the power of the

Countie, & beat downe the caſtell. As it appeareth by the ſtatute Weſt. 1. cap. 17. therefore looke the ſtatute.
               
               
                  Diuorce.
                  
                     DIuorce ſo called of Diuortium, cōming of the verbe Diuerto, which ſignifieth to retorne backe, it is vſed in law when a man is diuorced from his wife, hée retorneth her backe home to her Father or other Friendes, or to the place from whence he had her, and by ſuch diuorce the marriage is defeated & vndone.
               
               
                  Donor and Donee.
                  
                     DOnor is hée which giueth lands & tenemēts to an other in taile, and he to whom the ſame is giuē is called Donée.
               
               
                  Double plee.
                  
                     DOuble plee is where the defendant or tenaunt in any action pledeth a plée, in the which two matters be comprehended, & euery one by himſelfe is a ſufficient barre or aunſwere to the action, then ſuch a double plée ſhall not be admitted for a plée, except one depend vpon an other, and in

ſuch caſe if he may not haue the laſt plée without y• firſt plée, then ſuch a double plée ſhalbe well ſuffered.
               
               
                  174 Dower.
                  
                     DOwer is a writ and it lieth where a mā is ſole ſeyſed during the couerture betweene him and his wife, of lands or tenemēts in fée ſimple or fée tayle, where by poſſibilitie the iſſue betwéene them may inherite, if ſuch a man die his wife ſhall recouer the third part of all the landes whereof the huſband was ſole ſeyſed any time during the couerture by a writ of Dovver vnde nihil habet, though hée died not ſeyſed, and though that he made alienation thereof in his lyfe. But if a man before the ſtatute of Vſis 27. H. 8. had landes, in the which an other man, or other men were ſeyſed to his vſe alwaies during the couerture, and hée to whoſe vſe they were ſeiſed dieth before the ſaid Statute, his wife ſhal not be indowed.
                  And alſo if before the ſays ſtatute two men bée ſeiſed of lands to the vſe of

one of them, & he to whoſe vſe &c. dieth before the ſaid ſtatute, his wife ſhall not bée endowed. Alſo if a woman bring a writte of dower, ſhe ſhal recouer damages, for the profit rū after the death of her huſbād if he dieth thereof ſeyſed, but if any alienation or eſtate were made during ye couerture, ſo that the huſband died not ſeyſed, then though ſhee ſhall recouer the land, yet ſhée ſhall recouer no dammages. Alſo there is an other writte of dower called a writte of Right of dower, and 
                        ••
                      lyeth where a womā hath recouered part of hir dower in one towne, and the other part ſhe is to recouer. Alſo in diuers caſes a womā ſhall not haue dower, as if the huſband cōmit treaſon for the which he is attainted, then his wife ſhal haue no dower. Alſo if ſhe go away frō her huſband with an other mā in aduowtry, and if ſhe be not reconciled by her huſband of his own will without coherſion of the Church, ſhe ſhal not be indowed.
               
               
                  
                  175 Right.
                  
                     RIght, is where one hath a thing that was taken from another wrongfully as by diſſeiſin, diſcontinuance, or putting out or ſuch like, and the challenge or clayme that hee hath, who ſhould haue the thing, is called Right.
               
               
                  176 Right of entrie.
                  
                     RIght of entrie, is when one ſeiſed of land in fée, is thereof diſſeiſed: Now the diſſeiſée hath right to enter into the land, & may ſo doe when he will, or els hée may haue a writte of right againſt the diſſeiſor.
               
               
                  177 Dum non fuit compos mentis.
                  
                     DVm non fuit compos mentis, is a writ & it lieth where a mā that is out of his wits, that is to ſay, mad or lunatike alieneth the landes that he hath in fee ſimple, & dieth, then his heire after his deceaſe ſhal haue this writ, but he himſelfe ſhall not haue this writte for that, that a man ſhall not be receiued to diſable himſelfe. Alſo this writ may be made in the per, cui, and poſt.
               
               
                  
                  Dum fuit infra aetatem.
                  
                     DVm fuit infra aetatem, is a writ, and it lyeth where an infaunt within age alieneth his lande which he hath in fée ſimple or for terme of life, when he commeth to his full age hée ſhall haue this writ or he may enter if he will, but it behooueth that he be of full age the day of his writ brought. Alſo if an infant alien his land, and die, his iſſue at his full age ſhal haue this writ or hée may enter, but the iſſue ſhall not haue this writ within his age.
               
               
                  Dures.
                  
                     DVres, is where one is kept in priſon or reſtreined from his libertie contrarie to the order of the law, and if ſuch a perſon ſo beyng in dures, make anie eſpecialtie or oblig▪ by reaſon of ſuch impriſonment ſuch a deede is void in the law, & in an action brought vpon ſuch an eſpecialtie he may ſay that it was made by dures of impriſonment, but if a mā be arreſted vpon an action at the ſuite of

another though the cauſe of the action bée not good nor true, if he make an obligation to a ſtraunger being in priſon by ſuch arreſt, yet it ſhall not be ſaid by dures, but if hée make an obligation to him at whoſe ſuite hee was arreſted to bée diſcharged of ſuch impriſonment, then it ſhall be ſaid dures, as it is ſaid.
               
            
            
               E.
               
                  180 Eiectione firme.
                  
                     EIectione firme, looke for that in the title Gard.
               
               
                  181 Eiectment de garde.
                  
                     EIectment de garde, looke for that in the Title of Gardes.
               
               
                  182 Eire Iuſtices.
                  
                     EIre iuſtices, or Itinerāt, as wée call them, were Iuſt ces that vſe to ryde frō place to place through out the Realme to adminiſter Iuſtice.
               
               
                  183 Elegit.
                  TO holde by Elegit, is where a man hath reconered debt or damage by a writte againſt another by cōleſſiō or in other maner, hee ſhall haue within the

yéere againſt him a writte iudiciall called Elegit to haue execution of the halfe of all his landes and chattels (except exen & beaſtes of the plow) till the debt & dammages be wholy leuied and paid to him, and during the terme he is tenant by Elegit, And note well that if he be put out within the terme hée ſhall haue Aſsiſe of Nouel diſseiſin, & after a rediſſeiſin if néede be, and this is giuen by the ſtatute of weſtminſter ſecond Chap. 18.
                  And alſo by the equitie of the ſame ſtatute he that hath his eſtate if he be put out ſhall haue Aſſiſe & rediſſeiſin if néed be. And alſo if he make his executors and die, and his executors enter and after be put out, they ſhall haue by the equitie of the ſame ſtatute, ſuch action as he himſelfe before ſaid. But if he be put out, and after make his executors and die, his executors may enter, and if they be ſtopped of their entrie, they ſhall haue a writ of treſpaſſe vppon their matter and caſe.
                  
                     And note well if he doe waſte in al the land or parcell, the other ſhall haue againſt him immediatly a writ iudicial out of the firſt record called Venire facias ad Computādum, by which it ſhall be inquired if hée haue leuied all the money or parcell, and if hée haue not leuied the money, then it ſhall be inquired to how much the waſte amounteth, and if the waſt amount but to parcel, then as much of the money as the waſte amounteth vnto, ſhalbe abridged of the foreſaid money which was to be leuied. But if he haue done more waſte then the foreſaid ſumme of money which was to be leuied, amounteth, the other ſhalbe diſcharged by and by of all the ſaid money and ſhall recouer the lande. And for the ſuperfluitie of the waſte made about that, that amounteth to the ſaid ſumme he ſhal recouer his dammages ſingle, And the ſame lawe is of his executors, and alſo of him that hath his eſtate.
                  And note y• if he alien in

fée, for terme of life or in taile al or parcell of the lād which hee holdeth by Elegit, if the alienation bée made, within the terme or after, he which hath right, ſhall haue againſt him an Aſſiſe of Nouel diſſeiſin, And they both muſt be put in the Aſſiſe, the alienor and the alienee, and notwithſtanding that the alienor die preſently, yet he which hath right, ſhall haue Aſſiſe againſt the alienee alone, as if the alienee had bin a plaine tenant for terme of yéers, and that is by the equitie of the ſtatute of weſtm. 2. Cap. 25. for that that hée hath not but a chattell in effect, And the ſame law is of his executours and of him which hath his eſtate as is aforeſaid.
                  And note well that in Elegit if the ſhirif returne that hée had nothing the day of the Recogniſance made but that he purchaſed lands after y• time then the partie playntife ſhall haue a newe writ to haue execution thereof, the ſame law is of a ſtatut marchāt.

And note well that after a Fieri facias a mā may haue the Elegit, but not contrarie wiſe, for that the Elegit is of more higher nature then the Fieri facias, And note well that if a man recouer by a writ of debt and ſueth a Fieri facias, and the ſhirife returne that the defendāt hath nothing wherof he may ſatiſfie the debt to the partie, thē the plaintife ſhall haue Elegit or Capias ſicut alias and a Pluries, And if the Shirife returne at the Capias mitto vobis corpus, & he haue nothing wherof he may make ſatiſfaction to the partie he ſhalbe ſent to the priſon of the fléete, and there ſhall abide vntill he haue made agréement with the partie, and if the Shirife returne Non eſt inuentus, thē there ſhall go forth an Exigent againſt him. And note well y• in a writ of debt brought againſt a Parſon of holy Church which hath nothing of lay 
                        •
                     ee, and the ſhirife returneth that hee hath nought by which hée may bée ſummoned, then ſhall the playntife ſue a writte

to the Biſhop that he make his Clerke to come, and the Biſhop ſhall make him to come by ſequeſtration of the Church. And note wel that if a man bring a writ of debt and recouer, and make his executors & dieth, they ſhall not haue execution notwithſtanding, y• it be within the yeere, by a Fieri facias.
               
               
                  Embraſour ou Embraceour.
                  
                     EMbraſour or Embraceour is he that whē a matter is in triall betwéene partie and partie commeth to the barre with one of y• parties (hauing receiued ſome reward ſo to doe) & ſpeaketh in y• caſe or priuily laboreth the iurie, or ſtandeth there to ſuruey or ouerlooke thē, therby to put them in feare & doubt of the matter. But men that are learned in the law, may ſpeake in the caſe for their Clients.
               
               
                  Encrochment.
                  
                     ENcrochmēt, is ſaid whē the Lorde hath gotten ſeiſin of more rent or ſeruices of his tenant thē of right is due or ought to be paied or done vnto him,

as if 
                        •
                     he tenaunt holde his land of the Lord by fealtie, and ii. s. rent yeerely. And now of late time hee hath got ſeiſin of iii. s. rent or of homage or eſcuage, or ſuch like. Then this is called an incrochment of that rent or ſeruice.
               
               
                  186 Enheritance.
                  
                     ENheritance, is ſuch eſtate in landes or tenements, or other things, as may bee enherited by the heir, whether it be in eſtate of fée ſimple, or taile, by diſcent from any of his aunceſtors or by his own purchaſe.
                  And inheritance is deuided into two ſortes, that is to ſay, enheritance corporate, and enheritance incorporate.
                  Enheritance corporate are meſuages, lands, meadowes, paſtures, rents and ſuch like, that haue ſubſtance in themſelues and may continue alwayes. And theſe are called corporall things.
                  Enheritance incorporat are aduowſons, villains, waies, comons, courts, fiſhings, & ſuch like that are,

or may bee appendaunt, or appurtenant to enheritances corporate.
               
               
                  Entre.
                  
                     ENtre, is wher a man entreth into any landes or tenements in his proper perſon, or any other 
                        •
                     y 
                        •
                     is commandement.
                  Alſo there bee diuers writs of Entre which be in diuers maners, One is a writte of Entre ſur diſſeiſin, and this writie lieth where a men is diſſeiſed, hee or his heire ſhall haue this writ againſt the diſſeiſor or anie other after tenant or the Ian
                        •
                     . And if the diſſeiſor alien and die ſ
                        •
                     iſe
                        •
                      then the writ of Entre ſhal be againſt the heire with the alienee in the Per, that is to ſay▪ in which the tenaunt hath no Entre but by ſuch a one naming the diſſeiſor, which him hath diſſeiſed &c.
                  And if the heire or alienée die ſeiſed, or alieneth to another▪ then the writte ſhall be in the Per and Cui, that is to ſay, into which the tenaunt hath no entrie but by ſuch a one naming the heire or alienée of the

diſſeiſor to whome ſuch a one (naming the diſſeiſor) did lette it, which by force diſſeiſed him &c.
                  And if land bee co
                        ••
                     eid ouer to manie, or if the firſt diſſeiſor bee diſſeiſed, then the writte of Entre ſhall be in the Poſt, that is to ſay that the tenaunt hath no entry but after the diſſeiſin which the firſt diſſeiſour made to the demandant or his aunceſtor. See after Entre en le per.
                  
                  A writ of Entre in the Per lyeth where a man is diſſeiſed of his freeholde, and the Diſſeiſour alieneth or dyeth ſeiſed, and his Heire entreth, then the diſſeiſee or his heire ſhall haue the ſaide writte againſt the Heire of the Diſſeiſour, or againſt the alienée of the Diſſeiſour, but liuing the diſſeiſour hee ma
                        •
                     e haue an Aſſiſe if he will, and the writte of Entre ſhall ſay, in quod A. non habet ingreſſum niſi per B. qui illud ei dimiſit, qui inde eum iniuſte diſſeiſiuit &c. But if the diſſeiſor alien & the alienée dieth ſeiſed, or alieneth ouer to

another, or if the diſſeiſor die, and his heire enter, and that heire alieneth or dyeth, and his heire entreth, then the diſſeiſée or his heire ſhall haue a writ of Entre ſur diſseiſin in y• 
                     Per and Cui, And the writte ſhall ſay, in quod idem A non habet ingreſsū niſi per B. cui C. illud ei dimiſit, qui inde iniuſte &c.
                  
                  And note well, that no writte of Entre in the Per and Cui ſhall bee maintenable againſt none, but where he that is tenaunt bee in by purchaſe or diſcent: But if the alienation or diſcent bee put out of the degrees, vpon which no writ may bee made in the Per, nor in the Per and Cui, then it ſhall bee made in the Poſt, and the writte ſhall ſay, in quod A. non habet ingreſsum niſi poſt diſseiſinam, quam B. inde iniuſte & ſine iuditio fecit praef. N. vel M. proauo N. cuius haeres ipſe eſt.
                  
                  Alſo there are v. things which put the writ of Entre out of the degrées, that is to ſay, Entruſion, Succeſſiō, diſſeiſin vpon diſſeiſin,

Iudgemēt, & Eſcheat.
                  1 Entruſion is when the diſſeiſor dyeth ſeiſed, & an eſtranger abateth.
                  2 Diſſeiſin vpon diſſeiſin, is when the diſſeiſor is diſſeiſed by another.
                  3 Succeſſion, is where the diſſeiſor is a man of religion, and dyeth, or is depoſed, and his ſucceſſor entreth.
                  4 Iudgement is when one recouereth againſt the diſſeiſour.
                  5 Eſcheat, is when the diſſeiſor dyeth without heire, or doth felony wherby hee is attamted, by which the lorde entreth as in his Eſcheat.
                  In all thoſe caſes the diſſeiſie or his heire ſhall not haue a writ of Entre within the degrees in the Per, but in the Poſt, for that that in thoſe ſaide caſes they are not in by diſcent nor by purchaſe.
                  Alſo there is a writ of entre Ad communem legē, and lyeth where tenant for terme of life, tenaunt for term of anothers life, tenāt by y• curteſie, or tenant in dower alieneth and dyeth,

then he in the reuerſiō ſhal haue the foreſaide writ againſt whomſoeuer is in after in y• ſaid tenements.
                  Alſo a writ of Entre in caſu prouiſo 
                     
                        •
                     yeth, if tenant in dower alien in fee, or for terme of life, or for anothers life, liuing the tenant in dower, hee in the reuerſion ſhall haue the writ called a writ of Entre in caſu prouiſo.
                  
                  Alſo a writ of Entre In caſu conſimili lyeth, if tenant for terme of life, or tenant by curteſie alien in fee lyuing them, he in the reuerſion ſhall haue a writte called a writte of Entre in caſu conſimili.
                  
                  Alſo a writ of Entre Ad terminum qui preteriit lyeth, if a man leaſe lande to another for terme of yeares, and the tenaunt ho
                        •
                     d ouer his terme, then the leſſor ſhall haue a writ which is called a writ of Entre Ad terminum qui preteriit.
                  
                  And alſo if lands be leaſed to a man for terme of anothers life, and hee for whoſe life the landes are leaſed dyeth, and the leſſee

holds ouer, then the leſſor ſhal haue this writ.
                  Alſo a writ of Entre ſine aſſenſu capituli lyeth, where an Abbot, Prior, or ſuch as hath Couent or comon ſeale, alieneth lāds or tenements of the right of his Church, without the aſſent of the Couent or Chapter and dyeth, then his ſucceſſour ſhall haue this writ.
                  Alſo a writ of Entre Cauſa matrimonii prelocuti lyeth, wherelandes or tenements are giuen to a man vpon ſuch condition, that he ſhal take her to his wife within a certaine time, and he do not eſpouſe her within the ſaid terme, or eſpouſe another womā, or make himſelfe Prieſt, or enter in Religion, or him diſable, ſo that he cannot take her according to the ſaide condition, th
                        •
                     n the donour and his heires ſhall haue the ſaid writte againſt him or againſt whomſoeuer is in the ſaid lande. And alſo it behooueth that this condition be made by Indenture, or otherwiſe this writte

doth noth lye, and all theſe and other writs of entrie may be made in the Per, Cui, and poſt.
                  
               
               
                  Entruſion.
                  
                     ENtruſion, is a writ and it lyeth where a tenant for terme of lyfe dyeth ſeiſed of certaine lands or tenements, and a ſtraunger entreth, hee in the reuerſion ſhall haue the ſaide writ againſt the abator, or againſt whoſoeuer that is in after their entruſion.
                  Alſo a write of Entruſion ſhalbee maintenable by the ſucceſſour of an Abbot againſt the abator which ſhall enter in any lands or tenements in the time of vacation that belongeth to the Church by the ſtatute of Marlebridge, the laſt Chapter.
               
               
                  Equitie.
                  
                     EQuitie, is in two ſortes differing much the one from the other, and are of contrary effectes, for y• one doth abridge, diminiſh and take frō y• letter of the law, The other doeth inlarge, adde & amplifie therunto.
                  
                     The firſt is thus defined, Equitie is the correction of a lawe generally made in that part, wherin it faileth, which correction of the generall wordes, is much vſed in our law. As if for example when an act of parliament is made that whoſoeuer doeth ſuch a thing, ſhalbe a felon, & ſhall ſuffer death, yet if a mad man, or an infant of yong yeeres that hath no diſcreſion do the ſame, they ſhall bee no felons nor ſuffer death therefore.
                  Alſo if a Statute were made that al perſons that ſhall receiue or giue meate or drink, or other ſuccor to any y• ſhal do ſuch a thing, ſhalbee acceſſary to his offence, and ſhall ſuffer death if they did knowe of the fact, yet notwithſtanding one doeth ſuch an acte, and commeth to his wife, who knowing thereof doeth receiue him & giues him meate and drink, ſhee ſhall not bee acceſſary nor felon, for in the generalty of the ſaide wordes of the lawe, he that is mad, nor y• infāt nor y• wife, were not

included in meaning.
                  And thus equitie doeth correct the generalite of ye law in thoſe caſes, and the generall wordes are by equitie abridged.
                  The other equitie is defined after this ſort, Equitie is when the wordes of the law are effectually directed, and one thing onely prouided by the wordes of the law to the ende that all things of ye like kinde may be prouided by the ſame, & ſo when the wordes enact one thing they enact all other things that are of like degree, as the ſtatut which ordeines that in an action of debt againſt executors, hee that doeth appeare by diſtreſſe ſhall aunſwere, doeth extend by equitie to adminiſtrators, for ſuch of them as doeth appeare firſt by diſtreſſe, ſhall aunſwere by equitie of the ſaid acte, becauſe they are of like kind.
                  So likewiſe the ſtatute of Glouceſter giues the action of waſt, and the paine thereof againſt him that holdes for life or yeres, and by the equitie of the ſame,

a man ſhall haue an action of waſt againſt him that holdeth but for one yeere or halfe yeere, and yet that is without the wordes of the ſta
                        ••••
                     
                     ▪ for he that holdeth but for halfe a yere, for one yeere, doeth not holde for yeres▪ but that is the meaning and the wordes that enact the one, by equitie enact the other.
               
               
                  190 Error.
                  
                     ERror▪
                      i
                        •
                      a writ and it lyeth where iudgement is giuen in the Common place or before the Iuſtice in Aſſiſe or Oyer and terminer, or before the Maior and Sh
                        ••
                     ifes of L
                        •••
                     d
                        ••
                     , or in other Court of Re
                     
                        ••
                     rde, againſt the 
                        〈…〉
                      or vpon vndue and wrong proceeding▪ then by this were the partie grieued againſt whome the iudgement is giuen ſhall haue his writ 
                        •
                      and there
                        •
                     pon cauſe the Record & Proces to be remoued before the Iuſtice of the kings bēch. And if the error be found, it ſhalbe reuerſed: but if an erronious iudgement bee giuen in the kings bench,

then it cannot be 
                        〈…〉
                      but by Parliament▪ 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      the Statute 
                        〈…〉
                      of Elizabeth.
                  Alſo if a falſe iudgmēt be giuen in Court that is not of record, as in county, hundred or in to 
                        •
                     rt baron, then the party ſhall haue a writ of falſe iudgement for to make the record to come before Iuſtice of the common place. Alſo if errour be found in the Eſchequer, it ſhal bee redreſſed by the Chancelor & Treaſorer▪ is it appeareth by the ſtatute of Ed. 3. An. 31. c
                        •
                     . 12.
               
               
                  Eſcape.
                  
                     Eſcape, is where 
                        〈…〉
                      that is arreſted c
                        •••
                     eth to 
                        〈…〉
                      before y• 
                     
                        •
                     e be 
                        〈…〉
                      by 
                        •
                     word of any Iuſtice or by order of law.
                  Eſcape is in two ſorts▪ that is to ſay, 
                        〈…〉
                      & negligent.
                  
                     
                        •
                     oluntary eſcape▪ is when one doeth arreſt another for felony▪ or other crime, & after he in whoſe cuſtodie he is▪ letteth him goe where he will▪ this letting him goe is a voluntary eſcape.
                  
                     And if the arreſt of him that eſcaped were for felony, then that ſhalbe felony in him that did ſuffer y• eſcape, & if for treaſon, then it ſhalbe treaſon in 
                        〈…〉
                      & if for treſpas, then treſpas, and ſo in all other.
                  Negligēt eſcape is whē one is arreſted, and 
                        〈…〉
                      eſcapes againſt the will of him that did ſo arreſt him, & is not freſhly purſued & taken before the purſuer looſeth the ſight of 
                        〈…〉
                      this ſhall bee ſaide a negligent eſcape, notwithſtanding that hee out of whoſe poſſeſſion hee eſcaped doe take him after he loſt ſight of him▪ Alſo if one 
                        •
                     e arreſted, and after eſcape▪ & is at his libertie▪ and he in whoſe ward he was, take him 
                        〈…〉
                      and bring him to the priſon, yet it 
                        ••
                      an eſcape in him.
                  Alſo if a felon be arreſted by the Conſtable and brought to the ga
                        •
                     le in the county▪ and the gailor will not receiue him & the Conſtable letteth him goe▪ and the gailor alſo▪ and ſo he eſcapeth, this is an eſcape in the gailor, for that in ſuch

caſe the gaylor is bound to receiue him by the bond of the Conſtable without any precept of the Iuſtice of peace. But otherwiſe it is if a comon perſon arreſt another vpon ſuſpition of felony, there the ga
                        ••
                     er is not bound to receiue him, without a precept of ſome Iuſtice of peace. There is an eſcape alſo without arreſt, as if murder be made in the day, & the murderer be not taken, then it is an eſcape, for the which the towne where the murder was don ſhalbe amerced.
               
               
                  Eſchete.
                  
                     ESchete, is where a tenāt in fée ſimple doeth felony for the which he is hanged or a
                        •
                     iured the realm, or be outlawed of felony, murder, or petie treaſon, or if the: tenant dyeth without heire generall or eſpeciall, then the Lorde of whome the tenaunt held the lande, may enter by way of Eſchete, or if any other enter▪ the Lord ſhal haue againſt him one writ called a writ of Eſchete, which as I thinke is deriued of the french word Eſchien.
                  
               
               
                  
                  193 Eſcuage.
                  
                     EScuage, is called in latin Scutagium, that is to ſay ſeruice of the ſhield, and he that holdeth by eſcuage, holdeth by knightes ſeruice, and to that belongēth ward, mariage and reliefe, but that ſhalbee entended of eſcuage not certeine, when the Eſcuage runneth through Englande. when it is ordeined by al y• counſell of Englande that after the warre, euery lord ſhall haue a certain ſumme of his tenant which was not in the ſaid warre. But if the tenāt which holdeth of any Lord by eſcuage, be wt the king in his warres in Scotland, this Lorde will diſtraine h
                        •
                     m for Eſcuage, it ſhalbe a good plee to ſay, that hee was with the king in Scotland in his warres & that ſhalbee tried by y• kings Marſhal.
                  And note wel that a mā may not holde by eſcuage, vnleſſe he hold by homage, for that Eſcuage of common right draweth to him homage, as it was iudged in Term̄ H. 21. Edw. 3. cap. 42. folio 52. Auowrie 115.
                     
and note well that Eſcuage is a certeine ſumme of mony and it ought to be leuied 
                        •
                     y the Lord of his tenant after the quātity of his tenure when Eſcuage runneth through all Englād. And it is ordeyned by all the Counſel of Englād how much euerie tenant ſhall giue to his Lord, and that is properly to maintaine the warres betweene. England & them of Scotland, or of wales, and not betwéene other landes for that y• thoſe foreſaid lands ſhould be of right belōging to the realme of England. See Lit. lib. 2. chap. 3.
                  
               
               
                  Eſplees.
                  
                     ESplees, is as it were the ſeiſin or poſſeſſion of a thing, profit, or commoditie that is to be taken, As of a common the Eſplees is the taking of the graſſe or common by the mouthes of the beaſts that common there. Of an aduowſon the taking of groſſe tithes by the parſon preſented therunto. Of wood, the ſelling of wood, of an orchard the ſelling of appels and other fruit growing there,

of a mill, the taking of toll, is the Eſplees and of ſuch like. And note that in a writte of right of lande or aduowſon or ſuch like the demaundant ought to alleage in his count, that he or his aunceſtors tooke the Eſplées of the thing in demaund, or otherwiſe the pleading is not good.
               
               
                  195 Eſſoine.
                  
                     ESſoine, is where an actiō is brought & the plaintife or defendant may not well appeare at the day in court for one of the v. cauſes vnder expreſſed, thē he ſhalbe eſſoined to ſaue his default, note well yt there be v. maner of eſſoins, that is to ſay, Eſſoine de ouſter le mere, & that is the defē
                     dant ſhall haue a day by xl. daies. The ſecond Eſſoin is De terra ſancta, and vpō this the defendant ſhall haue a day by a yeere and a day▪ & theſe twaine ſhall be laid in the beginning of the plee. The third Eſſoin is De male vener, & that ſhall be adiorned to a common day a
                        •
                      the action requireth and this is called the common Eſſoin, and when and

how this Eſſoin ſhall be, looke the ſtatutes and the Abridgment of ſtatutes, where it is well declared, And the 4. Eſſoine is De malo lecti, and that is onely in a writ of right, & therupon there ſhall a writ goe out of the Chauncerie, direct to the Shirife, that he ſhall ſend iiij. Knights to the tenant to ſée the tenāt, and if he be ſicke to giue a day after a yéere and a day. Alſo the 
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                     e Eſſoine is de ſeruice le Roy, and it lieth in all actions except in Aſſiſe of Nouel diſseiſin▪
                      
                     
                        •
                      writ of Dower, Darrein preſentment, and in appeal of Murder, but in this eſſoyne it behoueth at the day to ſhewe his warrant or elſe it ſhall torne vnto a default, if it bee in a plée reall, or els he ſhall loſe xx. ſhillinges for the iourney or more, by the diſcretion of the Iuſtice, if it be in a plée perſonall, as it appeareth by the ſtatut o
                        •
                      Glouceſt. cap. 8.
               
               
                  Eſtoppel.
                  
                     EStoppel is when one is concluded and forbiddē in lawe to ſpeake againſt

his owne act or decrée, yea although it bee to ſay the trueth.
                  And of Eſtoppels there are a great manie, one for example is, when I. S. is bound in au obligation by the name of T. S. or any other name, and is ſued afterward according to the name in the obligation, that is to ſay T. S. now hée ſhall not bée receiued to ſay, that he is miſnamed, but ſhalbe driuen to anſwere according to the name put in the obligation, that is to ſay, T. S. for peraduenture the obligée did not knowe his name, but by the report of the obligor himſelfe, and in aſmuch as he is y• ſame man that was bound, hée ſhalbe eſtopped and forbidden in lawe to ſay contrarie to his owne déede, for otherwiſe hee might take aduauntage of his owne wronge, which the lawe will not ſuffer a man to doe.
                  Alſo if the daughter y• is an heire to her 
                        •
                     ather will ſue liuerie with her ſiſter y• is a baſtard ſhe ſhall not

afterwarde be receiued t
                        •
                      ſay that her ſiſter is a baſtard, in ſomuch that if her baſtard ſiſter take halfe the land with her, there is no remedy▪ by the law.
                  Alſo i
                        •
                      a man ſeiſed of lāds in fée ſimplée wil take a leaſe for yeres of the ſame land of a ſtranger by deede indented, this is an eſtoppel during the terme of yéeres, & the leſſée is thereby barred to ſay the truth▪ for the trueth is, that hée that leaſed the lād had nothing in it at the time of y• leas made, and that the fée ſimple was in him that did take the leaſe: But this he ſhall not be receyued to ſay till after the yeeres are determined, becauſe it appeareth that hée hath an eſtate for yéers, and it was his follie to take a leaſe of his owne lands, and therefore ſhall thus be puniſhed for his follie.
               
               
                  Eſtraungers.
                  
                     EStraūgers are ſomtimes takē they y• are not parties or priuies to y• 
                     
                        •••
                     ing of a ſine▪ or making of 
                        •
                      déed, ſometimes then that be borne beyond the ſeas.
               
               
                  
                  198 Eſtraie.
                  
                     EStraie, is wher any beaſt or cattel is in a
                        ••
                      Lordſhippe▪ and none knoweth the owner thereof, then it ſhall bee ſeiſed to the vſe of the Kinge, or of the Lord that hath ſuch Eſtray by the Kinges graunt, or by preſcription: And if the owner come & claime therto within a yere and a day, then he ſhal haue it againe, or elſe after the yeere the propertie thereof ſhall bee to the Lorde, ſo that the Lorde make proclamation thereof according to the Lawe.
               
               
                  199 Eſtrepment.
                  
                     EStrepment, is a writ, and it lieth where one is impleaded by a Precipe quod reddar, for certaine lande, if the demaundant ſuppoſe that the tenaunt will doe waſte hanging the plée, he ſhall haue againſt him this writte which is a prohibition, commaunding him that he doe no waſte hanging the plée.
                  And this lyeth properlie where a man demaundeth landes by Formedon, or writte of Right, or ſuch

writs where hee ſhall not recouer dammages, for in ſuch writs where hee ſhall recouer damages, hee ſhall haue his damages, hauing regard to the waſt done.
               
               
                  Etate probanda.
                  
                     ETate probanda, is a writ of office, and it lieth for the Heire of the tenaunt that helde of the Kinge in chiefe, for to proue that he is of full age, directed to the Shirife to enquire of his age, and then hee ſhall become tenant to the king by the ſame ſeruices that his aunceſtors made to the King: But it is ſaid that euery one that ſhal paſſe in this enqueſt ſhall be of the age of xlii. yeres at leaſt, ſo that he was of ful age whē he that ſueth the writ was borne.
               
               
                  Excommengement.
                  
                     Excommengement, is to ſay in Latin Excommunicatio, and it is where a man in Courte Chriſtian is excommenged, then hee is diſabled to ſue anie action in the Kings Court, and if he remaine excommunicate xl. dayes, and

will not bee iuſtified by his Ordinarie, then the Biſhop ſhall ſende his Letter patent to the Chauncelour to certifie this Excommunication or contempt and thereupon it ſhall be commanded to the Shiri
                        •
                     e to take the bodie of him that is accurſed by a writ called de excōmunicato capiendo, 
                     
                        •
                     ill hee hath made agréement to holie Church, for the contempt and wrong, and whē he is iuſtified and hath made agreement, thē the Biſhop ſhall ſende his letters to the King certifiing the ſame, and then it ſhall be commanded to the ſhirife to deliuer him by a writte called Excommunito deliberando
                  
               
               
                  202 Exchange.
                  
                     Exchaunge, is where a man is ſeiſed of certaine lande, and another man is ſeiſed of other land, if they by a déed indented, or without deede, if the lands be in one county, exchange their lands ſo that euery of them ſhall haue others lands to him ſo exchaunged, in fee, fée taile, or for terme of life, that is called an exchange,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
and is good without liuery or ſeiſin.
                  A
                        •
                     ſo in exchaunge it behou
                        •
                     th that the eſtates 
                        ••
                      them limited by thexchāge be egal for if one haue an eſtate in f
                        •
                     e in his land, and the other hath eſtate in the other lande but for terme of life, or in taile, then ſuch exchaunge is voide, but if the eſtates be egall, and the landes be not of egall value, yet the exchaunge is good. Alſo an exchange of rent for land is good. Alſo an exchange betwéen rent and common is good, and that ought to bée by deede. Alſo 
                        •
                     t behooueth alway, that this worde exchange 
                        •
                     e in the deede, or els nothing paſſeth by the deede except that he haue liuerie and ſeiſin.
               
               
                  Execution.
                  
                     Execution, is wher iudgment is giuen in any action that the plaintife ſhall recouer the lande, debt or damages▪ 
                     
                        ••
                      the caſe is, & when any writte is awarded to put him in poſſeſſion, that is called a writ of execution, and when he hath the p
                        •
                     ſſeſſion of the

land, or is paied of the debt or dammages, or hath the bodie of the defendaunt awarded to priſon▪ then he hath execution and if the plée bee in the Countie, or Court Baron, or hundred 
                        •
                     nd they deferre the execution of the iudgement in 
                        •••
                     our of the party, or for 
                        〈…〉
                     her cauſe, then: the demandāt ſhal haue a writ of Executione iudicii. Note that in a writte of debt, a man ſhall not haue recouerie of anie lands, but of thē which the defendant hath y• day of y• iudgement yéelded. And of cattels a man ſhall hau
                        •
                      execution onely of the cattels, which he hath day of the execution ſued.
               
               
                  
                     
                        •••
                      Executor.
                  
                     Executor, is when a man 
                        〈…〉
                      maketh his teſt
                        •
                     ment & 
                        •••
                     t will, and therein nameth the perſon that ſhall execute his teſtament, thē h
                        ••
                      that is ſo named: is his executor, and is aſmuch as in the ciuil law, (heres deſignatus or teſtamē tarius) as to debts, goods & cattels of his teſtator, and ſuch an executor, ſhal hau
                        •
                      an action againſt euery debtor

of his teſtator, and if the executors haue aſſets, eueryone to whom y• teſtator was in debt, ſhall haue an action againſt the executor, if he haue an obligation, or ſpecialtie, but in euery caſe wher the teſtator might wage his law, 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     tiō lieth againſt y• exe
                        〈…〉
                     . Look more therof before 
                        ••
                      the ti
                        ••
                     e Adminiſtrators▪
                  
               
               
                  Exigent.
                  
                     Exigent, is a writ & it ly
                     
                        ••
                     eth
                        •
                      where a man ſ
                        •••
                     h an action perſonal, and the defendant cannot be ſ
                        ••
                     d, nor hath nothing win the countie wherby he may: be attached nor di
                        ••
                     rai
                        〈…〉
                     , their this writte ſhall goe forth to the ſhirife to make proclamation at 5. counties euery one after another, y• he appeare, or elſe that hee ſhal be 
                        ••
                     tlawed: and if 
                        ••
                      be outlawed, then all his g
                        ••
                     ds and 
                        ••••
                     els 
                        •
                     e for
                        •
                      to the King▪ Alſo in an i
                        •
                     
                     dictment
                        •
                      of Fellony, the Exigent ſhall goe forth after the firſt Capias. And alſo in a Capias ad computandū, or ad ſatisfacien
                           ••
                        
                        ▪
                      And in euery Capias that goeth foorth after iudgmēt

the exigēt ſhal goe forth after the firſt Capias. And alſo in appeale of death, but not in appeale of robberie or appeale of maime.
               
               
                  206 Ex parte talis.
                  
                     Ex parte talis, Look therefore before in the title, Accompt.
               
               
                  207 Ex graui querela.
                  
                     Ex graui querela, Looke therefore before in the title Deuiſe.
               
               
                  208 Extinguishment.
                  
                     Extinguishment, is where any Lorde, or any other, hath anie rente or ſeruice going out of anie land and hee purchaſeth the ſame lande, ſo that he hath ſuch eſtate in the lande as hee hath in the rent, then the rente is extincte, for that one may not haue rent going out of his owne lande. Alſo when any rente ſhall be extinct, it behoueth that the land and the rent be in one han
                        •
                     , and alſo that the eſtate y• he hath bee not defeaſible: & alſo y• hee haue as good eſtate in the lande as in the rent, for if he haue eſtate in the lande but for terme of l
                        •
                     fe or yeeres, and hath fée ſimple in the rent,

then the rent is no
                        •
                      extinct, but the rent is in ſuſpence for that time, and then after the terme, the rente is reuiued. And if there bee Lorde, meſne, and tenant, and the Lord purchaſe the 
                        •
                     enancy, then the mena
                        •
                     tie is extinct, but the meſne ſhall haue the ſurpluſage of the rent, if there bee anie, as rente ſecke. Alſo if a man haue a hie wai
                        •
                      appendant and after purchaſe the land wherein the h
                        •
                     e way is, then the way is extinct: and ſo it is of a cō
                     men appendant.
               
               
                  Extortion.
                  
                     Extortiō, is a wrong done by an officer, Ordinary, Archdeacō, Official, Maior, Bailife, Shirif, Eſchetor, Coroner, vnderſhirife, gailer or other Officer, by colour of his Office, in taking exceſſiue rewarde or fee, for execution of his ſaid Office or otherwiſe, and is no other thing in deede then plaine robberie, or rather more odious then robberie, for robberie is apparaunt, and alwaies hath with it the countenance of vice, but extortion

being as great a 
                        •
                     ſee as robberie is, carrieth 
                        〈…〉
                      it a countenance of ve
                        〈…〉
                     : By means wherof it is the more hard to bee tried, or diſcerned, and therfore the more o
                        •
                     ious, and yet ſome there be that wil not ſticke to ſtretch their office, credit and conſcience, to purchaſe money as wel by extortion as otherwiſe according to the ſaying of the Poet Virgil, what is that that hunger ſweete of gold do
                        •
                     h not conſtraine men mortall to attempt?
               
            
            
               F.
               
                  210 Failin
                        •
                      of Record.
                  
                     FAiling of Record, is whē an action is brought againſt one and the defendant pleadeth any matter y• is of record in another ſort, and doth auerre to proue it by Record, And the plaintife ſaith there is no ſuch Recorde, whereupon the defendant hath day giuen him to bring in the record, at which day he faileth, or brought in ſuch a one, as is no barr
                        •
                      to this action, then h
                        •
                     e is ſaide to faile of his Record, and thereupon

the plaintife ſhall haue iudgement to recouer &c.
               
               
                  Deede.
                  
                     DEede, is a writing ſealed and deliuered to prooue and teſtifie of the agreement of y• partie whoſe déede it is, to the thing contained in the déede, as a deede of feoffement is a proofe of the liuerie of ſeiſin, for the lande paſſeth by the liuerie of ſeiſin, but when the deede and the deliuerie are ioyned together that is a proofe of the liuerie, and that the feoffour is contented, that the feoffee ſhall haue the lande. And note that all deedes are either indented, whereof there bee two, three, or more parts, as the caſe requireth, of which the feoffour, grantour, or leſſour hath on, the feoffee, grauntee, or leſſee another. And peraduenture ſome other bodie alſo another &c. or elſe they are poll Deedes or ſingle, and but one, which the feoffee, grauntee, or 
                        •
                     eſ
                     
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      hath &c. And 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     rie Deede conſiſteth▪ of three

principall pointes, (and if theſe three be not ioyned together, it is no perfect déed to binde the parties) namely, writing, ſealing, and deliuerie.
                  The firſt point ts writinge, whereby is ſhewed the parties names to the Deede, their dwelling places, their degrees, the thing granted, vpon what conſiderations, the eſtate limited, the time when it was graunted, and whether ſimply, or vpon condition with other ſuch like circumſtances. But whether the par
                        •
                     yes vnto the Deede, writte in the ende their owne names, or ſet to their markes (as it is commonly vſed) it maketh no matter at all (as I thinke) for that it is not meant where it is ſaid, that euerie deede ought to haue writing.
                  The ſecond point is ſealing, which is a further teſtimony o
                        •
                      their conſents to that contayned in the deed
                        •
                     , as it appeareth by theſe wordes. In witneſſe wherof &c. or to ſuch effecte alwayes put in the

later ende of deedes, without which wordes the deede 
                        ••
                      inſufficient▪ And becauſe wee are about ſealing and ſigning of deedes it ſhall not be
                        •
                      much amiſſe heere to ſhewe you, for antiquities ſake, the maner of ſigning and ſubſcribing of 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     des, in our aunceſtors the Saxons times, a faſhion different from that wee vſe in theſe our de
                        〈…〉
                     es, in this that they to their deedes ſubcribed their names (commonly adding the ſigne of the Croſſe,) 
                        •
                     nd 
                        •
                     n the end did ſet down a great number of witneſſes, not vſing at that time any kynde of Seale. And wee 
                        •
                     t this day for more ſuretie, both ſubſcrib
                        •
                      our names (although that b
                        •
                     e not verie neceſſary
                        •
                     , 
                        •
                     s I haue aforeſaide) and put to our Seales, and vſe the helpe of teſtimonie beſ
                        •
                     des: That former faſhion continued throughout▪ vntill the time of the Conqueſt by the Normans▪ whoſe maners by little and little at the length p
                        ••
                     ua
                        •
                     led amongſt vs, for the firſt

ſealed ch
                        •
                     rter in Englād is thought to b
                        •
                     e ſhal of King Edwarde the Confeſſour to the Abbey of Weſt. who being brought vp in Norman
                        •
                     y, brought into this Realme that and ſome other of their 
                        •
                     uyſes with him▪ And a
                        •
                     ter the comming of William the conqueror, the Normans l
                        •
                     king their owne countrey cuſtomes (as naturally all nation
                        •
                      do) reiected the maner that they found here, & retained their own, as Ingulp. the Abbot of Croiland, who came in with the conqueſt witneſſeth ſaying: The Normans doe change the making of writinges which were wont to be firmed in England with croſſes of golde & other holy ſignes, into the printing war, and they re
                        •
                     ect alſo the manner of the Engliſh writing. Howd
                        ••
                     t this was not done all at once, but it increaſed and came forward by certaine ſteps and degrées, ſo that firſt and for a ſeaſon the king onely, or a fewe other of the Nobilitie beſides him vſed to ſeale.

Then the Noble men for the moſt
                        •
                      part, and none other, which thing a man may ſee in the Hiſtorie of Battell Abbey, where Richard Lucy chiefe Iuſtice of Englande, in the time of King Henrye the ſecond, is reported to haue blamed a meane ſubiect, for that hee vſed a priua
                        •
                     e Seale, when as that pertayned (as hee ſaide) to the king and Nobilit
                        •
                     e onely.
                  At which time alſo (as I. Roſſe noteth it) they vſed to ingraue in their ſeales, their owne pictures and counterfaites, couered with a long coate ouer their Armors. But of
                        •
                     er this the Gentlemen of the better ſort tooke vp the faſhion, and becauſe they were not all warriors, they made Seales ingrauen with their ſeuerall coates or ſhields of armes, for difference ſake, as the ſame aucthour reporteth. At the length about the time of king Edwarde the thirde, Seales became verie common, ſo that not onely ſuch as bore

armes vſed to ſeale▪ but other men alſo faſhioned to themſelues ſignets of their owne deuiſe, ſome taking the letters of their owne names, ſome flowers, ſome knots and floriſhes, ſome birdes or beaſtes, and ſome other things, as wee nowe yet daily behold in vſe.
                  Some other manner of ſealing beſides theſe haue bin heard of among vs, as namely that of king Edward the third, by which he gaue to Norman the hunter: The hop and the hop towne, with all the bounds vpſide downe, and in witneſſe that it was ſooth, he bit the waxe with his fore tooth.
                  The like to this was ſhewed to mée by one of my friendes in a looſe paper, but not verye aunciently written, and therefore hee willed mee to eſtéeme of it as I thought good: It was as followeth.
                  I willyam Kinge▪ giue to thée Powlen Royden, my hop and my hoplandes, with all the

boundes vp and downe▪ from heauen to earth, from earth to hell, for thee and thine to dwell, from 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                      and mine, to thée & thine, for a Bowe and a broad arrow, when I come to hunt vpon yarrow. In witneſſe that this is ſooth, I bite this waxe with my tooth, in the preſence of Magg, Maude, & Margerie, and my third ſonne Henry.
                  Alſo that of Alberic de Veer, conteining the donation of Hatfie
                        •
                     d, to the which hee affixed a ſhort black hafted knife, like vnto an olde half
                        •
                     peny whittle, in ſteede of a ſeale, with diuers ſuch like.
                  But ſome peraduenture will thinke that theſe were receiued in common vſe and cuſtome, and that they were not rather the deuyfes and pleaſures of a fewe ſinguler perſons, ſuch as are no leſſe deceiued, then they that déeme eu
                        •
                     ry charter and writing that hath no ſeale ann
                        •
                     xed, to bee as auncient as the Conqueſt, wheras in déed

ſealing was not commonly vſed till the time of King Edw. the thirde, as hath 
                        •
                     m alreadie ſaid.
                  The third point is deliuerie, which although 
                        •
                     t be ſet la
                        •
                     t, is not the leaſt, for after that a deede is written and ſealed, i
                        •
                      i
                        •
                      bee not deliuered, all the reſt is to no purpoſe.
                  And this deliuery ought to bee done▪ by the partie himſelfe, or his ſufficient warrant, and ſo it ſhall bind him, whoſoeuer wrote or ſealed the ſame, and by this 
                        •
                     aſte acte the déede is made perfect, according to the intent and effect thereof, and therefore in deedes the deliuerie is to bée proued &c.
                  So thus you ſée that writing and ſealing without de
                        •
                     iuerie is nothing to purpoſe. That ſealing and deliuerie where there is no writing worketh nothing, Nor writing and deliuerie without ſealing alſo make no déede. And therefore they all ought iointly to concurre to make 
                        •
                      per
                        •
                     ect déede, as is before ſaid.
               
               
                  
                  Farme or Ferme.
                  
                     FArme or Ferme is ſpecially the chiefe m
                        •
                     ſuage in a Village or Towne whereto belongeth great demeanes of all ſorts, and hath béene vſed to bée let for terme of life, yéeres or at will.
                  Alſo the rent that is reſerued vpon ſuch a leaſe or the like, is called farme or ferme.
                  And farmor or fermor, is hée that occupieth the farme or ferme, or is leſſée thereof.
                  Alſo generally euery leſſée, for life, yéeres, or at wil, although it be of neuer ſo ſmall a cottage or houſe, is called farmor or fermor.
                  And note, that they are called farmes, or fermes, of the Saxon worde Feormian, which ſignifieth to féede, or yéelde▪ victuall. For in the auncient time, their reſeruatiōs were aſwell (or for the more part) in victuals, as money, vntill at the laſte, and that chiefly in the time of King Henry the firſt (by agreement) the reſ
                        •
                     ruation of victuals, was tourned

into readie money and ſo hitherto hath continued amongſt moſt men.
               
               
                  213 Faux impriſonment.
                  
                     FAux impriſonment, is a writ, and it lieth where a man is arreſted & reſtr
                        •
                     ined from his libertie by an other againſt the order of the lawe, then he ſhall haue agaynſt him this writte wherby he ſhal recouer damages. Looke more therof before in the title arreſt.
                  Faux iudgmēt looke therfore before in y• title error.
               
               
                  214 Fee farme.
                  
                     FEe farme, is when a tenant holdeth of his lord in fée ſimple, paying to him the value of halfe, or of the thirde or of the iii. part, or of other part of the lande, by the yéere. And he that holdeth by fée ferme, ought not to pay reliefe or do any other thing then is conteined in the feoffment but fealtie, for that belongeth to all kind of tenures.
               
               
                  215 Fee ſimple.
                  
                     FEe ſimple, is when anie perſon holdeth landes or rent or other thing inheri
                        •
                     able to him and to his heires for euermore & theſe

words his heirs make the eſtate of inheritance, for if land be giuen to a man for euer yet hée hath but an eſtate for terme of life Alſo if tenant in fée ſimple die, his firſt ſonne ſhall be his heire, but if he haue no ſon, then al his daughters, that he hath ſhalbe his heires, & euery one ſhall haue her part, by partition, but if he haue no ſonne nor daughter then his next coſin collaterall of the whole blood ſhalbe his heire.
               
               
                  Feoffment.
                  
                     FEoffement is wher a mā giueth landes, houſes, or other corporall thinges which be hered
                        •
                     table to an other in fée ſimple, & thereof deliuereth liuery & ſeiſin & poſſeſſion of the lād, that is a feoffment. Alſo if one make a g
                        ••
                     t in the taile, or a leas for terme of life▪ or of an other mans li
                        •
                     e, it behoueth alſo to giue l
                        •
                     uery and ſeiſin, or els nothing ſhall paſſe by the grant.
               
               
                  Fe
                        ••
                     or and Feffee.
                  
                     FE
                           •
                        for is he that 
                        〈…〉
                     effeth or maketh a feof
                        •
                     ment to another of landes, or tenements in fée ſimple. And

feoffée is he, who is infef
                     
                        •
                     ed, or to whom the feoffment i
                        •
                      ſo made.
               
               
                  218 Fealty.
                  
                     FEalty, is a ſeruice called in latin fidelitas, & ſhall be done in ſuch maner, that is to ſay, the tenant ſhall holde his right hand vpon a booke, and ſhall ſay to his lord. I ſhalbe to you faithfull & true, I ſhall b
                        •
                     are to you faith for the lands and tenemēts, which I claime to holde of you, and truely ſhall 
                        •
                     o to you the cuſtoms and ſeruices that I ought to doe to you at the termes aſſigned, ſo helpe me God. And ſhall kiſſe the booke, but he ſhal not kneele as in doing homage▪ And therof looke after in the title homage. Alſo fe
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     ie is incident to al maner tenures.
               
               
                  219 Felony.
                  
                     FElony, is a generall terme, which comprehendeth diuerſe heynous offences, for which the off
                        •
                     ndour ought to ſuffer d
                        •
                     ath, & looſe their landes: And it ſéemeth y• they are called f
                        •
                     lonies, of the Latine word Fel, which is in Engliſh gall, infrēch Fiel:

or of the auncient Engliſh worde fell or fierce, or becauſe that they are intended to be done with a cruell, bitter, fell, fierce or miſchieuous mind. And ſome of them are, when a man without any colour of law, ſtealeth the goods of an other amounting to the value of xij. pence or more, that is Larceny: But if anie approcheth the perſon of another in the high way, and robbeth him of his goods, although it be to the value but of one penie, it is felonie, & that is called robbery, and therefore he ſhalbe hanged.
               
               
                  Fireboote.
                  
                     FIreboote, is neceſſarie wood to burne, which by the common lawe, leſſée for yéeres, or for life, may take in his grounde, although it bee not expreſſed in his leaſe: and although it be a leaſe by word onely without writing: But if he take more then is néedfull, he ſhall be puniſhed in waſt.
               
               
                  Fledwite.
                  
                     FLedwite, that is, to bée quite from amercements

whē an outlawed fugitiue cōmeth to the kings peace of his owne will, or beyng licenced.
               
               
                  222 Flemeſwite.
                  
                     FLemeſwite, that is, that you may haue the cattell, or amercemēts of your man or fugitiue.
               
               
                  223 Fletwit.
                  FLetwit (or Flitwit) that is to be quite from contention and conuicts, and that you may haue plée thereof in your Court and the amerciamēts, for (flit) in Engliſh is Tenſone in French.
               
               
                  224 Forſtall.
                  
                     FOrſtall, that is to bée quite of amercementes and cattels arreſted within your lande, and the amercements thereof comming.
               
               
                  225 Forſtallers.
                  
                     FOrſtaller is he that buyeth Corne, Cattell, or other marchandize whatſoeuer is ſalable, by the waye as it commeth to markets, faires, or ſuch like places to bée ſolde to the intent that hee may ſell the ſame againe at a more high & déere price in preiudice

& hurt of the common wealth and people &c.
                  The payne for ſuch as are conuicte is for the firſt time impriſonment for two Moneths, and loſſe of the value of the thing ſold.
                  The ſecond time impriſonment by the ſpace of halfe a yéere, & ſhall loſe the double value of the goods &c. The iij. time impriſonment during the Kings pleaſure, and iudgement of the pillorie, and ſhall forfait all his goods. Sée the ſtatute 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14.
                  
               
               
                  Franches Roiall.
                  
                     FRanches roiall, is where the Quéene graunts to one and his heires, that they ſhall be quite of toll, or ſuch like.
               
               
                  Free almes.
                  
                     FRee almes, is where in auncient times landes were giuen to an Abbot and his Couent, or to a Deane and the Chapiter, and to their ſucceſſours, in pure and perpetual almes, without expreſſing anie ſeruice certaine, this is frankealmoigne, and ſuch are bounde before God

to make Oraſons & prayers for the donour and his heires, and for that they do no fealtie, and if ſuch that haue landes in frankealmoigne doe make no prayer nor deuine ſeruice for the ſoules of the donors, they ſhall not be compelled by the donours to do it, but for that they may complaine to the Ordinarie, praying him that ſuch negligence be no more after, and the Ordinarie of right ought to do it.
                  But if an Abbot &c. holdeth landes of his Lorde for certeine deuine ſeruice to bée done, as to ſing euery Friday a Maſſe, or doe ſome other thing, if ſuch diuine ſeruice be not done, the Lorde may diſtrayne, and in ſuch caſe the Abbot ought to doe fealtie to the Lorde, and therefore it is not ſaid tenure in frank almoigne, but tenure by diuine ſeruice, for none can hold by franke almoigne, if any certaine ſeruice be expreſſed.
               
               
                  228 Franke fee.
                  TO holde in Franke fée, is to holde in fée ſimple

landes pleadable at the common lawe, not in auncient demeſne.
               
               
                  Formedone.
                  
                     FOrmedone, is a writ and it lyeth where the tenant in the taile enfeffeth a ſtrā
                     ger or is diſſeiſed, & dieth, the heire ſhall haue a writ of Formdon to recouer the land: but there be thrée maner of Formedones, One is in the diſcender, & that is in the caſe before ſaide. Alſo if one giue landes in the tayle, and for default of iſſue the remainder to an other in the taile, and that for default of ſuch iſſue the land ſhall reuert to the donour, if the firſt tenant in taile die without iſſue hée in the remainder ſhal hau
                        •
                      a formdone in the remainder, but if the ten
                        •
                     nt in the taile die without iſſue, and he in the remainder alſo die without iſſue, then the donour or his heires ſhall haue a Formedone in the reuerter.
               
               
                  Fieri facias.
                  
                     FIeri facias, is a writ iudicial, and it lieth where a man recouereth debte or dammages in the Kinges

Court, then he ſhall haue this writ to the ſhirife, cō
                     manding him that he leuy the debt and dammages of the goods of him that hath loſt, & it lieth always within a yéere & a day, and after the yéere he muſt ſue a ſcire facias, and if he be warned, & doth not come at the day &c. or if he come, & can ſay nothing, then he which recouereth ſhall haue a writ of fieri facias directed to the Sherife, that he make him haue executiō of iudgmēt.
                  But if a man recouer againſt a woman & ſhe take a huſband within the yere & the day, then he that ſhall recouer muſt haue a ſcire facias againſt the huſband.
                  So it is if an Abbot or Prior recouer & dieth his ſucceſſor within the yéere ſhall haue ſcire facias. Sée thereof more in the title ſcire facias, & title Execution.
                  
               
               
                  231 Fine.
                  
                     FIne ſomtimes is takē for a ſumme of money which one is to pay to the King for any contempt or offence done by him: which fine euery one that cōmitteth any treſpas, or that he is cō
                     uicted,

that he falſly denieth his owne déede, or d
                        •
                     d anie thing in contempt of lawe, ſhal pay to the king: which is called fine to the King. Somtime a Fine is takē for a final agréemēt which is had between any perſons concerning any land or rēt, or other thing wherof anie ſuit or writ is betwéen thē hāging in any court which may be diuers waies. One is whē one party reknowledgeth y• to be the right of the other, as that y• he hath of the gu
                        •
                     ft of him y• made that recogniſance, which alwaies ſuppoſeth a feoffemēt going before, & is called a fine executed. Or if he acknowledgeth that to bee the right of another omitting theſe words (cōe ceo que il eit de ſō done) which being a fine vpon acknowledging of right onely, if it bee leuied to him which hath the freehold of y• land, is a Fine vpon a releaſe. And if he that acknowledged it, is ſeiſed, and hee to whom it is leuied hath not the fréehold of the land, thē it is called a fine executory, which he to whom the land

is acknowledged may execute by Entre or Scire fac.
                  
                  And ſometime ſuch a fine ſur conuſ
                           •
                        s de droit only is to make a ſurrēder: Therin is rehearſed that the reconuſor hath an eſtate for life, & the other a reuerſion.
                  And ſomtime it is taken to paſſe a reuerſion, where a particular eſtate is recited to be in another, & that the reconuſor will that the other ſhal haue y• reuerſion, or that y• land ſhal remaine to another, after the particular eſtate ſpent.
                  And ſomtime he to whō y• right is acknowledged, as that that he hath of the gift of the reconuſor, ſhall yeeld the land, or a rent out therof to y• reconuſor. And ſomtime for the whole fee: Somtime for the particular eſtate with remainder or remainders ouer: and ſometime with reſeruatiō of rents with diſtreſſe and graunt thereof ouer by the ſaid fine.
                  And it is called a fine becauſe thereby the ſuite is ended and if it be recorded with proclamation it barreth ſtrangers.
               
               
                  
                  Free mariage.
                  
                     FRee mariage, is when a man ſeiſed of landes in fée ſimple, giueth it to an other man, and to his wife (who is the daughter, Siſter or otherwiſe of kinne to the donour) in free mariage, by vertue of which words they haue an eſtate in ſpeciall taile, and ſhall holde the lande of the donour quite of al maner of ſeruices vntill the fourthe degree be paſt accompting themſelues in the firſt degree, except fealtie, which they ſhall doe becauſe it is incident to all tenures ſauing frée almes. And ſuch gifte may bee made as well after mariage ſolempnized as before. And a man may giue landes to his Sonne in frée mariage, as well as to his Daughter by the opin
                        •
                     ō of Maſter Fitzherbert in his writ of Champerty H.
                  But it appeareth otherwiſe in Maſter Littl. & in Maſt. Brook titulo Frākmarriage Placito decimo. And ſo it is holden clere in Graies Inne in Lēt, An.

1576. 18. Eliz. by the worſhipfull Maſter Rhodes, then reader there.
               
               
                  233 Freehold.
                  
                     FReeholde, is an Eſtate that a man hath in lands or tenements, or profite to bee taken in fee ſimple, taile, for terme of his owne life, or for terme of anothers life in dower or by the curteſie of Englād. And vnder that, there is 
                        •
                     o freeholde, for hee that hath eſtate for yeeres or holdeth at wil hath no fréeholde, but they are called chattels.
                  And of Freeholds there are two ſortes, that is to ſay, freeholde indeede, and fréehold in lawe.
                  Freeholde in deede, is when a man hath entred into lands or tenementes, and is ſeiſed thereof reallie, actuallie, and in deede: As if the father ſeiſed of landes or tenements in fee ſimple dieth, and his ſonne entreth into the ſame, as heire to his father, then he hath a fréeholde in déede by his entrie.
                  Freehold in Lawe, is when lands or tenemetnes

are diſcended to a man, and hee may enter into them when he will, but hath not yet made his entrie indeed, as in the caſe aforeſaid, if the father being ſeiſed of lands in fée ſimple die ſeiſed, and they diſcend to his ſonne, but the ſonne hath not yet entred into them indeede, nowe before his entrie he hath a fréehold in lawe.
               
               
                  Freshſuit.
                  
                     FReshſuit, is when a man is robbed, and the partie ſo robbed, followeth the felon immediatly, and taketh him with the manner, or otherwiſe, and then bringeth an appeale againſt him, and doth conuince him of the felonie by verdict, which thing being inquired of for the Quéene and founde, the partie robbed ſhall haue reſtitution of his goods againe.
                  Alſo it may bee ſaid, that the partie made freſhſuite, although hee take not the theefe preſentlie, but that it be halfe a yeere, or a yeere after the robberie done, before he bee taken, if ſo bee that the partie

robbed doe what lyeth in him, by diligent inquirie & ſearch to take him, yea although he be taken by ſom other bodie, yet this ſhalbe ſaid freſh ſuit.
                  And ſo freſh ſuit is whē the Lorde commeth to diſtraine for rent or ſeruice, 
                        •
                      the owner of the beaſtes doth make reſcous, & drineth them into others ground that is not holden of the lord, and the Lorde followeth preſently & taketh them, this is called freſh ſuit. And ſo in other like caſes.
               
            
            
               G.
               
                  235 Gager de deliuerance.
                  
                     GAger de deliuerance, is where one ſueth a repleuine of goods taken, but hee hath not the deliuerie of the goods, and the other auoweth, and the plaintife ſheweth that the defendant is yet poſſeſſed of the goods &c. and prayeth that the defendant may gage the deliuerance, then he ſhall put in ſuertie or pledges for the deliuerance,

& a writ ſhal go forth to the Shirife for to redeliuer the goods &c. But if a man claime propertie, he ſhal not gage deliuerance.
                  Alſo if hee ſaye that the beaſts be dead in ye pound, he ſhall not gage &c.
                  Alſo a man ſhall neuer gage the deliuerance before that they be at iſſue, or demurrer in the lawe, as it is ſaid.
               
               
                  Garrantie of Charters.
                  
                     GArrantie of charters, is a writ, & it lieth where any déed is made yt cōprehēdeth a clauſe of warranntie, yt is to ſay, dedi or cō
                        ceſsi, or this word warrantizabo, & if ye tenant be impleaded by a ſtranger, if it be in aſſiſe or ſuch action where he may not vouch to warrantie, then hee ſhall haue this writ againſt his feffor or his heire, & if ye lād be recouered againſt him▪ hee ſhall recouer as much land in value againſt him that made the warrantie. But this writ ought to be ſued hanging ye firſt writ againſt him, or elſe he hath loſt his aduantage.
                  
                     Alſo vpon a warrātie in the law, as vpon homage aunceſtrel, or vpon rent reſerued vpō a leaſe for term of life, or a gift in the taile, a man ſhall haue a writ of warrantie of charters, but not vpon eſchange.
               
               
                  237 Garrantie.
                  
                     GArrantie, is in two maners, that is to ſaye, garrantie lineall and garrantie collaterall.
                  Garrantie lineal is wher a man ſeiſed in fée, maketh a feffement by his deede to another, and byndeth him & his heires to warrantie, and hath iſſue a ſonne and dyeth, and the warrantie diſcendeth to his ſonne, that is lineall warrantie, for y• that if no déede with warrantie had bin made, then the right of the lands ſhould haue diſcended to ye ſonne, & he ſhall conuey the diſcent from the father to the ſonne. But if the tenant in ye taile diſcontinue the taile, & hath iſſue & dyeth, & the vncle of the iſſue releaſeth to the diſcontinuee with warrantie &c. & dyeth without iſſue, that

is a collaterall warrantie to the iſſue in the taile, for that, that the warrantie diſcendeth vpon the iſſue, the which may not conuey him to the taile by meane of his vncle. And in euery caſe where a mā demandeth lands in fee taile by writ of Formedon, if any of the iſſue in the taile which hath poſſeſſion, or which hath not poſſeſſion maketh a warrantie, and he that ſueth the writte of Formedon may by poſſibility by matter that may be in that déede conuey to him title by force of the gift by him that made the warrantie &c. that is then a lineall warrantie, and by ſuch a lineall warrantie, the iſſue in the taile ſhal not be barred, except that he haue aſſets to him diſcended: But if he may not by no poſſibilitie that may be conuey to him title by force of ye gift by him that made the warrantie, then that is a collaterall warrantie, and by ſuch a collateral warrantie, the iſſue in the tail ſhalbe barred without any aſſets.

And the cauſe that ſuch a collaterall warrantie is a barre to the iſſu in the tail, is for that, that al warranties before the ſtatute of Gloceſter, which diſcended to them which he heirs to them yt made the warranties were barres to the ſame heires to demaund any lands, except the warranties that began by diſſeiſin, & for that, that the ſaid ſtatute hath ordeined that the warrantie of the father ſhalbee no barre to his ſonne for the landes which come of the heritage of the mother, nor the warrantie of the mother ſhalbe no barre to the ſonne for the landes which come of the heritage of the father, & the ſtatute hath not made nor ordayned remedie againſt the warrantie that is collaterall, to the iſſue in the taile, & therefore the warrantie that is collaterall to the iſſue in the taile, is yet in his force, and ſhalbe a barre to the iſſue in the taile, as it was before the ſtatute. Alſo it behoueth yt all warrāties whereby any heire ſhalbee

barred, that the warrantie diſcend by ye courſe of ye cō
                     mon law, to him which is heire to him that made the warrantie, or elſe it ſhalbee no barre, for if the tenaunt in the taile, of lands in borow Engliſh, where the yongeſt ſonne ſhall inheririte by the cuſtome diſcontinueth y• taile, & hath iſſue ii. ſonnes, & y• vncle releaſeth to y• diſcōtinuee with warrantie & dyeth, and the yonger ſonne bringeth a Formdon, yet he ſhall not be barred by ſuch warrāty cauſa qua ſupra. Alſo if any man make any deede with warrantie whereby his heire ſhould be barred, and after he that made the warrantie bee attaint of felony, then his heire ſhall not bee barred by ſuch warranty, for y• that ſuch warrantie might not diſcend vpon him, for y• that the bloud is corrupt. Alſo if the ſonne purchaſe lāds, & after let the lands to his father for terme of yeres, & y• father by his déed enfeffeth a ſtranger, & byndeth him and his heires to warrantie, & the father dyeth,

whereby the warrāty deſcendeth to ye ſonne, yet this warranty ſhall not barre the ſonne, but ye ſonne may wel enter notwithſtāding his warranty, for that that this warranty began by diſſeiſin when the father made the feoffemēt which was a diſſeiſin to the ſon, and as it is ſaide of the father, ſo it may be ſaide of euery other anceſtour. And the ſame lawe is, if the aunceſtour be tenaunt by Elegit, or by ſtatute marchant, and make a feoffement with warrantie, ſuch warranties ſhalbe no barres, becauſe they begin by diſſeiſin.
               
               
                  238 Garrantie.
                  
                     GArrantie, is when one is bounde to another which hath lande, to warrant ye land to him, which may begin two waies▪s▪ by deede of lawe, As if one and his aunceſtours hath held land of another and his aunceſtours time out of mynde by homage, which is called Homage Aunceſtrel: Or by déede of y• partie which graunteth

by déede or fine to the tenāt of the land to warrant it to him: vpon which warrantie if the tenant be impleaded by him which ought to warrant, or his heires, the tenant ſhall barre the demandant by pleading of the warrantie againſte him, which is called Rebutter: Or if he be impleaded by another in an actiō, wherein he may vouch▪ he ſhall ▪vouch him which warranted, or his heires, & if the plaintife recouer, the tenant ſhall recouer in value againſt ye vouchée.
               
               
                  Garde.
                  
                     WArde▪
                      is when an infant whoſe aunceſtor helde by knights ſeruice, is in the warde or kéeping of the Lorde, of whome thoſe landes were holden: And if the tenaunt holde of diuers Lordes diuers landes, the Lord of whom the lande is holden by prioritie, that is to ſaye, by the more elder tenure, ſhall haue the wardſhip of the infant: but if one tenure be as olde as the other, then hee that firſt

happeth to haue the ward of the bodie ſhall keepe it: But in that caſe euery Lord ſhall haue the warde of the lande that is holden of him. But if the tenaunt hold any land of the Q. in chiefe, then ſhe by her Prerogatiue ſhal haue ye ward of the bodie, & of all ye lande that is holden of her, & of euery other Lord.
                  Alſo there bee diuers writs of warde, one is a writ of right of warde, and that lyeth where the tenant dyeth, his heire within age, & a ſtranger entreth into the land, and hapneth to haue the warde of the bodie of the infant.
                  A writ of eiectment of warde lyeth where a man is put out of the warde of the land without the bodie of the infant.
                  A writ of rauiſhment of ward lyeth where the body is taken from him only and not the land.
               
               
                  140 Wardeine.
                  
                     WArdeine, or gardeine moſt properly is hee that hath the wardſhip or keeping of an heire, and of

his lād holden by knights ſeruice, or of one of them to his owne vſe, during the nona
                        ••
                      of the heire, & within that time hath the b
                        •
                     ſtowing of the body of the heire, in marriage at his pleaſure, without diſparagement.
                  And of wardens there be two ſorts, namely gardeine in right, & gardeine in deede.
                  Gardeine in right is he that by reaſon of his ſeigniory is ſeiſed of the wardſhip or keeping of the land, and of the heire, during the nonage of the heire.
                  Gardein in déed, is wher the lord after his ſeiſin, as aforeſaide, graunteth by deede or without deede, the wardſhip of the lande, or of the heire, or of both to an other, by force of which graunt the grauntée is in poſſeſſion, then is the grauntee called gardeine in deede.
                  And this gardein in déed may graunt the heire to an other alſo, but that other is not properly called gardeine in déede for that is the grantee of the Garden

in right only, but the garden in ſocage hath the profit onely to the vſe of the heire, vntill he accompliſh the age of xiiii. yeeres, and muſt yéeld therefore an account to the heire. See more hereof Lit. lib. 2. cap. 4. & 5. and Stamf. vpon the ſtatute of Prerogatiue, cap. 1. 2. & 6.
               
               
                  241 Garniſhment.
                  
                     GArnishment is, if an action of detinue of charters bee brought againſt one, & the defendant ſayth, that the charters were deliuered to him by the plaintife & by another vpon certaine conditions & prayeth that the other may be warned to plede with y• plaintife if the conditions b
                        •
                     e performed or no, & thereupon a writ of Scire facias ſhal go foorth againſt him, & that is called Garniſhment, & the other when he commeth ſhall plede with the plaintife, and that is called enterpleder.
               
               
                  242 Gauelet.
                  
                     GAuelet, is a ſpeciall and auncient kinde of Ceſſauit

vſed in Kent where the cuſtome of Gauelkind continueth: whereby the tenaunt ſhall forfaite his landes and tenements, to the Lord of whom they are holden if he withdraw frō 
                     
                        ••
                     s Lord his due rents & ſeruices, after this maner as followeth.
                  If any tenaunt in Gauelkind, withhold his rent and his ſeruices of the tenement which hée holdeth of his Lorde, let the Lorde ſeeke by the award of his Court from thrée wéekes to thrée weekes, to find ſome diſtres vpon the tenements vntill the iiij. Court, alwaies with witneſſes. And if within that tune, he can find no diſtres in that tenement▪ whereby he may haue Iuſtice of his tenant, Then at the iiij. Court let it bée awarded, that he ſhall take that tenement into his hande, in the name of a diſtreſſe, as if it were an oxe or a cowe, and let him kéepe it a yéere and a daye in his hande without manuringe it: within which terme if the tenaunt come and pay his

arrerages, and make reaſonable ameno
                        •
                     s for the withholding, then let him haue an
                        •
                      enioy his tenement as his aunceſtors, and hee before held it: and if hee doe not come before the yéere and the day paſt, then let the Lord goe to the next Countie Court with his witneſſes of his owne Court, & pronounce there this proceſſe to haue further witneſſes, and by the awa
                        •
                     de of his Court, (after the County Court holden) he ſhall enter and manure in thoſe landes and tenements as in his owne. And if the tenant come afterward, and will rehaue his tenements, and holde them as he did before, let him make agréement with the Lord, according as it is aunciently ſaid.
                  Hath hée not ſince any thing giuen, nor hath hee not ſince anie thing paied: Then lette him pay v. li. for his were 
                        •
                     r before hée become tenaunt or holder againe. Sée hereof 10. H. 3. Fitz Ceſſauit 
                           •
                        0. and ſtatute 10. E. 2. of Gauelet in London, In the Collection

of ſtatutes London 2. matter much tending to this purpoſe, that by this worde Gauelet the Lord ſhall haue the land for the ceaſing of the tenant. And ſée W. 2. cap. 21. which giueth Ceſſauit.
                  There be ſome copies that haue the firſt Verſe thus written.
                  
                     Niſith yelde, and niſith gelde.
                  
                  And others thus.
                  
                     Nigheſith yeld, & nigheſith geld.
                  
                  But theſe differ not in ſignification, other copies haue it after this ſort.
                  
                     Nigondſith ſeld, and nigondſith geld.
                  
                  That is to ſay, let him ix. times pay, and ix. times repay.
               
               
                  Gauelkinde.
                  
                     GAuelkinde is a cuſtome annexed, and goyng with landes in Kent called Gauelkinde lands holden by ancient Socage tenure. And is thought by the ſkilfull in Antiquities, to be called Gauelkinde of Gyue al kin, that is to ſay, to all the kindred in one lyne according as it is

vſed among the Germās, from whom wee Engliſhmen, and chiefly of Kent come. Or els it is called Gauelkinde of Gyue all kind, that is to ſay, to all y• male children, for kind in Dutch ſignifieth a male childe. And diuers other like coniectures are made by thē of the name (Gauelkind) which I omit of purpoſe for ſhortneſſe ſake.
                  The moſt vſuall cuſtomes of them are, That the land is diuidable betwéene the heires males, and that the heire at the age of fifteene yéeres may giue and ſell his lande, and ſhall inherite although his father bée attainted and hanged for felonie, and his wife ſhalbe indowed of halfe the land, whereof her huſband died ſeyſed, and the huſband ſhalbe tenant by the curteſie of y• halfe although he haue no iſſue by his wife, but the eſtate of the huſband & wife ceaſeth by their ſecond mariage. And diuers other cuſtomes are vſed in Kent of landes in Gauelkind, for which ſée y• 
                     Perambulation of Kent,
                     
made by M. Lambert. For which cauſe the reſidue I will omit as vnneceſſarie for this booke, and intreated of largely in the ſaid Perambulation.
                  
               
               
                  Gelde.
                  
                     GElde. y• is to be quite of ſeruile cuſtomes which were wont to be giuen, and are yet giuen, as hornegeld and ſuch like,
               
               
                  Graund Cape.
                  
                     GRaund Cape, look therefore after in y• title Petit Cape.
               
               
                  Graund Seriantie.
                  
                     GRaunde Seriantie is, where a man holdeth of the king certaine lande by the ſeruice of carying his banner or launce, or to lead his hoſte, or to be his caruer, or butler at his Coronation, and that is moſt honorable ſeruice and moſt worthie that a tenant may doe, and for that it is called graund ſerianty. But petit ſeriantie is when one holdeth of the King, paying to him yéerely a bow, a ſworde, a ſpeare, and ſuch like, and that is but Socage in effecte, but a man cannot hold in grand

Serieantie or by petit ſerieantie but of the King. Alſo if a tenant by grand ſerieantie dieth his heire being of full age the heire ſhal pay to the King for reliefe the value of the lands ouer the charges that he paieth to the king by grand Serieantie: but hee that holdeth by Eſcuage ſhal paye for his reliefe but C. s.
                  Alſo thoſe that bee in the Marches of Scotlande, that holdeth of the king by Cornage, that is to blow an horne when the Scottes enter into England, are tenants in grand Serieantie.
                  Alſo where a man holdeth of the Kinge for to finde a man in his warres within the Realme, that is called graund Serieauntie, for that, that it is done by a Mans badic: And if the tenaunt cannot finde a man to doe it, then hee is bounde to doe it him ſelfe. And he that holdeth by graunde Serieauntie holdeth by Knightes ſeruice, and the King ſhall haue, warde, marriage and reliefe, but not of them

that holdeth by petit ſerieantie, but the king ſhal not haue of them that holde by graund ſerieantie eſcuage, except that they holde by eſcuage. So they that hold by graund Serieantie or Eſcuage hold by Knights ſeruice. But one may hold by graund Serieantie and not by eſcuage, and by Eſcuage and not by graund Serieantie: And the Knights ſeruice alwayes draweth to him warde, mariage and reliefe.
               
               
                  Grithbrech.
                  
                     GRithbrech, that is the kings peace broken, becauſe (Grith) in Engliſh is pax in Latin.
               
            
            
               H
               
                  Habere facias ſeiſinam.
                  
                     HAbere facias ſeiſinam, is a writte iudicial, and it lyeth where one hath recouered certaine landes in the Kings court, then hee ſhall haue that writte directed to the Shirife, commaunding him to giue him ſeiſin of that lande, and it ſhal not be returnable.
               
               
                  
                  249 Hangvvit.
                  
                     HAngvvit, that is to bee quite of a théefe or felon hanged without iudgment, or eſcaped out of your cuſtodie.
               
               
                  250 Hariot.
                  
                     HAriot, is in two ſortes, the one Hariot cuſtome, the other Hariot ſeruice.
                  Hariot ſeruice (ſome ſaye) is alwaies expreſſed in a mans graunt or déede that hee holdeth by ſuch ſeruice to paye Hariot at the time of his death, and this hariot is payable after the death of the tenant in fee ſimple.
                  Hariot cuſtome, is wher Hariots haue béene paide time out of minde by cuſtome. And this may bee after the death of tenaunt for life &c. but to ſpeake thereof generally.
                  Hariot is the beſt beaſt (whether it be Horſe, Oxe or Cowe) that the tenaunt had at y• time of his death. And the Lorde may either ſeiſe, or take a diſtreſſe for it, whether it bee Hariot ſeruice, or Hariot cuſtome, to the Lordes vſe of whome the tenaunt helde

by his Bailife or other officer belōging to his manor. But of right, the Lord nor his officer ſhoulde not take Hariot before it bee preſented at the next court holden after the tenaunt is dead, and that ſuch a beaſt is due to the Lorde for his hariot.
               
               
                  Haybote or hedgebote.
                  
                     HAybote or hedgbote, is neceſſary ſtuffe to make and amende hedges, which the leſſee for yeeres, or for life of common right may take vpon the grounde, to him leaſed, although it bee not expreſſed in his leaſe, and although it bee a leaſe by wordes wtout writing.
                  Haybote alſo may be taken for neceſſary ſtuffe to make rakes, forkes, and ſuch like inſtrumentes wherewith men vſe in ſummer to tedde and make hay. And ſo a Leſſee for yeeres tooke it, and it was allowed him by his Leſſour, the rather as I ſuppoſe for that ſuch inſtrumentes are commonly made of ſlender vnder wood, which by the cōmon

lawe the lſſée for yeres may cutte and take as is aforeſaid.
               
               
                  252 Hidage.
                  
                     Hidage, that is to be quit, if the kinge ſhal taxe al the land by hides.
                  Note that a hide of land is a whole ploughlande. And this kinde of tax
                        •
                     ng by hides was much vſed in olde time, as well for prouiſion of Armour, as paymentes of Money, and that chieflie in king Etheldreds daies (a king in this Countrey before the Conqueſt) who in the yeere of Chriſt 1006. when as the Danes landed at Sandwich in Kent, taxed al his land by hides thus, That euerie three hundred and tenne hides of lande, ſhould find one ſhip furniſhed, and euery eight hides ſhoulde find one Iack and one ſallet, for the defence of the Realme.
               
               
                  253 Hotchpot.
                  
                     HOtchpot, is a medling, 
                        •
                     or mixing together, and a partition of Landes giuen in frankmarriage,

with other landes in fée ſimple diſcended, As for example, a man ſeiſed of 30. acres of lande in fee ſimple hath iſſue 2. daughters, and giueth with one of his daughters to a man that marrieth her ten acres of the ſame lande in frankemariage, and dyeth ſeiſed of the other twentie acres: Nowe if ſhee that is thus married will haue anie part of the twentie acres wherof her father died ſeiſed: She muſt put her landes giuen in frankmarriage in Hotchpot, that is to ſay, ſhee muſt refuſe to take the ſole profits of the lande giuen in frankemarriage, and ſuffer the land to bee commixt and mingled together with the other lande wherof her Father died ſeiſed, ſo that an equall diuiſion maye bee made of the whole betwéene her and her ſiſter: and thus for her tenne acres ſhée ſhall haue fiftéene, elſe her Siſter will haue the twentie acres of which their father died ſeiſed.
               
               
                  
                  254 Homage.
                  
                     HOmage, is a ſeruice which ſhall bee made in ſuch manner, that is to ſay, the tenaunt in fee ſimple or fee taile that holdeth by homage ſhall kne
                        •
                     le vpon both his knees vngirded, and the Lorde ſhall ſit and ſhal holde the handes of his tenant betweene his handes, and the tenaunt ſhall ſaye. I become your man from this daye forwarde of life and member and of earthlie honour, and to you ſhall be faithfull and true, and ſhall beare to you faith for the landes that I claime to holde of you, ſauing that faith that I owe to our Lorde the king, and then the Lorde ſo ſitting ſhall kiſſe him.
                  But how fealtie ſhal bee done looke before in fealtie.
                  And the ſtewarde of the Lord may take fealtie but not homage.
               
               
                  255 Homage aunceſtrel.
                  
                     HOmage aunceſtrell, is where a man and his anceſtours of time out of mind, did hold their land of their lord by homage. And if ſuch Lord hath receiued

homage, he is bound to acquite the tenant againſt al other Lords aboue him of euery manner ſeruice. And if the tenant hath done homage to his Lorde, and be impleded and voucheth the Lorde to warrantie, the Lord is bound to warrant him, and if the tenant looſe, hee ſhall recouer in value againſt the Lord ſo much of the landes as hee had at y• time of y• voucher or any time after. Alſo if a man that holdeth his lande by homage aunceſtrell alien the lande in fee, then the alienée ſhall doe homage to his Lorde, but he ſhall not hold by homage aunceſtrel, for that the continuance of the tenauncie in the blood of the firſt tenaunt is diſcontinued.
               
               
                  Homeſoken.
                  
                     HOmeſoken, (or hameſoken) that is to bee quit of amerciaments for entring into houſes violently and without licence, and contrarie to the peace of the King. And that you holde plea of ſuch treſpaſſe done in your Court and in your land.
               
               
                  
                  257 Homicide or Manſlaughter.
                  
                     HOmicide or manſlaughter, is the killing of a man feloniouſly without malice forethought. It is alſo defined thus, Homicide is the killing of a man by a man, and if ſuch killing be done by a dog, oxe, or other thing, it is not properly called homicide: for it is called homicide of a mā, and to kill as the killing of a man.
               
               
                  258 Hornegelde.
                  
                     HOrnegelde, that is to be quit of a certaine cuſtome exacted by tallage thorowe all the lande, as of whatſoeuer horne beaſt.
               
               
                  259 Houſebote.
                  
                     HOuſebote, is neceſſarie timber, that the leſſee for yeres, or for life, of common right may take vpon the ground, to repa
                        •
                     re the houſes vpon y• ſame groūd to him leaſed, although it be not expreſſed in the leaſe, & although it bee a leaſe by words without deed. But if he take more thē is needful, hee may be puniſhed by 
                        •
                     n action of waſte.
               
               
                  
                  Hundred.
                  
                     HVndredes, were deuiſed by Alfred the king, after that hee had deuided the whole realme into certaine partes or Sections, which of the Saxon word Scynan ſignifying to cuite, hee termed Shires, or (as wee yet ſpeake) Shares, and Portions. Theſe Shires hee alſo deuided into ſmaller parts, whereof ſome were called Laths of the worde Ielapian, which is to aſſemble together, others Tythings, ſo named, becauſe there were in eache of them to the number of tenne perſons, whereof eache one was Suertie and pledge for others good ob
                        •
                     aring: others hundreds, becauſe they contained iuriſdiction ouer an hundred men or pledges dwelling peraduenture in two or thrée, or more Pariſhes, Boroughs, or Townes, lying and adioyning neuertheles ſomewhat neere together, in which hee appointed adminiſtration of Iuſtice to bee exerciſed ſeuerally amonge them of the ſame

hundred, and not that one ſhoulde runne out diſorderly into an others hundred, lath, or tithing, wherein hée dwelleth not. Theſe hundredes continue to this daie in force, although not altogether to the ſame purpoſe, whereunto at the firſt they were appoynted, yet ſtill verie needefull both in tyme of peace for good order of gouernement diuers wa
                        •
                     es and alſo in warre for certeintie of leuying of men: as els for the more readie collections of paymentes granted in Parliament to the Kings and Quéenes of this Realme.
               
               
                  261 Hundredum.
                  
                     HVndredum, that is to bee quite of money or cuſtomes to bée done to the gouernours and hundredors.
               
            
            
               I.
               
                  Ideot.
                  
                     IDeot, is hée that is a foole naturally from his birthe, and knoweth not how to accompt or number twentie pence, nor cannot name his father or mother,

nor of what age himſelfe is, or ſuch like eaſie & common matters: ſo that it appeareth he hath no maner of vnderſtanding of reaſon, nor gouernement of himſelfe, what is for his profite or diſprofit &c. But if he haue ſo much knowledge that hee can read or learne to read by inſtruction and information of others, or can meaſure an Ell of cloth, or name the dayes in the weeke, or beget a child, ſonne or daughter, or ſuch like, whereby it may appeare that hee hath ſome light of reaſon: then ſuch a one is no Ideot naturally.
               
               
                  Idemptitate nominis.
                  
                     IDemptitate nominis, is a writ, and it lyeth where a writ of debt, couenant, or accompt, or ſuch other writ is brought againſt a man, and another that hath the ſame name as the defendant hath is takē for him, then he ſhall haue this writ, by the which the Shirife ſhall make inquirie before the Iuſtice

aſſigned in the ſame countie, if he be the ſame perſon or not▪ & if he bee not found to be y• partie, then he ſhall go without day in peace.
               
               
                  264 Ieofaile.
                  
                     IEofaile, is when the parties to any ſ
                        •
                     ite in pleading haue procéeded ſo far that they haue ioyned iſſue, which ſhalbe tryed or is tryed by a Iury or enqueſt. And this pleading or iſſue is ſo badly pleaded or ioyned, that it wilbe error if they procéede: Then ſome of the ſaide parties may by their Counſel ſhew it to the Court as well after verdict giuen and before iudgement, as before the Iury be charged. The ſhewing of which defectes before the Iurie charged was often when the Iury came into the Court to trie the iſſu: then the Counſell which will ſhew it, ſhal ſay, This enqueſt ye ought not to take; And if it bee after verdict, then he may ſay, to iudgement you ought not to go. And becauſe ſuch many delaies were in ſuits, diuers

ſtatutes are made to redreſſe them, aſwell in the time of king H. 8. in the 32 yere ca. 30. as in the time of the Queene that nowe is: wherof a man may ſaye as the Ciuilians ſay, that although Conſtantine the Emperor commanded the formes of the law to be cut off, yet the daily vſe of pleading doth ſéeme againe to recall them, or rather, ſome of them increaſe as y• heds of Hidra.
                  
               
               
                  Vnlawfull aſſembly.
                  
                     VNlawfull aſſemblie, is where people aſſemble themſelues together to do ſome vnlawfull thing againſt the peace, although that they execute not their purpoſe in déede.
               
               
                  Imparlance.
                  
                     IMparlance, is when an action of debt, treſpas, or ſuch like is brought againſt a man, & after that the plainlife hath counted or declared, the defendant prayeth the Court, that hee may haue time to put in his aunſwere to

another daye in the ſame terme, or in the next terme following, this ſtay of aunſwere is called imparlance.
               
               
                  267 Impriſonment.
                  
                     IMpriſonment, is no other thing, but the reſtraint of a mans libertie, whether it be in the open field or in the ſtockes, or cage in the ſtreates, or in a mans owne houſe aſwell as in the common gaole. And in all theſe places the partie ſo reſtrayned is ſaid to be a priſoner, ſolong as hee hath not his libertie fréely to goe at all times whether he will, without Baile, Mainpriſe, or other aucthoritie.
               
               
                  268 Infangthefe.
                  
                     INfangthefe, that is, that theeues taken within your demeſne or 
                        •
                     ee conuicted of theftes, ſhall bee iudged in your Court.
               
               
                  269 Information.
                  
                     INformation, for y• Quéen is that, which for a common perſon 
                        •
                     s called a

declaration, and is not alwayes done directly by the Queene, or her Atturney, but rather by ſome other man, who ſueth or informeth as well for himſelfe vpon the breach of ſome penall lawe or Statute, wherein a penaltie is giuen to the partie that will ſue for the ſame, but no action of debt to re
                        •
                     ouer it, then it muſt be had by information.
               
               
                  Ioyntenants.
                  
                     IOintenants be wher two men come to any lands & tenements by one ioynt title: As if a man giue landes to two men and to their heires.
                  But Tenants in common bee where two men haue landes by ſeuerall titles, or by feoffement to ii. to haue & to holde the one halfe to one & his heires, & the other half to another and his heires, in all theſe caſes none of them knoweth his ſeuerall, as it ſhall be ſaid after.
                  And note wel, if there be two or thrée ioyntenants, and one hath iſſue & dyeth,

then hee and thoſe ioyntenaunts that ouerline ſhall haue the whole by the ſuruiuor.
                  But if two iointenants make partitō betwéen thē by deed by agreement, then they be ſeuerall tenants.
                  But if one ioyntenaunt graunt that that belongeth to him to a ſtraunger, then the other ioyntenaunt and the ſtranger be tenants in common.
                  And though two tenants in cōmon be ſeiſed throghlie and of the whole, and none knoweth his ſeueral, yet if one die the other ſhall not haue the whole by the ſuruiuor, but his heir ſhall haue the halfe.
                  And ſo if there bee thrée Iointenaunts, and one of them maketh feoffement of his part to another, and the feoffee dieth, then his heire ſhall haue the third parte, and the other two bee ioyntenants as they were, becauſe that they two be ſeyſed by one ioint title.
                  Alſo if landes bee giuen to the Baron and to his wife, and the huſband alieneth and dyeth, the wife

ſhal recouer the whole: but if they were iointenants before the couerture, then in ſuch caſe ſhée ſhall recouer but the halfe.
                  Alſo if land be giuen to the huſband & to his wife, and a third perſon, if the thirde perſon graunt that that belongeth to him, the one halfe paſſeth by this grant, for that, that the baron & his wife be but one perſon in the lawe, and in this caſe they haue nothing in right but ye halfe.
                  Alſo if two Iointenants bée of landes in a Towne which is borough Engliſh, where lande is deuiſable, and one by his teſtament deuiſeth that, that belongeth to him to a ſtrā
                     ger and dieth, this deuiſe is void, and the other ſhall haue the whole by ſuruinor, for that the deuiſe may not take effecte till after the death of the deuiſor, and immediate after the death of the deuiſor, the right commeth to the other ioyntenant ſuruiuor, the which claymeth nothing by the deuiſor but in his own right by the ſuruinor:

But otherwiſe it is of Parceners ſeiſed of lands deuiſable, cauſa qua ſupra.
                  
               
               
                  271 Indicauit.
                  
                     INdicauit is a writ, and lieth where debate is betwéene ij. Clerkes in court Chriſtian of one Church, or part of a Church, for diſmes which amounteth at the leaſt to the value of the iiij part of the Church, & for that that the patron of the Clerke of the defendant ſhall léeſe his aduowſon if the clerk of the plaintife ſhall recouer it, he ſhall haue a writ directed to the clerke of the plaintife, or to the officers of the Court chriſtian, them commaunding to ceaſe their plée, vntill it is diſcuſt in the Kings court to whom the aduowſon belongeth, And the writte ſhalbe betwéene fower perſons, two ſhalbe patrons, and two ſhalbe clerkes. But this writ is not returnable: but if they ceaſe not their ſuit, he ſhall haue an Attachment.
               
               
                  272 Iointure.
                  
                     IOinture is an eſtate and aſſurance made to a womā in conſideration of mariage

for terme of her life▪ or otherwiſe, as is mentioned in the ſtatute 27. H. 8. cap. 10. whether it be before or after the mariage. And if it be after the marriage, then ſhee may at her libertie after the death of her huſband refuſe to take or haue the landes ſo aſſured for her iointure, & demaund her dower at the common law: But if it be made before mariage, then ſhée may not refuſe ſuch ioynture, nor haue dower according to the common law, vnleſſe that when ſhée bringeth her writte of dower, the defendant pledeth ſuch a plée that will not barre her of her dower, thē ſhe ſhalbe endowed: As if he ſay in barre, that her huſband was not ſeyſed of ſuch eſtate whereof ſhée might be endowed, or anie ſuch plée, & doth not ſhewe that ſhée hath a ioynture made &c. and therefore demādeth iudgement of that action, or iudgement if ſhée ſhalbe alſo endowed, or anie ſuch lyke plée &c. And this was the opinion of the right worſhipfull Maſter
                     
                     Brograue, at his Reading in Grayes Inne in ſummer An. 1567. 18. El. vpō a branch of the ſtatute made An. 27. H. 8. ca. 10. concerning iointures & dowers.
                  And by him of thoſe things whereof a woman may bée endowed, ſhée may haue iointure as of mines, veſturam terre, woodes, Townes, Iles, Meadowes, and ſuch like. Alſo of an aduow on, of a reuerſion depending vppon an eſtate for life, of a windmill, a high Chamber, a rectorie and ſuch other, and they are called Tenementes. Alſo of a villen, for hée is an hereditament. And of all theſe profite may come to the woman. But of thoſe thinges whereof no profite will come, but rather a charge, a iointure cannot be made.
               
            
            
               L.
               
                  283 Theft.
                  
                     THeft, is a wrongfull takyng awaie of an other mans goods, but not from his perſon, with a minte to ſteale them, agaynſt

his will whoſe goods they were.
                  And thefie is in two ſorts, the one ſo called ſimply, and the other pety or little theft.
                  The firſt is where the thing ſtolē excéedeth ye value of xij. d. & that is felony.
                  The other (which is called little or petite theft) is where the thing ſtollen doeth not exceede the value of xij. d. and that is no felony.
               
               
                  Laſtage.
                  
                     LAſtage, that is to be quit of a certaine cuſtome exacted in faires & markets for carrying of thinges where a man will.
               
               
                  Leaſes.
                  
                     LEaſes bée graunts or demiſes by one which hath any eſtate in any hereditaments of thoſe hereditaments to on other for a leſſer time, and they be in diuers maners, that is to ſay for terme of life, for terme of yéeres, for terme of an others life, and at will.
                  Alſo a leaſe of lande is as good without déede as with déede.
                  But in a leaſe for terme

of life, it behoueth to giue liuerte and ſeiſin vpon the lande, or elſe nothing ſhall paſſe by the grant, becauſe that they bée called freeholdes.
                  Alſo a leaſe of a common or rent, may not bee good without déede.
                  But of a Parſonage, it is good without déede, for that that the Church which is the principall, may paſſe well ynough without déede, and ſo the diſmes & offeringes which bée as acceſſarie to the Church.
                  But diſmes & offringes by thē ſ
                        •
                     lfe may not be let without déed as it is ſaid.
               
               
                  286 Leſſor and Leſsee.
                  
                     LEſsor, is hée that leſſeth landes or tenements to an other for terme of life, yéeres, or at will and he to whom the leafe is made, is called leſſée.
               
               
                  287 Leuant & Couchant.
                  
                     LEuant and Couchant is ſaide, whch the beaſtes or Cattell of a Straunger are come into an other mans grounde, and there haue remained a certaine good ſpace of time.
               
               
                  
                  Ley.
                  
                     LEy, is when an action of debt is brought agaynſt one vpō ſome ſecret iudgement or contract had betweene the parties without eſpecialty ſhewed, or other matter of Record: as in an action of Detinue for ſome goods or chattels lent or left with the defendant, then the defendant may wage his lawe, that is to ſay, to ſweare vpon a booke and certaine perſons with him that he deteyneth not ye goods or oweth nothing to the plaintife in manner and forme as hée hath declared.
                  And it is allowed onely in caſes of ſecrecie where the plaintife cannot proue the ſurmiſe of his ſuit by any déed or open acte: or the defendant might diſcharge it priuily betwéene them without any writing of acquitāce or publike act, and therfore in an actiō of debt vpon a leas for terme of yéeres or vpon arrerages of accōpt before Auditors aſſigned a man ſhall not wage his Law.
                  But whē one ſhal wage

his law he ſhal bring with him vj. viij. or xij. of his neighbours as the Court ſhall aſſigne him, to ſweare with him, much like vnto the othe which they make which are vſed in the common lawe to purge others of any crime laide againſt them, which are called cō
                     purgators.
                  Note that the making of the othe is called wager of lawe, And when it is accompliſhed, then is it called, the doing of your law.
                  And alſo if the Sherife in any action returne that hée hath ſummoned the defendaunt to appeare in Courte at anie daye, to aunſwere the plaintife, at whiche daye hee maketh default, proceſe ſhall bee awarded agaynſt him to come & ſaue or excuſe his default: which is aſmuch to ſay, as to excuſe the deley, or otherwiſe to looſe the thing demanded, And then the def. commeth and will ſweare that hee was not ſummoned, which is called waging of law, Thē he ought to doe it at the day

aſſigned with twelue others, And in dooing of his lawe hée ought vppon his 
                        •
                     the affirme directly the contrary of that which is imputed to him▪ but the others ſhall not ſay, but that they thinke that hée faith the trueth.
               
               
                  Libertate probanda.
                  
                     LIbertate probanda, looke for that in the title de Natiuo habendo.
                  
               
               
                  Liuery of ſeiſin.
                  
                     LIuerie of ſeiſin, is a ceremonie vſed in conueyance of lands or tenements where an eſtate in fee ſimple, fée taile, or a fréeholde ſhall paſſe: and it is a teſtimoniall of the willing departinge by him: who makes the liuery from the thing whereof liuerie is made: And the receiuing of the liuery, is a willing acceptance by the other partie, of all that whereof the other hath diſmiſſed himſelfe: And was inuented as an open and notorious thing, by meanes whereof the common people might haue knowledge of the paſſing or alteration of eſtates from man to

man, that thereby they might bée the better able to trie in whom the right and poſſeſſion of landes and tenementes were, if they ſhould bée impanelled in Iuries, or otherwiſe haue to do concerning the ſame.
                  The common maner of deliuerie of 
                        •
                     eyſin is after this ſorte 
                        〈…〉
                     e: If it bée in the open field where is no building or houſe, then one that can reade taketh the writing in his hande, if the eſtate ſhall paſſe by déede, and declareth to the ſtanders by the cauſe of their méeting there together &c. and then openly readeth the déede, or declare the effect thereof in Engliſh, and after that it is Sealed, the partie who is to depart from the grounde, taketh the deede in his handes together with a clodde of the earth▪ and a twigge or bowe if any bée there, and all this hée deliuereth to the other partie in the name of poſſeſſion or ſeyſin; according to the forme and effect of the déede which before

them was there reād or declared, But if there bee 
                        •
                      dwelling houſe or building vpon the land, then this is done there at the doore of the ſame; none being left at that time within the houſe, and the partie deliuereth all the aforeſaide together with the ring of the doore in the name of ſeiſin or poſſeſſion, and he that receiueth the liuerie entreth in firſt alone and ſhutteth too the doore, and preſently openeth it again, and letteth them in &c. If it be of a houſe whereto is no lande or grounde, the liuerie is made and poſſeſſion taken by the deliuerie of the ring of the doore and déede onely. And where it is without déede either of landes or tenementes, there the partie declareth by worde of mouth before witneſſe, the eſtate that he meaneth to departe with, and then deliuereth ſeiſin or poſſeſſion in maner as is beforeſaid: and 
                        •
                     o the land or tenement doth paſſe as well where there is no déede as by déede, & that by force of the liuery of ſeiſin:

It was agreed in Grayes Inne by the right worſhipfull Maſter Snagge, at his reading there in ſummer Anno 1574. that if a feoffor deliuer the deed in viewe of the lande, in name of ſeiſin that it is good, becauſe that he hath a poſſeſſion in himſelf. But otherwiſe it is of an Atturney, for hee muſt goe to the land, and take poſſeſſion himſelfe, before that hee can giue poſſeſſion to another, according to y• words of his warrant &c. And where liuerie of ſeiſin is by viewe, if the feoffée doe not enter after &c. nothing poſſeth, for he ought to enter indéede.
               
               
                  291 Lotherwite.
                  
                     LOtherwite, that is that you may take amendes of him which doth defile your bondwoman without your licence.
               
            
            
               M.
               
                  292 Mahim or Maime.
                  
                     MAhim, is where by the wrongfull 
                        •
                     cte of another, any member is hurt or token away, whereby the partie ſo hurte is made

vnperfecte to fight: As if a bone bee taken out of the heade: or a bone be broken in anie other parte of the body: or a foote, or hande, or finger, or ioynte of a foote, or any member bee cutte: or by ſome wounde the ſinewes bee made to ſhrinke, or other 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     ber, or the fingers made cr
                        ••
                     
                     ked, or if anie eye be putte out, or the foreteeth broken, or anie other▪ thing hurte in a mans bodie by meanes whereof hee is made the leſ
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     bte 
                        •
                     idefend himſelfe or offend his enemie.
                  But the cutting off of an eare, or noſe, or breaking of the hinder teeth, or ſuch lik
                        •
                     , is no 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     him▪ becauſe it is rather a deformitie of the
                        •
                      bodie▪ then diminiſhing of ſtrength; and that is comma
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     e tryed by beholding the partie by the Iuſtices. And if the Iuſtices ſtand in doubt whether the hurt be a ma
                        •••
                     m or not, they vſe, 
                        •
                     nd will of their great diſcretion take the helpe and opinion of ſo
                        •
                     ne ſkilful Surgeon
                        •
                     
                     ▪ to conſider

thereof, before they determine vpon the caſe.
               
               
                  293 Mainpriſe▪
                  
                  
                     MAinpriſe, is whē a men is arreſted by Capias, then the Iudges may deliuer his bodie to certaine men for to keepe and to bring him before them, at a certaine daie, and theſe b
                        •
                     e called mainp
                        ••
                     nors, and if the partie appear not at y• day aſſigned, the main pernors ſhalbe amer
                        •••
                     .
               
               
                  254 Mannour▪
                  
                  
                     MAnnour, is a thinge compounde of diuers things, as of a houſe, land arrable, Paſture, Meadowe, wood, rent▪ 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ſon, court Baron▪ and ſuch like make a Man
                        ••
                     r. And this ought to be
                        •
                      by long continuance of 
                        〈…〉
                      to the cōtrarſo whereof 
                        〈…〉
                      memor
                        •
                     e cannot diſcerne: for at this days a Mannour cannot bee made, becauſe a Courte Baron cannot now be made, and a Mannour cannot b
                        ••
                      without a Court Baron, and ſuters or fréeholders, two at the leaſte, for if all the freeholdes except one e
                        •
                     cheat

to the Lorde, or if hee purchaſe all except one, there his manor is gone, for that it cannot 
                        •
                     e a manor without a court Baron (as is aforeſaid.) And 
                        •
                      Courte Baron cannot bee holden but before ſuters, and not before 
                        •
                     ne ſuter, & therfore where but one fréeholde or fréeholderis▪ there cannot bee a manor properly, although in common ſpéech it may be called a manor.
               
               
                  Manumiſſion.
                  
                     MAnumiſsion, is in two ſortes, the one is a manumiſſion expreſſed, the other a manumiſſion implied or ſecrete.
                  Manumiſſion expreſſed is when the Lord maketh a déede to his villeine to infranchiſe him by this word (manumittere) which is as much to ſay, as to le
                        •
                      one go out of another mās handes or power.
                  The manner of Manumitting or infranchiſing in olde time moſte vſually was thus: The Lord (in preſence of his neighbours) tooke the bondman by the head ſaying, I will

that this man be frée, and therwith ſhoued them forward out of his handes, & by this hee was free without more ado
                        •
                     .
                  Manumiſſion 
                        ••
                     plyed without this warde (Manumittere) is when the Lorde maketh▪ an obligation to his villeine to paye him money at a certaine day, or ſueth him where hee might enter without ſuit, or graunteth vnto his villeine an annuitie, or leaſeth lande to him by déede for yeres, or for life, and in diuers ſuch like caſes, the villeine thereby is made free.
               
               
                  296 Maximes.
                  MAximes be the foundations of the lawe, and the concluſions of reaſon, and are cauſes efficient, and certaine uniuerſall propoſitions ſo ſure and perfect, that they may not be at any time impeached or impugned, but ought alwayes to bee obſerued & holden as ſtrong principles and auctorities of them ſelues, although

they cannot bee proued by force, of argument or demonſtrations logicall, but are knowen by induction by the way of ſence and memoris: As for example, it is a Maxime that i
                        •
                      a mā haue iſ
                        ••
                      two ſonnes by diuers women, and the one of them purchaſe landes in fee and dyeth without: iſſue, the other brother ſhall neuer bee his heire &
                        •
                     .
                  Alſo it is another maxime, that lands ſhall diſcēd from the father to y• ſonne, but not from the ſonne to the father, for that is an aſcention &c. And diuers like there be.
               
               
                  Maynour.
                  
                     MAynour, is when a theefe hath ſtollen, and is followed with hue and criē and taken, hauing that ſound about him which he ſtole, that is called y• maynour▪ And ſ
                        •
                      w
                        •
                      commonly vſ
                        •
                      to 
                        ••
                     ye▪ when wee finde 
                        〈…〉
                      doing of an vnlawfull ac
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ that we tooke him with the may
                        •
                     our, or manner.
               
               
                  
                  298 Maintenance.
                  
                     MAintenance, is where any man giueth or deliuereth to another that is plaintife or defendant in any action, any ſumme of money or other thing for to maintaine his plee, or els maketh extreme labour for him when he hath nothing therewith to doe, then the partie grieued ſhal haue againſt him a writ called a writ of Maintenance.
                  
               
               
                  299 Meſne.
                  
                     MEſne, is where the owner of landes or tenements holdeth of one by certaine ſeruice
                        •
                     , and hee holdeth them of an other by like or other ſeruices, then hee which holdeth the lands is called tenant perauaile, and he of whome it is held is called Meſne, & he of whome the Meſne holdeth, is called cheefe lord. And in this caſe if the lorde aboue diſtraineth the tenant for the ſeruice of the Meſne, which ought to acquit him to the lord aboue, then the tenant ſhal haue a writ againſt the Meſne, which is called a writ of

Meſne, & if he come not to acquit the tenant, then the meſne ſhall loſe the ſeruice of the tenant & ſhalbe foreiudged of his ſeigniory, & the tenant ſhalbee tenant immediate to the chiefe lord, & ſhal do the ſame ſeruice & ſuits as the Meſne did to the Lord.
               
               
                  Miſpriſion.
                  
                     MIſpriſion, is when one knoweth that another hath committed treaſon or felony, and will not diſcouer him to the Queene or to the Councell, or to any Magiſtrate, but doth concea
                        •
                     e the ſame. Diuers other offences be called miſpriſion, as when a Chapleine had fixed an old ſeale of a Patent to a new Patent of Non reſidence, and this was holden to bee Miſpriſion of Treaſon onely, and no counterfaytinge of the Queenes ſcale.
                  Alſo if a man know money to bee counterfait, and bring the ſame out of Irelande hyther into England, and vtter it in payment, this is but Miſpriſion

of Treaſon, and no Treaſon, and ſo it is in diuers ſuch like caſes.
                  And in all caſes of miſpriſion of Treaſon, y• partie offendour ſhall forfaite his goods for euer, and the profits of his landes for terme of his life, & his body to priſon at the Quéens pleaſure.
                  And for Miſpriſion of felony or treſpaſſe, the offender ſhalbee cōmitted to priſon vntil he haue found ſureties or pledges for his fine, which ſhalbee aſſeſſed by the diſcretion of the Iuſtices before whome he was conuict.
                  And note that in euery Treaſon or felony is included Miſpriſiō, & where any hath committed treaſon or felony, the Queene may cauſe the ſame to bee indicted & arraigned but of Miſpriſion only if ſhe wil. See more hereof Stamford his firſt booke.
               
               
                  301 Shewing of deedes or Recordes.
                  
                     SHewing of deedes or Recordes, is, as if for example, an action of debt

be broght againſt one vpō an obligation by one or by executors &c. there after that the plaintife hath declared, hee ought to ſhewe his obligation, & the executor y• teſtamēt to y• Court, & ſo it is of Recorde.
                  And the diuerſitie betwéene ſhewing of déedes or Recordes, & hearing of déeds or Records, is thus: he that pleades the deedes or record, or declares vpon it, to him it doth appertain to ſhewe the ſame. And the other againſt whome ſuch deede or record is pleaded or declared, & is thereby to be charged, may demaund hearing of the ſame deede or record, which his aduerſatie bringeth or pleadeth againſt him.
               
               
                  Mortdaunceſter.
                  
                     MOrtdaunceſter, Looke therefore in the title Coſinage.
               
               
                  Monſtrauerunt.
                  
                     MOnſtrauerunt, is a writ and it lyeth for the tenāts in auncien demeſne, and is directed vnto the

lorde, him commaunding that he diſtrain not his tenant for to do other ſeruice that he ought not to doe, and they may haue this writ directed to the ſhirife that he ſuffer not the lorde to diſtraine the ſaide tenants for to doe other ſeruice. Alſo if the tenants cannot bee in quiet they may haue an attachment againſt the lorde to appeare before the Iuſtice, & all the names of the tenāts ſhall bee put in that writ, though but one of them be greeued onely.
                  Alſo if any landes in auncient demeſne be in variance betweene the tenants, then the tenant ſo greeued ſhall haue againſt the other a writ which is called of Right cloſe after the cuſtome of the manor, and that ſhall bee alway brought in the lords court and there he ſhall declare in the nature of what writ hee will, as his caſe lyeth, and this writ ſhall not be remoued but for a great cauſe or no power of the Court.
                  Alſo if the Lorde in

another place out of auncient demeſne diſtraine his tenant to do other ſeruice then he ought, he ſhal haue a writ of right, called Ne iniuſte vexes, and it is a writ of right patent which ſhalbe tryed by battell or Grand aſſiſe.
               
               
                  Mortgage or Morgage.
                  
                     MOrtgage or Morgage is when a man maketh a feoffement to another on ſuch condition, that if the feoffour paye to the feoffee at a certaine daye xl. li. of money, that then the feoffour may reenter &c. in this caſe the feoffee is called tenaunt in Morgage. And as a man may make a feoffement in fee in Morgage, ſo hee may make a gyft in taile, or a leaſe for terme of life, or for terme of yeeres in morgage. And it ſeemeth that the cauſe why it is called Mortgage, is for that it ſtandeth in doubt, whether the feoffour will pay the money at the daye appoynted or not, and if hee faile to paye, then the

lande which hee layde in gage vppon condition of payment of the money, is gone from him for euer & ſo dead to him vpon condition: but if he pay the money, then is the gage dead as to the tenant, that is to ſay, the feoffee, and for this cauſe it is called in Latine Mortuum vadium, as Maſter Littleton ſayth, or rather mortuum vas, as I thinke.
                  Alſo if a feoffement bee made in morgage vpon cō
                     dition that if the feoffour pay ſuch a ſumme at ſuch a day &c. And the feoffour dye before the day, then if the heire of the feoffour pay the ſame ſumme at the ſame day to the feoffee and the feoffee refuſeth it, then the heire of the feoffour may enter, but in ſuch a caſe, if there bee no day of payment expreſſed, then ſuch tender of the heire is voyde, for that that when the feoffour dyeth, the time of tender is paſt, or otherwiſe the heires of the feoffor ſhall haue time of the tender for euer, which ſhal be inconuenient, that one

ſhall haue a fee ſimple to him and to his heires which ſhalbee defeſible alwayes at the pleaſure and wil of others, but in the firſt caſe the time of tender was not expired by ye death of the feoffor.
               
               
                  Moderata miſericordia.
                  
                     MOderata miſericordia, is a writ, and it lyeth where a man is amerced in court Baron or county more then he ought to be, then he ſhal haue this writ directed to the ſhirif if it be in the county or to the bailife: fit be in the court baron comanding them that he amerce him not, but hauing regard to the quantitie of the treſpas, & if they do not vpon this writ, then ſhal go forth againſt them, a ſicut alias, and Cauſam nobis ſignifices & after that an attachement.
               
               
                  Mortmaine.
                  
                     MOrtmaine, is where lāds be giuē to a houſe of religion, or to another company which be corporate by the kings graunt,

then the land is come into mortmaine, that is to ſaye in Engliſh, a dead hand, & then the king or the Lorde of whome the lande is holden, may enter as it appeareth by the Statute de Religioſis, Therefore ſée the ſtatute. Alſo if one make a feoffement vpon truſt to certain perſons to the vſe of a houſe of Religion, or to the vſe of any guyld or fraternitie corporate, then it ſhalbee ſaide mortmaine, and then hee ſhal run in the ſame paine, as it appeareth by the ſtatute Anno. 15. R. 2.
                  
               
               
                  307 Mulier.
                  
                     MVlier, is a word vſed in our law, but how aptly I cannot well learn: For according to the proper ſignification, Mulier is a defiled woman, like as it is vſed by Vlpianus in a certaine place after this ſort. If I thought that I had bought a Virgin when ſhe was a defyled woman, the bargaine was not good. Hereby you may ſée, that Mulier is a woman y• hath had the company of a man.

But to leaue the right ſignification, Mulier is taken in our law for one that is lawfully begotten and borne: and is alwaies vſed in compariſon with a baſtard, onely to ſhew a difference betwéene them, as thus for example. A man hath a ſonne of a woman before marriage, that is called a baſtarde, and vnlawfull. And after he marrieth, the Mother of the baſtard, and they haue another ſonne, this ſeconde ſonne is called Mulier, that is to ſay lawfull, and ſhall bée heire to his father: but that other cannot bée heire to anie man, becauſe it is not knowen nor certeine in the iudgemēt of the law, who was his father, and for that cauſe is ſaid to bée no mās ſonne, or the ſonne of the people, and ſo without father, according to theſe old verſes.
                  To whom the people father is, to him is father none and all.
                  To whom the people father is, well fatherleſſe we may him call.
                  And alwayes you ſhall

finde this addition to them (Baſtard eldeſt, & mulier yongeſt) when they be cō
                     pared together.
               
               
                  308 Murder.
                  
                     MVrder, is a wilfull killing of a man vpon malice forethought, and ſéemeth to come of the Saxon worde Mordren which ſo ſignifieth: And Mordridus, is the murdered euen vntill this day amōg them in Saxonie, from whence we haue moſt of our words as hath bin often ſaid. Or it may be deriued of Mort and dire, as mors dira: Sée Stamford Plees of the Coron lib. 1.
                  
               
            
            
               N.
               
                  309 Natiuo habendo.
                  
                     NAtiuo habendo, is a writ, and it lieth where the villein or niefe of the Lorde is gone from him, then the Lorde ſhall haue this writte directed to the Shirife that he make his Lord to haue his villeine or niefewith al his goods. Alſo in this writ more villeins or niefes may not be demaunded then twayne, but as many villeynes or

niefes as will, iointly may bring a writ De libertate probanda. Alſo if a villeyne or niefe bring his writ De libertate probanda, before that the Lorde bring his writ, then the villeine pl' ſhall be in peace till the comming of the Iuſtice, or elſe his writ ſhall not helpe him.
                  Alſo if a villeine haue tarried in auncien demeſne one yeere and a day without claime of the Lord, thē he cannot ſeiſe him in the ſaid fraunchiſe.
               
               
                  Ne admittas.
                  
                     NE admittas is a writte directed to the Biſhop at the ſuite of one which is patron of any Church, and hée doubteth that the Biſhop will collate one his Clerke, or admit an other Clerke preſented by an other man to the ſame benefice: then hée that doubteth it ſhall haue this writ to forbid the Shirife to collate or admit any to that Church.
               
               
                  Non omittas propter libertatem.
                  
                     NOn omittas propter libertatem is a writ, and

it lieth where the Shirife returneth vpon a writ to him directed, that hee hath ſent to the Baylife of ſuch a franchiſe which hath returne of writs, and he hath not ſerued the writ, then the plaintife ſhal haue this writ directed to the Shirife, that he himſelfe enter into the franchiſe and execute the kings writ.
                  Alſo the Shirife ſhall warne the Baylife that hée be before the Iuſtice at the day contayned in the writte, and if hée come not and excuſe himſelfe, then all the writtes iudicials which ſhall paſſe out of the Kinges court during the ſame plee, ſhalbe writs De non admittas &c. and the Shirife ſhal make execution of them hanging that plée.
               
               
                  312 Negatiua pregnans.
                  
                     NEgatiua pregnans, is when an action or information, or ſuch lyke is brought againſt one, & the defendant pleadeth in barre of the action, or otherwiſe, a negatiue plée, which is not ſo ſpeciall

an aunſwere to the action, but that it includeth alſo an affirmatiue: As for example: If in a writte of Entre in caſu prouiſo, brought by him in the reuerſion vpon alienation by the tenant for life, ſuppoſing that hée hath aliened in fée (which is a forfaiture of his eſtate) and the tenant to the writte ſayeth that hee hath not aliened in fee, this is a negatiue, wherein is included an affirmatiue: for although it bée true, that he hath not aliened in fée, yet it may bée that hée hath made an eſtate in tayle (which is alſo a forfaiture) and then the entrie of him in the reuerſion is lawfull &c.
                  Alſo in a Quare impedit the Quéene makes title to preſent to a Prebend, for that the temporalties of the Biſhopricke we
                        •
                     e in her handes by the death of w. late Biſhop▪ &c. The defendant ſaith that it was not voyde béeing the Temporalties in the Quéenes handes by the death of w. this is a

Negatiue preignans, for it may be in y• Quéens hāds otherwiſe then by the death of w. and it ſufficeth the Quéen if it be in her hāds by any meanes &c.
                  So it is where an Information was brought in the Eſchequer againſt I. S. for that he bought wooll betwene ſhering time and the Aſſumptiō ſuch a yere of I. N. The defendant ſaith that he did not buy anie of I. N. as it is alleadged &c. this is called a Negatiue preignans, for it hee bought it o
                        •
                      anie other, yet he is culpable for the buying.
               
               
                  313 Ne iniuſte vexes.
                  
                     NE iniuſte vexes, Looke therefore before in the title Monſtrauerunt.
                  
               
               
                  314 Niefe.
                  
                     NIefe, is a woman that is bounde, or a villeine woman, but if ſhe marrie a free man, ſhee is thereby made frée, becauſe that ſhe and her huſbande are but one perſon in lawe, and ſhee ought to bee of the ſame nature and condition in lawe to all intents that her huſbande is.

But her huſbande is frée to all intents without anie condition in law or otherwiſe: and ſo by conſequens the wife ought to be, and is free according to the nature of her free huſbande, & then if ſhe were once frée & cleerely diſcharged of bondage to al intents, ſhee can not be niefe after without eſpeciall acte done by her, as diuorce, or confeſſion in court of record, and that is in fauour of liberty, and therfore a frée woman ſhall not bee bound by taking of a villeine to her huſbande: But their iſſue ſhalbe villeins as their father was, which is contrary to the Ciuil lawe, for there it is ſaid, the birth followeth the bellie.
                  Bondage or Villenage had beginning among the Hebrues, and his originall proceeding of Chanaan the Sonne of Cham, who becauſe that he had mocked his Father Noe to ſcorne, lying diſſolutelie when hee was drunk, was puniſhed in his Son Chanaan with penaltie of bondage.
               
               
                  
                  315 Nihil dicit.
                  
                     NIhil dicit, is when an action is brought againſt a man, and the defē
                     dant appeares, the plaintif declares, and the defendaunt will not anſwere, or pledes to the action, & doth not maintaine his plee, but makes default, nowe vpon this default, he ſhalbe condemned, becauſe hee ſaith nothing.
               
               
                  316 Niſi prius.
                  
                     NIſi prius, is a writ iudiciall, and it lieth when an inqueſt is empanelled and returned before the Iuſtices in the bench, then the plaintife or defendante maie haue this writte directed to the Shirife, him commanding that he cauſe the Countrey to come before the Iuſtices in the ſame countie, at their comming to be determined, and that for the eaſing of the enqueſt.
               
               
                  317 Nomination,
                  
                     NOmination, is where one may in right of his Mannour or otherwiſe, nominate and appointe a worthy Clerke or men to a Parſonage, Vicarage,

or ſuch like ſpirituall promotion. And note that this nomination ought to bee to another then the ordinarie, which other ſhall preſent him to the Ordinarie.
               
               
                  Nonabilitie.
                  
                     NOnabilitie, is where an actiō is brought againſt one, and the defendāt ſaith that the plaintife is not able to ſue a
                        •
                     ie action, and demandeth iudgment if he ſhalbe anſwered. There are ſixe cauſes of nonabilitie in the plaintife, as if hee bee an outlawe, or an alien borne, but that diſability is in actions reals and mixt onely, and not in actions perſonals, except hee be an alien enemie, or condempned in premunire, or profeſſed into an Abbey, Priorie or Fryarie, or excommunicate, or a villeine, and ſueth his Lorde, but this laſt is no plee for another that is not Lord to the villaine. See more hereof in Littleton. lib. 2. cap. 11.
               
               
                  Bare, or naked Contract.
                  
                     BAre Contract, or naked promiſe, is where a

man bargaineth or ſelleth his lands or goods, or promiſeth to giue to one money, or a horſe, or to build a houſe, or doe ſuch a thing at ſuch a day, and there is no recompence appointed to him for the doing thereof. As if one ſay to another, I ſell or giue to you all my landes or goods. And there is nothing appointed, aſſigned, or agreed vpon what the other ſhall giue or paie for it, ſo that there is not one thing for another, this is a naked Contract, and voide in lawe, and for not performance thereof no action lyeth, for of a naked Contract commeth no action.
               
               
                  320 Nuſaunce.
                  
                     NVſaunce, is where any man leuieth any wal or ſtoppeth any water, or doth anie thing vpon his owne grounde to the vnlawfull hurt and annoyance of his neighbour, he that is grieued may haue therof an aſſiſe of Nuſance. Alſo if he that make the Nuſance alien ye land to another, thē this writ ſhallbee brought

againſt them both as it appeareth by ye ſtatute weſtminſter 2. chap 24.
                  Nuper obiit.
                  
                     NVper obiit, is a writte and it lyeth where one hath manie heires, that is to ſay, manie Daughters or manie Sones, if it be in gauell kinde in Kent, and dyeth ſeiſed, and one heire entreth into all the lande, then the other that bee holden out, ſhall haue this writte againſt the coheire that is in. But a writ de Rationabili parte lyeth in ſuch caſe where the aunceſtor was once ſeiſed, and died not ſeiſed of the poſſeſſion, but in reuerſion.
               
            
            
               O.
               
                  Oredelfe.
                  
                     ORedelfe, is where one claiymes to haue the ore that is founde in his ſoile or ground.
               
               
                  Outfangthiefe.
                  
                     OVtfangthiefe, that is, that theeues or felons of your lande, or fee, out of your land or fée taken with felony or ſtealing, ſhall be brought back to your court and there iudged.
               
               
                  
                  324 Oweltie.
                  
                     OWeltie, is when there is Lorde, Meſne, and tenaunt, and the tenaunt holdeth of the Meſne by the ſame ſeruices, that the meſne holdeth ouer of the Lord aboue him. As if the tenāt hold of the meſne by homage, fealty, and xx. s. of rent yerely, and the meſne holdeth ouer of the Lord aboue by homage, fealtie, and xx. ſhillings rent alſo, this is called Oweltie of ſeruices.
               
               
                  325 Hearing of recordes and deedes &c.
                  
                     HEaring of recordes and deedes, is as for example, an action of debte bee brought againſt a man vpon an obligation, and the defendant appeares to the action, and thē praieth that he may hear the obligation wherewith the plaintife chargeth him.
                  So it is when as executors bring an action of debt, and the defendant demaundeth to heare the teſtament, vpon this demaunde it ſhall be read vnto the defendant. But if it be in another terme or after

that the defendant hath imparled, then he ſhall not heare it. And ſo asis ſaid of deeds, is to be vnderſtood of Records that are alleaged againſt him.
               
               
                  Oier & Terminer.
                  
                     OIer & Terminer, is a writ called in latin de Audiendo & terminando, & it lyeth where anie great or ſodaine inſurrection is made or any other ſodaine treſpaſſe which requireth haſtie reformation, thē the King ſhall directe a Commiſſion to certain men and Iuſtices to heare and to determine the ſame.
                  Note that euerie Iuſtices of Aſſiſe haue alſo one Commiſſion of Oier and determiner, directed to thē and diuers other inhabitantes within the ſhires, whereunto their circuite extendeth, whereof ech one of the Iuſtices of Aſſiſe are of the Quorum, for the hearing and determining of diuers offences, which may h
                        •
                     ppen in their circuite, which without yt commiſſion they could not.
               
            
            
               
               P.
               
                  Pape.
                  
                     PApe, is an ancient name falſly arrrogated, or proudly vſurped by the Biſhop of the onely Citie of Rome in Italie, and is commonly Engliſhed the Pope, a name truely much frequented in our auncient yeere Bookes, ſpecially in the times of thoſe kinges, who too much abandoning their Imperiall authoritie, and abaſing themſelues farre beneathe their eſtate, were not aſhamed to ſuffer an alien and outlandiſh Biſhoppe, that dwelt aboue fiftéene hundred miles from them, to bee Soueraign ouer them in their owne dominions, and to take from them not onely the diſpoſition of certaine ſmall trifles of none accompt, but alſo the nomination of Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Abbots, Deanes, Prouoſts, appropriation of benefices, preſentations to Parſonages, Vicarages, and generallie of all Spirituall perſons to their preferments

ſometimes by lapſe, and ſometimes by prouiſion or otherwiſe, whereby the Kinges Princelie Prerogatiue was verie much abridged within their own Realmes. For the repreſſion wherof diuers ſtatutes were made, but no ſufficiēt remedy vntil King Henrie the 8. did caſt off their yoke for him & his ſubiects.
               
               
                  Per que ſeruitia.
                  LOoke therefore afterwarde in the title, Quid iuris clamat.
                  
               
               
                  Parceners.
                  
                     PArceners, are according to the courſe of the common lawe, and according to the cuſtome. Parceners according to the common lawe are where an inheritor hath no iſſue but daughters, and dyeth, and the tenements diſcende to the daughters, thē they be called Parceners, and are but as one heir, The ſame law is, if he haue not any iſſue, and that his ſiſters ſhould be his heirs. But if a man hath but one daughter, ſhe is not called parcener, but ſhee is called the daughter and heir. And if there be no

daughters nor ſiſters, the lande ſhall diſcend to the aunts, and they bee called parceners. Alſo whē lands diſcend to diuers parceners, they may make partition between themſelues by agréement, but if any of them will not make partition, then the other or the others ſhal haue a writ de Participatione facienda direct to the ſhirife, who ſhall make partition betweene them by the oth of xii. lawfull men of the bailiwike. Alſo partitiō by agréement may be made by the law, aſwel by word without deed, as by déed. And if they bee of ful age the partition ſhal remaine for euer, and ſhall not at any time be defeated. But if the lands be to them in the tail, and though that they are concluded during their liues, yet the iſſue of him which hath the leſſer part in value, may diſagrée from the partition, and enter and occupie in common with the other parte. And alſo if the huſbandes of the parceners make partition, when the huſbande dyeth, the wife may diſagrée

from the partition. Alſo if the parcener which is within age make partitiō, when ſhee commeth to full age ſhe may diſagree. But ſhee muſt take good heede when ſhe cometh to her ſui age that ſhe take not al the profits to her own vſe of ye landes which were to her allotted, for then ſhe agréeeth to the partition, & ye age ſhall alway extend to the age of xxi. yeares.
                  Alſo if there bee diuers Parceners that haue made partition betwéene them, & one of their partes be recouered by lawfull title, then ſhee ſhal compell the other to make a newe partition.
                  Alſo they are parceners accordinge to cuſtome, where a man is ſciſes of landes in Gauelkinde, as in Kent & in other places franchiſed, and hath iſſue diuers ſonnes & die, then the ſonnes are parceners by cuſtome.
               
               
                  Partition.
                  
                     PArtition, is a deuiding of lands diſcended by y• common Lawe, or by cuſtome

among coheires or parceners where there be ii. at the leaſt, whether they be ſonnes, daughters, ſiſters, auntes, or otherwiſe of kinne to the aunceſtor from whome the lande diſcended to them.
                  And this partition is made foure wayes for the moſt parte, whereof three are at pleaſure and by agreemēt among them, the fourth is by compulſion.
                  One partition by agréement is when they themſelues deuide the lande equally into ſo many parts, as there bee of them coparceners, and eache to chooſe one ſhare or parte, the eldeſt firſt, and ſo the one after another, as they be of age, except that the eldeſt by conſent made the partition, then the choyſe belongeth to the next, and ſo to the eldeſt laſt, according as it is ſaide: who ſo maketh the partition, the other muſt haue the choyſe.
                  Another partition by agréement is when they chooſe certaine of their

friends to make diuiſion for them.
                  The thirde partition by agréement is by drawing of lottes thus: Firſt, to deuide the land into ſo many partes as there be parceners, then to writ euery part ſeuerally in a little ſcroll or peece of paper or parchment, and to put the ſame ſcrols vp cloſe into a hat, cap, or other ſuch like thing, and then each parcener, one after another as they be of age, to draw out thereof one péece or ſcroll wherein is written a part of the land which by this drawing is now ſeuerally allotted vnto them in fee ſimple.
                  The fourth partition which is by compulſion, is when one or ſome of the coparceners woulde haue partition, and other ſome wil not agrée thereto, then they that ſo woulde haue partition may bring a writ De partitione facienda againſt the others that woulde not make partition, by vertue wherof they ſhall bee compelled to depart &c.
                  
                     In Kent where the lands are of Gauelkinde nature, we call at this day our partition Shifting, euen the verie ſame worde that the Saxons vſed, namely Shiftan, which ſignifieth to make partition betweene coheires, and to aſſigne to each of them their portion, In Latine it is called Herciſcere.
                  
                  Partition alſo may be made by Ioyntenants or tenants in comon by their aſſent, by deede betweene them, or by writ by the ſtatutes of 31. H. 8. cap. 1. and 32. H. 8. cap. 32.
               
               
                  331 Parties.
                  
                     PArties to a fine or deede are thoſe which are named in deedes or fines as parties to it, as thoſe that leuie the ſame fine, & alſo they to whome the fine is leuyed. And they that make a déede of feoffement and they to whome it is made are called parties to the déede, and ſo in any other like caſes.
                  Note that i
                        •
                      an Indenture be made betwéene ii.

as parties thereto in the beginning, & in the déede one of them graunteth or letteth a thing to another, and one that is not named in the beginning, he is not partie to the déede, nor ſhall get nothing thereby.
               
               
                  Patron.
                  
                     PAtron is hee that hath the aduowſon of a parſonage, vicarage, frée chappel, or ſuch like ſpirituall promotiō belonging to his mannor, or otherwiſe in groſſe, and thereby may or ought to giue the ſame benefice, or preſent thereto, when and as often as it falleth voide. And this being patron or patronage had beginning for the moſt part by one of theſe three wayes, namely either by reaſon of the foundation, for that the Patron or his aunceſtors, or thoſe from whome hee claimes were founders or buylders of the Church, or by reaſon of dotation, for that they did endow or giue landes to the ſame for maintenance thereof,

or els by reaſon of y• groūd, becauſe y• Church was ſet or builded vpō their ſoile or ground: And many times by reaſon of them all three.
               
               
                  333 Perquiſites.
                  
                     PErquiſites are aduantages and profites that come to a mannor by caſualtie, and not yeerely, as Eſcheates, Hariots, Reliefes, waifes, ſtraies, Forfaitures, Amerciaments in courtes, wards, Mariages, goodes and landes purchaſed by villeynes of the ſame mannor, fines of copyholdes, & diuers ſuch like thinges that are not certaine but happen by chance, ſometimes more often then at other times. Sée Perkins fol. 20. and. 21.
               
               
                  334 Perambulatione facienda.
                  
                     PErambulatione facienda is a writte, and it lieth where two Lordſhips lie one nigh another, and ſome encrochment is made by long time, then by aſſent of both Lordes the Shirife ſhall take with him the parties and the neighbours, and ſhall make

perambulation & ſhal make the boundes as they were before, but if a lord incroch vpon another, & he will not make perambulation, then the Lord ſo grieued ſhall haue a writ againſt the other, which is called de rationabilibus diuiſis.
                  
               
               
                  Petit Cape.
                  
                     PEtit Cape is a writ, and it lieth when any action reall, that is to ſay of plée of land is brought, and the tenant appeareth, and afterward maketh default, then this writ of Petite cape ſhall go foorth to ſeiſe the landes into the Kings handes, but if hée appeare not, but maketh default at the firſt ſummons, then a graund cape ſhal go forth and for ſuch default the tenant ſhall loſe the land, but if he wage his law of non ſummons, he ſhall ſaue his default, and then hée may plede with the demādant. And in greūd cape the tenant ſhalbe ſummoned to anſwere to the default, and farder to the demaundant, but in petit cape he ſhalbe ſummoned to anſwere to the default onely, & not to

the demaundant, and it is called Petit cape, for that that there is leſſe in this writ.
               
               
                  336 Petit ſerieantie.
                  TO hold by petite ſerieantie is as if a man hold of the king landes or tenementes, yéelding to him a knife, a buckler, an arrow, a bowe without ſtring, or other like ſeruice at the wil of the firſt feoffor, and there belongeth not warde, marriage ne reliefe. And marke well that a mā may not holde by graunde nor petite ſerieantie, but of the King.
               
               
                  337 Plaintife.
                  
                     PLaintife is he that ſueth or complaineth in an aſſiſe or in an action perſonall, as in an action of debt, treſpaſſe, diſceit, detinue, and ſuch other.
               
               
                  338 Pleading.
                  
                     PLeadings, bée called all the ſayings of the parties to ſuits after the coūt or declaration, namely that which is contayned in the barre, replication, and reioinder, and not that contayned in the count it ſelfe, & therefore defaultes

in the matter of the count are not compriſed within miſpleading, or inſufficient pleading, nor are remedied by the ſtatute of Ieofailes, 32. H. 8. But onely that miſpleading, or inſufficient pleading, committed in the barre, replicatiō, & reioinder, are there prouided for.
               
               
                  Poſt diſſeiſin.
                  
                     POſt diſſeiſin, Looke for that before in the title Aſſiſe.
               
               
                  Poſſeſsion.
                  
                     POſseſsion, is ſaide two wayes, eyther actuall poſſeſſion, or poſſeſſion in lawe.
                  Actuall poſſeſſion, is when a man entreth in déede into landes or tenementes to him diſcended, or otherwiſe. Poſſeſſion in lawe is when landes or tenementes are diſcended to a man, and hée hath not as yet really, actually, and in déede entred into them. And it is called poſſeſſion in lawe, becauſe that in the e
                        •
                     e, and conſideration of the lawe, hée is déemed to be in poſſeſſion, for aſmuch as he is tenant

to euerie mans action that wil ſue cencerning the ſame landes, or tenementes.
               
               
                  341 Poundes.
                  
                     POundes are in ij. ſortes, the one pounds open, the other pounds cloſe.
                  Pounde open, is euerie place wherein a diſtreſſe is put, whether it be common pounde ſuch as are in euerie Towne or Lordſhip, or whether it bee backeſide, court, yard, paſture, or elſe whatſoeuer, whether the owner of the diſtreſſe may come to giue them meate & drinke without offence for their being there, or his comming thither.
                  Pound cloſe, is ſuch a place, where the owner of the diſtreſſe may not come to giue them meate and drinke, without offence, as in a cloſe houſe, or whatſoeuer els place.
               
               
                  342 Preamble.
                  
                     PReamble taketh his name of the prepoſition (Pre) before, and the verbe (Ambulo) to goe, ſo ioyned together, they make a compound verbe of the firſt coniugation (Preambulo)

to goe before, & hereof the firſt parte or beginning of an act, is called the preamble of the acte, which preamble is a key to open the mindes of the makers of the acte, and the miſchiefes that they intend to remedie by the ſame, as for example the ſtatute made at weſtminſter the firſt, the 37. chap. which giueth an attaint, the preamble of which is thus. Foraſmuch as certaine people of the realme, doubt very little to giue falſe verdicts or othes, which they ought not to doe, whereby many people are diſherited and loſe their right, it is prouided &c.
               
               
                  Premunire.
                  
                     PRemunire, is a writ and it lieth where any man ſueth any other in the ſpirituall court, for any thing that is determinable in the Kings court, and that is ordeined by certaine ſtatutes, and great puniſhment therefore ordeined, as it appeareth by the ſame ſtatutes, viz. that he ſhalbe out of the Kings protection, & that he be put in priſon

without baile or mainpriſe till that he haue made fine at the Kings will, and that his landes and goods ſhalbe forfait if he come not within ij. monethes. Alſo y• prouiſors, procurators, atturneis, executors, notaries & mainteinors, ſhall be puniſhed in the ſame maner, therefore looke the ſtatutes. Alſo ſome men ſay, that if a clarke ſue an other man in the court of Rome for a thing ſpirituall where hee may haue remedie within the realme in the court of his Ordinarie that hee ſhalbe within the caſe of the ſtatute.
                  And vpon diuers other offences is impoſed by Statutes lately made the penaltie that they incurre which are attainted in premunire. As by 13. Elizab. cap. 8. they which are, ayding to make a corrupte bargaine whereupon vſu
                     
                        •
                     y is reſerued aboue the x. pounds in the hundred in the yéere &c.
               
               
                  344 Precipe in capite.
                  
                     PRecipe in capite is a writ & it lieth where the tenant holdeth of his Lord

in chiefe as of his crowne, and hée is deforſed, that is to ſay▪ put out of his lande, thē he ſhal haue this writ, and this writ ſhalbe cloſe and ſhalbe pleded in the cō
                     mon place. Alſo if any tenant which holdeth of any Lord be deforſed it behoueth him to ſue a writ of right patent which ſhalbe determined in the Lords court, but if the lād be holden of the king, the writ of right patēt ſhalbe brought to the kings Coure and this writ may bée remoued from the Lords court vnto the countie by a 
                        •
                     oit, and from the countie into the comon place by a pone, Looke therefore before in the title Droit.
               
               
                  Preſcription.
                  
                     PReſcription. is when a man claimeth any thing for that hée, his anceſtors, or predeceſſours, or they whoſe eſtate he hath, haue had or vſed any thing all the time whereof no minde is to the contrary.
                  But one may not preſcribe againſt a ſtatute except he haue an other ſtatute

that ſerueth for him.
               
               
                  346 Preſentment.
                  
                     PReſentment, is of two ſignificatiōs: one is preſentmēt to a church, which when any man which hath right to giue any benefice ſpirituall, and nameth the perſon to the Biſhop to whom he will giue it, and maketh a writing to the Biſhop for him, that is a preſentatiō or preſentmēt, But if diuers coheires may not accord in preſentment, the preſentment of the eldeſt ſhalbe admitted, but of iointenants and tenants in common, if they 
                        •••
                     orde not within ſix moneths the Biſhop ſhal preſent by laps.
                  The other is a preſentment or Information by anie Iurie in a Court, before 
                        〈…〉
                      Officer which hath authoritie to puniſhe anie offence done contrarie to the law.
               
               
                  347 Pretenſed tight or Title.
                  
                     PRetenſed tight or Title, is where one is in poſſeſſion of lands or tenemēts, and 
                        •
                     n other who is out of poſſeſſion, claimeth 
                        •
                     t,

or ſueth for it. Now the pretenſed right or title is ſaid in him, who ſo doth ſue or clayme. And if he afterward come to the poſſeſſion of the ſame landes, or tenements, his right or title is annexed to the lande and poſſeſſion, and no
                        •
                      then called right.
               
               
                  Priuie or Priuities.
                  
                     PRiuie or Priuities, is where a leaſe, is made to holde at will▪ for yeeres, for life, or a feoffement in fée, and in diuers other caſes, now becauſe of this that hath paſſed betwéene theſe parties, they are called priuies in reſpect of ſtrangers betwéene whom no ſuch dealinges, or conueyances hath bin.
                  Alſo if there be Lorde and tenant, and the tenant holdeth of the Lorde by certeine ſeruice, there is a priuity betwéene them becauſe of the tenure, and if the tenaunt bée diſſeiſed by a Straunger, there is no priuitie betwéene the diſſeyſor and the Lorde, but the priuitie ſtil remayneth betweene the Lorde and the tenaunt that is

diſſeiſed, and the Lorde ſhall auowe vppon him, for that hee is his tenaunt in right & in the Iudgement of the lawe. Priuies are in diuers ſortes, as namely priuie in eſtate, priuies in déede, priuies in lawe, priuies in right, and priuies in blood.
                  Priuies in eſtate is where a leaſe is made of the manor of Dale to A. for lyfe, the remainder to B. in fée, there both A. and B. are priuies in eſtate, for their eſtates were bothe made at one time.
                  And ſo it is in the firſt caſe héere, where a leaſe is made at will, for lyfe or yeares, or a feoffement in fée, the leſſées or feffées are called priuies in eſtate, and ſo are their heires &c.
                  Priuies in dée
                        •
                     e is where a leaſe is made for lyfe, and afterwarde by an other déede the reuerſion is graunted to a Straunger in fée, this grauntée of the reuerſion is called priuie in déed, becauſe that hée hath the reuerſion by déede.
                  
                     Priuie in lawe is where there is Lorde and tenant, the tenaunt leſſeth the tenauncie for life and dyeth without heire, and the reuerſiō eſ
                        •
                     heats to the lord, hee is ſaid priuie in lawe, becauſe that he hath his eſtate onely by the l
                        •
                     w, that is to ſay, by eſcheate.
                  Priuie in right is where one poſſeſſed of a terme for yeeres, graunts his eſtate to another vpon condition, and maketh his executors and dyeth, nowe theſe executors are priuies in right, for if the condition be broken, and they enter into the lande, they ſhall haue it in the right of their teſtator, and to his vſe.
                  Pri
                        •
                     ie of blood is the heire of the feoffour or donour &c.
                  Alſo if a fine bee leuied, the heires of him that leuyeth the fine are called priuies.
               
               
                  Priuiledges.
                  
                     PRiuiledges, are liberties and franchiſes graunted to an Office, place, towne, or Mannor, by the Quéens great charter, letters

Patentes, or acte of Parliamente, as Tolle, Sake, Socke, Infangtheefe▪ 
                     
                        •
                      Outfangthiefe, Turne tolle, Oredelfe, and diuers ſuch like, for which looke in their proper titles and places.
               
               
                  350 Proces.
                  
                     PRoces, are the writs and precepts that goe vpon the original: and in actions reals and perſonels there bee ſundrie ſortes of proces, for in actions reals the proces is Graund Cape, before apperance: therefore ſee of that in the title Petite Cape.
                  
                  But in actions perſonals, as in debt, treſpaſſe, or detinue, the proces is a diſtreſſe, and if the Shirife returne Nihil habet in ballina &c. then the proces is alias Capias, and Piuries, and an Exigent, & they are called Capias ad reſpondē
                        dum. Alſo the Exigent ſhalbe proclaimed 5. times, and if the partie doth not appear he ſhalbe outlawed: But in diuers actiōs there are diuers manner of proces, which at large is declared in Natura brenium.
                  
                  
                     Alſo there are diuers other proces after apparance when the parties be at iſſue to make the enqueſt appeare, as a writ o
                        •
                      
                     Venire facias. and if they do not appeare at the daye, then a writ of Habeas corpora 
                           
                              •
                           urat,
                      & after a writ of Diſtringas Iurat.
                     
                  
                  Alſo there are diuers other proces after iudgement, as Capias ad ſatisfaciendum, Capias vtlagatū, and Capias ad valentiam &c.
                  But Capias ad ſatisfaciendum lieth where a man is condemned in any debt or dammage, then he ſhall be arreſted by this writte and put in priſon without baile or mainepriſe, till hee hath pa
                        •
                     ed the debt and the damages.
                  But Capias vtlagatum, lieth where one is outlawed, then he ſhall bee taken by this writie, and put in priſon without baile or mainpriſe, for that he had the law in contempt.
                  
                     Capias ad valentiam lyeth where I am impleaded of certain lands, & I vouch to warrantie another, and

cannot barre the demaundant, ſo that the demaundant recouer againſt me, then I ſhall recouer ſo much in value againſt the vouchee, and then ſhall goe forth this writte.
                  Alſo there beeother proceſſe and writs iudicials, as Fieri facias, Scire facias, and manie other: and therefore looke for them in their titles.
               
               
                  351 Next friend.
                  
                     NExt friend, is commonly taken for Gardian in ſocage, and is where a man ſeiſed of landes holden in ſocage dieth, his iſſue within age of xiiii. yeeres, then the next friend, or nexte of kinne to whom the landes cannot come or diſcend ſhal haue the keeping of the heire, and of the lande, to the onely vſe of the heire, vntill hee come to the age of xiiii. yeeres: And then at that yeeres 
                        •
                     e may enter and put been out, and bringe him to accompte: But in that accompte bee ſhalbe allowed for all reaſonable coſtes and expences beſtowed either vpon the heire or his land.
                  
                     And the next friende or nexte of kinne to whome the inheritance cannot diſcende, is thus to bee vnderſtoode: If the Landes diſcende to the heire from his Father, or anie of the kinne of his Fathers ſide, then the Mother or other of the Mothers ſide are called the next of kinne to whome the enheritaunce cannot diſcende, for before that it ſhall ſo diſcend, it ſhall rather Eſcheate to the Lorde of whome it is holden.
                  And ſo it is to bee vnderſtoode where the landes come to the heire from his Mother, or anie of the kinne of his Mothers ſide, then the Father or other of the Fathers ſide are called the nexte of kinne to whom the inheritance can not diſcende, but ſhall rather eſcheate to the Lorde of whome it is holden.
                  Otherwiſe, Procheine amy is he which appeareth in anie Courte for an enfante which ſu
                        •
                     th ani
                        •
                      action, and aideth the enfant 
                        •
                     o purſue his ſuite▪ where▪ of, ſee the Statutes of

w. 1. cap. 47. and w. 2. cap. 15. that an enfant▪ may not make an Atturney, but the Court may admit the next friend for the plaintif, and a gardian for the enfant defendant as his Atturney.
               
               
                  352 Procedendo.
                  
                     PRocedendo, is a writ, & it lyeth where any action is ſued in one Court which is remooued to a Court more high, as to the Chauncerye, the kings bench, or Common place by a writ of Priuiledge or Cerciorare, and if the defendant vpon the matter ſhewed, haue no cauſe of priuilege, or if the matter in the bill whereupon the cerciorare iſſued be not wel proued, then the plaintife ſhal haue this writ of procedendo, for 
                        •
                     o ſend again the matter vnto the firſt baſſe Court, and there to be determined.
               
               
                  353 Prohibition.
                  
                     PRohibition, is a writ & it lieth where a mā is impleded in y• ſpir
                        •
                     tual court of y• thing y• toucheth not

matrimonie nor teſtamēt, nor méerely tuhes, but that toucheth the kinges crowne, and this writ ſhal be directed as well to the partie as to the Iudge or his officiall, to prohibite them that they purſue no further. But if it appeare afterwarde to the Iudges temporall, that the matter is to bee determined in the ſpirituall Court, and not in the Court temporall, then the partie ſhall haue a writ of Conſultation, commanding the Iudges of the Court ſpirituall to procéede in the firſt plee.
               
               
                  Protection.
                  
                     PRotection is a writ and it lyeth where that a mā will paſſe ouer the Sea in the kings ſeruice, then hee ſhal haue this writ, and by this writ hee ſhall be quit of all manner of plees betwéen him & any other perſon, except plées of dower, Quare impedit, aſſiſe of nouel diſſeiſin, darreine proſentment, and attaintes, and plees before Iuſtice in eire. But there be two

writs of protection, one Cum clauſula volumus, & another Cum clauſula nolumus, as appeareth▪ in the Regiſter. Alſo a protection ſhall not bee allowed in any plée begun before the date of the protection if it be not in vyages where the King himſelfe ſhall paſſe, or other vyages royals, or in meſſages of the king for neede of the Realme. Alſo a protection ſhall not bee allowed for victuall bought for the vyage whereof the protection maketh mention, nor in plees of treſpaſſe or of contractes made after the date of the protection. But note that any may attach or begin any action reall againſt him that hath ſuch protection, and therein pro
                        •
                     éede vntill the defendant cometh & ſheweth his protection in the Court, & hath it allowed, and then his plée or ſuite ſhall goe without day. But if after it appeareth that the party which hath the protection goeth not a
                     
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     d y• affaires for which he hath it, then the demaū
                     dant

ſhall haue a repeale thereof. And if he go & returne after the buſines ended, the demaundant ſhall haue a reſummons to recontinue the former ſuit.
               
               
                  Proteſtation.
                  
                     PRoteſtation, is a forme of pleading when any will not directly affirme, nor directly deny any thing that is alledged by another, or which hee himſelfe alledneth. And it is in two ſortes: One is, when one pleadeth any thing which he dar̄e not directly affirm, or that hee cannot pleade it for doubt to make his plee double. As in conueying to himſelfe a title to any lande, hee ought to plead diuers diſcents by diuers perſons, and hee dare not affirme that all they were ſeiſed at the time of their death, or although hee could doe if it ſhall bee double to plead two diſcentes of both which, euery one by himſelfe may be a good bar
                        •
                     e. Then the defendant ought to plead and alledge the matter interlaſing

this worde Proteſtando: As to ſay, that ſuch a one dyed (by proteſtation) ſeiſed &c. and that is to be alledged by proteſtation, and not to bee trauerſed by the other. An other proteſtation is, when one is to aunſwere to two matters, & yet by the lawe hee ought to pleade but toone, then in the firſt part of the plee hee ſhall ſaye to the one matter Proteſtando, & not cognoſcendo, this matter to bee true, and make his plée further by theſe wordes, ſed pro placito dicit &c. and this is for ſauing to the partie, (that ſo pleadeth by proteſtation) to bee concluded by any matter alleaged or obieted againſt him, vpō which hee cannot ioyne iſſue: And is no other thing but an excluſion of the concluſion, for hee; that taketh the proteſtation excludes the other partie to conclude him. And this proteſtation ought to ſtande with the ſequell of the plee, and not to bee repugnant, or otherwiſe contrarie.
               
               
                  
                  Purchaſe.
                  
                     PVrchaſe is the poſſeſſion that a man hath in lands or tenements by his owne act, meanes or agreement, and not by title of diſcent, from any of his aunceſtours. See Littleton, lib. 1. cap. 1.
               
            
            
               Q.
               
                  Quale ius.
                  
                     QVale ius, is a writ and it lyeth where an Abbot, prior, or ſuch other ſhould haue iudgement to recouer l
                        •
                     nde; by the default of the tenant againſt whom the l
                        •
                     nde is demanded, then before iudgement giuen or execution awarded, this writ ſhal go forth to the eſchetor to enquire what right hée hath to recouer, and if it be 
                        •
                     ounde that he hath no right, then the Lorde which ſhoulde haue the land if the tenant had aliened in mortmaine may enter as into land aliened into mortmaine, for this looſing by default is like alienation. See the ſtatute w. 2. ca, 32.
                  
                     But a writ of Ad quod dampnum lyeth where one wil giue lāds to an houſe of religion, then this writ ſhall goe foorth to the Eſchetor, to enquire of what value the land is, & what preiudice it ſhall bée to the King.
               
               
                  358 Quare eiecit infra terminum.
                  
                     QVare eiecit infra terminum is a writ, and it lyeth where one maketh a leaſe to another for terme of yeres, and the leſſor enfeoffeth another, and the feffee putteth out the termour, then the termour ſhall haue this writ againſt the feoffee, but if another ſtranger put out the termour, then he ſhall haue a writ de Eiectione firmae againſt him, and in thoſe two writs he ſhal recouer the terme and his dammages.
               
               
                  359 Quare impedit.
                  
                     QVare impedit is a writ & it lieth where I haue aduowſon & y• parſon dieth and another preſenteth his clerke, or diſturbeth mee

to preſēt, then I ſhal haue the ſaid writ. But Aſſiſe of darrain preſentment lyeth, where I or my aunceſtors haue preſēted before. And where a man may haue Aſſiſe of darrain preſentment, he may haue a Quare impedit, but not contrariwiſe.
                  Alſo if the plée be depē
                     ding betweene two parties, and be not diſcuſſed within v
                        ••
                     moneths, then the Biſhop may preſent by laps, & he y• hath right to preſent, ſhal recouer his damages, as it appeareth by the ſtatute of weſt. 2. c. 5. therefore ſee the ſtatute. Alſo if hee that hath right to preſent after the death of the perſon, & bringeth no Quare impedit nor Darreine preſentment, but ſuffereth a ſtranger to vſurpe vpon him, yet he ſhal haue a writ of right of aduowſon, but this writ lyeth not, vnleſſe he claun to haue the aduowſon to him & his heires in fee ſimple.
               
               
                  Quare incumbrauit.
                  
                     QVare incumbrauit, is a writ, 
                        •
                      it lyeth where

two bee in plee for the aduowſon, and the Biſhop ad
                        ••
                     tt
                        •
                     th the clerke of one of them within the vi. monethes, then he ſhall haue this writ againſt the Biſhop, but this writ lyeth alway hanging the plee.
               
               
                  361 Quare intruſit matrimonio non ſatisfacto.
                  
                     QVare intruſit matrimonio non ſatisfacto, is a writ, & it lyeth where the Lord profereth couenable mariage to his ward, & he refu
                        •
                     eth and entreth into the land, & marryeth himſelfe to another, then the Lorde ſhall haue this writ againſt him.
               
               
                  362 Quare non admiſit.
                  
                     QVare non admiſit, in a writ, and it lieth where a man hath recouered on aduowſon, and he ſendeth his conuenable clerke to y• Biſhop to be admitted, & the Biſhop will not receiue him, the he ſhall haue the ſaide writ againſt the Biſhop. But a writ de Ne admittas lyeth, where ii 
                        •
                     e in plee, if the pl
                        •
                     intife ſuppoſe that the Biſhop

will admitt the clerke of the defendant, then hee may haue this writ to the Biſhop, comaunding him not to admit him hanging the plee.
               
               
                  Quarentine.
                  
                     QVarentine, is where a man dyeth ſeiſed of a maner place & other lands, whereof the wi
                        •
                     e ought to be endowed, then the woman may abide in the maner place, & there liue of the ſtore & profits thereof, the ſpace of x
                        •
                     . dayes within which time her dower ſhal be aſſigned, as it appeareth in Magna Charta; cap. 
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  Quid iuris clamat.
                  
                     QVid iuris clamat, is a writ, and lyeth where I graunt the reuerſion of my tenant for terme of life by fine in the kings-co
                        •••
                     , & the tenāt wil not 
                        •••
                     orn, then the gran
                        •
                     ee ſhall h
                        •••
                      this writ for to compell him to atturne▪ But 
                        •
                      writ of Que
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      r
                        •
                     ddit 
                        •••
                      reddit 
                        ••
                     th wher I grant by fine a rent charge, or another rent which is not 
                        ••
                     t ſeruice which my tenaunt

holdeth of mee, and the tenant will not atturne, then the grauntee ſhall haue this writ. And a writ of Per que ſeruit
                           •
                        a lyeth in like caſe for rent ſeruice.
                  Alſo if I graunt foure diuers rents to one man, & the tenant of the land atturneth to the grauntée by payment of a penye, or of an halfe penie in the name of attornement of all the rents, this attornmēt ſhall 
                        ••
                     t him in ſeiſin of all the rent. But theſe iii. writs 
                        ••
                     ght to be broght againſt thoſe which are tenants at the day of y• note leuied, & againſt none others.
               
               
                  365 Fifteene.
                  
                     FIfteene, is a payment graunted in Parlyament to the Queene by the temporaltie, namely, the fifteenth part of their goods: And it was vſed in auncient time to bee leuyed vpon their cattell going in their groundes, which thing was verie troubleſome▪ and therefore nowe for the moſt parte, that way is altered

and they vſ
                        •
                      to leuye the ſame by the yarde▪ or Ic
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     or other meaſure of land. By meanes whereof it is nowe leſſe troubleſome, & more certeine the
                        •
                      before it was. And euerie Towne and Countrey doe knowe what ſumme is to bee paied among them, and how the ſame ſhalbe rayſ
                        •
                     d. wée read that Moiſes was the firſt that did nuber the people, for 
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •••
                     
                     bred the Iſraelites, and therefore the firſt Taxe, ſubſidie, tribute, or fiftéene was inuēted by him amōg the Hebrews, as P
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     dore Virgill doth thinke.
               
               
                  Quod ei deforciat,
                  
                     QVod ei deforciat, is a writ, & it lieth where the tenaunt in the Ta
                        •••
                     , tenaunt in Dower, or tenant for terme of l
                        ••
                      lée
                     
                        •
                     eth b
                        •
                      defaut in anie action, then 
                        ••
                      that l
                        ••
                     ſeth ſhall haue this writie agaynſt him that recouereth, or againſt his heire, if he think that hee hath better right then hee which recouered. Sée the Statute weſt. 2. cap. 4.
               
               
                  
                  367 Quod permittat.
                  
                     QVod 
                           ••••
                        tat is a writ and it lyeth where a man is diſſeyſed of 
                        •
                     is cō
                     mon of paſ
                        •
                     ure, and the diſſ
                        ••
                     ſor 
                        •
                     lien
                        •
                     th or dieth ſ
                        •
                     yſ
                        •
                     d, and his h
                        •••
                     e entreth, then if the diſſeiſée m
                        •
                      his heire ſhal haue this writ.
               
               
                  368 Quo iure.
                  
                     QVo iure is a writ, and it 
                        ••
                     eth where a man hath had common of paſture in an other ſeuerall of 
                        〈◊〉
                      within the time of memorie, then hée to whom belongeth the ſeuerall ſhall ha
                        •
                     e this writ, and he ſhalbee c
                        •••
                     ged to ſhewe by what title hee claimeth the common.
               
               
                  369 Quo minus.
                  
                     QVo minus is a writ, and it 
                        ••
                     eth where a man hath graunted to another houſ
                        ••
                     ote & hey 
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     e in his wood to take 
                        •
                     uerie yéere, & he that made the graunt maketh ſuch w
                        •
                     ſt a
                        •
                     d diſtruction that the grauntée cānot haue his reaſonable eſtouers, then the grauntée ſhal 
                        ••
                     ue the foreſaid writ, and it is in manner of a writ of waſt.
                  
                     And note that houſebote is called certaine eſtouers to mend the houſe.
                  And heybote is certaine eſtouers to mend heis and hedges.
               
               
                  Quo warranto.
                  
                     QVo warranto is a writ, and it lyeth where a man vſurpeth to haue anie fraunchiſe vppon the King, then the King ſhall haue this writte, to make him to come before his Iuſtices, for to ſhew by what title he claymeth ſuch franchiſe.
               
            
            
               R.
               
                  Rationabilibus diuiſis.
                  
                     RAtionabilibus diuiſis is a writ, & it lieth where there are two Lordſhips in diuers Townes, and one nigh the other, and anie parcel of one Lordſhip, or of waſt hath béene incrocht by litle parcels, then the ſame Lord from whom the parcell of ground or of waſt hath bene encroched, ſhall haue this writte againſt the Lord that hath ſo encroched.
               
               
                  
                  372 Rediſseiſin.
                  
                     REdiſseiſin, Looke of that before in the title Aſſiſe.
               
               
                  373 Regrator.
                  
                     REgrator is hée that hath corne, vittayles, or other thinges ſufficient for his owne neceſſarie néede, occupation, or ſpending, and dothe neuertheleſſe ingroſſo and buy vp into his handes more Corne, vittayles, or other ſuch thinges, to the intent to ſell the ſame againe at a higher and déerer price, in Faires, Markets, or ſuch like places. Whereof ſée the ſtatute 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14. for hée ſhalbe puniſhed as a forſtaller.
               
               
                  374 Reioinder.
                  
                     REioinder, is when the defendant maketh aunſwere to the replication of the plaintife.
                  And euerie Reioinder ought to haue theſe two properties ſpecially, that is to ſay, it ought to be a ſufficient aunſwere to the replication, and alſo to follow and enforce the matter of the barre.
               
               
                  
                  Releaſe.
                  
                     REleaſe is the giuing or diſcharging of the right or action which any hath or claimeth againſt an other or his land.
                  And the releaſe of right is commonly made when one maketh a déede to an other by theſe or like words, Remiſed, releaſed and vtterly for me and my heires quite claimed to A. B. all my right that I haue, or by any meanes may haue hereafter in one meſuage &c, but theſe words (whatſoeuer I may haue hereafter) bée void: For if the father be diſſeiſed, and the ſonne releaſe by his déede of releaſe without warrantie all his right, by thoſe wordes, whatſoeuer I may haue hereafter &
                        •
                      and the father dyeth, the ſonne may lawfully enter in the poſſeſſion of the diſſeiſour.
                  Alſo in a releaſe of right it is néedefull that hee to whome the releaſe ſhall be made; haue a freehold or a poſſeſſion in the landes in déede or law, or a reuerſion a the time of that releaſe

made, for if hee haue nothing in the lande at the time of the releaſe made, y• releaſe ſhal not be to him auaileable. Sée more hereof in Litt. lib. 3. cap. 8.
               
               
                  376 Reliefe.
                  
                     REliefe, is ſometimes a certaine ſumme of money that the heire ſhal paye to the Lord of whom thoſe Landes are holden, which after the deceaſe of his anceſtour are to him diſcended as next heire, ſometimes it is the payment of another thing, and not money: And therefore reliefe is not certayne, and alike for all tenures, but euerie ſundrie tenure hath (for the moſte parte) his ſpecial Reliefe certaine in it ſelfe, Neither is it to bee paide alwayes at a certain age, but varieth therein alſo according to the tenure. As if the tenaunt had Landes holden by Knightes ſeruice (excepte graunde Serieantie) and die, his heire being at full age, & h
                        •
                     ld his lande by the ſeruice of a whole knights fee, the lord of whom theſe landes are ſo holden ſhall

haue of the heire C. s. in the name of the relief, and if he held by leſſe then a knights fee, hee ſhall pay leſſe, and if more, then more, hauing reſpecte alwaies to the r
                        •
                     te for euerie knightes fée 
                        •
                     n hundred ſhillings. And if hee helde by Graund Serieantie (which is alw
                        •
                     ies of the Quéene, and is alſo Knights ſeruice) then the reliefe ſhall be the value of the land by the yeer
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        ••
                     
                     ſides all charges 
                        〈…〉
                      out of the ſame.
                  Alſo if a man holde 
                        ••
                      the King in chief, and of other Lords the King ſhall haue the warde of all the landes, and the heire ſhall pay reliefe to all the Lords at his ful age, but the lords ſhal ſue to the King by petition and ſhal haue the rēt for the time that the inf
                        ••
                     t was in ward.
                  And note that alwayes when the reliefe is due, it muſt bee paid at one who
                        ••
                      payment and not by parts, althogh that the rent be to be paid at ſeueral feaſts.
               
               
                  Remainder.
                  
                     REmainder, of land is the lande that ſhall remain

after the particuler eſtate determined: As if one graunt lande for terme of yeres or for life, y• remainder to I. S. that is to ſay, that whē y• leaſe for yeres is determined, or leſſee for life is deade, that then the land ſhall remaine, ſhall be, or abide with, to, or in I. S. See Reuerſion.
               
               
                  378▪ Remitter.
                  
                     REmitter, is when a man 
                        ••
                      hath two titles to anie land, & he commeth to the lande by the laſt title, yet ſhe ſhall bee iudged in by 
                        •
                     orte of his elder title, and that ſhall bee ſaide to him a remitter, as it the tenaunt in the taile diſcontinue the tayle, and after diſſeiſeth his diſcontinue and dieth thereof ſeiſed, & the landes diſcendeth to his iſſue or coſin collateral by force of the taile, in that caſe hee is in his remitter, that is to ſay, ſeiſed by force of the taile, and the title of the diſcontinue is vtterly 
                        ••
                     nulled and defeated, and the reaſon and cauſe of ſuch remitter is, for that that ſuch an heire

is tenant of the land, & ther is no perſon tenant againſt whom he may ſue his writ of Formedon for to recouer the eſtate tayle, for hee may not haue an action againſt himſelfe. Alſo if tenant in the tail infeoffe his ſon or heire apparant in the taile which is within age & after dieth, that is a remitter to the heire. But if he were of full age at the 
                        〈…〉
                      of ſuch feoffement; it is 
                        ••
                      remitter, for that that i
                        •
                      was his foli
                        ••
                     , that hee being of 
                        〈…〉
                      age, would 
                        〈…〉
                      ſuch a feffement. Alſo i
                        •
                      the baron alien landes that hee hath in the right of his 
                        〈…〉
                     ; and after take an e
                        •
                     
                     ſtate againe to him and to his wife for terme of the
                        •
                      liues, that is a remitter to the 
                        〈…〉
                      for that that this alienation is the 
                        ••
                     te of the baron on 
                        〈…〉
                      of the 
                        〈…〉
                      for no follie 
                        〈…〉
                      adiudged in the woman during the 
                        〈…〉
                      of her 
                        〈…〉
                     , but if ſuch alienation bee by fine in court of Record, ſuch a taking againe afterward to the 
                        〈…〉
                      and wife for terme of their 
                        〈…〉
                     , ſhall not make the woman

to bee in her remitter; for that in ſuch a fine the womā ſhalbe examined by the Iudge, and ſuch examinations in fines, ſhal exclude ſuch women for euer. Alſo when the entre of any man is lawfull, and he taketh an eſtate to him when he is of full age, if it be not by 
                        •
                     éede indented, or matter of Recorde, which ſhall eſt oppe him, that ſhall bee to him a good remitter.
               
               
                  379 Rents.
                  
                     REnts, be in diuers manners, that is, rent ſeruice rente charge, and rent ſecke.
                  Rent ſeruice is, where the tenaunt in fee ſimple holdeth his land of his lord by fealty and certaine rent, or by other ſeruice and rit, and then if the rente of the tenant be behinde; the lorde may diſtraine for the rent, but for that hee ſhall not haue an action of debt.
                  Alſo if I giue lande in taile to a man paying to me certain rent, then ſuch rent is, rente ſeruice. But in ſuch caſe it behooueth that the reuerſion bee in the donour, for if a man make a

feoffement in fee, or a gi
                        •
                     t in taile, the remainder ouer in fée without déede, reſeruing to him a certain rent, ſuch reſeruation is voyde, and that is by the ſtatute Quia emptores terrarum, and then hée ſhall holde o
                        •
                      the Lord of whom his donour held.
                  But if a man by déed indent at ſuch a day make ſuch gifte in taile, the remainder ouer in fee, or leaſe for terme of life, the remainder ouer, or a feoffement, and by the ſame indēture reſerue to him rent, and that if the rent bee behinde that well it is lawfull to him to diſtrain, th
                        ••
                      ſuch rent is rent charge.
                  But in ſuch caſe, if there bee not anie ſuch clauſe of diſtreſſe in the déede, then ſuch rente is called rente ſecke, and for ſuch rente ſeck hee ſhal neuer diſtrain but if hee were once ſeiſed hee ſhall h
                        •
                     ue aſſiſe. And if hee were not ſeiſed, he is without remedie.
                  Alſo if one grant a rent going out of his lande with clauſe of diſtres, that is rent charge, and if the

rent be behinde, the grauntée may chooſe to diſtraine or ſue a writte of Annuitie, but hee cannot haue both, for if hee bring a writte of Annuity, then the lande is diſcharged. And if hee diſtraine and auowe the taking in the court of recorde then the land is charged, & the perſon of the grauntor diſcharged.
                  Alſo if one grant a rente charge, & the grauntée purchaſeth half of the land, thē all the rent is extinct.
                  But in rent ſeruice if the Lorde purchaſe parcell of the land, then the rent ſhall be apporcioned.
                  But if one hath a rente charge and his father purchaſe parcel of the land and that parcell diſcende to the ſonne which hath the rente charge, then the rente ſhall bee apporcioned according to the value of the lande as it is ſaid of rent ſeruice, for that that the ſon commeth to that not by his owne act, but by diſcent.
                  Alſo if I make a leaſe for terme of yeeres reſeruing to mee certaine rent, that is called a rent ſeruice,

and for that it is at my libertie to diſtraine for the rent, or to haue an action of debt, but if the leaſe be determined, and the rent bee behinde, then I cannot diſtrain, but ſhalbe put to my action of debt.
                  And note well, that if the Lorde bee ſeiſed of the ſeruice and rent before ſayde, and they bee behinde, and he diſtraine, and the tenant reſcueth the diſtreſſe hee may haue Aſſiſe, or a writ of Reſcous, but it is more neceſſarie for him to haue aſſiſe then a writte of reſcous, for that by aſſiſe he ſhall recouer his rent and his damages, but by a writ of reſcous hee ſhall not recouer but the thing and the damages.
                  And note wel, that if the Lorde bee not ſeiſed of the rent and ſeruice, and they be behind, 
                        •
                     nd he diſtraine for them, and the tenaunt take again the diſtreſſe, he ſhall not haue aſſiſe, but a writ of reſcous, & ſhall not néede to ſhew his right.
                  And note well, that if the Lorde may not finde a diſtreſſe by two yeere, hee

ſhal haue againſt the tenāt a writ of Ceſſauit per biennium, as it appeareth by the ſtatute of weſt. 2. cap. 21. And if the tenaunt die in the meane time and his iſſue enter, the Lorde ſhall haue againſt y• iſſue a writ of Entre vpon Ceſſauit, or if the tenant alien the lord ſhal haue againſt y• alienée the foreſaide writ. But if the lord haue iſſue and die, and the tenant bee in arrerages of the ſaide rent and ſeruice in the time of the father of the iſſue, and not in the time of the iſſue, hee may not diſtraine for the arrerages in ye time of his father, & he ſhall haue none other recouery againſt the tenāt or any other, for that that ſuch aduantage is giuen by the law to the tenāt. And note well that rente ſeruice is that to the which belongeth fealtie, but to rent charge and rent ſecke belongeth not ſealtie, but it belongeth to rent ſeruice of common right.
                  And note that if a man diſtraine for rent charge, & the diſtres be taeen againſt his will from him, and hee

was neuer ſeiſed before, he hath no recouery but by writ of Reſcous, for the diſtreſſe firſt takē giueth not to him ſeiſin, only if he hap the rent before, for if hee were ſeiſed of the rent before, and after the rent bee behind, and hee diſtraine, & reſcous to him be made, he ſhall haue Aſſiſe, or a writ of Reſcous.
                  And note well that in euery Aſſiſe of rent charge & annuall rent, or in a writ of Annuitie, it behoueth to him that bringeth the writ to ſhew forth an eſpecialtie, or eis he ſhall not maintain the Aſſiſe. But in an Aſſiſe of Mortdaunceſtor or Formedon in the diſcender, or other writs (in ye which title is giuen or compriſed) brought of rente charge, or annuall rente, it needeth not to ſhewe the eſpecialtie.
                  And note well that if a man grant a rent charge to another, and the grauntée releaſe to the grauntor parcel of the rēt, yet al the rent is not extinct.
                  And note well, that if rent charge be graunted to

two iointly, and the one releaſe yet the other ſhall haue the halfe of the rente. And alſo if the one purchaſe the halfe of the land whereof the rente is going out▪ the other ſhall haue the halfe of the rente of his companion: and if the diſſeiſor charge the lād to a ſtranger, and the diſſeiſie bring an aſſiſe and recouer, the charge is defeated. But it hee that hath right, charge the land, and a ſtraunger faine a falſe action againſt him, and recouer by defaulte, the charge abideth. And note well, that in caſe that partition bee betweene two parceners, and more lande be allotted to one then to the other, & ſhee that hath more of the lande▪ chargeth her land to the other, and ſhee happeth the rent, ſhee ſhall maintaine Aſſiſe without eſpecialtie.
                  And it is a rent ſecke, where a man heldeth of me by homage, fealty & other ſeruice, yelding to me acerteine rent by the yeere, & I grant this rent to another, reſeruing to me the ſeruice.
                  
                     And note well that if rent ſecke be graunted to a man and to his beires and the rent bee behinde, and the grauntour dye, the heire may not diſtreine nor ſhall recouer the arrerages of the time of his father, as it is before ſaide of rent ſeruice.
                  And in the ſame manner it is to ſaye of rent charge or annuall rent: But in all theſe rents before ſaide the heire may haue for the arrerages in his owne time ſuch aduantage as his father had in his life. See the Statute 32. H. 8. cap. 37.
                  And note well, that in rent ſeche, if a man be not ſeiſed of the rent, and it be behinde, hee is without recouerie, for that that it was his owne folly at the beginning when the rent was graunted to him or reſerued, that he tooke not ſeiſin of the rent, as a penie or two pence.
                  And note well that a man may not haue a Ceſſauit per biennium, or another writ of Entre ſur Ceſsauit for no rent ſecke

behind by two yeeres, but onely for rent ſeruice, as it appeareth in the Statute W. 2. cap. 21.
                  And note well that in rent ſecke it behoueth him that ſueth for the rent ſeck for to ſhewe a deede to the tenaunt, or els the tenant ſhall not bee charged with the rent, but where the rent ſecke was rent ſeruice before, as in this caſe: Lord, meſne and tenant, and euery of them holdeth of other by homage and fealtie, and the tenant of the meſne by x. s. of rent, the Lorde paramont purchaſeth ye landes or tenementes of the tenant, all the ſeigniorie of the meſne but the rent is extinct: And for this cauſe this rent is become rent ſecke, and the rent ſeruice changed, for hee may not diſtraine for this rent, and in this caſe hee that demaundeth the rent ſhall neuer be charged to ſhewe a deede.
                  Alſo in a writ of Mordaunceſtor, Aile, or Beſail, of rent ſecke, it needeth not to ſhewe a ſpecialtie,

for that theſe writtes of poſſeſſion doe comprehend a title within themſelues, that is to ſay, that the aunceſtour was ſeyſed of the ſome rent, and continued his poſſeſſion, becauſe of which ſeyſin the lawe ſuppoſeth that it is alſo auerable by the countrey.
                  Yet learne, for ſome ſuppoſe that it behooueth of neceſſitie to ſhewe foorth a déede, for that that rent ſeck is a thing againſt cō
                     mon right, aſwell as rent charge.
                  But in Aſſiſe of Nouel diſſeiſin, and in a writte of Entre ſur diſſeiſin brought of rent ſeck, it behoueth of neceſſitie to ſhewe foorth a déed, for that that rent ſeck is a thing againſt a commō right, except in the caſe before ſaid, where it was rent ſeruice before.
                  And Aſſiſe of Nouel diſſeiſin, and a writ of Entre ſur diſſeiſin, containe within them no title, but ſuppoſe a diſſeyſin to be done to the plaintife, and of the intendement of the lawe the diſſeyſin gyueth no

cauſe of auerment againſt common right, but of neceſſitie it behoueth to ſhew foorth a déede.
               
               
                  380 Repleuin.
                  
                     REpleuin is a writ, and it lyeth when any man diſtrayneth another for rent or other thing, then he ſhall haue this writ to the Shirife to deliuer to him the diſtres, and ſhall finde ſuretie to purſue his action, and if he purſue it not, or if it bee founde or iudged againſt him, then he that tooke the diſtreſſe ſhall haue againe the diſtreſſe, & that is called the returne of the beaſtes, & he ſhall haue in ſuch caſe a writ that is called Returno habendo.
                  
                  Alſo if it be in any franchiſe or bailiwike, the partie ſhall haue a Repleuin of the Shirife direct to the Baylife of the ſame franchiſe for to deliuer them again, & he ſhall finde ſuertie to purſue his actiō at the next countie. And this Repleuin may be remoued out of the coūty vnto the common place by a

writ of Recordare.
                  
                  Looke more of Repleuin in the title Diſtres.
                  Alſo a writ of Homine replegiando lyeth where a man is in priſon & not by ſpeciall cōmandement of y• king, nor of his iuſtice, nor for the death of a man nor for the kings foreſt nor for ſuch cauſe that is not repleuiſable, then hee ſh
                        •
                     ll haue this writ directed to the ſhirife y• hee cauſe him to be repleued: this writ is a Iuſticies & not returnable, & if the ſhirife do it not, then there ſhall goe foorth another writ, ſicut alias, & afterward another writ ſicut pluries vel cauſam nobis ſignifices, which ſhalbe returnable, & if y• ſhirife yet make no repleuin, then there ſhall go forth an attachement againſt y• ſhirife directed to the Coroners to attach the ſhirife & to bring him before y• Iuſtice at a certain day▪ & further more y• they make execution of the firſt writ.
               
               
                  Replication.
                  
                     REplication, is when the defendant in any action

maketh an aunſwere, and the plaintife maketh an aunſwere to that, that is called the Replication of the plaintife.
               
               
                  382 Repriſes.
                  
                     REpriſes, ar
                        •
                      deductions, payments, and duties that goe yeerely and are paide out o
                        •
                      a manor. As rent charge, rent ſecke, pē
                     tions, corodies, annuities, fées of ſtewards, baylife, & ſuch like.
               
               
                  383 Receite.
                  
                     REceite, is when any action is brought againſt the tenant for terme of life, or tenāt for terme of yeres, and hée in the reuerſion commeth in and praieth to be receiued for to defende the lande and for to plead with the demaundant. Alſo when he commeth it behooueth that he be alway ready to plead with the demaundant.
               
               
                  384 Reſcous.
                  
                     REſcous, is a writ and it lyeth when anit man taketh a diſtreſſe and another taketh it againe from him and will not ſuffer him to bring the diſtreſſe with him, then hee doth to

him reſcous and vpō that he may haue this writ and ſhall recouer dāmages. Alſo if one diſtraine beaſtes for dammage feſant in his ground, & driueth them in the hie way for to unpoūd them, and in going they enter into the houſe of him whoſe they be, & he withholdeth them there & will not ſuffer the other to impound thē then that withholding is a reſcous.
               
               
                  Reſeruation.
                  
                     REſeruation, is taken diuers waies, and hath diuerſe natures, as ſometimes by waie of exception to kéepe that which a man had before in him, as if a leaſe bée made for yeares of grounde reſeruing the great trées growing vppon the ſame, now the leſſée may not meddle with them, nor with any thing that commeth by reaſon of them ſo long, as it abydeth in, or vpon the trées, as maſt of Oke, Cheſtnu
                        •
                     , Appels, or ſuch like, but if they fall from the trées to the ground then they are in righte the leſſées, for the ground

is let to him, and all there vpon not reſerued &c.
                  Sometimes a reſeruation doth get and bringe foorth an other thinge which was not before. As if a man leaſe his landes reſeruing yéerely for the ſame xx. li. &c. And diuers other ſuche reſeruations there be.
                  And note that in auncient time, their reſeruations were as well (or for the more parte) in vitualles, whether fleſh, fiſh, Corne, Bread, Drinke, or what elſe, as in money▪ vntill at the laſt, & that chiefly in the Raigne of King Henrie the firſt by agréement, the reſeruation of victuals was changed into ready money▪ as it hath hitherto ſince continued.
               
               
                  386 Retraxit.
                  
                     REtraxit, is the preterperfectence of Retraho, compounded of Re and traho, which make Retraho, to pull backe. And is when the partie plaintife or demaundant commeth in proper perſon into the Court where his plée is,

and ſaith that he will not procéede any farder in the ſame &c. nowe this ſhall be a barre to the action for euer.
               
               
                  Reeue.
                  
                     REeue is an Officer, but more knowen in auncient time then at this day. For almoſt euerie manor had then a Réeue, and yet ſtill in many Copiholde manors (where the old cuſtome any thing preuayleth) the name and office is not altogether forgottē
                     ▪ And is in effect that which nowe euery Baylife of a manor practiſeth▪ although the name of Baylife was not then in vre among vs beyng ſince brought in by the Normans: But the name of Réeue, aunciently called Gereue (which particle (Ge) in continuance of time was altogether left out and loſt) came from the Saxon worde Gereſa. which ſignifieth a ruler: And ſo in déede his rule and aucthoritie was large within the compaſſe of his Lords mannor and among his menne and tenantes as well in matters

of gouernement in peace and warre, as in the ſkilfull vſe and trade of huſbandrie: For as hée did gather his Lordes rentes, paie Repriſes, or duties iſſuyng out of the mannour, ſet the ſeruauntes to worke, fell and cutte downe Trées to repayre the buyldinges, and encloſures, with diuerſe ſuch lyke for his Lordes commoditie: So alſo hée had aucthoritie, to gouerne and kéepe the tenauntes in peace, and if néede required, to lead them foorth in warre.
               
               
                  388 Reuerſion.
                  
                     REuerſion of lande, is a certaine eſtate remayning in the leſſor or donor, after the particuler eſtate and poſſeſſion conueyed to an other by leaſe for lyfe or yéeres, or gift in tayle.
                  And it is called a Reuerſion in reſpecte of the poſſeſſion ſeperated from it: ſo that hée that hath the one hath not the other at the ſame time, for being in one bodie together, there cannot bee ſaid a reuerſion,

becauſe by the vniting, y• one of thē is drowned in the other: And ſo the reuerſion of land, is the lād it ſelfe when it falleth.
               
               
                  Riot.
                  
                     RIot is where thrée (at the leaſt) or more doe ſome vnlawfull acte: as to beate a man, Enter vpon the poſſeſſion of an other, or ſuch like.
               
               
                  Robberie.
                  
                     RObberie, is when a mā taketh anie thing from the perſon of an other feloniouſlie, although the thing ſo taken bée not to the value but of a penye, yet it is felonie, for which the offendour ſhall ſuffer death.
               
               
                  Rout.
                  
                     ROut, is when people doe aſſemble themſelues together & after do procéed or ride, or go forth, or do moue by the inſtigation of one or more, who is their leader: This is called Rout, becauſe they doe moue, and procéed in Routes & numbers.
                  Alſo where many aſſemble themſelues together vpon their owne quarels

& brauls, as if the inhabitants of a towne will gather thēſelues together, to breake hedges, pales or ſuch like to haue common there, or to beate another that hath done to them a commō diſpleaſure or ſuch like, that is a Rout and againſt the lawe although they haue not done or put in execution their miſchieuous entent. Sée the ſtatute 1. Mar. ca. 12.
                  
               
            
            
               S.
               
                  392 Sake.
                  
                     SAke, this is a plée and correction of treſpaſſe of men in your court, becauſe (Sak) in Engliſh is Acheſon in french, and ſak is put for Sik, as to ſay for ſik, ſak, alſo for what hurt, and Sak is put for forfait.
               
               
                  393 Scire facias.
                  
                     SCire facias, is a writ iudicial going out of the record, and it lieth where one hath recouered debt or damages in y• kings court, & he ſueth not to haue execution within the yéere & the day, thē after the yéere and day he ſhal haue y• ſaid writ

to warne the party, & if the partie come not, or if hee come & nothing ſay to diſcharge or ſtay the executiō, then he ſhall haue a writ of Fieri facias directed to the ſhirife him commaunding that he leuie the debt or damages of the goods of him that hath loſt.
                  Alſo the writ of Fieri facias lieth within the yéere without any ſcire fac' ſued.
                  Alſo if the ſumme of the ſame debte or damages may not bée leuied of the goods of him that hath loſte them, he may haue a writte of Elegit directed to the Shirife, that he cauſe him to deliuer the one halfe of his lands and goods except his oxen and implements of his cart.
                  Alſo when one hath recouered debte or damages in an action parſonall (where y• proces is a Capias) he may haue an other writ of Execution called a Capias ad ſatisfaciendum for to take the body of him that is ſo condempned, which ſhalbe committed to pryſon there to abide without baile or mainpriſe

til that he hath ſatiſfied the partie.
                  Alſo when one hath iudgement to recouer anie landes or tenementes, he ſhall haue a writte called Habere facias ſeiſinam direct to the ſhirife, him commanding to deliuer to him ſeiſin of the ſame lande ſo recouered, Sée more of yt in the title Fieri facias, and in the title Execution.
                  
               
               
                  394 Scot.
                  
                     SCot, that is to bée quite of a certaine cuſtome, as of common tallage made to the vſe of the Shirife or Bailife.
               
               
                  395 Knights ſeruice.
                  TO hold by knights ſeruice, is to holde by homage, fealtie, and eſcuage, and it draweth to it ward, mariage, and reliefe, And note that Knightes ſeruice, is ſeruice of landes or tenementes to beare armes in warre in the defence of the Realme, and it oweth warde and mariage by reaſon that none is able nor of power, nor may haue knowledge to beare armes, before that he be of the age of 21. yéeres.

And to the ende that the Lorde ſhall not léeſe that that of right hée ought to haue, and that the power of the realme, be nothing weakened, The lawe will becauſe of his tender age, that the lord ſhall haue him and his lands in his ward till the full age of him, that is to ſay xxi. yeeres.
                  Looke of that more in the title Graund ſeriantie, and the title of Eſcuage.
                  
               
               
                  Shewing.
                  
                     SHewing, that is to bée quite with attachment in any court, and before whom ſoeuer in plaintes ſhewed and not auowed.
               
               
                  Sok.
                  
                     SOk, this is ſuite of men in your Court, according to the cuſtome of the Realme.
               
               
                  Sokmans.
                  
                     SOkmans, are the tenants in auncient demeſne, that holde their landes by Socage, that is by ſeruice with the plough, and therefore they are called Sokmans, which is as much to ſay as tenants or men that holde by ſeruice of the plough, or plowmen:

For Sok ſignifieth a plough.
                  And theſe Sokmans or tenants in auncient demeſne, haue many and diuers liberties gyuen and graunted to them by the lawe, aſwell theſe tenants that holde of a common perſon in auncient demeſne, as thoſe that holde of the Quéene in auncient demeſne, as namely to be frée from paying tolle in euerie Market, Faire, Towne, & Citie throughout the whole Realme, aſwell for their goods and cattels that they ſell to others, as for thoſe thinges that they buy for their prouiſion, of other. And thereupon euery of them may ſue to haue letters patents vnder the Quéenes ſeale directed to her Officers, and to the Maiors, Baylifes, and other Officers in the Realme to ſuffer thē to be tolle frée.
                  Alſo to be quite of pontage, murage, and paſſage, as alſo of taxes and Tallages graunted by Parliament, except that the Quéene taxe auncient demeſne,

as ſhée may at her pleaſure for ſome great cauſe.
                  Alſo to be frée from paimentes towardes the expences of the Knights of the Shire that come to the Parliament.
                  And if the Shirife will diſtraine them, or any of them to bee contributorie for their landes in auncient demeſne, then one of them or all as the caſe requireth, may ſue a writte directed to the ſhirife commaunding him that hée do not compell them to be contributories to the expences of the Knightes. And the ſame writte doth commaund him alſo, that if hee haue alreadie diſtrayned them therefore, that he redeliuer the ſame diſtreſſe.
                  Alſo that they ought not to bee impannelled, nor put in Iuries and enqueſts in the countrey out of their Mannour or lordſhip of auncient demeſne, for the landes that they holde there (except that they haue other landes at the common law, for which they ought to bee charged)

And if the Shirife doe returne them in panels, then they may haue a writte directed to him de non ponē
                        dis in aſsiſis & iuratis: And if he doe the contrarie, then lyeth an attachment vpon that againſt him.
                  And ſo it is alſo if the Bailifes of Franchiſes that haue returne of writs will returne anie of the tenaunts which holde in ancient demeſne in Aſſiſes or iuries.
                  And alſo to be exempt frō Leetes and the Shirifes turne, with diuers other ſuch like liberties.
               
               
                  399 Socage.
                  TO holde in Socage is to hold of anie Lord lands or tenementes, yeelding to him a certain rēt by ye yere for all manner of ſeruices.
                  And note well, that to holde by Socage is not to holde by knightes ſeruice, nor to it belongeth warde, mariage, nor reliefe, but they ſhal double once their rent after the death of their aunceſtor, according to that that they bee wont to pay to their Lord.
                  
                     And they ſhal not be ouer meaſure grieued, as it appeareth in the Treatile of wardes and reliefe.
                  And note well that Socage may be ſaid in 3. manners, that is to ſaye: Socage in frée tenure, Socage in ancient tenure, and Socage in baſe tenure.
                  rent for all manner of ſeruices, as is before ſaide, and of that the next kinnes bodie ſhall haue the warde to whom the heritage may not diſcende, till the age of xiiii. yéeres, that is to ſay: if the heritage come by the parte of the Father, they of the parte of the Mother ſhall haue the warde, And contrariwiſe.
                  And note well that if the gardian in ſocage do make waſt, he ſhal not be impeached of waſt, but hee ſhall yeelde accompt to the heire when hee ſhall come to his ful age of xxi. yeres. And looke the ſtatute of Marleb. cap. 17. for this matter.
                  Socage of auncient tenure is that where the people in auncient demeſne helde, which vſe no other writte to haue then the

writte of Right cloſe, which ſhall bee determined according to the cuſtome of the manor, and the Monſtrauerunt for to diſcharge them when their Lord diſtraineth them for to doe other Seruices that they ought not to doe.
                  And this writ of Monſtrauerunt ought to bee brought againſt the Lord▪ and theſe tenants holde al by one certaine ſeruice, and theſe be free tenants of ancient demeſne.
                  Socage in 
                        •
                     aſ
                        •
                      tenure is wher a man holdeth in ancient demeſne, that maye not haue the Monſtrauerunt, and for that it is called the baſe Tenure.
               
               
                  400 Summons ad warrantizandum &c.
                  
                     SVmmons ad warrantizā
                        dum & ſequatur ſub ſuo periculo, See of them a
                        •
                     ter in the title voucher.
               
               
                  401 Spoliation.
                  
                     SPoliation, is a ſuite for the fruites of a Church, or for the church it ſelf, and it is to bee ſued in the ſpirituall

Court, and not in the temporall Courtes. And this ſuite lyeth for one incumbent agaynſt another incumbent, where they both claime by one patron, and where the right of the patronage doth not come in queſtion or debate. As if a Parſon bee created a Biſhop, and hath diſpenſation to kéepe his benefice ſtill, and afterward the Patron preſents another incumbent which is inſtituted, and inducted: Nowe the Biſhoppe maie haue againſt that Incumbent a Spoliation in the Spirituall Courte, becauſe they claime both by one Patron, and the right of the patronage doth not come in debate, and becauſe that the other incumbent came to the poſſeſſion of the benefice by the courſe of the Spirituall Lawe, that is to ſaie, by inſtitution and induction, ſo that he hath colour to haue it and bee Parſon by the ſpirituall Lawe. For otherwiſe if he be not inſtituted and inducted &c. Spoliation lyeth not againſt him,

but rather a writ of Treſpaſſe, or an aſſiſe of Nouel diſſeiſin &c.
                  So it is alſo where a perſon which hath a pluralitie doeth accept an other benefice, by reaſon whereof the Patron preſents another clerke, who is inſtituted and inducted, now the one of them may haue Spoliation againſt the other, and then ſhall come in debate if hee haue a ſufficient pluralitie or not. And ſo it is of depriuation &c.
                  The ſame law, is where one ſayeth to the Patron, that his Clerke is dead, where vpon hee preſents another: There the firſt incumbent which was ſuppoſed to bee dead may haue a Spoliation againſt the other, and ſo it is in diuers other like caſes, whereof See Fitzherbert Nat. breuium.
                  
               
               
                  402 Stallage.
                  
                     STallage, that is to bee quite of a certaine cuſtome exacted for the ſtreat taken or aſſigned in faires and markets.
               
               
                  
                  Suit couenant.
                  
                     SVit couenant, is when your aunceſtors haue couenanted with my aunceſtors to ſue to the court of my aunceſtors.
               
               
                  Suit cuſtome.
                  
                     SVit cuſtome, is when I and my aunceſtors haue béene ſeiſed of your owne ſuit & your anceſtors time out of mynde &c.
               
               
                  Suit reall.
                  
                     SVit reall, is when men come to the ſhirifes turne or leete, to which court all men ſhal bee compelled to come to knowe the lawes, ſo that they ſhal not be ignorant of things that ſhalbee declared there how they ſhalbe gouerned. And it is called reall ſiute becauſe of their allegeāce▪ and this appeareth by cō
                     mon experience when one is ſworne, his othe is, that he ſhalbe a loyall and faithful man to ye Quéene. And this ſuite is not for the land which he holdeth within the Countie, but by reaſon of his perſon,

and his abode there, and ought to bee done twiſe a yere, for default whereof, he ſhall be amerced and not diſtrained.
               
               
                  406 Suit ſeruice.
                  
                     SVit ſeruice, is to ſue to the Shirifes turne or Leete, or to the Lordes Court from three weekes to three weekes by the whole yeere, and for default thereof, a man ſhalbee diſtrained and not amerced. And this ſuit ſeruice is by reaſon of the tenure of a mans lands.
               
               
                  407 Statute marchant.
                  TO holde by Statut marchant, is where a man knowledgeth to paye certain money to another at a certaine day before the Maior, Baylife or other warden of any town that hath power to make execution of the ſame ſtatut, & if the obligor paye not the debt at the day, & nothing of his goods, landes or tenemēts may be found wtin the ward of the Maior or warden beforeſaid, but in other places without, then

the recogniſee ſhall ſue the recogniſance and obligation with a certification to the Chauncerie vnder the kings ſeale, and hee ſhall haue out of the Chauncery a Capias to the Shirife of the countie where hee is to take him, and to put him in priſon, if hee bee not a clerke, till hee haue made gréement of the debt. And one quarter of the yeere after that, that he ſhalbee taken, hee ſhall haue his land deliuered to himſelf to make gree to the partie of the debt, and hee may ſell it while hee is in priſon, and his ſale ſhall be good and lawfull. And if hee do not gree within a quarter of a yeere, or if it be returned that hee be not found, then the reconiſée may haue a writ of the Chauncery which is called Extendi facias, direct to all ſhirifes where hee hath lands, to extend his lands and goods, and to deliuer the goods to him, & to ſeiſe him in his lands, to holde them to him and to his heires & his aſſignes, till that the debtes bee leuyed

or payed, and for that time he is tenaunt by ſtatute marchant. And note well, that in a ſtatute marchant the recogniſee ſhall haue execution of all the landes which the recogniſour had the daye of the recogniſance made, and anye tune after by force of the ſame ſtatute.
                  And note wel, that when any waſt and deſtruction is made by the recogniſee, his executors, or by him that hath eſtate, the recogniſor or his executors ſhal haue the ſame lawe as is beforeſaid of the tenant by Elegit.
                  And note well, if the tenant by ſtatute Marchāt holde ouer his terme, hee that hath right may ſue againſt him a Venirefacias ad computandum, or els enter by and by as vpon tenant by Elegit. See the ſtatut 11. E. 1. and of Acton burnel, & 13. E. 1. de Mercatoribus.
                  
               
            
            
               T.
               
                  408 Fee Taile.
                  TO holde in the taile is where a man holdeth

certain lands or tenemēts to him and to his heires of his bodie begotten. And note well, that if the lande be giuen to a man and to his heires males, & he hath iſſue male, he hath fee ſimple, and that was aiudged in the Parliament of our Lord y• king. But where lands be giuen to a man & to his heires males of his body begotten, then hee hath fee taile, and the iſſue female ſhall not be inheritable, as it appeareth the 14. yere of Ed. 3. in Aſſiſe 18. E. 3. 45.
                  Fee taile, is where land is giuen to a man and his heires of his body begotten, and he is called Tenant in the taile generall, but if lands be giuen to the huſband & the wife & the heires of their two bodies begotten, then the huſband and the wife be Tenants in the taile eſpeciall, and if one of them die, he that ſuruiueth is tenant in tail after poſſibility of iſſu extinct and if he make waſt he ſhal not bee impeached for that waſt. See Littleton.
                  But if the king giue lād

to a man and to his heires males, and the donee dieth without iſſue mal
                        •
                     , then the coſin collaterall of the donee ſhal not enherite, but the king ſhall reenter and ſo it was adiudged in the Eſchequer Chamber 18. H. 8. in an Information made againſt the heire of Sir T. Lou
                        •
                     l knight.
               
               
                  409 Taile after poſſibilitie.
                  TO holde in the tayle after poſſibilitie of iſſue extinct, is where lande is giuen to a man and to his wife, & to the heirs of their two bodies engendred, and one of them oueri
                        ••
                     eth the other without iſſue betwéene them begotten, he ſhall hold the land for term of his own life, as tenaunt in the taile after poſſ
                        •
                     bility of iſſue extinct. And notwithſtanding that hee d
                        •
                     e waſt, he ſhall neuer be impeached of that waſt. And note y• if he alien, he in the reuerſion ſhall not haue a writ of entrie in conſimili caſu. But he may enter, & his entre is law
                        •
                     ull, per R. Thorp chiefe Iuſtice 28.

                     E. 3. 96. & 4
                           •
                        . E. 3. 25▪
                     
                  
               
               
                  Taxe and tallage.
                  
                     TAxe and tallage, are paiments, as tenthes, fiftenths, ſubſidies, or ſuch like granted to the Quéen by Parliament.
                  The tenaunts in auncient demeſne are quite of theſe taxes and tallages graunted by Parliament except that the Quéen
                        •
                      doe taxe auncient 
                        ••••
                     ſne, as ſhée may 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſhée thinks good for ſome great cauſe. Sée auncient de
                        •
                      meſne.
               
               
                  Tenure in capite.
                  
                     TEnure in capite, is 
                        〈◊〉
                      any hold of the Quéen
                        •
                      as of her perſon 
                        •••
                     yng Quéene, & of her cro
                        •••
                      as of a Lordſhip by it ſelf
                        •
                      in groſſe, and in chief above all other Lordſhips, And not where they h
                        •
                     lde of her as of anie Mau
                        •••
                     , Honour, or Caſt
                        •
                     ll, except certeyn
                        •
                      auncient honor
                        •
                      which appeare in the Eſch
                        •
                     quer.
               
               
                  Terme dan
                        •
                     .
                  TO holde for terme of yere
                        •
                      is not but chattell

in effect, for no action is maintenable againſt y• termour, for the recouering of the free holde, for no freehold is in him. A leas for terme of yeres is a chattell reall, & the other chattell is perſonal, & all goods which are remouable are chattels parſonals.
               
               
                  413 Teſtament.
                  
                     TEſtament, is thus deſined in maſter Plowdens C
                        ••
                     mentarus, a teſtament is the witneſſe of the mind, & is compound of theſe two wordes, Teſtatio & mentis, which ſo ſignifieth, trueth is, that a Teſtament is a witnes of the mind, but that it is a compound worde, Aulus Gellius 
                     
                        ••
                      his vi. booke, cap. 12. doth deny the ſame to an excellent lawyer one Seruius Sulpitius, & ſayeth that it is a ſimple word, as are theſe Calciamentū, Paludamentum, Pauiamentū, and di
                        ••
                     rs ſuch like.
                  And much leſſe is agreamentum, a cōpound word of aggregatio and mentiū, as is ſaide before in the title 
                        ••
                      
                     Agreement, for

there is no ſuch latin word ſimple or compound, but it may neuertheleſſe ſerue wel for a law latin worde.
                  And therefore thus it may be better defined. A Teſtament is the true declaration of our laſt will, of that we would to bee done after our death &c.
                  And of Teſtamentes there be two ſorts, namely a Teſtament in writing, and a Teſtament by wordes, which is called a Nuncupatiue Teſtament.
                  The firſt is alwaies 
                        •
                     n writing as is ſ
                        •••
                     .
                  The other is, when a man being ſicke, and for feare leaſt death or want of memorie, or of ſpeech, ſhoulde come ſo ſuddenly and haſtely vpon him, that he ſhould bee preuented if hee ſt
                        •
                     yed the writing of his Teſtament, deſireth his neighbours and friends to 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     re witneſſe of his laſt win▪ and then declareth the ſame preſently by wordes before them, which after his dece
                        •••
                      is proued by witneſſes, and put in writing

by the Ordinary, and then ſtandeth in▪ as good force (except for lands) as if it had at y• firſt in the life of the Teſtator béen put in writing.
               
               
                  414 Them.
                  
                     THem, that is, that you ſhall haue all the generations of your villames with their ſuites and cattell whereſoeuer they ſhal be 
                        •
                     ound in England, except that if any bondman ſhal remain quite one yere and a day in any priuiledged towne, ſo that he ſhall be receiued into their communaltie or guilde, as one of them, by that meanes he is deliuered from villeuage.
               
               
                  415 Theftbote.
                  
                     THeftbote, is when a mā taketh any goods of a theefe to fauour and maintaine him: And not when a man taketh his owne goods that were ſtolien from him 
                        •
                     c.
                  The puniſhment in auncient time of theeftbote, was of life and member. But n
                        •
                     we at this day

                     Maſt. Stamford ſeith, it is puniſhed by raunſome and by impriſonment. But enquire further, for I thinke if be felonie.
               
               
                  Title.
                  
                     TItle, is where a lawfull cauſe is come vppon a man to haue a thing which an other hath, and he hath no action for the ſame, as title of Mortmaine, or to enter for breach of condition.
               
               
                  Title de Entre.
                  
                     TItle de Entre, is when one ſeiſed of land in 
                        •
                     ee maketh feffement thereof vpon condition, and the condition is broken: Now after the condition thus broken, the feoffor hath title to enter into the land, and may ſo doe at his pleaſure, and by his entrie the frée hold ſhalbe ſaid to 
                        •
                     e in him preſentlie.
                  And it is c
                        •
                     lſed Title of entre▪ becauſe that hée cannot haue writte of Right againſt his feoffée vppon condition, for his right was out of him by the feoffemēt, which cānot be reduced without entrie,

& the entrie muſt be for the breach of the condition.
               
               
                  418 Tolle, or Tolne.
                  
                     TOlle, or Tolne, is moſt properlie a payment vſed in Cities, Townes, Markets and Faires, for goods and cattell brought thither to be bought and ſolde. And is alwayes to 
                        •
                     e payed by the buyer and not by the ſeller, except there be ſome cuſtome otherwiſe.
                  There are diuers others Tolles, as Turne tolle, and that is where Tolle is paid for beaſtes that are driuen to be ſold, although that they be not ſolde in déed.
                  Alſo Tolle tr
                        ••
                     ers, that 
                        •
                     s where one claymeth to haue a halfepenie, or ſuch lyke tolle of euirie beaſt that is dryuen ouer his ground.
                  Through Tolle, is where a towne preſcribes to haue Tolle for euerie 
                        •
                     raſt that goeth through their towne a certaine, or for euery 
                        ••
                     oore or 100. a certaine: which f
                        •
                     emeth not to be ſo vnreaſonable a preſcription or cuſtome, as

ſome haue thought, although it bee through the Quéenes high way (as they call it) where euerie man may lawfully goe, if that there be one thing for an other: As it there bee a bridge or ſuch like commoditie prouided at the coſtes and charges of the Towne, for the caſe of trauaylers that driue that way, whereby their iourney is eyther ſhortned or bettered, why thē may not tolle be lawfully and with good reaſon demaunded of them &c?
                  But diuers Citizens & Townes men are frée frō paying tolle by graunt of the Quéene or her aunceſtors, or doe clayme the ſame by preſcription or cuſtome. So alſo ſpirituall perſons and religious men (as they call them) were quit of paying tolle for their goodes and marchandiſes bought and ſold, but now the Statute of king H. 8. An. 21. cap. 13. will that they ſhall not marchandiſe.
                  Alſo tenants in auncient demeſne ought to bée

quit throughout the whole Realme of paying tolle, as appeareth before in ye title Sokemās. And in al theſe caſes where toll is demaū
                     ded where it ought not to be paid of them that ſhould goe, bay and ſell tolle frée, there the partie or parties grieued may haue a writ, De eſſendi quietum de tolonio, directed to him, or thē that ſo demaūded tolle contrarie to the Quéene or her progenitors graunt, or contrarie to cuſtome or preſcription.
               
               
                  419 Treaſon.
                  
                     TReaſon, is in two maners, that is to ſay, graund treaſon and petit treaſon, as it is ordeined by the ſtatutes and therefore looke the ſtatutes, and Stamf. lib 1. cap. 2.
               
               
                  420 Treaſure troue.
                  
                     TReaſure troue, is when any money, golde, ſiluer, plate or bolyon, is found in any place, and no man knoweth to whome the propertie is, then the property thereof belongeth to the King, and that is called treaſure trone, that is to ſay, treaſure found.

But if anie mine of mettall be found in any groūd▪ that alway pertayneth to the Lord of the ſoyle, except it be a mine of golde or ſiluer which ſhalbe alway to the king in whoſe groūd ſoeuer they be found.
               
               
                  Shirifes tourne.
                  
                     SHerifes tourne, is a court of recorde in all thinges that pertain to the tourne. And it is the Queenes léete thorough all the Countie, and the Sherife is iudge. And whoſoeuer hath a léete hath the ſame authoritie within the precinct, as the Sherife hath within the tourne.
               
            
            
               V.
               
                  View.
                  
                     VIew, is when ante action reall is brought and the tenaunt knoweth not well what lande it is that the demaundant aſketh then the tenant ſhall pray the view▪ that is to ſay, y• hée may fée the land which he claymeth. But if the tenant hath had the view in one writ, and after the

writte is abated in miſnaming of the towne, or by ioyntenure, & after the demandant bringeth another writte againſt the tenant, then y• tenant ſhal not haue the view in the ſecōd writ.
               
               
                  423 Vilaica remouenda.
                  
                     VIlaica remouenda, is a writ, and it lieth where debate is betweene two Parſons or prouiſors for a Church, and one of them entreth into the Church with great power of laye 
                        •
                     n
                        ••
                     , and holdeth the other out with force and armes, then hee that is holden out ſhall haue this writ directed to the Shirife that hee remooue the power which is within the Church, and the Shirife ſhall bee commanded that if he find anie men there withſtanding, that the Shirife ſhall take with him the power of his Countie if neede bee, and ſtall arreſt the bodies of all them him reſiſting, and ſhal out them in priſon, ſo that he haue their bodies before the King at a certaine daie to anſwere to the cōtempt.

And this writte is returnable, and it ſhall not bee granted before that the biſhop of y• place wher ſuch a church is, hath certified in the Chauncerie ſuch reſiſting and force.
               
               
                  Villenage.
                  TO holde in pure villenage, is to doe all that, that the lord will him command.
                  The diffinition of villenage is villein of blood▪ and of tenure. And it is he of whome the Lorde taketh redemption to marrie his daughter, and to make him frée, and it is he whom the Lord maye put out of his lands or tenements at his wil, and alſo of al his goods and cattell.
                  And note well, that a ſokeman is no pure villein, nor a vilei
                        •
                     e oweth not ward, mariage, nor reliefe, nor to do any other ſeruices real.
                  And note well, that the tenure in villenage ſhall make no freeman villeine, if it bee not continued euer ſith time out of minde▪
                     
nor villaine land ſhal make no frée man villeine, nor frée lande ſhall make no villeine frée, except that the tenaunt haue continued frée ſith the time of no minde.
                  But a villein ſhall make frée lande villeine by ſeiſin or claime of the Lord. And note well, that if a villeine purchaſe certain land, and take a wife and alien, and dieth before the claime or ſeiſin of the Lord, the wife ſhall be endowed.
                  And note well, that in caſe that the Lorde bring a Praecipe 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         reddat againſt the alience of his villeine which voucheth to warrant the iſſue of the villeine which is villein to the lord hee ſhall haue the voucher, and by proteſtation the Lorde may notwithſtanding that hee plea
                        •
                     e with his villeine, ſaue that his villein ſhall not bee infranchiſed. And note wel that a Baſtarde ſhall neuer bée iudged villeine, but by knowledge in courte of recorde. And note well that if debt 
                        ••
                      due by a Lord to a frée man, and hée maketh

two men his executours the which be villeins to the ſaide Lorde and dyeth, the villeins ſhal haue an action of debt againſt their Lord▪ And notwithſtāding that he plede with them, and if hee make proteſtation they ſhal not be thereby enfranchiſed, for that that they be to recouer the dette aforeſaide to the vſe of another perſon, that is to ſaye to the vſe of their teitatour, and not to their owne vſe.
                  And if the tenaunt in dower haue a villein which purchaſeth certaine lande in fée, and after the tenant in dower entreth, ſhe ſhall haue the land to her and to her heirs for euermore, and the ſame lawe is of tenant for terme of yeeres of a villeine.
                  And note will that the Lord may rob
                        •
                     e, beate and chaſtice 
                        ••
                     s villeine at his will, ſaue o
                        ••
                     y that he may not ma
                        •
                     ne him, for then he ſhall haue appeal 
                        ••
                      maime againſt him.
                  And note well▪ that 
                        •
                      villeine may haue three actions againſt his lord, th
                        ••
                     
                     
is to ſaie, an appeale of the death of his anceſtour, an appeale of rape done to his wife, and an appeale of maime. And note well if ii. parceners bring a writ of niefe, and one of them bee nonſuit, the nonſuit of him ſhall be iudged the nonſuit of them both, ſo that if that nonſuite bee after appearance, they ſhall bee ſaued from that action for euer, for the lawe is ſuch in fauour of libertie.
                  And note well, if two haue a villeine in common, & one of them make to him 
                        •
                      manumiſſion, he ſhall not be made frée againſt both,
                  And note well, that in a writ de Natiuo habendo, it behooueth that the Lorde ſhew how the def. commeth to be priuie of the blood of the villeine of whom he is lord &c. And if he nor none of his anceſtors were not ſeiſed of none of his blood, he ſhal not win by his action, if the villein haue not knowledged in Courte of Recorde himſelfe to be his villein.
                  And note well that in a writ of Niefe may not be

put more Niefs then two and this was firſt brought in the hatred of bondage. But in a writ de libertate probanda may bee put as manie niefes as the plaintife will.
                  And note well that if the villeine of a Lorde be in auncient demeſne of the king, or other towne priuiledged, within a yeere and a day, the Lorde may ſeiſe him, and if hee dwell in the ſame towne or other place franchiſed by a yéere and a daie without ſeiſin of the Lord, he hath no power to ſeiſe him after, if hee go
                        •
                      not out of the foreſaid franchiſe.
                  And ſome bee villeines by title of Preſcription, that is to ſay, yt they haue béen villeines regardants to the manor of the lorde of time of no memorie.
                  And ſome be villeins by their confeſſion in a courts of recorde. Alſo the lorde maie make a manumiſſion to his villeine, and make him free for euer.
                  Alſo if the villeine bring anie action agaynſt his

lord, if it be not App
                        •
                     ale of mahim, and the Lord make aunſwere vnto it, then by this the villeine is made frée.
                  Alſo if a villeine purchaſe land, and hath goods and ſel the lands and goods before any entre or ſeiſin made by the Lorde. the ſale is good. But the King which is Lord of a villein in ſuch caſe may enter and ſeiſe the lande alter ſuch ſale made, for no time runneth againſt the king.
               
               
                  425 Viſcount.
                  
                     VIſcount, is either the name of one degrée or ſtate of honour vnder an Earle or aboue a Baron, or elſe the name of a Magiſtrate and Officer of great aucthoritie whome wee commonly call (Shirife) or to ſpeake more truelis (Shire reue) and was at the firſt called (Shiregereue) that is to ſaye the kéeper of the ſhire, vr the reue or ruler of the Shire, for (Gereue) being deriued of the Saxon worde (Gerecean) to rule,

was firſt called (Gerecfa) and then (Gerefa) which betokeneth a ruler. And heereof commeth (Portreue or Portgreue) a name that in olde time was giuen to the head officer of a Towne, and ſignifieth the Ruler of the Towne for that (Porte) comming of the Latine worde Por
                           ••
                        s, ſignifieth a Port town, and (Gereue) being deriued as is aforeſaide ſignifieth a ruler, ſo that Portgereue, or as we now ſhorter ſpeak it (Portreue) is the ruler of the towne.
                  And thus was the head Officer or Gouernour of the Citie of London long ſince (before they had the name of Maior or bailifs) called, as it doth appeare in diuers olde Monuments. But chieflie in the Saxon Charter of william Baſtard the Corquerour, which thus beginneth.
                  William the King gr
                        •
                     eteth William the Biſhop & Godfrey the Portreue, and alſo the▪ Citizens tha
                        •
                      in London be, &c.
                  
                     So alſo they of Germanie (from whome wee and our language together firſt came) call amonge them one gouernour Burgreeue, another Margreeue, and another Landſg
                        •
                     ee
                        •
                     e, with ſuch like &c.
                  Thus much is ſaid onely to ſhewe the right Etimon and antiquitie of the woorde (Shirif) to which Officer our common Law 
                        •
                     ath alwaies accordingly giuen great truſt and authoritie, as to be a ſpeciall preſeruer of the peace. And therefore all obligations that he takes to the ſame end, are as Recogniſances in lawe.
                  Hee alſo is a Iudge of recorde when hee holdes the Léetes or Turnes, which are Courtes of recorde.
                  Alſo he hath the execution and returne of writtes, and impanelling of Iuries and ſuch like &c.
               
               
                  426 Volunt.
                  
                     VOlunt is, when the tenant 
                        •
                     oldeth at the will

of the leſſour, or of the Lorde, and that is in two manners.
                  One is when I make a leaſe to a man of landes, to holde at my will, then I may put him out at my pleaſure: But if he ſowe the ground, and I put him out, then hee ſhall haue his corne, and going out and comming in till they bee ripe to cutte and carrie of the ground.
                  And ſuch tenant at will is not ſo bounde to ſuſtaine and repaire the houſe as a tenant for terme of ye
                        ••
                     es is bound: But if he make wilful waſt▪ the leſſor ſhal haue againſt him an action of Treſpas.
                  Alſo there is another tenant at will of the Lord by copie of Court Roll according to the cuſtome of the Mannor: And ſuch a tenaunt may ſurrender the lands into the hands of the Lord by cuſtome to the vſe of another for terme of life, or in fée ſimple, or in 
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     e, and then he ſhall take the lande of the Lorde or his ſtewarde by copie, and ſhal make fine to the Lord,

But if the Lorde put out ſuch a tenant, bee hath no remedy but to ſue by petition, and if ſuch a tenant will impled another at the lāds &c. hee ought to enter a plaint in the Court, & ſhall declare in the nature of what writte hee will, as the caſe lyeth.
               
               
                  427 Voucher.
                  
                     VOucher, is when a Praecipe quod reddat of land is brought aga
                        •
                     nſt a man, and another ought to warrent the land to the tenant, then the tenant ſhall vouch him to warrantie, and thereupon hee ſhall haue a writte called Summoneas ad warrantizandum: And if the Shirif retourne that hee hath nothing by the which hée maie bee ſummoned, then there ſhall goe foorth a writte called Sequatur ſub ſuo periculo, and when hee▪ commeth he ſhal plead with the demaundant, and if hee come not, or if hee come and cannot barre the demandant, then the demandāt ſhal recouer the land againſt the tenāt,

and the tenant ſhall recouer as much land in value againſt the vouchee, and thereupon hee ſhall haue & writ called Capias ad vavalentiā
                      againſt y• vouchée.
                  Looke more of Voucher before in y• title Garrātie.
               
               
                  Vſes.
                  
                     VSes of land had beginning after that the cuſtome of property began among men: As where one being ſeiſed of lands in fee ſimple, made a feoffement to another without any conſideration, but onely meaning that the other ſhould be ſeiſed to his vſe, and that he himſelf would take the commodity & proſits of the landes, and that the feoffee ſhoulde haue the poſſeſſion and franktenement thereof to the ſame vſe &c.
                  Nowe after this vpon good conſiderations, and to auoid diuers miſchiefes and inconueniences, was the Statute of Anno 27. H. 8. cap. 10. prouyded, which vniteth the vſe and poſſeſſion together, ſo that who hath the vſe

of the land, the ſ
                        •
                     me hath the poſſeſſion thereof, according to the vſe he hath therein by vertue of that eſtatute.
               
               
                  429 Vſurie.
                  
                     VSurie, is a gaine of any thing aboue the principall, or that which was lent, exacted onely in conſideration of ye loane, whether it be of corne, meate, apparell, wares, or ſuch like as of money.
                  And here much might bee ſaide, and many caſes might be put concerning Vſurie, which of purpoſe I omit, onely I wiſh, that they who accompt themſelues religious and good Chriſtians woulde not deceiue them ſelues by colour of the ſtatute of Vſurie, becauſe it ſayrth that it ſhall not bee lawfull for any to take aboue x. pound in the C. li. for a yerare &c. whereby they gather (although falſely) that they may therefore take x. pound for the loane of an C▪ pound with a good conſcience 
                        ••
                      becauſe the Statute doeth after a ſort

diſpence withall (for that it doeth no
                        •
                      puniſh ſuch taking) which thing it cannot do with y• lawes and ordinances of God, for God will haue his decrees to bee kept 
                        •
                     uiolable, who ſayeth, lende 
                        •
                     o king for nothing thereby &c. By which wordes is excluded, either the taking o
                        •
                      x. li. 
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     . yea, or one peny aboue the principall. But rather let ſuch 
                        〈◊〉
                     , that that ſtatute was made vpon like cauſe, that mooued Moyſes to giue a 
                        •
                     ill of diuorce to the Iſra
                        •
                     lites, as name
                        •
                     y to auoyde a greater m
                        •••
                     hiefe, and for the hardne
                        •
                     ſe of their hearts.
               
               
                  Vtlarie.
                  
                     VTlarie, is when an exigent go
                        •
                     th foorth againſt any man, & proclamation made in v 
                        •
                     . counties, then a
                        •
                      the v. countie if the defendant 
                        •
                     ppea
                        •
                     e not, then the coroner ſhall giue iudgement tha
                        •
                      hee ſhalbe out of the pro
                        •
                     ection of the king, and out of the 
                        •
                     yde of the law.
                  And by ſuch a
                        •
                      vilary in

actions perſone
                        •
                     s the partie outl
                        •
                     wed ſhall forfait al his goods and cattels to the king.
                  And by an vt
                        •
                     ary in felony he ſhall forfait aſwell a
                        •
                      his 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     des & 
                        •
                     enements that hee hath inſee ſimp
                        •
                     e, or for terme of his life, as h
                        •
                     s goods and cattels.
                  Alſo though a man bee outlawed, yet i
                        •
                      any 
                        •
                     rror or diſcontinuance be in the fuite of the proces the p
                        •
                     rtie thereof ſhall haue aduantage▪ and for ſuch cauſe the 
                        •
                     tiary ſhalbe reuerſed & ad
                        ••••
                     ed:
                  Alſo if the partie defendant be ouer the ſea at the time of the v
                        ••
                     arye pronounced, that is a good cauſe of the reuerſall of the vtlarie.
                  Alſo if an exigent bee awarded againſt a man in one Countie where hee dwelleth not▪ yet an exigēt with procla
                        •
                     atiō ſhall goe foorth to the Countie where he dwelleth▪ or els i
                        •
                      he be thereupon outlawed the vtlarie may bee reuerſed as it appeareth by the ſtatute made the 6. & 4. yere of king H. 8. cap. 4.
                  
                     Alſo if a man bee ou
                        ••
                     awed in an action parſonel at the ſuit of another, & after hee purchaſe his charter of pardon of the king, ſuch charter ſhall neuer be allowed, till he hath ſued a writ of Scir̄
                      facias to warn the partie plaintife, and if hee appeare▪ then the d
                        •
                     
                     fendant ſhall aunſwer him and barre him of his actiō, or elſe to ma
                        •
                     e agreement with him.
               
               
                  Vtrum.
                  
                     VTrum▪
                      is a writ, and it lyeth when the right of any Church is aliened & holden in lay fee, or tranſlated into the poſſeſſion of another Church, and the alienour dyeth, then his ſucceſſour ſhall haue the ſa
                        •
                     d writ, whereby an inqueſt ſhalbee charged to try whether it bee the free almes of the Church o
                        •
                      lay fee. And note well that none that hath Couent, or common Seale may maintain
                        •
                      this writ, but a writ of Entre ſine a
                           ••
                        en
                           ••
                         capituli of the alienation made by his predeceſſour.
               
            
            
               
               W.
               
                  Waife.
                  
                     WAife, is when a théefe hath feloniouſlie ſtollen goods, and being neerely followed with hue and crie, or 
                        ••
                     s ouercharged with the burden or trouble of the goodes, for his eaſe ſa
                        •
                     e and more ſpeedie trauayling, without hue and crie, 
                        •
                     lieth away and leaueth the goods or anie parte of them behind him, then the Queenes officer, o
                        •
                      the 
                        •
                     eeue or Baylife to the Lord of the manor (within whoſe 
                        •
                     ur
                        •
                     ſo
                        •
                     ction or circuit they were left) that by preſcription. or graūt from the Quéene hath the Fraunchiſe of waife, may ſeiſe the goods ſo wayued to their Lordes vſe, who may keepe them as his owne proper goods: except that the owner come with freſhe ſinte after the ſelon, and ſue an appeale, or giue in eu
                        •
                     
                     dence againſt him at his arra
                        •
                     nement vpon the indictment, and bee attainted thereof &c. In which

caſes the firſt owner ſhall haue reſtitution of his goods ſo ſtollen and wayued.
                  But although as hath béene ſaid waife is properly of goods ſtol
                        •
                     ē, yet waife may 
                        •
                     e alſo the goods that are not ſtolne. As if a man be purſued with hue and c
                        •
                     ie, as a felon, and he flyeth, and leaueth his owne goods &c. theſe ſhalbe taken as goods waiued, and forfait as if they had bée
                        •
                     e ſt
                        ••
                     ne.
               
               
                  Waiue.
                  
                     WAiue is a woman that is outlawed, and ſhée is called waiue, as lefte out or forſaken of the law, and not an vtlaw as a m
                        •
                      is. For women are not ſworne in leetes to the Queene, nor to the law
                        •
                     , as men are, who therefore are within the law, wher
                        •
                     
                     as women are not, and for that cauſe they cann
                        •
                     t 
                        ••
                      ſaid outlawed in ſo much as they neuer were within it. But a man is called vtlawe, becauſe that he was once ſworne to the law
                        •
                      and now for cōtempt he is

put out of the law, & is called vtlaw, as one ſhould ſay without benefit 
                        ••
                      the law.
               
               
                  434 Warwit.
                  
                     WArwit (or wardwit as ſome copies haue it) that is to be quite of giuing of money for kéeping of watches.
               
               
                  435 Waſt.
                  
                     WAſt is where tenant for terme of yéeres, tenant for terme of 
                        ••
                     fe, or tenant for terme of anothers life, tenant in dower, or tenant by the curteſie or gardein in chiualry doth make waſt or deſtruction vpō the land, that 
                        ••
                      to ſay, pu
                        ••
                     eth downe the houſe, or cutteth downe 
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     ber▪ or ſuffereth the houſe willing
                     
                        •
                     y to fa
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ or diggeth the ground, ther hee in the reuerſion ſhall haue▪ one writ for that waſt▪ and ſhall recoue
                        •
                      the place where the waſt is done, & t
                        ••
                     ble dammages. And if a man cut downe 
                        ••
                     mb
                        •
                     r without lice
                        •
                     ce and therewith repaireth old houſes, yet that is no waſt. But if he with the timber builde a newe

houſe, then y• cutting down of ſuch timber is waſt. Alſo the cutting downe of vnderwood or willowes, which is no timber ſhall not be ſaid waſt, but if they grow in y• ſight or ſhadow of the houſe.
               
               
                  Wrecke.
                  
                     WRecke or varech as y• Normās from whom it came call it, is where a ſhip is periſhed on the ſea, and no man eſcapeth a liue out of the ſame, & the ſhip or parte of the ſhip ſo periſhed, or the goods of the ſhip come to the lande of any Lorde, the 
                        •
                     orde ſhall haue that as a wrec
                        •
                     e of the Sea, but if a man or a dogge, or cat, eſcape aliue, ſo that the partie to whom the goods belonge come within a yeere and a day and prooue the goods to be his, hée ſhall haue them againe, by prouiſion of the ſtatute of weſtm. 1. cap. 4. made in king Ed. 1. dayes, who therein followed the decrée of Henrie the firſt, before whoſe dayes, if a ſhip had beene caſt on ſhore,

torne with tempeſt, and were not repaired by ſuch as eſcaped aliue within a certeine time, that thē this was taken for wrecke.
               
               
                  437 Withernam.
                  
                     WIthernam, Looke therfore in the title Diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  438 Warren.
                  
                     WArren is a place priuiledged by preſcriptiō or grant of the Quéene for the preſeruation of Hares, Comes, partriges, and Feaſantes or anie of them.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  Abatement de briefe ou plaint.
                  ABatement de br̄e ou plaint eſt quāt vn action eſt port per briefe ou plaint en q̄ fault ſufficient & bon matter, ou auterment le matter alleage, neſt certeinment alleage, ou ſi le plaintife, ou defendant, ou lieu ſont miſnom̄, ou ſil appere variance perenter le briefe & le ſpecialtie, ou record, ou que le briefe ou declaration ſont vncerteine, ou pur mort del plaintife, ou defendant, & pur diuers auters ſemblable cauſes, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſur ceux defaults, le def. poit prie que le briefe ou plaint abatera, ceſt adire, que le ſuit del pl. enuers luy ceſſera pur ceſt tēps, & q̄ 
                     
                        •
                     l commencer a auter temps ſon ſuit & port vn nouel brief ou plaint, ſil ſoit iſsint diſpoſe a faire. Mes ſi le def▪ in aſcun action plead vn matt in barre pur adnuller le

action a touts io urs, il ne viendra apres a pled' in abatement de br̄, mes ſi apres il appiert in le Record q̄ eſt aſcun matt apparant pur que le br̄ doit eſtre abat, dōq, le def. ou aſc' aut ꝑſon, vt amicꝰ curiae poit bn̄ plede & mr̄e ceo in arreſt de iudgem̄t.
                  Veies les titles de brief, Miſnoſm̄, & variance en les Abridgemēts, & le liuer appel le Digeſts del briefes, in quel eſt fort bn̄ entreat eſpecialment de ceux matters.
                  
                     Abatement de br̄e ou pleint.
                     Fault de

                           ſufficient matter
                           ou bone matter
                        
                     
                     Le matter neſt certeinment alledge
                     plaintife eſt Miſnoſme
                     defendant eſt Miſnoſme
                     ou lieu eſt Miſnoſme
                     variance enter

                           Briefe
                           Specialtie
                           ou Record
                        
                     
                     vncertaintie del

                           Briefe
                           Count
                           ou declaration
                        
                     
                     Mort

                           Plaintife ou
                           defendant
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  2 Abatement en terres
                  ABatement en terres ou ten̄ts eſt quant vn hōe

moruſt ſeiſi de terres ou ten̄ts, & vn que nad droit entra en meſmes les tres, ou ten̄ts, deuāt q̄ le heire fait ſon entrie, ceſt entrie de luy eſt appel vn abatemēt, & il vn abator. Mes ſi le heire enter primes apres le mort de ſon aunceſtor, & le aut 
                     ent ſur le poſſeſsion del heire, ceſt entre de luy eſt vn diſſeiſin al heire. Vide liuer dentres fo. 63. c. & 205 d. & 519. c. lou ceſt abatement eſt appell en latin Intruſio, 
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     eo entende deſtre melius de appeller ceo in latin Interpoſitio ou Intratio per interpoſitionem de faire differēce inter ceo & Intruſiō puis mort tenant pur vie.
               
               
                  Abbot.
                  ABbe ſuit le ſoueraigne teſte ou principall de ceux meaſōs q̄ux quāt ils fuerent, fuerēt appell Abbies, & cē abbe enſemble oue les Moygnes de m̄ le meaſon, q̄ux fuer̄ appel le couent fier̄ vn corpor, & tiel ſoueraigne de aſcun tiel meaſō ne ſer
                        •
                      charge ꝑ act de ſon predeceſſor,

fil ne ſoit ꝑ cōmon ſeale, ou p̄ tiel choſe que vient al vſe de ſon meaſon. Auxi abbe ne ſerra charge pur le det en q̄ ſon comoigne fuit indet deuant ſon entre en religion, mes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le creditor ad de ceo vn eſpecialty, ſinon q̄ il auoit deuenus al vſe de ſō meaſon, mes les executors de comoigne ſerra charge oue ceo.
                  Vide pur ceo in le Abridgm̄t m̄ title, deſouth quel veies com̄t aſcūs de ceux fueront electiue, aſc' preſentatiue, Et com̄t fueront prefect, & lour aucthority, & en cel title ſōt auxi comprehende touts autres corporations ſpirituall, come prior & ſon couent, Frieres & Canōs, Deane & Chapter.
               
               
                  4 Abbettors.
                  ABbettors ſont in diūs caſes diuerſm̄t priſe: vn kinde de abbettors ſont ceux que maliciouſm̄t ſās droitur̄ cauſe oudeſert ꝓeur̄ 
                     auts de ſuer faux appeals de murder, ou felonie enuers hōes al entent de troubl' & grieū eux &

pur fair eux en enfamy & ſlaunder. Abbettors in murder ſont ceux que cō
                     maund, procure, counſell ou confortauters de murder. Et en aſcun caſe 
                        •
                     el abbettors ſerront priſes come principals & en aſcū caſe forſque come Acceſſories: Iſsint en auter felonies, Et lour preſence a le choſe fait, & lour abſēce de la, fait vn differēce 
                        ••
                      le caſe. Il y ad abbett auxi en treſō, mes ils ſont en cas come princ', car en treaſ
                        •
                      il ny ad aſcun acceſſories.
                  Veies pluis de ceo en le lieur appel les Plees del Crowne cōpile per le tre
                        •
                     
                     reuerēd Iudg Sir W. Stāf. en les titles de Acceſſories & damages en appell.
               
               
                  Abeiance.
                  ABeiance eſt qn̄t vn leas eſt fait pur terme de vie le remainder al droit heires de I. S. le quel I. S. eſt en vie al temps del grant, Ore per ceſt grant le remainder paſſa hors del grantor maintenant, vncore il ne veſta maintenant,

ne priſt effect en le grantee, ceſt adire le droit heire de I. S. mes eſt dit deſte en abeiāce, ou come les Logiciens appelle ceo in potentia, ou in intellectu, & come nous diomus in nubibus, ceſtaſſauoir, en le conſideration de le ley, Que ſi I. S. moruſt eyant vn droit heire en vie, & viuant le leſſee pur vie, donques ceo eſt vn bone remainder, & a ore veſte & vient en le dit droit heire, en tiel ſort que il poit graunt forfait ou auterment diſpoſe ceo, & ceſsa deſte ore en abeyance, pur ceo que il eſt vn a ore de abilitie pur prender ceo, pur ceo que I. S. eſt mort & ad relinquiſhe vn droit heire en vie, le quel ne poit eſtre viuant I. S. car durāt ſon vie nul poit properment eſte dit ſon heire. Itē ſi vn home ſoit patron dun eſgliſe, & preſent auter a ceo, Ore eſt le fee des terres ou tenements perteignant al rectory en le perſon, mes ſi le ꝑſon moruſt & le eſgliſe eſt deuenus void, donque eſt le

fee en abeyance, tanque il ſoit vn nouel Parſon preſent, car le patron nad le fee, mes ſo lemēt le droit de preſenter, & le fee eſt in le incumbent, que eſt preſent, & puis ſon mort, il neſt en aſcun mes en abeyance, tanque il ſoit vn nouel incumbent come eſt auant dit.
                  Veyes Lit. lib. 3. Cap. 11. Fol. 145. Et Park. fol. 12.
               
               
                  Abiſherſing.
                  ABiſherſing (& in aſcun copies Miſherſing) hoc eſt quietum eſſe de amerciamētis corā quibuſcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      de trāſgreſsione probata.
               
               
                  Abiuration.
                  ABiuration eſt vn ſerement, q̄ home ou feme preygnont quant ils ont commiſſe felome, & fue al Egliſe ou cemitorie, ou auter lieu priuiledge pur tuitiō de lour vyes, eſlyſāt pluiſtoſt ꝑpetual baniſhment hors de Realme, que a eſtoier a le ley, & deſtre trie del felony. En cel caſe deuant le Coroner il ferra tiel confeſsion que puit

faire ſufficient endytement de felony, donques le Coroner al common ley luy ferra de abiure la Realme et aſſigne a luy quel port il alera et luy iura que il ne va hors del haut chymin & que il ne demurra en le port, (ſil poit auer bone paſſage) forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vn flood & vn ebb, & ſil ne poit auer paſſage, que il alera cheſcun iour durant xl. iours in la meare a ſon genu, Mes ſi 
                        •
                     iel felon que abiure, ala hors de la chemine & fue a auter lieu, ſi il ſo it priſe, il ſerra ameſne deuaunt le Iudge, & la auera iudgement deſtre pendus. Mes ſil que iſsint pria la priuiledge ne voil abiure, donques il auera la priuiledge pur xl. iours & cheſcun poit luy doner vyande. Mes ſi aſcun doner luy vyande apres xl. iours, meſque il ſoit ſa femme, tiel doner eſt felonie, Auxy ceſtuy que abiure ſerra deliuer per vn Conſtable a lauter, & de vn franchiſe a lauter, tanque

il vient a ſon port, & ſi le Conſtable ne voit receiue luy, il ſerra greuouſment amercie. Vide iuramentum in tractatu de Abiuratione Latronum.
                  Et ceſt ley fuit inſtitute per S. Edward le Confeſſor, vn Roy de ceſt realme deuant le Conqueſt, & fuit ground de le ley de mercie, & pur le amour & reuerence ſans doubt, que il & auters ſes ſucceſſors porteront al meaſon de Dieu, ou lieu de praiers & adminiſtration de ſon parol & ſacramēts, le quel nous appellomus, le Eſgliſe. Nota cel ley eſt ore change per ſtatutes 21. H. 8. ca. 2. 22, H. 8. ca. 14. & 32. H. 8. ca. 12. Per queux appiert que il a cel iour ne abiurera le realme, eins tout ſon libertie de ceſt realme, & de ſon liberal & frāk habitations, reſorts & paſſages de touts lieus de ceſt realme, a vn certaine lieu en cel realme a ceo limit per 32. H. 8. cap. 13. & 33. H. 8. ca. 15. Vide plus inde Staf. li. 2. ca. 10.
               
               
                  
                  8 Abridgement de plaint ou demaund.
                  ABridgmēt de plaint ou demand eſt lou vn port vn Aſsiſſe, brief de dower, briefe de garde, ou tiel ſē
                     blables, ou le brief de Aſſiſe eſt, de libero ten̄to, come en briefe de dower, le brief eſt, Rationabilem dotem quae eā cōtingit de libero tenemento, w. ſon baron. En en vn briefe de gard le briefe eſt cuſtod' terrarum & hered' &c. & le pl' ou demaundant, demaund diuers acres, ou parcells de terre, & le tenaunt plede Nontenure, ou ioyntenancy, ou aſcun auter tiel ſemblable plee a parcel del terre demaund, en abatement del briefe, dōques le plaintife ou demaundant poit abridger ſon plaint, ou demaund al ceſt parcel, ceſt adire, il poit omit hors ceſt part & prie q̄ le tenant reſpondra a reſt a que il ne ad vncore pled' aſcun choſe. Le cauſe eſt pur ceo q̄ en tiels br̄es le certainty neſt miſe, mes demaund eſt generalment de libero ten̄to; & nient

obſtant le demaundant ad abridge ſon plaint ou demand en part, vncore le briefe demurre bon de libero tenemento pur le reſidue.
               
               
                  ¶ Accedas ad Curiam.
                  ACcedas ad Curiam eſt vn brief direct al vicont, luy commaundant daler a tiel court daſcun ſeignior ou franchiſe lou vn plaint eſt ſue pur priſel del auers come diſtreſſe, ou aſcun faux iudgment eſt ſuppoſe deſtre fait en aſcun ſuit que fuit en tiel court, quel neſt court de record, & que le vicont la ferra record del dit ſuit en preſence del ſutors de meſme le Court, & de quatuor autres chiualers del Countie, & oeo record certifier̄ al court, & a cel iour quel eſt aſsigne en le briefe.
               
               
                  ¶ Acceptance.
                  ACceptance eſt vn prendrans en bon gree, & come vn agreement al aſcun choſe fait deuant, le quel poit eſte auoide & vnfait (ſi tiel acceptance

nad eſtre) per luy ou ceux que iſsint accepta, ſicome pur example: ſi vn Eueſque deuant primo Eliz. leſſe terre part del poſſeſsions de ſon Eueſcherie pur ans reſeruant rent & moruſt, & puis vn auter eſt fait Eueſque, le quel accepta, ceſt adire, priſt ou receiue le rent quant il eſt & doit eſtre pay, ore per ceſt acceptance le leaſe eſt fait perfect & bon, le quel auterment le nouel Eueſque poit aſſets bien auoid & faire fruſtrate.
                  Semblable ley eſt, ſi vn home & ſa feme ſeiſi de terres en droit del feme ioin & font leas ou 
                        •
                     effment per fait reſeruant rent, & le baron moniſt, el accept ou receyu
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                      rent, per cel le feoffement ou leaſe eſt fait perfect & boue, & ſerra barre a luy de porter ſa brief appel Cui in vita.
               
               
                  11 Acceſſories.
                  ACceſſories ſont en deux ſortes, lun auaunt le fact, le auter puis le fact fait. Acceſſorie

deuant le fait eſt celuy que commāda ou procura auter de faire felony, & neſt la preſent luy meſme quant lau ter le fait, mes ſil ſoit preſent donques il eſt auxi principal. Acceſſorie puis le fait eſt celuy que receiua, fauora, aida, aſsiſt, on comfort aſcun home que ad fait aſcun murder ou felonie, dont il ad conuſance, tiel acceſſorie ſerra puniſh, & auera iudgement de vie & de member, auxybien come le principal que fiſt le felonie: Mes tiel acceſſorie ne ſerra iammais mis a reſponder a ceo tā
                     que le principal ſoit conuict ou attaint, ou ſoit vtlage de ceo. Mes vn feme en tiel caſe ne ſerra acceſſorie pur le aider de ſon baron: en grande ou hault Treaſon ſibien les commanders, come les aſsiſters & receiuors ap̄s ſōt touts foits principals▪
                  
                  Auxy vn poit eſtre acceſſorie al acceſſorie, ſicōe vn feloniouſemēt receiue vn auter q̄ eſt acceſſorie al felonie, la le receiuer

eſt vn acceſſorie.
                  Veies pluis del acceſſorie en le dit Lieur de les Plees del Crowne, le primer lieur, cap. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. & 50.
               
               
                  12 ¶ Action.
                  ACtion eſt le forme de vn ſuit done per le ley de recouer choſe, come action de dette & tiels ſemblables.
                  Vide Lexicon Iuris pur action.
               
               
                  13 ¶ Actions perſonals.
                  Actions perſonals ſont tiels actions pur queux home claime det ou auter biens & chateux, ou damage pur eux, ou damage pur tort fait a ſon perſon, & eſt properment cel que en le Ciuil ley eſt appel Actio in perſonam, quae aduerſus cum intenditur, qui ex contractu vel delicto obligatus eſt aliquid dare aut concedere.
               
               
                  14 ¶ Actions reals.
                  ACtions reals ſont tiels actions per queux le demandant claim title al

aſcun terres ou tenemēts rents ou commons, in fee ſimple, fee taile, ou pur terme de vie.
               
               
                  Action populer.
                  ACtion populer eſt vn action q̄ eſt done ſur le breach daſcū penal ſtatute, le q̄l actiō cheſc▪ hōe q̄ voit poit ſuer pur luy m̄ & le Roigne, ꝑ information ou auterm̄t, come le ſtatut allow & le caſe require. Et de ceux actiōs il y ad infinite number, mes vn pur example eſt: Quāt aſcun del Iurie que ſont impanel & iurus de paſſer perenter partie & partie indifferentment, priſt aſcun choſe de lun part ou laut, ou de ambideux parties pur lour verdict dire al ceo part, donques aſcun home q̄ voit deins lan procheine enſuant le offence fait, poit ſuer vn briefe appel Decies tantū enūs luy, ou ceux q̄ iſsint priſt pur lour verdit dire, & pur ceo q̄ ceſt action neſt don al vn hōe ſpecialm̄t, mes generalment al aſc▪ de les peopl▪ del R. q̄
                     
voit ſuer, il eſt appell vn Action populer, mes en cel caſe, quant vn auoit commence de purſuer cel action, nul auter poit ceo ſuer, & en ceo come ſemble cel varie del action populer per le Ciuil ley.
               
               
                  16 Action mixt.
                  ACtion mixt eſt vn ſuit done per la ley de recouer le choſe demaund, & auxy damages pur le tort fait, come en Aſsiſe de Nouel diſſeiſin, quel briefe (ſi le diſſeiſor fait feoffemēt al auter) le diſſeiſee auera vers le diſſeiſor & le feffee ou auter terre tenant, & en ceo recouera ſon ſeiſin del terre & ſes dammages pur le mean ꝓfits, & pur le tort a luy fait. Et iſsint eſt vn action de Waſt & Quare impedit. Mes vn actiō de Detinu neſt appel action mixt, com̄t ꝑ ceo le choſe detenus eſt demaund, & ſerra recouer ſi poit eſte troue, & damages pur le detain̄, & ſi ne poit eſtre troue, dō
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      damages pur

la choſe & la deteiner▪ Mes ceo eſt appell ſolement action perſonall que ſerra port ſolement pur biens ou chattels.
               
               
                  Action del briefe.
                  ACtion del briefe eſt vn phraſe del parlance, vſe quant vn plede aſcun matter, per que il monſtre que le plaintife nad cauſe dauer le briefe que il port, & vncore poit eſte que il poit auer auter briefe ou action pur meſme le matter: tiel plee eſt appell plee al action del briefe, lou ſi per la plee appiert que le plaintife naueroit aſcun cauſe de auer aſcun action pur le choſe demaund, donq̄
                     ▪ ceo ſerra dit plee al action.
               
               
                  Action ſur le caſe.
                  ACtion ſur le caſe eſt br̄ port enuers vn pur aſcun offence fait ſans force, come pur nient ꝑformāce del promiſe fait

per le defendant al plaintife, ou pur parlance des parolles per queux le plaintife eſt defame, ou pur auter miſdemeanor ou diſceit, lou tout le caſe ſerra contenus en le briefe.
               
               
                  19 Action ſur le ſtatute.
                  ACtion ſur le ſtatute eſt briefe foundue ſur aſcun eſtatute, lou per aſcun eſtatute vn action eſt done a vn en aſcun caſe lou nul tiel action fuit deuant: Come lou vn commit periurie al preiudice dun auter, ceſtuy que eſt dampnifi
                        •
                      auera briefe ſur leſtatute & ſon caſe. Et le difference enter action ſur le ſtatute & action Populer eſt, que lou le ſtatute done le ſuit ou action al partie grieue, ou auterment, a vn perſon certaine, ceo eſt appell Action ſur▪ le Statute: Mes lou per le ſtatute aucthoritie eſt done a cheſcun que voyle de

ſuer, ceo eſt appell action populer.
               
               
                  Accompt.
                  ACcompt, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou Bailife ou receiuer daſcun Seigniour ou dauter home, que doit render accompt, ne voit ſon accompt render, donques celuy a que laccompt doit eſte rende, auera ceſt briefe. Et per leſtatute de Weſtminſter 2. Capitulo 10. ſi laccomptant ſoit troue in arrerages, les Auditours que ſount a luy aſsignes, ount power de agarder luy a priſon la a demurrer tanque il ad fait gree al party, Mes ſi les Auditours ne voillont allower reaſonable expence & coſtage, ou ſils chargeront luy oue pluſours reſceipts quant ne duiſſent, donques ſon procheyne amye, que voit ſuer pur luy, ſuera vn briefe de Ex parte talis hors del Chauncery, direct al Vicount de

prender iiii. mainpernors de render ſon corps deuant les Barons del Exchequer a certaine iour, & de garner le Seigniour dapperer la a meſme le iour.
               
               
                  21 Accord.
                  ACcord eſt vn agreemēt ꝑenter deux al meins pur ſatisfie vn offence que le vn ad fait al auter, Quant vn home ad fait vn treſpas ou tiel ſemblable al auter, pur le quel il ad agree oue luy de ſatisfier & content luy oue recompence, quel ſi ſoit executed & perform̄, dō
                     ques pur ceo que ceſt recompence, eſt vn pleine ſatisfaction pur le offēce, il ſerra vn bon barr̄ en le ley, ſi laut apres laccord perfourme, voit ſuer arere vn action pur meſme le treſpas.
                  Nota que le primer eſt ꝓprement appelle vn Accord, le aut eſt vn cōtract.
               
               
                  22 Acquital.
                  ACquital eſt quant, il y ad Seignior, meſne, &

tenaut, & le tenant tient de le meſne certeine terres ou tenemēts en frakalmoigne, frankmariage ou tiels ſemblables, & le meſne tient ouſter auxy de le Seign̄ paramount ou deuant luy. Ore doit le meſne acquite ou diſcharge le tenant, de tout & cheſcun maner de ſeruice, q̄ aſcū 
                     aut vo
                        •
                     t auer ou demaund de luy concernant meſmes les tres ou tenemēts, pur ceo q̄ le tenant doit fair le ſeruice a le meſne tantſolement, & nemy al diuers Sn̄rs pur vn ten̄t, ou parcel del terre. Meſm̄ le ley eſt ou il eſt Sn̄r, meſne, & tenant come auātdit, & le meſne granta al tenāt (ſur le tenure fait parenter eux) pur acquiter & diſcharger luy de touts rēts, ſeruices & tiels ſemblables, Ceſt diſcharge eſt appel Acquitall.
                  Meſme le ley eſt, ſi tenant tient de ſon meſne per autiels ſeruices, come le meſne tient ouſter del Seigniour, & le tenant fait ou paye ſeruices al

meſne, mes le meſne ne feſoit ſes ſeruices al ſeignior paramount, per que il diſtreine les beſtes del tenant, en cel caſe le meſne pur le ouelty del ſeruices doit acquitter le tenaunt del ſeruices due al Seignior.
               
               
                  23 Acquitance.
                  ACquitance, eſt vn diſcharge en eſcript dun ſumme de mony, ou auter duty, quel doit eſte pay ou fait: Si come vn ſoit oblige de paier mony ſur vn obligation, ou rent reſerue ſur vn leas, ou tiel ſemblable, & le party a q̄ le mony ou duety doit eſte pay, ou fait, ſur le reſceit de ceo, ou ſur auter agreement parenter eux ewe, fait eſcript, ou bil de ſon mayne en diſcharge de ceo, teſtmoinaunt que 
                        •
                     l eſt pay, ou auterment cōtent, & pur ceo acquite, & diſcharge luy de ceo, le quel acquitaunce eſt tiel diſcharge & barre in le ley, que il ne poit demand & recouer meſme le ſumme ou duty auter

foits contra a ceo, ſil poit monſtre le acquitance.
                  Ceſt paroll differt ab hoc, quod in iure ciuili acceptitatio dicitur, quia illud fieri poteſt verbo fine ſcripto, & nihil aliud eſt quam 
                        •
                     icta ſolutio & liberatio, licet ſolutio non ſit: nec Apocha dici poteſt, quae cautio eſt ſolutae dataeue pecuniae▪ quae non liberat niſi pecunia ſoluta ſit.
               
               
                  Actes.
                  ACtes de parliament ſont leys poſitiue que conſiſt de deux partes, ceſt adir de les parols del act, & del ſenſe de ceo, & ils ambideux ioint enſemble font la ley.
               
               
                  Additions.
                  ADdition, eſt ceo que eſt done al home ouſter ſon proper noſme & ſirnoſme, ceſt adire, pur monſtrer, de quel eſtate, ou degree, ou miſterye il eſt, & de que Ville ou Hamlett ou Countie.
                  
                     Additions de eſtate ſont ceux, yeoman, gentleman Eſquire, & tiels ſēblables.
                  Additiōs de degree ſont ceux q̄ nous appellomus noſmes de dignitie, come Chiualer, Conte, Marques & Dux.
                  Additions de miſterie ſont ceux, ſcriuener, painter, maſon, carpenter, tailor, ſmith, & iſsint toutes auters de ſemblable nature, car miſtery ē le craft ou occupation, per que home gaine ſon liuing.
                  Additions de villes cōe Sale, Dale, & tiels auters, & iſsint de les auters.
                  Et lou vn home ad houſhold en deux leuz, il ſerra dit demurr en ambideux, iſsint que ſon addition en vn de cux ſuffiſt.
                  Fuit ordeine per leſtatute Anno 1. Henrici 5. Cap. 5. que en ſutes ou actions, ou proces dutlagarie giſt, tiels additions ſerra al noſme defendant, a declarer ſon eſtate, miſterie & lieu ou il enhabite, & que tiels briefs abateront ſils ne ount tiels additions,

ſi le defendant priſt exception a ceo, mes ils ne abateront per office del Court.
                  Auxy Duke, Marqueſſe, Counte, ou Chiualer ne ſont pas del ceux additiōs, mes noſmes de dignitie, queux, duiſſont auer eſtre done deuant le Statute.
                  Et ceo fuit ordeigne per ceſt Statut fait en le primer an de Roy H. le 5. ca. 5. al intent q̄ vn home ne ſerroit greeue ne trouble pur le vtlagarie de vn auter: mes que per reaſon de le certaine addition, cheſcun home poit eſte certainment conus, & portera ſa burden demeſne.
               
               
                  Adiournement.
                  ADiournemēt eſt quant aſcun Court eſt diſſolue & determine, & aſſigne deſtr̄ gard arrere al auter lieu ou temps, & come ſemble, eſt cōpound de deux parols, (ad) ou (al) & iour.
               
               
                  Admeaſurement de Dower.
                  ADmeaſurem̄t de dower eſt vn briefe▪ & neſt

lou vn feme eſt endowe per vn infant, ou per vn gardein de pluis que deuoit auer, le heire en tiel caſe auera ceſt briefe, per quel le feme ſerra admeaſure, & le heire reſtore a le ſurpluſage. Mes ſi vn abate, ceſt adire, vn que nad droit entre apres le mort le barron, & endowe la feme de ceſtuy que eſt mort, de pluis que doit auer, le heire nauera ceſt briefe, mes aſsiſe de Mortdaunceſter vers la feme, & ſi el plede que el fuit endow de ceo terre come del franktenement ſa baron, le heire monſtra coment el fuit endowe per labatour, & quel el ad pluis, que deuoit auer, & prier̄ que il ſoit reſtore al ſurpluſage, & ſi ſoit troue, il ſerra reſtore.
               
               
                  28 Admeaſurement de paſture.
                  ADmeaſurement de paſture, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou pluſors tenaunts ont common appendant en auter terre, & vn ſurcharge

le cōmon oue pluſors auers: Dōques lauters cōmoners poient auer ceſt brief vers luy, & auxy poit eſtre port per vn commoner ſolemēt, mes donq̄es couient eſtre port vers touts lauters commoners, & vers ceſty q̄ ſurcharge, pur ceo q̄ touts les cōmoners ſerront admeaſures.
                  Et ceſt briefe ne giſt vers luy, ne ꝓur luy que ad common appurtenant, ou common ingros, mes ceux que ont commō appendant, ou common ꝑ cauſe de vicinage.
                  Vide le diuerſitie de touts ceux cōmons apres.
                  Auxy ceſt brief ne giſt pur le ſeignior, ne vers le ſeignior, mes ſeignior poit diſtrain les auers le tenaunt que ſont ſurpluſage. Mes ſi le ſeignior ſurcharge le common, les commoners nont remedy per le commō ley, mes vn Aſsiſe de ſon common.
               
               
                  ¶ Adminiſtrator.
                  ADminiſtrator eſt celuy a que le ordinarie cō
                     mit 
                        •
                     adminiſtration des

biens la mort pur defaut de executors, & action giſt vers luy, & pur luy come pur executor, & ſerra charge reſques al value des biens le mort & niēt ouſter, ſil ne ſoit per ſon faux plea, ou pur ceo que il ad waſt les biens le mort. Mes ſi le adminiſtratour deuie, ſes executors ne ſont adminiſtrators, mes couient al Ordinarie de commit nouel adminiſtration: mes ſi vn eſtrange que neſt adminiſtratour ne executor priſt les biens le mort, & adminiſter de ſon tort demeſne, il ſerra charge & ſue come executor, & nemy come adminiſtrator en aſcū actiō que eſt port vers luy per aſcun creditor. Mes ſi lordinarie fait vn brief ad Colligendum bona defuncti, ceſtuy que ad tiel letter neſt adminiſtrator, mes laction giſt vers le Ordinarie auxybien come ſil priſt les biens en ſon maine demeſne, ou per le maine de aſcun de ſes ſeruants per aſcun auter cōmandmēt.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Admiral.
                  ADmirall eſt vn officer ſouth le Roigne, que ad aucthority ſur le mere tantum, pur veier le nauie repaire & maintain pur ſuppreſſer & chaſer dehors eſtimures de mere, & de faire droit de contractes perenter partie & partie, concernant choſe fait ſur & ouſter le mere, & pur ceſt purpoſe il ad ſō court appel le Admiraltie. Il poit cauſer ſon Citation deſtre ſerue ſur le terr̄ & prēder le corps del party ou biens en execution ſur le terre.
                  Itē il ad cogniſance del mort ou maihem de vn home fait en aſcun grand mefe fleetant en graund ryuers en le Realme, debaſe les pontes de eux prochein al mere.
                  Auxy pur arreſt niefes en les graund ſtreames pur les voiages del Roign & realm, & ad iuriſdictiō en les dits ſtreames durāt meſme viages.
               
               
                  ¶ Ad quod dampnum.
                  AD quod dampnum eſt vn briefe que doit eſte

ſue deuant le Roy grant certaine liberties: Come faire, market, ou tiels ſemblables queux poient eſte p̄iudicial al autres. Et ꝑ ceo ſerra inquiſe ſi ſerroit preiudice a granter eux, & a que ſerra preiudicial, & que preiudice ent auiendra.
               
               
                  32 ¶ Aduowſon.
                  ADuowſon eſt lou vn home & ſes heirs ont droit de preſenter lour clerk al Ordinarie al vn parſonage, ou auter eſpiritual benefice quant il deuient void. Et celuy que ad tiel droit de preſenter eſt appel patron.
               
               
                  33 ¶ Age prier.
                  AGe prier eſt quant action eſt port vers enfāt de terre que il ad per diſcent, la il monſtra le matter al court, & priera que le action demurra tanque a ſon plein age de xxj. ans, & iſsint per agard del Court le ſuit ſurceſſera.
                  Mes en brief de Dower & en Aſsiſe, & auxy en tiels actions lou le infant

eſt ſuppoſe a veneral terre en demaund de ſon tort demeſne, il nauera ſa age.
                  Auxy nota que ſont pluſors diuerſities de ages, car le Seignior auera aide de ſon tenaunt en Socage pur marrier ſa file, quant le file le ſeignior eſt del age de ſept ans. Et auxy aide pur faire ſon fites & heire chiualer, quant il eſt del age de ſept ans.
                  Auxy feme que eſt eſpouſe al age de ix. ans▪ ſi ſa baron moruſt ſeiſie auera Dower, & nemy deuant ix. ans.
                  Auxy xiiii. ans eſt le age de feme que ne ſerra en gard, ſi el fuit de tiel age al temps del mort ſon aunceſtor, mes ſi el fuit deins age de xiiii. ans, & en gard ſon ſeignior, donques el ſerra en gard tan
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      al age de xvi. ans. Et auxy xxi. ans eſt lage de heire male deſtre en gard, & apres ceo hors de gard. Et auxy il eſt le age de male & female de ſuer & deſtre ſue des

terres, q̄ ils ont ou claime per diſcēt & de faire touts manners contracts & bargaines & nient deuant: mes ſi tiel infaunt deins age de xxj. ans done ſes biēs▪ & le donee eux priſt, lenfant poet auer vn action de treſpas, mes auterm̄ il eſt ſil deliuer eux.
               
               
                  24 ¶ Agreement.
                  AGreement▪ eſt en ceſt manner define ou expounde en maſter Ploudens commentaries. Aggreamentum, eſt vn paroll compounde de deux parolx; ceſt aſſauoir, de Aggregatio & Mentium, ceſt a dire agreement de ments, iſsint que aggreamentum eſt aggregatio mentium in re aliqua facta vel facienda. Et per le contraction de les deux parolx, Aggregatio & mentium, & per le correpte & briefe perlance deux, ils ſont fait vn parol, ceſtaſſ. Aggreamentum, le quel neſt auter choſe, q̄ vn vniō, collecte copulation & coniunction de deu
                        •
                      ou pluſours

ments in aſcun choſe fait ou deſte fait. (Veies apres en teſtament.) Et ceſt agreement eſt in 3. maners.
                  Le primer eſt vn agrement executed en fait al commencement.
                  Le ſecond, eſt vn agrement puis vn act fait per auter, & eſt vn agreemēt executed auxy.
                  Le tierce eſt vn agreement executory ou deſte fait ē tēpsvncore a vener.
                  Le primer que eſt vn agreemēt executed en fait al cōmencement, eſt tiel de q̄ mennon eſt fait en le ſtatute de 25. Ed. 3. cap▪ 3. de panms in le quart ſtatute que dit, que les biens & choſes achates per foreſtallers, q̄ de ceo ſerront attaintes ſoient forfaites al Roigne, ſi le achator ēt vſt fait gree al vēdour. En quel caſe, ceſt parol (Gree) q̄ eſt auterment appel agreement, ſerra entende agreement execute, viz. paiment pur les choſes.
                  Le ſecond maner de agreement eſt lou vn fait

vn choſe ou acte, & vn auter agree ou aſſent a ceo apres, come ſi vn fait diſſeiſ
                        •
                     n a mon vſe, & apres 
                        •
                     eo agree a ceo, ore ieo ſerra diſſeiſor ab initio▪ & tiel agreement eſt vn agreemēt puys vn acte fait.
                  Le tierce agreement eſt quant ambideux parties a vn temps ſont accords que tiel choſe ſerra fait en tēps a vener, & ceo agrement eſt executorie entāt que le choſe ſerra fait apres & vncore la lour ments accor
                        •
                      a vn temps. Mes entāt que le perf
                        ••
                     
                     māce ſerra apres, & iſsmt le choſe ſur que lagrem̄t fuit fait, remaine a faire, ceo agreement ſerra dit executorie. Et ceo le ſtatute de 26. H. 8. cap. 3. proue, ou il dit, q̄ cheſcun vicar, parſon & tiel &c. deuant lour actual poſſeſsiō ou medling oue les ꝓofits de lour benefice ſatiſfiera, cōtent &c. ou agreera a paier al vſe le Roign les primer fruits &c. 
                        〈…〉
                      ſi aſc tiel Parſō, vic &c. enter ē actual poſſeſſion,

&c. ceo agrement eſt deſte entende executory, come le common vſage proue, car eſt vſe, que
                        •
                     l oue vn ou deux oue luy fa
                        •
                     er̄ deux vel trois obligations pur ceo deſte pay en certaine iours apres, & ceſt agrement executory eſt deuidem deux points. Vn eſt agreement executory, que eſt certaine al cōmencement, come eſt dit darraine deuant del primer fruits.
                  Lauter eſt lou le certainty napp
                        •
                     ert al primes & les parties ſōt accords q̄ le choſe ſerra performe, ou pay ſur le certainty conus▪ come ſi vn vend al auter tout ſon wheat en tiel taſſe en ſon barne nient threſh & il eſt agree perenter eux, que il payera pur cheſcun buſhell xii. d. quant il eſt threſh, cleane, & meaſure.
               
               
                  ¶ Ayde.
                  AYde, eſt quant tenant a terme de vie, tenant en dower, tenaunt per le curteſie, ou tenāt en taile, ap̄s poſsibility diſſue extinct

eſt implede, dōques pur ceo que ils nont que eſtate pur terme de vie, ils praieront aide de ceſtuy in le reuerſiō, & proces ſerra fait ꝑ brief vers luy, de vener & pleder oue le tenant, en defence del terre ſi voyl, mes il couient, que ils accorde en plee: car ſils varie, le plee le tenant, ſerra priſe, & dōques leyde pryer eſt en vaine, mes ſi ne vient al ſecond briefe, le tenant reſpondera ſole.
                  Auxy tenant pur terme de ans, tenāt a volunt, tenant per Elegit, & tenāt ꝑ ſtatute marchant aueront ayde de ceſtuy en la reuerſion, & le ſeruant & bayly de lour maiſter, quant ils ount fait aſcun choſe loyalmēt, ē le droit lour maſter, auerōt ayde.
               
               
                  36 ¶ Ayde de Roy.
                  AYde de Roy, eſt en ſē
                     ble caſe come eſt dit deuant de cōmon perſon, & auxy en pluſours auts caſes, lou le roy puytauer perde, coment que le tenaunt ſoit tenaunt in fee

ſimple, il auera ayde, Come ſi vn rent ſoit demande vers tenaunt le Roy, que tient en chiefe, il auera ayde, & iſsint nauera de auter perſon.
                  Auxy lou vn Citie ou Borough ad vn fee farme del Roy, & aſcun choſe eſt demaund vers eux que apperteme al fee farme, ils aueront ayde pur le perde le Roy.
                  Auxy home auera ayde de Roy en lieu de voucher. Auxy le Baylife, Collectour & Purueiour del Roy aueront ayde del Roy, auxy bien come les officers de auters perſons.
               
               
                  ¶ Ayle.
                  AYle, eſt vn briefe que giſt lou terre deſcend de layell a ſon neuiew, viz. fits, ou file del fites de layell, le pier eſteant mort, deuant entrie per luy, & vn abate, le heire auera vers le abator cel briefe.
               
               
                  
                  38. Alien.
                  ALien, eſt celuy q̄ pere & il meſme fuer̄ ambideux nee hors del legeance le Roigne, & ſi tiel alien, neſteant vn enemy del Roigne, mes vn alien amy vient & demurr̄ cy en Engleterre & ad iſſue, ceſt iſſue nē aliē mes Anglois. Iſsint ſi vn Anglois ala ouſter le mere oue le licēce del roign̄ & la ad iſſu, cē iſſu nē alien.
               
               
                  39 Alienation.
                  ALienation, idem eſt, quod alienum facere de alter̄, ou mitter le poſſeſsion de terre ou auter choſe de lun home al auter.
               
               
                  40 Ambidexter.
                  AMbidexter, eſt celuy que quant vn matter eſt in ſuit parenter homs, priſt money de lun part, & del auter, ou pur labor le ſuit, ou tiels ſemblables, ou ſil ſoit del iury, pur dire ſon verdict.
               
               
                  41 Amendement.
                  AMendement, eſt quant error eſt en le Proces,

les Iuſtices poient ceo amender apres iudgemēt. Mes ſi error ſort en iugement done, ils ne poyent amender ceo, mes le partie eſt miſe al briefe de errour. Et in pluſours caſes lou le default appiert en le clerk q̄ eſcriera la Record il ſerra amende: Mes tiels choſes que vient per informatiō del partie come le ville, miſterie, & huiuſmodi ne ſerra amēd, car il doit informer veray a ſon perill.
               
               
                  Amercement.
                  AMercement, plus properment eſt vn penaltie aſſeſſe per les piers del partie amercie, pur vn offence fait, come pur default de ſuit de court, ou pur non amend' de aſcun choſe que il fuit appoint de redreſſer deuant, ou pur tiel ſemblable cauſe, en quel caſe la partie que offend ſoit miſt en le mercie del roy ou Seigniour, & ſur ceo cel penaltie eſt appel Amercement.
               
               
                  
                  43 Amercement royal.
                  AMercement royal, eſt quant vn Vicont, Coron̄ ou aut tiel officer del Roigne eſt amercie ꝑ les Iuſtices pur ſon miſdemeaning en le office, q̄re ſi neſerra dit fine.
               
               
                  44 An, iour & waſt.
                  AN, iour & waſt, eſt vn forfaiture, quāt vn hōc ad fait petit treaſon ou felony, & ad terres queux il tient de aſcun commō perſon, q̄ux ſerra ſciſi pur le Roigne & remain en ſa maines ꝑ la ſpace de vn an & vn iour procheine apres le attainder, & dō
                     ques les aibres ſerrōt defoſſe, les meaſons ſerront raſes, & les paſtures, & prees aires & plowed, ſinon que il, a que le terre deuenera per leſchete ou forfaiture, ne ceo redeem̄ de Roy, vn choſe le plus de greeuer le offendors & terrifie auters de cader en autiel, en demonſtraunce, coment le ley deteſt lour offence, cye auaunt iſsint que il execute iudgement &

puniſhment ſur lour mute & mort choſes.
               
               
                  Annuitie.
                  ANnuitie, eſt vn certein ſūme de money grant al vn auter, en fee ſimple, fee taile, pur terme de vie ou pur terme de ans, a receiuer del grantor ou ſes heires, iſsint q̄ nul franktenement eſt charge de ceo, de que home nauera vnques, aſſiſe ne aut action forſque briefe de annuitie, & neſt aſcun aſſets al heire le grantee a que il diſcendera.
               
               
                  Appeale.
                  APpeale, eſt lou vn ad fait murder, robberie ou mayhem, donques la feme ceſtuy que eſt tue, auera vn action de appeale vers le murderer, mes ſil nad femme donques ſon procheine heire male auera le appeale a aſcun temps deins lan & iour apres le feaſt, Et auxi ceſtuy que eſt iſsint robbe ou mayhem auera ſon appeale, & ſi le defendant ſoit acquit, il

recouera damages vers lappellour & labbettors, & ils auerōt le impriſonment dun an & ferra fine al Roy. Appeale de mayhem neſt en manner forſque action de treſpas, ear il ne recouera forſque damages.
               
               
                  47 ¶ Appellant.
                  Appellant eſt le plaintif en le appeale.
               
               
                  48 ¶ Appellour.
                  APpellourou Approuer, eſt ceſty q̄ ad fait aſc felonie le quel il confeſſe & a ore appeale, ou approue, ceſt adire, accuſe autres que fueront coadiutors ou aiders oue luy en feaſans de ceo, ou autres felonies, le quel choſe il voit approuer & ceo eſt appelle ē latin Probator.
               
               
                  49 ¶ Appendant & appurtenant.
                  APpendant & appurtenant ſont choſes q̄ per temps de preſcription ont belong, appertain, & ſont ioyne al auter principal choſe, oueſque que

ils paſſont & va come acceſſarie al meſme principal choſe, per vertue de ceux parolx Pertinentijs: come terre, aduowſons, cōmōs, piſcaries, chimins courtes, & diuers tielx ſēbl', al vn manor, meaſō, office, ou tiels auters.
               
               
                  Apporcionment.
                  APporcionment eſt vn deuiding en parts de vn rēt (le quel eſt diuidable & ment intier ou whole) & entāt q̄ le choſe hors de quel il fuit deſte pay, ē ſeperate & deuide, le rēt auxy ſerra deuide, ayant reſpect a les partes. Sicome vn home ad vn rent ſeruice iſſuant hors de terre & il purchaſe parcel de le terre, le rent ſerra apportion, accordāt al value del terre.
                  Iſſint ſi home tient ſon terre dun auter per homage, fealtie, eſcuage, & certain rent, ſi le ſeignior de que le terre eſt tenus purchaſe parcel del terre le rent ſerra apportion.
                  Item ſi home leſſa terres pur ans reſeruant rēt, & apres vn eſtrange recouer

part de le terre, donques le rent ſerra apportiō, ceſt adire deuide, & le leſſee payera ayant reſpect a ceo que eſt recouer, & a ceo que ore remaine en ſes maines accordant al value.
                  Mes vn rent charge ne poit eſtre apportion, ne choſes q̄ ſont entier: Sicome vn tient terres per ſeruice de paier a ſon Seignior annuelm̄t a tiel feaſt, vn chiual, eſperuer, vn roſe, vn chery, ou tiels ſemblables, la ſi le Seignior purchaſe parcel de la terre, ceſt ſeruice eſt tout ale, pur ceo q̄ vn chiual, eſperuer, roſe, ou vn chery, & tielx auters ne poient eſtre deuide, ſeuered, ou apportiō ſans damage al entiertie.
               
               
                  51 Appropriation.
                  APpropriations fueront quāt ceux meaſons de le Romiſh Religion, & ceux Religious perſons, come Abbots, Priors, & tiels ſemblables, ont le aduowſon de aſcū parſonage al eux & a lour ſucceſſors, & obtain licence

de lour S. Pere le Pape, & de le Ordinarie & Roy, q̄ ils meſmes & lour ſucceſſors de ceo en auant doyent eſte parſons la, & il ſerra en auāt vn vicar', & que le Vicar ſeruera le cure. Et iſsint al cōmencem̄t Appropriations fueront faites ſolement a ceux perſons ſpirituals, que puiſſciēt miniſter les ſacraments, & dire deuine ſeruice, come Abbes, Priors, Deanes, & tiels ſemblables. Apres per petite & petite ils fueront enlarge & fait as auters, come noſmement al Deane & Chapter, quel eſt corps corporat, conſiſtant de pluſors, q̄l corps enſemble ne puiſſoit dire deuine ſeruice: & q̄ pluis fuit, al Nuns que fueront Prioreſſes de aſcun Nūry quel fuit choſe horrible, entant q̄ ils ne puiſſoient miniſter ſacraments ne preacher, ne dire deuine ſeruice al parochians.
                  Et tout ceo fuit ſur pretence de hoſpitalitie & maintenance de yeel. Et de ſupplier cel defectes

vn vicar fuit deuiſe, quel ſerroit deputie al Priores ou Deane & Chapter, & auxy al darrein al dits abbeis & auters a dire deuine ſeruice, & il aueroit pur ſon labor forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      petite portion, & ils a quel le appropriatiōs fueront fait reteigneront le grād reuenues, & ils feſoient riens pur ceo, per meanes de quel hoſpitality decay en le lieu ou il doit eſtre chiefement garde, noſmement en le pariſh ou le benefice fuit, & ou les profits creſſcient, & iſſint il continue tanque a ceſt iour, al graund hindrance de erudition, al impoueriſhment de le miniſterie, & le infamie de le Goſpell & le profeſſors de yeel.
                  Le Vicar auera vn certaine portion del benefice, & que le Abbe & le Couent ſerront parſons & auerōt les auters profits: Ceſt appel vn appropriation, & donques le Abbe & le Couēt ſerrōt parſons imparſonees. Mes tiel appropriation

ne poit eſtre fait a commencer en le vie le parſon ſans ſon aſſent.
                  Mes ſi tiel aduowſon del parſonage ſoit recouer ꝑ auncient title, donq̄s lappropriation eſt adnul. Et eſt appel appropriation, pur ceo que ils teigne les profits al lour proꝑ vſe.
               
               
                  Approuement.
                  APprouement eſt lou vn home ad common en le waſt terre del Seignior & le ſeignior encloſe part del waſt terre pur luy meſme, relinquiſhant nient obſtant ſufficient common oue egreſſe & regreſſe pur les commoners: Ceſt encloſure eſt appel approuement.
               
               
                  Arbitrement.
                  ARbitrement eſt vn award, determination, ou iudgement, quel pluſors font al requeſt de deux parties al meins, pur, &, ſur aſcun det, treſpas, ou aut controuerſie ew perenter les dits parties. Et ceſt appel en Latin Arbitratus & Arbitrium,

& ils que font le awarde ou arbitrement ſōt appel Arbitri, en Anglois Arbitrators.
               
               
                  54 Arreſt.
                  ARreſt eſt quant vn eſt priſe & reſtrain a ſon libertie. Nul ſerra arreſt pur det, treſpas, detinue, ou auter cauſe de action, mes per virtue dun precept ou commandement hors de aſcū court. Mes pur Treaſon, Felonie, ou debruſer del peace, cheſcun home ad aucthoritie de arreſter ſans garrantie ou precept. Et lou vn ſerra arreſt pur felonie, il couient que aſcun felonie ſoit fait, & que il ſoit ſuſpect de meſme le felonie, ou auterment il poit auer enuers luy que iſsint luy arreſt vn briefe de faux impriſonment. Et quant aſcun home eſt arreſt pur felony il ſerra ameſne a le gaile, la a demurrer tanque al procheine ſeſsiō pur eſte indite, ou pur eſte deliuer per proclamation.
               
               
                  
                  Arrerages.
                  ARrerages ſont duties arrere nient pay apres le iours & temps, en quel ils fueront dues, & doyent auer eſtre paies, ſoyēt il rent de mannor, ou aſcun auter choſe reſerue
               
               
                  Aſſets.
                  ASſets eſt en deux ſorts lun appel (aſſets per diſcent) lauter (Aſſets enter maines.) Aſſets per diſcent eſt lou vn home eſt oblige en vn obligation & moruſt ſeiſy de tres de fee ſimple, queux diſcēde a ſon heire, donques ceſt terre ſerra appel aſſets, ceſt adire ſufficient de payer ceſt det & per ceſt meanes le heire ſerra charge cy auant que le terre iſsint a luy diſcende voyle ſtretch. Mes ſil ad alien deuaunt que le obligation ſoit miſe en ſuite, il eſt diſcharge.
                  Auxi quant vn home ſeiſie de terre en tayle, ou en droit de ſon feme, alien ceo oue garrantie, & ad en value tant terre en

fee ſimple que diſcende a ſon heire: q̄ eſt auxi heire en taile ou heire al feme, Ore ſi le heire apres le mort ſō anceſtor port vn briefe de Formedon ou ſur cui in vita, pur le tre iſsint alien, donq̄s il ſerra barre per reaſon dun garrāty & le terre iſsint diſcend, que eſt tant en value come ceo q̄ fuit vende, & iſsint per ceo il nad receiue aſcun preiudice, & per ceo ceſt terre eſt appel Aſſets per diſcent.
                  Aſſets enter maines eſt quant vn home endet, come deuant eſt dit, fait executors & relinquiſt a eux ſuffic' de paier, ou aſcun cōmodity ou profit eſt venus al eux en droit lour teſtatour, ceſt appel Aſſets en lour maines.
               
               
                  57 Aſsignee.
                  ASſignee eſt celuy a que vn choſe eſt appoint, ou aſſign̄ deſte occupy, pay ou fait, & eſt toutes foites tiel perſon, que occupy ou ad le choſe iſsint aſsigne en ſon droit demeſne & pur luy meſme,

Et de aſsignees il y ſont ij. ſortes noſmēt aſsignee en fait & aſſignee en ley. Aſſignee en fait eſt quant vn leas eſt graūt al vn & a ſes aſſignees ou ſans ceux ꝑols, aſsignees, & le grā
                     tee done, grant ou vende le dit leas al auter, il eſt ſon aſsignee en fait. Aſſignee en le ley eſt cheſcun executor noſme ꝑ le teſtatour en ſon teſtamēt: ſi come vn leas ſoit fait al vn home & a ſes aſſignees (ſicome eſt auāt dit) & il fait ſes executors & moruſt ſans aſſignm̄t del leas al aſcun aut, Ore les executors aūa m̄ le leas pur ceo q̄ ils ſont ſes aſſignees en ley. Et iſsint eſt en auters ſemblables caſes.
               
               
                  Aſsiſe.
                  ASſiſe eſt vn briefe & giſt ou aſcun home eſt mis hors de ſon terre ou tenementes ou de aſcun profit aprēdre en certain lieu & iſsint diſſeiſi de ſō franktenement. Franktenement a aſcun hom
                        •
                      eſt lou il eſt ſeiſie de terres ou tenements ou profit a prender in fee ſimple,

fee taile, pur terme de ſon vie demeſne, ou pur terme dauter vie. Mes tenaunt per Elegit, tenaunt per ſtatute marchant & ſtatute ſtaple poient auer aſſiſe, comēt que ils nont frank tenement, & ceſt eſt ordayne per diuers ſtatutes.
                  Auxi en aſſiſe il couient touts fo
                        ••
                     es que il ſoit vn diſſeiſor & tenant ou auterment le brief abatera.
                  Auxi ou vn home eſt diſſeiſi & recouera per aſsiſe de nouel diſſeiſin, & puis eſt auterfoits diſſeiſi per meſme le diſſeiſor, il auera vers luy vn briefe de rediſſeiſin directe al vicount de fayre inquiſitiō, & ſi troue ſoit le rediſſeiſin, il ſerra mis en priſon. Auxi ſi home recoūa ꝑ Aſsiſe de Mortdaunceſter ou per auter Iurie, ou per default ou redditiō, & ſil ſoit auterfoits diſſeiſie, il auera dō
                     ques vn brief de Poſt diſſeiſin, & ceſtuy q̄ eſt pris & impriſō pur rediſſeiſin, ne ſerra deliuer ſās eſpecial

commaundement le Roy. Vide les eſtatutes inde Merton ca 3. Marlbridge, Cap. 8. Et Weſtminſter 2. Cap. 26. Auxy il eſt vn auter Aſsiſe appell Aſsiſe de Freſh force & giſt lou home eſt diſſeiſie de tenements queux ſon deuiſables, come en le Citie de London ou auter Boroughs ou villes que ſont enfraunchiſes, donques le defendant viendra en la Court de dit Ville & entra ſon plaint, & aūa vn briefe direct al Maire ou Baylifes &c. & ſur ceo paſſera vn Iurie en manner daſsiſe de Nouell diſſeiſin, Mes il couient que il entra ſon pl
                        •
                     int deins xl. iours, vt dicit ou auterm̄t il ſerra miſſe a le commo ley, Et ſi le miniſtres delay execution, donques le plaintife auera vn auter briefe dauer execution
                        •
                     
                     ▪ Et Sicut alias, & Pluries &c. Vide Lattlet Ca. Rents, Aſsiſe ē noſme equiuocum &c.
               
               
                  
                  59 Aſsiſe de darraine preſentment.
                  ASſiſe de darrain preſētm̄t, vide de ceo ap̄s titulo Quare impedit.
               
               
                  60 Aſsiſe de Mortdanceſter.
                  ASſiſe de Mortdāceſter, vide de ceo apres titulo Coſinage.
               
               
                  61 Attainder.
                  ATtainder, eſt vn conviction daſcun perſon dun crime ou fault, dont il ne fuit conuicte deuāt, ſi come vn home fait felony, treaſon, ou tiels ſē
                     blables, & de ceo eſt endicte, arraign̄, & troue guiltie & adiudge, donques il eſt dit deſte attaint, & ceo poiet eſte deux voies, lun ſur apparāce▪ le aut ſur default: le attainder ſur apparance, eſt per cōfeſsion, battaile ou verdict, le attainder ſur default eſt per ꝓceſſe tanque il ſoit vtlage.
               
               
                  62 ¶ Attaint.
                  ATtaint eſt vn briefe & giſt lou faux verdicte eſt done per xij. homes &

iudgement done ſur ceo, donque le partie vers que ils auoyent paſſe auera ceſt briefe vers les douze homes, & quant ils ſont a iſſue, il ſerra trie per vynt quater Iurours, & ſi faux verdict ſoit troue, les douze Iurours ſount attaint, & donques le iudgment ſerra que lour prees ſerront aires, lour meaſons debruſes, lour boyes ſubuertes, & touts lour terres & tenements forfaites al Roy, mes ſil paſſa enconter celuy que port lattaint, il ſerra impriſon & grieuouſment ranſome al volūt le Roy, Vide le Statute 23. H. 8. cap. 3. Attaint auxy eſt quant iudgment eſt done en treaſon on felony.
               
               
                  Attournement.
                  ATtournement, eſt quāt vn eſt tenaunt pur tme de vie, & ceſtuy en la reuerſion ou remainder granta ſon droit ou eſtate a vn auter, donques il couient q̄ le tenāt pur tme de vie agree a ceo, & cē agreem̄t eſt appel atturnment,

ear ſi ceſtuy en le reuerſiō grant ſon eſtate, & ſon droit a vn auter, ſi le tenāt pur terme de vie ne attourna, riens paſſe per le grant.
                  Mes ſil ſoit graunt per fine en Court de record, il ſerra compel de attourner, Et vide de ceo apres titulo Quid iuris clamat, vide pluis de ceo en Litt lib 3. cap. 10.
               
               
                  64 ¶ Audita quaerela.
                  AVdita quaerela, eſt vn briefe & giſt lou vn eſt oblige en vn eſtatute marchant, eſtatute Staple ou Recogniſance, ou lou iudgement eſt done vers luy pur det, & ſon corps in executiō ſur ceo, donques ſil ad vn releas ou auter ſufficient matter deſte diſcharg del execution, mes nad iour de ceo pleder, donques il auera ceſt briefe vers ceſtuy que ad recouer, ou vers ſes executours.
               
               
                  65 ¶ Auerment.
                  AVerm̄t eſt lou vn home plede vn plee en abatement

de briefe ou barre dactiō, quel il diſt, il eſt priſt de prouer come le Court voit agard, ceſt offer de prouer ſon plee eſt appel vn Auerm̄t.
               
               
                  ¶ Auerpeny.
                  AVerpeny, hoc eſt quiet eſſe de diuerſis denarijs pro aueragiis domini Regis.
               
               
                  Auncien demeſne.
                  AVncien demeſne ſont cert tenures tenus de ceux Manours queux fuerōt en maynes de S. Ed. le confeſſor, & les queux il fiſt eſcrier en vn liuer appelle Domes day, Sub titulo R. & toutes les terres tenus del dit Manors ſont auncien demeſne, & les tenants ne ſerrōt implede hors del dit Man̄s, & ſils ſontils poiēt monſtre le matter & abater le brief, mes ſils reſpōder al brief & plede & iudgm̄t done, donq̄s les terres ſōt deuenus frank fee a touts iours. Auxi touts tenants en auncien demeſne ſont franke de tolle, pur touts

choſes concernant lour viand' & husbandry en auncien demeſne, & pur tiels terres ils ne ſerront mis ne impanel ſur aſcun enqueſt. Mes touts les terres en ancient demeſn̄ queux ſont in maines le roy ſont frank fee & pledable al common ley. Veies plus apres en le title Sokmans.
               
               
                  68 Auowrie.
                  AVowrie eſt lou vn priſt diſtreſſe pur rent ou auter choſe, & lauter ſua repleuin donques celuy q̄ auoit priſe iuſtifiera en ſon plee, pur quel cauſe il priſt ceo, & ſi il priſt ceo en ſon droit demeſne il ceo doit monſtre, & iſsint auowa le priſel, & ceo eſt appel ſon auowry: Mes ſil ceo priſt en ou pur le dr̄t de vn auter, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quant il auoit monſtre le cauſe, il ferra conuſāce del priſel, come bailie ou ſeruāt a celuy en que droit il priſt ceo.
               
            
            
               
               B.
               
                  Baile.
                  BAile, eſt quant vn hōe eſt priſe ou arreſt pur felonie, ſuſpition de felonie, indict de felonie, ou aſcun tiel caſe, iſſint que il eſt reſtraine de ſon libertie. Et eſteant per la ley bailable, offereth ſuertie al eux que ont aucthoritie de luy bailer, q̄ux ſuerties ſont oblige pur luy al vſe le Roigne en vn certain ſumme dargent, ou corps pur corps, q̄ il appearera deuant les Iuſtices gaole deliuery al prochein ſeſsions &c. Dō
                     ques ſur le bonds de ceux ſuerties, cōe eſt auantdit, il eſt baile, ceſt adire, mis al libertie tan
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le iour appoint pur ſō apparāce.
               
               
                  Bailement.
                  BAilement, eſt vn deliuerie de choſes, ſoyent ils de eſcripts, biens ou ſtuffe al auter, aſcun foits deſtre redeliuer arrere al bailor, ceſt adire

al celuy que iſsint deliuer ceo, aſcun foits al vſe del bailee, ceſt adire de luy a que il eſt deliuer, & aſcun foits auxy il eſt deliuer a vn tierce perſon, ceſt deliuerie eſt appell vn bailement.
               
               
                  71 Bailife.
                  BAilife eſt vn officer que appertient a vn manor, pur order le husbandrie, & ad aucthoritie de paier quite rents iſſuing hors del manor, ſuccider arbres, repaire les meaſons, faire pales, haies, diſtraine aūs dam̄ feſāt ſur le terr, & diūs tiels ſemblables.
                  Ceſt officer eſt celuy q̄ les auncient Saxons ont appel vn Reue, car le noſme Bailife ne fuit don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      conus enter eux, mes viēt eins oue les Normans, & eſt appel en Latin Villicus.
               
               
                  72 Backberinde theefe.
                  BAckberind theefe ē vn laron q̄ eſt priſe oue le maner, ceſt adire, aiāt ceo troue ſur lui eſteāt purſue

oue le hue & crie) le quel il ad emblee, ſoit il money, lynnen, wollen, ou auter ſtuffe: mes il eſt pl properment dit, quant il eſt priſe portāt tiels choſes que il ad emblee en vn bundel ou fardel ſur ſon dorſe.
               
               
                  Bargaine & ſale.
                  BArgain & ſale eſt quāt vn recompence eſt don per ambideux les parties al bargaine: come ſi vn bargain & vend ſon terre al auter pur argent, icy le terre eſt vn recompence a luy pur le argent, & largent eſt vn recompence al auter pur le terre, & cē eſt vn bone contract & bargaine, & fee ſimple paſſa nient obſtant il ne dit a auer & tener le tre a luy & a ſes h
                        •
                     s. Et ꝑ tiel bargaine & ſale terres poient paſſe ſans liuerie de ſeiſin, ſi le bargaine & ſale ſoit per fait endent, ſeale & enrolle, ou en le countie ou le terre giſt, ou en vn des Courts del Roigne de recorde, al Weſtm̄ deins ſixe mois

prochein apres le date de meſme le eſcript endent, accordant al ſtatute en cē caſe fait en le 27. an de H. 8. cap. 16.
               
               
                  74 Barre.
                  BArre, eſt quant le defē
                     dant en aſcun action plede vn plee que eſt vn ſufficient reſpons, & ceo adnul le action del plaintife a touts iours.
               
               
                  75 Baſe fee.
                  TEner en Fee baſe, eſt a tener a volunt le Seignior.
               
               
                  76 Baſtarde.
                  BAſtard, eſt celuy que eſt nee de aſcun feme nient eſpouſe, iſsint que ſon pere neſt conus per le order del ley, & pur ceo il eſt dit filius populi.
                  Mes per la ley del Romiſh eſgliſe, ſi vn engender vn enfant ſur aſcun feme, quel enfant eſt nee hors del eſpouſels, & puis il eſpouſe m̄ la femme, donques tiel enfant ſerra dit Mulier, & nemy baſtarde.
                  
                     Mes per la ley Dengleterre il eſt baſtarde, & pur ceſt cauſe quant tiel eſpeciall baſtardie eſt alleage, il ſerra trie p
                        •
                     r le pais, & nemy per Leueſque▪ Mes generalment baſtardie alleage ſerra trie per le certificat del Eueſque.
                  Et ſi vn feme ſoit groſſe de enfant per ſon baron que moruſt, & el priſt auter baron, & apres le enfant eſt nee, ceſt enfant ſerra dit lenfant le primer baron. Mes ſi el fuit priuement enſeint al temps del mort ſa primer baron, donques il ſerra dit lenfant del ſecond baron. Sed quaere & veies le opiniō de Thorp 21. E. 3. 39.
                  Auxi ſi vn home prent feme que ſoit groſſemēt enſeint per aſcū 
                     aut q̄ ne fuit ſon baron, & apres lenfant eſt nee deins les eſpouſels, donques il ſerr dit lenfant le baron meſque il fuit nee forſ
                        •
                      vn iour apres les eſpouſels ſolempniſe.
               
               
                  
                  77 Battaile.
                  BAttaile eſt vn auncient trial en noſtre ley, que le defendant en vn appeal de murder, robbery, ou felonie poit eſlier, ceſtaſcauoir, a combater oue lappellāt, pur proofe ſil ſoit culpable del felonie ou non: quel combate ſil ſucceede ſibien del part le defendant que il vanquiſh lappellant, il alera quite, & luy barrera de ſon appeal a touts iours. Mes ſi vn ſoit indict de felonie, & vn appeal eſt port ſur meſme le indictmēt, la le defendant ne gagera le battail: battaile auxi poit eſtre en vn briefe de droit.
               
               
                  78 Bigamy.
                  BIgamy, fuit vn counterple (deuiſe al councel de Lions ſur miſſike de ſecond mariage) deſte obiect quant le benefite de clergie, ceſtaſſauoir, ſon liuer, come noſment a dire, que il que demaund le priuiledge del Clergie, fuit marrie a tiel femme en tiel lieu,

deins tiel dioces & que el eſt mort, & que il ad apres marrie vn aut feme deins meſme le dioceſſe ou deins aſcun auter dioceſſe, & iſsint Bigamus. Ou ſil nad eſte forſque vn temps marrie, donques adire que el que il eſpouſe eſt, ou fuit vn viefe, ceſt adire, le relicte dun tiel &c. Le quel choſe ſerra trie per Leueſque de le Dioceſſe ou le eſpouſals ſont alleage. Et eſteant iſsint certifie per Leueſque le priſoner perdera le benefite del clergie: Mes al ceſt iour per force de le acte fait en Anno 1. E. 6. cap. 12. ceſt nul plea, mes que il poet auer ſon clergie ceo niēt obſtant.
                  Iſsint eſt Brooke titulo Clergie placito 20. al meſme purpoſe. Et ſur ceo ſi vous eſtes deſirous, de veyer q̄ux reaſons ils ont que perſwade enuers ſecond eſpouſals, lege ent diuers auters Frances Petrarche de remedus vtriuſque fortunae le primer liuer & lxxvi. Dialogue,

intituled de ſecūdis nuptiis, quel liuer ore tarde Maſter Thomas Twine ad bien & oue bon grace (come ils q̄ poyent iudger diount) tranſlate hors de Latin en Englois, & mult aptment appell ceo Phiſicke encounter fortune.
               
               
                  79 Bloodwit.
                  BLoodwit, hoc eſt quietum eſſe de amerciamentis de ſanguine fuſo, & que teneantur placita in curia veſtra, habebiti
                        •
                      amerciamenta inde prouenientia quia (wit) en Anglois eſt miſericordiaen Latin.
               
               
                  80 Boote.
                  BOote, eſt vn viel parol, & il ſignifie helpe, ſuccour, ayde, ou aduantage & eſt communmēt ioynt oue vn auter parol, que ſignification il augment come ceux bridgeboote, burghboote, fireboote, hedgeboote, plowboote, & diuers tiels ſemblables, pur queux ſignifications, 
                        •
                     eyes en lour proper titles.
               
               
                  
                  Broodhalpeny.
                  BRoodhalpeny, en aſcū copies, broodhalbeny, hoc eſt, quietum eſſe de quadā conſuetudine exacta pro tabulis leuatis.
               
               
                  Burgage.
                  TEner en Burgage eſt a tener ſicōe les burgeis teignēt de Roy, ou de aut ſeigniour terres ou ten̄ts rendant a luy vn certaine rēt ꝑ an, ou auterment la ou vn auter home q̄ Burgeis tient daſcun Seigniour terres ou tenements en Burgage rendant a luy vn certaine rent per an.
               
               
                  Brugbote.
                  BRugbote (& en aſcuns copies bridgbote (hoc eſt quietum eſſe de auxilio dando ad reficiendum pontes.
               
               
                  84 Burghbote.
                  BVrghbote, hoc eſt quietum eſſe de auxilio dando ad faciendum Burgum, caſtrum, ciuitatem vel muros proſtrata.
               
               
                  
                  85 Burghbrech.
                  BVrghbrech, hoc eſt quietū eſſe de trāſgreſſionibus factis in ciuitate vel Burgo contra pacem.
               
               
                  86 Burgh Engliſh.
                  BVrgh Engliſh, ou Borough Engliſh, eſt vn cuſtome en vn auncient borough, ou ſi vn hōe ad iſſue diuers fits & moruſt vncore le puiſne fits ſolement inheritera, & auera touts les terrer & ten̄ts, q̄ fueront a ſon pe re de q̄ il moruſt ſeiſie deins m̄ le burgh per diſcent, come heire a ſon pere, ꝑ force del cuſtome de meſme le burgh.
               
               
                  87 Burglarie.
                  BVrglarie, eſt quant vn debruſe & enter en le meaſon dun auter en le nuit, oue felonious intēt, de robber ou occider ou de faire auter felony en queux caſes nient obſtāt il ne emport riens, vncore il eſt felony ꝑ que il ſerra pendue. Auterment eſt fil ſoit en le iour ou que il

debruſe le meaſon en le nuit, & ne entre pas en ceo a ceſt temps.
                  Mes ſi vn ſeruant voile conſpire oue auters de robber ſon Maſter, & a cel entēt il ouer lesdores, & feneſtres de ſon Maſter en le nuit pur eux, & ils vient en le meſon per ceſt voy, ceſt Burglarie en les eſtrangers, & le ſeruant eſt vn laron, mes nemy Burglar. Et ceo fuit lopinion de le right worſhipful Sir R. Manwood Chiualer, plus digne Seignior chief Baron de le Exchequer a la quarter Seſsions tenus en Canterbury in Ianuary 1579. 21. Eliz.
               
               
                  Capias.
                  CApias, vide de ceo ap̄s en la title Proces.
               
               
                  Caruage.
                  CAruage, hoc eſt, quietū eſſe ſi dn̄s Rex talliauent totā terrā ſuam per Caruas. Nota q̄ vn carue de tre eſt vn plow land.
               
               
                  Certificatio in aſsiſe.
                  CErtificatio Aſsiſe nouae diſſeiſine, eſt vn

briefe & giſt lou le baylife le ten̄t in Aſsiſe plede nul tort &c. & parde per laſsiſe, donques ſi le tenāt ad vn releaſe ou auter eſcript a pleder, il auera ceſt briefe, & les primers iurors ſerrōt garnes dapperer deuant les Iuſtices & parties auxi, donques ſi puit eſte troue que le releaſe ou leſcripts ſon
                        •
                      voyer & bones, ceſtuy qui recoueroit in laſſiſe, rendra dāmages en double & perdra la terre.
               
               
                  91 Cerciorari.
                  CErciorari, eſt vn briefe & giſt lou vn eſt implede en vn baſe Court, que eſt de recorde, & il ſuppoſe que il ne poit aū equal Iuſtice la, donques ſur vn bill en la Chancerie compriſant aſcū matter en conſcience, il auera ceſt briefe pur remouer tout le Record en la Chauncery, & la deſte determin per conſcience, mes ſil ne proua ſon bill, donques lauter party auera vn br̄ de Procedēdo a remaūd' le record en la

baſe Court, & la deſte detmine. Auxi il giſt en pluſors auts caſes pur remoū Records pur le roy cōe inditem̄ts & auters.
               
               
                  Ceſsion.
                  CEſsion eſt quant vn eccleſiaſtical ꝑſon ē cree Eueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , ou quant vn perſon dun parſonage priſt vn aut benefice ſans diſpenſatiō ou auterm̄t mēt qualified &c. En ambideux caſes lour prim̄ benefices ſont deuenus void & ſont appel deſtre voide per ceſsion, & al ceux q̄ il ad que fuit cree eueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , Le Roigne preſētera pro illa vice, quicunque ſoit patron de eux. Et en laut caſe le patron poit p̄ſent.
               
               
                  Ceſſauit.
                  CEſſauit, eſt vn brief & giſt lou mō verie tenāt q̄ tient de moy certeine tre ou tenem̄ts rendaunt certeine rēt ꝑ an, & le rēt eſt arrere nient paye per deux ans, & nul ſufficient diſtreſſe poit eſte troue ſur le terre, donq̄s ieo auera ceſt brief ꝑ q̄ ieo recouera le terre, mes ſi le

tenant vient in Court deuant iudgement, & rend▪ le arrerages, & les damages, & troue ſuerty que il ne ceſſera plus de paim̄t de dit rent, ieo ſerra cō
                     pel de prēder les arrerag. & les damages, & don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le tenant ne perdera la terre. Auxy heire ne poyt maintaine cel briefe pur ceſſer fait en tēps ſon aū
                     ceſtor, Auxi ceſt briefe ne giſt, mes pur annuall ſeruice come rent & huiuſmodi & nient pas pur homage & fealtie.
                  Auxi il y ad auter brief appel Ceſſauit de cantaria, & giſt ou vn done terres a vn meaſon de religion a trouer pur la
                        •
                     me de luy & de ſes aunceſtors, & de ſes heires annuelment vn chandel ou Lamp in Eſgliſe, ou pur faire aſcū diuine ſeruice, ou de paſter les pouers, ou auter almes, ou auter choſe faire, donques ſi les dits charges ne ſont pas fait per ij. ans, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le donor ou ſes heires auera ceſt briefe vers quecunque eſt eins apres ti
                        •
                     l

ceſſer. Vide leſtatut W. 2. cap. 41.
               
               
                  Challenge.
                  CHallenge, eſt lou Iurors appe
                        •
                     ōt pur trier vn iſſue, donques ſi aſcun des parties ſuppoſont que ils ne ſont pas indifferēt, la ils poient eux challēge & refuſe.
                  Ils ad ēe diuers challē
                     ges: vn eſt challēge al array: lauter eſt al polles.
                  Challenge al array eſt quant la panel eſt fauorablement fait per le vicount ou auter officer.
                  Challēge ꝑ les polls ſōt aſcuns principal, & aſcun ꝑ cauſe, cōe il appel ceo.
                  Principall eſt quant vn des Iurors eſt le fits, frere ou coſin al plaintife ou defendant, ou tenant a luy, ou q̄ il auoit eſpouſe la file le plaintife, & pur c
                        •
                     ux cauſes il ſerra retrait.
                  Auxi in plee de le mort de hōe & en cheſc▪ action real, & en actions perſonal, ſi le det ou damages amount a xl. marks il eſt bon challēge q̄ il ne poit

diſpender xl. ſhillings per an de franketenement.
                  Challenge per cauſe eſt ou le party alleage vn matter que neſt principal challenge, come que fits dun des Iurors eſpouſe la file le plaintife, & donques conclude & pur ceo il eſt fauorable, quel ſerra trie per auters del enqueſt, ſi il ſoit fauorable ou indifferent, & ſi ils▪ diont que il eſt fauorable, & nemy indifferent, donques il ſerra treit auterment il ſerra iure.
                  Auxy vn felon que eſt arraigne poyt challenge xx. Iurours peremptory ſans aſcun cauſe, & ceo eſt in fauorē vitae, & tant que il voile oue cauſe, mes donques il ſerra trie ſi pur tiel cauſe il ſoit indifferent ou nemy.
               
               
                  95 Champertie.
                  CHampertie eſt vn brief & giſt lou deux hōes ſont impleadants, & lun done la moitie ou parte del choſe in plee a vn eſtraunge pur luy mainteiner

encounter lauter, donques le partie greue auera ceſt briefe deuers leſtrange: Vide leſtatute Articuli ſuper Chartas Cap. 11.
               
               
                  Champertors.
                  CHampertors ſont ceux q̄ moua plees & fuits, ou cauſe deſte moue, per lour ou auters procurement, & ſue a lour coſtages & charge demeſne, pur auer parte del terre, ou gaines en variance.
               
               
                  Charge.
                  CHarge eſt lou vn hōe graunta vn rent iſſuant hors de ſon terre, & que ſi le rent ſoit arrere, que ſerra liſt a luy, ſes heires & aſsignes a diſtrayner tāque le rent ſoit pay, ceſt appel vn rent charge. Mes ſi vn graunt vn rent charge hors del terre dun auter, & puis purchaſe la terre, le grant eſt void.
               
               
                  Charters.
                  CHarters de terres ſont eſcripts, faits, euidences, & inſtruments, fait de vn home a lauter, ſur

aſcun eſtate conueied ou paſſed perenter 
                        •
                     eux de tres ou tenem̄ts, mōſtrāt lēs noſmes, lieu, & quantitie del terre, le eſtate, tēps & maner del feaſans de yeel, les parties a le eſtate deliuer & priſe, les teſmoignes p̄ſent al ceo, oue auters circumſtāces.
               
               
                  99 Chattels.
                  CHattels ſont en deux ſorts, ceſt adire, chattels reals & chattels perſonels, chattels reals ſont leaſes pur ans, gards, & a tener a volunt.
                  Chattels perſonels ſont touts moueable biēs, come argēt, plate, biens del meaſon, chiuals, vacches, blees & tiels ſemblables.
               
               
                  100 Childwit.
                  CHildwit hoc eſt, quod capiatis gerſummā de natiua veſtra corrupta & pregnata ſine licētia veſtra.
               
               
                  101 Chimin.
                  CHimin eſt le hault voy lou cheſcū home paſſa q̄ eſt appel via Regia, & vncore le Roy nad

auter choſe la forſque le paſſage pur luy & ſon people, car le franktenement eſt en le Seignior del ſoile, & touts les profits creſſants la come arbres & auters choſes.
               
               
                  Choſe en action.
                  CHoſe en actiō eſt quāt vn home ad cauſe, ou poit porter vn action pur aſc' duitie due a luy, cōe vn action de det ſur vn obligation, annuity, rent, couenāt, gard, biens, treſpas, ou tiels ſemblables, & pur ceo que ils ſont choſes de queux vn home neſt poſſeſſe, mes pur recouerie de eux eſt mis a ſon action, ils ſont appel choſes en action. Et ceux choſes en action que ſont certaine le Roigne poit granter, & le grātee poit vſer vn action pur eux en ſon noſme demeſne ſolement. Mes vn common perſon ne poit graunter ſon choſe en action, ne le Roigne luy meſme ne poit grāter ſa choſe ē actiō quel eſt vncertain, cōe treſpas & tiels ſēblables.
               
               
                  
                  103 Cinque ports.
                  CInque portes, ſont certain hauen villes, ſink en n̄umber, as queux ad eſte graunt long temps paſſe mult liberties (que auts port villes nont) & ceo primerm̄t en le tēps del▪ Roy Edward appel le Confeſſor (q̄ fuit deuant le conqueſt) & fueront encreaſe apres, & ceo eſpecialment en les iours del trois Edwards, le primer, ſecond & le tierce, (ap̄s le conq̄ſt) cōe apiert en le lieur de Domeſday, & auts vieux Monum̄ts, queux en ceſt lieur ſerront trope long de citer.
               
               
                  104 Circuity de actiō.
                  CIrcuity de action, eſt quāt vn actiō eſt droiturelm̄t port pur vn duitie mes vncore circum le buſh cōe ſemble, pur ceo q̄ ceo poit ſibiē eſtre autermēt reſpondue & determin & le ſuit ſaue, & pur ceo q̄ meſme le actiō fuit pluis q̄ beſoigne, il eſt appel circuit de actiō. Come ſi vn home grant vn rent charge de x. li.

hors de ſon mannor de Dale, & apres le grantee diſſeiſiſt le grauntor de meſme le manor de Dale, & il port vn Aſsiſe & recouer le terre & xx. li damages lequel xx. li. eſteant paie, le grauntee del rent ſue ſon action pur x. li. de ſon rent due durant le temps de le diſſeiſin, le quel ſi nul diſſeiſin ad eſte il doit auer ew, Ceſt appel circuitie de action, pur ceo que il poit auer eſtr pluis briefment reſpondue, car lou le graū
                     tor doit receiue xx. li. damages, & paie x. li. rent, il puit auer receiue forſque le x. li. ſolement pur les damages, & le grauntee puit auer recoupe & retain arrere le auter x. li. en ſes mains per voy de detainer pur ſon rent, & iſsint per yeel poiet auer ſaue ſon action.
               
               
                  Claime.
                  CLaime eſt vn challēge per aſcun home de le propertie ou ownerſhip de vn choſe que il nad en poſſeſsion, mes ceo q̄ eſt

detaine a luy torciouſement.
               
               
                  106 Clergie.
                  CLergie eſt vn auncient libertie confirme en diuers parliaments, Et eſt quāt vn home eſt arraign de felonie ou tiels ſemblables deuant vn temporal Iudge &c. & le priſoner pria ſon clergie, ceſt adire, pur auer ſon Lieur, quel en auncient temps fuit autant ſicome il vſt prie deſte diſmiſſe del temporall Iudge, & deſte liuer al Ordinarie de purger luy meſme de meſme offence. Et donques le Iudge commander lordinarie de trier ſil puit lyer come vn Clerke en tiel liuer & lieu come le Iudge aſsignera, & ſi lordinary certifie le Iudg, que il puit, donques le priſoner nauera iudgement de perder ſon vie. Vide Stamford. lib. 2. cap 41. & quere le ſtatute 18. Eliz. cap. 7.
               
               
                  107 Clerke Attaint.
                  CLerke Attaint, eſt ceſtuy que pria ſon clergie

apres iudgement ſur luy done de felonie, & ad ſon Clergie allow, tiel clerke ne poit faire ſon purgation.
               
               
                  Clerke conuict.
                  CLerke conuict, eſt ceſtuy que pria ſon clergie deuant iudgement done ſur luy de le felonie, & ad le clergie a luy graunt, tiel clerke puit faire ſon purgation. Nota que cel purgation fit, quant il fuit diſmiſſe al ordinary, la deſtre trie del enqueſt del clerkes, & pur ceo ore per ſtatute 18 Eliz. ca. 7. nul tiel eſt miſſo al ordinarie.
               
               
                  109 Colour.
                  COlour, eſt vn fained matter, le quel le defendant ou tenant v
                        •
                     e en ſon bar, quant vn action de treſpas ou vn aſsiſe eſt port enuers luv, en le ql il done demaundant, ou plaintife vn ſhew prima f
                        ••
                     ie, que il ad bone cauſe de action, lou en verite il neſt iuſt cauſe, mes tātſolement vn colour ou

viſour dun cauſe: Et il eſt vſe al entēt que le determination del action doet eſte per les iudges, & nemy par vn ignorant Iury, de xij. homes. Et pur ceo vn colour doet eſte vn matter en ley, ou difficult al lay gents: come pur example A. port vn aſsiſe de terre enus B. & B. dit que il m̄ leſſa m̄ le terre al vn C. pur tme de vie & apres graunt le reuerſion al A. le demaundant, & puis C. le tenant pur terme de vie moruſt, apres que deceaſe A. le defendant claimant le reuerſion per force del graunt (ou C. le tenant pur vie ne vnques atturne) entra, ſur que B. entra, enuers que A. pur meſme entre port ceſt aſsiſe &c. Ceſt vn bone colour, pur ceo que les ley gentes penſant que le terre voile paſſe per le graunt ſans atturnment, lou en fait il ne voyle paſſe &c.
                  Auxy en vn action de treſpaſſe, colour doit eſte done, & de eux ſont

vn infinite number, vn pur example: En vn action de treſpas pur priſel de auers del plaintife, le defendaunt dit, que denaunt le plaintife riens auoit en eux, il meſme fuit poſſeſſe de eux come de ſes proper biens, & eux deliuer al A B. pur eux rebailer a luy quado &c. & A. B. eux dona al Plaintife, & le plaintife ſuppoſe le propertie deſtre en A. B. al temps del done priſt eux, & le defendant eux repriſt del plaintif, ſur que le plaintife port laction: ceſt vn bon colour, & vn bon plea. Vide de ceo pluis en les Drologues ent le Doctor & Student. li. 2. cap 13.
               
               
                  Colour de office.
                  COlore officii, eſt toutes dites priſt in malam partem & ſignifie vn act malement fait per le countenance de vn office, & il port vn diſsimulant vy
                        •
                     age del droit office, lou le office neſt q̄ vaile del fau
                        •
                     itie & le

choſe eſt ground ſur vice & 
                        •
                     offi
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     ſt come vn ſhadow al ceo. Mes ratione officii, & vertute officii ſont p
                        •
                     iſes toutes for
                     
                        •
                     es in bon
                        •
                     m partem, & lou le office eſt le iuſt cauſe del choſe, & le choſe eſt purſuant al office.
               
               
                  111 Colluſion.
                  COlluſion▪ eſt lou vn action eſt port vers vn auter per ſon agreement demeſne, ſi le plaintife recouer, tiel recouerie eſt dit per colluſion, & en aſcuns caſes le colluſion ſerra enqu
                        •
                     re come en vn Quare impedit. Aſsiſe & tiels ſemblables, queux aſcun corporation ou corps politique port enuers auter al entent de auer le terre ou aduowſon, dont le b
                        ••
                     e
                        •
                     e eſt port en mortm
                        •
                     ine. Mes en auowrie ne en aſcun action perſonal le colluſion ne ſerra enquire. Vide ſtitute W. 2. capit. 32. que done le quale ius & le enquirie in tiel caſe.
               
               
                  
                  Common ley.
                  COmmon ley, eſt pur le pluis pa
                        •
                     te priſe 3. voyes. Primerm̄t, pur l
                        •
                     s leyes de ceſt Realm ſimply, ſans aſ
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        •••
                      l
                        •
                     y, come cuſtomarie l
                        •
                     y, ciuil ley, ſpiritual ley 
                        •
                     u qu
                        〈…〉
                      
                     aut ley i
                        〈…〉
                      a ceo, come quant il 
                        ••
                      deſpute ē noſtre l
                        •
                     yes 
                        •
                     angle
                        •
                     re, quid doet de droit eſt
                        •
                      determine p
                        •
                     r le common ley & quid per ſpiritual ley, ou le Court del Admiral ou tiels ſemblables.
                  Second 
                        〈…〉
                     t il eſt priſe pur les Courtes le Roy, come l
                        •
                      b
                        ••
                     ke le roy ou common place, 
                        〈…〉
                      pur m
                        •
                     nſtre vn diff
                        〈…〉
                     ce pe
                        •
                     ē
                     
                        ••
                     r c
                        〈…〉
                      les baſe courtes, come cuſtomarie courts, courts Barons. Countie courts, P
                        •
                     powde
                        •
                     s & ti
                        •
                     ls ſemblables: c
                        •
                     me qū
                     
                        •
                      vn ple de terre eſt remoue hors de anciēt demeſn̄ pur c
                        •
                     o q̄ le 
                        •
                     re ē frāk ſ
                        •
                     e & pledable al cōmon ley, ceſt adire ē la Court le R. & nemy ē anciēt demeſn̄ ou en aſ
                        •
                     
                     ▪ auter ba
                        •
                     e court.
                  Tierce
                        ••
                     t & pluis vſualment

per le comon ley eſt entendue tiels leys q̄ fueront generalmēt priſe & tenus pur ley deuant q̄ aſcun eſtatut fuit fait pur alter ceo, cōe pur exāple, Tenant pur vie, ne pur ans ne fueront deſte puniſh pur feſance waſt a
                        •
                      common ley tan
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le ſtatut de Glouceſter ca. 5. fuit fait, le quel done vn action de waſt enuers eux. Mes tenant per le curteſie, & tenant in dower, fueront puniſhable pur waſt al common ley, ceſt adire, per le vſuall & common receiued leys de Realme deuaunt le dit ſtatute de Glouceſter fuit fait.
               
               
                  113 Common.
                  COmmon, eſt le droit que home ad de mitter ſes beaſts a paſture, ou de vſer & occupier le tre q̄ neſt ſon proper ſoile.
                  Et nota que ſont diuers commons ceſt adire common en groſſe, common appendant, common appurtenant, & cō
                     mon per cauſe de viſinage,
                  
                     Common en groſſe eſt lou ieo per mon fait graunt a vn auter, que il auer cōmon in ma terre.
                  Common appendāt eſt lou home eſt ſeiſi de certein terre, a que il ad cō
                     mon in auter ſoil, & touts ceux que ſerront ſeiſi del dit terre aueront le dit common ſolement pur ceux beaſtes que compaſt ſa terre a que il eſt appē
                     dant, except oyſons, chiuers, & porceaux.
                  Et touts iours, ceſt cō
                     mon eſt per preſcription, & de common droit, & il eſt appendant al terre erable ſolement, & nemy al auter terre ou meaſon.
                  Common appurtenaunt eſt en meſme le manner come common appendant. Mes eſt oueſque toutes manners des auers cibien porceaux, chiue
                        •
                     s & tiel ſemblable come chiuals, vacches, boefes, berbits, & tiels que compaſt
                        •
                     r de terre. Et tiel cōon poit eſte fait a ceſt iour, & poit eſte ſeuer del terre a que il eſt

appurtenant, mes iſſint 
                        •
                     e poit common appendant.
                  Common pur cauſe de viſinage eſt lou les tenants de deux Seigniours que ſont ſeiſies de deux villes, dont lun giſt pres lauter, & cheſcun de eux ont vſe de temps dont memorie 
                        ••
                      court de auer comon en auter ville, oueſque toutes beaſtes comminable.
                  Mes lun ne poit mitter ſes auers en le terre lauter, car la ceux de lauter ville poient eux diſtreine Damage feſant, ou auer action de Treſpas, mes ils eux mittera e
                        •
                      lour camps demeſ
                        •
                     e, & ſils eſtray en les campes del auter ville, ils la doy
                        •
                     nt eux ſufferer. Et les inhabitants de lun ville ne doyent mitter eins tants come il voile, mes ayant regard al franktenement del inhabitants de lauter ville, car auterment 
                        •
                     l 
                        •
                     e ſoit bon vicinitie, ſur q̄ tout ceſt matter depend.
               
               
                  
                  Condition.
                  COndition, eſt vn reſtraint ou bridle annex & ioyne al choſe, iſsint que per le non perfourmance & feſans de c
                        •
                     o le partie al condition reco
                     
                        •
                     era preiudice & perde, & per le performance & faire de ceo commoditie & aduantage.
                  Et toutes conditions ſont ou conditions actuall & expreſſe, queux ſont appel conditions en fait, O
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ls ſont conditions implicite ou tacite, & ment expreſſe, les q̄ux ſont appelles conditions en ley.
                  Auxi touts conditions ſont o
                        •
                      conditions precedent & vaiant deuaunt leſtate, & ſont executed, O
                        •
                      ſubſequent, & veniens apres leſtate & executorie.
                  Le condition precedēt, ſait gaine & obtaine le choſe ou eſtate fait ſur condition per le perfourmance de meſme.
                  Le condition ſubſequent fait garde, & continue le choſe ou eſtate

fait ſur condition per le perfourmance de yc
                        •
                     l.
                  Actual & expreſſe condition, que eſt appel vn condition en fait, eſt vn condition knit & annex per expreſſe parolx al feoffement, leas ou graunt, ou en eſcript ou ſans eſcript. Sicome ieo enfeffe vn home en terres reſeruant rent, deſtre paied a tiel feaſt, ſur condition, que ſi le feoffee faile de payment al iour, que donques il ſerra loial pur moy de reenter.
                  Condition implicite ou tacite & nient expreſſe, q̄ eſt appel conditiō en ley, eſt quant home graunt al auter le office deſtr̄ gardein dun park, ſeneſchal, beadle, baylife, ou tiels ſembl' pur term de vie & nient obſtant q̄ la ne ſoit aſcun condition expreſſe en le grant, vncore le ley parle couertment de vn condition, quel eſt, que ſi le grantee ne execute pas touts points apperteināt a ſon office, ꝑ luy meſme ou ſon 
                        •
                     ufficient deputy, donque ſerra loial pur le

grantor de enter & diſcharge luy de ſon office.
                  Condition precedent & vaant deuant eſt, quant vn leaſe eſt fait al vn pur vie ſur condition, que ſi le leſſee pur vie voile paie al leſſour xx. li. a tiel iour, que donques il auera fee ſimple, icy le condition preceede & va deuant le eſtate in fee ſimple, & ſur le performance de le condition, gaine & get fee ſimple.
                  Condition ſubſequent & veniens apres, eſt quant vn grant a I. S. ſon mannor de Dale en fee ſimple ſur condition, que le grauntee paiera a luy a tiel iour xx. li. ou auterment que ſon eſtate ceſſera, icy le condition eſt ſubſequent & ſequens le eſtate in fee ſimple, & ſur le performance de ycel, gard & continue le eſtate.
                  Vide pluis de ceo en Littleton lib. 3. cap. 5. Et Perkins titulo vltimo de Conditions.
               
               
                  
                  115 Confirmation.
                  COnfirmation eſt quant vn que aiet droit al aſcun terre ou tenements fait vn fait a vn auter que ait ent le poſſeſsion ou aſcun eſtate oueſque ceux parolx, Ratificaſſe, approbaſſe, confirmaſſe oue intent de enlarger ſon eſtate, ou faire ſon poſſeſsion perfect & nient defeſible per luy que fait le confirmation, ne per aſcun auter que poit aueigne
                        •
                      a ſon droit.
                  Dont vide pluis en Littleton Libr. 3. cap. 9. de Confirmations.
               
               
                  116 Confiſcate biens.
                  COnfiſcate biens ſont biens al q̄ux le ley entitle le Roigne quant ils ne ſont pas claime ꝑ aſcū auter. Come ſi vn home ſoit endict q̄ il feloniouſment emblea les biens de I. S. lou en veritie ils ſont ſes biens demeſne, & ils ſōt miſe en court vers luy come vn mayneur, & donques il eſt demaund q̄ il dit a ceux biens, & il denie eux, ore per ceſt denicr

de eux, il ꝑdra ceux biens, coment que apres il ſoit acquite del felony, & iſsint en auters ſemblable caſes.
               
               
                  Conſpiracie.
                  COnſpiracie eſt vn brief & giſt lou deux ou pluſors ſentailerent ꝑ ſerement, couenant, ou aut maner aliance, q̄ cheſcun aydera auter pur indicter ou appeller aſcun home de ſelonie, donques celuy que eſt per tiel maner endict ou appeal auera ceſt briefe, Mes ceſt brief ne giſt vers lendictors.
                  Vade pluis de ceo en Stamford lib. 3. cap. 12.
               
               
                  Cuſtome.
                  COnſuetud' & ſeruitijs eſt vn brief, & giſt lou 
                        •
                     eo ou mes aūceſtois depuis le limitation de aſſiſe, ne fueront ſeiſie des cuſtomes ou ſeruices de mon tenant, mes deuant, dōques ieo aūa ceſt brief pur recouer ceux ſeruices.
                  Auxy le tenant poyt auer ceſt briefe vers ſon Seignior, mes apres que le tenant ad count, le

Seignior defendera les motes del count, & repliant dirra, que il ne diſtrayna pas pur les coſtomes dont le count eſt, & donq̄s il countera tout le count de les cuſtomes & ſeruices, & donques le tenant que fuit plaintife deuiendra defendant, & defendra per battaile ou graund aſsiſe.
               
               
                  119 Conſultation.
                  COnſultation, vide de ceo apres en le title de Prohibition.
               
               
                  120 Continual claime.
                  COntinual claime eſt lou home ad droit de entre en certain terres dont vn auter eſt ſeiſi en fee ſimple ou fee taile, & il ne oſaſt enter pur pauor de mort ou baterie, mes approcha cy pres cōe il oſaſt, & fait claime a ceo deins le an & iour deuant le mort de ceſtuy que ad le terre, ſi apres ceſtuy que ad le terre deuie ſeiſie, & ſon heire eſt eins per diſcent, vncore ceſtuy que fait tiel claim poit enter ſur 
                        •
                     heir nient

contriſteant tiel diſcent, pur ceo que il ad fait tiel continual claime: Mes il couient que ceſt claime touts foits ſoit fait deins lan & iour deuaunt le mort le tenant, car ſi tiel tenant ne moruſt ſeiſie deins lan & iour ap̄s tiel claime fait, & vncore il q̄ ad droit noſaſt enter, dō
                     ques couient al ceſtuy q̄ ad tiel droit de faire auter claime deins lan & iour ap̄s le primer claim, & apres tiel ſecōd claime de faire le tierce claime deins lan & iour, ſi il voit eſte ſur de ſauer ſon entre. Mes ſi le diſſeiſor deuie ſeiſi deins lan & iour apres le diſſeiſin, & nul claime f
                        ••
                     t, donques lentre le diſſeiſee eſt tolle, car lan & iour ne ſerra priſe de le temps del title dentre a luy accrue, mes ſolemēt pur le temps del darrein claime per luy fait, come eſt auantdit. Vide pluis de ceo en Littleton lib. 3. cap. 7.
               
               
                  Counterplee.
                  COunterplee eſt lou vn port vn action, & le

tenant en ſon reſpons & plee vouch ou appel pur aſcun home pur garrant ſon title, ou prayer ayde de auter, que ad meliour eſtate, come de ceſtuy en la reuerſion ou ſi vn eſtraunge al action vient & prayera deſte reſceu de ſauer ſon eſtate, ſi le demaund reply a ce
                        •
                     , & monſtre le cauſe que il ne doyt de tiel home eyde auer, ou que tiel home 
                        •
                     e doit eſte reſceu, ceſt plee eſt appel vn coū
                     terplee al voucher, ayde. ou reſceit come le caſe eſt, mes ſi le voucher ſoit allow, & quant le vouche vient eins & demaund quel choſe le tenant ad de luy voucher, & le tenaunt monſtre ſon cauſe, & le vouchee plede aſcun matter de a
                        ••
                     yder le garrantie, ceo eſt appel counterplee del reſceit.
               
               
                  121 Contract.
                  COntract, eſt vn bargaine, ou couenant penter ij. parties ou vn choſe eſt done pur auter que eſt appel, Quid pro

quo, cōe ſi ieo vende mon chiual pur argent, ou ſi ieo couenāt de faire leaſe a vous de mon mannor de Dale, en conſideration de xx. li. que vous dones a moy, ceux ſont bone cō
                     tracts, pur ceo que il ad vn choſe pur auter, Mes ſi vn home fait promiſe a moy, que ieo auera xx. s. & que il voile eſte dettour a moy de ceo, & puys ieo demaund xx. s. & il ne voyle a moy deliuer, vncore ieo nauera iāmes action pur recouer ceſt xx. s. pur ceo que ceſt promiſe ne fuit contract, mes nudus pactus, Et ex nudo pacto nō oritur actio, mes ſi aſcū choſe fuit d
                        •
                     ne pur le xx. s. meſque il ne fuit forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      al value vn denier, donques il fuit bone contracte.
               
               
                  Contra formam collationis.
                  COntra formam collationis, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou home done terres en perpetual almoigne a aſcun meſon de Religion, come a

vn Abbe & la couent ou a auter ſoueraigne, ou al garden ou maſter de aſcū Hoſpital, & ſon couēt de trouer certeine pouer homes, & de faire aut diuine ſeruice, 
                        •
                     ils alien les terres dōques le donour ou ſe
                        •
                      heires, aueront le dit briefe pur recouer le terre, mes ceſt briefe ſerra tou
                        ••
                      fo
                        •
                     ts port vers l'Abbote ou ſon ſucceſſor, & nemy vers alience, coment que il ſoit tenat: mes en touts auters actions lou home demaunde francktenement, le briefe ſerra port vers le tenaunt del terre. Vide le ſtatute W. 2. cap. 41.
               
               
                  124 Contra formam feoffamenti.
                  COntra formam feoffamenti, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou vn home deuant leſtatute de Quia emptores terrarum, quel fuit fait Anno 18. Edw. infeoffe auter per fait de faire certaine ſeruice ſi le feoffour ou ſes heires diſtraine luy de faire auter ſeruice que eſt compriſe

en le fait, donques le tenaunt auera ceſt briefe, luy commaundant que il ne diſtrayne luy de faire auter ſeruice, que neſt compriſe deins le fayt, mes ceſt br̄ ne giſt pur le plaintife que clayme per purchaſe del 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     fee, mes pur tiel pla
                        〈…〉
                      que claime come heire
                        •
                     l primer feffee.
               
               
                  Contributione facienda.
                  COntributione facienda, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou ſont diuers Parceners & celuy que ad le part del eygn̄, f
                        •
                     ut tout le ſuit al Seigniour, les auters doient faire contribution a luy, & ſils ne voillont il auer vers eux le die briefe.
               
               
                  Conuſance.
                  COnuſance de plee, eſt vn priuiledge que vn citie ou ville ad del grant le Roy de tener plee des touts contracts, & des terres d
                        •
                     ns le precinct del Franchiſes: & que quant aſcun home eſt

impleded, pur aſcun tiel choſe en le court de Roy al Weſtminſter, les Maiors ou Baylifes de tiels Franchiſes, ou lour Atturneys poient demaunder Conuſance del plee, ſcilicet, que le plee & le matter ſerra pled & determine deuaunt eux. Mes ſi le court al Weſtm. ſoit loyalment ſeiſie del plee deuaunt que Conuſance ſoit demaunde, dō
                     ques ils ne auerōt Conuſance pur ceſt ſuite, pur ceo q̄ ils ont neglig
                        •
                     ntm̄t ſurceaſe lour tēps de demaunder ceo, mes ceſt ne ſerra barre al eux dauer Conuſace en auter actiō, car ils poient demaund Conuſance en vn action, & omitte ceo en auter action a lour pleaſure.
                  Et nota que Conuſance ne giſt en preſcription, mes ils couient monſtre letters patents le Roy pur ceo.
               
               
                  127 Corodie.
                  COrodie eſt vn allowance de meate, pane, boier, argent, veſtments, lodg. & tiels choſes neceſſarie

pur ſuſtenance: ceo aſcun foits eſt certein ou le certeinty des choſes eſt limit, aſcun foits vncerteine, lou neſt limit le certeintie que il aū 
                     
                        •
                     t aſcun de eux commence ꝑ grant fait ꝑ aſcun hōe al auter, & po
                        •
                     t eſt
                        •
                      pur vie, ans, en tail ou fee: & aſcū Corodies ſ
                        •
                     nt de cōmon droit, ſicome cheſcū foū
                     der de Abbies, Priories, Nunries, & auters meaſons de religiō papiſ
                        •
                     ick, auoient aucthoritie daſſigner tiel in meſme les meaſons (quant ils fueront) pur ſon pere, frere, coſin ou auter home q̄ il voit, prendroit ceo, ſil 
                        •
                     uit vn meaſon de moignes, & ſil ſoit foūd del meaſon de Nuns ou muliers, donque ceo pur ſa mere, ſoer, coſin ou aut mulier q̄ il voil direct al ceo, & touts iours cē ꝓu
                        ••
                     o fuit ew, que il q̄ ad Corody en vn meſon de moignes ne doit mitter vn feme de prender ceo. Ne ou Corodie fuit due 
                        •
                     n vn Nū
                     rie, l
                        •
                      il ne fuit lo
                        •
                     all de appointer vn hōe de receiuer

ceo, car en ambideux 
                        ••
                     ſes tiel preſentation fuit deſte reiect. Et ceſt Corody fuit due ſibien 
                        •
                      vn commō perſon que fuit founder, ſicome ou le Roy m̄ fu
                        •
                     t foūder, mes ou 
                        •
                     e meaſon fuit 
                        •
                     e
                     
                        •
                     is en frankalmoigne, la le tenure m̄ fuit vn diſcharge de corody 
                        
                           •
                        nco
                           •
                        t touts hōes ſicōe q̄ il fuit ap̄s charge voluntarim̄t, come ou le Roy voit mitter ſon brief al Abbe pur vn Corody pur vn tiel le que ils admit, la le meaſon doit eſte charge per ceo a touts iours, ſi le roy ſoit foūd ou nemy: vide breue de Corod. hab. en Fitz. Natura br̄. fo. 230.
               
               
                  Coroner
                  COroner eſt vn aunc▪ offic▪ de truſt, & de grād aucthority, ordain dēe vn principal conſeruator, ou gardein de la peas, a port record 
                        •
                     s Ples del crown & de ſon view demeſne & de diuers auter choſes mult en number &c. & pur ceo 
                        •
                     n temps le Roy Edward le primer ceſt

eſtatute ſequens 
                        •
                     uit fait pur ceo que petit gents meins ſages ſoient 
                        •••••
                     s ore de nouel communement al office del Coroner, ou miſtyer ſerroit q̄ probes homes loyalx & ſages 
                        •
                     e en
                        ••
                     r
                        •
                     e
                        •••
                     nt de cel office. Puru
                        •••
                      eſt▪ q̄ p
                        •
                     r toutes les Counties 
                        •
                     oyeat eſ
                        •••
                     s ſufficient homes Coroners, de pluis loials & plu
                        •
                     s ſages c
                        ••
                     
                     
                     
                        ••
                     l
                        •
                     rs, que mieux ſa
                        ••
                     at puiſſant & veilent a cel office entender, & q̄ loyalm̄t attachēt & repreſentēt le plees del Corone.
                  Et ment obſtinte le lett de c
                        •
                     ſt eſtatute ne ſoit pciſement obſerue vncore al meins le entent doit eſtre purſue, 
                        •
                     y pres come poit, que pur le default des chiualers, g
                        •
                     ntle
                        •
                     ōes furniſhed oue tiels qualities ſi come le ſtatut parle (de que 
                        •
                     ls y a
                        •
                      diuers) p
                        ••••
                      eſtre eſ
                        •
                     ieu 
                        •
                     ue c
                        •
                     ſt addition que ils ſoyent ver
                        〈…〉
                      & 
                        〈…〉
                      co
                        ••••
                      Chriſtians: vide de ceo en b
                        •
                     i
                        •••
                      de 
                        •••
                     o
                        〈…〉
                      eligendo in 
                        •••
                      Natura breuium fol. 1
                        •
                     3.
               
               
                  
                  129 Corporation.
                  COrporation, eſt vn choſe permanent que poit auer ſucceſsion: Et eſt vn aſſēbly & ioyning enſemble de diuers en vn fellowſhip, fraternitie & ment, de que vn eſt le teſte & principall, let auters ſont le corps, & cē teſte & corps ioint enſemble font le corporation. Et de corporations aſcuns ſont appels ſpirituals aſcuns temporals, & de ceux que ſont ſpirituals aſcuns fueront corporations de mort perſons en ley, & aſcuns auterment, & aſcuns ſont per aucthority del Roy ſolem̄t, & aſcuns ont eſtr dū mixt auctority. Et de ceux queux ſont tēporall aſcuns ſont ꝑ aucthority del roigne auxy, & aſcuns ꝑ le cōon ley del Realm̄.
                  Corporation ſpirituall & de mort perſons en ley eſt lou le corporation conſiſt dun Abbe & couent, & ceux ont lour cō
                     mencement del Roy, & le home de Rome, quant il y ad a faire cy.
                  
                     Corporation ſpirituall & dable perſons ē ley eſt lou le corporation conſiſt dun Deane & Chapter, Maſter del Colledge ou Hoſpitall, & ceſt corporation ad commencement del Roy ſolement.
                  Corporation temporal per le R. eſt lou eſt vn Maior & Comminalty.
                  Corporation temporal per aucthority del common ley eſt le aſſembly en parliament, le quel cō
                     ſiſt del Roign le teſte del corporation & S
                        •
                     rs ſpirituals & tēporals, & de les commons del Realm̄ le corps del corporation.
               
               
                  Corps politike.
                  COrps politike, ſont Eueſques, Abbeis, Priors, Deans, Parſons dun eſgliſe, & tiels ſēblables, queux ont ſucceſsion en vn perſon ſolement.
               
               
                  Corruption de ſangue.
                  COrruption de ſangue, eſt qn̄t aſc' eſt attaint de felony ou treaſon, dō
                     q̄s ſon ſague eſt dit deſte

corrupt, per reaſon de q̄l ſes enfants ne aſcun de ſō ſāgue ne po
                        •
                     ēt eſtre heirs a luy ne aſcun auter aunceſtor, ꝑur que ils doient claime ꝑer luy. Et ſii fuit noble ou gentle home deuant, il & touts ſes enfants per ceo ſont ſaits ignoble & vngentle, ayant regard al nobility ou gentrie ils claim per lour pere, que ne poit eſte fait fane arrere ſans aucthoritie de Parliament.
               
               
                  132 Coſinage.
                  COſinage, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou mon beſaiel mon trēſaile, ou auter coſin deuie ſeiſie in fee ſimple, & vn eſtrange abata, ceſt adire, enter en les terres, donques 
                        •
                     eo auera vers luy ceſt briefe, ou deuers ſon heire ou ſon alienee, ou deuers q̄
                     cunque que aueigne apres a les dits terres. Mes ſi mon aiel deuie ſeiſi, & vn eſtrange abate, donq̄s ieo aūa vn briefe de Aiel. Mes ſi mō pere, mere, frere, ſoer, vncle ou aūt deuie

ſeiſie, & vn eſtrāge abata, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ieo auera vn Aſsiſe de Mortdaunceſter.
               
               
                  Couenant.
                  COuenant, eſt vn agreement fait per fait en eſcript & enſeale per
                        ••
                     ter deux perſons, lou cheſcun de cux eſt tenus al auter de performer certain couenants pur ſon part, & lun de eux 
                        •
                     e 
                        ••
                     ent p
                        ••
                      ſō couenant mes enfreint ceo, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      celuy q̄ ſe ſent greeue, auera vn briefe de Couenant.
                  Et nota bien que nul br̄ de Couenant ſorra maintenable ſans e
                        •
                     ſpe
                        •
                     altie, ſinon en la Citie de Londres, ou 
                        •
                     n aſcun aut tiel lieu priuiledge per cuſtome & vſe.
               
               
                  Couerture.
                  COuerture, eſt quant vn home & vn ſeme ſont eſpouſe enſemble, ore aſcun choſe que eſt fait cō
                     cernant la feme en le t
                        •
                     ps de le continuance de ceſt marriage perenter eux eſt dit deſtre fait durant le couerture, & le fem̄ eſt

appel vn feme couert.
               
               
                  135 Couin.
                  COuin, eſt vn ſecret aſſent determine en les cures de deux ou pluſors al p̄iudice dun aut: Come ſi tenāt pur tm de vie, ou tenant en le taile ſecretmēt conſpire oue vn aut, q̄ 
                     laut recouera vers le t pur vie le terre q̄ il tient &c. en preiudice de celuy en le reuerſion.
               
               
                  136 Cui in vita.
                  CVi in vita eſt vn briefe & giſt lou home eſt ſeiſi de terres en fee ſimple, ou fee taile, ou pur terme de vie en droit ſa feme, & alien̄ meſme le terre & deuie, donques el auera le dit briefe pur recouerer la terre.
                  Et nota bien que en cē briefe ſon title doit eſte monſtre ſi ſoit de purchaſe la feme, ou del heritage la feme. Mes ſi le baron alien le droit ſa feme, & le baron & la feme deuiont, le heire la feme auera vn briefe de ſur Cui in vita.
               
               
                  
                  Cui ante diuortium.
                  CVi ante diuortiū, eſt vn briefe, & giſt en ſemble maner, quant tiel alienation eſt fait per le baron del terre la feme, & puis deuorce eſt ew enter eux, donques la femme auera ceſt briefe, & le briefe dirra, cui ipſa ante diuortium contradicere nō potuit.
               
               
                  Curteſie D
                        •
                     ngleterre.
                  CVrteſie Dengleterre, eſt lou home prent feme ſeiſie in fee ſimple ou fee taile general, ou ſeiſie cōe heire de la taile eſpecial, & ad iſſue per la feme male ou female, ſoit le iſſue mort ou en vie, ſi la feme deuie, le baron tyendra la terre deuant ſa vie per la ley de Angleterre: Et eſt appel tenant per le Curteſie Dengleterre, pur ceo q̄ ueſt vſe en nul aut Realm forſq, tātſolem̄t en Engleterre.
               
            
            
               D.
               
                  Damage feaſant.
                  DAmage ſea
                        •
                     at eſt quāt les beaſts de vn 
                        •
                     ſtrag'

ſont in auters terres ſans auctoritie loial ou licēce del tenant de la terre, & la mangeront, tread, ou auterm̄t ſpoylēt les blees, graſſe, boies, ou tiels ſemblables: En quel caſe le t q̄ ils iſsint damage, poit pur ceo prender, diſtrain, & impound eux, ſibien en le nuict come en le iour. Mes en auters caſes, come put rent & ſeruices & tiels ſembles nul poit diſtrainer en le nuict tēps.
               
               
                  140 Danegelde.
                  DAngelde, hoc eſt quietum eſſe de quada cō
                     ſuetudine q̄ cucu
                        •
                     rit aliquo tēpore, quā quidē Danu leuauerūt in Anglia.
                  Ceo commence primer 
                        •
                     n tēps le roy Etheldred, q̄l eſteant en graund diſtreſſe per le continual inuaſion de les Danes, pur purchaſer paix, fuit compel de charger ſon pais & people oue importable paiments, car il primermēt dona cux al ſink ſeueral paymēt 113000. li. & puis graunt al cux

48000. li. annualment.
               
               
                  Darrein preſentment.
                  DArrein preſentm̄t. Vide de ceo apres titulo Quare impedit.
               
               
                  Deane & Chapter.
                  DEane & Chapter, eſt vn corps corporate ſpiritual conſiſtant de pluſors able perſons en ley, come noſmement de Deane (que eſt principal) & ſes Prebends, & ils emſemble font le corporation. Et ſicome ceſt corporation poyent ioyntment purchaſe terres & tenements al vſe de lour eſglis & ſucceſſors. Iſsint auxy cheſcun de eux ſeueralmēt poit purchaſe al vſe de luy & ſes heires.
               
               
                  Decies tantum.
                  DEcies tantum, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou vn iurour en aſcun enqueſt, priſt 
                        •
                     rgēt dun partie ou dauter pur done ſon verdict, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il payera x. foits a tāt q̄ il ad receiue. Et cheſcun que voyl ſuer auera action, & auera

lun moitie, & le roy lauter moitie. Mes ſi le Roy en tiel caſe releaſe per ſon perdon a tiel iurour, vncore ceo ne ſerra barre versceſtuy que port laction, mes que il recouera lauter moitie, ſi ſon action ſoit commence deuant le pardon le Roy, mes ſi le pardon ſoit deuant aſcun action, il eſt barre encounter toutes gents. Et meſme le ley eſt de touts actions populers lou vn part eſt al roy, & lauter al partie que ſuera. Auxi les embracers que procurent tiels inqueſtes ſerront puny en meſme le manner & ils aueront priſonment de vn an, Mes nul iuſtice enquirera de ceo de office, mes ſolement al ſuite del partie.
               
               
                  144 Declaration.
                  DEclaration, eſt vn mō
                     ſtrance en eſcript de le griefe & complaint de le commaundaunt ou plaintife enuers le tenant ou defendant, en que il

ſuppoſe de auer receiue tort, & ceſt declaration doit eſte plaine & certain, pur ceo que il impeache le defendant ou tenant & auxy chace celuy a reſponder. Mes nota que declaration fait per le demaundant vers le tenaunt en action Real, eſt: appel properment vn Count.
                  Nota que le Count ou declaration doit conteine demonſtration, declaration & concluſion. Et en demonſtration ſont conteines troys choſes (ceſt adire) que ſe pleint, & deuers que & de quel choſe, & en le declaration doit eſtre compriſe come & en quel manner le cauſe del action ſurdit enter les parties, & quant & quel iour, an, & lieu, & a que laction ſerra done.
                  Et en percloſe il doit auerre & profer de prouer ſon ſuite & monſtra les dammages queux il ſuſteine per le tort a luy faite.
               
               
                  
                  145 Dedimus poteſtatem.
                  DEdimus poteſtatem, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou vn home 
                        〈…〉
                      le court le Roy, 
                        •
                     ou eſt ſue & ne p
                        ••
                     t bien traueler, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il auera 
                        •
                     eſt briefe direct a aſcun Iuſtice ou auter diſcreete perſon en le payes de 
                        •
                     oner a luy power pur admit aſcun pur ſon Atturney, ou de leuie fine, ou de prender ſon confeſsion ou ſon reſpōs, ou 
                        •
                     auter examination come le matter require.
               
               
                  146 Defendant.
                  DEfendant, eſt celuy q̄ eſt ſue en action perſonel, & il eſt appel tenāt en vn action Real.
               
               
                  147 Defence.
                  DEfence, eſt ceo que le defendant doit. faire immediatement apres le count o
                        •
                      declaration fait, ceſt adire que, il defenda tout le torre force & dammage, lou & quant il deuera 
                        •
                      & do
                        •
                     ques de proceede ouſter

a ſon plee, ou de 
                        ••
                     
                     parler.
                  Et no
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ que entant que il defend tort & force il ſe excuſe del tort ve
                        •
                     s luy ſurmiſee, & fait 
                        •
                     r partie al plee, & per tant q
                        •
                     e il defende lēs dammages, il affirme le partie plaintife able deſte reſpondue.
                  Et pur le
                        •
                      re
                        •
                     idue d
                        •
                     l defence, il accept le power del Court de over & determiner les pl
                        •
                     es de cel matter. Car ſil voile pleder al Iuriſdiction, il doit omitter in ſon defence les parols (o
                        •
                      & quant il deuera) & ſil voyle monſtre aſcun diſabilitie en le plaintife, & demaund iudgement ſi le partie ſerra reſpondu, donques il doit omitter le defence del dammage.
               
               
                  Demaundant.
                  DEmaundant, eſt celuy que ſue ou
                        〈…〉
                      complaine en action Real put

title de terre, & il eſt appel plaintife en vn aſsiſe, & en vn action perſonel, come en action de debt, treſpas, diſceite, detinue & 
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     ls ſemblables.
               
               
                  149 Demaines.
                  DEmaines, ou demeſnes generalment a parler ſolonque le ley ſont touts les parts de aſcun maner 
                        •
                     l ne ſont en maines del freeholders deſtate denheritance, coment ſoyent occupies pe
                        •
                      tenaunt per copy de Court Roll, leſſees pur ans, ou pur vie, cy bien come tenaunt a volunte: me
                        •
                      ſpecialment a parler dem
                        •
                     nes ſolonque le common parlance ſont ſolement entend le principall mannor place del ſeigmo
                        ••
                     , que il & ſes aunceſtors ont ewe de temps hors de memory en lour maines demeſue, & ount occupy ceo, enſemble oue touts edifices & meaſons quecunque, Etauxi les prees, paſtures, boyes, terres e
                        ••
                     able, & tiels ſemblables, oue ceo occupie.
               
               
                  
                  Demy ſanke ou ſangue.
                  DEmy ſanke eſt quant vn hōe marie vn feme, & ad iſſue per luy vn fits ou file & el moruſt▪ & donques il priſt vn auter feme, & ad per luy auxy vn fites ou file. Ore ceux deux fits ſo
                        •
                     t ſolō
                     que vn manner freres, on come ils ſont appels demy freres, ou freres del demy ſanke cē adire frere 
                        •
                      le part de pier pur ceo que ils ont ambideux vn pier, & ſont ambideux de ſon ſāgue, & nemy freres per le part le mere, ne de aſcun ſanke on kinne ceſt voy, & pur ceo lun de cux ne poit eſte heire al auter, car il q voile claime come heire al vn per diſcent, doyt eſte dentier ſāke a luy de q̄ il claime. En meſme le maner eſt ſi feme 
                        •
                     yt diuers iſſues ꝑ diuers barons qui fratres vterini dicuntur.
               
               
                  Demurrer.
                  DEmurrer eſt quant aſcun action eſt port & le defendant plede vn ple

a que le plaintife dit que il ne voile reſponder pur ceo que il neſt ſufficient plee en le ley & le defendant dit al contrarie que il eſt ſufficient plee, & ſur ceo ambideux miſt
                        •
                     
                     ro
                        •
                     t le cauſe al iudgement del Court, donques ceo eſt appelle vn demurrer.
               
               
                  152 Denizen.
                  DEnizen, eſt lou alien nee deuient le ſubiect le Roy & obteine le letters patēts le roy pur enioy toutes priuiledges, cōe vn hoe Anglois, mes ſi vn 
                        •
                     o
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     an Demzen il paiera cuſtomes & diuers auters choſes come alien▪ come appiert per diuers Statutes de ceo faits.
               
               
                  153 Deodande.
                  DEodande, eſt quant aſcun home per miſfortune eſt occide ꝑ vn chiual ou per charet ou per auter choſe que mouet▪ donques cel choſe que eſt le cauſe de ſon mort, que al tēps de la misfortune moua, ſerra forfait al

Roy, & ceo eſt appell Deodande, & ceo pe
                        •••
                     ne al Almener le Roy pur diſpoſer in Almes & actes de charitie.
               
               
                  Departure de ſon plee ou matter.
                  DEparture de ſon plee ou matter, eſt lou vn home plede vn plee en barre & le plaintife replie a ceo, & ſil apres en ſon 
                        •••
                     omder plede ou monſtre auter matter cō
                     trarie a ſon primer plea en barre, ceo eſt appell vn depart de ſon barr̄ &c.
               
               
                  Departure in diſpite del Court.
                  DEparture in diſpite del Court, eſt quant le tenāt ou defendāt appeare al action port enuers luy, & ad iour ouſter en m̄ le terme ou eſt demaunde apres, coment nul iour ſo
                        •
                     t a luy done iſsint que ſoit en meſme le terme 
                        ••
                      ne appeare me
                        •
                      fa
                        •
                     t defaut, cē vn departure in diſpite del Court, & pur ceo il ſerra conde
                        ••••
                     .
               
               
                  
                  156 Deputie.
                  DEputie eſt celuy que occupya en aut droyt ſoit ceo office, ou aſcun auter choſe, & ſon forfaitur̄, ou diſmeanor cauſe
                        •
                      officer, ou celuy que deputie il eſt de pard' ſon office ou choſe. Mes vn 
                        •
                     e poit faire ſon deputie en touts caſes, niſi le grāt ſoit iſsint, ſi come il ſoit o
                        ••
                      ceux ou tiels ſēblables parols, exercēdo per ſe, vel ſufficientem deputatum ſuum, ou ſi les parols va ouſter ꝑ ſe vel deputat▪ ſuum▪ aut deputat▪ deputati, donques il poit faire vn deputie & ſō deputie auxi poet faire vn deputie, auterm̄t nemie.
               
               
                  157 Det.
                  DEt eſt vn briefe & giſt lou aſcun ſumme dargent eſt due a vn ꝑ reaſon 
                        •
                     accompt, bargaine, cō
                     tract, obligation▪ ou aut eſpecialtie, a eſtre paie 
                        •
                      aſcū certaine iour, a quel iour il ne paia paſſe, dō
                     ques il auera ceſt briefe. Mes ſi aſcun ſumme de argent ſoit due a aſcun ſeignior ꝑ ſon tenant, pur

alcun rēt ſeruice, le ſeignior ne vnques aūa actiō de dett, mes il couient touts foits diſtrain. Auxi pur rent charge ou rent ſecke, quel home ad pur terme de ſon vie, en taile ou en fee, il nauera actiō de det, cy longe come le rent endure, mes ſes executors poient auer vn actiō de det pur les arrerages de aſcun des dits rēts due ē le vie lour teſtator, ꝑ leſtatute 32. H. 8. c. 37.
                  Mes pur les arrerages de rēt reſerue ſur vn leaſe pur terme de ans, le leſſor eſt a ſon election de auer action de dette, ou pur diſtrainer: Mes ſi le leaſe ſoit determine, donques il ne diſtreinera apres pur cel rent.
                  Mes couient luy dauer vn action de det pur les arrerages.
               
               
                  Deuaſtauerunt bona teſtatoris.
                  DEuaſtauerūt bona teſtatoris eſt quāt les executors voile deliuer les legacies que lour teſtator ad done ou faire reſtitution pur torts faits per

luy, ou paie ſes dets due ſur cōtractes, ou aut dets due ſur ſpecialties, que iours de paiment ne ſont vncore venus &c. Et ne gard ſufficient 
                        •
                     n lour maines pur diſcharger ceux dets ſur records ou ſpecialties, q̄ ils ſont cō
                     pellabl' primerm̄t ꝑ le ley de ſatisfier, dōques il ſerront cōſtrain de payer de lour biens, demeſne ceux duties, le quel al primer ꝑ le ley ils, fi
                        ••
                     ront compelles de paier, accordant al value de ceo q̄ ils deliuero
                        •
                     t ou pay ſans compulſion, car tiels paimēts de dets, ou deliuerie de legacies, come eſt auantdit, deuant dets paies ſur ſpecialties▪ ou recordes, quel iours de payment ſont a ore venus▪ ſont accompt en le ley vn vaſtāt des biens del teſtator, cy tant come ſi ils ad done eux ſans cauſe, ou vend eux & conuert eux a lour proper vſe.
               
               
                  159 Deuiſe.
                  DEuiſe eſt lou vn hōe en ſon teſtament, done

ou grant ſes biens ou ſes terres a vn auter apres ſon deceaſe. Et lou tiel deuiſe eſt fait des biens, ſi les executors ne voilent deliuer les biens a le deuiſee, le deuiſee nad remedie per le cōmon ley▪ Mes il couient de auer vn Citation vers les executors le teſtator dappearer deuant le Ordinarie▪ de monſt
                        •
                      pur quoy il ne ꝑforma le volūt le teſtator, car le deuiſee ne poit p̄nder le legacy & luy m̄ ſ
erū, mes il deit eſtre deliū a luy ꝑ les executors.
                  Mes per le cōmon-ley, ſi home fuit ſ
                        •
                     le ſeiſi de terres ē ſon demeſne come de fee▪ & deuiſa les terres ꝑ ſon teſtam̄t▪ ceſt deuiſe fuit void▪ 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      les terres ſeront en vn Citie ou borough lou terres ſont deuiſable ꝑ cuſtom. Mes ſi aſcun home ſoit▪ enfeoffe al vſe dun auter & ſes heirs, & ceſty a que vſe il fuit iſsint ſeiſſe fait deuiſe de ſes terres, ceſt deuiſe fuit bone, coment que il ne fuit en ville lou terres ſont deuiſable.
                  
                     Auxy ſi aſc' home deuiſe tres en citie, ville ou borough deuiſable, & le deuiſor deuie, ſi ſon heire ou aſc' auter abate en les terres, donques le deuiſee aūa br̄ de Ex graui quaerela: Mes ceſt br̄ ne ſerra iammes plede deuāt le Iuſtice le Roy, mes touts foits deuant le Maior on Bailifes in le dit ville.
                  Et ore al fine de monſtre quant les leyes de ceſt Realme, & les diſcreete Iudges de ceo, q̄ux ſont les interpreters de le ley, ont fauour volunts & teſtaments, & iſsint deuiſes en yelding al eux 
                        •
                     iel reaſonable cōſtruction, come ils penſant poit bien agreer oue les menes de les morts, conſiderantes q̄ volunts & teſtam̄ts ſont pur le plus part, & ꝑ common intendm̄t fait quant le teſtator eſt ore en graund langor, feeble & paſſa tout ſperans de recouerie, car il eſt vn opinion en le pais enter le greinder nū
                     ber, que ſi vn home per chaunce ſoit ey ſapient

come de faire ſon volunt en ſon bone ſane, quant il eſt ſtrong, de bone memorie, & ad temps & opportunitie, & poit demād counſell ſi aſcun doubt ſoit de le learned, que dō
                     ques il ne doit viuer long apres, & pur ceo ils ceo deferre tanque tiel temps quant ceo ſoit plus conuenient de applier eux meſmes a le diſpoſition de lour almes, q̄ de lour terres & biens, ſinon que il ſoit que per freſh memorie, & recitall de eux a ceſt temps, il poit eſtre vn cauſe de mittr̄ eux en ment▪ de aſc' de lour biēs ou tres fauxim̄t purchaſe & iſsint moue eux al reſtitutiō &c. Et a ceſt tēps le eſcripture de tiels volunts ſont communem̄t cōmit al miniſter del paroch ou al aſcun aut plus ignorant que luy, que ne ſeauoit q̄ux parolx ſont neceſſarie pur faire vn eſtate ē fee ſimple, fee tail pur terme de vie, ou tiels ſemblables, preter diuers aut miſchiefes: Ieo voile pur ceo miſe cy aſcuns de

ceux caſes queux ſōt plus common en les bouches de les ignorant homes & portont per le ſauient interpretations de les iudges, come eſt auantdit, vn large & plus fauourable fēce en volūts q̄ en faits.
                  Et pur ceo primermēt ſi vn deuiſe al I. S. per ſont volunt, touts les terres & tenem̄ts, icy non ſolement tout ceux tres, q̄ il ad en poſſeſsion paſſōt, mes auxi ceux de que il ad le reuerſion, per vertu de ceux parelx tenemēts.
                  Et ſi terres ſont deuiſe a vn home ae auer a luy in ꝑpetuum, ou a auer a luy & a ſes aſsignes, in ceux deux caſes le deuiſee aūa fee ſimple, Mes ſi ſoit dōe per feoffem̄t 
                        •
                     n tiel maner, il nad forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſtate pur terme de vie. Auxy 
                        •
                     i vn home deuiſe ſes terres al auter, pur doner, vender, ou fa
                        ••
                      de c
                        •
                     o a ſō wil & pleaſure, ceſt fee ſimple.
                  Vn deuiſe ſait al vn & a ſes heires males fait vn eſtate taile, mes ſi 
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     ls parols ſo
                        •
                     t miſe en vn fa
                        ••
                      de foffement, il ſerra

priſe fee ſimple, pu
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     eo que il 
                        •
                     appiert de que corps les heirs males ſerra ingend
                        •
                     e. Si terres ſont done per fait al I. S. & a les heires males de ſon corps &c. que ad iſſue file, que ad iſſue fites & moruſt, la le terrie reuertera al donour, & le fits de file nauera ceo, pur ceo que il ne poit a luy meſme conueier ꝑ heires males, car ſa meere eſt vn obſtacle a ceo, mes autermēt eſt de tiel deuiſe, car la le fites del file ceo auera pluſtoſt que le volunt ſerra voide.
                  Si vn deuiſe al enfant in ventre matris ſuae, ceſt bone deuiſe, auterm̄t eſt ꝑ feoffement, grant, o
                        •
                      done, ca
                        •
                      ē ceux caſes il doit eſtre vn del habilitie pur prender maintenāt, auterment il eſt voide.
                  Vn deuiſe fair ē fee ſimple ſans expreſſe ꝑols del heirs eſt bōe ē fee ſimple.
                  Mes ſi vn deuiſe ſoit al I. N. il auera les terres forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pur terme de vie, car ceux parols ne voilēt porter greinder eſtate.
                  
                     Si vn voile que ſon fits I. auera ſon terre puis le mort ſon feme, icy le fēe le deuiſor aūr le tre primes pur terme de ſa vie. Iſsint ſi home deuiſe ſes biens a ſa feme, & que apres le deceaſe de ſon feme, ſon fits & heire auera le meiſon ou les biens ſont, la le fits nauera le meaſon durant le vie de le feme, car il appiert que ſon intent fuit, que ſa feme doit auer le meaſon auxi put terme de ſa vie, nient obſtant il ne fuit deuiſe a luy per expreſſe parols.
                  Si vn deuiſe ſoit al I. N. & a les heires females de ſon corps engendres, apres le deuiſce ad iſſue fites & file, & moruſt, icy le file auera le terre, & nemy le fits, & vncore il eſt plus digne perſon, & heire al ſō peire, mes pur ceo que volunt del mort eſt, que le file doit ceo auer, ley & cōſcience voet iſsint auxy.
                  Et en ceſt point les heathen fueront preciſe, come appiert ꝑ ceux verſes

de Octauins Auguſtus que Donatus report il feſoit apres que Virgil a ſon morte donoit commaundem̄t, que ſes liuers doiēt eſtre combure, pur ceo que ils fueront imperfect, & vncore aſcuns perſuadont que ils doient eſtre ſaue, cōe en fait ils happiment fueront a que il reſpond iſsint: Sed legum ſeruāda fides, ſuprema voluntas, Quod mandat, fierique iubet, parere neceſſe eſt.
               
               
                  Diem clauſit extremum.
                  DIem clauſit extremū, eſt vn br̄, & giſt lou le tenant le Roy, q̄ tient en chief moruſt, donq̄ cē br̄ ſerra direct al eſchetour denquirer de quel eſtate il fuit ſeiſi, & que eſt procheine heire, & de q̄ lage & de la certainty del 
                        •
                     ie & de quel value le 
                        〈…〉
                      eſt. & de que ceo eſt ten
                        •
                     s, & cel inquiſitiō 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      returne en le chancerie & eſt communement appel, The office after y• death of that perſon.
                  
               
               
                  
                  161 Diſcent.
                  DIſcent, eſt en ij. ſortes, o
                        •
                      lineal, ou collatal.
                  Lineal diſcent eſt quant le diſcent eſt conuey en meſme le lyne dentier ſangue, come aile, peere, fits, fits del fits & iſsint debaſſa.
                  Collateral diſcent eſt dehors en vn auter brāch dehauſt dentier ſangue come le frere del ayle, frere del peere, & iſsint debaſſa.
                  Nota que ſi vn deuie ſeiſie en fee, ou en taile de terre en quel auter ad droit denter, & ceo diſcend a ſon heire, tiel diſcent tollera lentre de ceſtuy que droit auoit denter, pur ceo q̄ le heire ad ceux per le diſcent de ſon pere, & iſsint vient a les tenemēts per acte del ley, & ceſty que droit ad ne puit luy ouſter per entre ſur luy, mes eſt miſe de ſuer ſon brief a demaund le terre ſolonque le nature de ſon title. Vide de ceo Littleton, liuer. 3. ca. 6. & Stat. 32. Henr. 8. cap. 33.
               
               
                  
                  Diſclaymer.
                  DIſclaymer, eſt lou le ſeignior diſtraine ſon tenaunt, & il ſua repleuin, & le ſeignior auowa le pr
                        •
                     ſel, per reaſon que il t
                        ••
                     nt de luy, ſi le tenant dit que il diſclaime de tener de luy, ceſt appel vn diſclaimer, & ſi le ſeignior ſur c
                        •
                     o porte briefe de droit ſur diſclaimer, & il ſoit troue encounter le tenāt, il perdera le terre. Auxy 
                        ••
                      vn port vn precipe vers deux auters pur te
                        •
                     re, & le tenaunt diſclaime & dit, que il neſt de ceo tenaunt, ne claim rien en ceo, donques lauter auera tout le terre. Mes ſi le precipe ſoit envers vn ſole, & il diſclaim, come auant eſt dit le briefe abatera, & vncore le demandant poit enter en le terre, & ceo teter en ſon droiturel eſtate comēt ſon entrie ne fuit loyal.
               
               
                  Diſcontinuance.
                  DIſcontinuance, eſt quāt vn home alien a vn 
                        •
                     nter terres o
                        •
                      tenements

& moruſt, & vn aut ad droit a m
                        •
                     ſme les terres & 
                        •
                     e puit enter 
                        •
                     n eux ꝑ cauſe de cel alienation, ſicome vn Abbot alien les tres de ſon meaſon a vn auter en fee, ou en fee taile, ou pur terme de vie, ou ſi vn home aliē les terres q̄ il ad en droit ſa fem̄, ou ſi tenant en taile alien les terres done a luy & a ſes heires de ſon corps, donque tiels alienations ſont appels diſcontinuance, car tiels eſtates paſſont touts foits per liuerie & ſeiſin, & en ceux caſes le ſucceſſour labbe, ne la feme apres le mort ſon baron, ne liſſue en le taile apres le mort le tenaunt en le taile ne poient enter mes cheſcun de eux eſt miſe a ſonaction. Vide pluis de ceo en Litt lib. 3. ca 11. & 32. 
                        •
                     . 8. ca. 28. que toll les diſcontinuances per baron ſeiſi en droit ſon fe
                        •
                     e.
               
               
                  164 Diſmes.
                  DIſmes, ſont les diſmes parts de aſc▪ choſe▪ mes ꝓprem̄t de ceux choſes

que encreaſe, q̄ux pur le pluis parte perteigne al Miniſtres deſgli
                        •
                     e pur lour maintenāce & ils ſōt deuides en iij. ſorts, noſm̄t Predial diſmes, Parſonel diſmes & Mixt diſmes, Predial diſmes ſont diſmes, q̄ ſō
                     
                        •
                      paid de choſes, q̄ux viēt de le terr̄ ſolem̄t, cōe bles, ſein, f
                        •
                     uits del arbors & tiels ſemb.
                  Parſonel diſmes ſont diſmes que ſont paies de tiels profits que veigne ꝑ le labor & induſtrie del perſon dun home, come per emption & venditiō, gain de marchandize & de manuel crafts homes laborers & tiels q̄ labor pur ſalary, come carpent, maſons & tiels ſēblables.
                  Mixte diſmes ſont les diſmes de vitels, agnes, porcels & tiels ſēblabl▪ q̄ encreaſe partm̄t del tre, ſur q̄ ils ſont depaſtures, & partm̄t del garding, ē
                     duſtrie, & diligence del owner.
               
               
                  Diſparagement.
                  DIſparagem̄t eſt vn hōt, diſgrace ou villanye fait ꝑ le gardein en Chiualrie

a ſon gard en chiualry, eſteant deins age ꝑ reaſon de ſon mariage.
                  Come quant le gardein marrie ſon warde deins age de xiiii. ans, & deins tiel temps q̄ il ne poit cō
                     ſent al marriage, al vn nief
                        •
                     , o
                        •
                      al file dun q̄ d
                        •
                     
                     murt en vn borough (que eſt deſte entend tiels que peres profeſſe maincrafts & tiels baſer arts de emption & venditiō pur gam̄ lour viuer p
                        •
                     r ce
                        •
                     ) ou al vn que ad forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vn pee, ou vn maine ou eſt decrepit ou deforme, ou aiant horrible diſeaſe, come le leproſie, les pockes de frankes, falling ſicknes, ou tiels ſemblables, ou marrie luy a vn feme que eſt paſſe lage denfanter & diuers tiels auters, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſur le complaint fait per les amies de tiel heire, le ſ
                        •
                     
                     ̄r ou gardein perdera le gardſhip & les profits durant le nonage de le heire pur le hont fair a luy. Vide Litt lib. 2. ca. 4.
               
               
                  166 Diſſeiſin.
                  DIſſeiſin, eſt quant vn hōe ent en aſcū terres

ou tenements, lou ſon entre neſt pas congeable, & ouſta celuy q̄ ad le fraktenement.
               
               
                  Diſſeiſin ſur diſſeiſin.
                  DIſſeiſin ſur diſſeiſin, eſt quant le diſſeiſour eſt diſ
                        •
                     eiſie per vn auter.
               
               
                  Diſſeiſour & diſſeiſee.
                  DIſſeiſour, eſt celuy que 
                        ••
                     ſt aſcun home hors de ſon terre ſans order de ley, & diſſeiſee eſt celuy que eſt iſsint 
                        ••
                     s.
               
               
                  Diſceit.
                  DIſceit eſt vn bre, & eſt aſcun foi
                        •
                     s original, & aſcun foits iudiciall, mes quant il eſt original, giſt lo
                        •
                      aſcū diſceit eſt fait a aſc
                        •
                     
                     ̄ hōe ꝓ vn aut, iſsint q̄ il nad ſufficientm̄t ꝑform ſ
                        •
                     n bargain, ou ni
                        •
                     nt performe ſon promiſe, dō
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      c
                        •
                     luy que eſt en tiel man̄ diſceiue auera ceſt brief.
                  Auxy quant ceſt briefe eſt iudiciall il gift ou ſcire facias eſt ſ
                        ••
                      hors de aſcun Recorde ve
                        •
                     s vn & le Vicount retourne

que il eſt garnye, ou il ne fuit garnye ou lou vn Praecipe quod reddat de plee de terre, ou Quare impedit del preſentment al eſgliſe eſt ſue vers vn, & le vicou
                        •
                     r returne que il eſt ſummon, lou il ne fuit ſummon, per quel diſceit & faux returne le demaundant recouer en le plaint, donques le partie greeue auera ceſt briefe vers celuy que recouera, & vers les ſummoners, & vers le vicont, donques le brief ſerra direct al Coroners de meſme le countie, ſi il continue vicount que fiſt le retorne.
               
               
                  170 Diſtreſſe.
                  DIſtreſſe eſt le choſe q̄ eſt priſe & diſtraine ſur aſcun terre pur rent arrere, ou pur auter duitie, ou pur tort fait, coment q̄ le propertie del choſe ſoit perteignant al eſtrange: Mes ſi ſont auers que perteignont al eſtrange, il couient q̄ ils ſont leuaunt & couchant ſur m̄ le terre, ceſt adire

que les auers auoyent eſte ſur le terre per certaine ſpace, que ils ont eux bien repoſe ſur la terre, ou autermēt ils ne ſont diſtreinable pur rent ou ſerm
                        •
                     
                     ▪.
                  Et ſi vn diſtraine pur rēt ou auter choſe ſans cauſe loyal, donques le partie greeue auera vn repleuin, & ſur ſuretie troue de purſuer ſon action, auera la diſtres a luy redeliuer. Mes ſont diuers choſes q̄ ne ſont diſtrainable, viz. robe de auter home en le meaſon de vn Tailor, ou drape en le meaſon dun fuller, ſheereman ou weiuer, pur ceo q̄ ils ſont cō
                     mon artificers, & que le common preſumptiō eſt, que tiels choſes ne ſont perteignant al artificer, mes al auters perſons que le mittont la a ouerer.
                  Auxi viād' nē p̄ diſtreinable, ne blees en ſheues, ſinon q̄ ils ſont en vn chareot, pur ceo q̄ diſtres couient eſte toutes foits de tiel choſe, dont le vicont poit faire repleuin & redeliūy en auxi bon caſe q̄ il fuit al temps del priſel.
                  
                     Auxi hōe poit diſtreine pur homage de ſon t, pur fealtie & eſcuage, & auts ſeruic', & pur fines & amerc' que ſont aſſeſſe en vn Leete, mes nemy en vn Court baron. Et auxy pur damage feſant, ceſt adire, quant il troue les beaſtes ou bn̄s des auters feaſant tort ou incumbrant ſon terre: Mes home ne poit diſtraine pur aſcun rēt ou choſe due pur aſcun terr̄, mes ſur meſme le terre q̄ eſt charge oueſque ceo; Mes en caſe lou ieo veign̄ a diſtrainer, & lauter veyant mon purpoſechaſe les beaſtes, ou port le choſe dehors, al intēt que ieo ne prendra ceo pur diſtres ſur le terre, donques ieo poy bien purſue, & ſi ieo priſe ceo maintenant en le hault chimin ou en auter ſoyle, le priſel eſt loyal, auxy bien la cōe ſur la terre charge a quecunque la propertie des biens ſont.
                  Auxi pur fines & amerciam̄ts q ſōt aſſeſse en vn leete, vn port touts foites prēder les bn̄s celuy que

eſt iſsint amerce, en quecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſoile que ils ſont deins le iuriſdiction del court vt dicitur. Et quant vn ad priſe vn diſtres, il coment a luy de ameſner ceo al common pound, ou auterment il poit garder en ouert lieu, iſsint q̄ il done notice al partie, que il (ſi le diſtres ſoit viue auers) poit doner a luy viand, & donques ſi le auers moruſt pur default de viand, celuy que 
                        •••
                     t diſtrein ſerra a le pard, & donques lauter poit diſtraine auterfoits pur meſme le rent on du
                        •
                     tie. Mes ſil ameſn
                        •
                      le diſtres a vn forſlet, ou hors del countie, q̄ le vicont ne poit biē faire deliuerāce ſur repleuin, dō
                     q̄s le partie ſur le retorne del vicont aūa vn briefe de Withernam direct al Vicont, q̄ il prendra tant de ſes auers, ou tant des biēs lauter en ſon garde, tanque il ad fait deliuerāce de la primer diſtres. Auxi ſiſōt en vn forſlet ou caſtel, le vicont poit prē
                     der oue luy le power del

Countie, & abater le caſtel. Come appiert per leſta. W. 1. cap. 17. Ideo vide Statutum.
               
               
                  171 Diuorce.
                  DIuorce iſsint appel de Diuortium, veniēs del verbe Diuerto, que ſignifie deretorner arere, ceſt eſt vſe en ley quant vn home eſt ſeperate de ſa feme, il luy retorne arrere a ſa pere ou auter amies, ou a luy ou il luy ad, & per tiel diuorce le marriage eſt defeate & diſtroy.
               
               
                  172 Donor & Donee.
                  DOnor eſt celuy q̄ done terres ou tenements al auter en taile, & celuy a que il eſt done eſt appel Donee.
               
               
                  173 Double plee.
                  DOuble plee eſt lou le defendant ou tenant en aſcun action pled vn plee en que deux matters ſont comprehendus, & cheſcū per luy meſme eſt vn ſufficient barre ou reſpons al action, donques tiel double plee ne ſerra admit pur plee, ſinon q̄ vn depend ſur lauter, & en

tiel caſe ſi il ne poyt auer le darrein plee ſans le primer plee, donq̄s tiel double plee ſerr̄ bien ſuffer.
               
               
                  Dower.
                  DOwer eſt vn briefe & giſt lou home eſt ſole ſeiſie durant le couerture perenter luy & ſa feme, de terres ou tenemēts en fee ſimple ou fee taile, lou ꝑ poſsibility le iſſue enter eux poient enherite, ſi tiel hōe deuie ſa feme recouera la tierce part de touts les tres dont le baron ſuit ſole ſeiſi aſcun tēps durant le couerture ꝑ briefe de Dower vnde nihil habet meſque il ne moruſt ſeiſie, & meſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il ad fait alienation de ceo en ſa vie. Mes ſi hōe deuāt le ſtatute de Vſes 27. H. 8. ad terres, en queux aut hōe, ou auters homes fueront ſeiſies a ſon oeps touts foits durant le couerture, & ceſty a q̄ oeps ils fueront ſeiſies deuie deuaunt le dit ſtatute, ſa feme ne ſerra endow.
                  Et aux
                        •
                      ſi deuant le dit Statute deux homes ſont ſeiſies de terre al oeps de

vn de eux, & ceſtuy a que oeps &c. deuie deuant le di
                        •
                      ſtatute, ſa feme ne ſerra indow Auxi ſi feme port br̄ de dower, el recouera dammage, pur le profite incu
                        •
                     rus apres la mort le baron fil moruſt de ceo ſeiſie, Mes ſi aſcun alienation o
                        •
                      eſtate ſoit fait durant le couerture, iſsint que le baron ne moruſt ſeyſie, donques meſqueel recouer la terre vncore el ne recouera dammages. Auxy il eſt vn auter briefe de dower, appel briefe de droit de dower, & giſt lou feme ad recouer parte de ſa dower en meſme la ville, & auter parte el eſt a recouer. Auxy en diuers caſes fem̄ nauera dower, ſicome le baron fait treaſon, pur que il eſt attaint, donque ſa feme nauera dower. Auxy ſi el elopa de ſon baron oueſque vn auter home in auowtry, & ſi il ne ſoit reconcile ꝑ ſon baron de ſon bone volunt ſans coherſion d
                        •
                     l Eſgliſe, el ne ſerra endowe.
               
               
                  
                  Droit.
                  DRoit, eſt lou vn ad choſe que fuit toll de auter ꝑ torte, come ꝑ diſſeiſin, diſcontinuance, ou eiectment, ou tiels ſemblables, & le chalenge ou claime q̄
                     
                        •
                     l ad, que auoit le choſe, eſt terme droit.
               
               
                  Droit dentre.
                  DRoit dentre, eſt quant vn ſeyſie de terre in fee, eſt de ceo diſſeiſi: Ore le diſſeiſee ad droit dentre en le terre, & poet quant il voile, ou il poet auer briefe de droit enuers le diſſeyſor.
               
               
                  Dum non fuit compos mentis.
                  DVm non fuit compos mētis, eſt vn briefe & giſt lou hōe que eſt hors de ſō bone memory, ceſt adire, inſane ou lunati
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , alien les terres que il ad in fee ſimple, & deuie, donques ſon heire apres ſon deceaſe auera ceſt briefe, mes il meſme nauera ceſt briefe, pur ceo, que home ne ſerra reſceu a diſabler luy meſme. Auxy ceſt briefe puit eſte fait en le, per, cui, & poſt.
               
               
                  
                  178 Dum fuit infra aetatem.
                  DVm fuit infra aetatem, eſt vn brief & giſt lou enfant deins age alien ſa terre que il ad in fee ſimple, ou pur terme de vie, quant il vient a ſon pleine age il auera ceſt briefe, ou il puit entre ſil voile: mes il couient que il ſoit de pleine age, iour de ſon briefe purchaſe. Auxy ſi enfant alien ſa terre, & deuie, ſon iſſue a ſon pleine age aūa ceſt briefe ou puit enter, mes liſſue nauera ceſt briefe deins ſon age.
               
               
                  197 Dures.
                  DVres, eſt lou vn home eſt garde in priſon ou reſtraine de ſon libertie contrary al order de ley, & ſi tiel perſon iſsint eſteant in dures, fait aſcun eſpecialty on obligation per reaſon de tiel impriſonment, tiel fait eſt void en le ley, & in actiō porte ſur tiel eſpecialtie il puit dire que il fuit fait per dures de 
                        •
                     ō impriſonm̄t, mes ſi home ſoit arreſt ſur aſcun action al ſuite

vn auter meſque le cauſe del action ne ſoit bon ne voir, ſil fait aſcū obligation a vn eſtraunge eſteāt in priſon per tiel arreſt, vncore il ne ſerra dit per dures, mes ſil fait obligation a luy a que ſuit il fuit arreſt deſte diſcharge de tiel impriſonm̄t, donques il ſerra dit dures vt dicitur.
               
            
            
               E.
               
                  Eiectione firme.
                  EIectione firme, vide de ceo en le title, Gard.
               
               
                  Eiectment de garde.
                  EIectment de garde, vide de ceo en le title Gardes.
               
               
                  Eire Iuſtices.
                  EIre Iuſtices, ou Itinerāt, come nous appelle eux fueront Iuſtices que vſe de equitare de lieu al lieu per tout le Realme pur adminiſter Iuſtice.
               
               
                  Elegit.
                  TEner per Elegit, eſt lou home ad recouer det ou damage per briefe deuers vn auter per Conuſance ou en auter maner, al auera deins le

an deuers luy vn briefe iudiciall noſme Elegit dauer executiō del moitie de toutes ſes terres & chattels (exceptes beofes & affers a ſa carues) tanque le dett ou les damages ſoient ouſtremēt leues ou paies a luy, & durant ceſt terme il eſt tenant ꝑ Elegit. Et nota ſil ſoit ouſte deins le terme il auera Aſs. de nouel diſſeiſin, & apres vn rediſſeiſin ſi beſoigne ſoit, & ceſt done per le eſtatute de Weſtm̄. 2. cap. 18.
                  Et auxi per lequitie de meſme leſtatute celuy q̄ ad ſon eſtate, ſil ſoit ouſte auera aſsiſe & rediſſeiſin ſi beſoigne ſoit. Et auxi ſil face ſes executors & deuy, & ſes executors entrōt & puis ſoient ouſtes, ils aueront per lequitie de meſme leſtatute tiel action come luy meſme ſuiſdit. Mes ſil ſoit ouſte, & puis fait ſes executors & deuy, ſes executors purrōt ent & ſils ſoient eſtops de lour entre, ils aueront vn briefe de treſpas ſur lour matter & caſe.
                  
                     Et nota ſil face waſt en tout la terre ou en parcel, lauter auera enuers luy maintenant vn briefe iudicial hors de la primer recorde appelle Venire facias ad computandum, per force de quel ſerra inquiſe ſil ad leuy touts les deniers ou parcel, & ſil nad leuy les deniers, donques ſerra inquiſe a quant le waſt amount, & ſi le waſt amount ſinon a parcel dō
                     ques tāts des deniers que le waſt amount ſerra abridge de les ſuiſdits deniers queux fueront eſtre leuies. Mes ſil ad fait pluis waſt que le auantdit ſumme dargent que fuit a eſtre leuy amount, lauter ſerra diſcharge maintenant de touts les deniers ſuiſdits & recouera ſa terre. Et pur la ſuperfluity de waſt fait ouſtre ceo que amount a le dit ſumme, il recouera ſes damages ſingle: & meſme le ley eſt de ſes executors, & auxi de ceſtuy que ad ſon eſtate.
                  Et nota ſil alien en

fee, ou a terme de vie, ou en taile tout le terre ou parcell de la terre, que il tient per Elegit, ſi le alienation ſoit fait deins le terme ou apres, ceſtuy q̄ ad droit auera vers luy vn Aſſ. de nouel diſſ. Et couiēt que ils ſoient miſe en laſsiſe ambideux, auxibiē le alience come le alienor, & non obſtāt que lalienor deuie maintenāt, vncore ceſtuy que ad droit aūa vers le alience ſole Aſsiſe, come ſil vſt eſtre ſon ſimple tenant a terme de ans. Et ceo eſt ꝑ lequitie del Statute de Weſtm. 2. cap. 25. pur ceo que il nad ſinon chatel en effect: & meſme le ley eſt de ſes executours, & de ceſtuy que ad ſon eſtate, come eſt ſuiſdit.
                  Et nota que en Elegit ſi le vicont returne que il auoit riens iour de la recogniſance fait, meſque il purchaſe terre puis le temps, adonques le partie plaintife auera nouel briefe de auer execution de ceo: meſme le ley eſt de vn eſtatute Marchant.
                  
                     Et nota que apres le Fieri facias vn home poyt auer le Elegit, mes non econtra, entaunt que le Elegit eſt de plus haut nature que le Fieri facias, Et nota que ſi home recouer per briefe de det & ſue vn Fieri facias, & le vicount returne que le defendaunt nad ryens dont il poit faire gree a la partie, dōques le plaintife auera vn Elegit, ou vn Capias ſicut alias, & Pluries. Et ſi vicount returne a le Capias mitto vobis corpus, & il nad riens dount il poit faire gree a la partie il ferra maunde al gayle del Fleete, & illonques demurra tanque il ad fait gree al partie, & ſi le vicount returne Non eſt muentus, adonques iſſera Lexigent enuers luy. Et nota que en briefe de dett port deuers perſon de Saint Eſgliſe, que nad rien de lay 
                        •
                     ee, & le vicount returne que il nad riens per que il poit eſtre ſummons, adonques ſuera le plaintife briefe

al Eueſque que il face vener ſon clerke, & Leueſque luy ferra vener per ſequeſtration del Eſgliſe. Et nota que ſi home port brief de dett & recouer, & face ſes executours & deuie, ils naueront execution non obſtant que al ſoit deins lan per vn Fieri facias.
               
               
                  184 Embraſour ou Embraceour.
                  EMbraſour ou Embraceour, eſt celuy q̄ quāt vn matt eſt en triall ꝑenter partie & party, viēt al barre oue vn del parties (aiant receiue aſc' reward pur iſsint fair) & parle en le caſe, ou priu
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     t labor le iury ou ſtat la pur ſurueier ou ſuruiew eux ꝑ ceſt means de mitter eux en pauour & dout del matt. Mes homes q̄ ſont erudite ē le ley, poiēt ꝑle en le cas pur lour clients.
               
               
                  185 Encrochment.
                  ENcrochm̄t, eſt dit quāt le ſeigniour ad happa ſeyſin de pluis rent ou ſeruices de ſou tenaunt que de droit eſt due, ou doet ē
                     
                        •
                      pay o
                        •
                      fait a luy,

Come ſi le tenant tient ſa terre de ſon Sn̄r per fealtie & ii. s. rent annuelm̄t, & ore de tradife temps le Se
                        •
                     g'ad happa ſeiſin de 3. s. rent, ou de homage ou eſcuage ou tiels ſembl, Donques cē appel vn Encrochm̄t de cē rēt ou ſer'.
               
               
                  Enheritance.
                  ENheritance, eſt tiel eſtate en terres ou tenements, ou auts choſes, q̄ poient eſtre enherite per le heire ſoit ceo de eſtate en fee ſimple ou taile per diſcent, de aſcun de ſes anceſtors ou per ſon purchaſe demeſne.
                  Et enheritance eſt deuide ē deux ſorts, ceſtaſſauoir, enheritāce corpor' & enheritāce incorporat.
                  Enheritance corporate ſont meſuages, terres, prees, paſtures, rents, & tiels ſemblables, que ont ſubſtance en eux meſm̄s & poient continuer tout temps. Et ceux ſont appel choſes corporal.
                  Enheritance incorporate ſont aduowſons, villaines, waies, commons, courts, piſcaries, que ſont

ou poient eſte appendant ou appurtenant a enheritances corporate.
               
               
                  167 Entre.
                  ENtre, eſt lou vn home entra en aſcun terr̄ ou tenements▪ en ſon proper perſon ou auter perſon commandement.
                  Auxy ſont diuers br̄es dentre queux ſont en diuers maners, Vn eſt brief dentre ſur diſſeiſin, & ceſt briefe giſt lou home eſt diſſeiſi, il ou ſon heire lauantdit briefe auer
                        •
                      vers meſme le diſſeiſor, ou aſcun auter apres tenaunt del tre, Et ſi le diſſeiſour alyen ou de
                        ••
                     e 
                        •
                     ey
                        •
                     i, donques le br̄ de Entre ſerra vers le heire oueſque alienee en le per▪ ceſt adire, en q̄ le tenant non habet ingreſſum niſi per tiel noſmant le diſſeiſor, que luy auoit diſſeiſie &c.
                  Et ſi le heire ou alience deuie ſeiſie, ou aliena al auter, donques le briefe ſerra en le Per & Cui, ceſt adire, en que le tenant non habet ingreſſum niſi per tiel noſmant le heire ou le alienee del

diſſeiſor, cui tiel (noſmant le diſſeiſour) il demiſit, que luy per tort diſſeiſe &c.
                  Et ſi terre ſoit conuey ouſter al pluſors, ou ſi le primer diſſeiſor ſort diſſeiſi, donq̄s le br de Entr̄ ſerra en le Poſt, ceſt adire, q̄ le tenant non habet ingreſſum niſi poſt diſſeiſinā quel le primer diſſeiſor fait al demandant ou ſon aunceſtor. Vide ap̄s Entre en le Per.
                  Briefe de Entre en le Per giſt lou home eſt diſſeiſe de ſon franktenement, & le diſſeiſor alien ou deuie ſeiſie, & ſon heire entra, donques le diſſeiſee ou ſon heire auera le dit briefe vers le heire le diſſeiſor, ou vers le alienee l'diſſeiſor, mes viuant le diſſeiſor il poit auer Aſsiſe ſi il voile, & le briefe de Entre dirra, in quod A. non habet ingreſſum niſi per B. que illud ei dimiſit, qui inde eum iniuſte diſſeiſiuit &c. Mes ſi le diſſeiſor alien, & le alienee deuie ſeiſi, ou alien ouſter a vn

auter, ou ſi le diſſeiſor deuie, & ſon heire entra, & cely heir aliena ou deuie, & ſon heire entra, donq̄s le diſſeiſee ou ſon heire auera briefe de Entre ſur diſſeiſin en le Per & Cui, Et le brief dirra, in quod idem A. non habet ingreſſum niſi per B. cui C. illud ei dimiſit, qui iniuſte &c.
                  Et nota bien, que nul briefe de Entre en le Per & Cui ſerra maintenable vers nulluy, mes lou il que eſt tenant ſoit eins per purchaſe ou per diſcent: Mes ſi le alienation ou diſcent ſont deuenus hors des degrees, ſur quel nul briefe poit eſtre fait en le Per, ne en le Per & Cui, donques ſerra fait en le Poſt, & le brief dirra, in quod A. non habet ingreſſum niſi poſt diſſeiſinam, quam B. inde iniuſte & ſine iuditio fecit praef. N. vel M. proauo N. cuius haeres ipſe ē.
                  Auxy ſont v. choſes que mittont le brief de Entre hors des degrees ceſt adire, Entruſion, Succeſſion, Diſſeiſin ſur diſſeiſin,

Iudgem̄t, ou Eſcheat.
                  1 Entruſion eſt quant le diſſeiſor deuie ſeiſie, & vn eſtrange abata.
                  2 Diſſeiſin ſur diſſeiſin eſt quant le diſſeiſor eſt diſſeiſie per vn auter.
                  3 Succeſsion eſt ou le diſſeiſor eſt vn home de Religion & deuie, ou eſt depoſe, & ſon ſucceſſor entra.
                  4 Iudgem̄t eſt quant vn recouer vers le diſſeiſour.
                  5 Eſcheat eſt quant le diſſeiſor deuie ſans heire, ou fait felonie, per que il eſt attaint, per que le ſeigniour entra come en ſon Eſcheat.
                  En touts ceux caſes le diſſeiſee ou ſon heire nauera brief de Entre deins les degrees en le Per, mes en le Poſt, pur ceo que en ceux dits caſes ils ne ſont eins per diſcent ne per purchaſe.
                  Auxy il y ad vn brief de Entre ad communem legem, & giſt lou tenant a terme de vie, tenant a tm dauter vie, tenant per la curteſie, ou tenant en dower alieu & deuie,

don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      celuy en le reuerſiō auer le auatdit br̄ deuers quecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      q̄ ſoit eins ap̄s en les dits tenements.
                  Auxy briefe de Entre in caſu prouiſo giſt, ſi tenant en dower alien en fee, ou pur terme de vie, ou pur auter vie, viuant le tenant en dower, celuy en le reuerſion auera le brief appel briefe de Entre in caſu prouiſo.
                  Auxy br̄ de Entre in caſu conſimili giſt, ſi tenant pur terme, de vie, ou 
                        •
                      per la curteſy alien en fee viuāt eux, celuy en le reuerſion auera vn brief appel briefe de Entre in cō
                     ſimili caſu,
                  Auxy br̄e de Entre ad terminum qui praeterijt giſt, ſi vn hom̄ leſſa terres a vn aut put terme dans, & le tenant tient ouſter ſon terme, dōques le leſſor auera br̄ que eſt appel briefe de Entre ad terminum qui praeteriit.
                  Et auxy ſi terres ſont leſſe a vn home pur term dauter vie, & ceſtuy pur que vie les terres ſount leſſes deuie, & le leſſee

tient ouſter, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le leſſor auera ceſt briefe.
                  Auxy briefe de Entre ſine aſſenſu capituli giſt, lou vn Abbe, Prior, ou tiel que ad Couent ou common ſeale, aliena terres ou terements del droit de ſon Eſgliſe, ſans le aſſent del Couent ou Chapter & deuie, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſon ſucceſſour auera ceſt briefe.
                  Auxy br̄ de Entre cauſa matrimonii prelocuti giſt lou terres ou tenements ſont done a vn home ſur tiel condition, que il prendra la donour a ſa feme deins certein tēps, & il ne luy eſpouſa deins la dit temps, ou eſpouſe auter femme, ou luy fait Preiſter, ou entra en religion, ou luy diſable, iſſint q̄ il ne puit luy prender accordant a la dit cō
                     dition, donques le ſeme donour & ſes heires auera le dit briefe vers luy ou vers quecunque eſt eins en le dit teire. Auxy il couient q̄ ceſt conditiō ſoit fait per Indenture, ou auterment ceſt briefe

ne giſt, & touts ceux & auters briefes dentre poient eſte fait en le Per, Cui & poſt.
               
               
                  188 Entruſion.
                  ENtruſion, eſt vn briefe & giſt lou tenant a terme de vie deuie ſeiſie de certeine terres ou tenements, & vn eſtrange entra, celuy en la reuerſion auera le dit briefe vers labator, ou vers quecunque que ſoit eins ap̄s lour entruſion. Auxi vn briefe de entruſion ſerra maintenable per le ſucceſsor dun Abbe vers labatour que entre aſcun terres ou tenements tempore vacationis que appent a ſa Eſgliſe per ſtatute Marlebridge capitulo vltimo.
               
               
                  189 Equitie.
                  EQuitie, eſt en deux maners, diuers moulte lun del auter, & ſont de contrarie effectes, car lun abridge, diminiſh & tolle de le letter del ley, Le auter enlarge amplifie & adde a ce o.
                  
                     Le primer eſt iſsint define, Equitas eſt correctio legis generatim latae qua parte deficit, le quel correctio, del generall parols, eſt moult vſe en noſtre ley. Sicome pur example, quant acte de parliament eſt fait, quecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      que fait tiel acte ſerra felon, & ſerra miſe al mort, vncore ſi home de non ſane memorie, ou enfant de tender age que nad diſcretiō le fait, ils ne ſerront felons, ne miſe al morte.
                  Auxi ſi eſtatute fuit fait q̄ touts perſons q̄ recetteront, ou doneront maunger ou boier, ou aut ayde a ceſtuy q̄ faira tiel acte, ſerrōt acceſsarie a ſon offence, & ſerront miſe al mort ſi ils conuſterōt del facte, vncore lun fait tiel acte, & veigne a ſa proper feme, que ſciāt ceo luy receiue & done manger & boier a luy, el ne ſerra acceſsary ne felon, car en le generaltie de les dits parols del ley, ceſtuy de non ſaue memorie, ne le enfant, ne le ſeme, fuerent

include in intent.
                  Et iſsint equitie correct le generaltie del ley en ceux caſes, & les parols generals ſont per equitie abridge.
                  Lauter equitie eſt defined en tiel maner. Equitas eſt verborum legis directio efficiens, cum vna res ſolummodo legis ca
                     
                        •
                     etur verbis, vt omnia alia in equali genere, eiſdē caueantur verbis: & iſsint quant le parolx enacte vn choſe, ils enactes toutes choſes que ſont en ſemblables degrees, ſicome le ſtatute que ordeigne que en action de debt vers executors, ceſtuy que vient per diſtreſſe reſpondera, extenda per equity al adminiſtrators, car ceſtuy de eux que vient primes per diſtres reſpondera per equitie del diſt acte, Quia ſunt in aequali genere.
                  Iſsint le ſtatute de Gloceſter done le action de Waſte, & le puniſhment de ceo vers ceſtuy que tient pur vie ou ans, & per le equitie de ceo

home auera actiō de waſt vers ceſtuy q̄ 
                     
                        •
                     ien
                        •
                      forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pur vn an, ou demy an▪ & vncore ceo eſt 
                        •
                     ors d
                        •
                     l parols del eſtatut▪ car ceſtuy que tient forſque demy an ou vn an, ne 
                        ••
                     en
                        •
                      pur ans, mes ceo eſt le entent, & le parols que enact lun, per equitie enacteront lauter.
               
               
                  Error.
                  ERror, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou iudgement eſt done en le Common banke ou deuant▪ Iuſtice in Aſsiſe, ou deuaunt Iuſtice de Oyer & terminel ou deuaunt le Maior o
                        •
                      vicont de Londre
                        •
                      ou en auter Court de Recorde▪ contre le ley▪ ou for vndue ou male proceſſe▪ donques per cel briefe, le partie greene 
                        〈…〉
                      que le iudgement eſt done 
                        •
                     uera cel briefe 
                        •
                      & per 
                        ••
                     o cauſera le Record & proces deſtre remoue deuaunt les Iuſtices de bank le Roy. Et la ſi er
                        •
                      ſoit troue il ſerra reuerſe: mes ſi erronious iudgement ſoit done en bank le Rov,

donques 
                        ••
                      ne poit eſtre reuerſe forſque per Parliament tanque le ſtatute 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  Auxy ſi faux iudgement 
                        ••
                     i
                        •
                      done en court q̄ 
                     
                        ••
                     ſt de record▪ come en County hundred ou court ha
                        •
                      on▪ don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le party a
                        •
                     a b
                        •
                      de 
                        〈…〉
                      iudgemēt pur faire le record vener deuant Iuſtice de common bank. Auxi ſi error ſoit 
                        ••
                     oue 
                        •
                     n Leſchequer 
                        •
                     l ſerra redreſſe 
                        •
                      le Chancelor & Treſore
                        •
                     vt patet 
                        〈…〉
                      E. 3. An. 31. cap. 12.
               
               
                  191 Eſcape.
                  EScape, eſt lou vn que eſt 
                        ••
                      arreſt▪ deuelgue a 
                        •
                     on libertie de 
                        •
                     aunt q̄ il ſoit deliuer ꝑ agard de aſcun 
                        •
                     uſtice▪ on ꝑ order del ley▪ Eſcape eſt en deux ſorts, 
                        〈…〉
                      voluntary & negligent▪
                  
                  Voluntary eſcape eſt quant vn arreſt
                        •
                      
                     aut pur felony, ou auter crime & puis celuy en q̄ cuſtody il 
                        •
                     oi
                        •
                     , luy leſſer ale
                        •
                      ou il veult▪ cel leſſer de luy aler, eſt vn voluntarie eſcape.
                  
                     Et ſi larreſt de ceſtuy que eſcape fui
                        •
                      pur felony, ceo ſerra dit felony en ceſtuy que luy leſſa deſcaper, & ſi pur treaſon il ſerra treaſon en luy, & ſi pur vn treſpas, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      treſpas, & ſic de ſingulis.
                  Negligēt eſcape eſt quāt vn eſt arreſt, & puis eſcape enconter le volunt de ceſtuy q̄ luy arreſt▪ & ne ſoit 
                        •
                     reſhment puiſue, & repriſe deuaunt que le purſuor perda le view de luy, ceo ſerra 
                        〈…〉
                      negligent Eſcape, non obſtant q̄ ceſtuy hors de q̄ poſſeſsion il eſcape luy repriſt a
                        •
                     r
                        ••
                      le vieu per
                        •
                     u. Auxy 
                        ••
                      v
                        •
                      foi
                        •
                      arreſt, & puis eſcape & eſt a ſon libertie▪ & ceſtuy en que garde 
                        •
                     l f
                        •
                     iſt luy repriſe apr
                        •
                     s, & luy ameſne a le priſon, vncore i
                        •
                      eſt eſcape en luy.
                  Auxy ſi vn felon ſo
                        •
                     t arreſt per le Conſtable, & ameſne a le garle en le county▪ & le gailer ne voit luy receiuer & le conſtable luy de
                        •
                     it, & le gailer aux
                        •
                     , & iſsint il eſcape, ceſt eſt vn eſcape en le gailer pur ceo▪ que en 
                        ••
                     el

caſe le gailer eſt tenus deluy reſc
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     er per le main le Conſtable ſans aſcun precept de le Iuſtices de peace. Mes auterment eſt ſi vn common perſon arreſt auter pur ſuſpition de felony, la le gayler neſt tenus de luy reſce
                        •
                     ū ſans precept de aſcun des luſtices de peace, Il y ad v
                        •
                      eſcap̄ auxi ſans arreſt, cōe ſi murder ſoit fait en le iour, & l'murderer ne ſoit priſe, dō
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il eſt eſcap̄ pur q̄ le vil' ou le murder fuit fait ſerr̄ amercie.
               
               
                  192 Eſchete.
                  ESchete, eſt lou vn tenāt en fe
                        •
                      ſimple face felonie pur q̄ il eſt pendu, ou abiure le Realme, ou vtlage de felony, murder, ou petit treaſon, ou ſide tenant moruſt ſans heire general ou ſpecial don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le Sn̄r de q̄ le terre eſt tenus ꝑ le tenant poit enter per voy de eſchet, ou ſi aut home ent le Seign̄ auera vers luy vn br̄ appell br̄ de Eſch
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ que
                        •
                      come ſemble eſt deriue del paroll francoys Eſchien.
               
               
                  
                  Eſcuage.
                  EScuage, eſt appel en latin Scutagium, ceſt adire, ſeruitium ſcuti, & ceſty que tient per eſcuage, tiēt ꝑ ſeruice de chiualer, & a ceo appēt gard mariage & relief, mes ceo ſerra entend de eſcuage non certeine quant leſcuage courge ꝑ tout Engleterre, quant eſt ordeigne ꝑ tout le counſell Dengleterre que ap̄s les guerres cheſcun Seigniour auera certain ſumme de ſon tenant que ne fuit en le dit guer Mes ſi le tenant que tient daſcun Seign̄ ꝑ Eſcuage ſoit oue le roy en ſes guerres in Eſcoſe, & le ſeign̄ voit diſtrain luy pur Eſcuage il ſerra bon ple adire que il fuit oue le roy in Eſcoſe en le guerr̄, & ceo ſerra trie ꝑ le Marſhal le Roy.
                  Et nota bn̄ q̄ home ne poit tener ꝑ eſcuage ſinō q̄ il teign̄ ꝑ homage pur ceo q̄ eſcuage de Common droit treit a luy homage come il fuit Iudge in Term̄ H. 21. E. 3. ca 42 folio. 52. Auowrie 115.

& nota que Eſcuage eſt vn certeine ſumme de argent, & doit eſtre leuy ꝑ le Seign̄ de ſes tenāts ſolonque le quantity de ſon tenure quant le Eſcuage courge ꝑ tout Englet, & ordein ē per tout le coū
                     ſel denglet quant cheſcun tenant donera a ſon ſeignior, & ceo eſt ꝓperm̄t pur ſuſteiner la guer parent Engl', & ceux de Eſcoſe, ou de Gales & nō p̄ perent auters tres, pur ceo que les auātdit terres ſerront de droit appendant a la roi
                        •
                     lme Dengl'. Vide Lit. lib. 2. cap. 3.
               
               
                  194 Eſplees.
                  ESplees, eſt ſicōe le ſeiſin, ou poſſeſsion dun choſe profit ou commoditie que eſt a prender, come dun common les Eſplees, eſt le prender del graſſe ou common per les bouches de les beaſts que common la: dun aduowſon, de prender de groſſe diſmes per le perſon preſent, de boys, le vender de boys, dun orchard, le vēder de pomes ou auts fruits creſsāts la,

dun molin le priſel de toll eſt le eſplees & de riels ſemblables. Et nota q̄ en briefe de droit de terre, ou aduowſon ou tiels ſemblables, le demandāt doit alleger en ſon coūt, que il ou ſes aunceſtours priſe les eſplees de choſe en demaund, ou ante
                        •
                     m̄t le count neſt bon.
               
               
                  Eſſoine.
                  ESſoine, eſt lou vn actiō eſt port, & le plaintife ou defendaunt ne poit bien appearer al iour in court pur vn de v. cauſes deſouth expreſſes, donque il ſerra Eſſoin de ſauer ſon default. Nota que ſont v. maners de Eſſoins, ceſt adire Eſſoin de ouſter le me
                        •
                     e, & ceo eſt le def▪ auera iour per xl. iours, Le ſeconde eſſoin de terra ſancta, & ſur ceo le def. auera iour per vn an & vn iour, & ces deux ſerront giſt al commencement de plee, Le tierce Eſſoine eſt de male vener, & ceo ſerra adiorne a cōmen iour co
                        ••
                      laction require, & appel le cō
                     mon Eſſoin: & quant, &

coment ceſt Eſſoin ſerra, vide les ſtatutes & liuer de Abridgmēt de ſtatuts lou il eſt biē declare▪ Auxi le iiij. Eſſoin De malo lecti, & ceo eſt ſolement en briefe de droit, & ſur ceo iſſera br̄ hors de Chauncerie direct al vicoūt que il maunde iiii. Chiualers al tenant de veier le ten̄t, & ſil ſoit malade, de doner a luy iour apres vn an & vn iour▪ Auxi le v. Eſſoin eſt de ſeruice le roy, & giſt en touts actions forſque en Aſſiſe de Nouel diſſeiſin, br̄ de Dower, Darrein preſentment▪ & in appel de Murder, mes en ceſt eſſoin il couient al iour de monſtre ſon garrant▪ ou auterment il tornera a vn default, ſil ſoit en plee real, ou autment il perdera xx. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪ pur le iourney ou pluis, ꝑ le diſcretion del luſtice, ſil ſoit en plee perſonell, vt patet per le ſtatute de Glouceſt. cap. 8.
               
               
                  196 Eſtoppel.
                  EStoppel eſt quant vn eſt conclude & denie en ley de parler encounter

ſon act ou fait demeſne, nient obſtant il ſoit pur dire le veritie.
                  Et de eſtoppels il y ad vn graund nūber, vn pur example eſt, quant I. S. eſt oblige en vn obligation per le noſme de T. S. ou aſcun auter noſme, & eſt ſue apres accordant al meſme le noſme mis en lobligation, ceſt adire T. S. ore il ne ſerra receiue adire que il eſt miſnoſme, mes ſerra chaſe a reſpōd' accordāt al noſme mis en lobligation, ceſt adire T. S. car ꝑaduenture lobligee ne ſcauoit pas ſon noſme, mes de le report tantſolem̄t del obligor meſme, & entant que il eſt meſme le home que fuit oblige, il ferra eſtoppe & denie en ley pur adire le contrary enconter ſon fait demeſne, car 
                        •
                     uterm̄t il poit prēder aduātage de ſon tort deme
                        •
                     ne, le q̄l le ley ne voit ſuffrer vn home de faire.
                  Auxy ſi le file que eſt heire a ſon pere voit ſuer liuerie ou
                        •
                      ſa ſoer que eſt vn baſtard, el ne ſerra

apres receiue pur dire q̄ ſa ſoer eſt vn baſtard, entant que ſi la baſtard ſoer priſt le moitie del terre oue luy, il nad remedie per le ley.
                  Auxy 
                        ••
                      vn home ſeiſie de terre en fee ſimple voit prender vn leaſe pur ans de meſme le terre de vn eſtranger per fait endent ceſt vn eſtoppel durant le terme de ans, & le leſſee eſt per ceo barre adire le veritie, car le veritie eſt, que il q̄ leſſa la terre nad riens 
                        •
                     n ceo al temps del leaſe fait, & q̄ le fee ſimple fuit en luy que priſt le leaſe: Mes ceo il ne ſerra receyue adire tanque apres les ans ſerra determine, pur ceo q̄ il appiert que il ad eſtate pur ans, & il fuit ſon folie de prender vn leaſe de ſes terres demeſne, & pur ceo ſerra iſsint puni
                        •
                      pur ſon folie.
               
               
                  197 Eſtraungers.
                  EStraungers ſont aſcun foits priſe ils, q̄ ne ſont parties ne priuies al fine leuie, ou feſans de vn fait, aſcū foits 
                        •
                     ls que ſont nee ouſter de mere.
               
               
                  
                  Eſtray.
                  EStray, eſt lou aſcun beaſt ou cattell eſt en aſcun ſeigniorie, & nul conuſt le owner de ceo, donques il ſerra ſeiſie al oeps le Roy, ou de le ſeignior que ad tiel eſtray per graunt le Roy ou per preſcription, & ſi le owner vient & faite claime a ceo deins an & iour, donques il le reauera, ou autermēt ap̄s le an le propertie de ceo ſerra al Seigniour▪ iſsint que le Seigniour face proclamation de ceo accordant a le ley.
               
               
                  Eſtrepment.
                  EStrepment eſt vn brief, & giſt lou vn eſt implede per vn Praecipe 
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      reddat pur certain terre, ſi le demandāt ſuppoſe que le tenant voile faire waſt pendant le plea, il auera vers luy▪ ceſt briefe q̄ eſt vn prohibition, luy commandant q̄ il ne face waſt pendant le plee.
                  Et ceſt briefe giſt properment lou
                        •
                     n home demand tre per Formedon, ou brief de droit, ou tiels

briefes lou il ne recouer damage, car ē tiels briefs lou il recouera damages, il auera ſes damages, ayant regard al waſt fait.
               
               
                  200 Etate probanda.
                  ETate probanda, eſt vn br̄ doffice, & giſt pur le heir le tenant q̄ tient del Roy in capite, pur prouer q̄ il ē de plein age, direct al Vicour pur enquirer de ſon age, & donques il demendra tenant al Roy per meſme les ſeruices q̄ ſon anceſtor fiſt al Roy: Mes il eſt dit, q̄ cheſcun q̄ paſſera en ceſt enqueſt ſerra del age de xlii. ans al meins iſsint que il fuit de pleine age al temps quant ceſtuy que ſuiſt le briefe fuit nee.
               
               
                  201 Excommengement.
                  EXcommengement, eſt adire ē Latin Excōmunicatio, & eſt lou vn hōe per la iudgm̄t en Court chriſtian eſt excōmenge, donq̄s 
                        •
                     l eſt diſable de ſuer aſcun actiō en court le Roy, & ſil remaine excommenge xl. iours, &

ne voile eſte iuſtifie per ſon Ordinarie, 
                        •
                     donques le Eueſque mandera ſon letter al Chauncelour de certificer le excommunication ou contempt, & ſur ceo ſerra commaund al Vicount de prendre le corps lexcommenge per vn briefe appel Excommunicato capiendo, iuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il ad fait grce al ſaint Eſgliſe, pur le contempt & torte, & quant il eſt iuſtifie, & ad fait gree donque leueſque maunde ra la letter al Roy, certifiant ceo 
                        〈…〉
                      & donques ſerra maunde al viſcount de luy deliuer per vn briefe appel Excōmunicato deliberando.
               
               
                  Exchange.
                  EXchaunge, eſt lou vn hōe eſt ſ
                        •
                     iſi de certein terre, & vn auter home eſt ſeiſi de auter tre, ſi ils ꝑ vn fait endent, ou ſans fait ſi le terres, ſont ē vn coū
                     tie, exchange lour terres, iſsint que cheſcun de eux auera auters terres, a luy iſsint exchange en fee, en fee taile, ou a tm
                           •
                        
                      de v
                        ••
                      ceo eſt appel vn exc
                        〈…〉
                     ebtor

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
& eſt bone ſans liuery & ſeiſin.
                  Auxy in exchange il couient que les eſtates a eux limitte per lexchāge ſont egalles, car ſi vn ad eſtate en fee in ſa terre, & lauter ad eſtate in aut 
                     tre forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pur terme de vie, ou en taile, donques tiel exchange eſt voide, mes ſi les eſtates ſont egalles, & ſes terres ne ſont de egal value, vncore lexchange eſt bone. Auxy vn exchange de rent pur terre eſt bone. Auxy exchange inter rent & commen eſt boue, & ceo couiēt eſte ꝑ fait. Auxy il coment touts foi
                        •
                     s q̄ ceſt parol exchāg ſoit in le fait ou auterm̄t rien paſſa per le fait ſinon q̄ il aiet liuerie & ſeyſin.
               
               
                  203 Execution.
                  EXecutiō, eſt lou iudgment eſt done en aſcun action que le plaintif recouera la ter
                        •
                     e, le det ou dammages, come le caſe eſt, & q
                        •
                     t aſcun briefe eſt agarde de luy mitter en poſſeſsion, ceo eſt appel 
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        ••
                      execution▪ & quāt 
                        〈…〉
                      le poſſeſsion de le

terre, ou eſt pay de det ou damages, ou ad le corps le defendāt agard al priſon, donques il ad execucion, & ſi le ple ſoit en County, o
                        •
                      Court Baron, ou hundred, & ils alienōt le execution del iudgement in fauour de party ou per au
                        〈…〉
                      encheaſon, donque le demandant auera brief de Executione iudicii. Nota q̄ en brief de det, hōe nauera recouery de nul terre, mes de ceux que le defendant auoit iour de iudg
                        〈…〉
                     t rendu. Et de chateux home aūa execution ſolement des chateux, q̄u
                        •
                      il auoit iour de execution ſue.
               
               
                  Executor.
                  EXecutor, eſt q
                        •
                     t home fuit ſon teſtament & darre in volunte, & in ceo noſma le perſon que executera ſon teſtam̄t, donq̄ ceſty que eſt iſsint noſm̄ eſt ſon executor, & eſt a tant come en le ciuil ley (heres deſignatus vel teſtamētarius) cōe al debts, biens & chattels ſon teſtator, & tiel executor aūa actiō vers cheſcū debtor

de ſon teſtator, & ſi lexecutors ad aſſets, cheſcun a q̄ le teſtator fuit in debt, auera action vers lexecutors ſil ad obligation ou eſpec
                        ••
                     ltie, mes in cheſcun caſe lou le teſtator puiſſoit gager ſon ley 
                        •
                     nul action giſt vers execution
                        •
                      Vide pluis de ceo deuant titulo Adminiſtrators.
               
               
                  205 Exigent.
                  EXigent, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou home ſue action ꝑſonel, & le defendāt ne puit 
                        ••
                      tro
                        ••
                     e ne ad riēs deins le countie, ꝑ que il pui
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                      attach
                        •
                      ne diſtrein donq̄s ceſt briefe iſſera al Viſcount de faire proclamatiō al v
                        •
                     counties cheſcun apres auter qu
                        •
                      il appearer ou auterment que 
                        •
                     l ſerra vtlag
                        •
                     : & ſi ſoit vtlage, donques touts ſes biens & chateu
                        •
                      ſont forfaites al Roy. Auxy en vn enditement de felony le exigent 
                        •
                     ſſe
                        •
                     a apres le primer capias. Et auxy en capias ad computandum ou ad ſatisfaciendū, & en cheſcun capias que iſsiſt apres iudgement

lexigent iſſera apres le primer Capias. Et auxy en appeal de mort, mes nemy en appel de robbery ou appel de maim.
               
               
                  Ex parte talis.
                  EX parte talis, Vide de ceo deuant titulo Accompt.
               
               
                  Ex graui querela.
                  EX graui querela, Vide de ceo deuant titulo Deuiſe.
               
               
                  Extinguiſhment.
                  EXtinguiſhment, eſt lou aſcun ſeign̄, ou aſc▪ 
                     aut ad aſcun rent ou ſeruice iſſant daſcun terre, & il purchaſe meſme la terre, iſsint que il ad tiel eſtate en la terre, come il auoyt en le rent, donq̄s le rent eſt extincte▪ pur ceo que vn ne puit auer rent iſſant hors de ſon tre demeſne. Auxy qn̄t aſcun rent ſerra extient, il couient que le terre & le rent ſont en vn maine, & auxi q̄ leſtate q̄ il ad ne ſoit defeſibl': & auxi q̄ il ad auxi bō eſtat ē le tre cōe en le rent, car ſil ad eſtat 
                        •
                     n le tre forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pur tme de vie ou dās, & ad vn fee ſimpl en le rēt

donq̄s le rēt neſt extinct, mes le rent eſt en ſuſpēce pur cel temps, & don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      apres le terme le rent eſt reuiue. Auxi ſi ſoit Seigniour, meſne & tenant, & le ſeignior purchaſe la tenancie, donque le mena
                        •
                     tie eſt extinct, mes le meſne aūa le ſurpluſage del rēt, ſi aſc▪ ſoit cōe rent ſecke. Auxi ſi hōe ad chymin appendant & puis purchaſe le terre en q̄ le chymin eſt, donques le chymin eſt extinct, & auxi eſt de vn comen append'.
               
               
                  209 Extortion.
                  EXtortion, eſt vn tort fait ꝑ vn officer, Ordinarie, Archdeac▪, Official, Maior, Bailife, Vicount, Eſcheator, ſouthuicount, Coroner, gailer ou auter officer, Colore offic
                        •
                     j ſui en prendrās exceſsiue reward ou fee, pur execution de ſon dit office, ou auterm̄t, & neſt aut choſe in fait, que plaine robberie, mes plus odible que robberie, car robberie eſt apparant, & tout temps ad oue luy le countenance de vice, mes extortion

eſteant cy haut vice, come robberie eſt port oue luy vn countenāce de vertue, per reaſon de quel ilē le plus dure deſte 
                        •
                     rie, ou diſcerne, & pur ceo le plus odibile, & vncore aſcuns il y ad que ne valiēt demu
                        ••
                     , mes ſtretch lour office, credite, & conſcience pur purchaſer money, cibien per extortion, come auterment, accordant al diſans de le Poet Virgil, Quid non mortalia pectora cogit, auri ſacra fames?
               
            
            
               F.
               
                  Failer de Record.
                  FAiler de Recorde, eſt q
                        •
                     t vn action eſt porte enuers vn, & le defendant plede aſcun matter de Record en auter ſort & aū de ceo ꝓue ꝑ le Record. Et le pl▪ dit nul tiel Record, ſur que le def. ad iour dōe a luy, pur ameſner eins le Recorde, a quel iour il faile, ou ameſne eyns vn tiel que neſt barre al ceſt action, donques il eſt dit de failer de record, & ſur ceo

le plaintife auera iudgement de recouer &c.
               
               
                  211 Fait.
                  FAit eſt vn eſcript enſeal & deliuer a prouer & teſtifie de le agreement del partie quel fait il eſt, al choſe containe en le fait, Come vn faite de feoffement eſt vn proue del liuerie de ſeyſin, car le terre paſſa per le liuerie de ſeiſin, mes quant le faite & le liuerie eſt ioynt enſemble ceſt vn proue del liuerie, & que le feoffour eſt content que le feoffee auera le terre. Et nota que touts faites ſont ou indent, de quel y ſont deux, troys, ou pluſors parties, come le caſe require, de que le feoffour, grauntour, ou leſſour ad vn, le feoffee, grauntee, on leſſee, vn auter, Et peraduenture aſcun auter perſon auxy, vn auter &c. Ou auterment ils ſont faites poll, ou ſingle & forſque vn, le quel le feoffee, grauntee, ou leſſee, ad &c. Et cheſe▪ fait conſiſt de trois

principall choſes (& ſils trois ne ſont ioyne enſemble, il neſt perfect fait de lier les parties) noſm̄t, eſcripture, ſigillation, & deliuerie.
                  Le primer point eſt eſcripture, per que eſt declare les noſmes del parties al fait, lour habitation, lour degrees, le choſe graunt, ſur queux conſiderations, leſtate limit, le temps quant il ſuit graunt, & ſi ſimplement, ou ſur condition, oue auters tiels ſemblables circumſtances. Mes ſi les parties al fait, eſcript en le fine lour noſmes demeſne, ou miſe a ceo lour marks (come il eſt communem̄t vſe) il ne fait aſcū 
                     matt (cōe 
                        •
                     eo ſuppoſe) car ceo neſt entende, ou il eſt dit, que cheſcun faite couiēt de auer eſcripture.
                  Le ſecond point eſt ſigillation, que eſt plus teſtimonie de lour conſents al ceo containe en le faite, come appiert per ceux parolx. In cuius re
                        •
                      teſtimonium &c. ou a tiel effect miſe en le

fine de faits, ſans qux parols, le fait eſt inſufficiēt. Et pur ceo q̄ nous ſumus en ſigillation & ſigning de faits, il ne ſerra dehors icy a monſtre a vous, pur Ie amour de antiquitie, le manner del ſigning & ſubſcribing de faites en noſtre aunceſtors le Saxons temps, vn faſhion different de ceo que nous vſe en ceux noſtre iouis, en ceo que ils a lour faits ſubſcribe lour noſmes, (communement adding le ſigne del Croſſe) & en le fine miſe vn graunde number des teſtmoignes nient vſant a cel temps aſcun maner de ſigill. ▪Et nous a ceſt 
                        •
                     our pur plus ſuertie, aux
                        •
                     bn̄ ſubſcribe noſtre noſme (ment obſtant ceo neſt mult neceſſarie come 
                        •
                     eo aye deuāt dit) & mis noſtre ſigilles, & vſe le aide desteſmoignes auxy. Ceſt primer faſhion continue per tout, tanque al temps del Conqueſt per les Normans, que maners per petite & petite al darraine preuaile enter nous, car le primer

charter ſigil en Engl▪ eſt penſe deſtre ceo del Roy Edward le Confeſſor al Abbe de Weſt▪ que eſteant educate en Normandie, port en ceſt Realme ceo, & aſcun aut de lour guiſes. Et apres le venians de Guilliam le Conquereur, les Normans, eſtimans de le cuſtom de lour pays, (come naturalment touts nations font) reiect le maner que ils tro
                        •
                     ont cy, & reteignōt lour proper, co
                        •
                     e Ingulphus le Abbot de Croyland, que vient eins oue le Conqueſt teſmoigne, dicens: Norman
                        〈…〉
                      cheriographorum confectionem, cum crucibus aure
                        •
                     s, & aliis ſignaculis ſacris in Ang. firmari ſolita in caera impreſſ. mu
                        •
                     āt, modū q̄ ſcr
                        •
                     bendi Anglicum re
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ciunt. Mes ment obſtant ceo ne fuit f
                        ••
                     t tout al vn temps, mes il encreaſe & vient eins ꝑ certein ſteps & degrees, iſsint que p
                        ••
                     
                     mes & pur vn ſeaſon 
                        •
                     e Roy ſolement, ou vn peu auters de le Nobilitie ouſter luy vſe de ſigiller.

Don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le nobl▪ homes pur le plus part, & nul auters, quel choſe vn home poit veyer en le Hiſtorie de Battel Abbey, ou Richard Lucy chiefe Iuſtice de Engleterre, en le temps del roy Henry le ſecond, eſt report de auer blame vn meane ſubiect, pur ceo que il vſe vn priuat ſigil, quant ceo pertaine (come il dit) al roy & Nobilitie ſolement.
                  A quel temps auxy (come I. Roſſe note ceo) ils vſe de ingraue en lour ſigils, lour pictures demeſne, & counterfaits, couer oue longe tunicle ſuper lour Armors. Mes apres ceo les Gentlehomes del meliour ſort priſt le faſhion, & pur ceo que ils ne fueront toutes gouernors, ils feſoyent ſigilles engraue oue lour ſeuerall coates ou ſhields de armes, pur difference, come meſme le aucthour report. Al darraine, in temps del roy Edward le iii▪ ſigils fueront mult common, iſsint que non ſolement tiels, que portāt

armes vſe de ſigiller, mes auters hōes auxy feſoyent al eux meſmes ſignets de lour deuiſe demeſne aſcuns prendrans les letters de lour noſmes demeſne, aſcūs flowers, aſcūs knots & floriſhes, aſcūs au
                        •
                     s ou beaſts, & aſcuns auts choſes, cōe noꝰ ore vnc' iournalmēt veiomus en vſe.
                  Aſcuns auters maners de ſigillation ouſter ceux ad eſtre oye enter nous, come noſment ceo del roy Edw. le iii. per que il done al Norman le hunter: Le hop & le hopville, oue touts les boūds vpſide downe, & en teſmoigne que il ſoit veray, il morde le cere oue ſon fonge dent.
                  Le ſēblable de ceſt fuit monſtre a moy per vn de mes amies en vn loſe chart▪ mes non mult auncientm̄t eſcript, & pur ceo il voil moy q̄ ieo eſteema de ceo cōe ieo penſe bn̄: Il fuit come enſuiſt.
                  Ieo Guilliam King, done a vous Powlen Royden, ma hop & ma hop terres, oue touts les

bounds vp & downe, de coelo al terre, de terre ad infern̄, pur toy & veſtres a demurrer, de moy & mes, al 
                        •
                     oy & veſtres, pur vn arck & vn brode ſagit, quāt ieo veign̄ pur hunter ſur yarrow. In 
                        •
                     eſmoign̄ q̄ ceo eſt veray, ieo morde ceſt cere oue mon dent, in preſence de Magge, Maude, & Margerie, & mon tierce fits Henrie.
                  Item ceo de Alberic de Veer, conteignant le donation de Hatfield, al q̄l il fixe vn curt noier haft cuttel, ſemblable al vn vieux demy denier whittle, en ſteede de vn ſeale, oue diuers tielx ſemblables.
                  Mes aſcun peraduenture voylent penſe que 
                        ••
                     ux fuerount receyue 
                        •
                     n common vſe & cuſtome, & que ils ne fueront les deuiſes & pleaſures dun peu ſinguler perſons, tiels quels ne ſont meines deceiue, que ils que penſont cheſcun charter & eſcript que ne ad ſigille annex, deſte cy auncient come le Conqueſt, lou en veritie

ſigillation ne fuit cōmunemēt vſe tan
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      al temps del roy Edward le tierce, come ad eſte dit.
                  Le tierce pointeſt deliuerie, quel nient obſtant il ſoit mis darrein, neſt le meaneſt, car apres que vn fait ſoit eſcript & ſigil fil ne ſoit deliuer, tout le reſidue eſt a nul purpoſe.
                  Et ceſt deliuerie doit eſtre fait per le party luy meſme, ou ſon ſufficient garrāt, & iſsint il luy liera quecunque eſcript ou ſigille ceo, & per ceſt darraine acte, le fait eſte fait perfect, accordant al entent & effect de ceo, & pur ceo en faits le deliuerie eſt deſtre proue &c.
                  Iſsint pores veyer que eſcripture & ſigillation ſans deliuerie eſt a nul purpoſe, Que ſigillation & deliuerie lou neſt aſcun eſcripture, work nul choſe, Ne eſcripture & deliuerie ſans ſigillation auxy fait nul fait. Et pur ceo ils touts doiēt 
                        •
                     ointment concurre pur faire vn perfect fait, come eſt auantdit.
               
               
                  
                  212 Farme ou Ferme.
                  FArme ou Ferme eſt ſpecialment le chiefe meſuage en vn village ou towne a que appertient graūd demeanes de touts ſortes, & ad eſte vſe deſte leſſe pur terme de vie, ans, ou a volunt.
                  Itē le rent q̄ eſt reſerue ſur tiel leaſe ou ſembl', eſt appel farme ou ferme.
                  Et farmor ou fermor, eſt celuy que occupia le farme ou ferme, ou eſt leſſee de ceo.
                  Auxy generally cheſcū leſſee pur vie, ans, ou al volūt, nient obſtant il ſoit dū petit cottage, ou meſ. ē appel farmor ou fermor
                  Et nota, que ils ſont appels farmes, ou fermes, del Saxon paroll, Feormian, que ſignifie pur feede, ou render victual▪ Car en auncient tempes, lour reſeruations fuer cy bien (ou pur le plus ꝑt) en victuall come argent, tanque al darraine, & ceo principalmēt en le temps del Roy H. le primer (per agreement) le reſeruatiō de victuals, fuit conuert

en ready argent, & iſsint vncore ad continue enter pluſors homes.
               
               
                  Faux impriſonment.
                  FAux impriſonment, eſt vn brief, & giſt lou hōe eſt arreſt & reſtraine de ſō libertie ꝑ vn auter encounter order de ley, dō
                     ques il aūa vers luy ceſt briefe per q̄ il recouera damages: Vide plus de ceo deuant titulo arreſt.
                  Faux iudgment vide de ceo deuant titulo error.
               
               
                  Fee ferme.
                  FEe ferme, eſt quant vn tenāt tient de ſon ſeignior en fee ſimple rendāt a luy le value del moitie ou de tierce parte, ou quart part, ou de auter parte del terre, per an, & que tient en fee ferme ne doit paier reliefe ou faire auter choſe, mes ſicōe eſt contein en le feoffement forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fealty, car ceo appēt a touts man̄s tenures.
               
               
                  Fee ſimple.
                  FEe ſimple, eſt quant aſcun perſon tient terre ou rent ou auter choſe inheritable a luy & a ſes heirs a touts iours, ceux

parols ſes heires font leſtat denheritance, car ſi terre ſoyt done a home a touts iours, vnquore il nad forſque eſtate pour terme de vye. Auxy ſi tenant en fee ſimple deuie, ſon primer fites ſerra ſon heire, mes fil nad fits, dō
                     ques touts les files que il ad ſerront ſon heire, & cheſcun auera ſon parte ꝑ partition, mes ſil nad fits ne file, donques ſon procheyn coſin collater▪ de lētier ſank ſerr̄ ſon heire.
               
               
                  216 Feoffment.
                  FEoſment, eſt lou vn don terre, ou tiel choſe corporall hereditable a vn auter in fee ſimple, & de ceo deliuer ſeiſin & poſſeſſion del tre ceo eſt vn feoffment. Auxy ſi vn fait done in le taile ou leas pur terme de vie, ou pur terme dauter v
                        •
                     e, il couient auxy de don̄ liuery & ſeiſin, ou auterment riens paſſera per le graunt.
               
               
                  217 Feoffor & feffee.
                  FEffor, eſt celuy que enfeoffe, ou fait feoffem̄t al auter de terres ou tenements en fee ſimple. Et

feffee eſt celuy, q̄ eſt enfeoffe, ou a q̄ le feoffmēt eſt iſſint fait.
               
               
                  Fealtie.
                  FEaltie, eſt vn ſeruice appel en latin Fidelitas, & ſerra fait in tiel māners. le ten̄t tiendra ſa mayne dexter ſur vn liuer, & dira a ſon ſeign̄. Ieo a vous ſerra foyal & loyal, & foy vous portera des tenements que ieo claime de tener de vous, & loyall vous ſerra les coſtumes & ſeruices que faire vous doye al termes aſsignes, ſicome moy eyd dieu. Et baſera la liuer, mes il ne genulera, come en feſant Homage: Et de ceo 
                        •
                     ide apres en le title homage. Auxy fealty eſt incident a touts maners tenures.
               
               
                  Felony.
                  FElony, eſt vn generall terme, que comprehend diuers hainous offences, pur que loffendors doient ſuffer mort, & perder lour terres: Et ſemble que eux ſont appels felonies del latin parol Fell, q̄ eſt Angloys gall, en Francoys Fiel:

Ou del▪ auncient paroll angloys Fell ou fierce, ou pur ceo que ſont entend deſte faits felleo 
                        •
                     īo, with bitter, fell, fierce, ou miſcheuous mind. Et aſcun de ceux ſont, quant home ſans aſcun colour de ley, emb ley les biens dun aut amountant al value de xii. d. ou plus, ceo eſt larceny, mes ſi vn approcha a le perſon vn auter en le chimin, & luy robba de ſes biens, meſque ils ne ſont forſque al value de vn denier, il eſt felonie, & ceo eſt appel robberie, & pur ceo il ſerra pendu.
               
               
                  220 Fireboote.
                  FIreboote, eſt neceſſarie boys pur arder, quel per le comon ley, leſſee pur ans, ou pur vie, poet prender en ſon terre, nient obſtant il ne ſoit expreſſe en ſon lea
                        •
                     , & niēt obſtant il ſoit vn leas per parol tantum ſans fayte: Mes ſil priſt plus que beſoigne, il ſerra punic en waſt.
               
               
                  221 Fledwite.
                  FLedwite, hoc eſt quietū eſſe de amerciamentis

cum quis vtlagatus fugitiuus veniat ad pacē domini Regis ſponte, vel licentiatus.
               
               
                  Flemeſwite.
                  FLemeſwite, hoc eſt quod habeatis cattalla ſiue amerciamēta hominis veſtri fugitiui.
               
               
                  Fletwit.
                  FLetwit (ou Flitwit) hoc eſt quietū eſſe de contentione & conuictis, & quod habeatis placitū inde in curia veſtra, & amerciamēta, qa (flit) Anglice eſt Tenſone gallice.
               
               
                  Forſtall.
                  FOrſtall, hoc eſt quietum eſſe de amerciamentis & cattallis arreſtatis infra terram veſtrā, & amerciamenta inde prouementia.
               
               
                  Forſtaller.
                  FOrſtaller eſt celuy que achate blees, auers, ou aut marchādize quecū
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſt vēdible per le chimin quāt il vient al markets, faires, ou tiels ſēbl' lieus deſte vend' al entent que il poit vender ceo auterfoites al vn plus haut & chare pryce, en praeiudice

& damage de le cō
                     mō weale & people &c.
                  Le penaltie pur ceux queux ſont cōuict de ceo, eſt le prim̄ temps impriſonm̄t per i
                        •
                     . mois, & ꝑde le value del choſe vend.
                  Le ſecond temps, impriſonment per ſpace de demy an, & ꝑdra le double value des biēs &c. Le tierce temps, impriſonm̄t durant le pleaſure le roy, & iudgment del pillory, & forfeite touts ſes biens & chattels. Vide leſtatute 5. E. 6. cap. 14.
               
               
                  226 Franches Royal.
                  FRanches Royal, eſt lou le Roigne graunt al vn & a ſes heires que ils ſerront quite de tolnet, vel huiuſmodi.
               
               
                  227 Frankalmoigne.
                  FRankalmoigne, eſt lou en auncient temps terres fuerōt dones a vn Abbot & ſon couent, ou a vn Dean & le chapter, & a lour ſucceſſors in pure & perpetual almoigue ſauns expreſſe aſcun ſeruice certeine, ceo eſt frankealmoigne, & ils ſont tenus deuaunt dieu

de faire oraſons & praiers pur le donour & ſes heires, & pur ceo ils ne ferront fealtie, & ſi tiels q̄ ont terres in franke almoigne ne font aſcun praiers ne deuine ſeruice pur les almes le donor, ils ne ſerront ꝑ les donors a ceo cōpelles, mes pur ceo ils poient complaine al Ordinarie, luy prayant q̄ tiel negligence ne ſoit pluis auant, & Lordinarie de droit ceo doit fair̄.
                  Mes ſi vn Abbe &c. tient terres de ſon Seignior pur certeine deuine ſeruice de eſtre fait, come de chaunter cheſcun venderdie vn maſſe, ou de faire aut choſe certeine, ſi tiel deuine ſeruice ne ſoit fait le Seign̄ poit diſtreiner, & en tiel caſe labbe doit faire a le Seign̄, fealtie, & pur ceo il neſt pas dit tenure in franke almoigne, mes tenure ꝑ deuine ſeru', car nul poit tener in frāk alm', ſi ſoit exp̄ſſe aſcū certeine ſeruice.
               
               
                  Franke fee.
                  TEner en franke fee, eſt a tener en fee ſimple

terres pleadable a la common ley, & nient en auncient demeſne.
               
               
                  229 Formedone.
                  FOrmedone, eſt vn brief & giſt lou tenant en le taile enfeoffa vn eſtrange ou eſt diſſeiſe & deuye, le heire auera briefe de Formedone pur recouer la terte, mes ſont trois briefes de Formedone, vn eſt in le diſcēder, & ceo eſt in le caſe auant dit. Auxy ſi vn done tre in le tayle, & pour default diſſue le remainder a vn auter in la taile, & que put default de tiel iſſue, la terre reuertera al donour, ſi le primer tenant in le tayle deuie ſans iſſue ceſtuy en le remainder auera vn br̄ de Formedone en le remainder, mes ſi le ten̄t en le taile deuie ſans iſſue, & ceſty ē le remainder auxi deuy ſans iſſue, dōques le donor ou ſes heires aūa vn formdon in le reūter.
               
               
                  230 Fieri facias.
                  FIeri facias eſt vn briefe iudiciall, & giſt lou home recouera debt ou dammages in Court le

Roy, dōques il auera ceſt briefe al vicount luy cō
                     mandāt q̄ il leuie le debt & les damages des biens celuy q̄ ad perdus, & giſt touts foites deins lan & iour, & ap̄s lan luy couient de ſuer vn ſcire facias, & ſil ſoit garne, & ne viēt al iour &c. ou ſil vient & ne ſcauoit riē dire, donqs celuy que recouera auera br̄ de fieri facias direct al vicont que il face luy auer execution de iudgement.
                  Mes ſi home recouera vers vn feme & el priſt baron deins lan & le iour donques il couient que ceſty que recouera auera Scire facias vers le baron.
                  Auxy eſt ſi Abbot on Prior recouer & deuie, ſō ſucceſſor deins lan auera Scire facias. Vide de ceo plus in la title Scire facias, & title Execution.
               
               
                  Fine.
                  FIne aſcun foits eſt priſe pur vn ſumme dargent quel aſcun eſt de payer al roy pur aſcū cōtempt ou offence cōmit ꝑ luy▪ quel fine, cheſcun que commit aſcū treſpas ou que eſt cō
                     uict,

que il fauxm̄t deny ſon fait, ou feſoit aſc▪ choſe en contempt del Roy, paiera al roy, quel eſt appell Fine al Roy. Aſcun foits Fine eſt pr
                        •
                     ſe pur vn ſpeciall concord, quel eſt ewe enter aſcuns perſons touchant aſcun terre, ou rent ou auter choſe, dont aſcun ſuit, ou brief eſt enter eux pendant en aſcun court, q̄l poit ee in diuers maners. Lun eſt quant lou party reconuſt ceo eſte le droit del auter come ceo q̄ il eit del done ceſtuy q̄ feſoit le re
                        •
                     onuſans, quel toutes foits ſuppoſe vn feoffem̄t p̄cedent & ē dit Fine execute: ou ſi il reconuſt ceo deſte le droit del aut omittant les parols (come ceo q̄ il eit de ſon done) quel eſteāt fine ſur conuſauns de droit tantum, ſi ſoit leuy a ceſtuy q̄ eit le franktenem̄t del terre eſt Fine ſur releaſe. Et ſi ceſty que ceo conuſt eſt ſciſi, & celuy a que eſt leuy neit le frāktenement del terre, donques eſt dit fine executorie, quel 
                        •
                     eſtuy a q̄ le tre
                     
eſt conus poit executer ꝑ Entre ou ꝑ Scire facias.
                  Et a
                        •
                     c▪ foits tiel ſine ſur conuſans de droit tantū eſt pur ſa
                        ••
                     e vn ſurrēder, lou en ceo eſt repeat, que le reconuſor eit eſtat pur vie▪ & lauter en reuerſion.
                  Et aſc▪ foits ceo eſt ew de paſſer vn reuerſiō, lou particular eſtate eſt recite deſte en auter, & q̄ le reconuſor voit que le auter auera le reuerſiō, ou que le terre remain̄ al auter apres le particular eſtate finie.
                  Et aſcun ſoits celuy a q̄ le droit eſt conus, come ceo que il ad del done le reconuſor, rēdra le terre, ou vn rent hors de ceo al conuſor. Et a
                        •
                     cun
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     ts pur lent
                        ••
                     r fee. Aſc
                        •
                     n foites pur particular eſtate oue remaind▪ ou remainders ouſter. Et aſcun 
                        〈…〉
                     u
                        •
                      reſeruation del r
                        •
                     nt
                        •
                      ou
                        •
                      diſtres & gr
                        〈…〉
                      d
                        •
                      ceo ouſter per meſme 
                        •
                     ine.
                  Et eſt appel fine quia ꝑ ceo le ſu
                        ••
                      eſt determine, & ſi ceo ſoit record one proclamation, ceo barr̄ eſtrangers.
               
               
                  
                  232 Franke mariage.
                  FRank mariage, eſt quāt vn home ſeiſi de terres en fee ſimple done ceo al auter home & a ſa feme que eſt file, ſoer ou autm̄t de kin al donour) en frankmariage, ꝑ vertue de queux parolx ils ount vn eſtate en ſpeciall taile, & tiendra le terre del donour quit de touts manners de ſeruices tanque le iiij. degree ſoit paſſe, accountants eux meſmes in le primer degree, ſinon fealtie, queux ils fieront, pur ceo que il eſt incidēt a toutes tenures forſque franke almoigne. Et tiel done poit eſtre fait cybien apres mariage ſolemniſe, come deuant. Et home poit doner terres a ſon fits in frankmariage come a ſa file, per le opinion de Maſter Fitzherbert en ſon brief de Chā
                     pertie. H.
                  Mes il appiert auterment en Maſter Littletō, & en Maſter Brooke titulo Frankmariage, Pla. 10. Et iſsint il fuit tenus clere 
                        •
                      Graies Inne ē Lent, An.

1576. 18. Eliz. per le Wor. Maſter Rhodes donques lector la.
               
               
                  Franktenement.
                  FRanktenemēt, eſt vn eſtate que home ad en terres ou tenements, ou profit a prendre en fee ſimple, taile, pur terme de ſon vie demeſne, ou pur terme dauter vie, en dower ou per le curteſie Dangleterre▪ Et ſouth ceo il ne eſt franktenem̄t, car il que ad eſtate pur ans, ou tient a volunt nad aſc▪ franktenement, mes ils ſont appel chattels.
                  Et de franktenem̄ts il y ad deux ſorts, cē aſcauoir franktenement en fait, & franktenement en ley.
                  Franktenem̄t en fait eſt qūt vn hōe ad entred en tres ou tenem̄ts, & eſt ſeiſie de ceo realm̄, actualm̄t & en fait: Si come le pere ſeiſi de terres ou ten̄ts en fee ſimple deuie, & ſon fits enter en eux cōe heire a ſon pere, donques il ad vn franktenement en fait per ſon entrie.
                  Franktenem̄t en ley, eſt quant terres ou tenem̄ts

ſont diſcendus al vn hōe, & il poit enter en eux quant a luy pleſt, mes nad vncore fait ſon entrie en fait, come en le caſe auant dit, ſi le pere eſteant ſeiſie de terre en fee ſimple deuie ſeiſi, & ils diſcend▪ a ſon fites, mes le fites nad vncore enter en fait en eux, ore deuant ſō entrie il ad vn franktenement en ley.
               
               
                  234 Freſhſuit.
                  FReſhſuit, eſt quant vn home eſt robbe, & le party iſsint robbe, purſua le felon immediatment, & luy priſt oue le manner, ou auterment & dō
                     ques port vn appeale enuers luy, & luy conuince del felonie per verdicte, le quel choſe eſteant enquire pur le Roigne & troue, le partie robbe aūa reſtitut▪ de ſes biēs arrer̄.
                  Item il poit eſte dit, que le partie fait Freſhſuit, nient obſtant il ne priſt le felon preſentment, mes que il ſoit demy an ou vn an apres le robberie fait, deuant que il ſoit priſe, ſi ſoit iſsint que le partie

robbe fait tant que en luy eſt, ꝑ diligent enquirie & ſerch de luy prēder, nient obſtant q̄ il eſt priſe ꝑ vn auter home, vncore ceo ſerra dit bone freſhſuit.
                  Et iſsint freſhſuit eſt quant le Seignior vient pur diſtreiner pur rent ou ſeruice, & le owner des beaſtes fait reſcous, & enchaſe eux en auters terre que neſt tenus del ſeign̄, & le ſeignior enſue preſentment, & repriſt eux, ceſt appel freſhſuit. Et iſsint en auter ſemblables caſes.
               
            
            
               G.
               
                  Gager de deliuerance.
                  GAger de deliuerance eſt, lou vn ſua Repleuin de biens priſe, mes il nad deliuerie des biens, & lauter auowa, & le plaintife monſtra▪ que le defendant eſt vncore poſſeſſe des biens &c. & pria que le defendant gagera deliuerance, donques il mittera eins ſuertie ou pledge pur le redeliuerance,

& vn briefe iſſera al Vicont pur redeliuerer les bn̄s &c. Mes ſi home clayme propertie, il ne gagera deliuerance.
                  Auxy ſil dit q̄ les auers ſont morts en le pound, il ne gagera &c.
                  Auxy home ne gagera iammais le deliueraunce auant q̄ ils ſoyent a iſſue, ou demurrer en ley, vt dicitur.
               
               
                  236 Garrantie des charters.
                  GArrantie des charters, eſt vn brief, & giſt lou aſcun fait eſt fait q̄ comprehend clauſe de garr̄. s. dedi ou conceſsi, ou ceſt parol Warrantizabo, & ſi le t ſoit implede per vn eſtrange ſi ſoit en Aſſ. ou tiel action lou il ne poit vouch a garrant, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il auera cē br̄ vers ſon feoffor ou ſon heir, & ſi le tre ſoit recoū vers luy, il recouera tant del tre en value vers ceſtuy que ſuiſt le garr̄. Mes ceſt br̄e couient eſte ſue pendant le prim̄ br̄ vers luy, ou autmētal ad ꝑde ſō auātage.
                  
                     Auxy ſur garrantie en ley, come ſur homage aunceſtrel, ou ſur rent reſerue ſur leaſe a terme de vie, ou done en le taile home auera brief de garrantie de charters, mes nemy ſur eſchange.
               
               
                  Garrantie.
                  GArrantie, eſt en deux manners. s. garrantie lineal & garrantie collateral.
                  Garrantie lineal eſt lou home ſeiſie en fee, fait feoffement per ſon fait a vn auter, & oblige luy & ſes heires a garrant, & ad iſſue fits & moruſt, & le garrantie diſcend a ſon fites, ceo eſt lineal garrantie, pur ceo que ſi nul fait oue garrantie vſt eſte fait, donques le droit des terres diſcenderoit al fits, & il conueyeroit le diſcent de le pere a le fits. Mes ſi tenaunt en le taile diſcontinua le taile, & ad iſſue & deuie, & luncle del iſſu releſſa al diſcōtinuee oue garrantie &c. & moruſt ſauns iſſue, ceo

eſt collateral garrantie al iſſue en le taile, pur ceo q̄ le garrantie diſcende ſur le iſſue, le q̄l ne poit ſoy conueyer a le taile per le meane de ſon vncle. Et en cheſcun caſe lou hōe demaunda terres en fee tail ꝑ br̄ de Formedon▪ ſi aſcū del iſſue en le taile que auoit poſſeſsion, ou que nauoit poſſeſsion fait vn garrantie, & ceſty que ſua le briefe de Formedon poit per poſsibilitie per ma
                        •
                     ter que puiſſoit eſte en ceſt fait conueier a luy title per force del done per celuy que fiſt le garrantie &c. ceo eſt donques vn lineal garrantie, & per tiel lineal garrantie, le iſſue en le taile ne ſerra barre, ſinon que il ad aſſets a luy diſcendus en fee ſimple: Mes ſi il ne poit per nul poſsibility que poit eſte conueyer a luy title per force del d
                        •
                     n per celuy que fi
                        •
                     t le garrantie, donques ceo eſt vn collateral garrantie, & ꝑ tiel collaterall garrantie, le iſſue en le taile ſerra barre ſans aſcun aſſets.

Et le cauſe que tiel collateral garrantie eſt vn barr̄ al iſſue en le taile, eſt pur c
                        •
                     o q̄ touts garranties deuant leſtatut de Glouceſter, queux diſcendant a ceux queux ſont heires a eux que feſoyent les garranties, fueront barres a meſme les heires a demā
                     der aſcun terres forſpriſe les garranties que commence per diſſeiſin, & pur ceo que le dit eſtatute ad ordeine que le garrantie del pere ne ſerra barre a ſon fites pur les terres que veigne del heritage le mere, ne garrantie le mere ne ſerra barre al fits pur les terres que veigne del heritage de pier, & leſtatute nad fait ne ordeine remedie encounter le garrantie que eſt collateral al iſſue en le taile, & pur ceo le garrantie que eſt collateral al iſſue en le taile, vncore eſt in ſa force & ſerra barre al iſſue en le tayle, come il fuit deuaunt leſtatute, Auxy il couyent que toutes garranties, per que aſcun heire ſerra

barre, que le garrātie deſcend per courſe del common ley a celuy que eſt heire a luy que fiſt le garrantie, ou auterment il ne ſerra barre, car ſi le tenant in le tail des terres in borow Engliſh, lou le puiſn̄ fits inheriter̄ per la cuſtome diſcontinua le taile & ad iſſue deux fits, & luncle releas al diſcontinuee oue garrantie & deuye, & le puiſne fits porte Formedone, vncore il ne ſerra barre par tyel garrantie, cauſa qua ſupra. Auxy ſi aſcun home fait aſcun fait oue garrantie, per quel ſon heire ſerroit barre, & puis ceſtuy que fiſt le garrantie ſoyt attaint de felony, donques ſon heire ne ſerra barre ꝑ tiel garrantie, pur ceo que tiel garrant ne puit diſcender ſur luy, pur ceo que le ſanke eſt corrupt. Auxy ſi le ſits purchaſe tre, & puis leſſa le terre a ſon pier pur terme dans, & le pier ꝑ ſon fait de ceo enfeoffa vn eſtraunge, & oblige luy & ſes heires a garrantie, & le pier deuie,

per q̄l le garrantie diſcend al fits, vncore cē garranty ne barrer̄ my le fits, mes le fits bien puit entre nient obſtant cel garranty, pur ceo q̄ ceſt garranty commenſaſt per diſſeiſin, quant le pier fiſt le feoffement que fuit vn diſſeiſin al fits, & come eſt dit de le pier, iſsint puit eſte dit de cheſcun auter aunceſtour. Et meſme le ley eſt ſi launceſtor ſoit tenaunt per Elegit, ou per ſtatute marchant, & fait aſcun feoffement oue garrantie, tiels garranties ne ſerrōt barres, pur ceo q̄ ils cō
                     menceont per diſſeiſin.
               
               
                  Garrantie.
                  GArrantie, eſt quant vn eſt lye al auter que ad terre de garr̄ le terr̄ a luy, le quel poit commence per deux meanes▪s▪ per act del ley: come ſi vn & ſes aunceſtors ont tenu terre del auter, & ſes aunceſt' per temps dont memory ne curt, per homage▪ q̄ eſt appel homage aunceſtrell: Ou per lact del partie, q̄ graunta

per fait on fine al tenant del terre de garrant ceo a luy: ſur quel garrantie ſi le tenaunt ſoit implead per luy que doit garrant, ou ſes heires, le tenaunt barrera le demaundant per pleder del garrantie vers luy, que eſt appell Rebutter: Ou ſi ſoit implead per auter en action, en que poit vouch, il vouchera ceſtuy que garrant, ou ſes heires: Et ſi le plaintife recouer̄, le tenant recouera en value vers vouchee.
               
               
                  239 Garde.
                  GArde, eſt quant vn enfant que aunceſtor tient per ſeruice de chiualrie, eſt en le g
                        •
                     rde & cuſtodie de le ſeigniour de que ils fueront tenus: Et ſi le tenaunt tient de diuers ſeigniours diuers terres, celuy ſeigniour de que il tient per prioritie, ceſtaſcauoir, per le plus auncient Tenure, auera la garde del enfant, mes ſi vn tenure ſoyt auxy auncient que le auter, donques celuy q̄ primes,

happa le garde del corps, gardera ceo, mes en ceo caſe, cheſcun ſeignior auera le gard del terre que eſt tenus de luy, mes ſi le tenant tient aſcū terre del Roigne en chiefe, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le Roigne ꝑ ſa prerogatiue aūa le gard del corps, & de tout le terre que eſt tenus de luy, & de cheſcū auter ſeigniour.
                  Auxy ſont diuers briefs de gard, vn eſt briefe de droit de garde, & giſt lou le tenaunt deuye, ſon heire deins age & vn eſtrange entra in le terre, & hap̄ le garde de corps de lenfant.
                  Briefe deiectment de garde giſt lou home eſt ouſte de la garde de terre ſauns de corps de lenfant.
                  Briefe de rauiſhment de gard giſt lou le corps eſt priſe de luy ſolement & ment le terre.
               
               
                  Gardeine.
                  GArdeine, ou gardeine plus propermēt eſt celuy que ad le garde ou cuſtodie dun heire, & de

ſon terre tenus per ſeruice de ch
                        •
                     ual
                        ••
                     e, ou de vn de eux a ſon vſe demeſne, durant le nonage del h
                        •
                     
                     ▪ & deins ceſt temps ad le beſtowing del corps del hr
                        •
                     , en mariage al ſon volunt ſans diſparagem̄t.
                  Et de gardeines il y ad ii. ſorts▪ noſmement: gardeine en droit, & gardein en fait.
                  Gardein en droit, eſt celuy que per reaſon de ſon ſeigniorie eſt ſeiſie del gardſhip on cuſtodie del terre, & del heire, durant le nonage del heire.
                  Gardeine en fait, eſt lou le ſeigniour apres ſon ſeiſin, come auauntdit, graunta per fait, ou ſans fait, le gardſhip del terre ou del heire, ou dambideux a vn ant, per force de quel graunt, le grauntee eſt en poſſeſsion, donques eſt le grauntee appell gardein en fait.
                  Et ceſt gardeine en fait poit grant le heire al aut auxy, mes ceſt auter neſt properment appell gardeine en fait, car ceo eſt le grauntee del garden

en droit ſolement, mes le gardein en ſocage ad le profit ſolement al vſe del heire reſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il ad accompliſh lage de xiiii. ans, & rendra pur ceo accompt al heire▪ Vide plus de ceo Lit. li. 2. ca. 4 & 5. Et Stāf. ſur ſtatute de Prerog. ca. 1. 2. & 6.
               
               
                  Garniſhment.
                  GArniſhment eſt, ſicome vn action de detinue des charters eſt port vers vn, & le defendant dit, que les charters fuer
                        •
                     nt deliuer a luy per le plaintife & per vn auter ſur certeine conditions, & prey que lauter ſoit garny de pleder oue le plaintife ſi les conditions ſont pimples ou nemy, & ſur ceo vn briefe de Scire facias 
                        •
                     ſſera vers luy, & ceo eſt appel vn Garniſhmēt, & lauter quant il vient eins pled▪ oue le plaintif, & ceo eſt appel enterpleder.
               
               
                  Gauelate.
                  GAuelate, eſt vn ſpeciall & anciēt kind de Ceſſauit

vſed en Kent ou le Cuſtome de Gauelkinde continue, per quel le tenaunt forfeitera ſes terres & tenements al Seigniour de que ils ſont tenus, ſil detaine de ſon Seigniour ſes due rents & ſeruices, ſolonque ceſt maner que enſuiſt.
                  Si aſcun tenaunt en Gauelkinde retaine ſa 
                        •
                     ent, & ſes ſeruices de le tenement que il tyent de ſon Seigniour, querge le Seigniour per agarde de ſa Court, de trois ſemaines en trois ſemains, de trouer diſtreſſe ſur cel tenemēt ieſque a le quart court, a touts foits per teſmoignes. Et ſi deins cel tēps ne troue diſtreſſe en cel tenement, per queux il puiſſe ſon tenant iuſticer, Don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      a la quart Court ſoit agarde que il preigne cel tenement en ſa main, en noſme de diſtreſſe, auxy come fuit boefe ou vache, & le tiēt 
                        •
                     n an & vn iour, en ſa maine, ſans maine ouerer, deins quel terme, ſi le tenant vient, & rende ſes

arrerages, & fait reaſonables amendes de la deteiner, adone eit, & ioyſe ſon tenement, ſicome ſes aunceſtours & luy auant tiendront. Et ſil ne vient deuant le an & le iour paſſe, done auage le Seigniour al procheyne County court 
                        •
                     uyant oue teſmoygnes de ſa Court, & face la pronuncier cel proceſſe pur teſmoynage auer, & per agarde de ſa Court (apres ceo Countie tenue) entra & meynou
                        •
                     ra en cels terres & tenementes, ſicome en ſon demeſne. Et ſi le tenaunt vyent apres, & voyler reauer ſes tenementes, & tener ſicome il fiſt deuant, face gree al Seygniour, ſicome il eſt auncientment diſt.
                  Neghe ſith ſelde, & neghe ſith gelde, & v. li. for the were, 
                        •
                     r he become healder. Vide de ceo 10. Hen. 3. Fitzherb. Ceſſau
                        •
                     t 
                        •
                     0. & ſtatute 10. Ed. 2. de Gauelet en London, en le Collectiō
                     
del ſtatutes Lōdon 2. matter tendant mult a cel purpoſe, q̄ ꝑ cel parol Gauelet le ſeign̄ auera le terre, pur ceſſer le ten̄t. Et vide Weſtm̄ 2. cap. 21. que done Ceſſauit.
                  Il y ad aſcuns copies que ad le primer Verſe iſsint eſcript.
                  Niſith yeld, and niſith gelde.
                  Et auters iſsint.
                  Nigheſith yelde, and nigheſith geld.
                  Mes ceux ne differ en ſignification, auter copies ont ceo ſolōque cē ſort.
                  Nigondſith ſelde, & nigondſith geld.
                  Ceſtaſſauoir, paiera il nouies foits, & nouies foits repay.
               
               
                  243 Gauelkinde.
                  GAuelkinde eſt vn cuſtome annex & currant oue tres en Kent appel Gauelkinde terres tenus en auncient Socage tenure. Et eſt penſe per les erudite en Antiquities, deſte appel Gauelkinde de Gyue al kin, ceſt adire a toutes les kinne en vn line, accordant come eſt

vſe enter les Germans, de que nous Anglois, & eſpecialment de Kent venomus. Ou il eſt appell Gauelkinde de Gyue al kinde, ceſt adire al touts les males, car kinde en Dutch ſignifie vn male. Et diuers auters ſemble cō
                     iectures ſont fait per eux de le noſme (Gauelkind) le quel ieo omit de purpoſe pur breuitie.
                  Les plus vſual cuſtomes de eux ſont, que le terre eſt diuidable enter les heires males, & q̄ le heire al age de xv. ans poit dōe & vende ſa terre, & ſerra inherit coment ſon pere ſoit attaint & pendue pur felonie, & ſa feme ſerra endowe del demy del terre, dont ſon baron deuie ſeiſie, & le baron ſerra tenant per le curteſie del demy, coment ne auoit iſſue ꝑ ſa feme: mes leſtate del baron & feme ceaſe per lour ſecond mariage. Et diuers auts Cuſtomes ſont vſes en Kent de terres en Gauelkind, pur queux veies le Perambulation de Kent,

fait per M. Lambert, Pur quel cauſe le reſidue ieo voile omit come impertinent a cel lieur, & intreat amplemēt en le dit Perambulation.
               
               
                  244 Gelde.
                  GEld, hoc eſt quietū eſſe de cōſuetud' ſeruilibus q̄ quon lā dari conſueuerūt & adhuc dāt, cōe hornegeld & h
                        •
                     is ſimilibus.
               
               
                  245 Graund Cape.
                  GRaund Cape, vide de ceo ap̄s tit petit Cape.
               
               
                  246 Grand Serianty.
                  GRaund Serianty eſt lou on hōe tiēt de roy certein terres ꝑ le ſeruice de porter ſō bāner ou laūce, ou ameſner ſon hoſte, ou deſtre ſon caruer ou butteler a ſon coronment & tiels ſembl', & ceo eſt la pluis honorable ſeruice & pluis digne, q̄ le tenant poit fair, & pur ceo ē appel graund ſerianty, Mes petit Seriāty eſt quant vn tient de roy luy rendant annuelm̄t vn arke, vn coteau, vn launce, & tiels ſembl', & ceo neſt forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſocage en effect, mes hōe ne poit tener in graund

ſerieanty ne per petit ſerieanty ſinon de roy. Auxy ſi tenant per graund ſerieantie moruſt ſon heire eſteant de pleine age, le heir paiera al roy pur reliefe le value des terres ouſter les charges que il pay al Roy ꝑ grand ſerieantie: mes ceſtuy que tyent ꝑ Eſcuage paiera pur ſon relief forſque C. s.
                  Auxy ceux que ſont en le Marches de Scotland, que tient del Roy per Cornage, ceſt eſt, pur ventiler vn cornu quant les Scots entront en Angleterre, ſont tenants per graund ſerieantie.
                  Auxy ou vn home tient de roy pur trouer vn home en ſa guerre deins le Realme, ceſt eſt dit grand Serieantie, pur ceo, que il eſt fait per corps dun home. Et ſi le tenant ne poit trouer home de faire ceo, donques il eſt tenus de faire ceo luy meſme. Et il que tient per grand ſerieantie tient per ſeruice de chiualer, & le Roy auera garde, marriage & reliefe, mes nemy de ceux

que tient per petite ſerieantie, mes le Roy nauera de eux que tient per grand Serieanty eſcuage, ſi
                        •
                     on que ils tient per eſcuage. Iſsint ceux que tient per grand ſericantie ou eſcuage tient per ſeruice de chiualer. Mes vn poit tener per grand Serieantie & nemy per eſcuage, & per eſcuage & nemy per grand ſerieantie. Et le ſeruice de chiualer toutes foites treit. a luy gard, mariage, & relief.
               
               
                  247 Grithbrech.
                  GRithbrech, hoc eſt pax domini Regis fracta, quia (Grith) Anglice pax Latin.
               
            
            
               H.
               
                  248 Habere facias ſeiſinam.
                  HAbere facias ſeiſinam, eſt vn briefe iudicial, & giſt lou vn ad recouer certain terres en court le Roy, donques il auera ceſt briefe direct al Vicont, luy commaundant de doner a luy ſeiſin del terre, & ne ſerra returnable.
               
               
                  
                  Hangwit.
                  HAngwit, hoc eſt quietum eſſe de latrone ſuſpenſo ſine iudicio, vel extra cuſtodiam veſtram euaſo.
               
               
                  Hariot.
                  HAriot, eſt ē deux ſorts lun Hariot cuſtom, le auter Hariot ſeruice.
                  Hariot ſeruice (aſcuns diont) eſt touts foits expreſſe en le graunt dun home, ou en ſon fait que il tiēt per tiel ſeruice pur paier hariot al temps de ſon mort, Et ceſt Hariot eſt paiable apres le mort de le tenāt en fee ſimple.
                  Hariot cuſtome, eſt lou hariots ont eſte paies temps hors de memorie per cuſtome. Et ceo poit eſte apres le mort del tenant pur vie &c. mes a parler de ceo generalm̄t.
                  Hariot eſt le meliour beaſt (ſoit il Chiual, Boef, ou vache) que le tenāt ad al temps de ſon mort. Et le Sn̄r poit ſeiſe, ou p̄nder vn diſtreſſe pur ceo, ſoit il Hariot ſeruice, ou Hariot cuſtome, al vſe del Seignior de que le tenant tiēt

per ſon baylie ou auter officer de ſon manor. Mes de droit le Seigniour ne ſon officer ne doit prender Hariot deuant que il ſoit preſent al prochein court tenus apres le tenant eſt mort, & que tiel beaſt eſt due al ſeigniour pur ſon Harriot.
               
               
                  251 Haybote ou hedgbote.
                  HAybote ou hedgbote, eſt neceſſary ſtuffe pur faire & amend haies, que leſſee pur ans, ou pur vie de common droit poit p̄nder ſur le tre a luy leſſe, nient obſtant il ne ſoit expreſſe en ſon leaſe, & nient obſtant q̄ il ſoit vn leaſe ꝑ parols ſans eſcript.
                  Haybote auxy poit eſtre priſe pur neceſſarie ſtuf pur faire rakes, forks & tiels ſemblables inſtrumēts oue q̄ux homes vſont en ſummer de tedder & faire feme Et iſsint vn leſſee pur ans priſt ceo & fuit a luy allow per ſō leſſor, plus toſt come ieo ſuppoſe, pur ceo que tiels inſtrumēts ſont communement fait de ſlender ſubboys, q̄ per le cōmon

ley leſſee pur ans poit ſuccider & prender come eſt auantdiſt.
               
               
                  Hidage.
                  HIdage, hoc eſt quietum eſſe ſi dominus Rex talliaue
                        •
                     it totam terram per hidas.
                  Nota q̄ vn hide de terr̄, eſt vn entire plowland. Et ceſt kinde de taxing per hides fuit mult vſe en viel temps cibien pur prouiſion de armour, come paimēts de argent, & ceo principalm̄t, en les iours del Roy Etheldred (vn Roy en ceſt payes deuant le Conqueſt) que en le an de Chriſt 1006. quant les Danes p
                        ••
                     ſt
                        •
                      land al Sandwich en Kent taxe tout ſon terre per hides ē ceſt maner, Que cheſcun 310. hides de terre do
                        •
                     ent trouer vne niefe furniſh, & cheſcun 8. hides doient trouer vn lacke & vn ſallet, pur le defence del Realme.
               
               
                  Hotchpot.
                  HOtchpot, eſt vn medling, ou mixing enſē
                     ble, & vn partitiō de tres done en frankmariage,

oueſque auter terres en fee ſimple diſcendus. Come pur example: vn home ſeiſi de 30. acres de terre en fee ſimple, ad iſſue ij. files, & done oueſq̄ vn de ſes files al vn home q̄ luy marrie 10. acres de ceo terre en frankmarriage, & moruſt ſeiſie de les auters xx. acres: Ore ſi el que eſt iſsint marrie voiloit auer aſcun parte de les xx. acres de que ſon pier moruſt ſeiſie: El doit miſe ſes terres done en frankemariage en Hotchpot, ceo eſt adire, el doiet refuſer de prender le ſole profite del terre done en frankemariage, & ſuffer le terre de eſtre commixt, & mingle enſemble oueſque le aut terre de q̄ ſon piere moruſt ſeiſie, iſsint que vn equal diuiſiō poit eſtre fait de lentyer perenter luy & ſa ſoer: Et iſsint pur ſa 10. acres, el auera xv. auterment ſa ſoe
                        •
                      voyt auer les xx. acres, de que lour pier moruſt ſeiſie.
               
               
                  
                  Homage.
                  Homage, eſt vn ſeruice que ſerra fait en tiel maner, ceſt aſcauoir, le tenant in fee ſimple, ou fee taile q̄ tient per homage genulera ſur ambideux genus diſce
                        •
                     t, & le ſeigniour ſerra & tiendra les mayns ſon tenaunt inter ſes mains & le tenant dira. Ieo deueigne voſtre home de ceſtuy iour en auant de vie & de member & de tertaine honor, & a vous ſerra foial & loyal, & foy vous portera des terres que ieo claime de tenuer de vous, ſalue le foy que ieo doy a noſtre ſeigniour le Roy, & donques le ſeigniour iſsint ſeant luy beſera.
                  Mes comēt fealty ſerra fait, vide deuant in fealty.
                  Et le ſeneſchal le ſeigniour puit prender fealty mes nemy homage.
               
               
                  Homage anceſtrel.
                  HOmage aunceſtrel, eſt 
                        •
                     o
                        •
                      vn hōe & ſes aunceſt' de tēps dōt memory ne courge, ont ten' la tre del Sn̄r per homage, & ſi tiel Seigniour ad reſceu

homage il eſt tenus de acquiter le tenaunt 
                        •
                     er
                        •
                      toutes auters ſeigniours paramont luy de cheſcun mann
                        •
                     r ſeruice. Et ſi tenant ad fait homage a ſō ſeigniour & ſoit implede & vouche le ſeigniour a garrantie, le ſeigniour eſt tenu
                        •
                      de luy garranter, & ſi le tenant perde il recouera in value vers ſon ſeigniour tant des terres que il auoit al temps de la voucher ou vnq, puis. Auxy ſi home que tient ſa terre per homage aunceſtrel alien le terre ē fee donques le alience ferra homage a ſon Sn̄r, mes il ne tiendra ꝑ homage anceſtrel pur ceo que le continuance del tenācy in le ſank le prim̄ tenaunt eſt diſcontinue.
               
               
                  256 Homeſoken.
                  HOmeſoken, (ou hameſoken) hoc eſt quietū eſſe de amerciamentis, de ingreſſu hoſp▪ ciorum violenter & ſine licentia, & contra pacē domini Regis. Et 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      teneatis placita de hm̄di tranſg' facta in curia veſtra, & in tra veſtra.
               
               
                  
                  Homicide ou Manſlaughter.
                  Homicid' ou Māſlaughter, eſt le occider dun home felonieuſment ſans malice prepenced. Il eſt auxi define iſsint Homicidium eſt hominis occiſio, ab homine facta, ſ
                        •
                      autē a cane, boue, vel alia re, non dicitur proprie homicidium: dicitur homicid' ab homine & caedo, quaſi hominis caediū.
               
               
                  Hornegelde.
                  HOrnegeld, hoc eſt quietum eſſe de quadam cōſuetudine exacta ꝑ tallag. ꝑ totam tra
                           •
                        
                     , ſicut de quacūq, beſtia cornuta.
               
               
                  Houſebote.
                  HOuſebote, eſt neceſſary timber, q̄ le leſſee pur ans, ou pur vie, de cō
                     mon droit poit prender ſur le terre, pur repayrer les meaſons ſur meſme le terre a luy leſſe, ment obſtant il ne ſoit expreſſe en le leaſe, & ment obſtant il ſoit vn leaſe per parols ſans fait. Mes ſil priſt pluis q̄ beſoigne, il poit 
                        •
                     ſte puniſh per vn action de waſt.
               
               
                  
                  260 Hundred.
                  HVndreds, fueront deuiſe per Alfred le roy, apres que il ad deuide le entier Realme en certain parts ou ſections, le quel de le Saxō parol Seynan, ſignificant de ſeinder, il terme Shires ou (ſicome nous vnco
                        •
                     e pa
                        •
                     le) Shares & portiōs. Ceux Shires il auxy diuide en petites parts, de queux aſcuns fueront appelles L
                        •
                     thes, de le parol Ielapian, que eſt de aſſembler enſemble, auters Tythinges, iſsint noſme, pur ceo que la fueront en cheſcū de eux al number de x. perſons, de que cheſcun fuit ſuertie & pledge pur auts bone behauiour: auters hundreds, pur ceo que ils cō
                     teine iuriſdiction ſur vn 100 homes ou pledges demurrāt ꝑaduenture en ij. ouiij. ou plus paroches, borowes, ou villes, eſteant & adioynantes ment meines prochein enſemble, en le quel il appoint adminiſtration de Iuſtice deſtre exerciſe ſeueralm̄t ēter eux de meſme le

hundred, & nemy que lun irra hors diſorderment en lauter hundred, lath, ou tything, en que il ne demurt. Ceux hundredes continue a c
                        •
                     ſt iour en force, ment obſtant non en tout al meſme le purpoſe, pur que al primer ils fueront ordein, vncore a ore mult neceſſarie, & en temps de peace pur bone order de gouernement diuers voyes, & auxy en guerr pur certaintie de leuying de homes come auterm̄t pur le plus ſpedi collections de paiments grant en Parliamēt a les Ro
                        •
                     es & Roign̄s de ceſt Realme.
               
               
                  Hundredum.
                  HVndredum. 
                        •
                     oc eſt qetū 
                     
                        •
                     ſſe de d
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     r̄ vel conſuetudinibus faciendis p
                        •
                     aepoſitis & hundredarijs.
               
            
            
               I.
               
                  Ideot.
                  IDeot, eſt celu
                        •
                      que eſt vn 
                        •
                     ot naturall de ſa 
                        •
                     eyſture, & 
                        •
                     e ſcanoit de accompter ou number xx. d, ne poit noſm
                        •
                     r ſon pere ou mere,

ne de quel age il m̄ eſt, ou tiel ſemblable plaine & cōmon choſes, iſsint q̄ il appiert q̄ il nad aſcū maner de intendement de reaſon ne gouernement de luy meſme, quel eſt pur ſon profit, ou diſprofit &c. Mes ſil ad tant entelligēce que il poit lier, ou apprender de lyer per inſtruction & informatiō de auts, on poit meaſure vn vlne de drap, ou noſme les iours en le ſemaine, ou engēder vn enfant, ſits ou file ou tiel ſē
                     blable, ꝑ q̄ il poit appeare que il ad aſcun lumen de reaſon; don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tiel neſt Ideot naturalment.
               
               
                  263 Idemptitate nominis.
                  IDemptitate nominis, eſt vn br̄e, & giſt lou br̄ de det, Couenant, Accompt, ou tiel ſemblable briefe eſt port vers vn home, & vn auter que ad meſme le noſme come le defendant ad, eſt pris pur luy, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il auera ceſt br̄ per que le viſcount fra inquiry deuaunt Iuſtice

aſsigne in m̄ le countie, ſi ſoit meſ
                        •
                     e le perſon ou nemy, & ſil ne ſoit troue le partie donques il a
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      ſans iour in peace.
               
               
                  Ieofayle.
                  IEofaile, eſt quāt les parties al aſcun ſuit en pledant ont a tant proceed q̄ il aient ioyne iſſue quel ſerra trie, ou eſt trie per vn Iury ou enqueſt. Et cel pleding ou iſſue eſt cy malement plede ou ioyn q̄ il ſerra errour ſi eux ꝓceed: Don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      aſcun del diſtes parties poit per lou
                        •
                      Counſell monſtre ceo al Court auxibien apres verdiſt done & deuāt iudgement, come deuant le Iurie ſoit charge. Le monſtrans des q̄ux effects deuant le Iurie charge fuit ſouent quāt le Iury veign̄ al Court de trye le iſſue, dō
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le Counſell q̄l voit ceo monſtrer dira, cē enqueſt ne do
                        •
                     es prender, Et ſi ſoit apres verdict, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il voiloit dire, Al iudgemēt ne deues aler. Et pur ceo q̄ ceux mults delayes fueront en ſuites, diuers

ſtatutes ſont faits de redreſſer ceo, auxibien en temps Roy H. le 8. Anno 32. cap 30. come en tēps le roigne que ore eſt de queux home poit dire come les Ciuilians diont. Quod tame
                        •
                     ſi 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     is formulas amputari iuſſerit Conſtantinus Imperator, quotidianus tamen forenſis vſus eas reuocaſſe vide
                        •
                     , vel potiu
                        •
                     , quod creſcunt vt Hidrae capita.
               
               
                  265 Illoyal aſſemblie.
                  ILloyall aſſemblie, eſt lou people eux aſſemble 
                        •
                     uſimul pur faire illoyall choſe encounter le peace, nyent obſtant que ils ne execute lour purpoſe en fait.
               
               
                  266 Imparlance.
                  IMparlance, eſt quant vn action de dett, treſpaſſe, ou tiels ſemblables eſt port enuers vn home, & apres que le plaintife ad count ou declare, le defendant pria le Court que il poit auer temps de mitter 
                        •
                     ins ſon reſpons al

auter iour en meſme le terme, ou en le procheine terme, ceſt ſtay de reſpons eſt appel imparlance.
               
               
                  Impriſonment.
                  IMpriſonment neſt auter choſe forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le reſtraint del libertie dun home, ſoit ceo en le ouert chāps ou en le cippes, ou cage en les eſtreates, ou en le proper meaſon dun hōe, 
                        •
                     ibien come en le comon gaol. Et en toutes ceux lieux le partie iſsint reſtraine eſt dit deſte vn priſoner cy longem̄t come il nad ſon libertie frankmēt de 
                        •
                     re a touts lou il voit, ſans baile, mainpriſe, ou auter aucthoritie.
               
               
                  Infangthefe.
                  INfangthefe, hoc eſt qd' latrones capti in dominico vel in feodo veſtro de latrociniis conuicti, in curia veſtra iudicent.
               
               
                  Information.
                  INformatiō, pur le roign̄ eſt ceo que pur vn common perſon eſt appel vn

declaration, & neſt toutes foits fait directment ꝑ le Roigne, ou ſa Atturney, mes ꝑ vn aut home. Qui tam pro domina Regina quam pro ſeipſo ſequitur, ſur le breach de aſcū penal ley ou ſtatute, en que vn penaltie eſt done al partie que voit ſuer pur ceo, mes nul actiō de dett pur recouer ceo, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il doit ēe ewe ꝑ informatiō.
               
               
                  270 Ioyntenants.
                  IOintenāts ſont lou deux homes vient a aſcū terres on tenements per vn ioynt title: Come ſi home done terre a deux homes & lour heires.
                  Mes Tenants en common ſont lou ii. homes out terres per ſeueral titles, ou per feffement al deux, a auer & tener lun moitie al vn & ſes heires, & lauter moitie al lauter & ſes heires, en touts ceux caſes nul de eux ſcauoit ſon ſeueral, come il ſerra dit apres.
                  Et nota ſi ſont deux ou trois ioyntenaunts, & vn ad iſſue & deuie,

donques ceſtuy ou ceux iointenants que ſurueſque auera lentiertie per le ſuruiuor.
                  Mes ſi deux iointenāts font particion enter eux ꝑ fait ꝑ agreemēt donques ils ſont ſeueral tenants.
                  Mes ſi vn iointenaunt graunt ceo que a luy appent a vn eſtranger, donques lauter iointenant & le ſtranger ſont tenants en common.
                  Et meſque ij. tenants en common ſont ſeyſie per my & per tout, & nul conuſt ſon ſeueral, vncore ſi vn deuie, lauter ne auera lentiertie per ſuruiuor, mes ſon heire auera le moitie.
                  Et iſsint ſi ſont iii. iointenants, & vn de eux fait feffement de ſon part a vn auter, & le feffee deuie, donques ſon heire auera le tierce part, & les auters i
                        •
                     . ſont iointenants come ils fueront, pur ceo que eux deux ſont ſeiſies per vn ioint title.
                  Auxy ſi tre ſoit done al baron & ſa feme, & le barō alien & deuie, le feme

recouera lentiertie: mes ſi ils fueront iointenāts deuant le couerture, donques en tiel caſe el recouera forſque le moitie.
                  Auxy ſi terre ſoit done al baron & ſa ſeme, & al tierce perſon, ſi le tierce perſon graunt ceo que a luy appent, la moitie paſſa▪ per cel graunt, pur ceo que le baron & ſa feme ſont forſque vn perſon en le ley, & en ceſt caſe ils nont en droit forſque le moitie.
                  Auxy ſi deux ioyntenāts ſont des tres en ville que eſt borough Engliſh, lou terre eſt deuiſable, & lun per ſon teſtament deuiſe ceo que a luy appent a vn eſtranger & deuie, ceſt deuiſe eſt voide, & le auter auera lentiertie per ſuruiuer, pur ceo que le deuiſe ne poit prēder effect tanque apres le mort le deuiſor, & immediate apres le mort le deuiſor, le droit deuient al auter iointenāt per le ſuruiuor, le quel ne claime riēs ꝑ le deuiſour mes en ſō droit demeſne per le ſuruiuer:

Mes autermēt eſt de Parceners ſeiſies des tres deuiſables, cauſa qua ſupra.
               
               
                  Indicauit.
                  INdicauit eſt vn briefe & giſt lou debate eſt perenter deux Clerkes en court Chriſtian dun Eſgliſe, ou part de vn Eſgliſe pur diſmes q̄ amoūt al meines a le value de la quart part del Eſgliſe, & pur ceo q̄ le patron del Clerk le defendaunt perdra ſon aduowſon, ſi le clerke le plaintife la recouera, donques il auera brief direct al Clerke le plaintif ou al officers del cōurt Chriſtian, eux cō
                     maundant de ceſſer de lour plee, ieſques il eſt diſcuſſe en court le Roy a q̄ laduowſon appent, Et ceſt brief ſerra enter quater perſons, deux ſerront patrons, & deux ſerront clerkes. Mes ceſt briefe neſt returnable: mes ſils ne ceſſont lour ſuit il aūa vn Attachment.
               
               
                  Iointure.
                  IOinture eſt vn eſtate & aſſurāce fait al vn feme en conſideration de mariage

pur terme de ſa vie, ou auterment, come eſt mention en leſtatute 27. H. 8. ca. 10. ſoit il deuant ou apres le mariage. Et ſi ſoit apres le mariage, dō
                     ques el poit a ſa libertie apres le mort de ſon baron refuſer de p
                        •
                     ender, ou auer les terres iſsint aſſure pur ſa iointure, & demaund ſa dower al cō
                     mon ley: Mes ſil ſoit fait deuant mariage, donques el ne poit refuſer tiel iointure, ne auer dower accordant al cōmon ley, ſinon q̄ quant el port ſa briefe de Dower, le defendāt pled tiel plee que ne voile luy barrer de ſa dower, donques el ſerra endow: Sicome il dit en barre, q̄ ſa baron ne fuit ſeiſi de tiel eſtate de quel el doit eſte endow, ou aſcun tiel plee, & ne monſtre que el ad vn iointure fait &c. & pur ceo demaund iudgement de cel action, ou iudgement ſi el ſerra auxy endow, ou aſcun tiel ſemblable plee &c. Et ceo fuit lopiniō de le droit worſhipful M.

Brograue, al ſon lecture en Graies Inne en Sūmer An. 1567. 18. Eliz. ſur vn brāch, del ſtatute fait An. 27. H. 8. ca. 10. concernāt Iointures & dowers,
                  Et per luy de ceux choſes de que vn feme poit eſte endowe, el poit auer vn iointure, cōe de mines, veſturā terre, bo
                        •
                     es, villes, Iles, meadowes, & tyels ſemblables. Item dun aduowſon, dun reuerſion dependaunt ſur vn eſtate pur vie, dun Windmill, vn haut chamber, vn rectorie & tiels auters, & ils ſont appels tenements. Item dun villen, car il eſt hereditament. Et de touts ceux profit poet vener al feme. Mes de ceux choſes de que nul profite voet vener, mes plustoſt vn charge, vn iointure ne poet eſte fait.
               
            
            
               L.
               
                  Larceny.
                  LArceny eſt vn torcyous priſell des biens dun auter home, mes nemye de ſon perſon, oue vn ment de eux embleer encounter

ſon volunt que biens ils fueront.
                  Et la
                        •
                     eeny eſt en deux ſorts, lun iſsint appelle ſimplement, & lauter petit larceny.
                  Le primer eſt lou le choſe emblee exceda le value de xij. d. & ceo eſt felony.
                  Le auter (que eſt appell petite larceny) eſt lou le choſe emblee, ne exceda le value de xii. d. & ceo neſt felony.
               
               
                  284 Laſtage.
                  LAſtage, hoc eſt quietū eſſe de quadā cōſuetudine exact
                        •
                      in nundmis & mercatis pro rebus cariandis vbi homo vult.
               
               
                  285 Leaſes.
                  LEaſes ſont grāts ou demiſes ꝑ vn q̄ ad aſcun eſtate in heredit de ceux hereditam̄ts al auter pur meinder tēps, & ceo ſont en diuers māners, ceſt aſcauoir, pur terme de vie, pur terme dās, pur terme dauter vie & a volunt.
                  Auxy vn leaſe de terre eſt auxy bone ſans fayt come per fayt.
                  Mes en leas pur terme

de vie, il couient de doner liuery & ſeiſin ſur le terre, ou auterment riens paſſera ꝑ le grant, pur ceo que ils ſont appels franktenements.
                  Auxy vn leas de vn comen ou rent, ne poiet eſte bone ſans fait.
                  Mes de vn parſonage, il eſt bon ſans fait, pur ceo que leſgliſe que eſt principall, puit aſſets bien paſſer ſans fait, & iſsint les diſmes & offerings que ſont come acceſſory al eſgliſe.
                  Mes diſmes & offerings per ſoy, ne poyent eſte leſſes ſans fait vt dicitur.
               
               
                  Leſſor & Leſſee.
                  LEſſor eſt celuy que leſſa terres, ou tenements 
                        •
                     l auter pur terme de vie, ans, ou al volunt, & celuy a que le leas eſt fait, eſt appell leſſee.
               
               
                  Leuant & Couchant.
                  LEuant & Couchant, eſt dit, quant les beaſtes, ou Cattell dun eſtraunger ſont venue en le terre dun auter home, & la ont remaine vn certaine bone ſpace de temps.
               
               
                  
                  288 Ley.
                  LEy eſt quant action de det eſt port vers vn ſur aſcun ſecret iudgement ou contract ewe perenter les parties ſans eſpecialty monſtre, ou auter matter de Record, come action de detinue pur aſcun biēs ou chattels, dōque le defendant poit gager ſon ley, ſil voile, ceſtaſſauoir, de iurer ſur vn lieur, & certeine perſons oue luy, que il ne deteyna les byens, ou doit riens al plaintife in le manner & fourme come il ad declare.
                  Et ceſt allowe ſolement in caſes de ſecrecie ou le plaintife ne poit prouer le ſurmiſe de ſon ſuit per aſcun fait ou ouert act: ou le defendant poit ceo diſcharge ſecretmēt perenter eux ſans aſcū eſcript de acquitance ou publique acte, & pur ceo en action de det ſur vn leas pur terme dans ou ſur arrerages de accompt deuant Auditors aſsign̄, hōe ne gagera ſon ley.
                  Mes quant vn gag
                        •
                     ra

ſon ley, il ameſnera oueſque luy vi. viii. ou xii. de ſes vicins, come le Court luy aſsignera, de iurer oueſque luy, mult ſemble al ſerement que eux feſoyent que ſont vſes in cōmon ley, de purger auters de aſcū crime al eux impute: q̄ ſont appell conpurgators.
                  Nota que le feſans del ſerment eſt appell le gager del ley, & quant il eſt accōpliſh, donque eſt appell ſe feſans del ley.
                  Et auxy ſi le Vicount in aſcun action returne que il eit ſummon le defendaunt de appearer in Court a aſcun iour a reſponder le plaintife, a quel iour il fait default, proces ſerra agard vers luy de vener & ſaue, ou excuſer ſon default: que eſt a tant a dire, come purgare moram, ou autermēt de perder le choſe demaunde: Et donque le defendaunt vient & voit iurer que il ne fuit ſummon, que eſt appell gager de ley, donque il doit ceo faire al iout

aſſign̄ oue xii. auters, & en feſant del le
                        •
                      il doyt ſon ſerement affirmer directment al contrary de ceo que eſt impute a luy, mes lauters ne dira, mes que eux intend que il dit le verity.
               
               
                  289 Libertate probanda.
                  LIbertate probanda, Vide de ceo en le title de Natiuo habendo.
               
               
                  290 Liuerie de ſeiſin.
                  LIuetie de ſeiſin, eſt vn ceremony vſe en conueyance de terres ou tenements lou vn eſtate en fee ſimple, fee tayle, ou vn franktenement paſſera: Et il eſt vn teſmoigne de le voluntary departing per luy que fait le liuerie del choſe de que liuerie eſt fait: Et le reſceite del liuery eſt vn voluntary acceptance per le auter party, de tout ceo de que lauter ad luy diſmiſſe. Et fuit inuēt cōe vn ouert & notorious choſe, ꝑ meanes de q̄ le cōmon people poiēt auer intelligēce de paſſing ou alteratiō de eſtates de hōe al

home, que per ceo ils poient eſtre le meliour able pur trier en que le droit & poſſeſsiō de terres & tenementes fueront, ſils doient eſtre impannel & iures, ou auterment ont a faire concernant ceo.
                  Le common manner de liuerie de ſeyſin, eſt en ceſt ſort fait: Si
                        •
                     l ſoit en le ouert champe ou ne ſont edifices, ou meaſon, donques vn que poit lyer priſt le ſait en ſon maine, ſi leſtate paſſera per fait, & declare al eux que la ſont, le cauſe de lour vener la enſemble, & donques ouertment lya le fait, ou declare le effect de ceo 
                        •
                     n Engloys, & apres que il eſt ſeale le partie que eſt a departer oue le terre, priſt le ſai
                        •
                      en ſes maines enſemble oueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vn clodde del terre, & vn twigge ou bowe, ſil y ad aſcun la, & tout ceo il deliuer al auter partie, en le noſme de poſſeſsion ou ſeyſin accordant al fourme & effecte del fayt; que deuāt

eux fuit la lye ou declare. Mes ſil ſoit vn habitation ou edifice ſur le terre, donques ceo eſt fait la a le doore del ceo, nul eſteant relinquiſhe a ceſt temps deins le meaſon, & le partie deliuer tout les auantdites enſemble oueſque le annell del doore en noſme de ſeyſin ou poſſeſsion, & il que receiua le liuerie entra primes ſole & ſhota le doore, & prelentmēt ouert ceo, & leſſa eux eins &c. Sil ſoit de vn meaſon a que eſt nul terre, le lyuerie eſt fait & poſſeſsion priſe per le deliuerie del annuell del doore & fait ſolement. Et ou il eſt ſauns fait de terres ou tenements la le partie declare ꝑ parol deuant teſtmoignes, leſtate q̄ il entende de departer oue, & donques deliuer ſeiſin ou poſſeſsion, en maner cōe eſt auantdiſt, & iſsint le tre ou tenement paſſera cybien lou il nad fait, come per fait, & ceo per force del liuery de ſeiſin:

Il fuit agree en Graies Inne per le droit worſhipful M. Snagge, al ſon lecture la en ſommer An. 1574. que ſi vn feoffour deliuer le fait en view del terre, en noſme de ſeiſin, que il eſt bone, pur ceo que il ad vn poſſeſsion en luy meſme. Mes auterment eſt dun Atturney, car il doit aler al terre, & priſe poſſeſsiō luy meſme, deuant que il poit doner poſſeſsion al auter accordant al parols de ſon garrant &c. Et lou liuerie de ſeiſin eſt per le viewe, ſi le feoffee ne entra pas puis &c. nul choſe paſſa, car il doit enter en fait.
               
               
                  Lotherwite.
                  LOtherwit, hoe eſt quod capiatis emēdas ab ipſo qui corrumpit veſtram natiua ſine licētia veſtra.
               
            
            
               M.
               
                  Mahim ou Maime.
                  MAhim, eſt lou per le 
                        •
                     orcious act daut aſcun member eſt dampnifie ou tol, per que le partie iſ
                        •
                     int dāpnifie eſt fait

imperfect a cōbater: Come ſi vn oſſe ſoit priſe hors del teſt: ou vn oſſe ſoit debruſe en aſc' auter part del corps, ou vn pee; ou maine, ou digit, ou ioint dū pee, ou aſc' mē
                     ber ſoit ſciet: ou per aſc' plague les nerues ſōt fait de ſhrinker, ou aut mē
                     ber, ou les digits faits curue, ou ſi vn oyl ſoit miſe hors, ou les anterior dē
                     tes debruſe, ou aſc' auter choſe ē le corps dū hōe, ꝑ reaſon de que il eſt fait le meins able pur defender luy m̄, ou offēd ſō enemy.
                  Mes le ſ
                        •
                     yer dun de vn ori
                        •
                     l, ou n
                        •
                     ſe, ou lēfiéd' del▪ dēts▪ moliers, on tiels ſemblables, neſt aſc' ma
                        •
                     
                     hem, pur ceo q̄ il eſt pluis vn deformity de le corps; que vn defect del ſtrēgth, 
                        ••
                      ceo eſt communement try per I
                        •
                     nſpection del partie per les Iuſtices. Et ſi les iuſtices ſōt ē doubt 
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     am̄ ſoit vn ma
                        •
                     h
                        •
                     m ou 
                        〈…〉
                     , ils. vſe▪ & voylent 
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     our graund diſcretion prender le aide & opinion de aſcun erudite Surgion, pur conſid▪
                     
de ceo deuant que ils determine ſur le caſe.
               
               
                  Mainpriſe.
                  MAinpriſe, eſt quant vn home eſt arreſt ꝑ Capias, done les Iudges poient deliū ſon corps a certain homes pur garder & de luy am
                        ••
                     ner deuāt eux a certain iour, & ceux ſōt appels mainpernors, & ſi le party ne appear al iour a
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     gne, le mainpernou
                        •
                     s ſerront amercie.
               
               
                  Mannour.
                  MAnnour, eſt vn choſe compound de diuers choſes, come de vn meaſon, terre arrable, paſture, pree, bois, rent, auowſon, court baron; & tiel ſemblable font vn manor. Et c
                        •
                     o doit eſte per ancient continuāce de temps, cui
                        •
                     s contrarium memoria hominū non exiſtie: car a ceo iour vn manor ne poit eſte fait pur ceo q̄ vn Court baron ne poit eſtre fait a ore, & vn mānor ne poit eſtre ſans vn court barō & 
                        •
                     uters ou frāktenants, deux al meines, car 
                        •
                     i tontes les franketenements forſque vn eſcheat

al Seign̄, ou ſil purchaſe tout preter vn, la ſon manor eſt ale, pur ceo que il ne poit eſtre vn mannor ſans vn Court Baron (cōe auantdit.) Et vn court barō ne poit eſte tenus mes deuāt ſuters, & nemy deuant vn ſuter, & ideo lou forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vn frāktenem̄t o
                        •
                      
                     frākt eſt, la ne poit eſte manor properm̄t, coment en common parlāce ceo poit eſtr̄ appel vn manor.
               
               
                  295 Manumiſsion.
                  MAnumiſsiō, eſt ē deux ſorts, le vn eſt vn manumiſsion explicita, laut vn manumiſsiō implicita.
                  Manumiſsion explicita eſt quant le Seignior fait vn fait al ſon villeine pur luy enfrāchiſer ꝑ ceſt parol (Manumittere) quod idem eſt quod extra manum, vel extra poteſtatē alterius ponere.
                  Le manner de manumitting ou enfranchiſing en tēps paſſe plus vſualment fuit iſsint▪ Seignior (en preſence de ſes vicines) priſt le villeine per le teſt diſant, Ieo voile

que ceſt home ſoit frank, & oue ceo il luy miſe auant hors de ſes maines, & per ceo il fuit franke ſans aſcun pluis faire.
                  Manumiſsion impli
                        •
                     ita ſans ceſt parol (Manumittere) eſt quant le ſeignior fait vn obligation a ſon villeine a payer a luy money al vn certain iour, ou luy ſue lou il poit enter ſans ſuit, ou granta al ſon villeine vn annuytie, ou leſſa terre a luy ꝑ fait pur ans, ou pur vie, & en diuers tiels ſemblables caſes, le villeine per ceo eſt fait franke.
               
               
                  Maximes.
                  MAximes ſont les foundations del ley, & les concluſions de reaſon, & ſont cauſes efficient, & certain vniuerſall propoſitions, cy ſure & perfect que ils ne poyent eſte a aſcun temps impeach ou impugne, mes doyent touts foits eſte obſerue & tenus come fort principels & aucthorities de luy meſme, nient obſtant

ils ne poyent eſte proue, per, force de argument ou demonſtration logical, mes font conus per enduction per le yoy de ſence & memorie: Come pur example, il eſt vn Maxime que ſ
                        ••
                     n home ad iſſue deux fits▪ per diuers venters, & le vn de eux purchas terres en fee & moruſt ſans iſſue, lauter fits ne vnques ſerr' ſon heire &c.
                  Item il eſt vn aut maxime, que terres diſcendra del pere al fits 
                        •
                      mes nemy del fits al pere, car ceo eſt vn aſcention &c. Et diuers tiels ſemblables il y ad.
               
               
                  297 Maynour.
                  MAynour, eſt quant vn laron ad emblee
                        •
                     , & eſt purſue oue hue & crie & priſe, ayant ceo troue oueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      luy q̄ il ad emblee ceo eſt appel le maynour▪ Et iſsint nous cōmunem̄t vſe▪ pur dire quant nous trouomus vn feſant de vn illo
                        •
                     al act, que nous luy priſt oueſque le maynor, ou manner.
               
               
                  
                  Maintenance.
                  MAintenance eſt lou aſcun home done ou deliuer a vn auter que eſt plaintife ou defendant en aſcun action, aſcun ſumm̄ dargent ou auter choſe pur mainteiner ſon plee, ou fait extreame labour pur luy quāt il nad riens a ceo faire, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      lauter partie greeue auera vers 
                        •
                     uy vn briefe appel briefe de Maintenance.
               
               
                  Meſne.
                  MEſne, eſt lou le owner del tres ou ten̄ts ceux teigne de vn per certeine ſeruices, & il ceux tenoyt de vn aut ꝑ autiels ou aut ſeruices, la ceſtuy q̄ tient les terres eſt appel tenant perauaile, & ceſtuy de que il teigne eſt appel meſne, & ceſtuy de que le meſne tenoit eſt appel ſeigniour paramont. Et en ceſt caſe ſi le ſeigniour paramount diſtrem̄ le tenaunt pur les ſeruice le meſn̄ q̄ luy doit acquite al ſeign
                        •
                     our paramont, donques le tenaunt auera vn br̄ vers le meſne, que eſt appell briefe de

meſne, & ſi il ne vient pur acquiter le tenant, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le meſne perdra le ſeruice le tenant & ſerr' foriudge de ſeigniorie, & le tenant ſerra tenaunt immediate al chiefe ſeigniour, & fra meſmes les ſeruices & ſuites come le meſne fiſt al ſeigniour.
               
               
                  300 Miſpriſion.
                  MIſpriſion, eſt quant aſcun ſc
                        •
                     it que vn auter ad fait treaſon ou felony, & il ne voile luy diſcouer al Roigne, ou ſa Counſell ou a aſcun Magiſtrate, eins concela ſon offence: Diuers auts offences ſont appel miſpriſion, ſicome vn Chapleine ad fixe vn auncient ſeale dun patent, a vn nouel patent de Non reſidence, & ceo fuit tenꝰ deſte Miſpriſion de treaſon tantū, & nul counterfaiter del ſeale del Roigne.
                  Item, ſi vn auter ſceit money deſtre faux, & port ceo hors de Irelande en Engleterre, & vtter ceo en payment, ceo eſt forſque Miſpriſion

of Treaſon, & nemy Treaſon, & iſsint eſt en diuers tiels ſēblabl' caſes.
                  Et en touts caſes de Miſpriſion de treaſon le partie offender forfaitera ſe
                        •
                      biens a touts iours, & les profits de ſes terres pur terme de ſon vie, & ſon corps al priſon, al pleaſure del Roigne.
                  Et pur Miſpriſion de felony ou treſpas, le offendour ſerra cōmit al priſon, tan
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il ad troue ſuerties ou pledges pur ſon fine, q̄ ſerra aſſeſſe per le diſcretion de les Iuſtices deuant q̄ il fuit conuict.
                  Et nota que en cheſcun treaſon ou felony, eſt include Miſpriſion, & lou aſcun ad fait treaſon ou felony, le Roigne poit cauſer luy deſte indicte & arraigne forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      de miſpriſion ſolement ſil voile. Vide plus de ceo Stamf. lib. 1.
               
               
                  Monſtrance de faits ou Records.
                  MOnſtrance de faits ou Records, eſt ſicōe pur exāple, vn action de debt,

ſoit port enuers vn ſur vn obligation per vn ou per executors &c. la apres que le plaintife ad declare, il doit monſtre ſon obligation, & le executor le teſtament al court, & iſsint eſt de Records.
                  Et le diuerſitie perenter Monſtrance de faites ou Recordes, & oyer de faits & Records, eſt iſsint, il que plede le fait ou recorde, ou declare ſur ceo, a luy il appertaine de monſtre ceo. Et lauter vers que tiel fait ou record eſt plede ou declare, & eſt per ceo deſte charge poyt demaund oyer de ceo fait ou record, que ſon aduerſarie port, ou plead vers luy.
               
               
                  302 Mortdaunceſter.
                  MOrtdaunceſter, vide de ceo deuaunt titulo Coſinage.
               
               
                  303 Monſtrauerunt.
                  MOnſtrauerunt, eſt vn briefe, & giſt pur le tenant en auncient demeſne & eſt direct al

ſeigniour, luy commandant que il ne diſtraine ſon tenant pur faire auter ſeruice q̄ faire ne duiſſēt, & ils poyent auer ceſt briefe direct al viſcont q̄ il ne ſuffer le ſeigniour a diſtreine les dits tenants pur faire auter ſeruice. Auxy ſi le tenants ne poyent eſte en quiet ils poyēt auer vn attachment vers le ſeignior dapperer deuant les Iuſtices, & toutes les noſmes des tenāts ſerront miſe en le br̄ comēt q̄ forſque vn de eux ſoit greue ſolement.
                  Auxi ſi aſcun terre en auncient demeſne ſoit en variance enter les tenants donques le tenant iſsint greue auera vers auter br̄ quod vocatur Droit cloſe ſecund' conſuetudinem manerii, & ceo ſerra touts foits port en le court le Seign̄, & ſur ceo il countera en le nature de quel briefe il voit come ſon caſe giſt, & ceſt briefe ne ſerra remoue ſinon pur graund cauſe ou non power de Court.
                  Auxy ſi le Seignior en

auter lieu hors de auncient demeſne diſtraine ſon tenant de faire auter ſeruice quel ne doit, il auera briefe de droit appel ne Iniuſte vexes, & ceſt vn briefe de droit patent que ſerra trie per battel ou grand aſsiſe.
               
               
                  304 Mortgage ou Morgage.
                  MOrtgage ou Morgage eſt quant vn fait vn feoffement a vn auter ſur tiel condition, que ſi le feoffour paya al feoffee a certain iour xl. li. dargēt, que adonques la feoffour puit reenter &c. en ceo caſe le feoffee eſt appell tenant en Morgage. Et ſicome vn home puit faire feoffemēt en fee en morgage, iſsint il puit faire done en le taile, ou leas pur terme de vie, ou pur terme dans en morgage. Et il ſemble que la cauſe pur q̄ il eſt appel Mortgage, eſt pur ceo q̄ il eſtoit en awerouſt ſi le feoffor voile payer al iour limit le argent ou non, & ſil ne paya paſſe, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      la

terre que il mit en gage ſur condic' de paiment de de le money, eſt ale de luy a routes iours, & iſsint mort a luy ſur condic', & ſil paya le money, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſt le gage mort quant a le tenant ceſt aſcauoir, le feoffee, & pur ceſt cauſe il eſt appel en Latine, Mortuum vadium, come Maſter Littletō dit, ou mortuum vas, cōe ieo penſe.
                  Auxy ſi feoffement ſoit fait en morgage ſur condition que ſi le feoffour paya tiel ſumme a tiel iour &c. Et le feoffour moruſt deuant le iour vncore ſi lheire le feoffour paia m̄ le ſumme a meſm̄ la iour al feoffee, & ſi le feoffee ceo refuſa don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      lheire le feoffour poit enter, mes en tiel caſe ſi ne ſoit aſcun iour de payment expreſſe, donques tiel tender del heire eſt voide pur ceo que quant feoffor moruſt le temps del tender eſt paſſe, ou auterment les heires le feoffor aueront temps del tender a touts iours que ſerra inconuenient q̄ vn

auera vn fee ſimple a luy & a ſes heires q̄ ſerra defeiſable toutes foites a le pleaſure & volunt des auters, mes en le prim̄ caſe le tēps del tender ne fuit expire ꝑ la mort le feffor.
               
               
                  305 Moderata miſericordia.
                  MOderata miſericordia, eſt vn brief & giſt lou home eſt amercy en court Baron ou countie plus que deuer eſte, donques il auer ceſt briefe directe al Vicont ſi ſoit en countie ou al Bailife ſi ſoit en Court baron, eux commandant que il ne luy amerciont, mes eient regard al quantitie de treſpas, & ſils ne font ſur cel briefe, donques iſſera vers eux vn ſicut alias & cauſam nobis ſignifices & apres ceo vn attachement.
               
               
                  306 Mortmaine.
                  MOrtmain eſt lou terres ſont dones a vn meaſon de religiō ou a vn aut company que ſont corporate per le graunt le roy,

don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ceſt terre eſt deuenus en mortmaine, ceſt adire en Angloys a dead hand, & don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le roy ou le ſeign̄ de q̄ le terre eſt tenus poit entercome appiert en leſtatute de religioſis, ideo vide leſtatute, Auxi ſi vn fait feoffement ſur confidence a certaine perſōs al oeps de vn meaſon de religion, ou oeps de aſcun gyld ou fraternitie corporate, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il ſerra dit mortmaine, & il encourge m̄ le paine, vt patet per ſtatut, Anno 15. Richardi 2.
               
               
                  Mulier.
                  MVlier, eſt vn parol vſe en 
                        •
                     r̄e ley, mes come aptment, ieo ne poy dire ne ſcay bien, Car accordāt al proper ſignification, Mulier eſt faemina corrupta, ſicome il eſt vſe per Vlpianus, en vn certeine lieu en tiel maner. Quod ſi ego me virginem emere putarem cū eſſet mulier, emptio non valebit. Per ceo poyes voyer, que mulier eſt vn fēe q̄ ad ew le company dun home:

Mes a relinquiſher le droit ſignificatiō, Mulier eſt priſe en noſtre ley, pur vn q̄ eſt loyalmēt engender & nee: & eſt toutes dits vſe en cōpariſon oueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vn baſtard ſolemēt pur monſtre vn difference parent eux, cōe pur exā
                     ple. Vn hōe ad vn fites ꝑ vn fēe deuant mariage, cē iſſu eſt appel vn baſtard & illoial. Et ap̄s il marry oue le mier del baſtard, & ount vn auter fites, ceſt ſecond fites eſt appel Mulier, ceſt adire loyall, & ſerra heire al ſon pier, mes le auter ne poit eſte heire al aſcun home, pur ceo que il neſt conus ne certeyne, en le iudgemēt del ley, que fuit ſon pere, & pur ceſt cauſe eſt dit, deſte nullius filius, ou filius populi, & iſsint ſans pere accordant al ceſtuy viele verſes.
                  Cui pater eſt populus, pater eſt ſibi nullus & omnis.
                  Cui pater eſt populus, non habet ipſe patrem.
                  Et toutes foites vous

troues ceſt additiō al eux (Baſtarde eigne & mulier puiſne,) quant ils ſount compare enſemble.
               
               
                  Murder.
                  MVrder eſt vn volūtarie occider dun home ſur malice prepenſe, & ſemble de vener de le Saxon paroll Mordren q̄ iſsint ſignifie. Et Mordridus eſt le murderer tāque al ceſt iour ent eux en Saxonie, de q̄ nous auomus mulis de noſtre parolx come ad eſtre ſouent dit. Ou poit eſtre deriue de Mort & dire, quaſi mors dira: Vide St. Ples de le Cor. li. 1.
               
            
            
               N.
               
                  Natiuo habendo.
                  NAtiuo habendo, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou le villein ou niefe dun ſeign̄ eſt ale de luy, donques le ſeign̄ auera cē briefe direct al vicount que il face le ſeignior auer ſon villeine ou niefe oueſque touts ſes chateux. Auxi en ceſt briefe pluſours villeins ou niefs ne parront eſte demands q̄ deux, mes auxy pluſors villeins ou

niefs q̄ voilent enſembl' poient port br̄e De libertate probanda. Auxi ſi vn nief port briefe De libertate probanda auant que le ſeignior port ceſt brief donques le villeine pl' ou niefe ſerra en peace ieſque al venue des Iuſtice, ou auterment ſon briefe ne luy aidera.
                  Auxy ſi vn villeine ad demurre en ancien demeſne ꝑ vn an & vn iour ſans claime del Seignior, dōques il ne poit luy ſciſer deins le dit franchiſe.
               
               
                  310 Ne admittas.
                  NE admittas eſt vn brief direct al Eueſque al ſuit de vn q̄ eſt patron de aſcun Eſgliſe, & il doubta que Leueſque voit collate vn ſon clerke, ou admit vn auter clerke preſent ꝑ auter home al dit benefice: donques il que ceo doubta auera ceſt briefe de inhibiter le vicōt de collater ou admitter aſcun a ſon Eſgliſe.
               
               
                  311 Non omittas propter libertatem.
                  NOn omittas ꝓpter libertatē eſt vn brief, &

giſt lou le Vicont returne ſur briefe a luy direct, que il ad maund al Bailife de tiel fraunchiſe q̄ auer returne des briefes, & il nad ſeruie le briefe, donques le plaintife auera ceſt briefe direct al Vicont, que il luy meſme enter en le franchiſe & execute le briefe le Roy.
                  Auxy le Vicont garnera le Bailife que il ſoit deuāt les Iuſtices al iour contenus en le briefe, & ſil ne viēt & luy acquite, donques touts les briefes iudicials que paſſeront hors del Court le Roy durāt meſme le plee, ſerront briefes de Non omittas &c. & le Vicont ferra execution de eux pendant cel plee.
               
               
                  Negatiua pregnans.
                  NEgatiua pregnans, eſt quant vn action ou informatiō, ou tiel ſemblable eſt port enuers vn, & le defendant plede en barre del action, ou auterment vn negatiue plee, que neſt cy ſpecial

aunſwere al action, mes que il enclude auxy vn affirmatiue. Come pur example: Si en brief de Entre in caſu prouiſo, port per ceſtuy en le reuerſion ſur alienatiō per le tenant pur vie, ſuppoſant que il ad alien en fee (que eſt vn forfaiture de ſon eſtate) & le tenant al briefe dit, que il nad alien in fee, ceſt vn negatiue, en que eſt enclude vn affirmatiue: car nient obſtant il ſoit veray que il nad alien en fee, vncore il poit eſtre que il ad fait vn eſtate en taile (le quel eſt auxy vn forfaiture) & donques le entrie de celuy en le reuerſion eſt loyal &c.
                  Item en vn Quare impedit, le Roigne fiſt title de preſenter a vn Prebēd, ratione que les temporalties de leueſcherie ſueront en ſa maines per le mort de W. nuper Epiſcopi &c. Le defendant diſt q̄ ne voida pas eſteants les temporalties en les maines des Roign ꝑ le mort de W. ceſt vn

negatiue preignans, car il poit eſtre en les mains del Roigne, auterment que per le mort de W. & i
                        •
                      ſu
                        •
                     fiſt al Roigne ſi ſoit en ſa mains &c.
                  Iſsint eſt lou vn Information fuit port in Scaccario vers I. S. pur ceo q̄ il achate laines enter ſhering temps & le Aſſumption tali anno de I. N. Le defendant dit quod non emit de I. N. come il eſt alleage &c. ceo eſt appel vn Negatiue preignans, car 
                        •
                     il ceo achate de auter, vncore il eſt culpable pur le achater.
               
               
                  Ne iniuſte vexes.
                  NE iniuſte vexes, Vide de ceo deuant titulo Monſtrauerunt.
               
               
                  Niefe.
                  NIefe, eſt vn 
                        •
                     eme que eſt bonde, ou vn villeine feme, mes ſi el marie vn franke home, el eſt per ceo fait franke, pur ceo que el & 
                        •
                     on baron ſont forſque vn perſon en ley, & el coment eſtre de meſme le nature & condition en ley a touts intents come ſon baron.

Mes ſa baron eſt frank a touts intents ſans aſcun condition en ley, ou auterment: & iſsint per conſequens, le feme couient eſtr̄, & eſt frank accordāt al nature de ſō frank baron, & donques ſi el ſoit vn foits frank & clerem̄t diſcharge de villeinage a touts intents, el ne poit eſtre nief apres ſans eſpecial act fait per luy, come diuorce ou conuſans en court de record, & ceo eſt en fauour de libertie, & pur ceo vn frank feme ne ſerra villein per priſel del villein al ſon baron: Mes lour iſſue ſerra villeines come lour pere fuit, que eſt contrarie a le ley Ciuil, car la eſt dit, partus ſequitur ventrem.
                  Bondage ou villenage ad ſon commencement enter les Hebrewes, & ſon originall proceeding de Chanaā le fites de Cham, que ꝑur ceo que il auoit deriſee ſon pere Noe gyſant diſſolutement quant il fuit ebriee, fuit puny en ſon fites Chanaan oueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      penaltie de bondage.
               
               
                  
                  Nihil dicit.
                  NIhil dicit, eſt quant vn action eſt port enuers vn home, & le defendant appeare, le plaintife declare, & le defendant ne voile reſponder, ou plede al action, & no mainteine ſon plee, mes fait defaulte, ore ſur ceſt default, il ſerra condempne, quia nihil dicit.
               
               
                  Niſi prius.
                  NIſi prius, eſt vn briefe iudicial, & giſt quant l
                        •
                     nqueſt eſt empanell & returne deuant les Iuſtices en banke, donques le plaintife ou defendant puvt auer ceſt briefe directe al vicont, luy commaundant que il face venir la pais deuant les Iuſtices en meſme le county a lour venir la deſtre detmine, & ceo pur eaſement denqueſt.
               
               
                  Nomination.
                  NOmination, eſt ou vne poit en droit de ſon mannour ou auterment nominate, & appoint vn able Clerke, ou home al vn Parſonage, Vicarage,

ou tiel ſpiritual promotion. Et nota que ceſt nomination doit eſtre al auter que lordinarie, que auter luy preſentera al Ordinarie.
               
               
                  318 Nonabilitie.
                  NOnabilitie, eſt lou vn action eſt port vers vn, & le defendantdit que le plaintif eſt non able de ſuer aſcun action, & demand iudgment ſil ſerra reſpond. il y ad vi cauſes de nonabilitie ē le pl', cōe ſil ſo
                        •
                     t vtlage, ou vne alien nee, mes ceſt diſability eſt ē actions reals & mixt ſolement & non en actions perſonals, ſinon q̄ il ſoit vn alien enemy, ou cōdempne en premunire, ou profeſſe en vn Abbey, Priorie ou Friarie, ou excommenge, ou vn villaine, & ſue ſon Seigniour, mes ceſt darreme neſt plee pur auter que neſt Seigniour al villain. Vide plus de ceo Littl. lib. 2. cap. 11.
               
               
                  Nude Contract.
                  NVde Contract, ou nude promiſe, eſt lou vn

home bargaine ou vende ſes tres, ou biens, ou promiſe pur doner al auter money, ou vn chiual, ou a edifier vn meaſon, ou faire tiel choſe a tiel iour & nul recompence appoint a luy pur le faire de ceo. Come ſi vn dit al auter, ieo vende ou done a vous touts mes terres ou biens. Et la eſt nul choſe appoint, aſsigne, ou agree, que lauter donera, ou payera pur ceo, iſsint que il nad quid pro quo, ceſt vn nude contract & voide en ley, & pur non performance de ceo nul action giſt, car ex nudo pacto non oritur actio.
               
               
                  Nuſauns.
                  NVſans, eſt lou aſcun home leuye aſcun mure, ou eſtop aſcun ewe ou fait aſcun choſe ſur ſon terre demeſne a noyance ſon prochain, ceſtuy que eſt grief auera ent vn briefe appell Aſsiſe de Nuſance. Auxy ſi il que fiſt le nuſaunce alien ſa terre a vn auter, donques ceſt brief ſerra port

deuers ambideux come appiert per leſtatut weſtminſter, 2. cap. 24.
               
               
                  321 Nuper obijt.
                  NVper obiit, eſt vn br̄, & giſt lou vn ad pluſours heirs, ceſt aſcauoir, pluſours filesou pluſours fits ſi ſoit en gauelkind ē Kent, & deuie ſeiſie & vn heire entra en tout la tre, donque les auters q̄ ſont tenus dehors, aueront cē br̄ vers le coheire que eſt deins. Mes brief de Rationabili parte giſt en tyel caſe ou launceſtour fuit vn foits ſeyſie, & ne mo
                     
                        •
                     uſt ſeiſie de poſſeſsion, mes del reuerſion.
               
            
            
               O.
               
                  322 Oredelfe.
                  ORedelfe, eſt lou vne clayme de auer le ore que eſt troue en son ſoile ou terre.
               
               
                  323 Outfangthiefe.
                  OVtfangthiefe, hoc eſt, quod latrones de tra veſtra, vel feodo veſtro, extra trā
                      veſtrā, vel feodū veſtrū, capti cū latrocinio, ad curiā veſtram reuertā
                     rur, & ibidem iudicentur.
               
               
                  
                  Oweltie.
                  OWeltie, eſt quant il y ad ſeigniour, meſne & tenant, & le tenant tient del meſne ꝑ meſm̄ les ſeruices que le meſne tient ouſter de le ſeigniour paramount. Come ſi le tenant tient del meſne per homage, fealtie, & xx. s. de rent annuelment, & le meſne tiēt ouſter de le ſeigniour paramont ꝑ homage, fealtie, & xx. s. rēt auxy, ceſt appel oweltie de ſeruices.
               
               
                  Oier de Records & faits &c.
                  OIer de records & faits, ē ſicōe pur example, vn action de det ſoit port enuers vn hōe ſur vn obligation, & le defendant appere al action, & donques pray que il poitoier obligation oueſque que le plaintife charge luy.
                  Iſsint eſt quant executors port vn action de dette, & le defendant demaunde oyer del teſtament: ſur ceſt demand il ſerra lye al defē
                     dant. Mes ſil ſoit en vn auter terme, ou apres

que le defendant ad imparle, donques il n
                        •
                     uera le oyer Et iſsint come eſt dit de faits eſt deſte intēd de Records que ſont alledge enuers luy.
               
               
                  326 Oier & Terminer.
                  OIer & Terminer, eſt br̄ appel in Latin de Audiendo & terminando, & giſt q
                        •
                     t aſcun graund ou ſodein inſurrectiō eſt falt ou aſcun auter ſodein tranſgreſsion que require haſty reformation, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le roy directera vn commiſsion a certain gents & Iuſtices de audiendo & terminando.
                  Nota que les Iuſtices de Aſſiſe ont vn commiſſion doier & determiner direct al cux, & diuers auters inhabitants deins les Counties as queux lour circuite extend dont cheſcun de les Iuſtices de Aſsiſe ſont del Quorum, pur le meulx oier & determiner de diuers offences queux poi
                        •
                     nt a vener in lour circuites quels ſanscel Commiſsion eux ne poient faire.
               
            
            
               
               P.
               
                  Pape.
                  PApe, eſt vn auncient noſme fauxement arrogate, ou hautm̄t vſurpe per le Eueſque de le ſole Citie de Rome ē Italie, & eſt communem̄t appel en Anglois le Pope, vn noſm̄ veram̄t mult frequēnt en nr̄e aunc annels liūs, ſpecialm̄t ē les tēps de ceux Royes, queux grandm̄t abandonās lour imperial aucthority, & abaſāts eux meſmes mult debaſe lour eſtate, ne fueront hont de ſuffer vn alien & outlandiſh Eueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      que enhabite ouſter cynq̄ diz cēt miles de eux, deſtre ſoueraigne dehaut eux ē lour dominions demeſne, & de toller de eux non ſolem̄t le diſpoſition de certain petire trifles de nul accōpt, mes auxi le nomination de Archieueſques, eueſq̄s, Abbes, deanes, prouoſts, appropriations de benefices, preſentatiōs al parſonages, vicarages, & gen̄alm̄t de touts ſpirituall perſons a lour preferm̄ts

aſcun temps per laps, aſcun temps per prouiſion ou auterment, per que le praerog. del royes fuit moult abridg deins lour realmes demeſne, Pur le repreſsion de quel diūs ſtatutes ont eſtr̄ fait, mes nul ſufficient remedy tā
                     q̄ roy H. le 8. tout ouſterment reiect cel iuge de luy & ſes ſubiects.
               
               
                  328 Per que ſeruitia.
                  VIde de ceo apres, titulo Quid iuris clamat.
               
               
                  329 Parceners.
                  PArceners, ſont ſolon
                     
                        •
                     que le cours de common ley, & ſolonque le cuſtome. Parceners ſolō
                     que le common ley ſont lou vn enheritor ad iſſue forſque files & deuie, & les tenemēts deſcendont a les files, donques ils ſont appel parceners, & ſont forſques vn heire. Meſme le ley eſt, ſi neyt aſcune iſſue, & que ſes freres ſerroyent ſes heirs, Mes ſi home ad forſque vn ſile el neſt dit parcener, mes el eſt dit la file, & la heire. Et ſi ne ſont

files ne ſoers les terres deſcenderont a les auters, & ils ſont appels parceners. Auxi quant terres deſcendont a diuers parceners, els poyent faire partition enter eux per agreemente, mes ſi aſcun deux ne voilent faire donque lauter ou les auters aueront vn briefe de Participatione ſacienda direct al vic' que ferra partition enter eux per le ſerement de xii. loyals hōes de ſa bailiwik. Auxi partition per agreement poit eſte fait per le ley, auxibien per parol ſans fait come per fait. Et 
                        •
                      ſont de plein age, le partition touts iours demurrera, & ne ſeria vnq̄; defete. Mes ſi les terres ſont a eux in le taile, & comēt q̄ ils ſont cōcludes durāt lour vies, vnc' liſſue ceſty que ad le meinder part in value poit diſagreer a le ꝑtition & enter & occupier in cōen oueſq̄ 
                     laut part. Et auxy ſi les barons des parceners font partition, quant le baron deuy, la feme poit diſagreer

a la partic'. Auxi ſi le parcen̄ q̄ eſt deins age fait ꝑtition, quant el vient a ſon pleine age, el poit diſagreer. Mes il couiēt de bn̄ garder quāt el vient a ſon plein age, q̄ el ne preigne touts les profits a ſon vſe demeſne des terres q̄ fueront a luy allots car donques el ſoy agrea a le partition, & le pleine age ſerra toutes foits de ceo intend al age de xxi. ans.
                  Auxi ſi ſont diuers Parceners q̄ ont faite partitiō enter eux, & le part de vn ſoit recouer vers luy ꝑ title loyal, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      el compeller̄ les auters de faire nouel partition.
                  Auxy ils ſont Parcen̄s ſolonques le cuſtome, lou home eſt ſeiſie des terres en gauelkind cōe in Kent & auters lieus fraunchiſes, & ad iſſue diuers fits & deuie, donques les fites ſont parceners per le cuſtome.
               
               
                  330 Partition.
                  PArtition eſt vn diuiſion de terres diſcendus ꝑ le common ley, ou per cuſtome

perenter coheires ou parceners, ou ils ſont deux al mein
                        •
                     s, ſoyent ils fits, files, ſoers, aunts, ou auterm̄t de kinne al aunceſtour de que le terre diſcend al eux.
                  Et ceſt partition eſt fait quatuor voves pur le plus part, de que trois ſont al pleaſure & per agreement perenter eux, le quart eſt per compulſion.
                  Vn partition per agreement eſt quant ils meſmes deuide le tre equalment en tants partes, come la ſont de eux coparceners, & cheſcun de 
                        •
                     ſlier vn ſhare ou part, le eigne primerment, & iſsint lun apres lauter, come ils ſont de age, ſinon que le eigne per conſent fait le partition, donques le election appertient al procheine, & iſsint al eigne darreinment, accordant come il eſt di
                        •
                      Cuius eſt partitio, alterius eſt electio.
                  Vn auter partition per agreement eſt quant ils eſlient certeine de lour

amies de faire diuiſion pur eux.
                  Le tierce partic' ꝑ agrement eſt ꝑ trahens de lots iſsint: Primerm̄t de deuider le terre en tants des partes come la ſont parceners: don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      a ſcriber cheſcun part ſeueralment en vn petit ſcrol ou peece de paper ou parchment, & de m
                        •
                     tter ceux ſcrols cloſeen vn hat, cap, ou aut tiel ſēblable choſe, & dō
                     ques cheſcū parcener, vn ap̄s aut cōe ils ſont de age a traher hors de ceo vn peece ou ſcrol en que eſt eſcript vn part del terre q̄ per ceſt trahens eſt ore ſeueralmēt allotte al cux en fee ſimple.
                  Le quart partition que eſt ꝑ compulſion, eſt lou vn ou aſcun de les coparceners voilent auer partition, & auts ne voilent agreer a ceo, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ceux q̄ iſsint voylent auer partition poyent porter vn br̄e de Partitione facienda enuers les auts q̄ux ne voylent faire partition, ꝑ vertue de q̄l ils ſerront compel de departer &c.
                  
                     En Kent lou les terres ſont de Gauelkinde nature, eſt appel a ceſt iour noſtre partition Shifting, il meſme parol q̄ les Saxons vſe, noſmement Shiftan, que ſignifie pur faire partitiō perenter coheirs, & pur aſsigner a cheſcun de eux lour portiō, In Latine eſt appel Herciſcere.
                  Partition auxy poit eſtr̄ fait per ioyntenants ou tenants en common per lour aſſent, per fait enter eux, ou per briefe per les ſtatutes de 31. H. 8. cap. 1. & 32. H. 8. cap. 32.
               
               
                  Parties.
                  PArties al fine ou fait, ſont ceux queux ſont noſmes en faits ou fines come parties a ceo, come ceux queux leuie le fine, & auxy ils a que le fine eſt leuie. Et ils que font vn fait de feoffement, & ils a que il eſt fait ſont appelles parties al fait, & iſsint en auters ſemblables caſes.
                  Nota que ſi vn Indenture ſoit fait enter deux

come parties a ceo en le commencement, & en le fait vn de eux graunta ou leſſa vn choſe al vn auter & vn que neſt noſme en le commencement, il neſt partie al fait, ne prendra riens per ceo
               
               
                  332 Patron.
                  PAtron eſt celuy que ad le aduowſon de parſonage, vicarage, frāk chappel, ou tiels ſemblable ſpiritual promotions appertient a ſon mannor, ou auterment en groſſe, & per ceo poit ou doit doner meſme le benefice, ou preſent a ceo, quant & cy toſt que il deuient voide. Et ceſt eſteant patron ou patronage ad commencement pur le pluis part per vn de eux trois voies, noſmement ou ratione fundationis, pur ceo que le patron ou ſes anceſtors ou ceux de que il claime fueront founders ou edifiers de le Eſgliſe, ou ratione dotationis, pur ceo q̄ ils endow ou done terres al ceo pur maintenance:

ou autm̄t ratione fūdi, pur ceo q̄ le Eſgliſe fuit miſe ou edifie ſur lour ſoile ou terre: Et diuers temps per reaſon de ils touts trois.
               
               
                  Perquiſites.
                  PErquiſites ſont aduantages & profits queux vient al vn mānor ꝑ caſualtie, & non annualment, come eſcheates, hariots, reliefes, waiues, eſtraies, forfaitures, amerciamēts en courts, gardes, marriages, biens & terres purchaſe ꝑ villeins de meſme le manor, fines del copyholds, & diuers ſembl' choſes queux ne ſont certain mes happē ꝑ chance, aſcun temps pluis often que a auter temps. Vide Perkins fol. 20. & 21.
               
               
                  Perambulatione facienda.
                  PErambulatione facienda eſt vn br̄, & giſt lou deux ſeigniories giſont vn pres lauter, & aſcū encrochment eſt fait per long temps, donques per aſſent de ambideux ſeigniors le vicont prendera oueſque luy les parties & les vicines, & ferront

perambulation, & ferroit les mets come ils fuerōt adeuant, mes ſi vn ſeign̄ incroche ſur lauter & il ne voile faire perābulation, donq̄s le ſeign̄ iſsint greue auera briefe vers lauter, q̄ eſt appel de rationabilibus diuiſis.
               
               
                  Petit Cape.
                  PEtit Cape eſt vn briefe, & giſt quant aſcun action real. s. de plee de terre eſt port, & le tenant appeare, & puis fait default, donque iſſera ceſt briefe de petit cape de ſeiſer les terres en mayne le Roy, mes ſil ne appera, mes fait defaut al primer ſomons, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iſſera vn graund cape, & pur tiel defaut le tenaunt perdra la terre, mes ſil gage ſon ley de non ſummōs, il ſauera ſon defaut, & donques il puit plede oueſque le demaundant. Et en graunde Cape le tenaunt ſerra ſommō pour reſpō
                     der al default & ouſter al demaundant, mes in petit Cape il ſerra ſummon pur reſpōder al default ſolement, & nemye

al demandant, & eſt appell petite cape pur ceo que il ad minus en cel briefe, que en lauter.
               
               
                  Petit ſerieantie.
                  TEner ꝑ petite ſerieantie eſt ſicome vn hōe tient de roy terres ou tenem̄ts, rendant a luy vn cuttell, vn eſcue, vn ſete, vn arck ſauns corde, ou auter ſeruice ſembl', a la volunt le primer feoffor. Et la nappent, gard, mariage ne reliefe. Et nota que home ne puit tener per graund ſerieantie, ne ꝑ petite ſerieantie, ſi non del Roy.
               
               
                  Plaintife.
                  PLaintife, eſt celuy q̄ ſue ou cōplaine en vn aſſiſe, ou en vn actiō perſonall, come en vn actiō de det, treſpas, diſceit, & detinue, & tiels ſemblables.
               
               
                  Pleading.
                  PLeadings, ſont appell
                        •
                      toutes actes del parties al ſute apres le count ou declaration, noſement ceo que eſt conteyne en le barre, replication, & reioynder, & non ceo containe en le coūt meſme, & pur ceo defaultes

en le matter del count, ne ſont cōpriſe deins miſpleading, ou inſufficient pleading, ne ſont remedy ꝑ le ſtatute de Ieofailes, 32. H. 8. Mes ſolement ceo miſpleading ou inſufficient pleading, commit en le barre, replication, & reioynder, ſont la prouide.
               
               
                  339 Poſt diſſeiſin.
                  POſt diſſeiſin, Vide de ceo deuant in le title Aſſiſe.
               
               
                  340 Poſſeſſion.
                  POſſeſsion, eſt dit deux voies, ou actual poſſeſſion, ou poſſeſsion en ley.
                  Actuall poſſeſsion, eſt quant vn home enter en fait en terres, ou tenem̄ts, a luy diſcende, ou auterment. Poſſeſsion en ley eſt quant terres, ou tenementes ſont diſcend al vn hōe, & il nad vncore realment, actualment, & en fait enter en eux. Et il eſt appell poſſeſsion en ley, pur ceo que en le oile, & conſideration del ley, il eſt penſe deſte en poſſeſſion, entant que il eſt tenaunt

a cheſcun action que aſcun voet ſuer concernāt meſmes les terres ou tenements.
               
               
                  Poundes.
                  POundes, ſont en deux ſorts, lun poundes oūt, les auters poundes cloſe.
                  Pound ouert, eſt cheſcun lyeu en que vn diſſtreſſe eſt myſe, ſoit ceo common pound, tiels que ſont en cheſcun ville ou Seigniorie, ou ſoit ceo backſide, court, yarde, paſture, ou auterment quecunque, lou le owner del diſtreſſe poit vener a doner eux viande ſauns offēce pur lour eſteaunt la, ou ſon vener. la.
                  Pound cloſe, eſt tyel lieu, lou le owner del diſtreſſe ne poit vener a don̄ eux vyande ſans offence, come en vn cloſe, meſon, ou quecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      auter lieu.
               
               
                  Preamble.
                  PReamble ad ſon noſme de le prepoſition (pre) deuaunt, & le verbe (Ambulo) pur va, iſſint ioint enſeble, ils font vn cōpound verbe de le primer coiugation (Preambulo)

pur vaer deuaunt, & de ceo le primer part ou commencement dun acte eſt appell le preamble de act, le quel preamble eſt vn cliffe de ouerer les ments del feſors del act, & les miſchiefes que ils intend de remedy per ceo, come pur example leſtatute fait al W. le primer le 37. cap. que done attaint, le preamble de que eſt iſsint. Pur ceo que aſcuns gents de la terre doutent meins faux ſerement faire, que faire ne duiſſent, per que multes des gentes ſont diſherites & perdēt lour droit, puruiewe eſt &c.
               
               
                  343 Premunire.
                  PRemunire eſt vn brief, & giſt lou aſcun home ſue aſcun auter in court chriſtian pur aſcun choſe que eſt determinable en le court le Roy, & ceo eſt ordeine per certein ſtatutes, & graund puniſhmēt a ceo ordeine come appiert per meſme les ſtatutes. s. que il ſerra hors de protection le Roy, & q̄ ſoit mis en priſon

ſans Baile ou mainpriſe tanque ils ad fayt fine al volunt le Roy, & que ſes terres & chateux ſerront forfaites ſil ne veigne deins deux moys. Auxi lour prouiſors, procurators, attourneys, executors, notaries & mainteners ſerront puniſh en meſme le maner, ideo vide Statutum. Auxy aſcuns diont que ſi vn Clerke ſue auter home in court de Rome pur choſe ſpiritual lou il poit auer remedie deins ceſt realm in Court ſon Ordinarie que il ſerra in caſe del ſtatute.
                  Et ſur diuers auters offences eſt impoſe per ſtatutes depuis fait le penaltie que eux incurre queux fuer attaintes en premunire, Come ꝑ 13. El. ca. 8. ceux que aidont a faire corrupt bargaine ſur que vſurie eſt reſerue ouſter x. li pur le hundreth en lan &c.
               
               
                  Precipe in capite.
                  PRecipe in capite, eſt vn briefe & giſt lou le tenant que tient de Roy

in chiefe, come de ſa Corone & il eſt deforce dō
                     ques il auera ceſt briefe, & ceſt briefe ſerra cloſe & ſerra plede in le common banke. Auxi ſi aſcun tenant que tient daſcun Seigniour ſort deforce, luy couient ſuer brief de droit patent que ſerra determyne in le Court le Seignior, mes ſi le terr̄ ſoit tenns de Roy, le briefe de droit patent ſerra port in Court de Roy, & ceſt briefe poit eſte remoue de la Court le Seigniour en la Countie per vn tolt, & de la countie in commen bāke per vn pone. Ideo vide deuant titulo Droit.
               
               
                  345 Preſcription.
                  PReſcription eſt quant vn perſon claime aſcun choſe pur ceo que il, ſes aunceſtors ou predeceſſors, ou ceux que eſtate il ad ont ew ou vſe aſcun choſe dont nul memory court al contrary.
                  Mes ne poit preſcribe encounter vn eſtatute ſinon que il ad auter ſtatute

que ſerue pur luy.
               
               
                  Preſentment.
                  PReſentment eſt equiuocū: lun eſt preſentment al Eſgliſe quel quant aſcun home que ad droit a don̄ aſcun benefice ſpiritual, & noſme le perſon al Eueſque a que il voit le doner, & fait vn letter al eueſque pur luy, ceo eſt vn preſentation ou p̄ſentment, Mes ſi diuers coheires ne poient accorder en preſentment le
                        ••
                     ne ſerra admit, mes de iointenants & tenants in common, ſils ne accordent, deins les ſize moys, le Eueſque preſentera per laps.
                  Lauter eſt vn preſentment ou informatiō per aſcun Iurie en vn Court deuant aſcun officer la q̄ ad aucthority de puniſhe
                        •
                      aſcun offence fait contra le ley.
               
               
                  Pretenſed Droit ou Title.
                  PRetenſed droit ou Title, eſt lou vn ē en poſſ. de 
                        •
                     erres, ou tenements, & vn auter que eſt hors de poſſeſsion, claime ceo,

ou ſue pur ceo. Ore le p̄
                     tenſed droit, ou title, eſt dit en luy q̄ iſſint ſue ou claime. Et ſil puis vient a le poſſeſsiō de meſme les terres, ou tenements, ſon droit ou title eſt annex al terre & poſſeſsion, & mēt donque appel droit.
               
               
                  348 Priuie ou Priuitie, & Priuities.
                  PRiuie ou Priuitie, eſt lou vn leaſe eſt fait a tener a volūt. pur ans, pur vie, ou vn feoffement en fec, & en diuers auts caſes, ore pur ceo de ceo q̄ ad paſſe ꝑenter ceux parties ils ſount appell priuies, en reſpect de eſtrangers perent queux nul tiel conueiances ad eſtre.
                  Auxy ſi ſoit Seyguiour & tenaunt, & le tenant tient del Seigniour per certeine ſeruice, il y ad vn priuitie perenter eux per cauſe de tenure, & ſi le tenaunt ſoit diſſeiſie per vn eſtraunger, il ad nul priuitie perenter le diſſeyſour & le Seignior, mes le priuitie vncore demurt perent le Seign̄ & le tenant que eſt

diſſeiſie, & le Seigniour auowera ſur luy pur ceo que il eſt ſon tenaunt en droit, & en le iudgement del ley. Priuies ſont en diuers ſortes come noſment, priuies en eſtate, priuies en fait, priuies en ley, priuies en droit, & priuies en 
                        •
                     ange.
                  Priuies en eſtate, eſt lon vn leaſe eſt fait del mannor de Dale al A. pur vie, le remainder al B. en fee, la & A. & B. ſont priuies en eſtate, car lour eſtates fueront ambideux al vn temps.
                  Et iſsint eſt en le primer caſe cy, ou vn leaſe eſt fait al volunt, pur vie, ou ans, ou vn feoffement en fee, les leſſees ou ſeffees ſont appel priuies en eſtate, & iſsint ſont lour heires &c.
                  Priuies en fait eſt lou vn leaſe eſt fait pur vie, & apres per vn auter fait, le reuerſion eſt graunt al vn eſtraunger en fee, c
                        •
                     ſt grauntee del reuerſion eſt appel priuie en fait, pur ceo que il ad le reuerſion per fait.
                  
                     Priuie en ley eſt lou il eſt Seigniour & tenant, le tenaunt leſſa le tenancie pur vie & moruſt ſauns heire & le reuerſion eſcheate al Seignior, il eſt dit priuie en ley, pur ceo que il ad ſon eſtate ſolement per le ley, ceſt adire per eſcheat.
                  Priuie en droit eſt lou vn poſſeſſe dun termepur ans, graunta ſon eſtate al vn auter ſur condition, & fait ſes executors & moruſt, ore ceux executors ſont priuies en droit, car ſi le condition ſoit enfreint, & ils entront en le terre, ils aueront ceo en le droit de lour teſtatour, & a ſon vſe.
                  Priuie de ſanke eſt le heire del feoffor ou donor &c.
                  Item ſi vn fine ſoit leuie, les heirs de celuy que leuie le fine ſont appell priuies.
               
               
                  349 Priuiledges.
                  PRiuiledges ſont liberties & franchiſes grant al vn office, lieu, ville, ou mannor, per la graund charter del Roigne, letters

patents, ou acte de Parliament, come Tolle, Sake, Socke, Infangthiefe, Outfangthiefe, Turne tolle, Oredelfe, & diuers tiels ſemblables, pur queu
                        •
                      veyes en lour proper titles & lieux.
               
               
                  Proces.
                  PRoces, ſont les briefes & precepts q̄ iſſ
                        •
                     nt fur le original: Et in actions reals & perſonels ſont diuers ſortes de proces, car en actiōs reals proces eſt grand Cape deuant apparance: ideo vide de c
                        •
                     o en le title petite Cape.
                  Mes en actions perſonals, come en det treſpas ou detinue, le proces eſt vn diſtres, & ſi le Vicont returne Nihil habet in balliua &c. donq̄s le proces ē alias Capias & Pluries, & vn Exigent, & ils ſont appels Capias ad reſpondendum. Auxy lexigent ſerra v. foites proclaimes, & ſi le ꝑtie 
                        •
                     appeare il ſerra vtl
                        •
                     ge
                        •
                      Mes en diuers actions 
                        •
                     ont diuers manners de proces, q̄ pluis longe eſt declare in Natura breuium.
                  
                     Auxy ſ
                        •
                     nt diuers auters proces apres apparance quant les parties ſont al iſſue pur faire lenqueſt apperer, come vn brief de Venire facias, & ſils ne apperont al iour, dōques vn brief de Habeas corp. Iurat, & apres vn br̄e de Diſtring iurat.
                  Auxy ſont diuers auters proces apres iudgm̄t, come Capias ad ſatisfacicndū, Capias vtlagatū, & Capias ad valentiam &c.
                  Mes Capias ad ſatisfaciendum giſt lou vn home eſt condempne in aſcun det ou damages, donques il ſerra arreſt per cē briefe & mis en priſon ſans baile ou mainpriſe, tan
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il ad pay le det & les damages.
                  Mes Capias vtlagatum giſt lou vn eſt vtlage dō
                     ques il ſerra priſe per tiel br̄e, & mis en priſon ſans baile ou mainpriſe, pur ceo que il ad fait contempt enconter le ley.
                  Capias ad valentiā giſt lou ieo ſue implede de certain terre, & 
                        •
                     eo vouch a garrantie vn auter, &

il ne ſcauoit pas barre le demandant, iſsint que le demandant recouer vers moy, donques ieo recouera tant in value vers le vouchee, & donques iſſera ceſt brief.
                  Auxy ſont auters proces & briefs iudicials, cōe Fieri facias, Scire facias, & pluſors auters: & ideo vide ceux ē lour titles.
               
               
                  Prochein amy.
                  PRochein amy, eſt communem̄t priſe pur Gardian en ſocage, & eſt lou vn home ſeiſi de terres tenus en ſocage moruſt, ſon iſſue deins age de 14: ans, donques le prochein amy, ou prochein de ſank a que les terres ne poient vener ou diſcender, auera le gard del heire, & del terre, al vſe ſolement del heire, tanque il vient al age de xiiii. ans: Et donques a tiel ans, le heire poit enter & luy ouſte, & auer luy de accompter: Mes en ceſt accompt il auera allowance put touts reaſonable coſts & expē
                     ces beſtowe, ou ſur le heir ou ſon terre.
                  
                     Et le prochein amy ou procheine de ſanke a que le inheritāce ne poit diſcender eſt iſsint deſte entende: Si les terres diſcende al heir de ſon pere, ou aſcun del ſanke del parte ſon pere, donques le mere ou auter del part le mere, ſont appelle procheine de ſanke a que le enheritance ne poit diſcender, car deuant que il iſsint diſcendera, il pluis toſt eſcheatera al ſeignior de que il eſt tenus.
                  Et iſsint eſt deſte entē
                     de lou les terres vient al heire de ſa mere, ou aſcun auter de ſanke del part ſa mere, donques le pere ou auter del parte ſon pere ſont appell le procheine de ſanke a que le enheritaunce ne poit diſcend, mes pluis toſt eſchetera al Seigniour de que il eſt tenus.
                  Auterment procheine amy eſt celuy q̄ appiert en aſcun Court pur vn enfant que ſue aſcun action, & que 
                        ••
                     de le enfant de purſuer ſon ſuit: dont vide les ſtatutes de

W. 1. cap. 47. & W. 2. cap. 15. que vn enfant ne poit faire Atturney, mes le Court poit admitter le procheine amye pur le plaintife, & vn gardian pur le enfant def. come ſon Atturney.
               
               
                  Procedendo.
                  PRocedendo, eſt vn br̄e & giſt lou aſcun action eſt ſue en vn Court, que eſt remoue a vn pluis hault, cōe al Chauncery, banke le roy, ou commō banke, per bre de Priuilege ou Cerciorare, & ſi le defendant ſur le matt monſtre nad cauſe de priuilege, ou ſi le matter in le bill ſur que le cerciorare iſſuit ne ſoyt bien proue, donques la plaintife auera ceſt briefe de Procedédo pur remaunder le matter al primer baſſe court, & la deſtre determine.
               
               
                  Prohibition.
                  PRohibition, eſt vn br̄e & giſt lou home eſt implede in court Chriſtian de choſe que ne touch

matrimony ne teſtament ne meeremēt diſmes, mes q̄ touch le corone noſtre ſeigniour le Roy, & ceſt briefe ſerra direct auxibien al partie come al Iudge ou ſon officiall, de eux prohibite que il ne purſue ouſter. Mes ſi il appeare apres a les Iudges temporal q̄ le matter eſt deſtre determine en le ſpiritual Court, & nemy en le Court temporall, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le partie auera vn br̄ de Conſultation, commandant les Iudges de le Court ſpiritual de proceder en la primer plee.
               
               
                  354 Protection.
                  PRotection, eſt vn briefe & giſt lon home voit paſſer ouſter le meare en le ſeruice le Roy, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il auera ceſt briefe, & ꝑ ceſt brief il ſerra quite de tout maner des plees enter luy & aſcun auter perſon, except plees de dower, Quare impedit, aſsiſe de nouel diſſeiſin, vlti
                        •
                     e preſentationis & attain
                        •
                     s, & plees deuaunt Iuſtice in eire. Mes ſont deux

briefe de protection, vn Cum clauſula volumus, & lauter Cum clauſula nolumus, vt appert in la Regiſter. Auxy protection ne ſerra allowe en aſcun plee commence deuant le date de la protection ſi ne ſoit in vyages ou le Roy meſme paſſa, ou auters vyages royals, ou in meſſage le Roy pur beſoin de Realme. Auxy protection ne ſerra allow pur vitailes achates pur le vyage, dont le protection fait mention, ne in plees de treſpaſſe ou de contracts fait puis le date de meſme le protection. Mes nota que aſcun poit attacher ou commencer aſcun action reall vers ceſtuy que ayt tiel protection, & en ceo proceder tanque le defendant eigne & monſtre ſon ꝓtection en le Court, & ayt ceo allowe, & donques ſon plee ou ſuit ſerra miſe ſans iour. Mes ſi apres il appiert q̄ le partie que ad le protection ne va en le beſoigne pur que il cir, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le demā
                     dant

auera vn repeale de ceo. Et ſil va & returne apres le beſoigne ſine, le demandant auera vn reſummons de recontinue le former ſuit.
               
               
                  355 Proteſtation.
                  PRoteſtation eſt vn form̄ de pleading quant aſcū ne voyt directm̄t affirmer ne directment denier aſcū choſe quel eſt alledge per auter, on q̄ il m̄ alledge. Et eſt en deux manners, lun eſt quant vn plead aſcun choſe quel il ne oſaſt directment affirmer, ou que il ne poit ceo pleder pur doubt de faire ſon plee double. Come ſi en conueying a l
                        •
                     y title al aſcun terre, il doit pleder diuers diſcents per diuers perſons, & il noſaſt affirmer que eux toutes fueront ſeiſi al temps de lour mort, ou coment il ceo purroyt, ceo ſerra double a pleder deux diſcents, de queux ambideux cheſcun aperluy poyt eſtre bone barre, Donques le defendant doit pleder & alleager le matt enterlaſant

ceſt paroll Proteſtando, come adire, que tiel obiit (proteſtando) ſeiſie &c. Et ceo eſt deſte alledge per proteſtation & nemy trauerſable per lauter. Auter proteſtation eſt, quant vn eſt de reſponder al deux choſes & tamen per le ley il doit pleader forſque a lun, donques en le primer part del plee, il dira al vn matter, Proteſtando, & non cognoſcendo, cel matter eſtre vere, & faire ſon plee ouſter per ceux parols, Sed pro placito dicit &c. & ceo eſt pur ſaluation al partie (que iſsint plede per proteſtation.) deſte conclude per aſcun matter alle
                        •
                     ge ou obiect encounter luy, ſur que il ne poit ioyner iſſue. Et neſt auter choſe que excluſion del concluſion, car il que priſt le proteſtation exclude lauter partie de concluder luy. Et ceſt proteſtation doyt eſtoyer one le ſequel del plee, & nemy deſte repugnant, ou auterment contrarie.
               
               
                  
                  Purchaſe.
                  PVrchaſe eſt le poſſeſsiō que vn home ad en tres ou tenements per ſon act demeſne, meanes, ou agreement, & nemy ꝑ title 
                        •
                     e diſc
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     , de aſcun de ſes anceſtors. Vide Littleton lib. 1. cap. 1.
               
            
            
               Q.
               
                  357 Quale ius.
                  QVale ius, eſt vn briefe & giſt lou aſcun Abbot, Prior, ou 
                        •
                     tiels auters aueront iudgement de recouer terre, per le default del tenant ve
                        •
                     s que le tre eſt demaund; donques deuaunt iudgement don ou execution agard, ceſt bre iſſera al eſchetour pur inquirer quel droit il ad a recouer, & ſi ſoit troue q̄ il nad droit donques le ſeigniour q̄ duiſt auer le terre ſi le tenant vſt alien en mortmaine poit enter come en terre alien en mortmaine, Cor cel perd per default eſt come alienation, Vide le ſtatute W. 2. cap. 32.
                  
                     Mes briefe de Ad quod dampnum giſt lou vn voile doner terre al meaſon de religion, donques ceſt briefe iſſera al Eſchetor, pur inquirer de que value le terre eſt, & quel preiudice il ſerra al Roy.
               
               
                  Quare eiecit infra terminum.
                  QVare eiecit infra terminum eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou vn fait leaſe a vn auter pur terme dans, & le leſſour infeoffe vn auter, & le feoffee ouſta le termour, donques le termor auera ceſt briefe vers le feoffee, mes ſi vn auter eſtrange ouſte le termor donques il auera briefe de Eiectione firme vers luy, & in ceux deux briefes il recouera le terme & ſes dammages.
               
               
                  Quare impedit.
                  QVare impedit, eſt vn br̄, & giſt lou ieo aie aduowſō, & le ꝑſon deuie & vn auter preſent ſon clerke, ou moy diſturbe

de preſent, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ieo auera le dit briefe. Mes aſſiſe de darraine preſentment giſt, lou ieo ou mō anceſtors ont preſent deuant. Et lou home poit auer Aſsiſe de darrain preſentment, il poit auer vn Quare impedit, mes nemy contrary.
                  Auxi ſi le plee ſoit dependant inter deux parties, & ne ſoit diſcuſſe deins vi
                        ••
                     oys, donques leueſque preſentera ꝑ laps, & ceſtuy que ad droit de preſenter, recouera dam̄ com̄ appiert ꝑ ſtatute de Weſt. 2. c. 5. Ideo vide ſtatut
                        •
                     
                     ̄. Auxy ſi ceſtuy q̄ ad droit de preſenter apres le more le parſon, & ne porta Quare impedit, ne darrem preſentment, mes ſuffer vn eſtrange de vſurper ſur luy, vncore il auera vn briefe de Droit daduowſon, mes ceſt br̄e ne giſt, ſil ne claim dauer lauowſon a luy & ſes hr̄es in fee ſimple.
               
               
                  360 Quare incumbrauit.
                  QVare incumbrauit, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou

deux ſont in plee pur lauowſon, & Leueſque admit le clerke dun de eux depuis les vi. mois, donques il auera ceſt briefe vers leueſque, mes ceſt br̄ giſt touts foites pendant le plee.
               
               
                  Quare intruſit matrimonio non ſatisfacto.
                  QVare intruſit matrimonio non ſatisfacto, eſt vn br̄ & giſt lou le ſn̄r profera conuenable mariage a ſon gard & il refuſa & entra in la terre & ſoy marrie a vn aut, donques le Seigniour auera ceſt briefe vers luy.
               
               
                  Quare non admiſit.
                  QVare non admiſit, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou home ad recouer vn aduowſon, & il maund ſon conuenable clerk al eueſque pur eſte admitte, & le Eueſque ne voile luy receiuer, donques il auera le dit briefe vers le Eueſque, mes briefe de Ne admittas giſt lou deux ſont in plee ſi le pleintife ſuppoſe que leueſque

voit admit le clerk le defendāt, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il poit auer ceſt br
                        •
                     al Eueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , luy cō
                     maundant que il ne luy admit pendant le plee.
               
               
                  363 Quarentine.
                  QVarentine eſt lou hōe deuie ſeiſi dun maner place & dauters terres, dont ſa feme doit eſte endow, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      la feme tiendra ſe en le maner place, & la viue del ſtore & iſſu de ceo por quarant iours, deins q̄l temps ſon dower ſerra a luy aſsigne come appiert in Magna Charta Capitulo 6.
               
               
                  364 Quid iuris clamat.
                  QVid iuris clamat, eſt vn b
                        •
                     e & giſt lou ieo grant le reuerſion de mō tenant a terme de vie per fine in Court le roy, & le tenant 
                        •
                     e voyt atturner, donques le grantee auera ceſt briefe pur luy chaſer pur atturner. Mes briefe de Quem redditum reddit giſt lou 
                        •
                     eo grant per fine vn rent charge, ou auter rent que neſt rent ſeruice quel mon tenant

tient de moy, & le tenant ne voit atturner, donques le grauntee auera ceſt br̄. Et briefe de Per que ſeruitia giſt en ſemblable caſe pur rent ſeruice.
                  Auxy ſi ieo graunt iii
                        •
                     . diuers rents a vn home, & le tenant del terre attorna al grauntee per payment de vn denier, ou vn maile en no
                        •
                     me de attornement de toutes ceux rents, ceſt attornement luy mittera en ſeiſin de tout ceſt rent. Mes ceux ii
                        •
                     . briefes couient eſtre port vers eux que ſont tenants iour del note leuy, & vers nul auters.
               
               
                  Quinzime.
                  QVinzime eſt vn payment graunt en Parliament al Ro
                        •
                     gne per les layes gents, ceſtaſcauoir, le quinzime part de lour biens: Et fuit vſe en auncient temps deſte leuie ſur lour auers eſteants en lour terres, que choſe fuit mult troublous, & pur ceo a ore pur le plus parte, ceſt voy eſt alter,

& ils vſe de leuie ceo per les Verges, ou Acre, ou auter meaſure de 
                        •
                     re. Per reaſon de que il eſt a ore meins troublous, & plus certeine 
                        •
                      deuant il fuit. Et cheſcun ville & pays ſcient, quel ſūme eſt deſte pay parenter eux, & coment ceo ſer
                        •
                      raiſe. Nous 
                        •
                     egimus que Moyſes fuit le primer que number le le people, car il number les 
                        •
                     ſraelites, & pur ceo le primer Taxe, Subſidie, tribute, ou quinzime fuit inuent per luy enter les Hebrewes, come Polidore Virgile ſuppoſe.
               
               
                  366 Quod ei deforciat.
                  QVod ei deforciat, eſt vn brief & giſt lou tenant en le taile, tenant in dower, ou tenaunt a terme de vie perde per default in aſcun action, donques ceſty que perde auera ceſt briefe vers celuy que recouera, ou vers ſon heire, ſi il intend que il auoit melior droit que il que recouera. Vide le Statute Weſtm. 2. cap. 4.
               
               
                  
                  Quod permittat.
                  QVod permittat eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou hōe eſt diſſeiſie de ſō cō
                     mon de paſture, & diſſeiſou
                        •
                      alien ou deuie ſeiſie, & ſon heire entra, dōques ſi le diſ
                        •
                     eiſee deuie ſon heire a
                        •
                     era ceſt briefe.
               
               
                  Quo iure.
                  QVo iure eſt vn brief, & giſt lou home ad ew common de paſture en auter ſeueral de darrem temps puis le temps de memorie donques celuy a que appertient la ſeueral auera ceſt briefe, & il ſerra charge demonſtrer ꝑ qu
                        •
                     l title il claime le common.
               
               
                  Quo minus.
                  QVo minus eſt vn brief, & giſt lou vn home ad graun
                        •
                     a a vn auter houſebote & heybo
                        •
                     e in ſon bo
                        •
                     s a prender cheſcun an, 
                        •
                      celuy 
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     eſoit le graunt fait tiel waſt & d
                        •
                     ſt
                        •
                     uction que le grauntee ne poit auer ſon reaſonable eſt
                        •
                     uers dō
                     
                        •
                     ues le grauntee au
                        •
                     ra lauatdit brief, & eſt 
                        •
                     n na
                        •
                     ure de 
                        ••
                     i
                        •
                     fe waſt.
                  
                     Et nota que houſebote eſt appel certain eſtouers pur amender la meaſon.
                  Et heybote eſt certaine eſtouers pur amender heis & hedges.
               
               
                  370 Quo warranto.
                  QVo warranto eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou home vſurpe dauer aſcun frāchiſe ſur le Roy, donques le Roy auera ceſt briefe, de faire luy vener deuant ſes Iuſtices, pur monſtre per quel title il claime tiel fraunchiſe.
               
            
            
               R.
               
                  371 Rationabilibus diuiſis.
                  RAtionabilibus diuiſis eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou ſount deux Seigniories en diuers villes, & vn pres le auter, & aſcun parcel de vn Seigniorie ou de waſt ad eſte encrocht per petits parcels, & donques celuy Seigniour de quel parcel de terre, ou le waſt ad eſte encroche auera ceſt brief enuers le Seignior que ad iſsint encroche.
               
               
                  
                  Rediſſeiſin.
                  REdiſſeiſin, Vide de ceo deuaunt en le title Aſſiſe.
               
               
                  Regrator.
                  REgrator eſt celuy que ad blees, vittailes, ou auters choſes ſufficient pur ſon neceſſarie oeps, occupation, ou expences, & nient obſtant ingroſſe & achate en ſes maines plus blees, vitailes, ou auters tielx choſes, al entent de vender ceo arrere al vn plus hault & chare price, en Faires, Markets, ou tielx ſemblables lieus. De que vide le ſtatute 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14. car il ſerra punie come forſtaller.
               
               
                  Reioinder.
                  REioinder, eſt quant le defendant fait reſpons al replication del plaintife.
                  Et cheſcun Reioinder doit auer ceux deux properties ſpecialment, ceſtaſcauoir, il doit eſtre vn ſufficient reſpons al replication, & auxy de ſubſequer & enforcer le matter del barre.
               
               
                  
                  375 Releaſe.
                  REleaſe eſt le done ou diſcharge del droit ou action que aſcun eit ou claime enuers auter ou ſon terre.
                  Et le releaſe de droit eſt cōmunement fait quāt vn feſoit vn fait a vn auter ꝑ ceux ou tielx parols, Remiſiſſe, relaxaſſe, & omnino ꝓ me & haered meis quietum clamaſſe A. B. totū ius meū quod habui, habeo, ſeu quouiſmodo in futurū habere potero in vno meſuagio &c. Mes ceux parolx (quouiſmodo habere potero) ſount voides: Car ſi le pere ſoit diſſeiſie, & le fites releaſe ꝑ ſon fait de releaſe ſans garrantie de tout ſon droit, per 
                        ••
                     s parols, quouiſmodo in futurū &c. & le pere moruſt le fits puit loyalmēt enter ſur le poſſeſſion le diſſeyſor.
                  Auxy in vn releaſe de droit il couient que il a que releaſe ſerra fait, ad vn franktenement, ou vn poſſeſsion in les terres in faite ou in ley, ou vn reuerſion al temps de le releaſe

faite, car ſil nad riens in le terre al tēps de releaſe fait, le releaſe ne ſerra al luy auailable. Vide plꝰ de ceo Lit. li. 3. c. 8.
               
               
                  Reliefe.
                  RElief, eſt aſcun foits vn certaine ſumme de money que le heir paiera al ſeigniour de que ceux terres ſont ten, queux ap̄es le deceaſe de ſon anceſtor ſont a luy diſcend cōeprochein heire, Aſcun foits il eſt paiment dun auter choſe, & nemy money. Et pur ceo relief neſt certain & ſēble pur touts tenures, mescheſcun ſundry tenure ad (pur le plus ꝑt) ſon ſpecial reliefe certain en luymeſm̄. Neq̄ eſt ceo deſtre pay touts foits al vn certaine age, mes il varie ē ceo auxy accordāt al tenure. Come ſi le tenant ad terres tenus per ſeruice de chiualer (forepriſe graund ſerieantie) & moruſt ſon heire eſteant de plein age, & tient ſes terres per le ſeruice dun ētier fee de chiualer, le ſeigniour de que ceux terres ſont iſsint tenus,

auera del heire C. s. nomine releuij, & ſi il tient per meins que vn fee de chiualer, il paiera meins, & ſi plus don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      plus aiant reſpect touts foits al rate pur cheſcun fee de chiualer vn cent ſouz. Et ſi tient per graund ſerieanty (que eſt toutes foits del Roigne, & eſt auxy ſeruice de Chiualer) donques le reliefe ſerra le value del terre per an, preter touts charges iſſuant hors de ceo.
                  Auxy ſi home tient de le Roy en chiefe, & des auters Sn̄rs, le Roy auera le gard de touts les tres, & le heire paiera reliefe a touts les ſn̄rs a ſō plein age, mes le ſn̄rs ſuera al roy per petition, & aueront le rent pur le temps que lenfant fuit in garde.
                  Et nota que touts foits quant le reliefe eſt due, il doit eſte pay al vn entier paim̄t, & nemy per parts, niēt obſtant q̄ le rēt ſoit deſte pay al ſeueral feaſts.
               
               
                  377 Remainder.
                  REmainder, de terre eſt le terre que remainera

apres le particuler eſtate determine: Come ſi vn grant terre pur terme de ans, ou pur vie, le remainder al I. S. ceſt adire, que quant le leſſee pur vie eſt mort, que donques le terre remainera, ſerra, ou abide, oue, al, on en I. S. Vide Reuerſion.
               
               
                  Remitter.
                  REmitter, eſt quant vn home ad deux titles a aſcun terre, & il vient al terre per le darrain title, vncore il ſerra adiudge eins ꝑ force de ſon pluis eiſne title, & ceo ſerra dit a luy vn remitter, Come ſi tenant en le taile diſcontinua le taile, & puis diſſeiſi ſon diſcontinuce & moruſt ent ſeiſi, & les tres diſcendont a ſon iſſue ou coſin inheritable ꝑ force del taile, in ceo caſe il eſt in ſon remitter, ceſt aſcauoir, ſeiſi per force del taile, & le title del diſcō
                     tinuee eſt ouſterment anyēt & defeate, Et le reaſō & cauſe de tiel remitt eſt pur ceo que tiel heire

eſt tenāt del terre, & neſt aſcun perſon tenant vers que il poit ſuer ſon briefe de Formedone pur recouer leſtate taile, car il ne puit auer action vers luy meſme. Auxy ſi tenāt in le tail infeoffa ſon fites ou heire apparant in le taile que eſt deins age, & puis deuie, ceo eſt vn remitter al heir. Mes ſil fuit de plein age al temps de tiel feoffement, il neſt remitter pur ceo que il fuit ſon foly, que il eſteant de plein age, voile prender tiel feoffement. Auxy ſi le baron alien terreque il ad en le droit ſon feme, & puis reptiſt eſtate a luy & a ſon feme pur tme de lour vies, ceo eſt vne remitter al feme, pur ceo que ceſt alienation eſt lact le baron & nemy le feme, car nul folly puit eſte adiudge en le feme durant le vie le baron. Mes ſi tiel alienation ſoit per fine en court de record, tiel repriſ
                        •
                     ll apres al baron & feme pur terme de lour vies ne ferta la feme

deſte en ſon remitter, pur ceo que en tiel fine le feme ſerra examine per le Iudge, & tiels examinations ē fines excluderōt tiels femes a toutes iours. Auxi q
                        •
                     t entre daſc' hōe eſt congeable & il priſt eſtate a luy quant il ē de plein age ſi ne ſoit ꝑ fait indente, ou matter de record, q̄ luy eſtoppera, ceo ſerra a luy bon remitt.
               
               
                  Rents.
                  REnts, ſont en diuers maners, ceſt aſcauoir, rent ſeruice, rent charge, & rent ſeck.
                  Rent ſeruice eſt, lon le tenant in fee ſimple tient ſa terre de ſon ſeigniour ꝑ fealty & certain rent, ou ꝑ aut ſeruice & rent, & dō
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſi le rent de le tenant ſoit arrere, le ſeignior puit diſtraine pur la rent, mes pur ceo il iammais naūra actiō de det.
                  Auxy ſi ieo done terres en le taile a vn home rendant a moy certain rent, ore tiel rent eſt rent ſeruice, mes ē tiel caſe il couient que le reuerſiō ſoit ē le donor, car ſi hōe fait

feoffement en fee, ou dōe en taile, le remainder ouſter en fee, ſans fait, reſeruant a luy vn rēt, ceſt reſeruation eſt void, & ceo eſt per force del ſtat. quia emptores terrarū & donques il tiendra de le ſeigniour de que ſon donor tenoit.
                  Mes ſi home ꝑ fait indent a cel iour fait tiel done ē le tail, le remainder ouſter en fée, ou leſſe a terme de vie, le remainder ouſter, ou vn feoffement, & per meſme lendenture reſerua a luy vn rent, & que ſi le rent ſoit arrere, que bion lirroit a luy a diſtreiner, ore tiel rent eſt rent charge.
                  Mes en tiel caſe ſi ne ſoit aſcun tiel clauſe de diſtr̄ en le fait donq̄s tiel rent eſt appel rent ſecke, & pur tiel rent ſeck, il ne iammais diſtreinera, mes fi fuit vn foits ſeiſi, il aūa Aſsiſe, & ſi il iammais ne fuit ſeiſi, eſt ſans remedy.
                  Auxy ſi vn graunt vn rent iſſant hors de ſa terre oue clauſe de diſtres, cē vn rent charge, & ſi le

rent ſoit arrere, le grauntee poit eſlier de diſtraine ou ſuer vn brief dannuity, mes il ne poit auer ambideux, car ſil port br̄ dannuity, donques le terre eſt diſcharge. Et ſil diſtrein & auowa la priſe en court de record, donques le terre eſt charge, & le perſon del grantor diſcharge.
                  Auxi ſi vn grant vn rēt charge, & le grantee purchaſe le moity de la tre, ore tout le rēt eſt extinct.
                  Mes ē rent ſeruice ſi le ſeigniour purchaſe parcel del terre donques le rent ſerra apporcion.
                  Mes ſi vn ad vn rent charge & ſon pier purchaſe parcel del terre, & cel parcel deſcende a le fits que ad le rent charge, ore cel rent ſerra apportion ſolon
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      le value del terre come eſt dit de rent ſeruice, pur ceo que le fits ne vient a ceo ꝑ ſon act demeſn̄, mes ꝑ diſcent.
                  Auxi ſi ieo faice vn leaſe pur terme dans reſeruant a moy vn certaine rent, ceſt appel vn rent ſeruice:

& pur ceo il eſt a mon liberty a diſtrainer pur le rent ou auer vn actiō de det, mes ſi le leaſe ſoit detmine, & le rēt foit arrer̄, donques ieo ne puiſſe diſtreine, mes ſerra myſe a mon action de det.
                  Et nota que ſi le ſeigniour ſoit ſeiſi des ſeruices & rent auantdiſts, & ils ſoient aderere, & il diſtrain, & le tenant reſcue le diſtres il poit auer aſſiſe, ou briefe de reſcous. Mes il eſt plus neceſſary pur luy de auer aſsiſe, que brief de reſcous pur tant que per aſsiſe il recouera ſon rent & ſes damages, mer per cē briefe de Reſcous il ne recouera mes les repriſes & les damag▪.
                  Et nota queſi le ſeigniour ne ſoit my ſeiſie del rent & ſeruice, & ils ſont aderere, & il diſtrain pur eux, & le tenant reprēt le diſtreſſe il ne poit my aū aſsiſe, mes br̄ de reſcous, & ne couient my al Sn̄r de monſtre ſon droit.
                  Et nota que ſi le ſeigniour ne poit my trouer diſtreſſe per deux ans, il

auera vers le tenant brief de Ceſſauit ꝑ biennium, vt patet per leſtatute de Weſtminſter 2. cap. 21. Et ſi tenant deuie en le mean temps & ſon iſſue enter le ſeigniour auera vers liſſue briefe dentre ſur Ceſſauit, ou ſi le tenaunt alien, le ſeigniour auera vers lalienee lauātdit briefe. Mes ſi le ſeigniour ad iſſue & deuie, & le tenāt ſoit en arrerages de dit rent & ſeruices de le temps le pier del iſſue & nemy en temps del iſſue, il ne poit my diſtrein pur arrerages en temps ſon pier, & il nauera aſcun auter recouerie vers le tenant ou aſcun auter, pur ceo que tiel aduantage eſt done per le ley altenant. Et nota q̄ rent ſeruice eſt c▪, a quel appent fealty, mes a rent charge & rent ſecke ne appent paſſe fealtie, mes il appēt a rent ſeruice de commō droit.
                  Et nota ſi home diſtr̄ pur rent charge, & le diſtres ſoit reſ
                        •
                     u de luy, & il

ne fuit mie ſeiſie adeuāt, il nv ad my recoūy forſq̄ per br̄ de Reſcous, car le diſtreſſe primermēt fait, ne done a luy ſeiſin, forſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſil happe le rent adeuant, car ſil fuit ſeiſi del rent adeuāt & pais le rent ſoit aderere, & il diſtraine, & reſcous a luy ſoit fait▪ il auera Aſsiſe, ou briefe de Reſcous.
                  Et nota, q̄ en cheſcun aſsiſe de rēt charge & annual rēt, ou en vn br̄ de Annuity, couiēt a celuy q̄ port le br̄ de mōſtre auāt vn eſpecialty, ou auterm̄t il ne maintenera Aſsiſe. Mes en Aſsiſe de Mortdanceſtor ou Formedon en le diſcender, & auters br̄s (en les queux title eſt done ou compriſe) port de rent charge, ou de annual rēt, neſt my beſoign̄ de monſtre eſpecialty.
                  Et nota que ſi home graunt rent charge a vn auter, & le grantee releſſa a grauntor parcel de le rent, vncore tout le rent neſt extinct.
                  Et nota, que ſi rent charge ſoyt graunt a

deux ioyntment, & lan releſſa, vncore le auter auera le moity del rent. Et auxy ſi lun purchaſe le moity de le terre dont le rent eſt iſſuant, lauter auera le moity del rent de ſon compaignion. Et ſi le diſſeiſour charge la terre a vn eſtrange, & le diſſeiſee port laſsiſe & recouer, le charge eſt defeat. Mes ſi celuy que ad droit, charge la terre, & vn eſtrange faine vn faux action ēuers luy que nad droit & recouer per default, le charge demurra. Et nota que en caſe vn purpartie ſort perenter deux parceners, & pluis terre ſoit allot a lun que a lauter & celuy que ad pluis de terre, charge ſa tre a lauter, & el happe le rent, el maintainera aſſiſe ſans eſpecialty.
                  Et eſt Rent ſecke lou home tient de moy ꝑ homage, fealty, & auts ſeruices, rendant a moy vn certaine rent per an, & 
                        •
                     eo graunt ceſt rent a vn auter, reſeruant a moy le ſeruice.
                  
                     Et nota que ſi rent ſeck ſoit graunt a vn home & a ſes heires, & le rent ſoit aderere, & le grauntour deuye, le heire ne purra mye diſtreyner, ne recouera les arrerages de temps ſon pere, ſicome eſt auaundit de rent ſeruice.
                  Et en meſme le maner eſt adire de rent charge ou annual rent: Mes en touts les rents auandits le heire purroit auer pur arrerages en ſon temps demeſne tiel aduauntage come auoit ſon pere en ſa vie. Vide Statutum 32. H▪ 8 cap. 37.
                  Et nota que en rent ſeck, ſi home ne ſoit ſeiſie del rent, & il ſoit aderere, il eſt ſans recouerie, pur ceo que il fuit ſon folly demeſne adeprimes quant le rent fuit grant a luy ou reſerue, que il ne priſt my ſeiſin del rent ſicome vn denier ou deux.
                  Et nota que home ne poit my auer Ceſſauit per biennium, ou vn auter briefe dentre ſur Ceſſauit pur nul rent ſecke

aderere ꝑ deux ans, mes ils purront tantſolement pur rent ſeruice, vt patet in leſtat W. 2. cap. 21.
                  Et nota q̄ en rent ſecke il couient pur luy que ſue pur le rent ſeck pur mō
                     ſtre fait al tenant, ou auterment le tenant ne 
                        •
                     err̄ my charge del rent, forſque lo
                        •
                      le rent ſecke ſuit rent ſeruice adeuaunt, come en ceſt caſe: Seignior, meſne, & tenaunt, & cheſcun de eux tient de auter per homage & fealtie, & le tenant del meſne per x. s. de rent, le Seignior paramont purchaſe les terres ou ▪tenements del tenant, tout le ſeigniorie del meſne, forſpriſe le rent, eſt extinct: Et pur ceſt cauſe ceſt rent eſt deuenus rent ſeck, & la rent ſeruice change, car il ne poit diſtraine pur ceſt rent, & en ceſt caſe celuy que demaunda le rent ne ſerra iammes charge de monſtre fait.
                  Auxy en b
                        •
                      de Mordā
                     ceſter, Aile, ou Beſaile, de rent ſeek, il ne beforgne de monſtre eſpecialtie▪
                     
pur ceo que ceux briefes de poſſeſsiō comprehendont vn title deins eux meſmes, ceſtaſcauoir, que launceſtor fuit ſeiſi de meſme le rent, & continua ſon poſſeſsion, per cauſe de quel ſeiſin le ley ſuppoſe q̄ eſt auxy auerrable per le pais.
                  Tamen quaere, car aſcuns ſuppoſant que il couient a fine force a monſtre auant fait, pur ceo q̄ rent ſeck eſt vn choſe enconter common droit, auxibiē come rent charg.
                  Mes en Aſſiſe de Nouel diſſeiſin, & in briefe de Entre ſur diſſeiſin port de rēt ſeck, il couient de fine force de monſtre auant fait, pur ceo que rent ſeck eſt vn choſe encoūter cō
                     mon droit, ſinō en le caſe ſuiſdit, o
                        •
                      il fuit rent ſeruice adeuant.
                  Et Aſſiſe de Nouel diſſeiſin, & briefe de Entre ſur diſſeiſin, ne conteigne deins eux nul title, mes ſuppoſont vn diſſeiſine deſte fait a le plaintife, & de entendement del ley, le diſſeiſin ne done nul

cauſe de auerrement enconter comon droit, mes de fine force il monſtra auant eſpecialtie.
               
               
                  Repleuin.
                  REpleuin eſt vn briefe, & giſt quant aſcun home diſtraine vn auter pur rent ou auter choſe, donques il auera ceſt br̄e al Vicont pur deliuer a luy le diſtres, & trouera ſuertie de purſuer ſon action, & ſi il ne purſua, ou ſi ſoit troue & iudged enconter luy, donques ceſtuy que priſt le diſtr̄ reauera le diſtres, & ceſt appel returne des auers, & il auera en tiel caſe br̄e que eſt appel Returno habendo.
                  Auxy ſi ſoyt en aſcun franchiſe ou bailiwike, le partie auera vn Repleuin del Vicont direct al bailife de meſme le frāchiſe pur eux redeliuer, & il trouera ſuertie de purſuer ſon action al procheine countie. Et ceſt Repleuin poit eſtre remoue hors del Countie en le common banke per

briefe de Recordare.
                  Vide pluis de Repleuin deuant titulo Diſtres.
                  Auxy brief de Homine replegiando giſt lou vn hōe eſt en priſon, & nemy ꝑ eſpeciall commandem̄t le Roy ne de ſes Iuſtices, ne pur mort de home, ne pur le foreſt le roy, ne pur tiel cauſe q̄ neſt repleuiſable, donques il auera cē br̄ direct al vicont que il luy faire eſſe repleuie: & ceſt br̄e eſt vn Iuſticies & nient returnable, & ſi le vicont ne ceo face don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iſſera aut br̄ ſicut alias & apres, auter briefe ſicut pluries, vel cauſam nobis ſignifices, q̄ ſerra returnable, & ſi le vicont vncore ne face repleuine, donques iſſera vn attachem̄t vers le vicont direct al coroners dattacher le vicont & de luy ameſn̄ deuant les Iuſtices a vn certain iour & ouſter ceo q̄ ils facent execution del primer briefe.
               
               
                  381 Replication.
                  REplication, eſt quant le defendāt en aſcū actiō
                     
fait reſpons, & le plaintife fait vn reſpons a ceo, ceo eſt appel le Replication del plaintife.
               
               
                  Repriſes.
                  REpriſes, ſont deductions, payments, & duities, que va annuelment & ſont pay hors dun mā
                     nor. Come rent charge, rent ſecke, pentions, corodies, annuities, fees del ſen
                        •
                     ſchal o
                        •
                      baylife, & tiels ſemblables.
               
               
                  Receite.
                  REceite eſt quant aſcun action eſt port vers tenant pur terme de vie, ou tenant a terme dans, & 
                        •
                     eſtuy en la reuerſiō vient eins & pria deſte reſceiue pur defend la terre & pur pleder oueſque le demā
                     dant. Auxy quant il vient il couient q̄ il 
                        •
                     oit touts foits priſt a pleder oue le demaundant.
               
               
                  Reſcous.
                  REſcous eſt vn briefe & giſt quant aſcun home prent diſtres & vn auter repriſt la diſtreſſe de luy & ne voyle ſuffer luy de ameſmer le diſtreſſe oue luy, donques il fait a

luy reſcous, & ſur ceo il puit auer ceſt briefe & recouera dāmages. Auxy ſi vn diſtraine beſtes pur dammage feſaunt en ſa terre & les enchaſa per le haute chymin pur eux enparker & en alant ils entrent en le meaſon celuy a que ils ſount, & il eux de
                        •
                     ient la & ne voyle ſuffer lauter de eux imparker, donques ceo deteyner eſt reſcous.
               
               
                  385 Reſeruation.
                  REſeruation, eſt pris diuers voyes, & ad diūs natures, come aſcun foits ꝑ voy de exception de reſerue ceo que vn home ad deuant en luy. Come ſi vn leaſe ſoit fait pur ans de tre reſeruāt les graūd arbo
                        •
                     s creſſants ſur ceo. Ore le leſſee ne poit meddle oueſque eux, ne oueſque aſcū choſe que vient ꝑ reaſon de eux cy longe come il demurt en, ou ſur les arbors, come maſt de Oke, cheſtnut, pomes, ou tiels ſemblables. Mes ſil chient del arbors al terre, donques ils ſont en droit les leſſees, car le tre
                     
eſt leſſe a luy, & tout ſur ceo nient reſerue &c.
                  Aſcun foits vn reſeruation obtaineth & port hors vn aut choſe que ne fuit deuant. Come ſi vn hōme leſſe ſes tres reſeruant annualmēt pur ceo xx. li. &c. Et diuers auter t
                        •
                     els reſeruations y ſont.
                  Et nota q̄ en auncient temps, lour reſeruations fueront ſibien (ou pur le plus part) en victuals, ſoit ceo, carne, piſhe, blees, pane, boyer, ou auterm̄t, come en money, tāque al darraine, & eſpecialment en le temps del roy Henrie le primer per agreement, le reſeruation de victuals fuit change en priſt money, come il ad tanque cy continue.
               
               
                  Retraxit.
                  REtraxit, eſt le preterperfectence de Retraho, compound de Re & traho, q̄ ſignifie Retraho, pur euulſer arrere. Et eſt quant le partie plaintife ou demaundant vient en proper perſon en le Court ou ſon ſuit eſt,

& dit que il ne voyt vlterius proſequi in placito illo &c. Ore ceo ſerra vn barre al action a touts iours.
               
               
                  387 Reeue.
                  REeue eſt vn officer, mes plus conus en aunciēt temps que a ceſt iour. Car cheſcun manour ad donques vn Reeue, & vncore en diuers Copyhold mā
                     nours (ou le veyle cuſtome aſcun choſe preuaile) le noſme & office neſt en tout oblie. Et eſt en effect ceo que a ore cheſcun Bailife dun mā
                     nor practiſe: nient obſtāt le noſme de bailif ne fuit dōques en vre enter nous eſteant puis porte eins per les Normans: Mes le noſme de Reeue aūcientment appel Gereue (quel perticle (Ge) en continuance de tēps fuit ouſterment omiſe & ꝑde) vient del Saxon ꝑol gereſa, que ſignify vn rul'. Et iſſint veram̄t ſon rule & auctority fuit larg deins le cō
                     pas del manour ſon ſeign̄ & enter ſes homes & tenauntes cybien en choſes

de gouemement en peace & guerre, cōe en le ſkilfull vſe & trade de huſbādry. Car ſicome il collect les rentes del ſeigniour, paye repriſes, ou duities iſſuants hors del mannor, appoynt les ſeruauntes de worker, ſuccide & decoupe arbres pur repayrer les edifices, & encloſures, oueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      diuers tiels ſemblables pur le commoditie del Seigniour: Iſsint auxy il ad aucthoritie de gouerner, & garder les tenants en peax, & ſil beſoigne, de conducter eux en guerre.
               
               
                  Reuerſion.
                  REuerſion de terre, eſt vn certaine eſtate remainant en le leſſor ou donour, apres le perticuler eſtate & poſſeſsion conuey al vn auter per leaſe pur vie ou ans ou done en taile.
                  Et eſt appell vn Reuerſion en reſpecte del poſſeſſiō ſeperate de ceo: iſſint que il que ad le vn, nad le auter a m̄ le tēps, car eſteant en vn ſimul, la ne poit eſte dit vn reuerſiō,

pur ceo que per le vniting, lun eſt merge en lauter, Et iſsint le reuerſion del terre, eſt le terre meſme quant il eſchueſt.
               
               
                  389 Riot.
                  RIot eſt lou troys (al meins) ou plures font aſcun illoyal act come de bater vn home, entre ſur le poſſeſsion dun auter, vel huiuſmodi.
               
               
                  390 Robberie.
                  RObberie, eſt quaunt vn home prent aſcū choſe del perſon dun auter feloniouſmēt, coment que la choſe priſe ne ſoit al value forſque dun denier, vncore il eſt felony pur quel le offendor ſuffera mort.
               
               
                  391 Rout.
                  ROut eſt quant people aſſemble eux meſmes, & puis procedūt, ou chiuauchant, ou allant auāt, ou mouent per inſtigation dun ou pluſors que eſt conduct de eux: Ceſt appelle vn rout, pur ceo q̄ ils mouent, & proceed en routs & numbers.
                  Item ou plures aſſemble eux ſur lour quarels

& braules demeſne, come ſi les inhabitantes dun ville voile aſsēb eux pur debruſer huis, mures, foſſes, pales, ou tiels ſemblabl
                        •
                     , dauer commen la, ou de bater vn auter q̄ ad fait al eux vn cōmon diſpleaſure, vel huiuſmodi, ceſt vn rout & encounter le ley, coment q̄ ils nont fait, ou miſe en executiō lour male entent, Vide leſtatut 1. Mar. 12.
               
            
            
               S.
               
                  Sake.
                  SAke, hoc eſt placitū & emenda de tranſgr̄ hominū in cur̄ veſtra, quia (Sake) Anglice, eſt Acheſon Gallice, & dicitur pur ſicke ſack, idē quod pur quel acheſon, & ſacke dicitur ꝓ forfait.
               
               
                  Scire facias.
                  SCire facias eſt vn briefe iudicial iſſant hors de record & giſt lou vn ad recouer det ou damages en Court le Roy, & il ne ſue pas dauer executiō deins lan & le iour donques apres lan & iour il auera le dit briefe

a garner le partie, & ſi le partie ne vein ou ſil vein, & ne ſcauoit riēs dire encounter execution donq̄s il auera vn briefe de Fieri facias directes al vicount luy commaundant que il leuie le det ou les damages des biens celuy que a
                        •
                      perdue.
                  Auxy le briefe de Fieri facias giſt deins lan ſans aſcun Scire facias ſuer.
                  Auxy ſi le ſumme de meſme le det ou damages ne poit eſte leuy des biēs celuy q̄ auoit perdue, dō
                     ques il poit auer vn briefe de Elegit direct al vicoūt que il fac' luy deliuer la moitie de ſa terre & biēs except ſes boues & affries de ſa carue.
                  Auxy quant vn ad recouer det ou damages en action perſonall (lou le proces eſt vn capias) il poit auer vn auter briefe de execution appell capias ad ſatisfaciendum, pur prender le corps celuy que eſt iſſint condempne que ſerra commit al priſon illonques a demurrer ſans baile ou mainpriſe

tanque il ad ſatisfie le partie.
                  Auxi quant vn ad iudgment de recouer aſcū terres ou tenements il auera vn briefe appell Habere facias ſeiſinā direct al vicount luy commaundant de deliuer a luy ſeiſin de meſme le terre iſſint recouer, Vide plus de ceo en le title Fieri facias, & en le title Execution.
               
               
                  Scot.
                  SCot, hoc eſt quietū eſſe de quadam cōſuetudine, ſicut de communi tallagio facto ad opus vie' vel balliuorum eius.
               
               
                  Seruice de chiualer.
                  TEner per ſeruice de chiualer eſt a tener per homage fealtie, & eſcuage, & treit a luy gard mariage & relife. Et nota que ſeruice de Chiualer eſt ſeruice de terre ou de tenemēts pur armes port en guerre en defence de Royalme Et doit gard & mariage per la reaſon q̄ nul eſt able ne de power & ne poit auer conuſance darmes porter auant que il ſoit dage de xxi. ans.

Et pur tant que le Seignior ne perdera ceo, que de droit il doit auer, & que la power de la royalme de rien ne ſoit enfeeble: la ley voet ꝑ cauſe de ſon tender age q̄ le Seignior luy auera en ſa garde tā
                     que al pleine age de luy, ceſtaſſauoir xxi. ans.
                  Vide de ceo pluis en le title Graund ſeriantie, & en le title Eſcauge.
               
               
                  396 Shewing.
                  SHewing hoc eſt quietū eſſe cum attachiament in aliqua curia, & coram quibuſcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in querelis oſtenſis & non aduocat.
               
               
                  397 Sok.
                  SOk, hoc eſt ſecta de hominibus in Curia veſtra, ſecundum conſuetudinem Regni.
               
               
                  398 Sokmans.
                  SOkmans ſont les tenāts en auncient demeſne, queux tient lour terres per Socage, ceſt adire per ſeruice del carue, & pur ceo ils ſont appel Sokmans. que eſt tant adire come tenants ou homes queux tiēt per ſeruice del carue, ou homes del

carue: Car Sok ſignifie vn carue.
                  Et ceux Sokmans ou tenants en auncient demeſne, ont pluſors & diuers liberties done & graunt a eux per le ley, ſibien ceux tenāts queux tient dun common perſon en auncient demeſne, come ceux queux tient del Roigne en auncient demeſne, come noſment deſte quite de paier tolle en cheſcun Market, faire, ville, & Citie per tout le Realme, ſibien pur lour biens & chattels que ils vend as auters, come pur ceux choſes que ils achat pur lour prouiſiō, de auters. Et ſur ceo cheſcun de eux poit ſuer dauer letters patents deſouth le ſeale le Roigne a ſes officers, & al Maiors, Bailiſs, & auters Officers en le Realme de ſuffer cux deſte quite de tolle.
                  Item deſte quite de pontage, murage, & paſſage, & auxy de taxes & tallages graunt per Parliament, ſinon que l
                        •
                      Roign taxe auncient demeſne,

come el poit a ſa pleaſure pur graund cauſe.
                  Auxy deſte quite de payments a les expences del Chiualers del ſhire queux vient al Parliament.
                  Et ſi le Vicont voile diſtrainer eux, ou aſcun de eux deſtre contributorie pur lour terre en ancient demeſne, donques lun de eux ou touts come le caſe require poit ſuer vn brief direct al vicont, luy commandant, que il ne compel eux deſtre contributories al expences de chiualers. Et meſme le brief luy command auxy, que ſi il ad diſtraine eux pur ceo, q̄ il redeliuer meſme le diſtres.
                  Item que ils ne deueront eſtre impanel, ne mis en Iuries & Enqueſts en le pais hors de lour manor ou ſeigniory de auncient demeſne, pur les terres queux ils teigne la (ſinon que ils ont auters terres al common ley, pur queux ils deueront eſtre charge.)

Et ſi le Vicont retourne eux en pannels, donques ils poient auer vn briefe direct a luy de Non ponēdis in aſsiſis & iuratis: Et ſil face al contrarie, donques giſt vn Attachment ſur ceo enuers luy.
                  Et iſsint eſt auxy ſi les Bailifes des franchiſes q̄ux ont retournes des briefs voile retourne aſcun del tenants queux teigne en ancient demeſne en aſsiſe ou iuries.
                  Et auxy deſte exempts del Leetes, & de turnes del Vicont, oueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      diuers auts ſēblables liberties.
               
               
                  Socage.
                  TEner en Socage eſt a tener daſcun Sn̄r terres ou tenements rendant a luy vn certain rēt ꝑ an pur touts maner des ſeruices.
                  Et nota que tener per Socage neſt pas tener per ſeruice de chiualer, ne la appent gard, mariage, ne reliefe, mes ils double
                        •
                     ōt vn foites lour rent apres le mort lour aunceſtor, ſolonque ceo que ſoloyent paier a lour Seignior,
                  
                     Et ils ne ſerront ouſter meaſure greeues, come il appiert en le treatiſe de gardes & Reliefes.
                  Et nota q̄ Socage poit eſtre dit en trois maners, ceſtaſcauoir, Socage en frank tenure, Socage en ancient tenure, & Socage en baſe tenure.
                  rent pur touts maner des ſeruices, come deuant eſt dit, & de ceo le prochein amy auera le gard a que le heritage ne purra my diſcender, tanque al age le heir de xiiii. ans, ceſtaſcauoir, ſi le heritage veign per le part le pere, ceux del part le mere aueront le gard, Et econtra.
                  Et nota que ſi gardian en Socage fait waſt, il ne ſerra my empeache de waſt: Mes il rendra accompt al heir qn̄t il viē
                     dra al plein age de xxi. ans. Et vide leſtatute de Marlebridg capitulo 17. pur ceſt matter.
                  Socage de auncient tenure eſt ceo lou les gents en ancient demeſne tenoyent, que ne ſoylent auter briefe auoir que le

briefe de Droit cloſe, que ſerra deternune ſecundum conſuetudinem manerij, & le Monſtrauerunt pur eux diſcharger quant lour Seignior eux diſtraine pur faire auters ſeruices que faire ne duiſſent.
                  Et ceſt briefe de Monſtrauerūt doit eſtr̄ port ē
                     uerslour ſeignior, & ceux tenaunts 
                        •
                     eignent touts ꝑ vn certain ſeruice. Et ils ſont franktenants de ancient demeſne.
                  Socage en baſe tenure, eſt lou home tient en ancient demeſne, q̄ ne puitauer le Monſtrauerunt, & pur ceo il eſt appel le baſe Tenure.
               
               
                  Summons ad warrantizandum &c.
                  SVmmons ad warrantizandum & ſequatur ſub ſuo periculo, vide de ceux a
                        •••
                     s en le title voucher.
               
               
                  Spoliation.
                  SPoliation, eſt vn ſuite pur le fruits dun eſglis, ou pur leſglis meſme, & eſt deſte ſue en le ſpirituall

Court, & nemy en les temporall Courtes. Et ceſt ſuite giſt pur vn encumbent enuers vn auter encumbēt, ou ils ambideux claime per vn patron, & lou le droit del patronage ne vient in queſtion ou debate. Come ſi vn perſon ſoit cree vn Eueſque & ad diſpenſation de tener ſon rectorie, & puis le patron preſent auter encumbent que eſt inſtitute & induct: Ore leueſque poet auer enuers ceſtuy encumbent vne▪ Spoliation en le ſpiritual Court, pur ceo q̄ ils ambideux claim per vn patron, & le droit del patronage ne vient en debate, & pur ceo que lauter encumbent vyent al poſſeſsion del benefice per le courſe del ley ſpirituall, ceſt aſcauoir, per inſtitution & induction, iſsint que il ad colour de auer ceo, & deſte perſon per le eſpirituall ley. Car auterment ſil ne ſoit inſtitute & induct &c. Spoliation ne giſt enuers luy,

mes vn briefe de Treſpas, ou vn aſsiſe de nouel diſſeiſin &c.
                  Iſsint eſt auxy lon vn perſon que ad pluralitie, accept auter benefice, per reaſon de que le patron preſent vn auter clerke, q̄ eſt inſtitute & induct, ore lun de eux poit auer Spoliation enuers le auter, & donques viendra en debate ſi il ad vn ſufficient pluralitie ou non. Et iſsint eſt de depriuation &c.
                  Meſme le ley eſt, lou vn diſt al patron, que ſon clerke eſt mort ſur que il preſent vn auter, La le primer incumbent que fuit ſurmiſe de eſtre mort poit auer vn Spoliation enuers lauter. Et iſsint en diuers auters ſemblables caſes de que veyes Fitzherbert Natura breuium.
               
               
                  Stallage.
                  STallage, hoc eſt quietū eſſe de quadam conſuetudine exact▪ pro pl
                        •
                     tea capta vel aſsignata in nū
                     dinis & mercatis.
               
               
                  
                  403 Suit couenant.
                  SVit couenant, eſt quant voſtre aunceſtors ont couenant oue mes aunceſtors de ſuer a le court mes aunceſtors.
               
               
                  404 Suit cuſtome.
                  SVit cuſtome, eſt quant ieo & mes anceſtors ont eſtre ſeiſies de veſtre ſuite demeſne & voſtre aunceſtors de temps &c.
               
               
                  405 Suit reall.
                  SVit reall, eſt quaunt homes vient al turne de vicont ou leete, a q̄ courts touts homes ſerra compell de vener a conuſter les leyes, iſsint que ils ne ſerra ignorant de les choſes queux ſerra monſtres la coment ils ſerra gouernes. Et eſt appel real ſuit per cauſe de lour allegeance, & ceo appiert ꝑ cō
                     mon experience quant vn eſt iure, ſon othe eſt que il ſerra loyal & foyal home al Roigne. Et ceo ſuit nē pur le terre que il tient deins le countie, mes per reaſon de ſon perſon,

& pur ſon reſt la, & doyt eſtre fait deux foits per an, pur default de que, il ſerra amercy & non diſtreigne.
               
               
                  Suit ſeruice.
                  SVit ſeruice, eſt de ſuer al turne del viſcount ou Leete, ou al Court del ſn̄r de trois ſemaines en trois ſemaines ꝑ lentier an: Et pur default de ceo, vn hōe ſerra diſtreigne & non amercy. Et ceſt ſuit ſeruice eſt per reaſon del tenure del terres dun home.
               
               
                  Statute marchant.
                  TEner per Statute marchant, eſt lou hom̄ conuſt a paier certaine denyers a vn auter a certain iour deuant le Maire, bailie, ou aut gardeine daſcū ville que ad poyar de fair̄ execution de meſme leſtatute, & ſi le obligor ne paya le dett a le iour aſſes & rien de ſes biens, terres on tenements ne purront eſtr̄ troues deins la gard le Maior ou gardein auantdit, mes en auters lyeus dehors, don
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                     
le recogniſee ſuer̄ le recogniſance & obligation oue vn certification al Chauncery de ſouth le ſeale le Roy, & il aūa hors de la Chauncery vn Capias al Vicount de quel countie il eſt de luy apprender & metter en priſon ſil ne ſoit clerke, tanque il ad fait gree de la debt. Et vn quarter de lan apres ceo que il ſerra pris, il auera ſa terre liuer a luy meſme pur faire gree a le partie de debt. Et il puit vender tanque il eſt enpriſon, & ſa vendr̄ ſerra bon & loyal. Et ſil ne face gree deyns le quarter dun an, ou il ſoit returne que il neſt troue, & ſil ne ſoyt Clerke, adonques le reconiſee puit auer briefe de la Chauncerie que eſt appell Extendi facias, direct al toutes vicounts lou il ad terres dextender ſes terres & biens, & ſes byens a luy deliuer, & luy ſeiſer en ſes terres, pur les tener a luy & a ſes heires & a ſes aſsignes tanque le debt ſoyt leuye

ou paye, & per cel temps il eſt tenaunt per ſtatute marchant. Et nota que en leſtatute marchant, le recogniſee auera execution de touts les terres que le recogniſor auoit iour de la recogniſance fait, & vnques puis per force de meſme leſtatute.
                  Et nota que quant aſcū waſt ou deſtruction eſt fait per le recogniſee, ſe
                        •
                      executors, ou per celuy que ad ſon eſtate, le recogniſor & ſes executors aueront meſme la ley cōe eſt ſuiſdit de le tenant ꝑ Elegit.
                  Et nota ſi tenaunt per leſtatute Marchant tient ouſter ſon terme ceſtuy que ad droit poit ſuer enuers luy Venire facias ad computandum, ou entrer tantoſt ſicome ſur le teſtant per Elegit. Vide ſtatute 11. E. 1. & de Acton burnel, & 13. E. 1. de Mercatoribus.
               
            
            
               T.
               
                  Fee Taile.
                  TEner en le tayle, eſt lou home tient

certein terres ou tenem̄ts a luy & a ſes heires de ſon corps engendres. Et nota que ſi la terre ſoit done a vn home & a ſes heires males, & il ad iſſue male, il ad fee ſimple, & ceo fuit adiudge en le Parliament noſtre Seigniour le roy. Mes lou terres ou tenements ſont dones a vn home & a ſes heirs males de ſon corps engendres, il ad fee tail, & liſſu female ne ſerra my inherite, vt patet Anno 14. E. 3. en vn aſsiſe 1
                        •
                     . E. 3. 45.
                  Fee taile, eſt lou terre eſt done a vn home & a ſes heirs de ſon corps engendres, & il eſt dit tenāt en le taile generall, mes 
                        •
                     i terre ſoit done al baron & feme & al heires de lour deux corps engendres, or
                        •
                      le baron & la fēe ſont tenants en le tail eſpecial. Et ſi vn de eux deuy ceſt
                        •
                      que ſuruiue eſt tenant en le taile apres poſsibilitie diſſue extinct & 
                        •
                     il face waſt il ne ſerra empeche de cel waſt. Vide Littleton.
                  Mes ſi le roy don terres

a vn home & a ſes heires males, & le donee deuie ſans iſſue male, donques le coſin collaterall del donee inheritera, mes le roy reentra, & 
                        •
                     ſsint fuit adiudge en leſchequer chamber Anno 18. H. 8. en vn information fait vers 
                        •
                     heire de Sir T. Louel Chiu
                        •
                     ler.
               
               
                  Taile apres poſsibilitie.
                  TEner en le taile apres poſsibilitie diſſue extinct, eſt lou terre eſt do
                        ••
                      a vn home & ſa feme & a les heires de lour deux corps engendres, lun de eux ſuruiue lauter ſans iſſue enter eux iſſuant, il tiendra ſa terre a terme de ſa vie demeſne, come tenant in le taile ap̄s poſſibilitie diſſue extinct. Et non obſtant q̄ il fait waſt, il ne ſerra iammays empeche de cel waſt. Et nota ſil alien, celuy en la reuerſion ne auera briefe dentre in conſimili caſu. Mes il poit entrer, & ſon entre eſt congeable, per R. Th. chiefe Iuſtice 28.

E. 3. 96. & 45. E. 3. 25.
               
               
                  410 Taxe & Tallage.
                  TAxe & Tallage, ſont paiments, come diſmes, qui
                        •
                     zimes, ſubſidies ou tiels 
                        •
                     emb
                        •
                     ables grant al roigne per Parliamēt.
                  Les tenants en aunciēt demeſne ſont quits de ceux taxes, & tallages g
                        •
                     auntes per Parliament, ſinon que le Roigne taxe auncient demeſne, come el poet quant a luy pleaſt pur graund cauſe. Veies auncient demeſne.
               
               
                  411 Tenure en capite.
                  TEnure en capite, eſt lou aſcun tient del Roigne come de 
                        •
                     a parſon eſteāt roigne, & de ſa Corone, come dun Seigniorie per luy meſme en groſſe, & en chiefe deſuis touts auters Seigniories, Et nemy lou ils tient de luy come de aſcun mannor, honor, ou Caſtell, ſinon certeine auncient honors, vt patet in Scaccario.
               
               
                  412 Terme dans.
                  TEner a terme da
                        •
                     s 
                        •
                     eſt forſque cha
                        ••
                     ell

en effect, car nul actiō eſt maintenabl▪enuers le termor quant a recouerer le frankten̄t, car nul franktenem̄t eſt a luy. Leaſe a terme dans eſt chattel real. Et lauter chattel eſt ꝑſonal, & touts bn̄s mouables ſont chatels ꝑſonals.
               
               
                  Teſtament.
                  TEſtament, eſt iſsint define ou expounde en Mounſier Plowdens Cō
                     mentaries: Teſtamentum eſt teſtatio mentis, & eſt cōpoūd de ceux deux parolx, Teſtio & mentis, q̄ iſsint ſignifie, veray il eſt, q̄ vn teſtament eſt teſtatio mentis, mes q̄ il eſt vn cō
                     pound parol, Aulus Gellius en ſon vi. liuer ca. 12. deny ceo al vn excellent Lawier vn Seruius Sulpitius, & dit q̄ il eſt vn ſimple parol, come ſont ce
                        ••
                      Calciamentum, Paludamentū, Pauiamentum, & diuers tielx ſemblables.
                  Et mult meines eſt agreamentum, vn cōpound pa
                        •
                     oll de aggregatio & mentium, come eſt dit en le title de agreement, car

il ny ad nul tiel latin parol ſimple ou compound, mes il pe it niēt obſt ſerue bn̄ pur vn ley latin parol.
                  Et pur ceo il poit iſsint eſte meliour define. Teſtamentum eſt vltimae voluntatis iuſta ſententia de to quod quis poſt mortē ſuam fieri vult &c.
                  Et de Teſtaments il y ad deux ſorts, ceſtaſcauoir vn Teſtament en eſcript, & vn Teſtam̄t ꝑ parolx, q̄ eſt appel vn Nuncupatiue Teſtament.
                  Le primer eſt touts forts en eſcript come eſt dit.
                  Le auter eſt quant vn home eſteant en maladie, & pur pauor ne mort ou fault de memorie, ou de parler, voit vener cy ſuddeinment & haſtiuement ſur luy, que il ſerra preuent ſil demurt le ſcripture de ſon Teſtament, requeſt ſes vicines & amies de porter teſmoign̄ de ſon darreine volunt, & donques declare ceo preſentment ꝑ parolx deuant eux, que apres ſon deceaſe eſt proue per teſmoignes, & mis en eſcript

per le Ordinarie, & donques il eſt en cy bone force (ſinon pur terres) ſicome il ad al primer en le vie del teſtator eſte mis en eſcript.
               
               
                  Them.
                  THem, hoc eſt quod habeatis totam generationem villanorum veſtrorum cum eorum ſectis & cattallis vbicū
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in Anglia fuerint inuenta, excepto qd' ſi aliquis natiu
                        •
                      
                     quiet ꝑ vnū annū & diē in aliqua villa priuilegia
                        •
                     a manſerit, ita qd' in eorum cōmuniam vel gildam, tanquā vnus illarū repertus fuerit, eo ipſo a villenagio liberatus eſt.
               
               
                  Theftbote.
                  THeftbote, eſt quant home priſt aſcun biens dun laron de luy fauourer & mainteiner: Et nemy quant home priſt ſes biens demeſne, q̄ fueront emblees de luy &c.
                  Le puniſhment en auncient temps de Thefebote, ſuit de vie & de member: Mes a ore

M. Stamford dit, que il eſt puniſh per raūſome & empriſonmēt. Sed quaere car ieo penſe ceo eſte felonie.
               
               
                  416 Title.
                  TItle, eſt lou loial cauſe eſt veigne a vn home de auer choſe que auter ad, & il nad aſcun action pur ceo, come title de Mortmaine, ou de entrie pur condition enfreint.
               
               
                  417 Title de Entre.
                  TItle de Entre, eſt quant vn ſeiſie de terre en fee fait feoffement de ceo ſur condition, & le condition eſt enfreint: Ore apres le condition iſſint enfreint, le feoffour ad title de entre en le tre, & iſſint poit quaunt a luy pleiſt, & per ſon entrie le frank tenemēt ſerra dit en luy maintenant.
                  Et eſt appel Title de Entre, pur ceo que il ne poit auer briefe de Droit enuers ſon feoffee ſur cō
                     dition, car ſon droit fuit hors de luy per le feoffement, le quel ne poit eſte reduce ſans 
                        •
                     ntrie,

& le entre doit eſte pur le enfreinder de le cōditiō.
               
               
                  Tolle, ou Tolne.
                  TOlle ou Tolne, eſt plus properment vn payment vſe en Cities, villes, markets, & fayres, pur biens & cattel port la deſtre achate ou vende. Et eſt toutes dits deſtre pay per le achator, & nemy per le vendour, ſinon que ſoit aſcun Cuſtome al contrarie.
                  Il y ad diuers auters Tolles, come Turne toll, & ceo eſt lou toll eſt pay pur auers, queux for driues deſte vendus, com̄t que ils ne ſont vendus.
                  Item tolle trauers, ceo eſt lou vn claime dauer vn ob. ou tiel Temblable tolle de cheſcun beaſt que eſt driue ſur ſon terre.
                  Through tolle, eſt lou vn ville preſcribe de auer tolle pur cheſcun beaſt q̄ ale through lour ville, vn certaine, ou pur cheſcun vin
                        •
                      ou cent, vn certain: que ne appiert deſte cy vnreaſonable preſcription ou cuſtome, come

aſcuns ont ſuppoſe, nient obſtāt il ſoit per le hault chimin del roigne (come ils ceo appel) lou cheſcun poit loialment paſſe, ſil y ad quid pro quo: Come ſi la ſoit vn pont ou tiel ſemblable commodity, puruey al coſtes & charges del ville, pur le eaſe de trauaylers que chaſe meſme voy, per que lour iourney eſt ou abridge ou fait le meliour pur que donques ne poit tolle eſte demaund loialment & oue bone reaſon de eux &c▪
                  
                  Mes diuers Citizens & Burgeſſes ſont quite de pay tolle ꝑ le graunt del Roigne, ou ſa aunceſtors, ou claime ceo ꝑ preſcription ou cuſtome. Iſſint auxy eſpiritual perſons & religious homes (cōe ils fueront appels) fueront quite de tolle pur lour biens & marchandiſes achate & vendus &c. Mes a ore le Statute del Roy H. 8. anno 21. cap. 13. voit q̄ ils ne marchandiſer̄.
                  Item tenants en auncient demeſne doyent eſte

quite per tout le Realme de paier tolle, cōe appiert deuaunt en le title Sokemans. Et en touts ceux caſes ou tolle eſt deſte demaunde, ou il ne doit eſte pay de eux q̄ doyent aler, achate, & vēde, quite de tolle, la le partie ou parties greeue poyent auer vn briefe, De eſſendi quietū de tolonio, direct a luy, ou ceux que iſsint demaunde tolle contra al graūt le Roigne ou ſa progenitors, ou contra al cuſtome ou preſcription.
               
               
                  Treaſon.
                  TReaſō eſt en deux maners, ceſt aſcauoir▪ haute treaſon, & petit treaſon, come eſt ordeine per leſtatutes, & ideo vide ſtatuta & Stamford lib. 1. cap. 2.
               
               
                  Treaſure troue.
                  TReaſure troue, eſt quāt aſcun money, or, argent, plate ou bolion, eſt troue en aſcun lieu, & nul conuſt a que le propertie eſt, donques le propertie de ceo appertient al Roye, & ceo eſt dyt treaſure troue.

Mes ſi aſcun minerall de mettal ſoyt troue en aſcū terre, ceo toutes foites pertient al Seigniour del ſoile, forſque q̄ il ſoit minerall de or ou de argēt, queux ſerront touts foits al Roy, en quecūque ſoile que ils ſont troues.
               
               
                  421 Tourne del vicont.
                  TOurne del vicont, eſt vn Court de record en touts choſes que pertaine al tourne. Et eſt le leete le Roigne per tout le Countie, & le viſcount eſt Iudge. Et quecunque ad vn leete ad meſme le authoritie deins le precinct, ſicome le vicont ad deins le tourne.
               
            
            
               V.
               
                  422 View.
                  VIew, eſt quaunt aſcun action reall eſt port & le tenant ne ſeauoit bien quel terre il eſt que le demaūdant demand, dōque le ten̄t priera la view, ceſt aſcauoir, que il puit veyer le terre q̄ il claima. Mes ſi le tenant ad ew le view en vn briefe, & puis le

brief eſt abatus per miſnomer de ville, ou per iointenure, & puis le demandant port vn tiel br̄e vers le tenant, donque le tenant nauera le view en le ſecond briefe.
               
               
                  Vilaica remouenda.
                  VIlaica remouenda, eſt vn briefe, & giſt lou debate eſt perenter deux perſons ou prouiſours dun Eſgliſe, & lun enter en leſgliſe, oue graund power de les hōes & tient lauter dehors oue force & armes, donq̄ celuy que eſt ten dehors, auera le dit brief directal vicount que il remoua cē power q̄ eſt deins legliſe & ſerra command al vicont que ſil troue aſcuns homes luy reſiſtants, que le vicont prender̄ oueſ
                        •
                      luy la poyar de ſon countie ſi beſoigne ſoit & ferra attach per lour corps touts ceux luy reſiſtantes & les mittera en priſon iſsint q̄ il eyt lour corps deuāt le R. a certain iour de reſpōder del cōtempt.

Et ceſt briefe eſt returnable & ne ſerra grant deuāt q̄ leueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      del lieu lou tiel eſgliſe eſt, eyt certifie en le Chauncerie tiel reſiſtance & force.
               
               
                  424. Villenage.
                  TEnure en pure villenage, eſt a faire tout ceo que le ſeigniour luy voit commander.
                  La diffinition de villenage eſt villeine de ſank, & de tenure. Et il eſt de que ſon ſeignior prent redemption de ſa file marrier, ou ſoy meſme enfranchiſe, & le ſeigniour puit luy ouſte de ſes terres ou tenements a ſa volunt, & auxy de toutes ſes biens & chateux.
                  Et note que Sokeman neſt pas pure villeine, ne villein doit pas gard mariage ne reliefe, ne faire auter ſeruices reals.
                  Et nota que tenure en Villenage ne ferra nul franke home villeine, ſil ne ſoit continue puis le temps de non memorie,

ne villeine terre ne ferra franke home villeine, ne franke terre ne ferra villeine franke, ſ
                        〈…〉
                     on que le tenaunt ſoit continue frankment puis le temps de non memory.
                  Mes villein ferra frank terre villein per ſeiſin ou per claime de ſon ſeigniour. Et nota que ſi villein purchaſe certaine tre & prent feme & alien & deuie deuaunt le claime, ou ſeiſin de ſon ſeignior, la feme ſerra endowe.
                  Et nota que en ceſt caſe que le ōn̄r port Praecipe quod reddat enuers lalienee ſon villein le q̄l vouche a garrantie le iſſue la villein que eſt villein a la ſeignior, il auera le voucher. Et per proteſtation le Sn̄r poit ſauer (que non obſtant que il plede oue ſon villeine) vncore ſon villeine ne ſerra mie enfranchiſe. Et nota que baſtarde ne ſerra iammais adiudge villeine ſinon per conuſance en Courte de record. Et nota que ſi dett ſoit due per vn ſeignior a vn home & il face

deux homes ſes executors, les queux ſont villeines al dit Seignior & deuie les villeins aueront Action de dette enuers leur ſeigniour, Et nient obſtant que il pled oueſque eux, & il face proteſtation, ils ne ſerrontpurtant enfranchiſe, pur ceo que ils ſont a recouer le dette auantdiſt al vſe dun auter perſon, ceſtaſſanoir, al vſe lour Teſtator & nient a lour vſe demeſne.
                  Et ſi le tenaunt en dower eyt vn villeine, le quel purchaſe certain terre▪ en fee & puis le tenant en dower enter, el auera la terre a luy & a ſes heirs a touts iours, & meſme le ley eſt de tenaunt a terme dans de vn villeine.
                  Et nota que le ſeignior poit robber, naufrer & chaſtiſer ſon villeine a ſavolunt, ſalue que il ne puit luy maime, car donques il auera appeal de maihim enuers luy.
                  Et nota que villaine poit auer trois actions 
                        ••
                     uers ſa ſeigniour, ceſt

aſcauoir, vn appeale de mort ſon aunceſtour, vn appeale de rape fait a ſa feme, & vn appeale de maihim. Et nota ſi deux parceners port briefe de nieftie, & lun de eux ſoit nonſuite, le nonſuite de luy ſerra adiudge la nonſuite de ambideux iſsint q̄ ſi le nonſuit ſoit apres appearance, ils ſerront ſaue de ceſt actiō a touts tours, car la ley eſt tiel en fauorem libertatis.
                  Et nota ſi deux ont vn villein in common, & lun de eux fait a luy vn manumiſſion, il ne ſerra my enfrāc enuers ambideux.
                  Et nota que en br̄e de Natiuo habēdo il couiēt que le Sn̄r monſtr̄ coment aueigna priuie de ſanke a celuy villeine de que il eſt Seigniour &c. Et ſil ne nul de ſes anceſtors ne ſoit ſeiſi de nul de ſon ſanke, il ne gainer per ſon action ſi le villeine nad pas conus en court de Record luy eſtr ſon villeine.
                  Et nota que en briefe de niefe ne purront eſtr
                        •
                     
                     
mis pluſours niefes que deux tant ſolemēt, & hoc introductum fuit prius in odium ſeruitutis. Mes en brief de libertate probanda, purront eſtre miſe tāts Niefs come le plaintif voudra.
                  Et nota que ſi le niefe de ſeignior ſoit fue ē ancient demeſne de roy ou auter vill priuilegie, deins lan & iour le ſeigniour poit luy ſeiſer, & ſil demurt en la dit ville ou lieu franchiſe per vn an & vn iour ſans le ſeiſin de ſou ſeigniour il nad my power de luy ſeiſer apres ſil ne va dehors le ſuiſdit franchiſe.
                  Et aſcuns ſont villeins per title de Preſcription, que tout lour ſanke out eſte villeins regardants a le maner dun Seigniour de tēps de non memory,
                  Et aſcun ſont fait villeins ꝑ lour confeſsion en vn court de record. Auxy le Sn̄r poit fair vn manumiſsion a ſon villein & luy infrāch
                        •
                     a touts iours.
                  Auxy ſi le villeine port aſcun actiō vers ſon

ſeigniour, ſi ne ſoit appel de maihim, & le ſeignior a ceo ſans proteſtation fait reſpons, donqs ꝑ ceo l
                        •
                      villein eſt franches.
                  Auxy ſi vn villeine purchaſe terre, & ad biens & vend les terres & biēs deuant aſcun entre ou ſeiſin fait per le Seignior, la vend eſt bon, mes le roy que eſt ſeignior de villein ē tiel caſe poit ent & ſeiſer le terre ap
                        •
                     es tiel vendr fait, quia nullum tempus occurrit regi.
               
               
                  Viſcont.
                  VIſcont, eſt ou le noſm̄ de vn degre ou ſtate de honor ſoubs vn Cont & paramont vn Baron ou le noſme de vn Magiſtrate & officer d
                        •
                     l grand aucthority q̄ nous communem̄t appellomus (Shirif) ou de parler plus verayment (Shire reue) & fuit al primes appel (Shire gereue) cē a di
                        •
                     e cuſtos cōit
                        •
                     tus, ou le reue ou ruler del countie, car (Gereue) eſteant deriue de Saxon parol (Gerecian) pur rule,

fuit al primes appel (Gerecfa) & donques (Gerefa) que betoken vn ruler. Et de ceo vient (Portreue ou Portgreue) vn noſme q̄ en viel temps fuit done al chief officer dun ville, & ſignifie le gouernour del ville pur ceo q̄ (Port) v
                        •
                     niens de le latin parol portes, ſignifie vn port ville, & & (Gereue) eſteāt deriue come eſt auantdit ſignifie vn ruler, iſsint que Portgereue, ou come nous a 
                        •••
                      briefement parle ceo (Portreue) eſt le gouernet del ville.
                  Et iſsint fuit le chiefe Officer ou Gouernor del Citie de Londres longe temps paſt (deuant que ils ad le noſm̄ del Maior ou Bailifes) appel, come il appiert en diuers viculx Monuments: Mes principalm̄t en le Saxō Charter de Guilliam Baſtarde le Conquerour, que iſſint commence.
                  William Cing greit Williā Biſceop, & Godfrey Ges port Gerefan, and dalle tha Burwarren the on Londō beon &c.
                  
                     Iſsint ils de Garmanie (de que nous & noſtre language enſemble primerment vient) appel enter eux vn gouernour Burgreeue, vn auter Margreeue, & vn auter Landſgreue, oue tielx ſemblables &c.
                  Ceſt tant eſt dit tantſolement pur monſtre le droit Etymon & antiquitie del parol (Shirife) a quel officer noſtr commō
                     ley ad toutes foits accordant done graund confidence & aucthoritie, come deſtre vn ſpecial p̄ſeruer del peace. Et pur ceo touts obligatiōs q̄ il priſt a meſme le purpoſe, ſont cōe Recogniſances ē ley.
                  Il auxi eſt vn Iudge de record quant il tient les Lee
                        •
                     s on Turnes, les q̄ux ſont Courts de record.
                  Item il ad le execution & retourne des briefs, & empannelling des Iuries, & tiels ſemblables, &c.
               
               
                  Volunt.
                  VOlunt eſt quant le tenant tient a la volunt

del leſſor ou del ſeignior & ceo eſt en deux manners.
                  Vn eſt quant ieo face leaſe a vn home de terres, a tener a ma volunt, donques ieo p
                        ••
                     s luy ouſter a mon pleaſure: Mes ſi il emblee le terre, & ieo luy ouſta, donques il auera ſon emblee
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ & egreſſe & regreſſe i
                        •
                     ſq, ils ſont mature pur cux ſcier & carrier hors del terre.
                  Et
                        ••
                     iel tenaunt a volunt neſt pas tenus de ſuſtayner & repairer le meaſon ſicome tenant a terme de ans eſt tenus: Mes ſi il fait voluntarie waſt, le leſſour auera vers luy vn action de Treſpas.
                  Auxi eſt auter tenaunt a volunt del Seignior per copie de court Rolle ſolonque le cuſtome del manor: Et tiel tenāt poit ſurrēder le tre ē le mains le Seignior ꝑ le cuſtome al vſe vn auter pur terme de vie ou ē fee ſimple, ou fee tail, & donques il p̄ndra le terre del Sn̄r ou ſō Seneſchall per copie, & 
                        •
                     erra fine al Seigniour:

Mes ſile Seigniour ouſta tiel tenant, il nad remedy mes de ſuer per petition, & ſi tiel tenant voile emplede vn auter des terres &c. il couient enter vn plaint en le court, & coū
                     tera en le nature de quel briefe il voit, ſicoe le caſe giſt.
               
               
                  Voucher.
                  VOucher, eſt quant vn Praecipe quod reddat de teire eſt port vers vn home, & vn auter doit garrant le terre al tenaunt, donques le tenant luy vouchera a gair 
                        •
                     ti
                        •
                     , & ſur ceo il auera vn briefe appel Summoneas ad warrantizandum: l
                        •
                     t ſi le vicon
                        •
                      retourne que il nad ri
                        •
                     ns per que il poit eſte ſummon, donques iſſera briefe appel Sequatur ſub ſuo periculo, & quant il vient il pl
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     r
                        •
                      oneſque le demaundaunt, & ſi il vient & ne poit barre le demaundaunt, donques le demaundant recouera, la terre vers le tenaunt,

& le tenant recouera tant de terre en value vers le vouchee, & ſur ceo il auera vn briefe appel Capias ad valentiam vers le vouchee.
                  Vide pluis de Voucher deuant titulo Garrantie.
               
               
                  428 Vſes.
                  VSes de terre ad ſon cō
                     mencement apres q̄ le cuſtome de propertie cō
                     mence ent homes: Come ou vn eſteant ſeiſi de ties en fee ſimple, fait vn feoffement al vn auter ſans aſcun conſideration, mes ſolement meaning que le auter ſerroit ſeiſie al ſon vſe, & que il meſme voile prender le commoditie & profits de les terres, & que le feoffee doit auer le poſſeſsion & franktenement de ceo al meſme le vſe &c.
                  Ore apres ceo ſur bone conſiderations, & pur auoider diuers miſchiefes & inconueniences, fuit le Statute de An. 27. H. 8. ca. 10. puruiew, q̄l vnit le vſe & poſſeſsion enſemble, iſsint que il que ad le vſe

de terre, il meſme ad le poſſeſsion de ceo, accordant al vſe que il auoyt en c̄eo per vertue de ceſt eſtatute.
               
               
                  Vſurie.
                  VSurie, eſt vn gaine de aſcun choſe ouſter le principal, ou ceo que fuit lent, exact ſolem̄t en conſideration de le loan, ſoit il de corne, viande, apparel, wares, ou tielx ſēblables, come de money.
                  Et icy mult poit eſtre dit, & diuers cales poyent eſtre mis concemants Vſurie, le ql de purpoſe ieo omit, ſolement ieo pua, q̄ ceux q̄ accompt eux meſmes religious & bone Chriſtians, ne voylent deceiue eux meſm
                        •
                     s ꝑ colour de le ſtatute de Vſurie, pur ceo q̄ il dit, que il ne ſeria loyal pur aſcun de prender ouſter x. h. en le C. li. pur vn an &c. per que ils collect (mes fauxement) q̄ils poyent ꝑ ceo prender x. la. pur le loane dun C. li. oue vn bon cō
                     ſcience, pu
                        •
                      ceo q le ſtatute ſolonque vn manner

diſpence oue ceo (p
                        ••
                      ceo que il ne puniſhe u
                     
                        •
                     lx prendors) q
                        •
                     el choſe il n
                        •
                      po
                        •
                     t faire oue les leyes & ordināces de d
                        ••
                     u car Di
                        •
                     u voile auer ſes decrees obſerue inuiolable, que dit, lende expectans pur nul choſe pur ceo &c. Per queux parolx eſt exclude, le p
                        •
                     ſell de x. li. v. li. ou de vn denyer ouſter le principall. Mes plus penſant 
                        ••
                     els que ceſt ſtatute fuit fait ſur t
                        •
                     el cauſe, q̄ moua Moyſes de doner vn bill de diuorce 2 les Iſraelites, come noſment, pur auoyder vn greinder miſchiefe, & pur le du
                        •
                     itie de lour ceurs.
               
               
                  430 Vtlary.
                  VTlarie▪ eſt quant exigent iſsiſt vers aſcun home & proclamation fait in v. counties, donques a le v. countie ſi le defendant nappeare, le coroner don
                        •
                     ra iudgem̄t que il 
                        •
                     erra hors de protection de Roy, & hors del eyde le ley.
                  Et per tiel vtlarie in

action perſonels 
                        •
                     e partie vtlage forfetera touts ſes b
                        ••
                     ns & chateux al Roy.
                  Et per vtlarie in felony il forfeitera auxy byen touts ſes terres & tenem̄ts que il ad in fee ſimple, ou pur terme de ſa vie, come ſes biens & chateux.
                  Auxy meſque vn home ſoit vtlage, vncore ſi a
                        •
                     cū diſcontinuance ou errour ſ
                        •
                     it in la ſuite del proces, le partie de ceo auera la aduātage & pur 
                        •
                     iel cauſe lutlagary 
                        •
                     erra reuerſe & adnul.
                  Auxy ſi le partie defendant ſo
                        •
                     t ouſter la mere al temps de vtlaga
                        •
                     y pronounce, ceo eſt bon cauſe de reuer
                        •
                     al del vtlarie.
                  Auxy ſi vn exigent ſoit agard vers vn home in vn countie lou 
                        •
                     l ne demurra pas, vncore vn exigent oue proclamation iſſera al county lou il demurre ou auterment ſil ſoit ſur ceo vtl
                        •
                     ge vtlagarie puit eſte reuerſe come appiert per leſtatute fait anno 6. & 4. Henric
                        •
                      octaui, cap. 4▪
                  
                  
                     Auxy ſi vn ſoit vtlage in action perſonal al ſuite dun auter & puis il purchaſe ſon charter de pardon de Roy, tiel charter ne ſerra iammes allow, tanque il ad ſue vn briefe de Scire facias de garn̄ le partie pleintife, & ſi il appeare, donques le defendant reſpondera a luy & luy barrer̄ de ſa actiō, ou auterment de faire agrement oueſque luy.
               
               
                  431 Vtrum.
                  VTrum, eſt vn briefe & giſt quant le droit daſcun eſgliſe eſt alien & tenus in laye fee, ou tranſlate in poſſeſsion dauter eſgliſe, & le alienour deu
                        •
                     e, donques ſon ſucceſſor auera le dit briefe, per q̄ vn enqueſt ſerra charge de trier vtrum ſit libera el
                        ••
                     moſina eccleſiae vel la
                        •
                     cum feodum. Et nota que nul que ad couent ou common ſeale, puit mainte
                        ••
                     er ceſt briefe, mes briefe Dentre ſin
                        •
                      aſſenſu capituli de alienation fait per 
                        •
                     on predeceſſ
                        •
                     ur.
               
            
            
               
               W.
               
                  Waife.
                  WAife, eſt quant vn laron ad felomouſmēt emblee biens, & eſteant ne
                        •
                     remēt purſue oue hue & crie, ou auterment ſurcharge oue le burden ou trouble des biens, pur ſon eaſe & plus ſpeedie tra
                     
                        •
                     aile ſauns hue & cry fua, & waiua les byens o
                        •
                      aſcun part de eux a
                        ••
                     ere luy &c. donques le officer del Ro
                        •
                     gne, ou le Reeue ou Baylife al Seigniour del mannour (deins que iuriſdiction ou circuit ils fuerount way
                        •
                     e) que per preſcription, ou graunt del Roig
                        •
                     e ad le fra
                        ••
                     
                     chi
                        •
                     e de waife, poyent ſeiſer les biens i
                        ••••
                     t wayfe al v
                        •
                     e de lour Seigniour, q̄ poet retaine eux come ſes proper byens ſinon que le owner vient oueſque freſh 
                        •
                     uite apres le felon▪ & ſue vn appell, o
                        •
                      done en euidence enuers luy al ſon arraignmēt ſur lendictment, & il attaint de 
                        ••
                     o &c. En queux

caſes le primer owner auera reſtitution de ſes biens iſſint emblee & wayfe.
                  Mes nient obſtāt come ad eſte dit, waife eſt propermēt de biens emblees, vncore waife poit eſte auxy de biens nient embles. Come ſi vn hōe ſo
                        •
                     t purſue oueſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      hue & crie, come vn felon, & il fue & relinquiſh ſes biens demeſne &c. ils ſerra priſe cōe biens waife, & forfait com̄ ſils ad eſte emblees.
               
               
                  433 Waiue.
                  WAiue, eſt vn feme que eſt vtlage, & eſt appeal waiue, quaſi relicta a lege, & non vtlage come home eſt, car femes ne ſont iures en leetes al Roigne, ne al ley come homes ſont, queux pur ceo ſont de
                        •
                     ns le ley ou femes ne ſont, & pur ceſt cauſe ils ne poyent eſte dit vtl' ent
                        •
                     nt que ils ne vnques fueront deins ceo. M
                        •
                     s vn home eſt dit vtlage, pur ceo que il fuit vn foits 
                        •
                     ure al ley, & a ore▪ pur contempt il eſt

mys hors del ley, & dictus vtlagatus quaſi extra legem poſitus.
               
               
                  Warwit.
                  WArwit (ou wardwit come aſcuns copies ad ceo) hoe eſt qu
                        •
                     etum eſſe de d
                        •
                     nari
                        •
                     s dandis pro wardis faciendis.
               
               
                  Waſt.
                  WAſt eſt lou tenant a terme dans, tenant a terme de vie, ou renaunt pur terme dauter vie, tenant en dower, ou tenant per la curteſie, ou gardein en chiualry fait waſt ou deſtruction ſur la terre. s. ſil debruſa meaſon, ou coupe meriſme, ou ſuffer le meaſ voluntarily pur eſch
                        •
                     er, ou foder la terre, donq̄ ceſty en le reuerſion auera vn briefe & recouer̄ le lieu ou le waſt fuit fait & treble dam̄, mes ſi home coup̄ meriſme ſans licence, & oueſque ceo repaire les auncient meaſons, vnc' ceo neſt pas waſt. Mes ſil oueſque le meriſme 
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     fia vn nouel

meaſon donques le couper de tiel meriſme eſt waſt. Auxi le couper de ſubboys ou willowes q̄ neſt pas meriſme, ne ſer
                        •
                     a dit waſt, ſinō que ils creſſount en le view del ſite del meaſon.
               
               
                  436 Wrecke.
                  WRecke ou varech cōe les Normans de que il vient appello
                        •
                     t ceo, eſt quant vn 
                        ••
                     efe eſt periſh ſur la mere, & nul home eſcape viue hors de niefe & le niefe ou part del niefe iſsint periſhe ou les biens en la niefe vient al terre daſcun ſeigniour, le ſeigniour les auera cōe vn wrecke de mere, mes ſi vn home ou vn chyen ou chate eſcape viue, iſſint q̄ la partie a que les biēs ſont veign̄ de
                        •
                     ns lan & iour, & proue les biens deſtr̄ ſes, il auera eux arr̄, ꝑ prouiſion del ſtatute de Weſt. le primer ca 4. fait en les iours del Roy Ed. 1. que en ceo followed le decree de H. 1. deuant que iours, ſi vn niefe ad eſtre miſe ſur le ſhore,

torne oue tempeſt, & 
                        •
                     emy repaier per eux que eſcapont en vie deins vn certeine temps, que donques ceo fuit priſe come wrecke.
               
               
                  Withernam.
                  WIthernā, Vide de ceo deuant, titulo Diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  Warren.
                  WArren eſt vn lieu priuiledge ꝑ preſcription ou grant del Roign̄ pur le preſeruation del liuerets, comes, perdices & feſants, ou aſcun de eux.
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   