
      
         
            
            
               
THE FAMOVS AND WONDERFVLL RECOVERIE of a Ship of Bristoll, called the Exchange, from the Turkish Pirates of ARGIER. WITH THE VNMATCHABLE attempts and good successe of Iohn Rawlins, Pilot in her, and other slaues; who in the end with the slaughter of about 40. of the Turkes and Moores, brought the Ship into Plimouth the 13. of February last; with the Captaine a Renegado, and 5. Turkes more, besides the redemption of 24. men, and one boy, from Turkish slauerie.
            LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, dwelling at the Pide Bull at Saint Austins Gate. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE, Marquisse of Buckingham, Vicount Villiers, Baron of Whaddon, Lord high Admirall of England, Iustice in Eyre of all his Majesties Forrests, Parkes, and Chases beyond Trent, Master of the Horse to his Majestie, and one of the Gentlemen of his Majesties Bed-Chamber; Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesties most honourable Priuie Councell of England and Scotland.
            
            Right Honourable:
            
               SEeing it hath pleased God by so weake meanes, as my poore selfe, to haue his power and goodnesse made manifest to the world, as by this following Relation may appeare, I thought it my dutie to present the same vnto you, whom the Majestie of England hath presented vnto vs, as our Patron and chiefe Commander of our Sea-affaires: Accept it then, I humbly beseech you, as an vnpolished worke of a poore Sailer;

and the rather for that it exemplifies the glory of God: for by such men, as my selfe, your Honour must be serued, and England made the happiest of all Nations. For though you haue greater persons, and more brauing spirits to lie ouer our heads, and hold inferiours in subiection; yet are we the men that must pull the ropes, weigh vp the anchors, toile in the night, endure the stormes, sweat at the Helme, watch the Biticle, attend the Compasse, guard the Ordnance, keepe the night houres, and be ready for all impositions: If then you vouchsafe to entertaine it, I haue my desire. For according to the oath of Iurors, it is the truth, and the very truth: If otherwise you suppose it triuiall, it is only the prostitution of my seruice, and wisdome is not bought in the market.
            Your Honours humbly to be commanded,
            
               John Rawlins.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FAMOVS and wonderfull recouery of the Exchange of BRISTOVV, from the Turkish Pirats of ARGIER.
            
               THe Psalmist saith, that he that goeth to sea, shall see the wonders of God: and I may well say, that hee that conuerseth with Mariners and Saylers, shall heare of the wonders of men, as by this following discourse shall appeare: not that I am willing to be the author of nouelty, or amaze you with incredible reports; but because I would not let slip so remarkeable an accident, and so profitable a relation: remarkable, as extending to manifest the power and glory of God, who hath variety of supportation in store to sweeten affliction, & make all endurances subiect to fortitude and patience: profitable, as being thus farre exemplary, to teach all men of action, and imployment, not to dispaire in distresse, and to know thus much, that braue

attempts are compassed by resolution, and industrious imployment, and whether they thriue or no, yet shall the enterprise be Charactered with a worthy exploit, and if it end with successe, oh how shall the Actors be remembred to posterity! and make their fame immortall, that either purchased their liberty euen out of fire, or deliuered themselues, though by death it selfe, from slauish captiuitie, or the thraldome of barbarous Infidels, who glory in nothing more then the perdition of our soules, and derision of our Christ: Hearken then I pray you to this following relation, and learne hereby, as I said, both to giue God the praise of all deliuerances, and to instruct one another in the absolute duties of Christianity. By the one, the power and prouidence with all the attributes belonging to so immense a deitie, shall be made manifest: by the other, the weake brother shall bee comforted, the strong confirmed, the wauering reduced, the faint hearted erected, and the presumptuous moderated: By both religion shall haue a sweet passage in the consciences of men, and men made the happy instruments of Gods glory, and their owne increases of good example, and imitation. And thus much for preamble or introduction: now to the matter it selfe.
            In the yeere 1621. the first of Nouember there was one Iohn Rawlins borne in Rochester, and dwelling 23. yeere in Plimmoth, imployed to the strait of Gibralter by Mr. Richard and Steuen Treuiles, marchants of Plimmoth, and fraighted in a barke called the Nicholas of Plimmoth, of the burthen of 40. Tunne,

which had also in her company another ship of Plimmoth called the George Bonauenture of 70. Tunne burthen, or thereabout; which by reason of her greatnesse beyond the other, I will name the Admirall; and Iohn Rawlins barke shall if you please bee the Viceadmirall. These two according to the time of yeere, had a faire passage, and by the 18. of the same month came to a place at the entring of the straites named Trafflegar: but the next morning, being in sight of Gibralter, at the very mouth of the straites, the watch descried 5. saile of ships, who as it seemed vsed all the meanes they could to come neere vs, and we as we had cause, vsed the same meanes to goe as farre from them: yet did their Admirall take in both his top sailes, that either we might not suspect them, or that his owne company might come vp the closer together. At last perceiuing vs Christians, they fell from deuices to apparent discouery of hostility, and making out against vs: wee againe suspecting them Pirats, tooke our course to escape from them, and made all the sailes we possibly could for Terriff, or Gibralter: but all wee could doe, could not preuent their approach. For suddenly one of them came right ouer against vs to winde ward, and so fell vpon our quarter: another came vpon our luffe, and so threatned vs there, and at last all fiue chas'd vs, making great speed to surprise vs.
            Their Admirall was called Callfater, hauing vpon her maine top-saile, two top-gallant sailes, one aboue another. But whereas we thought them all fiue to be Turkish ships of warre, we afterwards vnderstood, that

two of them were their prises, the one a small ship of London, the other of the West countrey, that came out of the Quactath laden with figges, and other merchandise, but now subiect to the Fortune of the sea, and the captiuity of Pirats. But to our businesse. Three of these ships got much vpon vs, and so much that ere halfe the day was spent, the Admirall who was the best sayler, fetcht vp the George Bonauenture, and made booty of it. The Vice-admirall againe being neerest vnto the lesser barke, whereof Iohn Rawlins was Master, shewed him the force of a stronger arme, and by his Turkish name called Villa-Rise commanded him in like sort to strike his sailes, and submit to his mercy, which not to be gainesaied nor preuented, was quickly done: and so Rawlins with his barke was as quickly taken, although the Reare Admirall being the worst sailer of the three, called Riggiprise, came not in, till all was done.
            The same day before night, the Admirall either loth to pester himselfe with too much company, or ignorant of the commodity was to bee made by the sale of English prisoners, or daring not to trust them in his company, for feare of mutinies, and exciting others to rebellion; set 12. persons who were in the George Bonauenture on the land, and diuers other English, whom he had taken before, to try their fortunes in an vnknowne countrey. But Villa-Rise, the Vice-Admirall that had taken Iohn Rawlins, would not so dispence with his men, but commanded him and fiue more of his company to be brought aboord his ship, leauing in his barke three men and his boy, with thirteene

               Turkes and Mores, who were questionlesse sufficient to ouer-master the other, and direct the Barke to harbour. Thus they sailed directly for Argier; but the night following, followed them with great tempest and soule weather, which ended not without some effect of a storme: for they lost the sight of Rawlins Barke, called the Nicolas, and in a manner lost themselues, though they seemed safe a shipbord, by fearefull coniecturing what should become of vs: at last by the 22. of the same moneth, they, or we, chuse you whether (for I would not be mistaken in altering the persons, by either naming the first for the third, or the third for the first, but only make the discourse equall, by setting downe the businesse honestly and truly, as it chanced) arriued at Argier, and came in safetie within the Mould, but found not our other Barke there; nay though we earnestly inquired after the same, yet heard we nothing to our satisfaction; but much matter was ministred to our discomfort and amazement. For although the Captaine and our ouer-seers, were loth we should haue any conference with our Countrymen; yet did wee aduenture to informe our selues of the present affaires both of the Towne, and the shipping: so that finding many English at worke in other ships, they spared not to tell vs the danger we were in, and the mischiefes we must needs incurre, as being sure if we were not vsed like slaues, to be sold as slaues: for there had beene 500. brought into the market for the same purpose, and aboue a 100. hansome youths compelled to turne Turkes, or made subiect to more vilder

prostitution, and all English: yet like good Christians, they bade vs be of good cheere, and comfort our selues in this, that Gods trials were gentle purgations, and these crosses were but to cleanse the drosse from the gold, and bring vs out of the fire againe more cleare and louely. Yet I must needs confesse, that they afforded vs reason for this crueltie, as if they determined to be reuenged of our last attempt to fire their ships in the Mould, and therefore protested to spare none, whom they could surprise, and take aliue, but either to sell them for money, or torment them to serue their owne turnes. Now their customes and vsages in both these was in this manner.
            First, concerning the first. The Bashaw had the ouer-seeing of all prisoners, who were presented vnto him at their first comming into the harbour, and so chose one out of euery eight for a present or fee to himselfe: the rest were rated by the Captaines, and so sent to the market to be sold; whereat if either there were repining, or any drawing backe, then certaine Mores and officers attended either to beat you forward, or thrust you into the sides with goades, and this was the manner of the selling of slaues.
            Secondly, concerning their enforcing them, either to turne Turke, or to attend their filthinesse & impieties, although it would make a Christians heart bleed to heare of the same, yet must the truth not be hid, nor the terror left vntold. They commonly lay them on their naked backs, or bellies, beating them so long, till they bleed at the nose and mouth, and if yet they continue constant, then they strike the teeth out of

their heads, pinch them by their tongues, and vse many other sorts of tortures to conuert them; nay many times they lay them their whole length in the ground like a graue, and so couer them with boords, threatning to starue them, if they will not turne, and so many euen for feare of torment, and death, make their tongues betray their hearts to a most fearefull wickednesse, and so are circumcised with new names, and brought to confesse a new religion. Others againe, I must confesse, who neuer knew any God, but their owne sensuall lusts, and pleasures, thought that any religion would serue their turnes, and so for preferment or wealth very voluntarily renounced their faith, and became Renegadoes in despight of any counsell which seemed to intercept them: and this was the first newes we encountred with at our comming first to Argier.
            
            The 26. of the same moneth, Iohn Rawlins his Barke, with his other three men and a boy, came safe into the Mould, and so were put all together to be caried before the Bashaw, but that they tooke the Owners seruant, and Rawlins boy, and by force and torture compelled them to turne Turkes: then were they in all 7. English, besides Iohn Rawlins, of whom the Bashaw tooke one, and sent the rest to their Captaines, who set a valuation vpon them, and so the souldiers hurried vs like dogs into the market, whereas men sell Hackneies in England; we were tossed vp and downe to see who would giue most for vs; and although we had heauy hearts, and looked with sad countenances, yet many came to behold vs, sometimes

taking vs by the hand, sometime turning vs round about, sometimes feeling our brawnes, and naked armes, and so beholding our prices written in our breasts, they bargained for vs accordingly, and at last we were all sold, and the souldiers returned with the money to their Captaines.
            
               Iohn Rawlins was the last, who was sold, by reason of his lame hand, and bought by the Captaine that tooke him, euen that dog Villa Rise, who better informing himselfe of his skill fit to be a Pilot, and his experience to be an ouer-seer, bought him and his Carpenter at very easie rates. For as we afterwards vnderstood by diuers English Renegadoes, he paid for Rawlins but 150. dooblets, which make of English money seuen pound ten shilling. Thus was he & his Carpenter with diuers other slaues sent into his ship to worke, and imployed about such affaires, as belonged to the well rigging & preparing the same. But the villanous Turkes perceiuing his lame hand, and that he could not performe so much as other slaues, quickly complained to their Patron, who as quickly apprehended the inconuenience; whereupon he sent for him the next day, and told him he was vnseruiceable for his present purpose, and therefore vnlesse hee could procure fifteene pound of the English there, for his ransome, hee would send him vp into the countrey, where he should neuer see Christendome againe, and endure the extremitie of a miserable banishment.
            But see how God worketh all for the best for his seruants, and confoundeth the presumption of Tyrants,

frustrating their purposes, to make his wonders knowne to the sonnes of men, and releeues his people, when they least thinke of succour and releasement. Whilest Iohn Rawlins was thus terrified with the dogged answer of Villa Rise, the Exchange of Bristow, a ship formerly surprised by the Pirates, lay all vnrigged in the harbour, till at last one Iohn Goodale an English Turke, with his confederates, vnderstanding she was a good sailer, and might be made a proper man of warre, bought her from the Turkes that tooke her, and prepared her for their owne purpose: now the Captaine that set them on worke, was also an English Renegado, by the name of Rammetham Rise, but by his christen name Henry Chandler, who resolued to make Goodale Master ouer her, & because they were both English Turkes, hauing the command notwithstanding of many Turkes and Mores, they concluded to haue all English slaues to goe in her, and for their Gunners English and Dutch Renegadoes, and so they agreed with the Patrons of nine English, and one French slaue for their ransoms, who were presently imployed to rig and furnish the ship for a man of warre, and while they were thus busied, two of Iohn Rawlins men, who were taken with him, were also taken vp to serue in this man of warre, their names Iames Roe, and Iohn Dauies, the one dwelling in Plimmoth, and the other in Foy, where the Commander of this ship was also borne, by which occasion they came acquainted, so that both the Captaine, and the Master promised them good vsage vpon the good seruice they should performe

in the voyage, and withall demanded of him, if he knew of any Englishman to bee bought, that could serue them as a Pilot, both to direct them out of harbour, and conduct them in their voyage. For in truth neither was the Captaine a Mariner, nor any Turke in her of sufficiency to dispose of her through the straites in security, nor oppose any enemie, that should hold it out brauely against them. Dauies quickly replyed, that as farre as hee vnderstood, Villa Rise would sell Iohn Rawlins his Master, and Commander of the Barke which was taken: A man euery way sufficient for sea affaires, being of great resolution and good experience, and for all he had a lame hand, yet had he a sound heart and noble courage for any attempt or aduenture.
            When the Captaine vnderstood thus much, he imployed Dauies to search for Rawlins, who at last lighting vpon him, asked him if the Turke would sell him: Rawlins suddenly answered, that by reason of his lame hand he was willing to part with him, but because hee had disbursed money for him, hee would gaine something by him, and so prized mee at three hundred dooblets, which amounteth to fifteene pound English: which I must procure or incurre sorer indurances. When Dauies had certified thus much, the Turkes a shipboord conferred about the matter, and the Master whose christen name was Iohn Goodale ioyned with two Turkes, who were consorted with him, and disbursed 100. dooblets apeece, and so bought him of Villa Rise, sending him into the said ship, called the Exchange of

               Bristow, as well to superuise what had beene done, as to order what was left vndone, but especially to fit the sailes, and to accommodate the ship, all which Rawlins was very carefull and indulgent in, not yet thinking of any peculiar plot of deliuerance, more then a generall desire to bee freed from this Turkish slauery, and inhumane abuses.
            By the seuenth of Ianuary the ship was prepared with 12. good cast peeces, and all manner of munition and prouision, which belonged to such a purpose, and the same day haled out of the Mould of Argier, with this company and in this manner.
            There were in her 63. Turkes and Mores, 9. English slaues, and one French: foure Hollanders, that were free men, to whom the Turkes promised one prise or other, and so to returne to Holland, or if they were disposed to goe backe againe for Argier, they should haue great reward and no enforcement offered, but continue as they would both their religion and their customes: and for their Gunners they had two of our soldiers, one English and one Dutch Renegado; and thus much for the company. For the manner of setting out, it was as vsuall as in other ships, but that the Turkes delighted in the ostentous brauery of their streamers, banners, & top-sailes: the ship being a hansome ship, and well built for any purpose: the slaues and English were imployed vnder hatches about the Ordnance and other workes of order, and accommodating themselues: all which Iohn Rawlins marked, as supposing it an intolerable slauery to take such paines, and bee subiect to such

dangers, and still to enrich other men, and maintaine their voluptuous filthinesse and liues, returning themselues as slaues, and liuing worse then their dogs amongst them.
            Whereupon after hee had conceited vpon the indignity, and reproach of their basenesse, and the glory of an exploit, that could deliuer himselfe and the rest, from this slauish captiuity, being very busie among the English in pulling of ropes, and placing of Ordnance, he burst out into these, or such like abrupt speeches: Oh hellish slauery to bee thus subiect to dogs! to labour thus to inrich infidels, and maintaine their pleasures, to be our selues slaues, and worse then the out-cast of the world: is there no way of releasement? no deuise to free vs from this bondage? no exploit, no action of worth to bee put in execution, to make vs renowned in the world, and famous to posteritie? Oh God strengthen my heart and hand, and something shall be done to ease vs of these mischiefes, and deliuer vs from these cruell Mahumetan dogs. The other slaues pittying his distraction (as they thought) bade him speake softly, lest they should all fare the worse for his distemperature. The worse, (quoth Rawlins) what can bee worse? death is the determiner of all misery, and torture can last but a while: but to bee continually a dying, and suffer all indignity and reproach, and in the end to haue no welcome but into the house of slaughter or bondage, is vnsufferable, and more then flesh and bloud can endure: and therefore by that saluation which Christ hath brought, I will either attempt

my deliuerance at one time, or another, or perish in the enterprise: but if you would bee contented to hearken after a release and ioyne with me in the action, I would not doubt of facilitating the same, and shew you a way to make your credits thriue by some worke of amazement, & augment your glory in purchasing your libertie. I prethee be quiet (said they againe) and thinke not of impossibilities: yet if you can but open such a doore of reason, and probabilitie, that we be not condemned for desperate and distracted persons, in pulling the Sunn
                  •
                as it were out of the firmament, we can but sacrifice our liues, and you may be sure of secrecie and taciturnitie. Now blessed be my Genius, said Rawlins, that euer this motiue was so opportunely preferd, and therefore we will be quiet a while, till the iron be hotter, that we may not strike in vaine.
            The 15. of Ianuarie the morning water brought vs neere Cape de Gatt, hard by the shore, we hauing in our companie a small Turkish ship of warre, that followed vs out of Argier the next day, and now ioyning with vs, gaue vs notice of seuen small vessels, six of them being Sattees, and one Pollack, who very quickly appeared in sight, and so we made toward them; but hauing more aduantage of the Pollack, then the rest, and loth to lose all, we both fercht her vp, and brought her past hope of recouerie, which when she perceiued, rather then she would voluntarily come into the slauerie of these Mahumetans, shee ranne her selfe a shore, and so all the men forsooke her; we still followed as neere as we durst, and for

feare of splitting, let fall our anchors, making out both our boats, wherein were many Musketeers, and some English and Dutch Renegadoes, who came aboord home at their Conge, and found three peeces of Ordnance, and foure Murtherers, but they straight way threw them all ouer-boord to lighten the ship, and so they got her off, being laden with Hides, and Logwood for dying, and presently sent her to Argier, taking nine Turkes, and one English slaue, out of one ship, and six out of the lesse, which we thought sufficient to man her.
            But see the chance, or if you will, how fortune smiled on vs: In the rifling of this Catelaynia, our Turkes fell at variance one with another, and in such a manner, that we diuided our selues, the lesser ship returned to Argier, and our Exchange tooke the opportunitie of the winde, and plied out of the Straights, which reioyced Iohn Rawlins very much, as resoluing on some Stratagem, when opportunitie should serue: In the meane while, the Turks began to murmure, and would not willingly goe into the Marr Granda, as the phrase is amongst them: notwithstanding the Mores, being very superstitious, were contented to be directed by their Hoshea, who with vs signifieth a witch, and is of great account and reputation amongst them, as not going in any great vessell to Sea without one, and obseruing whatsoeuer he concludeth out of his diuination: the ceremonies he vseth are many, and when they come into the Ocean, euery second or third night he maketh his coniuration; he beginneth and endeth with prayer, vsing many Characters,
               
and calling vpon God by diuers names: yet at this time, all that he did consisted in these particulars.
            Vpon the sight of two great ships, and as we were afraid the chasing, being supposed to be Spanish men of warre, a great silence is commanded in the ship, and when all is done, the companie giueth as great a skrich; the Captaine still comming to Iohn Rawlins, and sometimes making him take in all his sailes, and sometimes causing him to hoise them all out, as the Witch findeth by his booke, and presages; then haue they two arrowes, and a curtleaxe, lying vpon a pillow naked; the arrowes are one for the Turkes, and the other for the Christians; then the Witch readeth, and the Captaine or some other taketh the arrowes in their hand by the heads, and if the arrow for the Christians commeth ouer the head of the arrow for the Turkes, then doe they aduance their sailes, and will not endure the fight, whatsoeuer they see: but if the arrow of the Turkes is found in the opening of the hand vpon the arrow of the Christians, then will they stay and encounter with any ship whatsoeuer: the Curtleaxe is taken vp by some childe, that is innocent, or rather ignorant of the ceremonie, and so laid downe againe; then doe they obserue, whether the same side is vppermost, which lay before, and so proceed accordingly. They also obserue Lunaticks and changelings, and the Coniurer writeth downe their sayings in a booke, groueling on the ground, as if he whisperd to the Deuill to tell him the truth, and so expoundeth the letter, as it were by inspiration. Many other foolish rites they haue, whereon they

doe dote as foolishly, and whereof I could intreat more at large, but this shall suffice at this time.
            Whilst he was thus busied, and made demonstration that all was finished, the people in the ship gaue a great shout, and cried out, a saile, a saile, which at last was discouered to be another man of warre of Turkes: for he made toward vs, and sent his boat aboord vs, to whom our Captaine complained, that being becalmed by the Southerne Cape, and hauing made no voyage, the Turkes denied to goe any further Northward: but the Captaine resolued not to returne to Argier, except he could obtaine some prize worthy his endurances, but rather to goe to Salle, and sell his Christians to victuall his ship; which the other Captaine apprehended for his honour, and so perswaded the Turkes to be obedient vnto him; whereupon followed a pacification amongst vs, and so that Turke tooke his course for the Streights, and we put vp Northward, expecting the good houre of some beneficiall bootie.
            All this while our slauerie continued, and the Turkes with insulting tyrannie set vs still on worke in all base and seruile actions, adding stripes and inhumane reuilings, euen in our greatest labour, whereupon Iohn Rawlins resolued to obtaine his libertie, and surprise the ship; prouiding ropes with broad specks of iron, and all the iron crowes, with which he knew a way, vpon consent of the rest, to ramme vp or tie fast their scuttels, gratings, and Cabbins, yea to shut vp the Captaine himselfe with all his consorts, and so to handle the matter, that vpon the watchword

giuen, the English being masters of the Gunner roome, Ordnance, and powder, they would either blow them into the aire, or kill them as they aduentured to come downe one by one, if they should by any chance open their Cabbins. But because hee would proceede the better in his enterprise, as he had somewhat abruptly discouered himselfe to the nine English slaues, so he kept the same distance with the 4. Hollanders, that were free men, til finding them comming somewhat toward them, he acquainted them with the whole conspiracy, & they affecting the plot, offered the aduenture of their liues in the businesse. Then very warily hee vndermined the English Renegado, which was the Gunner, and three more his associats, who at first seemed to retract. Last of all were brought in the Dutch Renegadoes, who were also in the Gunner roome, for alwaies there lay 12. there, fiue Christians, and 7. English and Dutch Turkes: so that when another motion had setled their resolutions, and Iohn Rawlins his constancy had put new life as it were in the matter, the 4. Hollanders very honestly according to their promise sownded the Dutch Renegadoes, who with easie perswasion gaue their consent to so braue an enterprise; whereupon Iohn Rawlins not caring whether the English Gunners would yeeld or no, resolued in the Captaines morning watch, to make the attempt: But you must vnderstand that where the English slaues lay, there hung vp alwaies foure or fiue crowes of Iron, being still vnder the carriages of the peeces, and when the time approached being very darke, because

               Iohn Rawlins would haue his crow of iron ready as other things were, and other men prepared in their seuerall places, in taking it out of the cariage by chance it hit on the side of the peece, making such a noise, that the soldiers hearing it awaked the Turkes, and bad them come downe: whereupon the Botesane of the Turkes descended with a candle, and presently searched all the slaues places, making much adoe of the matter, but finding neither hatchet nor hammer nor any thing else to moue suspition of the enterprise, more then the crow of iron, which lay slipped downe vnder the cariages of the peeces, they went quietly vp againe, and certified the Captaine what had chanced, who satisfied himselfe, that it was a common thing to haue a crow of iron slip from his place.
            But by this occasion we made stay of our attempt, yet were resolued to take another or a better opportunity: only I must tell you, what Iohn Rawlins would haue done, if this accident had not happened: he was fully minded with some others with their naked kniues in their hands, to presse vpon the Gunners brest, and the other English Renegadoes, and either force them to consent to their designes, or cut their throates, first telling them plainely, that they had vowed to surprise the ship, and by Gods assistance to obtaine their liberty, and therefore either die or consent, that when you heare the watchword giuen, for God, and King Iames, and St. George for England, you presently keepe your places and aduise to execute what you are commanded.
            
               
But as you haue heard, God was the best Physitian to our wounded hearts, and vsed a kinde of preuenting physicke, rather then to cure vs so suddenly: so that out of his prouidence perceiuing some danger in this enterprise, he both caused vs to desist, and at last brought our businesse to a better period, and fortunate end. For we sailed still more Northward, and Rawlins had more time to tamper with his Gunners, and the rest of the English Renegadoes, who very willingly, when they considered the matter, and perpended the reasons, gaue way vnto the proiect, & with a kinde of ioy seemed to entertaine the motiues: only they made a stop at the first onset, who should begin the enterprise, which was no way fit for them to doe, because they were no slaues, but Renegadoes, and so had alwaies beneficiall entertainement amongst them. But when it is once put in practise, they would bee sure not to faile them, but venture their liues for God and their country. When Rawlins had heard them out, he much liked their contradiction, and told them plainely, hee did require no such thing at their hands, but the slaues and himselfe would first sound the channell, and then aduenture the water, & so after reciprocall oathes taken, & hands giuen, Rawlins once againe lay in waite for the fittest opportunity, but once againe he is disappointed, and a suspitious accident brought him to recollect his spirits anew, and study on the danger of the enterprise, and thus it was.
            After the Renegado Gunner had protested secrecy by all that might induce a man to bestow some beleefe

vpon him, he presently went vp the scottle, but staied not aloft a quarter of an houre, nay he came sooner downe, and in the Gunner roome sate by Rawlins, who tarried for him where he left him: he was no sooner placed, and entred into some conference, but there entred into the place a furious Turke with his knife drawne, and presented it to Rawlins his body, who verily supposed, hee intended to kill him, as suspitious that the Gunner had discouered something, whereat Rawlins was much moued, and so hastily asked what the matter meant, or whether he would kill him or no, obseruing his countenance, and according to the nature of iealousie, conceiting that his colour had a passage of change, whereby his suspitious heart, condemned him for a Traitor: but that at more leisure he sware the contrary, and afterward proued faithfull and industrious in the enterprise. And for the present he answered Rawlins in this manner, no Master be not afraid, I thinke he doth but iest. With that Iohn Rawlins gaue backe a little and drew out kis knife, stepping also to the Gunners sheath and taking out his, whereby hee had two kniues to one, which when the Turke perceiued, hee threw downe his knife, saying hee did but iest with him. But (as I said) when the Gunner perceiued Rawlins tooke it so ill, he whispered something in his eare, that at last satisfied him, calling heauen to witnesse, that hee neuer spake word of the enterprise, nor euer would, either to the preiudice of the businesse, or danger of his person: Notwithstanding Rawlins kept the kniues in his sleeue all night, and

was somewhat troubled, for that he had made so many acquainted with an action of such importance: but the next day when he perceiued the coast cleare, and that there was no cause of further feare, he somewhat comforted himselfe, and grew bolder and bolder in disposing the affaires of the ship, only it grieued him, that his enterprises were thus procrastinated, whereby the Mahumetane tyrannie increased, and the poore slaues euen groned againe vnder the burthen of their bondage, and thought euery day a yeere till some thing were put in execution for their deliuerance: for it was now full fiue weekes, since Rawlins first proiected the matter.
            All this while Rawlins drew the Captaine to lie for the Northerne Cape, assuring him, that thereby he should not misse purchase, which accordingly fell out, as a wish would haue it: but his drift was in truth to draw him from any supply, or second of Turkes, if God should giue way to their enterprise, or successe to the victorie: yet for the present the 6. of February being 12. leagues from the Cape, we descried a saile, and presently tooke the aduantage of the winde in chasing her, and at last fetcht her vp, making her strike all her sailes, whereby we knew her to be a Barke belonging to Torbay neere Dartmouth, that came from Auerare laden with salt: ere we had fully dispatched, it chanced to be foule weather, so that we could not, or at least would not make out our boat, but caused the Master of the Barke to let downe his, and come aboord with his companie, being in the

Barke but 9. men, and one boy; and so the Master leauing his Mate with two men in the same, came himselfe with 5. men, and the boy vnto vs, whereupon our Turkish Captaine sent 10. Turks to man her, amongst whom were two Dutch, and one English Renegado, who were of our confederacie, and acquainted with the businesse.
            But when Rawlins saw this partition of his friends, before they could hoise out their boat for the Barke, he made meanes to speake with them, and told them plainly, that he would prosecute the matter either that night, or the next, and therefore whatsoeuer came of it they should acquaint the English with his resolution, and make toward England, bearing vp the helme, whiles the Turkes slept, and suspected no such matter: for by Gods grace in his first watch about midnight, he would shew them a light, by which they might vnderstand, that the enterprise was begun, or at least in a good forwardnesse for the execution: and so the bote was let downe, and they came to the Barke of Torbay, where the Masters Mate being left (as before you haue heard) apprehended quickly the matter, and heard the discourse with amazement. But time was pretious, & not to be spent in disputing, or casting of doubts, whether the Turkes that were with them, were able to master them, or no, being seuen to six, considering they had the helme of the ship, and the Turkes being souldiers, and ignorant of Sea affaires, could not discouer, whether they went to Argier, or no; or if they did, they resolued by Rawlins example to cut their throats, or cast them

ouer boord: and so I leaue them to make vse of the Renegadoes instructions, and returne to Rawlins againe.
            The Master of the Barke of Torbay, and his companie were quickly searched, and as quickly pillaged, and dismissed to the libertie of the ship, whereby Rawlins had leisure to entertaine him with the lamentable newes of their extremities, and the aduenture of their voyages, whereby he vnderstood of his first setting out from the West country, of his taking and surprizing at Sea by Villa Rise, of his twice being sold as a slaue, and so continuing to his heart-burning and excruciation; of the making the Exchange of Bristow a man of warre, which they were now in; of the Captaine and Master, who were both English Renegadoes; of the crueltie of the Turkes in generall, and his owne fortunes in particular; of his admission into the ship as a Pilot; of the friendship which passed betweene him and the Hollanders; of the imparting the secret of surprizing the ship both to the slaues and Christian Renegadoes; of their consent and couragious apprehension of the matter; of the first attempt, and their twice disappointing; of his still resolution presently to put it in practise; of his last acquainting the Dutch Renegadoes, who went aboord his Barke; and in a word, of euery particular which was befitting to the purpose: yea he told him, that that night he should lose the sight of them, for they would make the helme for England, and he would that night and euermore pray for their good successe, and safe deliuerance.
            When the Master of the Barke of Torbay had heard

him out, and that his companie were partakers of his storie, they became all silent, not either diffident of his discourse, or afraid of the attempt, but as wondring at the goodnesse of God, and his mercy, in chusing out such weake instruments to set forth his glory. True, quoth Rawlins, when he found them comming toward him, it is so: For marke but the circumstances of the matter, and you shall see the very finger of God to point vs out our deliuerance. When we came into the maine Ocean to hunt after prizes, according to the nature of Pirates, and that I resolued on the enterprise, there were 65. Turkes in our ship, and only 17. of our confederacie; then it pleased God to abate vs 10. of the Turkes, who were sent to Argier with the Pollaker before recited; and when we were disappointed againe of our purposes, you see now what hath chanced, we are rid of more Turkes, and welcome you as a new supply; so that if you please, we shall be 24. strong, and they in all are but 45: Be therefore couragious, and let vs ioyne heart, hand, and foot together, that we may execute this braue attempt, for Gods glory, our Countries honour, the good example of other, our owne deliuerance, and if we may not be counted vaine-glorious, our euerlasting memorie.
            By that time he had finished this discourse also, the Master of the Barke and his companie resolued to assist him, as proiecting the miserie and wretchednesse they should endure by being slaues to the Turks, and the happinesse of their libertie, besides the reputation of the enterprise; as for death, it was in communitie

to all men, and so in the hands of God to dispose at his pleasure, and either could not happen before the houre of limitation, or could not be preuented: for humane pollicy must submit to Diuine prouidence: yet to shew himselfe an vnderstanding man, he demanded of Rawlins, what weapons hee had: and in what manner he would execute the businesse, to which he answered, that he had ropes, and iron hookes to make fast the scottels, gratings, and cabbines, he had also in the Gunner roome two Curtleaxes, and the slaues had fiue crowes of iron before them: Besides, in the scuffling they made no question of some of the soldiers weapons: then for the manner, he told them, they were sure of the Ordnance, the Gunner roome, and the Powder, and so blocking them vp, would either kill them as they came downe, or turne the Ordnance against their Cabbins, or blow them into the aire by one stratagem or other, and thus were they contented on all sides, and resolued to the enterprise.
            The next morning being the seuenth day of February the prise of Torbay was not to bee seene or found, whereat the Captaine began to storme and sweare, commanding Rawlins to search the seas vp and downe for her, who bestowed all that day in the businesse, but to little purpose: whereupon when the humor was spent, the Captaine pacified himselfe, as conceiting he should sure finde her at Argier: but by the permission of the ruler of all actions, that Argier was England, and all his wickednesse frustrated: for Rawlins being now startled, lest hee should returne

in this humor for the straits, the 8. of February went downe into the hold, and finding a great deale of water below, told the Captaine of the same, adding, that it did not come to the Pumpe, which he did very politickly, that he might remoue the Ordnance: For when the Captaine askt him the reason, he told him the ship was too farre after the head: then he commanded to vse the best meanes hee could to bring her in order: sure then quoth Rawlins we must quit our Cables, and bring 4, peeces of Ordnance after, and that would bring the water to the Pumpe, which was presently put in practise, so the peeces being vsually made fast thwart the ship, we brought two of them with their mouthes right before the byticle, and because the Renegadoe Flemings would not begin, it was thus concluded: that the ship hauing three decks, wee that did belong to the Gunner roome should be all there, & breake vp the lower decke. The English slaues, who alwaies lay in the middle decke, should doe the like, and watch the scuttels: Rawlins himselfe preuailed with the Gunner, for so much powder, as should prime the peeces, and so told them all there was no better watchword, nor meanes to begin, then vpon the report of the peece to make a crie and skrich, for God, and King Iames, and Saint George for England.
            
            When all things were prepared, and euery man resolued, as knowing what he had to doe, and the houre when it should happen, to be two in the after noone, Rawlins aduised the Master Gunner to speake to the Captaine, that the soldiers might attend on the Poope,

which would bring the ship after: to which the Captaine was very willing, and vpon the Gunners information, the soldiers gat themselues to the Poope, to the number of twenty, and 5. or 6. went into the Captaines Cabbin, where alwaies lay diuers Curtleaxes, and some targets, and so we fell to worke to pumpe the water, and caried the matter fairely till the next day, which was spent as the former, being the ninth of February, and as God must haue the praise, the triumph of our victory.
            For by that time all things were prepared, and the soldiers got vpon the Poope as the day before: to auoide suspition, all that did belong to the Gunner roome went downe, and the slaues in the middle decke attended their businesse, so that wee may cast vp our account in this manner. First, nine English slaues, besides Iohn Rawlins: fiue of the Torbay men, and one boy, foure English Renegadoes, and two Dutch, foure Hollanders: in all 24. and a boy: so that lifting vp our hearts and hands to God for the successe of the businesse, wee were wonderfully incouraged, and setled our selues, till the report of the peece gaue vs warning of the enterprise. Now you must consider, that in this company were two of Rawlins men, Iames Roe and Iohn Dauies, whom hee brought out of England, and whom the fortune of the sea brought into the same predicament with their Master. These were imployed about noone (being as I said the ninth of February) to prepare their matches, while all the Turkes or at least most of them stood on the Poope to weigh downe the shippe as it

were, to bring the water forward to the Pumpe: the one brought his match lighted betweene 2. spoones the other brought his in a little peece of a Can: and so in the name of God, the Turkes and Moores being placed as you haue heard, and 45 in number, and Rawlins hauing proined the Tuch-holes, Iames Roe gaue fire to one of the peeces, about two of the clocke in the after noone, and the confederates vpon the warning, shouted most cheerefully: the report of the peece did teare and breake downe all the Bitickell, and compasses, and the noise of the slaues made all the soldiers amased at the matter, till seeing the quarter of the ship rent, and feeling the whole body to shake vnder them: till vnderstanding the ship was surprised, and the attempt tended to their vtter destruction, neuer Beare robbed of her whelpes was so fell and madde: For they not only cald vs dogs, and cried out, Vsance de Lamair, which is as much as to say, the Fortune of the wars: but attempted to teare vp the planckes, setting a worke hammers, hatchets, kniues, the oares of the Boate, the Boate hooke, their curtleaxes, and what else came to hand, besides stones and brickes in the Cooke roome; all which they threw amongst vs, attempting still and still to breake and rip vp the hatches, and boordes of the steering, not desisting from their former execrations, and horrible blasphemies and reuilings.
            When Iohn Rawlins perceiued them so violent, and vnderstood how the slaues had cleared the decks of all the Turkes and Moores beneath, he set a guard vpon the Powder, and charged their owne Muskets

against them, killing them from diuers scoutholes, both before and behinde, and so lessned their number, to the ioy of all our hearts, whereupon they cried out and called for the Pilot, and so Rawlins, with some to guard him, went to them, and vnderstood them by their kneeling, that they cried for mercy, and to haue their liues saued, and they would come downe, which he bad them doe, and so they were taken one by one, and bound, yea killed with their owne Curtleaxes; which when the rest perceiued, they called vs English dogs, and reuiled vs with many opprobrious tearmes, some leaping ouerboord, crying it was the chance of warre, some were manacled, and so throwne ouerboord, and some were slaine and mangled with the Curtlaxes, till the ship was wel cleered, and our selues assured of the victory.
            At the first report of our peece, and hurliburly in the decks, the Captaine was a writing in his Cabbin, and hearing the noise, thought it some strange accident, and so came out with his Curtleaxe in his hand, presuming by his authority to pacifie the mischiefe: But when he cast his eies vpon vs, and saw that wee were like to surprise the ship, hee threw downe his Curtleaxe, and begged vs to saue his life, intimating vnto Rawlins, how he had redeemed him from Villa Rise, and euer since admitted him to place of command in the ship, beside honest vsage in the whole course of the voyage. All which Rawlins confessed, but withall added, the fearefulnesse of his Apostasie from Christianity, the vniustifiable course of Piracy, the extreame cruelty of the Turkes in generall, the

fearefull proceedings of Argier against vs in particular, the horrible abuses of the Moores to Christians, and the execrable blasphemies they vse both against God and men. I will not dwell on his reply, nor on the circumstances of attonement, onely I am sure Rawlins at last condescended to mercy, and brought the Captaine & fiue more into England. The Captaine was called Ramtham Rise, but his Christen name Henry Chandler, and as they say, a Chandlers sonne in Southwarck. Iohn Goodale was also an English Turke. Richard Clarke, in Turkish, Iafar; George Cooke, Ramdam; Iohn Browne, Mamme; William Winter, Mustapha; besides all the slaues and Hollanders, with other Renegadoes, who were willing to bee reconciled to their true Sauiour, as being formerly seduced with the hope of riches, honour, preferment, and such like deuillish baits, to catch the soules of mortall men, and entangle frailty in the tarriers of horrible abuses, and imposturing deceit.
            When all was done, and the ship cleared of the dead bodies, Iohn Rawlins assembled his men together, and with one consent gaue the praise vnto God, vsing the accustomed seruice on shipboord, and for want of bookes lifted vp their voyces to God, as hee put into their hearts, or renewed their memories: then did they sing a Psalme, and last of all embraced one another for playing the men in such a deliuerance, whereby our feare was turned into ioy, and trembling hearts exhillirated, that wee had escaped such ineuitable dangers, and especially the slauery and terror of bondage, worse then death it selfe: The

same night we washed our ship, put euery thing in as good order as we could, repaired the broken quarter, set vp the Biticle, and bore vp the Helme for England, where by Gods grace and good guiding, we arriued at Plimmouth, the 13. of Februarie, and were welcommed like the recouery of the lost sheepe, or as you reade of a louing mother, that runneth with embraces to entertaine her son from a long voyage, and escape of many dangers.
            Not long after we vnderstood of our confederats, that returned home in the barke of Torbay, that they ariued in Pensance in Cornewall the 11. of February: and if any aske after their deliuerance, considering there were ten Turkes sent to man her, I will tell you that too: the next day after they lost vs, as you haue heard, and that the three Renegadoes had acquainted the Masters mate, and the two English in her with Rawlins determination, and that they themselues would be true to them, and assist them in any enterprise: then if the worst came, there were but 7. to 6. but as it fell out, they had a more easie passage, then turmoile, or man-slaughter. For they made the Turkes beleeue, the winde was come faire, and that they were sayling to Argier, till they came within sight of England, which one of them amongst the rest discouered, saying plainely, that that land was not like Cape Vincent; yes saith he that was at the helme, and you will be contented, and goe downe into the hold, and trim the salt ouer to winde-ward, whereby the ship may beare full saile, you shall know and see more to morrow: Whereupon fiue of them went

downe very orderly, the Renegadoes faining themselues asleepe, who presently start vp, and with the helpe of the two English, nailed downe the hatches, whereat the principall amongst them much repined, and began to grow into choller and rage, had it not quickly beene ouerpassed. For one of them stepped to him, and dasht out his braines, and threw him ouer-boord: the rest were brought to Exceter, and either to be arraigned, according to the punishment of delinquents in such a kinde, or disposed of, as the King and Councell shall thinke meet: and this is the story of this deliuerance, and end of Iohn Rawlins voyage.
            Now gentle Reader, I hope you will not call in question the power and goodnesse of God, who from time to time hath extended his mercy to the miraculous preseruation of his seruants, nor make any doubt that he hath still the same arme and vigour, as he had in times past, when Gedeons 300. men ouercame the Midianites: and many ancient stratagems are recorded to haue had a passage of successe, euen within our memories, to execute as great a wonder as this: nor doe I thinke you will be startled at any thing in the discourse, touching the crueltie and inhumanitie of Turkes, and Moores themselues, who from a natiue barbarousnesse doe hate all Christians and Christianitie, especially if they grow into the violent rages of Piracie, or fall into that exorbitant course of selling of slaues, or inforcing men to be Mahumetanes. Nor can I imagine, you will call in question our naturall desire of libertie, and sauing of our liues, when you

see from instinct of nature all the creatures of the world come to the law of preseruation; and our Sauiour himselfe alloweth the flying out of one Citie into another in the time of persecution; and Paul by saying he was a Roman procured his deliuerie. Well then: It is only the truth of the storie you are amazed at, making doubt, whether your beleefe of the same may be bestowed to your owne credit: I can say no more; the actors in this Comick Tragedie are most of them aliue; the Turkes are in prison; the ship is to be seene, and Rawlins himselfe dare iustifie the matter. For he hath presented it to the Marquisse, a man not to be dallied withall in these things, nor any way to be made partaker of deceit. Nay, I protest, I thinke, he durst not for his eares (concerning the substance) publish such a discourse to open ouerlooking, if it were not true. As for illustration, or cementing the broken peeces with well tempred morter, blame him not in that: for pretious stones are worne enameled, and wrought in gold, which otherwise would be still of value and estimation; but pollished, and receiuing the addition of Art and cunning, who doth not account the better, and esteemeth himself the richer for their possession? So then; entertaine it for a true and certaine discourse: apply it, make vse of it, and put it to thy heart for thy comfort. It teacheth the acknowledgment of a powerfull, prouident, and mercifull God, who will be knowne in his wonders, and make weake things the instruments of his glory. It instructeth vs in the practise of thanksgiuing, when a benefit is bestowed, a mercy

showen, and a deliuerance perfected. It maketh vs strong and couragious in aduersitie, like cordiall restoratiues to a sicke heart, & our patience shall stand as a rocke against the impetuous assaults of affliction. It is a glorious Sunne to dissipate the clouds of desperation, and cheere vs thus farre, that God can restore vs, when we are vnder the pressure of discomfort and tribulation: for preferment comes neither from the East, nor the West, but from him that holdeth the windes in his hands, and puts a hooke in the nostrils of Leuiathan: so that if he doe not giue way to our contentment, it is because he will supply vs with better graces, or keepe vs from the Adders hole of temptation, whereat if we tarry, we shall be sure to be stung vnto the death. In a word, it is a mirror to looke vertue in the face, and teach men the way to industry and noble performances, that a braue spirit and honest man shall say with Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I flie? Shall I feare death, or some pettie triall, when God is to be honoured, my Country to be serued, my King to be obeyed, Religion to be defended, the Common-wealth supported, honour and renowne obtained, and in the end the crowne of immortalitie purchased?
         
      
      
         
            
            The names of those English Renegadoes, as consented, and ioyned with the Slaues in the Recouerie of the Ship, were these.
            
               Richard Clarke, the Gunner, called in Turkish Iafar.
            
            
               George Cooke, Gunners-mate, called in Turkish Ramedam.
            
            
               William Winter, Carpenter, in Turkish, Mustapha.
            
            
               Iohn Browne, in Turkish, Memme.
            
            One Dutch Renegado.
            
            Foure Dutch Slaues.
            
            One French Slaue.
            
            Fiue Englishmen and one boy, taken but three dayes before.
            Nine English slaues which they tooke with them from Argier. In all 24. men and a boy. Which were all safely landed at Plimmoth, the 13. of February 1621.
            They saued aliue of the 45. Turkes and Moores, the Captaine, one Henry Chandler, borne in Southwarke, an English Renegado; and fiue Turkes more, who are at this present in Plimmoth Iaile. &c.
         
      
   