
      
         
            
            
            
               A TREATISE
INTITLED, BEWARE OF
M. IEWEL. BY Iohn Raſtel
MASTER OF ARTE AND
STVDENT OF DIVINITIE.
            
            
               Math. 7.
               ¶Beware of falſe Prophe
                     ••
                  , which come vnto
you in the cotes of ſheepe, but inwardlye are Rauen

                     ••
                  g wolues. &c.
            
            
               RESPICITE VOLA
                     •
                  ILIA COELI. ET PVLLOS CORVORVM.
            
            ANTVERPIAE
Ex officina Ioannis Foulerī.
M.D.LXVI.
         
         
            
            
            To the Indifferent
Reader.
            THE VVorthineſſe of a certaine boke, lately
ſet furth in the name of M. IeVVel, doth in
England perchaunſe, make it to be pretious
Vnto many, but Vnto Vs that are in theſe
partes of beyond the Seas, the Raritie only thereof,
gaue a Price and Value Vnto it. Inſo much that
receiuing one of them for my ſelfe, two monthes
(at the leaſt) after they had bene abrode in Englande,
I could not keepe the whole altogeather to
my ſelfe, but was faine to diuide it in the middle.
And yet there was no loſſe therein, becauſe a frind
was gratified with that halfe whiche I mighte
ſpare, and the other remaining with me woulde
keepe me ſo long occupied, Vntill both of Vs might

                  •
               hainge partes one with the other, and I (if I
thoughte good) continue my reading forwarde
as I had begon without any Interruption or ſtay
at all, But I ſavv ſuch geare and ſuch ſtore therof,
in the one halfe only, that I had litle mind to goe
through the other. And now that diuiding of
the Fooke into tvvo partes vvhich the Rarietie
thereof occaſioned me to make not altogeather ſo
vvillingly, but that I could haue vvished it better,
that ſame novv fell out ſo happely and agreably to



my purpoſe, that although I might conſider and
ſee, vvhat stuffing vvere in the vvhole, yet, of free
choiſe and for good cauſes, I vvould meddle vvith
no more then the halfe. And truly, to chooſe
vvho can let me, except ſome ſuch vnreaſonable▪
Heretike as taketh all freevvill avvay, frō a man
                  •
               
               ▪
Mary to chooſe any one vvay, of tvvo that may be
taken, that may be reproued in the Chooſer, except
the cauſes vvhich he folovved, be alovvable.
In the ſeeking of vvhich, least any man should extend
his vvit ſo much, that by long diſcourſing he
should make it the leſſer and vveaker, and imagine
vvith himſelfe, vpon Secrete Conferences,
Policies, Concluſions and Orders made among
the Catholikes, for the anſvvering of their
Aduerſaries: I vvill therefore shortly and faithfully
tell them my ſelfe.
            Firſt in foure Articles only, vvhich occupy vvel
nere halfe the Reply, I foūd ſo much mater vvorth
the briefe noting, that it vvould fully ſerue to the
making of a iuſt boke. Concerning then the
qualitie of thoſe thinges, it vvas ſo corrupt and
infectuous, that it required ſome preſent and ſpedy
preſeruatiue against it. I prouided alſo that
the reader should not be vvearied through any lōg
proceſſe or diſcourſe. Furthermore, if M, Ievvel
himſelf, in this vacation and leiſure of his vntill



D, Harding come vpon him againe, or if any other
of the right Iannizers in deede vvhich haue fled
from the Catholike faith, vvould make me an Anſvver:
I thought good ſo to meaſure out my Booke
vnto them, that they should not put the faulte in
the greatneſſe therof, vvhen they do not in conuenient
time ſay their minde vnto me for it. Byſide
this, the chiefe poyntes vvhich I did minde to
ſpeake of are ſuch, that if I vvould haue peruſed
the vvhole Reply, yet I should haue brought but
more Examples only to the prouing of thoſe my
Obiections against M. Ievvel, vvhich already are
declared by inough and ſufficient. And to Conclude
I ſay only BEWARE OF M. IEWEL,
that is, I shevv good cauſes to the Indifferent
Reader, vvherfore he should try him thriſe,
before he trust him once: Other are comming,
vvhich shall bring him to more ieobardy, & strike
directly at that crafty head of his, as if they should
ſay, NOW M. IEWEL BEWARE.
            
            Other cauſes therefore contrary to theſe, vvho
ſo euer shall name, he shall not expound my intent
and meaning, but open his ovvne euil minde and
ſuſpitions. And I trust, as theſe ſeemed probable
inough vnto me, vvherefore I might and shoulde

                  •
               ather certaine thinges (vvhat I vvould my ſelfe)
out of M. Ievvels boke, and diſpoſe them as I haue



done, ſo may any Reaſonable man be content vvith
this, vvhich for his vvarning ſake I haue noted and
neuer think that M. Ievvel is not touched becauſe
euery Article of his is not by me diſcuſſed: Or
that, for all this vvhich yet is ſaid, he muſt not be
miſtruſted, becauſe euery line and ſentence of his
boke is not Anſvvered.
            For euery man, as he is vvel diſpoſed, ſo may
he doe: and vvhat ſo euer vvay, cloſe or Open, frequented
or Solitary, Short or Long, Direct forvvard,
or about, Eaſy or Intricate, vvhat ſo euer
vvay be taken, if vve come to one end, and meete
togeather in the diſcouering of Craft or Hereſye,
the cauſe of the Catholikes is the ſtronger, the
hartes of the Proteſtantes may be the fainter.
            Some one (perchaunſe) hath a patient minde
to folovve M. Ievvel, Sentence by Sentence: An
other vvill not be bound to goe after him vppon
euery trifeling Occaſion, but leauing bymatters
and impertinent, gathereth out his Senſe and confuteth
it: Some againe chooſeth one Speciall Article
out, and ſpedely Anſvvereth it, An other
is not content vvith ſo ſevv as one or tvvo, and
therefore is longer a doing. There is that thinketh
it inough to Iustifye the vntruthes that D.
Harding is charged vvithall. That ſeemeth not



inough to an other, but he noteth M. Ievvel for his
plaine lies, and them out of meaſure. VVhat shall
I ſay more of other? My ſelfe haue folovved an
order much different from any the forſaid, and no
doubt, but an other may come after all that is hitherto
reckened, and finde more matter againſte
M. Ievvel vvith a peculiar diſpoſition thereof.
            Let the vvay therefore, vvhich any man taketh
be neuer condemned, but the end to vvhich
he bringeth proceſſes, let that be conſidered.
            M. Ievvel (I ſpeake it vvithout flattery) hath
a Rare gift in vvryting, he muſt not be proude of
it. He ventereth ſo boldlye, he fighteth ſo openly,
and is armed ſo ſinglely, that if tvventye
Catholikes should at one time encountre vvith
him, no one shoulde neede to ſtrike in the
ſame place that an other dothe, nor faile ſo to
ſtrike him that his credite and cauſe shoulde be
vvounded. Yet, to them that ſtand a farre of
from the ſight of the mater, he is harneſſed ſo finely,
he handeleth his vveapon ſo cunninglye, he
chaungeth from one hand to an other ſo readely,
yea shrinketh and geaueth backe ſo Artificiallye,
that he may vvell ſeeme to haue done a greate
Acte, and to make it doubtfull at the least, vvho
hath the victorie.
            
               
And ſo concerning theſe tvvo poyntes, becauſe
of the first, I may lavvfully take my vantage: And
though in moſt places I leaue him vntouched, in other
yet, (except he be vnſenſible) I doe inough to
make him feele it. Then becauſe of the ſecond, I
geue thee (Indifferent Reader) lavvfull vvarning,
that of all men that euer hitherto haue vvryten,
he is the moſt Bragging, Deceitfull and Impudent.
            Hovv true this is, it shall appeere by my profes:
And the profes hovv ready they are, it is euident in
this preſent Treatiſe, and shall further appeere by
an other vvhich is furth cumming. Concerning
this vvhich is Printed:
            In the firſt boke therof, I haue brought into a
short Table or Sum, (as it vvere) the State of the
Queſtion conteined in euery of the foure first Articles:
The Art of M. Ievvel, in ſauing himſelf from
Subſcription in euery one: And the Iſſue of the Cō
               trouerſy,
vpō vvhich a more direct Anſvver is to be
required, and more Iuſt reply to be inferred. And in
peruſing of this part, it vvill be quickly ſeene, vvhether
I ſlaunder M. Ievvel, in charging him vvith
Shifting, Falſifing, Corrupting, and Deſperate
handeling of ſuch matters as come againſt him,
Or no.
            In the ſecond boke, I come to more particular



poyntes, And declare in ſeuerall Chapters, by moſt
manifeſt Examples:
            That he hath ouercharged his Boke vvith Common 
Places, needleſſe, but harmeleſſe.
            That he ſtarteth into Digreſsions, Impure and 
fruteleſſe.
            That he troubleth Conſciencies vvith other Cō
               mon 
places ſo fruteleſſe, that they vvill make them
faithleſſe.
            That he peruerteth D. Hardinges meaning.
            
            That he diſgraceth his Authorities.
            
            That he vvrangleth vvith him.
            
            That he diſsimbleth or Butteth vvith him.
            
            That he refelleth one Trueth by an other.
            
            That he reporteth of him very vncourteouſly,
            
            By all vvhich Euidences, if it be not ſufficiently
proued, that he is a man of little Modeſty, Truthe
and Conſcience, I vvill shortly ſet furth a thirde
boke againſt him. In vvhich, the abuſing of ſundry
Doctours and vvryters Authorities, to the maintenance
of his falſeheade and Hereſy, &c. shalbe ſo
plainly exemplified, that (I truſt) it vvill be conſidered
as a true and profitable Concluſion: BEVVARE
OF M. IEVVEL.
            But novv, after all theſe paines taken, ſometimes
gladly, ſometimes patientlye, but alvvayes
faithfully and that to this end, that Truthe might



be knovven, And falsehead detected, And that the
nevve Doctrine of the late Goſpell might, either
beſt of all be forſaken, or els be better examined:
Are there none or very fevve, that vvill take the
paines to reade our Bookes? Or if there be,
that vvould gladly reade them, or vvith indifferencye
iudge of them, is it not lavvfull to
bring ſome in for thē? VVhat haue the Catholikes
done of late, ſo vnnaturally, or vnreaſonablye,
that from hencefurth they muſt vvryte no more
againſt the Chalenger? Or feare, that if they
doe vvryte, the Vates shall be ſearched vvhich
bring in the Bookes, and the Bookes not examined,
that bring in the Argumentes? Is it for our
perſon ſake or our cauſe ſake that vve are ſo excluded?
Is the place from vvhence vve vvryte, or
the matter vvhyche vve vvryte, cōdemned of you.
            It is obiected vnto vs, that we are yonge
Dyuines. The Obiection vvere good if vve folovved
the deuiſes of our ovvne heades, and not the
lerned Commentaries of moſt Auncient Fathers.
But novv the perſon is young, the Concluſion is old.
And againe, the youngeſt dyuine emong vs that
haue vvryten, might fiue yeres ſenſe, haue proceded
(vvithout Grace aſking) and haue gone for a Doctour
(if it had ſo liked him) in any of this Ages
hereſies for any exception that vvoulde haue bene



made, againſt his Age or lerning. Not only as Doctours
are made in the Country abrode, vvhere he
that can Read beſt, Or ſay vvithout Eoke moſt Or
Rovvle in Termes moſt faſt, Or Rayle (in deede)
moſt loud, is Created a Doctour for his labour: but
as Doctors allſo are made at theſe daies in Vniuerſities
by Diſputing, Anſvvering and Grace taking.
            But vve are not the wiſeſt of all the Catholikes.
VVe may borovv then of our ovvn Company,
and neuer be in your daunger for lending vs
any. And yet that alone vvhich vve haue, is not ſo
ſimple but vve are able vvel to perceiue, vvher the
beſt of your Arguments faileth.
            But we are the diſconted of Louane.
If Louane it ſelfe be contented vvith vs, the Teſtimony
of ſuch an Vniuerſitie, should be no reproche
vnto vs. As again, vvho cā blame any Catholike in
all the vvorld, for miſliking the ꝓcedings of hereſy?
            It vvil be ſaid we are fugitiues. VVe are
not of that kinde, of the vvhich it is vvrytten,
Fugit nemine perſequente,Prou. 28 he fleeth
when no man purſueth him. Again, vve
are not fled ſo far yet, as Geneua is. Nor fled in hart
or behauiour from the Catholike Faith of all chriſtendome,
Or from one hereſy vnto an other.
            And further it vvil be obiected, we liue in diſorder.
In dede vve liue not vnder an hedor vvardē,



depriued of our Collegies, vvithout any our fault
againſt the Statutes: neither are there here ſuch
Offices, Charges, Romes, or Places Vacant, by taking
of vvhich the perſons vvhich in England fulfilled
the like very vvorshipfully and vertuouſlye,
might declare hovv they be able to rule thē ſelues,
and alſo to kepe other in Order: yet vve liue vnder
the Rule of the holy Commaundementes of God,
and the approued Canōs of the Catholike Church,
And the lavvdable Customes or policies of the places
where vve remaine.
            And further yet, vve shall be ſaide to wryte
for corrupte and priuate gaine.
            But vve are not (vve trust) ſo il frynded that
vve neede it, or ſo il diſpoſed that vve minde it.
Againe, they vvhich haue forſaken great and ſure
liuinges in England, of one, tvvo, or three hundred
pound yerely, they thought not (I beleue) to ſet vp
a shoppe beyond ſea, and by making of nevv bokes,
and ſelling them for x. pence, or xij. pence a peece to
reare vp both Priuate and Corrupt gaine vnto
themſelues.
            To be short, we ſhalbe accompted vnnaturall,
vvhether for ſauing our head, vvhen
a blovv is comming at it? Or, for leauing our Cō
               modities
vtterly? Or chainging of the leſſe for



the Greater? Or for Louing and Fearing of God
more then Man? Some are ſo kind to their Coū
               try
that rather then abide the lack of it, they care
not hovv farre they goe from God. And there haue
ben in times paſt ſome ſo faithfull to their Princes,
that (vvhether in Sport or Erneſt) they haue ſaid
it, he is not worthy of the fauoure of his
Prince, that would ſticke to go to Hell for
his Prince. But he beleued, perchaunſe there
vvas no Hell at all. And ſo night venter boldlye,
vvhere (by his iudgment) there vvas no daunger.
Othervviſe if he had ſo much light of Eaithe, as to
confeſſe an Hel, and yet ſo great blindneſſe of Affection,
as to loue any Creature ſo much, that he
vvould caſt avvay his ovvne ſoule for euer the ꝓpprely
vvas vnnaturall, and his ſaying is Intolerable.
            As for vs, God be mercifull, and geaue vs the
Grace to loue him beſt, nay to loue him vvithout
compariſon. And after him to loue them beſt,
vvhich come nigheſt vnto him, either by Image
of Vertue, or Similitude of Povver and Office, euery
one yet in his degree and place.
            But all theſe Obiections (I ſuppoſe) are Perſonal,
and may be made either of Idle heades for
their fantaſy, or by Aduerſaries, for ſome Anger,
Or of Gentlemen merchantes for their pleaſure, or
of men right vvorshipfull, vpon ſad reporte made



vnto them. But yet, vvhat is any of theſe vnto the
queſtion: whether in the ſix hundred yeares
after Chriſt, there wer any Sole Receauing
or Receiuing vnder both kinds: And ſo furth
in any other of the Challengers Articles? nothing
at all vndoubtedly. For be they true, be they falſe,
(becauſe vve vvil not ſpend much time about it,)
they concerne priuate mennes Conditions, and not
the Catholike Religion. And they are (as it vvere)
a ſpotted Cote vpon a Reaſonable mannes backe,
but they proue not, that he hath no Reaſon at all
vvhich vveareth the Cote. VVherfore it becometh
not vs, ſo baſely to thinke of their iudgements that
conſider of our Bokes, that becauſe of the Authors
ſmall fauor, the boke it ſelfe should be out of fauor,
or becauſe the perſon is Condemned, that immediatly
the Boke is anſvvered.
            Some cauſe therfore vndoubtedly there is, in the
Bokes thēſelues, for vvhich they are miſliked? But
vvhat is that? Is it for the Vntruthes ſake vvhich
are conteined in them? Is it for the Wreaſting
and Racking of the Scriptures? Is it for miſalleging,
               Iewel in his Preface to the Reader.
               miſconſtrueing, corrupting, or altering
the holy Fathers &c. Theſe thinges in
deede are directly obiected, to D. Harding, by M.
Ievvel but (I trovv) the Serche is not therefore apoynted,
that no Anſvver should come in againſt



them. Yet except this only be the cauſe, vvherfore
els is the bringing in of them ſo daungerous?
            Is there any thing in them, againſt the Obedience
and Fidelitie due to a Soueraigne? Is there
any one blaſt in them againſt the Gouernment of
vvomen? Do they moue the Cōmons to take vveapons
againſt the Nobilitie? Or doe they inſtruct the
Nobilitie hovv to let the Commons of their libertie?
In one vvord to ſpeake it, doe vve meddle vvith
the proper maters of VVeaſtminſter Ilaule, Parleament
houſe or Cyuile Policie, and not only intreat
of Articles proponed in Scholes, meete for
Conuocations, and Generall to all Christendome?
Take (for exāple) any one, vvhat ſo euer you vvil,
of the Articles proponed by M. Ievvel. He denyeth:
vve affirme. He contrarieth vs: vve againe reſiſt
him. Before any man encountred vvith hym, he
Raigned in peace and vvas Magnified. It vvas
thought, no man vvas euer hable to matche him,
and therefore for very deſpair of any ſuccour, many
ſubmitted them ſelues vnto him. But novve,
ſenſe there haue ben found, vvhich haue met vvith
him, it is perceaued that he had no certaine victorye.
And if it ſeemed ſo before, yet novve the
battle beginning a freshe, there is sturred vp a cloſer
attention in euery mannes minde, to marke
hovv truely it is fought.
            
               
And in marking diligently, he is novve and then
found to be iustly noted of Hypocriſy, Foly, Hereſy,
and other faultes, Novv they vvhich read not the
Bokes can not marke ſo muche: Yet they alſo, of others
that haue reader and conſidered, may lerne.
It cummeth then at length to the knovvledge of
many. And, the very nature of Truthe or diſpoſitions
of men ſo geuing it, many are confirmed, many
are vvarned, many are troubled, euery one is
moued. Some ſee it manifeſtly, M. Iewel is cō
                  futed,
other looke not ſo narovvly but ſay, I will
better thinke of theſe matters, Other be lothe
to chainge their opinion and are grieued to heare
of ought ſayed againſt him: So that ſomevvhat is
vvrought, I think in euery man one vvay or other
about theſe matters.
            This by likelihode then, is the Sedition, vvhich
our Bokes are ſaid to moue: They confirme ſome in
the Truthe, that they be not lightly remoued from
it: They direct other vnto the Truthe, that they
pretend not lacke of Inſtruction: they confounde
and confute other by the Truthe, that they may
take leſſe pride in their Chiualry: and they ſturre
vp a General attention, to marke on vvhoſe ſide
the Truthe shall ſtand, and vvho shall moſt Faithfully
behaue himſelfe in the mater.
            
               
Are the Authors then of this maner of Sedition▪
to be punished? Or the bokes, by vvhich Lies, Deceiptes,
and Hereſies be detected, are they to be condemned?
If Proteſtantes may be ſuffered, to vvryte
as largely as they vvill, shall they be permitted allſo
to vvryte as falſely as they vvill? Or if no Priuilege,
be it neuer ſo Speciall, doth licenſe them to print any
Slaunders or Lies yet if aftervvardes they be found
out, and marked in theyr Bokes, may no man freely
tell them of it, but he shall incurre the daunger of
the Lavv, and further diſpleaſure? Surely this caſe
is very hard, to call firſt, into Queſtion, thoſe Truthes
of vvhiche the Catholike Church vvoulde haue no
doubt feared: And then, to graunt the Proteſtāt ſuch
fauour, that he might allvvaies denye and ſtill driue
the Catholike to proue, And further (as longe as the
Catholike made a ſtay of yelding ſo much to his Aduerſary)
to dravv that to an Argument of a vveake
cauſe and a faint hart, and to incline to the nevve
Goſpellers ſide: And novv laſt of all, (vvhen the
Catholikes anſvver them, and ſo anſvver, that they
make the other, euery day more and more to be taken
in their craft and hereſy) novv, (I ſay) to forbid
the Catholikes to Anſvver for themſelues, Or to
ſpeake any more againſt ſuch faultes as they finde,
this ſurely is a caſe very ſtrainge and hard: So hard
vndoubtedly, that vvhat to anſvver vnto it vve can



not tell.
            For if our Aduerſaries vvill haue the matter tried
by Lerning, our Diuinitie (the end shall declare
it) is much truer than theirs: but if they vvill novve
defend themſelues by force of Authoritye, One extraordinary
Argument made by a nevve and freshe
Sercher, shall more diſſvvade, then a vvhole shiplode
of our Bokes can moue, vvhen the reading of them it
taken avvay.
            
               But is it not poſsible, to finde fauoure in his ſight,
vvhich hath the Ordering of theſe matters committed
vnto him? Yeas verely poſsible inoughe, if the
Suer for it be notus Pontifici, and fauored of the
Superintendents? Louanians then muſt holde their
peace, but the Apology of England (I trovv) may be
heard. VVhy: vvhat ſayeth it? Mary, for men to
be careleſſe what is ſpokē by them and their
owne mater &c. is the part doubtleſſe of diſſolute
and Rechleſſe perſons,The Apology of England. and of them
which wickedly winke at the Iniuries done
vnto the name of God. Againe. Al Lawes
and Natures owne voyce, doe commaund vs
to defend our owne Cauſe and Innocencye.
Againe. The Auncient Chriſtians. &c. put
vp Supplications, and made meanes to Emperours
and Princes, that they might defend
themſelues and their felowes in open Audience.
            
               
Loe, hovv vvell the makers of that Apology could
ſpeake for themſelues, and hovv vvell it ſerueth our
purpoſe at this preſent? Yet the Oddes is exceding
great. For the Catholikes hauing continued time
out of minde, in a conſent and certaintye of theyr
Faith, might vvell take order, that no man at all
should be ſuffered to ſpeake againſte thoſe thinges
vvhich vvere ſo generally receiued and alovved: but
theſe men vvhich bring a nevv and vpſtart Religion
into the vvorld, neither commending it by Authority
of any their Predeceſſours, nor concluding it by
Reaſon, nor Confirming it by Miracle, hovv shoulde
they forbid a man to conſider and vevv their Opinions,
and require him firſt to build vpon them, before
he ſee the ſure ground of them?
            If therefore vnto them it be an vnlavvfull and
vnnaturall matter, that it should be denied to any
man to defend his ovvne cauſe, it ſeemeth that vve
may vvel be ſuffered to make our Anſvvers vnto our
Aduerſaries: And it ſeemeth allſo, that thoſe maye
Read our Anſvvers, vvhoſe loſſe and perill it vvil be,
to be kept, by any meanes, avvay from the hearing
of the cauſe examined.
            But perchaunſe they vvil not be knovven vvhich
made the Apologye: and cumming out vvithout a
Priuilege, vvho can tell vvhether it be of anye Authority?
Eſpecially D.Harding hauing anſvvered



it, and confounding the great boaſt and crakes ſet
vpon it.
            VVhat ſay vve then to M. Ievvel himſelfe? might
not he be in
                  •
               reted, to ſpeak in his beſt maner, for vs?
Of the Readineſſe of his good vvill, vve haue already
a Teſtymonie. For vnto D. Cole alleaging a Recogniſance,
vvhich ſo bound him in, that he vvas not
at liberty to diſpute and reaſon vvith him, I would
wishe (ſayeth he) the Quenes Maieſty would
not onlye ſet you at libertie,
               Iew. in the ſecond anſwer to D. Cole. 
               but alſo commaund
you to shew your groundes. Byſides
this, he hath ſo required, ſo deſired, ſo prouoked, ſo
erneſtly ſued vnto the Catholikes, to haue their Anſvver
vnto his Articles, that if it should novv ſtande
vvith his good vvill and Conſcience, yet it agreeth
not vvith his honor and vvorthineſſe, to ſee in hys
life time ſuch bokes, as to the vvryting of vvhich his
prouoking, gaue a neceſſary occaſion, to be ſo condē
               ned,
that they shoulde neuer be examined or Anſvvered.
            To you therefore M. Ievvel I ſpeake it, as in this
caſe one of the Indifferent Readers. VVhy prouoke
ye vs to vvryte? VVhy conſent you to this policye of
forbidding our bokes, that vve should not vvryte?
VVhy ſuffer ye not the Trueth to haue her ful courſe?
VVhy conſtraine you them by feare, vvhome ye shuld
better perſvvade by lerning? VVhy foreſee you not



that except our bokes be ſuffered to be Readen, you
shalbe iudged to be afraid, or ouercummed? VVhy
Conſider you not politikely, that except the Papiſtes
doe keepe you occupied, you vvill fall to greater battels
betvvene your ſelues, and vtterly deſye one the
other? You ſaid in the Preface of your Reply:
Bleſſed be the name of God that hathe offered
this Occaſion. For I haue no doubt, but
of this neceſſary conflicte, through his mercy,
there shall iſſue ſome ſparkle to the Glory
of his name. VVhy ſuffer you then the mater
of Gods glory and your victory to be taken avvaye?
VVhy pretend you, as though you vvere ſure of vvinning
and glad of the Occaſion, by vvhich your goſpel,
the more it is impugned and ſtandeth, the more it is
glorified, and yet heare of the prohibition of oure
Bokes, and haſt not to ſay againſt it? If you had not
challenged the Catholikes, the caſe had bene more
tolerable, but novv it can neuer ſtand vvith your or
your Religions honeſty, not to defende your ſelfe but
by terrour.
            But (to returne againe vnto the Indifferēt Reader)
let our ſayinges, if they come properly and directly
from vs, be ſtraitvvaies condemned: Let no
Reaſon and Argument be good for vs, thoughe the
very ſame in our Aduerſaries caſe, muſt be admitted
vvho ſo euer ſay nay: And let M. Ievvel forget



his old Charitye, and vvishe novve, that vve might
be conſtrained to holde our handes and tongues,
vvhich vvished before, that vve should be conſtrained
to vvryte and Speake: Let all theſe Iniuries be
patiently ſuffered: Yet vvho can let vs to vvishe
thee vvell, and tel thee of thy Soules daunger vvhen
Hereſy is flattering vvith thee: And note the very
places vnto thee, in vvhich her lying Sprite is couered,
And be glad to haue thinges for thee in a Readineſſe,
if the vvinde should happely turne, to ſende
them in to thee? Novv if this be an vnnaturall or
Seditious minde, haue me excuſed I pray thee, I neuer
thought it ſo, nor feared, it vvould ſo be taken.
And I can not promiſe ſuch Obedience, or vvarrant
to my ſelfe ſuch perfection, that if a Rebell and Aduerſary
againſt God and his Church should openlye
blaſpheme and deceaue, I vvould not ſpeake againſt
him, and trouble his procedinges vvith my Obiections.
Yet, if, as many other myſteries, vnheard of before,
be reueled in theſe daies, ſo it should likevviſe
novv be brought vnto light, that allthough a Theefe
vvere eſpied to doe his feate in any houſe, no man for
all that should cry out againſt him, for fear of troubling
them in the houſe, vvhich are at their bokes,
at their meat, at their game, at their reſt, or anye
ſuch like: then truely as vve might be ſo aſtonied at
this ſtrainge Reuelation, that for a time vve coulde



not ſpeake, yet neuertheleſſe (I truſt) vve shoulde
turne vnto God and pray. And ſo in like manner,
vvhen that is perceaued and confeſſed that in no
kinde of caſe, any more may be vvryten againſt M.
Ievvel, then shal vve pray God, as he hath vvrought
by our ſpeaking, ſo that he vvill continue and vvork
by our ſilence. And as the ſilence of the Catholikes
vvhen they vvere excedingly prouoked to ſpeake, did
more harme perchaunſe then al the other argumēts
of the Heretikes, ſo the letting of the Catholikes to
ſpeake, vvhereas through the importunitie of the
Aduerſary, they haue bene moued therevnto shal by
Gods Grace, more ſenſibly make others to conſider
vvhat Faith they haue forſaken, and vvhat opinions
they folovv, then if our Bokes should freely come in
and be Readen. Amen. Fare vvel, Reader, and be
Indifferent. At Antvverpe the .10. of May.
            
               
REgiae Maieſtatis Priuilegio
permiſſum eſt Ioanni
Rastello Anglo, vt librum
inſcriptū, A Treatiſe intitled,
BEWARE OF M. IEWEL,
Typis mandare, ac impunè
distrahere liceat. Datum
Bruxellis. 8. Martij. Anno
Domini. 1565.
            Subſig.
De la Torre.
         
         
            Opus istud perlectum est & approbatum á Viris Anglici
Idiomatis & ſacrae Theologiae peritiſsimis, quibus
tutô hac in re credendum eſſe iudico. Idcirco
operaepretium fore cenſeo, vt imprimatur.
            Itá teſtor Cunerus Petri, Pastor
S. Petri. 
               Louanij. 7. Martij. 1565.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST ARTICLE.
            
               THE queſtion of the fyrſte
article, is: Whether anye
priuate Maſſe were in the
whole world, for the ſpace
of ſixe hundred yeres after
Chriſte.
            What call we priuate Maſſe? A priuate
Maſſe? (ſay the Catholikes) is that, which is
not ſolemne. And other byſide this, of that
name, they haue none.
            But what meane ye Heretikes by it? Mary,
whereas the prieſt receiueth the Sacramente
him ſelf alone,
               Ie. pa. 4. 
               that we call (ſayth M. Iewel)
priuate Maſſe, yea allthoughe the whole parishe
be preſent. Ergo, this terme ſo taken,
is not in the proper bokes & ſcholes
of Catholikes, but is alltogether of the deuiſe
of Proteſtantes.
            To what ende is the mouinge of this
queſtion aboute priuate Maſſe? Or what
hath any Diuine to doe with it? The concluſion
is, that if it can be proued, M. Iewell
is content to yeld and ſubſcribe.
            
            But what if it can not be proued? Forſoothe
then is M. Iewel, I trowe, a true
man of his worde. Is this all? And hath
this great fighting, and writinge on bothe



ſydes no further end, but to the commendation
or diſpraiſe of one man, and hym not ſo
wonderfull? No truly, it is not for the lerned
or ſtudiouſe ſo to doe, ſuche ſpecially as
haue, or take charge of religion, but rather
to direct all theyr oppoſitions and anſwers
vnto that end, by whiche ſomewhat may be
concluded, either duly, to the honor of God,
or profitably, to the defenſe of the Church.
            Haue both ſydes then, done ſo for theyr
part? That now is to be conſidered. Firſt
concerninge the Catholike, he goeth directly
to ſome purpoſe, and bringeth the queſtion
vnto that ſtate, in whiche the aduerſarie
is ſo anſwered, that the Churche alſo
is defended. The Proteſtant, he, at the beginninge
ſeemed alſo to meane playnlye,
but nowe, he hath brought the queſtion
vnto ſuche pointes, as by whiche neither
his aduerſarie is any thinge hurted, nor
the Churche, whiche he impugnethe, any
thinge touched.
            By whiche it appeareth, the one to haue
labored to ſome end, the other to haue craked
to no purpoſe.
            As in example: D Harding conceyueth
the matter thus:
            
               
If priuate Maſſe, in reſpect only of
that it is priuate,Maior. after your meaning,
be reproueable:Hard. 39 it is for ye ſingle Communion,
that is to ſay, for yt the Prieſt
receiueth the Sacrament alone,
            But the ſingle Communion is lawfull,Minor.
yea good and godly:
            Ergo the priuate Maſſe,Conclu. in this
reſpecte, that it is priuate, is not reproueable.
            It followeth then, that Chriſtes inſtitution
is not broken,The Catholike reſoneth to ſome purpoſe. when the Prieſt receiueth
alone: And conſequently, the Catholike
Churche is not to be condemned,
for allowing that manner of receiuyng.
            Thus hath D. Harding, and euery other
Catholike, learned to referre his reaſoning
to ſome purpoſe, that others may be edifified
by it.
            But nowe on the other ſide, what ſay
you, M. Iewel, to the matter? what importe
you wyth all your preparaunce?
Whome prouoke you? What cōcluſion ſeke



ou? you aſke a queſtion of priuate Maſſe,
whether any ſuche were, ſix hundred yeres
after Chriſt. A ſtraunge queſtion vnto Catholikes,
and therfore you muſte expounde
your meaning vnto vs.
            1. I demaund (ſay you) of the open ChurchIe. p
                     •
                  . 59
2. I demaund of Prieſtes. 3. I demaunde
of the Maſſe. 4. I demaund of the right vſe
of the holy ſupper that ought to ſtand. 5. I
demaund of the vſage that thē was ordinary.
            Fiue greate demaundes, and ſomewhat
terrible vnto the vnſkilful, as a viſarde vnto a
childe, that can not iudge what is within it.
But marke,M. Iew els greate a doe about nothyng. good Reader, how litle he ſhal
make of them. Let me grauut vnto you,
M. Iewel, that I can not proue any prieſt, to
haue SAIDE MASSE ORDINARILY,
in OPEN CHVRCH, and to
haue receiued alone. What inferre you
herevpon? Or how doth this further your
procedings, or diſproue the preſent doings
of the Catholike Church? This ſure is an
idle queſtion, which maketh ſo much a doe
about that, which the contrary ſyde maye
graunt without any preiudice to the cauſe.
            
                For concerning the firſt: Chriſtes inſtitution
may be fulfilled in priuate houſes.
            
               
The ſecond: women, boyes, and lay mē,
are chriſten ſoules, aud proue, that Chriſtes
iuſtitution is not broken, if they be allowed
to receiue alone.
            As for the third: I anſwer, that your queſtiō
               
was not of Maſſe, but of priuate Maſſe.
And if you wil make the queſtion of Maſſe,
tell vs of it, and you ſhallbe prouided for.
            To the fifth: that which may be but ouer 
done well, nedeth not many repetitions of
the ſame, to proue that it is lawfull.
            Only now therfore, the fourth demaund 
doth remaine to be diſcuſſed, which is of the
right vſe of ye holy ſupper. To which our
auſwer is, that he vſeth it rightlye, which
receiueth it with faithe, hope, and charitye.
But as for receiuing alone, or with companye,
the Catholike Church acknowledgeth
her ſelfe to be therin at liberty, to vſe either
the one, or the other manner. Vpon this
queſtion (whiche in deede is the proper of
your firſte article) if you dare openlye encounter
with vs, then are you come to the
ſame ſtate of controuerſy, to whiche all Catholikes
haue brought it. Neither can you
complain that he ſwarueth from that he hath
taken in hand.
               Iew. 5
                     •
                  . But if ye will not reaſon about
ſole receiuing, but ſtande vpon your



circumſtancies and demanndes nothinge
ſubſtantiall, then doe I anſwer, as I did
before, that I can not proue priuate Maſſe
after ſuche ſolemne maner as you require:
that (I meane) it was ORDINARY,
and in OPEN CHVRCHES: contenting
my ſelfe with this, that although by
euident example, I find not, it was ſo, yet
by moste necessary principles I can proue
that it might haue bene ſo. And further
reioyſing in this, that although I do yelde
in your demaundes vnto you (the fourthe
only excepted, which only is worth the aſking,
and in which you be ſufficientlye anſwered)
yet you may not loke, that the Ladies
of Iſraell with their Lutes and Timbrels
will receiue you in triumphe, becauſe with
all your strokes hitherto, you haue hurted
no body.
            Your queſtions therfore, M. Iewel, being
altogether ſo vain and fruteles, yt they
neither touch vs nor profite you, let vs returne
vnto D. Hardinges argument or reſolution,
to geue therby vnto the indifferent
Reader,The true ſtate of ye queſtion aboute priuate maſſe the true meaning of this firſt
Article: and to put before him, ye Catholike
beliefe of the Church in this matter.
            The ſtate of the queſtion, as Catholikes



haue conceiued it, is comprehended in this
one foreſaid argument:
            If priuate Maſſe,Maior. in reſpect only of
that it is priuate, be reprouable, it is
for the ſingle Communion,
            But ſingle Communion is not reproueable:Minor.
            
            Ergo priuate Maſſe, in this reſpecte
that it is priuate,Conclu. is not reproueable.
            This argument is good,The profe of the cōſequēce in this argument: and holdeth of
that common rule: A deſtructione conſequentis,
ad deſtructionem antecedētis. That
is, to make it plaine, when we make a conditionall
or double propoſicion, the deniall
of the former parte, dothe well folowe vpon
the deniall of the later. As in example:
            
               If M. Iewel be a lawfull Bishop,
(this is the former parte) he was duelye
conſecrated, (this is the later part. And
bothe theſe ioyned together do make one
Propoſition.
            
            
               
Take away now the later part, and ye ſhall
conclude the taking away of ye former, as:
            But M. Iewel was not duely conſecrated:
            Ergo he is not a lawfull biſhop.
            The argument therfore, whiche D. Harding
hath proponed, is of a verye good and
right making. But what thinketh M. Iewel
of it? He frameth it after his owne likinge,Here beginneth M. Iewel to work his ſeate in alterīg thinges to his purpoſe.
and that, which the author himſelfe would
haue to be Hypothetical, he maketh it alltogether
Cathegorical, in this ſorte:
            The priuate Maſſe is ſingle communion.
Single communion is lawfull: Ergo priuate
Maſſe is lawfull.
            
               Then dothe he not anſwer neither this
argument, but by another which ſhallbe foliſh,
& of his owne making, he would haue
this to be iudged. As, The miniſtration of
priuate Maſſe is a ſingle communion, Single
communion is lawfull for a woman: Ergo,
the miniſtration of priuate Maſſe is lawfull
for a woman.
            No no M. Iewel, you can not goe inuiſible.
We ſe well inough how you caſt in the
terme Miniſtration, to make a ſport, or Abſurditie.
Of whiche follie or ſutteltie you
wilbe tolde in due ſeaſon. But concerning



               D. Hardings argument, it is an hypothetical
Syllogiſmus: and theſe which you make are
altogether Cathegorical, ſo that they be of
far other kinde and makinge. Whiche
geaueth me to ſuſpecte, that your wittes
were not in their natural place in your hed,
when you were ſo much occupied, (as your
boke declareth) in conſideration of Medius
Terminus,
               Ie. pa. 
                     •
                  9 
               Subiectum, and Praedicatum: leaſt
your reader mighte be deceiued by that argument
of D. Hardinges, which had neither
directe Medius terminus, nor Praedicatum,
nor Subiectum, to be feared, as beinge not
made in Mode and Figure, but concluded
out of that rule or conſequence, A deſtructione
conſequentis, &c. Of whych I haue
ſpoken.
            The forme therefore of D. Hardinges argument
being proued good, let vs conſyder
the matter and truthe of euery propoſition
in it. The Maior is declared after
this ſorte.
            If priuate Maſſe be not reproueable,The profe of the maior in the foreſaid argument.
in this reſpecte only, that it is priuate
and hath ſingle Communion: thē
doe you M. Iewel digreſſe from the



purpoſe,The profe of the Maior in the forſaid argumēt. and aſke more, then one queſtion,
at one tyme. But we could not
ſuſpecte, that you would iumble with
vs ſo confuſely. Ergo it is ſaied with
good reaſon, that, if priuate Maſse be
reproueable, it is in this reſpecte only,
that it is priuate and hath ſingle communion.
            The forme hereof is good a deſtructione
conſequentis &c. as aboue.
            The Maior I will declare. For if you
will not be bound to reſt vppon the terme
and ſenſe of priuate, but be at liberty to comprehend
within your meaninge, all that is
imported in the name of Maſſe, then may
you require of vs, by vertu of this queſtion
to make anſwer vnto you, not only of ſole
receauinge, but of receuinge in both kinds,
of the ſeruice in the latiue tonge, of the reall
preſence of Chriſte in the Sacrament, of the
ſacrifice, and many other matters byſides.
Becauſe all theſe are included within the
compaſſe of theſe two wordes Priuate, and
Maſſe. Now to the Minor.
            
               
But we could not ſuſpecte that ye
would ſo iumble with vs.
            For diſtinct articles being put forth by
you, of Communion vnder both kindes, Seruice
in the vulgar tonge &c. Ye ſignifie therby,
that ye loke for a ſeuerall anſwer vnto
eche of them, and that, within the queſtion
of priuate Maſſe, ye intended not to paſſe the
boundes and ſenſe of this worde Priuate,
For of Conſecration (we may be ſure I
truſt) you moued no queſtion, whether it be
proper to the Prieſt, or whether the people
may alſo doe it. Yet the Maſſe doth extend
it ſelfe vnto conſecration. If therefore,
neither we are ſo ſuſpitious as to feare it,
neither you ſo foliſh as to ſay it, that in aſking
vs a queſtiō of priuate Maſſe, ye douted
or demaunded, whether ye Prieſt alone doth
conſecrate and not the people, or, whether
one Prieſte alone may conſecrate by hym
ſelfe, without helpe or aſſemble of other
Prieſtes, (if this one point which properlye
pertaineth to the Prieſtes office and
the ſubſtance of a Maſſe) was not reſpected
of you in the queſtion of priuate Maſſe:
you muſte needes confeſſe and yelde,



that you referred this firſt article of yours,
to ſome one ſpeciall and ſingular matter,
and that ye extended it not, vnto all queſtions
that mighte be moued vppon the
Maſſe. And that ſpeciall thinge what it
ſhould be, beſides ſole receiuinge, it was
not, nor could not be perceiued: Ergo it is
ſaide with good reaſon, that if the priuate
Maſſe be reproueable, it is for the ſingle communion.
            
            Yet knowing ſo much as we doe, if all
were to begin againe, we woulde not vſe
theſe Ifs and diſcourſes, to finde oute what
you did meane by priuate Maſſe, but we
would rather wil you, to procede againſte
vs in order, and not to couer manye Articles
vnder pretence of one queſtion, that in
ſifting from one to the other, ye myghte
ſeeme to tarye ſtill in one place, by keeping
the ſelfe ſame termes (priuate Maſſe)
and yet euer ſkip from one poynte to another,
becauſe ye prouide to be at your own
proper choiſe, what one ſenſe of manye, ye
will haue to be conceiued by priuate Maſſe,
and, at pleaſure, to paſſe from any one ſēſe
to the other. But who wold haue thought
it, that they affected to make confuſion,
which promiſed to bring all truthe into order



and ſyght? Or that they which pretended
to require good profes for Sole receyuing
onlye, woulde afterwardes bynde the
anſwerer to proue the ſole receiuynge at
MASSE,
               M. Iēwels large walkes in plain matter, & one direct queſtion. and then, the SAYING of Maſſe
and after that, the ſaying of it in OPEN
CHVRCH, and yet farther, the ORDINARY
ſaying & receiuing in open Church
& (to be ſhorte) binde him to proue CONSECRATION,
OBLATION, ELEVATION,
ALTAR, VES
                     ••
                  
                  MENT,
or any other thing to the Maſſe belonging?
By which words we may ſee how
many queſtions M. Iewel would ſaye (for a
nead) to be comprehended & ment of him in
theſe. ij. words priuate Maſſe. D. Harding
therfore which knew not ſo much, or could
not ſuſpecte ſo much (as, y• 
               M. Iewel did at
one time, and with one breathe, aſke of ſo
manye diſtinct matters in one plaine propoſition,
without geuing therof any warninge)
made that conditionall and Maior
propoſition, to that his argumēt, of whiche
I haue ſpoken,The minor of D. Hardings argumē
                  
                     ••
                   declared. which Maior being ſo reaſonable
and allowable, I come now to the
prouing of the Minor of ye ſame argument,
which is this:
            Single communion is allowable.
            
               
Here, becauſe M. Iewel is contente to be
tried, by the examples of the ſixe hundred
yeres after Chriſte, and becauſe this kinde
of perſwaſion is moſt ſenſible, I wil bring
two or three of them, for our purpoſe.
            The Byſhopes of Rome,Eccl. Hiſ lib. 5. Ca. 24. Har. fo. 
                     •
                  2. when any
Catholike Byſhopes came thither from
other countries, vſed to ſend them the
Sacrament to receaue: Ergo ſingle
Communion is allowable.
            What anſwereth M. Iewel vnto this?
Or howe concludeth he (as it were) in D.
Hardinges name?
            
               Ergo (forſooth ſaieth he) there was Maſſe,
and addeth further:Iew. P. 41. 
               This concluſion is far
fet and hangeth loſely.
               Behold, in another example. M. Iew. feate. 
               For I might demaund
whiche of the three ſaied Maſſe? He that
ſent the Sacrament, or he that receaued it, or
els the meſſenger that brought it? It were a
ſtraunge matter to ſee a Maſſe and yet no man
to ſay Maſſe. Lo how cloſely M. Iewel kepeth
his wittes together. He is oppoſed
with Single Communion, and he demaundeth
of the Maſſe: the obiection goeth vpon
the receauinge the Communion, and he aſketh
(without anſwer making) who ſaied
the Maſſe. But to another example.
            
               
Tertullian dehorting his wife from
mariyng to an Infidel after his death:Har. fo. 3
                     •
                  .
will not thy huſband know (ſaieth he
of the ſacrament) what thou eateſt ſecretly
before al other meates. &c. Ergo
ſingle Communion is alloweable.
            But M. Iewel taketh it not ſo. how thē?Iew. 46. The ſame feate againe folowed.
Mary. Ergo Tertullians wife ſaied priuate
Maſſe. And herevpon then wil ryſe a greate
dout, whether a woman might ſay Maſſe,
or no, or who helped her if ſhe ſaied it. Yet
ſauing for M. Iewels pleaſure, that neaded
not, becauſe D. Harding ſpeaketh directly
not, of ſaying Maſſe, but only of receauing
the ſingle Communion.
            Another example:Har. fo. 34. Serapion lyeng
at the point of death,Eccl. Hi. lib. 6. Ca. 34. ye Prieſt whom he
ſent for, being ſycke him ſelfe, ſent the
ſacramēt vnto him and he receaued it
and departed. Ergo ſingle Communion
is aloweable.
            I pray you M. Iewel, is not this ſpokē plaine
enough? no truly, not to ſuch a wrāgler.
For, as though it were to be marked in this
ſtory, not, how Serapiō receued ye ſacramēt,



but only who brought it vnto him, ſo ſeeketh
M. Iewel for the bringer of it, and findinge
that it was Serapions boy,All of like pretiesent and of like ſmall honeſtie. to whom
the prieſt deliuered it, he layeth hādes vpon
him and concludeth: Ergo Serapions boy
ſaied priuate Maſſe.
            
            Thus doth M. Iewel handle D. Harding
through the whole firſt article, either like
an hypocrite diſſembling it, that we vnderſtād
by priuate Maſſe or ſingle Communion,
not the ſaying and celebratinge of Maſſe,
or Communion, but that onlye act, of who
ſoeuer it be, which receaueth the Communion
alone: either like a dull or diſtracted
perſon not perceauing it, that all the Argumentes,
Examples, and Authorities are, to
that only end, referred. But he hath not
ſo litle wit, as not to perceaue whereabout
D. Harding went. For, in the anſwer to the
23. Diuiſion, wher D. Harding ſheweth in
what ſenſe he taketh the queſtion of priuate
Maſſe:Iewel 56 he confeſſeth that D. Harding hath
taken paines to proue Sole receauinge, and
ſingle Communion that was neuer denyed.
And againe. Now he demaundeth whether
I reproue the Maſſe, or the priuate Maſſe.
What meaneth this, that priuate Maſſe and
ſole receauing be ſo ſodenly growen in one?
            
               
See then, he confeſſeth that D. Hardinge
doth vnderſtand by Priuate Maſſe, ſole receauing.
And therfore he miſliketh it, ſayinge,
what Meaneth this &c. And then he
laboreth to proue that it muſt not be his
meaninge, and why? forſooth, becauſe:
            Surely M. Harding well knoweth that
the nature of the wordes is not one.Iew. 57. Neither
who ſo euer receaueth alone, doth therefore
of necesſitie ſaie Priuate Maſſe.
            True it is, M. Iew. and therfore D. Hardinge
knowing right well ye 
               Priuate Maſſe,
might diuerſely be taken, & that you would
make it to ſignify the SAYING of Priuat
Maſſe, & he not ſo, but the Single Cōmunion
and Sole Receauing: therfore he warued
you of it, that the queſtion might be diſtinctly
handled. You therfore confeſſinge
ſo much, that he went about to proue Sole
Receauinge only and not to medle in this
article wt the Maſſe, either you haue played
the very hypocrites part, in pretendinge a
talke to the purpoſe whiche in deede you
knew to be otherwiſe: Either you haue
ſhewed a ſhamefull and hatefull vilany, in
burdeninge a man of good eſtimation and
lerninge with ſo many, and foliſh conſequences
as you attribute vnto hym. And



further you haue abuſed greate numbers
of your Readers moſte wickedly, in drawinge
theyr ſoules after you into pervition,
by makinge them beleue that you
ſpeake as you knowe, your knowledge
being contrarie to your vtterance.
            For ſuppoſe that your meaninge, in the
queſtion were, as you ſaye, and that your
demaund was, to be ſatiſfied in all theſe
pointes: Whether a Prieſt did SAIE
MASSE, in OPEN CHVRCH,
ORDINARILY, and receaue alone,
in the ſixe hundred yeares after Chriſte,
and that, if any of theſe Circumſtances
were lefte vnproued, ye woulde not be
bound to ſubſcribe, ſuppoſe I ſaye, that
this were true, yet ſeeinge your Aduerſarye
folowed another ſenſe, ye ſhould
haue conſydered, if, not hym, yet your
ſelfe, your lerned Counſell, your Secretarye
and Scribes, your Prynter, and
Reader, and haue made a better anſwer
with leſſe coſte and labor, declaringe in
sewe wordes, howe Doctor Hardinge
had miſtaken you, and expoundinge in
playne wordes, how your owne meaning
ſhould be concerned.
            
               
But nowe, whereas Doctor Hardinge
folowed the right ſenſe in deede of the queſtion,
and your ſenſe, M. Iewel, thereuppon,
hath no end or purpoſe to whiche it
ſerueth: why aſke you ſo importunately
for the Maſſe? why demaund you?
            IF here be a Maſſe, which of the two is it,Iew. 32.
that ſayeth this Maſſe? Is it the ſicke man, or
the Prieſt?.
            Why trifle you?
            That the queſtion is moued not of anye
other man or woman,33. but of the Maſſe,The ſome of M. Iewels anſwers in this firſt Article. and
only of the Prieſt that ſaieth the Maſſe.
            Why lye you?
            M. Harding hath brought forth theſe Fathers
for his Maſſe.
            Why wrangle you?42
            
            That for lacke of Prieſtes M. Harding allegeth
Tertullians wife,44. Certaine women
out of Cyprian, and Serapions boy, not the
fitteſt perſons that might haue bene found to
ſaye Maſſe.
            Why pitie you hym of your pure cōpaſſion?
            Alas doeth M. Hardinge thinke it was the
maner in old tymes,59. that laye people ſhould
ſaye Maſſe?
            Why deſcribe you the matter ſo cunningly,
and ſaye?
            
               
M. Hardinge ſhall not finde here any Maſſe
ſpoken of at all,76 neither bread nor wine, nor
Conſecration, nor Oblation, nor Eleuation,
nor Altar, nor Veſtiment, nor any thing
to the Maſſe belonginge? And to be ſhort,
(D. Harding intendinge to ſpeake not of
the Maſſe, or ſayinge of it, but only of ſole
receauing) Why triumph you & why crake
you,
               91 
               that The Maſſe which we muſt neades
beleue, is ſo Auncient, ſo vniuerſal, ſo Catholike,
ſo holy, ſo Gloriouſe, cā not be foūd neither
in Churches nor Chappels, nor in ſecret
Oratories, nor in Priuate howſes, in Towne
or Citie, but muſt be ſought out in ſome Petie
pariſh in the coūtrie, and that by coniecture
only.
            To this effect then, cometh the firſt article.
M. Iewel dalieth ſtil, yt D. Harding
ſhe weth not any Priuate Maſſe, that is (by
his interpretatiō) where any Prieſt SAID
maſſe, ORDINARILI, in OPEN CHVRCH
and receaued alone: D. Harding proueth
Priuate Maſſe, that is to ſay, ſingle Communion,
or Sole receauing.
            Of M. Iewels mening, no purpoſe foloweth.
            For whē it is graunted, for example that
we are not able to proue againſt him (with



all thoſe Circumſtances) what is his cauſe
the better for it? Of D. Hardinges concluſion
this commoditie groweth, that ſole
receauing is allowable by the crample and
Teſtimonies of the Primatiue Church.
            Ergo it ſtandeth well with Chriſtes inſtitution.
Frome hencefoorth therefore,
let no Heretike crake of Chriſts inſtitution,
as though that could not admit Sole receauing.
So ſhall the Church haue ſome
peace, and the Catholikes be quieted in this
ſure truth, that Sole Receauing is not againſt
Chriſtes inſtitution.
            This ground now and verity ſtanding,
let M. Iewel (if he dare) come viſiblie
furth, and ſhew an open face and intent,
without all dubling. And then ſhall it be
playnly perceaued, whether he muſt yelde
and ſubſcribe or no. Here for example are
ſix queſtions.
            Whether a ſicke mā hauing no penance to 
fulfill, may receaue alone at his departing.
            Whether a ſicke man whiche is not yet 
reconciled, but tarieth in his penance, may
receaue alone at the point of his death.
            Whether a ſicke man being not in daunger 
of death may receaue alone.
            Whether a man in good health and good 


               
lyfe may receaue alone.
            
                Whether a Prieſt not celebrating, may
receaue alone.
            
                Whether a Prieſt at Maſſe, may receaue
alone.
            Betwixt theſe ſixe, eche of them towardes
an other, there is ſome difference, and
therefore they make two ſeueral queſtions.
            The truth which is confeſsed on
both ſides, is:
            That Chriſtes inſtitution doth ſtand with
Sole Receauing in generall.
            For he which is put from the Communion,
and lyeth at the pointe of death
maye receaue alone, euen by Maſter Iewels
confeſſion: which yet is impoſſible
to be true, if Sole Receauing were abſolutely
againſte Chriſtes Inſtitution.
            Therefore, in what other ſpeciall kinde
of Sole Receauing his Inſtitution is violated,
therein muſte, of right, be the queſtion.
And therein let M. Iewel ioyne,
(if he thinke hym ſelfe able) with the Catholike.
            As, whether a ſicke man beinge not put
from the Communion for ſome faulte of



his, maye at the pointe of death receaue
alone or no, and ſo furth, in any of the ſix
foreſayed queſtions.
            Now when it ſhall be put furth in
one ſpeciall caſe, if he ſhall then fetche his
vagaries about, and run ouer his Common
Places, That Chriſtes Inſtitution
is to be obſerued, That the Primitiue Church
had a Communion, and proue it by ſundrie
wais, Out of holy Fathers, Out of M. Hardinges
owne Doctors (as he will terme them)
and Out of the very Maſſe boke it ſelfe. &c
Let it be vnderſtanded, that if he ſpeake
ſo in generall, and applieth it not to the
ſpeciall caſe proponed, he falleth within
daunger of his owne ſentence. Vanitas
vanitatum.
               Iew. 16. 
               And, that it is a greate token
of idleneſſe, to bee earneſt and copious
in prouynge that thinge, that no man denieth.
            
            
               Againe, It is a lewed kinde of Logike,
ſtoutely to proue that thinge, that needeth
no profe, & to leaue the thing that ſhould be
proued.
            On the other ſyde, if he wyll deale
ſincerelye and vprightely in deede, and,
leaue to vſe ſuche feares as he hath in this



his firſt Replie practiſed, then ſhal it quickly
be perceiued, that either he muſt yeld and
ſubſcribe, or els craue a licence to be looſed
frome y• bond, into which he caſt hym ſelfe,
through his own haſtines, in his Challēge.
         
         
            The ſecond Article.
(⁂)
            IN this ſecond Article, the queſtion
is,96 whether there was then (vnderſtād
ſix hundred yeres after Chriſt)
any Cōmunion miniſtred vnto ye people
vnder one kynd.
            Is this al? It ſeemeth to be al, becauſe
in the vttering of the Challenge, there is
no other forme of wordes concerning this
queſtion. Yet leaſt perchance we ſhall be
handeled here, as we haue bene in the firſt
Article, let vs aſke M. Iewel what he intendeth
and what he demaundeth in this
queſtion.
            Syr, and pleaſe you, what if we proue
vnto you, that ſome haue receaued the Sacrement
vnder one kind at home in theyr



owne houſes as Serapion did:Ecc. hict. lib. 6. 
                     〈◊〉
                   34. is not the
queſtion concluded againſt you? No ſaieth
M. Iewel. The queſtion is of the vſage and
order of the CHVRCH.
               Iew. 
                     〈◊〉
                   The firſte ſhift of M. Iew. 
               M. Hardinges
anſwer is of Serapions death bed, as though
there had bene no CHVRCH yet erected
in thoſe daies.
            
            Yes verely there were, but as we maye
ſay with S. Hierome:In Apdlogia aduerſus Iouin Chriſt is not one at
home in the houſe, an other in the Church,
and that which is not contrary to Chriſtes
inſtitution and commaundement, maye be
done without the Church, of building
which, he gaue no commaundement. But
let vs go further.
            If I may proue vnto you, that ſome
certaine perſons as ſicke men and faintye,
haue receiued vnder one kind: ſhall that
ſtand vs in any ſtead againſt you? No ſayeth
M. Iewel.Iew. 13
                     •
                  . The ſecond ſhift. 
               This is the only thing that
I denied, that ye are notable to bring anye
one ſufficient example, or authority, that euer
the WHOLE PEOPLE receiued
the Communion in open Church vnder one
kinde. Surely you be an hard man to
deale withall, which will meaſure your
witneſſes by quantity, and not by quality,
and ſike there, for a number, where a fewe



and honeſt examples were to be credited.
            Well, I will not yet leaue you ſo. What
if I can proue that receiuing vnder one
kind, was to be found in cloſe Chappels
and Oratories, in Wilderneſſe and Canes,
whyther contempt of the world, or auoydinge
of perſecution draue the Chriſtians:
go we not directly vnto the queſtion, and
bring you into neceſſity of ſubſcribing and
yelding? No ſayeth Maiſter Iewel againe.
            The queſtion that ſtandeth betwene vs,The third Shifte. Iew. 96. is
moued thus, WHETHER THE HOLY
COMMVNION. &c. were euer
miniſtred OPENLY in the Church. Yet
he lieth, for neither OPENLYE, neither
CHVRCHE is ſpecifyed in the
queſtion.
            
            How ſay ye to infantes, if I proue that
they in old time receiued in one kind, OPENLY,
               The 
                     ••
                  urth Shifte.
and in the CHVRCH, doth
not this make againſt you? No ſayeth
Maiſter Iewel. Maiſter Harding maketh
his whole plea vpon an infant, and yet of infantes
as he knoweth I ſpake nothing. No
more did ye of OPEN CHVRCH,
               Iew. 139.


               
               WHOLE PEOPLE, LAY MEN,
Prieſtes or others: But ye made an vniuerſal
and indefinite negatiue propoſition,
which is by all reaſon ſufficiently reproued,
if but in one particular, the contrarye be
proued.
            But let vs conſider the compaſſe of your
inuentiou a litle further. What if we proue
that the two Diſciples whom Chriſt ouertoke
in the way to Emaus, receiued the Sacrament
vnder one kind? Or that S. Ambroſe
and S. Baſile receiued likewiſe vnder
one? is not all this plaine contrary to
your aſſertions? No ſayeth M. Iewel.
            For the queſtion is moued of LAY PEOPLE.Iew. 12
                     •
                  . The fifth Shifte.
M. Harding bringeth examples of
Chriſt and two diſciples, who were of the
number of Seuenty and two, and therfore it
maye well be thought they were miniſters
and not of the lay ſort.
            And againe:
            I demaunde of the lavitie, he aunſwereth
of Sainct Ambroſe and Sainct Baſile
whiche were Bishoppes.
            In dede M. Iewel you muſte pardon
him, for hee thoughte that a good argumente
for Communion vnder one kinde



might haue ben taken of Chriſt & his two
diſciples, or of S. Ambroſe, or S. Baſils
authority alone. But ſeing you haue now
ſo conueighed the matter, that all that will
not ſerue, where might a man finde examples
to pleaſe you? If it were by one
example to be ſhewed that the laitye and
WHOLE PEOPLE receiued OPENLY
vnder one kinde, and in the
CHVRCH, would this ſatiſfie you? No
not this. For the thing denied by M. Iewel,The ſixth ſhifte. Iew. 14
                     •
                  
               
is this. That the Sacrament was euer
miniſtred vnto the people in one kind openly
in any congregation, or in the OPEN
ORDER and vſage of any CHVRCH
            
            And againe: It will not folowe that
this was the COMMON ORDER
of the Church.
               Iew. 133. By which wordes ORDER,
and VSAGE, we ſee one or two
euidences would not be taken, becauſe ſo
few proue not an VSAGE.
            
            How now then? When will this felow
leaue his flying backe? You ſhould (M.
Iewel) come nearer and nearer, or ſtay at
the leaſt in ſome Concluſion. But ye adde
ſtill more and more to the queſtion, and
ſeeke to come out of the ſtraits, into which
through foliſh hardineſſe you are caſt by



your owne glorious Sermon. Surely
ye be gone a great way, from thoſe plaine
and few wordes, which, this queſtion of
Communion vnder both kindes, had at
the beginning. Yet will I folowe you, if
perchaunce I may ſee ſome end.
            Therfore if I were able to proue, that
the WHOLE PEOPLE (withoute
mentioning of Biſhops, Prieſtes, or Infants)
did receiue vnder one kind OPENLY,
in any CONGREGATION, or
in the OPEN ORDER and VSAGE
of any Church: Then I truſt, you would
geue ouer all contention. No, you will
neuer leaue till you haue brought it to an
endleſſe controuerſye. The Negatiue of
our ſide, (ſay you) which ſo much troubleth
him is this.
               Iew. 14
                     •
                   Che. vij. ſhift. 
               That for the ſpace of ſix hundred
yeares after Chriſt, it can not be found
in any old Doctor or Councell, that euer the
holy Communion was miniſtred to the people,
in the Church, or in any open aſſemble,
in one kinde only, AS IT IS NOWE
MINISRED IN THE CHVRCH
OF ROME. You be ſafe M. Iewel, I
warrant you, you be ſafe. All the Catholikes
in the whole world, are not able
to take you. For what ecceptions



will not you make, and what Extenſions
will not you deuiſe, vnder pretenſe of
theſe wordes: AS IT IS NOW MINISTRED
IN THE CHVRCH
OF ROME. Come who will, let him
bring what he can: If from the Prieſtes
crowne downe to his foote: And from
Confite or to lte Miſſa eſt, he proue not the
like to haue bene vſed then, as is nowe: in
Amice, Albe, Stole, Girdle, Praying, Bleſſing,
Eleuating, Breaking, Communicating
and diſtributing. &c. who ſhall let
M. Iewel to ſay, that he demaunded of
ſuch order of miniſtring, as is now in the
Church of Rome? For as well he may in
this matter of Receiuing vnder both kindes,
make queſtion of the Prieſtes veſtiuentes,
and of his ſoft ſpeaking: as in the
queſtion of Priuate Maſſe, which concerneth
nothinge elſe but Sole Receiuinge,
draw the ſtate of it vnto ſaying of Maſſe,
and therevpon ſhewe many feates of his
Cheualry. And when ſhall he then come
to the poynt of the controuerſye, whiche
hath choſen ſuch compaſſes to wander about
in? Therefore M. Iewel if you hold
your ſelfe here, you be ſafe enough I warrant
you.
            
               
But are ye not aſhamed ſo to trifle,
and to fight for nothing with ſuche contention?
We can not proue againſt you
ſo formallye and demonſtratiuelye as you
require, neither can we anſwer your challenge
as nowe you haue expreſſed it.
But what then? Where is the profit of
your victorye? What ſpoiles bring ye to
your companye?
            This is your fault Maiſter Iewell,The vain contention of M. Iewel.
as in the former Article, ſo now againe
in this, that you make a mightie ſhew,
and are not hable to faſten one blowe,
you laboure with hande and tounge, as
thoughe you woulde conquere ſome, and
free paſſage beinge graunted you, ye can
take nothinge away from vs.
            For let not the receauing vnder both
kindes be foūd in, OPEN CHVRCH,
and, VSAGE OF THE CHVRCH,
and, in the WHOLE PEOPLE,
And, AS IT IS NOWE MINISTRED
IN THE CHVRCHE
OF ROME: Yet for ſo muche
as by Chriſte and his two Diſciples, by
Saincte Ambroſe, Scrapion and others,
we proue that it is not contrarie to



his Inſtitution, we confound your lying
tonge, which ſpeaketh ſo lowdely and earneſtly
thereof, as though the Catholike
Church did not kepe it, becauſe the Laietie
now, receaueth vnder one kynd in moſte.
places.
            If it be true (as your ſelfe confeſſe either
voluntariely or conſtrained by the Catholikes)
that Receauing vnder one kind, hath
Examples for it in the Primitiue Churche,The Catholike hathe his purpoſe.
and thoſe yeres which you were content to
be tried by, then is it aloweable. And
then ſurely, it is not againſt Chriſtes Inſtitution.
And then, doth the vſe of the
Church now, ſtand with Chriſtes Inſtitution:
and then ſhuld not you ſo ſhamefully
abuſe your Aduerſarie,Iew. 119 with how can M.
Harding warrant the manifeſte breach, of
Chriſtes INSTITVTION?
               343 Againe:
The cauſes that moueth the Church of Rome
to break Chriſtes INSTITVTION are
not great.
               150 Againe: M. Harding, thus maintaining
the open abuſe of the holy myſteries
offendeth againſt Chriſtes INSTITVTION.
               
                  
                     ••
                  9
Again: what? troweth he there is
no difference betwene obeing Gods COMMAVNDEMENT,
and breaking gods
COMMAVNDEMENT? Againe:
            
               
               With what indifferent iudgement then
can M. Harding thus compare theſe thinges
together,
               116 
               an INSTITVTION with no INSTITVTION?
Againe,
               114 
               the beſt ſtay that
theſe mē cā lay hold vpō, is to deny Chriſtes
INSTITVTION. Again,110 
               M. Harding
thinketh that the people may ſafely breake
Chriſtes INSTITVTION &c: As though
either he, or any other Catholik wēt about
it. But if it be ſo in deede, and if you will
abyde by it, that Chriſtes Inſtitution is
broken, when any receaueth vnder one
kinde alone: goe not then from that ſtate of
the queſtion. and before this be tried, troble
not vs, and others with matters impertinent.
            Wherefore did you mone this queſtion,
whether within ſix hundred yeares after
Chriſt, any Communion was miniſtred vnto
the people vnder one kind; did ye it not to
this end, that you might conclude there
vpon, (if no man woulde aunſwer you)
that Chriſtes Inſtitution is now broken of
the Catholikes, which miniſter otherwiſe
then they did in the Primitiue Churche?
Ergo, the marke which you loke vnto, is
Chriſtes Inſtitution: which to proue to be
with vs, or againſt vs, we therefore conſider
the doinges of the Primitiue Church.



And becauſe exāples are foūd enē in ye age, &
ſuch records, as your ſelf dare not yet deny,
by which we know, ye receauing vnder one
kind was many times vſed: we cōclude in ye
principal, yt it is not againſt Chriſtes Inſtitution
to receaue vnder one kinde. Do you
deni ye cōſequēt? How cā you, which haue ſo
appeled to the primitiue Church, as though
you wold be cōtēt & quiet, if good teſtimonies
of that time could be alleged againſte
you? What ſay ye thē to ye Antecedēt? ye cō
               feſſe
it in plain words ye ſome receaued then
vnder one kind,Iew. 132. ſaying: Neither did I deny
that euer any one mā receued the Cōmuniō
in one kind. But yet (you reply) it was an
abuſe. I here you wel. But that is another
queſtion.The. viij. ſhift. And it is another ſhift alſo, much
fouler thē any of the fornamed. Remember
your ſelf M. Iewel, I pray you, and let
vs conclude our matters in order.
            The firſt queſtion ſhould haue bene▪
VVhether Chriſtes Inſtitution doth
ſtand with receauing vnder one kinde.
            
               The firſt wt you, but the ſecond rather wt 
vs, is: whether any Communion was then
miniſtred vnto the people vnder one kinde.
We proue, & you cōfeſſe y• ſome hath hen miniſtred.
Ergo it is time ye yeld & ſubſcribe.



A iij. queſtion now, & if you wil, ſhal
be: whether it were an abuſe in ye primi
tiue Church to receue vnder one kind.
            And ſo furth in many other, according to
the circumſtancies of Perſons, time, and
places. But before we come to thē, do you
in the meane time as you promiſed: for we
haue proued yt which you denied.Either yelde or take better hold faſt, and begin again. If you
ſtriue, & ſay ye mēt yt it was not OPENLY
receiued vnder both kinds, & ORDINARIly:
Thā what a trif
                  •
               er or wrāgler be you, to
chalēge vs about circūſtāces, before we wer
agreed vpō ye ſubſtāce of ye mater. yet if you
wil nedes haue OPENLY wt his felowes
put in, thē begin again, & ſpeak more plainly.
for as ye haue proponed ye mater, ye ace
ouercōme. And yet before ye begin wt thoſe
cirūſtāces, I warn you, it wil be to no purpoſe,
becauſe our ſelues may confeſſe vnto
you, yt we cā not gaine ſay it: & you ſhal cō
               clude
nothing againſt vs, by it. For ye churches
cauſe is ſufficiētly defēded, if receiuing
vnder one kind may be proued, by any aūciēt
exāple, wtout any exception made by you.
Thus it may be againe ſene, how M. Iew.
ſpeaketh, in all this ſecond Article, to no
purpoſe, if he make the queſtion ſo circumſtantiall,
as he hath labored to haue it.



On the other ſyde, the Catholike cauſe is
ſufficientlye defended, both by our owne
witneſſes, and by confeſſion of our Aduerſaries,
becauſe it is proued ſundry wayes,
that receauing vnder one kind was knowen
and vſed in the Primitiue Churche,
and therefore vndoubtedly it is not repugnant
to Chriſtes Inſtitution.
         
         
            The third Article.
(⁂)
            COncerning this queſtion of the Common
Prayers, whether in the ſixe
hundred yeres after Chriſt, they wert
in a ſtrange tonge which the People
did not vnderſtand: what can any Catholik
of theſe partes of the world ſay more,
then that they were in the Greeke tounge
or Latine tounge only? For whereas neither
Authoritye of Scripture cōmaundeth
it, neither veritie of Tradition confirmeth
it, neither report of Hiſtorie witneſſeth it,
neither yet any Token or Memorie ſignifieth
it, that the Publike Seruice of the
Churche Eaſte or Weaſte, was within the
compaſſe of the firſt ſix hundred yeres, in



any other tounge then Greeke or Latine:
what lightneſſe muſte it be, to forſake the
orders which we haue, and take others, I
can not tell what?1. Cor. 14.
            
            The Apoſtle maketh an expreſſe diſtinction 
betwene the Idiote and him that
ſupplieth the place.It is no wiſedome to chaūge that We haue, for an other thing, no mā is ſure What. Of the Idiote (concerning
the Common Prayers) he geueth no
precept, of the other he ſayeth, how ſhall he,
that ſupplieth the place of the I
                     •
                  iote, anſwer
Amen, vpon thy blesſing? Now by Tradition,
we haue receaued no other, but Latine 
or Greeke Seruice. Of the change of the 
vulgar toūge, into any of theſe two, Greek
or Latin, or of ſetting vp of theſe, in ſtede of
the knowen and vulgar tounge, there is
no mention in any writer. And laſte of al,
ther can be ſhewed no token or ſufficient ſimilitude,
that the Seruice of old tyme, was
in the vulgar tounge. Ergo how ſhould
a reaſonable man condemne that whiche
hym ſelfe ſeeth ſo generally vſed, and folowe
another vnknowē manner, to which
he is vncertainely referred?
            S. Auguſtine ſaieth it but of Ceremonies,Auguſt. ad Ianuar. ep. 118.
that, If the whole Church throughout
the world, doe obſerue any thing: to diſpute
thereof it is a point of moſt inſolent madnes.


               
And if it be ſo in ceremonies, is it not much
more ſo in publike Seruice? For in Ceremonies
(becauſe of indifferencie of thē in
them ſelues, and infirmity of ſome perſōs,
which be ouer curiouſe againſt them) manie
poyntes might be reaſoned vpon, and
(If manifeſt neede require) be omitted.
Yet, If the whole Church vſe them, there
ought to be no queſtion. But in publike
Seruice, which perteyneth to the ſtate of
the Church, and in which, the mouing of
any dout cauſeth the whole Religion to be
ſhaken: how is it to be ſuffered, that ſhe
ſhould be appoſed? Or that any Priuate
perſons without reaſon or authority, ſhuld
cal that into queſtion, which is generally
receaued?
            The Heretikes of this age ſay, that the
Latine Seruice (for example) in all the
Weſt Churche, hathe not come frome the
ſix hundred yeres after Chriſte. Frome
whence came it then? Who were the planters
of it? Who were the mainteyners? If
they did it wt conſent of al the Weaſt Coū
               tries,
that is a great preiudice againſt your
contentionſneſſe.How unlikely. If they did it by force or
violence, would no man complaine of it
preſently? Or put it in writing, for inſtruction



of the poſteritie? Surely, this can not
be but a great wonder, yt the Cōmon Seruice
of the Weſt Church, was not generally
in Latine euery where at y• begynning:
And, that ſo many thouſand Churches, in
ſo many ſeuerall and diuerſe Countries
thereof, ſhould altogether, moſt faithfully,
hold and kepe the ſame: And no man yet
tell, of what begynning. But what ſhould
a Catholike be trobled in his mind or geue
eare to Peekers of quarells?
            If the iuſt and quiet Poſſeſſours of Auncient
and good Landes, ſhould be made
to bring foorth Euidencies, and, either anſwer
to all demaundes whiche it pleaſeth
the Aduerſarie to moue, or ells to be quyte
and cleane thruſt out of all, without any
further iudgmēt: would it not be accompted
ſo vnreaſonable and iniuriouſe, that no
wiſe man or honeſt man, could alowe it or
ſuffer it? What cauſe then is there, why the
troblers of quyet poſſeſſouts in Religion,
ſhould be prayſed and houore
                  •
               , as ghoſtly
S
                  •
               ru
                  •
               yers (I trow) of all Chriſtendome?
How hold you this, quod he? Mary, what
is that to thee? Thou ſeeſt I hold it. Yea
but how came you by it? Firſte who gaue
you the authority to aſke me that queſtion?
            
               
Then ſpare not,Enchroching and buſy heretikes. but lay it to my charge,
if thou haſt any euidence againſt me. It
was not ſo in the Primitiue Church. Yes
forſooth was it. Bring me then (ſayeth
he) any ſufficient authority of Doctor or
Councell. Foliſh felow, wilt thou put
me to my proofes, which am in poſſeſſyon,
and haue long dwelt here, as it can not be
denied, thy ſelf being not able to ſhew from
whence I had it, except it were of the firſt
Lordes and Patrones? What right I haue,
the ſame I haue receiued. And thoſe that
deliuered it to me, toke it of others before
them. And they againe, receiued it of
their forefathers. Neither canſt yu proue
any chaunge of Titles to haue come in betwene,
from the firſt Apoſtles & Fathers,
to their children which now do liue. Is it
not therfore a ſufficient defence to vs, that
thou canſt not deny, but the Weſt Church
doth vſe, and hath (for hundred of yeres together)
ſpokē Latiu generally in her Seruice,
and art not able to ſhew, where ſhe euer
vſed Engliſh, Dutch, French, or Spaniſh?
Thy ſilence in this queſtion doth
anſwer for vs. And it ſhould be a demonſtration
to all reaſonable men, that vndoubtedly
the publike Seruice here in the



Weaſt was in Latin from the beginning,Trafitiō for the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
becauſe, no other beginning therof can be
ſhewed, nor the ceaſing of thoſe vulgare
Tongues, which (as M. Iewel getteth)
were once vſed, can any where be found, or
eſpied. Thus much ſhould and would
be ſaid, if the right way might be alowed.
            But now, preſent poſſeſſion maketh nothing.
And therfore is D. Harding conſtrained,
to folow ye pleaſure of y• Extorciotier,
& to proue, that to be ours of auncient
ryght: ye long poſſeſſion wherof without
any diſturbāce, cōcludeth it to be our right.
Wherein though he hath done very well,
yet he bringeth nothing, but M. Iewel turneth
it to a geſſe, a likelihode, a coniecture.
Which phraſes are ſo common wyth him,
through all this Article, as though he
would admit no Authority or Argument,
but ſuch as is taken out of the Scriptures,
or ſuch as ſhould be ſo euident and inuincible,
that he could haue no power to
anſwer them. His Phraſes are theſe:
M.Harding is not able to proue this with all
his geſſes.
               Iewel. Againe:160 
               The Minor he warranteth
but by a geſſe only.
               166 Againe: Reply
is made and that by geſſes and likelihods.
               180
Againe: This geſſe ſtandeth vppon two


               
poyntes. And ſo in other places moe.
            For this cauſe, that it may be perceiued,
whether he allſo vſeth not Gheaſſes, & that
he may learn in time, to be good to others,
when he is fauorable to him ſelfe: before I
ſpeake of D. Hardinges reaſon, let vs a
while hold our peace, and put M. Iewel to
anſwering.
            Tel vs, I pray you, Sir, for truths ſake,
you which are ſo well ſeene in Antiquities,
and can appoſe, and preſſe others ſo erneſtly
with obſcure queſtions about the Primitiue
Church: Is it not reaſon that you
geue better inſtructions, which finde fault
with the Catholikes opinions? And i
                  •
               
the iudgment and anſwere of the whole
Church that now is, can not ſatiſfye you:
ſhould you, with any conſcience, require
your opinion to be receiued, except ye bring
Demonſtrations for it?
            
               Tell vs therfore I beſeeche you, without
Geſſes, Coniectures, and Like lihodes,
(which you can not away withall,) was
the publike Seruice of the Churche,
within the ſix hundred yeares after
Chriſt,Harding Pol. 74. in the Syriacal, or Arabike, in
the AEgiptian, AEthiopian, Perſian,



Armeniā, Scythiā, Frēch, or Britain
tounge? Here you may anſwer vnto vs:
            
            
               This is no indifferent dealing.
               Iew. 165 And again:
Sodainly he altereth the whole ſtate of the
cauſe, and shifteth his handes and requireth
me to shew. But, that it may appeare you
deale plainly, and ſeeke nothing but truthe:
Anſwer I pray you throughly and directly.
In one example or two, you are content,
but why not in examples for all? For
the Syriacal tounge you ſpeake the moſte,
but why bring you not ſomewhat for eche
of the other? You will refer the reſt to an
other place (vnto which ſtraighte waits
we will folowe you) but preſently thus
you ſay.
            At Paulaes funerall, all the multitude of
the Citye of Paleſtine met together.Hierony mus in Epitaphio Pan 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                The
Pſalmes were ſonge in order, in Hebrewe,
Greeke, Latine, and Syrian tonge.
            Well, here in dede is mention of the Syrian
Tounge, and of Pſalmes ſong in it.
But how proue you, theſe Pſalmes to infer
the Cōmon Seruice in the ſame tounge:
For, by Pſalmes, I vnderſtand Hymnes,
Songes, and Praiſes, made to the houor
of God, and memorie of S. Paula. For
Theodoretus reporteth (as you beare meLib. 4. cap. 10.


               
witneſſe) that Ephrem made Hymnes and
Pſalmes in the Syrian tounge, And that the
ſame were ſonge at the ſolemne Feaſtes of
Martyrs.
               Lib. 4. ca. 29. Iew. 157
                All Pſalmes therefore, were not
the Pſalmes of Dauid (for Ephrem made
new of his owne) and the ſynginge of
Pſalmes at Paulaes funerall,Here beginneth M. Iew. with his 
                     ••
                  ſſes. proue not,
but by Gheaſſe, that they were part of the
Common Seruice. And therefore, though
ye haue brought foorth a place where mention
is made of Pſalmes in the Syrian
tounge: yet doe ye not ſatiſfie our demaūd
and expectation, whiche aſke of Publike
Seruice, and looke to be, playnly and euidently
anſwered.
            Ye adde vnto this, a teſtimonie out of
S. Auguſtine, where he willeth the prieſtes
to correct the errors of theyr Latine
ſpeache: That the people vnto the thinge
they playnly vnderſtand, may ſay Amen.
And what of this?
               Iew. 156 
               This (ſay you) of S.Auguſtine,
ſeemeth to be ſpoken generally of all
Tounges.
            
            To whome ſeemeth it? To your ſelf (I
thinke) and your cumpanie only.An other geſſe of M. Iew. And if to
any other beſyde, it ſhould likewiſe ſeeme
ſo, yet Seeming hangeth but vpon Gheaſſes
and lykelihoodes. And therefore is, neither



to be vſed of you, which are to reſolute
to allege them: neither to be named againſt
vs, which ſeeke now after your Euidences
and perfect Inſtructions, and muſt
not be ſerued with Lykelihoodes.
            But ye refer vs to another place. To
that place then will we come, and repete
our queſtion again.
            VVhether your ſide is able to ſhew,
that the publik Seruice of the Church
in any nation was (in the Syriacall, or
Arabike, or AEgyptiā, AEthiopiā,
Perſian, Armenian, Scythian, Frēch,
Britaine tounge, or) in any other then
in Greeke and Latine.
            Here you may againe finde fault as you
did before and ſay:Iew. 15▪
                
               He altereth cunningly
the whole caſe, and willeth me to ſhew. But
we ſhall deſire you againe, to be cōtent and
yelde to our requeſt: If there be ſuch goodneſſe
and pregnancie of your cauſe, as you
ſpeake of, and ſpecially if ye ſpeake for the
better contentation of the Good Chriſtian
Reader. But remember that ye muſt exidently
anſwer vs without Gheaſſes, and



               Likelihodes. Go to then, wher begin you?
            Eckius ſayeth,
               Iew. 175 the Indians had their Seruice
in the Indian tounge. Durandus ſaith,
the Iewes that were Chriſtened had their
Seruice in the Hebrewe tounge.
            Call ye this, A contentation of a good
Chriſtian Readers mind, to proue vnto hym
a Concluſion, by thoſe mennes ſayinges,
whome, by your example, the better and
perfiter Chriſtian he is, the leſſe he muſt accept
for witneſſes? What tel ye vs now, of
Eckius and Durandus, whom you make vs
not to paſſe vpon?More weke (after M. Iew. mind) thē 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                This kind of reſoning
of there authority, whome you would haue
vs thinke to be of no Authoritye, is more
weake & vncertain, then if ye ſhould aime
onlye and geſſe at the matter, whiche we
loke to be fully quieted in, by your muche
reading and learning. Eckius alſo ſayeth
no more,Eckius in Locis communibus. but it was permitted. And he ſpeketh
of that which was done a this ſide the
ſix hundred yeres, to the which only, your
anſwer ſhould be referred. And Durādus
maketh no mention of Iewes, as though
the celebration of the myſteries, had ben for
their ſakes done in Hebrew, but of the beginnings
of the primitiue Church, in which
not only Iewes but Gentiles alſo in great



number came to the faith of Chriſt, he ſaieth
generally: In the primitiue Churche,Lib. 4. cap. 1. the
Diuine Myſteries were celebrated in the
Hebrew tounge. Of which we may iuſtly
gather, that euery Chriſtian vnderſtode not
the Seruice, becauſe more then Iewes
were then Chriſtened, and the Hebrewe
tounge was not vulgar to any, ſauing Iewes.
So that the tongue which they vſed
in the Diuine myſteries, was ſtraunge and
vnknowen vnto many, which from Paganiſee
were conuerted to Chriſt.
            
               But Nycolaus de Lyra,Iew. 17
                     •
                   An other gheaſſe of M. Iew. and Thomas of Aquine
ſay (authors whome you thinke worthy
of ſmall credit) the Common Seruice, in
the Primitiue Church, was in the Common
vulgar tongue.
            This is true, though it were but in the
Greeke or Latin tounge only. And ſo doth
it not anſwer our queſtion throughly.
            But what if D. Harding him ſelfe haue in
plaine wordes confeſſed,Iew. 17
                     •
                  . that Common praiers
were pronoūced in the primitiue Church
in a Common tounge knowen to the people?
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            But when he ſhall anſwer you, that he
taketh not Common praite
                  •
                and Common
Sernice both for one thing, (whi
                  •
               h without
what if I am ſure he will doe) what is
that, to the queſtion which we put forth▪


               
Or how haue ye anſwered, to the Contentation
of your good Chriſtian reader? Thus
then, all this hytherto is litle or nothinge
worth. And we loke for ſtrōger argumentes
at your learned handes. And therefore
perchaunce you ſay:
            Yet Good Chriſtian Reader for thy better
ſatiffaction,Iew. 176 it may pleaſe thee to knowe,
that in the Primitiue Church,Far from the queſtion. the Common
Seruice was not miniſtred, by one man alone,
but by the Prieſt and whole Congregation,
alltogether.
            But was it in any other tounge, then
Greeke or Latine? This is demaunded, to
this you haue to anſwer. And remember
here your bluid Senator,Iew. 327 which talked and
pointed to the higher end of ye table, ye Mullet
which he ſo much praiſed, being far beneth,
at the lower end.
            
               Clemens Alexandrinus ſayeth, In the
Common Prayers they haue all,Iew. 176 An gother 
                     •
                  eſſe of M. Iew. as it were,
one voice and one mynd.
            So may they, though it be out of publike
Seruice. Alſo where he talketh of Prayers
indefinitely, you adde the word (Common)
vnto them,falthode. leaſte it ſhould be any thinge
doubtfull. What call you that, a Gheaſſe,
or a Ieaſte?
            
               
S. Chryſoſtome ſayeth,Iew. 176 An other Gheaſse of M. Iew. not only the Prieſt
geaueth thankes, but alſo all the People.
            That is, becauſe he is a publike Miniſter,
to whoſe prayers all the people muſt
ioyne their conſentes, ſo that they are not
excuſed if they thinke of other matters
when ye prieſt prayeth, but are bound to applie
their deuotions to his, as in whom
they all do ſerue God. But what is this to
the vulgare Tongue in Publike Seruice?
            
               Iſydorus writeth thus:
               Iew. 176 Moe Gheaſſes. when they ſinge
they muſt ſinge all togeher, when they pray,
they muſt pray all together.
            He ſpeaketh of the Clergie only, that ye
neede not extend it to the laye people. And
therfore, if you haue no better then this, we
may well put you to other proofes. Which
are not far of.
            
               For,
               Iew. 176 Moe Gheaſſes. 
               out of y• old father Origen, you tell
vs: That al ſeueral nations, pray vnto god
and praiſe him in their mother tongue.
            This may be done in Prinat prayers,
And our requeſt is, to haue ſure argumentes
for Publike Seruice.
            
               Out of S, Ambroſe, There were Iewes
(ſay you) which in their Sermons and Oblations,Iew. 176 Moe Gheaſſes.
vſed ſometime the Syrian tongue and



ſome tymes the Hebrew.
            This perteineth then to Sermons and
Offeringes, not to Common prayers. And
it was, you may perceaue, no appointed
and ſett order of Common ſeruice, in which
they changed their tongues ſo, at their pleaſures.
            Out of S. Baſil, ye tell vs, of Such, as
offered vp to the lord the Pſalme of Confeſſion.
               Iew. 176.
And againe, ye number out of him,
Egyptians, and bothe the Countries of Lybia,
and the Thebanes,Moe Gheaſſes. Paleſtines, Arabi
               
                  •
               ns,
Phenicians, Syrians, and the borderers
of Euphrates, and generally all, that
haue VVatchinges,
               177. 
               and Prayers, and Common
Pſalmodie in eſtimation.
            
            But to what purpoſe name ye, al theſe
diuerſe countries. To make that cleere,
which we doubted of? and to proue, y• the
publike Seruice was, at thoſe dayes, in ſo
many tongues? By what reaſon or argument?
becauſe al theſe, had common Pſalmodie
in eſtimation? And who, emonge
vs, eſtemeth in not? Take you rather
heede to this, of whoſe Pſalmodie it may
be doubted, which haue ſo litle Prayinge,



and no watching. But what meane
you here, by Common Pſalmodie? Thinke
you that al theſe countries ſo ſeuerall, mett
in one Place, and ſonge Pſalmes together?
that is incredible. How then? wil you
gather this ſenſe of it, that the ſame Pſalmes
were reade and ſonge euery where?
Tell vs then in what tongue they were
vſed? And conſider, whether one tongue,
(as the Greeke for example) might not
haue ſerued to that purpoſe? For in the
weaſt now, we know the ſelfe ſame Pſalmes,
yea and text alſo, euery where to be
vſed.Baſil. in epiſt. ad Cler. Neocae. But was not this S. Baſiles
meaninge, that the manner of Watchinge,
Prayinge, and ſinginge Pſalmes, ſhould
not ſeeme ſtrannge and newly inuented,
becauſe it is allowed & practiſed in ſo many
and ſeuerall countries? yes verely this
only is his meaninge. for, certaine heretikes
there were then, which ſtirred vp the
myndes and ſtomakes of the Clergie of
Neocaeſaria, perſwadinge them, that
the old manner and Cuſtome of ſynging
Pſalmes was changed, and ſaying:
At non erant haec tempore Gregorii Magni.
But theeſe thinges were not in



Gregorie the Great his dayes. Vnto
whom S. Baſil anſwereth, that ye maner of
pſalmodie which he vſeth, is not his particular,
but common to him and Egiptians,
and both Contries of Lybia, and the Thebanes
etc. But where finde you here (M.
Iew.) that theſe pſalmes were in the peculiar
tongue, of euerie of theſe countries, or
that they were of the publike Seruice? S.
Baſile ſpeaketh no further, but concerning
the order of vſinge them, and you make
him to beare you witneſſe, in what tongue
thoſe pſalmes were vttered.
            
               Out of S. Hierome you proue to vs,
               Iew. 177 An other Gheaſſe of M. Iewels. That
the voices and letters of all nations, do ſound
out Chriſt his paſsion and Reſurrection.
            As who ſhoud ſay, that, in Kynge Henry
the ſeauenths tyme, the publike Seruice
in England was not in the Latine tonge,
becauſe many Engliſh bokes did intreate
of Chriſtes paſsion and Reſurrection,
and becauſe the people in their vulgar tongue
did ſpeake much of it.
            Out of Aeneas Syluius,leſſe then a Gheaſſe for the Seruice in the primity
                     •
                  e Church. Iew. 
                     •
                  77 you ſay, A voice
washeard, as it had ben from heauen 
                     •
                  
                (And
now you begynne, deuoutly to hearken to
Reuelations, though neuer written in go
ſpell, nor ſix hundered yeares after Chriſt)



               Let euerie ſpirit prayſe the lord, and let euerie
tonge acknowledge him. And that thereupon,
the Sclauons wee ſuffered to vſe their
owne tonge in their Common Seruice.
            
            
               When chaunſed this? About the yeare of
our Lord eight hundred and three ſkore.
            That is to ſay, ye come to late by two
hundred and threſkore yeares or thereabout,
to proue what was done in the ſix
hundred yeares after Chriſt. Againe, ſuch
ſute, for the Sclauons, as you ſpeake of,
to haue the Cōmon Seruice in their moother
tongue, proueth what was ordinarily
vſed then to the contrarie in al Chriſtendome.
The great ſtaie of the Pope and
Cardinals in grauntinge it, declareth how
Straunge, Needeleſſe, or daungerouſe, the
Rulers of y• Church, 800. and odd yeares
ſence, thought that requeſt to be. The voice
from heauen importeth, that it neaded a ſpeciall
ſigne and teſtimonie to obtaine a diſpenſation
in a matter ſo extraordinarie.
            Out of Innocentius, you bringe, ye can
not tell what. But firſt what was this Innocentius?
A Pope of Rome. when lyned
be? About 300. yeares ſence. And dare you
confirme your cauſe, with Popes decrees,
of ſo late yeares? But where, dehreed 
                  •
               e
this? In the Councel of Lateran. That



Councel, which of all other ye moſt deteſt,
as in which Tranſſubſtantiation, was in expreſſe
termes declared, and in which the
kyngedome (as you will ſay) of ye Popiſhe
Church was defended. Is it poſsible then,
(to goe no further) that, out of that world
and Councel, a Decree ſhould be alleged
by the which, M. Iewels Schiſmaticall opinion
ſhould be confirmed?
            Conſider by this one example, (indifferent
Reader) how this felow abuſeth thy
vnſkillfulneſſe, or lacke of leyſure to examin
the places, which he allegeth out of the
Auncient fathers,Who ſo bold as Iewel. or practiſe of the Primitiue
Church: which dareth, as it were, at
high noone, and in ye very ſight of y• world,
to make men beleue, that Innocentius (forſooth)
the third, was a fauorer of their procedinges?
And ſo to interpret his wordes
and ſett them foorth in great letters, as
though he had decreed, that if (for example)
Engliſhe men, Douch men, French men,
Italians, Spaniardes &c. were mengled together
in one Citye, the Biſhope thereof,
ſhould prouide meete men, to miniſter the
holy Seruice,
               Iew. 177. 
               ACCORDINGE TO
THE DIVERSITIE OF THEIR
MANNERS AND TONGVES,
which ſould be to ſay, In Engliſh, Douch,



French &c.
            But doth Innocentius meane ſo? Nay
doth he ſay ſo? for if ye dare to ſet furth
his wordes in Latin as though your fidelitie
ſhould be ſeene, and yet, in the Engliſſhinge
of them, corrupt the ſame wordes:
who may truſt you in your Comment and
conſtruction vpon them? Prouideant (ſayeth
he, of the Biſhopes of ſuch Cityes or
dioceſes, where ſundrie nations dwelled
together) viros idoneos qui ſecundum diuerſitates
rituum & linguarum diuina ILLIS
offica CELEBRENTET ECCLESIASTICA
SACRAMENTA adminiſtrēt,
That is, we ſtraightly commād,
yt the Biſhope of ſuch Cityes, prouide
meete mē, which according to the diuer
ſitie of Rites and Tongues, maye celebrat
ye diuine Seruice vnto thē, & miniſter
the Sacramentes of the Church.
            
            But, M. Iew. leaueth out quite the interpretation
of Illis celebrent may celebrate
vnto them: And,M. Iewels falſehoode, and that to 
                     〈◊〉
                   but 
                     •
                   Gheaſſe. 
               Eccleſiaſtica Sacramenta,
The Sacramentes of the Church
makinge of two verbes but one, and
of two Accuſatiue caſes but one: and applienge



ye verbe to ye former Accuſatiue caſe,
which ſhould gouerne y• later only: and
leauinge the later accuſatiue caſe, not only
without the proper verbe to rule it,Iew. 177 but altogeather
leauinge it out. As in example.
VVe doe therfore ſtraightly commaund that
the Bishopes of ſuch Cities or dioceſes prouide
meete men to miniſter (he ſhould haue
added ye proper accuſatiue caſe: The Sacramentes
of the Church, but it leeketh him
not, he leaueth it out quite) The holy Seruice
(he ſhould haue put before it the proper
verbe belonging to it: To celebrate vnto
them, the diuine or holy Seruice. for, by ſayinge
vnto them, the Pope, ſignifieth, that
the people ſayed not the ſeruice, but the
prieſt.) ACCORDING to the diuerſitie
of their manners (more playnly it would
haue ben ſayed, their Rites or Ceremonies)
and tongues.
            
            If any man thinke this omiſsion to be
of ſmal importance: I anſwer, that in him,
which is ſo curiouſe to note in the Margen
Rituum & Linguarum, and to engliſh them
in y• text with great letters, the better to
be conſidered, in him, it is no ſmal fault to
place and conſtrue wordes at his pleaſure,
and to conueygh thoſe away out of the ſentence,
which beinge left alone, doe open



and expound the whole matter. For interpretinge
ye Canō truly, your greate doub
                  ••
               
M. Iewel (of Accordinge to the Vniuerſitie
of their manners and tongues) will eaſily
be anſwered. for the Biſhopes (to make it
plaine) are commaunded, to prouide
meete men, to celebrate the diuine Seruice
vnto thē, Accordinge to the diuerſitie
of their manners or Rites, and to
miniſter the Sacramētes of the Church
vnto them, accordinge to the diuerſitie
of their tongues. For as it is not enough,
to bringe a ſimple Italian, (if he 
                  〈◊〉
               
be confeſſed and abſo
                  ••
               ed) to a prieſt of
the Latine Church, but to ſuch a 
                  〈◊〉
               , as vnderſtandeth
and ſpeaketh ye Italiā tongue:
So in ſayinge of Seruice to the ſame man,
it is enough to keepe the Rites and Ceremonies
which he hath ben vſed vnto, in
his owne countrie, and it is not required
that it ſhould be ſaied in the Italian tongue,
becauſe in Confeſsion reſpect is had
to ſingular perſons, but in publik Seruice
ye whole ſtate of the Church is conſidered.
In confeſsion alſo the prieſtes goe downe
to men, but in publike Seruice 
                  〈◊〉
               


               
aſcend vpward to God. In talking with
men our tongue ſhould be knowen vnto
them, in praieinge to God the thiefe care
ys of denotion. And therfore, it was not ſincerely
done of M. Iew. ſo to turne, & leaue
out, the wordes of this decree: neither are
litle omiſsions in this kinde, litle faultes.
            Who then may truſt him with expoundinge
the wordes? or what hope might he
haue, ſo to handle the matter, that Innocentius
the third, might ſeme to condemne his
owne Church of Rome: and ſtraightly commaund,
that accordinge to the diuerſitie of
manners and tonges the holy Seruice ſhould
be miniſtred? Was this law euer put in execution
in Rome it ſelfe? Was it not an eaſie
matter, for him beinge Pope, to doe it? Did
not ſundrie nations of diuerſe tōgues mete
in that Citie togeather, to geaue him occaſion
to do it? yet hath he not done it. and the
Romaines tontinew ſtill their Seruice in
the Latine, though their vulgar ſpeach be
Italian. It appeareth then that Innocentius
had no ſuch meaninge as you deuiſe.
            And note the wordes of the decree. Let
meete men be prouided, to celebrate and miniſter
to People of diuerſ
                  •
                Countries, Accordinge



to the diuerſitie of their Rites and
tongues. Here I would aſke, what diuerſitie
it ſpeaketh of? Such as was not
yet extant in the Church, or ſuch as was
preſently vſed? If ye meane the firſt: that
can not be. for of thoſe Rites which are not
yet, who can ſay, Let them be ſerued accordinge
to the diuerſitie of their Rites! If ye
meane the ſecond, that is, If ye vnderſtand,
that ſuch diuerſitie of Rites and tongues
as was then all readie found in the Catholike
Church, ſhould be vſed toward ye people
of euerie countrie, where diuerſe nations
met togeather, within one Citie or
dioceſe: this proueth not, that the Engliſh
men dwellinge at Rome, ſhould haue a new
Engliſh Seruice made for them, but only,The right meaning of Innocentius decree.
that the like Rites and tongue, as were
vſed in their Countrie at home, in their Cō
               mon
Seruice, ſhould be enioyed of them in
Rome. After the which rate, the Italians
abidinge in Conſtantinople, ſhould haue
the Latin Seruice, and not the Greeke:
And the Greekes in Venice, ſhould haue
the Seruice after their owne manner, and
not after the Latine.
            But what is this to our queſtion? for to



make it playner, let vs ſuppoſe yt, a French
man dwellinge then in Rome, with other
his countrie men, wold require to haue
his Common prayer in the French tongue.
To him would I ſay, by what reaſon
or conſequent doeſt thou require it? Here,
let his anſwer be, how Innocentius decreed,
that euery nation ſhould be prouided
for, according to the diuerſitie of their
manners and tongues. I would aſke
him againe, what manner or tongue haſte
thou, in the Church Seruice in Fraunce? If
he anſwered, we haue the French: he ſhould
be taken in an open lye, becauſe none was
than thought vpon. If he anſwered, (as ye
truth was) we haue it in Latin but we haue
other faſhions in it, then theſe of Rome
haue: then ſhould he perceaue Innocentius
and the Councels meaninge. which was
that the celebratinge of publike Seruice,
and miniſtration of Sacramentes, as it
was then preſently vſed, in ſeuerall Countries:
ſo ſhould it be in a readineſſe for the
men of ye ſame Countries (when they met
together in one Citie) accordinge to y• diuerſitie
of their Rites and tongues.
            Therfore if you (M. Iew.) can ſhew by
any meanes, that the Church Seruice of



England was, at that tyme, in the Engliſh
tonge, then may I graunt vnto you,
yt when ye goe to Rome or Conſtātinople,
you may clayme the benefite of Innocētius
decree to be ſerued Engliſh wiſe. But if
you can not find, that in any of ſo many ſeuerall
Countries, as may be rekoned, the
Seruice was then in any other tongue
then Greeke or Latin, then ſhal you ſee it
plainly and neceſſarily concluded, that euery
of them was prouided for According to
the diuerſitie of Rites and tongue (Tonge,
you muſt meane, which they vſed in publik
Seruice, and in Churches, and not in
open Market Place, or Pryuate howſes)
and yet no one of them all ſhould haue other
tongue then Greeke or Latine. And
therfore, this teſtimonie doth nor ſerue
you, nor ſatisfie vs. And byſide this, I muſt
tell you, that were it neuer ſo good and fitt
for your purpoſe, yet is it byſide your Glorie,
to vſe Popes decrees of ſo late makinge.
            Now to conclude: M. Iew. ſignifieth vnto
vs, that he might allege much more, euen
out of Addias him ſelfe,Iew. 17▪
                whom M.
Hardinge ſo much eſtemeth. But I will
only note the complaint of one Iohn Billet.



Whome (I beleue) you as much eſteme
as you doe Abdias.A lamentation of ſome of histr
                     ••
                  des vpon M. Iewel would ſerue here wel, for Complainte the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Iohn Billet. Iew. 176 But wherein
will ye note his complaint? Concerninge
this caſe? What caſe? whether that, The Common
Seruice was not miniſtred, by one man
alone, but by the Prieſt and the whole Congregatiō
together, which is ye thinge ye promiſed
to ſhew? Or that the publike Seruice
was, in the ſix hundred yeares after
Chriſt, in any other tongue then Gréeke or
Latine, which queſtion was only demaunded,
and vnto which, you were content to
anſwer, for the better Contentation of myndes,
and better ſatisfaction of the Reader?
            
            Goe to then, what eyleth that, One Iohn
Billet,
               Iew. 178 as you cal hym, and whereof complayneth
he? Mary what ſhall we do (ſayeth
he) in our dayes, when as there is, either
none at al, or very ſeldome, that readeth or
heareth, or vnderſtandeth
            
            Vnderſtandeth what? the publike Seruice?
no but the Goſpell which was readen
in the Seruice. for the wordes next before,
are, that whereas in the Primitiue Church
no man ſhould ſpeake wich tongues, onleſſe
ſome were preſent to expound them:
here of (ſayeth he) grew a laudable Cuſtome
yt after ye Goſpell was read litterally



it ſhould ſtraight waies be expounded
in the vulgar tongue. And there vpon
foloweth his Complaint: what ſhall we
do in our dayes &c. He complaineth
therfore of lacke of learninge in the Reader
or hearer: not of the vnknowen Tongue in
which the Goſpell was read. for if the expoſition
of it doe folow in ye vulgar tongue,
the Cuſtome is laudable. And ſo hereby is
preſuppoſed, that the Goſpell was then in
another tongue then vulgar.
            But now if the expoſition foloweth not,
and few either readers or hearers vnderſtand
the Goſpell: what is to be done? Verely
the ſuereſt way is, to ſett moe Childrē
to ſchole, and to make better prouiſion for
Scholars, and to chouſe out of Scholars, in
to the Clergie. But what is your aduiſe M.
Iew.? mary, yt the Seruice (I trow) ſhould
be in the vulgar tongue. But ye find not
this, in Iohn Billets complaint. And except
you gather this Concluſion, how
make ye an end of your proceſſe with his
teſtimonie? Marke, I pray you (M. Iewel
Iohn Billets concluſion vpon his owne
Complaint. It (ſeemeth ſayeth he) It
were better now to hould their peace,



then ſo to ſinge. Lo, he talketh of holdinge
their peace in the Church, not of cryenge
out in the vulgar tongue. Neither wiſſſheth
he nor alloweth he y• takinge vp of a
new tongue and Seruice, but of amending
the ignorance of hearers and readers
concerninge the old. Alſo he ſayeth,yet moe Gh
                     •
                  ſſes of M. Iewel. It ſeemeth:
but determineth nothinge. And therfore
it is a wonder that you eſpied not
that Gheaſſe of his, wherby, we (though it
made for your purpoſe) are not ſatiſfied.
And, to be as exact as your ſelfe are, he was
not within the firſt ſix hundred yeares
after Chriſt. Therfore you haue ſayed hitherto,
with al your Gheaſſes nothinge to
the purpoſe, nor proued, that the Seruice
was in the Primitiue Church in ſome other
tongue, then Greeke or Latine.
            But perchaunce the neerer you come
homeward, y• better you be inſtructed. and
therfore leauinge to aſke you of the Syrian,
AEthiopian, Perſian and Armenian with
y• lyke, what ſay you to the French tongue?
Was the Seruice of Gallia, (now Fraunce)
in the vulgar tongue, within the ſix
hundred after Chriſt? It was not ſayed
(you will anſwere) in ſuch order as M.
Harding Gheaſſeth.
               Iew. 
                     •
                  84
            
            
               
Doe you then tell vs without Gheaſſes
I pray you, how it was.
            
               But in a knowen tounge vnto the people.
               Iewel.
            
            What was that? Speake M. Iewel. Tel
vs of ſome certaintie, for of al thinges you
loue no Gheaſſes
            That it was in a tounge knowen vnto the
people it is euident by Seuerus Sulpitius.Iewel.
            
            To all or ſome? for herein conſiſteth the
very point. To ſome, we graunt, and that
helpeth you nothing. To all, how proue
you, out of Sulpitius, or any other? Here againe
you be at a ſtaie. But goe ye foorth
with Sulpitius.
            
            
               The Reader was ſhut out, by meane of
the thronge. One of the companie toke the
Pſalter,
               Moregeſſes for the ſeruice in yt vulgare tounge. Iewel. 
               Read the verſe of the Pſalme:
Out of the mouth of Infantes and Sucklings,
thou haſt wrought prayſe. And as ſone as that
verſe was read, the people made a ſhout, and
the contrarie part was confounded. Here we
ſee the practiſe of the Church of Gallia.
            A proper practiſe I promiſe you, that as
ſoone as the verſe of the Pſalme was read,
the people made a ſhout. Thinke you, that
this Pſalme, and Readinge, of ye which
Sulpitius ſpeaketh, was any part of the



Publike Seruice? Or thinke you, the
people to haue bene ſo wyld and diſſolute
at thoſe dayes, that they made ſhoutes,
when they were in theyr Seruice? But
this is enough for you, that they made a
ſhoute. By which you gather, that they
vnderſtoode what was readde. Yet doe ye
not ſatiſfie our queſtion, which is of Publike
Seruice, and whether all the people
vnderſtode it or no.
            But M.The hiſtorye which Sulpitius telleth, M. Iew. mangleth. Iewell, if it had pleaſed you,
to haue reported this Hiſtorie as Sulpitius
telleth it, neither we coulde wonder at
the peoples ſhoute: neither you make an
argument thereof, that they vnderſtoode
the Church Seruice. For to adde, to your
tale that which lacketh, when S. Martyne
ſtoode to be Biſſhoppe, one of the cheefe
Byſſhopes of the Countrie (whoſe name
was DEFENSOR) was his greateſte
Aduerſarye.Sulpitius lib. i. de vita D. Marti. For which cauſe, the
People beinge offended with hym, when
that verſe, of whiche you ſpeake was
readen, in the end of the whiche, theſe
wordes are (accordinge to an olde Latine
tranſlation) Vt deſtruas inimicum &
defenſorem they hearinge the worde DEFENSOREM,


               
ſome for ioy (I beleue)
that it alluded ſo rightely to the name of
theyr Aduerſarye, and other perchaunce
of Symplicitie, thinkinge that the Pſalme
did ſpeak
                  •
                of DEFENSOR the Biſſhope,
made a ſhoute, And ſignified or
agreed, that it was happelye ſpoken.
Whiche, I ſee not howe it proueth the publike
Seruice to haue bene in a knowen
tounge, and all the People to haue vnderſtanden
it. But this I mighte gather,
that the Pſalmes were then openly readde
in the Latine tounge.
            In whiche thinge what is your opinion,
M. Iewel? In what toung (thinke
you) was the Common Seruice of the
Church of France? You anſwer:Iew. 148 
               Whether
it were in the vulgar Tounge or in the Latine
Tounge, it was a Tounge knowen to the
People.
            
            But doth this anſwer, agree with your
abſolute intelligence, whiche would be
compted to knowe the ſtate of the Primitiue
Churche ſo perfectlye: that what
ſo euer others bringe agaynſte you, it
muſte bee taken for Coniectures onlye,
and Gheaſſes? See now, in what darkeneſſe
of vnderſtandinge, your ſelfe are.



And how much you be to ſeking, when you
be partycularly appoſed?
            You ſay of France, that they had theyr
Seruice in a knowen tounge:M. Iew. at a ſtay. but what
tounge that was, you can not readily tell.
And why ſo? Can ye ſay preciſely, that all
the people vnderſtoode it (for of all the
people our queſtion is) except ye be ſure
what toūge it was? And if it wer in any other
then ye vulgar French, can ye warrāt
that the whole Congregation vnderſtode
it▪ And marke, that they muſt not only vnderſtand
it ſimply, but alſo turne it to theyr
purpoſe cunnyngly. Except you thinke,
that it was an eaſye matter for euery body
to do (
                  •
               t the reading of the foreſayd verſe
of the Pſalme) to perceaue the alluſion and
conueyghance, which might be made, from
defenſorem the worde of the Pſalme, to
DEFENSOR the Byſſhope that reſiſted
S. Martine. And that in one inſtant, euery
man did make the ſenſe of the Pſalme
to anſwer and ſerue his iuſt indignation againſt
DEFENSOR the Biſſhope, and
ſo gaue an vniforme ſhout, for that they
goodwills, and the meaninge of that verſe
of the Pſalme, did ſo happely meete both
together.
            
               
And if, as I doe now tel it, there be thouſandes
which wil not perceaue it, forlacke
(not of Engliſhe) but of quicke vnderſtanding
or cloſe attention: who ma
                  •
                thinke,
that all the vulgar people, vnderſtoode the
grace of that facte not looked for, whiche
Sulpitius declareth? Or that they being
not able to conteine them ſelues, for the
greatenes aud agreablnes which they ſaw
in it, brake out into a ſhout or acclamation?
            But herein is your craft and ſubtiltie
M. Iewel y•, vnder the generalitie or indefitenes
of wordes, ye prouide to kepe ſome
gappes alwayes open, by which you may
ſhift frome ſenſe to ſenſe, and prolonge the
tyme of your taking. For wher ye can ſafely
ſaye it without eſpying, that, the ſeruice
was in the vulgar tounge: there will you
meane by a Strange toūge, that which is
not vulgar, in which ſenſe, the Latin toūge,
in England, is a ſtrange tounge. And
where it is lyke to be playnly proued againſt
you, that the Common Seruice was
in another tounge then the vulgar: There,
by a Strange tounge, you will vnderſtand,
not a contrary to the vulgar, but a contrary
to the knowen tounge, & ſo in this ſenſe



the Latine is not a Strange tounge in
Englande, becauſe it is vnderſtanden of
the inhabitours, though not generallye
of all.
            And ſo by this kinde of Shiftinge in the
queſtion of the Common Seruice of Gallia,
               Preſent ſhiftes at a nead.
where it appeareth, by that one verſe of
the Pſalme which Seuerus Sulpitius reherſeth,
that it was in Latine, there, ye care
not for the diſtinction: but, whether it
were in the vulgare tounge or in the Latine,
it was (you ſay) in a Tounge knowen to the
people.
               Iew. 184
            
            But, when we ſhall come to our owne
Countrye of Englande, and beginne to
proue, that Seruice there, was in Latine:
You can not abyde to heare it, but you
will needes haue it to be in the vulgare
Tounge.
            Yet ye nede not ſo to anſwer (if it pleaſed
you) becauſe, if the Latine Tounge
were graunted, to haue bene in the Publike
Seruice of England, when Sainte
Auguſtine conuerted it: Yet might ye as
well anſwer, that the Latine was a knowen
Tounge there, as you ſeeme eaſye
to be perſwaded, that it was a knowen



Tounge, to al the people in France.
            By which your handlynge of the matter,
it is moſte euidente, that you are ſure
lytle or nothinge, of the ſtate of the Primitiue
Churche concerninge the Particulars
of it, but, that you frame your
concluſion to your knowlege.
            And where you fynde, that the Seruice
was in the Latine Tounge, there
will you make, that the Latine was a
knowen Tounge: And where your ſelfe
can fynde nothinge, nor your Aduerſarye
brynge for his purpoſe playne euidence:
there wyll you reſte, and ſaye, that the
Common Seruyce was in the Vulgare
Tounge only.
            Againſte which your Determination,
if it ſhoulde be proued hereafter that the
Latine Seruice was vſed, euen there,
where you thoughte otherwiſe: then
woulde you (without all doubte) retorne
to your foreſayed place of Euaſion, that
Whether it were in the Vulgar Tounge,
or in the Latine, it was a Tounge knowen to
the People.
            
            Nowe to leaue all other Churches of
the world, and for your readines M. Iewel,



and our ſhortneſſe ſake, to ſpeake to you of
England only: In what tongue was the
Seruice there at the beginning? That beginning
I meane, when we were firſt conuerted
to the faith by S. Auguſtin? Whom
your Simplicity, and holineſſe, and mercifulneſſe,
and humility aboue meaſure, is ſo
good as to iudge, to be vnworthy to be called
a Saincte,
               Is this your Te Deū Laudamus, for S. Auguſtines coming in to England, and cōuerting it. 
               but an Hypocrite, a Superſtitious
man, Cruell, Bloudy, and Proud aboue
meaſure, and that by the reporte of them,
which ſawe him and knewe him. As who
ſhould ſay, that ſuch men were meete veſſels,
for God to dwell in, and woorke the
conuerſion of Idolatours, ſuch as our forefathers
(according to the fleſhe) were: Or,
as though S. Gregorye, which ſent him,
ſawe him not, and knew him not, yea and
tried him not better before he ſent him,Iew. 185 then
any Britains could doe, which ſtomaked &
enuied his doinges, when he was come nerer
vnto them: Or, as thoughe this were
an high poynt in your Schooles, when a
queſtion is aſked of the Seruice which any
Country had at the firſt conuerſion therof,
to defame and ſlaunder that Perſon, which
firſt conuerted it, and put forthe, to be marked
of others, or lightly beleue it your ſelfe,



the worſt that the malice of the enemy could
ſpeake againſt him, without any counterpoyſing
of it, with the iuſt and true commē
               dations,
which, the beſt men then liuing, or
the general voyce of the world afterwards,
gaue vnto him. To ſay no more vnto you
for this blabbing or ſlaundering, then God
reward you for it, I continue in my queſtion,
aſking you:
            What manner tongue was vſed in the
Common Seruice of England, at the firſt
conuerſion of it? The Latine you will not
graunt to haue bene vſed, though S. Auguſtine
with other Monkes, planted then by
likelihoode, no other then thē ſelues knew:
except you thinke that they ſtayed frō publike
Myniſtration, vntill them ſelues had
learned our Engliſh, or 
                  •
               aught the people
with all ſpeede to vnderſtand their Latine)
and though S. Gregory reioyſed that Alleluya
was ſonge in England.
            
               But,
               Iew. 185 
               theſe be but gheaſſes,
               185. 
               you ſay. And
Maiſter Harding ſhould not thus mocke the
world.186 He knoweth well a Childe woulde
not make ſuch reaſons.188 
               Againe: God wot
he might haue made it better.
            Wel Sir, for this purpoſe I am deſirous
to heare your anſwers becauſe ye wot, they



neede to be abſolute and excellent, whiche
come from your grauity and learning. If
then our Common Seruice were not in
the Latine: was it in ye Hebrew, or Greke,
or any vnknowen tounge? For ye ſeeme to
incline to the ſurmiſes of ye Brittiſh Chronicles
concerning Ioſeph of Arimathaea, and
to the report of Theodoretus,167 
               that S. Paule
came into this Ilande, nowe called England.
So that it is hard to ſay, what Antiquities
you haue in ſtore, concerninge
this matter.
            Yet becauſe y• greateſt part hereof is like
to be proued by Surmiſes, I beleue rather
that your finall anſwer will be, that the
Seruice in Englande, was in the vulgar
Engliſh tounge. But howe proue you
this? So common a thing, as the publike
Seruice, So farre and wideſpred a
brode, as the Realme of England is long
and rounde, So generally planted as
you ſuppoſe, So diligently remembred
and marked, as people muſte doe, whyche
(by your reade) muſt ſay Amen, and vnderſtand
the Prieſt when he celebrateth:
This to be ſo taken away, that you can
ſhewe no token whether euer it was or



no, is it credible, or is it poſſible?
            Can ye thē blame vs, if we aſke for ſome
Monumentes and Bookes, to be ſhewed
out of one place or other, Or if none at all
be founde, (for no doubt you haue ſearched
and labored) can ye blame vs if we
doubt of the matter? Yet ſay you:
            O what foly is this?
            What to doe?Iew. 187 How loth or vnable rather M. Iewel is to ſhew any euidence. Iew. 187 to aſke for witneſſes in
a doubtfull matter? And to loke for ſome
ſteppe of a foote or token of highe way,
which thouſand thouſandes haue Ordinarily,
and Openly paſſed by?
            
               But, who is able to ſhewe anye Booke
wrytten in Englyshe a thouſande yeares
a goe?
            If ye can not ſhewe a whole booke, yet
ſhewe but a peece of the leafe of one: Or
ſome token or teſtimonye thereof, that euer
any ſuch booke was vſed.
            It foloweth:
            Or if it could be shewed, yet who were able
to vnderſtand it?
            You may ſee then, how vaine it is, to
thinke that the Apoſtles or their ſucceſſors
did commit the woorde of God to vulgare
tonges, which being ſo ſubiect vnto chāges



coulde not well be truſted with the preſeruing
of the true Scriptures. For if the
Engliſh Seruice (which vndoubtedly, if
any ſuche had bene conſiſted of the holye
Scriptures) if it ſhould haue had the ſcriptures
tranſlated into it, there to be kept for
the Chriſtians: in what caſe ſhould we haue
bene nowe, being not able to vnderſtande
that Engliſh? Or in what caſe ſhoulde the
Scripture it ſelfe haue bene, if, as the propriety
of the tongue was altered, ſo it ſhuld
again be interpreted to the capacity of euery
generation? Yet ye procede further.
            There is no boke to be found of the prayers,Iew. 187
that the Druides made in Fraunce, or the
Gymnoſophiſtae in India. And will M. Harding
therof conclude, that therfore the Druides
or Gymnoſophiſtae praied in Latine?
            
                Firſt, how know you, what may be ſhewed,
for the Gymnoſophiſtes Prayers in
India: How long ſtudied you there?
How narowly ſearched you? Or what certificates
haue you receiued, of any man of
 credit, from that Country? Conſider then,
that the Druides and Gymnoſophiſtae were
Idolatours: & no maruel therfore, thoughe
all their bokes and Superſtitions be gone
and conſumed. But the Chriſtians Seruice



in the Vulgar tounge, pertaineth (you
will ſay) to the ſubſtaunce of true religion,
and coulde not therfore be ſo broughte to
nought, that no mon
                  •
               ment therof ſhould
be remaining. Or the Druides alſo, and
the Gymnoſophiſtes, we know ſome what,
the names (at the leaſt) of them be preſerued,
and what men theſe were, we finde it
expounded. But of the Seruice in Engliſh,
before now of late, who euer read, who
euer heard, who euer thought?
            Neither doth Doctor Hardinge reaſon
with you after this ſort:
            There is no old boke to be found of
the Seruice in Engliſhe:It is his maner, not ſo good as common. ergo it was in
Latine.
            This is but a tricke of your Logike M.
Iewel, to alter the ſenſe of your aduerſary,
and forme his arguments after your pleaſure.
But this rather is his reaſon. If
the Seruice had bene in Engliſhe, conſidering
the multitude of bookes and Churches,
ſome memory would be left of it: But
none is found, Ergo by good conſequence
there was neuer any ſuch Seruice. And
you, to ſhift your handes of this argument,
doe make as though his only Demaunde



were, to haue Engliſhe bokes of the auncient
Seruice brought forth: and as though
his concluſion ſhould be, if ye ſhewed not ye
plaine bokes, Ergo yt ſeruice was in Latin.
            But that you may not eſcape ſo, I will
not aſke you for Bookes, nor Monuments
nor Relikes, nor tokens of the Engliſh ſeruice:
But in this one, and reaſonable, and
eaſy queſtion to be anſwered, I wold faine
perceiue, what ſenſe you haue or vnderſtā
               ding.
When you were borne, and long before
that, the Seruice in England was in
the Latine tonge: If therfore it had not ben
ſo, from the beginning: when began the
Latine? when ceaſed the Engliſh?
            
               Doubtleſſe (ſayeth D. Harding) ſome
mention would haue bene made of the time
& cauſes hereof.
               Harding Fol. 88. For, if in the ſmalleſt matters
of the Church Seruice, there haue ben
found, which haue noted the particulars, as
that Damaſus cauſed the Pſalmes to be ſōg
by ſides, and Theleſphorus made Gloria in
excelſis to be ſong, and that S. Gregory added
ye 
               Anthems and Alleluya, & ſo in euery
part of the Maſſe: Is it poſſible, yt ſo great
a change of the publike Seruice from Engliſh
into Latin, ſhould not be marked of any
man, or put in record by any wryter?
            Was it done ſodainly in the night, when



al were a ſlepe? Or in the morning, did euery
man forget him ſelf? Or were there no
wryters then? Or were all corrupted? Or
was there no Heretike, to leaue behind him
a note of it: but yt ſuch an euident, & wonder
ful chaūge of the whole Seruice, frō Engliſh,
(as you M. Iewel think) into Latine,
ſhould either not be eſpied, or not cōmitted
to memory? What āſwer ye now vnto this?
            Ye anſwer not one worde, ye make,M. Iew. duin, and yet would not be knowen of it. as
though ye did not ſee it, ye pull ye reader frō
yt matter, to the Druides of France, & Gymnoſophiſtes
of India, ye ſpeke as though D.
Harding framed a direct argumēt for y• Latine
tounge, & aſked you no queſtion of the
Engliſh Seruice. Ye cry out, O what a foly is
this. And as though al mē were foles (for ye
anſwer not one word to ye principal poynt)
You do not bring ſo much as a geſſe, a cōiecture,
a likelihode. You ſteale away though
you be eied, & the queſtiō being ſo reſonable
you anſwer not one word to it. Whē began
yt Latin Seruice M. Iewel? whē ceaſed the
Engliſh? If there be any thing in record of
it, bring it forth: if ther be nothing, thē do I
proue yt you are blind in theſe maters, & yt al y•
grace of your reply, & force of your lerning,
cōſiſteth in ri
                  •
               eling of other mēs argumēts



(an eaſy matter in Rhetorike) not in cōfirming
any of your owne, which ſhould not
be to ſekinge in a new Goſpeller.
            Thus haue I then diſcourſed with M.
Iewel, about the publike Seruice in the
Syriacall, Egyptian, Ethiopian, Perſian,
Armenian, Scythian, Frenche or Britain
tounge.
            I haue aſked, whether he coulde proue
any of theſe to haue bene vſed within the
ſix hundred after Chriſt.
            I haue requyred ſure demonſtrations,
becauſe he contemneth Coniectures and
Gheaſſes.
            I haue cōſidered both thoſe common
places of his, pa. 155. 175. in which he bringeth
the beſt and moſte that he can ſay for
the Cōtentatiō
                and Satiſfactiō
                of his reader.
            I finde no mention of Publike Seruice
in any tounge in the primitiue Church, byſide
Greeke or Latine.
            He proueth his matters by Gheaſſes,
he alleageth Authorities and Examples
which were long ſence the firſt ſix hundred
yeres: to which tyme we bounde him as he
doth vs.
            I bring hym to the queſtion of our owne
coūtry, and leaue him not one likely word



which he might anſwer.
            And ſo (I truſt) he will be taken, as he is,
for a mouer of contention, about other mēs
right and poſſeſsion, him ſelf hable to bring
furth no one ſcrap neuer ſo little, of any old
Euidence to make expreſſely for his purpoſe.
As for vs, this only, is a very good &
ſufficient anſwer, to ſay: We found at our
comming vnto the faith of Chriſt the Latin
Seruice, of ye Engliſſh we neuer herd before
now of late: And ſurely, A chainge from
Engliſſhe into latine, could not be but noted
in ſome place: And without euident demonſtration
to the contrarie, we ought not
to be moued with any winde: & ſo we needed
not to troble our ſelues any further,
but put them to ſhew.
            Yet, becauſe D. Harding hath not dealt ſo
ſparingly, but hath ben content to bring
good Reaſon and Authoritie for that, which
was and is ſufficiently defended, with the
force and worthineſſe of Traditiō, by which
it hath ben commēded vnto vs: I therefore
alſo, wil put furth and declare, that his
argument, which he proſequuteth moſt in
this Article. That by conferryng the order
and weight of reaſonynge on bothe ſydes,
it maie the ſoner and better appere which



of y• two, vſeth more vncertain Geſſes, Cō
               iectures,
& lykelyhoodes. M. Iewel, whō
I haue proued to ſhewe nothing for Publike
Seruice in ye vulgare tonge, or D. Harding,
which ſhal be perceiued to cōclude directly
for y• publike Seruice in Greeke or
Latin, & not euery vulgar tonge. Firſt thē,
The queſtiō is,Iew. 1
                     •
                  1 
               whether, for the ſpace of 600
yeres after chriſt, the people had their Cōmō
praiers ī a ſtrāge tōge, yt they vnderſtode not.
            
            
               D.Hardinge, to make his owne purpoſe
plaine, anſwereth with a diſtinction, that,
If M. Iewel meaneth by ye peoples Cōmō
Prayers,Hard. 72. ſuch as they made Comōly to
God in priuate deuotion, he thinketh
they vttered thē, in yt tōge which they
vnderſtode:A diſtinction of common praiers. but if he mean bi thē, ye publike
ſeruice of ye Church (whereof the
moſt part hath bene pronounced by the
Biſhops, Prieſts, Deacōs, & other Eccleſiaſticall
miniſters) he graunteth yt
ſome of the people vnderſtode the langage
therof, & ſome vnderſtode it not.
And ſo vpō this later point cōſiſteth yt queſtiō.
Yet M. Iew. hath a quarel to ye former
ſaying. This diſtinction of Common Praiers,



is both vnperfit and nedeles.
            Nay, diſtinctions can neuer be nedeleſſe,
where, ſome Reader, is like to be of ſmall &
plain vnderſtāding, & wher, ye Aduerſary is
ful of words, ful of ſhifts, ful of digreſſions,
ful of craking & vātage making, ful of equiuocatiōs.
For ſee but this one ſhort exā
               ple.
D. Harding graunteth,Hard. 94 y• Prayers in
the Primitiue Church were in a known tōge.
            
            M. Iew. layeth hold vpon yt word,175 & reporteth
y• 
               M. Hard. confeſſeth, that the Cōmō
praiers wer ꝓnoūced, in a cōmō known tōge.
               Falſely.
Here therfor, wold not a diſtinctiō do good
yt 
               of Praiers ſome be Cōmon, ſome be priuate
& that D. Harding ſpake of priuate: but M.
Iew. draweth it to Cōmō Prayers? yet this
is no great matter, (ſauing for M. Iewels
boldnes in additiō) becauſe D. harding wil
in an other place, not refuſe yt terme of Cō
                  mō
praiers, but cōfeſſe yt they were, at ye beginning,
in a Cōmō tonge.Iew. 175 But now if vpō
this graūt M. Iewel wil begin to triūph &
ſay, althoug he haue wātōli denied Chriſt, yet
I trow, he wil not deni himſelf. And again M.
Hard. cōfeſſeth that the cōmō Praiers wer ꝓnoūced
in a Cōmon known tōge. &c. Now
quite cōtrary, as a mā that had vtterli forgottē
himſelf, he ſayeth: The Cōmon ſeruice was
neuer ſaid, but either in the Greke tōge, or in



the latine. And againe (auouching it with
his warrant verely) VERELy his ſainges can
not ſtand both together.
            
            After all theſe ſharp ſpitefull, glorious
and bragging wordes, is not a diſtinction
nedefull to declare ye truth of D. Hardings
cauſe and meaning? For, Common Praiers
may be vnderſtanded two waies Firſt, that
 praier, which is commonly made to God in
priuate deuotion, is or may be called common.
 Secondly the publike Seruice of the
Church beareth the name of Common
praier. & of this we ſhall by and by ſpeake
more. Concerning the firſt ſenſe, Common
prayer was in a tongue knowen to the people,
were they Iewes, Greks, Latines, Aphricans,
Frenchmen or Engliſhmen. Cō
               cerning
the ſecond it was in no other tongue,
than Greke or Latine: & ſome vnderſtode
it, ſome vnderſtode it not.
            
               How think we then? was it not nedefull
to put this diſtinction, in the very beginning
of this Article? For by this meane,One diſtinction 
                     〈◊〉
                   M. Iewels 
                     〈◊〉
                  . neither
D.Harding hath vtterly forgottē him
ſelf, neither M. Iewell meanely remēbred
himſelf. The plain dealing of the one, is euidently
defended, the blinde bragging of the
other, is iuſtly abhorred. The lybertie of



making diſtinctions is with reaſon to be
graunted, the licenſiouſnes in confounding
of wordes and ſenſes, is with conſcience to
be ſtopped. And now may D. harding confeſſe,
that the Common Praiers (as they are
diſtinct from Common Seruice) were ſayed
in a knowen tongue: neither can M. Iewell
gather any ſpeciall concluſion thereof,
which quite ouerthroweth our whole
purpoſe. Now for the other parte,Iew. 15
                     •
                  .
if the foreſayed diſtinction be vnperfite, doe
yow then, M. Iewell, add ſomewhat vnto
it: for take away from it yow can not well,
as hauing two membres, and vnitie being
indiuiſibill. But what is the reaſon, where
fore you miſlike the diſtinction?
            For the ſecrete Praiers,15
                     •
                  . that the faithful
make ſeuerally by them ſelues, haue euer
more ben called Priuate, and neuer Common.
            In dede as you vtter this matter, there appeereth
no likelihode of cauſe, why the Secrete
Prayers, which the faithful make ſeuerally
by themſelues, ſhould be called Cō
               mon.
But add this one worde Commonly,
(which D. Harding expreſſeth, and on
which, the ſtrength and conſequence of his
ſaieng reſteth) and then, if your ſelf can not



be aſhamed of your craftines, yet other mai
be warned, by ye exāple, to take hede of you.
As The ſecrete praiers that the faithful made
Cōmōly by thē ſelues be called Cōmō. What
abſurdity in this? Or what vātage to be takē
againſt it? none ſurely at al. Yet becauſe
it ſtode not wt your pride & cōtētiouſnes, to
let your aduerſaries diſtinctiō frely paſſe, wt 
out ſōe diſprofe, & iuſtli ſpeke againſt it you
could not, as he ꝓponed it: therfor ye made
as though ye did not ſee ye place & force of y•
word, (cōmōli) but quite leuing it out, ye in
fer your reply, as though D. Har. had ſaide,
Secrete Praiers be called Common.
But perchāce, though ye diſſēble ye word (cō
                  mōly)
yet your anſwer goth rightly againſt
his mening. What āſwer is yt? Mary that the
ſecret praiers of the faithfull,
               Iew. 152. 
               haue euermore
bē called cōmō & neuer priuate. What if thei
haue ben alwais ſo cald? Is yt a good argumēt
in your cōſciēce? Do ye not your ſelues
vſurp, ſuch ā authority & ſupremacy ouer al
chriſtēdō, yt ye dare both ſpeak & do, ye cōtrary
to yt, which hath bē euer more ſaid & practiſed?
for what if priuate praiers haue neuer
ben called cōmō? yet yt ſhall not let, but you
wil at your pleſure name thē ſo, whē you be
diſpoſed. And therfore D. Harding as it ſemeth
to me, ſpake very warely, in referring



the matter to your meaning only, ſaying:
(If you mean M. Iew. by ye peoples cōmō
praiers. &c. Again: But if by ye cōmon
praiers you mean ye publike ſeruice &c
As if he ſhould ſay: M. Iewel hath ye vpper
groūd aboue vs: what he denieth, y• muſt we
proue: what he affirmeth, yt is wel proued &c
& therfor I wil put this matter to his own
meaning & make my diſtinctiō accordingli.
Byſide this they may for ſome cauſe, continuing
priuate, be called cōmō although (which
negatiue is very hard for you to proue) thei
were neuer heretofore ſo named. For in
Englād now at this preſēt, i
                  ••
               ne ſhuld ſay,
The Aue Maria is a Common Praier,
(as at reherſal wherof thouſāds emōg ye people
do lift vp their mindes towardes God)
though it be not cōmōly vſed in your publike
ſeruice (for ſpecial & pure fear perchāce
leſt our Ladie ſhuld be to much remēbred &
Chriſt leſſe regarded) yet doth he not ſpeake
truly & ꝓprely y• doth ſo ſay? you think not,
I truſt, y• it is a Salutatiō & Praiers for holy
dais only, or Church only, or Lords & Ladies
only: & what fault thē is it in ſpeache,
when it is Cōmonly vſed, to call it a Cōmō
praier? I wil ſay more, not only Priuate
praiers being cōmōly ſaid mai be & are cald
cōmō praiers, & differ frō publik ſeruice: but



alſo thoſe ſelf ſame praiers, which are made
openly, in the hearing and ſight of other,
& vnto which they anſwer Amē, are of an other
ſorte & kinde, thā the Cōmon praier, as
it is takē for publike Seruice. As, when the
Apoſtles, in the cumpany of a hundred and
twēty perſons together,Act. 1. praied, that God
would ſhew, whether of the two, Ioſeph or
Matthias, he would chooſe to take the place
of ye miniſtery & Apoſtleſhip, frō which Iudas
the Traitour had falſely departed: was
not that a Common praier? yet cā you not
proue (I beleue) that it was a parte of their
Ordinary & Cōmon Seruice.
            Byſide this alſo, when the Chriſtiās met
together in the Primitiue Church, among
other gifts, which were plētifully thē geuē
by the holyghoſt, ye gift of Prayer was one.
That is, ſome one of the cūpany (and he not
alwaies of the Clergy) graciouſely inſpired,
vttered in the audience of the reſt, that
forme or matter of Praier, which the other
ſhould lerne and folow, being yet to ſeking
how to doe by them ſelues. And this was
in true ſpeach a Cōmon prayer, yet was it
not their Cōmon Seruice. For in publike
Seruice, the Eccleſiaſtical miniſters doe
goe before & pronoūce it, but this was ſuch



as lay men ſometymes did vtter. Alſo in Publike
Seruice the order is appointed and
ſet, but in this caſe of which I ſpeake, the
Prayer was not knowen, before it was
geauen: and they were not euery day ſure
of the geuing, the Holyghoſt alwaies diſpoſing
it by more or leſſe, according to his bleſſed
inſpiration.
            Seing therefore, that theſe kindes of Cō
               mon
Prayers are ſo diſtincted, firſt in reſpect 
of the Cōmones of thē (though the vſe
be Priuate according to deuotiō) Secondly 
for the open communicating of them according
to ye Holyghoſts inſpiration, Thirdly 
becauſe of the order & continuance of them,
according to the Catholike Churchs law &
cōſtitution: why doth M. Iewel finde fault
with diſtinctions, or that which is graunted
to be true in the firſt and ſeconde, why
will he haue it to be like in ye thirde kinde?
And becauſe the people vnderſtode wt they
praied Priuately, or ſome other, what they
vttered by the Holyghoſts gift, ſpiritually,
how can he conclude therefore, that the Cō
               mon
Seruice was alſo in a tongue knowē
vnto all the people vndoubtedly?
            How cā he deny y• firſt? How doth he nor
cōſider y• ſecond? How much abuſeth he his



Aduerſary and his Reader in the third?
            For whiles he woulde haue it beleued,
that Common Praier is no other thing to
ſay, then Common Seruice of the Church:
what ſo euer either Scriptures and auncient
Fathers doe proue,Craft in double vnderſtanding of a word. concerning Common
Praier, that it was in the Primitiue
Churche in a knowen Tounge: that
he draweth to Common Seruice of the
Churche. And againſte all forewarning,
and diſtinction, and reaſon, he will
triumphe therevpon, and crake, that it
was euery where in a Tongue knowen to
all the people.
            For whiche cauſe this diſtinction is the
better to be marked, leaſt M. Iew. through
his confuſion, trouble the clereneſſe of the
matter.
            Now therefore concerning the other
part of D. Hardings diſtinction, in which
he declareth vnto you, wherevpon he mindeth
to ioyne with you in this third Article,
what ſay yow therevnto? His wordes
be plaine:
            If you meane by Common praiers
the Publike Seruice,Hard. 72. ſome vnderſtode
it, and ſome vnderſtode it not.
            
               
Here vnwares he implieth a repugnance in
reaſon,Iew. 15
                     •
                  
                and a manifeſt contradiction.
            Whye ſo? may not both there propoſitions
ſtand togeather?
            When your felfe doe preache, M. Iewell,
ſome, I beleue, vnderſtande you not,
and ſome vnderſtand you: (for many ſtand
a far of & ſome nerer vnto you) & ſome vnderſtand
not all fyne Engliſh, yet ſome vnderſtand
it well inough.
            I will ſay, further. Your ſelf I thinke,
ſometymes vnderſtand your ſelf, and ſome
tymes ye doe not. Yet here is no neceſſitie
of contradiction. For they nede not to
be contrarye ſayinges one to the other, in
whiche ſometymes ye knowe where ye
be, ſome tymes ye ſpeake, you can not tell
what.
            As, in the Declaming againſt the Sellinge
and Byinge of Maſſes, you knowe
what you ſpeake: but in declaring of Chriſtes
Preſence in the Sacrament, to be Reallye,
Verely, Subſtantially, not by imagination
&c. and yet by faith Onlye: M. Iewel
himſelfe vnderſtandeth not M. Iewel.
Yet, this is no Contradiction, neither
ſhoulde that be the faulte, whiche I
woulde therevppon, obiecte vnto you:



but this rather that ye goe about to deſtroy
the Religion it ſelf, becauſe of the euill maners
of them which profeſſe it: or, that you,
which haue no Maſters worth the hearing
whom ye can or dare name vnto vs, preſume
to reach the Catholike Church, Diuinitie.
            How proue you then, a Contradiction
to be implied herein, and a Contradiction
of M. Hardings, where he ſaieth: Some vnderſtode
the Common Seruice, ſome vnderſtode
it not? For euen in England it ſelf
when the Latine Seruice was of late vſed,
as it had continued hundreds of yeres together,
it was true in leſſer Cities by many
degrees than London or Yorck: that ſome
vnderſtode it, ſome vnderſtode it not: yet
Latin is not ſo Common now in Englād,
as it was, in ye Primitiue Church, through
all theſe weaſt parts, where the Emperour
of Rome had chiefe iuriſdiction and gouernment.
            But let vs conſider, how M. Iewel proueth
y• foreſaied cōtradiction. For if ſome of
the people vnderſtode it not, how could al ye
               people ſay Amen?
               
                  
                     ••
                  orthie 
                     〈◊〉
                   Iew. 52. Aſke ye how? I will tell
you. The ignorant ſorte of the people,
which for their lack of lerning, knew no



more than their owne tōgue, & yet for Ch
                  •
               
               rities
ſake at the leaſt, ſhould think the beſt
of the Churches Seruice, they, when the
lerned began, might ioyne to, their voices
and declare by Amen, that they pray and
wiſhe and aſſent, as their betters doe before
them. And is this vnlikely or impoſsible?
What ſhall we then thinke of
ye 
               Amen, which ſoundeth at Paules Croſſe,
when ſome famous and feruent Brother
preacheth? Doth euery one that crieth Amen,
heare his Prayer? And can ye reproue
one for his good will, in helping forward
to make the ſhoute greater, though
he know not what the matter is: but only
beleueth, that it is well ſaied, what ſoeuer
that man of God vttereth? If there haue
ben found emong your peuiſh Martyrs,
which would dye, they knew not for what,
but only that ſome one whom they loued,
died before them: may not the faithfull people
anſwer to the Quiers Amen, them ſelues
vnderſtanding not what was ſpoken,
but truſting the others knowledge and Authoritie?
            Againe, what neceſsitie that all the people
ſhould ſay, Amen▪
                Or who maketh a



concluſion ſo generall? Surely not D.
Harding. And therfore he for his part vttered
no Contradiction. Who then? M.
Iewell by likelihode will tell vs.Iew. 152.
            
            S. Paules wordes be playne. How ſhal the
vnlearned ſay Amen to thy thankes geuing?
For he knoweth not, what thou ſaieſt. This
renneth directly againſt M. Harding. Al the
people gaue their aſſent and ſaid Amen &c.
            How haue you proued, that All? By S.
Paules words? Firſt he hath not this word
All.
               The Apoſtle falſify to by M. Iewel. Thē you falſify him, becauſe he ſhould
not make directly againſt your purpoſſe.
For his words are not, how ſhall the vnlearned
ſay Amen. But how ſhal he that SVPPLIETH
the PLACE of the Idiote and vnlearned
ſay Amen? He ſpeaketh not therfore
generally: nor of al ye people? but, he noteth
by ſpecial words ſōe diſtinct perſōs, which
ſtode & anſwered in the place and ſtead of ye
people. It is rather and trulier gathered
by this place of S. Paule, (if you corrupt
him not) yt all ye people did not anſwer Amē
               
ordinarily: but y• others ther were appointed,
to ſupply their place. And ſo may D.
Harding repete his propoſition again, (as
he doth) & ſay wtout reproch of cōtradictiō:
            Iſaye, that the Seruice was in a



tonge, which ſome people vnderſtode
and ſome vnderſtode not:
            And M. Iewell in reprouing him for it
hath done nothing els, but ſhewed his
egernes and his feblenes.
            But what meaneth D. Harding by it,
yt the Seruice was in a knowen tongue:
which ſome people vnderſtoode, and
ſome vnderſtode not? Whether intendeth
he ſome ſubtiltie, and will play ſuch a parte
as M. Iewell often tymes doth, in hyding
his purpoſe vnder y• generalitie of termes:
that ye may not be ſure wher to finde him?
No truly. The thing it ſelf doth teſtify the
contrary. For concerning the,Hard. 7
                     •
                  . 
               Tongue I
meane (ſaieth he) the Greke tongue and
ye Latine tounge. Concerning thoſe Some,
               Hard. 77.
which vnderſtode it, he meaneth (as it is
eaſy to be perceyued) Lerned men, Gentilmen,
Merchantes, al of liberal education.
Concerning the other Some. which
vnderſtode it not, he meaneth, al vplandiſhe
people, Tillers of groūd, heard mē
& womē. 
               
                  •
               hn
                  •
                doth he deale plainly and



ſenſiblie, And not only that, but modeſtly
alſo and quietly. I neuer read
(ſaieth he) neither, I think, M. Iewel
&c. that the Common ſeruice was in
any other barbarous, and vulgare
tongue within the ſix hundred yeres
after Chriſt. And here, leaſt errour
ſhould riſe, by miſtaking of termes: I
cal (ſaieth he) al tongues barbarous byſide
the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine.
            So that it may be well noted, that D.
Harding ſeketh, by diſtincting of duble and
doutfull wordes, and by his naming of y•
ſēſe on which he intēdeth to reaſon, to haue
the truth openly knowen, & ſhortly to haue
ye queſtion perceyned. But M. Iewel worketh
by a contrary ſprite, and as before he
miſliked with the diſtinction of Common
Praiers: ſo now he is offended with the
diſtinction of Tongues,M. Iewel lyketh not diſtinctions. where D. Harding
placeth on the one ſide, Hebrew, Greke &
Latine, and on the other, Barbarous and
Vulgare tongues. Of whom he ſaieth.
            
               
All other tounges byſide Greeke and
Latine he condemneth for Barbarous,Iew. 155 by
what authoritie I can not tell.
            See the malice of the man, and of the
word.Falſhode intepeting of words. He condemneth (you ſay) all other
tounges for barbarous. wher find ye this?
And if ye finde it not, how dare you affirme
it, excepte by Authority, your ſelf cannot
tell what?
            I cal (ſaieth D. Harding) al tounges
barbarous and Vulgar &c.Hard. 73.
            
            And that ye mighte not gather thereof,
that he ſpake ſo in reproche and condemnation
of any tounge, he putteth before the
reaſon of it, ſaying:
            To be the better vnderſtanded, I cal
all tounges barbarous &c.
            He ſowght not therefore to CONDEMNE
any Tounge, but to declare, what he
would meane by a Barbarous toūge. Neither
maketh he himſelfe a Controller and
Iudge ouer other mens opinions herein:
but an Interpretour of his owne. Yet doth
M. Iewel ſo take him vp for ye matter, as
thought this geare dyd ſauor of hereſye.
And therfore like a Diuine) for con
                  •
               utation



thereof, he goeth to ye higheſt cauſe, that is
God him ſelfe, ſaying:
            For in reſpect of God there is neither Iew
nor Gentile, nor Greeke, nor Barbarous.
            If you aleage this as out of the Scripture
(as it appeareth that ye doe by the
quotation in the margine and by the diſtincte
lettre in whiche it is printed) then
muſt I tel you, that the Apoſtle nameth in
deede Iewe and Greeke: but Gentile or
Barbarous he nameth not, neither ſpeaketh
he of theyr diuerſitie in tounges, but,
in religion and affectiōs. But if you allude
onlye to that place, and by accommodation
make a further meaning of it: let it be writen
then, in the curſiue letter of your owne
wordes, ſo much as is not expreſſely in the
Scripture. Yet your ſaying is true, though
your doing be ſuſpitious, and it maketh to
this purpoſe: that one ſhoulde not condemne
an other: But, that one might
not call an other after the proper name
of the Countrye where hee was borne,
thinke you that it is forbydden? Or is it
againſte the bleſſede and vniforme will
and mynde of God, to call one Tounge
Greeke, an other Latine: Or one pure and

                  •
               yne, an other ragged and Barbarous?



In reſpect of God, there is neyther Iew
nor Gentile: ergo (you ſhall ſee a merueilous
concluſion gathered out of Diuinitye)
who ſoeuer calleth ſome Iewes and
ſome Gentiles, ſpeaketh, by what Authoritie
M. Iewel can not tell. Or els thus,
In reſpect of God there is neyther Greeke
nor Barbarous: Ergo who ſo calleth one
a Greeke Tounge, an other Barbarous,
ſpeaketh, Maſter Iewel can not tell by what
Authoritye.
            
            Againe, In reſpecte of God, all is one:
but in reſpecte of men are not ſome Tounges
Eloquent, and other Barbarous?
And doe not your ſelfe confeſſe, in thys
very place,M. Iew. forgetteth himſelfe. of whiche we ſpeake, that S.
Paule, makinge a full Diuiſion of the
whole worlde, nameth ſome Greekes and
ſome Barbarous? Yet in reſpecte of
God there is neither Greke nor Barbarous.pa. 155.
Truly, if D. Hardinge woulde
haue made this diſtinction of his owne
heade only, you ſhould not yet ſo curiouſly
haue reproued hym for it, conſideringe
that he ſayth no more but: I cal tounges
Barbarous &c. And makethe no rule
to the worlde, And that you haue his
meaninge, thereby expreſſed vnto you.



But leaſt you thinke hym to be ſingular
herein, you ſhall finde in Contradus Geſnerns
(no Papiſte I warant you) that:
            Barbarae ſiue Barbaricae linguae,Con
                     •
                  in ſuo Michridatis
praeter Graecam & Latinam, omnes
dicuntur. Nos etiam Hebraeam excipimus.
All tounges are called Barbarous
or barbaricall byſide the Greeke
and Latine: but we alſo doe except the
Hebrew tounge.
            I note therefore this much, that you may
conſider with what Sprite ye procede:
whiche will not ſuffer a Lerned man, to
ſeperate by commodious diſtinction, the
three moſte principal knowen and lerned
Tounges, Hebrew, Greeke and Latine,
from other baſer and Ruder tounges. And
that you fetch a far of, ſuch a reaſō, to ouerthwart
only his ſayinges as may ſerue againſte
the Apoſtle himſelf, for calling ſome
Greekes and ſome Barbarous.
            Theſe thinges thus preſuppoſed, that
Common Prayers and Common Seruice
of the Church are not al one, and that ſome
there were within the ſixe hundred after



Chriſt, which vnderſtoode not the Publike
Seruice, and, that all Tounges are Barbarous
and Vulgare, byſide Greeke and
Latine: D. Harding begynneth to make
argumentes for profe of his purpoſe.
            Whereof it may begathered,Iew. 159 How gredye. that hitherto
he hath proued nothing.
            Much better it might be gathered, that
hitherto he hath made a plaine way to the
matter, by putting aſyde ſuche doubtes, as
might come in betwene through occaſion
of wordes miſtaken and miſunderſtanden.
What needeth therefore this brauerie? Or
what meaneth this haſtines? Or why triumpheth
he, not only before the victorye,
but alſo before battaile? Wil not M. Iewel
ſuffer a man to make a preface vnto his
treatiſe, And ſpeake ſome generall thinges
pertcining to the queſtion, before he make
his principall argument againſt it? but he
muſt ſhew furth his winninges (I can not
tell what) and ſay: hereof it may be gathered,
that he hath hitherto proued nothing?
There is neither Wit, nor Grauitie, not
Commoditie, in it, ſo to hall and put vnto
him, out of no occaſion, that which may
ſounde to diſgracing of the Aduerſary, and
magnifyinge of his owne cauſe. But to the



pointe of the queſtion.
            The chiefe Argument that D. Harding
maketh, is of one ſorte, as if he ſhould ſay:
The inferiour Countries and Churches,
folowed the ſame tounge in publike Sernice,
which theyr Mother or Principall
Church had: But thoſe inferiour Churches
had ſundry and ſeueral Languages: ergo
the vulgar people of thē, could not vnderſtand
that general and vniforme tounge,
of the Principall Church. This Argument
he proſecuteth in order: firſte by Example
of the Greeke Church, then of the Latine:
and, before he bringeth the Examples, he
doth in both places ſignify, what he intendeth
to proue, and by what meanes or
Propoſitions he will proue it. And firſte
therefore theſe are to be conſidered, either
becauſe they ſerue to the openinge of the
ſtate of this queſtion: either becauſe it
will be perceyued by them, what truſte is
to be geuen to M. Iewel: which ſo deſperately
(as I may ſay) doth put to and take
away from D. Hardings words, yt to know
his falſehoode and Craftines, it ſhould be a
good leſſon, to ſuch as loue their ſaluation.
            D. Harding, before he ſheweth particularly,
what he can ſay of the Seruice in the



Greeke Church, hath theſe wordes:
            If Icā ſhew, yt the people of ſome countries
of ye Greeke church which al had
their praiers and Seruice in ye Greeke
tounge,The princip
                     •
                  es out of which D. Harding will deduce his Concluſion, in the queſtion of Publike Seruice. for ye more part vnderſtode not
the Greeke tounge: thē haue I proued,
that I promiſed.
            In which ſentence he declareth his intent
and purpoſe, and ſheweth what ye propoſitions
are, which being proued, will
ſerue that purpoſe. The firſt is this.
            The people of ſome Countries of the 
Greeke church vnderſtode not, for the
more parte, the Greeke tounge.
            
               The ſeconde is. Al the people of thoſe
countries had their Common praiers in
the Greeke tounge.
            
            This is y• moſt, y• any man cā peeke out
of thoſe words: except it be an other as M.
Iewel is, which as he can make of nothing
ſomewhat, ſo doth he make of ſomwhat al:
for thus he gloſeth vpon the text of D. Hardinges
wordes.
            Two propoſitōs M. Hardīg hath here choſē to
proue.Iew. 1
                     •
                  9. the one is that AL the greeke church,



had the common Seruice,More falſho
                     •
                  e of M. Iewels. WHOLY and
THOROVGHLY in the Greeke tounge.
            Here firſt you lye, For in D. Hardinges
ſentence, theſe wordes, WHOLY and
THOROVGHLY, are not founde at
al: and the, WHICH AL, that you ſeeme
to take as ſpoken of the whole Greeke
Churche, is not thereto referred of D.
Harding, but to the people only of thoſe
ſome Countries, which he mentioned the
lyne before. And therfor as much difference
as there is, betwene a General and a Speciall
propoſion, Or the people of al Greece,
& Al the people of ſome Coutries of Greece:
ſo greate and euident oddes there is, betwene
true meaning and M. Iewels dealing.
Nowe to the other propoſition as
M. Iewel reherſeth it:
            
               The other propoſition is, That ſome
whole Countries in the Grekee Church vnderſtoode
not the Greeke tounge.Yet more craft.
            
            Before, you were blamed for addinge,
here now are you to be noted for taking away.
But what is that? No ſmal thinge
ſurely, nor ſuch as may be ſpared: but thoſe
very wordes, which declare the truth and
reaſonableneſſe of the propoſition. For it
is to abſolute and vnlikely to ſay, Some



whole Countries of the Greeke Church vnderſtoode
not the Greeke tounge, but that,
for the more parte, (which wordes M. Iewell
ſuppreſſed), they vnderſtode not the
Greeke tongue, that will be true in theyr
iudgement, which can conſider, how many
Simple, Rude, and Ignorant there are, in
euery Country, which know no other then
their vulgar tongue: And of the better ſort,
how many there are, which ſo know an other
tounge beſide their owne, that they
are not much the wiſer for it. You may ſee
then how daungerous and ſore a felow M.
Iewel is.
            Now concerning other two propoſitiōs
(which M. Iewel hath with like Arte gathered
out of D. Hardinges words, about
the Latine tounge, as he hath done about
the Greeke) to make his craft more ſenſyble,
let D. Hardings own words be plainly
ſet forthe.
            After that theeſe Countreys,Harding Fol. 59.
(ſaith D. Harding ſpeking of ye weſt church
had bene inſtructed in the Faithe, as
thinges grewe to perfection, they had



their Seruice accordingly. No doubte
ſuch, as was vſed in the Churches, from
whence their firſt Apoſtles and Preachers
were ſent. And becauſe, the
firſt Preachers of the Faithe came to
theſe weaſt partes from Rome, directed
ſome from S. Peter, ſome from S.
Clement, ſome others afterwarde from
other Biſhoppes of that ſea Apoſtolike:
they planted and ſet vp in the
Countries by them conuerted, the Seruice
of the Church of Rome, or ſome other
verye like, and that in the Latine
Tounge onlye, for ought that can
be ſhewed to the contrary.
            Hereof may be gathered two Propoſitions.
            
                The firſt,Propoſitiōs ſeruing to the queſtion of Publike Seruice. the weaſt Churches had
ſuche Seruice, as was vſed in the Churches,
from whence their firſt Apoſtles



and Preachers came.
            The ſeconde, the firſte planters of
the Faithe came to theſe weaſt partes
from Rome.
            But, how doth M. Iewel conceiue theſe
matters?
            His proufe (ſayeth he) for the Latine Seruice
hangeth vpon two poyntes. The fyrſte
is, that all the Faithe of the weaſt parte of the
worlde, came onlye from the Byshoppes of
Rome.
            Firſt, you be deceiued in your numbring,
becauſe this is not the firſt,Iew. 167 M. Iew. buſy in changing & ſh
                     •
                  fting, and altering and adding. but the ſeconde
Propoſition by D. Hardinges accompte.
Then, in that ſecond of D. Hardinges, ye
finde not theſe wordes, AL THE FAITH
OF THE WEST: or theſe, CAME
ONLY FROM ROME. For that had
bene nothing elſe, but to geue you an occaſion
to ſlip away from the Principall queſtion,
and to enter into an endleſſe & nedeleſſe
talke, about, AL THE FAITH to
come from, and to come ONLY from Rome.
Which becauſe it was not geuen, therefore
you make it to your ſelf of your owne wit,
And reaſon ſtrongly in ye matter: yt the faith
came not into theſe quarters, ONLY from


               
becauſe S. Paule planted the faith in England,Nedeleſſe proues, of M. Iew. and full of 
                     •
                  heaſſes.
and alſo Ioſeph of Aramathea, (as is
ſurmiſed by the Brittiſhe Chronicles: And
becauſe we (the Welſhmen you meane) being
your ſelfe borne in Deuonſheere) folowed
the Church of Grecia in keping of Eaſter,
with ſuch other mighty Argumentes.
            Thē, for the other part, that AL FAITH
came not from Rome, ye preſſe vs ſore with
Tertullians authority, that Hieruſalem was
the mother and the Springe of Religion: as
who ſhould thinke, that Iacob was not father
of Ioſeph, becauſe Iacob himſelf was
begoten of Iſaac: and that Rome could not
be mother of the Weaſt Churches, becauſe
ſhe her ſelf had her Parents out of Hieruſalem:
Or, as though D. Harding had ſtayed
vpon the queſtion of AL FAITH, and
that, ONLY from Rome, which at, all maketh
no mention of, AL, or ONLyE: So
looſely you haue behaued your ſelf in your
firſt poynt. let vs now conſider your ſecōd.
            The ſeconde is,Iew. 167 that the Planters of the
ſame faith miniſtred the Common Seruyce
EVERY WHERE IN THE LATINE
TOVNGE.
            This is the firſt of D. Hardinges Propoſitions,
though M. Iewell make it the



ſecond poynt: and in D. Hardinges words
there is ſpeciall mention neither of LATIN
TOVNGE,
               More chā
                  ging and altering of M. Iew. neither of EVERY WHERE.
But generally he ſayed it, that ſuche Seruice
was in theſe weſt partes: as was vſed
in the Churches from whence their
firſt Apoſtles and preachers were ſent.
            
            And this might ſtand, whether they came
from Hieruſalem, Greece or Rome. Wherfore
he ſpecified nothing, vntill his ſeconde
Propoſition: where, out of this Principle,
he gathereth, that becauſe the faith came in
to the Weaſt from Rome, and they had the
Latine Seruice: therefore, it ſhould folowe
by good reaſon, that it was alſo deliuered
in Latine, where they planted the Chriſtian
Religion.
            Conſider now (indifferent Reader) how
ſhamefully M. Iewel had diſordered theſe
matters. Of fower plaine and credible
propoſitions, he hath made ſuch a conueyaunce,
by Adding: by Taking away: by making
of Particulars General: by Drawing
the Generall to ſpecial poynts: by Making
that firſt which is ſecond: by Promoting ye
inferior vnto ye Superiors place: yt he hath
left nothing as he found it, but, as it wer of



ſet purpoſe, labored to make confuſion.The ſūme of M. Iewels conueiaunce in 
                     •
                  oure Propoſitions onlye.
               Al ye people of ſome countries had their
ſeruice in Greke, ſaith D. Harding. He
wil proue, ſaithe M. Iewel, that ALL the
Greke Church had it WHOLY & THROVGHLY
in the Greeke tounge.
            
            Some whole Countries for ye more part
vnderſtode not Greke, quod D. Hard.
            Some whole Countries vnderſtoode not
Greeke, quod M. Iewel by his gathering.
            
            The faith came into the weſt from
Rome, quod D. Harding.
            Al the faith came only from Rome, ſayeth
M. Iewel vpon it.
            
            The plāters of ye faith ſet vp, in the
Coūtries by thē cōuerted, ſuch Seruice
as thē ſelues vſed quod D. Harding.
            The planters of the ſame faith, (quod M.
Iewel vpon it) miniſtred the Common ſeruice
EVERY WHER in the LATIN tōge.
            What miſerable ſhifting and changing is
this? What boldneſſe in ventering? What
Ordinary courſe in deceiuing? Yet this, in
dede, is ye way to ſaue himſelf frō taking, if
he cā bring the queſtiō to ſuch a Generality:
yt if he be driuen frō one place, he mai flee
to an other, to make y• aduerſary weri of folowing,



& the Reader weary of loking. For
ſuppoſe, ye Latine Seruice were vſed in Aphrica,
ye vulgar people not vnderſtanding
it, yet that is not EVERy WHER. Suppoſe
it were vſed in Fraunce, yet neither ye
proueth EVERy WHER. Come nearer
home to England, and proue it to haue ben
vſed there, yet very much lacketh of EVERy
WHER. And ſo may M. Iewel like
a biſhop in deede not of Sarum but of the
Weſt Church, go frō Country to Country,
in a ſtraunge Viſitation, & neuer make an
end of Interrogatories & Inquiſitiōs: vntil
D. Harding ſhal ſatiſfy his Lordſhip in
al poynts, and proue y• 
               EVERy WHERE
IN THE WEST, the Seruice was miniſtred
in ye Latine tounge. Which thing I do
not ſay, yt the Catholikes are not able to declare,
(but be yt as it may be,) I note ye craft
& cūning of M. Iew. which wold draw all
things to ſuch a generality or preciſeneſſe
of termes, ALL FAITH, ONLy FROM
ROME, EVERy WHER, &c. and in any
part alter, an other mannes Propoſitions.
            Thus hauing declared what the chiefe
Propoſitions were, whiche D. Hardinge
thought vpon in this Controuerſye, and
which M. Iewel hath ſo hādled, as though
no body would thinke vpon them: Let vs



now return to that Argument, in ſhewing
of which, the moſt of this Article conſiſteth:
And which, if it be proued accordingly, ſhal
conſtrain M. Iewel to ſubſcribe. Which although
it may be exemplified in both Churches,
Greke & Latine, yet for ſo much as being
ended in one, it may very eaſely be applied
to the other, and alſo becauſe I haue
already bene to long in this Article: I will
make it no further, then to ye Greke church:
After this maner.
            The leſſe Aſia had the Seruice in
the Greeke tounge:
                  D. Hard. argumēt, againſt this thirde Article of M. Iew. Fol. 75.
               
            
            But ſundrye Countries of the ſame
Aſia vnderſtode not the Greke tounge,
            Ergo they had their Seruice in a
tounge, which they vnderſtode not.
            Take heede good Reader (ſayeth M. Iewell)
Onleſſe thou eie him wel,Iew 160 M. Harding
wil ſteale from thee. Againe: Here is a faire
gloſſe, but be not deceiued. M. Harding knoweth
wel inough, it is but a fallacy, that is to
ſay a deceitful argumēt, named in the ſcholes
ex meris particularibus, or, A non diſtributo
ad diſtributum. Onleſſe he amend the Maior
and make it an vniuerſal and ſay thus: Al Aſia
she leſſe had the Seruice in the Greke toūge.
            
               
Concerning D. Hardinges knowlege,
I beleue he putteth nothing in print, that
he thinketh to be a fallacie. But why, is it
a deceytfull Argument? Becauſe it is named
in Scholes, ex meris particularibus. Yet
the Scholes,M. Iew. Logike more harder then that of the Scholes. I trow, ſpeak not of D. Hardinges
argument, neither doe they condemne
all Argumentes, which conſiſte of
mere particulars. For the Syllogiſmus, named
in Scholes expoſitorius, is of that making,
and therefore your rule (M. Iewell)
hath exceptions.
            But you find fault with it an other way
ſaying: Or, a non diſtributo ad diſtributum,
as though it were to be ſuſpected, that D.
Harding (in ſayeing, Aſia the Leſſe had the
Seruice in the Greeke tounge) had meant
to except ſome countries thereof: and that
therfore it ſhould be nede to bid him to put
in Al, and amend the propoſition. Wheras,
within ſix lines before,Neadleſſe fear. he doubted not to
ſay (Al the Greeke Church had theyr Common
Seruice in the Greeke tounge) to put
you out of feare (M. Iewel) that he would
not deny it of the leſſe Aſia being but a part
of the Greeke Church, that which he graū
               ted
of the whole, & which alſo you ſpecially
marked.



marked. How ſay you alſo to this argumēt?
Englād hath the Seruice in the Engliſh tōge,
Wales the ſame Seruice that Englād hath: ergo
Wales hath the Seruice in the Engliſh tōg.
            
            Surely it ſeemeth good inough. And
though ſome Proteſtant of other countreis,
(thinking perchaunce that in the reformed
Church of England, euery part thereof is
prouided for, According to the diuerſitie of
Rites and Tounges, as Innocētius hath by
his vnderſtanding, decreed) though he (I
ſay) would tel me, that it is a deceytful argument
named in Scholes ex meris particularibus,
or, a non diſtributo ad diſtributū:
Yet would I not chainge my minde, but
think it ſtil a good reaſon, which I ſee proued
ſo euidently to my face, by the practiſe
and vſe of our country, that I can not deny
the conſequence. Therfore perchaunce you
are to ſcrupulous or to curious, M. Iewel
in theſe ſchole points of which you ſpeake,
or rather, if ye mater ſhuld be examined to y•
vttermoſt, I think you would be proued obliuious,
or worthy to be ſet again to ſchole
to lerne more Logik. But for ſhortnes ſake
let ye Maior be reformed as you require, as
            Al Aſia ye leſſe had ye cōmon ſeruice in
the Greeke tounge,
            
               
But ſundry nations in Aſia the leſſe
vnderſtode not the Greeke tounge:
            Ergo ſundry natiōs in Aſia the leſſe
vnderſtod not the Common Seruice.
            The argument being now amended in
ye point, for which only ye bid your Reader
take heed and eie him wel, if both propoſitions
may be proued, thē ſhal it behoue M.
Iew. to ſubſcribe. Therfore, to the Maior
and firſt of the two, what ſay you?
            That Aſia the leſſe had the Seruice in greke, it
is doubted of no mā, nor lernd nor vnlernd.Iew. 160
            
            See, what a good wil can do? Now, whē
you be diſpoſed, you are ſo fre,Bountefutty. y• rather then
fail, the vnlearned alſo ſhallbe ſuppoſed to
know y• 
               Aſia the leſſe had theyr Seruice in
Greke: which yet, being vnlearned, know
not what Aſia ye leſſe is, & much leſſe what
tonge was there vſed, a M. yeres a go. For
how ſhould they come to ye knowledge? by
ſeing & hearing? they are not thē aliue now
which ſo do know it. By reading & conſidering
ye bokes & records of thoſe dayes?
They are not thē vnlearned which can ſo
doe. By geſſing it and gathering it by their
own reaſon, or of an other mās talke? That
could not put thē out of doubt in ye matter.



That could not put them out of doubt in
the matter. Yet ſayeth M. Iewel, It is
doubted of no man, nor learned nor vnlearned.
It foloweth.
            
               But that al Aſia the leſſe had throughout
in al parts the ſame Seruice (why adde you)
THROVGHOVT, In al partes, the ſame
Seruice?
               Shifts in a readines This ſignifieth, that ye haue your
termes and ſhiftes in a readineſſe, if neede
be. But goe ye forwarde.
            If it be denied, M. Hardinge with all his
learning, is not hable to proue it.
            But you, I trow, are able, and that may
be perchaunce the cauſe, why you ſay, If it
be denied.
               Contentions. Sparinge, as it were for conſcience
ſake, to deny that which may be proued:
and yet taking that praiſe away frome
your aduerſary, that he ſhould be able to
doe it. But what ſhal we doe with your If?
A greate ſturre you haue kepte, in bidding
the Reader take heede. And to eye D. Harding
leaſt he ſteale away, in examininge the
argument, in amending the Maior: & now
when it is, as you wiſſhed, and the propoſition
is full and vniuerſall, you ſteale away
in deede by an If, and can not be certainely
eyed, whither ye goe or what ye intend.
Yet, becauſe the preſumption is very



good, that you would not ſpare your aduerſary,
if opportunitie ſerued, or leeſe any
vantage that might be taken: we may conceyue,
that you permit ye Maior to ſtand as
graunted. But yet againe, leaſt hereafter
you ſhuld driue him in your āger to proue
it, and flatly then deny that, which now fauorably
ye remit vnto him, ſignifyeing only
by an If, the liberty which you haue to
vſe more rigour & extremity, but not folowing
the vantage to the vttermoſte: therefore
will I tell you ſumwhat before hand,
how ye Maior ſhalbe proued, that you may
well thinke vpon a direct anſwer.
            I proue it by this conſequence.The fyrſt profe of ye Maior in the principall argument afore ſaide. All
Aſia the leſſe was of the Greke church:
Ergo they had ye Seruice in the Greeke
Tounge.
            The conſequence if you will doubt of it
foloweth of that Rule, A definitione ad definitum.
For after ye haue declared,What the Greekes church 
                     〈◊〉
                  . what
this word, Church meaneth, and founde,
that it includeth without exception all the
nūber of thē, which through ye whole world
confeſſe & profeſſe, one God one faith and
one Obedience: after this, I ſay, when you
come to ye particulars, and define vnto vs,



what ye Greke Church is: you ſhalbe conſtrained
to meane y• ſociety & cumpany of
the faithful, whoſe publike Seruice is in ye
Greeke tounge.
            The antecedēt I neade not proue,Iew. 164 leaſt
M. Iewel ſhould cal it vanitas vanitatum, &
tel vs, y• it is not denied neither of learned
nor vnlearned. And yet leaſt he ſhould interprete
this my opiniō to be but for a ſhift
and euaſion, I will ſhew him good cauſe,
wherefore I take it.159. For, if M. Iewel find
no fault with D. Harding, for compriſing
within the name of the Greeke Church:
            That coūtrie which properly is called
Graecia, Macedonia, Thracia, Aſia ye
leſse & coūtries adioining, ye prouinces
allotted to ye Patriarke of Alexandria
in AEgypt and of Antiochia in Syria:
            I can not feare, yt he wil be leſſe indifferent
and quiet towards me: which ſpeak ſo
much within my bounds, and mention no
other Countries belonging to the Greeke
Church, but only the leſſe Aſia.
            Beſide this, your ſelfe, M. Iewel, diuide
the Church, not only into the Greeke and
the Latine: but alſo in to the Churches of
Aethiopia, Scythia, India, Arabia, Syria, Perſia



Media, Armenia, & a great number of other
countries. In which part then of al theſe,
is Aſia the leſſe? Not in the Latin Church,
not in the cumpaſſe of Aethiopia, Scythia,
India, Arabia, Syria, Perſia, Media, Armenia
or any other of ye great nūber of Countries
which you ſignify. If it be in any, name it
vnto vs, & ſhew your Authority: yt and if it be
not (as in dede it is manifeſt by ye borders
whiche learned and experte Wryters doe
note to be attributed and made vnto them)
then muſte all Aſia the leſſe be of the Greke
Churche.
            And again, if throughout al ye leſſe Aſia, ye
Publike Seruice had not ben in one cōmon
and currant Greke, it muſt haue folowed, y•
according to ye diuerſity of tounges & coū
               tries
therof, a diſtinct interpretation of the
Scriptures, was alſo prouided for thē. For
the Publike Seruice conſiſteth chiefly of
the Scriptures, as the proper bookes of
Chriſtians (whiche are to be, either inſtructed,
Or furthered, Or perfited in the
lawe of God) and as mooſte proper for
that place, where all Prophane thinges
ſette a ſyde, the Diuine Hyſtoryes, Pſalmes,
Goſpels and Leſſōs are to be reherſed
& cōſidered. Will M. Iewel deny this:



how can he? which is ſo redye to graunt it,M. Iew. a falſifier of coūcels. 153.
that the belieth two Councels (of Laodic
                  •
               a
and of Carthage) ſayeing them to haue
decreede, that nothing muſt be redde in the
Church to the people, ſauing only the Canonicall
Scriptures. Yet the Councel is not ſo,
but, in prouiding that no other bookes
ſhould be red there, as in the name of Scriptures,
but onlye the Canonicall Scriptures,
it declareth, what a ſingular eſtimation
and vſe of them was in the Common Seruice
of the Church.
            This Seruice then, conſiſting chiefly
of Scriptures, muſt not the people vnderſtande
it? By M. Iewels Diuinitie they
muſte. Ergo the tounges, in which the
Scriptures were then writen, ſhould be
knowen vnto them. And to bring this to
paſſe, looke how many ſeueral Countries
were in the leſſe Aſia: ſo many interpretacions
of the Scriptures were made correſpondent
vnto them. But what ſhal we
nowe ſaye?Of the interpretation of ſcriptures into Greeke. For manye ſkore yeres after
Chriſt there was in all the world but one
Greeke interpretation of the Scriptures,
and that was made by ſeauentie Elders of
ye Iewes in y• tyme of Ptolomeus Philadelphus.
After which, there folowed ſix interpretations:



the firſt of Aquila, the ſecond of
Symmachus, y• third of Theodotio,
               Euthymius in praeſatione in Pſalmos. ye fourth
had no certaine Author, and was founde in
Hiericho. The fift, was (without Authors
name) found in Nicopolis. The ſixte, was
made by Lucianus the Heremite and Martyr,
and found in a tower of Nicomedia.
            
            Conſider now by this, indifferent Reader,
how litle ſtore and copy of Interpretations
of Scriptures, was then, when of vij.
only ſo great accompt is made: And howe
litle haſte was made to ſet them abrode,
which were ſo kept in by the Authors: and
howe great price was then made of them,
the finding of which is ſo singularly noted.
            But let vs ſtaye our ſelues vpon thoſe
firſt yeres, in which there was no other interpretation
of the Scriptures in ye Greeke
Tounge, but that of the Septuagintes.
            In this caſe then, did all Churches of Aſia
the leſſe, vſe that Interpretation? They
muſt haue vſed it, or elſe haue none.
            Did all vnderſtand it? How is it poſſible,
the ſeuerall Countries and Tounges
in Aſia the leſſe, being at the leaſt. xiiij. in
number. Forth then: had ſome Churches
no Seruice at all, becauſe they vnderſtode
not the Greeke of the Septuagintes? Or



Or had they ſuch Seruice,Here let M. Iew. ſhew hys knowledge. in whiche n
                  •
               
Scripture was read? Either ye muſt admit
this abſurdity, either ye muſt hold your
peace (M. Iewel) for lacke of anſwer, either
ye muſt ſubſcribe and yelde to the Catholikes.
For, if the Scriptures were then
in no other Greeke tounge, then that of
the Septuagintes: And if the vulgar people
of diuers Countries and Languages in
the leſſe Aſia vnderſtode not that Greeke:
And if without the Scriptures, the Publike
Seruice be not made: either the Seruice
was in that tounge which all the Vulgare
people of the leſſe Aſia did not vnderſtand,
(and then you muſt ſubſcribe) Or
elſe in ſome Churches they had no Seruice,
becauſe they had no Scriptures turned into
the Vulgare tounge, (which is moſt abſurde
and vnreaſonable) Or elſe you muſte
ſecretely confeſſe it, that you can not fynde,
what tounge they vſed in their Seruice, or
what you may anſwer to this Argument.
            Thirdly I proue the Maior,The. iii. pro
                     •
                  e. by an Induction.
            In Smyrna, in Pontus, in Cappadocia,
in Lycaonia, in Caria or Thracia,

                  •
               t Sic de ſingulis, and ſo in eche other



Countrey of the leſſe Aſia the Seruice
was in the Greeke tounge:
            Ergo (the Maior foloweth,) that
all the leſſe Aſia had their Seruice in
the Greeke tounge.
            The Induction is good and lawfull, as
conſiſting of a ſufficient Enumeration of
particular Countries in the leſſe Aſia, with
Importing, or Supplying, or Making
good, the reſt vnreherſed, by this clauſe, Et
ſic de ſingulis, and ſo in eche of the reſt.
            
               The Antecedent I proue,
               Iew 161. 
               concerning
thoſe Countries which I named. And I
proue it by your warrant (M. Iewel) becauſe
it is ſureſt. Verily, ſay you, Polycarpus
was Bishop of Smyrna, Gregorius Bishop
of Pontus, S. Baſil was Bishop of Caeſarea
in Cappadocia, Amphilochius B. of Iconium
in Lycaonia, Gregorius S.Baſiles brother
B. of Nyſſa in Caria or Thracia after
your reckoning: All theſe in ſondrye Countries
in Aſia preached openlye in the Greeke
tonge, and the vulgar people vnderſtode thē.
            I take your Confeſſion, and proue there
by, in your Iudgemente, and euerye other
Proteſtantes, that the Seruice alſo was
in the Greeke tounge in thoſe Countreis:



except you would anſwer, that they preached
in the Greeke and knowen Tounge,
but miniſtred in an other then Greeke or
knowen. And herein I vſe the vauntage
of your graunt, to proue that the Seruice
was in Greeke: but that it was knowen
vnto all ye Vulgare people, therin we agree
not wt you. Yea ye very Sermōs & Treariſes
of S. Baſile, Gregory Nazianzene and
Gregory Niſſine, as they are nowe extant,
were not ſurely vnderſtanded of the Common
people of thoſe Countries, wher they
ſate Biſhops: but were pronounced, to the
capacity of the vulgare audience, in termes
moſt familiar and knowen, and afterwards
penned in the learned Tounge, as well for
other Nations as their owne Countries.
For the Seruice being wryten in the Common
Greeke, as appereth by S. Baſiles
Liturgie or Maſſe, and their bokes alſo keping
the ſame Tounge: it is impoſſible, by
common reaſon, that the Vulgare people of
Cappadocia, Pōtus and Caria ſhould vnderſtand
it, whoſe language ſhalbe ſtraitewaies
proued (in declaring of the Minor
propoſition) to haue bene either Barbarous,
that is no Greeke at all: either ſo corrupt
and vncleane Greeke, that in compariſon



of the Tounges, vſed in the foreſayde
Liturgie or Sermons, they were (at the
leaſt) as far to ſeking, what was ſaide: as a
vulgare Italian or Frenchman is, when he
heareth a Latine Oration.
            Concerning nowe the other Countreis
which I haue not named, you can not require
it of me, to goe particularly throughe
them: but your part is to geue an Inſtance
and to name any one, that had not the Seruice
in the Greeke tounge: vntill whiche
time the Maior ſtandeth in good force, and
may well be vſed of vs for certaine, whiche
can not ſuſpect the contrary. Now therfore
let vs come to the Minor propoſition.
            Sundry Nations (ſaithe D. Harding)
in Aſia the leſse vnderſtode not
the Greeke.Harding Fol. 75.
            
            But to what end?Iew. 160 for neither this is denied
by any of vs, nor is it any part of the queſtiō.
            If ye deny it not, then foloweth the Cō
               cluſion,
that ſundry Nations in Aſia the leſſe
vnderſtode not the Common Seruice: and ſo
the end is, that you muſt ſubſcribe.Subſcribe If it be
no part of the queſtion, how coulde you by
force therof, be driuen to yeld? But conſider
what foloweth.
            
               
And yet notwithſtanding,Iew. 160 is not M. Harding
able to proue it with all his gheaſſes.
            Loe,What a ſtomake? he confeſſeth the Propoſition to be
true, and yet (ſo contentious he is) he will
ſtand againſt D. Harding, that he is not able
to proue it. Which ſtomake being once
taken, what foule ſhifts will not a man inuent,
rather then he wil take a double foile:
The one, in yelding vnto his Aduerſarye,
the other in not defending that, whiche he
toke vpon him to ſay. But for ſo muche as
M. Iewel is ſo ſet, let vs proue the Minor,
and conſider his Anſwer thervnto.
            The Minor is thus declared by ye Actes
of the Apoſtles.Sundry Coūtries of Aſia the leſſe vnderſtode not the learned Greeke?
            
            The inhabitors of Cappadocia and Pā
               philia
are within Aſia the leſſe, and eche of
them had a diſtinct and peculiar language.
For S. Luke reporteth, as of others ſo alſo
of theſe, y• when the Apoſtles begā to ſpeak
in diuers tounges, they were aſtonied and
wondered at ye matter,Act. 2. ſaying: A ſee, are not
all theſe that ſpeak, men of Galilee? and how
doth euery one of vs, heare oure Tounge, in
which we were borne? The Lycaonians alſo
are of Aſia the leſſe. And S. Luke noteth,
that the people of Lyſtris ſpake Lyeaonice,
               Act. 14.
that is, after the proper and peculiar tonge



of the Country of Lycaonia, wherof Liſtris
was one of the Cities. Ergo, ſundry countries
of Aſia the leſſe vnderſtode not the
Greke. What anſwereth M. Iewel? Mary
to the firſt of theſe two authorities he ſaith:
            What if anſwer be made,Iew. 16
                     •
                  
                that all theſe rehearſed
in the Actes of the Apoſtles were not
diuers Tounges but rather certain differencies
in one Tounge?
            Yet more what ifs?Contentious if ſing, & ſtriuing of M. Iewel. And are ye not yet at a
poynt, to anſwer directly neither to Maior
nor to Minor, but, that in both you muſte
hange vpon Ifs? Here may we ſee, what a
ſprite can do. He ſaid that M. Harding is
not able to proue his Minor (which he ſaide
to try maſtries) and now rather thē he will
ſeme not to abide by his worde, he neither
wil holde his Tounge, nor yet ſpeake anye
thing to the purpoſe: but by a what if, he
prouideth that if he be taken tardy, he may
not leeſe all, but ſay, I affirmed nothynge,
but only put forth a caſe: and if no man reproue
him, that then, his What if, may ſtād
for a perfite Reſolution.
            But let vs conſider your ſaying better.
What if anſwere be made. &c. as before.
            Mary without peraduenture, it will be an
idle anſwer and to no effect.
            
               
For, to let it paſſe that S. Luke expreſſely
ſayeth, Euery one hearde them ſpeake
Lingua ſua, in his owne Tounge,
and to graunt vnto you, that all the toungs
mentioned in the Actes, were not diuers,
but that ſome were diſtincted from other,
only by certaine differencies: Yet thoſe differences
were ſo great, that the Vulgare
people of one Tounge, vnderſtode not them
of an other: For (I truſt) you meane not
ſuch differencies, as are made by reaſon of
Swiftneſſe, Slowneſſe, Smothneſſe or
Hardneſſe, and ſo furthe of Tounges: but
ſuch only as cōſiſt in the variety of Letters,
Wordes and Dialect. In which reſpect,
though the Tounge of Saxonie, Flanders,
England and Scotland be one: yet becauſe
of a peculiar Property and Dialect whiche
is in them, the Vulgar Saxons are not only
Strangers to Engliſhe men, but allſo to
the Flemminges their neighbors: and the
Vulgare Scotteſman not only vnderſtandeth
not the Flemming, but of the Sowtherland
ſo nigh vnto him, he knoweth not
the wordes and meaning.
            There be about three ſkore ſeueral Coū
               tries,
that vſe the Tounge named Illyrica,



but though the kind of the Tounge be one,Geſnerus in Mithridate.
and the difference conſiſte in Dialecte and
proprietie only: yet they vnderſtand not
one the other, as in example: Hungarians,
Moſcouites, Polonians, Sclauons, Bohemians,
& caet.
            
            Alſo, if you wil conclude vpon this, becauſe
the kinde of tounge was one, of ſome
of them which are reherſed in the Actes of
the Apoſtles, that therfore, they vnderſtode
one the other: What miracle call you this
to make men aſtonied at? And that Cappadocians
and Bythinians, hearing the Apoſtles
ſpeaking vnto them in theyr owne
Tounge, vnderſtoode them both at once?
Or howe could S. Luke ſo forget himſelfe,
that to commend and ſet furth the greate
worke and gifte of God ſhewed by ye tounges
of the Apoſtles, he would make a great
mater of it, and ſay, that: the inhabitants
of Pōtus, Cappadocia, Phrygia, Pamphilia,
& Aſia wer amaſed & aſtonied
aſking: how do we euery one of vs here
our tounge, in which we were borne?
if in deede theſe had one naturall tounge,
& vnderſtode one an other, ſauinge for certein



odd differences. Cartainly if ye differēce
were ſmal, the miracle muſt needs be ſmal,
which S. Luke telleth for greate.
            If an Engliſh man, knowing no other
tounge byſide his owne, and a Welſhman,
of ye like knowledge in his naturall tounge
only, ſhoulde come together to Diuinitye
Schole in Oxforde, and both of them vnderſtād
ye Kinges Reader, this were much
to be wondred at: but if there come to Paules
Croſſe, out of eche Sheer in England,
ſeueral perſons, and vnderſtand the Preachers
Engliſh, doe they loke one vpon an
other for it? do they wōder at the working
ſprite in him, and ſay: howe doe we heare,
euery one of vs, this fellowe, whiche is
borne an Engliſh man, to ſpeake our Vulgar
tounge? Yet no doubt there is a difference
of ſpeache, betwen Engliſh men of
diuers Sheers. But it is not ſo great, as to
make a miracle when they, Engliſhe men
borne, vnderſtand the ſelf ſame tounge in
an Engliſh Preacher.
            Now, that in the Actes of the Apoſtles
was a wonderfull Strainge and Diuine
matter, and ye grace and ſtrength of it conſiſted
herein, that they (whom for y• purpoſe
S. Luke rekeneth vp) vnderſtoode at one



tyme, a third perſon ſpeakinge vnto them,
& could not yet vnderſtand eche the other,
ſpeaking together. Wherefore you may as
wel confeſſe, M. Iewel, y• al there expreſſed
had a diuers language: as ye ſome had,M. Iew. what if hepeth nothing. but
a certaine differēce only frō other, therein.
Becauſe, y• difference helpeth you ſo litle,
that we proue thereby ye tounge of Cappadocia,
Pontus, and Aſia, to haue bene ſo
muche diſtincte one frome ye other: that the
Common & learned Greeke tounge, which
was vſed in the Churches of thoſe ſelfſame
coūtries, could not be vnderſtāded of euery
vulgar mā womā & child, of thoſe coūtries.
            But let vs conſider M. Iewels anſwer,
to the other Authority of the Actes of the
Apoſtles, that we may al vnder one cōfute
his oft repeted Iffinge and ſhiftinge. To
that of the Lycaonians thus he ſayeth:
            The people of Lycaonia ſpake vnto Paule
and Barnabas Lycaonicè: Ergo,Iew. 164 ſaieth M.
Harding, they ſpake no Greeke.
            This is one cōmon trik, of your Logike,
to peruerte and alter the intent of your aduerſary.A commō tricke of M. Iew.
D. Hardings cōcluſiō wil be this:
Ergo they vnderſtod not the learned Greeke
tounge: for to this purpoſe he allegeth all
his Authorities.
            
               
Therefore, whether they ſpake Greeke or
no, that is not the mater: but whether they
ſpake or vnderſtoode ſuche Greeke, as the
Scriptures and Church Seruice were then
conteyned in, Or ſuch as we reade now in
the workes and Liturgies of S. Baſile,
Gregorie Nazianzene, or Chryſoſtome.
Conſidertherfore (M. Iewel) how properly
ye procede and argue.
            But what if S. Luke had ſaied, they ſpake
Ionicê,Iew. 164 Aeolicè, or Doricê, which tounges
were adioyning faſt vpon Lycaonia. would
he therfore conclude they ſpake no Greeke?
            Here loe is a what if, to further the cauſe.
But what ſeke you by it.M. Iew. much deceyued in his aunīg M. Iewel? Subpoſe,
goe to, that S. Luke, in place of Lycaonicè,
had writen Ionicê, what then? would
he therfore (ſay you of M. Harding) cōclude
they ſpake no Greeke? No forſoth: for he
ſought not after ye cōcluſiō. And Alas therfore
(to take more iuſt pity of you then you can
doe of others) here hath M. Iewell loſte
a good Argument.
            Againe, he knoweth, that the Greeke
tounge is diuided by the learned therein, in
to fyue Dialectes: of which Ionica, Aeolica,
and Dorica, are three, and therefore he ſpeaketh
Greeke that ſpeaketh in them, but we



haue no ſuch warrant for the Lycaonicall
Tounge.
            Thirdly he might conclude, ye al though
they ſpake Greeke, yet not that which is
Attica or the pure and Common Greeke
tounge: in which two the Scriptures, and
old Fathers writings, are ſet furth.
            But what talke you of that, whiche S.
Luke might haue ſayed, and do not anſwer
to that, which he hath writen? Theſe toun-(ges
ſay you, meaning Ionica, Aeolica Dorica)
were adioyning faſt vpon Lycaonia.
               An Idle reaſon or talke of M. Iew. I
finde no fault with your Coſmographie,
but I ſee not, what end ye bringe it to. For
Spaine is adioyning faſte vppon France,
yet Spaniſh and French, are two ſundry
languages. And Lycaonia though it ſhould
ſtand in the myddeſt of Ionium or Aeolia, it
needeth not yet, forget it felſe and become
Ionical or A
                     •
                  olical.
            
            Verely (ſay you) if a man by way of contention
would ſay, the Lycaonical tounge was a
Corruption or differēce of the greeke tonge
and not a ſeueral tounge of it ſelf (M. Harding
ſhould haue much a do to proue the cōtrary.
            So ſhould he, to proue that S. Peter was
euer at Rome. For what is ſo plaine or teſtified,
that a Contentious felow can not ſay



or ſuppoſe ſomewhat, againſt it. But this
way (one would think) you folow not your
ſelfe, and therfore you goe warely and wiſely
forward, with Verely if a man & caet.
Yet ye ſeeme to take, as it were, ſome cumfort
of it: that M. Harding ſhuld haue much
adoe with a Wrangler, if one would cōtend
with him. And ſodainly your ſelfe begyn to
play that part in prouing, that the Lycaonians
ſhould speake Greeke, ſaying:
            Doubtleſſe they whorſhipped Iupiter:Here is to be learned how one might go
                     •
                   inthe way of concention. But M. Iew. doth as 
                     〈…〉
                   If 
                     〈◊〉
                   &c. And
they had the Greeke Sacrifice as it appeareth
by the wordes of S. Luke. And it may be
credibly gathered that Paule and Barnabas
ſpake to them in Greeke.
            Doubtleſſe you haue well declared and
pith
                  •
               ly, what a man would ſay, by way of
Contention. Otherwiſe, ye might by theſe
reaſons proue that ye Romanes alſo ſpake,
after a certaine corrupte kinde of Greeke,
becauſe they worſhipped Iupiter the God
of the Greekes:Alex. ab Alexand genidl. dier, li. 6 And had Greeke Sacrifice
alſo, as much as they of Lycaonia,
& becauſe S. Paule wrote to thē in Greeke.
&, as it may be credibly gathered, ſpake alſo
vnto them in Greeke.
            Howebeit (ſay you) whether it were ſo or
otherwiſe, it importeth nothing (why then
reaſon you ſo mighte
                     •
                  y about it) ſauing that



M. Harding maketh the matter ſo certaine.
            I per
                  •
               ey 
                  〈◊〉
                then it is one of your cares,A Greate 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and ſet to reſiſt
how to ouerthwart D. Harding: And,
ſauinge that he ſayeth it, otherwiſe you
care not to graunt, that the Lycaonians had
a ſeueral tounge by them ſelues. For whether
it were ſo or otherwiſe, it inporteth nothing,
you ſay. Yet neither this is, is true, y•
you ſay: Becauſe, it importeth doth way
                  •
               .
            For if their tounge were a corrupt Greke
(as ye Italiā or Spaniſh is a corrupt Latin)
thē did they not vnderſtād pſalmes & chapi
                  •
               ters
of Scripture in theyr Seruice, which
were trāſlated into true & cleane Greke only.
And if they had a ſeueral Tounge by thē
               ſelues,
much leſſe thē, did they vnderſtand,
what was ſayed in the Church.
            The queſtion alſo, is not herein whether,
they ſpake greeke or no: but whether they
vnderſtode the learned Greek or no. So y•
vnderſtāding therefore al to be is.
And whereas we ſee by experience at th
                  ••
               e
dayes, that euery Engliſhman venderſtendeth
not ye Scot, nor ye lower coūtries th
                  •
               e
ſpeak Duch, vnderſtand the hygh 
                  〈◊〉
               
(which yet differ but in 
                  〈…〉
               
we think, y• euery one in Aſia y• ſpake greke,
vn derſtode alſo the proper & oure greeke:



For the pure Greeke, which holy Fathers
haue writen, and in which the Scriptures
be preſerued, is compriſed within a ſmall
cumpaſſe of Countries, and continueth after
one maner ſtill: but the Corrupte and
Barbarous Greeke extendeth it ſelfe farre
and wide, and is, by ſundry occaſions, altered,
euery day, wandring further and further
of, from the likeneſſe and vicinitie to
the cleane and Learned Greeke. And therfore,
Ioannes Grammaticus writing purpoſly
of ye Greeke Dialectes, him ſelf being
a Greeke writer, ſayeth, that if ye will take
into the number, y• Dialect called Cōmunis:
then are there fyue of them, Ionica, Attica,
Dorica, Aeolica, Communis. But the barbarous
Dialectes (ſayeth he) being of great
number and far out of reache, it is not eaſy
to declare. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            Yea rather we muſte not call them Dialects,
but tounges. So vnlike they were to
other Greke Tounges, not only the Common
but alſo ye peculiare fower Dialectes.
            So that if the Lycaonians had a Seueral
tounge, vtterly diſtincted from Greeke, ſo
much wilbe imported therby: ye al vnderſtod
not ye greeke Seruice, nor yet ye Sermōs



of Amphilochius, or any other Biſhop ther
if they ſpake, as they wryte. And if on the
other ſide, they ſpake Greeke, but yet corruptly
& barbarouſly, that it ſelfe importeth
ſo much, that they vnderſtode not their ſeruice,
whiche was wrytten in the learned
Greeke. And as I haue ſaid now for Lycaonia,
ſo may I reaſon of Cappadocia, Pō
               tus,
Thracia, and proue that whether the
people of that Country ſpake Greeke or otherwiſe:
yet vndoubtedly they vnderſtode
not (all of them) the Greeke of the Church
Seruice.
            Wherfore the Maior being preſuppoſed
as euident, that all Aſia the leſse had
the Seruice in Greeke, (vntil M. Iewel
bring an inſtance) and M. Iewel helpinge
forward to the prouing of it by his graunt,
that theſe Countries within it, Smyrna, Pō
                  tus,
Cappadocia, Lycaonia, Caria, had their
Sermons and (by conſequence) Seruice in
Greeke: The Minor being alſo abundātly
proued by D. Harding, and by me ſuffciētly
declared, that ſundrye Countries in Aſia
the leſſe vnderſtode not the learned Greeke.
The Concluſion foloweth, y• ſome Countries
had the Seruice in that tounge, which



was vnknowen and ſtrainge vnto them,
and that Maſter Iewell muſ yeld and
ſubſcribe. And thus muche concerning
the Greeke Church.
            To ſpeake now of the Latin Church, and
to proſequente the forſayed argument by it
alſo, I think it nedleſſe. Either becauſe that
which hath ben ſpokē of ye Greeke Church,
y• it had ye publike Seruice in ye greeke tōge,
may eaſely be applied to ye Latin Church, to
proue the Latin Seruice there (which once
admitted, M. Iewel will not deny, but that
ſundry Countries of the ſame Church vnderſtoode
not Latine, nor had it as theyr
Vulgare tounge, where vpon his yelding
muſt folow) either becauſe my intent is, not
to ſpeake ſo much, as the matter geaueth
occaſion, but ſhortly to comprehend the
Some of that whiche is done: Either becauſe
the Aduerſary will be ſo vnable and
impotent to anſwer that which allreadye
is ſayed: that, to troble hym with more,
were loſte lavor. I maye alſo moſte
iuſtlye ſaye it, that he is ſo wilfully diſpoſed
and ſette, not to yelde, and hath ſo many
wayes, through much Practiſe of his
owne, and helpe of other Subtile 
                  •
               eades,
To Diſſo
                  •
               ble the righte Obiections, To



make longe Anſwers to Thinges that
were not moued, 
                  〈…〉
                Authorityes
alleaged, To brynge all thynges
into playne doubte, or S
                  ••
               pition
thereof: that nothinge ſhall be brought
whiche he will not 
                  〈◊〉
               , except it be very
ſenſible.
            For whiche cauſe, it had not bene euill,
neuer to haue mentioned, ſo muche as
I haue done of D. Hardinges Argumentes,
but, by a more compendious
waye, to haue lefte them paſſe by, in ſilence,
and to haue ſtayed in the myddle
of this Article, where, I lefte Maſter Iewell,
without anye good Argumente
or Lykelyhoode for his Aſſertion, Requiringe
hym to ſhewe, what ſure Euideneies,
he or his Fryndes could bringe furth,
in the cauſe.
            Yet for ſo muche as I ſpared not to declare
alſo, howe D. Hardinge hath reaſoned,
nowe it remayneth, not only to co
                  •
               
               ſyder
his Argumentes, but alſo to compare
them: that is, not onlye to attend
and marke what ſtrength they haue by
thē ſelues, but alſo how much more force &
certayntie they haue in reſepte of M. Iewels



ſurmiſes. Conſider it by it ſelfe
and ſay:
            The Latin Church is therfore called Latine,
becauſe of the tounge which is cōmon
and currant through it.
            Againe, in all Italy at the leaſt, the Seruice
was in true Latine, but vndoubtedly
the vulgare ſpeache of the whole Countrye
was not pure Latine.
            Againe: If there had bene in the Weaſt
Church any other Tounge then Latine, it
could not, but by ſome token be apparent
and euident, and ſome fragmentes or portions,
of the Seruice in the Vulgar tounge
would haue bene preſerued, if by no other
meanes, yet by Hiſtory.
            Conſider I ſaye theſe thinges in them
ſelues, and it may become a right good and
wiſe man, not to miſtruſt, at this preſent,
the vſe of the Latine Tounge in Publike
Seruice, which he maye by ſo good reaſon
gather to haue bene vſed at the beginning
in ſuche Churches, where they that were
preſent, vnderſtode it not. But compare
nowe with this, that on the other ſyde
which M. Iewel alleageth, that in Olde
time they had in their prayers, al,
               Iew. 176 
               as it were
one voyce and one minde: and, that al ſeueral



nations praied vnto God and praiſed him in
their owne natural and Mother tounge: and,
That watchinges, Praiers and Common Pſalmodie,
was in eſtimation in iūdrie countries,
and, That Chriſte is nowe the voice of the
whole world: Compare, I ſay, theſe allegations
with the Authorities of D. Harding,
and thou ſhalt ſynde, that the oddes is ſo
greate, that in theſe of M. Iewels there is
no Teſtimonye or Reaſon at all, for Publike
Seruice. Yet if this ſhal not ſeeme ſo
to his Fauorers, and if they wil needes defende
it, that M. Iewel hath ſpoken like a
Greate Clerke to no litle purpoſe, maie it
pleaſe them, to intreate him to ſatiſfie vs a
litle more, y• we may vnderſtand but of our
owne Countrie (to troble him with no
other) when the Engliſſhe Seruice ceaſed,
and when the Latine began.
            And if he ſhal neuer be able to bring any
Token or Argument, that euer it was in
any other Tounge then Latine,Reaſonable. ſauing of
late in King Edward the vj. dayes, can it
with any conſcience be required of a Catholike,
to forſake that Order of which the
Aduerſary, with all his Serche or Curioſitie,
can geue no other begynninge, but
from the founders of our Chriſtian faithe



in England? Or will he enforce vs to
ſubſcribe to his newly inuented manner of
Seruice, which neither we, nor he, did euer
Reade or heare, that it was vſed in any
tyme theſe fiuetene hundred yeres?
            All other Argumentes maye be lette
paſſe, This one of Tradition beinge ſo auaileable
and ſufficient,Traditiō
                that, excepte we
would of ſet purpoſe and againſte all conſcience
folow new deuiſes and inuentions,
we ought not to forſake the Auncient and
receaued Order in Seruice.
            And therefore to the ouerthrowing of
this third Article, and ſtrieng of a faithfull
and Catholike harte, let it be anſwered
to all buſie peekers of quarels about other
mens right: I holde the Latine Seruice
by Tradition, I beleue it came frome the
firſt planters of the faith in our countrie.
If I he deceaued, tell me, frome whome
els, And whē, And how, I receaued it? And
ſhew, by whome, when, And how, the
Engliſhe Seruice was firſte receaued, and
afterwardes how it decaied?
            And if thou canſt not in theſe two poyntes,
neither ſpeake againſte the firſte, nor
ſhewe for the ſecond: hold thy peace then
like a wiſe man, and blame not them which



holde aduiſedly the Latine Seruice, becauſe
they haue receaued it, And will not Yeld
raſſhly to ye chainging of it into
Engliſhe, becauſe no Example
maketh for it.
         
         
            
            The fourthe Article
⁂
            Whether the Biſshope of Rome was,
within ſix hundred yeres after Chriſte,
called an Vniuerſall Biſshope and head
of the Church.
            BY what name foeuer, the B. of Rome
was then called, if it be plainly proued,
that his Supreme power and
Authoritie ouer the whole Churche,
was then acknowledged and cōfeſſed: there
is no more to be required or ſought for in
this Article. Is not this true? And ſhall
not euery quiet & reaſonable man, be contented
herewithal? Yes verely. Except we
would be brought to that foly, we muſte
not paſſe vppon the thinges themſelues,
but ſeeke only after the names of them:
And diſcredit the Truth of the matter, for
lacke of finding the worde whiche betokeneth
it. Will it pleaſe then M. Iewel. to be
contented and anſwered, if we proue to
him the Popes Supreme Authoritie ouer
the Church: though we alleage not the
very termes of Vniuerſal Biſshope or head,
which he aſketh for.
            
               
I would ſome indifferēt man would perſwade
with him,A reaſonable requeſto to remit ſomewhat of ye
rigor of his, and extreme hard dealing, that
if the Thinge it ſelfe be found, & the Terme
of it to ſeekinge, yet, he obey the approued
Authoritie and confound not al order
for lacke of ſignificant wordes to expreſſe it
by. Yet, he ſhall haue Termes ſignificāt
enough: as Principalitie, Primacie, Chiefe
Rule, and ſuch others, as the Fathers vſe,
in ſpeakinge of the See of Rome. Mary,
for thoſe two which he requireth, he muſt
not be to haſty vpon vs, conſideringe, that
it is not the word that maketh a Thinge,
but the wil of God or act of man. And
againe, that one Thinge may, by ſundrie
wayes of like force, be expreſſed, y• if ſome
one lacke, ſome other may ſupply it.
            Lyke as therefore in cominge to ſome
one place, that hath many wayes leadinge
thither, he, ſhould lacke either his ſight or
his reaſon, which would wrangle and contend
with me, that I am not there, becauſe
I knowe not, or folowed not, that way
which he would haue taken, & yet I choſe (I
trow) a good way enough, which brought
me directly to my purpoſe: So in ye ſeeking
out of the Truth which is in the thinges



themſelues, vnto which we are conducted
many wayes by varietie and copie of wordes,
he that could not deny it me, but that
I haue the Matter I ſought for, and yet
would aſke me where is the ſpeciall word,
Head of the Church which ſignifieth the
Popes Supremicie, doth by al reaſon declare,
not, that I am far from my purpoſe,
but that him ſelfe is deſirous to peeke
quarels and ſeeke digreſsions.
            Let vs be iudged then with tolerable
indifferēcie. Hath not D. Hardinge folowed
a reaſonable and allowable order, which,
in this queſtion of the Supremicie, proueth
the Thinge it ſelfe, and counteth it of no
greate importance, to ſeeke for the ſpeciall
wordes which M. Iew. requireth? Is not
ſo much enough for a quiet Reader? And ye
end beinge attained vnto, haue we to goe
any further? I could proue no. But I do
not miſtruſt, ſo little Iudgment or Conſcience,
to be in honeſt natures. And firſt
therfore I deſire this, wel to be remēbred &
noted, yt ye heretike hath no vātage againſt ye
Catholike, for his goinge to ye matter, and
paſſinge ouer Names, & Titles, & wordes.
            Secondly it foloweth to be marked well,
that D. Harding (not, becauſe ye queſtion it



ſelfe required it of neceſſitie, but, for that he
would ſatisfie to the vttermoſt M. Iewels,
or ſome others, curioſitie) he ſheweth out of
good authoritie the very ſelfe names which
M. Iewel requireth: (Vniuerſall bishop &
Head of the Church,) to haue ben ſpoken of
the B. of Rome, within the compaſſe of the
ſix hundred yeares after Chriſt. But marke
it (I pray thee good Reader) perfitely, that
by the conferringe of Perſon with perſon,
Behauior with behauior, Chalenger with
defender, and Aunſwer with Argument,
the triflinge or earneſt dealinge may the
better appeare, the more nigh theſe contraries,
be in ſight the one of the other.
            Now then in the third place, conſider,
how vnreaſonably M. Iew. craketh, in
this Article, againſt him, which by all right
was not bound to Names, and Titles, prouinge
the Thinges them ſelues, and which
afterward, brought furth the very Names
ſo much aſked for: leaſt perchaunce by M.
Iewels triumphinge there vpon, many
ſhould certainely beleue, we had loſt ye victorie.
Whoſoeuer therefore wil haue ſome examples,
where a great ſhew is made of nothinge,
to beware in him ſelfe of yt foly, let
him marke theſe that folowe.
            
               
The chief Authoritie beinge acknowleged
and confeſſed,
                  
                     •
                  at. fo. 101. whether thē
he were called, by either of thoſe names
that you deny, or no: it is not, of greate
importance.
            M. Hardinge ſeemeth in part willingly to
yeeld.Iew. 220 
               Againe:
            
            It was as eaſy a matter for Chriſt, to geue
Peter the Power and Title bothe togeather, as
to geue him the power alone, without the
Title.
            Here, I can not chuſe but anſwer ſome
what, though for deſire of ſhortneſſe I haue
and muſt let many thinges paſſe, which
might be ſtaied vpon. Who doubteth, but
Chriſt in deede might haue geuen the Title
(which M. Iew. findeth lackinge) togeather
with the power and Authoritie ouer the
Church? yet for ſo much as he hath not done
it, it becometh not vs to find any imperfection
in his doinges: but to honor them
with all Reuerence, though we ſee no reaſon
for them, or with all humilitie to thinke
vpon them, whether good cauſes may be
brought furth and alleged for them or no.
            And truly, concerninge this matter of



which we ſpeake, we may rightly iudge, yt
becauſe weyght and worthineſſe is in the
Thinges them ſelues, therfore he gaue the
power to S. Peter. As for Names and
Titles, becauſe they are ſo eaſely geueu (as
appereth by ſtyles of Noble men and Princes)
his maieſtie was not ouer curiouſe in
them. Yet, he left not S. Peter without a
name of honor alſo, ſayinge: Thou ſhalt
be called Cephas,
               Io. 1. 
               which is interpreted
Petrus, a rocke or Stone.
            
            Which Title, duly conſidered, is of more
weight and worthineſſe, than either the
name of Head, Rector, Gouernor, Prince,
               Chriſt gaue S. Peter a Title of dignitie and power. or
vniuerſal Biſhope. Which as they ſignifie a
Preeminence aboue others, ſo do they not
warrant, a Continuance, a Stedfaſtnes, a
ſure Ground to buyld vpon, and a Principall
and Chiefe Stone in the houſe of God,
as Cephas or Petros (which are to ſay a
Rocke) doe. for our Sauyour expreſſed it, in
the hearinge of the twelue, and ſayed to S.
Peter only and ſpecially:
            Thou art Peter or a Rocke,Mat. 16. and,
vpō this rocke, will I buyld my Church,



and the gates of hell ſhal not preuaile
againſt it. And to thee will I geue, the
keyes of the kingdome of heauens, and
what thinge ſoeuer thou byndeſt vpon
Earth, ſhalbe bound in heauē: & what
thinge ſoeuer thou looſeſt vpon Earth,
ſhalbe looſed in Heauen.
            Mary this Title of Vniuerſall bishope
or Head of the Church, he gaue not him in
plaine Termes. But what of that? He
inſtituted effectuall Sacramentes: yet he
neuer called any of them by the name of
Sacrament. He taught men to beleue
in the Trinitie, yet the word is not found in
all ſcripture. The prophet Dauid calleth
the Apoſtles Princes of all the Earth,
               Pſal. 44.
yet Chriſt which gaue them Authoritie
ouer al, ſayeth no more but: Goe and
Preach the Goſpell to al creatures.
               Mar. 16. And
againe, I ſend you furth as ſheepe emong
wolues.
               Mat. 10. Againe: your maſter is one,
Chriſt, and al ye, are Brethern:
               Mat. 23. and
neuer called them Princes.
            
            How then? Doth M. Iew. find an imperfection



in Chriſtes doinges? And
thinketh he ſecretly in his hart, that a Power
is not well geuen without a Title?
And that, if him ſelfe might haue ordered
the matter,To anger or troble the Catholikes M. Iewel mak
                     •
                  th obiections againſt God himſelfe. the Name and Office ſhould
haue ben geuen, both together? from whēce
cometh this, that a wretched and a vile creature,
hath to ſaye any thinge againſt his
Maker? The Catholike Church is cōtēned,
The iudgement of ye higheſt Biſhope in the
earth is condēned, & to hinder y• Pope, And
āger y• Catholikes, he is not afraied to dally
with Almightie God him ſelfe, And to aſke
of vs, whether it was not an eaſy matter for
him, to geue Peter the Power and Title, al
together. That when we ſhall confeſſe
the Title was not geuen,Either fooliſhe or blaſphemous. he may infer: Ergo
neither the Power. Which argument, If
your ſelfe M. Iewel thinke to be naught,
what a wyſe man are you, ſo trimly to ſet it
furth? If it be good, what a Miſerable
felow are you, which dare ſo to ſpeake of
him, that is Alwyſe, and Almightie? As
though it ſhould not be agreable, to geue a
Power and not the Title. Confeſſe
that you haue ouerſhot your ſelfe, in makinge
ſo much, of a weake reaſon: Or
looke to be Anſweered accordingly,



when him ſelfe ſhal come in Iudgement
for ſuch purpoſe. But let vs goe forward.
            To this Church of Rome,D. Har. Fo. 106. it is neceſsarie,
al that be faithfull to repaire
and come togeather: for the mightier
Principalitie of the ſame.Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. 
               Againe:
            
            Andrew re
                  •
               eiued not the Primacie,
but Peter.Amb. 2. Cor. 12. 
               Againe,
            
            The Primacie or Principalitie of
the Apoſtolike Chayre,Aug. epi. 162. hath euermore
bene in force in the Romaine Church.
            Now marke what M. Iew. concludeth.
He anſwereth after his maner vnto euery
one, but he triumpheth not therein, but in
this, ſayinge:
            M. Hardinge trippinge (as he ſayeth) ſo
nicely ouer the Doctors, hath not yet once
towched,Iew. 254 Here begynneth the he and 
                     〈◊〉
                  . the thingethat was looked for, and
that he hath only, and with ſuch affiance, take
in hand For, notwithſtanding a great Pōpe
of wordes and the Names of manie holie
Fathers, yet hath he not hitherto ſhewed,
that the Bishope of Rome within the ſpace o
                  •
               
ſix hundred yeares after Chriſt, was euer
called the Vniuerſall bishope, Or the head
of the vniuerſall Church, VVhich thinge i
                  •
               


               
he could haue ſhewed, I beleue he wold not
ſo lightlie haue tripte it ouer.
            See, how erneſt he is, vpon the name of
Vniuerſall Bishop. And how ſore him ſelfe
ſtumbleth, at one ſimple word (Tripping.)
And how much he craketh, before the end,
that the word he looketh for, is not yet
ſhewed. But ſee in an other place.
            
               D. Harding, from the 108. leafe to the 119.
of his boke, proueth the neceſſitie of one
head, and authoritie of the Biſhope of 
Rome.
            By naturall reaſon. By Appeales 
made to Rome. By Excommunications 
directed from Rome. By Elections of
Biſhopes, confirmed by the Pope. By
his Approuinge or Diſprouinge of 
Councels, By reſtoringe, of Biſhopes 
wrongfulli cōdēned, to their Churches.
By Biſhops and Patriarches reconciled
vnto him. And then goeinge forward
in this matter, Although it be a childiſh
thinge (ſaieth he) to ſticke at the
name, any thinge is called by, yet I will



bringe good witneſse for theſe names,
VNIVERSAL BISHOPE &
HEAD of the CHVRCH.
            This, I trow, ſhould cauſe M. Iew. to
be more calme and quiet, conſideringe that
he ſhall not tary longe, but haue the very
Names brought furth, which he craueth ſo
much for. But, he muſt make ſomewhat
of nothinge, aud ſeeme to be a Winner,
before his aduerſarie ioyne with him. And
therfore, he taketh him ſelfe to Coniectures
and Gheaſſes, ſayinge:
            Here M. Hardinge ſecretlie confeſſeth,Iew. fol. 295. An other copy of vnreaſonable crakinge. that
in al he hath hitherto alleaged, he hath not
yet found, that the bishop of Rome was
knowen in the world, within the ſpace of the
firſt ſix hundred yeares after Chriſt, by the
Name, either of the Vniuerſall bishop, or of
the Head of the Church.
            Well, becauſe you are ſo importunate
and haſtie with vs vpon the foreſayd
Titles: I can not ſtay now, to tell you
here againe of your crakinge, but wil make
ſpeede, to the places which might ſatisfie
your expectation.
            
               D. Hardinge therfore, from the 119.



leafe, to the 124. proueth, by S. Gregorie,
that the Councell of Chalcedon called
the Biſhop of Rome the vniuerſall Biſhop:
And by S. Chryſoſtome, S. Hierome,
S. Cyrill, and others, he proueth
that Peter was called the Head of the
Church. Now betwene he ſayeth, that
euery where almoſt, this Name is attributed
to S. Peter either in Termes
equiualent, or expreſly.Har. fo. 110.
            
            
               Thereupon, M. Iewell triumpheth.
Thus he doubteth at the matter and ſtammereth
and faltereth at the beginninge.Iew. 30
                     •
                  
                But
if the B. of Rome were the Head of the
Church in deede,More crakinge. ſo allowed and taken in the
whole world: why was he neuer expreſly and
plainly Named ſo? VVas there no man in the
world then, for the ſpace of ſix hundred
yeares, able to expreſſe his Name; Againe.
It had bene the ſimpler and plainer dealinge
for M. Hardinge to haue ſaied, This Name
can not yet be found: and ſo to haue taken a
longer daie.
            What will you doe when you ouercome



in deede, which although ye ſtroke be
but cominge, make rekeninge of your
gaines, And accompt it halfe a Victorie, for
that it is not more quickly geuen? But D.
Hardinge, before he bringeth furth the expreſſe
Terme (Head) to diminiſh the needeles
curioſitie of ſome perſons, he ſayeth:
            VVhat forceth it,Har. fo. 1
                     •
                  1. whether that very
terme (HEAD) be found in any
auncient writer, or no? And it foloweth,
But to take away occaſion of cauill, I
wil alleage a few places, where the expreſse
Terme (HEAD) is attributed
to Peter the firſt B. of Rome.
            Here now ſhould M. Iew. be attent, in
harkeninge to the Obiection. But, as
though al the matter were lyke to be loſt,
for lacke of a good face to ſet vpon it, he
looketh merily vpō the cauſe, And turneth
his eye away from that which is coming
againſt him, And is glad for a thinge paſt &
gone, I can not tell what: Sayinge.
            Gentill reader,Iew. 306 I beſeche the, marke wel
this dealinge. This Name the (Head) of the vniuerſall
Church is the (verie Thing) that we
denie,Fol. 77. And that M. Hardinge hath taken in



hand to proue, And boldly auoucheth, that
he hath already plainly ſhewed and proued
the ſame: yet now, in the end, finding him ſelf
deſtitute,Lycinge and. he turneth it of, as a thinge of
nought. Againe: VVithin the ſpace of the
firſt ſix hundred yeares, there were in Rome
68. Bishops,Iew. 20 for their Conſtance in fayth, for
their vertu and Lerninge, far exceedinge the
reſt that haue bene 
                  •
               ithence. The Number of
them beinge ſo greate,Bragg
                     •
                  
                  ge owt of meaſure. their Learninge ſo no
table, their Life ſo holie, it is meruaile M.
Hardinge ſhould not be able to ſhowe that
ani one of them al, in ſo Long time, was once
caled the (Head) of the Church, & therfor
ſhould thus reſt vpon S. Peter, who, when
he receaued theſe Titles was not bishop of
Rome, And of whom there is no queſtion
moued.
            Here lacketh (I confeſſe) no Inuention
or Exornation. A Title only or two are
ſought for. The finding of which, is made
to be of Greate Importance.
            The omnipotencie of Chriſt is conſidered 
for the matter (becauſe he was hable to
geaue the Power & Title both togeather)
            The diſpoſition of the Aduerſarye (becauſe 
if he could, he would bring them
furthe.)
            The ſpace of ſix hundred yeres (whether 


               
in that tyme no man was hable to expreſſe
them.)
            
               
               The number and worthineſſe of 68. Biſſhopes
of Rome, (with a ſpecial maruel, y•
M. Hardinge ſhould not be hable to ſhew
that any one of them al, in ſo Longe tyme was
once called Heade of the Church.) And
al this (with much more, which I let paſſe)
is conſidered and Amplified to the moſt
Vantage, As though it would be ſaide:
Good Lord what a felow is he, that hath ſo
oppoſed al the world? And how can that be,
but of Greate force to ſaluation, about
which, ſo Notable a Clerke doth keepe ſo
greuous a Stur?
            Yet in very deede, thoſe his Sentences
are not Argumentes of his well ſayinge,
but rather Copies, of his foule crakinge.
Which how vayne and vnſenſible it is, let
it now be tried, by indifferēt Readers. For,
if it had ben plainly Anſwered vnto him, at
the beginninge: That theſe forſaied Titles
could not be found, he might (I graunt)
haue Concluded as he doth:Iew. 306 
               Ergo mie aſſertion
is true, (vnderſtād verbo tenus, that is,
concerninge the outward ſound of ye word
only) But Crake thereof he could not by
any right: Becauſe he winneth no more,
but that no ſuch Name was then vſed: and



cometh not to the Thinge it ſelfe, and Subſtaunce
of the queſtiō. Yea rather, he might
be aſhamed, To Looke ſo bygge, And
Speake ſo lowdly, And Prouoke ſo generally,
And Stur about ſo buſily, And geaue
great hope of victorie, And when all that he
aſketh, is Graunted, to be able to make no
other vantage, but only this: Ergo mie aſſertion
is True. Yea forſoth A worthie Aſſertion,
To proue that, And ſtand vpon yt,
And bragge on that, which the Aduerſarie
may eaſely graunt, without any loſſe of the
cauſe, & you hauinge it yelded vnto you, cā
infer nothing againſt ye Popes ſupremicie.
            Take it vnto you M. Iew. that the name,
Vniuerſall Head, is not found: We are content
with y• ſenſe or Meaninge of the name.A Greate victorie and nothing taken.
Returne you home, from your Greate
fight, with certaine bare Titles & Letters:
And the aduerſarie hath not much to complaine,
keepinge the Thinge it ſelfe with
him, vnder other wordes and Letters.
            You haue done valiantly, (I trow) to
ſtand againſt al mē aliue vpon two names
and Titles: And we are not much hurted,
when, for all your Coſt, and Charges, you
haue come nothing nigh to ye matter, which
by thoſe Names or other, is imported.
            
               
Thus, if D. Hardinge would make ſhort,
and graunt vnto M. Iew. his Aſſertion:
Yet ſhould he ſo litle make any Boſt or Triumphe
thereof, that the might rather be
aſhamed, to leaue the Thinges them ſelues,
and ſtriue vpon the bare Names of
them. But, on the other ſide, now,
whereas D. Harding hath, not only ſo declared
the cauſe of the B. of Rome, that,
without ſeekinge or caringe for the Names
of Vniuerſall Biſhop or head, he hath,
plainely proued his Supremicie: But alſo
hath condeſcended vnto M. Iewels Infirmitie
or Curioſitie, And hath brought
furth, in conuenient place, the very Names
themſelues which M. Iew. demaundeth:
What modeſtie or honeſtie is this,Conſider M. Iewels be hauiour. ſo, to
Triumph, and Crake, as though thei were
not at al found out and recited?
            If he Anſwered D. Hardinge before he
had Read what he had ſayed: he Anſwered
by happ and not by cunninge: If he Read
ouer this Article, before he beganne to Replie
againſt it, how did he not marke, that
in the later part thereof, the very Names
which he aſketh for, are alleged out of the
Auncient Fathers? And then further, how
ſhould he, ſo, either diſſemble or trifle, as, to



preſſe in ſtill vpon his aduerſarie, with Importunate
& Impertinēt aſkinge for thoſe
Titles, (the place of ſhewinge the which
foloweth afterward) and thereupon ſo
ſolemly to Triumph, as though no ſuch
Title were to be found at all, becauſe they
were not found Immediately in the beginninge
of the Article, but in the latermoſt
part only thereof?
            But here now let vs conſider, whether
M. Iew. as he was haſtie in aſkinge for
thoſe foreſaied Titles, whiles the place was
not yet come where D. Hardinge apointed
to vtter thē: ſo now, whē they are brought
furth againſt him let vs ſee whether he
Shifteth not as faſt away from them, as
euer he was Inquiſitiue for them, And
whether he do not in deede Trip nicely
ouer the Doctors:
            
               Leo the greate,Har. fol. 119. B. of Rome, was called
in the Councell of Chalcedon by the
Name of VNIVRSAL BISHOP.
And this Councell was within the ſix
hundred yeares after Chriſt:Note the ſeuen fetches or flinges, or vagaries, or delaies or trials how to eſcape, 
               Ergo your
Aſsertion M. Iew. is falſe.
            
            In anſweringe to this Argument, firſt
you comfort your ſelfe, that this is the
firſt Teſtimonie of D Hardinges, for profe



of the Name it ſelfe: with,which M. Iewel here najetg vefire ge cine 
                     〈…〉
                   Iew. 295 
               Ergo hitherto, he
hath nor found it. Much good may it do you
if yow can make anie thing of it, ſauing a
Beggarly and an Idle Bragge.
            Then, you ſignifie, that you will ſticke
at the Name it ſelfe. Becauſe D. Hardinge
warned you, That ye Thinge ſufficiently
proued, to ſticke at ye Name it ſelf was
but a Childiſh point. 3. After this, you
caſt the Accompt,Hard. fol. 119. 
               that the Councell of Chalcedon
was holden in the yeare of our lord
488. Ergo of the whole number of the ſix
hundred yeares,
               Iew. 296. 
               M Hardinge freely euen at
the ſight, hath yelded vs backe, foure hundred
eight ſkore and eight yeares (writen
out at length and not in figures of Arithmetike,
to make the more ſhow) towardes
the rekeninge. As who ſhould ſay, he
ſhall not goe backe againe, And glad I am
that there remayne but 112. yeares to accompt
vpon, for the which I will Shift
well enough.
            Fourthly, He addeth that Leo Accuſeth
that whole Councell of Ambition, and that
the Apoſtolike See of Rome, in part allowed
it not By which you may gather, that the
Pope thē, much within ye 600. after Chriſt,



toke him ſelfe to be of Greater Authoritie
then the whole Councel: the Actes wherof,
he either Confirmed or Diſalowed by his
final ſentence.
            
               After this you come to VVhat If, and ſay:
               
VVhat if there were no ſuch Title, either
Geauen or offered in the Councell
                  
                     
                  
                  reversed ?
               
               Iew. 297 
               Againe:
VVhy doth not M. Hardinge alleage, either
y•
                Place or the Canō or the wordes? Againe.
Why geaueth he no Note in the Margine?
&c. Mary, becauſe he went not about to proue
his ſayinge by any Canon or decree of ye
Councell, but by other ſufficient authoritie.
            
            Now a man would thinke that by this 
tyme, ye had tryfied enough. Yet ye procede
in your Vanitie, & find matter of talke
where none is geuē,Iew. 297. with: Perhaps he will
ſay, this Canon was burnt by ſome heretikes.
&c. No M. Iew. he wil not ſay ſo: Yet you,
as though he were like to ſay it, do make
a Solemne & Curiouſe Confutation of it:
How that it were much for him to ſay ſo. And
concludinge with a victorious Epiphonema
and Acclamation, ye Vaunt and ſay. M.
Hardinge hath no other Councell, within
600. yeares after Chriſt to hold by, but only
this: and yet the ſame can not be found.
            
            Wel ſyr, what haue ye more to daly vpō?



Will ye now at length come to the matter?
You haue perchaunce forgot your ſelfe,
And therfore I will put you in memorie,
what you muſt anſwer vnto.
            D. Hardinge, to proue that the B. of
Rome hath ben called by the Name of Vniuerſall
bishop, allegeth S. Gregorie. You
haue aſked where it is to be found in the
Councel, And you would make him to be
laughed at,Iew. 198 Or diſcredited, that He allegeth
a Coūcell without a Canō. But he ſpeaketh
it expreſſely yt, you ſhall looke for it, not in
ye Coūcell, but in S. GREGORIE. What
anſwer ye now?
            This is an vntruth to beguile the reader.Iew.
            
            Then I beſhrew the lyer. But, how do
you proue it?
            For Gregorie ſayeth not,
                  
                     •
                  97. Shift. the bishops in
that Councell, Saluted, Intitled, Proclamed,
or Called the bishop of Rome by that name:
only he ſaieth, the Name of Vniuerſal bishop
was Offered by the Councell of Chalcedon
to the B. of Rome.S. Gregorie ſhameful
                     •
                   interpreted. He ſaieth they Offered
to Call him ſo, but that they Called him ſo in
deede, he ſaieth not.
            What meane you bere by, They OFFERED
to call him ſo? Is OFFERED
taken there, for makinge a Profer, Or for
goinge about to call him ſo? If it be, how



might this Ridle of yours be perceaued? or
how might I conceaue, that they made ſuch
an Offer? Firſt, they ſtode vp perchaunce,
They looked one vpon another, They
turned them ſelues to yt Preſidentes of that
Councell, They held furth their hādes as if
they had ſomewhat to geaue, They bowed
 wt their bodies, They gaped & breathed, like
mē very deſyrouſe & willinge to Offer ſome
what: but ſpeake they durſt not. Who
then can tell vs, of their Meaninge? or who
can ſay, that thoſe Biſhops, by theſe Geſtures,
do Intend to call the B. of Rome, an
Vniuerſall bishop? For, A thouſand other
matters there are, which may lye in the
hart of man, before the vtteringe of which,
theſe Profers and Signes do goe.
            How can M. Iew. then, make vs vnderſtand
it, that the Offers which the Fathers
of the Chalcedō Councell made, were Proper
and Speciall tokens of the Title
Vniuerſal bishop, which they were readie to
call him by, And not of ſome other thinge?
Or how can he ſay, that not Callinge him
ſo in deede, they went yet about it to Call
him ſo? Thinketh he, that they had reſpect
ſo longe before, to his Honeſtie, And feared
to let the Title of Vniuerſall bishop to paſſe



their Lippes, leaſt M. Iew. ſhould be conſtrained
to yeld and Subſcribe, and that
therfore they Offered (no man I beleue
can tell how) to Call him ſo, but Called him
not ſo in deede.
            Suppoſe it M. Iewel (which is probable
enough, leaſt by deuienge my caſe, you
ſhould crst, Alas, then hath he loſt a good argument)
ſuppoſe I ſay, that A Catholike
were before you, And conſideringe your
owtward Behauior, with Relation had to
your Bookes, Or otherwiſe takinge Occaſion
or Indignation, would thinke you in
his conſcience, to be an Hypocrite and A
wrangler, And therewith Offer to call you
ſo: except he veter ſo much by expreſſe word
or writinge of his owne, Or conſent vnto
it, by sa
                  •
               e other mans mouth or hande,
cou
                  •
               d you, with all your Lerned Councell,
be able to change 
                  〈◊〉
                therewithall, and ſay
that In deede he Called you not ſo, but yet
Offered ſo to doe? No ſurely, except ye had
A Familiar (which through his ſubtilitie of
Nature, is able to 
                  〈◊〉
                better of a mans
intent and meaninge, than the quickeſt perſon
of ſight and witt in all the word) no
mortall Creature is able to know what is
within a man.
            
               
Returne then, with your conſideration,
vnto the fathers of the Chal
                  •
               edon Co
                  ••
               
               cell.
If they Offered to Call ye B. of Rome
vniuerſall Bishop, either that was perceaued
by their wordes, either by their writinge,
or ſome other plaine Signe. If 
                  〈◊〉
               
writinge, that confirmeth the Popes Supremicie
better, then if they had but ſpokē
it, becauſe it tarieth longer, and teſtifieth
plainer. If by wordes, then vndoubtedly
they Called him ſo. But, if they made
but a Profer, and did it not in deede, who
could tell you, that their Profer had ſuch a
Senſe and Meaninge in it? whereas it is
impoſſible to know particularly, what an
other thinketh, except it be vttered of the
partie him ſelfe, by ſome word, Or Signe
as good as his word? And byſides this, If
you can ſay, that their Secret mind and
wil was ſo bent and diſpoſed toward the
B. of Rome as you imagine, how ſo euer
you came by ye knowledge, Yet this is manifest,
ye it muſt not be abſurd for vs to geaue
him a Singular Reuerence and 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
whō ſo Great & Graue a Councel thought
in their hartes, to excell in authoritie aboue
others, & therfore ſhould Offer (to ſignifie
their good will) to cal him Vniuerſal bishop


               
though in deede they Called him not ſo.
            But who is the Author of this falſe tale
                  •
               
M. Iewel. where had he it? Of S. Gregorie,
as he ſayeth. But doth S. Gregorie ſay
ſo? be not theſe his very wordes: Nomen
OBLATVM eſt, the name was OFFERED?
Doth it not ſerue the purpoſe of
which he ſpeaketh in thoſe Epiſtles, that
the Name was in deede geauen to his Predeceſſors?
For he ſayeth, that they neuer conſented
to reaceue it. But how could this be,
except that very Name, which they refuſed,
had ben Offered? for if they did but Offer to
cal him ſo: then did they not yet ſo cal him.
& not callinge him by the name,The forſayed ſhift vtterly taken awaie. how could
the other well refuſe, that, which at all was
not vttered? But that this ſhift of Interpretation
may not ſerue you, marke what S.
Gregorie writeth vnto the Biſhop of Conſtantinople.Lib 4. epiſt. 38.
            
            VVere not the Biſhops (as your
holineſſe knoweth) of this Apoſtolike
ſee,The B. of Rome called vniuerſal. Oblato honore.
                (which by Gods diſpoſinge I ſerue
and attend) called (by the reuerend
Coūcel of Chalcedō 
               VNIVERSALES
VNIVERSAL, by an Honor or
Name (not ſought for, but) Offered?
            
               
Here M. Iewel ye haue, that the B. of
Rome were called ſo. S. Gregory teſtifieth
it, his Authority you ſeeme to regard &
honor, eſpecially in this matter of Vniuerſall
Bishop. Ergo your Aſſertion is falſe, folowing
the very word and Title, which ſo
Cowhartly, and yet Braggingly allwaies
you driue vs to finde. And now therefore
you muſt Subſcribe. Except you will flee
from the word, vpon which you haue hitherto
ſo much ſticked, vnto your Meaning
vpon the word. Which we woulde ſayne
haue you to do: but thē, you could not crake
as you haue done, by ſetting forth your ſelfe,
vnder this bare Title of vniuerſall Bishop
or Head. &c. which now being found out againſt
you, you begin to ſeke more rome becauſe
you are pinched, and to extende this
word CALLED to ſignify, SALVTED,
INTITLED, PROCLAIMED, but
this Shift is not yet ſo currant. Howbeit,
great feare there is, leaſte after an other
boke ſet forthe as big as this whiche already
is made, by much turning of wordes, y
                  •
               
will more often vſe INTITLED and
PROCLAIMED in ſteade of Called,
that the queſtion may be, not what was thē
               
                  •
               one, but what OPENLY and Ordinarily


               
was INTITLED and PROCLAIMED.
            
            But let vs cōſider a plainer place againſt
you, and ſo diſcouer an other maner of ſhifting.
You ſticke vpon the bare F
                  •
               ame, and
as long as the Equiualent, and n
                  •
               t ye ſame
which you ſpecified, is brought forth, ye inſult
ſtill and egge your Aduerſarye. What
wil you ſay now then, whē it ſhalbe plainly
ſhewed? Athanaſius, Iſchyriō, Theodorus
ſaluted S. Leo in three ſundry Epiſtles, by
the name of Vniuerſall Patriarche: Ergo
your Aſſertion is falſe and you muſt Subſcribe.
How auoid you? Mary ye cōfeſſe
it to be true.
            But of that whole number of ſixe hundred
and thirty Bishops,Iew. 298 there aſſēbled, I trow M.
Harding is not wel able to shew, that any one
euer Saluted or Called him ſo.
            Why doe you take your queſtion ſo, that
three honeſt mens Teſtimonies are not ſufficient,What a 
                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
but you muſt haue a whole Coūcell
to call the Pope Vniuerſall Biſhop, Or els
ye wil not be conſuted? You aſked, whether
the B. of Rome was then called vniuerſall Bishop.
               Iew. 
                     ••
                  0
And you limited it not within the cō
               paſſe
of Generall Councell. Therfore if ye



will ſticke to the wordes, you muſte Subſcribe,
Or els confeſſe, that this was one of
the ſhiftes which you kept in ſtore.
            
               But why ſhould you refuſe the Teſtimonies
of Athanaſius, Iſchyrion, and
Theodorus, ſuppoſing that it were true, ye
in the Councel of Chalcedon, no one called
the B. of Rome Vniuerſall Bishop? The one
of them, Athanaſius, was a Prieſt, the other
two were Deacons. But what of that? You
make light of them as though they were
ſome abiectes of the world, and ſay:
            A ſtraunge Prieſt,Iew. 298 and two poore Deacons
in their Priuate Sutes for their Goodes and
Legacies, named Leo the Vniuerſall Bishop.
            
               Ergo, within ſix hundred yeares 
                  〈◊〉
               
Chriſte, there were that Called and 
                  〈◊〉
               
the B. of Rome Vniuerſall Bishop. B. 
                  〈◊〉
               
ye except againſt Prieſtes, and Pore Deacons,
and ſuche as haue 
                  〈◊〉
                and 
                  〈◊〉
               
ye will allowe none of the Cleargy for a
witneſſe, except he be a Biſhop, and ſit in a
generall Councell. Or a 
                  〈◊〉
                and 
                  〈◊〉
               
Prelate. Ergo, here againe ye sticke not to
the wordes of your queſtion, but 
                  〈…〉
               
a Copy of another kind of your 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            
               
How ſay ye now then to S. Peter? He
was Biſhop of Rome, and he was called
Heade of the Churche: Ergo, a Biſhop of
Rome was called Head of the Churche.
Haue ye any ſhift for this argument?
            But M. Harding knoweth the caſe is mouedIew. 308
not of S. Peter, but ſpecially and namely
of the bishop of Rome.
            But Maſter D. Harding inferreth, that
S. Peter was Biſhop of Rome: ergo your
Aſſertion is falſe, if you ſticke to the bare
Letter of your queſtion, and inuent not
ſome otherway to eſkape by. But when
wil M. Iewel be to ſeeking? For I dout
not (ſayeth he)
            But M. Harding doth remember,Iew. 309 that the
queſtion that lieth betweene vs, riſeth not of
any Extraordinary Name once or twice geuen
vpon ſome ſpeciall Affection:Shiftinge and lying. but of the
vſuall and knowen Title of the Bishoppe of
Rome.
            How ſhoulde he remember that, whiche
you were not ſo Gentle or Wiſe, to tel him
of? Haue ye not alwaies preſſed hym, with
bringing forth of the Name of vniuerſal Bishop▪
               
Haue ye not miſliked with him for
it, that he would not be bound to ſhewe the
Name, though he brought as much in ſenſe



as the Name importeth?
            This haue ye done through your whole
Aunſwer with extreme Craking and Inſultation.
And now, when to ſatiſfy your
fantaſticall requeſt, he hath alleaged the very
Names and Titles, which you vaunted
your ſelfe ſo much vpon, as thoughe they
were neuer able to be found in any wryter:
ye flee to the Interpretation and Limitation
of your queſtion, and ſtick not to ye plain
and Grammatical conſtruction of it.
            And now (ſee the vanity) your ſelfe are
able to bring forth good Authoritye, where
ſome Biſhop of the worlde was called vniuerſall
Patriarch,
               Iew. 30
                     •
                   Hipocrite. 
               and that, not by shifting of
Termes one for another, but in plaine, manifeſt
and expreſſe wordes, and ſuche as in no
wiſe, may be denied.
            
            Say you ſo? Why then haue you, all this
while, made ſuch a matter of findinge oute
theſe Termes vniuerſal bishop, and hed. &c.
as though you would ſtraight waies ſubſcribe
and yeld, if you might therein be anſwered.
And why ſay you ſo conſtantly in
an other place, This Name is the verye thing
that we deny. If your ſelfe haue the places
for that purpoſe already prepared & gathered
(vndoubtedly to the Greate Praiſe ofIew. 
                     •
                  06.


               
your Note Boke) why doe you with ſuche
brauery demaund them of your Aduerſaries?
Or with extreme Iniquitie, make
a Tumult and Stur in mens conſciencies
for that word, in which your ſelfe do know
you are but a Bragger? For, if the Biſhope
of Conſtantinople were called an Vniuerſall
Patriarch & caet. how could you miſtruſte,
but as much and with more reaſon, might
haue bene ſayed of the B. of Rome, which
was (as you confeſſe) the Cheife of the
four Patriaches? Or how could you be ſo
earneſt, in reprouinge of that Title, which
your wiſedome confeſſeth (for a Surpluſage
to ſhew your greate learning and ſtudy)
to haue bene geuen to baſer perſons
then the B. of Rome is?
            If your Conſcience were open, through
your owne ſincere and true Dealing, Or if
by the Authorities, which we ſhould allege,
you were conſtrayned, outwardly to expreſſe,
what ye conceaue and cōcele within:
then ſhould it be euident in ſight, that ye
paſſe no more for the Names of Vniuerſall
Biſhope, Or Head of the Vniuerſal Church,
though a thowſand Fathers had geauen
them to the B. of of Rome: then you doe
regard the Termes, Realy, Verely & truly


               
with ſuch like,M. Iew. ſeketh not peace and concord, but con
                     •
                  ē
                  tion and ſ
                     ••
                  ite. when they are by Catholike
writers attributed to Chriſtes body in the
Sacrament. And like as whē theſe words,
Principality, Primacy, Cheife Rule or
Ruler, are proued to haue ben ſpokē by old
Fathers of ye See of Rome, or B. there: you
turne your ſelfe to ſome dictionary or Etimologicō
of your owne or others,Iewel. 244 & ſay, A
Principal Church, is ſometime vſed of the Fathers
in this ſenſe, to ſignifie a Ciuil dominiō
or principalitie of a Citie. Againe, Primatus
is vſed for any ſuperioriti or prefermēt aboue
others: Againe, Princeps, in the latin tōge is
oftē vſed for a mā,
               245 
               that, for his vertu or rome,
or any ſingular qualitie, is to be had in eſtimatiō
aboue others:
               246 To be ſhort, wheras you
ſay, being preſſed to S. Ambroſe authoritie
which called Damaſus y• B. of Rome,Iew. 306 
               The
Rector & gouernor of ye church. Let vs
cōſider whether the ſelf
                        •
                     ame form of ſpeach,
haue bē applied to any other in like ſort.
                By
which ſhift, you ſatiſfie ye cōmō readers, vntil
you be againe anſwered to your greater
cōfuſiō: ſo, hauing in your boſō, Iam ſure,
lik diſtinctiōs & expoſitiōs, wher Vniuerſal
B. & Head of the church, are ſundry wayes
vſed, you wold neuer (if you had ben aquiet

                  〈◊〉
                & louer of truth) ſo lōg haue cōtinued,



in requiring thoſe ve
                  •
               y Termes to be allege
                  •
               ,
which, as you do expound them, proue
not to you ſufficiētly ye Popes Supremicy.
            You affirme,194 that, in deede in a kinde of
ſpeach, both Rome and Antioche, and other
great Cities, famous for Religion, may be called
the Head and Spring of the Goſpel. And
what ſhal let you then to turne thē to phraſes,
whatſoeuer Titles be found attributed
to the B. of Rome: & ſo, by a kind of ſpeach,
to make that Common which is Singular?
Wherby it is manifeſt that ye maintain Cō
               tention,
and put thoſe thinges forth, which
you know to be Nedeleſſe and Weake, and
Feeble, only to try perchaunce the ſtrength
of your Aduerſaries, to the Commēdation
of your owne Learning, Or Vttering of yt
Notes which ye haue gathered, Or to oppreſſe
your Anſwerer wyth multitude of
words and quarels, yt for the very heaps of
them, being either not Anſwered at all, Or
anſwered not ſo ſpeedily, you might triūph
i
                  •
                y• meane ſpace, wt ſome probability. For,
when y• Catholikes alleage Termes of like
force and Equiualent, then wil you haue no
other but the Names of Vniuerſall Bishop
and Head &c and then the Name is the thing
that you deny.
               From o
                     •
                  e corner to an other.


               
And when thoſe ſelues ſame very NAMES
are brought before you, then ye make as
though it were no harde matter to haue
founde them out, but then bring you the
lyke of your owne Motion: and then you
run to Limitations vpon your queſtion,
and to Shiftinge frome one point to another,
declaringe thereby, that your ſenſe
only is to be cōſidered, although ye peeked
the quarell againſt the Word. But where
will you ſtaie your ſelfe?
            For if it were proued, in moſt ample
manner, with al Conditions and Circumſtances
(as you by Shiftinge, haue nowe
added to the Principall queſtion) that, the
B. of Rome was not called, but Intitled
and Proclamed, not of Prieſts & pore Deacons,
but of ſome Riche Prelates ſitting in
GENERAL COVNCEL, and that,
not once or twiſe vpō fauor, but by an Vſuall
and knowen Stile: All this would not
conuert M. Iewel. For in the end of this
Article theſe be his wordes, Or rather his
difinitiue ſentence:
            Although that which the Pope claymeth,Extre
                     ••
                   ſhi
                     ••
                  .
were his very right, yet by his owne Iudgement,
he is whorthie to loſe it. For Pope
Gregorie ſaieth: Priuilegium meretur amittere,
qui abutitur poteſta
                  •
               e.Iew. 31
                     •
                  
                He that abuſeth



his authoritie, is worthie to loſe his priuilege.
And Pope Siluerius ſayeth: Etiam quod habuit
amittat, qui quod non accepit, vſurpat.
He that vſurpeth that he receaued not, let
him looſe that he had.
            Be it ſo. He, for his own part deſerueth.
Like as the Temporal heades and Princes
of the world, whē they doe not their office,
are worthie of loſinge it. But who ſhall
depoſe them? It muſt be done by Law, and
not by Inſurrection. And vntil lawful proceſſe
againſt them be ended, the Common
Wealthes are bound to obey them, be they
neuer ſo vnworthie. Yet the Princes are
made by men, and raceaue Authoritie, not
immediatly from God, but of the Cōmon
Wealth which doth chooſe them. But the
Pope, whome Chriſt him ſelfe (without
Conſent of men goinge before, or voyce
of y• world) hath made Head of his Church,
throughout the whole worlde: who ſhall
take his Priuilege frome him, if he ſhould
be thereof vnworthie?
            For the Prerogatiue and chiefe Authoritie
geauen by God, muſte continew,
what ſoeuer the partye his merites are,



The Apoſtle alſo ſaieng:
            There is no power except it be frō
God: and obey you,Rom. 13. Prepoſitours and
ſuch as are ſet ouer you.Heb. 13.
            
            And if the choſen of God,1. Reg. 24 King Dauid
hauinge Saull at a vantage, beſought
God to ſtaye his handes, that hym ſelfe
might not kill hym ſweringe, that, As
trewlye as GOD liueth, excepte God
ſtroke hym, or hys tyme were come to
dye, or he ſhould be deſtroyed in Battayle,
he would not lay hāds vpon the Anoynted
of God: And if our Sauiour Chriſte commaunded
the Iewes,
            To doe that which the Scribes and
Phariſies dyd ſaye vnto them, though
their lyuing and behauiour otherwiſe
was ſo euill, that he charged them, not
to doe as they dyd,
            who dare be ſo bould, as hurte Or diſſobeye,
the Anoynted of God, The Higheſt
Biſſhoppe in all Chriſtendome, the Succeſſour
of S. Peter, lawfullye sutttrg in
Chaire and Place, of Inſtructinge and
gouerning the Faithfull?



Wil the Superintendētes of the Church of
England doe it? By what law and reaſon?
Mary, y• Canon law ſhalbe brought furth,
11. quaeſt. 2. p
                     •
                  iuilegium. and 25. quaeſt. 2. Sic
decet & caet. And M. Iewel ſhal alleage
a Gloſe or make a Gloſe vpon it, Of which
the whole Fraternity muſt cōclude, that if
it were neuer ſo much proued, that the B.
of Rome, was Called in the ſix hundred
yeres after Chriſt, Head of the Vniuerſall
Church, And though it were his verye
Right: Ye
                  •
               , for as much he abuſeth his
Priuilege, he deſerueth to leeſe it, And we
wil haue him no more Obeied. Fare well
he. And ſo breketh out this fourth Artitle,
into Preſumptuons Contempte of Lawfull
Authoritie.
            
                Thus haue we the cumpaſſe of M. Iewels
triflinge Proceſſe. Firſt, the Name
(he ſaieth) can not be found, and as long as
that Anſwer will hold, he Inſulteth and
Braggeth like Iewel him ſelfe.
            
                Then, the Calling of S. Leo Vniverſal
Biſſhope, in the Councel of Chalcedon,
was not a Calling of him ſo in deede, but
an Offering to cal him ſo. And ſo the teſtymony
of y• inward Goodwill is not ſufficiente,
but he muſte haue it declared by



worde of mouthe.
            Thirdly, poore Prieſtes and Deacons,
but none of the Councell of Chalcedon did
geue it. So by like none but Noble Perſonages,
and men of honor ſhall geaue
Voices.
            Fourthly, though S. Peter, the firſt 
Biſſhope of Rome, were ſo called, yet the
queſtion is not moued of him, but of the
Pope. So might the Succeſſour challenge
nothing, of the Prerogatiue of his Predeceſſour.
            Fyfthly, if it were geuen but once Or 
twiſe, it is no matter: becauſe our queſtion
(ſayth he) is of the Vſual Stile. So muſt we
bringe furth a Proclamation (I trow) Or
Scale for it, Or els nothing is done.
            Sixthly in a kinde of Speache the B.
of Rome, as alſo of Conſtantinople may be
called by the Title of VNIVERSAL.
So ſhail it be but a Phraſe only, and of no
weight Or Subſtance, what ſo euer be
alleaged for theſe Titles aforſayed.
            Laſt of all, if it were the Popes Right,
Yet is he worthy to leeſe it. And ſo it

                  •
               ooteth no more, to Reaſon of this queſtion,
for that they haue done, they wil not

                  〈◊〉
               : Such is theyr finall determination.



By which way of violence and force, if the
cauſe of Religion may be folowed, ye will
be to ſtronge (M. Iewel) not only for Oppreſſed
Catholikes in theſe your proſperous
daies, but allſo againſte quiet Catholikes,
where they liue with the loue of their
Soueraignes. But if this muſte needes
ſeeme vnreaſonable in Profeſſors of a new
Goſpel, which take vpon them to direct vs
by the expreſſe woorde of the Lorde in the
Right knowledge of all Truthe and Honeſty:
I will truſte, that this Detection of
you their Chiefe man of Warre, Shifting,
Striuing, Craking, Diſſembling, Lying,
Triumphing. &c. will cauſe
the Indifferent Reader, to
Beware of M. Iewel.
(❧
               ❧
               ❧)
            Thus endeth the First
Booke.
         
         
            
            THE
SECOND
Booke, Declaring by more
Speciall Detection of M.
Iewels behauiour, that it is
needeful to BEWARE
of hym.
            
               THE proper Conueiaunce
and Art, which M. Iewel
hath vſed in the foreſayed
Articles, I haue for the
ſpeciall poyntes of thoſe
queſtiōs, ſhortly and ſufficiently
diſcouered.
            For which his conueyance, allthough
the Iudifferent or Waueringe myndes,
ſhould wiſely BEWARE of him, and his
owne frendes and deere brothers the Proteſtantes,
myght with a good zeale require



of him, either to begyn a Newe Challenge,
Or defende him ſelfe better in the Old:
And thoughe I my ſelfe might, for theſe
cauſes, thinke enough to be already ſayed
againſte him: Yet becauſe Affection and
Loue is not only blinde in it ſelfe, but darkeneth
alſo the ſighte of vnderſtandinge
and Reaſon, that his Fauorers will not
lightly perceaue his foule faſſhions, except
they appeere both Many, and Great, and
Notable: And becauſe the weaker and
doubtfuller in ſuch mater, are not ſatiſfyed
with ſuffiente, but require abundauce and
euidencie: I will for theſe two ſortes of
mens ſakes, declare yet further and plainer,
what Worthineſſe is in M. Iewels
Replye.
            
               
               Of the Common Places which M.
Iewel hath ouercharged his boke
withal, in the firſt four Articles.
CAP. I.
               FIrſt, concerning the outward ſhewe
only and face of his boke, it is ſo great
in quantitye, ſo faire in ſight, and ſo
Liuely (as I may ſay) by reſō of many
Allegations and Authorities, out of
Councels, Fathers, Hiſtories, Law Ciuil
and Canon, and the Gloſe alſo therevpon:
that it cummeeh very quickly into ones
minde, to thinke: that, a matter of nothing,
ſhould not increaſe to ſuch bygnes, nor an
euil fauored cauſe ſo well be ſet furth, nor
Auncient witneſſes be ſo thickly brought
out to no purpoſe.
               And this I take to be one knacke of his
cunning, that he prouided to make his Replie
in ſuch a forme, as might dehort ſome
frome the Reading (becauſe of the length
thereof not agreinge with theyr greate
buſineſſe) And amaſe other in reading (becauſe
it cumbreth the memory with ſo many
matters) And gette ſome renoune and



praiſe to his owne ſide, thoughe there folowed
no Reading (becauſe it wil be commonly
beleued, that, I trow) in makinge
ſo many wordes, he is not to ſeeking of
an Anſwer.
               And if he will not haue me to call it, a
knacke of his Cunning, then ſurely will
it be proued to be, a Lacke of diſcretion: ſo
that he ſhall not eſcape iuſt reproche, either
for his craftines, if he perceyued it, either
for his dulneſſe, if he did not conſider it.
For the biggneſſe of a boke is not reproueable,
if accordinge to the nature of the
matter, the handeling of it be proportioned.
But, whoſoeuer increaſeth his worke
aboue meſure, by taking in that which is
not agreable: either he is to wiſe for the
Simple, by making them conceiue muche
of that whiche is litle: Or he is not wiſe
enough in the iudgement of the Learned,
by puffinge that vp to a greate quantitie,
which would, by reaſon, be leſſe in Sight
and more in Subſtance.
               But lete vs, firſte, make our Obiection
and alſo proue it, and then, afterwardes,
conſyder whether it dothe argue, a
Craftines rather, or a dullnes to be founde



in M. Iewels Inuention.
               I laye it then vnto your faulte, that
ye haue ouercharged your Booke, with
Common Places and Impertinent.
               And, becauſe I woulde be, mye ſelfe,
the better perceyued, and you alſo thereby,
ſhoulde be directed, the more Orderly
to make your Anſwer: I take your
Common Places to be of two kindes.
               The one conſyſtethe of Thinges,
which we maye vſe as well as you: And
to the vſynge of whiche, you doe peeke
an Occaſion out of the Queſtion it ſelfe,
though you neede not yet to vſe it at all,
or els more Diſcretelye, ſhoulde haue
vſed it.
               And theſe I call Common Places.
               The other conſiſteth of ſuche Matters,
as we can not, or maye not vſe,
and whiche you alſo ſhould, at no tyme,
followe, thoughe it be moſte familiar
with you. And if at any other tyme you
might, yet in the caſe of theſe Articles
whiche are proponed, you had no occaſion
to vſe them.
               And theſe I cal digreſſions, not becauſe



the foreſayed places might not runne vnder
that Title: but becauſe in them, you
may pretend ſome excuſe, and here you can
bringe none.
               To begyn therfore with your Common
places, you are ſurely no niggard of them.
Out it gothe, vpon neuer ſo litle occaſion,
that which you haue gathered, and if none
at all be expreſſely offered, yet you will
make one, rather then not vtter your cunning.
Will you haue a fewe notes of them?
I could ſerue you, with a hundred and
odde, gathered out of one halfe only of your
boke and no more. But theſe few, which
I ſhall recken may be ſufficient, bothe to
proue my obiection true, and cauſe you to
amend that fault hereafter.
               
                  Iewel. Pag. 15 Euery man ought to prepare himſelfe,before
he come to God.
                  Iewel. Pag. 25. The example of Chriſt muſt be folowed.
                  Iewel. Pag. 28 The company of Communicantes was called
Communio.
                  Iewel. Pag. 28.The wicked Communicate togeather.
                  Iewel. Pag. 45. Small faultes are not to be contemned.
                  Iewel. Pag. 52. Heretikes haue alleaged Cuſtome.
                  Iewel. Pag. 66. Deceauers blaſe their doings by the names



of famous men.
                  Iewel. Pag. 89 The company of Prieſtes was greate in the
old time.
                  Iewel. Pag. 94 The people in old time did Communicate.
                  Iewel. Pag. 101 We muſt be obedient to God.
                  Iewel. Pag. 107 We muſt not hang vpon the authoritie of
mortall men.
                  Iewel. Pag. 111 Chriſtes inſtitution muſt be kept.
                  Iewel. Pag. 118 Gods holye ſpirite bloweth, where it thinketh
good.
                  Iewel. Pag. 127 The fewer places muſte be expounded by
the moe.
                  Iewel. Pag. 131 The myſteries were kept in both kindes.
                  Iewel. Pag. 141 Manye abuſes haue bene about the myſteries.
                  Iewel. Pag. 143 Hauing Gods woorde we want no authoritye.
                  Iewel. Pag. 162 All the Eaſt ſpake not one tounge.
                  Iewel. Pag. 167 Religion came not firſt from Rome.
                  Iewel. Pag. 171 God loketh not for vtterance of voyce.
                  Iewel. Pag. 181 The people of Hyppo ſpake Latin.
                  Iewel. Pag. 204 Appeale is to be made to the Churche in doubtfull caſes.
                  Iewel. Pag. 210 Great profite in reading of Scriptures.
                  Iewel. Pag. 216 Ignorance is the mother of errours.
                  Iewel. Pag. 229 One Bishop muſt be in one City.
                  Iewel. Pag. 230 Vniuerſa Fraternitas, the whole brotherhoode,
ſignifieth the companie within euerie
ſeuerall and particular Dioceſe.
                  
                     
241 Princes haue ben fauorable to Biſhops.
Papa in old tyme ſignified Father, and
was geuen generallie to all Biſhopes.
                  242 The prerogatiue to ſit before other, is
called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  259 In the old tymes, men that ſtode in doubt,
ſought vnto the beſt learned.
                  263 The Biſhopes of other Countries called
the Biſhope of Rome brother, or felow.
                  280 It is lawful for Biſhopes, to excōmunicat.
                  281 Biſhopes haue the alowing, of the Electiō
or conſecration of Biſhops.
                  295 Euery great Metropolitane Citie within
her owne Prouince, may be honored with
the Title of Mother Church.
                  300 The Title (Vniuerſall) hath bene geuen to
ſome Biſhoppes.
               
               Theſe be your Common places, M. Iewell:
but theſe, by the third part, are not all
that I doe finde in halfe your boke. And if
they were all, yet they might haue occupied,
by very many partes, leſſe roome
in your Booke, then they doe. What
cauſe then, why you dilated them ſo much?
               Let vs come to one or two particulars.
That Chriſtes Inſtitution is to be kepte, is
one of your Common places. An other is.



                  That the people of old tyme did Communicate
with the Prieſt.
               
               The firſt of theſe you ſpeake muche for,
and allege to that purpoſe:
               
                  Iew. 25 S. Paul. 1. Cor▪ 11.
                  Iew. 60 S. Hierom in. 1. Cor. 11.
                  Iew. 91 S. Matthe. 26.
                  Iew. 111 S. Chryſoſtom. Ho. 61 Ad Po. Antioch.
                  Iew. 143 S. Cyprian. li. 2. Ep. 3. and, ad Iubaianum.
                  Iew. 144 And again, S.Cyprian. li. 2. Ep. 3.
                  Iew. 150 S. Hierom ad Galat. li. 3. ca. 5.
S. Hylar. ad Conſt. Auguſtum.
S. Auguſtin. de vnitate Eccleſiae.
And, S.Cyprian once againe: lib. 2.
Epi. 3.
               
               Beſides Indignations and Inuectiues
of your owne againſte the Catholikes in
this matter, as thoughe they coulde not abide
Chriſtes Inſtitution.
               
                  
In folowing of which Place, if you had
ſpared your ſelfe and beſtowed that Tyme
and Labor in defynyng of Chriſts Inſtitution
vnto vs, which you waſted to no purpoſe
in prouing that it muſt be obſerued, it
had ben wel ſpent of you and as we Looked
for: but to proue that which is not
doubted of, and to leaue the doubt vnreſolued,
which ōly is moued, it ſerueth to make
the Replie Greate, but not to make it perfite
and full.
               
                  The ſecond you proue by S. Iames Lyturgie,
                  Iew. 11.
Abdias in vita S. I homae,30. & S. Matthei,
Iuſtinus Mart. Apol. 2.37. Dionyſ. Eccl. Hiſt.
cap. 3. S. Baſil. Lyturgie,
                  38. 
                  S. Chriſoſtomes
Lyturgie.
                  42. S. Ignatius ad Philad. S. Paul. 2.
Cor. 10.78. S. Hierome 1. Cor. 11. S. Chryſoſt. 1.
Cor. Hom. 27.94. S. Auguſt. In Ioan. tract. 26. S.
Chryſoſtom 1. Cor. Hom. 24. S. Cyprian ad
Magnum. S. Cyril in Ioan. lib. 11. cap. 26. S.
Hierom in Eccl. cap. 3. Iuſti. Martyr Apol. 2.
Concil Agathēſe cap. 60. epiſt. Decret. Syricij.
S.Hierom in 1. Cor. 11. S.Ambro. 1. Cor.
11. Canon Apoſt. cap. 9. And by the Canon
law it ſelfe, the authoritie whereof you doe
deſpiſe: De Conſecr. diſtin. 2. Peracta. diſtin.
2. Epiſcopus diſtin. 2. Si non. diſtin. 2. Si quis.
               
                  Byſides theſe you alleage. S. Clement



Ep. 2. S. Auguſtin. lib. 2. de ſermon. Dom. in
monte. S.Auguſt. in pſal. 16. Clemens. Stro.
lib. 1. S. Chryſoſ. 1. Cor. Hom. 27. S.Chryſoſt.
2. Cor. Hom. 18. S. Gregori Dialog. lib. 2.
cap. 23. And when you haue al done, no mā
doubteth of it.
               
               What meaneth it then, that you in ſo
Many Places, ſo Abundantly, and ſo Exactly,
haue commended and ſet furth theſe
two Concluſions? Thought you the Catholikes
to be ſo wicked, that, they would contemne,
the expreſſe Inſtitution of Chriſt?
Or to be ſo ignorant of ſo cōmon a matter,
as in the primitiue Church, was, and yet 
now ſtill is, the Communion? Thē are yo
                     •
                  
ſurely, either euill diſpoſed, or ſimply practiſed.
But thought you it good, to vtter
(howſoeuer it were) what you had to ſay for
theſe matters? Verily then,Of al naught choſe the leaſt, and it would be amended. 1 either you hoped
thereby to make ſome thinke well of
your Cunning (and that was a crafty Inuention)
Or els without further reſpect to
any your Vantage, yow buſied only your
ſelf in a Needeleſſe Matter: And that was
a plaine Vanitie.
               Now, if it was not, neither for lack of
Conſcience in you, nor for lack of Intelligence,
that you haue taken ſo greate a paine



to proue moſte vndoubted and cleare Concluſions:
it remayneth that you Anſwer my
Obiection by ſome likely cauſe and reaſon,
And ſhew, wherefore you haue bene ſo
Longe and Tediouſe in copiouſe and oft
repeted prouinge of a plaine Concluſion.
Vntill which tyme it is caſie to be perceyued:
that theſe Common Places of yours
keepe a Vaine and Superfluous ſturr in
your Replie to D. Harding.
               *Note.

                     COncerning this later Common place ſo
lernedly proued by M. Iewel, beware
of this One Argument.
                     There was alwaies a Communion in
the Primitiue Church: Ergo there
was no Maſſe.
                     For as the world goeth now, this word
A Communion, doth ſignifie, either the act
of ſome receiuing togeather, either that proper
kinde of Seruice, which is now vſed
in England at the Miniſtration of the
Lordes Supper.
                     In the firſt of theſe, two ſenſes, true it is
that A Communion was I can not ſaie,
alwaies, but no inconuenience wil folow if
it be graunted that it was alwaies in the
primityue Church. And that it was very
Common and Ordinarie, the heape of the



Authorities by M. Iewel reherſed, doe
make for it.
                     In the ſecond: It was neuer knowen
in the primitiue Church: And no One of
al the places which M. Iewel hath gathered,
doth conte
                           •
                        e ſo much. Againe, concerning
the firſt: The Argumēt is very falſe.
For euen at theſe daies, A Maſſe and A
Communion doe agree in ſight together, at
ſuch tymes as the People receiue with the
Prieſt at the Altar.
                     Concerning the ſecond: the Argument is
good but the Antecedent can neuer be proued:
that in the Primityue Church ſuch (a
Single and Simple, and Irreuerent,
and Dead) Miniſtration of the Dyuine
Myſteries was vſed then, as is taken vp
in the Engliſſhe Communion at this preſent.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of M. Iewels Digreſsions.
CAP. II.
               Concerning now ye other kinde of your
cōmō places, which I doe rightly call
Digreſsions, they are ſo frequented
of you, as though ye founde ſome ſpeciall
Cumfort in them, after werineſſe takē
in other thinges: And they are ſo Outragious,
as though you went not for a Biſhope
of Sariſburie, but were ſome Slaūderous,
Fumiſſhe, And vnlerned Proteſtant: And
to the matter proponed they are ſo Impertinent,
that you may Lawfully be charged
with the fault, of increaſing your Replie
with them. Haue you ſo much Leaſure (M.
Iewel) to ſpend your labour, in Extrauagātes?
Or if your Leaſure ſerued you neuer
ſo much, haue you ſo litle diſcretion, to occupie
your tyme in naughtie and idle talke?
               In your Anſwer, to D.Hardinges Preface,
ſtraitewayes you peeke out of ye Gloſe,
(which is nor Scripture nor Canon,Iew. fol. 1 pag. 1 nor
Doctors ſentence) A Slaunder againſt the
Pope: And to make yt matter more odious,
you vtter it, as ſpoken by the Pope him



ſelf with his owne mouth, I can not err. &c.
Which in deed neither he euer ſayed, neither
they which ſpake it of him, toke in ſuch
ſenſe as you doe imagine.
               
                  Fol. 2. pag. 2. In the ſame anſwer, you
put D. Harding againe, in remembrance of
the Pope, and you ſpeake your pleaſure of
him, alleging A Gloſe for your authoritie.
               
                  Pagina 2. & 6. Of your Replie, Againe
yow be vp with the Pope.
               To what greate Purpoſe, Or vpon what
Occaſion, your ſelf perchaunce doe know:
but vnto vs, it ſeemeth an vnreaſonable
and ſhamefull matter, to Accuſe anie Perſon,
out of the Lawful Court,Out of Seaſon and Reaſon. And to ſpeake
againſt the Pope, Cardinals, Prieſtes
&c. when other queſtions are to be handeled.
               Your part and dutie had ben, to anſwer
vnto D.Hardinges Argumentes: And not
to turne your mynde to finding of Faultes.
Remember yet, how oft ye vſe that Lewde
figure, of ſpeaking againſt Thinges and
Perſons out of place: As,
               
                  
                  Pag. 11 Againſt. The Clergie.
                  Pag. 16 Againſt. Confeſſion, and Prieſtes.
                  Pag. 18 Againſt. The Scholemen.
                  Pag. 24 Againſt. The Ceremonies of the Church.
                  Pag. 39 Againſt. The B. of Rome.
                  Pag. 40 Againſt. The B. of Rome.
                  Pag. 52 Againſt. S. Hierome, Tertullian, Origen, & againſt Reliques.
                  Pag. 56 Againſt. Pope, Cardinals, Prieſtes.
                  Pag. 83 Againſt. Miracles.
                  Pag. 92 Againſt. Deuout anſwers of Prieſtes.
                  Pag. 189 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 195 Againſt. Aultars of ſtone.
                  Pag. 204 Againſt. The Clergie and Churche.

This maketh your Sermons plauſible, and re
                        
                           •
                        yſheth al your writinges
                  
                  Pag. 220 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 221 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 225 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 234 Againſt. Biſhopes and Prieſtes.
                  Pag. 236 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 248 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 249 Againſt. The Pope.
                  
                     
Pag. 258 Againſt. The Popes.
                  Pag. 259 Againſt. The Pope, and Scholemen.
                  Pag. 262 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 274 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 275 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 277 The Pope.
                  Pag. 278 Againſt. Bonifacius the Pope.
                  Pag. 288 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 289 Againſt. The Biſhope of Rome.
                  Pag. 297 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 310 Againſt. The Pope.
                  Pag. 317 Againſt. Scholemen.
                  Pag. 313 Againſt. The Pope.
               
               How thinke we then, may this be called a
Replie, (which is preſuppoſed to folow the
ſayinges of yt aduerſaries wt a iuſt anſwer)
Or an Infamous Libell rather (which the
lighter the heade is, yt ſoner it inuenteth to
make, & vtter abrode at all aduenture?
               Againe: Is it, thinke we, a litle ſpace in
a Boke, which is hable to conteyne ſo many
Excurſions, or Digreſſions? Theſe ſurely,
which I haue noted here, I finde within
ye cumpaſſe of fower Articles only: Out of
which, I know, I might gather many
mo
                     •
                  . If theſe digreſſions then, which haue



a Speciall fling againſt the Pope of Rome,
and ſometimes againſt the Clergie, amoūt
to ſo Greate a nūber, And if theſe, by them
ſelues alone, muſt needes grow to ſome bigneſſe,
(for Some of them continue halfe y•
ſide, ſome y• whole, & Some almoſte a leafe,
altogeatherout of the matter) I neede not
to reken vp any more, to confirme my Obiection:
and by theſe few, in reſpect, the wiſe
may ſone gather, what maner of old endes
and Shreddes, M. Iewells new Boke is
ſtuffed withal.
               But now, as in the foreſaied Common
Places, it was ſtraitwaies perceaued with
out further declaratiō, yt they were cōmō in
deed, & might ſerue the Catholikes, as wel
as the Proteſtantes: So in theſe, of which
we ſpeake, though I ſay it, yet that doth
not proue it, that they be digreſſions. How
then? muſt I goe through all and ſhew,
how they belong not to the queſtion proponed?
That would be to long and tedious.
Shall I refer all to the Readers
Diligence? Yet would not that ſatiſfie
either M.Iewell (if he diſdained it not) Or
Some other, whoſoeuer would take it vpō
him, but that it ſhould be anſwered: I
bring in my Obiections in A Mummery,



and Doloſus verſatur in generalibus, He that
walketh in Generalities,
                  Iew. 
                        •
                     61 
                  walketh not plainly.
Briefly therefore, I will bring furth foure
or fyue Examples, that if M. Iew. cā proue
thē to be no digreſſions, I may be licenſed
to Replie: And if he can not honeſtly denie
thē to be ſo, yt then he amend that fault, and
ſpeake more to the purpoſe hereafter.
               D. Har. by way of naturall reaſon ſaieth
thus in effect,Har. fol. 109. 
                  yt if God had ordeined, yt
in ye Church ſhould be ſundry heades
& Rulers, and none to be conſtituted
to be ouer other, then he ſhould ſeeme to
haue ſet vp a Confuſion and an Anarchie,
(which is, the deſtruction of all Common
Weales) But he is moſt wiſe, & moſt tender
alſo ouer his Church: ergo, he hath (by all
likelihode) appointed her one Heade & Gouernour.
Ergo the Supremicie of one man
the ſucceſſour of S. Peter and Chiefe of all
Biſhopes, muſt not be thought abſurde.
What anſwer you to this reaſon, M. Iew?
               You tell vs of A ſpeciall Gloſe of Petrus
Bertrandus vpon the Decretales,Iew. 258 The firſt Example of an Abſolute Digreſſion. that: Non
videretur Dominus diſcretus fuiſſe &c. Our
Lord ſhould haue ſemed not to haue ben diſcrete
& puident (that I may ſay it with reuerence



of him) except he had left one ſuch vicare
behind him.
               
                  Yow gather further, out of ye ſame Gloſe,
Chriſto data eſt omnis poteſtas &c. Al maner
power in heauē and earth is geauen to Chriſt:
therfore the higheſt Bishope which is his vicare,
hath the ſame power.
               
                  Againe, ye add more Gloſes, that: Papa poteſt
facere omnia, quae Chriſtus ipſe poteſt.
the Pope may doe, what ſo euer Chriſt hymſelfe
may do. And, Papae & Chriſti vnū eſt tribunal,
ye Pope & Chriſt haue one Cōſiſtorie.
               
                  And not content with this, you allege an
extrauagant, that ſpeaketh of a Cloſet in the
Popes breſt, and you tell vs of one: Whoſe
pleaſure may ſtand in ſteede of a Law, vnto
whome what ſo euer he doe, no man may ſay:
Domine, cur ita facis? ſyr, why doe you ſo?
               
                  And laſt of all, when you had ended now,
with Gloſes & Canons not vnderſtāded of
you,
                  Ye neded not to haue gone out of your Saie to 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſo 
                        •
                     urth at length in 
                        〈◊〉
                      moſt Shameful and open 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  you bring, out of ye cloſet of your owne
breſt, a certaine deſcriptiō of a ſtraūge Officer:
that neither doth exhorte nor teach nor
miniſter Sacrament, nor exerciſe diſcipline,
nor doth ye dutie either of Biſſhop, or of prieſt
Or of deacō, or anie other the meaneſt officer
of ye Church: but only taketh vpō him to Rule
& Gouerne the whole Churche. And ſo, wt
much a doe, endeth yt Digreſſion, without


                  
anie begynning at all made to the anſwer
of y• argumēt. Which, I praie you to cōſider.
               Is it not reaſon, M. Iew. yt for auoiding
of Confuſion, which quikly ariſeth in a multitude,
where no Order is, y• One be Chief
ouer all?Iew. 25
                        •
                     . 
                  Bertrandus (ſae you) hath a Special
gloſe &c. What haue Diuines to doe with
Bertrandus gloſe? Anſwer you the text of
the Argument.
               
                  Likewiſe they ſay,
                  Iew. 
                  Papa poteſt facere omnia
&c. That is an other gloſe, but why tell you
vs thereof, and vtter not rather a parte of
your aduiſe concerning ye quiet Gouerning
of ye Church?Iew. Again, Papae & Chriſti v
                        •
                     ū eſt
tribunal &c. They ye ſay it, know in what
true ſenſe they ſay it. But what is all this
to our queſtion? Now, as for ye Cloſet in ye
Popes breſt, & Domine, cur ita facis, except
your ſelf be he, to whom no man muſt ſay,
Syr, why doe you ſo? We may iuſtly oppoſe
you in it, Syr why made you this digreſſion?
And becauſe ye cā g
                     •
                  ue no reaſon for it,
thinke, yt a Cloſet would doe you good in
your breſt, to kepe your wittes 
                     〈◊〉
                   together.
               An other Exāple of a needleſſe digreſſion
is to be ſeen pagin. 288.
                  The ſecond example. For, whereas
D. Harding had ſayed, that Athanaſi
                     •
                  s and



Paulus, being depoſed by the Arrians aſſiſted
 wt the Emperour Conſtantius, were
reſtored to their roomes againe by Iulius
ye Pope, M. Iew. 
                     •
                  ppealeth to ye iudgement
& diſcretion of his Reader, yt it is vnlikely.
And why ſo? He anſwereth:
               For neither was Bonifacius the 8. Yet borne,Iew. 288
yt determined,Fine for Iewels. that the Emperour ſhould
be inferiour to the Pope: Nor Pope Innocentius
the third, or his Gloſe, that rated the matter
by good Geometricall proportion, and
pronounced, that the Pope, is fyfty & ſeauen
degrees aboue the Emperour, euen iuſt as
much, as the Sonne is aboue the Moone: Nor
Pope Alexander the third, that ſet his foote
in the Emperours necke.
               A fine digreſſion, a groſſe Reaſon. Haue
you not readen,Hiſt. Ec. lib. 9. ca. 30. Chryſ. li. 3. de Sa
                     
                        ••
                     rd. M. Iewell, that S. Ambroſe
controlled the Emperour? Doth not
S. Chryſoſtome ſay, that as the Soule excelleth
the Body: ſo doth a Prieſt paſſe in
dignitie, a Temporall Kinge? Yet was
neither Bonifacius the 8. nor Pope Innocentius
the third borne at thoſe dayes. What
new kinde of Logike is this? Gonifacius
was not borne, when Iulius lyued: ergo it
is not likely, ye Iulius did reſtore Athanaſius
to his roome, frō which heretikes, wt y•


                  
Emperous fauor, had pulled him downe.
               Again,New found L
                        •
                     
                     gyke. there was no Gloſe then to rate y•
degrees of y• magnitude of the Sōne aboue
y• Moone, & applie it to ye Pope & Emperour:
ergo ye Pope & ye Emperour are not of
vnlike quātitie, iuſt (I trow) as the Sōne &
Moone are both of one bigneſſe. If this be
tru, thē haue you directly āſwered: but ſeing
it is falſe, then haue you Idelly wandered.
               But let vs ſee an other Example.Iew. 251 A thirde Example. 
                  When
I heare) ſayeth M. Iewell) M. Hardinge to
geue vnto the Biſhope of Rome a power
peerleſſe (what doe ye then? Prepare your
ſelf, by liklyhode, to Anſwer him. No, no,
you haue other matters to thinke vpon)
me thinketh (ſay you) I heare Doctour
Durandus ſay: Hic eſt Melchiſedech &c.
This is Melchiſedech whoſe prieſthode is
not comparable vnto others. He is the
head of all Biſhopes, from whome al they
deſcend, as membres from the head, and of
whoſe fulneſſe al they receyue. Me thinketh
I heare, that is written by the Canoniſtes?
Dominus Deus noſter Papa, Our lord God
the Pope.
               In this point I beleue you wel M. Iew.
For,Hier
                        •
                     . as to S. Hierome and other (whoſe
thoughtes and mindes were ſtill vpon



God) that Trumpet of the laſt day ſeemed
to haue ſowned alwaies in their eares: ſo to
you, which haue ſuch affection to y• Gloſes
vpon yt Canon law, as though your Chiefe
Armour & Treaſure were in thē in making
war againſt y• Supremicie, Doctour Durand,
or Hoſtienſis,Whether doth M. Iewel meditate vpon Gloſes for deuotion or knowledge Or Charities sake. or Petrus Bertrādus,
or yt Gloſe vpō 
                  Vnam ſanctam de Maioritate
& obedientia, are ſo nigh at hart wt you & ſo
ready in your memory: y• for reſpect of them
you forgett ye preſent queſtion: And D.Har.
ſpeaking vnto you, it ſeemeth to you it is
Doctour Durand. Verily M. Iewell,
this is but your thinking, And whether it
be through your much S
                     •
                  udie, and emptineſſe
of heade, Or through egreneſſe of
Stomake and abundance of Choler, that
you be ſo diſtracted: the truth is, D. Har.
neither ſaied it. nor alluded in anie parte
vnto, Dominus Deus noſter Papa, that you
might thinck your ſelf to heare in him the
Canoniſtes ſpeaking. But you had a fanſie
to bring in thoſe wordes: And for that
cauſe, no Occaſion being geuen by D.Har.
your owne Thought was your Guyde
and Warrant, that you might ſeeme yet to
haue ſome mention made vnto you of D.



Durand and the Canoniſtes: leſt your digreſſion
ſhould haue ben to manifeſt.
               Now one Example more, and then an
end of this Chapiter. D. Harding to proue
that the Publike Seruice of England was
in Latine, when it was conuerted firſt
vnto the faith, he bringeth furth one Iohn
Archechaunter of S. Peters Church at
Rome: which was therefore interteined
in England, that he ſhould teach the courſe
of Seruice for the whole yere, as it was
done at S.Peters in Rome. Of which
this muſt folow by all reaſon, that if the
Church Seruice in England had ben in
Engliſh: An Archechanuter of Rome, ſo
great A Stranger, had ben nothing a meete
Perſon to teach naturall Engliſſhm
                     •
                  n, to
Singe, Write and Reade in their owne Naturall
Tongue. But this witneſſe,
ſayeth M. Iewell, cometh to Late. How
much to late? Mary fower ſkore yeres. For
Iohn the Archechaunter Liued in the tyme
of Pope Agatho in the yere of our Lord
680.
               
               Well this is hard dealing: but hereof
we ſhall ſpeake in an other Place. In the



meane ſeaſon, Iudge thou now indifferent
Reader, and ſpeake freely, hath M.Iewel
any occaſion geuē here vnto him, to medle
with the Popes Decrees or Gloſes vpon
them? None at all. For the Argument againſt
him comprehendeth no more, but,
that the Latine Seruice was in England
at y• begynning: and his anſwer ſtretcheth
no further, then to the plaine refuſall of the
witneſſe brought in, hecauſe he liued without
the cumpaſſe of the ſixe hundred yeres
after Chriſt. And this once ſaied he is at
an end.
               
                  Yet ſee, what a tale he will tell thee.
                  Iew. 189 For
Iohn the Archechaunter (ſayeth he) lyued in
the tyme of Pope Agatho, in the yere of our
Lord 680. in whoſe name this decree is written.
Sic omnes ſanctiones Apoſtolicae Sedis
&c.As much to the matter as the making of a Canon to the taking of a iorney Or the ſinginge at yorke to the ſenſe of a Rubrike in Law. Al the conſtitutions of the Apoſtolik ſee
muſt be receaued ſo, as the if they were confirmed
by the very heuenly voice of S.Peter.
Vnto ſuch a tyrannie the Church of Rome
at that tyme was growen. And the gloſe vppon
the ſame ſaieth: Papa ſanctitatem ſuam
recipit a Cathedra. The Pope receaueth his
holyneſſe of his Chaire. Therefore herein
M. Harding ſomewhat miſrekened him ſelfe.
               Wherefore I praie you? Becauſe of the
forſayed Decree writen in Pope Agatho



his name? Or the ſaying of the Gloſe thervpon?
No, it is plaine that you conclude,
D. Harding to haue miſrekened him ſelfe,
becauſe that Pope Agatho lyued in the yere
of our Lorde 680. and Iohn the Archechaunter
was of the ſame tyme. Howe
now then? Doe you proue, by the decree
and Gloſe which you full ſolemly haue alleaged,
that Pope Agatho lyued in the yere
of our Lord 680? But there is no mention
of ſuch matter in them. Wherefore then
haue you brought in the Decree and the
Gloſe? You diſſemble your Arte, or els the
conſequence and hanginge of this geare
together (if any at all had bene) woulde
haue appered.
               But in dede, there lacked a poynt of plain
deling. For whē you had once named Pope
Agatho, you ſhould haue vſed a Therefore
or ſome ſuch like ſaying: Becauſe I haue mē
                     tioned
Pope Agatho, therfor I wil tel the (gētle
Reader, what Decree was writen in his name,
and what the Gloſe vpon the ſame ſaieth. In
like phraſe, as a certaine Preacher, after he
had declared the fall of Adam, taken by the
eatinge of an Apple: Now good people
(ſayed he) becauſe I haue tolde you of an
Apple, which is an Indifferent thing: lette



vs ſpeake of the faſt in Lent.
               Now, if you diſdain (M. Iewel) to vſe
this Therfore of my prompting, & tie your
tale together wt it: there is no cauſe why
we may not infer a worſe againſt you. I
meane this: You haue therefore gone ſo
ofte byſide the right waie, to ſpeaking of
Gloſes and Ca
                     •
                  oniſtes, either of a feruent
Paſ
                     •
                  ion of Malice againſte the Catholike
Faith, which made you alwayes greedie
of diſgracing it, Either of a vaine loue towardes
your owne prayſe, which itched
you forwarde, to vtter your much reading.
               Againe, the Places which you, ſo ofte
and thicke,Expound your own meaninge, if we M. 
                        〈◊〉
                      haue miſſed. doe bring againſte the Pope,
are odious at the firſte hearinge: but when
they ſhall be Conſidered and Anſwered,
either they ſhall he founde not to be ſo as
you reporte, either els to haue a true and
Chriſtian ſenſe in them. Therefore to preſſe
vs wt them, out of Place & Seaſon, that we
ſhould not intend to anſwer thē, that they,
ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   away, for the preſent, without
Anſwer, might hinder our cauſe in the
iudgement of many a Reader, it was craftely
done and vnhoneſtlye. As, on the
other ſide, if you (God wote) meante no
harme at all, but without all immoderate



Affection or Crafty cumpaſſe, went plainely
and directly forwarde in your matters,
only that your Replie might be full: then
haue you done groſſelye and vnorderly.
To be ſhorte, whatſoeuer, and howſoeuer
the cauſes be, the Indifferent Reader
may iudge of ye Effect, and perceaue that
they are vndoubted Digreſſions, whiche
you haue made from the queſtion, to Canons
and the Gloſes vpon thē, and which
I burden you withall.
               And I burden you herewithall, ſo much
the more iuſtely and erneſtly,M. Iew. fin
                        ••
                     th fault with digreſſiōs becauſe your
ſelfe are ſo Rigorous, vppon leſſe Occaſion
or none at all, againſte D. Hardinge.
               For when he, in the Article of Priuate
Maſſe, did put it as a ſure Ground: that
the Maſſe or Vnbloudye Sacrifice, was
ſo manye wayes to the Proued, that
you coulde not withſtande the Catholykes
therein,Hard. Fol. 25. And towched ſhortelye in
a Leafe and a half, the Authorities which
dydde ſerue that Purpoſe, of whiche he
might haue made A Iuſte Treatiſe, and
neuer haue gone byſide hys Purpoſe: yet
that litle whiche he ſpake greeueth you ſo
much, that you ſay:
               
                  
It is a ſimple kinde of Rhetorike,Iew. p 12 to vſe
ſo large digresſions frome the matter, before
ye once enter into the matter.
               As who ſhould ſay, that the Author of
a Treatiſe might not take what Order he
would: Or that to ſpeake of the Maſſe,
were an Impertinent thinge to Priuate
Maſſe, Or that in the diſcuſſing of a compound
it were not lawfull, to open the nature
of ye ſimple: Or, when two things are
at one tyme (yet couertly) impugned, to
ſhew that the one of them ſtandeth vppon
ſure ground, thereby to diſcumforte the
Aduerſarie.
               After like ſorte of quarrelling, whereas
D. Harding concluded, that:
               Single Communion was not only
ſuffered in tyme of perſecution,Hard. 38. but alſo
allowed in quiet & peaceable tymes
euen in the Churche of Rome it ſelfe,
where true Religion hath euer bene
moſte exactly obſerued & caet.
               M. Iewel greately offended herewith
all, and merueilinge (as it were) at the
Matter:
               But why doth M. Hardinge (ſayeth he)
                  Iew. 5
                        •
                     
                  


                  
thus out of reaſon, ruſh into the Church of
Rome that was longe agoe?
               But, why ſay you ſo M. Iewel? Doth
not the Argument, which he maketh, require
that he ſhould commend that See?
               
                  For Rome itſelfe allowed (ſayeth he) pai
                     
                        •
                     ate
Maſſe: ergo it is the leſſe to be douted of.
Whiche Argument becauſe it will at theſe
dayes ſeeme the worſe, the more that it
dependeth of the Authoritie of that See:
could he doe leſſe, then bring one teſtimonie
in the praiſe thereof? and call you this
a Ruſshing in thereto out of ſeaſon? But
what ſhould he haue done by your fyne
aduiſe?
               
                  Mary, ſay you:
                  See the malice to ſpeake il of Rome, he taketh it to be to ſome purpoſe, and to ſpeake wel therof he cōpteth it out of ſeaſon. It had bene more to the
purpoſe to haue vewed the ſtate of the ſame
Church as it ſtandeth now.
               Had it ſo? And you being ſo Maliciouſly
and wickedly diſpoſed, would the Authoritie
thereof, as it is now, haue preuailed
with you? Lette anie indifferent man
be Iudge, whether it had bene aptlye done
of D. Harding, in warrantinge of Sole
Receauinge as alowed in Rome, to commend
y• Conſequēce by telling the faults
which may be founde in that Citie nowe,
rather then the teſtimony of the Biſhopes



of all Gallia: whiche within the ſix hundred
yeres after Chriſte, acknowleged,
that from thence came the Fountaine and
ſpring of theyr Religion.
               Againe, let any Indifferent man iudge,
whether M. Iewell hath Anſwered this
prayſe of the Biſſhoppes of Gallia geauen
ſo longe agoe vnto the Churche of Rome,
by his Accuſinge of Biſſhoppes, Cardinales,
and Prieſtes: Or by Lamentinge
the caſe of Rome as S. Bernarde dyd,
Or by makinge of Prouerbes vppon it,
as Euripides ſometyme dyd of the Citie
of Athens.
               Surely in this very place,Is this the liberty of the Goſpell, or the Charitye of your Sprites? where without
cauſe he reproueth his Aduerſarie for
commendinge out of ſeaſon (as he iudgeth)
the See of Rome, it is a greate ſhame
to Ruſhe into Diſcommendation of Biſſhoppes,
Cardinals and Prieſtes attendinge
vppon that See: And to like it better
to Examine and Iudge the Preſent

                     〈◊〉
                   of Rome, then to remember the
Auncient Dignitie and Vertue thereof,
to confirmation of ſuche pointes, as in
thoſe dayes were by it alowed,
               Other places and Signes th
                     •
                  re are,



out of which I doe gather, that M. Iewel
can not abide Digreſſions, as when he
ſayeth:
               This Queſtion is out of courſe.Iew. 149
               
               We may well ſuffer M. Hardinge to
wander at large in matters that relieue him
nothing.153. I
                     •
                   it were lawfull for others ſo to
doe, it were no greate Maſterie to write
Bookes.
               Again Theſe be none of the maters, that
lie in Queſtion.
               M. Harding maketh a longe diſcourſe of
the Apoſtles & caet.155. If he had ſhewed to what
end, we might the better haue knowen his
purpoſe.
               But to what end?160. For neither, it is denied
of vs, nor it is any part of our queſtion.
               Which thinge neither is denied by me,180.
nor any wiſe toucheth the queſtion.
               By theſe I am perſuaded, that he would
haue ye matter it ſelf folowed, and loueth
not to haue the time idelly beſtowed.
               Nowe though I am hable to declare,
that Doctour Hardinge in theſe pointes
hath done no otherwiſe then he lawfullye
might: Yet to lette that paſſe, I Conclude
agaynſte 
                     〈◊〉
                   Iewell, that of all



thinges it is moſt Abſurd in him that is ſo
Preciſe with other,Vnequall meaſure. to be wide and large towardes
him ſelfe in the ſelfe ſame kinde of
thing, for which (though vniuſtlye) he reproueth
other.
               And if,Iew. 153. as M. Iewel confeſſeth, it be no
great maſtery to wryte bookes, if it be lawful
to wāder at large in matters that relieue not:
Let no man wonder at the worthyneſſe of
him, which hath wrytten ſo mightye a Reply,
conſidering that he runneth ſo far into
Common Places, and Ruſheth ſo fowlye,
into diſpraiſe of Popes, Cardinals, Prieſts
and Church of Rome: whiche neither maketh
the new Goſpellers the honeſter mē,
neither deſtroieth the Preſent and Auncient
faith of the Catholike Church.
            
            
               ¶Of a thirde kinde of Common
Places, worſe then any of
the foreſaid two.
CAP. III.
               TO proue by examininge of ſundrye
winteſſes, A Truthe which is either
plaine by it ſelfe, Or els by the Aduerſary
confeſſed, it is an idle ſpending



and prolonging of tyme, to the ſhame
of the party that vſeth it: And no hurt at al
to the vnderſtanding of the Iudge or the
Court, by troubling them with ſome dout
or erroure. For in laboring to perſwade
but a Trueth, which euery man oughte to
cleaue vnto, be the vnderſtanding neuer
ſo cloſelye vnited therevnto by fulneſſe of
perſwaſion, it can be no ſinne or daunger
to ſtand faſt by that, which not to aſſent vnto,
were reproueable. And therefore, ſauing
for other tircumſtances, of Subteltie
or Vanitie vſed therein, M. Iewel is not
hurtfull to any poynte of true Faithe and
Religion, in his folowing of thoſe Common
Places, of which I haue ſpoken all
ready.
               On the other ſide, when an Heretike
goeth from the matter that he hathe taken
in hand, to Accuſe, and Condemne, and
bring into harred, Popes, Cardinalles,
Prieſtes. &c. by gathering in of Ruinors,
by folowing of Suſpitions, and ſetting
open vnto the world the worſt that he can
ſpeake of the Clergy: This, although it be
Vniuſtly, Proudly, and Vncharitably don,
yet doth it not greatly touche in any parte
our Faith or Religion. For if all were true



that is fained vpon Popes, Cardinals and
Prieſtes: Or if nothing be falſe, of that
which their Enemies reporte, of ſome of
them, what foloweth then? No more ſurely,
than that ſuche Perſons are offenders,
and that the faultes of the Clergy are to be
Corrected. And I pray God be mercifull
vnto his Church, that either no Crimes be
found among the worthier members of it,
Or iuſt Canons and lawes may be executed,
ſuche as allready are made for the purpoſe.
               But let theſe thinges be, as they may or
will be, who hath made Engliſhmen Iudges
ouer Romanes? Or who but the curſed
Children, doe tell tales abrode of their
Fathers Priuities? Againe, why ſhould
there not be Praying for Soules departed,
becauſe Some haue taken mony for it?
Or whye due honor not geuen to Sacramentes,
becauſe ſome Sir Iohns are irrenerent?
It is not ſafe to leape out of the
Arke, into the maine waters, beeauſe of
ſome euil ſent of men or bcaſtes therin. Or
to leaue the folowing of Chriſte, becauſe
Publicanes and lypnners went in his companye.
               The Apoſtleſhip is honorable, thoughe



Iudas be a Traitor: And the Doctrine of
him that ſitteth orderlye in the Chaire, is
pure and good, though the breathe whyche
commeth from him doe ſauoure.
               Theſe things therefore conſidered, let
M. Iewel make Impure digreſſions, not
ſparinge to beraie his owne clothes in a
fowle waye and intent, ſo that he may get
ſome duſt or durt, to hurle after 
                     •
                  
                  e heeles of
Popes and Cardinals. Yet al this concerneth
but maners only, and ſhould not in
anie Indifferent iudgement or meane diſcretion,
remoue a Chriſtian from the ſ
                     •
                  edfaſtnes
of his faith.
               But nowe A thirde kind of Common
Places which I finde reſorted vnto of M.
Iewel, Yea rather pointed out vnto vs
by him, is ſo wide and ſo daungerous, that
a man ſhall not only goe quickely out of
his waye in folowinge them by him ſelfe,
but alſo when God ſhall ſend him a Guide
to conducte him in the way, 
                     〈…〉
                  
be vncertaine and doutful 
                     〈…〉
                  
meanes as M. Iewel 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               It ſemeth that now 
                     〈…〉
                   long
ſince intended Purpo
                     •
                  es of the 
                     〈…〉
                  
almoſt come to theyr 
                     〈…〉
                   there



lacketh no more nowe, but that, by Open
Apoſtaſie, he make the faith of Chriſte to
be forſaken: and that, not ſo much as the
name thereof, ſhal be ſuffered in the world.
               Speake I this without cauſe? Let any
Indifferent man be Iudge. For take the
fundations awaye frome an howſe, and
can it contynue any ſpace together? Take
all credite awaye, betwixte man and man
in this trade of life, and will there be left any
Occupying to and fro? If no Authoritie
and law be in a Common wealthe, can
the ſtate thereof endure? What is that among
Chriſtians which hath brought them
vnto the Faith, and Staied, and Gouerned
them in it? Is it not the Authority of the
Churche, Commending the Doctrine of
Chriſt vnto vs, By Fathers, By Councels,
By Cuſtome and Tradition, And by
Succeſſion of Biſhoppes euen from S.
Peter hitherto?Preparation for y• Antichrist Emong all which, if no
one, may ſafely be leaned vnto, what remaineth
in all the world worthye of credite?
And except there be an Authoritye
and Order, which we may and muſt folow,
what Faith can we haue at all?
               But who is he, that prepareth ſuche
waies for the Antichriſt? Or who ſhaketh



the Hartes and Conſciencies of Chriſtians,
euen from the very botome and foundations
of them? Mary, except you BEWARE
of him, M. Iewel emonge other,
is he. And either he keepeth yet ſtill
in ſtore, ſome ſecrete Reuelatiōs, by which
perchaunce he will perſwade the worlde,
(which is incredible) Or els (As farre as
we may gather by his Reply) neither him
ſelfe hath any Faith, neither will ſuffer any
other to be quiet in it.
               Like a Rhetorician, which for Glorie or
Gaine ſake, feareth nothing ſo much as to
be found Tongetied in any matter, eſpecially
profeſſing to ſpeake aptly and copiouſly
in euery matter, And to that end prouideth
his Common places to be in a readineſſe.
               For witneſſes and Againſt witneſſes.
For Rumors and againſte Rumors,
For trying oute a matter by
Racking, and Againſt racking:
               So hathe M. Iewel done.Diuinitye brought to Rhetoricke He hathe
brought Diuinitie downe to Rhetoricke,
And, as though the kingdome of God conſiſted
in Talke, and not in Vertue and



Power, ſo doth he ſhewe vnto his diligen
                     •
                  
Readers, the Arte how to weakē the Aduerſaries
ſtaies and Authorities, and in anſwering
all other men, yet for their owne
partes neuer to be anſwered. And to this
end, ſerueth thys worſt kind of Common
Places, of which I gene thee (Indifferent
Reader) faire warning. As in example,
For Cuſtome, againſt Cuſtome: For Fathers,
againſt Fathers: For Councels againſt
Councels: For Vnity, againſt Vnity:
For Ceremonies, againſt Ceremoni
                     •
                  s:
For Miracles, againſt Miracles. In
which how M. Iewel hathe furniſhed hym
ſelfe, let it firſte be declared, and then afterwarde
Conſidered.
               
                  For Cuſtome.
                  If he doubt S. Paule,Iew. 101. yet the verie practiſe
and continuall Order of the primitiue Churche,
fullie declareth what Chriſte mente.
                  And they ſay:
                  Conſuetudo eſt Optima Interpres
Legum.
                  Cuſtome is the beſt Interpreter of the
Lawe.
                  
                     
Si De Interpretatione legis quaeratur.
&c.
                  If queſtion happen to be moued, touching
the meaning of a Law, firſt of all we muſt ſee,De legibus et Se natuscō ſulto & Longa Conſue. Si de.
what order hathe bene vſed in the like Caſes
in times paſt. For the Cuſtome and practiſe
of the people, is the beſt expounder of
the Lawe.
               
               
                  Againſt Cuſtome.
                  THe Reaſon that S. Baſile maketh of Cuſtome
and continuaunce,Iew. 49. being wel conſidered
is very weake, bothe for many other
good and Iuſt cauſes, and allſo the ſame Cuſtome,
as it was neuer Vniuerſally receiued,
ſo vpon better aduiſe by Order of the Churche,
it was cleane aboliſshed. For wiſe men
in Goddes cauſe haue euermore miſtruſted
the Authority of Cuſtome. The Heretikes in
old time named Aquarij, that in the holy Miniſtration
vſed Water onlye, and no Wine,It is vtterly vntrue: for in his Epiſtles, ad Iubaianū, Qui rinum, Pōpeiū.
                     
notwithſtāding they manifeſtly brake Chriſtes
Inſtitution as our Aduerſaries do nowe,
yet they vphelde their doinges therein, by
Long Cuſtome. But S. Cypriane being then
aliue, wrote thus againſt them.
                  
                     
Victi ratione Opponunt Conſuetudinem
quaſi Conſuetudo ſit maior Veritate.
& caet.he ſpeketh not agaīſt aquarios but agaīſt the Catholikes, whiche by Cuſtome and Traditiō conſuted his Opinion concerninge Rebaptizing of them, whom He 
                           〈◊〉
                         had baptiſed before 97
                  
                  Being ouercome with Reaſon, they defende
them ſelfe with Cuſtome, as though Cuſtome
were better then the truth. We maie not preſcribe
of Cuſtome, but we muſt ouercome
with reaſon. Cuſtome without truth is the
Mother of errour.
                  
                  Conſuetudo, Initium ab aliqua Ignorantia
vel ſimplicitate ſortita, in vſū
per ſucceſsionem corroboratur. Sed
Dominus noſter Chriſtus veritatē ſe,
non conſuetudinē, cognominanit &c.
Cuſtome either of ſimplcitie,If ye allow Tertulliā, whi goe your maidens with open 
                           •
                        ace: If ye alow hym not, whye vſe you his 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      or of Ignorāce,
geating once an entrie, is inured and hardened
by ſuccesſion, and is defended againſt
the truth. For Chriſt our Lord called himſelf
Truth, and not Cuſtome, Let them take hede
therefore, vnto whome the thinge ſeemeth
new, that in it ſelf is old. It is not ſo much the
Noueltie of the matter, as the Truth that
proueth an Hereſye. Whatſoeuer ſauoreth
againſt the truth, it is an Hereſie, be the Cuſtome
thereof neuer ſo old.
                  Theſe foreſayed Places are Pro & Con.
This that foloweth, I can not tel where to



ſet it. Whether, emong thoſe that make for
Cuſtome, or againſt it. But as I find it,
ſo ſhal you haue it.
                  S. Auguſtine in this Caſeys very
reaſonable his wordes be theſe:Iew. 143 Vbi
Authoritas deſinit, ibi Conſuetudo Maiorum
Pro lege tenenda eſt: Where Authoritie
faileth. This ſeemeth in ſome Caſe
to make for Cuſtome. But Conſider what
foloweth in M. Iewel. But hauing
Gods worde and CHriſts Inſtitution, we
want no Authoritie. In what ſteede then
ſhal any Cuſtome ſtand vs, where the rudeſt
Proteſtant in A whole Countrie, wil
crake and boſt of it, that Gods worde is
his warrant in al his procedinges? But let
vs goe to an other place.
               
               
                  For Fathers.
                  COncerning Auncient Fathers we commend
them ſufficiently, when we defend
them erneſtly, Or ſpeake of them reuerētly.
And there needeth not a Texte for their
praiſe, owt of the Scriptures or Auncient
Hiſtorie, when our ſelues doe actuall?



tender their Integritie of Eſtimation, And
ſpeake many faire and good wordes of
them. So doth M. Iewel:
                  Sometymes Complainyng or ſorowing
that thei are not rightly alleged. As,
                  For proufe hereof M. Harding allegeth
the Authoritie of Dionyſius wherein he dothIew. 26.
Greate wronge to that GOOD OLD
FATHER, &c.Hypocrite
                  
                  Sometymes requiring thē to be brought
furth and beleued: As,
                  The mater being ſo weightie, and not yet
thoroughly beleued,Iew. 23. it had ben good for M.
Harding, to haue made profe thereof, by the
authoritie of S. Auguſt. S. Hierome or ſome
other OLD CATHOLIK Doctours.
                  At an other tyme, Gentelly intreatyng
the Reader to conſider the place of the Doctour,
and ſo ſweetly leading hym by reaſoble
requeſt, that he can not chuſe but conceiue
much of the worthines of the Father.
As,
                  Good Chriſtian Reader, Yf thou haue Chryſoſtome
peruſe this place,Iew. 269 and weigh wel his
wordes: If thow haue hym not, yet be not
ouerhaſtie of beleife.
                  At an an other tyme againe: Vehemently



inueighing againſt his Aduerſarie, as
though he dyd not eſteme the Fathers.
Which although D. Harding in that place
doe not, yet M. Iewel, in takyng hym vp
for it, as if he had done it, declareth thereby
his Zelous Affection towardes them:
As,
                  I alleged the ſaieing of S. Baſyle:Iew. 169 That the
Church &c. The ſaieing of S. Hierome: That
the noiſe &c. Lykewyſe the ſaieing of Chryſoſtome:
Common Petitions &c. But
WHAT THEN. ſaieth M Harding. Why
WHAT THEN? Thinketh M Harding
that the Authoritie of Arnobius, S. Ambroſe.
S. Auguſtine. S. Hierome. S. Chryſoſtome,
And other holie Fathers is ſo light, that he
is hable to blow them al awaie, with theſe
two vaine Sillables, WHAT THEN?
                  To be ſhort, when hymſelfe directly
eſtemeth them, it moueth the Reader to
thinke alſo wel of them: As in Example,
                  S. Auguſtine is verie REASONABLE.Iew. 14.
                  
                  Verily Gregories Authoritie in this caſe
were right good,188. if he would ſaie the word.
                  
                     
It is S. Ambroſe Interpretation.199. 
                     With
other lyke Phraſes.
                  
                  To this place it maye alſo be referred,
when he craueth erneſtly for the expreſſe
wordes of the Fathers: As.
                  If the holy Fathers had ſo belewed,Iew. 148. they
had wordes, and were hable to vtter it.
                  Was there no man then in the world,302. for
the ſpace of ſix hundred yeres, hable to Expreſſe
his name?
                  
                     As though he would ſaie: Al the olde Fathers
of the Churche,306. bothe Greekes and Latines
wanted wordes and Eloquence, and either
they could not, or they durſt not Cal the
Head of the Church by his owne peculiar
name.
                  As who ſhould ſaie that M. Iewel is ſo
addicted to the Fathers, that if any one of
them ſaie the worde, he Subſcribeth and
yeldeth.
               
               
                  Againſt Fathers.
                  FAthers, becauſe thei are many in numbers,
therefore to make the matter more
eaſie for the Conquering of them, it ys
politikely done, to ſet furth a General Exception
againſt them except they appeere



by a certaine daie, which is, before the 600.
yere after Chriſt, ſhalbe gone or Expired.
for in deede how M. Iewel taketh the ſix
hundred yere, I can not yet redily tel. As:Iew. 123
                  
                  Dionyſius, one of late yeres, and therefore
Lead awaie with many errours.
                  S. Bernard is A Doctour but of Late yeres:116.
Therefore his authoritie We muſt weigh the
Lighter.
                  An other policie ys, to cauſe the Alleaging
of Fathers to be generally ſuſpected:
As,
                  There ys no way ſo eaſy, to beguile the ſimple,Iew. in his preface to the reader.
as the name and countenance of Aunciēt
Fathers. The Arian Heretikes alleged for
themſelues, the Auncient Father Origen
                        •
                      the
Neſtorian Heretiques alleged the Councel of
Nice: The Donatian heretiques alleged S.
Cyprian: The Pelagian heretiques alleged S.
Ambroſe, S. Hierome, and S. Auguſtine.
                  
                     And Dioſcorus the heretike, alleged Gregorius,
Cyrillus, and Athanaſius, and compleined
openly in the Councel, euen in lyke
ſort, and as iuſtly, as M. Iewel doth now:
Ego defendo dogmata ſanctorum Patrum:In Con. Chalc. Act. 1.
Ego illorum habeo teſtimonia,
nō obiter nec in trāſcurſu ſed in ipſorū


                     
libris poſita. I maiīteine the Doctrine
of the holy Fathers. I haue their witneſses,
not vttered by Chaunce, or by
the waie, but writen in their bokes.
                  Alſo to deny the Authoritie of the teſtymonie
is one waie: and is done ſometymes
boldly and ieſtingly. As, Concerning the
Epiſtle of Athanaſius to Felix, and certaine
other Epiſtles, that be extant in his
name.
                  A ſcarcrow (ſaieth M. Iewel) ſtuft with
ſtraw,Iew. 332. and ſet vpright, maie Seeme a far of to
be A Man. Euen ſo a forger of lies and fables,
prickt vp in the apparel of Auncient names
maie ſeeme to the Ignorant An olde Catholike
Father. Againe:
                  
                  The maner of his vtterance is childiſſh,133. and
babling, emptie of mater, and ful of wordes
without meaſure. The ſubſtance of the whole
is nothing els but flattering. &c.
                  Sometymes againe couertly and courteouſly:
As,
                  The Decretal Epiſtle,Iew. 264 that is abrode vnder
the name of Iulius ſemeth to ſauor of ſome
corruption
                  
                     Lykewyſe:
                     212. This Expoſition of Chryſoſtom



is very ſtrange,303. and agreeth with few others.
Againe: Although this place of
Chryſoſtome import not greatly (as who
ſhould ſaie, I would not care much to
graunt al that he writeth) Yet being wel
ſhifted and conſidered, it maie ſeeme very
ſuſpitions, as nothing agreeing, either with
that went before, or with that foloweth after,
but altogeather ſauering of ſome corruption.
                  Furthermore though the perſon of the
Father can not be denyed, yet the Eſtimation
of by in maie be hyndred. As:
                  This Auguſtine, whome M. Harding calleth
Sainct,Iew. 185 and ſome others, the Apoſtle of
England, was not that Greate Learned Father
S. Auguſtine &c. but an Hypocrite, a ſuperſtitious
man, Cruel, Bloudie, and proude
aboue meaſure.
                  
                     Againe: He wrote to Rome for reſolution
of certaine queſtions &c. ſo Childiſſhe &
ſo Rude that a man maie wel doubt,Yet S. Gregorie anſwered them with out any ſuch ruſly kyng. 310. whether
Auguſtine were ruder, or the people.
                  
                     Item: Touchinge Victor that wrote the
ſtorie of the Vandals, he is neither ſcripture,
nor Councel, nor Doctour, nor writeth the
Order or Practiſe of the Primitiue Churche.
                  
                     
                     Againe. Vnto this ſuperſtition S. Hierome
himſelf gaue greate Occaſion, many
times, both writing and ſpeaking vnſeemely
of the ſtate of Mariage. Now to make this
mater more likely,
                     Iew. 52. 
                     M. Iewel doth cunningly,
to number hym emong other that
were gyltie: As, In this errour were diuers
of the Old lerned Fathers.
                  Tertullian ſaieth, I Allow not Mariage.
Origine ſaieth, No man can offer
the continual ſacrifice, vnleſſe he be a
Virgin. S. Hierome ſaieth: It is not
good to touche a woman, Therefore it
ys il to touche a woman. Vpon occaſion
of which errour the people ſometymes forbare
the Churches, where Martyrs were
buried.
                  
                  To conclude, there is a certaine figure
of Replyinge, when in graunting vnto
ſome matter, you ſecretely take it awaie againe?
As,
                  I maye not diſgrace the credite of this
ſtorie,Iew. 136. albeit in Sozomenus and Nicephorus,
of bothe whome, the ſame is recorded, there
be ſundrie thinges that maie be wel filed.
                  By theſe helpes then, A yong Diuine



ſhal meetly wel be furniſſhed to keepe his
tongue occupied withal, leaſt a ſuddaine
ſilence ſhould caſt him into a Confuſion.
               
               
                  For Old Councels.
                  
                     TOuchinge the Authoritie of Councels,
becauſe thei ſeeme often tymes to vary,
                     Iew. 124
                     Gelaſius thought it beſt to take vp the mater
thus: In geſtis Conciliorum &c.
VVhen ſo euer Contrarietie of ſentēce,Diſt. 50. Domi. ſancto.
ys found in the Actes of Councels, Let
the ſentence of that Councel be taken,
that hath the elder and better Authoritie.
               
               
                  For Prouincial Councels, againſt
the General.
                  GOD hath oftentymes reſtored his
Churche,Iew. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      and reformed Abuſes and Hereſies,
by particular conference, within ſeueral
Realmes and Coūtries. As we ſee by theſe
priuate Councels holden at Carthage vnder
S. Cypriane: At Neoceſaria in Pontus: At
Ancyra in Galatia. And by other like without
ani conſent of a General Councel. So likewiſe
ſaieth S. Ambroſe, againſt Secundus and



Palladius: The Biſhopes of the Eaſt
parte, and ſo the Biſhopes of ye weaſt,
haue euer vſed ſeuerally to aſſemble
themſelues together as occaſion was
offered,
                     Not in contempt of the whole world. 
                     And to reform their churches
by themſelues, without trobling of the
whole world.
                  
                  Si prouocandum putauerint. &c.
If they thinke it needeful to appeale
from their owne Biſhopes,
                        Iew. 235 Conc. Aphric. cap. 6. Let them
not Appeale, but only vnto Councels
to be holden within the countrie of Aphrica.
               
               
                  Againſt Councels.
                  TIb being Emperour, when he heard
of the wonderful workes yt were wrought
by Chriſt in Iurie,Iew. 18. thought therefore, he was
a God, and promoted A Bil vnto the Councel,
that Chriſt might be proclamed, and takē
for a God. But the Councel was otherwiſe
bent, and would alow him for no God. Tertullian
laugeth at their folie: his wordes be
theſe:In Apolog. 
                     Apud vos de humano arbitrio



Diuinitas penſitatur &c. Emong you
the diuinitie and ſtate of God, is weighed
by mans Iudgment. Except God
pleaſe man, God (emong you) ſhalbe
no God. Now therefore, man muſt be
Good and fauorable vnto his God.
The Like folie ſeemeth to be in them, that
thinke Gods Trueth to be no trueth, onleſſe
the conſent of a Councel allow it for trueth.
                  At this might be true, if the Holyghoſt
had not promiſed vnto the Church to cary
with it for euer, and to inſtruct it. Againe,
Gods Trueth is trueth in it ſelfe: yet vnto
vs it is not knowen, but by meanes. Now
emong thoſe meanes, which is the moſt
worthie? The text of the Scripture, which
except ſome body tel me, I ſhal not know,
in what eſtimation to haue it: ye repor of a
few men of our owne pariſhe or Countrie?
Or y• determinatiō & cōſent of a general or
prouincial Coūcel? I ſhould thinke, yt, ſeing
we come to faith by meanes of mē whō we
credite, it were not amiſſe to harkē Chiefly
after ye voice of a general Coūcel, where, As
greate authoritie & as worthie of credite is
repreſented, as maie be poſſiblie found in al



the world. But M.Iewel is afeard o
                        •
                     
a folie. and like a wyſe man, and ſuch as
worketh ſurely, he careth for none but fo
                        •
                     
God him ſelfe: and Let men tel hym wha
                        •
                     
they liſt, he hangeth not vpon the Authoritie
of any of them al, Or of al together,
receuing of Gods owne mouth (I trow)
immediatly, that which confirmeth hym
in his faith and religion.Iew. 207.
                  
                  Cicero ſaieth very wel of hymſelf: Nihil
nobis opus erat lege, de quibus nihil
eſſet actum legibus. To reſtore me
from exile, I needed no Lawe, againſt
whom there was nothing done by lawe.
                     Yf the Saxon Lyke one waie and the Palſgraue an other, maie both defend them
                           •
                        elfs by theſe Exāples and contemne what ſo euer Authoritie in Chriſtendome? Ioſue ca. 24.
                     
So maie we likewiſe ſaie, we neede no Councel
to reſtore Gods Truth, that was taken
awaie from vs without a Councel. Euerie
prince is bound in the whole, to ſee the reformation
of his owne Church and Countri.
Neither wil God hold him excuſed, if he
ſaie, I wil tarye til al other Princes, and the
whole world doe the Lyke. Ioſue that noble
prince, when he had aſſembled al the tribes of
Iſrael before him, thus he ſpake vnto them.
Si malum vobis videtur &c. If ye
thinke it il to ſerue the Lord, ye ſhal



haue your choiſe, But I and my houſe
wil ſerue the Lord.
                     Is it Lawful then, to refuſe the Nicene Councel. euen in this reſpect only as it conſiſted of Chiefe heades and Gouernours of al Chriſtendome. Tertul. aduerſu
                              •
                            Praxe
                              •
                           .
                     
                  
                  It pleaſed God to plant his Church in this
Realme. three hundred yeres, before the firſt
General Councel was holden at Nice. The
Lordes hand is not ſhortened. He is likewiſe
hable nowe, to reforme, the ſame by his
holie word, without tarieing for a General
Councel.
               
               
                  For Antiquitie.
                  TErtullian ſaieth: Hoc aduerſus omnes
Haereſes valet, id eſse verū, quodcunque
prius &c. This marke preuai
leth Againſt al Hereſies: That is the
Trueth, that was vſed firſt: That is
falſe and corrupt, that was brought in
afterward. And therefore the holy fathers
in the Councel of Nice made this general
ſhoute, and agreed vpon the ſame,

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Let the Aunciēt
orders hold ſtil, referring themſelues
thereby, to the vſe and order of the Primitiue
Church. Contrarywyſe, Valentinus
Marcion, and other Lyke Heretykes,



thought themſelues wiſeſt of al others, and
therefore vtterly refuſed, (as M.Harding
and his felowes doe now) to ſtand to the
Apoſtles orders. Thus Ireneus writeth
of them:Irenaeus lib. 3. ca. 2. 
                     Dicunt ſe, non ſolum preſbyteris
&c. They wil ſaie, yt thei are wiſer
not only then other Prieſtes, but alſo
then the Apoſtles, and that they haue
found owt the perfite trueth.
                  
               
               
                  Againſt Antiquitie.
                  NOtwithſtanding it appeare by S.Auguſtine,
S.Cyprian,Iew. 12
                           •
                        
                      and others, that Infantes
in the primitiue Church in ſundrie places,
were admitted to the holy Communion, yet
AFTERWARDE vpon good aduyſe,
they were iuſtly remoued from it, becauſe
that benig in that age, they were not thought
hable to examine and proue thēſelues, according
to the doctrine of S.Paule,1. Cor. 11 and ſo to eate
of that Breade, and Drinke of that Cup.
                  By this rekening then, they of the primitiue
Churche, vnderſtode not S. Paule
ſo wel as the aftercummers. And ſo
hath Tertullians ſai
                        •
                     ing litle effect, how,



That is the Trueth that was vſed firſt. It
wil ſerue alſo in this place, al that M. Iew.
hath gathered: Againſt Fathers and cuſtome,
as aboue is declared.
               
               
                  For Vnitie.
                  GOD hath other waies and meanes
(ſaieth M. Iew.) then by the Gouernement
of the Biſhopes of Rome, whereby
he hath euer gouerned his Church, and preſerued
Vnitie. How proueth he this?
Mary. S. Cyprian ſaieth, Ideo plures &c.
Therefore there be many Bishopes in the
Church,
                     Iew, 260 
                     that one rūning, into hereſies y• reſt
may help e & againe:Cypr. lib. 3. epi. 13. lib. 4. epi. 9. 
                     The Churche is preſerued
in. Vnitie by ye cōſent of biſhopes
agreing in one. And to this end S. Hiecome
ſaieth, as is before alleged: Nouerint
Epiſcopi &c. Let Biſhopes vnder
ſtād,
                     In epi. ad Titum cap. 1. 
                     that they ought to rule ye Church
as al in one.
                  
               
               
                  Againſt Vnitie.
                  IMmediatly vpō yt forſaied wordes, foloweth
a Cōmō place againſt Vnitie. As



if M. Iewel would plainely proteſt, that
when it maketh any thing for his ſyde, then
it ſhalbe alowed and praiſed, And yt when
the aduerſarie would turne it to his purpoſe,
then ſhal it be litle or nothing worthe.
As in example:
                        Iew. 260 Hieron. contra Luciferianos.
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaieth: Nomine vnitatis
& fidei, Infidelitas ſcripta eſt. Infidelitie
hath ben writen, vnder the Name
of faith, and Vnitie. So lykewyſe ſaieth
the wyſe man. In tanto viuentes ignorā
                     tiae
bello,Sap. 14. tot & tanta mala Pacem appellabant.
VVhereas they Lyued in
ſuch a warr of ignorance ſo many and
ſo greate mischiefs they called Vnitie.
                  What remaineth then now to be folowed
of certaintie? Or what ſtaie ſhal there be
for a right meanyng affection and trobled
conſcience? If no ſuch hold is to be taken of
Fathers, Councels, Cuſtom &c. but that the
Enemie wil make it to be forſaken vtterly,
or daungerouſly doubted of: what Refuge
is there left, or what Authoritie? Shal
the Biſhopes which are for the tyme, rule
in the cauſes of Religion? That ſurely



is already ſo apointed by God, and that if it
were otherwiſe, ſhould chieflie be wyſhed
for and procured. But what hope is there
to haue this graunted of M. Iewel? Or if
at one time he wil yeld vnto it, at an other
he will deny it. For ſometimes he will
haue all Biſhops equall: And what order
then can be ſet there, where no one is better
then an other? Sometimes he will
haue differencies and diſtinctions of Authoritie
among them. Yet then how little
ſhall that preuaile, when he wil not be obedient
to that Authority? As in example.
               
               
                  For aequalitie of Biſhops.
                  S. Hierome wryteth thus vnto Euagrius.Iew. 2
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  Si Authoritas quaeritur. &c. If we
ſeeke for Authority, the world is greater
then the Citie of Rome. VVhereſoeuer
there is a Biſhop, whether he be
at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at Conſtantinople
or at Rhegium. &c. he is of
like worthines and of like prieſthode.
                  
                     
Becauſe we are not onely led inwardly by
Gods Spirit,Iew. 257. but allſo outwardly by our ſenſes,
therefore hath Chriſt appointed not one
man to be his Vicar Generall ouer all, but euery
of his Apoſtles, and ſo euery Prieſt, to
be his Vicar within his diuiſion. So ſaieth
Euſebius B. of Rome.
                  Caput Eccleſiae Chriſtus eſt.Epiſt. 3 &c.
Chriſt is the heade of the Church. And
his Vicares be the Prieſtes, that doe
their Meſsage in the Churche, in the
ſteede of Chriſt.
                  Euery Biſhop hath a portion of the
Flocke allotted vnto him,Iew. 266. Cyp li. 1. Epi. 3. whiche he
muſt rule and gouerne, and yeld accōpt
vnto the Lord for the ſame.
               
               
                  For diſtinction emong Biſhops.
                  The Decrees of the Councel of Nice,Iew. 336. Conc. Aphric. Ca. 105
haue committed bothe the inferioure
clerkes, and alſo the Biſhoppes, vnto
their Metropolita
                        •
                     es.
                  The Fathers of the Councell of Aphrica



haue decreed thus, that the B. of the firſt See,Iew. 240 Ca. 6.
be not called the chief of Prieſts, or the higheſt
Prieſt, or by any other like title, but only
the Bishop of the firſt See.
                  In the Councel of Cōſtantinople it is wryten
thus:Iew. 245 Conſt. 1. Ca. 2. Let the Biſhops of Alexandria haue
the charge only of the Eaſt, the honor of primaci
euer reſerued to the church of Antioch.
                  More to this place might be broughte,
out of M. Iew. workes, eſpecially Pa. 250.
267. and. 286. But by what Primate, Patriarche,
or high Biſhop would he be ruled,
which putteth the Spirituall Gouernment
of the Church, in the handes of Temporall
Princes, and maketh euery Biſhop the Vicar
of Chriſt? In ſuch ſort, as if there were
no higher or better perſon then he, for Authority,
in all the world. And therefore i
                        •
                     
theſe poynts hitherto, there wil be no hold
or ſtay.
               
               
                  For Succeſsion.
                  But perchaunce all thinges ſhalbe determined
by Succeſſion.Iew. 277. For Irenaeus ſayeth:
Preſbyteris illis. &c.
We ought to obey the Biſ
                        •
                     ops in the church
that haue their ſucceſſion from the Apoſtles,
which together with the ſucceſsion of the Bishoprike,



haue receiued the certaine gifte of
the Trnthe, according to the will of the Father.
This in deede would ſerue, if it were
cōſidered, but M. Iewel liketh it not. For
in the next ſide before, he ſaith of yc Pope. &c
                  
               
               
                  Againſt Succeſsion.
                  THey Feaſt and cheare them ſelues,Iew. 276. and
Smothe the world with vaine talke. But
S. Ihon ſayeth:
                  Nolite dicere. &c.Matth. 3. Neuer ſay (Peter
or) Abraham was our Father.
S.Paule ſpeaking of his Succeſſors ſaith thus:
                     Act. 20.
                  
                  Equidem Scio. &c. I know, that after
my departure from you, there ſhall
Rauening wolues come amongeſt you,
that ſhall not ſpare the flocke.
                  And S.Hierome ſayeth:Diſt. 40. Nō eſt fa. Non ſunt
ſanctorum filij. &c. They be not euermore
the Children of holy men, that ſit
in the roomes of holy men.
                  But notwithſtanding all theſe foreſaide
perplexities and doubtes, at length I trow



we ſhall come to ſome Reſolution and quietneſſe.
For the word of God and the ſcripture
ſhallbe the Iudge. And yet, here alſo
is a great vncertainty. For M. Iewel, for
the moſt part appealeth to ye expreſſe worde
in the Scripture. His Reply is full of his
bragges therein, and with ſuche faire promiſes
the greater ſort is ſeduced. One
example in a matter ſo manifeſt is ſufficient.
As:
               
               
                  For the VVorde of God
or Scripture.
                  SPeaking, of the Scholemens concluſyons
about Chriſtes preſence vnder the
formes of bread and wine, he ſayeth:
                  We may not here accompt,Iew. 99. what may be
in either of them, by drift of vaine fantaſie:
but rather we ought to conſider, what Chriſt
in the firſt Inſtitution thereof did, and what
he commaunded to be done.
                  Here loe, he refuſeth to haue the ſenſe diſcuſſed,
but ſticketh to the bare text. But it
wil not be allwaies ſo, as appereth by theſe
Examples.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt the VVorde of God
or Scripture.
                  CHriſt did not therefore ſo abaſe himſelfe
to washe his Diſciples feete,Iew. 117. to the intent
they according to the letter, should doe the
ſame, but in himſelfe to shewe them a perfite
Example of humility. &c.
                  In like manner,Math. 18 10. &. 8 Chriſt ſet a Childe before
his Diſciples, and willed them all to be as
Children. He bad them to shake of the duſt
from their Shewes, and to cary neither Rod,
nor Scrip, about them, and to ſalute no man
vpon the way: not, that they shoulde practiſe
theſe thinges according to the rigoure of the
wordes, but to the intent, that by the ſame,
they mighte be induced to a deeper vnderſtanding:
                  And S. Hierome ſayeth.Iew. 150.
                  
                  Whoſoeuer vnderſtandeth the Scriptures,Hieron. ad Gal. li. 3. ca. 5.
otherwiſe then the ſenſe of the
holy Ghoſt requireth, by whiche holye
Ghoſt the Scriptures were wrytten,
although he be not yet departed from
the churche, yet he maye well be called
an Heretike.
                  
                     
The ſenſe rather and the meaninge of the
Scriptures is to be taken,Iew. 198. Orig. ad Ro. ca. 3. li. 3. Iew. 211. then the wordes.
                  To ſay, The word of God, only becauſe it
is wryten or ſpoken, is auaileable of it ſelfe
without vnderſtanding, is a Superſtitious
and Iewishe kinde of foly.
                  Let vs make nowe an end of this Chapiter,
for there is no ende of queſtionynge
and altering, as farre as is to be learned of
M. Iewel. And my Deduction or Argument
is ſhort.When the Sonne of man commeth, ſhall he fynde think you, faith vpon the earthe. Lucae 18.
                      If the ſenſe of the Scripture,
be the thing that is to be honoured
and folowed: And if that Se
                        •
                     ſe is not to
be perceiued of euerye one that vnderſtandeth
the Grammatical conſtruction and expoſition
of the wordes: we muſte learne it
of ſome body biſide our owne ſelues. And
they of whome we learne it, muſt be ſuche,
as vpon whoſe Authority we may builde
and neuer chaunge: But neither by Fathers,
nor Councels, nor Cuſtomes, nor
preſent ſtate of Biſhops, nor by the texte it
ſelfe of the Scripture, that Authoritye can
be eſtabliſhed (for by Maiſter Iewels accompte,
neuer a one of them dothe fullye
ſatiſfye in any mater) ergo we are left vppon
this reckening alltogether vnquiet,



and to ſeeking where to ſtaye our Conſciencies.
                  Is not this a perfecte Religion? Or is
not this a ſkilfull Profeſſor of it, by whome
it is brought to paſſe that no Faithe at all,
can be appoynted vnto vs?
                  The Catholike yet, may ſone be in quiet.
For obeying that viſible Churche, of
which the Pope is a viſible heade, he leaueth
to the determination of it, all thinges
perteining to Councels, Cuſtomes, Fathers
and Scriptures. But theſe felowes,
that know not, What to followe or forſake,
but by the Teſtimonye of Councels, Cuſtomes,
Fathers. &c. and yet dare not fully
truſt thoſe ſelfe ſame thinges or perſons
which are their guides: what a miſerable
caſe are they in, cōcerning them ſelues,
and how Artificially, doe they take Faithe,
cleane away in ſome, and weaken it exceadingly
in other?
                  
                     BEWARE therefore of them by time
(Indifferent Reader.) And concerninge
the ſtedfaſtneſſe which ſhould be of Faithe,
be not made alltogeather Indifferente,
throughe this laſte and worſte kind of M.
Iewels Common Places.
                  
                     
Thus hauing declared euidently, that
M. Iewells greate boke in Quantitie, is
of ſimall matter in ſubſtance, and, that his
Common places and Digreſſions are ſo
many, that his ſtraite folowing of the queſtion,
and his direct Anſwers to the purpoſe
muſt be ſone rekoned: I truſt, the Indifferent
Reader will BEWARE of him,
and not muche maruell at that Bo
                        •
                     lke,
where litle Corne is ſure to be found: Nor
thinke thoſe veſſels to be ful, whoſe bourdes
are longe, and whopes of greate cumpaſſe.
Now, to make his behauiour more
plaine yet and manifeſt, let vs come to certaine
other Specialties, and loke more particularly
into his boke. And firſte, it ſhalbe
worth the while to conſider, how M.
Iewell hath ordered D. Harding:
                  In Peruerting his meaninge,
                  
                  In diſgrating his Authorities,
                  
                  In Wranglinge with him,
                  
                  In Diſſimbling and butting with him,
                  
                  In Refelling one truth by an an other,
                  
                  And in Courteous (as they ſay) Reportinge 
of him:
                  Which ended, I wilcome, in ye third boke,
to other men: as, Auncient Fathers, Later
Doctours, and ſo furth, ſhortly prouing it



vnto thee (Indifferent Reader) that M.
Iewell hath ſo abuſed him ſelfe, And thee,
And them all, more or leſſe, one waye or
other: that he will neuer be able to ſaue his
honeſtie. Firſt then concerning the firſte
pointe.
               
            
            
               That M. Iewel peruerteth D.
Hardinges meaning
CAP. 4.
               I Will leaue it to thy further conſideration
(Indifferent Reader) leiſuerly to
examyne it by thy ſelfe, how much it maketh
to the ending of controuerſies, or
bringing of theſe matters to ſome Iſſue,
that ſuch as be Doers therein, ſhould diligently
intend vnto the ſenſe of the Aduerſarye,
and applie therevnto a iuſt and direct
Anſwer. For if it be otherwiſe, the
Obiection firſt of all, remaineth vnanſwered:
And then, new matter of diſputation
and talke is miniſtred, through the peruerſitie
of the Anſwerer. Stomakes alſo doe
riſe, Bokes are multiplied, Readers weeried,
And the further men goe foreward,
in the waye, as it were, of finding out the



pointe of the queſtion, the more intricat
                     •
                  
it is dayely made vnto them, by makinge
and ſeeking of bypathes without the queſtion.
If I would conclude that we are
moued and warned not only by wordes
but alſo by other Signes, And to that
purpoſe would make mention of the bell,
which warneth vs, either to come to Sermōs,
either to attēd more deuoutly at ſome
ſpeciall tyme of the Seruice: If my Aduerſary
in this caſe, would tell the Readers,
that my meaning is to teach the people by
a Bell rope, and to make one of the greate
Bels in the Steple, A Preacher, and a leſ
                  
                     •
                  er
one in the Quier a Deacon, to what
purpoſe were our reaſoning, or what end
were like to be, of ſuch a beginning? But
as I ſayed, theſe thinges I leaue to thy
further conſideration, chooſing rather by
Examples to verifie my ſayeinges, then
(as the indignitie of the matter requireth)
to inueigh againſt this foule Demeanure
of peruerting the Senſe of any mans ſayinges,
which M. Iewel vſeth.
               VVe are bounde to folowe Chriſtes
Examples,Hard. 28 Quoad ſubſtantiam, non
quoad externam ceremoniam. For



the ſubſtance not for the outwarde
Ceremonie.
               Here is great paine taken,Iew. 22. The firſte Example. to proue that
Chriſtian men, in the miniſtration of Chriſts
ſupper, are not boūd to folowe the Example
of Chriſt. Againe: Why doth he defend his
Sole Receauing, contrary to his owne wiſſhing,33.
and cōtrary to the Example of Chriſt,
as him ſelfe confeſſeth.
               You ſay not truly. But contrarywiſe
D. Hardinges concluſion is, that we are
bounde to folow Chriſtes Example, And
that we are not yet forbydde Abſolutely,
from Sole Receauing, though Chriſt him
ſelfe Receaued with cumpanie. Becauſe
he did not that, for an Example, as beinge
a mere Accident touching that whiche he
then intended, no more then he meant to
charge vs with Receauing in a Parlor,
Or Chamber, Or at Night tyme only, Or
Sittinge at ſupper, becauſe all theſe thinges
are founde to haue bene obſerued of
Chriſte, and therefore (as ſome frowarde
Heretike might ſay) that we ſhould folow
his Example.
               The Communion hath his name of the,Iew. 27 
                        •
                     nother Example.
effect, for that it ioyneth vs to God: Ergo
ſaieth M. Harding, if ſignifieth not the Communicating



of many together.
               No he ſayeth not ſo, but thus rather:Hard. 2
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Ergo you can not thincke your
ſelfe to haue an Argument againſte,
Priuate Maſſe, of the word (Communion)
as though the Sacrament were
called a communion, in conſideration
of many receauers togeather.
               In which ſenſe in deede, if it be a Communion,
then is it no Priuate Maſſe. But,
as the Truth is, and as D. Harding taketh
the worde, it ſtandeth well inoughe with
Sole Receauing. And the partie receauing
alone, is ioyned to God, and Communicateth
with Chriſt the Heade, and his whole
bodye.
               Note further, that D. Harding made
his forſayed Argument, to Anſwer yours
(M. Iewel) whiche are ſo deceiued, that
whereſoeuer you find mention of Communiō,
thervpō ſtraitewayes ye cōclud againſt
Sole Receauing, Or Priuate Maſſe. Wherby
it is euident, that you haue abuſed him
much, & defiled your ſelfe not a litle, in reaſoning,
as it were in D. Hardinges name,



after this faſſhion.
               
                  Iew. 30▪ It is called
Cōmunion. Ergo it maie be Priuate.
                  Iew. 30▪ It is called
Cōmunion. Ergo it maie be receaued of
one alone.
                  Iew. 30▪ It is called
Cōmunion. Ergo the Prieſt may receaue
it without Communicates.
               
               
                  Againe:
                  Iew. 37. By the Communion all faithful are
ioyned together: Ergo the Prieſt may ſaye
Priuate Maſſe.
               Serapions boy miniſtred the Sacrament
to his Maſter:Iew. 46. The iij. Example. Ergo Serapions boy ſaid priuate
Maſſe.
               D. Hardinge ſayeth not ſo, but:
               Ergo the Example of Serapion (whichHard. Fol. 34
receaued alone) confirmeth our purpoſe
of Single Communion.
               And note, that in this kind of Peruerſion,
M. Iewel continueth through the whole
firſt Article, turning ye to ſaying of Maſſe,
which D. Harding alleaged for profe of
Sole Rerceauing only, either in al conuenient
tymes and places, Generally: either
at Maſſe tyme and in the Church, Conſequently.
               D. Harding,The iiij. Exampl
                        •
                     . in tranſlating a teſtimony
of S. Hierom making for Sole receauing,
engliſſhed alſo a peece of Perſius ye Poetes



Verſe, as he founde it in the Texte of his
Author. Wherein, though he did but as
faithfull Interpretours doe vſe, yet M.
Iewel, not only taketh it ſo, as if D. Hardinge
of his owne heade, had put it in, but
alſo, as though he meant to applie it to his
purpoſe in the queſtion of priuate Maſſe.
His wordes be theſe:
               Here, M. Harding interlaceth (no,
                  Iew. 51. 
                  he
interpreteth only S. Hierome, and addeth
nothinge of his owne) other matter of the
office of wedlocke, the wordes of Perſius the
Pagane Poe
                     •
                  e, and the ſuperſtitious ceremonie
of the Heathens, as I take it, litle perteining
vnto his Maſſe.
               True it is (M. Iewell) Such geare perteineth
no more to the Maſſe, then yoke
felowes doe to Prieſtes, except both ſhould
be ſet to the Carte. And wherefore then
doe you ſo ſpeake, as though it were any
part of D. Harding
                     •
                  s meaning?
               It is a Sacrament of Vnitie: therefore if it
be abuſed, we may ſeeke no Redreſſe.
               
                  It is nothinge lyke: but thus he concludeth:
Ergo let them take heede who
moued by ſlender reaſons for bothe
kindes, doe rashly and dangerouſly cō
                  demne
the Churche, for geuinge of it



                  vnder one. For this in deed, is a manifeſt
breach of vnitie.
               The fruite of the Sacrament dependeth
not of the 
                     •
                  ourmes of bread and wine.Iew. 99. The ſixth Example. Therfore
we may breake Chriſtes Inſtitution.
               The more Impiouſe this concluſion is,
the more wicked are you, to laie it to his
charge, which at all hath none ſuch. For
thus he Reaſoneth.
               The fruite of the Sacrament,Hard. fo. 50. pa. 2. dependeth
not of the outwarde formes of
bread and wine, but redoundeth of the
Vertue of fleſhe and Bloude of Chriſt,
which vnder either kind is wholy and
verely preſent. Ergo the church ſtandeth
vppon good groundes, in Miniſſtring
the Sacramēt, vnder one kynde
vnto the people, by which no leſſe fruit
commeth vnto them, then if they receaued
vnder bothe.
               The Prieſt conſecrateth the Sacrament, and
offereth the Sacrifice: Therefore the people
is not bound to Receaued in both kyndes.
Againe: The Church hath her libertie: ergo
ſhe is not bounde to Chriſtes Inſtitution.
               
                  
Be not aſhamed (M. Iewel) to reade D.
Hardinges wordes againe: And marke
then whether you deale like an honeſt man
with him, or no. The ſome of his diſcourſe,
is this: The Sacrament maie be conſidered
2. waies: Either as it is a Sacrifice,
Or as it is a Sacrament.
               Concerning the firſt, the formes of breade
and wine bothe, are neceſſary,Sacrifice. that the ſhedding
of Chriſtes bloude, And ſeparating of
his life from his body,Har. 51. may the better be repreſented.
And in this part, D. Har.
ſpeaketh nothing, of the peoples Recea
                  
                     •
                  ing:
though in deede owt hereof, as owt of
A Principle, it could afterwardes be deducted,
that ye people are not bounde to receaue
in both kyndes. But it maketh much
to the purpoſe, to place euery thing aright:
as, though your head be part of your body,
yet to ſet that and your heele together, were
no good faſſhion.
               Concerning the ſecond, becauſe it is reſpected
as meate,Sacrament. which the people do
                     •
                   receiue,
to Preparation or Preſeruation of
Body and Soule into euerlaſting life, in
which meate the Subſtance, and not the
Forme is ſought for, therefore the Church
is at her libertie, (not to breake Chriſtes



Inſtitution as you M. Iewel doe iangle)
but to ſerue them, either with both kyndes,
either one alone, as it ſhal ſeeme expedient.
               Some men doe lothe wine, Some people cā
hardly geat,Iew. 113. The 8. Example. ſome cā hardly keepe wine ergo.
there muſt be made a law general, y• ye whole
world ſhal Communicate in one kynde.
               D. Har. wordes are theſe, after ye forſaide
cauſes alleged:Har. 56. 
                  Ergo, it had ben byſide
reaſon, to haue bounde al to ye neceſſity
of both kynds. For there be two extremes,
in the middle of which is the truth: Al
must receaue in both kyndes, Is yt Proteſtātes
hereſy:Trueth in the middle of Extremes. Againſt which, D. Har. in
his place cōcludeth. The whole world
muſt receiue in one kynde, Is an other
hereſy, which M. Iew. forceth here, vpō D.
Har. & yet he neither ſpake it, nor thought
it, I am ſure. ye middle & Catholik way is, yt,
It is an indifferent thing in it ſelfe, the
Laye people to receiue in one or both
kyndes, And yt ye Churches order & counſel
herein is to be ſolowed, without any further
vaine bragging of Chriſtes Inſtitutiō,



as though yt heretikes were yt expounders
therof. Iudge therfeore whether M. Iewel
hath not in his place done like a ioly clark,
ſo to myſconſter a plaine ſenſe & meaning.
               M. Har. would haue vs put Gods word to
daving,The 9. Example. Iew. 121. Slaunderouſly. And none otherwiſe to be obedient
to Chriſtes Commaundement, then yf a few
Bishopes gathered at Trident, ſhall allow it
               
                  Who would not thinke, vpon this report
of M. Iew. y• D. Har. had ſpoken blaſphemie
againſt God hymſelfe. Yet he ſaied no
worſe then this:
                  Har. 60. VVe condemne not the
Commnnion vnder both kyndes but cō
                  feſse,
it might be reſtored againe, by ye
Authoritie of the Church lawfully
aſſembled in a General Councel &c.
               And is there any harm in this? Specially
being proued ſufficiently yt ye Laie people to
receiue in one or both kyndes, is not commaunded
preciſely & neceſſaryly by God?
But this is a Generall peruerſitie of M.
Iew. through this whole Article, to burden
the Catholikes with the Contempt of
Gods word, and Chriſtes Inſtitutiō, in y•
they miniſter vnto ye Laitie, vnder one kind



whereas, to ſpeake Indifferently, the matter
is yet in controuerſie, betwene vs and
hym with his felowes: Or if it be certaine
vnto them, that it is againſt Chriſtes Inſtitution,
the contrarye is as certayne alſo wt 
vs. So that it is very peuiſſhly done,
to frame the Catholikes Argumentes, not
according to that Principle which they folowed
in makinge them (As, that to Receaue
in one kynd or both is Indifferent) but according
to the meaſure of that heretical concluſion,
in which the Catholikes doe withſtand
them, As, that, it is Chriſtes Cōmaundement,
y• people to receaue in both kinds.
               
                  The breade which Chriſt bleſſed at Emaus,
                  The 10. example.
                  and gaue vnto his two Diſciples,
was the Sacrament, And, as ſone as they
knew him in breaking of the bread,Har. he
vaniſhed awaie from their ſight, er yt
he toke the cup into hys handes:
               Ergo, ſaith D. Harding, thei receiued in
one kynd. But how taketh M. Iewel
the Antecedent here? He maketh an Exclamation,
Or he taketh an Indignation, Or
he falleth into a Lamentation, Or ſurely
he ſpeaketh with much Affection. O (ſaieth



he) what miſerable ſtraites theſe men be driuē
into.
                  Iew. 125 Schoffer. 
                  To make vp their tale, they are glad to
ſaie, that Chriſt lackt leiſure.
               
               Sir, if you finde any ſuch blaſphemous
worde, in D.Hardinges boke, I wil thāke
you for geauing vs warning: but ſeeing
there is none ſuch, what haſte were you in,
to be ſo peruerſe and impudent? Surely,
there is ſome occaſion, why you crye owt
firſt, And then accuſe D. Harding, for ſpeaking
ſo of Chriſt. And in deede in your
Reply, y• Reader wil not perceaue but you
inueighe moſt iuſtly, with, O what miſerable
&c. For the wordes, which immediatly
goe before writen in a diſtinct letter, as
if they were al D. Hardinges, are theſe:
But Chriſt ſtraight waie vaniſhed
from their ſight,
                  Falſifier 
                  vpon the breaking of
the bread: And therefore had NO
LEISVRE to deliuer the other
portion: neither is there any mention
made of the Cup.
               
               Theſe you attribute to D. Harding, but
that which you put in the middle of,
Chriſtes Lacke of LEISVRE,


                  
is not at al in D. Harding. Why cry you
then vpon the miſerable ſtreictes that we
are dryuen into, whereas ourſelues made
them not? Or what a miſerable Iuggler
are you, to number it as in D.Hardinges
owne text, yt 
                  Chriſt lackt leiſure, which
at al is not there: And afterwardes to Crie
owt againſt hym, for ſaieng that, which is
of your owne putting in only, & not of his?
               The ſicke mans mouth was drye:The 11. Example. Iew. 134 Scof
                        •
                     er. Ergo he
could not receiue the Cuppe. Who would
make ſuch reaſons but M. Harding?
               But M. Har. maketh thē not: Ergo, who
would be ſo blinde or Wilful, in conceiuing
an other mans reaſon, but M.Iew? For D.
Harding gathereth his Argument thus:
Baſſus the Archeprieſt, waſshed the
mouth of Simeō lyinge ſicke & feble,
                  Har.
                  before he gaue hym the diuine Sacrament,
And, ſuch procuring of moiſture had
ben needleſſe, if Simeon ſhould haue receiued
the holy Cuppe: Ergo he receiued vnder
one kind only. Where finde you here M.
Iew. y• he could not drinke, becauſe he was
dri
                     •
                  ? It appereth y• your ſelfe at this place
had takē of ſome Cup to much, which could



either mocke in an erneſt matter ſo drilie, or
vnderſtād a reaſonable argumēt ſo drōkēly.
               I cā not ſee what neceſſitie is in this reaſon.Iew. 140 The 12. Example.
The man is frentike, Or lieth Speechleſſe: Ergo
he cā not receiue the Sacrament bread.
               In deede your eies herein ſerue you well.
and euery reaſonable man will beare you
witneſſe, that no neceſſitie, is in this Argument.
But what neceſſitie was there, why
you ſhould not rightly, either perceaue Or
report D. Hardings reaſon? For thus it is:
The Sacrament was powred into the mouth
of him,
                  Har
                        •
                     
                   
                  which in his ſicknes demaunded hys
houſel, And er he dyed, fel into phreneſie, or
became ſpeachleſſe: Ergo it was geauen, vnder
onekynde and in forme of wine. For
how thinke you, M. Iewel, haue you ſeen
or reade, that when men haue ben extreme
ſicke, Breade hath ben Powred into their
mouthes? by reaſon thē, it was wine which
is ſayed to haue ben Powred. Conſider
alſo what foloweth in D.Harding, owt of
the Councel of Toledo: where you ſhall
fynde it proued, that Some ſicke men are ſo
vnable, to take the Sacrament in forme of
bread, yt they receiued ōly A draught of our
Lordes Cup. Therefore, you are much deceaued,
which thinke D. Har. to be as mad



as you, and of phreneſie or lack of Speeche
to gather, that they receiued in Forme of
breade.
               If the Manichees would not beleue Leo
or Auguſtine,Iew. 147 The 13. Example. Wickedly. that Chriſt had one body, how
muche leſſe would they beleue M. Harding,
that Chriſt hath two bodies, the one in the
Bread, the other in the cup, And eche wholy
in the other?
               Where ſaieth D. Harding ſo? In no place
at all, you maie be aſſured. but this is that
which you carpe at, M. Iewel. The
Catholikes beleue, and D. Harding for his
parte confeſſeth, that vnder either kynd,
whole Chriſt is verely preſent.
                  Har. Fol. 50.
               
               Chriſt therefore is not diuided, by one,
Or two, Or moe, as your blaſphemous
In
                     •
                  ention dare make, but, the ſelfeſame
Chriſt, is by diuers and ſundrie waies diſpenſed.
For in A naturall and leſſer
Example: Your Anima, Life, Or Sowle,
is but one: the ſame is Whole in your litle
finger, Whole in your thumbe, and in euery
part of your body, Whole. Yet, you haue
not (I trow) ſo many lyues by tale, as you
haue toes and fingers. Now, if your brethern,
Or other vnlerned, wil not perceaue



this true Principle, that, Anima eſt tota
in toto, & tota in qualibet parte,
which yet your ſelf, I truſt, doe admitt,
how litle can they comprehend of Chriſtes
whole preſence, vnder either kynde of the
Sacrament? And how deſperate are you, to
make ſome beleue, that D. Hardinges opinion
is, that one body of Chriſt, is in the
Breade, An other in the Cup? Whereas you
can not be ignorant, of the Catholike and
Receiued Faithe herein.
               M. Hardinge,The 14. Example. Iew. 158 Fanſie. ſeemeth to reaſon thus: Ephrē
made homilies in the Syrian tongue: And S.
Hierome tranſlated the Bible into the Slauō
Tongue: Ergo, the Common Seruice, was in
the Latine or Greeke tongue.
               
                  Many thinges ſeeme vnto you M. Iew.
which are not ſo in deede. For D. Harding
in theſe places which you allege, ſuſteineth
the perſon, not of an Opponent (as to you
it ſeemeth) which maketh argument for his
owne ſyde, But of a Reſpondent (As his
boke declareth) which putteth awaie the
obiections of his aduerſarie.Har. Fol. 74. 
                        〈◊〉
                      75. As in Exāple:
The homilies which Ephrem made in
the Syrian Tongue, and the ſcripture



which S. Hierome tranſlated into the
Slauon tongue, were not part of the
Publike ſeruice, nor ſerued to that purpoſe:
Ergo, It is to no purpoſe to proue
by them, that the Publik ſeruice was
in the mother tongue.
               
               To this effect D. Har. anſwereth: And
doth not at all gather by holy Ephrem Or S.
Hierom, that the Seruice was in the Latine
or Greeke tongue. There is a proper
Place to doe euery thing in, And the Opponent
and Reſpondentes partes, are diſtinct
one from the other.
               Here M. Hardinge taketh in hande,The 15. Example. Iew. 158 to Anſwer
the Authorities by me alleged, And that
with this ſpecial note of Remembrance in y•
margin, M. IVELS ALLEGATION
SOLVTED. It appeereth his Solutions be
very ſhort. For what ſo euer be alleged, it is
ſufficient for him, to ſaie, WHAT THEN?
For whereas I ſaied &c.What a do
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     pon no 
                        •
                     ccasi
                     
                        ••
                      saugng M. Iew. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Al this is ſone Anſwered.
For M. Har. ſaith, WHAT THEN?

                     〈◊〉
                   alleged the ſaieing of S. Baſile, That the
ſounde &c. The ſaieing of S. Hierome, THat
y• noiſe &c. Lykewiſe of Chryſoſtom, COmmon
petitions &c. But WHAT THEN?



ſaith M. Harding, why WHAT THEN?
Thinketh M. Harding, that the Authoritie
of Arnobius, S. Ambroſe, S. Auguſtine, S. Baſile,
S. Hierome, S. Chryſoſtome and other
holy fathers is ſo light, that he is able to blow
thē all awaye, with theſe two vaine ſyllables,
WHAT THEN?
               Here lacketh no Inuention, here lacketh
no Amplificatiō, but only a Iuſt cauſe
to beſtow them vpon. For in deede, D.
Harding ſaieth vnto M. Iewel (rowling in
his Authorities) WHAT THEN? but
he addeth further, No man denietb you
this. How then, M. Iewel? Doth D. Har.
thinke, the authoritie of holy Fathers to be
light? Or, that he is able to blowe them all
awaie, wt two vayne ſyllables? No verely
his Sprite is not ſo mightie. But he directeth
his (WHAT THEN) only to you,
no Father yet, nor Holy one, aſkyng, to
WHAT END you be ſo erneſt, in that
which no man denieth you? Becauſe he reuereuceth
the holy Fathers, therefore doth
he admit their Authorities: but becauſe it
greeueth hym to ſee them brought furth,
for a ſhew only and countenaunce to be
made on your ſyde, without any iuſt



occaſion or purpoſe: therfore he demaundeth
of you, by a WHAT THEN,
to ſhew the cauſe wherfore you alleged thē.
You draw a faire length M. Iewel, but you
ſhoote at a wronge marke, Or at none
rather at all.
               But he ſaieth,The 16. Example. Iew. 199 Needeleſſe Feare. The place of S. Paule, is doubt
ful &c. S. Ambroſe, S. Auguſtine, S. Chryſoſ.
&c. vnderſtode it diuerſly. And wil he therfore
conclude thus: Theſe Fathers miſtook S.
Paules Senſe, Ergo S Paule had no ſenſe? Or,
diuers Doctours, touching this place, had diuerſe
Iudgements: Ergo, we muſt haue no
Iudgement.
               Troble not yourſelfe M. Iewel, with
any of theſe doubtes. for he geaueth you no
occaſion. But in anſwering your argumēt,
and not in forming any of his owne, he requireth
of you,1. Cor. 14 that, S. Paules ſenſe, where
he ſpeaketh of the bleſſing, and ſpeaking wt 
Spirit, being ſo doubtfull as it is, you
ſhould not ſo preciſely conclude that he
meaneth by Praing in Spirit,
                     
                        •
                     ar. Fol. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   ye prayeing
with a noiſe of ſtrange wordes, after
your ſtrange Interpretation: Or crake
before the people, that S. Paules wordes,
are moſt manifeſt, that al publike Seruice,



ſhould be in the Vulgare Tongue.
               Now let vs conſider M. Hardinges reaſons.
               The ſtate, ſaieth he,The 17. Example, Iew. 204. Slaunderouſly. of the primitiue Churche
was farr vnlike the ſtate of the Church we be
now in: Ergo we are not bound to S. Paules
Commaundementes.
               For ſhame of your ſelfe, why make you
D. Harding to ſpeake ſo Contemptuouſly
of the Apoſtle, and ſo proudly of him ſelfe?Har. 95.
His mynd rather is, that, It is no Commaundement
at al of the Apoſtle, becauſe
there were neceſſarye occaſions, to geaue it
in the primitiue Church, which are not ſo
neceſſary now: And ſo it ceaſeth to be a Cō
                  maundement
vnto vs. As, that women
ſhould goe couered, it was his expreſſe Cō
                  maundement,
yet now, I truſt, you make
noe cōſcience of it,1. Cor. 11 to ſuffer your Siſters to
goe wt open face. Not becauſe you Reaſon
thus: we are not bounde to the Apoſtles com
maundement, but, becauſe the ſtate of this
tyme, and that, beinge diuers, you would
interprete, that it continueth no more to be

                     •
                   Commaundement.
               Againe he ſaieth:The 18. Example. Iew. 204 Some one or other in
a pariſſhe vnderſtandeth ſomwhat of the
Latine tongue: Ergo they owght to haue
the Serulce in a ſtrange Tongue.Har. fol 95. Not ſo
M. Iewel, but: Ergo the latine tongue



is not vtterly Strange and vnknowen,
And therefore not forbidden by S. Paule.
The People is ſufficiently i
                     •
                  ſtructed in Religiō:The 10. Exemple. Iew. 204 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
They come togeather now, not ſo much
to be inſtructed, as to praie: ergo, they ought
to haue the Seruice in a Strange tongue.
               Neither is this ſo, M. Iewel, but
Ergo there is no neceſsitie, wherefore
it ſhould be in the vulgare. As, for this
Abſolute concluſion, that it ought to be in
Latine, how can any Catholitie make it,
Whereas it is confeſſed, that the Pope hath
diſpenſed with the Slauons to haue their
Seruice in the vulgare Tongue, And may,
if cauſe ſo require, permit it alſo vnto other
Countries.
               It were good (ſaieth M Harding) the people
vnderſtode the Seruice.The 10. Example. Iew. 206 Forgette not
this good Reader, that the People vnderſtode
their Seruice M. Harding himſelfe confeſſeth
it were good. And why ſo?
               Yea but remember, good Reader, or els
marke D. Hardinges owne wordes, in
which, he ſpeaketh not abſolutly of the people,
but of people hauing humble and Reuerent
hartes. And ſuch to vnderſtande
their Seruice it were (he graunteth)



good. but ſee what foloweth in M. Iewel.
               And why ſo? doubtleſſe becauſe is forced
to ſee and ſay, that it would redound to
the Glorie of God, And to the greate Cumfort
and Profite of the people. Therefore
he faieth, it WERE GOOD. whereof
we maie gather this argument, of the contrary:
Then, that the people in this brute ſort,
is kept ſtil in ignorance,Much making of nothing. not vnderſtandinge
any portion of their Common Seruice, by M.
Hardinges confeſsion, It is il. And is it not
lawful to doe that is Good, to Redreſſe that
Is il, to ſeeke Gods glorie, And the cumfort
of his People, without conſent of a General
Councel? &c.
               It were Good M. Iewel, euery man
to know, The Rules of Phyſik, (to haue
thereby how to helpe hymſelf) The Statutes
of the Common Law, (the better to
keepe them,) The Counſel of God in working
owr Redemptiō: And may you then,
wel gather this Argument of the contrarie,
that it is il to be ignorant of Phiſike, Law, &
Diuinitie? Surely, leaſt you ſhould take
this aduantage, And ſhew after a wiſe ſorte
your folly,Shameful Craft or Errour. D. Harding prouided very
well, but that you diuide his ſentēce, which
is but one. For, after he had ſaied:



                  It were good the people hauing humble
& reuerēt hartes vnderſtode ye ſeruice:
Har. I denie not: Although you make, not only
a ful point there, but alſo an ende of your
31. diuiſion, as who ſhould thinke, D. Har.
had ſaied as much as he wil in this ſentēce:
Yet there foloweth immediatly this aduer
ſatiue, yet al, ſtandeth not in vnderſtan
dinge. By which he meaneth expreſly,
that though it were Good, the people to
vnderſtand their ſeruice, yet it is not
il, to be vnſkilful thereof, becauſe al
ſtandeth not in vnder ſtandinge, as he
proueth owt of two places of S. Auguſtine.
               Now (ſee your fidelitie M. Iewel) this
Aduerſatiue YET, which openeth the matter,
And ſhould goe together with ye former
parte of the ſentence, you cut awai
                     •
                   cleane
from it, And begyn your 32. diuiſion with
it: that you might ſeeme not to haue Reaſoned
al in vaine, in ſaieing: This is good, ergo
the other is il. Whereas if you take D. Har.
whole meaning, you ſhal finde him to ſay
no more in Effect, but, This is good: yet ye


                     
other is not to be miſlyked. Haue you any
Priuilege thus to peruert right Senſes at
your pleaſure?
               Owt of Origine M. Harding gathereth
this Reaſon:The 21. Example. Few. 210 The Angels are delited to heare
vs reade or Praie although we of our weaknes
know not throughly what we ſpeake:
Ergo the people in Origens tyme had the
Common Seruice in a ſtrange tongue. Not
ſo M. Iewel, although the Concluſion be
true. but if you add further to the Antecedent
as you ſhould doe, that the Reading
of Pſalmes though not vnder ſtanded, do
prouoke the Angels to help vs, then foloweth
the right conſequent in deede,
Ergo there cometh profite to the Reader
and hearer of the ſeruice in the
Latine tongue,
                  Har. 97▪
                   
                  though it be not vnderſtanded.
               
               The people,The 22. Example: Iew. 214 ſaieth M. Harding, is groſſe
and ſimple, And can not vnderſtand the ſcriptures,
by hearing the ſame in the Mother
tongue: Ergo, they muſt heare it pronounced
in the Latine tongue. This ſemeth to be
a very ſimple Argument.
               It is ſo in deede, yet it is of your owne
making which myſlike it. For D. Har.



concludeth after an other ſort, ſaieing:
Ergo, if our new maſters wil condemne
the Latine ſeruice in the Latine
Churche,
                  Had. Fol. 98. 
                  for that the people vnderſtand
it not, thei muſt alſo condemne,
for a great part, ye Engliſhe ſeruice,
Which, the common people, for ye greateſt
parte of the Scriptures read therein, doe
not vnderſtand.
               Seruice in the vulgare Tongue,The 23. Example. Iew. 216 is cauſe of
Schiſmes and errours: Ergo, within 6. hundred
yeares afte
                     •
                   Chriſt, it was miniſtred in
ſome place, in a tongue vnknowen vnto the
people.Falſely. The force of this concluſion is euident.
A very child may ſone ſee through it.
               Much more then, you ſee through it
your ſelfe. And doe ye not then perceaue, y•
it is of your owne ſubtile making, and
none of D. Hardinges, whoſe Reaſon is
this:
               The people of thoſe countries,Har. 99. where
the ſeruice was in the vulgare tongue
haue continued in ſchiſmes and Errours:
Ergo, example is not to be
taken of them, for the ſeruice in the



vulgare Tongue.
               Of S. Ambroſes wordes, M. Harding reaſoneth
thus:The 24. Example. Iew. 246 Peter, was the Chiefe of the
Apoſtles, Ergo, the Pope is Head of the vniuerſal
Church. This Argument would be
better conſidered. for as it is, it holdeth but
weakly.
               Verely this is a weake Solution. But
let the Argument be better conſidered, &
formed in thoſe termes which D. Harding
vſeth.
               S. Androw folowed our Sauior before
ye S. Peter did,Amb. 2. Co. 12. Har. 106. And yet Androw
receiued not the Primacie, but Peter:
ergo, the Apoſtolike ſee & Church
of Rome hath the Primacie.
               Conſider you now what Anſwer you
may deuiſe. For this Argument doth not
meddle, with the queſtion of the Apoſtles
Preeminence emong themſelues, vnto
which only you bringe it: but of Primacie
in yt Church of Chriſt, ouer which though
other Apoſtles were generall officers, yet
the ſupremacie was ſingularly in S. Peter.
               Paule went vp to Hieruſalem to viſite PeterThe 25. Example. Iew. 253.


                  
Ergo, the Bishope of Rome, is Head of
the Church.Foliſhely.
               
               Is it not tyme, M. Iewel, either that
ſome Phyſitian, or God hymſelfe viſite
you, either to purge you of that cuil humor
which occupieth your heade: Or to
take vengeance of you, which do ſo abuſe
your Readers in matters of ſo Great
weight? D. Harding hymſelfe maketh no
other Argument in this place, but of Authoritie.
and the reaſon which he bringeth,
and you peruert is Theodoritus an Auncient
Biſhopes: who writing to Pope
Leo ſaieth thus:Har. 108. 
                  If Paule, the preacher
of truth and trumpet of the Holy
Ghoſt ranne to Peter to bring from
hym A determination And declaration,
for them who at Antioche were
in Argument and contention, concerning
lyuing after Moyſes Law: much
more we, which are but ſmal & vile,
ſhal runne to your Throne Apoſtolike,
that of you we maie haue ſalue
for the ſores of the Churches.
               
               
                  
Doe you then, M. Iewel, cal this
goeing for determination in a doubtfull
queſtion nothing els but S. Paules viſiting
of S. Peter? And would you haue it
conceiued, either, that S. Peter was ſicke
there & il at eaſe, Or that for good willes
ſake and curteſie only, S. Paule went to
viſite hym? Byſide this, D. Harding groū
                  ded
not his Concluſion vpon this argument,
but that rather which foloweth
in Theodoritus, which is this:
               For in al thinges it is meete, that
you haue the cheife doinges: Ergo it
foloweth wel of Theodoritus authoritie,
that the Pope is ſupreme.
               The Church of Chriſt is one:
               Ergo, the Pope is an vniuerſal Bishope.The 26. Eyample. Iew. 255
               
               
                  That is an other queſtion, Which D.
Harding went not about to proue by Natural
Reaſon, but his preſent concluſion
is this: A multitude can not continue
ONE,Har. 108. onleſſe it be conteined and
holden in, by ONE: But the Church
continueth ONE, Ergo: it muſt



haue ONE Heade or Gouernour.
               Now, whether the Biſhope of Sarum
or London, or Rome, or Conſtantinople
&c. ſhalbe that One Head, ouer al ye members
of Chriſtes myſtical body in earth,
that may be afterwardes conſydered: but
in yt meane tyme D. Har. goeth no further
then Natural reaſon doth leade hym, that,
in A greate multitude and cumpanie,
it is meete to haue One ouer the reſt,
if thei ſhal be kept in Vnitie.
               
               Mankynd dependeth moſt of ſenſe:The 27. Example. Iew. 257 Vnſenſible.
               
               Ergo the Pope is the Heade of the Vniuerſal
Church. Here is a very vnſenſible Argument▪
nor ſenſe nor reaſon can make it
good.
               Why make you it then? For D. Har.
concludeth not ſo. But, whereas you in
ſayeing Chriſt only to be the Heade of the
Churche, would inferre that the Pope is
not anie Heade at al: in Anſwering this
your obiection, he declareth that, mankynd
dependeth moſte of ſenſe, and
receiueth al lerning and inſtruction
of ſenſible thinges:
                  Har. 108. 
                  Ergo notwithſtanding
Chriſt be the cheife Heade, yet becauſe



he lyueth not viſiblie emong vs,109.
                  the Church hath neede of a man to be
her Gouernour, whom ſhe maie perceiue
by owtward ſenſe. Which man,
whether he muſt be the Pope or no, he
commeth not ſo low in this place.
               M. Hardinges reaſons procede thus:The 28. Example. Iew. fol. 260. God
is careful and hath ſpecial Prouidence for
his Church: Doubtful places of yt ſcriptures
muſt be expoūded: General Councels muſt
he ſummoned: Bishopes being at variance
muſt he reconciled: Ergo, the Bishope of
Rome is Chriſtes General Vicar, and Head
of the Vniuerſal Churche.
               
                  Ergo,
                  Indirectly. (ſaieth D. Har.) by natural reaſon
there muſt be One Heade in ye Churche
and one chiefe ſeruant in ye howſehold
of Chriſt. Mary yt y• Pope is he: yt is out
of the cumpaſſe of natural Reaſon. which
although it attaine vnto it, that by moſt
perfite waie of Gouernemēt, there ſhould
be One heade: Yet yt this or yt man ſhould
be he, by her owne power ſhe cā not bring
it to paſſe. & therefore, it was not directly
ſo cōcluded of D. Har. in this place, as M.
Iewel ful peruerſly gathereth.
               
                  
This is a very poore helpe in deede.The 29. Example. Iew. 274. Fautleſſe. M.
Harding here is faine to reſemble the Biſſhopes
of Rome, touching their doctrine to
 Balaam, to Caiphas And to a Leaden Seale:
And touching their lyues to confeſſe,False. thei
 are Lampes without light.
               The firſt is falſe, through your reporting:
the ſeconde is fautleſſe, in D. Har.
ſaieing. Concerning doctrine, he ſaieth:
that the See of Rome hath this ſingular
Grace, that he which ſitteth in it, is compelled
to teach truthe, like as Balaam and
Caiphas were made to fulfill the bleſſed
wil of God, notwithſtanding their falſehode
and wickedneſſe. The compariſon
therefore is not Ignominious to the Catholikes,
but muſt Glorious to the praiſe
of God, and moſt comfortable to the conſciences
of true Chriſtians. And it conſiſteth,
not as you report it (M. Iewel)
ſpitefully enough, in reſembling the doctrine
of the Biſhopes of Rome, to ye Perſons
of Balaam and Caiphas: but in reſembling
the Prouidence, Aſſiſtance, and
Grace of God,Sophiſtrie. in directing their doctrine
vnto the like Spirite of Trueth and Prophecie,
as God hymſelfe vttered by Balaā
and Caiphas, withowt their good wills.



In reſembling alſo the doctrine of the B.
of Rome, not vnto the mater of a leadden
Scale, but vnto the Forme of a Seale,
which is as true in the baſeſt metal, as in
the pureſt. And ſo let the Biſhop of
Rome be as he wil, his doeinges ſhal not
let the working of God: but as perfite a
printe of his Truth, ſhal be made with a
Leaden Seale, as a Golden.
               Concerning now the other pointe, of
lampes withowt light, he maketh not a
General Rule, nor ſaieth that ye Biſhopes
of Rome are ſo, (which worde you M.
Iewel doe vſe) but, ſometyme (ſaieth he)
the ſee hath failed in Charitie, and it
hath ben in caſe as it might truly ſaie:
Our lampes be without light. And this
may be ſaied, either charitablie enough,
naming no perſons, and ſorowing ye caſe:
either very diſcreetly againſt Heretikes,
which ſo obiect vnto vs the euil liues of
Popes, as though it were an Article of
our faith, that a Pope can neuer ſynne: or
our cauſe were vtterly deſtroied, if ſo
much were confeſſed or graunted, which
is ſo far otherwiſe, that it proueth rather



the prouidence & mercie of God towardes
his Church to be exceding ſure & greate in
aſſiſting the See of Rome, in which euil
men are conſtrained to tel Truthe, yt
ye hope of ye faithful might be ſtedfaſt
in God,
                  Auguſt. epi. 166. and not come & goe at the good
or euil life of any Pope.
               Theſe Examples (I truſt) are ſufficient
and plaine enough of themſelues, not
only to proue, that M. Iewel hath very
diſſorderly behaued hymſelfe, in repeting
of D. Hardings Argumentes, but alſo to
warne euery Indifferent & Gentle reader
of the Daunger which needes muſt folow,
if without further ſerche or Conſideration
of the mater he take that for a Trueth and
Certaintie, which M. Iewel once committeth
vnto printing.
               Note alſo, that al theſe forſayed Argumentes
which M. Iewel hath thruſt out
of their right waie, to find fault with thē:
contynue yet ſtil in their true ſenſe and
meaning, without any iuſt Replie or Anſwer
to the contrarie. And ſo muſt thoſe
pointes of the Controuerſies, betwene
hym and vs, remaine as wel proued on
the Catholykes ſyde, which are touched



ſpecially in theſe forſaied argumentes and
Examples, vnto which he hath geauen
no direct or cleare Anſwer.
            
            
               How M. Iewel diſgraceth D. Har.
Authorities.
CAP. V.
               IT foloweth now ſhortly to declare, how
M. Iewel Diſgraceth and extenuateth,
the Authorities of D. Har. For emong
Sophiſtes, it is one of the kindes of
Anſwering, when they can not directly or
ſufficiētly put away the argument: to deface
then, by A croked worde, and a wrie
mouth, Or a Lippe (as it were) the whole
mater. Which, the more vngracious it is,
the deeper it is printed in the myndes of
to many: And the viler it is, the more it
needeth to be diſcouered, that erneſt and
ſad Truthe, may not be ſo eaſely outfaced.
               Surely if in temporall maters, where
the thinges that men ſtriue vpon are ſenſible,
this maner of dealing (of which
Examples ſhall folow out of M. Iewell)



be vſed, the Stomakes doe ſo increaſe, y•
it maketh men quickly to let goe Wordes,
and to come to blowes. Yet God forbid,
that I ſhould wiſſhe for any ſuch Concluſion:
but this doe I meane only, that if ſo
greate offenſe be taken of a Temporall
Iniurie: much more it ſhould greeue vs
to ſee maters of Religion depraued. And
truely in Temporall cauſes, men oftimes
are to quicke, but concerning the State
of right faith and vnderſtanding, they
neede not miſtruſt leaſt they be to deuont
and diligent. Let the Examples declare,
whether I burden M. Iewel rightly, or
no.
               
                  D. Har. after other cauſes which moued
him, not to diſcredite y• Treatiſe of Amphilochius
vpō S. Baſiles life & miracles, he
ſayeth at the laſt, that this Treatiſe, is to
be ſeē in the Librarie of S. Naſarius,
in the Citie of Verona in Italie, Writen
in Veleme, for three hūdred yeres
paſt, bearing the name of Amphilochius
Biſhope of Iconium.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  But, A
Calues ſkinne (quod M. Iewel) is no ſufficient
warrant of trueth.
               
                  
In deede who can deny it? Neither
doth D. Harding Conclude that it is to
be credited, becauſe it was writen in veleme:
but becauſe it was writen ſo long
agoe, and kept to this day in a Librarie at
Verona.
               D. Harding putteth a caſe of foure or
fyue,Another Example. which in time of ſikneſſe ſhould be deſirous
to Receiue: And, if neither the
Preiſt be able, neither other be willing to
Communicate with them, may not (ſaieth
he) they Recei
                     •
                  e ſeuerally? And doe not
they Communicate together? See now,
M. Iewells demeanure.
               Alas (ſaieth he) muſt he leaue al the old
Doctours and holy Fathers, and begg at
deathes dore, to geat ſumwhat to help his
Maſſe?
               Alas M. Iewel, are you ſo vnſenſible,Iew. 31. Kynd hart.
that you thinke it to be a leaning of all
Old Doctours, to make an Argument of
A Sicke mans caſe? And, as you haue allreadie
made a Rule, that no Authoritie againſt
you ſhall ſtand, but that which is
taken, iuſt out of the next ſix hundred after
Chriſt: will you ſo now perchannce contemne
all Reaſons as beggarly, which
are not without a certaine precincte of



Deathes Dore? I permit it to your Conſcience,
whether this your (Alas) became
your State, Or can be ſuffered in an erneſt
Queſtion.
               An other Example.A Third Example. Here firſt I
would aſke the Indifferent Reader, whether
an Engliſh man borne might not vſe
in his writinges the Authoritie of S. Baſile?
And whether, S. Baſile reporting it,
y• they which lyned in wilderneſſe, Or in
Alexandria, Or in Egypt, had the Communion
at home, And kept it with thē ſelues,
And Receyued it of them ſelues: it were
not lawfull to ſpeake it againe, and to vſe
that Teſtimonie? Yet M. Iewell ſayeth:
               Verely,Iew. 138. if M. Harding could finde any
thing in the Church, he would not thus
hunt the Mountaines: neither would he flee
for ayde into AEgypt, if he could finde any
neere at home.
               What would this felow call the Liuing
it ſelf of holy men in Mountaines, which
nicknameth the diligent gathering of Argumentes
out of their lyuing a hunting of
Mountaines: And calleth the vſing of the
Fathers of Egypts Authoritie, a fleeing
for ayde into AEgypt? How far I pray



you, will you ſuffer vs to goe for an Argument,
without Obiecting of fleeing,
vnto vs? Yet what aſke I you Leaue Or
Counſel in this mater, which am ſure, y•
Truth is not founde only in Europe: but
in euery place of the world, where Chriſt
is confeſſed.
               Againe, Who goeth farther? He that
goeth in his Anſwer beyonde Reaſon, Or
he y• Reaſoneth vpon a fact done beyonde
the See called Mediterraneum, And applieth
it to his purpoſe? Keepe your ſelf
warme at home M. Iewell, as long as
you may: for if you be once out of your
owne Countrie, your Religion is ſo Vniuerſall
and Catholike, that many myles
before ye come to the Mountaines or Egypt,
you will be taken for a Renegate.
               He hath alleged (ſaieth M. Iewell of
Doctor Harding) two women,The fourth Example. Iew. 142 Diſdainefully. three ſicke
folk in their death beddes: Perſonnes excō
                  municate,
Infantes, Phrenetikes, and Madd
men: He hath alleged Napkyns, Cheſtes,
Chambers, Mountaines and wilderneſſe.
               He alleged theſe in deede, to proue
Sole Receiuing. And if your Maſterſhip
contemne the perſons, becauſe they were



                  VVomen, Sicke folke, Infantes, Phrenetikes:
Or the thinges themſelues, becauſe
in telling of thē, mention is made, of
Napkins, Cheſtes, Chambers and
Mountaines: Yet let the Indifferent
Reader conſider, that theſe baſe Perſons
and Thinges were not, by or for thēſelues
reſpected of D. Harding: but the Authoritie
of Tertulliā, Euſebius, S. Cyprian,
S. Baſile, S. Ambroſe, and other (out of
whome theſe Examples of Women, Infantes,
Mad men, Napkins and Cheſtes,
were taken) was only regarded and folowed.By ſuch Eloquēce as M. Iewel vſeth, the profeſſed enemies of Chriſts Goſpel, might furniſſhe their wickednesse. Matth. 8. 9. 12.
               
               Sainct Matthew (all faithfull beleue)
did write a True Goſpell, the Authoritie
thereof is moſte vndoubted and holy.
Would M. Iewell then thinke it ſincerely
done to ſcoff out the matter, And to depraue
the whole, by telling vs, that all the
diſcourſe or the moſt that he maketh, is of,
Lazares, Boyes, Old womens Agues,
Sicke folkes, Blinde beggars, Dūme
perſons, Mad men, Lunatikes, Old



Nettes, Barley Loaues, two Fiſſhes,
and Greate Store of Hey.
               
               S. Auguſtine teſtifieth of the Peoples
affection in his tyme, that for Reuerence
towardes the Sacrament, they were carefull
to haue a cleane Lynen Clothe to carie
it therein home with them,Hard. fo. 54. And receaue it,
when they were diſpoſed. S. Cyprian
witneſſeth, that the Sacrament was kepte
in a womans cheſt, & that when ſhe being
vnworthy, would haue opened and Receiued
it: fire came furth and fraied her away.
And in this ſorte could I reherſe other authorities,
to proue, that Sole Receauinge
was not only vſed, but Reuerently alſo
vſed, in the Primitiue Church. And will
M. Iewel ſo Extenuate theſe matters, as
though it were no more worth then a cheſt,
or a Napkin, that which is alleaged of the
reporte of S. Auguſtine, and S. Cyprian?
               If it lothed thoſe Holy and Reuerend
Fathers to ſpeake of Cheſtes & Napkyns,
when the narration and hiſtorie ſo Required:
may it freely be ſkorned at, to reherſe
ye ſelf ſame fact after them againe, and to
make mention of Cheſtes and Napkyns?
But here alſo, let any Indifferent man be
Iudge, whether it ſtandeth with the Grauitie



of an high Miniſter, ſo cōtemptuouſly
to ſpeake of the Teſtimonies of Auncient
Fathers.
               D. Harding alleageth the Councels of
Agatha,The fyfth Example. Hard. fol. 42. 43. of Auerna, and Conſtantinople,
which make mention of priuate Oratories
& Chapels to ſay Maſſe in. Here vpon ſaith
M. Iewel:
               In his former allegation, he ſought his
Maſſe in litle Townes and Villages: now he
hunteth for it, in priuate mens houſes.Iew. 73. Much in his paſtim
               
               Was the laſt Supper of Chriſte, Or his
Inſtitutinge there of the Sacrament, and
Sacrifice of the new Lawe, any pointe the
worſe, becauſe it was but an obſcure Parlor,
where he wrought thoſe Myſteries?
And call you this A Huntinge for a Maſſe
in Priuate houſes, to Reaſon out of the
open decree of three Auncient Councels?
If you would vſe leſſe barking and byting,
then to hunt after Auncient Recordes,
we would not miſlike it in you.
               D. Hardinge proueth out of Leontius
a Biſſhope in Cypres, that:
               Iohn the holy Patriarche of Alexandria,The ſixth Example. Hard. fol. 43.
ſayed Maſse, and Receaued
alone.
               
                  
M. Iewel inferreth:
               A ſtraite caſe for M. Hardinge to runne
to Alexandria, A thouſande miles beyonde
al Chriſtendome, to ſeeke his Maſſe, and that
not in Open Church neither, but in Priuate
Oratories.
               Why is it a ſtraite caſe? May not a Lerned
man as ſone come from Englande to
Alexandria,Iew. 78. Childiſſhly as he may turne from one
boke to an other, and thinke nowe of one
thing, then of an other? Alexandria is not
ſo farre in miles beyonde al Chriſtendome,
as you be far in your degrees beyonde all
Grauitie. For if the Authoritie of Leontius
doth not weighe with you, it is A
plaine anſwer to refuſe it: but to obiecte
the bringing of an Argument out of an
Hiſtorie reported for done in Alexandria,
and to Terme it A Runninge beyonde all
Chriſtendome, it may be founde in children
which in their Declamations are permitted
to vſe what ſo euer Figure they can,
Or in the Vices parte vppon the Scaffolde,
Or in Ieſters monthes at the tables
of Secular men: but in theyr Writinges,
which would ſeeme to folow the Spirite of
Chriſt, and Zeale of Trueth, it can not be
ſuffered.
               
                  
S. Baſile (Amphilochius writeth) was
thought of Chriſte to celebrate Maſſe, in
whiche he diuided the Sacramente into
three partes, and Receauing one by hym
ſelfe alone, the other two he Reſerued. And
ſo by this Teſtimonie, Priuate Maſſe is
ſufficiently proued. Or, if it proue nothing
to hym whiche refuſeth the Authoritie of
Amphilochius by whome it is writen, yet
to him which would take it for a true hiſtorye,
no doubt but it ſerueth for Priuate
Maſſe. M. Iewell then ſuppoſing it to
be true, let vs ſee how he tranaileth to diſgrace
it. His wordes are theſe:
               
                  But if all this (that Amphilochius reporteth
of S. Baſils Saicing of Maſſe) were
good record, and mater of trueth: yet & caet.
               
               What intend you by this Yet? Would ye
not beleue it? Would ye not embrace it?
Would ye not be ruled by it? Would ye not
yeld and Subſcribe? Conſidering that Amphilochius liued wtin ye ſix hundred after
Chriſt? No ſurely, you would not. For you
haue ſo many wayes to depraue thinges, yt
you may graunt our aſking vnto vs, and
kepe your ſelfe ſtill to the winninge ſyde.
Which how cunningly you do in this place
I will take the paynes to conſider.
               
                  
If al this were good record &c. Yet were
it but a Miracle.
               Do ye make a But at a Miracle? And ſuch
a Miracle,Marke to the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of this place the exquiſi
                        •
                     e excep
                     
                        •
                     ions againſt the witneſſe. as ſtandeth with a Truth? I 
                     •
                  oked,
that you wuld haue diminiſſhed ſomewhat
of the price of the Good Record of
which you 
                     •
                  oake, and to that end your YET
did lead vs: but you haue ſo forgoten your
ſlfe, that you make it the ſtronger, by that
very thing, which you brought to weaken
it by. For a Record may be true and good,
and yet it foloweth not the fact to be alowed:
but if a Miracle be wrought about it,
it is not only to be compted as True, becauſe
of the thing it ſelf & witneſſe of Man,
but alſo to be alowed as Good, becauſe of
the teſtimonie of God geauen to it by Miracle.
It foloweth in M. Iewel:
               But a Viſion.
               As who ſhould ſay, that an Hiſtorie were
the worſe, becauſe it conſiſeth of a Viſion
from God, and not of the externall ſight
and Record of man. What wiſe man would
euer ſay: Let it be true, that Iacob ſaw Angels
goeing and cumming vp and doune
vpon the ladder betwene Heauen & earth,
yet were it but a Viſion. Is this your ſight
in Diuinitie, to diminiſſh a Truth by the



manner of Repreſenting it. It may be
proued that to ſee thinges in a Viſion, whē
the mind is eleuated from bodyly ſenſes,
is perfiter in degree of dignitie, then to ſee
them with corporall eyes, where more
meanes and more groſſe are occupied. Yet
(ſayeth M. Iewel, contemptuouſly) it were
but a Viſion. It foloweth in hym:
               And perhaps a Dreame.
               Wiſely ſayed, I promiſe you, and agreably
to your former wordes. For how can
theſe two Propoſitions ſtande together?
If it were a matter of truth, yet perhaps but a
Dreame. Doe not theſe, the one playnly
hynder the other? Or can ye graunt yt one,
and feare the other? Nay, if it were of good
Recorde and mater of trueth, then vndoutedly
it was no Dreame. But you, of a great
confidence and courage doe permit vs the
firſt, And yet of a miſerable forgetfulneſſe
or fearfulneſſe, are not reſolued in ye ſecond.
In ſayeing: If all were good Record: you
permit vs to take it, and your ſelfe, by
puttinge the caſe, doe graunte it: In addinge,
Yet were it perhaps but a Dreame,
you take awaye from vs that whiche you
graunted, and your owne ſelfe are contraried
by your ſelfe. For (to ſaye it againe)



if it were mater of truth, it was no dreame:
and if perhaps it were A Dreame, you
ſhould not then haue bene ſo abſolute or
bountifull, as to let vs receaue it for a mater
of Trueth. It foloweth:
               But one mans fact.
               You aſked but for any one ſufficient example,
when you challenged vs. The fault
therfore can not be in that it is One, but if
you dare anſwer that S. Baſils fact alowed
by Chriſt himſelfe, is not ſufficient, then
ſay you ſomewhat. It foloweth.
               But once done.
               Once done is truly done, and ſo much is
inough againſt thē which deny y• it was at
any time done. Againe, Once done in the
preſence of Chriſte, and by hys apointement,
is for euer done, to confirme the faith
of the Catholikes. I foloweth:
               Not in the day tyme, but at midnight.
               What thinke you then M. Iewell, that
there is no Trueth, when the Sunne is
downe? Or that euil Sprites only doe
occupie the worlde at midnight? Or
that God is A God of the daye, and not
of the Nyghte? Is not this A worthie
cauſe to ſet loſſe by S. Baſiles Maſſe,
for that, whē other were aſleepe, he waked



And that Chriſte made him not tarie till
brode daye, but ſtraite wayes to riſe and
Say Maſſe at midnight? What fault you
find with midnight I can not tel: but your
Literall ſenſe in this place beinge ſo fooliſſhe,
either you haue ſome pure and fine
Myſticall ſenſe, Or els you take ſo litle reſt
in the night, that in the day time your wittes
be not your owne. It foloweth:
               And that without cumpanie, and without
Witneſſe.
               Concerning the companie, Chriſt and
his Angels were preſent: concerning the
Witneſſes, take awaye Eubulus which ſaw
it, yet as many were preſent, as were at the
Annuntiation of our Ladie, Or the Reſurrection
of Chriſt our Sauiour. at whiche
though no man was preſent, yet by the
euent of thinges, and credite of thē which
ha
                     •
                  e reported it, it is as true as an Article
of our faith. Againe, what neede witneſſes,
your ſelfe permitting the Recorde of Amphilochius
to be good, and the mater true?
How hangeth this together M. Iewell?
If all were true, yet was it done without witne
                        •
                     ſe
For what would you ſay I pray you?
meane you this, that if it were true, yet it
was falſe? Or, if the Recorde were good, yet



is it not to be credited? For to what other
purpoſe ye complaine of lacke of witneſſe,
I can not tell, but for that you iudge the
Recorde without it, not to be good. Otherwiſe
if you will not plucke backe your Liberalitie,
nor take awaye that which you
haue graunted, but let it ſtand that the Record
is good, why diſgrace you it by ſaying,
yet it was without witneſſe? And ſo by conſequence,
no good Recorde. Thus in this
Teſtimonie alſo, it appeareth, what wiſedome
and Arte M. Iewel hath in defacing
of Authorities: and that after, him ſelfe (all
circumſtancies conſidered) hath permitted
them to ſtand for true and good.
               D. Harding,The vi
                        ••
                     . Example. out of S. Bede, doth make
reporte of one Iames a Deacon of Yorke,
a very cunning man in ſonge: and of Cednom
a Diuine maker of Dities,Hard. fol. 88 90. whome
M. Iewell calleth Cedname (For ſo his
name is reade in Beda writen in parchement
ſaieth he, forgetting him ſelfe that a ſheepeſkynne
can be no more ſufficient warrant▪ of
trueth, then a calfeſkinne) but (be it Cednom
or Cednam) what ſaieth he to hym,
Or to Iames the Deacon?
               I litle thought, M. Harding would ſo much
haue bewrayed his want,18
                        •
                     . Blinde Harper. to proue his mater
by Pipers and Poetes.
               
                  
Make you no more accompt, of Muſicians
and Verſifiers? Many a Minſtrel is
in your Miniſterie, and many A Twanger
vpon his harp A: & whome venerable Bede
commendeth to the poſteritie with ſingular
praiſes, are they but Pypers and Poetes
with you? Aſaph, Heman and Idithū,
becauſe they made, and ſonge prayſes vnto
God, might a ſober Panyme call them Pipers
and Poetes? Iuuencus, Sedulius, Prudentius,
ought they to be of litle price or eſtimation,
becauſe they were makers of
Verſes? Cednom (ſayeth Bede) made
ſonges, conteyning mater of the holy Scripture,
with ſuch exceding ſweetneſſe, and with
ſuch a grace: that many feelinge theyr hartes
compuncte and prickte, with hearinge
and reading of them, withdrewe them ſelues
from the loue of the worlde. Speake not
therefore M. Iewell againſte the Grace
of God: And theſe ſweete meanes, whiche
he hath prouided, to allure men thereby
to his Loue, terme them not Pypinge or
Poetrye.
               Perchaunce, if ye had ſome ſuch pyper
as Cednom was, to ſyng and play before
you, when the Sprite trowbleth you,



there might be hope, that you would be
more quiete and reaſonable. Hope, I ſay,
there might be, but no aſſurance, becauſe
ſometymes you are ſo taken, that I feare,
if Kinge Dauid hym ſelfe ſhould play
before you, though you would not be ſo
furious, as to caſte your ſpeare at hym:
yet you would be ſo madly meryly diſpoſed,
as to call him a Piper.
               By theſe few Examples then, lette it
be tried, whether M. Iewell hath folowed
an honeſt faſhion, in his Replieng. And
whether it becummeth hym, which would
be compted vprighte in his Do
                     •
                  inges,
ſo to play the Childes, the Womans, the
Madmans, the Phrenetykes, Or the
Mynſtrels parte, in Toyinge, in Ieſtinge,
in Imagyninge, and in Harpinge
ſo as he hath done, about D. Hardinges
Teſtimonies. For what is there now
lefte, which may not be (after M, Iewels
Rhetorike) contemned?
               If the Authoritie of ſuche as haue
writen at any tyme theſe nyne hundred
yeres be alleaged, it is (ſayeth M. Iewel
ſtraitewayes) out of the cumpaſſe of the
firſt ſix hundred yeres.
               
                  
If we bringe the Example of ſuch as
lyued ſolitarilie within thoſe ſix hundred
yeres: Ye flee (ſayth he) for ayde into Aegipt,
or ye hunt the Mountaines.
               
               If the Example of populouſe Cities far
diſtant from vs be alleaged, then ye goe
(ſaieth he) A thowſand miles beyond Chriſtendome.
               
               If ye ſpeake of their caſe, which are nigh
their death, Alas (ſaieth he) ye begge at deathes
dore.
               
               If the Auncient Fathers, S. Cyprian,
S. Baſile, S. Ambroſe, and others, be
brought in, to confirme your purpoſe, you
muſt take heede, that no mention in theyr
teſtimonies be made of Boyes, women,
Infantes, Phrenetikes, Cheaſtes, Chambers,
wilderneſſe &c? For then al the whole
ſhalbe diſgraced, becauſe of thoſe baſe thinges
and Perſons.
               Beſyde this, a confeſſed Trueth is not
to be eſtemed, if it were either but once, Or
without cumpanie, Or done at midnight.
               
               To be ſhorte, no Muſitian ſhalbe alowed,
becauſe he is a Piper, and no maker
of verſes, neuer ſo good, becauſe he is a
Poete. And ſo the concluſion will be, that
nothing almoſte ſhalbe brought ſo worthy



and euident: but M. Iewel, by his arte
and policie, wil make it obſcure and ſimple.
If this be tolerable, thē is D. Harding anſwered:
but if this be vnreaſonable, then
hath not M. Iewell vſed a neceſſarie point
of diſcretion Or modeſtie.
            
            
               Of M. Iewels wrangling with
D. Harding.
CAP. 6.
               THis, whiche already I haue ſpecified,
is to muche for a ſober man to
vſe: but this yet is not all that M.
Iewel abuſeth himſelfe in, againſte
D. Harding. For byſide peruerting or defacing
of his Authorities, he wrangleth alſo,
very contentiouſly with him. And that,
not after a general ſenſe only or meaninge
of this worde, but after a Singular & proper
faſſhion. For (to ſpeake in general) Al
the deprauing of D. Hardings Argumentes,
al the diſgracing of his witneſſe, al the
turning and ſhifting from one pointe and
ſtate of the queſtion to an other, which (as
I haue ſhewed) M. Iewel vſeth in the firſt



foure articles: all this (I ſay) may wel goe
vnder the name of contention and quareling:
and in this ſenſe, the whole Replie, is
ſtuffed therewithall. But, in this place, I
note that ſingular kind of cōtētiouſnes, by
force of which, any man driueth his aduerſary
to prouing of that, which is either ſo
poſſible, that a thouſand experiencies declare
it: either ſo credible, that they them
ſelues which aſke for profe of it, do openly
and plainly confeſſe, that they doe not deny
it. As in three or fower Examples:
               VVhat if foure or fiue (ſayeth D.
Harding) of ſundrie houſes in a ſicknes
tyme, being at the point of death, in
one Pariſshe, require to haue theyr
rightes er they departe?
               This caſe, is not only poſſible by courſe of
time, but alſo common through infection of
cōtagious aiers. But yet M. Iew. replieth.
               What if no man happen to be ſicke? Then
hath M Harding loſte a good Argument.
               But what if ſome happen to be ſicke?
Then haue you (M. Iewell) found a Rude
Obiection. For of the two, which is more
poſſible? To haue in a plage tyme, foure



or fiue Sycke: Or to haue a tyme of
Sycknes, and none at all Sycke in it?
For, of a tyme of Sycknes, D. Hardinge
dyd ſpeake. And if you will put (A what
if) againſte the tyme it ſelfe, and ſuppoſe
that there is no plage at all: as this I
graunt is poſſible, ſo is, by lyke Reaſon,
the other alſo. Neither can you by putting
your caſe, ſo diſtroie the contrarie ſuppoſition,
that you might ſeeme to make it
fruſtrate and voide: Or diſapointe thereby
your Aduerſaries purpoſe.
               What if foure or fyue Principall Proteſtantes
ſhould be connerted by Reading
the Bookes of Catholykes: could not
they vtter many ſecrete Deuiſes of yours,
for Open profeſſing of whiche you lacke
but a better world?
               Yea, but ſaie you againe, what if ſuche
wayes be taken for lettinge of Catholyke
Bookes to come into the Realme, that
by Readinge of them, none ſhall ſee what
is Anſwered? In deede, you haue put
me a caſe,Iew. 3
                        •
                     . whiche is lykely inough, and
I could ſone Anſwer vnto it, that it is a
hard Caſe alſo, to Prouoke, and Challenge,
And bid men ſpeak, & make as though we
ſhould haue cōmendation for our freenes.



And at yt very beginning, to let thē yt wuld
and ſhould, or reade or heare what we ſay.
But yet, what were this to y• anſwer of my
queſtion? For it is poſſible inough, that although
you make the ſerche neuer ſo diligent,
yet ſome wiſe men of your owne ſide
wil be deſirous to vnderſtād our anſwers,
& not be haſtie to condēne vs before iudgemēt.
Therfore, whē a likely or poſſible caſe
is put, to make a cleane cōtrary vnto it, as
though it were thē fully refelled, what other
thing is it, but to fight vpon anger, & not
for truth: And to procure troble only to ye
aduerſary, and not to manifeſt and open
your owne doctrine.
               Of what affectiō & humor ſhal I ſay it cū
                  meth,
y• you dare permit ye hiſtorie which
Amphilochius writeth of S. Baſile to be
true,Iew. 91. & yet wil not be ruled by it? Doth not
this proue, y• you haue a ſprite of cōtention
within you, and that you ſhift to make exceptions
againſt the Trueth?Iew. 89.
               
               That you miſlike not daily preaching, &
yet y• you reproue D. Harding for ſaieing y•
in Antioche ye ſcripturs were dayly expoū
                  ded
& preached, doth it not argue a contētio
                     •
                  s
ſtomake? for ſuppoſe yt it were not true,
yet no harm cūming therof vnto ye reader,



what neede was there of a ſpecial and ſolemne
refelling of it? No dout but if you
were diſpoſed (M. Iew.) you could quickly
fynd it owt, that dayly expoſition of the
ſcripture might be in Antioche, and yet ye
cōmon people be called thereunto but once
a weeke, as S. Chryſoſtome ſaieth. For
it might be throughowt the Churches of
Antioche by courſe, and in that courſe, the
ſermon might be one daye in S. Chryſoſtomes
church. Alſo there might be dayly
expounding of the ſcriptures to ye Clergie
though not to the people: And the Propoſition
conteyning in it nothing againſt
good maners, or truth of doctrine, a quiet
man in ſo much matter byſide, requiring
in deede a ful Anſwer, would not haue
troubled hymſelfe with this queſtion.
               When you ſaie in an other place, that,Iew. 16
                        •
                     
                  
                  It is neither denied of you, nor any part of
your quaeſtion, that ſundrie nations in Aſia
the leſſe vnderſtoode not the Greeke, and
yet notwithſtandinge, is not M. Harding
hable to proue it with al his Gheaſſes doe
ye not ſignifie by theſe wordes, that your
good wil is not, plainely and peaceablie
to declare the Trueth of your doctrine:
but your Stomake is againſt ye perſon of



your aduerſarie, and that ye ſeeke to contrarie
his ſaieinges?
               
                  When you ſaye: Verely if a man by waie
of contention, would ſaie, the Licaonical
tongue was a corruptiō or difference of the
Greeke tongue, & not a ſeueral tongue of it
ſelfe, M. Har. ſhould haue much a doe,Iew. 164 to
proue the contrarie: And in ſaieing ſo, whē
yourſelfe by, & by, doe contrarie D. Har.
therein, is it not ſtraitewaies manifeſt, yt
you folow the waye of contention?
               
               More might be brought againſt you,
M. Iew. in this kinde: but if by theſe few
Examples it be perceiued, that you haue
wrangled and ſtriued, where no cauſe was
offered, I truſt that although yourſelf be
ſo affected, yt you wil neuer ſubmit yourſelfe,
And yeld to the Catholike and Romane
Church, yet other, which loue trueth
and Sinceritie, wil take heede how they
commit the ſettling of their myndes & conſciencies,
to the Poſitions and Anſweres
of a man ſo contentiouſe. As on the other
ſide if theſe ſo manifeſt Examples, proue
not plainely what you are, it profiteth
not to bring more copie, where ſtore ſufficient
is not conſidered.
            
            
               
               Of the Buts Which M. Iewel vſeth
with D. Harding.
CAP. VII.
               THe marke, that M. Iewel ſhooteth
at, is to Refel D. Hardings anſwer:
which how many wayes he hath
pricked and roued at, as alſo how
artificially he hath beſtowed his ſtrength
therein, I haue, by example, declared. And
now I thinke it good to ſhew, what buts
he vſeth. Such buts of his I meane,
which like an Hypocrite he would ſeeme
to haue ſet vp of his own motion, where
as in deede D. Harding had made them
vnto him before, that he ſhould not, al at
pleaſure, Roue or hobbe abrode at euery
marke yt liked his fanſie. As in Exāple D.
Har. thought it good, (before he ſhould
ſpeak of Sole receiuing or priuate Maſſe)
ſhortly to alleage ſuch authorities, by
which y• Maſſe or Sacrifice of ye new teſtaſtament,
was cōfirmed. Againſt which, M.
Iew. ſpeaketh his worſt, & proueth three
leaues together, ye either the witneſſes be
not lawful, either that they proue not
Priuate Maſſe. Now the Trueth being
this, y• D. Har. brought thē not in, to confirme



Priuate Maſſe, M. Iewel therefore
leaſt he might ſeeme to haue taken his
Marke amiſſe, ſo long togeather as three
leaues are in his Replie, he commeth (as
I ſaie) from Rouing abowte the mater,
to the very ſtate thereof, ſaieinge:
               BVT he wil ſaie,The firſt Example. Iew. 12. wel ſhott. he alleged al theſe doctours
to an other purpoſe, to proue the Sacrifice.
               
                  Wil he ſaie ſo M. Iewel? and hath he
not rather ſaied it alreadie? Are not theſe
his expreſſe wordes: that, although you in
a printed Sermon,Har. 24. and preached at Poules
Croſſe, pretend enemitie againſt Priuate
Maſſe in word, yet in deede, that you extēd
your whole witt and cunning, vtterly to
aboliſſhe the vnbloudy and dayly Sacrifice
of the Churche? And hereupon, doth not
he name ſhortly the Authorities, by which
he might proue the vnbloudy Sacrifice?
In the end of which maketh he not a
tranſition ſaieing, Now this preſuppoſed,
that the Maſſe ſtandeth vpon good and ſufficient
groundes, let vs come to our ſpecial
purpoſe, & ſaie ſomewhat o
                     •
                   Priuate Maſſe?
What vanitie then was it of yours, (M.
Iewel) to make ſo greate a talke againſt
the witneſſes alleged that they proue not
Priuate Maſſe, for which yet they were



not brought, and how like an Hypocritie
come you in with your, But he wil ſaie he
alleged al theſe Doctours to an other purpoſe,
whereas D. Harding ſo plainely declared
it, that in deede he vſed them not
for profe of priuate Maſſe, but only of the
dayly and vnbloudy Sacrifice.
               
               After a like ſort,The 1. Example. concerning the nūber
of Canons which were made in the firſt
Nicene Councel, you aſke this queſtion,
and to ſeeming, oppoſe your Aduerſarie
with it, ſaieing:
               What leadeth M. Harding to ſaie,Iew. 239 The
bishope of Rome hath theſe three ſcore and
ten Canons in ſafe keeping? Why doth he
thus diſſemble and mocke the world? Certainely
the bishope of Rome himſelfe diſclameth
it, and ſaith he hath them not. for
thus he writeth touching the ſame: There
are in the Church of Rome only twentie Canons
of the Councel of Nice, By what negligence
the reſt are loſt, it is not knowen.
The Pope ſaieth there are but twentie Canons
extant: M. Harding ſaieth, there are
three ſcore and ten Canons. I trow, it is no
reaſon we ſhould beleue M. Harding, and
leaue the Pope.
               It is no reaſon in deede. Yet if they
ſpeake not contrarie one to the other, then



is it no Reaſon, that you ſhould in ſuch
ſort handle the mater, as though thei were
repugnant. For true it is, that as ye Pope
ſaied, there are but twentie Canons extāt,
yet yt there were once more then twentie,
it appereth by theſe wordes which folow
immediatly: By what negligence the reſt
are loſt, it is not knowen. Alſo that there
were in Tyme Paſt three ſcore and ten Canons
of the Councel of Nice,Har. 104. true it is,
and ſo it is ſaied of D. Harding: but that
there are at this Preſent Tyme ſo manie,
he ſaieth it not, though you boldly report
it of hym, to make A Contradiction, betwene
hym and the Pope.
               Now, maie we thinke, that you perceiued
not this much by yourſelfe? Yeas
without al doubt you dyd. and therefore
not ignorant that you had ouerſhott your
ſelfe, and that the Catholike would bring
you from your Rouing, to certaine and
ſet Markes, yourſelfe come welfauoredly
to them, and ſaie:
               BVT Steuen the Bishope of Rome
ſaieth: there were ſometyme in Rome the ful
three ſcore and ten Canons.
               O M. Iewel, doe you ſee, that this wil



be your Anſwer? Or rather that ſo much is
included in the wordes of Pope Stephanus,
And yet dyd you bring his Teſtimonie
in, to proue D. Hardings report falſe,
which ſaied no more, then that the whole
number, of theſe three ſcore and ten
Canons, was kept diligently in the
Church of Rome?
               
               Tel vs now, who diſſimbleth? Or who
mocketh the world? And therefore was
not this BVT of yours firſt conſydered,
before you dyd ſo ſharply inueigh againſt
D. Harding? For both the Pope and he,
ſpeakyng of the Tyme Paſt, it is true
that three ſcore and ten Canons of the
Nicene Councel were in Rome: And the
Pope ſpeakyng of the tyme Preſent, that
twentie only are extant is not contrarie to
hym that ſpeaketh of yt Tyme Paſt, ſaieng
that, three ſcore and ten Canons were
kept in Rome.
               
               And therefore it may be iuſtly returned
vpon you againe M. Iewel, that, Non ſatis
commodè diuiſa ſunt temporibus tibi
Daue haec.
                  Iew. 237
               
               
                  
                  Let vs bring an other Example.
                  The third Example. 
                  To
proue the Souerantie of the Churche of
Rome, D. Har. allegeth S. Iren. ſaieing:
                  Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Ad hanc eccleſiam propter maiorem
principalitatem &c. To this Church
(of Rome) it is neceſſarie all the
Churches, that is to ſaye, al that be
faithful any where, to repaire & come
togeather, for the mightier Principalitie
of the ſame.
               
                   In anſwering to this teſtimonie: firſt,
ſaieth M. Iewel, Irenaeus ſpeaketh not of
the Supremacie.
                  Rouing. Then, ſaieth M. Iewel
againe: Irenaeus writeth only againſt Valentinus,
 tinus, Cerdon and Marcion old Heretikes,
whom he biddeth for trial of their doctrine,
to behold the Churches which the Apoſtles
 planted. After this, he telleth vs y• Ireneus
reſteth ſpecially vpon the Example
of the Church of Rome, & by this rouing,
he would haue it thought, that he hath not
Anſwered nothing. And then it foloweth:
               
                   But they wil Replie, Irenaeus ſaieth, propter
maiorem principalitatem.Iew. 244 Hypocrite
               
               Haue ye founde it now at length? and
dyd ye not perceaue at the firſt alleging of



Ireneus, y• y• force of D. Hardinges Argument
conſiſted in theſe wordes, propter
maiorem principalitatem, becauſe of the
greater principalitie of ye Church of Rome?
Why diſſimble you then? And why plaie
you the hypocrite ſo artificially, in keping
that backe, which ſhould haue ben at the
very firſt Anſwered: And in delyuering it
whē it cummeth, after ſuch a ſort, as maie
cauſe the Reader to conceine, that it is of
your owne pure Inuention, and not of
your aduerſaries obiection: And that you
doe freely of your owne wil and wit encreaſe
ye ſtrength of the witneſſes brought
againſt you, and ſpeake more for your Aduerſarye,
then he hath done for hymſelfe?
               
                  Thei wil (you ſaie) Replie. Wil thei? Naie
thei doe: And not Replie, as though it
would depend of a former argument, but
Obiect, without anie preambles, that,
The Greater or mightier Principalitie
of the Church of Rome, which
Irenaeus ſpeaketh of, doth proue the Supremacie
therof aboue al other Churches.
Yet you But only, at it.
               There is alſo a very plaine TeſtimonieThe fourth Example.


                  
of S. Ambroſe, alleged by D. Har. for the
Supremacie of the ſee of Rome: And the
ſtrength of the argumēt conſiſteth in this
yt 
                  the Chieftie of the Apoſtolike prieſthood
is affirmed by him to floriſſhe there.Amb. lib. 
                        •
                     . cap. 6. Note
ye wordes, Chieftie, and prieſthoode. For
vntil anſwer be made to thē, al beſides is
but Rouing. As in Example owt of M.
Iewel.
               
                   He admitteth firſt, S. Ambroſe wordes,
and addeth more vnto them, to the praiſe
of the Church of Rome. He preferreth (and
worthely) the Glorie of Chriſts Goſpel
before the power of the Romane Empire.Al byſide ye marcke.
He encreaſeth the mater, by the teſtimonies
of S. Auguſtine, and S. Chryſoſtome,
and leaueth it as a moſt plaine and manifeſt
Trueth, that Rome was more noble
for the Goſpel of Chriſt then the Empire
of the world. And whereas he is not ſo
dul, but perceaueth wel enough, that al
this geare cummeth not to the point of ye
argument, then he cummeth to his familiar
BVT, ſaieing:
               But S. Ambroſe ſaieth,Iew. 248 Apoſtolici ſacerdotij
principatum: The principalitie



of the Apoſtolike Prieſthoode.
               Yea forſoth M. Iewel, of the Principalitie
of Prieſthoode, S. Ambroſe ſpeaketh.
And we maye wel wonder, that al this
while, you haue diſſembled, as though you
had not ſeene the marke which we ſet before
you, to direct your anſwer there vnto.
Now how wel you haue Replied concerning
theſe two Teſtimonies. of S. Iren.
and S. Ambroſe, it ſhal be examined in
the place proper for it, which wil be in the
third Booke. At this preſent, I note
your Craft only and Hypocriſie, by which
you conueigh the matter ſo, that you maie
firſt wander abrode, withowt ſcope in
deede, yet not withowt ſome apparance
of direct Anſwer, and that, afterwardes,
you come with A BVT to the very
poynt of the argument, and make it ſeeme
that this BVT was ſet vp of your owne
ſelf, and not of the aduerſarie.
               Of which kynde, he that wil require
moe examples, maie for the ſeking, eaſely
haue thē. And when he findeth thē, let hym
remember, that it is but a lewde kynde of
Rhetorike, either ſo to daly with the Aduerſarie,



either ſo to delay the right Anſwer
vnto the mater proponed. And
now to an other point.
            
            
               Of M. Iewels Refellyng one Truthe
by an other.
CAP. VIII.
               IT is A common thing with you (M.
Iewel) in Anſwering, to put awaie one
Trueth by an other: Or by adding one
to an other, ſo to confoūde them bothe,
that no certainety ſhalbe founde in the
queſtion. Which ſurely is a good prouiſion,
yt you may haue ſumwhat alwaies
to Replie: but except there folow a better
Application, it ſhould not in any part ſatisfie.
As in Example,
               When Ireneus witneſſeth that Biſhopes
of the Greke Church cummyng to
Rome,
                     The firſt Example. Eccl. Hiſtor. lib. 5. ca. 24. had the Euchariſtia ſent vnto them,
to ſignifie their mutual Communion in
Sacrament, notwithſtanding their Diuerſitie
in keeping of Eaſter: though you
ſhould bring neuer ſo manye Examples,



that, Paulinus ſent at one tyme a loaf of
breade to S. Auguſtine,Iew. 40. at an other, fyue
loues, and them in token of good wil: yet
doe ye not proue hereby, that the Euchariſtia,
which S. Ireneus ſpeaketh of, was
not, as the Catholikes expounde it, the
Sacrament. For neither is the bread
which S. Paulinus ſēt, called Euchariſtia,
neither doe ſuch Preſentes from one to
other, proue a conſent in Religion: And yt
which S. Ireneus ſpeaketh of is called
Euchariſtia, and the cauſe for which it was
ſent (which was to ſignifie their vnitie,Euchariſtit. in
the Subſtance of our Religion) doth require
that it ſhould be ye Sacrament. And
ſo I ſaie, true it is that Biſhopes preſented
Biſſhopes, with tokens of mutual
frindſhip: but this Trueth muſt not deſtroie
or confound an other Trueth, of the
Cuſtome in the Church of Rome, to ſend
the very Sacrament to the Biſhopes that
came from the Eaſt Churche. And in this
place (M. Iewel) you lacke not Inuentiō,
but Application: And you bring furth in
deede faire loues, but you match them not
rightly with the Sacrament.
               
                  The ſum of M. Iewels Anſwer is this:
The loafe which Paulinus ſent vnto S. Auguſtine



was not the Sacrament: Ergo, the
Euchariſtia which S. Irenaeus witneſſeth to
haue ben ſent to bishopes of the Eaſt cummyng
to Rome, was not the Sacrament.
               
                  Leontius a Breeke writer,
                  The 2. Example. 
                  reporteth
of the Patriarke of Alexandria, yt he ſaied
Maſſe (fecit Miſſas) in his Oratorie. yet
wil it not neceſſarily folow (ſaieth M. Ieu.)
                  Iew. 78. Miſſa.
that Miſſa in this place, importeth the maſſe.
For, as I haue already proued by ſundry Authorities,
Miſſa is oftentymes vſed for any
kynd of praier.
               But what then? If it be oftentymes ſo
vſed, muſt it not be otherwiſe vſed in this
place df Leontius? How proue you this
Conſequence? Or how Applie you ye one
place to the other? Breifly then to repete
it, M. Iewels anſwer is this:
               Miſſa is often tymes taken for any kynd
of Praier: Ergo the Maſſe, which holy Iohn
the Almener ſaied, was not properly maſſe.
               In the ſame hiſtorie of Leontius, D.The 3. Example.
Harding expoundeth (cum benedixiſſet ſancta)
thus in Engliſhe: when the Patriarch
had conſecrated.
                  Benedicere ſancta. Which proueth (by the
waie) that (miſſa) the Maſſe, of which the
Storie ſpeaketh, is not taken for any
kind of Praier, becauſe, bleſſing of the holy
thinges or conſecratiō is not vſed generally
in euery kynde, but in Special mater, Tyme,



and place. But to note, what M. Iewel
concludeth, of Benedicere ſancta:
               
               Theſe wordes doe no more ſignifie (faieth
he) the cōſecration of the Sacrament,Iew. 78. as M.
Harding hath tranſlated it, then theſe wordes,
Extollite manus veſtras in ſancta, doe
ſignifie the lifting vp of handes to the Sacrament.
And why ſo? Chryſoſtome in his Lyturgie
vſeth the ſame manner of ſpeach, to a
far other purpoſe. What is yt? He allegeth
the wordes, and then inferreth: It maie appeare,
that Chryſoſtome by theſe wordes,
meant a ſolemne praier to cōclude ye whole.
               But how applie you now theſe thinges
to yonr purpoſe? becauſe, S. Chryſoſ. meaneth
by Benedicere Sancta, a praier to conclude
his liturgie, doth Leontius vnderſtād,
iuſt ye ſame by thoſe wordes? In what
Logik fynde you that Conſequence? Or, by
what maner of likelihoode, make you it
probable? Mark it better (M. Iew.) & you
ſhal perceaue, yt which you would cōclude
not ōly to be vnlikely, but alſo impoſſible.
For, ye benediction of which S. Chryſoſt.
ſpeaketh, was you ſaie a ſolēne Praier to cō
                     clude
ye 
                  whole: but ye Benedictiō of which
Leōtius telleth you, was before the Pater
noſter, of the maſſe, which Praier is
vſed, when the Myſteries are not yet Receiued.



Therefore vndoubtedly the
meaning is not one in them both, concerning
Benedicere Sancta, which is referred
to ſo diſtinct Tymes and Conditions,
And your Craftines may be eſpied
which would deſtroy one Trueth by an other.
               
                  The Anſwer which M. Iewel maketh
is this: Benedicere Sancta, ſignifieth in S.
Chryſoſtome a ſolemne Praier made to conclude
the whole: Ergo, benedicere Sancta,
that is, to bleſſe the holy thinges, doth not
ſignifie in Leontius Hiſtorie, Conſecration.
               Let vs come to an other Example.
                     The 4. Example. Matth. 16. Petra.
Our ſauiour ſaied vnto S. Peter, Thow
art Peter, A Rocke, and vpon this Rocke
wil I builde my Churche: Ergo, S. Peter
was moſt faſt ſett aboue all other in worthineſſe,
and he was a moſt ſure and Principal
perſon in the building of Chriſt his
Churche: Such, as by which, all the faithfull
ſhould be ſtaied. Which proueth his
ſingular Prerogatiue.
               
                  But (ſaieth M. Iewel) Chriſt is the
Rocke.
                  Iew. 222. Who denieth it? Againe, The confeſsion
of S. Peter, is the Rocke. Neither
this is denied. And to proue this, that no
Catholike denieth, he lacketh no Authorities.
But how foloweth this, that



becauſe Chriſt is the Rock, therfore S. Peter
is not the Rocke? Or becauſe ye Church
is builded on the faith of S. Peter, therefore
it was not builded vppon the perſon
which had that faith? By like Reaſon you
might conclude,By ſuche argumēts al religion hathe bene confuted. God is our King and our
Father: Ergo, we owe not ſupreme Reuerence
in their kinde, to our Prince, Or our
Parents. Which is nothing els, but by one
Truth, to deſtroy an other: And for lacke of
Vnderſtanding, And abundance of Preſuming,
neither to diſtinct duties and offices
accordingly, neither to refraine from determining,
that which we know not, ouer haſtely.
Otherwiſe it were quickly to be perceaued,
that Chriſt is the Rocke by merite,
S. Peter by mere mercy: Chriſt by Abſolute
Authority S. Peter by meanes of Legacy:
Chriſt before and aboue all other, S.
Peter aboue al other, but yet after, and not
before Chriſt. By which commodity of diſtinctions,
thoſe propoſitiōs which Proteſtantes
faine to be contrary, one to ye other,
will ſtand and agree well together.
               
                  The briefe Argument of M. Iewels is
this. The Rocke which Chriſt ſpake of to S.
Peter, ſignifieth the cōfeſſiō of S. Peters faith:
ergo it ſignifieth not S. Peter confeſſing it.
               
                  
An other Example.The. v Example. Ambr. 2. Cor. 12.
                   S Androw folowed
our ſauiour before S. Peter. And yet (ſaith
S. Ambroſe) Androw receiued not Primatum,
the Primacie, but Peter.
               
               
                  But,
                  Iew. 245 
                  M. Iewel Auſwereth: It is eaſye to
be shewed, that Primatus emong the olde fathers,
is farre otherwiſe vſed, I meane, for any
Superioritie or preferment before others.primatus
And this he proueth at large by Phraſes of
Speach vſed about Eſau, about the Heretike
Abbate Eutyches, Or towardes any of
the foure Patriarches. But what concludeth
he?
               Thincketh he▪ becauſe the Primacy that
Eſau loſt for a diſh of pottage, was to wear
a better cote then his felowes, Or to ſyt
higheſt at the Table, Or to haue thriſe or
fiue times more meat for his part, then an
other, Or any other ſuche thing belonging
to the honour of the firſt borne: that the primacy
which S. Ambroſe attributeth to S.
Peter, may haue the very ſelf ſame ſenſe in
it? Or, becauſe Eutyches had a Primacie
in his Abbey, may it therfore be lawfull for
vs to imagine, that all the Apoſtles liued
in one Cloiſter togeather, and that S. Peter
was no more then an Abbate amonge
them?
               
                  
Beſide this, if Primatus doth ſignify any
Preferment, it ſerueth alſo to ſignify the
Supremacy. And ſo, as you wiſhe that it
ſhould be taken in your ſenſe, ſo ſhould you
iuſtly haue prouided for it, leaſt it were taken
in an other ſenſe. And this truly had
bene your part, (M. Iewel) to proue that
S. Ambroſe dothe not meane by S. Peters
Primacie, the General Gouernmēt ouer al
the worlde. As for the bare ſhewing of it,
y• Primatus hath diuers ſenſes, it is mete &
cōuenient for a Scholemaſter or maker of
Dictionaries: but in an Anſwerer it is not
reſonable, except ther folow an Applicatiō
thereof to his purpoſe. You loue allwaies
to drine the Catholikes to the prouing ſide,
knowing it to be ſafeſt & eaſyeſt for you, to
ſtand ſtil at the denial of euery thing. And
who ſo foliſhe that can not doe ſo?
               If (ſaye you) this worde Primatus muſte
ſignifie that power and Gouerment,Iew. 145 that M.
Harding fantaſieth: then muſt it folow of neceſſitie,
that Eſau, Eutyches, the bishop of
Antioche, and the Bishop of Alexandria, had
the Vniuerſall power and Gouernmēt of the
whole worlde.
               As who ſhould ſay, that the queſtion had



bene, whether Primatus hath any moe ſignifications
then one: Or that D. Harding
had taken vpon him, to proue that Primatus
where ſo euer it be founde, muſt needes
ſignifie the Supremacy of the B. of Rome.
               
               No, (M. Iewel) let Primatus haue as
manye diuers ſignifications, as you haue
deuiſes to confound A trueth, D. Harding
obiecteth you, the teſtimony of S. Ambroſe
where it is plaine, that S. Peter had a Primacy.
To this now make a direct anſwer,
not by telling a long Tale & True inough
of the Significations of Primatus, but in
Applying them to the Purpoſe, and Inſtructing
vs, in what one ſenſe it is to be
taken in S. Ambroſe. And if you dare ſay,
that he meant ſuche a Primacy, as Eſau
loſt for a diſhe of Pottage, Or ſuch, as the
Heretike Eutiches had in his Abbey, then
ſhall we prouide an Anſwer for you. But
whereas the very wordes themſelues doe
geue it, that it coulde not be ſo Simple a
mater, (for S. Androw, as euery other of ye
Apoſtles, had Authority geuen him in the
whole worlde, and yet the Primacie was
beſtowed vpon S. Peter only, of whiche it
foloweth, that emong the chiefeſt he was
the chiefe) What helpeth it you, to the Anſwering



of S. Ambroſe, to declare that Primatus
is taken for any Superiority or Preferment?
               Againe whereas you can not denye it,
but S. Peter had a Dignitie & Preferment
aboue other, how wel ſhould you haue don
to Specify wherein it conſiſted? But you
thinke it inough perchaunce, to ſhewe that
you are not altogether vnlearned, and that
you haue in your daies, Heard, Reade, and
Seene many thinges. Which in deede were
inough to doe, if Chriſtians might ſeke for
their owne Praiſe only, and not the ſetting
forth of the Trueth, but the caſe being other
wiſe, content not your ſelfe herewith (M.
Iewel) to play the bare parte of a Grammarian:
nor thinke the office of an Anſwerer
fulfilled, if in telling one Trueth, you
deſtroy an other.
               
                  The Anſwer that M. Iewel maketh is
this: Primatus doth ſignifie anye Preferment,
Ergo, it ſignifieth not in S. Ambroſe
the Supremacie of S. Peter. Againe: Eſau
loſt his Primacie for a meſſe of pottage, Ergo
S. Peters Primacie was not an vniuerſall Gouernment.
               Now as I haue ſaide of this worde Primatus,
                  The. vj. Example.
ſo might I alſo of this word Principatus,



Principalitie,
                  Principatus. which S. Auguſtine
vſeth to Bonifacius Biſhop of Rome in
theſe wordes: Who is he that knoweth not,
that, that Principalitie of Apoſtleship, (which
vndoubtedlye was in the See of Rome)
is to be preferred before any Bishoprike that
is?
                  Auguſt. de Bapt. cont Dō. lib. 2. which place prouing ſo euidently, that
the See of Rome paſſeth in Dignitie what
ſoeuer Biſhopricke in the worlde, yet M.
Iewel anſwereth, that it ſignifieth not here
a Supreme Gouernment. Aſke him the cauſe
why, and he can ſay no more but that,
               Socrates is called Prince of Philoſophers,Iew. 249
And Plato Prince of Oratours, And Pompeius
Prince of the world, And Elias head of
the Prophets. In which places, Princeps is taken,
not for a Prince or Gouernour, but only,
for A man that for his qualities is to be eſtemed
aboue the reſt. And in this ſenſe S.
Auguſtine calleth the See of Rome, as it was
in his time, principatum ſedis Apoſtolicae.
               Well Sir, that, Princeps is often vſed for
A man had in eſtimation for his vertue, rome,
or any ſingular qualitie, euery Grammarian
can witneſſe. But that it is alwais ſo vſed,
who telleth you? And excepte you proue
that it hath no other Signification biſyde,



how can you inferre, that becauſe Socrates
is called Prince of the Phyloſophers in
reſpect of his knowledge, ſo the See of
Rome ſhoulde be called Princeps or chi
                     •
                  fe
in reſpect of ſome qualitie only, (you tell
not what) and not of Supreme Gouernment.
For Supreme Gouernment it ſelf,
is it not a certain qualitie? And Pompeius
whome your ſelfe name as Prince of the
world, though he were ſo in deede: in reſpect
either of Vertue or Office, yet was he
not Supreme Gouernour. How hangeth
this Tale then togeather, that Princeps is
not taken for a Chiefe Gouernour,Like Germans Lippes. becauſe
it is often vſed to ſignifie an Eſtimation aboue
others in vertue. &c? Or who woulde
euer ſo confounde a Trueth by a Trueth,
but he that loueth not the Trueth?
               I woulde aſke you allſo (M. Iewel)
what qualitie that ſhould be in the Apoſtolike
See of Rome, for which it ſhoulde be
preferred aboue other Biſhoprickes of all
the worlde? It is not (you ſay) for Supreme
Gouernmēts ſake. Wherefore then?
Is it for Eſtimation of vertue, Gloquence,
Philoſophy or any ſuch like? Name the
quality if you can but you can not.
               
                  
Only you ſtay vpon the Negatiue, that
it had not the Principalitie becauſe of Supreme
Gouernment: And to that you adde
that Princeps is taken, in the places which
you allege, only for a man that for his qualities
is to be eſteemed. As wel you might
proue, (M. Iewel) that Socrates was
not Prince of Philoſophers, becauſe Princeps
is taken oftentimes for A Chiefe Gouernour
in A country, which Socrates neuer
was.
               See then (indifferent Reader) whether
this be an honeſt and plaine maner in anſwering,
to refell one Trueth by an other,
Or ſo to deny one Senſe of A word, that he
can not tell, what other Senſe of the ſame
worde, to folow? Surely where M. Iewels
ſenſes in this matter ſhould be, I can
not tel. For like as when we ſay, Socrates
is the Prince of Philoſophers, we are vnderſtanded
to make the Compariſon betwene
him and other Philoſophers, and not to
meddle with Oratours, Captaines, Artificers,
Or any of a diuers ſtate and condition:
So, when S. Auguſtin witneſſeth, that
the Principalitye of the Apoſtleship (which
is in the Sea of Rome,) is to be preferred
before all other what ſo euer Bishoprikes,


                  
what wiſe man doubteth, but that ye Compariſon
here is to be made, betweene the
degrees of Power and Charge that are leſſer
or greater in that kinde of Office? Now
by a Biſſhopricke, what is imported? Is
not a Spirituall Function and Charge
ouer Soules vnderſtanded thereby? And
in this Charge are not Archbyſſhoppes
aboue Biſſhopes, and Patriarches aboue
Archebiſſhopes? But in what thing aboue?
In Iuriſdiction vndoubtedly, & Gouernment,
larger then their Inferiour haue.
               Therefore, if the See of Rome, doe paſſe
in Principalitie, all other Biſſhoprikes (as
S. Auguſtine witneſſeth) And if the Superiortie
or Inferiortie in Biſſhoprikes muſt
be conſidered according to the greatneſſe or
ſmalneſſe of the Iuriſdiction whiche is apointed
to them (as the Definition of the
Name will declare) howe ſhould not the
See of Rome haue an vniuerſall Authoritie
or Gouernment ouer al Chriſtendome,
which hath ſuch a Principalitie geauen it,
that all other Biſſhoprikes are not comparable
vnto it?
               Not comparable, I meane, in thoſe
thinges, that perteine to Authoritie and
Gouernment, ſuche as is annexed to the



Condition, Subſtance, or Nature of
Biſſhoprikes. For in Vertue, Policie, Eloquence,
Fauor of Emperours, Abundance
of Riches and lyuinges, and many other
lyke thinges which are Perſonal or Temporal,
the Biſſhoppes of Conſtantinople
may far excell the Pope. Yea, in ſuch Biſſhoply
and Spirituall things alſo, as concerne
theyr Character and Order, euerye
Biſſhope in the world, doth Baptiſe, Confirme,
Abſolue and Conſecrate as perfitely
and excellentely as the B. of Rome. But
yet for all this, concerning the examininge
and practiſing of theſe ſelfe ſame thinges
which by Vertue of theyr order they maie
doe, and concerning the power of Iuriſdiction,
As, to plant and to pul vp, to Cite,
to dipenſe, To Forbidde, to Commaunde,
To preſcribe Orders, To determyne doutes,
and ſo furth: what ſo euer Biſſhoprike
it be, The Principalitie of the Apoſtleshippe,
that is in Rome, muſte be preferred. And
what lacketh then here, to Supreme Gouernmēt
concerning cauſes Eccleſiaſticall?
Howe lilte alſo muſte it be, to paſſe all
others in Degree of Biſſhoprike, if anie
one were exempted from him?
               
                  
The greater & fouler is your fault therfore
(M. Iewell) whiche woulde make
your Reader beleue, that the Principalytie
of ye Apoſtolike See of Rome, in reſpect
of other Biſſhoprikes, conſiſteth in any
other Qualytie (what, you can not tell)
and not in Supreme Gouernment. Wheras,
in Comparinge of Byſſhoprike with
Byſſhoprike, the Authoritie of Gouernment
is directly to be conſidered.
               
                  The Anſwer of M. Iewell is this.
Princeps is often vſed for a man had in eſtimation
for any Vertue, Roome, Or Singular
Qualitie: Ergo, the Principalytie
whiche S. Auguſtine attributeth to the Apoſtolike
See conſiſteth not in Supreme Gouer̄ment.
               It woulde be ouer longe and tedious,
to teken vp all Examples, by whiche I
might euidently confirme, this obiection
of myne, that Maiſter Iewell vſeth the
ſettinge further of one Trueth, to the diſgracinge
or diſſanulling rather of an other.
As when the Catholikes ſay, to proue the
Supremacie of the Biſſhope of Rome:
Iulius reſtored Athanaſius:The .vij Example. Iew. 290
                  
                  M. Iewell Anſwereth: Maximus alſo reſtored
vnto him, his Communion.
               
                  
                  When they ſay:
                  The viij. Example. Touching faith and
Religion the See of Rome hath alwaies
bene conſulted:
               
                  He Anſwereth:
                  Iew. 294 Marcellinus, Dulcitius, Bonifacius,
Euodius and other ſent theyr queſtions
to S. Auguſtine.
               
                  When they ſay:
                  The .ix. Example. S. Peter was called,
Princeps or Chiefe of the Apoſtles:
               
                  He Anſwereth: So we reed in Scriptures,
Princeps Familiae, Princeps Legationis, Princeps
Coquorum, that is, the Chiefe of rhe
houſe or ſtocke,Iew. 302. the Chiefe of the Embaſſage,
the Chiefe of the Cookes.
               When the Catholikes ſay:The .x. Example.
               
               S. Peter the Maſter of the whole
world apointed S. Iames to be Biſſhope
of Hieruſalem:Iew. 303
               
               
                  He Anſwereth: That vnto Michael is committed
the nation of the Iewes. But, Land and
Sea, and all the habitation of the world, is
committed to S. Paule.
               
                  When they ſay,
                  The .xi. Example. 
                  that Rome is the
moſte notable and chief Church of the
worlde:
               
                  
                  He Anſwereth that, Cicero to blaſe the nobilitie
of that Citie, calleth lucem orbisterrarum,
at
                     •
                  ue arcem omnium Gentiū,Iew. 304 the light
of the world and the Caſtle of all nations.
               
                  To make an end, when they ſay out of
S. Ambroſe,
                  The .xii. Example. That Damaſus the Pope is
called the Rector and Ruler of the
houſe of God:
               To put the mater out of al doubt, ſee what
he anſwereth therevnto.
               But to put the mater out of doubt, let vs
conſider whether the ſelfe ſame forme of
Speach,Iew. 306 haue bene applied to any others in
like ſorte. And then he telleth where other
Biſſhopes haue bene ſayed to be Rulers
in the Church.
               
               But doth this kinde of Auſwer, either
ſatiſfie the Obiection, Or Determine the
Trueth, Or quiet a doubtful minde? Doth
not this kinde of Reaſoning bring vs rather
into perplexities, that it may not be
knowen, how to be reſolued in any mater?
Is there any fitter waye for the Antichriſt
to worke by,Antichrist high way for 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   then, by Forme and Phraſes
of Speache, to confound all Faith and Religion?
               Doe you beleue (M. Iewel) that Chriſt
is the Sonne of God? But doe you beleue



that he is the natural Sonne of his Father,
of the ſame Subſtance & Eternitie with
him? If you doe ſo in deede, what ſay you
to this Argument, that Iudges in ye Scriptures
are called Goddes,Ex. 22 and that, the frindes
and Seruantes of God, are called
Goddes?pſal. 81. Would this put the mater out of
doubt, that Chriſte is not the Sonne of
God (I meane by Nature) becauſe you
coulde finde it oute (after you had conſidered
it) where the ſelfſame form of ſpeache
is applied to others in like ſort? And where
ſuche, as are not the naturall Children of
God, are called yet the Children of God?
               Chriſt ſaueth vs, & in Form of Speache
S. Paule ſayeth to Timothie: Doeinge ſo,
thou ſhalt ſaue thy ſelf,
                  1. Tim. 4. 
                  and them that heare
thee. And would you conclude herevpon,
that the Power of ſauinge is all one in
them bothe, becauſe the Forme of the
worde, is all one? Or that it is not properly
and worthely veryfyed of Chriſte,
becauſe it is but improperly attributed
to S. Timothie?
               Conſider then I praie you (M. Iewel)
whether this will put the mater oute of
doubt, if in Refelling the Senſe of ſome
one place whiche pleaſeth you not, you



bringe a lyke Forme of Speache vſed in
an other place: And without further
probation, require to haue the vnderſtandinge
which your Aduerſaie gathereth of
his witneſſe, to be reformed accordinge
to the meaninge of the Sentencies which
you allege: As, becauſe Princeps, that
is Chiefe, is vſed in bothe places, whether
you ſay Princeps Apoſtolorum, or Princeps
Coquorum: Therefore to conclude,
that the Chieftie of S. Peter Emonge
the Apoſtles, was no other thinge then
the Chieftie of N. emonge the Cookes.
               Beware therefore (Chriſten Reader)
of M. Iewell, And eſpecially in thoſe
places: whiche as they make moſte for the
Catholyke Faith, ſo hath he no other refuge
for ſauinge hym ſelfe from Subſcribinge
vnto them, but this very Simple
one and Feeble, to ſeeke where lyke
Phraſes may be founde of an other Senſe
yet and meanynge, thereby to bringe in
to doubt (or as he ſuppoſeth) to putre
out of doubte, that the Senſe of the Catholykes
Obiection can not contynue.
Whiche, in fewe wordes, is no other, then
to ſhewe hymſelfe A Grammarian only,



And to deſtroie one trueth by an other, as
though. One phraſe might not haue two
good Senſes, eche one agreeing with the
place in which they are apointed to ſerue.
               
                  The ſum of M. Iewels Argument is
this: The like forme or phraſe of ſpeache is
to be found in an other ſenſe: Ergo, to put the
mater out of doubt, this Preſent place (of
which the queſtion is) hath not a different
or ſundrie ſenſe frome that other.
               The Summe of my meaning, is this:
that no man be deceaued through this kind
of M. Iewels Anſwering, wherein, he ſo
telleth one Trueth, that he diſſwadeth an
other. This practiſe of the Proteſtātes
hath already done harme inough. let them
beginne rather to amend, theyr former iniquites,
then to adde fresshe vnto them.
               They haue anſwered: God muſt be worſhipped
in Spirite: Which is moſt true, and
haue thereby taken awaie an other trueth,
that, God is alſo to be worſhipped with
our body and bodily thinges.
               
               
                  They haue anſwered: The true Faſt is to
abſtaine frome Synne. Whiche is vndoubteely
True: but by that faire ſhew of pure
holynes, they haue Deſtroied an other



Trueth that, Togeather with the faſting
from ſynne, we muſt alſo take
paynes in our body, and abſtaine now
and then, from meate and drinke.
               Thei haue Anſwered: We muſt receiue
the body of Chriſt by faithe, which in ſome
ſenſe is moſt true. But thei haue there
withal taught the people, not to beleue
the Real preſence of Chriſt in the Sacrament:
which preſence yet is as true, as the
other is certaine.
               In other caſes moe, they haue done
the lyke. It is to much that thei haue
already done: let them not therefore continue
in this trade of Anſwering, nor of
dealing in maters of Religion. Specially
when thei bring the mater, to Phraſes of
Speache, and Signification of wordes,
and by one Senſe take awaie an other,
whereas bothe in their ſeueral places doe
agree with Truthe: this kynd of handeling
or Tumblyng rather of thinges, the
more further of it is, from the Common
Capacitie and iudgement of the Reader, yt
ſorer it trobleth his conſcience, & ye harder
it is to be remedyed. For the leſſe he is
able to examine it, the more he miſtruſteth,



when he ſeeth many wordes made on
the contrarie ſide about it: and by yt ſame
reaſon, becauſe he lacketh the lernyng and
Intelligence, he wil not ſo eaſely conceiue
what is told hym, or perceiue what is
what in the queſtion.
               For, like as you M. Iew. haue now inſtructed
vs, in the ſignifications, of Miſſa,
Princeps, Principalitie, and Rector: ſo, if an
other would teach vs, as concernyng the
Motherheade of our bleſſed Lady, The
excellencie of Chriſt, the Reſurrection of
our fleſſhe, yt 
                  A Mother, Chriſt, & fleſſhe,
ſignifie not alwaies a natural mother, Or
the Saluiour of the world, or this ſenſible
and palpable fleſſhe: would it not coſt vs
ſo many wordes in yt refelling of it, & cauſe
vs ſo narowly to examine, euery circumſtāce
aboute it, yt y• common reader ſhould
either not intēd, for ſlewth or wearynes,
to cōſider it, Or not be hable to perceaue
it, or if he dyd, to ſaie yet to himſelfe,
Byr Lady, this geare is not ſo cleare and
manifeſt, but argumentes maie be found out
againſt it? To what purpoſe then is it, to
peeke vp phraſes only, & to geue vs the
ſundrie ſignificatiōs ōly of wordes? Surely
to no other end, thē to bring in a confuſion.
In ſo much, yt a man ſhal not be able
to affirme any thing almoſt, be it neuer ſo



manifeſt, but by y• lyke feat a Replie wil be
made againſt it. Is it not true at this preſent,
that you (M. Iew) ſtand for a Biſhop
of Sarum? Let ſo much then be writen
vnto Geneua, And let the brothers there,
Reioyſe, and Praiſe the Lord for it, that ſo
lerned and Feruent a Miniſter is ſet ouer
the congregation. But in the begynning
of their ioy, if it ſhould be ſaied ſadly vnto
them, that they were not beſt to be ſo glad
before they be ſure thereof, becauſe A Biſhope
is not alwaies taken for a preacher of
the word, or miniſter of the Sacramentes,
but ſignifieth ſometymes a man which for
any ſingular Qualities ſake, hath a Charge &
ſight ouer any thinge committed vnto him
&c. would not this obiection, let y• furth
goeing and courſe of their gladnes? No
doubt thereof. For by that tyme his needleſſe
talke were anſwered, and he for al y•
would replie againe, that it foloweth not
Neceſſarily, M. Iew. to haue any ſpiritual
office in yt he is reported to be a Biſhope,
becauſe Cicero himſelf in his Epiſ. vſeth a
lyk word to a far other ſēſe, it would make
ſome to doubt of ye mater, & other to maruel
at ye putting vp of ye doubt, & euery one
to be trobled wt ſome affectiō either wt it or
againſt it, the end therefore wil be cōfuſiō.
               
                  
I ſpeake not here againſt diſtinctions:
neither can I miſlyke with his diligence,
that when one word is taken ſundrie
waies, doth ſet euery ſenſe of the worde
in his proper Place. But this is that,
which would be amended in M. Iewel,
that in Reaſoning againſt vs, he be not
content to tel vs Barely, that Princeps,
or principatus, or Rector is vſed dyuerſly:
but that he declare, in what one ſenſe it
muſt be taken, concernyng that place about
which our queſtion ys, Or in what
other ſenſe, then that which we doe take
it in Otherwiſe: If the queſtion were,
VVhether any Maſse be, at this daie,
ſaied in Rome: we affirmyng, that there
ys: He Replieth in deede, when he Anſwereth,
that, Miſſa is taken for any kind of
Praier. but, if he adde no more, and if he cā
not ſaie, in his conſcience that the Maſſe
at Rome is ſuch a kynde of Praier only,
he Replieth but lyke A Sophiſt, and
mainteyneth only a Cōtradiction, to y• increaſe
of Contention. And, neither
wil he yelde to our propoſition, becauſe he
replieth againſt it, neither doth he veny
our propoſition, becauſe it is but a Truth
which he ſaieth, and therefore nothing



contrarie to that of ours: Neither wil he
applye his owne ſenſe of the word Miſſa
(or what ſo euer other it be) to the queſtion
proponed, but like a man not only
Amaſed hymſelfe, but that would haue al
other to be vncertaine in euery mater, ſo
he leaueth it as he found it in ſome note
boke or Lexicon, that Miſſa, Princeps, Principatus,
are taken not alwaies in one
Senſe. Beware therefore of hym.
            
            
               Of the Courteous, Mylde & Gentle,
behauiour of M. Iewel towardes
D. Harding.
CAP. IX.
               YOur frindes (M. Iew.) beleue it, &
your ſelf doe alſo acknowledge it: y•
you haue dealt in this Cōflict wt D,
Har. very honeſtly & modeſtly. And,
if they think ſo, I maruel not, becauſe a
good will is ſo readie, to alow y• Praiſes
of hym whom it liketh, y• of euery occaſiō,
it doth admit ye perſuaſion, y• leadeth there
vnto. In ſo much, y• without further Loking
into your Boke, & Conſidering of ye
Specialties, it is vnto ſome a plaine Demonſtration,
yt you are of a very Quiet &
Gentle Sprite, becauſe you haue charged



your aduerſarie only with Vntruethes,
and abſtained from the Terme of Lies.
               Wherein, though they be greatly deceaued
(becauſe in dede, in doeing your worſt,
you could neuer haue rightly called them
Lies, which ſhalbe ſhortly proued, to be
not ſo much as, Vntruethes) yet are they
eaſely to be pardoned, becauſe it is A common
mater in good Natures & diſpoſitions,
quickly to be moued with the ſhew
of Vertue and honeſtie, without long tarying
and further trial, whether it be true
or Counterfaite. But:
               As for you, M. Iewel, it is great wōder,
not, that you ſpeake Sweetly and meane
bitterly, or ſpeake ſharpely and think it
Truely: but, yt you doe pretend Modeſtie
and practiſe Extremitie, ſhewing in wordes,
as though either you had no Choler
at all, either kept it downe from Inflammations,
And in deedes expreſſing ſuch
paſſions, as declare exceding copie of bitter
humors.Iew. 
                        •
                     : Gentle M. Iew. 
                  I wil not (you ſay at the begynning)
Anſwer heate for heat, but in ſuch
kinde of Eloquence, wil rather geaue place.
               
               And againe:42. 
                  No, No, M. Iewel triūpheth
not, but geueth al triumph, victorie, & glorie
vnto God.
                  79. & inan other place: Of my arguments
I make no Vaunt. If they ſound wel



In Gods eares, they are wel in tuene.
               
               Doe not theſe phraſes and ye like declare,
the man to be much mortified, that vſeth
them? And, that he is ſo far of from geauing
Reproche or Taunt of his owne making:
that he will not ſo much as vſe the
occaſion, when it is offred, or requite lyke
with lyke, being Prouoked?
               
                  And who is he ſo perfite by his owne
Teſtimonie? Forfoth M. Iewel. And that
M. Iewel, which (byſyde thoſe forſaied
behauiours, of which I haue ſpoken)
ſpareth not to cal men Innizers, Renegates,Iew. pa.
Robbers of the people,2. and deceiuers
of them in al cumfort,3 Blind Guides, Soueraigne
Heretikes, Wilful Deuiſers,Modeſt M. Iew. Againſt
their owne knoulege, violently to repel
y• inſtitutiō of Chriſt,55 Deniers of Chriſts
inſtitution, Improuers of Gods commaundement,96
Men that vſe ſcorneful and ſclaunderous
tales.114 
                  That M. Iewel,
                  118 
                  which chargeth
them with Wilful malice,2 Hatred of
trueth,3. Childiſſh fables, Lies & ſclaunders,
Vaine folie, and Manifeſt falſehoode.
               Euen yt Iewel, which ſayeth of the Biſhopes
of Rome (to let goe other, as fauorable
& gentle wordes towardes thē) yt 
                  as
Iulianus ye 
                  Emperour in his phreneſie, ſome



tymes imagined y• yt greate Alexāders ſoule
was come by ſucceſsiō to dwel in him: euē ſo
now the bishopes of Rome Imagine by like
phātaſie or phreneſie, yt S. Peters ſoule cometh
by ſuccesſiō to dwel in thē. Such Priuilege
& grace he hath boldly to ſet furth ſo
Incredible & Slaunderous Lies: & yet to
be taken for a Quiet and Peaceable man.
               But againſt Strangers & Foreners, he
is (you wil graunt) ſomewhat Erneſt and
zelous: Marye towardes D. Har. his old
acquaintance & countriemā, he is very ſober
So I trow,& tēperate.Iew. pag. 1. as by theſe his
familiar Termes it will appeere.4
               
               
                  He laith to D. Har. charge,
                  5 Cauils, Intō
perat humors of ſpeaking euil,See what ſtore He hath kept vn to himſelfe for al his leauing ſuch kind of Eloquēce vnto his aduerſarie. Inflaming14
of his choler,19 Villanie, Vnhoneſt coūtenāce,
wicked wilfulnes, Wātō foly,23 Wel
broking of his owne lerning,73 Bringing of
blind Geaſſes,79 Skorning, & yt as his maner
is, Wilful renoūcing of gods knowē truth,84
Preſuming of his owne wit and eloquence,85
Brauery,129 Oſtentatiō of lerning, Groſſe
error, Pōpe of words,165 New fantaſy, Kind
of lerning not only peuiſh, but alſo fātaſtical
& mere frātike,149 Refreſſhing himſelf with
one pore ſillable,254 leuing his lerning vtterly,39.
& holding by bare Gheaſſes as he cōmonly
doth,106 Speaking only by authoritie and ꝓuing
nothing,112 as his maner is, Narow ſeking



to finde ſome couert for his errour:122.
Leauing ye whole rout of his cōpanie,127 & gladnes
to run alone,145 Blindnes, Bitternes of
talk inflamed 
                     〈◊〉
                   Malice,172 whereof it ſemeth he
wanteth no ſtore:174 Wantonly denying of
Chriſt,175 Amaſing of the ignorant Reader wt
a countenance of great learning: Faction,181
Cōtētiō,217 Mainteyning of vntruth, cōtrary
to his own knowledge,219 Doctrine ſeruing
only to maintein Ignorāce & the kingdō of231
darknes,269 Liking of thoſe authorities aboue
al others,284. which are moſt vain & ſhamles aboue
al others. Manifeſt corruptiō and falſifiēg
of Doctours, Purpoſely corrupting
both the Greke & the Latine of Socrates.
               Theſe wordes be yours, M. Iew. not
only for yt they be vttered by you: but alſo,
for that they perteyne directly & properly
vnto your ſelf. With theſe and other like
pearles (As a Ieweller abunding in ſuch
Pretiouſnes) ye haue thoroughly beſett
your whole boke, yt it might ye more glitter
in ye eie of your reader. Here 
                     〈◊〉
                   your Stage
is fully freight. Some man would think,
it were Vetus Comoedia: But it is not Abſolutely
ſo, becauſe ye admitt vnto your
Stage the Nouam alſo. And like A cunning
and wiſe Plaier, ye temper one humour
diuerſely, keeping ſtill y• ſharpenes



of your ſenſe and meaning, but expreſſing
it not alwayes vncourteouſly. For lyke a
good natured & nurtered aduerſary you
order ſometymes D. Harding manerly &
ſhamefaſtly, As: This argument is very
weake,
                  Iew. pa. 27. Iew. 104 Tender Compaſſion. 
                  I wil not ſay it is vnlerned or procedeth
of ignorance. Againe: if it be, either ye
                  violence of nature, or the maner of his Catholike
doctrine, that dryueth M. Harding
thus to taunt, he muſt be borne withal.
                  204 And
againe: O what meaneth M. Harding thus
to deale? Lothe I am to make the cōparion,
                  225.
                  but true it is: very children doe not vſe to
reaſon in ſo Childiſſh ſort. Againe: If I Liſt
to vſe his owne termes, I might wel cal this,
foiſting or cogging, or I know not what.
               
               Lo what a kind hart here is? He wil not
ſaie yt he may ſay, he wil beare wt his aduerſarie.
Loth he is, to doe yt he doth. If he
Liſt, he could he ſharper. As who ſhould
think, M. Iew. of hymſelf ſurely is of A
Sweete & Gentle diſpoſitiō, he inflameth
not his Choler, not becauſe he hath none:
but either he wil not, either he is loth, either
he liſteth not. He anſwereth not heate for
heate, not only becauſe he promiſed ſo: but
euen of very pure mildenes of Sprite, and
Moderation. Yet ſauing for the ciuilitie



in vtterance, al in effect is one: Whether
one ſay, he lyeth, or ſauing his reuerence he
lyeth. And I lyke M. Iew. no better whē
he ſaieth:
               
                  Loth I am to make the Compariſon,
                  Iew. pa. 204
                  but true it is, very childrene doe not vſe
to reaſon in ſo childiſſhe ſort:
                  164 than when
he goeth plainely to worke without diſſimulation,245
calling it,60. 
                  Lewed Logike,
                  
                     Where now is Loth I am, and he muſt be borne withal. that D.
Har. vſeth, And with theſe Phraſes diſgracing
his ſayinges: This Argument is much
acraſe
                        •
                     , It is vtterly vnſenſible and voyde
of reaſon, It halteth downe right of one
ſyde, It hangeth only vpon lacke of cariage,
A very Childe may 
                        •
                     one ſee through ht it, It
is a good Frydayes Argument:
                  166. 129 216. Againe:
This concluſion is faint, It is ſingle ſould
&c.
                  135. 65. 137. 263. For both wayes the aduerſary is
greuouſly touched. Yea rather, where
by other Signes it is plaine and euident,Iew. 308.
that D. Harding is nothing at all ſpared,
there to pretend A Good Countenance
and a Quicte Affection: it is the more bitter
and odious.
               What meane you by theſe wordes M.
Iew? here by y• way, I muſt put M. Har. in remēbrance,
notwithſtāding for his eſtimatiō
ſake, he would faine haue his foorth in theſe



matters: Yet ſhould he not therefore thus
beguile the eies of the ſimple, & thus myſreporte
and falſi
                     •
                  ie the wordes of the auncient
Fathers? Doe you not herein charge
him with high Pride, extreme Crueltie &
wicked falſehoode? When you call him
Somwhat ſhort witted,
                  198 29.26 54.143 & obiect againſt him
wicked wilfulneſſe, Wanton folie, Broking
of his owne lerning, and tell hym that
His worde is not yet Canonized, And, that
his worde is no Charter: doe ye not Accuſe
him, by theſe wordes, vnto yt world & condemne
hym or contēne him in your owne
hart, for a Solemne, arrogant, high mynded,
Foliſſhe, Light and Vnſkilful man?
               This being then ſo euident, yt you nothing
regarde hym, when ſo euer you ſpeake
ſo Courteouſly as though in deede you
had no Diſdaine or Choler: it is, to ye betraieing
of your Craft and Hypocriſie, &
no profe at all of your Sinceritie or modeſtie.
Neither doe you miſtike the ſharpe
& bitter Termes, becauſe of an inward humilitie
of your owne, & erneſt Imitation
of Meeknes: but becauſe you ſhall make
your aduerſaries ſayings appere yt more
Feruent, ye more quietnes in Anſwering
your ſelf doe Pretend and Counterfaiete.
               
                  
                  I maruell (ſay you) M. Harding being ſo
graue a man,
                  Iew. 173. 
                  would borow Ruffians Termes
to ſcof withal.
                  M. Iew. Maruel. This you ſay, becauſe he vſed
the Termes of Cogging and Foiſting
yt die. And to make this more odious, you
extoll the Grauitie of your aduerſarie on ye
one ſide, & increaſe ye vilenes of ye termes
on ye other ſide: as though thei could neuer
haue ben lerned but of Ruffians. And betwene
theſe Extremes, your ſelf ſtand a
marueyling, as if you ſhould think: Surely
if it were to me, I would neuer vſe ſuch
Methaphores, as are taken of Shamefull
Occupations.
               But, If theſe Termes offend you (M.
Iewell) why call you them out of ſeaſon
to memory?Iew. 22
                        •
                     
                   Why are you not content wt
once noting of ſo Graue A man for them,
but againe and againe repete them, out of
Tyme and Place:235. 
                  I might (ſaie you) cal this
Foiſting or Cogging. Likewiſe, Here might
M. Harding well beſtow his termes, here
might he truely ſaie, the pope coggeth and
foiſteth. Doth this Cogging of your
Aduerſary, become your Modeſtie? Or,
is it for loue of Meeknes and Puritie,
that you can not abide the wordes which
are vſed in ſome Art or Feate of ſmall
Honeſtie? I would or might conceiue



ſo much, if your ſelf practiſed not the contrary.
For when you ſay:
               He heweth and Mangleth Chryſoſtomes
words,Iew. 65. Iew. 225. He Mangleth and Maimeth S. Gregories
wordes,269 He Shuffleth in wordes,
Now haue an eie Good Reader to M Har.124
fingers,160 And marke how he Iuggleth with S.
Auguſtines wordes,Maruel at your ſelfe 198 M. Iew. Onleſſe thou eie him
wel, he wil ſteal from thee, He Plaieth roūd
about, merely, with his owne phātaſie,221 Here
M. Har. ſaieth,225 he wil trip & Daunce lightly
ouer the Doctours,237 Was he ſtaied with the
Choinecough?240 Non ſatis commodè diuiſa
ſunt tēporibus tibi Daue haec.299 He bringeth
in Councels in a Mummery,302. O what Ranging
and Hunting here is to beate vp that
thing, that wil not be found? He cummeth
in only with ioly Brags and Great vauntes
as if he were Playing at Poſt, and ſhould
wynne al by Vieinge: When you ſay
all this (M. Iewel) in half your Booke
only, byſides that which I haue already
ſpoken, and that which I haue left vntouched:
Into what cumpanie ſhall I
ſay you haue fallen, to borow theſe Termes
of them to ſkof withall? What Hewers,
Ruffians, Shufflers, Iugglers, Tumblers,
Daūcers, Dauyes, Mummers,



Rangers, and Cardeplayers Haue
you mette withall: of whom you ſhould
borow fit Termes for expreſſing of your
Gentle Affections?
               
                  Doubtleſſe (you ſay) ſuch kinde of dealing,
                  Iew. in ye anſwer to D. Har. preface. Matth. 11. An Holy Leſſon.
                  as is without gal or bitternes, as it is
moſt commendable in it ſelf: ſo it ſeemeth
moſt ſitting in them, that trauaile in Gods
cauſe. Chriſt ſaieth, Learne of me: for I am
meeke and Gentle. You therefore
which know ſo much: with what Sprite
haue you multiplied your Reprocheful
Metaphores, againſt D. Harding? Or
how ſpeake you, againſt Vngentle and
Sharpe Termes: your ſelf in this very
forſayd place (where of purpoſe you frame
your talke to a ſingular forme of modeſtie)
calling by craft, a man of Profeſſed
grauitie, as your ſelf acknowledge, A
SCORPION,
                  Quickly forgotten. & obiecting vnto him, his
yonger IANNIZERS? And in ye next
leafe, that He thinketh al the world ſingeth
SANCTVS, SANCTVS, &receaueth hym
with OZANNA. Is this your Remembring
of that Good Leſſon of Chriſt,
which you teach D. Har. Learne of me, for
I am meeke & gētle? Cometh this, of your
Smoth and Calme Affections? Doe you
ſtand faſt and quiet vpon the Shoare?


                  
Thinke you D. Harding, for calling you
Goliath, Therſires &c. to be blowen out by
the tempeſtes of his affectiōs and to be toſſed
from the ſhoare: And were you in no
ſtorme at all, when the Sprite moued you
to ſay, that with thoſe wordes he Solaceth
himſelf, and Refreſſheth his Sprites?
               
               Your ſelf (M. Iewell) are not a meete
man to geaue Rules, Or to geaue ſentēce
in theſe maters, being ſo Eger and Light
of mynd: that neither ye haue any ſtaie
of your ſelf, Nor yet doe refraine, from cō
                  mending
your ſelf of Modeſtie. But, if
there be emong your brothers any ſo perfitt,
that can tell, When, Where and in
What ſort &c. the Aduerſarie may be
ſharpely ſpoken vnto, And can ſhew vs
an Example thereof, in his owne writinge
                     •
                  :
let hym put his Coucluſions, and
we ſhall 
                     〈◊〉
                   be at a point, to know what
behauiour we may boldly folow, when
the cauſe it ſelf geaueth vs to reproue
you. As for ſuch humblenes and
Meeknes that a man ſhould not in any

                     〈…〉
                  , an Heretike an Heretike, Or
an Hypocrite an Hypocrite: Wel it may
be perchaūce ye counsell of ſome indifferēt



man, which neither loueth y• one opinion
                     •
                  
nor hateth the other: but precept and Commandement
of God, it is not. Our Sauiour
hym ſelfe without any Inflaming of his
Choler, vſing the Termes of Hypocrite,
                  Math. 1
                        •
                     . 13. & 23. Tit. 1. Phil. 3 Iud. epiſ. 1. Io. 2.
                  Blinde Guides, Fox, and Dalbed Sepulchres:
And the Apoſtles after him, not ſparinge
to name ſuche as deſerued it, Naughtie
Beaſtes, Idle Belies, Dogges, Clowdes without
water, Antichriſtes & caet.
               
               Perchaunce therefore, if the mynde be
Simple, and the harte vncorrupted, and if
the Reproche which we geaue, be truely
occaſioned of our Aduerſaries ſayeinges or
doeinges, and not inuented of our ſelues:
our whole Acte, is out of daunger. But
this I am ſure of, that it becummeth not
him, which wil be Exacte againſt others in
ſuch maters, and take vpon him the Countenance
of a Quiete, Gentle, Courteous,
Patience, and holy man: to offend more
extremely in ye ſame kind of thing, for which
he miſliketh with others. And becauſe, you
are ſo Reported and Praiſed (M. Iewell)
to deale in this your Reply, very Modeſtly
and Charitable, like A man that ſayeth
leſſe then he could, And that fauoreth the

                     •
                  ſtimation of his Aduerſarie, chooſing rather



to diminiſſhe ſomewhat of that fyer
which is enkindled, than to adde more mater
vnto it: I thought it expedient to declare
A Parte of ſuch Notes and Signes,
by which it may be perceaued, that for all
the faire ſhewe of a good Complexion inwardly,
yet you be full of ill humors. And
that, notwithſtanding the ſweete Sprite,
that fauor reporteth to come from you,
you are ſo bitter and ſower in Experience,
that the Reader needeth aduertiſement, To
BEWARE Of you.
               
               It foloweth now, ſhortly to declare, in
what ſort M. Iewell hath abuſed many
other, with whome he hath to doe in his
Replie. I meane, not only Auncient Councels
or Fathers within the Firſt ſix hundred
yeres, but any kinde of writer, whoſe
Teſtimonie he vſeth or Refuſeth. His
Contradictions alſo, his Groſſe Errours
or Hereſies, And the Places or Argumentes,
which for all his Greate Replie, he
hath not Anſwered, they would not be
left vntouched. But, becauſe theſe pointes,
though I mynd, but ſhortly, to note them,
wyll occupie more tyme and Paper, then,
at this preſent, I thinke good to tarie, or



this Boke wil commodiouſly beare, beinge
already of a ſufficient bigneſſe: I wil therfore
put it ouer to A Third Boke. Which
if it ſhould, either not come furth at all, Or
more ſlowly come furth, then either my intent
ſurely and purpoſe is, Or thy deſire
perchaunſe and expectation wil be: yet doe
I leaue this, in the meane time, ſufficiently
proued, that M. Iewel is, in deed, ſuche
a man, as of whome thou oughteſte to
BEWARE, though in worde, he ſeemeth
to be one of the moſte vprighteſte
Proteſtantes, that in theſe dayes, laboreth
in the Engliſſhe Vineyarde.
               For Who ſo zelous as he, for ſettinge
furth of the Procedinges? who ſo copious
as he, in alleaging Auncient Fathers and
Councels? Who ſo ſtowte in challēging &
bragginge? Who ſo ſweete in alluringe &
flatering? What he is in Sermos by liuely
vtterance, I neuer harde, or I haue forgottē:
but what he is in his writings through
a ſadde and louing countenance, I ſee, and
am both weary of it, and ſory for it. For I
find in his words ſo great reuerence & remembrance
of God, ſo tender compaſſion
and care of his Reader, that excepte I did
certainely knowe it, by all his writtinges,



yt he dealeth vniuſtly, I might eaſely thinke
it, yt he feareth God, & regardeth men.
               I ſpeake not this (ſaieth he) in vehemency
of ſprite,Iew. in his Sermon. or heate of talke, but euen as before
GOD, by the waie of ſimplicitie and truth.
Againe: As truly as GOD is GOD & caet.
And againe in an other place of the ſame
anſwer,
                  In the 1. anſwer to D. Cole. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . I proteſte before God. And in this
Reply, When I reade theſe wordes of M.
Hardinges, I am ſtrikē with horrour, to conſider
the terrible Iudgement of God: It is
much to be feared that he that is lead awaie
of this ſorte, offendeth not of Ignorance,
for ſo were the faulte more pardonable, but
againſte the manifeſte knowen trueth, and
againſte the ſpirite of God.
               Here loe in theſe phraſes is expreſſed the
ſimilitude of A right good man, whiche
continually walketh in the ſight of God,
and hath ſuth conſideration of his maieſrie
that the mind ſometimes being attentiuely
ſe
                     •
                   thervpō, draweth (I can not tel how)
much of ye corporal Spirite & ſenſe with it,
and ieaueth the body in an horrour.
               
                  Concerning then his affection towardes
men: God graunt (ſaieth he) vnto all his
people the Spirite of wiſedome and vnderſtanding
& caet. Againe. O good Reader,
they deale not ſimple, they diſsimble, they



meane it not. Againe, Alas this was no parte
of S. Auguſtines minde.Iew. pa. 5. 3
                        •
                     . 124. 117. Beware good Reader,
this man ſeeketh waies to deceaue thee.
Againe. O good Chriſtian Reader, marke
the dealing of this man, and Beware of hym.
Againe. Take heede good Reader, M. Hardinge
hath here throwen A greate Miſte of
learning, to daſle thy ſight.
               Here loe againe ſuch Charitie and Conſcience
is pretended, as though M. Iewel
(good man) did hate nothinge more then
deceauing of the Reader, and caſtinge of
any myſte before his eyes: And that he ſo
intendeth the Glorie of God,In his 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and w
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  the
of Soules, as though without any requeſt
made vnto him, he did, for his parte, vtterly
denie his learning, denie his Biſhoprike,
denie his eſtimation, denie his name, deny
                        •
                     
himſelfe: Only The Faith of Chriſt and the
Truthe of God he could not deny.
               
               Yet, all theſe deuoute Affections, and
Earneſt ſayinges notwithſtanding, thou
ſhalt find him in deede ſo contrary vnto
them, as though he cared neither for God
nor for man. Remember (if thou haſt reade
this boke) or Conſider (if thou wilte he
aſſured) what Hvpocriſie and Iniurie, he
vſeth in the firſt Article, of priuate Maſſe?
For whereas D. Harding reaſoned only



about Sole receauing, he draweth maſt violētly
& wrōgfully, al his argumēts to ſaieing
of Maſſe, of Receiuing vnder both kindes.
               
               In the ſecond Article, what A Trifler,
and Shifter, and wrangler doth he ſhewe
himſelfe to be? Firſt he ſtoutly ſaieth, The
Communion in the primitiue Church was
not miniſtred vnto the people in one kinde.
If you proue the contrarie by ſome Examples,
yea, ſaieth he, but it was not miniſtred
ſo vnto the WHOLE PEOPLE:
Againe, not in the OPEN CHVRCH. further
yet, NOT ORDINARILY, and laſt of
all, NOT AS IT IS NOW VSED & caet.
               
               In the third Articie, of the Publike Seruice
in the vulgare tounge? How Contentious
& weyward is be? Nothing cā pleaſe
him or ſatiſfie him. Al yt D. Harding doth
alleage is but Coniectures and Gheaſſes.
               
               In yt fourth Article of the Supremacie,
he calleth for the name of Vniuerſal Bishop
or Heade of the Church. And A name as
good as y•, ſhal not ſuffiſe: the very Name
it ſelfe, he muſt haue, or els the Catholikes
(let them be ſure thereof) ſhall here of it.
As longe then, as the Name cometh not,
he braggeth: when it cummeth in deede,
be contemneth it, and ſheweth how it was
no greate maeſtrie to find it. So contentiouſly



and ſo ſhamefully, as though 
                     〈◊〉
                  
were not A God whiche beholdeth 
                     〈◊〉
                  
iudgeth our ſecret thoughtes, or as tho
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
it ſhould not perteine to any mans C
                     •••
                  
ſcience, to care or paſſe muche vpon th
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
maters, but only to haue ſome what to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
alwaies for him ſelfe, leaſte he ſhould 
                     〈◊〉
                  
at any tyme to his Aduerſarie.
               How, for the ſecond boke, his Common
Places and Digreſſions, his Abuſing of
D. Harding ſo many waies, as I 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſpecified, doe meetly wel proue (I thanke)
that he followeth not the plaine waye of
Simpliciti of Truth. If they do not, then 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſome Charitable Proteſtant, deliuer me
of my opinion therein by anſweringe my
Examples and Argumentes. If they
doe, I praie thē to remember themſelues,
& either to moue M. Iewel to ye amending
of his faults, & ye Correcting yet once more
Againe, of his Reply: or to make no more of
this which he hath done, then it deſerueth.
               But to make here an end: If my 
                     〈◊〉
                  
doe bring any profite vnto thee (Indifferent
Reader) I am ſufficiently recom
                     •••
                  
                  ſed
for them, by the vantage 
                     〈…〉
                  
take of thy profite: If they 
                     〈…〉
                  
al, they yet cā not be al loſte becauſe of 
                     〈◊〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   conſidereth my Intent, & knowet
                     •
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   for iuſt cauſes in
                     •
                  ued to take theſe

                     〈…〉
                  . Being theerfore myſelfe out of all

                     〈…〉
                   of loſſe by this bargainē, for thēt, I

                     〈…〉
                   him, yt thou alſo mayſt winne 
                     〈…〉
                  
or if thy occupieing be not hitherto

                     〈…〉
                   yt thou ſhouldeſt loke to winne, yet I

                     •
                  ay God hartely, yt thou maieſt not le
                     •
                  ſe,

                     〈…〉
                  , to ſpeake it more plainely vnto thee, yt
thou maieſt BEWARE OF M. IEWEL.
               
            
         
         
            Faultes eſcaped in the Printing.
            
               
                  
                     Folio.
                     Page.
                     Line.
                     Fault.
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                     60.
                     2.
                     2
                     the
                     he
                  
                  
                     70.
                     1.
                     12.
                     lefte
                     let
                  
                  
                     86.
                     2.
                     4.
                     the
                     he
                  
                  
                     104.
                     2.
                     20.
                      
                     put out (the)
                  
                  
                     116.
                     1.
                     6.
                     ſhifted
                     ſifted
                  
                  
                     128.
                     2.
                     23.
                     Receaued
                     Receaue.
                  
                  
                     141.
                     2.
                     17.
                     muſt
                     moſt
                  
                  
                     75.
                     1.
                     24.
                     Cogging.
                     Egging.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Faultes in the Margent.
                  
                     Pa.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        .
                     ying
                     lying
                  
               
            
            
         
      
   