
      
         
            
            
               A
Necessary instruction of
Christian faith and hope, for christians
to holde fast, and to be bolde vp
on the promise of God, & not
to doubt of their saluation
in Christ.
            Translated out of D. Vrbanus Regius, into
English And newly recognised
by Iohn F.
            
               PSALM. 54 verse. 8.
Taste yee and see how gracious the Lord is:
blessed is the man that trusteth in him.
            ¶Imprinted at Londō by
Hugh Singleton, dvvelling in Crede
Lane, at the signe of the gylden
Tunne, nere vnto Ludgate, and
are there to be sold.
            Cum priuilegio.
            Anno. 1579.
         
         
            
            
               To the Right honourable
Sir Fraunces Knolles Knighte, Thresorer
of the Queenes Maiesties houshold,
and one of her highnes most honourable priuie
Counsaile, vvisheth aboundance of
blessednes, both in this lyfe &
in the life to come.
            HAVING (RIGHT
honourable) aboue thirtie
yeeres since, printed
this shorte treatise ensuing,
being translated
and deliuered vnto mee
by Maister Foxe, whose iudgement and
faithfulnesse in the Lordes causes are, so
sufficientlye grounded among the faithful
both at home and abroade, as my pore testimony
can nothing adde thereunto, naye
so much as I not only protect, but also reioyce
my selfe in the fyrst printing hereof
vnder the same. And the euent hath yet
more made good his choyse in this treatise
whilest that the same was euen desirously
embraced of the christian readers,
and hath ben knowne to perswade in the
matter, it treateth of, some that before
were farre wide from the truth therin.
For though the volume be very smal yet
doth it discourse a great poynt of our christian

faith, religion, and comfort, not only
very plainly and familiarly, but also moste
pithely and substantially, which to do can
not be but to the reader singularly fruitfull.
Wherefore I haue nowe my selfe requested
of M. Foxe, of whom I fyrste receiued
it, that it would please him to reviewe
the same, with such profitable additions
as to him should seeme meete for the
benefite of the godly reader, that yet once
more in my time I might publish the same
to Gods glory and the comfort of the godly.
Wherin I esteme my selfe much bound
vnto him for graunting my request. And
now (righte honourable) I thoughte my
selfe to haue a fit occasion aswell to giue
vnto your honor some duetiful remēbrance
of my thankefulnes for so greate kindnes
as I acknowledge to haue inioyed frō you
                  •
               
as also to publish a booke so greatly adu
                  •
               
               ̄
               cing
the honour of God and the faithe of
his people vnder your honours name, to
whom I know both those respects to be very
precious: The Lorde giue his blessing
thereunto, and encrease his heauly giftes
vpon you with daily encreases, euer preseruing
your honor and al yours in this life, &
vnto the life of immortality, blessednes, &
glory, in the kingdome of heauen.
            Your honors euer to cōmaund, Hugh Singleton.
         
         
            
            ¶ A preface to the
booke here folowing.
            THere came to my hands of late a certaine
litle boke, bearing the title: An
instruction hovv to be bold vpon gods
promise, &c. VVhich boke being trāslated
aboue xxx. yeeres since, for a deere father of
mine, one Richard Melton (to recompence hym
with some fruite of my studyes, for the charge
which he more like a naturall, then a stepfather
bestovved vpon me in setting mee to schoole) and
being broughte to mee by the Printer, I was desired
to take a litle paines in perusing the same.
VVhereunto, to satisfie the request both of hym,
and certaine others, which semed desierous of the
booke, I vvas contented to graunt. And so much
the more, both for the authors sake, being a learned
vvriter of Luthers yeeres and standing, and
especially for the argument of the booke, whiche
in these our dayes I see greatly expedient & much
needefull, for comfort of the simple ignorant.
For vvhat doctrine can be more excellent, then
of saluation? vvhat more sure, then the promise
of God? vvhat more certaine then the veritie
thereof? vvhat more comfortable, then to stand
firme and ascerteined of the same? or vvhat more
needefull, then the same doctrine to be taughte a
broad? And that so much more nedefull, by how
much vvee see the aduersaries of this doctrine in
these our dayes to growe, both strong and many,
but none more strong, then mans owne naturall
sence and iudgemente, vvhich f
                  •
               lowing nothing

but his ovvne originall capacitie. vvithout the
vvorde of the gospell, can comprehend litle or nothing,
of thys mysterie.
            From the vvhich our naturally ingrafted blindnes
little differeth the scholediuinitie of the papistes,
who albeit they do seeme outvvardly to hold the
nam of christ: yet the promises made to vs in christ,
they hold not: the freedome of his grace they see
not, but make doubts vvher none is, teaching also
that no man ought to be sure of his saluation, but
to stand in feare and doubt. And no great maruel
if they so teach,Difference between the Papist and the Protestant. for if iustification as they say doe
stand by workes vvith faith, and not by faith with
out vvorkes: by merites: and not by promise frely,
by our selues partly, and not by Christe onely,
how can any certainty c be holden vvithout feare
or doubting? And yet neither is feare altogether
excluded from this certainty, vvhych we hold, nether
vvorkes also from fayth. The feare of God
I meane,How feare & confidēce stand togeather in a true christian. vvhich is and ought to be in euery good
childe of God. And yet not vvithstanding his inheritaunce
standeth fast and sure. As a sonne and
heyre feareth and reuerenceth his father, and yet
doubteth not of his heritage: So God is alwayes
to be feared, but his couenant neuer to be mistrusted.
Neither doe they rightly consider the causes
of our saluation, whiche teache this docttrine of
feare and doubting.
            Touching the explication vvhereof, thre causes
are especially to be noted.Three causes of saluatiō declared VVhereof the one
resteth in the promise of God, the other in the
bloud of Christ. The third in the fayth of man. All
vvhiche three, bee causes together concurrent for
our saluation. For both gods promise saueth, and

Christes passion saueth: Also faith saueth, but in
sundry and diuers respectes, by promise and grace
vve ar saued, as being the cause purposing, or formal.
By Christ, as cause material & meritorious.
By faith as cause instrumental or conditional. Of
these three, the promise, (the thinges promised I
meane) is to come. The death of Christ, vvherupon
the promise standeth, is past. Faith which looketh
to the person of him that dyed,Assurance of our saluation hovv it resteth. endureth.
And hereupon resteth the true assurance of saluation
in the hearts of all the faithful, for as it is true
that the suffering of Christ is past: So no lesse true
it is, the thinges promised vpon his suffering, are
to come.
            And for so much,Hovve faith bringeth in hope. as all these promises of God
are in Christ, and made to them that beleeue in
him: therefore fayth in Christ, to vvhich fayth alone
the promise is made, may boldlye call hope
vnto her, and so most certainly assure himselfe of
vndoubted saluation. And here riseth vp the operacion
of fayth, and of hope, with difference
betvveene them both. VVhich tvvo albeit moste
ioyntly knitte together, yet they differThe difference betwene faith and hope discussed. some what
in the obiecte. For as hopeThe obiecte of faith and of hope considered. properly respecteth the
promise of God, and respecteth things to come:
euen so faythe properly looketh to the person of
the sonne of God, and in him taketh present iustification.
Thus then the obiecte of hope is the
vvorde of promise. The obiecte of fayth is principally
the person of the Sauior. And though it
may be sayde truely, speaking in righte terms,
that wee beleeue the promise of god to bee true:
yet it is not so truly said, that vve beleue in the promise,
but hope in the promise of almighty god.
            
               Faith then,The operation of faith and hope. touching his obiect, runneth to the
person of the sonne, in whom the promise is geuen.
Hope holdeth fast in the promise giuen in
Christ, vvhereby hope assureth, faith f
                  •
               aueth.Faith saueth hope comforteth The cause of our saluation, euer to faith onely and not to hope. And
as true faith in Christ can not b
                  •
               e without hope:
So hope againe vvithout faith in Christe is to no
purpose. Neither is euery man 
                  •
               h
                  •
               t hopeth, or be
cause he hopeth vvell, therfore saued, but because
he beleeueth vvell, (that is in the sonne of God)
therefore is he saued. VVho so is freely saued by
bloude, as boldlye may hope of saluation by promise
and nothing doubte. Albeit notvvithstanding
this hope is not alvvayes alike strōg in euery
particular beleuing man, for although the promises
be generall, and indifferently extended to
all beleeuers, and ought to be hold 
                  ••
               st of all men:
yet euery particular person, though hee beleeue in
Christ right well, can not so vvel at al tymes, as we
se, apply these promises to himselfe, as he should,
but many times creepeth in some distrust or misdoubt
of himselfe, partlye thorovve vvekenes of
spirite, partly through conscience of sin, or greuous
impressions of the enemie. As many times
by experience vve see happen to the good s
                  •
               intes
of God, vvho holding the same professiō of christian
fayth,Faith to iustification may be somtimes where hop fainteth but hope to comfort can neuer be without faith. as other good christians doe, yet in
applying these generall promises to themselues,
can not vvithout some feare and diffidence, be so
comforted, as others be, and as they wold themselues.
Against vvhom, nothing in this booke is
ment, or spoken, but onely againste suche as vvilfully
mayntain the contrary doctrine: Not agaīst
such as of infirmity being deiected through feare
woulde fayne hope better, and can not: but against

those, which of purpose contrary to the
promise of grace, doe holde that no man oughte
to be certaine or assured in this life of his saluatiō
and fauour of God, but euer to stande in doubte
and feare thereof. Of the which two sorts of men
the one is to be comforted, and well hoped of, for
though hope and faith many times in good men
do shrinke and qua
                  •
               e through infirmitie and tentation,
yet by grace and goodnes of the Lorde it
riseth again. The other vtterlye as hereticall and
contrary to grace, are to be detested and by sound
doctrine impugned, by such godlye bookes as in
this ye may read. The lord Iesus of his grace
& goodnes, comfort the weake sp
                  •
               
               ted,
raise vp them that be falne,
reduce the ignorāt, & set vp
his glorious kingdome
with speede, to whō
be glory for
euer.
            Amen.
            Iohn Foxe.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               AN errour of all errors,
most pestilent
and deuilish it is, to
teache vs euer to
doubt, and neuer to
be sure of Gods fauour
and our saluacion: as we haue bene ledde in the popes
church, by vnlearned priestes, which for
their purpose haue wickedly wrasted the
words of Salomon in a wrong vnderstanding.Eccl. 9
No man can till whether he be
worthy of loue or hatred.The Hebrue text meaneth āother thing, and is wrong trāslated. This erroure
hath Sathan himselfe broughte into the
church to obscure Christ, and cleane to
abolish our fayth in him, and in the place
of our faithe to bring in wauering and
doubtfull opiniones, and weake imaginations
into our heades, whereby in
great extremitie, and earnest temptations
we could take no assurance,A true christian man doubteth not of Gods fauour. but wer
driuen to feare and doubting, for he that
doubteth of the will and fauour of God,
and is not assured that he will be merciful
to him for Christes sake, and that all
his sinnes be pardoned in him, and maketh
a staid doctrine thereof, and wilfully
resteth therein, hec is no trewe christian,

and in his incredultie can not be
but condemned, if he doe not rise and repent.
Most sure it is, faithFaith. in Christ is only
that maketh a true christian mā, doubtting
and incredulitieIncredulity. maketh a man no
christian. To bel
                  •
               ue and to doubt be not
both one. To beleue is one thing, and to
doubt is an other. Therefore he that continueth
in this foresaid errore, beleeueth
not the twelue articles of our Crede, in
which Gods grace is clerely and vndoutedly
giuen to vs in Christ: Then howe
can they be christian men, which lack the
faith of Christ? Or how can such one say
the Lords oration well, which maketh a
doctrine of doubtfulnes. Hee may with
his mouth sound the words, O our be auē
                  ly
father, but his heart hath no truste in
God, neither hath anye 
                  •
               irmitie yt he is a
mercifull father, but doubteth of yt grace
of god, whither he be mercifull or no, or
whither he pardon him or not. His tonge
sayth, I beleeue in Iesus Christ, I beleeue
the forgiuenes of sinnes, but his heart beleueth
not that Christ dyed for our offences,
and yt by his death he hath obteined
for vs forgiuenes of all our sins. He that

wauereth thus, can not but despaire in y•
laste extremitie of this life. And if he despaire,
without repentance is in daunger:
for he deperteth with an euill conscience,
& hath no knowledge of Christ, nor
beleueth the gospell. Then what hope
can he haue of euerlasting life except I
say he repent his error? Yet our blynde
guydes & seducers in the Popes clergye
haue taughte vs, that no man can preciselye
knowe, but oughte to doubte
whether hee bee in Goddes fauoure
or no. They that bee or haue bene in
thys erroure, what beleife had they? dyd
they not waunder like the Winde hither
and thither? Were they not cleane
voyde of fayth? Had they not a wretched,
vncertaine and a wauering life?
Howe coulde they knowe whither their
workes pleased GOD or no? What
coulde suche a man thinke in hym selfe
but thus.
            I am a Christened man, I haue
studyed to lyue well, and to doe good
woorkes: but yet I am vncertayn whither
my woorkes please GOD, or
whether my sinnes be forgeauen me or

or not. Mine ill deedes be moe then my
good. I haue don mo sins then vertues.
Alas what shall become of mee. They
that thus wauer and doubt, what hope
cā they haue in the agony of death, what
faith haue they, what thing to trust vpon?
At what time Sathan and his owne
conscience shall accuse him of sin, saying,
he that liueth ill, shall be damned, thou
neuer fulfilledst the commandements of
God, No sinner can be saued. Doth not
Christ say if thou will enter into life kepe
the commandements:Math. 19. but thou hast neuer
kept them. Here is no hope left but that
a man oppressed with such cogitations,
must needes despayre. The blynde Papistes
haue taughte vs poore wretches,
that the foundation of our hope lyeth in
the grace of God,The doctrine of the priests clergye. & in the m
                  •
               rites of our
owne workes, so that our hope should be
nothing els but the expectation of life
comming of gods grace and of our owne
deseruinges.VVhat hope is, by the sophisters. Item, that our hope in no
wise coulde stande without the helpe of
our merites, other of the sophisters doe
thus defyne it: Hope is a boldnesse of
minde conceiued of Gods goodnesse to
haue euerlasting life throughe our good

workes.
            Here thou hearest these two, grace and
deseruing,Grace and deseruing are tvvo cōtrary things & to be seperated but these two do i
                  •
                ioyne together,
for where is grace there is no meriting,
againe, where meriting is there is
no grace. Therefore if a sicke persone
tempted about his sinnes thinke thus,
that without his owne merites hee can
looke for no saluation, then he trusteth not
to the grace of God, neither doth he apprehend
it nor ground himselfe vpon it,
for so he hath ben taughte and ledde that
it was presumpcion to say, a man might
be assured of Gods fauour, without the
adding of his works and merites. And
thus haue we ben led in this fals perswasion
so many yeeres, but in earnest tenta
               
                  •
               ions
there is none that can stande vpon
his merites or deedes, for here commeth
in the lawe of God accusing him and all
other men, that none of them al haue fulfilled
it. Then where be those good dedes
wher vpon the sicke man may trust, and
hope for saluation therby? In our great
tentations wee all doe feele that we bee
sinners, and that all our lyfe is noughte
and so voyde of all goodnesse, that it is
not able to abide and stande in the seuere

iudgement of GOD. These blynd seducers
haue made one foote of our hope
lame and mayned, which is grace. The
other foote lame and halting, which is
our owne woorkes. Nowe howe can
our hope stand faste, that we fall not into
desperation?
            To proue than that by our deedes
wee can deserue no iustification, neither
anye parte thereof, wyth all that euer
wee are able to doe: And that it is not
in our power to accomplyshe the lawe
of GOD, but that the laweThe lavve, onely serueth
to see our vnablenesse, our vices &
sinnes thereby, it needeth no greate declaration.
Wee see thys daylye in our
selues, that our fleshe neuer ceaseth fighting,
agaynste the spirite, and dooth inwardlye
grudge at euerye good deede
wee doe, so that this naughtinesse and
corruption of ours marreth all, whereby
our good woorkes can not bee pure nor
acceptable that wee doe Ro. vii.Rom. 7. Gal. v.Gala. 5.
1. Iohn. 1.1. Iohn. 1 Wherefore writteth Iohn, if
we say we haue no sinne, we deceiue our
selues, and truth is not in vs. Also all the
faithfull say dayly in the Lordes prayer.
Forgeiue vs our trespasses, Ers. lxiiii.

We be as vncleane euery one, and al our
righteousnesse like a cloth de
                  •
               led with
the flowers of a woman.Eph. 64. Furthermore
if we did fulfill all commandementes of
God, yet did we nothing but which is
our bound duety to doe, neyther can we
looke for any reward thereby, witnes to
Christ. Luke. xvii.Luke. 17. Whan you haue d
                  •
               n
all that you can, yet saye you be vnprofitable
seruants. These wordes of Christe
verelye may plucke downe our glorye,
and make vs all ashamed to put anye
affiaunce in our selues, or in our owne
good workes.
            Howbeit I speake not this to extenuat
the worthines of good works,good works, hovv they are necessarye. or to pluck
men back frō wel doing. For y• scripture
teacheth vs, y• the studye of good workes
is euer to be employed, and willeth vs to
be folowers of honesty & good working.
            But no man must put affiaunce in hys
works, as though by y• worthines of thē
he could obteine grace, or put away sin,
or gett his saluation. Fo
                  •
                if our righteousnes
& iustificatiō before god stande in
our might or merites, then dyed Christe
in vayne. Gala. ii.Gala. 2. Good woorkes in
their degree & order haue their value and

be greatly commended. A good man
ought to insewe good vertues to thentent
he may doe the will of his Lorde God,
which commandeth vs to liue vertuously,
and that he may also approue himself
to his Lord God, that God our heauenly
father may be glorified thereby.Math. 5. Also
we ought to doe good workes, to shewe
our selues thankfull againe to God, for
his infinite benefites and giftes.Phil. 2. Also we
must doe good workes to exercise our
faith, that they may be testimonies of
our beleife, and thus doe they profit both
me and my neighbour: My neighbour in
geuing example to encorage him the better
to a christian life, also in that he is
succored by them in his necessitie. Secondarily,
they profit me in that they exercise
my faith,2. Pet. 1 and mortifie my fleshe
and kepe me truely in my vocacion. For
why if I doe any benefite to my frendes
and to mine enemies, and perceiue it to
come of a franke and free hearte, then
I well assure my selfe that my faith is
liuely and a true faith which maketh of
damned sinners the true children of god.Iohn. 1
               Gala. 3.
            
            Item, here is to be noted that good
workes be those, which a man beleeuing

in Christ worketh in fayth in his lawfull
vocation, after the ordinaunce and forme
of the lawe of God: Contrary euil worksEuil vvorks.
and sinnes be those, which be don without
fayth and with a fained charitie, trusting
vpon them to purchase the fauour
of God, the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and
the kingdome euerlasting, which is directly
contrary from our christian fayth.
For our christian fayth doth grounde vs
vpon a more substanciall stone, which is
Christ the true forgiuer of sinnes,The foundation of our faith. and
our onely reconciler, which hath obteyned
for vs this grace, hath washed away
our sinnes and hath deserued for vs euerlasting
saluation. This faith maketh our
consciences not to wauer nor doubt anye
thing of the grace of God. For the propertie
of this fayth is to quiet our conscience.
The true catholike and liuely fayth
is this,Rom. 5. when a man grounding vppon
Christ fully perswadeth himselfe,VVhat true faith is. & beleueth
stedfastlye and nothing doubteth,
that he hath God pacified, and a moste
gentill father to him for Christes sake,
to whom in all his necessity, aduersitie,
and in all his affaires as a childe to his
father, he wholy cōmitteth and commendeth

him selfe, putteth al his trust in him
calleth on him, seeketh no succour, consolation,
nor goodnes but onely of him.
            This faith purifieth our hearts.Acts. 15. This
faith is alwayes working throughe charitie
and hath the holy ghoste which moueth
vs and stirreth vs vp to folowe the
example of Christ, which hath left behind
steppes of all good workes, and patience
in afflictions for vs to folowe, saying to
vs: This is my commandement that yee
loue together as I haue loued you.Iohn. 15. You
be my frendes if you wil do these things
that I haue giuen and taught you. Hee
that loueth me will keepe my lessons.Iohn. 13. I
haue giuen you example,Luke. 19. as I haue done
to you, so doe ye to your selues, by thys
you shal bee knowne to be my disciples,
if ye haue loue one to another. Agayne,
he that taketh not vp his crosse and foloweth
me, he is not my disciple.
            Where there is no repentance nor any
amendment of life,No good faith, no good vvorks and studye of good
workes, verery there is no true faythe.
            True faythe can not bee without good
woorkes,True faith true vvorks. no more then a good tree with
out fruite or the sunne without hys heat,
thys is vndoubted. Therefore let euerye

man examine and searche himselfe well
least he deceiue himselfe. Many men ther
be whiche saye they beleeue when they
haue no beleife, as it may appeare by
their vicious and wicked lyfe. For this
is certaine, where soeuer true faith is,
there is also the feare of God, ther is repentance,
there a true and a Christian
mans life foloweth, there the olde sinfull
man is put off and a newe put on.Ephe. 4. For
because this is the vertue and operation
of our holy baptisme, that fayth doth
clean renue & transforme a christian into
a new man, which walketh not afte flesh
but after the spirit. Rom. viii.Rom. 8.
            
            Then where the grace of god wor
                  •
               keth
in vs good fruite, and wee begin
to folow the commandementes of God,
our old man is not all mortified straight
way, but wild and wanton flesh, wyth her
lustes dothe striue againste vs all our
lyfe long, and neuer ceaseth prouoking
vs to sinne, and euer rebelleth agaynste
oure spirite, letting and hindering
vs in all honeste vertues, whereby
we bee not able to liue so vprightlye after
Gods commandements as we would
Wherefore when our sinfull conscience

or the feare of death doth come vpon vs,
we can not trust to our works, nor finde
any comfort therein, but (if we will bee
saued) we must needes cry with the holy
king Dauid. Enter not Lord into iudgement
with thy seruant, for in thy sight no
liuing flesh shall be iustified. Our good
workes thoughe they bee neuer so holye
and excellent, yet the value of them is
not such, neither oughte wee to doe them
for any such purpose, neither doth God
require them to be done of vs for that in
tent, that we should be iustified and saued
by them. For no man can trust anye
thing to his workes, neither be they able
to deliuer vs from our death. That thing
only the works of Iesus Christe is able
to doe and nothing els.
            This glory and honoure is onely dewe
to him and to no man else,Our iustification only belongeth to Iesus Christ. to be a Iesus,
that is by interpretation, a Sauiour. For
hee onelye taketh away our sinnes iustifieth
and saueth vs by his workes, & passion.
This is his office, his worke & duty
onely, for the which hee was sent hither
of his Heauenlye Father and oures to
doe. Therefore if the holye workes and
commandements of God, can bring no

peace of conscience, then what shall a miserable
sinner doe in the distresse of hys
tentation? Whether shall he goe? whether
shall he turne himselfe? Wher shall
he find helpe, and succour and comforte?
so then if we looke for any saluation, we
must firmelye beleeue and perswade our
consciences, that our sinnes be pardoned
vs, and cleane taken away.
            But now howe shall we be so certified
in our mindes. I answere, in such tentations
a man must needes sette aparte the
lawe, and all his good deedes that euer
he hath done, all his strength, all his power,
and merites, and let them all stande
a side in this case. For here nothing can
succoure vs, but onely the workes and
passion of Iesus Christ. And therefore
we must appeale from the law,Appeale frō the lavve to Christ. streighte
to the riche and mercifull promise of our
Father in his sonne Christ, as vnto a
sure succour and a sanctuary of eternall
security and peace, and holde it fast in a
firme and a sure fayth. And thus shall we
find comfort and quietnes ynough, and
more then we can desire, then neyther
sinne, nor death, nor hell, shall be able to
hurt vs.
            
               
               The promise of God is this.
            
            Almightye GOD hath promised vs
damnable sinners in his onely begotten
sonne Iesus Christe,VVhat the promise of God is. without any maner
of exception or condition of our owne
merites clearely
                  •
                of his owne free grace
and goodnes,Hie. 31. full remiss
                  •
               on of al our sins
his holy spirite and euer lasting life, and
that he will euermore be our Father,Heb. 3. and
that he wil vouchsafe to receiue vs to his
children, & giue vs perpetuall saluation.
            These things stand true,Heb. 9. firme eternal,
vnfalible, sure and stedfast for euer. God
which is almighty, & which can not lye
hath so promised to vs,2. Cor. 1 and hath sworne
depely by himself yt he wil performe thē.
            This is the newe testament and the euerlasting
couenant of grace made to vs
in Christ betwixt him and vs, and confirmed
with his bloud, wherof his prophe
                  •
               s
so greatly speake.
            Christe the sonne of God hath confirmed
this testament by his death, and is
a sure gage or a pledge of this promise
of God. The truth and grace of God is
layd and reposed for vs in Christ, in him
we be sure to finde it, as God speaketh of
his sonne Christe, our true Dauid in the

psalme. lxxxix.Psalme. 89.
            
            My truth and my mercie shall eueruermore
be with him, & in my name hys
power shall be exalted, he shall call me:
Thou art my father my god, & the rescue
of my health. And I shal set him to bee
mine heire & first begotten, auance him
abaue al ye kinges of ye earth. I shall euermore
reserue my mercy to him, and
my faithful testamēt vpon him. And I
shal set vp his seede for euermore, & hys
throne like the dayes of the firmament.
And if his children transgresse my preceptes,
& wil not walke in my iudgemēts
I shall visite & chastice their iniquities
with my rod, & their sinnes with stripes
but I will neuer take away my mercye
cleane from him, & my truth shall neuer
fayle him. I will neuer breake my testament
that I make, neither wil I euer go
frō my words yt procede out of my lyps.
Once haue I sworn in my holines, see if
euer I breake mine appointmēt with my
leruant Dauid, his sede shal remaine for euer,
& his thron like y• son in my sight. &c.
            This promise is also read in the ii.
Reg. vii. Here in this prophesie God
speaketh of yt eternal kingdom of Christ

which perpetuall mercy, peace and quietnes
is, for in Christe he hath reposed &
layd vp his truth and mercy. Therefore
in no other thinge can this promise of
grace be found or obtained saue onely in
Christ. In him God hath promised to vs
saluation freely through his mighty mercye:
Therefore who soeuer beleeueth in
Christe without any more a doe (to bee
bolde vpon it) he hath al thinges. And
thoughe there be in Christes kingdome
weake and infirme-sinners,VVeakenes in Christes kingdome born vvithal which slippe
and fall many times, yet this priuiledge
and prerogatiue they haue, their sinnes
shall not be imputed to damnation. All
their offences be offences of children not
of seruants. We haue a salue-conducie &
a passeporte throughe all the perills of
death and damnation. And though we
fall neuer so hainous
                  •
               ye yet shall wee not
perish therefore, for our christian faythe
doth so fasten vs vnto our Dauid Christ
that we be made o
                  •
               e spirite with hym.
In Christ we haue the veritie of Goddes
promise, and his mercye euermore to
continue, our heauenly father will not
punishe his weake children in his wrath
for euer, but will chastice them with fauour

in this temporall lyfe, call vs again
to repentance. Thus the grace of God
shall euer abide firme and stable, whiche
we bee sure shall not fayle vs so that wee
beleue this Dauid Christe to be our king,
and cast all our trust on him.
            And here is to be noted and considered
where he sayth. My truthTruth. and mercy alwayes
goe with him, if it bee his truthe
then it cannot lye, nor deceiue vs: if it be
his mercy and grace,Grace. then it standeth not
by our workes nor the lawe: wherefore
al these things shal happē to vs in Christ
and for Christes sake, which by his workes
& passion, hath purchased & boughte
all thinges for vs.Esa. 55.
            
            
               Bowe downe your eare and come to
me, heare me and your soule shall liue, &
I shall strike a bargaine with you perpetuall,
the sure mercies which I promised
to Dauid. This shall be the bargaine,
that I shall strike with the house of Israell.
                  Iere 31.
After those dayes I shall giue my
law within their bowels, and will write
it in their hearts: and I wil be their god,Nota.
and they shall bee my people, for I will
pardon all their iniquities, and will no
more remember their offences. &c. So

doth the Apostle in his epistle to the HebruesHeb. 8. 10.
alledge the same place, wher he approueth
that this bargaine of grace or
this newe Testament betwixt God and
vs is nowe confirmed and sealed vp by
the death of Christ. And that god is now
no more a streight iudge, but a most tēder
father to all the faithfull of Christ, & that
he will pardon all their offences. Likewise
to the Gala.Gala. 3. S. Paul calleth this eternall
bargayne of grace, a testament
that shall stand for euer, where as he writeth:
No mā breketh or addeth vnto y• wil
or testamente of a man being once confirmed
and ratified. Then if mens testaments
ones made and confirmed, abide
firme and sure, how much more the testament
of God once confirmed and ratified
shall abide firme? These testimonies doe
proue euidently and stronglye that Gods
grace promised in Christ is firme & sure,VVe oughte not to dout.
so that nowe no beleuer oughte ne can
doubt of the fauour of God and remission
of his sinnes. But vndoubtedly and constantly
oughte to sticke to the promise of
God, which cannot, neither shal be found
false.
            What heart nowe is so hard or stonye

that will not relent nor bee stirred vp by
thys firme and sweete promise of god, to
take a bold faith & a confident trust vpō ye
grace & fauor of almighty God being so
promised to vs? Will not these wordes
make vs certified, yea & also secure as it
were, a bond,Bond, testament. promise. mercy. oth. a bargaine, a testamēt, promise,
othe, & mercy. And al these doth no
mā which may deceiu vs, but god eternal
our father in heauen promise, which is
truth it selfe. Yt is an horrible blindnes
in vs y• whē god himselfe doth call vs
to his grace, & doth promise freely to vs
for his mercy sake, cleare remissiō of our
sins, & for y• same purpose hath sent to vs
his onely begotten sonne into the world,
to be a sure token or pledge of his heauenly
fauor and grace, and yet we leane
& hold more to our own stinking workes
then to the true and euerlasting truthe
of God. Ah for pitie how many precious
soules most pituously haue we brought to
ruine & doubtful desolation through these
works doing. The lawe onely hath bene
vttered vnto them, and nothing els beatē
into their heades but thys, what God
requireth of vs, howe greate sinners wee
were, what vengeance of God did fall

vpon sinne, what tormen
                  •
               s, what fire and
brimstone we shoulde suffer in hell. But
none taught the people faithfully the promises
of God, the go
                  •
               pell of Christ, in the
which sorowful and vexed consciences of
sinners might be refreshed, and learn the
infinite and vnlearchable grace whiche
God of his vnknowen mercye hath promised,
that is to say hath giuen vs freely
in Christ,Gods promise is a gi
                     •
                  t. with the which promises seelye
consciences might be reliued and confirmed
strongly against all the gates of hel.
We blynd and wretched creatures wold
rewarde God with ou
                  •
               s, and deserue of
him all thinges that we haue, we woulde
not be in his debt or danger, we disdayned
to haue his liberty come freely vnto
vs, and nothing woulde take of him
by grace. An
                  •
                that was the cause why
Christ was not rightly preached,VVhat vvas the cause vvhy Moses vvas preached and not Christ. but onlye
Moses: So it alwayes commeth to
passe, when the commandementes onely
be set forth, after the manner of y• Iewes,
and the promises of God nothing spoken
of, ther can be none other but that mens
consciences muste needes bee vexed and
disquieted with miserable sorow and perplexitie,
so that they can receiue almoste

no consolation. But whosoeuer wil bring
men to God in deede, and will quiet their
consciences, muste alwayes teach these
two together, the lawe and the promyse,
as the prophets, Christ, and the Apostls
euer did.
            By the lawe they broughte men to the
knowledge of their sinfulnes,The vse of the lawe. their vnworthines,
their infirmitie and vnability
to goodnes, their duety what they oughte
to doe, and their damnation which therof
folowed: And so brought them to humiliate
themselues before God, whereby
they being iustly stroken with the feeling
of Gods right iudgement, might ernestly
forethinke them of their sinnes, & call
for mercye. They taughte not the lawe so
as though it were ynough to know, what
were to be done, or not to be done, or as
thoughe of our strengthe wee coulde doe
good and eschewe yll, and so by the lawe
and by our owne workes be founde iuste
before God, and put away sinne. They
taughte not the lawe I say, for no suche
end and purpose,VVhy the lavv vvas giuen. neyther was the lawe
geuen therfore that we should be iustified
thereby before God, but it was giuen
for this, to require of vs all righteousnes,

and to threaten vs, that by the requiring
of this righteousnes, & we being nothing
able to performe it, we mighte the better
learne thereby our vnright
                  •
               ousnes, and
naughtines, & so finally to acknowledge
and confesse our owne wretchednesse, to
thintent y• being thus contrite & humiliated
in heart we might seeke to Christe
for succoure the which by his works and
passion doth onely iustifie vs.
            We bee nothing able to deserue anye
saluation by the law or our works. That
is an higher and a more excellent thinge
then that our rotten workes bee able to
procure. God hath promised to giue vs
that freelye by his mercye for Christes
sake, and dooth giue it of grace to them
that beleeue in Christe, as S. Paul to the
RomainesRom. 6 doth call euerlasting lyfe the
g
                  •
               ft of God. And likewyse to the GalathiansGala. 3.
dooth put a cleare difference betwixt
them, and sheweth playnlye hys
minde of the law and of the promise how
they concurre to our iustification. Let vs
weigh well his words, for all y• weight &
foundation of our iustification dooth lye
vpon thē. His wordes be these. If our inheritance
stand of the lawe, then it standeth

not of promise. But God did geeue
it to Abraham.Marke this vvell. If the lawe had bene geuen
vnto vs, which mighte haue iustified
vs, then our iustification might be of the
lawe. But the scripture hath wrapped al
thinges vnder sinne, that the promise
might come by the fayth of Iesus Christ
to all that beleeue.
            
            
               And agayne in the second to the Gal.Gala. 2.
If our iustification sayth he, coulde come
by the lawe, then Christ dyed in vayne.
Therefore I saye where as men thus by
the lawe were brought to the knowledge
of their sinnes, and so stroken with great
sorowe and heauinesse of conscience, for
their sinfull and vicious nature, thā was
the gospell put and set before them, that
is to saye grace promised in Christ.
            And than did they beginne to beleeue ernestly
and to reioyse in their hearts truly
for this grace promised in Christe,
that God had geeuen them for Christes
sake, forgiuenes of their sinnes. Thus s.
Paule in the place afore recited, dooth
comfort with true consolation wretched
and desperate sinners, for he leadeth thē
only to the promise of GOD and beateth
that into them, for thereby only

our consciences be cleane and quieted.
And doth teach the law & Gods cōmandements
also, exhorting vs diligentlye to
the study of good workes, and is not only
content with that, but also doth shewe
where and how to come by the corage &
iust to doe these good works.
            Thus first they taught the lawe for repentance,
but streighte after they ioyned
with all the promise of God, to bring mē
to the knowledge of the moste rich grace
of God giuen and promised vs in Christ,
teaching withall where wee shoulde get
the strength to fulfill the commandemēts
where our sinfull nature was not able to
fulfil it. In consideration whereof, the Apostles
euerye where declared and settefoorth
the exceeding and passing riches
and treasures of Gods mightye grace
which he hath giuen and promised vs in
Christ,Rom. 8. if we beleeue vpon him, and so

                  •
               orth did leade wretched sinners from y•
lawe to Christ. This great grace of god,
so offered they receiue then and imbraced
greatlye: and thus beleeuing were
pacified in their consciences.
            The law doth threaten and affraye, but
than shee is not able to heale or comforte

them being greeued, or to deliuer them
from their agonye, wherefore wee must
needes flee to the promise. And ther shall
we find righteousnes, peace, life, & health
ynough. Here vpon S. Paule to the GalathiansGala. 3
saith. The lawe was as it were
our schoolemayster vnto Christ,The ende of the lavve. that wee
should be iustified by Christ, for the lawe
doth force vs, doth straine vs, doth call
vpon vs, doth manace vs, and lyeth vpon
our necks, requiring of vs all manner of
good workes, perfecte iustice, perfect innocencie
of heart, perfecte feare and loue
of God, and also of our neighbour. But
we of our owne strengthe bee not able to
accomplish that which it requireth, and
thus it driueth vs to Christe, and is our
schoolemaister vnto Christ. He than receiueth
vs comming to him, helping vs,
and giuing vs all suche thinges that the
lawe requireth of vs, so that the law shal
not be able to damme vs.
            For this cause S. Paule dooth call
Christ the ende of the lawe:Rom. 10. Or as Saint
Augustine doth expound it, the fulfilling
of the lawe. He that hath Christ is iuste,
he that beleueth in Christ, hath al things
which the lawe requireth. Christe hath

reconciled for vs God his Father, hee is
our mediatour and euerlasting priest, hee
hath obteyned for vs grace, the holye
ghost wyth all his giftes, remission of
sinnes, and all manner of goodnesse, with
life euerlasting, he as IeremyeIere. 11. writeth
doth giue vs a newe hearte, and a softe
heart, and the holy ghoste to moue vs to
doe well. And where as yet we be partly
fleshly, nor can not be al mortified in this
body, nor thorowly fulfill the commaundements
of God, there is hee made oure
wysedome, our iustice and redemption, so
that his innocencie and all that euer
hee hath, is made ours by fayth, for after
that we put on Christ vppon vs, and after
we beleeue in him, there is no ieoperdye
can hurt vs, thoughe we be neuer so
weake and frayle, so that we do not walk
purposely after our appetite of the fleshe
and runne still headlong in sinne, without
repentance, for oftymes it happeneth
that good and most godly men doe
fall as well as other,Good men doe sinne. but yet they lye not
still, but get vp againe, and be stil delited
with the lawe of God inwardly in theyr
heartes, euer calling for remission of
sinnes by Christe, and obteyne also the

same which we desire.
            All these things we may see very well
expressed in Abraham, for Abraham saith
Paule is the father of all the faithful beleuers
in Christe, therefore wee haue in
Abraham a clear figure, and an example
howe that a sinner may be iustified, and
what is the nature of a christian fayth,
what is the power, the propertye and
working of the same, and also howe that
our consciences may be quieted, whither
by faith or by workes. Therefore he that
is the true child of Abraham, that is a
good man in deeede, or that woulde bee a
true member of Christ, let him loke vpon
Abraham his father, and there he shal se
how God doth with vs, how he tendereth
vs, and how we oughte to doe againe for
him, as Paul also teacheth vs. Firste
of all Abraham hearde the greate and
ri
                  •
               he promise of God, saying vnto hym:Rom. 4.
Doe not feare Abraham,Gal. 3. I am thy de
                  •
               ē
               der,
and great is thy rewarde with mee.
And afterward. In thy seede all nationes
shall be blessed, that is, shall be deliuered
from sinne, death, and malediction, and
shall haue euerlasting life. This was
gladde tydinges to Abraham. And stil

did Abraham bel
                  •
               eue this promise, notwithstanding
yet much greued with troubles
and sorrowes. And so therefore was
iustified by this faith and truste, that hee
had to the promise of God. Nowe thys
was iiii.
                  •
               . and thirtye yeeres,Not
                     •
                  . before the
lawe was giuen, and therefore was hee
saued, not by the workes of the lawe, but
by his faith in God & in the blessed seede
which was promised him. And no otherwise
also must we all bee saued, for there
is no other waye nor meanes to come to
health, but only the promise of God must
iustifie vs if we beleeue, and not the law,
nether works.
            Secondarilye the faithe of Abraham y•
he hadde vpon Christ, made him a newe
man, and cleane did alter his olde affections,
and put in him newe cogitations,
otherwise then this nature of ours hat
                  •
               ,
for he reioysed onely in the Lorde, and in
him taketh a maruailous boldnes, he knoweth
well that God is his father, which
in al his affaires, afflictions & troubles,
will helpe him, and thus trusting vnto
Goddes promise receiueth and reposeth
him selfe in the handes of God, with a
bold heart & a strong confidence, doubtting

nothing that God will be mercifull
vnto him, euen as any father will
be to his owne naturall child, whom hee
loueth most tenderlye, so then Abraham
hauing this faith, wēt vp to the hill at the
commaundement of God, to shew his obedience,
and offered his sonne.Iacob. 2 For true
faith can neuer be with out good works,Gala. 2.
but euer will be occupyed, in the obedience
of God. In the meane season Abrahams
heart and conscience was nothing
vnquieted for all that, but still quiet by
reason of his fayth 
                  •
               he had in Christe, for
he was euer sure of the fauour and loue
of God toward him.Roma. 4. Wherfore s. Paule
full well describeth his whole thoughte
and cogitation, where as he sayth that
Abraham did neuer shrinke in his fayth,
nor doubted in the promise of God, but
euer strōg in his fayth, did giue glory to
God, knowing well this that 
                     •
                  ee whiche
promised him was able to performe it.
And therefore he sayth that it was imputed
to him for righteousnes, that is for
his iustification, for this Abrahā thought
and perswaded himselfe, that God was
almighty and true of his promise, which
would not defeate nor deceiue his people
               
And if he had so thought in himselfe (as
nowe our papists doe teache) I can not
tell surelye whither God loue mee or no,
peraduenture he is not freendly vnto me,
nor careth for me, nor regardeth me. &c.
If Abraham I say, had thoughte on thys
maner, or had shrinked so in his faith, I
thinke hee would neuer haue intended to
offer vp his onely sonne, nor would haue
bene persuaded to goe from his Fathers
house out into a strange land, but rather
would haue thought thus: It is good to
be sure of that a man hath already, this
I haue and am sure of, the other is vnsure,
what should I kil my onely and wel
beloued son? who will giue me another?
What shall I goe out of mine owne
house into a strange land, I can not tell
howe farre? what folishnes were it? I
will not so, I will tary still her
                  •
                wher I
am in my Fathers house, neither will I
be so cruell to my sonne for to slaye hym.
            Thus I say he had thoughte if hee had
not beleeued constantlye, but when hee
went out so boldly and mearily out of his
Fathers house, into a farre and a strange
countrey, and with so lustye cheere went
vppe to the hyll with his Sonne to offer

him vp to God, which no na
                  •
               ure of man
can doe, for what naturall man can finde
in his heart to offer vp his sonne. Than
be like he did onely hang of the hands of
God, onely did trust vppon God, vppon
his grace, vpon his helpe, nohing doubting
in his conscience, but that God was
able to performe all that hee had promysed,
for why no doubting heart can be so
willing to doe as Abraham did, nor yet
once thinke to doe it. So quiet was Abrahams
conscience by faythe in Gods
promise, that Paule in his Epistle to the
Romaines,Rom. 4. dooth giue him an excellent
prayse therefore, that we all should mark
it, and wel bear it away. Abraham, saith
he, neuer did shrinke in his faith, but alwayes
strong in his beleeuing trusted
surely. Why did he trust surely? because
God promised, for this he did knowe and
was fully perswaded that God was true
of his word and promise, what soeuer he
promiseth hee performeth of his grace,
and is well able to performe it, for hee
is almightye, nor dooth not promise for
our deseruinges, but of his grace onelye,
that nowe wee may be bold to trust
vnto it. For if he shoulde promise after

our deseruinges any thing, hee coulde neuer
performe it, for our merites be none,
and nothing worth. And yet notwithstanding
hee dooth promise vs infinite goodnes
in Christ without our merites, onely
of his owne pure grace and mercy.
            And therefore writeth Paule y• God
promised Abraham the blessing cccc.xxx.
yeeres before the law of Moses was giuen,The promise vvas made before the law cāe.
because no man should think so, this
blessing to stand by the works of the law
or that he could not enioye this free promise
and blessing of God, before he did
fulfill all the lawes of Moses. Wherfore
for the loue of God let al good men here
marke, that Abraham neuer fayled nor
did shrinke in fayth,Nota. nor euer doubted at
the promise of God, nor of the loue and
grace of God toward him. For so y• holy
ghost doth say that he had a sure perswasion,
marke 
                  •
               his well: Yf it were a firme
perswasion he had, then it was no opinion,
or doubting, but fully did he trust and
beleue, & he went not whether, incredulitye
and doubting did bydde him to goe,
(which doubting papistes haue taughte
vs) neither thought be thus, be it true or
not true, I will doe it: but his conscience

was fullye perswaded that it was true
which God had promised, and that God
woulde be good and mercifull vnto him,
had forgeuen his sinnes, had iustified him
and would neuer forsake him nor abiecte
him, and after this life also woulde giue
him euerlasting life, for the 
                  •
               ede sake that
was promised him, which was Christe.
            If God hadde sayde thus to Abraham.
Heare Abraham: I wil be merciful vnto
thee, I will forgiue thee thy sinnes, and
alwayes be present with thee and helpe
thee, so on this condition, that thou keepe
and fulfill all my commandements, thus
I saye if God had geuen hym hys promyse
vnder thys condition of fulfillyng
his commaun
                  •
               ementes, then Abrahams
conscience hadde neuer bene merye nor
quiet, but alwayes doubtting of y• grace
of God and for
                  •
               iuenes of his sinnes, nor
should euer haue bene certaine of his saluation.
            For thus hee mighte haue thoughte: I
haue done all that I can with al diligēce
to fulfill Gods precepts, yet I coulde neuer
fulfill them so perfectly as I ought,
nothing like. Wherefore this promise of
God is vncertaine to mee, neither can I

test whither I shall take it or no, because
I haue not performed all was inioyned
and commaunded mee, and God did giue
me his promise no otherwise, but of this
condition if I kept his commandeme
                  •
               ts
and I am not able so to do. Wherefore I
am not sure whether he wil giue me these
things y• hee promised. I can do nothing
on my parte, and therefore howe can hee
keepe his promise with me, wherefore
what hope can I haue nowe of health.
It is but lost labour all that I go about.
            Thus I saye if God had promised hys
blessing vnder this contition to Abraham,
then hee might well haue despeared
but nowe hee addid no suche condition,The promise came vvithout any cōdition.
and all because wee should not doubt, but
that his promise remaineth alwayes sure
and stable. And this it is that god requireth
onely of vs, that wee should neuer
doubt nor question of his free grace, but
to be bold and trust vpon it, that hee is a
louing father vnto vs, and that we be his
children.
            But wee could neuer be so bolde of thys
grace of God, if any such conditionCondition. excluded. of ful
filling ye lawe were giuen wt al, as if thou
kepe my commandements wel, then shalt

thou haue thy sinnes forgiuen. Therefore
it is necessary that y• promise of thys
blessing stand wtout al conditions, and wt
               out
all respect of workes or merites, but
onely in the free grace of God, or els we
could neuer be sure of it, nor certain, but
alwayes in doubt & mistrust. For if remission
of our sins should stand in ye fulfilling
of the lawe, then our fleshe being so
weake and fraile, and not able to fulfil the
lawe, howe shoulde wee be sure that god
is good to vs, or that wee were in the fauour
of God, but rather shoulde thinke,
that he were angry with vs, because wee
neuer fulfil his commandementes, as we
should doe. And thus the free promise of
God shold stand voyd & in no effect. For
why, no man were able to obtaine it.
            But thanks and prayse be to the faithful
Lorde the father of our Lorde Iesus
Christ & ours, the father of mercye & the
god of all comforth, who hauing mercye
vppon vs and tendering our weakenes,
hath not bilded our health and saluation
vpon any such brickle & weak foundatiō,The foundation of our hope.
as vpon our works and our fulfilling of
ye law, for so we cold neuer be saued. But
the foundation yt we be grounded vpon &

preuaile against the gates of hell, is the
great grace and mercy of God in his son
Christ. For in him God hath promised
vs all, remission of our sinnes, and euerlasting
life. This promise is onely and alone
all our comforte, which boldlye wee
doe and may trust vpon.
            So thus you see howe God promiseth
vs remission of our sinnes and life euerlasting,
not vnder any condition of working,Grace free vvithout condition.
and fulfilling the lawe, but he giueth
it frely, of his fre grace I say, only & alon
thorow Christ, and not for any workes of
ours. And therefore he geeueth it freelye
without any condition of our workes, because
the promise might stand firme and
stable, that is, that we may be sure of the
fauour of God, and of remission of oure
sinnes, doubting nothing therin, notwithstanding
wee 
                  •
               ee neuer so much sinfull in
our nature, & vnworthy wretches, that euery
beleeuing Christian man may saye
with Paule:Rom. 8. 
               This I knowe and is vndoubted,
that neither death, nor life, neyther
angels, neither princes, nor potestates,
neither things present nor things
to come, neither height nor depenes, nor
no other creature is able to seperate vs

from the loue of God, which is in Iesus
Christ our Lord. Here may we playnly
see that Paul had a bolde and a confident
trust of the forgiuenes of sinnes, and of
his health to come, plentuouslye perswaded
of the grace of God towarde him, or
els how could he so feruently reioyse and
tryumphe in spirite against all creatures
bothe in heauen and in the worlde, so
mightelye, defying them all, being right
sure and certaine, that nothing neyther
aboue nor beneath, coulde anoy him. And
why? because he beleued in Christe, and
was sure of the mercye of God towarde
him thorowe fayth, and therefore was
his conscience so quiet, and triumphant.
            And euen so may euery Christian man
likewise take ye same courage & the same
mind in himselfe.Marke and learne. Howbeit no man can
doe this vnlesse he put away all respecte
of his own merites and workes and onely
trust vnto the free mercy and grace of
God,Tit. 3. which grace is giuen vs only thorowe
Christ and not through our selues.
Notwithstāding yet that good works of
ours consequently do folowe and springe
out of this faith, and promise of God. So
that where as the same doe not folowe,

and may folow, ther is no true nor liuely
fayth, but a deede, and barraine opinion
of fayth, but where this true and liuely
faithe is, there is workes and miracles
and thynges farre passing the possibility
of naturall working. For as saynt
Paule sayth, wee receiue the holy ghost,Gal. 3.
not by our working, but by hearing of
the Gospell, thys holye Ghoste, wyll not
suffer vs to doubte after the papists fashion,
or as they woulde haue vs not to
feare as their seruyle spirite dooth: but
wyth a bolde truste cryeth in our hearts
to GOD Abb A Father, and witnesseth
wyth our spirite that wee bee the
chyldren and the heyres of GOD, and
felowe heyres wyth C
                     •
                  riste, that wee
may be glorified togeather wyth hym.
And as Paule to the Ephesians sayth,Ephe. 1.
they that beleeue in Christe bee sealed vp
with the holy spirit of promise, the wt spirite
we have as a pledgeThe holy spirite is our pledge. or an ernest penye
of our inheritaunce and possession
which we haue got and be redemed vnto
            Therfore with al faith & trust we must
euer looke vpon the promise of God, and
vppon Iesus Christ onely. And so in
thys promise of God our conscience may

finde comforte and peace plentye, but in
our workes we shall finde none. And
therefore marke well this text of Paule
and keepe it well in your remembraunce,Rom. 4.
where hee sayth: Abraham had thys
promyse geauen to hym and to hys sede,
that he should be the heyre of the world,
not for hys working after the lawe, but
for his beleeuing in fayth, for if they that
belonge to the lawe, bee the heyres,
then is fayth voyde and the promyse of
none effecte, for why the law worketh anger,
by reason that if there were no law,
ther were no traunsgression, therefore
the inheritāce is giuen by faythe as by
grace freely, because the promise muste
stande firme and stable to all y• seede of
Abraham.
            
            Dayly experienceExperience. and practise in troubles
and distresses declareth, that no mā
(bee hee neuer so holy) can quiet hys cō
               science
by his workes. Our sinnes and
death be more greeuous ennemies vnto
vs, then that wee bee able to ouer come,
by our owne deedes and deseruings, we
must haue an other manner of meanes to
that, which is our faythe, receiuing and
hol
                  •
               eing the promyse of GOD in

Christ. And so that shall be able to conquer
the mighty feircenes of sin & death,
This faith retaineth and apprehendeth
those infalible and eternall things, that is
to say: it receiueth not the feeble workes
of ours, but the greate grace of GOD,
Christ himselfe, his works and his deseruings,
and the promises in Christ, which
things be much greater, higher, more stable,
and magnificall, then our capacities
be able to comprehend. Therefore when
anye tentacion assaulteth, wee muste not
looke to the lawe and our works,Remedy. in tentation. but setting
all them aside, wee muste runne
and creepe to the crosse of Christe, wee
muste seeke for helpe and grace by
Christ, and humbly must knowledge our
faults.
            And though our sins be neuer so gret, or
g
                  •
               eeuous, though the feare and tentation
of death be neuer so horrible, yet 
                  ••
               e must
still sticke to the promise of God, & surely
must trust and doubt nothing, that our
sinnes be forguiē vs for Christes sake according
to the promise of God, withoute
any dese
                  •
               uings of ours: and that God is
our father, and we shall hue with him for
euer and euer.
            
               
The works and passion of Christ which
be of great and infinite and omnipotent
power, oughte more to stirre vs vppe to
trust well on God, that hee will bee euer
more to vs a merciful Lord, then our sins
ought to fray vs. For the grace of God
in Christ is much stronger & more able
to deliuer and helpe, then our sinnes bee
to condemne vs. And this grace of
GOD dooth not hang of our workes,Rom. 5.
for than it shoulde be vncertaine, but it
standeth firme by grace and by fayth in
Christe, with out any regard or respect
of our working. And this is done by the
singular pro
                  •
               idence of the great fatherly
loue of God towarde vs, because our
iustification should stande firme and certaine
by faith, so that no man nede doubt
of the fauor and mercye of God towarde
him. If this grace and promise stand in y•
hand of God, then is it sure, so that wee
cannot doubt of the remissiō of our sins.
But if 
                  •
               hey should stand in our own hand
and sho
                  •
               ld hang of our selues, then wee
should a
                  •
               wayes be vncertain because we
were ne
                  •
               er able to descrue sufficiently, being
not sifficient of strength to fulfil the
law. But after that we return
                  •
                & repose

our selues in Christ alone, and in the promise
of God, through Christ, then be we
safe and sure ynough, because God hath
so promised of his voluntary grace frely,
and hath founded his promise vppon the
fayth in Christ, to the intent it shal stand
firme and certaine. And therfore I sayd,
and say agai
                  •
               e the kingdome of Christe
to be a kingdome of securitie and peace,
as the Prophets doe desc
                  •
               ybe it.
            In thys kingdome we haue peace and
most sure succour, so that there is nowe
neither sinne, death, nor hel can feare vs.
So doth Es
                  •
               ias also call Christ ye prince
of peace,Christs kingdome is a kingdom of secu
                     ••
                  e: Esa. 32. Esa. 9. Christ the prince of peace. Icre. 23. whose princedome is large and
great, and whose peace shall neuer haue
ende. In Ieremy also, God doth promise
vnto Israell, that is, vnto all beleeuers in
Christ, a springing bud of iustice, a king
which shall rule wisely, and shall execute
indgement and iustice in earth, and vnder
whom Israell shall dwell boldly with
confidence, these things be in the spirituall
kingdome of Christ, in which there is
true and spiritual securitie, where as euery
christian mans hart hath pea
                  •
               e with
god through faith in Christ, in the which
kingdome neither sin can damneos, neither

death can kil vs, nor hel can swalow
vs, for god is with vs and feedeth vs, and
defēdeth vs as his sheepe. Therefore
who shall stande against vs? And Esai
               When ye holy ghost,Esa. 42. saith he, shal be powred
from aboue (yt was when Christe began
his kingdome) then the worke and
fruite of iustice shall bee peace & the keeping
of Iustice shall be silence & security
for euer & euer. And ye people of god shall
dwell in com
                     •
                  ines of peace & in houses of
trust. All these things do nothing els but
signifie y• Christes people in his kingdōe
shall be all good, quiet, at rest and merry
which shall haue a quiet & a glad con
                  •
               cience,
being euermore sure & certain that
God is fauourable vnto them for Christ,
which doth deliuer vs from all euills wt
               out
any doubt.
            I besech you what can our aduersaries
bring against this? or how can they maintain
their errors in the face of the world?The conclusion.
            
            Here I haue proued & taught out of ye
foundatiō of the word of God, y• no faithfull
beleuer in Christe can, or oughte to
doubt of the fauour of God, & of remissiō
of his sins, & that his consciēce may thorowly
be certified, y• god is fauorable vnto

him, which will pardon all his fautes,
for Christes sake in whom we beleeue, &
which will iustifie vs, and giue vs euerlasting
life wtout any doubt. Here our aduersaries
can haue nothing to lay against
this doctrine or to subuert this foūdation
but one refuge they haue,Obiection. of the papistes. that when wee
bring scriptures agaynst them: what say
they, the Lutherians, bryng Scriptures
for them, but they muste expounde Scriptures
as our fathers dyd.
            
               I aunswere againe,
               An answere We doe not denye
so to doc, for we may doe it well ynough.
And I may saye with Saint Cirillus
               Cirillus. we
keepe the faith of our fathers, and of the
church so farre as we ought, and vse their
interpretations so much as they require.
But the chiefest of the auncientAncient. doctors against the new Roman Papistes. fathers
of the church do agre in the same matter
no otherwise then we expound it, therefore
why doe these holye workers bring
for them the church?
            S. Augustine
               Augustine de predest. 11. one of the moste catholike
& godlye doctor of thē al, in his boke
which hee writeth of Predestination, in
the xi. chapter. saith in thys wise: Truely
wher as ye apostle in his epistle to ye Ro.
writeth these words: Therfor is our inhetaunce

               giuen vs by fayth through grace,
because the promise mighte stande firme
and stedfast, I maruel (saith he) that mē
had rather looke on their o
                     •
                  ne infirm
                     ••
                  y
then vnto the firmity and stedfastnesse of
Gods promise. But here thou wilt saye,
I can not tell nor doe not knowe the will
of God of me. Well then dost thou knowe
thine owne will of thy selfe? if thou doest,
beware, for he y• thinketh he standeth let
him take hede y• he fal not. Therfore in so
much as thou knowest nether his wil nor
thine owne wil, then why should not a mā
rather put his trust and hope in y•, which
is more certaine, than in that which is
lesse certaine?
            
            
               But say they againe, where it is spoken,
if thou beleeuest thou shalt be saued,
there one of these is required of vs, the other
is offered, and that which is required
of vs is in our owne power, the other
in God. And why I pray you, is not both
in Gods power, both that which is required,
and that which is offered? for do not
we as well desire God to forgiue vs that
which he requireth, as wel as that he offereth?
doe not the beleeuers also desire
him to encrease their fayth: Do they not

desire also for the vnbeleuers, that they
may haue faith, so that God onely muste
be the beginner and increaser of faith. In
like manner is thys to be taken. If thou
beleue
                     •
                  st thou shalt be saued, And this: if
you mortifie y• works of the fleshe by the
spirit, ye shall liue: for in like case here
one is required, the other is offered. If
thou mortifie (sayth he) y• works of fleshe
by the spirit, ye shal liue: Then to mortifie
the works of the flesh by spirit, that is required,
the other is offered vs that wee
should liue. What then therfore shall we
not say, that this is the gift of god to mortifye
the workes of the fiesh, because it is
required of vs to be done? God forbid, y•
any pertaining to the grace of god shold
so thynke. Thys is a damnable errour
of the Pelagians. whom as the Apostle
in his wordes following doothe confute,
saying: Who soeuer be led with the spirit
of God, they be the childrē of God. Lesse
we shoulde thinke this mortefiing of the
flesh came by our spirite, but by the spirit
of God, of the which spirite of God the
same Apostle speaketh more ouer. All
these things sayth he, worketh one alonly
spirite, destributing to euerye man hys

gyftes so as it pleaseth hym, amongste
the whyche gyftes also hee rekeneth
faythe. So then, lyke as thys mortifieng
of the fleshe, notwithstanding it be required
of vs, is the gyfte of God, euen so
is fayth also the very gyft of God, though
neuer thelesse it be required of vs (if wee
will bee saued) to beleeue, for these
thinges both bee commaunded vs of god,
and also be the giftes of God. To the entent
we shoulde vnderstand, that both we
doe them, and yet it is the gyfte of God
that we doe them, so as the Scripture
sheweth by Ezechiell
                  Ezechiell. the Prophet. And I
(sayth almighty God) shal make you that
you shall doe them. What can be more
playne? Marke well this place of scripture
(gentyll brethren) and yee shall see
that God promiseth hee will make them
to doe suche thinges, which he will haue
done. And ther in ye same place, hee bringeth
forth no merites of theirs, but much
wickednes, shewing & declaring thereby
y• hee giueth good for euil, in y• he maketh
thē bring forth afterward good workes,Augustine vpon the psal. 88.
causing them to doe his commandements.
            
            Also in the lxxxviii. psalme hee saythe
in lyke manner. Lyfte vp your heartes,

for he which promised will performe, so
as he hath performed manye things alredy,
for the trust that we haue in him, we
haue it not in our merits, but only of his
mercy. No man can be strong in this life
but onely in the hope of Gods promise.VVe be weak in our selues, in Gods promise strong.
For as concerning our owne merites,
we be marueilous weake, but as concerning
the promise of God we bee strong.
            And in the lxxxxviii. psalme hee saythe:
where is security and peace? hee answereth
againe, truely none in this lyfe but
onely in the hope of the promise of God.
            S. Ambrose in the firste booke de vocat
genti.
               Ambrose. De vocat genti lib. 1. Cap. 3. &c. writeth if no man (saith he) wil
breake or dispise a mans will or testamente,
as sayth the Apostle nor alter it,
Then howe can it bee that Gods will &
testament should be broken in any thing.
It tarieth alwayes, and euery day is fulfilled,
that the Lorde promised to Abraham
without any condition, & gaue with
out any lawe.
            
            By this saying of Ambrose it may wel
appeare, that the promise of the newe testament,
(which is, that God wil be mercifull
vnto vs, wil forgiue vs our sinnes,
wil giue vs the holy ghost, and wil make

vs safe) that this promise I say doth not
depend of any condition of the law. For
freely it commeth onely of grace, because
we should neuer doubte of his grace and
fauour toward vs. And what other thing
meaneth S. Ambrose
               Ambrose vp on. Paule to the Rom. 3. 4. 9. 10. where hee sayth so
ofte, y• wee be saued before God by fayth
only and a lonely. Looke vpon his comentaries
of the Romains, looke also in
the Corin. and Gal.
            
               Theophilactus
               1. Cor. 1. Gal. 1. 3. 5. Theophilact in Rom. 4 also writeth in like sort.
In so much (saith he) as it is euident, yt
the lawe bringeth nothing but anger,
therefore had Abraham, his iustice and
inheritance giuen him, because that all
should goe by grace. Wherefore then seing
that all thinges nowe doe stande, in
the grace and in the mercy of God, so
that he is bounde nowe not to worke after
his iustice, then what should let vs to
thinke, but that all thinges bee certaine
and stable what soeuer he doth, giueth, or
promiseth.
            
            Nowe if blind hipocrisie here obiecte
again that Paule in this place speketh
onely of Abraham and therefore y• thing
concerneth none els but him, but wee
muste seeke our health and iustification

otherwise. I answere again. Not so. For
therefore Paule calleth Abraham there
the father of all the beleuers, and in him
propoundeth, to vs al y• true meanes how
al men both before the cōming of Christ,
and after the comming of Christ, must be
iustified. And therefore this text of Paule
doth as well pertaine to vs all, for it is
writen and set forth vnto all vs. Euen as
S. Paule in the very same chap.Rom. 4. writeth
This is not written for him onely (sayth
he) that it was imputed to him for iustice
but for vs all, to whom it shall be imputed
for iustice, beleeuing on him,
who raysed vp from death our
Lord Iesus Christ, w̄ was
giuen for our sins, and
raised vp again for
our iustificatiō.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at Londō by
Hugh Singleton, dvvelling in Crede
Lane, at the signe of the gylden
Tunn, neere vnto Ludgate, and
are there to be sold.
            Cum priuilegio.
            Anno. 1579.
            
         
      
   