
      
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable the Lords Spirituall and Temporall
in this preſent Parliament aſſembled.
            The humble Petition of Eraſmus Record and Millicent Vaughan widow the Adminiſtratrix
of the goods, chattels and debts of Walter Vaughan deceaſed.
            Moſt humbly ſhewing,
            THat Iohn Skinner became bound in a Recogniſance of three thouſand pounds to Richard Wilbraham,
               22. Aug. Eliz. 41. conditioned to pay one thouſand eight hundred pounds to William Winne and his creditors,
whereof the petitioner Eraſmus Record was one, to whom Winne owed 850 pounds; which
condition being broken by the ſaid Iohn Skinner, the ſaid Winne and Record preferred their bill in
Chancerie,23. Ian. Eliz 43. to put the Recogniſance in ſuite: whereupon the Lord K
                  •
               eper did order the 23 of Ianuary
43 of Elizabeth, that the petitioner Record ſhould follow the ſuite at his owne coſt and charges,
which he did, in regard that Winne was in meane eſtate, and not able to follow it.
            Vpon that Recogniſance the Moytie of the lands of the Mannor of Caſtle-campes in the Countie
of Cambridge,Eliz. 44. by courſe of Law and order of the Chancerie was at the petitioner Records charges
extended, and deliuered in extent to your petitioner Record and the ſaid Winne. Afterwards
4. Febr.4. Feb. 45. Eliz. 
               Anno 45. Eliz. by conſent of all parties and their Counſaile, it was decreed in Chancery,
that your petitioner Record and his Aſſignes ſhould haue yearely one hundred pounds out of the
extended Moytie, vntill his debt of eight hundred and fiftie pounds were payd him.
            The petitioners further ſhew,Iacob. 2. that An. 2. Iacobi, there was an aſſignement from Wilbraham, Winne
and Record, made to the ſaid Walter Vaughan, being another creditor of Winne, with a ſpeciall ſauing
of the petitioner Records decree, and all ſuch order or orders as did concerne the iſſues, rents and
profits of the ſaid land ſo extended: and alſo a ſauing of a certaine report of Sir Iohn Tyndals (as in
the Decree, and by the Deed more plainly doth appeare) vntill your petitioner Record were ſatisfied
and payed out of the extended Moytie eight hundred and fiftie pounds with his dammages.
            Alſo an Act of Parliament paſſed An. 3. Iacobi,Iacob. 3. concerning the ſaid extended Mannor, on the
behalfe of M. Sutton, wherein the right of the petitioner Record is likewiſe ſaued.
            Afterwards the petitioner Record and the ſaid Walter Vaughan were outed by Alderman Leman,
               Iacob. 4.
by vertue of a former Statute of foure hundred pounds; and after that by Sir William Smith vpon a
Statute of one thouſand fiue hundred pounds (he being one of the Feoffees for the ſale of the land.)
But notwithſtanding the ſaid Statutes,Iacob. 5. your petitioner Record and the ſaid Walter Vaughan obtained
an Iniunction for the poſſeſſion againſt Sir Iohn Skinner and Sir William Smith, and all clayming
any right vnder them, and thereby were put in poſſeſſion againe. Then M. Sutton (hauing no bill
in Court againſt Record or Vaughan) purchaſed the ſaid Mannor,Iacob. 5. and retained in his hands one thouſand
pounds towards ſatisfaction of the extent, as Sir William Smith hath ſet downe vnder his hand.
But afterwards by a priuate agreement betweene Sutton,
               23. Sept. Iacob. 5. 
               Skinner and Winne, a reference was made
to their owne counſaile, your petitioner Record, nor Vaughan, nor their counſaile priuie thereunto,
as by the order and report doth appeare, and as Winne by his oath and letter doth acknowledge;
notwithſtanding a report was made the ſame day, by which it was pretended that the petitioner Record
was ſatisfied, and thereupon was ſix hundred pounds giuen to Winne, and the ſame day by an
order foure hundred pounds more was giuen to Sir Iohn Skinner, neither of them hauing any right
to any part of it. And thus your petitioner Record was defeated of eight hundred and fiftie pounds
due debt, ouer and aboue eight hundred pounds ſpent in following the ſuite theſe two and twenty
yeares, to his vtter vndoing, being a poore old man of the age of 72 yeares.
            Your Petitioners do therefore moſt humbly pray, that in all Acts to be paſſed this preſent
Parliament concerning the ſaid Mannor of Caſtle-campes, the petitioner Records right may
be ſaued, or elſe that he may be ſatisfied his ſaid debt of 850 pounds, in ſuch manner
as this moſt honorable Aſſembly ſhall thinke meete.
         
      
   