
      
         
            
            
               
                  
                     A CHROnicle
of all the
                      noble Emperours
of the Romaines, from Iulius
Caeſar, orderly to this moſte victorious
Emperour Maximilian,
that now gouerneth, with
the great warres of Iulius
Caeſar, & Pompeius
Magnus:
Setting forth the great power, and
deuine prouidence of almighty
God, in preſeruing the godly
Princes and common
wealthes.
                  Set forth by Richard Reynoldes,
Doctor in Phiſicke.
Anno. 1571.
                  ¶ Imprinted at London by
Thomas Marſhe.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            HONORANDO DOMIno,
domino Gulihelmo Cicello, domino
Baroni de Burgley, Senatori Regiae
Maieſtatis prudentiſsimo, domino
ſuo colendo.
            
               PErpetuam laudem prudentiae, ac
gloriam ſummae nobilitatis florere
in ſenatu pacis inclita ſtudia oſtē
               dunt.
Nihil magis arduū in republica
optimè cōſtituta exiſtit, quā
conciliorum optimorum curſum ſic
in republica tenere, vt reſpublica ipſa prae caeteris
regum externorum imperijs, pacis ornamentis excellere,
& in ſummo ocio cum dignitate rerum agē
               darum
florere poſsit. Qui reipublicae praeeſſe volūt,
in medium maximarum rerum certamē, ac in difficilimā
orbis totius prouinciā deueniunt. Reſpublica
ſacra dei ſummi theatrum eſt, legibus quaſi ſacrato
dei dono, diſciplina prudentum fulta, principum, ac
nobiliſsimorum conſulum ſtudiis, ac maieſtate tanti
numinis altius fundata eſt. Beatae igitur reſpublicae
quae norint ſapientes viros, ac probos eſſe ſua munimenta,
non muros aut turres. Si in florentiſsimo
Imperio vnquam pacis inclita ſtudia viguere, aut
fructus ſummorum ingeniorum ad egraegiā foelicitatē
in ſenatu regio vllo tēpore innotuere: quocun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
te verteris animo ac cogitatione, haec noſtra reſpublica
beata eſt, tanta claritudine imperii, tàm rara
literatae principis maieſtate, prudētia, ac cōſiliorum

magnitudine colēda. Quod in cauſis regni maximis
celſa reginae maieſtas, ad vniuerſi ſtatus foelicitatē
dominationem tuam, fama maximarū virtutum, cō
               ciliorum,
ac literarum celebrem elegit: eoſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                rarè
nobilitatis, prudentiae
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                fructus, tam egregiae Reipublicae
fabrica in omnes reipublicae partes, et ad exteras
nationes, & apud potentiſsimos reges diffudit▪
Haec ſplendida tantae reipublicae moles maximis de
cauſis, te tanti honoris tantum ſenatorem, literarū
decus eximium, academiarum patronum, tam fortunata
republica ac principe tàm potente dignum
conſulem admiretur: qnod intra domesticas regni
iſtius parietes, literarū ac pacis diuina ſtudia, pura
ſincera
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                religio, prae cūctis regum externorum imperijs
in omni foelicitate, claritudinis fructus in regnum
Anglicanū, populum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſeſe diſpergunt. Maximis
de cauſis dominationi tuae me deuinctiſsimū eſſe
ſateor, q
                  •
               òd ab ineunte aetatè in optimis literarum
ſtudiis, maximis tuis ſumptibus, ac regalibus colleg
                  •
               i
ſtipendiis promotus ſ
                  •
               m. Tuo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſingulari beneficio
regiae munificētiae literatos fructus hauſi, tū egregio
opere Domini Iohannis Checi equitis torquati,
qui aurea naturae fabrica extitit, Illuſtriſsimo principi
Eduardo Sexto dum vixerat ad omnem gloriā
literarum, & virtutis ſummum decus, patriae ſplendor,
Philonis ac Platonis nobilia ſtudia literis aequabat,
Princeps ingenii fuit ac doctrinae, Anglis vniuerſis
rarus maximarum virtutum phoenix. Nulla

gens prudentiores habet viros, ac magis literatos
quā Anglia habet, quae pars orbis, bellorū in omni genere
clariores, aut Hectoreo Achilleo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                animo prōptiores
ad fortia pericula Anglis habet. Gentis ac regum
Anglorum gloria prima eſt, exterorū principum
nobilitas hiis ſecunda. Haec ſplendidiſsima gē
               tis
ac regum ornamenta▪ doctis literarum monumē
               tis
poſteritati, ad ſempiternam & non flacceſcentem
vllo tempore famam reconduntur. Nihil intentatū
Reipublicae ac patriae ſtudioſis eſſe debet, quod ad
Reipublicae dignitatem, regni
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                incliti gloriam, aut
quod ad poſteros iuuandos cum vtilitate ac ſingulari
virtute profluere poſsit▪ Sunt plurimi ſingulares
doctrina viri, qui excellentia diuini ingenij bona
ornamēta
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                abſcondūt, & ſupprimūt, quibus cum ad
maximā gloriā prae caeteris, Reipublicae ac poſteris
inſeruire valeant. Quaſi non prodeſſe tantis ingenij
ornamentis Reipublicae, in autoritatem ſcientiae
ſit, eruditis illis ac excellentibus doctrina viris. Làbes
maxima tantis ingenijs exiſtit, cum in excogitā
               dis
bonis, promouenda que vita per doctrinae ſtudia
poſteris tradenda torpedi, & omni quaſi maſcula
virtute eneruati vitam tranſigunt, quaſi hoc
ſummi ingenij opus ſit intra ſe tam egregia ſpiritus
ſancti, doctrinaeque dona, ſine vlla re nobili geſta
quaſi in homūculo aliquo plebeio ac rudi morte perire.
Si monumenta doctorum virorum ad illorū perpetuam
gloriam nobis poſteris redundarunt, profluat

à nobis ſi quae ſit claritudinis ſparta cōſequenti
nepotum aetati profutura. In quanta nobilitate literarum,
virtutis, ingenij, ac maximorum conciliorum
pondere, ſingularis ille vir Dominus Antonius
Cookus, eques torquatus, ſocer tuus in Reipublicae oculis
viuit, rarum decus huius aetatis, qui tam praeſtanti
liberorum ſuorum educatione tantos gloriae
fructus hauſit: vt reliquis Anglis ille ſolus docti patris
viua effigies, amoris, virtutis, ac verae nobilitatis
exēplar vnicū ſuis domi quaſi in celeberima academia
fulget. Vtinā in omnibus nobilibus familijs literarum
ſplēdor tàm altas verae nobilitatis radices
propagaſſet, qui valeat ſuorū familiā, genus, ac maiorum
ſtirpem inclitā tanto literarum ſplendore, generis
fama, ac genuina claritudinis gloria ſuos ornare.
In hac maxima nobilitatis gloria, ac ſingulari
laude, reponendus eſt dominus Gualterus Mildmaius,
eques torquatus, quatuor Anglorum principibus
potentiſsimis cum ſummo ſplendore inſeruiens
qui licet adhuc longaeui Neſtoris annos nō attigerit,
ac tantis virtutibus & magnitudine conciliorum in
principū negotijs, Methuſelah aetate dignus eſt, vt
Reipub. tam florenti viuat, valeat, floreat
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tantus
ac tātus ſenator. Magnitudine tantorum beneficio
               
                  •
               um
obrutus, ac excellentis dominationis tuae ſtatus
ſplēdore adductus, has Moſcouiticas meas lucubrationes
in lucem edidi, quae de actis Caeſarum omnium
ab ipſo Iulio Caeſare ad hunc illuſtriſsimū orbis Monarcham

Maxim
                  •
               lianum, longa orationis ſerie, per
ſingulorum regum familias, ac regias ſtirpes pertractat,
eas
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                dominationi tuae offero animi mei gratiſsimi
munuſculum. Has lucubrationes meas Moſcouiticas
appello, quia dū magno Moſcouiae Duci, potentiſsimo
Ruſsiae, Caſani, ac Aſtrachani Imperatori
in arte medica inſeruiebā, eas ocio dato cōpoſui▪
Sed nō deero Dominationis tuae volūtati ac petitioni,
de omni ſtatu Reipub. Moſcouiticae deſcribendo,
de
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Imperio Caſanico, & Aſtracanico mare Caſpiū
attingēte, magno Ruſsiae Imperatori ſubiecto. Nihil
homini prìuato conducibilius, nihil magistratui,
nihil regi, aut Imperatori quicquam vtilius eſſe poteſt,
quàm antiquitatem Rerumpublicarum, & omnium
Imperiorum formas, exitū bellorum tam externorum
quam ciuilium, in quiete & ſummo ocio
cum ſumina animi delectatiōe, ac voluptate, intueri
ac reuoluere. Eſt enim hiſtoria ſpeculum principis,
imago virtutis, theatrum doctiſsimum vniuerſi orbis,
veritatis certiſsimus index, tēporum teſtis, poſt mortem
vita, memoriae ſempiternum monumentum
viua Reſpublica, lex viua, morum doctiſsima magiſtra,
ad optima, & prudentiſsima concilia firma
pediſſequa, prudētiae fons, regum ac potētiſsimorum
monarcharum ſchola literata, omnium ſeculorum ac
imperiorum ſapientiſsimū ſtudiū. Quod in Rerū pub.
antiquitatibus, & in diuerſis Imperiorum formis,
longe caeteris Graecis praeſtitit Vliſſes, rarum illud

Graeciae propter prudētiam & ſacrata concilia
lumē habitus eſt. Quod Neſtor orationis maieſtate,
eloquentia, ac in regio ſenatu maximorum conciliorum
pōdere, reliquos patricios viros, generis principatuque
celſos anteibat, ſenatus graecorum pater, populi
robur, Imperii vniuerſi neruus graecis & omnibus
barbaris habitus eſt. Quod graecia ipſa ſenſit,
hiis duobus luminibus extinctis Epaminunda Duce
mortuo, dolendam Reipublicae iacturam ſenſerunt
Thebae, mortuo pericle Athenae, mortuo Archidamo
Lacedemonia luctus dedere. Robur imperii Anglicani
firmiſsimum, ac neruus tutiſsimus principis noſtrae
rara maiestas eſt, omnium maiorum regum
ſplendor, vnicum huius aetatis, ac conſequentum nepotum
dulciſsimum decus, cuius celſitudini praecaeteris
orbis monarchis, cum ſumma tranquillitate in
hiis turbulentiſsimis imperiorum tēpeſtatibus, ſenatorum
tanta prudentia, vultus nobilis, ſacrato
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                numine
fulta cōcilia inſeruiunt. Rarum patriae noſtrae
lumē in regio ſenatu existit dominatio tua, dum ſummae
eruditionis, verae nobilitatis, ac maximorum conciliorum
Neſtor, patriae florenti
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Reipublicae fulges.
Viuit ad perpetuam Reipublicae Anglicanae
gloriam Dominus Thomas Smithus aeques torquatus,
regiae maieſtatis nobilis Secretarius, iuris ciuilis,
ac omnium preſtantiſsimarum ſcientiarum. Doctor
ſummus, abstruſae abditae
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , cognitionis vberimū
penu, academiae Cantabrigienſis rarum decus, qui

Demoſthenem eloquētia, grauitate Platonem, concilio
Periclem, ac Senatoria prudentia Epaminundam
aequare poſsit. Non ſine cauſa floret Reſpublica
noſtra, reliquorum ſenatorum prudētia, ac ſummis
ingenijs fortunata, quorū ſi in Republica egregiā
conciliorum fabricam digne pertractarem, nullus
externorum principum ſenatus cum regio ſenatu
cōferendus, Deo enim Rempublicā edificante cō
               cilijs
tāti numinis ſingula agunt. Habet regnū Anglicanū
Reginā illuſtriſsimā, dominam noſtram Eliſabetham,
principem rarae maieſtatis, prudentia
Neſtorea imbutā, ac Neſtoris annis digniſsimam,
regalibus virtutibus, literata
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                praeſtantiſsmarum
artium cognitione illuſtrem, pacis ac concordiae nutricem,
regni ſui exoptatiſsimam ſpem foelicitatis,
regni Anglicani vnicum ſolatium, imperij robur, populi
ſui vnicam cōſolationem, maiorum regum, aeui
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
huius vnicū Decus. Faxit deus, vt nos tata pietate
tàm celſo numini inſeruiamꝰ, vt aureū tam illuſtris
principis, imperii
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſeculum diu teneamus.
            
               Dominationi tuae deuinctiſſimus Richardus Raignoldus.
            
         
         
            
            AN EPISTLE TO THE
Reader.
            
               
                  SCIPIO that noble capitaine, and valeante
conquerour, continually delighting in ſeking
wiſedome, and aſſaying profitable enterpryſes
for the common wealth of the Romaines, and
alſo for the glory and aduauncement of his
countrey, in noble feates of armes, ſtriuing to
be aboue the reſte ſingular, did continually occupy
him ſelfe in hiſtories, & in monumentes
of great antiquitie. Whoſe commendable ſtudies, Marcus Tullius Cicero,
in a certayne epiſtle to his brother Quintus, commendeth in theſe
woordes, Cyrus ille à Zenophonte non ad hiſtoriae fidem ſcriptus, ſed ad
effigiem iuſti imperij, cuius ſumma grauitas ab illo Philoſopho cum ſingulari
comitate coniungitur, quos quidem libros non ſine cauſa noſter
ille Africanus de manibus ponere non ſolebat; nullum eſt enim praetermiſſum
in hijs officium diligentis & moderati imperij. Cyrus that noble
prince of Perſia, who is ſet out in ye hiſtory of Zenophon, although ye hiſtorie
wrytten of him, be aboue that which Cyrus attayned to, yet the
very liuely image of a prince, what he ought to be, and of his ſtate is in
thoſe bookes declared, the grauitie and maieſtie of. Cyrus, with a ſingular
courteous humanitie is ioyned together of that Philoſopher,
the whiche bookes of Zenophon, not without great cauſe or dope conſideration,
oure noble Africanus woulde neuer laye oute of his handes:
For in thoſe bookes is fully ſet out the ſtate and royall office of a carefull
prince and tēperate. The example of ſo worthy a prince of ſo great
wyſdome, of ſo victorious and valeante a conquerour, is of great force
to ſhewe what great knowledge, wyſedome, and profitable learning,
what glory is conteined in hiſtories to the ſtudentes thereof. This noble
Scipio, being a rare prince for all excellency. The ſtaye of the Romayne
Empire, a light to all princes, dayly occupied him ſelfe in reading
of hiſtories. Octauius Emperour of Rome, did greatly delight in
hiſtories, and in all antiquities of learning, who was in loue ſo muche
rapted & inflamed with the Aeneados of the famous Poete Virgil, as
that noble Scipio Africanus, was delighted with Zenophons workes.
Alexander the great, whoſe commendation is aboue all princes, who
as the booke of the Machabes ſheeweth, hauing great warres in hande,
he wan many ſtrong cities, and ſlewe many kynges of the earth, goyng
throughout the endes of the worlde, in ſo muche that the whole worlde
ſtoode in awe of hym. This Alexander the great, being brought vp of
that great and moſte wyſe Philoſopher Ariſtotle, did chiefly place his
delight in hiſtories, who gaue great and princely giftes to all ſuche as

by any meanes profited the cōmon wealth thereby. This mighty prince
Alexander, did ſo muche delighte in hiſtories and in the bookes of Homere
the Greeke Poete, that he would reſt his ſtudy and minde therin.
Whiche bookes of Homere he named his pillowe, becauſe he woulde
neuer ſleape without them: ſaying alwayes giue me my pyllowe (meaning
thoſe bookes.) Out of thoſe bookes he learned many notable vertues,
mete for ye office of prīces, many rare vertues & great knowledge,
for all ſuch as ſhall be gouernours in the common wealthe, great wiſdome
for captaynes with the felicitie of ye minde & rare magnaminitie,
the noble vertue patiēce, is there fully ſet out, mete for al ſtates, with al
the calamities of warre. Lucius Lucullus, by his great knowledge in hiſtories,
brought to the Romaines felicitie of eſtate, and perpetuall renowme
in his warres fought againſt Mithidrates. Thus Marcus Tullius
Cicero writeth of him. Lucius Lucullus, percontandis peritioribus,
rebus geſtis legendis, tātus in omni genere belli extitit vt omnibus quorūcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
ſeculorū principibus anteferretur. Lucius Lucullus, by diligent
inquiſition of the beſte learned, and by reading of hiſtories, was ſo famous
and noble in al pointes of chiualry, that he ought to be placed before
the princes of all ages. Alexander Seuerus, an Emperour of great
glorie, and of moſte noble fame, inferiour to no prince in wyſedome and
learning, by whome the Romaines enioyed a floriſhing ſtate and moſte
peaceable gouernemente, the frutes of all good gouermente. This Alexander
Seuerus, wold neuer enterprice any thing of any great weight
or importance, either in warre or peace, but he would ſende for ſuche as
were knowen to be excellēt in hiſtories, to conſulte and debate with thē
of ſuche matters: wherein he founde a chiefe treaſure of all depe & ſage
councell, a regiſter of all famous actes. Alexander the great, at what
time as he ouercame Darius king of Perſia, in a place called Arbellis,
he demaunded of his noble men the nereſt and ſafyſt waye out of Perſia
into Aegipte, but none could tell him. A certayne marchaunt man the
hiſtorie ſayth, Homo multarum rerum peritus, a man very cunning in
many thinges, it ſemed by his anſwere he was a traueyler in thoſe places
& in many other countries. This marchaunt was by countrey a Sidonian,
who being brought to him, the hiſtorie maketh no mention of
his name, but Lucianus wryteth the ſtory. O king (ſayth the marchaūt)
I am able to promyſe thee that the waye from this parte of Perſia into
Aegipte, is but three dayes iourney through the mountaynes, and ſo it
was proued. Alexander ignoraunt of the ſituation of the countrey, and
fearing the marchaunt to haue diſſembled with him, of long time beleued
it not, but in the ende the marchauntes tale was founde true, it ſemed
the marchaunt knew more by his trauayle then thoſe Perſians did,
of ſo great force is the worthy knowledge of hiſtories. The knowledge

of the ſituation of countreis, regiōs, and cities, Ptolomeus Euergetes
                     •
                  
               
that worthy prince of Aegipte, of whome Galene that noble phiſition
wryteth of in the third booke De morbis popularibus. This Ptolomeus
greatly deliting in hiſtories, and in all kinde of learning, commaunded
as many as arriued at his coaſtes or countreis, to bryng to hym al ſuch
bookes as were to be founde with them of any worthy memorie. Thoſe
bookes this king Ptolomeus cauſed truly to be writtē out, and the new
copies to be deliuered to the firſte poſſeſſours, all ſuche bookes in this
ſorte brought, the kyng commaunded them to be placed in goodly and
ſumptuous libraries, there perpetually to remayne as worthy monumentes
to be reſerued of the poſteritie. And alſo this kyng Ptolomeus,
commaunded that vpon all thoſe bookes thus broughte to him from
farre countries, to haue this title vpon them, Ex nauibus acceptorum,
as who ſhould ſaie, all ſuche bookes were brought by ſhippe from farre
places to him. Howe great was the care of this Ptolomeus towardes
learning, when he b
                  •
               rgayned with the Athenians to paye to them. 15.
talentes of ſiluer for the bookes of Sophocles, of Euripides, and of Eſculus
the poete. He cauſed a copie to be writtē out of thē, the olde bookes
he kepte, and reſtored to them the newe laſte written copies. Thus writeth
Galene, Orabat vt quindecim talenta tenerent acciperent
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nouos
pro veteribus quos ipſi dederant, ſic Athenienſes & argento potiti ſunt, &
libris. Ptolomeus prayed the Athenians that they would receiue of hym
the. 15. talentes, & the newe wrytten copies for the olde copies whiche
they gaue to him, ſo the Athenians receiued at ye kinges handes muche
ſiluer and their bookes agayne. The rare loue of this Prince towarde
learning, his greate care to obtayne workes, to reſerue them to all poſterities,
and geeue ſo great rewardes for ſo ſmall bookes, ſheweth a
rare and moſte royall harte to learning. Thoſe tragedies of Sophocles
and Euripides, do conteine notable hiſtories, wherin kyng Ptolomeus
delighted, a continuall ſtudie mete for all princes. Great be the commē
               dations
of that noble Empreſſe Zenobia, the Empreſſe of the Eaſte, ſhe
was the wyfe of valeant Odoacer, for her great wyſedome and excellēt
learnyng, both in hiſtories, and alſo in all matters of councell. This
learned Empreſſe Zenobia, by her wyſedome, and great knowledge in
hiſtories, excelled in thoſe dayes and in manye ages before, ye mightye
Monarches of the worlde. This Zenobia made a Chronicle of all ye
warres fought in Alexandria. Alſo ſhe gathered a collection of all the
notable warres fought in the Eaſte partes. The reading of hiſtories
is a ſtudy right profitable for all men, for magiſtrates, for princes a
moſte pleaſaunt and comfortable trauell. The knowledge of hiſtories
is a ſpurre to vertue, a brydle to repreſſe vice in all that feare God. An
hiſtorie is the glaſſe of Princes, the image moſte liuely bothe of vertue

and vice, the learned theatre or ſpectacle of all the worlde, the councell
houſe of Princes, the trier of all truthes, a witnes of all tymes & ages.
After death a perpetuall memorie of the noble actes of thoſe that here
deſerued fame, a liuely regiſter of ye common wealthes of al ages, the
worthieſt ſcholemaiſter of manners, the fountayne of all knowledge to
knowe God thorowely and thy ſelfe, a bytte and ſnaffle to the proude &
ambitious, the learned ſchole of princes, the booke of princes, & their
quiet and ſofte pillowe to ſlepe on, the perfit deſcription of the maruelous
workes of God, in the preſeruing of princes & common welthes,
a paterne of all common wealthes layde before our eyes. Kyng Aſueueuerus
that mighty king, who reigned frō 
               India vnto Ethiopia ouer 127.
prouinces, ſo muche delighted in hiſtories, that for a perpetuall memory
of thinges done. He commaunded to be put in a chronicle all thinges
that happened to hym. And alſo that treaſon whiche Mardocheus the
Iewe vttered of the kinges chāberlaynes wrought againſt this Aſuerus,
of the whiche treaſon the king commaunded inquiſitiō to be made,
the king Aſueuerus commaūded it to be written in ye Chronicles before
his owne ſighte and the name of him that vttered the treaſon. This
worthy regiſter of fame, being preſerued and kepte. A certayne tyme
this king Aſueuerus, (not able to take ſleape in ye night ſeaſon, through
his greate cares of mynde) commaunded the Chronicles and Hiſtories
to be brought before hym, and the Chronicles were redde. In that
place of the hiſtories redde to ye king, Mardocheus the Iewe was foūde
chronicled, who vttered the great treaſon wrought againſt the kyng, by
Bigthana & Theres the kyngs chamberlaynes, who ſought to haue layd
handes on the kyng, but they were as all traytours deſerued, in lyke
ſorte hanged vppe, but Mardocheus who vttered this treaſon, was extolled
to greate honour. It was a worthye acte of the kynge to exalte
and rewarde the well doer, and to hange vp the traytours diſobeying
ſo miſchieuouſly God and their prince, ſeeking to eſtablyſh their
deueliſhe purpoſe by the ſubuerſion of the prince. Proude Haman was
broughte to confuſion, that ſoughte the deathe of manye: who, beinge
aboue all the ſubiectes of the kynge aduaunced, not knowing him ſelfe
fell into the deſtruction that hee prepared for other. Malum conſilium
conſultori peſſimum, The deuyce and counſell of a wicked man to
hurt other, turneth to his owne deſtructiō. The ſtory ſayth kyng Aſueuerus
not able to take reſte, commaunded the Chronicle to be brought
to him, and to be redde, it ſemeth that Chronicles be pleaſaūt, they put
awaye tediouſnes, they bringe great wyſdome to princes, they geue
knowledge to forſee miſchieues and treaſons, & to ſubuerte the wilye
pollicies of forayne nations. This noble kinge Aſueuerus calleth hiſtories
an euerlaſting remembraunce. The actes of wiſe men are a rule

and ſquare for other to direct their councel and doings by. This noble
Scipio Africanus, ſheweth to all wyſe men the depe knowledge in hiſtories,
and the great profite of them. Octauius Auguſtus, Alexander the
great, Lucius Lucullus, Alexander Seuerus, Ptolomeus Euergetes, who
were the great princes of the worlde, by learned hiſtories, in floriſhyng
eſtate gouerned, and thereby attayned to great wyſedome. The worthy
Zenobia is to be folowed in the great knowledge of hiſtories, and in her
great wyſedome obteined therin. That wyſe Salomō Henry the ſeuēth
was very ſtudious of hiſtories, and that victorious prince Henry the
eight, who was a terror to all princes that had any quarel againſt him.
The Emperour Charles the fifte ſovght his amitie, and Fraunces
the Frenche kyng afrayde to diſpleaſe him, he was more valiant then
Hector, of more noble courage then Achilles, an other Scipio Africanus,
or rather if he had mynded to enlarge his dominion, an other Alexander,
in wyſedome and graue councell Salomon. Theſe noble princes do
ſhewe what it is for princes to be learned, and eſpeciallye for graue
councell and wyſedome in hiſtories. He knoweth nothing that knoweth
not hiſtories, and it is the lyfe of beaſtes to knowe nothing, the more a
man knoweth, the more he excelleth from men & differeth from beaſtes.
If the Empire of the Eaſte might in thoſe dayes glorie and reioyce of
their Empreſſe Zenobia. What may this our noble ilande of Britaine,
and how much reioyce, that almighty God, for the glory and aduaūcement
of his church, for the floriſhing ſtate of this noble kingdome, hath
rayſed vp this our noble queene to ſit in the throne & ſeate of her aunceſtours,
kynges from long deſcent, of moſte auncient tyme victorious
princes, in the queenes maieſties vertuous gouernement, the frutes of
godlye peace do ſhewe it ſelfe, whoſe maieſtie of princly ſtate, the great
power of God vpholdeth, in all reſpectes the moſte fortunates countrey,
God graunte that all we Engliſhe men may acknowledge in what
bleſſed ſtate God hath ſette vs, to be vnder the gouernement of ſo vertuous
a princeſſe, and moſte royall queene choſen by God, preſerued
with his mightie hande, & to his glory vpholded to aduaunce his holy
name: God graunte that we Englyſhe men maye beare in mynde in
what bleſſed ſtate God hath ſet vs, all ſuche as are vnmyndefull of this
bleſſed gouernment, are vnmete burdenes to treade on earth, meete to
drawe in yoke and myſerable ſeruitude with the barbarous Scithians,
or in ſlauerie with the bloudye Turkes. Marcus Tullius Cicero wryteth
a notable ſentence, meete to be put in golden letters, to be redde of
all good ſubiectes againſt rebelles, or mainteyners of rebellion.
            
               Sic ſentit ſenatus, ſic populus Romanus nullos vnquā hoſtes digniores
omni ſupplicio fuiſſe quam eos, qui hoc bello contra patriam arma ceperūt,
quos quidem ego omnibus ſententijs vlciſcor & perſequor omnibus

bonis approbātibus. So the Senate of Rome iudgeth, & ſo alſo the
people of Rome at any time yt no enemies haue ben more worthy al kind
of puniſhement or tormentes, then thoſe who in this warres taken in
hande againſt their owne countrey are become rebellious, making war
againſt the ſame, vpon whiche workers with the cōſent of all good mē,
I do take reuengement of, and purſue to the vttermoſte this talke
he had with Brutus a man of great authoritye: Alſo the ſayde Tullye
made aunſwere to a certayne epiſtle of this Brutus, which was writtē
to Tullie. Vehementer à te diſſentio Brute ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   clementiae tuae concedo,
ſed ſalubris ſeueritas vincit inanem ſpeciem clementiae, quod ſi
clementes eſſe voluerimus, nunquā deerunt bella ciuilia. O Brutus
ſaith he, I do greatly diſagree from thee, neyther do I alowe thy pitifull
clemency, for wholſome ſeuerity doth paſſe and excelle this vayne
kinde of clemencie: for if we will be pytifull in ſuch caſes, ciuil warre
wyll neuer ceaſe to the Romaynes. God alwayes ouerthroweth the
wicked attemptes of ſuch domeſtical vipars, to whome their owne deuices
are their owne ſnares and pitte of deſtruction to fall into.
            As conſerning the order of my Booke, I do beginne wyth the lyfe of
Iulius Caeſar, ſetting forth with it the greate warres betweene him and
noble Pompeie, called Pompeius Magnus: from thence I procede thorowe
the liues of all the Emperours, euen to Maximilian this noble
Emperour which preſentlye rayneth, makinge a full diſcourſe of the
great glorye, nobilitye and perpetuall fame of the godlye Princes, the
myſerable and doulefull fall of the wicked. In this hiſtorye I note
perticulerly the actes of euery one, I doo ſet foorth the great prouidēce
of God in preſeruing common wealthes, in rayſing and exalting to gouernement
godly princes, in thrawing downe tyrauntes, rebelles, and
all mainteiners of rebellion, howe God by his mighty hande ouerthroweth
the perſecutors of his churche, and all deueliſhe practiſes, the deuil
hath his limites and bondes appointed which he ſhal not paſſe. In
hiſtories, it is ſet forth of the great alterations from tyme to tyme of
kingdomes, the chaunges of Empires, the partition of the Romayne
Empire for the Eaſt, the firſt being of the beggerly Scithians, ye beaſtly
Gothes, of the runnagate Vandales, & to what power they grew in Europe,
and in the ende their ouerthrowe by the mighty power of God,
the ſtate of the Turkes and Saracenes, & of their beginning, of the oft
taking of Rome, & ſacking of it, of the great warres againſt Millaine
by the Frenche kyng, of the great warres in Germany, of the taking of
the Frenche kyng, of the great warres of the Emperour Charles and
noble Ferdinando againſt the Turkes, and of the great ouerthrowe of
the Turkes. I haue in the hiſtories ſetforth the images of the Emperours

as they were in the coigne of them, with their tittles. I doubt
not but the reader ſhall finde it profitable, with manye plentifull hiſtories
for knowledge neceſſary, the noble man, the captaine, the gentleman,
ſhall finde knowledge therein very profitable. God graunte vs al
to feare God, and to obeye our noble prince, whom God in moſt happy
tyme hath to the aduauncement of his churche, and moſt happye kingdome,
rayſed to gouerne ouer this noble and beutifull Ilande and coū
               trey
of Englande.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A Table contayninge the principall
matters in this Booke.
            
               A.
               
                  AChillas ſeruinge Ptolomeus
the kinge, a
murtherer of Pompeie.
Fo. 12.
               
                  Arthur kinge of Brytaine, &
his noble actes againſte ye
Romaynes. Folio. 47.
               
                  Alexander Magnus deade.
Folio. 14.
               
                  Antipater a frend to Caeſar.
Folio. 14.
               Ambition Folio. 14.
               
                  Antonius killeth himſelfe.
Fol. 15.
               
                  Antonius a reuēger of Caeſars
death. 16.
               
                  Adrianus his lyfe. 55.
               Alexander Magnus. 43.
               
                  Aurelia Caeſars mother. 1.
               
                  Antonius a reuenger of Iulius
Caeſars death. Fo. 1.
               Apollonius Molo. 2.
               Ambition his force. 2.
               
                  Albinus his ende. 67.
               A godly admonitiō to al Engliſhemen,
to auoyde diſcorde
and treaſon. 4.
               
                  Aurelia dead. 5.
               Ambition hath no regard of
God and nature. 5.
               
                  Antiſtius Caeſars Phiſitiō.
Fol. 6.
               A fearefull admonition to
learne men to beware of
treaſō. 9.
               Alexander Magnus. 43.
               
                  Amazones and of their doinges.
Folio. 43.
               
                  Artabanus his actes. 20.
               
                  Antoninꝰ Emperor, ſought
counſell at ſpirites for his
eſtate. 72.
               Auguſtinus de diuinatione
demoniorum. 72.
               
                  Artabanus kinge of Perſia
ioyneth league with the
Romaynes. 72.
               
                  Artabanus death. 83.
               
                  Artaxarxes his embaſſage.
83.
               
                  Altarcus king of Scots. 83.
               The auctoritye of the biſhop
of Rome not Apoſtolicke.
94.
               
                  Athanaſius biſhoppe. 108.
               
                  Ambroſe biſhop of Millen.
16.
               
                  Attalas his doinges. 125.
               Angli Saxoni. 130.
            
            
               B.
               
                  BRitanie, and of ye actes
of Caeſar there. 3. 4.
               
                  Britayne called ſometime
Olbion, after Albion.
Fol. 3.
               
                  Britayne broughte to ſubiection
by diſcord. Fol. 4.
               
                  
                  Brutus made ſecond heyre to
Iulius Caeſar, yet a traytor
to Caeſar. 8.
               
                  Brutus his conſpiracie. 14.
               
                  Brutus commaundeth Strato
his mā to murther Brutus
himſelfe. 15.
               Blaſinge ſtarres what they
ſignifye. 38.
               
                  Babilus an Aſtronomer propheſying
vpon Nero. 38.
               
                  Beliſar of his noble actes 142
            
            
               C.
               Caius Iulius Caeſar. 1.
               Caius Marius. 1.
               
                  Caeſars education. 1.
               
                  Coſſutia Caeſars wyfe. 1.
               
                  Cornelia. ibidem.
               
                  Caeſar for feare of Silla hydeth
himſelfe. 2.
               
                  Caeſar queſtor. 2.
               
                  Caeſars dreame. 2.
               
                  Calphurnia Caeſars wyfes
dreame. 2
               
                  Caeſars conquering of ye Germaynes
and of the French
men. 3.
               
                  Caeſars conſideration before
he woulde enter on ye Britaynes.
3.
               
                  Caeſars talke with marchantes.
3.
               
                  Caius yoluſenus Embaſſadour
to the Britaynes. 4.
               
                  Comas Atrabas ſecond Embaſſadour
to ye Britaynes
and put in priſon. 4.
               
                  Caſſibelan king of London.
4.
               
                  Caeſars entringe into Britaine
by treaſon. 4.
               
                  Caeſars conquering of ye Britaynes,
commended at
Rome aboue al his actes.
Fol, 4.
               
                  Caeſars meanes to honour. 5.
               Caeſars taunt to Spurina. 8.
               Ciuil warre worſt of al warres.
8.
               Cauetouſnes the ouerthrow
of common wealthes. 85.
               
                  Carolus Caluus & his life. 87.
               Couragious warriours. 8.
               Chiualrye the beſt precept of
it. 90.
               
                  Cyprian his conuerſion 94.
               
                  Charles the great 104.
               Counſell of Nice. 105.
               
                  Coil Duke of Colcheſter father
to Queene Helena.
100.
               
                  Conſtantine the greate his
lyfe. 104.
               Chriſtiā doctrine with their
foundation. 109.
               
                  Coſroe ſlaine of his owne
ſonne. 106.
               
                  Carolus Martellus his actes
175.
               
                  Commodus his lyfe. 62.
               
                  Caeſar after his death honoured
as a God. 8.
               
                  Cyrus charge of his funeral.
9
               
                  Caeſars opinion what deathe

was beſt 9.
               
                  Caeſars propoſition with Caeſars
concluſion to it. 9.
               
                  Caeſars Image why it is pictured
with a ſtarre. 9.
               
                  Caeſars anſweare to the Senates
decree. 10.
               
                  Cratippus anſweare to Pō
                     peius
propoſition. 12.
               
                  Cornelia Pompeius wyfe, &
her calamitye. 13.
               
                  Cato his death. 14.
               
                  Caſſus the firſt author of Caeſars
death. 14.
               
                  Cicero his death. 15.
               
                  Cleopatra her death. 19.
               Common wealthes compared
to a Garden. 47.
               
                  Coccius Narua his gouernment.
54.
               The cauſe and firſte originall
of nobilitye. 24.
               Couetous officers cōpared
to fleſhe flees. 28.
               
                  Caius Caligula his gouernment.
31.
               
                  Claudius Tiberius his beaſtlye
life. 33.
            
            
               D.
               
                  Dwina a floud in Ruſſia that
is. 1
                     •
                  000. myles longe.
83.
               Deſperate ſouldiours. 90.
               The death of one wyſe counſellour,
is a plague to a
whole realme 91.
               Diſcorde of Chriſtians is a
ſtrength to infidels. 108.
               Death of many tyrantes. 117
               
                  Dolobella an ennemy to Caeſar.
2.
               Diſcord a plague to the ſtrō
                  geſt
fortes & kingdomes 4.
               
                  Douer builded of Caeſar 6.
               A decree of ye Senate againſt
Caeſar. 10.
               
                  Domitius Nero his life. 36.
               Darius killed by Beſſus 43.
               
                  Domitian his beaſtlye lyfe.
53.
               
                  Didius Iulianus his beaſtlye
lyfe, and ende. 65.
               
                  Digeſt and Code volume
broughte into a briefe by
Iuſtinian. 155.
               Dukes and their beginning
157.
               Deuils, tyrants and wicked
men, haue their limittes
appointed. 163.
            
            
               E.
               Embaſſadours ought curteouſlye
to be vſed. 84.
               Embaſſages why they were
ordayned. 84.
               Eloquēce of great force. 132.
               Exāple moſte rare of a ſonne
towardes his father. 138.
               Elius Cinna murthered for
Cornelius Cinna. 9.
               Example of ingratitude. 12.
            
            
               F.
               Foelix a noble mā with Claudius
Tiberius▪ 34.
               
                  
Forgetfulnes of Tiberius
after his murthers. 35.
            
            
               G.
               The gouernmente of Rome
lefte to Lepidus, in Caeſars
abſence. 10.
               The great deliberatiō of coū
                  cellers,
and care, in prīces
affayres. 19.
               The godlye princes bleſſed of
God. 39.
               
                  Galba the death of Nero by
vſurpinge. 39.
               
                  Galba of a noble houſe.
               Galba killed of Otho. 39.
               Godly princes with theyr gouernmente.
45.
               Gods ſecrete counſel in kingdomes.
72.
               Gawiſhe apparell. 76.
               The gouernment of women
maruelouſlye vpholded of
God. 80.
               Galerius Armentarius. 103.
               Gods wrathe againſt heritikes.
109.
               
                  Gothes frō whēce they came
116.
               
                  Genſericke his actes. 134
               
                  Genſericke his death. 137.
            
            
               H.
               
                  Heliogabalus a king, a man,
a prieſt and a God. 76.
               
                  Heliogabalus his beaſtly life
78.
               
                  Helena queene of Englande
100.
               
                  Heraclius his life, & of ye 
                  Turkes
their originall. 167.
               Honourable eſtate a moſte
happye ſtate to godly maieſtrates.
3.
               
                  Herodes diſſimulation wyth
Cleopatra. 17.
               Henrye the v. of his nobility
and royall ſtate 42.
               Henrye the vi. of his calamitye.
               Henrye the vii. viii. ibidem
of their worthines and royall
eſtate.
            
            
               I.
               
                  Iulia Caeſars aunte. Fol. 1.
               
                  Iulia Caeſars daughter. 2.
               
                  Iulia dead. 5.
               
                  Iuſtinian of his worthines.
145.
               Ignatius commendation of
Caeſar. 7.
               Iames kinge of Scottes
brought to Londō dead. 41
               Iames king of Scottes, his
poſye and ſentence written
in gould and found about
his necke he beinge deade.
41.
               Iames kinge of Scottes his
Propheſye of his returne
home deceyued him. 41.
               The Ile of Wyght ſubdued
by Veſpaſian 51.
               Ignorance the mother of ſuperſtitious
deuotion. 111.
               
                  Iouian his life, 114.
               
                  
                  Irene her beaſtly lyfe. 176.
            
            
               K.
               Kinges & wiſemen why they
be ordayned. 505.
               A kingdome ſmall well gouerned.
6.
               King Zerxes cowardly retyreth.
80.
               Kinges foſtered vppe of God
vpholded, defended, and
created 5.
               Kinges in the ſecrete counſel
of God, geeuē to landes &
kingdomes 53.
               Kinges raiſed from poore cotages
to rule. 33.
            
            
               L.
               
                  Lodouicus & his actes. 172.
               
                  Lotharius his life and actes.
176.
               Lucius Caeſar. 1.
               
                  Lucane ye Poete vpon ye warres
of Pompeie. 5.
               The long life of a ſtage to the
which Caeſar gaue a collor.
6.
               A letter deliuered to Caeſar
of the conſpiracye. 8.
               Lucretia. 16.
               
                  Liuia Octanius wyfe 22.
               
                  Lactantius Firmianus ſayth
that an Epiſtle was wrote
to S. Paule by Seneca. 56.
            
            
               M.
               
                  Macrinus his beaſtly life 72.
               Men of lowe degree promoted
are cōtemned of ye baſe
multitude, though they be
neuer ſo godly & wyſe. 72.
               
                  Macrinus death 76.
               
                  Meſa her commendatiō worthye
perpetual memorye,
for the gouernmente of a
woman. 80.
               Marriages allowed in Prieſtes
105.
               
                  Mauritius his ende 164.
               
                  Mahomet his Proclamatiō
to his people, with ye doctrine
and originall of the
Turkes. 168.
               
                  Moſcouites their Sabboth
daye & fonde ceremonyes.
177.
            
            
               N.
               
                  Naera and Car mion, Cleopatra
her maydes 23.
               Noble houſes and their deſcente.
36.
               
                  Numa Pompilius his actes.
Fol 1.
               Nobilitye and warlicke ſtomackes
of the Britaynes.
4.
            
            
               O.
               
                  Octauia Caeſars ſiſters daughter.
3.
               
                  Octauius Emperour at the
byrth of Chriſt. 10.
               
                  Octauius maried. 16.
               
                  Octauius aunſweare to Ptolomeus
picture. 18.
               
                  Octauius ſayinge of Rome
20.
               
                  
                  Octauius wyues. 21.
               
                  Octauius mother deade. 21.
               
                  Otho killed himſelfe 44
               Offices bought wyth money
do ſhewe an yll maieſtrate
to followe. 64.
               
                  Odenatus his noble actes.
96.
               
                  Orimaſda his actes & lamentable
ende. 160.
               The Oration of a Romaine
full of perſwatiōs to beate
downe the pride of a tyrant
or any proude perſon, that
knowes not himſelfe nor
God. 161.
               
                  Oicomenicos in double ſignification.
163.
            
            
               P.
               
                  Pompeia Caeſars wyfe. 2.
               
                  Plato his ſaying of traytors.
3.
               Pompeius death, & Caeſars.
10.
               
                  Pompeie in miſerie flying to
a falſe frende. 5.
               
                  Pompeie trayterouſly ſlaine.
5.
               
                  Plutarcke his commendatiō
of Caeſars & deſcription. 7.
               Propheſyes doubtfull, proue
true manye tymes. 8.
               Pompeie flyeth into Egipte,
12.
               
                  Ptolomie king of Egipt falſe
to Pompeie 12.
               
                  Pothinus an Eunuke, a murtherer
of Pompeie 40
               Pōpeie toke Hieruſalem 12.
               
                  Ptolomeus deade. 13.
               Proclamation for the murtherers
of Caeſar. 17.
               Propheſye of Octauius byrth
21.
               Pilate accuſed of the Iewes
and ſent to Rome. 28,
               
                  Phalaris with many other tirants,
and their ende. 44.
               Perſecutions of the Chriſtians
the third time in Traianus
dayes. 55.
            
            
               Q.
               
                  Quintilius Emperour ſlaine
of his ſouldiours. 97.
               
                  Quintus Ligarius one of the
murtherer of Caeſar. 10.
            
            
               R.
               The race of kings frō meane
cotages firſt73.
               Riches not in admiration wt
the wiſe. 73.
               A remedy to auoyde plagues
91.
               Rocheſter builded by Iulius
Caeſar, & other fortes as I
haue declared: reade Lidgate
therof, in his booke of
diuiſion. 6.
            
            
               S.
               Succeſſion of kingdomes in
the ſecrete counſel of God.
20.
               Sinne the fal of kingdomes.
               
                  Silla why he reſiſted Caeſar. 2
               
                  
                  Silla dead. 2.
               The ſtaye of a whole realme
vpholded ſometime by one
wyſe man. 97.
               The ſtronge fortes of a prīce
is the loue of his ſubiectes
14.
               
                  Spurina his propheſy of Caeſar
with his taunt▪ 8.
               
                  Seneca put to death of Nero.
37.
            
            
               T.
               
                  Titus Veſpatianus his lyfe.
Fol. 50.
               
                  Troynouantes traytours to
Britaine to let in Caeſar 4.
               
                  Thyeſ
                        •
                     es & Atreus wt many
other cruell tyrantes 5.
               The tower of London builded
of Caeſar. 6.
               
                  Tiberius follye. 26.
               Tyrants haue an ill ende, 32
            
            
               VV.
               Warres of Caeſar & Pompeie
10.
               Warres of Charles the fifte
with kinge Frauncis, againſt
Millen & other Cittyes.
               Warres of the Germaynes.
               Warres of the Turkes, and
their ouerthrow by Charles
and Ferdinand, and ſo
thorowe the life of Charles.
               
               Warres moſt co
                     •
                  ragiouſlye
fought of the nobleſt Prī
                  ces
in the life of Charles.
               
               Why warres are to be moued,
when, and vpon what
occaſion. 19.
               Warre hath alwayes two
companions, peſtilence &
hunger ioyned wyth him.
19.
            
            
               V.
               
                  Veſpaſian his actes. 45.
               
                  Vitellus his lyfe and ende.
44.
            
            
               X.
               
                  Xenophon his workes a cō
                  tinuall
ſtudye to Scipio.
Folio. 1. in Epiſt.
               
            
            
               
                  Immandrubalus, reade for it Theomantius. Folio. 4.
            
            The ende of the Table.
         
         
            
            Faultes eſcaped in the Printing.
            
               In the latine Epiſtle Egergiam, reade Egregiam.
               
               In the latine Epiſtle Aeques, reade eques.
               
               In the Engliſhe Epiſtle quindecim. reade quindecem.
               
               Aſueuerus, reade Ahaſuerus.
               magnaminitye, reade magnanimitye.
               Odoacer, reade Odenatus.
               
                  Cuſſulia, reade Coſſutia. Folio. 1.
               callinge, reade to that calling. Folio. 1.
               
                  Immandrubalus, reade Theomantius. Fol. 1.
               Caeſar non patitur, reade Caeſar ve priorem non patitur.
Folio. 5.
               
                  Tolomeus, reade Ptolomeus. Fol. 5.
               
                  Mecum, reade Moechum. Fol. 7.
               
                  ſumpiſti, reade ſumſiſti. Fol 7.
               
                  mutium, reade mutuum Fol. 7.
               repentinun in opinatunque, reade repentinum in opinatumque.
Fol. 10,
               
                  Periodo, reade periodos. Fol. 12.
               Plyas, reade Ptyas. 17.
               
                  Deatherica, reade de theriaca. Fol. 17.
               
                  Apolinis, reade apollinis. Fol. 20.
               Cani, reade Caij, 20.
               Potentia, reade potentiam. 29.
               Chronicarum, reade Chronicorum. 183.
               Caſpar, reade Gaſpar 183.
               Henrye the ſeconde, reade Henrye the thirde. 192.
wape, reade waye. 228.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               CAIVS IVLIVS
CAESAR.
               
               
                  
                     CAIVS IVLIVS CAESAR the
ſonne of Lucius Caeſar, and Aurelia was
borne at Rome, in the Conſulſhippe of Caius
Marius, and Lucius Valerius Flaccus, in the
Ides of the fifte moneth, the whiche moneth
at thoſe dayes was called Quintilis,
                  Antonius. but after
the death of Iulius Caeſar, it was called Iuly, by the cōmaundement
of Antonius,
                  The educatiō of Iulius Ceſar. who was a reuenger of ye death of Iulius
Caeſar. As concerning the educatiō of Caeſar, he was brought
vp vnder the gouernement of his mother Aurelia, ſhe being ye
daughter of Caius Cotta, he wanted not alſo to be well trained
vp according to the councell of Iulia his Aunte by the father
ſide, his great vertues manifeſtly ſhewed, that his education
was ſinguler, his giftes of nature rare, worthy to be compared
with any other, his excellencie in all reſpectes was ſuch
that in Rome the like was neuer.Lucius. In the .xvi. yeare of his age,
Lucius his father died,Flamen Dialis. the yeare followynge he was choſen
Flamen Dialis, which is an office of prieſthode, of it the Chronicles
of auncient tymes do ſhewe, that Numa Pompilius,
was the firſte that ordained that office of Flamines,
                  Numa Pompilius. the cauſe
that moued Numa Pompilius thereunto was this, yt kinges
not long before the dayes of Numa did take vppon them the
office both of kynges and prieſtes,Priamus Agamemnon. as it is noted of Priamus
kinge of Troie, of Agamemnon king of Micene, and of many
Princes, as Homer, Euripides and Sophocles, do ſhew. The
whiche two offices kingdome and prieſthode, many princes

after thoſe dayes enioyed together. The Grekes, the Egiptians,Numa. and the Perſians, vſed that manner. Numa ordained
foure chiefe Flamines, who continually addicted them ſelues
callinge, and kynges vnburthened them ſelues of that ſuperſtitious
prieſthode.An auncient religion. All this was to wante nothinge
that ſhoulde apperteine to the moſte holee veneration of their
fonde ceremonies, and glorious ſuperſtition of their Goddes.
This was their religion,Flamines. as they had diuers Goddes, ſo euery
God had a diuers Flamine. Iupiter their chiefe God, had but
one Flamine to ſerue him. Romulus, after his death being the
firſt king of the Romaines, had alſo but one. Theſe Flamines
differed much in veſture one frō an other:Coſſulia. Thus much as concerning
Caeſar in that office of Flamines. At this time Iulius
Caeſar maried Coſſulia,
                  Cornelia. but Coſſulia no long time remayned
with him,Cinna. being deuorced from him, whether by deſerte or otherwyſe, no Chronicle ſheweth. After her deuorce, Caeſar
maried Cornelia the daughter of Cinna,
                  Iulia. this Cinna had ben
in Rome foure times Conſull: of Cornelia he begat Iulia his
daughter: Silla Dictator, reſiſted that mariage, yet the
ennemitie of Silla could not withdrawe Caeſars loue frō 
                  Cornelia:
Caeſar loued his Cornelia ſo well, that by marieng of
her,Marius. he was depriued of his office of the Flamines. Alſo he loſte
her dowry and heritage, whiche of right by her fell to him.
The ennemitie of Silla made Caeſar to fauour Marius.
                  Enuie of noble peres. This
Marius was ſuche an ennemy to Silla, as Silla and Rome, in
all calamities felt, ſuche is the enuie of noble Princes, that
they ioyne them ſelues in amitie, kindred and alliaūce, rather
where they may aſſure them ſelues of ſtaye and ſtrength then
for anye good affectiō they beare one to an other.The trouble of Ceſar. At this time
Silla bore ſuche authoritie and ſwaye, that by the mariage of
Cornelia, Caeſar was compelled to flie from his ſight, a quartain
ague thē maiſtring him, oftē times for feare he was enforced
to chaūge his abiding places, & many tymes to brybe ye
priuie ſerchers. The heauy diſpleaſure of Silla was mitigated
by the humble interceſſion of the virgines of Veſta. Marcus
Emilius, and Caius Aurelius Cotta his kinſfolke, did all
ſo appeaſe the wrath of Silla, long it was ere that cankered ennemitie
ceaſed. It ſhould ſeme that Silla feared Caeſar muche,

as his talke to thoſe that made ſute for him ſheweth, where he
ſaith.The cauſe why Silla reſiſted Ceſar. He whoſe ſauegarde ye ſeke ſo entierly, intime to come
wilbe an ouerthrowe and deſtructiō to the nobilitie of Rome,
the whiche eſtate of nobilitie was by Silla ſupported againſte
Marius. At in Caeſare vno, multos videbat ineſſe marios,
                  Caeſar.
but in Caeſar alone he ſawe many, Mariās to be conteined. As
yet fortune frowned vpon Caeſar,
                  The enuie of the mightie. great authoritie, & the loftie
countenaunce of his better frendes kept his vertues couched,
wiſedome nothing preuayleth where the enemitie of mightie
princes contrarily affecteth, and where will ruleth and fantaſie
onely leadeth. Authoritie kept vnder Caeſar, who for ſacke
of liuing went into Aſia, and there he ſerued Marcus Thermus
Pretor,
                  Ceſar driuen to ſeke aduentures. with whome Caeſar was of long time brought
vp, this was the firſt time that Caeſar inured him ſelf to warlike
enterprices. Marcus Thermus knowyng the wiſdome of
Caeſar, and his ſubtile politique head, ſent him into Bithinia,
to prepare a nauie of ſhippes. After this he bare office vnder
Seruilius Iſauricus in Cicilia, but that continued a ſhort ſeaſon,
for immediatly after ye death of Silla was bruted through
out all partes, and was certainly knowen vnto Caeſar to bee
true,The death of Silla. he returned ſpedely to Rome. This Silla whyle he liued,
was a cruell enemie to Caeſar. Nowe conceiued Caeſar a certayne
aſſuraunce of aſpiring vnto ſome greate preferremente
through a newe deuiſion begonne at Rome by Marcus Lepidus,
                  Caeſar. whiche deuiſion pacified,Dolobella▪
                   
                  Caeſar and Dolabella fell at variaunce,
but Caeſar not able to matche with the partakers &
confederates of Dolabella, departed to Rhodes, where he became
a dilligent hearer of that great learned man Apolonius
Molo▪
                   an Orator moſt famouſe,Apolonius Molo. through whoſe inſtructions
Caeſar became excellently learned, and during his lyfe,
fauoured the learned. But Caeſar not contented to lyue a ſtudious
life, made warre againſt Mithridates,
                  Mithridates. whoſe forces he
vanquiſhed, and ſetled the ſtate of thoſe countries in quiet, After
this he was choſen at Rome a Tribune, in the whiche office
Caeſar bore him ſelfe very wyſely, thē he enioyed the Queſtorſhip,Cornelia. in his Queſtorſhip Cornelia died, & his Aunte Iulia,
who in a funerall oration were greatly commended, and their

progenie highly extolled, not long after the death of Cornelia
he married Pompeia,
                  Pompeia. this Pompeia was the daughter of
Quintus Pompeius, and nece to Lucius Silla,. In that Caeſar
was Queſtor, the one part of Spayne called Bethica, was
vnder his iuriſdictiō. Where Caeſar making his abode came
vpon a certaine tyme to Gades in the ende of this Prouince,
called Bethica, where there was a temple of Hercules moſte
ſumptuouſly buylded, in which tēple Caeſar eſpied the image
of Alexander the great,The ambitious minde of Ceſar. whiche he very welvewed, & mourned
in harte, as though he had conceiued ſome inward griefe,
for that his actes as yet were nothinge like to the doinges of
Alexander,
                  Alexander. or rather becauſe no famous thinge had bene atchieued
of him at thoſe dayes in the whiche Alexander had
ſubdued a whole worlde. After this Caeſar inflamed with ambition
purpoſed in his harte to attempte great thinges. In
the ſame citie Caeſar dreamed on a nighte as he ſlepte in his
bedde,A ſtraunge dreame of Ceſar. that he enforced vnto inceſt luſt his own mother, which
dreame he opened to the interpretours, who interpreted, that
Caeſar by this dreame ſhould be a conquerour ouer many coū
                  tries,
for by his mother (they ſayde) was ſignified the earthe,
whiche is the mother of all thinges.Artemidorus. 
                  Artemidorus writeth at
large of the interpretation of dreames, both Galen & Hippocrates
in their bookes do declare their grounded argumentes
vpon the ſame,Galen. ſaying,Hyppocrates. when the bodie doth reſte, the mynde
moueth, and purifying the partes of the body gouerneth the
whole houſe, and the mynde maketh perfecte all the actions
of the body. For the bodie ſleping hath no vnderſtanding, fealeth
not, careth not, perceiueth not: to be brief, al ſuch things
as the bodie ſleping cannot do, the mynde waking executeth,
and ſeeth viſible thinges, or heareth thinges that are to bee
hearde, ſhe goeth, ſhe toucheth, ſhe is ſad, ſhe perceiueth, and
vnderſtandeth: finally, what thinge ſoeuer is lyke to happen
vnto the body, that is vnderſtode in ſleape of the mynde, with
many mo argumentes, ſhewing the ſecrete diuination of thē.
But as cōcerning Iulius Caeſar daily more and more he was
incenſed to clyme to dignitie,Ambition. he made verie great ſute and labour
to haue the gouernement of the prouinces of Egipt, but

that ſute preuayled not, then he ſent vnto the highe prieſte no
ſmall giftes for the obteinement of his ſute, of ſuche force is
monie, to leade affectiō, for that whiche honor oftētimes cannot
get, mony & gifts procure, & that which vertue meriteth,
is decided by frendſhip. Although Caeſar ſtoode in choyſe againſt
two mightie perſones for this gouernemēt, yet money
and large giftes made hym ſuperiour. Thus Caeſar by proceſſe
of tyme, aſcended from honor to honor, from dignitie to
dignitie, and was choſen Pretor,Pretor. but from that office he was
vpon certayne cauſes remoued, and at the laſt reſtored thereto
againe, not long after this,Conſul. he was made Conſull with Bibulus,
but Caeſar ruled all thinges. At that tyme Caeſar maried
Calphurnia, the daughter of Lucius Piſo. This Piſo ſucceded
Caeſar in ye cōſulſhip. In this ſeaſon Iulia, Caeſars daughter,
whome he begat of Cornelia, did marie Gneius Pompeius,
for Seruilius Scipio her firſt huſbande, was put from
her, nowe Caeſar made him ſelfe ſtronge by mariages, their
frendſhip couered many frendes, their linked amitie caught
at a becke great & mighty ſupporters,Strength in mariage. by vnited frēdſhip roſe
the magnificent eſtate of Caeſar, honor nowe chaūged Caeſar,
many noble actes were done of him in his conſulſhip, muche
contention & great debate, aroſe on euerye ſyde, fortune fauouring
Caeſar,
                  Frendſhip plē
                     tifull in proſperitie. he lightely purchaſed many frendes, but yet
ther were no ſmal nōber of thoſe outward frēdes, cloked enemies,
as ye end ſhewed. Honorable eſtate is a moſt happy thing
to thoſe magiſtrates that feare God, & in that feare know thē ſelues,Honorable eſtate. for in that eſtate what noble vertues may thei exerciſe,
what compaſſion, howe greate wiſdome, what iuſtice, what
clemencie may they miniſter? as they maye be the vpholders
of vertue, ſo many they be the deſtroyers of vice, the ſwaye of a
whole Realme dependeth ſometime on ye head of one wiſe magiſtrate.A good magiſtrate. As Caeſar grew in power & ſtrength through frēds,
ſo outwardly he aſſaied by martiall attēptes to poſſeſſe ye ſeignorie
ouer many regions, he ſubdued the Germaines that inhabited
beyonde the Ryuer Rhene, and made a brydge ouer
it, he conquered the Frenche mē, then he ſet on this our Ilāde
of Brytaine, a people very warrelike and fearce, who through

diſcorde and diuiſion among them ſelues, fell at lengthe into
the handes of Caeſar,
                  Deuiſion in Britayne brought ſeruitude. and for a certaine tyme payde tribute vnto
the Empire of Rome, and gaue them hoſtages. The whole
manner of Caeſars entring was thus. Whē 
                  Iulius Caeſar had
ended his mightie and perillous battayles,The cōming of Ceſar into this Ilande. about the floudde
Rhene, he marched into the Realme of Fraunce: at the ſame
time repairing with a Frenche multitude, his legiōs, but the
chiefe cauſe of his warre in Fraunce was,The time. that of long tyme,
he was moued in mynde, to ſee this noble Iſlande of Brytane,
whoſe fame for nobilitie was knowen and bruted,The perſone. not onely in
Rome, but alſo in the vttermoſte partes of the worlde. Iulius
Caeſar was wroth with them,The cauſe. becauſe in his warre whiche he
kepte in Fraunce,The fame and glorie of Brytaine. the fearce Britaines ayded the Frenchmen,
and did mightely encounter battayle with the Romaines:
whoſe prowes and valiaunt fight, ſlaked the proude and loftie
ſtomakes of the Romaines, and droue thē to diuerſe haſardes
of battayle. But Caeſar as a noble warrier, preferring nobilitie
and worthines of fame,The prowes of Iulius Ceſar. before money or cowardly quietnes:
ceaſed not to enter on the fearce Britaines, and thereto
prepared his ſhippes, the wynter tyme followyng, that aſſone
as oportunitie of ye yeare ſerued, he might paſſe with al power
againſt thē.The maner howe. In the meane tyme, Caeſar inquired of the marchauntes,
who with marchaundiſe had acceſſe to the Iſlande:
as concerning the quantitie and bignes of it, the faſhion and
manner of the people,Ceſars communication with the marchauntes, as concerning ye land of Britaine. their lawes, their order, and kinde of
gouernment. As theſe thinges were in all pointes vnknowen
to Caeſar, ſo alſo the marchauntes knewe no more then the
places bordering on the ſea ſide. For, the Brytaines fearinge
the trayterous & diſſembling hartes of aliauntes, politikely
repelled them by this meanes:The warre & pollitike gouernement of the Britayns Aliauntes in tyme trayterous. For no ſtraunger was ſuffered
to enter from his ſhippe on the lande, but their marchaū
                  diſe
were ſolde at the ſeaſide. All nations ſought to this land,
the felicitie of it was ſo greate, that the Grekes knowing and
taſting the commoditie of this Iſlande, called it by a Greeke
name Olbion.
                  Britayn ſome tyme called of the Grekes Olbion. whiche ſignified a happie and fortunate countrie,
though of ſome after it was called Albion, time ſo chaū
                  ged
the firſte letter, as at this daye Ebrancke nowe called

Yorke Londō is called for ye towne of king Lud. Caeſar therupon
before he would marche with his armie againſt the people
of Brytaine,
                  Caius Voluſenus, Embaſſadour to Britayne. ſent Caius Voluſenus a noble man of Rome,
a valiaunt and hardie Captaine, as Embaſſadour to the Britaines,
who as he thought by his Embaſſage, ſhoulde knowe
the faſhion of the Iſlande, the manner of the people, and their
gouernement. But as it ſemeth, the Embaſſadour was not
welcome: for, he durſt not enter from his ſhippe to do his maiſters
Embaſſage, ſo that Caeſar could know nothing by him.
Yet Caeſar not ſo contented, ſent an other Embaſſadour, a
man of more power, ſtomacke, & more hardie, Comas Atrebas
by name,Comas Atrebas, ſeconde Embaſſadous from Ceſar. who would enter as an Embaſſadour, to accompliſhe
the will & expectation of Caeſar, Comas Atrebas was
ſo welcome, that the Britaines caſte him in pryſon: Embaſſages
were not common among them, nor the curteous vſage
of Embaſſadours knowen at thoſe dayes. All theſe thinges,
made Caeſar more wroth, and deſirous to aſſaie the vncourteous
Britaines.
                  Caſſibelan king of London, at the arriue of Ceſar Caſſibelane a worthy prince In thoſe dayes Caſſibelan was king of Londō,
this Caſſibelon was a prince of high wiſedome, of manly ſtomacke,
and valiaunt in fight: and for power and valiauntnes,
was choſen of the Brytaines, chiefe gouernour and king. Diſſention
and cruell warre was among them, through the diſagreing
of diuerſe kinges in the lande. The Troynouauntes,
enuied the ſtate of Caſſibelan. The ſonne of Immādrubalus,
hearing of the comming of Caeſar,
                  The Troinouantes by treaſon let in Ceſar. did flie traiterouſly to Caeſar:
The Troynouauntes fauoured Immandrubalus parte, &
thereupon promiſed, as moſt vile traytours to their countrie,
an entering to Caeſar, & to do him ſeruice and homage, who
through a ſelfe wil, & priuate fauour of one, ſought the ruine
of their countrie,Domeſticall treaſon. and in the ende, their owne deſtruction. But
Caſſibelan gaue many ouerthrowes to Caeſar, & mightely encountred
with hym, ſo inuincible was the part of Caſſibelan:
that by treaſon of the Troynouauntes, not by manhode of Caeſars
power, entring was geuen. What houſe can ſtand, wherin
diſcorde doth broyle?Treaſon a cō
                     fuſion to the mightieſt dominions. What ſmall power is not able to enter
the mightieſt dominions or regions: yea, to ouercome the
ſtrongeſt fortreſſe, treaſon opening the grate, treaſon geuinge

paſſage. Although Caeſar by treaſon entered, (ſo Caeſar wryteth):Treaſon.
Yet the fame of Caeſar was more commended, for his
enterpriſe into Brytaine, & victorie there gottē: then for al his
cōqueſte, either againſt Pompeie, or any other natiō. For in a
piller at Rome,A ſentēce grauen of Britayne, in the commendatiō of Ceſar. this ſentence was engrauen: Of all the dominions,
citties, and regions, ſubdued by Caeſar, his warre
attempted againſt the fearce Brytaines, paſſeth all other. After
this ſorte as you haue hearde, Caeſar entred our Iſland of
Britayne by treaſon. But let all good Engliſh hartes beware
of diuiſiō and foreſee the plague yt falles euen vpō the diuiſers
cōſider the nobility of this our goodly Ilande, ye noble princes
in their gouernement, the great felicitie of this land and people
aboue all other nations, and nowe preſently the frutes of
moſt godly gouernement which we reape of this preſent ſtate
of ſo noble a prince, of ſo great wyſdome, of ſo ſinguler learning,
of ſo manifolde and rare vertues, by whoſe bleſſed gouernement
we haue liued in peace onely of all other nacions,
from her maieſties firſt gouernement: if Marcia that noble
queene ſometime of this Iſlande gouerner, be cronacled for
wyſdome & noble actes. if queene Helena of this lande gouerner,
ſometime the mother of Conſtantine ye great Emperour
of Rome, be cōmended in hiſtories yet in no part for learninge
and nobilitie ſhe can be equal with this our noble gouerner,
who with all lenitie proceadeth in lawe and with iuſtice holdeth
ouer her people the Scepture. Though of late certayne
vipers, not contented with ſo bleſſed ſtate, haue ſediciouſly
ſought by marciall attempt in opē armour to ſubuert ſo worthy
gouernement: But as all rebelles haue the frutes of their
enterpriſe to be their owne ſhame, deſtruction, and perpetual
ignomini, ſo God who createth princes, and kepeth them in
gouernemēt, hath heaped due plagues vpon their treaterous
attemptes, & ſubuerted their purpoſes of whome this ſaying
of Plato in his bookes of gouernement may be verified, Quipatriè
hoſtis eſt ſibi peſsimus as who ſhould ſaye, who ſo ſeketh
a miſchiefe to his owne countrey, on him ſelfe chiefly the
ruine falleth, that ſtate in no part declining, & therefore bothe
Homere and Plato, conſidring the great maieſtie of princes,

intituleth them with theſe names Agos Andron Diotrepheas
Poimenas that is gouernours of men, foſtered vp by the
tuition of God the ſhepeheards of his people, and as the wyſe
Philoſophers write, Reges & ſapientes fiunt à potentibus
cauſis ideo talium vt potentes ſunt, neceſſario valide ſunt
cauſe: kynges and wyſe men are placed in gouernement to doe
ſome great enterpryſe and maruelous factes, and therefore
the cauſes muſt be great & marueilous, why thoſe ſhould
be mighty, as who ſhould ſaye, God hath created princes and
wyſe men to ſome maruelous purpoſe, and the ende whereunto
God hath appointed them ſhall neuer be fruſtrate: let
traytours ſurmyſe what they will, & geue what attempt they
dare for the prince is Gods annointed. Immediatly after the
ſame time yt he warred in Brytaine his mother Aurelia died,Auraelia.
then Iulia his daughter died, & not long after, his nece begotten
of his daughter Iulia and Pompeia,
                  Iulia. As Caeſar gat honor
vpō honor, ſo he ſpared no princely liberalitie, for of him were
commonly geuen great offices, large fees, by which meanes
he purchaſed more to his aduauncemēt, thē by any other way.
For his liberalitie and the continuall preferrement of thoſe
that deſerued wel, wanne hym greatter nombers of moſte valiant
ſouldiers, with inuincible courages, that remayned loyall
& faithfull vnto him, as long as they lyued, then did his legions.Ceſars waye to honor.
                  Caeſar then by all meanes ſought the fauour of all people,
and moſte of all his ſtudie was to linke him ſelfe in mightie
kindredes & honorable alliances, whoſe eſtates were moſt
dreaded, and whoſe frendſhippes harbored moſte frendes, as
with Marius & Pompeie.
                  The ſtrength of noble peres And therupon to kepe the kyndred
whiche was betwene Pompeie and him, though his daughter
Iulia was dead,Iulia. whome Pompeie had maried, he procured
Octauia his ſiſters daughter to be married to Pompeie,
and that he on the other ſide condicionally ſhoold marrie Pō
                     peies
daughter, and ſo it came to paſſe, that where as Pompeies
daughter ſhould haue married Fauſtus Silla,
                  Condicionall mariages. now Caeſar
marieth her, ſo honor maketh mariages, & hope of ſtrēgth
and authoritie, by frendes lynketh in noble houſes croſſe marriages,
and manye tymes that are vnlawefull, all this yet

notwithſtanding, warres fell at laſt betwene Pompeie and
Caeſar, marriage was made of frendſhip, nowe ambition of
Pompeie and Caeſar, regardeth neither frendſhip nor marriage.Ambition.
                  Quia Pompeius parem, Caeſar non patitur. For now
Pompeie wyll haue no mate,Pompeie no mate. nor Caeſar cannot ſuffer a ſuperiour.
Lucan the Poete writeth at large of the warres betwene
Pompeie and Caeſar,
                  Ceſar no ſuperiour. whiche were to long to wryte of,
but in the ende Pompeie had the ouerthrowe, and deſire of
glorie, or the poſſeſſion of kyngdomes in ambitious perſones,
knoweth neither God, nor obeieth nature, it maketh enemies
frendes, and frendes enemies, the father hūteth for the death
of the ſonne, the ſonne likewyſe for the fathers death, deſier of
kyngdome in ambitious perſones, neither regardeth God,
nor nature, ye moſte cruell factes of Atreus and Thyeſtes, for
kingdomes ſake are not vnchronicled, ye cruell hatred of Eteocles
and Poliniſes, & the ſlaughter committed by them, is wel
knowē to thoſe which reade Euripides,
                  Honor diſſolueth mariages. 
                  Seneca, & Sophocles,
for in them they ſhall ſee the bloudy and miſchieuous actes cō
                  mitted
by noble peares: ſo you ſe in Pompeie & Caeſar throughly
on euery ſyde, that where as mariage was made to the
great increaſe of honour and frendſhip betwene them, nowe
they are become enemies and mortall foes, that hath honour
cauſed. Where is the mariage become nowe that was betwene
Pompeie and Caeſar, Iulia is dead whome Pompeie
maried, yea, the frendſhip died alſo, Caeſar had then Pompeies
daughter to wyfe,Honor knoweth no kindred in tyrants Pompeie driuen to flight. honour biddeth Caeſar not care for
that, nowe there is no kindred, for honor knoweth no kindred.
Pōpeie being dreuē to flight, ſet vnto Tolomie king of Egipt,
requeſting hym of ayde & ſuccour in this his extremitie & nede
(in recompēce of the great frendſhip and courteſie which his
father had receiued before tyme of hym) ye kyng ſent him word
that willingly he woulde do for hym, as muche as he deſired,
(but vnto the miſerable that are fallen from highe dignities
into aduerſitie, rarely is faithe obſerued, and littell helpeth
olde frendſhip) for as Pompeie was paſſing in a ſmall boate
towarde the ſhoare to fynde the kynge Tolomey, he was by
his commaundement ſlayne before he came to lande, of Septemius
                  
and Achilla, who hoping by killing of him to purchaſe
the frēdſhip of Caeſar. Who now being come vnto the ſhoare,
and entring Alexandria, had ſodainly preſented vnto him the
head of Pompeie the great, whiche he in no wyſe woulde beholde:
but loking vpon the ryng of Pompeie, he wepte for cō
                  paſſion
of him, vnto whome the ſame once appertayned, conſidering
the ende of the felicitie and greatnes of Pompeie, who
with honour and fame had thrice triumphed, and had bene as
often Conſull in Rome, and had ſo many yeares had the gouernement
of the common weale, and had bene the greateſt
cittezen that euer was, and had alſo obteyned ſo many victories
and dignities, Caeſar thereuppon as Euripides ſaith, had
this ſayinge in his mouth, lawe and right is to be broken for
dominions ſake, for Caeſar being accuſtomed to cōmaunde,
could not ſuſtaine to be without an hoſte.
               
                  If lawe and right be made for naught,Ceſars ſayinges mete for a tyraunt.
                  
                  Let kingdome the inflame,
                  Els right and lawe be in their force,
                  And luſt to dreade the ſame.
               
               Large are the bondes of ſmall kingdomes,A ſmal kingdome. which thorowly
do maintaine iuſtice, with a true and godly religion, which
breadeth obedience and loue in the hartes of ſubiectes, for neither
the ſtrong walles, nor the infinite nomber of people, nor
huge troupes of horſes, neither the large and mightie dominions,
do make the prince inuincible,Loue maketh a prince inuincible. but the loue of the ſubiectes
indiſſolublie knitte and of a pure zeale vowed vnto the
princes ſeruice, for what ſaufegarde was the infinite hoſte of
Xerzes whiche he brought into Grece?Xerxes. was he not fayne to
flye awaye alone, he was neglected abroade, contemned at
home, and died in the end ſorowfully. Caeſar made hym ſtrōg
not only by marriage, but by all other meanes, he made the
moſte parte of the Senate to be his frendes, other ſome by
giftes he allured thereto,Ceſars 
                        •••
                     
                     nes to honor. ſome of their owne will & affection
were drawen thereto, all manner of perſoues of what eſtate &
condition ſo euer they were, perſones guiltie of great crimes,

prodigall and youthfull perſones were ayded and ſupported
by hym, none he excluded, but ſuche as well he durſt not or
weare to beggerly, for thoſe he would ſaye. Ciuell warre had
neade of ſuch as they warre, whom either ſpoyles might helpe
from their miſeries, or preſent death ſhorten their calamimities.
As at Rome Caeſar ſought frendſhippe and amitie ſo
with foraine Princes, on all ſides he ceaſed not to procure
fauour. Caeſar was nowe growen to that dignitie, and ſo
dreaded, that without the knowledge of the Senate, or conſent
of the multitude of the Romaines, he would ayde forrain
Princes with men of warre,The ſubuerſion of Ceſar. at their calling and his appointment
a meruailoos matter to beholde the doinge of Ceſar in
all prouinces and countries,Many princely monumentes erected by Ceſar. where he came, who euer erected
ſome famouſe monument, whiche remayneth at this daye not
onely in Italie, Fraūce, Spayne, but alſo in ye mightie cities
of Aſia and Greece, and in this our Iſland of Britaine, diuers
holdes and fortes were made by him, as Douer, Canterbury,
Rocheſter, the Tower of London, Chicheſter, the caſtel
of Exceſtor, and Salisburye. Ricius Patricius noteth in
his booke, intituled de Regibus Galliae, of ye kings of Fraūce.
That Caeſar being about ye Forreſt of Arden,Ceſar gaue a coller to a Stagge. toke a Stagge,
and cauſed a coller to be put about his necke, wt theſe wordes,
Caeſar hoc me donauit, Caeſar gaue me this. That Stagge
was not killed three hundreth yeare ago, it ſhould ſeme that
this was done of Caeſar in no other reſpecte but that the long
continuing age of that beaſte might be knowen, which before
that time none or very fewe hearing of it,Rodericius Patricius. would beleue to be
true. All men nowe became aſtoniſhed at Caeſars actes, they
were ſo princely, and all his doinges ſo famouſe, and ſo proſperouſly
ſucceſſe fel to him,Curio. for in al forrein warres he felt no
ſiniſter fortune,Caius Antonius. but by his deputies of the whiche Caius Curio,
died in Africa, Caius Antonius in Illiria, fell into the
handes of his enemies, and ſo Caeſar triumphed with prayſe
among the Romaynes.Scipio. He had to do againſt Scipio, whome
be ouer came with Pompeie,
                  Pompeie. and his ſonnes. Fraunce felt his
victories, Alexandria, Pontus, Africa, Spaine, Sueuia, Germanie,
                  Ceſars victories.
                  Pannonia, Heluetia, Allobroges, with many mo,

whiche were tedious and ouerlong to recite, ſo moche in all
places and regions his fame roſe. In matters appertaininge
to the ciuile lawe, he was a man of profounde knowledge, in
iudgement ſeuere, but in all thinges he proceaded according
to truthe and equitie, the mightie volumes of the ciuile lawe
were brought into a certaine order of breuitie by him,The ciuile law corrected by Ceſar. who explicated
the moſte neceſſary pointes and cauſes of the ſame, &
as the manner is, euery Emperour by augmenting decrees
and ſtatutes haue much enlarged it againe. Iuſtinian longe
after Caeſars dayes broughte the Code,
                  Iuſtinian. the Digeſt, and the
Pandecte into a more breuitie by the helpe of Tribunianus,
Doritheus and other, Caeſar did ſo much fauour learninge,
that he augmēted plētious ſtore of many goodly antiquities
both in Greeke and Latyne: for Marcus Varro had chardge
of Caeſar,
                  Varro. to get in all places the moſt goodlye monumentes
that were to be founde in the commendation of learninge.
Ignatius that famous learned man wryteth in this maner of
Iulius Caeſar ſaying,Ignatius cō
                     mended Ceſar in him no excellent qualitie lacked that
was meete and requiſite for anye noble perſonage, in him
there was counſell, eloquence, greate and profounde wyſedome,
valiant ſtrength of bodye, a conſtant heade, experte in
knowledge of Marſhiall attemptes, and alſo in the moſt excellent
artes and ſciences very noble, hee was endued with
a moſt liberall hart, where with hee purchaſed to him the
hartes of the people,Ceſars commendations. by the which vertue hee ſtepped from a
meane eſtate, to beare the chiefe ſtroake and regement in the
worlde.Plutarche vppon Ceſar. 
                  Plutarcus intreatynge of the life of famous Princes
and gouernours, noteth this Iulius Caeſar to be a man of a
goodly parſonage, of ſtature taule, in coloure white, whoſe
body no delicatenes of pryncelye fare coulde make grooſe or
fatte,Ceſars perſonage. his eyes in coulour black, his head was ſo diſtempered
that oft hee was payned with the heade ache, in his life time
twiſe or thriſe the falling ſickenes tormēted him,Ceſar taken with the falling ſicknes. his heares
of his heade ſo thynne, that baldnes continuallye encreaſed
more and more, althoughe by medicine hee ſpared no coſte to
remedy that imbecillitie of nature,Ceſars cōcubines. diuerſly hee was ſpotted
wyth adultrie as with Poſthuma the wife of Seruius Sulpitius,
                  
with Loliae the wyfe of Manlius Gabinius, with Tartalin
the wyfe of Marcus Craſſus,
                  Lolia. wyth Muſia the wyfe of
Gneius Pompeius, aboue all withe Saruillia the mother of
Marcus Brutus, in forreine Countries where hee came, the
like cryme of adultrie followed him, for of his men of warre
hee was openly taunted for thoſe vyces,Tertalm. in theſe woordes.
Vrbani ſeruate vxores,
                  Muſia. 
                  quia Mecum caluum adduximus
auro in Gallia ſtuprum emiſti, hic ſumpiſti mutium. Full
happy had Caeſar bene if ye Chroniclers of ages & time could
not but ſpeake wel of him in all pointes,Seruilia. the ſecret doinges of
Caeſar as they were not vnknowē to God, ſo thei paſſed not in
obliuion to the world, that whiche for feare men than ſpeake
not in ye life of Caeſar,
                  The ſecrete doing of princes vnknowē to the poſteritye. fame afterward euerlaſtingly bloweth
abroade, and he as he was remayneth chronicled. A maruelous
and hyd ſecrete prouidēce of God, that in no age it hath
beene ſeene, but godly Princes haue alwayes beene cōmended,The prouidence of God in Princes.
the wicked as they were Chronicled, therefore Princes
haue neede to be very ware and circūſpect in their gouernement
that the ſubiect may reioyce of the actes of the Prince,
the ennemy not to laughe at it, nor the Chronicles of the poſterities
in wrytinge or monumentes of antiquityes to note
their follies leſte that maye be ſayde whyche Homere noteth
of the Greekes.Why Princes ought to be ware in gouernment.
               
               
                  The auncient time may well recorde,
                  moſt filthye to beholde,
                  Their workes which vgglye ſhowd in ſhape,
                  whoſe ſtate deſert enrolde.
               
               For all this Caeſar was of diete temperate inſomuch that
his ennemies would report of him, and ye which alſo Marcus
Cato would ſay, of all Princes Caeſar alone came to deſtroy
the common wealth ſober. Hereuppon the Senate ſoughte
Caeſars deathe,The cauſe of Caeſars death becauſe hee ſoughte to aſpier to a ſoole regimēt,
their Counſels were taken now by two and thre, and ſo
by many heades, throughe whiche meanes pryuilye they
wrought their foule conſultaciō, which ended a moſt deteſtable

conſpiracie, their treaſon had the more ſpeedy ſucceſſe becauſe
the commons for the moſte parte grudged at the ſoole
eſtate of tyrannye which Caeſar ſought for,Tyrannie. the comons openlye
ſpake ill of that eſtate, and deſired inſtantly patrones and
defendours of their aunciente libertyes, diuers billes were
caſt vp in the place of the Senate aſſembled, againſt yt eſtate,
which Caeſar hūted at, many meanes wer ſought to declare
the full minde and purpoſe of the Romaynes: Certaine mē
vnder the Image of Brutus a famous Senator and Conſull
of Rome caſt theſe woords:Brutus. 
                  Vtinam viueret Brutus quia reges
eiecit, & Conſul primus factus eſt, I woulde Brutus
were a lyue becauſe hee baniſhed Tyrauntes who was
made the firſte Conſul. Vnder the Image of Caeſar thys
verſe was tituled, Hic quia Conſules eiecit Rex Poſtremus
factus eſt.
                  Caeſar. 
                  Caeſar becauſe hee putte downe the ſtate of Conſuls
was made the laſt kynge. The number of the conſpiratours
that were againſte him were 60.Tyrant. & more, the chiefe of
the treaſon were Caius Caſſius,
                  The nomber of the conſpiratours. 
                  Marcus Brutus, Quintus Ligarius,
Decius, Marcus Spurius, Attilius Cimber: theſe
chiefe conſpyratours were long in cōſultacion in what place
they might haue beſt oportunitye and ſleight conueighances
to murther him, ſome ſought meanes that in Campo Martis
a multitude beinge gathered hee myghte be caſte downe the
bridge ſodaynly, other deuiſed other practiſes. When the
Senate ſhoulde be gathered in the Ides of March in ye court
of Pompeie,
                  What maruelous things happened before the death of Ceſar. a little before Caeſars death many ſtrange thinges
apeared and wonderful. At Capua certaine monuments
were caſt downe throughe couetouſnes whiche were erected
vnto the honor of the dead wyth certaine pooſes wrytten vppon
them among which there was in one monument a table
of braſſe founde whereon were grauen theſe Letters.
               
                  VVhen the bones of Capis shoulde be caſt vp and vncouered,
                  A prophecie of Ceſars death.
                  it woulde followe that hee whiche shoulde be of the
progenie and lyne of Iulius, shoulde be murthered by the
handes of his nere kinsfolke, and forthwith Italye shoulde
be plagued with many calamities This Capis was the father
of Anchiſes, and graundfather to Eneas this was not

vnknowen in Rome nor hid from Caeſar, this was the firſt
foreſhowe of Caeſars death. This one thinge is written for a
trouth of Cornelius Balbus a very familiar frend of Caeſar yt
ſone after the ſame time,Cornelius Balbus. a little before Caeſars death, a goodly
race of horſes which Caeſar had conſecrated holy to Mars,
in paſſinge ouer the fludde Rubicon were ſene to go wythout
a keper,Another forſhowe of his death. which horſes hee did know certainly afterward
neuer eate meate, but wepte muche. Spurina a ſouthſayer
warned Caeſar by a ſtrange ſight which hee ſawe in a ſacrifyce
that Caeſar ſhould beware of one danger which woulde
not be finiſhed or the Ides of Marche were paſt.The warning of Spurina to Ceſar The daye before
the ſame Ides,The Ides of Marche. a certaine birde named Regalis, a kynges
byrde, hauing a baye bough in the mouth, flying into the court
of Pompeie, was torne a ſunder of many other fowles purſewyng
the ſame fowle from the next woode.Regalis. The night before
Caeſar was murthered:Ceſars dreame. He dreamed that ſome tyme he
was carried aboue the cloudes flying, and ſome time to be hād
in hand with Iupiter, Calphurnia Caeſars wyfe dreamed that
ſhe ſawe in a viſion the toppe of her houſe to fall downe,Ceſars wiues dreame. & her
huſband to be woūded through his body being in her boſome,
and ſodainly the dores of the chambers opened of them ſelues.
What with theſe thinges and his craſed health, Caeſar was
long in doubte whether he might at home tarie and ſo put of
and delaye all ſuche thynges as he was before determined to
conſult vpon with the Senate. Nowe marke howe his death
was procured and furthered,Decius Brutus 
                  Decius Brutus the chiefe traitour
and meanes of that conſpiracie, exhorted Caeſar that he
would not breake of, or make fruſtrate ſo goodly and greate
aſſemble now loking for him. Se what miſfortune hong ouer
Caeſar, a certaine man of good wyll meating Caeſar gaue into
his handes a litle ſcrole whiche vttered the whole treaſon, but
Caeſar not peruſing ye contētes thereof, helde it in his left hād
mingling it with other wrytinges, Caeſar at the ſame tyme
entering the place where he was murthered, perceiued many
ſacrifices to be offered of Spurina, but Caeſar ſetting lyght by
that religion,Man purpoſeth and God diſpoſeth. and accompting Spurina as falſe of his prophecies,
becauſe the Ides of Marche were come without harme

(as he thought,) he ſayd to Spurina: the Ides are come; but
Spurina aunſwered,Spurina. but they are not yet paſt, not doubtinge
any miſhappe placed himſelfe in his ſeate, the conſpiratours
gathered aboute him by and by, And one whoe was of
the conſpiracy approched neare, as to demaunde ſome thinge
at his handes, vnto which demaunde Caeſar geuinge eare, all
the conſpiratours compaſſed him very ſtraightlye on euerye
ſyde.Ceſars ſayinge. Then Caeſar forſeeing what would happen to himſelfe
made an exclamation and ſayd this is violence. Then Caſſius
woūded him beneath the necke, Appianus ſayth that Caſſius
wounded Caeſar on the face, other ſome in one place, and
ſome in another, Caeſar beinge ſo wounded and on euerye
ſyde ſeing many more weapons drawen to wounde him with,
toke part of his gowne in his righte hande, and couered his
heade therewith, and with his left hande he drewe downe the
ſkirt thereof, euen vnto his ſlippers, and ſo with all ſeemelines
fell downe dead, all partes of his body decently couered,
and ſo hauinge receyued three and twenty wounds yelded vp
his ghoſte,Xxiii. Woūds none of his woundes was mortall as the Phiſition
Antiſtius iudged, but a thruſt which hee had in his breſte.Antiſtius.
At the firſt ſtroke he gaue a ſighe without any word, but whē
                  Brutus whom hee had ſubſtituted his ſeconde heyre began to
ſet vppon him, Caeſar then ſpake this laſte worde, what thou
my ſonne?Beaſtly ingratitude. As who ſhould ſay if thou whom I loued, do ſeeke
this villanie, If thou whom my deſartes moued to beare intier
affection towarde mee, haſt ſo ill rewarded my benefites
beſtowed vppon the, what may I loke for at other mens handes,
whom neyther benefite hath moued, nor deſert conſtrayned?Ceaſar dead.
When Caeſar was murthered euerye one that murthered
him fledde away, theyr ill conſcience wounded them, and
theyr good deſartes cauſed them to retyre into ſtartinge holes,
Now hee lyeth alone vndreaded, whom manye feared, &
obeyed, hee lyeth without honour, that all people, Princes &
Regions for vertue dreaded, and for worthines honoured.
               Three of his ſeruauntes caryed him home beinge dead of all
theſe woundes. The mynde of the conſpiratours was to caſt
the body of Caeſar dead into the fludde Tiber, and to do many
               
                  
                  The warres of Pompeie and Caeſar,
both Romaynes.
                  
                     THe thirtye yeare after the death of Silla,
bloudy & cyuill warres was moued betwene
Pompeie, & Caius Iulius Caeſar,
the which roſe vppon this occaſion, Caius
Iulius Caeſar ſought to haue himſelf
made Conſull hee beinge abſente from
Rome before hee would departe oute of
Fraunce, for Caeſar ledde with this conſideration, thoughte
that if hee ſhoulde retourne to Rome a priuate man withoute
the dignitye of the Conſulſhippe, that his ennemyes woulde
accuſe him, and alſo ſeeke to ouerthrowe him, ſo fearefull is
the ſtate of the mighty and ambitious perſons, to feare their
ſtate and continuance, wherin Caeſar ſhould not onlye ſeeme
to feare many, but alſo to offende many, and the commonalty
of the Romaynes at the demaunde of ye 
                     Tribunus Pompeie
beinge Conſull agreinge to it, commaunded a conſideration
to be had of Caius Iulius Caeſar in this peticion, after that the
ennemyes of Iulius Caeſar were exhortinge thereto, that in
no caſe they ſhould ſuffer any ſuche thinge, wherevppon Lentulus,
& Marcus Marcellus being Conſulles, a decree of the
Senate was made,The decree of the Senate. yt 
                     Caeſar muſte diſmiſſe his whole power
before a certaine day appointed of yt Senate, if Caeſar would
not, then ſhould it be manifeſt to the Romaines, that he pretended
miſcheues againſt the common wealth, wherevppon
the enemyes of Caeſar lincked themſelues to noble Pompeie,
ſuch as were the frendes of Caeſar were againſt this decree of
yt Senate, certaine Tribunes, Marcus Antonius, Quintus
Caſſius, Curio, they ſought earneſtly that the benefite before
promiſed ſhould not be taken from Caeſar, forthwith the Senate
made this decree, that the Conſuls ſhould foreſee and other
Magiſtrates, that the common wealthe of the Romaynes
take no hurte, thereby, this forme of wordes the Senate
vſed as oft as they gaue cōmaundement to the Conſuls as againſte

ſeditious perſonnes to moue warre, herevppon the
Tribunes departed oute of the Cittie to Caeſar, forthwithe
Fraunce, theyr prouince is appointed to Lucius Domicius, &
a generall muſter is had throughoute all Italye by the Couſuls
and by Pompeie. Caeſar ſheeweth that hee is contented
to referre the iudgemente of this his ſtate to the people, and
Marcus Tullius Cicero did propounde equall conditions of
peace and quietnes for them both, that both Caeſar and Pompeie
ſhoulde diſmiſſe and laye downe theyr armye,Cicero, and that
Pompeie ſhoulde for quietnes ſake goe into Spayne his prouince,
and Caeſar on the other ſyde ſhoulde be made Conſull
at Rome. Caeſar woulde receiue theſe conditions, but the
frendes of Pompeie were againſt it.Caeſar. When Caeſar ſawe the
crueltye of the Senate againſt him on Pompeies ſyde, and
alſo did certainlye knowe the generall takinge vppe and muſtringe
for men of warre againſt him, then he thought yt cauſe
to be iuſt to defende himſelfe from violence by force of armes,
and wyth all haſt hee brought his armye neare to the Cittye
of Rome, the comminge of Caeſar beinge knowne, the Conſulles
and Pompeie fledde out of Italye and paſſed into Epirus
to the Cittye Dirrhachium,
                     Conſuls. wher they did gather out of
Greece and Aſia as great a power as they were able.Pompeie. This
was the beginninge of that warre betweene Pompeie and
Caeſar, by theſe cyuill warres, the aunciente fourme of regimente
amonge the Romaynes was chaunged, which ſlode
by Conſuls of longe time, after this amonge the Romaynes
they had the gouernment of one, as in a ſole kingdome. Caeſar
before he came to Rome made haſt to take Pompeie. who
at that time was at Brunduſium, Caeſar did beſiege the ſame
Cittye but Pompeie went awaye by night priuilye, the inhabitantes
of Bruuduſium gaue vp themſelues to Caeſar, after
this Caeſar wēt to the Citie of Rome, & in the Senate declared
that of neceſſitye he was compelled to make this defence.
Hee promiſed the Romaynes that hee would not followe the
cruelty of Sylla & Marius,
                     The diſſimulation of Ceſar. he exhorted yt whole Senate, that
they would gouerne the common wealth with him, and willed
them to ſende Embaſſadours to Pompeie. Caeſar did innouate

nothinge at Rome or made anye newe alteration, but
haſted himſelfe to ye armye of Pōpeie which was in Spaine,
Hee commended the gouernmente of Rome to Lepidus in
his abſence, and Italye to Marcus Antonius. Caeſar a fewe
dayes after went into Spaine, and in Spayne hee forced the
hoſt of Pōpeie thorow lacke of victuels & for famine to yelde,
and ſo he ioyned to him the Spaniardes, after this he tooke
Maſſilia,
                     Maſſalia. a moſt renowmed Citye and commendable by force
of armes, an old auncient habitation of the Iewes: this Maſſilia
was a friende to the Romaynes. In the meane tyme
Lepidus had obtayned at Rome that Caeſar might be made
Dictator:Lepidus. After this Caeſar returned to Rome and gathered
together an aſſemblye of the Conſuls and Senators, in the
which aſſemble, hee did ordaine manye Lawes and decrees
profitable for the common wealthe, and toke order for corne
and grayne to be brought to the Cittye of Rome as the Dictator
geeueth order, hee made himſelfe Conſull, and Saruillius
Iſauricus wyth him, and after the eleuenthe daye, he left
his Dictatorſhippe, beinge contente with the ordinary name
of the Conſull, and then he commaunded the Citty of Rome
to be gouerned by Saruilius beinge Conſull at that time.Saruilius.
                  
                  Whereas many troubleous and ſeditious Cittizens thorow
hope of new lawes to be made, had gotten great treaſure of other
mens, & he ordayned lawes Do omytionibus & vſuris,
hee made that the value of thinges ſhould remaine all one as
they were before the warres, and many other notable things
hee deuiſed for the common wealthe, and Saruillius beinge
Conſull, defended thoſe thinges of iudgemente. Afterwarde
this Saruillius baniſhed out of the Cittie Celius the Pretor,
whiche Celius ſtyrred vp the people wyth a certayne hope of
newe lawes and chaunge of gouernmente againſt Caeſar to
rayſe a ſeditious tumulte.Celius. 
                     Celius lincked himſelfe with Milo,
                     Milo.
                     Milo gathered a great company of ronagates to come to
Rome, but both Celius and Milo were killed in their enterprice
in the 700. yeare of the building of Rome, v. monethes
Caeſar beinge Conſull, ſayled into Epirus againſt Pompeie,
and whē 
                     Pompeie was at Dirrhachiū, Caeſar marched with

his power to him, and there made diuers Caſtels and holdes
to incloſe Pompeie, althoughe in often ſkirmiſhes Caeſars
men of warre had the vpper hande, yet in one great battaile
Caeſar,
                     Ceſars ſoyle. was ouercome in the which Caeſar loſte 900. men of
warre, from thence Caeſar departed into Theſalia, by reaſon
of famyne and ſcarſitye of vittuels, was compelled to ſeeke a
more plentious countrye for his prouiſion.Pompeie. 
                     Pompeie purſued
Caeſar beinge puffed vp with hope of victorye for his ſucceſſe
at Dirrhachiū, Pompeie comming into Pharſalia, and being
but a Germaine myle from Caeſar, in that part of Theſſalia
ouercame Pompeie, and there were killed in that battaile
1500. men, and toke priſonners 2400. the cauſe that ſo many
priſoners were taken, was Caeſar himſelfe, for Caeſar (the
ennemyes ſcattered and retyringe) cryed out miles parce ciuibus,
thou man of warre fauour Cytizens, by this meanes
they yealded themſelues voluntarilye: mercye is a ſinguler
vertue in ſuch extremitie of battayle to geeue life to manye,Mercy a ſinguler vertue.
it winneth the ennemye, and honour perpetuall to the Captayne.
Pompeie flyinge came to Lariſſa, from thence he ſayled
to Mitelenie, where Cornelia his wyfe did make her
abode, Pompeie turned to ye lodginge of Cratippus the Philoſopher, not enteringe the Cittye, wyth whom when he had
made his complaint of fortune & diſputed with him to knowe
whether the worlde were gouerned by counſayle and prouidence,Caeſar.
which be doubted of, becauſe he was ouercome of Caeſar,
                     Pompeie.
his parte being the iuſter. For Pompeie defended Rome
and the libertyes of Rome, Caeſar vſurped to a ſole ſtate to
chaunge the ſtate of Rome,Cratippus. 
                     Cratippus made aunſwere: Fatales
eſſe Imperiorum periodo & iam conuerti Romanā
rempublicam in monarchiam. The courſe of kingdomes and
continuance is fatall, and nowe the common wealthe of the
Romaynes is to be tourned into a Monarchye. Pompeie
thinckinge with himſelfe that he might haue in Egipte faithfull
harbour,Man purpoſeth and God diſpoſeth. and that there he might gather a newe power,
repayred thether. In Egipte becauſe Ptholomeus the yonge
kinge being vurype of yeres to gouerne himſelfe, was ſtayed
with the connſayle of others, neyther any thinge paſſed without

the ſufferaunce of his counſellers, herevppon Pothinus
his eunuche, & Theodotus Chius the Scholemaiſter of the
yonge kinge Ptolomeus, and Achillas who was liefetenaūt
of his armye, did longe conſulte whether Pompeie were to
be receyued or no, and this queſtion beinge thorowlye diſputed
and debated on euery ſide, Theodotus wonne them to his
perſwaſion,Theodotus, Achillas. that Pompeie ſhoulde be killed, vrginge them
wyth this ſayinge: a deade man cannot byte, then Pothinus
vttered a ſentence out of Lucan the Poete. Exeat aula qui
vult eſle pius, nulla fides vnquam miſeros elegit amicos,
and hee accuſed Pompeie, who when the Senate of Rome
woulde haue Egipte to be quiet, Pompeie by his retyre thether
doth bringe in fyre brandes of debate and warre. Vppon
this they beinge parſwaded vnto ſo euill a purpoſe: toke order
that Achillas the liefetenaunte of the kinges armye,Falſe frends. and
Septimius a trybune of the people, were ſente oute to murther
Pompeie, this Septimius was ſomtime a Centurion in
the armye of Pompeie, Septimius ſaluted firſt Pompeie in ye
lattaine tongue, and then Achillas greeted him in the Greke
tongue, and willed him to come foorthe of his owne ſhippe
where hee was, wyth his wyfe and his children, and to enter
into the kinges ſhippe, Pompeie fearinge no euill towardes
him, wente into the kinges ſhippe with one truſtye manne:
and goinge oute hee ſpake theſe Verſes of Sophocles: Who
ſo traueleth to any Prince, although he himſelfe be a Prince
of hye eſtate, yet is hee at the will and commaundement of y•
other Prince, thoughe he entered a free man of his owne wil
and pleaſure. Pompeie knew Septimius & ſpake vnto him,
and readinge a great Oration in the which hee did welcome
Ptolomeie, Septimius at vnwares thriſte Pompeie thorow
the body with his ſworde, and then Achillas and other thruſt
theyr weapons in him falling,The death of Pompeie. noble Pompeie in this lamentable
ende ſheewed no deformity of coūtenaunce, but geuinge
a great ſighe, wrapped his head in his garmēt which he wore
on, immediatlye Pompeie beinge thruſte thorowe and killed,
Septimius cutte of his heade, theſe thinges were done wyth
great ſpeede betwixt Caeſar and Pompeie, for Caeſar beinge

Conſull came into Epirus in the monthe of Ianuary, the battaile
fought in Pharſalia was ended the ſame yerre in September
or a little before. Pompeie was killed the firſt day
of October, beinge of age nyne and fiftye yeares, hee was
borne the laſt day of September, this was the ende of noble
Pompeie who atchiued many goodly enterpriſes, profitable
to his countreye before the cyuill warre beganne and vnto
this lamentable end, fortunate for worldly glory, for his vertues
a myrror to many Princes, beloued of all men, this was
that noble Pompeie that toke Hieruſalem that famous Cittye
at the feaſt of Eaſter, 15. yeares before the cyuill warres
began betwene him and Caeſar,
                     Pompeie. this was that Pompeie that
reſtored the dignitye of the hieghe prieſtes to Hircanus, and
brought Areſtobulus with his ii. ſonnes Antigonus and Alexander,
to Rome captiues: what beaſtly ingratitude was
this, Pompeie to be murthered of the yonge kinge Ptolomy
by a falſe trayne and gyle, whom hee had reſtored before into
his kingdome.Beaſtlye ingratitude. Of all examples this is moſt notable whiche
placeth before all men, to flye beaſtlye ingratitude, it geueth
admonition to all men, to noble men and Princes, to ponder
the mutabilitye of fortune, and to beware, but alſo to knowe
that the like calamityes falleth to wyſe men and Princes, as
to meaner perſonnes, as God diſpoſeth ſo pollicye and counſaile
geeueth place in all eſtates,Man purpoſeth and God diſpoſeth. as the ſecrete counſayle of
God determineth, man only purpoſeth and God diſpoſeth.
No man is ſo wyſe that hee can be able to forſee what wyll
happen: neither doth it lye in mans power to preuent and put
of anye calamitye or miſhappe that maye fall, all that Caeſar
coulde obiect againſt Pompeie was this, that Pompeie was
not of neceſſity moued to make that battaile, hee doth rather
accuſe other thē himſelf. Immediatly God ſhewed vēgeance
vppon thoſe murtherers of Pompeie, as ſone as Caeſar came
into Egipte,
                     Caeſar. in the monthe of October hee commaunded all
the murtherers of Pompeie to be killed, ſo God puniſhed by
his heauy wrath bloudſhed.The ende of ye murtherers of Pompeie. Some Hiſtoryes do recorde, that
the murtherers of Pompeie hopinge to receiue ſome greate
rewarde at Caeſars hande, brought the heade of Pompeie to

                     Caeſar, Caeſar conſideringe theyr falſe holde and wilye trayne
in murtheringe of ſo noble a parſonage hanged them vppe.
Other Hiſtoryes recorde that they wente aboute to murther
Caeſar as they did Pompeie, but howe ſoeuer theyr pretence
and purpoſe was, death was theyr reward. The ende of king
Ptolome who was priuye to the murther of Pompeie was
lamentable,Ptolomeie. for hee was drowned in the Sea, at what time
as Caeſar draue the armye of the Egiptians to retyre to Alexandria.
Theodotus ſcholemaiſter to kinge Ptolome, eſcaped
not the vengeance of murther, for a fewe yeres after, Brutus
cauſed him to be hanged vppon a gibbet,Brutus. at what time as
Brutus poſſeſſed Sardes. After the death of Caeſar lamentable
was the ſtate of Cornelia the wyfe of Pompeie, who
wyth greate griefe of minde,Cornelia. ſawe the murther of her huſbande
wyth her children beinge in the ſame ſhippe that Pompeie
was before, immediatlye ſhee was conſtrayned to flye
with her children into Cyprus, from thence ſhe ſent her two
ſonnes to Scipio and Cato her frends, beinge conſtrayned by
her great calamity to ſeeke frends. Her eldeſt ſonne Cneius
Pompeius in Spayne .iiii. yeare after the warres of Caeſar
& Pompeie, was ouercome in a greate mayne battayle, and
retyringe was taken of Caeſars ſouldiours and murthered,
her other ſonne Sextus Pōpeius liued after, who made great
warres agaynſt Auguſtus and Antonius,
                     Sextus Pompeius. after the deathe
of Caeſar hee helde Dominion in Sicilia, hee was Lorde of
thoſe ſeas, hee broughte his power into Bythenia, and helde
Dominion in Niſia and Nicomedia, but afterward being deceyued
of Ticius a chiefe Captaine of Antonius to whom
he yelded himſelfe, was killed of him traytrouſlye agaynſte
the lawe of armes, thus was the ende of the noble ſonnes of
Pompeie, the father dyed in Egipte, the elder ſonne in
Spayne, and the yonger in Aſia: Theſe lamētable examples
geeueth warninge to the ambitious to feare God, to beware
and circumſpecte in the loftye ſtate and highe dignitye of fortune,Ambition.
for honour and glorye are not perpetuall, the wyſeſte
Princes, the nobleſt and valiantes Conquerours, haue bene
deceiued of theyr ſtate at a ſodaine, whoſe lamentable falles,

no counſayle could put of, neyther ſtrengthe of armes coulde
defende,Alexander. or vpholde. Alexander the great fell hee knewe not
howe,Cato. noble Scipio and wiſe Cato dyed a lamentable death,Scipio.
                     Pompeie was deceiued of his hope,Pompeie. and Caeſar thereof by
ambitiō fruſtrate,Caeſar. the beſt leſſon for Princes is to feare God,
for all kingdomes ſayth Plato and moſt floriſhynge, are like
vnto yonge age, which in time will growe feeble and weake,
whiche no wyſedome,Plato. no arte, no counſayle can put of from
thē. Caeſar after his warres fought in Pharſalia being Cōſull
the ſame yere, in the monthe of October he came to Alexandria,
where he beinge vacante from all marſhall affayres, did
heare the readinge of the learned Philoſophers, at the ſame
time, certaine that were the cauſe of Pompeies death, rayſed
a new power againſt Caeſar, but Ceſar put them al to flight,
and vanquiſhed them. In the ſame warre Ceſar was much
ayded by the counſayle and fayth of Antipater,
                     Antipater. who was the
father of Herode: Wherefore Ceſar gaue vnto him all Indie
to be in his Dominion and poſſeſſion. In the meane time
at Rome Calenus and Vatineus ſucceded Ceſar in the Conſulſhippe,Calenus.
in the yeare of the firſt buildinge of Rome 706. &
that Ceſar might haue the name and tytle of a lawfull maieſtrate,Vatineus
hee was made Dictator of Marcus Antonius beinge
abſente,Dictator. and returninge to Rome the ſame yeare hee remayned
there a fyue monthes. The next yeare after whiche was
in the 707. yeare of the buildinge of Rome, Ceſar was made
the thirde time Conſull with Lepidus,
                     Conſull. 3. the ſame yeare in Aphrica
he had great warres agaynſt the frendes of Pompeie
that remayned, but hee ouercame them at the lengthe, there
Petreius killed kinge Iuba and himſelfe,Petreius. 
                     Scipio and Cato
killed themſelues,Scipio. 
                     Aphranius as hee came into the power
of Ceſar was killed:Cato After this Ceſar retourned to Rome, in
the .708. yeare of the buildinge of Rome, and was created
Dictator the thyrde time, for 10. yeare and made Conſull yt
fourth time without a companion, all lawes laye now in hys
power to be gouerned, his worde was the voyce of the whole
Senate, he appoynted all offices and their continuance. In yE
709. yeare of Rome in the monthe of Aprill, he foughte at

                     Munda with the ſonnes of Pompeie, with greate perill of
his life,The perill of Ceſar. when he did make the firſt aſſult vppon his enemies,
200. dartes were caſte againſt him, and late in the eueninge
he wonne the fielde, and murthered of his enemyes 30000.
Spayne beinge in his poſſeſſion, and all prouinces beynge
quieted, hee retourned to Rome in the monthe of October,
where new honours were geeuen to him, he was made Dictator
and Emperour for euer,Dictator. 
                     Et ſacro ſanctus: and that all
Maieſtrates ſhould ſweare to his doinge what he did, ſo a ſole
Monarche was geeuen to him of vniuerſall gouernmente,Ceſars ambition. at
the ſame time he made lawes which he called Leges Iulias of
his owne name: And hee did ordayne the yeare by arte of Aſtronomye,
ſheewinge the courſe and motion of the Planetes
which the poſteritye obſerueth: this rule did Ceſar learne of
that great learned man Soſigenes, whom Ceſar broughte frō
                     Alexandria to Rome, of whom he learned great knowledge
in that arte, by this knowledge many notable thinges be obſerued
in the common wealthe, not onlye by the order of the
yeare and courſe of Planettes times and ſeaſons, but alſo for
Iudiciall matters,The vſe of a Aſtronomye. Hiſtories, and contractes, for plantinge,
plowinge, ſowinge, ſaylinge, and for geeuinge of medicine,
theſe notable frutes of Aſtronomye from auncient times, the
Egiptianes, the Chaldeis and the Greekes, the Romayues
haue from auncient times to the poſteritie obſerued the ende
of Pompere, the Hiſtorye hath ſette forthe, and now the like
chaunge of fortune hath caughte Ceſar, whoſe rewarde for
ambition was death.Ambition. Ambition in the loftye mindes of thoſe
that neyther feare God, nor knowe themſelues, creepeth as a
cankar and filthye leproſye, deſtroyinge all partes, and corruptinge
the ſame: For Ceſar ſeeked a ſole regemente not
contente with his lofty ſtate, but ſuch as liked him: Whereby
Caſſius ſeekinge to be Preator and not obtayninge the ſame,Caſſius.
was the firſt aucthor and cauſe of Ceſars death. This Caſſius
toke counſayle wyth Brutus and with other to attempte this
murther,Brutus and the aucthority and fauour of Brutus which was
great in the common wealth of Rome, lincked to him manye
other conſpirators, the conſpiracy was wrought in the Ides

of March Iulius Ceſar in the courte of Pompeie, was killed
of Brutus and Caſſius,
                     Ceſars death and manye other that were conſpirators
to that murther, beinge ſtickte in with xxiii. woundes:
the ende of this great Prince and Emperour, is amonge all
examples a rare glaſſe for all men to loke vppon, conſider his
dignitye of ſtate, his greate wyſedome, his pollicyes & groū
                     ded
knowledge in all pointes of chiualrye, forget not the mutabilitye
and fall of him, the ingratefull hartes of them that
murthered him, for ye moſt part of them that murthered him
roſe by Iulius Ceſar vnto honour and power.
                  
                     Ceſar beinge deade, peace and quietnes coulde not be maintayned,
although Cicero and other Senators went about to
make peace, for immediatly the next day after Ceſars death,
a decree was propoūded of the Senate,A decree. that all offences paſt
ſhould be remitted, and the death of Ceſar to be forgotten vtterlye,
becauſe otherwyſe the ſtate of the common wealthe
woulde be altered and newe fyer brandes of warre kindled,
but nothinge what they purpoſed came to paſſe, For immediatlye
the Senate to ouer throwe Antonye, they ioyned to
them Octauius Ceſar who ſucceaded afterwarde. Octauius
Ceſar, Antonius, and Lepidus, were in leage together
the ſame yeare, that Ceſar was murthered in the monthe of
Decēber, great was the wrath of God againſt all ye murtherers
of Ceſar. Mar. Tullius Cicero, who was an vmpere betweene
Pompeie and Ceſar was murthered in the monthe
of Ianuary beinge 64. yeares of age,Cicero, his head beinge cut of,
with his righte hande, and put vppon the place of pleadinge
which was called Roſtrum. Antonius and Octauius, purſued
Brutus and Caſſius,
                     Caſſius. 
                     Caſſius killed himſelfe,Brutus 
                     Brutus afterward
commaunded himſelfe to be murthered of Straton,
at the lengthe diſcention aroſe betweene theſe .iii. Octauius
Ceſar,
                     Octauius. 
                     Antonius, and Lepidus, for Antonye hopinge to
obtayne a ſole Empyre, brought out of Egipte a great hoſte
to Rome,Antonius. 
                     Octauius met him with another power and chaſed
him to Alexandria, and there beinge compaſſed in of Octauius,
                     Lepidus.
and hauinge many foyles in battayle, and hearinge a falſe
rumor that Cleopatra had killed herſelfe, he forth wyth murthered

himſelfe, this was done in the .56. yeare of his age, in
the 2. yeare after the death of Iulius Ceſar.
                     Cleopatra. Howe Cleopatra
killed herſelfe who was queene of Egipte and concubyne of
Antonius, ſhalbe declared in the life of Octauius.
                  
                  It is worthye conſideration to ponder theſe loftye and ambitious
Princes, how echone, hoped by the fall of the other to
aſpyre, to a ſole Regiment, and proude loftye ſtate, but ambition
in ſome one, alwayes broyleth, to aſpyre the like, ſo the
ſtate of vſurpers is neuer quiet neyther ſtedfaſte, wythoute
cōtinuaunce many fayned frends, as it appeared in Pōpeie,
and Ceſar, Antonius, Silla, Marius, eche one truſted and
they were deceiued, ſo ponder you ye ſtate of theſe two mighty
perſonnes Pompeie and Ceſar: eche one feared the other,
and eche one hoped to aſpyre aboue ye other, Pompeie caught
his ende vnloked for, and Ceſar for all his wyſedome and pollicye,
ſodainlye fell he knew not howe.
                  Thus yee ſee the ſtate and ende of theſe two loftye perſonnes
what they purpoſed, God otherwyſe determined,
all power is of God, the ſtate of mightye
Princes, theyr continuaunce, theyr ende, reſteth,
onlye in the ſecrete counſayle
of GOO.
(⸫)
               
            
            
               
               OCTAVIVS.
               
               
                  AFter Iulius Caeſar was thus murthered,
whoſe death the moſte parte of the nobilitie reioyced
at,The cauſe of Ceſars death becauſe ſuch an one was taken away
whome for his ambicious mynde to dominion
they did cut of, for thei feared greatly his cruel
and tyrannicall regiment, and many of them enuied his ſucceſſe,
& fortunate eſtate, other ſome his vertues, ſo that their
diuerſe affections in one were linked, to plucke Caeſar from
his throne.No truſt in a kingdome for a tyrant. Nobilitie deceiued Caeſar who by deathe ſoughte
to extinguiſhe that hope whiche Caeſar hunted at. All his aduerſaries
appeared as they were, open enemies, nobilitie beguiled
Caeſar,
                  Caeſar. and all frendſhip lefte hym. Nowe Caeſar is
dead, and his enemies lyue, and whome they woulde not they
after obeye, and of whome by Antonius procurement the violent
ende of Caeſar was ſo reuenged, that none of them ſawe
any quiet tyme of reſte,Murther not vnpuniſhed. for God had rayſed ſuche an one, as
boulted out the murtherers, for as the facte was horrible to
deſtroy ſo noble a gouernour, euen ſo their ende was moſte lamentable,Man maye purpoſe, but God diſpoſeth.
and whereas they thought to cut of all hope and
practiſe of ſole regiment: the Romaynes neuer after ſawe but
a ſole regiment, certaine it is that before the tyme of Tarquinius
Superbus,
                  Tarquinius. kinges helde a ſole regiment, which Tarquinius
rauiſhed the moſte beautifull Lucretia Collatinus wife.Lucretia.
After Tarquinius was baniſhed and his ſtocke, the name of
kinges was baniſhed, and that forme of regiment chaunged,
not that, that eſtate of gouernement was ill, but bycauſe

theyr Princes placed in that ſole and excellente eſtate,Princes tyrauntes. after
theyr will and luſte rulinge, of reaſon and all moderation
neglected, tyrannicall and outragious factes were committed
by them. This was the cauſe that, that eſtate of gouernment
was diſſolued, and chaunged through the euill maners
of Princes, of ſuche force is ſinne to throwe downe a Prince
from his ſeate,Sin ye fall of kingdomes. to expell him from his kingdome, and therby
to alter the quiet & fortunate eſtate wherin yt Romaines ſtode
wholie, and becauſe theyr Princes vngodly gouerned, & in al
theyr enterprices tyrannically proceaded. After kinges, two
Conſuls ſucceaded,Conſuls. which yearely were choſen, they were of
Maieſtye like vnto kinges, but of no continuance, becauſe if
theyr gouernment ſhould not be with equitye, or at the leaſte
not tollerable, the office ſone ceaſſed, which brideled many in
theyr affections, and cut of from many theyr bloudy cogitacious
in diuerſe purpoſes.Ceſars ambition. 
                  Ceſar by ambition moued to eſtabliſhe
in him a ſole regimente, dyed in his ambitious enterpriſe
as it is before declared. After Iulius Ceſars death, Octauius
ſucceaded in a ſole regimente,Octauius Emperour at the byrth of Chriſt. who raigned at the byrth
of our Sauiour Chriſte. Then there was an vniuerſall peace
ouer all the worlde. Octauius caughte the imperiall ſeate in
the 722. yeares after the buildinge of Rome,Rome. 722. yeares builded before Octauius raigned. which was the
yeare after the baniſhment of kings 480. this was a ſtraūge
maner of gouernmēt in the eyes of the Romaynes that wheras
they deteſted the ſole Regiment of a kinge now they haue
a ſole Regiment of an Emperour,Conſuis continued. 480. yeares. 
                  Octauius was the ſonne
of Octauius, this Octauius beinge a Senator, hys mothers
progenye came by lyniall diſſente from Eneas, by the noble
houſe of Iulius, who by adoption of Caius Iulius Ceſar hys
greate vnckle ſucceaded. Octauius by his famous actes
and large victoryes was tituled Auguſtus, ſome referre the
originall beginning of Octauius to ryſe at Velitre a famous
towne in Italye,Emperours hath cōtinued a 571. which deſcended from Tarquinius priſcus,
a kinge of the Romaynes, whoſe progenye was alwayes in
honourable eſtate. Octauius father from his yonge yeares
was had in great eſtimation, a man of greate ſubſtaunce and
wealthe, and enioyed an honourable eſtate, whoſe doinges

were alwayes directed to iuſtyce and vpright dealing, namely
to aſſaye that which he enterpriſed,Octauius his father. hee dyed ſodeinly as he
came from Macedonia, this his ſonne Octauius beinge but
foure yeares of age,Octauia maior. he left behinde him two daughters Octauia
maior and Octauia minor. As concerninge the time that
Octauius was borne,Octauia minor. it was in the Conſulſhippe of Marcus
Tullius Cicero, and Antonius, in the ix. Kalendes of October
ſomewhat before the ſonne ryſinge. Foure tymes cyuill
warres was foughte of him. The firſt was agaynſt Marcus
Antonius at Mutina,
                  Brutus the ſeconde was againſte Brutus and
Caſſius at Philippos a City in Macedonia,
                  Caſſius. the third againſt
Lucius Antonius who was famiſhed to deathe of Octauius,
                  Lucius.
ſo harde hee was beſieged at Pruſia: the fourthe warre was
fought againſt Sextus Pompeius which Pompeius hee ouercame
about Cicile in warre by Seas,S. Pompeius. after that he ouercame
the ſonne of Gneius Pompeius.
                  G. Pompeius As concerninge the multitude
of thoſe which conſpired Ceſars death, proclamatiō was
made, that who ſo coulde bringe the heade of any one of them
that conſpired Ceſars death,A Promaclation for the murtherers of Ceſar. ſhould receiue great ſummes of
moneye, there was not one left almoſt but money brought his
heade, ſo faythfull were all theſe Promoters and priuye ſearchers
to plye theyr buſines, for moneye made them true ſearchers
ſome were hidde in filthye priues, ſome conueighed in
feether beddes,The ſtate of the conſpiratours. ſome killed themſelues, manye faythfull ſeruanntes
clothed in theyr maiſters apparell were murthered
for them, but all had one ende, and that in three yeares ſpace:
neyther theyr former dignitye ſaued theym, nor the power
whereon they ſtayed themſelues.Murther. 
                  Octauius neuer ceaſſed till
he had rooted out the whole race of the conſpiratours:Cicile. 
                  Cicile
felt his warres,Alexandria. 
                  Alexandria was longe beſieged,Antonye where vnto
Antony and Cleopatra fledde for feare,Cleopatra. who was in the ende
apprehended and there put to death. Antony ſought to gette
the conditions of peace at Octauius hands, but Octauius did
not thence depart vntill hee ſawe the deade bodye of Antony,
                  Antonye.
with whom Cleopatra was buryed,Cleopatra. 
                  Antonius harlotte in a
ſumptuous Tombe, which was begon longe before of Antony
to be his Sepulcher. But Cleopatra ſoughte meanes in

her life time to aſpyre to Herodes kingdome verye deſyrous
to haue ſome accuſations againſt him, for ſhe knewe Antony
would be moued vppon a light occaſion to beleeue her. Cleopatra
bare fayned frendſhippe to Herode,
                  Herode. and Herode recō
                  penſed
her with the ſame, for Herode ſoughte meanes to kill
her becauſe by ſubtill meanes, ſhe ſought to ſpoyle him of his
kingdome, but by counſayle of his frendes he was prohibited
they knowinge what horrible murthers ſhe had done of manye
Princes and noble men of all coūtreyes where ſhe came,
but Herode was compelled with greate treaſures to pacifye
the bloudy purpoſe of Cleopatra and diſſembled her myſcheues.Herode.
In the ende Antonius and Cleopatra came to a violent
ende, as concerning the death of Cleopatra how ſhe wrought
her owne death,Gallen. 
                  Gallen ſheeweth very excellētly in his booke
Dea therica ad piſonem the eyght Chapter: when Octauius
the Emperour ouercame Antony, hee was purpoſed to take
Cleopatra aliue, and to bringe ſo royall a perſon to Rome in
tryumphe, when Cleopatra vnderſtode the minde of Octauius
the Emperour, ſhe thought it more honour and renowne
to her to dye a queene thoughe ſhe killed her ſelfe, then to goe
to Rome in triumphe at the will of other, a captiue, a ſpectacle,
a laughinge ſtocke to all yt world, wherevpon ſhe ſought
the way to murther herſelfe,Cleopatra. ſhe called to her the .ii. faythfull
maydes ſhe had, Naera and Carmion was theyr names, who
alwayes ſerued to the adorninge and deckinge of her bodye,
the one of them foulded her heares, the other to pare her nayles:
ſhe commaunded that they ſhould bringe vnto her a certaine
Serpente called Plyas couered with figge leaues and
vyne leaues whereby ſhe thought to deceiue the keepers and
watche men, and ſhe made a proufe of poyſon of her two gentle
women Naera and Carmion they not knowing of the poiſon
as ſone as ſhe ſawe the poyſon to take effecte ſodenlye vppon
them, ſhe applyed y• ſame vnto her ſelfe, ſome write that
ſhe applyed ii. Serpētes vnto her breſtes and ſo dyed of them,
ſome write that ſhee made a longe and deepe wounde vppon
her arme firſt with her teeth, and then the poyſon taken of ye
Serpent, ſhe put it in a cuppe, and ſo the poyſon wyth his infected

qualitye, deſtroyed her ſodainly: Cleopatra was found
with her righte hande to holde vppon her heade a princelye
Crowne,
                     Cleopatra, her death. that in her death ſhee mighte appeare a Queene to
all that behelde her, her death beinge knowne to Octauius ye
Emperour he wondred at the loue of the gentle women that
dyed wyth her, and her ſtoute courage in preferringe deathe
before a ſeruile life.The .ii. ſonnes of Fuluia
                   At the ſame ſeaſon hee put to death the
.ii. ſonnes of Antony begotten of Fuluia, alſo Ceſarion whō
                  Cleopatra did vaunt to haue borne of Iulius Ceſar, diuerſe he
ſpared. Octauius beinge in the countreye of Egipte and by
good occaſion offered,Alexanders picture reuerenced of Octauius. ſawe in a certayne place the picture of
Alexander the great, as conninglye as arte coule deuiſe pictured,
whoſe body ſeene with a Crowne on his heade, ye place
decked with pleaſaunt flowers, Octauius made obeyſance to
it, this beinge done: Octauius was demaunded if he woulde
ſee the picture of Ptolome?
                  Ptolomes picture neglected. 
                  Octauius made aunſwere my
minde was to ſee a kinge & not the dead, meaninge that Ptolome
in compariſon of Alexander the greate for his mightye
conqueſt was as the dead to the lyuinge.Octauius aunſwere vpon Ptolomes picture. 
                  Ptolome althoughe
his picture was in compariſon contemned to Alexander, yet
hee is not ſwalowed vp in obliuion.Ioſephus. 
                  Ioſephus a famous Hiſtoriographer
and Euſebius alſo do Chronicle with muche
commendatiō this Ptolome,
                  Euſebius. Princes famous are not buried
in obliuion,Godly Princes. the wicked are with the godlye to all poſterities
Chronicled, the good Princes are neuer forgotten nor the
wicked out of memorye, the one for fame yt other for ignomini,Wicked Princes.
as Octauius grewe in magnificence in glorye, and more
large Dominions, euen ſo the malice of many men puffed vp
wyth enuy, wrought treaſones againſt him, ſuch is the eſtate
of Princes thoughe they haue Dominion ouer manye,Princes liue to all poſterityes. they
are enuyed of manye, which oftentimes ſeeketh the decaye to
the eſtate of Princes, factious heades neuer contented wyth
anye eſtate,Ambition of factious heades. cauſe innouations, ambitious heades ymagine
new deuiſes to augment theyr proper eſtate, ambitious heades
ſurmiſe treaſonnes, ambitious heades alwayes beynge
vayne glorious do apply and ſettle themſelues to al vanities,
with ambitious heades the care of priuate luker, honour and

wealth is their only ſtudy, and theyr pretenced purpoſe, with
ambitious heades,Lightnes. the common wealthe is leaſt thoughte of,
well willinge hartes neuer deſyre innouacions,Conſtancye. conſtant heades,
in minde and ſtate quiet do alwayes continue, in a moſte
goodlye harmonye directing theyr deedes and actes to the aduauncement
and honoure of the common wealthe: And therfore
Alcibiades whom Thucidides ſetteth forth with greate
commendations, noteth theſe two ſinguler pointes to be placed
in all men, who do embrace with earneſt loue and ſincere
affection the proſperity of the common wealth: that he be of
force and power to tame and ſubdue pleaſure: ouer money to
be Lorde and maiſter: to make moneye to ſerue him, and not
that his treaſures, ſecrete, and vnknowen mynes of flotinge
wealthe, ſhould make him captiue, and bondſlaue to vnſatiable
affection,Two properties meete for magiſtrates. hee ſerueth, and obeyeth, who followeth affection:
He onlye ruleth whoſe actes in well doinge tempere and
bridle affection. Many treaſons by theſe meanes were conſpired
againſt Octauius, which were for the moſte part detected
and opened before they caught theyr purpoſe:Lepidus. as of Lepidus,
of Varro,
                  Varro. of Murena, of Scipio with manye other, yea and
ſometime of meane perſonnes,Murena. who thought to haue deſtroyed
Octauius and the whole Senate.Scipio. As concerning his martiall
enterpriſes in forraine Regions, two fields were fought
of him in his owne perſon,Dalmacia. as concerninge his warres in Dalmacia
he was but of tender yeares at that inſtant, and in that
ſame he was ſtricken with many woundes: he caughte a ſtroke
vppon the knee: in another battaile hee was wounded vppon
the thigh, & both his armes were hurt by the fall of a bridge,
manye other warres hee toke in hand by his deputies or ambaſſadors,
alſo hee was not farre from the warres foughte in
Pānonia,
                  The victories of Octauius. 
                  Germany and Cantabria were brought vnder his
ſubiection: Aquitania & Dalmacia with all Illiria, what Nation
did hee not bringe vnder his ſubiection? to note orderlye
by Hiſtoryes what Nationes he ouer came, and what mighty
Kinges hee vanquiſhed, to ſhowe alſo howe farre the fame of
his vertues reached whereby the ſtoute and proude harte of
his enemyes the lofty and hautye ſtomackes of the mightye

Monarches yelded themſelues, being rauiſhed with his vertuous
ſucceſſe which fell vnto him on euery ſyde, and how the
Romaynes loued him, and forraine Regions dreaded him, &
were in admiration of him, how hee remoued ye Germaynes
that inhabited behinde the ryuer Albine of ye which nomber
were the Sueuianes, and Sicambri whoe had yelded themſelues,
and howe hee broughte them into Fraunce and cauſed
them to inhabite neare the borders of Rhene, and howe many
Nations beſides beinge full of diſturbance hee made at hys
becke to obeye as my ſkill at full to deſcribe them is not able,
or a great volume is not ſufficiente to containe them.Arare prince. Howe
happye had the Romaine Empyre beene if ſo quiet a Prince,
or if the rare vertues of ſo vertuous a gouernour had continued
amonge them, then ſo infinite hoſtes and multitudes of
men had not bene deuoured of ſo manye ambitious heades in
the cyuill warres, what Prince is there not? excepte hee be a
rare Prince in diſpoſition from other,Arare prince. but that a ſleighte deuice
or toye maketh a iuſt quarrell to warre as the Prince affecteth
or as counſaile perſwadeth, all matters in the commō
wealth take effecte,The fortunat kingdome. the quiet and fortunate kingdome enioyeth
the quiet and happye Prince,Raſhe heads. for raſhe heades to proue aduentures
feeleth the ſmarte of their deuiſes,Manye calamities of warres. longe conſultation
brought happy ſucceſſe & ſtedfaſte eſtate. Warres haue
deuoured manye, whom if affection to liue at home had brideled
them, they mighte haue enioyed lyuinge, the fatherleſſe,
the fathers ſlaye, the widowe her comforte, many ryche houſes
not ſpoyled, many a Cittye and towne in theyr former and
auncient eſtate ſhould haue continued, which thereby are decayed.
As God permitted the earth whiche gaue from her ſo
many ſhapes of bodyes of life and conditions ſo contrary, beinge
caryed into all wickednes, to be meete burthens to render
yt to earth which earth once gaue & yelded vp ſo warres
bringe death,Warre, obliuion graue. and death in the graue obliuion, the people are
gone, the graue vnknowen the warres Chronicled, and their
calamities not out of memorye, great ought the deliberation
to be of them which tendereth the affayres of the Prince for
that which one deuiſeth, manye feeleth and taſteth be it good

or badde,Whye greate deliberation oughte to be had in the affayres of the Prince. els that commeth to paſſe whiche the Greeke svttered
of theyr Princes.
               
                  Quicquid delinquunt Reges plectuntur achiui:
                  What Prince doth luſt to frame at will by counſel, or decre:
                  the ſeely ſoule the ſubiecte meane ſhal feele like ſtate to be.
               
               But where warres are iuſtlye to be moued,Why warres are to be moued. as to repreſſe
forrayne ennemyes or cyuill commotions, there the Prince
iuſtlye reſiſteth warres, and the ſubiecte aydeth the Prince,
for ſo Bellum ſuſcipiendum eſt vt in pace viuatur, warres
are therefore to be enterpriſed and taken in hande, to make
peace, and quietnes, but who ſo without a conſideration to repell
great iniuries, not to defende theyr countrey, nor to ſaue
the proſperous eſtate both of the Prince and the vniuerſall
multitude do moue warres, thoſe ſeeke not peace but make
as it were Seminarium multorum bellorum et calamitatū,
a ſowinge of ſeede of infinite warres,Warre. and no lacke of calamities:
for warre is alwayes lincked with theſe two companions
Loimos kai Limos peſtilence & hunger, yt whiche warre
cannot do, famine and peſtilence will do, ſo it may be ſayd truly,
that which was ſpoken of the Greekes.
               
                  Not Mars alone in furye greate,
                  with bloudy handes doth ſpill:
                  But death and famine worke diſtreſſe,
                  that Mars might haue his fill.
               
               
                  Octauius therevppon conſideringe the greate calamities
that happened by warres, ſheewed his minde to be ſo farre
from that deſier, that hee cauſed certaine Princes to take an
othe in the Temple of Mars that none of them ſhould breake
the othe which they had made: that this was his accuſtomed
ſayinge, deſyre of warres was a token of a boaſtinge and crakinge
heade, and of a light brayne, by vnknowen aduentures,
and hazarde of battell to throw headlonge downe the quiet
eſtate of Cittye and countrye, for an ambitious glorye of a

Laurell crowne, as a man would ſaye, for a few vnprofitable
leaues who ſo without iuſt cauſe moueth battell,Warre wythout iuſt cauſe is like vnto
one that fiſheth with a greate golden houke, whiche beinge
broken the praye gotten is nothinge. Some do thincke that
this Emperour Octauius had ſo greate care to his common
wealthe,The greate care of Octauius toward the common wealth. and that ſo great was his ſtudye and trauaile in wel
doinge, in plantinge iuſtice, in vpholding vertue, and repreſſinge
vyce, whereby his cares of minde grewe ſo greate, his
daungers of life ſo manye, that he was diuers times minded
to render vppe that dignitye of hye eſtate, but hee altered hys
minde in conſideringe more deepelye, that in leadinge a priuate
eſtate, he ſhould not be wyth oute daunger, and alſo hee
ſawe that at that preſent leauinge that ſtate of gouernment,
it would be ruled by many gouernours,Ambition. whereby Octauius a
moſte godlye Prince foreſawe what factiones mighte aryſe,
what deuiſion by partes takinge, what tumultes mighte followe
and vprores, no man bearinge with an others eſtate,
but eche one clyminge, who maye be beſte and of higheſt power
to commaunde, to rule, not to be ruled, to rule the wyll
of other at commaundemente: wherein it ſeemeth that Octauius
preferred for worthynes and happynes of continuinge
eſtate,A Monarcke the beſt ſtate. a Monarche accordinge to the ſayinge of Vliſſes the
wyſe Grecian.
               
                  Multorum principatus mala res eſt,Homers Verſe. Rex vnicus eſto.
                  Where many peares as right do hold▪
                  
                  one lande to rule at will:
                  There feeble ſtate doth ſmart their lore,One gouernor beſte in a kingdome.
                  
                  and deadly Mars that kingdomes ſpill.
               
               This Octauius deſiered that it might be ſayde of him, the
common wealthe of the Romaynes to be preſerued from all
peryll of daungerous eſtate by him, and this to be the frutes
of his trauaile, yt I maye (quoth he) be called the Aucthor of
the beſt eſtate,The requeſt of Octauius and of al good Princes. & at my death to carye wyth me ye hope, that ye
common wealthe to manye ages maye remayne in that good
eſtate wherein I left it, ſuche was the great care of the good

Prince Octauius as it ought to be of all good Princes, for as
huſbandmen, they plant for theyr poſteritye, and as the ſayinge
is of law makers:Lawes. 
                  Leges poſteritatem ſpectant, lawes
be made for the poſteritye, thoughe they were decreed preſentlye:Gouernmēt.
And accordinge to godlye lawes, Princes oughte to
frame theyr gouernment, that the poſterity may ſpeake well
thereof,Rome. & take aduauncement thereby. The Cittye of Rome
before Octauius dayes, was but of meane and ſlender buildinge,
without the beutye of goodly houſes, ſumptuous Pallaces,
and gorgious Temples, but hee with all ornature and
beutye builded the ſame, and made it fenced from the ouerflowinge
of the fludde Tyber, and from all caſualties of fier.
Octauius vſed this ſayinge of Rome,The ſayinge of Octauius vpon Rome. that is: hee might worthely
glory of Rome, ſince that he had left it builded of Marble
ſtone, whiche hee receiued but builded of tyle, and mudde
walles, many famous monumentes he builded as Forum et
Edem, Martis Vltoris, Templum Apolinis in Palatio edem
tonantis in Capitolio,
                  Sumpteons buildinges. he made alſo a greate and ſumptuous
librarye plenteous with all maner of excellent bookes
of Greeke and lattine & other languages,Monuments of Octauius. manye other worthye
monumentes hee erected of fame, as Porticus Baſilij,
Lucij, & caui Porticus, Liuij & Octaui, Thaeatrum diui
Marcelli, with many other goodly monumentes of fame.
Octauius did not erecte theſe monumentes of fame onlye for
his commendation, but alſo to moue manye other noble peares
and Princes, that euerye one accordinge to his abillitye
woulde endeuour himſelfe to beutifye and adorne the Cittye
of Rome eyther with newe monumentes, or to repayre monumentes
which are in decay, or other famous workes which
in time are weakened and made feebell from the foundation,The monumentes at Rome.
for many goodly woorkes were then erected whereof Rome
daily ſhoweth ſome fallen, many broken downe, ſome from ye
foundation lifted and caryed away: as the houſe of Homer,
the houſe of Diana whiche Aſinius Pollo builded, the houſe
of Saturne, the notable monument of Agrippa: Many goodly
lawes Octauius did decree and make as the Digeſt and the
Pandect:
                  Lawes. and the Code doth ſhowe, certaine lawes hee did

amende and correcte. On all ſides, both Rome and all prouinces,
yea the whole Iuriſdiction of the Romaine Empyre
was ſo excellently gouerned,
                     Pater patriè, ye title of vertuous Princes. that they gaue vnto him this title
and name Pater patriè, that is, the father of the coūtrye.
Octauius beinge but a yonge man, had the daughter of Publius
Saruilius Iſauricus to be eſpouſed to him, but yt brake of, &
then maryed Claudia ye daughter of Fuluia, begottē of Publiꝰ
Claudius,
                  Claudia. he was maryed but a while to her, ſuch was ye diſagreemente
betweene Fuluia his mother in lawe and him, hee
left her daughter vndeflowered and vntouched, after that he
maryed Scribonia who was maryed before to two Conſuls,Scribonia.
but Scribonia was deuorced from him, her maners were odious,
and beinge wearyed with her conditions left her, and
ſone after gat to his loue Liuia Druſilla, her hee loued and yt
continually the whole time of his gouernment Octauius had
by Scribonia,
                  Liuia. 
                  Iulia his daughter, but of Lyuia hee had neuer
a childe, of whom earneſtly hee wyſhed to haue ſome fruite of
her body, ſhe was with child but vntimely it periſhed: Octauius
cauſed Iulia his daughter to be maryed to Marcellus his
ſiſters ſonne beinge but paſſed a lytle the limmettes of childhoode,Iulia.
hee beinge but newly maryed dyed,Marcellus. after whoſe death
hee maryed her vnto his friende Agrippa,
                  Agrippa. who alſo dyed before
her, but lefte behinde him v. children .iii. ſonnes, and .ii.
daughters of the which ſonnes the .ii. eldeſt dyed, then to eſtabliſhe
a quietnes in the Empyre, hee adopted the third ſonne,
who was named Agrippa, but his manners and conditions
were ſo wicked and odious vnto Auguſtus that hee reuoked
the adoption,Tiberius and for his childe did adopt Tiberius his ſonne
in lawe, as concerninge his daughters they were ſo wicked,
that he vttered of them the Verſe of Homer: I woulde they
had neuer bene got or yt they had dyed vnmaryed. As concerninge
Octauius how hee gouerned and to ſhow what worthy
victoryes he had gotte, what mightye kinges became tributory
to him it were a worthy matter to ſpeake of, but to make
a full diſcourſe how, when, where, how happely he gouerned
the moſt eloquent ſhall want meanes to vtter, and ſet forth ſo
worthy a Prince,Octauius. ſo fortunate a Captayne, ſo wyſe a counſellor,

and ſo victorious an Emperour, not for lacke of matter
but his worthines ſhall ſubuert the order, argument and diſpoſition
of the moſt eloquente, for euen before hee was borne
many thinges were foreſhewed of him to ſucceade,Suetonius. for Suetonius
Tranquillus in his Hiſtorye ſheeweth: Quod prodigium
Rome factum eſt,
                  Prodigium, 
                  Quo denuntiabatur naturam parturire
Regem Romanorum, a wonder happened at Rome,
whereby was ſheewed Octauius beinge borne, that nature
did bring forth the kinge of the Romaynes, many other thinges
happened which were to tedious, & to longe to reſite, &
as concerninge his mothers dreame before he was borne this
it was,The dreame of Accia.
                   ſhe dreamed that her bowelles were caryed vp to the
ſtarres, & ſpread ouer all the earth, and vp to ye clymate of ye
Heauen,The dreame of Octauius father. his father dreamed yt the beames of the ſonne roſe
vppon the wombe of his wyfe. The ſame day that Octauius
was borne, the Senators of Rome ſate vppon the treaſon
of Catelin whervppon Octauius mother at that time trauelinge,Cateline.
his father did ſomewhat abſent himſelfe from the Senate
houſe,Vigidius. the cauſe beinge knowen, Vigidius conſideringe
the inſtante of his natiuitye, hee beinge a famous man in the
Mathematicall ſciences ſaid: Dominum terrarum orbinatum,
a gouernour of the earthe to be borne, manye probable
coniectures, do aryſe in calculatinge and domifyinge, but ſo
many fooliſhe errors as that they which ſeeme to tell other,
of theyr fortune and ſtate to come, are moſt ignoraunt of theyr
owne, and none more feele the vanitye thereof, then the vaine
calculator.The death of Octauius. He dyed the fourtenthe daye of the Kalendes of
September, the nynthe hower of the day, in the fourtye and
ſixe yeares of his age,The lamētation for the deathe of Octauius. 
                  Octauius beinge deade great lamentacion
was made for hym of all the Romaine kingdomes and
nations farre of, the mightye Princes mourned for his funerall,The deathe of noble Princes.
all that knewe him mourned, and thoſe that neuer ſawe
him full bitterly lamented, ſuch was the worthynes of his ſo
noble gouernmente. Tyberius who ſucceded in the Empyre
after him was aduaunced by this Emperoure,Tiberius. his gouernemēt
was called Aureum ſeculum Auguſti,
                  Aureum ſeculum. the goldē world
of Auguſtus: Druſus the ſonne of Tiberius commēded with

eloquent Oration this Emperour: this done his corpes was
carryed on the ſhoulders of the Senatours in an appointed
place,Octauius. and there conſumed to aſſhes, great was the pompe, &
no ſmall lamentaciō in the funerall of ſo victorious a Prince,
who in time gouerned many Nations, now he geeueth place
to duſte. How many reioyced of him lyuinge ſo many lamented
his departinge,Fame after death preſerueth Princes in memorye. his fame ſo remayned, as neyther deathe
vglye, nor time auncient, or enuye malicious mighte euer let
fame aboliſh, ſuch is the fame of the worthy, & vertuous: & of
the Godly Princes,The fruite of good life. this onlye is the fruite, els vaine is theyr
glorye,Noble fame the fruite of kingdome. theyr actes baſe and meane, whom no worthines can
ſaue from obliuion, neyther whom a perpetuitye of noble
actes cannot bleſſe, hee dyed in the Conſulſhippe of Gneius
Pompeius, and Sextus Apuleius: Hee lefte his Realme in
greate quietnes, and alſo in great felicitye, great were
his victories, and his large Dominions, his peopeople
not to be nombred,What loſſe the Romaynes had by the death of Auguſtus. they loſt fortunate
Auguſtus when hee dyed, Rome loſt her
father, the golden worlde, and of
Auguſtus a victorious
Prince.
⸫
            
            
               
               TIBERIVS.
               
               
                  DYuers opinions were ſpred of Octauius death,Tiberius.
ſome thoughte one waye, other ſome another,
muche it was to be lamented, ſo good an Emperour
to fall into the handes of ſo vnnaturall
a wyfe. After Octauius death Claudius Tiberius
the ſonne of Liuia ſucceded,Liuia. beinge the ſteppe ſonne of
Caeſar Octauius: the meanes whereby hee ſucceded was ſubtillye
compaſſed by many ſleightes, and wilye pollicies of his
mother Liuia, but the chiefe cauſe that he ſucceded was this
his famous actes and nobillity in the late Emperours affayres,
cauſed both the Senate and the vniuerſall multitude of
the Romaynes, wyth earneſt affection, & moſte willinge hartes
to create him Emperoure:Tiberius maners chaunged. but as ſone as Tiberius was
in the dignitye placed, bothe the Senate and the vniuerſall
multitude of the Romaynes felt him a chaungelinge in al his
doinges. Whereas before vertue and nobilitye in him ſprede
great glorye and renowne to the common wealthe of the Romaynes,
now vglye vyces, his monſterous life in gouernmēt.
ouer whelmeth that fortunate eſtate,The fortunat Region. hys vertues did not ſo
muche good as his vyces hurt, moſt fortunate is that Region
wherein by longe continuance, and by longe deſcente Godlye
Princes remaine ſucceſſors famouſe.The godlye Prince. For, what the godlye
Prince procureth in his gouernmente, the wicked Prince
diſſolueth, marreth, and pulleth downe, ſo brittle is the eſtate
of kingdomes,The wicked Prince. ſo vnſted faſte the forme of common wealth, becauſe
at the maners of the Prince, the kingdome eyther ryſeth

or falleth,One Prince many Dominions. ſo muche the life of one, the maners and conditions
of one, frameth manye mightye Dominions: As this
Tiberius who if hee had continued in his former doinge, had
beene nombred amonge the moſt excellent Princes, but now
highe eſtate of dignity ſetteth out Tiberius in his proper conditions,Tiberius in his coullours
in his naturall diſpoſition, that which hee ſeemed, is
now chaunged to another hewe with his eſtate, his maners,
and conditions be alſo altered: now cruell and bloudy factes,
moſt beaſtly lyfe, braſte oute in him to vtter what hee was: for
certaine it is the Romaynes neuer loked for theſe thinges at
Tiberius hands, ſo difficult a matter it was to iudge throughly
what hee wyl proue in gouernment, becauſe that free ſtate
in him beinge commonly after will and luſte,Why it is a hard thing to iudge of the Prince. did vtter in doinge
ſecrete and hid cogitations of his tyrānicall minde, with
the perfecte diſpoſitions & naturall inclynations of a tyrante:
as it appeareth by many Princes, which in like ſort gouerned
as this Tiberius,
                  Nero. 
                  Nero, Cōmodus, Baſſianus, that this Emperour
Tiberius might thorowly be knowen:Domitianus. I will orderlye
procede to ſhowe what hee was,Commodus. his ſtocke had beginninge at
a certaine towne of the Sabynes called Regilis,
                  Baſſianus. frō the which
his aunceſtours fled to Rome:The beginninge of Tiberius ſtocke. Rome then beinge but newe
builded, ſo is referred the beginninge of his ſtocke to Appius
Claudius, and that he was of that diſcent: which time was
in the ſixt yeare after the baniſhment of kinges they that dyſcended
of this race or progenye were called Nerones.
                  Appius Claudius. 
                  Quia
lingua Sabinorum Nero ſtrenuus appellatur:
                  Nerones. Becauſe in
the Sabyne tongue Nero by the true Etimologie and interpretation
is named ſtronge or ſtoute, there were two houſes:
vna plebeia,
                  Plebeia. but yet very worthye: the other pulchrorum,
which were of the order of the Senators,Pulcrorum▪
                   of thoſe which dyſcended
of the families called Claudij, many famous actes remayne,
and contrarywyſe actes not regiſtred wt noble fame,
ſometime endueeth to noble houſes & longe auncientrie, not
like diſcente of worthines nor equall deſarte, but for theyr euill
gouernment, ignominye and reproche, thoughe the wicked,
wante that true renowne of honour,True nobilitye. whiche for vertues
ſake was attributed vnto theyr aunceſtours, yet they accompt

them ſelues of the ſame with diſcente of equall worthynes of
bloude, and tytle of longe auncientrye, but it is neyther the
bloud, nor the bones of theyr aunceſtours, longe tytles from
many diſcentes,Noble armes nor noble armes which from moſt aunciente
time haue beene in price that can make any one, wanting the
like renowne of his noble houſe, or the vertues of his predeceſſours
to clayme lyke honour,True nobilitye. or to enioye like title and armes:
For the vnworthye gentleman moſte of all neglecteth
that, which his noble progenitours attayned vnto, who were
made worthye by vertue,Vertue firſte createth nobilitye. and fame: fame gaue it theym to
clayme, where is then the tytle? what can be theyr clayme?
when there is no ſparke of deſarte yt reſpecteth the renowmed
merites of theyr auncientrye.Diſcent of noble houſes. If deſcente of nobilitye ſhoulde
fall out, as merite & ſinguler vertue did craue, then were
rare all the true and perfecte nobilitye, onlye prudente nobilitye,Learned nobility.
learned, full of counſayle, grauitye, modeſtye, temperaunce,
aboundance in all knowledge, meete to adminiſter
and execute the lawes, yea for as fame firſte taughte nobility
by merite,Fame. ſo lacke of like worthynes, doth abaſe and make
them vnworthye to enioye like clayme of nobilitye.True clayme of nobilitye.
               
               Reade the Oration of Marius as concerninge nobilitye in Saluſt,
entreatinge vppon the warres of Iugurtha, and as concerninge
Appius Cecus,
                  Appius Cecus. 
                  Appius the blinde, whom Tulli
maketh mention of, in his Booke de ſenectute: Appius Cecus
made ye league which ſhould be concluded wyth Pirrhus,
                  Pirrhum
moſt ſhamefull to ye Romaines to be finiſhed. Claudius Caudex
was the firſt amonge the Romaynes that paſſed the ſeas
with a greate nauye,Ciaudius Caudex. and expelled the Carthagimanes from
Cicile,
                  Claudius Nero. 
                  Claudius Nero ouercame Haſdruball marchinge out
of Spayne with a greate power, before hee ioyned his power
with his brother Hanniball, with many other famous actes
of that auncient houſe,Hanniball. which were to longe to entreate. Tiberius
came of this houſe and progenye by the mothers ſyde,
for his mother came from Appius the fayre,Appius pulcher. his fathers progeny
came from Nero the father of Tiberius, who was ſometime
treaſuror to Iulius Caeſar in his warres fought in Alexandria,
he was beſydes the chiefe of his Nauie, his excellencye

in his Princes affayres was ſuche, yt the greate renowne
of his victoryes was much furthered by him, his ſecrete pollicyes
in the Emperours affayres, his wyſedome, his faythfull
ſeruice merited muche eſtimation with Iulius Caeſar.
                  Tiberius. 
                  Tiberius
being well lyked of Octauius the Emperour, was geuen
vnto him of his father in adoption. Immediatlye after yt
                  Tiberius father dyed,Druſus. leauinge behinde him two ſonnes, this
Tiberius and Druſus, this Tiberius was borne at Rome, at
ſuche time as Marcus Emilius Lepidus, and Mucius Plauca
were Conſuls, hee had then to wyfe Agrippa, the daughter
of Marcus Agrippa the nyce of Pomponius Atticus, ſometime
a kinge of the Romaynes.Agrippa. 
                  Agrippa did not longe tyme
continue with her huſbande Tiberius, for ſhee was at the
length put away great with childe.Forced mariage. 
                  Tiberius at thoſe dayes
beinge enforced thereto to take Iulia the daughter of Auguſtus
to wyfe. So matrimonye was made by pollicies, lincked
and relincked,Mariages for honour. not as godly affection did leade, but as hope of
honour moued, ſo maryages were made, often vnder pretēce
of amitye, & adulation of poyſoned hartes, deepe and cloked
emnities lye lurkinge, which time vttereth afterward. This
was the pollicye of Liuia that wicked Empreſſe, ſhe hauinge
further fetch to bringe thereby ye eſtate of the Empyre, to her
ſonnes handes.Iulia. 
                  Iulia was hated of Tiberius for her conditions,
ſhe was proude, loftye, diſdaynfull, wrathfull, geeuen to
all voluptuouſnes, light of countenaunce, light of chaſtity, &
fruitleſſe of good maners, aboūdant in bloudy imaginaciōs,
cruell in her purpoſes, ſone turned to folly, conſtant and ſtedfaſt
to wickednes.Agrippa. 
                  Agrippa pleaſed the eye of Tiberius, ſhee
in maners contēted him, ſhee was beutifull, ſober, diſcrete, of
goodly perſonage, chaſtitye poſſeſſed her whole bodye and an
humble loke, not proude, gentle, full of courteſye, pitifull, ſo
adorned with vertue,The frutes of honeſt life in women. that her breſte was a pure fountaine of
vertues, of yeares tender, a matrone in manners, excellinge
in all goodly qualities, Her vertues ſheewed what ſhe was, &
time vttered her chaſtitye. Iulia leadinge a wanton life, in the
ende vttered her follye, whiche beinge knowen a deuorce enſued
thereof. Tiberius as hee vnwillinglye caughte her, ſo

willinglye he left her▪
                  The fruites of forced mariages. frends, aucthoritye, and moneye made
the mariage, her vyces did vndo that which Tiberius in hart
well wiſſhinge could not do, vntill ſuch time as her naughtye
life could merite no pardon, nor frendſhippe make any excuſe.
Octauius was muche plagued with his daughters of whom
he was ſo aſhamed through theyr follye and wicked life, that
hee would tytle them by many monſtrous names, and would
wiſhe that they had neuer beene gotten, or dyed vnmaryed.
Now as concerninge Tiberius, diuers ſtraunge things happened
which foreſheewed yt the eſtate of the Empyre ſhoulde
come to his handes,Scribonius. for Scribonius a famous man in the Mathematicall
ſciences, groundinge his knowledge vppon his
calculation in the Iudgement of Aſtrologye, ſayde: that Tiberius
ſhoulde ſucceade nexte in the Empyre, but withoute a
Diademe: and ſo it came to paſſe an Aſtronomer, otherwiſe
called Thraſibulus,
                  Thraſibolus. excellente in the like facultie but euerye
thinge not happeninge in all pointes to Tiberius as hee propheſyed.
In a rage Tiberius was like to breake his necke ſodainly:
whiche miſhappe towardes him if Thraſibulus had
foreſeene by his owne calculation, hee woulde not haue beene
preſent in that peril,The vncertentye of Aſtrologye. but they vncertaine of theyr owne eſtate
do make a certaine calculation of other mens, and not able in
deede to withſtande perilles, do yet boaſt of theyr faculty and
ſcience as thoughe it preſerued them,The eſtate of all thoſe which caſt natiuities. wherein euerye one of
them is deceiued & do fall to manye vndoinges: & they which
cā domify to all felicity for other a bare & nedye eſtate, theyr
owne deuiſes haue wrapped them with many myſeries, ſuch
is theyr vaine glorious calculation, ſo deceiptful is their arte,
and ſo vaine is theyr knowledge, repleniſhed wyth illuſions,
and ſuche is theyr vaine ſtudye,The caſtinge of Natiuities. deceitfull inuentions, ſubtill
illuſions, coniecturall practiſes: which Theodoretus a moſt
famous writer in his booke of queſtions vppon Geneſis, condemneth
as vaine,Theodoretꝰ in queſtione 1
                        •
                     . Geneſis. moſt wicked & deteſtable in theſe wordes:
As concerninge the vaine contention vpon a calculation, caſt
vppon the natiuity of any mā,Pithagoras. neyther Pithagoras nor Plato,
                  Plato.
nor the Stoikes haue receyued anye ſuche kinde of ſcience:Stoikes.
Who then hauinge theyr fayth in the holy Scriptures: will

not receiue theſe things not onlye as wicked but as vaine and
foliſhe. Thus much as concerninge that part of Aſtrologye,
or the calculation vppon the natiuitye of any man, how wycked,
foliſhe, and impious it is. As concerninge the thinges
whiche did foreſhewe Tiberius ſucceſſe in attayninge to the
Empyre, this was one,A foreſhew of Tiberius to ſuccede in the Empyre. at his returne to Rome Tiberius beinge
at Roodes, an Egle neuer ſeene before in that coaſt, fate
vppon the place where Tiberius lodged, with manye other
tokens: wherevppon a coniecture was taken, the Empyre to
fall to Tiberius handes. At that inſtant when Octauius the
Emperour was at the point of death,A manner of foreſhewe amonge the Romaynes. but of perfecte remembraunce:
he cauſed Tiberius to be called for to common with
him, manye do thincke that Octauius neuer minded to create
Tiberius Emperour, but beinge ruled by Liuia the Empreſſe:Liuia.
For Octauius could better rule the large Dominion
of the Romaine Empyre, yea the mightye Region of Greece
was more in feare of him, then the frowarde and diſſolute
minde of Liuid, ſo harde and difficulte a matter it is to rule a
creature with whom wyll, luſte, and apetite was as a lawe,
and eſpecially where ſuche a one hath aucthoritye and ſtroke
to affecte and diſpoſe as nature and wyll lyſteth to rule aboue
the Prince. Otherſome do ſay that the nobilitye of hart and
courage of Tiberius, his noble actes in the affayres of ye Emperour
Octauius, moued him thereto, manye are the commē
                  dations
of Tiberius in certaine Epiſtles written by Octauius,
in his affayres and buſines,The commē
                     dations of Tiberius. if other Chronicles be ſerched
you ſhall finde the commēdations of Tiberius before he came
to be Emperour to be very greate. This is one of many: Nihil
intereſt valeam nec ne, ſi tu non valebis: if thou Tiberius
do not well, I my ſelfe cannot do well: with many words
of commendations. Dyuers ſuſpitions were ſurmiſed of
Tiberius in attayninge to the Empyre, for the death of Auguſtus
was not knowen before Agrippa
                  Agrippa. beinge adopted of
Octauius was murthered, which thinge comprehended in it
a full ſuſpition,Deuiſes for kingdomes ſake. that bothe Tiberius and Liuia had vſed theyr
ſubtilities, ſuch are the deuices manye times for kingdomes
ſake, for true it is, no cruell beaſte ſeeketh ſo egerlye for hys

preye, as bloudy hartes puffed vppe with ambition, do deuiſe
purpoſes to eſtabliſhe in ſome ſecuritye theyr eſtate, there is
no regarde of right, lawe, nor kindred, noble parentage, the
foole and the wyſe, the cowarde with the politicke perſon are
a like,Ambition a bloudy beaſt. where ambition with ſtronge hands armed doth gette
maſtrie, nature, diſcent, righte and lawe is ouerwhelmed by
ambition in tyrantes. The Chronicles are full of ſuche teſtimonies
of ambitious examples,Iugurtha. as of Iugurtha towardes ye
children of Miſipſa,
                  Romulus. of Romulus and Remus,
                  Polinices. brethren of
Polinices,
                  Eteocles. and Eteocles brethren,Clitemneſtra of Clitemneſtra and Egiſtus,
                  Egiſtus.
& thoſe that ſucceaded Alexander the greate, of Beſſus
                  Beſſus.
towardes kinge Darius,
                  Herode. of Herode againſt his owne ſonne,Antonins.
of Antonius Caracalla,
                  Henrye the fourth. againſt his owne father Seuerus Emperour
of Rome: Our Chronicles want not the like deuiſes,
call to minde the late dayes of Henrye the fourthe towarde
Richarde the ſeconde, and of his nobilitye: Of Owen Glendoure
vſurpinge in Wales agaynſt Henrye the fourthe,Owen Glē
                     doure. Richarde
the thirde againſt Edwarde the fourth children,Richarde the thirde. for
both they were murthered by Richarde the thirde,Ambition. ſo ſtronge
is ambition to inflame the hartes of the ambitious, to ſeeke
innouation againſte the ſtate of the Princes, to rayſe from
meane to greater, and ſo with all exceſſe of vnſaciable deſyre
from better do minde as Iuſte in them kindleth to enioye the
higheſt throne alone to commaunde,Ambition. not of one Cittye or coū
                  trye,
but of large Dominions, and of infinite Regions.
               At ſuche time as Tiberius ſhould take vppon him the ſtate of
the Empyre by the conſente of the Senate,The diſſimulation of Tiberius. hee ſeemed to refuſe
it for manye daungers hanginge ouer his heade, and alſo
becauſe be woulde be thoughte free from all ſuſpition before
time ſurmiſed: and that he might know his frendes from his
foes. Diuers wrought conſpiracies againſt him as Clemens
the ſeruaunte of Agrippa in his maiſters quarell had gathered
no ſmall ſtrengthe and power to reuenge the murther of
his maiſter.Scribonius. Alſo Scribonius a noble peere began a ſedicious
tumulte, beſides that his men of warre which were in Illiria
were at diſcorde, and thoſe in Germanye were moued to ſedition
in that their ſtipende of wages was not equall to the others

longe hee was in that feare, but by litle and litle hee
crept out of all miſtruſt: At the firſt he deteſted flatterye and
flatterers, inſomuch that he would not ſuffer any to call him
Lorde, thoughe was by eſtate an Emperoure, ſo greate was
his diſſimulation,The diſſimulation of wicked men. for the wicked wil ſeeme that they leaſt deſyre
to be, the couetous manye times will ſhewe themſelues
liberall, yea more then liberall, princely in giftes, full of many
deceites,Adulation. the voluptuous temperate,Couetouſuespunc; ye prodigall ſparinge,
the irreligious full of holines, by proceſſe of time his conditions
ſheewed fourth his hidde cogitacions, his diſſimulation
gaue an open truth to vtter what he was truly: where vppon
the Romaynes ſeinge ſo greate alteration in the lyfe of the
Prince,The eſtate of wicked Princes. his manners ſo beaſtlye, and his purpoſes in all
reſpectes ſo wicked, that manye ſpake freelye, more raſhlye,
then wiſelye, more boldlye, then circumſpectlye, againſte
the beaſtly life of theyr gouernoure, the moſt parte thoughte
more then they ſpake, the godly and welwilling hartes helde
theyr peace, becauſe they feared the lawe and diſpleaſure of
the Prince, other ſome there were, whom neither lawe nor
diſpleaſure reſtrayned. Reade the whole Chronicles of euery
age, the good and godlye Princes were euer for fame and
worthyues of Actes commended in theyr preſent age, aduaū
                  ced
throughe deſerte of worthines reſerued from obliuion to
all ages, and to all poſterityes: the wicked Princes as they
liued ſo they remayne Chronicled to all ages. The like remayneth
of Tiberius, for as he deſerued by worthynes, ſo afterwarde
contrary deſart purchaſed iuſt cōmendation. This
thinge was muche to be commended of Tiberius before hee
chaunged his maners in gouernmente, when as he was willed
of diuerſe who bare great aucthoritye in many of his prouinces,
that he ſhould laye on his people great & heauy tributes,
He wrote againe vnto them in theſe words: Boni Paſtoris
eſt tōd ere pecus, nō deglubere. A good ſheepe heard ought
to ſheare his ſheepe,The godly prince. but not to ſwallow them: Good Princes
may do to theyr behoufe and commoditye take of the ſubiecte
to the furtheraunce of his eſtate,The tyrante. with the common wealthe:
for therein the good Prince and the tyraunt differre, the one

regardeth the common wealthe,The good Prince. thother his priuate commoditye:
for the tyraunte lyueth to himſelfe, the good Prince to
manye, & therefore hee is loued of many. As concerninge the
externall ceremonyes of the Iewes hee prohibited the vſe of
them in all his prouinces and all ſuche as addicted themſelues
to theyr Religion and ceremonyes, and who ſo therein obeyed
not his commaundement was in the perill of perpetuall
bondage. He baniſhed out of the Cittye all ſuch as by gaſinge
of the Starres foreſhewed thinges to come, after theſe
thinges,Germanicus. his two ſonnes Germanicus and Druſus dyed: Germanicꝰ
dyed in Syria,
                  Druſus. 
                  Druſus died at Rome for whoſe death
he toke ſo greate penſiuenes and thoughte of minde, that hee
left the Cittie of Rome with all his pleaſures, for that all his
ioye, his delight, and comfort was takē from him, not longe
after that miſhappe, an other great miſfortune fell vnto him:
Tiberius being at ye Cittye of Anxur otherwyſe called Terrachina,
beinge in the place of the Pretor not hauinge as yet
ſupped, manye mightye great ſtones fell downe from the vpper
parte of that place, by whiche miſhappe manye of thoſe
whiche were at that bancket and of theyr ſeruauntes were
cruſhed to death, and hee alone beyonde all exſpectation eſcaped.
At the ſame time hee made a progreſſe throughe Campania:
                  Capua.
he made at Capua a goodlye and ſumptuous Temple
or Capitoll,Nola. at Nola hee crected a Temple in a perpetuall
memory, of the Emperour Auguſtus his predeceſſor: which
was thoughte to be done for this cauſe that Octauius dyed
there. After that he went to the Ilande Capreas a pleaſaunt
Iſlande: whiche was on the one ſyde cloſed with hys rockes,
on the other ſyde, the ſea cloſed it in. The abſence of ye Prince
was much deſyered, by reaſon of a certaine greate calamitye
and miſfortune which fell at Fi
                        •
                     enas an olde auncient towne
builded of the Albanes, for in that place aboue twentye thouſande
men periſhed by the fall of the Amphitheatrum, hee
gaue ouer by reaſon of his foreſayde penſiuenes for the death
of his two ſonnes, the care of his common wealthe, hee had
no conſideration of the eſtate of Spayne, and Syria, whiche
was then in the iuriſdiction of the Romayne Empyre, it was

without Embaſſadors, Armenia was poſſeſſed of the Parthians,
which Armenia obeyed the Romaynes vntill ſuch time
as they careleſſe neglected the ſame. Meſia was ſpoyled of
the Dacians and Sarmatians, Fraunce was alſo ouer runne
of ye Germaynes, with no ſmal infamy, not onlye to this careleſſe
Emperour Tiberius but to the whole Empyre.The greate care of Princes
                        •
                     
                   Greate
ought the cares of a Prince to be, who beareth Scepter ouer
ma
                     •
                  y, for the great care and ware deliberation, preſerueth in
fortunate eſtate his Dominion: whereas the careleſſe lyfe of
a Prince, his wanton and diſſolute maners pulleth downe &
deſtroyeth. It was not without conſideration that Homer ye
famous Poet, ſettinge forthe the full and abſolute maner of
gouernment wrote theſe wordes.
               
                  Nequaquam oportet virum cōſularem, totas noctes ſomno
indulgere, cui populus curae eſt & tanta reipublicae negotia:
A good Prince moſt not lye all the whole night drowſye
who hath a charge ouer people and kingdomes.
               
                  Tiberius thus geeuinge ouer the care of the cōmon wealth
appeared then as nature inclyned him to all beaſtlines, and
follye, vndecente for that eſtate: Firſt he gaue himſelfe to exceſſiue
riote and quaffinge, wherevppon throughe follye a
dronken name was geeuen vnto him, beinge called for Tyberius,
Biberius,
                  Biberius. as one delightinge in drincke, a banketinge
Prince,Caldius. a quaffer, hee was called alſo for Claudius, Caldius,
for Nero, Mero.
                  Mero. He gaue himſelfe to ſuch companye as yt delighted
in the like follye with whom day by daye he accompanyed
himſelfe in banketinge, ſuche were his frendes and hys
delight, and for their great excellencye therein he woulde beſtowe
vppon them greate offices of greate aucthoritie, for to
Pomponus Flaccus he gaue the gouernment of Syria,
                  Pomponius being
one of them who procured theſe kinde of follies, he gaue alſo
to Lucius Piſo,
                  Lucius Piſo. the chiefe office ouer the Cittie of Rome, hee
was alſo in loue with Sextus Claudius, who was baniſhed
from the Emperour Octauius for his beaſtly life,Sextus Claudius. ſuch nowe
are his frendes and hye counſaylours. The Prince cannot
lacke his mates, for as he inureth himſelfe, ſo many followe &
faſhion themſelues to the doinge of the Prince. This Sextus

Claudius was an old man, vnthriftye, geeuen to all beaſtly
pleaſures, with Tiberius on a time he made a couenaunte
to geue him a ſumptuous bancket, if hee woulde ſuppe with
him: where many fayre maydens ſerued him at the borde naked,
many other there were in whom he delighted, ſuch eſpecially
as could finde out newe and fonde pleaſures, ſtraunge
deuiſes,The follye of Tiberius. beaſtly paſtymes, and ſuch were moſt eſteemed with
him as paſſed other in follye, hee made a newe office whiche
was called a voluptatibus, rewardinge all ſuche as inuented
delightes for the Princes tothe,A voluptatibus. who furthered therein hys
eſtate and heaped by inuention, ſtore of ſuch pleaſures. The
beaſtlynes of this Prince was in all reſpectes ſuche, as that
nature abhorreth to vtter his condicions: beſydes this as he
ſuffered filthye life commonlye, ſo openly he both vſed and allowed
it, It may be thought that no follye could be greater,
but who ſo readeth the Chronicles, and wayeth thorowly his
lyfe, ſhame faſtnes will prohibite him to beſtowe his time in
readinge ſo filthye matter. After this hee behaued himſelfe
wyth all tyrannye, not onlye againſt Caius Lentulus Augur,
but alſo againſt Lepida:
                  Tyrannye. with all tyrannye he vſed the Princes
of Greece, Syria and Fraunce, he cauſed the kinge of the
Parthians, who was expelled from his owne country, and flyinge
to the truſtye handes of the Romaynes to be murthered
and ſpoyled of all his ryches,Fayth to be obſerued in Princes. hee was at defyance with Liuia
his mother, by whom he purchaſed that aucthoritye, hee was
muche greued with the Senate, in that in actes and decrees,
he was called the ſonne of Octauius and Liuia, yea ſuch was
his hatred towarde her, that ſhe beinge dead, he cruelly handled
all thoſe to whom Liuia gaue charge ouer her funerall:Liuia.
his wicked life was ſuche that manye wrote againſt him, and
not vnworthely, his tyrannye paſſed all other, no daye paſſed
withoute bloudſheddinge,A tyrante. manye women and children killed
themſelues, fearinge to fall into the handes of ſuch a tyrante,
his crueltye was ſuche that Artabanus the kinge of the Parthians
reuiled him in lettters,Artabanus. placing before his eyes, his filthye
lyfe, his murthers, and liuinge not to be named, of
whiche hee was aſhamed. This is that Tiberius by whom

                  Valerius Gractius was made gouerner ouer the Iewes, the
ſucceſſor of Annius Rufus.
                  Pilate. 
                  Pilate was accuſed of the Iewes,
and ſente by Vitellius to Rome, but Tiberius was deade before
Pilate came to Rome.Iſis. The famous Temple of Iſis was
deſtroyed at the commaundement of Tiberius, and the Images
of Iſis throne in the Tiber at Rome, becauſe of the great
miſchieuous acte committed in the Temple of Iſis,
                  Munda. againſte
Paulina a chaſte woman, by one Munda a yonge man, to the
which facte, the prieſtes of the Temple were priuye baudes,
the beaſtlye practiſe vnknowen to the good woman Paulina:
Ioſephus telleth the whole ſtorye at large. Tiberius made
Vitellius chiefe gouernour vnderneth him, as the vice Roye
in Hieruſalem:
                  Vitellius. who wrote letters to Vitellius, to make a
leage of amity with Artabanus the kinge of the Parthians,
becauſe he feared him, but vppon that condition a leage to be
made, ſo that the ſonnes of the Emperor of the Parthans be
deliuered as pledges to Vitellius. Vitellius forthwith perſwadeth
two Princes with great giftes without all delaye to
enter battaile againſt Artabanus, king of the Parthians, but
they woulde not moue battaile againſt him, but they ſuffered
the Scithians to enter, geuinge them paſſage and entrye by
ſtraites of the Cuſpians ſea, to inuade the countrye, by
whoſe inuaſion the whole countrye of the Armenians was
ſpoyled and waſted, and the lande filled with the ſlaughter
of the Parthians, his chiefe nobles being at that battaile
fled, the Emperors ſonne of the Parthians was ſlaine there.
With this meane Vitellius by greate giftes, had wonne to
him all the Princes borderinge vppon thoſe partes, to betraye
Artabanus the Emperour, but as ſone as Artabanus
vnderſtode his falſehode, bee fledde with a fewe faythfull
people, to other Princes a farre of, who of themſelues prepared
a great power and defended his owne Dominion, as ſone
as Tiberiꝰ vnderſtode that Artabanus▪
                   was of force to ioyne
warres with the Romaynes, he willinglye made peace with
him, the league was made at the floude Euphrates, betwene
Artabanus and Vitellius, eche of them with a few meetinge,
Herode made a ſumptuous bancket to Vitellius, and Artabanus
                  
kinge of the Parthians: & Artabanus to the full confirmation
of this league, gaue to the handes of Vitellius his .ii.
ſonnes, Darius and Artaxerxes, with whom he ſente manye
ritche giftes and princely, with whom he ſent a man of highe
ſtature, vii. cubites high, his name was Lazarus, who for his
highe ſtature was called a Gyante, the league confirmed,
Vitellius departed to Antioche, Artabanus to Babilon returned.
Herode falſe in all his doinges to preuent Vitellius,
                  Herode.
by letters ſent to Tiberius the Emperoure as concerninge ye
league confirmed, for vnto Vitellius letters, Tiberius maketh
aunſweare that hee knewe longe before of thoſe newes,
by the letters of Herode: where vppon great enuye & grudge
roſe betweene Herod and Vitellius, ſecrete pollicye of deſtructin
againſt one another,Vitellius. 
                  Vitellius neuer vttered his
malicious intente, but keepinge cloſe his malicious purpoſe
and kindled Ire, vntill ſuche time as oportunitye ſerued to
ſubuert Herode, and that was in the gouernment of the next
Emperoure. Caius ſuccedinge this Tiberius: this was hee
that put to death that holyman Iohn Baptiſte, and becauſe
Herode ſawe the people to be parſwaded by him (his beaſtly
lyfe reproued of the Prophete) he thought it befte to put him
to death, for no man durſt rebuke Herode, great plagues fell
vppon Herode & his power. Tiberius vſed to geue offices
for terme of life not wtout great cauſe remouing any officers:
Who being demaūded why he did ſo? he made this aunſwere
by a fable: There was a certaine man woūded, vnto whoſe
woūde many hūgery fleſhe flees in great nōber flew & ſucked
his wound, this being ſeene of another man yt paſſed by, who
lamented the miſchaunce of the wounded perſon, moued with
pitty & compaſſion came vnto him, both wt helpinge hand and
coūſaile to eaſe him, thincking yt through weakenes, hee was
not able to driue them from him: but the woūded mā aunſwered
greater harme and payne will inſue to mee if freſhe and
greedye flyes do come to my wounde, for theſe filled with my
bloude are not ſo greuous, hauinge theyr fill of it, but if hungrye
flyes do gather to my wounde,Couetous officers. they will with ſuch hungrye
deſyre ſucke my wounde, that they wyll increaſe a newe

payne to me, ſo officers where they be oft remoued, hauinge
no aſſurance of office nor perpetuitye fearinge of remouing,
they do for theyr time more gredily hunte for gaine, & ſearche
more narrowlye, the hidde and inwarde bowels of gain
                     •
                  .
Tiberius returninge to Caprias, fell ſicke of an ague whereof
in the ende he dyed, who hauinge but two ſonnes and thoſe
only by adoptiō, for Druſus his owne ſonne was dead at that
inſtante time, whoſe ſonne Tiberius had made his adoptiue
ſonne, and he made Caius the ſonne of his brother Cermanicus
his other adoptiue ſonne: this Caius was broughte vp in
all excellencye of learninge, interelye beloued of the people,
both for his owne vertues, and for his fathers noble actes:
theſe iii. excellent vertues promoted his father Germanicu
                        •
                     ,
to high dignity: Morū manſuetudo Affabilitas, Humilitas,
that is to ſay, of conditions gentle and meeke, eaſye to be talked
with, and humble or lowlye, by theſe vertues, hee was in
greate eſtimation and honour, both with the Senate and the
common multitude, greate lamentation was made for the
death of Germanicus. Tiberius the Emperour commaunded
Enodus to bringe earlye to him thoſe two yonge children
Caius and Tiberius, praying to God that he might ſee ſome
manifeſte ſigne, who ſhoulde ſuccede him in the Empire, of
theſe two deſirous to leaue to his nephewe his Empire, but
the purpoſe of man is nothinge, the prouidence of GOD
to diſpoſe all things at his will and counſaile, yea the mightieſt
ſtate of Dominions, kinges and kingdomes are in his
handes, to be created as hee ſeeth cauſe and time. This
was ſhewed to him, the ſway of the Romaine Empyre to fall
to him who ſhould come firſt to him, the next day followinge,
Tiberius knowinge this, ſent vnto the Scholemaiſter of his
nephewe Tiberius, cōmaunding him very earneſtly to bring
Tiberius his yonge nephewe to him,Nephewe. thinking thereby to ſatiſfye
the ſentence of the oracle which he had vttered, but God
contrarywyſe diſpoſed for the ſucceſſion of the kinge. The
next day following, Tiberius ye Emperor cōmaunded Enodꝰ
to bringe to him which of theſe .ii. yonge children came firſt,
Enodus departed from yt Emperour, Tiberius & found Caius
                  
before his tente,Ioſephus. for Tiberius was not as it preſente beinge
more deſirous of his breakefaſte, Enodus not knowinge
the ſecrete cogitation and hid purpoſe of the Emperoure Tiberius,
come hyther Caius ſayth hee, the Emperoure thy father
calleth thee, and forthwith Caius with Enodus entered
in to the Emperor, aſſone as the Emperoure Tiberius ſaw
Caius (ſayth Ioſephus:) Tunc primū intellixit maieſtatis
diuinae potentia, et quod non 
                        •
                     it in hominū poteſtate de imperij
cōſtitutione decernere: Then the Emperour Tiberius
ſaw the power of almighty God, & that it is not in mans power
to diſpoſe the ſeate of gouernmente, as we maye ſee in all
Hiſtories how contrarilye to all expectation, thoſe that haue
bene deade in all conſiderations and reſpectes of hope to the
world of enioyinge kingdome,Succeſſion of Princes in ye counſayle of God. haue obtayned kingdome and
triumphed. Tiberius muche lamented himſelfe becauſe his
counſayle, his will and determination was fruſtrate, whiche
be longe purpoſed, and that in his life time, he was not of power
to eſtabliſhe in trone whom hee wyſhed, agayne bee ſawe
what perill woulde happen to Tiberius beinge put from the
ſucceſſion of the Empyre, and the enuye agaynſt many noble
peares againſt Tiberius the Emperour, Tiberius much blamed
himſelfe in that he made ſuch requeſt and peticiō to God,Ioſephus.
for the ſucceſſion at his owne will, for with greate griefe of
minde he departed his life, yet Tiberius vſinge diſſimulation
to appeaſe the wrath and enuye that might riſe betweene Caius
and Tiberius, ſpake theſe words: O my ſonne Caius, althoughe
Tiberius my kinſman be nearer to mee then you be,
yet the ſecrete counſaile of God, his ordinance and my decree
doth reſigne and geue ouer to the: this our Emperiall ſeate,
I do requeſt of the that thou beare in minde no euill againſt
anye man, that hath beene ſeruiſable to me or loued me, neyther
hurt any man for my ſake. I haue aduaunced the only to
this ſtate of royall trone, be not vnfrendly to Tiberius, ſomewhat
kinred moueth you to that loue, and I eſpecially ought
to perſwade you therto, in that I haue beene ye chiefe patrone
and aucthor of this Emperiall ſeate, and that for my ſake you
ſhewe loue to thoſe whom I haue loued, and alſo to haue a

                  
                     •
                  are of Tiberius in that he is your kinſmā, and in honouring
Tiberius you ſhall make your ſelfe ſtronge. Nam ſolitarius
quiſque amplius periculis patet maxime, cum in tanta rerū
celſitudine fuerit cōſtitutus, ad haec quoque quia nec dij impunitum
quidquam relinquunt, quod contra faedus naturae
fuerit perpetratum. For what Prince ſoeuer be wythout
ſome one aſſured ſtaye or ſtronge arme neare vnto him,Ioſephus. hee is
alway in perill beinge in ſuch loftye eſtate, neyther doth God
let go vnpuniſhed anye thinge committed againſt the lawe of
nature. Tiberius the Emperoure ſpake this to make a concord
betweene Caius and Tiberius his kinſman, fearinge after
his death this ſubuertion of Tiberius, Caius for that time
made aunſwere to the Emperour Tiberius very curteouſly,
and promiſed to do all thinges that the Emperour Tiberius
exhorted him vnto, all the Emperoure Tiberius ſpake wyth
deſſimulation to Caius, ſo Caius with diſſimulation requited
the talke of the Emperoure Tiberius. For aſſone as Caius
was created Emperoure,Murther. 
                  Caius killed Tiberius, and Caius
not longe after was alſo murthered. Tiberius raigned
22. yeares. 6. monethes and thre dayes. The Romaynes hearinge
of the death of Tiberius, they were very ioyfull, but openlye
they durſte not ſhewe theyr ioyfull hartes, till it was
manifeſt to all men, for much would be geuen to heare of that
tyrantes deathe, the cauſe why the Romaynes reioyce of Tiberius
death was greate, for he had murthered manye of the
great Peares & nobles of Rome wythout cauſe. His euilles
were ſo great, they were not to be borne, no counſayle could
withdraw his wrath, neyther any meanes pacifye his Ire, as
he liſted ſo was he without diſcretion ledde to all euill, wtout
reaſon inuenting the occaſion of euill,Tiberius. beaſtly & barbarous in
all his doinges, theſe were the cauſes that made Kenas glad
of his death, Machias the free man of Agrippa, bringinge ye
firſte newes to Agrippa of Tiberius death, hee declared the
deathe of the Emperour Tiberius, ſpeakinge this in the Hebrew
tongue: Mortuus eſt inquit Leo, the Lion is dead. For
Agrippa was put in priſon of Tiberius, Caius enioyinge the
kingdome extolled to greate honour Agrippa. Before his

deathe diuerſe thinges happened, as an earthquake whiche
ſwallowed vp the Tower of Pharus, wyth manye other like
thinges: As concerninge his deathe ſome thincke that Caius
poyſoned him, ſome ſaye one waye, ſome another, hee dyed in
villa Luciana, in the ſeuenty & eight yeare of his age, ye whole
time of his gouernmente was three and twentye yeares, hee
dyed in the ſeuentene of the kalendes of Aprill: Caius Aſeronius
proculus, and Caius portius niger beinge Conſulles.
               In the xvii. yere of his raigne Chriſt our Sauiour was crucifyed
of ye Iewes. His death ſhewed what good hartes ye people
bare to him, ſome cryed throw him into the floude Tiber,
many thought the earth vnmete to receyue his bodye, in ſuch
ſorte are wicked Princes loued, theyr life ceaſſinge, thē ſpake
they freely which before his crueltye had couched in ſylence,Euill life.
his ende was as his life beaſtly in all infamye, the earth
vnmeete to receiue a nature and bodye ſo monſterous.
Vnto Rome was hee broughte, and
there ended the funerall Exequies with
ioye, whoſe crueltye all men had
felt, and whoſe beaſtly life al
honeſt natures abhorred.
This was the ende
of Tiberius.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               Caius Caligula.
               
               
                  
                     CAius Caligula raigned foure yeres, this Caligula
was the ſonne of noble Germanicus,
                  Germanicus.
the father was not ſo vertuouſlye inclined as
his ſonne Caligula to al wicked rapted: great
be the commendations of his father Germanicus,
whoſe death was procured by the Emperour,
and by Cneius Piſo, which Piſo had the gouernmēt
of Syria vnder Tiberius,
                  Piſo. this Germanicus was made by the
wyll of Octauius, to ſuccede in the Empyre as Tiberius did.
In fortunate eſtate had Rome beene in, if Germanicus after
the death of Octauius had preuented Tiberius, ſo it came to
paſſe that Caligula ſucceaded Germanicus, his father beinge
dead, this name Caligula was geuen him of the mē of warre,
the mother of Caligula to allure the loue of the people would
ſometime ſhewe him to the armye, this Caligula followinge
the like ſteppes of Tiberius was entirely beloued of all men
before he was Emperour, but in the gouernment hee was ſo
wicked, that not without deſarte the fame of him wente, that
in Rome there came neuer ſuch a tyrant.A ſodaine chaunge. 
                  Caligula was borne
the daye before the kalendes of September, his father Germanicus,
and Caius fonteius Capito beinge Conſulles.
               When he came to age he maryed Iunia Claudilla the daughter
of Marcus Sillanus a noble man,Iunia Claudilla. this Iunia Claudilla dyinge
in childbed, he did allure to vnlawfull luſt Enia Neuia ye
wyfe of Macron promiſinge her mariage, if hee obtayned the
Empyre which after he came to enioye,Pride. pride gate ſuch maiſtrye

ouer him, that one title or name of dignitye contented
him not, but he would be called Pius Caeſar, Caſtrorum filius,
pater excercituū & optimus maximus Caeſar. Nowe
he beganne to challenge honour,Lacke of knowledge. not as a man but as a God,
for the which cauſe hee commaunded certaine of his Gods to
be brought oute of Greece as Iupiter and Olimpicus, whoſe
crowne beinge taken from the head, he put it on his, & would
place himſelfe betweene his Gods to be honoured as a God,
he cauſed a Temple proper to his Godheade,Pride. to be erected &
Prieſtes to honour him, & alſo meete ſacrifices to be offered,
the Image was apparelled in ye Temple as he went himſelfe,
he would ſeeme alſo to talke with Iupiter ye God, be defamed
his mother, and cruelly vſed himſelfe and beaſtlye, this Caligula
deflowred three of his owne ſiſters, followinge therein
the like faſhions in apparell of Iupiter,
                  Iupiter. whom he followed in
apparell,Bacchus. and ſomtime he went like dronken Baccus, vſinge
Baccus dronken and beaſtlye daunce. This Caligula was ſo
wicked his beaſtlye life in all pointes conſidered, that the Hiſtoriographers
haue beene in doubte whether it were beſt to
leaue anye memorye of him. But ſeinge it is profitable to the
poſterity of all ages followinge,Why wicked Prīces ought to be Chronicled. yt they by Chronicles might
know the life, maners, and conditions of Princes and gouernours.
For wicked Princes knowinge theyr wicked life to be
in perpetuall memorye, after what ſort ſoeuer it be, they will
thereby be afrayde and leade their life more vprightlye and
vertuouſly, leaſt theyr filthy body dead in graue, ſhould leaue
like fame to brute theyr worthines. This Caligula was the
firſt Emperour that put on his head a Crowne or Diademe,The Crowne firſt vſed.
and cōmaūded himſelfe to be called Lord, to entreate at large
his beaſtly life, it were not onlye 
                     •
                  ediouſe to ſcyte, but a matter
to filthye for anye, to thincke that anye Prince had ſpente
his dayes in ſuch beaſtlynes,Beaſtlines. not vnlike to vnreaſonable creatures,
who as they be ledde by nature, ſo they obeye vnto nature,Murther. beſydes this, horrible was his murthers as the Chronicles
do ſhewe at large: As Suetonius Tranquillus recordeth,
ſuche was his crueltye that hee woulde compell the
parentes to be preſente at the tormentes of theyr children,

hee burned the Poete Attalina, for a Verſe which hee ſuppoſed
priuilye did not his follye.Attalina. A certaine knighte of Rome
at his commaundemente being caſte to cruell beaſtes to be
deuoured, (who in his tormente cryinge oute to dye an innocente)
hee cauſed him to be broughte to his preſence, whoſe
tongue beinge cutte oute commaunded hym agayne to be
throwne to the beaſtes.
               A certayne man beinge called home from baniſhmente
was demaunded of Caligula howe he paſſed his time in exile?
(hee aunſweared with flatterye,) my prayer was alwayes to
the Gods,Adulatiō rewarded with death. (that as it happened in deede) Tiberius your predeceſſor
mighte dye, and you to raigne after him, Caligula
ponderinge that his baniſhed menne mighte wiſhe in theyr
prayers the like ende to him, ſente therefore into all the Ilands
where vnto they were baniſhed, that euery one of them
mighte be murthered, of infinite murthers, theſe are a fewe
to ſhewe his cruelty, as he herefte them of theyr liues, ſo hee
ſpoyled other of goodes and landes. This was one thinge
that might ſhewe his crueltye, that to his mother or aunte he
would commonly ſay: Tam bona cernix ſimul ac iuſſero demetur.
                  Crueltye.
Your neckes are at my pleaſure be they neuer ſo fayre.
As he paſſed in beaſtly crueltye, ſo alſo he laboured and endeuored
to extinguiſhe learninge, for the woorkes of Homer
were by him quighte aboliſhed, defendinge himſelfe by the
Bookes of Plato intreatinge of a perfitte common wealthe,Tyrants hate learninge.
who expelled Poetes, Virgill the famous Poet, and Titus
Liuius a notable Hiſtoriographer, were throughe the contempte
of the wicked Emperoure almoſt throwen oute of all
Liberaries,Virgil. 
                  Virgill hee regarde not, ſayinge that he was of
no witte and leſſe learninge,Liuie. & Liuie becauſe he was tedious
and not circumſpecte in his Hiſtories. This Caligula alſo vnder
an outward pretence of right ſought to aboliſhe all lawes
and monumentes thereof ſayinge: Se effectū ne quid repondere
poſſunt leges preter equum, that hee woulde redreſſe
lawes and that they ſhould pronounce nothinge but
righte, yet hee ſoughte by all meanes to extinguiſhe learninge,
theſe thinges are but a parte to ſhewe oute of infinite,

his abhomination, crueltye, diſpiſinge of God, and contempt
of man, many wonderfull tokens wente before his deathe, to
ſhewe his ende, a certaine experte man in the Mathematicall
ſciences did foreſhewe vnto him his violente death to be procured,
hee was warned of one who would ſlea him: whom for
feare he put to death, but by another Caligula his death was
wrought,The dreame of Caligula. the daye before he dyed Caligula dreamed, that hee
ſtode in Heauen before the throne of Iupiter, and with Iupiters
right toe was throwen downe to the earth, Caligula was
but xxiii. yeares of age when he dyed,Caligula. his gouer
                     •
                  emente continued
but three yeares and tenne mouethes, ſome write .iiii.
yeares, hee was killed by one Kyria and Sabinus with
other moe, who ſtrake him with thirtye woundes,
ſome thruſt theyr weapons throughe his priuie
members: In the houſe where hee dyed no
night paſſed withoute terrible ſighes,
vntill ſuche time as fyer had
conſumed it.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               Claudius Tiberius the
ſonne of Druſus.
               
               
                  CLaudius Tiberius the ſonne of Druſus, was
borne in the Kalendes of Auguſte at Lugdunum
a Cittye in Fraunce, in the countrye of
Aquitania, ye ſame day there was an Aulter
(as theyr olde maner of ſuperſtition was) erected
to Auguſtꝰ: at which time Iulius Antonius,
and Fabius Africanus were Conſulles, hee was called
Tiberius Claudius Druſus, this Claudius was brother to
Tiberius the Emperour before Caligula, this Claudius was
alſo vncle to Caligula by the fathers ſyde, hee raigned fouretene
yeares,Claudius Tiberius. by nature he was vexed with many infirmityes,
alwayes diſſeaſed of bodye, and ill affected in minde, and as it
ſhould ſeeme, the diſpoſition of his minde following ye frame
of his diſeaſed body, his wit was ſuch that he was more meete
in fielde to be a ſheepehearde, then in place to gouerne: certaine
it is as Hiſtories do note, that when this Claudius Tiberius
was bruted to be placed in the ſeate of the Empyre,
his ſiſter ſayde: Deteſtata ſum tam iniquam populi Romani ſortem.
I deteſt (ſayth ſhee) ſuch abhominable and wicked
ſtate to fall on Rome,Claudius Tiberius. his mother was alſo wont to call him:
Portentum hominis, nec abſolutum, à natura tantū inchoatum:
That is, a wonder and monſterous thinge in reſpecte
of a man, whom nature had not finiſhed perfectly, but left vnperfecte:
who if at any time ſhee had reproued any for follye,Claudius.
ſhe would ſaye he was as foliſhe as Claudius her ſonne.
               
                  
                  Octauius alſo wrytinge diuerſe Epiſtles to Liuia his wife,
noted much his follye, none there were that hoped any goodnes
of him, and yet he was broughte vp in learninge, but neyther
anye education, feare, nor the teacher, coulde enter into
ſuch a monſterous nature, and ſo vntoward a parſon, to plant
in him vertue, knowledge or excellencye, a maruaylous matter
that ſuch a one in whom neither vertue nor any excellente
quallitye, whom nature had framed with conditions monſterous,
whom his owne kinne (for vntowardnes and wicked
diſpoſition) diſpyſed and contempned to enioye ſuch dignitye,Man purpoſeth, God only diſpoſeth.
but ſuch is oftentimes the eſtate of kingdomes and Empyres
that they diſcende as other poſſeſſions and landes do to fortunate
fooles.Rome. Rome hath ſmarted by foliſhe Princes, and by
ſuch alſo as after good education haue applyed themſelues to
practiſe miſcheues,The eſtate of kingdomes. by ſuch the frailty of kingdomes and mutable
eſtate is knowen, he raiſeth the foole to beare Scepter,
not alwayes the wiſe, he huffeth to the like eſtate. Ab armento,
a gregario milite, a compedibus, ab horto, that is, from
the droue, as Galerius Armentarius, from a baſe and meane
ſouldiour, as Mauricius and Phocas, frō a Gardeners ſonne,
as Probus, ſo the eſtate of kingdomes in time to come is vnknowen,The eſtate of kingdomes in ſucceſſion.
when perſonnes ſo vnlikely, ſo baſe for dignitye, are
aduaunced to beare Scepter, and to haue Dominion, ouer
kingdomes. The ſecrete prouidence of God reſerueth many
times vnknowen perſons, and ſuche as in reſpect of other,
the worlde contemneth to do mightye thinges, this mightye
Empyre of Rome,The prouidence of God in kingdomes caughte to rule them a Prince vnmanlye,
withoute courage or wyſedome, who was placed to gouerne
in the Empyre beinge fiftye yeares of age, and for xiiii. yeares
ſpace bare Dominion: who for feare at the firſt hidinge himſelfe
was brought forthe by certaine of the ſouldiours and ſaluted
Emperour, for in thoſe dayes the Senatours were by
force compelled to ſtande to theyr election and choiſe, ſuche a
broyle theyr warrelike ſtomackes rayſed, and theyr ſtoute
courages moued,Forced election. not by reaſon ledde, not by counſayle, not
by good perſwaſions, but raſhly placinge whom they wilfullye
allowed, as it doth appeare by manye Emperours, who

were in the like ſorte choſen, who manye times as they were
by theyr wilfull heades created to ſuch eſtate and dignitye, ſo
likewiſe ſodenly diſplaced, many treaſons alſo were wrought
againſt this Emperour Claudius. For Gallus, Aſininꝰ, Stati
                        •
                     ius,
Coruinus with other moued ſeditiouſlye againſt him.
Rome alſo was infected with ciuill warre by Furius Camillus,
and Scribonius an Embaſſadour of Dalmacia: but within
the ſpace of fiue dayes they were repreſſed, this Emperour
beinge very yonge was eſpouſed to Emilia Lepida:
                  Emilia Lepida. Hee was
alſo betrothed to Liuia Medullina, hee made a deuorce from
Emilia Lepida,
                  Liuia Medullina. 
                  Liuia Medullina dyed on the mariage daye:
After this he maryed Plauſia Herculanilla, and beinge weery
of her,Plauſia Herculanilla. he maryed Elia Petina, none of theſe two liked him,
for both were deuorced from him,Elia petina. 
                  Petina vppon light occaſion
was deuorced, but Herculanilla for her ſpotted life towardes
him who was ſuſpected to woorke the deſtruction of his
life, was put from him, after all theſe hee maryed wyth like
vnfortunate eſtate Valeria Meſſalina,
                  Meſſalina. by her in myſerable
eſtate was the Romaine Empyre. In the dayes of this Meſſalina,
although ſo foliſhe a Prince, ſuche a meacocke, ſuche a
coward of ſtomake, for want of wit ſo foliſhe, for knowledge,
ſo ignorantlye gouerned, yet wanted hee not crueltye, moued
thereto by Meſſalina and other,Meſſalina. who ruled him: all abhomination,
whoredome, bloudſheding, iniuryes, toke place by his
follye:The Courte of Tiberius. his wyfe Meſſalina made his courte and Pallace a
place of baudrye, of all vncleanes, the wyfe and ſeruauntes,
ruled to theyr pleaſure, profite, and aduauncement: no time
hath ſheewed the like beaſtlye behauiour, as in the dayes of
this Emperour: his euill officers were not withoute cauſe
glad that theyr chiefe Prince, and gouernour wanted ſtoute
courage to beare the ſtroke & ſwaye in gouernmente, he wanted
wyſedome, learninge and knowledge: for in a Prince,
ſtoutnes▪ and valiant ſtomacke are neceſſarye to commaunde
in, els the multitude lacketh obediēce, and the life, maners, &
conditions are diſſolute of them, a Prince muſte be both feared
and loued,Feare. workinge with equitye and iudgemente: It
was right well to be thought,Loue. that this Emperour Tiberius
                  
foliſhe and hauinge no regarde of the common wealthe: that
his officers whom he put in office vnder him woulde yll gouerne
the Romaine Empyre with vertue and godlynes, but
rarely, or neuer it happeneth in a Region, Countrye, or common
wealthe to be ſincerely gouerned where ye Prince is not
worthely inſtructed of himſelfe, nor inclined by nature or ſtudye,
to wiſedome, godly pollicies, & coūſayle. Theyr ſubiects
wilbe as Princes to rayſe vnto themſelues peculiar profite,
priuate aduauncement, ſegniorye, & encreaſe of reuenewes,
they wyſhe a continuance of ſuch eſtate, wherein they with all
ſecuritye may enriche themſelues, ſuch were the officers vnder
Claudius Druſus:
                  Felix. as Polibus, Felix, Poſſideus, and Pallas,
Felix who was made liefetenaunte and chiefe Captayne
ouer his Legions.Poſſideus. 
                  Poſſideus his eunuche was in hye reputacion
with him, as one that was chiefe partaker of his victoris:Polubus.
                  Polubus was placed in the middeſt of his Conſulles, but
Narciſſus paſſed them all,Narciſſus. who was this Emperours Secretorye,
for he was maiſter ouer his Lord.Pallas. 
                  Pallas puffed with
pride, by ſumptuous apparell whiche hee woare by his office
beinge Pretor, was made ſo riche that hee made his Lorde a
pore Emperour, whervppon a rumor commonlye wente on
him, and as it were a nippinge taunte that Claudius Tiberius
coulde not want treaſure, if he mighte be receiued into the
ſocietye of his officers.
               And now as concerninge Meſſalina,
                  Meſſalina. who was ſo beaſtlye
that ſhe vſed her adulterous luſt openlye, for the which abhominable
facte many good men withdrewe themſelues, from
thence and therefore they were murthered. Meſſalina kindeled
with greater crueltye did allure by force noble women
of Rome, that were maryed, and maydens who by her wyll
and commaundement were apparelled and tyred as harlots,
and were conſtrayned to do that which nature abhorreth, &
ſhamefaſtnes cloſeth in ſylence to vtter, if it ſo happen that any
good man or well affected matrone did abhorre and deteſt
that villanye,The beaſtlye life of Meſſalina. a cryme was forged and crueltye was ſheewed
without mercye vppon theyr familye, wyfe and goodes.
               
                  Meſſalina rulinge Tiberius thought that ſhe mighte ſo continue

rulinge him: but Tiberius knowinge her follye murthered
her, hee made a promiſe, vppon proteſtation (becauſe
ſo greate was his miſfortune by mariage) to remaine in ſingle
life, who if he ſhould mary at anye time woulde not refuſe
to dye at theyr handes, but that continued not, for he was immediatlye
allured with the loue of Petina.
                  Petina. 
                  Lollia Paulina
wonne alſo his loue,Lollia Paulina. but with theſe he maryed not. Agrippina
wonne his fauoure to marrye with him, thoughe againſt
the conſent of the Senate, inceſt marryages were permitted
by him, becauſe he might the more quietlye enioye her whom
manye denyed, theſe were his children whiche hee had by his
thre wyues:Druſus. Of Herculanilla he begat Druſus and Claudia,
                  Claudia.
of Petina hee begat Anthonia,
                  Anthonia. of Meſſalina hee begat Octauia,
whiche Octauia was after marryed to Nero ſonne to Agrippina
his ſtepſonne.Octauia. In the ende of his life by reaſon of
his vexatiō in ſickenes he was minded many times to ſlea him
ſelfe.The qualites of Tiberius. He was riotous and geuen to all exceſſe in banke
                     •
                  inge,
litle ſleape ſufficed him, verye ſtudious in dyceplayinge, and
ſo excellinge in the ſame, that he made a Booke of that arte,
which dyceplaye came firſt from the inuention of the idle Lydians.
                  Dyce playe.
This Tiberius was cruell by nature, bloudye in all
his doinges, ſo fearefull that hee woulde aſſaye to goe to no
place but he would ſende forth ſpyes to ſearche and viewe the
place,Miſtruſt in tyrantes. they alſo whiche wayted on him were as ſouldiours in
the fielde armed, ſuch was his feare, lighte of credite, whereby
manye were murthered by him, full of forgetfulnes, euen
towarde thoſe that he murthered, forgettinge what hee had
commaunded to be done of theym, as of Meſſalina beinge
ſlayne through forgetfulnes after death hee aſked for her,Forgetfulnes. as
he did the like of manye other.
               This Tiberius was well broughte vp in learning, who in no
parte framed himſelfe to do what good education did nurter
him in, hee repented him at the laſt of the maryage of Agrippina
hauinge no ſonne by her, hee repented that hee made
Nero his adopted ſonne, longe after as it ſhoulde ſeeme hauinge
a foreſhewe of death,Repentance. hee made his Teſtamente: before
hee finiſhed other thinges which hee determined, for Agrippina
                  
his wyfe preuented him wyth poyſon, but his death was
not knowen vntill ſuch time as Nero the ſonne of Agrippina
was knowen to ſuccede, he dyed in the thirde Ides of October,
Afinius Marcellus, Aulius Auiola beinge Conſulles,
when hee was threeſcore and fower yeares of age, the
fouretene yeare of his raigne. A blaſinge ſtarre appeared
before his death, and diuers other thinges
happened, and of all eſtates at that time manye
dyed aſwell of noble peares,
as of other.
(⸫)
            
            
               Domitius Nero.
               
               
                  
                     DOmitius Nero was the ſonne of Domitius Enobarbus,
Agrippina was his mothers name,Agrippina.
whiche Agrippina was the wyfe of Claudius
Tiberius Druſus the Emperour before whom
ſhee poyſoned, and murthered his children, to
make this Nero Emperour. This Nero was borne ix. monethes
before Tiberius dyed, in the xviii. of the kalendes of
Ianuarye, euen at the ſonne ryſinge. As concerninge his
byrth ſtraunge it was, that whereas Nero beinge borne, manye
with frendly gretinges reioyſed and ſaluted his father,
but Enobarbus ſayde: Neque quidquam ex ſe & Agrippina

naſci potuiſſe niſi deteſtabile, & malo publico. Nothing
ſurely cold be borne of him and of Agrippina,
                  A propheſye▪ vppon Nero but that which
is deteſtable, and a decaye of a publike wealth, an ill Propheſye
of ye father vppon his owne ſonne, but afterwardes Rome
felt him, Deteſtabile, & malo publico, both deteſtable and
a deſtroyer of the common wealth. Straunge thinges happen
of Princes both in theyr byrth and death,Why ſtrange thinges happen in the birth & deathe of Princes. and not without
cauſe ſeinge that on them mightye Regions depende, and as
they gouerne, ſo the frame ſometime of a whole world is ruled,
God not without cauſe in them alone by ſtraunge ſignes
and by diuers wonders, foreſheweth eyther maruailous ſucceſſe
or monſterous enterpriſes, and therefore by good reaſon
the good Prince aboue all other,The good Prince. is behelde and loked at, as a
perfecte myrrour and ſimilitude of God, as by maners ſo by
eſtate, on the earthe as a God rulinge. The wicked Prince
thoughe in like eſtate gouerninge,The wicked prince. yet his maners the contrary
do worke, and contrary ſucceſſe pulleth downe his eſtate,
ouerwhelmeth his kingdome, good thinges alwayes foreſhew
of good Princes, of their race, of theyr gouernment and
of an happye continuinge eſtate, monſtrous are thoſe whiche
are foreſheewed of monſtrous Princes,A foreſhew for Princes. as the Chronicles do
ſhewe at large of many. This Claudius Nero the eleuenth
yeare of his age, was made adoptiue ſonne to Claudius, and
at the ſame inſtante geeuen ouer to Annius Seneca,
                  Annius Seneca. whoe
was a Senator both wyſe and graue, ſingularlye learned,
whoſe excellent Tragedies for worthye argumente, and ſentence,
do excell. It is ſayde of Lactantius Firmianus, that
Paule the holy Apoſtle wrote to learned Seneca as concerninge
Nero,
                  Paule. the firſt night that he was geeuen ouer to the tuicion
of Seneca. Seneca ye ſa
                     ••
                  e night by a vyſion in a dreame
ſawe that Nero did ſeeme in wordes to cōmaunde the Emperour:Nero.
wherein he noted his beaſtly behauior in time to come.
Seneca beſtowed much care and diligence to frame ſo monſterous
a nature into an excellent parſō worthy to rule,Seneca. but educatiō
toke ſmall effecte in him, whē opportunitye was geuen
that his nature might ſhewe frelye what hee was, for a kingdome
beinge a free eſtate, geueth many occaſions vnto ye wanton

& diſſolute natures to followe theyr inclynation, though
otherwiſe ye godly, by theyr tutors education do alter & turne
theyr lewde affection. Certaine Chroniclers do write that as
concerninge the gouermente of Nero for fiue yeares ſpace, he
excelled in all vertues.Traianus. 
                  Traianus a godlye Emperour after
Nero, was wont to ſaye: that there was no Prince like in gouernment
to Nero for fiue yeares ſpace, a lamentable caſe yt a
Prince for gouernmente famous,Nero. for life vertuous, and well
learned, that ſo ſone in fiue yeres ſpace, both vertue & godlye
lyfe ſhoulde ceaſe in him, and horrible vices to raigne in theyr
places, and whereas before he was a light to all Princes for
his gouernment, now a life moſt beaſtlye chaungeth him frō
a worthye man,Why Princes ought to liue warelye. to a brutiſhe beaſte, from a Prince and chiefe
gouernour, to a bondſlaue, daungerous is that eſtate and full
of perill wherein dignitye ſhall ſo exalte that, excepte the gouernor
daily do liue warely and circumſpectly, obliuion will
ſone caſt him downe from knowledge of himſelfe: Such is ye
brittle eſtate of kingdomes. All kindes of villanye and crueltye
hee exerciſed,Nero. Tauernes and quaffinge houſes was hys
delighte to haunte, and alſo to vſe lighte companye, murtheringe
as many as happened to meete him, beinge armed with
his beaſtly follye, and beinge thereby in perill of his life daylye,
his follye ſo encreaſed, and his beaſtlye life, that he rauiſhed
Ruberia a certaine mayde profeſſing chaſtitye to Veſta.
                  Ruberia.
He would haue maryed Acten who was made of a bonde woman
a free,Acten. and alſo would haue forced certaine Senators by
othe to foreſwere them ſelues, and to ſay that ſhe was diſcended
of a kings bloud, but that would not be. Againſt nature
he would haue framed Sporus his eunuche out of kinde to be
a woman,Sporus. and would haue maryed him, wherevppon this rumor
went, It had bene better with the eſtate of Rome, if his
father Domitius had had ſuche a wyfe, meaninge that then
this wicked and beaſtly Noro had neuer bene borne, be deflied
his owne mother hauinge no conſideration of his owne kindred
neither reſpecte of any other,Nero. in continuance hee grewe
ſo full of follye, that he himſelfe as Sardanapalus was wonte
to do that voluptuous Prince of Thaſſirians, was tyred as

Virgins are when they marrye, and for that cauſe he called
the aſſemble of ye Senate, who as it ſeemed durſt do no other,
but geeue eare vnto his follye, and to ſeeme contente therewith,
by holdinge theyr peace, for therein they thought more
wiſedome to kepe ſecrete & as to ſeeme not to know the great
follye of ſo beaſtly a Prince with whom, godly counſayle and
profitable perſwaſions could nothinge availe:Tyrantes. Beſydes this
he added more beaſtlines, he vſed to cladde himſelfe with the
ſkinne of a beaſt, and beaſtly did vſe that,Nero. which nature remoueth
from ſighte, and as he defiled himſelfe with his mother
Agrippina, ſo he killed her immediatlye, & euen as Clytemneſtra
murtheringe her huſbande, was murthered by her
ſonne Oreſtes, euen ſo Agrippina murthering Claudius her
huſbande,Bloudy end. was at the lengthe at the handes of Nero in like
ſort murthered,The ſecrete counſaile of God. ſo by one meanes or other God permitteth awaye
and rayſeth vppe thoſe whiche are leaſte thoughte of to
ſcourge ye wicked, he rewarded very vertuouſly his Scholemaſter
Seneca beinge a Senator not for any deſarte in tranſgreſſinge
the Lawes of the Romaine Empyre, but becauſe
wyth chaſtiſemente and correction while age and tyme ſuffered
he did force him to learninge and vertuous life,Nero. but now
he ſheeweth what a cruell hart, what beaſtlye conditions his
childiſhe body harboured, that which the feare of the rodde,
the awe of Scholemaſter repreſſed, nowe the free ſtate of life
ſetteth out in him at large and pictureth him in his owne nature
& proper conditions,Seneca. ye reward of Seneca muſt be death,
becauſe he taught him vertue, and hee loued vyce: wherevppon
Seneca finding ſo cruel a iudge, deſyered his owne death,
who dyed in a bathe, his vaynes beinge cutte: his death was
eaſye thoughe the iudgement cruell, no doubt but that Seneca
made longe proteſtation, of his trauaile and diligence beſtowed
in the education of him: for the whiche rather there
was cauſe of aduauncement to honour in Seneca,
                  Nero. then ſo cruell
a ſentence to procede from ſo bloudy a tyrante. No eſtate
of life is ſo neceſſary, no ſtate for worthynes ſo profitable,The ſtate of the Scholemaſter. to
all partes of the common wealth as the ſtate of the Scholemaſter
is, he beinge of good life and well learned, for euen as

good education was the firſt cauſe that made brutiſhe people
cyuill, the fierce, meeke, the fooliſhe wyſe, the ignorante learned.Education.
Euen ſo continually the ſame education preſerueth men
in that good eſtate to knowe God, to learne wiſedome, and to
excell in all excellencye of arte, where otherwyſe it could not
but followe, that the poſteritye woulde be as brutiſhe in time
to come, as that theſe ornamentes and giftes of God had neuer
bene:Learninge. For by learninge, the Prince himſelfe, his nobles &
pieres do knowe God, and in theyr eſtate are taught to rule ye
populous, raſhe, and heedeleſſe multitude to obeye, onlye by
learninge pollitike lawes,Learninge. godlye gouernmente, wyſe & ſage
counſaylours are made: and yet of all eſtates moſte thanckeleſſe
is that office, leaſt accepted and commonlye iniuriouſlye
rewarded. There was no vyce to be named that he wanted,
as he was laſciuioūs ſo he was prodigall, hauinge no mediocritie
in his expences,Caius. he prayſed therefore his vncle Caius in
that he had riotouſlye ſpent the innumerable treaſures of Tiberius
the Emperour in ſo ſhort ſpace. As hee was ſtraunge
and ſumptuous in his apparel, for he neuer vſed to weare one
garment twyſe,Prodigalite. ſo manye other thinges alſo be receyued of
his prodigalitye: More thinges of his murthers, and alſo of
his beaſtlye pleaſures, which to recite woulde be to tedious,
ſome alſo of his maners, it is better to couer with ſylence, thē
to make manifeſt to all men by wrytinge.Nero. 
                  Domitius Nero
maryed two wyues beſides Octauia, one was called Poppea
Sabina, and alſo Statilia Meſſalina who had murthered their
huſbandes,Murther. and them alſo at lengthe he murthered, and ſuche
as were of his kinred he alſo ſlewe, his inſolencye was ſuche,
that no meane obſerued, no eſtate ſpared, but whom beaſtlye
Iuſt affected,Tyrannye. them he ſpoyled of life: He burned alſo (through
follye with his owne handes) many houſes and ſtreates of the
Cittie of Rome, ſayinge the faſhion of the houſes and the by
lanes lyked him not, many thinges were written in lattine &
Greeke, and openlye ſet forth of him in theſe wordes:
               
                  Nero alter oreſtes,
                  Nero. 
                  matricida, nouus ſponſus. Nero propriam
matrem occidit. With many other thinges. At the ſame
time a Comette or blaſinge ſtarre appeared, the which Nero
                  
beinge not ignorante of, what it commonly did foreſhew, feared
his owne eſtate miſtruſted his owne life,A Comete. for as Pontanus
wryteth. Ventorum quoque certa dabunt tibi ſigna,
cometae, illae etiam belli motus fera
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      arma minantur, magnorum
& clades populorum, & funera regum, aquarū ſignificāt
penuriam. Comets (ſayth he) do geue certaine ſignes
of ſtormye wyndes, cruell and bloudye warres, a ſlaughter
of people, death of kinges, and ſcarſitye of water.
               
                  Lucan writinge of the warres of Pompeie and Caeſar,
                  Comets. ſheeweth
in Verſe that Comets, Sunt magnorum Regum fatalia
ſigna: Comets (ſayth hee) be the deadlye ſignes of Kinges,
for immediatlye after they were ſeene, Pompeie dyed,
and Caeſar dyed, and the moſt of the nobility of Rome, as the
Hiſtoryes of thoſe times do note. Of late dayes after ye death
of Edward the ſixte, in the firſt yeare of the raigne of Queene
Marye, a blaſinge ſtarre appeared, but what terrible things
hath followed, what chaunge of kingdomes, and what death
of Princes?Comets. two Emperours haue dyed ſince, Fraunce loſte
two kinges, many other Regions had by death lacke of their
Princes, what plagues beſides hath happened in other Regions,
what bloudſhed by deadlye hatred of ambitious Princes?
As concerninge the blaſinge ſtarre, Nero ſeekinge to
put the miſchiefe from himſelfe, as ſone as he learned of one
Babilus (beinge experte in Aſtrologye) that theſe Comets
did ſignifye the lamentable eſtate of ſome Princes,Babilus. he therevppon
put to deathe the mightieſt and the moſte nobleſt in the
Romaine Empyre,Man purpoſeth and God diſpoſeth. but his pollicyes preuented not deathe,
for immediatlye after, his lamentable life caught a lamentable
death. After that Nero had raigned xiiii. yeares through
his ill gouernment he was neglected, the fauour of people declyned
from him,Vertue. as vertue kindeleth l
                     •
                  ue, ſo vice moueth hatred,Vice.
the prouince of Fraunce fell from him, and many other
Regions: it was alſo foreſhewed by the Aſtronomers, that
Nero ſhould ceaſe ſhortly from his eſtate. Immediatlye vppon
that Spayne ſhranke from him and theyr Captaine Galba
was vſurpinge:Galba. Which thinge as ſone as Nero hearde of,
as a mad man depriued of witte and ſences, rentinge his clothes,

beatinge himſelfe ſayd: that he was vndone, whoſe lamentable
eſtate manye did ſeeke to eaſe by comfortable perſwaſions:
ſayinge, this was no newe and ſtraunge thinge,
for ye like happeneth dailye to all Princes: but Nero aunſwered
the like happened to no Prince, for he lyuinge ſhould leaſe
his kingdome. For all this his bloudye harte ceaſed not to
worke his pretenced miſchiefe, he went about to poyſon all ye
Senate in bankets,Nero. to deſtroy by fyer the Cittie, and by cruell
beaſtes to deuoure them. Night by night, hee was troubled
with terrible dreames,A dreame. in a viſion it ſeemed to him that
he gouerninge a ſhippe, the tacle of it was taken from him by
violence, and himſelfe drawen of Octauia his wyfe whom hee
murthered before into a darcke dungion, another time hee
dreamed that he was couered with an infinite nomber of antes:
and many other thinges beſydes happened vnto him terrible
both in viſion and dreames, his eſtate afterwarde declined,
his power decayed, there was no frende to defende him,
his beaſtly life,The feare of tyrantes. his bloudye ſlaughters vexed his conſcience,
which put him from all hope, often times he had in minde to
flea himſelfe,Galb
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   and hyde him for feare of Galba, who ſought to
diſplace him, what with feare and myſerye and hunger this
newe vnaccuſtomed life pearſed him,Myſerye. ſo that hee was compelled
for thyrſt to drincke the filthye puddle water, and ſayde
with lamentable voyce: An haec Neronis decocta, what is
Nero come to this to eate of ſuch brothe, he wāted his Princelye
bedde, his cloake was his pallet, and ſtrawe his pillowe.
The Senate of Rome did determine that Nero ſhoulde be
whipped to deathe with roddes, accordinge to the olde vſage
of theyr aunceſtours, his necke yoaked with a forke. Nero ſeinge
himſelfe forſaken of all his frendes, at midnighte departed
out of the Cittie, Ephannius & Epaphroditus waytinge
on him, with Neophitus and Sporus. This was the ende of
Nero, tremblinge he thruſt himſelfe through with his owne
ſworde, his wicked man Sporus did thruſte for warde his ſhakinge
hande, and beinge not all deade a chiefe Captayne of
Galba comminge to him fayninge by wordes to haue come to
helpe him ſayde:The ſayinge of Nero. 
                  Sero, & haec eſt fides: to late (ſayth Nero)

who ſhoulde a man truſt? meaninge by Galba who hauinge
the chiefe gouernment vnder him did ſhrincke from him, and
ſo he dyed hauinge his funerall without any pompe: when he
was but a childe, hee was excellentlye trayned vp in all learninge,
a good Poete but euillye he vſed the ſame, being a wicked
Prince was deſirous of fame in tytlinge his name to manye
things.Neronius. He called the moneth of Aprill Neronius: Rome
alſo hee woulde haue called Neropolis, that is, the Cittie of
Nero, as at this daye Conſtantinople is called by the name
of Conſtantine Emperoure, whiche is as muche to ſaye in
Greeke as the cittye of Conſtantyne. Hee was withoute all
Religion and feare of God,The firſt parſecution of ye Chriſtians. tormentinge cruellye the Chriſtians,
puttinge there to death Peter and Paule. He dyed
the xxxii. yeare of his age the ſame daye that hee murthered
ſometime his wyfe Octauia, but Vologeſus the kinge of the
Parthians as it ſeemeth,Vologeſus. loued him in his life, when as in
death he had more care of him then the Romaines, with whō
he gouerned: He ſente Embaſſadours deſyringe lyſence to erecte
to him a monumente, but all countreyes and prouinces
that were in the iuriſdiction of the Romaine
Empyre, did ſo much reioyſe of this wicked Nero
his deathe, that they all did put on theyr toppinge
tanke hattes,The death of Nero. (which bonde men do
vſe to weare when they be ſet at liberty)
and ſo they triumphed of his death
beinge deliuered from ſo wicked
a tyraunte.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               
               
                  THis Sergius Galba deſcended from the
noble houſe of the Sulpitians, who raigned
but ſeuen monethes and ſeuē dayes,Ambition.
beinge of no aliance or kindred vnto Nero,
but commonlye as couragious ſtomackes
ambitiouſly minded, do alwayes
by diuers perſwaſions moue, & procure
to ſubuert the eſtate of the lawfull Prince: Euen ſo the wicked
Galba not content with his eſtate, not by vertue, or good
conſideration, was moued to ſeeke innouation and change of
this eſtate in Nero, but was wickedlye alſo in hart diſpoſed,
of life alſo beaſtly, and ſought as wicked men do, to catche to
himſelfe an eſtate more mightye, to a name more glorious, &
to haue a tytle of greater worthynes, but ſone his eſtate and
title fell who ſo vniuſtlye for ambition ſake and degree of honour
diſplaced his maiſter and Emperour Nero:
                  Ambition. Ambitious
heades are beaten with ſtormye blaſtes, they liue and dye
vngloriouſlye that ſubuerte the eſtate of anye Prince, yea
thoughe it be of the moſt wicked, neyther haue they ſecuritye
of eſtate,The ende of ambitious heades. or continuance that by falſe meanes and bloudy factes
do aſcende to honour: who ſo readeth the whole Chronicles,
euen from the beginninge of Thaſſyrian Empyre, let
him note the Perſian kingdomes, and reade of the Greekes,
and ſo ende with the Romaynes: way alſo the Chronicles of
other Princes and eſtates of time: And this ſhalbe founde a
truthe, a hiſtorye moſte certaine: Waye the Chronicles of

Fraunce from Faramundus the firſt kinge,Carolus Caluus. to Carolus Caluus,
from Carolus Caluus to Pipinus, from Pipinus to theſe
dayes:Brutus. Cōſider alſo our noble Iſland of Britaine, from Brutus
to Cadwallader, note the eſtate of the Saxon Princes euē
to theſe dayes,Ambition. and you ſhall finde ye like ſucceſſe of kingdome,
the like eſtate of Princes, and fall of ambitious heades.
               
                  Sergius Galba in like ſort framed the kingdome to himſelfe, &
ſo in like wyſe ended it: Galba ſucceded Nero deſcendinge of
a noble houſe and was borne, Marcus Valerius Meſſala, and
Gneius Lentulus beinge Conſulles, in the ix. kalendes of Ianuary
neare to Terrachina, hee was made the adoptiue ſonne
to his ſtepmother, & was called by the name of Liuius, which
name he kept vntill he became Emperour, and he was called
Lucius for Sergius,
                  Lucius. it is ſayd that Auguſtus the Emperour,
(Sergius beinge but a childe, in the companye of other children)
ſaluted him, Auguſtus takinge him by the cheeke ſaid:
Et tu fili imperio noſtro creſce,
                  A Propheſy. And thou ſonne growe vppe
to rule this kingdome, the which thinge Auguſtus knewe by
this meanes: The graunde father of Sergius in a greate tempeſt
of lightninge, as his office was in ſacrifice, makinge expiation:
an Eagle flewe vnto him and caughte the ſacrafice
from his handes, and caryed it to an oake. Talke then wente:
Summum ſed ſerum imperium portendi familiae ſue: That
is, the Empyre ſhould fall to ſome one yt ſhall diſcende of his
familye or noble houſe though longe after: his graund father
ſmylinge ſayd:Mules. 
                  Cum mula pepererit: That is, when a Mule
ſhall haue a foale: meaninge thereby neuer: As Ariſtotle &
Plinne, both ſhew cauſes that by naturall courſe, barrennes
is founde to be in them: but the Chronicles do ſhewe diuerſe
times the contrarye, but in maner of a wonder. For Herodotus
ſheweth that at the ſame time,Cyrus. when Cyrus the kinge
of the Perſians did winne the mighty Cittye Babilon, a mule
broughte forthe a foale: At ſuche times as wonders be foreſhewed,
beaſtes haue broughte forthe creatures of contrarye
kinde, as at the deſtruction of Hieruſalem many like ſtrange
thinges appeared, a ſheepe to bringe forthe a calfe, not ſo
ſtraunge then a Mule a foale, though commonlye nature denyeth

it.Arcadia. Yet Theophraſtus affyrmeth that in Arcadia Mules
commonly haue theyr foales. Galba bearing in minde the
Eagles flight,Fonde Propheſyes amonge the Romaynes. and the aunſwere of his graundfather, did the
more bodlye aſſaye that enterpriſe, becauſe hee doubted not
of the enterpretation of that wonder. In the ende it happened
that Galba aſpyred to the Empyre, his education was ſinguler,
in all liberall artes and ſciences very ſtudious, eſpeciallye
in the ciuil lawe. As ſone as hee came to age and rype
to mariage,Lepida. he toke to him Lepida, which Lepida dyinge and
leauinge to Galba two children, he remayned the reſte of his
life without mariage, as concerning what degree & eſtate he
paſſed in Rome by office it were tedious to ſcite: but nothing
was done of him before he came to be Emperour, but ye equity,Ambition roteth out vertue.
iuſtice, clemēcy, vpright dealing maiſtered his affections:
He ruled Affrica and Aquitania, Germany alſo by his office
obeyed him, & noble fame by worthines then bruted him: but
afterward theſe thinges ceaſed in him: for wyſedome follye,
for vertue vice, for famous actes, ignomye, longe hee ruled
not, and many things happened which foreſhewed his death.
This Galba was accompted in life a glotton, geeuen ouer
wholly to bellye cheare, to immoderate exceſſe of eating and
drincking, to beaſtly life ſo exceſſiuelye to ſerue the bellye, as
beaſtes, whom nature hath framed, to the earth onlye lyuing
to eate, ſeruinge the bellye, obeyinge with luſte and pleaſure
altogether the ſame. The Emperour Galba was ruled alwayes
in all thinges by the counſayle of three whom hee entyrelye
beloued Iulius,
                  Iulius Cornelius. 
                  Cornelius, and Celius, in ſo muche yt
in his Pallace and all places els,Celius. theſe thre were called (Galba
his ſcholemaiſters) becauſe as it ſeemeth hee woulde attempte
nothinge without the counſaile and procuremente of
them: No doubt but that the Empyye of Rome was in myſerable
eſtate when the Emperour was ignorante,The happye gouernment in a wyſe Prince. howe to
beare Dominion and regimente: Sildome times they had
fortunate ſucceſſe in theyr enterpriſes, when the witte, pollicye,
counſaile, and ſure affiance of the Emperour did depend
vppon the wittie conueyance, and pollicy of his counſellours,
who in his princelye affayres, ought to be inferiour to no coū
                  ſellour,

in vertue, learninge, pollicye and counſaile. In our
Engliſhe Chronicles it is moſt manifeſt in Henry the fift his
dayes,Henrye the fifte. what fortunate ſucceſſe hee had in his kingdome, with
what conqueſt of other Realmes, how in glory and felicitye,
hee triumphed againſt his ennemyes? the Scottes and the
French men were ouerthrowne by him: theyr Realmes and
Dominiōs ſpoyled:The wyſe Prince. he beinge Crowned in Paris. This Hē
                  ry
had coūſaile, wiſedome & pollicye in himſelfe to atcheiue any
enterpriſe, he was a kinge ouer his people, & both dreaded
and beloued, and alſo a counſeller to his counſailours, of a
Princelye harte, feared without bloudſhed, wittelye & with a
dreaded maieſty he aunſwered theyr Embaſſages, they more
deſyrous of his abſence then couetinge his preſence, but then
afterwarde in his ſonnes dayes (which was Henry the ſixte)
who was a Prince of no courage,Henry the vi. of ſmall pollicye, in counſayle
to worke and conueye, his great enterpriſes wanted ſtomake
to commaunde: his domeſticall gouernment was maymed
at home, & for lacke of courage put out of his kingdome,
throwne into the Tower and there ended his life.Henrye ye vii. Henry the
ſeuenth a Prince of greate wyſedome, in how great felicitye
was his kingdome, the Prince himſelfe endued with all coū
                  ſayle,
whoſe breaſte was full of knowledge: ſingularlye learned,
graue, conſtant in his doinges, that his enemyes feared
him for his vertues, his ſubiectes loued him at home, in all
Regions he was commended, and of al famous Princes wel
liked.Henry ye viii. Henry the viii. deſeruinge perpetuall fame of memorye
to whom neyther Achilles, Galba, Epaminondas, neyther
Sarpedon the mightye, neyther Caeſar, nor Pompeie,
for ſuche matters as he for the eſtate of his kingdome atchieued,Fraunce.
might be compared: For as Fraunce recordeth his martiall
enterpriſes,Scotlande. ſo Scotlande hath not forgot his victoryes:
hee in all partes directed his princely hart to vertuous vſage,
and clemencye, with all bounteouſnes rewarded theyr nobilitye,
beſtowing vppon them Princely giftes,Scottes. and large pentions,
but they falſely miſuſed ſo royall a harte, like periured
truſe breakers, as witneſſeth their kinge Iemye, whoſe bones
lyeth here,King Iemy. a perpetuall memorye of the ſame: but ſithens yt
                  
time manye like ſleightes and falſe conueyances haue beene
wroughte of the Scottes towards the Princes of this lande.
               Kinge Iemye mighte well haue be contente with his
owne lande, rather then periured of his ſacrede othe and promiſe
of a Prince,The othe of a Prince. which ought to be inuiolable, in the abſence
of our noble gouernour to ſeeke innouatiō, to make an vprore
and moue ſedition, the Prince beinge abſente: hee ſoughte to
winne all, but he loſt his life, he purchaſed hatred, perpetuall
ignominye to himſelfe and to his Realme, not thoughte worthye
of buriall,A Scotiſhe Propheſye. his falſe Propheſye deceyued him, Ibis, redibis,
non ſed in bello peribis: His body beinge founde deade,
a fayre Agathe of gold was founde about his necke with theſe
wordes in lattine: Nulli ſeruire cupiat, qui ſui dominus eſſe
poſſit. He that maye be his owne man, and liue at his owne
will, let him be a ſeruaunt to no man: A ſentence meete for a
Prince. And he that will liue of his owne, let him not 
                     •
                  eeke
vnlawfull meanes to ſpoyle from other.Galba. 
                  Galba likewiſe vniuſtlye
ſeekinge, (being a ſubiecte) to put downe his maiſter
Nero was at the length (rulinge but ſeuen monethes and ſeuen
dayes) murthered, great was his cōmendation for warfare,
if he had well vſed himſelfe, great was his prayſe in gouernment
before he was Emperour, wherevppon he coulde
not ſo ſone enter his pauilion or tente, but immediatly a voice
was hearde commonly: Diſce militare miles, hic eſt Galba,
non Getulicus, learne to be a warriour, for this is valiante
Galba not Getulicus whiche name was geuen to the laſte
Tiberius,
                  Galba. who was a fooliſhe man withoute ſtomacke.
               
                  Galba had valiantnes and ſtrength of bodye, but ſtrengthe of
bodye withoute wiſedome, is as armor to a madde man, as
Iſocrates wryteth therof to kinge Demonicꝰ ſildome times
alſo valiantnes and wyſedome are poſſeſſed in one bodye, for
both Aiax and Hector wanted the wyſedome of Vliſſes,
                  Wiſedome. and
the graue counſaile of Neſtor: & ſo did Diomedes alſo, Sarpedon
the mighty,Valiantnes. 
                  Paris the beautifull, and luſtye Troilus.
Galba althoughe by nature he was framed to all excellencye
in feates of warre, wyſedome & pollicy, yet lacked he the diſcretiō
to gouerne,Galba. he was murthered at ye length at a certaine

lake called Curcius, of his men of warre, who when they
ranne vppon him violently, he ſaid: Ego veſter ſum, vos mei,
I am your gouernour, & you my people, but nothinge perſwaded
them, certaine Germaynes full willinglye woulde
haue holpen him, but they came to late, to whom as it ſeemeth
he ſhewed himſelfe a mercifull Prince. Galba being deade a
certaine meane ſouldiour cut of his heade & brought it Otho
who vſurped vppon Galba, and dyed afterwarde violentlye
as Galba did,Of ambition the frutes. for he killed himſelfe. Well, the head of Galba
beinge brought to Otho, he gaue it to his blacke guarde,
who takinge it on a ſpeare, caryed it about the Tentes with
mockinge and ſpitefull woordes, makinge an exclamacion or
ſhoute: Galba cupide fruaris etate tua. Galba well haue you
wiſhed longe life and well might you fare, whiche ſcoffe and
tauntinge wordes roſe herevppon, that he being prayſed of a
certaine man for his bodye being in well lykinge, & of goodly
complexion, and though aged, yet luſtye and full of ſtrength:
Galba made aunſwere, thoughe I be well ſtriken in age,
yet ſtrengthe fayleth me not. This he woulde ſpeake
in his life time. This Galba was of a goodlye ſtature,
bauld, his eyes ſomewhat grene of colour,
houke noſed, his handes and feete croked by a
longe ioynte ſickenes, hee was ſeuentye
and three yeares of age when he dyed,
rulinge ſeuen monethes and
ſeuen dayes.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     SIluius Otho, a man diſcended of noble
bloude, and from the Princes of Hetruria,
his graundfathers name was Marcus
Siluius Otho, a knight of Rome, his
mother was but of meane parentes, his
fathers name was Lucius Otho, whoſe
mother did lyneallye diſcende from aunceſtours
of hye nobilitye, this Lucius
Otho was not vnlike to Tiberius the Emperour, for manye
by Phiſiognomye and ſtature of bodye, affyrmed him to be ye
ſonne of Tiberius.
                  Siluius Otho. This Siluius Otho, whom nowe I intreate
of as Emperoure ſucceaded Sergius Galba, not by
right ſucceſſion or by merite, whereby he could challenge any
ſuch thinge, neyther yet throughe any famous enterpriſe that
might inflame the hartes of the wyſe, and graue Senatours
towards him, but by the raſhe and brutiſhe fauoure of ye men
of warre, who more by will, then by counſaile, more by raſhe
and vnaduiſed meanes, then by wittye perſwaſions, diſpoſed
that eſtate, not beinge meete for euery parſon, nor for euerye
one that is by bloude noble, ſince onlye the worthy in life, the
parſon renowmed by deſarte of worthye fame meritethe to
poſſeſſe and enioye, the Scepter, power, and aucthoritye of ſo
highe an office.The ſeate of Princes. So theſtate of kingdomes is toſſed from the
worthye to the vnworthye, from noble to baſe, from baſe to
meane, & from meane returneth againe to noble: The childe
enioyeth ſometime not beinge rype of yeares, the throne and

Scepter of the hore heared Prince, and greate and mightye
thinges God ſuffereth to be compaſſed and wrought in ſuche
weake bodies of witte, not rype for counſaile throughe theyr
tender yeares, and wher as kingdomes haue fallen frō mightye
Princes, vnto women, God hath ſo wrought for them, yt
the puiſante kinges in their gouernment haue dreaded them,
yea large and mighty haue beene theyr victoryes,Women. their tytles
famous, theyr name in perpetuall memory, ſo it is that where
ſtrength is not loked for, nor ſtomacke by force to cōmaunde,
yet by the prouidence of God, alwayes the moſt mighty haue
geuen place to the weake, & the furious & couragious Princes
haue bene at a becke,Alexander. ready to ſerue them, (except Alexder.)
Who euer entered ſo farre into India? who did more
valiantlye in Ethiopia? Who with greater felicity hath aſſayed
ſo great thinges? & for ſucceſſe obtayned like victories?
as Semiramis the wyfe of Ninus the firſt?Semiramis. who ruled xlii. yeares
after Ninus, beinge a woman, in the apparell of a man,
cauſinge one kinde of attyre commonly to be vſed amonge all
Thaſſyrians: and as it appeareth by many Hiſtories of great
antiquitye, no counſailour of Aſſyria paſſed her in pollicye,
no meanes wāted in her to inuente, to aſſaye great and mightye
thinges, and ſo greate, as that the poſteritye followinge,
did wonder of the ſame, and this preſent age as thinges moſt
maruailous do behold them.Kingdome. What be kingdomes? of what
force be the mighty Princes, where God geeueth not ſucceſſe
to theyr enterpriſes?Alexander. 
                  Alexander was farre inferiour for
wiſedome, for pollicye, for graue and profounde knowledge
vnto Iulius Caeſar,
                  Iulius Caeſar. to Auguſtus, to Hanniball, and Scipio:
yet how inferiour were theyr actes,Auguſtus. the ſucceſſe of their enterpriſes,Hanniball.
and tytle of conqueſt to Alexander? Darius the wiſe
Prince of Perſia to whom God had geuen wiſedome and valiantnes,Scipio.
contemninge the yonge age of Alexander,
                  Darius. by an Epiſtle
admoniſhed him to leaue of his bragging toyes & childiſh
boaſtinges: thinking it a thinge impoſſible Alexāder to
ouercome him, he made no accompt of Alexander, but in the
ende he was content to geue a great part of his? Dominiō euē
vnto the floude Euphrates, and his daughter to wyfe: but Alexander
                  
refuſed the offer, ſeekinge to haue Darius ſeconde
to him: in the ende Darius was put to flighte, his kingdome
poſſeſſed of Alexander, his wife and children taken, & in flight
he was murthered,Beſſus. not of Alexāder, but of Beſſus, who was
chiefe vnder him: finallye his eſtate wholye thus did decline.
As concerninge the Amazones,
                  The Amaz
                        •
                     
                     nes. howe farre ſtretched theyr
kingdome? what mightye Citties builded they? and what
great conflictes had they with Princes? and what ouerthrowes
did they geue them? And as they wt diuers others maruailouſlye
beyonde all expectacion haue ryſen ſodainlye vnto
great fame,Man purpoſeth, God diſpoſeth. Dominion and power, through the fall & ruine
of other, whom God would not permit lenger to gouerne, euen
ſo contrarye to the expectation of all men ſucceaded this
Otho Siluius, a man farre vnmete, and not thought of ye Romaynes
worthye to poſſeſſe that eſtate. To make a full diſcourſe
of him,Otho. 
                  Otho was borne the .iiii. kalendes of Maye in
the Conſulſhippe of Camillus Aruntius, and Domitius Enobarbus,
euen from his firſt childhode vices had deepe roote in
him, whoſe wicked and lewde diſpoſition was oftentimes by
his father recompenſed with ſharpe correction, who followinge
voluptuouſnes, ledde his life with a fine ſtrumpet of Neroes
Court, which was aged, in face olde wythered, and with
vnpleaſant and croked limbes maiſtered, by whoſe fauoure,
acquaintance, and frendly entertainment, he was ſo acceptable
and in ſuch highe reputacion with the wicked Emperour
Nero, as both his maners, his nature, and whole diſpoſition,
ſeemed to be framed as Nero himſelfe was inured.Nero. 
                  Nero ſo
well lyked the behauiour of Otho, that he made him priuie of
his ſecrete villanyes and counſayles, and of the deſtruction of
his mother Agrippina. Otho growing to luſtye age bore
great enuye and deadlye hatred againſt Galba, by whom Nero
loſſe his kingdome and diſpayred of his life: but Otho Siluius
wanted courage and hardye ſtomacke to aſſaye Galba,
he hated Galba,
                  Galba. but he dreaded him. Seleucus alſo a famous
man in the Mathematicall ſciences by a coniecturall natiuitye,
comforted Otho Siluius, and procured forwarde his cowardlye
harte perſwadinge him not to feare Galba. Quippe

audaces fortuna Iuuat timidoſque repellit Aude, potenti
eſto animo. hoc fretus Galba Neronem deuicit. For (ſayth
hee) fortune exalteth the boulde venturour, and repelleth a
cowarde: Galba beinge couragious, deſtroyed Nero: and
thou procedinge proſperouſlye ſhalt Galba ſubdue, Be bould
therefore and aſſaye greater thinges, your natiuitye alſo geeueth
fortunate ſucceſſe: This one thinge moued Otho Siluius
againſt Galba, for whereas he hoped to ſuccede his heire
by adoption, Piſo was preferred before him, and therevppon
immediatlye hee thoughte in his minde to kill Galba,
                  Ambition. but
Galba was well defended, and ſo wayted on, as that cowardlye
Siluius durſte not enterpriſe or make anye attempte, not
longe after the ſouldiours of Germanye conſpired on Vitellius
ſyde,Murther recompenſed 
                        •
                      murther. and daylye diuers conſpiracyes were wroughte by
them to bringe downe Otho: It was not for the Senators of
Rome to make election, where ſo manye legions of wilfull
heades armed ſhoulde geeue the choyſe, the ſouldiours fell in
contempt of Otho becauſe hee was an vnmanlye Prince, for
the Hiſtorye doth note, that if Otho ſhould heare at any time
terrible newes, of the dalefull and lamentable ende of Princes,
or of Captaynes, or meane ſouldiours, as the lamentable
ende of Caſlius and Brutus and of other, his faynte harte ſoū
                  ded,
and woulde be in an agonye: He neuer durſte attempte
anye enterpriſe againſt Galba,
                  Cowardlines. but when he perceyued him to
be as it were vanquiſhed. Vitellius whom they in minde preferred
was more childiſhe then Otho, inferior in manlye courage.Vitellius.
But Otho ſeinge the whole ende of theyr conſpiracye,
for feare in the ende killed himſelfe: For earlye in the morninge
hee did ſtrike himſelfe with a dagger vnder the lefte
pappe, and beinge halfe aliue as the ſouldiours ruſhed into
him, immediatlye dyed, who had his funerall at Veleterna,
and dyed in the xxxviii. yeare of his age being a man of meane
ſtature,Otho. baulde, weake legged, his face without heare, wanton
in loke and effeminate: and hee enioyed the ſeate but .iiii.
monethes. This Otho had diuers conflictes in battaile
with the conſpiratours of Vitellius who nexte ſucceded him:
firſt at Placentia a Cittie in Liguria, afterwarde hee was ouercome

at a certaine towne in Italye lyinge betweene Cremona
and Verona, and in the ſame place, hee ranne himſelfe
through with his owne ſworde. Thus ſome wryte that ſome
of his men of warre did ſo entyrelye loue him, as that
manye of them murthered themſelues when
they ſaw his deade bodye.
(⸫) 
                     〈☐〉
                   (⸫)
            
            
               Aulus Vitellius.
               
               
                  
                     IVlius Caeſar dyed by violent hande,Iulius Caeſar. 
                  Octauius
ſucceded Caeſar,
                  Octauius. with all royaltye gouerning,
and his funerall likewyſe ſolemniſed: Tiberius
ſucceaded Octauius,
                  Tiberius. a wicked Prince. Caligula
killed Tiberius,
                  Caligula. 
                  Caligula was ſlaine by
the handes of Tiberius Druſus,
                  Tiberius Druſus. who in his
place gouerned. Nero by the meanes of Agrippina his mother,
who was wyfe to Tiberius Druſus (whom ſhe poyſoned)
obtayned the Empyre.Nero. 
                  Galba diſplaced Nero, who therfore
deſperatly dyed:Galba. 
                  Galba gouerninge, Otho gaue him his
deathes wounde. Otho ſuccedinge: Vitellius in likewyſe vſed
him,Otho. who vſurped but a ſhorte ſpace, for his ſouldioures
threwe him into ye floude Tiber. This Aulus Vitellius came
from a noble lynage,Vitellius. his gouernment was ſhort, cōtynuinge

but viii. monethes, ſome ſaye that his progenye came from
Faunus kinge of the Aborigines and Vitellia who was eſteemed
for a Goddes in manye places, of this is his progenye
ſayde to come,Caſſius Seuerus. eyther as Caſſius Seuerus ſayeth yt hee was a
coblers ſonne, and hee by arte a ſhomaker: This Vitellius
was borne the viii. kalendes of October, or as ſome do ſaye:
the vii. Ides of September, in the Conſulſhippe of Druſus
Caeſar,
                  A vaine inquiſition. and Norbanus Flaccus. His father Lucius Vitellius,
deſired to knowe by calculation of his nauitye, the proufe, the
maner of life, the diſpoſition, ende and nature of his ſonne, ye
iudgement thereof ſheewed a nature monſtrous, a parſonne
beaſtlye, and geuen to all wickednes, a ſcourge to Rome, a
calamitye to his parentes,Petronius. hee maryed one Petronia a noble
mans daughter, by whō he begat Petronius who was blinde
of one of his eyes,Vitellius murthered his ſonne. which Petronius after he murthered. Petronia
his wife dyinge, he maryed Galeria Fundana, by whō
he had two children, a ſonne and a daughter: his ſonne by nature
ſtutted and ſtāmered. As concerninge his gouernmente
cruell it was,Crueltie. and ſo cruell as that he delighted not only in ye
bloudſheddinge and cruell handelinge of his ennemye, but
alſo of his owne ſubiectes whom he tormented and miſerably
vſed, wherevppon this cruell ſentence was alwayes vſed of
him: Optime olere occiſum hoſtem, & melius Ciuem, The
ſauour (ſayth hee) of an ennemye ſlaine,A bloudy ſē
                     tence. ſauereth beſte, but
of a Citizen better: What coulde be more cruelly ſpoken?
or what thinge can ſhew and vtter the hart of a tyrante more
manifeſtlye? then that whiche in this ſentence hee vttered:
whoſe harte paſſed in all crueltye, whoſe lyfe for bloudye tyrannye
God ſhortened: his raigne was but viii. monethes,
vnto whom if time, if ſucceſſe, and oportunitye had beene of
longe raigne left, he woulde haue made full ſlender the multitude
of the Cittizens of Rome, and of thoſe in all other places
where he by aucthoritye held tyrannicall gouernmente,Euill Princes.
ſuche be thoſe Princes, who neyther feare God, nor knowe
themſelues,Phalaris. the like was cruell Phalaris, Dioniſius the tyrante,
Thieſtes,
                  Dioniſius. & Atreus, Antiochus, Iulianus who was ye
greate Apoſtata. Nero with Comodus, Decius and Domitianus.
                  
Godlye Princes who are endued with vertue, who
alſo do beare a tender zeale to theyr kingdome, country, and
common wealth:Godly Princes. do with all gentlenes, with all clemencye
and mercifull dealinge, intreate theyr ſubiectes. For cruelty
in a Prince is contrary to lawe, contrary to iuſtice, it maketh
him to be hated of his commons,Crueltye. weake againſt his ennemye,
and contemned at home. The louinge and zelous ſubiecte as
he loueth hartely, ſo he defendeth valiantly and ſtoutelye his
gouernour: What be walles? of what force be towers and
fortreſſes,Loue of ſubiectes. where lacke of harte in the ſubiecte worketh faintlye?
he neglecteth the Prince, an outwarde frende, but a ſecrete
ennemy, for ſurely where loue affecteth not the ſubiect,
there the Prince and the kingdome is weake, his eſtate maymed,
his common wealthe in ruine, his throne and Scepter
fallinge:A weake kingdome. Such was the eſtate of Vitellius and alſo his ende,
both Claudius Tiberius, Caligula, Tiberius Druſus, Nero,
Galba, and Otho with tyrannye exerciſing theyr gouernmēt,
were hated and deteſted, and dyed not onlye violently, but alſo
lamentablye: where contrarilye godlye Princes dye wyth
perpetuall fame of glorye and renowne,Godly Princes. time forgetteth not
theyr memorye, and the poſterity commendeth it to allages.
This Aulus Vittellius addinge no meane to crueltye, had ſo
great delight in tyrannye, as that the murthers of them was
ſayde to delight his eyes,Tyrannye. and pleaſe his fantaſy: as he would,
ſo he commaunded, his will ſtode in all reſpectes for a lawe:
As concerninge his adulterous luſte with women, it was ſo
beaſtly and ſo common, as yt ſhame forbiddeth to write thereof
as for that which hee did againſt nature, it is not to be put
in Chronicle. nor cōmonly to be redde, his violente death was
propheſyed of, wherevppon he baniſhed all thoſe that profeſſed
the ſcience of Aſtrologye. After hee had ruled viii. monethes,
this wickes Prince beganne to be contemned, his name
and power weakened, his men of warre that came from Meſia,
& Pānonia, & they alſo that came by ſea from Iurye and
Syria, cōſpired with Veſpaſianus who after ſucceded. Short
was the raigne of Vitellius more dreaded, then loued, ſo God
at a ſodaine diſplaceth tyrantes and chaungeth theyr ſeate.Tyrantes.
               
               
                  
Nowe Vitellius for all his beaſtlye gouernment, his curſed
tyrannye, and diſcente from a noble houſe, geeueth place to
Veſpatianus,
                  Veſpatianus. who from a lowe and meane eſtate, aſcended
with all honour and famous actes vnto gouernment, beyond
all expectation both in himſelfe,Titus. and his ſonne Titus Veſpatianus,
who gaue the ouerthrowe to the greate and mightye
Cittye Hieruſalem,
                  Hieruſalem. theyr famous and ſumptuous Temple
he deſtroyed, as afterwarde in theyr liues ſhalbe delcared.
Veſpaſianus by this meanes (ayded with his men of warre)
vanquiſhed Vitellius. Vitellius was drawen out by them frō
his Pallace and Courte, his handes bounde behinde him, and
nowe feeleth tyrannye,Vitellius. beinge before tyme inferior to none in
tyrannye, whoſe highe dignitye nowe ceaſed & name vndreaded,
is mocked with the meaneſte, and of abiecte perſons not
regarded: ſo God leaueth tyrauntes (who knowe not him) &
they feele the ſtroke & power of him who geeueth aucthority
to the mightieſt: for by God onlye ſtandeth ye kingdome of the
Prince, his ſeate thereby floriſheth, and his people throughe
him proſper, hee is onlye the meanes that kingdomes moſte
brickle, continue not theyr eſtate, name or title, and that their
progenye endure not, and that is ſinne the cauſe. Vitellius
without all ſhame, in this extremitye was nothing diſmayed,
but in the ende deſperatly ſought to kill himſelfe, his clothes
were rente from his bodye, ſo that hee was lefte halfe naked,
no filthe wanted that was not caſt vppon him, they drew him
vnto the place from whence the bodyes of parſons condempned,
were throwne downe at Rome, & in that place where
he commaunded Sabinus the brother of Veſpaſian to
be put to deathe,Sabinus. ſo it came to paſſe that in the ſame
place Vitellius a murtherer of other,
                     Vitellius death. was thruſt
throughe with manye woundes, at the ſame
time his brother and ſonne dyed, hee being
fiftye and ſeuen yeares of age, receiued
his ende,The ende of a tyrante. who tyranniouſlye had gouerned,
and ſhedde in that ſhort
tyme much bloude.
⸫
            
            
               
               Veſpaſianus.
               
               
                  THe Empyre of Rome beinge full of mutabilitye,
hauing no permanent ſucceſſion:Permanent ſucceſſion, or kingdome of heritage.
as kingdomes which deſcende by heritage,
but many times according to the
election of ſeditious heades and vnmete
parſons, vnto ſome one the poſſeſſion of
that place and roume was geuen,Kingdome. which
onlye vertue and worthines in actes merited. Nam virtus
nobilitati locum,
                  Vertue. 
                  & regibus ſolium diſtribuit: Vertue firſt
gaue the title and place to nobilitye,True nobilitye. and to kinges their ſeates:
For God of whom all excellencye is geuen, from whom
all goodnes, all pure and ſincere holynes floweth and procedeth,
only ordayned that Princes ſhould gouerne the earthe,
and beinge as chiefe vnder him, might rule the people: and
alſo that they being higheſt in aucthority,Why kinges be moſt honoured. in all vertues moſt
excellinge, directinge theyr eſtates and gouernment vnto iuſtyce
and equitye, ſhould therefore be accompted as Gods vppon
the earthe, and aboue all other creatures moſt honoured,
wherefore godlye Princes the more that they excell in all integretye,
the greater theyr wyſedome is, and moderation of
life, the nearer they aſpyre vnto God: The wicked Prince iniuriouſly
poſſeſſeth that eſtate of maieſtye,The wicked Prince. where vertue doth
not adorne the ſeate of the Prince. From Octauius, what
beaſtlye gouernours haue helde in poſſeſſion this Empyre?
how hath the Empyre bene toſſed by the gouernours? euery
one of them throughe ambition and deſyre to raigne, procucured

one an others death, not regardinge how vniuſtly and
wickedly they obtayned the ſame:Ambition. For rebellion placed Galba,
                  Rebellion.
by rebellion Otho obtayned, by rebellion Vitellius ſucceded,Tyr
                        •••
                     ye.
as theyr wicked enterpriſes are knowen, ſo theyr myſerable
endes remayne, as brydles vnto all that deſyre by tyrannye
to vſurpe. Veſpaſianus deſcendinge from no nobilitye
of bloude, nor from any noble progenye, for the eſtate of
his parentes were but meane, yet all Chronicles recorde the
highe commendations and great worthines of this Veſpaſian,
honour and worſhip followed him in all his enterpriſes, a
zelous harte incenſed him to ſeeke the aduauncemente of the
Romaine Empyre,Veſpaſianus. vnto all thoſe things vertue allured him.
This Veſpaſian was borne the Kalendes of December, in
Samis beyonde Reatin a ſmall village, whiche otherwyſe is
called Phalacryne, in the eueninge, at what time as Quintus
Sulpitius Camarinus, and Caius Pompeius Sabinus were
Conſuls, this Veſpaſian was but fiue yeare olde at the death
of Auguſtus, his education and bringinge vp, was vnder his
grandmother by the fathers ſyde,Tertulla. 
                  Tertulla was her name.
Veſpaſianus growinge to mans eſtate, ioyned to him in mariage
Flauia Domicilla,
                  Flauia Domicilla. of her hee begatte two ſonnes, Ti
                     
                        ••
                     s
and Domitianus, and a daughter called Domicilla: His
wife Flauia Domicilla dyinge, hee enioyed the companye of
another, (not by mariage) but otherwyſe: He greatlye affected
a gentlewoman named Cenides. This was one deteſtable
vyce in Veſpaſian a gouernour, otherwyſe for actes famous,
and amonge the beſt Emperours for worthines Chronicled,
to ſerue herein an adulterous mind, which in a Prince
is ſo much the more haynous, as he by eſtate is moſt higheſt
in degree and aucthoritye. In the dayes of Claudius Tiberius
Druſus,
                  Narciſſus. 
                  Veſpaſian beinge in highe fauoure with Narciſſus,
chiefe ſecretarye to this Claudius, was ſent Embaſſadour
in greate and waightye matters from the Emperoure
Claudius to Germany:Claudius. His charge and office there finiſhed,
he was ſent into Britaine this our Iſlande called England,
who had there mightye conflictes with the Britaynes, for as
it ſeemeth the Romaynes by an olde conqueſt whiche Iulius

Caeſar had of the Britaynes, as he recordeth himſelfe, and let
in by the Troye nouantes fauouringe Mandubracius,
                  Mādubratius Caſſibelan. whoſe
father Caſſibelan put to deathe, Caeſar thereby enteringe, &
chiefely throughe deuiſion and treaſon obtayned a conqueſt,Ceſars conqueſt by treaſon.
as I haue declared before in the life of Iulius Caeſar, ſithens
thoſe dayes, the Romaynes makinge clayme and title to this
our noble Iſlande, from Iulius Caeſar, haue not ceaſſed manye
times to warre on the Britaynes, to enioye theyr olde
clayme and title, as it appeareth in all Emperours from Iulius
Caeſars time, for in all theyr time mention is made of this
our Iſlande of Britayne, by whom many times the Romaynes
were ayded: but at the lengthe the Britaynes contente
with a Prince and gouernoure of theyr owne, woulde no longer
be vnder the iuriſdiction of the proude Romaynes, neyther
the Romaynes themſelues had greate encouragemente
to warre on the Britaynes, who reſiſted them in the dayes of
kinge Arthur they demaunding tribute of this our Iſlande,Arthur.
but Arthur valiantlye with his couragious men of warre in
the partes of Fraunce, ſo diſcomfited the Romaynes, beinge
a great nomber of mē of warre, conducted by Lucius a chiefe
Conſull,Lucius. that Lucius was put to flighte, and great hauoke &
bloudye ſlaughters were made on the Romaynes: Sythens
thoſe dayes neyther with force of hande, neyther by clayme or
tytle, haue the Romaynes chalenged anye tribute of this Ilande.
As concerninge Veſpaſian whom I ſpake of, who
had three greate conflictes with the Britaynes,Suetonius. 
                  Suetonius
Tranquillus recordeth, who liued in thoſe dayes that Veſpaſian
brought into his ſubiection two mightye Nations, and
aboue twentye greate townes, and alſo ſubdued the Iſle of
Wyght,The Iſle of wyghte. which lyeth neare vnto this our Iſland of Britaine,
which Iſle of Wyght is now vnder the iuriſdiction of the gouernours
of this lande. Veſpaſianus obtayned greate renowne
in many Dominiōs: Achaia obeyed him, Licia, Rhodes,
                  Veſpaſianus.
                  Bizantium, Samos, Thracia, Silicia, & other countries,
many thinges were done by him famouſlye in the gouernmēt
of the Romaine Empyre: who thoughe he were clothed and
endued with vertues, moſt excellent and ſinguler good qualities,

yet this one vertue was in him worthy chiefe commendation,
that was to forgeue iniuryes & diſpleaſures wrought
againſte him,A rare vertue. and not to reuenge him of them, for althoughe
Vitellius the Emperour before him, was a moſte wicked and
cruell ennemye to Veſpaſian, and had vniuſtlye put to deathe
Sabyne, Veſpaſianus brother, yet notwithſtāding that cruell
facte. Veſpaſian after ye death of Vitellius cauſed his daughter
(enrychinge her with great dowryes) to be maryed to one
of highe eſtate and dignitye. Certainlye a rare vertue in a
Prince in not reuenginge, the death of his brother ſo vniuſtlye
procured: He was as it ſeemeth Lord ouer affections, and
a kinge ouer raſhe, cruell, & malicious perturbations, what
other in the worlde placed in ſuche eſtate, whom the people &
lawes do obeye, hauinge the ſworde, the lawe and aucthoritye
on his ſyde, and vnder his gouernment woulde not moſte
cruellye haue handeled ſuch as were lyuinge of his enemyes
ofſpringe?A rare vertue This Veſpaſian alſo with all facilitye of minde &
patience, did beare with the vnquietnes of his frendes, and
woulde reproue theyr contumelyes,Veſpaſianus. with the quippes and pleaſante
aunſweres, for he was of his owne nature framed to all
pleaſantnes of minde and pacience. There was a certaine mā
whoſe name was Licinius Martianus, by this Licinius Martianus,
Veſpaſian was furthered and promoted to the ſeate
imperiall: For which frendlye deſarte Licinius Martianus,
was become inſolente and pro
                     •
                  de: but Veſpaſian mollifyed
his arrogante and lofyte minde, in the preſence of his moſte
frendlye ſayinge,Ingratiiude. you are not ignorante that ingratitude in a
man, betokeneth great beaſtlynes: for to commit the benefit
of any man vnto obliuion,Xenophon. amongeſt the Perſians, (as Xenophon
ſayth) was the moſt haynous cryme that might be imagined,
ſo much was ingratitude abhorred,Ingratitude moſt beaſtly. becauſe nothinge
more betokeneth brutiſhnes and beaſtly behauiour, then to extingniſhe
ſocietye,Ingratitude. frendſhippe, and amitye. Ingratitude neglecteth
frendſhippe, frendſhippe neglected, ſociety of life muſt
preſentlye be diſſolued, and where the ſocietye is diſſolued,
there the conuerſatiō of people is cruell, without order & reaſon,
brutiſhe, wilde and beaſtlye: but he did not forget his befite,

neyther ye ſame periſhed vnrecompenced: but what maruaile
is it if Veſpatian did beare that in his frend when as he
little wayed and leſſe regarded the peruerſe ſayinges of thoſe
which pleaded iudiciall cauſes, and the ſtoute libertye of the
arrogant Philoſophers. This Emperour Veſpaſian in that
ſhorte time whiche hee gouerned, broughte from decaye and
ruine the vniuerſall world: His mercifulnes was ſuch, that
by all gentle parſwaſions, he ſought to withdrawe all archetyrantes
from theyr cruell and beaſtlye doinges, with exhortinge
them to embrace mercye and pittye, thoſe onlye hee
would torment and greuouſlye puniſhe, whoſe crueltye by no
meanes he might molifye: for he thought it a pointe of ſinguler
wiſedome to vſe this lenitye,Lenitye. where he parceiued any hope
of amendement, as he iudged it rightfull to myniſter ye lawe
vppon ſuch as were paſt amendment,Rigor. obſtinate, and rebellious
againſt his maieſtye: for ſuche, as rotten, hurtfull, and
venemous herbes,Rebels. be extirpated and rooted out from the cō
                  mon
wealthe: The common wealthe is like vnto a garden,
wherein nature hath planted goodly herbes and ſeedes, pleaſante,
neceſſarye, and profitable, in the which alſo are manye
weedes, vnſauerye, neither neceſſarye, nor profitable whiche
for lacke of vertue are caſt oute when they growe vp: euen ſo
ſuche members as are the decaye ruine and deſtruction of a
common wealth,Euill men. are not to be tollerated, but the law, ſword,
and aucthority of the magiſtrate muſt cut them of, els a good
common wealth, a perfecte eſtate cannot be eſtabliſhed:Lawes. His
lawes were with all equitye and iuſtice ordayned, with the
which he greatlye profited his common wealth: but chieflye
his life was ſo vertuous, ſo godlye, that many vices were expelled,
and euerye man practiſed daylye to followe in vertue
and vprightnes of life their Emperour, for in a cōmonwealth
the vertuous life of the Prince chieflye maketh countryes of
ſtrengthe and force,Lawes. for lawes are of theyr force and ſtrengthe
maymed, excepte the Prince in godlye life, yelde to lawe and
aucthoritye:Aucthoritye. Lawes can do nothinge withoute aucthoritye,
but aucthoritye maye do muche withoute lawes, as diuers
Princes followinge theyr owne will, affection, and headdye

aucthoritye haue commaunded thinges withoute lawe, who
in ſo doinge haue diſhonoured lawes, when they & theyr aucthoritye
ought to be vnder the lawe.
               This Emperour Veſpaſian builded vp againe the Capitolle
of Rome, the houſe of peace, the monumentes of Claudius, ye
like he did in all partes of his Dominions, where the lawes
of Rome were of force. Alſo manye famous Citties were
newly adorned with ſumptuous and gorgious buildinges:
Alſo the highe wayes and common paſſages, were made in
his time of gouernmente, for in his time a paſſage was made
throughe the hilles and mountaynes,Tyrannye. by a highe waye which
leadeth from the Cittye which is called Areminum. The tyrannye
of Princes whiche afore this Emperoure gouerned,
was ſo cruell, that of many Nations he ſcarcely founde two
hundreth remayninge aliue.Vologeſus. 
                  Vologeſus the kinge of the Parthians
was for feare of his Maieſtye, driuen to make peace wt
him: Syria otherwyſe called Paleſtina, alſo Cylicia a countreye
in Aſia, and Thrachite Comagene beinge a parte of
Syria, which at theſe dayes is called Auguſta Phratenſis, all
theſe places and Realmes were prouinces vnder his Dominion:
Iewrye in like ſort was vnder his Dominion. On a
certaine time it happened his frendes to geue him counſaile &
admonition, to beware of one Mutius Pompoſianus, of whō
a rumor was rayſed that he would vſurpe ye Emperiall ſeate:
furth with he exalted this Mutius Pompoſianus vnto great
honour, for he made him a Conſull, and herein ſayth Veſpaſianus:
he wilbe mindfull of receyuinge at my hands ſo great
a benefite, by the wyſedome of Veſpaſian all the whole Empyre
of Rome was gouerned one faſhion. This Emperour
Veſpaſian did vſe muche to watche by nighte in accompliſhment
of the affayres of his Empyre: which ended oportunitye
was geuen to talke with him in the morninge, while
he arrayed and adorned himſelfe with his Princelye roobes.
The greateſt part of his affayres ended, he did accuſtome him
ſelfe to the exerciſe of his bodye, & as ſone as he had waſſhed,
with much quietnes of minde he toke his repaſte.Veſpaſianns. Verye loue
of this Emperours vertues, compelleth mee to ſpeake much

of him who luckely chanced to ye Romaine Empyre,Veſpaſianus. the lvi.
yeare after the death of Auguſtus ye Emperour. The cruelty
& tyrannicall dealinge of tyrauntes, was brought to ruine by
this good Emperour, who by the prouidēce of almighty God
was geuen to gouerne. This Emperour Veſpaſiā
                   being 70.
yeares of age dyed, who a little before his death talkinge of
graue matters of the cōmon wealth according to his pleaſant
nature, did alſo merilye geſte. At the time of his death, there
appeared a blaſinge ſtarre in Heauen,A comete. whiche was like vnto
longe lockes of heare
                     •
                  . Veſpaſian the Emperour hearinge
of that merelye ſayde, the appearinge of this blaſinge
ſtarre doth ſignifye nothinge of mee, but of the kinge
of ye 
                  Perſians who weareth a longe heare, immediatelye
beinge greeued with the payne of
his bodye,The death of Veſpaſian. roſe vp and merelye ſayde: it
ſhall become an Emperoure, to dye
ſtandinge on his feete, and ſo
this good Emperoure departed
his life.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               Titus Veſpaſianus.
               
               
                  
                     TITVS who alſo was called Veſpaſian,
Domicilla was his mothers name,
ſhe was made of a bonde woman a free.
This Titus was borne the thirde kalendes
of Ianuary,Caligula▪
                   the ſame yeare that Caligula
was ſlaine, his education in al ſingularitye,
for the knowledge of all Artes
and ſciences was exceadinge, the giftes of body, and of the
minde, nature had ſo exactlye framed them in him, as that he
was inferiour to none, fauoure, beuty, perſonage, lacked not
in him, his memorye in thinges to apprehende and remember
was ſo rare, that fewe attayned vnto the like, for wiſedome
for graue counſayle,Titus. and for feates of warre, he was paſſinge
in the lattine and Greeke tongues, with all eloquence he excelled,
nothinge wanted in him that was to any excellencye,A wiſe counſaylour.
he was both a wyſe counſaylour, & a valiant warrior, (which
two thinges do ſeldome times happē in one parſon.Valiant captaine. This Titus
Veſpaſian in the time of Claudius Tiberius Druſus, (thē
Emperour of Rome, came to this Iſlande with his father
Veſpaſian of whom I made mention of before, whoſe actes
there, deſerued for worthynes greate commendation and rewarde
amonge the Romaynes: to reade from the beginning
of the lowe progenye, and meane eſtate of theyr aunceſters,
and of theyr great and mighty enterpriſes,The ſecrete counſaile of God. of theyr large and
mighty Dominions, of theyr victoryes & conqueſtes it would
ſeeme ſo ſtraunge a wonder that fewe would beleeue it: So

God rayſeth (contrarye to the expectation of all men) from a
meane and lowe eſtate a chiefe gouernour,The power of God. to whom ſo happy
ſucceſſe is geuen, that the nobleſt haue geuen place. Who ſo
readeth the whole Hiſtorye of Ioſephus, ſhal finde what thinges
were wrought by this Titus and his father Veſpaſian.
                  Hieruſalem.
                  Iewrye and all partes there aboutes felt theyr power,Veſpaſianus. 
                  Titus
was at the deſtruction of Hieruſalem, in the ſeconde yeare of
the raigne of Veſpaſian:
                  Titus. 
                  Veſpaſian beinge there himſelfe &
Domitian his brother:Domitian. by them was wrought ye dolefull ende
& lamentable ouerthrow of the Iewes foreſheewed of longe
time by the Prophetes, and by Chriſt himſelfe. A madde mā
who in the eyes of all men ſeemed beſtraught of witte and ſenſes,
ſeuen yeare before the ſiege, cryed in the open ſtreates:
Ve tibi Hieruſalem,
                  A madde mā. oftentimes repeated, wherat the whole
Cittie was muche diſquieted, ſinne ſo abounded in it, and all
iniquitye euen amonge the clergye and Seniors,The temple. the Temple
of God was nowe become a Tabernacle of vncleane ſpirites,
a denne and lurkinge place of theeues, the good therefore
looked for iuſtly a plaine deſolation, the wicked for ſinnefull
life, and wicked conſcience dreaded the ſame: This poore
ſillye man ceaſſed not day by daye, cryinge manye times: Ve
tibi Hieruſalem. The maieſtrates full of all ſecuritie, rewarded
him as a madde mā, oftentimes ſcurging him, thereby
thinckinge his franticke heade to ceaſe this exclamation,
but no threatninge, neither the rodde, nor cruell ſcourginge,
neither impriſonment, could cauſe that to ceaſſe in him which
afterward dolefully did faule vppon Hieruſalem,
                  Hieruſalem. as ye haue
reade, before the lamentable crye of terrible cryes he ceaſſed
not, vntill ſuch time as the armye of Titus was neare ye wall:
this madde man laſt of all cryed, Ve tibi Hieruſalem & mihi
ve, Wo to the Hieruſalem and to me likewyſe wo, and immediatly
he being ſtricken, there he dyed on the wall. Sibilla
in a furye, ſeeminge madde, propheſyed longe before of the
eſtate of all kingdomes, and from the beginninge of theyr fall
alſo, and the ende of the world euen from Adam: makinge a
full diſcourſe of Rome what ſhould be fall vnto it.Sybilla. This Sibilla
did cloſe in darke and obſcure Verſes the deſtruction of

Troye, longe before it fell. Of fewe the pore mans woordes
were regarded, God reuealeth oftentimes to ye abiects of the
worlde ſecrete thinges,The ſecrete counſaile of God. which lye hidde from the wyſeſt, the
world regardeth not threatninges propheſyed, as they liue in
all ſecuritye, ſo they hope and loke for like eſtate. The Prophetes
therefore were not regarded becauſe they foreſhewed
thinges vnpleaſaunte, and troubleſome newes: The worlde
loueth ſecuritye,Securitye. and they like them beſt that tell them of the
like thinges meete for wordlinges. In Sodome and Gomorra,
and in thother Citties about them,Sodome. theyr worldly felicitye
was ſo aboundant,Gomorra. theyr ſoyle ſo fatte, and ſtore ſo plentifull,
ſuche ſecuritye of eſtate, ſo contented mindes therein, as that
the holeſome counſayle of the good mā 
                  Lotte was not regarded,
theyr wyſe heades could not foreſhewe theyr daungers &
deſtruction. Lotte as one moſt abiecte and vile in the eyes of
the Sodomytes, (yet in fauour with God) warned and exhorted
them to repentaunce, foreſhewed them theyr plagues, all
was lightlye regarded, but immediatlye fyer and brimſtone
conſumed the place, with fyue other Citties, and all the inhabitauntes,
the childe periſhed, and the infant but then borne:
In a moment the olde and the yonge fell, the mightye & great
perſonages, the Princes alſo, the elders and counſellours,
fiue kinges taſted with their peeres the like deſtruction, ſinne
ſo abounded in the place and in all the inhabitors,Sinne. the childe
that neuer ſpake, was in that deſtructiō partaker, So vglye
a thinge ſinne is in the ſight of God, that therby no kingdome
is ſpared, no eſtate vnſcourged, no Citty free of puniſhment,
where God taketh heauye diſpleaſure to puniſhe.The wrathe of God. Mightye
Empyres thereby are fallen, and wealthye Citties made a
plaine ſoyle, their kinges and theyr people turned into duſte
are forgotten, forgetfulnes for lacke of worthynes, rooteth
them from memorye of fame,Vertue. theyr vertues are deade, theyr
vyces liue in perpetuall memorye.Vice.
               
               As concerninge this Titus whom I make mention of, did
marrye Artiſidia, who dyinge, hee toke to wyfe Martia Ful
                     
                        •
                     ia,
from whom he was deuorced: greate thinges were done
by this Titus not onlye in Hieruſalem, but alſo in all ye Eaſt

partes, his vertues were not ſo excellent, but his vices for a
time were ſo odious: As that openly Alium Neronem opinabantur
& predicabant, for his wickednes they called him
another Nero, but afterwardes ſo greate was his chaunge
as that nothinge of vice remayned in him, his fame by good
deſarte gate great commendation, his gouernment (though
ſhorte) was with all equitie towarde his commons executed,
lawes by iudgemente rightlye ordered, a father hee
was and a great patrone to the Romaynes. This Titus dyed
in the xli. yeare of his age in the Ides of September, his gouernment
continued but two yeares .ii. monethes & xx. dayes,
the death of Titus was with greate ſorrow and lamentacion
receiued, for all countries and prouinces bewayled his funerall,Titus.
in his life time they called him the delight & ioye of theyr
common wealth: theyr lamentacion was ſo great that it ſeemed
they loſt the chiefe patrone, ayde, ſuccoure and ſafegarde
of the whole world. Ioſephus wryteth that Veſpaſian beinge
in ye Eaſt partes at the death of Vitellius, the good fame
of his worthynes bruted him Emperour ſo he wanne the hartes
of all people, al citties made feſtiual dayes & as theyr maner
of ioye was, did ſolemniſe ſacrifices, as tokens of greate
ioye the Legions of ſouldiours whiche remayned in Metia &
Pannonia were ſworne with greate ioye to him: Veſpaſian
wente from thence to Ceſarea,
                  Veſpaſianus. and came to Betritum where
manye Embaſſadours mette him out of Syria and oute of other
prouinces, offeringe to him Crownes & thinges of great
gratulation. Muſianus the greate gouernour of that prouince
by all meanes furthered him, when Veſpaſian ſawe all
thinges ſo luckelye happen vnto him, hee conſidered that this
Empyre could not fall to him, without the great prouidence
of God, and as it were by fatall deſtenye broughte to him,
then alſo he remembred Ioſephus,
                  Ioſophus. who at that preſente was
captiue, a godlye man and a prieſt of the Temple, what wonderfull
thinges he had foreſheewed of him whiche thinges in
him takinge effect, Titus Veſpaſianus ſonne, beinge preſent
with Veſpaſian his father, ſayde. Iuſtum eſt inquit pater
vna cum ferro, etiam probum Ioſephum ſolui: And ſo it

followed Ioſephus was deliuered, his fetters beinge bruſte
went at libertye with Veſpaſian. After Veſpaſian had aunſwered
the Embaſſages, he went to Antioche, from thence
to Alexandria, he ſente into Italye Lucianus, with a greate
companye of horſemen and footemen, and paſſed by Cappadocia
and Phrigea, in thoſe partes Anthonius firſt of all hauinge
his third Legion of ſouldiours, came to him which did
remayne about Meſia, for hee did gouerne that prouince and
with that power he made haſt to make warre vppō 
                  Vitellius.
Vitellius ſente with a great armye Cicinna to meete Anthonye,
but at laſt Cicinna
                  Cicinna. with his men of warre, fledde to Anthonye
fauouringe Veſpaſians parte, in the ende the ſouldidiours
of Cicinna repentinge theyr facte, woulde haue ſlaine
Cicinna, but being otherwyſe aduiſed, they 
                     ••
                  t him bounde
to Vitellius, but Anthonye purſuinge vppon them, cauſed
them to retyre to Cremona, the which Cremona was ſpoyled,
& all the armye of Vitellius, to the nomber of .xxx. thouſande
and two hundreth were ſlaine:Cicinna. 
                  Cicinna was deliuered
and brought to Veſpaſian, not onlye commended but highly
rewarded.Sabinus. 
                  Sabinus the brother of Veſpaſianus, hearinge
Anthonye to draw neare to Rome, by night toke the Capitoll:
but in the ende Sabinus beinge taken, was broughte to
Vitellius and ſlaine by him. The nexte day followinge, Anthonye
comminge to Rome, foughte with the ſouldiours of
Vitellius in three partes of the Cittie:Vitellius. 
                  Vitellius then in this
extremitye came for the druncke, who was cruellye handeled
and ſlaine in the middeſt of the Cittie.Mutianus. The next daye Muſianus
enteringe Rome with a greate armye, and all thinges
there ſet in quietnes, did make Domitianꝰ chiefe gouernour
of the Cittie, vntill ſuch time as Veſpaſian his father came,
whom they proclaymed Emperour. As ſone as Veſpaſian
came to Alexandria, the eſtate of all thinges at Rome was
declared vnto him, Embaſſadors came to him from all partes
of the worlde reioyſinge of his eſtate. As ſone as all thinges
were quietlye ſettled at Rome, Veſpaſian did meane to
warre on the Iewes, who as ſone as winter was done, ſente
Titus his ſonne with a great power of choſen ſouldioures, to

deſtroye Hieruſalem.
                  Titus. 
                  Titus makinge his paſſage bothe by
Nicopolis and other places (as good oportunitye ſerued him
for his ſouldiours) paſſed to Ceſarea, and there ſette in order
his men of warre, hee cauſed the Legions of ſouldiours to be
diſperſed in diuerſe partes, whereby with more fortunate ſucceſſe
he mighte ſet vppon the Iewes. To reſighte the whole
Hiſtorye howe Hieruſalem was taken, the Temple ſpoyled,
and then by fyer deſtroyed, it woulde ryſe to a volume: Ioſephus
writeth of it at large, and alſo this is his which is written
thereof in a briefe. In this maner Hieruſalem was taken,
in the ſeconde yeare of the raigne of Veſpaſian, the viii.
daye of the moneth of September, which had bene taken fiue
times before and then ſpoyled.Aſocheus. 
                  Aſocheus kinge of the Egiptians
firſt toke it,Antiochus. after him Antiochus, then Pompeie, after
thoſe Socius with Herode toke it,Socius. the kynge of Babylon firſt
of all by ſtronge hande poſſeſſed and deſtroyed it, in the thouſande
three hundreth and threeſcore yeare after the buildinge
thereof, the eight moneth and ſixt daye. The firſt founder of
the ſame was Cananiorum Vinaſta, who in theyr moother
tongue is called the iuſt kinge, hee called it the Cittie Hieruſalem,
the Temple firſt was builded there, the Cittye before
was called Solyma.
                  Solyma. After this Dauid beinge kinge of the
Iewes, hauinge expelled the Cananites, gaue the ſame to the
inhabited of his people, which Cittie Hieruſalem in ye foure
hundreth threſcore and foure yeare and three monethes, from
kinge Dauid was deſtroyed of the Babilonians, whoſe kinge
beinge a Iewe, firſt raigned in the ſame, vnto that time that
Titus deſtroyed it, which was a thouſande, a hundreth ſeuentye
and nyne yeares after. From the firſt buildinge of the
ſame, vnto the laſt deſtruction was two Thouſande yeares a
hundreth ſeuentye and ſeuen. Ioſephus reſyteth that neyther
the antiquitye of the Cittie, neyther the great treaſures
and ritches, neyther the fame of it ſpredde in all places of the
worlde, neyther the great glory of theyr Religion colde ſaue
it. Thus farre Ioſephus wryteth of it in a briefe, thoughe otherwyſe
he ſetteth it furthe at large, ſheewinge the lamentable
eſtate of the inhabiters, the great famyne fell on them,

that for lacke of victuels women eate theyr owne children,
(filthye thinges not to be eaten) then in this neceſſitye was
theyr fare, the bloudye ſpoyles and ſlaughter the lamentable
crye moſte pitious,The faule of Hieruſalem. the terrible thinges that happened bothe
then and afore, will make in readinge the ſt
                     •
                  uteſte courages
for pittye to lamente, ſuch is the eſtate in time, not onlye of
mightye Citties, but of mightye kingdomes and
Princes:The wrathe of God. where the almightye God taketh his
diſpleaſure, bothe Cittie, kingdome and
Prince feeleth his ſtroke, they decaye
where God terriblye frowneth.
            
            
               Domitianus.
               
                  
               
               
                  DOmitian ye brother of Titus, was after
his death created Emperour, who in the
beginninge of his gouernment, counterfaytinge
a vertuous perſon, was gentle,
pitifull, and vertuous: With good ſucceſſe
he ended all ye warres yt were begon,
and finiſhed manye goodlye Pallaces in
Rome, & builded many euen from their foundations, in ſuche
ſort that in the beginninge of his Empyre, he purchaſed a very
good fame, and credite of a ſinguler and vertuous perſon.

But after chaunginge his conditions, he became ſo cruell, ſo
vniuſt, and ſo greedye, that he would put to death men for ridiculous
or tryflinge matters, to thende they beinge dead, he
might enioye theyr goodes: ſayinge, he was theyr heyre.
He perſecuted the Iewes, and eſpeciallye thoſe of the ſtocke
of Dauid, becauſe that hee had vnderſtode that of that ſtocke
ſhould be borne a mā which ſhould gouerne the whole world.
Alſo he was a great perſecutor of the Chriſtian Religion,The ſeconde perſecution of the Chriſtians. in
ſuch ſort that in his ryme there were martyred many godlye
men. He vexed all thinges, not ſo muche as flyes coulde eſcape
him, where vppon one of the Courte beinge demaunded,
who was with the Emperour: hee ſayde, there was not ſo
muche as one flee. He was a greate profeſſor of Aſtrologye,
and a great frende vnto thoſe which profeſſed that ſcience, although
he entreated one Aſtrologian verye cruellye, whiche
tolde him that within ſhort ſpace he ſhould dye. Hee liued xl.
yeare, and gouerned the Empyre xv. yeare: And in the ende
by the conſpiracye of Stephen the ſtewarde of his houſe, and
of certaine other amonge whom his owne wyfe was one,
he was ſlaine in his Pallace, of whoſe deathe the common
people were neyther heauye nor ioyfull, but
the gentlewomē and Senators toke ſuch contentation
thereat, that in the verye ſame
day they cauſed all his Images which
were of golde, to be caſte
downe. (⸫)
            
            
               
               Cocceius Narua.
               
                  
               
               
                  COcceius Narua ſucceaded Domitianꝰ being
66. yeares of age, he gouerned but one yeare
4. monethes and 9. dayes. This Narua was
a iuſte Prince and bounteous, hee reſtored all
ſuch as were vniuſtlye condemned of Domitian,
he ſeaced the crueltye which was exerciſed
againſte the Chriſtians, hee was verye bounteous to the
poore and mercifull, he made Vlpius Traianus beinge borne
in Spaine, his adoptiue ſonne: and made him his ſucceſſor
before the aſſemble of the Senate, and ſente to him beinge in
Germanye, the ornamentes of the Empyre to Coullen, Narua
dyed ſone after of an Ague: Dyuers do write that in the
time of this Narua, Iohn the Apoſtle returned from Pathmoſe
to Epheſus, this Iohn liued after the deathe of Narua
4. yeares. This wyſe Emperour was borne in the Cittie of
Narni, neither is it certainly knowne whether hee was an Italian
or no, but all aucthors agree, that he was diſcended of
a noble progenye, hee was created Emperour when he was
verye olde, who in the beginninge of his raigne had newes
broughte him that Domitian was not deade, (but that was
an vntrue reporte, and cauſed muche vnquietnes. He reuoked
from exile the Chriſtians, hee vnburdened the Romaynes
of theyr taxes, and cauſed the children of the deade, and
of ſuche as were verye poore to be nouriſhed, and broughte
vppe at his proper coſtes and charges, to be ſhort hee did makye

vertuous actes. There was onlye one conſpiracye
wroughte againſt him,The ende of treaſon. whiche gaue vnto the conſpirators a
moſt vnfortunate ende. In his tyme were moſt cruellye ſlaine
all thoſe that murthered Domitianus (although he conſented
not thereto) hee adopted for his adoptiue ſonne Traian,
                  Murther.
becauſe he had no children of his owne, vnto whom he might
commit the Empyre. He gouerned the Empyre but xiii. monethes,
and dyed of choller which he toke for the loue he
bare vnto a Senator named Regulus, which choller
cauſed him ſo extremelye to ſweate that it killed
him,Eclipſe. and the verye ſame daye that he paſſed
out of this life, there was a great Eclipſe
of the Sunne.
(⸫)
            
            
               Vlpius Traianus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     VLpius Traianꝰ ye adoptiue ſonne to Cocceius
Narua, caughte ye Emperiall ſeate
after the diſceaſe of him.Traianus. This Vlpius
Traianus was borne (as ſome write) in
Spayne, in a Cittye adioyning vnto Ciuilla.
This Emperoure was called
Vlpius by his graunde fathers name by
one Traius, his other name was called Traianus, who was

was the firſt aucthor of his fathers progenye, or els it may be
he was called Traianus by his father who was called Traianus,
the tyme of his raigne was twentye yeares. The gouernment
of this Emperour Vlpius Traianus was ſo ſinguler
and famous, for his wiſedome, politicke gouernment and
vertues, that the moſt famouſe monumentes of writers, can
not well and ſufficiently ſet forth the worthye prayſe commē
                  dation
and glorye of him:A rare commendation of a Prince. this Emperour Vlpius Traianus,
toke vppon him ye ſeate of the Empyre at Agrippina:
                  Agrippina. In feates
of warre, and in all thinges partayninge to chiualrye he
was induſtrious: In iudiciall matters and controuerſis of ye
lawe with all equitye and iuſtice, hee tendered the eſtate of euerye
mans cauſe, in repayringe of his Citties bounteous &
liberall. In a Prince or gouernor two thinges are moſt requiſite
and neceſſarye, in peace godlynes, in battaile and time
of warre ſtrength and valiantnes,Thinges requiſite in a Prince. and both in peace & warre
prudence and wiſedome. The modeſtye of him was ſo ſingular,
and ſuch the temperature of his moſt excellent giftes and
vertues, that hee ſeemed to haue mingled one with an other,
onlye this fault was in him,The third perſecution o
                        •
                      the Chriſtiās he gaue himſelfe to bellye cheare
and to perſecute the Chriſtians, to the exceſſiue drinckinge of
delicious wynes: in the conuerſation of his life, and in the ſocietye
thereof moſt fellowlye towarde his frendes,Traianus manners. and verye
liberall. This Emperour Traianus in the honour and memorye
of Licinius (by whoſe furtherance he came to be Emperour)
builded a place of whot bathes, neceſſarye for the curinge
of ſundrye diſeaſes. If the prayſe of this Emperoure
ſhould in all partes be reſighted, it would be a longe volume
to ſpeake of him: but thus much in fewe wordes maye be reherſed,
In labour he was inuincible and pacient, very ſtudious
to preferre the beſt men, and all ſuch as were warrelike,
he loued the ſimple natures, and the profeſſors of learninge:
He was of no great learninge, a keper of Iuſtice, an inuentor
of lawes partayninge to Religion, of the olde lawes a dilligent
obſeruer, all theſe vertues and good quallities were ſomuche
the greater, becauſe the eſtate of the common wealthe
in the Romaine Empyre before time, had beene broughte to

ruine by many cruell tyrantes, and who for the remedye of ſo
great euils, in good time ſeemed to be geuen of God. For at
what time as Traianus came to the Emperiall ſeate,Good Princes. manye
maruaylous thinges happened in moſte wonderfull wyſe, amongeſt
many this one thinge was chiefe: From the toppe of
the Capitoll,Thus ſome write. a crowe ſpake in Greeke wordes Kailos eſta
                        •
                     :
That is, full happye and fornunate ſhall Rome be, Traianus
beinge Emperour: Traianus dyed, and when the bodye of
him was burned, (as the maner of ye Romaynes was at that
time his aſhes were brought to Rome, and layed in the ſame
place where the aſſhes were buryed of the father of this Traianus,
and vnder the ſame mightye pillar the Images of him
were ſet vp (and as in triumphes they are wont to do) ye ſame
daye his picture was brought to Rome, the noble order of all
Senators goinge before him,The buriall of 
                        •
                     raianus. and his legions of ſouldiours:
At the deathe of this Emperour Traianus, the great floudde
Tyber of Rome did ouerflowe his banckes, more aboundantlye
then it did in the time of Narua, with greater deſtruction
and damage: alſo at the ſame time a great calamitye chaunced
vnto the Citties,Straunge thinges happen at the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of Princes. an earthquake moſt terrible happened
in many of his Regions, and in his prouinces a ſore infectiue
plague or peſtilence did raigne. Alſo in the ſame Regions aroſe
a famine, and caſualtyes by fier. This Emperour Vlpius
Traianus, in his life time had politikelye prouided, and
wiſelye for the ſodaine caſualties of fyer, whereby hee eaſed
much the forces and daungers thereof: this was his order, yt
the height of euerye houſe ſhould be but lx. feete and not
aboue, becauſe the pluckinge downe of them ſhould
be eaſye, and the charges after ſuche caſualties
might be the leſſe. For the proſperous eſtate
and felicitye of his gouernmente he was
called the father of the counſaile, his
whole life was threſcore and
foure yeares.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               Aelius Adrianus.
               
               
                  
                     AElius Adrianus (as Eutropius and Euſebius
affirme) was by byrth, & progenye
very noble, he was alſo borne in Spaine
and was coſyn to Traianus the Emperour.
But as other affirme, this Emperour
Aelus Adrianus was borne at Adria
a Cittie in Italye, which bordereth
vppon Marca Ancona, the ſea neare adioyning, is called by ye
name of the place Mare adriaticū. Aelius Adrianus ware ye
Emperial Crowne xii. yeres:Adriānus. this Emperour Aelius ſo much
did employ his ſtudye in ye knowledge of the Greeke tongue,
& in the copious & aboundant eloquence therof ſo much excelled,
that of manye he was named for his exquiſite knowledge
therein: this is our Gretian. Aelius Adrianus did ſet forth
alwayes the noble artes and ſtudies of the famous Athenians,
theyr lawes and maners, not onlye in verſifyinge, but
alſo in all other artes and ſciences, as in muſicke, in playinge
and ſinginge to the inſtrumente, in Phiſicke, and in all
kinde of harmonye: Beſydes in Geometrye, in painting conninglye,
in grauinge, and in all other ſinguler inuentions, &
artificiall doinges, he paſſed in mettel, and working in Marbell
like to the famous Polucletus and Euphranoras who
were moſte cunninge. A rare thinge, an Emperour to be ſo
ſinguler and famous in all kinde of learninge,The rare vertues of Adrianus, vppon whom
no priuate gouernment, but the protection of all men, of manye

Regions, Citties & townes did depende. Euerye Prince
therefore ought to haue iudgement, knowledge, faculty, and
experience in all thinges that are requiſite in a maieſtrate,
but eſpeciallye ſuch a one, which vnder God is a chiefe maieſtrate
of all maieſtrates, a ruler of rulers, a highe iudge ouer
Iudges.Ad
                        •
                     ianus. This Emperour Adrianus was ſo excellently framed
of nature, that nature could neuer in anye one man ſhew
a greater perfection, neither at anye time hath bene founde a
man that was with ſo ſinguler qualities, and vertues indued.
The memorye of Adrianus was ſo greate and famous, that
no man mighte comprehende the manifolde vertues in him
contayned, more ouer diuers places, infinite Regions and
countryes, deſyred to beholde his picture & ſtature, his highe
and weightye affayres coulde neuer be extinguiſhed with obliuion:
the whole power of his armye was knowne vnto him,
and furthermore he coulde recite the names of all beinge abſent,Memorye.
which was a difficult matter, he was in labour ſo painfull
that hee in proper perſon viſited all partes of his prouinces.
In iourneying he alwayes marched one foote before his
armye, and as he reſtored his townes and Citties, & brought
them to a good eſtate, ſo hee ſet in euerye one of them good orders,
and ſundrye occupations, for as he did in the diſpoſinge
and ordering of his legions in time of warre,Order. ſo in peace ſome
companyes he appointed to be Smythes, other Maſons and
Carpenters that wrought by lyue, other to be chiefe maſters
and ouerſeers ouer theyr workes, and alſo ordayned all maner
of artificers meete for their ſcience, as to make the walles
and fortreſſes, or ſuche deuiſes as ſerued to the buildinge
or ſettinge oute of anye thinge, all theſe practiſes hee deuided
into certaine ſortes and companyes. This Emperour Aelius
Adrianus was a man of a ſtraunge nature and condition,
of a ſubtill and wyſe heade, towarde vertue and vice diuerſelye
affected and enclyned, with reaſon geuinge arbitrement
or iudgement, in matters of controuerſy: for with wiſedome
and temperance, he would bridle and keepe vnder the violent
mocions, and ſodaine perturbations of the minde, and of his
owne nature hee was enuiouſe, penſine and ſadde, at other

times, in pleaſure laſciuious, in the aduauncemēt of himſelfe,
in extollinge his owne fame,Adrianus. glorye, and commendation inſolente:
yet with all cloſenes he ſhadowed the ſame: He would
appeare continent, cyuill and gentle, louinge and courteous,
alſo he would not ſeeme that he was to be, for being inflamed
with the whot and burninge deſyre of honour and ambitious
glorye, yet he would diſſemble the ſame, he was ſtoute to prouoke,
and redye to ſhape an aunſweare in waighty and graue
matters, in ſport and pleaſaunt talke readye and prompte, in
nippinge talke no verſe wanted for verſe,Adrian
                        •
                     s. no ſentence for ſentence,
nor theame for theame, or word for word, whoſe wit or
nature was ſo ſinguler and pregnant that in all theſe thinges
it would ſeeme that with deliberation and inuention hee had
deuiſed therevppon.Sabina. 
                  Sabina the wyfe of Aelius Adrian
                        •
                     s,
beinge wythout all reaſon or modeſtye, was cruellye entreated,
and with extremitye driuen to deſperation, and to murther
herſelfe. For ſhe openly did report and affirme, that Aelius
Adrianus her huſbande, was of minde and maners cruell,
ferce and beaſtly: Furthermore ſhe ſayde ſhe did refraine
from procreation and iſſue of children from him, leaſt that ofſpringe
whiche mighte diſcende from him, ſhoulde be the deſtruction
of mankinde.
               At the laſt Adrianus was diſeaſed of a dropſeye goute, the
which diſeaſe of longe time he bare quietlye, ye griefe thereof
encreaſinge, and with the payne beinge made furious hee
wrekked his anger on the Senate, for he murthered many of
them. Manye kinges and Princes from farre of, ſought for
peace with Adrianus, ſo muche they feared his name, and
dreaded his maieſtye, they ſente vnto him greate and infinite
sommes of money, wherevpon this Adrianus did opēly boaſt
that whileſt the common wealthe was in quiet eſtate, he gate
more then all other Princes, in warre and deſtruction of
Realmes and Countryes. In the common wealth of Rome

                     •
                  e ordayned diuers offices and dignityes, and likewyſe in his
royall Pallace, and Princelye Courte. In warre alſo hee
did appointe officers, the whiche after of longe time did remayne,
ſome of them were chaunged by Conſtantius.
               
               
                  
                  Adrianus liued 62. yeares and at the laſt he dyed, being payned
and tormented in all partes of his bodye, this griefe was
ſo greate, that he prayed thoſe that were faythful to kill him,
alluringe ſome therevnto by gentle perſwaſions, and threatninge
other if they would not do it,Sickeneſſe. but there was none that
would obeye him therein, neyther was he of force himſelfe
to do it, in the ende for his beſt remedy, through
the counſaile of the Phiſitions, hee abſtayned
from meate, and drincke, and became ſo
weake thorrow faſtinge, yt he dyed.
            
            
               Antonius Pius.
               
               
                  AFter the deathe of Adrianus ye Romaine
Empyre came to the gouernment of Antonius
Fuluius,
                  Antonius Pius. his vertues and godlye
life cauſed him to be called Antonye the
godly Prince. The glorye of the Empyre
continued with him xx. yeares: Adrianus
the Emperour made this Antonius
by adoption his ſonne to inherite after him, for the
which he was greatly commended. This Antonius was his
wyues ſonne by her firſt huſband: In the adminiſtratiō & gouernment
of the Romaine Empyre, his fame for his worthines

flouriſhed ſo, that manye which were vnder his gouernement
did compare him to Numa,
                  Numa. the ſeconde kinge of the Romaynes.
Antonius for the ſpace of xxii. yeares with highe
aucthority gouerned all his Realmes, by him all warres turned
into peace and tranquilitye,A fortunate eſtate of king do
                        ••
                     s. all kinges feared him, and
with feare they loued him, all Nations, people, and prouinces
dreaded him, for his vertues they called him the father &
patrone of the Romaine Empyre, but rather a patrone then
Lorde or Emperour, and all with one conſent and voice as a
God they honoured him: Such was his goodnes, as he was
ſo oughte all kinges, Princes, and Emperours to be: for by
vertuous gouernmente and godlye life,Godly life in a Prince. they ſhall not onlye
winne the hartes of theyr ſubiectes to loue and obedience, but
alſo they ſhall vanquiſhe and ouerthrowe (with the maieſtye
of the ſame vertues) theyr ſtoute and obſtinate ennemyes.
Aſſone as Antonius began his gouernmēt, he made preſentlye
a declaration of his proper and naturall goodnes, for hee
chaunged not one maieſtrate vnto whom Adrianus had geuē
anye office, but did eſtabliſhe them in the ſame. Hee gaue ſo
muche of his owne ſubſtance before he was Emperour, that
he was reproued for ye ſame of his wife Annia Fauſtina, the
daughter of Annius Verus: vnto whom he aunſwered, thou
muſt vnderſtande, that after I was choſen Emperour, I loſt
all thoſe goodes which beinge a priuate perſon I poſſeſſed.
               He neuer determined to go out of Rome into any countrye,
for he would ſay that the countryes, and people which did followe
the Emperoure, were greuous and hurtefull vnto the
prouinces and countryes where they paſſed. By this circumſpecte
abode, he appeaſed manye rebellious and ſeditious vprores,
both in Englande, Dacie and Germanye, whereby he
obtayned great reputation, that in all controuerſyes and debates
that happened betweene Princes, with mutiall aſſente
they alwayes referred the whole determination & agreeinge
thereof, vnto his noble diſcretion. This Antonius was of
ſtature taule, valiante, and ſtronge. In the morning this Emperoure
Antonius before he would accupye himſelfe in anye
publicke matter of his common wealth, or be in companye of

his nobles to be ſaluted, his cuſtome and vſage of dyet was to
comfort his hart with bread, leaſt with ouermuch abſtinence
from meate his bloude ſhould waxe could aboute his harte, &
thereby his ſtrength conſumed he ſhould be feeble and fainte:
through which he ſhould not be able to trauaile and wade, in
his publicke affayres of his common weale, fewe would take
the paynes that he did, with ſo great laboure and carefull diligence
to prouide for his houſe kepinge, glorye dignitye, and
highe renowne followed him, he beinge voyde of all ambitiō,
he was nothinge ſpotted with any ſpyce of oſtentation, ſo gentle
and mercifull he was, that when certaine had conſpired a
treaſon againſt him, the Senators moued him to apprehende
them, Antonius pacifyed theyr inſtigations and withdrewe
theyr intentes, for hee ſayde it was not good nor neceſſarye
to make any inquirye, to take anye ſuche as were deſyrous to
worke deſtruction againſt his maieſtye, for ſo it might happē
(ſayde he) a greater nomber of traytours inhabiting all partes
of the worlde, might vnderſtande of howe manye hee was
hated and of what noble men, whē the age of this Emperour
was complete to lxxi. yeares,The death of Antonius Pius. he dyed at a village of his owne
xii. myles from Rome of an ague, withinge three dayes after
it toke him. When he had gouerned the Emperiall ſeate 29.
yeares, (with a perpetuall fame, and all memorye of honour
that mighte be) Temples were builded, and prieſtes appointed
to ſigne for him,As theyr religion taught them. & many other ſolemnities were decreed
and ordayned: Of gentle nature he ſo much excelled, yt when
the meane commonaltye of Rome did vniuſtly and withoute
cauſe ſuſpect him to be the cauſe of a dearthe and ſcarcitye of
corne in the Cittie, and was caſt at with ſtones of the people,
he in that caſe rather pitied them, then procured theyr vprore
tumulte, & ſedition to be puniſhed. And when in contempte
of him the valiaunte actes of Iulius Caeſar, and of Hanniball
were reherſed,A wittye ſentence. he would aunſwere with Scipio, that hee did
more dearelye accompte the defence of one of his frendes,
then the death of an hundreth ennemyes.
            
            
               
               Marcus Antonius.
               
               
                  
                     MArcus Antonius called Marcus Aurelius,
ſucceded Antonius Pius in ye Empyre
without any contradiction, he elected
for companion and equall gouernor
in ye Empyre Lucius Commodus, who
was adopted with him by Antonius.
This Emperour was of nature and diſpoſition
right godlye, the vniuerſall calamitye
of Rome founde him a ſinguler ſuccoure and defendor:
In good time the Cittie of Rome may ſaye that hee was
borne to be Emperour, els at a ſodaine the eſtate of Rome
had for euer periſhed and bene proſtrate,A good Prince. in all the time of his
gouernment battaile and mortall warre neuer ceaſſed, for in
all the Eaſt partes and in Britannye, in Italye and Fraunce,
warres were very fierce, and vppon the countryes of Italye
at the ſame time earthquakes happened, with the which many
a Cittye was ouerthrowne, great and mightye flouddes ouerflowed
their banckes, and drowned bothe Towne & countrye,
fewe places eſcaped ye rotten and infectiue plague, their
lands and frutes were deſtroyed with locuſtes,Plagues. there was no
plague or calamitye which happened amongeſt men at any other
time, or any kinde of miſerye that euer was harde of, but
in the time of his gouernment the like was felte: So God in
the dayes of the Godly and vertuous Emperour ſent his plagues,
for theyr offences which longe before had tranſgreſſed,
and neglected his lawes. God oftentimes puniſheth the poſteritye

and ofſpringe, not only by plaguinge them with wicked
gouernours and Princes, but alſo vnder the vertuous &
moſte godlye, for the abhominable life paſſed and wickednes
before committed, God ſendeth diuers plagues and puniſhmentes:Good Princes in euill times.
yet hee in theſe myſeries & calamityes, doth ordaine
vertuous, graue and pollitike heads to be ouer his people, as
in theſe troubleous times the godlye and wyſe Prince Antonius
was reſerued to beare regimente ouer the Romaynes,
wherevppon manye will iudge that God by his eternall prouidence
foreſeinge the plagues and calamities, that in time
to ſome ſhall happen and fall vppō any Cittie, hath ordayned
as one by whoſe power, lawes & ordinances, the whole world
is gouerned, to leaue ſuch heades and rulers as that by theyr
wyſedome, their vertues and politicke adminiſtration, the
greuous plagues of his diſpleaſure might be mittigated and
healed, as by remedies for the ſame ordayned. This Emperour
in the thirde yeare of his raigne, had verye daungerous
warre with the Parthians, (a kinde of people alwayes verye
much feared of the Romaynes) againſt whom was ſent Lucius
Verus his companion, who throughe his ſurfetinge and
other diſordered lyuinge,Lucius Verus. fell ſicke by the waye, whoſe ſlackenes
cauſed the Romayne legions to receiue much damage of
the Parthians, with the deathe of theyr captaine: But after
Verus was come with his populous armye and valiante captaynes,
the Romaynes recouered theyr damages, and gaue
vnto the Parthians and other kinges which ayded them, many
greate ouerthrowes. Marcus Aurelius remayninge all
this while at Rome, did with great diligence and pollicye gouerne
the ſame, and verye carefullye prouided all thinges neceſſary
for the warres: At which time as Euſebius and Oſorius
do write,The fourthe perſecution of the Chriſtiās this Emperour cauſed ye Chriſtians to be perſecuted,
for ye which it may be ſuppoſed, that God ſo plagued
his ſubiectes & whole Empyre, with earthquake, peſtilēce,
famine and warres. After Lucius Verus had ended the warres
in Aſia, he returned vnto Rome, where with all ioye hee
and Marcus Aurelius, triumphed together for theyr greate
victories. Aurelius neuer did any thinge withoute the conſent

of ye whole Senate, for he would ſay that it was more requiſite
that hee beinge but one, ſhoulde▪ be ruled by the counſaile
of ſo many wyſe men,The counſell of many heades. then that ſo manye wyſe counſaylours
ſhould obeye vnto the will of one alone. This Emperour
ſuſtayned not plagues onlye by famyne, peſtilence, warres
and earthquakes, but he had a continuall plague, which
hee nouriſhed in his owne Pallace, which was his wyfe Fauſtina,
                  Fuaſtina.
who was (as all aucthours affirme) diſhoneſt, and aboue
all meaſure diſſolute. After the barbarous Nations
had intelligence of the great mortalities which grewe dailye
more and more in Italye, (as it were with one conſent) all the
Northe regions rebelled againſt the Romaines, againſt whō
with all ſpeede marched Marcus Antonius, and his companiō
                  Lucius Verus, who beinge in the way was taken with an
Apoplexi & ſodainly dyed,Lucius Verus. ix. or x, yeres afore they had ruled ye
Empyre together.Caſſius. In this Marcus Antonius dayes Caſſius
ſeekinge to vſurpe to the Empyre was ſlaine. This Emperour
had two ſonnes, Veriſſimus and Comodus: Veriſſimus
dyed very yonge, but Comodus was broughte vp wyth
great care and trauaile of the nobliſt teachers in learninge &
vertue: his daughters he maryed to Senators, who was as
well endued with vertue, as titled with nobilitye: learninge
encreaſed excedinglye in all partes of the Romaine Dominions
hauinge ſo wyſe a Prince, the example of this gouernour
moued with greate force, infinite people to followe his vertues.Galene.
This was that Emperour whom Galene the famous
Phiſition in thoſe dayes noteth to haue delighted in the vſe of
triacle, to preſerue him from all poyſon, to whom Demetrius
was a Phiſition while hee liued, after whoſe deathe Galene
made vnto him that compoſitiō of triacle: To be briefe of his
warres and greate victoryes, happye ſucceſſe alwayes fell to
him in the ſame. Marcus Antonius beinge aged and remayninge
in Pannonia, beinge greued with ſickenes and hauing
preſent death before his eyes, called ye Senators and wiſe coū
                  ſailers,The wiſedome of this Prince.
beinge moued with the eſtate of the Romaine Empyre,
and alſo with the brittle and the diſſolute youthe of Comodus
his ſonne: in the preſence of thoſe he gaue godly counſaile

to his ſonne Cōmodus, exhorting him that the counſaile
of ſo godlye and graue parſons mighte rule him ſayinge that
thereby both the gouernour and the kingdome ſhould be aduaunced
to moſt fortunate eſtate: hee placed before his eyes
the example of godlye Princes, willinge him to follow theyr
ſteppes and vertues, hee tolde him alſo of the beaſtly gouernmente
of other Princes that were wicked, as of Dioniſius,
Ptolomeus, Antigonus, Nero, Domitianus &c. Hee
ſhewed theyr liues,The godlye admonition of Marcus Aurelius to his ſonne. he reſighted alſo theyr endes, mouinge by
theſe examples the grene youthe and vnconſtant heade of Cō
                     modus
to godly gouernment. This exhortacion ceaſſinge hee
made a wittie oration and a godly, meete for a gouernour leauinge
his eſtate, he exhorted them to be fathers to his youthfull
ſonne Cōmodus, and to adde by theyr wiſedome a perfect
frame of gouernmente, to him that was of age to be gouerned,
beinge as one that was but newe borne to counſaile.
               Immediatly after this Marcus dyed, when hee had ruled the
Empyre .xviii. yeares, lyuinge but a daye and a nighte
after, for his vertues in gouernmēt, they called him
Parentem probum, other Bonum Imperatorem,
and ſome fortiſſimum ducem, manye
called him Continentem moderatum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
principem, great lamentacion was
in all partes of the Romaine Dominion,
ſo vertuous a gouernour
to be taken
from them.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               Aurelius Commodus.
               
                  
               
               
                  TWo hundreth yeares were almoſt paſſed
from Auguſtus to this Emperour. Frō
                  Auguſtus who ſucceaded Iulius Caeſar
his great vncle, the gouernment of one
in a Monarche preuailed:Monarchia▪
                   thoughe in
thoſe .ii. hundreth yeares there had bene
manye wicked gouernours, yet from the
time of this wicked Emperoure Cōmodus,
                  Comodus. to Gordianus
who was the xxviii. Emperour, greater were the troubles &
ſtormy ſeaſons of the Romaine Empyre in theſe Emperours
followinge then before: for then was the brittle eſtate of
kingdomes ſeene,The troubleſome ſtate of Emperours followinge. bloudye conſpiracies to vſurpe ambitiouſlye,
ſo many calamityes, ſuche ſlaughters of noble peares, a
ſouldiour to daye, to morrowe and Emperour, a Prince fallen
from throne yt yeſter day enioyed: raſhnes made choice of Emperours,Troublous times.
and money brybed the electors, by the often faule of
tyrantes, the ouerthrowe of the Empyre of Rome manye times
was like to followe, great were the calamityes of thoſe
dayes, the people & kingdome in myſerable eſtate, when ſuch
broyle and ſtormy ſeaſons followed. As the maner was this
yonge Emperour (his father Marcus beinge deade) was
broughte vnto the armye to be ſeen of them, at whoſe ſighte
they greatlye reioyſed, hopinge in him the like eſtate of kingdome
and felicitye, beinge ſo vertuouſlye broughte vppe: to
whom he made an oration alluringe by all meanes theyr loue
and ſtedfaſt fayth, by the which Princes haue theyr ſtrongeſt

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
holde,The ſtrōgeſt hold of Princes. at this preſent the godly exhortacion of Marcus his father
was layed vp in his breſt, ye graue counſaile of thoſe whō
                  Marcus left fathers to him as yet brideled him, and ruled his
doinges, diſſolute libertye and wanton pleaſures were as yet
baniſhed from the Courte of this Prince, great was the hope
of the godly, to haue and enioye a wyſe and godly gouernour,
the wicked feared that godlynes harboring the Prince, their
practiſes (enemyes to vertue) woulde ſhut them out by little
and litle, wherevppon there crept in euen thoſe who ſoughte
by pleaſant inuention and courtly toyes to delight the yonge
Prince,Flatterye. flatterye ſaluted the kinge, and pleaſure followed to
banket with him:Pleaſure. at a ſodaine theſe two diuerſlye moued and
incenſed this yonge Prince from godly exerciſes, placinge before
his eyes the noble libertye of Princes, the free lyfe, the
voluptuous eſtate, by aucthoritye to commaunde as will lyſteth
to beare aucthoritye, theyr pleaſaunt counſaile, toyes &
fantaſyes, drewe the heade of this yonge Prince to diſſolute
libertye, his owne minde gaue him counſaile to fanſye what
liked him:Adulation. graue counſaile gaue place to adulation, and pleaſure
was chiefe gallant to the kinge,Pleaſure. ſo much flattery and luſt
draweeth frō vertue godly Princes, that very fewe are found
whiche yelde not therevnto,The deſtruction of kingdomes. ſo harde a thinge it is to put of ye
plague which pulleth downe kingdomes & deſtroyeth Princes.
Cōmodus pricked forward wt theſe inſtigations, was deſirous
to leaue the roughe and barren countrye of Pannonia,
and to ſee the pleaſures of Rome & delightes thereof: whoſe
comminge to Rome, was with all ioye and princelye entertaynment
receiued. This Cōmodus diſcended from an auncient
race of Senators by byrth, his mother was called Fauſtina
the daughter of Antonius Pius, nyce to Adrian the Emperour,
Traian the Emperour was her great graundfather:
nothinge wanted in Cōmodus that nature coulde geeue, for
hee was adorned with a moſt beutifull perſonage, a manlye
coūtenaunce, grauetye, learninge and wiſedome: yeares onelye
wanted in him, for affectinge to be at libertye, his yonge
heade began to rule the counſayle of the graue: pleaſure ſheewed
wherein he delighted, and then pleaſure choſed him mates:

the care which he ought in gouernment to haue was neglected,Pleaſure.
how happye had it bene for him if hee had ſubmitted
himſelfe to the tuition of thoſe graue and fatherly Senators,
whom his father Marcus had choſen him? Cōmodus nowe
enduced by euill perſwaſion,Perennius. made Perennius an Italian
chiefe ouer his ſouldiours, who perceyuinge Cōmodus wholye
enclined towardes him, ſuffered the Emperoure as luſte
ledde him to diſpoſe his life, his counſaile ruled the Prince &
ſuffered him to exceade in al wanton pleaſures, ryote, whoredome
and all abhomination: This euill counſellour Perennius,
                  Ambition.
moued with ambitious deſyre neglected the Prince, ſeekinge
his priuate aduauncemente: the ſage and graue Senators
are now put out of place, onlye Perennius beareth ſway
to rule the diſſolute minde, by whoſe conueyance ambition ſo
broyled in his breſte, that hee wroughte treaſons againſt Cō
                     modus,
for his ambition not content with lofty eſtate, ſought
to murther this Emperoure Cōmodus:
                  Perennius. but his conſpiracye
came to light, wherevppon he was beheaded of Cōmodus.
Many treaſons alſo were wrought againſt him, as of Maternus,
                  Maternus.
and Cleander
                  Cleander. who in like maner by ambition moued,
ſought to vſurpe aboue the Prince, but theyr ſodaine ambition
brought them vnloked for a ſodaine death. At this tyme a
great peſtilence fell in Rome which deuoured infinite people
by infection, greate fyers alſo deſtroyinge houſes continued
many dayes, and becauſe this Emperour abhorringe vertuous
life gaue himſelfe to all abhomination, eche one cryed out
theſe plagues to faule for ye iniquitye of theyr Prince. What
greater pride coulde be then to refuſe his name Cōmodus,
commaunding himſelfe to be called Hercules the ſonne of Iupiter,
                  Pride:
and leauinge of his princelye robe to clothe himſelfe
with a Lions ſkinne: great was the follye of this Prince if it
were in all pointes at large reſighted. In the quallity of ſhotinge
Comodus excelled all men, whom in that gifte neither
the moſte worthye archers of the Parthians, neyther of the
practiſed Numidians coulde in anye reſpecte be equall, Herodian
reſighteth at large his excellencye therein. Cōmodus
leauinge the care of gouernmente, gaue himſelfe to all

diſſolutenes, who beinge counſailed of his frendes to auoyde
the infamye & euill fame that his wicked life did procure him,
thoſe priuily not onely he expelled from him, but alſo ſought
to murther them:Letus. as Letus and Electus his chamberlaynes,Electus.
with Martia his harlotte: Cōmodus (as his maner was) did
vſe oftentimes the bathinge houſe, whom at a certaine time
returninge from the ſame Martia by drincke poyſoned him,
which poyſon whether it were by force of nature, (or as the
maner of Emperours was) by vſing a preſeruatiue againſt
poyſon, at that inſtance hee was preſerued and began to recouer,
but they that were priuye of this treaſon, (ſeinge the
Emperour beyonde theyr expectation to eſcape the poyſon)
brybed with great rewardes one Narciſſus a hardye & ſtoute
man to ſtrangle him,Narciſſus. who for money accompliſhed theyr
deſyre: This ende Cōmodus had for the leadinge of
a filthye and abhominable life, after he had ruled
thirtene yeares, whoſe nobilitye and
goodlye giftes of nature, by adulation
and pleaſure were deſtroyed, &
he by folly ſubuerted.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               Pertinax.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     COmmodus being deade in this ſorte as you
haue harde, the conſpiratours toke counſell
how they might conceale the murther: whervppon
by night they conueighed his body in a
cheſt as if it had bene ſome other thinge neceſſarye
to be caryed forth by two whom they
truſted. The murder as yet vnknowen, and leaſt of all ſuſpected,
neither ſearche or vewe was made to know what thinge
was caryed oute: but the bodye of the ſlaine Emperour was
caryed vppon a carte into the fielde. Martia the harlotte of
Commodus, with Letus and Electus poletikelye deuiſed for
theyr ſafegarde,Commodus. conſidering that Commodus exceſſiuelye
pampered his body with ſurfetinge, obſeruinge no meane
but as a moſt be aſtlye glotton was deſtitute of all reaſon, ſobrietye
neuer tempered the Prince, but as Sardanapalus or
Epicurus, placed all his ioye and felicity in that exceſſiuenes,
therefore becauſe his diſordered life was knowne to all people,Pollicye.
his continuall ſurfetinge reſerued in memorye, they bruted
abrode that he died ſodainly of a diſeaſe called Apoplexia:Apoplexia.
the which fame was ſone beleued,The death of tyrantes. becauſe eche one knew this
Prince to be geuen to all beaſtlines, the plagues alſo that fell
before time were thoughte to happen on them for the wicked
life of the Prince: the multitude not regardinge the ſodaine
ende of Commodus life, was moſt glad thereat, the godlye
wiſhed for a better eſtate through a more godly and vertuous
gouernour: the wicked were very glad of a chaunge, eche one

rather deſyrouſe to heare and carrye newes, then to regarde
the manner of his death: After this conſultation was had amongeſt
the conſpirators, no heyre being left to ſuccede in gouerment,
a longe pauſe taken, they thought it good to chuſe
out ſome one whom wiſedome, & horeheaded age had caught,
thereby hopinge for full ſecuritye of eſtate, and a deliuerance
from tyrannicall gouernment, amongeſt many graue & ſage
peares:Pertinax. 
                  Pertinax a noble Senator aboue the reſt appeared,
whom Marcus Antonius before vſed familiarly for his graue
counſaile, makinge alſo greate price of him, this alſo was a
greate proufe of his worthines, that beinge a ſage, graue and
wiſe man, obtayninge greate dignities in Marcus Antonius
dayes, a noble warrior a valiant captaine, a fatherlye Senator
preferred vnto manye highe dignityes by offices, and beinge
become poſſeſſor of greate and ritche reuenewes whiche
had fallen to him:Pertinax his life. yet he was in goodes and ſubſtance poore,
well he vſed the ſame when vertue diſpended his reuenewes:
wherevppon hee was thoughte moſt worthye to beare chiefe
ſtroke of gouernmente,Couetouſnes in maieſtrates, is the ouerthrowe of a common wealth. beinge not couetous and by neglectinge
his owne eſtate to preferre ye ſtate of the cōmon wealth.
In the night they went to Pertinax, who fearinge to be murdered
becauſe of ſo ſodayne a comminge, the deathe of Commodus
not knowne: who before had ſodainlye murdered many
Senators, but theyr comminge beinge thorowlye vnderſtode
and the writinge of Commodus ſeene, what murthers
he pretended:The acte of 
                        ••
                     rantes. he gaue credite vnto them, and was content to
obey vnto theyr choiſe: eche one was glad that ſo vertuous a
Prince ſhould ſuccede, great were the numbers of ſouldiours
at theſe dayes in the Romaine Empyre, for continuallye hauinge
warres, they were enforced to maintaine gariſons of
ſouldiours to content whoſe mindes, Letus made an Oratiō
to them in this wyſe: Commodus your Emperour daily ſurfetinge
dyed ſodainlye, his diſordered life haſted his deathe,
(and as ye knowe) euery one hath ſome or one impediment to
vntwine the brittle threade of life, you knowe his liuinge, ye
ſee his ende,Commodus. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   his wilfull heade obeyed no counſayle, he was a
banketing Prince, ryote was his mate, and ryote hath killed

him: who by bellye cheare choked, the earthe preſētlye hath
ſwallowed vp: thus muche he ſayd vnto them, commendinge
with longer talke Pertinax, whom all men loued, whoſe vertues
they embraced.Pertinax. 
                  Pertinax alſo made an Oration vnto
them, whereby he might pacifye theyr mindes, & winne them
to obedience. Forreine Princes knowinge of the election of
ſo vertuous a Prince ſent theyr Embaſſages, reioyſing thereat.
This Pertinax was an Italian borne, and valiantly ſhewed
himſelfe againſt the Germaynes, and vnto manye other
Regions in time of his gouernment, he behaued himſelfe as
a vertuous Prince and mercifull.Beaſtlye ſouldiours. But the nomber of ſouldiours
prohibited of theyr olde liberties, which they before enioyed
vnder Commodus, who then liued voluptuouſlye as he
did, in workinge iniuryes, robbinge and ſpoyling from other
like raſhe heades and warlike ſtomackes, not bearinge the
gouernment of ſo vertuous a Prince, they diſobeyed him, and
contempned his gouernment, ponderinge more the reſtraint
of their foliſhe libertye and voluptuous life, then his godlye
and vertuous rulinge: happye had the Romaine Empyre
bene if he had longe continued in gouernment, beinge repleat
with iuſtice,A godly maieſtrate. voyde of ambition, carefull of the cōmon wealth,
louinge learninge: oftentimes frequentinge the Scoles and
diſputations of the learned, the baſe multitude of ſouldiours
voide of counſayle, full of beaſtly maners in a tumulte roſe againſt
Pertinax and ſlue him in the ende, and cut of his head:
thoſe that conſpired his deathe incloſed themſelues in holdes
for feare of reuenge of theyr wickednes. This thinge pacifyed,
they made Proclamation the Empyre to be his, that
would geue moſt moneye for it, Iulianus hearinge at his banquet
and feaſt, that moneye would bye the Empyre,Iulianus. his wife
and daughter with manye other perſwadinge him with moneye
to purchaſe that moſte noble dignitye, for that Iulianus
in heaped ritches paſſinge all other might the better obtaine
it:Moneye. Thus was the Empyre, which by vertue and merite onely
was to be geuen to Princes, was nowe boughte with moneye,
but no office or dignitye purchaſed with moneye,Bought offices. can
ſhewe anye hope of a good maieſtrate: for dignity boughte,

ſheeweth an ambitious minde, a corrupt cōſcience, a purpoſe
grounded vppō priuate gaine:Priuate gaine. priuate gayne without mediocrity
is the marke & ende at the which all they ſhote at, which
procure ye ſame with moneye, as did this Iulianus: The good
and fatherly Senators bewayled yt eſtate, and all other good
men lamented to ſee ſo noble an Empyre brought to the election
of moneye. The death of Pertinax was muche bewayled
of the godly, who were not able to beare ſway amongeſt thoſe
barbarous Legiōs of raſh & bloudy ſouldiours, whoſe crueltye
was extreame toward ſo graue & fatherlye a Prince, for
his head cut of, was caryed about as a laughinge ſtocke: but
the godlye Pertinax beinge deade, the people vttered theſe
wordes with great lamentation, as longe as Pertinax liued
we liued in all ſecuritye,Pertinax. we feared no man, Pertinax was a
godly Prince, a father amōgeſt Senators, a defender of good
men. The Romaynes thought themſelues fortunate hee rulinge,Sinne.
but ſodainly they loſt that Iewel, ſo God for the iniquitye
of ſinne, taketh from the earth godlye Princes, and in
the ende hee ſcourgeth wicked gouernours,The power of God. treadeth
downe the mightye, and pulleth downe the proude,
he rayſeth out of priſon to commaunde the puiſaunte,
ſuch is the eſtate of kingdomes, the
cauſe, the time, the perſon, the continuance
of ſucceſſion vnknowen, excepte
onlye to God.
(⸪)
            
            
               
               Didius Iuliauus, and Seuerus.
               
               
                  
                     DIdius Iulianus was borne at Milane,
who bought the Empyre with money as
it is ſheewed before, hee continued ſeuen
monethes, who in all the time of his gouernmente
gaue himſelfe to all beaſtlynes
and wicked life he deſcended of a noble
byrthe, hauinge great cunninge and
knowledge in the ciuill lawe, who becauſe he coulde not paye
thoſe greate ſommes that hee promiſed in byinge of the Empyre,
the men of warre murthered him, for hee was beheaded
in his Pallace,Iulianus. his head ſet vp before the courte of Hoſtilius,
and there as an open ſpectcle and laughinge ſtocke was derided:
this was his ende, but the Romaynes beinge in this
eſtate fanſyed an other gonernour called Niger,
                  Niger. at the ſame
time beinge the liefetenaunt in Syria, for all Phenitia and all
the Region to the floudde Euphrates was vnder his gouernment:
Niger was greatly commended in thoſe whom he gouerned,
Embaſſadours alſo came to Antioche, kinges and
noble Peares reſorted from beyonde Euphrates reioyſinge of
Niger his ſucceſſe. Niger therevppon fully hopinge to enioye
without reſiſtaunce the honour of that dignitye which he loked
for,Delaye. ſomewhat delayed the time: Furthwith the glory of
that Empyre,Seuerus. moued a valiante Captaine Seuerus by name,
who was not only valiaunte in ſtrength, but alſo wyſe and experte
to aſſaye & finiſhe that which he enterpriſed, his dreame
alſo which he dreamed at the choiſe of Pertinax made him egar

to aſſaye his enterpriſe, Seuerus with all pollecye perſwaded
ye whole multitude that he wente to reuenge ye death
of Pertinax, Seuerus was a great diſſembler, circumſpectlye
groundinge his pollicies,Vſurpers. as thoſe are, who by vniuſte meanes
ſeeke to vſurpe: preparation was made on euerye ſyde,
forth wente Seuerus, who at a ſodaine enteringe into Italye
diſmayde them ſo, that therevppon they yelded them ſelues.
Iulianus hearinge of this,Iulianus. (voyde of all preparation) diſpayred
of himſelfe, the Romaynes ſeeinge Seuerus ſo valiantlye
to haue ſucceſſe, and all thinges to go forwarde with him, accompted
Iulianus a cowarde, they neglected Niger becauſe he
delayed the oportunitye geuen. Iulianus drawinge neare to
Rome,Iulianus death. was commaunded to be beheaded of one of the Trybunes,
which thinge aſſone as Seuerus hearde, hee drewe towarde
Rome with more haſt, where he ſoughte out the murtherers
of Pertinax, by commaundement expellinge them.
This ende Iulianus had,Moneye. his kingdome bought with moneye
continued not, ye men of warre diſceaued of theyr pray murthered
him. Niger ſeinge a mightier to ryſe, whō alſo many victories
followed with felicitye of eſtate, and hauinge receyued
letters in the which was declared vnto him, that Rome was
enioyed of Seuerus, and that ye whole Senate ſaluted him as
Emperour, theſe thinges being knowen to Niger, which before
were vnloked for: Suche is the fauour and ſtrengthe of
brittle kingdomes, ſo vncertaine is the ſtaye of ambitious gouernours
and ſeates ſone remoued, nowe ſodainlye fortune
which laughed vppon Niger,
                  Proſperitye deceitfull. frowneth on him, the mightye
armyes and gariſons of warrelike ſouldiours foſtered in Illiria
both by ſea and lande buſkled themſelues to bringe downe
Niger, Niger beinge amaſed at this great and ſodaine blaſt,
ſeeketh frendes, and warneth the Preſidentes and chiefe gouernours
of thoſe prouinces to ſee vnto his portes, to fortifye
all thoſe places where the ennemye might haue beſt opportunitye
to enter in,Niger his practiſes. he ſent vnto the kinges of Parthia, of Armenia,
                  Byzance.
& other Princes for ayde, hee made Bizanſium his forte,
a Cittie moſt wealthy and great, fortifyed aſwell with men
as moneye. Seuerus by all meanes ſlackinge no time as Niger
                  
did, forthwith approched to the Cittie of Bizance, becauſe
he knew it a Cittye for ſtrength paſſinge other: to withſtand
his paſſage Niger ſente Emilianus, who foughte diuers battailes
wt the ſouldiours of Seuerus,
                  Emilianus. but in the ende Emilianus
was by him vanquiſhed, ſo all thinges went againſt Niger,
greate was the ſlaughter of Niger his ſouldiours, none eſcaped
but ſuch as fledde: Manye battayles were alſo fought betwene
Niger and Seuerus, but Seuerus for ſucceſſe preuailed,
Niger for lacke of men and money,Niger. fled to Antioche for ayde,
but all this preuailed not, for neither munitiō, neither valiant
ſouldiours which he had plentye of, did anye thinge preuaile,
ſo hard a thinge it is to truſt vnto loftye eſtate, or the fauoure,
power, and aucthoritye of the mightye, where God rayſeth a
kingdome, the weake ſhall chaſe awaye the mightye, and the
nedye robbe the wealthye,Kingdome. foliſhe heades ſhall ſubuert ye ſage
and prudente counſailes of the graue and wiſe:The ſecrete counſaile of God. no counſaile
ſtayeth victorye, nor pollicye putteth of the enterpriſes of abiecte
parſons where God refuſeth ye eſtate. Well ſo vnluckelye
all thinges wente on Nigers ſyde, that neyther the fauour
of the Romaynes which firſt choſe him, neither ſtrengthe of
men or moneye preuailed, but the greate calamitye whiche
happeneth vnto the miſerable, for hee in the ende was forced
to flye backe to Antioche:
                  Calamities of warre. great lamentacion was made and
pitifull ſhowtes for the death of ſo many ſouldiours, the child
for his father cryed alas, the father for his ſonne, the wyfe for
her huſbande, brother for brother, the frende for frende.
Niger then ſought an out corner to hide himſelfe in, he that liued
in the face of many nowe hydeth himſelfe for feare, one ye
ruled many,The faule of a mightye Prince. nowe feareth to be murthered of one, but Niger
purſued of Seuerus horſemen was taken & beheaded of them.
Theſe thinges ſet in quietnes, Seuerus had but one ennemye
to aſſaye, Albinus by name, whom alſo by deceit he murthered:Albinus.
then Seuerus was onlye, but as concerninge Albinus
aſſone as he heard yt 
                  Seuerus did ſtoppe the narrowe ſtraightes
and paſſage of the Alpes, hee as yet in all voluptuouſnes
leadinge his life, was ſodainlye ſtricken with feare and forthwith
hee remoued his armye oute of Britayne into Fraunce,

ſendinge letters to the Princes that dwelled by him,Albinus. for ayde
of men and moneye, manye refuſed to ayde Albinus fearinge
the ſucceſſe of Seuerus. When Seuerus came into Fraunce
diuers ſkirmiſhes were made, but in ye ende Seuerus pitched
his tente neare to Lugdunū
                   a Cittie in Fraunce in ye partes
of Aquitania, a Cittye of great wealthe of people populous,
wherein Albinus cloſed himſelfe for his ſafegard, & ſent forth
a ſufficient multitude to fighte for him, valiaunt was the courage
of euery ſouldiour, theyr fight manlye, none gaue place
to other a longe ſeaſon, this doubtfull eſtate of battaille continued,
at the lengthe Seuerus (though moſt manlye) was vnhorſed,
and caſtinge his Princely cloake from him was thereby
vnknowen, aſſone as Albinus hearde that Seuerus was
in that extremitye, he came out of the houlde, not as a manly
Prince but as a cowarde the fielde wonne, but vnloked for,
reſkue was made of freſhe ſouldiours to ayde Seuerus: Albinus
and his ſouldiours at a ſodaine retyred beinge chaſed of
Seuerus men to the Cittye of Lugdunum the which Cittye
they burned,The death of Albinus. and beheaded Albinus and broughte the heade
vnto Seuerus. This Seuerus moſt victoriouſly hath put downe
three Emperours, Iulianus, Niger and Albinus: who maye
be compared with Caeſar againſt Pompeie, who were valiante
captaynes, eyther with Auguſtus againſt Antonye, and
the noble ſonnes of Pompeie, eyther with Silla and Marius
in pollicye or counſayle, for hee excelled them: And becauſe
Albinus had many frendes at Rome he ſent the heade of Albinus
thither: cōmaundinge it to be hanged vp in the ſight of
all men, & in the ſame letter wherin he certifyed the Romaynes
of his ſucceſſe, he wrote in the ende thereof theſe wordes:
Ideo caput Albini publicae in patibulo ſpectandum mitto,
vt exemplum capiant eius amici, quid ipſis patiendum foret.
Therefore I do ſende the heade of Albinus in ſight to be
hanged vp,A terror. that his frends may loke for the like: Immediatlye
all thinges ſet in quiet eſtate, he marched toward Rome
with a terrible hoſte, and with all haſt taking his voyage followinge
therein Caeſar. Seuerus enteringe Rome, all the
Romaynes outwardly reioyſed and the Senate, forthwith he

put to deathe all the fauourers of Albinus. Seuerus was a
cruell Emperour,Crueltye. nothinge regardinge the life of any whom
his cruell harte did fanſye to murther, in trauaile and paynes
he was inferiour to no ſouldiour in ſufferinge of colde, heate,
honger,Couetouſnes thirſte, he paſſed all other in theſe extremityes, in couetouſnes
he went beyonde all Emperours, wherevppon not
content with his eſtate, ambitiouſlye he ſoughte larger kingdomes,
and vnder pretence to worke his heauy diſpleaſure againſte
certaine which fauoured Niger, hee entered againſte
Barſemius, he ledde his armye into the Eaſte, he paſſed alſo
into Armenia ſubduinge Augarus and his kingdome,Augarus. and caryed
his children with him for hoſtages, Seuerus was ayded
by him with a greate nomber of mightye Archers, hee paſſed
from thence to Felix Arabia,
                  Arabia. burninge & ſpoylinge the countryes,Arras.
hee layde ſiege to the Cittie Arras where the Romaynes
were myſerablye afflicted, and Seuerus with the greate
ſlaughter of his ſouldiours diſcomfited left the ſiege: the mē
of Arras were noble Archers, wherby Seuerus nothinge preuailed,
the men of Arras alſo vſed diuers pollicies whereby
they poyſoned his men, hee paſſed from thence to Parthia to
kinge Artabanus,
                  Artabanus. whom againſt the lawe of Armes he entered
vpon, beinge in league with him, he ſpoyled his countrye,
deſtroyed his people and ledde them captiues awaye, only the
kinge Artabanus with a few horſemen eſcaped,The lawe of armes to be kept. but his treaſure
and ritches fell to the praye and ſpoyle of Seuerus ſouldiours,
then from thence hee paſſed home to Rome, who cauſed
the whole maner & eſtate of his conqueſtes, to be ſet forth
in Mappes and cardes to be ſeene of all men, Seuerus beinge
receiued with all ſolemnitye, quietly ſetled himſelfe to make
his abode there, geuinge ſentence in all controuerſyes of the
lawe, carefull in the education and bringinge vppe of his two
ſonnes Marcus Antoninus & Geta,
                  Mareus Antoninus. Geta. theſe two in the abſence
of theyr father with all libertye hauinge free paſſage, to fanſye
that liked them, theyr natures were corrupted: Delicijs,
victu vrbano, ſpectaculis, ſtudio ſaltationis. That is, with
delicious fare, ryot, ſightes, and daunſing, and ſurely where
theſe things be in vſe, beaſtly life followeth, becauſe pleaſure

which deſtroyeth vertue incenſeth them, and where pleaſure
harboreth,Pleaſure. vertue with all ſobrietye, temperancye and prudente
counſaile is expelled. Conſtantinus the greate reforminge
his Courte and purginge it, expelled from the ſame
Aliatores,
                  The rattes of Prīces Courtes. 
                  ſaltatores, & adulteros, quia inquit hij ſunt Sorices
Pallacij. That is, dyſers, daunſers, & adulterous parſons,
ſaying theſe be ye rattes of my Pallace: the like alſo ſayd Priamus,
                  Priamus.
                  Hector, Neſtor, and worthy Troilus being ſlaine, theſe
valiaunte parſonages (ſayth he) cruell Mars hath ſlaine, but
I haue left me reprochfull children, droſſe, and refuce full of
filthye ſpottes, deteſtable lyars, dauncers, & robbers of other.
The like we reade of Henrye the fift kinge of Englande,Henrye ye v. who
conquered all Fraunce, this Prince (as the Hiſtories do note)
baniſhed all diſſolute parſons frō his Court, being ſometime
a wantō Prince himſelfe, yet receiuing charge of kingdome,
he gaue himſelfe to all wiſedome, grauety, & temperancy, his
kingdome proſpered,The wyſe Prince. and people flowriſhed, large were his
victories in Fraunce, vertuous life ruled his commons, and
quailed his ennemyes: A voluptuous Prince is neuer dreaded
of his ennemyes,The voluptuous Prince he is hated and accompted of little force,
the weake Prince beinge godly winneth by vertue, and procureth
thereby the loue of his ennemye, ſmall are the holdes,
and weake are the fortreſſes of the voluptuous Princes, as
the Chronicles teſtifye, concerninge Antoninus and Geta
the two ſonnes of Seuerus by diſpoſition and nature contrary,
continuallye were at diſcention in all games and paſtymes,
not as children ſone ceaſſing diſpleaſure, but maliciouſly eche
one hatinge deadlye thother.The deſtructiō of a kingdome. 
                  Seuerus feared theyr naturall
diſpoſitions, leaſt at anye tyme theyr malicious hartes ſhould
worke on thēſelues miſchiefe. Antoninꝰ
                  Antoninus. was by nature wicked,
cruell, beaſtly, Geta gentle, lowly, & curteous, this Antoninus
afterwarde in his owne life ſhalbe Chronicled what
he was.Geta. At yt time Seuerus maryed Antoninus to the daughter
of Plauſianus againſt his will, wherevppon Antoninus
threatned aſſone as Seuerus his father dyed, to ſlea his wyfe &
her father Plauſianus,
                  Plauſianus. which thinge Plauſianus hearinge of,
fearinge ye cruell head of Antoninus, determined in minde to

ſlea both the ſonnes of Seuerus, his conſpiracye came to light
Seuerus yet liuinge:Plauſiauus. This Plauſianus had bene exalted from
poore and needye eſtate, to greate dignitye, who not contente
with his eſtate ſought by ambition, to be aboue his Lorde and
maiſters childrē,Ambition. the age of Seuerus moued him thereto partlye,
and the great & infynite treaſures gathered by the ſpoile
of manye Regions, and captiuitye of kinges moued him alſo,
but this conſpiracye beinge knowne to Seuerus & vttered by
Saturninus a Tribune,Saturninus. who ſhould haue done yt wicked facte,
therevnto beinge hyred, Plauſianus was apprehended as the
Hiſtorye noteth at large,Plauſianus his death. and forthwith was beheaded.
               
                  Seuerus by all meanes ſought to ioyne amitye and concord
with his two ſonnes, fearinge the perill that would followe,
and the greate calamitye on the Romaynes, theſe two Princes
beinge at diſcorde,Diſcorde. liuinge with all libertye, flowed in all
wanton pleaſures and fonde paſtimes, all which things with
theyr wicked behauiour made Seuerus a carefull Prince, hee
perſwaded them to loue, geeuinge them admonitions and fatherlye
counſaile,The ruine of kingdomes. hee called to minde before them the greate
ruine of kingdomes, the faule of Princes, the deſtruction of
noble houſes which happened by diſcorde, hee badde them beware
by them, he ſhewed to them the glorye and fame of good
kinges and Princes, the ignominye and ſpotted life of ye wicked:Diſcorde.
diſcorde he ſayde pulleth downe in a momente more then
concorde in manye yeares purchaſeth, and aduaunceth. His
greate victoryes and large conqueſtes he ſayde, woulde ſone
faule in the handes of other Princes, his two ſonnes beinge
at diſcorde,Deuiſion. theyr deuiſion makinge them weake, would rayſe
ſtrength in other, to pull them downe, to ſpoyle them of their
ritches,Strēgthe armed with cō
                     corde. and to diſſolue theyr kingdomes: ſtrengthe armed wt
concorde preuaileth mightely, but great armyes deuided are
chaſed awaye and loaſe oftentimes theyr honour in the field:
ſo much diſcorde preuayleth being in force to diſſolue vnitye,
but all this counſaile of Seuerus was in vaine: for dailye, for
lyuinge ſake,Flatterye. there crepte in thoſe that moued by flatterye,
deuiſion & diſcorde betwene the two brethren, diuers of them
Seuerus put to deathe, that thus gaue counſaile to moue that

broyle of diſcorde.Britaine. 
                  Seuerus thoughe he were very aged hearing
that the Britaynes denyed obedience to the Romaynes,
forthwith marched from Rome to warre on them, but the
Britaynes ſought peace, and ſent Embaſſadours to Seuerus
to purge themſelues, but Seuerus entered on them, they takinge
the mariſh ground reſiſted him, but Seuerus politickelye
deuiſed meanes to fighte with them,Getā. and in the ende conquered
them, all thinges ſet in quiet eſtate, he lefte Geta his
yonger ſonne chiefe gouernour there, with a nomber of wyſe
counſailours to inſtruct Geta, and to order the Ilande: The
people of the Ilande knewe no vſe of apparell,The maners of the Britaynes. but they had a
hoope of Iron about theyr necke and middle, which was coū
                  ted
an ornament with them, and a token of great riches: their
bodyes were pictured and painted with diuers ſhapes of beaſtes,
As Caeſar doth note in his Commentaryes vppon the
people of this our Ilande, a nation very warrelike, cruell &
bloudye. In this Emperours dayes the Chriſtians were
perſecuted.The fifte perſecution of ye Chriſtians. Croked age comminge vppon Seuerus, and alſo
the goute troublinge him, he drewe to Rome, age forbidding
him any more to warre, he ſent his ſonne Antoninus as liefetenaunte
and chiefe gouernour to forraine warres,Antoninus. now Antoninus
(mindinge that hee alwayes coueted) ſoughte to be
honoured as Emperour of all men, ſorye he was that Seuerus
his father liued ſo longe, diuers wayes he ſoughte by the
Emperours ſeruauntes and Phiſitions to ſlea him, but
none obeyed his counſaile: Seuerus hearinge of his
ſonnes wicked purpoſes dyed more vpon thought
then ſickenes, after hee had raigned xviii. yeares.
This was the death of that valiante
Emperour Seuerus:
                  Seuerus. but Charion writeth
that Seuerus comminge to
this Ilande, dyed heare and
was buried at Yorke.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               Marcus Seuerus Antoninus.
               
               
                  ROme loſt a wyſe gouernour Seuerus beinge
dead, the ennemye alſo and forreine
Princes had ſuch an one taken awaye as
they dreaded, who for pollecye, counſaile
and all qualityes meete for ſuch a parſonage
was inferiour to no Prince,The commē
                     dation of Seuerus. greate
was his fame for his noble victoryes, all
Italye, Fraunce, yea all Europe, Affricke and Aſia, eyther
dreaded his name or obeyed his gouernement. At the time of
Seuerus death, Antoninus and Geta were in Britayne this
our Ilande, immediatlye they made preparation to Rome to
ſolemniſe the funerall of Seuerus theyr father: Nowe began
that diſcord to broyle, which longe time was in the hartes of
theſe two brethren, for in all their paſſage to Rome, eche one
feared other, hauing together no mutuall ſociety, ſuch was ye
feare of the brother with the brother, both feared treaſon, the
one dreaded to be poyſoned of the other,Diſcorde. wherevppon ſeuerally
they toke their repaſte and banquetes, they feared in drinckes
and meates poyſoning, feare ſuſpected the hartes of theſe
that ſerued them, aſſone as they came to Rome theyr lodginges
were ſeuerallye appointed,Diſcorde. eche owne feared yt the great
diſcorde of theſe two Princes, would worke great calamities
to all the Romaynes, and deſtruction to themſelues. As concerning
the funerall of Seuerus, the Romaynes did celebrate
it wt all due honour, (meete for ſo worthy an Emperour) layinge
his corpes in the place of the Romaine Emperours, this

funerall once ended, then Geta and Antoninus openlye vttered
theyr diſcorde, eche one makinge traynes and craftye conueyance
to entangle the other.Antoninus. 
                  Antoninus beinge the elder
brother, feared Geta his yonger brother, Geta (thoughe yonger)
ambitiouſlye ſought by manye pollicies, to occupye the
place and kingdome of his elder brother,Nature. nature made them
bretherne, reaſon woulde that concorde ſhoulde haue obeyed
vnto nature:Lofte eſtate. loftye eſtate depriueth nature of right, kingdomes
manye times obeyeth not nature, ambition in loftye gouernours
caſteth of kindred and grudgeth to haue his mate,Ambition.
euen as Pompeie broked not his like, and as full euill Caeſar
coulde beare his ſuperior, ſo ambition in theſe two bretherne
ſeeketh a ſole regiment alone without the other, thoughe diſcorde
poſſeſſed theſe two Princes, yet they had ſubtill heades
and flatteringe tongues, whiche frequented them, counſaile
lacked not on both theyr ſides to worke miſchiefes,Adulationſ but yet ye
loue and fauoure of the greater parte of the Romaynes was
well affected to Geta, becauſe Geta gaue a good opiniō of godly
behauiour,Geta. in talke and geſture ciuil, gentle, and curteous,
his delectacion was in thinges worthye commendation, the
company of the ſage and wiſe delighted him, his vertues gate
him loue and his gentle behauiour with all men purchaſed
him fauoure, but Antoninus
                  Antoninus. by nature cruell, excerciſed crueltye,
with tyrannye commendinge: warrelike in all his conditions,
Irefull, mightely threateninge, with feare not with
loue ſeekinge obedience, euē as violent kingdomes lacke loue
of ſubiectes to obedience, ſo violente gouernours are more
dreaded then loued,Violent gouernours. miſerable is the eſtate of thoſe Princes,
yea the kingdome vnfortunate, where diſcord prepareth miſchiefe,
where cloked hartes grounde pollecies to deminiſhe ye
eſtate or depriue the honoure thone of the other:Diſcorde. that that Seuerus
by large victories gate, that which by concorde he rayſed
to the aduauncement of the Romayne Empyre, now diſcorde
in theſe. ii. brethrene bringeth defamation, weakeneth
theyr ſtrength, ſhortneth theyr life, pulleth downe theyr kingdome,
theyr diſcorde cauſed diuiſion of countryes, for diuers
Regions were lymitted vnto eche of them, as all Europe to

be in the iuriſdiction of Antoninus and Aſia was lymitted
for the poſſeſſion & patrimonye of Geta:
                  Bizance. 
                  Bizance had a great
garriſon of ſouldiours for Antoninus,
                  Calcedon. and Calcedon a Cittye
in Bithinia was the forte of Geta, Antioche and Alexandria
the kinglye ſeate for Geta, Mauritania and Numidia belonged
to Antoninus, this the Senators of Rome (ledde wt
all deliberatiō) thought good to make this equality betwene
them, the Empreſſe with great ſorrowe ſuſpectinge diſcorde
oftentimes admoniſhed them,Vnitye. and gaue them exhortacion &
as a wyſe Empreſſe mindefull of vnitye allured them to concorde,
but her counſayle nothinge preuailed, dailye theyr diſcorde,
hatred, and bloudye practiſes encreaſed, thone fearing
thother, both liued warely from hurt and poyſoninge becauſe
they feared:Ambition. but at the lengthe Antoninus not contente with
the eſtate of Geta, nor with the fauoure wherewith hee was
affected, therevppon incenſed to poſſeſſe a ſole kingdome, at a
ſodaine by violence entered his brothers chamber by nighte,Geta murthered.
and at vnwares before his mother beheaded him: Nowe is
the hart of Antoninus ſeene, nowe hath diſcorde caughte his
ende which hee loked for, then Antoninus (the murther vnknowen)
ranne forth makinge great exclamation cryinge out
for helpe: ſayde, that Geta with a companye entered vppon
him to ſlea him, but his ſtrength preuayled and ſo he eſcaped,
great was the tumulte and buſines of Antonye in this ſturre
then he allured the hartes of the men of warre geuinge them
princely giftes, (by which they beinge ouercome) proclaymed
him Emperour. Antoninus with an eloquent Oration parſwaded
the multitude, appeaſed theyr Irefull hartes, and aſmuche
as laye in him altered theyr ſuſpition.Tyrannye. As ſone as hee
was created Emperour and in quietnes ſettled, hee murthered
all the frends of Geta ſparinge no age, yea not the infant,
ſo yt not one remayned on liue in the cōmon wealth of Rome,
that had any frendſhip wt 
                  Geta. Then he made hauoke of the
Senators of Rome, eſpetiallye on thoſe who eyther in nobilitye
or ritches excelled, ſmall was the cauſe, and full lighte the
occaſion that procured the murther of any put to death, many
noble peares and women alſo he put to death, as his owne

wyfe the daughter of Plauſianus, the ſonne of Pertinax, his
crueltye was intollerable, that hatred whiche he bore toward
Geta was ſo great (that he being murthered) yet he ceaſſeth
not to deſtroye and ſlaye all the chiefe gouernours and Preſidentes
of the prouinces as frends to Geta:
                  Tyrannye. the day time was
not ſufficient for his murthers, but alſo he beſtowed the night
ſeaſons in that crueltye, manye were his ſlaughters, and his
beaſtlines intollerable, the barbarous ſouldiours loued him,
bothe for his prodigalitye and bountifull giftes,Mē of warre wherewith
theyr fauoure was incenſed to loue him, hope of praye and
ſpoyle,The warriars life. leadeth to extreame perill and haſarde the accuſtomed
warrior: contrary to that which peace procureth, and furthereth
to thoſe whiche liue by peace: Euenſo theſe ſonnes of
Mars, do pitche theyr ſure holde in the great calamities of other,
and as reueninge foules do loke after praye. Antoninus
wrapped in all monſtrous vices, left the partes of Italy,
and toke his voyage to Danubius, wher in all pleasure for his
delight he did flowe at will. The Germaynes he made frendes
to him, to ayde him in warres he choſe oute of them thoſe
which were of goodlieſt parſonage to garde him in all pointes,
and in dyet, apparell & maners he became a Germaine,
and to winne the fauoure of the ſouldiours to make them the
more painefull in all trauaile:A greate pollicye. hee digged, he delued manye
times with his owne handes, on foote he trauailed bearinge
burthens, vſinge moſt ſlender fare wherewith his commendation
entitled him a rare captaine. Theſe were rare & ſinguler
practiſes in ſo noble a peare, which Zenophon noteth
in his Hiſtorye, ſaying that this onlye is the meanes for thoſe
which in martiall feates ſeeke to go beyonde other, to be in
labour equall to other, and becauſe he woulde be an other Alexander,
                  Alexander.
in all Citties he cauſed the Images of Alexander
to be ſet vppe, yea at Rome in the Capitolle and Temples.
               
                  Herodian wrote the Hiſtorye at large, and ſayth that hee in
thoſe dayes with manye other, ſawe diuers pictures whiche
in one bodye had ii. faces the face of Alexander and of Antoninus,
hee wente to the Tombe of Achilles honouringe him,
but aboue al he commended Silla and Hanniball to whom alſo

he made pictures, he wrought much villanye to the men of
Alexandria as the hiſtorye noteth at large, becauſe they of
Alexandria mocked him, in that ſo vainlye he would matche
himſelfe with Alexander and Achilles, which contumely he
not bearinge, murthered an infinite ſort of them by a gyle, after
this he ſought to marye the daughter of Artabanus king
of the Parthians,
                  Diſſimulatiō
                     ▪
                   ſhewing what ſtrength it would be, the Romaine
Empyre and the mightye kingdome of Parthia to be
ioyned in one, but this was only a guile and trayne to winne
Parthia. Kinge Artabanus thought, that vnfaynedly Antoninus
made that requeſt of mariage, but in the ende he had
welnighe deſtroyed the kinge, makinge greate hauoke with
his people. Then Antoninus after that he had murthered ye
people & ſpoyled the country, went into Meſapotamia, where
hee had his delectation in hunting ſtraunge beaſtes, at that
time Macri
                        •
                     us and Audentius beinge liefetenantes of his
armyes,Macrinus. had the doinge of thoſe matters onlye,Autentius. wherby they
were the onlye rulers. Antoninus curious in his doinges
was not content to aſpyre to the knowledge of humaine matters,
but alſo he ſoughte to learne of ſprytes, and becauſe hee
feared by other to be murthered, he talked with the moſt experte
ſouthſayers,Vanitye. Aſtrologians, inchaunters and witches,
none excelled whom he talked not with to knowe his eſtate &
ende of life, but not cōtent with theyr aunſweres becauſe they
ſeemed to flatter him, he cauſed certaine to coniure vp ſpirites,
to knowe of them what ende hee ſhoulde haue, or if anye
wrought treaſon to his perſon or kingdome, amonge manye
coniurers Matermanus aboue the reſt excelled, who learned
of his coniured ſpirite, that one Macrinꝰ who bare chiefe aucthoritye
vnder Antoninus, did ſeeke the Emperours death,
and whether that he learned ſo of the coniured ſpirite,Coniuringe. or that
ſome other for hatred vttered the ſame to kill Macrinus it is
vncertaine,Macrious. but the Chronicles do note that Macrinus was
in the ende the deathe of Antoninus: Auſtine wryteth a
Booke De diuinatione demoniorum, ſheewinge that deuils
do knowe of thinges to come, declaringe great proufes of the
ſame. Palingenius wryteth alſo thereof, ſheewinge by good

argument the ſame, and herein for a manifeſt
                     •
                   example is that
Hiſtorye of the ſpirite coniured in the bodye of Samuell,
                  Saule. who
ſhewed that Saule the kinge ſhould dye in the next battaile.
               But nowe as concerninge Macrinus the letters which the
coniuerer ſente to Antoninus the Emperour, came at ſuche
time as Antoninus was otherwiſe occupyed, he willed therevppon
Macrinus to reade the letters: Macrinus readinge the
letters ſawe his death that would followe, by the inſtructiō
of the coniured ſpyrites,Martialis. but he preuentinge the matter, perſwaded
a certaine yonge man named Martialis, to ſeeke aportunitye
to murther Antoninus, who at a ſodaine killed him,
beinge at his priuye, but Martialis eſcaped not, for hee was
ſlaine of the Germaynes who were his garde, the murther
done,Macrinus. 
                  Macrinus thoughe he wrought the treaſon, yet hee ſeemed
by lamentation and outwarde behauiour ſorrowfull of ye
death of Antoninus: for cauſes there were that might ſeeme
vppon ſome priuate diſpleaſure taken, to procure that murther.
Antoninus beinge deade, the men of warre not knowinge
what gouernours they mighte obeye (for .ii. dayes they
were without an Emperour) then they toke aduiſement who
were moſte meete to gouerne,Antoninus recompenſed with bloude for bloud. at the firſte Audentius was
thoughte aboue the reſt meete to occupye that roume, for hee
was a wiſe and valiaunte captaine,Audentius. longe age with greate experience
excelled in him, but by reaſon of age he refuſed ye offer,
preferringe a quiet and priuate eſtate, before that digni
                  
                     •
                  ye,
then the Tribunes fauouringe Macrinus, obtayned ſo
greate fauoure that Macrinus enioyed the ſame. At the ſame
time Artabanus kinge of the Parthians to reuenge the olde
iniuryes,Moerinus choſen Emperour. made preparation againſt the Romaynes, wherevppon
the more willingly they choſe Macrinus Emperour,
becauſe he was liefetenaunt in the warres before. Artabanus
with a great power came vppon the Romaynes hauinge
a great bande of valiant horſemen, ſtronge Archers, mighty
Camels, theyr power was great and noble for parſonages.
Macrinus made an Oration to the Romaynes, vtteringe the
cauſes of Artabanus comminge, and to encourage the Romaynes,
hee did extoll theyr inuincible ſtrengthe, ſhewinge

them alſo the decaye of the Romayne Empyre if Artabanus
preuayled,Parthians. he layed before theyr eyes the bare and rude pollicye
of the Parthians, he extolled the wittye practiſes and noble
enterpriſes of the Romaynes, in all Regions theyr victoryes
and large conqueſtes. After this the hoaſte of Artabanus
enteringe on ye Romaynes, his Archers and other ſouldiours
greatlye did hurte and made hauocke of them, the Romaynes
on foote hande to hand, were more valiante then the
Parthians,
                  Parthians. the ſucceſſe that fell to the Parthians, was by their
Archers and Camels, from whom many threw dartes, then
the Romaynes greatly endamaged by the horſemen of ye 
                  Parthians,
made ſharpe pykes, priuelye to be ſet to annoye the
horſemen of the Parthians, whereby manye were deſtroyed,
mightye were the warres on bothe ſides, for two dayes the
battaile continued vntill nighte: the thirde daye alſo a newe
they made a freſhe battaile, where greate was the ſlaughter
as appeared by thoſe that laye dead in great heapes, not onelye
of men but of Camels, in this extremity Macrinus knowinge
that the iniuries of Antoninus (beinge deade) was the
onlye cauſe that moued Artabanus to warre on the Romaynes,
ſente Embaſſadours to Artabanus the kinge of the Parthians
ſignifying by letters, that Antoninus the Emperour
who was the cauſe of theyr iniuries, was deade, and now the
Empyre to be in his hands, and that he liked not the doinges
of Antoninus,
                  The petition of Macrinus wherefore he promiſed to geue to Artabanus
all the captiues and ſpoyle which Antoninus had from him,
and that willinglye he deſyered to ioyne amitye with Artabanus,
the letters redde, he receyued the Embaſſadours of the
Romaynes honourablye, Artabanus was contente with the
offer, and ioyned league with the Romaynes, and ſhortlye after
he returned into Parthia, & Macrinus marching with his
armye oute of Meſapotamia wente to Antioche. In this
ſort at large wryteth Herodian the true and faythfull Hiſtoriographer,
ſodaine was the death of Antoninus the wicked
Emperoure, and at a ſodayne the choiſe of Macrinus, raſhe
were the heades of thoſe warrelike ſouldiours,A raſhe choiſ
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   to chuſe the
murtherer of theyr Emperour to gouerne them.
            
            
               
               Macrinus.
               
               
                  
                     MAcrinus comminge to Antioche (as
Herodian writeth) immediatlye ſente
letters to the Senate & people of Rome
and as it ſhould ſeeme was moued there
to, to thende good opinion might be bruted
of him wherby he might winne their
fauoure, and poſſeſſe theyr louinge hartes:
and becauſe hee was giltye of the
deathe of the Emperour Antoninus, with other of the Tribunes,
as afterward time vttered ye cloſe conſpiracye of their
treaſons, againſt theyr Lorde and kinge (thoughe hee were a
wicked Emperour) & euen as God leaueth no eſtate vnſcourged,
but for ſinne and iniquitye deſtroyeth Citties, ouerwhelmeth
Regions, diſplaceth Princes, ſo he vttereth in time all
treaſons,Treaſons. as in theſe conſpiratours hee opened theyr beaſtlye
facte and bloudy practiſe, it is no rare thinge, but yet for wō
                  der
rare a captiue and abiecte parſonne to the worlde (yet in
vertue excellinge) throughe the ſecrete prouidence of God to
be aduaunced vnto a kingdome, a wicked Prince in all glory
and ſtrength flouriſhinge expelled from Dominion,The ſecrete counſaile of God in kingdomes. and the
eſtate tranſlated to an vnknowē parſon, and to a ſtraunge nation:
O howe happye therefore is it a kingdome to poſſeſſe a
godly Prince & a vertuous, God defendeth the eſtate of ſuche
whoſe kingdome is beautifyed with a godlye Prince, the onlye
cauſe of the chaunge of kingdomes,A godlye Prince. and the ouerthrowe and
plague of mightye Regions doth come throughe wicked gouernours,

for as a good Prince heapeth great glorye and felicitye
to his kingdome,The wicked Prince. ſo the wicked Prince ſubuerteth deſtroyeth
and pulleth downe more in a moment and ſhort time,
then the godly gouernour is able to eſtabliſhe and ordaine in
a longe continuance, ſo muche the life of one chiefe gouernor
is of force to preuaile in kingdomes.
               As concerninge Macrinus in his letters to the Senate of
Rome, he altogether reproued the beaſtly life and vngodlye
behauiour of Antoninus, hee aduaunced his owne glorye by
good ſucceſſe which he aſpyred to in forreine warres, becauſe
he roſe from no noble parentage, to defende him thereby frō
baſe reputacion: which people commonlye do beare in minde
(a man of meane and lowe eſtate promoted to dignitye) who
better cōmonlye can honour and accompte of any one though
neuer ſo baſe,Men of lowe eſtate promoted. being an aliant. thē of ſuch an one borne in their
owne countrye, whoſe low condition of life vnto them is knowē,
although his vertues, & worthines in actes haue extolled
him to that dignitye.The race of noble kinges. The race of many kinges is by age out
of minde, not knowen from what pore cotage they deſcended,
time oute of minde entitleth them with honoure, and age for
memorye Chronicleth them royall, God by a ſecrete prouidence
hath raiſed from all eſtates to beare Scepters, longe
deſcent rayſeth nobilitye to fame, but vertue and valiantnes
of actes, are onlye the cauſes that ſhoulde make nobilitye.
               
                  Macrinus therefore to proue himſelfe noble wryteth this argument:True nobilitye. Let no man thincke me vnworthye the place of the
Emperour, becauſe from lowe eſtate I haue aſcended, for
what is nobilitie excepte vertuous conditions, and noble actes
do make the parſon glorious, for we ſee daylye many who
as beaſtes liue vnto the earth deſtitute of all excellency,Glorious talke of a tyraunte. without
good fame, yea the ignorante to aſpyre to heaped ritches,
to honourable reuenewes, and wealthy patrimonye, vnworthye
parſons alſo to enioye fortunes flotinge wealth & bleſſed
maintenaunce, becauſe they are thought to deſcende from noble
progenye: Maruaile not therefore if the chiefe glorye of
worthye fame requiſite for a noble man, happen vnto one deſcendinge
of meane parentes, from a meane cotage in a deſpiſed

body, whō fortune ſeemed to haue caſt of, if that in prowes
& valiantnes both in feates of armes, & in all other noble qualities,
apt for the defence and gouernmente of a countrye, hee
flowriſheth more then anye other.Riches not in admiration with y^ wiſe. The brittle giftes of fortune
are not with wiſe men in admiration, for fooles as beaſtes
without ſences accordinge to theyr owne vnderſtandinge
are in admiration of the riche, and place all felicitye in kingdome,
ponder with oure ſelues theſe fewe examples, what auayled
the longe race of the Aſlyrian Princes to Sardanapalus?
                  Sardanapalus.
or the nobilitye of the kinges of Lidia to Candaules':
                  Candaules. or
the valiante prowes of the whole race of the kinges of Perſia
to cowardlye Zerxes?
                  Zerzes. or the nobilitye of Commodus,
                  Commodus. who
in outwarde kingdome noble, did degenerate from the true
nobilitye that was in Marcus his father, which Marcus was
a wiſe, noble, godly and valiante Prince: Commodus was a
raſhe, fooliſhe and beaſtly gouernour. Wherevnto is come
the nobilitye of Seuerus,
                  Seuerus. 
                  Geta,
                  Geta. and Antoninus,
                  Antoninus. being once
in glorye, who orderly by ſucceſſion woulde clayme withoute
iuſt cauſe the titles of kingdomes? theſe altogether without
deſcente, withoute good qualities, entered by innouations to
ſuccede in kingdome: This tale being told to the Senators
and people of Rome, he wrote alſo that he woulde be ruled in
all thinges with the wiſedome of the Senators, & that theyr
aucthoritye ſhould moderate the whole frame & order of his
gouernment, and he promiſed that they ſhould liue in that libertye,Diſſimulatiō
                  
wherein godly Princes before him, had ſettled ye eſtate
of the Romaine Empyre: As Traian, Veſpaſian, Adrian,
Nerua, Marcus Antoninus, and Pertinax, theſe letters beinge
redde they proclaymed Macrinus Emperour: thoughe
Macrinus were at Antioche, all the Romaynes were glad
that cruell Antoninus was murthered, then inquiſition was
made,A iuſt reward for promoters. the Senators beinge godly diſpoſed therto, to ſearche
out al promoters, which in the time of the bloudy Emperour
Antonye, procured the death of many, and alſo accuſed their
maiſters before that Emperour and ſhortned theyr liues, all
ſuche were hanged on gybbets, the common wealth of Rome
was throughlye purged of all wicked perſons, more by the

pollicye and counſayle of the Senatours then throughe Macrinus:
For Macrinus at ye firſt enteringe of his gouernmēt,
gaue himſelfe from all vertue, lyuinge in all pleaſure at Antioche,
nowe his priuate ſtate is forgotten, honour and dignitye
haue chaunged him, and that great ignobilitye which hee
reproued in other is forgotten, and the nobilitye for which he
gloried in himſelfe is now lackinge, his behauiour waxed
proude, his countenaunce hautye, and maners inſolent: now
he will not be ſpoken with in maters of grauitye touchinge a
common wealth, pleaſure and fonde delightes drewe this voluptuous
Emperour from care of kingdome,A ſodaine chaunge. pleaſant flatterers,
ieſters, dauncers, prodigall and riotous perſons were
his delight and companye, the laſciuious life contented not ye
warriors and ſouldiours, for the pampered life of the delicious
Prince and his wanton behauiour, cauſed him to be contemned,
he now renued the euill examples and tragicall partes
of Antoninus,
                  Wanton behauiour. whiche before he ſo muche deſpiſed. Macrinus
this ill gouernour raigued a ſhorte time, throughe
his wickednes he continued but a yeare in gouernmente, the
vertuous life in a Prince hath no cauſe to feare what the ennemye
can do,Vertuous life in a prince. neither can the malicious heade aſſure anye enterpriſe.
Well, Macrinus was deceiued of the Romaynes, &
thoſe barbarous and warrelike ſouldiours, pondred howe to
place another in that roume by murtheringe Macrinus.
               
               A certaine honourable womā named Meſa the ſiſter of Iulia,
                  Meſa.
mother in lawe vnto Antoninus, (who afterward maryed ye
ſame Antoninus the late Emperoure) had two daughters,
Semiamira
                  Semiamira. whiche was mother to Antonius Baſſianus,
                  Mammea. and
Mammea which Mammea was the mother of Alexianus afterwarde
called Alexander, both theſe two yonge men were
Sacerdotes ſolis, prieſtes or dayned to the honour of ye Sunne,
to whom the Phenitians did build a ſumptuous Temple, the
Princes alſo of other Nations therevnto a dioyninge, did honour
the Sunne for a God, the Parthians alſo (as the Hiſtoryes
note) did the like. Baſſianus beinge in yeres youthful, of
a goodly perſonage,Baſſianus. of viſenomye very amiable, at ſuch time
as the Romaynes had a garriſon of noble warriors in Phenitia,
                  
whiche warriours alſo makinge theyr abode there, reſorted
many times to yt goodly Temple builded to ye Sunne,
where by theyr oft reſorte, they vewed well the perſonage of
Baſſianus, whoſe grandemother was ſiſter to Iulia
                  Iulia. the Empereſſe,
which Iulia was mother and wyfe to Antoninus the
Emperour before, they that bare chiefe aucthoritye ouer the
ſouldiours vnder Macrinus in Phenitia, ſeinge that this Baſſianus
was of noble byrth deſcended (thoughe a prieſte) The
mother alſo of Baſſianus ſayd that he was the baſtard ſonne
of Antoninus,
                  Antoninus. whether it was fayned of her or no, it is vncertayne,
but as for ye life of Antoninus his beaſtlines was ſuch,
that hee ſpared not his owne kindred, no not his daughters,
but had with them his pleaſure in theyr tender yeres, Theſe
wordes beinge credited that were ſpoken by the Ladye, the
ſouldiours preſentlye determined to make Baſſianus Emperour,
for that they knewe his mother to be greatlye enriched
with infinite treaſures,Murther for murther requited. with whom alſo they talkinge, the
murther for money was agreed vppō. And ſo deſyringe to accompliſh
theyr promiſe made for gaine, they conueighed Baſſianus
into theyr tentes & called him by they name of Antonye,
clothinge him in Princely apparell, preparinge all thinges
neceſſarye to repell the ennemye, if theyr forte ſhoulde be
beſieged, forthwith it was knowen to Macrinus what thinges
were done in Phenitia by the baſtarde ſonne of Antoninus,
he had vnderſtandinge of the whole meanes of theyr conueyance,
and of the large promiſe of Meſa, at the firſt Macrinus
regarded not the newes, but at the lengthe iuſte occaſion
was geeuen to credite that reporte, and then he ſente forthe a
chiefe and valiaunte captaine:I
                        •
                     lianus. 
                  Iulianus by name, to repreſſe
thoſe rebelles and to deface theyr rebellion, to pull downe the
eſtate vſurped by the baſtardly prieſt Baſſianus, who leauing
his eſtate of prieſthode,A prieſt Emperour. coueted to be an Emperour. Iulianus
doinge Macrinus commaundemente followed his purpoſe,
aſſaulted the forte, where the ſouldiours ſheewed on the
wall this Baſſianus called Antoninus, and great bagges of
moneye with infinite ſummes, which procured the treaſon.
Iulianus as a valiaunte Captaine, aſſayinge by all meanes to

deface the vſurper, and to win the forte, in the ende he loſt his
heade,Iulianus. & in ſpight they ſent it to Macrinus, the men of warre
which came with Iulianus fled to Baſſianus, then Macrinus
made preparation in his owne parſon to fighte againſt them,
but he was fayne to flye chaūginge his apparell, and ſhauinge
his bearde that he might not be knowne, the ſouldiours in the
meane time fought for theyr Lord a longe time: it was longe
vnknowen that Macrinus was fledde, but as ſone as Baſſianus
hearde thereof, he ſent certaine to purſue after him, who
founde him in Calcedon
                  Calcedon. a Cittye of Bithinia very ſicke,
wher they cut of this heade with his ſonne Diadumenus, whō
in his life time he created Emperour. Macrinus thus is recompenſed
with violente deathe, and for murtheringe
Antoninus the Emperour before,Murther. was murthered
by Baſſianus called the baſtard ſonne of Antony,
who euer after he was made prieſt, was called
Heliogabalus. Macrinus ruled but one
yeare, a Prince withoute care of the
common wealthe geuen to voluptuouſnes
and all fonde
pleaſures, thus caughte
a miſerable ende.
            
            
               
               Heliogabalus.
               
               
                  
                     HEliogabalus called the baſtarde ſonne of
Antonye, ye ſonne of Semiamira, ſhe beinge
ſiſter to Iulia the Empreſſe before,
which Heliogabalus beinge a prieſt: In
honorem ſolis, made to the honour of the
Sunne, for amongeſt the Phaenitians) as
you haue hearde) the Sunne was compted
a God, beinge but a planet, they did honour the ſame at ye
ryſinge & going downe, to whō for honour, ſuperſtition amō
                  geſt
them had made aprieſthode of great renowne.Helyogabalus by interpretation ſignifieth a prieſt of the ſunne. This Heliogabalus
howe he came to be Emperour, the Hiſtory before
ſheeweth in the life of Macrinus, he was but ſixtene yeares of
age when he was choſen Emperour, and ſixe yeares he continued
therein: in the ende was ſlaine with his mother Semiamira,
who procured with greate ſummes the Empyre to her
ſonne, whom ſhee fayned to be the Emperours childe. This
Heliogabalus immediatelye vppon the deathe of Macrinus
(the armye of ſouldiours brybed with greate ſummes of money)
was proclaymed Emperour,Semiamira. though the Senatours at
Rome had no choice therein,Neceſſities. for aſſone as the Senate hearde
thereof, of neceſſitye they obeyed the choiſe, hauinge proufe
dailye that vertue and worthines created not Emperours amōgeſt
them,Election. forced. but as fanſye in thoſe warrelike ſtomakes gaue
election, herein by force they obeyed election, ſeinge ſo ſodaine
choiſe of Emperours by them, and ſo ſodaine the faule from
their eſtate throughe them, cruell and bloudye hartes diſplaced

the choſen, and hartes bribed with moneye made a newe election,
as Marchandiſe of cattell and wares they ſolde the
Empyre, as money made the Emperours, ſo moneye made
choyſe of officers:Money. ſo great was the calamities of thoſe dayes
in the often chaunge of Princes and officers, that Princes vſurped
by moneye and officers by bribes grewe wealthy, priuate
gaine with eche one was in ſteede of a common wealth,Welthye officers.
the Empyre bore a name of eſtate, but priuate gaine with
eche one bore awaye the mayſtrye. As concerninge Heliogabalus
after hee was created Emperour, remayned vnder
the tuition (for lacke of wiſedome in thoſe tender yeres) of his
grandemother Meſa,
                  Priuete gai
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   and his mother Semiamira, the eſtate
of the common wealth wel ſettled and in quietnes in the Eaſt
partes, hee was counſailed (by thoſe vnder whoſe tuition hee
was gouerned) to make haſt to Rome:Meſa▪
                   they ſheewed him that
delay in Niger, folly & tirāny in Macrinus, & vnaduiſednes in
Albinus, was theyr deſtructiō, then this Baſſianus being vnder
the gouernmēt of other, obeied what they willed for a ſeaſon,Follye.
the departure of Heliogabalus towarde Rome was bruted
in all coaſtes,Delaye. the armye of ſouldiours vnderſtode ye ſame,
forth he paſſed from Syria, and made his winter abode in Nichomedia,
ſuche was the ſeaſon of that yeare, that it letted ye
paſſage of the Emperoure to other coaſtes,Vnaduiſednes. and in ye end ther
he wintered. Thoughe his graundmother and mother, had
chiefe iuriſdiction ouer this prieſtlye Emperoure, yet there
crept in certaine gallantes both warelye and ſecretely, whoſe
pleaſure was in Courtly behauiour, and all thinges delectable
to delight a Prince, they founde fauoure with Heliogabalus,
                  Courtly gallantes.
ſo muche theyr demeanes and lighte toyes ſancke in the
heade of that yonge Prince (thoughe his graundmother with
other endued with all grauitye and wiſe counſayle, vſed oftē
                  times
exhortacious mete for his eſtate) but yonge Princes obeyinge
fanſyes, and refuſinge counſayle do commonly flowe
in free paſſage to vice, wher counſaile preuaileth not, (pleaſure
following) fanſye beareth rule & weakeneth the ſtronge
Prince,Pleaſure. & pulleth downe the mightie from theyr kingdomes,
whom noble vertues and temperancye hath exalted, the embraſinge

of the meaneſt pleaſure hath caſte downe fortes,Pleaſure. and
demyniſhed the eſtate of the mightye, vertue harboureth not
wher vice dwelleth,Vertue. pleaſure geueth no abode wher vice raū
                  geth,
ſuche mates hath the Emperour choſen, as pleaſure &
vice liked:Vice. thoſe two diſpoſed yt frame & order of his houſhold,
and in like ſort ſchowled the common wealth, he might well
be the ſonne of Antonye, who in beaſtly behauiour did ſo wel
reſemble that beaſtly Emperour Antoninus, his holy prieſthode
is forgotten,Gawiſh aparell what it betokeneth. and the deuoute ceremonyes of his ſtrange
God, and he as a ruffyne with all ſumptuouſnes in lighte and
gaudiſhe apparell of diuers coullers clotheth himſelfe, rybaldrye
was affected in all his doinges,Daunſinge. daunſinge was the
delectation of the Prince, and therewith followed like pleaſures,
hee deſpyſed the veſtures and apparell of the Romaine
Emperours, a newe faſhion is inuented to pleaſe this fonde
Emperour, his apparell was not wholye after the maner of
the Phenitians, but ſomewhat like the Medes and the Phenitians,
a mingle mangle of both: As for the apparell of the Romaynes,
which the Emperours before vſed, he would ſaye in
reproche:New faſhion of apparel deviſed of ſtrang heades. 
                  De lana viliſſima confe & as Imperatorum veſtes,
greſye woll (ſayth he) before clothed Emperours of Rome, &
as newe faſhions for apparell crepte in by vaine heades, ſo the
ſober mediocrite, and vertuous meane was deſpiſed, and now
fonde pride, monſterous vices in all eſtates flew abrode, riche
ought the ornamentes to be, & full ſumptuous the clothinge
of Princes and noble peares, when the meane ſorte, leauinge
all meane and conſideration of eſtate, as players on a ſtage,
aboue Princes & Princes mates do clothe themſelues,Pride. yea
when amongeſt the meane ſorte, eche one ſtriueth to be a rare
gallant, Princes may go as Princes, & as nobility leadeth nobles,
and of highe eſtate enioye theyr veſtures, the meane ſort
in compariſon without nobilitye,The pride of theſe dayes. do matche with ſumptuouſnes
theyr nobles, ſo pride hath broughte in ſumptuous clothinge,
wherewith a greate and wealthye patrimonye that
foſtered many, lyeth all in gaye clothes. Meſa being grandmother
to this Hehogabalus,
                  Meſa. was verye muche greued with
the inſolente maners, exceſſiue pride, and gariſhe apparell of

of her nephewe, mouinge him to haue conſideration of his
eſtate, by callinge to minde the faule of proude Princes, the
decaye of foliſhe gouernours: ſhe warned him with longe and
humble intreatye, to vſe the accuſtomed robe of the Romaine
Emperours,Pride. ſhewinge alſo how light he would ſeeme to the
Romaynes, whoſe apparell as childiſhe, woulde be thought
& womanlye rather then for anye man, and muche leſſe for a
Prince.The ſchole of folly. But Heliogabalus was now throughlye ſcholed of
his mates, whereby he deſpiſed Senators, and men of grauetye
and wiſedome were put farre from him, ſuch was his delectacion
as in pride, rybaldrye, ryote and beaſtlye demeanor.
theſe he embraced as companions, and becauſe he would not
enter Rome with his ſtraunge apparell to be wondered at,
cunninge men were ſerched out: who moſt liuelye and artificiallye
could ſet forth his very viſenomye, parſonage & comelye
ſtature, the very apparell thoughe lighte and gawiſhe, wt
his prieſtlye robe which he vſed, the picture alſo of ye Sunne,
in whoſe honoure he was conſecrated prieſt, he gaue alſo commaundement
that his picture ſhoulde be ſet on highe, where
the aſſemble of the Senate ſhould be gathered, and that euerye
one of them to him as a God, ſhoulde burne incence, and
that the Romaynes before all goddes, ſhould entitle him the
greate God Heliogabalus,
                  Heliogabalus, a man, a prieſt, a great God. this thinge at Rome (as he commaunded)
was done of the Senators and multitude. Eche
one toted and loked at the picture, the ſight was rare, the follye
of a mortall man ridiculous, and worthye to be hiſſed at,
of an Emperour intollerable, no man liked the greate follye
of that Prince vnknowē to the Romaynes, choſen by manye
of ye ſouldiours, the Romaynes loked for ſome ſinguler matter,
they wondered a mortall man to fanſye a Godheade, children
laughed in theyr ſleeues,Pride. and olde men for feare ducked,
as proſtrate to honour a mā as a God, an Emperour, a prieſt,
and baſtarde ſonne of Antoninus.
                  Wicked gouernours. Neuertheleſſe ſuch is the
eſtate of wicked times, wherein vngodlye and beaſtly gouernours
do raigne, that for feare eche one obeyeth theyr commaundementes,
Rome receyueth him with honoure, and the
Senatours wiſhe him (faynedlye) longe life, full Princelye

was the Courte of this yonge prieſte, who in his accuſtomed
prieſtly apparell entered bearinge ye eſtate of an Emperour,
fayninge with all men a Godheade: to winne the fauoure of
the Romaines, princelye were the giftes whiche hee gaue to
winne theyr loue. Forth with in the honour of his God, he erected
a mightye, huge and ſumptuous Temple, and rounde
aboute the Temple Al
                     •
                  ars, doinge therevppon ſacrifyce of
Oxen and ſheepe, and with incence oderiferous perfumed his
God, certaine women of Phaenitia playinge on cymbals and
inſtrumentes, did ſolemniſe the ſacrifyce, the wickednes of
him was ſuch, that he murthered all thoſe which reioyced not
at his follye, and all ſuche as reproued and ſpake euill of him:
ſecretely this Emperour was deſyrous of mariage,Iyranny. & would
haue had to wyfe a noble Ladye of Rome, with whom afterward
he maried, but not continuinge with her, he made a deuorce
depriuinge her of all dignitye and honour. After her he
fell in loue with a Nunne ſeruinge the Goddes Veſta, profeſſinge
virginitye,A Nunne. which alſo the lawes both Ciuill and Common,
do binde to perpetuall virginitye, whom Baſſianus takinge
from her holye ſell & Temple maryed, that crime was
full reprochefull, the facte deteſtable, wherewith the Senate
beinge greeued accompted it horrible, in thoſe dayes it
was ſo haynous, & the lawes alſo gaue this ſentence: A vowe
broken in virginitye ye party ſo offending to be buried quicke.
The firſt kinge of the Romaines was borne of one profeſſing
that holy virginitye,Romulus. his mothers name was Rhea, who ſerued
Veſta the Goddeſſe. Heliogabalus aunſwered in theſe
wordes. Sacerdotis nuptias congruere ſacerdoti ob id magis
venerandas & auguſtiores eſſe nuptias. The mariage of a holy
Nunne would wel agree to ioyue in matrimony with a holy
prieſt, for wher two holy ones be ioyned in mariage, there
the mariage muſt nedes be moſte holy. This Emperour as it
ſemeth followed fancye, wherin pleaſure ruled mariage, forlōg
he cōtinued not with her being ſuch a holy one, for her he
put from him by deuorce, then afterward he maried one who
deſcendid from the houſe of Cōmodus the Emperour,Follye. her alſo
he put from him, then would he nedes haue the Image of

a goddeſſe which was Pallas,
                  Pallas. to be broughte to his chamber,
that ſame Image was of great antiquitie amongeſt the Romaines,
the Grekes when Troye was burned ſaued the Immage
of Pallas,
                  Troye. of the which the Romaines attained to haue
the poſſeſſion, this goddeſſe he called the wife of the ſunne his
God, this Image was coumpted of that holines that no man
durſt remoue it from the place where it was ſet, ſuch was the
ſuperſticion of thoſe daies in Images and forged godheads of
antiquitie,Superſtitiō
                     ▪
                   as in manye other ages ſuperſtytion hathe borne
ſuch rowte, not amongeſt the ſimple and princes onely, but
fancied, vpholded, and allowed of the learned, which maintenaunce
of fond goddes of deuotion in Images,Images. ſpronge from
thoſe that knewe not God, and yet mainteyned as clarkelye
as tong could forge of thoſe, which would ſeeme to holde of a
religiō pure and profeſſe god, & euen as ye heathen were in admiration
of honouringe ſtraunge goodes by force and blodye
practiſes, grownding a perfite religion vpon their goddes, euen
ſo from tyme to tyme there haue remayned ſuche as haue
brought in amonge chriſtians a ſuperſticious deuotion of infinite
ſainctes, not as merite but as fancye and auctoritie ſtauled
them ſainctes:Sibilla. lib. 
                        •
                     . but Sibill who perfectlye ſet forth ſuche ſuperſtitions
calleth them. Deos mortuos, Idola mortuorum.
Dead goodes, and patternes of the dead: as concerning that
matter more largely it ſhalbe ſpoken of,Irenae. in the lyfe of the blodye
and ſuperſtitious Empreſſe Irenae, who for ye lyke ſuperſtitiouſnes
practiſed the terrible perſecution vpon chriſtians.
               As concerninge the laſte mariage of Baſſianus for his god,
now he putteth of Pallas as vnmete to match with the ſunne
his god ſaing.A lamentable ſtate when God is neglected of a Prince. 
                  Belligera dea & armata, vxor eſſe non poſſit
pacifici dei. A wyfe all in armoure and warlike, was an vnmeete
wife for a quiet god, then as folly grewe vpon folly he
commaunded a certaine Image whiche had no name, but becauſe
it was found, & no man knew frō whēce it was, and at yt
time being full of bewtye,An old deuiſe of the ſuperſticious. gorgeous, and ſumptuouſlye clothed
as a quene, bearing chiefe route amongeſt her ſhe gods,
and becauſe the finding of that Image was ſtrange, they ſaid
it came from heauen, leauinge immortall creatures to vyſite

the mortall, and therfore they called her the heauenlye goddeſſe,
other hiſtories write that Dido building Carthage placed
her there, at what time as ſhe firſte erected Carthage the
Carthaginians, and Phenitians, called her the gouernour of
of the ſtarres,Follye. which is the mone, ſo Baſſianus blynded wyth
folly thought it a meete matche to marry the Moone and the
Sunne together, ſuch was his folly led with pleaſure, caſte
from the knowledge of God to do thinges againſte God, to ye
which ſolempnity he ordained a feſtiuall daye and a greate ſolempnity
for all people of all eſtates, younge and olde, tagge
and ragge to ſe this mariage, he made alſo a ſumptuous temple:
it were to long to ſet forth his beaſtly manners, his horrible
life in all reſpectes, and wheras by nature he was amiable
and beautifull he paynted his face with diuers collours,
wherwith his dignity for his beaſtly lyfe was not dreaded, he
was contempned, the loue was not ſo greate in ye beginninge
as is now the hatred of thoſe who choſe hym, ſo brickle a hold,
and weake ſtrength it is for a prince to truſt in people or kingdome,The vertuous Prince.
the vertuous prince ſhall neuer haue cauſe to feare his
enemy, to doubte of his kingdome, or to ſtande in awe of hys
ſubiectes, all theſe thinges wicked princes feare.
               The gouernment of Baſſianus being in this ſort, his graundmother
Meſa feared that by indignation of the men of warre,
the faule of Baſſianus woulde happen, wherby alſo ſhe ſawe
that if Baſſianus were murdered, hir owne eſtate would fall
in like perill, yea, to haſarde her life, and leaſe her dignitye,
wherupon in that extremity, full wiſely ſhe commoned wyth
Baſſianus and by pollicye perſwaded him to make hys Coſin
who was the ſonne of Mammea her other daughter, companion
with him in the Empire: ſayinge the cauſe that enforced
her to moue him therto was the tenderinge of his eſtate, and
procurement of his liberty, ſhe extolled therwith his free eſtate:
ſaying it ſhalbe mete for you Baſſianus to leaue the care
of worldly thinges whiche are farre vnmeete for youre highe
eſtate, being holy addicted to the honor of your god the ſunne,
as for Alexianus he ſhalbe an eaſe vnto you in al your buſynes,Subtill coū
                     
                        •••
                     .
wherby with more quietnes and leſſe care lyeu maye execute

your other affayres, ſhe declared vnto him that ſhe ſought
out no ſtraūger nor aliante to perticipate with him in ye kingdome,
but his kinſemā 
                  Alexianus, who wt all profit, aduaūcement,
loue and ſinceritye, would execute yt office: The grandmother
Meſa ſignifyed vnto the men of warre, that Antoninus
the Emperour before, begat Alexianus of her daughter
Mammea,
                  Pollicye. whereby ſhe knewe that the men of warre woulde
more feruently loue Alexianus, the memorye of Antoninus
not forgotten: therevppon Alexianus was called alſo by the
name of Alexāder,
                  Baſſianus. & was entitled Emperour. Baſſianus purpoſed
to trayne his yonge coſyne, to runne ye race throughe all
beaſtlye pleaſures wherin he ranged, but Meſa (as diſcret
Ladye, & grandmother to both) kept backe Alexianus from
all ſuch villanye,Godlye education in a Prince. priuelye ſhe brought Alexianus vppe vnder
vertuous gouernours and teachers, which gaue him education,
meete for the eſtate of ſo noble a parſonage, no excellencye
wanted wherein his yonge yeares was not dailye inſtructed.
Then Baſſianus full of vyce, & flowinge in all beaſtlynes,
was greued muche at the vertuous education of Alexianus,
whoſe life hee woulde haue framed to his owne faſhion, and
therevppon he repented him that hee had exalted him to that
fellowſhippe in kingdome: Now it was to late to chaunge yt
which the Romaynes, the whole Senate and the warriours
had decreed, now was the eſtate of Heliogabalus moſt weake,
the Romaynes poſſeſſinge a Prince whom they loued, being
learned, broughte vp vertuouſlye, excellinge in all Princelye
qualities: this wicked Emperour Baſſianus therevppon baniſhed
from his Courte thoſe that furthered this yonge Emperour
to wiſedome, and godlynes, to learninge and other
princely qualities: ſome he put to death for the ſame cauſe, he
ſayde they corrupted the tender yeares of his ſonne, he ſayde
theſe are onlye meete qualities: Principem agitare choros,
bacchari & ſcortari. It ſhall behoue a Prince (ſayth he) to be
an excellent daunſer, a riotous parſon, & to vſe many womē.
Baſſianus onlye promoted to dignitye inuenters of pleaſures
delightinge in beaſtlye follye, and all ſuche as be out caſtes
from the Courtes of godlye Princes,Follye. and from all common

wealthes: the wickednes of this Prince brought him in contempte
of all men, then Heliogabalus ſeinge all the Romaynes
with the Senate, and mē of warre to be wholy geuen to ye
fauoure of Alexianus otherwyſe called Alexander, ſoughte
diuers times to murther him by diuers traynes as by poyſon,
but Meſa his grandmother warelye preuented by diſcrete officers
to put of all theſe miſchiefes,Meſa. whereby ſhee preſerued
him:Heliogabalus. alſo Heliogabalus would openlye diſcloſe what ſecretelye
he pretended diuers times, alſo he woulde haue depriued
his vicegerent of eſtate, but the men of warre not bearinge it,
deliuered this Alexianus otherwyſe called Alexander from
the handes of the Emperour, then in theſe his extremityes,
he woulde haue put to death thoſe as traytors, and ennemies
to his parſon, but what is it for a Prince or chiefe Emperour
to ſtande, beinge ſtriken downe: for as loue created him Emperour,
ſo ſinne, vice, and beaſtlye gouernmente, haue caſte
him from dignitye. They apprehended Heliogabalus with
his mother Semiamira, drawing theyr bodyes with all ſpight
throughe the Cittie of Rome, cruellye theyr bodyes were
handeled, torne in peces, and at the length caſt into the
open priuyes of the floudde Tiber. Thus at large ye
life of Heliogabalus is ſet out in hiſtorye. Sixe
yeares hee gouerned, his election is well
knowen,The death of Heliogabalus. his ende likewiſe Chronicled,
now openlye Alexander is choſen,
ſaluted and obeyed for an Emperour,
who was alwayes called
Alexander Seuerus.
               
            
            
               
               Alexander Seuerus.
               
               
                  
                     ALexander ſucceded Heliogabalus, by ye
pollicye of his graundemother Meſa, by
whoſe godlye counſayle, his tender yeares
were altogether trayned vp in learninge
vnder famous teachers, in the
Greeke and lattine tongues alſo ſingulerlye
inſtructed,Godly education. & as his education was
vertuous, ſo his naturall diſpoſition from tender yeres, gaue
great proufes of his excellent vertues, for he was gentle, lowlye,
curteous, and indued with all humanitye. The beaſtlye
lyfe of Baſſianus was the vtter decaye of his eſtate, the vertuous
behauiour of this Alexander preuayled to purchaſe
vnto him the fauour of the Romaynes, as he was vertuouſly
brought vp, ſo he vertuouſlye gouerned, nothinge lackinge in
him to all nobilitye & excellencye of eſtate for gouernmente,The coūſaile of women in the courte of Princes.
if he had not bene obedient to follow the fanſye of his mother
Mammea, who with infaciable couetouſnes, procured many
times thinges which delighted her greedye purpoſes, the obeyinge
of her was the decaye of this Emperour in the ende.
               As concerninge the whole maner of his gouernment thus
will I orderlye procede,Meſa. his graundemother was called Meſa,
ſiſter to Iulia the Empreſſe the wife of Seuerus: This Meſa
in the dayes of Seuerus and Antoninus his ſonne, Emperours
of Rome, with great dignitye and eſtimation liued intheyr
Courte, and ſo longe as Meſa liued with this Emperour
Alexander, her dignitye was ſuch, and counſaile of ſuch

value, her maners of ſo greate grauetye, and her eſtimation
with the wyſeſt Senators of ſuch credite, her countenaunce
framed with ſuch a maieſtye,A rare ſingulertye in a woman. that for a woman ſo many vertues
in one body was ſtraunge and marueylous, ſo God in diuers
ages to many kingdomes, & to diuers commō wealthes,
hath geuen of that ſexe and kinde ſuch maruailous ſucceſſe of
eſtate, as the mightye frame of many Regions, of populous
people,The gouernmente of women. or infinite nations, yea the mightye Princes of the
world haue obeyed theyr gouernment: for it is not to be ſuppoſed
(much leſſe to be beleued) yt men in theyr eſtate, do paſſe
and excell women in theyr gouernmente: the moſte mightye
Princes cannot of theyr owne power and proper ſtrengthe,
worke anye marueylous thinge, if GOD giue not a ſtronge
grounde and a ſtedfaſt foundation to theyr kingdomes: oftentimes
wee ſee Princes baſe (in no point worthy to be compared
vnto noble Ladyes adorned with reaſon and vertue) as ye
                  Macedonians,
                  The eſtate of kingdome. the Meades, the Mores and the Bactrianes to
haue ryſen from theyr baſe eſtates, to beare Sceptures ouer
many Regions, and to rule mightye Princes. Howe meane
was the eſtate at firſt, when Aemilius vncle to Romulus firſt
kinge of the Romaynes gouerned? euen as the eſtate of ſmall
kingdomes haue ryſen by meane perſonnes, in time to runne
a race in title and longe deſcente from manye kinges ouer diuerſe
Nations: ſo the moſt noble and vertuous race of women
haue in many ages obtayned maruailous ſucceſſe, to aſſpyre
to mightye kingdomes,The gouernment of women. and to gouerne many Princes:
as the Amazones & Semiramis, the Queene of Halicarnaſſus,
who ruled worthely, & foughte more valiantly then durſt
Z
                        •
                     rzes wt all his huge hoaſtes: conſider ye the noble actes of
Debora, of Iudeth againſt Holopharnus, of Queene Mertia
queene of England, & Heſter for the Iewes. The gouernmēt
of this Alexander was vnder the tuition of Meſa and the other
noble Ladyes, who altogether directed and diſpoſed the
whole frame of his dominion to all excellencye, and theſe noble
Matrons beinge vertuouſlye inclyned to tender the ſtate
of the Emperour,A worthye gouernment. and the whole iuriſdiction of the Romaine
Empyre, with greate conſideration choſe
                     •
                   vnto them ſixtene

Senators being men of grauity, in whoſe breſtes experience
of long time had layed vp plenteous ſtore of great wiſedome,
without whoſe counſayle nothinge paſſed to be done, or determined
in anye matter, ſuche is the care of thoſe who gouerne
kingdomes in all godlynes, to procede with graue and
ſage counſaile of the wyſeſt, of the moſt experte and godlieſt
affected,A godly coū
                     ſaile. in all affayres couchinge the common wealthe: the
time before the gouernemente of this Alexander, was with
tyrannye maintayned, as vnder Antoninus the ſonne of Seuerus,
and vnder Macrinus and Heliogabalus: nowe was
Rome thoughte to be in greate felicitie of eſtate, when it
was thus changed from tyranny, to the beſt order that might
be in a common wealthe, for one yonge heade did not raſhlye
determine matters, but hore age with longe experiēce, wiſedome
and godly counſaile,The beſt coū
                     ſayle. which before was contemned, did
now beare the ſwaye, and yet in the hart of euerye Senator,
ſuperſtition remayned in thoſe dayes of ſtraunge Goddes, for
God was not then knowen: the eſtate of ſuch people perfectly
knew not God, but outwardly and politikelye to a common
wealthe gouerned. Antoninus withoute anye zeale or true
knowledge (as fantaſticall ſuperſtition blindeth) both ſet vp,Ignoraunce the mother of this deuotiō.
and pulled downe the Image of his Gods. Alexander (ſuch
was the ignorance of thoſe dayes) renued the due and proper
honour of his Gods, reſtoringe eche one to his proper place &
deuoute Tabernacle. Of longe time their ſuperſtitiō remayned,Blinde deuotion.
theyr blinde conſciences was puft vp with blinde deuotion
& inuented dailye as eche one fanſyed in Religiō of ſtrange
ceremonyes, the Hiſtories do note that in the dayes of the gouernment
of this Alexander, ſuperſtitiō was vpholded with
famous men of great learninge, for many ſage, pollitike and
deepe grounded heades, flowed plentiouſlyin thoſe his dayes,
manye noble, valiaunt, and rare Captaynes eche one in theyr
eſtate, the one for counſaile, the other in armes did endeuour
themſelues manfullye to vpholde the eſtate, and to preſerue ye
Romaine kingdome a longe ſeaſon,Meſa a rare Ladye. the gouernmente of this
proſperous eſtate continued as longe as Meſa the graunde-mother
of Alexander liued. For counſaile, and deepe memorye

neuer failed in her croked age, nor noble courage
neuer ceaſſed in ſeekinge to make perfecte a common wealth,
till withered age gaue vppe her ghoſte: her death was much
lamented: Rome loſt of her a Ladye of rare vertues. Alexander
was maymed, by her death he loſt his chiefe ſtaffe, the
meane & ſtrongeſt grounde to eſtabliſhe his Empyre thoughe
his mother Mammea liued, and well affected in hart to ſeeke
the proſperous eſtate of Alexander her ſonne.A perfect token of a wiſe Prince. 
                  Meſa neuer
enterpriſed any one thinge but by the counſaile of many wyſemen,
and their experience diſpoſed and ruled the ſame. Meſa
beinge deade, Mammea the mother of Alexander in like ſort
ſought to gouerne her ſonne beinge not of yeares rype to gouerne.Mammea.
                  Meſa was ledde aduiſedlye by counſaile of other, but
Mammea made her owne counſaile of force to rule Alexander
and other, though at the firſt ſhe pretended otherwiſe, this
thing was not cōmendable in Mammea his mother, his education
continued altogether in vertuouſnes, in learninge, and
all qualities meete for a Prince, ſhe expelled from the Court
all ſuche, whoſe inſolent maners, whoſe proude behauioure,
whoſe beaſtlye follye, might ſone corrupte and inure to horrible
life her ſonne, beinge vertuouſlye broughte vp, ſo daungerous
is the Court of Princes,The Courte of Princes. where cloſe, & ſecrete pleaſures
lurcke with haultye lokes, ſtraunge deuiſes, idlenes and
all gallant demeanour ranginge: moſt cōmonlye courtly behauiour
by all meanes indeuoureth throughe courteous ciuilitye,
and by frendſhippe of the mightye to be moſt honoured.
The Courte receaueth all ſortes, wherin eche one laboureth
to excell in that behauiour which the Courte commonlye fauoureth,Courtlye behauiour.
wherevppon the mother of this Emperour, ponderinge
the perill of Alexander, and knowinge his eſtate to be
ſubiecte to many ſuche, who vnder a certaine excellencye and
ſingularitye of rare qualities, creepe into the Court of many
Princes: As in the Courte of Tiberius, Druſus, Claudius,
Nero, Domitianus, Commodus, Antoninus and corrupted
thoſe Princes, whereby ſhe ſawe theyr eſtate of gouernment
proſpered not, theyr kingdome was weakened, theyr life ſhorte
ned, ſhe ledde with theſe perſwaſions, did therevppon take ye
                  
greater head: for after Alexander came to thoſe yeres, as yt
in his owne hands the gouernmēt was wholy ſettled, amongeſt
many a certaine Senators daughter deſcending of noble
bloud, was choſen of him in mariage, wherein alſo he obeyed
the counſayle of his mother, who thoughe ſhe was commendable
in manye thinges in time paſſed,Couetouſnes and pride. yet now pride and couetouſnes
poſſeſſed her and ſhe not bearinge the eſtate of the
Empreſſe to be aboue hers, chalengeth to haue that name alone
to her ſelfe, wher vppon great diſcention fell, and the father
of the Empriſſe (throughe the inſtigation of Alexander
his mother was put to death. The mother of Alexāder bore
ſuch ſwaye, ſo terrible was her cōmaundement, and maieſty
dreaded, that ſhe baniſhed from the Courte and bedde of the
Emperour the Empreſſe, vnto the vttermoſt coaſtes of Affrica:
Thus was Alexander the Emperour ruled, (who as
it ſeemeth ſtode in great feare of his mother, not beinge able
by aucthoritye to retayne with him his wyfe the Empreſſe,Crueltye.
nor to ſaue his wiues father from death,Pride. pride onlye was the
cauſe yt moued his mother Mammea herevnto, who againſt
order of eſtate, lawe, and right, challenged the ſole title of the
Empereſſe, the like pride alſo moued Lucilla the ſiſter of Cō
                     modus
Emperour of Rome, ſhee beinge wyfe to Pōpeianus,
but firſt to Lucius Verus, who was aſſociate in the Empyre
with Marcus her father (that ſhe puffed with pride) accomptinge
herſelfe the aunciente Empreſſe in Lucius Verus time,
diſdayned nowe to follow the trayne of the yonge Empreſſe,
wherevppon great miſchiefe was practiſed.Pride. Nowe beganne
the maners of Alexanders mother to be had in great indignation,
his gouernmente muche contempned, in that ſo fondlye
he obeyed, it ſhoulde ſeeme greate was her aucthoritye ſo to
diſpoſe the gouernment of her ſonne Alexander, who manye
times by iuſt occaſiō moued thereunto, reproued his mother,
the brute and talke of people was ſo heauy againſt her,Couetouſnes▪
                   for her
intollerable couetouſnes, wherrewith the eſtate of the mightye
was brought downe, and the eſtate of the poore and inferiour
ſort much decayed. All theſe thinges were done againſt
the will and counſayle of Alexander, his mother (thoughe

couetous) by heaped ritches thought to make him a wealthy
Prince,True nobilitye vpholded by liberality. and for his rare & infinite treaſure a rare gouernour:
This in cogitation ſhe minded farre cōtrary to the noble Ladye
Meſa, who otherwiſe, in true nobility, in faithfull loue &
ſincere affection of his ſubiectes, placed the ſtrengthe of kingdome,Couetouſnes▪
                  
couetouſnes neuer harboreth in noble ſtomackes, but
as Ariſtotle doth ſay: Omnis imbecillitas facit auaros. Peulinge
hartes affecteth couetouſnes. The true nobility of courage
hath not reſpecte to ryches withoute meane,True nobilitye. or heaped
treaſures without mediocretye, but as vertue in all affayres
ſhall geue out an excellencye in vſinge to diſpoſe the ſame, ſo
this onlye was ye chiefe cauſe that there aroſe reprehenſion in
Alexander, who for the ſpace of xiii. yeres might be for vertuous
gouernment that whole time placed aboue all Princes:
crueltye & bloudye factes were moſt abhorted in his gouernment,
as it becommeth the wyſe and nobleſt Princes with lenitye
and all gentlenes to intreate the hartes of thoſe whom
they gouerne, ſo he with equity and iuſtice ordered the frame
of his Dominion, wherewith Iuſtice from eche one proceded
to geue ſentence vppon lawes: in all this time ſuch was ye
quiet eſtate of thoſe xiii. yeares wherin Alexander gouerned,
as that no Chronicle or aunciente Hiſtorye can recorde anye
time more noblye or with greater excellencye gouerned. If
ye conſider the antiquitye of times and order of all common
wealthes, from Iulius Caeſar through the whole race of Emperours
to thoſe his dayes, the like quiet eſtate of the Romaine
Empyre was not knowen. For many tyrantes & bloudye
gouernours ſucceded in that Empyre before the dayes of
this Alexauder,
                  Alexanders happy gouermente. who deſtroyed for theyr time the common
wealth, they deminiſhed the eſtate and name of the Romaine
Empyre: The happye dayes of this godlye Emperoure Alexander,
deliuered from all ſtormye ſeaſons and troubleous
times, the miſerable eſtate of Rome, thus longe Rome was
by him fortunate, though at the length contrary ſucceſſe fell:
Kingdomes do not alwayes enioye a like ſecuritie of eſtate,Kingdomes.
but many times ſtormye ſeaſons, and ſiniſter ſucceſſe doth followe
in kingdomes. Nowe at a ſodaine heauye newes was

ſente him from his deputies, who gouerned in Syria and Meſapotamia,
                  The death of Artabanus.
who in their letters ſignifyed, that Artabanus ye
mightye Prince of Parthia, (who ſometime inuaded with
maine hoaſt the Romaines) was murthered of Zerxes kinge
of Perſia, his people ſlaine, and countrye waſted and ſpoyled,
& in the poſſeſſion of Artaxarxes kinge of Perſia. The newes
was the more terrible,Artabanus. becauſe Artabanus who was titled ye
firſt of all kinges, the great and mighty Prince of the world,
who for his dreaded maieſty & large conqueſtes wore a double
Crowne, was murthered. Theſe thinges made ye Romaines
afeard,Artaxarxes. becauſe Artaxarxes ceaſed not with ye cōqueſt of Parthia,
but threatned to aſſay all the world, to get fame by conqueſt,Cyrus.
he challenged much frō 
                  Cyrus ſometime kinge of Perſia,
who firſt reduced ye kingdomes of ye 
                  Meades, as in one linked
vnity to the Perſians. This yonge Emperour Alexander
broughte vppe in all ſecuritie of eſtate, to whom neither ciuill
warre at home, neither foreine ennemye did at any time moleſt,
now at a ſodayne mightye warres are threatned: ye letters
being redde and conſideration had on euery ſyde through
the counſaile of his noble Senators, anſweare were made in
theſe wordes:The ſayinge of Alexander. A Prince ought to be content wt his owne Dominion,
& not to moue any ſparcle of warre to ſeeke innouatiō
ouer other Regions, therby through vaine hope to ſeeke after
leaſinges & decaye of his owne eſtate, wiſelye alſo he admoniſhed
ye kinge Artaxarxes, declaring what foyles the Perſian
kinges caught at the handes of the Emperours of Rome: he
called to minde the greate ouerthrowe that Auguſtus gaue
them, and what Traian the Emperour did, what Lucius valiantlye
aſſayed, and how great an ouerthrow Seuerus gaue
them,Alexanders letters. This was the effect of Alexanders letters to Artaxarxes,
ſente by famous Oratours from Rome to Parthia, they
redde the letters, they contemned the argument and the Embaſſadours:
For Artaxarxes the ſonne of cowardly Zerxes,
by nature puffed vp with vaine glory, ledde with flattery, nothinge
knowing God, forgetfull of his eſtate, thought by his
mayne hoaſt to ſubdue all the whole worlde:Pride. At the firſt all
thinges went luckelye on his ſyde, Parthia a mightye Regiōe

gaue place to him by conqueſt, many Regions for feare of inuaſion,
yelded vppe theyr Crowne and title before they were
aſſayed, neglectinge theyr owne and proper gouernours, all
thinges went with Artaxarxes, feare abandoning munitiō,
they opened the gates of euery Cittie, fortes not aſſayled yelded
to an vnknowē Prince, ſo it fauleth out many times vnto
kingdomes,The ſecrete counſaile of God. wher God hath prepared a ſcourge by a forraine
Prince, by an vnknowen enemye to ſubdue and bringe to ſubiection
mightye Nations, ſo many times ambition raigneth
in many Princes, who deſirous of more loftye eſtate, and larger
Dominions bringe in thende theyr owne kingdomes and
people to ruine,Ambition the ouerthrow of ye ambitious. in ſeekinge larger Dominions. This great
ſucceſſe of Artaxarxes amaſed Alexander, who continually
in his gouernment had ſecuritye of eſtate, peace and quietnes
by ſea and by lande, wherevppon generall muſters were taken
in all the prouinces and iuriſdiction of the Romaine Empyre,
nowe noble courages were redye to ayde theyr Prince
whom they loued entierlye, and obeyed willinglye, eche one
for ſincere harte both lamented and wept for his troubleous
eſtate. Aſſone as a great armye was prepared of the Romaines,
noble Captaynes who had proued diuers aduentures by
longe experience in manye bloudye warres, were appointed
to their bandes, nothinge for munition wantinge, then they
paſſed from al coaſtes to arriue at Antioche, where all thinges
were ſet in readynes both for men, victuels and moneye.
Alexander as a moſt godly Emperour abhorringe from effuſion
of bloud, euen in his ennemye ſought by all meanes to put
of bloudye ſlaughters in thoſe deadlye warres, wherevppon
he ſent another Embaſſage to ye proude and lofty Prince Artaxarxes
kinge of Perſia,
                  Artaxarxes. to entreate him to peace, & to will
him to concorde, but nothinge preuayled, he ſet at nought the
Embaſſage and Embaſſadours, who immediatly vppon that
to ſhewe his Princelye courage and glorious vaunte, ſente a
newe Embaſſage from himſelfe .iiii. hundreth of the mightieſt
parſonages for ſtature that hath bene ſeene in Princelye
robes,A proude attempte. with whom gold and treaſure was at will plentifull,
with fearce and barbed horſes, with bowe & arrowes armed

in theyr Embaſſages, to bring terror to the Romaynes, who
by conſideringe of them, might imagine what the maine hoaſtes
of the Perſians were,Embaſſadors ought well to be vſed. 
                  Alexander receyued the Embaſſadours
as a good Prince, retayninge them Princelye: farre
vnlike to his Embaſſadours receyued of the Perſian kinge, ye
next daye followinge thoſe braue Embaſſadours came before
Alexander to declare theyr Embaſſage, ſilence beinge geuen
one amongeſt them who for wiſedome, counſaile, grauetye &
valiant courage, had charge to tell his Embaſſage before the
other, thus hee beganne. The greate and mightye Prince
Artaxarxes kinge of Perſia, beinge Lorde of Lordes & kinge
of kinges,The Embaſſadour of the Perſians, his Oration. commaūdeth the Romaines & their gouernours to
depart and geue ouer the title of all Siria, Aſia, & all the partes
neare to Europe, and alſo to ſuffer the Perſians to be Lordes
ouer Caria and Ionia and all thoſe countryes whiche the
Mare aegeum and the Iſle Pontus ſeperate, which ſome time
the olde Princes of Perſia, otherwiſe ouermatched with forraine
ennemyes loſt by rebellion, who for lacke of oportunity,
and throughe diuers calamities chauncinge vnto theyr Princes,
haue hitherto ceaſed to claime theyr right. This is therefor
to admoniſhe them, leaſt Artaxarxes moued with iuſte indignation,
do deſtroy them and leade away the reſt captiues,
and as villaynes to ſerue him, this was the effecte of his Embaſſage.
Alexander the Emperour toke great conſideratiō,
the whole nomber of Senators aſſembled, & conſulted what
they were beſt to do therein, they thought it haynous to ſlea ye
Embaſſadours, for it was againſt the lawe of armes they beinge
but meſſengers,Embaſſadors ought curteouſlye to be vſed. the which like facte the Athenians abhorred
from, being moued of all the Greekes to ſlea the Embaſſadours
of Corinthe. Achilles alſo beinge iniuriouſly handled
of Agamemnon receyued his Embaſſadours curteouſlye,
for Talthuuius and Eurubates louingly and frendlye entertayned
them with theſe wordes: You who are Embaſſadours
bothe of God and man are welcome, you are not the
cauſe of this,Whye Embaſſages were firſt ordayned. but Agamemnon your maiſter, and ſeing that
Embaſſages were firſt ordayned, not onlye to ioyne amitye wt
Princes, and to make leage, and for the weake to ſeeke ayde

of the mighty: but alſo the eſtate of gouernment, the maners
of people, the forme and faſhion of the beſt common wealthes
are knowne to Prīces by Embaſſages: iniuries alſo wrought
by manye Princes are preuented, diuers conſpiracies of forrayne
ennemyes are cutte of: whiche thinges alſo conſidered
of Alexander, hee commaunded the Embaſſadours to be entertayned,
geuinge vnto them large reuenewes in the coaſtes
of Phrigia there to remayne perpetuallye, thus hee prouided
for them, yet contrarye to the maners of a good Prince: for
Artaxarxes a proude and loftye Prince gaue free paſſage to
his Embaſſadours to carrye home with theym theyr bodyes
with aunſweare of the Embaſſage.Free courſe to Embaſſadours. After this Alexander
deuided his hoaſt in thre partes, as he thought good, ſending
one part by Armenia, another by Medea, & the thirde by Euphrates
wt the which ye Emperor went, who in ſundry coaſtes
arryuinge, much diſmayed the Perſians, and greatlye endamaged
them, this ſtrength alſo had the Romaynes aboue the
Perſians, to haue continuall ayde from other Princes: for ye
                  Perſian kinges at thoſe dayes gaue no wages to theyr ſouldiours,
but the ſpoyle of warres maintayned them, women
alſo bore armor to fight for theyr Prince.Valiant people in ye Princes quarrell. And that Prince is
moſt ſtronge, whoſe ſubiectes haue wealthye eſtate at home
and patrimony to care for, who ſo fighteth for any Prince,
and knoweth yt other ſhall poſſeſſe the followinge felicitye,
they fight but faintlye,The ſtronge Prince. becauſe the daunger is theirs and the
profite for other, but who ſo fighteth for his country, he doth
the more egarlye & manfully fight for his Prince, to the ende
hee maye vpholde that whiche hee poſſeſſeth, and therefore
valiante courage aſſayeth ſo greate aduenture as neceſſitye
enforceth, for the maintaynance of priuate profite to
geue great aſſayes. The Perſians did not vſe as the Romaynes
are wonte, to wage theyr ſubiectes in battaile, the Romaynes
did it for that they knewe of moſt ſtrengthe that people
to be,Couragious people. that hath great maintenaūce and ſuccour in warre,
as Iſocrates noteth in his Oration written to the Athenians.
               
               As ſone as worde came to Artaxarxes that the Romaynes
were in diuers coaſtes arriued, he gathered a greate nomber

of ſouldiours and ſette vppon them where they arryued in all
coaſtes, happye ſucceſſe fell on the Perſians ſide, great ſlaughters
were made on ye Romaynes, wherewith Alexander oppreſſed,
(as with the great griefe and heate of the countrye)
returned with great loſſe of men: and the valiante courages
of his ſouldiours being much diſmayde. Alexander returned
to Antioche where with Princely giftes geuen and deſtributed
to his men of warre,The louinge Prince. hee comforted and reuiued theyr
ſpirites, and there prepared freſhe ſouldiours, where all care
of warre for a time ceaſinge: Alexander in pleaſure & princelye
delightes paſſed the time, thinkinge immediatly vppon ye
diſmiſſinge of the Perſian armye to ſet vppon them. At that
inſtant when he thought to haue proceded further againſt the
Perſians, letters were ſent him from Illiria from his chiefe deputye
there, wherein he redde that the Germaynes were paſſed
beyonde the floud Rhene,
                  The ſiniſter fortune of Princes ſome times. and the floud Danubius, ſpoylinge
and waſtinge the Countrye and prouinces of ye Romaynes
cōmittinge many ſlaughters, townes and villages were
deſtroyed: whervppon they requeſted tht Emperour his preſence,Ciuill warre worſte.
this heauye calamitye did muche diſmaye the Romaynes
and the Emperour Alexander, yea more then the greate
miſfortune that fell in the former warres againſte the Perſians.
It is commonlye ſeene (ſuche is the wickednes of men)
that it is a weake ſtaffe for a kinge to truſt to the league and amitye
of other Princes,The league of Princes. for ambition neuer ceaſeth to aſſaye
enterpriſes, but taketh occaſion to faſten aduenture, if anye
pretenced cauſe may be ſurmiſed, as the Thebanes did, inuadinge
Pelloponeſus, Phillip into Thracia, Antoninus into
Parthia, of kinge Iemye into Englande. In this miſfortune
and heauy eſtate of fierce warres, the raſhe multitude of
ſouldiours blamed Alexander, becauſe eyther throughe negligence
and lacke of counſaile, or by his cowardlye harte, the
forraine Princes were encouraged to diminiſhe the eſtate of
the childiſhe Emperour and cowardlye Prince. After he had
ſet in order al thinges neceſſary to reſiſt the ſeditious vprores
of the Perſians, he paſſed ouer Rhene makinge a bridge ouer
it, for the readye paſſage, as Caeſar did in his warres againſt

the Germaynes, theſe two flouddes Rhene and Danubius be
thoughte the greateſt vnder the Northe,Rhene. 
                  Rhene paſſeth by
Germanye,Danubins. and Danubius paſſeth by Pannonia: but Volga
in Ruſſia is greater,Volga. which is in lengthe .iiii. thouſande miles
and more, and a goodly ryuer, wherevppon they paſſe euen to
Perſia,
                  Mare Caſpiū. by the Mare Ca
                        •
                     pium nexte vnto it. I may ſelfe haue
paſſed a thouſand myles vppon a great riuer called Dwina in
Ruſſia,
                  Dvvina. & yet but vppon a part of it for a monthes ſpace, frō 
                  S.
Nicholas to Vologda,
                  Vologda. where the great Emperour of Ruſſia
hath a mighty Caſtel. I haue alſo paſſed ouer ye 
                  Volga otherwiſe
called the Rha,
                  Rha. ouer againſt the Cittie called laroſlaue,
where it is twiſe as brode as the Thames at London, & very
deepe:Moneye. which at large I will ſet out in another Booke, of the
mightie eſtate of that Dominion. Then Alexander prepared
a great nomber of Mores excellinge in ſwiftnes of foote,
being noble darters & out of Parthia he had noble Archers,Innouation of eſtate.
which in thoſe dayes gaue moſt noble and worthye aduentures
in caryinge away the honour of the field. Alexander hauinge
his armye prepared and readye to encounter with the
Germaynes, not deſirous of any ſlaughter, ſent Oratours to
entreate of peace, and becauſe Alexander was feareful of nature
and tymerous, promiſed to geue vnto the Germaynes
what they requeſted,Peace. knowinge that diuers Princes haue repreſſed
theyr iniurious offers by bribinge them with moneye:
but the Romaynes in martiall enterpriſes geeuinge place to
no Nation, not onlye reproued Alexander, but alſo began to
diſceauer themſelues from obedience, fanſyinge raſhlye an other
gouernour, ſo vnconſtant are the heades of the raſhe and
bace multitude to ſeeke innouation of eſtate and chaunge of
Princes, as fanſye leadeth them to refuſe nowe that Prince,
throughe whoſe vertuous education and godly gouernment,
the quiet and proſperous eſtate, longe time flouriſhed in the
Romayne Empyre: thoſe rare vertues are not with them in
price,Maximinus. a Prince deſyrous of peace is contemned, his dignitye &
counſaile derided, bloudy warres, ſpoyle and robbinge is the
marke whereat they ſhot: thus the Romayne Empyre by vnconſtant
heads was brought to miſerable eſtate, at a ſodaine

they made choiſe where fanſye ledde them, and wt like conſideration
diſplaced the choſen. At the ſame time there was one
a chiefe captayne, who bare chiefe authoritie called Maximinus
a Thracian, borne of baſe eſtate, a ſhepeheard, whoſe
mighty ſtature of body & ſtiffe ſturdines, had aduaunced him
by diuers aduentures to all orders and degrees of chiualrye,
who for his excellencye & dexteritye in feates of warre, was
the chiefe to traine vppe yonge ſouldiours, of whom by dailye
familiaritie and diligence, with induſtruous trauaile, he purchaſed
great fauour and earneſt loue, who alſo to winne their
fauour vſed this meane, liberality & great giftes, then all the
men of warre did contempne & diſobeye the godly Emperour
Alexander,
                  A miſerable ende for ſo vertuous a Prince. aſcribinge to him the euill ſucceſſe of ye warres, &
to the childiſhe ſtomacke of him followinge only the aduiſe &
counſaile of his mother Mammea: treaſon thereby was conſpired
to place Maximinus Emperour, and to murther Alexander.
Who now but Maximinus, Alexander the godlye
Emperour is forgotten, nowe the princelye robe clotheth
Maximinus,
                  Note the ende of the vſurper. who as vnwillinge ſeemed, by force compelled
thereto (as the maner of diuers ambitious Princes is
noted in Hiſtoryes) ſome recorde that the men of warre did
threaten to murther him refuſinge the choiſe, immediatlye
after by violence they beganne to ſet vppon Alexander who
at a ſodaine amaſed, ſeinge himſelfe thus forſaken wept, and
trembled for feare, he alſo conſideringe yt hee had aduaunced
Maximinus from a baſe ſheepehearde, from the dungehill to
be a chiefe captaine,A moſt deteſtable facte. reproued his ingratitude and falſehode:
& blamed alſo the other ſouldiours (who leauinge theyr liege
Lorde) ſoughte to promote an vſurper trayterouſlye. Alexander
ſpake vnto them manye thinges mouinge obedience,
he ſhewed alſo a full diſcourſe by what lenitie many yeares he
gouerned the Romayne Empyre: hee ſhewed vnto them his
education from tender yeares.Couetouſnes ye ouerthrow of kingdome and people. Some good hartes moued wt
his Oration lamented his caſe, and with willinge hartes obeyed
him, but the mayne route of ſouldiours ſwarmed to
Maximinus, Maximinus onlye exalted by this good Emperour
Alexander, from a baſe ſheepehearde and baſe peſante

to that dignitye, was the deſtructiō of Alexander and Mammea
his mother, he left not one aliue that fauoured Alexander,
ſo deadly is the enmitye of thoſe which wickedly aſpyre,
diſplaſinge and murtheringe whom fanſye leadeth. Thirtene
yeares Alexander ruled vertuouſlye withoute bloudſhedde,
lawes proceded with equitye, godlye was the gouernment
hee beinge moſt godlye, he was a rare Prince,
of whom greater vertues in other cannot be recyted,Couetouſnes ought to be auoyded.
onlye the couetuouſnes & greedye appetite
to infinite treaſures of his mother Mammea,
was the firſt occaſion that extinguiſhed the
faithfull obedience and ſincere loue of
the men of warre.
            
            
               Maximinus.
               
               
                  
                     MAximinus was of baſe condition of life
a ſheepehearde in his childhode, his parentes
verye poore and needye, but hee
wearye of that baſe and ruſtical life, beganne
to applye himſelfe to the exerciſe
(for lacke of lyuinge) of the arte of a
ſouldiour, and becauſe nature had made
him of perſonage mightye and taule, of
ſtrengthe the valiante, hee fanſyed in himſelfe, accordinge to his

ſturdye eſtate, great aduauncement, for in proceſſe of time beinge
hardye, he aſſayed moſt manfullye all perils obiected to
him, the daungers which he paſſed brought him to great admiratiō,The couragious man.
as it doth all thoſe whom noble fame in martiall enterpriſes
vpholdeth, for they refuſe no daunger, the ſucceſſe of
theyr aduentures tytleth them with greate commendation,
they paſſe thoſe daungers which courages feareful, and hartes
timerouſe do flye and avoyde, the good ſucceſſe which beutifyeth
them, bringeth fame and nobilitye of actes in the eyes
of all thoſe which pondereth theyr practiſes,Fearefull hartes. fearefull and tymerous
hartes neuer aſſpire to large kingdomes, ſplayed cō
                  queſt,
or renowmed victoryes: fortune taketh by the hand the
boulde and hardye ſouldiour,The hardye ſouldiours. and maintayneth him in all his
enterpriſes. Thus Maximinus purchaſinge fame and honor,
was promoted by ye laſt Emperour Alexander to greate dignitye,
to rule ouer many, but in the ende with all ingratitude
from ſhepehearde exalted by Princely fauour, both loued and
accepted, in the ende was the deathe of this good Emperour,
ſo great was his ambition to diminiſhe the eſtate, to depriue
of honour and to take away the life of ſo good an Emperour.
This Maximinꝰ being made Emperour,Maximinus. for a time wt great
liberality purehaſed to himſelfe theyr hartes, but after a ſeaſon
beinge ſettled in gouernment,Alexander. he was not ſo gentle as Alexander
whom he ouerwhelmed & with all tyrannye ſlue.
Alexander deſerued at his handes great obedience, faithfull
ſeruice, but thus hath he rewarded him, Alexander promoted
him to dignities, but Maximinus framinge diuers conſpiracies,
catched to himſelfe the dignitye of his Lorde and
maiſter, moſt traiterouſlye hee robbed him of eſtate, and ſpoyled
him of life, his miſchiefes ſo ceaſed not, for he murthered
all who eyther by frendſhippe,Tyrannye. alyance or kindered, eyther fauoured,
loued or obeyed the Emperour: his great tyrannye
appeared in the eyes of all the Romaynes, the chaunge was
ſodaine, Rome thus to be plagued with a deteſtable tyraunt,
yet that great tyrannye could not repreſſe the talke and brute
of the people,A hard thing to remoue a tyraunt. his tyrannye was ſuche in his enteringe, that
eche one reproued him, then they lamented the dolefull ende

and pytifull miſfortune of Alexander, whoſe gouernmente
longe they enioyed in felicitye of eſtate, nowe ſaye they, abaſe
ſheepehearde, a runegate from his owne country, a barbarous
Thratian, a righte Thratian by nature and bringinge
vp, deſyrous of bloudſhed, practiſeth yt, which the vile Thratians
in theyr countrye do, and the more they contemned him
with blaſinge vnto all the world, the baſe eſtate of his parentes,
with whom he was brought vp: the more fearce he was,
for the bloudy harte of Maximinus quailed not in all his tyrannye,
but on ſheepe, ſo on men he played the butcher, thinkinge
to place himſelfe in ſecuritye of eſtate,A butcherlye Prince. and to purchaſe
reſt (all thoſe beinge murthered whom he hunted after) hee
chaunged the eſtate of Rome, he put in and put out offices and
officers, his manners contented him whom hee promoted to
dignitye, manye for feare fledde from his tyrannye, manye taryed
clokinge and diſſemblinge a fayned loue, and ſincere obediēce,
they flattered him that in the ende conſpired his death,A iuſte reward for a tyraunt.
they in all pointes obeyed him that wiſhed him fainedly long
life, ſuch is the eſtate of tyrantes, who thinkinge themſelues
by aucthoritye mightye, in the harte of eche one accurſed and
deteſted, whoſe death they wiſhe and ſeeke after rather then
longe life, in the ende his tyrannye prouoked many treaſons,
manye alſo were accuſed before him of diuers conſpiracies,
none eſcaped againſt whom accuſation was broughte before
him, alſo he was brought to extreme perill by treaſō, paſſing
ouer a bridge into Germanye, but that conſpiracye came to
light, the aucthors thereof taken and put to death, the tyrannye
of Maximinus was ſo great,Tyrannye. that the barbarous ſouldiours
cōſpired his death many times. There was one ambitious
parſō (who as ye Hiſtory noteth) was enforced by cruell
meanes to vſurpe, whom one that ſeemed to be his frend murthered,
and brought his head to Maximinus, thinking thereby
to obtaine great prefermente with the loue and fauoure of
the Prince: for althoughe Maximinus had great cauſe to reioyce
to ſee his ennemye ſlaine, yet in like ſort he recompenſed
with death him that broughte his heade, iudginge that ſame
parſō a chiefe aucthor of the cōſpiracy, who alſo was thought

to haue done y• murther onlye for hope of preferment, no loue
and ſincere affection leadinge him thereto. Iulius Caeſar likewiſe
recompēſed thoſe, which vppon hope murthering Pompeie
thought at Caeſar his hand to be thanckefully rewarded,
but Caeſar knowinge the great truſt that Pompeye put in
them who murthered him, beinge neyther by othe nor allegiance
bounde to Caeſar, but frends to Pompeie, whoſe cloked
hartes well vewed and diſſimulation towards ſo noble a gouernour
vttered, death for honour and rewarde at Caeſar his
hand, they receyued theyr deadly facte, which worthely purchaſed
them a deadly dome. Theſe cōſpiracies moued Maximinus
to greater crueltye and more deteſtable tyrannye, it
encreaſed rather then dimyniſhed in him, thoughe he was at
that inſtant oppreſſed with great warres againſt ye Germaynes,
againſt whom when he had prepared noble warriours &
moſt worthieſt captaynes, he entered vppon theyr territorye
in the Harueſt time, deſtroyinge theyr Harueſt, theyr Townes
and villages were quite burned, this one thinge the men
of warre commēded in Maximinus, that with large & mightye
ſpoyles he fed continually the ſouldiours,The barbarous ſouldiours. whoſe riotous
and diſſolute life, affecteth ſincerelye ſuch a one as procureth
moſt ſpoyles, the doinge of Maximinus was ſo terrible againſt
the Germaynes, yt they retyred into the mariſh groundes,
great hauocke he made of them with manye ſlaughters,
ſuch ſpoyle and deſtruction of theyr countryes, ſuch burninge
of houſes and ruine of whole villages, hath not bene ſeene: he
might well be the ſonne of bloudye Mars that was in actes ſo
bloudy, his victoryes not onelye was ſet out in letters to the
Romaynes, but to be ſene in Mappes & Cardes, his victories
might with commendation be celebrated, if that his crueltye
had not paſſed towarde the Romaynes:Flatterye. for by flattery (wherwith
he was altogether ledde) hee ſought the deſtruction not
onlye of the commons, but alſo of the nobilitye, wherevppō
diuers
prouinces being vnder the iuriſdiction of the Romaynes
roſe againſt him,Tyrannye. ſuch was his tyrannye both by officers &
other meanes, ſuche onlye were fauoured of Maximinus as
were moſt wicked, at a ſodayne he roſe, and murthered Procuratorem

Africae, then beinge in that extremitie they choſe
Gordianus againſt his will Emperour, after whoſe creation
throughe the tyrannye of Maximinus, the fame and dignity
was ſone remoued, and honour and renowne taken awaye,
Gordianus enioyed fully the dignitye of the Emperour, who
enioyinge that eſtate and ſettled therein, wrote letters vnto
Rome reprouinge the tyrannye of Maximinus, and becauſe
he began vertuouſlye to gouerne, great was the commendation
of him, in puttinge to deathe all thoſe deteſtable promoters
who by vniuſt meanes had ſought the death of many mē,Promoters.
then hee put to death Vitellianus, who was a chiefe doer vnder
Maximinus, forthwith the Romaynes ſaluted Gordianus
Emperour and his ſonne, who endeuouringe to appeaſe
all partes of the Romaine Empyre, and in theyr letters ſette
forthe the beaſtly life of Maximinus, his crueltye and bloudy
tyrannye, theſe thinges beinge knowen to Maximinus, he beganne
forthwith to make an oration vnto his ſouldiours, to
appeaſe and quiet theyr mindes, ſheewinge vnto theym the
vnconſtante heades of the Carthaginians, theyr natures
prone to treaſon, he contempned and ſet light by Gordianus
an vnmanlye Prince, a deceauer, an vſurper, then hee prepared
an armye againſt Gordianus towarde Carthage, and at ye
ſame time a certaine Senator beinge an enemye to Gordianus
of longe time hauinge greate auchoritye in thoſe partes
prepared alſo an army againſt Gordianus: as ſone as Gordianus
heard that Maximinus the Emperour came with great
power againſt him and y• other Senator,Gordianus. beinge in vtter diſpayre,
vnmanly hanged himſelfe for feare, thoſe that created
Gordianus Emperour ſeinge him thus dead, did keepe cloſe
his death and obeyed his yonger ſonne Gordianus: who alſo
in battaile dyed, for Capilianus the Senator whom I ſpake
of before, made hauoke on Gordinaus ſonne, wt great ſlaughters
of the Romaynes, who alſo in ye ende woulde haue vſurped,
ſo great was his ambition vnder the coloure of obedience
and a ſincere harte of atrue ſubiecte.Ambition. After the Senate vnderſtode
of the deathe of Gordianus and his ſonne, preuentinge
the crueltye of Maximinus, who was nowe comminge

againſt them like a Lyon, they elected two Emperours,
Maximus Puppienus, and Claudius Balbinus, both men of
great auctoritye, whom manye by voice and election woulde
haue ſucceded, but the Romaynes cryed oute againſt them,
& would haue ſlaine them, being not content wt theyr gouernment,
in great tumulte was Rome and the Empyre in myſerable
eſtate, diuers ambitiouſly would haue vſurped, and diuers
alſo ſought to poſſeſſe,A myſerable eſtate. they choſe a child Emperour but
that continued not, Gallicanus by force would haue vſurped,
ambitious heads wrapped Rome in great calamities, ye wealthy
were made pore, the moſt beggarlye ſort made rytche by
ſpoyle, the Cittie alſo in diuers partes was fyred, greate hauoke
Maximinus made by ſlaughter vppon the nobilitye of ye
Romaynes, as he cared not for man, ſo he regarded not God,
for he perſecuted the Chriſtians alſo,The vi. perſecution. tyrannye was the whole
eſtate of his gouernment, his fanſy ruled lawes and all thinges
proceded as him liſted, at the ſame time diuers other conſpiracies
were wroughte againſt him, and as hee by murther
vſurped, ſo alſo by murther ſeekinge innouation and chaūge
of eſtate they ſought to diſplace him, hee paſſed with a greate
armye by the highe Alpes of Italye to Aquileia where his
ennemyes had theyr abode.Aquileia. 
                  Aquileia is a noble Cittie populouſlye
inhabited, a Cittye of great ryches, and a marte moſt
higheſt in price of all Italy, ſituate by the ſea, to whom frō al
coaſtes and coūtries ſtrongers for marchandiſe haue had acceſſe,
and becauſe at that time they heard of the comminge of
Maximinus, all the countrye there aboutes leauinge theyr
houſes, fledde with all theyr riches and ſtore to Aquileia, placinge
therein theyr great forte of ſtrengthe, Aquileia beinge
an olde auncient Cittie was muche in ruine, but the neceſſity
of that time ſone repayred it with infinite handes, for the people
were infinite in nomber, theyr prouiſion was not lackinge
to continue a longe ſiege: the chiefe of this enterpriſe were
Criſpianus
                  Chriſpianns. and Menephelus,
                  Menephelus. by whoſe counſayle and pollicye,
all thinges were in a readynes to vpholde manfully their
eſtate, and to put of violently theyr ennemy.
               
                  Maximinus ponderinge the ſtronge and fenced forte, the noble

Cittie Aquileia wherein they were encloſed, aſſayed firſt
by a flatteriuge Embaſſage to ouer come them, and by great
giftes to bribe them, hee ſente vnto them in theſe woordes:
Maximinus beinge theyr Emperour commaundeth them to
leaue theyr forte, to yelde vp theyr armoure and to take hym
theyr frinde, not an ennemye, hee ſeeketh not theyr ſlaughter
but peace, quietnes, and aduauncement to the eſtate of ye Romaynes:
muche alſo they vttered in commendation of Maximinus,
                  Neuer truſte a tyraunt.
and exhorted the men of warre not to neglecte the liberall
and Princely offer, but Criſpianus fearinge the ſubtill
practiſe of Maximinus, gaue exhortociō to the men of warre
and people inhabitinge Aquileia to withſtande the violente
tyrante, who vnder fayre wordes and fayre promiſes, woulde
deſtroy them as he hath before time handeled diuers yeldinge
to him:Criſpianus. This Criſpianus was one in great reputation with ye
Romaynes & vertuous in his gouernment, of talke wittye,
of counſayle graue, whoſe wiſedome they obeyed and reſiſted
valiantlye Maximinus: they cut of all theyr bridges the water
by ſtormye ſeaſons beinge mightye, and of greate depthe,
ouer the which Maximinus and his armye coulde not paſſe,
but many of the Germaynes more raſhlye then wiſelye, aſſayinge
to paſſe that water periſhed in it, but afterwarde by pollicye
of a ſhipwrighte, meanes was found to come to the wall
of Aquileia,
                  Neceſſitye. where the men of the Cittie defendinge theyr
walles, foughte from aboue, no age or kinde wanted to beare
armour for the faſegarde of Aquileia. Maximinus deſtroyed
all the countrie about Aquileia, ſo great was his diſpleaſure
againſt them, which the ſouldiours of Maximinus felte, beinge
glad to returne with great loſſe, and little honour.
               This Maximinus beinge in this ſort Emperour after Alexander
throughe crueltye his life was ſhortned,Maximinus. who raigned
but three yeares, and no maruaile he murthered his kinge, &
alſo exerciſed cruelty towarde his friendes.Crueltye. As concerninge
his exceſſe in glottonye,Glottonye. euerye daye fortye pounde of fleſhe
was his repaiſte, fiue gallons of wyne his drincke, as he was
mightye of ſtature,Germanye is vanquiſhed. ſo in warre manlye, and fortunato, for his
time, at the length he vanquiſhed the Germaynes, and on the

Romaynes alſo he ſhewed great crueltye. This tyrante made
greate perſecution vppon the Chriſtians: in the time of this
Emperour was Origine the great learned mā,Origene. who through
his excellent knowledge in learninge and deepe parſwation,
brought to the vnitye of the true Churche,Berillus. one Berillus a biſſhoppe
in Arabia, which heritike taught that Chriſt neither
was before his mother,Hereſye. nor had a Godheade, as one parſon of
the Trinitye but that the Godhead did remayne in him a certayne
ſeaſon.Antherus in the time of Maximinus and Fabian. At this time the biſhoppe of Rome was called
Antherus, whoe enioyed his ſeate but one moneth, after Antherus
ſucceded Fabian and he was biſhoppe xii. yeares. As
you haue heard before, there was choſen of the Senate at one
time to be Emperours Maximus and Balbinus,
                  Three were choſen at one tyme. and of the
commons Gordian a childe, vnto which election the Senate
yelded, that they might appeaſe the furye of ye people: Maximus
was ſlayne of his people in Aquileia, and Maximinus &
Balbinus not fauoured of the ſouldiours were ſlaine at Rome.
               The kinge of Britayne at this time was one Aſcleprodorus
who raigned .xxx. yeares, who beſieged London beinge
driuen oute thereof before by the manhode of Lucius Gallus,
but Lucius Gallus was after ſlaine by Aſclepiodorus, and
caſte into a broke that ranne where Walbrooke ſtandeth,Walbroke whereof it toke y• name. for
this Lucius Gallus being caſt into the ſame, it hath euer ſince
bene called Gallus broke, though now Walbroke or Walleſbroke,
but the cauſe that moued Aſclepiodorus to make hys
warre, was one Alectus a Romaine who gouerned Britaine
and ſubdued to the Romaynes this kingdome, whoſe gouermente
was cruell,Alectus. and the Britaynes were moued that this
noble man ſhould vſurpe as a kinge, where vppon they chaſed
the Romaynes with theyr kinge from place to place by mightye
force,Alectus. 
                  Alectus went towardes London becauſe there hee
was the moſt ſureſt, but in ye ende he was ſlaine with a great
nomber of Romaynes. This Alectus was before a Duke in
Rome, in great eſtimation with Maximinus, and ſent to the
Britaynes to ſubdue Caraſſus,
                  Caraſſus. whom hee ſlewe and vſurped
after viii. yeares. Altharco after the murther of his father
was kinge of Scottes & raigned xi. yeres, a diſſolute Prince,

a flute player, & minſtrillike in all his dayes, hee was ſlaine
for rauiſhinge of a mayde, a noble mans daughter.
            
            
               Gordian.
               
               
                  THe cruell tyrant Maximinꝰ beinge thus
deade, Gordian who was choſen with other
two, onely came in fauour to enioye
the Empyre, the ſouldiours fauoured
neyther the godlye Princes, neyther yet
they loued ye vngodly, but alwayes they
bore ſway, ſpoyle large & greedye praye
contented them,The maner of ſouldiours luker and prodigall gaines made them choſe
gouernours, ſo was theyr kingdome boughte and ſoulde for
moneye, and ſurelye where ſuch brainleſſe people beare ſiegnorye,
there the like is practiſed, for what confuſde heades do
determine vnaduiſedly miſchiefe executeth,The beſte point of chiualrye. it is the happieſt
part in all chiualry and mortall warres, ſouldiours to obeye
the counſayle of the wyſe and happye Captayne, els periſheth
the armye, and counſaile is no counſaile, when raſhe heades
vppon a ſodaine bringe the kingdome to diſſolution,Deſperate ſouldiours. neither
is the deſperate ſouldiour of anye price, beinge a beaſtlye lyuer,
he can bringe no glorye to the Prince that is not beloued
of God,The feare of God. all honour and renowne flyeth from him that feareth
not God and lyueth wantonlye: ſodaine is the faule of

Princes, & vnloked for, diſolation happeneth both to ye kinge,
the Prince & the people, the godly onely ſeeth the cauſe, ſometime:
Quicquid delinquunt Reges plectūtur achiui,
                  The ſentence of Ouide. & ſometime
contrarywyſe: Scaelere grecorum plectuntur Reges
achiui. As a wicked Prince bringeth diſſolution to his people
(God ſcourging ſinne) ſo miſcheuous people is a rewyne to ye
good Prince, and to the moſt flouriſhinge kingdomes, therefore
both muſte be amended,Remedies to auoyde plagues in kingdomes. for as a certaine godlye man
writeth. Ergo fames, peſtis, bellum graſſantur in omnes:
viuere ſi vultis viuite iam melius. No Region can quietlye
be gouerned where there is vncertaine ſucceſſion to be placed
in eſtate,Vertuous ſucceſſion. ye Prince by death ceaſinge to rule, note theſe troublous
tymes of the Romayne Empyre, wherein ſo often
chaunge and pullinge downe of eſtate haue followed, in fewe
dayes to ſee manye poſſeſſinge kingedomes, ſome by fauour,
other by enuye, manye by kindred moued to vpholde, or pull
downe the exalted from kingdome, and as all theſe be cauſes,
ſo ambition is the roote of all other,Ambition. that geeueth moſte aſſayes
to aſpyre and trouble kingdomes, ye ſee the ende of tyrauntes
as in Maximinus, Baſſanus, Commodus, and ſo in
all other what lamentable ſayinge was this Maximinus a
moſt cruell tyraunt beinge murthered, & his ſonne alſo ſlaine
with him. Ex peſſimo genere ne catulum habendum, full
ſodainlye was the ende of Puppienus Balbinus ambitiouſlye
inuadinge the Empyre.Puppienus. In this troubleous ſeaſon Gordianus
the nephew of Gordian,
                  Balbinus. borne of his daughter, whoſe
father and grandfather, were famous Senatours, in hye reputation
of wyſedome and graue counſayle amonge the Romaynes,Gordianus.
beinge wel brought vppe of his father, choſen of the
Romaynes to ſuccede in this troubleous tyme, yt name was
welbeloued. This Gordian the ſeconde yeare of his gouernment,Miſitheus.
maryed the daughter of Miſitheus who was excelling
amonge the Romaynes, in rare wiſedome and learninge, by
eſtate & dignitye a Senator, the Empyre of Rome was with
all nobilitye ſtayed by the counſaile of Miſitheus, the Emperour
Gordian was ruled by him, of ſo great force is counſaile
and wiſedome to vpholde and ſtaye the Prince: all partes of

the common wealthe proſpered, where ſuch graue and wyſe
heades be in eſtimation, the Prince ruled by one good man,
geueth good example vnto other, howe manye wayes dothe
that kingdome proſper that is gouerned by wiſedome, but
ruine and diſſolution followeth many times for lacke of wiſedome
in maieſtrates and counſailers: in the gouernmente of
Gordian warres were proclaymed againſt the Perſians, at ye
ſame time ye fierce Thraſians were ſubdued,Sapor. 
                  Sapor alſo kinge
of Perſia was put to flight and drouen into Ciuillia, he recouered
many Citties and countryes loſt before tyme of tyrantes,
ſo great was the wyſedome of Miſitheus in the Emperours
affayres: as he was loued ſo he was dreaded, not onlye of the
Romaines, but of many other Nations, of ſuch value is worthy
counſaile, all thinges went luckelye wt him whileſt his father
in law Miſitheus liued, for at a ſodaine the former eſtate
declyned,The death of one wiſe coū
                     ſailer, is a plague to a whole realme 
                  Miſitheus beinge deade: Gordianus made greate
lamentacion and alſo the Romaynes, who depelye conſidered
the former ſtate and beutifull gouernment, wherein the Romayne
Empyre flouriſhed as longe as he liued. Howe ſone
was Gordian maymed? his great comfort gone from him?
the office and dignitye whiche Miſitheus enioyed,Philippe. 
                  Philippe.
was preferred vnto, who in the ende ſlue Gordian the Emperour.
As longe as Miſitheus liued, no treaſon was aſſayed
againſt Gordian, ſo it is ſeene manye times in kingdomes,
hee whom the Prince promoteth,Ambition. ſeeketh ſometime to be aboue
the Prince, and for a ſole regimente to ſlea his kinge.
               
                  Gordian was ſlaine by the traiterous ſouldiours of Philippe
in an vprore, Gordian was but xx. yeres of age when he dyed,
he gouerned but vi. yeares, hee was buried in the vttermoſte
ende of the Romayne Empyre, neare to the Perſian kingedome:
who had a monument erected vnto him, wt this ſuperſcription
written in Lattine, Perſian, Hebrewe and Egiptian
letters. Gordiani hoc poſteris monumentum relictum:
This monument of Gordian is lefte to the poſteritye.
               The kinge of Scottes was at this time called Altarchus a
wicked Prince.Altarchus king of Scottes. The kinge of Britayne was called Aſclepiodorus
who killed Alectus the Romayne, who manye yeares

with tyrannye ruled Britaine,Alectus. and ſlue at the ſame time Lucius
Gallus, and drowned him in Walbroke, (Walbroke being
a part of the Thames then at that time) in the ſeconde yere
of his gouernmente. The deadlye ennemye of Chriſtian
Religion was flouriſhinge at Rome Porphirius by
name,Porphirius. who cauſed great perſecutiō, this Porphirius
was a Philoſopher of great ſubtiltye &
knowledge in all artes, who made a notable
Booke of the Predicables commō
                  lye
red in all Vniuerſities in Greke,
manye other famous men there
were at that time.
            
            
               Philippus.
               
               
                  
                     PHilippus, of other called Marcus Iulius Philippus,
deſcendinge from a noble houſe, but of
verye poore parentes, for his father was amonge
theeues ye chiefe ringeleader and Captayne,
barbarous and fierce in his conditions,
brought vppe in bloudye practiſes and delightinge
therein, his ſonne who was this Emperour Philippus
for feates of armes, was aduaunced and fauoured of the Captaynes:
although he murthered Gordian: The men of warre
at the firſt choſe one Marcus to be Emperour who dyed within

fewe dayes after Marcus beinge deade, they choſe in his
place Seuerus Hoſtilius, then was preferred vnto that roume
Philippe which murthered Gordian, the Hiſtorye before declareth (Miſitheus beinge dead) that this Philip was placed
in his roume, thoughe by him a deteſtable facte was committed,
ſo to rewarde his Lorde and Emperour of whom he was
promoted: but that purpoſe & fact as in all other payeth home
with like recompence,Murther recompenſed 
                        〈◊〉
                      murther alwayes. euen bloud for bloude: Philippe murthered
Gordian, and Decius murthered Philippe, ſo bloudy
handes receiue meede of bloude. Some Hiſtories write that
this Philippe beinge made Emperour, in his gouernment of
all Emperours firſte profeſſed the Chriſtian faythe, and was
baptiſed with his wife and children, certaine Epiſtles of Origene
ſhewe that Origene wrote to this Emperour as concerninge
Chriſtian religion.Origene. Certaine it is that perſecution ceaſed
againſt the Chriſtians, and the Scriptures preached, and
the godlye were maintayned in his Dominion. The fourthe
yeare of his gouernment, was the yeare ſince the firſt foundation
of Rome by computacion of yeares a full thouſande, in
Rome at the ſame time great ſolemnitye and triumphe were
for the ſame, euen as Philippe ſought by vniuſt meanes to vſurpe
ouer his Lorde and maiſter, ſo nowe Decius ſeeketh a
bloudy purpoſe againſt Philippe:
                  I iuſt recompence. Thus Philippe raigninge
but fiue yeares was cruellye murthered of him, his heade beinge
clouen: his ſonne alſo was murthered beinge but .vii.
yeares of age.Cyptian. In the dayes of this Philippe was Ciprian ye
famous biſhoppe of Carthage, whoſe woorkes remayne of
great value: this is that Cipriane whom Gregory Nazeanzene
writeth of, ſhe winge what knowledge hee had in coniuration
of ſpirites, who amonge many practiſes of cōiuration,
coniured a ſpirit to winne to him ye loue of a mayde, that not
preuailinge, the foule ſpirite poſſeſſed Cipriane, as ye Hiſtory
telleth at large,The conuerſiō of Cyprian. who afterward conuerted to God, became a
true profeſſor of Chriſtian Religiō, a moſt famous Deuine,
and burned openlye his Magicall bookes deteſting the ſame.
               At this time Dioniſius was biſhoppe at Alexandria, and

alſo thoſe heretiques whiche denyed certaine Scriptures, &
reiected them as falſe Epiſtiles, were confounded by Origene.
Aſclepiodorus as yet gouerned Britaine. Fabian
was biſhoppe of Rome at that time.
            
            
               Decius.
               
                  
               
               
                  AFter the death of Marcus, and ſo of Seuerus
hoſtilius who raigned but a fewe
dayes Emperours, althoughe orderlye
they are not noted in the Chronicles after
Gordian: It is to be noted that Marcus
ſucceded Gordian, he raigned but a
fewe dayes, & no famous thinge of him
Chronicled, likewiſe Seuerus hoſtilius, and of him nothinge
worthye memorye recited, theſe by deathe ceaſinge, Decius
came by fauour to enioy the Empyre, (who as the Hiſtories
do note) murthered Philippe. This Decius was borne in
Pannonia bubalia,
                  Decius. who raigned but .ii. yeares, he was in armes
valiant, a great ennemye to God and againſt his ſincere
Religion,The vii. perſecution. for immediatlye in enteringe to that eſtate, he publiſhed
a terrible perſecution againſt Chriſtians, in what place
ſoeuer they mighte be founde oute, in that perſecution manye
learned and godly fathers were tormented,Fabian. 
                  Fabian biſhop of
Rome was martyred,Cornelius, 
                  Cornelius the other biſhoppe after Fabian
                  
martyred, and that in the profeſſion of Chriſte, at thoſe
dayes the great aucthority which the biſhoppe of Rome hath
ſence chalenged was not,The auctoritye of the byſhop of Rome for Fabian biſhoppe of Rome was
martired for the profeſſion of Chriſt, who to death ſubmitted
himſelfe to the aucthority of Decius. This is the greateſt preheminence
yt the Prelates in Chriſt can chalenge, not to fight
againſt Princes, no not againſt the crueliſt tyrauntes & moſt
terrible perſecutors, and as for the deſyre of highe and loftye
eſtate, it ought not to harbour in theyr breſtes, whō God hath
placed paſtours & feders of his congregation.Humilitye in the clergye. Chriſt in himſelfe
and to his Apoſtles gaue that example of this perfit humilitye
to contemne ſo highe a ſeate, for howe ſhoulde they
learne and teache others to deſpiſe the world, they moſt of all
ſtryuinge for honour,Pompe. for pompe and domination, who not as
followers of the flocke do liue, but as Gods in earthe, and rulers
ouer Princes.Prelates Princelye. The Chronicles ſhewe from all times ye
before thoſe Lordlye and Princelye reuenues came to Prelates,
greater was the care of Chriſte, and they of a more pure
Religion, but ſithens thoſe dayes theyr doctrine hath beene
but all in fancies and vaine conſtitutions made to ſearche out
golden mynes,Decius. and delicate wayes of lyuinge. If there were
a cruell Decius,
                  Nero. a Nero,
                  Iulian. a nother Iulian to ſcourge the true
preachers,Domitian. or a terrible Domitian, they muſt do as Fabian ye
biſhoppe of Rome did, to dye in the holye profeſſion of Chriſt,
as Peter and Paule did, Iames and Iohn, teachinge all prelates
to be Fabians, that is to feede, and ſuffer deathe for the
defence of Chriſtes flocke, and not as raueninge wolues to
deſtroye them. In many and ſundrye Citties, all kinde of tormentes
were inuented,Bloudye tyrauntes. to make the profeſſours of God to forſake
theyr Chriſtian Religion, diuers famous biſhops put to
deathe. As concerninge Decius, hee was xlviii. yeares
of age when he began to gouerne, he continued but .ii. yeares,
his ſonne called alſo Decius was made partaker in the Empyre
with him,Fraunce. the Frenche men made warres againſt Decius,
who were maruailouſlye diſcomfited of him, greate was
their ouerthrowe, theyr goodes confiſcated, theyr Citties and
Townes burned, then Decius departinge from them left diuers

garriſons, to keepe vnder the Frenche men, after that
by occaſion and neceſſitye offered, he was forced to make warres
on the Gothes, but the Gothes preuayled againſt him, the
cruelty alſo of Decius did alſo dyminiſh his power in the Romayne
iuriſdiction.Crueltie maketh a Prince weake. Thus Decius with his whole hoaſte
put to flight, but Decius in his flight paſſinge a ryuer of
Thracia in the ſame was drowned, his ſonne ſlaine
in the ſame battaile, all this time Aſclepiodorus
was kinge of Britaine, and Nathalac kinge
of the Scottes.
            
            
               Virius Gallus.
               
                  
               
               
                  AFter the ouerthrowe which the Romaynes
receyued of the Gothes, as many as
eſcaped, fledde vnto the place wher Gallus
was encamped, whom vppō a ſodaine
they created Emperour, who together
with his ſonne Boluſſenus continued in
gouernment xi. yeres the Romaine Empyre
was at this tyme in greate trouble,
not onlye with warres, but the like tyrannye that was in the
gouernment of Decius againſt the Goſpell,Tyrannye againſt the Goſpell. was executed of
Virius Gallus, no eſtate of parſō, ſexe or kinde was in ſafe cō
                  dition
from his tormenters, neyther did there wante parſons

meete to ſatiſfye the pleaſure, luſt, and appetite of ſo cruell a
tyraunte, Chriſtian Religion perſecuted, the Chriſtians fled,
thoſe that abode felte the tormentes of this tyraunt, all meanes
were inuented oute, to make this tyraunte poſſeſſor and
Lorde of innocentes goodes, they were moſt in price that inuented
delectacions & pleaſures for this Prince, and becauſe
God was not knowen amonge them, beaſtlye was theyr gouernment,Tyrannus.
miſerable theyr common wealthe, no care of true
Relition, but eche one gaped who might ambitiouſlye to the
higheſt roume aſpire: for manye at a ſodaine roſe to demaūde
the ſeate of Empyre, ſome by treaſon, other ſome wanted no
title, many by might would aduaunce themſelues to be moſte
mightye,Vſurpers. as Hoſtilianus perpenna was by the fauoure and
will of the Senatours choſen againſt Virius Gallus, for now
the cruelty of Virius Gallus was abhorred of the Romaynes,
ſo deteſtable is tyranny that neyther the fortreſſe, nor ſtronge
garriſons can vpholde the tyrauntes, nor manye frendes linked
in amitye,The eſtate of tyrantes. all hope in the ende fayleth them: Who ones
hath redde the eſtate of tyrantes to be quite? theyr ende not
miſerable? and dolefull to themſeues, & the condition of their
ſubiectes not enclyned vnto all wickednes? & many plagues
followe theyr gouernmente. In this vprore and tumulte Emilianus
by nighte, enterpriſed to take vppon him the eſtate
of the Emperour,Scithians. in Meſia the beggarly Scithians roſe mightely,
who brought a ſcourge to the Romaynes, for in paſſing
they ſpoyled many partes of the Romayne Empyre, who by
a ſecrete prouidence of God became moſt mightye, and made
other tributory vnto them, great was theyr cruelty, for in one
cittie called Adria they ſlue moſt cruelly of all ſortes of people
100000.Virius Gallus. 
                  Virius Gallus was but a cowardlye Prince who
ouermatched of ye 
                  Scithians, made great meanes to conclude
a peace, & conſented to paye them great tribute, theſe calamities
did not onlye ſcourge the Romaynes, but alſo a greate
peſtilence fell which infected all partes of thempyre whereby
they periſhed infinite nombers,Peſtilence. ſuche plagues followed the
perſecutions of Chriſtians, the ſame plague beganne in the
Citties of Ethiopia and Egipte, and continued tenne yeares.

As concerninge Emilianus vſurping: Virius Gallus and hys
ſonne leuied a great power againſte him: but in the battayle
they were both ſlaine, at this time roſe a greate controuerſye
in the churche betwene Ciprianus the greate learned father,Cyprianus.
and Cornelius a Biſhoppe,Cornelius. if heretikes returninge
into the faith might be baptiſed or no againe,
reaſons were alleged on bothe ſydes. As
yet Aſclepiodorus was kynge of Brittaine,
Nathalac king of the Scots,
and the biſhop of Rome was
Lucius, immediatly after
him was Stephan.
(⸫)
            
            
               Licinius Valerianus,
               
               
                  AFter the deathe of this Emperour, who
was ſlaine wt his ſonne in his enterpriſe
againſt Emilianus, who is not nombred
amongeſt ye Emperours, becauſe of his
ſhorte raigne, for hee was immediatlye
ſlaine of the ſouldiours. Licinius Valerianus
who was otherwiſe called Colobius
enioyed the Empyre,Colobius. of him the Hiſtoryes note diuerſly:
Some write that he was of witte dull, moſt ſimple in his doinge,
and farre vnmete for that office, as the Hiſtorye of Euteopius
and of Sextus Aurelius Victor affirmeth, but Trebellius
                  
affirmeth, that this Valerianus was a wyſe and valiante
Prince, a vertuous Emperour, thoughe on him fortune
frowned, no Prince amonge the Romaynes felte more miſerable
calamities thē he, neither the like thraldome, who ſone
out of a Princelye throne was throwne and made viler then a
ſlaue, as it is ſheewed at full afterwarde: This Emperour
Valerianus was alſo a perſecutour of the Chriſtians, like vnto
Decius in maners, and in beaſtlye lyuinge like to Domitian,
the Chriſtians liued in greate feare, beinge ſo longe time
ſcourged with theſe tyrantes,The viii. perſecution. but in the ende the tyrauntes
haue taſted of the like plagues, wherewith they ſcourged other.
Valerianus made his ſonne partaker in gouernment wt
him, and alſo Cornelius his nephewe. It is ſayde that Valerianus
came from a noble houſe: greate vprores and tumultes
were rayſed in diuers partes of his Dominiō. Religianꝰ
vſurped in Meſia, Caſſius Labienus Poſthumus in Fraunce,
Emilianus in Egipte and in Macidonia,
                  Vſurpers. 
                  Valens Aureolus vſurped
in Millane, all theſe mightye perſonages put in truſte
vnder this Emperour, ambitiouſlye ſought to place themſelues
in kingdomes, Meſapotamia was in this troublous
eſtate inuaded of the Parthians, Sapor then kinge ouer them,
who made fierce warre againſt the Romaynes, Valerianus ye
Emperour beinge in Perſia with the Romaynes, gaue alſo
the Parthians a battaile, but the battaile was diſhonourable
to the Romaynes, for the moſt part of them was ſlaine, and ye
Emperour made a captiue, who of longe time in vile bondage
with Sapor the kinge of Parthia,
                  Sapor. was made his foote ſtole or
treadinge blocke, ſo he continued a longe ſeaſon in miſerable
captiuitye with his ennemye,Crueltye. whom the Romaynes neuer aſſayed
to bringe home from bondage, ſo muche the hartes of
them abhorred him for his crueltye, neyther his owne ſonne
who was made partaker with him in gouernmente, neyther
Cornelius his nephewe beinge mightye amonge the Romaines,
in his captiuitye would redeeme him. The life of Galienus
was moſt beaſtly, exerciſinge the like crueltye as his father
Valerianus did, who thereby in the ende was abhorred,
this Galienus raigned xv. yeares,Galienus. vii. yeares with his father,

and viii. yeres alone. As concerninge Aurelius who vſurped
in theſe dayes, he enioyed for a ſeaſon, in Egipte, Emilianus
ſeeinge to vſurpe, was cutte of from his ambitious hope, by
Theodotus, manye other there were whiche vſurped, as in
Fraunce certaine Almaynes who by theyr enteringe ſpoyled
the Romayne Empyre, in Slauonia, Macrinus was choſen to
be theyr Emperour, but he proſpered not, for Aurelius in battaile
ſlewe him: thus manye miſcheues roſe one of another, &
all for kingdomes ſake, Greece, Pontus and Aſia were ruled
by the Scithians:
                  Scythians. Euen as the eſtates of gouernmente were
troublous, ſo alſo like conſtitutions of the ayre, according to
this gouernmente, in Aſia earthquakes, in Italye darcknes
of the ayre, cold filthye and ſtinckinge miſtes, a rottinge peſtilence
in many countryes, deſtroyinge man & beaſt, God foreſeinge
the decaye of the Romayne Empyre,Odenatus. rayſed Odenatus
who mightelye preuayled againſt the Parthians, and ouerthrew
many other coūtries, Galienus moued wt the valiaunt
ſucceſſe of Odenatus, proclaymed him to be his vicegerente &
chiefe deputye in the tytle of Auguſtus, in this Odenatus
name moneye was coyned.
               After manye fierce battailes and noble victoryes atchiued
and wonne to the Romaynes, Odenatus dyed beinge in the
affayers & warres of ye Romaynes, whoſe death they did not
without cauſe lamente, his ſonne a worthye captayne dyed wt
him:Zenobia. when Odenatus was thus deade, Zenobia his wyfe a
Ladye of great courage, and of maruailous pollecye ſucceaded:
This Zenobia with two of her ſonnes (againſt the will
of Gallienus Emperour of Rome) toke on her the gouernment
of the Eaſt, and was called Empreſſe, the like vertues
raigned in Zenobia, that did in her huſband Odenatus: but
Gallienus the Emperour of Rome (accordinge to the vſuall
maner of his gouernmente) gaue himſelfe to all beaſtlynes,
whoſe life decayed much the Romayne Empyre, at this time
the great heretike Paulus Samoſatenus was,Samoſatenus whoſe hereſye
was haynous, That is, that Chriſte was not before our Ladye,
and was but a man: his hereſye was condemned by a generall
counſaile, Samoſatenus an heretike was excommuni-

then Aurelius began to vſurpe ouer the Romaynes, and to be
their Emperour & to diſplace Gallienus: Armyes were prepared
on both parties, and deadly conflictes fought betwene
them, in the ende Gallienus the tyrante was murthered with
his brother neare to Millane, Aurelius not longe endured
after the death of Gallienus,
                  The death of a tyrante. but hee ambitiouſlye
inuadinge, was with death rewarded at the handes
of Claudius, who next ſucceded this Aurelianns
who vſurped many yeares in Pannonia.
               
            
            
               Claudius, the ſeconde of that name,
               
               
                  
                     CLaudius raigned .ii. yeres, this Claudius by
ſome Hiſtoryes, is thought to be the ſonne of
Gordian, his mothers name was Liciſta.
               
               This Claudius ſubdued Aurelius, and alſo
diſcomfited him:Claudius. by this valiant Claudius ye
terrible hoaſt of ye 
                  Scithians and Gothes was
diſcomfited, which was in nomber 3200000. fightinge mē,
and diuers other Nations he ouercame, ſome write that hee
raigned but one yeare, he deſerueth immortall commendations
for his worthines, in yt he reduced the Romayne Empyre
to ſo fortunate eſtate, from the crueltye of tyrantes, from the
ſpoile of forrayne Princes and aliantes.
            
            
               
               Quintilius.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     CLaudius dyinge with honour and greate glorye
vnto the Romaynes. Quintilius his brother
a noble yonge gentlemanne ſucceaded,
who raigned but xvii. dayes, a barbarous,
cruell, and bloudye ſouldiour, murthered
him at Aquileia, not contented with the vprighte
and iuſte dealinge of this Prince, who endeuoured to
conuerte vnto vertue, the diſſolute lyfe of the ſouldiours.
            
            
               Aurelianus,
               
               
                  
                     AVrelianus ſucceded Quintilius, this Aurelianus
was of lowe byrthe deſcended,
his father was an huſbandman, hee gouerned
fiue yeares, his nobilitye of actes
aduaunced him and for his valiante prowes
and experience he was made Emperour,
ye Chronicles do ſhewe that he was

a vertuous gouernour, of whom vice was corrected, in all
partes, with all men it was bruted that the Emperour was a
good Phiſition, but that his medicines were to ſharpe & bitter,
the worthy ſucceſſe that followed him, made him not vnlike
to Alexander the great, or to the valiante Iulius Caeſar,
for the Cittie of Rome was ſaued by his wyſedome, pollitike
practiſe and valiantnes, from vtter deſtruction beinge thriſe
beſieged, the Hiſtoryes recite at large, in howe manye & ſundrye
places hee triumphet ouer his ennemyes, diuers alſo vſurped
who by his wyſedome were repreſſed.
               This Aurelianus was the firſt Emperour yt wore crowne
Emperiall, clothinge of golde and pearle, which ornamentes
were as then ſtraunge to the Romaynes. In Thracia and
Illiria he ſubdued the Gothes, & the kinge of Bithinia was cō
                  quered
of him. Aurelianus was a vertuous Prince, and enlarged
the Cittie of Rome, and made it ſtronge with walles:
Rome at thoſe dayes was 50. miles in compaſſe, this Aurelianus
did firſt ordaine amonge the Romaynes, the eatinge of
ſwynes fleſhe.The ix. perſecution of ye Chriſtians. This Emperour not fauouringe true Religion
perſecuted the Chriſtians, but in the ende by
meanes of his ſecretarye hee was murthered, betwene
Heraclea and Conſtantinople, after his
death by the ſpace of viii. monethes there was
no Emperour choſen. Euſebius a famous
biſhoppe in Laodicia flouriſhed in the
time of this Emperour, whoſe learned
workes remayne at theſe
dayes in great price.
            
            
               
               Tacitus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     TAcitus was made Emperour after Aurelianus,
Tacitus was endued with all
humanitye, who gouerned but v. monethes,
and alſo Florianus his brother gouerned
two monethes, ſome Hiſtoryes
note ye 
                  Tacitus dyed of an ague at Tharſis,
other do write that hee and his brother
was murthered of theyr ſouldiours, the one at Pontus,
the other at Tharſus. Victor affirmeth that Florianus dyed
by cuttinge his owne vaynes.
            
            
               Probus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     PRobus a Gardeners ſonne was borne in Dalmatia,
his gouernment was verye ſhort, in his
dayes Saturnianus vſurped in Egipt, & Proculus
and Bonoſus in Fraunce and Germany,
but they were ſubdued, the prayſe of Probus
is in highe commendation, in that his godly gouernment did
aſtabliſhe ye Romaine Empyre in ſo great quietnes, ye 
                  Sarmathians
                  
(now called Muſcouites and Poles, in which name are
contayned many other people alſo whiche rebelled) but they
were maruailouſlye ſcourged of hym, hee ſlue of the Germaynes
in theyr Commotions. 400000. The Pollonians
were ſubdued by him, he ouercame the Gothes in many notable
battayles, hee reſtored to the Romayne Empyre, diuers
Regions and ſondrye countryes, whiche were vnder the gouernment
of tyrantes, the care of Probus was great to bring
glory to the Romaynes, for by the induſtrious trauaile of his
men of warre, he cauſed the great hill neare to Smirnato to
be planted with vynes, ſome do write that the great ſeruitude
wherewith hee oppreſſed the Romaynes was the cauſe of his
death, this was his vſuall ſayinge to them: Souldiours muſt
not ſpende victuels, excepte they labour to profite the commō
wealthe, this was alſo his ſayinge. Quid opus eſt militibus
cum deſint hoſtes?
                  Souldiours oughte alwaies to be maintayned. What neede is there of men of warre
when there lacked ennemyes? Which ſayinge beinge vnderſtode
of the ſouldiours & men of warre, it cauſed them to hate
him, and to conſpire his deathe: For the Emperour hauinge
reduced all his Empyre into a maruaylous quietnes & peaceable
eſtate, marched towardes the Perſians, and Parthians,
mindinge to ſubdue and chaſtiſe thoſe proude ennemyes of the
Romaynes, but his ſouldiours ſlewe him by the waye, when
he had gouerned the Empyre vi. yeares and .iiii. monethes.
Suche is the force of ſuche as be barbarous ſouldiours, who
beinge trayned vp in bloudſhedinge, do alwayes thirſte after
the ſame, hauinge no regarde of any eſtate, neyther obeye the
wiſe captayne nor Prince: Of this minde Scipio was, when
he woulde not haue Carthage to be deſtroyed of Romaines,
ſayinge: It was a thinge very neceſſary that the Romaynes
ſhold haue ſuch an enemy as Carthage was,A forrayne ennemye. wherby ye people
of Rome might for feare of ſuch a forraine enemye, be moued
to all prowes & excellency, wheras otherwiſe ciuill warres
at home woulde bringe them to vtter deſtruction: Through
peace, both pollicy and feates of armes, woulde be to ſeeke
in Captaynes, and the ſouldiours maymed from al dexterity
excepte they haue an ennemye abrode whō they maye feare.
            
            
               
               Carus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     CArus was borne at Narbona, he raigned but ii.
yeares, who immediatlye made his ſonnes Carinus
and Numerianus Caeſars with him, hee
continued the like enterpryſe that Probus did
againſt the Perſians, Carus not contente with
his proſperous eſtate, but ſtill ambitouſly minded,Ambition.
proceeded in larginge the Romayne Empyre, wyth the
calamities and myſeries of other Princes, but ſodainly in his
enterpriſe, he was from Heauen ſtriken with lightninge and
thunder at Pteſiphon & thereof dyed, Numerianus his ſonne
bewailed the lamentable death of his father, in ſuch extreme
ſorte, that his eyes became ſo ſore as he was not able to abide
the light, but was caryed in a Waggen, and after murthered
of Aper his father in lawe, which murther came to light in
the dayes of Diocleſian the Emperoure followinge,Murther recompe
                        •••
                     d wt murther. for the
which Aper was put to death. As concerninge Carinus who
was made partaker in the affayres of the Empyre with his
brother: This Carinus was polluted with all filthines of
life, he put to death the good and godly Senators by crimes
forged: by his beaſtly and corruptible meanes, diuers chaſte
Matrones and manye an honourable Ladye was rauiſhed,
this beaſtlye perſon was ſo outragious and wicked in gouerninge
in Fraunce (when he hearde of his fathers deathe) hee
expelled all wyſe and graue counſayl
                     •
                  urs from him, lyuinge
moſt wickedly in all kinde of vices, but his miſchieuous life,
caught a miſchieuous ende, for after his longe cruel, &
beaſtlye

life, euen of the Romaynes he was deteſted and ſlaine in a
battaile of Diocleſian, who after ſucceded in ye Empyre: ſuch
is the ende of tyrantes and beaſtly liuers, whom God ſodainlye
ſtriketh,The ſundrye deathes which happened vnto diuers Emperours. as an example of his wrathe and heauye diſpleaſure
conceyued agaynſt them. For in all the Chronicles
whiche haue beene redde, of kinges and Princes, there haue
not beene mentioned the like ſortes of deathe, as happened
vnto Romayne Emperours, for it is certaine that there is no
kinde of ſtraunge deathe, but it hath happened vnto one of
them: For Carus was ſlaine by thunder, Valens burned in ye
fiere as hereafter you ſhall heare, Bonoſus who vſurped in ye
time of the Emperour Probus, was hanged: Heliogabalus
was rente in peeces: ſome were poyſoned, as Tiberius and
Druſus: Valerianus kept in priſon, dyed there as a moſt miſerable
and vile ſlaue: Quintilius and Florianus, dyed by inciſiō
of veynes: Decius drowned himſelfe: Iulius Caeſar was murthered
in the Senate houſe: Commodus was ſtrangled to
death, amongeſt which vnfortunate nomber of Emperours,
maye alſo theſe two ſonnes of Carus, Carinus and Numerianus
(who were called Caeſars as longe as they liued) be nombred.
In ſuch ſort yt hauing deſcribed but ye liues of xl. Emperours,
it may appeare how doubtfull is the eſtate of Princes,
& what calamities followeth them, if God frowne
on them: God reſpecteth no parſon, the ſecrete counſayle
of God, ſeeth onlye the cauſe and ende.
The ſequele of oure Hiſtorye, ſhall ſhewe vnto
you the endes of other Emperours, no leſſe
ſtraunge and fearefull, then thoſe
which alreadye you haue
hearde of.
            
            
               
               Diocleſianus.
               
               
                  
                     DIocleſian was a Dalmatian borne, ſome
tyme in eſtate a bondeman, but hee was
made free by Emilianus a Senator, his
mothers name was Dioclea, & the towne
wherein he was borne is called alſo Dioclea,
whereby he was called Diocles vntill
ſuch time as he came to be Emperor,
theu this name Diocleſian was geeuen vnto him, bee continued
in gouernmente .25. yeares, hee was before his creation,
a Notarie. This Diocleſian was by nature wittye,
quicke, ſubtill in his gouernment, cruell, and a great ennemy
to Chriſtian Religion,The .x. perſecution of the Chriſtians. and becauſe the boundes and Dominions
of the Romayne Empyre, were large hee made diuers
partakers with him in the Empyre: In the 3. yeare of his gouernment,
Diocleſian ſente into this our Ilande, a Duke of
Rome called Conſtantius▪
                  
                  Conſtantius. for certaine tribute due to ye Romaynes
ſence the deathe of Alectus, who beinge a Romayne
ruled this lande,Alectus. and was killed in a battayle not farre from
London, by the handes of Aſclepiodorus (who as I ſhewed
before) after him ruled this lande. At the ſame time as this
tribute was demaunded, Coilſucceding Aſclepiodorus who
was king of this land, this Coil was ſometime Duke of Colcheſter,
                  Coſt Duke of Colceſter.
but then dyed at the comminge of Conſtantius, whē
he had gouerned this lande xxvii. yeares, but of him in Hiſtoryes
no notable thinge, or any worthy factes remayne Chronicled,
but this onlye, which is worthye to be remembred the

great fauoure which he bore to learninge, alſo his daughter
Helena a Princeſſe of great worthines by him broughte vp
in learninge to all excellencye, a Ladye of greate beautye:
This Helena (Coil her father beinge deade) was choſen to
gouerne this land,Helena. the Britaynes beinge in troubleous eſtate
with the Romaynes, cauſed Helena their Queene to marrye
with Conſtantius a Duke of Rome, to make quietnes with
the Romaynes: the mariage was concluded by a common cō
                  ſente
of the Britaynes, for an vniuerſall peace and quietnes.
This Princelye marryage ſolemniſed, peace & quietnes ſettled,
Conſtantius returned to Rome with the tribute and his
wife Helena.
                  Conſtantius. 
                  Conſtātius was made gouernour of this land,
his receyuinge at Rome was with great triumphe, and Helena
accordinge to the eſtate of a Queene entertayned. Her
wiſedome, learninge and Princely maieſtye, was in admiration
with the Romaynes, her knowledge in many languages
right commendable, her outward Princely geſture, within ye
Princely body ſhewed to be repoſed ſecret & maruailous vertues.
Thus was the troubleous eſtate of Britanye quieted,
by a maryage lincked with the Romaynes, the Romaynes
alſo reioyced of their tribute & iuriſdiction wonne of the Britaynes: But as no eſtate can alwayes be ſettled in quietnes &
ſecuritye, & as no glorye is ſtedfaſte, ſo nowe in the middeſt of
this ioyfull eſtate wherein the Romaynes thought themſelues,
Carauſus vſurped to be Emperour in Fraunce, Achilles
in Egipte, and Iulius in Italye vnder the eyes of Diocleſian
vſurped:Vſurpers. But ſee wherevnto the ambition came of thoſe,
who without righte or title, clayme Princelye ſeate, all theſe
at the laſte came to a myſerable ende.Iulius. 
                  Iulius who vſurped in
Italye killed himſelfe, & the other caught like ende: through
theſe Commotions and bloudy vprores, Diocleſian was enforced
to aſſociate manye partakers in the Empyre with him,
Galerius was made chiefe gouernour in the Eaſte, Conſtantius
yt maryed Quene Helena of Britayne chiefe preſidente,
and in Fraunce Carauſus there vſurped: By this order taken
nowe againe, all thinges began to proſper with Diocleſian,
                  Diocleſian.
and in the warres all victoryes fell on his ſide, his ennemyes

came to nought, the name of the Romaynes was in his
olde auncient ſtrength and glorye: But what is it, a Prince
bleſſed of God by the good ſucceſſe that floweth to him in landes
and people, when by pride he falleth from God? Diocleſian
in pride puffed, commaunded himſelfe to be called a
God, and ſometime brother to the Sonne and the Moone, by
cōmaundemēt he was kiſſed,Pride. as many Popes haue ſince thoſe
dayes compelled kinges to kiſſe theyr feete, they paſſe to be
brothers to ye Sonne and Moone, beinge the chiefe and moſte
Lordlieſt vicars, moſte pontificall, and moſte vaine gloriouſe
Prelates vnder Chriſte:Popes. If Diocleſian had liued in a proude
Popes dayes, where had his title beene, of beinge brother to
the Sunne or Moone? ſurely his necke ſhould haue bene bended
to ſmacke at a Popes foote, and bene content to geue ſubmiſſion
to theyr proude & blaſphemouſe ſayinges: Et mihi &
petro.
                  Pride. They alſo in title of ſanctitie, wilbe aboue Chriſte,
not as Chriſt ſanctus, but ſanctiſſimus: The Apoſtles
woulde not proſtrate be worſhipped, neyther the Angell of
Iohn, as in the Apocalipes, but the Popes muſte, wherein
they ſhewe themſelues not followers of the Apoſtles, but rather
ſucceſſours of Diocleſian and Domitian in pride and tyranny.
Their apoſtolicke vſage of Frederike the Emperour,
& of Henry ye ſecond Emperour, ſhew whoſe vicars they are:
they immitate Sapor the Parthian kinge in abuſinge Emperours:
For the Pope dyninge or banqueting, the Emperour
Fredericke was tyed in chaynes at his feete, that was his bā
                  quet.The pride of of Popes.
Henry the ſecond waytinge the Popes abſolution, was
enforced with his wife and childe barefoote to do penaunce
certaine dayes. If vertue had bene the ſcope & marke wherat
the Prelates did ſhoote, theyr humilitye would haue ſheewed
them in humility otherwyſe affected,Humilitye. not commaunding
Princes, but obeyinge to death tyrantes for the Goſpels ſake,
which trulye is profeſſed in obedience, in holy title, in perfect
humility, and not in a glitteringe Crowne, ſworde, armour,
fiere & faggote, & contente to let theyr doctrine abide the triall,The life of prelates.
theyr bodyes at the will and commaundemente of tyrantes,
and theyr minde inuincible to deathe in a good cauſe:
               
                  
                  Quia non mors ſed cauſa facit martyrem: For it is not death
but the cauſe yt maketh a martyre.The obedience of Chriſtians. The obedience of Chriſtians
amaſeth tyrantes, ouerthroweth theyr power, and bringeth
plagues on them and theyr people, and for a iuſte triall
note the ende of all tyrantes, euen from the beginninge, who
not conuerted, dye moſt miſerable.
               As concerninge Diocleſian who forgot God in his glorye
and fell moſt beaſtly, was become a moſt terrible perſecuter
of Chriſtians, his perſecution continued .x. yeares, hee ouerthrewe
Churches of the Chriſtians,A terrible perſecution. hee gaue commaundement
that the holye bookes of Scripture ſhoulde be burned,
Images to be worſhipped, by him all meanes were ſoughte
to ouerthrowe Chriſtian Religion, as by tyrannye, by promiſes,
by promotions, and by promoters, but to paſſe ouer the
longe perſecution wherewith the Chriſtians were tormented,
at the length Diocleſian filled with the bloud of Chriſtians,
gaue ouer his gouernmente into the handes of Galerius
and Conſtantius.
                  Galerius. 
                  Galerius was alſo a perſecutor, and as a
raueninge wolfe ſought out his praye, and did thriſte after the
bloude of Chriſtes profeſſors: Galerius alſo at the length filled
with his bloudye perſecutions, gaue ouer to perſecute,
but hee was firſte plagued of God,The death of a perſecutour and by greate affliction,
enforced to reuoke his terrible perſecutions and proclamations:
his filthye beaſtlye life made him to 
                     •
                  tincke aboue the
earth, who not able to abide his owne ſtincke killed himſelfe.
               
                  Galerius beinge dead another perſecutor roſe to plague the
Churche of God, who alſo dyed moſt miſerable: all theſe perſecutors
beinge thus deade, the gouernmente conſiſted in the
handes of Conſtantius & Licinius:
                  Conſtantius. This was that Conſtantius
that marryed Helena Queene of England & the daughter
of kinge Coil, of this Conſtantius and Queene Helena,
was Conſtantine the great, I wil orderly entreate of Maximianus,
of Galerius Armentarius, of Maxentius & of their
deathes, becauſe they were as partakers with Diocleſian in
his Empyre: The gouernment was together, but to auoyde
confuſion, I haue placed them as Emperours ſeperatlye.

                  Diocleſian beinge at Salna for feare, murthered himſelfe,
and dyed without iſſue. Immediatlye after whoſe death alſo
dyed Conſtantius the father of Conſtantine the great.
            
            
               Maximianus.
               
               
                  
                     MAximianus ſurnamed Herculius being
beſieged of Conſtantinus at Maſilia a
countrye in Affricke, and at the laſte taken
priſoner, was ſore puniſhed and in ye
ende hanged,Galerius. 
                  Galerius was murthered,
(but as ſome write) hee ſlewe himſelfe:
Maxentius while hee waged battaile againſt
Conſtantius,
                  Maxentius. ſomewhat aboue a
bridge which hee had made, makinge haſte to take ſhippe at a
hauen, & ſo to enter on the other ſyde, by the faule of his horſe
was drowned in the deepe, his bodye with muche difficultye
founde beinge ſoncke into the mudde with the waighte of his
harneys:Maximinus, 
                  Maximinus dyed at Tharſis by ſickenes, Valens. Valens
was murthered of Licinius, and Licinius
                  Licinius. afterward of Conſtantinus:
Suche lamentable ende, fell to theſe ambitious
Princes, ſeekinge by all meanes to themſelues regimente, &
preheminence of Dominion,Vſurpers. but kingdomes will not beare
perticipation or fellowſhippe, ſo that it is a matter of impoſſibilitye,
and neuer ſeene in any eſtate of kingdome, that vnity

or concord hath taken rote in ye hartes of many gouernours,
but that after theyr fayned frendſhippe and concord, murther
of people, waſte, ſpoyle and deſolation of the countrye, with a
lamentable and dolefull ende hath enſued to them.
               This Maximianus was a man of nature fierce,Maximianus. raginge in
all luſt, a very foole in matter of counſaile, of low byrth,
and by countrye a Hungarian, for at theſe dayes not
farre frō 
                  Sirmius the place is to be ſeene, a Princelye
houſe there builded, where his parentes before
did liue, by theyr handye crafte: He dyed
when he was lx. yeares olde, he was Emperour
twentye yeares.
            
            
               Galerius Armentarius
               
                  
               
               
                  THis Emperour Galerius was very worthye
of cōmendation althoughe his equitye
and vpright life, was without ciuilitye,
rude and homelye accordinge to his
education, hee was beutifull in complexion,
of bodye fayre, for vertuous
gouernmente luckye and fortunate, his
parentes were of byrth bace, liuinge by kepinge of cattell, for
he was ſo brought vppe. And becauſe this Emperour Gallerius
was ſometime a keper of beaſtes, therfore his ſyrname

was Armentarius, ſo the prouidence of God diſpoſeth times
and ſeaſons,Armentarius. placinge in ye throne & maieſtye of kinges, bondmen,
and ſheepeheardes ſonnes, to beare in the worlde ſwaye
and Dominion, thereby ſhewinge his will and omnipotente
might, ſo to aduaunce rude & homely men aboue the mightye
eſtates & peares of the Realmes ſomtime:The ſecrete counſaale of God. In time & ſeaſons
extollinge and puttinge downe mighty kingdomes, ſhewinge
thereby alſo no kingdome or eſtate of gouernment, to be fixed
or ſtabliſhed to any one man, but as his prouidence. ſeeth time
and cauſe alteringe the eſtate and forme of common wealthes:
What kingdome hath ſo proſpered that hath not ſeene
a chaunge or alteration, & felte at the laſt ſubuertion of theyr
eſtate? what lyne or progenye of kinges hath helde Scepter
of ſo longe time, but that in the ende it hath lefte the ſucceſſion
out of theyr titles, and geuen the regemente to an vnknowen
parſonne, baſe and meane in compariſon? This Emperour
was borne in Hungarye, which lyeth towardes
the hilles neare to Arcadia, which place was called
Romulianū
                   by his mother name Romulia. This
Galerius would cracke proudly, that in his conception
his mothers did dreame that ſhe conceyued
him beinge begat of a Dragon:
as Olympias the mother of Alexander
the great did dreame of
his byrthe.
            
            
               
               Galerius Maximinus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     GAlerius Maximinus was borne of the ſiſter
of Galerius Armentarius who was
Emperour before, this Emperour was
called Daza by his true name: before he
was created Emperour, hee was Caeſar
for the ſpace of .iiii. yeres, and afterward
in all the Eaſt parte for .iii. yeares raigned
Auguſtus: he was broughte vp: as a ſhepeheards ſonne,
his father was a ſheepehearde, beinge aduaunced to the Empyre,
he became a great fauourer of learned men, and ſuch as
were wyſe, it is a token of a flouriſhinge and happye eſtate of
kingdome where learning is in price,The floriſhīg eſtate of a kingdome. eſtimation and honour,
who ſo careth not in his time to plant learninge, and geeueth
not honour reward and maintenaunce to further the ſtudientes
thereof, ſheweth himſelfe to be depriued of all lerninge &
vnderſtandinge: For honour onlye and rewards nouriſhe artes,
and plante wiſedome, withoute the which two, the kingdome
would be beaſtlye, without order, lawe and diſcipline:
and in that he gaue ſuch honour to learning, he loued and tendered
the wiſe, for theſe two in one knit and conſociate, for a
kingdome flowinge and aboundinge, with famous & learned
men,Wyſedome. muſte of neceſſitye be vpholden by wiſedome: What
Prince therefore fauoureth learninge, cannot but tender and
loue wiſe, ſage & diſcrete perſonnes. He was of nature quiet,
an immoderate drinker of wyne, and becauſe with exceſſe of
wyne beinge ſometime droncke, he did beaſtly gouerne, ſeing

at the laſt his owne fault, he enforced himſelfe to repentance,
and what affayres or buſynes of the Empyre came to his handes
beinge in that caſe, he would differre them till he was ſober,
or vnto the next morninge.
            
         
         
            The ſeconde parte of the lyues
of the Emperours.
            
               Constantine the great.
               
               
                  
                     COnſtantine the greate, was ſonne to Conſtantius
a Duke of Rome & Helena a queene
of Britayne, her father was Coil kinge of
Britaine, & ſometime a Duke of Colcheſter.
Conſtantius was Emperour of Rome, but
hee dyed in Britaine in the Cittie of Yorke,
who gouerned the Iſland, and other partes of his prouinces
wt ſuch wiſedome and pollicye,Conſtantius. yt in all the time of his raigne,
there was neuer moued againſte him anye rebellion. This
Conſtantius father of Cōſtantine, after longe ſickenes dyed
of a feuer: at whoſe death the nobles and Princes that were

preſent, toke counſayle to bringe the whole gouernment of ye
Realme to his ſonnes handes:Crocus. 
                  Crocus kinge of the Almaynes,
came with him into Britaine to further him to the kingdome,
wherein he ſo muche preuayled, that his father beinge
deade, and all Princely ſolemnitye in his funerall ended, the
Britaynes enioyed Conſtantine theyr kinge, who was Emperour
of Rome afterwards, and did great thinges in the aduauncement
of the Romayne Empyre, whoſe great glorye &
worthynes of actes, titled him Conſtantine the great, which
name roſe by the great ſucceſſe that fell to him in the conqueringe
of kingdomes,Conſtantine the great. and ſubduinge of Nations. At ſuche
time as Conſtantine the great, was both kinge of this oure
Iſlande, and alſo Emperour of Rome, hee ioyned with him
as partaker of his gouernment Licinius,
                  Licinius. ſo greate loue was
betweene Conſtantine and Licinius, that he did not only authoryſe
him with equalitye in gouernment, but alſo Conſtā
                     tine
maryed his ſiſter Conſtantia at Millane. But in all
this greate amitye and fellowſhippe, yea thoughe a marriage
was linked to make the ſtronger bandes of amitye, loue
and ſtrengthe in kingdomes, yet at a ſodaine, cruell hatred,
warre and diſcention, ſpredde on eche ſyde the banners, & no
ende made till Conſtantine was a ſole gouernour, and Licinius
ſlaine, this amitie of Princes is not ſo ſtronge lincked,
but as ambition kindled, ſo the ſame breaketh the knot, and
maketh the hate to be more deadlye and cruell: For Princes
are moſt deluded by ſuche lincked marryages. At this preſente
the gouernment of the Empyre conſiſted in the hands of
Conſtantine & Licinius,
                  Licinius. 
                  Conſtantine ruled all Aſia at that
time, who beinge moſt godlye minded, reuoked from baniſhment
the Chriſtians, and ceaſed the perſecution continued of
manye tyrantes: But Licinius who was partaker with him
in the gouernment of the Empyre, begā a moſt haynous perſecution,
becauſe hee ſawe Conſtantine more beloued of the
Chriſtians then he was, and ſayd the Chriſtians prayed more
for the life and good ſucceſſe of Conſtantine then for him: immediatlye
great contention roſe, betweene Conſtantine and
Licinius at Ryball neare to a fenne called Hiulca: in the

night ſeaſon, Conſtantine did breake into the tente of Licinius,
but Licinius fledde to the Cittie Bizanze, & made Martianus
maſter of the requeſtes Caeſar: But Conſtantine prenaylinge
in warre agaiſt Licinius, forced him to flye into Bythinia,
wherevppon a condition to ſaue his life, hee conſented
to geeue vnto Conſtantine his Princelye robe by his wyues
handes: from Bithinia he was ſente to Theſlalonia, not manye
dayes after Conſtantine commaunded Licinius & Martianus
(whom I ſpake of before) to be murthered:Licinius. 
                  Licinius
gouerned xiiii. yeares,Martianus. he dyed neare xl. yeares of age, in couetouſnes
he was moſt beaſtlye of all men, in adulterous luſtes
ſpotted excedinglye, of nature bitter and roughe, nothinge
paciente,The ignorāce of Licinius. a deteſtable ennemy to all artes and learninge, who
wrapped in moſt ignorance, called learning Virus & peſtem
publicam: But eſpeciallye with thoſe execrable names hee
titled the pleadinge of iudiciall cauſes, a rare thinge to ſee in
beaſtly parſonnes learning loued, maintayned or aduaunced,
though ſometime learninge hath beene maruaylonſly extolled
of the ignoraunt, as well as of the moſt glorious.Iuſtinian. 
                  Iuſtinian
Emperoure of Rome, whoſe actes and carefull ſtudye for
the maintenance of a good common weale, the mightye volumes
of the ciuile lawes recordeth.Galerius. 
                  Galerius Armentarius,
did both fauour and loue learninge beinge vnlearned: This
one thinge in Licinius in deſpiſinge learning, was according
to his bringinge vppe, he was in all reſpectes to huſbandmen
verye profitable, and gracious: to the warriour in all order &
ceremonyes to chiualrye appertayninge, a ſeuere arbitrator,
he was a ſcourge to the Enuches, and laſciuious Courtiars,
he called them the moathes and rattes of Princes Courtes.The rattes & moathes of princes courtes.
               
               Some Hiſtoryes note that Licinius was murthered of his
owne men of warre, (who beinge dead) the ſole gouernment
of the Romayne Empyre was fullye ſettled in the handes of
Conſtantine, fortunate ſucceſſe of victorye fell on euerye ſyde
to him, enemyes preuayled not that diſplayed banner againſt
him, fortune almoſt in all thinges was a companion to Conſtantine,
but that a wicked wyfe was a great plague to him,
whoſe name was Fauſta:
                  Fauſta. by whoſe bitter parſwatiō and execrable

requeſt, he commaunded his ſonne Criſpus a baſtard,
borne of his concubine Mineruina to be murthered:Bloudye practiſes requited. but her
blinde practiſes wroughte her a cruell ende. for her forged accuſation,
for the truth beinge knowen vnto Conſtantine, ſhe
was cauſed by him to be caſt into a hoate bathe, and ſo ſlayne:
Helena his mother did muche reproue him,Helena. for his crueltye
againſt his baſtarde ſonne Criſpus, whō ſhee loued entierlye.
This faulte remayned in Conſtantine, hee was enflamed wt
the ſelfe loue of himſelfe, and deſirous of commendation and
vaine glorye: Conſtantine beinge a vertuous Prince, called
an aſſemblye and counſayle of moſt graue & learned biſhops
to a generall counſayle, at the Cittie of Nyce, in the whiche
Cittie and moſt godly aſſemble,Counſaile at Nyce. 
                  Conſtantine the Emperour
in his owne parſonne was preſente, and 318. biſhoppes, they
all conſulted againſt Arrius the great heretike, they excommunicated
him and baniſhed him with ſixe other biſhoppes.
               In this aſſemblye maryages began to be odious amonge ye
Clergye,Mariages in prieſtes. in ſo much that ſome of them would haue ſuch prieſtes
as were marryed alreadye, not to companye anye more
with theyr wiues, many to the contrarye wythſtode it, but eſpeciallye
a vertuous & learned father withſtode yt demaunde
mightelye, ſayinge that the lettes and prohibition of prieſtes
marriages, would worke great whoredome, & all filthye abhomination
in ye clergye. This was ye firſt time wherein prieſtes
began to be prohibited of marriages, where the auncient
eſtate of the Church alwayes allowed marryages as a thing
in all eſtates honourable,Prohibition of mariage. and the beddes of holye wedlocke
to remayne vndefiled. Since thoſe dayes that filthye opinion
with fayned hypocriſye, in all Regions vnder the Popes iuriſdiction
hath preuailed, the perfite life in chaſtitye, the holy
conuerſatiō therof hath not ſo much bene regarded in ye ſight
of the world, as a fantaſticall ſole life of prieſtes, bearinge an
outward ſhew of holynes, but ye great abhominatiō yt flowed
from thoſe chaſte Prelates, the Sodomitical actes, the murtheringe
of infantes in their holy ſelles cōmitted, theyr ouerthrowinge
of the chaſt conuerſation of vertuous Matrones, ye
defēce of Stewiſhe houſes, which harboured their ſecrete abhominations

for theyr ſole chaſte recreation, haue in all ages
bene Chronicled. A whore as a moſt holy Pope, ſtauled in ye
high Princely dignity, & in theyr ſolemne proceſſion deliuered
of a childe,Pope Ioane. Pope Ioane by name: this whoriſh woman is become
a mytred Pope, ſhe ſheweth in her whoriſhe body ye Romaynes
chaſtity, frō time to time the actes of Popes with other
like, in moſt learned Hiſtories are recorded. But as concerninge
the defence of Prieſtes marriages, Theophilacte
in this wiſe ſpeaketh of yt texte of Mathew, where Chriſt cō
                  minge
to Peters wyfes mother, whom being ſicke of an ague
hee healed. Thus Theophilact ſayth: the Prince of the Apoſtles
had a wyfe, neyther doth mariage let from vertue. In
the xxi. yeare of the gouernment of this greate Conſtantine,
he made a great ſolemne triumphe with Princelye banquettes,
in the whiche the ſinode of thoſe biſhoppes that were at ye
counſaile. 318. were preſente. God bleſſed Conſtantine
mightelye in his doinges, both in the quiet eſtate at home &
alſo in externall affayres whiche he toke in hande againſt his
ennemyes:Conſtantine baptiſed. 
                  Conſtantine embraſinge Chriſtian Religion,
was baptized of Euſebius biſhop of Nicomedia, in the which
Cittie he dyed, but his body was buryed at Conſtantinoble.
               
               As concerninge the hereſye of Arrius,
                  Arrius. it grue mightelye
and manye fauoured it, but ſodainlye God plagued him, who
before the diſputacion dyed at the ſiedge of nature, and by auoydinge
his guttes dyed myſerablye.Lactantius. 
                  Lactantius floriſhed
in thoſe dayes,Athanaſius. and Athanaſius alſo the famous biſhoppe of
Alexandria, Iuuencus a notable learned Poete flowriſhed at
Rome. Alſo it is not to be put in ſilence, that Conſtantine
made a bridge ouer the great floude Danubius,
                  Danubius. 
                  Conſtantine
vſed continuallye Princelye robes decked with Pearle, on
his head alwayes he wore a Crowne: This Conſtantine was
to be commended for many notable vertues, as to ceaſe ſtrife
and contention, not onlye with the Romaynes, but with forraine
Princes to make frendſhippe, he nouriſhed all excellent
Artes, encouraginge by great preferments, ſtudientes therunto,
wherein hee declared himſelfe to be a carefull Prince,
not onlye of his priuate eſtate or gouernmente, but of that

which to the poſterites mighte be glorious by learninge.The worthy care of Princes.
This Conſtantine vſed muche to reade, eſpeciallye in the excellent
knowledge of Hiſtoryes, the liuelye glaſſe of Princes
wherein is contayned the memorye of all ages, a ſcolemaiſter
to manners,Hiſtories. the light of all truth, ye counſayle houſe of Princes,
the perfecte ſpectacle of all gouernmente, aſwell of the
floriſhinge eſtate of kingdomes, as of theyr decaye, vnto vertuous
Princes a perpetuall example, and a continual memorye
of the wicked: of all theyr enterpriſes a perfecte rehearſer,
a directour of wyſedome, & to counſaylours a liuely regiſter.
This Conſtantine woulde heare the Embaſſages of
Princes, & theyr complaintes, he liued lxxxix. yeares, he made
in the ende his ſonnes Conſtantine, Conſtantius and Conſtance,
with Adalmatius his brothers ſonne Caeſars, xiii. yeares
he raigned alone: his nature ſomwhat gaue him to pleaſante
ſcoffinge. As concerninge Adalmatius his brothers
ſonne, hee was killed of the warriours nowe at the deathe of
Conſtantine, ſo that the gouernmente of the whole worlde,
was brought to the hands of the thre ſonnes of Conſtantine,
who deuided the Empyre amonge them: vnto Conſtantine
was limited Spayne, Englande and Fraunce, and that part
of Germanye whiche was then poſſeſſed of the Romaynes:
Vnto Conſtantius who was the ſeconde brother, was geuen
Italye, and all Affricke, Sicilia, Dalmatia, Achaia, Macedonia,
and all Greece: Vnto Conſtance whiche was the
thirde, was geuen the prouince of Thrace, in the which ſtandeth
the Cittie of Conſtantinople, with all the Eaſt prouinces
of Aſia the leſſer, of Syria, of Meſopotamia, & of Egipte.
               In this ſort after the death of Conſtantine the great who
was ſonne to Helena kinge Coils daughter) was the Empyre
deuided amonge his thre ſonnes, which dyed afterward
moſte lamentablye:A notable example of ambition. For deuiſion enflamed with ambition,
brake this naturall knot, eche one hunted for ye others death,
ſo harde a matter it is for Princes to liue in concorde and amity,Ambition.
ambition and deſyre of Domition deſtroyeth kindreds,
and for the moſt part enforceth rulers to forget iuſtice, and all
integritye: large hope of mightye kingdomes diſplayeth the

banners with inſaciable deſyre, and without reaſon rayſeth a
quarrell, raſhe counſayle geueth attempte, & flattery linked
with Princes inuenteth occaſion, they kindle ye bloudy foundation
of Mars,Ambition. they reape vppe the bulwarke of all decaye,
they for priuate lucre ſake, hunt for the bloud and ruine of manye:
diſcorde deſtroyeth at a ſodaine, more then manye fortunate
victoryes haue obtayned. In many ages the raſhe & priuate
quarrels of diuers Princes haue vndone the great & pollitike
counſayle of the wiſe: thorowe which they haue not onlye
receyued diuers greate ouerthrowes, but alſo loſte theyr
eſtate, and ſeene theyr Townes and Citties deſtroyed and
burned before theyr eyes. Theſe are the fruites of deuiſion,
as it ſhall appeare in the Hiſtorye followinge of the .iii. ſonnes
of Conſtantine ye great: this Conſtantine ordayned the
ſondaye to be kept, and that vppon that day abſtinence ſhould
be made from all labour: he alſo was the firſt that appointed
Rome to be the biſhops ſeate.
               As concerninge the eſtate of Britanye, at the death of Cō
                     ſtantine,
Octauius a Duke of the Weſte Saxons, (who was
made liefetenaunt and highe Deputy in Britaine vnder Cō
                     ſtantine)
throughe the counſayle of the nobles and commons
of the lande, woulde haue rebelled and expelled the monkes:
but Conſtantine ſent ayde againſt the Britaynes, makinge a
Duke of Rome called Traiherne, with a great hoaſt to go againſt
them, who at his arriuall were at hande to ioyne their
hoaſtes with the Romaynes who landed at Southampton, &
nere to the olde auncient Cittie of Wincheſter a terrible battayle
was foughte: but the Romaynes and theyr Captayne
retyred, not able to abide the force and power of the Britaynes.
Traiherne fled into Scotland, Octauius purſued him &
in Weſtmerlande another battaile was fought, but ſo vncō
                  ſtante
is the eſtate of Princes, fortune now turneth her whele
from Octauius, & with terrible countenaunce behold him, &
they before chafed, began to conquere: Octauius with great
bloudſhed fled, and power and ſtrength ſo fayled him, that of
neceſſitye hee was compelled leauinge the lande to flee into
Normandye, in whoſe abſence another Earle of the Britaynes

by treaſon murthered the Romaine Duke, which beinge
knowen to Octauius, he came againe into Britaine and raigned
54. yeares againſt whom the Romaynes ſent a great armye,
to maintaine theyr iuriſdiction.
            
            
               
                  
                     Conſtantinus.
                  
                  
                     Conſtantius
                  
                  
                     Conſtance.
                  
               
               
                  NOwe the ſwaye of the Empyre was in ye
gouernmente of three, but Conſtance,
did appointe as Caeſar to gouerne Armenia
Dalmatiꝰ his coſyn, ſo that ye Empyre
was ruled by thre Emperours and
one as Caeſar. At this ſeaſon deuiſiō began
betwene Conſtance and Conſtantius
bretherne,
                     
                        •
                     onſtance. the ſonnes af greate Conſtantine for the title
of Italye and Affrica,
                  Conſtantius. 
                  Conſtantius was effeminate and womanlye

of nature, not couragious, vnapte to generation, all
theſe bretherne were perſecutors, the Churche of God was
in moſte miſerable eſtate,Perſecutors. by reaſon that in all partes of the
Romayne iuriſdictions diuers pernitious ſectes, opinions &
doctrines flouriſhed, eche one perſecuted other, but aboue al,
the aucthoritye, power, and poiſoned opinions of the Arrians
preuailed, wherevppon many bloudy commotions were conſpired
of the Arrians, and euen in the Temple and houſe of ye
Chriſtians, were put in practiſe, by whoſe bloudye practiſes,
the people were of infinite nombers ſlaine: The diſcorde of ye
Chriſtians,The diſcorde of Chriſtian Princes, is a ſtrength to infidels. theyr deuiſion in manye ſectes, did encourage the
hartes of the Paganes and infidels, to place theyr Ethnicall
fayth in theyr fonde Gods: where the Chriſtians made ye true
worde of God to be blaſphemed, and euill ſpoken of amonge
thoſe Gentiles that knew not the true God, as in theſe dayes
the like contention amonge Chriſtian Princes, and the bloudye
practiſes of the mighty Prelates in the worlde, do decaye
the name of the Church of God,A decaye to Chriſtians. whiles that worldly promotions,
pompe and dignitye doth accompanye them, theyr preſent
ioye, theyr felicitye, theyr glorious name, theyr pontificall
ſeates, theyr large titles by all crueltye and bloudy meanes
are vpholded. This Conſtantine made a lawe that no
delicate meate ſhould be vſed in feaſtes, it is ſaide hee was of
dyete moſte temperate,Arrians doctrine. in all cauſes of Iudgement iuſte and
righteous, wherefore great was the decaye of the Romayne
Empyre, in that the Emperour fauoured the ſect of the Arrians,
whoſe opinion he ſo fauoured, that thereby he was cruel
againſt the Catholike Athanaſius a famouſe biſhoppe,Athanaſius. who
for withſtandinge the doctrine of the Arrians, was baniſhed
by Conſtantine that ruled Fraunce, one of the ſonnes of Cō
                     ſtantine
the great, from the which baniſhment he was reuoked,
but Conſtance that was Emperour of the Eaſte, as of
Aſia the leſſer, of Syria of Meſopotamia, and of Egipt, was
alſo infected with the opinion of ye Arrians, wherby Athanaſius
was againe exiled from the Cittie of Alexandria where
he taughte.Athanaſius. This Athanaſius was a moſt godlye biſhoppe,
of great learninge in the fayth of Chriſt, ſuffering many perſecutions

of the Arrians, this Athanaſius was preſent at the
counſaile holden at the cittie of Laodicia, beinge moſte mightye
in ye Scriptures he confounded the hereſies, but in a manner
the vniuerſall worlde, the mightye Princes the biſhops
and Prelates were infected with this doctrine of ye Arrianse
the wrathe of God in this troublous eſtate of Religion was
ſpredde vppon Aſia and the Region of the Eaſt,Arrians doctrine. for manye of
the renowmed Citties were ouerthrowē with earthquakes,The wrath of God againſte heretikes.
a great peſtilence not longe before, deuoured the countreyes
of Syria and Silicia, ſo the wrathe of God ſcourgeth the wickednes
of men, and ſleeth the perſecutors of his Church, all
theſe Princes, and their Prelates were wrapped in theſe plagues,
the Regions by many plagues were deuoured and conſumed.
The ende of that heritike Arrius (whoſe opinion
firſt I mentioned) is before reherſed in the life of Conſtātine
the great. Conſtantine the ſonne of Conſtantine ye great,
not content with his Dominion left of his father,Ambition. which was
Spayne, Englande, Fraunce and Germanye, moued warre
againſt his brethren, thinking to obtayne by force that which
they woulde not willinglye geue him, but Conſtantine was
ſlaine of the men of warre ſent againſt him by his brother Cō
                     ſtantius,
                  The eldeſt ſonne of Cō
                     ſtātine ſlaine.
neare to a Cittye called Aquileia: thus throughe
ambition the eldeſt of the ſonnes of Conſtantine the great is
ſlaine, after he had raigned .iii. yeares, beinge a yonge man of
xxv. yeares of age, ſo that there remayned but two Emperors,
Conſtantius and Conſtance. At this time Macedonius
a prieſt of Conſtantinople,
                  An abhominable hereſy. taughte another hereſye, that
the holye Ghoſt was not God but a creature, alſo this Macedonius
ambiciouſly ſtriued with one Paulus whether of them
ſhould ſuccede that famous biſhoppe Alexander, biſhoppe of
Conſtantinople. This biſhop Alexander ſhould haue dyſputed
with Arrius,
                  Sapor. but that Arrius dyed before the dyſputacion:
In Perſia the Chriſtians were alſo perſecuted by Sapor
the kinge:Conſtantine the great, a defender of Chriſtians. this Sapor was a great ennemye to God, for
in the time of Conſtantine the greate. 16000. were martyred,
of the which bloudye facte Conſtantine the great wrote
to this Sapor, willinge him no more to perſecute the Chriſtians.

As concerninge the byſhopprike for the which Macedonius
and Paulus ſtriued for,Euſebius. 
                  Euſebius was made biſhoppe
of the ſame, beinge fauoured of this Emperour Conſtantine:
this Emperour was as an Arrian, and by all meanes
furthered them, wherevppon to fortifye and make ſtronge
theyr Churche, theyr faythe and doctrine, by his commaundement,
a Synode of biſhoppes was aſſembled at Antioche,
where Athanaſius that godly father was condempned as an
heretike,A iuſt plague of God. but the wrathe of God was ſtyrred ouer the Cittye
of Antioche where the wicked aſſemblye was gathered, an
earthquake ſhoke diuers countryes about Antioche, but eſpecially
in Antioche, where it continued a whole yeare. Athanaſius
fledde to Conſtantine the Emperour, of whom he
was with all humilitye receyued, yet the great contention in
Religion ceaſſed not, but therevppon another Synode and
counſayle was holden at Sardis, where 300. biſhoppes did
allowe the counſayle of Nyce: thoſe that were biſhoppes of ye
Eaſte, refuſed the companye of them, and accordinge to their
heriticall ſecte, gathered themſelues at a Cittie called Philipolis,
in that wicked Synode, was made accurſed the foreſaide
counſaile of Nyce, which was called in the time of Cō
                     ſtatine
the greate, of 318. biſhoppes againſt Arrius and his
ſecte, who denyed the ſonne of God to be equall with the father:
In that Synode Arrius with vi. other biſhoppes were
baniſhed, for this cauſe the biſhoppes of the Eaſte, made that
holye counſayle of Nyce accurſed,The coūſaile of Nyce. in that Arrius & his ſcholers
were put to flight, who alſo were Arrians. But ſee what
the chaunge of an Emperour is:The chaunge of a good Prince. ſone a true and perfect Religion
is throwne downe, an holy Sinode and theyr true profeſſion
perſecuted: the father an vpholder of ye true Church,
mayntayned Chriſtes Religion and Catholike faythe, hys
ſonne deſtroyed the ſame good doctrine, and beinge a perſecutour
was in his gouernment, manye wayes plagued by the
Perſians in warre, and greuouſly ſcourged, for in viii. battayles
he had the ouer throw, and loſt many great Citties which
were brought to theyr thraldome: Conſtantius his brother,
was ſlaine by the conſpiracye of Creſtius, Marcellianus, and

                  Magnentius by the handes of Geiſon the thirtene yeare of
his gouernment,Conſtantius. thus Conſtantius was ſlaine in a certaine
Cittie, whoſe deathe beinge knowen to Conſtance his brother,
and vnderſtandinge that Magnentius was the chiefe
aucthor thereof, hee prepared warre againſt him, and in his
abſence ordayned Gallus his kinſemā liefetenant in the Eaſt:
Diuerſe ambitious Princes vſurped to be Emperours, as
Britanion in Illiria, Nepotianus at Rome, great was ye fight
betweene Conſtance and Magnentius, for in theyr conflicte
were ſlaine 54000. men of warre, & Magnentius in the ende
flewe himſelfe. Gallus in the abſence of Conſtance, exerciſed
tyrannye ouer the people, and put to death manye thouſands,
diuerſe of theyr Citties were burned by him, which rebelled
againſt him, but his crueltye cauſed him to be depriued, and
after his baniſhment his head was ſtriken of. At this time
Fraunce was inuaded of the kinge of the Almaynes: and as
yet the hereſye of Arrius preuailed,The coūſaile of Ariminū. and therevppon a counſayle
was gathered at Ariminum of 200. biſhoppes of the
Weſte, who eſtabliſhed as moſt holye the counſayle of Nyce,
but ye Arrians withſtode it: In this troubleous eſtate of Religion
Conſtance by a commaundement, cauſed the biſhops
of the Eaſt who were all Arrians, to make theyr Synode at
Celeutia,
                  Sapor. to confirme the doctrine of the Arrians. Sapor
kinge of Perſia warred on ye Romaynes, & endamaged them
muche, and toke diuers of theyr Citties, the doctrine of the
Arrians was by crueltye vpholded of Macedonius biſhoppe
of Conſtantinople, his bloudye factes note no ſmall teſtimonye
of theyr wicked doctrine: a cruell practiſe is alwayes
grounded of a like doctrine.Chriſtian doctrine. No Chriſtian doctrine buildeth
it ſelfe in bloudy pollices, but in humilitye both theyr faithe,
and theyr ſincere conuerſation floriſheth, whereby they geue
a teſtimonye of an humble Church, of a pacient profeſſion, wt
it the ſaintes of God haue ouercome the worlde: by tyrannye
the humble Martyrs haue moſt floriſhed, in the moſt wicked
tymes theyr oppreſſed eſtate,The true Churche. hath at a ſodayne ouerthrowne
the mightye tyrantes, plagued theyr kingdomes, for God neuer
vtterlye forſaketh his Churche, but by a ſecrete meanes

rayſeth it to be moſt mightye, and confoundeth the vngodlye:God alwayes preſerueth his true Churche.
as in the time of the Arrians doctrine, God preſerued ye true
Churche, and plagued the perſecutors. Iulianus was after
the deathe of Gallus made chiefe vnder Conſtance, whoſe
name by the great ſucceſſe that fell to him was in great commendatiō, both amonge the Romaynes & alſo otherwiſe: the
Almaynes inuaded Fraunce and ſpoyled it, but they were ouercome
of Iulianus,
                  Iulianus. and all ſuche Citties as were taken of
the Almaynes, Iulianus recouered againe: hee deſtroyed the
whole pompe of theyr felicitye and glorious ſucceſſe, ſo that
the ſouldiours woulde haue had him theyr Emperour, & called
him Auguſtus. Conſtance knowinge his dignity, name,
and power deminiſhed thorowe Iulianus prowes and tytle,
was greuouſlye diſpleaſed, commaundinge him by Embaſſadours
to refuſe that name or tytle, but immediatly after this
Conſtance dyed at Mopſocris, a Cittye lyinge betweene Cilicia
and Capadocia: Of his death Victor thus wryteth, that
there he dyed of a ſharpe Ague, which hee toke of anguiſhe of
minde and lacke of ſleape:The death of Conſtance. 
                  Conſtance dyed the .44. yeare
of his age, hee raigned xxxix. yeares Emperour, eyghte yeares
alone, and with his brethren xvi. yeres, and Caeſar 25.
yeares: the good ſucceſſe that fell to him in ciuill warre was
great, in deſtroyinge his domeſticall ennemyes, but he neuer
proſpered in forrayne battayles. This Emperour was very
curteous, of a pleaſante and delectable conuerſation, liberall
to his friendes, moſt temperate in eating and drinkinge, very
painfull, he delighted in fine communication, althoughe hee
were by nature neyther verye wyſe nor eloquent, he was a verye
experte archer, and therein very much exerciſed himſelfe.
Moreouer hee was verye prompte to geeue credite, vnto tryflinge
reportes that ſhoulde be made vnto him, of a mans ennemye:
At his deathe hee ordayned to be his heyre Iulian of
whom I will nowe entreate. At this time Romake kinge of
the Scottes was ſlaine of his nobles,Octauius. & then Octauius was
kinge of Britaine, who raigned liiii. yeares.
            
            
               
               Iulian the Apoſtata▪
               
               
               
                  AFter the death of Conſtance,
                  
                     Apoſtata, ſignifyeth one yt renounceth ye fayth which once he hath profeſſed. 
                  Iulian his
kinſeman called the Apoſtata, enioyed
peaceable the whole Empyre: who if he
had not renounced the fayth of Chriſt, &
enclyned vnto ydolatrye, might worthelye
for his manyfolde vertues and good
qualities, haue beene compared with any
other that euer lyued. Dyuerſe Aucthors wryte that hee
fell into this vnbeliefe, through the parſwaſions of one Libanus
an Idolatrer,Libanus. who was his inſtructour in Rethoricke:
which thinge may be a notable example vnto Princes, and all
other men of euerye eſtate and condition, that they ought not
onlye to procure with eſpeciall diligence ſuche mayſters for
theyr childrē,Inſtructors of children. as are learned in thoſe faculties, in which they
deſyre to haue them ſkilful, but alſo ſuch as be vertuous, honeſt,
and of a good iudgemente in Religion: for moſt certayne
it is, that thoſe things which children learne in theyr youthe,
they ſo imprint in theyr memorye, that afterward they neuer
forget them, and the exerciſes and conditions which they get
in that tender age, become vnto them both proper and naturall:
For probation whereof, although many examples maye
be alleged, yet for this preſente, let that Iulian ſuffice, in whō
the inſtruction of ſo wicked a maiſter had ſuch force, that the
fruites thereof verye well appeared, whiche hee receyued
throughe him.Iulian compared. For in all other thinges he was ſo expert and
ſinguler, that in bountye and curteſye, hee was equall vnto

                  Titus, in clemencye vnto Antonye, in proſperous ſucceſſe againſt
the Dutchemē vnto Traian, in temperance, modeſty,
and Philoſophye, vnto Marcus Aurelius. Hee was endued
with a ſinguler good memorye, and therewith very ſtudious,
he was very eloquent, aſwell by nature as by Arte, moſt temperate
in his eatinge, drinkinge, and ſleapinge, in all carnall
deſyres he was moſt chaſte and continente: He was of ſuche
ſtrengthe and courage, that hee was reprehended for vſinge
greater bouldnes, then was cōuenient for a Captaine or Emperour.Vaine glory.
He was very deſyrous of vaine glorye and fame, (a
vice common vnto moſt excellēt wittes & haughty courages)
he was liberall & pleaſante with his frendes: he vſed iuſtice
a like towardes all men, both in the time that he was Caeſar,
and alſo when he was Emperour. But all theſe vertues, wt
manye other were polluted with the infidelitye which he embraced
at the parſwations of his Scholemaiſter Libanus the
Idolatrer.Libanu
                        ••
                     
                   As ſone therefore as he had vnderſtandinge of yt
deathe of Conſtance the Emperoure (whiche newes was
brought him in Fraunce, from whence he was going againſt
him, who likewiſe was marchinge for the ſame intente) hee
went with all celeritye vnto the Cittie of Conſtantinople,
                  Conſtantinople.
which after Conſtantine was the head of ye Empyre, whereby
all meanes hee procured the good will of all men, and cauſed
the Temples of the gentiles to be opened, and gaue them
lycence to adore theyr Idols: and albeit hee was an ennemye
vnto Chriſtians, yet woulde hee not perſecute them, alſo betwene
the Catholickes and the Arrians he remayned a neuter,
enclyninge neither vnto ye one, nor other part, which doinge
purchaſed him yt loue and fauoure of all worldlinges: &
the barbarous Nations fearing his fame & name, abſtayned
not onlye from makinge warre againſt the Empyre, but alſo
ſent vnto him Embaſſadours to requyre peace of him, which
he graunted them. In this wyſe he began with contentacion
and proſperity to gouerne the Empyre: but as one that in
harte was an Idolatrer, hee determined to finde oute ſome
meane to perſecute the Chriſtians, for thaccompliſhmente
of which wicked intente, he vſed a meane not lightye hard of:

For hauinge intelligence that through tormentes or martyrdome,Perſecution rayſeth more Chriſtians. the Chriſtian fayth was muche encreaſed, he reſolued
the woorke by the contrarye, who (as Ruffinus and Sainte
Hierome write) did enduce them with giftes, promiſes, offices
and dignityes to renownce their fayth, and to do ſacrifice
vnto theyr falſe & lyinge Idols. And as diuers affirme, there
were not a fewe of couetous and ambitious parſonnes, which
to become riche, and to be exalted vnto honour and dignitye,
denyed their true fayth, in ſuch wiſe, that this was one of the
greateſt perſecutions that euer the Church receyued, not onlye
in reſpecte of thoſe whiche did willinglye abandon theyr
fayth, but alſo for that he did inſtitute and ordayne by general
decrees,The decrees of Iulian againſt the Chriſtians. that no Chriſtian might profeſſe any arte, or ſcience,
nor likewiſe ſtudye, or go vnto anye Schole, but ſuche as did
worſhippe vnto Idols: to the ende that for the deſyre of learninge,
they might do ſeruice vnto his Idols, or els to remaine
ideottes and ignorantes, whereby they ſhoulde be vnable to
preache and teache theyr fayth ſufficientlye. In concluſion he
immagined all wayes and meanes that mighte be deuiſed to
perſecute the Chriſtians, excepte onlye by effuſion of bloude.
               And continuinge the vſe of this pitifull crueltye againſt the
Chriſtians, hee determined like a moſt valiante Captayne, to
moue warre againſte the Perſians: who onlye had not humbled
themſelues, nor woulde not acknowledge him for theyr
ſuperiour. Wherevppon hee wente into Aſia with a huge
hoaſt, and hauinge paſſed thorowe Aſia the leſſe, he came into
Meſopotamia, which was the country for which the Romaynes
& the Perſians did contende, from thence after certayne
lighte ſkirmiſhes,Zaita. he wente vnto Zaita, where hee vnderſtode
that the kinge of Perſia was encamped not farre of,
with his whole hoaſte, and therefore hee ſet in good order his
armye, with a maruaylous deſyre to ioyne battaile with his
ennemyes: but they at this inſtante refuſed to fight, and ſent
theyr Embaſſadours to requyre pardon of him: Vnto whom
the couragious Emperoure gaue no audience, but perceyuinge
that they refuſed the battaile, ye more to prouoke them
he entered into diuers partes of theyr countrye, takinge manye

Citties of Surrey, ſome by force, and ſome by yeldinge of
their owne accorde, greatelye endamaginge the whole countrye
as he paſſed, whereby in the ende the Perſians beinge ouercome
with ſhame, fought a battaile with him, which was
both cruell and terrible: into whiche before hee entered, hee
made a ſolemne vowe, that if hee had the victorye in that conflict,
he would make ſacrifice vnto his Gods, with the bloude
of all thoſe Chriſtians (whom he termed Gallileans) whiche
woulde not do ſacrifyce vnto his Idolles.The voyce of Iulian. And it pleaſed Almightye
God (throughe his ſecrete Iudgementes) to make
him conqueror for that inſtante, and to rewarde him in this
worlde with his wrathe. Who perceyuinge that hee had
obtayned the victorye,The victorye of Iulian. not findinge anye reſiſtance, proceded
till hee came vnto the famous Cittie of Pt
                        •
                     ſiphont, determininge
to make his abode that wynter in Meſopotamia: but
in this iourneye his ſouldiours ſuffered greate afflictions, as
well throughe wante of victuels, and that theyr hoaſte was
verye copious, as alſo for that theyr ennemyes, did manye times
aſſaulte and moleſte them: And hauinge for his gyde a
fugitiue Perſian, he was broughte by him (throughe treaſon
together with his ſouldiours) into a place where was made
a great imbuſhement of the Perſians, with whom hee beinge
enforced to fight, was with a ſpeare ſo wounded in one of his
armes & thighes, that not longe after he dyed: who when hee
felt himſelfe to become fainte,Iulian woū
                     ded to death. ſpake with great arrogancy againſt
Chriſte, ſayinge: Viciſti Gallilee, O thou Gallilean
thou haſt ouercome mee. After which woords when he ſawe
that all they which were preſent bewayled his death, hee reprehended
them ſayinge: that they did greatlye offende, to lament
and bewayle the death of a Prince, that dyed in the fauour
of his Gods.Gregorye Nazeanzen writeth an inuectiue Oration againſte Iuliā, which is worthye to be redde. And afterwarde as longe as breathe ſerued
him, he deſiſted not to entreat of the immortalitye of his
ſoule. A thinge to be greatlye lamented at, that ſuch want
of grace, filthines ſhoulde remayne in a man, endued with ſo
muche worthynes, and ſo manye excellent vertues. He dyed
in the ſeuenth yeare after he was Caeſar, and in the thirde of

his Empyre, when he was xxxi. yeares of age: and in the yere
of oure Lorde and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. 366.
            
            
               Iouianus.
               
               
                  AFter the ſouldiours had much bewayled
the death of Iulian, they elected for Emperoure
a famous and noble gentleman
named Iouianus borne in Hungarye, a
verye faythfull and conſtante Chriſtian:
For when Iulian commaunded that no
Chriſtian ſhoulde haue the charge of a
Captayne, nor enioye any other office in the warre: This Iouianus
anſwered with a ſtoute and cherefull countenaunce, yt
he made more accompt of his profeſſion, then of all ye dignities
he had, and ſo abandoned his charge.A good example of a Chriſtian. And afterward being
which (as is ſayd) elected Emperour, he prouounced in open
Parlament, yt he beinge a Chriſtian, would not (although he
might) be a Captaine ouer infidels & idolaters: and ſo moſte
conſtantly refuſed the Empyre. But the contentation which
euery of them conceyued of his election was ſuche, that after
they had confirmed the ſame, they exclamed that they were
Chriſtians: And to thende that hee ſhould receyue charge of
the Empyre, they that were not as yet, promiſed that they
would be. In this maner with incredible ioye, they ſware
obedience vnto him, and gaue him the enſignes of the Emperour

Wherevppon preſently with greate induſtrye, he prouided
and made preparation of all ſuch neceſſaryes, as were
requiſite for the mayntenaunce of the preſent warre, (which
was very difficulte to be done.)Sapor. For Sapor vnderſtandinge of
the death of Iulian (whom for his noble actes, and great courage,
hee did not a little dreade) made ſmall accompte of the
new Emperour: & aſſemblinge all the power that he might,
he ſet with ſuch violence vppon the armye of the Emperour,
that the Romaynes were enforced to retyre, and the Perſians
remayned as conquerours in the fielde, wherevppon Iouian
with greate labour and trauaile remoued his campe, & marched
towardes the Cittie of Carra,
                  Carra. where Creſſus was ouercome
by the Parthians, makinge as hee marched diuers ſkirmiſhes
with the Perſians, who continuallye purſued him euen
vnto the ryuer Tigris:
                  Tigris. and thither Sapor ſent Embaſſadours
vnto Themperour, to ſignify vnto him, that although
he perceyued that throughe wante of victuels, and other miſhappes,
both he and his hoaſte were at his mercye, and in his
power: yet he was contēted, (if he would yelde vnto certaine
conditions) to remayne for euer a faythfull friend to the Empyre:
Vnto which cōditions, Iouian (being enforced through
the preſent perill) yelded vnto, and concluded a peace with Sapor
for xxx. yeares. This truce was of ſome, accompted moſt
abhominable vnto the Empyre: but of other, who better conſidered
the diſtreſſe vnto which the Romaynes were dryuen,The doinges of Princes are diuerſlye conſtrued.
it was reputed (althoughe not honourable) yet both profitable
and neceſſarye: for he was in apparaunt daunger both of
loſinge his whole hoaſte, and of the greater part of thoſe prouinces
which he graunted vnto him.
               After 
                     •
                  he concluſion of the truce, Iouian went into Surrey:
from whence hee ſent decrees into all places, to reuoke from
exile Athanaſius, with other infinite godly Chriſtians: vnto
whom he commaunded that all ſuche offices, dignityes, and
honours ſhould be rendred, as were geuen them in the time of
Conſtantine the greate, and that the tythinges of corne and
other thinges which were taken from them by Iulian, ſhould
be likewyſe reſtored vnto them againe. After Iouian had finiſhed

this holye foundation, with vſinge in all other affayres,
the dutye and office both of a wiſe and iuſt Prince, and hauinge
ſufficiently prouided in the Eaſt, for all ſuch thinges as
were neceſſarye: He marched towardes Conſtantinople,
ſhewinge himſelfe in all places where he paſſed, both a iuſt &
mercifull Prince, in ſuch wiſe that all men conceyued a good
hope of him: But this and all his noble intentes, and Chriſtian
determinations were intercepted by death, (for the wickednes
of the people deſerued not ſo worthy a Prince) which
happened in this wyſe.The ſecrete counſaile of God. After he was arriued at a certaine
place in Aſia the leſſe, called Dudaſtana, beinge in the colde
time of the winter: there was in the Chamber where ye Emperour
ſhould lye, a fyer made of coales & wodde, which was
moyſt and grene, in which after he was gone to bedde, and ye
chamberlaines departed & locked the dore,The death of Iouian. the vapoure of the
fyer maruelouſly encreaſed, & fillinge all places full of ſmoke,
not hauinge any vent or windowe to iſſue forth at, ſtopped Iouianus
breath in ſuch wyſe, that he ſmothered as he ſlept, for
in the morninge he was found deade, moſt men iudginge this
to be thoccaſion of his deathe: althoughe ſome ſuppoſed, that
he dyed by eating of a Muſhron, which was poyſoned: other
affirme, that he eate ſo muche meate the night before, that ye
naturall heate, not able to make perfecte diſgeſtion, hee
was through the cruditie of his meate ſtrangled. But
(howſoeuer it was) his death gaue great cauſe of
ſorrowe vnto all men, for he had helde the Emperiall
Septer but eighte monethes: and
dyed when he was (as ſome write) of xl.
but as other, of xxx. yeares of age.
            
            
               
               Valentinianus the firſt of that name.
               
               
                  IT pleaſed Almightye God of his goodnes, to
appoint to ſuccede the Chriſtian and vertuous
Emperour Iouian (althoughe he left behinde
him neyther child nor kinſeman) one that was
equall with him in fayth,Valentinian like in goodnes and vertue vnto Iouian. goodnes, and vertuous
conditions, whoſe name was Valentiniā.
Who although he were diſcended of a baſe ſtocke, and borne
of poore parentes: yet he was a Catholicke Chriſtian, beutifyed
and adorned with moſt ſplendente vertues: His fathers
name was Gratian,
                  God exalteth from lowe eſtate. borne in Hungarye in the Cittie Cimbala,
a verye poore man, and by profeſſion a maker of coardes or
ropes, one of a verye great ſtrengthe, who after he became a
ſouldiour, ſo excelled in martiall prowes, that he was for his
worthines, preferred from degree to degree, and in the ende
appoynted generall of the Pretorian ſouldiours: which was
the cauſe, that his ſonne Valentinian (of whom we nowe entreate)
was brought vp in martiall feates wherin he became
verye excellent. And at ſuch time as Iulian commaunded that
all they which woulde not do ſacrifyce vnto idols, ſhoulde be
depriued of theyr dignity and offices. (he being a Captaine ouer
the ſouldiours which bare ſhieldes) refuſed as a moſt cō
                  ſtant
profeſſor of Chriſt,Perſecution tryeth Chriſtians. the office of his captaine ſhippe, to remayne
and abyde in his true profeſſion, but afterwarde in the
time of the good Emperour Iouian, he together with infinite
other Chriſtians, was reſtored vnto his former dignitye, and
was at ſuch time as he dyed in that degre of honour, in which

he had bene before the edict with Iulian. This Valentinian
for his ſinguler worthines was by the generall ſuffrages of ye
whole hoaſte, elected at the Cittie of Nyce: as his father for
his valiantnes, had beene likewiſe preferred vnto manye honourable
degrees of chiualrie. After he was thorowly eſtabliſhed
in his Empyre, he elected for companion wyth him in
the ſame his brother Valens, and not longe after he created
Ceſar, his yonge ſonne Gratian: In the time of theſe Emperours,
the worlde was greatlye afflicted with earthquakes,
wōders, excurſions and inundations of the ſeas, with ſtrange
thinges which rayned from Heauen, and with ſuche mortall
warres, that the like haue not lightly bene harde, or redde of.
Notwithſtanding theſe afflictions, the wiſe and ſage Emperous
did with ſuch force and pollicye oppugne and reſiſte the
inuaſions and rebellions, which were made by ſondry barbarous
Nations: that they did not only conquere them in manye
battayles, with expellinge them out of ye Emperiall territoryes,
but alſo ouercame and ſuppreſſed diuers domeſtical
tyrantes:Procopius. amonge which there was one Procopius, a kinſeman
of Iulian the Apoſtata, who toke vppon him the title &
name of Emperour in Conſtantinople: But afterward hee
was ouercome in battaile by Valens, and flyinge awaye, hee
was by his owne ſouldiours apprehended and broughte vnto
themperour: who (as ſome affirme) cauſed him to be beheaded,
But as other write, hee cauſed two trees to be bowed, &
vnto eyther of them one of his legges to be tyed,A reward for rebelles. and after by
lettinge them go at libertye, hee was (vnto the terrour of all
other) rente and deuided in two partes: a meete rewarde and
puniſhment due vnto all rebelles.
               As Valens was infected with the ſect of the Arrians, whō
he greatly fauoured: ſo Valentinian was a moſt true and ſincere
profeſſor of Chriſtes Religion, who after hee had ouercome
the Sarmathians, a barbarous people whiche often rebelled,
made aunſwere vnto theyr Embaſſadours, which entreated
for peace with ſo muche vehemencye,The death of valentinian. that he fell into
ſuch extreame bledinge at his mouthe, as that he dyed thereof
within fewe dayes. Some ſaye that hee fell into an Apoplexia
                  
and dyed of that diſeaſe, in the 50. yeare of his age,
when he had raigned xii. yeares. After whoſe death Valens,
together with his nephewe Gratian enioyed the Empyre:
He began to make little accompte of his nephewe, and greatlye
fauouringe the ſecte of the Arrians, employed and beſtowed
his time in Nigromancye and enchantmentes, with dyuers
other kindes of ſorceries,The perſecution of Chriſtians. and alſo in martyringe of manye
Chriſtians, which God did not permit longe vnpuniſhed:
For ſhortly after beinge ouercome in a conflict by the Gothes
(vnto whom he had done manye pleaſures) hee fledde for ſuccour
into a pore cotage of the countre, (which his ennemyes
perceyuinge) ſet at a ſodaine the houſe on fyre, and ſo burnte
him beinge in the ſame,The ende of a wicked gouernour. makinge there that ende whiche his
wicked life deſerued: when he was 50. yeares of age, after he
had gouerned the Empyre xv. yeares, and after the incarnation
of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt 382. yeares: according vnto
the computation of S. Hierome, who in this yeare endeth
his Hiſtorye,A flouriſhing time of the learned. and hereafter followeth that of S. Proſper.
               
               There began to floriſhe at this preſent manye excellent learned
doctours in Diuinitye, which at this inſtant are the
chiefe pillers of the Church: As S. Hierome, S. Ambroſe,
and not longe after S. Auguſtine, the learned
Baſill biſhoppe of Ceſarea, Gregorius Nazeanzenus,
Epiphanius, Cirillus biſhoppe
of Hieruſalem with many other.
            
            
               
               Gratianus.
               
                  
               
               
                  AFter the deathe of Valens ye Emperour,
the adminiſtration of ye whole Empyre,
as well of the Eaſt as of ye Weſt remayned
onlye vnto Gratian his nephewe the
ſonne of his brother Valentinian, who
before him enioyed ye Empyre of ye Weſt:
and vnto the infante Valentiniā
                   his brother,
whom hee had created Emperour: althoughe becauſe
of his infancye hee made no accompte of him. The Gothes
followinge theyr victorye, in ſhorte ſpace became patrones of
the whole country adioyninge neare vnto them, and beſieged
the Emperiall Cittye of Conſtantinople, (where the noble
Empreſſe, wyfe vnto the vnfortunate Valens made her abode)
againſte whiche Cittye they made warre with greate
force and violence, burninge and deſtroyinge both the walles
and Suburbes of the ſame, which were verye great: but the
widdowe Empreſſe (as Caſſiodorus wryteth) did wt dilligēce
animate her people with giftes and fayre ſpeache,A valiaunte Empreſſe. that they
fought with ſo maruailous force againſt ye 
                  Gothes, that they
receiued great loſſe and hurt and cold not enter, but were enforced
to rayſe theyr ſiege. In this wyſe by the carefulnes
of this Ladye,The noble gouernment of a woman. and valiantnes of the inhabitantes, the Cittye
was defended. After the Gothes were departed thence, they
deuided themſelues into ſundrye companyes, inhabitinge the
prouinces of Thrace, of Dacia, and the confines vnto them
ioyning. Theſe were certaine Nations, which deſcended out

of Scithia & Ruſſia (as moſt Aucthours affirme) but whether
they were borne there,From whēce the Goathes came. or come from ſome other country thither,
no writer maketh mention, nor putteth any difference
betwene thoſe which are called Oſtrogothes & Viſogothes,
ſince that the diuerſity of names betokeneth no other thinge,Oſtrogothes.
but that the Oſtrogothes are thoſe of the Eaſt,Viſogothes. and the Viſogothes
of the Weſte. Wherefore I intende at all times whē
I ſhall haue occaſion to make mention of them, (which wilbe
verye often) to terme them indifferentlye by the name of Gothes:
For it is moſte certayne that the greateſt wounde and
loſſe, and the beginninge of the ruyne of the Romayne Empyre,
was occaſioned by them. Wherefore thoſe Nations
maye worthelye be accompted and iudged the moſte valiante
in armes of all other.The Gothes. Since that (although with greate trauaile,
and longe warre) they were able to ouercome and ſubdue,
a people & Empyre which was conquerour of the whole
worlde. Gratian hauinge vnderſtandinge of the deathe of
his vncle Valens, and how the Gothes with diuers other Nations
of the North called Hunnes & Alanes, no leſſe valiante
in armes then they were:Hunnes. did continually inuade ye Empyre,Alanes.
and became Lordes ouer manye countryes and prouinces:
Then he, with as great a power as he was able to aſſemble,
marched towardes Hungarye to repreſſe theyr furye, ordayninge
for generall ouer his armye, a certaine noble Captayne
named Theodoſius,
                  
                     Theodoſius a fortun 
                        〈◊〉
                      Emperour. which was borne in Spayne, who
ſo worthelye behaued himſelfe, and with ſuch courage repreſſed
the furye of his ennemyes, that in the ende hee enforced
them to ſerue him in the warres, & reduced the Empyre vnto
his priſtinate eſtate and dignity. For which noble actes Gratian
did aſſociate him for companiō with him in the Empyre,
and aſſigned vnto him the Empyre of the Eaſte: for he continued
in Fraunce, where he alienated the mindes of the ſouldiours
from him, by ſhewinge himſelfe to much affectionate
towards the Alanes,
                  Gratian 
                        •
                     omuche addited to ſtrangers. & other ſtraunge Nations whoſe kinde
of attyre he did often weare: At which time one Maximus a
tyrante in the countrye of Britannye rebelled, and leuyed a
greate power againſt him, who ſeinge himſelfe to be abandoned

of his Legions, returned in all haſt towardes Italye, in
which voyage, Maximus makinge a great ſlaughter of hys
ſouldiours, did alſo in the Strategeme kill him: who without
doubt would haue proued a vertues and worthy Emperour,
if he had attayned vnto the gouernment of the Empyre:The death of Gratian. for
in all other thinges, which appertayned vnto a worthye
and bountifull Prince he excelled. His death
happened (after the computation of Proſper)
in the yeare after the byrthe of oure
LORDE 387.
            
            
               Theodoſius the firſt of that name.
               
               
                  
                     GRatian the Emperour beinge dead, the
orderinge of the whole eſtate of the Empyre,
concerninge both warre and peace,
appertayned vnto Theodoſius, as the
onlye pillour & ſuſtentation of the ſame:
for albeit the yonge Prince Valentinian
made his abode in Italye,The cowardlynes of Valentinian. yet he had not
the courage to reuenge the death of his brother Gratian: for
when he vnderſtode that Maximus was entered into parte of
Italye with a mightye power, he forſoke the ſame, and fledde
vnto Conſtantinople to demaunde ſuccour of Theodoſius:
who beinge very ſorrowfull for the miſhappe of the two Emperours,

thone to be ſlaine by treaſon, and thother to be driuēdute
of his Empyre by tyrantes, accordinge vnto his accuſtomed
naturall worthines, reſolued to ſaile into Italye, to reuenge
the death of thone,
                     Theodoſius a moſt noble Emperour. and to eſtabliſh thother in his Empyre,
by perſecutinge and deſtroyinge the newe mightye tyrant:
wherevppon leauinge his ſonne Arcadius in Conſtantinople,
and takinge with him Valentinian, he prepared all
thinges neceſſarye for his departure, and hauinge aſſembled
a ſufficiente armye of valiant Captaynes and ſouldiours, he
directed his courſe towardes Lumbardye: where Maximus
was makinge his abode in the Cittie of Aquileia,
                  Maximus. who
had ordayned for his generall to withſtand Theodoſius, Andragathius,
a valiant Captayne in martiall affayres,Andragathius captayne vnto Maximus. which
was the party that ſlue Gratian. Hee with greate dilligence
had taken and occupyed all the ſtreights and paſſages, by the
which Theodoſius ſhoulde come: but afterwarde alteringe
his determination, hee remoued his ſouldiours from the defence
of the mountaynes, & placed them in certayne ſhippes,
mindinge to fight with his ennemyes vppon the water before
they landed, and to apprehende his aduerſary. Whereof the
pollitike and worthy Emperour Theodoſius hauinge intelligence,
very well prouided for his landinge,Theodoſius. & after marched
with great iourneyes, who findinge the paſſages without defence,
entered into the territoryes of Lumbardye, and came
vnto Aquileia where Maximus was,Maximus. before that Andragathius
coulde come thither, and beſieginge the Cittie on euerye
ſyde: they that were within the ſame throughe feare, and
moued alſo in conſcience yelded themſelues vnto Theodoſius,
before any aſſaulte was made or battaile fought,The death of Maximus and his ſonne and the
tyraunte as a traytour and rebell was put to deathe, with a
ſonne of his called Victor, who not longe before had bene by
his father created Emperour.
               
                  Andragathius vnderſtandinge of the takinge and death of
Maximus, (who at that inſtant was with a great armye vppon
the ſea) beinge ſurpriſed with excedinge griefe and deſperation,
caſte himſelfe oute of the Gallye where he ſtode,The death of Androgathius. into
the ſea, and ſo was drowned, and his ſouldiours wantinge a

heade or gouernour yelded vnto Theodoſius: vnto whom after
he had obtayned this notable victorye without the effuſi
                     •
                  
of much bloude, there repayred out of Fraunce, Germanye,
Spayne and Englande, many Embaſſadous, yeldinge theyr
obedience vnto him, with great humillitye and deuotion.
               Who after he had triumphed in Rome,
                     Theodoſius 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      rare Prince reſtored the Empyre
vnto Valentinian, and returned vnto Conſtantinople. This
was a manifeſt argument, and ſufficiente proofe of his goodnes
and loyaltye, for whereas he was of power if he had bene
ſo diſpoſed, to haue made him ſelfe a ſole monarke, and Lorde
ouer all, he reputed it to be a greater worthines and dignitye
to recouer an Empyre,The nobility of Theodoſius. and to reſtore it vnto him vnto whom
by righte it appertayned: then to reſerue it vnto himſelfe.
               Not longe after the returne of Theodoſius vnto Conſtantinople,
the death of Valentiniā
                   was conſpired by a Captaine
of his called Arbogaſtus, a man of a ſinguler courage, wyſedome
and ſtoutnes, verye mightye, by reaſon of the aucthoritye
and credite which he was in with the Emperour. This
Arbogaſtus determined vppon the ſodaine to murther Valentinian,
                  Arbogaſtus.
& to create Emperoure one Eugenius,
                  Eugenius. who for his
excellencye in Rhetoricke was verye well thoughte of, & had
in great reputacion with all men, vnto whom after he had reueled
his intente,Tribes. and that Eugenius had willinglye accepted
the ſame, they inuented the meanes to corrupt the Eunuches
which were the Emperours chamberlaynes, and concluded
with them that they in the night ſhould ſtrangle Valentiniā,
and ſaye that they founde him deade.The death of Valentinian. It happened therefore
that in the nighte as the Emperour ſlepte in his Chamber at
Vienna a Cittye in Fraūce, the ribalde Eunuches did ſtrangle
him, reportinge vnto all men that hee had hanged himſelfe,
beinge the xviii. yeare after hee was by his brother created
Emperour.Eugenius created Emperour by Arbogaſtus. Incontinently after his deathe was publiſhed,
before the treaſon was knowen, Arbogaſtus nominated
and made Emperour Eugenius, and becauſe theſe two were
of moſt reputatiō, the election was approued of all men. And
albeit Eugenius was nominated Emperour, yet all thinges
were diſpoſed and ordered at the pleaſure of Arbogaſtus.
               
               
                  
Within ſhort ſpace Theodoſius had vnderſtandinge of this
facte, which he receiued very ſorrowfullye, in that he perceyued
howe daungerous a warre he was to enter into. For hee
accompted it a great diſhonour,Murther unto be vnpuniſhed. to permit ſo haynous an acte
vnpuniſhed: wherefore wt all dilligence he leuied ſouldiours,
and with as muche celeritye as he mighte, hee departed from
Conſtantinople, leauinge in the ſame his .ii. ſonnes Arcadius
and Honorius, whom at that preſente hee created Emperours.
After he was arriued in the confines of Italy, where
the tyrantes had ſo huge an hoaſte, and ſo carefullye had prouided
for the maintenance of the warre, that they occupyed al
the paſſages of the Alpes, and encamped theyr armye in the
cloſures of the ſame: in ſuche ſorte, that Theodoſius was in
very great diſtreſſe, for after he had paſſed ouer certaine moū
                  taynes,
he might very well perceiue that he was on euery ſide
enuironed with ennemyes, in ſuch wiſe that victuels mighte
be brought vnto him frō no place, his ennemyes alſo hauinge
manye mo ſouldiours then he had, in no reſpect inferiour vnto
his, in experience and courage. Notwithſtandinge theſe
extremities like a moſt prudēt Emperour, hauing his whole
confidence and truſte in God, hee omitted not, to remedye the
preſente neceſſitye in the beſt maner that he mighte:God geueth the victorye to Princes onlye. And certainlye
the daunger and oppreſſion in whiche hee was in,
was ſuch, & the multitude of his ennemyes ſo greate, that he
with his, muſt nedes haue beene deſtroyed, if God in the battaile
which followed, had not aſſiſted him, with a manifeſte
myracle. For when as in the nexte morninge Theodoſius
ſawe, that he was compaſſed in on euery ſyde with ennemies,
he embatailed his ſouldiours very ſtrongly, awaytinge with
a maruailous courage ye aſſault of his ennemyes, out of whoſe
campe at a ſodaine,Arbitius. came vnto him a Captaine named Arbitius
with all his ſouldiours: preſentlye after whoſe comminge
the battaile beganne, in which the Romaynes fought againſt
Romaynes, ſo fiercely, that at the firſt encoūter Theodoſius
armye was like to haue had the ouerthrowe: if at the verye
inſtant a Captayne of his named Barbarius,
                  Barbariu
                        •
                     
                   with a great nō
                  ber
of ſouldiours, had not ſuccoured certayne Squadrons,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
which were at the point of beinge ouercome: which he did ſo
couragiouſly, that they which ſeemed before to be ouercome,
recouered theyr former forces, in ſuche wiſe, that withoute
makinge any retyre, they endeuoured to ouercome fightinge
moſt valiantlye: Although the nomber of the ennemyes was
ſo great, that it ſeemed a thinge vnpoſſible to withſtand them.
But in this conflicte it pleaſed God to aſſiſte Theodoſius wt
his deuine power, for at a ſodaine there aroſe a moſte boyſterous
and tempeſtuous winde, the like whereof hath not bene
ſeene: which without the offending of the armye of Theodoſius,
                  The power of God in battayle.
did ſtrike with ſuch force into the faces of his ennemyes,
that it toke from them their ſight, & kept them backe in ſuche
wyſe, that they had no force to proceade againſt Theodoſius
ſouldiours, yea the winde was of ſuche might, that all the arrowes,
ſtones, dartes and launces which they threwe, were
driuen backe vppon them, wounding and moleſtinge them in
ſuch wyſe,The death of Engenius. that in thende after longe fightinge, (contrarye to
all mens expectacion) Theodoſius got the victorye, and ſlue
in the battaile Engenius: but Arbogaſtus (as all writers affirme)
when he ſawe that he was ouercome;Arbogaſtus killeth himſelfe. fledde out of the
battaile, and not findinge anye place where he might abyde in
ſafetye, with his owne ſworde killed himſelfe. After this victorye
Theodoſius, ſeinge thempyre to be deliuered from all
warres, went vnto Millane, wher he remayned the remnant
of his life,S. Ambroſe biſhoppe of Millane. 
                  S. Ambroſe beinge at that preſent biſhoppe of the
ſame: thither he ſent for his ſonne Honorius, whom he inueſted
after his death, wt thempyre of Italy and of all the Weſt,
and his brother Arcadius, of all thempyre of the Eaſte. Alſo
into Affricke & the prouinces there about, he ſente for gouernor
Gildus a verye noble and wyſe Captaine: but for that his
children were as yet but of a tender age, hee appointed vnto
them two tutors, men no leſſe valiant in warre, then prudent
in peace, thone called Ruffinus, and thother Stilicon. Not
longe after the finiſhinge of this his order taking, he fell ſicke
of a certaine diſeaſe, whereof he dyed, when he was fiftye yeares
of age, after be had raigned in the Empyre xi. yeares, beſides
the vi. yeres, in which he gouerned together with Gratian:
                  
ſo that in the whole he raigned xvii. yeares, and dyed in
the yeare after the incarnation of our Lorde and Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſte. 397.
            
            
               Arcadius and Honorius.
               
               
                  AFter the deathe of Theodoſius, his two
ſonnes Arcadius & Honorius toke vppon
them the gonernmēt,Arcadius. who had with
little care and ſmall trauaile,Honorius. ſuſtayned
& ruled the whole Monarchie, if the wickednes
of theyr tutors had not moleſted
and troubled the ſame. For they which
were elected & choſen to ſee all thinges well gouerned, were
the occaſion, that the Empyre in ſuch ſort was vexed, that in
the beginninge they miniſtered no ſmall preſumptions of her
vtter ruine.The tutors of Arcadius & Honorius, procured to get the Empyre vnto them ſelues. For immediatlye after Theodoſius was dead,
Gildus, which was gouernour in the prouince of Affricke, &
Ruffinus and Stilicon in theyr prouinces, likewyſe did by all
meanes procure to reuolte the ſtate of the Empyre, from the
ſonnes of the late Emperour theyr Lorde, vnto themſelues:
and euery of them at conuenient time, manifeſted his wicked
intente and imaginations. Arcadius, together with Ruffinus
his gouernour,Arcadius. went to Conſtantinople, wher he enterred
with much honour the dead bodye of his father: but Honorius
remayned with Stilicon in Italye. The yonge Emperours

in all reſpectes continued theyr gouernment as their
father had done before:The behauiour of Gildus. And true it is that Gildus, the gouernour
of Affricke, after hee vnderſtode of the deathe of Theodoſius,
regarded not to kepe ſecretr any longer his peruerſe
and wicked intent, as Ruffinus and Stilicon did: but preſentlye
in his deedes did vtter the ſame, attempting to beare ſeigniorye
ouer the prouinces committed to his gouernment:Ambition. not
with the title of a Countye, as vnto that time hee had done,
(the which title as Paulus Diaconus ſayth was at yt inſtante
geuen vnto the gouernours of prouinces) but as a kinge or
Emperour without acknowledginge eyther of Honorius or
Arcadius.
                  Maſtelzerius ye brother of G
                        ••
                     dus. This tyraunt a brother of his owne, called Maſtelzerius,
a good and faythful Chriſtian, reſiſted in all that he
might: but the power of Gildus was then ſo much encreaſed,
that his brother was enforced to flye into Italye, and he remayned
as Lord in Affricke.
                  Tirants ſpareth no kinred. 
                  Gildus vnderſtanding that his
brother was gone to finde oute the Emperour, cauſed two of
his ſonnes that he had left in Affricke to be ſlaine, not reſpectinge
that they were his nephewes and his owne bloude. After
Maſtelzerius was come into Italye, he reueyled as much
as was happened, vnto Honorius, or to ſaye more trulye vnto
Stilicon his tutor and gouernour (whoſe wyſedome and
courage was very greate,Stilicon. althoughe founded vppon a diſloyall
and wicked immagination) He gatte vnto him an armye
of men, with all neceſſaries therevnto belonging, to the ende
hee ſhoulde inuade his brother as ennemye of the Emperiall
eſtate.Maſtelzerius 
                  Maſtelzerius, to reuenge the death of his ſonnes, wt
the greateſt celeritye that mighte be, returned into Affricke
with a ſmall company, truſtinge vnto the right which he had
on his ſyde, and the good will of the people, but eſpecially vnto
Gods helpe, whoſe deuine bountye he deſiſted not dailye to
call vppon, with effuſion of teares, and continuall prayer.
               And althoughe he arryued in this manner vppon the coaſtes
of Affricke, with ſo ſmall a nomber of ſouldiours, yet with a
maruailous courage hee landed them, and hauinge erected &
fortifyed neceſſarye lodginges, hee cauſed his arriuall to be
publiſhed, in all thoſe places where hee was beloued, & from

whence ſuppoſed to receiue ſupplie of ſouldiours and ayde of
frendes. His brother vnderſtandinge of his arriuall, came
againſt him with .iii. ſcore and tenne thouſand men of warre,
ſo that Maſtelzerius might verye well ſeeme to be in a maruelous
diſtreſſe & daunger,Victory is in the handes of God. yet it abated nothinge of his iourneye,
neyther was he in doubt of winninge the victorye, for yt
he knew the obtayning thereof conſiſted in the power of God,
and not in the multitude of men and horſe. The thirde daye
after Maſtelzerius was arriued, and had well refreſhed his
armye, with an inuincible courage he ſet vppō his ennemyes:
who ſuppoſed nothinge leſſe, then that he durſt make any ſuch
attempte, and therefore had theyr mindes occupyed with the
contrarye.A wiſe Captayne, winneth with counſaile. But he aduauntinge himſelfe before the formoſt
rankes, exhorted his brothers ſouldiours to deſiſte from farther
rebellion, & vſinge of weapons againſt one that was ſent
from theyr Lorde and Emperour: Which requeſt when an
enſigne bearer refuced to agree vnto, & therewith vſed violence
againſt him, he ſtroke the ſouldiour with ſuch force that
his enſigne fell vnto the grounde, with which onlye ſtroke it
pleaſed God to geue him the victorie, for there was not one yt
would make farther reſiſtance, but preſentlye the moſt parte
of the armye yelded and obeyed vnto him, and the other together
with his brother fledde, ſo that myraculouſlye he obtayned
the victorye.The flyinge away and the death of Gildus. After Gildus ſawe that hee was abandoned
of his ſouldiours, he fled vnto the ſea coaſte, where he entered
into a ſhippe, and committed the ſayles vnto the winde,
thinkinge to eſcape thereby, but after hee had ſayled proſperouſlye
a certaine ſpace, at lengthe the winde turned againſte
him, in ſuch ſorte that he was enforced to returne frō whence
hee departed,Traytors taken in theyr owne ſnare. where he was apprehended, & his brother for a
chaſtiſement of his crueltye, as alſo to reuenge the deathe of
his two ſonnes, and treaſon vnto his Lordes, cauſe him to be
beheaded. After whoſe death Maſtelzerius remayninge conquerour
and as Lord in the fielde,Pryde. without any contradictiō,
and perceyuinge himſelfe to be verye puiſſante (as happeneth
vnto men which in proſperitye become inſolente) yelded not
prayſe vnto God for this his victorye, as hee oughte to haue

done: but rather attempted to get vnto himſelfe the Empyre
of Affricke,
                  Ambition. not once reſpectinge the Emperour Honorius
which ſent him thither: which diſloyaltie his captaynes and
ſouldiours not contented with,The death of Maſtelzerius thorowe inſolent pride ſ
                     •
                  ue him with their owne handes.
After the deathe of theſe two brothers, the Empyre of
Affricke continued a certaine ſpace obedient vnto ye Romaine
Emperours. While theſe thinges paſſed in this wyſe in
Affricke, Arcadius was not without diſturbance in Conſtā
                     tinople,
for Ruffinus his gouernour deſyringe to bringe to
effect his purpoſe, procured by all meanes poſſible, to bringe
Arcadius into ſome diſtreſſe and daunger, to thend he might
thereby vſurpe the Empyre:Ruffinus doth ſollicite the Gothes to dampnifye the Empyre. Hee did ſollicite the Gothes
and other Nations to inuade the Emperiall territories,
whiche practiſe beinge diſcouered, (hee was by the procuremente
of Arcadius,) ſlaine by certaine Italian ſouldiours,
and his head hanged vppon one of the gates of Conſtantinople.
After the death of Ruffinus, Arcadius remayned a more
free and quiet Lord in his Orientall Empyre,Ambitious traytors. then Honorius
his brother did in his: For Stilicon who had the gouernment
in the Occidentall, was more circumſpecte and pollitique
then Ruffinus,
                  Stilicon. and therewith a verye valiante and ſinguler
Captayne, and ſente ſouldiours to ayde and aſſiſte his
brother. Not longe after the former feare was paſſed, Alaricus
arriued in Italye, a more wyſe and valiant Captaine
then was Rhadagaſius, whoſe ſouldiours alſo were verye actiue
and expert in Martiall affayres: Againſt him went Stilicon
with his armye, as one that neuer feared anye daunger,
and encountered with the Gothes within the territory of Rauenna:
in which conflict Alaricus was ouercome by ye prowes
of Stilicon,
                  Alaricus ouercome of Stilicon. who for courage and pollicye in warre like affayres,
had not his equall at that time lyuinge. But continuinge
in harte the conſpiracye before mentioned, who woulde
neuer (althoughe hee mighte) vtterlye vanquiſhe Alaricus,
for diuers times he ſeemed not to regarde his doinges, & ſuffered
to marche thorowe the countrye without reſiſtance, or
endamaginge his people. Whereby Alaricus verye well
comprehended yt 
                  Stilicon was not verye willinge to conquere

him: for as ſome write, this warre continued betwene them
three yeares. At this time the Alanes, ye 
                  Hunnes, the Vandales,
and the Burgundions were entered the Emperial territoryes,
and iorneyed, makinge of warre alonge the ryuer of
Rhene: this enforced a newe terror to poſſeſſe the hartes of
the people. But Alaricus hauinge vnderſtandinge of theyr
comminge, ſente vnto Honorius, to deſyre a peace or truce of
him, and ſo muche of the Realme of Fraunce, as woulde ſuffice
for him & his people to inhabite in, promiſinge to defende
that countrye from the inuaſion of thoſe Nations, he did alſo
geue him to vnderſtande, how Stilicon proceded craftelye by
protractinge the warre which he had againſt him, and that he
was the onlye Aucthor of mouinge of theſe newe warres.
               The Emperour vppon this enformation, conceyued greate
ſuſpition of treaſon in Stilicon, (althoughe when it was reported
vnto him longe before, he would not credite the ſame)
and yet alſo for the preſent he did diſſemble it, & made peace
with Alaricus, graunted his demaundes, receyued of him hoſtages,
and ſent him into Fraunce: whereby there ſeemed to
enſue two great commodities, thone was the peace and tranquillitye
in Italye throughe his abſence, and thother the defence
and ſafegarde of Fraunce: into whiche alreadye were
entered the Vandales, the Alanes, and the Hunnes, of which
Nations the nomber was eſteemed to be more then two hū
                  dreth
thouſande.The wickednes of Stilicon. Theſe preſumptions of felicitie were wholye
diſturbed and interrupted by the treaſon of Stilicon: who
although he accompliſhed that which was commaunded him
by Honorius, as in permittinge Alaricus with the Gothes,
quietlye to enter into theyr iourneye, with ſupplyinge vnto
his people all ſuch neceſſaryes as were nedefull for theyr voyage,
according to thorder receyued of Honorius: Yet as one
that hated peace, and eſpecially that Alaricus ſhould go vnto
the defence of Fraunce, he determined to deſtroye both him &
his people. For as Alaricus was iourneyinge peaceable towarde
Fraunce, (as was accorded) Stilicon priuilye practiſed
with an Hebrewe Captayne named Saul, whiche was in
his armye, that hee with his ſouldiours vppon ſome fayned

diſpleaſure or peculiar quarell, ſhoulde at Eaſter when the
Gothes were celebratinge, and leſt miſtruſted any ſuche miſchiefe
aſſault them at a ſodaine and ſlay as many as he might:
by which breach of peace he thought the warre would reuiue
againe, which mighte reſtore him vnto his priſtiuate dignity
in gouernment, which with the late concluded peace began to
decline. The Hebrew Captaine at ye time appointed brought
to effecte this priuye conſpiracye, for he aſſaulted the Gothes
vppon a ſodaine, vnto their great hurte and damage: but he
preſentlye receiued the rewarde which his treaſon deſerued,
for they arminge themſelues wt great ſpeede, fought againſte
him and ſlue him,The death of Saui. with the moſt part of his ſouldiours.
               Althoughe his intente were as wicked or worſe then theirs,
yet he was better able to conceyle it, as wel by his wiſedome,
as alſo through his aucthority and power. For beſydes yt he
was ye ouerſeer & gouernour of Honorius, he was alſo twyſe
his father in Law: for Honorius had at yt inſtante vnto wife.
a daughter of his,Stilicon. & was before maryed vnto an other of his
daughters which dyed a mayden. This Stilicon was a Vā
                     dall,
                  Of what country Stilicon was.
and beinge deſirous in minde to create a ſonne of his called
Leucherius Emperoure, with his (althoughe a wicked)
circumſpecte forſighte, did conceyle his purpoſe vnto a cōueniente
time: immagininge the beſte waye to attayne vnto his
pretence, was to bringe the Emperours into greate troubles
by warres, to thend that he for his worthines ſheewed in ſuch
extremities,The animo
                     
                        ••
                     ty & ſtrēgth of Stilicon. mighte be accompted and reputed the onlye defence
and ſafegarde of the Empyre. For he was of ſo ſtoute
a courage, and endued with ſuch force, that he eſteemed himſelfe
ſufficient to order & diſpoſe all thinges at his owne pleaſure,
and knewe that the neceſſitye whiche the Emperours
ſhould haue of his ſeruice, would be a very good entrance vnto
his attempte. Wherefore by many ſubtill, ſecrete and craftye
deuiſes, he prouoked the Gothes, the Alanes, the Vandales
& the Swyzers, with diuers other Nations to moue warre
againſt ye Emperiall territories.Gothes. And after he had brought
his reſolution to this forwardnes, hee appointed the Gothes
(as men which knewe the countrye very well) to go vnto the

conqueſt of Italye, and that the Vandales, the Alanes, and ye
                  Swyzers, ſhould aſſayle Fraunce: and yet he decreed to take
vppon himſelfe the defence of Italye, ſuppoſinge that Honorius
ſhould be compelled for want of good Captaynes, in proper
parſon to go vnto the defence of Fraunce, where either he
ſhould be ſlaine or ouercome, or at leaſt brought into ſome extremitye:
So that he by conqueringe the Gothes in Italye,
(which he iudged very eaſy) might without reſiſtance become
Lorde of Rome,Traytours purpoſe one waye, & God diſpoſeth the contrarye. and hauinge obtayned the principall, hee nothinge
doubted to attaine vnto the ſegniorye of all the other
members of the Empyre. But theſe his determinations had
ſucceſſe contrarye vnto his expectation: For that treaſon became,
not onlye his owne confuſion, but alſo the ruine and deſtruction
of the whole Empyre.The Gothes moue warre in Hungarye and Auſtria. For after Honorius and Arcadius
had raigned viii. yeares, Stilicon and Aurelian being
choſen Conſulles, the Gothes began couertly to make warre
in Hungarye and Auſtria, which warre although in the beginninge
it ſeemed very ſmall, and little daungerous, yet wt
                  in
ſhort ſpace, theyr power and might grewe to be ſuche, that
they were dreaded of the whole worlde. For hauinge with
theyr Captaynes Halaricus and Radagaſius,
                  The Gothes in ſuche ſorte
ſubdued all Thrace, Sclauoni and Hungary, that nothing
was there to be ſeene, but the earth and firmament, they marched
into Italye, where paſſinge the Apennine, they came
vnto the mountaines Fieſole in Tuſcanie: Againſt whom for
the defence of the Empyre, went two valiant Captaynes called
Vldinus and Sara,
                  Vldinus and Sara, Captaynes vnto Honorius. with a greate armye of Hunnes & Gothes,
Mercenary ſouldiours hyred of Honorius. Whiche
Captaynes with theyr ſouldiours reſiſted valiantlye the power
of Rhadagaſius, and cut of his paſſages, ouer the mountaynes,
and alſo depriued his armye of victuels: by reaſon
whereof, within very ſhort ſpace, the mortalitye amonge the
ennemyes became ſo great, that moſt part of the armye dyed
by famyne, and Radagaſius apprehended by Honorius, and
put to death.Rhadagaſius. When theſe euents in this wiſe ſucceded, Honorius
made his abode in Rauenna, whiche at that time was
the principall Cittie,Rauenna. & his brother in Conſtantinople: Frō
                  
whence Alaricus with this diſpleaſure was greatlye moued
to wrathe, and marched to fighte with Stilicones armye: of
whom Stilicon fayned to haue great feare, & ſent to the Emperour
for ayde: who not ignoraunte of that which was happened
throughe Saul the Iewe (althoughe Stilicon ſuppoſed
his pretence to be vnknowen) ſente priuelye certayne ſouldiours
into the hoaſte,Saul. and gaue them in charge, that at ſome
cōuenient time they ſhould ſlay Stilicon and his ſonnes:The death of Stilicon. this
commaundemente was preſentlye executed, and the cauſe
thereof was afterward openlye publiſhed to the whole army.
               But althoughe the Emperour in extirpatinge the ſeditious
race, wrought verye wyſelye, yet he omitted to inſtitute
for gouernour ouer his hoaſt ſuch a Captayne, as was ſufficiente
vnto ſo great a charge, and that might remoue kinge Alaricus,
from creditinge that this breache of truce was committed
with Honorius conſente. For Alaricus prouoked by
his iniurye,The enterpriſe of Alaricus againſt Rome. or rather ſeinge the time & opportunitye to ſerue
well for his purpoſe, marched with his whole armye towardes
Rome, the heade and Emperyce at that preſente of the
whole world, vſinge as hee iourneyed extreme crueltye, committinge
all thinges vnto fyer and ſworde, and in thende beſieged
the Cittie after it was firſt builte, a Thouſande & ſixe
hundreth yeares. The Romaynes prepared them vnto the
defence of theyr Cittye ſo valiantlye,Rome beſieged .ii. yeres. that the ſiege continued
two yeares: duringe which time it was kept ſo ſtreight, that
the mortalitye of the inhabitantes became maruailous, for
there were verye fewe, but eyther they were ſlaine, or taken
priſoners. Finally the famyne amonge the people was ſo perſinge,A greate famine in Rome which enforced ye mother to eate her owne childe.
that they were conſtrayned to eate one another, yea the
mother enforced to feede of her ſuckinge infant, which ſhe had
a little before brought oute of her owne bellye. And in concluſion
the Cittie was taken by Alaricus (as ſome Aucthors
affirme) throughe treaſon, but as other write by force of armes,
and in ſuche wyſe ſpoyled, that all thinges founde there
in,Rome wonne and deſtroyed by ye gothes. were committed to the ſworde and fyer: excepte onlye the
Churches, and the people which for theyr ſafegarde had fled
into the ſame. Honorius the Emperour, notwithſtanding

this warre, made his abode in the Cittie of Rauenna: Who
after he vnderſtode that Rome was taken, was ſtriken with
no ſmall terrour and feare of looſinge the whole Empyre.
               This was the firſt time that Rome was wonne,The firſt time that Rome was wonne. by any barbarous
Nation, after it became of anye force or mighte. After
the ſackinge of the Cittie, Alaricus departed from thence,
and ſayled towardes Cicilia, but there aroſe ſo greate a tempeſte
vppon the ſea, that hee was enforced to returne vnto the
coaſtes of Italye,The death at Alaricus. where he became ſicke, and dyed in a Cittie
called Coſeuza. After whoſe death the Gothes created kinge
Ataulfus, who was marryed at the expugnation of Rome vnto
Placidia, the daughter of Theodoſius ye late Emperour,
at whoſe requeſte hee abſtayned from the vtter ſubuertion of
Rome, and concluded a peace with Honorius, and departed
out of Italy into Spayne, where he made his abode in a Cittie
called Barcellona. While theſe thinges proceded in this
maner in Italye, Arcadius Emperour of the Eaſt, made his
abode in the Cittie of Conſtantinople, where he lyued continuallye
in peace, and gouerned with little diſturbance: For
there are no wryters that make mention of any warres, that
might haue procured the contrary.The death of Arcadius. This Emperour after he
had gouerned, and ruled the Empyre of the Eaſt xiii. yeares,
dyed in the ſayde Cittie, leauinge behinde him a ſonne called
Theodoſius, whom he committed to be brought vppe, vnto ye
kinge of Perſia and Parthia,
                  Hiſdig
                        •
                     rdus. called Hiſdigardus, which was
at that inſtante, confederat and frend to the Empyre. After
the kinge of Perſia vnderſtode the decree of Arcadius, hee verye
willinglye accepted the gouernmente and charge of the
yonge Emperour, and ſente preſentlye vnto Conſtantinople
for him,Antioch
                        ••
                     
                   by a valiant Captayne of his named Antiochus, who
afterwarde together wt 
                  Honorius, gouerned the whole Empyre
with great fidelitye and muche honour, conſeruinge the
ſame in peace and iuſtyce, vntill that Theodoſius the ſonne o
                     •
                  
                  Arcadius, was growne vnto yeares apte to beare rule.
               After the deathe therefore of Arcadius,
                  That whiche happened after the deathe of Arcadius. the titles of Emperours
remayned onlye vnto Honorius, and Theodoſius his
nephewe, But the Weſt Empyre was nowe brought vnto a

maruaylous confuſion, throughe the Gothes, the Vandales,
and other Nations,Gothes. who proceded conquering the prouinces
of the ſame,Vandales. for that the Emperour Honorius was not carefull
in leuyinge ſome ſufficient armye, that might reſiſt theyr
barbarous inuaſions, but continued his abode in the Citty of
Rauenna. Alſo in England one of the chiefeſte barrons of ye
Iſlande called Gratian,
                  Gratian. rebelled and toke vppon hym the title
and name of Emperour, with the conſent of certayne of ye
commons of the Countrye, but his raſhnes had euill ſucceſſe,
for within a fewe dayes after, he was ſlaine by his owne ſouldiours.
After whoſe deathe they created an other of the ſouldiours
Emperour called Cōſtantinus,
                  Conſtantius choſen Emperour of the ſouldiours. a man of greater courage
and ſtrengthe then Gratian was: he remoued his whole
armye out of England, and went into Fraunce, mindinge to
beare ſegniorye ouer the ſame. And therefore preſentlye hee
procured peace with the Vandales, the Swyzers, and the Alanes,
who departed out of that countrye towardes Spayne,
the Burgundions remayninge in that place, whiche nowe is
named Burgundie. Conſtantinus aſſociated in league with
him, a great nomber of Frenchemen, whereby hee became ſo
puiſante and of ſuche force, that he minded to make himſelfe
Lorde ouer Spayne, and ſo to preuent thoſe barbarous Nations,
of theyr purpoſed habitacions. Vppon which reſolution,
diuers Captaynes with ſondry bandes of ſouldiours, to
poſſeſſe the ſame, vnto whom a greate nomber of Spaniards
yelded, reputinge it leſſe daūgerous to obeye vnto them, then
vnto thoſe which were to come: But two noble, rich & mightye
gentlemen of Spayne, refuſed to yelde vnto eyther parte,
who (as Paulus Diaconus affirmeth) were called Didimus
& Verodianus,
                  The loyaltye of Didimus & Verodianus. borne in Valencia: theſe reſiſted the vſurpations,
& determined to expell the tyrants frō theyr countryes.
Wherevppon at theyr owne, and at theyr kinſefolkes proper
coaſtes & charges, with the ayde of theyr frendes, they wente
vnto the mountaynes Perinei, to defende the paſſage ouer ye
ſame: not onlye againſt Conſtantinus the vſurper, but alſo
againſt all thoſe Nations before mentioned, endeuoringe to
maintayne and keepe Spayne in the continuall obedience, &

deuotiō of theyr Emperour Honorius, which they did a long
ſeaſon, although with great trauaile, maruelous ſlaughters
and extreame daungers. Wherewith Conſtantinus was
greatlye offended (beinge as he thought) not a little iniured,
and therevppon elected certaine of the moſt experte, and valiante
ſouldiours that he had, to go againſt them, ouer whom
he appointed Captaine Conſtantius his ſonne:Conſtantius. Who was of
ſuche force, and ſo well experienced in martiall feates, that
in the ende hee ouercame the two brothers, and entered into
Spayne. The which after the people of Conſtantius had wt
great tyrannye ſpoyled, and with moſt cruel warre ouer rūne
the countrye, they marched towardes the mountaynes Perinei,
from whence they expelled the Spaniardes, which were
appointed for the defence of thoſe hilles, & toke vppon themſelues
the cuſtodye, vnto which they were verye ſufficiente:
and Conſtantius went into Fraunce vnto a cittie called Arli,
where he founde his father. After whoſe departure, they
which kepte the paſſages, made a contracte with the Vandales
and other Nations, and for moneye ſoulde vnto them the
ſame, permittinge the Vandales, the Swyzers, and the Alanes,
to paſſe thorowe the countrye, who ſo waſted and ſpoyled
all Spayne, that ſufficientlye it cannot be reſighted or expreſſed,
eſpeciallye thoſe places adioyninge neare vnto the
mountaynes, becauſe there they were moſte reſiſted. After
they had exerciſed theyr barbarous crueltye in the countrye,
they went vnto the Cittye of Valentia which they vtterly deſtroyed:Valentia.
then they marched vnto the Cittie of Aſtorga, into
whiche they entered by force of armes, & ſo procedinge without
reſiſtāce, they greatly endamaged Galatia. From whence
coaſtinge ouer Caſtile,
                  Toledo a famous Citty. they came to Toledo, whiche Citty eyther
throughe the fortitude of the ſituation, or valiantnes of ye
inhabitantes, they coulde not conquere: (althoughe they cō
                  tinued
the ſiege many dayes) but were conſtrayned to depart
vnto the reproche and ſhame of themſelues, and the great honour
of that noble Cittie,Toledo▪
                   which for experience in warrefare
and martiall pollicye, hath alwayes bene reputed verye famous:
with this example, a great nomber of Spaniards remayned

faythfull vnto the Emperour Honorius, althoughe
he neuer ſent thither eyther Captayne or ayde. Theſe Nations
did very muche endamage the valleye of Toledo, and ſo
marched forwarde alonge ye ryuer of Tagus,
                  Tagus. vntill they came
vnto the Cittie of Liſbone,
                  Liſbone. which at that time was one of the
worthyeſt, and moſte famous Citties in Europe, the whiche
they aſſaulted, but it was ſo valiantlye defended of the Cittizens,
that they were not able to make any entrye: and therefore
were content to cōpounde with them for a certayne ſūme
of moneye, and ſo to rayſe theyr ſiege, then they returned that
waye by which they came, makinge warre in diuers places.
At whiche time the countrye beinge oppreſſed with famyne,
(as Oſorius affirmeth) they were conſtrayned to laye a part
theyr weapons, and geue themſelues to till the grounde, ſo
that beinge nowe become as it were Cittizens, they deuided
the conqueſtes amonge the Captaynes, and kinges, of the
Vandales, Alanes, and Swizers. Theſe troubles chaunſed
in this wyſe, (as ye haue harde) when Athaulfus, and the
Gothes kepte Narbone and Barcellona, who together were
confederates and frendes with Honorius,
                  Conſtantine. and when Conſtā
                     tine
the tyrant with his children did poſſeſſe the greateſt part
of Fraunce. The yonge Emperour Theodoſius beinge at
that inſtant a child, was nouriſhed in Conſtantinople vnder
the protection of the kinge of Perſia, and Antiochus his Captayne,
of whoſe royall parſon,Anthemius. and courte, was gouernoure
a very vertuous & wiſe mā called Anthemius: who brought
vp the yonge Prince in ſtudye of good letters, in ſuch ſort that
he proued vertuous, religious, and a good Chriſtian.
               
                  Honorius his vncle who made his abode in Rauenna,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      in a Prince. began
nowe to make preparation for the deliuerye of the Empyre of
the Weſte from the yoke of tyrantes, and barbarous Nations,
as was that of the Eaſt. For he elected an armye of ſouldiours,
and appointed generall ouer the ſame, a ſinguler and
valiant gentleman named Conſtantius, who of longe continuance
had bene an Earle and cittizen of Rome, and was deſ
                  
                     •
                  ended
from an auncient parentage. This worthy Captaine
with a Romanes harte and courage, hauinge a practiſed and

choſen hoaſte entered Fraunce, where he ouercame and put
to flight the mighty tyrante Conſtantine,
                  The death of Conſtantine the tyrante & others. and after beſieged
him in Arli, and in the ende toke him, and put him to death.
This enterpriſe had ſuch good ſucceſſe, that within few dayes
after the deathe of Conſtantine was certainlye knowen, Cō
                     ſtantius
his ſonne whom he had created Caeſar, was ſlaine at
Vienna in Fraunce by one of his Captaynes, called Gerontius:
                  Gerontius.
and the ſame Gerontius, (who alſo endeuoured to become
a tyrante,Ambitiō maketh traitors. and minded to create Emperour, a frende of
his named Maſſimus) was likewiſe ſlaine by the ſouldiours,
which had rebelled in England with Conſtantine, and now
were willinge to returne vnto the ſeruice of Honorius.
               
               After the death of Gerontius, they ſpoyled Maſſimus of hys
Emperiall tytles & dignities, & ſent him to inhabite Spaine.
In this manner as you haue harde, Fraunce was recouered
by the vertue of this excellent Captayne Conſtantius, and ye
armye of the rebelles with all deuotion & humility, returned
vnto theyr true Emperour Honorius: and ſent certayne captaynes
into Englande to recouer that againe, which from ye
beginninge of Conſtantines tyranny had diſobeyed,Englande. but now
peaceable yelded vnto the Emperour. Conſtantius the generall
Captayne for the Emperour (as you haue harde) was
nowe become very puiſant & mighty: when Athaulfus kinge
of the Gothes who remayned in Barcellona, and was Lorde
ouer the Countrye adioyninge thereunto, that had alſo at the
requeſt of Placidia his wyfe, ye ſiſter of Honorius, continued
in peace iii. yeares: began greatly to feare the might and power
of Honorius, & of his Captayne Conſtantius, who (as
he vnderſtode) had fortifyed the A
                     •
                  pes in ſuche ſort, that hee
might not againe inuade Italye, Wherefore he determined
to create himſelfe Lorde and kinge ouer all Spayne. And to
put it in practiſe, hee perſwaded a certayne Romayne Captayne
named Atalus, to take vppon him the title of Emperour,
and to collect an armye promiſinge that he would ayde
him vnto the ſegniorye of Andaloſia, together with the greateſt
parte of Affricke, and alſo woulde make warre for him.
Which offer Atalus with little foreſight, and leſſe diſcretion

accepted and preſently ſent into Affricke his hoaſte with gouernours
to rule the countrye, as if he had already bene Emperour
and in quiet poſſeſſion, & after begā with cruell warre
to inuade Spayne.Heraclian the Captayne of Honorius. Againſt whom Honorius ſent a valiante
Captaine named Heraclian: who droue oute of Affricke the
gouernours of Atalus, and leauinge it in peaceable quietnes,
went with his armye to encounter with Atalus, whom hee ouercame
in battaile vppō the ſea: And he flyinge into Spaine
was apprehended by the Spaniards, & was ſent into Fraūce
vnto Conſtantius the generall for the Emperour,Atalus. hee preſently
ſent him vnto Honorius, who cauſed one of his handes
to be cut from his arme, and then ſent him in exile vnto Lipari,
an Iſlande neare vnto Cicilia. And after preferred Heraclian
for the victorye which hee had obtayned vnto the dignitye
of Conſull,With proſperity groweth pride. and gaue vnto him the gouernment of Affricke,
whereby (as moſt commonly wee ſee, that with the encreaſe
of felicitye groweth pride and ambition in mens hartes,
which draweth them oute of the right pathe or waye in ye
which aduerſity or meane eſtate, kepeth them in) euen ſo this
Heraclian ſeinge himſelfe nowe to be come mighty & of great
power,Ambitiō forgetteth duty. determined to vſurpe vnto himſelfe the Empyre. And
beinge alreadye as it were Lord of Affricke (as Oſorius writeth)
he admitted for frende and companion in the Empyre (or
to ſaye more trulye) for a fellowe Captaine with him in his
rebelliō, one named Sabinus, a verye ſubtill perſon & of great
courage, whom he ſent into Italy againſt Honorius, & to cō
                  quere
ye country ſo huge a Nauye of ſhippes, as the like was
neuer redde of. For as ye ſame Oſorius affirmeth (if in the cō
                  putaciō
no error be cōmitted) there were of Veſſelles of great
and ſmall .iiii. thouſande lxx. Which without doubt was the
greateſt Nauye, that euer paſſed the ſea: For it was neuer
redde that Xerxes or Alexāder had ſo great a nomber. With
this Nauye, beinge furniſhed with ſouldiours and all neceſſaryes
thereunto belonginge, he arriued vppon the coaſtes of
Italye and there landed his ſouldiours, to marche towardes
Rome, who althoughe they were manye, yet were they not
ſo experte and well practiſed, as the Romaynes were, which

in verye good order expected their arriuall, beinge conducted
by an excellent Captaine called Marinus,
                  Marinus. who had the title &
name of a Countye. This Captaine kepte his ſouldiours in
very good order, and determined rather to dye, (if he mighte
not ouercome) then to be beſieged as other had bene of Alaricus.
Heraclian that thought to terrifye the whole world wt
his fame, & with his multitude of ſhippes and ſouldiours, and
ſuppoſed that he ſhould finde no power that was able to reſiſt
his: became ſtriken with ſuch feare, when he ſawe his armye
vppon the ſea diſcomfited,The flyinge awaye of Heraclian. that without abyding the battaile,
he returned backe, flyinge awaye by ſea in a Gally, & ſo came
with ſhame into Affricke, from whence he departed with ſo
great an armye. But immediatlye after his returne, his cowardlines
beinge vnderſtode, the ordinarye ſouldiours murmered
at it,The death of Heraclian. and ſlue him: And Sabinus his ſonne in Law and
companion (to eſcape the daunger of deathe) ſayled vnto Cō
                     ſtantinople,
and there beſeched the yonge Emperour Theodoſius,
to obtayne for his offence of his vncle pardon. Wherevppon
Theodoſius ſente him vnto Honorius,
                  Sabinus baniſhed. who at his requeſt
was content to graunte him life, notwithſtandinge hee
condemned him vnto perpetuall exile. In this wyſe as you
haue harde,The ende of all rebelles. all the tyrantes and rebelles, were by Honorius
confounded and deſtroyed: Who nowe knowinge himſelfe to
be wholy deliuered from Domeſtical ennemyes, and alſo the
greateſt part of his prouinces, to remaine towards him both
in peace and obedience, determined to expell from the Citties
of Spayne, Fraunce and Narbone, the barbarous Nations
which did poſſeſſe the ſame, and accompted it moſt expediente
to beginne with the Gothes,
                  The Gothes came oute of Scithia and Ruſſia, & yet poſſeſſed Spayne. who were the mightieſt, & beſte
practiſed in feates of armes, and inhabited y• part of Spaine
aforeſayd, nothinge doubtinge but if that they were expulſed,
he might with very great facilitye expell all other.
               
                  Athaulfus theyr kinge, as one who loued his wyfe Placidia
moſt entierelye, greatlye deſyred to haue peace with Honorius,
and did procure it by all meanes poſſible: whiche beinge
knowen,The death of Athaulfus. and perceyued of his ſouldiours (who deſyred
the contrary) was the cauſe that preſentlye they ſlue him.
               
                  
After whoſe deathe they elected for theyr kinge a ſtoute Captayne
of theyr owne countrye,Segericus choſen kinge of the Gothes was alſo preſentlye ſlaine by them. named Segericus: And becauſe
they ſuſpected ye like of him, as they did of Athaulfus, (which
was moſt true, that he deſired to haue peace with Honorius)
they ſiue him alſo. After the murtheringe of the two kinges,
they created kinge one Vualius, not doubtinge but that
he would be a mortall ennemye vnto the Romaynes, wt whō
they deſired alwayes to haue warres: they retayned as yet in
theyr cuſtodye Placidia the ſiſter of Honorius, wydowe vnto
Athaulfus, whom they vſed verye honourablye, and with all
reſpectes of honeſtye.Vualiꝰ created kinge of ye Gothes. 
                  Vualius takinge vppon him the gouernmente,
was very lothe, (as one that did accompte it neyther
profitable or neceſſarye) to warre with Honorius, but
being terrifyed with the death of the late .ii. kinges his predeceſſours,
as alſo to content his people, aſſembled an huge armye
of ſouldiours, & ſent them to conquere Affricke, which
at that time was in peace & obeyed vnto Honorius. But God
in the voyage wroughte miraculouſlye for the Emperour, by
ſending amonge them as they ſayled ſuch a terrible tempeſt,The power of God.
that the whole Nauye was almoſt deſtroyed. Which miſhappe
with the vnderſtandinge of Conſtantius) Honorius
Captaynes) cōminge againſt them, they did greatly aſſwage
the fiercenes of the Gothes: wherevppon Vualius vſed ſuche
pollicye with them, that willinglye and requeſted there unto
by them, he concluded a peace with Honorius, which was vppon
this condition:Peace made betwene Vualius & Honorius. That Placidia ſhould be reſtored vnto Honorius,
and Vualius with his ſouldiours, ſhould faythfullye
ayde and aſſiſte the County Conſtantius Captayne vnto Honorius,
to expell out of Spayne the Vandales, the Swyzers,
and the Alanes, which then had in theyr poſſeſſion the greateſt
parteof the countrye. The accorde beinge finiſhed Vualius
gaue good aſſurance and hoſtages, and Placidia was reſtored:
whom afterwarde Honorius gaue for wyfe vnto Conſtantius,
                  Conſtantius created Ceſar and ſucceſſor vnto Honorius.
in recompence of the manifolde and great victories
which he had atchiued, and obtayned in his behalfe, and created
him Caeſar, and pronounſinge him his ſucceſſor. Immediatlye
after this, Conſtantius and Vualius the kinge of the

                  Gothes, beganne theyr warre in Spaine againſt the barbarous
Nations, as hereafter ſhalbe ſheewed. While theſe
things as you haue hard of were a doing, the barbarous people
were become Lords of diuers partes of Spayne, and the
Vandales had gotten into their Segniory a great part of Bethica,
                  From when
                        •
                      Bethica toke the name Vā
                     daloſia & after Andaloſia.
which of them was named Vandaloſia, and after was
called Andaloſia. The Alanes and Swyzers occupyed Merida,
and a great parte of Lucitania, which at this preſente is
part of Portingale, and in Galitia, and in the kingdome of Lions,
they poſſeſſed alſo many great prouinces, & had amonge
themſelues, deuided the countryes by lottes. Conſtantius
the Emperours Captaine, beinge arryued in Spayne, and
with him the Gothes did preſentlye after his arriuall, enter
into battaile againſt the Alanes,
                  The victorye of Conſtantius. which inhabited neare vnto
the cittie of Merida, with whom he fought a moſt cruell and
terrible conflicte, in which the Alanes were vanquiſhed, and
the kinge who was called Acall ſlaine. This victory of Cō
                     ſtantius
ſo feared all the other Nations, that preſently wyth
all ſubmiſſion and humillitye, they requeſted peace of him, &
ſent to entreat and beſeche him, that he would graunte them
truce, and limit vnto them ſome one place in Spayne, where
they might inhabite and liue. While theſe affayres had this
proſperous ſucceſſe in Spayne, Honorius wente vnto Conſtantinople,
to viſite the eſtates of the Eaſte, where ye childe
Theodoſius his nephew gouerned: who now was growē vnto
yeares of diſcreſſion, & free from the gouernment of tutors.
And it chaunced that while he made his abode there, beinge
farre from Italye, and Conſtantius alſo occupyed wyth the
warres of Spaine,Tertallus a Romaine. that a certaine noble and mightye Romayne
named Tertallus, of a very aunciente familye, beinge
aſſiſted with a greate nomber of the people of Rome and Italye,
rebelled and toke on him the title of Emperour, and began
to inuade ye Empyre with a great nomber of ſouldiours:
but the frende and allies of Honorius came in battaile againſt
him, where he was both ouercome and ſlaine. After
whoſe death,Atalus. audacity and diſloyaltye began to enflame mens
harts, that an other named Atalus did as the other had done,

naminge himſelfe Emperour, alſo he leuyed a great nomber
of people thorowe out all Italye: which riote beinge vnderſtode
of Conſtantius in Spayne, where hee made his abode,
after the aforeſayde victorye, enforced him to myniſter great
hope vnto the Alanes, Swyzers, and Vandales, that he would
yeld vnto theyr deſired peace: for (ſome thinge to acquiet thē)
he publiſhed that he would go into Italy to debate thereof wt
                  Honorius, wherevppon he departed out of Spayne, & came
into Italye, whither alſo the Emperour was come, for that
he had intelligence of the troubles of Italye in Conſtantinople.
The arriualles of Honorius & Conſtantius being knowen
of in Rome, the common people aroſe in great fury,Atalus taken. and
apprehended the tyrant Atalus and ſente him to Honorius in
Rauenna, where was alſo at that inſtante Conſtantius with
his wyfe Placidia: and there by the commaundement of Honorius,
Atalus was bereiued of one of his handes, and then
ſent in exile vnto Conſtantinople. This without queſtion
was a maruelous example of clemency in Honorius, who remayninge
in Rauenna, where Conſtantius Caeſar his kinſeman
continued, after hee had with ſage aduiſe conſidered and
pondered, the noble actes and great exploytes which he had
atchieued,Conſtantius created of Honorius Ceſar and companion with him in the weſte Empyre. and howe beneficiall he had bene vnto the Emperiall
eſtate, cauſed him to be called Caeſar Auguſtus, and his
companion in the Empyre of the Weſt, which was done at a
very ſolempne feaſt, with a longe Oration pronounced in the
commendation of his honour. There the two Emperours
with mutuall conſent, to retayne in theyr ſeruice Vualius the
kinge of the Gothes, did geeue and eſtabliſhe vnto his people
the Cittie of Toloſa, which is in the kingedome of Fraunce,
with all the prouince adioyninge vnto the ſame,Aquitaine now called Guaſconye. called Aquitanie,
which they named Vaſconia, and nowe is called Guaſconie.
The feaſtes of the coronation of Conſtantius beinge
expyred, Honorius wente to Rome, to pacifye the tumultes
which raged in that Cittie, and Conſtantius the newe Emperour
determined to returne into Spayne, to ende ye warre
which he had begunne: which he would with muche honour
and greate renowne haue finiſhed, if death had not preuented

the noble pretence of this moſt worthye Captaine, and valiante
Emperour yt he had deliuered Spayne,What it is to leeſe a noble Captaine. from the inuaſion
of forraine Nations. His death was vnto Honorius a iuſt
cauſe of extreame griefe & ſorrow: who to ſupplye his roume
inſtituted for Captayne to go into Spayne,Etius elected captayne of Honorius for Spaine. a famous gentleman
both valiant and actiue, whoſe name was Etius: he without
protractinge of time, toke the hoaſte which Conſtantius
had collected, and marched towardes Spayne: where preſentlye
after his arriuall, he conceyued diſpleaſure againſt ye
                  Alanes, for that they had not elected to gouerne them a king,
ſince they were ouercome by Conſtantius, but were aſſociated,
and confederate with the Swyzers whiche gouerned the
countrye of Liſborne. But after they had perfecte vnderſtandinge
of ye death of Conſtantius, they returned vnto Merida,
recoueringe againe theyr priſtinate courages, and forthwyth
began to moue warre againſt the Cittyes whiche remained
faythfull vnto the Empyre. When Etius parceyued
that theſe Nations with one con
                     •
                  ent were comminge againſt
him, and knowinge his hoaſte not of force to encounter
with them, refrayned certayne dayes frō geuinge of battaile,
to the ende he might thereby encreaſe his armye, and deminiſhe
that of his enemyes, but his pollicy (without iuſt cauſe)
was of Honorius accompted a cowardly part, and therefore
he ſente to receiue his charge the Countye Caſtinus,
                  Caſtinus. whom
he ordayned his Captaine and ſucceſſour. Caſtinus ſeinge
the affayres of Spayne to be verye daungerous and ruinous,
allowed the counſaile of Etius, and in like maner protracted
the warre, vntil Bonifacius who was gouernor of Affricke,
came to ayde and 
                     •
                  uccour him with an expert hoaſte of ſouldiours,
and then theſe two armyes beinge ioyned in one, they
beganne the warre, and obtayned ſundrye notable victoryes
againſt the Barbarians, and procede ſo proſperouſlye, that it
was ſuppoſed for certaintye, that they woulde within ſhorte
ſpace haue deliuered Spayne from thoſe forraine Nations:Contentiō betwene Boniface and Caſtinus for ſuperioritye.
if through the contencion which aroſe betwene thoſe two valiante
Captaynes for ſuperiority, there had not followed this
inconuenience, that Bonifacius returned vnto his gouernment

in Affrica (as Proſper and Paulus Diaconus affirme)
whoſe departure, did greatlye dimyniſhe and bringe to ruine
a great part of the Romaine eſtates in Spayne. At ſuche
time as theſe things proceded in this wyſe in ye Weſt, Theodoſius
nephewe vnto Honorius and Emperour of the Eaſt,
beinge (as is ſayde) deliuered from tutors, and come vnto the
yeares of bearinge rule:Diſcorde betwene Theodoſtus & Barrobanus. was in greate diſpleaſure with Barrobanus
the king of Perſia, & ſucceſſor of Iſdegeron, becauſe
he had requeſted and admoniſhed him to deſiſte from perſecutinge
the Chriſtians, which did inhabite his countryes: For
Barrobanus would not yelde vnto his demaunde, but rather
perſecuted them the more, which tyrannye enforced Theodoſius
to ſende an armye into thoſe partes, wyth a ſinguler captayne
to gouerne the ſame called Ardaburus: Who preſentlye
came to battayle wyth Narſius, ye generall captayne ouer
the Perſians, and made of them verye greate ſlaughters, then
he iuuaded the whole countrye, maruelouſlye waſtinge and
ſpoylinge the ſame.The victorye of the Chriſtians againſt the Perſians and Saracines. Alſo Theodoſius ſent at that inſtant an
other Captaine, with an army againſt Alamander the kinge
of Saracines, who gaue vnto him a maruelous ouerthrowe, ſo
that he himſelſelfe eſcaped with muche difficultye oute of the
battaile. Moreouer an other Captaine of ye Romaynes called
Arcobiada, ouercame in battaile ye 
                  Perſians in ſuch ſorte,
that the honour of the Romaynes excedinglye encreaſed, and
the Perſians were enforced to deſiſte from perſecutinge the
Chriſtians.The death of Honorius. At this tyme dyed Honorius, after he had raigned
and gouerned the Empyre xxviii. yeares, for he gouerned
two yeares before his father dyed, and xiii. yeares together wt
his brother Arcadius, & xiii. yeares after his brothers death.
Hee lefte behinde him no children, for by his two wyues the
daughters of Stilicone he had no iſſue: a little before he dyed
there aroſe a diſcorde betwene him and his ſiſter Placidia, ſo
that he went to Conſtantinople vnto the Emperour Theodoſius
her nephewe, with her two ſonnes whiche ſhee had by
Conſtantius, whoſe names were Honorius, & Valentinianus
who afterward was Emperour. Honorius dyed after
the incarnation of Chriſt .4. hundred and xxvii. yeares.
            
            
               
               Theodoſius the ſeconde of that name▪
               
               
               
                  MAruailous haue bene the affayres of the
empyre, their warres aſwel proſperous
as vnfortunate, which haue continued
in ye Empyre by the ſpace of thoſe .400.
yeares (or there aboutes) of which wee
haue intreated, as the reader may with
ſmall trauaile eaſelye comprehende.
               And althoughe the Empyre at ſondrye
tymes, hath bene greatlye afflicted and oppreſſed, and in danger
of vtter ruine, yet in thende hither unto it hath bene deliuered
from aduerſitye, and recouered her priſtinate dignitye
and forces.The declin
                        •
                     g of the empyre in the ſecrete counſaile of God. But from this time forward (throughe the ſecrete
iudgement of God) ye affayres of thempyre proceded not
in ſuch order, but rather cōtinually decreaſed & did looſe theyr
forces. Albeit at ſondrye tymes throughe the worthines of
ſome valiante Emperours and Captaynes, ſhe recouered her
priſtinate maieſtye, and was both honoured and feared, yet
ſhe cold neuer attaine vnto her auncient dignitye: for that the
ſame happened verye ſildome. But from this preſente forwardes,
at diuers times by ſundrye accidentes, themperours
haue loſte both prouinces and Regions, ſo that in thoſe haue
begunne perticuler kingdomes and eſtates, & by the ſtrength
which the Empyre loſte, were made other great and mighty
kingdomes, and as theyr power and Dominions encreaſed,
ſo the euentes and chaunces whiche happened were greater:
which I cannot reherſe, neither if I might will do it, for that

my intent neyther was, nor is to deſcribe a generall Chronicle,The intent of the Aucthor.
but onlye the liues of the Emperours, as ſuccintlye as I
maye. Wherefore with that breuity which I may well vſe,
I will procede in this my enterpriſe, writinge onlye the thinges
of importaunce in the Hiſtoryes of the Emperours: And
that I may very reſtrictly finiſhe my ſtorye, omitting thoſe of
other kinges & kingdomes, which in this diſcourſe ſhal occur
vnto mee, vnto other which haue, and do take vppon them a
longer treatiſe. For to proſecute fullye the eſtate of all Princes,
the eſtate of Religion, the faule of the mightye prelates,
the ambitious purpoſes againſt God & their Princes, would
ryſe to an huge and mighty Volume.
               
                  Honorius beinge dead, the gouernment of the whole Empyre
remayned onlye vnto Theodoſins his nephewe, who at
that inſtant made his abode in Conſtantinople. This Emperour
perceyuing that many tumultes endeuored to vſurpe
the Empyre of the Weſt, and alſo that the tumultes of ye barbarous
Nations excedinglye encreaſed, created Caeſar for
thoſe prouinces beinge but a child,Valentinian beinge but a childe was made Ceſar. his coſyn Valentinian the
ſonne of Placidia, ſiſter vnto the Emperours Honorius and
Arcadius, and wyfe vnto the excellent Captayne and Emperour
Conſtantius, by whoſe wyſedome and pollicye, the Empyre
was ſo well gouerned, with the ouerthrow of many puiſant
tyrantes: that not longe after the recouerye of Italye, ye
yonge Caeſar was by the conſente of Theodoſius, and of the
people created Emperour. As longe as theſe two Emperours
liued, there were continuallye ſuch greuous and bloudye
warres, kept by the barbarous Nations, as of the Hunnes,
Gothes, Vandales, and other ſtraūge Nations, that the
whole world was vexed and boyled in moſt cruell ſlaughters,
but that which was kept by a people of Germany called Frā
                     chi,
                  From whēce the Frenchemen diſcēded.
who toke theyr name (as ſome affirme) of the Cittye Frā
                     conia,
excelled all the other, for they perceyuinge, that the
Emperiall Captaynes were buſyed in the warres againſte ye
                  Burgundions and Gothes, and that the Emperour Valentinian
had his hoaſt diſcomfited in Affricke, by a tyrant called
Bonifacius, & alſo that his coſyn Theodoſius was occupyed

wyth thaffayres of the Eaſt, determined to inuade Fraunce,
from whence not longe before in the time of the Emperours
Honorius and Arcadius, they were expelled by the Vandales,
Alanes, and Sueuians, and alſo by a Romayne Captayne
named Etius. But now with the helpe of the time beinge become
mightye, they entered into the prouinces of Sennoni,
Aurelieſi, & of Paris, of all which in ſhorte ſpace they became
patrones,The firſt kinge of Fraunce. hauinge vnto theyr Captaine Faramund the ſonne
of Marcamund, who was the firſt kinge of the Frenchemen,
vnto whom ſucceded Clodius who alſo was theyr kinge: So
that in proceſſe of time their power grew to be ſuch, that Gallia
was called of them Fraunce, and at this daye theyr kinge
is called the kinge of Fraūce.From whēce the Frenchmen had beginninge. Of this Nation of the Frenche
men, certaine Frenche Hiſtoryes reherſe diuers fables, ſayinge
that they deſcended from the Troyans, and from a ſonne
of Hectors called Francus, from whom they deriue theyr
name. Other affirme that they obtayned this name by certaine
Frauncheſſe (that is, priuileges and immunites) which
they had in the time of Valentinian the firſt: All whiche are
both fayned & vntrue, For Hector had neuer any ſuch ſonne,
neyther do they deſcende from the Troyans, neyther is there
founde anye mention of more Antiquitye to be made of theſe
Frenchmen,The beginninge of the Frenchmen. then from the time of Aurelian themperour,
who ouercome them in the yere after thincarnation of Chriſt
270. or there aboutes,The yeare of Chriſt. 270. neyther did they obtayne this name in
the time of Valentinian, for he was longe after, & they (as I
haue ſayd) were ſo called two hundreth yeares before. Notwithſtandinge,
at that preſent, there were certaine vnknowē
Nations, of whom neyther Caeſar, Strabo, Plinni, Cornelius
Tacitus, Pomponius Mela, nor Ptolomie, euer made any
mention, becauſe then they had no names, nor were not knowen.
For if it had bene otherwyſe, ſome one, yea the greater
parte of theſe writers, woulde haue left ſome memorye of
them:When the Frenchmen came into knowledge. Let this ſuffice therefore that the Frenchemen came
into knowledge, in the time of Aurelian or there aboutes.
It is alſo to be conſidered yt thoſe kinges which in theſe dayes
raigne in Fraunce, haue no righte or intereſt therevnto, nor

do not deſcende from that ſtirpe or familye, for the houſe of ye
kinges of Fraunce hath had diuers alterations. The firſt, in
the yeare of our ſauioure Chriſte. 750.The yeare of Chriſt. 750. when kinge Childericke
was depriued by Zacharie ye Pope, after the kingdome
had bene gouerned by the Frankes .330. yeares:Childericke. then was elected
Pipin the father of Charlemaine,
                  Pipinus. a Germaine borne,
ſo that then the Frankes loſte the ryall Scepter, which continued
vnto the deſcendentes of Pippin 238. yeres, which was
in the yeare of our Sauiour 990.Capuccio. Then a mightye barron of
Fraunce named Iohn Capuccio obtayned the kingdome, vnto
whoſe ſucceſſors it remayned, vntill yt for wante of heyres
males, it deſcended lawfullye by mariage vnto the kinges of
Englande, which title oure moſt gratious ſoueraigne Ladye
the Queenes moſt excellent maieſty enioyeth at this preſent,
and in this accorde, agree all good and true aucthors.
               But to returne vnto the Hiſtorye, I ſaye that the Frenchmen
entered the prouinces with ſuche force, that in all theyr
attempes, they obtayned moſt proſperous ſucceſſe. But the
Empyre of Theodoſius in the Eaſt continued in great quietnes
and tranquillitye, in reſpect of that of the Weſte, whiche
was alwayes afflicted with moſte cruell and tumultuous inuaſions
of the barbarous Nations, for the reſiſting of whoſe
furyes Theodoſius ſent continuallye Captaynes and ſouldiours
into Italy. Wherevppon Atlas the kinge of the Gothes,
ſuppoſing the Empyre of Conſtantinople vnforniſhed
of Captaynes and ſouldiours to defende the ſame, (not contente
with the conqueſte of Hungarye and manye Citties in
Germanye) determined alſo vppon that occaſion to aſſaulte
that Empyre. So that Theodoſius was enforced to ſende for
thoſe Legions which he had ſent vnto Cicilia for to ayde Valentinian,
to defende his Countryes and prouinces from the
inuaſions of ſo mightye an ennemye, who had in his ayde and
fauour the Turlinges, Tungries, Oſtrogothes, and Marcomanes,
with diuers other Nations of the North, which moſt
like vnto ſwarmes of Bees repayred dailye vnto Atlas from
all partes, who prepared himſelfe to inuade the Empyre of
Conſtantinople, but by reaſon of a ſuſpition which aroſe betweene

him and his brother Beda, and of certaine controuerſies
amonge thoſe kinges which they conducted with them, ye
warre proceeded not with ſuche violence as it did before, althoughe
they deſiſted not from ſpoylinge the whole countrye
as they marched. While theſe troubles continued in this
wyſe in Fraunce, Italye, Spayne, Cicilie, Germanye, and
Conſtantinople:
                  Scottes the Scottes and Redſhankes, or Pictes,
moſt fiercelye inuaded England, which at that time was called
Britannye. Wherevppon the Romaynes which at that
inſtante gouerned the Iſlande (diſpayringe of all ayde at the
Emperours handes) allured with promiſes and greate ſummes
of moneye to aſſiſt them,Angli, were Saxons whiche were called of the Romaynes vnto their ayde. the Saxons called Angli, a noble
people of Germany, bordering vppon the ſea coaſt. Theſe
inuited with moneye, and with the fertilitye of the countrye,
ſayled wyth theyr kinge Ingiſt into Britannye, where with
the ayde of ye inhabitātes, they both ſubdued & ouercame their
enemyes. But afterward ambition ſo raigned in theyr hartes,
that they did in the Iſlande, as the Vandeles had done in
Affricke, for within ſhorte ſpace they became patrones of the
whole countrye, and ouer came the inhabitantes, in ſuch wyſe
that they in the time of Auguſtus ye Emperour, draue them
into Fraunce, where they remayned in that parte, whiche
throughe theyr comminge at this preſente is called Britannye.
In this wyſe the Empyre loſte that Iſlande,Britannye called of the Angli, Anglia, or Englande. and the
kingdome thereof remayned vnto the Saxons who altered ye
name of Britannye, and called it Anglia or Englande, which
name as yet continueth, althoughe there haue bene in y• ſame
diuers alterations, with infinite warres and troubles. Of
all which: beſides Beda,
                  
                     Polidor Virg. a diligent writer of the affayres of England. with diuers other Hiſtoriographers,
Polidorus Virgilius, ye moſt diligent Chronicler of our time,
hath written a noble and famous Hiſtorye. While Theodoſius
was ſeriouſlye buſied at Conſtantinople, in leuyinge
of ſouldiours againſt Atlas, hee was ſtryken with the peſtilence,
whereof he dyed within few dayes, after he had gouerned
the Empyre xlii. yeares,The death of Theodoſius. whoſe death was vnto the whole
Empyre occaſion of muche griefe and ſorrowe, for hee was a
mercifull, vertuous, and a moſt Chriſtian Prince, finallye

there wanted no vertue in him, that was requiſite in a moſte
worthy Emperour, for he was endued with all goodnes, and
voyde of all vice.The yeare of Chriſt .450. He dyed in the yeare after the incarnation
of our Sauiour Chriſt .450.
               In his time beganne the hereſye of the Neſtorians,The hereſye of the Neſtorians. which
was introducted by Neſtor the heretike, biſhoppe of Conſtā
                     tinople,
who iudged moſt peruerſlye of the deuinity of Ieſus
Chriſt, both God and man, the redeemer of mankinde. This
hereſye by a generall counſaile helde at Epheſus of 200. biſhoppes,
in the time of Pope Celeſtine, was condempned together
with Neſtor, who alſo was excommunicated: One of
the chiefe of this coūſaile,Cirill: was ſaint Cirill biſhoppe of Alexandria,
a moſt learned doctour in Diuinitye, as his workes
at this preſente moſt manifeſtlye declare.Chriſoſtome and other floriſhed at this time. Alſo at
this inſtante flouriſhed S. Chriſoſtome, Caſſian
the heremite his Diſciple, who wrote a moſte
holy and learned Epiſtle againſt Neſtor.
There flouriſhed alſo Sozomen, Socrates
and Theodoret, with diuers
other moſt learned
Deuines *
            
            
               
               Valentinian the ſeconde of that name.
               
                  
               
               
                  AFter the death of Theodoſius, the whole
Empyre remayned onlye vnto Valentinian,
who at that inſtant made his abode
in the Weſte, which was not little afflicted
with warres, & continuall inuaſions
of ſondry nations. This Emperour cō
                  ſideringe
that the Empyre of the Eaſte
was inceſſantlye moleſted by Atlas, marryed his ſiſter Pulcheria
vnto a valiant and worthye auncient Captayne named
Martian, whom he created Emperour and gouernour of the
Eaſt: Whereof after Atlas had vnderſtandinge, he deſiſted
from farther attemptinge the conqueſte of Conſtantinople,
as a thinge verye difficulte, and of longe trauaile, and departed
towardes the Weſt, mindinge to conquere Fraunce and
Italy. Againſt whō 
                  Valentinian ſente a worthy Captayne
named Etius, who ordinarily was his generall in Fraūce, hauinge
firſt, bothe he and the Emperour Martian concluded a
peace with Genſericke the kinge of the Vandales. This Etius
encombred Atlas verye muche, for with many ouerthrowes
which hee gaue vnto his ſouldiours, hee made manifeſte
proues of his excellencye in martiall affayres, and in the ende
he vanquiſhed him in a notable battaile▪ and put him to flight.
Which victorye cauſed Valentinian to ſuſpect that Etius eudeuoured
to create himſelfe Emperour, and that he practiſed
ſecretelye with Atlas for the ſame intent, ſince that in the former
battaile he had not vtterlye deſtroyed his whole armye▪
                  
wherefore hee cauſed him ſecretelye to be ſlaine,Etius murthered. whoſe death
was the occaſion of the ruine of Italye, and of the Empyre of
the Weſte. For Atlas vnderſtandinge of the death of Etius,
returned into Atalye, (the which at that inſtante was peaceable
enioyed of Valentinian) & aſſaulted the ſame, which none
of the Emperours endeuored to reſkewe or ſuccour, for that
they were vnfurniſhed with ſuch a ſufficient armye, as might
reſiſt the force of their ennemies.Aquileia beſieged. Wherefore Atlas beſieged
the Cittie of Aquileia, and continued the ſayd ſiege iii. yeres,
before he wonne the towne: and then after he had committed
vnto the ſworde all that he founde a liue,Abuileia takē and vtterlye ſubuerted by Atlas. he cauſed the Cittie
to be deſtroyed and made plaine with the grounde, not permittinge
to ſtand eyther houſe or place, that might ſerue for
any habitation: Althoughe it was at that inſtante, the moſte
noble, and the moſt richeſt Cittie (or the ſeconde) that was in
the whole worlde. After the fierce tyrante had deſtroyed
Aquileia, in fewe dayes he conquered manye other noble Citties,
as Mantua, Breſcia, Cremona, and Bergama, & went vnto
the conqueſt of Rauenna, whiche for that the Emperours
kept there theyr Courtes, was at that inſtant accompted the
moſt worthyeſt and famouſte Cittye of Italye, it yelded notwithſtanding
vnto Atlas, without abydinge eyther battaile
or aſſault. From thence hee marched thorowe Tuſchanie,
not mindinge to ſtaye vntill he came to Rome, wt which Cittye
he publiſhed yt he would deale with it, as he had done with
Aquileia.
                  Pope Leo. At that preſente was Pope, Leo the firſt of that
name, who at the interceſſion of Valentinian the Emperour,
went againſt Atlas with many Senators, moſt humblye beſechinge
him, that he woulde not deſtroye Rome, but pardon
that Cittye. Which dutye of Leo was executed with ſuche
wiſedome & eloquence, yea it pleaſed God to forme his words
with ſuche force, that althoughe Atlas was the moſt cruell &
obſtinate Prince that euer was portrayed or Chronicled, yet
he was with his Oration ſo ouercome, that hee did not onlye
deſiſte and leaue his iourneyinge towardes Rome, but alſo
determined to abandon all Italye,Eloquence of great force. and to retourne vnto his
auncient ſeate in Hungary, hauinge firſt receyued of the Romaynes

a great ſumme of money, for the acknowledginge of
his Segniorye. The eſtate of that Empyre through the wickednes
of the inhabitantes, was in ſuch miſerye & extremity,
that they durſte not denye vnto Atlas that which he demaunded,
but accompted it a moſte happye and fortunate euente, yt
they eſcaped with ſuch facilitye, the daunger of his cruell and
tyrannicall determination. After Atlas was returned into
Hungarye, he marryed Honoria the ſiſter of Valentinian, &
at the feaſte of his mariage daye, he ouercharged himſelfe wt
ſo muche wyne & meate, yt in the nighte his nature not being
of force to ſupporte ſo greate a burden,The death of Atlas the tyrante. there began to iſſue frō
him great abundance of bloud, whereof he dyed in his bedde.
Whoſe death began to reſtore libertye vnto the Empyre, althoughe
the Weſte part was in a maner vtterlye deſtroyed,
whereby aroſe the greatnes of the Empyre of the Eaſt and of
Conſtantinople. The next yere after the death of Atlas, Valentinian
was alſo ſlaine,The death of Valentinian. by a ſouldiour named Tranſill:
aſwell to reuenge the death of his Captaine named Etius,
as alſo beinge hyred thereunto by one Maximus
whoſe wyfe Valentinian had enforced. He
dyed after he had gouerned the Empyre thirtene
yeares. In the yeare of our Lorde
and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. 456.
            
            
               
               Martianus.
               
               
                  IMmediatlye after Valentinian was murthered,
(as Procopius and Paulus Diaconus, wt
ſondrye other Aucthors do affirme) Maximus
a Cittizen of Rome,Maximus vſurpeth the name of Emperour. diſcended of a noble bloud
or familye, preſently vſurped the name of Emperour:
and became patrone of the Cittye, and of all Italy.
               Alſo to aſſure his vſurpation, hee practiſed by diuers meanes
and ſubtilties, to take vnto wyfe (although more by force
thē through loue) Eudoſia, which was but a little before the
wyfe of Valentinian, and daughter of Theodoſius the yonger.
Vnto whom after he had her perſon in poſſeſſion, thinkinge
thereby to purchaſe her fauoure, he diſcouered that he
had cauſed her late huſbande Valentinian to be ſlaine, eſpeciallye
for that he was ſurpriſed and ouercome with the loue of
her beutye. That confeſſion did little mittigate or aſſwage
the wrathe of Eudoſia,
                  Murther. but rather with ſuch force augmented
the Ire and hatred which ſhe bare towardes him, that ſhe determined
by ſome meane or waye to be reuenged. And ſuppoſinge
that ſhe might not from Conſtantinople, and from the
Emperour Martian haue any ayde, ſecretelye ſhe wrote vnto
Genſerick the kinge of ye 
                  Vandales,
                  Genſerick ye kinge of the Vandales at the interceſſion of Eudoſia commeth into Italye. who reigned in Affricke:
whom ſhe moſt earneſtly beſeched, that he would vouchſafe to
deliuer her out of the handes, and from the cuſtodye of Maximus.
Genſerick minded not to omit ſo preſent an occaſion,
for that he conceyued he might thereby, eyther become Lord
ouer all Italye, or at the leaſt thorowlye ranſancke and ſpoile

the ſame. Wherefore employinge his whole force, hee aſſembled
a mightye hoaſte, and paſſed into Italye ſo puiſant,
(that moſt Aucthors affirme) he conducted with him thirtye
hundreth thouſande ſouldiours:The ende of 
                        〈◊〉
                      murtherer. Againſt this greate force of
Genſerick, Maximus was neyther able, nor durſt make any
reſiſtance: althoughe he aſſayed euerye waye that mighte be
immagined. Wherefore being depriued of all hope, he fledde
towardes Rome, but in his iourney hee was ſlaine by a valiante
Captaine named Orſus.
               
               After Genſerick was arriued in the conſines of Italye, ye
feare of him was ſuche in Rome, yt the moſt part of the noble
men did flye & abandon the ſame.The office of a true paſtor. But the deuoute and holy
Pope Leo, foreſeinge the greate calamitye which was imminente
vnto the poore Cittye, as a good ſheepe harde determined
to haſarde his life, for ye defence or ſafegarde of his weake
flocke. And hauiuge intelligence of the extreme crueltye
which Genſericke had vſed, towardes the biſhoppes of Affricke,
for that he was infected with the ſecte of the Arrians,
hee went to meete with him before he came to Rome, and requeſted
him with all lowlines and ſincere humilitye,The Pope humble in neceſſitye. that for
Chriſtes ſake, he would mittigate or aſſwage the furye, and
that hee woulde contente himſelfe with the praye of the ſubſtance,
and riches of the Romaynes, and leaue vntouched the
ornamentes of the whollye Temples. The cruell tyrante
(notwithſtandinge this interceſſion) wente vnto Rome, and
entered the ſame with his whole armye,Gēſerick ſacketh Rome. ſpoylinge & ſacking
without difference, aſwell thinges ſacred, as prophane. And
after he had continued the ſpoyle of the Cittye xiiii. dayes, hee
departed from thence with infinite riches and priſoners, caryinge
with him Eudoſia & her ii. daughters, whom afterward
he ledde with him into Affricke. In ſuch wiſe was Rome,
(the heade of the whole worlde, and Emprice ouer all Nations
and people) taken and ſacked by the Vandales, hauinge
beene once before (as is reherſed) ſpoyled by the Gothes: A
maruailous example, ſufficient to inſtructe all men of euerye
condition and eſtate, that they oughte to contempne and accompte
as nothinge the dignityes, honours, promotions and

Empyres of this world.Naples. From Rome he departed vnto Naples
and beſieged the Cittye, but it was ſo valiantly defended
by the inhabitantes, that he rayſed his ſiege and departed into
Affricke, laden with treaſure and ſpoyles: where he marryed
one of the two daughters of Valentinian, vnto his ſonne
Traſimond who ſucceaded him in the eſtate. This happened
in the ſixt yeare of the raigne of Martian, and the ſeconde after
the death of Valentinian. After Genſerick was departed
out of Italy, the principall Senators, & noble men of Rome,
immediatlye returned thither, & elected by common conſent
to be Emperour of Rome, Italy and Sicilia, an auncient Romaine
both of bloud and yeares named Auitus,
                  Auitus a Romaine elected Emperour. which election
was approued and confirmed by the Emperour Martian:
who conceyued an aſſured hope, that therby ye Romaine Empyre
ſhould be maintayned and conſerued in the preſent eſtate.
But theſe preſumptions or ſuppoſitions, were wholye diſturbed
by the deathe of the Emperour Martian,
                  The death of Martian.
who was poyſoned in Conſtantinople, by the treaſon
and practiſes of Ardibure, and of Aſpar his
father: which happened in the yere of our Sauiour
Chriſt .459. After he had gouerned
the Empyre .7. yeares, beinge (as you
haue hard) a vertuous & iuſt Prince,The yeare of Chriſt.
who bath preſerued and encreaſed
the Empyre of the
Eaſte.
            
            
               
               Leo the firſt of that name.
               
               
                  AFter the deathe of Martian, certaine tyrantes
which had bene the occaſion of his
death, endeuoured by ſondrye meanes to
vſurpe the Empyre, but their pretences
not enioyinge or obtayninge any good or
proſperous ſucceſſe, they created Emperour
Leo, a Gretian: Who in the beginninge
of his raigne,Leo choſen Emperour. did ſo worthilye and brauelye behaue
himſelfe, yt there was not one of his moſt mightye ennemyes,
which had the courage to rebell or moue warre againſt him.
But the Empyre of the Weſte, there were both in Italy and
Cicilia, marueilous alterations and changes of many Emperours,
worthye to be compared vnto their auncitors, rather
for theyr title and name, then for theyr aucthoritye or continuance
in the adminiſtration. The mightye and puiſant Genſerick
kinge of the Vandales, did not deſiſte from moleſtinge
and ſpoylinge the Citties of Italye and Cicilia, of whiche Ilande
in the ende he became patrone. In the firſt yeare of the
raigne of Leo,
                  The death of Auitus. 
                  Auitus dyed at Rome, where as is before mē
                  tioned)
he ruled: after whoſe death ye Romaine armye which
remayned about Rauenna, did elect and nominate Emperor
a worthy captaine named Magioran,
                  Magioran elected Emperour of Rome vnto which election cō
                  ſented
alſo the Emperour Leo: He was verye carefull in defendinge
Italy from inuaſion of Genſerick, and of other barbarous
nations, and made preparation to ſaile into Affricke,
mindinge to recouer the ſame, but he colde not bringe his enterpriſe
vnto any good ende, for yt he was preuented by death

after he had bene Emperour .iii. yeres & certaine monethes,
ſome write that hee dyed of a naturall death,The death of Magioran. other affirme yt
he was ſlaine by ye ſouldiours which created him Emperor.
               In his place was choſen an other mighty Captayne named
Seuerianus,
                  Seuerian elected Emperour. who gaue vnto ye 
                  Alanes a maruelous ouerthrow
and ſlue in the conflicte Berigus their kinge, after which victorye
hee returned vnto Rome where hee dyed, when he had
gouerned the Empyre .iiii. yeares.The death of Seuerian. In exchange of whom
was receiued & created Emperour, a noble Captaine which
was ſent by Leo into Italye, to ſuccour and defende the ſame
againſt the Vandales, named Anthemius, a ſonne in lawe vnto
Martian the Emperour the anteceſſor of Leo.
                  Anthemius elected Emperour. But there
aroſe preſently againſt him, and vſurped the name of Emperour,
a Captaine named Geruandus, who was the Preſident
and gouernour of the prouince of Narbone, which part onlye
of all Fraunce remayned in obedience, at that inſtante vnto ye
Empyre. But Anthemius vſinge expedition and diligence,
ſente againſt him his Captaines, who apprehended him, and
condempned him vnto perpetuall exile: and in his place to gouerne
the prouince of Narbone, Anthemius ſente a ſinguler
frend of his named Belimer: The former rebelliō was ſcarcelye
thorowlye appeaſed, when in Rome there aroſe an other
mightye perſon named Patritius, but he was with like facilitye
ouercome by Anthemius. While theſe mutations and
deathes of Emperours happened in this wiſe in Italye, the
Emperour Leo enioyed quietly Greece and the whole Eaſt,
with muche honour and worthines: when the valiante Genſerick
kinge of Vandales and of Affricke, ſeinge the dailye
calamities which happened in Italye, determined with that
ſo good an occaſion, to make himſelfe Lorde ouer Italye, of
whoſe riches he had manye times (to his great contentaſion)
moſt happely taſted of. Vppon this reſolution therefore he
aſſēbled together as great an armye as he might, both of his
Vandales & of the people of Affricke: Which beinge vnderſtode
of the Emperour Leo (who very well knew yt 
                  Anthemius,
who gouerned in Italy was not able to withſtand Gē
                     ſerick)
and that if his eſtate were ouerthrowne, his mighte

not remaine in ſecuritye, eſpeciallye Schiauonia which was
neare adioyninge vnto Italye, hee determined therefore to
prepare in all that hee mighte againſt Genſerick, and to ayde
Anthemius, who at that inſtant was ſeriouſlye buſied, in makinge
of prouiſion for the defence of Italye, and had prepared
a ſinguler armye of ſhippes to fighte with him vppon the ſea.
               After Leo had leuyed as greate an hoaſte as hee was able,
bothe of valiaunte Captaynes and couragious ſouldiours,Baſiliſcus ye Captaine of Leo.
he ordayned for generall, a very noble man named Baſiliſcus,
who was brother vnto the Empreſſe his wyfe, and coſin vnto
Anthemius. He departed with a moſt mighty armye from
Cōſtantinople, and ſailed with proſperous winde into Italye,
where he ioyned with the nauye of Anthemius, & ſo coaſted
to ioyne with the armye of Genſerick, who at that inſtant
was ſaylinge with his nauye verye neare vnto the bankes of
Italye: So that the .ii. armyes were come thone within the
conſpect of thother, when Genſerick perceyuinge that his ennemyes
were more actiue, and better practiſed vppon the ſea
then his ſouldiours were, began the battaile with feare, not
hopinge of any victorye, for he wittinge of the diſauauntage,
determined to departe out of the battaile, while the Gallyes
were buſyed to fight,The ouerthrowe of Genſerick. thone againſt thother: and in thende began
ſo to do. Which after his ſouldiours perceyued, they altogether
fledde after him: being purſued and chaſed by theyr
ennemyes, and in this wyſe with the loſſe of his ſouldiours &
of manye ſhippes, he fledde with ſhame and reproche into Affricke.
Baſiliſcus continued the chaſe, and landed not xx. miles
from Carthage (and as Procopius mētioneth) if preſentlye
he had marched with his armye vnto Carthage, he might
without reſiſtance haue taken the ſame, and alſo for that Gē
                     ſerick
ſhoulde haue bene enforced (as one baniſhed and forſaken)
to abandon the countrye, he mighte haue recouered the
priſtinate ſegniorye of the whole prouince: for on the other
part towardes the Eaſte, a Captaine named Hera
                        •
                     lius (who
was ſent by Leo the Emperour) had conquered the Cittye of
Aripolis, with diuers other townes and fortreſſes therevnto
adioyninge. Wherefore for the wante of ſage aduiſe, or for

that Baſiliſcus was corrupted with ſome greate ſūme of moneye,
(as diuers affirme) he ceaſed the warre, remayninge ſatiſfyed
and content with that victorye: & from thence he ſayled
into Cicilia, mindinge to recouer in that Ilande, the Citties
& townes which were poſſeſſed of Genſerick. While
the Captaynes of the Emperour Leo were buſied in theſe affayres,Aſpar.
                  Aſpar together with his ſonne Ardibure, fearinge yt
through ye great power of Baſiliſcus, they might not in time to
come attaine vnto theyr wiſhed deſyre, determined (as it were
by rygor or cōpulſion) to enforce the Emperour to create Ardibure,
                  The wordes of Aſpar vnto the Emperour Leo.
                  Caeſar as he promiſed whē he was made Emperour.
               Wherefore Aſper (as one that was of greate power and
aucthoritye) at this inſtante requeſted Leo with ſuch ſtoutenes
and vehemencye, that hee woulde perfourme and fulfill
his promiſe, that he ſhaked his Emperiall robe which he did
weare, and ſaide: Leo, thou oughteſt to diſcharge thy promiſe
made vnto mee: for this Veſture with whiche thou arte
adorned,An excellente ſayinge. ought not to harbor vntruth. The Emperour anſwered,
neyther muſt it ſuſteyne, that any man vſe towardes
it force or violence. Aſpar by theſe wordes conceyuinge the
determination of the Emperour, determined by force of armes
to create his ſonne Caeſar, and began preſentlye to leuye
an armye. Wherevppon the Emperour with all celeritye,
ſente for his Captaine Baſiliſcus, willinge him, (that all his
other affayres ſet a parte) hee woulde with his whole armye
come to ſuccour him:Aſpar ouercome by Leo. for before his landinge the Emperour
was in a maruelous diſtreſſe and daunger, but immediatlye
after Baſiliſcus arriued, he fought againſt the father and the
ſonne (who both were very valiante) and in the ende after diuers
conflictes ouercame them, and put them to death at the
commaundement of the Emperour. After the ouerthrow
of Genſerick, Anthemius enioyed a moſt quiet gouernmente
in his Empyre of Italye. But as ther neuer was, ſo maye
there not be founde eyther ſtabilitye or ſecuritye, in this moſt
troubleſome and wretched eſtate of mans life, for in the chiefeſte
felicities happen moſte extreame calamities: as witneſſeth
the ſodaine faule and ruine of this Emperour. When

                  Rithiner or Richimer (who as we ſaid) ouercame the Alanes
and ſlue their kinge at Bergamo,
                  Rithiner rebelleth agaīſt Anthemius. began (as one altogether
vnmindfull of the manifolde promotions & dignities whiche
he had receiued) to rebell againſt his Lord and father in law.
And hauinge aſſembled a maruelous huge nomber of valiant
ſouldiours, he marched into Italye againſt the Emperour:
who not beinge able to reſiſt ye puiſance of ſo mighty an hoaſt,
fortifyed in the beſt maner that he might the Citty of Rome,
hopinge in time to receiue frō 
                  Leo ſome ayde or ſuccour: but
his expectation was made fruſtrate, for Rithimer ouercame
al thoſe Captaines, which were ſent from Leo to ſuccour Anthemius:
and in thende ſlue the Emperour and wonne the
Cittye alſo,Rome ye third time taken & ſacked. which he moſt cruelly ranſacked and ſpoyled, excepte
onlye two places which he reſerued vnto his proper vſe.
               In this maner was Rome the thirde time ſpoyled, after it
had ſuſtayned manye trauailes, muche affliction, and infinite
rapes: So that by this, as in a myror or moſt brighte Criſtall
a man may eaſelye perceiue, that the world cannot geue
any felicity, which it doth not in ye ende take againe: Neyther
doth it exalt any Citty or Empyre, vnto any highe renoune or
dignitye,No kingdome ſtedfaſt. but in fine wt extreme miſerye & infinite calamityes,
he abaſeth the ſame whē God ſeeth time. Rome once ſubdued
whole world, & bare rule ouer all Nations: Neuertheleſſe in
proceſſe of time (throughe the deuine prouidence of Almightye
God) it was taken and ſpoyled by thoſe, whom ſhe before
had ouercome and brought vnder the yoke: as hath bene alreadye
ſeene in that which is written, & ſhalbe in that whiche
hereafter I ſhall write. After Rithiner was become Lorde
of all Italye (except Rauenna and the ſtreight therevnto adioyninge) with the name and tytle of Emperour:The death of Rithiner. he enioyed
the ſame but .iii. monethes, for then hee dyed of a certaine diſeaſe,
wt which he was maruelouſlye tormented. After whoſe
death Olibrio the Captaine of Rauenna,
                  Olibrio created Emperor. was created Emperour,
he enioyed ye ſame .iiii. monethes alſo and then dyed:
So that as Rome had loſt her former forces and reputacion,
ſo the Emperours enioyed little healthe and ſhort liues.
For who ſo well cōſidereth the Hiſtory, ſhall finde that while

                  Leo gouerned in the Eaſt,Man purpoſeth and God diſpoſeth. there raigned with legitimate and
illegitimate titles in Italye vi. or vii. Emperours. Immediatlye
after the death of Olibrio, the Senate hauinge conſideration
of the manyfolde tyrannies and ruines paſſed, endeuoured
to electe and choſe, after a good diſcuſſe, and conſultation,
an Emperour by the ſuffrages, & conſente of the whole
eſtate. But they were preuented by Guandibar a Captayne
of Rauenna, who enforced them to create Emperour Glicerius,
a Senator of Rome. Againſt whom the Emperour Leo
(for that the election was done by force) ſent a Captaine named
Nipole,
                  Nipole. with the name and title of Emperour: hee was
ſo aſſiſted with the Romaines, (which were enforced againſt
theyr willes to ſerue vnto Glicerius obedience, yt within ſhort
ſpace hee reſigned his title and dignitye,A prieſte. and became againſte
his will a prieſt: vnto whom Nipole gaue a biſhopprike, and
reſerued thempyre vnto himſelfe, whiche was like to haue
beene thoccaſion of infinite troubles and warres, if they had
not beene appeaſed by the vertuous and worthye biſhoppe Epiphanius.
                  Epiphanius.
While Nipole enioyed with great tranquility
the eſtate of Italye, hee had vnderſtandinge that Henrye the
kinge of the Gothes, who at that inſtant raigned in Toloſa &
in the greateſt part of Spayne, made warre againſt that part
of Fraunce, which as yet was vnder the deuotion of the Empyre,
and had alreadye taken certaine Cittyes, and minded to
procede farther. Againſte him, Nipole to ſhewe himſelfe
mightye,Oreſtes the Captaine of Nipole. ſent a familiar frende of his named Oreſtes, with a
valiante armye of worthye ſouldiours. Who after hee was
departed went vnto Rauenna, where neglectinge his dutye,
and allegeance due vnto his Lord, he nominated and created
Emperour a ſonne of his owne named Auguſtus,
                  Auguſtus nominated Emperour in Rauenna. which of ye
Romaynes and Hiſtoriographers was called (for that he was
but a child) Auguſtulus, and ſo will we hereafter terme him.
After he had ſo done, he determined to go towardes Rome againſt
Nipole, who for that he had employed his whole forces
in yt armye, was not able to encoūter wt him: Wherfore voyde
of all hope to remayne Emperour, he abandoned Rome and
fledde vnto Dalmatia, which was vnder the iuriſdiction of the

Emperour Leo, and ſo Auguſtulus was confirmed in Rome
with the name of Emperour. But while theſe euentes happened
in this wyſe in Italye,The death of Leo. 
                  Leo dyed in Conſtantinople,
after he had gouerned the Empyre with honour and
reputation 17. yeare, and in the yeare of our
ſauiour Chriſte, 476.
            
            
               Zenonus the firſt of that name.
               
               
                  I Supoſe ye the reader hath had ſufficient vnderſtandinge,
in what eſtate ye Empyre was foūde
to beginne, at the death of the Emperour Leo
in Conſtātinople. Wherefore it ſhall not be:
needefull, that I returne to reherſe ye ſame againe.
I ſay therefore, that as ſone as Leo was departed out
of this life, his nephewe called alſo Leo, wtout difficulty was
obeyed as Emperour: who after hee had gouerned certaine
monethes, wrought an effecte, in my iudgement both rare &
merueilous: which was, that of his owne proper conſent and
good zeale,Leo refuſeth the Empyre, and geeueth it vnto his father Zeno.
                   (reputinge it a thinge very vnſeemelye the father
to be ſubiecte and inferior vnto the ſonne) hee renounced the
Empyre, and gaue it vnto his father Zeno, whom hee crowned
with his owne handes, and gaue preſentlye obedience vnto
him. That fathers in theyr life time, haue reſigned their

dignityes & kingdomes vnto theyr ſonnes, it is a thinge that
we haue both redde and harde, and it ſeemeth both honeſt and
reaſonable: but rarely it hath happened, that anye man hath
vnderſtode, that the ſonne hath depriued himſelfe of his owne
ſegniorye, to geue it vnto his father, but rather it hath often
chaunced, that the childe hath by force depriued his father of
his lyuinge: yea and ſondrye times children haue deſyred and
procured theyr fathers deathes, yt they mighte inherite theyr
kingdomes: Wherefore it maye be reported for a rare and
miraculous vertue, that there was ſo great loue & obedience
in this ſonne. It happened therfore that Zeno was Crowned,
and ſworne Emperour at Conſtantinople, and his ſonne
remayned in his former eſtate. The contrary vnto that, was
then ſeene in Italye, for Oreſtes had created Emperour his
ſonne Auguſtulus, without procuringe or deſyringe the Empyre,The death of Leo.
vnto himſelfe. After Leo had ſurrendred the Empyre
vnto his father, he dyed within fewe dayes after, but in what
maner his death happened, there is made no mention: but his
father began the adminiſtration of the Empyre, when in Calcedonie
the widdowe Empreſſe, wife vnto Leo the firſt made
her abode: She diſdayning that Zeno ſhould be Emperour,
for that her huſbande did neuer accompt him worthye the honour,
induced Baſiliſcus her brother (who as is ſaide, ouercame
Genſerick in a battaile) to take vppon him the name &
title of Emperour.Baſiliſeus, created Emperour of Cōſtantinople. For he being through that notable victorye
become puiſant and mighty, & had in great reputation,
did this withoute contradiction, and was receiued & ſworne
Emperour in Conſtātinople: which as ſone as it was vnderſtode
of Zeno, (whether it were throughe cowardiſe or to auoyde
the effuſion of much bloude) he went vnto Iſauria, a verye
ſtronge prouince in Aſia the leſſe, where he ſuppoſed hee
might liue in ſafetye. Whereof Baſiliſcus became very inſolente,
and reioyſed excedinglye, reputinge himſelfe nowe to
be in maruailous ſecuritye, and named preſentlye his ſonne
Marke,
                  The wrathe of God on the proude. 
                  Caeſar. But his pride and reioyſinge continued not
longe: for beinge infected with the hereſye of the Neſtorians,
he began to perſecute the faythfull Chriſtians, & the Temples:

Wherevppon he was ſo hated of all men, that the Captaynes
which he ſent againſt Zeno, went againſt him, and by
a generall conſent Zeno was reſtored vnto his Empyre,The death of Baſiliſcus. and
he, his ſonne, with Verina his ſiſter were apprehended, and
beinge baniſhed they dyed in exile. In this maner was Zeno
reſtored vnto his Empyre, xviii. monethes after hee had
bene depriued: Of whom we will for this inſtante omitte farther
to intreate of, and returne to ſpeake of that, which happened
vnto Auguſtulus Emperour in the Weſte of Italye:
Who ſeinge that there was none in Italye yt made reſiſtance
againſt him,Auguſt
                        •
                     iua entereth into league with Genſerick. (by the aduiſe of his father) entered into league
and concluded a peace with Genſerick kinge of the Vandales
in Affricke, who at that inſtant was verye aged, and of ſhort
life. After which league he conceyued a firme ſecuritye, for
that Leo was buſyed and moleſted with the warres againſte
Baſiliſcus. But his ruine happened from whence it was not
ſuſpected: for the Herulians, & the Turiges, a people of which
mention is made, that they were in the hoſt of Atlas, the moſt
mightye kinge of the Hunnes, which at that inſtant, inhabited
vppon the ryuer of Danubius in the vttermoſt confines of
Hungarye, elected for theyr Captaine a valiante gentleman
of their owne Nation named Odoacre,
                  Odoacre. and determined to go
vnto the conqueſt of Italye, for that they ſawe without all order
or reaſon it was poſſeſſed of the moſt mightieſt, (ſo it pleaſed
God) that Italye,The ſecrete counſaile of God. which accuſtomed to ſende Captaines
vnto the conqueſt of the whole worlde, ſhoulde ſee, that from
all partes of the worlde ſhould come people to conquere her.
               After Odoacre was arriued in the confines of Italye, Oreſtes
the father of Auguſtlus, with a ſinguler armye of elect
ſouldiours, which he & his ſonne had aſſembled, went againſt
him: and the .ii. armyes beinge within the conſpecte thone of
thother, both the Captaynes were deſirous to fight, and gaue
ſignes of battaile: But certaine ſquadrons of Oreſtes ſouldiours
paſſed vnto Odoacre, which he perceiuinge, and hauing
no great confidence or truſt in thoſe which remayned,Ti
                        •
                     ine at this preſente called Pauia. he retyred
with the beſt order that he might, and marched towardes
Ticine, called at this preſent Pauia, a Cittye of Lumbardye.
                  
Odoacre followed him, ſo that Oreſtes not hauinge a ſufficient
armye to encounter with his, permitted himſelfe to be beſieged
in that Cittye, where althoughe hee employed and endeuoured
in all that he mighte to defende the ſame, yet the aſſaultes
were of ſuche violence, that it was taken after it had
bene defēded certaine dayes by force of armes, & Oreſtes was
taken priſoner. In that Cittie the ſouldiours of Odoacre
vſed moſte extreame crueltye, from thence Oreſtes was caryed
vnto Placenza,
                  The death of Oreſtes. where by the commaundement of Odoacre,
he was put to death. After this victorye, as the Empyre
of Auguſtulus, helde by a weake foundation, and leſſe
iuſtice, ſo all things ſucceaded in the fauour of Odoacre: who
with ſmall difficultye, and little reſiſtance, became patrone of
all the Cittyes of Italye, and named himſelfe Lord and king
of the ſame. When Auguſtulus vnderſtode that the people
drewe whollye vnto Odoacre, he departed from Rauenna, &
wente towardes Rome, leauinge of his owne accorde as hee
went, the enſignes and Emperiall Veſture: where vppon he
abandoned Rome, and fledde away ſecretely deſyring to ſaue
his life, by lyuinge in ſome ſimple eſtate, and ſo he conſumed
the remnante of his life in pouerty and miſerye, for the Hiſtoriographers
make no more mention of him. Rome beinge
abandoned of Auguſtulus,
                  The death of Auguſtulus. 
                  Odoacre became Lorde ouer the
ſame, and all Italy without reſiſtance which he poſſeſſed quietlye
in proſperitye and peace xiiii. yeares. In this wiſe as
you haue harde, ended with this Auguſtulus the Empyre of
Rome,The time whē the Empyre of Rome ended. which enioyed no Emperor afterward by the ſpace of
330. yeres & ſomewhat more. This happened in ye 1229. yere
after it was firſt built, and in the 529. after Iulius Caeſar became
Lorde thereof:The yeare of Chriſt. and in the 477. yeare after the byrth of
our Sauiour Chriſt. At this inſtant in England, a mightye
barron of the country named Ambrogius, moued warre
againſt the Saxons, but in the ende he was ouercome and enforced
with his Britaines to flye into that part of Fraunce,
which at this preſent is called Britaine, were in thoſe dayes
inhabited certaine people caled Veneti, Cenomani, and Turoni,
by the conſent of which inhabitants, and by theyr owne

prowes, they inhabited that country, & perſeuered in ye ſame
with good ſucceſſe, ſo that at this preſente theyr name remayneth,
& theyr ſpeache continueth, it is alſo one of ye principall
prouinces of all Fraunce: and there haue gouerned the ſame
many mightye Princes, but at this inſtant after ſondrye alterations
and chaunces, it appertayneth vnto the poſſeſſions of
the Frenche kinges. After theſe alterations, Zeno raigned
in Conſtantinople, and Odoacre in Italye certaine yeares
in tranquilitye: ſo that there happened vnto thempyre no act
worthye of memorye. At thende of which, the whele of vnſtable
fortune turned in ſuch wiſe,Odoacre depriued of that which he had gotten. yt 
                  Odoacre loſt al that, which
before he had moſt wickedly gotten, and that tyrante was depriued
from his vſurped kingdome, by an other tyrant which
happened in this manner. Theodorick the ſonne of Theomir
the kinge of Oſtrogothes,
                  Theodorick the kinge of ye Gothes. by the conſente of Zeno Emperour
of Conſtantinople, inuaded Italy with a mighty armye
of practiſed ſouldiours, and pitched his campe vppon the
ryuer Sonza not farre from Aquileia,
                  The riuer of Sonza. mindinge there to refreſhe
his ſouldiours: Againſt whom Odoacre marched with
an hoaſte of no leſſe puiſance, and in ſhort ſpace ioyned in battaile
with his ennemye, which was apprehenced of Theodorick
with an exceadinge courage, and with no leſſe accepted
of Odoacre: So that as it were by a mutuall conſent of both
the Captaynes, their hoaſtes encountred together.A conflicte betwene Theodoricke and Odoacre. That cō
                  flicte
was fought as valiantlye as euer was any, for the Captaynes
and ſouldiours of both partes were moſte liuelye, and
the one endeuoured to winne honour, a kingdome and fame:
the other procured to conſerue the ſame. The battaile continued
the moſt part of the daye, and after many occiſions, and
muche bloudſhed on both partes,The victorye of Theodorick. the victorye fell vnto Theodoricke:
and Odoacre was enforced to flye after he had moſt
valiantlye ſuſteyned the fighte. Although Odoacre loſt the
fielde, yet he abated no parte of his courage, but with all celerity
aſſembled an other hoaſt, and awayted the comminge of
Theodorick, not farre from Verona: where was fought an
other battaile, with no leſſe prowes then was the firſte, for in
this conſiſted ye whole hope of Odoacre: but in ye ende Theodorick
                  
remayned conquerour alſo, and Odoacre fledde vnto
Rome,Odoacre returneth vnto Rauenna. mindinge to defend and keepe that Cittye againſt his
ennemyes: but the Cittizens would not permit him to enter,
wherefore he returned vnto Rauenna, which not longe after
was beſieged of Theodoricke, but it was moſt valiantlye defended
by Odoacre, who continuallye ſo much greued & moleſted
his ennemyes armye, that the ſiege endured thre whole
yeares, at the ende of which, it was yelded vnto Theodorick
vppon condition to haue his life ſaued, and a part of Italye limitted
for him and his to inhabite.The death of Odoacre. But that promiſe or compoſition
was not afterwarde perfourmed, for both he and his
ſonne were ſlaine: ſuch was the ende of the life and Dominiō
of Odoacre. After whoſe death, Theodorick within a very
ſhort ſpare became Lord ouer all Italy, and named himſelfe
(as Odoacre had done xiiii. yeres before) kinge and Lord ouer
the ſame:The commē
                     dation of Theodorick. This kinge was a moſt vertuous, a moſt iuſt, and
a moſt excellent Prince & gouernour, as he was very mighty,
ſo he was both beloued and feared, but aboue all thinges, hee
was moſt prudent and wyſe in conſeruinge his eſtate,The parentages of Theodoricke. yea hee
grew to be inuincible by procuringe of parentage with all the
kinges, which in thoſe dayes raigned in Europe: For in one
inſtante he marryed with Audefreda daughter vnto the king
of Fraunce: and of thre daughters which he had, he gaue one
for wife vnto Sigiſmond kinge of the Burgundians, an other
vnto Alaricus kinge of the Viſigothes, and of Spaine, And
the thirde called Amaſulinuta vnto a Prince of Germanye
named Eutharicus: and his ſiſter Maufreda, he eſpouſed vnto
Honoricus the kinge of Affricke and of the Vandales, who
ſucceaded Genſerick: He proceded ſo pollitickely, that wt all
the Princes adioyninge vnto Italy, hee contracted a parentage
and frendſhippe: ſo that hee enioyed and ſuſteyned the
kingdome which he had conquered with honour, and with no
leſſe dignitye, more then xxx. yeares.
               While theſe affayres ſucceaded in this wyſe in Italy, Zeno
who held in Conſtantinople the Empyre of the Eaſt, had
diuers battailes with the Bulgarians, which after the death of
Atlas inhabited Germany: he entered through the prouince

of Thrace, and did there muche hurte, but ſhortlye after they
returned into their owne countrye. At that preſente alſo in
Conſtantinople there aroſe a maruaylous fyre, which conſumed
a great part of the Cittye. Alſo Ariadna the wyfe of the
Emperour was accuſed vniuſtlye of diſloyaltye, by Illo the
Lord Stuarde of his houſehold: vppon whoſe accuſation Zeno,
(without either iuſte proofe, or farther examination) cō
                  maunded
one of his ſouldiours to ſlaye her, whereof ſhee hauinge
vnderſtandinge fled ſecretely vnto the houſe of ye Archebiſhoppe:
who (when Zeno the next day, was apparelled wt
mourninge attyre,Raſhe iudgement to be auoyded. as though he lamented the death of thempreſſe)
reprehended his raſhnes and lightnes very ſeuerelye,
manifeſtinge vnto him the bounty, faythfulnes, & loyaltye of
his wife, and how that was both vntrue and falſe, which was
obiected againſt her. Finallye he wrought ſuch meanes, that
be perſwaded him to credite the truth: and reduced them both
vnto a perfect vnitye and peace. But the Empreſſe after ſhee
vnderſtode who was her accuſer, (being deſirous of reuenge)
appointed a certaine frende of hers to ſlaye him:Falſe accuſors. who aſſaulted
the traytor at a ſodaine, and thinkinge to haue deuided his
head, did onlye cutte of one of the traytors eares, and ſo he eſcaped.
After which blemiſhe beinge aſhamed to repayre vnto
the Court, he conſpired a great treaſon, with an other man
named Leoncio,
                  Leoncio. who both were in ſhort ſpace ſlaine by theyr
ſouldiours, and theyr heads preſented vnto the Emperour at
Conſtantinople. In this maner was Zeno frō all griefes
and trauailes, and liued the remnant of his life in quiet tranquillitye:
althoughe without iuſt occaſion he cauſed certaine
of his chiefe noble men to be put to death. And after he had
gouerned the Empyre .xvii. yeares hee dyed in Conſtantinople
of an ordinarye deathe.The death of Zeno with diuers of his conditions. It is written that he was
ſome what brutiſhe, both of nature and countenaunce, and
that he would be diuers times ouercome with wyne.
Hee dyed in the yeare after the incarnation of
Chriſte .494.
*********
            
            
               
               Anastaſius the firſt of that name.
               
                  
               
               
                  AFter the death of Zeno, Anaſtaſius was
elected, who beinge in fauoure with the
Empreſſe was marryed vnto her, the xl.
daye after the exequies of her huſbande.
He findinge all thinges in quietnes, in ye
beginning of his gouernment, wrought
manye good woorkes, but hee continued
not longe in his well doinge, for beinge infected with the hereſye
of Eutichius,
                  Eutiches an heretike. which added a quaternity vnto the deuine
Trinitye, he began to be hated and deteſted both of God and
man: and many Nations rebelled againſt him, againſt whō
hee foughte ſondrye battailes, and ouercame diuers rebelles,
but in the ende he was ſo inuironed and compaſſed by thē,
that he was enforced with diſhonour and ſhame, to purchaſſe
peace with moneye. After which, he went againſt the Perſians,
and ouercame them in diuers battayles, but in the ende
he concluded a truce or peace with them,The Citty of Anagia buite by Anaſtaſius. and built a Cittye in
Meſopotamia called after his name Anaſtagia, whiche did
not a little diſcontente the Perſians: who, for that they had
warre with the Hunnes, durſt not breake league with ye Emperour:
So that he conſumed the reſte of his life with quietnes
and peace. And finally when he was moſt voyde of feare,
he was ſlaine with a thunder bolte which fell from Heauen,The yeare of Chriſt. 510.
after he had gouerned the Empyre 27. yeres, and in the yere
of our Sauiour Chriſte .510.
            
            
               
               Iuſtine the firſt of that name.
               
                  
               
               
                  THere ſucceaded Anaſtaſius in the Empyre,
Iuſtine Emopalate,
                  The baſe parentes and countrye of Iuſtine. this Iuſtine
was a Thratian, although ſome affirme
that he was of Schiauonia or Dalmatia,
borne of verye ſimple parentes, ſo that
in his childhoode, hee was a keeper of
ſheepe. Notwithſtāding it pleaſed God
to exalt him, that was diſcended and borne of moſte baſe and
vile parentes vnto that moſt higheſt ſeate and dignitye, for by
the inſpiration of the Deuine power, at xvi. yeares of age, he
forſoke that ſeruile conditiō, and went vnto the warres, mindinge
to paſſe his whole life in the atchieuinge of martiall exploytes,
in which he became ſo excellente a ſouldiour, that in
ſhort ſpace he was verye much renoumned for his egregious
actes, and worthines. Wherevpon hee was by the Emperour
created a Captaine, & not longe after a Countye, which
vocation in thoſe dayes, was accompted a moſt honourable &
highe dignitye: while he was in that eſtate, it happened Anaſtaſius
to dye, beinge of a very great age. After whoſe death
whē the noble men endeuoured to create a new Emperour, a
certaine Courtier named Amantius,
                  Amantius. which was an Eunuke
and chiefe in the Emperours houſe: The richeſt man that liued
in his time, did greatly deſyre, and verye muche procure,
that there mighte be elected a noble and mightye gentleman
named Theocretian,
                  Theocretian who was his eſpeciall frend. And becauſe
it was needefull to haue in this behalfe, the ayde of the

ſouldiours and men of warre, he went vnto Iuſtine, & offered
him a great ſumme of money, ſo that he would wt the ſouldiours
cōſent, that Theocretiā
                   his frend might be elected Emperour.
Iuſtine receyued his moneye, and promiſed to accompliſhe
his whole requeſt: but after he had the treaſure in
his poſſeſſion, he omitted to entreate for Theocretian, & procured
ſecretely to wynne theyr good willes, for his owne preferment:The pollicye of Iuſtine.
yea he laboured the matter with ſuch pollicye, that
when Amantius ſuppoſed that the ſouldiours woulde haue
created his frende Emperour, they all with one voyce nominated
Iuſtine: vnto whom they ſwore preſentlye fidelity and
obedience, by a common conſente both of the Senate & whole
hoaſte. Amantius perceyuinge that he was deceyued (although
he durſt not for the preſent refuſe to ſweare vnto him
obedience) yet preſentlye after, hee procured the death of the
newe Emperour, by conſpiringe the ſame with Theocretiā,
and with an other named Andrea, with Miſſahale, and Ardibure,
all which were Chamberlaines vnto the Emperour:
that they ſhoulde ſlaye him, when time and oportunitye ſerued.
But God reueiled theyr treaſon, which beinge proued,
the Emprrour cauſed to be put to death Amantius, Andrea
and Theocretian, and condemned thother vnto perpetuall
exile: and for the better eſtabliſhinge of his Emperiall eſtate,
hee ſente for Vatilian vnto the Courte, who rebelled againſt
Anaſtaſius, and created him Conſull and generall ouer his
men of warre. Notwithſtandinge all which, hee (as an ingrate
& diſloyall ſubiect) wrought certaine practiſes againſt
the eſtate and life of Iuſtine:
                  The death of Vatilian. For which, after they were knowen,
hee was by the appointmente of the Emperour ſlaine in
his Pallace, together with Paule and Celerian, which were
partakers wt him in the conſpiracy. Iuſtine beinge deliuered
by ye death of theſe traytors from all daungers, & enioyinge ye
Empyre wyth muche quietnes: endeuoured to refourme the
abuſes in Religion. Wherevppon he cōmaunded by his decrees,Iuſtine againſt the ſect of the Arriās
throughe out all the Eaſt, that none ſhould admitte to
receiue into the Churche, for biſhoppes or prieſtes, anye that
were infected with the ſecte of the Arrians: While Iuſtine
                  
was buſyed with this good woorke,The death of Traſimonde kinge of the Vandales. 
                  Traſimond kinge of the
Vandales, which was an Arrian died in Affricke: and his
ſonne Elderick ſucceded him in the kingdome, whom he begot
by a daughter of the Emperour Valentinian, he was a very
good Chriſtian, and reuoked from exile all ſuch biſhoppes, &
Religious men, as had beene baniſhed by his father. But
Theodorick kinge of Italy beinge an Arrian, cauſed the noble
men which enuyed his hereſye to be ſlaine, and not content
with that crueltye, hauinge remayned vnto that inſtant a iuſt
and worthy Prince,The death of Pope Iohn. he cauſed Pope Iohn with diuers other
which returned from Conſtantinople, to be caſt into priſon,
where throughe famiſhment, with other tormentes they ended
theyr liues. Which crueltye God with ſpeede reuenged,
for the 90. day after they dyed,The death of Theodorick. he was ſtriken with a ſodaine
death, leauinge for his heyre (in that he had no children of his
owne) a nephewe of his, named Athalaricus his ſiſters ſonne
being but viii. yeares of age. Alſo Iuſtine beinge throughe
his yeares vnapte to gouerne the Empyre determined
to nominate Caeſar, and to adopte for his ſucceſſor &
heyre his nephewe Iuſtinian, whom preſently he
aſſociated for his companion in the Empyre,
and .iiii. monethes after, hee dyed on a diſeaſe
which he toke in Conſtantinople,
when he had raigned xi. yeres in the
Empyre. He dyed in the yeare after
the incarnation of our Sauiour
Chriſte 529.
(⸫)
            
            
               
               Juſtinian.
               
               
                  VNto Iuſtine withoute reſiſtance ſucceaded
Iuſtinian, who preſentlye began his
enterpriſe againſt the Perſians, vnder ye
conducte of a moſt worthye and valiante
Captaine named Beliſare:
                  Beliſare. He after ſondrye
euentes of fortune, and variable
ſucceſſe in diuers conflictes ouercame
them, although for certaine occaſions of importance, he concluded
a peace with their kinge. After that, there happened
in Conſtantinople a verye cruell, & pernitious ciuill warre,
in which Iuſtinian was very likely to haue receyued his vtter
ruine, if by the induſtrye, and worthines of Belliſare hee had
not bene preſentlye reſcued, and deliuered from that imminēt
daunger, although in that battaile were ſlaine, aboue thirtye
thouſande perſons. After this ſedition was appeaſed, and ye
aucthors thereof extremely puniſhed, Beliſare went vnto the
conqueſt of Affricke:
                  Gilimer. the cauſe was, for that Gilimer had by
force of armes, & without eyther right or iuſt title (not onlye
rebelled againſt Ilderick the nephewe of Genſerick the kinge
of Vandales,
                  Ilderick. and righte heyre vnto that kingdome) but alſo
apprehended him, and made himſelfe kinge and Lorde of all
Affricke. This thinge did not a little greue Iuſtinian, for
that before hee was elected Emperour, hee had contracted a
league and amitye with Ilderick: wherefore after hee had wt
letters and Embaſſadours, exhorted and requeſted Gilimer,
that he would reſtore his coſyn vnto his kingdome & ſegniory:

and preuailed nothinge with this his demaunde, hee became
accenſed with indignation, and wrathe againſt Ildericke, determininge
by force of armes to recouer the prouinces,Beliſar ſente by Iuſtinian vnto Affricke. and
Citties of Affricke. And hauinge aſſembled a moſt puiſante
armye of worthy and practiſed ſouldiours, he ordained for generall
ouer them the inuincible Captaine Belliſare: who after
diuers and ſondrye victoryes,Beliſar in a ſmal time cō
                     querred all Affricke. in the ende dryuinge Gilimer
into the moūtaynes, recouered and ſubdued all Affricke
vnto the Empyre, after it had bene poſſeſſed by the Vandales
96. yeares: and then leauinge for generall ouer the whole
prouince,Solomon made general of Affricke by Beliſar. 
                  Salomon. He returned with the kinge & his kinſefolke
together, with a greate nomber of men and women priſoners,
and with infinite Iewels and riches that was, with
all that which the Vandales in a hundreth yeares before had
robbed from Rome, Spayne, & Affricke, with diuers other
prouinces. And when he was arriued at Conſtantinople, the
Emperour cauſed him to be receiued with a triumph, & with
all ſuche ceremonies and pompes, as in the beginninge the
olde auncient Romayne Conſulles, and afterward the Emperours
vſed, in their triumphes at Rome. * It is neceſſary
(althoughe I abridge the Hiſtorye in all yt I maye) that the
Hiſtorye of Iuſtinian be ſet oute full, before that I intreate
of manye other Emperours: for that as the time of his gouernmente
was of longe continuance, ſo the affayres whiche
happened were great and notable: Wherefore it ſhall not be
well done, that I omitte without ſome mention making, the
noble and illuſtruous exploytes of armes,Of what thinges the readers are deſirous. which were atchieued
in his time. For that alſo I ſeeme to conceyue, that
Readers are only delighted with the readinge of cruell warres,
ſtraunge happes, conqueſtes, and mutabilitye of kingdomes.
The Hiſtoryes of peaceable Princes, and of happye
times withoute warres, are not ſo contentable: as thoſe in
whiche are ſpoken of murthers, warres, alterations of eſtates,
mutations of kingdomes, ſinguler victories, vprores, takinge
of partes, tumultes, and finally daungerous and great
euentes bothe good and euill. See that for theſe delightes
thoſe Bookes of fables are moſt cōmonlye redde, wherein

are written the ſlaughters of infinite thouſandes, how Citties
were ouerthrowne and wonne, with other fayned things
altogether vnpoſſible.To what end Hiſtoryes are to be redde. But true Hiſtories are principallye
written, and eſpeciallye to be redde, to the ende that by readinge
of euill and vicious actes, the readers maye eſchue and
auoyde the like, and to imitate the vertuous: and that by the
variable ſucceſſe they may learne to be circumſpecte, in thadminiſtration
of ſuch thinges, as in theyr life time ſhall happē
vnto the gouernment. But to returne to the Hiſtorye, Beliſar
remayned not longe in Conſtantinople, for within fewe
dayes, he had the charge giuen him by the Emperour, of the
conqueſt of Italye and of Cicilia, againſt the Gothes & Theodate,
who at that inſtant was Lord of them bothe: Which enterpriſe
was reputed of no leſſe importance and daunger, then
that of Affricke, yea the ſucceſſe in the ende manifeſted, that
it was more troubleſome, by reaſon of the greate conflictes,
and manifolde ſlaughters, which happened vnto both partes.
The original & beginninge of this warre, was in this maner.
               As ſone as the puiſante and terrible kinge Theodoricke
dyed, there ſucceaded in his kingdome (as is before mētioned)
Atalaricus his nephew, for that he had no ſonne of his owne,
who at that inſtante was but viii. yeares of age. Wherefore
his mother Amalaſuntha toke vppon her the gouernment of
Italy,Amalaſuntha toke vpon her the gouernment of Italye. which ſhe began to adminiſter, wt ſinguler wyſedome:
educatinge and inſtructinge her ſonne, in vertuous behauiour,
and honourable exerciſes, with applyinge him vnto the
ſtudye of good letters and learning. But after a while, there
aroſe bothe diſcorde and partes takinge betwixte her, and the
kinſefolke of the childe: and there grewe a perticuler hatred
with her and Theodate the coſyn of Atalaricus. Wherevppon,
ſhe ſeinge herſelfe in a diſtreſſe, ſurrendred the charge of
her ſonne, vnto the principall and chiefe of thoſe perſons: and
abandoninge Rome, wente vnto Rauenna: where ſhe reſerued
continuallye her aucthoritye in the gouernment: but the
enmitye did dailye ſo encreaſe with her and Theodate (who
was exceadinge mighty, and had couertly obtayned the Dominion
of Tuſchanie:) that bothe of them procured the fauour,

and ayde of Iuſtiniā: and promiſed vnto him an entrie
into Italye.The death of Atalaricus. At that inſtant dyed the yonge kinge Atalaricus:
for whoſe death Amalaſuntha became not a litle deſturbed,
and moleſted, in that ſhe was a ſole woman, and muche
hated of many of the Gothes, which were in greateſt reputation.
But ponderinge in her minde the ſequell that mighte
happē, ſhe determined to compounde with Theodate, and to
create him king of Italy, ſuppoſing, yt he receyuing ſo great
a benefite, woulde remaine vnto her a moſt faythfull frende,
but yet ſhe minded to adminiſter the kingdome, and he onlye
to enioye the name and tytle of a kinge.Amalaſuntha createth Theodate king of Italy She beinge fullye
reſolued to accompliſhe this her determinatiō, began to put
it in practiſe, & in fine, after they had debated the controuerſye
ſufficientlye thone with thother, there was concluded a
frendſhippe and amitie betwixt them, with ſolempne othes &
promiſes, and he was named kinge of Italye. Wherevppon
ioyninge his power with that of Amalaſuntha, (which was
the greater) he obtayned without difficultye the kingdome,
and obedience of al men. Notwithſtanding, this counſaile
or aduiſe ſucceded verye vnfortunate vnto Amalaſuntha, for
immediatlye after that Theodate ſawe himſelfe to be Lord
and patron ouer all, he began his gouernment not onlye contrarye
to the expectation of Amalaſuntha,
                  The death of Amalaſūtha. but within fewe
dayes (as a moſt ingrate and periured Prince) cauſed her to
be apprehended, and in the ende moſt cruelly ſlaine. Wherof
when Iuſtinian had vnderſtandinge, he became not a litle
moued with wrathe and indignation againſt Theodate: for
he alwayes fauoured the partes of Amalaſuntha: and therefore
reprehended excedinglye this moſt cruell and haynous
facte. And ſuppoſinge that the occaſion ſerued vnto his deſire,
which he had to recouer Italye vnto thempyre: determined
withoute protracte of time, to aſſaile Theodate with
open warre, hopinge to conquer the ſame by force of armes:
ordayning for generall ouer this enterpriſe, Captaine Belliſare,
who at that preſent was returned a conquerour oute of
Affricke.
                  Peter. 
                  Iuſtinian in thoſe dayes had alwayes an Embaſſadour
in Italye named Peter, who trauayled very muche,

to conclude an vnitye with Amalaſuntha & Theodate, who
yelded not a little, for that he greatly feared the diſpleaſure
of the Emperour. But while this practiſe was a determininge,
Belliſare arryued in Cicilia with a mightye hoaſt and
huge armye, for that he ſuppoſed it a thinge moſt neceſsarye
firſt to ſubdue that Ilande. Wherefore after he had by force
conquered the Cittyes Catanaia, Saragoſa, and Palermo,
which he wanne with great loſſe of ſouldiours, within ſhorte
ſpace after he became patrone ouer the whole Ilande, ſuche
was the expeditiō and felicity of Beliſar in martiall affayres.
And for that his fame was excedingly feared: Theodate hauinge
conſideration of that which happened in Cicilia, fearinge
his force, concluded with the ſayd Peter, certaine couenauntes
of peace in the which he renounced the tytle whiche
he had vnto Cicilia,
                  The conditions with Theodate & Peter. and conſented that in Italye, in all the
decrees & ſtatutes which ſhould be ordayned or publiſhed, ye
name of Iuſtinian ſhoulde be firſt placed: Moreouer that he
would be bounde to ſende vnto him euery yeare a crowne of
goulde, in token of ſubiection, with certaine other thinges,
which are written of Procopius. Peter beinge departed wt
this aunſwere, ye feare which Theodate had did ſo encreaſe
and diſturbe his quietnes, that hee cauſed to returne againe
his Embaſſadour named Ruſticus which he had ſente with
Peter, and bound him by a ſolempne othe, that he ſhould not
diſcouer this his ſeconde reſolution, before he perfectlye vnderſtode how Iuſtinian accepted the firſt offer: and that thē,
if he refuſed and were not contented with the ſame, he ſhould
make vnto him a promiſe of all Italye, vpon this condition,
that he would lymit and aſſigne vnto him as muche grounde
in Grece, as might ſuffice for him and his to inhabite in. And
therevppon he wrote with his owne hande vnto Iuſtinian a
moſt noble letter.
               After the Emperour had heard the firſt petition of Theodate,
as a Prince of an inuincible courage, he woulde not accepte
the ſame, wherevpon the Embaſſadour reueiled vnto
him the ſeconde, in ye which was offered vnto him all Italy: ye
contented and reioyſed Iuſtinian excedinglye, for therevpon

he reſcribed vnto Theodate a moſt gratious aunſwere, with
which he ſent his Embaſſadours to conclude the accord, and
to enforme Beliſar, that hauinge eſtabliſhed the affayres of
Cicilia, he ſhould paſſe into Italye, to impadron himſelfe of
the forces of the ſame. But the accorde was not concluded
for that, before the Embaſſadours,The victorye of Theodate, which wente vnto themperour
returned, ye Captaynes of Theodate obtayned a ſinguler
and notable victorye in Sclauonia: in the whiche were
ſlaine Mundus and Mauritius his ſonne, who were Captaynes
vnto Iuſtinian, ſo that the Emperiall hoaſt ſeemed to be
vtterly deſtroyed. After which victorye Theodate became
ſo proude and haughtie, that he refuſed, not onlye to accompliſhe
the partitye offered: but ſhewinge himſelfe wrathfull
with the wordes, which were ſpoken by ye Emperours Embaſſadours,
he cauſed them to be apprehended, and committed
to ſafe cuſtodye. Alſo this encreaſed his bouldnes: for
at that inſtant Beliſar was enforced to ſayle out of Cicilia into
Affricke, to ſuccour and reſcue Salomon, whom hee had
left there as lieue tenant general, for a Captaine of the Emperours
named Extorſa,
                  Extorſa rebelieth in Affricke. with the greater parte of the hoaſt
rebelled, and were become patrones of diuers Cittyes, hauinge
murthered the gouernours and Iuſtices of the whole
prouince. But after the arriuall of Beliſar into Affricke, the
enterpriſe proceded with ſuche a good and happye ſucceſſe, yt
within fewe dayes hee ouercame the rebelles, and corrected
moſt ſharpely the Cittyes, reducinge them vnto a quiet and
peaceable obedience, then he returned into Cicilia, where he
had vnderſtanding of the affayres of Italy.What the obſcurity of the Sunne betokeneth. 
                  Eutropius writeth,
that in this ſeaſon, there was ſeene in the Sunne a ſigne
and marueilous prodigie, ye like whereof hath not bene hard,
continuinge the moſt parte of a whole yeare. Which was, yt
the ſayd Sunne, yelded as ſmall a lighte as did the Moone,
ſo that, there appeared litle difference or none at all betwene
the ſhyninge of thone, and thother, although her gliſteringe
were neither kyuered, or hidde by anye cloude or other impediment:
but without any occaſion that appeared, vnto mans
iudgement, it continued darckened and with litle lighte all y•
                  
ſeaſon. Which, (as afterward was iudged) portended and
betokened the great famyne and want of breade, that happened
vnierſallye thorowe the whole worlde: and likewyſe it
prognoſticated the warres & prognoſticatiō of bloud, which
were to be made in Italye.
               
                  Iuſtinian ſeinge the vnconſtancy of Theodate, and being
not a litle diſpleaſed for the death of his Captaynes and ſouldiours
in Dalmatia, with the apprehending of his Embaſſadours
in Italye: prouided with great wyſedome, courage,
and diſpoſition of a worthye Prince, vnto both his preſente
neceſſities:Conſtance Captayne for Iuſtinian in Dalmatia. for he ſent into Dalmatia and Slauonia, a valiant
Captayne named Conſtance, who recouered a greate parte
of that which was loſt, and renued ye warres in thoſe partes.
For the affayres of Italye, he commaunded Beliſar, that wt
all expediton he ſhoulde enter into the ſame, with all the power
and force that he was able to make. He with his accuſtomed
celeritye, and courage, (leauinge in the Citties and fortes
of Cicilia ſufficiente gariſons to defende the ſame) paſſed
with his hoaſt, by the ſtreight of Meſſina into Italye, where
he wanne all thoſe Townes & Caſtels which bordered vpon
the ſea, not meeting with any power that might diſturbe his
enterpriſe, and ſo he proceded conquering, euen vnto ye Cittie
of Naples, for the defence of which Theodate had appointed
a great and choſen companye of Gothes, which defended the
ſame moſt liuelye, ſo that betwene them there was done many
a notable proofe in feates of armes, but in thende, by force
the Cittye was taken and ſpoyled of the ſouldiours,The takinge of Naples. with the
ſlaughter of all the Gothes. But the nexte daye after, Beliſar
induced, and perſwaded his ſouldiours wt curteous language,
that they would ſet a libertye the Cittizens, and reſtore
vnto them their goodes, with contentinge themſelues
with the great bootye of their ennemyes,The bountye of Beliſar. and not of the Cittizens,
for he publiſhed, that their comming was onlye toreſtore
Italye vnto libertye. Great was the feare, which the
takinge of Naples gaue vnto ye 
                  Gothes, for that they thought
it vnpoſſible to be wonne: Wherevpon all the men of greateſt
reputation, and Captaynes of Theodate, ſeinge ye ſmall

prouiſions, which he made, and vnderſtandinge for certaintye,
that Beliſar would not ſatye longe in Naples, for that he
determined to marche towardes Rome, aſſembled and toke
counſaile together, in a certaine place adioyninge vnto the
Cittye, where after manye diſcourſes they elected for their
kinge a valiante and prudent Captayne named Vitige,
                  Vitige elected kinge of ye Gothes. to
thende that he ſhould prouide a ſufficiente hoaſt that mighte
withſtand the forces of Beliſar. Which whē 
                  Theodate vnderſtode,
beinge at yt inſtant in Rome, doubtinge of his ſecuritie,
fledde from the Cittye towardes Rauenna, but he was
takē as he iourneyed, & ſlaine at the appointment of the new
king by a Captayne named Ottaro,
                  The death of Theodate. who was ſent after him
vnto that effecte, his death happened after he had gouerned
Italye .iii. yeares.
               After the death of Theodate, Vitige called a counſaile,
in which it was concluded, for that there was not a ſufficient
and readye armye at that inſtant to encounter with Beliſar,
who drewe towardes Rome: that he ſhould go vnto Rauenna,
where, after he had prepared a ſufficiēt hoaſt of practiſed
ſouldiours, he ſhould expect and prouoke his ennemyes vnto
battaile.Bador lefte Captaine at Rome. After this conſultation was finiſhed, hee lefte in
Rome a Captaine named Badore, with .iiii. Thouſand ſouldiours,
and hauing exhorted and perſwaded the Cittizens to
defende theyr Cittye valiantlye, he toke his iourneye towardes
Rauenna. And Beliſar leauinge Naples in good order
and well furniſhed with ſouldiours, marched with his hoaſt
alſo towardes Rome: whoſe comminge beinge knowen vnto
the Citizens, they reſolued and fullye determined, not to
remaine and abyde in the defence of the Cittie, but to open ye
gates vnto him, againſt whom the Gothes, not able to reſiſt,
were enforced to departe and leaue the Cittie:Beliſar entereth into Rome. and it happened
that the very ſame day, in which the Gothes iſſued forth
at one gate, Beliſar entered by an other. Who, after he had
made a worthye Oration vnto the Senate, and encouraged
them vnto the recouerye of their Libertye, began preſentlye
to reedefye the waules, and thorow out to fortifye the Citty,
cauſing alſo great prouiſiō of victuels to be brought thither,

and the Citties and Townes in y• ſtreighte therevnto adioyninge
to be furniſhed with garriſons of ſouldiours.
               In this meane whyle Vitige the newe king, who in no reſpecte
was vile or a coward, omitted not to attempte, or practiſe
euery waye and meane that might make him mightye againſt
Beliſar.
                  The wiſedome & pollicye of Vitige. And firſt for his better aſſurance, he concluded
a peace with the kinge of Fraunce, who ſent vnto him al his
Captaynes and ordinarye ſouldiours, vnto whiche hee gaue
continuall ſtipendes, and commaunded them to ioyne wt his
armye, alſo from Germany, and diuers other places he procured
ayde, and aſſiſtance in all that he might. Finallye he
ſo well prouided, that he aſſembled in Rauenna and in ye territoryes
of the ſame, a hundred and fiftye thouſande ſouldiours
on horſebacke and foote, al excellent in feates of armes,
the greater part wherof were very well armed. Wyth this
hoaſt hee marched towardes Rome, where Beliſar made his
abode, not being at that inſtant of ſufficient power, to encoū
                  ter
in the fieldes with the armye of his ennemye. Wherevpō
kinge Vitige not doubtinge of the victory became ſo inſolent
and proude,The vanitye of Vitige. that he was onlye vexed to ſee that Beliſar would
not flee and abandon Italye, yea he would demaunde as hee
iourneyed if Beliſar were fleinge awaye, reioyſinge infinitly,
when it was reported yt he fortifyed Rome, & would there expecte
his comminge. But Beliſar was minded contrarye to
thexpectation of Vitige, for he determined rather to dye, thē
with diſhonour to abandon that, which hee had ſo worthilye
gotten. But for that he ſawe his armye to be farre inferiour
vnto that of his ennemyes, he ſente for Bleſſus and Conſtantinus
bothe Captaynes, who were appointed to defende the
fortes there abouts, that with all ſpeede they ſhould returne
vnto Rome with theyr ſouldiours, where he was with his,
ſo yt after theyr repayre he kept the Cittie both ſtrongly, and
well prouided for, with intente to defende the ſame, and diſturbe
his enemye,The going of Vitige vnto Rome. if he would procede torecouer that, which
he had wonne in Campania, Puglia, and Calabria.
               
               
                  Vitige continued his iourney towardes Rome, ſuppoſing
that againſt his power Beliſar was not able to defende the

ſame: and in his ioyning vnto the Cittie, there happened an
accident ſo notable, ſo rare, and of ſuch importance, (that although
I know in the declaration, I muſt ſomewhat excede
the lymits of breauity, yet I haue thought it both expedient &
neceſſarye to reherſe the ſtraunge auenimente) Beliſar had
procured to be built at a certaine bridge diſtant a myle from
Rome, vpon the ryuer Tyber, two exceding ſtrong Caſtels,
and had left therein certaine garriſons of ſouldiours, to moleſt
and reſiſt his mightye ennemye: but Vitige being in the
night ſeaſon come vnto this bridge, they which had in charge
the defence of the ſame, were ſo ſurpriſed with terror & feare,
that preſently they did abandon it, without makinge of anye
reſiſtance, ſo that the ſame nighte there paſſed ouer a greate
part of the hoaſt. The next day folowing Beliſar not hauing
intelligence of this cowardlye parte of his ſouldiours, iſſued
out of Rome with a thouſande choſen horſemen, and rode towardes
the bridge, to electe and chuſe oute ſome conueniente
place where he might beſt pitche his tentes, or lodginge, and
with moſt aduauntage defende the paſſage. But as he drew
nere vnto the bridge, he mette at a ſodaine with the ſouldiours
of Vitige, which had in the night paſſed ye ſame. Wherat
Beliſar became ſo wrathfull after he perceyued yt his people
had loſt the bridge, that with leſſe conſideration thē was
conuenient, he aſſaulted his enemyes with ſuch violence and
force, that there folowed as cruell a fight as might be imagined,
in ſuch ſorte, that the ſouldiours of Vitige retyred vnto
the whole armye:The worthines of Beliſar. where Beliſar was ſo greuouſlye charged
with many troupes of Gothes on horſebacke, that all his, loked
for preſent death, but he in his iorneye behaued himſelfe
with great prowes, killinge and wounding manye of his ennemyes,
and with ſuch daunger aduenturinge his owne perſon,
that the authors which make mention of this conflicte,
write that therin he behaued himſelfe as a moſt valiant ſouldiour,
but not as a prudente & politique Captaine, for he did
in ſuche wyſe hazarde his owne perſon, that in Rome it was
ſuppoſed, and beleued that he was deade, for certaine of his
ſouldiours which had eſcaped reported it for a veritye.
               
                  
He being at this inſtant in ſuche an extremitye, and diſtreſſe,
ſeinge manye of his familiars and frendes ſlaine, and the reſidue
moſt like to paſſe that waye, not able any longer to ſuſſtayne
the force of his ennemyes, (of whom there were ſlaine
a thouſand) began with his to retyre. But he was purſued
and folowed with a great nomber of his ennemyes on horſebacke,Beliſar was not permitted to enter into Rome.
euen vnto the gates of Rome, which were kept continually
ſhutte, and they which had the cuſtodye would not in
any wyſe open them for that the ennemyes ſhoulde not enter
in with the Romaynes, and for that vpon the report, they beleued
that Beliſar was ſlaine, no man gaue eare or harkened
vnto his voyce. Wherevpon Beliſar who had fought ye greater
parte of the daye, accoſted nighe vnto the walles, and reducinge
into a ſquare battaile his ſouldiours, defended himſelfe
with fighting againſt his enemyes, without taking any
repaiſt euen vntill nighte, when he practiſed and vſed a moſt
boulde enterpryſe, both daungerous & deſperate. For he aſſaulted
with ſuche violence the Gothes, after he had made a
cyrcle of his owne ſouldiours, that his ennemyes beinge deceyued
with the obſcurity of the night,The courage of Beliſar. ſuppoſed and credited
that not they, but a great nomber of freſhe Captaynes were
iſſued out of the Cittye and foughte againſt them, which ſuſpecte
cauſed the Gothes to retyre vnto theyr campe, Beliſar
moſt fiercelye purſuinge them, vntill that he, finding a place
of moſt aduantage, which was abandoned of the enemyes,
returned with all celeritie vnto a gate of Rome, where his
voyce beinge knowen he was with all his intromitted & receyued,
the nomber being farre inferiour vnto that which he
ledde forth with him. In this maner he retyred with ſafetye
out of ſo daungerous an encounter, hauinge his armour
perced with manye Dartes, Speares, and ſtrokes of ſwordes,
of all which there was not one, that touched his ſkinne,
this was reputed & accompted a myracle, in reſpect of theyr
marueilous oppreſſion, & dangerous diſtreſſe which he was
beſtede. The daye folowinge Vitige arryued, & ouercame
at one inſtant the whole companye of Rome, and for that hee
was not able throughe the greatnes of the Cittie to beſiege

it round about,Vitige beſiegeth Rome. yet he did inuiron it, by deuiding his hoaſt into
ſixe campes. And becauſe it woulde be more tedious then
neceſſarye, to reherce the manifolde conflictes and battailes
whiche happened in the time of this ſiege, in that they were
both great and marueilous, I will omitte to entreate of any
of them. It ſhall ſuffice to knowe, that this was one of the
moſt bloudye & perillous oppugnations, that euer happened
vnto any Cittye,The time of continuance of the ſiege. for it continued a whole yere and .ix. dayes,
and in ye firſt vii. monethes of the ſiege, Vitige & his Gothes
which were moſt liuelye, neuer deſiſted from battering, and
aſſaultinge the Cittye an euerye part, whereby they both receyued
& did very muche hurte. And Beliſar wyth hys ſouldiours
on thother ſyde, did neuer permitte hys ennemyes to
take reſt or to be at quiet, but iſſued oute of the Cittye continually
to fight wyth them: in ſuche wyſe, that in theyr ſkyrmiſhes
and battayles they ſlue more then xl. Thouſand Gothes.
In which tyme he atchieued marueylous factes aſwel
by hys dexteritye and proweſſe, as by the pollicye, and cyrcumſpect
gouernmēt of a moſt excellent Captayne. Themperour
Iuſtinian omitted not to ſend continuallye ſuccour,
both of ſouldiours & victuels vnto Beliſar, for he ſēt him certayne
Captaynes with footemen & horſemen, who conducted
wt them all kynds of grayne and other victuels, al which
with greate trauayle & daunger were brought vnto Rome.
This prouiſion preuayled not ſo much, but that they in ye Citye
ſufferd extreame famyne. Notwythſtanding Beliſar kept
ſecrete this neede or want, & behaued hymſelfe ſo ſtoutlye agaynſt
Vitige,
                  A truce concluded betwixt Beliſar and Vitige. who at that inſtante beinge wearye of hys abydinge
in the fieldes, entreated wyth Beliſar a truce, which
was concluded for three monethes. But it continued not ſo
longe, for Vitige (procured therevnto by the deceyte & treaſon
of certayne of inhabitaunts) requyred that he myghte be
permitted to enter and viſite the Cittye. Which demaunde
renued the warre, and Beliſar commaunded one Iohn hys
Captayne which was vnder hym generall in the fielde, that
he ſhoulde with moſt cruel warre inuade ye territorye of Rauenna,
vnto which he had ſent him wyth mo
                     ••
                   then two thouſande

horſemen, and certayne other ſouldiours, ſuppoſing yt
by afflicting that part, Vitige would rayſe the ſiege & depart
from Rome. And it happened that Iohn vſed ſuch dexterity
in this enterpryſe, that he toke by force of armes the Cittye
of Ariminum with diuers other, wherefore Vitige fearing
the loſſe of Rauenna, determyned to rayſe the ſiege, & to reuolt
vnto the defence of thoſe partes. But in hys retyre Beliſar
gaue vnto the rerewarde of hys hoaſt a greate diſcomū
                  ture,
and ſlue manye of hys ſouldiours. So that wyth greate
ſhame & reproche Vitige returned vnto the ſiege of Rauenna,
                  Vitige beſiegeth Arimiū.
and beſieged a longe tyme Ariminum, in whych was the
Captayne Iohn. And Beliſar, who alwayes was vnwyllynge
to looſe tyme, aſſembled an armye of ſouldiours, and
hauinge fortifyed the Citty of Naples, departed wyth all expedition
towards Rome, & from thence towards Rauenna,
beginninge to inuade with terrible warre ſondrye partes of
Italye. At which preſent there was come vnto him from Iuſtinian
the Emperour, a valiant Captayne with a great nō
                  ber
of ſouldiours named Narſete an Eunucke,Narſete an Eunucke. who afterward
was general. Beliſar and he ioyned theyr armes together,
and went to reſkue and ſuccour Iohn, who at that preſent
was beſieged, but they enforced Vitige to rayſe his ſiege
and depart with no ſmall loſſe of his people. After yt, Gallia
Ciſolpina which at this preſent is called Lumbardye, &
Milan, Bergamo, & Nauarra with manye other Cittyes yelded
vnto the deuotion of Beliſar. Wherefore he ſent thyther
certayne Captaynes, which fought diuers notable battailes
wyth the Gothes, and with Theodorick kinge of Fraunce,
who at that inſtante was in armes, ſuppoſinge throughe the
dyſcord and continuall warre of thoſe Princes, he mighte wt
litle labour poſſeſſe it himſelfe of that Segniorye. Beliſar in
thende foughte a ſinguler & notable battayle wyth Vitige,
who had in the ſame all ye power that he was able to aſſemble,
or gather. In which (to vſe breuitye) Beliſar was conquerour,
& Vitige fled vnto Rauenna, wher he was beſieged
many dayes, during which tyme, ther were manye practiſes
practiſed betwene them, & vnto Beliſar was offered the kingdome

of Italye. But he continuinge his ſiege, toke the Cittye,The takinge of Vitige.
and had Vitige rendred vnto him for priſoner, whereby
almoſt all Italye was broughte in obedience vnto Beliſar.
               
               But when the affayres of Italye proceded in this wyſe, Iuſtinian
(contrarye to that which he ought to haue done) ſent
for Beliſar to go againſt the Perſians, for that he had finiſhed
the conqueſt of Italye: althoughe not longe after there happened
great alterations, with infinite diſcommodityes. For
although there remayned in thoſe partes for Captaynes and
myniſters in his ſtede, Iohn, Beſſa, Vitale, all which were
both valiante & of greate reputacion, yet they were not to be
compared vnto him, who in euerye reſpecte was bothe rare
and ſinguler.
               The mightye Captayne Beliſar departed oute of Italye,
caryinge with him the kinge Vitige priſoner,Beliſar returneth vnto Conſtantinople. & the Queene
his wyfe, with manye of theyr kinſefolke, and principals of ye
                  Gothes. He was receyued into Conſtantinople with infinit
ioye & gladnes, where he was ſo excedinglye beloued and honoured,
that al the Citizenes and ſtraūgers went to ſee him,
as a thinge myraculous, geuing great commendations vnto
his notable prowes and worthines, which the breuitye of my
Hiſtorye is not ſufficient to contayne.The proportion and conditions of Beliſar. His cōmendation was
the more, for that hee was of an amiable and comlye countenaunce,
taule of ſtature, of a very gentle, and well proportionat
perſonage, he was alſo noble, curteous, fauourable, and
endued wt all other vertues.
               Not longe after the departinge of Beliſar oute of Italye,
certayne Cittyes created for theyr kinge Idibald,
                  Idibald. a verye valiant
Captayne & of greate reputacion amonge the Gothes.
He became the more mightye thorowe the euill gouernment
of the Captaynes, and for certayne taxes which they burthened
the Cittyes withall,Euil officers ſo that after he had aſſembled together
his people, he elected out of thē an armye of ye moſt worthieſt
ſouldiours, and fought and ouercame Vitale in a battayle,
ſo that he became a terror vnto all ſtates. But, for
that hee had ſlaine a nephewe of kinge Vitiges,
                  The death of Idibald. one of hys
Guarde did alſo murther him, after hee had raigned litle

more then one yere. In his place was elected Alari
                        •
                     us, who
of Paulus Diaconus, and Iordan is called Ararius, hee alſo
was ſlaine within fiue monethes after his creation,Alaricus kinge of Gothes. and then
they elected & created for kinge Totile, who was the deſtruction
and ruine of Rome, as ſhalbe manifeſted, after the occaſion
is reueyled, for whiche Beliſar was by Iuſtinian called
out of Italy, which was touched a little before. It happened
in this maner. Coſroe kinge of Perſia, perceyuing that Beliſar
whom he eſpecially feared was buſyed with the affayres
of Italy, founde certayne fayned occaſions to moue warre againſt
the Emperiall territoryes,Coſroe. & enteringe into the countrye
of the Romaynes, he toke by force certayne Cittyes.
               Wherevpon Iuſtinian, who with great wyſedome and policye
prouided for all partes beſydes his ordinarye gariſons,
ſent an armye into the Eaſt, appointinge for generall a valiante
and worthye knight called Scytha, who was ouercome
and ſlaine in the firſt conflict. Then Iuſtinian ſent thyther an
other named Buce, a very expert Gentleman in martiall exploytes,
with a nephewe of his called Germanus, and diuers
other Captaynes & ſouldiours, who had with Coſroe moſt
cruell and bloudye conflictes, all which I omitte to entreate
But in the ende ye ſtate of the Empyre were not of ſufficient
power to reſiſt the Perſians: for Coſroe proceded cōquering,
and leauing Meſopotamia on the right hand, he ouercame
Surrey and Gicilia, and wanne many noble Cittyes by force
of armes. Whervpon Iuſtinian conceyuing that there was
no man ſufficient or able to appeaſe the furye & rage of that
warre but Beliſar, cauſed him to depart out of Italy, at ſuch
time as he had ſubdued the ſame, except only certayne ſtrong
Cittyes and Caſtelles in Lumbardye, in whiche remayned
ſondry gariſons of ſouldiours with diuers Captaynes of the
Gothes. Beliſar beinge vpon this occaſion departed oute of
Italye, and arryued in Conſtantinople, he was within few
dayes after ſent into the Eaſt againſt ye mighty Coſroe king
of Perſia, by whoſe comminge the Emperiall armye recouered
his priſtinate force, for Beliſar renued ye warre with ſuch
pollicye and courage, that in all thinges he made a ſodaine

chaunge. And hauing obtayned certayne victoryes againſt ye
Captaynes of the ſaid kinge (for he himſelfe neuer durſte encounter
with him in battayle) he recouered a great part of y•,
which had bene vſurped by the ennemyes: So that the affayres
of the Orient did daily waxe better through the preſence
& politicke gouernment of Beliſar. But in this meane ſeaſon
(which was of two yeares) the affayres and eſtate of Italye
did daily decline, for (as it is before mentioned) after ye kingdome
of the Gothes deſcended vnto Totile, he maintayned ye
warre with ſuch courage & circumſpecte dealinge, that he ouerthrew
and ſlue certaine Captaynes of themperour Iuſtinians,
whereby the Gothes wonne ſuche reputacion, that all
men out of euery part accoſted vnto them, except thoſe onlye
which had amonge them the Emperours ſouldiours. And
Totile with his whole armye wente thorow oute all Italye
without finding reſiſtance: and beſieged the great Cittye of
Naples,
                  Naples beſieged & wa
                        •
                      of Totile. (after diuers ſucceſſes happened both by ſea & land)
he wanne with certayne other therevnto adioyninge, yea his
affayres proceded with ſuche proſperitye, that it manifeſtlye
appeared, that if preſently there were not appointed ſome remedye,
he woulde poſſeſſe himſelfe of the whole. Which Iuſtinian
verye well perceyuinge, who accompted the loſſe of
Italye to be greater, then that of anye other prouince, commaunded
Beliſar to eſtabliſh the affayres of the Orient in as
good order as he might, and to repayre preſently vnto him.
Who (as one ſubiect vnto obedience) with expedition accō
                  pliſhed
themperous commaundemente, and beinge arryued
in Conſtantinople, without makinge any abode there, Iuſtinian
ſent him into Italye,Beliſar arriued in Italye with fewe ſouldiours. in ſuch haſt, that he might not cō
                  duct
with him for want of tyme, more thē 5000. ſouldiours,
ſuppoſinge to finde there ſufficient people to ſupplye vnto hys
want, alſo he imagened yt themperours parte was not reduced
vnto ſuch extremity. But he found in all reſpectes ye contrarye:
ſo that his arriual did rather damnifye then profite,
for whereas he was deſyred, and loked for of his frendes, and
feared before of his ennemyes: nowe, for that they ſawe him
to arriue wt ſo ſimple a power, thone parte layed awaye their

weapons and armour, & thother exiled from them all feare.
Wherfore in the beginninge the enterpriſe was both full of
trouble and trauaile.The wyſedome & worthines of Beliſar. But the placinge himſelfe in Rauenna,
to fortifye and defende the ſame, within fewe dayes ſo well eſtabliſhed
al thinges, and in ſuch wyſe prouided vnto the preſent
neceſſity, that although he might not encounter & meete
with his eunemyes in the fielde, for that he had ſo mighty an
hoaſt, yet notwithſtanding ye 
                  Gothes did rather looſe of their
Cittyes then recouer or win any from themperour. Which
did not a litle moleſt & greue Totile, wherefore he aſſembled
all the Captaynes and ſouldiours that he had, and ſent part
of them vnto Rauenna where Beliſar was, and he with all ye
remnant of his hoaſt marched vnto ye Citty of Rome,
                  Totile goeth vnto Rome. which
was ſo ſimplye furniſhed with ſouldiours and victuels, that
it ſeemed, it might not longe defende it ſelfe. Theſe determinations
being reueiled vnto Beliſar, did not a little afflict and
vexe him, who remembring the greate trauayle & daunger yt
hee ſuſtayned for the defence thereof, & ſeinge himſelfe not of
ſufficient power to meete his ennemye in the fielde, wrate in
all haſt a moſt rigorous letter vnto Iuſtinian, requyringe of
him ſouldiours and moneye,The order takē of Beliſar to go vnto Rome. & determined to leaue Rauenna,
and to go vnto Rome by ſea. Wherefore hee ſayled into
Dalmatia, and from thence vnto Durazzo where he mette
with Captayne Iohn, who conducted with him an hoaſte of
ſouldiours ſente from themperour, with which he thoughte
himſelfe able enoughe to fight againſt the Gothes. But hee
iudged it moſte neceſſarye to ſuccour with all celeritye ye Citye
of Rome, for he ſuppoſed that if Totile ſhould winne the
fame, yt then all Italye woulde render it ſelfe vnto his deuotion.
Wherfore he reſolued to ſayle thither by ſea & to enter
the Cittye by the ryuer Tiber: For the Cittye called Porto
which ſtandeth at the mouthe or entrye of the ſayd ryuer, appertayned
vnto the Emperour, althoughe Oſtia which is ſituate
on the contrarye ſyde was ſubiect vnto the Gothes, he
ordeyned alſo that Captayne Iohn ſhould croſſe the ſea, and
lande in Calabria & ſo ſuccour the Cittye by lande.
               After this deliberation, Beliſar ſayled from Rauenna and

arriued at the port & mouthe of the ſayd ryuer, and not being
able by reaſon of the huge hoaſte of Totile to paſſe by lande,
he prepared with muche ſpeede, a great nomber of ſhippes &
Brigantines laden with victuels & ſouldiours, and ſo ſayled
a longe the ryuer. And although Totile kept it, in the moſt
narroweſt places attrauerſed with chaynes,Beliſar paſſeth a long 
                        〈◊〉
                      ryuer 
                        •
                     ber. & a bridge vpon
eche ſyde of which was a Caſtell, repleniſhed with munition
and ſouldiours appointed to deſturbe ye paſſage: Beliſar notwithſtanding
proceded with his vp ye ryuer, & being arriued
at the ſaid bridge, his ſouldiours fought ſo valiantly againſt
thoſe which garded yt ſame, ye they ouercame theyr enemyes,
brake the bridge & chey
                     •
                  es & paſſed forwardes. And had preſently
reſcued Rome, & miniſtred vnto euery thing a proſperous
auenimēt, if one ſiniſter accident had not diſturbed the
whole. Beliſar had left his wyfe & family (which wyfe he ſo
feruently loued, yt in the moſt part of hys warres he conducted
her wyth hym) in the ſayd Porto, which ſtandeth at ye entrye
of the ryuer, wyth ſouldiours to defende the forte, hauing
for theyr Captayne a valiante gentleman named Iſaac,
wyth expreſſe commaundemente, that he ſhoulde not in anye
wyſe iſſue out at the gates, but ſhould guarde & defende the
fortreſſe. But Iſaac vnderſtandinge of the victorye whiche
Beliſar obteined againſt his enemyes, deſyred alſo to atchiue
ſome ſinguler exploite, wherefore he iſſued out of the forte againſt the ſouldiours of Totile, which were appoynted for ye
defence of thoſe places▪ & although in the beginning he brake
theyr arraye, and enforced them to retyre, yet in the ende hee
was vanquiſhed and taken by them. Which was preſentlye
vnderſtode of Beliſar by certaine that fled, and the fame went
alſo that his people were taken,The loue of Beliſar to his Wyfe. and his wyfe remayned in ye
cuſtodye of the ennemyes. Which thing ſo much greued his
hart, that withoute expectinge of other newes, hee returned
downe the ryuer, determyning eyther to dye amonge his ennemyes,
or els to deliuer his wife, determyning after he had
recouered her to returne in one inſtante vnto Rome. But
whē he arryued at Porto, he founde that the fort was mainteyned
and defended by his, & that his wyfe was at libertye,

although the Captaine, remayned captiue: whereat (when
he ſawe that he was deluded) he was more greuoſlye vexed
and oppreſſed, then at the former newes. Moreouer the
ſame nighte in which he arryued at Porto, whether it were
throughe ire or griefe,The diſeaſe of Beliſar. or by ſome other priuate occaſion, hee
was aſſaulted with ſo feruent an ague, that ſodeinlye he fell
into a ſound abandoned of all ſence: ſo that it was vnpoſſible
for him to ryſe out of his bedde, or procede in the enterprice of
Rome, for the anguiſhe of his diſeaſe did ſo encreaſe, that often
times he was at the point of death.
               In this meane while, whiche was of many dayes continuance,
Totile beſieged Rome ſo ſtraitlye that they of the Cittye
dyed by infinite nombers of famine,Totile taketh Rome. and did eate dogges,
cattes, & rattes with other things, which may ſeeme vnpoſſible.
And in thende Totile wanne & toke the ſame by force,
and ſent Embaſſadours vnto Iuſtinian, offeringe vnto him
his ſeruice & frendſhip, and that he would reſtore Rome vnto
him, ſo that he would graunte him peace: vnto whiche if hee
would not conſent & yelde, be promiſed and proteſted vtterly
to ſubuert it, & to moue againſt him moſt cruell warres.
               
                  Iuſtinian aunſwered, that he had in Italy his Captayne Beliſar,
& that vnto him he remitted the diſpoſinge of all his affayres.
Totile with this aunſwere became ſo wrathful, that
he determined to deſtroy Rome,
                  The ruine & deſtruction of Rome. which determination (in an
vnhappy hower) he accompliſhed. For he cauſed the Capitoll
to be burnt, with the better part of the whole Citty, and
ouerthrew the thirde part of the whole Cittye, & ouerthrew
the thirde parte of the waules, commaundinge the Citizens
vpon paine of death to abandon the ſame, & to procure an habitation
in ſome other place. In this wiſe he left Rome burned,
deſtroyed and deſert. And went againſt Iohn, who was
the Captayne,Totile becommeth Lorde & patrone of many prouinces. which with the ſouldiours of Iuſtinian marched
thorow Calabria towardes Rome: He was of ſo vyle &
baſe a courage, that he durſt not abyde the comminge of Totile,
but wente vnto Otranto, which is ſituate in ye vttermoſt
conūnes of Calabria: ſo that Totile withoute reſiſtance did
poſſeſſe himſelfe of al Calabria, Abruzzo & Lucania, which

all had remayned vnto that inſtante in obedience vnto themperour.Beliſar repayreth Rome.
At this preſent Beliſar recouered his healthe, and
enterpriſed as worthy an exployte as euer he had attempted.
For he went & placed himſelfe with his ſouldiours in Rome,
mynding to repayre and defend the ſame, & ſent his wyfe vnto
Conſtantinople. Yea he vſed ſuch diligente expedition in
the reedifying of the Cittye, that within a very ſhorte ſeaſon
he made a Cittye of a deſert and vnhabited ſoyle. The fame
wherof beinge publiſhed, many cytizens (drawne as it were
with ye loue of the country, as alſo with the true zeale which
they bare vnto Beliſar) repayred thyther from all places.
               This being vnderſtode of Totile, he returned at a ſodayne by
makinge of great iorneyes vnto Rome, which he minded to
take together with the Captayne Beliſar. But it was defended
ſo valiantly, that Totile was enforced with great loſſe of
his ſouldiours to depart and rayſe the ſiege.
               In this meane ſeaſon Captaine Iohn had in Calabria and
Puglia, receyued & intertayned all the Cittizens which had
f
                     •
                  ed and were expulſed, & ſent them backe againe vnto Rome:
whom Beliſar placed in theyr Cittye, & hauing made ſufficient
prouiſion & well fortifyed the ſame, he left therein ſundry
gariſons of practiſed ſouldiours for the defence therof, with
a valiant Captayne named Cannon, and departed thence to
ioyne wyth Iohn and thother Captaynes, mynding to ſeeke
out Totile, betwene whom there happened diuers euentes,
which for breuityes ſake I omitte to wryte of.
               At this inſtant for that the king of Perſia, renued his war
in the Eaſte, Iuſtinian was enforced to ſende for Beliſar, although
in thende he wente not vnto that enterpriſe,Beliſor ſente againe into Italye. for that
there was a peace concluded. Whervpon he was ſent againe
into Italye, where although he obteyned not ſuch good ſucceſſe
in his attemptes as he had in times paſſed, yet he neuer
receyued eyther ſhame, reproche, or diſhonour, for hee at no
time declyned in any point, from that which was conuenient
or requiſit vnto a moſt valiant, prudent, & politike Captaine.
And finallye, beinge ſurpriſed with age, hee returned vnto
Conſtantinople, wherwith quietnes he paſſed the remnant

of his lyfe.Rome taken by Totile the ſeconde time. After whoſe departure Totile returned vnto
Rome, & beſieged the Cittye, which after a longe ſeaſon and
manifold afflictions of the inhabitantes, as alſo through the
negligence of Iohn which made no expedition in ſuccouring
the ſame, & by treaſon of certaine which were corrupted
with giftes, the cruell barbarian wanne it againe. But in
this he did not exerciſe ſuch tyranny as he vſed in the former,
for he permitted no ſpoyle to be done in the Cittye, but procured
and endeuoured to furniſh it with inhabitantes, by geuinge
of great rewardes & large priuileges, vnto all ſuch as
would returne & remayne there. He wan afterwardes many
other places, and paſſed into Cicilia, in which (for that he
might not lightly or with ſmal trauaile conquere the Iland)
he lefte .iiii. Captaynes with an armye of ſouldiours and returned
into Italye. Of all which within ſhorte ſpace he had
bene patrone, if Narſete a Captayne ſente by Iuſtinian, had
not moſt valiantly reſiſted, & diſturbed this his fortunate ſucceſſe.
This Narſete was in great reputation & authoritye wt
themperour, whereby he became both riche & mightye: Hee
arriued in Italye with a mighty hoaſt, which conſiſted of diuers
kindes of people, as Hunnes, Erulians and Lumbardes,
whiche at that inſtante inhabited Hungarye, with ſondrye
other warlike Nations. He made his iourney a longe
the banke of the Adriatike ſea, coaſtinge from Venice vnto
Rauenna, although at his entrance into Italy he fought diuers
battayles wyth the Gothes. And after hee had remayned
certayne dayes in Rauenna, he marched with his armye
towardes Rome. But Totile who in no reſpecte was vyle
or fearefull, awayted & expected his comminge with whom
he fought a moſt cruel battaile, in which conflict Totile was
ſlaine, & his hoaſt vanquiſhed. This victorye opened & manifeſted
vnto Narſete,
                  The death of Totile. that the conqueſt of all Italye conſiſted
of ſmal trauaile, & litle daunger. Wherevppon he continued
his iourney, vntill he came to Rome, which he beſieged, & in
thende (although it was moſt valiantly defended by the Gothes)
yet hee wanne the ſame, & made of them a maruelous
ſlaughter. And departing from thence withoute reſiſtance,

he poſſeſſed himſelfe of all the Cittyes, & Caſtelles therevnto
adioyninge. After the death of Totile, the Gothes created
for theyr king,Teia kinge of Gothes. a mighty & worthy champiō named Teia,
who toke all the treaſure which Totile had in Pania, and leuyed
ſouldiours therewith to reſiſt Narſete: and ſent vnto ye
Frenchemen for ayde, but they would not in any wyſe graūt
therevnto. Wherefore Teia ſeinge that Narſete toke bothe
Cittyes & Caſtels without fightinge for them, departed out
of Lumbardye wyth as great an hoaſt as he was able to prouide,
and marched towardes Campania, where he determined
to meete with Narſete, ſo that ye two armyes encamped
vpon the ſyde of a ryuer, betwene whom after longe ſkyrmiſhes
was fought a moſt cruel and bloudy battaile, yea diuers
wryters make mention of marueilous actes which the king
of the Gothes atchieued with his owne hands.The death of Teia. But in thend
he was after a longe & cruel fight, ſlaine by the ſouldiours of
Narſete, notwithſtandinge the battaile continued euen vnto
night, without any apparant victorye vnto eyther part. The
Gothes repoſed that night as quietly as they might, but the
morninge folowinge like deſperate parſons they renued the
battayle, and the Emperial ſouldiours moued wyth wrath,
fought moſt fiercelye, for yt the Gothes being without a Captaine
began the fight and defended themſelues ſo obſtinatly,
this conflict continued alſo vnto night, when the Gothes ſent
Embaſſadours vnto Narſete,
                  The victorye of Narſete. offeringe to abandone all that
which they poſſeſſed in Italye, vpon condition that he would
permit them (without bearing of armour) to liue freelye in ye
ſame. That demaunde was graūted vnto them by Narſete,
becauſe he would not anye loner fight with deſperate men,
as alſo for yt his ſouldiours receyued great damage and loſſe:
In this wyſe they loſt all that which they enioyed in Italy,In what maner the Gothes loſt their name in Italye. &
remayned as ſubiectes and natiues in that country, wherby
in ſhort ſpace the Gothes loſt theyr name & memory. But the
affayres in yt eſtate obteyned not throughe this victory a preſent
quietnes: for certayne Captaynes & ſouldiours whiche
remayned in Lumbardye and Piemont, fortifyed themſel
                  
                     •••
                  ,
and hauing ayde out of Fraunce & Burgundye, renued

the warre, which cōtinued a whole yere, in which time were
fought diuers & ſundry battayles. But in thende Narſete obtayned
the victorye, & became Lord and Segnior ouer all Italye.Narſete extinguiſhed i
                        •
                      Italye, the name of the Gothes and Oſtrogothes
And it pleaſed God, that he ſhould ende and deſtroy
the name of the Gothes and Oſtrogothes, in the xviii. yeare
after this warre was begunne, and 72. yeare after Theodorick
firſt enioyed and poſſeſſed the ſame. But contrary wyſe
the Viſigothes whiche were in Spayne encreaſed dailye in
might, and the name of the Swizzers & Alanes decreaſed, ſo
that the fame of thoſe Gothes remayned onlye. At this time
there raigned in that kingdome, Athanalgidus in great proſperitye,
who gouerned all Spayne .22. yeares.
               After the finiſhing & endinge of theſe enterpriſes, Narſete
endeuoured in al that he might to reedifye Rome: which for
that it was very ruinous, & muche deſtroyed, & voyde alſo of
inhabitantes, he reduced into farre leſſer circuit, gouerning
both that, and the whole eſtate of all Italye with as good order,
lawes and pollicyes as might be deuiſed or inuented.
               For the which he enioyed the whole gouernment as long as
Iuſtinian liued: who all the time of theſe warres made hys
abode in Conſtantinople, frō whence he ſent prouiſion, both
of men and moneye, not only vnto the affayres of Italye, but
alſo vnto thoſe of the Eaſte, for that he maintayned an inceſſant
warre, & of no leſſe danger agaynſt Coſroe the kinge of
Perſia, then againſt the Gothes in Italy.
               There happened in the time of Iuſtinian beſydes ye before
ſpecifyed conflictes & conqueſtes,Earthquakes with diuers other accidents happened in the time of Iuſtinian. marueilous earthquakes,
famiſhmentes with diuers other accidentes of great importance.
Notwithſtandinge all which he omitted not to haue a
regarde and care vnto the preſeruation and mainteynance of
peace, yea it mighte ſeeme that he onlye ſtudyed, and reſpected
the ſame: For he reduced, all the old volumes & decrees
of the Emperours, which were ſo infinite yt ſcarcelye a man
might liue to read them ouer,Lawes ordayned and made by Iuſtinian. and ſo variable and contrary,
that they ſeemed a confuſion of many lawes repugnante and
diſagreing thone vnto thother, into a vnitye and ſuccint breuitye,
excerpting only out of them that which was neceſſary

with adding thereto certaine of his owne inuention. In this
maner he abreuiated all the lawes of ye aunciente Maieſtrates,
Iudges and Lawyers, whiche all conſiſted of .2000.
bookes, by reducing them into .50. Bookes called Digeſtes,
and he compounded the .iiii. Bookes of the Inſtitutes, and
the lawes and decrees of the Emperours & Caeſars whiche
were diſperſed into manye bookes,Digeſtes, Inſtitutes, Code, Volume. he reduced into .xii. & named
the ſame the Code of Iuſtinian, hee made alſo an other
booke which hee entyled the Volume, vnto which hee added
.iii. bookes of the ſayd Code. Moreouer ye Emperour was
very curious in making of ſinguler and ſumptuous edifices.
And when he was very aged, for that he had no heyre males
of his owne, he elected and aſſociated for companiō with him
in the Empyre, Iuſtine his nephewe, ſonne vnto one of his
daughters. It is written that in his age he was infected
with ye hereſye of thoſe which affirme that Chriſt
was impatible:With what hereſy he was infected. which proceded (as it is ſuppoſed)
for wante of iudgemente or reaſon, of whiche he
was reuoked frō certaine dayes before he dyed:
which was when he had lyued 80. yeres
and more, and in ye 39. of his Empyre,
and after the incarnation of our
Lorde and Sauiour Ieſus
Chriſt .578.
*****
            
            
               
               Justine the ſeconde.
               
               
                  
                     IVſtine, nephewe vnto Iuſtinian, toke vppon
him the gouernment of the Empyre, he was
in conditions contrary vnto his grandfather,
and alſo negligente in adminiſtratinge & gouerninge
the Empyre, which he permitted to
be whollye ruled by Sophia his wyfe. Who in the beginning
(to winne the fauour and beneuolence of the people) perſwaded
Iuſtine, to paye out of the publike treaſure the dettes of
the poore, which ſuffered indurance, and were not able with
oute theyr vtter vndoinge to recouer their libertye. For this
liberall acte, he was a while well thought of with all men.
He had moreouer at that inſtante warre with Hormiſda the
kinge of Perſia,
                  Hormiſda. who ſucceaded Coſroe. But after diuers cō
                  flictes,
and ſondrye victoryes obtayned by the ſtates of themperours,
there was a peace concluded, whereby the affayres
of the Eaſt were reduced vnto reſt and quietnes, and Iuſtine
paſſed his life voyde of care, delightinge onlye in vyces and
wanton pleaſures. Of him there are no notable actes to be
mentioned of,The affayres of Italye. except certayne aueniments which in this maner
chaunced in Italy. After Iuſtine had raigned .iiii. yeares,
and Narſete gouerned Italy for the Empyre xii yeares,
in which tyme he obteyned infinite victoryes of the Gothes, &
ruled both wyth ſinceritye and pollecye: dyuers malicious,

and wicked perſons, enuyinge at his great honour, dignity
and ryches, which he had gottē in the former warres, wrote
certaine accu
                     •
                  ations againſt Narſete vnto Iuſtine: in whoſe
Court, (as happeneth moſt commonly in all Courtes) there
wanted not that bare him the like hatred,Falſe and ſlaunderous accuſations obiected againſt Narſete, for which he was by Iuſtine depriued from his gouernement. wherfore the accuſors
were hard with ſuch fauour, that Iuſtine throughe the
imbecilitye of reaſon, and Sophia by her lighte credytinge,
were perſwaded, that to be moſt true which was obiected againſt
hym. And therefore withoute reſpectinge, or hauinge
conſiderations of the manifold daungers & trauayles, which
Narſete ſuſteyned & ſuffered in the conqueſt of Italy, they determined
to depriue hym of his gouernmente, and to authoryſe
another to be Regent ouer the ſame, which was one of
the extremeſt iniuryes that euer was hard of.Noble actes ought to be rewarded. And Sophia
not content wyth this deſpyte and manifeſt wronge, did alſo
reproue him in wordes: ſayinge, that ſhe would enforce him
to ſpynne woll in Conſtantinople amonge her maydens, &
wyth all expedition there was ſent in exchaunge of him a noble
man named Longine. Which beyng vnderſtoode of Narſete,
whoſe inuincible courage could not dyſgeſt, ſo greate a
reproche, without diſdayne & wrath: ſayd, in aſmuch as ſhe
woulde ſende for hym to ſpynne, hee aduouched vnto her, to
weaue ſuch a peece of clothe,No cauſe ought to moue a mā to warre againſt his countrye. as ſhe ſhould not verye eaſelye
vndo: which promyſe or vowe he accōpliſhed, as ſhalbe hereafter
declared. For he, hauing intelligence that Longine
was arryued in Italye in the Cittye of Rauenna, fearing to
ſayle vnto Conſtantinople, went frō 
                  Rome where he made
his abode, vnto Naples, in which he was ſo well thought of,
& ſo intierlye beloued: that there he reputed himſelfe to be
in moſt ſafety. From whence, as one ſlaundered and become
deſperate, he did ſollicit wyth many letters the Lumbardes,
wyth Alboine theyr kinge (who was his very frend,Narſete induceth Albonie to inuade Italye. and had
ſent hym ſouldiours agaynſt ye 
                  Gothes) that he ſhould leaue
Hungarye, and poſſeſſe hymſelfe of Italye, vnto whyche he
would aſſiſt him in all that he might, & geue him inſtructiōs
for ye better order taking in atchieuing y• ſame. This attēpt or
offer was accepted & receyued both of them and theyr kyng:

Who as ſome affyrme were called Lūbardes becauſe of their
longe beardes: and theyr oryginall and beginninge (as Paulus
Oſorius mentioneth in hys Hiſtory) was in a certayne Iland,
ſituate in the Germayne ſea, named Scandinania: frō
whence, for that they were many, and the lande not ample enoughe
to contayne the inhabitantes, (as many other Northren
Nations had done) with .ii. Captaynes called Aeione
and Thermes, they aduentured to wyn ſome commodious
place to inhabite in, eyther by warre, or otherwyſe. And after
the deathe of theſe two Captaynes,Agelmond. they elected a kynge
named Agelmond, after whom they created dyuers other
kynges, which had ſondrye warres & ſucceſſes wyth the Gothes,
Vandales and manye other Nations, vntill that after
longe warres they became Lordes ouer Hungarye, from
whence Albonie theyr king had ſent ſouldiours to ayde and
ſuccour Narſete againſt the Gothes. Whereby, this occaſion
grewe, that Narſete ſent for him to conquere Italy, vnto
which he determined to goo, being allured as wel through ye
promiſes made vnto him of Narſete, as alſo for that he was
informed of the fertility of the ſoyle, by thoſe which had bene
ſent of hym vnto the warres of Italye.
               Whyle he was muſtering of hys people, and making preparation
for this ſo waighty an enterpryſe, Longine ye new
gouernor of Italye, began a newe forme & maner of adminiſtration,
whiche continued longe after: naminge hymſelfe a
ſupreme gouernour, and he appointed vnto euerye Cittye a
ruler whom he termed a Duke from whence it is ſuppoſed yt
that name of honour and dignitye was firſt deriued:The original and begining of the tytle & dignitye of Dukes. and in
Rome hee ordayned a gouernour which was called a Preſident.
In this maner the authoritye of the Senate, and dignitye
of the Conſulles were altogether loſt, & neuer recouered
there preſtinate name and forme, for Narſete and Baſill
hys companion were the laſt. After the gouernmente of Italy
was in this maner deuided,Pope Iohn defendeth a traytour againſt his prince. and Albonie in a readynes
to march thither warde, it happened yt Pope Iohn the third,
with the conſente of the whole people of Rome, who with a
marueylous affectiō honoured Narſete, went vnto Naples,
                  
and after many perſwaſions cōducted him vnto Rom
                        •
                     , minding
both to defende him from his ennemyes, and to retayne
him in his owne Pallace.Narſete repē
                     ted himſelfe of his treaſō. Wherevpon Narſete repented yt
he had procured Albonie, whō hee perſwaded from ye enterpryſe
by wryting, & manifeſting vnto him the manifold difficultyes
which would come in ye ſame. But he preueyled nothinge,
for Albonie was fullye reſolued to procede in that he
very well knewe the force or ſtrength that was in Italye, as
alſo the newe gouernment of Longine, & the ſmall care and
negligence of Iuſtine: Wherfore he would not credite Narſete,
but did rather accelerate his iorney,The death of Narſete, and Pope Iohn. before whoſe arriuall
Narſete dyed in Rome, where he had hidde a great treaſure,
which afterward was founde, his bodye was conueyed
vnto Conſtantinople, & at that inſtant there dyed alſo Pope
Iohn, which brought him from Naples.
               
               
                  Albonie at his departing out of Hungary, left the gouerment
of that prouince vnder the protection and tuition of the
Hunnes, which were the remnant of the hoaſt of the fierce &
mighty Atlas, of whom it was called Hungarye: and paſſed
into Italye with 200000. men, which brought with them
theyr wyues, childrē & facultyes, he entred firſt into the prouince
called Friuli, and without reſiſtance cōquered ye ſame,
ouer which he appointed for gouernour a nephewe of his named
Siſulphus. Then, for that Longine had fortifyed with
garriſons & victuels Rauenna, Padoa, Cremona and Mantua,
with diuers other Cittyes, hee departed from thoſe places
& went vnto Vincenza, & Verona both which yelded vnto
him without reſiſtance. From thence he paſſed ouer the riuer
Adda, and marched towardes Milan, whoſe Citizens
at ye perſwaſions of theyr biſhop, as alſo for that they woulde
not be ſpoyled and ſlaine, yelded the Cittye vnto his clemencye:
which example many other followed, for his fame was
ſuch and ſo generall, that all places rendred themſelues, excepte
thoſe which were fortifyed by Longine, among which,
there were on that part wher he cōquered two Cittyes Verſelli
and Pauia,
                  The beſſeging of Pauia. which he beſieged, but it was ſo well defended
that the ſiege continued three yeares. At the beginninge

wherof for that he perceyued it would requyre a longe time,
hee deuided his hoaſt, remayninge him ſelfe at Pauia with a
ſufficient nomber, and ſent the reſt to inuade other places of
Italye, vnto whom there happened ſuche good ſucceſſe, that
they became poſſeſſors of many Cityes, Townes & Caſtels.
In ſuche wyſe, that from Milan to Bonnonie, there were verye
few Cittyes or fortes which were not reduced vnto theyr
ſubiection, within the ſpace of thoſe thre yeares: which prouince
they enioyed afterward more then 200. yeres and called
it Lumbardye,
                  Lumbardye from whence and at what time it was ſo named. and that name remayneth euen vnto this
preſent. At the ende of .iii. yeres Albonie might eaſely haue
entered Pauia, but he wente vnto Rauenna, where his wyfe
Roſimund repayred vnto him, wt al his treaſures & Iewels.
And while he there made his abode with continual paſtimes
and feaſtes, hee was murthered by treaſon, at the appointment
and conſente of Roſimund,
                  The death of Albonie. whoſe father he before had
ſlaine, and at a bankette gaue her to drincke in his ſkull: for
which moſt tyrannous acte, ſhee with good reaſon conſpired
his death. After Albonie, the Lumbardes elected for their
kinge a noble man both of byrth & worthines,Clephi elected kinge of Lumbardes. called Clephi
or Cleue, who renued the warre and exerciſed great cruelty
in thoſe Cittyes, which in the prouince of Venice, remayned
loyall & in deuotion vnto the Empyre, that cauſed the Citty
of Venice, through the flyinge thither ſo many worthye gentlemen
to become ſo renoumed, as at this preſent it is one of
the moſt famous Cittyes in the whole worlde. Alſo in theſe
dayes Iuſtine the Emperour, who made his abode in Conſtantinople
voyde of care, but repleniſhed with vices, was ſo
tormented with the Goute,The death of Iuſtine. that he dyed with the anguiſhe &
dollour: after he had raigned xi. yeres. But certayne dayes
before, at the requeſt of Sophia his wyfe (for that he had no
ſonne of his owne) hee created Caeſar a moſt excellente Captaine
named Tiberius, whom he moſt earneſtly intreated to
remayne obedient vnto Sophia.
               
               His death happened in the yeare after the incarnatiō of our
Sauiour Chriſt. .579.
¶***********¶
            
            
               
               Tiberius the ſeconde.
               
               
                  THe behauiour and conditions of Iuſtine
were ſuch, that his death was bewayled
of no man, excepte onlye of his wyfe Sophia,
who onlye in his tyme held in her
hande, the brydle of the whole gouernment,
with geeuing order vnto all thinges:
In which eſtate the determined to
continue, being fullye reſolued to take vnto huſbande Tiberius,
                  The vertuous conditions of Tiberius. who immediatly after the death of Iuſtine was created
and crowned Emperour. He, for that he was a vertuous,
iuſt, curteous, mercifull & a bountiful Prince, endued with
all vertues requiſite vnto a Chriſtian Emperour, would not
receyue and accepte Sophia for his wyfe, whoſe conditions
were repugnat and contrary vnto all goodnes. Wherevppon
after he was created Caeſar, he diſtributed great ſūmes
of moneye vnto the poore, and after his Coronation, he cauſed
to be nominated Empreſſe a noble Lady named Anaſtagia,
                  Anaſtagia the wyfe of Tiberius. with whom he had priuatly contracted a mariage. For
whiche, Sophia practiſed to haue him ſlaine at his nuptiall
feaſt, determininge to create Emperour Iuſtinian an other
nephewe of Iuſtines. But it pleaſed God to defende the good
Emperour from this execrable conſpiracye,The mercifulnes of Tiberius. & to reueyle vnto
him the wickednes of Sophia, vnto whom at her humble
ſubmiſſion hee remitted the offence or cryme, and pardoned

alſo Iuſtinian who was her confederat in the treaſon.A horrible murther of Sophia pretended. But
not longe after, ſhe aſſayed and attempted the like: for which
Tiberius cauſed her to be apprehended, and depriued frō all
her ryches: but (in that he was repleniſhed with clemencye)
he permitted her to liue, maintayning and procuringe her to
be well entreated & ſerued with much honour, notwithſtanding
he diſcharged all her olde ſeruantes,The mercifulnes of Tiberius. and appointed to
ſupplye theyr roumes certaine of his owne familye. He alſo
pardoned Iuſtinian, for that he perfectlye vnderſtoode, that
he was entyced and allured therevnto by Sophia: but he not
long after was excedingly beloued and exalted by Tiberius,
whom as Paulus Diaconus affyrmeth, hee euer after ſerued
with ſincere loyaltye. Theſe were the priuate and domeſticall
affayres which happened principallye vnto Tiberius.
Who as touchinge the vniuerſall gouernmente of his Empyre,
alwayes obſerued equity and iuſtyce, and raigned with
infinite worthines. Vnto him obeyed Affricke and all thother
prouinces: for that he enioyed the Empyre of Europe &
Aſia with tranquillitye and quietnes, but the warre in Italye
againſt the Lumbardes, and that in the Eaſt with yt 
                  Perſians,
did not a litle moleſt and diſturbe him. Yet in Perſia
he obtayned many victoryes and made greate ſpoyles, by the
worthye procedinges of the valiante and prudente Countye
Maurice, who afterwarde was created Emperour.
               While the affayres of the Eaſte proceded in this manner,
thoſe of Italye,Clephi kinge of the Lumbardes. enioyed not the like proſperity: For Clephi
the newe kinge of the Lumbardes, inuaded with moſt cruell
warre the Cittyes and Townes, which remayned obediente
vnto ye Empyre, his ſucceſſes were ſo fortunate, that he dailye
recouered from the Emperors eſtates, & being deſyrous
ſomewhat to repoſe his weryed ſpirites, hee ſente his Captaynes
and ſouldiours towardes Rome, who with litle trauaile
wanne the Cittyes therevnto adioyning, and Rome it
ſelfe was by them beſieged, and in great daunger of taking.
For the Hiſtoriographers affyrme, that if Clephi had not ſo
ſodainlye dyed,The death of Clephi. he would in ſhorte ſpace haue bene Lorde and
patrone of Rome and Rauenna, the two eyes of Italye.

But his determinations were intercepted by death, as thoſe
were of other kinges, as mighty or mightyer then he, which
death happened vnto him by the treaſon of his owne ſubiectes.
After him ye 
                  Lūbardes refuſed to create any other king,
but they elected xxx. of the chiefe among them, or to ſay more
trulye .xxx. tyrantes,Thirtye tyrantes. which did poſſeſſe themſelues of xxx. of
the chiefeſt Cittyes in all Italye, euerye of them rulinge his
with the territory therevnto belonging as beſt pleaſed him,
with ayding one another when any warre was kept againſt
thempyre. And for that Tiberius was buſyed in the warres
againſt the Perſians, without reſpectinge the affayres of
Italy, or making ſuch prouiſion as was neceſſary, the Lumbardes
had the better oportunitye,The kingdome of Naples wonne by the Lumbardes. to extende theyr forces
more at large, with conqueringe of Citties and Caſtelles euen
vnto Rome & Naples. In whiche warre they vſed ſuche
crueltye, forces and rapines, as the like were neuer hard of,
and for that theſe barbarians were not as then perfect Chriſtians,
they robbed and ſpoyled withoute anye difference, aſwell
thinges ſacred as prophane, and in thende wanne the
kingdome of Naples. Moreouer his their happye ſucceſſe
was furthered,The death of Tiberius. in that Tiberius became ſo extremelye oppreſſed
with ſickenes, that he might not attende vnto the gouernmente
of the Empyre, yea the infirmitye continued ſo
longe that he dyed thereof.
               Wherevppon the Romaynes ſeing the great diſtreſſe into
which they were brought,A truce taken with the Lū
                     bardes. by the Lumbardes, intreated a
peace, and concluded a truce with them for a certaine ſeaſon.
Vnto the which the Lumbardes graunted throughe this occaſion,
that the kinges of Fraunce (for at that inſtant there
raigned three brethren) had ſente had a mightye hoaſte againſte
them, beinge not a little diſpleaſed that they were growen
vnto ſo great a power. They yelded therevnto alſo, for that
the Saxons which vnto that preſent had aſſiſted them, were
nowe departed and had left them.
               While Tiberius (as is aforeſayde) was oppreſſed with
that his infirmitye, he nominated Caeſar and his ſucceſſour,
Maurice his ſonne in lawe: and preſently after, leauinge all

the Empyre whiche he inherited in peace, and tranquillitye,
except onlye the eſtates of Italy, he dyed after he had gouerned
vii. yeares, and in the yeare after the incarnation of oure
Sauiour Chriſt 585. Whoſe death was greatly bewayled,
and lamented of all ſortes of people, aſwell for his magnificencye,
and liberalitye, as alſo for his ſinguler vertues and
bountye.
               At this preſent there flouriſhed in Spayne, the holye doctour
and Prelate Leander Archebiſhop of Ciuilia, thorowe
whoſe deuine preachinges and godlye exhortations Ricardo
the kinge of Spayne with al thother Gothes, vtterlye
renounced and forſoke the ſecte of the Arrians.
At this inſtant there flouriſhed alſo Saint Gregorye
one of the foure Doctours of the
Church, who at yt time wrate the noble
Booke of the moralles vpon Iob,
and dedicated the ſame vnto
the biſhoppe Leander
aforeſayde.
*****
            
            
               
               Mauritius.
               
               
                  
                     MAuritius by countrye a Cappadocian,
maryed Tiberius daughter Conſtantina
by name, & ruled in the Empyre of
Rome 20. yeares: he was Crowned of
the Patriarcke Iohn. This Mauritius
was ſecretarye to Iuſtine the ſecond, &
for his great ſeruice throughe the perſwaſion
of Sophia, was made generall
of his armye. Who againſt the Perſians moſt happelye preueyled
and ouercame them,Mauritius. & wanne from them Meſopotamia.
The beginninge of this Mauritius gouernmente, was
verye fortunate: hee had alſo in his gouernmente warres againſt
the Perſians, againſt whom he ſent a chiefe Captaine
called Philippicus, who marryed Gordia the ſiſter of Mauritius.
Many calamityes fell to the Romaynes, and alſo to ye
                  Perſians, manye tumultes and ſeditious vprores on euerye
ſyde: but in the ende the Romaynes preuayled, and became
conquerours ouer the Perſians, they being wounded with ciuill
warres. The Perſians were at rebellion with a tyrante
beinge their Prince, called Orimaſda:
                  Orimaſda. whoſe eyes they pulled
out of his head. Alſo Coſroes the ſonne of this tyraunte
Orimaſda, againſt nature cruellye commaunded his father
to be ſlaine: Althoughe Orimaſda was a deteſtable tyrante,
yet the wrath of God for this murther fell vpon Coſroes his
ſonne,Coſroes. for the murther cōmitted on his father, who for ſauegar
                     ••
                  
of his life, was forced to flye to the Romaynes. So in

this deuiſion amonge themſelues they were ouercome of the
Romaynes, by the flyinge awaye of Coſroes to the Romaynes.
Mauritius by this extremitye happeninge to Coſroes,
reſtored him into his kingdome, and the limittes of the Romayne
Empyre and of the Perſians was appointed.Phocas. This
peace continued till the beginninge of the raigne of Phocas.
               
               After this, Mauritius reduced his armye and greate power
into Europe, and his great hoaſt out a
                     •
                   
                  Syria, to ſubdue
the great Prince Caganus,
                  Caganus. a noble warriour, a moſt experte
Captaine, and a Prince of great renowne. Before he enterpriſed
this warre, he made his ſonne Theodoſius Emperor,
beinge crowned of Iohn the Patriarcke, called for his abſtinence
Ieiunator.
                  Theodoſius. 
                  Theodoſius marryed the daughter of Germanus
a Senator, the ſiſters daughter of Mauritius wyfe.
Hitherto the eſtate of Mauritius was moſt fortunate, but ye
eſtate that folowed was a declaration to all eſtates,Kingdomes of ye mutability
and chaunge of kingdomes. Mauritius by pride puffed
vp,Pride. forgatte God Almightye, cruell, diſdai
                     •
                  full, ſuſpicious:
His proude & wicked behauiour, withdrew obedience,
loue, and the faythfull hartes of his people. At this inſtante
time hee made warre againſt ii. mightye Nations,Hungariās. ye 
                  Lumbardes
in Italy, and againſt the Hungarians: yet the Lumbardes
although they through diſcord had loſt many famous
townes, yet they were not ſubdued. The warres againſt the
Hungarians was moſt cruell,Caganus. 
                  Caganus kinge of Hungarye
a Prince of great power, an excellente and moſt couragious
warriour: This Caganus was for his noble artes in chiualrye,
much feared of the Romaynes and of manye other noble
Princes. Of ſo great force is a valiant Prince to his coūtry,
a terror to many Pinces. This Caganus had warres with ye
                  Turkes:
                  Turkes. the name of ye 
                  Turkes was firſt knowē in the time
of this Mauritius. As concerninge the Turkes, I will intreate
of them in the life of Heraclius.
               
               This Prince Caganus poſſeſſing a part of the Romaynes,
Mauritius marched againſt him & toke that part from him:
Mauritius returned to Conſtantinople, & there made Priſcus
a noble Captayne liefetenant of his armye: Priſcus 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
made warre with Caganus, and ye 
                  Romaynes greatly ſcurged
by him. Priſcus at the commaundemente of Mauritius,
ſente an Embaſſadour to entreate of peace, who becauſe hee
knew Caganus a proude Prince, contemninge al other Princes,Caganus. a cruell tyrante and withoute the feare of God. He learnedly
deuiſed with himſelfe an Oration, very eloquent, ſo ful
of perſwaſions to beate downe the proude ſtomacke of a tyrante,
that as the Hiſtorye telleth: Caganus thoughe moſte
wicked, not knowing God before time nor himſelfe, did with
al modeſtye vſe his eſtate, bridled his tyrannical gouernmēt,
and fell into a league with the Romaynes, & deliuered theyr
Captaynes. Thus beginneth the Oration of the Romayne
Embaſſadour.
               
                  PRISCVS generall of the armye and greate hoaſt of
my Lord and Emperour Mauritius, at the commaundemēt
of Mauritius, hath appointed me from ſo mightye a Prince
an Embaſſadour to ye O Kinge: whoſe wiſedome in Princelye
affayres, whoſe nobilitye and expert knowledge in warlike
enterprices, whoſe great Dominion of Princelye eſtate
is bruted to all partes of the worlde.The cauſe of this Embaſſage. I came not to call to
minde in what highe renowne God hath placed thee, neither
to entreate vpon thy Princely glory & royall magnifycence,
neither of thy puiſante force linked and vnited with ſo manye
noble Princes: but by an Embaſſage to encreate a perpetuall
amitye, to be concluded betwene the Emperour of ye Romaynes
and thy maieſty. And wheras ye 
                  Romayne Princes,
haue many times cōfirmed leagues wt diuers Prīces, whoſe
othes and princelye promiſes in the ſacred breaſt of Princes
ought to haue bene inuiolable, yet ſo chaungeable haue bene
theyr conditions,The othe of Princes. theyr league & othe of ſo ſmal force & value,
that ſleight deuiſes haue diſſolued that, which al god lines &
iuſtice did maintayne, the lawe of armes from aunciente tymes
obſerued, and the lawe of nature in all pointes confirmed.The power of God. Such is the brickle holde of ambitious Princes, their
othe and promiſe towards Princes violable: but the power
of him who is aboue all Princes, doth not let go vnpuniſhed

ſuch malitious dealing of ſuch Prīces whoſe actes are wrapped
in al miſchiefe,The power of God. whoſe ſtudies are only for the ſpoyle of other
Princes the ruine of kingdomes, and infinite people.
               Are ambitious Princes ſo ignorant,Ambition. that for lofty eſtate they
are blinded aboue all other? who knoweth not that euerye
one hath a mixture of pleaſure and ſorrow folowinge them:
yea the noblyeſt Princes, the richeſt, the wiſeſt, the moſt triumphante
conquerours haue felte it, yea the one followeth
conſequētly the other. To all mortall creatures the heauēs
haue alwayes from aboue their influence and temperatures
falling to cōſerue & anoye, as theyr vertue & power is limitted:
yet all chaunces are common as well to Princes as to other
mortall creatures, both age and kingdomes haue their
flouriſhinge times appointed, and the mightye Dominions
haue had a beddered ſtate and douleful faule. Seing therfore
that Princes are wrapped in the ſame mortal ſhape and
corruptible earthly mould with other creatures:The eſtate of Princes. the earth,
the ayre, the heauens, are without the reache of Princes to
be gouerned, the great floudes and mightye ſtreames do not
paſſe theyr bondes and limittes by God appointed. Such is
the eſtate of Princes, the hande of God gouerneth them, forceth
& compelleth them, he exalteth & who can pull downe?
he ſubuerteth and who exalteth?The pr
                        •
                     ſeruatiō of a prince in god onlye. No kingdome can ſaue a
Prince, no power can defende him, when God refuſeth the
Scepter and throne of anye kingdome: In thoſe dayes who
loked for, or hoped of the pitifull and dolefull ende of yt moſt
noble,Caeſar. wyſe and valiante conquerour Iulius Caeſar? or the ouerthrowe
of that noble Pompeie?
                  Pompeie. If wyſedome nor grauitye
coulde ſaue Cato,
                  Cato. neither manye conqueſtes preſerue
from ſo pitifull an ende Scipio:
                  Scipio. Nor Ptolomeus diſpleaſing
God,Ptolomeus. auoyde his wrathe: If Alexander the greate fallinge
from God,Alexander. and by pride puffed to fanſye in his proud corruptible
bodye a godhead, was at a ſodaine by the power of God
ſubuerted in Babilon: his kingdome rapted & catched into
the hands of many ambitious gouernours, and they ſeuerally
in kingdomes and Dominions mightye, by cruell warres
deſtroyed & quight raſed out from memorye of noble fame.
               
                  
What may other ambitious Prīces loke for, who knowe
not God?Lyon. The Lyon beinge moſt fearce & by terrible voyce
and countenannce ſubduinge the courage of all other, yet he
ones ſnared is a praye to the meaneſt foules: A ſmall edge
toole ouerthroweth ſodainly the mighty Ceders of Libanus,
                  Olyphant. and the ſtrōgeſt okes & Firre trees of Parnaſſus. The mightye
Olyphant being bounde, is of no force: neyther the cruell
Tygers can preuayle, beinge ouermatched by ſubtill pollicye:
Stonye rockes haue bene waſted wyth a ſmall iſſue of
water droppes, Iron of all metle ſtrongeſt, is quight conſumed
with ruſte: thinges of moſt ſtrengthe are vtterlye ouerthrowne
by the weekeſt.Olyphant. The ſtronge Olyphante that by
power is able to throwe downe mightye thinges,This was proued at Muſcouia. is tamed
with the ſight of a Ramme, or trembleth at the grunting of
a ſuckinge pigge. Raueninge grypes, are by a ſecrete operation
of nature killed with odor of oyntmentes:Serpentes. And Serpētes
by touching an oke bough dyeth:Adamant ſtone. The Adamant ſtone
by a ſmall head of garlicke, leeſeth his power and ſtrengthe
of drawing. In ſuche ſorte be the ſecrete euentes in things
naturall, waye theſe examples, and conſider the doubtfull
ſtate of the Romaynes,
                  The fall of kingdomes. and in them conſider thine owne flouryſhing
eſtate. The Romaynes ſometime Lordes of all the
world, yet haue they loſt diuers times theyr greate Segniorye:
What ſhoulde I ſpeake of the runnagate Gothes,
                  Gothes. the
beggerlye Scythians,
                  Scithians. the ſpoylinge Vandales, beinge at the
firſt feared of no Prince,Vandales. no accompt made eyther of their valiantnes
or power, beinge a fielde and ſauage people, without
all honour & dexteritye of martiall feates: yet they haue
driuen the mightyes Princes, both of Aſia and Europe oute
of their Dominions, Princelye ſeates and territoryes.
               
                  Rome the head of all the world ofte
                     •
                   taken,
                     Rome often taken. ſpoyled & deſtroyed,
as by Alaricus kinge of the Gothes in the time of Honorius:
Of Genſericke kinge of the Vandales in the time of
Martian: Of Totile in the time of Iuſtinian and Narſete.
Alſo conſider theſe moſte valiante conquerours, who for a
time preueyled and plagued vniuſtly without title or lawe of
armes other Princes, ſcurging them with all calamityes of

war:The ſecrete counſaile of God. yet they throwen downe frō theyr glorye, their conqueſtes
and large victoryes, were in the ende by a mightyer force
ſubdued and vtterlye vanquiſhed.Troye. Loftye Troye is fallen, &
Priamus with many ambitious Princes brought to deſolation,
the Greekes vniuſtlye vexinge the Troyans,
                  Greekes. were alſo
brought to confuſion: The Thebanes entring into Platea wt
                  out
lawe of armes vniuſtly, were deſtroyed and ouerthrowē
in their hoſtill enterpriſes. The Emperour Mauritius ſeeketh
not a league of peace with thee becauſe he feareth thee,The cauſe of Mauritius league.
but becauſe the concorde of ſo mighty a Prince, is a terror to
other forraine Nations, thy amitye a defence, thy countenance
a Bulwarcke to the Romaynes,
                  The amitye of Princes a bulwarcke to eche other. and ye 
                  Romaynes to
thee. The Romaynes know thou art mightye, and yet they
haue ſeene thee weeke, and manye hazardes of battels haue
followed thee:for ſake not amitye offered, but foreſee wyſely
the ſodaine cracke or vnfortunate happe of ſhippewracke that
may follow. Neuer proude Prince proſpered, neyther tyrantes
haue enioyed a ſure perpetuall foundation of kingdome:
wee know thy beginning, and thy glorye and renowne, therof
with great admiration we do beholde, but thy ende who
knoweth? Proud Nicanor is fallen, Antiochus, Zerzes for
all his infinite hoaſt, fled away cowardlye, and dyed at home
vngloriouſlye. Caligula, Nero, Domitian, wicked tyrantes
not knowing God, neyther regarded iuſtice, was at a ſodaine
ouerwhelmed in all theyr glorye wt 
                  Diocleſian, with Silla &
Marius. Who was more mighty then Nabuchodonoſar?
and yet the Hiſtorye ſayth he fell and liued as a beaſt vii. yeares,
caſte oute of kingdome: let the faule of proude Princes
teach the to gouerne. Who ſo knoweth himſelfe, is not ignorāt
to know god, for he knoweth God yt knoweth himſelfe,
& it is ye chiefeſt point of wyſedom, any mā to know himſelfe:
Enter into a league perpetual with the Romaynes, & know
thou haſt a frende moſt mightye, redye to defende thee, & ſo a
league confirmed deliuer our noble Captaynes and other.
               * The fame of Seſoſtris is knowē to all Princes,Seſoſtris. who was
a Prince of great glory & of large Dominions, yet by a wittye
Oration and perſwaſion was mollifyed, and releaſed and

ſet at libertye the .iiii. great Princes beinge with him in captiuity.
Seſoſtris was one of the prowdeſt Princes that anye
Chronicle or Hiſtorye maketh mention of, yet in the ende by
an Embaſſage perſwaded. This Seſoſtris was accuſtomed
when he woulde ſeeme to all his people moſt glorious, to be
caryed abrode in his moſte glorious Chariot,Seſoſtris his Chariot. whiche was
layed on with moſt pure and fine goulde, adorned and beutifyed
with the richeſt ſtones that might be founde: this Chariot
was driuen with the handes of .iiii. kinges, being in this
proude Princes thraldome and captiuitye. One of the Captiue
kinges being in this toyling ſlauerye thus occupyed, did
continually beholde the wheele of the chariot turninge:A tyrante. 
                  Seſoſtris
the proude and beaſtly tyrante, not knowing God, diſdainfullye
aſked why the captiue kinge did continuallye beholde
the turninge of the wheele?The captiue kinges Oration. The captiue kinge moſt
wiſely aunſwered: (I being a kinge, and ſometime in great
renowne both for my kingdome and people, though nowe in
thy thraldome and miſerable captiuitye) do daily behold and
wonder at this my ſtate with the reſt, and do deepelye conſider
the power of God in all Princes, to throw downe and exalte
as he only liſteth.Gods ſecrete iudgement. I do dailye behold the wheele of thy
Chariot turning, yt part of the wheele which is now hieſt, ſodainly
is loweſt deſcended & fallē: We were ones in Princely
ſeates aloft exalted, and now with the loweſt and meaneſt
abiects abaſed and throwne downe, the vpper parte of oure
wheele of glorye is caſt downe that was ſometime aloft. And
thy wheele aloft ſtandeth which when the mighty God wil,
maye faule.Kingdomes Kingdomes haue no ſtaye, nor time of continuance,
whiche whē God apointeth they faule when he pulleth
downe, & who ryſeth not when he exalteth? & in this our miſerable
eſtate & ſlauerye: Know thy ſelfe O king, & vſe vs as
it becommeth kinges.Seſoſtris molifyed with ye captiue kinge talke. 
                  Seſoſtris moued with this talke of
the kinge, being ſo full of wyſedome, and with ſo feareful an
admonion of his eſtate, was ſodainly ſtriken with feare, and
forthwith became humble, lowlye and modeſte, and ſet at libertye
the .iiii. captiue kinges.
               
                  
                  *⁎* The Hiſtorye ſayth, that Caganus was ſo much moues
with this Oratiō, and ſpecially with this one notable example
of the kinges,Ambition. that he entered in league with the Romaynes,
and deliuered all the Romaine Captaynes. Vpon this
for a time, peace and tranquilitye was maintayned betwene
them, but ſodainlye broken, eche one feared the power of the
other.
               
                  Sic neſcia virtus ſtare loco,Lucanus. 1. Lib.
                  
                  Solus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pudor non vincere bello.
                  A ſentence meete for the ambitious.
               
               The Captaynes of Mauritius murthered .30. thouſande
of the Hungarians and Slauonians,
                  Warre. the ennemyes toke of the
Romaynes .12. thouſande by the treaſon of a Thratian who
was in the hoaſt of Mauritius.
                  Treaſon. 
                  Caganus kinge of Hungarye
in his hoſtill enterpriſe threwe downe the temples of the
Chriſtians, and threw out of ye graues the bodyes of the holy
Martyrs: the wrath of God in all this his cruelty fell vpon
Caganus, a great peſtilence fel on his armye, and in a maner
deſtroyed the whole nomber.The power of God againſt tyrantes. God alſo deſtroyed at a ſodaine
vii. of his ſonnes with the peſtilence in one daye, the plague
droue him home to his countrye. The wrath of God molifyed
him, wherevppon he ſent letters to Mauritius that he would
ſende him his Captaynes home, if he woulde ſende but foreuery
one a peece of goulde. Thus ye power of God tameth,
bridleth & bringeth downe tyrantes,The power of god againſt tyrantes and perſecuters. he alone cutteth of their
purpoſes, and maketh them to know that ther is a mightier
to ſcurge them: Not as mans will is, or purpoſe, but as the
ſecrete counſaile of God ſhall determine and diſpoſe: by whō
the mighty ſtates of the world are diſpoſed ruled and gouerned,
the proude brought lowe, the humble exalted, mightye
kingdomes tranſlated. So God beinge moſt mighty ruleth
at commaundemēt all thinges, the deuill can do nothing but
what God permitteth him to do:Deuils at the commaundement of God. So euil men againſt God &
Chriſtian Religion, tormentinge Chriſtians, and by paynes
thinking to ſubdue them, and being of leſſe force then deuils:
they haue theyr limittes and bonds appointed, that they ſhal

not paſſe. And this is a great cōfort to all Chriſtians yt feare
God, not to be diſmayde in the troubles of this worlde, for ye
leaſt finger of God will at a ſodaine ouerthrowe an infinite
nōber of Senacheribes,
                  A great comfort to all Chriſtians. 
                  Mahomets, Iulianus, or Antiochꝰ.
This Coſroes a cruell ennemye to all Chriſtians, was driuen
home with manye plagues, and in the ende ſlaine of his
owne ſonne as the Hiſtorye ſheweth.Coſroe ſlaine of his owne ſonne.
               
               
                  Mauritius being a cruell Prince not regarding the Chriſtians
being in captiuity, woulde not geue moneye out of his
treaſure to redeeme them, for ye which afterward the wrath
of God fell on his kingdome, and hee was murthered of one
whom he loued entyrelye. Caganus beinge wrathe that
Mauritius did not redeeme his Chriſtians,A ſlaughter of Chriſtians hee cauſed all the
Chriſtians to be put to death, with diuers kindes of tormentes.
In the armye diuers conſpiracyes were wrought, alſo
Petrus ye brother of Mauritius being a chiefe Captaine polled
the men of war of theyr wages.Petrus. By the hardened hart of
Mauritius towardes the Chriſtiās who in his quarel fought
ſo couragiouſly, was ſo much hated that on Chriſtmas daye
he entringe the Temple, was almoſt ſtoned to death. He became
without cauſe ſuſpicious fearing euery man, for he put
in priſon a Duke called Philippicus that maryed his ſiſter,
ſuſpecting yt he ſought to depoſe him,Germanus. alſo Germanus to whō
his wyues ſiſter was maryed, would haue put him in priſon:
Alſo his owne ſonne Theodoſius he ſuſpected of the like. Mauritius feared the more theſe thinges becauſe of ſtraung
things that happened and dreames vnto him: There appeared
a blaſing ſtarre like a ſworde, and a certaine monke rūne
with a ſword drawne to the Emperours Image, and crying
oute: Imperatorem ferro periturum. Mauritius himſelfe
dreamed yt he was geuen to be murthered of Phocas, whervpon
he broughte Philippicus oute of priſon (as one he durſt
truſt moſt) and he aſked of him: Qualis ſit Phocas? Philippicus
aunſwered: Centurio ambitioſus ſed timidus. He is
ſayth he, an ambitious Centurion but feareful: Then Mauritius
aunſwered againe: Si timidus eſt, homicida eſt. The
feareful man not by manhode, but by murther finiſheth his

purpoſe. Mauritius was brought to great contempt in the
armye, and diuers conſpiracyes wrought to put him downe:
the men of warre aboute Iſtrus choſe Phocas, a barbarous
bloudye Thratian to be Emperour. This Phocas being choſen
Emperour, made haſt to Conſtātinople, & there he was
Crowned in the Subberbes by Cyprian the Patriarke.
               
                  Mauritius beinge at Calcedon for griefe of minde & trouble
fell ſicke, being thither fledde with his wyfe and childrē:
but Phocas this tyraunt commaunded him to be killed, with
Phocas diuers other raſcolles, who by themperours fauour
came vp and conſpired with Phocas to deſtroy in his ſighte,
Mauritius two yongeſt ſonnes, who killed afterward his .3.
daughters, then their mother Conſtantina the daughter of
Tiberius the Emperour before, Mauritius behelde ye death
of his daughters with great pacience,A lamentable end of a Prince. but when he ſawe his
wyfe put to deathe, he vttered theſe wordes confeſſinge his
owne faultes: O Lord thou art iuſte and thy iudgementes
are righte. Laſt of all Mauritius had his heade cutte of, &
ſo the bodyes were layed vpon the ſhore, to be loked at of the
people, whiche were afterwarde buryed of an Eunucke of
Mauritius. Theodoſius who was afore of Mauritius his
father commaunded to flee to the Perſians was taken & murthered
at the commaundement of Phocas. He put to deathe
Germanus the father in lawe of Theodoſius, and Theodoſius
wyfe alſo,A deteſtable tyrante. and then afterwarde he killed all the frendes
of Mauritius. Greate was the wrathe of God on Mauritius
(as all Hiſtoryes do note) for not redeeminge the Chriſtians
which beinge taken in his warres, was in thraldome with
an infidell Prince: No money ought to be ſpared to redeme
our Chriſtian brethren, if money may redeeme them, and ful
charitable, through all Chriſtēdome almoſt money is collected
to ſet at liberty Chriſtians, the ende of Mauritius was in
this ſort and that moſt miſerable.
               This was done in the .4366. yeares after the beginninge
of the worlde. Of Rome .1355. Of Chriſt. 604.
            
            
               
               Phocas.
               
               
                  
                     PHocas a baſe Centurion and a Thracian in ye
ſeditious vprore was created an Emperour.
He murtheringe his maiſter and kinge Mauritius
of whom he was brought vp, this Phocas
gouerned vii. yeares, he was Crowned at
Conſtantinople of the patriarcke Ciriacus.
Aſſone as Mauritius was ſlaine,A tyrante. immediatly he exerciſed crueltye
againſt his frends: After he was placed in the Emperial
ſeate without all nobility, as by bloudye practiſes he obtayned
the ſame, ſo he exerciſed himſelfe to the deſtruction of
the Romaines with all crueltye tormenting them, geuen ouer
to all abhomination. He toke awaye other mens wyues
from their huſbands: he made much of wicked perſons: He
waſted the Romayne Empyre of their riches and treaſures:
he liued at Rome in all beaſtly dronkennes, and ſuffered the
Romaine Empyre to be ſpoyled of the Perſians, of the Hunnes,
and of Caganus kinge of Hungarye whō I ſpake of before.
The wrathe of God fell vpon this murtherer, and all
that hoaſt & power of men which was ye ouerthrow of Mauritius
and priuye to his death. For Coſroes in .ii. great battailes
made ſlaughter of the Romaynes infinitlye, and ye reſt
he ledde away captiues. This Coſroes wanne from the Romaynes
Hieruſalem, and murthered there a greate nomber
of Chriſtiās, he poſſeſſed the Dominion of Cyria & deſtroyed
manye Princes.
               
                  Phocas thorow his ill life came in hatred, not onlye of the

                  Romaynes, but alſo of al other Princes: ye murther of Mauritius
committed by Phocas was not forgotten. Priſcus who
in the time of Mauritius was one of his chiefe Captaynes, &
alſo a Duke & ſonne in law to Phocas: alſo Heraclius Preſidēt
in Affrica whoſe wyfe Phocas had taken away, all theſe
conſpyred againſt Phocas to deſtroy him. This was ye effect
of their purpoſe, that at one time Priſcus ſhoulde bringe his
hoaſt of Thracians to Conſtātinople, & Heraclius his hoaſt
out of Affrica to Conſtātinople alſo, Photius with another
part to ſet vpon Phocas in his Pallace, wher ſmall reſiſtāce
was made, theſe entring ye Emperours houſe, toke Phocas
& brought him to Heraclius ye ſonne of Heracliona who was
then generall of the partes in Aſſyria. Immediatly the men
of warre cut of his legges and armes, and cutte of his priuities,
and laſt of all his head. This was the ende of that tyrant,
who before murthered the Emperour Mauritius, hys
wyfe, his children, his kinſfolke and frendes, and plagued wt
all calamyes the Romaynes: God neuer leaueth vnpuniſhed
any murther committed,Murther. & moſt of all he ſcourgeth the bloudye
factes of thoſe who ſeekes to deſtroy theyr owne king or
Prince, and be domeſticall vipers to theyr owne countrye.
               This is that Phocas that firſt made the biſhoppe of Rome,
ſupreame heade aboue all other biſhopes: a godlye foundation
of ſuperioritye, grounded and vpholded by ſo wicked a
tyrant, and as a tyrante gaue that title of ſuperiority, ſo they
like bloudye tyrantes againſt Princes, do houlde and defend
theyr ſuperiority, not as humble Prelates in ſincere doctrine
and veretye, but by ſworde and armour keepe it, ſubduinge
Princes, & make them proſtratinge to worſhip them, kiſſing
theyr feete. Gregory did ones diſcōmende this Phocas therin,
as it appeareth: for Mauritius made ye Patriarke of Cō
                     ſtātinople
chiefe biſhop, which brought cōtentiō vp betwene
the biſhops of Rome & of Conſtantinople for the ſuperioritye.
                     Oicoumenicos
chiefe ouer the houſe of God. The biſhop of Conſtantinople named himſelfe Oicoumenicon,
the biſhop of all the whole world, for ſo this word
Oicoumenicon ſignifyeth. But as the Romaynes were neuer
Lordes ouer all the world, ſo theyr ambitious Prelates

neuer Oicoumenicoi, for then had they beene ouer all the
world the head. But they beinge moſt ambitious, haue gotten
ſo vaine a title to them: whiche vaine title Gregorye in
thoſe dayes reprehended as a moſte ambitious title in theſe
woordes. O wicked tymes, O deteſtable conditions, the
world on euery ſyde is ſet a fyre with warres, the Chriſtians
are murthered of the worſhippers of Idolles, Cittyes
are ouerthrowne of barbarous Nations, and the
Chriſtians ſpoyled: And yet for all this
the Prelates do as it were with leapinge
ioye reioyce all, at the vniuerſall
calmityes, and wt prophane
title do vaunte
themſelues.
               * This was done in the yeare of the worlde, foure
Thouſande three hundreth ſeuentye thre: And
after the firſt building of Rome, one Thouſande
three hundreth ſixtye one: And in
the yeare of our Lorde and Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſt. 612.
¶*******¶
            
            
               
               Heraclius.
               
                  HERACLIVS ye ſonne of Heracliona
(who was Preſident of Affrica, at what
time as Phocas was killed.) Hee was
borne of a noble houſe: Immediatlye by
the Senate and men of warre was made
Emperour, he gouerned .xxx. yeres. His
gouernmente was famous in two thinges,
the one was fortunate, the ouerthrowe of Coſroe kinge
of Perſia: the other eſtate full of calamitye, to al mankinde.
For in his tyme roſe the beginninge of that beaſtlye Mahomet
his kingdome,Mahomet. of the which it ſhalbe intreated orderlye.
               ** Heraclius makinge peace with Caganus, by his Embaſſadors
he made peace alſo with Coſroe, who at that time
had ſpoyled Hieruſalem, and poſſeſſed Cyria, and had murthered
90. Thouſande of Chriſtians, at that time as the Iewes
had bought many Chriſtiās to kill them. Coſroe made
aunſwere that he woulde not ceaſe his warres vntill hee had
broughte to paſſe yt his God of Perſia might be worſhipped, &
the inuocation of that God quight aboliſhed Qui dictur ciucifixus,
that is ſayd to be crucifyed. Coſroe the proude king
was puffed vp with pride, for his great ſucceſſe in the time of
Phocas. Heraclius was in greate diſtreſſe by meanes yt his
Captaynes was falſe to him,Treaſon. 
                  Heraclius the more wyllingly
fought becauſe not for kingdomes ſake only, but for defence
of Chriſtes Church his quarell was attempted.I godly quarell to warre. 
                  Heraclius
therefore ſtyrred vp by the helpe of God, ledde his hoaſt into

                  Cyria to Azotum, from Azotum whence Coſroe fled. Heraclius
foughte with the hoaſt of Coſroe,
                  God ouerthroweth the perſecutors of his ſaints. who beinge driuen
to flight: Coſroe was oppreſſed wt great calamitye at home,
where wt his great pryde & blaſphemy was puniſhed. Coſroe
made his ſeconde ſonne ſucceſſor after him called Mardaces,
diſplacing his eldeſt ſon Syroe:
                  Mardaces. vpon this the elder ſonne Syroe
toke his father Coſroe,
                  Syroe. & killed his brother Mardaces in
ye ſight of his father,Coſroe kille
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   after yt he murthered his father Coſroe.
By this meanes Syroe obteyned the kingdome, and becauſe
he woulde be ſafe he made peace with Heraclius, reſtoringe
home his captiues, amonge whom was Zacharias the Patriarcke
of Hieruſalem.
                  Zacharias. Alſo Heraclius reſtored his captiues,
& receyued Cyria & Hieruſalem, this greate warres cō
                  tinued
6. yeares: Heraclius returninge from theſe warres,
entred Byzance ſittinge in a Chariot withoute ornaments,
(which had bene meete for a triumphinge Prince) and openly
gaue thankes to the ſonne of God for this great victory.The wrathe of God vpon blaſphemers.
And trulye the vengeance of God for the blaſphemye of Coſroe,
as of Senacherib, Nichanor, Antiochus, and Iulianus
and ſuch like, is worthy of perpetuall memorye.
               In the time of this Heraclius the dreadfull chaunge of all
mankinde, at a ſodaine was made by reaſon that the doctrine
of Mahomet was ſpredde abrode. This doctrine of Mahomet
the Arabians did firſt embrace,The Arabiās firſt embraced Mahomets doctrine. who neuer obeyed kingdomes
or lawes lawfully appointed: for ye 
                  Arabians eyther
did exerciſe robbīg of ech other at home, or els of their owne
voluntary wil abroade, many of them haue ſerued vnder the
baner of other Princes for wages. Mahomet wrote a lawe
meete for this licentious people,Mahomets lawes. deſyrous of libertye, & man
by the enlarging of liberty his power. Mahomet was borne
in Arabia as many do write, and firſt of all ioyned to him the
hoaſt of the Saracenes,
                  The firſt beginninge of ye Saracenes. wherevppon afterwarde mention is
made of the hoaſt of the Saracenes. I thinke it good to ſhew
how the Saracenes firſt came: It is manifeſt by ye holy Prophete
Moyſes,
                  Iſmaell. that the ofſpringe of Iſmaell who deſcended
from Agar, did poſſeſſe Arabia,
                  Agra. therof the Cittye Agra hath
his name of Agar the mother of Iſmaell,
                  Agrei and theyr people

                  Agrei, who in the firſt booke of Paralepomenon ye .5. Chapter
are called Agareni, where the limittes of Galaad are
ſhewed,Agareni. that name Agareni is in the 92. Pſalme. In that
ſame conntrye where it is certaine that Agareni were, Ptolomeus
placeth the Saracenes: And the name of ye 
                  Saracenes
is in the Hiſtorye of Zenobia, in the victoryes of Aurelianus
Emperour of Rome. It is to be thoughte that that people
called Agareni, had rather be named Saraceni of Sara, becauſe
it is more glory for them to vaunt that they be borne of
Sara, then of her handmaide Agar. Mahomet afterward by
mention of this glorious name did confirme & ſtrengthē his
hoaſt: Cryinge out that the promyſe of the kingdome of the
world, did appertaine vnto them only geuē vnto the poſteritye
of Abraham,
                  The Proclamation of Mahomet to his people. becauſe they were ye ſonnes of Sara.
               
               The hoaſt of the Saracenes were vnder the banner of Heraclius,
in warres againſt the Perſians, & becauſe they were
withoute their wages, they trayterouſlye fledde from Hreaclius.
Some Hiſtoryes write that they were contumeliouſly
vſed at ye Treaſurers hands of Heraclius, in yt they ſayd they
had not money ſufficient to pay to the Romaine ſouldiours,
and to the Greekes, and much leſſe to ſatiſfy ſuch a nomber
of dogges as they were. Theſe Arabians were theeues and
liued by ſpoyle, as the Tartars do. The power that fledde
from Heraclius of the Saracenes, did ſpoyle manye townes
neare to Damaſcus. Alſo many ſpoyling wretches beinge
furthered of Mahomet, for Mahomet maryed a riche wife,
and by his riches and large giftes, broughte to paſſe that his
men of warre, wt giftes ſhould heare him, & to conſtitute him
theyr Captayne, & that theyr campe might be the ſtronger,
there were taken away al controuerſyes in Religion. Mahomet
ſet forth to them a newe forme of doctrine, & ſayde he
had talked with God, thereby thinkinge to encreaſe his power.
The beginninge of Mahomets kingdomes is put in
the .623. yeare after Chriſte: After Mahomet ſucceaded Amiras
his ſonne in law, who toke Damaſcus and made it his
Princely ſeate, after this he toke Gaſan, and Hieruſalem hee
beſieged .ii. yeares. The thyrde after Mahomet, was Ahumar,
                  
who poſſeſſed a great part of Aſſyria, & helde in Dominiō
                  Egipt. Then Muhauias the 4. king after Mahomet,
toke Ceſaria & Paleſtina .ii. yeares beſieged, and ouercomminge
Orimaſda the ſonne of Coſroe, he added Perſia to the
kingdome of the Saracenes, and made them keepe Mahomets
lawes, which the Perſians obſerue at this daye. So wt
                  in
30. yeres the Saracenes poſſeſſed Arabia, Paleſtina, Phenitia,
Syria, Egipte and Perſia. After this they poſſeſſed
all Affrica, and by litle and litle they wente forwarde into
Aſia, and largely did ſet oute the lawe of Mahomet in theyr
Empyre: althoughe amonge them were greate tumultes
and ſedition, and deuiſion of kingdomes followed them as in
al other kingdomes: Yet the Princes of the Saracenes called
Sultany, had theyr chiefe Dominion in Syria, Egipt, Affrica,
and a great part of Aſia about 400. yeares, vntill a king
of the Saracenes who ruled Perſia, broughte the Turkes againſt
Babilon. Who by litle & litle receyuinge the lawe of
Mahomet, they driue out of the kingdom of Perſia the Saraſen
king, in the time of Cōſtantine Monomachus or of Cō
                     radus
the Frenche man not longe before the ſetting forth of
Godfride with his power & hoaſt into Paleſtine. It is true yt
the Nation of the Turkes is ſignifyed vnder ye name of Gog
and Magogge, the which Eſechïel the Prophete ſayth to be
a people Northwarde, in the .18. Chapter and .19. It appeareth
by the Prophete Daniell, that he ſpeaketh of the Saracenes
kingdome, when he foreſheweth the deſtruction of ye
.iiii. Monarchies:The deſtruction of the .4. Monarchyes Sayinge that ſuche a kingdome ſhoulde
come, yt which ſhould ſet forth a newe doctrine blaſphemous
againſt God, and make warre againſt the ſaintes, who be ye
Chriſtians.The doctrine of Mahomet. This agreeth manifeſtlye with the kingdome of
the Saracines or Turkes, for they haue a blaſphemous Doctrine,
denyinge Chriſte to come in the fleſhe, and many other
abhominable hereſies defacing Chriſt and his Doctrine.
               This doctrine the Iewes receyued and many other mo: In
theyr Alcaran it is written that ye holy man Sargius & other
Iewes, haue ſate in counſayle and ſet out a certaine vniuerſall
doctrine, which the Turkes at this daye do hold of Mahomets
                  
faith.Sargius an heriticall Muncke. This Sergius an heretical Muncke vnlearned
fayninge himſelfe to be inſpeared of God, came into Ruſſia,
and ſpredde many hereſies there, and manye iudeicall Cerimonyes
fooliſhe and abhominable,Ruſſia. which I will ſette oute
at large in a booke of the Moſcouiticall kingdome. He lyeth
buryed at the Monaſterye of Troites, called otherwayes
the Monaſtery of Sargius: by whō the Moſcouites ſay many
myracles haue ben wrought, by his holy meditatiō & prayers
fountaynes of waters hane beene ſpronge vppe, where there
hath bene none to be founde. And they ſay and it is beleued,
that the bodye of Sargius neuer putrifyeth, and it is a great
point of Religion ſo to beleue: All men may ſee the ſhape of
a bodye vnder a clothe, but no man ſo boulde to ſearch it, for
that were abhominable hereſye, to doubte or not to beleeue
what is tolde them of Sargius.
               
               They ſaye by this myracle,A maruelous potte. there is a potte boylinge with
meate, and no man bringeth eyther water, fyre, or meate, &
yet the potte dailye boyleth & feedeth infinite perſons, and ſo
continueth. I marueile there is ſo many miſerable parſons
that dye for hunger, & ſo greate a myraculous potte.
               I my ſelfe haue bene at that Monaſterye where this Sergius
lyeth buryed: And of this wryteth alſo an Embaſſadour
called Sigiſmundus, ſente from Ferdinando to Baſilius this
greate Emperours father, that ruleth nowe ouer ſo manye
kingdomes.
               
                  Mahomet to bring men vnto his law, ſayth yt the kingdome
of ye vniuerſal world, is promiſed vnto his Nation, becauſe it
is deſcended from Sara, and that it is to be kept by force of armes,
& all Nations to be compelled to obeye the law of Mahomet,
or els to dye or liue in ſeruitude: who ſoeuer ſpeaketh
againſt any thinge in the Alcaran to dye. He doth permitte
a man to marrye as many wyues as he will, and to make deuorce
at his owne pleaſure, he puniſheth homicide and thefte
as the law of Moyſes did, to make a diſtinction of his people
from other Nations. He hath appointed certaine iudeicall
Ceremonyes, as waſhinge of all theyr body to be cleane frō
ſinne: Waſhing of all the body the Moſcouites vſe, in ye hot

houſes or ſtoues ſweating out their ſinnes, or els they ſtande
without the Church doore: And ſhauinge all partes of their
bodyes the Turkes, Tartars & Perſians do vſe. The law of
Mahomet obſerueth Cyrcumciſion to confirme a perſwaſiō
of a kingdome promiſed to the poſteritye of Sara.
                  The Sabboth day on ye ſaterday with the Turkes and Muſcouites. Theyr ſondaye
is there the ſixt daye of the weeke, euerye daye they are
commaunded by their Alcaran to praye .5. times, he geueth
leaue to eate the fleſhe of all beaſtes, fiſhe or foule, yet he excepteth
ſwynes fleſhe: To thoſe that doth obſerue this law,
he promiſeth victory & riches in this life, and after this life to
be in the ioyes of Paradyce, and moſt happy is he that dyeth
in the quarell of Mahomet. With many other blaſphemous
pointes of Religion. It is manifeſt that the doctrine of Mahomet
is of latter time after the Apoſtles doctrine, more thē
500. yeres: therefore it is impoſſible the Church of Mahomet
to be of God, in that he doth reiect the writinges of the
Apoſtels and Prophetes. This kingdome of the Saracenes
roſe at the firſt, propheſyed by Daniell of .iii. hornes yt were
plucked from the Romaynes Monarchy, which was Syria,
Egipt, and Affrica. This is that Antichriſt yt denyeth Chriſt
to come in the fleſh. He that honoureth not ye father, honoureth
not the ſonne, this is life euerlaſting that they ſhould acknowledge
the true God, and whom thou haſt ſent Ieſus to
be Chriſt. Who ſo denyeth the ſonne, hath not the father, no
man commeth to ye father, but by the ſonne. He that doth not
beleue, is alreadye condempned: becauſe he doth not beleue
in the onlye begotten ſonne of God. Who ſo doth not beleue
the ſonne ſhall not ſee life, but the wrathe of God remayneth
vpon him. No other foūdation can be layd, than that which
is layd already, which is IESVS CHRIST. Thus
muche as concerninge Mahomet and his doctrine, nowe to
the ſtorye of Heraclius.
               
               
                  Fabia Eudoxia was the firſt wyfe of Heraclius, by whom
he begat Conſtantine the yonger, whoſe ofſpring for a time
enioyed ye Empyre, although his mother in lawe went about
to kill him with poyſon, that ſhe might bring the Empyre to
her ſonne, borne in vnlawfull mariage. For Heraclius after

the death of his wyfe Fabia, he marryed his brothers daughter
called Martina: of whō 
                  Heraclionas was borne, his mother
to make him Emperour, poyſoned Conſtantine her
huſbandes ſonne the ſixt monthe after he raigned. Pyrrhus
the Patriarcke did further this pretence, who hated Conſtantine
beinge of a good Religion:Good Religion hated of the wicked. their bloudye conſpiracye
brought thē a like ende, as God alwayes puniſheth bloudye
factes. So on them fell the wrath of God, for Martina &
her ſonne Heraclionas gouerned not fully two yeres, for the
Senate apprehended them, and cutte out the Empreſſe tongue:A iuſt reward of murther. leaſt by witty perſwaſions ſhe might allure the people.
Heraclionas her ſonne had his noſetrelles cut of, & they were
both exiled into Capadocia, and there dyed in priſon: Pyrrhus
the Patriarcke beinge giltye of the facte fledde, &
in flying was taken & killed. Thus yt wrath of God
fell vpon this horrible murtherer, ſhe murthering
her ſonne in lawe: Her bloudy purpoſes
for ambition ſone diſſolued, and thereby
the inceſt mariage puniſhed, for ſhe
maryed her vncle. And the holy
Patriarcke was accordinge to
his bloudye fact rewarded.
               This was done in the yere of the world .4684.
The yeare of Rome .1396. And in the
yeare of Chriſte .644.
¶*******¶
            
            
               
               Conſtantinus the yonger.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     HEraclius otherwyſe called Conſtantinus
the yonger, from his firſt byrth was
Crowned of his father Emperour. This Conſtantinus begat of Gregorie
the daughter of Niceta who was a Senatour,
Conſtans the nexte Emperour
in ſucceſſion. This Conſtātinus by his
ſtepmother Martina was poyſoned ye firſt yere of his raigne.
This Martina his ſtepmother vſurped with Heracliona, beinge.
.10. yeares of age the Empyre, and by a conſpiracye of
the Court, two yeares not fully paſſed, they were taken and
ſet into baniſhment. They cutte out the tongue of Martina,
leaſt that by her eloquente talke (wherewith ſhe much excelled)
ſhe might perſwade the people. They cut of the noſe of
Heracliona her ſonne, and then they choſe Conſtans Emperour,
withoute the choiſe of the men of warre, which before
that time was ſildome ſeene.
            
            
               
               Constance the thirde.
               
               
                  
                     COnſtance the ſonne of Conſtantine the yō
                  ger,
the nephewe of Heraclius (Martina being
baniſhed with her ſonne) was made Emperour
of the Senate. He gouerned 27. yeares,
hee was vnfortunate in his enterpriſes
againſt the Saracenes: At home he killed his
brother Theodotius, and fauouringe the hereſye of thoſe
who was called Monothelete:
                  An hereſye. Hee putte to death certaine
godly men rebukinge this errour. At his commaundement
Theodorus Caliopa by diſceate and gyle, toke Martine byſhoppe
and ſent him into Thracia, and there Marten the byſhoppe
dyed with hunger and filthe of priſon.
               The kingdome of the Saracenes greatly encreaſed, for frō
the beginninge of the kingdome of Mahomet, which began
in the 623. yeares, vnto that preſent yeare of Chriſte .6
                     •
                  5.
and the xiii. yeare of Conſtance, that they ſending theyr Nauye
from Phenicia, did ſpoyle the ſea coaſtes of Aſia. Conſtance
the .13. yeare of his raigne, was ouercome in a battaile
foughte in Licia by Muthauia a chiefe Captayne of the
Saracenes, and alſo the Saracenes ſpoyled the Roodes. Conſtance
at the lengthe came into Italye, and was ouer come of
the Lumbardes in battaile, with whom hee toke truce, & the
Citty of Rome being ſpoyled by them: he returned into Sycilia,
where this vnfortunate Emperour being in a Bathe,
was ſtrangled. After he had raigned 27. yeares. And in the
yeare of the worlde .4932. Of Rome .1423. And of our
Lord and Sauiour Chriſt. .670.
            
            
               
               Conſtantinus Barbatus.
               
                  
               
               
                  THis man began to raigne at what time
as his father made him Emperour, before
he ledde his hoaſt into Italy, and at
that time he was Crowned. He raigned
17. yeares, he was more fortunate then
his father. In his dayes a great manye
of Saracenes, came euen to the waules
of Byzance, from thence repulſed, they poſſeſſed Chiſicum:
there they remayned .7. yeres, and oftentimes made warres
againſt Conſtantinople,
                  A ſubtile pollicye. Vntill ſuch time as wilde fyre was
deuiſed of Calinicus, which fyre cōſumed the Saracenes ſhippes
vnder the water, by which ſlaughter the reſte were compelled
to flye awaye. At Malia where contrarye windes do
make oftentimes whirlewindes,The wrath of God. the reſte of theyr Nauyes
were deſtroyed by rockes, and the reſte were drowned in the
Sea. There dyed of the Saracenes as good as 3000. Their
chiefe Captayne Muthauia ſought peace at the Romaynes
hands, and peace was made for .30. yeares. After this the
Bulgarians began to be knowen, which be in Miſia ye lower
whiche had theyr name of the floude Volga,
                  Volga. whoſe heade
and fountaine ryſeth not farre from Liuonia in the mariſhe
groundes of it, ſo ſome do write. But it is certaine that the
heade of Volga ryſeth out of the marryſhe grounds of Beloſero,
Beloſero ſignifyeth as muche in the Ruſſe tongue, as
Albus Lacus: that is a white lake, and paſſeth from thence
by the Cittye Iaroſlaue, a Cittye with a Caſtel in it, which

is in ruine. The floude Volga is as broade as twyſe ye Thames
at London, in that place manye goodlye ſtreames enter
into it.Volga. By Volga they paſſe to the Mare Caſpium towards
the Eaſt it runninge, & ſo to the Mare Caſpium: frō thence
to Perſia. At what time the Bulgarians ouercame the Romayne
hoaſt, the Emperour made peace with them, & gaue
vnto them Miſſia the lower: which at this day is called Bulgaria.
In the xii. yeare of this Conſtantine, which was in
the yeare of Chriſte .681. A Sinod was aſſembled at Conſtantinople: this was called the .vi. Sinod in the whiche it
was deſputed againſt the hereſyes of Samoſatenus. Conſtā
                     tine
the Emperour dyed peaceablye, makinge peace in the
Empyre of the Eaſte, and in the Church. The yere
of the worlde. .4649. The yeare after the firſt
buildinge of Rome. 1440. And after the
incarnation of our Lorde and Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſt .687.
¶*****¶
            
            
               
               Juſtinianus the ſeconde.
               
               
                  
                     IVſtinianus the ſonne of Conſtantinus Barbatus,
was made Emperour after his father.
He gouerned .10. yeares before he was driuen
into exile: after that beinge reſtored he raigned
.6. yeares. This Prince was the laſte of
Heraclius ſtocke, a man vnquiet, cruel and vnfortunate, manye
calamityes fell on him by two of his Courte, that were
ſycophants and flatterers, who toke vpon them great authoritye,
and did manye miſchieues thereby. As in the time of
Theodoſius the yonger: Eutropius whō for his miſchieues
they called Gorgone. One of the ſycophants in the Courte
of Iuſtinianus, was a Moncke called Theodoſius, to whom
by reaſon that he had ſo great authority, they called him generall:
the other was called Stephane ye Emperours Chaplene,
who gouerned al things as touching Religion: Who
as it ſeemeth was of to muche credite with the Emperour,
when he durſt beate the old Empreſſe. Theſe two euil perſons
exerciſed crueltye againſt the chiefe Dukes and Captaynes,
they kept Leontius a Duke .ii. yeres in priſon: who
eſcaping out of priſon (the Patriarcke helping him) he was
made Emperoure, hee cutte of the Noſethrelles from Iuſtinian,
and ſente him to Chirſoneſus. Theodoſius and Stephen
his two ſycophants of the Courte beinge bounde with
fetters, were drawne throughe the Cittye, and afterwarde
buryed. This Leontius gouerned not aboue thre yeares, for
Tiberius Apſimarus returning with his hoaſt out of Affrica,
                  
beinge driuen backe of the Saracenes: and ſayd Leontius
was by a conſpiracye made Emperour of the hoaſt. He cauſed
Leontius Nooſetrelles to be cut of, and put in a Monaſtery
to be a Moncke. He ſent his brother Heraclius into Cyria
againſt the Saracenes, who for a time repulſed them. He
gouerued 7. yeares.
               
                  Iuſtinian before mentioned, returned beinge ayded of the
Bulgarians: who commaunded Leontius and Apſimarus,
to be ledde bounde thorowe the market, and trade vpon their
neckes, they lying proſtrate at his feete, and then immediatlye
cutte of theyr heades. He pulled out the eyes of Callinicus
the Patriarke: he hanged vppe Heraclius the brother of
Apſimarus. At what time as he ſent his Nauye againſt
Chirſon the hoaſt made Philippicus Bardanes Emperour
who made haſt to Conſtantinople, and toke Iuſtinian
and his ſonne Tiberius and killed them, takinge
them from a Santuarye place: So thre Emperours
in a ſhort ſpace were killed.
This was done in the yeare of
the worlde .4675. Of
Rome. 1466. Of our
Sauiour Chriſt .713.
❧
                  ❧
                  ❧
               
            
            
               
               Philippicus Bardanes.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     PHilippicus Bardanes being made Emperour
of the armye, which forſaked Iuſtinian: Hee
helde his gouernment 2▪ yeres, he put downe
Images in the Temples He ouerthrewe the
decrees of the 6. Sinode, & defended his opinion
againſt Monotheletas, but by the coūſaile
of Artemius his Secretarye, his eyes put out was caſt into
priſon. In ye yeare of the world. 4677. Of Rome 1468.
Of our Sauiour Chriſt .715.
            
            
               Artemius, otherwyſe called
Anaſtaſius.
               
                  
               
               
                  WHo was named the ſecond, helde his Empyre
one yeare and .iii. monethes. He was learned
& was chiefe of all the ſecretaryes of ye Empyre,
and beinge deſyrous of concorde in the
Church, he repreſſed thoſe that would ouerthrowe
the ſixt Sinode. In all his warres vnfortunate, for

his menne of warre corrupted with the ſeditious vprore of
the Emperours before, and greued to be put from their old
licentiouſnes, they made Theodotius Adramittenus Emperour,
who hauing Artemius put from his kingdome, and
afterwarde included in a Monaſterye. He gouerned but one
yeare, and willinglye gaue place to Leo Iſaurus: but Artemius
after a fewe yeres gathering an hoaſt out of Bulgaria,
wente about to recouer his Empyre, but he beinge brought
to Leo was murthered. In the yeare of the world .4680.
The yeare of Rome .1471. And of Chriſt .718.
            
            
               Leo the thirde.
               
               
                  
                     LEO the thyrde of that name before, named
Iſaurus Conon, and gouerned the
Alanes afterwarde being ſente of Artemius
againſt the Saracenes, aſſone as he
harde that Theodoſius was made Emperour
againſt Artemius, (he although
hee woulde defende Artemius) came to
Nicomedia, and taking the ſonne of Theodoſius, made a couenant
with his father to geue place in kingdome. So Leo
Iſaurus cōmaunded his chiefe Captaynes & hoaſt to ſweare,
he gouerned 25. yeres. The time of this Leo Iſaurus is worthy
moſt conſideratiō, for in his time was that great warres

of the Saracenes, and there they ſhall ſee how ſone the power
and mighte of the Sarcenes increaſed. The Saracenes were
driuen out of Fraunce by the happy victory of Carolus Martellus,
Duke of Brabantia: This Carolus Martellus was
grandfather of Charles the great who was Emperour. And thus conſider the cruell Mahomet began to raigne in ye
623. yeare after Chriſt, from that time to the beginninge of
Leo Iſaurus, that is to the yeare of Chriſt .718. are yeares
105. In this ſpace Mahomet & his ſucceſſors which are called
Saraceni & Agareni, obtayned Araba, Paleſtina, Syria,
Perſia, Egipt and Affrica. They paſſed out of Affrica into
Spaine, where they held gouernment 10. yeares: then into
Fraunce 3. hundreth thouſand and 70. of the Saracenes ruſſhed
in euen vnto Turonum, into other places they paſſed as
into the leſſer Aſia, they beſieged Byzance, Conſtantinus
Barbatus raigninge: this was done in the yeare of our Sa-Chriſt. 674. From Byzance repelled, they returned with a
great hoaſt in the time of Leo Iſaurus .40. yeares after, to ye
beginninge of this Emperours raigne. Then againe two
yeares they beſieged Conſtantinople, Magaſda being theyr
chiefe Captayne, but the Almightye God ouerthrew them,
for their hoaſt periſhed with famine and peſtilence, the nauye
of ſhippes with lightining from Heauen were drowned and
burned: and thus they were driuen backe in theyr enterpriſes,
leaſt they ſhould obtayne the leſſe Aſia & Byzance. But
great warres were moued in Fraunce by them, firſt Abiramus
a kinge brought a greate multitude of Saracenes to the
nomber of 30000. men. Eudo Lord of Aquitania brought
him in againſt the Frenchemen, the Saracenes ſpoyled Burdogala,
takinge it by force of armes, and euen to Turonum
a great nomber of Chriſtians being murthered, as they paſſed:
At this time Italye and Fraunce were in greate perill.
Then Carolus Martellus keepinge his warres in Fraunce &
Friſia,
                  A Chriſten quarell to defende Chriſtendome. he being ye chiefe ſtaye of Fraunce, brought in a great
power againſt the Saracenes. This Carolus Martellus, required
of Eudon that he would not thus ſee ye name of Chriſtians
to be ouerthrowen, and gaue him Chriſtian exhortacion,

that leauinge the ſecte of the Saracenes, hee woulde come
himſelfe with the hoaſt of the Frenchemen. The battaile ioyned,
thorow the power of Almighty God, the hoaſt of Carolus
Martellus had the victory, & all yt multitude of Saracenes
was murthered, & Abiramus their king lay deade in ye field.
Although ye 
                  Saracenes toke this foyle yet they ceaſed not as
yet, for ſone after eut of Spayne, two great hoaſtes of ye 
                  Saracenes
ruſhed into Fraunce, truſtinge to the ayde of the Viſogothes in Aquitani, and thoſe that were in Fraunce.
               
                  Athinius king of the Saracenes with a great power and nauye
of ſhippes, inuaded the partes of Narbone in Fraunce, &
toke Auinionem at a ſodaine and made it their ſtrong holde:
then Carolus Martellus deliuered that frō their hands, and
expelled the Saracenes a great nomber of them, with Athinius
their kinge, who fled into his ſhippes with a great part
of his ſouldiours, and was brought to Narbone. Aſſone as
Carolous Martellꝰ did beſiege this Citty, Amoreus another
kinge of ye 
                  Saracenes to helpe thoſe that were beſieged, came
out of Spayne: then Carolus Martellus making haſt leaſt ye
power of the ennemyes ſhould ioyne, in the valleye neare to
Narbone by the floude Burie, he had a great battaile with ye
                  Saracenes, and in the ſame battaile Amoreus their king being
ſlaine, the armye amazed with ye death of theyr king, the
whole hoaſt was partly killed of them. The death of Amoreus
beinge knowen, and the ſpoyle of his armye, Athinius
fledde from Narbone with his power, & robbing in the Iſles
neare to Liguria, & ſo be went into Spayne. Carolus Martellus
ouerthrew Naroena, leaſt afterward the Viſogothes
of it ſhould rayſe new warres. By theſe calamityes and foyles,
ye 
                  Saracenes were quight vanquiſhed, who hoped to haue
enioyed both Fraunce and Italy: after this they helde them
ſelues within the compaſſe of the mountaynes of Pirineus.
by this calamity Fraunce & Italye was ſaued from ye ſpoyle,
and alſo that wicked Doctrine and blaſphemous religion of
Mahomet, was quighte in thoſe places extinguiſhed. No
warres was more profitable then theſe, nor more neceſſarye
then to defende ſo many bodyes of Citizens, and families of

of Chriſtiās, and from ſuch blaſphemous people & doctrine.
Theſe be the moſt cauſes why noble men wore armour: and
herevpon the kinge of Spayne called Alphonſus in his banner
hath a portured Pelican woundinge her owne breſt, and
with her bloud nouriſhing her yong ones wt this title: Prolege
& pro grege. As who ſhould ſay, A Prince ought to vē
                  ture
his life, for ye defence of godly lawes and for his people:
Theſe are the .ii principall pointes of warres. This victorye
was profitable to Spayne, becauſe manye Chriſtians that
came of the Gothes helde the rough and baren places of the
mountaynes of Pireni, Cantabria and Aſturia, they goinge
forwarde by litle and litle vanquiſhing the Saracenes, and at
the length recouered Spayne, ſo of that remnant of the Gothes
is deſcended the progenye of the laſt kinges of Spayne:
from the which Charles the fifte Emperour of that name, by
the mother ſyde is come. God by his mighty power rayſed
vp Carolus Martellus to this mightye warre. He preuayled
much againſt ye 
                  Saracenes being in nomber infinite: Where
God defendeth, the coward chaſeth away the ſtrong & mightye,
the foole the wyſe, no pollicye preuayleth where God geueth
the victorye, and where as God diſpoſeth a kingdome
or ſtate, the deuiſe & counſel, and pollicye of the wicked are
caught to theyr owne deſtruction of the wicked.
               This Carolus Martellus was of a noble bloud in Fraūce,
and neare to the Princes of that lande: he was Duke of Brabant,
God diuerſlye ſaued him from many perilles, who beinge
but tender of yeares, by his mother beinge a ſteppemother
was put in priſō at Colleine, her name was VVoldruda,
his father Pipinus then at that time beinge dead, yet frō
that bloudye purpoſes he by the power of God eſcaped.
               This Carolus Martellus obteyninge his fathers dignity,
vanquiſhed the Friſians, and after that hee ouercame Eudon
in Aquitania: After this God bleſſing him in his victoryes,
the Princes and chiefe gouernours of Fraunce, gaue vnto
him the kingdome of Fraunce which he would not receiue,
being content with his fathers dignitye. After this he vanquiſhed
quight ye 
                  Saracenes that came into Fraunce: in theſe

warres he had ye ayde of kinge Lutbrande a kinge of ye 
                  Lumbardes,
and Lanfryde a Duke of the Almanes, of Odille
Duke of Bauaria. The name & authoritye of Carolus Martellus
was ſo great, yt at what time as this Lutbrande king
of the Lumbardes did beſiege the Citty of Rome, and the biſhoppe
of Rome in this extremitye ſought for ayde, then Carolus
Martellus only by an Embaſſage, broughte to paſſe yt
the Lumbards ſhould depart frō the ſiege, and to make peace
with the biſhop of Rome. This Carolus Martellus gouerned
in his fathers eſtate and ſeate 26. yeares, hee dyed in the
yeare of Chriſt .741. The 11. of the Kalends of Nouember,
not longe before the death of the Emperour Leo Iſaurus: He
was buryed among the kinges of Fraunce, in Saint Denis
Churche, and vpon his Tombe was put this Epitaphe.
               
                  Ille Brabantinus Dux, primus in orbe triumphans,
                  Malleus in mundo, ſpecialis Chriſticolarum:
                  Dux Dominus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Ducū, Regum quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Rex fore ſpernit,
                  Non vult regnare, ſed regibus Imperat ipſe.
               
               Thus muche of the Saracenes, and of the victoryes of Carolus
Martellus, whiche actes are neceſſarye to be knowen:
the Saracenes beinge expelled from Byzance, Leo Iſaurus
made an edict by the which he put downe all Images in Tē
                  ples,
and for that facte hee was called Eiconomacus, and ſo
Gregorye the thyrde of that name, ſhotte out againſt him his
thundringe boultes of excommunication, and letted tribute
to be payed to him in Italy. At this time began a contract
or league, betwene the Biſhop of Rome and the Frenchmē:
the Frenchemen flouriſhed not only in power, but
alſo in vertue and godlynes, therefore defence was
ſought at theyr hands ſo oft.
               The yeare of the worlde .4740. Of
Rome .1475. And after the incarnation
of our Lorde and Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſt .742.
¶? ☞▪ ¶
            
            
               
               Conſtantinus the v.
               
               
                  
                     COnſtantinus Copronimus the ſonne of Leo Iſaurus,
was crowned in the life of his father,
by Germanus the Patriarcke, he gouerned 35.
yeares. Hee was called Copronimus becauſe
beinge an infant new borne, and in Baptizing
did defyle the water with the filthye excremē
                  tes
of his body. Copros in Greeke ſigni
                     •
                  yeth Stercus.
               
               This Conſtantinus was more vehement then his father
in puttinge downe Images (& for that cauſe was Artabaſdus
made Emperour againſt him, by the conſente of the Patriarcke,
and of the nobilitye.) But this Conſtantinus after
two yeares, toke Ardabaſdus and put out his eyes, and alſo
of his two children: he gaue commaundement to beate ye Patriarcke
with whippes, & to ſet him on an Aſſe with his face
turned to the tayle, and to hold the tayle in his hande, and ſo
to be caryed about. The like puniſhmēt is vſed in Moſcouia
to ryde on a Bulles backe.
               This Emperour made great warres againſt the Bulgariās,
at the length after his crueltye ſheewed, he dyed of ſicknes:
In the dayes of this Emperour, the eſtate of the Vicegerē
                  tes
in Italye ceaſed, and Pipinus the ſonne of Carolus Martellus
was made king of Fraunce, in the yeare of Chriſt .751.
Some Hiſtoryes note, that by the authoritye of Zacharias
biſhoppe of Rome, the nobles of Fraunce beinge made free
of theyr othe and alegiance toward kinge Hildericke, depoſed
him and put him in a Monaſtery. Bonifacius Crowned
Pipinus kinge of Fraunce at Sueſſiane: after this Pipinus
                  
was called for into Italye twyſe, againſt Aſtulphus king of
the Lumbards. In both theſe expeditions the great vertue of
Pipinus appeared, and vſed the Lumbardes curteouſlye, and
made ſo gentle a peace, that he ſet in quietnes the kingdome
of the Lumbardes not poſſeſſing one foote of their countrye,
he vſed the more fauour becauſe of Lutbrande a kinge of the
Lumbardes, with whom he was brought vp. In this firſt
warres againſt the Lumbards, he compelled Aſtulphus beinge
beſieged at Ticima, to promiſe to keepe peace geeuinge
pledges, and Pipinus beinge content with the promiſe he returned
into Fraunce: But the fearcenes of Aſtulphus was
more and more increaſed, not molifyed. For after the returne
of Pipinus, Aſtulphus (againſt his leage & couenant)
made newe warres, and with a great power went to Rome
and beſieged it three monethes. And as ſone as kinge Pipinus
came into Italye, Aſtulphus not able to encounter with
Pipinus, left ye ſiege of Rome, fearing his owne kingdom of
Lumbardye: and although Pipinus might haue vanquiſhed
Aſtulphus out of his kingdome, yet he full of all humanity,
willed him to obſerue the conditions of peace, and to be content
with his fathers kingdome, and to leaue of the ſiege of
Rome & from Italye. Pipinus not credeting the fayre promiſes
of ye 
                  Lumbardes, taryed in Italye vntill ſuche time as
Aſtulphus had brought backe his power from Rome and other
Citties. At what time as Pipinus departed out of Italye,
he ledde his power and greate hoaſt againſt the Saxons,
and the Bauarians, but Taſſillo kinge of Bauaria withoute
fight, entred into amitye with Pipinus, who commaunded
him to kepe his kingdome (for he was the ſiſters ſonne of Pipinus.)
The Saxons beinge ouercome, peace was ſo graunted,
that beinge contente with their owne, they ſhoulde take
nothing from the kingdome of Fraunce, and to liue wt their
owne lawes:The 
                        〈◊〉
                      Parliamente in Fraunce. Why a Parlament is ordayned. Onlye this tribute they ſhoulde paye yearelye
to the Frenchmen .300. barde horſe meete for the warres.
               Of this Pipinus was the Parliamente firſt ordayned in
Fraunce, the which for the wyſedome of the Iudges & worthie
counſellers, gathered from all partes of the Dominiō
                  
for pollicye in geuinge orders, a care vniuerſall of all eſtates,
for ordayning any ſtatutes and decrees, in reuoking any
enormities fallinge vppon anye common wealthe, Cittye or
Towne, for the ſauegard of the Prince & his eſtate, it paſſeth
all aſſembles. Theſe chiefe pointes of nobility was in Pipinus
very heroycall: He moued onlye iuſte warres, vpon iuſt
occaſions, in victoryes he retayned iuſtice and modeſtye, and
ſet forth lawes very profitable to the common wealth. Theſe
were the chiefe matters which were in ye Weſte, in the time
of this Copronimus. Alſo, in the Eaſt out of the mouth or
Porte of the Mare Caſpiū, the Turkes ruſhed into the lande
of Colchis and in to Armenia, where they fought wt the Saracenes.
In the time of Mauritius the Turkes fought with the
Perſians, but they were ouerthrowne of the Perſians, and
therefore theyr firſt inuaſion is not ſo famous as the ſeconde
time. In this time the force of the Saracenes power was
moſt mighty, which happened in the dayes of this Copronimus
and Pipinus. The mountaynes of the Mare Caſpiū
                  
are neare to Iberia, where nowe are founde out manye riche
mynes of metall: By this Sea Caſpium the Engliſhe Marchantes
paſſe with their aduentures into Perſia, from 
                     
                        •
                     ar
                        •
                     
                     ſlaue
& ſo vppon Volga on the freſhe water two Thouſande
myle of Ruſſia myles, and ſo they paſſe to Caſane, which ye
great Emperour of Ruſſia hath at this day in his owne poſſeſſion,
it was the chiefe Citty of the Tartars, from thence to
Aſtrachan whereof the Emperour of Ruſſia calleth himſelfe
greate Emperour of Aſtracan & Emperour of Caſane. At
Aſtrachani a great filthy ſtincke is of fiſh that is there takē,
by which corruption the ayre is much infected, & many ſtraū
                  gers
paſſinge thereby are killed with ill ayre. It is called
Caſpium of an Hebrue worde Keſephe which ſignifyeth ſiluer,
of the which the places by are plentious of ſuch mynes:
So that moſt noble wryter Philippe Melancton wryteth.
               At what time as the Turkes toke a way the kingdome frō
the Saracenes. it ſhalbe declared afterward.
               The yeare of the worlde .4739. Of Rome. 1530. Of
Chriſt .777.
            
            
               
               Leo the fourth.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     LEO the ſonne of Conſtantinus Copronimus,
ſucceaded his father in the Empyre,
hee gouerned fiue yeares, hee was
Crowned of the Patriarcke in his fathers
life. His father marryed him to a
wyfe called Irene, an Athinian borne:
This Leo the fourthe, followed his father
in putting downe Images. He ſent in his time an army
into Syria, which did rather ſtyrre vp the Saracenes, then repreſſe
them. Not longe after Irene made peace with the Saracenes,
promiſinge them tribute: Leo the .4. cauſed in his
life time, his ſonne Conſtantine to be Crowned of the Patriarcke,
a fewe dayes after Leo dyed the .4. daye of Nouē
                  ber.
The yeare of the worlde .4744. Of
Rome .1535. Of Chriſt .782.
            
            
               
               Irene with her ſonne Conſtantinus.
               
               
                  
                     IRENE with her yonge ſonne Conſtantine,
gouerned the Empyre .10. yeares, after this
theyr domeſticall diſcord brought vpon them
great confuſion. The firſt part of the gouernmente
of this Irene was verye quiet, in the .7.
yeare of her gouernmente, a Sinode was aſſembled at Nice,
which was the .7. Sinode: In this Sinode a decree was ſit vpō
to reſtore Images (but that was not done without great
tumulte. At what time as the Biſhoppes and Doctours
ſate in the Temple of Byzance to ſpeake their minde of this
matter, diſalowing Images, a multitude of ſouldiours was
of Irene appointed to enter in and breake vppe the Sinode by
force of armes,Images. becauſe they in that aſſemble & Sinode, would
not allowe Images. This Sinode was afterward reduced
to Nicia by the ſute of the biſhoppe of Rome, and he made an
edicte that Images ſhould be reſtored againe. There was a
certaine Eunucke of ye Empreſſe, Aetius by name, who gouerned
chiefely in all matters of counſell in the Courte, who
perſwaded Irene to marrye with a kinſemā of his, who was
Preſidente of Thracia: and perſwaded her that this Preſident
ſhould come with his power to remoue and appeaſe all
ſeditiō, (this Preſidēt ſent for) all armour was taken away
from the Citizenes, and many caryed awaye in ſhippes, and
ſent into Iſlands for to liue in ſeruitude. After this her ſonne
Conſtantine beinge .xx. yeares of age, toke vpon him the gouernment,
and remoued certaine counſellers about his mother:

then ſhe with her company ſtryred vp part of the hoaſt
to ſweare, not to admitte her ſonne to be Emperour, but the
Armenians deteſted this vniuſte acte, and ſware vnto her
ſonne to ſtand to him their true Lord and Emperour, which
example afterward ye other folowed. Yet herein ceaſed not ye
traynes layde for her ſonne. When Conſtantine had raigned
7. yeares, his mother gathered an occaſion becauſe her
ſonne, did put away his wyfe and cloſed her in a Monaſtery,
and maryed another, ſhe ſent certaine men to take her ſonne,
they apprehending him put out his eyes, of which griefes he
dyed immediatly. Then Irene (her ſonne beinge dead) raigned
.iii. yeare, in this three yeares ſpace, cruell bloudy warres
were committed by her, and for her cruelty ſhewed vpon
her ſonne, & againſt his vncle: and alſo Italye was in great
diſtreſſe needinge ayde againſt the Lumbardes, and theyr ſeditious
tumultes, Alſo at Rome the high biſhoppe by ſedition
was apprehended and whipped. Herevpon Charles for
his great iuſtice and manye other ſinguler vertues, when as
before alſo Italye had taſted of the iuſtice & modeſty of Carolus
Martellus his grandefather, & Pipinus his father: herevpon
the gouernmente of Italye was committed to Charles
the greate, and hereby there was a godlye vnitye of Italye,
Germanye and Fraunce.
               Now the Emperours of Greece ceaſinge in gouernment
of the Empyre, of ye which nomber, moſt haue bene tyrantes,
and the laſt of the Emperours by Domeſticall diſcorde
haue broughte in the Turkes, and now followeth
the actes of the Germaynes, whoſe doinges
were godly to Italye and Germany,
and the ruine that after fel, was by the
diſcord of the Romiſhe biſhoppes
and Emperours, and theyr power,
ſtrenghte and fortitude,
by diſcorde waxed feeble.
❧
                  ❧
                  ❧
               
            
            
               
               Nicephorus.
               
                  
                     NIcephorus poſſeſſed the Empyre of the
Eaſte, and made peace with Carolus
Magnus. He was Crowned of Leo ye
biſhoppe, he kepinge the league yt was
made with Charles, agreed of betwene
Irene and Charles: Whiche was that
Apulia, Calabria, Cicilia and Italye
ſhould be Charles, & the Venicians ſhould liue of theyr owne
lawes free. This Prince was moſt couetous, he had manye
ouerthrowes of the Bulgarians, and was killed of them wt
his whole power, the ix. yeare of his raigne: he making firſt
his ſonne Stauratius Emperour in y• battel, his ſonne being
woūded in the ſaide battaile, returned to Conſtantinople,
who alſo the thirde monthe after he gouerned, was depoſed
of Michaell Curopalates and put in a Monaſtery.
            
            
               Michaell Curopalates.
               
                  THis Michael Curopalates maryed Procopia
ye ſiſter of Stauratius. This Emperour
made a league wt 
                  Charles ye greate
that Charles ſhould gouerne the Weſt,
and the Eaſt to be in his gouernmente.
He had warres againſt the Bulgarians
and ouercame them, but at the lengthe
he was ouercome at a Cittye called Adrianopolis: and hearing
that Leo an Armenian did vſurpe, he went into a Monaſterye
and became a Moncke, rulinge his Empyre but .ii.
yeares.
            
            
               
               Charles the great, the firſt Emperour
of the Weſt.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     THe godly orders in gouermente,
                  Godlye orders. where people liue in obedience
both towardes God and their Prince,
are manifeſt tokens of the greate goodnes
of God, to maintaine ſociety in life:
without lawes the life would be brutetiſhe
and beaſtly, ſeruitude and myſerye
to al eſtates, and in ſteede of lawful Princes and gouerners,
tyrantes, homicides, deſtroyers of common wealthes, & kepinge
no lawes, they would ſubuert al good orders, neyther
knowing God nor obeying nature.Lawes. Godly lawes and iudgementes
are the waightes and ballanes of God, to directour
life. For lawes, ſociete maintayned by wedlocke, distinction
of poſſeſſions, lands and goods, contracte
                     •
                  , Maieſtrates,
iudgement, puniſhmēt for ſinne, are the eui
                     ••••
                   teſtimonyes
of the wyſedome, goodnes and iuſtice of God, & of his preſence
in mankinde.Tyrannye. Where tyrannye is, it is a ſcourge for
the ſinne of the people, and for ſinne God chaūgeth kingdom
and Princes oft,Godlye Prī
                     ces. it is a ſinguler benefite of God where godly
Princes ſucceade. For excepte God do keepe the Cittye, in
vaine doth the watch kepe it, God tranſlateth ye kingdomes,
and ſtabliſheth them, great alteration and channge fel about
the time of Charles ye great. God ſhewed his heauy wrathe
vpon the Empyre of the Eaſte, alſo vpon al other Nations,

for there aroſe vp in the Eaſte, the blaſphemous and wicked
kingdome of the Saracenes, by the which the true Church of
Chriſt was waſted and deſtroyed: the true Religion of God
extinguiſhed, ſeruitude to Chriſtians, many famous Citties
and goodly common wealthes ouerthrowen, but the greate
mercyes of God was a ſtay vnto them & to al Chriſtians. In
good time God rayſed this mighty Prince Charles ye great,
who profited ye poſterity wt his orders after his age 300. yeares,
vnto ye raigne of Henry the 4. In this Henries time by ye
miſchieues of the biſhops, and theyr ambitious conditions,
the Empyre fell into great decaye: and although betwene ye
ſucceſſors of Charles ciuill warres aroſe,Charles. yet of that Charles
great good wealth roſe, and quietnes.Lodouicus. As alſo by theſe. Lodouicus
pius,
                  Arnolphus Ottones. 
                  Arnolphus Ottones, Henry of Bambridge,
Conradus the Frenchman, and Henry. the. 3. All theſe did
greatlye aduaunce Italye, Germanye, Pannonia, and all other
Regiōs, theſe were called of God in heauy ſtate of time,
for God rayſeth good gouernours to be a defence for the people.
As Octauius Auguſtus, Veſpaſianus, Titus, Nerua,
Conſtantine the great, and Theodocius. Deſiderius a king
of the Lumbardes made greate warres in Italye at thoſe
dayes (and poſſeſſed manye great Citties) of the which ſome
partayned to the Emperour, & ſome to ye Church of Rome.
At Rome alſo much tumulte roſe thorowe ambitious Prelates.
The Emperours of the Eaſt had ſmal regard to Italye
or Rome, herevpon the Weſte part oppreſſed with calamityes:
God rayſed that noble Prince Charles the great,
who toke Deſiderius the kinge of the Lumbardes, and toke
his kingdome from him. This Charles was called Charles
the great for his noble actes: as Pompeie the great, Alexā
                     der
the greate. Carolus Martellus was grandfather of this
Charles the great, his father was Pipinus kinge of Fraūce,
his mothers name was Birtha daughter of Heraclius, Emperour
of Conſtantinople, crowned by Leo the biſhoppe of
Rome. Pipinus their father dying, left his kingdom to theſe
two ſonnes, Charlemaine and Charles the great. But this
Charles the great, (his brother Charlemaine dying ye third

yeare after he began to raigne) he was Lord only of Fraūce
and kinge, he was excellently brought vp in the Greeke and
latiue tongue, for Petrus Piſanus an excellent learned man
was his teacher. This Charles the great learned at Paris, &
there Alcoinus an Engliſhe man famouſlye well learned,Charles excellently learned.
taught him Logicke, and the doctrine of Chriſte. This Alcoinus
was the Scholer of Bede that greate learned man of
Englande. Alcoinus made a briefe ſhorte booke of the doctrine
of the Churche,Alcoinus. which remayneth at this daye: by the
which it appeareth that he followed ye doctrine of S. Auſten.
Some do write yt 
                  Charles the greate ledde with the perſwation
and counſell of Alcoinus, did make the Vniuerſitye of
Parris: but it is written that the Vniuerſitye of Tiſina, was
ſet vp by Charles:
                  Paris. in diuers partes of Fraūce he did ſet forth
learning, and gaue great ſtipendes, he was excuſite in ye Mathematicall
Sciences, in Aſtronomye, and in the motion of
the Celeſtiall Planets, he profited ſo yt he was able to write
an Ephemerides, all this he learned of Alcoinus ye Engliſhe
man. He occupyed himſelfe muche in reading of Saint Auſtines
workes: wherby it appeareth yt he had the true knowledge
of the ſayth in Chriſt, the ſtorye ſayth that he was a verye
godly Prince, whereby his vertue gaue him to be a myrror
to all Princes. He had many great warres againſt ye 
                  Saxons
and the Hunnes, for at what time as his father Pipinus
dyed, which was in the eyghte Kalendes of October, in the
yere of Chriſt 768 He deuided his fathers kingdome with
his brother Charlemaine, Charlemaine had his Princelye
ſeate at Svveſion, & Charles the great abode at VVormes.
The firſt warres that he toke in hande, was againſt thoſe of
Aquitania, left of his father Pipinus vnfiniſhed, wher a remnant
of the Gothes remayned, ſeekinge by tumulte to make
an vprore, a Duke of Aquitania called Hunodus, ſtyrringe
them to rebelliō. This Duke of Aquitania not able to beare
the force of Charles the great, fledde vnto Lupus a Duke of
Vaſconia, to whom hee ſente Embaſſadours to deliuer the
Duke of Aquitania: Lupus Duke of Vaſconia deliuered
him, and yelded himſelfe to Charles ſonne, after this his brother

                  Charlemaine dyed, in the yeare of Chriſt .771. Whoſe
wyfe called Berta by the counſell of Adomarus, fled into Italye.
Deſiderius king of the Lumbardes, either for hatred
or feare of Charles the greate, which thinge ſtyrred vp Deſiderius
to great hope, being before deſirous of that Cittye of
Rome, and of the Empyre in Italye, after the putting away
of ye Vicegerents of kings. And he feared alſo the Frenchmē
whoſe league with the Romaynes, was ſuſpected of him to
be a hurt to his eſtate, in time he thought to bringe to paſſe yt
the ſonnes of Charlemaine, ſhould be made kings of Fraūce
of the biſhoppe of Rome. If that might be brought to paſſe,
he hoped that eyther the Frenchmē would of their owne wil
depart from him, or ciuill warres betwene them ſhould weken
the power of Fraunce. He ouercame the Saxons, on
euerye ſyde peace beinge ſettled, hee returned into
Fraūce makinge his ſonne Lodouicus, partaker
of the kingdome with him. He dyed at Aquiſgrane,
in the .5. kalendes of Februarye,
in the .71. yeare of his age. Of his
gouernment 14. yeares, and the
yeare of Chriſt .816.
¶****¶
            
            
               
               Lodouicus Pius, the firſt of that name.
               
               
                  
                     LOdouicus alone remayned aliue of ye children
of Charles, after his father, who as ſone as he
vnderſtode of the death of his father, he returned
oute of Aquitania, and loke vpon him the
gouernment at Aquiſgrane. He was called wt
this holy name Pius,
                  Lodouicus a ſuperſtitious Price. a Religioſa ſuperſtitione,
not hauinge ye perfite knowledge of God, nor of any pure
Religion, but as ye Religion went in thoſe dayes he was coū
                  ted
Religious: for he encreaſed the worſhipping of Idolles
and Images, and ſet vp manye obſeruations of Monkrye, &
of that ſole Monaſtical life. This Lodouicus was farre inferiour
to his father, bothe in wyſedome and vertue, his authority
alſo began to be contemned. He was a cruell Prince
againſt all godlye lawes,Cruelty in a Prince. wherevppon hee was hated of the
noble peares: What crueltye did he vſe againſt his brothers
ſonne, called Bernardus kinge of Italye? and againſt his
kinſefolke?The counſell of a ſtepmother. alſo towardes his owne ſonnes, thorow the ſubtill
purpoſes of their ſtepmother? Wherevppon ciuill warres
roſe betwene this Lodouicus and his owne ſonnes. This
Lodouicus had firſt to wyfe Irmengardin ye daughter of Ingramus
a Duke, of whom he begat iii. ſonnes Lotharius, Pipinus,
& Lodouicus: this his firſt wyfe dyed .ii. yeares before
hee came to enioye the Empyre, then hee maryed Iudeth the
daughter of Guelphus the firſt Earle of Altofordenſis, in ye
country of Sweuia: ſhe was the ſiſter of Conradus & Rodulphꝰ
Princes, of her he begat Carolus Caluus. This Lodoui-
                  
before he was Emperour, did valiātly vſe himſelfe eſpeciallye
againſt the Saracenes in Spaine: Aſſone as he was Emperour,
he created Lotharius his eldeſt ſonne kinge, and hee
made Pipinus kinge of Aquitania, and Lodouicus his yongeſt
ſonne he retayned with him, but he made him king of Italye.
The aduauncemente of Lodouicus to ye Dominion of
Italye, moued Bernardus who was before kinge of Italye,
to make warre againſt his vncle the Emperour Lodouicus
Pius. The Emperour at that time was in warre againſt
the kinge of Denmarcke, and to reſtraine him from the entringe
of Italye, and from the kingdome of Fraunce. This Bernardus thorowe the perſwaſion of certaine flatterers,
was perſwaded that ye Dominion of Italy was proper
to him, and not to Lodouicus: thē 
                  Lodouicus Pius, his warres
being ended in Denmarcke, entred with a great and terrible
hoaſt into Italye, by whoſe comming many of thoſe yt
were conſiderates with Bernardus fledde awaye, Bernardus
beinge forſaken of his men of 
                     〈…〉
                   his body to ye
Emperour his vnckle, with his ſonne Pipinus, and his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
nephewes Bernardus, Pipinus, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  . The Emperour,
ſente this Bernardus vnto Germanye, and was condemned
to dye at Aquiſgrane, but he was pardoned hauing
his eyes put out, he was put into a M
                     •••
                  aſterye, in the which
with greate penſiuenes dyed: this acte was done of the Emperour
Lodouicus Pius, in the yeare of Chriſte .818. This
great crueltye did withdrawe the mindes of many from the
Emperour Lodouicus, ſo incon
                     •
                  inentlye after the deathe of
Bernardus kinge of Italye, the Emperour made Lotharius
his ſonne kinge of Italye, and alſo Emperour, hee gaue
him to wyfe Irnengardis▪
                   the daughter of one Hughte, hee
made him Emperour by the byſhop of Rome called Paſthalis.
The nobles of the Empyre did ha
                     •
                  e Lodouicus, and eſpeciallye
the biſhoppes, becauſe he was ruled by his wyfe, and
with her counſell the gouernment was ruled, wholye to the
deminiſhinge of the eſtate of the Empyre. Herevpon the
nobles and biſhoppes vnder a 
                     ••
                  lloure and outwarde ſhewe
of deuilliſhe practiſes of their ſtepmother, they moued them

againſt thier father & to depoſe him.A conſpiracy againſt the Emperour. The beginninge of this
conſpiracie 
                     〈◊〉
                   as in Fraunce, wrought wt 
                  Pipinus his ſonnes
but this conſpiracye was ſone extinguiſhed, becauſe at that
time his ſonnes had not mette with their power, but afterwarde
they ren
                     •
                  ed theyr former conſpiracy againſt theyr father,
who beinge driuen to ſuche an extremetye▪ that he was
compelled to yelde himſelfe to his ſonnes, and was forced
to putte awaye theyr ſtepin other 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Lodouicus the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſonne of this Emperour,The ouerthrow of the Emperour by his ſonnes. put his father into a Monaſterye at
S
                        •
                     eſſion, the .19. yeare of the raigne of this Lodouicus: He
ſente his brother Charles into Brumia to a Monaſterye in
Lotharingia: Hee ſente his ſtepmother into an other Monaſterye
in Italye called Derton. Of all theſe miſchieues
done and conſpired agaynſt the Emperour, the chiefe authors
were the biſhoppes: but the heauy wrathe of God ceaſed
not, but that the children of ye father 
                     〈◊〉
                   of his vengeaunce.Vngratious children.
The other brethren hauing compaſſion of this great
calamitye and miſery that fell to theyr father, they made petition
with a great nomber of the nobles of Germanye, that
they woulde reſtore theyr father depoſed into his Empyre againe.
Lotharius
                  Lotharius. beinge vnwillinge to ſet vpon his father againe,
fledde into Fraunce, and moued warre to let the purpoſes
of his brethren: but in the ende he being forſakē of all
his men, did requeſt pardon of his father and obtayned it.
               So by this meanes Lodouicus
                  Lodouicus. came to be Emperour againe,
a yeare after his depoſinge, who forgaue his ſonnes
theyr offences: then he reuoked from baniſhmente his wyfe
who ruled her huſbande, and made his ſonne Charles kinge
of Neuſtria,
                  Neuſtria. which is Celtic
                        •
                      Gallia, & Lugdunenſis Gallia.
Sone after this, Pipinus his ſeconde ſonne dyed, and lefte
behinde him two ſonnes Carolus and Pipinus.
                  Pipinus. 
                  Pipinus did
ſeeke to poſſeſſe the kingdome of Aquitania. Lodouicus afterward
againe made warres againſt his father, whom his
father mette at Moguntia, and there was reconciled to Lodouicus:
                  The death of Lodouicus.
and there Lodouicus dyed, the 10. of the Kalendes
of Iune, in the yeare of Chriſte .840. In the yeare of the

world .4802. Of his raigne 27. Of this life 64. He was buryed
in the Cittye called Metenſis neare to his ſtepmother
Hildegarde.
               
            
            
               Lotharius the firſt.
               
               
                  
                     LOdouicus Pius being deade, ciuil warres began
amonge his ſonnes,Ciuil warre. with ſo great bloudſhedde,
with the ſlaughter of ſo manye noble
peares: that by the great deſtruction & longe
continuance of the warres, the whole power
of Fraunce and ſtrength was in vtter decaye,
there were conſumed by thoſe warres more then a hundreth
Thouſande in one conflicte. Lotharius obtayning the Empyre
by lawfull title of ſucceſſion,Lotharius worketh iniurioſlye againſt hys brethren. and being appointed of his
father to enioye the Empyre: he would compell his brethrē
to his appointment, that Lodouicus ſhoulde gouerne Bauaria,
and Charles to poſſeſſe Aquitania, & to be contente with
his appointment, & thereby to chalenge no parte of the Empyre
more, and to obey him as Emperour. The brethrene
beinge vppon iuſt cauſe greued in yt they were put from their
iuſt inheritaunce, continentlye in armour they made warre
againſte their brother Lotharius, and draue him to 
                     •
                  lighte in
Gallia Lugdinenſi, at a towne called Fontannedū, and his
hoaſt almoſt vtterlye ſlaine. Greate calamityes hath fallen

on Fraunce by ciuill warres through ambitious gouernors:
So God for the iniquitye of men pulleth downe kingdomes,
ſpoyleth countryes, and tranſlateth the ſeates of Princes.
This warre was foughte in the yeare of Chriſt .841. the .7.
kalendes of Iulye.
               So in all countryes ciuill diſcention pulleth downe ye mightyeſt
Dominions, as of Fraūce, Italy, Germany, Spaine,
Polonia, Grece and Perſia, yea all countryes hath felte the
plague thereof as the hiſtoryes ſheweth: So of Scotlande,
deuiſion from time to time, & ciuill cōmotion, haue wrought
many miſchieues. A certaine learned man of Germanye named
Caſpar Peucerus, writeth a notable thinge oute of the
Hiſtoryes of Scotlande: as followeth.
               Scotia crebra ex caedibus inteſtinis interregna habuit,
donec poſt atroces & tragicos multorum Tyrannorum
interitus,Lib. 5. Chronicarum. regnum nutans ad Stuardam
domum Danicae originis deuenit Cúm enim per annos
mille ſeptingentos & amplius, Reges numerent
ex veris annalibus cētum & quin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ex his, quinquaginta
aut in bellis cecidiſſe, aut inſidijs procerū crudeliter
interemptos eſſe reperimus.
               Scotlande hath oftentimes lackte their kinges, by ciuill
warres, vntill after manye cruell and tragicall faules and
death of many tyrantes, the kingdome fell to the houſe of the
Stewardes, (whoſe ſtocke firſt roſe frō the Danes.) For whē
as by the ſpace of a thouſande yeares ſeuen hundreth & more,
they recken theyr kinges out of theyr owne true hiſtoryes, to
be in nomber an hundreth & fiue, and of thoſe 100. & fiue, 50.
of them was either killed in ye warres, or els at home cruellye
murthered by the miſchieuous factes of the noble men.
               And now to our ſtorye againe. Lotharius retyring came to

                  Aquiſgrane, and there leuyed vp a newe power, with whō
alſo his brethren met the 17. of the kalends of April: the yere
following the ſouldiours of Lotharius beinge broughte into
great feare thorow the great calamitye that fell to them before,
they forſoke Lotharius the Emperour. But Lotharius
as a moſt valiante Captayne, not hauinge his witte to ſeeke,
neyther amaſed with theſe two ouerthrowes, did ſo quiet
himſelfe: but deepely conſideringe the ſiniſter ſtate of Princes
happeninge in warres, gathered his men of warre together,
and pitchinge his tentes at Maliſcone a Cittye of Burgundia,
and thither came his brethren to fighte with him.
But the noble peares of the Empyre was as lettes and ſtiklers
betwene them, by whoſe counſaile, a concluſion was
made to make a Tetrarchia, that is, the Empyre to be deuided
into iiii. partes: that Lodouicus ſhould rule Germany,
Fraunce to be in Charles handes, Lotharius to enioy Italye
with the Empyre, and to poſſeſſe a part of Germanye which
lyeth betwene Rhene and Moſella floudes, and Pipinus the
ſonne of Pipinus to gouerne Aquitania. This agremēt was
concluded at Verodunum, and proclaymed there in ye .843.
yere of Chriſte. Lotharius after this cōcluſion, made his ſon
Lodouicus partaker with him in ye Empyre, and wt a great
hoaſt ſent him into Italy againſt ye 
                  Saracenes. In this partitiō
of the ſtates of thempyre, yt part yt was geuen to Londouicus,
was ye Dominion of the Eaſt, and yt which Charles poſſeſſed
was the kingdome of ye Weſt, to make a diſtinction frō
that which Lotharius had in gouerment. By this ciuil diſcē
                  tion
the brethren beinge thus occupyed and wekened, other
forreine Nations glad of ſuch occaſion offered to them, rayſed
an army againſt theſe countryes: In Saxone alſo warre
was moued of the ſeruauntes and ſlaues of the countrye, but
that warre was ſone repreſſed. The Normanes entred by a
nauye of ſhippes, into certaine coaſtes of Fraunce, & through
the country deſtroying and ſpoyling al partes as they went,
euen to the Citty of Paris. King Charles not able to match
them, with infinite ſummes of money, willed them to depart
out of his countrye. This people did firſt inuade Fraunce in

the time of Lodouicus the firſt, & afterward poſſeſſed a great
part of it. The Bohemians roſe againſt Lodouicus Sorabi
Marcomanni, yea for all the troubles and inuaſion of ſo many
forrayne ennemyes, the deadlye hatred of theſe brethren,
many times braſte oute againſt themſelues. Lothariꝰ threatned
to warre on his brother Charles, becauſe Geſelbartus a
chiefe gouernour vnder Charles, had taken away his daughter
ſecretelye, but by the wyſedome of Lodouicus it was pacifyed,
& al ſides contented. By this diſcord of the brethren,
forreine Nations being ſtyrred vp, and infidels alſo by falſe
treaſōs of ambitious heads were broughte in, with a greate
ſcourge to the Chriſtians: this great inuaſiō ceaſed not vntil
the gouernmēt of ye 
                  Saxon Princes,The happye comminge of the Saxon Princes. out of whō God rayſed
mightye worthye Princes, that ſet vppe againe the Empyre
decayed. Lotharius perceyuinge that the Biſhoppes and
ambitious clargye did enclyne themſelues to ye Emperours
of Grece, and that they did priuilye conſpyre to betake vnto
them the Cittye of Rome,
                  A conſpiracy of the clergye of Rome againſt themperour. he wente to Rome in the yeare of
Chriſt 854. and put to death the chiefe doers in that conſpiracye,
appointinge newe Maieſtrates more ſurely ordering
the ſtates thereof. Thus Lotharius returninge out of Italy
parted to his three ſonnes the Empyre: he gaue Italye to
his ſonne Lodouicus and the Empyre: to Charles, Gallia
Narbonenſus:
                  Lotharius depoſeth himſelfe. & to Lotharius, Lotharingia. The father
of them being in conſcience pricked for his euil
committed againſt his father Lodouicus Pius,
gaue ouer himſelfe from the Empyre, and
wente into a Monaſterye called Brumia
in the yeare of Chriſt .855. The next
yeare followinge he dyed, the
thyrde of the kalendes of
October.
            
            
               
               Lodouicus the ſeconde.
               
                  
               
               
                  AFter the death of the Emperour Lotharius
who againſt his father made warre,
and therevpon by his euill conſcience &
cruel dealing tormented in minde, gaue
ouer his gouernmente, and dyed into a
Monaſterye. This Lodouicus the ſeconde
of that name, ſucceded by the wil
of his father: Of what force is ambition to moue the ſonnes
to ſeeke the fathers deathe for kingdomes ſake? ſurelye the
ſtate of kingdomes is verye brickle, and the ſeate ſubiecte to
many calamityes, the priuate ſtate (though meaneſt) in moſt
ſafetye. Therefore the godly Princes haue no ſmall cares,
and men of greate authoritye, no ſmall charge by whoſe noble
coūſayle, the whole body of the cōmon wealth is in ſafetie.
After ye deathe of Lotharius Italye was neuer in quiet,
vntill the comminge of Otho: So God ſcurged the ſucceſſion
of thoſe Princes, that ſo vnnaturally did depoſe their father,
many vſurpinge to depoſe eche other, manye tumultes
began,Seditious men haue an ill ende. and many ſeditious vprores attempted, but all came
to an ill ende. This Lodouicus the eldeſt ſonne of Lotharius
before, as ſone as he was choſen of his father into ye poſſeſſion
of the Empyre: he deſcended downe into Italye with
a greate power to driue the Saracenes from thence, and eſpecially
Exagro beneuentano. He warred nobly & valiātly, wt
moſte fortunate ſucceſſe againſte thoſe, chiefelye ayded of his
brother Lotharius, but their armye was almoſt conſumed

with the rottē peſtilence & other diſeaſes. Lodouicus departing
frō thence commended the defence of Italy, to Adalgiſius
a Lumbarde Prince of Salerne: but this falſe Lumbard
committed to ſo great a charge, intiſed with great promiſes
of the Grekes, he fledde trayterouſly to the Grekes, yelding
ouer to them theſe townes of Saminū, Campania and Lucania.
Lodouicus ſeeking to reuenge himſelfe of this treaſō,
returned againe into Italy, & by his valiant proweſſe wannē
againe his townes being loſt, he wan Capua by longe ſiege,
and they in the ende yelded themſelues. Yet he was for all
this, ſnared with manye traiterous wyles, wherevppon Lodouicus
was compelled to ſweare to this falſe Lumbarde, yt
he ſhould remitte and forgeue this trayterous acte committed
by him: but his holy father the Pope abſolued him from
that othe that he might lawfullye breake the ſame. Wherevpon
this Lumbarde Adalgiſius beinge Prince of Salerne,
fearing Lodouicus crueltye, and the Popes abſolution to be
not ſufficiente, fledde into the Iſles called Corſica. But Lodouicus
cruelly tormented thoſe that were confederate with
him in that treaſon: al thinges ſet in peace & quietnes in Italye,
he dyed at the length at Millen, in the yeare of Chriſte
874. after he had ruled 19. yeres. This Prince Lodouicus
excelled in learning, in godlynes, humanitye, liberalitye, in
profound witte, ſinguler dexteritye, and in wyſe counſel at a
ſodaine not to ſeeke, furthwith to determine vpon anye
matter, which is a rare gift & a great bleſſing of
God: And they are in reſpect of other
moſt noble for counſell, and in the
affayres of the common wealth
*⁎* moſt fortunate. *⁎*
¶
                     〈☐〉
                  ¶
            
            
               
               Carolus Caluus,
               
               
                  THis Emperour Lodouicus being dead
without any heire male, nexte after him
ſucceaded Carolus Caluus, the ſonne of
Lodouicus ye ſuperſtitious, borne of his
ſecond wyfe Iudeth. As ſone as he hard
of the death of Lodouicus, he marched
into Italye that he might bring againe
the Empyre (then in ſucceſſion to the Germaynes) to ye handes
of the Frenchmen. The purpoſe of this Emperour certainlye
knowne to Lodouicus Germanicus, he ſent with celeritye
his two ſonnes Charlemaine & Charles, who was alſo
called Carolus Craſſus, to mete his brother Carolus Caluus,
& to cut of that pretenced purpoſe toward thēpyre. But
the two ſonnes of Lodouicus Germanicus, eyther by greate
giftes wonne of Carouls Caluus, or afrayde to enter againſt
their vnckle Carolus Caluus by reaſon of his great hooſt, returned
to their father without any warre moued. Thus Carolus
Caluus wente to Rotme withoute reſiſtance, and there
was made Emperour the eyght Kalendes of Ianuary, in ye
yere of Chriſt 875. Carolus Caluus placed in the Empyre,
ſodainly his brother did ſeeke to make himſelfe ſtrong, with
the frendſhip of other mighty Princes, and league of them,
by whoſe force and ayde, he might more ſtrongly poſſeſſe the
Empyre: He exalted diuers noble men to higher dignitye of
eſtate, as to Boſon he gaue the Dukedome of Italy, and immediatly
he created him kinge or chiefe Preſident of y• whole

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
prouince. He made Berēgarius & Guido, being noble men of
Rome,, and deſcended from an auncient race of Lumbards:
One of them hee made Duke of Foroiulienſium, the other
Ducem Spoletanorum, and to ye other he gaue offices, reuenewes
& dignityes to make them faythful to him, & through
the amitye of ſo mighty perſons, to be a terror to his brother
and his cōfederates. But vaine is the purpoſe of mā where
God bleſſeth not the ſtate, and counſell is no counſell, where
God refuſeth the eſtate: No leagues are fortunate, neyther
the purpoſe of Princes haue any good ſucceſſe, that ſeeke the
defacing of good to ſet vp euill, and by vniuſt title, frendſhip
or amitye of the mightieſt rulers for kingdomes ſake, be folowers
of Iulius Caeſar. Si violatū eſt ius, regnandi cauſa
violatū eſt. If right & rule be to be brokē, let it be broken for
kingdomes ſake, otherwiſe let godlines & iuſtice be maintayned.
The great miſchieuouſnes of theſe Princes & theyr
bloudy ambitious purpoſes not regarding God nor righte,
was ye vtter ouerthrow of the ſtocke of Charles ye great & almoſt
vtterlye rooted them out. By this confedrature or amity,
Italy was wrapped with ſeditious vprores, and therby
cut of from the Princes of Germanye and Fraunce: and
after manye cruell warres and bloudye ende of manye noble
Princes and peares, the Frenchmen were ouercome, and ye
Germaynes againe recouered their former eſtate loſte, & became
againe mighty. But the ſtoutnes & bouldnes of Charles
at the length was cut of from the Empyre, and the kingdome
of Fraunce, and thoſe that Charles ſent into Italye againſte
his ennemyes for his Empyre, put theyr Lorde oute
from that poſſeſſion, and entred thereon themſelues.
               This Carolus Caluus returninge into Fraunce, and beinge
certifyed of ye death of his brother Lodouicus Germanicus,
forthwith hee made warres on his brothers ſonnes, for to
take frō them their fathers kingdome, he went againſt them
with a greate hoaſt, but Carolus Caluus was put to flighte,
and recouered of him thoſe Dominions that he loſte.
               This Carolus Caluus was puniſhed of God for his iniurious

dealinge towarde other, for his myſerable couetouſnes,
for his ambition and warres moued withoute iuſt title, this
warre was foughte the .8. of the Ides of October, the yeare
of Chriſt 876.
               In the meane time Charlemaine comming with his brother
Charles, marched into Italye with theyr power, ye Emperour
mette theſe, but he was forced to retyre, and eſcaped
with much difficulty, he fledde to Mantua, & dyed of a laſke:
but it was not withoute the ſuſpicion of poyſoninge, by a
Iewe called Sedechias who was his Phiſition,Sidechias. and in greate
eſtimatiō with him: He was a couetous Prince, proude, ambitious,
a great boaſter, wtall vanity vaine glorious, he dyed
the yeare of Chriſt .878. Of the world .4840. After he had
gouerned Fraunce 36. yeare. and the Empyre two yeares.
His ſonnes would haue caryed his body into Fraunce, there
to be buryed, but they coulde not for ſtincke of his Carcas,
wherevpon they were compelled to burye it at Vercelles, &
7. yeares after takinge his body vp againe, they caryed it into
Fraunce. This Emperour had two wyues, the firſt was
called Richildis the ſiſter of Boſon: the ſeconde was named
Hirmendruda, of her he begat .4. ſonnes and .1. daughter.
               
                  Lodouicus Balbus ſonne to this Lodouicus, Pope Iohn
gaue to him afterward in Fraūce the title of the Empyre: &
Lotharius who dyed before his father, and Charles Duke of
Aquitania, & Charlemaine Duke of y• prouince: this Charles
Duke of Aquitania in wraſtling with one Albinus, dyed
his backe beinge broken: Charlemaine being cōpelled of his
father to be a Moncke, he leauinge ye Monaſticall life, (was
altogether accordinge to his proper ſtudye and inſtruction a
warriour.Charlemaine) His father with much chiding would haue driuē
him to that Monaſticall life, but he would not: at the length
his father put out his eyes and caſt him in priſon. He would
haue made him a blind Moncke, but he thoughte eaſe and libertye
would haue got him frends, to reduce him to his former
ſtate, Then was Lodouicus only lyuinge.
               This Carolus Caluus warred on the Norman
                        •
                     , by ye ayde
of VVelechindus the Saxon: this VVelechindus came of ye
                  
progenye of that noble VVelechindus, with whō 
                  Charles ye
great had warres. Carolus Caluus made this VVelechindus
chiefe gouernour ouer Gallia Lugdunenſis: Of this
VVelechindus, ye kings of Fraūce are thought to deſcende.
Carolus Caluus made Rupertꝰ VVelechindꝰ ſonne, chiefe
Captayne of his greate hoaſte in Italye, againſte the Normanes
who alſo dyed in warres. Otto the ſonne of Rupertus
by the permiſſion of Arnulphus came to the kingdome
of Fraunce, when as Carolus Simplex for yonge age,
was not meete to gouerne: Of the brother of Ottou,
Hugo the great Earle of Paris was borne,
to whom by the ſiſter of greate Otto Hugo,
Capetus kinge of Fraunce was borne,
the firſte ſtocke of the kinges of
Fraunce that nowe is and
* gouerneth. *
(⁂)
            
            
               
               Lodouicus the thirde.
               
                  
               
               
                  AS ſone as the deathe of Carolus Caluus was
knowē to be true, the nobles of Rome & eſtates
of the Empyre did incline themſelues to
the choyſe of the empyre, for Carolus Craſſus
who with his brother Charlemaine poſſeſſed
Italye: but Pope Iohn biſhoppe of Rome at
that time, withſtode it for he fauoured more the Frenchemē.
But this holy and ſpirituall Pope,Pope Iohn was taken mouing ſedition
and ſtyrred an vprore againſte the eſtates, but ſome of
his frends in pitition to ye eſtates, intreated for his libertye:
but he beinge ſet at libertye, trayterouſlye fledde awaye into
Fraūce to Lewes the kinge, of whom he was with all honor
receyued and honoured for ſo holye a Prelate. The Pope for
his good entertayninge & honourable receyuing, rewarded
him with ye title of ye Emperour. This Lodouicus wt the Popes
graunte and his power and mighte, became Emperour
contrarye to the will of the nobilitye: this Lodouicus
gouerned but two yeares, he dyed in
the warres attempted againſt Bernardus
in ye marches of Italye, in the Ides of
Aprill, the yeare of Chriſt .878.
of the world 4842.
            
            
               
               Carolus the yonger, or Craſsus
               
               
                  
                     CArolus the ſonne of Lodouicus 
                        •
                     ermanicus,
who receyued of Charlemaine Italye,
and of the other Lodouicus the kingdome of
Germany by heritage. This Carolus Craſſus
with very fortunate ſucceſſe, expelled the
Saracenes oute of Italye, at that time as he
was made Emperour of Pope Iohu
                     •
                  . Within .iiii. yeares
ſpace, the Empyre of the Weſt had this Emperour ye third,
whereby great alteration fell: and a great wekeninge to the
eſtates.Alteration of kingdomes. So ſodaine chaunges are not happening withoute ye
great wrath of God, and manifeſt calamityes to the vniuerſall
eſtate. Xenophon wrote of the noble eſtate of common
wealthes of the Lacedemonians & of ye 
                  Athenians, thus he
ſayth. Omnes mutationes rerumpublicarum lethales. All
chaunges of common wealthes are deadlye. Alſo the ofte
chaunge of gouernours, pulleth downe the ſtate of coūtries:
for becauſe commonly Nouus Rexnoua lex, A newe kinge
new lawes. Moſt happye are they that enioye the vertuous
Prince: It is a manifeſt token of the wrath of God, the often
alteration of the ſtate of Princes. At what time as Carolus
Craſſus had expelled the Saracenes oute of Italye, he returned
into Germanye, he helde at that time the gouernment of
Fraunce in his handes,The oft alteratiō of Prī
                     ces. becauſe Lodouicus Balbus had lefte
Carolus Simplex borne after his death. The Normans entred
by force into the countrye of Atribatum, hauing admitted
Godfride & Sigefride for theyr Captaynes: then Carolus
                  
ſeeking to ayde the people inuaded of their enemyes, but
his enterpriſes not proſperinge, he made peace with them, &
gaue in mariage to Sigefride, a fayre Ladye called Giſ
                        •
                     la, ye
daughter of Lotharius his vnckle, and gaue for her Dowrye
Friſia. But ye Normanes did not ſo ceaſe, but with another
Captaine called Rollo, they inuaded Neuſtria, but Carolus
alſo made a league with them, and graunted them that they
ſhould haue that part of Neuſtria, which lyeth from ye floude
Epta to the Britaynes & there endeth, it is cloſed in with the
Frenche Ocean Sea, whoſe head Cittye is Rotomagū. Of
theſe new inhabitours Normandy toke his name, which before
was called Neuſtria. To this Rollo being Chriſtened,
another name was geuen Rupertus. Carolus Simplex gaue
his daughter to him in mariage: Frō this king in long ſucceſſiō
deſcended ye Dukes of Normandye. Carolus Craſſus
throughe his miſfortune in warre, and throughe his euill
leages with his enemyes, came in hatred & contempte with
his owne people, ſickenes alſo brought him lowe, wherby &
with care of minde, he was not of righte minde, and left
his kingdome. In his ſteade Arnolphus the
ſonne of Charlemaine was elected. This
Carolus Craſſus was brought to great
miſerye, not hauinge ſufficiente to
liue, he dyed afterward in a po
                     ••
                   towne
of Sweuia, in the Ides
of Ianuary. The yeare of
the world .4850.
               When he had raigned .7. yeares, and in
yeare of our Sauiour Chriſt .888.
¶
                     〈☐〉
                  ¶
            
            
               
               Arnolphus.
               
               
                  THen Arnolphus the ſonne of Charlemaine
was created Emperour, & ſubdued
the Normanes, who being geuen
to great couetouſlle neglected no meanes
to catch to him his ſpoyle or pray, he
gouerned xii. yeres & dyed of lyce: after
him, ye maieſtye of the Empyre fell to ye
Germaynes which for the ſpace of 100. yeares continued wt
the Frenchemen. Arnolphus beinge deade, Italye and all
the ſtates thereof would haue Beringarius, by deſcent a Lū
                     barde
to be Emperour, but the Germaynes and Frenchmē
would haue to enioy the Emperiall ſeate, Lodouicus ye ſonne
of Arnolphus, who gouerned vi. yeares: to whom alſo Cō
                     radus
Duke of Auſtria put in place raygned vii. yeares. So
he had his ſucceſſor Henry the firſt, ye ſonne of Otho Duke of
Saxone for xviii. yeares: By the ambition of theſe Princes,
manye deteſtable vprores & ſeditious tumultes roſe almoſt

60. yeres, frō the death of Arnolphus to Otho the firſt. In
this ſort the Italians vexed with daily inuaſion of barbarous
Nations, not willing to leaue ye auncient regimēt, lawes, &
glory of eſtate, they created Beringarius Foronilienſē
                   a noble
mā of great renowne & a noble warriour to be Emperor.
               This Beringarius ouerthrewe at Verona, Lodouicus the
ſonne of Arnolphus and put oute his eyes, he draue the Pā
                     nonians
out of Italy with moneye, he killed Guido a Duke.
After he had gouerned foure yeares, Beringarius the ſecond
ſucceaded him, who after the thirde yeare was driuen out of
his countrye of Rodolphus kinge of Burgundye: this Rodolphe
raygned .iii. yeares, and was driuen out of his kingdome
by Hugo a Duke: this Hugo gouerned .x. yeares and
dyed, leauinge behinde him Lotharius his ſonne, who dyed
after he had gouerned .ii. yeares: after whom Beringarius ye
third ſent for into Italy, with his ſonne Adelbertus gouerned
it xi. yeares, who vſed himſelfe with all tyrannye, & therfore
Otho a Saxon was ſent for. This Otho draue oute of
Italye the father Beringarius and his ſonne. Great calamityes
fell to all Europe by the oft chaunge of Princes, whiche
happened throughe the ambition of vſurpinge Princes who
knew not God, and it is a ſigne of the great wrath of God
to haue oft the chaunge of Princes, and moſt of all when
tyrantes ſucceade the vertuous Princes, who be fathers
of Chriſtes Church rulinge with good
law and diſcipline.
¶:¶
            
            
               
               Otho the firſt.
               
               
                  
                     OTHO the firſt ſonne of Henrye aforeſayde
king, this Otho was ſent for to throw downe
Beringarius the thirde of that name: this Beringarius
was a wicked Prince, and a tyrant
to the Romaynes. Pope Agapetus was very
willinge of his comminge: this Otho came with .50000.
men of warre, and draue out of Italye Beringarius with his
ſonne, but he gaue to them by his liberality a part of Fraūce
to dwel in. But after this both Beringarius and his ſonne rebelled
and ouercame them: this Otho depoſed Iohn the biſhop
of Rome from his ſeate, and put Leo in his place. This
Otho depoſed Bodeſlaus king of Boemia frō his kingdome,
becauſe he killed his owne brother, he was a Prince of great
iuſtice, indued with all ſinguler vertues, ſo to adminiſter iuſtice
againſt a murtherer, and it was with all le
                     •
                  itye to depoſe
him only of kingdome, that deſerued death for murther.
               This Otho ouerthrewe the Rānonians waſtinge and ſpoylinge
Italy, and in that conflicte .iii. kinges was taken of the
Germaynes and hanged vp. This Emperour Otho dyed after
that he had gouerned 30. yeres, he was buryed at Magdenburge
a Cittye of Saxonie, beinge a noble Prince, learned
and an excellent warriour
            
            
               
               Otho the ſeconde.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     OTHO the ſeconde, the ſonne of Otho and Adelhida,
who was before the wyfe of Lotharius king
of Fraunce, he was Crowned in his fathers life:
This Otho reſtored Nicephorus Emperour of
Conſtantinople (beinge put oute of his kingdome) into it againe,
and marryed Theophania his ſiſter. After this he vā
                  quiſhed
Henrye Duke of Bauaria, & made warres againſte
Lotharius kinge of Fraunce: At this time alſo the Saracenes
entered into Calabria, but Otho with an armye of ſouldiours
went againſt them, who being ouerthrowen and
put to flight, narrowlye eſcaped in a litle boate and
came to Rome. Sone after this he dyed there,
and was buryed in S. Peters Chappel after
he had raigned .xi. yeares, leauinge
behind him Otho his ſonne and 7.
daughters.
            
            
               
               Otho the thirde.
               
                  
               
               
                  IMmediatlye after the deathe of Otho the .2.
Otho the thirde (being his ſonne) was created
Emperour of the Princes of Germanye
at Rome: who as ſone as he was Crowned,
made Bruno a Saxon biſhoppe of Rome, and
that Pope was called Gregorye the ſixte. At what time as
Otho toke his iourney into Saxonie, this Gregory was depoſed
from his Papacye, of Iohn that vſurped: but Otho
full of wrath,The ambitiō of the Romiſhe Byſhops. with a greate power entered Italye and toke
Rome, and put to deathe Creſcentius the author of this ſedition,
hee put oute the Popes eyes that vſurped, and reſtored
Gregorye againe. And at this day an order remayneth that
6. Princes of Germanye ſhould choſe the Emperour .3. Eccleſiaſticall
3. Laye or ſecular, and the kinge of Bohemia is
the ſeuenth, who is appointed an Vmpeare to breake of all
diſcention in election if any ryſe. This Otho when he had
ruled xix. yeares dyed at Rome, not without ſuſpition of
poyſon, & was caryed into Germany: his wiues name
was Marye, the daughter of the king of Aragon,
a woman geuen to all beaſtlynes,
and vntemperance of life.
¶ ⸫ ¶
            
            
               
               Henrye the ſeconde.
               
                  
               
               
                  DVke of Bauaria, the nephewe of Otho the firſt
by his brother the firſte kinge of the Germaynes
of that name, who was choſen Emperour
of the ſtates of Italy & Germanye. He brought
Stephen kinge of Pannonia to be Chriſtened,
and to him hee gaue his ſiſter in marryage, mouinge him againſt
the Saracenes. This Prince gaue himſelfe frō al warres,
and whollye was geuen vppe to all Religion and godly
life: his wyues name was Cunigunga, whom hee loued entierlye,
with whom he liued godly, and they were buryed to
gether at Bambrige. He gouerned but .8. yeares.
            
            
               Conradus the Frencheman.
               
                  
               
               
                  THe nobles of Italye being at diſcention at the
death of Henry, there was apauſe and ceaſing
of anye Emperour to be choſen: but .iii. yeares
were not fullye paſſed, or that Conradus
was choſen, borne of the daughter of Otto the

firſt, from whom a certaine parte of Italye departed, whervppon
hee entred Millen with a greate power and beſieged
it, but by the entreating of Duke Lutebrande, and ye admonition
of the biſhoppe of Collen, hee ceaſed from the ſpoile
of Millen. He had fortunate warres againſt the Pannonians
who in this rebellion ayded ye Italians: This Cōradus
ſubdued Burgūdie, he gouerned xv. yeres & then dyed, & was
buryed at Spyres, his wyues name was Giſa the daughter of
a Prince of Vandalia, of whom he begat Henry the ſeconde
whom he Crowned king before his death.
            
            
               Henrye the thirde.
               
                  
               
               
                  THe ſonne of Conradus the Frenchmā,
this Henrye aſſone as he had receyued
his charge of the Empyre, by the conſente
of the Princes, he made Vldricus
kinge of Bohemia tributary to him: he
reſtored Peter caſt out frō his kingdom
of the Hungarians to it againe. In the
time of this Emperour, great diuiſion roſe at Rome about ye
biſhoppes, who ſtraue to be Popes, Gregorye, Silueſter and
Benedicke, ye which ye Emperour draue away as vſurpers,
and made the biſhoppe of Bambrige Pope, whom he named
Clement the ſecond. He compelled ye 
                  Romaynes by an othe

that they ſhould not at anye time choſe the Pope. After this
he fortifyed Capua with munitiō, then he returned into Germany,
he dyed the 18. yeare of his raigne, and was buried at
Spyres. His wyues name was Agnes ye daughter of VVilliam
Duke of Aquitania.
               
            
            
               Henrye the fourth.
               
                  
               
               
                  HEnrye the fourth, the ſonne of Henry ye .iii. this
Henrye was curſed of the Pope, and therefore
of manye Hiſtoriographers he is called an ennemye
of ye Church: this Henrye began his raigne
in the yeare of Chriſte .1507. The ſtate of this
Henrye is worthy deepe conſideratiō
                  ▪ who greatly withſtode
the tyranny of the ambitious Prelates, and as much as laye
in him defended the ſtate of the Empyre, beinge curſed of the
Pope, who by treaſon was ouerthrowne into the Popes hā
                  des.
This Henrye was but .7. yeares of age when he began
to raigne, his father gaue ye education of him to his mother,
and the gouernmente of the Empyre to Conradus a noble
Sweuiā. For .v. yeares ſpace his mother gouerned very wiſelye,
this Henrye throughe the treaſon of Conradus, had his
mother taken from him, & ſhe fledde for ſauegard into a Monaſterye:
then this Henry went into Saxonie, (the biſhoppe
of Cole
                        •
                     , and Eccebertus a noble man of Saxonye mouinge

him thereto.) This Emperour was accurſed of the Pope,
becauſe he had geuē Eccleſiaſticall dignityes, which ye Pope
woulde haue had in his owne handes to geue: Manye Hiſtoryes
write that he was a vertuous Prince, well learned, & of
a good witte, yet the thundering boultes of the Pope, ceaſed
not againſt him, and ſtyrred vp alſo his frendes to enuye at
his eſtate. The bodye of this Henry being buryed, the Pope
cauſed it to be taken vp, but at the laſt it was vuryed at Spyres
in the Monumentes of his aunceſtours.
            
            
               Henrye the v.
               
                  
               
               
                  HEnrye the v. the ſonne of Henrye the fourth, followed
the ſteppes of his father in withſtandinge the
tyrannye of the Pope, and Paſchalis the biſhoppe
woulde not ſuffer him to enter into the Cittye of
Rome. But the yong Prince not bearing the proude biſhoppes
attempte, hee callinge himſelfe Seruus ſeruorum Dei,
The ſeruaunt of the ſeruauntes of God. Then he brought ye
Pope into his iuriſdiction, and toke his Crowne from him,
then the Emperour returned into Germanye: by this ſeditious
Pope, great tumultes roſe in Italye, wherevppon the
thirde time ye Emperour entered into Italye, and put out of
the Cittye of Rome Gelaſius the Pope. After this he returned
into Germanye, and after he had gouerned xv. yeares he
dyed and was buryed at Spyres amonge his aunceſtours.
            
            
               
               Lotharius the ſeconde.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     LOtharius the ſecond was a Duke of Saxonie,
this Lotharius was made Emperour by ſubtill
pollicye of the Biſhoppe of Magunce, hee
made his firſt warres againſt ye 
                  Bohemians,
but he had euill ſucceſſe, and in the ende peace
was concluded betwene them. The .7. yeare
of his raigne, Innocentius the 2. was driuen out of Rome into
Fraunce of a biſhoppe that vſurped. The Emperour Lotharius
to reſtore him againe to that pontifical ſeate, went to
Rome and draue the vſurpinge biſhop out of Rome to
Apulia with other of his faction. Theſe affayres beinge
ended, he in his iourneye was taken with a
Feuer wherof he dyed, his bodye was caryed
into Germanye, & there buryed
in a Monaſterye of his name, after
he had gouerned .xi.
yeares.
            
            
               
               Conradus the thirde.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     COnradus the thirde Duke of Bauaria, the
nephew of Henrye the fourth by his daughter,
he was made Emperour by ye conſente
of the Princes of Germanye, he had greate
warres with the Saracenes in Aſia, ye which
warres the Hiſtoryes note, that Lewes the
Frenche kinge, and kinge Richarde kinge of Englande did
take in hande, but they returned withoute anye notable acte
done. Conradus after theſe warres returned into Germanye,
and dyed without all glorye or renowne, the xv. yeare of
his gouernment, and was buried at Bambrige in Germany.
            
            
               
               Fredericke the firſt.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     FRedericke ye firſt called Oinobarbus becauſe
he had a redde bearde, hee was by countrye a
Sweuian, his fathers name was Fredericke ye
brother of Conradus a king. This Emperor
Fredericke was indued with al Princely qualityes
both of minde and bodye, of noble courage, a notable &
expert warriour, all felicitye followed him, much he had to
do with the Popes of Rome, and with Alexander ye Pope,
placing in his roume Octauius a biſhoppe. He made warres
againſt Millen and ouerthrewe it to the grounde, hee
chaſed Pope Alexander oute of Rome, but at the
length he was almoſt ouerthrowē of the Millaners:
not long after this there was a league or
amitye concluded betwene the Emperour &
the Pope, then the Emperour toke his
iourneye into Syria, & in the paſſage
ouer a riuer was drowned, the 37.
yeare of his raigne.
            
            
               
               Henrye the ſixte.
               
                  
               
               
                  HEnrye the ſixte, the ſonne of Fredericke
Barbaroſſa the kinge of Sicile before, he
maryed Conſtantia a holy Nunne, the
daughter of Rogerus Northman. This
Henrye (his father beinge deade) was
made Emperour of Clement the third,
vpon a condition to put out of his kingdome
Tancrede a baſtarde out of Sycile, becauſe the Pope
chalenged that title. The Emperour ouerthrew Tancrede,
he toke Naples & ſpoyled it, he killed two daughters of Tā
                     crede
vnmaryed: Some Hiſtoriographers write that a
greate plague roſe, and draue the Emperour away
from Sycile, but Tancrede being put to flighte,
he obtayned the country of Sycile. The Emperour
dyed of ſickenes, when he had ruled
eyghte yeares, he lefte behinde
him his ſonne Fredericke borne
of Conſtantia.
               
            
            
               
               Philippus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     PHilippus the ſonne of Fredericke Barbaroſſa
the brothere of kinge Henrye, this Philippus
was choſen Emperour, the greater parte of
the Princes being willing thereto, but Pope
Innocentius the .3. did choſe Otho a Saxon,
whoſe aunceſtours did before time defende &
vpholde that pontificall ſeate. By this diſcorde they brake
out to warres, the kinge of Englande gaue ayde to Otho, &
the Frenche kinge to Philippus: but in the ende Otho was
driuen oute of all, and Philippus enioyed the ſeate, but the
Pope was much againſt it. Philippus raygned 9. yeares, &
was murthered of one Otto a Countye Palatine: then ruled
in his ſeate Otho the fourth of that name, who before entierlye
beloued of the Pope, and was vnder the curſe of the
Pope, & in his place there was placed Fredericke the ſecond,
At the length he dyed the 4. yeare of his raigne.
            
            
               
               Rodulphus. Adolphus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     ROdulphus a Countye of Haſburge was choſē
Emperour, but before he was choſen, euē frō
the death of Fredericke till .22. yeares after,
there was no Emperour choſen, ſuch diſcention
roſe on euery ſyde, no man bearinge an others
ſtate. This Rodulphus killed Othocarus
kinge of Bohemia, he burned one that woulde haue parſwaded
the people that hee was Frederick the ſeconde, and
manye beleued it becauſe hee was ſo like to Fredericke, as in
England the like hath bene done of diuers which haue geuē
out themſelues to be ye king. This falſe vſurper Fredericke
vſurped in Sweuia, this Emperour gouerned xviii. yeares, &
was buryed at Spyres. The Countye of Naſon ſucceaded
him, who was choſen by ye nobles, but they annoyed with his
beaſtly life, and ambitiō of this Adulphus, they choſe in his
place Albertus Duke of Auſtria: then Adulphus rayſed a
power againſt this Duke, but he was ſlaine in his enterpriſe
ruling but viii▪ yeares.
            
            
               
               Albertus the firſt. Henrye the vii.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     ALbertus the firſt, the ſonne of Rodulphus the
Emperour, by the conſent of the Princes and
of Bonifacius the Pope was Crowned Emperour.
The Pope was moued therto for enuye
he bare to the ſeate of Princes, and becauſe
he mighte thereby worke his malitious
and deteſtable minde againſt Philippe the Frenche kinge.
This Emperour to gratifye the Popes minde, went with a
great power againſt the kinge of Fraunce, but in paſſinge ouer
ye floud of Rhene was killed of Iohn his brothers ſonne,
after that he had ruled x. yeares. The Emperour his brother
neglected him, becauſe he was a yong gentlemā of gret
actiuitye, of excellent learning, of rare vertues (yet fearing
him) would not ſuffer him to enioy his dignitye & reuenues,
neither gaue vnto him any thing. The Emperour being thus
ſlaine Henry of Lucenbrige a County, ſucceaded in the Empyre:
the biſhoppes was willing thereto, becauſe the Princes
and ſtates of Italy holped the biſhop, and he would gladlye
ſhewe and vtter his bloudye purpoſe by the Emperour.
This Emperour ouerthrewe ye people of Millen, he entered
Rome after he was 
                     〈◊〉
                  , but he was driuē oute of it, he
had great warres againſt the Saracenes, but in the ende a holye
Dominicke Fryer poyſoned him in the Sacramente:The practiſe of Romiſhe Prelates. A
holy practiſe of Prelates to poyſon Princes, it ſheweth how
farre they be from the Doctrine of the Goſpell, from humilitye
and obedience towardes Princes. The Goſpel teacheth

them to obeye Princes euen to the death: but it is the fruites
of the Romiſhe Catholickes to vtter their woluiſhe fayth by
murther.K. Iohn. Kinge Iohn kinge of Englande (as the Hiſtoryes
ſheweth) was poiſoned by a Monke, with diuers other examples
to manifeſt their tyrannye, which I will omitte becauſe
it is manifeſt: and it hath bene an oulde purpoſe of Romiſhe
prelates by murther (againſt the lawe of God and nature) to
further theyr deuiliſhe purpoſes.
            
            
               Lodouicus.
               
               
                  
                     LOdouicus Duke of Bauaria, and Fredericke
Duke of Auſtria, both were choſen
Emperours, the ſtates of Italy and
Germany were deuided in the election:
wherevpon neither of them would geue
place, but for the ſpace of 8. yeares, they
made warres one againſt the other, to ye
great ruine of all Italy & Germany, many ſeditious vprores
and commotions boulſtered by them, the ſlaughter of many
noble yeares, the decay of many noble houſes, & the death of
many valiāt Captaynes, this is the fruites of ſeditiō, of cruel
commotions, & of ambitious heads. At the length the Duke

of Auſtria being killed, the Duke of Bauaria was a ſole Emperour:
He entered Italye with a mightye power, but the
biſhoppe of Rome beinge not his frende, ſhotte oute againſt
him his thundringe boultes of curſinge and excommunication,
but the Emperour little eſtemed his curſing God bleſſinge
him, and entered Rome the biſhoppe not able to withſtand
him, & was Crowned there of Stephanus Columnius,
So little the curſe of the Pope preuayled. And in this place
it geeueth me occaſion to write of a certaine curſe which the
Metrapolitan of Moſconia did curſe the Emperour withal,
as followeth.
               ⁂ The Emperour of Ruſſia who is Emperour of Caſane
and great Emperour of Aſtracā, on a time was curſed of the
Metropolitan of Moſcouia, and the Emperour hearing of
his curſe,The Metropolitan of Moſcouia. ſente to the Biſhoppe which curſed him, a greate
ſtone in a platter, tauntingly ſaying: bleſſe the from famyne
for I haue curſed thee. The holye biſhop aunſwered againe,
biſhoppes loue not to eate ſtones? the Emperour anſwered,
nor Emperours to be curſed. But ſayth the Emperour thou
ſhalt feele not onlye what is the wrath of a Prince by ſo hard
a ſtonye penaunce, but alſo thou ſhalte feele for all thy curſe,
that my power is without the reach of thy curſe. The biſhop
fearing the Emperours threateninge, fledde to a poore Monaſterye,
but he was taken, and by the waye he gaue to oure
Ladye his Pall and his biſhoppes roabe, to Petronilla his
hatte, and to S. Michol (whom we call Nicholas) his ſtaffe.
And I ſaw this Metropolitan (as many more Engliſhe mē
did to) haue a great Iron chayne about his necke, and caryed
on a 
                     •
                  ledde moſt vyle to behold, which was neuer ſeene afore
in Moſcouia: for the chiefe biſhop there, is counted a Saint
and father of the Emperour. After this & diuers other tormentes,
the Emperour cauſed him to be torne a ſonder with
fierce horſe: This was done in the yeare of Chriſt .1569. at
what time as I ſerued with the Emperour of Moſcouia.
               
               
                  Lodouicus made Corbarius Pope, and depoſed the other

biſhoppe, and placed in all the Citties Maieſtrates that acknowledged
obedience to him being their Emperour. He
dyed the 32. yeare of his raigne, he was a moſt noble Prince
endued with all Princelye qualityes.
            
            
               Charles the fourth.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHarles the fourth a Bohemian, whoſe father
was Iohn, a Countye of Lucenburge, he was
choſen Emperour and enioyed it againſt Edwarde
kinge of Englande elected, and againſt
Gunter Earle of Suarlzenburge. This
Charles was brought vp in learning, & in the knowledge of
the chiefe languages: He made the vniuerſitye of Prage, &
adorned it with moſt ſumptuous buildinges. He neglected
the maieſtye of the Romayne Empyre, geuinge
himſelfe whollye from the care of it, the Pope
curſed him out of Italye. He gouerned 32.
yeares, then his ſonne Venceſlaus by a
common counſell was elected
Emperour.
¶
                     〈☐〉
                  ¶
            
            
               
               Venceſlaus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     VEnceſlaus the ſonne of Charles the fourthe, was
vnlike to his father, & graund father in martial
pollicies, who through ſlouthfulnes let the Empyre
faule into ruine: hee was taken of his brother
ſigifmundus and depoſed, and in his ſteede
was choſen Rupertus the Earle Palatine of Rhene, he dyed
the .22. of his raigne. Rupertus Duke of Bauaria in fighte
againſt Galiatius, was driuen out of the field, he went to the
Venetians and to the people of Trydent, and was honourably
receyued of them. After this he returned into Germanye,
and gaue himſelfe to peace and Religion: hee dyed the x.
yeare of his raigne, leauinge the ſtate of the Florentines in
great peril.
            
            
               
               Sigiſmundus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     SIgiſmundus the ſonne of Charles the fourth, in
all Princely glorye moſt excellent, of goodlye &
taule perſonage, with all princely qualityes indued:
a godlye Prince, excellent in al noble languages.
He excelled in the copuouſnes of the latine
tongue: and much blamed the Germaynes that they hated
the lattine tongue. He marryed Marye the daughter of
a kinge of Hungary, and obtayned Bohemia of the king her
father: he was often ouerthrowen of the Turkes and Bohemians,
he put to death 32. noble mē of Pannonia beheading
them. At ye laſt he was taken and in the cuſtodye of a Ladye
whoſe huſbande he put to death, but with great difficulty he
was deliuered: He toke awaye the contention of ambitious
Prelates at Rome, and draue three biſhoppes
from their ſeates. Hee had a ſeconde wyfe and
dyed the 27. yeere of his raigne. He was
buryed at Alba in Hungarye.
¶*******¶
            
            
               
               Albertus.
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     ALbertus Duke of Auſtria, the ſonne in
lawe of this Sigiſmundus before, kinge
of Bohemia and Hungarye: Aſſone as
he was Emperour he ſubdued the Normanes,
and the people of Sweuia, alſo ye
                  Pooles he brought them within his bō
                  des
& limittes, he broughte vnder ye factions
in Bohemia, he had warres wt the Turkes, but he preuayled
not againſt them, he dyed of a bloudy Flixe, and was
buryed with his father in lawe Sigiſmundus, rulinge but
two yeares. The Empyre was in great calamitye
by him, he left his wyfe Elizabeth the daughter
of Sigiſmundus (afore named great with
childe, who bare him Lediſlaus kinge
after his death.
¶
                     〈☐〉
                  ¶
            
            
               
               Fredericke the thirde,
               
                  
               
               
                  
                     FRedericke ye third, Duke of Auſtria who gouerned
his Empyre with ſo great wiſedome,
that for the ſpace of 53. yeares continuallye ſo
longe as he gouerned, the ſtate was vpholded
with all proſperity and quietnes. He ceaſed
manye ſeditious tumultes in Auſtria, he deliuered his ſonne
Maximilian frō ye 
                  Flemminges, & was Crowned at Rome
of Pope Nicholas with his wyfe Leonora daughter to the
king of Luſitania, who with his wife returned to Naples to
greete his kinſeman Alphōſus Then he returned into
Germanye, makinge a fooliſhe vowe that hee
would go to Rome on pilgrimage in poore
habite, then after yt he returned into Germanye,
and dyed the 79. yeare
of his age.
            
            
               
               Maximilian.
               
                  
               
               
                  MAximilian the ſonne of Fredericke the
thirde, borne of his wyfe Leonora, in ye
life of his father the gouernment of the
Empyre was committed to him. This
Maximilian entering into Burgundie
wher he marryed Marye ye daughter of
Duke Charles, by whō he had ye Dukedome
of Burgundie: Mathewe king of
Pannonia being dead he obtayned to himſelfe his kingdom.
This Maximilian was a noble Prince, Germanye was geuen
all to warres in his time, yet this Prince was moſt deſirous
of peace, till iuſt & good occaſion moued him thereto.
He was of beautifull countenaunce, of goodly ſtature, brode
ſhouldered, he was ſo much geuen to hunting, that neyther
heate nor colde, coulde kepe him from that paſtyme. He was
excellent in all languages, a patrone of all learninge, This
was his excellent ſayinge of thoſe that were learned. Eos
ſe amare quos natura alios ante ſtare voluit: Thoſe hee
ought to loue, whom nature had made to paſſe other. He
was a Prince indued wt all humanitye, & wiſedome, in proſperitye
and aduerſity all one, neyther proude in the one, nor
caſt downe in the other. He gouerned .33. yeares, and dyed
with the griefe of all men, for his vertues ſo much beloued.
            
            
               
               The moſt victorious Emperour
Charles the fifte.
               
               
                  
                     CHarles the fift the ſonne of Philippe, which
Philippe was Archeduke of Auſtria, and ye
ſonne of Maximiliā
                   & Marye: Of this Philip
was borne theſe two noble Prīces, as al
writers do wryte them, Duo preclariſſima
orbis lumina, Carolꝰ Q. & Ferdinādus. The
mother of this Charles & Fernandus, was Ioane queene of
Caſtill: Of this Ioane, Philip begat alſo .4. daughters, yt is
Leonora, Iſabella, Marye & Katherine all theſe his daughters
were marryed to kinges: Leonora was marryed to ye
king of Luſitania, Iſabella to ye king of Fraūce called Fraū
                     cis,
at what time as he was deliuered home from Charles ye
fifte, kinge Frauncis beinge in his captiuitye. Marye was
marryed to the king of Dacia, Katherine to the king of Hū
                     garye,
their father was buryed at Burges in Caſtile, the yere
of our Lord and Sauiour .1506. Charles the fifte ſucceaded
his grandfather Maximilian, by the election of all the
eſtates: Theſe cōmendations ye Germaynes geue vnto him.
               Carolo Q. praeter fortunae & animi dotes, maximae bellorum & pacis acceſſere
felicitates, vtpote, qui tot inſulas ſubegit, tot regulos aut bello
perdomuit, aut etiam poteſtati ſubiecit quo regnante res maiorum monumentis
inauditae obtigerunt.
               
                  
To Charles the fifte not onlye all felicitye followed, both for
fortune and the minde, but alſo in peace and warre he triumphed
ouer all his ennemyes, for manye Cittyes and Ilandes
he brought to his ſubiectiō, & manye Princes and kinges he
brought to his obeyſance, as no Emperour more.
               This Charles the fifte, vnto whom for valiante actes, maye
worthily be attributed ye ſyrname of Magnus, in that it may
be truly affyrmed, that ye vertues of this Prince were ſo manifolde,
& his qualityes ſo rare, that neyther the deuine eloquēce
of Cicero, nor ye graue Copie of Demoſthenes, might
ſuffice with due honour to celebrate him. And as vnpoſſible
it is fully to deſcribe his who
                     •
                  e conqueſtes and victoryes, as
it is to reduce the Ocean into a litle Veſſell. Wherefore although
the burthen of this enterpriſe be moſt greate, for his
noble actes fully to be ſpokē of: wher vpon there may happen
vnto me ye like as chaunced vnto a certaine Ingrauer, who
hauinge taken vpon him to ſet forth an Image in ſome ſtone
of Porfrey or white Marble, and althoughe his workemanſhippe
therein was not very perfect, yet it was much regarded
and behelde for the raritye of the ſubſtance, and not for ye
excellencye of the workemanſhippe. Euen ſo the ſubiecte of
him on euery ſyde, of whom I haue taken vpon mee to write
of, is ſuch, that of it ſelfe it maye very much ſupplye vnto the
imbecilitye of my vnderſtanding, and baſenes of ſtyle: being
encouraged therefore with theſe occaſions to enter freely vnder
this burden, I haue thoughte it neceſſarye to repete the
Original of the houſe of Auſtria, a familye certainly, by fate
aſcribed vnto Emperours. The firſt frō whom this moſt
famous houſe had beginninge, was Leopold (ſyrnamed the
worthye) who was created Marques of Auſtria, by Charles
the greate, which was in the time when the Hungarians ouercame
the countrye of Germanye: but in the ende beinge
ouercome of Charlemaine,
                  The firſt name of Marqueſſes, and why they wer ſo called. they were proſecuted by him vnto
Buda, where firſt began the name of Marqueſſes for ſuch
noble men, vnto whom were aſſigned frontiers of countryes
to defende, againſt the incurſions and inuaſions of the ennemyes,
were named Marqueſſes.
               
                  
After Leopold,
                  Leopolde. ſucceaded Henrye the firſt of that name & ſecond
Marques of Auſtria (ſyrnamed ye rebell) becauſe long
time he refuſed to obey vnto ye Romaine Empyre.Henrye. 
                        •
                     . Vnto Hē
                  rye
ſucceaded Albert (ſyrnamed the victorious) for his manifolde
victoryes.Albert. 
                  Herueſtus ſucceaded Albert (ſyrnamed the
valiant.) Leopold the ſeconde (ſyrnamed the beutifull) ſucceaded
Herueſtus.
                  Herueſtus. Vnto Leopold the ſeconde, ſucceaded
Leopold the thirde (ſyrnamed the godlye) who for the godlye
deedes which he wrought,Leopolde. 2 was canonized and regiſtred
in the nomber of ſaintes. Vnto him ſucceaded Leopold the
fourth (ſyrnamed the bountifull) for the liberalitye which he
vſed.Leopolde. 3 Vnto Leopold ſucceaded Henrye, who of Fredericke ye
Emperour was created Duke of Auſtria,
                  Leopolde .4▪
                   which was in the
yeare after the incarnation of our Sauiour Chriſt .1361.
               Vnto Henrye ſucceaded Leopold the fifte ſyrnamed the vertuous,Henrye.
for his manifolde good qualityes: this was ye ſecond
Duke of Auſtria and the firſt of Stiria.
                  Leopolde. 5 Vnto him ſucceaded
Dukes of Auſtria and Stiria, two brethren, Fredericke the
firſte ſyrnamed the Catholicke,Fredericke .1. and Leopold the ſixte called
the glorious, who ouerliued his brother and gouerned
proſperouſly both Duches. Vnto him ſucceaded Fredericke
the ſeconde ſyrnamed the warlicke,Leopolde. 6 who was the laſt Duke
of Auſtria and Stiria. He dyinge wtout any heyre, Margaret
who was the ſiſter of Fredericke,
                  Fredericke .2. & ones wyfe vnto Henrye
the king of the Romaynes, the ſonne of the Emperour Fredericke
the ſeconde: being now a wydowe and without heyres
by her huſbande,Margaret. returned into Auſtria as ſole heyre.
               There was alſo an other Lady named Gertruda,
                  Gertrude. daughter
of Henry Duke of Medling (who was alſo brother vnto the
ſaide Fredericke) ſhe was geuen by him in mariage vnto Ladiſlao
Duke of Morauia, wt whō ſhe liued ſcarſely xviii. monethes
but he dyed, and after ſhe was maryed vnto Herman
the Marques of Bada, by whom ſhe bare a ſonne named Fredericke,
vnto ye which withoute queſtion had deſcended both
the eſtates, if he had not bene beheaded at Naples. This Gertruda
after ſhe had bene wydowe .iiii. yeares, returned into
Auſtria, vnto whom was aſſigned to inhabite the forte and

Caſtell called Medling, & vnto Margarete was geuē 
                  Hiemburg.
After Frederickes death, the treaſure which was in
the Caſtell of Starchemburg, was deuided into thre partes,
one part was geuē vnto Margaret, an other vnto Gertrude,
who had two ſonnes Theodoricke and Albert, and the third
was diſtributed amonge the ſiſters of the ſayde Fredericke.
After this there grewe a great diſcord amonge the Barons
for the electiō of a gouernour, ſince there remayned no heyre
male vnto Fredericke, of which diſcord to entreate of appertayneth
nothing vnto my purpoſe. It ſufficeth to vnderſtāde
that after the Empyre of Rome had long time bene deſtitute
of a kinge, Rodulphe the Countye of Haſburge was elected
kinge of the Romaynes, who gaue the Duchye of Auſtria
vnto his eldeſt ſonne: by whiche meanes it deſcended vnto
this moſt glorious family of Hapſburg, in the which it hath
continued the ſpace of 260. and mo yeares, & hath broughte
forth nyne Emperours, which are. The ſayde Rodulphe,
Albert the firſt, Fredericke the firſt, Alberte the ſecond, Fredericke
the ſeconde, Maximilian, Charles the fifte of whom
we nowe write of, Ferdinando his brother, & Maximiliā
                   yt
raygneth.The beginninge of the the houſe of Auſtria. This (as moſt approued Authors affyrme) was ye
Originall of the houſe of Auſtria. Charles the fifte was the
ſonne of Philippe king of Spayne, ſonne to Maximilian the
Emperour, and of Queene Ioane who was daughter vnto
kinge Ferdinand the Chatholicke, he was borne in Gaunte
a noble Cittye of Flaunders, verye famous by ye byrth of this
mightye Prince. But here the better to ſatiſfye the Reader,
I haue thought it neceſſarye to entreate of his Petegree, by
a more higher deſcent. Charles the ſifte, kinge of Fraūce
(ſyrnamed the wiſe) gaue vnto Philippe his yonger brother,The ſtocke of Charles the fifte.
the Duchie of Burgundy: this Philip toke to wyfe a daughter
of Lodouickes the Countye of Flaunders, who was his
onlye heyre & was called Margaret,
                  Philippe. by whom he had a ſonne
whoſe name was Philippe,
                  Charles. this Philippe had a ſonne who
was called Charles (ſyrnamed the warriour) who beinge
ſlaine before the Cittye of Nance,
                  Marye. lefte Marye his daughter
ſole heyre vnto manye large Countryes, who marryed with

                  Maximilian ſonne vnto the Emperour Fredericke ye third,Maximiliā, Philippe.
and bare by him Philip, who had vnto wyfe Ioane the daughter
of Ferdinand kinge of Spayne,Ioane. vnto whom ſhe bare two
ſonnes,Ferdinande Charles. 
                  Charles and Ferdinand, which Queene Ioane being
great with childe remoued vnto Gaunt where ſhe was deliuered
of Charles,
                  Ferdinand. as you haue harde before. Ferdinand his
grandfather by the mother, was kinge of Aragonie and Cicilia,
and had to wyfe Elizabeth the daughter and heyre of
Iohn the ſeconde, kinge of Spayne, who afterward conquered
the kingdome of Naples: He begat
                     •
                  e of Elizabeth theſe
children, Iohn, Iſabell, Ioane, Marye & Katherine. Iohn
and Iſabell, dyinge withoute iſſue, the kingdome deſcended
(according to the lawes of Spayne) vnto Ioane the ſeconde
ſiſter: by this meane therefore all the ſegnioryes whiche belonged
vnto the Duke of Burgundye, (who vndoubtedlye
was a verye mightye Prince) and all the kingdomes whiche
kinge Ferdinand poſſeſſed, deſcended vnto this Charles the
ſonne of Ioane: in the deuiding of which enheritance, all the
Duchie of Auſtria was obtayned by his brother Ferdinand.
Charles was borne vppon S. Mathias daye, which was the
xxiiii. of Februarye .1500. Philippe his father dyed he beinge
but a childe of vi. yeare olde, but his grandfather Ferdinand
liued after him tenne yeares, and continuallye duringe
his life, tendered his nephewe with a fatherly affection, and
procured to haue him brought vp in learninge and moſt vertuous
exerciſes, who when he was of xvi yeares of age, ſayled
into Spayne, where hee was receyued with great ioye &
gladnes: For the Spaniards more then anye other Natiō,
are enclined to loue their Prince, and for this they did the
more honour Charles, for that they conceyued to be in him
great proweſſe, and that their name through him woulde be
much exalted. It is certaine that at the firſt diuers of the
Barons and chiefe of the kingedome, would not accept him
for their Kinge, but as a Prince, for that they ſuppoſed they
ſhould very much iniurye their queene Ioane, if they ſhould
do anye thinge againſt the Teſtamente of the worthye kinge
her father. About this there aroſe great tumultes, but in ye
                  
but in the ende all thinges were acquieted by accepting him
for gouernour together with her in the kingdome: Charles
beinge receyued vnto the adminiſtration of Spayne, in the
yeare of Chriſte .1517. He remayned there two yeares, in
which time hee exerciſed himſelfe, not in childiſhe paſtimes,
but in all thoſe affayres which belonge to a moſt ſage & prudente
gouernour. And (a thinge to be wondered at) in that
little ſpace he ſo attayned vnto the conditions and behauiour
of yt people, that he ſeemed to be borne, nouriſhed & broughte
vp amonge the Spaniardes, and yet he neuer abaſed in any
reſpect the ſtate of a kinge, for with his maieſtye, humanitye
was ſo vnited, that with difficulty it might be diſcerned whether
in him was the greater: Vnto the proude he was a terrour,
and vnto the humble curteous, which made him to be
both loued and feared of all men.Rare vertues in a Prince. Theſe vertuous of his beinge
publiſhed thorowout all Europe, ſo much preuayled, yt
after the death of Maximilian, the Electours choſe him for
Emperour when he was but .xix. yeares of age: the whiche
electiō was eſteemed the worthier, in yt 
                  Frauncis the French
king was his competitor in the ſame, who had in his fauour
Pope Leo the x. It is reported that Charles vnderſtanding
the Frenche kinge to ſeeke after the Emperiall dignitye,
doubtinge that there mighte throughe this emulation aryſe
ſome diſcord, certifyed him that he alſo ſought after ye ſame:
Vnto whom the French kinge aunſwered, that it diſpleaſed
him no more, then if they were both riualles in louing of one
woman. After Charles was choſen Emperour, he ſent the
report thereof into Spayne by Fredericke the Countye Palatine,
who for his newes was moſt welcome vnto the Spaniardes:
but he ordayned certaine in his abſence to gouerne
the kingdome, as Adrian the Cardinall, and Charles Ceurus
a Flemminge, inſtructor vnto the Emperour in feates
of armes, which ruled Spayne with ſuch tyrannye, that wt
                  in
ſhort ſpace it was altogether in Armes, vnto the vniuerſal
diſcommoditye & hurte of the whole prouince. Vpon which
occaſion the Frenche kinge (a Prince of great worthines) verye
well perceyuinge that if the Emperour were not in tyme

preuented, he would in ſhort ſpace grow vnto ſuch ſtrength &
power, as yt he might be a great terrour both vnto Fraūce, &
al other Princes neare vnto him adioyning. He had in remē
                  brance
the folly of Pompeie,
                  The ſmall diſcretion of Pompeie. who permitted Caeſar to grow
vnto ſuche power and force, yt hee was not able (when after
he woulde abate his might) but in proceſſe of time throughe
his negligence was by him vāquiſhed, & by thoſe he truſted,
moſt ſhamefullye ſlaine. Wherevppon by this tumulte in
Spayne, the Frenche kinge toke oportunitye to inuade the
kingdome of Nauarra: but as the rebelles were ſone ouercome
by Don Ignico Veloſco ye great Cōſtable of Spaine,
and by Henrye the Admirall, euen ſo by thoſe Captaynes ye
Frenchmē were deſtroyed and vanquiſhed. At this preſent
the Emperour paſſed into Germany, where he was ioyfully
receyued, and in the yeare after the Incarnation of Chriſte
.1520. in the Citty of Aquiſgrane, he was ſolemply Crowned
Emperour with the ſiluer Crowne: for it is an auncient
cuſtome, that all Emperours ſhould be Crowned at iii. fondrye
places, with thre diuers Crownes. I haue thoughte
it neceſſary therefore in this place,The order obſerued of ye Electors in chuſinge the Emperour. to deſcribe ye order which
the electors obſerue in theyr creation. Charles kinge of Bohemia
and fourth Emperour, in the yeare 1306. ordayned
for the ſame a certaine lawe, the which is commonlye called
the Bull of gould. The principal points of which are theſe:
Firſt, vpon the certaine reporte of the Emperours death, ye
Archbiſhop of Menſe is bounde, as ſone as he ſhall haue vnderſtandinge
thereof, to certifye the reſt of the electors, and
to cyte them to meete together within ye ſpace of thre monethes
in the Citty of Franckeforde, there to elect a new Emperour:
& that they which cannot at the day appointed come
themſelues, do ſende theyr deputyes with full commiſſion &
authoritye. Yea if it ſhould happen the Archebiſhoppe to be
necligent in accompliſhinge the ſame, yet they notwithſtanding
are bounde to meete there within that terme, and none
of them to enter into the Citty accompanyed with more then
two hundreth horſes, amonge which there muſt be, but .50.

men of Armes: and he that doth not appeare himſelfe nor by
his deputye is for that preſent depriued of his Electorſhippe.The firſt penaltye.
Moreouer the Maieſtrates of Franckforde, are bounde to
permitte them to enioye all Frauncheſſes and libertyes: &
not to ſuffer during the dyet, anye other perſon to enter into
Franckeforde, beſyde the electors and theyr familyes. After
they be all aſſembled, they haue ſeruice ſolemplye celebrated
for them in S. Bartlemewes, where, in their prayers they
pray vnto God, that in the preſent election he wil vouchſafe
to endue them wt his grace, and to illuminate theyr hartes wt
his holye ſpirite, that they maye chuſe a good and vertuous
Emperour.The othe. After this they ſweare, yt in the election they
will worke nothinge neyther for fauour, rewarde, condition
or promiſe. In fyne they come to conſultation, from whence
they may not depart, vntill they haue choſen the Emperour:
for if it happen that they conclude not within the ſpace of one
monethe,The ſeconde penaltye. then all kinde of victuels are taken from them,
excepte onlye breade and water. And as touchinge the election,
he that is choſen by moſt voyces, enioyeth as much priuiledge,
as if they had all conſented to the ſame. The Election
beinge in this maner as you harde ended,The othe of ye Emperour. and the Emperour
created, he is ſworne to eſtabliſhe all the electors priuiledges,
with al ſuch rightes as appertayne to theyr dignity,
liberty, and immunityes. I pretermit for breuitye diuers other
cōditions, which to write would make a large volume.
               * At this time Martin Luthar, did moſte feruentlye and
learnedly enueighe againſt the Popes vſurped ſupremecye,
and his erronius traditions.
               The Emperour conſidering how that Frauncis ye Frenche
kinge attempted the conqueſt of the kingdome of Nauarra,
and vnderſtandinge that the ſayde kinge was in Arde, there
to meete with the kinge of Englande, to conclude with him
a league and peace: ſuppoſed yt if the Frenche kinge mighte
obtayne anye ſuch league of amitye at the kinge of Englandes
hands, (whoſe valiant courage he verye well knew was
inferiour to no Prince that euer liued, and whoſe power (as
bothe Fraunce and Scotlande can teſtifye) was inuincible:

might be vnto his attemptes very preiudicial, or to ſay more
trulye an vtter ſubuerſion. Wherefore after hee had polliticklye
conſulted vpon theſe ambiguityes: Immediatly vppon
king Henryes returne into England, the Emperour wt
all ſpeede poſſible, ſayled thither alſo, where the king receyued
him very royallye, with whom the Emperour ſo much
preuayled, that in the ende the kinge (for yt he was his kinſeman)
ioyned with him in league:Henrye the eyght a terror to Princes. Such was the mighte and
worthines of this moſt triumphante Prince, that theſe, two
of the moſt mightyeſt Kinges that haue of long continuance
raigned in Europe, omitted no occaſions that mighte be deuiſed,
to procure his fauour and frendſhippe.
               After the death of Lewes the French kinge, Frauncis diſcending
from the royall familye of the Valeſi ſucceded him:
who hauinge a minde deſpoſed to attempte waightye affayres,
determined the conqueſt of Milane: and hauinge in redines
a warlicke hoaſt of worthye ſouldiours, prepared before
of king Lewes for the ſame intente, without protracting
of tyme, marched forward with his armye, which was of .8.
Thouſand men of armes, euery one of which ledde with him
thre horſes: viii. thouſande light horſemen, & twentye Thouſande
footemen, amonge theſe were .x. thouſande Almanes
verye valiaunte and hardye ſouldiours, with .xx. enſignes of
Ghiunie men, Gaſcoynes & Biſcalines, with theſe Nations
he marched into Italye by ſecrete, & vnuſed bye wayes: for
at the perſwaſion of Triuultius he paſſed ouer the the Alpes
of Argentera,
                  Proſpero Colonna taken priſoner by ye Frenchmen. with ſuch celerity and ſylence, that vnawares
Proſpero Colonna, who then was at Villa Franca, with 5.
hundred men of Armes and light horſemen, was with all his
taken priſoner. This Colonna and the Cardinall Saduneſe
were ye Popes generalles ouer his armyes. After the Frēch
mē had fought diuers times wt the ſouldiours of the Pope, &
of the Sforzeſchi, by a Cittye appertayninge vnto the Duchie
of Millen, they fought alſo twyce with twentye Thouſande
Suizzers verye valiantlye, and in the ende after they
had with doubtful ſucceſſe continued ye battaile the ſpace of
xvi. houres, the Suizzers were by the French horſemen put

out of order and ſo vanquiſhed. There were ſlaine in two battayles,
aboue ix. Thouſande Suizzers, beſydes as manye mo
which were wounded, the other that eſcaped fledde thorowe
Millen, and ſo returned into their owne countrye. After the
Milaners had receyued this great ouerthrowe,Millen in the Frenche kinges handes. being abandoned
of the Suizzers, they opened ye gates vnto king Fraū
                     cis,
who victoriouſlye entered Millen. The Duke whereof
Maximilian Sforza fledde into the Caſtell, which for feare
yelded it vnto the Frenche kinge: vpon this condition, that
the king ſhould pay him yearely during his life, xxxv. Thouſande
Crownes, and that he as longe as he liued, ſhould neuer
depart out of Fraunce, withoute lycence obtayned of the
ſayde kinge. In this maner as you haue harde Millen became
ſubiecte vnto the Frenche kinge: preſentlye after this
he went vnto Bonnonie, wher he met with Pope Leo, with
whom he entered into a league of frendſhippe,Carniual we call it ſhrouetyde. and after hee
had paſſed the Carniuall in ſolace and pleaſure, he returned
into Fraunce, and for a fewe yeares enioyed quietly that miſerable
and vnfortunate eſtate.
               After the death of the Catholicke king, before ye going of
Charles into Spaine,A truce taken betweene the Emperour & the Frenche kinge at Noion. he made a truce by his Embaſſadors
with kinge Frauncis at Noion in Burgundye, rather of neceſſitye
enforced thereto, then moued by good wyll: for hee
mighte neither ſafelye nor ſpedelye haue made his iourneye,
not hauing the frendſhip of this ſtoute and mightye prince:
The conditions of which accorde were theſe. Firſt, that
the Emperour ſhould reſtore Nauarra vnto ye ſonne of kinge
Iohn, if the arbitrators whiche were to determyne the controuerſye,
would iudge it reaſonable: Moreouer yt he ſhould
paye euery yeare vnto king Fraunces, an hundred Thouſand
Ducates for the kingdome of Naples, to thende it might appeare
that he had ſome right to the clayme thereof.
               This accorde beinge concluded by a Prince of .xvi. yeares
of age, could not be of much force, for the tribute was neuer
payde: although in the behofe of the Frenche kinge, it was
diuers times demaunded. Charles who poſſeſſed the kingdome
of Naples lawfullye as his inheritaunce by his grandfather

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  Ferdinand, thought it a diſcredite to paye tribute for
his owne, for he well knewe that in ſo doinge he ſhould haue
abaſed his lawfull title: Moreouer hee eſteemed it a greate
diſhonour that the Frenche kinge ſhoulde enioye the ſtate of
Millen, which was tributarye vnto the Empyre, withoute
hauinge any iuſte title or clayme thereto: Alſo the beinge of
the Frenche men in Italye, cauſed him to doubte of the ſafe
enioyinge of the kingdome of Naples. Wherefore after conſultation
had vppon theſe differences, hee fullye determined
and diſpoſed himſelfe to reuenge the iniuries offered him by
the Frenchmen, and with all ſpeede to driue them out of Italye.
Hee appointed as generall in this enterpryſe Proſpero
Colonna, and Fraunces Daualo Marques of Peſcara, hee
made generall ouer the footemen. The Frenche kinge not
ignorant of the Emperours determination, ſent into Italye
an armye of ſouldiours, wherof a great part were Suizzers,
ouer whom was Captayne Monſignor de Lotrecco, who
marching with great celeritye out of Fraunce, drewe neare
vnto the ſame bridge ouer ye which Proſpero Colonna had
paſſed to go vnto Cremona: So that the two hoaſtes incoū
                  tred
as it were face to face at Rebecco. The Captaynes of ye
                  Suizzers, being deſyrous to ioyne battayle wyth theyr ennemyes▪
deſyred Lotrecco that he would graunt them lyſence
to geeue the charge vpon the Emperours armye: And alſo
Franceſco Maria Duke of Vrbine, a wyſe & valiant Prince
who then was in the Venitian Campe, affyrmed by good arguments
that the conflicte would haue bene vnto them moſt
proſperous. But Lotrecco (no man wittinge the occaſion)
woulde not by anye perſwations, condiſcende therevnto, althoughe
euerye man affyrmed that Colonna had encamped
his armye imprudentlye,Great wyſedome in the encamping of an armye. and in a place of greate diſauauntage,
which opinion he himſelfe verifyed ſhortlye after, by retyringe
with his armye into a more ſafe and better defenced
grounde: and in the ende verye politickelye paſſed wyth his
armye ouer ye ryuer Adda in certayne ſmall boates Whoſe
paſſage Leſen a Captayne of the Frenche kinges reſiſted all
that he might, for he well perceyued that paſſage to importe

verye muche, but he preuayled little with this his attempt,
wherefore he retyred with all ſpeede vnto Millen. When ye
Marques of Peſcara marched with ye footemen, ouer which
he was generall, towardes the Cittye alſo: The Spaniardes
approching neare vnto the Towne, and vewinge euerye
place diligentlye, founde a ſecrete enterye into the ſame by a
Poſterne gate, who not omitting the preſent occaſion which
fortune as ſmyling offered vnto them, paſſed with force thorow
the trenches neare vnto which Lotrecco was encamped
in the Suburbes:Millen taken of the Emperours ſouldiours. & aſſaultinge the Frenche and Venitian
ſouldiours at vnawares gaue them a marueilous greate ouerthrowe,
and toke priſoner Signior Theodoro Triuultio
generall o
                     •
                  er the Venitians, who at that preſent was vnarmed,An ouerthrowe of Frenchmen.
as one that loked not for anye ſuch aſſault. The Milleners
who greatly fauoured the parties of Sforza, and might
not well ſupport the greate pride and cruelty of the Frenchmen,
at midnighte opened vnto the Emperours armye the
gates of the Cittye, and receyued him with great ioye.
               
                  Lotrecco at this inſtant (althoughe no man purſued him) wt
the Frenchmen at Armes fledde vnto Cremona, whiche at
length he obtayned, and attempting in vaine the conqueſt of
Pauia, incamped at Seſto, mindinge to aſſault Millen. But
he founde in a redines Proſpero Colonna and Sforza, who
with great affection was followed of the Milleners:
                  The Frenchmen & Suizzers are vanquiſhed. wherefore
he went vnto Bicocca, where a battaile was foughte, in
which the Frenchemen were ouercome, and a great nomber
of them and of the Suizzers ſlaine, and in this conflicte was
ſlaine Albart Peter their Captaine.Pope Leo as it was thought killed wt poyſon. After this fortunate ſucceſſe
the Emperours ſouldiours wanne Lod
                        •
                     , Piccightone
and Alexandria. At this time dyed Pope Leo, who as it
was ſuſpected) was murthered by empoyſonmēt:Adrian the 6. created Pope Vnto him
ſucceded Adrian the ſixte.
               At this preſent the Marques of Peſcara toke the Citty of
Geane,
                  The Citty of Geane taken by the Marques of Peſcara. whiche he permitted to be ſacked of the ſouldiours.
Adrian the Pope entered Rome at ſuch time as the miſerable
Cittye of the Rhodes (ſo muche celebrated of aunciente
wryters, beinge a ſecuritye vnto all Chriſtendome, of marueylous

force) was after a longe ſiege,The Citty of Rhodes takē by the Turkes. wonne by Soliman
the Emperour of the Turkes, a moſt deadlye ennemye vnto
all Chriſtians, & yelded vnto him vpon certayne conditions
by Monſignor Litidaine, the chiefe gouernour there for
the Chriſtians.
               And now the Emperour to gratifye the Milleners, inueſted
Fraunces Sforza with the Duchie of Millen, and alſo
concluded a league with the Pope, for the defence and conſeruation
of the Duchye vnto the ſayde Sforza: into whiche
league entered the Venetians, who eſteemed this the onlye
meane to reſtore Italye vnto libertye. Notwithſtandinge
this league, & the manifolde ouerthrowes which the French
men had ſuſtayned, yet no chaunce that mghte happen, was
able to withdraw the inuincible minde of king Fraunces, frō
the conqueſt of Millen: Wherefore with all ſpeede he prepared
a mightye hoaſt of .32. Thouſand footemen,The ſeconde comminge of kinge Fraū
                     ces into Italy to conquere Millen. among whō
were xii. Thouſande Suizzers, and of .xii. Thouſande horſemen.
But the Duke of Burbon Conſtable of Fraunce, did
ſomewhat ſtaye the Frenche kinges haſtye comminge into
Italye, for Madame Aluigia the kinges mother ſeemed by
force wrongfully to take from the ſayde Duke certayne Caſtelles
which appertayned of right vnto his Duchie: whereof
he complayned vnto ye kinge, of whom hee receyued ſo diſcouragious
and aunſweare,No cauſe ought to moue a man againſt his countrye. that he was moued beinge much
iniured to conceaue diſpleaſure againſt him with deſyre of
reuenge, which deſyre in the ende toke effecte: And nowe ye
kinge for diuers conſiderations, thought it neceſſary to haue
his companye, but the Duke (otherwyſe mindinge) fayned
himſelfe to be ſicke, & was viſited of the king, who ſayd yt in
any wyſe he ſhould go with him vnto the cōqueſt of Millen.
Vnto whom the Duke (to ſatiſfye him for the preſent) aunſwered
that he was contente. But after the kinges departure,
he vſed this ſubtiltye to eſcape: and hauing ſent before
the army certayne of his family with a Horſe litter, in which
were his Enſignes and Armour, al men ſuppoſing him likewyſe
tobe in the ſame, ſecretelye with a ſmall companye of
horſemen he roode into Burgundie, a countrye of the Emperours,

in which he leuyed x. Thouſand footemen, minding to
aſſault Fraunce preſentlye after y• kinge ſhoulde be departed
thēce, as he had decreed with the Emperour longe before:
by the working of Adrian Baureno, who was ſent vnto him
to debate of this enterpriſe, in the habite of a marchaunte.
After the Duke had moleſted the countrye of Fraunce with
thoſe Duchmen, atchieuing no exploite worthy of memory,
he departed into Italy: In whoſe place the French king authoriſed
Vvill
                        •
                     ā Gofferius his Admiral, who greatly dampnifyed
ye Emperours hoaſt.The death of Proſper
                        •
                      Colonna. At this preſent Proſpero Colonna
dyed, to ſupplye whoſe charge was appointed Charles
Lanoia the Viceroy of Naples. Gofferius entringe into
Italye with the armye aforeſayde, draue from the ryuer Ticine
the Emperiall hoaſtes, and pitched his tentes not farre
from Millen, & determined to beſiege ye ſame: whoſe power
the Emperours Captaynes not able to reſiſt in ye fielde, wt
                  drewe
themſelues into the Cittye, which they afterwarde
perceyuinge to be weake and ſlenderlye furniſhed of victualles,
forſoke it alſo, and returned vnto the defence of certayne
other fortes and Caſtelles. Theſe Captaynes were ſcarlye
departed the Cittye by the gate called Porta Romana, bu
                     •
                  
the Frenchmen who conceyued hope of victory, by celeritye
entered into the ſame Cittye, by the gate whiche goeth vnto
Vercelli. The ſouldiours would haue ſacked the Cittye but
the kinge who was repleniſhed with clemencye and mercye,
would not in any wyſe permit them. After the Frenchmen
were entered Millen, Anthony Lodia a moſt famous Captayne
toke vpon him the defence of Pauia, and the Marques
of Peſcara with the Spaniſh footemen marched vnto Lodi:
and Don Charles Lauonia, with Fraunces Sforza went vnto
Cremona, and the Duke of Burbon being gone into Germanye
to leuye ſouldiours. While theſe things were thus
a doing, king Fraunces was doubtfull, whether it were better
to aſſault Lodi, or to cut of ye Duchmen before they came
to Pauia: but in the ende after longe deliberation his ſiniſter
fortune enduced him to marche vnto Pauia, at ſuche time as
the Duke of Burbon was returned out of Germanye, with

a great ſupplye of that countrey ſouldiours, and the kinge
hauing ſent a greate parte of his armye vnto the conqueſt of
Naples, beinge abandoned alſo of 7000. Griſones, was enforced
with that companye which was left him, to ioyne battayle
with the Emperours ſouldiours. In which confliete ye
Marques of Peſcara Lanoia, & the Duke of Burbon ſo vexed
the Frenchmen,An ouerthrowe of Frenchmē. that in the ende they gaue them a greate
ouerthrow: Which the couragious kinge perceyuinge, entred
with his horſemē into the battaile, and fought moſt valiantlye,
not omittinge anye dutye that mighte appertayne
vnto a moſt valiante Captayne, or worthye ſouldiour. But
in this conflicte the kinge at one inſtante receiued three miſfortunes:
the firſt, ye Duke of Alonſon with foure hundred
fledde awaye: ſecondly Anthonye Leua with his ſouldiours
iſſued oute of Pauia, who at the firſt entrye into the battaile
put to flight two Thouſande Italians: and thirdlye with an
inuincible courage, ſet vppon the Suizzers and brake theyr
arraye. The king alſo had behind him the Duchemē whoſe
force he was notable to reſiſte becauſe they kept theyr order,
and were ſtronglye enbattailed, and the Spaniardes did ſo
aſſaulte him on euerye ſyde, that in the ende his armye was
whollye diſcomfited and vanquiſhed, and hee himſelfe taken
priſoner by Lanoia,
                  The Frenchkinge taken priſoner. who entertayned him curteouſlye, honouring
him with all dutye appertayninge vnto ſo puiſant a
Prince. Some write that the Duke of Burbon firſt apprehended
him, willing him to render himſelfe priſoner vnto ye
Emperour:A worthye aunſweare of a Prince. vnto whom the kinge aunſwered that he would
not yelde vnto a traytour. There were ſlayne in this bloudye
conflicte, aboue viii. Thouſande Frenchemen, beſydes
.xx. of the nobleſt Pieres in all Fraunce: there were taken
priſoners of noble men beſyde the kinge. The kinge of Nauarra,
the baſtarde of Sauoy, ye Popes Legate, Monſignor
Memoranſi, Monſignor de Florenge, the Lorde Leſcu, the
Lorde of Buonauille, ye Lorde of San Polo, Viconte Galeazzo,
Fredericke of Bozzolo, the Prince of Lorene, Monſignor
de Brion, Monſignor Dobeguino, Fraunces the brother
of the Marques of Saluzzo, with manye other Barons

and gentlemē. Of the Emperours ſouldiours were ſlaine about
700. This conflicte happened vpon S. Math
                        •
                     as daye,
which was the day of the byrth & Coronatiō of ye Emperour.
A rare vertue in a Prince, for after reporte was broughte to
him of this great victorye, & taking of the French kinge priſoner,
he ſhewed not any ſigne or token of ioye: but rather cō
                  ſidering
the vnſtablenes of fortune, & infinite calamityes proper
vnto the eſtate of mans life, he deſyred ſecretelye in hart
for euer to liue in peace, rendring prayſe vnto the bounty of ye
Almighty God, yt had opened ſo preſent a waye, for the quiet
eſtabliſhment of ye eſtates of Italy, which he greatly deſyred.
Whervpon by letters directed from him vnto Don Charles
Lanoia, he exhorted the kinge with patience to embrace this
vnfortunate accident, vnto ye like wherof all men are ſubiect:
and to be conducted vnto Piccighitone, where (thoughe his
cruell fate had in one inſtant deiected him frō ſo high & mighty
eſtate & dignity, yt he was become a priſoner vnto his ennemye,
with greate loſſe and death of his people) he ſheewed a
ſinguler fortitude, & an incomperable temperance of minde:
for he was neuer ſeene to vtter or manifeſt in his talke or coū
                  tenaunce
any alteration, eyther by myrth or ſorrow, neyther
did there at any time ſighe procede frō him: alſo he would wt
ſuch ſobrietye, & ſkil entreate of that cōflict, as he gaue great
cauſe of admiration vnto ſuch noble men as hard him, of his
ſinguler iudgement in the ſame. He only lamented ye vilenes
of the Suizzers, who in the beginning fought ſo valiantly, &
now the victorye being in their handes, fledde ſo cowardlye.
Not long after, Lanoia by order & appointment trāſported
the French king (becauſe the Emperour woulde not in anye
wyſe ſee him) into Spaine,King Fraū
                     ces caryed unto Spayne. and placed him in Madrid with
a ſufficient gariſon, for the ſafe cuſtodye of his perſon: where
he continuinge priſoner, voyde of all hope to receyue any curteſye
or fauour at themperours hands, in ye ende by thought
taking and penſiuenes, became very ſicke: whom in that extremitye
the Emperour at the earneſt ſute of diuers his familiars,
& in moſte curteous wyſe promiſed to reſtore him wt
al ſpeede vnto libertye. Neyther did he protracte the time in

accompliſhing his promyſe,King Frauncis deliuered out of priſon. for vpon theſe conditions he was
ſhortly after redeemed. Firſt, that he ſhoulde diſpoſſeſſe him
whollye of Italy & Burgundye, & that when the Emperour
ſhould repayre into Italye to be Crowned, the kinge ſhoulde
ſende at his proper coſtes & charges to garde his perſon, ſixe
Thouſand footemen, 600. men of Armes, & as manye Archers
wt Croſſeboweson horſebacke, vnto al which the king
ſhould pay wages for ſixe monethes: And for the ſure performance
of theſe cōditions, he ſhoulde cauſe to be deliuered for
hoſtages, of his thre ſonnes, ye two eldeſt Frauncis & Henry:
and yt not performing the conditions he ſhould come & reſtore
him ſelfe priſoner againe: Alſo to thende that this league &
agrement might be of ye greater force, the kinge ſhould take
vnto wyfe Helenor his ſiſter, who was left wydow by Emanuell
ye king of Portingale, by whō if he ſhould haue childrē,
themperour promiſed to inueſt them with ye Duchie of Burgundie.
                  Charles the fift maryed Iſabell daughter vnto the king of Portingale.
Theſe conditions being ended & condiſcended vnto,
the kinge was ſet at liberty, & returned into Fraunce. Not
long after themperour marryed Iſabel ſiſter vnto Iohn king
of Portingale, & daughter of ye foreſayd Emanuel, & contrary
wyſe he gaue for wyfe vnto ye ſayd king, Madam Katherine
his ſiſter. Through this league betwene themperour and ye
French kinge, a greate ſuſpition was conceyued by manye,
that they had coniured ye deſtructiō of diuers Princes: whervpon,
Pope Clement, the king of Englande, and the Venetians
renued theyr former league, vnto theyr mutuall ſecuritye.Frauncis Maria Duke of Vrbine Captayne of the Venetians.
And the Venetians preſently moued warre for the deliuery
of Sforza beſieged in the Caſtell of Millen, ouer whom
was generall in ye enterpriſe, Frauncis Maria Duke of Vrbine,
who wt great courage toke Lodi: wher he attended the
cōming of 4000. Suizzers, which had bene leuyed by ye officers
of kinge Fraūcis. The Armye alſo of Pope Clemente,
which was conducted by Signior Gionaū de Medici ioyned
vnto his:Segnior Gionaum de Medici Captayne of the Popes ſouldiours. at ſuche time as Sforza with his ſouldiours in the
Caſtell of Millen was driuen vnto ſuch extremitye through
want of victuels, yt ſecretelye he cauſed to be ſignifyed vnto ye
Duke of Vrbine, that wtout preſente ſupplye of victuels, hee

was not able to abyde the ſiege any longer. Wherefore the
Duke together wt 
                  Gionaum de Medici, hauing in theyr cō
                  pany
.15000. footemē, & 2000. horſemē, marched towards
Millen & encamped at Porta Romana, wherethey gaue certayne
couragious aſſaultes: but finding verye ſtronge reſiſtāce,
they deſiſted frō making farther attempt for yt preſent,
minding to attempt ye cōming of ye 
                  Suizzers, who now were
paſſed the Alpes. Wherfore vpon this reſolutiō they retyred
with both theyr Armyes vnto Marignano, wt intent to ioyne
with the Suizzers, but by reaſon of theyr carryages, theyr
enterpriſes was ſo ſlow, that the ſouldiours of Sforza which
were beſieged in the Caſtell, not being able any lōger to ſupport
theyr extreme famyne, ſente Giacomo Philippo Socco
vnto the Duke of Burbon, to ſignify yt Duke Sforza would
yeld the Caſtell vpon reaſonable conditions. The Duke as
one that deſyred nothinge more,Frauncis Sforza yeldeth the Caſtell of Millē vnto ye Duke or Burbon. graunted that he ſhould depart
fre wt all his, & promiſed alſo to geue him Coma, which
when afterward he woulde haue poſſeſſed, the Spaniardes
which were therein refuſed to part thence: ſayinge, that although
the Citty was geuing vnto him, yet it was not ſo cō
                  diſcended
ye they ſhould leaue it. Sforza perceyuing him to be
deluded, went vnto ye armye of the league, not cōplayning of
themperour, but reportīg yt he was deceyued & iniured of his
officers. At this time Don Vgo Moncada was arriued in
Naples wt a freſh ſupply of ſouldiours, which he brought out
of Spaine, who mindīg to remoue ye Pope frō the league cō
                  cluded
againſt themperour wt the Princes of Italye,Cardinall Colonna ranſacketh the Popes Pallace. induced
Cardinal Colonna to make warre againſt him, who beinge
deſtitute of ſouldiours for his defence, fled into the Caſtell of
S. Angelo, where he was ſo ſtraightly encloſed, yt he had victuels
ſcarcely for thre dayes. Cardinall Colonna being very
wrathful towardes him in the behalfe of themperour, wtout
reſiſtance of anye ſacked the Popes Pallace: & woulde haue
paſſed farther, if Moncada who was the occaſiō of this, had
not otherwiſe perſwaded him. Whervpon a truce was concluded
betwene him, & the Pope for 4. Monethes, with condition
that ye Popes ſouldiours ſhould retyre frō the territorye

of Millen, vnto the other ſyde of the ryuer Po: & hauing
receyued pledges for the performance of the ſame, he departed
from Rome, at ſuch tyme as Don Charles of Lanoia beinge
returned out of Spayne wt an armye of Spaniſhe footemē,
encountred with ye Popes armye at the riuer of Lauoro,
where after long fight, he was ouercome and put to flighte.
After which conflict a peace was entreated of, which in the
ende was concluded betwene themperour & the Pope, vpō
this condition: That Don Charles of Lanoia ſhould cauſe to
returne & deſiſt from farther proceding the Duke of Burbō,
who was reported to march towards Rome, with intent to
ſacke the ſame. Don Charles met with ye Duke, but he preuayled
nothing, for he ſaid yt his ſouldiours (who were without
money) would not in any wiſe be withdrawē frō the rich
pray of that Citty: except ye Pope to auoyde that inconuenience,
would geue him to pay his ſouldiours .4. hūdred thouſand
Crownes. Of which aunſweare Don Charles certifying
ye Pope, he ſeemed in countenance nothing to accompt or
regarde the ſame, but ye Duke of Burbon cōtinuinge his iorneye
came to Ronciglon, which preſently he ranſacked, and
frō thence he went vnto the Suburbes of Rome: when the
Pope (who imprudētly had diſmiſſed his ſouldiours) wtdrew
himſelfe with a great nomber of his Cardinalles, into ye Caſtell
of S. Angelo, otherſome recoueringe themſelues for
feare into other ſtrong places, ſo yt 
                  Rome was with ſmal reſiſtance
eaſelye taken. But at the aſſault thereof, the Duke
of Burbon was ſlaine with an Hargabuſe,The death of the Duke of Burbon. ſo that the ſouldiours
being withoute a chiefe ruler, ſacked the ſame, exerciſing
therein ſondry kindes of extreme crueltye, and ye Pope
who was ſtraighty beſieged in the Caſtell,Rome taken and ſacked. & not well furniſhed
with victuels, was enforced to entreate for his libertye:
for the obtaynment wherof, he deſtributed for a pray among
the ſouldiours .400000. Crownes. At this inſtant Don
Charles who concluded the peace dyed, & in his place ſucceded
Don Vgo Dimōcada, in whō the Pope hauing no great
affiance, the morning followinge, vnaccompanyed of any in
the habite of a ſeruinge man, he mounted vpon a good horſe

and departed oute of the Caſtell, from whence he rode vnto
Oruielo. This taking of Rome was occaſion that the kinge
of Englande, the Frenche kinge, the Pope, and the Venetians,
renued their league againſt the Emperour: Wherevpon
the Frenchmen wanne Geane, and beſieged Naples.
At this inſtante the Emperour was in Spayne, who vnderſtanding
that againſt the eſtate of Millen and his kingdome
of Naples, was moued a moſt terrible warre, beinge at that
inſtant deſtitute of money, did by ſinguler pollicye very wel
prouide, both for the defence of the Duchie, and ſauegard of
the kingdome: And being very wrathfull againſt ye French
kinge, for that he had broken his fayth and promiſe made vnto
him at Madrid,
                  Charles the fi
                        •
                     te chalengeth the combate of the French king. did challeng the combat of him, and ſente
him the defyance by one of his Haroldes: vnto whom was
geuen no audience, but diuers and ſondrye ſkoofes. About
this inſtant Phillipine Doria gaue a notable ouerthrowe by
fight vpon the Sea, vnto the Emperours Nauye, in which
were ſlaine ſeuen hundreth ſouldiours, the greateſt nomber
whereof was Spaniardes, together with Moncada, and diuers
other valiant Captaines, and Signior Aſcauio Colonna,
with the Marques of Guaſto were takē priſoners. Not
longe after this conflict, Andrea Doria not ſatiſfyed by the
Frenche kinge for the good and faythfull ſeruice which hee
had done vnto him, reuulted vnto the ſeruice of the Emperour,
and cauſed Geane to rebell againſt him. At this preſent
beinge in the yeare of Chriſt .1528. when the Frenchmen
beſieged Naples, ye whole armye almoſt was deſtroyed
by an vnknowen diſeaſe, which roſe amonge the ſouldiours,
and Lotrecco their Captayne dyed alſo at that inſtante: the
yeare following the Frenchmen were whollye driuen out of
Italye, which cauſed the Frenche kinge to conclude a peace
with the Emperour, which was determined in Cambrai by
Madam Aluigia the kinges mother, and Madam Margaret
Aunte vnto the Emperour and daughter of Maximilian: ye
accorde was, that the kinge for the raunſome of his ſonnes,
ſhoulde paye vnto the Emperour two Millions of goulde, &
ſhould cauſe al the ſouldiours to depart which as yet remayned

in Calauria and Puglia.
                  The ouerthrowe of the Turkes. At this inſtant Ferdinand the
Emperours brother, gaue a great ouerthrow vnto the Turkes.
And in the yeare of Chriſt 1530. the 24. of Februarye,
which was S. Mathias daye,The Chronation of the Emperour at Bononie. ſo much fortunate vnto Charles,
hee was by Pope Clement Crowned Emperour at Bononie
with a Crowne of goulde, and an other of Iron: For
tenne yeares before (as you haue hard) he was Crowned wt
the ſiluer Crowne at Aquiſgrane,
                  The ſignifycation of the iii. Crownes which ſignifyeth ye kingdome
of Germanye: that of Iron which was accuſtomed to
be receyued in Monza nye vnto Millen, betokeneth ye kingdome
of Lumbardye: the Crowne of gould repreſenteth the
Empyre of Rome. At this Coronation by the requeſt of the
Pope, Frauncis Sforza vppon a certayne compoſition, was
by themperour reſtored vnto the Duchie of Millen: alſo the
Emperour at the inſtance of this Neronius Pope, and Sedituis
Cateline conquered Florence, and reduced that noble &
famous common wealth into a priuate eſtate, geuinge it vnto
Alexander de Medici the Popes nephewe (who was preſently
created Duke thereof) and to his poſteritye for euer.
               At this preſent there aroſe a great diſcorde amonge ye Princes
of Germanye, concerning the reformation of the abuſes
in Religion, for Fredericke the Duke of Saxonie, and Philippe
the Langraue of Heſſa, with diuers other, refuſed anye
lōger to obeye vnto the falſe, & erronious traditions of ye
biſhoppe of Rome: wherevppon was ordayned a dyet by the
Pope, whoſe perſon was repreſented by Cardinall Campagio,
but nothinge worthye reherſall, was concluded in the
ſame. In this yeare Mulemanſe kinge of Tunnis dyed,
who left behind him two ſonnes, Muleroſetto who was the
elder, and Muleaſem: Muliroſetto for that he was the elder
was Crowned kinge, but Muleaſem by the ayde of certayne
of his frendes, moued warre againſt his brother, and
in the ende draue him oute of Tunnis. Wherevpon, Muliroſetto
hauing intelligence that Soliman was at that inſtāt
in Germanye, went vnto him, and beſieched his ayde for the
recouerye of his kingdome: vnto which demaunde ye 
                  Turke
conſented preſentlye, and ſent with him Barbaroſſa into Affrica,
                  
ſuppoſinge by that meane, to make himſelfe patrone of
that Segniorie: this warre (as after you ſhall heare) paſſed
in ſuch ſort,Soliman the ſecond time enterpriſeth the conqueſt of Vienna. that themperour in proper perſon was enforced
to ſayle into Affricke. But at this preſent I will continue ye
Hiſtory of Vienna. The Turke to reuenge the ouerthrow
whiche kinge Ferdinand gaue him, aſſembled an huge hoaſt
of .200000. ſouldiours, or as many affyrme of .300000.
with the which on S. Iohn Baptiſt daye he entered Hungarye,
deuidinge many troupes of horſemen in ſondrye partes
of the countrye, ouer whō was generall Abraim Baſſa, who
cauſed to be made in one inſtant, manye Bridges ouer Sana:
For leauinge the ryuer Danubius on the right hand, he marched
directlye vnto Stiria, a prouince verye plentious of all
kinde of victuels. The Emperour hauinge vnderſtanding
of theſe doinges, he cauſed all the Spaniardes which were
aboute Florence to repayre into Germanye, with a greate
parte of the Italian footemen conducted by the Marques of
Guaſto, whiche were in nomber aboute fyftene Thouſande
choſen footemen, after whoſe comminge there repayred vnto
the Emperour alſo Don Ferrāte Gonzaga, who brought
with him two Thouſand Italian horſemen, amonge which,
beſydes thoſe of the Duke of Ferrara, there were manye
knightes and gentlemen who ſerued of their owne accorde,
deſyringe to wynne honour in ſo noble an enterpryſe. The
Pope alſo ſent thither Hippolitus a Cardinall of the familye
called Medici, with diuers other knights and gentlemē,
together with a great ſomme of moneye, to leuye in Hungarye
viii. Thouſand ſouldiours: vnto this enterpriſe alſo ther
reſorted the moſt part of the nobleſt gentlemē of all Germanye:
ſo that all theſe aſſembles, amounted vnto .90000.
footemen,Solimā feareth to ioyne battayle with the Emperour. and thirtye thouſande horſemen, all which when
they came vnto Vienna, were deuided into three armyes, &
awayted the comminge of the Turkes, for the rumor went yt
                  Soliman woulde bidde them battaile. Who, althoughe hee
had ſent his defiance vnto Ferdinand and the Emperour, yet
continuallye he diſcoſted from Vienna: which cowardlynes
of him ſo muche encouraged the Chriſtians, that not a little
they contemned the baſe courages of the infidells, eſpecially

that they were farre greater in nomber then the Chriſtians.
But Soliman not mindinge to returne withoute the atchieuing
of ſome notable enterpriſe,Michaloglie. ſent Michaloglie Captaine
ouer the aduenturers with .15. Thouſande horſemen, to ouerrunne
the Countrye, who was encountred firſt with the
Palſgraue, whoſe Ordinaunce afflicted him not a little: and
in the retyre Lodouico Lodrone, made a ſecond ſpoyle of his
ſouldiours, and ye reſidue were ſlaine by ye 
                  Hungarians, who
ſet vpon them at vnawares, ſo that verye fewe of them eſcaped.
Vppon which diſcomfiture the Turke fearing his vtter
ruine,Soliman flyeth from the attempte of Vienna. deſiſted from the attempt of Vienna, and wt all ſpeede
retyred ouer the ryuer Mura, ouerthrowinge the Bridges
alwayes as he wente, fearinge continuallye that the Emperour
was at his backe. It is written that he ledde with him
for ſlaues .30. Thouſande Chriſtians, beſydes a greate nomber
which he ſlue in diuers places. After the runninge away
of the Turke, the Emperour returned into Italye, leauing
with his brother Ferdinand a ſufficient ſupply of ſouldiours
for the defence of the Countrye: and at Bononie Pope Clement
met with him, where was concluded a peace betwene
them for ſixe monethes. Immediatlye after which concluſiō
hee ſayled into Spayne, where hee had vnderſtandinge that
Mendoza was in Cerene beſieged of the Turkes: againſte
whom he ſent Andrea Doria, who reſcued the Citty and put
the Turkes to flighte, at which time alſo the More of Alexandria,
a Captayne of Solimans was vanquiſhed vppon the
Sea, by Girolamo Canale Admirall ouer the Venetiā
                   Nauye.
At this preſent Pope Clement, who continuallye enueyed
the proſperous eſtate of this noble Emperour, hauing
a minde onlye bente vnto wrathe and reuenge, procured the
obtaynment of a moſt firme & ſure frēdſhip with the French
kinge, by geuing in mariage vnto Henrye his ſecond ſonne,
Katherine the daughter of Lorenzo de Medici, which Henrye
by the death of his elder brother, was afterwarde king,
and his wyfe Katherine Queene. This meetinge and newe
parentage betwene the Pope and kinge Frauncis, nothinge
contented the Emperour, who conceyued ſmall ſecuritye to

remayne in the vnconſtant Pope, and leſſe aſſurance of peace
in the French kinge. Alſo at this inſtant Philippe the Langraue
of Heſla,
                  The Langraue endeuoureth to moleſt the ſtate of Lumbardye. for diuers iniuryes which he alleged he had
receyued of the Emperour, being (as it is ſuppoſed) ayded &
ſupported by kinge Frauncis, beganne to diſturbe theſtate of
Lumbardye. Wherefore the Emperour doubting the Lā
                     graues
forces, the Popes vnconſtancy, & the Frenche kings
diſſimulation, like a polliticke Prince, prouided ſufficient repayres
agaynſt the deuiſes of his enemyes: for as before time
hee had promyſed in maryage Margaret his daughter vnto
Alexander Duke of Florence, ſo the better to eſtabliſhe his
ſeate in Italye, hee gaue Chriſterna the daughter of Chriſterne
kinge of Dacia, and of Iſabell his ſiſter for wyfe, vnto
Frauncis Sforza Duke of Millen, which he did aſwell to remoue
all ſuſpition of depriuing the Sforzeſchi at anye time
of the Duchie of Millen: as alſo to gratifye the Venetians
whom he alwayes knew verye deſirous of the libertye of Italye:
Alſo he gaue vnto the Duke of Vrbine, the Duchie
of Sora, and vnto Doria Melfi, and longe before he was aſſured
of the faythe & frendſhip of the Duke of Ferrara, for the
ſentence which hee pronounced agaynſt the Pope (in his behalfe)
vpon the Cittyes of Modena and Reggio: Moreouer
he allured vnto him Fredericke the Duke of Mantua (vnto
whom he gaue that title) by promiſinge him the Marcheſat
of Monferrate, which afterwarde he gaue vnto him.
               At this time Barbaroſſa who was ſente of Soliman into
Affricke, eſtabliſhed Muliroſetto in the kingdome of Tunnis,
by conquering of Muleaſen, & forcifyed Goletto, which
is the keye of that prouince (beinge a moſt ſtronge forte, by
reaſon of the manifolde mariſhes which inuiron the ſame) wt
a great nomber of Moores for the ſafe keeping thereof.
               While theſe thinges in this wyſe proceded,The death of Pope Clement. Pope Clemēt
who pretended in hart muche euill agaynſt the Emperour,
was preuented by death when he had raigned xi. yeares, and
in his place was created Alexander Farneſe, called Paule
the thirde. At the time of whoſe creation the Emperour had
intelligence, that Barbaroſſa had driuen Muleaſen oute of

                  Affrica, in ſuch ſort yt the whole countrye became as it were
tributorye to the Turke. Wherefore he by the ayde of the
Pope, the king of Portingale, and diuers other Princes, gathered
a Nauye of two hūdreth ſayle & paſſed into Affricke,
whoſe comminge did not a little diſturbe the tranquillitye of
Barbaroſſa: Neuertheleſſe with a ſtout and valiant courage
he prepared all thinges neceſſary, for the defence of yt 
                  Goletto,
diſtante from Tunnis .xii. myles, nye vnto which the incurſion
of the Sea, hath made a poole, in ſuch wyſe, that by
reaſon of the lownes of the water, there is no paſſage from
thence vnto Tunnis, but by a little canall or ſtreame. The
Emperour after he was arryued within the cōſpectt of Goletto,
cauſed the Nauye to lye at Ancar, and certaine ſouldiours
to land by little boates, who with theyr Hargabuſhes
draue awaye the Moores which defended the Sea banckes:
then the Emperour cauſed Trenches to be made, and planted
the Artillery about the Tower to batter the ſame,The takinge of Goletto. which
after diuers ſkyrmiſhes and aſſaultes, made both by Sea &
lande, was taken with a marueylous occiſion of thoſe which
were within the ſame, ſo that fewe eſcaped, for they whiche
lept into the poole were ſlaine with Hargabuſhes & pykes.
After Barbaroſſa had vnderſtandinge of the taking of Goletto,
although he was greatly terrifyed thereat, yet like a polliticke
and valiant Captayne, he comforted his ſouldiours:
ſayinge, that he doubted not, but that in ſhorte ſpace, by the
ayde of the Arabians, he ſhoulde be reuenged of the receyued
damages, and alſo of force to expell his ennemyes out of Affrica.
Muleaſen (who as you haue harde) was by Barbaroſſa
depoſed from the kingdome, repayred vnto the Emperour,
humblye beſeechinge him that he woulde reſtore him
vnto it againe: the Emperour accepted his comminge, and
gaue him a verye frendlye countenance, promiſynge to accompliſhe
his requeſt. But while he was buſyed in repayringe
for the ſiege of Goletto, and in furniſhinge the ſame wt
munition and Armour, Barbaroſſa with twentye thouſand
horſemen, of Arabians and Moores, amonge whom were a
great nomber of Archers and Gunners, ſodainlye aſſaulted

his armye in ſuch ſort, that he was enforced to ioyne battaile
with them, in which encounter the Spaniſhe horſemen not
able to ſupport the force of the Arabians, were cōſtrayned to
retyre vnto their enſignes: which ye Emperour perceyuing,
(like a moſt worthye Captayne, and moſt valiant ſouldiour
voyde of all feare) with the men of Armes ſo ſtoutely charged
them,The worthynes of Charles the fifte. that he compelled the enemyes to leaue theyr Artillery
behinde them, and to commit themſelues vnto flight.
After this glorious victorye (althoughe the Emperour was
not a little diſwaded) yet he continued his enterpriſe, determininge
to driue Barbaroſſa out of Affricke, and to deliuer
from bondage manye Chriſtians which were in Tunnis:
towardes the which hee marched preſentlye with his whole
hoaſt, and beinge come neare vnto the Cittye, as much as he
mighte hee prouoked his ennemyes (who were in the Subburbes)
vnto battayle. But Barbaroſſa not a little terrifyed
by his late ouerthrowe, refuſed the offer, and through his ineſtimable
choler, fel into ſuch a frenſye, that he cauſed all the
Chriſtian captiues, to be bound with two chaynes, and to be
put into the Caſtell of Tunnis which hee woulde haue ouerthrowen
with Gunnepouder, if when he was conſultinge wt
the Maieſtrates, what order was beſt to be obſerued for the
defence of the Cittye, certayne which deteſted his curſed and
dampnable intente, had not ſecretelye ſet them at libertye by
vnloſinge theyr bandes, and geuing them ſufficient weapon
and armour, with the which they might defende the Caſtell
againſt Barbaroſſa, whereof as ſone as they had obtayned ye
full poſſeſſiō, they made with a Standarde a certayne ſigne
by the which they ſignifyed that they would yeld the ſame vnto
the Emperour. Barbaroſſa vnderſtandinge of the loſſe
of the Caſtell, endeuoured by fayre wordes and large promiſes
to get the ſame againe,Barbaroſſa flieth toward Bona. but he preuayled nothinge, whervppon
diſpayringe to winne anye good ſucceſſe, hee fled with
vii. Thouſande Turkes towardes Bona, which in time paſt
was called Hippona, where he had cauſed to wayte in a redynes,
to ſerue him if occaſion ſo requyred .xiiii. Gallyes and
certayne Foyſtes. The Emperour hauing certayne intelligence

of the worthye acte of the Captiues, and of the flight
of Barbaroſſa, marched immediatlye with his armye vnto ye
walles of the Cittye, againſt whom came the Maieſtrates &
proferred him the keyes of the ſame, promiſinge to become
his obediente and faythfull ſubiectes. Wherefore hee commaunded
that no hurt ſhould be done vnto the Cittye, but ye
ſouldiours which entered in at other gates, of whom ye chiefe
were Duchemen, did thorowly ſpoyle the ſame: the Emperour
made verye muche of the ſlaues which were in the Caſtell,
who were in nomber more then .vi. Thouſande, and to
euery one of them he gaue moneye, and promiſed them ſhippes
and prouiſiō, neceſſary to conducte them into their owne
country. This happye ſucceſſe had ye enterpriſe of Affricke.
               
               Then the Emperour accordinge to his promyſe, reſtored
Muleaſen vnto his kingdome, vpon this conditiō, that yeare
lye for a tribute, he ſhould ſende him a caſt of Faulcons, and
ſixe Barbarye horſes, that he ſhould alwayes be ennemye vnto
the Turkes, a frende vnto the Chriſtians, and at the deuotion
of the Empyre. After this as a moſt triumphant conquerour
(or another Alexander,) he departed frō 
                  Affricke
into Cycilia, from thence to Reggio and ſo to Naples, where
he had vnderſtandinge that Frauncis Sforza Duke of Millen
was dead,The death of Frauncis Sforza Duke of Millen. and that the Frenche kinge renued the clayme
and tytle whiche he had vnto that eſtate: and alſo that in his
abſence by Philippe Sciabotto his Admyrall, he had taken,
burned, and deſtroyed diuers Cittyes, Townes and Caſtelles
in Piemont, appertayning vnto the Duke of Sauoye.
Theſe doinges of the Frenche kinge ſo muche diſpleaſed the
Emperour, that the winter beinge paſſed, hee iourneyed vnto
Rome, where he was receiued of Paule the thirde, and of
the whole Cittye with great ſolemnitye and pompe: & there
in the preſence of the Pope and many other noble men, with
a verye excellent Oration he bewayled the great vntruth of
the Frenche kinge, and reherſed vnto them the manifold iniuries,
which the kinges of that Nation had alwayes vſed
againſt the houſe of Auſtria, with reprouinge alſo the kinge
for breakinge the accorde which was made at Madrid, proteſting

yt he had obſerued and performed any of thoſe vowes
whiche he promiſed beinge his priſoner, for the recouery of
his libertie: and yt in his abſence he had vexed Piemont with
moſt cruell warres, wherfore he concluded, that althoughe
he had moſt iuſte occaſions, to moue war againſte the kinge
and to aſſaile his kingdome, yet to auoyd th'effuſion of chryſtian
bloud,The Emperour offereth to fighte the combat with the Frenche kinge, at Rapier & Dagger. he profered to finiſhe and end all controuerſies,
vppon condition that he would fight the combat with him at
the Rapier and Dagger. The French embaſſadors which
were preſēt, would haue anſwered in their maiſters behalfe
but the Pope would not permit them, who endeuored with
curteous talke to mittigate the wrath of the Emperour, but
he litle preuailed, for preſētly after his departure frō Rome:
in Prouenza he aſſembled an huge hoſte of horſemen & footemen:
ouer which footemen was captayne the Marquyſe of
Guaſto,
                  Don Hernā
                     do Duke of Alua. ouer the men of armes the Duke of Alua, and ouer
the light horſemen Don Ferrante Gonzaga: in this hoſte as
moſt authours affirme were .50. thouſand footmen, and .30
thouſand horſemen: with this royall army the Emperour
entered Prouence which he found abandoned, but his nauie
ouer which was general prince Doria alwayes folowed him
to ſupply vnto the want of all ſuch cōmodities as were nedefull
for his hoſt, for the Frenchemen to endamage their enemies
had conſumed with fyre, their owne corne and all other
prouiſion, for which doing the kynge releaſed them of their
ordinary taxes for ten yeares. At Bregiola the French horſe
men in a conflict were vanquiſhed by the imperiall horſemen
as they marched vncircumſpectly in a playne, and diuers of
their captaines taken priſonners:A great nomber of themperours army deſtroyed with ſicknes. not long after whiche encounter
there happened ſo mortall a plague in th'emperors
army, that 18000. of his ſouldiers dyed, wheruppon he re:
tyred into Geane: but while he was in Prouence the french
King had prepared an hoſte of .40. thouſand ſouldiers for ye
recouery of Geane, vnto whiche city his captaines gaue a
freſh aſſaulte, but Auguſtin Spinola who valyauntly defended
the ſame and gaue thē the repulſe, that they reyſed theyr
campe and returned into Piemont, where they ioyned wyth

the reſidue of the french captaines: and not long after Kyng
Frauncis entred Flaunders, where hee toke Edine a verye
ſtrong cytie whē he had beſieged the ſame 50. dayes: whervppon
the Flemings with all ſpede gathred an army, & nere
vnto Turwin they gaue the Frenchmen a great ouerthrow:
but while theſe euents happened in Flaunders and Piemont:
                  An ouerthrowe of Frenchmen.
                  Soliman began to make war againſt the Venetians, ſo that
both by ſea and land he greatly endamaged the territories of
the chriſtians, without any reſiſtaunce made againſt him, by
reaſon of the continuall diſcord betwene the Emperour and
the Frence King: wherfore the Pope hauing preſent occaſion
for that a truce was taken betwene theſe two mighty princes
for 6. moneths, ſent to perſwade with them his embaſſadours,
who ſo much preuailed that in the end they conſented
to meete at Nizza where alſo ye Pope mynded to be preſent,
who ſo vehemently in his talke exhorted them vnto peace, wt
manifeſting vnto them the greate ruine that otherwyſe was
lyke to enſue vnto all Chriſtendome through their contention,
that in the ende a truce was taken & peace concluded betweene
them for ten yeares. After this accorde the Emperoure
paſſinge throughe Fraunce returned into Flaunders,
Where the citizens of Gaunt refuſed to pay their taxes, and
had expelled ye Emperours officers, but they not able to defend
the cytie againſt his power rendred it vnto his maieſtie,
who after he had vnto th' example of all other greuouſlye puniſhed
the principalles and chief authours of this rebellion,
cauſed a Caſtell to be built in the city, to remoue from them
all hope of rebelling that myght happen in tyme to come.
               The amytie concluded betwene the Emperour & the french
King continued not long,The Caſtell of Gaunte builded. for Kynge Frauncis ſent embaſſadours
vnto the Emperoure to requyre him that vnto the accorde
he would inueſt his ſonne with the Duchy of Milaine,
vnto which demaund the Emperour would not in any wyſe
conſent, wheruppon the Kinge became verye wrathfull and
conuerted his good wyll into extreme hatred, and encouraged
William Duke of Cleueland to rebell againſt the Emperour,
vnto whome he conſented the rather for that Charls
                  
denyed to inueſt the ſayde Duke with the Duchie of Gelderland,
                  The Duke of Cleue rebelleth againſt themperour.
which he claymed by the right and title of his mother.
Wherefore the Emperour (who at this inſtante was vppon
ſondrye occaſions departed oute of Flaunders into Germanye)
hauing intelligence of the French kinges practiſes, not
prouided of a ſufficient armye, ſignifyed vnto him that he intended
to geue the kingdome of Flaūders vnto his ſonne the
Duke of Orlians: vnto which promiſe the kinge for diuers
conſiderations geuing no credite, continued his former preparation
for the warres, being thereto the more incenſed for
that his Embaſſadours verye valiante, Rincone and Caeſar
Fregoſo were ſlaine not farre from Pauia, by an ambuſh
of Spaniardes contrary to the lawes and order taken in the
truce. But whyle theſe thinges thus proceded, the Barons
and commons of Spayne (who in the Emperours warre againſt
the Turke, would not contribute anye ſumme of moneye,)
beinge nowe greatlye vexed by the kinge of Algiers,
proffered vnto him by their owne conſent and accord, that he
would (vnto the benefit of all Spayne) make warre againſt
thenfidels, to ayde him with as much moneye as ſhoulde ſuffice
for the maintaynance of the ſame.Thenterpriſe of the Emperour againſt the king of Algerie. Wherevppon themperor
whoſe chiefe deſyre was to ſuppreſſe infidels willingly
accepted thenterpriſe, & leauing in the cōfines which border
vpon the French king, ſufficient garriſons of ſouldiours for
the ſafe keping of the ſame, he iorneyed with all ſpeede into
Italye, and after hee had in Millen prepared all thinges neceſſarye
for that warre, he wente vnto Luca where the Pope
met with him, who endeuoured by all meanes poſſible, to renue
the vnitye which was before concluded betweene him &
the French kinge: but he nothing preuayled, for themperor
openlye declared that he woulde not in anye wyſe ſurrender
the ſtate of Millen vnto the Frenchmen, whom he knewe to
be ſo vnſatiable that hauinge that, they woulde endeuour
by all meanes to depriue him of all other his ſegnoryes in Italye:
Alſo he ſayde it greatlye diſpleaſed him, that hee who
bare the tytle of the moſt Chriſten king, ſhoulde be in league
with the Turke, by occaſion whereof there enſued daylye no

ſmall damages vnto the Chriſtians. The Pope not able to
bring to effecte that which he deſyred returned vnto Rome,
and the Emperour the beginninge of October with .xxxvi.
Gallyes,The Ilands Baleariche. ſayled vnto Corſica, hauing ſent his ſhippes before
vnto the Ilandes Baleariche, from Corſica hee ſayled vnto
Bonifacio, and from thence vnto a Cittye of Sardinia called
Larghera:
                  A calfe borne with two heades. where, the ſame night in which he was arriued, a
Cowe brought forthe a Calfe with two heades, which was
brought vnto the Emperour to be ſeene, by him that oughte
the Cowe. From thence hee ſayled towardes the Ilande
Minoreca, but being marueilouſly afflicted with tempeſtes,
he arryued with much daunger at the Porte Mahone:
                  Porte Mahone.
                   from
whence he ſayled vnto Maiorica, where he founde Don Ferrante
Gonzaga Viceroye of Cicilia, in a readines with .vii.
Gallyes of that Countrye, and .50. greate Italian ſhippes,
which together with thoſe that the Emperour had, made in
nomber a hundred and fiftye: from thence themperour ſayled
vnto Algeris, which he beſieged in .3. places, deuidinge
his people beinge of .iii. Nations into .iii. companyes: The
Spaniardes were encamped vpon the ſydes of the hylles, ouer
whom was Captayne Don Ferrante: The Duchemen
at the foote of the hilles neare vnto Themperours pauilion,
and the Italians (ouer whom was generall Camillo Colōna)
were encamped in the plaine neare vnto the Sea ſyde:
So that the Emperour nothing doubted the takinge of the
Cittye, but while hee expected the comminge of the victuels
with other prouiſion from the ſhippes, ſodainlye from Heauen
there fell a terrible raigne, which continued thre whole
dayes withoute ceaſinge, together with ſuch a tempeſtuous
winde, that it drowned manye of the Shippes and Gallyes
which laye at Anker, and the miſerable ſouldiours whiche
ſwamme towardes the lande to ſaue themſelues, were moſt
cruelly ſlayne by the Turkes, and Arabians, and his ſouldiours
by ſtanding ſo long time in the water without victuels
became ſo faynt, and weake, that ther ſeemed but ſhadowes
of men, they were ſo bereft of all courage: throughe whiche
miſhappes the Emperour was enforced to rayſe his ſiege, &

in thoſe ſhyps whiche he had left him to embarke his ſouldyers,A moſt noble act of a prince
for whoſe ſafegarde he cauſed a greate number of verye
fayre gennets to be drowned, preferring the lyues of theſe feble
ſouldiers, before the preſeruation of ſuch excellent races.
An example moſt worthy to be remembred at this preſent of
moſt nobles, who contrary to the example of this moſt noble
Emperour are not aſhamed for a litle vayne pleaſure which
they conceiue, to accompt much more of the flying of a byrde
or running of a dog or horſe,Our chriſtiā brethrē ought to be cheriſhed then of manye poore chriſtians,
whome by Gods precepts they are bound to cheriſhe. Yea
ſo vncharitable are their lyues, & brutiſh ye doings, of ye couetous
yt moſt lyke vnto prophane Epicures, they ſtudy only to
make thē ſelues happy in this trāſitory world, in which they
thinke alwayes to remayne, for if they thoughte of any other
to come, they woulde not as they do, continually keepe their
gates ſhut, their eares cloſed vnto the cry of the port, whoſe
cauſe no doubt God the moſt iuſt iudge, will in the end according
to his vnfallible promiſe reuenge vnto their vtter confuſion,
and ſubuertion of the ruinous ſecuritye whiche they
buylde vpon. But to returne to the hiſtorye, as the Emperour
was the fyrſt that landed, ſo was he fyrſt that entred in
to ſhyp, after whoſe entrye, the mariners launched and ſayled
towards Spaygne, (but by occaſion of tempeſt which ſeperated
the nauie) ſome were driuen vnto Cicilia, other vnto
Geane, but the Emperour with much trauaile landed in
Carthaginia in Spayne: ſuche was the miſerable ende of ye
enterpriſe of Africa,
                  The affaires of princes, troblous. which as it was a diſcomfiture vnto all
chriſtians, ſo it was eſpecially vnto the Emperour. At this
preſent the Dolphin not expecting ye Emperours returne,
with a mighty hoſte beſieged Perſegnano, but not being able
to win the ſame, he rayſed his ſiege and departed: at whiche
tyme Charles Duke of Orliance toke in the cōfines of Luxenberge
many townes and caſtels, and in the ende the cytye
it ſelfe,Launderſey taken by the Frenchmen. but afterward it was recouered agayne by the Emperours
ſouldiers: the nexte ſpringe after this, the Frenche
King tooke Launderſey a city not far diſtāt from Cambrai:
and Monſignior Vandoſme was ſent by the ſayde King into

the countrey of Artois where he tooke by compoſitiō 
                  Turnay,
and alſo wanne Mentarole, alſo Monſignior Lange
who was gouernour for the King in Piemont, wan Chieraſco
and poſſeſſed Verolenge, Pinauolo, Sanigliano, Mō
                     calier
and Turine, & the emperiall captains were patrones
of Foſſano, Chieri, Alba and Vercelli, with dyuers other
places. Moreouer the French King, who wholy deſired to
moleſt and endamage the Emperour, induced the Duke of
Cleues when the Emperour was ſayled vnto Algeris to leuy
certaine ſouldiers againſt him whiche he willinglye dyd, not
mynding to manifeſt his pretence vnto the worlde, vntyll he
might vnderſtand newes of the Emperours eſtate whoſe correction
he greatly feared, for when it was reported the Emperour
with all his nauye to be drowned hee much reioyced,
and refuſed to defer the aſſaulting of Anwarpe, after which
he had ſo long thirſted, wherfore he aſſembled his ſouldiers,
and with his armye marched towardes Eburone, deſyringe
the citizens of paſſage thorowe the ſame, ſaying that he was
going to conduct home his wyfe, daughter vnto the King of
Nauarra. But the Eburones denied his demaund, ſayinge
that they would not permit any to paſſe thorow the citye into
the country of the Emperours enemie with ſuche an armed
company:The Duke of Cleues aſſalteth Anwarp The Antuerpians vnderſtanding the pretence of
the Duke ſent againſte him ſeuen thouſand Flemings, but
they were repulſed by the Cleueners. Roſhemio a valiaūt
captaine, generall for ye duke of Cleues entred Brabant ſpoylinge
the countrey as he went, againſte whome was ſent the
prince of Orenge,
                  Roſhemio captaine of ye Cleueners. who in a conflict was put to flight, and ſo
retired into Anwerp: which cytie Roſhemio afterward beſieged,
but it was ſo valiauntlye defended that he rayſed his
ſiege, and marched towardes Fraunce thorowe Flaunders,
where he tooke many cyties and townes, and meruailouſlye
endamaged the whole country. At which tyme the French
King alſo to the end he might the more moleſt and debilitate
the proud forces,A deueliſhe practiſe of a chriſtian king renued his league with the Turke, whom
he exhorted & perſwaded to inuade the frontiers of Spaigne,
which he did with th' effuſion of much chriſtian bloud and no

benefite vnto the Kinge: moreouer the Frenchmen attemptinge
to wynne Cuni, were couragiouſlye repelled by the
Spaniardes, and the Imperiall ſouldiers tooke Carignano,
a place of great force adioyning nye vnto Turine, which
as hereafter you ſhall reade cauſed ye warres to become more
cruell then they were at any tyme before. But whyle theſe
warres continued theſe mighty princes, the Duke of Saxonie,
and the Langraue of Heſſa depriued the Marquiſe of
Brunſwick of his eſtate: and the King of Englād for diuers
iniuries done vnto him by the french King renued his league
with the Emperour, who not willing to detract tyme paſſed
out of Barcelona into Gean with .40. gallyes, and certayne
greate ſhyps which conducted twelue thouſand Spaniards
and ſeuen hundred horſes: from thence he went vnto Buſetto
wher he was exhorted by ye Pope (who wayted his cōming)
vnto peace with the French King, but he beinge deſirous of
reuenge would not in any wyſe condiſcend therunto: and frō
thence he departed thorow Germany with an incredible deſyre
to ioyne battaile with the Duke of Cleueland: at which
inſtāt ye nauie of Barbaroſſa appeared at Ciſtia which greatlye
feared the Pope,The Turke concludeth a peace with Ferdinand. but without doinge of hurt it departed
towardes Prouenza and Soliman returned into Hungary,
when after he had taken Alba Reale, and obteyned Strigonia
he concluded a truce with king Ferdinand. The Emperour
continuing his iorney came vnto a ſtronge cytie of the Duke
of Cleuelāds called Dura, which was defēded by a valyaūt
Captaine named Flattes,
                  Flattes with a garriſō of worthy ſouldiers,
this citye the Emperour aſſaulted, and in the ende when after
great occaſion and loſſe of th' aſſaulters he had taken the
ſame, the ſouldiers moſt cruelly committed all they found a
lyue to the ſwoord, and after the ranſackinge conſumed the
whole cytie with fyre. The Emperour folowing his good
Fortune, went vnto the Cyties neare adioyninge whiche
beinge terrified by Bura,
                  Duraburnt by thēperors ſouldirs. did of their owne accorde open
their gates vnto him. The Duke not a lyttle feared by
the winnynge of ſo ſtrong a Citty, determined to commytte
his whole ſtate and life vnto the Emperours clemency, who

at lengthe throughe interceſſion and longe ſute made by the
Marquiſe of Brunſwicke and the Prince of Orange in his
behalfe, he was permitted in ſafetye to repayre to the Emperours
preſence, of whome after humble ſubmiſſyon he obtayned
pardon vppon certaine reaſonable conditions: And
not longe after the Emperour procured him to renounce the
mariage of the Kinge of Nauarras daughter whome he had
not as yet eſpouſed, and to take vnto wife a daughter of king
Ferdinandes his brother: he pardoned alſo Roſſenio, reteininge
both him and his hoſte vnto his ſeruyce, with whyche
myghtye armye, together wyth the ayde that was ſent hym
by the Kynge of Englande, he marched towardes Picardie,
endamagiuge very greately the French territoryes: myndinge
before he would attempt any newe enterpryſe, to recouer
againe the countrey of Luxenburge, eſpecially Launderſey,
a Cittye of a greate force, whiche althoughe at that inſtant
was well garded wyth valyaunt Captaines, ſouldiers
and a good companye of lighte horſemen, yet it was by hym
battered with greate ordynaunce in one inſtante at three ſundry
places, but the ſtrength of the walles was ſuch that the
battry little hurted: the ſiege continuing notwithſtandinge
Kinge Frauncis came thither with a greate power, whoe
greatly deſyring to vittel the Cittye, ſente before his armye
Monſignior Briſack, and Decarſo wyth certaine troupes of
horſemē to prouoke ye enemies vnto battayle, betwene whō
there began a lyuely cōflict, at which inſtant ye french kinge
(hauing cauſed to be ladē certain carts wt victuals appeared
as though he would alſo enter into battaile,The Frenche King vitaileth Launder ſey. but not omitting
the preſent oportunitye, by mayne force he pearced thorow ye
enemyes, making a notable ſlaughter of the reſiſtantes, and
ſo vittayled the Cittye, furniſhing alſo the ſame with freſhe
ſouldiours, and taking from thence the olde with their Captayne
Landa who was hurt, in exchaunge of whom he placed
Varminio a moſt worthye ſouldiour: And the next day followinge
hee wente vnto Cambrai, by which time the Emperour
was ioyned with his armye, vnto whom the Frenche
kinge profered battaile, which offer he willingly accepted &

prepared his hoaſt to fighte, but the Frenche kinge not minding
as he ſpake,Tee Frenche king after hee had proferred battall flyeth into Fraūce. departed with his armye, and ſo returned
into Fraunce. Vpon whoſe departure the Emperour by
reaſon the ſharpe winter, went into Flaunders mindinge
the Springe followinge, (by the ayde of the king of Englande)
to renue his warres againſt the ſayde kinge: who althoughe
he had intelligence of the great preparation which
the Emperour and the kinge of England made for the inuaſion
of his country, omitted not to prouide for his affayres in
Piemont: but ſent thither an armye of .xx. Thouſande ſouldiours,
ouer whō was generall Monſignor d' Angie, who
with ſmall reſiſtance recouered certayne Townes & Caſtels
which the Frenchmen a litle before had loſte, and remayned
in the field as a cōquerour, (for the Marques of Guaſto was
gone vnto Millen to leuie ſouldiours) and brought the Cittye
of Carignano vnto ſuche extremitye, that Pirro Colonna
who was in the ſame not being able to encounter with his
power, was enforced to awaite ye comming of the Marques,
who making haſt to vittell the ſayd Cittye, was encountred
by Monſignor d' Angie, and after long fight ouercome and
put to flighte, & with that nomber of ſouldiours which was
left him, he recouered Haſti, being ſore wounded. It is written
that in this battaile were ſlaine of the Emperours ſouldiours
.10. Thouſande, and of the Frenche .4. Thouſande.
               At this preſent Amida the ſonne of Muleaſen (whom the
Emperour had reſtored as you haue harde vnto his kingdome)
draue his father out of ye Realme, who flying againe
vnto themperour for ayde, receyued letters that hee ſhoulde
ſtaye for his comminge at Naples, but he vnderſtanding that
his ſonne was become Lorde of the whole kingdome, leuied
with ſuch money as he had left him,An vnnaturall acte of a ſonne. certaine Italian ſouldiours,
and ſayled into Affricke where in a conflicte he was ouercome,
and taken by his ſonne, and afterward by him moſt
cruelly depriued of his eyes:The king of Tu
                        •
                     me was depriued of his eyes by his ſonne. for which acte Amida fearing
the diſpleaſure of themperour, laboured to conclude a peace
with the gouernour of Goletto, who knowing the minde of
the Emperour not to be greatly greued with his facte, willinglye

agreed to his demaunde. At which inſtant while ye
Emperour and the kinge of Englande, were ſeriouſlye occupyed,
in prouiding of all ſuch neceſſaryes as were expedient
for the maintaynance of warre agaynſt the French king,
at Rome certaine noble men with the French Cardinalles,
leuyed ſouldiours to fight in king Fraūcis quarrel, & diuers
other noble men of the ſame Cittye, with the Duche Cardinalles,
hauing money ſente from the Viceroye of Naples,
leuyed a power likewyſe in ye Emperours behalfe, betwene
which two companyes happened diuers ſucceſſes. But the
Frenche men which were in Piemont and Lumbardye became
ſo mightye and terrible to theyr ennemyes, yt the Milleners
had forſaken theyr Citty for feare, if Coſmo Duke of
Florence had not at the verye inſtante ſent .2000. footemen
to defende them againſt their ennemyes. Notwithſtanding
Pirro Colonna yelded vppon certaine conditions the Cittye
of Carignano vnto the Frenche men, who of king Frauncis
was entreated with muche curteſye, and requeſted with honourable
entertainment of the ſayde kinge to ſerue him,A worthy example of a ſaythful ſubiect towards his Prince. but
be would not in anye wyſe condiſcende thereto, for which cō
                  ſtante
fidelitye towardes his Prince, the kinge highlye commended
him, and with riche rewards licenſed him to depart,
and returne vnto themperour. Who, hauing acquieted the
tumultes of the Duke of Cleueland, and the Realme of Hū
                     garye
not moleſted by the Turkes, proceded in his determination
together with the kinge of Englande, who at that inſtant
was arriued in Picardye: where, not mindinge to conſume
time in vaine withoute the atchieuinge of ſome notable
exploite worthye of memorye,Bolloigne wonne by the kinge of Englande. beſieged Bolloigne the ſtrong
Mayden towne of Fraunce, which after hee had battered in
ſondrye places (to the greate deſtruction of the Boloigners)
was yelded to his mercye, who in proper parſon entered the
ſame: ſetting at libertye all that were there, and lycenſinge
them to depart with bagge and baggage. And themperour
in marchinge toward Paris,
                  The Prince of Orenge flame. beſieged Sandeſir, at the aſſault
whereof Landa the Frenche Captayne was ſlaine, and likewyſe
the Prince of Orenge, who ſerued the Emperour: but

notwithſtanding his death, he continued thaſſaulte in ſuche
wyſe, that no ſuccour appearing, Sanſerra the Captaine yelded
the ſame vnto the Emperours mercye: at which time ye
French king was come wt his armye vnto the ryuer Marne,
where on the contrarye ſyde the Emperour was encamped
with his boaſte, who deſyred greatlye if he mighte, to ioyne
battaile with the French king.Kinge Henry the eighte, a terror to all Fraunce. The winning of Bolloigne
brought ſuch terror vnto the Frenche Nation, that the Pariſians,
thinkinge theyr kinge to be taken priſoner and vanquiſhed,
embarked their treaſure, and ſayled downe the ryuer
Seane towardes Normandye: but hauinge vnderſtandinge
of the contrarye, they returned vnto the Cittye.
               While theſe two couragious Princes with their mightye
hoaſtes thone againſt thother, certayne reſpectes mutuallye
moued them to conclude a peace, eſpecially the French king,
who verye well comprehended that if he ſhould loaſe the victorye
in that battayle, all Fraūce would become ſubiect vnto
the Emperour and the kinge of Englande: wherefore (by
the Deuine operation) when it was leaſt looked for, a peace
was concluded betweene them vppon theſe conditions, that
the Emperour ſhoulde geue in marriage vnto ye Duke of Orlians,
his daughter which he had in Spaine, and Flaunders
for her Dowrye: and that the Frenche kinge ſhould marrye
a daughter of king Ferdinandes his brother, with whom he
woulde geue the Duchie of Millen for a Dowrye: to reſolue
vpon which waighty cauſes, the Emperour requeſted a yeares
deliberation. Moreouer it was condiſcended that after
the maryage ſhoulde be ſolemnized (vnto which the Duchie
of Millen ſhoulde be geuen for Dowrye) yet themperour to
keepe in his poſſeſſion the fortes of the ſame, and of Cremona
vntill they ſhould haue borne vnto them a child, and that
then vpon the deliuerye of theſe fortes, the kinge ſhoulde reſtore
vnto the Duke of Sauoye, all the Townes and Caſtelles
which hee had taken from him in Piemont: and finallye
that eyther to other ſhould reſtore al ſuch Citties and Townes,
which in the confines of Flaunders they had gotten the
one from the other, ſince the truce taken at Nizza.
               
               
                  
At this preſent a great nomber of the Princes of Germanye
and free Citties of the ſame, kept a Dyet in Smalkaldia
a Cittye appertayninge vnto the Duke of Saxonie, for the
reformation of Religion: the chiefe where of were the Langraue
of Heſſa, and the Duke of Saxonie, which two Priuices
for diuers iniuryes done by the Duke of Brunſwicke agaynſt
the Citty of Coſlaria (which was one of the confederates)
expelled him oute of his Duchie, and in the ende toke
him priſoner. This doinge moued the Emperour vnto
wrath, and therevpon ſent vnto the Langraue, willing him
to ſet at libertye the ſayd Duke, and to reſtore him vnto his
Duchie, which the Langraue did not onlye refuſe to accompliſhe,
but alſo beinge furniſhed with a mightye Armye of
his owne, and of the confederates, marched againſt the Emperour,
ſayinge that he mynded not to reſtore that which he
had gotten by Conqueſt: this aunſweare muche greued the
Emperour, inſomuche that with as muche celeritye as hee
might, beinge not a little ayded and prouoked therevnto by
the Pope, he leuyed a huge power, intendinge as ſone as the
ſeaſon of the yere ſerued, to make warre againſt the Princes
of Germanye.The death of Henry the .8. king of Englande. At this preſent dyed Henrye the eight king
of Englande, leauing to inherite the kingdome, Prince Edwarde
his ſonne, & in Marche the ſame yeare dyed alſo Fraū
                     cis
the Frenche kinge:The death of king Frauncis kinge of Fraunce. but to returne vnto the affayres of
Germanie. The Emperour to iuſtifye his attempte, cyted
the Duke of Saxonie and the Langraue, to appeare at a dyet
at Ratiſbone, but neyther of them woulde come, wherefore
he depriued the Duke of Saxonie of his Electorſhippe, and
pronounced againſt him and the Langraue, a baniſhment or
perpetuall exile out of the Empyre, geuing for a praye their
Dominions vnto ſuch as woulde by any meane occupye the
ſame. At the fame of the Emperours preparation for this
warre, certayne Princes and free Cittyes ignorante of his
pretence, beganne greatly to feare his ſodaine tempeſt: The
cauſe was, that the Emperour alwayes before that inſtant,
accuſtomed vnto the preparation of anye warre, to requeſte
theyr ayde and counſayle: wherevppon manye Cittyes ſeate

vnto him their Embaſſadours, aſwel to vnderſtand his meaninge,
as alſo to ſiguifye theyr prompe readines to ſerue in
his affayres.The Emperours aunſweare vnto the Embaſſadours. Vnto whom the Emperour gaue great thankes,
for their large offers and good wil: ſaying, that for this
enterpriſe he had no neede of their ayde, ſince that he minded
but to correcte certaine perſonnes, which rebelled againſt ye
Empyre: and that therefore hee had geeuen them no vnderſtanding
of his determinatiō, for that he reſerued their ayedes
vnto affayres of greater importance, and ſo diſmiſſed them.
The Princes nothinge impaled with themperours condemnation,
and Edict pronounced againſt them, continued their
enterpriſe, and gathered to withſtand his violence an Armye
of 80. Thouſand footemen, and of 15. Thouſande horſemen,
with a hundreth Peeces of Artillerye 6000. Miners, 300.
boates for bridges, and .800. Cartes for ye caryages of ſhot
and munitiō, vnto which were appointed. 8000. horſes, wel
furniſhed with all ſortes of Artificers that were needefull.
This maye be accompted one of the greateſt hoſtes that euer
was amonge Chriſtians: wherevpon the Langraue perceyuiug
a preſent ſigne of victory to be offered by fortune, determined
not to omitte the ſame, but ſente preſentlye vnto the
Duke of Saxonie, willing him in any wyſe to ſend his horſemen
vnto him, that he mighte at vnawares aſſayle ye Emperour,
who as then was not prouided of ſouldiours for his defence,
(which if he had done withoute queſtion he had driuen
themperour out of Germanye) but the Duke voyde of reaſon
deferred the tyme, and neglected the wiſe aduertiſement
of the Langraue, ſendinge a letter vnto themperour, which
ſignifyed that where they vnderſtode his maieſtye, determined
to correcte certaine rebelles, they deſyred to knowe who
they were that they might ſerue him in the ſame warre, and
that if hee prepared his armye againſt them, they nothinge
doubted but that they woulde both iuſtlye and honourablye
aunſweare him. The Emperour aunſwered that hee was
not come into Germanye of his owne accorde, but called by
them, & that he was not minded to moue anye warre againſt
anye, but rather to chaſtice ſuch as ſhoulde ſeeme to diſturbe

the quiet eſtate of the countrye: After which anſweare, they
thoughte it neceſſarye not to protracte longer time, wherefore
they remoued theyr hoaſte towardes Ratiſbone where
the Emperour was, ſuppoſing that if they might winne that
Citty, the warre would be quight ended. But in their marchinge
intelligence was geuen them, that Albert Marques
of Brandeburg was entered the Cittye with the horſemen,
and that daylye the nomber encreaſed with all ſortes of ſouldiours,
they vnderſtode alſo that xii. Thouſande footemen, &
ſixe hundreth horſemen, were now arryued in thoſe borders,
which two occaſions remoued the Princes from continuing
ther iorneye vnto Ratiſbone, to endeuor and ſtudye to kepe
and defend the ſtraights, & fortes by which theſe ſouldiours
ſhoulde paſſe: but theyr deuiſes toke no effect, for whereas ye
                  Langraue had taken Tonauert, and marched to Lanzuotto,
mindinge alſo to occupye the ſame, he was preuented by the
Emperour, who not longe before was entered into the ſayd
Cittye, beinge onlye accōpanyed with .2000. Duche footemen,
and .300. Spaniardes, vnto whom ſhortly after came
5000. Duche ſouldiours on foote, and 2000. horſemen.
               Wherefore the Princes perceyuing theyr intentes to become
fruſtrate, prouoked the Duke of Bauaria to ayde them
in theyr enterpriſe: vnto whom he aunſwered, that the Emperour
was his Soueraine,Subiectes ought to obey the commaū
                     dement of the Prince, and not to rebell. and that therefore he might not
denye vnto him enterance into his Dominion, yet he promiſed
vnto them, that in yt warre he would remayne a Newter
without offendinge eyther partye. This aunſweare muche
troubled the Princes, who knowing the power of ye Duke,
were lothe in theyr talke to diſpleaſe him: and now they vnderſtandinge
that the Italian armye was approched verye
neare, minded to ſet vpon the fame but they were preuented,
for the Emperour fearinge ye ſame, aduertiſed Segnior Gioua
Baptiſt Sauelli Captayne ouer the Romayne horſemen,
that with all celeritye he ſhould repayre with his armye vnto
Lanzuotto: which commaundemente he accompliſhed wt
all expedition, and ſo deceyued the deuiſe of the ennemyes,
wherefore they remayned in the territoryes of Inghilſtatte,
                  
for defence of which Cittye (becauſe it was of greate importance
for that warre) the Emperour ſente to ſafegarde it, a
Captayne with two hundreth Italian Hargabuſyers, and
fyue hundreth Duchemen. And now the Emperours ſupplies
beinge aſſembled together with thoſe of his confederates
and allies, he marched towards Inghilſtatte neare vnto
which the armyes as it were mette together: where ye 
                  Langraue
not mindinge to looſe time, ſent the defyance vnto the
Emperour and prouoked him vnto battaile, which defiance
for diuers cauſes the Emperour would not accepte, for as he
verye well knewe the nomber of his ennemyes to be muche
ſuperiour vnto his, ſo he iudged that within ſhort ſpace theyr
power woulde not a litle decreaſe,The greate wyſedome of Charles the fifte. wherefore he reſouled to
keepe them at a baye, and to paſſe the time with ſkirmiſhes:
which continued vnto the .xxi. of Nouēber. When the Langraue
perceyuinge daylye the victuels and ſouldiours of the
Emperour to encreaſe, and his to deminiſhe, and alſo that
while he conſumed the time in vaine in the field, by thinking
to ouercome the Emperour, he together with other, loſte at
home their owne countryes: he rayſed his campe, (themperours
armye not witting thereof) and in the night marched
manye myles, not ſtaying till he came to Haiden,
                  God ouerthroweth rebelles. where he
diſmiſſed his power, euerye one repayringe vnto his owne
countrye.
               Themperour ſeinge his ennemyes departed, and no reſiſtance
to remayne, lyſenced the Countye of Bura to departe
with his ſouldiours, at which inſtant the Countye Palatine
repayred vnto him, in moſte humble wyſe yeldinge himſelfe
vnto his mercye, of whom hee obtayned fauoure for his diſobedience.
And althoughe this ſeaſon was moſt colde, yet the
Emperour not minding to omitte the preſent oportunity offred
vnto him by fortune, ſent parte of his hoaſt to winne certayne
Cittyes and Caſtelles of the Langraues there adioyning,The Duke of Vertenberg ſubmitteth himſelfe to the Emperour.
and the Duke of Alua likewyſe with an other parte of
the armye, man moſt of the country of Vertenberg, ye Duke
whereof (as the Countye Palatine had done) humbled himſelfe
vnto the Emperour, of whom he obtayned pardon vpō
                  
condition that he ſhould paye vnto the Emperour 2. hundred▪
Thouſand Florens of Golde, in conſideration of the expences
made in that warre, with diuers other couenauntes.
               In like maner Vlmes and Auguſta yelded vnto the Emperour,
with certayne other free Cittyes, euery one payinge a
ſumme of moneye to ſuſtaine the charge of that warre: and
althoughe the ſharpenes of the ſeaſon did dailye encreaſe, yet
the Emperour would not deſiſt from perſecuting the Duke
of Saxonie and Langraue as chiefe of this rebellion. But
while he abode at Vlmes to refreſh his ſouldiours, there repayred
vnto him Monſignor de Bura, who practiſed to make
an accorde betwene him and the Langraue, but he would in
no wyſe geue eare vnto his ſute: and at that inſtante hee receyued
newes, that Duke Maurice was in a readynes to enter
into battayle with the Duke of Saxonie, but immediatlye
after hee had vnderſtanding howe the Duke had not onlye
cauſed Maurice to retyre, but alſo had recouered all ſuch
Cittyes as the ſayde Duke Maurice had wonne in ye behalfe
of his brother Ferdinand the kinge of the Romaynes, with a
great parte of his owne Segnoryes. Wherefore themperour
ſente Signior Pirro Colonna,
                  Marques Albert taken priſoner. and Marques Albert to
moleſt the territoryes of the ſayde Duchye, but Albert was
with a great nomber of his taken priſoner by an ambuſhmēt
made of Saxons: wherfore themperour reſolued to go himſelfe
to tonquere that Duchie, and therevpon ſent his armye
towards Norinberg, for he being ſore vexed with the goute,
ſtayed at Nerling, but within ſhort ſpace recoueringe he departed
thence, and ioyninge his armye wt his brothers, they
made in nomber x. Thouſande horſemen and viii. Thouſand
footemen, with this hoaſt they entered Saxonie, bearing awaye
all that they found without reſiſtance, and as Conquerours
they came vnto the Ryuer Albi, on the farther ſyde of
which within a fewe myles the Duke was encamped, & had
ſente a nomber of ſouldiours vnto the ryuer to prohibite the
Emperours paſſage. This ryuer was .8. foote deepe and
.300. broade, which made it very difficult to be waded ouer,
but fortune was ſo fauourable vnto the Emperour, that in

this neceſſity a countryman declared vnto him the foorde, ſo
that he and his brother with all their armye paſſed eaſely ouer
the ſame and entring into battaile with the Saxons, after
longe fight he ouercame them and tooke priſoner the Duke
who was a litle hurt, and his eldeſt ſonne who was alſo hurt
eſcaped by flight: in this battaile were ſlayne about .5000.
Saxons, and of the Emperours ſouldiers but .300. The
Duke was preſented priſoner vnto ye Emperour by the countye
Hippolitus:
                  The Duke of Saxony takē priſoner. who after he was broughte before the Emperour,
alighted not from his horſe but putting of onely his
hat, ſayde, moſt myghty and mercifull Caeſar, I am youre
priſoner,The wordes of the duke of Saxonie to ye Emperour. and as a priſoner I praye you deale with me: vnto
whome the Emperour aunſwered, that he woulde intreate
him as he had deſerued and that he called him to late Caeſar:
theſe wordes the Emperour ſpake becauſe the Duke in hys
letters directed vnto him entituled thē vnto Charles of Gaūt
not accomptinge him as Emperoure, not louge after the
Duke was by ye Emperours Iudges cōdemned vnto death,
but he as a moſt mercifull prince,A mercifull Prince. graunted him lyfe, vppon
certain condicions, of which one was, that he ſhould remaine
priſoner during Th'emperours pleaſure, who vſed exceding
greate liberality vnto Sibilla a Lady of hauty courage wyfe
vnto the ſayde Duke. At this inſtant alſo, the Bohemians
(who were in league with the Duke) being not a little terrified
with theſe euents, humbly beſeched ye Emperour that
he would reconcile thē vnto his brother Ferdinand the kyng
of the Romaines: of whome they receiued aunſweres booth
of hope, and doubt. The Langraue deſtitute of all ayde, aſſayed
to winne the fauour of the Emperour, by the meanes
of the Marquiſe of Brādēburg, and of Maurice his ſonne in
lawe: who with earneſt ſute obteyned his pardon, vpon cō
                  dicion
that he woulde preſent him ſelfe, and in humble wyſe
beſeche the ſame:The Conit
                        •
                      Albert of Maſ
                        •••
                     t and Tunberſon, 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the duke of Saxone. but the Langraue by nature very ſtout,
refuſed in ſuch a lowly manner to ſubmit him ſelfe, harboring
as yet a certaine vaine hope to be ayded by diuers of the
confederates, who not longe after deceiued hys expectation
for they diſmiſſed their ſouldyers, and to procure quyetneſſe

returned into their countries. Wherevpon the Langraue
of his owne accord now offered to do that with manye other
condicions, wherunto before at the requeſt of his frendes he
woulde in no wyſe condiſcend: but Charles vnderſtandinge
that he was ready to demaund pardon and to yeld vnto all other
conditions, ſhewed him ſelfe not ſo tractable as he had
done before, notwithſtanding in the end as it were ouercome
with the importunate ſute of ye Langraues frendes, he graū
                  ted
ſo that he would come vnto his preſence, & with humble
ſubmiſſion demaunde pardon, he woulde not onely receyue
him into fauour but alſo remit vnto him all offences whiche
he had committed, alſo reuoke his edict pronounced againſt
him, moreouer hee promiſed to pardon his rebellion, wyth
deliueringe him from perpetuall impriſonment, and from
all other puniſhement as well of hys ſubſtance as of his perſon.
The Langraue hauinge ſufficient aſſurance for the performance
of theſe conditions, preſented himſelfe vnto themperoure
humblye demaundinge pardon vppon his knees, of
whome he was receiued into fauour, but whē after the Germaine
faſhion he offered him his hand, the Emperour would
not receyue it, but wylled hym to repayre vnto the Duke of
Alua, with whom he ſupped merylie, but at night when he
thoughte to be diſmiſſed hee was reteyned by the Duke, not
without great feare vnto the Langraue, and much maruaile
vnto the electours, whoe beinge troubled in mynde quieted
them ſelues for the preſent, in that they perceyued the Emperour
mynded to keepe hym in priſon, vntill all the condicions
were obſerued, which were cōteined in ye cōditiōs writtē.
This was the ende of the long warre whiche the Emperour
had with the Langraue and the Duke of Saxonie, whome
without queſtion he had neuer in this wiſe brought vnto ſubiection,God ouerthroweth rebelles.
if they had not bene betrayed by certayne of their feined
confederates, in whome they repoſed greate confidence
and credit. The Emperour hauinge with proſperous ſucceſſe
finiſhed the warres in Germanie paſſed into Sueuia
couducting with him the two Princes as priſoners, he caryed
with him alſo greate abundaunce of Artilerye whiche hee

tooke from his enemies, parte wherof he ſent into Spaine,
parte into Milaine, and the reſt vnto the kingedome of Naples.
                  Ferdinand.
The Kinge of the Romaines alſo by the induſtrye of
the Marquiſe of Marignano, and Auguſto the brother of
Maurice, broughte the Bohemians vnto his obedyence and
ſubiection. While the Emperour made his abode in Auguſta,
Lubeck, Bremia, and Branſuice ſubmitted them
ſelues vnto hym payinge for their libertye .200000.
Crownes, many other free Cityes yelded themſelues vnto
the Emperoure raunſominge them ſelues with ſommes of
money, but the Dukes of Luneburg deſiring themperours
fauour did not obteyne it, for that their ambaſſadours vttered
words of greate arrogancie:The 
                        〈…〉
                     . It is moſte true that in the
cittye of Auguſta the ſouldiers of Madrucci, being greeued
for not hauing the paies which were promiſed them, commē
                  ced
a mutine, and beinge moſt inſolent went to beſiege the
Emperour being in his owne pallace, who preſently cauſed
their due to be payde and the authors of the treaſon to be
puniſhed: alſo after the Emperour had appeaſed certayne
tumults which were lyke to haue happened in that cittye about
religion, he iorneyed vnto Spires where he procured a
reformation & eſtabliſhment for religion,Fortune. but Fortune whoſe
propertie is to be mutable, and then eſpeciallye when leaſte
cauſe of doubt is offered, ſeemed at this inſtant as it were to
reuoke her fauourable ſmilinges whiche ſhe had of ſo longe
tyme continued towardes the Emperour, for where as hee
thought he had ended all troubles, he was at a ſodain wrapped
in greater trauayles then euer at any other time, for after
the death of King Frauncis, Henry his ſonne ſucceded in
the kingdome, who (as Hannibal againſte the Romaines)
hauyng from hys chyldehoode hated the Emperour,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      of Fraunce. immediatly
after he was plated in his fathers ſeate determined to
moue war againſt him, wherfore hauing well prouyded for
the defence of the frontiers of Picardie, and ſent diuers captaynes
and ſouldyers into Scotlande to ayde them in their
warres againſte the Engliſhemen, he went into Piemont,
as well to furnyſhe their forts and cities there with all kinde

of municion & other neceſſaries, as alſo to conclude a league
with the Pope and Suizzers. Vnto the Emperoure who
was moſte vigilant, the practiſes of the French King coulde
not be hidden, although he endeuoured by all meanes poſſyble
to conceile the ſame.Bura. Wheruppon he ſent into Englāde
the Countie Bura to confirme with that Kinge the League
which he had with the Kinge his father: and vſinge the lyke
artes of diſſymulation with the Frenche Kynge, as he
knewe the Frenche Kinge dyd vſe to practyſe towardes
him, to renue ſuſſpition did write vnto him, that hee ſhoulde
not maruaile at the going of the Countie into England, for
that it was vppon certaine occaſions of his owne pryuate affayres,
moreouer yt he entended (yf by him there were made
no brech) to continue the peace whiche he made with Kynge
Frauncis, with all frendſhyppe and brotherlye loue. Theſe
wordes the King accompted as feyned, and ſuſpectinge contrarye
effects procured with more expedition to renue wyth
the Suizzers the league which was concluded with them by
Kynge Frauncis his father. This league did not a litle dyſpleaſe
the Emperour, who perceiued to what end their confederacy
tended, as alſo for that he had determined to chaſtice
certaine free citties whiche were in armes for the reformacion
of religion: from which attempt he was reuoked by
this newe league of the Pope, the French King, & the Suizzers,
with diuers other princes: wherefore while tyme and
occaſion ſerued, he ſent into Spayne for King Philippe his
ſonne by Maximilian his Nephew, who in Valiadohe maried
Marie the Emperours eldeſt daughter, and was left in
Spayne to ſupplye the roume of Kinge Phillip: who in the
moneth of Nouember arriued at Geane, and paſſed from
thence by eaſye iorneyes vnto Bruſſels where he was looked
for by the Emperour his father:The death of Paule the 3. the tenth daye of Nouember
which was in anno. 1549 dyed Pope Paule the thyrd:
for whoſe ſucceſſour was created Giouan Maria, called Iulius
the thirde,Iulius the 3. created Pope who preſentlye eſtabliſhed Octauio Farneſe
in the Duchy of Parma, and Piacenza, and ſent him foorthwith

vnto the ſame, but Piacenza was kepte vnto the Emperours
behalfe by Don Ferrante Gonzaga, in whom
Duke Octauio repoſed little confidence,Duke Octauio marryed the baſe daugher of ye Emperour Charles. althoughe hee
had marryed the Emperours baſe daughter, wherefore
both thone and thother were ſtronglye guarded, for the better
aſſurance of their mutuall ſecuritye. At this preſente
Dragut Raſis a famous Corſale occupyed the Citty Affrica,
which is a Cittye both riche and mightye, and ſtandeth
vpon an arme of the Mediterraneū
                   Sea: from whence Dragut
toaſtinge the Seas, did greatlye endamage the Chriſtians,
and induced no ſmal feare vnto Cicilia and diuers other
Ilandes thereunto adioyning. Wherefore the Emperour
to repulſe the furye of this tyrannous infidel, determined to
winne from him that Cittye, and appoynted general ouer ye
enterpryſe Gian de Vega Viceroy of Cicilia, he ſent thither
Prince Doria with his Nauye, accompanyed with manye other
ſhippes full of Spaniardes and Italians, thither went
alſo Don Pietro Viceroye of Naples, with the Gallyes of ye
kingdome: theſe valiant Captaynes beſieged the Citty, and
in thend toke it with ſmall loſſe of Chriſtians, for there were
not ſlayne aboue fiftye. Dragut fledde from thence with 6.
Gallyes and .xiiii. Galliottes vnto Zerbi, from whence hee
wrote vnto Soliman of the iniury done vnto him by the Emperour:
who therevpon ſente verye threatninge letters vnto
kinge Ferdinand. At this preſent through the ayde which
the Frenche kinge gaue vnto Duke Octauio, to mayntayne
hym in the ſtate of Parma, or rather as ſome thincke, to impadron
himſelfe therof: there aroſe ſodaine warres betwene
the Emperour and the Frenche kinge, in ſondrye places, as
well by Sea as lande, for while Giouan Baptiſta the Popes
nephewe, and Don Ferrante (who credited the truce which
was taken betwene themperour and the kinge,) had cauſed
certayne Garriſons of ſouldiours to repayre vnto him out of
Piemont, which were left there for ye defence of diuers Cittyes
and Caſtelles: to be ſiege Parma, into which entered a
great nomber of French Captaynes and ſouldiours. Mō
                     ſignor
Briſack generall in Piemont for the Frenche kinge,

mindyng to reuolte the warre from Parma, cauſed certayne
companies of ſouldiours at ſondrye tymes to repayre ſecretely
vnto him oute of Fraunce, with whom at a ſodayne
hee aſſaulted Cheri, and wanne it with diuers other fortes
of importance. And vppon the Sea the Prior of Capua
generall for the French kinge, vnderſtandinge that Prince
Doria, was departed from Geane, to conducte into Italye
(by the Emperours appoyntment) Maximilian the king of
Boheme with the Queene his wyfe, determined to encounter
wyth them, and vppon the ſodayne to aſſaulte them: but
Doria although he had .v. Gailyes more in nomber then the
Prior had, durſte not meete with hym, but retyred backe againe
for feare, wherevppon the Prior chaſed him a whole
daye, and being not able to ouertake him, returned vnto the
Porte of Tolone, and not long after departed for the ſeruice
of the Frenche kinge, and went to ſerue wyth the knightes
of the Rhodes.
               
               The ſiege of Parma and Mirandola hauing long tyme cō
                  tinued
vnto a ſmal effecte, and little cōmoditye of the Pope,
who now beinge wearye with the great charges and expenſes
which daily aryſe by the maintaynance of warre, concluded
a peace wyth the French king, after the death of hys nephew
who dyed at the ſiege of Mirandola, and ſo rayſed both
ſieges: from whence the Marques of Marighano departed
with his ſouldiours to ſuccour Piemont: (but here omitting
certaine euentes which happened betweene themperour and
the Frenche kinge) I ſaye that the warre ceaſed betweene
them. Notwithſtandinge Henrye to procure the encreaſe of
his owne forces, and to deminiſhe thoſe of the Emperours:
cauſed many Princes both of Italye and Germanye, to manifeſt
theyr hatred againſt him (which vnto that time had remayned
verye ſecrete & not knowen:) For hee entered into
league wyth diuers Germayne Princes, who nowe were in
Armes againſt the Emperour, for controuerſies in matters
of Religion: amonge whom was Maurice who had bene inueſted
by the Emperour of the Duchye of Saxonie, Duke
Iohn beinge depriued of the ſame, together with his Electorſhippe

when he was taken priſoner. This Maurice was
moſt fiercelye incenſed with wrathe agaynſt the Emperour,
for yt he would not diſmiſſe the Langraue who was his lonne
in ſawe,Mauryce inſenced wyth wrath againſt themperour. frō impriſonment, ſince he had long before obſerued
and performed al the Articles contayned in the Capitolatiō
of the accord. Wherfore he eſtemed yt he was both mocked &
deceyued by themperour, and therefore omittinge his obedience
and dutye which he ought vnto him being his Lorde,
and pricked forwarde by other who for matters in Religion
hated the Emperour: he determined to moue warre againſt
him, and therevpon ioyned wyth the Duke of Saxons ſonne,
the ſonnes of the Langraue, & certayne other Princes theyr
confederates, to endamage him all the wayes they mighte:
All theſe entered into a league wyth the French kinge, who
as one that deſyred nothing ſo greatlye, gaue them vnto this
effecte 400000. Crownes, vpon condition that they ſhould
diſburſe amonge them euerye moneth 100000. Crawnes,
with which, together with that which other woulde contribute,
they ſhould maintayne cōtinually in the fielde an hoaſt
of 20. Thouſande footemen, 8. Thouſande horſemen, and of
2. Thouſande men of Armes: Moreouer he promiſed that at
what time the Emperour ſhoulde come againſt them with
an armye, he would be in a readines with an hoaſt to ſuccour
them. The Emperour at the concludinge of this league
was in Iſpruck, who not thinking that th'ennemyes coulde
in any ſhort ſpace haue gathered ſo puiſant an hoaſt, vſed no
expedition in prouidinge of ſouldiours, but continued there:
eyther mindinge to ſee vnto what ende this prouiſion would
tende or els (beinge vppon ſuch a ſodaine vnprouided of ſufficient
power to reſiſt the force of ſo mighty ennemyes) to procure
meaenes to mittigate the wrath of Maurice, which cauſed
certayne to ſuſpect (althoughe withoute cauſe as hereafter
will appeare) that Maurice had wyth the Emperour cō
                  ſpired
the deathe of the Frenche kinge, whiche opinion was
moſt foliſh and vaine: For Maurice at a ſodaine wt his Army
marched vnto Auguſta, takinge by the waye Vlmes, from
thence he wente towardes Iſpruck, intendinge there to apprehend

the Emperour: who hauing intelligence of his cō
                  minge
ſent certayne ſouldiers to defend the ſtreighte (a paſſage
very ſtrong and of greate importance) but the ſouldiers
of Maurice came againſt it with ſuch force that they toke it:
the Emperour diſapointed of his purpoſe, departed frō 
                  Iſpruck
in the night by torch lighte when it rayned without any
company except thoſe of his court, & certaine other which
garded his perſon together with the embaſſadours vnto Vilacco,
                  Themperour is cōſtrayned to flye vnto Villocco.
a Caſtell in the confines of Friuli, belonging vnto the
auncient patrimony of the houſe of Auſtria: a thing certain
to be lamented at, that ſo victorious an Emperour, ſhoulde
in the night when it rayned retyre with ſuch haſt into ſo ſimple
a place, with his court diſordered, and the greater parte
on foote for want of horſes, being chaſed of his owne vaſſall,
and ſubiect vnto ye Empyre, whom a litle before he had exalted
vnto that eſtate and dignitye: Maurice came y• very ſame
night vnto Iſpruck in which he departed where he ſtaid not,
but followed the Emperour, whome when he coulde not ouer
take returned vnto Iſpruck, where hee ſpoiled all ſuche
goodes as appertained vnto ſtraungers, withoute endamaginge
any of the cittizens. The Segniorie of Venis vnderſtanding
of the Emperours being at Vilacco, ſent immedyately
to viſite him, preſenting them ſelues very honorablye,
and with much curteſye profering to pleaſure him any waye
they might. Vnto whome the Emperour rendered moſte
harty thankes, hauinge his mynde wholye bent to reuenge
this iniury of Maurice, notwithſtanding his determination
(the tyme ſo requyringe) he ſent Kinge Ferdiuand to fall to
ſome accorde with Maurice, but he obteined nothing, for the
Proteſtants would not in any wyſe accept the conditions offered,
for that the Emperour to mainteine the Popes ceremonies
had ſo cruelly delt with them in the laſt warre: and
therfore proceded as conquerours in reuenginge vppon the
Papiſtes, the iniuries which of late by them they had receyued,The death of Mauryce.
but in the end in a conflict with the Duke of Brunſwick
this Maurice was ſo hurte that within three dayes after
hee dyed, whoſe deathe was rather a hurte then a profitte

                  
                     •
                  inge of the Emperoures affayres: the cauſe of thys warre
chiefly being for the long deteyninge of the Langraue priſoner
contrarye to the Emperours promiſe.The death of the Duke of Saxonye. At this preſent
Iohn ye Duke of Saxonie dyed, who although he were ſet at
liberty by themperour before time, yet willingly he folowed
the courte, whoſe children he receiued into fauour & inueſted
them wt the Duchie of their father, & determining alſo to ſet
the Langraue at lyberty, he ſent into Flaūders vnto Quene
Marie his ſiſter that ſhe ſhould delyuer the Langraue out of
priſon, which the captaine of the Caſtell would not permitte
to be done,The Lāgraue ſet at liberty. for that the Emperour had not ſente vnto him by
a ſecret token which was betwene them, of which in the end
he aduertiſed the Queene, and then he was ſet at liberty.
               At this tyme the people of Sienna beynge muche abuſed by
Don Diego,
                  Don Diego. who gouerned the ſame for th'emperour, practiſed
with the French King for their liberty, who fauouring
their ſute, ſent thither the countie Pitilian, and the countie
Fiori with .5000. ſouldiers, which of the Sieneſes were intromitted
the citty, and the Spaniardes vppon certaine cō
                  ditions
were content to render the cittadell, which Don Diego
had built, for that the cittizens promiſed faithfully to remayne
and abyde at the deuotion of the Emperour, proteſtinge
that they had not done this as rebelles againſt him, but
to recouer their libertie, which they had loſt by the tyrannie
of Don Diego, while theſe euents happened in Sienna, the
French Kinge moued warre freſhly againſt the Emperour
in Flaunders. Whereuppon the Emperour ſent the Marquiſe
of Mariniano with diuers other captaines into Germamnie
to leuie ſouldiers, vnto whome repayred at Iſpruck,
many captaines of Spaniardes and Italians, with a great
number of Duchmen, moreouer he induced Marquyſe Albert
who at that tyme ſerued the French king with .14000.
footemen and certaine horſemen to renounce his ſeruice,Subiectes ought to obey their prince. and
to reuolt vnto him who was his naturall Lord whiche in the
ende he obteined. The Emperour beinge at this inſtante in
Auguſta altered his determination from going into Flaunders,
and reſolued to paſſe into Fraunce againſt the Kinge,

thorowe the Duchy of Loreine: of which reſolution ye Marquiſe
Albert hauing vnderſtanding marched before him vnto
the citty of Mettes a mightty and popolous cittye in yt territorie
of Loreine,
                  The deſcription of Mettes. ſtanding in a playne not much diſtant frō
the Alpes, from which the riuer of Moſella deſcēdeth which
ouer runneth the fieldes, and deuideth itſelfe into two braū
                  ches,
the bigger of which compaſſeth for a little ſpace parte
of the cittye, and then entringe into the ſame, maketh as yt
were two Iſlandes. The other in lyke maner makinge as it
were without the cittye a little Iſlande, doth after approche
more nere and formeth an other Iſland betweene two bridges,
the one called Ziſtro, and the other Diſmore, both the
one and the other of which bridges hath ſeuen arches.
               This citty for a greate ſomme of money was once made fre,
but after it came into the poſſeſſion of the Frenche Kynge.
               In it there was at this preſente the Duke of Guiſe with many
ſouldiers of Frenchemen and Italians, who iſſued out againſt
the Marquiſe with greate force, and ſkirmiſhed dayly
with the Duchmen. But not long after the Emperoure
with a mighty hoſte came and made preſent battry againſt ye
ſame,The Emperour battereth Mettes. which was couragiouſlye defended by the Duke: and
by reaſon of the ſharpenes of winter, which that yeare in all
partes of Europe was very extreame, for a great number of
the Emperours ſouldiers and horſes died with colde, ſo that
not being able to ſupport any lenger the contagious ſeaſone
in the ende of December he departed from thence eſpecially
for that he vnderſtoode the French King had taken by Monſegnior
of Vandoſme, Edine a citty in Flaunders of greate
importaunce, which he determined all other affayres ſet aparte,The Emperour battreth Mettes.
to recouer the next ſpringe following. But at his departure
from Mettes, hauing in mynde the affayres of Sienna,
he wrate vnto Don Pietro of Toledo, viceroy of Naples,
that he ſhoulde with ſpeede prepare a ſufficient hoſte, and go
his owne perſon to make warre againſte that cittye, whiche
commaundement hee accompliſhed with all expedition, and
being come vnto Frorence, where he ſhould haue ioyned his
power with that of the Dukes, he dyed, but the warre was

afterwarde mainteined by the Emperoure and the Duke againſt
the Frenchmen with variable ſucceſſe, and in the end
Storza vnaduiſedly comming to battaile with the Marquiſe
of Mariniano,
                  The Marquiſe Mariniano, ouercō
                     meth Pietro Storza and taketh Siēna receiued a greate ouerthrowe, & he him ſelfe
wounded in one of his thighes. Then the Marquiſe cauſed
the cittye to be aſſaulted, but he could not that waye winne it
wherfore he continued his ſiege, and at length had it vppon
ſondry conditions, of the which neuer any one was obſerued
At this inſtant the Emperoure was encamped before Edine
with a very braue hoſte, and ceaſed not to batter and aſſaulte
the towne moſt liuely both night and day, vntill he had gotten
ye ſame, where was ſlaine Duke Horatio, who was ther
for the French King,D. Horatio. and dyuers noble gentlemen Frenchmen
and Italians taken priſoners, among whome was Memoranſi
the Conſtables ſonne of Fraunce: this citty & Tirwin
which afterwarde the Emperoure alſo tooke, he cauſed
to be ouerthrowen, and plained with the grounde, becauſe
he woulde be no more moleſted with them. This yeare before
the winninge of Sienna dyed Charles ye Duke of Sauoy,
vnto whoſe ſonne Filibert the Emperoure gaue the countrye
of Haſti: and who at this preſent (through the accord which
after happened betwene the Emperour & the french Kyng)
enioyeth againe his whole Duchye of Sauoy.
                  The deeth of Edwarde king of Englande. There dyed
alſo in this yeare Edwarde Kinge of Englande: and Marie
the daughter of King Henrie the eyght by Madame Katharine,
daughter to the catholike king was crowned Queene:
which Mary afterward was maried in England to Phillip
kinge of Spaine her owne coſin,Quene Marye maryeth Phillip kinge of Spaine. ſonne vnto the Emperour,
which mariage was made legittimate by ye Popes diſpēſation.
And in the yeare .1555. dyed Pope Iulius the third,
vnto whome ſucceded Marcellus the 2. who died ye .20. daye
after his creatiō:The death of Iulius the .3 Marcellus ye ſecond. & Paulus quartus of ye houſe of Caraſſa was
created Pope, whoſe lyfe was ſuch yt al mē wiſhed his death
eſpecially ye Romaines who more thē all other taſted of hys
Neronious wickednes.Paulus ye .4. created biſhop of Rome. Thēperour who at this preſēt was
in Flaūders ſore greued wt the gout, & diuers other infirmities,
being ouercom wt the continual wars, & great troubles

vnto which empires are ſubiect,Themperour determineth to forſake his gouernmente of all his eſtates. reſolued to wtdraw himſelfe
frō ye cares of this world, vnto a quiet & peaceable lyfe wtout
bearing any lenger gouerment ouer anye eſtate whiche certainlye
no man is able to do, but that the two contrarye
paſſions deſire, and feare, in altringe our myndes, do diſturbe
our whole quietnes: it is ſaide yt he was determined
ſo to do viii. yeares before: The like is redde of the themperour
Diocletian, who forſakinge the Romaine Empyre, wt
                  drew
himſelfe vnto Salona a Citty of Dalmatia his coūtry,
where he continued his dayes in labouringe & makinge of a
litle Garden wyth his owne hands, reputing himſelfe more
bleſſed in that eſtate, then whē he enioyed the Empyre of the
whole world: So was Octauius minded to forſake his kingdome.Themperour ſendeth for kinge Philip out of Englande, and reſigneth vnto him all his eſtates.
The Emperour deſyring to bring to effect this his determination,
ſent for Kinge Phillip his ſonne who at that inſtant
was in Englande, and reſigned vnto him by open Decree
the kingdome of Naples, Flaunders, Burgundye, the
eſtate of Millen, with all other his Segnioryes: And yt next
yeare following he reſigned likewyſe vnto kinge Ferdinand
his brother, the .24. of Februarye in the yere of Chriſt 1557.
which was the daye of his Natiuitye, the whole Empyre: &
in Auguſt following beinge in Gaunt,
                  The Emperour reſigneth the Empyre vnto kinge Ferdinand his brother. he lyſenced to depart
all the Embaſſadours that were with him, and all his officers,
Princes & Captaynes, ſaying vnto them that he ſhould
haue no more neede of theyr ſeruice. Moreouer he rendered
infinite thanckes vnto the Maieſtrates that were preſent, for
theyr loyalty and faythfulnes, which they had alwayes vſed
towardes him, recommending vnto them Phillip his ſonne:
and hauinge finiſhed theſe wordes he aſcended into a Litter,
and was carryed vnto a certayne Caſtell called Aſueda,
where the 14. of September he entered into a ſhippe, which
was prepared for his voyage with ye two Quenes his ſiſters,
and after he had bleſſed his ſonne wt geuing him many godly
exhortacions, he toke of him his laſt farewell, & therewith ye
ſayles beinge hoyſed, he ſayled towardes Spayne, being accompanyed
wyth .70. Gallyes, for the ſafegarde of his perſon,
in which countrye it is ſayde he had bene vii. tymes, the

firſt whē he was xvii. yeares of age,Of the Emperours arriual at Lared, and of the words which he ſpake the
                        •
                     e. ye ſecōd whē he was xxii.
the thirde .xxiii. the fourth .xxxvi. the fift xxxviii. the ſixte .xli.
and this ſeuenth whiche was the laſte, when he was .lvi.
yeares olde: and being arryued at the Porte of Lared a Cittye
in Biſkay, thither repayred to receyue him the great Cō
                     ſtable
with all the Barons of Spayne: who as ſoone as hee
landed, kneeled downe vppon the Sea bancke, where after
he had rendred his moſte humble thanckes vnto Almightye
God for his arriuall, in that it had pleaſed his goodnes to
bringe him ſafe vnto the lande and people which he moſte loued,
and by whom next vnder God he had aſpyred vnto ſo manye
highe degrees of honour, and receyued infinite victoryes
and triumphes: He ſpake theſe wordes, O my moſt deſyred
mother, GOD preſerue thee, naked I came out of my mothers
wombe, and naked I returne vnto thee, as vnto another
mother of myne,Themperour was carred to Valiadolit and in recompence of the manifold benefites
which I haue receyued of thee, (not being able to rewarde
the with anye thinge) I geeue thee this my ſimple bodye,
and theſe my ſimple boones: which wordes being ended
with the effuſion of many teares, he curteouſly ſaluted thoſe
noble men which were come to honoure him, and then was
caryed in a Litter vnto Vagliadolit,
                  Themperour at S. Iuſtus withdraweth himſelfe from all cōpanion into a Monaſterye of Monckes of thorder of S. Hierome. where the infant Charles
his nephew made his abode: there he remayned 2. dayes,
not in a ſumptuous Pallace, but in a priuate houſe, where he
exhorted the infant to feare God, and to follow in vertue his
aunceſtours: From thence he was caryed vnto a certayne
Valleye ſomewhat pleaſant, wherunto towards the South
adioyned certaine hilles, this place he had choſen to conſume
that remnaunt of tyme, which God ſhould geue him to liue,
the name of it is S. Iuſtus, diſtant .7. myles from Piacenza
in the prouince of Eſtremadure: In it alſo was a Monaſterye
of Monckes, of the order of S. Hierome, with whom themperour
intendinge to make his abode as longe as he lyued,
he lyſenced to depart the two Queenes his ſiſters, with all ye
reſidue of his familiars, retayning onlye to attende his perſon,
but .xii. men wyth a horſe which he verye ſeldome occupyed.
There he diſpenced the houres continually in prayer,

and in hearing Deuine ſeruice, in ſuche wyſe that his whole
thoughtes and wordes were onlye of God: with this Deuine
and ſpirituall exerciſes, he continued vnto Anno 1558.
the xxi. of September, in which he feeling his tyme to draw
neare, prepared himſelfe moſt willingly vnto death, and lifting
his eyes vnmouablye vnto heauen ſayde theſe wordes.
               O Lord God my redemer, I render vnto thy deuine Maieſtye
moſt harty thanckes, for the manifold benefites which
thou of thy goodues haſt vouchſaued to beſtowe vppon mee,
as in making me Lord and ruler ouer ſo many kingdomes,
and likewiſe for thy holy protectiō, which thou haſt alwayes
preſerued mee: But aboue all thinges for this my laſt ende,
which by the lighte of thy grace I ſawe two yeares ſince, by
contemninge of this tranſitorye and vaine worlde, and cleauing
vnto the ſure ladder,The perfitte wape to heauen. by which I truſt to come to raigne
with thee in Heauen, which is the paſſion of thy deare ſonne
Ieſus Chriſt. After that he ſayd: O moſt merciful father,
I moſt humblye beſiech thee, that thou wilt forgeeue mee all
my offences, and waſhe cleane with thy innocent bloud, this
my ſinfull ſoule, as yet bathed and defyled with bloude, who
haue cauſed the bloude of manye Thouſandes of thy creatures
to be ſhedde,Anotable leſſon for all men to learne to auoyde ſinne, and to contemne this worlde. throughe the vaine follye of theſe falſe Dominions,
and tranſitorye wordlye felicityes: Receyue my
ſoule O heauenly father into the armes of thy mercy. Theſe
wordes beinge ended he ſayde: Into thy handes O Lorde I
commende my ſpirite, and therewyth cloſing his eyes,
as thoughe he had fallen into a ſweete and pleaſante
ſleepe, he paſſed (as it is to be iudged) out of this
moſt myſerable worlde into a moſt bleſſed,
without making of any paſſion or alteration
of countenance or coullour.
This was the death of this moſt
victorious and inuincible
Emperour CHARLES
the fifte.
            
            
               
               Ferdinandus.
               
                  BY the prouidence of Almightye God, ye
Maieſtye of ye Romayne Empyre, hath
continued .260. yeares and more, in the
moſte noble houſe and royall familye of
Hapſburge, and hath brought forth lynallye
.9. Emperours. Rodulphe Coū
                  tye
of Hapſburge was elected kinge of
the Romaynes, at what time a longe ſeaſon, the Empyre of
Rome was deſtitute of a kinge (who as it is ſheewed before)
gaue the Duchie of Auſtria vnto his eldeſt ſonne: By this
meanes it deſcended vnto this royall and moſt Princelye familye
of Hapſburge, from that honſe .9. Emperours haue
ſpronge forth to gouerne this Empyre. The firſt Emperour
was Rodulphe ye firſt Countye of Hapſburge, the ſeconde
was Albarte the firſt, Fredericke the firſt the thirde Emperour
of his houſe, the fourth was Albarte the ſeconde, then
the fifte Fredericke the ſeconde, the .6. was Maximilian, ye
ſeuenth was Charles the fifte, then the eyght was Ferdinandus,
of whom I nowe entreate of.
               This Ferdinandus was the brother of Charles the fifte, ye
ſonne of Philippe Archeduke of Auſtria. The perfite deſcēt
of that noble houſe, is fully ſet forth in the life of his brother
Charles the fifte, and howe it hath continued in that royall
familye of Hapſburge, of the which houſe this Ferdinandus
was the eyght Emperour, and Maximilian the 9. that now
gouerneth. This Ferdinandus was the ſonne of Ioane

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
Queene of Caſtile, whoſe petegree is on euery ſyde ſet forth
alſo in the life of the foreſaid Charles, which orderly ſucceſſiō
to recyte were tedions. It is a great bleſſing of God, a kingdome
or Empyre, to continue ſo longe in one familye they
beinge godly Princes: great be the commendations of this
Ferdinandus, whoſe noble actes if I according to his merits
ſhould fully ſet forth, it would ryſe to a great huge Volume.
               This Ferdinandus was in the time of Charles the fifte his
brother, kinge of the Romaynes, he was a greate comforte,
ſtaye, protection, and ſafegarde vnder God, to all Chriſtendome,
againſt the Turke. This Ferdinandus God by his
mighty power bleſſed in many proſperous victoryes, & in a
ſmal power (in cōpariſon of the Turke Soliman his power)
was made a conquerour ouer the Turke. After many ouerthrowes,
ye 
                  Turke ſeking by a great power to conquere Hū
                     garye
& Vienna: God marueilouſlye proſpered & preſerued
him, & gaue to him wt his brother Charles the victory. This
Ferdinandus was a Prince of great clemencye, wyth al curteous
humanity endued, of fewe wordes, of life moſt temperate
and godlye, a louer of learninge, ſtudious by al meanes
to preſerue peace and concorde in Europe amonge Chriſten
Princes. Soliman the Turke was ouer throwē of this Ferdinandus,
aboute the yeare of Chriſte .1529. Soliman to reuenge
the great ſlaughter which he caughte by Ferdinādus,
gathered an hoaſt of 200000. ſouldiours, but as ſome authors
write, of. 300000. and with this greate armye hee
entered Hungarye, but that great hoaſt was almoſt quight
ouerthrowen, the Palſegraue entering the one ſyde of them,
and the Hungarians on another, wyth diuers other noble &
valiante perſonages, theſe valiant Captaynes on euery ſyde
ſo aſſaulted them, that they gaue them a marueylous great
ouerthrow and put them to flighte. An other time alſo this
Ferdinandus gaue the Turkes a great ouerthrow at Malta,
he beinge then Emperour: as concerninge more at large of
him I will write, as ſone as I gette the perfit declaration of
his whole life, but this ſufficeth to ſhewe that he was a rare,
wyſe godlye and victorious Prince.
               
                  
This Ferdinandus left behinde him his ſonne Maximilian,
who nowe with all glorye gouerneth, and with the mightye
hande of God vpholde is againſt the Turke, who accordinge
to the office of a carefull Prince, hath a diligent eye to ye preſeruation
of Chriſtendome, wyth other godlye Princes.
               God graunte that all wee Chriſtians maye walke in the
feare of God, to loue and dreade him, to obeye our Princeſſe,
to whom by dutye we are bounde to be ſubiect, in holye conſeruation
of life, to ſhewe the frutes of Chriſtians in mutual
loue and charitye one towardes another, charitye being the
badge of a Chriſtian: For by charitye we abyde in God and
God in vs, Loue beinge the fulfillinge of the Lawe and Prophetes,
whereby the deteſtable ennemyes of God, ſeinge the
good workes of Chriſtians, and ſo holy fruites of that moſt
holye woorde, maye be made to become Chriſtians, and to
glorifye our Heauenlye father. Concord and vnitye among
Chriſtians, ouerthroweth the deteſtable ennemyes of God:
God graunt that the Princes of Chriſtendome may embrace
that Chriſtian loue, & ſo lincke themſelues in one vnity, that
the infidels may not ſeeke by the contention and diſagreing
of Chriſtian Princes, an occaſion to do miſchiefes: For by the
contention and diſagreinge of Chriſten Princes, the deuill &
his ſeeke to eſtabliſhe their kingdome. God graunt all contention
to ceaſe amonge Chriſtians, and in the loue of God
to be vnited, by which loue neyther the fleſhe, the world, nor
the deuill, ſhal be able to hurt vs: by this holye vnitye wee
ſhalbe the children of God, and God wil be on our ſyde, and
if God be on our ſyde, wee neede not to care who ſhalbe
againſt vs, let vs therfore humble our ſelues before
God, wee beinge moſt wretched and
miſerable, wtout Gods helpe, & put our
ſlues vnder him, by whoſe protectiō
wee are defended, vpholded,
and deliuered.
¶*******¶
            
            The ende of the lyues of all the Emperours.
         
         
            
            Faultes eſcaped in the printinge.
            In the Epiſtle Dedicatory the firſt ſyde, read egraegiam for
egaergiā.
            
            An Folio .11. reade De emptionibus, for Do omitionibus.
            
            In Folio .12. reade periodos, for periodo.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               Imprinted at London in Fleteſtreate
neare to Saint Dunſtones Churche,
by Thomas Marſhe.
¶*******¶
            Anno Domini. .1571.
            
         
      
   