
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A booke called the Foundacion of Rhetorike, becauſe all other partes of Rhetorike are grounded thereupon, euery parte ſette forthe in an Oracion vpon queſtions, verie profitable to bee knowen and redde: Made by Richard Rainolde Maiſter of Arte, of the Vniuerſitie of Cambridge. 1563.
            
            Menſ. Marcij. vj.
            ¶ Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kingston.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the right honorable and my ſinguler good Lorde, my Lorde Robert Dudley, Maiſter of the Quéenes Maieſties horſe, one of her highes priuie Coun
                     •••
                  e, and knight of the moſte honourable order of the Garter: Richard Rainolde wiſheth longe life, with increaſe of honour.
            
            
               
                  ARISTOTLE the famous Philoſopher, writing a boke to king Alexāder, the great and mightie conquerour, began the Epistle of his Booke in theſe woordes. Twoo thynges moued me chieflie, O King, to betake to thy Maieſties handes, this worke of my trauaile and labour, thy nobilitie and vertue, of the whiche thy nobilitie encouraged me, thy greate and ſinguler vertue, indued with all humanitie, forced and draue me thereto. The ſame twoo in your good Lordſhippe, Nobilitie and Vertue, as twoo mightie Pillers ſtaied me, in this bolde enterpriſe, to make your good Lordſhippe, beyng a Pere of honour, indued with all nobilitie and vertue: a patrone and poſſeſſoure of this my booke. In the whiche although copious and aboundaunte eloquence wanteth, to adorne and beautifie the ſame, yet I doubte not for the profite, that is in this my trauaile conteined, your honour indued with all ſinguler humanitie, will vouchſaufe to accepte my

willyng harte, my profitable purpoſe herein. Many famous menne and greate learned, haue in the Greke tongue and otherwiſe trauailed, to profite all tymes their countrie and common wealthe. This alſo was my ende and purpoſe, to plante a worke profitable to all tymes, my countrie and common wealthe.
            And becauſe your Lordſhippe ſtudieth all ſingularitie to vertue, and wholie is incenſed thereto: I haue compiled this woorke, and dedicated it to your Lordeſhippe, as vnto whō moſte noble and vertuous. VVherin are ſet forthe ſoche Oracions, as are right profitable to bee redde, for knowledge alſo neceſſarie. The duetie of a ſubiecte, the worthie ſtate of nobilitie, the preheminent dignitie and Maieſtie of a Prince, the office of counſailours, worthie chiefe veneracion, the office of a Iudge or Mageſtrate are here ſet foorthe. In moſte fortunate ſtate is the kyngdome and Common wealthe, where the Nobles and Peres, not onelie daiely doe ſtudie to vertue, for that is the wiſedome, that all the graue and wiſe Philophers ſearched to attaine to. For the ende of all artes and ſciences, and of all noble actes and enterpriſes is vertue, but alſo to fauour and vphold the ſtudentes of learnyng, whiche alſo is a greate vertue. VVho ſo is adorned with nobilitie and vertue, of neceſſitie nobilitie and vertue, will moue and allure thē
               
to fauour and ſupport vertue in any other, yea, as Tullie the moſte famous Oratour dooeth ſaie, euen to loue thoſe whō we neuer ſawe, but by good fame and brute beutified to vs. For the encreaſe of vertue, God dooeth nobilitate with honour worthie menne, to be aboue other in dignitie and ſtate, thereupon vertue doeth encreaſe your Lordſhipps honor, beyng a louer of vertue and worthie nobilitie.
            
               Your lordſhippes humble ſeruaunt
Richard Rainolde▪
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               
                  APHTHONIVS a famous man, wrote in Greke of ſoche declamacions, to enſtructe the ſtudentes thereof, with all facilitée to grounde in them, a moſte plentious and riche vein of eloquence. No man is able to inuente a more profitable waie and order, to inſtructe any one in the exquiſite and abſolute perfeccion, of wiſedome and eloquence, then Aphthonius Quintilianus and Hermogenes. Tullie alſo as a moſte excellente Orator, in the like ſorte trauailed, whoſe Eloquence and vertue all tymes ertolled, and the ofſpryng of all ages worthilie aduaunceth. And becauſe as yet the verie grounde of Rhetorike, is not heretofore intreated of, as concernyng theſe exerciſes, though in fewe yeres paſt, a learned woorke of Rhetorike is compiled and made in the Engliſhe tounguei, of one, who floweth in all excellencie of arte, who in iudgement is profounde, in wiſedome and eloquence moſte famous. In theſe therefore my diligence is emploied, to profite many, although not with like Eloquence, beutified and adorned, as the matter requireth. I haue choſen out in theſe Oracions ſoche queſtions, as are right neceſſarie to be knowen and redde of all thoſe, whoſe cogitaciō pondereth vertue and Godlines. I doubte not, but ſeyng my trauaile toucheth vertuous preceptes, and vttereth to light, many famous Hiſtories, the order of arte obſerued alſo, but that herein the matter itſelf, ſhall defende my purpoſe againſte the enuious, whiche ſeketh to depraue any good enterpriſe, begon of any one perſone. The enuious manne though learned, readeth to depraue that, which he readeth, the ignoraunt is no worthie Iudge, the learned and godlie pondereth vprightly & ſincerely, that which he iudgeth, the order of theſe Oracions followeth afterward, and the names of thē.
         
         
            
            ¶ The contentes of this Booke.
            
               
                  AN Oracion made, vpon the Fable of the Shepherdes and the Wolues, the Wolues requeſtyng the Bandogges: wherein is ſet forthe the ſtate of euery ſubiecte, the dignitie of a Prince, the honourable office of counſailours.
               An Oracion vpon the Fable of the Ante and the Greſhopper, teachyng prouidence.
               An Oracion Hiſtoricall, howe Semiramis came to bee Quéene of Babilon.
               An Oracion Hiſtoricall, vpon kyng Richard the thirde ſometyme Duke of Gloceſter.
               An Oracion Hiſtoricall, of the commyng of Iulius Ceſer into Englande.
               An Oracion Ciuill or Iudiciall, vpon Themiſtocles, of the walle buildyng at Athenes.
               An Oracion Poeticall vpon a redde Roſe.
               A profitable Oracion, ſhewyng the decaie of kingdomes and nobilitie.
               An Oracion vpon a Sentence, preferryng a Monarchie, conteinyng all other ſtates of common wealthe.
               The confutacion of the battaile of Troie.
               A confirmacion of the noble facte of Zopyrus.
               An Oracion called a Common place againſt Theues.
               The praiſe of Epaminundas Duke of Thebes, wherein the grounde of nobilitée is placed.
               The diſpraiſe of Domicius Nero Emperour of Roome.
               A compariſon betwene Demoſthenes and Tullie.
               A lamentable Oracion of Hecuba Queene of Troie.
               A deſcripcion vpon Xerxes kyng of Perſia.
               An Oracion called Theſis, as concerning the goodly ſtate of Mariage.
               An Oracion con
                     •••••
                  g a certaine lawe of Solon.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The foundacion of Rhetorike.
            
            
               NAture hath indued euery man, with a certain eloquence, and alſo ſubtilitee to reaſon and diſcuſſe, of any queſtion Rhetorike and Logike giuen of nature. or propoſicion propounded, as Ariſtotle the Philoſopher, in his Booke of Rhetorike dooeth ſhewe. Theſe giftes of nature, ſinguler doe flowe and abounde in vs, accordyng to the greate and ample indumente and plentuouſnes of witte and wiſedome, lodged in vs, therefore Nature it ſelf beyng well framed, and afterward by arte and order of ſcience, inſtructed and adorned, muſt be ſingularlie Arte furthereth nature. furthered, helped, and aided in all excellencie, to exquiſite inuencion, and profounde knowledge, bothe in Logike and Logike. 
               Rhetorike. In the one, as a Oratour to pleate with all facilitee, Rhetorike. and copionſlie to dilate any matter or ſentence: in the other to grounde profunde and ſubtill argument, to fortifie & make ſtronḡe our aſſercion or ſentence, to proue and defende, by the force and power of arte, thinges paſſyng the compaſſe & reach Logike. of our capacitée and witte. Nothyng can bee more excellently giuen of nature then Eloquence, by the which the floriſhyng Eloquence. ſtate of commonweales doe conſiſte: kyngdomes vniuerſally are gouerned, the ſtate of euery one priuatlie is maintained. The commonwealth alſo ſhould be maimed, and debilitated, except the other parte be aſſociate to it. Zeno the Philoſopher zeno. comparing Rhetorike and Logike, doeth aſſimilate and liken them to the hand of man. Logike is like ſaith he to the fiſte, for Logike. euen as the fiſte cloſeth and ſhutteth into one, the iointes and partes of the hande, & with mightie force and ſtrength, wrappeth and cloſeth in thynges apprehended: So Logike for the Similitude Logike. deepe and profounde knowlege, that is repoſed and buried in it, in ſoche ſort of municion and ſtrength fortified, in few wordes taketh ſoche ſorce and might by argumente, that excepte

like equalitée in like art and knowledge doe mate it, in vain the diſputacion ſhalbe, and the repulſe of thaduerſarie readie. Rhetorike is like to the hand ſet at large, wherein euery part Rhetorike like to the hande. Rhetorike. and ioint is manifeſte, and euery vaine as braunches of trées ſette at ſcope and libertée. So of like ſorte, Rhetorike in moſte ample and large maner, dilateth and ſetteth out ſmall thynges or woordes, in ſoche ſorte, with ſoche aboundaunce and plentuouſnes, bothe of woordes and wittie inuencion, with ſoche goodlie diſpoſicion, in ſoche a infinite ſorte, with ſoche pleaſauntnes of Oracion, that the moſte ſtonie and hard hartes, can not but bee incenſed, inflamed, and moued thereto. Theſe twoo ſinguler giftes of nature, are abſolute and perfect Logike and Rhetorike abſolute in fewe. in fewe: for many therebe, whiche are exquiſite and profound in argument, by art to reaſon and diſcuſſe, of any queſtion or propoſicion propounded, who by nature are diſabled, & ſmallie adorned to ſpeake eloquently, in whom neuertheles more aboundaunt knowledge doeth ſomtymes remaine then in the other, if the cauſe ſhalbe in controuerſie ioined, and examined to trie a manifeſte truthe. But to whom nature hath giuen ſoche abilitée, and abſolute excellencie, as that thei can bothe copiouſlie dilate any matter or ſentence, by pleaſauntnes and The vertue of cioquence. ſwetenes of their wittie and ingenious oracion, to drawe vnto theim the hartes of a multitude, to plucke doune and extirpate affecciōs and perturbacions of people, to moue pitee and compaſſion, to ſpeake before Princes and rulers, and to perſwade theim in good cauſes and enterpriſes, to animate and incenſe them, to godlie affaires and buſines, to alter the coū
               ſaill of kynges, by their wiſedome and eloquence, to a better ſtate, and alſo to be exquiſite in thother, is a thing of all moſt noble and excellent. The eloquence of Demoſthenes, I ſocrates, Demoſthenes. Tiſias. Gorgias. Eſchines Tullie. Cato. Tiſias, Gorgias, Eſchines, were a great bulwarke and ſtaie to Athens and all Grece, Rome alſo by the like vertue of Eloquence, in famous and wiſe orators vpholded: the wiſe and eloquente Oracions of Tullie againſte Catiline. The graue and ſentencious oracions of Cato in the Senate, haue

been onelie the meane to vpholde the mightie ſtate of Rome, The Emperors of Rome. famous in Eloquence. in his ſtrength and auncient fame and glorie. Alſo the Chronicles of auncient time doe ſhewe vnto vs, the ſtate of Rome could by no meanes haue growen ſo meruailous mightie, but that God had indued the whole line of Ceſars, with ſinguler vertues, with aboundaunt knowlege & ſinguler Eloquence. Thuſidides the famous Hiſtoriographer ſheweth, Thuſidides. how moche Eloquence auailed the citees of Grece, faliyng to diſſenciō. How did the Corcurians ſaue them ſelues from the Corcurians. inuaſiō and might, of the Poloponeſians, their cauſe pleated Peloponeſians. before the Athenians, ſo moche their eloquence in a truthe preuailed. The Ambaſſadours of Corinth, wanted not their Corinthians copious, wittie, and ingenious Oracions, but thei pleated before mightie, wiſe, and graue Senators, whoſe cauſe, accordyng to iudgemēt, truthe, and integritée was ended. The eloquēt Embaſſages of the Corinthiās, the Lacedemoniās, Lacedemonians. Mituleniās. Athenians. & the Mituleneans, the Athenians, who ſo readeth, ſhall ſone ſée that of neceſſitee, a common wealth or kyngdome muſt be fortefied, with famous, graue, and wiſe counſailours. How often did Demoſthenes ſaue the cōmon wealthes of Athens, Demoſthenes. how moche alſo did that large dominion proſpere and floriſh by I ſocrates. Tullie alſo by his Eloquēt pleaſe, Cato, Craſſus, Socrates. Cato. Craſſus. Antonius. Catulus. Ceſar. Antonius, Catulus Ceſar, with many other, did ſupport and vphold the ſtate of that mightie kyngdō. No doubte, but that Demoſthenes made a wittie, copious, and ingenious oracions, when the Athenians were minded to giue and betake to the handes of Philip kyng of the Macedonians, their Philippe the kyng of the Macidoniās peſtiferous enemie moſte vile and ſubtell, the Orators of Athens. This Philip forſeyng the diſcorde of Grece, as he by ſubtill meanes compaſſed his enterprices, promiſed by the faithe of a Prince, to be at league with the Athenians, if ſo be thei would betake to his handes, the eloquente Oratours of Athens, for as long ſaith he, as your Oratours are with you The ſaiyng of Philippe. declaryng, ſo longe your heddes and counſaill are moued to variaunce and diſſencion, this voice ones ſeaſed emong you,

in tranquilitée you ſhal bee gouerned. Demoſthenes beyng Demoſthenes. eloquente and wiſe, foreſawe the daungers and the miſchieuous intent of him, wherevpon he framed a goodly Oracion vpon a Fable, whereby he altered their counſaile, and repulſed the enemie. This fable is afterward ſet forth in an Oracion, after the order of theſe exerciſes, profitable to Rhetorike.
            
            
               ¶ A Fable.
               
                  FIrſte it is good that the learner doe vnderſtand what is a fable, for in all matters of learnyng, The ground of al learning it is the firſte grounde, as Tullie doeth ſaie, to knowe what the thing is, that we may the better perceiue whervpō we doe intreate. A fable what is a fable. is a forged tale, cōtaining in it by the colour of a lie, a matter of truthe. The moralle is called that, out of the whiche ſome Morall. godlie precepte, or admonicion to vertue is giuen, to frame and inſtruct our maners. Now that we knowe what a fable is, it is good to learne alſo, how manifolde or diuers thei be, I doe finde three maner of fables to be. The firſt of theim is, Three ſortes of fables. wherein a man being a creature of God indued with reaſon, is onely intreated of, as the Fable of the father and his children, i. A fable of reaſon. he willing thē to concorde, and this is called Rationalis fabula, whiche is aſmoche to ſaie, as a Fable of men indued with reaſon, or women. The ſecond is called a morall fable, ii. Morall. but I ſée no cauſe whie it is ſo called, but rather as the other is called a fable of reaſonable creatures, ſo this is contrarilie named a fable of beaſtes, or of other thinges wanting reaſon or life, wanting reaſon as of the Ante and the Greſhopper, or of this the beame caſte doun, and the Frogges choſyng their king. The thirde is a mixt Fable ſo called, bicauſe in it bothe iii. Mixt. man hauyng reaſon, and a beaſte wantyng reaſon, or any other thing wanting life, is ioyned with it, as for the example, of the fable of the woodes and the houſebandman, of whom he deſired a helue for his hatchet. Aucthours doe write, that Poetes inuentours of fables. Poetes firſte inuented fables, the whiche Oratours alſo doe

vſe in their perſwaſions, and not without greate cauſe, both Oratours vſe fables. Poetes and Oratours doe applie theim to their vſe. For, fables dooe conteine goodlie admonicion, vertuous preceptes Good doctrin in fables. of life. Heſiodus the Poete, intreatyng of the iniurious dealyng of Princes and gouernours, againſt their ſubiectes, admoniſhed Heſiodus. them by the fable of the Goſhauke, and the Nightyngale in his clauſe. Ouid alſo the Poete intreated of diuers Ouide. fables, wherein he giueth admonicion, and godly counſaile. Demoſthenes the famous Oratour of Athens, vſed Demoſthenes vſed fables. the fable of the Shepeherdes, and Wolues: how the Wolues on a tyme, inſtauntlie required of the Shepeherdes their bande dogges, and then thei would haue peace and concorde with theim, the Shepeherdes gaue ouer their Dogges, their Dogges deliuered and murdered, the ſhepe were immediatly deuoured: So ſaieth he, if ye ſhall ones deliuer to Philip, the king of the Macedonians your Oratours, by whoſe learnyng, knowlege and wiſedome, the whole bodie of your dominions is ſaued, for thei as Bandogges, doe repell all miſcheuous enterpriſes and chaunſes, no doubte, but that rauenyng Wolfe Philip, will eate and conſume your people, by this Fable he made an Oracion, he altered their counſailes and heddes of the Athenians, from ſo fooliſhe an enterpriſe. Alſo the ſame Demoſthenes, ſeyng the people careles, ſlothfull, and lothſome to heare the Oratours, and all for the floriſhing ſtate of the kingdome the aſcended to the place or pulpet, The fable of Demoſthenes, of the Aſſe and the ſhadowe. where the Oracions were made, and began with this fable. Ye men of Athens, ſaied he, it happened on a tyme, that a certaine man hired an Aſſe, and did take his iourney from Athens to Megara, as we would ſaie, frō London to Yorke, the owner alſo of the Aſſe, did aſſociate hymſelf in his iourney, to brynge backe the Aſſe againe, in the voyage the weather was extreame burning hotte, and the waie tedious the place alſo for barenes and ſterilitée of trees, wanted ſhadowe in this long broyle of heate: he that ſatte one the Aſſe, lighted and woke ſhadowe vnder the bellie of the Aſſe, and

becauſe the ſhadowe would not ſuffice bothe, the Aſſe beyng ſmall, the owner ſaied, he muſte haue the ſhadowe, becauſe the Aſſe was his, I deny that ſaieth the other, the ſhadowe is myne, becauſe I hired the Aſſe, thus thei were at greate contencion, the fable beyng recited, Demoſthenes deſcended frō his place, the whole multitude were inquiſitiue, to knowe the ende about the ſhadowe, Demoſthenes notyng their follie, The contencion vpon the ſhadowe and the Aſſe. afrended to his place, and ſaied, O ye fooliſhe Athemans, whiles I and other, gaue to you counſaill and admoniciō, of graue and profitable matters, your eares wer deafe, and your mindes ſlombred, but now I tell of a ſmall trifeling matter, youthrong to heare the reſte of me. By this Fable he nipped their follie, and trapped them manifeſtlie, in their owne doltiſhenes. Here vpon I doe ſomwhat long, make copie of wordes, to ſhewe the ſingularitee of fables well applied. In the Fadles well applied bee ſinguler. tyme of Kyng Richard the thirde, Doctour Mourton, beyng Biſhop of Elie, and priſoner in the Duke of Buckynghams houſe in Wales, was often tymes moued of the Duke, to ſpeake his minde frelie, if king Richard wer lawfully king, and ſaid to him of his fidelitee, to kepe cloſe and ſecret his ſentence: but the Biſhop beyng a godlie man, and no leſſe wiſe, waied the greate frendſhip, whiche was ſometyme betwene the Duke & King Richard, aunſwered in effect nothyng, but beyng daily troubled with his mocions & inſtigacions, ſpake a fable of Eſope: My lorde ſaied he, I will aunſwere you, by a Fable of Eſope. The Lion on a tyme gaue a commaundement, that all horned beaſtes ſhould flie from the woode, and none to remain there but vnhorned beaſtes. The Hare hearing The fable of the Biſhop of Elie, to the duke of Buckyngham. of this commaundement, departed with the horned beaſtes from the woodde: The wilie Foxe metyng the Hare, demaunded the cauſe of his haſte, forthwith the Hare aunſwered, a commaundemente is come from the Lion, that all horned beaſtes ſhould bee exiled, vpon paine of death, from the woode: why ſaied the Foxe, this commaundement toucheth not any ſorte of beaſt as ye are, for thou haſte no hornes but

knubbes: yea, but ſaid the Hare, what, if the i ſaie I haue hornes, that is an other matter, my lorde I ſaie no more: what he ment, is euident to all men.
               In the time of king Hēry theight (a prince of famous memorie) at what time as the ſmall houſes of religiō, wer giuen euer to the kinges hand, by the Parliament houſe: the biſhop of Rocheſter, Doctour Fiſher by name ſtepped forthe, beyng greued with the graunt, recited before them, a fable of Eſope to ſhewe what diſcommoditee would followe in the Clergie. My lordes and maiſters ſaieth he, Eſope recited a fable: how The fable of the Biſhop of Rocheſter againſte the graunt of the Chauntries. that on a tyme, a houſebande manne deſired of the woodes, a ſmall helue for his hatchet, all the woodes conſented thereto waiyng the graunt to be ſmall, and the thyng leſſe, therevpō the woodes conſented, in fine the houſbande man cut doune a ſmall peece of woodde to make a helue, he framyng a helue to the hatchette, without leaue and graunt, he cut doune the mightie Okes and Cedars, and deſtroyed the whole woodd, then the woodes repented them to late. So ſaith he, the gift of theſe ſmall houſes, ar but a ſmall graunt into the kinges hā
                  des: but this ſmall graunt, will bee a waie and meane to pull doune the greate mightie fatte Abbees, & ſo it happened. But there is repentaūce to late: & no profite enſued of the graunte.
               
                  ¶ An Oracion made by a fable, is the firſt exerciſe to declame by, the other, bee theſe,
An Oracion made by a
                  A Fable, a Narracion, Chria,
                  
                  Sentence. Confutacion,
                  Confirmacion. Common place.
                  The praiſe. The diſpraiſe.
                  The Compariſon, Ethopeia.
                  
                  A Diſcripcion. Theſis, Legiſlatio
                  
               
               OF euery one of theſe, a goodlie Oraciō maie be made theſe excerciſes are called of the Grekes Progimnaſmata, of the Latines, profitable introduccions, or fore exerciſes, to attain greater arte and knowlege in Rhetorike,
                  
and bicauſe, for the eaſie capacitée and facilitée of the learner, to attain greater knowledge in Rhetorike, thei are right profitable and neceſſarie: Therefore I title this booke, to bee the foundaciō of Rhetorike, the exerciſes being Progimnaſmata.
               
               I haue choſen out the fable of the Shepeherdes, and the Wolues, vpon the whiche fable, Demoſthenes made an cloquente, copious, and wittie Oracion before the Athenians, whiche fable was ſo well applied, that the citée and common wealth of Athens was ſaued.
               
                  ¶ A fable. The firſte exerciſe.
Theſe notes muſt be obſerued, to make an Oracion by a Fable.
                  
                     ¶ Praiſe.
                     
                        1.Firſte, ye ſhall recite the fable, as the aucthour telleth it.
                     
                        2.There in the ſeconde place, you ſhall praiſe the aucthoure  who made the fable, whiche praiſe maie ſone bée gotte of any ſtudious ſcholer, if he reade the aucthours life and actes therin, or the Godlie preceptes in his fables, ſhall giue abundant praiſe.
                     
                        3.Then thirdlie place the morall, whiche is the interpretacion  annexed to the Fable, for the fable was inuented for the moralles ſake.
                     
                        4.Then orderlie in the fowerth place, declare the nature of  thynges, conteined in the Fable, either of man, fiſhe, foule, beaſte, plante, trées, ſtones, or whatſoeuer it be. There is no man of witte ſo dulle, or of ſo groſſe capacitée, but either by his naturall witte, or by reading, or ſences, he is hable to ſaie ſomwhat in the nature of any thyng.
                     
                        5.In the fifte place, ſette forthe the thynges, reaſonyng one  with an other, as the Ant with the Greſhopper, or the Cocke with the precious ſtone.
                     
                        6.Thē in the vj. place, make a ſimilitude of the like matter. 
                     
                        7.Then in the ſeuenth place, induce an exāple for the ſame matter to bée proued by. 
                     
                        8.Laſte of all make the Epilogus, whiche is called the concluſion,  and herein marke the notes folowyng, how to make

an Oracion thereby.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ An Oracion made vpon the fable of the Shepeherdes and the wolues.
                  
                     ¶ The fable.
                     
                        THe Wolues on a tyme perſwaded the Shepeherdes, that thei would ioyne amitee, and make a leagne of concord and vnitee: the demaunde pleaſed the Shepeherdes, foorthwith the Wolues requeſted to haue cuſtodie of the bande Dogges, becauſe els theiwould be as thei are alwaies, an occaſion to breake their league and peace, the Dogges beyng giuen ouer, thei were one by one murthered, and then the Shepe were wearied.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The praiſe of the aucthour.
                     
                        THe poſteritee of tymes and ages, muſte needes praiſe the wiſedome and induſtrie, of all ſoche as haue lefte in monumentes of writyng, thynges worthie fame, Inuentours of al excellent artes and ſciences, commended to the poſteritee. what can bee more excellently ſet foorthe: or what deſerueth chiefer fame and glorie, then the knowledge of artes and ſciences, inuented by our learned, wiſe, and graue aūceſtours: and ſo moche the more thei deſerue honour, and perpetuall commendacions, becauſe thei haue been the firſte aucthours, and beginners to ſoche excellencies. The poſteritée praiſeth and ſetteth forth the wittie and ingenious workes of Apelles, Partheſius, and Polucletus, and all ſoche as haue artificially Apelles. Partheſius. Polucletus. ſetforth their excellent giftes of nature. But if their praiſe for fame floriſhe perpetuallie, and increaſeth for the worthines of theim, yet theſe thynges though moſte excellent, are inferiour to vertue: for the ende of artes and ſciences, is vertue The ende of all artes, is to godlie life. and godlines. Neither yet theſe thynges diſſonaunt from vertue, and not aſſociate, are commendable onely for vertues ſake: and to the ende of vertue, the wittes of our aunceſtours were incenſed to inuent theſe thynges. But herein Poludetus, Apelles, and Partheſius maie giue place, when greater vertues come in place, then this my aucthour Eſope, for his Eſope worthie moche commendaciō
                         godly preceptes, wiſe counſaill and admonicion, is chiefly to

bée praiſed: For, our life maie learne all goodnes, all vertue, of his preceptes. The Philoſophers did neuer lo liuely ſette Philophie in fables. forthe and teache in their ſcholes and audience, what vertue and godlie life were, as Eſope did in his Fables, Citees, and common wealthes, maie learne out of his fables, godlie concorde Realmes maie learne concorde out of Eſopes fables. and vnitee, by the whiche meanes, common wealthes floriſheth, and kingdoms are ſaued. Herein ample matter riſeth to Princes, and gouernours, to rule their ſubiectes in all godlie lawes, in faithfull obedience: the ſubiectes alſo to loue Preceptes to Kynges and Subiectes. Preceptes to parentes and children. and ſcrue their prince, in al his affaires and buſines. The father maie learne to bring vp, and inſtructe his childe thereby. The child alſo to loue and obeie his parentes. The huge and monſterous vices, are by his vertuous doctrine defaced and extirpated: his Fables in effcet contain the mightic volumes and bookes of all Philoſophers, in morall preceptes, & the infinite monumētes of lawes ſtabliſhed. If I ſhould not ſpeake The content of al Lawes. of his commendacion, the fruictes of his vertue would ſhewe his commendacions: but that praiſe ſurmounteth all fame of glory, that commendeth by fame it ſelf, the fruictes of fame I true praiſe commēded by fame it ſelf. in this one Fable, riſeth to my aucthour, whiche he wrote of the Shepeherd, and the Wolues.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The Morall.
                     
                        WHerein Eſope wittely admoniſheth all menne to beware and take heede, of cloked and fained frendſhip, of the wicked and vngodlie, whiche vnder a pretence and offer of frendſhip or of benefite, ſeeke the ruin, dammage, miſerie or deſtruccion of man, toune, citée, region, or countree.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The nature of the thyng.
                     
                        OF all beaſtes to the quantitée of his bodie, the Wolue paſſeth in crueltée and deſire of bloode, The wolue moſte rauening & cruell. alwaies vnſaciable of deuouryng, neuer contented with his pray. The Wolfe deuoureth and eateth of his praie all in feare, and therefore oftentymes he caſteth his looke, to be ſafe from perill and daunger. And herein

his nature is ſtraunge frō all beaſtes: the iyes of the Wolfe, tourned from his praie immediatlie, the praie proſtrate vnder The wolues of all beaſtes, moſte ob
                              ••
                           uious. his foote is forgotten, and forthwith he ſee keth a newe praie, ſo greate obliuion and debilitee of memorie, is giuen to that beaſte, who chieflie ſeketh to denoure his praie by night. The Wolues are moche inferior to the bandogges in ſtrength, bicauſe The wolue inferiour to the bandogge nature hath framed thē in the hinder parts, moche more weaker, and as it were manned, and therefore the bandogge dooeth ouermatche theim, and ouercome them in fight. The Wolues are not all ſo mightie of bodie as the Bandogges, of diuers colours, of fight more ſharpe, of leſſe heddes: but in The Dogge paſſeth all creatures in ſmellyng. ſmellyng, the nature of a Dogge paſſeth all beaſtes and creatures, whiche the hiſtorie of Plinie dooe ſhewe, and Ariſtotle in his booke of the hiſtorie of beaſtes, therein you ſhall knowe their excellente nature. The houſholde wanteth not faithfull and truſtie watche nor reſiſtaunce, in the cauſe of the maiſter, the Bandogge not wantyng. Plinie ſheweth out of Plinie. his hiſtorie, how Bandogges haue ſaued their Maiſter, by their reſiſtaunce. The Dogge of all beaſtes ſheweth moſte loue, and neuer leaueth his maiſter: the worthines of the bā
                        dogge is ſoche, that by the lawe in a certaine caſe, he is counted acceſſarie of Felonie, who ſtealeth a Bandogge from his maiſter, a robberie immediatly folowing in the ſame family.
                     As concernyng the Shepe, for their profite and wealthe, The worthines of Shepe that riſeth of theim, are for worthines, waiyng their ſmalle quantitie of bodie, aboue all beaſtes. Their fleſhe nouriſheth purely, beyng ſwete and pleaſaunt: their ſkinne alſo ſerueth to diuers vſes, their Wolles in ſo large and ample maner, The wolle of Shepe, riche and commodious. commodious, ſeruyng all partes of common wealthes. No ſtate or degrée of perſone is, but that thei maie goe cladde and adorned with their wolles. So GOD in his creatures, hath created and made man, beyng a chief creatour, and moſte excellent Man a chief creature. of all other, all thinges to ſcrue him: and therefore the Stoicke Philoſophers doe herein ſheweth excellencie of man Stoike Philoſophers. to be greate, when all thinges vpon the yearth, and from the

yearth, doe ſerue the vſe of man, yet emong men there is a diuerſitee of ſtates, and a difference of perſones, in office and cō
                        dicion of life. As concernyng the Shepherde, he is in his ſtate The office of the ſhepeherdes, are profitable and neceſſarie. and condicion of life, thoughe meane, he is a righte profitable and neceſſarie member, to ſerue all ſtates in the commō wealthe, not onely to his maiſter whom he ſerueth: for by his diligence, and warie keping of thē, not onely from rauenyng beaſtes, but otherwiſe he is a right profitable member, to all partes of the common wealth. For, dailie wée féele the cōmoditie, wealth, profit, and riches riſeth of the wolles of Shepe. wealth and riches, that riſeth of theim, but the loſſe wée féele not, except flockes periſhe. In the body of man God hath created & made diuerſe partes, to make vp a whole and abſolute man, whiche partes in office, qualitée and worthineſſe, are moche differing. The bodie of man itſelf, for the excellent workemanſhip of God therein, & meruailous giftes of nature and vertues, lodged and beſtowed in the ſame bodie, is called Man called of the Philoſophers, a little worlde. of the Philoſophers Microcoſmos, a little worlde. The body of man in all partes at cōcord, euery part executing his funccion & office, floriſheth, and in ſtrength proſpereth, otherwiſe the ſame bodie in partes diſſeuered, is feeble and weake, and The bodie of man without concord of the partes, periſheth. thereby falleth to ruin, and periſheth. The ſinguler Fable of Eſope, of the belie and handes, manifeſtlie ſheweth the ſame and herein a floriſhing kingdom or common wealth, is compared to the body, euery part vſing his pure vertue, ſtrēgth & The common wealthe like to the bodie of manne. Menenius. operacion. Menenius Agrippa, at what time as the Romai▪ were at diuiſion againſt the Senate, he vſed the Fable of Eſope, wherewith thei were perſwaded to a concorde, and vnitée. The vileſt parte of the bodie, and baſeſte is ſo neceſſarie, The baſeſte parte of the bodie moſte neceſſarie. that the whole bodie faileth and periſheth, the ſame wantyng although nature remoueth them from our ſight, and ſhame faſtnes alſo hideth theim: take awaie the moſte vileſt parte of the bodie, either in ſubſtaunce, in operacion or function, and forthwith the principall faileth. So likewiſe in a kyngdome, or common wealth, the moſte meane and baſeſt ſtate of man taken awaie, the more principall thereby ceaſeth: So God to

a mutuall concorde, frendſhip, and perpetuall ſocietie of life, The amiable parte of the body doe conſiſte, by the baſeſte and moſte beformeſte. hath framed his creatures, that the moſte principall faileth, it not vnited with partes more baſe and inferiour, ſo moche the might and force of thynges excellente, doe conſiſte by the moſte inferiour, other partes of the bodie more amiable and pleaſaunt to ſight, doe remain by the force, vſe and integritée of the ſimplieſt. The Prince and chief peres doe decaie, and al the whole multitude dooe periſhe: the baſeſte kinde of menne wantyng. Remoue the Shepeherdes ſtate, what good followeth, 
                           The Shepeherdes ſtate neceſſarie.
                           The ſtate of the huſbande manne, moſte neceſſarie.
                         yea, what lacke and famine increaſeth not: to all ſtates the belie ill fedde, our backes worſe clad. The toilyng houſebandman is ſo neceſſarie, that his office ceaſyng vniuerſallie the whole bodie periſheth, where eche laboureth to further and aide one an other, this is a common wealth, there is proſperous ſtate of life. The wiſeſt Prince, the richeſt, the mightieſt and moſte valiauntes, had nede alwaies of the fooliſhe, the weake, the baſe and ſimpleſt, to vpholde his kingdomes, not onely in the affaires of his kyngdomes, but in his domeſticall thinges, for prouiſiō of victuall, as bread, drinke, meat clothyng, and in all ſoche other thynges. Therefore, no office or ſtate of life, be it neuer ſo méete, ſeruyng in any part of the common wealthe, muſte bée contemned, mocked, or ſkorned No meane ſtate, to be contempned. at, for thei are ſo neceſſarie, that the whole frame of the common wealth faileth without theim: ſome are for their wicked behauiour ſo deteſtable, that a common wealthe muſte ſéeke meanes to deface and extirpate theim as wéedes, and rotten members of the bodie. Theſe are thefes, murtherers, and adulterers, Rotten members of the cō
                           mon wealth. and many other miſchiuous perſones. Theſe godly Lawes, vpright and ſincere Magiſtrates, will extirpate and cutte of, ſoche the commo wealth lacketh not, but rather abhorreth as an infectiue plague and Peſtilence, who in thende through their owne wickedneſſe, are brought to miſchief.
                     Read Plato in his booke, intiteled of the common wealth who ſheweth the ſtate of the Prince, and whole Realme, to Plato. ſtande and conſiſte by the vnitée of partes, all ſtates of the cō
                        mon

wealth, in office diuers, for dignitée and worthines, bearing 
                           A common wealth doe conſiſte by vnitie of all ſtates.
                           Ariſtotle. what is a cō
                              mon wealth.
                         not equalitee in one conſociatee and knit, doe raiſe a perfite frame, and bodie of kingdome or common wealthe.
                     Ariſtotle the Philoſopher doeth ſaie, that a cōmon welth is a multitude gathered together in one Citée, or Region, in ſtate and condicion of life diuering, poore and riche, high and low, wiſe and fooliſhe, in inequalitee of minde and bodies differyng, for els it can not bee a common wealthe. There muſt be nobles and peres, kyng and ſubiect: a multitude inferiour and more populous, in office, maners, worthines alteryng. Manne needeth no better example, or paterne of a common A liuely exā
                           ple of commō wealthe. wealthe, to frame hymſelf, to ſerue in his ſtate and callyng, then to ponder his owne bodie. There is but one hedde, and many partes, handes, feete, fingers, toes, ioyntes, veines, ſinewes, belie, and ſo forthe: and ſo likewiſe in a cōmon welth there muſte be a diuerſitee of ſtates.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The reaſonyng of the thynges conteined in this Fable.
                     
                        THus might the Wolues reaſon with themſelues, of their Embaſſage: The Wolues dailie moleſted and wearied, with the fearce ragyng Maſties, and ouercome in fight, of their power and might: one among the reſte, more politike and wiſe then the other, called an aſſemble and counſaill of Wolues, and thus he beganne his oracion. My felowes and The counſail of wolues. compaignions, ſithe nature hath from the beginnyng, made vs vnſaciable, cruell, liuyng alwaies by praies murthered, and bloodie ſpoiles, yet enemies wée haue, that ſéeke to kepe vnder, and tame our Woluiſhe natures, by greate mightie Bandogges, and Shepeherdes Curres. But nature at the firſte, did ſo depely frame and ſet this his peruerſe, cruell, and bloodie moulde in vs, that will thei, nill thei, our nature wil bruſte out, and run to his owne courſe. I muſt moche, waiyng the line of our firſte progenitour, from whence we came

firſte: for of a man wée came, yet men as a peſtiferous poiſon doe erile vs, and abandon vs, and by Dogges and other ſubtill meanes doe dailie deſtroie vs. Lycaon, as the Poetes doe Lycaon. faine, excedyng in all crueltées and murthers horrible, by the murther of ſtraungers, that had acceſſe to his land: for he was king and gouernor ouer the Moloffians, and in this we maie worthilie glorie of our firſte blood and long auncientrée, that he was not onelie a man, but a kyng, a chief pere and gouernour: The firſte progenie of wolues. by his chaunge and tranſubſtanciacion of bodie, wée loſte by him the honour and dignitée due to him, but his vertues wée kepe, and daily practiſe to followe them. The fame of Lycaons horrible life, aſeended before Iupiter, Iupiter the The inuencion of the Poet Ouide to compare a wicked man, to a wolue. mightie God, moued with ſo horrible a facte, left his heauenlie palace, came doune like an other mortall man; and paſſed doune by the high mountaine Minalus, by twilighte, and ſō to Licaons houſe, our firſte aunceſtoure, to proue, if this thing was true. Lycaon receiued this ſtraunger, as it ſemed Lycaon. doubtyng whether he were a God, or a manne, forthwith he feaſted him with mannes fleſhe baked, Iupiter as he can doe what he will, brought a ruine on his houſe, and tranſubſtanciated Lycaon chaū
                           ged into a wolue. hym, into this our ſhape & figure, wherein we are, and ſo ſens that time, Wolues were firſte generated, and that of manne, by the chaunge of Lycaon, although our ſhape is chaunged from the figure of other men, and men knoweth vs not well, yet the ſame maners that made Wolues, remaineth wolue. Manner. vntill this daie, and perpetuallie in men: for thei robbe, thei ſteale, and liue by iniurious catching, we alſo robbe, alſo wee ſteale, and catche to our praie, what wee maie with murther come to. Thei murther, and wee alſo murther, and ſo in all poinctes like vnto wicked menne, doe we imitate the like faſhion of life, and rather thei in ſhape of men, are Wolues, and wee in the ſhape of Wolues menne: Of all theſe thynges hauyng conſideracion, I haue inuented a pollicie, whereby we maie woorke a ſlauter, and perpetuall ruine on the Shepe, by the murther of the Bandogges. And ſo wee

ſhall haue frée acceſſe to our bloodie praie, thus we will doe, wee will ſende a Embaſſage to the Shepeherdes for peace, ſaiyng, that wee minde to ceaſſe of all bloodie ſpoile, ſo that thei will giue ouer to vs, the cuſtodie of the Bandogges, for The counſail of wolues. otherwiſe the Embaſſage ſent, is in vaine: for their Dogges being in our handes, and murthered one by one, the daunger and enemie taken awaie, we maie the better obtain and enioye our bloodie life. This counſaill pleaſed well the aſſemble of the Wolues, and the pollicie moche liked theim, and with one voice thei houled thus, thus. Immediatlie cōmunicacion was had with the Shepeherdes of peace, and of the giuyng ouer of their Bandogges, this offer pleaſed theim, thei cōcluded the peace, and gaue ouer their Bandogges, as pledges of theſame. The dogges one by one murthered, thei diſſolued the peace, and wearied the Shepe, then the Shepeherdes repented them of their raſhe graunt, and foly committed: So of like ſorte it alwaies chaunceth, tyrauntes and bloodie The counſail of wicked mē to miſchief. menne, dooe ſeke alwaies a meane, and practiſe pollicies to deſtroye all ſoche as are godlie affected, and by wiſedome and godlie life, doe ſeke to ſubuerte and deſtroie, the miſcheuous The cogitacions of wicked men, and their kyngdō bloodie. enterpriſe of the wicked. For, by crueltie their Woluiſhe natures are knowen, their glorie, ſtrength, kyngdome and renowne, cometh of blood, of murthers, and beaſtlie dealynges and by might ſo violent, it continueth not: for by violence and blooddie dealyng, their kyngdome at the laſt falleth by blood and bloodilie periſheth. The noble, wiſe, graue, and goodlie counſailes, are with all fidelitée, humblenes and ſincere hartes to be obeied, in worthines of their ſtate and wiſedome, to The ſtate of counſailours worthie chief honour and veneracion. be embraced in chief honour and veneracion to bee taken, by whoſe induſtrie, knowledge and experience, the whole bodie of the common wealth and kyngdome, is ſupported and ſaued. The ſtate of euery one vniuerſallie would come to pardicion, if the inuaſion of foraine Princes, by the wiſedom and pollicie of counſailers, were not repelled. The horrible actes of wicked men would burſte out, and a confuſion enſue in al

ſtates, if the wiſedom of politike gouernors, if good lawes if the power and ſword of the magiſtrate, could not take place. The peres and nobles, with the chief gouernour, ſlandeth as Shepherds ouer the people: for ſo Plato alledgeth that name Plato. well and properlie giuen, to Princes and Gouernours, the which Homere the Poete attributeth, to Agamemnon king Homere. of Grece: to Menclaus, Vliſſes, Neſtor, Achillas, Diomedes, Aiar, and al other. For, bothe the name and care of that ſtate The Shepeherdes name giuē to the office of kyngs. of office, can be titeled by no better name in all pointes, for diligent kepyng, for aide, ſuccoryng, and with all equitie temperyng the multitude: thei are as Shepeherdes els the ſclie poore multitude, would by an oppreſſion of peſtiferous men. The commonaltee or baſe multitude, liueth more quietlie then the ſtate of ſoche as daily ſeke, to vpholde and maintaine The ſtate or good counſallers, troublous. the common wealthe, by counſaill and politike deliberacion, how troublous hath their ſtate alwaies been: how vnquiete from time to time, whoſe heddes in verie deede, doeth ſeke for a publike wealth. Therefore, though their honor bee greater, and ſtate aboue the reſte, yet what care, what penſiueneſſe of minde are thei driuen vnto, on whoſe heddes aucthoritée and regiment, the ſauegard of innumerable people doeth depend. A compariſion from a leſſe, to a greater. If in our domeſticall buſineſſe, of matters pertainyng to our houſholde, euery man by nature, for hym and his, is penſiue, moche more in ſo vaſte, and infinite a bodie of cōmon wealth, greater muſt the care be, and more daungerous deliberacion. We deſire peace, we reioyce of a tranquilitée, and quietneſſe to enſue, we wiſhe, to conſiſt in a hauen of ſecuritée: our houſes not to be ſpoiled, our wiues and children, not to bée murthered. This the Prince and counſailours, by wiſedome foreſée, The worthie ſtate of Princes and counſailours. to kéepe of, all theſe calamitées, daungers, miſeries, the whole multitude, and bodie of the Common wealthe, is without them maimed, weake and feable, a readie confuſion to the enemie. Therefore, the ſtate of péeres and nobles, is with all humilitée to be obaied, ſerued and honored, not without greate cauſe, the Athenians were drawen backe, by the

wiſedome of Demoſtnenes, when thei ſawe thēſelues a ſlauter and praie, to the enemie.
                  
                  
                     ¶ A comparſon of thynges.
                     
                        WHat can bée more raſhly and fooliſhly doen, then the Shepeherdes, to giue ouer their Dogges, by whoſe might and ſtrength, the Shepe were ſaued: on the other ſide, what can be more ſubtlie doen and craftely, then the Wolues, vnder a colour of frendſhip and amitée, to ſéeke the blood of the ſhepe, as all peſtiferous men, vnder a fained profer The amitie of wicked menns. of amitée, profered to ſeeke their owne profite, commoditée and wealthe, though it be with ruine, calamitie, miſerie, deſtruccion of one, or many, toune, or citée, region and countree, whiche ſort of men, are moſte deteſtable and execrable.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The contrarie.
                     
                        AS to moche ſimplicitie & lacke of diſcrecion, is a furtheraunce to perill and daunger: ſo oftētimes, he taſteth of ſmarte and woe, who lightly beleueth: ſo contrariwiſe, To beleue lightly, a furtheraunce to perill. diſimulaciō in miſcheuous practiſes begon wt frēdly wordes, in the concluſion doeth frame & ende perniſiouſlie.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The Epilogus.
                     
                     
                        THerefore fained offers of frendſhip, are to bee taken heede of, and the acte of euery man to bee examined, proued, and tried, for true frendſhip is a rare thyng, when as Tullie doth ſaie: in many ages there are fewe couples of friendes to be found, Ariſtotle alſo cōcludeth the ſame.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The Fable of the Ante, and Greſhopper.
                  
                     ¶ The praiſe of the aucthour.
                     
                        ESope who wrote theſe Fables, hath chief fame of all learned aucthours, for his Philoſophie, and giuyng The praiſe of Eſope. wiſedome in preceptes: his Fables dooe ſhewe vnto all ſtates moſte wholſome doctrine of vertuous life. He wholy extolleth vertue, and depreſſeth vice: he correcteth all ſtates and ſetteth out preceptes to amende them. Although he was deformed and ill ſhaped, yet Nature wrought in hym ſoche

vertue, that he was in minde moſte beautifull: and ſeing that the giftes of the body, are not equall in dignitie, with the vertue of the mynde, then in that Eſope chiefly excelled, hauyng the moſte excellente vertue of the minde. The wiſedom and witte of Eſope ſemed ſinguler: for at what tyme as Creſus, Creſus. the kyng of the Lidians, made warre againſt the Samians, he with his wiſedome and pollicie, ſo pacified the minde of Creſus, that all warre ceaſed, and the daunger of the countree was taken awaie, the Samiās deliuered of this deſtruccion Samians. and warre, receiued Eſope at his retourne with many honours. After that Eſope departyng from the Iſle Samus, wandered to ſtraunge regions, at the laſte his wiſedome beyng knowen: Licerus the kyng of that countrée, had hym in Licerus. ſoche reuerence and honor, that he cauſed an Image of gold to be ſet vp in the honour of Eſope. After that, he wanderyng ouer Grece, to the citée of Delphos, of whom he beyng murthered, Delphos. a greate plague and Peſtilence fell vpon the citee, that reuenged his death: As in all his Fables, he is moche to bee commended, ſo in this Fable he is moche to be praiſed, which he wrote of the Ante and the Greſhopper.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The Fable.
                     
                        IN a hotte Sommer, the Graſhoppers gaue themſelues to pleaſaunt melodie, whoſe Muſicke and melodie, was harde from the pleaſaunt Buſſhes: but the Ante in all this pleaſaunt tyme, laboured with pain and trauaile, ſhe ſcraped her liuyng, and with fore witte and wiſedome, preuented the barande and ſcarce tyme of Winter: for when Winter time aprocheth, the ground ceaſſeth frō fruict, winter. then the Ante by his labour, doeth take the fruicte & enioyeth it: but hunger and miſerie fell vpon the Greſhoppers, who in The Ante. the pleaſaunt tyme of Sommer, when fru
                           ••
                        es were aboundaunte, ceaſſed by labour to put of neceſſitée, with the whiche the long colde and ſtormie tyme, killed the
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        p, wantyng al ſuſtinaunce.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶ The Morall.
                     
                        HEre in example, all menne maie take to frame their owne life, and alſo to bryng vp in godlie educacion their children: that while age is tender and young, thei maie learne by example of the Ante, co prouide in their grene and luſtie youth, ſome meane of art and ſcience, wherby thei maie ſtaie their age and neceſſitée of life, al ſoche as do flie labour, and paine in youth, and ſeeke no waie of Arte and ſcience, in age thei ſhall fall in extreme miſerie and pouertée.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The nature of the thyng.
                     
                        NOt without a cauſe, the Philoſophers ſearchyng the nature and qualitee of euery beaſte, dooe moche com
                        
                           •
                        mende the Ante, for prouidence and diligence, in that The Ante. not oneie by nature thei excell in fore wiſedome to thēſelues, but alſo thei be a example, and mirrour to all menne, in that Manne. thei iuſtlie followe the inſtincte of Nature: and moche more, where as men indued with reaſon, and all ſingulare vertues and excellent qualitees of the minde and body. Yet thei doe ſo moche leaue reaſon, vertue, & integritee of minde, as that thei had been framed without reaſon, indued with no vertue, nor adorned with any excellent qualitée. All creatures as nature hath wrought in them, doe applie themſelues to followe nature their guide: the Ante is alwaies diligent in his buſines, and prouident, and alſo fore ſéeth in Sommer, the ſharpe ſeaſon of Winter: thei keepe order, and haue a kyng and a common wealthe as it were, as nature hath taught them. And ſo haue all other creatures, as nature hath wrought in thē their giftes, man onelie leaueth reaſon, and neclecteth the chief ornamentes of the minde: and beyng as a God aboue all creatures, dooeth leeſe the excellent giftes. A beaſte will not take exceſſe in feedyng, but man often tymes is without reaſon, and hauyng a pure mynde and ſoule giuen of God, and a face to beholde the heauens, yet he doeth abaſe hymſelf to yearthlie thynges, as concernyng the Greſhopper: as the Philoſophers Greſhopper. doe ſaie, is made altogether of dewe, and ſone periſheth

The Greſhopper maie well reſemble, ſlothfull and ſluggiſhe perſones, who ſeke onely after a preſent pleaſure, hauyng no fore witte and wiſedom, to foreſee tymes and ceaſons: for it is A poincte of wiſedome. the poinct of wiſedō, to iudge thinges preſent, by thinges paſt and to take a cōiecture of thinges to come, by thinges preſent.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The reaſonyng of the twoo thynges.
                     
                        THus might the Ante reaſon with her ſelf, althoughe the ſeaſons of the yere doe ſeme now very botte, pleaſaunt A wiſe cogitacion. and fruictfull: yet ſo I do not truſt time, as that like pleaſure ſhould alwaies remaine, or that fruictes ſhould alwaies of like ſorte abounde. Nature moueth me to worke, and wiſedome herein ſheweth me to prouide: for what hurteth plentie, or aboundaunce of ſtore, though greate plentie commeth thereon, for better it is to bee oppreſſed with plentie, and aboundaunce, then to bee vexed with lacke. For, to whom wealthe and plentie riſeth, at their handes many bee releued, and helped, all ſoche as bee oppreſſed with neceſſitie and miſerie, beyng caſte from all helpe, reaſon and prouidence mainted in theim: All arte and Science, and meane of life cutte of, to enlarge and maintain better ſtate of life, their miſerie, neceſſitie, and pouertie, ſhall continuallie encreaſe, Pouertie. who hopeth at other mennes handes, to craue relief, is deceiued. Pouertie is ſo odious a thing, in al places & ſtates reiected for where lacke is, there fauour, frendſhip, and acquaintance decreaſeth, as in all ſtates it is wiſedome: ſo with my ſelf I waie diſcritlie, to take tyme while tyme is, for this tyme as a Wiſedome. floure will ſone fade awaie. The houſebande manne, hath he not times diuers, to encreaſe his wealth, and to fill his barne, Houſebande menne. at one tyme and ceaſon: the houſebande man doeth not bothe plante, plowe, and gather the fruicte of his labour, but in one tyme and ſeaſon he ploweth, another tyme ſerueth to ſowe, and the laſte to gather the fruictes of his labour. So then, I muſt forſee time and ſeaſons, wherin I maie be able to beare of neceſſitie: for fooliſhly he hopeth, who of no wealth and no abundaunt ſtore, truſteth to maintain his own ſtate. For, nothyng

ſoner faileth, then frendſhip, and the ſoner it faileth, as Frendſhip. fortune is impoueriſhed. Seyng that, as Homere doeth ſaie, a flothfull man, giuen to no arte or ſcience, to helpe hymſelf, Homere. or an other, is an vnprofitable burdein to the yearth, and God doorth ſore plague, puniſhe, and ouerthrowe Citees, kyngdomes, and common wealthes, grounded in ſoche vices: that the wiſedome of man maie well iudge, hym to be vnworthie of all helpe, and ſuſtinaunce. He is worſe then a beaſt, that is not able to liue to hymſelf & other: no man is of witte ſo vndeſcrite, or of nature ſo dullc, but that in hym, nature alwayes Nature. couereth ſome enterpriſe, or worke to frame relife, or help to himſelf, for all wee are not borne, onelie to our ſelues, but The cauſe of our bearth. many waies to be profitable, as to our owne countrie, and all partes thereof. Eſpeciallie to ſoche as by ſickenes, or infirmitie of bodie are oppreſſed, that arte and Science can not take place to help thē. Soche as do folowe the life of the Greſhopper. are worthie of their miſerie, who haue no witte to foreſée ſeaſons and tymes, but doe ſuffer tyme vndeſcretly to paſſe, whiche fadeth as a floure, thold Romaines do picture Ianus with two faces, a face behind, & an other before, which reſemble Ianus. a wiſeman, who alwaies ought to knowe thinges paſte, thynges preſente, and alſo to be experte, by the experience of many ages and tymes, and knowledge of thynges to come.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The compariſon betwene the twoo thynges.
                     
                        WHat can be more deſcritlie doen, then the Ante to be ſo prouident and politike: as that all daunger of life, & neceſſitie is excluded, the ſtormie times of Winter ceaſeth of might, & honger battereth not his walles, hauyng ſoche plentie of foode, for vnlooked bitter ſtormes and ſeaſons, Prouidence. happeneth in life, whiche when thei happen, neither wiſedō nor pollicie, is not able to kepe backe. Wiſedome therefore, it is ſo to ſtande, that theſe thynges hurte not, the miſerable ende of the Greſhopper ſheweth vnto vs, whiche maie be an example to all menne, of what degree, ſo euer thei bee, to flie

ſlothe and idelneſſe, to be wiſe and diſcrite.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of contraries.
                     
                        AS diligence, prouidence, and diſcrete life is a ſingulare gift, whiche increaſeth all vertues, a pillar, ſtaie Diligence. and a foundacion of all artes and ſcience, of common wealthes, and kyngdomes. So contrarily ſloth and ſluggiſhneſſe, in all ſtates and cauſes, defaſeth, deſtroyeth, and pulleth doune all vertue, all ſcience and godlines. For, by it, the mightie kyngdome of the Lidiās, was deſtroied, as it ſemeth no ſmall vice, when the Lawes of Drac
                           •
                        , dooe puniſhe with Idelnes. death idelneſſe.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The ende.
                     
                        THerefore, the diligence of the Ante in this Fable, not onelie is moche to be commended, but alſo her The Ante. example is to bee followed in life. Therefore, the wiſeman doeth admoniſhe vs, to go vnto the Ant and learne prouidence: and alſo by the Greſhopper, lette vs learne to auoide idelnes, leſſe the like miſerie and calamitie fall vpon vs.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Narratio.
               
                  THis place followyng, is placed of Tullie, after the exordium or beginnyng of Oracion, as the ſeconde parte: whiche parte of Rhetorike, is as it were the light of all the Oracion folowing: conteining the cauſe, matter, perſone, tyme, with all breuitie, bothe of wordes, and inuencion of matter.
               
                  ¶ A Narracion.
                  
                     A Narracion is an expoſicion, orderlaracion of any thyng dooen in deede, or els a ſettyng forthe, forged of any thyng, but ſo declaimed and declared, as though it were doen.
                  A narracion is of three ſortes, either it is a narracion hiſtoricall, of any thyng contained, in any aunciente ſtorie, or true Chronicle.
                  
                     
Or Poeticall, whiche is a expoſicion fained, ſet for the by inuencion of Poetes, or other.
                  Or ciuill, otherwiſe called Iudiciall, whiche is a matter of controuerſie in iudgement, to be dooen, or not dooen well or euill.
                  In euery Narracion, ye muſt obſerue ſixe notes.
                  
                     
                        1. Firſte, the perſone, or doer of the thing, whereof you intreate.
                     
                        2. The facte doen.
                     
                        3. The place wherein it was doen.
                     
                        4. The tyme in the whiche it was doen.
                     
                        5. The maner muſt be ſhewed, how it was doen.
                     
                        6. The cauſe wherevpon it was doen.
                  
                  There be in this Narracion, iiij. other properties belōging
                  
                     
                        1. Firſt, it muſt be plain and euident to the hearer, not obſcure,
                     
                        2. ſhort, and in as fewe wordes as it maie be, for ſoche a matter.
                     
                        3. Probable, as not vnlike to be true.
                     
                        4. In wordes fine and elegante.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ A narracion hiſtoricall, vpon Semiramis Queene of Babilon how and after what ſort the obtained the gouernment thereof.
                  
                     AFter the death of Ninus, ſomtime kyng of Babilon, Tyme. his ſoonne Nuius alſo by name, was left Perſone. to ſuccede hym, in all the Aſſirian Monarchie, Semiramis wife to Ninus the firſte, feared the tender age of her ſonne, wherupon ſhe thought that thoſe mightie nacions and kyngdomes, would not obaie The cauſe. ſo young and weake a Prince. Wherfore, ſhe kept her ſonne The facte. from the gouernmente: and moſte of all ſhe feared, that thei would not obaie a woman, forthwith ſhe fained her ſelf, to be The waie how. the ſoonne of Ninus, and bicauſe ſhe would not be knowen to bee a woman, this Quene inuented a newe kinde of tire, the whiche all the Babilonians that were men, vſed by her commaundement. By this ſtraunge diſguiſed tire and apparell, ſhe not knowen to bee a woman, ruled as a man, for the ſpace of twoo and fourtie yeres: ſhe did marueilous actes, for The facte. The place. ſhe enlarged the mightie kyngdome of Babilon, and builded

the ſame citée. Many other regions ſubdued, and vallauntlie ouerthrowen, ſhe entered India, to the whiche neuer Prince came, ſauing Alexander the greate: ſhe pa
                        ••
                     ed not onely men in vertue, counſaill, and valiaunt ſtomacke, but alſo the famous counſailours of Aſſiria, might not contende with her in Maieſtie, pollicie, and roialnes. For, at what tyme as thei knewe her a woman, thei enuied not her ſtate, but marueiled at her wiſedome, pollicie, and moderacion of life, at the laſte ſhe deſiryng the vnnaturall luſt, and loue of her ſoonne Ninus, was murthered of hym.
               
               
                  ¶ A narracion hiſtoricall vpon kyng Richard the third, the cruell tiraunt▪
                  
                  
                     RIchard duke of Gloceſter, after the death of Edward The perſone the fowerth his brother king of England, vſurped the croune, moſte traiterou
                        •••
                     e and wickedlie: this kyng Richard was ſ
                        ••
                     ll of ſtature, deformed, and ill ſhaped, his ſhoulders beared not equalitie, a pulyng face, yet of countenaunce and looke cruell, malicious, deceiptfull, bityng and chawing his nether lippe: of minde vnquiet, pregnaunt of witte, quicke and liuely, a worde and a blowe, wilie, deceiptfull, proude, arrogant in life and cogitacion bloodie. The fowerth daie of Iulie, he The tyme▪ The place. entered the tower of London, with Anne his wife, doughter to Richard Exle of Warwick: and there in created Edward his onely ſoonne, a child of ten yeres of age, Prince of Wales. At the ſame tyme, in the ſame place, he created many noble peres, to high prefermente of honour and eſtate, and immediatly with feare and faint harte, bothe in himſelf, and his nobles and commons, was created king, alwaies a vnfortunate The horrible murther of king Richard and vnluckie creacion, the harts of the nobles and commons thereto lackyng or faintyng, and no maruaile, he was a cruell murtherer, a wretched caitiffe, a moſte tragicall tyraunt, and blood ſuccour, bothe of his nephewes, and brother George Duke of Clarence, whom he cauſed to bee drouned in a Butte of 
                        〈…〉
                     , the ſtaires ſodainlie remoued, wheron

he ſtepped, the death of the lorde Riuers, with many other The facte. nobles, compaſſed and wrought at the young Princes commyng out of Wales, the .xix. daie of Iuly, in the yere of our lorde. 1483. openly he toke vpon him to be king, who ſekyng haſtely to clime, fell according to his deſart, ſodainly and ingloriouſly, whoſe Embaſſage for peace, Lewes the Frenche king, for his miſeheuous & boodie ſlaughter, ſo moche abhorred, that he would neither ſee the Embaſſador, nor heare the Embaſſage: for he murthered his .ij. nephues, by the handes of one Iames Tirrell, & .ij. vilaines more aſſociate with him The tyme. The maner how. the Lieutenaunt refuſyng ſo horrible a fact. This was doen he takyng his waie & progreſſe to Gloceſter, whereof he was before tymes Duke: the murther perpetrated, he doubed the good ſquire knight. Yet to kepe cloſe this horrible murther, he cauſed a fame and rumour to be ſpread abrode, in all partes of the realme, that theſe twoo childrē died ſodainly, thereby thinkyng the hartes of all people, to bee quietlie ſetteled, The cauſe. no heire male lefte a liue of kyng Edwardes children. His miſchief was ſoche, that God ſhortened his vſurped raigne: he was altogether in feare and dread, for he being feared and dreaded of other, did alſo feare & dread, neuer quicte of minde faint harted, his bloodie conſcience by outward ſignes, condē
                     pned hym: his iyes in euery place whirlying and caſte about, his hand moche on his Dagger, the infernall furies tormented The ſtate of a wicked mā. him by night, viſions and horrible dreames, drawed him from his bedde, his vnquiet life ſhewed the ſtate of his conſcience, his cloſe murther was vttered, frō the hartes of the ſubiectes: thei called hym openlie, with horrible titles and names, a horrible murtherer, and excecrable tiraunt. The people ſorowed the death of theſe twoo babes, the Queene, kyng A dolefull ſtale of a quene. Edwardes wife, beeyng in Sanctuarie, was beſtraught of witte and ſences, ſounyng and falling doune to the grounde as dedde, the Queene after reuiued, knéeled doune, and called on God, to take vengaunce on this murtherer. The conſcience of the people was ſo wounded, of the tolleracion of the

facte, that when any bluſtryng winde, or perilous thonder, or The wicked facte of kyng Richard, a horror and dread to the commons. dreadfull tempeſt happened: with one voice thei cried out and quaked, leaſt God would take vengaūce of them, for it is alwaies ſeen the horrible life of wicked gouernors, bringeth to ruin their kyngdom and people, & alſo wicked people, the like daungers to the kyngdome and Prince: well he and his ſupporters with the Duke of Buckyngham, died ſhamefullie, God permit meanes, to pull doune tyrauntes. The knotte of mariage promiſed, betwene Henrie Erle of Richemonde, and Elizabeth doughter to kyng Edward the fowerth: cauſed diuerſe nobles to aide and aſſociate this erle, fledde out of this lande with all power, to the attainmente of the kyngdome by his wife. At Nottyngham newes came to kyng Richard, that the Erle of Richmonde, with a ſmall cō
                     paignie of nobles and other, was arriued in Wales, forthewith exploratours and ſpies were ſerit, who ſhewed the Erle to be encampled, at the toune of Li
                        ••
                     hfield, forthwith all preparacion Lichefelde. of warre, was ſet forthe to Leiceſter on euery ſide, Leiceſter. the Nobles and commons ſhranke from kyng Richarde, his power more and more weakened. By a village called Boſworthe, Boſworthe in a greate plaine, méete for twoo battailes: by Leiceſter this held was pitched, wherin king Richard manfully fightyng hande to hande, with the Erle of Richmonde, was ſlame, his bodie caried ſhamefullie, to the toune of Leiceſter naked, without honor, as he deſerned, truſſed on a horſe, behinde Kyng Richard killed in Boſworth fielde. a Purſeuaunte of Armes, like a hogge or a Calfe, his hedde and his armes hangyng on the one ſide, and his legges on the other ſide: caried through mire and durte, to the graie Friers churche, to all men a ſpectacle, and oprobrie of tirannie this was the cruell tiramites ende.
               
               
                  ¶ A narracion hiſtoricall, of the commyng of Iulius Ceſar into Britaine.
                  
                  
                     WHen Iulius Ceſar had ended his mightie and huge battailes, about the ſtood Rhene, he marched into the The tyme. regiō of Fraunce: at the ſame time repairing with a The perſone. freſhe multitude, his Legiōs, but the chief cauſe of his warie

in Fraunce was, that of long time, he was moued in minde, to ſee this noble Iſlande of Britain, whoſe fame for nobilitee The cauſe. The fame and glorie of Britaine. was knowen and bruted, not onelie in Rome, but alſo in the vttermoſte lādes. Iulius Ceſar was wroth with thē, becauſe in his warre ſturred in Fraunce, the fearce Britaines aided the Fenche men, and did mightilie encounter battaill with the Romaines: whoſe prowes and valiaunt fight, ſlaked the proude and loftie ſtomackes of the Romaines, and droue thē to diuerſe haſardes of battaill. But Ceſar as a noble warrier The prowes of Iulius Ceſar. preferryng nobilitee, and worthineſſe of fame, before money or cowardly quietnes: ceaſed not to enter on ye fearce Britaines, and thereto prepared his Shippes, the Winter tyme folowyng, that aſſone as oportunitee of the yere ſerued, to paſſe with all power againſt them. In the meane tyme, Ceſar inquired of the Marchauntes, who with marchaundiſe had acceſſe The maner how. to the Iſlande: as concernyng the quātitee and bignes of 
                        Ceſars communicacion with the marchauntes, as concernyng the lande of Britaine.
                        The ware & politike gouernement of yt Britaines. Aliaunce in tyme traiterous.
                        Britain ſomtyme called of the Grekes Olbion, not Albion.
                        Caius Voluſenus, Embaſſadour to Britaine.
                      it, the faſhion and maner of the people, their lawes, their order, and kinde of gouernmente. As theſe thynges were in all poinctes, vnknowen to Ceſar, ſo alſo the Marchaūtes knewe no more thā the places bordring on the ſea ſide. For, the Britaines fearing the traiterous and diſſembled hartes of aliaū
                     tes, politikelie repelled them: for, no ſtraunger was ſuffered to enter from his Shippe, on the lande, but their marchaundice were ſold at the ſea ſide. All nacions ſought to this land, the felicitee of it was ſo greate, whereupon the Grekes knowyng and taſtyng the commoditée of this Iſlande, called it by a Greke name Olbion, whiche ſignifieth a happie and fortunate countrie, though of ſome called Albion, tyme chaunged the firſte letter, as at this daie, London is called for the toune of kyng Lud. Ceſar thereupon before he would marche with his armie, to the people of Britain, he ſent Caius Voluſenus a noble man of Rome, a valiaunte and hardie Capitaine, as Embaſſadour to the Britaines, who as he thoughte by his Embaſſage, ſhould knowe the faſhion of the Iſland, the maner of the people, their gouernemente. But as it ſeemeth, the

Embaſſadour was not welcome. For, he durſte not enter frō his Ship, to dooe his maiſters Embaſſage, Ceſar knewe nothing by him. Yet Ceſar was not ſo contented, but ſent an other Comas Atrebas, ſecōde Embaſſador from Ceſar. Embaſſadour, a man of more power, ſtomack, and more hardie, Comas Atrebas by name, who would enter as an Embaſſadour, to accompliſh the will & expectacion of Ceſar, Comas Atrebas was ſo welcome, that the Britains caſt him in priſon: Embaſſages was not common emong theim, nor the curteous vſage of Embaſſadours knowen. Al theſe thinges, made Ceſar more wrothe, to aſſaie the vncourtous Bristaines. In thoſe daies Caſſibelan was kyng of London, this Caſſibelane king of London, at the ariue of Ceſar Caſſibelane a worthie Prince. Caſſibelan was a prince of high wiſedom, of manly ſtomacke and valiaunt in fight: and for power and valiauntneſſe, was choſen of the Britaines, chief gouernour and kyng. Diſſencion and cruell warre was emong thē, through the diuerſitie of diuers kinges in the lande. The Troinouaūtes enuied the ſtate of Caſſibelan, bicauſe Immanuencius, who was kyng of London, before Caſſibelan, was put to death, by the counſail of Caſſibelan. The ſonne of Immanuencius, hearing of the commyng of Ceſar, did flie traiterouſlie to Ceſar: The Imanuēcius Troinouauntes fauoured Immanuēcius part, & thereupon promiſed, as moſte vile traitours to their countrie, an enteryng to Ceſar, ſeruice and homage, who through a ſelf will, The Troynouauntes by treaſon let in Ceſar. and priuate fauour of one, ſought the ruine of their countrie, and in the ende, their own deſtruccion. But Caſſibelan gaue many ouerthrowes to Ceſar, and ſo mightelie encountred with hym, ſo inuincible was the parte of Caſſibelane: but by treaſon of the Troinouauntes, not by manhod of Ceſars power, enteryng was giuen. What houſe can ſtande, wherein Treaſon a confuſion to the mightieſt dominions. diſcord broile? What ſmall power, is not able to enter the mightieſt dominions or regions: to ouercome the ſtrongeſte fortreſſe, treaſon open the gate, treaſon giuyng paſſage. Although Ceſar by treaſon entered, ſo Ceſar writeth. Yet the fame of Ceſar was more commended, for his enterpriſe into Britain, and victorie: then of all his Conqueſt, either againſt

Pompey, or with any other nacion. For in a Piller at Rome A ſentēce grauen of Britaine, in the commendacion of Ceſar. this ſentence was engrauen: Of all the dominions, Citees, and Regions, ſubdued by Ceſar, his warre attēpted againſt the fearce Britaines, paſſeth all other. After this ſort Ceſar entred our Iſlande of Britaine by treaſon.
               
               
                  ¶ A narracion iudiciall, out of Theuſidides, vpon the facte of Themiſtocles.
                  
                     THe Athenians brought vnder the thraldome of the Lacedemonians, ſoughte meanes to growe mightie, and to pull them from the yoke, vnder the Lacedemonians. Lacedemonia was a citee enuironed with walles. Athenes at the ſame tyme without walles: whereby their ſtate was more feeble, and power weakened. Themiſtocles a noble Sage, and a worthie pere of Athens: gaue the Atheniās counſaile to wall their citee ſtrōgly, and ſo forthwith to be lordes and rulers by them ſelues, after their owne facion gouerning. In finiſhing this enterpriſe, in all poinctes, policie, and wittie conueiaunce wanted not. The Lacedemonians harde of the purpoſe of the Athenians, & ſent Embaſſadours, to knowe their doynges, and ſo to hinder them. Themiſtocles gaue counfaill to the Athenians, to kepe in ſafe cuſtodie, the Embaſſadours of Lacedemonia, vntill ſoche tyme, as he from the Embaſſage was retourned frō Lacedemonia. The Lacedemonians hearyng of the commyng of Themiſtocles, thought little of the walle buildyng at Athens. Themiſtocles was long looked for of thē, becauſe Themiſtocles lingered in his Embaſſage, that or the matter were throughly knowen: the walle of Athens ſhould be builded. The ſlowe commyng of Themiſtocles, was blamed of the Lacedemonians: but Themiſtocles excuſed hymſelf, partly infirmitie of bodie, lettyng his commyng, and the expectacion of other, accompaignied with hym in this Embaſſage. The walle ended, neceſſitie not artificiall workemanſhip finiſhing it, with al haſt it was ended: then Themiſtocles entered the Senate of Lacedemonia,

and ſaied: the walle whom ye ſought to let, is builded at Athens, ye Lacedemonians, that wee maie be more ſtrong. Then the Lacedemonians could ſaie nothyng to it, though thei enuied the Athenians ſtate, the walle was builded, and leſte thei ſhould ſhewe violence or crueltie on Themiſtocles, their Embaſſadours were at Athens in cuſtodie, whereby Themiſtocles came ſafe from his Embaſſage, and the Athenians made ſtrong by their walle: this was politikely dooen of Themiſtocles.
               
               
                  ¶ A narracion Poeticall vpon a Roſe.
                  
                     WHo ſo doeth maruaile at the beautée and goodly colour of the redde Roſe, he muſt conſider the blood, that came out of Venus the Goddes foot. The Goddes Venus, as fooliſhe Poetes dooe feigne, beyng the aucthour of Loue: loued Adonis the ſoonne of Cynara kyng of Cypres. But Mars called the God of battaile, loued Venus, beyng nothyng loued of Venus: but Mars loued Venus as feruently, as Venus loued Adonis. Mars beyng a God, loued Venus a goddes, but Venus onely was inflamed with the loue of Adonis, a mortall man. Their loue was feruent, and extremely ſet on fire in bothe, but their kinde and nature were contrary, wherevpon Mars beyng in gelouſie, ſought meanes to deſtroie, faire amiable, and beautifull Adonis, thinkyng by his death, the loue of Venus to be ſlaked: Adonis and Mars fell to fighting Venus as a louer, ranne to helpe Adonis her louer, and by chaunce ſhe fell into a Roſe buſhe, and pricked with it her foote, the blood then ran out of her tender foote, did colour the Roſe redde: wherevpon the Roſe beyng white before, is vpon that cauſe chaunged into redde.
               
            
            
               Chria.
               
                  
                     CHria, this profitable exerciſe of Rhetorike, is for the porfite of it ſo called: it is a reherſall in fewe wordes, of any ones fact, or of the ſaiyng of any man, vpō the

whiche an oracion maie be made. As for example, Iſocrates did ſay, that the roote of learnng was bitter, but the fruictes pleaſaunt: and vpon this one ſentence, you maie dilate a ample and great oracion, obſeruyng theſe notes folowyng. The ſaiyng dooeth containe ſo greate matter, and miniſter ſoche plentie of argumente.
               Aucthors intreatyng of this exerciſe, doe note three ſortes to bee of theim, one of theim a Chria verball, that is to ſaie, a profitable exerciſe, vpon the ſaiyng of any man, onely conteinyng the wordes of the aucthour, as the ſentence before.
               The ſeconde is, conteinyng the facte or deede of the perſone: As Diogines beyng aſked of Alexander the Greate, if he lacked any thyng, that he was able to giue hym, thinkyng his demaūde vnder his power, for Diogenes was at the ſame tyme warmyng hymſelf in the beames of the Sunne: Diogenes aunſwered, ye take awaie that, that ye are not able to giue, meanyng that Alexander by his bodie, ſhadowed hym, and tooke awaie that whiche was not in his power to giue, Alexander tourned hymſelf to his men, and ſaied, if I were not Alexander, I would be Diogenes.
               The thirde is a Chria mirt, bothe verball and notyng the facte, as Diogenes ſeyng a boie wanton & diſſolute, did ſtrike his teacher with a ſtaffe, vetteryng theſe woordes: why doocſt thou teache thy ſcholer ſo diſſolutlie.
               You ſhall learne to make this exerciſe, obſeruyng theſe notes.
               
                  Firſte, you ſhall praiſe the aucthour, who wrote the ſentence, waighing his life, if his life be vnknowen, and not eaſie to finde his ſentence or ſentences: for godlie preceptes will miniſter matter of praiſe, as if theſe ſaiynges bee recited, thei are ſufficient of them ſelues, to praiſe the aucthour.
                  Then in the ſeconde place, expounde the meanyng of the aucthour in that ſaiyng.
                  Then ſhewe the cauſe, why he ſpake this ſentence.
                  Then compare the matter, by a contrary.
                  
                     
Then frame a ſimilitude of the ſame.
                  Shewe the like example of ſome, that ſpake the like, or did the like.
                  Then gather the teſtimonies of more writers of the ſame
                  Then knit the concluſion.
               
               
                  ¶ An Oracion.
                  I Socrates did ſaie, that the roote of learnyng is was bitter, but the fruictes were pleaſaunt.
                  
                     ¶ The praiſe.
                     
                        THis Oratour Iſocrates, was an Athenian borne, who floriſhed in the time of Luſimachus the chief Luſimachus gouernor of Athens: this Iſocrates was brought vp in all excellēcte of learning, with the moſte famous and excellent Oratour Prodicus, Gorgias Leontinus Prodicus. Gorgias Leontinus. indued him with all ſingularitie of learnyng and eloquence. The eloquēce of Iſocrates was ſo famous, that Ariſtotle the chief Pholoſopher, enuied his vertue & praiſe therin: Demoſthenes alſo, who emong the Grecians chieflie excelled, learned his eloquence, of the Oracions whiche Iſocrates wrote, Demoſthenes learned eloquence of Iſocrates. to many mightie and puiſaunt princes and kinges, do ſhewe his wiſedome, & copious eloquēce, as to Demonicus the king to Nicocles, Euagoras, againſt Philip the king of the Macedoniās, by his wiſedome and counſaill, the Senate and vniuerſal ſtate of Athens was ruled, & the commons and multitude thereby in euery part floriſhed: chieflie what counſaill, what wiſedome, what learnyng might bee required, in any man of high fame and excellencie: that ſame was aboundantly in Iſocrates, as in all his Oratiōs he is to be praiſed, ſo in this ſentence, his fame importeth like commendacion.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The expoſicion.
                     
                        IN that he ſaieth, the roote of learnyng is bitter, and the fruictes pleaſaunt: he ſignifieth no excellent qualitie or gift, vertue, arte or ſcience can bee attained, All excelle
                              ••
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            is attained. except paine, labour, diligence, doe plant and ſette the ſame:

but when that noble gift, either learnyng, or any excellente qualitee, is lodged and repoſed in vs, then we gather by painfull labours, greate profite, comforte, delectable pleaſures, wealth, glorie, riches, whiche be the fruictes of it.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The cauſe.
                     
                        AND ſeyng that of our owne nature, all men are enclined from their tender yeres and infancie, to the extirpacion of vertue, folowyng with all earneſt ſtudie and gréedie, the free paſſage to vice, and ſpecially children, whoſe iudgementes and reaſon, are not of that ſtrengthe, to rule their weake mindes and bodies, therefore, in them chieflie, the roote of learning is bitter, becauſe not onely many yeres thei runne their race, in ſtudie of arte and ſcience. With care and paine alſo, with greuous chaſtiſment and correcciō, thei are compelled by their teachers and Maiſters, to apprehende the ſame: the parentes no leſſe dreaded, in the educaciō of their children, in chaſtiſement and correction, ſo that by all meanes, the foundacion and roote of all learnyng, in what ſort ſo euer it is, is at the firſte vnpleaſaunte, ſower, and vnſauerie. The roote of learnyng bitter. To folowe the times and ſeaſons, appoincted for the ſame, is moſte painfull, and in theſe painfull yeres: other greate pleaſures, as the frailtie of youth, and the imbecilitie of nature iudgeth, dooeth paſſe by, but in miſerable ſtate is that childe, and vnfortunate, that paſſeth the flower of his Who is a vnfortunate childe. youth and tender yeres, inſtructed with no arte or Science, whiche in tyme to come, ſhalbe the onelie ſtate, helpe, the piller to beare of the ſore bront, neceſſitie, and calamities of life. Herein the noble Romaines, laied the ſure foundacion of their mightie dominion, in the deſcrite prouidente, and politike Good educacion the foundacion of the Romaine Empire. educacion of children: to whom the Grecians gaue, that neceſſarie bulwarke and faundacion, to ſet vp all vertue, all arte and ſcience. In Grece no man was knowen, to liue in that common wealth, but that his arte and ſcience, gaue manifeſt probacion and teſtimonie, how and after what ſorte he liued. The Romaines in like ſorte, the ſworde and aucthoritie

of the Magiſtrate, executyng the ſame, did put forthe, and draw to the attainment of learnyng, art or ſcience, all youth hauyng maturitie and ripeneſſe to it, and why, becauſe that in a common wealth, where the parentes are vndeſcrete and fooliſhe, as in all common wealthes, there are not a fewe, but many, thei not ponderyng the ſtate of the tyme to come, bringing vp their children without all ciuilitie, vnframed to vertue, ignoraunt of all arte and ſcience: the children of their owne nature, vnbrideled, vntaught, wilfull, and heddie, doe run with free paſſage to all wickednes, thei fall into al kinde of follie, oppreſſed with all kinde of calamitie, miſerie, and vnfortunate chaunces, whiche happen in this life. Nothyng doeth ſoner pulle doune a kyngdome, or common wealthe, Euill educacion bringeth to rume mightie kingdoms then the euill and leude educacion of youth, to whom neither ſubſtaunce, wealth, riches, nor poſſeſſions doe deſcende, from their aunceſtours and parentes, who alſo of themſelues wāt all art, ſcience and meanes, to maintain them to liue, who of themſelues are not able to get relief, for onely by this meanes, life is maintained, wealth and riches ar poſſeſſed to many greate ſiegniorics, landes, and ample poſſeſſions, left by their parentes, and line of auncetours, haue by lacke of vertuous educacion, been brought to naught, thei fell into extreme miſerie, pouertie, and wantyng learnyng, or wealth, to maintaine their ſtate and delicate life, thei haue robbed, ſpoiled, murthered, to liue at their owne will. But then as rotten, dedde, and putride members frō the common wealth thei are cutte of by the ſworde, and aucthoritie of the Magiſtrate. What kyngdome was more mightie and ſtrong, then the kyngdome of Lidia, whiche by no other meanes was brought to rume and deſtruccion, but by idlenes: in that thei Lydi
                              •
                           . were kepte from all vertuous exerciſe, from the ſtudie of artes and ſciences, ſo longe as thei meditated and liued in the ſchoole of vertuous life: no nacion was hable to ouerthrowe them, of themſelues thei were prone and readie, to practiſe all excellencie. But Cyrus the kyng of Perſians, by no other Cyrus.
                        
meanes was able to bring them weaker. He toke from thē al furtherance to artes, deſtroied all occupaciōs of vertue whervpon by commaundemēt and terrour, wer driuen to practiſe the vaine and peſtiferous practiſe, of Cardes and Dice. Harlottes The decay of a kyngdome. then ſchooled them, and all vnhoneſte paſtyme nurtered them, Tauernes an quaffyng houſes, was their accuſtomed and moſte frequented vſe of occupacion: by this meanes their nobilitie and ſtrengthe was decaied, and kyngdome made thrall. Ill educacion or idlenes, is no ſmall vice or euill when ſo mightie a prince, hauyng ſo large dominions, whō all the Eaſte ſerued and obaied. Whoſe regimente and gouernemente was ſo infinite, that as Zenophon ſaieth, tyme would rather want, then matter to ſpeake of his mightie and large gouernement, how many nacions, how diuerſe people The mightie dominions of Cyrus. and valiaunte nacions were in ſubieccion to hym. If this mightie Prince, with all his power and populous nacions, was not hable to giue the ouerthrowe, to the kyngdome of Lidia, but by ill educacion, not by marciall attēptes, ſworde Euill educacion. or battaill: but by giuyng them ſcope and libertie, to dooe as he would. No doubt but that Cyrus ſawe, by the like example of other kyngdomes, this onelie pollicie to bee a ruine of that kyngdome. Pythagoras the famous and godlie Philoſopher, Pithagoras. ſaued the kyngdome and people of Crotona, thei leauyng all ſtudie of arte, vertue and ſcience. This people of Crotona, was ouercome of the people of Locrus, thei left all Eatona. exerciſe of vertue, neclectyng the feates of chiualrie, whervpō Pythagoras hauyng the profitable and godlie lawes of Lycurgus, which he brought from Lacedemonia: and the lawes of Minos kyng of Creta, came to the people of Crotona, and by his godlie teachyng and Philoſophie, reuoked & brought backe the people, giuen ouer to the neglectyng of all vertue, declaryng to them the nobilitie and excellencie thereof, he liuely ſet foorthe the beaſtlineſſe of vice. Pithagoras recited to them, the fall and ruine of many regions, and mightie kingdomes, whiche tooke after thoſe vices. Idlenes beyng forſaken,

vertue embraſed, and good occupacions practiſed, the kyngdome and people grewe mightie.
                     Emong the godlie lawes of Lycurgus, Lycurgus omitted Lycurgus. not to ordaine Lawes, for the educacion of youthe: in the whiche he cutte of all pamperyng of them, becauſe in tender yeres, in whoſe bodies pleaſure harboreth, their vertue, ſcience, cunnyng rooteth not: labour, diligence, and induſtrie onelie rooteth vertue, and excellencie. Vices as vnprofitable Vertue. weedes, without labour, diligence and induſtrie growe vp, Vice. and thereby infecteth the minde and bodie, poiſoneth all the mocions, incenſed to vertue and ſingularitie. Who euer attained cunnyng, in any excellent arte or ſcience, where idlenes or pleaſure helde the ſwaie. Philoſophie ſheweth, pleaſure to bée vnmete for any man of ſingularitie, for pleaſure, Pleaſure. Idlenes. Ignoraunce. idlenes, and ignoraunce, are ſo linked together, that the poſſeſſion of the one, induceth the other. So many godlie monumētes of learning, had not remained to this poſteritie of ours and of all ages: if famous men in thoſe ages and tymes, had hūted after immoderate pleaſure. Thinduſtrie of ſoche, who left to the poſteritie of all ages, the knowledge of Aſtronomie is knowen: the monumentes of all learnyng of lawes, and of all other woorkes of antiquitie, by vertue, noble, by induſtrie, labour, and moderacion of life in ſtudie, not by pleaſure and wantones, was celebraied to all ages. the mightie volumes of Philoſophers, bothe in morall preceptes, and in naturall cauſes, knewe not the delicate and diſſolute life of theſe our daies. Palingenius enueighyng againſt the pā
                        pered, and laſciuious life of man, vttereth a ſingulare ſentēce
                     
                        Qui facere et qui noſce, cupit quam plurima et altum,
                        In terris virtute aliqua ſibi querere nomen:
                        Hunc vigilare opus eſt, nam non preclara geruntur,
                        Stertendo, et molles detrectat gloria plumas.
                     
                     Who ſo coueteth to purchaſe fame by actes, or whoſe minde hunteth for aboundaunte knowledge, or by vertue in this life, to purchauſe good fame. He had not nede to ſlugge

and flepe in his doynges: for good fame is not vpholded by gaie Pecockes feathers. Of this, Demoſthenes the famous Oratour of Athens, vttereth a worthie ſaiyng to the Athenians in his Epiſtle: if any will iudge Alexander the greate, to be famous and happie, in that he had ſucceſſe in all his doynges, let this be his cogitacion, that Alexander the greate, alwaies did inure hymſelf to doe thynges, and manfullie to Alexander the great, cō
                           mended for diligence. aſſaie that he enterpriſed. The felicitie of his ſucceſſe came to hym not ſlepyng, or not cogitatyng thereof: Alexander the greate now dedde, Fortune ſeketh with whom ſhe maie accompanie, and aſſociate her ſelf.
                     Thuſidides comparyng the Lacedemonians, and the Athenians together, ſhewed a rare moderacion, and temperature of life, to be in the Athenians: wherupon thei are moſte commended, and celebrated to the poſteritie.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The contrarie.
                     
                        EVen as idlenes and a ſluggiſhe life, is moſte pleaſant to all ſoche, as neglecte vertuous exerciſes, and godlie life. So paine, labour, and ſtudie, beſtowed and emploied, in the ſekyng out of vertue, arte, or ſcience is moſte pleaſaunt to well affected mindes: for no godlie thyng can be attained to, without diligence and labour.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The ſimilitude.
                     
                        EVen as houſbandmen, with labour and trauaile, dooe labour in plantyng and tillyng the grounde, before thei receiue any fruicte of the ſame. Euen ſo no vertue, arte, or ſcience, or any other thyng of excellencie is attained, without diligence and labour beſtowed thereto.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The example.
                     
                        LEt Demoſthenes, the famous Oratour of Athenes, bee an example of diligence to vs, who to auoide all let from ſtudie, vſed a meanes to kepe hymſelf therto: preuentyng alſo the induſtrie of artificers. The ſame Demoſthenes,

wrote ſeuen tymes out the ſtorie of Thuſidides, to learne thereby his eloquence and wiſedome.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The teſtimonie.
                     
                        PLinie, Plato, and Ariſtotle, with many other mo, are like examples for diligence to vs: who wrote vpon vertue and learnyng like ſentences.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The concluſion.
                     
                        THerefore, Iſocrates dooeth pronounce worthelie, the roote of learning and vertue to be bitter, and the frutes pleaſaunte.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ A Sentence.
               
                  THe Oracion, whiche muſt be made by a ſentēce is in al partes like to Chria, the profitable exerciſe, onelie that the Oracion made vpon a ſentence, as aucthours do ſaie: hath not alwaie the name of the aucthour prefixed in the praiſe, a ſmall matter of difference, who ſo can make the one, is expert and exquiſite in the other, aucthours doe define a ſentēce in this maner. A ſentence is an Oracion, in fewe woordes, ſhewyng a godlie precept of life, exhorting or diſwadyng: the Grekes dooe call godly preceptes, by the name of Gnome, or Gnome. 
                  Gnomon, whiche is aſmoche to ſaie, a rule or ſquare, to direct any thyng by, for by them, the life of manne is framed to all ſingularitie. Thei are diuers ſortes of ſentences, one exhorteth, an other diſwadeth, ſome onely ſheweth: there is a ſentence ſimple, compounde, profitable, true, & ſoche like. Frame your Oracion vpon a ſentence, as in the Oracion before.
               
                  
                     1. The praiſe of the aucthour.
                  
                     2. The expoſicion of the ſentence.
                  
                     3. A confirmacion in the ſtrength of the cauſe.
                  
                     4. A conference, of the contrarie.
                  
                     5. A ſimilitude.
                  
                     6. The example.
                  
                     7. The teſtimonie of aucthors, ſhewing ye like.
                  
                     8. Then adde the concluſion.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ An Oracion vpon a ſentence.
                  
                     ¶ The ſentence.
                     In a common wealthe or kyngdome, many kynges to beare rule, is verie euill, let there be but one kyng.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The praiſe of the aucthour.
                     
                        HOmere, who of all the Poetes chiefly excelled, ſpake this ſentence in the perſone of Vliſſes, vpon the king Agamemnon, kyng of Grece. This Homere intreating of all the princely affaires, and greate enterprices of the Grecians: and of the mightie warre againſte the Troians, emong whom ſoche diſcorde roſe, that not onely the warre, for lacke of vnitie and concorde, continued the ſpace of tenne yeres. But alſo moche blood ſhed, hauocke, and deſtruccion, came vpon the Grecians, vttered this ſentēce. This Homere for his learnyng and wiſedome remaineth, intteled in many monumentes of learnyng: with greate fame and commendacion to all ages. What Region, Iſle, or nacion is not, by his inuencion ſet foorthe: who although he were blinde, his minde ſawe all wiſedome, the ſtates of all good kyngdomes and common wealthes. The verie liuely Image of a Prince The praiſe of Homere. or gouernour, the faithfull and humble obediēce of a ſubiect, toward the prince, the ſtate of a capitaine, the vertue and noble qualities, that are requiſite, in ſoche a perſonage, be there The content of Homers bookes. ſet forthe. The perfite ſtate of a wiſeman, and politike, is intreated of by hym. The Iuſtice, and equitie of a Prince, the ſtrength of the bodie, all heroicall vertues: alſo are ſet forthe his eloquence and verſe, floweth in ſoche ſorte, with ſoche pleaſauntnes: ſo copious, ſo aboundaunt, ſo graue and ſentencious, that his ſingularitie therein excelleth, and paſſeth.
                     The mightie prince Alexander, in all his marciall enterprices, Alexander, and great conqueſtes, did continually night by night, reade ſomewhat of the Ilias of the Poete Homere, before he The Ilias of Homere, mete for princes to looke vpon. ſlepte, and aſkyng for the booke, ſaied: giue me my pillowe. Alexander as it ſemeth, learned many heroical vertues, policie, wiſedome, & counſaill thereof, els he occupied in ſo mightie

and greate warres, would not emploied ſtudie therein.
                     Iulius Ceſar the Emperour, commendeth this Poete, for his ſingularitie, his commendacion giueth, ample argument, in this ſingulare ſentence, whiche preferreth a Monarchie aboue all ſtates of common wealthes or kyngdome.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The expoſicion.
                     
                        HOmere the Poete, ſignified by this one ſentence, no kyngdome or common wealthe can proſpere, or floriſhe to continue, where many holde gouernement as kynges. For, the mindes of many rulers and princes, doe moſte affecte a priuate wealthe, commoditie and glorie: and where, many doe beare ſoche ſwaie and dominion, the common wealth can not be good. For, thei priuatly to theim ſelues, doe beare that regiment, and alwaie with the ſlaughter of many, do ſeke to attain and clime, to the whole gouermēt
                  
                  
                     ¶ The cauſe.
                     
                        MAny occaſions dooe riſe, whereby many princes, and gouernours in a common wealth, be diuerſlie affected, The ſtate of many kinges in one lande. ſo that the gouernmēt of many, can not proſper. For, bothe in quiete ſtate, their counſailes muſt bee diuerſe, and vncertaine: and where thei ſo differ, the kyngdome ſtandeth in great ieopardy and daunger. Iſocrates intreatyng of a Monarchie, ſheweth that the common wealth of Athenes, Athenes. whiche deteſted and refuſed, that forme and ſtate, after the ruine and fall of their citee: beyng vnder the thraldome of the Lacedemoniās, bothe in their externall chiualrie and ſeates, bothe by ſea and by lande, and alſo in regimente otherwiſe, their citee grewe mightie, and ſtate ſtedfaſt.
                     The Carthagineans alſo, gouerned by one, had their gonernment Carthage in a monarchie. ſtedfaſte, and kyngdome totall: who in puiſaunte actes, might compare with the noble Romaines. As the obedience to one ruler and chief gouernour, ſekyng a common wealth, is in the hartes of the ſubiectes: feruent and marueilous with loue embraced, 
                           ••
                         the Maieſtie of hym is dreade,

with loue ſerued, and with ſincere barte, and fidelitie obeied, his maners folowed, his lawes imitated. Many gouernours The ſtate of many kinges mone lande. bearyng regiment, as their maners be diuers, and faſhion of life: euen ſo the people bee like affected, to the diuerſitie of diuers princes. And if we weigh the reuolucion of the heauens and the marueiles of God therein, the maker of the ſame, who beyng one God, ruleth heauen and yearth; and all thynges cōtained in the ſame. The heauen alſo adorned with many a 
                           A monarchie in heauen.
                           One Sunne
                         ſtarre, and cleare light, haue but one Sunne to gouerne thē: who being of a ſingulare vertue aboue the reſt, by his vertue and power, giueth vertue to the reſte. Alſo in ſmall thynges the Ante and the Bee, who for prouidence and wiſedome, at 
                           The Ante.
                           The Bee.
                         moche commended: haue as it were a common wealth, and a king to gouerne thē, ſo in all thinges as a confuſion, the ſtate of many kings is abhorred in gouernmēt. After the death of Conſtantinus the greate, Conſtancius his ſonne was made Emperour, and Licinius with him, partaker in felowſhip of Conſtancius Licinius Marabodius the Empire. But forthwith, what blood was ſhed in Italie, with all crueltie, vntill Conſtancius had ſlaine Licinius, partaker of the Empire, and Marabodius was ſlaine alſo, whom Licinius did aſſociate with hym in the gouernment. So moche princes and chief gouernours, doe hate equalitie, or felowſhip in kingdomes. After the ſame ſort, in this mightie Pompey. Ceſar. Marius. Silla. Monarchie of Rome, diuerſe haue attempted at one and ſondrie tymes, to beare the ſcepter and regiment therein, but that mightie Monarchie, could not ſuffer but one gouernor. The kyngdome of Thebes, was in miſerable ſtate, the twoo ſonnes of Dedipus, Eteocles, and Polunices: ſtriuing bothe to be Monarche, and onely kyng. The kyngdome of Aſſiria; Aſſiria the firſt monarchie. whiche was the golden kyngdome, and the firſt Monarchie: hauyng. 36. kynges by ſucceſſion, continued. 1239. yeres, this kyngdome for all nobilitie and roialnes excelled, and all in a Monarchie. The kyngdome of the Medes, in a Monarchie floriſhed in wealthe and glorie and all felicitie: who in dominion had gouernmente. 300. lackyng. 8. yeres. After that, the

monarchie of the Medes ceaſed, the Perſiā people roſe mightie, The monarchie of the Medes. The Perſiā. Macedonia. bothe in people and Princes, and continued in that ſtate 236 and 7 monethes. Macedonia roſe from a baſe and meane people, to beare the whole regiment, and power ouer all kingdomes. So God diſpoſeth the ſtate and ſeate of princes, ouerthrowyng often tymes mightier kyngdomes at his will: the continuaunce of this Monarchie was. 157. and eight monethes, ten kynges linealie deſcendyng. Aſia and Siria, was 
                           Aſia
                           Siria
                         gouerned by one ſuccedyng in a ſole gouernement. Nicanor gouerned Siria 32. yeres. In the other Antigonus raigned, Demetrius Poliorchetes one yere, Antiochus Soter alſo, the ſcepter of gouernment, left to the ſucceſſion of an other, then Antiochus Soter, ruled all Aſia and Siria, hauyng. 16. kinges whiche in a monarchie, cōtinued 189. yeres. The Egipcians, Egipte in a Monarchie had famous, wiſe, and noble princes, whoſe kyngdome and large deminion, in all felicitée proſpered: whiche was in the tyme of Ninus, the firſt king of the Aſſiriās, who hauing 10▪ princes, one by one ſuccedyng, Cleopatra their Quéene, gouerning, ſtoode in a monarchie. 288. This one thyng ſheweth, that kinde of gouernmente to bee roiall, and moſte famous, not onely for the felicitée and glory therof: but alſo for the permanent and ſtedfaſt ſtate thereof. Ariſtotle and Plato ſetteth forthe, thother formes of gouernmēt. But in all thoſe, no long cōtinuaunce of felicitee, nor of happy ſtate can appere in them, as for the contrarie to a Monarchie, is tirannis, peſtiferous, Tirannis Nero Domicianus Caligula. and to be deteſted, where one man gouerneth to his priuate gaine, pillyng and polyng his ſubiectes, murderyng with all crueltie, neither Lawe nor reaſon, leadyng thereto: but will bearyng regiment ouer lawe, Iuſtice and equitee, whiche princes often tymes ſee not. How the wilfull raſhenes, or tirannicall minde doeth abaſe them, and make them, though in vtter porte the ſame princes, yet in verie déede, thei bee thrall and ſlaue to beaſtlie affeccion. Nothyng dooeth ſo what doeth beautifie the throne of a Prince moche adorne and beautifie, the ſeate and throne of a prince, as not onely to beare dominion, ouer mightie people and regions,

then to be lorde ouer hymſelf. The ſtate of a fewe pèeres Ariſtocratia. or nobles, to holde the chief and whole gouernment, who bothe in vertue, learnyng, and experience dooe excelle, is a goodlie ſtate of common wealth. But the profe of that common wealthe and ende ſheweth, and the maner of Princes: who, although thei be, of life godlie, wiſe, graue, expert and politike. For, theſe vertues or ornamentes, ought to be repoſed in ſoche noble perſonages, thei doe marueilouſly chaunge and alter: So honour and preeminente ſtate, puffeth theim vp, and blindeth theim, that euery one in the ende, ſeeketh to climbe ouer all, as hed and gouernour. Shewe me one kinde of this ſtate, and forme of gouernmente, whiche either longe proſpered, or without bloodſhed, and deſtruccion of the reſt of the nobles and peres, haue not caught the whole regimente. Seyng that in all common wealthes and kingdomes, equalitee or felowſhippe, will not be ſuffred in gouernmente: for, it can not bee, that this forme of common wealthe maie bée good, as Ariſtotle and Plato ſheweth: The ende of this gouernemente, The ende of Ariſtocratia. fell euer to one, with a ruine of the kingdome and people. The multitude to beare dominion, and though a Politeia. publike wealth bée ſought for a tyme, moche leſſe thei continue in any good ſtate: for in the ende, their rule and gouernement, will be without rule, order, reaſon, modeſte, and their lawe muſt bee will. The other three ſtates, are the refuſe of good common wealthes, not to bée tollerated in any region. The one of them is a tyraunte, to bée gouernour onely to his Tirannis. owne glorie, with crueltie tormented his ſubiectes, onelie to haue his will and luſt, ouer all lawe, order, and reaſon. The nobilitée rulyng to themſelues, euery one for his owne time The third, the baſe and rude multitude, euery one for hymſelf, Oligarthia. and at his will. This troublous ſtate, all Regions and Democratia. common wealthes, haue felte in open ſedicions ano tumultes, raiſed by theim, it is a plagued and peſtiferous kinde of gouernemente. The example of a good Monarchie, is of greate force, to confounde the ſtate of al other common wealthes,

and formes of Regimente.
                     The nobilitée of Perſia hauyng no kyng, linially deſcendyng, A monarchie prefarred of the Perſians to rule that mightie dominion of Perſia, Cambiſes beyng dedde, the vſurper murthered, thei tooke counſaill in their aſſemble, what ſtate of gouernment was beſte, thei hauyng the profe of a Monarchie: in their longe counſaill, thei knewe the felicitie of that ſtate, thei knewe as it ſeemed, the perilous ſtate of the other gouernmentes. If theſe noble and peres had been ambicious, and that eche of them would haue had felowſhippe, or participacion in kyngdomes: thei would not haue preferred a Monarchie aboue the reſte. The antiquitie of that tyme ſheweth, their perſonages, wiſedomegrauitie, and maieſtie was ſoche, that eche one of theim was mete for his vertues, to haue a whole kyngdome. If Ariſtocratia would haue contented them, then was tyme and occaſion offered, no kyng remainyng to haue preferred that ſtate. But thei as vpright nobles, ſincere and faithfull, hauyng altogether The duetie of al noble peres reſpecte to a publique wealthe: to a permanent ſtate and felicitie of kingdome, ſought no participacion by priuate wealthe, to diſſolue this Monarchie. But thei beyng moſte godlie, eche were content to proue, whoſe chaunce might be, to ſet vp againe that Monarchie. The kyngdome at the laſte came to the handes of Darius, who was after kyng of the Darius. Perſians. This is a goodly example, to ſhewe the worthines of a Monarchie, the Perſian kingdome after many yeres declinyng, from his power and ſtate, not for any faulte of gouernment, but God as he ſeeth tyme, raiſeth vp kyngdomes and plucketh them daune. Afterward Darius the kyng, not Kyngdomes riſe and fall able to make his parte good with Alexander the Greate: offered to hym the greateſt parte of his kyngdome, euen to the ſtood of Euphrates, and offred his daughter to wife: Alexander was content to take the offer of Darius, ſo that he would The anſwer of Alexander to Darius, as cōcernyng a monarchie. bee ſeconde to hym, and not equall with hym in kyngdome. For, Alexander ſaied, that 
                           ••
                         the worlde can not bee gouerned with twoo Sunnes, 
                           〈◊〉
                         the worlde can ſuffer twoo

mightie kingdomes: wherupon it is manifeſt, that no kingdome will ſuffer equalitie or felowſhip, but that if the will & minde of Princes might bruſt out, the ſtate of all the worlde, would bee in one mightie gouernours handes. For, alwaies Princes dooe ſeke to a ſole regimente. Alexander the greate Alexāder the great prefarred a Monarchie. cōquerour alſo, preferring for worthines a Monarchie, at the tyme of his death, demaunded whō he would haue to ſuccede him in his mightie dominiōs, he by one ſignifiyng a Monarchie, ſaiyng: Digniſsimus, that is to ſaie, the worthieſt. After the death of Alexander, Antipater caught the gouernmente Alexanders monarchie fel by many kinges. Antipater. Crates. Meliagrus. Perdiceas. Ptolemeus. Learcus. Caſſander. Menander. Leonatus. Luſimacus. Eumenes Seleucus. of Macedonia and Grece, and Crates was Treaſurer. Meleagrus and Perdiceas caught other of his dominions, then Ptolemeus poſſeſſed Egipte, Africa and a parte of Arabia, Learcus, Caſſander, Menāder, Leonatus, Luſimachus, Eumenes, Seleucus and manie other, who were for their worthines in honor and eſtimacion with Alexander, caught into their handes other partes of his dominions, euerie one ſekyng for his time, his owne priuate glorie, dignitie, and aduauncemente, but not a publike wealthe, and ſo in fine, ambicion broiled in their loftie ſtomackes, eche to attaine to others honor. Whereupon bloodſhed, deſtruction of the people and countries, the fall of theſe Princes enſued. So moche kingdomes hate equalitie or felowſhipe let vs laie before our iyes, the kyngdomes nere at hand. Fraunce, from the tymes of Faramundus vntill this daie haue ſtoode, and did floriſhe Fraunce. Spaine. Germanie. Britaine. in a Monarchie. The ſtate of Spaine, from the tyme of the firſte Kyng, vntill this daie, hath floriſhed continually in a Monarchie. The great ſeigniories of Germanie, by one ſuccedyng in gouernment, haue been permanent in that goodlie ſtate. Our noble Iſle of Britain from Brutus, hath ſtoode by a Monarchie: onely in thoſe daies, the ſtate of gouernmēt chaunged, at the commyng of Iulius Ceſar, Emperour of Rome. The lande beyng at diuiſion, and diſcorde, through the diuerſitie of diuerſe kynges: ſo moche the ſtate of diuerſe kynges in one lande, is to be expelled, or the gouernment of

the baſe multitude, to haue vniuerſally power of dominion, or the ſtate of peres, to bee chief in regiment, no kyng lefte to commaunde ouer the people, and nobles, or els there can not be but diſcorde in thende, whiche pulleth doune moſſe mightie Regions and dominious, ſo that the beſte ſtate, the moſte ſtedfaſte and fortunate, is in all tymes, in all ages, in all lawes, and common wealthes, where one king ſekyng the aduauncement, wealthe, glorie, of hym and his people.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The contrarie.
                     
                        THat houſholde or familie, can not be well gouerned, where many and diuerſe beareth gouernment, necleayng the ſtate proſperous vniuerſallie: for where obedience is drawen to diuers and many, there can not bee good gouernment, nor faithfull obedience. And ſo in a kingdome where one chiefly gouerneth, and to a common wealth there the hartes of the ſubiectes, be moſte knitte to obaie.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The ſimilitude.
                     
                        EVen as thei, whiche ſerue one maiſter, ſhall ſoneſte with labour pleaſe, and with fidelitie, accompliſhe his will and pleaſure. For, the maners of many mē be diuerſe, and variable, ſo in a Monarchie, the ſtate of one is ſone obaied, the minde and lawe of one Prince ſone folowed, his Maieſtie dreaded and loued.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The example.
                     
                        LET the fower thief Monarchies of the Aſſirian, the Perſian, Grecian, and the Romaine, whiche haue continued from the beginnyng mightie, moſte happie, bee an example herein. If that ſtate of gouernement, had not been chiefe of all other, thoſe mightie kyngdomes would not haue preferred, that kinde of gouernment.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The teſtimonie of auncient writers.
                     
                        THerefore, Ariſtotle, Plato, and all the chief Philoſophers, intreatyng of the adminiſtracion of a common wealthe: doe preferre b
                           •••
                        re all ſtates of gouernment

a Monarchie, bothe for the felicitie of it, and ſtedfaſte ſtate.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The concluſion.
                     
                        HOmere therefore deſerueth greate commendacion, for this one ſentence, whiche preferreth a Monarchie before all ſtates.
                  
               
            
            
               The deſtruccion.
               
                  THis exerciſe of Rhetotike, is called deſtruccion, or ſubuerſion, becauſe it is in a oracion, a certain reprehenſion of any thyng declaimed, or dilated, in the whiche by order of art, the declaimer ſhall procede to caſte doune by force, and ſtrengthe of reaſon, the contrarie induced.
               In this exerciſe of Rhetorike, thoſe propoſicions are to be ſubuerted, whiche are not manifeſte true, neither it ſo repugnaunt from reaſon, as that there can appere no bolde, to induce a probable reaſon to confounde the ſame. But ſoche propoſicions are meete for this parte, as are probable in both ſides, to induce probabilitie of argument, to reaſon therupon.
               
                  It ſhall behoue you firſte, for the entryng of this matter,  to adde a reprehenſion there againſt thoſe, whiche haue confirmed as a truthe, that, whiche you will confute.
                  In the ſame place, adde the expoſion, and meanyng of his  ſentence.
                  Thirdly, ſhew the matter to be obſcure, that is vncertain
                  Incrediblie.
                  Impoſſible.
                  Not agreyng to any likelihode of truthe.
                  Vncomlie to be talked of.
                  Vnprofitable.
               
               This exerciſe of Rhetorike doeth contain in it al ſtrength of arte, as who ſhould ſaie, all partes of Rhetorike, maie copiouſlie be handled in this parte, called confutacion, ſo ample a matter Tullie doeth note this parte to be.
               
                  ¶ The theme or propoſicion of this Oracion.
                  
                     
It is not like to be true, that is ſaid of the battaill of Troie.
                  
                     ¶ The reprchenſion of the aucthor, and of all Poetes.
                     
                        NOt without a cauſe, the vanities of Poetes are to bee reproued, and their forged inuencions to bee reiected: in whoſe writynges, ſo manifeſtlie are ſet forthe as a truthe, and Chronicled to the peſteritie of ages and times, ſoche forged matters of their Poeticall and vain wittes. Who hath not heard of their monſterous lies againſt God, thei inucntyng a genealogie The vanities of Poetes. of many Goddes procreated, where as there is but one God. This vanitie alſo thei haue ſet forthe, in their monumentes and woorkes. How a conſpiracie was ſometyme emong the Goddes and Goddes, to binde the great God Iupiter. How impudentlie doe thei ſet forthe the Goddes, to bee louers of women, and their adulterous luſte: and how thei haue tranſformed theimſelues, into diuers ſhapes of beaſtes and foules, to followe after beaſtly luſte: The malice and enuie of the Goddes, one to another▪ The feigne alſo the heauē to haue one God, the ſea an other, helle an other, whiche are mere vanities, and falſe imaginaciōs of their Poeticall wittes. The like forged inuencion haue thei wrote, of the mightie The battaill of Troie, x, yeres for a harlotte. and terrible battaill bruted of Troie, for a beautifull harlot ſuſteined ten yeres. In the whiche, not onely men and noble peeres, gaue the combate of battaile, but the Goddes toke partes againſt Goddes, and men wounded Goddes: as their The vain inuention of Poetes. lies exceade all nomber, becauſe thei hee infinite, ſo alſo thei paſſe all truthe, reaſon, and iudgemente. Theſe fewe examples of their vanities and lies, doe ſhewe the feigned ground and aucthoritie of the reſte. Accordyng to the folie and ſuperſticiouſnes of thoſe tymes, thei inuented and forged folie vppon folie, lye, vpon lye, as in the battaill of Troie, thei aggrauate the dolour of the battaill, by pitifull and lamentable inuencion. Plato reiecteth Poetes from the common wealth. As for the Poetes themſelues; Plato in his booke, made vpon the adminiſtracion of a common wealth, maketh

theim in the nomber of thoſe, whiche are to bee baniſhed out of all common wealthes.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The expoſicion.
                     
                        HOmere dooeth ſaie, and many other Poetes, that the warres of the Grecians againſt the Troians, was for beautifull Helena, and continued tenne yeres. The Goddes and Goddis toke partes, and all the people of Grece, aided Menelaus, and the kyng Agamemnon, to bryng home again Helena, neclecting their own countrie, their wife and childrē, for one womā. The Grekes inuentyng a huge and mightie horſe made of Firre tree, and couered with braſſe, as huge as a moūtain, out of the whiche the Grecians by treaſon iſſuyng, brought Troie to ruine.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The obſcuritie of the matter.
                     
                        IT ſemeth a matter of folie, that ſo many people, ſo mightle nacions ſhould bee bewithed, to raiſe ſo mightie a armie, haſſaroyng their liues, leauyng their countrie, their wiues, their children, for one woman: Be it ſo, that Helena paſſed all creatures, and that Nature with beautie had induedher with all vertue, and ſingularitie: Helena. yet the Grecians would not be ſo fooliſhe, that vniuerſallie that would ſeke to caſte doune their owne wealthe, and moche more the common wealthe of Grece, and kyngdome to ſtande in perill. Neither is it to be thought, the Grecians, ſekyng to aduaūce the beautie of Helena: would leaue their owne ſtate. But it is like, the wittes of Poetes did immagine The cauſe of the forged inuencion. ſo forged a Chronicle, that the poſteritie of ages followyng, ſhould rather wounder at their forged inuencion, then to beleue any ſoche warre truly mencioned. There was no ſoche cauſe, ſeyng that the kyngdome of Grece, fell by no title of ſucceſſion to Helena, for them to moue warre, for, the bringyng backe of that beutifull harlotte Helena. Neither in Helena was there vertue, or honeſtie of life, to moue and exaſperate the Grecians, to ſpende ſo greate treaſures, to raiſe

ſo mightie an armie on euery ſide. What commēdacion had Nocommendacion in vpholdyng and, maintainyng of hariottes. the Troians to aduaunce Helena, and with all roialneſſe to entreate her, ſhe beyng a harlotte: the folie of the Grecians and the Troians, is ſo on euery ſide ſo greate, that it can not be thought, ſoche a warre truely chronicled. If violence and power, had taken Helena from her houſebande, and not her owne will and luſte, caught with the adulterous loue of Paris, Helena followed Paris. beyng a ſtraunger. If her moderation of life had been ſo rare, as that the like facte for her chaſtitie, had not been in any age or common wealthe, her vertues would haue giuen occaſion: The Princes and nobles of Grece to ſtomacke the matter. The example of the facte, would with all praiſe and Vertuous life, worthie commendation in al ages. Lucrecia. Tarquinius. the kyng baniſhed for rauiſhyng Lucrecia, and all of his name baniſhed. Penelopes chaſtitie. commendacion be mencioned, and celebrated to al ages. Lucretia for her chaſtite, is perpetuallie to be aduaunced, whervpon the Romaines baniſhed Tarquinius their kyng, his ſtocke and name from Rome. The rare chaſtite of Penelope, is remainyng as a example herein: So many ſhares laied to caſte doune her vertuous loue towarde her houſebande Vliſſes. But Vliſſes made hauocke by murder, on theſe gaie and gallante Ru
                           ••
                        ins, who in his abſence ſought to alienate and withdrawe, the chaſte harte of Penelope, conſumyng his ſubſtance. A greater example remaineth in no age, of the like chaſtite. As for the battaile of Troie, raiſed for Helena, could wiſe men, and the moſte famous nobles of Grece: So occupie their heddes, and in the ſame, bothe to haſarde their liues for a beautifull ſtrumpet or harlot. The ſage and wiſe Neſtor, whom Agamemnon for wiſedome preferred, before Neſtor. the moſte of the péeres of Grece, neither it Vltiſſes wanted at the ſame tyme, hauyng a politike and ſubtill hedde, to withdrawe Vliſſes. theim from ſo leude and fooliſhe a enterpriſe. Grece wanted not beautifull creatures, Nature in other had beſtowed Grece the lande of faire women. amiable faces, perſonage, and comelie behauiour. For, at thoſe daies, Grece thei called A chaida calligunaica, that is, Grece the lande of faire women. The dolorous lamentacion of the Ladies and Matron
                           •••
                         Grec
                           •
                        , would haue hindered

ſoche a fooliſhe enterpriſe, ſeyng their owne beautie neclected, their honeſtie of life caſte vp to perilles, one harlot of innumerable people followed and hunted after, in whom neither Vncomelie. honeſtie, vertue, nor chaſtite was harbored.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Vncredible.
                     
                        ALthough the folie of men is greate, and the will of princes and gouernours beaſtlie and raſhe, yet by no meanes it can be ſo many yeres, ſo greate folie to take roote in their hartes, and that the wiſedom of the Greciās ſhould not rather caſte of as naught, the beautie Beautie without vertue, nothyng of valour. of Helena: rather then the whole multitude, the ſtate of the Prince, the welfare of the ſubiecte, to ſtande in perill for the beautie of one. What is beautie, when a beaſtlie and adulterous minde is poſſeſſed: Beautie without chaſtitie, harboreth a monſterous rabelmente of vices, a ſnare and haire, Beautie a poiſon, in a adulterous mynde. to poiſon other. Beautie in fewe yeres, is not onely blemiſhed, but decated, and wholie extinguiſhed: it is vncredible, that the Grecians would ſeeke to bryng home Helena, who Beautie ſone fadeth. had loſte the chaſte loue toward her houſband, beyng caught with the adulterous loue of Paris, ſoonne to Priamus kyng Paris Helenas louer. Phrigia. of Troie. The lande of Phrigia was a mightie Region, the people noble, puiſſaunte in warre: the kyng for nobilitie of actes famous. The Citee of Troie, wherein the kyng helde his Scepter of gouernement, was riche, mightie, and populous: ruled and gouerned, by the wiſedome and policie of famous counſailours, ſo that by all meanes it is vncredible, without any poſſibilitie. Thei neclectyng their owne ſtate Vncomelie. and kyngdō, ſo to preferre the beautie of one, that the whole multitude of Grece thereby to periſhe. It is a matter vncredible in all Grece, whiche for the fame of wiſedome, is moſte Grece the fountain of al learnyng. celebrated emong all nacions, not one wiſeman at the ſame tyme to be therein: whoſe coūſaile and politike heddes, might ponder a better purpoſe. Grece, whiche was the mother and fountaine of all artes and ſciences, all Eloquence, Philoſophie, wiſedome flowyng from them, and yet wiſedome to

want in their breaſtes. Reaſon can not make any parſwaſion that any probabilitie can riſe, of any ſoche matter enterpriſed, what could the intent be of the Grecians, as concerning Menelaus. In Menelaus there was no wiſedom, to ſeke and Menelaus houſbande to Helena. hunte after Helena, or by any meanes to poſſeſſe her, ſhe beyng a harlotte, her loue alienated, her hart poſſeſſed with the loue of an other manne: fooliſhlie he hopeth to poſſeſſe loue, that ſeeketh to enioye the cloked, poiſoned, and diſſembled Harlottes loue diſſentbled. harte of a harlotte, Grece was well ridde of a harlotte, Troie harbouryng Helena. In the Troians it is not to be thought, Troians. that either the kyng, or nobles, for a harlotte, would ſee the the people murthered, their owne ſtate, the king to be in danger of ruine. In the Grecians there was neither wiſedome, Grecians. neither commendacion, to purſue with a maine hoſte, with a greate Nauie of Shippes, to bryng backe againe a harlotte, whoſe enterpriſe rather might better bee borne, to baniſhe & exile ſoche a beaſtlie diſpoſed perſone. The Troians mighte Abſurditie. well ſcorne the Grecians, if that the poſſeſſion of a beautifull moſte amiable, and minſyng harlotte, was of ſoche valour, eſtimacion, and price with theim, not onely the beautie of all other to bee reiected. But moſte of all the vertuous life, and chaſtitie of all their matrons and honourable Ladies, to bee caſte of as naught. Grece that had the name of all wiſedome, The defence of Helena. of all learnyng and ſingularitie, might rather worthelie bee called, a harbouryng place of harlottes: a Stewe and vpholder of whoredome, and all vncleanes. Wherefore, theſe abſurdities ought to bee remoned, from the minde and cogitacion of all menne, that ſhould worthelie ponder the ſtate of Grece. Troie of like ſorte to bee a kyngdome and common Troie a kingdome of whordome. wealthe of all vice: whoredome in ſoche price with the kyng, and people, that moſte fortunate ſhould the harlotte bee, and the adulterour in ſoche a common wealthe, that for adulterous loue, putteth rather all their ſtate to haſarde and perill, for the maintenaunce of beaſtlie loue, brutiſhe ſocietie moſte, in price with ſoche a 
                           〈◊〉
                         chaſtitie and moderacion of life,

abandoned and caſte of.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Vnpoſſible, and not agreyng.
                     
                        IF wee weigh naturall affeccion, it can not bee, that Nature abhorreth the warre of the Grecians. the Grecians ſo moche abhorring frō nature, ſhould caſt of the naturall loue of their wifes, their children and countrie, to bryng home againe, by ſlaughter of infinite people: ſoche an one as had lefte honeſtie, and chaſte loue of her houſbande. For, what praiſe can redounde to the Grecians by warre, to bryng home Helena, though ſhe of all creatures Helena. was moſte beautifull, beyng a harlotte: followyng the bridell and will of an other man. Maie ſhame or commendacion riſeto the Troians, can wiſedome, counſaile, or grauitie, defende the adulterous luſte of Priamus ſoonne, yea, could Priamus. Priamus ſo loue Helena, for Paris his ſonnes ſake, as that he had rather venter the ruine and deſtruccion of his citee, and the falle of his people, the murder and ruine of his children, and wife for the beautie of one. For what is beautie, where honeſtie and vertue lacketh, it is an vncomply matter, though the Poetes ſo faigne it, not onely that in heauen, a contenciō ſhould fall emong the Goddiſes of their beautie, or that Iupiter of whom thei make an ignoraunt God, to chuſe Paris the kynges ſonne of Troic, chief arbitratour & Iudge of that matter, to whō he ſhould giue the goldē Apell to her beautie, as chief of al other, was aſcribed theſe thynges, are vndecent to thinke of the Goddeſes, and moſte of all, to thinke there is more Goddes then one. And euen as theſe are vanities, and forged imaginacions of the Goddes, ſo of the hattaile.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Vncomelie and vnprofitable.
                     
                        THE daunger of many people doeth ſhewe, that no ſoche thyng ſhould happen, either of the Grecians or of the Troians: for, it is a matter diſſonaunt frō all truthe, that thei ſhould ſo moche neclecte the quiete ſtate, and proſperous renoume of their kyngdome, in all tymes and ages, ſince the firſte can ſtitucion of all Monarchies

and kyngdomes. Who euer harde ſoche a forged matter to be Chronicled, and ſet forthe. Or who can giue credite to ſoche warre, to be enterpriſed of ſo ſmall a matter: to leaue the ſtate of waightier thynges for one woman. All the women of that countrie to ſtande in perill, the ſlaughter of their deare houſbandes, the violent murder of their children to inſue. Therefore, the wilfulneſſe of people and princes, are the cauſe of the falle and deſtruccion, of many mightie kyngdomes, and Empires. The fall of Grece enſued, when the chief citees, Athenes and Lacedemonis tooke partes, and did conſederate Ambicion. Eeſar fell by ambicion. diuers citees to them to aſſiſte theim, and aide theim in battaile onely: ambicion and deſire of glorie, moued bothe the Athenians and Lacedemonians, frō concorde and vnitie Diſcorde. by whiche meanes, the power, glory, and ſtrēgth of all kingdomes falleth. Ambicion was the cauſe that mightie Pompey fell, and died violently. Ceſar likewiſe caught with ambicion, not bearyng the equalitée, or ſuperioritie of Pompei, Pompey. was tourned of violentlie frō Fortunes whéele. Many princes of like ſorte and kingdomes. By ambicion onely, had the cauſe of their ruine. The glorie of the Aſſirian Monarchie grewe moſte mightie, by the ambicion of Ninus kyng of Babilon: the offpryng of Ninus, whiche were kynges lineallie deſcendyng to the firſte kyngdome of the Medes, bothe inlarged their kyngdomes, and alſo had the decate of theim by ambicion. Let the Medes alſo aſſoriate them ſelues to thē, from Arbactus the firſt kyng, vnto Aſtiages the laſte: the beginnyng and falle of the Perſian Monarchie. The mightie ſtate of Grece, the ſeate Imperiall of Rome, by ambiciō firſt Romulus killed Remus by ambicion. extolled theim ſelues: and alſo by it, their glorie, ſcepter, and kyngdome was tranſlated, but the falle of Troie came not, by ambicion, that the Grecians ſought. But as the Poetes doe ſaigne, the beautie of one women ſo wounded their hartes, that the Grecians did haſarde, the perilles of thei
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••
                        untrie. The Troians ſo moche eſtemed, the beautie o
                           •
                         
                        
                           •••
                        ena, as that the ſtate of all their kyngdome periſhed. I alas no

glorie nor honour to the Grecians, to reſiſte by armour, and to defende the violente takyng awaie of Helena, from her houſbande: nor it was no honour, the Grecians to purſue by armour, the takyng awaie of Helena, beyng a harlotte. So that by no meanes it can followe, theſe thynges to bee true, of the battaile of Troie.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Confirmacion.
               The other part, contrary to deſtruccion or ſubuerſion, is called confirmacion.
               Confirmacion, hath in it ſo greate force of argumente, to ſtabliſhe and vpholde the cauſe or propoſicion: as deſtruccion hath in caſtyng doune the ſenten̄ce or propoſicion.
               Confirmacion is a certain oracion, whiche with a certain reprehenſion of the perſone or facte, by order and waie of art, caſteth doune, the contrary propounded.
               As in the other parte called deſtruccion, thoſe propoſicions are to bee ſubuerted, whiche are not manyfeſtlie true, with all other notes before ſpecified: ſo in contrariwiſe, this oracion by contrary notes is declaimed by, as for example.
               
                  
                     1.It ſhall behoue you firſt, for the entring of the oracion, to induce a reprehenſion againſte thoſe, whiche haue confutid as a truthe, that whiche you will confirme.
                  
                     2.In the ſeconde parte, place the expoſicion and meanyng  of the aucthours ſentence.
                  
                     3.Shewe the matter to be manifeſt. 
                  
                     4.Credible. 
                  
                     5.Proſſible. 
                  
                     6.Agreyng to the truthe. 
                  
                     7.Shewe the facte comelie. 
                  
                     8.Profitable. 
               
               This exerciſe of Rhetotike, doeth contain in it all ſtrēgth of arte, as who ſhould ſaie, all partes of Rhetorike maie 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ee handled in this parte, called confirmacion. You 
                     〈…〉
                   matter riſeth, ioigne twoo notes together, as the reaſon 
                     ••
                   the argumente cometh in place, whiche Apthonius

a Greke aucthour herein vſeth. As manifeſt and credible poſſible and agreyng to truthe, comelie and profitable, but in al theſe, as in all the reſte: the theme or propoſicion by itſelf, is to bee placed, the reprehenſion of the aucthour by itſelf, the expoſicion of the theme by itſelf.
               
                  ¶ The theme or propoſicion.
                  
                     IT is true that is ſaied of Zopyrus, the noble Perſian, who vētered his life: & did cauſe the deformitie of his bodie, for the ſauegarde of his countrie.
                  
                     ¶ The praiſe.
                     
                        Iuſtinus the Hiſtoriographer, for worthineſſe Iuſtinus. of fame and wiſedome, deſerueth to the poſteritie of all tymes, immortall fame, by whom the famous actes of Princes, and other noble men, doe remaine Chronicled. Giuyng examples Chronicles moſte neceſſary to be red of all valiauntneſſe and vertue: for, bothe the actes and worthie feares of Princes, would paſſe as vnknowen in all ages, excepte the worthineſſe of them, were in monumentes of writyng Chronicled: For, by the fame of their worthines, and vertues, cōmon wealthes and kyngdomes, doe ſtabliſhe and make Lawes, the hartes of people are incenſed, and inflamed, to the like nobilitie of actes, and famous enterprices, The worthineſſe of hiſtories. Hiſtories of auncient tymes, bee vnto vs witneſſes of all tymes and ages, of kyngdomes and common wealthes, a liuely example. A light to all truthe and knowledge, a ſcholemaiſter: of maners a memorie of life, for, by it we ſe the wiſedom what is a hiſtorie. of all ages, the forme of the beſte and floriſhing common wealthes. We learne by the vertues of Princes and gouernours, to followe like ſteppe of vertue: to flie and auoide vices, and all ſoche thynges, as are to the deſtruccion and decaie, of realme and countrie. How brutiſhe wer our 
                           〈◊〉
                        , if 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        An ignorant life, 
                              〈…〉
                           . knewe no more then we ſe preſently, in the ſtate of 
                           〈…〉
                         wealthe and kyngdome. The kyngdome
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         and common wealthes that 
                           〈…〉
                         by

the longe experience, wiſedome, pollicy, counſaile, and godlie lawes of Princes of auncient times, no ſmal praiſe and commendation can be attributed, to all ſuche as doe trauell 
                           The knowlege of Hiſtories maketh vs as it were liuyng in all ages.
                           Hiſtoriogriphers.
                         in the ſerching out the veritie of auncient Hiſtories, for bi the knoledge of them, we are as it were liuyng in all ages, the fall of all kyngdomes is manifeſte to vs, the death of Princes, the ſubuerſions of kingdomes and common wealthes, who knoweth not the firſt riſyng & ende of the Aſſiriane monarchie, the glorie of the Perſians, and the ruynge of the ſame, the mightie Empire of the Grekes, riſyng & fallyng, the Romane ſtate after what ſorte floriſhyng and decaiyng, ſo that no ſtate of common wealthe or kyngdome is vnknowen to vs, therefore Iuſtine, and all ſuche as doe leue to the poſteritie, the ſtate of al things chronicled, deſerue immortal commendacions.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The expoſicion.
                     
                        IN the time of Darius kyng of the Perſians, the Aſſyriās who ware ſubiects to him, ſence the time The treaſon of the Aſſyrians. of Cirus the firſte kynge of the Perſians, rebelled, inuaded and toke the myghtie Citie of Babilon, whiche beyng poſſeſſed, with much difficultie, and not withoute greate daungers coulde bee attained. Darius the Darius. kynge hearyng of the treaſon of the Aſſyrians and that the mightie Citie of Babilon was taken, was very wroth waiynge Babilon taken of the Aſſyrians. with himſelfe, that there by, the ruyne of the Perſian Kyngdome mighte happen. Zopyrus one of the .vij. noble Peres of Perſia, ſeing the daunger of the countrie, the ſtate of the Prince, and the welfare of the ſubiectes to decaie, in the ſafegarde of his countrie, leuyng all priuate commoditie, for the behoufe and felicitie of the Perſian kyngdome, did venter his owne life, commaunded his ſeruauntes at home to The fact of Zopyrus. 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         rēte his bodie with whippes, to cut of his noſe, his 
                           〈…〉
                         his eares, theſe thinges being vnknowen to Darius 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪ As ſone as Darius ſawe Zopyrus ſo torne

and deformed, bewailed his ſtate being aſtoniſhed, at ſo horrible Zopyrus cauſed the deformitie of his bodie, for the good ſtate of his countrie. a faict: but Zopyrus ſhewed to the kynge his hole intente and purpoſe that he mynded to go to Babylon, whiche the Aſſyrians dyd traitorouſlie poſſeſſe, & complained as that theſe things had ben don by the tyrannte and crueltie of Darius, be wēt to Babilon, and there complained of the crueltie of his Kyng, whereby purchaſyng the fauor and loue of the Aſſyrians, he ſhewed them how Darius came to be kyng not by worthines, not by vertue, not by the common conſent of men, but by the neynge of a horſe. Zopyrus therefore admoniſhed them, that they ſhould truſt more to their armour, then to their walles, he willed them to proclame opē warre, The pollicie of Zopyrus. forthwith they encountred with the Perſians, and for a time victorie fel on the Babilonians ſide, ſuche was the pollice of Zopyrus. The Aſſyrians reioiſed of the ſucceſſe and felicitie of their warres, the King of the Babilonians gaue to Zopyrus, the chiefe power & office, to leede a mightie armie, of the whiche beynge Lientenaunt, he betraied the Babilonians and their Citie.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Manifeſte.
                     
                        NOt onlie Trogus Pompeius the famous Hiſtoriographer, and Iuſtine which tooke the Story of him, Trogus Pō
                           peius. but alſo the Greke writers doe ſette forthe, as matter of truthe, the valiaunte enterpriſes of Zopyrus: ſo that the ſtraunge and mightie facte of him can not ſeme vncredible, hauyng teſtimonie of it in all ages. Zopyrus hauing not reſpect Zopyrus. to his owne life, to his owne priuate wealthe or glorie, did thereby put of the daunger that inſued to the Perſiane Kyngdome: It maie ſeme a greate matter, to a mynde not well affected towarde his countrie, to deſtroie or deforme his The ſaiyng of Tullie. owne bodie, for the ſauegarde of countrie or common welth. But if we waie the State of oure bearth, oure countrie chalengeth more at oure handes then frindes or parentes, ſo muche price Plato the Philoſopher, and 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        Plato, 
                              〈…〉
                           . vnto our countrie, the volumes of all 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
doe prefare oure naturall countrie before the priuate ſtate of owne manne, wealthe, glorie, honor, dignitie, and riches of The ſtate of a publike wealthe, is to beē preferred before a priuate wealth. Pericles. one or fewe, the Statutes of all Princes, ſekyng the glorie of their countrie, doe prefare a vniuerſal welthe, before a priuate and particulare commoditie. Pericles the noble Athenian in his oration made to the Athenians, ſheweth that the glorie and welthe of one man or manie, cannot plante ſuche glorie, and renowne to their countrie, as that in all partes thereby to be beautified and decorated, but whē glorie a happie and floriſhyng ſtate redoundeth to the kyngdome, the ſubiectes, the nobelles and hye peres, the gouuernour ſtandeth happie and fortunate. Who ſo hopeth in ſparing coſtes and charges, monie or ornaments, to the behouf and imploiment of his countrie and not by all meanes to his power and ſtrength aydeth and defendeth his naturall countrie, from the daunger and inuaſion of his enemie, what ſtate inioyeth A good ſubiecte is redie to liue and die for his countrie. he, or what wealth remaineth priuatlie, when the trone and ſcepter of his kyng faileth, the enemie waſteth, ſpoileth and deſtroieth all partes of his ſtate, with the reſte his life periſheth, ſo that no daunger, coſte, is to bee refuſed, to ſerue the kingdom and prince, by whoſe ſcepter, iuſtice, lawes, and equitie we are gouuerned, there is no ſubiect well affected, but that he onlie liueth to proffite his countrie, to liue & dye therein.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Probabell.
                     
                        IF only Zopyrus had enterpriſed this valiaunt act, and that no memorie were remainyng in anie age of the noble acts of other men, it may ſeme not truelie chronacled; but from time to time, in all ages & cōmon wealthes, famous men for their acts & nobilitie haue ben, whiche with like courrage and magnanimitie haue ſaued their countrie, by the loſſe of their owne liues. Horatius Horacius Cocles. Cocles is bothe a witneſſe and a light to the ſame, by whoſe aduenture the mightie and ſtronge Citie Rome was ſaued: 
                           〈…〉
                         a
                           •
                         what time as the Hetruſcians entred on the citie, and

were on the bridge, Horatius cocles defendid the ende of the ſame, baryng of the brunte, and ſtroke of the enemie, vntill the Romans, for the ſauegarde of the cytie, had broken doun the bridge, as ſone as Horatius Cocles ſawe the Cytie thus deliuered, and the repulſe of the enemie, he lepte with his armours into the flud Tibar, it ſemed he had not regard to his life, that beyng burdened with the waighte and grauitie of his armour, durſt venter his life to ſo main and depe a water. Marcus Attilius in the defence of his Prince, his right hand Marcus Attilius. being cut of, the which he laide on the ſhip of the Maſſilians, forthwith he apprehended with the lefte hand, and ceaſed not vntill he hadde ſoouncke the ſame ſhip. Cynegerus the Athenian lineth by fame and like nobilitie of actes, vēteryng his Cynegerus. life for his countrie. The mightie cytie of Athenes, brought vnder the dominions of the Lacedemonians. Thraſſbulus, Hiſmenias and Liſias bi their aduenture, and noble atchiue Hiſmenias. Thraſibulus reduced Athenes to his falicitie ſo moche loue, ſoo faithefull hartes they hadde towardes theire countreie. Leonides the King of the Lacedemonians, defendyng the narow ſtraights of the cytie Thermopolie with ſower thouſand men againſt the mightie and huge armie of Xerxes, for Xerxes contemned theire ſmalle number and armie: Leonides the kyng hearde Leonides kyng or the Lacedemonians. that the place and hill of the battell was preuētid of .xx. thouſande enemies, he exorted his ſouldiours parte of them to departe vntill a better time might be locked for, and onlie with the Lacedemonians he proued the conflicte and the combate, although the campe of Xerxes was mightier & more in number: yet Leonides the kyng thought it good for the ſauegarde of his contrie, for ſaieth he, I muſt rather ſaue it, then to haue reſpecte to my life, although the oracle of Delphos had foreſhewed, that euen Leonides muſte die in the fielde or battell of the enemie, and therefore Leonides entred battall, & comfortid his men for their countrie ſake, as to die therein, therefore he preuented the narrowe ſtraightes of the countrie, and the dangerous places, where the force of 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        nem
                           •
                        e 
                           ••
                        ught

bruſte in, he lingered not, leſte the enemie mighte compaſſe him in, but in the quiet ſeaſon of the nighte, he ſet vppon his enemie vnloked for, and they beynge but ſixe hundred men with the kyng Leonides, bruſt into the cāpe of their enemies Leonides. beyng ſixe hundred thouſand menne, their valiauntnes was ſuche, and the ouerthowe of their enemies ſo great, and Xerxes the Kyng hauyng two woundes, retired with ſhame and loſte the honor. Ageſilaus and Conon valiaunte in actes, Ageſilaus. Conon. and excellynge in all nobilitie, what great and mightie dangers haue thei atchiued and venterid for their countrie ſake, howe moche haue thei neglectid their owne wealth, riches, life and glorie, for the aduauncement and honor of their coū
                        trie. Liſander alſo the Lacedemonian, was indued with like nobilitie with faithfull and ſyncéer harte towarde his country. Liſander. Archidamus alſo lieth not in obliuiō, whoſe fame death buried not the famous aduenture of Codrus kyng of the Athenians Archidamus Codrus. is maruelous and almoſte incredible, but that the Hiſtores, truelie ſet forth, and declare a manifeſt truthe therof, who is more famous then Epaminundas, bothe for virtue, Epamniundas. nobilitie and marciall feates among the Thebans, the mightie armie of the Grecians, at the longe ſege of Troie, Grecians. what valiaunte Capitains hadde thei, whiche in the defence of their countrie haſarde their life: the Troians alſo wanted Troians. not for proues valiauntnes and al nobilitie, their péeres and nobles: amonge the Romans, what a greate number was Romans. of noble peres, whoſe ſtudie alwaies was to liue and dye in the glorie, aide and defence of their countrie, for he liueth not by whoſe cowardlines fainted harte and courage, the contrie or kyngdome ſtandeth in perrill, he liueth in ſhame, that refuſeth daunger, coſte or charge, in the defence or procuryng, better ſtate to his countrie. The worthie ſaiyng of Epaminundas declareth, who liueth to his countrie, who diyng valiauntlie who liueth in ſhame. in the felde, beyng thruſt thorow with the ſpeare of his enemie, aſked thoſe queſtions of theſe that ſtoede by him at the poincte of deathe, is my ſpeare manfullie broken, and

my enemies chaſſed awaie, the whiche things his cōpanions in warre affirmed, then ſaide he: nowe your Capitaine Epaminundas beginneth to liue in that he dieth valiauntlie for Epamenundas a moſt noble and valiaunt pere. his countrie, and in the proffite & aduauncement of the ſame, a worthie man, noble and valiaunte, his ſentence alſo was worthie to be knowen, and followed of all ſuche as bee well affected and Godlie mynded to their countrie, Marcus Marcellus of like ſorte, and Titus Manlius Torquatus, & Scipio Aemilianus, Marcus Attilius ſhewed in what hye price our naturall countrée ought to bee had, by their valiaunt atchifes, and enterpriſes: I might paſſe by in ſilēce Scipio Cato, and Publius Scipio Naſica, but that thei by like ſame, honour and glorie liue immortall to their countrie, the fame alſo of Vibeus, Valerius Flaccu
                           •
                        , and Pedanius Centurio giueth ampell and large matter to all menne, endued with nobilitie and valiaunt proues, for the defence of their countrie with Quintus Cocctus, Marcus Sceua and Sceuola.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Poſſibilitie.
                     
                        THere nedeth no donte to riſe of poſſibilitie, ſeinge that examples doe remain of famous men, of godlie and well affected perſones, whiche haue with like magnaunimitie putte in daunger their life, to ſaue their Prince, kyngdome, and countrie. Greate honour was giuen of the Athemans, to ſoche noble and valiaunte men, whiche ventered their liues for their common wealthe, The order of Athenes. to maintaine the floriſhyng ſtate thereof. The eloquente and copious oracion of Thuſidides, the true, faithfull, and eloquente Hiſtoriographer doeth ſhewe: what honour and immortall Thuſidides. fame was attributed, to all ſoche as did venter their liues, in the floriſhyng ſtate of their countrie, in ſupportyng, mainteinyng, and defendyng the ſame. Who, although thei loſte their liues, whiche by death ſhould bee diſſolued, their fame neuer buried, liueth with the ſoule to immortalitie, the loſſe of their Priuate wealthe, glorie, riches, ſubſtaunce, or dignitie, hath purchaſed and obtained fame, that withereth

not, and glorie that faileth not.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Agreyng and comelie.
                     
                        BOthe the true Hiſtories, doe leaue in commendacion, the facte of Zopyrus, and the noble and worthie enterpriſes of other: whiche haue giuen the like aſſaie, and their fame is celebrated and titeled with immortall commendacion and glorie, to the poſteritie of all ages followyng. What harte can bee ſo ſtonie, or brutiſhly The duetie of all good ſubiectes, affected, that wil not venter his life, goodes, landes, or poſſeſſions: if with the daunger of one, that is of hymſelf, the whole bodie and ſtate of his countrie, is thereby ſupported, and ſaued. What ſecuritie and quietneſſe remained, what wealth, honour, or fame to Zopyrus: if not onely Zopyrus had periſhed, but the kyng & people vniuerſally had been deſtroied. Therevpon Zopyrus weighing and cōſideryng, the ſtate of his birthe, that his countrie chalenged his life, rather then the diſſolucion of the whole kyngdome, the decaie of the The cauſe of our birthe. Prince, the takyng awaie of the ſcepter, the ſlaughter of infinite people to enſue. He was borne to be a profitable member to his countrie, a glorie and ſtaie to the ſame: and not ſparyng his life, or ſhunnyng the greate deformitie of his bodie, to bee a ruine of the ſame. Was it not better that one periſhed, then by the ſecuritie of one, a whole lande ouer runned, as partes thereby ſpoiled: it was the duetie of Zopirus, to take vpon hym that greate and famous enterpriſe. It was alſo comelie, the kyngdome ſtandyng in perill, a ſage and deſcrite perſone to preuente and putte of, ſoche a daunger at hande: The faicte altogether ſheweth all vertue and greate The facte of Zopyrus. ſingularitie, and a rare moderacion of minde, to caſt of all reſpectes and excuſes, forſakyng preſentlie honour, quietneſſe and obiecting himſelf to perill, he ſawe if he onelie died, or by ieopardie ſaued his countrie, many thereby liued, the kyngdome & people floriſhed, where otherwiſe, he with his Prince and kyngdome might haue periſhed.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Proffitable.
                     
                        
                        AL the power of the Babilonians, was by his pollicie The fact of Zopyrus. throwen doune, the Citee taken, the enemie brought to confuſion: on the other ſide, the Perſians roſe mightie, ſoche a mightie enemie put vnder foote. The fame of Zopryus and glorie of the facte, will neuer be obliterated, or put out of memorie, if this were not profitable to the kyngdome of Perſia: if this were not a renoume to the prince and people, and immortall glory to Zopryus iudgeye. Zopyrus therfore, beautified his countree, by Zopyrus deformed, a beautie of his countree. the deformitie of his bodie. Better it wer to haue many ſoche deformed bodies, then the whole ſtate of the realme deſtroied or brought to naught: if we weigh the magnanimitie of that man, and his enterpriſe, there is ſo moche honour in the fact, that his fame ſhall neuer ceaſe.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ A common place.
               
                  A Common place is a Oracion, dilatyng and amplifiyng Why it is called a common place. good or euill, whiche is incidente or lodged in any man. This Oracion is called A common place, becauſe the matter conteined in it, doeth agree vniuerſally to all menne, whiche are partakers of it, and giltie of the ſame
               A Oracion framed againſte a certaine Thefe, Ertorcioner, Murderer, or Traitor, is for the matter conteined in it, metelie and aptlie compiled, againſt all ſoche as are giltie of theft, murder, treaſon, or ſpotted with any other wickednes.
               This oracion of a common place, is like to the laſte argument or Epilogus of any oracion, whiche the Grekes doe call Deuterologian, whiche is as moche to ſaie, as a rehearſall of that whiche is ſpoken of before.
               Wherefore, a common place hath no exhordium, or beginnyng, yet neuertheleſſe, for the profite and exerciſe of the learner, you maie place ſoche a proemium, or beginnyng of the oracion, as maie be eaſie to induce the learner.
               This parte of Rhetorike is large to intreate vpon, for the aboundaunce of matter.
               This part of Rhetorike is large to intreate vpon, for the

aboundaunce of matter.
               The common place, whiche Aphthonius intreateth of, is to be aplied againſt any man, for the declaimor to inuade, either againſt vices, or to extoll and amplifie his vertues.
               This oracion of a common place, ſerueth bothe for the accuſer and the defender.
               For the accuſer, to exaſperate and moue the Iudges or hearers, againſt the offender, or accuſed.
               For the defendour to replie, and with all force & ſtrength of matter, to mollifie and appeaſe the perturbacions of the Iudges and hearers, to pulle doune and deface the contrarie alledged.
               There is greate force in this oracion, on bothe the ſides.
               Properlie this kinde of Rhetorike, is called a common place, though it ſemeth to be made againſte this man, or that man: becauſe the matter of the ſame ſhall properly pertain to all, giltie of the ſame matter.
               Priſtianus ſheweth, that this parte of Rhetorike, is as it Priſtianus. were a certaine exaggeracion of reaſon, to induce a manifeſt probacion of any thyng committed.
               As for example, a Theife taken in a robberie, in whom neither ſhamefaſtneſſe, nor ſparcle of grace appereth againſt ſoche a one: this oracion maie be made, to exaſperate the Iudges from all fauour or affeccion of pitie, to be ſhewed.
               
                  ¶ The order of this Oracion followeth with theſe notes to be made by.
                  
                     ¶ The firſte Proheme.▪
                     
                     
                        DEmoſthenes the famous Orator of Athenes in his oraciō made againſt Ariſtogitō doeth ſaie, that Lawes wherewith a common wealthe, citie what are Lawes. or Region is gouerned, are the gifte of God, a profitable Diſcipline among men, a reſtraint to with holde and kepe backe, the wilfull, raſhe, and beaſtilie life of man, and therupō Ariſtotle and Plato doe ſhewe, that Ariſtotle. Plato. through the wicked behauour of men, good lawes were firſt

ordained, for, of ill maners, ſaie thei, roſe good lawes, where lawes doe ceaſe, and good order faileth, there the life of man Order. will growe, rude, wild and beeſtlie: Man beyng a chiefe creature Man borne by nature to ſocietee. or God, indued with manie ſinguler vertues, is framed of nature to a mutuall and Godlie ſocietie of life, without the whiche moſte horrible wolde the life bee, for not onlie by concorde and agremente, the life of man dothe conſiſte but al things on the earth haue therin their being: the heauens and l
                           •
                        ghtes conteined in the ſame, haue a perpetuall harmonie & concente in finiſhyng their appointed race. The elementes of the worlde, where with the nature and ſubſtaunce of all All thinges beyng on the yearth, dooe conſiſte by a harmonie or concorde. thinges, doe conſiſte onlie by a harmonie and temperature of eche parte, haue their abidyng increaſe & proſperous beyng, otherwiſe their ſubſtaunce, periſheth and nature in all partes decaieth: Kyngdomes and common wealthes doe conſiſte in a harmonie, ſo long as vertue and all ſingularitie tempereth their ſtate and gouernemente, and eche member thereof obeieth his function, office and callynge, and as partes of theſame bodie, euerie one as nature hath ordained theim occupiyng, their roume and place, the vſe of euerie parte, all to the vſe and preſeruacion of the hole bodie, and as in the bodie ſo in the common wealthe, the like concorde of life oughte to be in euery part, the moſte principall parte accordyng to his dignitie of office, as moſte principall to gouerne thother inferior partes: and it thei as partes moſte principal of theſame bodie with all moderacion and equabilitie tēperyng their ſtate, office and calling. The meaneſt parte accordyng to his lowe Order conſerueth common wealth. ſtate, appliyng hymſelfe to obeie and ſerue the moſte principall: wherein the perfecte and abſolute, frame of common wealthe or kyngdome is erected. And ſeyng that as the Philoſophers doe ſaie, of ill maners came good lawes, that is to ſaie, the wicked and beaſtlie life of man, their iniurius behauiour, ſekyng to frame themſelues from men to beaſtes moued Euil maners was theoccaſion of good Lawes. the wiſe and Godlie, elders to ordaine certaine meanes, to rote diſcipline, whereby the wickedlie diſpoſed perſonne

ſhould bee compelled to liue in order, to obeie Godlie lawes, to the vpholdyng of ſocietie. Therefore, all ſuche as diſſolue lawes, caſte doune good order, and ſtate of common wealth, out as putride and vnprofitable weedes, to be extirpated and plucked vp from Citie and Common wealthe, from ſocietie, who by miſcheuous attemptes ſeke, to extinguiſhe ſocietie, anntie, and concord in life. Princes & gouernors with al other magiſtrates ought in their gouernment to imitate the practiſe of the Phiſician, the nature of man, wekedned and made feble with to moche abundaunce of yll humors, or ouermoch with ill bloode repleniſhed, to purge and euacuate that, and all to the preſeruacion and healthe of the whole bodie: for ſo was the meanyng of the Philoſopher, intreatyng of the politike, gouernment of kingdome and commonwealth, when thei compared a kingdome to the bodie of man: the thefe and robber as a euill and vnprofitable member, and all other as without all right, order, lawe, equitie and iuſtice, doe breake Theiues not mete to be in any ſocietie. ſocietie of life, be the againſt lawe and nature: poſſeſſing the goodes of a other man, are to bee cutte of, as no partes, méete to remaine in any ſocietie.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The ſeconde Proheme.
                     
                        THe chifeſt cauſe that moued gouernours and magiſtrates, Why theiues and wicked men, are cut of by lawe. to cutte of the race of theues, and violēte robbers, and of all other miſcheuous perſons, was that by them a confuſion would enſue in al ſtates. What Citee could ſtande in proſperous ſtate, yea, or what houſe priuatlie inhabited, where lawes and aucthoritee were exiled: where violence, will, luſte, and appetite of peſtiferous men, might without terrour bee practiſed. If the labour and induſtrie of the godlie, ſhould be alwaie a praie to ye wicked, and eche mannes violence and iniurious dealyng, his owne lawe, the beaſte in his ſtate, would bee leſſe brutiſhe and iniurious. Who ſo ſeketh to caſte doune this ſocietee, he is not méete to be of any ſocietée, whiche he diſſolueth. Who ſo robbeth or ſtealeth, to liue by the gooddes of an other manne, as

his poſſeſſion, is by violence and againſte Nature: ſo by violence and againſt nature, their peſtiferous doinges do frame A due rewardes for thieues and murtherers. their confuſion: their execrable & deſietable purpoſe, do make theim a outcaſte from all good people, and as no members thereof, cut of from all ſocietée, their euill life r
                           •••
                        th perpetual ignomie and ſhame. And 
                           〈…〉
                         the tragicall ende of their enterpriſe.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The contrarie.
                     
                        HErein the loſe and diſſolute ſtate of gouernments called of the Grekes Democratia, haue contented the wilfull heddes of peſtiferous men: wherein Democratia. euery man muſt bee a ruler. Their owne will is their Lawe: there luſte ſetteth order, no Magiſtrate, but euery one to hymſelf a Magiſtrate. All thynges in common, as long as that ſtate doeth remain emong the wicked, a moſt happie ſtate coumpted, a wiſhed ſtate to idell perſones, but it continueth not. Herein the murtherer, the thiefe were meete The thiefe. The murtherer: to be placed. The greater thiefe, the better manner the moſte execrable murtherer, a moſte mete perſone, for ſoche ſtate of gouernemente. There is no nacion vnder the Sunne, but that one tyme or other, this troublous ſtate hath moleſted theim: and many haue ſought to ſette vp ſoche a monſterous ſtate of regiment, a plagued common wealthe, and to be deteſted. Soche was the order of men, when thei liued without lawes. When the whole multitude were ſcattered, no citee, Toune, or houſe builded or inhabited, but through beaſtlie maners, beaſtlie diſperſed, liued wilde and beaſtlie. But the wiſe, ſage, and politike heddes reduced by wiſedome, into a ſocietie of life, nature leadyng thereto: Houſes and hab
                           •
                        tacions, Houſes. Families. Tounes. Citees. were then for neceſſitte made, families multiplied, villages and Taunes populouſtie increaſed, and Citees raiſed emong ſo infinite people. Nature by God inuented and ſtabliſhed Lawe, and the ſage and wiſe perſones, pronounced and gaue ſentence vpon Lawes. Whereupon, by the obedience of lawes, and preeminente authoritie of Magiſtrates.

The ſtate of mightie kyngdomes and Common wealthes, haue growen to ſoche a roialneſſe and loftie ſtate, many famous kingdomes haue been on the face of the yearth: many noble Princes from tyme to tyme ſuccedyng, whiche without a order of godlie lawes, could not haue continued. What Obedience of Lawes did ſtabliſhe the mightie monarchies. was the cauſe that the mightie Monarchies, continued many hundred yeres: did the loſſe and diſſolute life of ſubiectes and Princes, cauſe the ſame but good lawes, and obedience to orders. Therefore, where Magiſtrates, bothe in life and office, liue in the obedience of Lawes: the multitude inferiour, by The life of the Magiſtrate, a lawe example of the Magiſtrates ſingularitie, incenſed dooe place before them, their example of life, as a ſtrong lawe.
                     Theodoſius Emperor of Rome, writyng to Volufianus The Epiſtle of Theodoſiu
                              •
                           s Emperor of Rome his chief Pretor, as concernyng his office, in theſe woordes, ſaieth: Digna vox eſt maieſtate regnantis legibus alligatum ſe principem profiteri. Adeo de autoritate Iuris noſtra pendet autoritas et reuera maius imperio eſt ſubmittere legibus principatum & oraculo preſentis edicti quod nobis licere non patimur alijs indicamus. It is a worthie ſaiyng, and meete for the Maieſtie of a Prince, to acknowledge hymſelf vnder his lawe. For, our aucthoritie, power, and ſworde, doeth depende vpon the force, might, and aucthoritie of Lawes, and it paſſeth all power and aucthoritie, his gouernemente and kyngdome to be tempered by lawe, as a moſte inuiolable Oracle and decrée, ſo to doe as we prouulgate to other. Whereupon it is manifeſte, what force godlie lawes gaue to the Prince, what aucthoritie. Take lawes awaie, all order of ſtates faileth, the Prince by Lawe, is a terrour to the malefactour: his Princes Lawe. Maieſtie is with all humbleneſſe ſerued, feared, and obeied. By lawes, his ſtate maketh hym as a God, emong menne, at whoſe handes thé preſeruacion of eche one, of houſe, citee and countrie is ſought. Seing bothe lawes and the Prince, haue that honour and ſtrength, that without them, a Chaos a confuſion would followe, in the bodie of all common wealthes and kyngdomes. Let them by aucthoritie and lawe bee confounded,

that practiſe to ſubuerte aucthoritie, to neclecte the Prince, and his godlie lawes.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The expoſition.
                     
                        THe theife, or any other iniurious perſons, doeth ſeke Theiues and all iniurious perſones. to bee aboue all lawes, exempted from all order, vnder no obedience, their peſtiferous dealyng, dooe vtter the ſame: For, as Demoſthenes the famous Orator of Athenes Demoſthenes in Ariſtogiton. doeth ſaie. If that wicked men ceaſe not their violēce if that good men in all quietnes, and ſecuritie, can not enioys their owne goddes, while lawe and aucthoritie of the magiſtrate, ſeuerelie and ſharply vſeth his aucthoritie and ſword. If dailie the heddes of wicked men, ceaſe not to ſubuerte lawes, orders, and decrees godlie appoincted. Whiles that in all Citees and common wealthes, the Princes and gouernours, are by lawes a terror to them. Lawes then ceaſyng, The force of lawes. the dreadfull ſentēce of the Iudge and Magiſtrate wanting. The ſworde vndrawen, all order confounded, what a confuſion would followe: yea, what an open paſſage would bee lefte open to all wickedneſſe. The terrour of Lawes, the ſworde and aucthoritie of the Mageſtrate, depreſſeth and putteth doune, the bloodie cogitacions of the wicked, and ſo hindereth and cutteth of, many horrible and bloodie enterpriſes. Els there would bee neither Prince, Lawe, nor ſubiects, no hedde or Magiſtrate: but euery manne his owne hedde, his owne lawe and Magiſtrate, oppreſſion and violence ſhould bee lawe, and reaſon, and wilfull luſte would bee in place of reaſon, might, force, and power, ſhould ende the caſe. Wherefore, ſoche as no lawe, no order, nor reaſon, will driue lo liue as members in a common wealthe, to ſerue in their functiō. Thei are as Homere calleth theim, burdeins to the yearth, wicked men burdeins of the yearth. for thei are of no ſocietie linked with Nature, who through wickedneſſe are diſſeuered, abhorryng concorde of life, ſocietie and felowſhip. Whom ſiniſter and bitter ſtormes of fortune, doe daiely vexe and moleſte, who in the defence of their

countrie are maſmed, and thereby their arte and ſcience, for, imbecilitie not practiſed, all art otherwiſe wantyng, extreme Maimed ſoldiours muſte be prouided for. pouertee fallyng on them, reaſon muſte moue, and induce all hartes, to pitee chieflie their ſtate: who in defence and mainteinaunce of our Countrie, Prince, and to the vpholdyng of our priuate wealthe at home, are become debilitated, deformed and maimed, els their miſeries will driue them to ſoche hedleſſe aduentures, that it maie bee ſaied, as it was ſaied to Alexander the Greate. Thy wartes, O Prince, maketh many The ſaiyng of a ſhuld our to Alexander the greate. theues, and peace will one daie hang them vp. Wherein the Grecians, as Thuſidides noteth, had a carefull prouidence, for all ſoche as in the defence of their Countrie were maimed, yea, euen for their wiues, and children of all ſoche, as died in warre, to be mainteined of the commō charge and threaſure of Grece. Reade his Oracion in the ſeconde booke, niade vpon the funerall of the dedde ſoldiours.
                  
                  
                     ¶ A compariſon of vices.
                     
                        THe dronkarde in his ſtate is beaſtlie, the proude The drūkard The proude perſone. The prodigal The coueites: is. The robber. and arrogante perſone odious, the riotous and prodigall perſone to be contempned, the coueitous and nigardlie manne to bee reietted. But who ſo by violence, taketh a waie the goodes of an other man, or by any ſubtill meanes, iniuſtlie poſſeſſeth the ſame, is deteſtable, with all ſeueritée to be puniſhed. The adulterer and the harlotte, who by brutiſhe behauiour, leude affection, not godlines leadyng theréto: who by their vnchaſt The adulterer. The hariot. behauior, and wanton life doe pollute, and cōtaminate their bodie, in whom a pure muide ought to be repoſed. Who therowe beaſtly affection, are by euill maners tranſformed to beaſtes: and as moche as in theim lieth, multipliyng a brutiſhe ſocietie. The homicide in his ſtate more horrible, accordyng The homicide. to his outragious and bloodie life, is to bee tormented, in like ſort all other vices, accordyng to their miſchiues, reaſon, Lawe and Iuſtice, muſt temper and aggrauate due reward,

and ſentence to them.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The ſentence.
                     
                        NO vice was more greuous, and horrible emong the Scithians then thefte, for this was their ſaiyng: Thefte horrible amōg the Scitheans. 
                        Quid 
                              〈…〉
                            potent ſilicet furarl, what can be ſafe, if thefte bee 
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        ull or tolerated. Herein the vniuerſalle ſocietee of 
                           •••
                         is caſte doune, hereby a confuſion A ſentence agenſt thefte. groweth, and a ſubuerſion in all ſtates immediatlie followeth, equitee, iuſtice, and all ſincere dealyng is 
                           〈…〉
                        , violence extirpateth vertue, and aucthoritie is 
                           〈◊〉
                         of.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The digreſſion.
                     
                        THe facte in other maie be with more facilitie tolerated, in that to theim ſelues, the facte and conuerſacion of life is moſte per
                           •••••
                        us, and h
                           •
                        rtfull, but by ſo he kinde of nature, whole kyngdomes and common wealthes would bee 
                           〈…〉
                         for a proſperous ſtate and common wealthe, a common woe and calamitee would fall on them, tumultes and vprores maintained, right and lawe exiled: neither in field quitnes, welth Horrible vices. or riches, houſes ſpoiled, families extinguiſhed, in all places ſedicion, warre for peace, violence for right, will and 
                           ••
                        ſt for lawe, a hedleſſe order in all ſtates. And as concernyng Vſurers though their 
                           〈◊〉
                         be neuer ſo ample, and plentifull Vſerers. to enriche them, whereby thei growe to be lordes, ouer many thouſandes of poundes: yet the wealthe gotten by it is ſo iniurious, that thei are a greate plague, to all partes of the cō
                        mon wealthe: ſo many daungers and miſchiues, riſeth of thē Cato the noble and wiſe 
                           〈◊〉
                         of Rome, being demaunded diuers queſtions, what was firſte to bee ſought, in a familie The ſentence of Cato againſt vſurers. Vſure is 
                              •••
                           
                           ther. or houſholde, the aunſweres not likyng the demaunder: this queſtion was aſhed, O Cato, what ſenfēce giue you of Vſurie, that is a goodlie matter to bee enriched by. Then Cato aunſwered in fewe woordes. Quid hominem occidere. What ſaie you to be a murderer? Soche a thyng faieth he, is

Vſurie. A brief ſentence againſte Vſurers, but wittely pronounced from the mouth of a godlie, ſage, noble, and deſcrite perſone, whiche ſentence let the Vſurer, ioigne to his Vſure retourned, and repeate at the retourne thereof, this ſentence of Cato, I haue murthered. This one ſentence will diſcourage any Vſurer, knowyng hymſelf a murtherer. Though The ſentence of Cato a diſcomfort 
                              〈…〉
                           . moche more maie be ſpoken againſt it, this ſhalbe ſufficient. The Hebrues calleth Vſurie, by the name of Shecke, that is a bityng gaine, of the whiche many haue been ſo bitten, that whole families haue been deuoured, & beggerie haue been their gaine. And as Palingenius noteth.
                     Debitor aufugiens portat cum faenore ſortem.
                     The debtour often tymes ſaieth he, runneth awaie, and carieth with hym, the debte and gaines of the Vſurie. The Grekes calleth Vſurie Tokos, that is properlie the trauaile of women of their childe: ſoche is their Vſurie, a daungerous gettyng. Demoſthenes likeneth their ſtate as thus, as if terreſtriall thynges ſhould be aboue the ſtarres: and the heauēs and celeſtialle bodies, gouerned by the baſe and lowe terreſtriall matters, whiche by no meanes, can conſerue the excellencie Vſure a dangerous gaue. of them, for, of them onely, is their matter, ſubſtaūce and nature conſerued.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Excluſion of mercie.
                     
                        WHerefore, to whom regimente and gouernemente is committed, on whoſe adminiſtracion, the frame of the cōmon wealth doe ſtaie it ſelf: thei ought with al wiſedome and moderacion, to procede in ſoche cauſes, whoſe office in worthineſſe of ſtate, and dignitie, maketh thē as Goddes on the yearth, at whoſe mouthes for wiſedome, counſaill, and fortunate Princes and magiſtrates be as Gods on the earth. ſtate, infinite people doe depende. It is no ſmal thing in that their ſword & aucthoritee, doeth ſette or determine all thinges, that tendereth a proſperous ſtate, whereupon with all integritee and equitée; thei ought to temper the affeccions of their mynde: and accordyng to the horrible facte, and miſchiues

of the wicked, to exaſperate & agrauate their terrible iudgemente, and to extirpate from the yearth, ſoche as be of no ſocietie in life. The 
                           〈…〉
                        , the thief, the adulterer, for by theſe all vertue 
                           〈…〉
                         out, all godlie ſocietie The 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ The Theue. The Adulteror. extinguiſhed, cit
                           •••
                        , r
                           •
                        al
                           •
                        es, and c
                           •
                        untries, proſtrate & plagued for the tolera
                           •
                        ion of their 
                           〈…〉
                         ag
                           •
                        inſt ſ
                           •
                        ch 
                           •
                        ren
                           ••
                        hip in iudgemente muſte ceaſe, and accordyng to the ſtate of the cauſe, equitee to retaine frendſhip, money muſte not blinde, nor rewardes to force and temper Iudgementes: but accordyng to the verit
                           ••
                         of the cauſe, to adde a concluſion. Worthelie the pictures of Princes, Gouernours and Magiſtrates Whey the pictures of magiſtrates bee picturid with oute handes. in auncient tymes doe ſhewe this, where the antiquitée maketh theim without handes, therein it ſheweth their office, and iudgemente to proceade with equitée, rewardes not to blind, or ſuppreſſe the ſinceritie of the cauſe. Magiſtrates not to bee bounde to giftes, not rewardes to rule their ſentence. Alciatus in his boke called Emblemata, in ſenatū ſancti principis.
                     
                     
                        Effigies manibus trunce ante altaria di
                              •••
                           e
                        Hic reſident, quarum himine capta prior
                        Signa poteſtatis fumme, ſancti
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ſenatus, Princes and magiſtrates, graue & 
                                 •••
                              
                              ſtante.
                        
                        Thebanis fuerant iſta reperta viris.
                        Cur reſident? Quia mente graues decet eſſe quieta
                        Iuridicos, animo nec variare leui.
                        Cur ſine ſunt manibus? Capiant ne xenia, nec ſe
                        Pollicitis flecti muneribus ve ſmant.
                        Cecus eſt princeps quod ſolis auribus, abſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           
                        
                        Affectu conſtans iuſſa ſenatus agit.
                     
                     Where vertue and integritie ſheweth it ſelf, in the perſone and cauſe, to vpholde and maintain the ſame. Roote out horrible vices from common wealthe, that the more ſurer and ſtronge foundacion of vertue maie be laied: for, that onelie cauſe, the ſcepter of kinges, the 
                           •••
                        ice of magiſtrates was left to the poſteritee of all
                           •
                        ges.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶ Lawfull and juſt.
                     
                        SEyng that lawes bee godlie, and vniuerſally thei Lawes giue equitee to all ſtates. temper equitée to all ſtates, and giue according to iuſtice, euery man his owne: he 
                           〈◊〉
                         vertue, that diſpoſ
                           •••
                        e than other manne of his own; and 
                           〈…〉
                         Iuſtice. And thereupon his beaſtly life What briueth ye magiſtrate to horrible ſentence againſt wicked perſons. by 
                           〈…〉
                         forceth and driueth, lawe and Magiſtrate, to terrible iudgement. For, who ſo againſt right, without order, or lawe, violateth an other man, ſoche a one, lawes of iuſtice, muſte puniſhe violentlie, and extirpate from ſocietée, beyng a 
                           〈◊〉
                         of ſocietee.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Profitable.
                     
                        IF ſoche wicked perſones be reſtrained; and ſeuerelie puniſhed, horrible vices will be rooted out: all artes ſciences, and godlie occunacions maintained, vpholded and kept. Then there muſt bee a ſecuritee in all ſtates, to practiſe godlines, a mutuall concorde. The Magiſtrate with Magiſtrate. equitée, the ſubiecte with faithful and humble obedience, accompliſhyng Subiect. his ſtate, office, and callyng. Whereupon by good Magiſtrates, and good ſubiectes, the common wealthe and kyngdom is in happie ſtate ſtabliſhed, For, in theſe twoo poinctes, as Plato doeth ſaie, there is vertuous rule, and like obedience.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Eaſie and poſſible.
                     
                        AL this maie eaſely be doen; when wickednes is cutte of, in his firſte groweth, when the magiſtrate driueth continually, by ſworde and authoritee, all menne to obedience, bothe of lawes and gouernuurs. Then in al good common wealthes, vices are neuer tolerated to take roote: becauſe The begynnyng of vice is to be cutaf. the beginnyng and increaſe of vices, is ſone pulled vp, his monſterous kyngdome thereby ouerthrowen.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The concluſion.
                     SO doyng, happie ſhall the kyng be, happie kyngdome, and moſte fortunate people.
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The parte of Rhetorike called praiſe.
               
                  
                     •
                  His Oracion, which is 
                     〈◊〉
                   praiſe, is a declamaciō of the vertuous or good qualitees, properties belongyng to any thyng, whiche d
                     ••
                  th procede by certaine notes of a
                     •
                  te.
               All thynges that maie be ſee
                     ••
                   with the iye of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , touched, or with any other ſen
                     ••
                   appr
                     •
                  hend
                     •
                  d▪ that maie be praiſed, or diſpraiſed.
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  F
                        •••
                     e.
                  Bea
                        •••
                     .
                  Orthardes
                  Stones.
                  Trees.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  Ca
                        •••••
                     .
                  T
                        •••••
                     .
                  
                     
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     ins.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  Artes.
                  Sci
                        •
                     nc
                        ••
                     .
               
               Any vertue maie be praiſed, as wiſedome, rightuouſnes fortitude, magnanimitie, temperaunce, liberalitee, with all other.
               Theſe are to be celebrated with praiſe.
               The perſone, as Iulius Ceſar, Octauius Augu
                     ••••
                  , Hiere
                     ••
                  le, Tullie, Cato, Demoſthenes.
               Thynges, as rightuouſnes, temperaunce.
               Tymes, as the Spring tyme of the yere, Sommer, Harueſt, Winter.
               Places, as Hauens, Orthardes, Gardeins, Toures, Caſtles, Temples, I
                     ••
                  andes.
               Beaſtes wantyng reaſon, as Horſe, Shepe, Oxen 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               In the praiſe of vertue, this maie be ſaied
               THe excellencies of it, the antiquit
                     •
                  e and originalls beginnyng 
                     〈…〉
                   any region by it, as no 
                     〈…〉
                   without vertues

and to extoll the ſame, in makyng a compariſon, with other giftes of nature, or with other giftes of fortune, more inferiour or baſe.
               Vpon a citee, praiſe maie be recited, conſideryng the goodlie ſituacion of it, as of Paris, Venice, London, Yorke: conſideryng Wherein the praiſe of a citie conſiſteth the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the lande, the wealthe and aboundaunce, the noble and famous gouernours, whiche haue gouerned the ſame. The firſt aucthors and builders of the ſame, the politike lawes, and godlie ſtatutes therein mainteined: The felicitee of the people their maners, their val
                     •
                  aunt prowes and hardines. The buildyng and ornatures of the ſame, with Caſtles, Toures, Hauens: Floodes, Temples: as if a manne would celebrate with praiſe. The olde, famous, and aunciente Citée of London, ſhewyng the auncient buildyng The praiſe of London. of the ſame: the commyng of Brutus, who was the firſte aucthor and erector of the ſame. As Romulus was of the mightie Brutus builded Londō in the. 
                        •
                     . yeare of his raine, Citée Rome, what kyngs haue frō tyme to tyme, lineally deſcended, and ſucceded, bearing croune and ſcepter therein: the valiauntnes of the people, what terror thei haue been to all forraine nacions. What victories thei haue in battaile obteined, how diuers nacions haue ſought their amitée and league. The falſe Scottes, and Frenche menne truce breakers: Fraunce and Scotlande vpholdid by ye gouernors of this lande. many and ſonderie tymes, loſyng their honour in the field, and yet thei, through the puiſſaunt harte of the kynges of this lande, vpholdyd and ſaued, from the mighte and force of other enemies inuadyng theim. The twoo famous Vniuerſitées of this lande, from the whiche, no ſmall nomber of Cambridge. Oxforde. greate learned men and famous, haue in the comon wealthe ſprong, with all other thynges to it.
               The praiſe of a Kyng, Prince, Duke, Erle, Lorde, Baron, Squire, or of any other man be maie declaimed of obſeruing the order of this parte of Rhetorike.
               
               This parte of Rhetorike called praiſe, is either a particuler praiſe of one, as of kyng Henry the 
                     •••
                  te, Plato, Tullie, Demoſthenes, Cyrus, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Alexander the greate.
               
                  
Or a generalle and vniuerſalle praiſe, as the praiſe of all the Britaines: or of all the cit
                     •••
                  in
                     •
                   of London.
               
                  ¶ The order to make this Oracion, 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  Firſte, for the enteryng of the matter, you ſhall place a exordium, or beginnyng.
                  The ſecond place, you ſhall bryng to his praiſe. Genuseius, that is to faie: Of what kinde be came of, whiche dooeth conſiſte in fower poinctes.
                  
                     Of what nacion.
                     Of what countrie.
                     Of what a
                           ••
                        cetours.
                     Of what parentes.
                  
                  After that you ſhall declare, his educacion: the educacion is conteined in thrée poinctes. In
                  
                     Inſtitucion.
                     Arte.
                     Lawes.
                  
                  Then put there to that, whiche is the chief gr
                        •••
                     de of al praiſe: his actes doen, whiche doe procede out of the giftes, and excellencies of the minde, as the fortitude of the mynde, wiſedome, and magnanimitée.
                  Of the bodie, as a beautifull face, amiable countenaunce ſwiftneſſe, the might and ſtrength of the ſame.
                  The excellencies of fortune, as his dignitée, power, aucthoritie, riches, ſubſtaunce, frendes.
                  In the fifte place vſe a compariſon, wherein that whiche you praiſe, maie be aduaunced to the vttermoſte.
                  Laſts of all, vſe the Epilogus, or concluſion.
               
               
                  ¶ The example of the Oracion.
                  ¶ The praiſe of Epaminundas.
                  
                     IN whom nature hath powred ſinguler giftes, in whom vertue, & ſingularitee, in 
                        〈…〉
                      enterpriſes aboundeth: whoſe glorie & renowne, 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the 
                        〈…〉
                     , immortall 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                        •
                     n the gra
                        •
                     e, their vertues and godlie 

life, taſteth not of Obliuion, whiche at the length ouerſhroweth Obliuion. all creatures, Citées, and regions. Thei liue onelie in all ages, whoſe vertues ſpreadeth ſame and noble enterpriſes, by vertue rooteth immortalitee. Who ſo liueth as that his good fame after death ceaſeth not, nor death with the bodie Who liue in all ages. rutteth of their memorie of uſe: Soche not onely in life, but alſo in death are moſte fortunate. In death all honor, dignitee, glorie, wealthe, riches, are taken from vs: The fame and glorie of ſingulare life is then, chieflie takyng his holde 
                        Good fame chieflie routeth after death.
                        Tuilie.
                        Demoſtheues.
                        Iulius Ceſar.
                        Ocrauius Auguſtus.
                        Veſpaſianus Theodoſius.
                        Traianus. Adrranus.
                      and roote, wiſe men and godlie, in life, knowen famous, after death, remain woſte worthie & glorious. Who knoweth not of Tullie, the famous Oratour of Rome. Doeth Demoſthenes lieth hidden, that noble Oratour of Athenes. Is not yt fame of Iulius Ceſar, Octauius Auguſtus remainyng of Veſpaſianus: of Theodoſius, of Traianus, of Adrianus, who by praiſe minded, be left to the ende of al ages. Soche a one was this Epaminundas, the famous Duke of Thebe, whoſe vertues gane hym honour in life, and famous enterpriſes, immortalitée of fame after death. What can bee ſaied more, in the praiſe and commendacion, of any peere of eſtate, then was ſaied in the praiſe of Epaminundas, for his vertues were ſo ſingulare, that it was doubted, he beyng ſo good a manne, and ſo good a Magiſtrate, whether he were better manne, or better Magiſtrate: whoſe vertues were ſo vnited, that vertue alwaies tempered his enterpriſes, his loftie ſtate as fortune oftentymes blindeth, did not make hym vnmindfull of his ſtate. No doubt, but that in all common wealthes, famous gouernours haue been, but in all thoſe, the moſte parte haue not been ſoche, that all ſo good men, and ſo good magiſtrates: that it is doubted, whether thei 
                        〈…〉
                     , or better magiſtrates. It is a rare thyng to be 
                        〈…〉
                     , Good man, good magiſtrate, boothe a good man and a good magiſtrate. but a more difficult matter, to bee a good Magiſtrate: and moſte of all, to be bothe a good man, and a good Magiſtrate. Honour and preeminent ſtate; doeth 
                        〈…〉
                     , whereupon thei ought the more 
                        〈◊〉
                      to wade
                        •
                     
                     
in all cauſes, and with all moderacion, to temper their preeminent ſtate. The Philoſophers ponderyng the brickle and ſlippere ſtate of fortune, did pronunce this ſentence: Difficilius 
                     The ſaiynge of the Philoſophers. 
                     eſt res aduerſas pati, quam fortunam eſlantem ferre, it is more eaſie to beare ſharpe and extreme pouertie, then to rule and moderate fortune, becauſe that the wiſeſt menne of all haue as Chronicles doe ſhewe, felte this obliuion, that their maners haue been ſo chaunged, as that natures molde in thē 
                     Obliuion. had ben altered or nuelie framed, in the life of Epaminūdas moderacion and vertue, ſo gouerned his ſtate, that he was a honor and renowne to his ſtate, nothing can be more ample in his praiſe, then that which is lefte Chronicled of him.
                  
                     Of his countrie.
                     
                        EPaminundas was borne in Thebe a famous citie in Beotia, the which Cadmus the ſōne of Agenor builded, Cadmus. whiche Amphion did cloſe & enuiron with walles, Amphion. in the whiche the mightie and valiaunt Hercules was Hercules. borne, & manie noble Princes helde therin ſcepter, the which Citie is tituled famous to the poſterity by the noble gouernment of Epaminundas.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of his auncetours.
                     
                        EPaminundas came not of anie highe nobilitie or blood, but his parentes were honeſte and verteous who as it ſemed were verie well affected to vertue, inſtructyng their ſoonne in all ſingulare and good qualities, for by good and vertuous life and famous enterpriſes from a meane ſtate, manie haue bene extolled to beare ſcepter, or to attaine greate honour, for as there is a begynnyng of nobilitie, ſo there is an ende, by vertue and famous Nobility roſe by vertue. actes towarde the common wealthe, nobilite firſt roſe. The ſtock of Ceſar and Ceſars was exalted from a meaner ſtate, Ceſar. Scipio. by vertue onelie to nobilitie. Scipios ſtocke was not alwais noble, but his vertues graffed nobilitie to the poſteritie of his line and ofſpryng followynge. And euen ſo as their famous

enterprices excelled, nobilite in theim alſo increaſed. Catilina wicked, was of a noble houſe, but he degenerated Catilina. from the nobilitie of his aunceſtours, the vertues that graffed nobilitie in his aunceſtors, were firſt ertinguiſhed in Catiline. Marcus Antonius was a noble Emperour, a Prince Marcus Antonius. indued with all wiſedome and Godlie gouernmēt, who was of a noble parētage, it what a wicked ſonne ſucceded him, the father was not ſo godlie, wiſe, and vertuous, as Commodus Commodus. was wickedlie diſpoſed and peſtiferous. There was no vertue or excellence, meete for ſuche a perſonage, but that Marcus attained to. Who for wiſedome was called Marcus Philoſophus, in his ſonne what vice was thē that he practiſed not, belie chier, druncknes and harlottes, was his delite, his crueltie and bluddie life was ſuche that he murthered all the godlie and wiſe Senatours, had in price with Marcus his father. Seuerus in like maner, was a noble and famous Seuerus. Emperor, in the Senate moſte graue, politike, and in his warres moſte fortunate, but in his ſonne Marcus Antoninus Marcus Antonius Caracalla. Caracalla, what wickednes wanted, whoſe beaſtlie life is rather to be put in ſilence, then ſpoken of. In the aſſemble of the Grecians, gathered to conſulte vpon the contencion of Achilles armour, Aiax gloriouſlie aduaunceth hymſelf of his aunceſtrie, from many kinges deſcended, whom Vliſſes his Aiax. Vliſſes. aduerſarie aunſwered: makyng a long and eloquente Oracion, before the noble péeres of Grece, concernyng Aiax his auncetours. Theſe are his woordes.
                     
                        Nam genus et proauos et que non fecimus ipſi,
                        Vix ea noſtra voco, ſed enim quia retulit Aiax,
                        eſſe louis pronepos.
                     
                     As for our parentage, and line of auncetours, long before vs, and noble actes of theirs: as we our ſelues haue not doen the like, how can we call, and title their actes to be ours. Let them therefore, whiche haue deſcended from noble blood, and famous auncetours: bee like affected to all nobilitée of their auncetours, what can thei glory in the nobilitée of their auncetours.

Well, their auncetours haue laied the foundacion, and renoume of nobilitee to their ofſpryng. What nobilitee Nobilitee. is founde in them, when thei builde nothyng, to their auncetours woorke of nobilitée. Euen as their auncetours, noblie endeuoured them ſelues, to purchaſe and obtain, by famous actes their nobilitée) for, nobilitée and vertue, deſcendeth alwaies to the like) ſo thei contrary retire and giue backe, frō all the nobiliée of their aunceſtours, where as thei ought, with like nobilitée to imitate them. Many haue been, whiche through their wiſedome, and famous enterpriſes, in the affaires A beginnyng of nobilitee, of their Prince, worthche to honour haue been extolled and aduaunced: who alſo were the firſte aucthours and founders of nobiliée, to their name and ofſpring. Whoſe ofſpring indued with like nobilitee of vertues, and noble actes haue increaſed their aunceſtors glorie: the childrē or ofſpring lineally deſcendyng, hauyng no part of the aunceſtours glorie, how can thei vaunte them ſelues of nobiliée, whiche thei lacke, and dooe nothyng poſſeſſe thereof, Euen from lowe birthe and degree. Galerius Armentarius was aduaunced, euen from a Shepherdes ſonne, to ſit in the Imperiall ſeat of Roome. Galerius Maximinus whom all the Eaſte obaied, Galerius a Shepherds, ſonne Emperor of Rome. Probus a Gardeiners ſonne, Emperour. his vertues and noble acts huffed hym to beare ſcepter in the Empire of Roome. Probus a Gardiners ſoonne, to the like throne and glorie aſcēded, ſo God diſpoſeth the ſtate of euery man, placyng and beſtowing dignitée, where it pleaſeth him as he ſetteth vp, ſo he pulleth doune, his prouidence & might is bounde to no ſtate, ſtocke, or kindred.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of his educacion.
                     
                        EPaminūdas beyng borne of ſoche parentes, was brought vp in all excellente learnyng, for, vnder hym Philippe the kyng of the Macedonians, the ſoonne of Amintas, was brought vp. This Epaminundas, the Hiſtories note hym to be a chief Philoſopher, and a capitaine moſte valiaunte. In Muſike, in plaiyng, and

ſingyng finelie to his Inſtrumente, notable and famous, no kinde of learnyng, arte, or ſcience, wanted in his breaſte: So greate and aboundante were his vertues, that aboue all gouernours, whiche haue been in Thebe, his name and fame is chieflie aduaunced.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The praiſe of his actes.
                     
                        EPaminundas beyng moſte valiaunte and noble, leauing all priuate commoditée, glory, and The dutie of good gouernors. riches a ſide: ſought the renoume of his countree, as all rulers and gouernours ought to do. For, a kyngdome or common wealth, can not riſe to any high nobilitée or Roialneſſe, where gouernours, rulers, and magiſtrates, neclecting the vniuerſall, and whole Nowe a kingdome riſeth to all felicitie. body of the common wealthe, doe cogitate and vigilantly endeuour themſelues, to ſtabliſh to them and theirs, a priuate, peculiar, and domeſticall profite, glorie, or renoume. Coueiteouſnes, whiche is in all ambicious Magiſtrates the poiſon, plague, deſtruccion, and ruine of the beſte and floriſhing cō
                        mon wealthes, of al wickednes and miſchief the roote: a vice, whereupon all vice is grounded, from whom all miſchiefe Couetouſnes a great euill. floweth, all execrable purpoſes iſſueth. That wanted in Epaminundas, for in the ende of his life, his coffers were ſo thin and poore, that euen to his Funerall, money wanted to ſolempniſe the ſame. Priuate glorie nor exceſſe, was hunted after of hym, yet his vertues were of ſoche excellencie, that honour, dignitée, and prceminent ſtate, was offered and giuen to hym vnwillinglie. This Epaminundas was in gouernement ſo famous, and ſo vertuouſlie and politikelie ruled the ſame, that he was a glorie, renoume, honour, and felicitée to his kingdome, by his ſtate. Before the time of Epaminundas, the countree of Beotia was nothyng ſo famous Beotia. in their enterpriſes: neither the citee of Thebe ſo roiall, puiſſaunt Thebes. or noble, the antiquitee of that tyme ſheweth, that Epaminundas wantyng the power of Thebes, their glorie, ſtrength, and felicitee fell and decaied. The learning of Epaminundas

and knowlege, was ſo aboundant and profounde bothe in Philoſophie, and in all other artes and ſciences, that it was wounderfull. In chiualrie and in feates of warre, no péere was more couragious and bolde, or hardie, neither in that, whiche he enterpriſed, any could be of greater counſaile in hedde more pollitike, of minde more ſage and wittie: his gouernement ſo good, that beyng ſo good a Magiſtrate, it is doubted, whether he be better man, or better Magiſtrate, Epaminundas died in the defence of his countrée. The Athenians were enemies to the Thebanes, and many greate battailes were aſſaied of theim and foughten: and often tymes the Athenians felt many bitter ſtormes, and fortune loured of them, he beyng ſo valiaunt a capitain. Epaminundas beyng dedde, the Athenians ceaſed to practiſe, any one parte of chiualrie, their proweſſe and dexteritée decaided: thei hauyng no aliaunte, and forraine enemie to moleſte theim, or whom thei feared. So that a famous, wiſe, pollitike, and valiaunte capitaine, is not onely a ſtaie, a pillar and ſtrong bulwarke A valiant capitain, to his countrie a pillar to his 
                              •••
                           
                           mie, a occaſiō to dexteritie. to his countrée. But alſo forraine nacions, hauyng one, whō for his valiauntnes thei dreade, doe practiſe and inure themſelues, to all dexteritee, counſaile, wiſedome, and pollicie: ſoche a one was Epaminundas, to his enemies and coūtrée.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The compariſon.
                     
                        NEither Hector of Troie, nor Achilles of Grece, might bee compared with Epaminundas, Numa Pompilius Hector. Achilles. Numa Pompeius. Adrianus. was not more godlie, Adriane the Emperour of Roome, no better learned, nor Galba the Emperour more valiaunte, Nerua no more temperate, nor Traianus more noble, neither Cocles nor Decius, Scipionor Marcus Regulus, did more valiauntly in the defence of their countrie, ſoche a one was this Epaminundas.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The concluſion.
                     
                        OF many thynges, theſe fewe are recited, but if his whole life and vertues, wer worthely handeled: fewe would beleue, ſoche a rare gouernour, ſo vertuous a

Prince, ſo hardie and valiaunte a capitaine, to haue remained in no age.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The parte of Rhetorike, called diſpraiſe.
               THis parte of Rhetorike, which is called diſpraiſe, is a ſuuectiue Oracion, made againſte the life of any man.
               This part of Rhetorike, is contrary to that, whiche is before ſet, called laus, that is to ſaie, praiſe: and by contrary notes procedeth, for the Oratour or declaimer to entreate vpō.
               This parte of Rhetorike, is called of the Grekes Pſogos.
               
               In praiſe, we extoll the perſone: Firſt by his countrée.
               Then by his aunceſtours and parentes.
               In the third place, by his education and inſtitucion.
               Then in the fowerth place, of his actes in life.
               In the fifte place vſe a compariſon, comparyng the perſone with other, whiche are more inferiour.
               Then the concluſion.
               Now in diſpraiſe, contrarily we doe procede.
               Firſte, in the diſpraiſe of his countrée.
               Of his auncetours and parentes.
               His educacion is diſpraiſed.
               Then his actes and deedes of life.
               Alſo in your compariſon with other, diſpraiſe hym.
               Then in the laſte place, adde the concluſion.
               All thynges that maie be praiſed, maie be diſpraiſed.
               
                  ¶ The diſpraiſe of Nero.
                  
                     AS vertue meriteth commendacion and immortall renoume, for the nobilitée and excellencie repoſed in it: ſo ougle vices for the deformitée of Vertue. them, are in mynd to be abhorred and deteſted, and with all diligence, counſaile, and wiſedome aucided. As peſtiferous poiſon extinguiſheth with his corrupcion and nautineſſe, the good and abſolute nature of all Vice. thinges: ſo vice for his peſtiferous nature putteth out vertue and rooteth out with his force all ſingularitée. For, vice and

vertue are ſo of nature contrary, as fire and water, the violence of the one expelleth the other: for, in the manſion of vertue, vice at one tyme harboreth not, neither vertue with vice can be conſociate or vnited, for, vertue is a ſinguler meane, what is vertue. or Mediocrite in any good enterpriſe or facte, with order and reaſon finiſhed. Whoſe acte in life, doeth repugne order and reaſon, diſſeuered from all Mediocrite, ſoche do leaue iuſtice, equitée, wiſedome, temperaunce, fortitude, magnanimitée, and al other vertues, bothe of minde and body: onely by vertues life men ſhewe theimſelues, as chief creatures of God, with reaſon, as a moſte principall gifte, beautified and decorated: In other giftes, man is farre inferiour to beaſtes, both in ſtrength of bodie, in celeritée and ſwiftneſſe of foote, in labour, in induſtrie, in ſenſe, nothyng to bee compared to beaſtes, with beaſtes as a peculier and proper thyng, wee haue our bodie of the yearth: but our minde, whiche for his diuinitée, paſſeth all thynges immortall, maketh vs as gods emōg other creatures. The bodie therefore, as a aliaunt and forain enemie, beyng made of a moſte baſe, moſte vile and corruptible nature, repugneth the mynde. This is the cauſe, that wickedneſſe taketh ſoche a hedde, and that the horrible facte and enterpriſe of the wicked burſte out, in that, reaſon exiled and remoued from the minde, the ougle perturbacions of the minde, haue their regiment, power, and dominiō: and where ſoche ſtate of gouernemente is in any one bodie, in priuate and domeſticalle cauſes, in forraine and publike affaires, in kyngdome and cōmon wealthe. Vertue fadeth and decaieth, and vice onely beareth the ſwaie. Lawe is ordered by luſte, and their order is will, ſoche was the tyme and gouernment of this wicked Nero.
                  
                     ¶ Of his countres.
                     
                        NEro was a Romaine borne, though in gouernement he was wicked, yet his coūtrée was famous, and noble: for, the Romaines wer lordes and heddes ouer all the worlde. The vttermoſte Indians,

the Ethiopes, the Perſians, feared the maieſtie and aucthoritée of the Romaines. From Romulus, who was the firſte founder, and builder of that Citee: the Romaines bothe had their name of hym, and grew afterward to marueilous puiſaunt Rome. roialnes. There was no nacion vnder the Sunne, but it dreaded their Maieſtie, or felte their inuincible handes: there hath been many mightie kyngdomes, on the face of the yearth, but no kyngdome was able, with like ſucceſſe and felicitée in their enterpriſe, or for like famous gouernors, and continuance of their ſtate, to compare with them. This was, and is, the laſte mightée Monarchie in the worlde. Roome a olde aunciente citee, inhabited firſte of the Aborigines, which came from Troie. The prouidence of God, ſo diſpoſeth the Carthage. tymes and ages of the world, the ſtate of kyngdomes, by the fall of mightier kyngdomes, meaner grewe to power and glorie. The Carthagineans, contended by prowes, and magnanimitee, to be lordes ouer the Romaines. Carthage was a greate, mightie, olde, auncient & famous citee, in the whiche valiaunte, wiſe, and pollitike gouernours, helde therein regiment, long warres was ſuſteined betwene the Romaines and Carthagineans, emong whom infinite people, and many noble péeres fell in the duſte. Fortune and happie ſucceſſe fell to the Romaines: the people of Carthage vāquiſhed, and proſtrate to the grounde. Scipio the noble Conſull, beyng at the deſtruccion of it, ſeeyng with his iye, Carthage by fire brunte to aſhes, ſaied: Talis exitus aliquando erit Rome: euē as of Carthage, like ſhall the deſtruccion of Rome bee, as for Deſtruction of Rome to aſhes in tune. continuaunce of the Romaine ſtate, of their glorie, power, and worthie ſucceſſe, no nacion vnder the Sunne, can compare with theim: ſoche was the ſtate of Rome, wherein wicked Nero raigned.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of his annceſtours.
                     
                        DOmitianus Nero, the ſonne of Domitius Enobarbus, Agrippina was his mothers name: this Agrippina, was Empreſſe of Rome, wife to Claudius Tiberius,

the daughter of his brother Germanicus. This Agrippina, the Chronicle noteth her, to be indued with al miſchief Agrippina. and crucltée: For Tiberius her houſbande, hauyng by his firſte wife children, thei were murthered by her, becauſe ſhe might, thei beyng murthered, with more facilitée, further the Empire, to her ſoonnes handes, many treaſons conſpired againſt them oftentimes, Agrippina poiſoned her huſbande, then Nero ſucceded.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of his educacion.
                     
                        SEneca the famous Poete & Philoſopher, was ſcholemaiſter Seneca ſchol maiſter to Nero. to Nero, who brought hym vp in all nobilitie of learnyng, mete for his ſtate: though that Nero was wickedlie of nature diſpoſed, as his beaſtlie gouernement ſheweth, yet wickednes in him, was by the ſeueritie of Seneca, and his caſtigacion depreſſed: for Traianus Emperour of Rome, would ſaie, as concernyng Nero, for the ſpace of fiue yeres, no Prince was like to hym, for good gouernement, after fiue yeres, loſely and diſſolutly he gouerned.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of his actes.
                     
                        THis Nero, at what tyme as his mother was conceiued The dreame of Agrippina mother to Nero, in his concepcion. of him, ſhe dreamed that ſhe was conceiued of a Viper: for, the young Viper alwaies killeth his dame. He was not onely a Viper to his mother whom he killed, but alſo to his kyngdome and common wealthe a deſtroier, whiche afterward ſhalbe ſhewed, what a tyraunte and bloodie gouernour he was. This Nero made in the Citee of Rome, the rounde ſeates and ſcaffoldes, to beholde Nero a viper ſpectacles and ſightes, and alſo the bathes. He ſubdued Pontus a greate countrée, whiche ioineth to the ſea Pontuswhiche countrée containeth theſe realmes, Colchis, Cappadocia, Armenia, and many other countrées, and made it as a Prouince, by the ſuffraunce of Polemon Regulus, by whoſe Pontus. Colchis. Cappadocia. Armenia. name it was called Pontus Polemoniacus. He ouer came the Alpes, of the king Cott
                           •
                        us, 
                           •
                        ttius the king being dedde

The life followyng of Nero was ſo abhominable, that the ſhame of his life, will make any man a fraied, to leaue any 
                           Nero vnworthie to be chronicled.
                           Seneca▪
                           
                         memorie of hym. This Domitius Nero, cauſed his Scholemaiſter Seneca to be put to death, Seneca choſing his owne death, his veines beyng cutte in a hotte bathe died, bicauſe he corrected wicked Nero, to traine hym to vertue. He was outragious wicked, that he had cōſideracion, neither to his own honeſtie, nor to other, but in continuaunce, he tired hymſelf as virgines doe when thei marie, callyng a Senate, the dourie aſſigned, and as the maner of that ſolemnitee is, many reſortyng and frequentyng, in maidens tire and apparell. He went beyng a man, to be maried as a woman: beſide this, at The ſhamful life of Nero. other tymes he cladde hymſelf with the ſkin of a wilde beaſt, and beaſtlie did handle that, whiche Nature remoueth from the ſight. He defiled hymſelf with his owne mother, whom he killed immediatlie. He maried twoo wiues, Octauia, and Sabina, otherwiſe called Poppea, firſte murtheryng their houſbandes. In that tyme Galba vſurped the Empire, and Caius Iulius: as ſone as Nero heard that Galba came nere Galba. Caius Iulius. towardes Rome, euen then the Senate of Rome had determined, that Nero ſhould bee whipped to death with roddes, accordyng to the old vſage of their aunceſtours, his necke yoked with a forke. This wicked Nero, ſeyng himſelf forſaken of all his friendes, at midnight he departed out of the Citée, Ephaon, and Epaphroditus waityng on hym, Neophitus and Sporus his Eunuche: whiche Sporus before tyme, had Nero aſſaied to frame and faſhion out of kinde. In the ende, Nero thruſte himſelf through, with the poinct of his ſworde, his wicked man Sporus, thruſtyng foreward his trembling hande: this wicked Nero before that, hauyng none to murther The death of Nero. hym, he made a exclamacion, in theſe woordes. Is there neither friende nor enemie to kill me, ſhamefullie haue I liued, and with more ſhame ſhall 
                           〈◊〉
                        , in the .xxxij. yere of his age he died. The Perſians ſo atire ly loued hym, that after his death thei ſente Ambaſſidours, deſiryng licence to erecte

to hym a monumente, all countrées and Prouinces, and the whole Citée of Rome, did ſo moche reioyce of his death, that thei all wearyng the Toppintant hattes, whiche bonde men doe vſe to ware, when thei bee ſette at libertie, and ſo thei triumphed of his death, deliuered from ſo cruell a tyraunte.
                  
                  
                     ¶ A compariſon.
                     
                        AS for wicked gouernement, Nero doeth make Caligula like to Comodus, Domitianus, Antoninus Nero. Caligula. Domitianus Antoninus. Caracalla, thei were all ſo wicked, that the Senate of Rome thought it méete, to obliterate their name, from all memorie and Chronicle, becauſe of their wickedneſſe.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The concluſion.
                     
                        MOche more the life and gouernement of wicked Nero, might be intreated of, but this ſhall be ſufficient: to ſhewe how tyrannically and beaſtly, he gouerned vnmete of that throne.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ A compariſon.
               
                  A Compariſon, is a certain Oracion, ſhewyng by a collacion the worthines, or excellēcie of any thing: or the naughtines of the ſame, compared with any other thyng or thynges, either equalle, or more inferiour.
               In a compariſon good thynges, are compared with good as one vertue with an other: as wiſedome & ſtrength, whiche of them moſte auaileth in peace and warre.
               Euill thynges maie bee compared with good, as Iuſtice, with iniuſtice, wiſedome with fooliſhnes.
               Euill thynges maie be compared, with euill thynges, as wicked Nero, compared to Domitianus, or Caligula to Cō
                  modus, theft to homicide, drunkenes with adulterie.
               Small thynges maie be compared with greate: the king with his ſubiect, the Elephant or Camell to the Flie, a Crocodile to the Scarabe.
               In a compariſon, where monumente is ſupputated on

bothe the ſides, worthetie to praiſe, or diſpraiſe.
               Where a compariſon is made, betwene a thyng excellente, and a thyng more inferiour: the compariſon ſhall procede with like facilitee.
               All thynges that maie bee celebrated with praiſe, or that meriteth diſpraiſe: al ſoche thynges maie be in a compariſon.
               The perſone, as Cato being a wiſe man, maie be compared with Neſtor, the ſage péere of Grece: Pompei with Ceſar, as Lucane compareth them, and ſo of all other men.
               Thynges maie bee compared, as golde with ſiluer: one mettall with an other.
               Tymes maie bee compared, as the Spryng with Sommer: Harueſte with Winter.
               Places maie be compared, as London with Yorke, Oxforde with Cambridge.
               Beaſtes without reaſon, as the Bée with the Ante, the Oxe with the Shepe.
               Plantes, as the Vine, and the Oliue.
               Firſt, make a proemium or beginnyng to your cōpariſon
               Then compare them of their countrée.
               Of their parentes.
               Of their aunceſtours.
               Of their education.
               Of their actes.
               Of their death.
               Then adde the concluſion.
               
                  ¶ A compariſon betwene Demoſthenes and Tullie.
                  
                     TO ſpeake moche in the praiſe of famous men, no argument can wante, nor plentie of matter to make of them, a copious and excellent Oracion. Their actes in life through nobilitée, will craue worthelie more, then the witte and penne of the learned, ca
                        •
                      by Eloquence expreſſe. Who can worthelie expreſſe and ſette foorthe, the noble Philoſopher

Plato, or Ariſtotle, as matter worthelie forceth to commend, Plato. Ariſtotle. when as of them, all learnyng, and ſingularitée of artes hath flowen. All ages hath by their monuments of learning, participated of their wiſedome. Grece hath foſtered many noble wittes, from whom all light of knowlege, hath been deriued by whoſe excellencie Rome in tyme floriſhyng, did ſeeke by nobilitée of learnyng, to mate the noble Grecians. So moche Italie was adorned, and beautified with the cunnyng of the Grecians. Emong the Romaines many famous Oratours and other noble men hath ſpronge vp, who for their worthineſſe, might haue contended with any nacion: either for their glorie Tullie. of learnyng, or noble regiment. Emong whom Tullie by learning, aboue the reſt, roſe to high fame, that he was a renoume to his countree: to learnyng a light, of all ſinguler Eloquence a fountaine. Whom Demoſthenes the famous Oratour of Athenes, as a worthie mate is compared with, whom not onely the nobilitée, and renoume of their Countrée ſhall decorate, but thē ſelues their owne worthines & nobilitée of fame. No age hath had twoo more famous for learnyng, no common wealthe hath taſted, twoo more profitable to their countrée, and common wealthe: for grauitée and coū
                     ſaile, nor the poſteritée of ages, twoo more worthie celebracion. Thuſidides ſpeakyng, in the commendacion of famous men ſheweth: as concernyng the fame of noble men, whoſe Thuſidides. vertue farre ſurmounteth thē, and paſſeth al other. Thenuious The enuious manne. man ſeketh to deprane, the worthineſſe of fame in other, his bragging nature with fame of praiſe, not decorated. The The ignoraunte. ignoraunte and ſimple nature, accordyng to his knowlege, iudgeth all ſingularitée, and tempereth by his owne actes the praiſe of other. But the fame of theſe twoo Oratours, neither the enuious nature can diminiſhe their praiſe, nor the ignoraunt be of them a arbitrator or iudge, ſo worthely hath all ages raiſed fame, and commendacion of their vertues.
                  
                     ¶ Of their countree.
                     
                        
                        IN Grece Demoſthenes, the famous Oratour of Athenes was borne, whoſe Countrée or Citee, lacketh no cōmendacion: either for the nobilitée of the lande, or glorie of the people. What nacion vnder the Sunne, hath not heard of that mightie Monarchie of Grece: of their mightie citees, and pollitike gouernaunce. What famous Poetes how many noble Philoſophers and Oratours, hath Grece brede. What ſcience and arte, hath not flowne from Grece, ſo that for the worthineſſe of it, it maie bee called the mother of all learnyng. Roome alſo, in whom Tullie was brought vp, maie contende in all nobilitee, whoſe power and puiſant glorie, by nobilitee of actes, roſe to that mightie hed. In bothe ſoche excellencie is founde, as that no nacion might better contende, of their ſingularitée and honour of countrée, then Grece and Rome: yet firſt from the Grekes, the light of Philoſophie, and the aboundant knowledge of all artes, ſprange to the Romaines, from the Grecians. The Godlie Lawes, wherewith the Romaine Empire was decorated and gouerned, was brought from the Grecians. If the citee maie bee a honour and glorie, to theſe twoo Oratours, or their Eitees a ſinguler commendacion, there wanteth in bothe, neither honour, or nobilitee.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of their aunceſtours, and parentes.
                     
                        BOthe Demoſthenes and Tullie were borne, of verie meane parentes and aunceſtours: yet thei thorowe their learnyng and vertues, became famous, aſcendyng to all nobilitee. Of their vertues and learnyng, not of their aunceſtours, nobilitée roſe to them.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of the educacion.
                     
                        THE ſinguler vertues of theim bothe, appered euen in their tender youth: wherupon thei being brought vp, in all godlie learnyng and noble Sciences, theibecame moſte noble Oratours, and by their copious Eloquence, counſaile, and wiſedom, aſpired to nobilitée & honor.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of their 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     
                        
                        BOthe were taught of the mouthe of the beſt learned, Demoſthenes of Iſeus, a man moſte Eloquent: Cicero of Philo and Milo, famous in wiſedome and Eloquence.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of their exerciſe.
                     
                        CIcero did exerciſe hymſelf verie mothe, to declaime, bothe in Greke and Latine, with Marcus Piſo, and with Quintus Pampeius. Demoſthenes wanted not induſtrie and labour, to attain to that ſingularitée, whiche he had, bothe in Eloquence, and pronounciacion.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of the giftes of their minde:
                     
                        IN bothe, integritee, humanitee, magnanimitee, and all vertue flowed: at what time as Demoſthenes was commaunded of the Athenians, to frame a accuſacion, againſte a certaine man, Demoſthenes refuſed the acte. But when the people, and the whole multitude, were wrothe with hym, and made a exclamacion againſt hym, as their maner was. Then Demoſthenes roſe, and ſaied: O ye men of Athenes, againſte my will, you haue me a counſailer, or pleater of cauſes before you: but as for a accuſer, & calumniator, no, not although ye would. Of this ſorte Tullie was affected, excepte it were onely in the ſauegard of his countrée: as againſt Catiline, bothe were of godlie, and of vpright conuerſacion, altogether in Mediocrite, and a newe leadyng their life.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of their actes.
                     
                        DEmoſthenes and Tullie bothe, gaue themſelues to trauail, in the cauſes and affaires of their common wealthe, to the preſeruacion of it. How vehemently did Demoſthenes pleate, and ingeniouſlie handle the cauſe of all his countree, againſt Philip, for the defence of their libertee: whereupon he gatte fame, and greate glory. Whereby not onely, he was coumpted a great wiſe counſailour: but one of a valiaunte ſtomacke, at whoſe

wiſedome, all Grece ſtode in admiracion. The kyng of Perſia, Darius. Philip. Demoſtheues. laboured to enter fauour with him. Philip the king of the Macedonians, would ſaie often tymes, he had to doe againſt a famous man, notyng Demoſthenes. Tullie alſo by his Eloquence and wiſedome, ſaued Roome and all partes of that dominion, from greate daungers.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of their aucthoritee.
                     
                        THeir aucthoritee and dignitee was equalle, in the common wealthe: For, at their twoo mouthes, Roome and Athenes was vpholed. Demoſthenes was chief in fauour with Caretes, Diophetes, Leoſtines, Cicero with Pompei: Iulius Ceſar, aſcending to the chief ſeate and dignitee of the Conſulſhip.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of a like fall that happened to them, before their death.
                     
                        YOu can not finde ſoche twoo Orators, who borne of meane & poore parentes, that attained ſo greate honour, who alſo did obiecte themſelues to tyrantes a like, thei had loſſe of their children a like, bothe were out of their countree baniſhed men, their returne was with honour, bothe alſo fliyng, happened into the haudes of their enemies.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Of their death.
                     
                        BOthe a like, Demoſthenes and Tully wer put to death, Demoſthenes died, Antipater gouernyng Antipater. Demoſthenes. Archias. Marcus Antonius. Tullie. by the handes of Archias. Cicero died by the commaundement of Marcus Antonius: by Herenius his hedde was cutte of, and ſette in Marcus Antonius halle. His handes alſo were cutte of, with the whiche he wrote the vehement Oracions againſt Marcus Antonius.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The concluſion.
                     
                        TO ſpeake as moche as maie bee ſaied, in the praiſe of theim: their praiſe would riſe to a mightie volume, but this is ſufficiente.
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Ethopoeia.
               
               
                  Ethopoeia is a certaine Oracion made by voice, and lamentable imitacion, vpon the ſtate of any one.
               This imitacion is in iij. ſortes, either it is.

                     
                        Eidolopoeia.
                     
                     
                        Proſopopoeia.
                     
                     
                        Ethopoeia.
                     
                  
               
               That parte, whiche is called Ethopoeia is that, whiche hath the perſone knowne: but onely it doeth faigne the maners of the ſame, and imitate in a Oracion the ſame.
               
                  Ethopoeia is called of Priſcianus, a certaine talkyng to of any one, or a imitaciō of talke referred to the maners, aptly of any certaine knowen perſone.
               Quintilianus ſaieth, that Ethopoeia is a imitacion of other meane maners: whom the Grekes dooe calle, not onelie Ethopoeia, but mimeſis, & this is in the maners, and the fact.
               This parte is as it were, a liuely expreſſion of the maner and affeccion of any thyng, whereupon it hath his name.
               The Ethopoeia is in three ſortes.
               The firſte, a imitacion paſſiue, whiche expreſſeth the affection, to whom it parteineth: whiche altogether expreſſeth the mocion of the mynde, as what patheticall and dolefull oracion, Hecuba the quene made, the citee of Troie deſtroied, her houſbande, her children ſlaine.
               The ſecond is called a morall imitaciō, the whiche doeth ſet for the onely, the maners of any one.
               The thirde is a mirt, the whiche ſetteth for the, bothe the maners and the affection, as how, and after what ſorte, Achilles ſpake vpon Patroclus, he beyng dedde, when for his ſake, he determined to fight: the determinacion of hym ſheweth the maner. The frende ſlaine, the affection.
               In the makyng of Ethopoeia, lette it be plaine, and without any large circumſtaunce.
               
                  
In the makyng of it, ye ſhall diuide it thus, to make the Oracion more plaine, into three tymes.
               
                  A preſente tyme.
                  A tyme paſte.
                  A tyme to come.
               
               
                  Eidolopoeia is that part of this Oracion, whiche maketh a perſone knowne though dedde, and not able to ſpeake.
               
                  Eidolopoeia is called of Priſcianus, a imitacion of talke of any one, vpon a dedde manne, it is then called Eidolopoeia, when a dedde man talketh, or communicacion made vpon a Eidolopoeia dedde manne.
               
                  Eidolopoeia, when a dedde manne talketh, is ſet forthe of Euripides, vpon the perſone of Polidorus dedde, whoſe ſpirite entereth at the Prologue of the tragedie.
               Hector ſlain, ſpeaketh to Eneas in Eidolopoeia. O Eneas thou goddes ſonne, flie and ſaue thy ſelf, from this ruine and fire: the enemies hath taken the walles, and loftie Troie is proſtrate to the grounde. I would haue thought, I had died valiantlie inough to my countrée, and my father Priamus, if with this my right hande, Troie had bee defended.
               Polidorus beyng dedde, in Eidolopoeia talketh to Eneas whiche Virgil ſheweth in his thirde booke of Eneados.
               Iulia the wife of Pompei beyng dedde, ſpake to Pompe, preparyng his arme againſt Ceſar, Eidolopoeia. Reade Lucane, in the beginnyng of his thirde booke.
               Tullie vſeth Eidolopoeia, when he maketh talke vpon Hiero beyng dedde.
               If that kyng Hiero were reduced frō his death, who was a aduauncer of the Romaine Empire, with what countenaunce, either Siracuſa or Rome, might be ſhewed to hym, whom he maie beholde with his iyes. His countree brought to ruin, & ſpoiled, if that kyng Hiero ſhould but enter Rome, euen in the firſte entryng, he ſhould beholde the ſpoile of his countree.
               Tullie alſo vſeth the like Eidolopoeia, as thus, vpon Lucius

Brutus dedde.
               If it ſo wer, that Lucius Brutus, that noble and famous Lucius Brutus. manne were on liue, and before your preſence: would he not vſe this oracion: I Brutus, ſomtyme did baniſhe and caſt out for crueltee, the ſtate and office of kinges, by the horrible fact of Tarquinius, againſte Lucretia, and all that name baniſhed, but you haue brought in tyrauntes. I Brutus did reduce the Romain Empire, to a fredome and libertée: but you fooliſhly can not vphold and maintein, the ſame giuen to you. I Brutus, with the daunger of my life, haue ſaued my countree of Roome, but you without all daunger, loſe it.
               
                  ¶ Proſopopoeia.
                  
                  
                     AS cōcerning Proſopopoeia, it is as Priſtianus ſaith, when to any one againſte nature, ſpeache is feigned to bee giuen.
                  Tullie vſeth for a like example this, when he maketh Roome to talke againſte Cateline.
                  
                     ¶ Proſopopoeia of Roome.
                     
                        NO miſchief hath been perpetrated, this many yeres, Catiline. but by thee Catiline, no peſtiferous acte enterpriſed, without thee: thou a lone, for thy horrible murther perpetrated vpon the citee of Rome, for the ſpoile and robberies of their gooddes art vnpuniſhed. Thou onelie haſte been of that force and power, to caſte doune all lawes and aucthoritee. Although theſe thinges were not to be borne, yet I haue borne them: but now thy horrible factes are come to ſoche an iſſue, that I feare thy miſchiues. Wherfore leaue of Cateline and deminiſhe this feare from me, that I maie be in ſecuritée
                     Lucane the Poete, intreating of mightie and fearce warres, againſte Pompei and Ceſar, maketh Roome to vſe this Proſopopoeia againſte Ceſar.
                     
                        Quo tenditis vltra quo fertis mea ſigna viri,
                        Si iure venitis ſi aues hucuſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            licet.
                     
                     
                        Proſopopoeia is properlie, when all thinges are faigned bothe the maners, the perſone, as of Roome in this place.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ what lamentable Oracion Hecuba Quene of Troie might make, Troie being deſtroied.
                  
                     WHat kyngdome can alwaies aſſure his ſtate, or glory? What ſtrength can alwaies laſt? What Kyngdomes. power maie alwaies ſtande? The mightie Okes Okes. Cedars. are ſomtyme caſte from roote, the Ceadars high by tempeſtes falle, ſo bitter ſtormes dooe force their ſtrength. Soft waters pearſeth Rockes, and ruſte the maſſie Iron doeth bryng to naught. So nothyng can by ſtrēgth ſo ſtande, but ſtrength maie ones decaie: yea, mightie kingdoms in time decaie haue felt. Kingdomes weake haue roſe to might, and mightie kyngdomes fallen, no counſaile can preuaile, no power, no ſtrength, or might in lande. God diſpoſeth Princes ſeates, their kyngdome there with ſtandes. I knewe before the brickell ſtate, how kyngdomes ruine caught, my iye the chaunge of fortune ſawe, as Priamus did aduaunce his throne, by fauour Fortune gat, on other Fortune then did froune, whoſe kingdom did decaie. Well, now I knowe the brickle ſtate, that fortune hath no ſtaie, all raſhe her giftes, Fortune blind doeth kepe no ſtate, her ſtone doth Fortune hath no ſtaie. roule, as floodes now flowe, floodes alſo ebbe. So glory doth remaine, ſometyme my ſtate on high, was ſette in Princelie throne, my porte and traine ful roiall was, a kyng my father alſo was, my houſband ſcepter held. Troie and Phrigia ſerued his becke, many kynges his power did dreade, his wille their power did ſerue. The fame of Troie and Brute, his glorie and renouine, what landes knoweth not? But now his falle, all toungues can ſpeake, ſo greate as glorie was, though kyngdomes ſtronge was ſette, loftie Troie in duſte proſtrate doeth lye, in blood their glorie, people, kyng are fallen, no Quene more dolefull cauſe hath felte. The ſorowes depe doe paſſe my ioyes, as Phebus light with ſtormes caſte doune. Hectors death did wounde my hart, by Hectors might Troie ſtiffe did ſtande, my comforte Hector was, Priamus Hector. ioye, of Troie all the life, the ſtrength, and power, his death

did wound me for to die, but alas my dolefull and cruell fate to greater woe reſerueth my life, loftie Troie before me felle, ſworde, and fire hath ſeate and throne doune caſte. The dedde on heapes doeth lye, the tender babes as Lions praies are caught in bloode, before my ſight, Priamus deare murdered Priamus. was, my children alſo ſlain, who roiall were, and princes mates. No Queene more ioye hath taſted, yet woe my ioyes hath quite defaced. My ſtate alwaie in bondage thrall, to ſerue my enemies wille, as enemie wille, I liue or dye. No cruell force will ridde my life, onely in graue the yearth ſhal cloſe my woes, the wormes ſhall gnawe my dolefull hart in graue. My hedde ſhall ponder nought, when death hath ſence doune caſte, in life I ſought no ioye, as death I craue, no glorie was ſo wiſhed as death I ſeeke, with death no ſence. In priſon depe who dolefull lieth, whom Fetters ſore dooeth greue. Their dolefull ſtate moſte wiſheth death, in dongion deepe of care my harte moſte penſiue is, vnhappie ſtate that wiſheth death, with ioye long life, eche wight doeth craue, in life who wanteth ſmart? Who doeth not féele, or beare ſomtime, a bitter ſtorme, to doleful tune, mirth full oft chaunged is, the meaner ſtate, more quiet reſt, on high, who climes more deper care, more dolefull harte doeth preſſe, moſte tempeſtes hie trees, hilles, & moutaines beare, valle is lowe rough ſtormes doeth paſſe, the bendyng trees doeth giue place to might by force of might, Okes mightie fall, and Ceders high ar rēt from the roote. The ſtate full meane in hauen hath Ancre caſte, in ſurgyng ſeas, full ofte in vaine to ſaue the maſte, the ſhippe Ancre caſteth.
               
            
            
               ¶ The deſcripcion.
               
                  THis exerciſe profitable to Rhetorike, is an Oraciō that collecteth and repreſenteth to the iye, that which he ſheweth, ſo Priſeianus defineth it: ſome are of that opinion, that deſcripcion is not to bee placed emōg theſe exerciſes, profitable to Rhetorike. Becauſe

that bothe in euery Oracion, made vpon a Fable, all thynges therein conteined, are liuely deſcribed. And alſo in euery Narracion, the cauſe, the place, the perſone, the time, the fact, the maner how, ar therin liuely deſcribed. But moſt famous and Eloquente men, doe place deſcripcion, in the nomber of theſe exerciſes. Deſcripciō ſerueth to theſe things, the perſon, as the Poete Lucane deſcribeth Pompei & Ceſar: the perſon is deſcribed, thynges or actes, tymes, places, brute beaſtes.
               
                  Nec coiere pares, alter vergentibus annis
                  In ſenium longo que toge, tranquilior vſu.
                  Dedidicit. &c.
               
               Homer deſcribeth the perſone of Therſites, in the ſecond booke of his Ilias.
               Homer ſetteth out Helena, deſcribing the perſone of Menalaus and Vliſſes, in the fowerth booke of Ilias.
               Thynges are deſcribed, as the warres attempted by ſea and lande, of Xerxes.
               Lucan deſcribeth the war of the Maſſiliās againſt Ceſar
               Thuſidides ſetteth forthe in a deſcripcion, the warres on the ſea, betwene the Corcurians, and the Corinthians.
               Tymes are deſcribed, as the Spryng tyme, Sommer, Winter, Harueſte, Daie, Night.
               Places are deſcribed, as Citees, Mountaines, Regions, Floodes, Hauens, Gardeines, Temples: whiche thynges are ſette out by their commoditees, for Thuſidides often tymes ſetteth forthe Hauens and Citees.
               Lucane alſo deſcribeth at large, the places, by the whiche the armie of Ceſar and Pompei paſſed. The deſcripcion of any man, in all partes is to bee deſcribed, in mynde and bodie, what he was.
               The acttes are to bee deſcribed, farre paſſed, by the preſente ſtate thereof, and alſo by the tyme to come.
               As if the warre of Troie, ſhould be ſet forthe in a deſcripcion, it muſt bée deſcribed, what happened before the Grecians arriued at Troie, and how, and after what ſorte it was

ouerthrowne, & what thing chaunced, Troie being deſtroid.
               So likewiſe of Carthage, deſtroied by the Romaines. Of Hieruſalem, deſtroied by Titus Veſpaſianus, what admonicion thei had before: of what monſterous thynges happened alſo in that ceaſon: Of a Comete or blaſyng Starre, and after that what followed.
               Lucane alſo ſetteth forthe the warres of Pompe and Ceſar, what ſtraunge and marueilous thynges fell of it.
               
                  ¶ A deſcripcion vpon Xerxes.
                  
                     WHen Darius was dedde, Xerxes his ſoonne did ſuccede hym, who alſo tooke vpon him to finiſhe the warres, begō by his father Darius, againſt Grece. For the whiche warres, preperacion was made, for the ſpace of fiue yeres, after that Xerxes entered Grece, with ſeuen hundred thouſande Perſians, The armie of Xerxes. and three hundred thouſande of forrain power aided him that not without cauſe, Chronicles of aunciente tyme dooe ſhewe, mightie floodes to be dried vp of his armie. The mightie dominions of Grece, was not hable to receiue his houge, and mightie power, bothe by ſea and lande: he was no ſmall Xerxes a cowarde. Prince, whom ſo many nacions, ſo mightie people followed hym, his Nauie of Shippes was in nomber tenne hundred thouſande, Xerxes had a mightie power, but Xerxes was a cowarde, in harte a childe, all in feare the ſtroke of battaile moued. In ſo mightie an armie it was marueile, the chiefe Prince and Capitaine to be a cowarde, there wanted neither men, nor treaſure, if ye haue reſpecte to the kyng hymſelf, for cowardlineſſe ye will diſpraiſe the kyng, but his threaſures beeyng ſo infinite, ye will maruaile at the plentie thereof, whoſe armie and infinite hoſte, though mightie floodes and ſtreames, were not able to ſuffice for drinke, yet his richeſſe ſemed not ſpente nor taſted of. Xerxes hymſelf would be laſto Xerxes laſte in battaile, and firſt to runne awaie. in battaile to fight, and the firſte to retire, and runne awaie. In daungers he was fearfull, and when daunger was paſte,

he was ſtoute, mightie, glorious, and wonderfull crakyng, before this haſſarde of battaile attempted. He thought hymſelf The pride of Xerxes. a God ouer nature, all landes and Seas to giue place to hym, and puffed with pride, he forgatte hymſelf: his power was terrible, his harte fainte, whereupon his enteryng into Grece was not ſo dreaded, as his flight frō thence was ſhamfull, mocked and ſcorned at, for all his power he was driuen backe from the lande, by Leonides king of the Lacedemonians, he hauing but a ſmall nomber of men, before his ſecond battaile fought on the Sea: he ſente fower thouſande armed men, to ſpoile the riche and ſumpteous temple of Apollo, at Delphos, from the whiche place, not one man eſcaped. After that Xerxes entered Theſpia, Platea, and Athenes, in the whiche not one man remained, thoſe he burned, woorkyng his anger vpon the houſes: for theſe citees were admoniſhed to proue the maiſterie in wodden walles, whiche was ment to bee Shippes, the power of Grece, brought into one place Themiſtocles, fauoryng their part, although Xerxes thought otherwiſe of Themiſtocles, then Themiſtocles perſwaded Xerxes to aſſaie the Grecians. Artemiſia the Quene of Halicarnaſis aided Xerxes in his battaile: Artemiſia fought man Themiſtocles. fullie, Xerxes cowardly ſhronke, ſo that vnnaturally there was in the one a manlie ſtomacke, in the other a cowardlie harte. The men of Ionia, that fought vnder Xerxes banner, by the treaſon of Themiſtocles, ſhrāke from Xerxes, he was not ſo greate a terrour or dreade, by his maine hoſte, as now ſmally regarded & leaſt feared. What is power, men, or money, when God chaungeth and pulleth doune, bothe the ſucceſſe, and kyngdome of a Prince. He was in all his glorie, a vnmanlie, and a cowardly prince, yet for a time happie ſtate fell on his ſide, now his might and power is not feared. He flieth awaie in a Fiſher boate, whom all the worlde dreaded and obaied, whom all Grece was not able to receiue, a ſmall boate lodgeth and harboureth. His owne people contemned hym at home, his glorie fell, and life ingloriouſly ended, whō
                     
whom God ſetteth vp, neither treaſon nor malice, power nor money can pull doune. Worthelie it is to be pondered of all Princes, the ſaiyng of Veſpaſianus Emperour of Rome, at a certain time a treaſon wrought and conſpired againſt him, the conſpiratours taken, Veſpaſianus ſatte doune betwene The ſaiyng of Veſpaſianus. theim, commaunded a ſworde to be giuen to either of theim, and ſaied to them: Nonne videtis fato poteſtatem dari. Dooe you not ſee? Power, aucthoritée, and regimente, by the ordinaunce of God, is lefte and giuen to princes: A ſinguler ſentence, A ſentence comfortable to al princes. to comforte all good Princes in their gouernemente, not to feare the poiſoned hartes of men, or the traiterous hartes of peſtiferous men. No man can pull doune, where God exalteth, neither power can ſet vp and extoll, where God diſplaſeth or putteth doune: Soche is the ſtate of Princes, and their kyngdomes.
               
            
            
               ¶ Theſis.
               
               
                  
                     THeſis, is a certain queſtion in conſultacion had, to bée declaimed vpon vncertaine, notyng no certaine perſone or thyng.
               As for example.
               Whether are riches chieflie to be ſought for, in this life, as of all good thynges, the chief good.
               Whether is vertue the moſte excellente good thynge in this life.
               Whether dooe the giftes of the mynde, paſſe and excelle the giftes and vertues of Fortune, and the bodie.
               Whether doeth pollicie more auaile in war, then ſtrēgth of menne.
               Who ſo will reaſon of any queſtion of theſe, he hath nede with reaſon, and wittie conſultacion to diſcourſe, and to declaime vpon the ſame.
               The Greke Oratours doe call this exerciſe Theſis, that is to ſaie, a propoſicion in queſtion, a queſtion vncertain, included with no certaintée, to any perticuler thyng.
               
                  
The Latine men doeth call it a queſtion infinite, or vniuerſall: Tullie in his booke of places called T
                     •
                  pickes, doeth call Theſis, Propoſitum, that is to ſaie, a queſtion, in determinacion. Priſcianus calleth it poſitionem, a propoſicion in queſtion on ether parte to be diſputed vpon.
               As for example.
               Whether is it beſt to marie a wife?
               Whether is frendſhip aboue all thynges to be regarded.
               Is warre to be moued vpon a iuſte cauſe?
               Is the Greke tongue mete, and neceſſarie to be learned?
               There is an other kinde of queſtion called hypotheſis, hypotheſis is called queſtio finita, that is to ſaie, a queſtion certaine notyng a certaine perſone, or thyng, a certaine place, tyme, and ſo forthe.
               As for example.
               Is it mete for Ceſar to moue warre againſt Pompei?
               Is not there a certain perſone?
               Is the Greke tongue to be learned of a Diuine?
               Is the Greke tongue maete for a Phiſicion?
               In this kinde of exerciſes, famous men of auncient time did exerciſe youth, to attain bothe wiſedome and Eloquence therby, to make a diſcourſe vpō any matter, by art of lerning
               Ariſtotle the famous Philoſopher, did traine vp youthe, to be perfite in the arte of eloquence, that thei might with all copionſnes and ingenious inuencion handle any cauſe.
               Nothing doeth ſo moche ſharpe and acuate the witte and capacitee of any one, as this kinde of exerciſe.
               It is a goodly vertue in any one man, at a ſodain, to vtter wittely and ingeinouſlie, the ſecrete and hid wiſedome of his mynde: it is a greate maime to a profounde learned man, to wante abilitee, to vtter his exquiſite and profounde knoweledge of his mynde.
               
                  ¶ Theſis.
                  
                  tHis queſtion Theſis, which is a queſtion, noting no certaine perſone or thyng: is moche like to that Oracion,

intreated of before, called a Common place.
                  
                     ¶ A Common place.
                  
                  
                     BVt a Common place, is a certaine exaggeracion of matter, induced againſt any perſone, conuicted of any crime, or worthie defence.
                  ¶ Theſis.
                  
                  
                     Theſis is a reaſonyng by queſtion, vpon a matter vncertaine.
                  
                     Theſis, that is to ſaie, a queſtiō generall is in two ſortes.
                  A queſtion

                        Ciuill.
                        Contemplatiue.
                     
                  
                  
                     QVeſtions Ciuill are thoſe, that dooe pert
                        •
                     ine to the ſtate of a common wealth: and are dailypractiſed in the common wealthe.
                  As for example.
                  Is it good to marie a wife.
                  Is Vſurie lefull in a citee, or common wealthe.
                  Is a Monarchis the beſte ſtate of gouernement.
                  Is good educacion the grounde and roote, of a floriſhyng common wealthe.
                  
                     ¶ A contemplatiue queſtion.
                  
                  
                     THe other Theſis is a queſtion contemplatiue, which the Grekes dooe call Theoricas, becauſe the matter of them is comprehended in the minde, and in the intelligence of man.
                  The example.
                  Is the ſoule immortall?
                  Had the worlde a beginnyng?
                  Is the heauen greater then the yearth?
                  A queſtionA queſtion is either

                        Simple.
                        Compounde.
                     
                  
                  Is it good for a man to exerciſe hymſelf in wraſtlyng, or in
                  
                     
Is it profitable to declaime.
                  
                     A compounde.
                  
                  Is vertue of more value then gold, to the coueitous man
                  Doeth wiſedome more auaile, then ſtrength in battaile?
                  Doe olde men or young men, better gouerne a common wealthe?
                  Is Phiſicke more honourable then the Lawe?
                  A Oracion made vpon Theſis, is after this ſorte made.
                  Vſe a exordium, or beginnyng.
                  Vnto the whiche you maie adde a Narracion, whiche is a expoſicion of the thyng doen.
                  Then ſhewe it lawfull.
                  Iuſte.
                  Profitable:
                  And poſſible.
                  Then the conclucion.
                  To this in ſome parte of the Oracion, you maie putte in certaine obieccions, as thus.
                  Vpon this queſtion: Is it good to marie a wife?
                  In Mariage is greate eare, and penſiueneſſe of minde, by loſſe of children, or wife, whom thou loueſte. There is alſo trouble of diſſolute ſeruauntes. There is alſo greate ſorowe if thy children proue wicked and diſſolute.
                  The aunſwere to this obiection, will miniſter matter to declaime vpon.
               
               
                  ¶ Is it good to Marie.
                  
                     SInce the tyme of all ages, and the creaciō of the worlde, GOD hath ſo bleſſed his creacion, and meruailous workemanſhip in manne: as in all his other creatures, that not onelie his omnipoteucie, is therby ſet forthe. But alſo from tyme to tyme, the poſteritee of men, in their ofſpring and procreacion, doe aboundantlie commonſtrate the ſame. The ſtate of Kyngdomes continue by mariage and cōmon welth all kyngdomes and common wealthes: by procreacion deriued, haue onelie continued on the face of the yearth, thereby

many hundred yeres. How ſone would the whole worlde be diſſolued, and in perpetuall ruine, if that God from tymes and ages, had not by godlie procreacion, bleſſed this infinite The dignitee of man, ſheweth the worthines of mariage. iſſue of mankinde. The dignitee of man in his creacion, ſheweth the worthie ſucceſſion, maintained by procreation. In vaine were the creacion of the worlde, if there were not as manne ſo excellente a creature, to beholde the creatour, and his meruailous creacion. To what vſe were the Elementes and Heauens, the Starres and Planettes, all Beaſtes and Foules, Fiſſhe, Plantes, Herbes and trees, if men wer not, for mannes vſe and neceſſitée, all thinges in the yearth were made and procreated. Wherein the Stoike Philoſophers do note the excellencie of man to be greate: for ſaie thei, Que in terris gignuntur omnia ad vſum hominum creari. To what vſe then were all thynges, if man were not, for whoſe cauſe, vſe, & neceſſitée theſe thynges were made. If a continuaunce of Gods procreacion were not, immediatlie a ruine and ends would enſue of thinges. What age remaineth aboue a hundred yeres? If after a hūdred yeres, no iſſue wer to be, on the Godlie procreacion. face of the yearth, how ſone wer kyngdoms diſſolued, where as procreacion rooteth, a newe generacion, iſſue and ofſpring, and as it were a newe ſoule and bodie. A continuaunce of lawes, a permanente ſtate of common wealthe dooeth enſue. Though the life of manne be fraile, and ſone cutte of, yet by Mariage, man by his ofſpryng, is as it were newe framed, his bodie by death diſſolued, yet by iſſue reuiued. Euen as Plantes, by the bitter ſeaſon of Winter, from their flowers fadyng and witheryng: yet the ſeede of them and roote, vegitable and liuyng, dooe roote yerelie a newe ofſpryng or flower in them. So Mariage by godlie procreacion bleſſed, doth perpetually increaſe a newe bodie, and therby a vaſte world, A ſimilitude. and infinite nacions or people. Xerres the mightie kyng of Perſia, vewing and beholding his maine and infinite hoſte, weeped: who beyng demaunded, why he ſo did. Doleo inquit poſt centum annos, neminem ex hijs ſupereſſe. It is a pitéefulle

and dolefull caſe, that after a hundred yeres, not one of theſe noble capitaines, and valiant ſoldiers to be left.
                  
                     ¶ The obieccion.
But you will ſaie parauenture, mariage is a greate bondage, alwaies to liue with one.
                     ¶ The ſolucion.
                     To followe pleaſure, and the beaſtlie mocions of the mynde: what libertée call you that, to liue in a godly, meane, and Mediocritee of life, with thy ſpouſed wife. There is no The libertie in mariage. greater ioye, libertee, or felicitée, who ſo practiſeth a diſſolute life: whoſe loue and luſte is kindeled, and ſette on fire with a harlotte, he followeth a brutiſhe ſocietée. What difference is there, betwene them and beaſtes? The beaſte as nature leadeth, A brutiſhe ſocietie with harlottes. he obaieth nature. Reaſon wanteth in beaſtes, manne then indued with reaſon, whiche is a guide to all excellencie how is it that he is not ruled by reaſon. Whom GOD hath clothed and beautified, with all vertue and all ſingularitée: If a godly conuerſacion of life, moueth thee to paſſe thy daies without mariage, then muſt the mocions of thy minde, be tamed and kepte vnder. Otherwiſe, execrable is thy purpoſe, and determinaciō of the life. If thou hopeſt of loue of a harlot Ehaſtitee in mariage. though thou enioye her otherwiſe, thou art deceiued. Bacchis the harlot, whom Terence maketh mencion of, in the perſone of her ſelf, ſheweth the maners of all harlots to Antiphila, ſaiyng.
                     
                        Quippe forma impulſinoſtranos amatores colunt:
                        Hec vbi immutata eſt, illi ſuum animum alio conferunt.
                        Niſi proſpectū eſt interea aliquid nobis, deſerte viuimus.
                     
                     For ſaieth ſhe, the louer anamoured with our loue, and ſette on fire therewith, it is for our beautie and fauour: but when beautie is ones faded, he conuerteth his loue to an other, whom he better liketh. But that we prouide for our ſelues in the meane ſeaſon, wee ſhould in the ende liue vtterlie forſaked. But your loue incenſed with one, whoſe maners and life contenteth you: ſo you bothe are linked together,

that no calamitèe can ſeparate you: who ſo hopeth loue of a The loue of a harlotte. harlotte, or profite, he maie hope as for the fruite of a withered tree, gaine is all their loue, vice their ioye and delite. In vertue is libertee, in vertue is felicitee, the ſtate of mariage is vertuous, there can be no greater bōdage, then to obaie many beaſtly affections, to the whiche whoredome forceth hym vnto, Loue is fained, cloked amitée, a harte diſſembled, many a mightie perſon and wiſe, hath been ouerthrowen by the deceiptes of harlottes: many a Citee plagued, many a region ouerthrowen for that miſchief, to obaie many affections is a greate bondage. Who ſo ſerueth the beaſtlie affections of his mynde to that purpoſe, he muſt alſo as Hercules to Omphala Hercules. Omphala. bee ſlaue, not onely to his owne will and affection: but to the maners, will, and exſpectacion of the harlotte. So ſerued Thraſo, and Phedria Thais, that Gorgious harlot, Antony and Iulius Ceſar, Cleopatra, this is a bondage, to liue ſlaue from reaſon and all all integritee, to a monſterous rablemēt The harlottes leſſon to her louers. of vices, who ſo ſerueth a harlot, thei muſt learne this leſſon. Da mihi & after, giue and bryng.
                     The women of Scithia, abhorryng the godlie conuerſacion of mariage, with their houſbandes, lefte theim, who in tyme waxe ſo mightie, that thei repelled theim by force: thei called mariage not Matrimonie, but bondage. For, the chronicles doe teſtifie, thei became conquerours ouer many kynges, all Aſia obaied them: thei did builde many a great citee, and for theire ſucceſſe, thei might compare with many princes. Theſe women were called Amazones afterwarde, the The life of the Amazones. order of their life was this, ones in the yere thei would enioye the compainie of a man: if it ſo were that thei had a man childe, the father to haue it, if a daughter, then thei poſſeſſed her, and foorthwith burned her right pappe: for thei were all Archers, and wonderfully excelled therein, but in the ende, thei came all to ruine. One of them, Thaleſtris their Quene in the tyme of Alexander the Greate, came to Alexander, Thaleſtris. thinkyng that he had been, ſome monſtrous man of ſtature:

whom, when ſhe did beholde (for Alexander was of no mightie The offer of a woman to Alexander. ſtature) did contemne hym, and offered him hand to hande to fight with hym. But Alexander like a wiſe Prince, ſaied to his men, if I ſhould ouercome her, that were no victorie, nor manhoode againſte a woman: and being ouercome, that were greater ſhame, then commendacion in all my victories The anſwer of Alexander to the offer. and conqueſtes, but afterwarde, there was a greate familiaritee betwene them. The adulterer and the adulteris, neuer proſpereth, for many miſchiues are reſerued, to that wicked and beaſtly loue. Sincere loue is not rooted, frendſhip coloured: the ſober and demure countenaunce, is moche to be commended in a chaſte woman, whoſe breaſte pondereth a chaſte life. The facte of the matrones of Rome, ſemeth ſtraunge to The facte of the matrones of Rome. be tolde, of Papirius a Senators ſoonne, beyng taken to the Senate houſe, of his father: the childe beyng indued with a ſinguler wit, harde many cauſes in the aſſemble, talked and conſulted vpō, at his retourne home, his mother was inquiſitiue of their conſultacion, to heare ſomewhat. The childe was commaunded by his father, to vtter no ſecrete that he heard, wherevpon of a long tyme, he refuſed his mothers demaunde: but at the laſte ſubtelie, he ſatiſfied his mothers requeſt. Truth it is, my father willed me, to vtter no ſecret, you Papirius. keping my counſaill, I will ſhewe you, it is concluded by the Senate houſe, that euery man ſhall haue twoo wines, that is a ſtraunge matter, ſaieth the mother: foorthwith ſhe had communicacion with all the matrones of Roome, that could doe ſomewhat in this matter, thei alſo full willyngly aſſembled themſelues, to let this purpoſe, to the Senate houſe, thei went to vtter, their ſwollen griues. The Senators were amaſed at their commyng, but in this matter bolde thei were, to enterpriſe that, whiche thei wer greued at. A Dame more eloquente then all the reſte, and of ſtomacke more hardie, began in theſe woordes. Otherwiſe then right, we are iniuriouſly The Oraciō of a matrone, to the Senatours. handled, and that in this aſſemble, that now we ſhould be caſte of and neclected: that whereas it is concluded in this

counſaile, that euery manne ſhould haue twoo wiues, more meter it were, that one woman ſhould haue twoo houſbandes. Straunge it was in the Senators eares ſoche a requeſt, whereupon a proofe made how that rumour roſe, Papirius was found the aucthor, who tolde before the Senate, his mother alwaies inquiſitiue to knowe that, whiche he ſhould not tell, and thereupon he faigned that, whiche he might better tell. It is to be ſuppoſed the Senators muſed thereat, and the matrones of Rome went home aſhamed: but their ſecrete cogitacion of minde was manifeſt, what willingly in hart thei wiſhed. What greater felicitee can there bee, then in a vnitée of life, the houſebande to liue with his wife. The beaſtes in their kinde, doe condemne mannes brutiſhe affections herein: there is no facte that ſheweth a man or woman, more like to beaſtes, then whoredome.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The obieccion.
But you will ſaie, many calamitées happeneth in mariage?
                     ¶ The ſolucion.
                     Fortunne herein is to bee blamed, and not mariage, if any miſfortune happeneth to manne therein, the felicitée and Eleccion in Mariage. quiet ſtate that any man enioieth thereby. The diſcrete eleccion is therein approued, in the ſtate itſelf, nothyng can bee founde worthie reprehenſion, if a man will impute the bitter ſtormes of life to mariage: whatſeouer happeneth, our owne reaſon maie iudge contrary. Place before thy iyes all the affaires, and occupacions of this life, bee all tymes pleaſaunte to the houſebande man, many a colde ſtorme perceth his bodie, and many a mightie tempeſte, dooeth moieſt hym and greue hym. Sommer is not the tyme, to caſte his ſeede in the grounde, or implowyng to occupie hymſelf: ſhall he therfore leaue his houſebandrie, or doeth he rather neclecte it, his diligence therein is the more, and labour more induſtrious. From whence commeth the tempeſte, the ſtormes and bitter ſeaſons? From his houſe, from his wife, from his art and occupacion, all thoſe thynges by violence are expelled from the

aire. No ſtate of life is able to giue riches, healthe, or ſecuritée to his ſtate. There hath been princes and Emperours, nedie, Emperours. full of infirmitées and ſickenes, in daungerous ſtate, oppreſſed with many calamitées: was their dignitie and office, the cauſe of their calamitées? No, God tempreth the ſtate of euery one, how, and after what ſorte to poſſeſſe the ſame. Some are fulle fortunate in Mariage, if Mariage were of neceſſitée the cauſe, then all ſhould be onely fortunate, or onely vnfortunate: Mariage. then in mariage is not the cauſe, if in marige the maners doe diſagrée, and loue is extinguiſhed, blame thyn own maners, thy choiſe, and thy eleccion. The Mariner that paſſeth the daungerous Seas, and by dreadfull tempeſtes, and The Mariners. huffyng waues is alwaies in perille, and many often tymes drouned. The Marchaunt leſyng his marchaundiſe by ſhipwrack, The Marchauntes. ſhall thei impute the daunger and loſſe, to their wife at home? Or doe the Mariners leaue for all theſe tempeſtes, their arte of Nauigacion? Or the owner breake his ſhippe? Or the Marchaunt proue no aduentures, becauſe of his loſſe, and many haue been of this ſort drouned. No. But more earneſtlie thei dooe aſſaie theim ſelues thereto. Becauſe warre ſpoileth many a man of his life, doe Princes therefore, leaue warre, to moue armour againſte the enemie, but becauſe, who ſo in the defence of his countrée, dieth manfullie, is worthelie aduaunced, and in perpetuall memorie, no daunger is refuſed, becauſe euill thynges happeneth in life, is the ſtate of good thynges to be auoided and eſchued. Were it not vnſemelie, if houſebande men, for no ſtorme or tempeſte, doe leaue their ſtate, their laborious and rough cōdition of life, nor the ſhipman his arte of Nauigacion, becauſe he ſeeth many drouned venteryng theſame, and he hymſelf often tymes in daunger, nor the ſoldiour or capitain, their perilous condicion of life, doe leaue for daunger. Should Mariage bée leſſe ſette by, becauſe alwaies riches and quietnes happeneth not.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The obieccion.
The loſſe of a good wife and children, is a greate grefe to

any man, and a cauſe to blame mariage.
                     ¶ The aunſwere.
                     You your ſelf are borne to dye, thei alſo by death obaye likewiſe Nature, this is the Lawe of Nature ones to dye, The lawe of Nature. whiche you ſeeme to blame. Thou the death of thy wife and childrē, is not the blame in Mariage. What is the cauſe that you dye? Natures imbecillitie and weakenes, then in theim Mariage is not the cauſe: Nature in her firſte molde hath ſo framed all, wherefore doe you aſcribe that to mariage, that is founde faultée in Nature. Thei die that marie not, what infirmitie, daunger or peril happeneth to any in mariage, as ſharpe and perilous, doe moleſt and torment the other. If any manne by death, leaſeth aright honeſte wife, clothed with all chaſtites, demureneſſe, ſobrietée, and alſo with all ſingularitée of vertue adorned: he hath loſſe a rare treaſure, a iewell of price, not in all to bee ſounde. Did you loue your wife, that A chaſte woman. was ſo goodlie, ſo honeſte and vertuous: there was greate cauſe ſaie you, for her vertuous ſake, God hath choſen her frō a mortall creature, to immortalitée, with her it can not bee better. There is no cauſe why you ſhould blame mariage, for the loſſe of her, or of thy children, or for the loſſe of thee, ſhe to blame mariage. If for thy owne ſake, this ſorowe bee, Eſtſeipſum amantis non amici, it is then of a ſelf loue, to thy ſelf, not for her cauſe: for I muſte aunſwere as Lelius did to A
                           ••
                        ricanus; Cumea optime eſſeactū quis neget, quid eſt quod no aſſecuta eſt immortalitatem. Who can deny ſaieth he, but that with her it can not bee better? What is it that ſhe hath not attained. Immortalitée. She was vertuous, chaiſte, ſober, deſcrete, of behauiour womanlie: for her vertues beloued. Well, now ſhe hath immortalitée and bleſſe, are you ſorie thereat, that were enuious. Did you loue her liuyng, loue her alſo departed, her vertuous ſhewed vnto vs, her immortalitee.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The obieccion.
There is a care for the wife and children; if the houſband

dye before theim.
                     ¶ The aunſwere.
                     If thou leaue them riches, hope not that thy riches ſhal be a ſtaie to theim, though thei bee innumerable: a wretched, a miſerable executour, waſteth and deſtroieth oftentymes, the fruictes of thy trauaile, who reioyſeth more of thy death, then A wretched executour. of thy life. Or thy childrens father in Lawe, ſhall ſpoile and ſpende with a merie harte, that whiche thou haſte long t
                           •
                        rauailed for. Staie thy ſelf and thyne vpon Gods prouidence, for it hath been ſeen, many a riche widowe, with infinite treaſure lefte, to her children alſo like porcions deſcendyng: Gods prouidence. afterwarde bothe wife and children, haue been brought to miſerie and beggerlie ſtate. Otherwiſe, poore children committed to the prouidence of God, and vertuouſlie brought vp, and the wife in like ſtate, yet thei haue ſo paſſed their daies, that thei haue roſe to a goodlie ſtate. See that thy richeſſe bée not iniuriouſlie gotten by falſhode, by liyng, by Vſurie, if it ſo be, then Male parta male dilabuntur. That is this, gooddes euill gotte, euill ſpente, ſoche riches neuer giue déepe roote to their ofſpryng. That is an euill care, by a iniurious care, to purchaſe thynges and gooddes wickedlie.
                     Alſo mariage taketh awaie widowhed, and doeth repare with a newe freſhe mariage, the lacke and priuacion of the other. She that was by death left a widowe, mariage again Death. Mariage. hath coupled her to a newe houſbande: and doeth reſtore that whiche death tooke awaie. That that death diſſolueth and deſtroieth, mariage increaſeth, augmēteth, and multiplieth. Bee it ſo, but mariage is a painfull life, it forceth euery one to trauaile, to vpholde and maintaine his ſtate, I commende not the idell life, neither a life occupied to no vertuous ende. Nature moueth euery manne to loue hymſelf and his, ſo thy care and paine be to a godlie purpoſe. It is commendable. It is the duetie of euery man, as his power, witte, and induſtrie is able, to emploie thereto his cogitacion. To laboure for thy wife, whom thou loueſte, and deare children, thy laboure is

pleaſure, the ioye eaſeth thy labour. To behold thyſelf in thy children, thei beyng vertuouſlie broughte vp, it is a goodlie comfort, to liue with a chaſte woman, ſober and continente, The mariage of a chaſte woman. her vertues be a continuall pleaſure, a paſſyng ioye. In mariage ought to be greate deliberacion, whom thou choſeſt to thy continuall compainie or felowſhippe, her life paſte well knowen, her parentes and kindrede how honeſte and vertuous, her maners, her fame, how commendable, her countinaunce The choiſe of a wife. ſober, a conſtaunt iye, and with ſhamefaſtnes beautified, a mouthe vttering fewe woordes diſcretlie. She is not to be liked, whō no vertuous qualitées in her educaciō, beutifieth and adorneth, the goodlie qualitees ſheweth, the well framed and nurtured mynde. Theſe thynges maie be ſufficiente, to ſhewe what excellencie is in mariage and how neceſſarie it is, to the procreacion and preſeruaciō of mankind.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Legiſlatio.
               ¶ A Oracion either in the defence of a Lawe, or againſte a Lawe.
               
                  MAny learned menne are in this opinion, that vpon a Lawe alledged, a Oracion maie bee made in the defence of it: or matter maie be ſuppeditated, to inuaigh by force of argument againſte it.
               Although the lawe alleged be in maner the whole cauſe, bicauſe it doeth cōtain al the matter included in the oracion.
               In this Oracion, the perſone is induced to be ſpoken vppon, vnknowne, vncertaine: wherefore it is to be placed, rather in the ſtate and forme of conſultacion, and to bée examined with iudgement.
               The induccion of a Lawe, is in twoo ſortes.
               A confirmacion of any olde Lawe, or a confutacion.
               As for example.
               The Ciuill Lawe doeth well commende, bondmen to be manumiſed, that is, to be made free.
               The lawe is herein to be praiſed, that willeth the coūſail of the parentes & frendes, to be knowne before the contracte.

Vpon a Lawe alledged, worthelie matter maie riſe, waighyng the godlie ende, whereunto the Lawe was firſte inuented, derreed and ſtabliſhed, what profite thereof enſueth and foloweth. What it is to vertue a mainteiner, otherwiſe if it be not profitable: What moued any one to frame and ordain ſoche a Lawe, as was to a common wealthe vnprofitable, to vertue no aider, if it were a profitable Lawe and godlie, it is as Demoſthenes ſafeth, of God inuented, though by famous wife, and godlie menne, ſtabliſhed and decréed. Good Lawes Lawe. tempereth to all ſtates equitee and iuſtice, without fauour or frendſhip, no more to the one then the other.
               The order to make an Oracion by a lawe, is in this ſort. Firſt, make a prohemiū or beginning to enter your matter.
               In the ſeconde place, adde a contrary to that, whiche you will entreate vpon.
               Then ſhewe it lawfull.
               Iuſte.
               Profitable.
               Poſſible.
               You maie as in Theſis, whiche was the Oracion before, vſe a contradiction or obiection: and to that make an anſwere or ſolucion.
               
                  ¶ A confutacion of that Lawe, whiche ſuffered adultrie to bee puniſhed with death, no iudgement giuen thereupon.
                  
                     SOlon, who was a famous Philoſopher, in the time of Creſus king of Lidia, and a lawe giuer The moſte rigorous and moſte cruell lawe of Solō
                      to the Athenians: by whoſe Lawes and godlie meanes, the Athenians were long and proſperouſlie gouerned. Emong many of his lawes, this Solon ſet forthe againſte adulterers: Fas eſſe deprehendentimaechum in ipſo adulterio interficere: it ſhalbee lawfull ſaieth he, who ſo taketh an adulterer in his beaſtlie facte, to kill hym. Solon beyng a wiſe man, was more rigorous and cruell, in this one Lawe, then he ought to be. A meruailous

matter, and almoſte vncredible, ſo wiſe, ſo noble and worthy a Lawe giuer, to bruſte out with ſoche a cruell and bloodie lawe, that without indgement or ſentence giuen, the matter neither proued nor examined, adulterie to be death. Wherefore, reaſon forceth euery manne, to Iudge and ponder with hymſelf, that either adulterie is a moſte horrible vice, moſte beaſtlie & peſtiferous, and not mere to tary vpon the cenſure, Adulterie a horrible vice. and ſentence of a Iudge: or Solon was not ſo wiſe, diſcrete, and a politike perſone, but a raſhe and fonde lawe giuer, that in ſoche a terrible voice, he ſhould burſte out, as adulterie ſo horrible, as not worthie to be pondered, examined and boulted of in Iudgemente. The Athenians receiued that Lawe, thei did alſo obaie his other lawes. Their dominions thereby in felicitée was gouerned: there was no populous nomber of adulterers, to let that Lawe, thei liued moſts godlie, a ſtraunge worlde, a rare moderacion of that age and people. Plato the godlie Philoſopher, who leſte in his woorkes, and Plato againſte adultrie made a lawe. monumentes of learnyng, greate wiſedome and alſo godlie Lawes in his bookes: intiteled vpon Lawes, and gouernement of a common wealth, did not paſſe by in ſilence, to giue and ordain a Lawe againſt adulterie. Who alſo as it ſemed Iudged adulterie as moſte horrible and deteſtable, in his .ix. booke de Legibus. This is the Lawe. Adulteram deprehenſam impune occidi a viro poſſe. The adultrous woman ſaith he, taken in the crime, her houſbande maie without daunger of death, or feare of puniſhement ſlea her. A ſtraunge matter twoo ſo noble, ſo famous for wiſedome, to make adulterie preſent death, no Iudgement or ſentence of Magiſtrate, procedyng to examime and iudge, vpon the ſtate of the cauſe. A man maie ſaie, O goodlie age, and tyme in vertue tempered, eche ſtate as ſeemeth brideled and kepte vnder, and farre frō voluptuouſnes remoued. There was no ſtewes or Baudes houſes, where ſoche Lawes and Lawmakers were. Sobrietée was in maides, and chaſtitée harboured in matrones and wedded wiues, a harte inuiolable to honeſte conuerſacion.

Where adulterie is cutte of, there many deteſtable vſces, and execrable purpoſes are remoued. Cato the ſage Peere of Catos ſentence vpon adulterie. Rome, indued with like ſeueritée, did fauour that lawe and highlie extolled it. Although adulterie bee a deteſtable vice horrible, yea, although it be worthie death, better it were by iudgemente, and the ſentence of the Magiſtrate, the faute to bee determined: then at the will of euery manne, as a Lawe Lawe. by death to bee ended, the common wealthe ſhalbee in more quiet ſtate, when the horrible factes of wicked menne, by the Lawe made worthie of deathe: are neuertheleſſe by a liuelie The Iudge, a liuely lawe. Lawe, whiche is the Iudge, pronounced and condemned, accordyng to the Lawe. Els many miſchiues might riſe in all kyngdomes and common wealthes, vnder a colour of lawe, many a honeſte perſone murthered: and many a murtherer, by cloke of a Lawe, from daunger ſaued. In Rome ſomtime a Lawe there was ordained againſte adulterie, whiche was called Lex Iulia, this Lawe Octauius Auguſtus ſet foorthe. The Lawe was thus, Gladio iuſſit animaduerti in adulteros The lawe commaunded adulterers to be hedded. The chronicles of aunciente tymes herein doe ſhew, and the decrées of auncient elders alſo, how horrible a thing adulterie is, when thei puniſhe it with death. Who knoweth not emōg the Iſraelites, and in the olde lawe thei wer ſtoned to death. Well as Magiſtrates are in common wealthes remoued, or as times chaunge, lawes alſo are chaunged and diſſolued: and as the Prouerbe is, Lex vt Regio, the Lawes are accordyng to the Region. Afterwarde Valerius Publicola, a man aſcendyng to high nobilitée of honour, and fame emong, the Romaines gaue this Lawe. Qua neminem licebat indicta cauſa necare. By this lawe it was not lefull, any manne to be put A godly law. to death, their cauſe not examined in Iudgemente, this was a goodlie Lawe. Then afterwarde, Lawe giuers roſe in the common wealth, that with more facilitee tolerated that vice, then wickedneſſe flowed, adulterie not puniſhed by death. And ſence that, the Romaine Empire, wrapped and ſnared

with ſoche miſchiues hath decaied, in fame, nobilitée and vertue. Many a parte of their dominion plagued, deuoured, and deſtroied. The good and godlie menne, nede not to feare any The good manne. Lawe godlie, their life beyng in vertue and godlines nurtured. The terrible ſentence of a lawe, forceth the good and godlie, to perſeuere and continue in godlines. The terrible ſentence Lawe. of a Lawe, cutteth of the wicked enterpriſes of peſtiferous menne. Vice where lawe is not to correcte, will inure it Vice as a lawe by cuſtome. ſelf by cuſtome as a Lawe, or borne and tolerated againſte a Lawe. Therefore as adulterie without Iudgemente, to bee puniſhed worthie of death is vngodlie: ſo it ought not to bee paſſed ouer, or tolerated in any Region or common wealth, as no lawe ſeuerely to puniſhe the ſame. Adulterie.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The contrarie.
                     
                        AL other lawes doe differ, from that rigorous lawe of Solon and Plate herein, yea, and though thei be vices horrible, yet thei ar not determined, with out the ſentēce of the Magiſtrate and Iudge. But this cruell Lawe of Solon, doeth repugne all lawes, ſtabliſhed in all Citees and common wealthes. And ſithe the lawe The lawe vniuerſall and equall to all menne. is of hymſelf vniuerſall, with equitée, giuing and tempering to all ſtates. Fonde muſte that Lawe bee of Solon, whiche raſhely, without conſideracion of iudgement doeth procede, no man ought in his own cauſe, to be his own iudge or Magiſtrate. This is argument ſufficient to confounde the lawe of Solon. All Lawes are repugnaunte to that, becauſe with Iudgement thei procede againſt vices moſte peſtiferous. In common wealthes Theft is by lawe, pronounced worthie of Thefte. death, whereupon alſo the Magiſtrate and Iudge, determineth the matter, and heareth of bothe the action of the caſe, before he condempneth, ſo in all other miſchiues.
                     But you maie ſaie, many miſchiues riſeth of adulterie.
                     Although it ſo be, the Iudge determineth vpon Murder, whiche is in like ſort horrible, ſoche alſo as dooe ſéeke to caſte into perill their countrée, and by treaſon to deſtroie the ſame,

Iudgemente proceadeth by determinacion of the Lawe and Iudge. And ſo in all other wicked factes, and miſchiuous enterpriſes, the Iudgement in euery cauſe procedeth, as Lawe and right willeth, from the mouthe of the Iudge, he beyng a The Iudge & liuely lawe. liuelie Lawe, to the Lawe written. The cruell Lawe of Solon, is like to the phantaſie and wille of a tyraunte, who, as phantaſie and will leadeth, murdereth at his pleaſure, whoſe will is alwaies a ſufficient Lawe to hymſelf, as who ſhould ſaie, ſo I wille, ſo I commaunde, my wille ſhall ſtande for a The will of a tyraunte his owne lawe. Lawe: but godlie lawes doe iuſtlie, accordyng to reaſon and vertue, tempereth the cauſe of euery man. No godlie Lawe, maketh the accuſer his owne Iudge.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Lawfull.
                     
                        WHo ſo by Lawe is iudged, and the offence proued, there is no excuſe in the malefactour, nor ſuſpicion Lawes were made for two cauſes. ſeing that, accordyng to lawe, the fact is puniſhed, and as Demoſthenes ſaieth, twoo thynges moued the wiſe Elders to make Lawes, that the wicked ſhould bee hindered, and cutte of from their purpoſe, and that good men ſeyng by a lawe, the actes of peſtiferous men kepte vnder, by the terrour of them, are afraied to commit the like facte. This was euen accordyng to lawe. The terrible ſentence of a law executed, vpon moſte wicked perſones, doe kepe vnder many a miſchiuous enterpriſe, whiche through the dolefull and lamentable ende of the wicked, doe driue and force all other to all godlines.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Iuſte.
                     
                        THe accuſer by Lawe and Iudge, is able to defende hymſelf, whē his cauſe is ended accordyng to law. Vertue thereby vpholded, when by order of lawe, vice is condempned. The malifactour hath no excuſe, all ſtaie and colour remoued, the accuſer by iuſte Lawe pleateth, when the law is thereby ſupported and ſaued. And herein a greate parte of Iuſtice is placed, when the fauour of the Iudge or frendſhip, is onely on the cauſe, the perſone neclected,

that is Iuſtice, to giue to euery one his owne.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Profitable.
                     
                        IT muſt be profitable to the whole bodie of the common wealthe, when by the Iuſtice of godlie lawes, vertue is in high price aduaunced, vice by the open ſentence, and manifeſte profe conuicted, the malefactour ſhall be knowen, the ſincere and godlie deliuered, and from tyme to tyme maintained. Lawes as thei be vniuerſall ſo thei openlie ought to giue ſentence.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Poſſible.
                     
                        THen without lawe to procede, and iudgemente of the Magiſtrate, as Solon did in this lawe, it were not poſſible, any common wealthe to floriſhe therby. Therefore in Iudgemente ought the cauſe of euery one to be pleated and examined, that thereby all ſuſpicion, & greuous enormitees, maie be put of. Vice is not therefore tolerated, becauſe for a tyme, Iudgemente ceaſeth, but hereupon vices are more depely rooted out, all people knowyng the determinacion of the lawe, and the manifeſt ſentēce of the Iudge heard. A terrour enſueth to al malefactours and peſtiferous men, good men are incenſed to all godlines, whē vice by Lawe is condempned, cutte of, and deſtroied. Good menne by Lawe and aucthoritée, vpholded and maintained. This is the ſtate of good lawes, by order to procede, the cauſe in Iudgemente examined, the facte proued, The ſtate of good lawes. vertue in any perſone vpholded, vice in all caſte doune and defaced, ſo there is good Lawe, as Demoſthenes ſaieth, ſincere Iudge, and ſentence inuiolable.
                  
               
            
         
      
   