
      
         
            
            A briefe some of the Treason intended against the King and State, when they should haue beene assembled in Parliament. Nouemb. 5. 1605. with certaine other English Meeters, which may bee called: A dying repentance, or A mournefull Song for Traytors to make vse of now begun by one of Babingtons company.
         
            HEare the verse which dooth rehearse,
            briefly this
            Traytors plotforme, which should reforme
            thinges amisse.
            First in England, then in Scotland,
            
            with such praise
            As should make them famous State-men,
            all their dayes.
            
               Pouder Barrels must end quarrels,
            for vs all:
            King and Subiect, Lord and abiect,
            great and small.
            Bands of P P P
               Popes, Priestes & Papists. of all degrees,
            haue sought still:
            English Brittaines
            
            vtter ruine by their skill.
            
                But since Adam, none could fadom,
            plots like this.
            Which Nouember, may remember,
            to our blisse.
            Some good men say, that beyond Sea,
            this began:
            
               Fawkes and Winter, first did venter,
            to goe on.
            These came ouer, and woon other,
            to this action:
            Piercy,With many others afterwards. Catesby, Wrights and Digby,
            12. in faction.
            Thus did Thewdas, Caine and Iudas,
            
            vow and sweare:G
                     •
                  n. 4. Nat. 26. Act. 5.
            
            Take their Sacrament, and all to worke
            this geare.
            Prince of darkenes, and hels blacknes,
            was their leader:
            
               Piercy Papist, masked Atheist,
            
            banners spreader.
            Iuggling Iesuites, with their false sleights,
            many a one:
            Like lewde Strumpets, and lowde Trumpets,
            sets them on.
            Thus resoluing, and reuoluing,
            of their plot:
            God and duety, to their Country,
            was forgot.
            Some resorted, and reported,
            to the crew:
            Of this wonder, and great thunder,
            to ensue.
            
               Some were Py
                     •
                  ners, vnder-mynors,
            by consent:
            Of the vpper house and Romes,
            of Parliament.
            Some hirde Vault roome, and brought in soone,
            Coales and Wood:
            To lay ouer, all the powder,
            as it stood.
            Traynes were all spread, and Pipes of Lead,
            laide with match:
            Barres and Wedges, Stones and Sledges,
            to dispatch.
            Traytor Standly, must leade manly,
            Rebelles Stout:
            
               Owin wyely, must bring slyly,
            this about.
            Proclamation, for a facion,
            they had printed:
            That Puritane, the State had slayne, and Gods annoynted.
            This grose slaunder, as commaunder,
            from the Deuill:
            Should haue passed, and defaced,
            good for euill.
            But I wish still, euen with good will,
            Papists were:
            So conuerted, and true hearted,
            as these are.
            Then no question, but Religion,
            still should flourish:
            And no perrill, strife or quarrell,
            we should nourish.
            
                But these killed, and Streetes filled,
            with their bloud:
            
               Protestants by Papists vants,
            should doe small good.
            Our Kings Daughter shortly after,
            she should raigne:
            And so quiet all this ryot
            soone againe.
            But how long, without all wrong,
            this young Queene,
            Should be suffered and not smothered,
            is not seene.
            Then beleeue them, you that shrieue them
            for not I:
            Will giue credit to this edict,
            hastely.
            For, will Wolfe keepe, Lambe of that Sheepe,
            he hath eate:
            And not rather, soone deuoure it,
            As his meate?
            These belooued, this is prooued,
            euery day:
            Where the Papist, or the Atheist
            
            doe keepe sway.
            Gods moste sweete word should not be sturd,
            yet awhile:
            Till to Protestants, and all,
            they might giue foile.
            Oft returning, and reiourning,
            Parliament:
            Neuer moou'd them, as behou'd them,
            to repent.
            
                They were carelesse bould and fearelesse,
            in the act:
            Popes great Pardon was their Garden,
            for this fact.
            But these Zimries, that would surprise,
            and spoile all:
            God forsakes them, and betakes them,
            to their fall.
            For when each thing, had setling,
            and day came:
            God bewrayed them, & dismayd them.
            to their shame.
            By a Letter, and no better
            without doubt:
            To preserue one from this plotforme,
            all came out.
            King and Counsell, noted this well,
            and did send:
            Twice to search out, thinges then in doubt
            and their end.
            
               Fawkes at midnight, and by torch light,
            there was found:
            With long matches and deuises,
            vnder ground.
            Hauing found him, there they bound him,
            and then sought:
            For the Powder and prouision
            in the vault.
            This perceiued, Fawkes bereued,
            of his sence.
            Said the Deuill, did that euill,
            for our defence.
            
                Yea this dreamer, and blasphemer,
            Sathans Sonne:
            Oft relented, and repented,
            deede not done.
            To the Court then, goe these glad men,
            to declare:
            All and each thing, to our good King,
            they found there.
            This laid open, baud was broken,
            of this traine.
            And their gladnesse, turn'd to madnesse,
            in the braine.
            Some roade North-ward, some North-westward
            there to showe:
            That their treachery, and their butchery,
            State did knowe.
            Then like Wilde-men, and most vilde-men,
            in strange fashion:
            They got Armor, Shot and Powder,
            for commotion.
            Horse in Stable, strong and able,
            they stole out:
            Thus the compn'y, roade the country,
            all about.
            In the meane time, thus their foule cryme,
            was proclaymed:
            And so Papists, with vilde Atheists,
            
            made ashamed.
            Thus confounded, some were wounded,
            as they fled:
            Some are taken, all forsaken,
            some are dead.
            
                Musket-Bullet, leaden pellet,
            made them stand:
            Powder drying, mar'd their flying,
            out of hand.
            House end blowne out, some eyes burnt out,
            they could say:
            God offended, was reuenged,
            there that day.
            And thus spoyled, they were foyled,
            in that place:
            Doores set open, as a token,
            of some grace.
            Then to prison, as good reason,
            did require:
            Sheriffe conuaide them, and so payd them
            part of hire.
            And in good time, they for this crime,
            were sent vp:
            To the counsell, for to drinke well,
            of one cup.
            Heads of Catesby, and of Piercy,
            
            they were sent:
            And sette vpon, the vpper house,
            of Parlyament.
            Brauely plodding, yea and nodding,
            each to other.
            Thanking Pope, for Axe and Rope,
            for them and other:
            Such a downefall, to the Papall,
            none aliue:
            But these Traytors, and their way
                  ••
               s,
            could contriue.
            
                This foule faction, and vilde action,
            will conuince:
            Pope and Popelings, Fryers and Shauelings,
            long time hence.
            Babes vnborne, will hate and scorne,
            such as these:
            
               Papists O
                  •
               spring, will for this thing,
            finde small ease.
            God our keeper, is no sleeper,
            this is knowne:
            But attend vs, and defend vs,
            as his owne.
            Diuelish Treason, hath no reason,
            night or day:
            Proud ambition, makes sedition,
            euery way.
            Their aspiring, and their fyring,
            comes from hell:
            The vnkindenes, growes of blindenes,
            most can tell.
            Banckrout fellowes, blow the bellowes
            to Commotion:
            And their backeside, must be couered,
            with deuotion.
            
               Romes Religion, pretty Pigion,
            of the Pope:
            Some would bring in, by this foule sinne,
            to haue scope.
            And the Gospell, which dooth expell,
            all their drosse:
            With our Preachers, and professors,
            they would crosse▪
            
            
                These vilde rangers, would bring Strangers,
            heere to raigne:
            Or in all things, make themselues Kings,
            by their gaine.
            This performed, men well armed,
            then should rise:
            And cry kill, kill, all sortes still, still,
            in strange wise.
            Then to ryfling, without tryfling,
            these would ronne:
            Yea to spoyling, and defiling,
            this kingdome.
            Thus were these bent, with full intent,
            treacherously:
            To blow vp all, & make much thraule,
            soddenly.
            Popish preesthoode, neuer yet good,
            prate and pray:
            That their Popery, and their fopery,
            might beare sway.
            But their praying, for betraying,
            King and State:
            God and Angells, Saints and Virgins,
            still dooth hate.
            All late Queenes time, this their foule crime,
            God put by:
            And still saued, his anoynted,
            wonderously.
            Yet they seeke still, moe Kings to kill,
            which doth growe:
            By their writing, and inditing,
            which teach so.
            
                In Petitions, great submissions,
            they doe offer:
            And to facion, tolleration,
            much they proffer.
            But denyed, this is spied
            sworde and fire,
            Bloud and Murther, they will further,
            and require.
            Thus their knotting, and their plotting,
            God dooth know:
            And this vilde route, he still brings out,
            to their woe.
            Reade each story, to Gods glory,
            of these thinges:
            English writings, haue indightings,
            for our Kinges.
            In the meane time, let our hearts clime,
            to the skye:
            With all due prayse, to God alwaies,
            for safety:
            And our trust is, that true iustice,
            shall take place:
            On offenders, and abetters,
            in this case.
            All our care then, is that good men,
            we may prooue:
            Seruing God still, dooing his will,
            liue in Loue.
            Preach now and pray, teach youth I say,
            still to knowe:
            How our good Lord, by his pure word,
            keepes from woe.
            
                Eighty eight yere, wee in Gods feare,
            may remember:
            
               Gowries August, Pereyes vniust,
            fift Nouember.
            These thinges require, Bels and bonfires,
            on this day:
            Musicke moste sweete, now were as meete,
            to shew ioy.
            Louely feasting, without wasting,
            once a yeare:
            Almes deedes giuing, with good liuing,
            let appeare.
            And take heede still, that the selfe will,
            of this swarme:
            Growe not desperate, to exasperate,
            some new harme.
            Now for our King, and Queene liuing,
            let vs pray:
            That Prince & Peeres, may Nestors yeres,
            tyme inioy.
            Two young Babies, Princely Ladies,
            of our King:
            God that saued them, still preserue them,
            in each thing.
            All three Kingdomes, with their Earledomes,
            and true Pastors:
            God stand for vs, and defend vs,
            from all Traytors.
         
         
            
            A forme of true Repentance, fit for
Traytors to Sing and vse now, and at all times
while life is in them: made in part by one
of Babingtons Conspiracy. And
may be sung to the tune
of the 25. Psal.
            
               MY prime of youthfull yeares,is but a frost of cares,
               My croppe of Corne is turned now,into a field of tares.
               The day is fled and gone,yet saw I not the Sunne,
               I seeme to liue, yea liue I doe,and yet my life is done.
            
            
               The spring for me is past,and yet it hath not sprung:
               My aged dayes are growing on,and yet I am but young.
               My thrid is cut in two:and yet it is not spunne,
               I seeme to liue, yea liue I doe,and yet my life is done.
            
            
               I sought for mirth and ioy,Yet found I nought but paine:
               My tree is dead, though leaues be greene,and losse is all my gaine.
               My glasse was set but late,and yet the same is runne:
               I seeme to liue, yea liue I doe,and yet my life is done.
            
            
               
               If subiect I had bin,and nought else could I be:
               Then had I neuer heard or seene,the sorrowes now I see.
               But I a kingdome sought,or else a State-mans roome:
               Wherefore I am moste iustly brought,aliue vnto my Tombe.
            
            
               All men be rul'd my be,leane not to Papistry:
               
               For sure the same can not indure;it workes such treachery.
               Ah woe to all that sleepe,or will be blinde at noone:
               They seeme to liue, yea liue they doe,and yet their life is done.
            
            
               Lord Iesus saue my soule,thy mercy be my merrit:
               Forgiue the sinne that I am in,that heau'n I may inherrit.
               O let me not beleeue,of purgatory doome:
               For then I shall but seeme to liue,when this my life is done.
            
            
               The Commons euery one,whome wee ment to destroy:
               And with Gun-powder to blow vp,in secret suddainely:
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
            
            
               
                   Like Constantine the Emperour,he dooth begin his royall Raigne:
               Whereat his foes are danted much,and seekes to him for grace amaine.
               Lord make their peace to bee in thee,and then thrice happy shall we be.
               
                  God saue King Iames, &c.
               
            
            
               The Gospell pure he dooth maintaine,among vs preached as before:
               Blinde ignorance it shall not raigne,as some did hope and threaten sore.
               Our Realme God hath established,and former feares from vs are fled.
               
                  God saue King Iames, &c.
               
            
            
               Lift vp your hearts to God on hie,and sing with one consent of minde:
               Laude and prayse to the Trinity,
                  for our good King that is so kinde,
               Let vs reioyce in God alway:that we haue seene this happie day.
               
                  God saue King Iames, &c.
               
            
            
               All Countries ioyne with vs in Loue,to beate downe Turke and Pope apace:
               The King and Counsels acts approue,let vertue now all vice deface.
               Amidst all ioyes prepare to dye,that we may liue eternally.
               
                  
                     God saue King Iames, and still pull downe, 
                  
                  
                     All those that would annoy his Crowne.
                  
               
            
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Another Song in Commendations of
the Kings moste excellent Maiestie,
to be sung at any time, but chiefly
on his Coronation
day.
            
               Let men and Angels witnesse beare,
               of our vnfained ioy:
               That we expresse with heart and tongue,
               for our good King this day.
            
            
               The Ditty or Song.
               
                  GReat Brittaine pleasant Paradice,
                     prayse thou the Lord with me:
                  And thanke him for his benefits,That he bestowes on thee.
                  But chiefly for his holy word,and for our Royall King:
                  The fame of whome in Europe wide,all Christians true will sing.
                  
                     Let men and Angels, &c.
                  
               
               
                  In Iuda and in Israell,
                     were Kings of noble fame:
                  Who did set vp Religion,
                      and nourished the same.
                  
                     Dauid and Salomon his Sonne,
                     Iosias and the rest:
                  Like whome our King began his Raigne,and shall like them be blest.
                  
                     Let men and Angels, &c.
                  
               
               
                  In Egipt Saba ruled well,at Troy, Casindra sat:
                  At Athens, did Minerua dwell,
                     Samose was Iunos state.
                  
                     Sibella lay in Cuma fayre,
                     in Greece, Penelope:
                  And in this Realme King Iames dooth Raigne,more famous then all they.
                  
                     Let men and Angels, &c.
                  
               
               
                  The Muses nine and Worthies all,the Artes and Graces seauen:
                  All these doe now agree in one,in him to make their heauen.
                  Yea heauen and earth, with all good things,doe fauour him we see:
                  The Lord therefore continue him,in Brittaine long to be.
                  
                     Let men and Angels, &c.
                  
               
               
                  In these his daies when he began,To weare the Crowne and Raigne:
                  God by his hand establisht vs:and made vs glad and faine.
                  In these his daies all feare, began
                      to flye and fall to ground:
                  And euery way our quiet state,began much to abound.
                  
                     Let men and Angells, &c.
                  
               
               
                  Wherefore as Iewes reioyced much,when Iubylies drewe neere:
                  As Moses with the Israelites,
                     keepe solemne Feasts each yere,
                  As Hester eke with Mardochai,
                     did daies of Purim holde:
                  So let great Brittaine keepe this day,and graue the same in golde.
                  
                     Let men and Angels, &c.
                  
               
               
                  Pray for the King and his Ofspring,all signes of ioy expresse:
                  For in one day both griefe and ioy,did wayte on vs doubtlesse.
                  A Christian Constantine we haue,Lord giue him length of dayes,
                  To all his Kingdomes further blisse,and Gods eternall prayse.
                  
                     
                        Let men and Angels witnesse beare,
                     
                     
                        of our vnfayned ioy:
                     
                     
                        That wee expresse with heart and tongue,
                     
                     
                        for our good King this day.
                     
                  
               
            
            Amen.
         
         
            
            An Antheme often Sung in the
Royall Chappel of our late Queene
Elizabeth, in any time of danger:
Made in Anno. Dom.
1588.
            And may serue at all times for vs.
            
               DEliuer vs O Lord,from all our foes that bee,
               And eke defend all Christian soules,that put their trust in thee.
               Preserue vs still good Lord,from al: the wicked traine
               From such as long and thirst for blood,and dooth thy truth disdaine▪
               
            
            
               Our enimies be strong,thou Lord the same doost know:
               Without offence on our parts done,to them, that seeke our woe.
               
                   Our selues, our cause, and all,to thee we doe commend:
               From traps, from snares, and bloody hands, good Lord still vs defend.
            
            
               Our hope and helpe O Lord,hath euer bin in thee:
               And thou according to thy word,doost stil deliuer me.
               O Christ come end our strife,the cause is wholy thine:
               Wherefore it shall while I haue life,haue helpe of mee and mine.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            Some other Monuments
and Memorandums of
Popery, (which together
with the Precedent Meeters) may
well be entituled as followeth:

                  The Smoke of Enborne in Barkeshire.
Anno. 1604.
                  The sparkes of Allens-more in Herefordshire.
1605.
                  And the flames intended at the Parliament
house. 1605.
               
All which, brake out of the fierye Coales
which burned, and was but as it were taked vp
in the breastes, bosomes, and hearts of Papists:
till they perceiued that the Kinges Maiestye
would not haue, allow of, nor tollerate a Mulish,
or Lincy-Wolsey Religion in England: &
then their madnes did appeare, and this fire began
to kindle. &c.
            
               
               
                  To the different, and indifferēt Readers, I. R. wisheth grace and Peace.
               
               
                  PErceiuing that these leaues going before,
would containe too small a volume:
I thougt it conuenient to make
some supply, & remēbring that I had
the rayling Libel that Papists scattered
in Enborne Church in Barkshire, together with a
preface & some part of the answere to the same: As also
the sum & effect of the Commotion of Papists in
Herefordshire: thought it good to fix them to these
Meeters. I knowing the certainty of the one by the printed
Book, put out therof in prose by M. Thomas Hamon
&c. And of the other mentioned in part by good
M. Powel in his Booke to the Puritan Papist, therfore
I say, I haue beene the more willing to adde the
same to the rest of my Booke, hoping of good acceptance
for the same: seeing that I meane
it for the instruction of the ignorant,
and the recreation of others,
and not otherwise.
               
                  Yours in the Lord. I. Rhodes.
               
            
            
               
               The true Coppye of the rayling Libell, left or cast into the Church of Enborne in Barkshire, as I receiued the same.
               The superscription in Prose.
  To the Parson of Enborne, giue this with speede.
               
               A post Script vnder the superscription.
  THe Carryer is payd already, as much as hee looketh
  for, and so it shal cost you nothing but the reading: &
  would you haue it better cheape?
               
               The Tytle or Inscription.
  
                     
                        TO the Heretical Parson of Enborne, due commendation,
                        Wishing him Catholique minde or else no saluation.
                     
                  
               
               The Lybell it selfe after his manner of ryming.

  
                     
                        NOw Maister Parson for your welcom home,
                        Reade these few lines you know not from whom
                     
                  
               
               Of their Popish Crosse.

  
                     
                        HOuld Crosse for an outward token & signe,
                        And remembrance onely, in Religion thine:
                        And of the profession the People doe make,
                        For more thē this comes too, thou dost it not take,
                        Yet holy Church tels vs, of holy Crosse much more,
                        
                            Of power and of vertue, to heale sicke and sore.
                        Of holynesse to blesse vs, and keepe vs from euill.
                        From foule feend to fend vs, and saue vs from deuill,
                        & of many miracles, which Holy-Crosse hath wrought
                        All which by tradition, to light, Church hath brought
                        Wherefore holy worship, holy-church doth it giue:
                        And sure so will we, so long as we liue.
                        Though thou saist Idolatry, and vilde superstition,
                        Yet we know it is Holy Churches Tradition.
                        
                           Holy-Crosse then disgrace not, but bring in renowne,
                        For vp shall the Crosse goe, and you shall goe downe.
                        And now what we are, if any would know,
                        
                           Catholiques we are, and so we will goe.
                        The Seruice Booke heere, scattered all,
                        Is not diuine, but Hereticall:
                        So is the Bible of false translation,
                        To cut it and mangle it, is no damnation.
                        The Register also, if so we doe serue,
                        We vse it no otherwise then it doth deserue:
                        For why should new Heretickes, be therein inroulde,
                        Inrole good Catholiques long deade of ould,
                        Out with new Heritickes, hence let them goe,
                        Register Catholiques, & Register no moe.
                        For Catholiques onely, are worthy recorde,
                        And into Church Register to be restorde.
                     
                  
               
               Finis.
            
            
               
               The Preface of the Answere to the Romish Rime and rayling Libell.
               HOw now my Maisters of the Popish crue?
               What yet more Rymes, to blaze your armes a new?
               We thought that you had left these tryfling toyes,
               To be performed of Mad-men, Girls and Boyes,
               And not that men of sorte, or of ripe age,
               Would thus like Players come vppon the Stage.
               Members of holy Church, as you would bee,
               Should hate such sports as thinges of base degree.
               But Hogs and Dogs will wallow in the mire,
               Eate their owne vomit, to fulfill desire:
               All carryon Crowes, and Kites will stoop to ground,
               Yea strike on Dunghils where their pray is found.
               But Eagles, they will mount & soare on hie,
               Feede on the best thinges, pleasing taste and eye:
               You knowe the meaning, therefore be asham'd,
               In such bad actions to be seene or namde.
               Some of your friendes and fauorites I know,
               Abhorre this course & would not haue it so.
               When one like you did write of Popish Crosse,
               Another on your questions of like drosse,
               A Papist curst: and said now fye for shame,
               These first rude rimers, are most worthy blame,
               And not the answerers prouok'd thereto,
               By fooles on our side that such thinges will doe.
               
                   Vnto lowe ebbe your Pop'ry sure is come,
               When vp and downe in Meeters it must runne:
               Will prose no longer serue your turnes indeede?
               But that like Fidlers you must thus proceede?
               Or must you wander now like Pedlers poore?
               To sell your Romish wares from doore to doore?
               What hath our learned men desir'd you so,
               That like to corner Creepers you must goe?
               Are you become S. Nicholas Clarkes at last?
               That walkes by Owle-light when the day is past?
               If Ballad Mungers trade you must professe:
               Or like to Tinkers seeke for worke by guesse.
               If like to merry Beggars you will sing,
               From house to house, then thinke vpon this thing.
               The law for Vagrants will light on you,
               And so some whipping cheere may well insue.
               If Romish Church doe hatch such Birdes as these,
               Who will beleeue that she our Christ can please
               Some three yeares since, your questions put in rime,
               Were answered all, according to the time.
               Since then we heard of no reply at all,
               Nor ye
                     •
                   of Popish Poets greate or small:
               But now of late one stole out of his denne,
               And shamefully abuz'd both tongue and penne.
               That is to say at Enborne in Barkeshire,
               
               They delt as if they would set all on fire,
               The Church doore they brake open with strong hād
               Which is plaine sacriledge in euery land.
               They cut one Booke, and did disprayse the rest,
               Scattering the leaues, to shew how they detest:
               Our bookes and vs, with all the power they haue,
               Our Ministers and all things they depraue.
               
                   Wee seeke to bring them to the faith againe,
               Which in Saint Paules time, did in them remaine:
               But they abuse vs for our paines therein,
               Accounting all we doe that way but sinne.
               Wherefore we must lose time no longer so,
               Nor suffer them that euer seekes our woe:
               But euen deale roundly both with tongue and penne,
               By force of law and what befits such men.
               And sith Rome is the Seate of Antichrist:
                  viz. in their Masse.
               
               And euery day blasphemeth the most highest,
               Sith shee no longer is Christs spowse and wife,
               But Harlot like, in Doctrine and in life.
               Why should a Christian rest or stay on them?
               But onely cleaue to Christ like Christian men.
               The Protestants they say doe hurt them sore,
               The Puritanes they thinke will plague them more:
               If these agree, (as by Gods helpe they shall)
               Then reason tels them Popery soone must fall.
               But leauing these thinges to Authority,
               Vnto the Popish rimers words come I.
               Which shall haue answere as they doe deserue:
               And from their owne words I meane not to swarue.
               Foget I may not yet to tell thee plaine,
               What lame leg'd Meeters, heere I finde amaine,
               Which like the Author euery where dooth hault,
               As Vulcan doth, but I will not finde fault.
               Let this suffice for Preface to this Rime,
               Which to the wise mans censure I resigne.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            To the Reader.
            HEere good Reader, I am driuen to leaue off for lack
of time to finish the rest, before the first execution
of Traytors: but you shall haue the rest with the
second part of this Booke, which shall shortly bee printed.
In the meane time, I pray thee to haue patience for this
stay, as also for any fault that escaped the Printing: And
when my second part of this booke comes foorth, thou shalt
haue my answere to this Rayling Libell, & the matter of
Herefordshire. In the meane time I craue both thy prayers
for me, and thy patience towards me, and the
Printer, as is aboue said: for we meane
to make amends if God will.
            
               Thine in the Lord Iesus. Iohn Rhodes Minister.
            
            
         
      
   