
      
         
            
            
            FAVLTES FAVLTS, And nothing elſe but FAVLTES.
            AT LONDON Printed for Ieffrey Chorleton, and are to be ſold at the great North doore of Paules Church. 1606.
         
         
            
            
            To the moſt worthie, the moſt vertuous and godly Prince, Henrie, by the grace of God, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earle of Cheſter, and Heire Apparant of the Realme of great Britaine, France, and Ireland.
            
               YOur Souldier (moſt gracious and worthie Prince) hath once againe betaken him to his Penne; he hath, to auoyd idleneſſe, endeuored with Domitian to catch flies, he graſped at greater matters, then his abilitie was able to reach vnto. He meant to haue mounted the Alpes, that ſtumbled by the way at a ſorie Mole-hill. But I ſee it is Souldiers lucke, for when they hope to effect wonders, they conclude with iuſt nothing. I dare not therefore preſent theſe trifles as worthie your gracious view, I know they are too ſlight for your greatneſſe, and too meane a preſent for ſo high renowne: Shall I offer them yet vnder the examples of the Widowes mite, or, the handfull of water that was offered to Alexander. Me thinkes the conceit
is growne too ſtale, when euerie baſtard Poet hath alreadie worne it threed-bare: no, I preſent them with a Souldiers faithfull heart, that is ſtill armed to the proofe, to doe your Grace all humble and dutifull ſeruice. If my lines bee of little worth, your Graces name is of great worth, and inough to ſhrowde both them and me from the prowdeſt contemner. The rude Poet Cherilus, had nothing worthie to be noted in his verſes, but onely the name of Alexander: And I confeſſe my fruites are too vntimely to be gathered in the age of this ripe and plentifull harueſt. I haue therefore with Cherilus the better to adorne them, humblie preſumed of that gracious fauour, that hath alreadie tied me with all dutie and zeale, to lay my hands vnder your Highneſſe feete.
            
               Your Graces moſt humble and dutifull ſouldier: Barnabie Rich. 
            
         
         
            
            To the Gentlemen that are diſpoſed.
            GEntlemen, if I haue fitted your humors with this fantaſie, much good doe it yee, I would it were for you: if it be offenſiue to ſome queaſie ſtomacke, it proceedeth rather vpon ſome diſtempered humour in the partie ſo offended, then of any fault of mine: and yet to ſpeake truly, I meant not to pleaſe all. For when I firſt vndertooke the ſubiect, I knew it could not be handled without offence: but as I haue not detected any one particularly of mine owne knowledge, ſo if any man vpon a guiltie conſcience will accuſe himſelfe, his fault be vpon his owne head: ſhould we forbeare to ſpeake againſt vice, becauſe the vicious will be offended? if that might once be brought to paſſe, it were high time to follow Tarltons aduice, to pull downe the Church, and ſet vp the Ale-houſe. And how many inferiour officers would then fall to decay: amongſt the reſt, the poore hang-man would miſcarie for want of maintenance, but let them comfort themſelues, vice muſt be corrected, and ſinne will be puniſhed.
            And for the hangman me thinks I durſt warrant him worke, ſo long as there is a Pope in Rome, or a Papiſt in great Brytaine.
            Now for mine owne part, that haue taken vpon me to ſpeake of ſo many faults, let me firſt manifeſt mine owne, I confeſſe I haue iested at abuſe, and I haue a little ſcoffed at thoſe that doe vſe themſelues to make a ſcoffe at vertue. In the ſetting downe whereof I haue imitated the Painter, who applieth colours but according to his picture. So in theſe diſcourſes, I haue kept a Souldiers Decorum, expreſſing matter of little regard, with words and phraſes beſt befitting the ſubiect. And where I haue to deale with more ſerious circumſtance, I haue tempered my ſtile with words and tearmes thereafter.
            
               B. R.
            
         
         
            
            
               A Figge for all that Enuie can inuent,
               On fearefull ſteps true honour neuer treades,
               I come not to implore Lucina's helpe,
               To bring my Muſe a bed with fantaſies,
               Nor ſteale Iiestes in cloudes to make you game,
               Nor do I ſeeke by gawdes to purchaſe fame.
            
            
               I wade into the world as one vnknowne;
               Yong in diſguiſe, and yet in yeares more ripe:
               I can diſcerne an Ape, though clad in ſilke,
               And temper wit ſometimes to ſerue a turne.
               To what impriſsion I haue wrought it now,
               The wiſe may iudge, for fooles I care not how.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Faults, and nothing but Faults.
            
               All things beſt in time and ſeaſon.
               AS that enterpriſe which is indeuoured in a ſeaſonable time, is moſt like-to conclude with a good and happy ſucceſſe: ſo to vndertake (whatſoeuer) not fitting the inſtant, ſhall neuer get paſſage through the hearts of men; but rather be ſpurned at, and vtterly deſpiſed. And for him that ſhal reade a Lecture of Abſtinence, when men be in the midſt of their cuppes, ſhould haue ill audience: and where men haue betaken themſelues to reſt, the ſound of the Trumpet, and the clattering of Armour doth rather interrupt their quiet, then augment their courage. An Orator at a table, being requeſted to ſpeake of Eloquence anſwered; Thoſe things that are fit for the place and time preſent, I am ignorant of: and that which you require, I know at this time would be out of ſeaſon. Thus euerie thing is made gracefull, or diſgracefull, according to time and place. My hardineſſe then may be reputed ouer-much, that dare take vpon me to finde Faults in ſo daungerous a time, when
there is no man willing to heare of his owne miſſe; when he that ſhould but looke into the ſinnes of the mightie Giants of the world muſt neds periſh, when he that ſhould but ſearch out their euill that will wallow in wickedneſſe, and yet will not bee controlled, is thought vnworthy to liue in a wel-gouerned Common-wealth: Auguſtus wel pleaſed with fault finders.yet the good Emperour Auguſtus was neuer angrie with accuſers, but thought it neceſſarie, that where there were ſtore of vices, there ſhould likewiſe be many to find fault.
            And Alexander vnderſtanding that ſome had breathed out bad reports againſt him, ſought no reuenge, but ſaid: That it belonged to Kings, to do well, and to heare ill. It hath bin a cuſtom in ſome parts of the Indies, that when their King or any other great commander amongſt them were dead, if any man came againſt him, to charge him with any notorious vice, or to oppoſe any faults againſt him, he was denied buriall, which amongſt them was eſteemd to be a greter infelicity, then if a man were depriued from the ioyes of heauen. Paſquils piller
               Paſquilles pillar was tollerated in Rome, to reprehend all ſorts of ſinnes, till they touched the Pope with his Cleargie. many reſtrained more for feare of the world, then for feare of God.The Lacedemonians thought it a neceſſarie point of pollicie, that there ſhould be ſuch reprouers, whereby to repreſſe enormitie in thoſe for feare of worldly ſhame, that otherwiſe neither remorſe of conſcience, nor any feare of their gods, could haue reſtrained or kept in compas. The like conceit was had amongſt the Thurines, where it
was thought the wicked were rather reſtrained for feare of worldly ſhame, then for any feare or dread of God. Euerie man had free libertie therefore to ſpeake, either for the generall good of his Countrie, or to reprooue any mans priuate enormitie, till in the ende they made a lawe, that no man ſhould finde fault at anie abuſe, vnleſſe at Adulterie.
            
            Amongſt other fictions of the Poets, there is one feined of Momus, who for reprehending the lewdneſſe of the Gods, was therfore throwne from the heauens hedlong to the earth, wher he was driuen to wander like a vagabond, no man daring to render him relief, for offending of Iupiter. He hath ſtil continued in common contempt, eſpecially in the Courts of Princes, and in the Palaces of great and mightie men, amongſt whom Fault-finders could yet neuer get grace, where Adulation (better fitting their humour) is crept ſo cloſe in their boſomes, that ſmoothing Flatterie is more dearely eſteemed, then reprehending Veritie:
               Satyriſts not inconuenient. I doe not altogither diſlike of our Satyrists and Critickes of theſe times, that doe chide at vice; but I cannot allow them ſo to ayme at any one particularly, nor ſo to point at anie mans priuate miſſe, that when they ſeeke to ſhadow him vnder ſome diſguiſed ſhape, they doe but ſhrowd him in a Nette. Let them reprooue ſinne, but not in ſuch a ſort that euerie man may vnderſtand by whome it is meant: wee are rather inclined to find faultes then to commend things that are

               Thoſe ſooneſt find fault that tread moſt awry.well done we deſire to heare of imperfections of others, but we cannot abide to be ill ſpoken of our ſelues: and how curious we be to ſearch into other mens follies, and how careleſſe againe to amend our own, and who wil ſo readily accuſe others for treading awrie, as thoſe who ſithence they were borne, could neuer go vpright.
            
               An example of great charitie.Hiſtories make mention of a renowmed Abbot called Moiſes, who being willed to giue his verdit vppon a Friar of the brotherhood that had offended, he came in with a great ſacke of Sand on his backe, and being asked what he brought with him, anſwered they were his finnes, which being ſo burthenſome for himſelfe to beare, was therfore vnfit to cenſure of any other mans faults: but now there is nothing more conuerſant amongſt vs, then this reprehending and mocking, and we are ſo apt and readie to controll, that it might ſeeme that neither the mouth were wide inough, nor the tongue readie inough, to reprehend and reproue thoſe follies in others, that do moſt abound in our ſelues.
            I remember a merrie ieſt of two prating companions, eſpecially noted for their many wordes: the one of them growing a little ſicke of a feuer Iordan, the other came to ſee him, who after his departure being met withall by a ſecond friend, that was likewiſe going to viſite this ſicke man, and knowing the other to be newly come from him, asked of him how he did: the other anſwered, in no danger of death, for I find he hath not forgot
his prating: the other comming where the ſicke man was lying on his bed, after ſome comfortable words, told him whom he met withall: it is true ſaid the other, he was here to ſee me, but he ſo tired me with his prattle, that I was glad when he was gone.
            
               We can eſpie other mens faults, but not our owne.The world is growne to that paſſe, that we can laugh at our owne imperfections in another, but we cannot ſee them in our ſelues. It ſhould ſeeme we are better ſighted a farre off, then we be nigh at hand: for at home we be as blind as Moales, but abroad we haue as many eyes as Argus. The ſum of all is, there is nothing more diſpleaſing vnto vs, then to be told of our owne faults: and nothing better pleaſing again, then to heare of other mens: The world is growne to this paſſe, and he that ſeeketh not to pleaſe the world, ſhall neuer thriue in the world, and he that ſtudieth to pleaſe all, ſpendeth his time in vaine.
            And although I haue not endeuoured my ſelfe in framing an Idea of Vtopian perfections; yet I haue aduentured to graſpe at abuſe, but vnder generalities in ſuch ſort, as I haue not aymed at any one man particularly, neither to open his ſhame, nor yet to blazon his infamie.
            
               Pleaſe all pleaſe none.If any man ſhall ſeeke to wreſt my generalities to any priuate application, they ſhould doe mee wrong, when I haue not ſought ſo much as to blaſt any mans good name; I haue ſhadowed follies, but yet vnder couert tearmes, and I haue ouerpaſſed many things in ſilence, becauſe the world is giuen
to ſee too much.
            
               If men will miſconſter, the fault is theirs.We imitate the Diſciples of Theodorus, who complained that his Schollers were accuſtomed (how plainely ſoeuer he ſpoke) yet ſtill to miſconſter him, and howe expreſſely ſoeuer he could write, they would yet wreſt his ſenſe and meaning to their owne expoſitions. There is nothing well ſaid, that is not rightly vnderſtood; neither is there anie thing well done, that is wrongfully interpreted.
            
               A gauld Iade.If anie man vpon a guiltie conſcience ſhould find himſelfe agreeued, the fault is not mine, mee thinkes it were better for him to amend his miſſe, then to publiſh his ſhame.
            
               They haue found out new mines of new faſhions.There is nothing more formall in theſe dayes then Deformitie it ſelfe. If I ſhould then begin to write, according to the time, I ſhould onely write of new faſhions, and of new follies that are now altogether in faſhion, whereof there are ſuch aboundant ſtore, that I thinke they haue got the Philoſophers ſtone to multiplie, there is ſuch a dayly multiplicitie both of follies, and faſhions.
            
               In diebus illis, Poets and Painters, were priuiledged to faine whatſoeuer themſelues liſted: but now, both Poet and Painter, if he be not the Tailors Ape, I will not giue him a ſingle halfepenie for his worke: for he that ſhould either write or paint, if it be not fitte in the new faſhion, he may go ſcrape for commendation, nay they will mocke at him, and hiſſe at his conceit.
            
               
               Preuention.But amongſt an infinite number of faults, I am not yet reſolued with which of them I ſhould beginne, nor what text I might firſt take in hand, and it may be, ſome will therfore taxe me to haue but little witte: and no force, let them not ſpare, I will bee afore-hand with ſome of them, there is a figure with the Logitians, they call it Prolepſis, or Preuention, and I learned it long agoe, of the Boy that taught his mother to call whoore firſt. And I will now ſitte in iudgement of all thoſe that my memorie can readily produce, and I doubt not, but to bee afore hande with ſome of them.
            
               Ieſtmonger.As for the humorous they haue beene alredie brought to the ſtage, where they haue plaide their partes, Euerie man in his humour.
            
            Amongeſt the reſt therefore to begin withall, Rome for a Iestmonger, that will rather chooſe to looſe a friend, then to looſe a ieſt, and are quite out of loue with their owne witte. If their vnſauourie gawdes doe not produce laughter: and ſometimes when they doe thinke wiſely to giue ſome prettie nippe, God knoweth, their wordes doe rather tickle, then pinch, and giue the more occaſion to be laught at for their follie, then otherwiſe to be commended for their witte. Yet many of them are ſo full of merriment, that a man would thinke Nature had hatched them into the world to be derided of all companies where they become.
            Some wanting wit to coine conceits of their

               Will ſteale other mens ieſtes.owne are driuen to commit felonie, to ſteale from other men; and putting them in execution, the effect may ſo fall out, as it did with Eſops Aſſe, who counterfetting the little dogge, would play with his Maiſter till he was ſurely bangd: So there be among them that will get ieſtes by heart, that haue gathred a Common-place booke out of Plaies, that will not let a merriment ſlip, but they will truſſe it vp for their owne prouiſion, to ſerue their expence at ſome other time: and this they eſteeme to be as good as a ſute of Sattin, to grace themſelues withall, and are in hope by theſe pleaſures (if they be not placed at the vpper end of the table) yet to get a roome aboue the Salt.
            
               Brode ieſters.Some making profeſſion to be pleaſant, do by that meanes purchaſe themſelues certaine libertie (amongſt their friends) to ſay what they liſt, wherby many times they ſet abroach ſuch matters, which being not able to runne through, they are driuen to helpe themſelues by raiſing laughter, the which they performe with that kind of grace, as is rather to be loathed, then liked.
            
               Slouenly ieſters.Some other by vnreuerent demeanor at a table, otherwhiles by a brutiſh and vnmanerly kinde of eating and drinking, and ſometimes by belching, out filthie and diſhoneſt wordes and tales, whereat if they can make Modeſtie to bluſh, they thinke they haue gotten the gole, and doe ſo much eſteeme the better of their owne wits, and will further faſhion themſelues to ſuch vnciuill and vncleanly demeanour, that their rude and boiſtrous
conuerſation, ſhall ſo ſmell of the Plow, and the Cart, as will abhorre any mans noſe to ſit nigh them, that haue but ſmelled of ciuilitie. But this bourding and carterlike ieſting, is more readie to turne a wiſe mans ſtomacke, then to make him laugh.
            
               No feaſt with out a foole or a flatterer.It is not worthie to be called a feaſt, where there is not a Iester and a Flatterer, to cheare vp the gueſts; the one to raile and ſlander, the other to ſmoothe and flatter: for as the bodie muſt be ballanced with exceſſe, ſo the minde muſt be recreated with theſe ſlauiſh delights. And where theſe two doe meete, they are ſtill at great expences: for you ſhall heare them ſpend ſuch a deale of idle breath, that both Zoylus and Gnato would haue plaid bankrupt, if they had beene halfe ſo liberall of their windie commoditie. And yet in the midſt of their prodigalitie, you ſhall not ſee them ſpend one dram of loue vpon a wiſe man, but onely amongſt their fauourites and friends.
            
               Paraſite.Of the ſelfe and ſame Grape bee theſe ſupple-mouthed Paraſites, thoſe that can pamper itching ſenſuality, that to pleaſe humors can carows with Alexander, abſtaine with Romulus, eate with the Epicures, faſt with the Stoicks, ſleepe with Endimeon, watch with Criſippus, laugh with Democrites, weepe with Hiraclites, that can couer vice with the name of vertue, that can call Impudencie, Audacitie, that will conuert Rage into Courage, Wilineſſe into Wit, Obſtinacie into Constancie.
            
            I thinke Flatterie at this day be in as good requeſt

               Tabacco and Flattery, both ſmoky vapors.as Tabacco, two ſmokie vapours, yet the one purgeth wiſe-men of their witte, and the other fooles of their money. And no maruell though Flatterers are ſo acceptable, when men for the moſt part can flatter themſelues with an ouer-weening, to be what they are not: this maketh them ſo willing to giue eare to Flatterers, of whom they think they are prayſed, when they are but flattered, for ſo much as falſe praiſe is nothing elſe but flat mockerie.Men are willing to be flattered. And we are growen to thinke ſo well of our ſelues, that we account him, either to be enuious, or prowde, that will not ſoothe and ſmoothe vs vp in all our follies, ſo great is our vaine-glorie, that when we be commended farre aboue our deſert, yet we rather attribute it to the aboundance of good will,Fit to be flattered. then to the fraude of him that flattereth.
            
               Too many in theſe dayes.But it hath beene, and is, proper to men of all ſorts, to ſuffer themſelues to be coyd and clawed with this tickling of Flatterie. Alexander not free from flatterie.Alexander was not freed from it with all his courage, neither yet Dioniſius with all his crueltie. And Themistocles being asked what wordes were beſt pleaſing vnto him, anſwered: Thoſe that recount my praiſe. Our eares are more in loue with the melodie of words ſounding to our owne praiſes, then with any other muſicke: and therefore many times (like as by the voices of Mermaides) they are the cauſe of drowning him that ſetteth them open to that deceitfull harmonie. And how manie are there, that knowing themſelues to be palpably flattered, doe yet loue him that flattereth faſteſt, and hate him that ſpeaketh
but the truth? And who doth not bluſh to ſee the groſſe flatteries of our Paraſites of theſe times? how they will extoll and commend many things in great and mightie perſons, making them beleue they excell in many things, wherein they haue no skil at al: commending that againe, which might rather be thought to be Deformities then Conformities, in a man of meane eſtate. And he that will be Thraſo, ſhall neuer want a Gnato: but beware of the baites of Flatterers, who with ſugred wordes creeping into mens boſomes, doe but imitate the Butcher, that claweth the oxe with his hand, that he might haue the more conuenience to knocke him on the head with a Beetle.
            
               A good requitall of an Emperour.The example of the Emperour Sigiſmund is not to be forgotten, who hearing a ſhameleſſe fellow to call him God, ſtroke him on the eare, to whom the Paraſite ſaid, Why doſt thou ſtrike me, Emperour? To the which he anſwered, Why doſt thou bite me, Flatterer?
            
            
               Floures of curteſie.God haue mercie Sigiſmund for this tricke, and I would all our Paraſites of theſe times might be ſo recompenced: Better to hit a Paraſite on the eare, than to lend him thine earefor it is better to hit them on the eare, then to lend them an eare; for he that lendeth his eare to a Flatterer, is like a ſheepe that lendeth the Woolfe her teate, and doth more often ſubuert and ouerthrow the wealth of a kingdome, then an open enemie.
            But ſee here a companie now preſenting themſelues, that I cannot ſay are affected, but I thinke are rather infected with too much courteſie; you
ſhall know them by their ſalutations. For firſt with the kiſſe on the hand, the bodie ſhall be bowed downe to the ground: then the armes ſhall bee caſt out, like one that were dauncing the old Antike, not a word but, at your ſeruice, at your commaund, at your pleaſure: this olde proteſtation, Yours, in the way of honeſtie, is little cared for: euerie Gull was woont to haue it at his tongues end, but now it is forgotten. And theſe Flowres of courteſie, as they are full of affectation, ſo they are no leſſe formall in their ſpeeches, full of fuſtian phraſes, many times deliuering ſuch ſentences as doe bewray and lay open their maiſters ignorance: and they are ſo frequent with the kiſſe on the hand, that a word ſhall not paſſe their mouthes, till they haue clapt their fingers ouer their lippes. But he that is ſo full of creeping, and crowching, either hee meanes not well, or his wit will not ſerue him to meane well, for this common affabilitie, dooth lightly bring with it an ill intent, and but according to the Prouerbe, Much courteſie, much craft.
            
               Faſhion-monger.But will you ſee how I am peſtered with a finicall companie that comes in now all together, throwing vppon mee, birdes of a wing, and it is fitteſt for them to flie together: here comes firſt the Faſhion-monger, that ſpendes his time in the contemplation of ſutes. Alas good Gentleman, there is ſomething amiſſe with him, I perceiue it by his ſad and heauie countenance: for my life his Tailer and he are at ſome ſquare about the making
of his new ſute, he hath cut it after the old ſtampe, of ſome ſtale faſhion, that is, at the leaſt of a whole fortnights ſtanding.
            
               Fantaſticke.But what call you him a Fantaſticke, that followes his fellowe ſo cloſe, a foole I warrant him, and I beleeue hee hath robd a Iackanapes of his ieſture, marke but his countenance, ſee how hee mops, and how he mowes, and how he ſtraines his lookes. All the Apes that haue beene in the Parriſh Garden theſe twentie yeares, would not come nigh him for all maner of complements.
            
               His head the ſtore-houſe of wiſedome.
               Malecontent.Here comes now the Malecontent, a ſingular fellow, and very formall in all his demeanours, one that can reprooue the world but with a word, the follies of the people with a ſhrug, and ſparing of his ſpeach, giueth his anſwer with ſigns and dumb ſhews, paſing his ſteps with ſad and ſowre countenance, as if hee would haue it ſaide; Lo, yonder goes the melancholy Gentleman, ſee there Vertue and Wiſedome deſpiſed, this is the man, that dooth carry a whole common-wealth in his head, that can mannage the affaires of a State, and fitter to be of a Princes priuy houſe counſaile, than the beſt Acter that euer playd Grauets part at the Theatre.
            
               State Ape.But good lucke now in Gods name, I hope we ſhall heare ſome newes, for heere comes a fellow that can giue vs intelligence from Fraunce, Flaunders, Spaine, and Italy, from the great Turke, and I thinke from the Diuell himſelfe; it is one of theſe State-Apes, that are euer hunting after matter of State. He vſeth to frequent the Exchange, and you
ſhall meet him in the middle walke in Paules at ten of the clocke, and three of the clocke: and after the vulgar ſalutation of, God ſaue you ſir, the next ſhall be an Interrogatory, I pray ſir, what newes doe you heare from Spaine? how be our Countrymen entertained there? be they not troubled with thoſe of the Holy houſe? They deſerue to bee well vſed, for they haue made corne almoſt as good cheape in Spaine as it is in England; they report the like of all other victuall: And among the reſt of all other our commodities that flieth into Spaine, they ſay our caſt yron ordonaunce findeth ſuch entertainement, and is ſo daily befriended amongeſt the Spaniardes, that it is thought our clymate is too colde to keepe it in, but it wil ſeeke aduentures in Countries neerer the Sunne.
            Theſe trickes they haue, both to groape mens opinions, and to gather ſuch other newes as they can informe, and with theſe intelligences they go from place to place; for they are noſed like Catullus, they can ſmell a feaſt; and they knowe well enough, that men are ſo inclined to heare nouelties, that a few newes well couched, is a better payment for a dinner or a ſupper, than eighteene pence to giue vnto an Ordinary. Theſe men haue a ſpeciall gift, eyther to Metamorphiſe, or to Paraphraſe what newes ſoeuer.
            And what great Ambaſſadour can be ſent from any forraigne Prince or Potentate, but before hee hath delivered his meſſage, yea and before he hath put his foote in at the Court gates, but you ſhall
haue one of theſe Newes-mongers that will not ſtick to tell, both what his arrand is, and what ſhall bee his anſwer.
            Heere comes a ſpruce fellow now, and if hee be not alied to the Fantaſticke, yet I am ſure the foole and he are ſo neare a kinne, that they can not marrie, without a Licence from the Pope. Would ye knowe who it is? Mary ſir, it is a Traveller, not of thoſe ſort that endeuor their trauels, but of purpoſe to growe into the hieway of Experience, for the better ſeruice of their Prince or Country: but of thoſe whipſters, that hauing ſpent the greateſt part of their patrimony in prodigality, wil giue out the reſt of their ſtocke, to be paid two or three for one, vpon their returne from Rome, from Venice, from Constantinople, or ſome other appoynted place. Theſe fellowes in their iourneying doe ſo empty themſelues of the little witte they carryed out, that they can make no better return than their mindes full fraught with farre fetcht follies, and their heades ouer burthened with too many outlandiſh vanities; if at his returne he hath but ſome few fooliſh Phraſes in the French, Spaniſh, or Italian language, with the Baſelos manos, the Ducke, the Mump, and the Shrugge, it is enough; for they take much trauell vpon them, to ſee faſhions, but none at all, to learne vertue: This is a ſtrange kinde of travell, to make profeſſion, to looſe their credite at home, to learne follies abroade. What truſt can there be in a traueller, who is ſtil watching for a winde, whoſe feete are euer fleeting, whoſe faith
plighted on the ſhoare, is turned to periurie when they hoyſe ſaile?
            
               Trauailers may well ſpeake of wonders.Travellers are priuileged to lie, and at their returne, if they doe hitte into a company that neuer trauelled towards the South Pole, beyond Gads hill, you ſhall heare them ſpeake of wonders, his talke ſhall be of Lawes, and Cuſtoms, Prouinciall, and Politique. What ciuilitie doth abound in the partes where he hath beene, hee will tell how conuerſant he hath beene with great Princes, and how prouident he hath found them in gouerning their eſtates; & almoſt at euery pauſe that he hath drawen his ſpeach to a full period, the next ſtraine ſhall beginne with this Duke, or that Prince: So that Dukes and Princes are as rife at his tongues end, as, What lacke you ſir? or, What would you haue bought? is to a prentiſe of Cheapeſide.
            
            
               The greateſt Vertue.But whom haue we here, one, two, three, foure fiue? One, two, three, foure, fiue, and nothing elſe but, one, two, three, foure, fiue? A Dauncer.O ho, I vnderſtand him now, this is one of the Skipping Arte, that is newly come from the Dauncing Schoole; this fellow had rather treade a tricke of one and twentie follies, than to performe one action that might increaſe wiſedome: And yet to ſpeake truely, there is no great harme in his witte, but it will ſerue him well enough to talke of the turne of the toe, of the caper aboue ground, of the lofty tricke, and he hath ſome ſmacke of iudgement in vawting, tumbling, and in dauncing with the Iebie horſe. And he will ſpeake of Playes, Players, and who be
the beſt Actors, and lightly he is acquainted with her that keepes the beſt Brothell-houſe.
            
               Oh for a Pipe of Tobacco.But O for a Pipe of Tobacco! paſſion of me, how haue I forgotten my ſelfe, that haue vented ſo much idle breath without a pipe of Tobacco? I know a number of my good friends that woulde not haue ſpent halfe this prattle without taking of ten Pipes at the leaſt.
            
               The ſoueraintie of Tobacco.O ſoueraigne Tobacco! that art a medicine for euery malady, a ſalue for euery ſore: twill cure the Dropſie, the Gowt, the Rhume, the Cold, the Ache of the heade, a Pin and Webbe in the heele, it will make a woman that is barren to beare ſixe children in one night; it is wonderfull in operation, and they ſay it will make a leane man fatte, and a fatte man leane. But I know it hath made many wiſe men to become fooles, and it hath made ſome fooles againe to become wiſe men.
            It cannot be denied, but it makes men ſociable, and he that can but take a Pipe of Tobacco, drinke Bottle Ale, and play a game at Noddie, is a companion for a knight: But let theſe fantaſies paſſe amongſt a number of others, I will not call them follies, but Gods bleſſing on his heart, who ſaid, that Thought was free.
            Now ſome will ſay, theſe are but ſmall Faults to be ſpoken of, they are none of the ſeuen deadly ſinnes, and therefore the leaſt drop of a Popes Pardon may diſpenſe with all this. And what can I do but confeſſe a troth? and for this pleaſant imperfection of Pompe, Pride, Adulterie, Gluttonie, Drunkenneſſe,
               and ſuch other, if I ſhould but ſpeake of them, there be thoſe would nicke me by and by, and come ouer me with, Phiſition help thy ſelfe. And to ſpeake truly, I could find in my heart to be verie prowde, if I had where-withall to beare it out.
            
               Three ſorts of Bavvdes. One to the Vſurer.But for this ſweete ſinne, that is of greater antiquity then the game at Maw, (ye know what I mean I am ſure) if I ſhould finde fault at that, I ſhould offend you, and him, and a great many others of my verie good friends, that I would be loath to diſpleaſe. I could yet find in my heart, to chide a little at ſome ſorts of Tradeſ-men, that doe gather their greateſt gaine from the ſinnes and abuſes of the people. Among the reſt, there are three ſortes of Bawdes: but becauſe wee will be a little mannerly, we will call them Panders. The firſt is, a Broker, a Pander (indeede) to Vſury, and a neceſſary inſtrument for the Vſurer, wherby to accompliſh a great deale of (ſir reuerence of you) K, N, auerie.
            
               The drunkard as precious to the Vintner, as the vnthrift to the Vſurer.The ſecond ſort be Vintners, panders to Drunkennes, many of them keepers of hoſpitalitie for the Prodigall, for the Riotous, for the Epicure, and receptacles many times for ſhamefull purpoſes, where the vicious hath more often recourſe than thoſe of honeſt life.
            If there be a Walker, that dooth ſtill vſe his ſtations from Tauerne to Tauerne, reeling and tottering, that his two ſupporters will ſcarce beare vp his drunken carcaſſe out of the kennell, yet who can blame Tom Tapſter to vndertake in his behalfe,
and to auowe him for a man of as honeſt conuerſation, as euer came drunke out of a tipling houſe.
            
               Such Vintners do know their owne diſhoneſtie.I confeſſe, I do ſometimes loue to ſmell to a cup of good wine my ſelfe: but when I come in amongſt good company to ſpend my pinte, or my quarte, ſome of theſe Pandering Vintners are ſo ſuſpitious of their owne honeſt dealing, that they will not ſuffer vs to ſend a ſeruaunt, to ſee out of what veſſel our wine is drawen, but we muſt take it as they wil bring it, mingled and brewed, fitter for him that commeth to call for a Chamber with his female conſort, than for any man whatſoeuer that hath money to pay.
            Can you blame me now to be angry with this baſtard kinde of Vintners? Sbloud, he that wil not brabble for his liquor, and his Wench, hath no ſpirit in the world.
            
               Well worth a good liuerie.
               Shameleſſe Panders.I haue ſpoken yet of a third kinde of Pander, and thoſe be ſuch as doe keepe Burdelles and Brothell houſes, but it is not poſſible to intreate of theſe matters with tearmes ſo ſeemely and modeſt, as to the naturall ſhamefaſtnes of honeſt eares is requiſite: but this I can aduiſe you, there is no ſuch trade, as to keep a Brothell houſe. And theſe affaires in times paſt, haue beene eſpecially indeuoured by women, but to ſaue her from the Charriot that runnes vpon two wheeles: it is more ſafety for her to haue a husband, who creeping into ſome liuery coate, (which may be obtayned well enough for money) wil be ſuch a countenaunce, as neyther
Conſtable, Headborough, nor the prowdeſt Officer in the pariſh dare meddle withall. And beeing conueniently prouided of houſe-roome, the next prouiſion, to haue ſome Lais to be a Lidger, and ſometimes to lodge twoo or three wenches together, one perhappes a Widdowe, another a mans wife ruune away from her husband, and for the third, riddle me a Riddle, What is ſhe that is neither Maide, Wife, nor Widdowe? Wel, let her paſſe for a woman, theſe wil bring in company, and company brings in wine, ſugar, orenges, limonds, veniſon, ſturgeon, fatte capons, fatte quailes, and many good cates beſides.
            Doe you aske me how I knowe this? why they themſelues care not who knowes it: But heere is the queſtion, May not a non eſt woman lodge men and women all together in one chamber, night after night, but they muſt be naught togither? Now fie vpon theſe miſdeeming people that are ſo ful of ſuſpition. But as long as they are not able to proue rem in re, let them ſuſpect ſtill and ſpare not.
            
               Drunkard.Me thinks the Drunkard and the Epicure ſhold likewiſe be of this colledge, for Drunkennes and Incontinencie haue euer drawne by one line: and it is no diſgrace, but rather a glory, to ſee a man after ſo ſweete an encounter of cuppes, to be carried away to his bed vpon mens ſhoulders, where he may lie to recouer new forces. But ſome doe diſtinguiſh the firſt cup of wine to be of thirſt, the ſecond of merrineſſe, the third of temptation, the fourth of fooliſhneſſe, and all the reſt of beaſtlie
drunkennes. An other writeth that the wine hath three grapes, the firſt of pleaſure, the ſecond of drunkennes, and the third of ſorrow.
            
               Fruites of drunkenneſſe.At Banquets there is nothing ſo much followed as filthy drunkennes, nor nothing more embraced then ſenſuall concupiſcence; for when the fume once beginneth to aſcend to the braine, the minde is oppreſſed with idle thoughts, and wanton cogitations, it is a ſpur to the tongue, to contentious quarrelling, ſlaunderous backbiting, to inſolent ſpeaches and beaſtly talke.
            
               Epicure.The Epicure a bird of the ſame feather, and fitteſt to march in equall rancke with the Drunkard, whom a man cannot ſay to be born to liue, but rather to liue to eat & drink, whoſe felicity doth eſpecially conſiſt in pampering the paunch; to whom a fine conceipted Cooke in a kitchin is better reſpected, than euer was Plato or Ariſtotle in the Academy of Athens, I am glad I haue rid my hands of this beaſtly generation. But what monſter is this? Couetouſnes.The hatefull, pernicious, deteſtable wretch Couetouſneſſe, looke to your ſelues, you that doe loue your ſelues, for this beaſt dooth neuer come in place to doe any good.
            This is the curre that thinkes nothing to be vnlawfull, where either gaine is to be gotten, or gold to be gathred. This is the canker of the common-wealth, that eateth and deuoureth the gettings of the poore. This is the viper that poyſoneth the eares of Princes, teaching them to ſet aſide all iuſt and honourable dealing: it is Couetouſneſſe that
maketh no conſcience in gathering of gold, nor in ſpilling of blood; holding nothing to be vnlawfull that bringeth in gaine. And how many haue we that be of the Trochiles kinde, that doe cleanſe the iawes of theſe deuouring Serpents, that eates vp the meanes that the poore haue to liue by, and that reues the ſweat from the Labourers browes. They heape together abundaunce of wealth with paine, with trauell, with periury, with oppreſſion, with vſury, with the wronging of neighbors, with the curſe of the poore, which they leaue againe to vnthrifty heires; no leſſe prodigall in ſpending, than their fathers were miſerable in gathering; by how much they are aduanced to greatneſſe, by ſo much the more they are curſed of the poore people, and daily vengeance denounced agenſt them, by as many as doe but heare of their names.
            The covetous miſer is then moſt ready to deuoure, when he makes ſemblance of greateſt loue and amitie: hee maketh no reſpect, either of frind or foe, with as little regard either of the vertuous, or vicious.
            
               I am ſorie for this experience.When hee beginnes to giue precepts of good counſaile, his aduice is then moſt daungerous, for if it bring not poyſon in the mouth, be ſure it hath a ſting in the tayle. But would you know my experience, from whence it doth proceede, I will not ſticke to tell you; It is nowe more than fortie yeeres agoe, ſince there were ſome few that called me Landlord, and I warrant you, I was as prowd of that Lordly name, as my yong Maiſter woulde
be if his father were dead. But ſo long as I was knowne by one foote of land of mine owne, Lord how I was haunted with theſe gaping ſpirites that haue purſes at commaund to purchaſe reuenues, yet not one penny to lend an honeſt friend.
            
               A neceſſarie caueat.They came to mee with many good inſtructions, teaching me to be wary of my expences, and to take heede of vnthriftines: and when they were in beſt hope to make purchaſe of my land, then were they moſt buſie to whiſper in my eare, principles of good husbandry. Well, they hadde it amongſt them, and much good do it them for me. But I am taught to ſay, Beware of theſe couetous purchaſing fellowes, take heede of theſe men that liue vppon Tenne in the hundred; that will giue a man a whole thouſand poundes woorth of good counſaile, but will not lend him ſixteene pence, without ſuch a pawne as they will be ſure to gaine by: they will ſtretch their tongues, but they can holde their handes. A man may ſooner wring a thouſand teares from ſuch a miſers eyes, than one penny out of his purſe, but they are made wiſe too late, that are made wiſe by their owne harmes.
            
               A counterfeit Souldiour.But ſee now, heere comes a Souldier, for my life it is Captaine Swag: tis euen he indeede, I do knowe him by his Plume and his Scarffe; he looks like a Monercho, of a very cholericke complexion, and as teaſty as a Gooſe that hath yong Goſlings, yet very eaſie to pleaſe, but with a handfull of Oates. He lookes like Haniball, the great Captaine of Carthage, and good reaſon too; for hee that

               Eaſie to know the roare of a Lion, from the bray of an Aſſe.ſhould but heare his Table-Talke, and how he will diſcourſe among ignorant company, would think that the Nine Worthies were but fooles in compariſon of his worth: He will talke of more proportions of Battels than ever Langius, Vigetias, or Machiauell did know of. He will atchieve greater victories, but ſitting at a dinner or a ſupper, than euer did Alexander, when he conquered the whole world. And he will diſcourſe of greater exploits and more haughtie attempts, than euer were performed before Troy. And what Towne ſo ſtrong or Citydale ſo well fortified that hee will not ſurprize, but with diſcharging ſome two or three volies of oaths: for there is not a greater Teſtimonie of a Captaines courage, than to ſweare as if hee would make his Audience to tremble, and heauen it ſelfe to ſhake, but with the very breath of his diſpleaſure. At a word, he will attribute the actions of a whole army to his owne vertue and worthineſſe, and will beare fooles in hand, that neyther ſtrong Sampſon amongeſt his Philiſtins. Nor valiant Hercules againſt his vgly Monſters, were halfe ſo fierce and terrible. Now he that hath but a weake faith, and cannot beleeue theſe myracles, muſt be terrified with the Stab, as Caligula threatned the ayre, if it rained vppon his Game-players, and yet euery flaſh of lightning made him creepe vnder his bed for feare.
            I haue almoſt loſt my ſelfe in this intricate laborinth of abuſes, but he that ſhould particularly diſcourſe of theſe matters, had neede to haue tongue
enough, but becauſe we ſtand in greater neceſſitie of the truth, then we doe of wordes, we will proceede with the more breuitie: if any man would ſeeke to accuſe in taxing mens imperfections with too much ſeueritie, I anſwere, that he that will endeuour to wipe away blemiſhes, muſt firſt lay them open.
            The vnknowne diſeaſe is moſt doubtfull to be cured, and the leſſe it is ſought into, the more dangerous to be healed. We doe ſeeke to couer vices, which the leſſe they are thruſt out, the more they eate and feſter within. But wayward children are rather brought aſleepe with rocking, then with rating: we wil therefore interlard our ſowre taunts with ſugred counſaile.
            
               Lying and ſlaundering.But with what patience might a man temper himſelfe to ſpeake of theſe moſt execrable creatures, that doe endeuour themſelues in nothing but in lying, and ſlaundering, whoſe poyſoned breath is more peſtilent then the plague of peſtilence it ſelfe; whoſe deprauing tongues, are more perſing then the point of a ſword, & are whetted ſtil with ſcandelous and lying reports?
            It is holden more honeſt, openly to reprehend, then ſecretly to backbite: for as the ſoule is more precious then the bodie; ſo it is a greater offence to take away any mans good name, which refreſheth the ſoule, than to defraude him of his foode, that ſuſtaineth but the bodie. And as the Philoſopher ſaith: Men are not borne onely to liue, but they muſt likewiſe endeuour to liue well. He addeth further,
It is a iuſt thing, that euerie one be aſwell aduiſed what he ſaith, as what he doth, becauſe amongeſt noble mindes, an actuall wrong is more eaſilie tollerated, then an iniurious worde preiudicing our honour, by a ſlanderous and lying report, alwayes eſteeming the blow of a ſworde to hurt but the fleſh (and may eaſily be plaiſtered) but a word ſuggeſted to infamie as a blemiſh to the reputation, that no ſalue is able to recure. But as there is no happineſſe without hazard, no goodneſſe without temptation, no honour without enuie; ſo there is no vertue without detraction.
            
               The reputation of a liar.A reputed liar yet hath ſome reputation: for Theophraſtus being asked to whom a man might beſt commit a ſecret, anſwered, To a knowne Liar, becauſe, if he ſhould diſcloſe it, he ſhould not be beleeued.
            There is no better Antidote againſt this poyſon of detraction, then patience; and how well aſſured, and well recompenced is that pacience which is of long ſuffering, knoweth how to beare and forbeare.
            
               Patience.Patience is but a drie plaiſter, but it is a tried medicine, and it armeth men to the proofe againſt all aſſaults whatſoeuer.
            I preſcribe no other counſaile, then what my ſelfe doe follow, that for mine owne part (amongſt all theſe ſlaues of imperfections) the liar and the ſlaunderer, doth leaſt offend me, becauſe I knowe that a thouſand imputations, iniuriouſly furniſhed, by a thouſand detracting ſlanderers are not
ſo grieuous to a man of wiſdome, as one matter of truth auouched by him that is of an honeſt reputation.
            What ſhould I ſpeake of Pride or Vain-glorie, the one hath depriued the Angels of the ioyes of heauen; the other hath repleniſhed the world with Knights.
            
               Pride dangerous in all eſtates.Pride hath beene the ouerthrow of many flouriſhing Citties; Vaine-glorie infecteth commonly none but fooles.
            There is not a more dangerous vice then pride, if in a Prince, it ruines the loue of his ſubiects; if amongſt ſubiects, it breedeth neglect of dutie to their Prince; if in any States-man, it draweth contempt both of Prince and ſubiect.
            It is a miſerie to be prowde, and poore, to bee reuengefull, and dare not ſtrike; to be ſicke, and farre from ſuccors. But pride is commonly drawne in by proſperitie; for worldly Proſperitie is a ſpurre to wickedneſſe, and it carrieth men voluntarily to the Court of vanitie.
            
               Proſperity begetteth pride.
               Proſperitie is puffed vp with Pride: it is full of preſumption, and ſleepeth in ſuch ſecuritie, that Philips Boy, who euery day cloied his maſter with the clamour of Mortalities, can hardly awaken it: there cannot bee a more excellent touchſtone, whereby to diſcouer the diſpoſitions of men, then is the ſuperfluitie of wealth, and the extremitie of want; the ſpringtide of proſperitie, and the lowe ebbe of aduerſitie: For although the matters of themſelues are indifferent, yet the managing of
them is it that giueth light. Proſperitie pampereth vs in pleaſure, it maketh vs to forget God, and to repoſe our greateſt confidence in the vanities of the world. Aduerſitie maketh vs contemptible in the eye of the world, it is the meane whereby we are taught to know our ſelues, and to drawe vs to God.
            
               Aduerſitie more pretious to the ſoule than proſperitie.
               Proſperitie ſo ſwelleth vs in pride, that we forget our ſelues: it blindeth our vnderſtanding, that we are not able to diſcerne a friend from a flatterer, nor to iudge whether theſe which doe fawne vpon vs, be more in loue with our ſelues, or with our fortunes.
            
               Vertue neuer tried but in aduerſitie.
               Aduerſitie maketh vs humble, it cleareth the vnderſtanding, and giueth vs eyes to diſcerne betweene friendſhip and flatterie, and to make aſſured triall betweene a frind and foe. Aduerſitie may be both Iudge and Iurie.
            
               Pouertie not greatly cloied with friends.What haue I ſaid? may Aduerſitie iudge betweene a friend and foe? I neuer heard that pouertie was cloyed with many friends. And Aduerſitie, if he once begin to want, ſhall neuer want a foe: they will ſay a friend is tried in time of need; but I ſay ſtill, that Neede is it that makes a friend a foe. He is a foole that wanteth friends, and if he want no wealth: But he that hath pouertie to caſt vp his accounts, and is become Needs Ambaſſador, to begge, or to borrow, if he finde a friend to helpe and ſupplie his want, I ſay ſuch a friend is precious, and more rare to be found, than Platoes Common-wealth, Moores Eutopia, Ciceroes Orator,
               or Baldeſers Courtier.
            
               The frendſhip of this time.A friend, in this age, is more ready to lend his conſcience than his coyne, more apt to enter into any exployt of vice, than to relieue the neceſſitie of his friend that wanteth.
            In a cauſe of quarrell hee is but of ſlender account, that cannot carry with him, tenne, twenty, thirty, or forty that will take his parte, and will aduenture their liues, be the quarell neuer ſo vniuſt: but let him be in want, not one of thoſe forty will lend him his purſe.
            The mightier thy friend is in his owne eſtate, by ſo much thy daunger is the greater to prooue him for money: And yet how many are there in theſe daies that would abſtaine from hainous and hurtfull offences, if they had not confidence in the fauour and reſcues of their great friendes, to boulſter and beare them out in their wickednes.
            Friends being of the world, their friendſhippe hath alſo his corruption of the world; and friendſhip nowadayes ſtands vpon theſe limites, that is, not to correct one another for their vices, but rather to couer and diſſemble, and to ſuffer communitie of euills.
            
               What requird in friendſhip.The firſt effect of that faith and vertue which ought to be conſidered in the election of friends, is to giue counſaile; yet ſome doe rather deſire to dwell in the luſt of their particular deſires, than to be aduiſed by a friend: And for good counſaile, we vſe to take it as we take Tabacco, if we drawe in at the mouth, we ſtrait blow it out at the noſe.
            
               True frendſhip is not to be found, but amongſt the vertuous, and groweth betweene them thorowe the affection which they doe equally beare vnto vertue: But wee are better knowne the one to the other by our faces, than by our vertues; and I would to God wee were not better knowne by our follies, than we are by our faces. It is an eaſie matter to ſpeake of vertue, and to tell of her excellencie; but to tranſlate her out of wordes into deedes, is not conuerſant with many: and no wonder though ſo few do looke out after her, for ſhe is growne poore, and who would folow a beggar? But in her greateſt want, ſhe is not without her recompence, for if there be no body elſe to reward her, ſhe ſtill paies her ſelfe with a certaine contentment, which may ſooner be felt than expreſſed by wordes. And let vs praiſe vertue howe wee liſt, and lette vs write whole volumes in her commendation, yet if it extend no further than to the things on earth, I ſay there is not any thing ſo wretched and miſerable as man.
            Honour is the rewarde of vertue, and ouelie vertue muſt open the gates beefore honour can enter.
            
               The Pope hath ſuſpended vertue from Rome.The Romans builded two Temples ioyned together, the one being dedicated to vertue, the other to honor, yet ſeated in ſuch ſorte, as no man could enter that of honour, except he firſt paſſed through that of vertue.
            But it ſhould ſeeme the Pope hath made a new dedication of thoſe Temples, as hee hath doone
of that builded by Marcus Agrippa caled Pantheon; and becauſe hee could neuer bring vertue to become a Papiſt, hee would therefore leaue no monuments of her in Rome.
            
            
               The Papiſt of more expedition than the Alcumiſt.I could take occaſion here to ſpeak of them that will make men beleeue that they can make golde; but to whom they promiſe abundance of wealth, of him they aske a great deale of mony: me thinks the Papiſt and he ſhould be of neere affinitie, the one profeſſeth to make golde, the other to make God: but I commend the Papiſt to be the more ſpeedy workeman, for hee can diſpatch vppe his God, but with ſpeaking of fiue wordes, the other cannot perfit his gold in the ſpending of five loads of char-cole.
            But Lorde, how haue I forgotten my ſelfe! I was bidden to day to a dinner, where wil be a great meeting of good company, I muſt frame my ſelfe to be ſociable amongeſt them, I muſt flatter and lie, & learne to make curtſie after the new faſhion, I muſt prepare mine eares to heare of ſtrange diſcourſes, and where ſuch ſtore of matters are ſo often debated; no maruell though reaſon be ſomething abated.
            
               Table-talke.One will prooue by naturall reaſon, that fire is hote: another, after the ſetting of the Sunne, wil tell a tale of the ſhadow: a third will avowe it of his credite, that Hercules was a tall fellow with a Club: an other will clap himſelfe on the breaſt, and tell you twenty lies, as, how kinde and loving he hath beene to his wife: an other ſweares a tale
is aſwell beautified with deteſtable oathes, as an Oration is with figures.
            Now for ſome others that will reioyce in their owne abhominations, making vaunts of their adulteries, fornications, drunkenneſſe, and other like Sodomicall ſinnes, taking as much pleaſure in the boaſting and brauing of it, as they did in the acting: I ſay, that a man committing an ill, may bee ſayd to be but ſimply wicked; but after, to glorie and reioyce in his euill, is of a curſed ſpirite, and woorthy to be deteſted of all honeſt company.
            
               Matters of ſmall worth.What ſhould I ſpeake of otherſome, that at ſuch meetings, will enter into diſputations, of approuing and defending matters of ſo little worth, as they are not worth the ſpeaking of? yet where this ſhort Text, Dixit inſipiens, might ſuffice for authenticall authoritie, they will ſpowt out their Syllogiſmes, their Majors, and their Minors, framing their Arguments with as great vehemencie as if they were diſputing about matters of faith. Now if there be a good Trencher-man amongeſt them, that can helpe himſelfe with the advantage of time, he betakes him to his teeth: If he can but ſay, This is a good cup of wine, who would deſire a better concluſion?
            Perhappes there may be ſome one or other amongeſt them better learned than the reſt, who hearing this reſolution, and finding the cup to be emptie, will aptly apply this axiome ſet downe by Ariſtotle, Corruptio vnius, eſt generatio alterius, and calles to one of the wayters to fill in a freſh pot.
            
               A man might ſpeake of a number of other trifling matters (fitter to be laughed at, than to be repeated) that commonly falles out at theſe merry meetings, at feaſts, at Ordinaries, or other places of good fellowſhip: but let them paſſe amongeſt the number of Faults of little or no importance; and for my owne parte, I thinke a man were many times better to dine or ſuppe with breade and cheeſe quietly in his owne houſe, than to goe to thoſe places where there is ſo great frequent, vnles he knew his company the better, for God bleſſe them all I pray God, there are ſuch a number crept into this order of Knighthood, that a Gentleman may thinke himſelfe to be highly fauoured, if hee can but find a place to ſetle himſelfe at the ſide-table; for the high boord is ſtil taken vp with thoſe of the decayed order.
            
               Husbandmen.I thinke it were beſt for mee now to take a little breath, but I haue yet a ſhort iourney to make into the countrey, I muſt goe viſite the ſeruauntes of Chriſt, thoſe that liue by the plow and the cart, that can gather gold out of the durt, and can reape commoditie from the very excrements of filth it ſelfe.
            
               Well gotten goodes.Husbandry hath euermore beene of great account in all times and ages, and the husbandmans increaſe is the bleſſing of God; for he can but eire, ſowe, harrow, dung, digge and delue, but it is the bleſſing of God that giueth the encreaſe: the beſt gotten goods then (I ſay) is that which is gotten by husbandry.
            
               Husbandry breedeth vppe cattle for the reliefe and ſuſtenaunce of man, it maketh prouiſion of skinnes, of wooll, hemp, flax, and ſuch other like, ſufficient, in the firſt age, for the apparrelling of man; this ſuperfluitie of colouring, dying, with ſo many ſeuerall ſorts of weauing and transforming, ſerueth but for pompe, and is a great deale more than Nature hath neede of.
            The husbandmans pride, and his wit, are verie neere alike, yet they will calculate of dearth and plenty, and will prognoſticate to day, of corne, cattell, butter, cheeſe, and ſuch other, what price they will beare for a yeere or two to come. Their greateſt ſpeculation is in obſeruing the ſeaſons of the yeere, and if it happen to holde drie two daies more than they thinke is enough, or that it raine but two houres too much, the next market day they will raiſe the priſes of all manner of victuall.
            The poore in the country ſhal neuer thriue that do dwell too neere the rich, for the wealthy haue ſtill money enough at commaund, to buy, when the poore muſt ſell good cheape, to pay his Landlords rent: And when the rich men hoord vppe their ſtore, to make ſcarcitie and dearth, the poore muſt ſerue the market to relieue his preſent want.
            
               The rich mans ioy is but vanitie.Theſe drudges be they that doe drawe their whole contentment from a little durt and droſſe, ſo ſhutting vppe the treaſure of Gentry within the limites of their miſerable pelfe, that if God hath but bleſt him with ſome few hornes about him, I meane his paſtures well ſtored with cattell, and a
teeme or two of oxen to plow his land, with the kow paſture well repleniſht with milch kine; you ſhall ſee ſuch a peſant to ſtand more on his reputation, than a Gentleman indued with as much knowledge as the ſeauen liberall Sciences can afford him.
            The malapert clownes that haue no vertue of the minde to crake of, but of their oxen, of their ſheepe, and how many hogges they haue in their backeſide, that are ſo choaked vp with the carkes and cares of the worlde, that they can not relliſh thoſe things that ſauour of wit, to whoſe eares the lowing of a kow is better pleaſing, than a Lecture of Logicke. Let them vaunt of their Gentrie what they liſt, but if they be ſo reſpected, I am ſure it is amongſt plowmen, amongſt ſhepheards, amongeſt clownes, or amongſt churles, ſuch as they bee themſelves.
            This comfort is yet left, Nature her ſelfe hath hanſomely prouided for them; for as ſhe brought them innocents into the world; ſo at her appointed time, ſhe taketh them away againe, as arrand fooles as ſhee firſt brought them in, without any great alteration, vnleſſe perhaps a little pride and a great deale of ignorance.
            Thoſe ſinnes that were woont to be called, the ſinnes of the Citty, becauſe Towneſmen had eſpeciall trade and traffique with them, as Pride, Voluptuouſneſſe, Exceſſe, Incontinencie, Drunkenneſſe, Periury, Vſury, and ſuch other, are now as frequent, and as well entertained in the Country,
as if they had bin there firſt bred and brought vp.
            
               A guiltie conſcience.Mary for Conſcience, I pray you commend me to it, you that know where to finde it, for my owne part, I know not where to ſeeke after it, neither in the City, nor in the Country: and it makes no matter, for it is a nice thing to deale withall, this ſame conſcience. And men that are wiſe, will runne through the affaires of the worlde, and not ſo much as once thinke of it.
            A guiltie conſcience is euermore a ſeuere accuſer, and to the impenitent perſon, a moſt terrible Iudge.
            A bad conſcience is a ſcourge, nay it is the executioner, which burneth, which beateth, which tormenteth the mind, and that with ſo much the more horrour, by howe much the life is prolonged.
            
               The woolfe that could meaſure his conſcience.Now who in the name of God would be combred with ſuch a Conſcience, that doth thus vex and torment a man that hath a little regarde to Godward? Mee thinkes men might learne wiſedome from amongeſt bruite beaſtes, they might remember the Woolfe that was enioyned by his ghoſtly father, to faſt, and for foure and twentie houres to abſtaine from fleſh, or at the leaſt to eate no more then in his conſcience did exceede the value of three halfe-pence. The Woolfe departing homewardes meeting with a ſheepe and her lambe, and hauing an appetite vnto his dinner, and remembring what his ghoſtly father had enioyned
him vnto, valewed the ſheepe in his conſcience to be woorth a penny, and the lambe a halfe penny, and without any further ſcruple, deuoured them both. And hee that will liue in this world, and cannot learne of the Woolfe, how to ſquare out a good conſcience, ſhall neuer growe fatte.
            It is but our owne deeming, or miſdeeming, that maketh the conſcience good or bad; this leſſon is not new, Crede quod habes & habes, the prieſt taught it long agoe to the yong ſcholer that came to borrow a horſe. Now hee that can wiſely perſwade himſelfe, that his conſcience is good, hath this for his comfort.
            
               A good conſcience.A good conſcience is the Correctreſſe of our affections, the Schoolemiſtris of our ſoules: It is a bridle before ſinne, whoſe teſtimonie is better than a thouſand witneſſes, when euery mans ſoule is fed with hope or diſpaire according to the teſtimony that is witneſſed by the conſcience.
            Let Conſcience goe, for you may perceiue hee is beſt at eaſe, that hath leaſt to doe with her; yet there be ſome that will boaſt and braue ſo much of it, that all things well knowne (if a man didde ſtand in neede) hee might buy more conſcience and honeſty too at Sturbridge faire for a hundred of Colcheſter oiſters, than a hundred of them were able to furniſh.
            
               Honeſtie like to die.Honeſty they ſay, lies ſicke of a conſumption, pray God helpe him, for Charitie is waxen cold, and fewell againe is growne deare, we muſt therefore
keepe the ſmaller fires, for neceſſitie is not onlie without lawe, but ſhee her ſelfe is likewiſe the lawe of Time.
            Vice hath ſo long time beene couered with the name of Vertue, and Vertue is againe poluted, and counterfeited in the habite of Vice: Mercie that euer hath beene accounted gracious, and dooth moſt neereſt reſemble the diuine Nature, yet being vſed out of time and ſeaſon, ſhee looſeth her grace, and may rather beare the name of fooliſh pitie, then of mercie: It is no leſſe crueltie (ſaith the Philoſopher) to puniſh no offence, then not to puniſh any: It is then a great vertue in him, that can be wiſe and mercifull both togither.
            
               Liberalitie.The like againe may be ſaid of Liberalitie, for as thoſe that build, be not all good workmen, ſo thoſe that giue, be not all liberall; for many lay hold of other mens goods, and are lauiſh of that which is none of their owne. Some other will giue to him that hath no neede, and leaue another in wretchedneſſe, whom they ought to reward. Some other againe on the ſodain, will ſo emptie the fountaine of Liberalitie, that they are not able againe of a long time to vſe it.
            
               Alexander doth beſt fit vs with examples of true liberalitie; for he euer conſidered the worth aſwell of himſelfe that was to giue, as of him that was to receiue.
            
               An exerciſe aptly rewarded,Amongeſt other preſidents, there was one brought to Alexander, of ſuch dexteritie, that with one peaſe he would neuer faile to ſtrike off another,
(as men do play at ſhouel-aboord) the length of a long table. Alexander eſteeming of the ſleight to be but vaine, and to ſerue for no maner of purpoſe that was good, beſtowed his reward accordingly, and gaue the partie a buſhell of peaſon: A fit recompence (indeede) for ſo idle a toy.
            
               The AmoriſtBut I am ſtill interrupted, I thinke now by one that is in ſome Lunacie, or elſe he hath beene ſcared with ſpirits: alas how ghaſtly he looks, now fie vpon loue, it is an Amoriſt, for twenty pounds, his Miſtreſſe hath loſt her little Dogge, or elſe her Munkie is lately dead, and hee mournes in blacke as Hortentius did for the death of a Lampray.
            
               The miſerie of an Amoriſt that hath a coy Miſtreſſe.Alas poore foole, I do pittie him, I think Dame Follie her ſelfe will ſimper to ſee her ſeruant in this perplexitie, how many nights watching, how many dayes weeping, how many howres ſuing, how many times ſighing, and yet how little profiting, to ſee a foole ſerue that Saint on his knees, that honoureth the diuell in her heart, to thinke that the old painted face of Proſerpina, to be the ſame that it was when ſhe came to be Plutoes wife.
            
               Loue is like an Ague fit, ſometimes hot, ſometimes colde, ſometimes glad, ſometimes ſad, my louers head troubled with vnquiet thoughts in the night, with iealouſie in the day, mocked by his companions, pittied of his friends, derided of his enemies, ſcorned by his fooliſh Miſtreſſe.
            I cannot beleeue that euer Vertue was a Potarde in that we call Loue, yet this follie doth many times aſſault the braueſt minds, and Cupid hath
made a breach in the campe amongeſt the ſquadrons of armed Souldiers.
            The follie of affection I ſee is wonderfull, yet are the errours of beautie much more admirable, when in her ſelfe ſhe is but a painted Sepulchre, and in her actions the diminiſher as well of naturall as morall reaſon.
            With like happineſſe Louers poſſeſſe their Mistreſſes, as Vatinius did his Conſulſhip, whoſe honour, neither froſt, nor ſpring, neither Winter nor Summer, did euer behold (as Tullie partly ieaſted) whoſe countenance of fauour depending on inſtants, hath but a dayes breeding, and a years repenting.
            
               Loue ſir reuetence.In loue, what ſeeth the eie? laſciuiouſnes; what heareth the eare? laſciuiouſneſſe; what vttereth the tongue? laſciuiouſneſſe; what thinketh the heart? laſciuiouſneſſe; what inureth the bodie? laſciuiouſneſſe.
            And call you this loue? I, it is loue ſir reuerence, I haue heard of many that were mad for loue, yet I neuer heard of any that were wiſe in loue. I haue read of Conquerers whom Loue haue made effeminate, but I neuer heard of any whom Loue hath made truly valiant, I know where wiſe-men haue beene beſotted by fancie, but I could neuer learne where fancie made a wiſe man.
            If men would diſpoſe their eyes as warily, as women can diſplay their beauties gariſhly, they ſhould borrow bird-lime from the fowler, & catch the birds by compaſſe in his owne nets. But he
that treadeth that deſperate laborinth of Loue, is in ordinarie deſtinie of a wiſe man to take the habite of a foole: of a carefull man to become negligent, of a valiant man to become ſo weake, as to ſtand in awe of a fooliſh womans word: of a prouident man, to looſe all pollicie: of a yong man, to become withered, of a free-man to become miſerablie bond, of a milde man to beare the burden of an Aſſe, of a religious man to becom an Idolater, of a rich man honoured, to be a poore man ſcorned, of a patient man, to be a reuenger of the filthie cauſes of his Minion: in briefe, to forget God, and to neglect the knowledge of all goodneſſe.
            
               More haire ouer her brows then would ſerue three or foure honeſt women.I thinke my Ladie her ſelfe would laugh, to ſee an Amorist that is kindly beſotted, how his Angels muſt flie to fetch new faſhions from Venetian Curteſans, to pleaſe his demie honeſt Miſtreſſe. Then ſhe muſt haue a Maske, to couer an impudent face, a Periwigge to hide a loathſome buſh, a Buske to ſtreighten a laſciuious bodie. And for painting, it is as generall amongeſt a number of women (that would faine be accounted honeſt) as it is to the moſt noted and common ſtrumpet.
            His looſe legged Miſtreſſe, muſt ſpurre forward his wit, to ſet abroach pretie conceits; and if his braine be not too barren, he muſt indite louing lines, and amorous verſes in the praiſe of his Miſtreſſe: He muſt borrow colours from Lillies, and red Roſes, to beautifie her cheekes, her teeth muſt be of Pearle, her breath Balme, a Pallas for her wit,

               The worſt part ſhall be her ſoule.a Venus for her chaſtitie, her tongue the tongue of an Adder, her taile, worſe then the taile of a ſerpent; he muſt learne pretily to liſpe out, ſweete Miſtreſſe, kinde Miſtreſſe, he muſt kiſſe her prettie hand, the handle of her fanne, her Noſegay, the nether skirt of her Petticote, he muſt play with her little Puppie, he muſt adore the point of her Busk, the ſeate that ſhe ſits on, the ground that ſhe treads on, yea the verie ſtrings that ſerues to tie her ſhooes.
            Baſe Vaſſals, more baſe then baſeneſſe it ſelfe, the verie ſhame of men, and the ſtaine of manhood, go learne with Sardanapalus to ſpinne, and for thoſe women that will retaine ſuch ſeruants, God make them honeſt, for I am ſure they wil neuer be wiſe.
            
               What we call loue.But let vs ſpeake a little of Loue, for ſo farre as I vnderſtand, that which we call Loue, is ſo farre from loue, that I rather thinke it to be a doating frenzie, rouing and running headlong vpon impoſſibilities, ingendred firſt between Luſt and Idleneſſe: his aſſociates and chiefeſt companions, are paine, trouble, anger, rage, furie, doubt, griefe, languiſh, threatning, diſpaire, vncertaine hope; his ſureſt good, baſe weakneſſe, his fruits are laborſome aduentures, nay rather, loathſome miſaduentures.
            To ſpeake truly, that which we call Loue, ſtands vpon too many nice circumſtances, when filthie luſt, and inordinate deſire, do euermore march vnder Loues Banner, and doe make the name of Loue their Bawde, to cloake and boulſter out
their fleſhly appetites.
            The Amoriſt is ſeldome ſeene to take delight in ouerworne antiquities, or in vnſeemely deformities: an argument that they are rather in loue with the bodie, then the minde, and that their loue is both earthly, and fleſhly.
            The effect of loue is faith, not luſt, delightfull conference, not deteſtable concupiſcence. He therfore ſaid well that ſaid, Loue was Diuine, for loue indeede is a ſubiect of greater excellencie then to ioyne earth to earth.
            I cannot thinke the ſocietie betweene man and wife may be called loue, becauſe it giueth oportunitie to luſt, and it hath too much trade and trafique with carnall deſire: I thinke a man ſhould loue his wife with as great zeale and feruencie, as he loueth himſelfe: and he cannot be ſaid to loue (but rather to hate himſelfe) that doth not ſo reſpect his loue and dutie to God, as to curbe his braine-ſicke affections, that they raunge not after ſenſuall pleaſure, not to pamper, nor to pleaſe himſelfe with the vaine delights of a fleſhly appetite, that leadeth from the diuinitie of Loue, and draweth to loathſomneſſe, and to the deſtruction of the ſoule. Now the husband, that ſhould loue his wife in this ſort, that ſhould ſeeke to bridle her from her fooliſh vanities, a hundred to one, ſhe would neuer loue him againe, and all the women in the Pariſh would proteſt againſt him, and ſweare, that he were neither louing nor kind to his wife.
            Why then we may perceiue the excellencie of
loue, is where God is a partie, or where it hath relation to things that are diuine.
            
               True loue in deede.This preſcribed commaundement, Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God, and thy neighbour as thy ſelfe, is it that draweth neereſt vnto loue, betweene man and man, but this loue cannot be ſaid to be terreſtriall, when it hath his originall from the Commaundement of God. But would you know what is true loue (indeede?) the loue of God, who loued vs vndeſeruedly. And this loue was well expreſſed by our Sauiour in the day of his paſſion, when neither the torments of his bodie, nor the wickedneſſe of his people, could reſtraine him, not onely reconciling thoſe to his grace, that were preſent, or alreadie paſſed, but to loue thoſe, that were yet to come, and hereafter to be borne, was a loue neuer heard on before nor ſithence, but in the perſon of our Redeemer.
            
               The loue of Chriſt.Our libertie and abſolution dependeth vpon his condemnation. He was condemned by the ſentence of men, and we abſolued in the iudgement of God. Here is true loue indeed, and the property of his affection doth neuer alter towards his choſen: for he pitcheth his Tents about them to defend them, and his eares are euer open to heare them, if they appeale to him in their aduerſities, and he accompanieth them with his holie Angels, to guide and direct them, that they runne not aſtray.
            There is no doubt but there are ſome that doe meditate on this mercy, and that haue grace again
to conſider of this ineſtimable loue of GOD towardes man, that indeuoureth againe with all humilitie and thankfulnes of heart both to loue and feare: and for his ſake to be both of a louing and charitable diſpoſition towards their neighbours.
            
               Loue muſt be diuine.Here is loue now truely expreſſed in his owne nature, and this loue muſt be both celeſtiall and diuine, when God is at the one end of it.
            
               Womens faults.We haue hitherto ſpent the time in deliuering of thoſe faults and follies that are conuerſant amongſt men. And I thinke if a man were made al of eyes, as Argus was, he could not looke into the one halfe of thoſe vices that now doe infect the world: But is there any eſcape to be found amongeſt women. Men you ſee are full of Faults, but amongeſt women (ſome will ſay) there is but two Faults, and thoſe are, they can neither doe nor ſay well. But this (as I take it) is rather to bee obiected in the way of merriment, than to be received for a trueth. But this is true, there hath bin both good and bad women from the beginning; but for thoſe that haue beene accounted ill, they were neuer halfe ſo deteſtable in times paſt, as they be at this houre: nay, thoſe women that now would be accounted good, and would be angrie if there ſhould be any exceptions taken to their honeſty, are more Courtezan-like (to the ſhew of the world) than euer was Lais of Corinth, or Trine the famous Curtezan of Thebes.
            
            What new fangled attires for the heades, what flaring faſhions in their garments, what alteration
in their ruffes, what painting of ſhameleſſe faces, what audacious boldnes in company, what impudencie, and what immodeſtie is vſed by thoſe that will needes be reputed honeſt, when their open breaſts, their naked ſtomackes, their frizled haire, their wanton eie, their ſhameles countenance, are all the vaunt errours of adulterie.
            With theſe ſleights and ſhews they haue made Emperours idle, as Anthonie, ſtrong men feeble, as Sampſon, valiant men effeminate, as Hercules, wiſe men diſſolute, as Solomon, eloquent men laſciuious as Aurelius.
            
            What is become of that age, when ſimple beutie was beſt beſeeming an honeſt woman, when baſhfull modeſtie incloſed in a vertuous breaſt was their beſt lewre, whereby to induce an honorable reputation? they were then beloued by the vertuous, by the wiſe, by the learned: but nowe moſt commonly, by the laſciuious, by the ydle, and by thoſe Hermaphrodites, that are not worthie the name of men.
            
               Thucidides will needes approoue that woman to be moſt honeſt, that is leaſt knowne, and in whoſe praiſe or diſpraiſe there is no reporte at all, but it is not poſſible for any woman ſo to behaue her ſelfe, but ſhee ſhall be miſreported; and the more honeſt in life, ſo much the ſooner infamed, when it is the common practiſe of euerie knowne ſtrumpet to ſcandalize and ſlaunder that woman, which ſhee in her owne conſcience thinkes to be moſt honeſt becauſe it helpeth to couer her own
abhominations (as ſhe thinketh) and the more to blaze it foorth, ſhee ſhall not want the aſſiſtance of her Ruffians, her Apple-ſquires, and of thoſe brothell queanes, that lodge, that harbour, and that retaine her, and ſuch as ſhee is, in their houſes for commoditie and gaine.
            Nay, they haue the ſleight, euen then moſt diueliſhly to infame, when they wil make ſhew moſt honeſtly to excuſe. And vnder the pretence of flying reports, which they will ſay hath beene tolde them by others, they will ſpreade their owne venome, complotting and deuiſing thoſe vntrueths, that neuer were heard nor thought on.
            
               Report of no authoritie whereby to cenſure women.Many good and vertuous women are by theſe ſleights moſt ſhamefully infamed, I cannot therefore admitte that reporte ſhould be of any credite, whereby to deeme of womens goodneſſe: I haue (me thinkes) a better marke whereby to diſcerne betweene the good and bad, and I haue gathered it by obſeruation. An harlot hath more friends than an honeſt woman.I haue ſeldome ſeene an honeſt woman to haue many frinds that wil take hir part, that will ſpeake for her, that will quarrell for her, that will fight for hir; there be not many that wil beſtow giftes on her, that will lend her mony, that will ſend her in daily prouiſion of capons, conies, partriges, pigeons, wine, ſugar, ſpice, and ſuch other acates, both coſtly and dainty: you ſhall not ſee an honeſt woman thus ſupported, vnleſſe by a father, a brother, or by a husband.
            I haue not knowne an honeſt woman much frequented, with one, with another, with a third,
and ſo with twentie, euery day a new; I will not ſpeake of nights, for ſo I might putte all ſurmiſe-quite out of queſtion. Nor I neuer heard of women greatly cloyed with honeſty, that would harbour ſuch as theſe, that will defend them, excuſe them, ſhut them vp in a chamber; but I beginne to bluſh, Ile ſay no more: you may quickely gheſſe a Strumpet by her multitude of friendes, in the court, in the country, in the citty, in the towne, in the eaſt, in the weaſt, in the north, in the ſouth, in all the quarters of the world. Shee hath adopted fathers, adopted brothers, adopted cooſins, adopted friendes, adopted ſeruants, adopted partners, and ſuch a number of other like adopted companions, that ſhee hath more (called by the name of friends) to vndertake in her behalfe, than twenty honeſt women. Then ſhee hath her Cutters that muſt vndertake her quarrelles, Ruffians, Royſters, Swaſhers, Swearers, Thieues, Robbers, Shifters, and the whole fraternitie, that hath ſette aſide all feare of God, and ſhame of the world.
            Doe you aske me how ſhee ſhould induce this large acquaintance? I ſay, beware of the ſleights of an harlot, ſhe hath a tongue to traine, eyes to allure, teares to excuſe, lookes to atract, ſmiles to flatter, imbracements to prouoke, frownes to delay, beckes to recall, lippes to inchaunt, kiſſes to inflame, a body to performe, and all theſe to poiſon.
            She had neede to haue many ſuters, for her expences are great, and therefore ſhe retaines none
longer than their crownes will laſt; but ſhe plumes them one after another, till ſhe hath left them neither feather nor fleſh on their backes; and as ſhee weares them out one after one, ſo ſhee diſperſeth them againe, ſome to the Phyſitian to ſeeke for helpe, ſome to the Spittle, that are paſt recure: Some to Weeping Croſſe to bewaile their owne follies: Some to raiſe new rents by the high way ſide: Some ſhee ſendeth to the Compter, ſome to Newgate, ſome to the Gallowes, and all to the Diuell, if they haue not the better grace to repent in time.
            
               Frine the Curteſan of Thebes.Hiſtories make mention of many famous Curtezans, that it ſhould ſeeme had great taking; for amongeſt the reſt, this Frine ſpoken of before, reputed to be but a common curtezan, after Alexander had raſed the walles of Thebes, proffered the Thebanes, to repaire them at her owne propper charges, but onely that ſhe might be ſuffered to ingraue this inſcription vpon the wall, Alexander raſed it, and Frine raiſed it.
            
            It would be a tedious taske for mee now to take in hand to ſpeake of Faults as they happen to fall out betweene the married, ſometimes by a miſdemeaning towardes his louing wife, otherwhiles by a malitious woman towardes her kinde huſband. But as the occaſions are innumerable that fall out betweene them, ſo the ſtrifes and debates ariſing by thoſe occaſions woulde be no leſſe infinite to be deſcribed.
            But it ſhoulde ſeeme theſe contentions falling
out between man and wife, are not new: for there is a Record of one Gorgias, a famous Orator that was ſhrewdly combred with an vnquiet wife, who in an Oration exhorting the Greeks to peace and concord, in the middeſt of his Oration was interrupted by one Melanthus, who crying vnto the people, ſayde, My Lordes and Maiſters, doe you not ſee this Gorgias, who with his eloquent Oration, would exhort vs to concord, beeing a number of people, and yet he can not perſwade a quiet peace in his owne houſe, where there is but himſelfe, his wife, and his maide that doe liue in continuall ſtrife and debate.
            The Athenians to preuent diſſentions which might fall out betweene men and their wiues, appoynted certayne Magiſtrates whome they called Reconcilers of the married.
            
            The Spartans in like manner had certaine ſet officers whome they called Harmoſyus, who had in charge to correct and chaſtice the pride and inſolencie of married women. But Varro reaſoning of womens infirmities ſaith; that the fault of the wife is either to be taken away, or to be indured: Now he that hath diſcretion to take it away, bettereth his wife, but hee that hath patience to endure it, maketh himſelfe better.
            
               A vaine queſtion by a great Philoſopher.By this we may perceiue, that the diſcords falling out betweene married men and their wiues, are grieuous offences, and ſo burthenſome for many to endure, that Theophraſtus a great Philoſopher made a queſtion, whether it were expedient
for a wiſeman to marry, or no. And Thales one of the ſeauen Sages of Greece, being demaunded in his youth why he did not marry, anſwered, becauſe it was too ſoone: and after, comming to more riper yeares, being asked the ſame queſtion againe, anſwered, that then it was too late; in this ſorte couertly proouing that it was not expedient for a wiſe man to marry at all.
            
               Mariage commaunded by God.Marriage is not onely commended, but it is alſo commaunded, and by whom? by the Almightie himſelfe, who hath created vs, and who hath ſaide, It is not good for man to liue alone: And what greater honour than that wee owe to our Parents, being expreſly commaunded, Honour thy father and mother; yet this holy inſtitution of wedlocke is more worthily dignified, Thou ſhalt leaue father and mother, and cleaue to thy wife: when a man betakes himſelfe to wife, he giues no occaſion to be ſlaundered, but rather iuſt occaſion to be honoured.
            
               Marriages in theſe dayes hovv they are made.Marriages in theſe dayes, are rather made for fornication than for continencie, not ſo much in hope of iſſue, as for gaine of money, more for lucre than for loue: neither is there any reſpect had to the qualitie, ſo they may embrace the quantitie; for nobleneſſe and vertue, alas it is no portion, when a thouſand crownes are rather embraced, than two thouſand good conditions.
            But the world is growne too too wiſe, and Parents are too wonderfull prouident in theſe daies, that in knitting vp of marriages will carke and care
for childrens children, before they are borne, yea many times long before they are begotten.
            I thinke there is not ſo arrant a drudge, but if ſhe do bring a portion, ſhe ſhall haue a husband: neyther is there ſo ſeely a Clowne, but if he be able to make a joynture, hee ſhall ſoone haue a wife.
            Well, I haue no daughter to marry, and I am glad of it, for I perceiue it riddes me of many encombrances, but if I had, and that I were of abilitie to giue bountifully, I would ſooner beſtowe my money to buy her alittle witte, than to buy her a lumpe of fleſh, that is but lapt together in a fooles skinne.
            
               A fooliſh father.O how fooliſh is that father, that will beſtow his well nourtured daughter in marriage with ſuch a ſot, that hath nothing in him but a joynture: theſe parents doe little conſidder what a grieuous fault they commit, in bringing their children to a loathed bed; and yet theſe faults amongeſt parents are too common.
            
               The fruites of our MarriagesTheſe marriages are preparatiues to fornication and adulterie, and how many inconueniences doe daily fall out, by occaſion of theſe marriages; the world is ſo full of examples, that I may therefore be the more ſparing: let him that will needes marry (as neere as hee can) make choice of her that is rich, to the end that the neceſſities of this life may be ſupplied. Let her be nobly borne, the better to miniſter to his reputation, and to ioyne honour to his poſteritie. Let her be yoong, that
ſhe may the rather delight him: and that hee may haue no occaſion to finde marriage loathſome, let her be faire, the better to content his deſires, and to containe him from ſtrange affections: but in any caſe, let her be wiſe, honeſt, and vertuous, to the end hee might with the more ſecuritie repoſe his eſtate vpon her gouernement.
            
               A great error in Parents.There is nothing wherein Parents doe ſo much erre, as in bringing vp of their children, that are more deſirous to ſee a childe liue, than to ſee him vertuous; but what a miſerie is this, to ſee a father liue in wretchednes all the daies of his life, to the end he may die rich, to leaue a light headed ſon, that wil ſpend more in one weeke in riot and prodigalitie, than the father could ſcrape together in one yeare with all his ſparing miſerie? If thy ſonne be good and vertuous, a little is enough: if hee be fooliſh and diſhoneſt, alittle is too much.
            There is not a greater reproach to a father then a wicked ſonne, becauſe the faults of the children are iuſtly imputed to the Parents that had no better regard to bring them vp in their infancie.
            
               Holy the Prieſt was not puniſhed for any fault himſelfe had committed, but becauſe he winked at the ſinnes of his children.
            
               A good laweThe Heluetians had an antient Lawe, that if a yongman had receiued ſentence of death, the execution thereof ſhould be done by his father (if he were liuing) that the father might, in ſome ſorte, be puniſhed for the negligence hee vſed in the education and bringing vp of his childe.
            
               And the lawe called Facidia was much to that purpoſe, by which it was enacted, that the childe ſhould be, for the firſt offence admoniſhed, for the ſecond puniſhed, for the third hanged; and the father ſhould likewiſe be baniſhed as partaker of his fault.
            It is ſaid, that youth neuer reigneth well, but where age doth hold the bridle: but this is certaine, I neuer ſaw that childe, which was let runne with the reine in his owne necke, but when hee came to ripeneſſe of yeares, he rather proued a Thorne in his fathers ſide, or rather a dagger to his heart; heaping griefe and ſorrow to his owne ſoule, either by a miſ-led life, infamous and deteſtable in the eye of the world, or by an vnnaturall, diſobedient, and vndutifull demeanour towards his father himſelfe.
            But Lord, how many incombrances are incident to parents that are vexed with the practiſes of amorous daughters! for whileſt they are prouiding dowries to beſtow them in marriages of ſuch as they like, and thinke fitteſt for them, they prouide themſelues of Paramours, ſuch as they liſt to fancie: But for him that ſhould take to wife, her that hath beene her fathers wanton, were not ſuch a one well ſped? he ſhould be ſure to haue Gaule to his Sugar, ſowre ſoppes to his ſweete meate, he were better to marrie a milke-maide, then to marrie a fathers fondling, one that is called her fathers ioy, his iewell, his dearling, that is brought vp in pleaſure, in pride, in idleneſſe, in audacious boldneſſe,
(for that is growne to a faſhion) and this is the cauſe, that women in theſe dayes haue forgotten to bluſh.
            It may be that ſuch a one will bring a great portion, but let him that ſhall marrie her, make full accompt, that her vanitie will farre exceede her marriage good. And for euery hundred poundes in money, ſhe brings a thouſand vanities, a thouſand fitts, a thouſand follies, a thouſand fancies, a thouſand new-fangles.
            
               As Knights grow poore, Ladies grow prowde.To day ſhe muſt keepe her chamber, ſicke of a quotidian fitte of follie, to morrow the Coach muſt be made readie, ſhe muſt amongeſt her acquaintance to liſten out for new faſhions: the third day alas, ſhe breedes child, and then we muſt looke about for dainties; and farre fet, and deare bought (they ſay) is fit for Ladies: the Prouerbe is olde, and it may be true, that as knights grow poore, Ladies grow prowd. But this fooliſh nicitie that is in this common requeſt amongſt women it is got into the bone, and it will neuer out of the fleſh; and let it ſticke there ſtill, for a nice conceit beſt becomes a pretie ſoule. She did well expreſſe it that wept ſo bitterly, to thinke how much aſhamed ſhe ſhould be at the day of iudgement, when ſhee ſhould ſtand ſtarke naked before ſo great an aſſembly, as ſhe heard ſay would be there preſent.
            I haue runne my ſelfe beyond my bounds, my purpoſe was, but to haue ſpoken a litle of theſe faults, that are committed in knitting vp of theſe wicked and vngodly marriages, and that in ſuch a
generall ſort, as almoſt there are no other made.
            
               Vnduetifull children.I haue a little glaunced by the way, at the folly of thoſe fathers, that doe loue their children with more affection than wit.
            If I ſhould now take vpon me to ſpeake of the ingratitude of children towards their parents, I might write a greater volume then my leyſure might well permit.
            But they ſay it is a wiſe childe that doth know his owne father: I ſay againe, that in many places he is a wiſe father that doth know his owne child. And there is not a better Item, whereby to diſcern a Baſtard, then to ſee a brat vnnaturall, and vnkind to him that is taken for his father. Nature her ſelfe hath taught this, and Nature cannot erre: And therefore that ſonne, that both againſt the law of God, and the law of Nature, becommeth vngratefull to him whom he ſuppoſeth to be his father, if he be not a Baſtard, I ſay he is worſe, and pittie the earth ſhould beare ſo vngracious a burthen.
            I will conclude with this caueat to careleſſe parents, beware of thoſe that doe gape for your lands after your death, and deſire the managing of your goods during your life.
            But it is true, Nature may be peruerted, and there is no knowledge in the world which is not corrupted, nor any learning, art, or ſcience, which is not abuſed: It were too great a preſumption in me to meddle with Diuinitie: no, it is too high a ſtile for a Souldiers penne, and I haue learned long ſince, Ne ſutor vltra crepidam.
            
            
               Diuinitie.
               Yet to ſpeake a little with humilitie and reuerence, I will not implore the aſſiſtance of the Muſes, or Apollo, but of the high and moſt mightie God.
            Whatſoeuer is certaine of it ſelfe needeth no demonſtration: then in Diuinitie, the dignitie of the ſubiect may ſuffice, for where the obiect is God, the ground-worke is infallible, ſtill permanent and irreuocable.
            
               Diuinitie hath beene from the beginning, yea, the word was before the world, for the worde was God. Diuinitie is a heauenly law confirmed by antiquitie, ſealed by God the Law-giuer, written and ſet downe by the finger of God, and deliuered by thoſe that were inſpired by his holy ſpirit. It hath pleaſed God from the beginning to raiſe vp Patriarkes and Prophets, to teach and gouerne his people: and after, in the Kingdome of our Sauiour, he ordeined the Miniſtrie of the Goſpel, appointing it perpetuall to the end of the world, and hath further taught vs to pray, that labourers might bee thruſt into the harueſt.
            But I am ſorie now to ſpeake of our Miniſtrie, and but according to the trueth, how manie doe make themſelues blind, by ſeeing too much, ſuch as can ſet the holy Scriptures at a iarre, who curiouſly ſearching out the vertue of words, doe careleſly ſubuert the words of the truth.
            What is it that they cannot vtterly ouerthrow with their fierie blaſts of thundring words by Ingins of Definitions, Diſtinctions, Diuiſions, Silogiſms,

                  The demigods of theſe latter dayes that dare take in hand to warre againſt doctrine.Figures, Allegories, then they haue ſo many Generals and Specials, with ſuch gloſing, and expounding, that they will preſume euen to meaſure gods worde, and his workes with their Logicall Sophiſmes.
            One holds of the Letter, an other would haue vs to ſearch out the meaning contained in the letter, another ſtands vpon the bare worde, another of the ſenſe, another of I know not what, but it is a miſerable & vngracious ſtudie, that doth nothing elſe but learne how to erre.
            The puritie of diuinitie is enſpired from aboue, and not to be comprehended by diuiding, defining, compounding, nor by any other Sophiſticall contending.
            
               Diſagreement among cleargy-men.In a great part of the world (euen at this day) Mahomet is worſhipped, who was the Authour of a verie fooliſh Religion, and the Iewes are yet looking after their Meſſias: but amongſt vs Chriſtians it is ſtrange to ſee, what diſagreement there is amongſt our Cleargie-men, about rites, about ceremonies, about worſhipping, about apparell, about Diſcipline, and about I cannot tell what. Yet this is eſpecially to be wondred at aboue the reſt, that they doe thinke by theſe contentious matters, to aſcend into heauen, for the which in times paſt Lucifer was throwne downe into hell.
            I might ſpeake of others, that can content them ſelues with knowing vntruths, without ſearching out of the truth; but he that will be a ſteward of much, muſt yeeld an account for much, and of
him that hath receiued fiue Talents, the Lord will looke for an increaſe of fiue Talents.
            
               The authority of the miniſterie.The Miniſters of Gods worde are theſe Stewards of God, appointed to diſpenſe his holy Miniſteries. They are the Ambaſſadours vnto vs with glad and ioyfull tidings, they bring vnto vs the worde of our ſaluation, they are our fathers that doe beget vs vnto Ieſus Chriſt, by preaching the Goſpel of peace, they are the light of the world, to ſhine before men in all godly example, of loue, of charitie, of humility, of temperance, of chaſtitie, of ſobrietie, of integritie of life, of honeſt conuerſation, and therefore worthie of double honour.
            Such they ſhould be, and of ſuch without doubt there be a great number. And for mine owne part, I proteſt I know a great many more that be good, then I doe of thoſe that be bad. And I would to God, that thoſe of the better ſort would themſelues looke into the demeanour of ſome that are a ſlaunder and reproach to that honourable function, that can baite his hooke with grauitie, till he hath caught a Benefice, and then the Surpleſſe muſt ſerue to couer a moſt vngodly carcaſe.
            Thoſe vices are moſt of all daungerous, that are masked vnder the viſour of Vertue, and there is leſſe hope in theſe counterfeit holy Hypocrites, then there is in the Publicane or Harlot: but for their ſakes that be good, I will ſpeake no more of thoſe that be ill.
            I might likewiſe ſpare my labour in ſpeaking of Philoſophie, becauſe the ſtudie of wiſdome is

               Of Philoſophie.now out of faſhion. And although there are not many faults to be picked out againſt the Philoſophers of this age (the number being ſo ſmall) yet I will glaunce a little at ſome errours committed by thoſe men that haue beene eſpecially extolled and renowmed for their Philoſophie.
            Philoſophie is a ſtrict inquiſitor of the ſoule, and it will diue into many naturall cauſes, but the cauſe of all cauſes, Philoſophie knowes not.
            The Philoſophers that haue ſo much buſied themſelues, to ſearch out the cauſes & beginnings of things, could neuer find out God, the Creator and maker of all things.
            
               Philoſophie could neuer find out God.They could ſpeake many good words concerning maners and conuerſation amongſt men, but of God they ſpake nothing but dreamingly, neither dreamed they of him but ouerthwartly: how many grieuous incounters haue there beene amongſt the Philoſophers themſelues (and that of the graueſt ſort, concerning the principles of naturall things whereof there are many matters, that doe yet hang before the Iudge not fully decided?
            
               Thales Mileſius, one of the wiſe men of Greece, beginning to look into the generation of al things, for the ſoule hee thought it immortall, for the world he concluded it to haue his beginning by water.
            
               Fabeling of this Philoſopher.
               Anaxagoras, truſting in his owne opinion, fabled, that the Sunne was compoſed of bright iron, and that the heauens were of ſtone, wonderfully knit togither leſt they ſhould fall.
            
               
               Euripides his ſcholler, he feignes that the Moone had valleyes and mountaines in her, and that the minde was the beginner of all motion, concluding that all creatures had their creation of earth, fire and water, whereunto had he added the other Element of aire I thinke it would neither haue bin diſſonant from reaſon, nor repugnant from true Philoſophie.
            For the creation of the earth, Archelaus will haue it of liquid water, inflamed by the heate of fire, and by reſolution turned into duſt.
            
               Heraclitus, he thinketh all things to haue their originall of fire, concluding with Aristotle, that the generation of one thing is the corruption of an other.
            
               Democritus, Criſippus, with the reſt of their coherents, imagining ſomewhat, but yet concluding nothing, they referre the originall of the worlde to a litle Nothing, and making vp a Something of this Chaos, conclude it to be the ſubiect of corruption, wherin they harped on a truth in their error, confirming the vanitie of our Metaphiſickes, who wading paſt their reach, concluded ſomething, they knew not what.
            Vulgar Philoſophers, ſeeing the marueilous workes which bruit beaſtes doe performe, affirme and hold no cauſe of maruell, becauſe they doe it by a naturall inſtinct.
            
               Galen ſeeing a yong Kid, but newly fallen from the damme, which being ſette vpon the ground, it beganne to goe, as if it had beene tolde and taught
that his legges were made to that purpoſe; and for further experience ſetting before him ſundrie platters, with wine, water, vinegar, oyle, and milke, after the kid had ſmelt to them all, hee fed onelie of that with milke; which being beheld by diuers other Philoſophers, they all cryed out with one voyce, that Hippocrates had great reaſon to ſay, That ſoules were skilfull without the inſtruction of any teacher.
            
               Galen againe woondering to ſee the frame of mans body, conſidering of the ſeuerall parts how they were ſeated, euery one applied to a proper vſe and office by it ſelfe, after admiration hee grew to conclude, it was not poſſible a vegetiue ſoule, neither yet the temperature could faſhion a workmanſhip of ſuch ſingularity, but it was firſt vndertaken by a moſt wiſe vnderſtanding.
            In the time of Aristotle it is recorded of certain children, who immediately after they were borne, ſpake certaine wordes diſtinctly and plainely, yet afterwardes were ſilent as other children of their age; the Philoſophers of that time, not being able to coniecture the naturall cauſe of this effect, imputed it to the diuell. Aristotle much offended with this conſtruction vndertooke of himſelfe to ſearch out this ſecret of Nature, which although he laboured with great diligence, was not able to apprehend.
            
               No matter to wonder at.
               Plato admired how it might come to paſſe, that of two ſons begotten by one father, the one ſhuld haue the skill of verſifying, without any teaching,
and the other toyling himelfe in the Arte of Poetry, could neuer beget ſo much as one verſe.
            I ſee no great cauſe why Plato ſhoulde ſo much wonder at that, when Nature hath euermore excelled Arte, yet I know there hath beene contention about this ſuperioritie, ſome vpholding Arte, ſome other maintaining Nature.
            
               Affinitie betweene Art and Nature.But to ſpeake a little of the affinitie betweene Arte and Nature, wee are to conſider with the Philoſophers what Nature is. Tully in his Offices hath this ſaying, If wee followe Nature as our guide, we ſhall neuer erre, eſteeming Nature for a god, by whome our chiefeſt good fortunes do happen vnto vs.
            
               Ariſtotles Interpreters diuide Nature in twoo formes, calling the one Natura Naturans, and the other Natura Naturata, this nature which natureth, is that which Tully accompteth for a god.
            Then if Art be compared with that which perfecteth al things, it ſhould ſtriue with his Founder, but compared with his Equall, it perfecteth that; ſo that Nature is it which preſenteth the ſubiect, and Art it that perfecteth the ſubiect.
            But Art perfecteth Nature in ſome things, and Nature excelleth Arte in many things, and yet haue theſe two ſo ſtriuen together, that in Protogynes table were as faire grapes in colours, as in Natures gardine they were in ſubſtance; for Nature indeede not onely affecteth the ſight, but alſo the ſences, when Art in ſetting out of colours preſenteth a Shape without a Subſtance; but ſo are theſe
two knit together: that if Nature alow no fewel, Art can make no fire: and if Nature allow no colours, we can haue no painting.
            
               Nature what it is.The Philſopher woulde needes tie God to the lawes of Nature, who was the firſt creater of Nature, which is nothing elſe more of it ſelfe, but whatſoeuer it pleaſeth God to commaund.
            God created Nature, and gaue it a lawe, which lawe he will haue it likewiſe to followe; but whether may wee more woonder at the Philoſophers for the inſight they had in naturall things, or for the blindneſſe in the knowledge of Him that was the Author of all things, who the more they labored by their Philoſophy to comprehend, by ſo much the ſooner they loſt themſelues, ſo that one of their moſt profound Clarkes called Symonides, deſired by Cicero the Tyrant, to inquire what God was, and demaunding but one dayes reſpite, was in his deepeſt imaginations ſo confounded, that ſeeing the farther hee ſought, the more he failed, was enforced to ſtay his attempts, and to ſubiect his opinion to the inſcrutable eſſence of the moſt Higheſt.
            Philoſophy in theſe cauſes concerning God, is not able to render any reaſon, becauſe they are not martialled vnder her iuriſdiction. And for the Philoſophers, albeit they were men of excellent wit and learning: yet being in a time ouerwhelmed with errours and blindnes, they could not behold the perfection of trueth.
            
               Ariſtotle that was eſpecially extolled amongeſt

               An vnfit anſwer by Ariſtotle.them for his knowlege in naturall things, demanded from whence it ſhould growe that the riches and wealth of this world, for the moſt part, was rather enioyed and poſſeſſed by the wicked, than by men of more honeſt reputation; vnto the which Probleme hee anſwereth himſelfe thus: Becauſe Fortune being blinde, cannot knowe, nor make choice of what is beſt.
            An vnwoorthy anſwere by ſo great a Philoſopher, for according to the rules of natural reaſon, the ſolution of this demaund is this, that the lewd ſort, through craft and ſubtilty are more apt to beguile in their buying and ſelling, & can exact their profite, by periurie, extortion, and by many other lewde and vngodly deuiſes, which the honeſt and well diſpoſed would ſtagger at, in reſpect of honeſtie and conſcience.
            This is partly confirmed by our Sauiour Chriſt by the example of the Steward, who being called to an account by his Maſter, reſerued a round proportion of the goods to his owne vſe; which wiſdome, though it were faultie, yet Chriſt in this ſort commended it, ſaying; The children of this world are wiſer in their generation then the children of light. But theſe natural Philoſophers, becauſe they could not reach into the height of Diuinitie, deuiſed ſo fond and ill ioynted a cauſe, as Lady Fortune, to whoſe power they might impute good or badde ſucceſſe.
            This Fortune, as ſhe is feigned by the Poets, is painted blind, ſtanding on a ball, and turning with

               We aſcribe many things to blinde Fortune that doe belong vnto God himſelfe.euerie winde, but it is a more eaſie matter to wipe her away, then it is to paint her, for take away ignorance from men, and Fortune preſently vaniſheth away.
            Some of the Philoſophers will needes haue it, that all occurrents (whatſoeuer) are gouerned by a fatall deſtinie, and this fate or deſtinie they do call God. As Criſippus firſt ſpeaking of a ſpirituall power gouerning the whole world, concludeth it to be the deſtinie, the eternall purpoſe and decree of all things.
            
               That would bereaue God of his prouidence.Some others would make God himſelfe to be ſubiect to the wheele of deſtinie: amongſt the reſt, Seneca maketh a prettie hotch-potch, in theſe wordes. An irreuocable courſe carrieth away both humane, and diuine things: the Maker and Ruler of all things, decreed deſtinies, but now he followeth them, he commaunded once, but he obeyeth foreuer.
            
            Poets haue feigned, that Giants in times paſt haue aduaunced themſelues againſt God, to pull him out of his throne, by the poynt of the ſword, how many of thoſe Giants are yet remaining, that doe ſtruggle and ſtriue (as much as in them lieth) to wreſt his Scepter out of hands, and to depriue him of his prouidence; and with Seneca, wil aſcribe all the chaunces of this world, to Fortune, Fate, or Deſtinie.
            Who is ſo fooliſh to thinke, that the affaires of mortall men are carried headlong, or do happen, as it were by chance-medley: he is (no doubt) in a pittifull caſe, that will not acknowledge the Creator
of all things, to be moſt fitte to haue the gouernment of all things, and that God, to whoſe abſolute perfection nothing is more agreeable, then to be both able and willing, to take the care and charge of his owne workmanſhip: the chaunces & changes of this world, is firſt determined from heauen, the ebbing and flowing of all humane affaires, are onely depending of this Moone. The riſing and falling of Kingdomes are ſtill gouerned by this aſpect: It is he that ruleth, guideth and gouerneth all the rowling Spheares of heauen, the manifold courſes of the Starres and Planets, the ſucceſſe in alteration of the Elements: and to bee ſhort, of all the things whatſoeuer in heauen or earth. O blinde mortalitie that will ſtriue againſt the ſtreame, and haſt not wiſedome to diſcerne of this great Worke-maſter, that at his pleaſure pulleth downe and ſetteth vp! And if without preſumption I may ſpeake, it maketh a ſport at human affaires, determining and diſpoſing at his owne pleaſure, the plots and purpoſes, enduoured and ſet downe by the wiſedome of men.
            They are much deceiued, who would perſwade the affaires of the world to bee turned about by chaunce, or vncertaintie, when euerie thing by an immutable lawe, folows the order preordained & eſtabliſhed by an eternall appointment. Will you then ſay, what courſe ſhall I take? Shall I doe nothing but leaue all to this preordinate deſtinie? Alas good man, thou art euen now in the readie path that leadeth vnto it, and drawn into this high
way likewiſe by deſtinie, that is to ſay, by the appointment of God.
            Art thou inclined to vertue? God knoweth it, & furthers thee dooſt thou addict thy ſelf to vice, he knowes that alſo, and ſuffreth thee: there is left in man onely a free-will to ſtruggle and ſtriue againſt God, but no power to performe it.
            We muſt not yet think that God is variable, but attributing all things to his eternall foreſight, wee muſt acknowledge him to be ſtayed, reſolute, and immutable, alwaies one and like himſelfe, not wauering nor varying, but firme and conſtant in all his determinations, preordained and ſet down before the foundation of the world.
            Wouldeſt thou yet know why the vengeance of God ouerskippeth ſome, and lighteth againe vpon otherſome; and dooſt thou ſeeke with Ariſtotle to know the cauſe?
            
               An excellent anſwer of Euclides.Let me anſwere with Euclides, who being asked of many things concerning God, anſwered fitly: other things I know not, but of this I am aſſured, he hateth curious inquiſitors: I may likewiſe anſwere ſafely in this cauſe, I know nothing, but this I am ſure, Gods will is a cauſe aboue all cauſes, and he that ſeeketh any other, is ignorant of the diuine nature: for when God ſpeaketh, it becommeth man to hold his peace; and when he vouchſafeth to teach vs, it becommeth vs to beleeue.
            But of whom doſt thou demand this queſtion but of God? to whom all things are lawfull whatſoeuer he liketh, and nothing liketh him, but that
which is lawfull.
            I will not preſume to wade any further into the ſecret iudgements of God, who forbearing the vngodly in their wickedneſſe for a ſeaſon, payeth them in the end with more grieuous puniſhment than that which is obiected to our eyes, or that which is inflicted vpon the body.
            
               A notable example of gods iudgements.But would you ſee one example of the ſecret iudgements of God? Titus the Emperour had intelligence what Chriſt had prophecied of Ieruſalem, that one ſtone ſhould not be left ſtanding vpon an other: ſee nowe the ſecret iudgementes of God, that the ſame man that perſecuted the Chriſtians at Rome, goeth now to Ieruſalem, to reuenge the death of Chriſt vppon the Iewes that had crucified him, drawne heereunto (without doubt) by his owne paſſion but ouer-ruled by God to be the executioner of his Iuſtice, who many times looſeth the reines of bloud to runne vpon bloud, drawing one ſinne to doe execution on an other, one murtherer to kill another, one wicked Cittie to afflict another, and one prowd nation to chaſe and perſecute another.
            
               Seauen liberall Sciences.For the ſeauen liberall Sciences, Grammar, Logicke, Arithmetike, and the reſt, if I ſhould take vppon mee to ſpeake in their commendations, I might happen to ſpeed as he did that would needs take vpon him to ſpeake in the praiſe of Hercules, and to that purpoſe had whetted the ſtrength of his wit to haue made a long Oration. But a Philoſopher hearing this needeleſſe commendation very
prettily interrupted him, and asked him, Whie who diſcommends Hercules? and I doe thinke there is not a greater argument of folly, then for a man to vndertake the praiſe of that which is more excellent of it ſelfe, than any other commendation a man can render vnto it.
            For thoſe that are profeſſours of the Artes, if there be any that are of a contentious wrangling ſpirit, they are vnto ſuch a one, like a ſword in a madde mans handes, more apt to doe hurt than good.
            
               Grammar.The Grammarian, his ſubiect is but wordes, teaching vs to bring the diuers partes of ſpeach in one congruitie, and to this purpoſe they doe many times, tire, and martire themſelues more than needes.
            
               Logicke.
               Logicke teacheth how to ſift out the troth from a number of falſhoodes, howe to frame an argument; it ſetteth downe rules and precepts how to define, diſtinguiſh, diuide, conclude, and how to iudge and argue.
            But there be too many, that with this little miſt of knowledge will ſeeke to peruert and deface all knowledge, and ſometimes by wreſting the weapons of reaſon, will mannage them to the confuſion of Reaſon it ſelfe.
            
               Rhetoricke drawes mens mindes to one ſelfe opinion.
               Rhetorike by her rules doth beautifie the ſpeach with polliſhed words, fine phraſes, and gratious colours, whereby to ſtirre affections, which is fitter to adorne a leaſing, than to ſet forth a ſerious troth, which the Apoſtle well proueth, where he
ſaieth, Chriſt ſent me not to Baptize, but to Preach, and that not in wiſdome of words leſt the croſſe of Chriſt might proue in vaine.
            
            
               Better to couer a leaſing than to ſette foorth a truth.Which woordes the Apoſtle vſed, to the end the Gentiles ſhould not thinke his exhortation to be but a well cowched leaſing, ſuch as their Orators were accuſtomed to perſwade by the force of their Arte, for thoſe haue moſt neede of artificiall ſpeeches, who with pleaſing words doe go about to couer diſhoneſt deedes.
            The country-man is more afraid of the ſerpent that lieth hidden in the graſſe, than of the wilde beaſt that feedeth openly on the mountaine. The mariner is more endaungered by hidden ſhelues than knowne rockes, and more perrill in a ſecret ambuſh, than in a ranged battell.
            
               Trueth beſt naked.A naked tale doth moſt truly ſet foorth a naked trueth, and veritie then ſhines moſt brightly, when ſhe is in leaſt brauery.
            A good cauſe bringeth credite, it needeth not the help of Art; and to vſe ſuperfluous eloquence in a matter of ſufficient excellencie, is a greater ſhew of a pregnant wit, than of a perfect wiſedom; yet eloquence is one of the greateſt graces, whereby the popular ſort are beſt perſwaded, and thinke that a man hath much wiſedome and knowledge, if he can ſpeake with great eloquence, and hath a ſweete tongue with pleaſing wordes.
            
               Ariſtotle writte with ſuch ſlender ornament of wordes, with ſuch ſimple manner of deliuerance, and with ſuch obſcuritie of ſtile, (but yet his Axiomes,
Problemes, and all his ſentences being opened, they held ſuch lineaments and proportions of rare admiration, that ſome ignorant expoſitours would needes conclude, that Ariſtotle had deliuered his writings in this ſort, but of ſette purpoſe, rendring this reaſon, becauſe hee would that his workes ſhould paſſe with the greater authoritie, he writ vnder Riddles.
            They might haue ſaide the like by Plato, who with no leſſe harſh breuitie obſcureth his reaſons, and many times darkeneth his writings by the ill placing of the parts of his tale; but yet Cicero praiſing his eloquence, ſaide, That if Iupiter ſhould haue ſpoken Greeke, hee would haue ſpoken as Plato did.
            
            
               Muſicke.
               Muſicke hath his proceeding from the concordance and agreement of ſoundes; I would I could praiſe it but halfe ſo well as I loue it, but yet for all that, for him that hath his head troubled with too many crochets, I would rather wiſh to haue his cunning than his wit.
            
               Arithmetike.
               Arithmeticke proceedeth but from a vnite; yet by addition, multiplication, and the reſt of her partes, it comprehendeth things that be infinite.
            
               Geometrie.
               Geometry hath likewiſe his proceeding but from a pricke, but the knowledge of it is excellent, and ſerueth for diuerſe purpoſes, both for peace or warre: But wee haue Geometritians in theſe dayes, ſome that if they can but drawe three lines with a Compaſſe, will vaunt themſelues to haue as much cunning as euer had Euclides.
            
            
               Aſtrologie.
               Aſtrologie, for the Science it ſelfe, it is a high myſterie;
Mary amongſt the Profeſſors there is great variety, I will not ſpeake of incertainty, becauſe there is one thing certaine which I my ſelfe can aſſure: and that is, whileſt the Aſtrologian is calculating for others, hee knowes not what is hanging ouer his owne head.
            
               The Letter.The Letters are the firſt inſtruments of the arts, and Grammar, Logicke, and Rhetoricke are onely entries into the reſt of the Sciences, and may be called the Artes of well ſpeaking.
            
               Learning in generall.Learning is the Ladder whereby to climbe to heauen, it raiſeth men from earthly vanities, to the contemplation of things celeſtiall and diuine: A man that is enlightned with knowledge, graſps after vniuerſalities, and Science it is that ſtretches it ſelfe to the heauens, it meditates of eternity, and makes ſteppes whereby to aſcend to the throne of Glorie.
            
               He is but a beaſt that knoweth no more thē what is common to beaſts.A man without Learning, is but an immortall beaſt, he hath being with blocks, life with plants, and ſence with beaſts: but as Ariſtotle ſaieth, that the reaſonable ſoule partaking of the ſame generall nature with the Angells, is aſhamed to behold her ſelfe placed in a body which hath but fellowſhip with beaſts. And as Socrates hath defined, a man that is deſtitute of knowledge, if hee be amongeſt the beſt, hee may be ſaide to bee a man amongeſt beaſts; but amongſt the learned, the beſt you can repute of him, is to be but a beaſt amongeſt men. There is nothing then ſo much to be ſought for, as this knowledge of Artes, for that is the maine Ocean
of celeſtiall light, from whence all knowlege doth deriue it ſelfe: And Science dooth illuſtrate the minde with all vnderſtanding that is requiſite or behoouefull eyther for body or ſoule: This is it that maketh the eyes of the minde ſo chriſtaline and cleere, that by it we haue all totall knowlege, either humane or diuine.
            
               Men for their excellencie in learning accounted gods.This is it that many times beyond the limits of humanitie, men haue beene reckoned amongeſt the fellowſhip of the Gods, for when there was any man found to be excellent, whether in Science or Armes, or in influence of witte, or had any other ſingular or ſoueraigne qualitie of the minde, which made him ſeruiceable vnto the Commonwealth, him they deified and yeelded him diuine honor.
            
               What gods the Romanes haue worſhipped.The Romanes haue worſhipped Iupiter the Adulterer and Rauiſher; they erected an Altar to euill Fortune, in one of their mountaines at Rome, and they haue inuented gods in hel, and haue worſhipped and honoured diuels, vnder the titles and names of Dis, of Pluto, and ſuch other.
            
               Flora a publique curtizan, and a woman, whoſe body was abandoned to all luſt and alurements of the fleſh, was canonized and honoured with an Image or Figure, for that all the goodes ſhee had gotten with the filthie vſe of her bodie, ſhee bequeathed to the Senate; for which fact they gaue her diuine honour, and celebrated her feaſt euerie yeere, wherein as a ſpeciall ceremonie, there was libertie for all yong men to be naked, and to exerciſe
their pleaſure with the firſt woman they didde finde.
            
               Rome full of gods.
               Marcus Varro writeth, that Braſilius the Philoſopher found at Rome two thouſand eight hundred gods, which carry no ſmall poſſibilitie of troth; for the Pope and his diſciples, do yet euery yeere conſecrate (at the leaſt) three times ſo many: they haue learned ſince of the Gentiles to dedicate their Churches to the Saintes, as they didde their Temples to their Pagan gods. But it is written, that Xerxes did once burne al the Temples that were in Greece, becauſe he thoght it a moſt vngodly thing, to ſhut vp gods in houſes, and to impriſon them in ſtone walles.
            
               Learning the riches of the minde.But as I haue already ſaide, it is Science ioyned with vertue, that is, the riches of the minde, and this treaſure of the minde is it that maketh this difference betweene a man and a beaſt. This minde, I ſay, that being enlightned with knowledge, is able to compaſſe the earth, to eleuate the Poles, that can mount vp to the heauens, and can trauell from houſe to houſe, from ſphere to ſphere, from planet to planet, that can diue into the ſea, and ſincke to the gates of hell, that can circuite the whole world, diſtinguiſh of all time and ages, and all this in a moment.
            
               Learning poorely requited.But this trauell of wit is yet the moſt thriftleſſe and vnprofitable exerciſe that a man can endeuor, for where findeth it rewarde or recompence? The Swaine that followeth his handie worke, is paid at night for his dayes labour. The Cobler
that ſits and clowtes a ſhooe, receiues his pennie for his patch: but he that doth toile and tire himſelfe to digge the Mine of witte, may reape good wordes: and (I ſay) he that reapeth them for ſatiſfaction, his pay is good, he ſpeedeth not amiſſe; and yet he that is ſtill fed with wordes, ſhall ſterue with wants.
            The concluſion is, knowledge is precious, and yet true felicitie conſiſteth not in the knowledge of goodneſſe, but in a good life, not ſo much in vnderſtanding, as in liuing with vnderſtanding.
            
               Hiſtoriographers flatterers.May we ſpeake a little of Historiographers, their office is as well to record faults, as worthie Acts; their pennes haue not ſpared to deſcribe the times and ages paſt, and no prince hath eſcaped, but his behauiour hath beene publiſhed, either to his glorie or reproach: But our Hyſtorians in this age that cannot flatter, cannot thriue. I muſt accuſe them of palpable offence, who in relating their hiſtories, ſhould tie themſelues to exact truth. But ſome of them haue ſo powldred their writings with ſuch varietie of diſcourſe, as he is but a ſingle-ſoald reader, that cannot perceiue they haue flattered, (I will not ſay fittoned.) Looke but into our Engliſh Chronicles, and ſee what deſcriptions they haue made of Pettigrees, not ſo much to ſet downe a truth, as they haue done to pleaſe greatneſſe.
            
               Many worthy fictions feined by Poets.I might likewiſe ſpeake of Poetrie, and of the fictions of Poets, that haue many times induced to honeſt recreation, and vnder commendable reſemblances, they haue diſcouered the cuſtomes
& conditions of men, impropriating many things to the actions of men, euermore extolling of the vertuous, and imbaſing of ſuch as do ſeeke their felicitie in vice.
            They feigned Prometheus to haue ſtolne the fire from Iupiter, becauſe he was the firſt that inſtructed the Egyptians in a forme of ciuilitie: & Atlas for the wonderfull skill that he had in Aſtronomie, was feigned to beare the heauens on his ſhoulders.
            When they ſought to blame or deface the vicious, the better to make men abhorre them, they transformed thoſe of diſſolute & licentious life into brute beaſtes. In this ſort ſtill comparing men good or bad, according to the good or bad properties that were in them. For this vaine of Poetrie, it is good if it be in good mens handling; it hath beene prohibited in many common wealths. But Socrates admoniſheth, that if any man be carefull of his honour, let him foreſee that he hath not a Poet to his enemy, becauſe they haue not ſo great a grace in prayſing, as in il ſpeaking.
            But yet for all that, to blaze the praiſes of my friend, I could wiſh a Poets pen, who with a drop or two of Inke, can exalt him whom they loue, and leaue him famed and renowmed to poſteritie.
            
               Many excellent Poets at this time, the worth of their owne workes their beſt cō
                  mendation.I could finde in my heart to praiſe Poetrie, and to commend a great many of Poets that I am acquainted withall, and many other likewiſe that I know, by the excellencie of their liues, but their owne workes are a better commendation then I am able to apply. And although I cannot render
them that due honour according to their woorth, yet I will carrie them that renerend regard according to their wit.
            
               Baſtard poets.But we haue ſuch a number of Baſtard Poets in theſe dayes, that would ſeeme to be retaining to the Muſes, but alas they doe Minerua wrong, they peſter the Stacioners ſtalles with ſuch vnprofitable ſtuffe, that learning might ſeeme to be the Miſtres of vngodlineſſe.
            
               A number of vaine and fooliſh bookes.Some conuert all their reaſons into rime, and becauſe they can ſet downe a Balductum verſe, doe thinke they haue recouered Virgils veine in Poetrie.
            
               Poets turned Paraſites.Some will write a whole volume, neither in rime, nor reaſon: ſome others inclined to a more pleaſing vaine, will runne throgh a large diſcourſe, all of meere flatterie: But what a number of Pamphlets haue wee by our new writers of this age, whereof the greateſt part are nothing elſe but vanitie: and how many haue written (but they will ſay not of vaine-glorie) and yet their bookes are full of ambition.
            O how many others might I ſpeake of, that do labour with the mountaines, to bring forth Mice, that doe ſeeke to draw the Lions skin vpon Eſops Aſſe, and Hercules ſhooe vpon a childes foote! but they doe well to ſute the world with bookes according to the faſhion; for rude limping lines, are beſt befitting a lame halting age: writers are not ſo vaine, but readers (for the moſt part) are iij. times more fooliſh. For he that is but in a blew coate

               As fooliſh readers as there be of Poets.with a cognizance, if he can but make curteſie after the new faſhion, and that his wit will but ſerue him to play with his Miſtreſſe little dogge, he dare take vpon him to cenſure any thing. And theſe raſh readers will make ſuch expoſitions, as the Authour himſelfe neuer thought on, and they will diſpraiſe many things that they could neuer conceiue; and they will praiſe againe, what they neuer vnderſtood. Ignorance neuer ſpareth to commit Sacrilege: theſe Paper monſters therfore are fitteſt to fill the dull conceits of the multitude with admiration, amongſt whom a ſtrained ſtile is in better account, then the beſt laboured lines. A good title better than a good booke.Yea, the Printer himſelfe, to make his booke the more vendible, doth rather deſire a glorious Title, than a good Booke: ſo that our new written Pamphlets of theſe times, are not much vnlike to a poore Inne in a Countrey towne, that is gorgiouſly ſet foorth with a glorious ſigne; but being once entred into the houſe, a man ſhall find but cold intertainment, as well of homely lodging, as of bad fare.
            They are but reſemblances to the Apples that are ſaid to grow about Sodom, which being pleaſant to the eye, doe vaniſh into ſmoke, or into ſoot as ſoone as a man doth but put his teeth into them: and like the ſmall bells of the Choribantes, that may make a little tingling noiſe, but they are good for nothing but to trouble the braine.
            To ſpeake truly, I haue many times beene deceiued with theſe flouriſhing Titles that I haue ſeene paſted vpon a Poſt, for beſtowing my mony

               Euerie thing may be imploied to vſe.in haſte at my better leiſure looking into the book, and finding ſuch ſlender ſtuffe, I haue laughed at my owne folly: but I haue yet made vſe of them, for what will not ſerue for one thing may well be imployed to another. I learned that of the Lion, who being aduiſed to diſcharge the Aſſe, and the Hare, as vnprofitable in his campe, the one for his ſimplicitie, the other for his timeritie, aunſwered, that notwithſtanding they were vnfitte for the fight, yet he would make vſe of them, the one to ſerue for a Trumpetter, the other to be imployed as a Purſeuant. And I neuer met with ſo vaine a book, but that I could gather ſomething out of it for mine owne inſtruction, if it were but to bleſſe my ſelfe from his humour that writ it.
            
               Fooliſh books good to ſet Printers a worke.But let them go with their bookes, they are but ſmall faults, they are good yet, if it be but to ſet the Printers a worke, that otherwiſe ſhould be idle, and I thinke they do little harme, vnleſſe amongſt that ſort of people, that are themſelues as vaine as the bookes: but I will now wade into matter of ſome more importance, not to detect any faultes that I know, yet ſuch as haue beene knowne in times paſt, and therefore now good if they could be ſhunned.
            As the bodie cannot guide it ſelf without eies; ſo a Common-wealth cannot be gouerned without Maieſtrates, but ſuch as ought to bee cleare ſighted: for the bodie giueth more credite to the eie, then it doth to the eare, & men are rather moued to one good example which they ſee with

               Doing better then ſaying.their owne eyes, then a thouſand wordes teſtified by reports, and therefore whoſoeuer he bee that commandeth, from the higheſt to the loweſt, muſt winne his opinion from well doing, and not by well ſaying.
            It was not pronounced without great Myſterie where God commaunded in the booke of Deuteronomie, that ſuch as ſhould aſpire to the adminiſtration of publique gouernment, ſhould be wiſe and Noble.
            
               Authoritie is the Touchſtone whereby to trie the perfection of any mans vertue: for in authoritie, the vertuous doe manifeſt their goodneſſe, but the wicked will ſo much the ſooner lay open their vice.
            
               A couetous Magiſtrate moſt pernitious.
               Couetous perſons (amongeſt all other) are moſt pernitious to be admitted to adminiſtration of Iuſtice: and the counſell that Iethro gaue to Moſes, amongſt other things, was, that he ſhould not giue any publique office of iuſtice vnto anie couetous perſon.
            
               They haue more ambition & pride whereby to gouerne; then wiſedome or policie wherewith to gouerne.The moſt ignorant are euer apteſt, to beleeue that they are moſt worthy of the chiefeſt promotions; and becauſe they did neuer mannage any affaires of importance, they know not what burthen and difficulties are therevnto incident: how many haue ſought to aduaunce themſelues to beare rule and gouernment by their wealth (which indeede is but the nurce of vice) who once placed in authoritie, haue made port ſale, both of Vertue and Iuſtice, ſeeking ſtill to enrich themſelues by the
ruines of the Common-wealth, increaſing as faſt in their wickedneſſe, as they did in their wealth.
            Where the Magiſtrate is good, the people are not lightly ill; ſo that the goodneſſe, or ilneſſe of the Common-wealth doth much conſiſt in the Magistrate. It is not then without great conſideration that the multitude ſhould pray for the Magistrate: But hee that is honoured more for his power, then he is for his puritie of life, may ſpeake (as it were) in the perſon of God, This people honoureth me with their lippes, but their heartes are farre from me.
            
            It hath euer beene a thing deteſted amongeſt the multitude, to ſee an vnworthie man, that is either inclined to pride, to couetouſneſſe, to oppreſſion, or other ſuch like, to be aduaunced, or ſo fauoured, that he ſhould ſway at his owne pleaſure without impeachment, no man daring to examine his wrongs and oppreſſions; ſuch greefes haue turned to great inconuenience: for preuention wherof, the antiquitie haue vſed to baniſh thoſe for certaine yeares that haue ſo aſpired; yea ſometimes though they were not to bee charged with any publique crime or offence.
            
               Ariſtophenes foreſeeing this danger of greatnes, what a meane it might proue whereby to attempt the vſurpation of tyrannie, deuiſed a tragedie, rayſing Pericles from hell, wherein he exhorted the Magiſtrate not to nouriſh a Lion in their Cities; for if they fall to cheriſhing of him whileſt hee was little, they muſt of neceſſitie obey him when hee
was growne great.
            Where exceptions of perſons are reſpected, there iuſtice muſt needes bee corrupted. And nothing can be permanent that is corrupted, and therefore the greater he is that offendeth, by ſo much the more deſerueth to be puniſhed: and the more authoritie a Magiſtrate hath to commaund, the leſſe libertie he hath to offend.
            It may be called a happie gouernment (as Plato ſaith) where the ambitious are not ſuffred to beare rule. And it is no leſſe pittifull againe, where abuſe is not redreſſed by the care of the Magiſtrate, and where thoſe that are oppreſſed dare not complain.
            
               Authoritie is by many deſired, but by few well executed. And although it were knowne that our Sauiour Chriſt was accuſed by falſe teſtimonie, yet thoſe that ſat in iudgement would rather condemne iuſtice, then diſpleaſe the wicked.
            
               Luxurious magiſtrates are the cauſe of commotions.Iniurie and oppreſſion vſed by thoſe that haue beene in authoritie, haue turned to Commotions, Rebellions, and Reuolts, and there is no broile more noyſome and hurtfull to any weale publike, then that which falleth out betweene the Magiſtrates, and the Commons, about gouernment: for if we ſhould aduiſedly call to minde Hyſtories of Antiquitie, it would appeare that there hath not been any gouernment ſo happily founded, which hath not beene ſhaken againe through diſſention, and diſcord, riſing and falling out betweene thoſe of ancient Nobilitie, and the meaneſt ſort of the raſcall and peeuiſh people.
            
               The mutinie of the Switzers.
               The pollitike gouernement of the Switzers was changed by a generall mutiny of the multitude, who for the tyranny of their Princes and Magiſtrates freed themſelues by murdring all that took vpon them, either the dignitie or title of a Gentleman.
            
               It is a tickle ſtate that is founded on the multitude whoſe good opinion is woonne with what they ſee, and loſt again with what they heare.The multitude of the people, the greateſt part of them, are ignorant of the beſt things; they are euermore deſirous of chaunge, hating ſtill what is preſent: amongſt whome the counſaile of the wiſe were neuer heard without daunger, neither can there be any thing profitably ordain'd by the confuſed fury of the multitude.
            And although popular loue be light, yet their hatred is heauie: and it little auailes to haue walles and fortreſſes, where the heartes of the people are eſtranged.
            
               Dioniſius the Tirant being guarded with many armed Souldiers, was asked by Plato, why he had committed ſo many offences, that he ſhould be ſo impriſoned with ſo many ſquadrons.
            The feare conceiued by ſubiects hath bin cauſe of mutation, and the feare of the Spaniſh Inquiſition, was the firſt cauſe of Netherlands reuoult: ſubiects haue reaſon to fear that are kept in fear without reaſon: and he that is feared of many, is hated of many, and he had need to haue a large winde, that will ſaile againſt the Tide.
            
               Ariſtotle thinkes, that the common good of the multitude is rather to be preferred, than the priuate profite of ſome few. And yet he wiſheth rather

               The good of the multitude eſpecially to be preferred.to aboliſh the humorous paſſions of the multitude, than to fauour it. And Diogenes ſeeing the people to throng out of church doore, preaſed as faſt againſt them to get in, and hauing once entred he ſaid, It was the part of wiſemen to be alwayes contrary to the multitude.
            
            
               Nobilitie beſt to rule.The vulgar people, through their dull wittes, and brutiſh nature, can not perceiue what is profitable, either to themſelues, or to their country, but the noble minde is not only the worker of preſent profite, but alſo through great foreſight, preuents imminent daunger: Furthermore, the common people haue no taſte nor feeling of honor and renowne, neither in the defence of their countrey, or of any corage or hardineſſe of ſtomacke; where on the other ſide the noble bloud is inflamed with renowne, abhorreth daſtardly cowardlineſſe, and in defence of a common profite, attempteth great and dangerous enterpriſes: but it is neceſſitie that maketh more wiſe men amongeſt the multitude, than any other doctrine that reaſon can perſwade.
            It hath been queſtioned, whether that gouernment be better where there is a naughtie Prince & good miniſters vnder him, or where the Prince is good, and the Magiſtrates euill. Marius Maximus leaneth to the firſt; and a pillar of Philoſophie hath ſet downe this for a Maxime, how that common-wealth is beſt and moſt aſſured where the Prince is ill conditioned, rather than that where the Miniſters are corrupt and badly diſpoſed.
            But there be many other of great authoritie,

               A good prince will ſuffer no power vnder him to oppres.that will in no wiſe conſent, when former experience hath ſo many times taught, that euill men be oftener corrected by a good Prince, than an euill Prince amended by good men; but this is certain, there can be no worſe gouernement than that that is managed by opinion.
            
               Opinion is a barre, it ſtill cleaueth to the mighty.Seditious eſtates with their owne deuiſes, falſe friendes with their owne ſwordes, and rebellious commons with their own ſnares, are ouerthrown.
            Either Riches or Pouertie when they are in extreamitie, doe bring the Common wealth to ruine, for exceſſe is euer vnaſſured, and in daunger to be ſhaken.
            
               A moſt eſpeciall thing to be regarded.Amongſt many eares in a well gouerned common-wealth, there hath beene great reſpect had to theſe idle begging people, whoſe libertie of running about hath produced many inconueniences; ſometimes in the time of ſickeneſſe, they haue ſpread the infection by their licentious libertie of gadding from place to place; otherſome againe, vnder the pretence of begging, haue ſearched out the ſecrets of Citties and Townes, haue layed them open to an ennemy, haue poyſoned waters, and haue ſometimes fired Citties, as the citty of Tire, and other Citties in Fraunce haue well experienced, and it is ſtrange that here in our Country we haue ſo long eſcaped theſe practiſes, when ſuch multitudes of ſturdy rogues haue bin ſuffered so ordinarily to paſſe, by two, by three, by foure; yea ſometimes by ſixe and more in a company, vnder the pretence of begging Souldiors,
that neuer croſſed the Seas (the moſt of them) to come where ſeruice was: I ſpeake not this to the annihilating of charitie, which God knows is too colde already, when thoſe that are poore and needie indeede, growne decrepite with age, with impotencie, with ſickeneſſe, with griefe, and are not pittyed, but ſuffered to lie in the open ſtreetes, pining away without any reliefe.
            But it is no great reproach, to ſee a poore man, that hath ſpent his bloud in the defence of his Country, that is able to bring good Teſtimonie of his honeſt ſeruice, and beeing returned home, hurt, maimed, lamed, diſmembred, and ſhould be ſuffered to crouch, to creepe, to begge, and to intreate for a peece of bread, and almoſt no body to giue it him.
            Well, God be thanked of amendment, they ſay there is better order taken, and there is great hope it will be as well executed.
            
               How many Princes haue felt the ſmart of this.I will not ſpeake of Faults committed amongſt Officers, that in times paſt, for the moſt part, by ſeeming, haue been tranſported into priuate gaine, for if Princes themſelues did aduiſedly conſidder how much it would redownd aſwel to their own commoditie, as to the benefite of their ſubiects, to looke to theſe Horſe-leaches, that haue ſuckt their own gaine, by the ruines of Princes, and the wrack of commonwealths, they would become as vigilant as Veſpaſian, who in the beginning of his gouernement, gaue the greateſt Offices and Dignities of Rome, to thoſe that were eſpecially noted

               A fine policie vſed by Veſpaſian.for oppreſſion and wrong. And when he was aſked, why he did ſo, ſeeing authoritie giuen to the wicked was a meane to make them worſe: He anſwered, that he ſerued his turne with ſuch Officers as with ſpunges, which when they hadde drunke their fill, were then fitteſt to be preſſed.
            
               The time wasThat gouernment muſt needs be happie where places of office and authoritie were giuen to ſuch men as knew how to execute them as they ought: and vnhappy againe haue thoſe Commonwealths euer prooued, where thoſe haue beene preferred that were better skilled in taking, than in executing.
            
               Offices boght and ſold·
               Alexander Seuerus both puniſhed and depoſed as many as had bought their offices, ſaying, they ſolde deerer by retale, than they bought in the groſſe: I will not ſay that it is preiudiciall vnto the Common-wealth, that Offices ſhould be bought and ſolde for money. But this is true, that Princes ought to bee very circumſpect by whom they are mannaged, becauſe, being to continue in the ſame during their liues, the holders are the leſſe ſubiect to correction. And being bought and ſold for money, they are the more ſubiect to corruption.
            Offices that were wont to be painfull toiles for men of honeſtie and care to be heedefull of, are now become gainfull ſpoiles, executed by thoſe that endeuour their owne commoditie, exacting their owne gaine, by the ſpoile both of Prince and Countrie. But in that Common-wealth where
Officers are made to do their dueties (and no more than appertaineth to iuſtice and right) they will giue as much to be rid of an Office, as they will doe now to buy an Office.
            
               The pollicie of the eſtate not to be medled with.
               Pollicie is a ſpeciall parte of gouernement, and the ſtate and pollicie of the time is not for priuate men to deale withall: and Pollicie that is legittimate, firſt begotten by Wit, and then foſtered by Honeſtie, is not to be neglected, but that which more reſpecteth profit than it doth the ſoueraigne Pollicie preſcribed by Gods lawe, is it which the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of, The wiſedome of the fieſh is enmitie to God.
               Pollicie that is more for profit thē honeſtie. He dooth not ſay an enemy, for an enemy might be reconciled, but enmity it ſelfe can neuer be reconciled, and therefore he addeth further, The wiſedome of the fleſh is death: And although the name of Pollicie at the firſt ſight doth carry a great and glorious ſhew, yet being eſtranged from that Pollicie before ſpoken of commanded by God, it doth not reach vnto that perfection of true chriſtian gouernement that many haue ſeemed to perſwade.
            The drift of worldly Policie is to do litle good, but to the end to doe a great deale of harme; for Pollicie and Profite haue euer marched arme in arme in one ranke: and how many Princes haue bin abuſed (yea and ſometimes diſhonoured) vnder thoſe plauſible pretences.
            Profite being diuorced from Honeſtie, begetteth but a baſtardly progenie, and it is a very dangerous doctrine, to teach that Profite may be ſeparated
from honeſtie, when there is nothing profitable, vnleſſe it be honeſt.
            He therefore that maketh diuiſion betweene profite and honeſtie peruerteth Nature; and hee ſeeketh but his owne ſhame, that ſeeketh but his owne profite.
            
               The pollicies of men muſt giue place to the pollicies of God.All Policie therefore is to be reiected, that tendeth not to publique profite, or that preferreth the vaine policies of men, before the infallible policie reuealed in the worde of God: for theſe Polititians (for the moſt part) doe neuer conſider, that the principal things that do bring miſeries and diſorders to whole Countries, & Kingdoms, are ſuch offences, as are counted directly againſt the Maieſtie of God.
            Looke into hiſtories, and you ſhall find no ſtateſ-men more peſtilent to a Common-wealth, then theſe Polititians, that ſquared out their gouernment by the rules of their owne wits. Looke into the two Catoes, the one with his frantique accuſations diſturbing the whole Common-wealth of Rome, and the other going about ouer-wiſely to protect it, did vtterly ſubuert it yea, and Cicero with all his eloquence, was as troubleſome amongſt the Romanes, as Demoſthenes was amongſt the Athenians.
            
            There be many other of theſe great polititians which might be named, that with their peeuiſh diſciplines haue diſturbed the quiet of ſtates, (ſo that in mine opinion) there is not a more peſtilent thing then this plague of policy, which diuides
it ſelfe from the policie preſcribed by the rule of Gods word.
            
               Euery man borne for his Countrey.When the humour of preferring our countrie before any other thing was had in requeſt, there was no man ſo meane, but if he could endeuour his Countries good, his reputation was aduanced, and his wiſdom was not ſuffered to go away emptie-fiſted: then men might ſpeake freely, ſo they ſpake truly: but after the Polititian, he that hath but a Mammon for his God, and Machiuell for his ghoſtly father, had once gotten the mannaging of Common-wealth affaires; they haue ſo prohibited this libertie of free ſpeaking for their Country, with their preſcription of, Quod ſupra nos, nihil ad nos: that the meanes whereby the Romanes, the Grecians, & many other floriſhing eſtates, wrought their greateſt woonders, in aduauncing their Common-wealths, were long ſithence taken away vnder the colour of Policie, and pregnancie of wit.
            We are priuileged by our Country, and vnder the enſignes of her authoritie, it is not onely lawfull for vs to ſpend our liues, but it is like behoueful to vndertake any thing, that may be for her ſafetie, and the good of our Prince.
            
               Curtius, for the good of his common-wealth, leaped into the Gulfe, Sceuola burned his hand, becauſe he miſſed the killing of Porcenna: Horatius fought againſt the whole armie of the Tuſcans, whileſt the Bridge was broken behind his backe.
            But theſe dayes are paſt, for many that did then

               Where honor is taken from deſert, there vertue is taken from menſtriue who ſhould exceed in Vertue, do now contend how the one might excell the other in Vice: and that feruencie of zeale that we ſhould beare to God, to our Prince, and to our Countrey, it is growne cold, and it is conuerted to this olde Adage: Euerie man for himſelfe, and God for vs all: (as they would haue it) but I ſay, If euerie man be for himſelfe, the Diuell for vs all, for ſo we ſhall find it.
            I muſt here craue your gentle patience, that you would pleaſe to giue me leaue to Lie a little, and yet a little time would hardly ſerue my turne, for if I ſhould lie, but according to the truth (I meane if I ſhould tell all that is reported) a whole Reſme of Paper would not ſuffice my little wit to ſet it downe at large: but if they be lies, they ſhall coſt you no money, you ſhall haue them cheape inough in conſcience, I will not aske with the Lawier, for euerie lie a Fee; no, keepe your money till you haue need of Lawiers helpe.
            
               They be as of other profeſſions, good and bad.For mine owne part, I haue had little to doe amongſt Lawiers, but for thoſe few that I do know, and haue had to deale withall, I dare proteſt them to be Gentlemen of that honeſt life and conuerſation euerie way, as there is no exceptions to bee taken againſt them.
            The Text that I haue now taken in hand, is to ſpeake of Faults. The innocencie then of thoſe that be good, muſt not be a ſhelter to thoſe that be bad: and all the ill that I haue to ſpeake is but by report, but Report is a lier, and let him be ſo ſtill. A man for all that may tell a lie by report; I wil proue
it, I hope the Lawiers themſelues will vpholde the cauſe that are driuen in their proceedings at the Bar, to vent a great number of lies: but as they take them by report from their fooliſh Clients; here is now all the difference, the Lawier is well feed for his lie, and I ſell you mine for nothing.
            
               The Law intendes to giue euery man his right.Then firſt I acknowledge the Law it ſelfe to bee worthie of all honourable repute, being leuelled and proportioned according to the firſt inſtitution: for the end wherevnto Law hath relation, is to profit the good, to perfect the commonwealth, to relieue the oppreſſed, to miniſter iuſtice, neither is there any vice, which is not by Law bridled; yea, where God himſelfe was not knowne, Law miniſtred equitie, and the power of exceſſe by it hath beene reſtrained.
            By Law good diſciplines are preſcribed, the Common-wealth gouerned, and all policies to the maintenance of peace, both begunne, continued, & ended. In the commendation of the Law, what can be ſaid more? They haue relation, firſt to Religion, next to Determination, thirdly, to preſcription and cuſtome, and pleas whatſoeuer hauing paſt the aſperitie of the Law, may yet be ordred by conſcience: So that if aught be neglected by error, may yet be relieued by equitie in the Court of Chauncerie.
            
            But if the Law be certaine, why ſhould iudgement be delayed? if bent to do right, why are ſo many poore men wronged? if grounded on conſcience, why ſhould it be partiall?
            
               But I reproue not the Law, nor yet find I fault at the honeſt Lawier, but alas how ſhould they chuſe but erre, when their accuſations bee but other mens reports, and their whole pleadings, nothing elſe but hearſayes, maintaining but what their Clients will enforme them.
            But this doth not excuſe all; for there be many others by whom the Law that of it ſelfe intendeth nothing but right, is yet made the verie inſtrument of iniurie and wrong: they haue Lawe to ouerthrow Lawe, and there is no Lawe, be it neuer ſo legitimate or truely begotten, which with wreſted gloſes, and ſubtil expoſitions they cannot baſtardize.
            
               There is but one right, and that is ſuppreſſed with many wrongsThey make their plea according to the pennie, not according to the trueth, when amongſt them hee that hath moſt money, hath commonly, moſt right: they coyne delayes for priuate aduantage, they make ſtreight crooked, and crooked right: they are open mouthed againſt the poore mans proceſſe, who ſhall ſooner finde his purſe emptied, than his ſuite ended. And where they ſhoulde be the Miniſters of light, they hunt after continuall darkeneſſe, concluding the trueth within a golden cloude. They are pugnantia inter ſe, when amongſt them there is no agreement, but what they confirme to day, to morrow they will fruſtrate: this clauſe annihilated by this Iudge, that diſtinction by another. And although the text of the Lawe of it ſelfe be briefe, yet they obſcure it by their too many gloſings, and how many are there that doe

               Iohn a Nokes and Iohn a Stile.checke the courſe of Iuſtice by dilatory pleas, and how many Petty-foggers that doe nothing but ſet men at variance; and a pox take Iohn a Nokes, and Iohn a Stile, for thoſe two flie companions are made the inſtrumentes of a great deale of miſchiefe.
            And woe againe to all thoſe Lawyers that are but like to Aeſopes Kite, that whileſt the Mowſe and the Frogge were at controuerſie for ſuperioritie in the Marſh, he deuoured them both.
            When a man comes to commenſe a ſuite, in the beginning hee ſhall be entertained with a hope to obtaine; and being entred, they conſume him by delayes, and whileſt hee hath meanes to beare out the charge, they aſſure him his right is good, but when they haue ſpent him, that he is not able longer to giue, they do pronounce Sentence againſt him: and hee that is not well ſtored with money wherewith to corrupt, ſhal want no ſorro w wherof to complaine.
            
               Not a Saint in heauen medicinable to end controuerſies.How many myracles are aſſigned to Saintes, to whom we do go in pilgrimage! we proteſt vowes, yeeld worſhip, and of whome we doe craue giftes. Women likewiſe are not without their women Saints, as Lucina, whoſe help they implore when they would haue children; and Iuno, of whom they doe begge to bee reuenged on their angrie husbands: there is almoſt no kinde of griefe, that hath not his Phyſition amongſt the Saints, which (as it is imagined) is an eſpeciall cauſe why Phiſitions can not gaine ſo much as Lawyers, becauſe
there is no controuerſie, be it neuer ſo litle, ſo iuſt, or ſo honeſt, that hath either he Saint, or ſhe Saint to defend it.
            They ſay it is an argument of a licentious common-wealth, where Phiſitions and Lawyers haue too great commings in.
            
               Many worthy men profeſſors of the lawAs I haue not endeuoured any priuate accuſation, ſo I will not enter into any particular praiſe; I might elſe in this place, without any ſuſpition of flattery, take occaſion to ſpeake in the commendation of many worthy Profeſſors of the Lawe, not onely of ſome that ſit Roahed on the Bench, but alſo of others that are Pleaders at Barre.
            
            The Profeſſor of the Lawe hath Relation to leade him, Conſcience to direct him, Iuſtice to counſaile him, and Honour to reward him.
            All happineſſe may be ſaide to be in that common-wealth, where Lawes be not only good, but wbere they are likewiſe duely obſerued and kept, without wreſting.
            The materiall cauſe of the Lawe is, that it conſiſtes of ſuch caſes, and for the correcting of thoſe diſorders, as accuſtomably befall in the Common wealth, not of things impoſſible, or ſuch as do but ſeldome times happen.
            The finall cauſe is to order the life of man, and to direct him what he is to doe, and what to forbeare.
            
               Many lawes a ſigne of many faults.What elſe are the great number of Lawes amongſt vs, but authenticall Registers of our corruptions? and what are the manifolde Commentaries
written vppon them, But a verie corruption of the Lawes themſelues, and what do they witnes vnto vs, But as the multitude of Phiſitions doe in a Cittie, that is to ſay, the multitude of our diſeaſes.
            Good Lawes do proceede from the wickednes of men, for it is offences that doe beget lawes: for where there is no law, there can be no breach of law.
            Good lawe vnexecuted, were better vnmade, yet ſharpe and rigorous lawes, were rather made to terrifie, then to deſtroy men. And, the ſeate of a Iudge, that is too ſeuere, ſeemeth to be a Gibbet alreadie erected.
            
               Many lawes commodious to the prince.Thoſe Princes that haue Policie to attire Auarice and Crueltie, vnder the pretence of eſtabliſhing lawes, they do therby exact their own commoditie: for where there be many Lawes, there muſt be many offenders: & the multitude of tranſgreſſors, are the riches of the Prince, when they make forfeyture, as well of their goodes, as of their liues.
            
               Warre a grieuous plague.
               Warre is the Miniſter of the wrath of God, when hee is diſpleaſed, no leſſe greeuous to the worlde (where it lighteth) then the loathſome plague of peſtilence.
            
               The fruits of warre.The effect of Warre is, the deſtruction of countries, the deſolation of noble houſes, and the ſacking of opulent Citties.
            The Action dependeth vpon fortune, or miſfortune, vpon oportunities, delayes, expeditions, frowardneſſe, and vntowardneſſe of a number of
vaine headed followers, if diſcipline be not the better reſpected.
            Warre is a miniſter of Gods Iuſtice, eyther for contempt of himſelfe, of his religion, or the wicked life of worldlings, ſo that it is the ſinnes of the people that vnſheatheth the Souldiers ſword.
            God is not the Author of ill, but the chaſticer of abuſe. Hee holdeth the hearts of Princes, and ordereth them to his will.
            
               Souldiors muſt ſerue the Prince.The Souldior with all obedience is to performe the will of his Prince: for if power were not to maintaine their proceedings, the Prince ſhould be diſpoſſeſt of his eſtate, cruell hands would be laid on his royall perſon: to conclude, in peace the Souldiour is a reſtraint to the rebellious, and in war makes ſubiect the prowdeſt reſiſter.
            
               Armes are but a corrector to the diſorder of peace, they are the Phiſitian to a decayed eſtate.
            
               A iuſt warre.The Warres vndertaken by Princes, either in defence of their right, or for matters in claime, may be reputed to be both iuſt and honourable; but in Ciuill warres, all things are full of miſerie, yet nothing more miſerable then victorie.
            
               Ciuill warres moſt miſerableLet him be accurſed (ſaith Homer) and liue with no Nation, nor Tribe, who ſtirreth vp domeſticall diſſentions, or ſeeketh after Ciuill warres.
            
            
               The motiues that draws on ciuill warre.Wealth and riches haue afflicted the manners of all ages, and what other thing hath engendred ciuill furie, then ouer great felicitie?
            The motiues that draweth them on, are commonly Faction, Sedition, and Tyrannie.
            
            
               
               Warres haue had their beginning with the world, and they will neuer haue an end, ſo long as the world laſteth.
            The Surfets of peace, is it that bringeth on warres, and what peace can be ſo ſurely knit, which Auarice and Pride will not eaſily vndo.
            
               There was neuer yet any kingdome free from the practiſe of ambitious heades, that lay in ambuſh for a Crowne.Wee are more readie and willing to conquer Kingdomes, then we are to ſubdue our owne affections; and warre depending on the deſire of gaine, & worldly glory, the ſweetnes of command, together with the gaine of a Crowne, will ſerue to couer any kind of iniurie: and warres are not ſo much arreared to defend a right, or to reſiſt an iniurie, as they are to encroach a wrong, and to inuade an innocent.
            It is the ſinnes of the people that draweth the Souldiors ſword, and when it pleaſeth the Almighty to puniſh by warre, all the things vppon the earth are euer preſt to fight vnder his banner, yea euen the ambitiouſneſſe of Princes, to puniſh themſelues one by another.
            They may much deceiue themſelues, who vnder the ſhadow, either of their mightineſſe, wiſedome, or policie, either in conſideration of their long continuance of peace, doe imagine ſtill to make the ſame perpetuall, neither can we Pleade preſcription againſt the iuſtice of the Almightie, who limiteth the boundes of all eſtates to his appointed time of correction, the which they can not paſſe.
            There is nothing then more neceſſarie immediately

               The knowlege of warrs moſt neceſſarie.after the knowledge of God, then to know how to manage our marſhall cauſes, when, aſwell Prince, Countrey, Religion, Law, Iuſtice, Subiects, and al together, are vnder the protection of Armes. Oſorius ſeemeth to confirme it in theſe wordes, He that taketh away the knowledge of Armes, worketh the ouerthrow of the Common-wealth. And Cicero againe leaueth this Item, We muſt not lay our Armes aſide, if we deſire to liue in peace. Plato, that that Princes Crowne can neuer ſit cloſe who once neglecteth the knowledge of Armes.
            This ſaying of Tacitus is not to be forgotten, No man is ſooner brought to ruine, than he that feareth nothing, for retchleſneſſe is the common entraunce into calamitie.
            
            
               Vnskilful men fitter to furniſh a funeral, then to maintaine a fight.To this I might adde, There is nothing more rather to incite an enimy, than where he findeth ſlouth and negligence: for where the orders and diſcipline of Warre is neglected, it is not the multitude of names in a Muſter-rowle that auaileth, when, the greater the number of men is, the more is their diſorder and confuſion. More Armies haue beene ouerthrowne through want of skill, than eyther for want of ſtrength or courage.
            It therefore behooveth thoſe that deſire to liue in Peace, to prouide themſelues of all things appertaining to the Warre; for in euery Action it is odious to erre, but in Warre it is moſt daungerous of all other, when there needeth but one fault to ouerthrowe an Army, whereon may depend the wracke of a Kingdome, and the loſſe of a Princes Crowne.
            
               Souldiors are full of faults.
               The Faults that are imputed to men of Warre, are not to be excuſed, and how ſhould it be otherwiſe, when in the firſt election they are rather choſen for their vices, than for their vertues: when a Letter of fauour is of more worth to preferre the ſwaggering Captaine, than either honeſtie, experience, or any other care of reputation.
            
               This ſparing of princes doth moſt hurt themſelues.Captaines are choſen, that haue no reſpect to Honour, but ſuch as do ſeeke to enrich themſelues with the generall ſpoiles of Warre. And if we did aduiſedly conſider of euery circumſtance, they are not altogether to be blamed: when Princes are growne, in nothing more ſparing, than in thoſe expences wherein they ſhould extend their greateſt bountie, I meane to Souldiors, whome they doe ſtill curtoll and ſcantell to a threed-bare alowance, and yet they cannot get that little but with loſſe, and moſt times kept ſo long without paie, that they are driuen, either to ſteale or ſtarue.
            
               A ſouldiors beſt reward is ingratitude.This want of Pay, is the original of all diſorder, it breedeth mutinies amongſt Souldiers, diſgrace to the Commaunders, and it giueth encouragement to an enimy that dooth vnderſtrnd it. It is the occaſion of treaſon, of ſelling of Townes, betraying of Fortes; and to be ſhort, the breach of all diſcipline; for, what reaſon hath that Prince to puniſh, that dooth not pay? And who can blame Souldiers to help themſelues in the time of warre, that are little reſpected in the time of Peace. This want of Pay is a iuſt excuſe to ſet them all a ſcraping, aſwell from friends as foes.
            
               The Souldier hee fleeceth the Husbandman, who is driuen for feare to forſake his labour. The Captaine he couſoneth the Souldier, and both of them (commonly) conſumers of the Cittizen.
            
               The want of pay, the cauſe of much miſchiefe.Nay the Prince him ſelfe eſcapeth not ſcot-free amongſt them, for if they do not coſin him of his pay, they will yet deceiue him of his ſeruice: for that Souldier dooth neuer performe any great enterpriſe, that loueth not his Leader: & how can he loue him, whom he knoweth doth oppreſſe him? neyther can that Captaine exploite any thing of woorth, that is not aſſured of the loue and obedience of his Souldier.
            
               A prince can not want ſouldiors.The Common-wealth haue as great neede of valiant men to defend it, as it hath of good Lawes to gouerne it. And Caeſar was woont to ſay, that there were two things which doe vphold, maintaine, and enlarge an Empire, that is to ſay, Men of warre, and money: and for the skilfull Souldior, although the prince doth ſtand in no doubt, nor dread of war, yet he is a grace vnto him, and ought to giue him countenance, if it were but in reſpect of Maieſtie. Tacitus addeth againe to this: It is certaine, that mightie Empires are not kept by ſooth, but by weapons in the handes of the experimented Souldior.
            
            An honeſt Souldior in the time of peace, is an honour to his Prince, and in the time of warre a great defence.
            The skilfull Captaine can treate of peace and warre, both together; but he neuer knew how to make a good peace, that neuer knew how to make warre.
            
            
               In the choiſe of a Generall, it is requiſite he be indued with experience, and martiall skill, otherwiſe there is ſmall hope of victorie, vnleſſe God doe fight for him, as he did for the Armies of the children of Iſrael. And yet they euer choſe the wiſeſt, and moſt skilfull men amongeſt them to bee Commanders.
            
            
               All choſen ſouldiors.I could wiſh, that thoſe that ſhould haue any great command amongſt Souldiors, ſhould be men of good reuenue. And although I doe here yoke wealth with vertue, yet I do make it but her hand-maid, for the exerciſe of liberalitie is many times as neceſſarie as knowledge and experience. And Captaines being men of honour, and able to liue, being well informed of the infamie growing of diſordered Militarie prowlings, & Pilfries, ſhould ſtudie how to keepe their Companies as complete as might be, and not exceſſiuely to robbe them, as in times paſt the cuſtome hath beene.
            
               The reliques of the Beadles whippe (me thinks are vnfit to bee made Souldiors; but our Souldiors in theſe dayes, are become proteſted enemies to all ſorts of Poultrie, as Capons, Hens, Chickens; nay, they will not ſpare the Cocke himſelfe, if hee come in their walke. But if they meete a flocke of Geeſe, it ſhall neuer bee ſaid when they are gone, but that they durſt ſay, Bo to a Gooſe.
            
            When Rome honoured her Captaines with triumphs, and ſolemnities, ſhe did not onely reward the corage of the Triumpher, but alſo their iuſtice, with which ſhe maintained her army in peace and
concord, together with the which ſhe performed her enterpriſes.
            It hath beene holden for great happines, where the ſword and all other weapons of warre, are turned to plow-yrons; and I could acknowledge it for a great bleſſing, if it might bee ſo brought to paſſe, but the malice of men hath made them ſo neceſſarie, that they can not long be ſpared.
            
               Cicero ſaith, An vniuſt peace is to be preferred before the moſt iuſt warre, and I reuerence the Author that writeth, They that contemne peace, to ſeeke for honour by warre, doe many times looſe both peace and honour.
            
            
               An aſſured peace (ſaith another) is better than a victorie that is but hoped for: And it is truly ſaid, the prayers that are exhibited in the behalf of peace, is farre more happie for the Common-wealth, then the noiſe of Drums and Trumpets, ſounding the alarums of warre.
            
            
               Good to be warriors, but not warre louers.I muſt confeſſe, that theſe warre louers, are like Phyſitions, that could wiſh the Cittie to be full of diſeaſes, whereby they might bee imployed for their owne gaine. And it may be, that ſome of our warriours haue ſought to aduaunce themſelues by that profeſſion: but he that would gather a Catalogue of thoſe that haue ſuffered ſhip-wracke vpon that hope, had need to haue a long ſcroll.
            
               Valiancie hath an eye to warre, warre againe the like to peace, peace to the proſperitie of the Common-wealth: but this proſperitie is it that ſetteth an edge, both of ſlouth and negligence: for as peace is the parent of proſperitie; ſo it is the nurſe of
pride, and the trainer vp of all careleſſe ſecuritie: and in the time of peace there is no wickedneſſe that wants example.
            
               Peace the nurſe of all iniquitie.But peace breedeth plenty, ſo it armeth Cape apee, all ſortes of ſinnes, and as Warre hath his aſſociates, Sword, Fire, Famine, and Murder; ſo Peace hath his copartners, Pride, Pleaſure, Idlenes, Luſt, Senſualitie, Drunkennes, Gluttony, Voluptuouſnes, and ſo many other enormities beſids, as were but curioſitie in me to hunt after.
            
               After Rome began to diſcontinue her warres, vice forgat not to reenter into cuſtome.Peace draweth the very corruption of manners after it, and there is nothing that brings ſo ſweete and eaſie a ſubiection to vice, as the ſeaſon and idlenes of Peace, it enfeebleth the minds of yong men, it maketh them become Hermaphrodites▪ halfe men, halfe harlots, it effeminats their minds, and nuzleth them vp in all folly, it giues old men opportunitie, to trauell, to turmoile, and to tire themſelues, by oppreſſion, by extortion, by periury, by vſury, by bribery, by craft, by ſubtiltie, and by all manner of vngodlineſſe, to ſcrape for my yong maiſters ſonne, who is then ſporting and dallying with his wench, whileſt his father is thus in his money harueſt toyling for wealth: then comes in ſome gloſing Expoſitor, and he expoundeth this miſerable ſcraping of pelfe, to be a zeale, to be a pittie, to be a fatherly care to prouide for his houſe, for his children, and for his family, according to the rule of the Apoſtle.
            In the time of Peace, the prowling Marchant findeth libertie to carry away corne, beere, butter,
cheeſe, leather, lead, tinne, ordonance, cloth, and al commodities of eſpeciall importaunce: and they returne vs againe, wine, reiſins, figges, orenges, and many other trifles that might very well bee forborne.
            
               The ill more in number than the goodBy this we may perceiue, the vices that are hatched vp in Peace, are in farre greater number, than the enormities that accompany Warre: and therfore if the affaires of Warre do not buſie a Stateſman, the diſeaſes of Peace will ſo turmoyle him, as he muſt be ſtill vigilant to diſcouer the diſeaſes of the commonwealth dayly drawne in by this ſecuritie and ſurffet of Peace: and I thinke the worlde will neuer be ſo reconciled, but that thoſe that be good, ſhall finde more ill than they ſhall be able to redreſſe.
            
               Diſſimulation in the time of Peace wors than warre.I might ſpeake of many other daungers depending vpon Peace, eſpecially where it is growne ſo careleſſe, as to neglect all preparation of Warre: Philopomines ſaieth, That in the time of Peace, it is then best to prepare for warre: But we haue a better inſtance, Solomon notwithſtanding he was promiſed a peaceable gouernement by God himſelfe, and was called in the Scripture Rex pacificus, he yet forgotte not to furniſh his garriſons with greater prouiſions than his father Dauid had doone before him, though he were ſtill turmoyled and tyred in the warre: and the deceitfull enemy vnder the colour of Parlies, of Truces, and of treaties of Peace, hath effected that which he could neuer performe by open warre.
            
               Truces many times patched vp the cauſe of many inſuing dangers.
               
               Beleeue not thine ennemy, ſaieth Eccleſiasticus, for with his lippes hee ſweetneth, and in his heart he betrayeth thee, to make thee to fall into the dike, and weepeth with his eyes, but if he light vpon a fit occaſion, hee will not be ſatisfied with thy blood.
            
            I haue now wouen this web of Peace and War, I haue made a ſhort medly of all together, if it be good for any thing, I care not; I hope it will proue either hote or colde, and then it may be employed to vſe, either fit for ſummer or winter.
            
               A Prouerb truely approued.I am not halfe ſo wel acquainted among Courtiers, as I am amongſt Souldiers, yet I was a yong Courtier, and I haue approoued the Prouerb, A yong Courtier, an olde Beggar, I could commend his iudgement that firſt ſet it downe, but I would he had prooued but a lying Prophet.
            I am now to ſpeake alittle of Courtiers, and it is but according vnto that little experience I learned long agoe; if I hit the trueth, it can be but chance medley, and then I hope I ſhall intreate a Pardon of Courſe: if I faile of mine ayme, it is time to leaue ſhooting, for a good Archer is better known by his ayme, than by his arrow.
            
               A Princes Court.A Princes Court is like a glorious gardin, planted and repleniſhed with ſeuerall ſortes of pleaſant flowers, whereof ſome are ſpoiled in the bud by the Caterpiller, ſome reſerued in the bloſſome, to content the eie of the beholder; the Bee gathereth honny from the one, the Spider draweth poyſon from another, euery one making vſe, but according to his owne nature.
            
               It fareth ſo with Princes Courtes, ſome repaire thither, hoping of preferment by their vertuous indeuours, and to growe in fauour by their good deſeruings: other incited by vanitie, make their reſort to ſatisfie their humors, with alittle fooliſh brauery, ſpending their time in voluptuous exceſſe▪ So that, as the Court is a Schoole of Vertue, to ſuch as can bridle their mindes with diſcretion; So it is a Nurſe of Vice, to ſuch as meaſure their willes with witleſſe affection.
            In the Courtes of Princes, fauour preuaileth with many, by occaſion, not by deſert, by opinion, not by worthineſſe, where Gentlemen muſt be delicate, Ladies amorous, the Prince himſelfe ſtudious, and though not ſeeing all enormities, yet compaſſed about with many that be enormious.
            Let Trian preſcribe good Laws for eternall memorie, where are they ſooner broken than in the Court of Trian, Let Aurelius ſtore his Court with wiſe men, yet euen there they doe waxe diſſolute.
            The Court is fitter for Aristippus, then for Ariſtides, for Criſippus then for Cato, for Damocles than for Calisthenes.
            
            
               Court flattterie.In Court euery man muſt be flattered in his foly, euery great mans vaine ſhall haue a follower; if Phaleris will torment, Perillus will inuent; if Aemilius will martire, Paterculus will miniſter; if Alexander will be ſtately, Phocion will be humble; if Domitius fooliſh, Hippodamus will be frantike.
            
               A noble mans nod, a banket for a foole.
               By theſe ſteps of ſoothing, our Courtiers ſeeke to climbe; and if a noble man doe but vouchſafe him a nodde; he waxeth ſo drunken with ioy, that he that ſhould but marke his demeanour, woulde thinke him to be new raiſed againe with Lazarus, to liue another age in the world.
            In the Court of a wicked Prince, fornications, Adulteries, Rauiſhments, and ſuch other, are yong Courtiers ſports; honeſt men are there oppreſſed, Ribaulds preferred, ſimple men ſcorned, iuſt men perſecuted, preſumptuous men fauored, flatterers aduaunced.
            
               Such ſaints, ſuch reliques.
               Ahab being a wicked king, was ſo ill attended, that Eliah thought onely himſelfe to ſerue God, and that all the reſt of the Kings ſeruants and followers, were Idolaters and Worſhippers of Baal.
            
            If Honors were to be compaſſed by vices, as in olde Rome they were by Vertues; who ſhould haue more aduaunced to honour, in one yeare, then Rome had of good men in a whole age.
            In Court the itching eares of the Vaine-glorious muſt be ſcratched by Sycophants: and he that cannot make the Diuell a Saint, tis high time hee were with God, for this is no worlde for him to liue in.
            The meaner ſorte of Courtiers muſt learne, to creepe, to crowch, to flatter, to make a ſcoffe at Vertue, to buy and ſell breath, and to bluſh at no diſgrace.
            A prowde Court makes a leane Countrey, and theſe Moathes of the Court, they are the woorſt
vermin, that can be in a common-wealth.
            
               Theſe beging Courtiers that are ſpying out of ſuites to the hurting of the common-wealth.How many will Diue into a Princes eare, and vnder the pretence of common good, do obtaine thoſe ſutes, that are but for their owne priuate gaine: How many againe that liue perfumed in the Court, ſleeping in ſenſualitie, ſecured vnder the protection of greatnes, that are ſtill gaping after ſutes, graſping at Monopolies, the very plague ſoares of a common-wealth, that doe oppreſſe a Comminaltie, to maintaine the voluptuous pride of one priuate man, to vpholde his inordinate expence with the purſes of the poore.
            
               Goods ill goten will ſticke to the ſoule.Some will ſay, That goods ill gotten, will ſoone decay: but that Prouerb is not true, for they ſhall find that the goodes that are thus raked from the common-wealth, will ſticke cloſe to the ſoule, whatſoeuer they do to the body.
            How many againe that doe poyſon the eares of Princes, that haue no other meanes to make themſelues gracious in the eye of the Prince, but by ſtirring him vp to wicked and vngodly acts, as Lucane Curio ſtirred vp Caeſar.
            
            
               Princes fauorites.He that is fauoured by a Prince, he muſt bee ſoothed in his pleaſure, prayſed in his follies, commended in his vanities, yea, his verie vices muſt be made vertues, or elſe they will ſay we forget our duties, we mallice greatneſſe, we enuie his fortune, and how ſhall we be checkt by the Paraſites that follow him? And for thoſe that are highly prized in a Princes fauour, what cannot they effect? they can flie without wings, they can diſguiſe the truth
without controlment, they can fight without hands, they can conquer without weapons, they can kill a man behinde his backe with a word, that they durſt neuer looke on the face with a ſworde, and they haue reigned more kings in their priuie Chambers, with their ſmoothing flatteries, then haue beene ouercome in the open field, with their armed enemies.
            
               Nobilitie fitteſt for a princes Court.
               Honourable Nobilitie, are the fitteſt ornaments wherewith to garniſh a Princes Court: For Nobilitie is a moſt glorious and excellent Image of auncient progenie, moſt commonly repleniſhed with excellent vertues.
            But Nobilitie (in many places) hath little left but the bare name, and that is diſtained too, by her owne deſeruings.
            Euerie ſtocke and linage is beautified by vertue, but vertue is not beautified, nor ſet forth by any linage.
            It is true Nobilitie, which as on a chiefe pillar is ſtayed vpon vertue, but where that pillar is ouerthrowne, there Nobilitie muſt likewiſe fall to the ground.
            Wee followe not thoſe ſteppes that bring vnto honour, but we trace out thoſe tracts that leade vnto pleaſure or profite; and we rather deſire to be rich, then to be wiſe.
            If we were as couetous of our proper honour, as we are greedie of other mens goodes, the canker of Infamie could not ſo deuour our renowne and reputation.
            
               Gaine and glorie did yet neuer march in one ranke, no more did profite and honour.
            
               Danger and honor doe follow one an other, & wiſedome, and modeſtie, ſecond them.We haue in theſe dayes varietie of Scutchins, ſundrie ſorts of Armes, multiplicitie of dignities and honourable titles, but true Nobilitie is it that ſpringeth from Vertue.
            
               Saluſt writing to Cicero, vpbraided him to be diſcended from a baſe kinde of people, but himſelfe was extracted from a noble progenie: to whome Cicero made anſwer, that Salust indeede was diſcended of noble raſe, but he was the firſt that had debaſed the Nobilitie of his houſe. And for himſelfe he was diſcended (indeed) from a people of obſcure condition, but yet he was the firſt Gentleman of his ſtocke.
            
               They chaſe from them the profeſſors of vertue.There is nothing to counterpeiſe the ballance of a noble name, but how many little worthy perſons haue there beene in times paſt, that woulde faine haue gone currant for ſix ſhillings eight pence; yet if they had beene brought to the ballance, they would haue weighed too light by a great deale more than the common allowance of two graines, but if they had bin tried by the touch, we might well haue ſaid, All is not golde that gliſters.
            
               That greatnes to be commended that conſiſteth in goodneſſe.The title of Nobilitie to a good man is of great excellencie; but to an ill man, of no leſſe infamie.
            It is likely that good ſhould come of good, and vertue is moſt ſucceeding in noble blood, and the worthineſſe of honourable anceſtors craueth a reuerend regard to be had in their poſteritie.
            
               
               Honourable Nobilitie is fitteſt to counſaile kings, and to take vpon them the great affairs of the ſtate· Our Noble men are inflamed with the deſire of glorie and renowne, and the inferiour ſort doe thinke themſelues moſt happie and bleſſed, when they are gouerned by the wiſedome and vertue of Noble perſonages, that commonly manage their authoritie with magnificence, for as it is witneſſed in the Prouerbs,Prou. 29. Where righteous men are in authoritie, the people reioyce: but where the wicked beare rule, the people ſigh.
            
            
               Nobilitie fitteſt to counſel kings.
               Honourable Nobilitie is then moſt fit to counſell a king, and the care and ſtudie of good Counſailors is ſtill to endeuour thoſe things that ſhall concerne the honour of God, the preſeruation of the Kings royall perſon, and the furtheraunce of the good and benefite of the common-wealth: and in the middeſt of their moſt weighty affaires, not to leane too much to the pollicies of worldly wicked men, that they impugne the wiſedome and pollicie ordayned and decreed by the Almightie himſelfe.
            
               Vnfit for counſellors.There is nothing more vnbefitting in a Counſailour than paſſion, to be haſtie, to be angry, to be cholericke; for anger, rage, and fury haue neuer bin knowne to gouerne well.
            Couetouſneſſe is the poyſon that marreth all, but Couetouſneſſe in a Counſailor is the mother of extortion, of oppreſſion, of bribery, alienating all compaſſion into mercileſſe crueltie, diſhonouring the reputation euen of the greateſt perſonages,
making them to be reputed amongſt the baſe and miſerable minded.
            It teacheth to buy or ſell all things for money, and to neglect no manner of meanes that brings in gaine.
            
               A law amōgſt the Thebans.The Thebanes eſtabliſhed a Lawe, forbidding, that no man ſhoulde bee admitted to the adminiſtration of any manner of gouernement in a common-wealth, except hee had firſt left off buying and ſelling, of retayling, or tranſporting for the ſpace of tenne yeares.
            
               An excellent vertue in a Counſellor.There is not a more excellent commendation, that may be giuen to a Counſailor, nor any thing better pleaſing to God and man, than to haue him compaſsionate of the poore oppreſſed ſuters, that follow him, giuing them diſpatch with ſuch conuenient expedition, that their long and tedious ſuings be not more hurtfull vnto them than any wrongs they haue formerly indured.
            Here leaving the Muſes to their Helicon, I yet once againe implore th'aſſiſtance of the heauenly Power, that I might ſpeake a little of Kings and Princes, with that humble and dutifull reuerence, that is appertaining to their greatneſſe, and but fit for me to meddle with.
            As the Law when it was firſt giuen, with thundring, lightning, and great terrors vnto the people from Mount Sinay; ſo likewiſe when the children of Iſrael required a King, he was firſt giuen with the like tempeſt of thunder, which ſo feared the people, that they cried vnto Samuel, to pray for
them, that they might not die.
            Here is to be noted the authoritie of a King; for as the voice of the Law is terrible to the wicked: euen ſo is the King, for he is ordained to take vengeance, and hath a ſword to puniſh offence.
            The Prince executeth not his owne authoritie, but the iudgement of God, and whoſoeuer reſiſted the Anointed of the Lord, reſiſteth God himſelfe.
            
               Kings the great miniſters of God.As God hath ordained Kings and Princes to beare ſouereigne authoritie vpon the earth; ſo he hath dignified them with names and titles belonging to himſelfe, aſwell to put them in minde of their owne duties towards God, as alſo to ſtirre vp and continue the loue and obedience of their ſubiects towards themſelues: So that whether the King bee good or bad, he is yet notwithſtanding the gift of God, and either the Miniſters of his mercies, or of his iudgements: for if the Prince be euill, he is ordained for a ſcourge to wicked and vnthankful people, to puniſh their ſinnes.
            
               Kings and Princes muſt be obeyed.Subiects may in no wiſe charge their Princes with any crimes at their owne pleaſures, for the power of Kings commeth from God, who holdeth the hearts of Princes in his owne hands, and ruleth them according to his owne pleaſure.
            A King doth not adminiſter his owne, but the affaires of many, obſeruing duely thoſe Lawes whereof he is both founder and ouerſeer.
            In mine opinion they are much ouerſeene, that will preſcribe lawes and order of life to Princes,
who are Lords ouer Lawes, and may inioine them to others.
            Good Kings are to be wiſhed for (where they want) but howſoeuer, good or bad they muſt be obeyed; for if Iupiter bee angrie, hee muſt ſend a Storke to deuoure.
            In the word of a King, there is power, and who ſhall ſay to his Prince, What doſt thou?
            
            
               The prerogatiue of princes
               Princes may ſhake off their owne errours, by blaming other men, and ſo they may aſſume their ſeruants foreſights to their owne praiſe.
            The good will of a Prince may eaſily be obtained, but as quickly blowne forth againe with the wind of ſlaunder: and therefore Cicero admoniſheth to ſpeake as reuerently of Kings and Princes as we do of the gods.
            
               The office of a King.The office of a Prince ſerueth to ſuppreſſe tyrants, and to vpholde the meaneſt ſubiect in his right, againſt the greateſt power that would oppreſſe him.
            A Prince muſt heare the complaint of his Subiects, if either the regard of his owne glorie, or the eſtate of the publike weale be deare vnto him: for that is the moſt abſolute and behouefull thing appertaining to a Prince, and is no leſſe precious vnto him then is his Empire.
            Moſt happie is that Prince, and borne (no doubt) for the good of his Countrey, that neglecteth not that ſpeciall care toward his ſubiects.
            A Prince to be iuſt in himſelfe, is honour to his perſon; but to miniſter right to his wronged
Subiects, is a generall good to the whole Common wealth.
            The office of a good King towards his people, ſhould be as a father toward his children, but not as a Conquerour toward the vanquiſhed.
            As there is nothing more miſerable to a Prince then to be compelled; ſo there is nothing more rather to breake the heart of ſubiects, then when he will not be intreated.
            There is nothing more gratious in a Prince, then mercie, but yet ouermuch lenitie breedeth contempt.
            The King that treadeth the ſteps of clemencie, becommeth old, and leaueth his inheritance to his poſteritie; but the Prince that gouerneth with rigour and crueltie, is ſeldome ſet to liue long.
            
               Thales being asked what rare thing he had ſeen, anſwered, An old Tyrant.
            
            
               Wherin princes are moſt deceiued.Princes moſt commonly are in nothing more deceiued, then in beſtowing their rewards; but eſpecially when they giue vpon other mens commendations.
            
               Of what princes haue leaſt ſtore.Princes haue not ſo much ſcarcitie of any other thing, as they haue of that, whereof they ſhould be moſt plentifully ſtored, which is, Of ſuch as ſhould tell them the truth.
            
            
               Compariſon betweene a good prince and a bad.The differences betweene the Prince that is vertuous, and the other that is vicious conſiſteth in this.
            The firſt ſtriueth to enrich his ſubiects, the other to ſacke and ſpoile them: the one ſpareth the honour
of good women, the other triumpheth in their ſhame: the one taketh pleaſure to be freely admoniſhed, the other diſpiſeth nothing ſo much as wiſe and vertuous counſaile: the one maketh moſt account of the loue of his ſubiects, the other is better pleaſed with their feare: the one is neuer in doubt of his owne people, the other ſtandeth in awe of none more than of them: the one burdeneth them as little as may be, but vpon publique neceſſitie, the other gnaweth the fleſh from their bones but to ſatisfie his vaine pleaſures: the one in the time of warre hath no recourſe but to his own Subiects, the other keepeth warre but onely with his ſubiects: the one is honoured in the time of his life, and mourned for after his death, the other is hated in the time of his life, and regiſtred with perpetuall infamie after his death.
            A cruell Prince will make a ſlaughterhouſe of his Common-wealth: A vicious Prince will make it a ſtewes, a prodigall, wil ſucke the marrow of his Subiects, to glut ſome fiue or ſixe Paraſites that wil be about his owne perſon, diſguiſed in the habite of fidelitie.
            A good Prince will not dedicate the Common wealth to himſelfe, but will addict himſelfe to the Common-wealth. And becauſe no man asketh account of him in his life, he will therefore bee ſo much the more ſtirred vp to aske the ſtraighter reckoning of himſelfe.
            There be many other worthie preſcriptions ſet downe by that worthie Emperour Aurelius, that
I may ouerpaſſe, & will giue a little touch of things neceſſarie and behouefull to be ſpoken of.
            
               A King muſt not be vnniſhed of treaſure.The expences of a King is great, and therefore he muſt be well ſtored, and ſtil prepared with treaſure, to beare out the charge. It is he that muſt defend his Realmes and ſubiects, from the ſpoyle and rapine of forreigne forces: It is he that muſt be prouident in the time of peace, to haue all things in a readineſſe againſt the time of warre. Can he then be vnprouided of treaſure? Warres not to be mainteined with emptie coffers.Or ſhall his ſubiects grudge and murmure againſt him, if he ſupply his wants by Taxes or Subſidies, which are warranted by the word of God, and which the Prince may take with a verie good conſcience, for the bearing out of his expences, which doe concerne the common good and ſafetie of the ſubiects:Many examples in the Scriptures to warrant it. the king muſt defend all, and there is no reaſon but his wantes ſhould be ſupplied by all.
            
               A neceſſarie conſideration for princes.There is yet a matter of great importance for a Prince to conſider of, that vnder this priuilege of taxing his ſubiects for his needfull and neceſſarie affaires, hee doth not oppreſſe them for any vaine or idle expences; for what is he that dare preſcribe limits or bounds to a King? what he ſhould take or leaue of his ſubiects. If he haue not a good conſcience of himſelfe, if he haue not a charitable diſpoſition towards his people, of his owne princely nature, who dare croſſe him in his courſes, or tell him of thoſe faults wherein he offendeth? or what Subiect (that knoweth his duetie) dare ſpeake againſt a princes prerogatiue?
            
               It was not without cauſe therefore, that Chryſoſtome with ſuch admiration did ſay, Miror ſi aliquis rectorum poteſt ſaluari. And Apolonius ſaith, that the treaſure taken by a Prince from his ſubiects by tyrannie, is more baſe then yron: for being wette with the teares of the people, it cankereth and becommeth accurſed.
            
            
               Subiects muſt not reſiſt.That Prince therefore that will exact more then inough, between god & his own conſcience be it; but the ſubiect is to make no reſiſtance. Our Sauiour Chriſt hath left vs example, for hee himſelfe paid that was impoſed vpon him: and when the Scribes and Phariſies demaunded of him, whether it were lawfull to pay tribute to Caeſar, he did not impugne it.
            
               Kings haue need of great priuileges.Kings and Princes had neede of great priuileges, their cares are many, and farre exceeding the common capacitie of the ſimple multitude. A Princes royall Robe doth couer many cares, and their guardes are not able to defend the aſſaults of troubled thoughts.
            Better for a Prince to bee Irus for contentment, then to enioy the Empire of the whole world. For whileſt he ſeeth all pleaſures, he enioyeth none, and in the middeſt of his ſugred dainties, he ſuppeth vp ſorrowes, euery day tyred with ſuters, troubled with Damocles, euerie night ſubiect to broken ſleepes, troubleſome thoughts, and vncouth dreames.
            A Kings daintie diſhes are alwayes ſawced with ſuſpition, & there is reaſon; for although amongſt

               Chamber counſellers that are ſtill buzzing in the eares of Princes.the vulgar, too much ielouſie ſauoureth of little wit, yet more hurt commeth of the light beleefe of Princes, then of miſtruſt: amongſt the reſt, Thales admoniſheth Kings and Princes to ſuſpect him moſt, that is most buſie ſtill to be whiſpering in his eare.
            
            
               Aristotle aduiſeth, that a Prince ought earneſtly, and aboue all things, to haue care of things diuine, he rendreth this reaſon; For thoſe ſubiects doe hope that they ſhall ſuffer leſſe iustice from that Prince whom they deeme religious, and who feareth God: and leſſe conſpiracies are complotted againſt him, as hauing God him ſelfe for his helpe and ſuccour.
            
            
               The bleſſedneſſe of the time preſent.Let me now ſpeake but a word of the time preſent, and let me ſpeake truly of our owne happineſſe, here within this Empire of great Britain: with what zeale and feruencie hath our royall King reeſtabliſhed that Religion of the Goſpel, the which although hee found it here readie planted to his hand, yet with how many ingins hath the Pope and the Diuell ſought ſithence, to vndermine and ouerthrow it, and are yet euerie day endeuoring, if his Maieſty himſelfe were not the more firme and conſtant.
            He hath then bleſſed himſelfe, his Realmes, and Dominions with the light of the Goſpel; and if the happineſſe of peace be a bleſſing, we likewiſe enioy it by his happie gouernement. To prop vp all with great ſecuritie, he hath made choiſe of a moſt wiſe, diſcreete and godly diſpoſed Counſaile, the Pillars (indeede) of a happie Common-wealth.
            
               To conclude, if there be felicitie in peace, in proſperitie, in pleaſure, in plentie, we inioy all by his wiſdome and prouidence: if there be any thing wanting, it is but thankefull hearts to God, and to our King, that hath bleſſed vs with thoſe foyſons, that we are glutted, and almoſt readie to burſt; but let vs take heede, that with the churliſh Nabal, we harden not the heart of Dauid againſt vs.
            
               The crueltie of one man towards an other.Let vs now looke into the particular dealing of one man towards another, and we ſhall find ſuch plentie of fraude, linked together with violence, as if one were brought into the world to ſubuert and roote out another: and I thinke the world would ſuddenly periſh, if wrath were not by mercie appeaſed.
            
               We are afraid to do well.We ſpeake of Honeſtie, but it is with halfe a lip; and for Vice, we ſeeme to ſhut it out at the broade gate, but we priuily take it in againe at the Wicket: we make a gappe where the gate ſtands open, and we ſeeke to enter by force, where the high way lyes by fauour. We deſire to come to Chriſt by night with Nichodemus, that no bodie might ſee vs for feare of worldly loſſes, and it is a point of wiſdome to take Chriſt in one hand, and the world in another, and to make ſome outward appearance a litle to ſatisfie the world, if it be but with a dumb ſhew.
            A man for faſhions ſake may inroll himſelfe in the Muster booke of Ieſus Christ, but in the day of ſeruice, he may ranke himſelfe to fight in Satans campe.
            
            
               
               Ill feaſting with God.It is enough for vs to cry, Lord, Lorde, but not to doe any thing that is commanded by the Lord of Lords: if we doe thinke of God, we thinke him eaſie enough to be pleaſed, we know how to driue him off, and to gaine time, till wee haue a more fit opportunitie.
            Man is made of body and ſoule, and the bodie is then in his moſt floriſhing eſtate, when the ſoule is beſt obeyed; but the body rebelling, and waxing lazie and ſluggiſh, the ſoule then beginneth to faint: but the ſoule being immured in the durtie priſon of the body, feeleth not her owne euill, but in the euill that ſhe there indureth.
            
               Reaſon that ſhoulde rule, is but incloſed in the narrowe compaſſe of the head, all the reſt of the partes of the body beſides are left to affections: Anger raigning in the fortreſſe of the heart, Pride, Luſt, Concupiſcence, and ſuch other poſſeſsing all the partes of the body; our eyes, whoſe office ſhould be to direct our ſteppes in a right courſe, are they not our gerateſt ſtumbling blockes? what enemies more malitious to vs than our eares, that are ſtill wide open to wickedneſſe? The tongue, is it not more apt to ſpeake ill, than good? our hands, our feete, and all the reſt of our other partes, more nimble and ready to vanitie than vertue.
            
               The diſtemperature of our own humors.Euery Idea of folly is become our ſummum bonum; our neceſſary and naturall members (firſt created as the miniſters to the Soule) are now become the diſturbers of our innocencie, our braine in ſtead of wiſe precepts, are cloyed with idle imaginations:
our eyes the dreamers of our diſcretions, are made the blindneſſe of the inſight of our ſoules.
            
               The miſerie of man.What is man? a bodie ſubiect to a thouſand diſeaſes, a thouſand harmes, a thouſand daungers, weake, fraile, fraught with miſeries within, wrapped with wretchedneſſe without, alwayes incertaine of life, euermore aſſured of death.
            Againe, who is ſo found or healthie of bodie, but hath a diſeaſed mind, and then if he were put to his choiſe, had not rather to haue a ſound mind in a ſicke bodie, then to be tormented with continuall griefe of minde in a healthfull bodie?
            The waues and ſtormes of our affections raiſed with euerie puffe of wind, doth ſo toſſe and turmoile vs vp and downe, that the beſt Pilots are driuen ſometimes to ſtrike ſaile, and Reaſon it ſelfe is well neere driuen to forſake the Helme.
            The greateſt things in the world doe climbe but to fall, and hee that climbeth moſt high, his fal is greateſt, they haue their times, an age to win, and an houre to looſe, we compaſſe the heauens, the earth, and the ſea, with our fooliſh thoughts, compaſſe our ſelues whiles we liue in ſixe foote of aire, and being dead within an ell of ground, and who hath beene ſo much admired for his might, which hath not beene as much contemned in his fall?
            See the change of times, a man now happie, ſtrait happeleſſe; now compaſſed with friendes, now ouercome with foes; this day rich, that
day poore; at Morne a Prince, at night a Peaſant.
            
               Our reputation but as it pleaſeth the fooliſh people.Our worldly honour hangeth on brittle Ballance, and our reputation runneth as the conceit of the common people will affoord, ſometimes Caeſar renowned in the Senate, accounted a Pater patriae, no ſmall time Emperour, beloued of Brutus, ſaluted by Cicero: now Caeſar a Tyrant, ſlaine in the Senate, Hoſtis Patriae, bereft of his Diademe, no Pater but Predator, from an Emperor to a dead carkaſſe, gored with his friends owne knife, vnkind Brutus, exclamed on by the declaiming Cicero, O ſtrange mutabilitie!
            Notwithout wiſdome the world is reported to be Sphericall, for it is ſtill turning, and with great iudgement Fortune is ſaid to be blind, for ſhe is ſtill flitting, and when we thinke to haue the ſureſt footing, we are euen then moſt ſubiect to declining.
            It were good if euerie man would mend one, but that will not be performed, for we imitate nothing but what we doe ſee; and when we doe ſee, ſetting vppe that light that might giue vs example.
            Let thy Conſcience bee Commaunder to call Reaſon to account, whether ſhe hath ſubiected her ſelfe to ſenſuall appetite, and let Conſcience examine thy Will, whether her deſires haue beene chaſte, or as a Harlot ſhe hath luſted after her own delights. He that could cal himſelfe to this account, and could aduiſedly conſider of that eternitie to
the which the Soule is prepared, he would neuer ſeeke to patch a peece, and to lengthen out his hopes with ſuch fraile and tranſitorie ſtuffe that he neuer thinkes of death, till the one of his feete be alreadie in the graue.
            Death it is that looſeth vs from the chaines of bondage, it onely ſetteth vs free from calamities, and it bringeth vs to the harbour of happineſſe. God grant vs whileſt we doe liue, ſo to liue, that our life might ſerue him; and when we die, our death might ſet him foorth, that our life might die in him, our death liue to him, and that both life and death might glorifie him.
            FINIS.
         
      
   