
      
         
            
            
            
               OPINION DIEFIED. Diſcouering the Jngins, Traps, and Traynes, that are ſet in this Age, whereby to catch Opinion. Neither Floriſhed with Art, nor Smoothed with Flatterie. By B. R. Gentleman, Seruant to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie.
            
            LONDON. Printed for Thomas Adams. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST HONORABLE SYR THOMAS RYDGEWAY Knight Baronet, viz. Treaſurer, and Treaſurer at Warres in his Maieſties Realme of IRELAND, and one of his Maieſties priuie Councell in that Realme.
            
            
               MOſt honorable and moſt worthie to be honored Knight, Cato hath ſet downe his Opinion, That thoſe that did nothing learned to do ill.
            
            I beleeue him, and I thinke it againe to be true that he doth much euill that knoweth no good at all.
            I may boldly ſpeake thus much (without any great oſtentation to my ſelfe) that I do ſometimes thinke of doing good, though I doe but little, now he that ſometimes thinketh well, perhaps other whiles may hyt vppon doing well: but when I looke into the Cattalogue where good deedes are commanded, I find it written that we muſt Feed the hungry, Cloath the naked, Helpe the poore and needy. Comfort the comfortleſſe, Viſite thoſe that be ſicke.
            
            When I looke againe vnto my betters, that are well able to performe theſe preſcriptions: I find the moſt good they doe, is God helpe ye, God helpe ye, indeede I haue not for ye.
            
            Well God be thanked yet, good prayers are good cheape, for we had rather open our mouthes, and ſay God helpe ye twentie times, then once to open our purſes and to beſtowe a penny.
            Now to ſpeake of any good that I can doe my ſelfe, I confeſſe it is very ſmall, yet to auoyde that ill that Cato ſayes wee doe

learne by doing nothing, I haue betaken my ſelfe to my penne, thereby to auoyd idleneſſe, I haue wouen out the Webbe of vaine Opinion, briefly expreſſing howe it hath Dominered from the beginning: I haue made a ſhort Medly of altogether, if it be good for any thing I care not, I hope it will proue eyther hotte or colde, and then it may be imployed to vſe, eyther fit for Summer or Winter, be it good or badde or howe ſo euer, I haue made bolde to preſent it to your iudicious view, wherein I haue imitated his ſimplicity, that preſumed to preſent lines to Minerua, but it is Opinion that hath made me thus bolde, yet not the Opinion of mine owne wit or worthyneſſe, but the Opinion that I haue of your worthy acceptance, for I haue ſo much the better Opinion of my ſelfe, knowing my ſelfe to bee fauoured by you: it is your many fauours towardes mee, that hath alwayes made mee mindfull of your vertue and worthyneſſe.
            I beſeech you Syr, to accept it as a ſeruice of his good intent that would bee glad to preſent you with more worthyer preſents: in the meane time, can but wiſh long life, ſtill lengthened out with all happyneſſe, euermore reſting.
            
               To doe you all ſeruice BARNABE RYCH.
            
         
         
            
            The Contentes of the Booke.
            
               The potency of Opinion. Chap. 1.
               The antiquitie of Opinion. Chap. 2.
               What diuerſitie in Opinions amongſt the Philoſophers. Chap. 3.
               What contrarieties in Opinion amongſt Chriſtians. Chap. 4.
               A generall Opinion receiued by all men. Chap. 5.
               Of diuerſe and ſeuerall Opinions concerning gouernment. Chap. 6.
               Of ſeuerall conceiued Opinions behouefull for Princes. Chap. 7.
               What diuerſitie in Opinions who fitte to bee made Counſaylers. Chap. 8.
               All humane policie, but vayne Opinion. Chap. 9.
               It is Opinion that placeth men in office and authority. Chap. 10.
               It is Opinion that maketh Fooles to bee admired for their wiſedome. Chap. 11.
               The gouernment is neuer good that is mannaged by Opinion. Chap. 12.
               What diuerſitie in Opinions about the prerogatiue of Princes. Chap. 13.
               The mutability of Opinion in all times and ages. Chap. 14.
               How oppoſite in Opinion to our predeceſſors, our actions beare witneſſe. Chap. 15.
               What variety in Opinion whether the miſeries that are drawen in by warre, or the vices that are hatched vp in peace, are moſt tollerable. Chap. 16.
               What diuerſitie in Opinion amongſt Lawyers. Chap. 17.
               Of Opinion what it is. Chap. 18.
               From whence Opinion hath his being. Chap. 19.
               How Princes and other great perſonages are ledde aſtray by Opinion. Chap. 20.
               How vnworthy perſons doe creepe into the Opinion of Princes and other great perſons. Chap. 21.
               Nobilitie led into Opinion by Paraſites. Chap. 22.
               Of ſelfe Opinion how it beſotteth. Chap. 23.
               The vnconſtant Opinion of the vulgar. Chap. 24.
               
                  Of particular Opinion, how it infecteth Fooles. Chap. 25.
               What Opinion the antiquitie helde of Fame. Chap. 26.
               The vaine Opinion of thoſe that haue hunted after Fame. Chap. 27.
               That Fame and Renowne are but popular Opinions. Chap. 28.
               Of the number of Follies in this age whereby to winne Opinion. Chap. 29.
               From whence it is that men are ſo eaſily drawne into Opinion. Chap. 30.
               What it is that onely bridleth Opinion. Chap. 31.
               
                  Opinion Diefied. Chap. 32.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            OPINION DIEFIED.
            
               The Potency of Opinion. Chap. I.
               
               
                  SIMONIDES, a great Philoſopher, being deſired by Cicero, to enquire what God was, craued a dayes reſpite to meditate of the matter, which requeſt when hee had obtained, and that he began to ſummon his ſenſes, and to enter into a conſideration of the buſines, hee found it to be ſo intricate and obſcure that the next day when he ſhould haue giuen his reſolution, hee was inforced then to craue one whol month longer, in which meane time hee might the better bethinke him: which requeſt being likewiſe granted vnto him, being now in his deepeſt cogitatiōs of the taske he had taken in hand, he was ſo confounded in his enterpriſe, that the farther he ſought, the farther he was from his purpoſe, he was therefore inforced to ſtay his attempts, and to ſubiect his Opinion to the inſcrutable eſſence of the moſt higheſt
               Now whether is more to be wondered at in the Philoſophers for the inſight they had in naturall things, or for their blindneſſe in the knowledge of him that was the authour of all things, who the more they laboured by their philoſophy to comprehend, by ſo much the ſooner they loſt themſelues: I am brought into this predicament with the Philoſophers, for hauing a little begun to meditate of this ſubiect by me vndertaken, I founde the potency of Opinion to bee ample and infinite, that

the more I looked & conſidered of the matter, the leſſe I found my ſelfe able to performe it, and as in the night time, the more wee fixe our eyes on the firmament, the greater number of ſtars we ſtill diſcouer: ſo he that ſhall but looke into Opinion, how it hath ſwaied in the world from the beginning, may eaſily find matter wherewithall to begin, but neuer find time when to make an ende: he that ſhould then enter into that Laberinth, had neede of Theſeus clew to wind himſelfe well out: but for mine own part, I cōfeſſe I neuer came nere thoſe places wher the Muſes haue vſed to frequent: I dare not therefore wade to deepe in this ſubiect, for Opinion was neuer ſo nice and fooliſh to pleaſe as ſhe is at this houre: and ſhe is in nothing more curious then in cenſuring of books, for he that will preſume to publiſh a booke, if hee doth not learne with the Tayler and the Atyremaker, to put it into a new faſhion, it will neuer ſell, it will lie ſtill in the Printers hands, and thoſe lines that are now put in print if they conteine any matter of pietie, or that are any whit at all entending to honeſty, they doe but peſter a Stationers ſtall, and there are very few or none that will beſtow one peny of them, ſuch is the curioſity of Opinion in this age, but eſpecially concerning bookes, I might yet ſpeake of ſome ſtrange conceited books that hath beene publiſhed by ſundry authours, one amongſt the reſt In the Contempt of glory, ſome others In the prayſe of the peſtilence, In the prayſe of the Quartane Ague, In the praiſe of Baldnes: In the praiſe of a Flie, in the praiſe of Nothing: and that great Clarke Eraſmus of Roterdam, writ a book In the prayſe of Folly: & all theſe and diuerſe others that might be yet named, the meere motiues of Opinion.
               
               But leauing to ſpeake of Pamphlets, I might ſpeake

of great volumes nay (excepting the holy ſcriptures) how many bookes are extant, which Opinion hath not had ſome hand in?
               It was a ſtrange Opinion that led Alexander to bury his horſe Bucephalus, Auguſtus to bury his Parrot, Heliogabilis his Sparrow: & what ſhould we ſay to Hortenſius a Roman Gentleman, that mourned certaine monethes for the death of a fiſh.
               By this little it may appeare the Potency of Opinion, how it hath raigned and ruled in the world in all times, in all ages, in all places, and hath had ſoueraignty with all ſortes of perſons.
            
            
               The Antiquity of Opinion. Chap. II.
               
               THe firſt conception of Opinion was in heauen, at that time when Lucifer fell: for it was a ſelfe ouer-weaning Opinion that puffed vp thoſe glorious Angels into that height of pride, that was the cauſe of their perdition.
               It was after hatched vp in Paradiſe: for when the Serpent inſinuating himſelfe to curry fauour with the woman, that ſhee might the rather conceiue a good Opinion of him: what (ſayth he) hath God forbidden you, that you ſhould not eate of the tree of knowledge? but why ſtand you in doubt of that preſcript, there is no ſuch danger in the matter as he hath proteſted, for God doth know that when you ſhall eate thereof, your eyes ſhall bee opened, and you ſhall bee as Gods, knowing both good and euill.
               This pleaſing perſwaſion ſo allured the woman to like of his ſpeeches that ſhe beleeued all to bee true, but

it is Opinion that firſt begetteth beleefe (according to the old prouerbe) Men are beleeued as they are beloued, for we neither truſt nor beleeue him in whom wee haue no conceit whereby to draw on our affiance, but where Opinion is a little ſetled, euery moule-hill is turned to a mountaine, we beleeue impoſſibilities, we wonder at matters of no moment, nay we many times, extoll, and commend ougly vice, for ſeemely vertue: this poore blind Opinion hath euer ſince ſo dominired in Adams poſteritie, that it no leſſe ouer ruleth the Prince then the Peſant, the mighty then the meane, the rich then the poore, the wiſe then the fooliſh.
            
            
               What diuerſitie in Opinions amongſt the Philoſophers. Chap. III.
               
               VVHat varietie in Opinions amongſt the Philoſophers, and how many ſectaries were there amongſt them, as Stoickes, Peripatetickes, Ethnickes, Academickes, Epicures, and as hyſtories doe make mention, there were 50. ſeuerall ſectes amongſt them, and what were theſe contrarieties, they were but Opinions: and thoſe that ſtill were ſtriuing to vpholde Reaſon with ſo many reaſons, were yet vtterly ignorant from whence Reaſon came, the wiſeſt amongſt them did but geſſe of the Immortality of the Soule, yet they were ſtill diſputing and arguing one againſt an other to vphold opinions, that were ſometimes farre from the truth.
               They could ſpeake many good words concerning manners and conuerſation amongſt men, but of God, they ſpake nothing but dreamingly, neyther dreamed they of him, but ouerthwartly and how many greeuous in counters haue there beene amongſt them concerning

the principles of naturall things whereof there are many, that doe yet hang before the Iudge not fully decided.
               
                  Thales Myleſius, one of the wiſe men of Greece, beginning to looke into the generation of things, concluded that the world had his firſt beginning by water.
               And Archelaus (not farre diſſenting from his Opinion) affirmeth that the creation of the earth, was but by liquid water inflamed by the heat of fire, and by reſolution turned into duſt.
               
                  Heraclitus, he thinketh all things to haue their originall of fire, concluding with Ariſtotle, That the corruption of one thing, is the generation of an other, Democritus and Criſippus with diuerſe others, they referre the originall of the world to a little nothing, & making vp a ſomething of this Chaos, they conclude it to be the ſubiect of corruption.
               
                  Anaxagoras truſting in his owne opinion, fabled that the Sunne was compoſed of bright Iron, and that the heauens were of ſtone, wonderfully knit together leaſt they ſhoulde fall.
               I might yet ſpeak of many other contrarieties in Opinion, that was holden amongſt the Phyloſophers, about Fate, about Fortune, about Felicity, & what diſtinctions they made betweene Natura Naturans, and Natura Naturata, ſo that to conclude the Phyloſophers that haue ſo much buſied them ſelues to ſearch out the beginning of thinges, coulde neuer find out God the creator and maker of all things.
               The wiſedome of that Phyloſopher is yet to be admired who ſuſpected the vprightneſſe of his owne carriage, when he heard himſelfe to be commended, by a man that was noted to be of a lewd conuerſation.
            
            
               
               What contrarieties in Opinion amongſt Chriſtians. Chap. IIII.
               
               AS this iarring and ſeditious diſputing was of continuance amongſt the Phyloſophers, ſo Opinion is made a mattter of conſcience with Turkes, Infidels, Papiſtes, and Sectaries, and there were amongſt the Heathen in times paſt, who to win an opinion, were faine to perſwade the world falſely, that they had conference and communication with the Gods.
               In a great part of the world (euen at this day) Mahomet is worſhipped, who was the authour of a very fooliſh religion: And the Iewes are yet looking after their Meſſias, but amongſt vs Chriſtians, it is ſtrange to ſee what diſagreement there is amongſt our cleargy men about rites, about ceremonies, about worſhipping, about apparell, about diſcipline, & about many other matters too long to bee ſpoken of, but this is eſpecially to be wondered at aboue the reſt, that they doe thinke by oppoſition, and contention to aſcend into heauen, for the which in times paſt Lucifer was throwne downe into hell: the diuiſions that are amongſt diuines by ſiniſter opinions holden about religion, are ſo diuerſe, doubtfull and contrary, that they haue filled the Schooles and Vniuerſities with contention & ſcoulding, who contend not for the confines of Chriſtian religion, but for the principall appertayning to our ſaluation.
               I dare not affirme confidently, that learning & knowledge is able to giue vertue vnto vs, but this I know, it prepareth our mindes to imbrace it: and as there are many that vnder the vayle of vertue, doe ſhadow their vices, ſo then bee as many againe that doe indeuour to learne (but not how to liue well) but how to diſpute againſt the truth, an vngratious ſtudy that doth nothing elſe, but learne how to erre.
               
                  How many doe make themſelues blind, by ſeeing too much, who curiouſly ſearching out the vertue of words, do careleſſely ſubuert the words of the truth.
               A madde opinion in thoſe that hauing a Saint Iohns Goſpel or an Agnus Dei, hanging about their neckes, doe thinke themſelues thereby to be free from all manner of daunger, and that the perfection of a Chriſtian man, doth eſpecially conſiſt in thoſe gaudy trifles: but yet moſt fooliſh of all to beleeue, that when Chriſt came to worke the ſaluation of the world, that hee did not finiſh the worke that hee came for, but left the greateſt part of the buſineſſe, to bee performed by a popiſh prieſt.
               And theſe dreames and fantaſies that are but the obſtinate, wilfull and blind opinions of papiſtes, they would wreſt to be matters of conſcience, and do no leſſe reuerence them, then the heathen doe their Gods.
               
            
            
               A generall Opinion receiued by all men. Chap. V.
               
               ONe religion is the author of vnitie, but from a confuſed religion, there alwaies groweth diſſention, therefore this opinion is generally receiued, that one religion is to be obſerued in one kingdome.
               Contrarieties in religion doth moue ſedition, it draweth to conſpiracie, to treaſon and rebellion, and therefore here is no place for clemencie, for thoſe that doe violate religion (by the opinion of all men) are worthie to be chaſticed, yet in diuerſe countries after diuerſe manners.
               Some cries out burne, torture, torment, ſaw a ſunder, kill, murther, poyſon, maſaker, blowe vppe with gunpowder, but leauing to fetch any preſidents from any of thoſe tyranicall gouernmentes, yet I neuer heard of godly policie,

where the diſturbers of religion, did euer eſcape vnpuniſhed, but if the Prince bee not ſometimes able to rule the mindes of the erronious yet it is very expedient for him to bridle their tongues.
               Let vs but ouerrunne all Europe a little in our imaginations, and ſee for religion, whether the difference in opinions, doth not breed a diſcordancie in affections, neyther may Princes winke at corrupt and vicious religions, for as a man cannot ſerue two maſters, ſo the ſeruice that a Chriſtian prince ſhould yeeld vnto Chriſt (in reſpect of his royall vocation) is to make lawes for Chriſt, which if he ſhould doe the like for Antichriſt, it cannot be ſalued but that he ſhould then ſerue both God and Mammon: and Saint Auguſtine was of Opinion, that light ſhould not be matched with darknes, nor Chriſt yoked with Antichriſt.
               
               
                  Solomon was reiected for admitting other Gods to be ſerued (within his dominiōs) beſides the God of Iſraell, though his toleration were granted in reſpect of his owne wiues which were ſtrangers.
               But where the edge of correction is abated and taken away, it giueth boldneſſe to ſubiectes not onely to forſake God, but likewiſe to ſpurne againſt the Prince, and to liue in contempt of his lawes and proceedinges.
               And it moreouer draweth after it an vnbridled liberty to doe euill, and maketh offences to become vſuall, and to grow headſtrong: holſome ſeueritie therefore, hath euer beene ſtill commended, and is many times more neceſſarie then this ouermuch clemency.
            
            
               Of diuerſe and ſeuerall Opinions concerning gouernment. Chap. VI.
               
               WHat diuerſitie in Opinions hath there beene about the gouernment of common wealths, what diſputations,

ſome vpholding that which is called Monarchia, others Ariſtocratia, other ſome that which they called Democratia: and as there were great contrarieties in opinion what gouernment was beſt, ſo when it was reſolued that the kingly gouernment was moſt agreeable both to nature and reaſon, then they were as diuerſe in opinions againe, which was moſt worthie, eyther election or ſucceſſion: and whither this place of regall gouernment, belonging but to one, what that one ſhould bee, whither a man or a woman: then they made cauels againſt the female ſexe, obiecting againſt them that although God the creator hath giuen wit vnto women yet he hath denyed them ſtrength and abilitie of bodie, as though vertue were ſo partiall to exclude any, eyther for want of ſtrength or for want of wealth, or that ſhe refuſed to receiue any becauſe of their ſexe, it is not the body but the minde, for where the body is weakeſt, there the vnderſtanding is ſtrongeſt: and although there might be preſidentes enough inferred of many worthy Queenes that haue beene valiant, wiſe, and full of prouidence (ſome of them reputed for Propheteſſes, but as ſuperſtition increaſed in the worlde, many of them accounted for Goddeſſes) yet leauing them all to their immortall Fame, let me in this place humbly craue pardon to ſet downe mine owne Opinion in this matter, I will neyther ſeeke Aſia nor Affrica, for a preſident, but lette me with reuerence put you in remembrance of that gracious gouernment (that can neuer bee forgotten) howe our worthy Queene Elizabeth, whoſe Heroycall vertues all the world did admire, whoſe gratious gouernment, whoſoeuer could duly conſider of, will neuer let, freely to confeſſe, that a good woman inthronized in the ſeate of ſoueraignty, is as great a bleſſing from God, as otherwiſe the eſtabliſhing of the moſt worthieſt man.
            
            
               
               Of ſeuerall conceiued Opinions behouefull for Princes. Chap. VII.
               
               A Prince that is contented to be counſayled by manie, becommeth of all others the moſt wiſeſt, but hee that leaneth but to the opinion of thoſe whiſpering chamber counſaylers that are euery day buzzing in Princes eares, ſhall be many times led into errours.
               
                  Thales aduiſeth kings and princes, to ſuſpect him moſt, that is moſt buſie ſtill to be whiſpering in his eare.
               The king is but one man, and cannot poſſibly ſee into all occaſions, it muſt therefore neceſſarily followe, that eyther by giuing libertie to his owne appetites, or leaning too much to the opinion of thoſe whom he doth affect, hee muſt bee led aſtray: for ſurely, it is a matter of more importance then euery ignorant man can looke into, for a prince that is aſpired to the height of Fortune to holde a due courſe in the troubleſome ſea of gouernment, and not to bee caryed away with the windes of immoderate libertie.
               It is an eaſie matter for a king to gouerne good ſubiectes, yet there is not a more ready way wherby to incite ſubiects to be good then by the example of his owne life.
               A Prince after he hath once incurred the hatred and ill opinion of his people, and that they haue once alienated and eſtranged their affections from him, ſhall hardly attempt any thing, how prouidently ſo euer entended, but it ſhall be blaſted with ſcandall and ſiniſter interpretation.
               It is a ſpeciall vertue in a prince to be well inſtructed in the diſpoſition of thoſe that be neare about him, but by the generall opinion of all wiſe men, princes haue not ſo much ſcarcitie of any thing, as they haue of that whereof they ſhould be moſt plentifully ſtored with, and that is, of ſuch as ſhould tell them the truth: but it is not behouefull for

princes to giue credite to all informations that will be told them, but eſpecially from any ſuch as they imploy in any places of authoritie.
            
            
               What diuerſitie in Opinions who fit to be made counſaylers. Chap. VIII.
               
               AS by the ſeuerall opinions of diuerſe learned men, kings and princes ſhould be aſſiſted with graue & wiſe counſaylers, ſo there was as great diuerſitie in opinions againe, how theſe counſaylers ſhould be choſen, out of what profeſſions the election ſhould be made, and what perſons they thought to be moſt fitting for the purpoſe.
               King Drydanus amongſt the Cicilians, gaue greateſt honour to the ſacrificing prieſtes.
               
               
                  Brias king of Argiues, gaue eſpeciall preferment to the Philoſophers.
               
               
                  Numa Pompilius amongſt the Romaynes was of Opinion, that he was worthy to be eſpecially reputed, to whom had happened the victorie of any famous battell, and that was fortunate in warres.
               
                  Anaxarchus ordained amongſt the Phenetians that in the common wealth ſuch ſhould be honoured who in the time of peace, entertayned the ſtate in tranquillitie, and in the time of warre were found to be valiant protectors of the lymits and liberties of their countrey: concurring with that of Tully, who likewiſe preferreth to the higheſt degree of honour, thoſe who armed doe make warre, and roabed doe rule and gouerne the common wealth.
               
                  Lactantius, left vs his opinion in theſe words: I repute him to be moſt wiſe, who as occaſion falleth out, can giue good inſtructions what is fitteſt to be done: Next I holde him to bee wiſe, that can followe good aduiſe, that is giuen him by others, but hee that

can neyther giue nor take counſayle, I account him to be in the higheſt degree of indiſcretion.
               
               The Thebans made a law forbidding that no man ſhould be admitted to the adminiſtration of any maner of gouernment in the common wealth, except he had firſt left of buying and ſelling for the ſpace of ten yeares, directly forbidding all men whoſoeuer, that were mercenary, or vſed any trade or profeſſion that brought in gaine.
               This were a hard decree for Lawyers, that doe thinke no man ſo fit to gouerne as he is, that is learned in the Lawes: and I confeſſe the ſtudye and knowledge of the Lawes, to be an excellent profeſſion, and I reuerence the grauitie and wiſedome of the Iudges that are found to be vpright in their Iuſtice and Iudgement, but yet that a proctor, an Aduocate, a pleader, or any of thoſe men that haue been mercenary, and haue oftentimes beene the miniſters of falſhood and iniury, bearing about them both mindes and tongues, inſtructed and armed againſt iuſtice, it is a hard matter for him to bee a louer of iuſtice and truth, that hath inured his tongue to ſpeake for gaine and lucre.
               In the time of warre the common wealth is defended by Souldiers, in the time of peace it is preſerued by Counſaylers: Souldiers and Counſaylers therefore, haue bin euer thought moſt fitte to gouerne: but a happy and a bleſſed common wealth it may bee called that is gouerned by the wiſedome and vertue of noble perſonages that doe commonly mannage their authorities with magnificence, and not by the policies of worldly wiſe men, that thinke nothing to be vnlawfull that bringeth in gaine.
               Honourable nobility is then moſt fit to counſayle a king and the care and ſtudy of good Counſaylers is, ſtill to endeuour thoſe thinges that ſhall concerne the honour of God,

the preſeruation of the kings royall perſon, and the furtherance of the good of the common wealth, and in the midſt of their moſt waightie affayres, not to leane ſo much to the policies of worldly wicked men, that they impugne the wiſedome and policy ordeined and decreed by the almightie himſelfe.
            
            
               All humaine policy, but vaine Opinion. Chap. IX.
               
               THe world hath euer bin full of policy, but theſe Politicians that haue ſquared out there gouernementes by the rule of their owne wits, haue euer been found to be moſt dangerous ſtates men.
               Would you haue ſome preſidents, looke into the life of the two Catoes: the one with his franticke accuſation diſturbed the whole common wealth of Rome, the other goinge about ouer wiſely to protect it, did vtterly ſubuert it: And Cicero, with all his eloquence, was as troubleſome amongſt the Romains, as Demoſthenes was amongſt the Athenians: I might ſpeake of others, that with their peuiſh diſciplines haue diſturbed the quiet of ſtates, for to ſpeake truely what are the policies of men, but vayne opinions.
               
               It is truth, that policie is a ſpecyall part of gouernment, and hath ben magnified by a general applauſe amongſt Infidels but amongſt Chriſtian Princes, there is not a more peſtylent thing then this plague of policy which diuides it ſelfe from that policy preſcribed by the rule of gods worde. In matters of policie, vanitie beareth ſway, when from the force of humayne preſcriptions they thinke to mayntaine & vphould a common wealth without conſideration that the principal thinges that do bring miſeryes, and diſorders to countryes and kingdomes, are ſuch offences as are directly oppoſite againſt

the maieſty of God, as where his word is neglected his religion deſpiſed, where his glory is not principally, but reſpectiuely conſidered: where we ſeeke by policie to lift vp our ſelues and to plucke downe God: And where we thinke to eſtabliſh ſuch a gouernement, whereby to pleaſe and content our owne appetytes, without any reſpect at all to the aduancement of gods glory.
               This policie is to be reiected amongſt Chriſtians. And as that policy that is conducted by the rule of gods word, is the life of gouernement, ſo policy (as it hath beene commonly taken and vſed amongſt a great many) is indeede the high way to Atheiſme.
               
               What ſhould I ſpeake of this man, or of that mans opinion concerning this matter, I doe appeale to euery mans opinion (that hath either wit, or Iudgement together with the feare of God before his eyes) whither that man (howe great a polititian ſo euer accounted) yet if hee bee not religious, or that his policies be eſtranged from that policie that is commanded by our ſauiour Chriſt in his glorious Goſpell, whither ſuch a polititian were not more fit to bee made a Counſayler, to a Heathen then to a Chriſtian Prince.
               Then he that hath but Mammon for his God, and Machyuell for his ghoſtly father, is to bee reiected and that common wealth that is gouerned by ſuch a policie is not onely vnhappy, but in the winding vp it becommeth miſerable.
            
            
               It is Opinion that placeth men in office and authoritie. Chap. X.
               
               AS Kings and princes muſt bee thus aſſiſted with honorable Counſaylers, yet moreouer and beſides, as the body cannot guide it ſelfe with the head alone, but it muſt haue the helpe of other members, no more can Common

wealths be well gouerned without the aſſiſtance of inferior officers.
               It is called a happy Common wealth where ſubiectes be good, now from whence this goodneſſe in ſubiectes ſhould proceede, there be diuerſe opinions, ſome woulde haue it to proceede from good lawes ſubſtantially and duly adminiſtred, ſome hold opinion that good education doth informe it, ſome others are perſwaded, that the temperature of the Climate doth make men apt for Ciuill life, and other ſome doe holde Opinion, that the indeuours of good Magiſtrates doth make good ſubiectes.
               I am ſure we want no poſitiue lawes whereby to bridle abuſe, but the example of a good and godly life in thoſe that ſhould miniſter the due execution of thoſe lawes, would be more effectuall then the lawes themſelues, becauſe the actions of thoſe that are placed in authoritie, are receiued by the common people, for precepts and inſtructions.
               But the greateſt number of them doe rather ſhowe their authorities in correcting other mens faultes then in mending their owne, and they will propounde to others what they themſelues will neuer put in practiſe: but it is Opinion that placeth them in office and authoritie, and it is Opinion againe that maketh many men rather to attend their owne priuate, then the publicke commoditie, becauſe they know that all honors and dignities are giuen to men that be rich, but not to men that be honeſt: there be many therfore, that diſtruſting their owne vertues, haue no other meanes wherby to aduance themſelues, but by bribery, and giuing of rewardes: and therefore in former well gouerned Common wealthes, this inſatiable deſire of honour, was ſo bridled and curbed, that theſe oppreſſing practiſes were well enough preuented and ſo circumſpectly looked vnto, that

no ambitious perſon (contrary to the rules of honeſty) ſhuld either by bribery, or any other meanes of corruption, aſpire eyther to office or dignitie.
               To ſpeak my opinion I think that cōmon wealth to be happy, where offices are giuen to the vertuous, but not to the rich. And where thoſe might be well puniſhed that do ſeeke by mony to oppreſſe vertue: but in thoſe common wealths, where ſo great worſhip and veneration is giuen to riches, there is nothing ſo holy ſo godly or religious, that couetouſnes (the fatall plague of all gouernement) cannot violat and ſubuert. The Lacedemonians, conſulting of the cōtinuance of there eſtate, was anſwered by Apollo that Sparta ſhould be deſtroyed by no meanes, but by corruption the which fatall prediction to avoyd, they reiected the vſe of gould ſiluer & braſſe making a coyne (to paſſe currāt amongſt thē) of iron.
               When Rome began ſo far to decline from her precedent magnificence that all thinges were ſet to ſale, to be bought & ſould for mony, Iugurtha ſeeing the corruption, was of opinion that the citty it ſelfe would ſhortly proue ſalable, there wanted but a bountifull Chapman, to make a large offer, and it fell ſo out indeede, for the Emperiall ſtate was bought & ſould for mony ſhortly after, and Saint Peters Chayre hath ſo continued for theſe fiue or ſix hundred yeares together, and more Popes ſince that time haue crept in by corruption then by any orderly Canonicall election.
            
            
               It is Opinion that maketh Fooles to be admired for their Wiſdome Chap. XI.
               
               IN the appoynting of Officers, in former ages, the beſt opinion, was had of him that was moſt profitable to the Common wealth but now who is ſooner preferred then he that is moſt priuat to himſelfe & being once placed in authoritie,

though he neuer did good all the dayes of his life, yet if hee doth no harme we call him a very good and a moſt worthy magiſtrate: and may we not well repute him to be good, that all the dayes of his life is good for nothing: but the moſt ignorant, are euer moſt apteſt to beleeue that they are moſt worthy of the cheefeſt promotions, and becauſe they did neuer mannage any affayres of importance, they know not what burthen and difficultyes are there vnto incident.
               How many haue ſought to aduance themſelues to beare rule and gouernment by their wealth, who once placed in authority, haue made porte ſaue both of vertue & honeſty, ſeeking ſtill to inrich themſelues by the ruines of the common wealth, increaſing as faſt in their wickednes as they grew in wealth and riches. And theſe ignorant men that do ſeldome vnderſtand the truth of any thing, being drunke with the pleaſures and delightes that the abundance of their wealth bringeth with it, they do beleeue that the vnderſtanding how to rule is an eaſie matter, and that there needeth neyther art nor learninge to compaſſe it, but onely an audacious bouldnes, and a rough, and ſtout behauiour, wherevnto they do bend all their thoughtes, thinking him to be moſt happy, that doth liue moſt at liberty thus blinded with ignorance, they doe both abhorre and baniſh Reaſon, thinking it to be a bridle but to bringe them into bondage and to diminiſh their eaſe and contentation, and therefore flatteringe themſelues with an ouerweeninge Opinion, of their owne worthines, they do laboure to get eſtimation and authoritie amongſt men and to be accounted great, that in my opinion, may be well reſembled to the Giants that are accuſtomed at London once a yeare, to march before the Lord Mayors Pageantes, that outwardly do make ſemblance to be men of great might and valiance, but inwardly are nothing

elſe but Lathes, towe and ragges.
               Yet theſe men amongſt the ignorant and fooliſh people, are accounted to be wiſe, graue, learned, they are worſhipped, honoured, and reuerently eſteemed; but if they could but ſee into the barrenneſſe of their braines, and conſider the miſerable pouertie of their mindes, if they did not pitty their wretchedneſſe and miſery, I am ſure they would laugh at their ſimplicitie and folly.
            
            
               The gouernment is neuer good that is mannaged by Opinion. Chap. XII.
               
               IT hath many times beene queſtioned whither that gouernment be better, where there is a naughty prince, and good Magiſtrates vnder him, or where the prince is good and the Magiſtrates ill: Marius Maximus leaneth to the firſt, but a principall pillar of Philoſophy, hath ſette downe for a Maxime, how that common wealth is beſt and moſt aſſured, where the prince is ill conditioned, rather then where the magiſtrates are corrupt and ill diſpoſed.
               But there be many other of great authoritie, that will in no wiſe conſent, when former experience hath ſo many times taught, that euill men are oftener corrected by a good Prince, then an euill Prince amended by good men: but this is certaine, that there can be no worſe gouernment, then that which is mannaged by Opinion.
               
               It is a deſperate euill in any man that is too much in loue with his owne wit, but there is not a worſe enemy to a ſtate or common wealth, then where a Magiſtrate placed in office or authoritie, is too much leaning to his owne Opinion; for whatſoeuer affaires ſhall paſſe through his handes, hee wreſteth them ſtill to his owne conceipt.
               To conclude this chapter, I thinke this may ſtand for certaine

certaine, that where the magiſtrate is good, the people cānot lightly be ill, ſo that the goodnes or ilnes of the Common wealth doth much conſiſt in the example of the magiſtrate.
            
            
               What diuerſitie in Opinion, concerning the prerogatiue of Princes Chap. XIII.
               
               AS Emperours, Kings, Princes and Potentates, both them ſelues together with their liues & actions, haue beene euer more cenſured by opinion, ſo their princely prerogatiues haue beene ſometimes cald in queſtion, and it hath been demāded, whether they might exact vpō their ſubiects loanes, Impoſitions, taxes, ſubſidies, tributes, or any ſuch other like colections: and ſeuerall men haue ſeemed ſeuerally to determine of the matter, but what is hee that dares preſcribe limites or boundes to a king, what hee ſhall take, or what he ſhall leaue, or who is he (that knoweth his dutie) that dare ſpeake againſt a princes prerogatiue.
               If a prince by tiranny will exacte, what ſubiecte is he that dare impugne, if he hath not a charitable diſpoſition of his owne nature towardes his people, there is no croſſinge of him in his courſes by his owne ſubiectes.
               This matter was in queſtion when our ſauiour Chriſt was vppon the earth, when the Scribes and Phariſes demanded of him whether it were lawfull to pay tribute vnto Caeſar, he did not impugne it, but ſurrendered himſelfe to pay what was due, but here is a matter for Princes yet to conſider that vnder this priuiledge of taxinge their ſubiectes for their needfull and neceſſary affayres, that they doe not yet oppreſſe them, for their vaine and Idle expences: it was therefore but a barbarous opinion that was ſet downe by Eufemus, that nothing is to be accounted vniuſt in a prynce, that bringeth in commoditie: and the like againe in him that durſt

avouch that in an ample and large fortune that is moſt iuſt that is moſt profitable: but Apolonius was of an other opinion, for he hath ſet downe, that the treaſure taken by a prynce from his ſubiectes by tirany, is more baſe then iron, for being wette with the teares of the people, it cankereth and becometh acurſed: And it was no maruell though Chryſoſtome crieth out with ſuch admiration, Miror ſi aliquis Rectorum poteſt Saluari: the expences of a prynce are many, and it is he that muſt defend his ſubiectes & dominions from the ſpoile & rapine of forraine forces: if the king muſt then defend all, there is no reaſon but his wants muſt be ſupplied by all, it is warranted by the holy ſcriptures, & our ſauiour Chriſt himſelfe hath left vs an exā
                  ple, who refuſed not to pay what was impoſed vpō himſelfe
               Publicke actions, muſt neceſſarily inforce the vſe of a publicke purſe, and the prince muſt bee ſtill prepared & ſtored with treaſure, it is he that in the time of peace muſt haue all things in readines againſt the time of warre, & his ſubiectes muſt not grudge nor murmur againſt him, though he importune there contributions to ſupply his wantes.
               But what madnes is hit into my braines, that now when this ſweete and quiet peace hath luld vs all a ſleepe, I ſhould diſturbe them in their pleaſant ſlumber by ſpeaking of warres, an action that maketh euery man angry but to heare it ſpoken of.
               But Polipomines was of opinion, that in the time of peace, it is then beſt to prepare for warre.
               
               But we haue a better inſtance, Salomon, notwithſtanding he was promiſed a peaceable gouernment by God himſelfe & called in the ſcriptures Rex pacificus, yet he forgat not to furniſh his garriſons with greater prouiſions then euer his father Dauid had done before him though he were ſtill turmoyled and tired in the warres, neither was it omitted in

former ages, but in the time of peace they were ſtill prouident for the time of warre.
            
            
               The mutabilitie of Opinion in all times and ages Chap XIIII.
               
               IT would be tedious to ſet downe what meanes hath bin vſed whereby to drawe in mony for the ſupply of warres, for beſides Rents, Reuenues, impoſitions, taxes, ſubſidies penalties, confiſcations, loanes, and ſuch other like: there hath beene great ſums raiſed from the pride and exceſſe aſwell of men as of women; from their garded garmentes, there coloured ſilkes, their gould and ſiluer lace, their plate more then neceſſary, their chaines, their Iewels and ſuch other like ſuperfluities.
               But bleſſed be that gouernement that hath freed vs from that expence, we are not much burthened with any military charge: yet the ſurfetes of peace is it that bringeth on warres, or what peace can be ſo ſurely knit but Auarice & pride will not eaſily vndoe.
               It is a madde opinion to thinke that eyther our mightines our wiſedome, our policie, or that the long continuance of peace, which by a gratious gouernement wee haue hetherto inioyed, ſhould be ſtill perpetual, or who can plead preſcription againſt the iuſtice of the almightie, who limiteth the boundes of all eſtates, to his appointed time of correction the which they cannot paſſe.
               Now let vs looke into the vaine opinion of this age that can be contented to ſpend infinit ſums of mony, amongſt lawyers, amongſt faſhion-mongers, amongſt Epicures, and if I were able truely to calculate the ſummes, that are yearely ſpent in all ſorts of vanities: I dare be bould to avow it, it

would ſuffice to maintaine an able army, againſt any Prince in Chriſtendome that would be aduerſe vnto vs, now if his Maieſtie ſhould haue occaſion to vſe ſouldiers, eyther in defence of his owne right, or for any other matters in claime, (which warres haue euer beene reputed to be both iuſt and honorable, by the generall opinion of the whole world) I thinke thoſe that are now moſt prodigall in idle & vngodly expences would be then moſt ſparing in their contributions eyther for the honour of their Prince, or the defence of their country.
               See here the mutabilitie not of Fortune, but of opinion, in former ages they were honorably eſteemed of, that kept bountifull houſes, that vpheeld great hoſpitalitie: that were attended on by troupes of ſeruing men, that were able (if neede had beene) to haue ſerued the Prince, to haue fought for their countrey: but ſee what Opinion now ouer ruleth, when he is thought to be moſt prouident, that hath a foote boy or two, to runne by his Coach, and a Page in a garded coate, to attend on his trencher, my Lady muſt haue her powdered perywigs, her painted face, her mocke maske, that will doe little more then couer her noſe, and doe make themſelues like maskers indeede, that although they will put a vizard on their face, yet they would faine be knowne what they are.
               The Peacocke when hee is in his greateſt glory, yet when he lookes downe and ſees his blacke feete, hee puls downe his plumes, but our Gentlewomen, a great number of them haue prouided well for that, for their very feete ſhall gliſter with gould and ſiluer, their ſhooes muſt bee imbroidered, ſometimes with pearle, and becauſe they will haue no moniment about them, to put them in mind of their mortality they will exceed in pride, from the crowne of their head to

the ſole of their foote.
               I haue not ſpoken of theſe thinges as a warre louer for I confeſſe theſe louers of warres are like Phiſitions that could wiſh the citty to be full of diſeaſes, whereby they might be imploied for their owne gaine, but I am iuſt of his opinion that doth hold it for great happines where the ſword and all other weapons of warre were turned into plough irons, what I haue ſpokē is only againſt that exceſſiue pride which hath beene the ouerthrowe of many floriſhing common wealthes, which former well gouerned eſtates by penall lawes haue ſought with great diligence to preuent as by the ſequell of that which followeth ſhall more plainly appeare.
            
            
               How oppoſite we be in Opinion to our predeceſſors, let our actions beare witnes. Chap. XV.
               
               THe eye of wiſdome, that in former ages could looke into the enormities, that are euermore hatched vp in the time of peace, made ſuch lawes & prouiſoes, that men ſhould not abuſe their owne riches, nor be ſuffered to ſpend them in riote & exceſſe, I limit exceſſe in theſe foure in plate, in building in banquitinge and in aparell.
               
                  Dionyſius of Siracuſa (although a tirante) yet he made a lawe, that thoſe that exceſſiuely gaue them ſelues to banquiting & belly-cheare ſhould be puniſhed with great ſeueritie.
               There was a lawe made in Rome called Iulia, the tenure whereof was, that no man ſhould be ſo hardy to ſhut his doores when he was at dinner, that the officers of the towne might haue the more eaſie acceſſe, to ſee if their ordinary did not exceed their abilitie.
               
                  Licurgus made a lawe againſt drunkards, Auguſtus Caeſar againſt pompous building, the Lucanes againſt prodigalitie,

the Lacedemonians againſt exceſſe in apparell, the Egiptians againſt whordome, the Thebans againſt negligēt parents, that brought vp their children in idlenes and inſolency.
               
                  Cato depriued a Senator of Rome, for kiſſing of his wife before his daughter.
               P: Rufinus was depoſed from the Senate by the Cenſors, for hauing ten pound waight of ſiluer in his houſe.
               
                  Amelius Lepidus, hauing built a houſe, which coſt ſixe thouſand pounds, was for that cauſe depriued from the Senate.
               
               If theſe conſtitutions thus ordained by predeceſſors for the ſuppreſſing of vices were alowable and good, what may we thinke of our ſelues now in this age, that are ſo oppoſite in life and conuerſation: that we be not indued with thoſe common vertues that heathen men haue learned, eyther by reaſon giuen them by nature, or by vſe of liuing, or by the precepts of Philoſophy, for what a number of vs that do profeſſe to be Chriſtians, are ſeene to liue as if Heauen and Hell were but the Fictions of Fooles, or as we call them dreames and olde wiues tales.
               Let vs looke aduiſedly into the actions of this age, when was vertue and honeſtie more deſpiſed: when was pride, riot and exceſſe more immoderate, when was adultery and all other kind of vnchaſt liuing, eyther more apparant or leſſe puniſhed, when were all manner of abhominations more tollerated, when Magiſtrates will ſometimes fauour their owne vices in others: and euery man accounteth that to be moſt comly, which is moſt taken vp and inured by the vicious.
               How many men doe but flatter themſelues, by fauouring their owne vices, which they thinke to bee but veniall, accounting the immoderate vſe of voluptuous pleaſures, to

be but ſmall offences.
               Theſe adulterers, theſe drunkards, theſe ſwearers, theſe blaſphemers, they haue made a ſacrifice of their ſoules to the Diuell, and haue caſt of all care both of honour and honeſtie.
               We neuer thinke of the matter, how negligently we liue, and how careleſſely we ſleepe, euery houre beſiedged with a number of armed vices, that doe keepe a continuall watch, to bring vs to deſtruction: the thing that is eſpecially ſought after and deſired by all men is peace and quietnes, but theſe kinde of men that doe ſo much incline themſelues to this vngodly manner of liuing, it is but an vnaſſured peace they hunt after, for the happyneſſe of peace indeed, is to make war againſt our ſelues, and to fight ſtrongly againſt our owne vices, for with theſe enemies God himſelfe (which is our true peace) is at variance, and that with deadly hatred.
               The life of a Chriſtian was wont to be called a continuall warfare, but it is nowe turned to a more peaceable time, when we liue in banqueting, in eaſe and in idleneſſe, in pleaſure and in ſporte, and in ſteade of Tents and Pauilions, wee walter and tumble our ſelues vpon our beds of downe, and in the ſtead of hard Armour, wee bee cloathed in ſoft ſilkes, perfumed with muske bals, with powders and pomanders of ſweete and pleaſant ſmell: and in the ſtead of weapons in the hand of a warriour, a payre of perfumed gloues, or ſomtimes perhaps a Curtizans Fanne, and thou O madde man cryeſt peace, peace, when thou haſt God thine enemie, the author of peace, that hath with open mouth denounced warre againſt thee, for whoſoeuer is at one with vices, hath broken the truce made betweene him and God in the time when he was baptized.
            
            
               
               What varietie in Opinion whether the miſeries that are drawen in by warres, or the vices that are hatched vppe in peace, are moſt tollerable. Chap. XVI.
               
               SOme will ſay that, As the heart thinketh, ſo the tongue ſpeaketh: but we ſee where Opinion is once ingrafted, wee are no leſſe leaning vnto it in our actions, then we be in our wordes, and our opinions are ſo variable, that more changable then the Moone, we erect euery day a new choice, loathing that to morrow, which we liked of to day: and men doe vary in opinions, euen in matters of delight: yet amongſt all the things that may happen vpon this humane Theater of the world, there is nothing more generally hated then the actions of Warre, yet by a contrary Opinion conceiued by ſome other, there is nothing more pernicious then the bleſſedneſſe of peace.
               
                  Cicero would haue it, That an vniuſt peace, is to be preferred before the moſt iuſt warre.
               
               
                  Tacitus tels vs againe, That there is more ſafety in an vniuſt warre, then there is in a patcht peace.
               
               One affirmes warre to bee the miniſter of Gods wrath, when he is diſpleaſed, no leſſe grieuous to the world, then the loathſome plague or peſtilence.
               It is truth (ſayth another) warre is the miniſter of Gods iuſtice, eyther for contempt of himſelfe, or of his religion, or for the wicked life of worldlings.
               It is yet againe alleadged, that the effect of warres is the deſtruction of countries, the deſolation of noble houſes, and the ſacking of oppulent Citties.
               The effect of peace (ſayth another) is to draw the verie corruption of manners after it, and there is nothing that bringes ſo ſweet and eaſie a ſubiection to vice, as the ſeaſon

and idleneſſe of peace, it infeebleth the mindes of young men, it maketh them become Hermophrodites, halfe-men, halfe harlots, it eſſeminates their minds, and nuſeleth them vp in all kinde of Folly: It giueth olde men opportunitie to trauell and turmoyle, and to tire themſelues, by oppreſſion, by extortion, by bribery, by periury, by craft, by ſubtiltie, and by all manner of vngodlineſſe to eſcape from my yong maiſter his ſonne, and whilſt the father is thus in his money harueſt toyling for wealth, the ſonne is in a Brothell houſe, ſporting and dallying with his wench.
               But yet (ſayth one) Warres ſhould euer haue an eye to peace, and Warres ſhould neuer be taken in hand but to the end to haue peace.
               It is anſwered againe that peace is it that draweth to proſperitie, and this proſperitie is it that ſetteth an edge to ſloath and negligence, for as peace is the parent of proſperitie, ſo it is the nurſe of pride, and the trainer vp of all careleſſe ſecuritie.
               But warres ruineth both towne and Countrey, inforceth the husbandman to forſake his labour, it bringeth in want, dearth, and ſcarcitie, but peace is it that breedeth plenty.
               And as peace breedeth plentie, ſo it armeth Cape apee, all ſortes of ſinnes, for in the time of peace there is no wickedneſſe that wantes example: and I might yet further adde that in this time of peace the Marchant findeth libertie, to carry away Corne, Beere, Butter, Cheeſe, Leather, Tinne, Ordinance, Cloath, Wooll, and all other ſuch commodities, ſo that our ſtore and plenty, by theſe meanes are turned to penury.
               Warres that are vndertaken by a prince, in defence of his right, though they may be reputed to be iuſt and honourable, and likewiſe to ſuppreſſe a forraigne foe, although the

conqueſt bee accounted glorious, yet in Ciuill warres, all things are full of miſery, yet nothing more miſerable then victory: when it pleaſeth the almightie to puniſh by Warre, all thinges vppon the earth are preſt to fight vnder his Banner, yea euen the ambitiouſneſſe of Princes, to puniſh themſelues one by another: but where a kingdome is deuided in it ſelfe, the Barre of deuiſion proceedeth from their ſinnes: and where the neighbour forſaketh the neighbour, ſeeking to deſtroy him, God letteth looſe the reyne to bloud, for to runne vpon bloud, puniſhing (O great worke maiſter) one ſinne with another, ſo that where they once fall from God, they doe finde no crueller tormentors, then themſelues vppon themſelues.
               Warre is the ſcourge of God to puniſh ſinnes: the hand of Deſtiny to inforce change, and as it is the Adamant, to draw courrage vnto it, ſo it is a Baſilique to Feare, that dyes to behold it.
               Warre ſtrikes as God willes, workes as ſinne warpes it, and to be briefe, it is a miſerable neceſſitie in nature, and a neceſſary corrector of times infirmitie.
               It is yet againe alleadged that the Prayers that are exhibited in the time of peace, is farre more happy for the common wealth, then the noiſe of Drummes and Trumpets ſounding the Alarums of warre.
               And yet we may perceiue that the vices that are hatched vp in peace, are in far greater number then the inormities that doe accompany warre, and therefore if the affayres of warre doe not buſie a Statesman, the diſeaſes of peace will ſo turmoyle him, as he muſt be ſtill vigilent to diſcouer the diſeaſes of the common wealth daily drawne in by the ſecuritie and ſurfeites of peace.
               I might yet inferre diuerſe other opinions, ſome vpholding

the calamities to be intollerable that are drawne in by warre, whoſe aſſociates, are Sword, Fire, Famine, and Murther, other ſome as bitterly reprehending the abhominations that are daily foſtered vppe in the time of peace, whoſe compartners are pride, pleaſure, Idlenes, luſt, Adultery, Senceſualitie, Drunkenneſſe, Gluttony, voluptuouſnes, and all manner of hated villanie: but paſſing ouer the reſt, lette me yet put you in minde, that the practiſe & knowledge of armes hath euermore beene carefully endeuoured, and not without a ſpeciall conſideration, when Prince, country, religion, law, iuſtice, ſubiectes, and altogether, are vnder the protection of Armes.
               
                  Oſorius confirmeth it in theſe wordes, He that taketh away the knowledge of Armes, worketh the ouerthrowe of the common wealth.
               
               
                  Cicero againe giueth vs this Item, we muſt not lay our Armes aſide, if we deſire to liue in peace.
               
               
                  Tacitus is not to bee forgotten: There is nothing more rather to incite an enemie, then wher he findeth ſlouth & negligence
               
               And Caeſar was wont to ſay, It is certaine, that mightie Empiers, are not kept by ſlouth, but by weapons in the handes of experimented Souldiors.
               
               We will conclude with Plato, who affirmeth how that a princes Crowne, can neuer ſit cloſe to his head who once neglecteth the knowledge of Armes: the common wealth therefore hath as great need of valiāt men to defend it, as of good lawes to gouerne it, for maieſty without force, was neuer yet aſſured.
            
            
               What diuerſitie in Opinion amongſt Lawyers. Chap. XVII.
               
               I Thinke I ſhall need to ſpeake but little what diuerſity of Opinions, there is amongſt the Lawyers, when the Lawes

themſelues (at the leaſt as they are hand-led) are but the meere opinions of men.
               Vnhappy may thoſe lawes be called (poore ſuiters may well ſay) where there is ſo much controuerſie that they cannot be diſtinguiſhed.
               If law be certaine, why ſhould iudgement be delayed; if but to doe right why are ſo many poore menne wronged, if grounded on conſcience, why is it partiall.
               Men that are out of apparell are deſirous to cloath themſelues in laſting ſuites, but he that would haue a laſting ſuite indeed, let him get him a ſuite in Weſtminſter Hall, if it doth not laſt him out three ſuites of Perpetuana, the lawyer is but a Foole, that firſt tooke the meaſure of his cauſe.
               There is no worſe torture, then the torture of the lawe, they are ſo full of Inſtances, of Quidities, of Demurres, of Delatories and delayes, that what ſhould I ſay, though the law it ſelfe intendeth nothing but right, it is yet made the inſtrument of iniury and wrong, for they haue law to ouerthrowe law, and there is no law be it neuer ſo Legitimate or truly be gotten, which with their wreſted gloſſes and ſubtill expoſitions, they cannot Baſterdize.
               
               For the law it ſelfe I acknowledge it to be honorable (being leuelled and proportioned according to the firſt inſtitution) for the end whereunto law hath relation, is to profite the good, to perfect the common wealth, to releeue the oppreſſed, to miniſter right and iuſtice, neyther is there any 
                     •
                  ice, which is not by lawe bridled (if law were duly executed)
               But now they make ſtraight crooked & crooked ſtraight and hee that hath moſt money hath moſt right: they are pugnantia inter ſe, when amongſt themſelues there is no agreement, but what they confirme to day, to morrow they

will fruſtrate: we may ſee ſo many incumbrances, that the Iudges themſelues will be of ſeuerall Opinions, and will diſpute the one with the other ſo long, that they be readie to change colour, and to waxe pale, with anger and choller, that in a matter of difficultie, they cannot diſcuſſe ſignificantly, but what one Iudge affirmeth this day to be law, an other will diſauow to morrow to be ſcarce worth a ſtraw.
               What is the end of all their wrangling, but euery man to vphold his owne Opinion.
               
               It is the ill liuing of wicked men, that did firſt begette good Lawes, for what elſe are the great number of Lawes that are amongſt vs, but the Authenticall Regiſters of our corruptions, and what are the manifolde Commentaries that are written vppon them, but a very corruption of the lawes themſelues.
               Some are of Opinion, that in this age the multitude of our Lawes doe more oppreſſe, then the multitude of our enormities could hurt or moleſt.
               Amongſt the Locrenſes it was prouided, that if any man did inuent a new law, hee ſhoulde firſt propound the ſame to the people wearing a Halter about his necke, to the end that if it were thought pernicious, he might forthwith be hanged.
               
                  Ferdinando, ſending a Vyzroy into the Weſt Indies, but then newly diſcouered, forbadde him to carry any Lawyers with him, to the end, they might not ſowe the ſeedes of ſectes.
               And if a man might nowe ſpeake the truth, this brawling ſtudie of Lawe, is it that infecteth all Europe: and as Columella hath formerly deliuered: It is but a lawfull robbery or Theft.
               
            
            
               
               Of Opinion what it is Chap. XVIII.
               
               
                  OPinion, the Legetimate child of affection, a moſt inconſtant thing, it ſtandeth but vpon the pleaſure of men, but eſpecially of the Irreſolute multitude, opinion a ſmookie vapoure, the breath of the vulgar, the applauſe of the ignorant, the mother of Hipocriſie.
               
               It is blind, it is lame, it is ſelfe conceited, it is decrepit, it is idle, it is full of ſin it draweth in Sectes Schiſmies, Heriſies, Popery, it is full of lies It is the effect of ignorance it is nothing, And yet the baites are infinite, that are laid to catch this nothing.
               It is hunted after in the court, in the country, in the towne in the citty, and it is an infirmitie no leſſe abounding in Princes then in beggers, for where vncontrouled affections doe meet in a high fortune they beget opinions.
               
               It is a plaine coſiner, for it deceiueth Emperours, Kinges, Princes, Dukes, Earles, Lordes, and what is he that is not ouer-reached by Opinion.
               
               Is infecteth many times the mindes of them which profeſſe (and by there outward habites do make ſhowe) to be religious, but theſe men that are ſo wiſe and holy in there owne opinions are of all other moſt eſpecially to be avoded, for if it be no ſacrileadge to pilfer a text from out the holy ſcripture, the proud Phariſie that boaſted ſo much of his owne worthynes, was more odible in the ſight of God, then the publican or Harlot.
               
               The greateſt number of men in generall, are rather led by opinion then eyther by wit or reaſon: Kinges, Princes, Poentates, yea the Pope himſelfe they doe all march (if not in their owne) yet in the ſteppes of othermens opinions.
               
               But as that body is neareſt vnto health, which though it be ſomthing waſted, is yet free from the danger of noiſome humors, euen ſo is that mind more inclineable to the diſcipline

of vertue, which is not beſotted with the miſty fogges of a blind Opinion.
               
               Men that are but of a corrupt vnderſtanding, are likewiſe poſſeſſed with a preiudicate opinion: and they are no leſſe led by opinion, eyther to loue or hate, then they are by witte or reaſon: but he that will diſcerne a right, muſt plucke away the vaile of Opinion.
               
               Wiſe and graue men haue euer more made little acount of wauering opinion.
               
               It is truth, that reaſon ioyned with wit may ſometimes giue out preceptes, but opinion ioined with paſſiō
                   are of force to countermaund.
               
                  Opinion is a vaine appetite ſpringing from affection, yet more nice, and fooliſh to pleaſe, then either with or iudgement: to conclude, what is it but opinion, that ruleth and turneth, the world topſie turuie.
            
            
               From whence Opinion hath his being. Chap XIX.
               
               MAn is made of two parts, that is to ſay, of body and of ſoule, the body more imperfect in diuerſe naturall giftes, then many bruite beaſtes, the ſoule becauſe ſhe is more capable of the diuine nature, being likewiſe immortall, ſhe therefore leaueth things that be immortall, and that are of like nature to her ſelfe, yet by the contagiouſnes of the bodyes infirmities, ſhe is ſo far growne out of kind that ſhe is not onely made a play fellowe, with the bodies wantonnes, but ſhe is likewiſe drowned in the bodies filthines, for although at the firſt in our primatiue creation, the body was obedient to the beheſtes of the minde, yet ſinne, hauing ſince ſowne the poiſon of diſſention between them, hath ſet them ſo opoſite, that the appetites & affections of the licentious body, are ſtill ſtriuing and ſtruggling to ſuppreſſe the

perfections of the ſoule.
               
                  Reaſon, that ſhould rule, is incloſed but in a narrowe compaſſe of the head, all the other parts of the body beſides are left to affections: our eyes, whoſe office ſhould be to direct our ſteppes in a right courſe, are they not our greateſt ſtumbling blockes, not the deamers of our diſcretions, but the very blinders of the inſight of our ſoules: what enemies more malitious to vs then our eares, that are ſtill wide open to wickednes, ready to liſtē to the ſuggeſtions of Flatterers: our tongue, is it not more apte to ſpeak ill then good, our hands our feete and all the reſt of our partes, more ready & nimble, to tread the tract of vanity then of vertue, our braines in ſteade of wiſe preceptes, are ſtill cloied, with idle imaginations, our induſtries are killed by ſenſuality, that drawes the naturall well inclined partes of the mind to the vnnaturall, naturall affections of the body: as the ſoule and the body are two things ſo is the ſoule diuided into two parts, whereof the one hath in it reaſon, and the other appetite, & as in generation, the body goes before the ſoule, ſo doth the vnreaſonable part of the ſoule goe before the reaſonable, wee find the experience in yong babes, whilſt they be in their innocency, that immediatly after their birth do vtter feruent appetite, but it is a long time after before any Reaſon appeare.
               By this it may appeare, it is the miſt of our affections that doth blind the iudgement of our reaſon, & where the mind is blinded by affection, there the iudgement is ſeduced and led a ſtray from the pathe of reaſon, and doth forth with fall into opinion, whereof followeth that they are not onely deceiued in the opinion of things honeſt and profitable, but alſo with the loue of diſhoneſt & vnprofitable deſirs blinded: humours and affections haue a great hand ouer vs, and they place and diſplace reaſon at their pleaſure: where affection
                  
doth hould the ſeat and ſcepter in the Caſtle of the mind, they can iudge of nothing but indiſcretly, they may geſſe at many things by opinion, but at very few according to a truth he that is once wounded with the darte of affection, it is a hard matter for him to ſhake it out, he that is ſtronge and able to incounter his owne affections, is able to command, to diſpoſe to cenſure and determine, whatſoeuer is to bee preſented vpon our humaine theater.
               
            
            
               How Prynces and other great perſonages are led aſtray by Opinion Chap XX.
               
               OPinion is a Burre that euermore cleaueth to great perſonages, & I know not from whence it is that this vice of affection doth euermore follow the court, and that this infection of opinion, ſhould ſtill bewich the moſt great & worthy perſons, but where opinion is coupled with confidence, the ſame being not likewiſe coupled with wiſdome and diſcretion they doe but make themſelues ſubiect to the wind of vulgar opinion.
               
               Where a great perſon is inclined to any one (though neuer ſo dull and ignorant) yet his manners and behauiours ſhall be admired and commended by all men, nay, wee do ſometimes magnifie his qualities, that hath (all moſt) neuer a good condition to bleſſe himſelfe with all.
               So contrary wiſe againe the malignant aſpect of any perſon in authority towardes his inferiour is thought a ſufficient warrant for any other man to wronge him.
               From hence it proceedeth, that in the courtes of Princes he that once begins to ſlide, ſhal very hardly be able for euer after to recouer his footinge againe.
               Greatmen that be in authority, do cōmonly ſettell their

                  opinions of ſuch men that are more willinge to follow the delight of the body, then the vertue of the minde cenſuring their worth and worthines by no better rules, then by that blind opiniō, which they themſelues haue conceiued of thē.
               Great perſonages, & men in high authorytie that are the diſpencers of goods temporall here vpon the earth ſhould ſettle their opinions of ſuch men as be honeſt and exemplary life and not of ſuch Paraſits, as by ſeruile flattery, can winde themſelues into fauour, by working a more worthy into diſgrace.
               There be ſpeciall conſiderations to be had before wee do grownd an opinion, and the rules of piety doth command it eſpecially to looke into the inward diſpoſition of the man, and not into the outward conuerſation onely, which is many times ſhadowed with the beautious maske of formall diſſimulation, but by a iudiciall demonſtration or an experimented knowledge, for other wiſe the iudgement may eaſily be miſtaken.
               A man is like a tree, whoſe fruite cannot be diſcerned till it be through ripe, we muſt not reſpect the greennes, the bud nor the bloſome, and the diſpoſition of a man is not to be coniectured but on the latter ſeaſon, for I haue ſeldome heard of him that was accounted to be Semper Idem.
               
               He that will ſettle an opinion, in thoſe that be vnlearned, ſhall be deceiued in his opinion for the vnlearned are they that giue themſelues to diſhoneſt practiſes, for ſeeing that for the lacke of learning and vertue, they know themſelues vnfit for any place of preferment, they therefore indeuour to rayſe their fortunes by baſe and ſeruill ſhiftes, by lying by ſlanderinge by flatteringe, by falſe accuſing & by ſuch other diſhoneſt indeuours.
               To haue a charitable opinion of mens worthines I confeſſe

it to be good, but yet to giue Eſops Cocke a precious gemme, a barly corne were better: the iudgemēt of greatnes ſhould be able to diſtinguiſh between truth & falſhood.
               Greatnes counſailed by knowledge chooſeth the way of vertue, but blinded by opinion turnes all into vice.
            
            
               How baſe and vnworthy perſons do creepe into the Opinion of Princes and men of great place. Chap XXI.
               
               THis Opinion that is conceiued by men of high eſtate aduanceth into authoritie thoſe that bee couetous, ſometimes inclined to brybery to extortion, to oppreſſion, it maketh fooles to be accounted wiſe, cowardes to be reputed coragious: and he that can but creepe into a great mans opinion, he may diſguiſe the truth without controulment, he can fight without handes, conquer without weapons, he can kill a man behind his backe with a word, that he neuer durſt looke in the face with a ſword.
               He can draw a man into ſome dangerous practiſe & then by diſcouering of it, he can make an other mans offence, the firſt ſteppe to his owne aduancement.
               Theſe Court Paraſites, that haue their eyes continually fixed vpon their Princes inclination, doth watch at opportunities, not only to grace thēſelues, but likewiſe to diſgrace others, and the rather to induce a good opinion, they pretend all their purpoſes, for honour of the King, and the good of the country, for theſe two pretences, honour and profit, are the two harbengers that doth lodge opinion in the boſome of a Prince.
               Now he that can humour a prince in his Affections and hath ſkill to watch his times, meanes and opportunities, he is already maſter of what his heart deſireth.
               
                  Where Affection is throughly ſettled in the heart and mind of any man, there Opinion hath an eaſie paſſage, ſo that when our heartes are once poſſeſt with any vehement Affection, there Reaſon is exempted from his proper office, and Iudgement being taken pryſoner, for quietneſſe ſake is contented to yeeld her ſelfe to captiuitie.
               Open and apparant vertues may ſometimes bring forth prayſe, but a fooliſh conceiued Opinion, doth bring foorth Fortune, and therfore thoſe fooles that will ſpeake but what is truth without flattery are ſeldome ſeene to bee fortunate, yet a lying foole may comfort himſelfe with hope, for there is not a more ſpeedy way to creepe into Opinion, then by lying and flattering.
               
                  Pietie in the Opinion of the world, is accounted but a fantaſticke fiction, and honeſtie and vpright dealing, but for an ayery apparition, true vertuous actions come ſeldome on the Stage, but when by neceſſitie of lawes they are inforced to ſhewe themſelues, if we doe any good, it is eyther in hope of reward, or to get a popular prayſe, & amongſt many thouſands, that doe ſeeke to draw out opinion by ſeruile and baſe practiſes, there is ſcarcely one that doth endeuour it by their good deedes.
               Greatneſſe muſt be flattered in his folly, his humour muſt be obſerued and followed: if Phaleris will torment, Perillus muſt inuent, if Aemelius will martyre, Pateroulus muſt miniſter; if Alexander will bee ſtately, Phocion muſt bee humble; if Domitius be fooliſh, Hippodamus muſt be franticke.
               The itching eares of vaine glorious men muſt bee ſcratched by Sycophantes, and he that cannot make the Deuill a Saint, it is time he were in Heauen, this is no world for him to liue in.
               They muſt be ſoothed in their Opinions, prayſed in their

follies, commended in their vanities, yea their very vices, muſt be applauded for vertues.
               By theſe ſteppes of ſmoothing, Clawbackes muſt learne to climbe, and they know well enough that if they can make ſhift to creepe into the Opinion of a great man, it is more auaileable then ſixe of the ſeuen liberall ſciences, and therefore what adoe in the Court, firſt to become gratious in the ſight of the Prince: and then what flattering, what fawning to curry fauour with thoſe that be in authoritie: what ducking, what dyuing, what creeping, what crouching, what countenances fained and faſhioned to pleaſe the ſuperiors: what ſcorning, what mocking, what contemning and diſpiſing of inferiors: the briberies, the extortions, the oppreſſions of the great men, muſt not be ſpoken of, but in ſecret, the faultes of the poore checked controuled, and openly puniſhed.
               Now amongſt the reſt of thoſe Flatterers, that doe poyſon the eares of Princes, thoſe onely are eaſily to be diſcerned, that will ſtill be commending whatſoeuer the Prince doth whether it be good or bad.
               It is fit for Courtiers I confeſſe, to bee officious, for the more dutifull and ready that a man is in the ſeruice of the Prince, the ſooner he commeth to honour and preferment, but thoſe whoſe endeuours are but onely profitable for themſelues, they are but in common opinion reputed to bee the Moathes and Mice of the Court.
            
            
               Nobilitie led into a vaine Opinion by paraſites. Chap. XXII.
               
               AS Nobilitie, that is thus drawne into a vaine opinion of other mens worthineſſe (but by their owne ſence and feeling) are led into many errours, ſo by theſe ſupple

mouthed paraſites, that canne pamper the itching eares of ſenſualitie, by prayſing and extolling many thinges in them more then are true: they are likewiſe led into as vaine a beleefe of themſelues: and by theſe commendations giuen them by Flatterers, they are growne into ſuch an ouer-weening of their owne worthyneſſe, that they account him to be either enuious or proud that will not ſooth & ſmooth them vp in thoſe conformities, which being examined by wit and iudgement, are flat deformities: ſo vaine they are in their owne conceites, that they thinke themſelues to be prayſed, when (in truth) they bee palpably flattered, for falſe praiſe is nothing elſe but flat mockery, yet ſuch is their vayne glory, that when they be commended farre beyond the pytch of their deſertes, they rather attribute it to the abundance of good will, then to the fraud of the flatterer.
               A fawning paraſite, ſeeing Dioniſius in conference with company, although he could not heare his ſpeeches, yet he fell into a great laughter, which being perceiued by Dioniſius he demanded of him wherefore he laughed, becauſe (ſaid he) I doe ſee you talking, and I know your words are ſo ful of witty pleaſantnes, that they will make any man to laugh that is not ſo dull of conceipt, that he cannot comprehend them.
               This tickling by flattery is an olde diſeaſe, and I thinke the ſickneſſe will neuer bee cured: Alexander was not free from it with all his Courage, neyther yet Dioniſius with all his crueltie: and Themiſtocles being asked what words were beſt pleaſing vnto him, anſwered: Thoſe that recount mine owne prayſes.
               
               
                  Alexander flattering himſelfe, would needes bee reputed to be the ſonne of Iupiter, his mother complained of the matter ſaying He would bring her into diſgrace with Iuno: but

a certaine Philoſopher, who ſeeing his Phyſitian in his ſickeneſſe prepare for the recouery of his health a certaine Supping, mocking at this diuinitie, he ſaid Our God hath put the hope of his health in a meſſe of Broath.
               
               Mee thinkes the Emperor Sigiſmund ſhould not here bee forgotten, who hearing a ſhameleſſe fellow to call him god ſtroke him on the eare to whom the paraſite ſayde, Why doeſt thou ſtrike me Emperor: to the which he anſwered, Why doeſt thou bite me Flatterer.
               
               I am perſwaded, that if Nobility would learne of Sigiſmund how to deale with Flatterers, and rather to hyt them on the eares, then to lend them their eares, and to bee leſſe attentiue to the ſound of flattering wordes, and ſomething more circumſpect to ſearch out the honeſtie of him that is the ſpeaker, they could not be ſo often deceiued in their opinions, nor ſo eaſily led aſtray by diſſembling Paraſites.
               It is flattery in this age that breedeth good bloud, and there is nothing in better requeſt then flattery and Tabacco: two ſmoakie vapours, ſcarce worth the ſpeaking of, yet the one robbeth wiſe men of their wittes, and the other fooles of their money: they be both ſociable and fit for the time: and he that cannot Carouſe with Alexander, abſteine with Romulus, eate with the Epicure, faſt with the Stoick, ſleepe with Endimeon, watch with Criſppus, laugh with Democritus, weepe with Heraclitus, take a pipe of Tabacco and goe to a Brothell houſe, he ſhall neuer get credite nor good Opinion.
               
            
            
               Of ſelfe Opinion, how it beſotteth. Chap. XXIII.
               
               AS men are blinded by Affection, to ſettle their opinions, where themſelues doe beſt loue, ſo it is as blind an Opinion, that is ſettled more for loue then for honeſtie;

let vs now ſpeake of a ſelfe Opinion, where (according to the prouerbe) A man thinketh better of himſelfe then all the world doth beſide.
               
               Theſe men that be thus infected, do little hurt vnles to thē
                  ſelues, for ſometimes whē they cānot put the Foole vpō ſome other, they doe moſt commonly make fooles of themſelues.
               Thoſe that haue beene lifted vp farre beyond the leuell of their owne deſertes are mad drunken with their vaine greatnes, which being founded vpon no worthynes, they are eaſily trayned into opinion, that their ſtate was achieued by their owne vertue for where there is a ſelfe opinion, wiſdome is diuorced: I haue ſmyled at the folly of ſuch as I haue oftē hard ſo to extoll their owne deſertes, as though they would induce the hearers to accuſe the country of ingratitude, that had no better rewarded their indeuours: and ſome haue not ſpared to publiſh knot, wherby they would bring the prince to be their debtour for thoſe ſeruices, that if the very ſpirit of their indeuours were well cōſidered of, would rather manifeſt the vaine glory of the writer thē make any due proofe of that profit that is pretended.
               I haue heard a mercinary mind make open proteſtation, that by the very dexterity of his owne wit, he would eaſe the Prince of that military expence, that where predeceſſors, for theſe many hundred yeares, could neuer free themſelues from a continuall charge of great garriſons, they ſhould not need ſo much as a pay for one Souldiour.
               
               O poore blind Opinion whither wilt thou range doſt thou not know that the lawes haue beene many times impugned and that it is the Souldiors ſword, that onely vphouldeth the Iudge in the ſeate of Iuſtice?
               If thou thinkeſt to effect that, which ſo many ages could neuer bring to paſſe I ſay thou art more behoulding to

thine owne Opinion then thou art to thy wit.
               
                  Selfe opinion proceedes ſometimes from a little wit that is vtterly voide of iudgement and ſometimes from him that hath great ſtoore of wealth and no wit at all: for ignorance & ſelfe loue are proper to thoſe that doe know nothing, and yet do think that they know all thinges and do hould their ignorance for wiſdome: for ſelfe conceipt is it that makes opinion obſtinate.
               
                  Hippias moſt arrogantly gloryed of himſelfe that through the ſharpnes of his wit, and the quicknes of his capacitie he could vnderſtand any thing, but a man ought not to ſpeake of himſelfe neither in praiſe nor diſpraiſe for the one is a deede of arrogancy, and the other of folly.
            
            
               The inconſtant Opinion of the vulgare. Chap XXIIII.
               
               AS the ſea, which of it owne nature is calme and quiet, yet by the winde it is raiſed vp into huge billowes, ſo the vulgare people, though of themſelues ſeeming neuer ſo tractable, yet by the breath of opinion, they are preſently ſtirred vp into violent tempeſtes, and therefore they that haue in them more fooliſh boldnes, then aduiſed counſaile ſhall worke them to any thing.
               As popular loue is light, ſo their opinions are as variable, and therefore Diogenes ſeeyng the people to throng out at a Church doore, preſſed as faſt againſt them to get in, and being asked what he ment, anſwered, That it was the part of wiſe men, to be ſtill opoſite to the multitude.
               
               Where the ſmall ſparke of vnderſtanding (which is vſually the portion of the vulgare) is dimmed & obſcured with the miſty cloud of fooliſh opinion, what is to be hoped for in the ſhallow ignorance of ſo wauering and vnſtedy a multitude,

which can but iudge of matters, with a ſenſitiue apprehēſion
               There is no contending againſt them, amongſt whom opinion is of ſuch force, as Reaſon is of no force againſt them.
               How vncertaine then is that worldly honour that hangeth on the brittle balance of the wauering Opinion of the common people.
               Take an example, ſee what mutabilitie, to day Caeſar renouned in the ſenat: accounted a pater patriae, the father & defender of his country, no ſmall time Emperour, beloued by Brutus, ſaluted by Cicero, now Caeſar a Tyrant, ſlaine by the Senat, Hoſtis patriae, bereft of his Dyademe, no pater, but predator, gored by his friends with their owne kniues, detected and infamed by the vnkind Brutus, exclaimed & rayled on by the declaiminge Cicero; ſee here the mutabilitie of opinion in the vulgare.
            
            
               Of Particular Opinion how it infecteth Fooles. Chap XXV.
               
               I Call it a particular opiniō, where men will aſſume to them ſelues precedence, ſome for their wealth that are litle troubled with wit ſome for their authoritie, which haue neither knowledge nor vnderſtanding; and ſome for their diſcent becauſe they can ſhow their aunceſtours armes, and all theſe but blind opinions, that hath no regard at all to vertue.
               Now firſt for him that is in ſuch pride of his pelfe, whoſe wit doth conſiſt but in his Prognoſtication to calculate from thence, what time of the Moone doth ſerue beſt to ſet Beanes, or in which of the twelue ſignes it is good to geld Horſe-Coltes, I can but pronounce him with Socrates to be an immortall beaſt: and Ariſtotle ſayth that the reaſonable ſoule, partaking of the ſame generall nature with Angels, is aſhamed to behould her ſelf placed in a body which hath but felowſhip with beaſtes: there is yet one comfort left vnto them which

                  Nature her ſelfe hath prouided, that as ſhe brought them innocētes into the world, at the time of their birth, ſo ſhe takes them away again as arrant fooles as ſhe brought them forth, at the houre of their death.
               Now for him that ſhould be placed in authoritie, wanting knowledge & vnderſtanding how to vſe it, is like a garment in the hands of an ill Tayler which is many times mardin the making, yet ſuch a man may ſpeake his opinion, in deſpite of wiſdome, & his words muſt cary credit & authorytie, for all his ſtrength & vertue doth lie in his tongue & although he doth ſometimes amaze the ſimple & ignorant people with his arrogating explications, yet wiſdome ſeeth the pouerty of his minde, & doth pitty that which the world admires.
               A mans wiſdome is in nothing better tryed then in ſpeaking his opinion, & therefore Socrates beholding a yong man whom he had neuer ſeene before, willed him to ſpeake that he might know him, but it is Opinion in this age, that maketh many men ſpeake too faſt, & when ſome of them hath ſpoken they know not what themſelues, they haue gotten a text out of the holy ſcripture to confirme it, Dixit inſipiens.
               
               There be ſome other that to winne Opinion, will come out with a Scutchine, vanting of their aunceſtors worthines, that haue of themſelues neyther qualitie nor good condition, & ſome that haue no Scutchins of their owne to ſhow, will yet deriue themſelues from ſome worthy familie, like the Mule, that being demāded of his byrth, being aſhamed to ſay that he was the ſonne of an Aſſe, anſwered, that he was coſine get man to a Horſe, or like the Bricklayers ſon, who being aſked what his father was, ſaid he was a Ieweler, and when it was demanded what Iewels he vſed to make, anſwered, that he vſed to ſet ſtones in morter.
               The honour of aunceſtors, as they do ornifie nobilitie, ſo they diſgrace the beautie thereof, if they liue not vertuouſly

it is better therfore to be noble by a mans owne vertue, then by an opinion, but conceiued of his aunceſtors worthines yet ſome are of opinion, that if they can but paint their halles & glaſſe windowes with Armes and Scutchions, they be noble enough, without either honeſty or vertue of their owne.
               Let it not moue thee when thou ſeeſt ſome ſo high minded for the noble actes of their grandfathers, or great grandfathers that haue in themſelues neither honour nor honeſty, nor haue nothing to vant of, but the worthines of their aunceſtors, we haue in theſe dayes varietie of Scutchions, ſundry ſortes of Armes, multiplicitie of dignities, & honourable titles, but true Nobilitie is it that ſpringeth from vertue.
            
            
               What Opinion the Antiquitie helde of Fame. Chap XXVI.
               
               THere is nothing more generally hunted after thē 
                  Fame, the deſire of Fame, as it is vniuerſall to all worldlinges that be great & mighty, ſo there is not almoſt ſo meane a creature but he is ambitious of Fame: and how many haue there beene, that ſeeking after Fame by a wrong tract thinking to make themſelues famous haue hit vpon infamy.
               
                  Heroſtratus, that conſumed the Temple of Epheſus in one night by fire, that had beene a hundred yeares in buildinge he did it but to leaue himſelfe famed to poſteritie.
               And Lucius Pius (by a baſe practiſe) hauing obtained a drunken victory, and returning to Rome crauing triumphe for his exploit, thinking thereby to make himſelfe famous, the Romaines vnderſtanding the manner of his cōqueſt, they rewarded him with an infamous death.
               And what is this Fame, that is ſo much in requeſt, but the vaine opinions of men perhaps a little popular prayſe, and what madnes in thoſe that doth haunt after the opinions of

a wauering and vnſteady multitude that can iudge of nothing, but with a ſenſitiue apprehenſion.
               Honorable Fame cannot be attayned vnto, but by honorable actions, nor honor is not to be ſought after but by vertuous indeuours, for honor is the reward of vertue, & it is vertue onely that muſt open the gate before honour can enter: the ancient Rōanes builded two Temples joined together the one being dedicate to vertue the other to honour, yet ſeated in ſuch ſorte as no man could enter that of Honour but hee muſt firſt paſſe through that of vertue.
               
               I thinke the Pope hath made a new dedication of thoſe Temples, as he hath done of that builded by Marcus Agrippa called Pantheon, and becauſe he could not bring vertue to turne Papiſt, he would therefore leaue her, neuer a monument in Rome.
               
               How many haue there beene, that not able to leaue behind them a good report, by helpe of their owne vertues, yet to leaue thēſelues famed to poſterity, they haue erected ſtately buildinges and houſes of renowne, which ſeemed with their tops to carry vp the earth aboue the heauens and with their foote to open the botomles deepth vnto which they haue ſett vp as markes of their glory, that are indeede the miſerable enſignes (alas other whiles) of a wicked miſled life.
               And ſome are of opinion, that for a penny dole to bee giuen by their Heyres or Executors after their death, it will ſuffice aſwell to make them famous to the world, as for a Quietus eſt, and a cleare diſcharge of all former extortions, oppreſſions, & vngodly exactions whatſoeuer: and it is now an ordinary matter, for thoſe to leaue a Memorandum to the world by erecting of glorious Tombes, that were not able to leaue behind them a good report merited by vertue.
               
                  
                  Cornelius Tacitus writeth that in former ages, the Images and ſtatues of Princes and great men, were ſo erected, that they might be ſeene naked, ſignifying thereby that princes and magiſtrates ſhould ſo lay themſelues open, that their iuſtice and clemencie might appeare vnto all men, to be immaculate, without any cloaked or couered inwarde miſchiefe, but after that Acilius Glabrio, hadde hatched out this golden ſtatuary, it was generally accuſtomed in euery country, and as Lactantius ſayth, thoſe golden and imboſſed ſtatues of theſe latter times did onely make manifeſt, the auaritious minds of men, that were more poſſeſſed with riches then they were with vertues.
            
            
               The vaine Opinion of thoſe that haue hunted after Fame. Chap. XXVII.
               
               THey haue vſed in former ages, to erect Images of marble, or of other mettall, ſometimes of gold, and to ſet them vp in publike places, aſwell for the honor they beare to the perſons, as for the incouragement of others, that with an honeſt enuie, they might alſo indeuour themſelues to reach vnto that glory.
               But thoſe that had their names thus conſecrated to Immortalitie, they did not erect their owne monuments them ſelues, neither did they leaue it in their wils to their heyres or executors to performe, but it was done by a general conſent, for although vertue ſeldome ſeekes any other reward, then that content wherewith ſhee payes her ſelfe, yet theſe thinges were performed for the incouragement of others.
               We doe read of Fabritius, how hee refuſed the conqueſt that was offered vnto him by that traytor Timocliares, neyther woulde Camillus receiue the ſchoole-maiſters offer, though he might thereby haue ſubdued his enemies.
               
                  Theſe men diſdained to winne Fame by fraud or trechery, vertue was the marke whereat they leuelled their actions.
               The like is to be thought of Curtius and Sceuola, the one for caſting himſelfe headlong into a deuouring pyt, to deliuer Rome from plague, the other burned of his owne hand to make the enemies knowe, that the Romaynes were reſolute in defence of their liberties.
               But how many examples might be inferred out of auncient hyſtories, of many worthy perſons, who diſpiſing riches and all worldly honours, in all their indeuours haue beene guided by vertue: I might ſpeake here of the holines of Phocion, the pouertie of Fabritius, the courage of Camillus, the iuſtice of Brutus, the chaſtitie of Pithagoras, the temperance of Socrates, the conſtancy of Cato, with manie others that diſpiſed money, eſteemed nothing of worldly honors, nor were nothing moued with Glory, prayſe or fame.
               
               They ſought for the true effectes of vertue, little caring for the fooliſh eſteeme of mens Opinions, thus happy were many of them in former ages, to diſpiſe the vaine reputes of the world for vertues ſake.
               Thoſe on the other ſide, that are ſo far in loue with Fame they doe but manifeſt their fooliſh Opinions, for they do not reſpect the preciouſneſſe of vertue, ſo much as the deſire of a popular prayſe.
               
                  Nero tooke not ſo great paines for the atteyning of anie thing, as he did to get himſelfe famed, to be an excellent ſinger, and he that denyed him that glory, hee would deny to let him liue in any long ſecuritie of life.
               
                  Cicero in a long letter earneſtly requeſted Luceius to gratifie him in three things: the firſt, that he would ſet downe ſeperately from his other ſtories: The conſpiracie of Catelyne,
                  
thereby to giue immortall Fame to his name: the ſeconde, that he would adde ſomething in reſpect of the friendſhip which was betweene them, the third that he would publiſh his booke with all ſpeed poſſible, that whilſt he were yet liuing▪ he might taſt of the ſweetneſſe of his owne glory.
               
                  Auguſtus in like manner, ioyned to his laſt will and teſtament his owne actes, appointing that they ſhould be ingrauen vpon his Tombe, in pillars of braſſe.
               
                  Tryne a common Curtizan, tickled with this deſire of Fame, at ſuch time as Alexander hadde razed the walles of Thebes, proffered the Thebans to repayre them at her owne charges, if (to her euerlaſting Fame) they would but permit theſe words to be ingrauen on the wall: Alexander razed it, and Tryne rayſed it.
               
               Here is now the difference betweene the louers of Fame, and the louers of vertue, the one ſeekes for commendations but withall he loues to heare it himſelfe, the other thinkes of nothing but meditates to himſelfe of the ſweetneſſe of Vertue: no wonder then, though there be a great difference in their indeuours that imployeth them but to winne a vulgare Opinion, from theirs againe that indeuours for vertue.
            
            
               That Fame and Renowne are but popular Opinions. Chap XXVIII.
               
               LEt vs ſpeake now of Fame and Renowne, and let honour goe with them together for company, and what are all theſe, but the vaine opinions of men, yet any of theſe obtayned by vertue is called glorious, but Glory is a Crocodile, that flyeth thoſe that followeth it and followeth them that flies from it: and glorious Fame is obteyned by wiſe men, by the grace of God, but not by Fooles by their owne endeuours.
               
                  He that indeuours himſelfe in vertuous exerciſes without any other reſpect, then in the ſweetnes he conceiueth in the vertue it ſelf, Fame followeth him, but he that indeuours in any vertue (ſeming neuer ſo worthy) with an intent to be prayſed by men, he may perhaps winne a popular prayſe, but glorious Fame flieth him.
               Valiance is called a vertue that fighteth for equitie and right, but he that fighteth without cōſideratiō of the iuſtice of his cauſe, may be ſaid to be fooliſh hardy or accounted to be deſperatly aduenturous, but not valiant.
               
                  Ariſtotle would in no wiſe admit that Diomedes ſhould be accounted either valiant or wiſe for that when the Greekes were put to flight, he remained alone, and aduentured himſelfe againſt the force of Hector, which he did rather to winne a vayne prayſe of the people then for the right of his cauſe, wherein conſiſted the true end of vertue.
               
               The like he iudged of Hector himſelfe, who many times behouldinge his wife and other women vpon the walles of Troy, would more bouldly & couragiouſly aduenture himſelfe, rather fearing ſome bruit thoſe women might haue raiſed ſounding to his diſhonor, then other wiſe he did reſpect the iuſtice of his cauſe or the generall good of the Citty ſo diſtreſſed by the Greekes.
               
               See here a heathē 
                  Philoſopher, that would not admit thoſe aduentures, to be ſo much as reputed wiſe which in a vulgare opinion would haue beene conſecrated to immortall Fame.
               
               Our ſauiour Chriſt himſelfe condemned the Phariſies, that vſed to giue forth their Almes, with the ſound of Trumpetes and to make their prayers in the open ſtreets thereby to be ſeene and praiſed by men, and although to giue Almes, and to pray be the workes commaunded by God, yet to be done with ſuch oſtentation to the world they merite no reward.
               
                  
                  Vertue is the high way then that leades vnto Fame, and he that hunteth after Glory not being directed by vertue, is too vaine glorious, but let vs prayſe vertue how we liſt, and let vs write whole volumes in her commendations, yet if the ſoueraigntie of vertue doth extend no further then to tranſitory things here vpon the earth, there is not any thing ſo wretched and miſerable as man.
            
            
               Of the number of follies in this age whereby to winne Opinion. Chap XXIX.
               
               AS thoſe that doe hunt after Fame, do thinke to leaue themſelues eternized, by their owne indeuours, ſo if I would now vnder take to ſpeake of them that in this age, doth hunt after the vanity of opinion, I might ſpeake of ſo many baſe qualities, as their fooliſh deuiſes could not be comprehended by arte, neither yet conteined within the acount of number.
               How many ſilken ſlaues that can creepe, crouch, lie, faune, flatter, and all to get a fauour, that can watch, write, diſſemble and conſpire, whereby to winne opinion.
               
               Some will ſeeke to ſcrape out opinion with their courte complements, by ducking, by diuinge, by kiſſing of their hands & furniſhed perhaps with a French or an Italian phraſe they will proſtitute their ſeruice to a Dogge to winne opinion
               
               Some will ſeeke to wooe opinion, with prayſes and commendations, extolling thoſe for wit and wiſdome, that are ſo neere a kinne to the Foole, that they cānot marry without a licence from the Pope.
               
               Some doe thinke to creepe into the very guttes of opinion, be diſcourſing at a table, where they haue a reaſon to ſhowe for euery vnreaſonable paſſion.
               
                  Some deſirous to winne an opinion, to be accounted mery companions, will ornifie themſelues with ſo many dunghill demeanures, that a man would thinke Nature had brought them into the world for a ſpite and mockery.
               Some doe ſeeke opinion by breaking of bitter ieſtes, and theſe haue commonly a ſpeciall gift in lying & ſlandering.
               Some will frame their geſture to agree with their words as the dauncer doth to the ſounde of the inſtrument, in their very behauiour it is eaſie to be ſeene how they doe labour to winne opinion.
               
               Some to get the opinion, of grauitie, do many times incurre the ſuſpition of folly.
               Some to winne opinion, will goe to Church, with a Bible brought after them, but looke into the manner of their life, by the fruites you ſhall know the tree.
               But I wonder of what Opinion they be that will neither omit a Sermon, nor let ſlippe a new faſhion.
               Some to winne opinion, doth euery day ſuit themſelues in new fangled faſhions, like Proteus the god of ſhapes; and whilſt the poore ſoule is pend vp in a ſtreight Cell, our fooliſh cogitations are ſtill wandering throughout the world to ſeeke out new faſhions.
               Some by wearing a long locke that hangs dangling by his eare, do think by that louzie cōmoditie to be well eſteemed by the opinion of Fooles, for although there be ſome wiſemen that will tollerate in the matter, yet I neuer knew wiſemen that would followe the faſhion,
               Some will ſo curle their haire, picke their browes and will ſo metamorphife themſelues aſwell in their atire as in their demeanures, that they rather make ſhow to be demy-harlots, then men.
               Some haue ſought to ſhake Opinion out of a Sinque pace,
                  
but now their legges are ſo ouer peſtered with Garters and Roſes, that they are fit for nothing vnles for a Moris dance.
               
               Theſe and ſuch other like may perhaps beget an opinion, and what opinion is it, but a baſe opinion, and it is commonly conceiued, but by the baſeſt ſorte of people.
               I had allmoſt forgotten to ſpeake of women, yet they are ſometimes conceited in their opinions aſwell as men, but to ſpeake truly of thoſe women that be modeſt, they do laugh at the fooliſh opinions of men.
               
                  Nature hath not ordained all women to be wiſe, there muſt be ſome vaine, if it be but to fit the follies of men, and it is a receiued Opinion amongſt thoſe women of entertainment, that ſhe that learneth faſteſt to forget ſhame is houlden to be moſt excellent in faſhion.
               By this it may appeare, that the edge of induſtry is ſo abated by the force of pleaſure both in men and women, that they rather ſtuddy to winne opinion then to practiſe vertue, I will not ſay how often we be deceiued in our opinions, taking that for vertue that is indeed but vice, but an eſpecial meane whereby to drawe on a vertuous opinion doth rather conſiſt in him that doth liue well then in him that can talke well; rather in doing of thinges worthy to be ſpoken of, then in ſpeaking of thinges worthy to be done.
            
            
               From whence it is that men are ſo eaſily drawne into Opinion. Chap. XXX.
               
               
                  REaſon is a true ſence and iudgement of thinges both humaine and diuine, and as Seneca ſaith it is an excellent power and facultie of vnderſtanding and iudgement, which is the perfection of the ſoule, euen as the ſoule is of man.
               
                  Now whoſoeuer is obedient vnto Reaſon, hee is Lord ouer his owne luſts, he commandeth his owne appetites and rebellious Affections, hee may with this thryd paſſe with Theſeus through the Laberinth of his contagious ſences, & to conclude, he is reſolute in all good purpoſes, hee is not eaſily drawne into Opinion: now opinion is it that ſtill fighteth againſt Reaſon, for Opinion hauing his ofſpring from the body (which is but earth) doth yet repreſent vnto the ſoule the ſhapes and formes of things, through the windowes of the ſences, whereby ſhe aſſociateth the ſoule with thoſe things, that doth depriue her of her dignitie: and thus opinion being linked and coupled to our groſſe Affections, hath her ſeate onely in the ſences, becommeth vaine, vncertaine, deceitfull, euill in counſayle, baſe in iudgement, it depryueth the minde of conſtancie and veritie, allowing that to day which it miſliketh of to morrow, it hath no reſpect to ſound iudgement, but to pleaſe the body and to content the ſences.
               It is therefore the wakefull eye of Reaſon, that muſt continually keepe Centinell ouer our paſſions, that wee bee not luld aſleepe in our owne ſelfe conceites, & our iudgements dazeled and made drunke with our fooliſh Opinions.
               
            
            
               What it is that onely bridleth Opinion. Chap. XXXI.
               
               
                  KNowledge is it that ſtill fenceth the body from al fooliſh and erronious Opinions, and it is celeſtiall wiſedome, that is able truly to diſcerne of opinion.
               
               And as a man that is blind folded, and ſhould be appointed to remoue himſelfe to a certaine place, is liker to fayle then to performe his purpoſe, ſo thoſe vertues that bee potentially ingendred in our minds, if they be not ayded with

inſtruction, doth often come to naught, becauſe the minde is not ſatisfied with nature alone but hath neede of a politicke vſage of Reaſon, which may cleanſe and ſcoure the ſoule by taking away the dim vayle of opinion, from whence ariſeth all the errors in men, for in caſe good and euill were well knowne, and perceiued, euery man woulde chuſe the good and leaue the ill, and therefore may vertue be ſayd to be a wiſedome and an vnderſtanding to chuſe the good, & vice againe a lacke of foreſight and an ignorance that leadeth to iudge falſely, becauſe men neuer chuſe the ill with Opinion that it is ill, but they are deceiued through a certain likeneſſe of ſome thing that is good: the Art therefore that teacheth to diſcerne the truth from falſhood may well bee attayned vnto, and the vertue by which we chuſe this good indeed, may be called true knowledge, which cannot bee ouercome by any affection that proceedeth from the bodie, eſpecially where the minde is well gouerned and ruled by Reaſon, for ſuch force Reaſon hath, that ſhe maketh the ſences euer ready to obey, ſo that although our ſinewes, our bones, and our groſſe compacted fleſh, haue no Reaſon in them at all, yet when there ſpringeth in vs the motion of minde, that the imagination pricketh forward, and ſhaketh the bridle to the ſpirites, all the members are in a readynes, the feete to runne, the handes to vndertake, and the whole bodie to doe and indeuour any thing that the minde thinketh vpon.
               It is requiſite therefore that knowledge ſhould euermore march in the foremoſt rancke, for although Appetite may ſometimes haue a longing after thinges that be good, yet being blinde of her ſelfe, ſhee cannot make election of the good from the bad therefore hath Nature ſo ordained▪ that to euery vertue of knowledge, there is annexed a vertue of

longing, and the ſoule hath three manner of meanes where by ſhe may learne to know, as namely firſt by Sence, againe by Reaſon, and laſtly by vnderſtanding: of Sence there ariſeth Appetite or longing, and this is no leſſe common to bruite-beaſtes then to men: of Reaſon ariſeth Election or choyce, which is proper to man onely: of vnderſtanding (by the which man may be a partner with Angels) ariſeth Will: and therefore whatſoeuer is not vndertaken with knowledge, by the choice of Reaſon, is accompliſhed by falſe opinion by the longing of the Sences: and then is reaſon in her moſt eſpeciall perfection, when ſhee beholdeth ſome purpoſed ende whereunto ſhe leuelleth and directeth her actions.
               
                  Knowledge as I would define it, is vnderſtanding tempered with reaſon, neyther vaunting it ſelfe for any action of our owne, nor of any others that wee loue, or belong vnto vs: and knowledge is it that doth refine vs from the dregges and filth of the common people, it ſerueth as a Ladder to climb to Honour and dignity, it calleth vs from earthly vanities, to things celeſtiall and diuine: knowledge giueth vs new eyes to ſpie into the demeanures of flattering Paraſites, that wee cannot bee eaſily deceiued in our Opinions: and knowledge doth ſo vnmaske any mans eyes to ſee into himſelfe, that Opinion can neuer make him blind.
               It is not Opinion that knowledge doth holde but iudgment, that laboureth euery thing with diſcretion and wiſedome, what ryſeth from the ſences, are affections, what affection thinketh is opinion, but knowledge determineth rightly of euery thing.
               Make much of this wiſedome, take her in thine armes & imbrace her, ſet fooliſh opinion aſide, for they are but fooliſh wiſe men that are ouer reached with it.
            
            
               
               Opinion Diefied. Chap. XXXII.
               BY this that hath beene ſayde, may bee perceiued the Potency of Opinion, we ſee Chriſtian kings, Princes and Potentates, they are in nothing more ouer ſwayed, then they are by Opinion; the Pope and all his Cleargie, are but the vowed votaries of opinion: the great Emperour of the eaſt that ornifieth himſelfe with ſo many high titles, what is he but the very ſlaue of opinion.
               
               Olde men, yong men, wiſe men, learned men, they are all led and ruled by opinion.
               
               What were thoſe great Philoſophers, but Fauorites to opinion.
               
               Nay looke into Philoſophy it ſelfe, & what is it but Opinion.
               
               What traps, what traynes, what labour, what paines, & but to catch opinion.
               
               We ſpend our time, wee ſpend our witte, wee ſpend our wealth, we ſpend poore ſoule & all, and but to win opinion.
               
               What was it, but to win the Opinion of the multitude, that Pilate deliuered Chriſt to be crucified, who by his own confeſſiō, found no iuſt cauſe in him that was worthy of death.
               Thus we ſee, there hath beene no time, no age, no place nor perſon, but opinion hath raigned, ruled, and ſwayed.
               
                  Opinion hath thus reuelled from the beginning of the world & it wil ſo continue ſo long as there is a world: Let it ſuffice that all worldly happines hath his being onely by opinion. Finding then opinion to be thus regall, thus mighty, and magnificent, as Chriſtofer Marcellus (in the Counſayle of Laterane) ſayde to the Pope Tu es alter Deus, ſo ſay I to opinion, Thou art an other God heere vppon Earth.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   