
      
         
            
            MY LADIES LOOKING GLASSE. WHEREIN MAY BE DISCERNED A WISE MAN FROM A FOOLE, A GOOD WOMAN FROM A BAD: AND THE true reſemblance of vice, masked vnder the vizard of vertue.
            By Barnabe Rich Gentleman, ſeruant to the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            
               Malui me diuitem eſſe quam vocari.
            
            LONDON, Printed for Thomas Adams. 1616.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE VVORTHILY HONOVRED, AND MOST WORTHY TO BE WORTHILY HONOVRED, the LADY SAINT IONES, wife to the Right Honourable SIR OLIVER SAINT IONES, Knight Lord Deputie of Ireland.
            
               MAdame, to auoide Idleneſſe, I haue betaken my ſelfe to thoſe endeauours, that the world will repute to be more idle, than idleneſſe it ſelfe; and perhaps ſome will not let to ſay, that it had beene better for me to haue continued idle ſtill, than to 
                  ••
               ue been thus ill occupied. For it is now accounted ſinne to reprooue ſinne, and there is no exerciſe accounted to be more idle, than to reprehend the idle follies of this madding age, that Time hath now hatched vp, and are long ſithens become ſo fluſh and fligge, that they are flowne into the world, and they haue there neſtled themſelues amongſt the Chickins of vertue, ſo diſguiſing themſelues vnder the habit of vertue, that they are reputed to be of vertues Broode, and are not eaſily to be diſcerned by their plumes, or outward ſhew.
            To diſcouer them therefore, to thoſe that haue any liſt to eſchue them, I haue compoſed this looking Glaſſe, which I haue fronted in the forehead with the title of My Ladies Looking Glaſſe. Not that it is any thing leſſe behoouefull for my Lord, than it is for my Lady to looke in; for although women doe vſe their looking glaſſes, but to eſpie the deformities of their bodily beautie, yet this looking Glaſſe is

compoſed of a contrarie conſtitution: for this maketh manifeſt the diſeaſes of the minde, and diſcouereth the Imperfections aſwell of men as of women, that doth behold themſelues in it.
            It taxeth the abuſes of the time and here is to be ſeene (though in a few lines) many actuall breaches of Gods holy lawes. I haue preſumed to preſent it to your Ladiſhips protection, and although I know it be not fit for euery one to reade, that perhaps would winch, if they found themſelues to be rubd: yet your vntainted vertues being free from all detection, you may with a cleare conſcience, and an vnbended brow, aſwell vouchſafe to reade, as likewiſe to protect, when their is nothing therein conteined but iuſtifiable truth; the iniquities of theſe times being ſo palpable, that it is as eaſie to proue, as it is to reproue them. I haue not preſumed to preſent theſe lines whereby to inſtruct your knowledg, nor, to ſet down precepts for your Ladiſh▪ to follow; but knowing your Ladiſhip how worthily famed, of whom could I make better choice than of a Lady ſo highly renowned both for wiſedome and vertue?
            I might here indeauour your Ladiſhips further praiſes, and that without either fraud or flatterie, but as the vnskilfull painter, that would take vpon him the draught of ſome rare perfection that were more then ordinary, how well ſoeuer he might be furniſhed with colours, yet wanting art, he might rather blemiſh than grace the worke he tooke in hand: I will therefore here ſtay my ſelfe, beſeeching your Ladiſhip to pardon his bold preſumption, that will reſt to doe you ſeruice during life,
            
               Your Ladiſhips, to command, BARNABE RICH.
            
         
         
            
            TO ALL READERS, EITHER CVRTEOVS OR Captious I care not.
            
               CVrieous Reader, if thou prooue ſo indeede, I would be glad; but if thou be diſpoſed to cauill, I care not greatly: thou ſhalt but bewray thine owne guiltie conſcience. And I am become to be a little fooliſh hardy. (And why may I not call it true valiance?) I haue Aduentured one of the labours of Hercules, to ſtrike at Sinne: And is not that as much as to fight with the Hydra? Nay, it is more: for where the Serpent had but two heads ſtarting vp, where one was taken off; let Sinne but be diſmembred of one vicious folly, there springeth vp tenin the place of that one, more ſtrange to be ſeene, and monſtrous to behold; this generall ſickneſſe of Sinne is growne ſo contagious, that it is paſt recoucrie. It lies at the laſt gaſpe, and yet it is more dangerous to preſcribe a Remedie, than it is to deſcribe thee Malady. We muſt not ſay that the world is ſicke, nor that worldlings are infected with the diſeaſes of Pride, of whoordome, of Drunkenneſſe, of Swearing, of Swaggering, of Bribery, of Fraude, of Deceit, of Periury, of Popery, of Idolatry. No, we muſt not speake of theſe abominations: we dare not ſay that ſinne is ſinne. And more ſafety for a man to commit ſinne than to reprooue it.
            I haue aduentured yet, to Bayt the vanities of this madding age at the Stake of Reproch, And I doe looke my ſelfe to be Baited at againe, by the whole rablement of theſe Slaues of Imperfections▪
                but it is no matter, they ſhall doe but their kinde, and there beſt conviction is but Slander: If the better ſort accept of it (as I make no doubt) let the reſt except what they can, I care not; their inuectiues are as Impotent as themſelues are Impudent. Take this now by the way and ſo farewell, I neuer ment to pleaſe thoſe that be ill, by publiſhing in print any thing that is good.
         
         
            
            To the wide world.
            
               I Sing no Song to pleaſe the Formall Foole,
            
            Nor lulle aſleepe, the vaine Fantaſticke Gulle.
            
            I haue no skill, nor neuer went to ſchoole,
            To pipe a dance to euery Trickt vp Trulle,
            
            That pouders, paints, and periwigs her face:
            I can not flatter theſe in any caſe.
            I ſhoote at Sinne, I taxe none but the bad,
            The Shifting Swaine that heapes vp pelfe by fraud,
            
               The Bribing Groome, the Drunken Swearing Swad,
            
               The Shameleſſe queane, the Harlot and the Bawd.
            All theſe and more too many to be told,
            Looke in this Glaſſe, it doth them all vnfold.
         
      
      
         
            
            MY LADIES LOOKING GLASSE.
            
               TO be often prying, and beholding our ſelues in a Glaſſe, it hath beene thought rather to fauour of vanity and pride than of godlyneſſe or piety: yet we haue beene taught by a learned Philoſopher to looke in a Glaſſe, and that very often, but with reſolution that if we do finde our ſelues to be fayre and well formed, wee ſhould doe fayre and commendable actions: but if we do ſee our ſelues in any thing imperfect, we ſhould correct thoſe defects of nature with the beauty of good behauiours.
            
               What one applies to vice, another may conuert to vertue. By this we may perceiue that a looking Glaſſe may be imployed to a godly purpoſe; and what one doth imploy to the ſupporting of vice, another may conuert to the exerciſe of vertue.
            
               Looking Glaſſes haue euermore beene reputed amongſt thoſe neceſſaries belonging to women; I haue not heard of many men that haue made any great vſe of them vnleſſe in Barbers ſhops, or in Haberdaſhers ſhops; and yet in thoſe Glaſſes he that is too much prying and beholding of himſelfe, ſhall oftner ſpye out the picture of a Foole than the perſon of a Wiſeman.
            
               
                  Caligula vſed to looke in a glaſſe 
               Caligula vſed many times to behold himſelfe in a glaſſe, to ſee how ſternely and how terribly he could frame and ſet his countenance.
            
               The nicitie of yong men in this age. They are now as common and conuerſant to men as they be to women: And our yong gentlemen in this age

are as curious to behold themſelues in a glaſſe, as Dame-Folly her ſelfe when ſhe is newly trickt vp in the Attyremakers Trim.
            
            
               Looking glaſſes flattering. Amongſt Looking glaſſes, there be ſome that be ouer much flattering, that will make the beholders to ſeeme more yong, more ſmoth, and better fauoured than they be; and theſe ſortes of glaſſes are beſt of all eſteemed, but eſpecially amongſt women.
            There is yet an other ſort that doth make defectsSome make defects where none are. where none are, that will ſhew the round and well formed viſage to be long, leane, and wrinkled; and theſe kinde of Glaſſes are little ſet by either of men or women.
            
               The nature of this Glaſſe. I haue indeuoured the forming of this Glaſſe, that I hope ſhall giue a true repreſentation, aſwell of the perfections as of the defections either of men or women that ſhall behold themſelues in it.
            Yet this Glaſſe by me thus compoſed, it is not to view any exterior part of the body, but firſt to grope the conſcience, and then by a diligent obſeruation to ſuruey the interior part of the ſoule: And as I haue not faſhioned any ſmooth reſemblance wherby to flatter, ſo I haue not forged any deformities thereby to ſlander.
            I haue pictured forth diuers repreſentations, not ayming particularly at any mans priuate perſon that hath not a guilty conſcience to accuſe himſelfe: yet I haue graſped at abuſe, and haue ſtroken at thoſe ſinnes that are ſo ſupported and befriended, that I know, will rather become offenſiue than pleaſing to the world.
            
               The loftineſſe of ſinnes. Iniquitie, is growne proude, and neſtles herſelfe amongſt the Cedars, and towers aloft as high as the cloudes.
            The ſinnes of this age are become ſo nice and ſo queaſie that they cannot digeſt any potion of reprofe: menMen are vnwilling to heare their faults. are more vnwilling to haue their ſinnes ranſackt, than to haue theſe inueterate and mortall wounds ſearched into.
            And as the often taken potion neuer worketh, ſo the

phiſicke of Reproofe turnes rather to the hardening of their hearts, than to the amendment of their liues. Reprofes are but like Goades that do make beaſtes but to kicke when they be toucht with them.
            The world is become olde, and now in this later age we haue ſo far ouergrowne the Rod, that we ſcorne any correction, or to be controuled either by the rule of Gods word, or by any other aduertiſement, and therefore it is but to knocke at a deafe mans doore.
            
               No ſpeaking againſt ſinnes They are the vicious only, that cannot endure to heare ſinne reproued: and who are they but the impious that would barre the freedome of our tongues? theſe gauld backt Iades, are thoſe that are ſo afraid of rubbing: but what will becom of this world when we dare not ſpeake againſt ſinne for offending of thoſe, that in truth are but the very Slaues of Sinne?
            
            
               
                  Auguſtus thought it neceſſary for men to finde fault. That good Emperour Auguſtus was neuer angry with accuſers, but thought it neceſſary, that where there were ſtoore of vices there ſhould likewiſe be many to finde fault: And the Lacedemonians thought it a neceſſary point of policy that there ſhould be ſuch Reproouers, whereby to reproue enormity in thoſe for feare of worldly ſhame, that otherwiſe neither remorſe of conſcience nor any feare of their Gods could haue reftrained or kept within compaſſe.
            
               Paſquils piller why prohibibited. And Paſquils pillar was tollerated in Rome to reprehend all ſorts of ſinnes till they touched the Pope and his clergy: but they cannot indure now that their Sodomicall ſinnes ſhould be reputed for faults, but will rather reioyce in their abhominations, making vaunts of their Adulteries, of their Fornications, of their Blaſphemies, and their Drunkeneſſe, taking as great pleaſure in the boaſting of them as they did in the acting.
            He that doth auow Pryde, Drunkenneſſe, Adultery, Swearing, and Blaſphemy to be damned ſinnes, is ſooner derided than beloued.
            
               
               Sin growne malipert. The Iniquities of this age are not aſhamed to ſhew their faces, they walke the ſtreetes more peartly and bold, than either Honeſty or Innocency.
            
            Sinne was wont to walke in feare, but now men are ſo farre from being aſhamed, that as they make no conſcience to commit euill, ſo they boaſt of that euill they haue committed; And will againe defend what they haue boaſted.
            But as they do glorie in their owne ſhame, ſo their end is eternall damnation.
            Though our owne conſciences will take no notice of our owne iniquities, yet our ſinnes do crie out and complaine in the Audience Court of Heauen, where they preaſe into the preſence Chamber of God: And to our confuſions they cry out for Iuſtice. And he will not ſpare for euer, but as he is luſt ſo he muſt ſtrike.
            Our conſciences are ſo deafe and dull, in theſe daies of our lolitie, what with the loude noiſe of Muſicke, ſometimes of Gaming, ſometimes of Carowzing, ſometimes of Oathes, ſometimes of Quarrelling, ſometimes of Blaspheming, that we cannot heare the Preacher cry out, That all fleſh is graſſe.
            
            
               The fearefull condition of the time. We ſee at this preſent houre, how Sinne is lifted vp: and what leagues and conſpiracies there are againſt thoſe that be honeſt, that hath the feare of God before their eies; and doth reprehend the follies of the time. The Iewes, that had thought to haue nailed Chriſt to the Croſſe, they proudly cried out, If he be the Sonne of God, let him ſaue himſelfe. And how far hath this voice eſcaped vs now in theſe later times? Are not thoſe that doth liue in the feare of God, reputed to be but the ſhame of men and the reproch of the people? haue they not ſaid: Let them truſt in the Euerlaſting: and let him deliuer them, and take them out of our hands, if he would their good? Is not God himſelfe had in deriſion & made a by-word? doe they not multiply their blaſphemies againſt his holy

name? haue they not ſaid, Let vs do it boldly, God doth not ſee it, the Almightie is aſleepe, he cannot heare it? at the leaſt they do not let to thinke God doth not regard it, and ſome will not let to ſay, there is no God to regard it; from whence elſe proceedeth this ſwearing, this pride, this blaſphemy, this drunkenneſſe, this adultery, but that they thinke the ſeat of God is voide, or that he is become regardles? But he that hath made the eare, ſhall he not heare? he that hath framed the eye, ſhall he not ſee? and he that iudgeth the nations, ſhall he not conuince?
            Let them know, that the Euerlaſting neither ſleepeth nor ſlumbereth, but they ſhall finde in the winding vp, that he will cauſe his Iudgements to returne in Iuſtice.
            The Diuels do tremble to thinke of the day of Iudgement, theſe doe but deride it, when they be put in minde of it: the cuſtome of ſinne, hath ſo benummed our ſences that we feele it not, but after the infection of ſinne, followes the infliction of puniſhment. Securitie hath no reſting place but Hell.
            
            
               Angry fault ſinders. It hath beene told me, that I haue already incurred the diſpleaſure of a great number, for ſome lines by me formerly publiſhed, inueighing againſt pride, againſt drunkenneſſe, againſt adulterie, but eſpecially for writing againſt popery.
            But thoſe that doth taxe and torture me with their tongues, they are not any perſons of any great account,VVhat they be that are angry, they are but drunkards, adulterers, and other vicious liuers: the moſt of them (indeed) poore ignorant papiſts, whom I do rather pittie than any waies deſpite: but as the Philoſopher, that ſuſpected the vprightneſſe of his owne carriage, when he heard himſelfe to be commended by a man that was noted to be of a looſe and a lewd conuerſation: ſo, vnderſtanding what they be, that doth thus detect and depraue me, I doe hold my ſelfe to be better graced by their diſcommendations, than if they would ſet open their throates, to publiſh forth my praiſes. For amongſt

all the ſlaues of imperfections, the Lyar and the Slanderer, doth leaſt of all offend me, becauſe I know, that a thouſand I mputations iniuriouſly publiſhed by a thouſand detracting ſlanderers, are not halfe ſo grieuous to a man of wiſedome and iudgement, as one matter of truthA dangerous time. avowed by him that is of honeſt life and reputation. But is not this a fearefull time, when iniquitie doth ſo reigne and rage, that the wretches of the world would ſtill wallow in their wickedneſſe, without impeachment or contradiction, but eſpecially the Papiſts, that are themſelues ſo buſie and ſo repugnant to the lawes, both of God and the 'Prince? firſt the Pope with his Bulles, with his Indulgences, with his Pardons, with his Diſpenſations, with his Abſolutions,
               The holy workes of Papiſts. with his Prieſts, with his Ieſuites, with his Miniſters, of all ſorts and of all profeſſions, that are ſtill conſpiring, that are ſtill practiſing, with poiſons, with piſtoles, with ſtabbing knifes, with Gunpowder traines, that are ſtill repugning, that are ſtill peruerting, that are ſtill ſeducing, and drawing the hearts of the people, from that dutie and obedience, they doe owe to their ſoueraignes; nay, that doth draw ſo many poore ſoules to deſtruction: for although all ſorts of ſinnes did neuer ſo much abound, as they doe at this houre, yet of my conſcience,The Diuell much bound to the Pope. the Pope himſelfe doth ſend more Chriſtian ſoules to the Diuell; and Hell is more beholding to the Popes Holineſſe alone, then to all the reſt of thoſe ougly Monſters, that are called by the name of the ſeauen deadly ſinnes.
            
            But what ſinner ſo intemperate but will himſelfe confeſſe in generall, that all ſorts of ſinnes were neuer more inordinate, and that wickedneſſe and abhomination were neuer more apparant, and I might ſay againe neuer les puniſhed? The Adulterer will cry phough at the lothſomeVice deriding vice. ſinne of Drunkenneſſe, the Blaſphemer will ſweare the vſurer is a moſt damned creature, the Extortioner will laugh at pride, and make himſelfe merry with the Folly

of new faſhions.
            Thus euery vicious liuer can one deride an other, but they cannot indure to heare themſelues detected; and they will laugh at the very ſame imperfections in an other, that they cannot ſee in themſelues, neither will they beleeue any other that ſhould informe them of them.
            But I tell thee thou man or woman, whatſoeuer thou be that diſdaineſt to heare thy wickedneſſe reproued, thou art fallen into temptation, and thou art in danger of a iudgement: he that is fallen into that Lethargie ofA dangerous ſickeneſſe. ſinne that he neither feeleth himſelfe nor will indure to be told of it, is in a dangerous plight, he is paſt recouery.
            There is no ſickeneſſe ſo dangerous as that which is leaſt felt: and as he that feeleth not his ſickneſſe, neuer ſeeketh the Phiſitian, ſo he that feeleth not his ſinne neuer careth for repentance; and he that hath no remorſe to repent can neuer be forgiuen: for how ſhould Chriſt forgiue him his ſinnes that will neuer acknowledge them? but if the ſins of this age doth not make worke for repentance, they will make a great deale of buſineſſe for theVVorke for the Diuell. Diuell.
            Forbeare then thou captious Slaue of ſinne, to complaine againſt thoſe that doe complaine againſt thee:Pitifull ſpectacles. when we cannot turne our eyes on neither ſide but we ſhall ſee ſome rouing with boldneſſe, ſome rauing with madneſſe, ſome reeling with drunkenneſſe, ſome rioting in wantonneſſe, ſome curſing with bitternes. They haue made a ſacrifice of their ſoules to the Diuell, they neither feare nor reuerence God, but eſteeme all godlineſſe as a mockery; they do but play with religion, and do but deride at Diuinity it ſelfe: all will cenſure, none will amend, yet many will cry out the daies are euill, when they themſelues do helpe to make them worſe and worſe. If we haue a little verball deuotion, be ſure it is mixt with actuall abhomination. But they will ſay, it only belongeth to

the preacher to reprooue ſinnes, but not fit for euery particular perſon to meddle with.
            We cannot weare a garment in the new faſhion, ſaies one, we cannot drinke a pot with a good fellow, ſaies another; we cannot fortifie our words with the credit of an oath, ſaies a third: but euery Foole will be ſhooting of his bolt: euery Criticke companion will be girding at vs: buſiyng himſelfe with that which becomes him not to meddle with. It is truth, there are many will goe to Church,
               Religious in ſhow. they will not miſſe a Sermon, they haue their Bookes carried after them, they are very attentiue, they turne ouer leaues, they conſent to the preacher, they ſay his doctrine is good, they pretend great loue to the truth, they make many ſignes and ſhowes of zeale: but being once returned to their owne homes: what reformation or amendment of life? do they not liue ſtill as if Heauen and Hell, were but the Fictions of Fooles, and that the threatnings denounced by the preacher againſt ſin were but dreames and old wiues tales?
            The propheſies, pronouncing the puniſhment of ſin, they are eſteemed but as Caſſandrias Ryddles, they are not regarded: And what is it but the vnbeleefe of that doctrine, that the Prophets, the Apoſtles, and that Chriſt himſelfe haue deliuered, that thus armeth the wicked with boldneſſe to ſinne?
            
               Religion but made a ſtaale. The word of God is not regarded, and if ſometimes they doe take the Maske of religion, it is but when pietie becomes their aduantage: vertue may now and then be ſet forth to the ſhow, but it is but as a Staale, to draw into the Net of villany.
            
            The preachers of the word, which are the Fiſhers of Soules, they fiſh but now introubled waters, they may fiſh perhaps, and catch a Frog, or peraduenture light vpon a Cuttell, that will vent forth yncke; but if their Nets doe ſometimes incloſe, yet they are ſeldome ſeene to hold a Fiſh that is great & mightie: he that ſeeth this & can not

ſigh, is not a witneſſe but an agent: and he that can ſee this without compaſſion, is like a Nero, that can ſit and ſing, whilſt he ſees Rome a burning.
            
               VVe muſt exhort one another. The Apoſtle willeth vs to exhort one an other, and not for once and ſo away, but daily. Heb. 3. And in the 19. of Leuit. it is expreſſely ſet downe: Thou ſhalt plainly rebuke thy Neighbour, and ſhalt not ſuffer him to ſinne. And there is none but a Cain, that will deny to bee his brothers keeper.
            But is not euery man tyed aſwell by the rule of Gods word, as by the lawes of euery well gouerned common wealth, not onely to reprehend, but alſo to informe againſt any perſon, that either by word or deede ſhall ſeeke to eclipſe the honour or dignitie of his Prince? If we owe this duty to a King here vpon the earth, how much are wee further obliged to the King of Kings, to the King of Heauen? ſhall we ſee his lawes deſpiſed, his name prophaned, his Maieſtie blaſphemed, and ſhall we be ſilent and hold our peace? Qui tacet conſentire videtur, to heare and ſee and ſay nothing, is to make our ſelues a partie.
            But we dare not do our duties for diſpleaſing of thoſe that haue alreadie bequeathed themſelues to the Diuell: for offending a Drunkard, for offending an Adulterer, for offending a Blaſphemer: for offending a Papiſt. From hence it is that vice doth now ſleepe in thatThe ſecuritie of the time. ſecurity, that Philips Boy that euery day cloyed his maſter with the clamor of mortalitie, is not able to awaken it: but thou that art ſo a ſleepe in ſinne that nothing can awaken thee; aſſure thy ſelfe thou ſhalt be ſo awakened that nothing ſhall bring the a ſleepe.
            I haue hitherto ſpoken of the cuſtome of ſinne, how it hath weakned our ſpirits and lulde vs a ſleepe in the cradle of ſecurity: I do appeale from your drowſie luſtes to your awakened conſciences whether I haue ſpoken the truth or nay. If I ſhould now ſpeake of the antiquitie of ſinne, and ſhould therewithall take vpon me to deliuer

the manifold afflictions that from time to time, and from age to age ſhe hath drawne from the iudgment ſeate of God, to puniſh the enormity of wickedneſſe here vpon the earth, I might enter into ſuch a labyrinth, as Theſeus clew would hardly ſuffice to wind me out.
            
               The effects of ſinnes. It was ſinne that firſt ſecluded the Angels from the ioyes of heauen: it was Sinne that draue Adam out of Paradiſe. It was ſinne that cauſed the inundation of the whole world, It was ſinne that drew on the tempeſt of Fire and Brimſtone on Sodom and Gomorrha, It was ſinne that brought deſtruction on that holy city of Ieruſalem, It is ſinne that at all times and in all ages hath plaid the Strumpet through all the partes of the world, and hath filled the whole face of the earth with her brood of baſtards. And as the Armies of the Low countries are compounded of Engliſh, of Scots, of French, of Spaniſh,
               The ſinnes of all nations brought into England. of Italians, of Germans, and of all the nations of Chriſtendome collected and gathered together: ſo the ſinnes of all thoſe countries and of all the world beſides are euery day ingroſſed and tranſported into England. We haue ſtolne away the pride and ambition of the Spaniard, the fraude and falſhood of the French, the deceit and ſubtilty of the Italian, the drunkenneſſe and ſwearing of the German: we haue robbed the Iew of his vſury, the barbarous Sicilian of his rage and cruelty, the Turke and Infidel of his infidelity and vnbeliefe; we haue ſpoyled the Venetian Curtizans of their alluring vanities, to decke our Engliſh women in the new faſhion: and Rome that ſometimes hath beene worthily renowned, but now reputed to be the very ſynke of ſinne, we haue brought from them their idolatry, their ſuperſtition, their popery, their hereſie; and we haue robbed the Pope himſelfe and all his colledge of Cardinals, both of their luxury, and their letchery; and all his whole rablement of Monks, Fryers, and Maſſing Prieſts, of their beaſtly Bawdery. This propagation of ſinne, that hath infected the whole world with their abhominations

thus tranſported into England, are now there reſident and all entertained, not like ſtrangers, but as natiues that had beene both borne and bred in the countrey.
            
               The wantonneſſe of ſinne in this age. And that old hagge Sinne herſelfe, that a man would thinke ſhould be ſo far ſpent in yeares and ouerworne with age that ſhe ſhould be paſt trimming, is more propagating at this preſent howre, then ſhe was fiue thouſand yeares agoe; and is become more wanton, nice, and toyiſh then euer ſhe was before.
            
               Sinne a knowne Strumpet become a Lady. And notwithſtanding though from the beginning ſhe hath bin notoriouſly knowne to be a moſt infamous ſtrū
               pet common to all, yet now within theſe very few yeares one of theſe poore thread▪bare knights Sir Nicholas New-faſhions by name, that had ſo waſted and conſumed himſelfe in fooliſh pride and prodigality, that he was not worth the clothes that was belonging to his owne backe; hoping by her means to ſupport his vaine glorious pride, hath taken her to be his wife, and hath made her a Lady.
            And although ſinne of her owne nature and diſpoſition be both proud and preſumptuous more then ynough, yet now being dignified with a Ladiſhip and being inrould in the Heraulds booke to march in the Ladies rancke, ſhe is become more bold and inſolent then euer ſhe was, and who now but my Lady New faſhions that is had in eſteeme? ſhe is almoſt euery day troling in her Coach about the ſtreetes, inſinuating herſelfe into euery company; there is no feaſting, banquiting, reueling, nor any other merry meeting, but my Lady New faſhions is a principall gueſt.
            When ſhe meeteth and conuerſeth with Ladies and Gentlewomen, ſome ſhee teacheth to paint themſelues, ſome to powder their periwigs, ſome ſhe doth corrupt in manners, making them to be like her ſelfe, Bold, impudent,The Lady New-faſhions a Strumpet, a Bawde, and a VVitch immodeſt, ſome ſhe induceth to play the Harlots.
            For as ſhe herſelfe hath bin a common Strumpet from

the beginning, ſo ſhee hath bin a notorious Bawde and a Witch, and thoſe women, that ſhee cannot inchant with her Siren tongue, thoſe ſhee infameth by lying and ſlandering.
            And who is it but this old Beldame Sinne, now bearingSinne ſetteth a worke all ſorts of Tradeſmen. the name of the Lady new faſhions, that ſetteth a worke theſe new fangled Tailers, theſe Body-makers, theſe Perfumers, theſe Imbroderers, theſe Attire-makers, and all the reſt of theſe inuenters of vanities, that are the inſtruments of ſinne, that doth inforce their whole endeauours to fit her in her follies, and to decke and adorne her in her pride and wantonneſſe?
            The number, is almoſt without number, that doth both ſerue her, and will likewiſe ſeeke to defend her, Artificers, Tradeſmen, Shopkeepers, Men, women and children, are all depending vpon her: and as Demetrius, the ſiluer ſmith, in the 19. of the Actes, incenced the people againſt Paul, telling the Crafts-men, that he went about to diminiſh the dignitie and reputation of their great Goddeſſe Diana, which if he ſhould bring to paſſe, their gaines would likewiſe quaill that got their liuings by thoſe workes belonging to her ſelfe and to her great Temple in Epheſus: and as theſe perſwaſions ſtirred vp the multitude in thoſe daies, ſo he that in this age doth but open his lippes to ſpeake againſt ſinne, ſhall want no accuſers, not onely to reprooue him, but alſo to reproach him.
            
               Sinne doth neither want Siluer-ſmithes nor Gold-ſmithes, to ſerue her with plate and garniſh her with iewels, that will call him Foole that will but ſpeake againſt her exceſſe.
            
               Sinne hath her Silkemen and Mercers, that doth ſerue her of lace, ſilke, ſattin, veluet, cloath of ſiluer, cloath of gold, that will ſay he is a Criticke that will inueigh againſt her pride.
            
            
               Sinne hath her Merchants, that will tranſport the commodities behoouefull for the common wealth, into

forraine countries, and will returne backe againe toies and trifles; that will ſay he is but a ſatyriſt, that will detect her vanitie.
            
            
               Sinne hath her Lawyers, that will bring him into the Starre-Chamber for a Libeller, that will ſpeake againſt her Bribery.
            
            
               Sinne hath her Procters, that will cite him to the Commiſſaries Court, and make him doe open penance, that will ſpeake againſt her whooredome.
            
            I might yet ſpeake of women, whereof a great number that are not to be detected with any bodily abuſe, that would yet ſharpen their tongues to chide at any man that would reprehend thoſe enormities, that ſinne by cuſtome had ingrafted in them.
            
               A godly admonition to Ladies and Gentlewomen. But I would I could now admoniſh Ladies and Gentlewomen, that amongſt all the creatures of Gods handie worke, I doe acknowledge to bee moſt excellent, here vpon the earth: but as the fineſt cloath is moſt apteſt to take a ſtaine, ſo their milde diſpoſitions inclined to all compaſſionate loue and curteſie, are ſooneſt led aſtray, and moſt eaſieſt to be ſeduced. And this olde Hagge of Hell, this loathſome Lady Sinne, with her glazed eyes, her painted cheekes, her new-formed faſhions, and her inchanting tongue, doth ſo bewitch and blindfolde their vnderſtandings, that when they thinke they conuerſe with an Angell of Light, they giue entertainment to a Monſter of Hell; but when Sinne ſhall preſent her ſelfe to their new awakened ſoules, in her true forme and ſhape, and begins once to play the makebate betweene God and them, and their owne conſciences to teſtifie betweene them and themſelues; then they ſhall ſee to their owne ſorrow, what Saint it is that they haue ſerued, they ſhall then perceiue to their great horror and grief, that this darling of theirs ſo dearly eſteemed and beloued, will then be moſt buſie to affright and afflict them.
            
               
I would, I could wiſh therefore, (and with a reuerent regard I doe intreate them) that they would bethinke themſelues of their owne happineſſe whilſt they haue time, and not to doe as that fooliſh gentlewoman, that neuer remembred to ſay her prayers till ſhe heard it thunder.
            
               VVomen more excellent by nature then men. But ſome wil ſay, And why women, more then men) becauſe as women are more flexible, and therefore more apt to be ſeduced to ill, ſo they are more tractable againe, and therfore more eaſie to be induced to vertue.
            Men are compoſed of an vneuen temperature of the elements, togither with the malitious influence of the planets, prefiguring them to be ſturdie, ſtubborne, froward and ouerthwart; but women are by nature of a more excellent metall, their hearts are more ſoft and yeelding, and themſelues more pliable to all vertue and goodneſſe.
            There is more poſſibility to reclaime ten ill liuing women, to a conformitie of a better life, then to reforme one miſliuing man.
            Would they now bethinke themſelues, when they looke in their Glaſſes, that there is no Forehead heeld ſo gracefull (amongſt many women) as that which the Prophet Ieremie tearmeth to be graceleſſe, the Forehead, that is paſt ſhame and cannot bluſh: let them therefore fall a chiding at their owne reſemblances, beginning firſt withI ſpeake this but to thoſe women that be wiſe & doe feare God▪ More then would ſerue 
                     •
                  o▪ good women that feared God. the Forehead, and ſay, ô thou proud and ſhameleſſe Forehead, the very Chaire and Seate of pride: where thou ſhouldeſt be deckt with a Crowne of Glory, thou art clouded and ouerſhadowed with a monſtrous Mappe of Haire, no leſſe offenſiue to the Maieſtie of God, then ougly and deformed in the ſight of all good men; be aſhamed therefore of thy intollerable pride, and by thy humilitie, and ſubmiſſiue lowlineſſe, reconcile thy ſelfe againe to thy God, whom thou haſt ſo highly offended.
            
               VVandring Eyes. Deſcending then a little, ſay yet againe, ô you wandering

and laſciuious Eyes, the attracters and drawers on of luſt and ſinfull thoughts; you that were firſt created to be the Deemers of my Diſcretion, but now become the Dimners of the inſight of my Soule: forbeare your wonted traines of light and wanton glances, ſeeke now with bitter teares, to bewaile your former follies, and lifting vp your ſelues to Heauen, aske grace and mercie.
            
               I hope al this will offend no women that are good. Proceeding thus, you may yet reprooue the Tongue that is more apt to ſpeake ill then good: the Eares againe that are euer more ſet wide open to vanitie, but ſtill ſhut vp to good counſell or godly inſtruction: And ſo we may ſay of all the reſt of our neceſſarie and naturall members, that are diſplaced of their ordinarie courſes: for being firſt created as the Miniſters of the Soule, are now become the Diſturbers of our Innocency.
            
            
               How women ſhould vſe their glaſſes. This externall beautie of the body, ſo much eſteemed of amongſt women, when they behold it in a Glaſſe, it ſhould ſtirre them vp a farre off to diſplay the maieſtie of the Creator, and from thence ſhould paſſe with the wings of their cogitations to the contemplation of the higheſt Faire, which is the inuiſible beautie of the Almighty God, from whence as from a Fountaine, all ſmaller Riuers deriue their beauties.
            It is ſaid that Africa, bringeth forth euery yeare a new Monſter, the reaſon is, that in the deſarts of that countrey, the wilde and ſauage beaſts, that are both diuerſe in nature, and contrarie in kinde, will yet ingender the one with the other: but England hatcheth vp euery moneth a new Monſter, euery weeke a new Sinne, and euery day aMonſtrous faſhions euery day hatched vp. new Faſhion: our Monſters are not bred in the Deſarts, as thoſe in Africa, but in euery Towne and Citty: where they are ſo chearely foſtered, & ſo daintily cheriſhed that they multiply on heapes, by hundreds and by thouſands. It were not poſſible for me now to ſet down how this monſtrous generation thus hatched vp by Sinne, hath beene from time to time procreated and brought into the

world, one ſinne ſtill begetting an other.
            
               The genealogy of ſinne. 
               Pride the eldeſt daughter of Sinne, was firſt Spaund in Heauen: ſhee was from thence expelled; but ſhee drew after her a great diſſolution of Angels. It was pride, that begat Contempt in Paradiſe, where there was no Apple in the Garden ſo well pleaſing to Eue, as that which God had forbidden her.
            It was Contempt that begot Malice, And Malice againe begat Murther, when Cain kild his brother Abell.
            
            As the ſonnes of men increaſed in the world, ſo Sinne began to multiply ſo faſt, that God repented him that hee had made man.
            To purge the world of her abhominations, the Deluge came, and all were drowned, except eight perſons. After the Floud, amongſt the ſonnes of Noah the generation of the accurſed Cham, became to be great and mightie vpon the earth; at which time Sinne was growne againe to that ſtrength, that ſhee began on the ſudden to play the Rebell, and with a tumultuous aſſembly gathered together in the plaines of Shinar, ſhee began to fortifie her ſelfe againſt Heauen.
            
            Amongſt thoſe Giants, then reigning ouer the face of the earth, that greedy Curre Couetouſneſſe, which the Apoſtle tearmeth to be the roote of all euils, was (amongſt a number of other monſtrous ſinnes) foſtered vp by Ambition.
            
            
               Couetouſnes the parent of many ſinnes. 
               Couetouſneſſe, was the firſt parent of Oppreſſion, Extortion, Bribery, Vſury, Fraud, Deceit, Subtilty: and that common Strumpet Idolatry, was a baſtard borne of this broode.
            
               Idolatry had iſſue, the Lady Lecherie, who in proceſſe of time, became ſo conuerſant with the Pope and his Cardinals, that they procreated amongſt them that loathſome ſinne of Buggery.
            
            
               The varieties of Iniquities. It would bee a matter of impoſſibilitie for me to ſet downe the varieties of thoſe ſinnes that are hatched vp in theſe daies, when ſo many new faſhioned iniquities

doth ſwarme, both in Cittie, Towne, and Country; that were our bodies but halfe ſo diſeaſed with ſickneſſes as our ſoules be with ſins, it could not be auoided, but that ſome ſtrange and vnheard-of mortality would enſue. The time hath beene, men would maske their vices with cloaked diſſimulation from the eye of the world, but now iniquitie is ſet forth bare faſt, without any maske of preteires to hide her ougly viſage.
            They ſought to couer their ſinnes from the open ſhow, we haue ſo litle ſhame, that we neuer ſeek to ſhelter them: our Anceſtors were but bunglers at vice, they had not the wit to grace a ſinne, nor to ſet it forth to the ſhow; they could but call a Spade a ſpade, a Greene Gooſe a goſling, a profeſſed Broker, a craftie knaue: we are become farre more exquiſite, we can make an Owle a Hawke, a Iacke Naaps, a ſheepe, an old Milne Horſe, a palfry for a man of honour; we can call Impudency, Audacitie, Rage, Courage, Wilineſſe, wit, Obſtinacy, Conſtancy; and Lewde Luſt, Pure Loue.
            Our wittes are become more capering then they were in times paſt, our conceits more nimble, and ready to finde out new trickes, new toies, and new inuentions, as well of follies as of faſhions.
            
               Sinne thinkes ſcorne to be reprooued. But what remedie? pride thinkes ſcorne to be reprooued or to be told of her faults, ſhe is growne ſo ſtubborne and ſo ſtately.
            
               Swearing ſwaggers out admonition, and will not be reprooued.
            
               Whooredome and Drunkenneſſe, hath ſo hid themſelues in the Maze of vanities, that repentance can no where fiinde them out.
            
               Rage & Fury are produced as argumēts of valour, where the Lie ſhall be giuen but vpon the ſpeaking of a word, & the Stab againe returned, but for the giuing of the Lie: where not to pleadge a Health, is a ground good ynough for a Challenge, and the taking of wall, made a heinous matter, whereby many times murther doth inſue.
            
               
               Three ſhrewd witneſſes. But ſinners haue three ſhrewd witneſſes to teſtifie againſt them, the Diuell, the Law, and their owne Conſciences: but if here vpon the earth a mans owne conſcience condemnes him for his ſinne, how much greater ſhall beThe glory pride. the iudgement of God? The glory of pride as ſhe paſſeth through the ſtreetes in this age, doth ſo farre exceed, that the eye of heauen is aſhamed to behold it. And thoſe bleſſings which God hath giuen vs in great meaſure, we conſume in pride, and wantonneſſe, and like Swine we beſlauer the precious pearles of Gods abundant plenty, conuerting them by our exceſſiue pride, into dearth and ſcarcity: and this wickedneſſe ariſeth not from Turkes, Ieſuits, Heretykes, and Papiſts, but from the profeſſors of true Chriſtianity, and euen now in the hotteſt Sunne-ſhine of the Goſpell: we haue neglected Heauen, to dote vpon the vaine pleaſures of the earth, and haue forſaken God, but to wrappe our ſelues in the excrement of wormes; a little garded and garniſhed with the minerall of Gold and Siluer.
            How many that are not able to pay honeſtly for homeſpunne cloth, will yet weare ſilke, and will euery day gliſter in Gold and Siluer? the ſoule goes euery day in her working day clothes, whileſt the body keepes perpetuall holy-day, and iets vp and downe in her ſeuerall ſuites.
            
               The effects of pride. How many againe are ſo eager of ſuperfluities, that all their racked rents in the country are not able to diſcharge the Shop bookes in the City, when there be that will ſpend aſmuch as ſome knights be worth, but in a payre of Garters, and a payre of Shooeſtrings?
            It is pride that hath baniſhed Hoſpitality and good houſe keeping.
            It is pride that raiſeth the rents and rates of all things vniuerſally.
            It is pride that breadeth our dearth and ſcarcities:
            It is pride that impoueriſheth City, Towne and countrey.
            
               
It is pride that filles all the priſons in England, and brings a number to the Gallowes.
            
            It is pride, (if it be not preuented in time) that will make a hangmans roome in reuerſion, to be a good ſute for a gentleman that hath honeſtly ſerued his Prince and Countrey: for howſoeuer hee may ſhift for meate and drinke, he ſhall be ſure to want no cloathes.
            
               A happie age. It was a happy age when a man might haue wooed his wench, with a paire of Kiddes lether Gloues, a Siluer Thimble, or with a Tawdry Lace; but now a veluet gowne, a chaine of pearle, or a coach with foure horſes, will ſcarcely ſerue the turne; ſhee that her mother would haue beene glad of a good Ambling Maare, to haue rode to Market on, will not now ſteppe out of her owne doores, to croſſe the other ſide of the ſtreete, but ſhee muſt haue her coache.
            
            It was a merry world, when ſeauen or eight yeards of veluet would haue made a gowne for a Lady of honour; now eighteene will not ſuffice for her that is ſcarce worthy to be a good Ladies laundreſſe: we are growne from a peticoate of ſtamell to cloath of ſiluer, cloath of gold, ſilke ſtockings, and not ſo much as our ſhoes, but they muſt be imbrodered with ſiluer, with gold, yea and ſometimes with pearles.
            I haue ſpoken of pride indifferently, how it inforceth a like both men and women▪ it is pride that draweth after it ſuch a daily innouation of new faſhions, that I thinke they haue found out whole Mines of new inuentions, or they haue gotten the Philoſophers ſtone to multiply, there is ſuch a daily multiplicity, both of follies and faſhions.
            
            
               Vitellius in his daies ſearched farre and neare for the varieties of Nature, but we haue harrowed Hell in theſe daies for the vanity of new faſhions, and (I thinke) wee haue found them out; for hee that had as many Eyes as Argus, were not able to looke into the one halfe, that are now followed and imbraced aſwell by men as women. The Prophet Eſay in his 3. Chapt. maketh mentiō of many

ſtrange engins belongeth to women: he ſpeaketh there of oyntments for their lippes, of caules, and round attires for their heads, of ſweete balles, bracelets, and bonnets: of tabiletes, earrings, muffelers, wimples, vailes, criſping pinnes, glaſſes, lawnes, and fine linnen.
            
            Theſe and many other vanities belonging to women are there numbred vp: but if the Prophet had now lately, but walked one turne through the Royal Exchange in London, he would haue beene put to his ſhiftes to haueStrange inuented vanities. made a true repetition of the new inuented vanities, that are there to be ſeene; and this would more haue troubled him more then all the reſtt, hat when he had heard them cald by their proper names, he could neuer haue vnderſtood whereunto they had belonged, without the helpe of a chamber maide.
            
            
               The diuels Ingeny. Some will ſay that theſe new inuented vanities came firſt from hell, and I would be loath to excuſe the diuell himſelfe in the matter, that I know is very ingenious, and is euery day deuiſing of new ingines, and (I thinke) doth keepe an attire-makers ſhops, whereby to attempt and allureCredible and true though ſtrange to be beleeued. both men and women, to ſinne: but this I dare aſſure my ſelf, that our Ladies and Gentlewomen in theſe daies are ſo exceeding in their attires, and ſo deformed in their faſhions, that all the Ladies and Gentlewomen that be in hell▪
                did neuer weare nor ſee the like.
            There be many both men and women, that to follow the new faſhion, hath marde that faſhion that God himſelfe hath formed.
            
               VVe marre that faſhion that God hath made to follow our owne. I proteſt I haue many times beene hartily ſorry, to ſee ſome women, whom God and Nature had adorned with beauty, with perfection, and with comelineſſe of perſonage, that haue diſguiſed themſelues in that ſort, with the deformities of faſhions, that of amiable and louely creatures, they haue transformed themſelues to be moſt deformed and loathſome monſters.
            There is a decorum to be kept (but eſpecially amongſt

women) in attiring of themſelues; for that attire that is comely for a round well-formed viſage is as vnſeemely againe in her that hath a little, a leane, or a long face: but as euery ſhooe is not fit for euery foote, nor euery medicine to be applyed to euery maladie, ſo euery faſhion, doth not befit euery perſon, nor euery colour agree with euery complexion. The woman therefore that is wiſe, will fit her ſelfe with ſuch a faſhion, as may adde comelineſſe to her owne proportion: but mine intent is not here to inſtruct women how to adorne themſelues to the ſhow of the world, when there is no ornament ſo pretious wherewithall to beautifie a woman, as is the beauty of a good and godly behauiour. This one inſtruction I wil yet leaue to thoſe that are deſirous to follow the faſhion: their is not a greater enemy to all complexions, either in men or women, then is this found fantaſie of yellow ſtarched bands, and thereforeA moſt ridiculous folly. as it is a certain argument of vanity, ſo there can not be a more ridiculous follie. The woman ſhall not weare that which apperteineth to the man, neither ſhall a man put on womans rayment: for all that doe ſo, are abomination to the Lord thy God.
            
            
               A precept from God neglected. A precept left vnto vs by the Almightie, Deuteronom. 22. But the yong man in this age, that is not ſtrumpet like attired, doth thinke himſelfe quite out of faſhion, and the yong woman againe, that as well in her behauiour, as in the manner of her apparrell is moſt ruffian like, is accounted the moſt gallant wench: and I know not what to ſay, or whether I ſhould accuſe men, for ſuting themſeluesThe little difference that is vſed between men and women in their apparell. in womens apparrell, or whether I ſhould accuſe women for ſuting themſelues in mens apparell; but this is certaine, that their hattes, their feathers, their bands ſo beſtitched, ſo beedged, ſo belaced, and in their ridiculous banbeles, ſir named picadillies, yea and in their gownes to, they are ſo ſutable and like in faſhion, that there is no more difference to be ſeene, then is betweene a horſe ſhooe, and a Maares ſhooe.
            
            
               
We are better knowne the one of vs to the other by our faces, then we are by our vertues, and yet we are better knowne by our follies, then we are by our faces: but if we did not looke aſquint at the matter, we ſhould finde, that as we haue prouoked the wrath of God by our ſtrange and new fangled faſhions, ſo he hath in a ſort requited vs againe, with as many ſtrange and vnknowne diſeaſes, almoſt euery yeare with a new kinde of ſickneſſe, ſuch as our phiſitions are no leſſe ignorant of the cure, then they be of the cauſe from whence proceeding. And what is itThe new found out folly of taking tobacco. now, but the cuſtome of new faſhions, that hath foiſted in that Indian plant Tobacco? that till now of late was neuer knowne but amongſt Indians, Barbarians, and ſuch infidels as did euery day adore and worſhip the diuell, but it is now ſo entertained amongſt vs both in England and Ireland, that all the nations in Chriſtendome beſides do laugh at our folly.
            If it were but halfe ſo pretious as a number would perſwade, I thinke the people of other parts of Chriſtendome could looke into it aſwell as wee, neither amongſt our ſelues could it be ſo much deſired in ſuch generalitie, for the multitude was neuer inclined yet greatly to imbrace vertue, or to like of any thing that were good.
            But ſome will ſay, I doe want matter to quarrell with that will be finding fault with the ſouereigntie of Tobacco, that is ſo much admired, and therewithall, ſo generally receiued.
            I confeſſe it maketh drunken euerie day in the weeke, the whole rablement of panders, paraſites, bawdes, Brokers, knights of the poſt, Hoſtlers, Tapſters, Tinkers, Tailers, Coblers, Coſtermongers, and the whole generation of Drunkards, cut and long taile, one and other: and I doe looke that all theſe will cenſure me from the Tribunall of their Alebench. Now for that olde prouerbe, ſometimes avowed by them that will crie out

               The more the merrier, yet let them know that the multitude of ſuch gueſts, ſhall adde to the horrour of miſeries. But yet to blemiſh and to make dimme this my Looking Glaſſe, by belching out their ſtinking vapour, they will ſpeake of Knights, Gentlemen, oldmen, yong men, wiſe men, learned men that doe all vſe to take it, and will likewiſe defend it.
            I know there be Knights and Gentlemen both, that doe vent more ſmooke out of their Noſtrils, then they doe out of their kitchin chimnies; and old men and yong men may bee led aſtray, the one through dotage, the other too much inclined to follow the faſhiō: but for thoſe that are accounted to bee ſo wiſe and learned, that will ſtand ſo much in the defence of their Tobacco, Cardinall Bellarmin will doe as much in defence of the Pope, and in the approbation of his Idolatrous Maſſe.
            
            Shall wee then denie the Phiſitians teſtimony, will not his authoritie ſuffice in the matter?
            Giue me leaue to anſwer Maſter Doctor thus; I will inforce againſt his Philoſophy, that which can not erre, and that is the experience which many ages hath taughtExperience much better then Maſter Doctors opinion. vs: that before Tobacco was euer knowne in England, wee liued more free from all manner of ſickneſſes, then we haue done ſithens: and let them looke yet againe to the time now preſent, there be a number that neuer meddied with Tobacco, in their liues, doe they not liue in more perfect health then thoſe that doe take it faſteſt? if they doe not ſee this, they are but blind Doctors, & ſome will ſay that an ignorant Phiſition is the worſt of all diſeaſes, and God bleſſe me and my friends from his phyſicke that wil prefer his owne skill before a known experience.
            But they ſay Tobacco is phyſical: the greater their folly that will then take it too faſt, when the beſt phiſicke accouuted beſt indeede, is to take no phiſicke at all vnleſſe vpon vrgent occaſion, but he that taketh phiſicke euery day, can neuer haue a healthfull body.
            
               
Well, yet they ſay Tobacco is of an excellent operation for the drying vp of Rheumes, Dropſies, and of all other moiſt humors whatſoeuer: as good a medicine pickt out for thoſe diſeaſes as he that poured on oyle to quench theTobacco vſed but to drawe dowue drinke. fire, when Tobacco is but made a ſhooing horne to drawe downe drinke, when euery pipe muſt haue his pot, and when both pipe and pot muſt ſtill walke the round, and march togither arme in arme, as louingly as the Whore and the Bawde.
            But here is now a vertue pickt out that cannot be denied, we ſee it with our eyes what water and Rheume it bringeth vp, and maketh vs to ſpit in that abundance, as muſt be very holeſome to be ſo auoided; but if the vertue of Tobacco be ſo precious becaus it wil make a man to ſpit & to ſpaule, learne this of me; thou that ſo much deſireſtThe loathſomneſſe of Tobacco. to driuell & to ſlauer, take but one dragme of the abſtract that is drawne out of a Cloſe-ſtoole; it ſhall goe further for that purpoſe then a whole ounce of the beſt Tobacco that euer came out of the Weſt Indies, be it pudding or leafe.
            Let me intreate the gentle reader a little to pardon me, though I ſomewhat ſtray from the bounds of modeſty, it is but to expreſſe one loathſomneſſe by another.
            I cannot tell what reuerent tearmes I might vſe to deliuer their rude inciuility, that whileſt they are taking their Tobacco do ſo ſpit and ſpaule, driuell and ſlauer, in that loathſome and vnmannerly ſort, as were ynough to make either man or woman to turne vp their ſtomacks, eſpecially if they were ſuch as had beene trained vp in ciuility, or had any regard of cleanlineſſe. I know not thereforeThe Tobacconiſt and the Drunkard fit companions. whether of the twain I might condemne to be moſt loathſome and beaſtly, whether the common Drunkard, or the Smoake taking Tobacconeſt, the one vomits vp his draffe when he is drunke, the other ſlauers out his driuell when he is ſober; a ſight as vnlouely to looke on the oneTobacco ſophiſticated. as the other: but if Gentlemen did know what ſophiſticated

ſtuffe it were that they did buy at ſo deare a rate, I thinke ſome of them would be better aduiſed; we might elſe conclude that draffe were good ynough for Swyne, and that a Barley corne were fitter for Eſops Cocks then a precious ſtone.
            The Tobacconiſt yet hath this ſpeciall vertue, when he hath beſtirred himſelfe well to his Tobacco-pipe, he will be more thankfull for a penny pot of drinke then he will for a two-penny loafe of bread.
            It is not without ſome ſpeciall cauſe that I doe thus inueigh againſt Tobacco, when for myne owne part I am not ſo ſquemiſh but that I can aſwell endure the loathſomneſſe of the ſight, as the filthineſſe of the ſtinke: but if it were aduiſedly looked into and well conſidered of, we ſhould finde that the maſſe of treaſure that is yearely blowne out of the Tobacco pipe, would ſuffice to giue royal pay to an army of forty thouſand Souldiers, either for theA pitious expence. ſeruice of the King, or the defence of the country if neede ſhould ſo require: or might rather be imployed to many other charitable vſes, now in this miſerable time, then to be ſo vainely conſumed and ſpent as it is.
            I referre it to the iudgment of any man that hath but the grace or feare of God before his eyes.
            Now to ſet downe myne owne conceit what I do aſſuredly beleeue, from whence it ſhould proceede that the Engliſh aboue all the nations in Chriſtendome beſides are ſo much inclined to doate on this ſtinking ſmoaky vapor: I thinke it to be an engine of the Diuels owne deuiſing, who by his miniſters hath thus diſperſed this miſty helliſh fogge to ſtirre vp ſinne and wickedneſſe, and in that place aboue al the reſt where true religion doth ſhine moſt bright, and the word of God hath freeſt paſſage.
            
               The inormities that be drawne in by Tobacco. Let vs but now a litle looke into the enormity: it is Tobacco that conſumeth that wealth that might be imploied to many godly vſes.
            It is Tobacco that in euery Tauern, Inne, and Alehouſe,

is now as common as any Curtizan.
            
            It is Tobacco that Harlot like holdeth in ſociety, the baſe and raſcall ſort of people, and containeth them as well in idleneſſe, as in drunkennſſe.
            It is Tobacco that maketh the poore Artificer to ſpend that at night, that he hath laboured for all the whole day, whileſt his wife and poore children do ſit at home without bread.
            It is Tobacco that maketh a rich man a poore man, a poore man a ſtarke begger, a wiſe man a foole, an old man to dote, and a yong man to admire his owne ignorance.
            It is Tobacco that draweth to drunkenneſſe, from drunkenneſſe to ſwearing, from ſwearing to quarrelling, from quarrelling to ſtabbing, killing, and murthering.
            It is the exceſſiue taking of Tobacco, that hath hurt a great many, and of mine owne knowledge hath killed ſome outright.
            For him that wil yet oppoſe me with his owne experience, and will tell me what himſelfe hath felt of the vertue of Tobacco: I will intreat him to pardon me, though I giue no better credit to his words then I do to the Papiſt, that will proteſt in good earneſt that he hath found himſelfe to be better aſſiſted by his prayers to our Lady, then he hath beene by the power of our Lord, and will not let to ſweare that a Popes bleſſing is ynough to preſerue him from all the Diuels in Hell, that will not ſo much as protect him from the poore Hangman.
            
            The Diuell that hath ſo many ſuperſtitious conceits wherewith to blindfold the Papiſt, is not vnfurniſhed of vaine impreſſions wherewith to be ſot the Tobacconiſt: to conclude, he that can take Tobacco, drinke Bottle-ale, play an after game at Tables, and weare a Picadilly, is a compleat man fit for the time, and pleaſing to all companies.
            I haue thus preſented to your view, firſt the true picture of pride, together with the folly of New-faſhions, amongſt the which this inordinate taking of Tobacco,
               
as it is the moſt vaine, ſo it is the moſt loathſome. I would now giue you a little glimce of that accurſed curre Couetouſneſſe, and of ſome one or two of thoſe whelpes, that are crept out of his owne kennell, namely Bribery and Vſurie; for the reſt that be of the ſame litter, as oppreſſion, extortion, exaction, and a number ſuch other like, I may let them yet ſleepe till fitter opportunitie may ſerue to awaken them. They ſay it is not good to awake a barking dogge, but theſe bee all byting curres, that ſheepe-biter like, doe euery day rauen and worrie the whole Common-wealth.
            
               Of couetouſneſſe. 
               Couetouſneſſe is the curre, that deuoureth his owne Actaeon▪
                it is the Charybdis, that greedie gulfe, that ſwalloweth vp all without reſpect either of friend or foe, either of vertuous or vitious: it is the Canker of the Common-wealth, that eateth vp the gettings of the poore.
            It is the viper that poiſoneth the eares of Princes, teaching them to ſet aſide all iuſt and honourable dealing.
            It is Couetouſneſſe, that thinketh nothing to be vnlawfull, where either gaine is to be begotten, or gold to be gathered.
            It is Couetouſneſſe, that maketh no conſcience in gathering of gold, nor ſpilling of blood, holding nothing to be vnlawfull that bringeth in gaine.
            It is Couetouſneſſe, that eateth vp the meanes, that the poore haue to liue by, and that reaues the ſweate from the Labourers browes.
            The couetous wretch heapeth together abundance of wealth, with paine, with trauell, with periurie, with oppreſſion, with vſurie, with extortion, with wronging their neighbours, with the curſe of the poore: which they leaue againe to their vnthrifty heires, no leſſe prodigall in ſpending, then their fathers were miſerable in gathering.
            
               
Couetous perſons (amongſt all other) are moſt pernitious to be admitted to the adminiſtration of Iuſtice; for by how much more they be aduanced to greatneſſe, by ſo much the more they are accurſed of the poore people, and daily vengeance denounced againſt them▪ by as many as doe but heare them ſpoken of.
            The couetous miſer is then moſt ready to deuoure, when he makes ſemblance of greateſt loue and amitie, and when he begins once to giue precepts of good counſell, his aduiſe is then moſt dangerous, for if it bring not poiſon in the mouth, be ſure it brings a ſting in the taile: o what paines the miſer will take, but to coniure a little money into the narrow circle of a canuas bagge, he thinketh that the Angels of Heauen are not comparable to the Angels that be in his purſe.
            I thinke if Hell were a place of returne, and that either gold or gaine were there to be gotten, more triple headed dogges then one, were not able to defend the entry.
            Mammon is a great God, and hee is honoured by no baſe perſons; he is ſerued by the rich and reuerenced byBribery in great eſtimation. the mighty. Bribery is a bird of the ſame wing, though not ſo great a God as Mammon, yet mightily befriended, defended and ſupported.
            But as a man that hath change of names, is ſeldome found to be honeſt, ſo a Bribe that is ſometimes great by the name of a gift, ſometimes of a preſent, ſometimes of aBriberie diſguiſed. 
               gratification, ſometimes of a Beneuolence, doth ſo ſlily paſſe from hand to hand vnder ſo many names and titles, that Bribery indeed, is hardly diſcerned.
            Vnder theſe names and ſhowes Bribery many times preiudiceth the ſeruice of the Prince, peruerteth good Lawes, and armeth all ſorts of ſinners with boldneſſe to offend.
            
               Many ſinnes boulſtered out by briberie. The lawes and ordinances that are ſometimes decreed in Cities and Townes corporate, for the common good of the inhabitants, Briberie ſo diſſolueth them, as if they had

beene ordained to no other purpoſe but to bring in gifts and rewards: and God forgiue them their ſinnes that will ſay, their be many inſtitutions, ordained (indeed) amongſtLawes ordained but to bring in bribes▪
                theſe inferiour ſort of towne magiſtrates, rather to bring in bribes, then to puniſh abuſe.
            
               Bribery many times ſtandeth in the doore of greatneſſe, and ſometimes helpes vp iniurie to the place of audience; but he that hath but a bad matter to follow, briberie, is the man, that muſt firſt do his meſſage: for he that hath art and skill, to know both how to giue and take a bribe, he hath the onely approoued medicine, to paſſe through any affaires that are poſſible to be effected.
            There be many notes whereby thou maieſt know a briber, for all his cunning counterfeiting, but take theſe few for the moſt ſpeciall: he loueth ſtill to be neere about a magiſtrate, or at the elbow of any other great perſon in place and authority, and if you marke him well, he is euer more incroaching, to creepe into an office, and if you miſſe him in any of theſe places, you ſhall lightly hit vpon him amongſt ſome of the Clarkes, that are belonging to ſome of the foure Courts.
            
            I would be glad now to preſent to your view, the true picture of vſury, but there hath beene queſtion made ofVſury. 
               vſury what it is; ſome would haue it to conſiſt onely in the letting of money: but if we could aſwell vnderſtandVVhat vſurie is. the ſpirituall, as we do plod at the litterall, there was neuer more occaſion to exclaime againſt vſury, then at this preſent.
            But it is written, Thou ſhalt not giue thy money to vſurie: therefore to extort, to exact, to oppreſſe, to deceiue, by falſe waights, by falſe meaſures, by lying, by flattering, by periurie, or by any other manner of deceitful villanie: they thinke it honeſt trade and traffique.
            
               VVhether all theſe be vſurers or nay▪
                The Land-lord, that racketh vp his rents, the Farmer, that hoiſeth vp the market, the Merchant that robbeth the Realme, the Shop-keeper, that buyeth by one weight

and ſelleth by another; the Baker flatly coſſineth the poore, in euery loafe of bread, that hee buieth to fill his belly; the Bruer that is no leſſe deceitful in the meaſure of his caske, then in the price of his beere; the craftie Tradesman, the deceitfull Artificer: what are all theſe and manyIf no vſurers, then arrant theeues. A queſtion demanded. other moe that might be here inſerted, if they be not vſurers, what are they but arrant Theeues?
            
            And I would here craue the cenſure of Diuinity, whether hee that will not ſell but for exceſſiue gaine, whether he that ſelleth vpon truſt, and will therefore hoiſe vp his commoditie to the higher prizes; whether he that will not lend vpon a pawne, vnleſſe he may buy it out right to the great hinderance of the partie that ſelleth it; whether he that takes aduantage of his neighbours neceſſitie either in buying or ſelling; whether he that purchaſeth his neighbours houſe or liuing out of his hands, whether he that buies an office thereby to poule and pill, whether he that doth take exceſſiue gaine, or exceſſiue fees, whether theſe or ſuch other like are to be accounted vſurers, or nay, and whether all theſe things thus mentioned and ſpoken of are not as fit to be reformed, as the vſurie in lending of mony?
            
               I ſpeake now of Dubline. There be ſome that haue done their indeauours for the reforming of vſurie: but now, as the Apoſtle ſaith, The law ſpeaketh to them, that are vnder the law, Romanes 3. ſo I ſpeake now of the place where my ſelfe was reſident at the writing of theſe lines, namely, at the cittie of Dubline in Ireland, where mony being ſcant, and where there bee no lenders but vpon good ſecuritie, and profit both togither; yet in Dubline (as in all other places) men are driuen vpon neceſſarie occaſions (that haue not money of their owne) to borrow of others that haue to lende, though they ſometimes pay dearely for it; whereupon ſome well diſpoſed perſons (ſtirred vp by a godly zeale) beganne to inueigh againſt vſurie, wherein without doubt, they honeſtly diſcharged their

duties towards God, but the vſury that they ſo much reprehended, was onely the vſe of lending of mony: when pretermitting now to ſpeake of the exceſſiue gaine that is incroached by ſhopkeepers, and by all other ſorts of Tradeſmen that do liue by buying and ſelling: I dare boldely auouch thus much, that all the Vſury, and Extortion,
               The extortion of Bakers and Brewers, pitious to be ſuffered. or call it what you will, that is vſed by Bakers, and Brewers alone, is tenne times more grieuous and eſpecially to the poorer ſort of people, then all the intereſt that is taken for the letting out of mony.
            But they onely denounced againſt the letting of mony, and they did it no doubt but according to the rule of Gods word, for the lending of mony to vſe is directly forbidden by Gods owne mouth, and therefore ſinne; but the inconuenience that I do finde is this, Vſury is reprooued,Vſury reproued, but not truely defined but it is not defined but according to the letter, whereupon the great Vſurers indeed, that do thinke that in their trade of buying, and ſelling, the gaine of one hundred pounds for an other a great deale too little, and that howſoeuer they can defraud or exact by bargaining, they do thinke themſelues to be very honeſt and true dealing men; and that this prohibition: Thou ſhalt not put thy mony to vſury, doth nothing at all concerne them; and as they ſuppoſe, it ſtretcheth no further then to the lending of mony, when many great Diuines haue giuen their opinions, that as in that petition giue vs this day our daily bread: all our other neceſſaries are there comprehended; ſo in thoſe wordes, Thou ſhalt not giue thy mony to vſurie: all other exceſſiue gaine, is likewiſe included.
            To this agreeth the opinion of that ancient Father Saynt Hierome, who writing vpon the Prophet Ezekiel,
               Vſury defined deliuereth theſe wordes, Some think that there is no vſury but in mony. This did the holy Scriptures fore-ſee, and therefore taketh away all exceſſiue increaſe or gaine in any thing.
            
               
What ſhould I need to bring any further teſtimony in this caſe, when there is no learned Diuine that did euer deny it? I would not haue men therefore to flatter themſelues too much, or to thinke themſelues more honeſt then they be; for he that taketh exceſſiue gaine in any thing, is as great a vſurer as he that lendeth out mony: but he that hath the moſt corrupted Lungs himſelfe, will ſooneſt complaine of the vnſauoury breath of others. And who will be more ready to exclaime againſt vſury then he that is himſelfe the greateſt vſurer?
            Vſury needs no more but the bare name to make it hatefull: the Ribauld, the Robber, the Theefe, the Murtherer, the Drunkard, the Whore-maſter, the Swearer, the Blaſphemer, they all cry out againſt vſury; they that are of noreligion will yet pleade religion, and bitterly raile at him, that lendeth mony to vſe: he that hath no conſcience at all, will yet pretend a conſcience, and wil exclaime againſt the vſurer: when if he did but looke into his owne impiety, or if his owne faules were written in his forehead, he might pulle his cap ouer his browes as low as his neighbours: but whileſt they would bereaue the vſurer of his intereſt, they themſelues would robbe him of his principall.
            I would not haue any man to thinke that what I haue formerly ſpoken is in the defence of vſury, that I know at all times, in all places and by all good men, hath euer bin condemned.
            I am now come to figure forth a ſinne that in a certain kinde hath ſome affinity with vſury, and that is that monſtrousOf Murther. ſinne of Murther: for as he that in bargianing, buying, & ſelling, can by any fraudulent or deceitful meanes, circumuent, or ſo ouer reach his neighbour to make him pay for a commodity three times more in value then it is worth, yet this he accounteth to be no vſury, nor any manner of cracke to his credit or reputation; but doth thinke it to be Merchant-like, or Tradſeman-like traffique,

and will in no wiſe acknowledge himſelfe to be an 
                  Ʋſurer: ſo the malicious wretch that by practiſe and by pollicy ſeeketh the vtter wracke and ruine of his neighbour whom he doth maligne, ſo long as he layeth no violent hands on him, he thinketh himſelf to be no Murtherer at all.
            
               Of Murther as it is determined by Chriſt. When the High Prieſts by ſubtilty brought Chriſt to Pilate, and by falſe accuſations procured his death, they thought themſelues to be cleane and pure.
            
               Pilate againe, when he had deliuered Chriſt to be crucified, waſhed his hands, and pronounced himſelfe to be innocent: but our Sauiour Chriſt in the fift of Mathew, hath there determined the matter, both what Murther is; & who is a Murtherer; his words be theſe: Ye haue heard how that it was ſaid, to them of old time, kill not, for whoſoeuer killeth ſhall be in danger of iudgment. But I ſay vnto you, whoſoeuer is angry with his brother ſhall be in danger of iudgment; and whoſoeuer ſaieth to his brother Racha, ſhall be in danger of councell, but whoſoeuer ſaieth to his brother, thou Foole, ſhall be in danger of Hell fire.
            
            The Phariſies that had corrupted the Scriptures with their falſe gloſſes, interpreted this place: he that ſlayeth ſhall be guilty or in danger of iudgment, that is to ſay, if a man commit a Murther, his act is ynough to teſtifye againſt him, there needs no more but to pronounce the ſentence of death: this text did the Phariſies extend no further then to kill with the hand, or to murther by ſtroke or dent of weapon; but our Sauiour Chriſt reſtoring againe the true ſence, auowed flatly, that a man to be angryVVho be murtherers by Gods Law with his brother, is to murther him, and deſerueth death, for the Law is not ſo much reſpecting to the hand, as to the heart.
            But this is a hard ſaying ſaith the malicious, but yet a true ſaying, as Saint Iohn in his firſt Epiſtle, & 3. Chap. plainly affirmeth, that he that hateth his brother is a Murtherer.
            
            But now actuall Murther indeed findeth friends, and

to kill a man▪ though ſometimes cowardly, it is rather reputed for Man-hood, then for Murther, or will be found but Man-ſlaughter or Chance-medly: and there be thatCowardly Murtherers. can tell how to murther a man with a Pinne, better then they know how to do with a Pyke, and dare aduenture to murther him with a word, that they neuer durſt looke in the face with a ſword; but theſe ſorts of Murtherers are not to be taxed, when murther in former ages hath beene knowne ſometimes to ſit roabed in Scarlet, and whenCruell Murtherers hiſtories do make mention of ſome mercileſſe Magiſtrats, that hath murthered more poore ſuiters with their Curriſh anſwers, then the Hangman of London did euer ſtrangle with his Hempen halter.
            To conclude, as amongſt 
                  Ʋſurers, thoſe that do offend by the letting out of mony, are the feweſt in number, ſo amongſt Murtherers, the number is farre more greater of thoſe that doth both ſlay and ſlaughter by their merciles cruelty, then are the other that do moſt bloudily commit murther with their hands.
            But ſee here a monſter in nature, that preaſeth now to ſhow himſelfe in my Glaſſe, a common Drunkard, the very dregges of double Beere, and ſtrong Ale: amongſt men a Beaſt, and amongſt Beaſts a very Swyne.
            
            A Drunkard is called the King of good-fellowes, but it is but a drunken kind of good-fellowſhip, when amongſt all ſorts of friends, a drunken friend is moſt to be deteſted and abhorred.
            A drunken friend is the worſt friend that may be, for in his drunkenneſſe he diſcloſeth all that he knoweth: the Drunkard diſſolueth all his gettings into the pot, and drowneth all his vertues in the Ale-Fat: he is not fit to be imploied in any good or godly exerciſe.
            There are three things that are not to be credited, a Woman when ſhe weepes, a Merchant when he ſweares, nor a Drunkard when he prayes.
            But it is accounted now to proceed from a generous

ſpirit, to be drunken once a day, and they haue gotten coniurations, and inchantments, whereby to draw on drunkenneſſe.
            
            
               Charmes to draw on drunkenneſſe. A health to the King, a health to the Queene, a health to my Lord, a health to my Ladie: And who dares deny to pledge one of theſe healthes? they will ſcarcely auow him to bee a good ſubiect, that will denie to pledge the Kings health: as though the king were honoured by a company of drunken ſots, that will make themſelues beaſts, vnder the pretence to doe the king honour. It is like the honour the idolatrous papiſts doe giue to the virgin Marie, who in a ſuperſtitious zeale do attribute that to her for honour, that being well examined, is her greateſt diſhonour.
            Theſe Art-Magicke Charmes, that do draw on men to powre in more then they are able to beare, if it bee not vomited vp againe by the drunkard himſelf, it is yet ſpewed out of the ſoule of him that doth behold it with an honeſt conſcience. The Prophet Eſay in his third chap pronounceth an endleſſe woe vnto them that are mighty to draw downe drinke, and as their end is damnation, ſo their damnation is without end.
            But ſee, here comes in the adulterer, with his harlot in his hand; but they muſt needs goe (they ſay) that the Diuell driues, and there is no hope to keepe out whoredome, where drunkenneſſe her gentleman vſher hath free and quiet paſſage to leade the way.
            
               Whoredome hath many friends and fauourites. 
               Whoredome hath many friends in theſe daies, a number of fauorites, that giueth her boldneſſe whereby ſhee inſinuates her ſelfe into the world.
            Salomon tels vs, That the plague is in the houſe of the harlot, and that ſhee ſits in the doores of her houſe on a ſeat in the high places of the cittie.
            
               Whoredome ſcornes to be cloſed vp in any obſcure place, no, ſhee hath friends to boulſter her out, and to ſupport her in the higheſt and moſt principall places of the city.
            
               
               Harlots now adaies; do not lurke in by corners as theeues are wonted, nor in ſecret chambers, as ſtrumpets haue bin accuſtomed, nor in cloſe cloſſets as conſpiring Papiſts, when they be at their Maſſe; but ſhee frequents the principall places of the cittie, where ſhee giues entertainment to thoſe that comes vnto her, that are not of the baſeſt ſort, but many times of the beſt reputed: but they do not know, ſaith Salomon, that the dead are in her houſe, and that her gueſts are in the depth of hell. And wilt thou yet enter her houſe, that carries death and damnation about her? bewareA true deſcription of a harlot. of her, thou that art wiſe; ſhee firſt inticeth, and then ſhee killeth, ſhe wooes thee with her eyes, for in theſe daies eyes can both ſpeake and vnderſtand, and the harlot baits her deſires, with a number of proſtituted countenances whereby to allure and intice.
            
               Nothing more true▪
                As the harlot deſtroieth his ſoule that doth frequent her, ſo ſhe is a plague to the fleſh, more infectious to the body then the common peſtilence, and carries more diſeaſes about her, then is in an hoſpitall.
            
            And as the knowne whoremonger, is but of a rotten reputation,A reward fit for whoremongers. ſo he is moſt commonly as full of loathſome diſeaſes; or let it be that God ſometimes doth ſuffer whoremongers to liue, till they may ſtroke there gray and hoarie haires, yet they neuer eſcape the filthy diſeaſes of botches, byles, aches, inflâmation, & of that loathed diſeaſe of the french poxe, a litle gilded ouer by the name of the gowt, or ſometimes of the ſciatica: & beſides a corporall ſtroke of heauens heauy hand in this life, the whoremōger ſhal feele the fearefull addition of an eternall woe in the fire of hell.
            
            The harlot is like a new play, that being thrice preſented on the ſtage, begins to grow ſtaale. And the harlot that isTheſe old antiquities are little ſet by. once paſt thirty fiue yeares, is fitter to furniſh an Hoſpitall, then to garniſh a bed chamber. The prouerbe is old, A Popes Bull, a dead mans skull, and an old trull, are not all worth a pound of wooll: marry there is ſome comfort yet left to a harlot, when ſhee comes to yeares, for an old whore will make a ſpicke and ſpan new bawde.
            
            
               
The beſt commendations, I can giue to a harlot is this; ſhe brings a man to repentance in the end, though not for his ſinnes, yet to curſe the time that euer he knew her.
            
               Harlots of two ſorts, the firſt a ſtaine to good women. 
               Harlots be of two kinds, the one induced the rather vnto it, by the curriſh demeanure of an vnkinde husband: or ſometimes inforced to play the ſtrumpet to relecue her want, ô (perhaps) to vphold her pride: theſe kinde of harlots are very ſecret, in all their carriages, & wil make choice of ſuch friends (as neere as they can) as ſhall conceale all their eſcapes, and maintaine their reputations in the eye of the world.
            
               The ſecond a limme of the diuell. A ſecond ſort there be that ſetting aſide all feare of God, or ſhame of the world, doth ſurrender thēſelues to whoredome, through the vitious heate of there own intemperat deſires: theſe be thoſe that doth liue of the ſpoile of all comers: they conſume them in goods, in body, and in ſoule that doth frequent them. And theſe are deſirous to make themſelues knowne ſtrumpets to the world, thereby to get themſelues to be hunted after and ſought vnto: for theſe are ready for all that will come, and that they might be the rather noted in their vocation, they doe manifeſt themſelues in there attire, in there demeanure, in there audacious boldneſſe and immodeſt behauiour.
            They will ſhew themſelues what they be, at maskes, at meetings, at banquets, at feaſts, which they will ſtill frequent, but of purpoſe to ſeeke acquaintance, and to draw in cuſtomers.
            
               The cuſtome o
                     •
                   good women pitiouſly neglected. The time hath bin when a woman that had bin once infamed, ſhould haue bin ſhunned, nay ſhee ſhould haue bin ſcorned of euery good woman, and ſhee that had beene honeſt (indeede) would neuer haue endured her companie that had beene tainted in her credit: but now euery marked creature, that is notorious to the world, will inſinuate her ſelfe into the moſt principall places, and into the companie of thoſe women that are not onely regarded for their greatneſſe, but in like manner

eſteemed for their goodneſſe.
            But I will not take vpon me to detect Ladies and Gentlewomen, what company they ſhall keepe, but the old prouerbe can no longer hold, That birds of a wing will flie together: but alas poore vertue, ſul little doeſt thou know how much thou wrongeſt thy ſelfe, by thy aſſociating thyThe practiſe of harlots to ſlander good women. ſelfe thus with vice, when the practiſe of a harlot is, that where ſhee knoweth a woman to bee moſt worthily renowned, and moſt honourably eſteemed for her vertue; there ſhee will intrude and preaſe to get admittance, not ſo much to countenance her ſelfe, as to diſgrace & diſcredit the other, bending all her endeauours to diminiſh the reputation of euery good woman, and to bring them into a ſuſpitious coniecture, to be birds all of one feather.
            How many women, both good and honeſt, (and ſometimesMany good women defamed by conuerſing with harlots. honourable) that by this practiſe of inſinuating harlots, hath beene betraied and infamed?
            And as good women, by their ouer much kindnes and affability, haue ſometimes thus diminiſhed their own credits: ſo men that be of place and authoritie, had neede be very warie and circumſpect, how they giue grace or entertainement to a woman that hath beene noted to be of lewde life: for beſides, it breedeth ſuſpition in as many as doth behold it; ſo it is the rather confirmed, when euery harlot is deſirous to ſlander her ſelfe with great perſonages, and the greater a man is either in office or dignitie, by ſo much the more ſhee is deſirous to be ſlandered by him: for ſhee is not ignorant, but that to be accounted a paramour to him that is had in any regard at all, is auaileable for her aduantage: and ſhee makes vſe of it for ſeuerall purpoſes: for firſt, ſhee prizes her ſelfe at the higher rate amongſt her baſer companions that doth frequent her, then otherwiſe ſhe could do.
            Againe it ſhelters her from being cald in queſtion, for who dares detect her that they thinke ſhall be ſupported and borne out by ſo mightie friends?
            
               
It yet againe ſo armeth her with that audacious boldneſſe, that ſhee dares inſinuate her ſelfe into any company, be they neuer ſo honeſt, that otherwiſe would ſpit at her.
            
               Harlots better countenanced then thoſe women that be good. But what woman would be honeſt now adaies, when the worſe a woman liues, the better ſhee is thought on: if there be any that liues in want, it is poore chaſtitie, ſhee findes feweſt friends, and leaſt countenance.
            He that hath a wife, if ſhee be a little wanton, ſhee is as good as Comminſeede, to draw home cuſtomers, & there hath beene husbands, that hath had diſcreetion to make vſe of it; as Phanlius the Argian, who to raiſe his fortunes,A wittall the very ſhame of manhood. offered his wife to King Philip: and as Galba, who ſeeing Mecenas to caſt ſome amarous glances on his wife, ſhrunk downe vpon his Cuſhion, as one oppreſſed with ſleepe, thereby to giue him the better ſcoope, whereby he might perſiſt.
            He that can thus tollerate, may keepe his wife to ruffle it out amongſt the beſt, without any charge to his owne purſe, and ſhee will winne him many friends, that will bring him in Caates, to the kitchin, fiſh, foule, wine ſugar, ſpice, The prouerbe is old, though to make vp a Rime, it be a little vnmannerly: i. Bleſſed be the Hoole, that brings in both
               The prouerb old, though ſomething vnmannerly. 
               wood and coole: that helpes to pay houſe-rent, and ſome mony to the good mans purſe. Women are wiſe, and by their ſleights they haue Emperours idle, as Amthoxy, ſtrong men feeble as Sampſon, valiant men effeminate as Hercules: wiſe men diſſolute, as Salomon: and eloquent men laſciuious, as Aurelius.
            
            But I hope all that I haue ſaid, cannot offend thoſe women that be good, whom I proteſt, I haue euer reuerenced, and doe ſtill eſteeme to be more pretious then ſilues or gold, and therefore to be honoured of all good men; but as the Apoſtle writing to the Corinthians: There muſt be
               Good women more pretious then ſiluer or gold. 
               Hereſies, that thoſe that are prooued may bee knowne: ſo ſay I, Amongſt women, there muſt be ſome bad amongſt the

good; that thoſe that are good indeed may be the moreVVith a reuerent regard I do thus aduiſe them. glorious▪ but yet I would wiſh Ladies and Gentlewomen, that do tender their owne credits, to be well aduiſed how they conuerſe or giue entertainment to thoſe womē that be bad; becauſe if the rules of Philoſophy be true, there is not a better meane to diſcerne of men or women what they be, then to meaſure them by the company that they are accuſtomed to keepe.
            But let vs enter a little into conſideration, how we might diſtinguiſh betweene a good woman and a bad: we cannot do it by the outward ſhow; for if we ſhouldA hard matter to iudge of women by their outward ſhow. ayme our iudgments but according to their lookes, we might ſometimes thinke the old painted face of Proſerpsna, to be the ſame that it was, when ſhe firſt became to be Plutoes wife.
            If we ſhould iudge of them but by the ſhow of their apparrell, we might many times preſuppoſe the vertuous yong woman, to be a laſciuious Curtizan; they are al alike attired in their coloured ſilkes, and they do ſo narrowly imitate the one the other, both in forme and faſhion, as that they cannot be diſcerned but onely by behauiour.
            
               Precious things ordained by God to be vſed to his glory. I am not ignorant, but that ſilke, ſiluer, yea and gold it ſelfe, were created by the almighty God: and not onely for his owne glory, but likewiſe for neceſſities ſake, and may well be vſed by good and godly perſons, ſuch as are in degree, and of ability to pay for them. We haue ſome preſidents out of the holy Scriptures: Iſaac a godly man ſent Bracelets, and other habiliments of gold to Rebecca, a good and a vertuous woman: and we reade of Heſter, that ſometimes clad her ſelfe in rich and ſumptuous apparrell, proteſting before God that ſhe did it to no other end, then to feede the liking of that great King Aſſuerus, that had choſen her for his wife.
            And Iudith praiſed in the Scriptures for a godly woman, though after the death of her huſband, during

the time of her widdow-hoode ſhe ſuited herſelfe in ſackcloth, yet whileſt her huſband liued, ſhe had beene both ſumptuous in apparrell and rich in Iewels and other pretious ornaments, wherewith ſhe afterwards decked herſelfe, but of purpoſe to free the Citty of Bethulia from the power of Holofernus, that then had beſiged the ſame.
            
               A womans garment no argument of incontinency. It is not the Frocke that maketh the Fryer the more deuout, nor the garments of any woman, a true confirmation of incontinency of her body. This therefore may well be auowed by the rule of Chriſtian ſobriety: that a womanVVhat is fit for good women to obſerue. (neither exceeding the decency of faſhion, nor going beyond the limits of her owne eſtate, nor ſurpaſſing the bounds of her husbands calling) but that ſuch a woman may weare any thing.
            Silke, ſiluer, and gold, are things iudifferent of themſelues, the vſe is all whereunto they are imployed: yet as there is a conueniency to be vſed in behauiours, ſo there is a decency to be followed in faſhion; neither do I think that all faſhions that are now in vſe, are fit for euery good woman to follow.
            
               Gawdy attires by whom firſt deuiſed. I am perſwaded, that a number of theſe new inuented Gaudes that be now in vſe and cuſtome, were firſt deuiſed to pleaſe the appetites of ſuch women, as were either of looſe life or of little wit, & afterwards becomming generall,VVhy taken vp by good women. were taken vp & reputed for the new faſhion: and that many women againe, that are both good & gracious, are the more inclined to follow them the rather to auoid ſuſpition, either that they are not able to ſupport it as other women, be or otherwiſe to be accounted Hypocrites and contumelious deſpiſers of that which is receiued by all.
            There is not a woman ſo vaine or vngodly that can deuiſe a toy (be it neuer ſo fond and fooliſh) but it is taken vp for a faſhion, and then it is as good a warrant as a Non omittas to an vnder ſherife, for euery woman to follow. But where chaſtitie is ioyned with vanitie, what

commendations it may merite, I will leaue to good women themſelues to be cenſured.
            This I would inferre, that the incontinent woman is no ſo eaſily coniectured by the outward ſhow, as by the inward diſpoſition.
            
               Things tollerable. Do you ſee her that is ſumptuous in apparrell, that doth ſhine in ſilke, in ſiluer, and in gold, that is deckt with Gems, and lewels, that be rich and precious? looke into her ability, is ſhe able to pay for them, doth ſhe not exceed the limits of her degree and calling? ſhe vſeth them then to the glory of God, that hath created them to that end and purpoſe, to decke and ornifie ſuch worthy perſons.
            See yet another that is gaudy to the ſhow, gariſh to looke vpon, and new fangled in all the manner of her attire: looke yet againe into her diſpoſition, is ſhe ſober, is ſhe ſilent, is ſhe baſhfull, is ſhe modeſt? let vs thinke reuerently of that woman, let vs not iudge of her by the outward ſhow, ſhe doth but follow the faſhion.
            
               Things not to be excuſed. I would I could now frame a cleanely excuſe for thoſe women that be Painted, that be Poudered, that be Periwigde; that do bend their whole endeauours but to the adorning of their bodily beauties, as if they had beene created of God, but onely to make themſelues to appeare to be gay and beautifull but I know not how to do it, for ſhe that is not aſhamed to falſify thoſe exterior parts of the body, is much to be ſuſpected that ſhe will make little conſcience to adulterate the inward beauty of the mind. But amongſt theſe women that do ſo much affect this bodily beauty, tell one of them of ſome other woman that is reputed to be more wiſe, more modeſt, or more vertuous then herſelfe, alas it is a matter of nothing,A matter of nothing. the newes doth little offend her; but tell her of another that is reputed to be more beautifull, more faire, or better fauoured then herſelf, this is a heauy croſſe indeed,A matter intolerable. ynough to make her ſicke, and keepe her chamber, and there is nothing that doth more grieuouſly afflict her,

then to ſee another womans gowne, more gawdy then her owne.
            
               Marks whereby to know a good woman from a bad. But my promiſe was to giue rules how to diſtinguiſh betweene a good woman and a bad, and promiſe is debt, but I muſt be wel aduiſed how I take the matter in hand; for we were better to charge a woman with a thouſand defects in her ſoule, then with that one abuſe of her body; and we muſt haue two witneſſes, beſides our owne eyes, to teſtifie, or we ſhall not be beleeued: but I haue bethought my ſelfe of a couple that I hope will carrie credit.
            
               The teſtimony of the Prophet Eſay. The firſt is the Prophet Eſay, that in his daies challenged the daughters of Sion for their ſtretched out neckes, their wandring eyes, at their mincing and wan ton demeanure as they paſſed through the ſtreetes: theſe ſignes and ſhowes haue beene euer thought to be the eſpeciall markes whereby to know a harlot. But Salomon inThe teſtimony of Salomon. a more particular manner doth better furniſh vs with more aſſured notes, and to the end that wee might the better diſtinguiſh the good woman from the bad, he deliuereth their ſeuerall qualities, and wherein they are oppoſite: and ſpeaking of a good woman he ſaith, Shee ſeeketh out wooll and flaxe, and laboureth cheerefully with her
               The properties of a good woman. 
               hands: ſhee ouerſeeth the waies of her houſhold, and eateth not the bread of idleneſſe.
            
            
               Salomon thinketh that a good woman ſhould be a home houſewife, he pointeth her out her houſeworke. ſhee ouerſeeth the waies of her houſhold, ſhee muſt looke to her children, her ſeruants and family: but the pathes of a harlot (heThe properties of a harlot. ſaith) are mooueabl, for now ſhee is in the houſe, now in the ſtreetes, now ſhee lieth in waite in euery corner, ſhee is ſtill gadding from place to place, from perſon to perſon, from companie to company: from cuſtome to cuſtome, ſhee is euer more wandring; her feete are wandring, her eies are wandring, her wits are wandring, Her waies are like the waies of a ſerpent: hard to be found out.
            
               
               A good woman (againe) openeth her mouth with wiſedome, the Law of grace is in her tongue: but a harlot is full of words, ſhee is loude and babbling, ſaith Salomon.
            Shee is bold, ſhee is impudent, ſhee is ſhameleſſe, ſhee can not bluſh: and ſhee that hath loſt all theſe vertues, hath loſt her euidence of honeſty: for the ornaments of a good woman is temperance in her minde, ſilence in her tongue, and baſhfulneſſe in her countenance.
            It is not ſhee that can lift vp her heeles higheſt in the dancing of a galliard, that is lauiſh of her lips or looſe of her tongue.
            Now if Salomons teſtimonie be good, the woman that is impudent, immodeſt, ſhameleſle, inſolent, audacious, a night-walker, a company-keeper, a gadder from place to place, a reueler, a ramper, a roiſter, a rioter: ſhee that hath theſe properties, hath the certaine ſignes, and markes of a harlot, as Salomon hath avowed. Now what credit his words will carrie in the Commiſſaries court, I leaue to thoſe that be aduocates, and procters in womens cauſes.
            I haue hitherto preſented to your view the true reſemblance of a harlot, aſwell what ſhee is, as how ſhee might be diſcerned: I would now giue you the like notice ofThe whore of Babylon. that notable ſtrumpet, the whore of Babylon, that hath made ſo many Kings and Emperours drunke with the cup of abhominations, by whom the nations of the earth haue ſoOf ſpirituall fornication. defiled themſelues by their ſpirituall fornication, called in the ſcripture by the name of idolatrie, (but now within theſe laſt 500. yeares, amongſt Chriſtians) ſhadowed vnder the title of Poperie. This harlot hath heragents, Popes, Cardinals, Biſhops, Abbots, Monkes, Friers, Ieſuites, Prieſts, with a number of other like, and all of them Factors and her Bandes, the profeſſed enemies of the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt, that doe ſuperſticiouſly adore the Crucifixe, that are indeede enemies to the Croſſe of Chriſt, and doe tread his holy bloud vnder their ſcornefull feete: that do

build vp deuotion with ignorance, and doe ring out theirThe doctrine of the Pope. hot Alarums, in the eares of the vnlearned, teaching that the light can bee no light, that the Scriptures can bee no Scriptures, nor the truthcan be no truth, but by their allowance, and if they will ſay, that high noone is midnight, we muſt beleeue them, and make no more adoe, but get vs to bed.
            Theſe bee they that can make God the creator that made both heauen and earth, of a little peece of bread; thisThe God of the Papiſts. doctrine they do teach, and this the poore ignorant Papiſts muſt beleeue, and zealouſly ſay Amen to: but alas, their pretended holineſſe in zeale, is indeede but the hollowneſſe in zeale, and the fulnes of that zeale wherewithThe blindnes of Papiſts. they be ſo blinded, ariſeth through the emptineſſe of that knowledge which they will not ſee.
            If blindneſſe be a miſery, what is ignorance, or if the duskineſſe of the night be vncomfortable, what is the darkeneſſe of ſuperſtitious Popery?
            
            A Papiſt and a Tayler are of like affinitie, they do both relie on their good workes: their faithes do hang on otherA papiſt and a tailer of ſome affinity. mens beleefes, they doe exerciſe all their religion by an exorciſing Maſſe, accounting the old & new teſtaments, to be but bookes of controuerſies, holding it to be a peremptorie ſacriledge for any lay-man to meddle with; they thinke they may ſee more by a waxe candle when it is lighted, then they may doe by the light of Gods word: they ſay they be good ſubiects dutifull and loyall, and yet what a wrangling they do keepe with the Prince for his ſupremacy?
            
               Things vnpoſſible. The hound that followeth two hares at once can catch neither, and hee that ſerueth two maſters of contrarie kinds, muſt bee a traitor to the one. As much poſſible to vnite two contrary religions in one conſcience, as to reconcile fire and water, Chriſt and Beliall, God and the Diuell.
            
            If the Pope court in the conſcience, and ſit in the

               Throne of the heart, the King can haue there but a cold entertainment. Hee was wiſe therefore that turned hisA wiſe part. gueſt out of doores, that could warme his cold hands with the ſame breath, wherewith he cooled his hot pottage.
            
               The double dealing of Papiſts. The Papiſts haue mouthes for their Maſſes, tongues for their Prince, and hearts for their Pope: but let them ſay what they liſt, and let them ſometimes binde it with an oath, the Pope hath taught his vermine a new doctrine of equiuocation, and of mentall reſeruation: and he hath diſpenſations in ſtore, not onely for infringing an oath to a King, but alſo for the murthering of a King, if he be ſuch a King as doth profeſſe the Goſpell.
            
            
               The Popes power. If the Popes penance chāber were opened, we might finde a rate of pardons for all offences that might be committed either againſt God or man, thoſe onely excepted, that may be any waies preiudiciall to him ſelfe; nay, you ſhall finde indulgences for future offences, for ſinnes that are not yet committed.
            
               Chriſt forgiueth no ſinne, but vpon hearty repentance:A happy thing for richmen the Pope forgiueth all ſinnes onely for ready mony; a happie thing for rich men that may buy heauen for mony: but the diuel in the meane time, is like to be baſely attended on in hell, with a company of poore beggers, that are not able to buy pardons, nor to purchaſe diſpenſations.
            
            The Pope ſhutteth vp all goodneſſe into his owneThe Popes charitie. 
               waare-houſe, God receiueth vs now no more to mercie, but he receiueth vs to penance, to plunge vs in purgatory, where we ſhall lie ſcorched and broiled, till the Pope in his charitable diſpoſition, will mercifully releaſe vs: which he is euer readie to doe if we haue ready money to giue him.
            
               Angry Saints. And for the Saints, they are become very tyrants, malicious and vengible, if their Eues be not faſted, their images worſhipped, and their Shrines viſited, with a Candell, or with ſome other offering; they will elſe wreake themſelues of vs without any compaſſion, & will both puniſh

and grieuouſly afflict vs: ſo that there is no mercy remaining in God nor in his Saints, but all reſteth in the Pope alone. Doe not the poore Papiſts runne mad in conceit,No mercy but in the Pope. to thinke that Indulgences for all ſinnes, may be deriued from the Popes Exchequer; that if a man wants not mony,The madde conceits of Papiſts. he needs not want heauen: that the meere ſigne of the croſſe, can fray away the diuell; that prieſts ſhould be licenſed their concubines, and inhibited there wiues: that one Benefice, and one honeſt wife, ſhould be vnlawfull, but that two Benefices, and three whores ſhould bee tollerable?
            
               The Popes votaries. But let vs a little conſider of theſe holy votaries that haue vowed obedience, that haue vowed pouertie, that haue vowed chaſtitie: what is their vowed obedience, but an exemption of all obedience, either to God or man, to ſerue their Pope alone? what is their vowed pouertie, but to inioy the wealth of the world, to liue in eaſe and idleneſſe, and to feede themſelues fat? and now to ſpeake truely, what is their vowed chaſtitie; but vowed Bawderie?
            
            
               The grounds of Popery. The efficient cauſe of Poperie: it firſt ſpringeth from a blinde zeale, it doth vaunt of true religion, and attributeth a certaine vertue vnto things without Gods ordinance.
            The Pope himſelfe ſteales his ceremonies, from Iewes, from Turkes, from Pagans, ſome from Idolatry, all from Hereſie.
            
            
               Poperie could neuer endure the preaching of the Goſpel, and there is neither Turke, Iew, nor Pagan, whatſoeuer,The hatred of Papiſts, that the Papiſts doe ſo much hate, as they do theſe Heretickes that do ſeeke their ſaluation in the death & paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt: we pitty them, they perſecute vs, we pray for them, they perſue vs, we loue them, they loath vs, we ſeeke to conuert them, they ſeeke to confound vs; they purſue vs, not for that we are ſinners, but becauſe we are zealous of the glory of God, & of ſincere & pure worſhip:

they hate vs not becauſe of our offences, but becauſe of that will and deſire it hath pleaſed God to giue vs, to ſerue him purely according to his word; they ſeeke vs not out for our abhominations and Idolatries, but becauſe we deteſt theirs.
            Thus they hate vs, but it is with a contrary hatred; for they hate vs becauſe we do ſeeke the glory of God according to his word, of the which they would drepriue vs.
            
               The true picture of a Papiſt. In a briefe manner now to ſhew you what a Papiſt is: he is blinde in knowledge, lame in iudgment, ſelfe conceited, apt to beleeue lyes, he is willfull, obſtinate, he is wiſe and holy in his owne conceite, walking in the ſteps of other mens opinions; he cannot beleeue that God vnderſtandeth any praiers but thoſe that are made in latine: he thinketh there is no other high way to heauen, but that which leadeth through purgatory. Amongſt all the Beaſtes in the field he loues a Popes Bull, but amongſt all the Hearbes in the garden he cannot endure that which the Apothecaries do call Gratia Dei: his eyes are dimmed, his eares are ſtopt, his heart is hardened, his ſences are benummed, he is ſo afraid of ruſting, that he doth vſe to ſcoure himſelfe with aſhes and oyle: he is ſo zealouſly inclined to the deedes of loue and charity, that he had rather murther a Proteſtant on Sunday, then eate an egge on Friday.
            If I ſhould ſtill proſecute as I haue begun, to preſent to your viewes the true repreſentations of vice and vanitie, as they do offer themſelues to open ſhow, I might compoſe ſuch a Looking-glaſſe as were fitter for a Barbers ſhop, then a Ladies chamber: I will therefore giue you but a little glimce of thoſe deformities, that are yet to follow.
            
               The Flatterer The Fatterer was neuer yet aſhamed to ſhew his face, yet in former ages palpably to flatter, was accounted but the profeſſion of a knaue: but now vaine glory doth ſo ſway amongſt vs, that he that wants a knaue to flatter him, can play the Foole and flatter himſelfe.
            
               
A Paraſite ſeeing Dioniſius in priuate diſcourſe with certaine Fauourites of his owne, burſt out into a great laughter, but being demanded by Dioniſius why he laughed ſo loude? anſwered, At your Maieſties pleaſant conference: why (ſaid the Emperour) doſt thou heare our communicatiō? no (ſaid the Paraſite) I do not heare your ſpeeches,A notable Flattering Knaue. yet knowing your words to be alwayes full of wit, and all your diſcourſes ſo pleaſant and pithy, it produceth me to laughter, but to ſee that ſpeech, though I heare not any thing what you ſay.
            
               Flattery and Tobbaco two violent purgers. 
               Flattery and Tobacco, are but two ſmoaky vapors, yet as the time ſerueth, the one purgeth wiſe men of their wit, and the other Fooles of their mony.
            The Flatterer is nearely alyed to the Cannyball, they do both feede on men; the difference is, the Cannyball feedeth on thoſe that be dead, but the Flatterer deuoureth thoſe that be aliue.
            
               A dangerous Paraſite. The Court Paraſite doth more often ſubuert and ouerthrow the wealth of a Kingdome, then an open enemy.
            
               Ieſtmonger But ſee here another bird of the ſame wing, a Ieſtmonger, a kind of creature that a man would thinke, Nature had hatched vp into the world, to be a ſcorne to all wiſemen:
            
               Vnciuil ieſtes His moſt pleaſant mirth is vnciuill ieaſtes, and for want of better matter, he will ſometimes helpe it out with a bawdy ſong.
            
               Stolne ieſts. Some wanting conceits of their owne, are driuen to commit fellony, and to ſteale from other men, and putting them in execution, the effect may ſo well fall out, as it did with Eſops Aſſe, who counterfeiting the little Dogge, would play with his maſter, till he was ſurely banged.
            There be ſome of them that will ſteale ſentences, and phraſes out of bookes, which hauing once committed to memory, when they be amongſt company, they will deliuer them as familiarly as if they were children of their owne begettting, both lawfull and legitimate.
            
               
               Odible ieſtes. There be amongſt them, that will breake ieſtes vpon Heauen & ſometimes make themſelues merry with God that created Heauen: another will ſport as pleaſantly with the word of God▪ as he wil do with the fictons of the Poets one will auow a villany, a ſecond will ſweare it, a third will defend it, and all the reſt will laugh at it.
            
               No Ieſt without a Foole and a Flateter. It is not worthy to be called a leſt, where there is not a leſter, and a Paraſite to cheere vp the Gueſts, the one to raile and ſlander, the other to ſmooth and flatter: for as the body muſt be ballanced with exceſſe, ſo the minde muſt be recreated with ſlauiſh delights.
            
               The Temporiſer. The next that now maketh his appearance, is the Temporizer; a fellow that can carrowſe with Alexander, abſtain with Romulus, eate with the Epicure, faſt with the Stoieke, ſleepe with Endymion, watch with Criſippus, laugh with Democitus, weepe with Heraclitus.
            
            He is like a Winde-mill, that will ſtill grinde, let the wind blow where it will: he neuer troubles himſelfe about matters of Fayth; for looke how the Prince beleeues, ſo beleeues he.
            He hath ſome prety ſight in muſick, and is very apt to play a baſe part, and although ſometimes he may fayle in the Note, yet he will be ſure to keepe the Time.
            
            
               The Formaliſt. Here comes now the Formaliſt, a fellow that is full of complements; one that doth vſe to frequent other mens tables, and can make ſauce to euery diſh as it comes to the board, with other mens diſcredits: he neuer drinkes to any man, but with ſome quicke conceited ſentence, and not a word but at your ſeruice ſir, at your command, at your pleaſure; and in all his communication, ſo full of Fuſtian phraſes, that do many times lay open their Maſters ignorance.
            This ouer much affectation is more ridiculous then meere and ſimple ignorance, the one is to be pitied, the other to be denyed: but the Formaliſt taketh great paines to make himſelfe to be mocked at▪ all that he endeuoureth,

is to be reputed a floure of curteſie▪
                when by his demeanure he ſhowes himſelfe to bee a right ſpectacle of folly.
            
            
               The Fantaſticke. Here followes now an other, that one paire of couples might ſerue them both, it is the fantaſticke, one that is ſo neere a kin to the foole, that they cannot marry without a licence from the Pope: he hath robd a Iacke Naapes of his geſture, marke but his countenance how hee mops, how he mowes, and how he ſtreines his lookes: he hath the French Congé, the Spaniſh Baſelos Maines, the Italian ſhrug, his countenance is the true deſcription of the time.
            
               The Ninihammer. Will you ſee now, one that is new come from the dancing ſchoole, a Ninihammer, that had rather tread you out a tricke of one and twentie follies, then to performe one action, tending either to vertue or wiſedome.
            
               His obſeruation. He thinkes boldneſſe to be a principall part of vertue, and that makes him to become impudent: his greateſt obſeruation is about the New faſhion: his ambition is, to bee highly commended, but eſpecially by fooles, fiddlers, andHis Ambition. 
               tapſters: his greateſt dexteritie is in the managing his Tobacco pipes:
               His Dexteritie. and he hath the gulpe, the whiffe, and the ſnuffe very exactly and at his fingers ends.
            
               His skill in Aſtronomy. He is very iudicious, in cenſuring of plaies and players, and is well ſeene in the high Art of Aſtronomy, and without the helpe of an Ephemerides, he is able to calculate the whole number of Bawdy houſes, that be neere about his owne lodging, in what temperature they be ſeated, and whether they ſtand in a hot or a cold Climat.
            
            
               Special notes whereby to know him. You ſhall know him partly by his feather, partly by his long locke, that hangs dangling by his eare, partly by his garters and his roſes, but that which comes neereſt the marke indeed, is his yellow ſtarched band. Will you now make a little roome for a fellow that perhaps can tell youThe Newesmonger. ſome Newes, and it is the Newesmonger himſelfe, that can acquaint you with all the occurrence, from Italy, from France, from Spaine, from Germany, from the Eaſt, from the

               Good newes for Tyrones wel-willers in Ireland. 
               Weſt, from the North, from the South: he can tell you newes from the Pope, how he meanes to giue aſſiſtance to the Earle of Tyrone, of men, of mony, of munition, of ſhipping, and of all other r eſſaries, and to ſend him into Ireland, new ſanctified a
                  ••
               ngſt his friends, that hath long lookt for him, and doe daily wiſh for him, and alas are like to doe ſo ſtill, to their great griefe and ſorrow.
            Theſe Newesmongers be thoſe that from time to time do ſpread ſuch reports, as doth ſometimes arme the ill diſpoſed,Papiſts are very credulous. with vaine and friuolous hopes, but eſpecially the Papiſts▪
                that are ſo ſtrong of faith, that they will beleeue any lie, be it neuer ſo vaine or fooliſh, if it doth any waies ſerue their purpoſe.
            And as the Newesmonger is not without Art ſometimes to ſpread a lie, that is of his owne coining, ſo by ſome prery skill that he hath in Arithmeticke, he can both multiply and deuide lies, that be of other mens making.
            He vſeth to frequent faires, markets, and other places of aſlembly: ſometimes hee will ſtumble into a Barbers ſhoppe: but about ten of the clocke in the fore-noone, you may hitte vpon him in the middle walke in Pauls: but from aleauen to twelue, hee will not miſſe the Exchange.
            
            Theſe be the places, from whence he makes his collections, and if there be any newes at all ſtirring, he pockets them vp for his owne prouiſion, and hee neuer vents them but for his owne aduantage, for he knoweth that men are ſo well inclined to haue nouelties, that they are as good paiment for a dinner, or a ſupper, as eighteene pence to goe to an ordinary.
            Here comes yet another, a fit companion to march in one ranke with the newes monger, it is the ſtate ape: aThe ſtate ape. man that will take vpon him to know more then he vnderſtandeth: hee ſpeakes of nothing but of matters of ſtate and what lawes are fit to paſſe and repaſſe by act of Parlament; and in the Parliament time, he makes himſelfe

as conuerſant with all intents and plots, purpoſed for the Common-wealth, as if they had beene of his own begetting.
            And what Embaſſadour can bee ſent from any forraine Prince or Potentate, but before he hath deliuered his meſſage, or before he hath put his foote in at the courtA wonderfull preſcience. gate, but he will tell you, both what his arrand is, and what ſhall be his anſwer, if a man will beleeue, what himſelfe will make vaunt of? there is not a Court counſell holden,The malecontent. but he will ſeeme to know whereof they haue conſulted, and what they haue concluded.
            I thinke I doe but peſter your eye-ſight with preſenting to your viewes theſe vaine proſpects; but a man may the better learne to eſchew vanitie, by learning firſt to know it: here is yet one other of the ſame ſtraine, a malecontent, a right corniſh Diamond, that although a counterfeit, would yet be ſet in gold.
            He is ſingular in his owne conceit, and will ſometimes withdraw himſelfe into retired places, for bearing ſpeech and conuerſation, reproouing the vanities of the world but with a word, and the manners of the people with a ſhrug, or a countenance, giuing anſwers with ſignes and dumbe ſhowes, pacing his ſteppes, with ſad and ſober aſpects, as if he would haue it ſaid, Loe, yonder goes the melancholy gentleman: ſee there vertue and wiſedome both deſpiſed and neglected, this is the man that doth carrie a whole Common-wealth in his head, that can mannage the whole affaires of a ſtate, and that is able to draw the world about by the noſe in a ſtring.
            His verie gate, as he paſſeth along the ſtreete, cries Looke vpon me: and although to ſome mens thinking hee is but a man, yet in his owne opinion, the wiſeſt of men.
            
               Swaggerers and quarrellers▪
                I will not trouble you with theſe angrie fellowes, that will ſwagger, and be ready to giue the ſtabbe, ſometimes for the pleaſure of a harlot ſometimes for the ſpeaking

of a word, ſometimes for the taking of the wall: ſometimes, for the not pledging of a health. And what aPrecedence▪
                ſturre we keepe againe about precedence? we ſtriue with Zebed
                     •
                  us children, who ſhall ſit on the right hand, who on the left, we diſpute of dignities, who ſhal go before, & who ſhall come behind; and as this infection is common amongſt men, ſo it is become ſo violent amongſt women, that they are ready to ſcratch for their places, many of them, taking their roomes perforce, and will render reaſons whereby to maintaine their cauſes: one makes her plea, my husband is an Eſquire, and I will giue place to none but to my Ladie; an other will alleadge, my husband is a Doctor, and I will therefore march with the foremoſt: one ſtands vpon her pedigree, and deriues her ſelfe from ſome ancient family; an other challengeth precedence by her husbands office, an other by her wealth, by her chaines, by her Iewels, by her ſilken gownes, by her garded peticoate; and they are ſo eager, and ſo vehement in theſe incounters, that if their husbands ſhould once fall a dealing in theſe quarrels, they could not bee determined, without bloodie noſes.
            But amongſt all the ſpectacles of folly, that wee haue yet ſurueied, hee now preſents himſelfe that is beſt worthy to beare the Bable: looke vpon him, itThe Amoriſt. is the amoriſt: ſee how gaſtfully hee lookes, his armes croſſed, his eyes blubbered, his hatte puld ouer his browes, and all for loue ſir reuerence. Alas poore gentleman, I doe pittie him, and I thinke Dame folly his miſtris, would ſimper to ſee the foole her ſeruant, how he is beſotted.
            I can not beleeue that euer vertue was knowne to be a dotarde, in that we call loue.
            
            I haue heard of ſome that haue beene mad for loue, yet I neuer heard of any that were wiſe in loue: I haue read of couragious men, that loue haue made effeminate, yet I

neuer read of any whom loue hath made truly valiant; I haue knowne where wiſe men hath beene beſotted by fancie, but I neuer knew where fancie made a wiſe man.
            In loue what ſeeth the eye, laciuiouſneſſe, what heareth the eare, laciuiouſneſſe: what vttereth the tongue, laciuiouſneſſe: what thinketh the heart, laciuiouſneſſe: what incurreth the bodie laciuiouſneſſe: and call you this loue, no, it is filthie luſt, that marcheth vnder the banner of loue.
            
            The folly of affection is wonderfull, but the indiſcretion of an Amoriſt is more admirable, that will hang the whole eſtate of all his fortunes in a womans word, but in the yea or nay, of his light heeled miſtris.
            
            To conclude, I neuer heard of any of theſe louing wormes, that was euer beſotted of any woman that was famed for her vertue, yet if the braines of my Amoriſt bee not barraine, they will ſometimes hatch out Rimes, and learne to indite amorous verſes in the praiſe of his miſtrisThe folly of Amoriſts. (that is many times ſcarce worth the ſpeaking of) and will borrow colours from lillies and red roſes to beautifie her cheekes, her eyes ſhall be ſaphires, her lippes, corall, her teeth, pearle, her breath, balme, a Pallas for her wit, but he neuer ſtreines ſo farre as to her honeſty; women haue euer beene witty, but now more wiſe then they haue beene inThe wiſedome of women in this age. former ages, they euer knew well ynough how to make vſe of one of theſe amorous guls, that they ſaw did affect them (indeede) with an ardent deſire: for they would make him to hold the Candle, whilſt they had an other, that ſhould offer to our Ladie.
            
            
               A new way to wooe. But now adaies there is a newer way to wooe, then for a man to ſpend a whole moneth together in making of loue: he that will winne a wife now (though he be but Sot, a Dolt, a Foole, an Aſſe, let him be neuer ſo ſilly, or neuer ſo ſimply, if he hath but ſo much wit, as to make a great and a large ioynter, he ſhall ſpeed, and heThe next way to winne. ſhall get a wife when a wiſe man ſhall faile.
            
               
I could here finde in my heart to blame ſome parents, that will beſtow their well nurtured daughters on ſuch perſons, they do little conſider of the fault they commit by bringing their children (ſometimes) to a loathed bed.
            But parents do ſeeme to be very carefull to prouide for their children, and very diligent they be to ſeeke a ſtay for them; but they do not ſeeke it as they ſhould do, in the hand of God, but in the wiſedome of their owne fooliſh fleſh.
            
               She cannot want a huſband that doth not want a portion. I thinke there is not a woman ſo vnlouely, nor ſo vnnurtured, but if ſhe doth bring a large portion in her purſe, ſhe ſhall haue a huſband; neither is there ſo ſilly a Clowne, but if he be able to make a great ioynter, he may quickly get a wife: I thanke God I haue neuer a daughter to marry, but if I had, and that I were of ability to giue bountifully with her, I would ſooner beſtow my mony to buy her a huſband that had a little wit, then to buy her a lumpe of fleſh, that is but lapt together in a Fooles skin. Now for my ſelfe, if I were yong, & were againe to marry, I would bleſſe my ſelfe from her that hath beene brought vp in pleaſure, in pride, in idleneſſe, or in audacious boldneſſe: from ſuch a one as is called her fathers ioy, his iewell, his dearling: he that lights on ſuch a wife, had need to light on a good portion with her, for if ſhe doth not bring him a griefe to vexe his ſoule, I am ſure ſhe will bring himThe vanity of many yong women▪
                a charge to empty his purſe, her vanity will farre exceed marriage good, and for euery hundred poundes in mony, ſhe brings him a thouſand vanities, a thouſand fits, a thouſand fanſies, a thouſand follies, and a thouſand new fangles.
            To day ſhe keepes her chamber, ſicke of a quotidian fitte of Folly: to morrow the Coach muſt be made ready, ſhe muſt about the towne to inquire after new faſhions, the next day ſhe begins to breed child, and then for forty weekes after, what queaſineſſe, what ſqueamiſhnes, what curioſity, what nicity, what luſtig after vanities? ſhe longs

for plumbes before they be ripe, for chickins before they be hatched, for dainties that cannot be come by: ſhe muſt haue the henne that ſits next the cocke, the apple with the red ſide▪ the calfe, vith the white face: ſhee longs for the fiſh, the foule, the fruit, that is but ſpoken of: we muſt take heede how wee ſpeake of any thing in her hearing for ſetting her into a veine of longing; ſhee muſt haue an eye to the temperature of the aire, the ſunne muſt not ſhine too hot, nor the winde blow too cold on her.
            To conclude, ſhee muſt be more nice, more curious, and more daintie, then euer was that bleſſed virgin that bare the Sauiour of the world.
            I commend me yet to the women of Laconia, that to increaſe their ſtrength and vigour (where propagationThe worthineſſe of the women of Laconia. might become the more ſtrong and ſturdy) they vſed to exerciſe themſelues to running, to leaping to wraſtling, to heauing and throwing of weights: theſe were excellent wenches to breede vpon, theſe were gallant girles to maintaine a race, of men, fit to make ſouldiers, fit to fight for their country; for what doth it auaile to haue a cocke
               An excellent iſſue. 
               of the game, vnleſſe we haue againe a hen of the ſame? the whole ſtreine will be but of a crauen kinde, and the broode a great deale fitter for the dunghill, then the cocke pit.
            
            I would not be thought yet to be ſo derogating to the reputation of good women, but that I do know there be a number amongſt them, that during the time whileſt they were breeding of child, they are not free from fittes and qualmes: and many of them ſubiect to paine, ſicknes moreThis is allwaies to be reſpected. then ynough▪ and therfore they are not onely to be comforted and cheriſhed, but likewiſe to be pitied and commiſerated: yet there be amongſt them againe, that if they ſhould not be more nice, then wiſe, they would thinke themſelues to be quite out of faſhion; and the ofſpring of theſe (for the greateſt number) are fitter to follow a Taber and a Pipe, then to march after a Drum and a Fyfe, and do know better how to giue fire to a Tobacco pipe, then to

buckle on an Armour of proofe.
            
               A precious ſight. O what a precious ſight it were to ſee a woman that is but yong in yeres, to be ſober & modeſt, as the time now ſerueth; glory & admiration attends on her in al her actions; and it is good likewiſe in thoſe that be aged, becauſe the contrary in an ancient woman were abhominable.
            
               Good women plenfull to be found. And ſuch there be, both old and yong, and well conſidering the condition of the time, in great plenty to be found, and the number of theſe would farre exceed, and be yet more abundant then they be, were they not not alienated from their owne proper natures by the ſeducements of men.
            
               VVomen made worſe by the ill example of men Do you ſee a woman that is gariſh to looke vpon, that is new fangled, and gawdy to the ſhew? looke amongſt men, and you ſhall find tenne men for one woman, that are more vaine, more nice, and more fooliſh then any woman you can ſeeke out, or that is moſt noted for her vanity: andVViſe women and fooliſh men an vnfit match. would you haue ſo many women Saints, and men Diuels? nay there muſt be vaine women, if it be but to ſatiſfie the humours of fooliſh men: where men haue giuen themſelues ouer to follow ſenſuality, they muſt haue women that be of their owne element to incounter them, otherwiſe they would neuer ſympathize, for vertue and vice could neuer agree.
            A woman that ſhould binde herſelf apprentice to modeſty, ſobriety, and baſhfulneſſe, might ſit long ynough without a husband in theſe daies, when a thouſand crownes are more preciouſly eſteemed amongſt our Hermophrodites, then two thouſand good conditions: for ſo they may imbrace the quantity, they neuer looke after the qualitie; vertue, wit, wiſedome, nor honeſty it ſelfe, is not regarded: good women may ſay with Fryer Bacons
               A pitifull ſaying. 
               Brazen head, Time is paſt.
            Is it any maruell though women do become both vain and diſſolute? it is but to feed the humor of thoſe men that are both laſciuious and ſenſuall.
            
               
It is the baſe diſpoſition of men, that maketh ſo many Harlots as there be at this preſent, when there is not ſo common a Curtizan, but ſhe ſhall be ſupported by vicious men: and how many Prodigals are there that will ſpend their ſtocke, their ſtore, their lands, their liuings, and all toIt is men only that ſeeketh the defamation of women. maintaine Harlots, and ſuch other women as be looſe and lewde of life? now ſhew me but the man, that will extend his bounty, his liberality, or almoſt his good word, to her that is honeſt.
            If women were not ſtayed, and mightily propped vp by their owne vertues, they could not conuerſe with men, but to their great perrill and danger; for if they meet with one man that doth preſent to their modeſt eyes, the example of wiſedome, they ſhall meet with ten for that oneDangerous for women to conuerſe with vitious men. that doth ſtill carry about them, the badge of Folly; if they meet with one man that will ſoberly aduiſe them for their honeſt reputation, they ſhall meet with ten for that one that will ſeeke their defamation.
            They are men therefore, yea moſt wicked and vngodly men that haue thus ſought to ouerthrow (and do yet ſeeke to diminiſh) the honour of women, the which I know they are not able to doe, for although they may wreſt ſome few vicious minded like themſelues to their lewd allurements, yet as good women haue euermore defended their honours, ſo their vertues will ſtill ſhine in that wonted oriental brightneſſe, as the malice of wicked men ſhal neuer be able to extinguiſh nor ecclipſe.
            I will ſpeake no more of women, but will you now ſee the honeſty of this age? it is put in print, and there are none diſhoneſt now, but thoſe that are poore.
            
               A foule fault to be poore and honeſt. Pouerty in this age is the greateſt diſhoneſty that a man can fall into, neither can there be a greater blemiſh to any manscredit, then to be reputed poore and honeſt.
            Rich men be all honeſt, and their honeſties are accounted ſo much the more, or ſo much the leſſe, as they be rated in the Subſidy booke.
            
            
               
               The honeſty of richmen. A rich mans wealth, is his wiſedome, his vertue and his honeſty: and he that is better able to giue you white mony for your gold, then to giue you a wiſe anſwer to your honeſt demand, may yet ſpeake his opinion in diſpite of wiſedome, and his words muſt carry credit and authoritie, when truth it ſelfe ſhall not be beleeued, if it proceede from theHoneſty is d
                     ••
                  d many yeares ſince. mouth of pouertie. Plaine dealing: honeſty is dead, many yeares ſince, hee died of a conſumption, but this is the miſchiefe, he died without iſſue.
            
               Knaucry in neuer better health then at this preſent. 
               Knaucry hath taken phiſicke, and is growne ſo ſtrong and luſtie, that he walkes the ſtreetes at pleaſure, but yet diſguiſed, ſometimes like a promoter, ſometimes like a broker, ſometimes like a ſcriuener, and many times like an vnder ſheriffe.
            
            In the Tearme time he will be ſure to looke into Weſtminſter hall, ſometimes amongſt the catchpoules, and otherwhile like a poore client, with a paper in his hand, and will looke ſo ruthfully that a man would ſooner pittie him, then be able truly to diſcouer him.
            
               Vertue growne poore. 
               Vertue is growne poore, and hath few or none to attend her, but that is no great wonder, for who would follow a begger?
            
            
               A cold recompence. Her beſt deſerts are recompenced, perhaps by a balletmaker, or if they be ſometimes canonized on a ſtage amongſt players, ſhe is highly fauoured: alas poore vertue, that haſt no better recompence then what thou thy ſelfe canſt draw from vice; yet there are many that will ſpeake of vertue, and tell of her excellency, but they are few that will tranſlate her truly out of words into deedes.
            
               Conſcience exilde. 
               Conſcience is exilde, and baniſhed quite out of Citty, Towne and Country.
            
            My ſelſe hauing ſome occaſions, making inquirie where I might finde him, I was told he vſed ſometimes to frequent faires and markets, wherupon I went to Bartholmew-Fayre, and miſſing him there, I went to Sturbridge-Fayre, and likewiſe loſt my labour; whereupon I came to

               Romford market, where I could no newes at al of him: then comming backe to London I made inquirie amongſt ſhopkeepers, tradeſmen and Merchants: they told me they knew him not, but wiſht me to inquire amongſt the ſtationers, and thoſe that ſold bookes: to Pauls Church-yard I went, and they ſhewed me a booke, that made mention of one that was ſometimes called by the name of Robin Conſcience, but what was become of him they could not tell, but willed me to aske amongſt the Lawyers; but comming to them, they began to laugh at me, and thought me to be out of my wits, that would aske for Conſcience amongſt them: I was then in deſpaire for euer to finde him, thinking to giue ouer my gueſt, till a friend ſoftly whiſpering in mine eare, willed me to ſeeke amongſt the Papiſts that will make vaunts, that they haue gotten Conſcience tied vp in a ſtring, and that Conſcience and they were as familiar the one with the other, as the Begger and the Lowſe; but when I came amongſt them, he that they ſtood ſo much vpon, whom they called by the name of Conſcience, was a meere counterfeit hypocrite, no more like Conſcience then a traytor is like a true man: it was (indeed) wilfull opinion, froward, blind and obſtinate, whom they impoſed to carry the name of Conſcience: & leauing them where I found him, being out of hope for euer to finde out Conſcience, it was my fortune yet in miraculous manner to hit vpon him, but if I ſhould tell you where, and in what country, you would think it ſtrange: but to tell youConſcience found onely amongſt Souldiers. the truth, I found him in Ireland, and would you know amongſt whom, it was amongſt a company of poore and needy ſouldiers: when I had a while wondered at the matter, I asked him what he meant to abandon better company, to aſſociate himſelfe with theſe thread beare fellowes, the very Abiects of this age, that amongſt all other profeſſions were of the baſeſt account & leaſt eſteemed: his anſwer was, their fellowſhip was fitteſt for him, that now at this day, tooke but eight pence a day pay, no more

then they tooke many hundred yeares agoe, vvhen they might buy more for their eight pence, then they can doe now for their eighteene, and therefore he knew not any profeſſion more fitting for him to aſſociate himſelfe of, then amongſt Souldiers.
            
            Hauing thus heard his reaſon and his reſolution I diſpatched my buſines, and there I left him; but I ſee conſcience will not ſtay amongſt them, that a man would thinke, were beſt able to ſupport him, I meane amongſt rich men. But ſome will ſay, riches that are not honeſtly come by, will not long ſtay, but as they are quickely gotten, ſo they are ſuddenly gone, but they are much deceiued,Ill gotten goods very kinde to their maſter. that are of that beleefe: for riches are as kinde and louing to their maſter, as the Body lowſe, that will neuer leaue his maſter, though he be going to the gallowes, but wil there hang with him for company; and riches that are vnlawfully gathered togither, will neuer leaue their maſter till they haue brought him to hell, and there they will bee a corroſiue to his Conſcience ſtill world without end.
            
               Riches but a tickle commoditie. But this worldly wealth I ſee is but a tickle commoditie, for he that hath moſt, he hath notynough, neither to keepe his head from aking, nor his conſcience from deſpairing.
            
               Who is to be accounted rich. He is onely to be accounted rich, that poſſeſſeth, what he hath gotten iuſtly, and vſeth what he poſſeſſeth honeſtly▪
                but for the vngodly, they may well be reputed wealthy, but neuer rich.
            
            
               An excellent Touch-ſtone. There cannot bee a more excellent Touch-ſtone, whereby to diſcouer the diſpoſitions of men, then is the ſuperfluitie of wealth, and the extreamitie of want, the ſpring tide of proſperitie, and the low ebbe of aduerſitie; for although the mattess of themſelues are indifferent, yet the mannaging of them is it that giueth light.
            
               Proſperitie. 
               Proſperitie, pampereth vs vp in pleaſure, it maketh vs

to forget God, and to repoſe our greateſt confidence in the vanities of the world.
            
               Aduerſitie▪
                
               Aduerſitie, maketh vs contemptible in the Eye of the world, it is the meanes whereby we are taught to know our ſelues, and to draw vs to God.
            
            
               Proſperitie, ſo ſwelleth vs in pride, that wee forgette our ſelues, it ſo blindeth our vnderſtanding, that vvee are not able to diſcerne a friend from a flatterer, nor to iudge whether thoſe that doe favvne vpon vs, bee more in loue with our ſelues or with our fortunes.
            
               Aduerſitie, maketh vs humble, it cleereth the vnderſtanding, and giueth vs Eyes to diſcerne betweene Friendſhip and Flatterie, and to make aſſured triall betweene a Friend and a Foe. Aduerſitie may bee both Iudge and Iurie.
            
            VVhat haue I ſaid, may Aduerſitie iudge betweene a friend and a foe? I neuer heard that pouerty was cloied with many friende, and aduerſitie, if he once begins to want, ſhall neuer want a foe: they will ſay a friend is triedOf friends and friendſhip. in time of need▪ but I ſay, that neede is it that makes a friend a foe, he is a foole that wanteth friends, and if hee wants not wealth.
            But he that hath pouertie to caſt vp his accounts, and is become Needes Embaſſador, to beg or to borrow, if he finde a friend to ſupply his wants, I ſay ſuch a friend isStrange to be found. more precious, & more rare to be found, then Platos Common▪wealth, Moores Eutopia, Ciceroes orator, or Baldeſers Courtier: he that is a friend to all can be friend to none, but it is nothing ſo ſmarting to be called a Niggard or to be reputed for a Miſer, as to haue it ſaid, He is euery mans
               A fooliſh commendation. 
               friend but his owne.
            
            It were too great a preſumption in me now to meddle with Diuinitie, the dignitie of the ſubiect may ſuffice, for where the obiect is God, the ground worke is infallible, there needs no further demonſtration.
            
               
               Of Diuinitie. 
               Diuinitie is a heauenly Law, ſealed by God the lawgiuer, written and ſet downe by the finger of God, and deliuered by thoſe that were inſpired by his holy ſpirit.
            It hath likewiſe pleaſed God from the beginning, to raiſe vp Patriarkes and Prophets, to teach and gouerne his people and after in the kingdome of our Sauiour, he ordained the miniſtery of the Goſpell, appointing it perpetuall to the end of the world, and hath further taught vs to pray, that Labourers might be thruſt into the Harueſt.
            
               The worthineſſe of the Diuine. Shall I then ſpeake of the Diuine, that is the Steward of God, appointed to diſpoſe his miſteries, that is, the Embaſſadors of glad and joyfull tidings, that doth bring vnto vs the word of our ſaluation, that is the light to ſhine before vs in all godly example, of Loue, of Charity, of Humility, of Temperance, of Chaſtity, of Sobriety, of integrity of life, of honeſt conuerſation, and therefore worthy of double honour?
            
               Our Engliſh Clergy what they are. I thinke, of my conſcience, our Engliſh Clergy at this preſent houre, are as compleat in learning in liuing, in doctrine, in wiſedome, and in all manner of godly knowledg, as although in ſome other parts in Chriſtendom (perhaps) there may be ſome found to ſecond them, yet none to diſproue, or exceed them.
            But as amongſt the twelue Diſciples, there was a ludas, ſo amongſt this honourable function, there creepes in now and then a falſe Diſciple, that knowes how to bait hisA falſe Apoſtle▪
                booke with grauity, till he hath caught a Benefyce, & then the Surples muſt ſerue to couer a moſt vngodly carcaſe: & he that ſhould ſet vp a light for other men to follow, his Lampe doth burne ſo dimme, that he that were not well ſighted of himſelfe, might ſooner ſtumble, then hit the right tract.
            
               Parſon pleaſe time▪
                Another intruder there is, Parſon pleaſe-time by name, that being vnbeneficed, will therefore become a Chaplaine, to ſome man of worth, and worthines: he will ſometimes ſtep vp into the Pulpit, and he will preach againſt ſin, but it ſhall be done with halfe a lip, he dares not preſſe it till

it ſmarts; he knowes it is no time of yeare, to be too vehement againſt all ſorts of ſinnes, for offending thoſe that he would more willingly pleaſe.
            
               An other Nathan hard to be found. Where ſhall we finde another Nathan, that dares tell his maſter to his face, Thou art the man? 2. Sam. 12. Thou art the man that haſt ſinned in Pride, thou art the man that haſt ſinned in Drunkenneſſe, in Adultery, in Blaſphemy; thou art the man that haſt racked vp thy rents that haſt oppreſſed thy tenants, that haſt wronged thy poore neighbours: no, Parſon pleaſe-time knoweth well ynough, this is not the ready way to get a fat Benefice.
            
            To ſpeake now in generall, and to ſpeake according to a truth, the Pulpits in England, and in Ireland both, were neuer better ſupplied, with a more reuerent, and a more learned Miniſtry then at this preſent, for their ſakes therfore that be good, I will ſpeake no more of thoſe few that be ill.
            
               Of Philoſophy. I ſhall not neede to ſpeake of Philoſophy; the ſtudy of wiſedome is now out of ſeaſon, and the natural part of Philoſophy, but ſheweth vs what we haue, and the morall, how to vſe rightly what is our own, a burthē too heauy for euery mans head to carry: I will leaue it, and ſpeake a little of Souldiours,
               Of counterfelt Souldiors or at the leaſt of ſuch as in theſe daies, would faine be taken for ſouldiers, and do march ſome of them vnder the title of Captaines, that neuer ſpread Enſigne of their owne before an enemy, nor neuer ſaw enemy march in the field: yet he will relate of warres, of skirmiſhes and incounters, as brefly, as ifTheir brauadoes. he had bin an eye-witnes, vvhen he hath but pilferd them from report, or (perhaps) ſtolnethem from ſome new printed ballade: and he that hath but ſeene the ſiege of Troy, pictured forth in a painted cloath, will ſpeake of ſallies, of aſſaults, of incounters, of retraites, of palizados, of rauelins, of parapites, all his ſpeeches ſhall be nothing elſe but powder and ſhot.
            He will ſpend a whole after noone, in relating his own valours, and this he doth to preuent quarrels, becauſe he loues not euery day to fight; he beares downe ſtrangers with the ſtory of his own actions, & wil attribute the honour of a victory to his own valour: now he that is but weake of faith, &

wil not beleue theſe wōders, muſt be terrified with the ſtab.
            
            
               The title of a Captaine. A good priuiledge for a Drunkard. It is as good a warrant for him that would ſwagger, ſweare, and be euery day drunke, to be called a Captaine, as for him that would become a Rebell both to God and his Prince, to be called a Catholique.
            
            Honour was wont to be the Adamant to draw the ſouldiers ſword, but now the inſtigation of a Harlot, or a pot of ſtrong Ale.
            
            
               A Souldiers vertue. His vertue is this, if it be but for a matter of a thouſand pounds, a Souldiers word is as good as his band.
            
               Of Knights. I might now ſpeake of Knights, that in former ages were had in honourable reputation, and the order ſo remaineth honourable ſtill, where the dignitie is beſtowed vpon worthy perſons; but as amongſt Captaines and Souldiers, there be a number that doth march vnder thoſe titles, that are but counterfeits, ſo amongſt Knights, what a number are crept into the order, that doth but be-durty the dignity, and are become a ſcandall to that honourable order?
            
               The one a carpet Knight the other King Arthurs foole. 
               Knight-hood was wont to be the reward of vertue, but now a common prey to the betraiers of vertue, & we ſhall ſooner meet Sir Dinadine, or Sir Dagonet, at another mans table, thē with Sir Triſtrum de Lionis, or Sir Lancelot de lake in the field.
            
               Knights in former ages haue beene aſſiſtant vnto Princes, and were the ſtaies of the Common-wealth; but now, they liue by begging from the Prince, and are a burthen to the common-wealth.
            
               Of a Courtier. May we yet ſpeake a little of the Courtier, I will ſpeake but ſoftly; the firſt principles of a Courtier (I ſpeake but of the meaner ſort) he muſt learne to creepe to crouch, to flatter, and to climbe vp to immerited praiſe, by the ſteps of others diſgrace: and the ambitious ſort, muſt not be without baſe mindes to attend them that will ſtoope to any villany for preferment.
            A right Courtier, is high in his owne imagination, and his beſt complements, are Pride, and Ignorance; he is more curious in his wordes, then conſtant in his promiſes: the matter that he moſt admireth, is the beauty of his Miſtris, his greateſt

circumſpection is about his apparrel, how he may pinke it, how he cut it, ſtitch it, and lace it: he is ſtill inquiſitiue after newes, and in all his diſcourſes, he dares ſpeake more then himſelfe vnderſtands.
            He ſpends his greateſt time, in the contemplation of ſuits, and he will not open his lips to ſalute any man, that is not clad in ſilke, and his apparrell made in the new faſhion.
            
               Of Lawyers. Now I cannot tell what I ſhould call the ſtudy of Law, whether I ſhould tearm it to be a profeſſion, a ſcience, or an art: a trade I cannot call it, yet there be ſome that do thinke it to be a craft, becauſe a Gentleman demanding of a Lawyers ſeruant, what crafts-man his maiſter was? anſwered, Syr, my maſter is a crafty Lawyer.
            
            But I thinke it may rather be called an occupation, for they haue thoſe amongſt them, that they do call apprentiſes at Law, who by that time they haue ſerued out their yeres, and that they are become iourney men, they do troubleIourney men Lawyers. the whole common-wealth, with their practiſe, as they make it an vngracious practiſe that doth breed ſuch diſturbance.
            There be three ſorts of men, that they ſay may tell a lye by authority, and thoſe are, an olde man, a Trauailer, and a Poet; but a Lawyer hath both authority and law to tell any lye, that his Clyent will informe.
            
               The effect of the Law. The office of the Law is to command things that be honeſt and vertuous, & againe, to countermand what is diſhoneſt and vicious, and next after the Goſpell the Law is the greateſt comfort that God hath giuen to the ſonnes of men; it remedieth iniuries, and giueth to euery man what is his: but by the corruption of ſome Lawyers the Lawes are made traps, and traines, whereby both rich and poore are caught and ſpoyled; for they haue ſuch a number of ſubtillThe ſubtillty of Lawyers. ſubtillties, that they do yet make more ſubtill by their ſubtill handling, that they be able to ſet the Lawes themſelues togither by the eares, and vtterly to ouerthrow one Law with another.
            The Lawyer is more hated for his inconſtancy, then loued

for his learning, when he will take mony to defend a matter, that in his owne conſcience he knowes to be vniuſt.
            Their tongues were wont to be tied to tenne ſhillings, but they haue raiſed their market, and they thinke foure forThe charitable diſpoſition of Lawyers. one, now to be too litle; yet they do ſhew thēſelues to be of a charitable diſpoſition, they do loue their enemies; they do loue, and with an entire affection, they do heartily imbrace the Angels, that with faire ſhowes ſometimes ſhining and gliſtering in their faces, do ſend a number of them to the Deuill.
            
            Now to wind vp all, and for a laſt farewell, I could find in my heart, to praiſe Poetry, and to commend a great number of writers, which I do better know by the excellency of their lines, then by their perſons; but their own works are a better cōmendation, then I am able to apply: but there areBaſtard Poets a nūber in theſe daies, that make ſemblance, to be retaining to the Muſes, that do peſter the Stationers ſtalles, with ſuch vnprofitable ſtuffe, that learning might ſeeme to be the miſtres of vngodlineſſe, when our eſpeciall endeuours conſiſteth but in the abuſe of knowledge: and Poetry that hath beene accuſtomed (vnder feined fictions) to diſcouer 
                  Ʋice, is now become the Art of Flattery.
            
            Be there not printed lines, or to ſpeake more truly, may be called printed lyes; for take away but ſo much of the matter as they haue inforced but to Lying and to Flattering, and there would nothing be left remaining that were worth theFlattering and lying. reading. How many Writers be there, that do labour with the Mountaines, to bring forth Myce, that do ſeeke to draw the Lyons skin vpon Aeſops Aſſe, and Hercules Shoe vpon a childes foote?
            Some againe conuerts all their Reaſon into Rime; and ſome will write a whole Volume, neither in Rime nor Reaſon: & let their lines be neuer ſo vaine and friuolous, yet they muſt be fronted with the name of Excellent.
            
            But they doe well to ſute the World with Bookes according to the time; for rude limping lines, are beſt befitting

a lame halting age. Writers are not ſo vaine, but Readers (for the moſt part) are three times more fooliſh, and a vaine glorious tytle, doth better fit their appetites then a good booke: the Stationer dares hardly aduenture to print a good booke, if it tend to the reprehending of vice or vanitie. Idle toyes tending to ſenſualitie, or other like lycencious follie, are ſet foorth vpon their Stalles, in bright and gliſtering couers, when thoſe Bookes that are eyther drawing to vertue or godlineſſe, are throwne into duſtie corners.
            
               Socrates admoniſheth, that if any man be carefull of his honor, let him foreſee that he hath not a poet to his enemy, becauſe they haue not ſo great a grace in pray ſing, as in ill ſpeaking: but yet to blaze the praiſes of my friend, I would wiſh a learned Poets pen, that with a drop of Inke can exalt him whom they loue, and leaue him famed to poſterity.
            
               The trauell of wit, but ſlightly regarded. But this trauell of wit, is the moſt thriftleſſe and vnprofitable exerciſe that any man can indeuour: for where doth it finde recompence, or who is he that doth reward it? The Swaine that followeth his handy worke, is paid at night for his handy labour: the Cobler that ſits and cloutes a Shoe, receiues his peny for his patch: but he that digs the Myne of wit, and giues the world new eyes to ſee into conceits beyond the common ſence, what gaineth he, or what is his reward? perhaps good words. A poore ſatisfaction: yet he that gets good words from all, muſt haue a ſtrange Subiect and a pleaſing pen. But ſtay my brayneſick thoughts, whitherThe concluſion. will you gallop, you haue ridden a large circuit, and I feare me quite out of the way, or at the leaſt to little purpoſe. You haue inueighed againſt ſin, and that is all one to rolle Siſiphus Stone, or to fill Daneas Tubs. We muſt not taxe the times abuſes; we may make a ſhow to expell vice, and to ſhut it out at the brode gate, but we may priuily take it in againe at the wicket: wee may deſire to come to Chriſt, but it muſt bee with Nicodemus; it muſt bee in the night when no bodie may ſee vs. We may dance with Chriſt in the one hand, and the world in an other; and ſo wee

inroule our ſelues in his Muſter booke, we may march in Sathans campe, and fight vnder the Diuels banner.
            
            It is ynough to cry Lord, Lord, but not to doe any thing that is commanded by the Lord: if we thinke of God, wee thinke him to be a good man eaſie to be pleaſed, and vve knovv hovv to put him off vvith faire vvords, and dumbe ſhovves, till our prime of pleaſure be paſt: it is time ynough to repēt vs of our ſins when we be vvel ſpent in yeres ready for the graue: but if vve vvill haue our wils in ſinne, God will haue his will in puniſhment, and our ſhort pleaſures being ended, euen then begins our euerlaſting paines: the pleaſures and delights of the world, as they are ſoone loued, ſo they are as quickly ended, but they are long, yea very long lamented. My concluſion is, it is leſſe miſery when we die to giue vp the ghoſt, then vvhilſt vve liue, to giue vp the holie Ghoſt.
            I leaue vvhat I haue vvritten, to thy conſcience, and leauing againe thy conſcience to God, I reſt.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            EPILOGVS▪
            
            I Haue here caſt into a ſmall volume, a large diſcourſe of ſin and wickednes, the which I haue endeauoured rather by a diligent obſeruation of the time, then by any other ſhaddow of complement. I haue compoſed a Glaſſe wherein to behold the inconſtant follies of this giddy headed age; a taske that I know, wil rather produce hatred, then win loue: the vicious ſort doth ſo hugge their ſinnes, and doth ſo beſtroke and flatter their owne abhominations, that he that ſhould but detect there vice and villany, he could not be accounted to be Caeſars friend, they cry out, crucifige, crucifige▪
                away with him, and deliuer vnto vs Baxabas.
            
            Let vs haue him that can ſing lullaby to folly, that can ſmooth vp ſinne and wincke at any maner of wickedneſſe.
            He that is too buſie with his ve vobis, he muſt be brought coram nobis, he muſt haue his tongue charmed, & he muſt be taught to know to whom he ſpeaks, and how he dares preſume to diſturb their quietnes that are ſo addicted to follow their pleaſure and delight, that they cannot indure to heare neither of God nor the Diuell, neither of heauen nor of hell, nor of any other motion, that ſhould either mooue them to repentance, or reprehend there ſinnes.
            Whē 
               Lot went about to diſſwade the Sodomites from their abhominations, were they not angry with him, did they not ſay vnto him: What haſt thou to doe, to take vpon thee, to correct and iudge vs?
            
            He that ſhould now ſpeake againſt the pride of the time, where ſhould he be able to ſhew his face, but that both men and women, would be ready to worrow him? whoredome and adultery, hath ſo many friends to ſupport them, ſo many fauourites to vphold them, ſo many of all ſorts, both old and yong, rich and poore: that doth delight & follow the game, that he that ſhould but open his lips to reprehend it, the whole rablement of whoremaſters, harlots, bawdes, panders, and ſuch vicious liuers, they would ſay he were a criticke, a ſatiriſt, a preciſian, a puritane, or a counterfeit hipocrite, but they would not mend their liues.
            
               Drunkenneſſe againe is growne into that generalitie that he is not accounted to be an honeſt man that will not bee

drunken for good fellowſhip, but amongſt drunkards that be of diuerſe kindes, I hold thoſe to bee more dangerous ill, that are drunken with vanitie, then thoſe other that are drunken with wine; for the one, two houres ſleepe may reſtore him againe to the vſe of his ſenſes: but the other, many houres, daies, monethes nor yeares may ſuffice to make him to looke into his owne folly. Amongſt theſe I commend me to the drunken Tobacconiſts, that doth beſot themſelues in their owne conceits, attributing that ſoueraignty to a ſtinking Indian weede, that if they were not enemies to their owne diſcretions, daily experience would teach them that their exceſſiue ſucking at their Tobacco pipe, is but a flat mockery; and would make that fauorite, that doth thinke himſelfe moſt wiſe to defend it, to confeſſe his owne ignorance: neither can there be a ſtronger argument to proue it meere vanitie indeed, then to ſee it ſo much imbraced by ſo many vaine men, that doth ſo much dote and are ſo farre in loue with it, that ſome of them are more angry with him that doth but ſpeak againſt their Tobacco, then they would be with him that ſhould take exceptions at the ſhalowneſſe of their wit.
            But hee that weares a ſiluer or a golden Mine on his backe, there is no queſtion to be made, neither of his wit nor of his honeſty: he may praiſe or diſpraiſe, how or what he liſt, he is priuiledged, and he hath a parcell of ſcripture to avow in his owne behalfe, Dixit inſipiens, Pſal. 14.
            By this it may appeare, Sinne is growne to that ſtatelines of Pride, that ſhee will not be controld. If we ſpeake againſt ſinne, we muſt doe it liſpingly, wee muſt not ſpeake it out too bitterly: but the follies of this age muſt bee ſeaſoned with ſugar, they muſt be made ſweete; but thoſe ſinnes that do ſeeme ſweete in the committing, will be found as bitter, when without repentance they come to be accounted for.
            Lo
                  •
               ke vpon the actions of this age, conſider of the times abuſes, & whoſe eyes are ſo bleared with vice, that doth not behold how ſinne and ſenſualitie did neuer ſo much abound? he is blinde that ſeeth not this, and too malitious that will not acknowledge it. The ſinnes of this age are become

like old feſtered ſoores, that are not to bee cured but with biting coroſiues; we can not therefore too bitterly reprehend them. We are become like naturall beaſts that do bring all things to triall but by the ſenſes; but if we could carry them to the inquiſition of the ſoule, we ſhould finde it a fearefull iudgement of God, for men to be giuen vp ſo much to their owne luſts, to haue no ſenſe nor feeling of their ſinne: he that hath this hardneſſe of heart, that he neither feeleth his owne ſinne, nor will not be told of it by another, he is no more of the race of Adam, who was aſhamed of himſelfe, but of Pharao, who hardened his owne heart, and whoſe heart God did harden.
            If the head doth but a little ake, our vrins muſt knocke at the Phiſitions doore, and alas how inquiſitiue we be about the ſtate of our bodies? but let our conſciences cry out and exclaime how they liſt, our ſickly famiſhed ſoules are neuer reſpected, we are ſo farre in loue with our ſinnes, that wee care not for the loſing of our ſoules.
            Are theſe the works that faith affordeth, is this the life that God requireth? we goe to Church (indeed) and we ſay, to ſeeke the Lord▪
                but we do not ſeeke him as if we ment to finde him, wee ſeeke him not with humble and penitent heart, but with proud and preſumptuous ſpirits, decking and pranking vp our ſelues with thoſe gawdy and vngodly attires as are more liker to poiſon our praiers then to profit our ſoules, better fitting indeed for a Brothell houſe, then for the houſe of God.
            
            We goe to Church, rather to ſhow our pompe and our pride, then with any zealous intent, to ſerue our God as we ſhould do▪
            
            We goe to the Church, as Iudas went to the Supper of the Lord, we returne home in a worſe caſe then when we firſt went thither.
            With what faces can we make ſhow to profeſſe the Goſpel▪ when we be ſo giuen vp to that monſtrous pride, that we rather deſire to follow our owne voluptuous pleaſures, then to ſerue God? the world doth ſee it, our conſciences doth witneſſe it, neither can we denie it.
            They will make ſhow by their ſpeeches, as if they could not indure that God ſhould be diſhonoured: but looke vpon their

actions, their pride, their vanity, their drunkenneſſe, their exceſſe; and they doe ſhew them plainly what they are: and he that ſhould iudge thē by the rules of holy ſcriptures, might boldly pronounce them to be farre from euerlaſting life: our Sauiour Chriſt hath confidently avowed: The vnrighteous ſhall not inherit the kingdome of heauen: and the Apoſtle, 1. Cor. 6. Be not deceiued, neither fornicator, neither adulterer, nor drunkard, nor idolater, ſhall not inherit the kingdome of God.
            
            Let them flatter themſelues therefore how they liſt, they are in a dangerous plight, & we cannot be too plaine to put them from that vaine hope that thus deludeth them, that will euery day pollute themſelues with theſe abhominations, & yet will truſt or hope for ſaluation, they thinke it time ſoone ynough to repent, when their climacterical yeare is paſt, & then if they haue but time to ſay, Lord haue mercy vpon vs, and for their executors to giue penny dole when they bee dead, it wil ſerue for a quietus eſt, for all their ſins forepaſſed: they may perhaps ſometime dreame of a dying time, and it is but a dreame, for being not throughly reſolued, that this time draweth euery day neerer then other, they neuer prepare themſelues againſt the time, but are many times taken ſuddenly in the fulneſſe of their filthineſſe, and in the very prime, when they be acting of the abhominations.
            I haue little hope therefore to reforme thoſe by my writing, whom the thundring voyce of Gods word pronounced euery day by the Preacher, can neither conforme, nor any thing at all terrifye: I know I ſhall rather procure hatred, for ſpeaking truth, then win loue for wiſhing well: but I little feare the Adulterat cenſure of a ſenceles multitude; the wicked are like an Ocean, that cannot reſt from raging: and a madneſſe for him that will run amongſt thornes, and thinke ſcorne to be prickt; let them then rage & raile as they liſt, he that is throughly ſettled and compoſed in himſelfe, moues in ſo high an Orbe, and at ſo far a diſtant from the malicious and ill diſpoſed, that their vnſauoury belchings can neuer annoy him. It ſufficeth me that I maske in the true ſimplicities, of a loyall honeſty, my conſcience bearing me witnes, I haue ſpoken thoſe truths, that I am in nothing more agrieued, then in that they are too true.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   