
      
         
            
            
            A
New Deſcription
OF IRELAND:
Wherein is deſcribed the diſpoſition
of the Iriſh whereunto they
are inclined.
            No leſſe admirable to be peruſed then credible
to be beleeued: neither vnprofitable nor vnpleaſant
to bee read and vnderſtood, by thoſe worthy
Cittizens of London that be now
vndertakers in Ireland:
By Barnabe Rich, Gent:
            
            
               Malui me diuitem eſſe, quam vocari.
            
            Printed at London for Thomas Adams.
1610.
         
         
            
            
            The Contents of the Chapters
contained in this Booke.
            
               OF the little credite that is to bee giuen to their
teſtimonies, that haue hitherto written of
Ireland. Cap. 1.
               Of the temperature of the ayre, and the fertility of the
ſoile vniuerſally through Ireland. Cap. 2.
               Of the nature & diſpoſition of the Iriſh how they are
inclined. Cap. 3.
               From whence it proceedeth, that the Iriſh are ſo repugnant
to the Engliſh. Cap. 4.
               That the Iriſh by nature are inclined to cruelty. Cap. 5.
               Of the ingratitude of the Iriſh. Cap. 6.
               Of the inciuilty both of manners and conditions vſed
by the Iriſh. Cap. 7.
               Of the Vulgar ſotte of the Iriſh, what account they
make of an Oath. Cap. 8
               That a Conqueſt ſhould draw after it, Law, Language,
and Habite. Cap. 9.
               Of certain ſepts and degrees amongſt the Iriſh. Ca. 10.
               Of the manner of the Iriſh Coſhering. Cap. 11.
               How Ireland was purged from all venimous wormes,
by the praiers of Saint Patrick. Cap. 12.
               Of the holy Saintes that hath beene borne, bred, and
brought vp in Ireland. Cap. 13.
               Of the ſuperſtitious conceit that is holden by the
Iriſh, about certaine Wels. Cap. 14.
               
                  
A true diſcription both of the Citty, and Cittizens
of Dubline. Cap. 15.
               Of ſome defects in the gouernment of Dublin. Ca. 16.
               Of the trade & traffique that is vſed in Dublin. Ca. 17.
               Of the ambition of the Iriſh. Cap. 18.
               Of the Doctrine of the Pope, how imbraced by the
Iriſh. Cap. 19.
               How the Papiſts of Ireland, are neither aſhamed nor
afraid, to manifeſt themſelues. Cap. 20.
               The inconuenience of Popery, how it hurteth in
Ireland. Cap. 21.
               Whither there by any poſſibility, that the Iriſh ſhould
be able to maintaine warre againſt the Kinges Maieſtie. Cap. 22.
               Of thoſe lets and impedimentes that defeated our late
gracious Qu. in her ſeruices againſt the Iriſh. Ca. 23.
               Of Pardons and protections, how hurtfull in Ireland.
Cap. 24.
               Of the dallying out the time of ſeruice, and the delayes
of Ireland. Cap. 25.
               How Tyrone was ſtill ſupplyed with Souldiors, and
all other prouiſions for warre, at the Queenes
charges. Cap. 26.
               That the Iriſh are more dangerous then neceſſary, for
his Maieſtie ſeruice in Ireland. Cap. 27.
               The concluſion.
            
         
         
            
            To the Right Honourable, Robert
Earle of Salisbury, Ʋicount Cranburn,
Baron Cecill of Eſſenden, Lord High Treaſurer
of England, principall Secretarie to his Maieſtie,
one of the Lordes of his Honourable
Priuie Councell, and Knight of the Noble
order of the Garter, &c.
            
               MOſt Honorable, and most worthie Earle, the
ſeuerall Bookes that are ſpread, bearing the
names and Titles of Hiſtories, of ſummaries of
Chronicles, & of diuers other collections drawn
from vnworthy Authors: ſome of them printed,
ſome otherwiſe publiſhed here in Ireland, by Papiſts, by lieng
Chroniclers, by idle Poets, by Bardes and Iriſh Rythmers,
all of them conteining matter of vntruth: As the memories
of ſuperstitious foundations, lies and Fables, fooliſhly medled
and compacted togither: written rather in the maintenance
and fauour of lewd miſdemeanor, of Superſtition, of Idolatry,
and do rather giue encouragement to wicked Subiects to enter
the field of Rebellion, to take Armes againſt the Prince,
to diſobey, to contemn, to deſpiſe, not onelie the Princes lawes,
and his Maieſties gracious proceedings, but alſo ſetting open
the wide gate that leadeth to many miſdemeanors againſt
the Prince himſelfe. I haue therefore thought it a matter
much importing his Maiesties ſeruice, to do my beſt endeuor
to ſtop this gap thus broken downe, that thus openeth the way
to the wastfull ſpoile of Rebellion, of Treaſon, of Superſtition,
of Idolatrie, of Diſobedience, of Contempt: and to giue a

Booke to the well-diſpoſed of that Realme of Ireland, wherein
they may behold that truth, which they themſelues haue
heard with their eares, haue ſeene with their eies, and are able
to testifie vpon dailie experience.
            Theſe lines thus ſquared out, I durst not preſume to preſent
to your Honor, in reſpect of anie abilitie that I acknowledge
to be in my ſelfe, I knowe there can come nothing from
me, that may be anie waies anſwerable to your exquiſit iudgment
or worthineſſe: but it is your owne vertue, your owne
affabilitie and Noble diſpoſition, that was yet neuer knowne
to deſpice or diſcountenance any mans endeuours, that were
honestlie intended, or vndertaken to a good end and purpoſe.
            It is this, your Honorable inclination, that hath encouraged
me: this is it hath made me to preſume of a fauorable
acceptance. To you therefore, and to your honor alone, I haue
in most humble and ſubmiſſiue manner, bequeathed thoſe experiments,
which forty yeares obſeruation hath taught me to
know. To your Honor, whoſe exquiſſite iudgment is beſt able
to diſcerne, and whoſe wiſdome and knowledge is moſt fitting
to redreſſe: by whoſe Honorable care for the good of the common-weale,
England and Ireland, are both made happie. By
whoſe prouidence and wiſdome (next vnder his Maieſtie) we
haue hitherto reaped the fruits of a most happie and bleſſed
gouernment. To your Honor therefore, I ſubmit my labors,
my Loue, my lines, my ſeruice, my ſelfe, my endeuors, & all
that I haue, to be at your Honors diſpoſe: and thus will rest
to praie for your Honour, that GOD would ſtill continue his
bleſſinges vpon you, as hitherto he hath done.
            
               Your Honors, in all humble
and dutifull affection:
Barnabe Rych.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ To the Curteous and friendly
Reader, either English or Irish, either Proteſtant
or Papiſt, either learned or vnlearned,
or to any other whoſoeuer, I care not.
            
               ONe of the diſeaſes of this age, is the multitude
of Books, that doth ſo ouercharge
the worlde, that it is not able to diſgeſt
the abundance of idle matter that is euery
day hatched and brought into the
world, that are as diuers in their formes, as their Authors
be in their faces.
            It is but a thriftleſſe, and a thankeleſſe occupation, this
writing of Bookes, a man were better to ſit ſinging in a
Coblers ſhop, for his pay is certaine, a penny a patch: but a
Booke-writer, if hee get ſometimes a few commendations
of the Iudicious, he ſhall be ſure to reape a thouſande
reproaches of the Malicious.
            
            Bookes are like Cheeſe, that is neuer well ſeaſoned to
euery mans taſt; for one will ſay it is too ſalt, another wil
ſay it is too freſh, a thirde will ſay it is to tart, another
thinkes it to be too milde; one will haue it too hard, another
too ſoft, another too tough, another too brittle,
it neuer pleaſeth euery mans taſt; no more do Bookes.
            I am cenſured for writing of a Book, to be a malicious
enemy to Ireland, to poore Ireland, that (God knoweth)
is rather to be pittied, then ſpighted.
            I confeſſe, I haue made my ſelfe known in print, to be
an enemy to Popery, but not to Ireland.
            
            
               Ariſtotle being vpbraided by ſome of his friends, that
he had beene ouer mercifull to a wicked man: I haue indeede
(ſaide Ariſtotle) bin mercifull towardes the man,
but not towards his wickedneſſe.
            So ſay I by Ireland, though I finde fault with the Idolatry
that is committed in the Country, yet I find no fault

with the Countrey it ſelfe, nor with a great number of
good people that are of the Iriſh birth, that I neuer ment
to reproue, neither am I able to detect.
            But for thoſe that haue found, ſo many faults with my
book, that I ſo honeſtly meant for the good of the countrey.
I forgiue them from my heart, for I durſt ſweare for
them, they did it more for want of wit, then for any malice
they beare to my perſon.
            I haue liued in Ireland of a poore pay, the full recompence
of 47. yeares, ſpent in my Prince and Countreyes
ſeruice, I haue not begged nor purchaſed any man lāds,
rents, or reuennewes; I haue not heaped to my ſelfe, eyther
Offices or Church-liuinges: yet ſomething I haue
noted of the Countrey by obſeruation. I ſee a number of
good people, that are both capable of obedience & diſcipline,
if they were not miſled: but their minds (alas)
are ſtill poyſoned with Popery, and what is he that it not
touched with a kinde of compaſsion, to ſee the poore &
ſilly people ſo ſeduced & carried away by theſe iuggling
Ieſuites? What monſtrous miracles are there daily preſented,
and how many lying woonders are there to bee
witneſſed, teſtified by men ſcarce worth to bee credited,
and yet with what confidence are they receiued and beleeued?
            I haue yet once againe betaken me to my penne, and I
haue writ ſomething. I know not what my ſelfe: he that
would vnderſtand it, let him read a Gods name, he ſhall
finde I haue dealt plainly, without welt or gard.
            I woulde not haue it thought, that I make any difference
between the Engliſh and the Iriſh, in reſpect of their
birth, for I know there be as woorthy men in Ireland, as
any are in England, though not in ſuch generality, nor ſo
many in number: neyther is that to be wondered at, for
there are many reaſons to enduce it: So I know, there are
too many of the Engliſh, that are planted in all the parts
of Ireland, that are no leſſe ſuperſtitious, no leſſe Idolatrous,
nor no leſſe contentious both to God and the K.

then the moſt wilde or ſauage Iriſh man, that neuer came
in place where to learne good or bad.
            It is not therefore either the Countrey or the Countryman,
that maketh me either to loue or hate, it is their
manners and conditions that maketh mee both to prayſe
or diſpraiſe.
            As M. Stanihurſt therefore in his deſcription of Ireland,
in the 8. Chapter, diſcourſing of the manners and diſpoſitions
of the Meere Iriſh (for ſo hee tearmeth them) before
he entereth into the matter, fore-warneth his Reader,
not to impute any barbarous cuſtome, that he ſhold
there ſpeake of to the Cittizens, Towneſ-men, or to the
Inhabitants of the Engliſh pale, for that he reputeth thē
to be men of another ſpirit, better trained vp in ſcience,
knowledge, ciuility, in curteſie, and ſuch other like complements
of humanity. Let mee intreat the like fauour,
that hauing now occaſion to ſpeake of the manners and
cuſtomes of the Iriſh, do not thinke me yet to be ſo generall,
but that I doe make a great difference, betweene
thoſe that are rude, vnciuill, vnreuerent, vncleanly, and
vntaught, and thoſe other againe that are milde, modeſt,
mercifull, kinde, curteous, and that are euery way indued
with wit, reaſon, and vnderſtanding. And I do make
the like exceptions betweene thoſe that are irreligious,
ſuperſtitious, Idolatrous, ſeditious, rebellious; that doe
retaine Ieſuites, Seminaries, and other Traiterous prieſts,
then of thoſe, that contrariwiſe are profeſſors of the goſpell,
that do embrace the holy Scriptures, and do indeuour
themſelues in the ſeruice of their God, and obedience
to their Prince.
            Now, for theſe men of little wit, and leſſe vnderſtanding,
that becauſe by the Text of the holy ſcriptures, I
haue hunted their Pope from Saint Peters Chaire, to the
ſeat of Antichriſt, would therefore conclude, that I were
an enemy to Ireland; let them vnderſtand, that I loue
Ireland, and that I thinke there is as neere a high way to
go to Heauen from out of Ireland, as there is from any

part of England, or elſe my ſelfe would neuer haue ſtayed
ſo long in the Countrey. Now, for the people, they
are in Ireland, as in all other places, ſome good, ſome
bad, yet more rude & vnciuil in Ireland, then they be in
any part of the worlde that is known: but for Poperie (I
proteſt) they are more fooliſh-ſuperſtitious in Irelande,
then they be in Rome it ſelfe. But I do therefore, rather
pitty, then malice them; there be a great many of known
Papiſts in Dublyne, that I doe loue, and wiſh well vnto:
for, may not a man loue a papiſt, as hee loueth a friend
that is diſeaſed? Admit I had a Brother that were viſited
with Morbus Galicus it ſelfe, might I not loue him, and
hate his ſickneſſe both at once? Euen ſo I loue a papiſt,
I loue the party, when I defie his Religion. But Popery
is a malady not eaſie to be cured, and I thinke theſe lines
of mine will ſooner moue Choller, then giue contentment,
or produce amendment. And yet as I meane not
in this my Deſcription of Ireland, to buſie my ſelfe about
any matters of State, ſo I will not meddle with the diſcouery
of any hidden ſecrets, that may bee brought into
any queſtion of doubt, for the truth and certainty: for, as
I haue vſed no other helpe then mine owne experience,
ſo my beſt method ſhall be, to ſpeake nothing but what
is true, and ſo to be approoued. If there be any exceptions
taken by Fooles that be ignorant, I hope the wiſe &
learned will make no worſe conſtruction then the matter
doth import: for the reſt that bee of a wrangling diſpoſition,
let them do as they haue done, fret and fume at
that which they are not able to contradict: let them ioyn
impudencie to their ignorance, and becauſe they cannot
comprehend the ſincerity of true religion, let them carpe
and cauill againſt it, and let them neuer ſpare.
         
         
            
            An Epiſtle, added in the due praiſe
and commendation of that worthy and worshipful
Gentleman, Maiſter WILLIAM COKYNE,
Sheriffe and Alderman of the moſt renowned
and Honourable Citty of
LONDON.
            
               WOrthy Gentleman, if the kingdome of heauen
were to be merited by a mans owne deſeruings
(as a number of Groſſe-headed Papiſtes
will not let to affirme) you were then
happy, for you neither needed to purchaſe
any Popes Pardons, or to buy any Maſſes of Scala Celi, to
be ſung for your ſoule when you are dead.
            You haue begun a worke of Supererogation, more merritorious
in the iudgements of all thoſe that are (indeed) godly
wiſe, then either the building of a Chappel, or a Chantery,
or the giuing of perpetuities, either of lands or liuings, what
or how ſoeuer beſtowed about any Popiſh purpoſes.
            This enterprize, the rather by your encouragement thus
vndertaken, for the planting of the Northerne parts of Ireland,
with the Engliſh, cannot be but acceptable in the preſence
of God, when it ſhall draw ſo much to the aduancement
of his glory, making way for the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt to
be truely preached in a place where there was nothing but Idolatry
and ſuperſtition formerly practiſed; giuing light and
vnderſtanding to a blind and ignorant people, to diſcern the
way of ſaluation, that do rather hope to be ſaued by the means
of Saint Patricke, then by the mercy of God.
            This action cannot be but pleaſing to the Kings moſt excellent
Maieſty, when the ſequell ſhall not redound to his honor,
but likewiſe to his profit: But how happily will it fall out for a

number of poore people in England, that are oppreſſed with
penury, by reaſon of the multitude that doth ſo ſuperabound,
whereby the ſcarſity of victuals doth the more exceede, that
may there be releeued by their owne industry: for Ireland is
able to render relecfe to forty thouſand people, but to be placed
in thoſe parts of the Countrey, that at this preſent lyeth
wast, and altogether vninhabited: and yet where the Countrey
is beſt planted and peopled throughout the whole realme,
the thirde part of the commodity is not raiſed, that the ſoile
would affoord: the reaſon is, by the ill Husbandry of the Iriſh,
that either for want of wit, or for want of knowledge,
doth not mannage their Husbandry according to skill.
            And although it be out of my element to ſpeake of husbandry,
that all the dayes of my life, could neuer play the good
Husband for my ſelfe: yet I am not ſo dull of conceite, but
I can ſee a number of defects, and that in the moſt principall
points of their Husbandry; as in the manner of the Tilling of
their ground, and ſowing of their Corne, they haue no other
meanes whereby to draw the Plough, but euery Horſe by his
owne taile, ſo that when the poore beaſt by his painfull labor,
hath worne the haire of his taile ſo ſhort, as it can bee no longer
tied, the Plough muſt ſtand.
            I might ſpeake of many other defects, and one amongst the
reſt, of the vnſeaſonable time that they vſe in the making of
their Hay: but to ſpeak truely of their ill Husbandry in that
point: in the greateſt part throughout all Ireland, they vſe to
make no Hay at all, although they haue as good grounde
as any other Countrey doth affoord: ſo that their poore Cattle
in the Winter ſeaſon, haue no other fother, then what they
can picke vp, and gather from the ground: but in thoſe parts
neere about Dublyne, where they vſe to make Hay, they neuer
meddle with the cutting of their graſſe, till they bee likewiſe
ready to cut their Corn, ſo that they wil haue their Hay
harueſt, and their Corne harueſt, to come both together,
which cōmonly neuer falleth out, till September be wel ſpent:
at which time of the yeare, there ſometimes falleth out great
ſtore of raine, ſo that from the beſt Meddow Lands, which is

euermore vpon their lower grounds, their hay is many times
either vtterly marred, or altogither ſwept away with a floud.
            I might heere conclude and boldly affirme, that if thoſe
parts of Ireland that now lieth waſt, were inhabited by an
induſtrious people, and that the reſt of the Countrey were
manured aud husbanded according to skill, Ireland woulde
ſuſtaine more people by two parts, then are now inhabiting in
it. But leauing to ſpeake of Ireland in generall, I will come
to that part of the North now intended to be planted, namely
of the Derry and the Colrane. In the time of Sir Iohn Parrates
Gouernment, I my ſelfe lay at Colrane, with a hundered
ſouldiers vnder my leading, I may therefore ſpeake ſomething
of mine owne experience.
            For the Land that is adioyning about Colrane, it is verie
firtill, and the whol Countrey that ſtretcheth it ſelfe between
the Riuer of Bande, and the riuer of Lough-foile, that was
ſometimes O-Cannes Countrey, is not onely a moſt pleaſant
place, but is likewiſe verie commodious both for Corne and
Paſture.
            On the South ſide of the riuer of Bande, faſt by Colrane,
there lieth a goodly country, called the Rowt, no better Corn
land in any part of Ireland, and it did at that time ſo abound
with Conies, ſo exceeding fat, and therewithall ſo ſweete, as
I neuer ſaw the like, neither in Ireland, nor in any other
place where I haue trauailed.
            What ſhould I ſpeake of the Salmon fiſhing of the Bande,
which is ſo famouſly known and ſpoken of: and there is moreouer
for three moneths of the yeare, betweene September &
December, ſuch a fiſhing for Eeles, as I thinke is not the
like againe in Europe, eſpecially when there ſhall come men
that hath skill to take them, which the Iriſh hath not to any
purpoſe, yet they take great ſtore, by reaſon of the great aboundance
of ſuch notable Eeles, both for greatneſſe and for
goodneſſe, as the like are no other where elſe to be found.
            I might ſpeake heere of the fiſhing for freſh water Trowts,
whereof there are great plentie in euery Riuer, in euerie
Brooke, in euerie Lough, and that throughout the whole

Realme of Ireland, but ſpeciallie in thoſe Northerne partes
about Colrane and the Derry.
            But let me ſpeake now of the fiſhing for Sea-fiſh, and firſt
for Cod and Lyng: what ſhippes are yearely ſet out from all
the parts of England: ſome to New-found-land, ſome to Iſland,
ſome to Shotland, ſome to Ward-houſe, ſome to one
place and ſome to another: and I thinke of my conſcience,
that at the verie entrance aſwell of the riuer of the Bande,
as of the Riuer of Lough-foyle, which are not aboue ſome
eight or ten miles distant, there will fall out as good fiſhing
both for Cod and Lyng, as in any other place that I haue
formerly ſpoken of.
            Now for Herring-fiſhing, who can name a better place
then Loughfoyle it ſelfe, and there is one other Loughe
fast by, called by the name of Lough-Sully, where hee that
were but ſtanding vpon the ſhore at the time of Herring-fiſhing,
would thinke that the very Sea it ſelfe did ſwell of herrings,
there are ſuch abundance all along that Coast.
            Without doubt, there will be found good fiſhing for Ray,
for Haddock, for Whiting, for Gurnard, and for all manner
of other fiſhe, which neuer faileth all along the Coaſt of
Ireland, if it be ſought for.
            As I haue now ſpoken of fiſhing, ſo I might yet again ſpeak
of fowling: but let it ſuffice, that aſwell for fiſh, for foule, for
Conics, for Cattle, and whatſoeuer is otherwiſe needefull
for mans ſuſtenance, the whole Realme of Ireland is as rich
and fertile as any other Countrey in Christendom: yea and
for all manner of fruites: as Apples, peares, & plums, in
manie parts of the Countrey, where men haue bin induſtrious
to plant, they haue as good fruit in Ireland as anie is in England.
            
            To conclude, there wanteth nothing in Ireland but the
true knowledge of God, & obedience to the Prince, the which
by Gods permiſſion, will ſo much the rather bee brought to a
good paſſe, when that part of the Countrey that in former ages
hath bin most rude and inclined to inciuilitie, that hath

euermore bin the receptacle and refuge for the worst diſpoſed
people, ſhall by this Plantation, be made a patterne of good
example, aſwell for Godly as Ciuill Gouernment, to all the
Realme beſides: but there is a kind of temeritie that doth no
good, yet is conueyed by thoſe men, that are vtterly ignorant
in the affaires of Ireland.
            
            Since my comming from Dublyn, within ſixe daies after
my arriuall here at London, I thinke I was asked ſixteene
ſeuerall times, what I thoght of this Plantation in the north
of Ireland, and whether it were poſſible that thoſe labouerers
and workmen that are now ſent ouer for the building, coulde
ſaue their throats from cutting, or their heades from beeing
taken from their ſhoulders, before the worke were finiſhed: or
what aſſurance there could bee, but that when this erection
were fullie perfected, and that men did thinke themſelus to be
most quietly ſetled: why might not the Iriſh do then as they
had done before, in one night to lay wast and conſume al with
fire and ſword? So that I ſee there be a number that are afraid,
but it is but of their owne ſhadowes.
            But let timerous men doubt as they liſt, and let ignoraunt
men write what they pleaſe: Ireland (God be praiſed)
is in no ſuch daungerous manner of plight. That doubt is
diſſolued, and the daunger is past: for menne may worke as
quietlie in thoſe places wherevnto they are now ſent, as they
might doe if they were in Cheapeſide. And in that part of
the Countrey, through the which a thouſand menne in times
paſt would haue beene intercepted, I dare now vndertake to
paſſe my ſelfe and my Boy.
            But there be ſome will ſaie: And why may it not come to
paſſe, that there may be as great daunger as euer there was,
and that the Iriſh may be as Potent to execute miſchiefe, as
euer they haue bin before?
            I ſay, They cannot. And whoſoeuer ſhall pleaſe to read
the ſequele heerein contained, I hope ſhall be fullie ſatisfied
in that point, for onelie to that ende and purpoſe, I haue endeuoured
theſe Lines. And all the matter that I ayme at

throughout this whole Booke, is but to make it manifeſt, that
the Iriſh are of no ſuch reſistance at this houre againſt his
Maiestie, as they haue beene in times past against our late
Queene.
            I am not ignorant, that although Ireland be reduced to a
great conformitie, and that his Maieſtie hath a number of
loyall and faithfull Subiects in euery part of that Kingdome,
yet I know againe there be ſome, that are not to be trusted,
and therefore I ſpeake not of their mindes, but I ſpeake of
their manners: And I ſay, that the Rebel of Ireland ſhall
neuer more ſtand out hereafter, as they haue done in times
paſt.
            If any man pleaſe to read, let him iudge of my reaſons,
in the meane time, there is but one thing (worthy Gentleman)
that is to be feared, and may very eaſily be holpen, if
you ſuffer no Papiſt (either Engliſh or Iriſh) to plant himſelf
among you. Looke well but to that, and there is no doubt but
the Almightie God himſelfe will bleſſe your enterpriſe, and
England and Ireland both, ſhall hereafter call you happy, &
I ſhall rest ſtill to wiſh you well.
            
               Your wel-willing Friend
Barnabe Rych.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Deſcription of IRELAND, together
with the Manners, Cuſtoms,
and diſpoſitions of the people.
            
               CAP. 1.
               Of the little credite that is to be giuen to their teſtimonies,
that haue hitherto written of Ireland.
               
                  I Thinke Ireland to be in nothing more
vnfortunate, then in this; that the Hiſtorie
of the Countrey was neuer vndertakē
to be truly ſet forth but by Papiſts.
Giraldus Cambrenſis, whoſe teſtimony
of that Countrey is moſt auncient, & vpon
whoſe authority all that haue hitherto written of
Ireland doe eſpecially relie, was a Papiſt, and in his
deſcription of Ireland hath fabled ſo many follies,
as Stanihurſt himſelfe, though he maketh mention
of them in his Hiſtorie which hee hath written of
Ireland, yet he durſt not auouch them to bee true,
but leaueth them to the diſcretion of the Reader,
to iudge of them as he findeth himſelfe diſpoſed.
               But to put the matter quite out of doubt, Cambrenſis
himſelfe, in his Epiſtle Dedicatorie to King

                  Iohn, giueth aduice to the K. that the Peter-pence
might be paide throughout the whole Realme of
Ireland, that his Father had formerly promiſed to
the Pope; in performing whereof, he might thereby
deliuer his Fathers ſoule, (I thinke hee meant from
Purgatory) for he was not ſo mad to beleeue that
a ſoule could be deliuered from Hell.
               A ſecond Writer, that hath made colections of
the Hiſtory of Ireland, as Stanihurſt himſelfe reporteth
in his Epiſtle to ſir Henry Sidney, was his faſt
& ſure friend Edmond Campion. I need not diſcribe
the man any further, for his ende made tryall of his
honeſty: but like will to like (quoth the Deuill to
the Colliar) and birdes of a winge (they ſay) will
flie together: but for maiſter Stanihurſt himſelfe, I
knew him many years ſithence at Antwarpe, where
hee profeſſed Alcumy, and vndertooke the practiſe
of the Philoſophers ſtone, and when hee had multiplied
lyes ſo long, that euery body grew weary
of him, hee departed from thence into Spaine, and
there (as it was ſaid) he turned Phyſition, and whether
he bee aliue or dead I knowe not: but theſe
three, Giraldus Cambrenſis, Edmond Campion, and
Richard Stanihurſt, are the onely Authors that haue
patched & peeced together the Hiſtory of Ireland:
who beſides, that they haue ſtuffed their volumes
with manifeſt vntruthes, ſo they haue enterlarded
their lines with ſuch ridiculous matter, as they
themſelues are aſhamed to auouch them for truth.
For the reſt that hath been attempted by Holinſhed
and Hooker, they haue referred the whole matter
of what they haue writ, concerning Ireland, to

thoſe mens authorities: Holinſhed, to what had bin
collected by Campion and Stanihurſt; and Hooker, to
no more then he had tranſlated out of Giraldus Cā
                     brenſis.
               
               Theſe lying authorities, do euermore engender
ignorance, & there is nothing that hath more led
the Iriſh into error, then lying Hiſtoriographers,
their Croniclers, their Bardes, their Rythmers, and
ſuch other their lying Poets; in whoſe writinges
they do more relie, then they do in the holy Scriptures,
and this rablement do at this day endeuour
themſelues to nothing elſe, but to feed & delight
them with matter moſt diſhoneſt and ſhamefull:
for in their ſpeaking and writing, they do nothing
but flatter them in their vngracious humours, ſtill
opening the way with lying praiſes of their progenitors,
what Rebellions they haue ſtirred vp, and
how many miſchiefes they haue performed; this
is ſuch a whetſtone to their ambitious deſires, and
being thus made drunke with theſe lying reportes
of their Aunceſtors worthineſſe, that they thinke
themſelues to be reproched for euer, if they ſhould
not be as apt & ready to run into al manner of miſchiefe,
as their fathers were afore them. From
hence it commeth, that being thus drowned in ignorance,
they thinke it to be the true high-way to
happineſſe, for euery man to do what hee liſt, and
do therefore ſeeke to free themſelues from Lawe,
Iuſtice, and reaſon, becauſe they would not be brideled,
or compelled to obey, either to duty or honeſtie.
               For Ireland otherwiſe, the leſſe it hath been famed

for any memorable matter, the more it hath
bin repleniſhed with horrible murthers, and actions
of bloud; there are no hiſtories of good things
worthy to be followed, but Tragedies of crueltie,
fit to be abhorred.
               One of the greateſt felicities wherewith Ireland
hath bin bleſſed, is the gouernment of godly princes,
which haue endeuoured themſelues, to their
great expences, to reforme that countrey, and to
reduce the people to ciuility, and to a reaſonable
knowledge of humane ſociety.
            
            
               CAP. 2.
               Of the temperature of the Ayre, and the fertilitie of
the ſoyle vniuerſallie through Ireland.
               
                  MY meaning is not to make any Coſmographicall
deſcription of Ireland, I
haue nothing to do with Longitude,
with Latitude, nor with Altitude: I
will not ſpeake of the Countrey how
it ſtretcheth it ſelfe towards the Eaſt, or towardes
the weſt, nor how it is deuided into Prouinces, into
Shires, nor into Countries; nor how the countrey
is repleniſhed with Citties, with Towns, and
Villages: but to ſpeake ſomething of the temperature
of the Climate, vnder the which it is adiacent.
I ſay, we do not find Ireland to be cold in the
winter, nor ſo hot in the Summer, as it is in England.
The froſts in Ireland, are neither ſo harde nor
of that continuance as they be in England, and yet

the Countrey is verie cold, with a kind of rawiſh
moiſture, but not ſo nipping, nor dureable, as the
dry cold that commonly coms with froſts.
               
                  Ireland is wonderfully inclined to fogs & miſts,
and giuen to very much raine, aſwell in ſummer as
in winter, and the Countrey is full of ſprings, and
great currants of water that fals from the mountaines,
which with a ſhewer of raine will riſe verie
ſuddenly, and will fall againe as quickly when the
weather cleareth vp.
               
                  Ireland is full of great Riuers, and mightie huge
Loughes, ſuch as we call Meeres in England, wherein
are many large and ſpacious Iſlands, where the
Iriſh haue many times fortified themſelues againſt
the Prince, but are ſtill ferreted and drawne out by
the eares, though other whiles with great difficulty.
To ſpeake of Ireland generally, it is repleniſhed
with Riuers, with Woods, with Bogs, and with
as good lande, both for corne and paſture, as any
Europe affoords; but not ſo well manvred, nor ſo
well husbanded: for the Farmers of Ireland, are far
to ſeeke in many pointes of good husbandry, and
the women (for the moſt part) haue as little skill
of huſwifery.
               From hence I might affirme, and confidentlie
conclude, that throughout the whole Realme of
Ireland, what betweene the ill husbandrie of that
which is inhabited, and ſo much of the Countrey
againe lying waſt for want of Inhabitants, there is
not the third part of that profit raiſed, that Irelaud
would affoord.
               For fiſh, for foule, for Conies, they are very plentiful

throughout all the partes of Ireland, and for
red-Deare, they haue them vpon the mountayns,
but not in ſuch plenty as I my ſelfe haue knowne.
Fallow deare are not ſo common, vnleſſe it bee in
ſome few Parkes.
               To be ſhort, there is nothing wanting in Ireland
that is behouefull for the ſuſtinance of man, yet I
dare not ſtretch ſo far as M. Stanihurſt, that would
haue Ireland the Treaſure-houſe of the world, as he
hath publiſhed in his Booke, I will not ſay how
vainely or how vnwiſely. Let other men iudge of
that, but I thinke he meaneth of hidden Treaſures
that are not yet diſcouered. It is truth, there are
ſome ſmall ſtore of Pearle now and then found,
chopt vppon by chance, but not in ſuch abundance
that they bee worthy to be ſo ſpoken of, nor thoſe
few that be found, are neither ſo oryent, ſo praiſe
worthy, nor of ſuch price and eſtimation, as thoſe
that are brought from other places, both from the
Eaſt and Weſt Indies, and yet I once ſaw an Iriſh
Pearle that was ſould for xv. poūd. I neuer heard of
any Mines either of Gold, or Siluer, or Copper, or
Tinne, or Leade, or of any other Minerall matter
that was found in the Countrey, that would quit
the charge in refining; but to ſpeake truly, the Iriſh
are ſo malicious that they wil not ſuffer men of art
and ſkill to make ſearch for them: One of the beſt
Mines that is knowne to bee in Ireland, is that of
Iron, which is very rich (indeed) if it would hold
out, or that there were any ſtore of the Oore to be
found, as like enough it would do if the Iriſh
would giue men leaue to ſeeke for it. It is many

yeares agoe ſince I heard talke of an Allum Mine
that was found, and great hope was had of profit
and commodity, but how it was left, I know not, I
thinke by the vnwillingneſſe of the bad diſpoſed
people of that Countrey, that will neuer (by their
good willes) ſuffer men to worke with their heades
vppon their ſhoulders. Ireland (without doubt) is a
fruitfull Countrey, and it yeildeth in moſt abundant
maner, all conuenient neceſſaries that is behouefull
for humaine ſuſtinance, but to hope after
Mines and Minerals in Ireland, I thinke there is no
ſuch likeli-hood, for thoſe are euermore to bee
ſought after, in thoſe Countries that are warme,
or at the leaſt very dry, but not in thoſe places that
are ſo ouercharged with raine, and ſo much giuen
to moiſture as Ireland.
               
            
            
               CAP. 3.
               Of the nature and diſpoſition of the Iriſh, and howe
they are inclined.
               
                  
                     I Thinke it ſhall not bee impertinent
to this my diſcription of Ireland, to
diſcipher the diſpoſition of the Iriſh,
of what temper they be framed, and
wherevnto they bee naturally inclined.
But before I will ſet down mine owne vnderſtanding,
what I my ſelfe haue gathered by experience,
I will deliuer what M. Stanihurſt hath writtē
on the very ſame matter, whoſe words be theſe:
The inclination of the Iriſh people is, to bee Religious,
franke, amorous, yrefull, ſufferable of infinite paines,

very glorious, many Sorcerers, excellent Horſemen, delighted
with warres, great Almeſ-giuers, paſsing in
Hoſpitality, The lewder ſort (both Clarkes and lay-men)
ſenſual and ouer-looſe in liuing, the ſame (being vertuouſly
bred vp or reformed) are ſuch mirrours of holineſſe
and auſteritie, that other Nations reteyne but a ſhaddowe
of Deuotion, in compariſon of them. As for abſtinence
and Faſting, it is to them a familiar kinde of chaſticement.
They follow the dead Corps to the graue with
howling and barbarous out-cries, pittiful in apparance,
whereof grew (as I ſuppoſe) the prouerbe; To weep
Iriſh.
               
               Thus farre haue I cited, what Maiſter Stanihurſt
himſelfe hath publiſhed of the diſpoſition of the
Iriſh whereunto they are inclined. And now (not
to impugne any thing that Maiſter Stanihurſt hath
written) I will yet once againe take a ſuperficiall
ſuruey of what hee hath ſet downe, and will giue
him mine opinion, what I doe thinke of his Deſcription.
               And firſt, he ſaith [They are Religious] I ſay, It is
truth, but I would to God it were according vnto
knowledge. [They are franke,] Neither will I impugne
that, for the Iriſh are beneuolent enough
among their friendes and acquaintance. [they are
Amorous] I thinke he meaneth to women: but if
he ſpeaketh in generall, I ſay and affirme, that the
greateſt number of the Iriſh, are vtterly ignoraunt
what honeſt Loue doth meane. [They are yrefull]
the more is the pitty, for it hath coſt the price of
much Chriſtian bloud. [They are ſufferable of infinite
paines] but yet at any hand they wil not, or can

cannot indure to labonr, for there is not a greater
plague-ſore to Ireland, then the ydleneſſe thereof.
[They are very glorious] very true; and they are no
leſſe proud, for the meaneſt Shackerell, that hath
ſcarce a mantle to wrap himſelfe in, hath as proud
a mind as Oneal himſelfe, when he ſits vpon a green
banke vnder a buſh in his greateſt maieſty. [There
are many Sorcerers] and the Countrey doth no leſſe
abound with Witches; and no maruel that it ſhould
ſo do, for the Deuill hath euer bin moſt frequent
and conuerſant amongſt Infidels, Turks, Papiſtes,
& ſuch other, that doe neither know nor loue god,
then he can be amongſt thoſe that are the true profeſſors
of the Goſpell of Chriſt. [They are excellent
horſemen] yet good for nothing but for the ſeruice
in Ireland. [They are delighted with warres] they are
delighted with Rebellions, Commotions, and Inſurrections;
but they cannot be called wars, that
are ſtirred vp by ſubiects againſt their Prince. [They
are great Almeſ-giuers,] I neuer heard any great
commendation of their Almeſ-giuing, in any ſuch
generallitie, vnleſſe it were to a Fryer, a Prieſt, or
to ſome other of that annointed Order. [Paſsing in
Hoſpitalitie,] I would be loath to barre the Iriſh of
that right; for to giue them their due, they are as
bountifull of their meate and drinke, as any other
Nation in Europe whatſoeuer. [The lewder ſort both
Clarks and Lai-men, ſenſual & ouer-looſe in liuing,] By
that ſame word [Clarkes] ſo ioyned with the Laity,
I thinke he meanes the Iriſh Clergy, which he ſaith
are of laſciuious and loſe liuing: hee might haue
added farther, that the greateſt number of them

are trayterous Prieſts, proteſted Enemies to their
Prince, and ſo vowed to their Pope; [The ſame being
vertuouſly bred vp or reformed, are ſuch Myrrors of
holineſſe and auſterity, that other Nations retaine but a
ſhaddow of Deuotion, in compariſon of them.]
               A proud praiſe, that the holy ones of Ireland
ſhould ſo farre out-ſtretch all the holineſſe in the
world beſides: but I will not contradict M. Stanihurſt;
for without doubt he ſpake but as he thoght:
And heere wee may ſee, that theſe lying ſuppoſitions
thus publiſhed by our Iriſh Writers, haue led
the people into ſuch a blind arrogancy, that they
will admit nothing for truth, but what they receiue
from their owne Authors, or gather out of
their owne bookes; And now it followeth.
               [As for Abſtinency and Faſting, it is to them a familiar
kind of Chaſtiſement.] I thinke this Abſtinency
and Faſting, is the holineſſe which Maiſter Stanihurſt
hath formerly ſpoken of, for this is a viſible
holineſſe (indeede) which euery man may ſee and
wonder at: for let mee ſpeake of the moſt abiect
Creatures, that I think either Ireland or the world
affoordeth, and thoſe are the Kearne of Ireland, amongſt
whom, there is not ſo notable a wretch to
bee found, that will not obſerue his faſting daies,
three daies in a weeke at the leaſt, and thoſe are
Wedneſdaies, Fridaies, and Saturdaies: then they
haue other Vigiles, and ſuch Saint Eeues, as I neuer
heard of but in Ireland, nor I thinke be knowne in
any other place, which they obſerue and keepe
with ſuch religious zeale and deuotion, that I am
ſure Cardinall Bellarmine himſelfe cannot be more

ceremonious then theſe bee, nor ſhew himſelfe to
be more holy, nor more honeſt; yet that very day,
that for conſcience ſake, they will abſtaine from
eating of Fleſh, Butter, Cheeſe, Milk, Egges, and
ſuch like, that very houre they will not forbeare
to ſpoile, to robbe, to rauiſh, to murther, nor to
commit any other villany, what or howſoeuer.
               And let mee ſay ſomething for our Females in
Ireland, and leauing to ſpeake of woorthy Matrones,
and of thoſe Women that are honeſt,
good, and vertuous, (as Ireland Good bee thanked
is not deſtitute of many ſuch) I will ſpeake onelie
of the riffe-raffe, the moſt filthy Queanes, that are
knowne to bee in the Countrey, (I meane thoſe
Huſwiues that doe vſe ſelling of drinke in Dubline,
or elſe where) commonly called Tauerne-keepers,
but indeed filthy and beaſtly Alehouſekeepers: I will
not meddle with their honeſties, I will leaue that
to be teſtified by Maiſter Maior of the Bull-ring, but
otherwiſe for the greateſt number of them (for
God defend that I ſhould condemne them al) they
are in the manner of their life and liuing to bee deteſted
and abhorred: yet on their preſcribed faſting
daies, if there bee any ſanctity in abſtaining
from fleſh, from Butter, from Cheeſe, from Milk,
from Egges, they are as holy (I dare vndertake) as
the Pope himſelfe, and why not as honeſt? This is
the holineſſe which (I thinke) M. Stanihurſt hath
ſo highly commended to be in the Iriſh; And this is
to be lamented, that the poor people of that countrey
ſhould bee ſo ſeduced and made beleeue, that
their faſting, their praying in Latine, their running

wels and to other Idolatrous places, is a full ſatiſfaction
for any ſins that they can commit, how deteſtable
or abhominable ſoeuer; for thus they are
taught, and ſo they beleeue.
               But is not this a madde manner of faſting, that
marcheth in equall manner with Theft, with murder,
with Treaſon, with drunkennes, with whoredome,
and with all manner of Sodometry? but the
cauſe of all thinges muſt needes tell whoſe childe
the effect is.
               
                  Now laſtly, M. Stanihurſt ſeemeth to find fault
at the manner of the Iriſh burials, and ſayth; They
follow the dead corps to the graue, with houling and barbarous
outcries pittifull in apparance, whereof grew (as
I ſuppoſe) the Prouerbe To weepe Iriſh.
               
               I think it would be admired in any part of Chriſtendom,
to ſee the manners of the Iriſh, how they
vſe to carry their dead to their graues, in the remote
partes of the Countrey; to a ſtraunger that
had neuer ſeen the ſight before, at the firſt encounter,
would beleeue that a company of Hags or helliſh
Fiendes, were carrying a dead body to ſome infernall
Manſion; for what with the vnſeemlineſſe
of their ſhewes, and the il-faring noyſe they doe
make, with their howling and crying, an ignorant
man would ſooner beleeue they were Deuils of
Hell, then Chriſtian people. But as M. Stanihurſt
ſaith; [it is pittifull in appearance:] pittifull indeed,
that a people ſo many yeares profeſſing Chriſtianitie,
ſhould yet ſhew themſelues more Heathen
like, then thoſe, that neuer heard of God.
               M. Stanihurſt farther ſuppoſeth, that the prouerbe,

                  to weepe Iriſh, had heere the firſt beginning:
It may be ſo, and it is troth, that in Citties
and Townes where any deceaſeth that is of worth
or worthineſſe, they wil hyre a number of women
to bring the corps to the place of buriall, that for
ſome ſmall recompence giuen them, will furniſh
the cry, with greater ſhriking and howling, then
thoſe that are grieued indeede, and haue greateſt
cauſe to cry; and herevpon ariſeth this Prouerbe,
to weepe Iriſh, that is to ſay; To weepe at pleaſure,
without cauſe, or griefe.
               Heere is thus much more to be conſidered, that
notwithſtanding this vnchriſtian-like demeanour
of the Iriſh, that in their burials do ſhew themſelus
like Infidels, repugnant to all Chriſtianity, there
is neither Ieſuite, Seminary, nor Popiſh prieſt, (that
do ſo ſwarme in the Countrey,) that wil once rebuke
or find fault at the matter. But they are not
to be blamed, for the Popes doctrine hath no ſuch
operation, to draw men from darkneſſe to light;
but it ſerueth rather to hood-winke them, or put
out both the eies, and ſo make them ſtarke blind.
            
            
               CAP. 4.
               From whence it proceedeth, that the Iriſh are ſo repugnant
to the Engliſh.
               I Remember, there was ſometime one Alan Cope,
who hath written of many matters, who, if a
man might iudge of, (but as hee hath teſtified of
himſelfe) was a moſt arrogant & ſuperſtitious Papiſt,
yet writing againſt that fooliſh conceit houlden

by the Iriſh, that Ireland was purged from venemous
wormes, by the only praiers of S. Patrick,
was therefore complained on, and accuſed by M.
Stanihurſt, that Cope had wronged and ſlaundered
the whole Iriſh Nation.
               I hope I ſhal not be ſo dealt withal, that bicauſe
I haue detected and reproued the vnciuill demeanors
of thoſe that bee blame-worthy, I ſhall not
therefore be exclaimed on, to be an open deprauer
of all that whole Nation.
               I proteſt, I do know neuer a man in Ireland that
I do hate, or that I do wiſh any harme vnto, and
therfore if I hapen to glance at the abuſes of thoſe
that be ill, let not thoſe that be good think themſelues
thereby to be detected, or ſo much as touched.
But as the throng of fooles, doth euermore
exceed the number of the wiſe, ſo the multitude of
the rude and ignorant among the Iriſh, do far paſſe
the number either of the religious, or ciuilly reformed.
I do not hold, that euery Citizen or townſman
that liueth in common ſociety, is therefore to
be accounted ciuill; neither doth it follow, that euery
man inhabiting the Countrey, is therefore to
be called vnciuill; for ciuillity and vnciuilitie, hath
no relation to the Citty or Countrey, but it hath
conſideration to the manners and conditions of
men, that are therfore to be accounted ciuil or vnciuill,
according to the diſpoſitions of the mind.
               All the Countries that are knowne (eſpeciallie
in Europe) haue their ſeuerall inclinations aſwel to
vertue as vice: We ſay, the Frenchmen are politike
and deceitfull, and not ſo valiant in conquering, as

prouident in keeping. The Spaniard is ſaide to bee
proud and tyrannous. The Italian full of curteſie,
and full of craft. The Dutch are more wiſe when
they be in their Cups, then when they bee in their
Cloſſets; the Engliſh are reputed to bee more wiſe
to look after, then they are to foreſee: and the Engliſhman
(indeede) doth then thinke himſelfe to bee
beſt in faſhion, when he is moſt out of faſhion. To
ſpeake now of the Iriſh more at large, for to them
my talke doth eſpecially belong, I ſay they are behoulding
to Nature, that hath framed them comly
perſonages, of good proportion, very well limbed,
& to ſpeak truly, the Engliſh, Scottiſh, and Iriſh, are
eaſie to bee diſcerned from all the Nations of the
world: beſides, aſwel by the excellency of their cō
                  plexions,
as by al the reſt of their lineaments, from
the crown of the head, to the ſole of the foot. And
although that in the remote places, the vnciuill
ſort ſo disfigure themſelues with their Glybs, their
Trowes, and their miſhapen attire, yet they appear
to euery mans eye to be men of good proportion,
of comely ſtature, and of able body. Now to ſpeak
of their diſpoſitions, whereunto they are adicted
and inclined. I ſay, beſides they are rude, vncleanlie,
and vnciuill, ſo they are very cruell, bloudie
minded, apt and ready to commit any kind of miſchiefe.
I do not impute this ſo much to their naturall
inclination, as I do to their education, that are
trained vp in Treaſon, in Rebellion, in Theft, in
Robery, in Superſtition, in Idolatry, and nuzeled
from their Cradles in the very puddle of Popery.
               This is the fruits of the Popes doctrine, that doth

preach cruelty, that doth admit of murthers and
bloudy executions; by poiſoning, ſtabbing, or by
any other maner of practiſe hoſoeuer: the pope
teacheth ſubiects to reſiſt, to mutinie, and to rebel
againſt their Princes.
               From hence it proceedeth, that the Iriſh haue
euer beene, and ſtill are, deſirous to ſhake off the
Engliſh gouernment.
               From hence it doth proceed, that the Iriſh can
not endure to loue the Engliſh, bicauſe they differ
ſo much in Religion.
               From hence it proceedeth, that as they cannot
indure to loue the Engliſh, ſo they cannot be induced
to loue any thing that doth come from the Engliſh;
according to the prouerbe, Loue me, and loue
my Dog: ſo contrariwiſe, he that hateth me, hateth
in like manner all that commeth from me.
               From hence it is, that the Iriſh had rather ſtil retaine
themſelues in their ſluttiſhneſſe, in their vncleanlineſſe,
in their rudeneſſe, and in their inhumane
loathſomnes, then they would take any example
from the Engliſh, either of ciuility, humanity,
or any manner of Decencie.
               
               We ſee nowe the author of this enmity, is hee
that neuer did other good, where hee had to doe
with mens conſciences.
               There is yet a difference to bee made, of thoſe
faults that do grow from our weakneſſe, and thoſe
that do proceed from our mallice: and the Iriſh in
this are the more to be pittied, that are no better
taught; whoſe educations, as they are rude, ſo they
are blinded with ignorance, and I thinke for deuotions

ſake, they haue made a vow to be ignorant.
               But although the vulgar ſort, through their dul
wits, and their brutiſh education, cannot conceiue
what is profitable for themſelues, and good for
their Countrey, yet there bee ſome other of that
Countrey birth, whoſe thoughts and mindes being
inriched with knowledge and vnderſtanding,
that haue done good in the Country, and whoſe
example hereafter, may giue light to many others:
For I thinke, that if theſe people did once vnderſtand
the pretiouſneſſe of vertue, they would farre
exceed vs; notwithſtanding, our long experience
in the Soueraignty of vertue.
            
            
               CAP. 5.
               That the Iriſh by nature are inclined vnto cruelty.
               IT cannot be denayed, but that the Iriſh are very
cruell in their executions, and no leſſe bloudy in
their diſpoſitions, the examples are to many,
and to manifeſt, to be by any means contradicted.
               But ſome will ſay, their cruelty doth not ſo much
proceede from that naturall inclination that is in
themſelues, as from the mallice and hatred they
bear to the Engliſh gouernment, which they haue
alwaies ſpurned at, and are ſtill deſirous to ſhake
off; but their rebellious diſpoſitions are thereby
made the more apparant, and they ought therefore
to be ſo much the more reſtrained: for there
is not a more daungerous thing, to relye either in
the promiſes, or in any other aſſurances of thoſe
men, that are by nature ambitious, diſloyall, cruell,

and accuſtomed to ſhed bloud.
               But let vs make a ſhort ſuruay, what they are
in behauiour amongſt themſelues, and wee ſhall
find that it is the Engliſh gouernment that ſtaieth
them from their bloudy executions, the one of
them againſt the other, and that our late gratious
Queene was in nothing more troubled, then in
keeping them from perſecuting and proſecuting
the one the other, with fire, with ſword, and with
ſuch raging fury, that the moſt barbarous ſauages
that neuer knew ciuility, are not more tragicall in
their executions, then are the Iriſh.
               
               The time hath beene, when they liued like Barbarians,
in Woods, in Bogges, and in deſolate places,
without politique Law, or ciuil gouernment,
neither imbracing Religion, Lawe, nor mutuall
loue.
               That which is hatefull to all the world beſides,
is onely beloued and imbraced by the Iriſh, I mean
ciuill Warres and domeſticall diſcentions.
               The wilde vnciuill Seythians, doe forbeare to be
cruell the one againſt the other. The Canibals, deuourers
of mens fleſh, doe leaue to bee fierce amongſt
themſelues, but the Iriſh, without all reſpect,
are euer moſt cruel to their very next neighbours.
               In ciuill broiles, euery baſe Raſcall is an equall
companion with the greateſt commaunder, and
their libertie to do wrong, is no leſſe the one then
the other; for they knowe they are the more willingly
drawne to vndertake commotions and rebellions,
for the aid & aſſiſtance of theſe licentious

routes that follow them: they therefore forbeare
no miſchiefe, abſtaining no more from that which
is holy, then from that which is prophane: neither
marriage nor honour ſo protect any, that Rape be
not mingled with murder, nor murder with Rape.
               All things are full of miſery in ciuill Wars, and
as in forraigne encounters, there is nothing more
honourable then Conqueſt, ſo in ciuill and domeſticall
conflictes, there is nothing more miſerable
then victory: for the rebellious that are led by cruelty
firſt to vndertake, can vſe no moderation
where they become victors.
               Theſe ciuill furies, are by ſeuerall means ingendered:
many take armes oppreſſed by the tyranny
of Princes, but theſe through ſufferance and ouermuch
liberty: ſome others, hauing beene offered
wronges and iniuries, haue therefore betaken thē
                  ſelues
to actions of rebellion; but theſe fearing to
be puniſhed for wronges by themſelues committed,
doe therefore ſeeke to preuent it by playing
the Rebels: Some to free themſelues from thraldome,
(as they pretended) haue oppoſed themſelues
againſt their Princes (and as they ſay) to purchaſe
liberty: but what Subiectes in Europe, doe
liue ſo lawleſſe as the Iriſh, when the Lords and
great men throughout the whole Countrey, doe
rather ſeeme to bee abſolute, then to liue within
the compaſſe of ſubiection? neither haue I known
any amongſt the Iriſh, that haue ſtood vpon thoſe
tearms of liberty, but whom they wuld ſet free frō
the Prince, they would inthrall to the Pope. I neuer
yet heard of any man that was an enemy to the

common quiet of a Realme, but he was likewiſe an
enemy to the commonwealth.
               
                  Alexander was wont to ſay, that the clemencie
of Kings & Princes, conſiſted not ſo much in them
ſelues that were to command, as in the diſpoſition
of their ſubiects, that were to obey. And one, attributing
the flouriſhing eſtate of Sparta, to the
gouernment of the Kings that knew howe to rule
well; nay, anſwered another, It is to bee imputed
to the vertue of the Citizens, that knowe how to
obey well.
               Alaſſe poore Ireland, what ſafety may bee hoped
for thee, that art ſtill ſo addicted to diſobedience,
to contempt, to ſedition, to Rebellion, that
thy wounds are no ſooner cloſed vp, but thou thy
ſelfe goeſt about to open them againe? Your granfathers
haue felt the ſmart of diſobedience, your fathers
haue complained of it, your ſelues haue ſeen
the calamities of contempt, and God grant that
your childrens children, haue not iuſt cauſe to
curſe the miſeries that are raiſed vp by Rebellion.
               The extreameſt point whereunto the crueltie
of man may ſtretch, is for one man to kill another,
yea Diuinity it ſelfe, willeth vs to ſhew fauor, and
not to be cruelly inclined, no not to bruit beaſtes,
which the Almighty hath created and placed amongſt
his other creatures, aſwell for his glory as
for his ſeruice, and hath himſelfe had mercifull reſpect
vnto them; as when he ſaide to Ionas, Should
not I ſpare Niniuy that great Citty, wherein are ſixe
ſcore thouſand perſons that cannot diſcerne between the
right hand and the left, and alſo much Cattle.
               
               
                  
We ſee here God himſelfe had ſome commiſeration
to the poore cattell, and it was not without
reſpect, that he preſcribed to Moſes in the firſt
Table of the Commandementes, that aſwell the
cattell as the ſtranger within thy gates, ſhuld ceaſe
from their labour, and reſt on the Sabaoth day.
               If it hath pleaſed God the Creator of all things
to be thus regardfull to the worke of his handes, I
am fully perſwaded, that ſuch as by nature do ſhew
themſelues to be no leſſe bloudy minded towardes
men, then towards beaſts, do ſhew themſelues to
be naturally inclined to cruelty, the vglines whereof,
is to be abhorred and deteſted amongſt men.
            
            
               CAP. 6.
               Of the ingratitude of the Iriſh.
               THE Iriſh, as they are naturally inclined to cruelty,
ſo there is neither lenity, loue, nor liberality,
whereby to confirme them in their duty
and allegiance to their Prince.
               Some will ſay that there is not a readier meane
whereby to draw ſubiects to a ſetled loue, then a
gracious clemency to be vſed by the Prince: but in
times paſt it would not ſerue, and I ſhall not need
any far-fet preſidents, let vs but remember our late
gracious Queene, with what mildneſſe and with
what mercy, ſhe ruled and gouerned forty & odde
yeares, and with what diſloialty was ſhe ſtill requited.
               Her Maieſty thought in being gracious, ſhe might
thereby haue woon their hearts to a more louing

and willing obedience, and to this ende, to drawe
them to a more dutifull regard, what did ſhe neglect,
that was either befitting for a Prince to grant
amongſt ſubiects, or behouefull for ſubiects to receiue
from their Prince? If clemency might haue
mittigated the rigor of cruelty, what pardoning,
what protecting, and what tollerating of offences
that were daily and continualy committed againſt
her.
               But for the better diſcouery of their ingratitude
towardes her Maieſtie, how did ſhee continually
grace and countinance the Nobility of that realm,
not onely ſuffering them to triumph and tyranize
ouer their Tenants and followers, with ſuch priuiledges
and prerogatiues, as were more befitting
Kings, then behouefull for ſubiects, but alſo ſhee
bountifully beſtowed of them, contributions, ſtipendes,
pentions, and other daily paies out of her
Cofers, for the better vpholding of their decayed
eſtates, and to haue woon them (if it had bin poſſible)
to her loue and their allegiance; and how ſom
of them requited her, it is ſo manifeſtly known, as
it were but loſt labour any further to rehearſe.
               How many Gentlemen againe of that country
birth, came daily into England about ſutes, that
were ſtill begging and craving, and were continually
returned from her Maieſties Court back again
into Ireland, laden with guiftes and prefermentes,
that ſhe graciouſly & liberally beſtowed on them;
who after they had paſſed & poſſeſſed their grants,
would neuer com in place to ſay Amen, when they
heard her Maieſty praied for; but rather by their ill

example of contempt, made ſome others more obſtinate
and ſtubborn, then otherwiſe they would.
               I thinke the ingratitude of the Iriſh (conſidering
how mildly they haue bin and are yet gouerned)
deſerueth no leſle to be condemned thē their Treaſons:
and Rebellious: and there is nothing ſo much
deteſted amongſt the Iriſh themſelues, as this vice
of ingratitude.
               Ingratitude is no way to be excuſed nor coloured,
Theft, Robery, Murther, yea Treaſon it ſelfe,
may bee a little flouriſht ouer with ſome blind excuſe,
but ingratitude can neither bee couered nor
ſhadowed by any meanes, but remaining naked,
muſt mannifeſt it ſelfe euery where with ſhame &
diſhonour.
               Not to requit a benefit receiued is ill, but this
may be ſaid to bee the frailty of man: but to render
and requit euill for good, is moſt pernicious, and
this malignity hath euermore proceeded from
deteſtable Creatures, denounced and abhorred by
God and all good men.
               The Egyptians vſed to geld ſuch perſons as were
detected with this vice of ingratitude, to the end
that there might been no farther procreation of ſo
viperous a brood: if this ſeuerity were vſed to
thoſe of the Iriſh that haue taſted of the bounty, liberality
and mercy of their Princes, & haue repayed
them againe with grudge; murmnre, diſobedience,
contempt, and ſometime with Treaſon it
ſelfe, I ſay the Eunuches of Ireland, would farre exceede
in number ouer and aboue all the reſt that
were fit for propagation.
               
                  
They haue bin ſtill gouerned by ſuch Princes,
who ſhunning the ſeuerity of Lawes, haue rather
conformed themſelues to diuine mercy, then to
due Iuſtice; they haue bin and ſtill are, gouerned
by Chriſtian Princes, endued with the knowledge of
the truth, that haue ruled and do rule with curteſie
and clemency, but it is the imperfections of their
iudgements, that maketh them to miſtake the perfection
of their Princes.
            
            
               CHAP. 7.
               Of the inciuility, both of manners and conditions,
vſed by the Iriſh.
               IF I ſhould ſet downe the ſluttiſh and vncleanly
obſeruations of the Iriſh, as well of the men, as
the Women, but eſpecially of thoſe manners &
conditions whereunto they invre themſelues in
the remote places of the Countrey, I might ſet
downe ſuch vnreuerent and loathſome matter, as
were vnfit for euery queaſie ſtomacke to vnderſtand
of.
               I will not ſpeake of thoſe affaires belonging to
Child-bearing women, that are no leſſe vnciuill
then vncleanly, in many their demeanors belonging
to thoſe buſineſſes: Neither will I ſpeake of
their vnmannerly manners in making of their Butter,
nor of the beaſtly Phyſicke they haue vſed to
apply to a Cow, when ſhe will not giue down hir
Milke.
               I might ſpeake heere what I my ſelfe haue ſeen
in the North parts of Ireland, how vnhamſomely

the women do vſe to grinde their Oat-meale.
               But to ſpeake generally throughout the whole
Realme of Ireland, in thoſe thinges wherein they
ſhould be moſt neate and cleanely, they doe ſhew
themſelues to be moſt ſluttiſh and filthy; namely,
in making of their Butter, and waſhing of their
Linnen.
               Firſt, they do abuſe one of the greateſt bleſſings
of God beſtowed vpon that Country, for as God
promiſed the children of Iſraell to tranſport them
into a land that flowed with Milke and Honey, ſo
the plenty of milke throughout all the parts of Ireland
doth ſo abound, that the greateſt part of the
people (of the pooreſt ſort) are eſpecially relieued
and ſuſtained (both Summer and Winter) with
Milke and Butter; but according to the Prouerbe,
GOD ſendes meate, and the Deuill ſends Cookes; ſo,
it pleaſeth God to ſend them plenty of Milke, but
as they behaue themſelues in the vſing of it, it is
fit for no body but for themſelues, that are of the
vncleanly diet: not onely in their Milke and Butter,
but in many other vnſauoury diſhes beſides.
               It is holden among the Iriſh, to bee a preſagement
of ſome misfortune, to keepe their milking
veſſels cleanly, and that if they ſhould either ſcald
or waſh them, ſome vnlucky miſaduenture would
ſurely betide them: vpon this conceit, al the veſſels
that they vſe about their milke, are moſt filthily
kept: and I my ſelfe haue ſeene, that veſſell which
they hold vnder the Cow whilſt they are in milking,
to be furred halfe an inch thicke with filth, ſo
that Dublyne it ſelf is ſerued euery Market day with

ſuch Butter, as I am ſure is much more loathſome
then toothſome.
               Now, in the manner of their waſhing, they are
yet more filthie then in any other of their exerciſes,
wherein they are moſt vncleanlie, and I do almoſt
loath, but to thinke of their ſcouring ſtuffe
which they doe vſe in the ſtead of Sope; but hee
that came in place when they were in their Laundry,
in their Nettyng (as they call it) would neuer
after ſtop his noſe, if he chanced to goe by where
they were ſcouring of a Priuy.
               Theſe and many other loathſome obſeruations
are vſed by the Iriſh, from the which they wil not
be diſwaded, but the vnnurtered ſort among them
are no leſſe admiring our decencie, then wee their
rudeneſſe & vnciuility. And as I haue ſaid elſwher,
they wil not take any preſidents from the Engliſh,
and long it was before they coulde bee brought to
imitate our Engliſh manner, in diuers pointes of
husbandry, but eſpecially in the ploughing of their
land; in the performing whereof, they vſed the labour
of fiue ſeuerall perſons to euery plough, and
their Teem of Cattle, which commonly conſiſted
of fiue or ſixe horſes, were placed all in front, hauing
neither cordes, chaines, nor lines, wherby to
draw, but euery horſe by his owne taile; and this
was the manner of ploughing when I knew Ireland
firſt, and is vſed ſtill at this day in manie places of
the Countrey.
               Demand of them, whie they ſhould be ſo much
addicted to their owne durtie demeanures, & that
they ſhould not conforme themſelues to thoſe ciuill

courſes which they ſee are to bee perfourmed
with leſſe paine, and more profit; they can ſatisfy
vs with no other reaſon but cuſtome, Thus did our
Anceſtors.
               Cuſtome is a Metall amongſt them, that ſtandeth
which way ſoeuer it bee bent; Checke them
for their vncleanlineſſe, and they plead Cuſtome:
reprehend them for their Idolatry, they ſay thus
did our Fathers before vs: and I thinke it bee Cuſtome
that draweth them ſo often into rebellion,
becauſe they would do as their fathers haue done
before them.
               But alas! their iudgements are both blinde and
lame, and they are deafe to all good counſels, they
are falne into a blinde arrogancy, and they are ſo
generally bewitched with Popery, that they will
neither draw example nor precept from the Engliſh.
               But I hope my generall ſpeeches, will breed no
generall offence; to ſay that the Iriſh are generally
adicted to Poperie, it would argue but a quarrelſome
diſpoſition, to denay that truth which wee
ſee in daily example before our eies, and the Iriſh
themſelues (I am ſure) would be much offended,
if they were not able to drop ten Papiſts, for one
Proteſtant, throughout the whole Realme; themſelues
are neither aſhamed, nor affraid to confeſſe
it, and I would wee might as well truſt them in
their fidelity to the King, as we may beleeue them
in that: but they all ſpeake faire, and they ſay they
loue the king, and without doubt there are ſome
ſmall number, to whome it hath pleaſed God to

open their eies, and that doe ſtand aſſured to his
Maieſty: but for the greateſt number of thoſe that
be Papiſts, what fair ſemblance ſoeuer they make,
his Maieſtie may well ſay with our Sauiour, This
people honoureth me with their lips, but their hearts are
far from me. And for theſe, whatſoeuer they ſpeake
with their lippes, their harts are at Rome. Do they
not ſhew it through euerie part of the Realme, in
Cittie, Towne, and Countrey, in their receiuing
and entertaining of Ieſuites, Seminaries, and Popiſh
Prieſts, the proteſted enemies to his Maieſtie?
               With what face may they then auouch themſelues
to loue the King, that dooth with ſuch feruencie
embrace his Maieſties deadly enemies. I
will neuer beleeue them, neither can it ſinke in my
head, that an honeſt man may be brought to be in
league with God and the Deuill, and to be in perfect
loue and charity with them both together.
               The vulgar ſort of the Iriſh, wanting facultie to
iudge of thinges truely as they are, and ſuffering
themſelues to be ledde and carried away with outward
apparitions, are not only poſſeſſed with bold
neſſe to deſpiſe, but likewiſe with malipertneſſe to
impugne thoſe meanes, that ſhould aſwell induce
them to the loue and obedience of their Prince, as
to the true knowledge of their God, wherin conſiſteth
the ſtate of their ſaluation.
               It is ignorance that hunteth after light in darkeneſſe,
that beleeueth ſhaddowes to be ſubſtancial;
but Diuine knowledge, from whence proceedeth
all bleſſings, it is the parent of Peace, of Wiſdom,
of Obedience, and it is the light of reaſon, that diſcouereth

truth from falſhood, and therefore the
moſt reſplendant ornament of Man.
            
            
               CHAP. 8.
               Of the vulgar ſort of the Iriſh, what account they
make of an Oath.
               THe multitude of the Iriſh (I meane the ruder
ſort) are very regardleſſe of their Oathes, and
there are many reaſons to induce it; for I
haue knowne Ireland theſe forty yeares, yet (to my
remembrance) I neuer knewe any man punniſhed
for periury, by any Iudiciall courſe of the Princes
Lawes.
               They haue a cuſtome, that vpon any controuerſies
amongſt themſelues in the Countrey, the Tenants
are inioyned to ſweare by their Land-lordes
hand; the which Oath, if the Land-lord do by any
meanes diſproue, he impoſeth a great fine vppon
the partie, and he ſhall be ſure to pay it: they are
therefore verie circumſpect in taking of that Oath.
               They haue ſome reſpect againe to their Oaths,
when they are depoſed vpon a Maſſe-booke: And
I will truſt him better, that offereth to ſweare by
bread and ſalt, then him that offereth to ſweare by
the Bible▪
                   I meane, amongeſt the greater number,
that make no conſcience what they ſwear vpon an
Engliſh book. And the ſimpler ſort of them, do hold
their Oathes to be ſo much the more, or ſo much
the leſſe, according to the bigneſſe of the book: for
if they ſweare vpon a little Booke, they think they
take but a little Oath.
               
                  
Thus, what betweene thoſe that are ſimply ignorant,
and the other againe that are blinded with
Poperie, there will hardly be found a Iurie that wil
find for his Maieſtie. And heere (with al reuerēce)
I muſt needes remember that euer renowned Qu.
Elizabeth, who would many times ſaie, That the
Iriſh were ſo allyed in kindred the one with the other,
and ſhe hauing neuer a Coſine in the Country,
could neuer get her right. But woe be to him,
that hath his ſtate depending vpon the verdict of a
Iurie in Ireland, eſpeciallie if he be a Proteſtant.
               
               The honeſtie of him that ſhould giue teſtimonie
in any matter whatſoeuer, is to be reputed for
more or leſſe, according to the companie that hee
is knowne to frequent. I do not thinke it therfore
conuenient, that a Papiſt, that is trained vp in the
deuilliſh doctrine of Equiuocation, and that they
may ſweare what they liſt, with A mentall reſeruation,
is to be receiued as a witneſſe againſt a proteſtant,
or to bee beleeued or credited in any thinge
that he ſhall either ſay or ſweare againſt him.
               Becauſe the two Midwiues, Shiphuah and Puah
in the firſt of Exodus, tolde a lie to the King, who
had commaunded that all the male children of the
Hebrewes ſhould be ſlaine, therefore ſaith our holy
Father the Pope, it is lawfull to lie for aduantage.
Methinkes his holineſſe might haue borrowed
ſuch another from the 12. of Exodus, where by the
commandement of God, the children of Iſrael borrowed
Iewels of Siluer and Gold of the Egyptians;
if the Popes catholiques might haue the like liberty
with Proteſtants, then it were an excellent matter

to be a Papiſt, for then a man might both lie &
ſteale by authority, and they are not farre from the
matter: for it is knowne well enough, that in the
time of our late gracious Queene, the Pope gaue
full power and authority to diſpence with all Popiſh
Recuſants, neither to holde worde, promiſe,
contract, nor proteſtation, what or howſoeuer,
that had bin formerly conditioned, or were heereafter
to be made with any Heretique (as they call
him) that will not acknowledge the Pope to bee
Chriſts high Vicar heer on earth, and that he hath
thereby full authority to depoſe Kings and princes
at his owne will and pleaſure.
               Methinkes this Doctrine of Equiuocation and
Mental reſeruation, was very acceptable to the yong
married wife, who in her Husbands abſence being
ſolicited by an amorous friend, ſhe conſented vnto
him, vpon condition, that hee ſhould not meddle
with her lippes, neither to kiſſe, nor ſo much as to
touch them; Hir louer demanded the reaſon, ſhe
anſwered; That at my mariage day, this mouth of
mine made inuiolable promiſe to my husbande of
continencie; and therefore, what my mouth hath
Religiouſly vowed, ſhall Ceremoniouſly be kept:
content thy ſelfe therefore with the other parts of
my bodie, for my lippes are onely vowed vnto my
Husband, and for him I will reſerue them. I think
of my conſcience, this Woman was as firme in the
promiſe ſhe made to her husband, as a number of
Papiſts in their Oaths they do make to the king.
               This Doctrine is not onely warrantable againſt
Proteſtants, but it may ſometimes ſerue to ſalue a

vow that is raſhly made to God himſelfe, as the
holie Pilgrim, that made ſolemne proteſtation to
offer the one halfe of his good fortunes at the high
Altar, whatſoeuer ſhould betide him in his iourney.
And by the way as he paſſed, fortuning to find
a bag of Nuts, hee eate vp the Kernels, and offered
vp the ſhels.
               What call you this, Equiuocation, or Mentall Reſeruation?
But call it what you liſt, this Doctrine
doth fit our holy Fathers tooth, for he hath taught
vs long agoe, There is no Faith to bee holden with Heretiques.
               
            
            
               CAP. 9.
               That a conqueſt ſhould draw after it Lawe, Language,
and Habit.
               
                  MAiſter Stanihurſt is of opinion, that a Conqueſt
ſhould draw three things after it, and
that the vanquiſhed ſhould ſurrender themſelues
to imitate the Lawes, the Language, & the
manner of Apparrell vſed and accuſtomed by the
Victors.
               I could wiſh that the Iriſh would ſubmit themſelues
to the obedience of our Engliſh Lawes, for I
ſay the Countrey is accurſed, that is not gouerned
by Law, but it is ignorance that breedeth contempt
of Law; contempt of Law, draweth on Rebellion;
and Rebellion is the vtter decay, ruine, and deſolation
of countries and kingdomes.
               It is ignorance ioyned with obſtinacie, that hath

not onely contemned the poſitiue lawes of Princes
in Ireland, but they haue likewiſe diſpiſed and
impugned the deuine lawes of the liuing God. And
where God is not knowne, the Prince cannot bee
obeyed: for it is the light and knowledge of Gods
word, that conteineth ſubiects in obedience vnto
their Princes; and where the Goſpell is generallie
receiued, there is peace and tranquillity vniuerſallie
embraced.
               It is not ſo in Ireland, and they are in nothing
more repugnant then againſt the law of God. And
as for the imitation of Language (as M. Stanihurſt
hath ſaid) it hath been thought very expedient, for
diuers reſpects, that the conquered ſhould ſurrender
themſelues to the language of the Conqueror:
and for this very cauſe, when William Duke of Normandy
had conquered England, hoping to tranſlate
our Engliſh language into French, he cauſed al our
Engliſh Lawes to be written and ſet downe in the
French tongue, and ſo they haue continued, and are
ſtill remaining at this very houre.
               But heer beehold the godly diſpoſition of our
gracious King that now raigneth, who comiſerating
the calamity of the hunger-ſtarued Realm of
Ireland, that hath neuer yet taſted of any thing publiſhed
in their owne language, but lies, fables, and
popiſh fantaſies, that hath but led them into ignorance
and error. To giue them ſome taſt therfore
of that heauenly foode, whereof they haue neuer
yet felt ſmack or ſauour; he hath cauſed the New
Teſtament, togither with the Booke of Common
Praier, in that forme and manner as it is now vſed

in our Engliſh churches, to be both tranſlated into
Iriſh, and to be printed in the Iriſh Charracter,
that aſwell the lettered ſort, that can reade their
owne language, as alſo the vnlearned, that can but
vnderſtand what they heare others read, may reap
the benefit of his Maieſties clemency and loue towards
them, that doth ſeeke by curteſie to winne
them, that might otherwiſe enforce them by compulſion
of Lawes.
               Now, for the Iriſh to invre themſelues to ſpeake
Engliſh, I thinke it were happy for England & Ireland
both. If neuer a Papiſt throughout that whol
coūtry, could either ſpeak, or ſo much as vnderſtād
a word of Engliſh: and it is holden for a Maxime in
Ireland, that ten Engliſh wil ſooner become Iriſh,
then one Iriſh will be found to turne Engliſh.
               
               Now, for the imitation of habit and attire, that
(M. Stamhurſt ſaith) ſhould likewiſe follow a conqueſt,
I proteſt I would not wiſh the Iriſh ſo much
harme, to inioyne them to follow our Engliſh faſhion
in apparrell, when there is almoſt neuer a
paſſage from Cheſter to Dublyne, but one Foole or
other commeth ouer with a new faſhion, either
for men or Women, or for both. And although
the Iriſh are proud enough of minde, yet they are
not lightly proude in their apparrell; and yet the
example of our Engliſh pride, hath doone a great
deale of harme amongſt that people.
               I remember many yeares ago (when I was a little
Bookiſh) I haue read of a pretty Prouiſo, deuiſed
for the preuention of Pride, an Act eſtabliſhed, debarring
all ſorts of people, aſwell men as women,

from the wearing of any gayiſh or light-coloured
apparrell (Players and Curtizans onely excepted)
to whome free liberty was giuen to weare vvhat
they themſelues liſted.
               This did not onely incite thoſe that were honeſt,
to liue within the compaſſe of modeſt and
comly attire, but it was alike inducement to thoſe
that were well knowne Strumpets, to ſhelter
themſelues vnder the habit of modeſty, thereby to
eſcape from being reputed infamous.
               But as the Prouerbe is, It is not the Frocke that
maketh the Friar, ſo without doubt, thoſe women
are not all diſhoneſt of their bodies, that by the
outward ſhowes in their Attyre, a man woulde
thinke, they had ſent their Conſciences vnto the
Stewes.
               It were pitty that beutie ſhould be Mercenary,
or that by ſtrange inuentions it ſhould ſet it ſelf to
ſale; And why are thoſe beauties vailed, that Women
themſelues deſires to ſhew, and euery man
deſires to ſee? But they ſay it is for modeſty, and I
commend it, but let them bee modeſt likewiſe in
their Manners.
               
                  Pithagoras Neece was wont to ſay, that a Woman
going to bedde with a man, ought together
with her Peticote, to put off all baſhfulneſſe, but
in the morning to put it on againe: Not like her,
that when ſhe firſt went to bed with a Sea-faring
man, ſtript her ſelfe quite of her modeſty, & could
neuer finde a time to put it on againe after. But
modeſty (aſwell in attire, as in conuerſation and
manners) hath euer beene the reputed Ornament

of women; but to ſpeake truth of our Gentlewomen
of Ireland: that be of Iriſh birth, they haue little
practiſe, either in pride or in good huſwiferie;
for they are for the moſt part alwaies buſied in taking
their eaſe. And it is holden for a ſeruile kinde
of baſeneſſe amongſt the Iriſh, for a gentleman or
a gentlewoman, to be ſeen in any manner of faculty,
Idleneſſe onely excepted. And this conceipt
of theirs, is another occaſion of ignorance, which
as it engendreth many vaine & laſciuious thoghts,
ſo it draweth after it, wicked and diſhoneſt deeds.
               To conclude this Chapter, I ſay, that thoſe of
the Iriſh that haue reduced themſelues to ciuility,
(were it not for their Religion) are otherwiſe, of
very good conuerſation; and aſwell in their manners,
as in the decencie of their apparell, they are
very modeſt and comly, but they are ſo charmed
by their ghoſtly fathers, that if an Angell ſhoulde
come from heauen, and ſpeake againſt Poperie, he
ſhould be condemned amongſt them, yea and holden
for accurſed.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               Of certaine Septes and degrees among the Iriſh,
how they are reputed.
               THere is amongſt the Iriſh, as amongſt all the
Nations of the world, diuers degrees, accorto
the which each man is regarded.
               For the Nobilitie of that Realme, they are amongſt
them as Honorable, and as worthy to bee
honoured, as of any other Nation whatſoeuer; ſo

likewiſe againe, both of Knights and Gentlemen.
               After their Gentlemen, whereof a great number
of them are rude and vnciuill enough, the horſmen
ſucceedeth in the next ranke, who is more fit
to ſerue his lord and Captaine in an action of Rebellion,
then in the ſeruice of his Prince.
               The Galloglas ſucceedeth the Horſman, and hee
is commonly armed with a Scull, a ſhirt of maile,
and a Galoglas Axe: his ſeruice in the field, is neither
good againſt horſmen, nor able to endure an
encounter of Pikes, yet the Iriſh do make great account
of them.
               The Kerne of Ireland are next in requeſt, the very
droſſe and ſcum of the Countrey, a generation
of Villaines not worthy to liue: theſe be they that
liue by robbing and ſpoiling the poore Countreyman,
that maketh him many times to buy bread to
giue vnto them, though he want for himſelfe and
his poore children. Theſe are they, that are ready
to run out with euerie Rebell, and theſe are the verie
Hags of Hell, fit for nothing but for the gallows.
               We are now come to the horſ-boyes, ſo tearmed
by their profeſſions, which is, to keep or dreſſ
horſe; and as in England we cal them horſ-keepers,
ſo in Ireland he carries the name but of a horſe boy
how yong or old ſoeuer.
               There are other Septes or profeſſions, namely of
Bardes, which are in manner of Poets or Rythmers,
which do nothing but ſit and compoſe lies. Then
they haue Harpers, and thoſe are ſo reuerenced among
the Iriſh, that in the time of Rebellion, they
will forbeare to hurt either their perſons, or their

goods, but are rather inclined to giue them, & are
verie bountifull, either to Rymers or Fooles.
               
               Then is there a certaine brotherhood, called by
the name of Karrowes, and theſe be common gamſters,
that do onely exerciſe playing at Cards, and
they will play away their mantels, and their ſhirts
from their backs, and when they haue nothing left
them, they will truſſe themſelues in ſtraw; this is
the life they lead, and from this they will not be reclaimed.
               But here is now a matter to be noted, that among
all theſe ſorts and profeſſions of the Iriſh, the child
is euer deſirous to imitate what his father hath bin
before him. If the father hath been a horſeman, the
ſonne will be a horſman: if the father hath beene a
Galoglas, the ſonne will be a Galloglas: if the father
hath beene a Kerne, the ſonne will be a Kerne:
if the father haue been a horſe boy, the ſon will be
no better. But this is moſt of al to be wondred at,
that if the father had bin a Rythmer, the ſon would
bee a Rithmer; which ſeemeth ſtrange vnto mee,
that Poetry in Ireland, ſhould ſucceed by diſcent
from the father to the ſonne, that muſt be holpen
elſewhere, not only by Nature, but Art: and therfore,
if their Iriſh Rymers be of ſuch excellencie, as
the Iriſh themſelues will commend, I ſay it is wonderfull.
               Euery great man in the Countrey hath his Rymer,
his Harper, and his knowne Meſſenger, to run
about the Countrey with Letters.
               Theſe altogither among themſelues, do obſerue
the Law of Complements, and euery profeſſion hath

his particular Decorum, I cannot commend them
for their Ciuility, nor they do not ſuperabound in
honeſty: their Vertue is, they will do nothing but
what their Fathers haue done before them.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               Of the maner of the Iriſh Coſhering, and of the credulity
in beleeuing of Lyes.
               THere is amongſt the Iriſh, a kinde of feaſting
or banquetting, which they call Coſhering, &
this is the maner of it; Good company both
of men and women being drawne together a feaſting,
to entertaine the time betweene meales,
they haue their Rythmers & their Harpers; the one,
to ſing, and the other, to play: the ſonges that
they vſe to ſing, are vſually in the commendation
of Theft, of Murther, of Rebellion, of Treaſon,
and the moſt of them lying fixions of their owne
Collections, inuented but of purpoſe, to ſtirre vp
their hearts to imitate the example of their Anceſtors,
making repetition how many Cowes they
had ſtoln, how many murthers they had committed,
how many times they had rebeld againſt their
Prince, and what ſpoiles and out-rages they had
done againſt the Engliſh.
               The maner of their ſitting in this great feaſting,
is this; Stooles nor Tables they haue none, but a
good bundle of Straw ſtrewed about the floure,
they ſet themſelues downe one by another: Another
burden of ſtraw being ſhaken ouer their legs,

doth ſerue them to ſet on their diſhes. Perhaps, if
it bee in the time of Summer, or where the place
will affoord it, then in the ſtead of Straw they vſe
greene Ruſhes; but whether it be Straw or Ruſhes
thus ſtrewed ouer their legges, this is both
Table and Table-cloath, wheron they vſe to place
their diſhes.
               Victuals they ſhall haue plenty, Beefe, Mutton,
Porke, Hens, Rabits, and all together ſerued in a
great woodden platter: Aqua vite they muſt haue
good ſtore, or elſe it is not worthy to bee called a
feaſt. Vpon Wedneſdayes, Fridayes, and Satterdaies,
they haue like plentie of fiſh, for vpon thoſe
daies, to eate a bit of fleſh, is a more deadly ſinne,
then either drunkenneſſe or Letchery.
               And commonly the Iriſh cuſtome is, that when
they are ſerued with fleſh, they haue no bread with
their meat, but if their ſtore be ſuch that they hauebread,
their fineſt Manchets are ordinarily Oaten-Cakes,
in this ſort prepared.
               Firſt, in the remote places of Ireland, in the ſtead
of Threaſhing their Oats, they vſe to burne them
out of the ſtraw, and then winnowing them in the
wind, from their burnt aſhes, they make them into
meale, but if I ſhould ſay how vnhandſomely
they doe grinde them, or if I ſhould tel, how my
ſelfe haue ſeene a woman ſitting with a Muſtarde
Quearne betweene her bare thighes, grinding of
Oatmeale, I thinke a man would haue little liſt to
eate of the bread; but of this Meale, as ill in complexion
(to looke vppon) as a little durt vnder a
mans feet, they make their Cakes, for other bread

they haue none, and it is but ſeldome when they
haue this.
               I might tell ſome other vnmannerly tales vſed
by the Iriſh, in thoſe times of Coſhering, but I will
let them paſſe. And as M. Stanihurſt ſaith, the antiquitie
of this manner of feaſting, is ſet foorth by
Virgil, when Dido entertained the Troyan Prince &
his company; but Maiſter Stanihurſt ſhall neuer
make me beleeue, that the Iriſh maner of Coſhering
was drawne from that preſident: but the manner
of our Iriſh writers, haue euer beene, to draw preſidents
from ancient and Worme-eaten Authorities:
for with theſe Trifles they doe bewitch the
poore ignorant people of the Country, that they
make them beleeue what themſelues liſt to perſwade;
and the Iriſh are wonderfully addicted to
giue credit and beleefe, not onely to the fabulous
fixions of their lying Poets, but alſo to the Prognoſticating
Soothſayers and Witches, like our
Husbandmen of the Countrey, that doe draw all
their knowledge from the Counſell of a Kalender.
And if any of their wiſe men, or wiſe women
(as they call them) do prognoſticate either good
or euill fortune, they doe more relie in their preſagements,
then they do in the foure Euangeliſts:
and ſooner they will beleeue them.
               They doe beleeue in Charmes and Incantations:
then they haue words and Spels to driue away rats,
& to heal diſeaſes: then they haue inchanted Gyrdles,
that can defend the violence of ſhot, and are
of ſuch defence, that no ſword, or any other weapon
ſhall hurt the party that is girded with them.
               
                  
It were both admirable and incredible for to ſet
downe the obſeruations vſed by the Iriſh, vppon
certaine Saints Eeues, but eſpecially on May-Eeue,
& Midſommer Eeue; what watching, what ratling,
what tinkling vpon pannes and candleſticks, what
ſtrewing of Hearbes, what clamors, and what other
Ceremonies are vſed, and not onely in the
Countrey, but in Dublyne it ſelfe, the very markes
and badges of infidelity, neither obſerued nor beleeued
amongſt any other people in the Worlde,
but amongſt Infidels, Pagans, and Papiſts.
               
               And it is a wonder to ſee, how from theſe vain
fantaſies, ſo many famous impreſſions do ariſe, or
rather (I may ſay) how many infamous lies are beleeued,
and as when a man hath once gotten the
end of a Clue, hee may winde off at pleaſure what
himſelfe liſteth; ſo men that are naturally inclined
to nouriſh Nouelties, hauing once receiued any
thing for truth, he thinketh it a deede of charity to
impart it to his friend, and feareth not to adde
ſomething of his owne inuention, the better to
make the matter to be beleeued: and thus from a
particular errour, by this manner of handling, it
becommeth publicke: for as the flixability of our
inuentions, to frame reaſons vnto all manner of
dreames and fantaſies, are very apt and readie, ſo
our immaginations are likewiſe found as eaſie to
receiue impreſſions from falſhoode, deriued from
very friuolous and fooliſh apparitions: but it is
commonly ſaide, that to bee light of beleefe, and
eaſily perſwaded, proceedeth from a lightneſſe of
the wit, and weakeneſſe of the braine.
            
            
               
               CAP. XII.
               How Ireland was purged from all venemous wormes,
by the Prayers of Saint Patrick.
               MAiſter Stanihurſt, in his Chronicle of Ireland,
is very angry againſt Maiſt. Alan Cope,
that ſeemed to ſcoffe at the Iriſh conceite,
that will needs attribute the purging of venemous
Wormes from out of Ireland, to the Prayers of S.
Patruke.
               
               Now, although Maiſter Alan Cope, ſufficiently
proueth by the Teſtimony of ſeuerall writers, that
Ireland was deſtitute of all theſe venomous wormes,
many hundred yeares before Saint Patricke
was borne; yet Maiſter Stanihurſt is ſo angry, that
there ſhould bee any doubt or queſtion made of
that which hath beene ſo long receiued and beleeued
for an vndoubted truth amongſt the Natiues
of Ireland, that he pickes a great many of quarrels
againſt M. Alan Cope; finding fault firſt, that he neither
obſerued Decorum perſona, nor Decorum dialogi,
and then he quarrelleth with his Diuinity, which
(as hee ſaieth) is farre diſſonant from the Rules of
Charity.
               
                  And when he hath charged M. Cope with many
other abſurdities, he ſetteth downe this propoſition,
That like as God in his Iuſtice puniſheth a Country
that is hard hearted, with Wormes and Vermine, ſo of
his mercy they are remoued again from a Realme, that is
obedient and ready to follow his Lawes and Precepts.
               
                  
                  To put this out of Queſtion, hee bringeth this
Preſident, That as Pharaoh woulde not liſten to thoſe
threats denounced him by Moſes & Aaron, was therfore
punniſhed with Frogges and Flyes, and ſuch other
vermine, yet vpon his ſhew of repentance, at the inſtant
requeſt of Moſes, thoſe plagues were appeaſed, and the
wormes extinguiſhed: why then (ſaith he) may it not
likewiſe hold, that Saint Patrick, finding the Iriſh ſo
preſt and ready to embrace the Chriſtian faith, might
not ſtand ſo highly in the fauour of God, as through his
earneſt Prayers, the venemous and poiſoned Wormes
ſhould be abandoned.
               But alas (ſaith he) this is not a matter of ſuch difficulty
to be belieued, when it was fore-promiſed by Chriſt
himſelfe, who in the xvi. of Marke ſaith, And theſe tokens
ſhall follow them that beleeue, they ſhall caſt out deuils
in my name, they ſhall ſpeake with new tongues, they
ſhall driue away Serpents, &c.
               Were not theſe places of Scripture well ſpyed
out by our Iriſh Chronicler, and as aptly applyed, as
thoſe of the Deuill, that willed Chriſt, if hee were
the ſonne of God, he ſhould caſt himſelf from the
Pynacle of the Temple, For it is written, That his
Angels ſhould hold him vp, that hee ſhould not daſh his
foote againſt a ſtone.
               
               But I will not contend with M. Stanihnrſt, nor
with any other, whether it were Saint Patricke,
who by his Praiers hath thus purged Ireland from
Toads, from Snakes, from Adders, & from other
like venomous Wormes: but there are other, aſwell
Beaſts as Birds, as the Roe-Buck, the Moule,
the Pianet, the Nytingale, that are as meer ſtrangers

in Ireland, as the other, and I cannot thinke
but that it was one mans worke to expell all theſe
together, and all at one time. But if it were Saint
Patrick, or whoſoeuer otherwiſe, that was ſo ſeuere
againſt the Nytingale, the ſweete Querriſter
of the Wood, whoſe delectable harmony is pleaſing
to euery eare, I would he had been as ſtrict in
Iuſtice againſt that foul mouthed Bird the Cuckow,
whoſe notes were neuer yet pleaſing to any mans
eare, that was iealous of his wife.
               And yet to do the Iriſh no wrong, this gauling
griefe of iealouſie, is no generall ſickneſſe in Ireland,
it troubleth very few, and I account them ſo
much the wiſer; it is a kinde of frenzie, that neuer
yet did good, the wiſe men of the world hath euer
ſought to reſtraine it by diſcretion.
               If Hiſtories be to be credited, Lucullus, Caeſar,
Pompei, Anthoni, Cato, and diuers other gallant
men, were Cornuted: and although they themſelues
knew it, yet they made no ſtirre about it,
that Coxcombe Lepidus onely excepted, who dyed
with verie greefe that his Wife had made him
Cuckold.
               But how many husbands haue their beene, that
haue indured this accident, not onely without reproach
and offence againſt their wiues, but with
ſingular commendation to their owne Vertue, in
concealing it from the world.
               Some women there hath beene, that hath proſtituted
themſelues, thereby to aduance her Husbands
credit, ſometimes to ſaue her husbands life:
but this ſubiect is not for this place, and theſe preſidents

are out of ſeaſon for this age, but there
hath beene Husbands knowne, that haue of themſelues
made Port-ſale of their wiues honeſties, aſwell
for their profite, as for their preferment: as
Phanlius the Argian, who through ambition, offered
his wife to King Phillip: And as Galba, who beſtowed
a Supper of Merenas, and perceiuing him
to caſt ſome amorous glances on his wife, beeing
riſen from the Table, ſhrunke downe vppon his
Cuſhion, as one oppreſſed with ſleepe, thereby
to giue him the better ſcope, whereby hee might
perſiſt.
               It is a fooliſh curioſity for a man to ſeeke for
that which he would bee loath to finde, and that
when he hath found, he cannot amend.
               I rather commend me to him, who taking his
wife ſo tardy, that hee needed no other witneſſe,
then what himſelfe had ſeene, would not yet beleeue
his own ſences, but would ſay, that he wold
neuer condemn a true dealing wife, for a falſe miſdeeming
eye. I applaude his Wiſedome, that
with his owne Vertue, could ſuppreſſe his ovvne
ſhame.
               It is not ſaid without iudgment, that a good mariage
might be made betweene a deafe man, and a
blind woman. But I ſay, I woulde not wiſh that a
man ſhould either be too light in hearing, or too
quicke of ſight, to looke into his wiues affaires:
and for him that would liue in a quiet content, I
ſay that one eye were enough, and with the moſt,
for him that will be ſtill peeping and prying into
his wiues buſineſſe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII.
               Of the holy Saintes, that haue bin borne, bred, and
brought vp in Ireland.
               IF a man may beleeue Maiſter Stanihurſt in his
diſcription of Ireland, there hath bin many holy
Saints, natiues of that Countrey, that were full
of Miracles, & performed ſo many wonderful matters,
as there is neuer a wiſe man in the worlde
would beleeue them to be true, and ſo they continue
ſtill at this preſent houre. Our holy, holy
brood of Ieſuites, Seminaries, Fryers and ſuch other,
do performe ſtranges thinges, but ſpecially for the
increaſe and propagation of children, not a barren
woman in an houſe where they be lodged: for ſhe
that is not Child-bearing, a bleſſing from one
of theſe of the holy order will make her ſo to fructify,
that her huſband (whatſoeuer he wanteth beſides)
ſhal be ſure to want no Children.
               But as Maiſter Stanihurſt aduiſeth his reader not
to be ouer credulous to beleeue all that is written
of thoſe holy Saintes themſelues, nor yet of their
fained Miracles: ſo I proteſt, for the loue that I
beare to a nūber of my Ireland frends, I could wiſh
them to bee well aware of this holy brood of the
Popes Cockrels, the prouerbe is old, and not ſo old
as true: That Pigeons and Prieſtes do make foule houſes.
               
               I haue heard of many Miracles, and there is no
place or Countrey where Popery is profeſt but
they are full of Miracles, full viſions, and full of

ſtrange euentes, but the Miracles of Ireland, they
are more fooliſh, more ridiculous, more groſſe, and
more abſurd then any other, that I haue either
heard or reade of. It were ſtrange to make relation
of the Miracles that haue bin wrought at the holy
Croſſe, but eſpecially at Saint Patricks Purgatory;
and it is a peece of Rethoricke, ſometimes by ſeeming
to affect ignorance, to ſet forth a ſubtilty; and
he that ſhould but reade, what Maiſter Stanihurſt
himſelfe hath ſet downe of that miraculous place
of S. Patrickes Purgatory if he hath bin but a little
touched with the Tincture of wit, will finde out
the very myſtery of groſſe and palpable Knauery.
               And as Ireland is full of ſtrange Miracles, ſo I
thinke there are more Saints known in that Countrey,
then euer was heard of in Heauen, or were euer
regiſtred in the Popes Golden Legend.
               
               Wee reade of a holy ſaint that was long ſithens
in the North of Ireland, called by the name of Saint
Wooddoge, to whom was giuen a large portion of
lands, the which were after tranſlated to the Byſhops
ſea of Rapo; but ſome of thoſe landes being houlden
at this day from the Byſhop that now is, and being
called in queſtion vpon what conſideration the
Church liuinges ſhould bee ſo detained, there is a
recorde brought foorth, how a holy Byſhop, many
hundred yeares ſithens, conueied away that parcell
of lād to one Sugere a Boylle, with theſe plain words,
For the vſe of his Daughters body. They haue moreouer
in the North of Ireland, an old monumēt (cald
by the name of Baughall Murry) and this is reſerued
onely for O-Neale to ſweare by. There is mention

made of many other Saints; as Saint Colme, Saint
Branden, Saint Keuen, Saint Mac-Looge, Saint Dolocke,
and they ſay there are ſome few Saintes of a
later edition: as Saint Bedloc, Saint Brown, & there
is great hope that if Tyrone bee not already in the
Popes Kalender that he ſhall not be long out.
               I thinke this Saint Colme before ſpoken of, is
that great Saint in the North, called by the name
of Coleme Rille, in great veneration at this day for
many ſtrange Miracles, the which they ſay hee ſtill
performeth. Then they had a gentlewoman Saint,
that Stanihurſt in his Hiſtory maketh mention of,
called by the name of Bridgit, not that Bridgit who
in the time of Pope Vrbane errected a certaine order
of Nunnes, (called Bridgidians) but this without
doubt was a very holy woman, for ſhe lyes buried
with two men; namely with Saint Patrick, and Coleme
Rille, as apeareth by an ancient Monument in
the Cathedrall Church of Doune in the North of
Ireland, where this inſcription is to be reade:

                     Hi tres in Duno, tumulo tumulantur in vno,
                     Brigidia, Patricia, atque Columba pius.
                  
               
               I haue not numbred Saint Patrick amongſt theſe
Saintes that be of Iriſh birth: for if a man may beleeue
M. Stanihurſt, hee was a Welch-man borne.
He ſetteth downe in his Chronicle the certaine
place of his birth, and how comming ouer into Ireland,
he bound himſelfe Prentiſe to a Maiſter, that
ſet him to keepe Hogs, and following his Maiſters
Swine in the fielde, one day as they were rooting,
one Hogge among the reſt, turned vppe with his
ſnowt a parcell of Gold, the which Patricke taking

vp, brought home his Hogges to his Maiſter, and
with that Gold, he bought his own Freedome: &
thus departing againe into his owne Countrey, he
trauailed after that to Rome, wher being inſtructed
in the Chriſtian Faith, from thence he returnd again
into Ireland, where he eſtabliſhed the Chriſtian Religion,
& wrought a great many of Miracles more
then were true.
               Thus farre M. Stanihurſt, and till I had read it of
his owne ſetting downe, in his deſcription of Ireland,
I would haue layed two to one, that S. Patrick
had bin an Iriſhman borne. But I will be better aduiſed
hereafter, both how I lay any wagers, & how
I beleeue any ſuch authorities. But let S. Patricke
be what countriman he liſt, I wonder how he foūd
the Iriſh ſo confirmable as M. Stanihurſt reporteth,
that will beleeue nothing now, but what their fathers
haue beleeued before them.
               They are now ſo much inclined to cuſtom, that
they will giue no place to reaſon, but let thē ſtand
vpon Cuſtome as much as they liſt, yet truth is
truth, in deſpite of Cuſtomes hart: but preſumption
is our naturall and originall infirmity, and this
opinion of wiſdome is the plague of man.
               I think the ouer good conceit and ſelf-weening
opinion that man hath of himſelfe, is the mother
of falſe opinions, both publike & perticular, when
there is nothing whereunto men are more addicted,
then to giue way to their owne opinions.
               
                  It was a bold ſpeach deliuered by Pliny: This only
is ſure, that nothing is ſure, and nothing more miſerable,
and yet more arrogant and obſtinat then man.
               
                  
Obſtinacie, is no other thing, then a ſetled and
firme purpoſe and determination, either to do, or
not to do ſomething: he that is in this manner reſolute,
is vnfit to receiue either councell or aduiſe,
how wiſe, how learned, how behouefull, or how
honeſt ſoeuer. And ſuch men, preferring their own
opinions, are the cauſe of many euils, & do manie
times bring themſelues and others into extreame
dangers: and it is but loſt labour to diſſwade any
ſuch perſons by the rules of reaſon, for they preſuming
to know more then all the world beſides, do
ſtop their eares to all good councels, and their eies
to all daungers, and perſiſting in their obſtinacie,
without reaſon or iudgement, the Browniſts themſelues
are not more preciſe, nor ſir Patricke, (Saint
Patrick I meane) the canonized ſaint of Ireland, was
neuer more holy, then theſe obſtinate fooles doe
aſſume vnto themſelues in their owne conceits.
               Curteſies that are beſtowed vpon obſtinat perſons,
are euermore beſtowed in vaine, for there is
no curteſie nor clemency that can be ſo vſed, but
the nature of obſtinacie, is rather to impugn, then
to make any ſhew of humilitie.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               Of the ſuperſtitious conceit that is holden of the Iriſh,
about certaine Wels.
               THere are yet other admirable matters in Ireland,
ſuch as I am halfe aſhamed to ſpeake of,
and yet if there were but one halfe of the vertue
in them that the Iriſh do beleeue, and wil confidently

auow, wee needed no other phyſicke nor
Surgerie to heale all manner of diſeaſes. The blind
might be reſtored to their ſight, the halt and lame
to their limbs; there is no infirmity, but it might
be cured at ſundry ſanctified and holy wels, whereof
there are great plenty in Ireland. The Citty of
Dublin is quartered out with them. Firſt, on the
Eaſt part, they haue Sai. Prtricks Well, the water
whereof, although it be generally reputed to bee
very hot, yet the very prime of the perfection, is
vpon the 17. of March, which is Sai. Patricks day,
and vpon this day, the water is more holy then it is
all the yeare after, or elſe the Inhabitants of Dublin
are more fooliſh vpon that day, then they be al the
yeare after. For vpon that day thither they wil run
by heapes, men, women, and children, and there,
firſt performing certain ſuperſtitious ceremonies,
they drinke of the water; and when they are returned
to their owne homes, for nine daies after, they
will ſit and tell, what wonderfull thinges haue bin
wrought by the operation of the water of Sa. Patricks
Well.
               
               On the weſt part of Dublin they haue Sa. Ieames
his well, and his feaſt is celebrated the 25. of Iulie,
and vpon that day, a great Mart or faire is kept faſt
by the Well. The commoditie that is there to be
vented, is nothing elſe but Ale, no other merchandize
but only Ale: I thinke ſuch another Faire was
neuer heard of in any other place, where a man can
not buy ſo much as a penniworth of pins, but what
money hee hath to beſtow, hee muſt lay it out for
Ale, and yet it carries the name of S. Iames his faire.
               
               
                  
The multitude of raſcall people that vſeth to
frequent this faire, are firſt accuſtomed to perform
certaine ceremonies at S. Iames his well, in caſting
the water, backward and forward, on the right ſide
and on the left, and ouer their heads; then drinking
a draught of the water, they go into the Faire, and
there inſtalling themſelues in ſom Brothel-booth,
they ſit and drinke drunke all the day after.
               On the South ſide of the towne, they haue Sa.
Sundaies wel: I cannot tell what countrey man Sa.
Sunday was himſelfe, but his wel is of pretious eſtimation
amongſt the Iriſh (I meane) amongſt the
Popiſh ſort of the Iriſh, that doe flocke thither ſo
thicke vpon ſunday mornings, in the ſummer ſeaſon,
that I am ſure, that if ſaint Sunday were there
in perſon to read a Lecture out of the New Teſtament,
they had rather go altogither to an alehovſe
then they would trauell ſo farre to ſee him.
               To the North-wards from the Citty of Dublin,
they haue S. Dolocks well; another ſanctified place
ceremoniouſly frequented at certaine ſeaſons, fooliſh
and ridiculous to be ſpoken of; ſo that let the
wind blow which way it liſt, Eaſt, Weſt, North,
or South, Dublin is ſo ſeated, that a Papiſt may go
from the high croſſe, with a Blowne Sheat right before
the wind, either to an Idalatrous Maſſe within
the towne, or to a Superſtitious Well, without
the Towne.
               But this is moſt of all to be admired, that a people
that hath bin ſo many yeares inſtructed and informed
in the doctrine of the Goſpell, ſhould ſtill
ſubmit themſelues to ſuch groſe & peruerſe foolerie.
               
                  
I might ſpeak of diuers other Wels, for I think
there is neyther Apoſtle nor Patriarch, that neuer
came neere vnto Ireland, and yet there be Welles,
Fountaines, and other holy places, that be attributed
vnto them. But if I ſhould ſpeake of the wonders
and myracles, which they ſay are wrought
there, it would make a more admirable hiſtory thē
that of ſir Iohn Mandevile: It woulde vndoo all the
Phyſitians in England and Ireland. For at thoſe holy
Wels, and at many other of thoſe ſanctified places,
the blinde are made to ſee, the Lame are made
to goe, the Cripple is reſtored to his limbes, or
what diſeaſe ſoeuer, neuer ſo ſtrange, neuer ſo inueterate,
which is not there cured.
               But I am ſory for Dublyn, the place where I my
ſelfe do liue, the towne that of all others in Ireland,
I do beſt loue, I do not therefore ſpeake any thing
maliciouſly (I appeale to their owne knowledges)
whether I ſpeake true or falſe: I haue often ſaid, &
ſtill do ſay, that there be many good people in Dublin,
and ſo throughout all the parts of Ireland beſides,
men of all ſorts, of all profeſſions, and of all
degrees, that are not to be detected. And thus (I
hope) the good will take no exceptions at anye
thing that I ſhall truly report of thoſe that be ill.
               And although I direct my ſpeech ſtil to the Iriſh,
I make no ſuch difference between the Engliſh and
the Iriſh, but that I know there bee as peruerſe Papiſts
that come daily creeping out of Eng. to plant
themſelues in Ireland, that giue worſe example, &
are more daungerous to his Maieſties eſtate, than
thoſe that are naturally borne in Ireland.
               
                  
I dare be bould to avowe it, that there is neuer
a Pulpit within the City of London (that at Paules
Croſſe onely excepted) that is better ſupplied, then
that Pulpit at Chriſt-Church in Dubline; and how
many graue and learned men, that vpon a Chriſtian
Comiſeration haue charitably admoniſhed
them to deſiſt, from thoſe blind fantaſticall follies
which they themſelues by many years experience,
haue found to proceed but from their owne vaine
and ſuperſtitious conceites: but neither preaching
nor teaching can ſo preuaile amongſt them, but
that they become thereby to be more froward and
ſtubborne, and do with the more obſtinacy perſeuere,
not ſo much of ignorance, but rather in deſpite.
But I am come now to a ſtrange euent, a tale
of Maiſter Stanihurſt his owne ſetting down in his
Hiſtory of Ireland, and it is worth the reporting,
if it be but laught at, and thus it followeth:
               There is in the Notth part of Ireland a mighty
Loughe, 30. Miles in length, and 15. in breadth,
called by the name of Lough-Earne, but now called
Lough Sidny, I know the place well.
               This Lough (as Maiſter Stanihurſt ſaith) was at
the firſt one of theſe holy Wels, and was frequented
and ſought vnto, by the inhabitantes of thoſe
partes, for many Miraculous accidentes that was
there effected.
               A preſcribed cuſtome there was, (belike ſet
downe by ſome angrie Saint) that the Pilgrimes at
their departure ſhould not leaue the Wel vncouered,
fore warning them aforehand, that when the
ſpring ſhould bee left open, the water ſhould ſo abound,

that it ſhould drowne all the Countrey adioying
neare about. And it happened (as Maiſter
Stanihurſt ſayeth) that an old Trot came to ſanctifie
hir ſelfe at that Well, and hauing vncouered the
ſpringe, a child of hers which ſhe had left but faſt
by, began to cry, the which the woman hearing,
forgetting the obſeruance of her preſcribed order,
which was to couer the Wel, ſhe made haſt to ſtill
her brat, and returning backe againe to haue mended
hir miſſe, ſhee was incountered with the water,
which was ſo farre ouerflowne, that it was
paſt her help, whereby both ſhe, her child, and all
the reſt of the inhabitantes with in that territorie,
were al together drowned. And here Maiſter Stanihurſt,
fearing that his lye is to palpable and aparant,
yet to the end it might be ſomething the better
beleeued, he addeth, that there is the more likelihood
of truth in this ſtory, becauſe the Fiſhers in
a ſunny day, may ſee the Steeples and other Piles
plainly, & diſtinctly in the water. And this is a larger
lye and more ridiculous then the firſt, for to
begin withall, it is well enough knowne, that the
Lough is of no ſuch deapth as M. Stanihurſt would
perſwade: large it is, and very ful of Iſlands, & ſomwhat
deeper in one place then in another, but not
ſo deepe to drowne Steeples. Againe, Maiſter Stanihurſt
hath very fondly forgot a Schoole Principle,
Oportet mendacem eſſe memorem: for Maiſter Stanihurſt
being an Iriſh-man borne, could not be ignorant
(I am ſure) that in all that part of the Countrey
neere about Lough-Earne, there was neuer yet
any Steeples knowne, vnleſſe it bee the Steeple of

                  Armagh, there is neuer another ſteeple nowe to
that Lough, not by a great many of miles, perhaps
(as M. Stanthnrſt ſaith) there may bee ſome lately
builded in the bottome of the Lough, but I am ſure
that there neither is, nor neuer was any vpon the
land, in all that part of the Countrey.
               I do not meddle with this matter of any ſet purpoſe,
whereby to impugne M. Stanihurſt in his hiſtorie
of Ireland; although he hath therein fabled
forth a great number of vntruths: but I haue done
it indeed, whereby to make manifeſt the light beleefe
of obſtinate Papiſtes, that are ready to giue
credit to ydle lies and fantaſies, then they are to beleeue
the teſtimony of the word of God.
            
            
               CAP. XV.
               A true deſcription both of the Citty and Cittizens of
Dublin.
               HE that had no other knowledge of the Citty
of Dublin, but as it is deſcribed by M. Stanihurſt,
in his Chronicle of Ireland, woulde
thinke it to be far exceeding in ſtatelineſſe of building,
and in many other commodities more then
it is at this houre, & yet I am ſure that within theſe
forty yeares that I haue knowne Dublin, it hath bin
repleniſhed with a thouſand chimnies, and beautified
with as many glaſſe-windowes, and yet it maketh
no ſuch ſumptuous ſhew: But (ſaith M. Stanihurſt)
It dooth exceed in gorgeous buildings, in Martial
Chiualrie, in obedience and loyaltie, in largeneſſe of

hoſpitalitie, and in manners and ciuility. Firſt, for the
gorgeous buildings in Dublin, there be ſom other
Townes in Ireland that do farre exceed it: And to
ſpeake truly, the buildings of Dublin, are neither
outwardly faire, nor inwardly handſome: a ruynous
kind of building, neither conuenient nor wel
caſt: neither do I thinke, that either the Maſons,
nor yet their Carpenters, are of skill to contriue
any better.
               For their Martial Chiualrie, I will not diſauowe
them, no doubt they haue able men among them,
both of body & mind, but I beleeue there are better
ſouldiers in Ireland, then any be in Dublin. For
their obedience and loyalty, let mee not flatter
(if hee meanes it to the Prince) I ſay, that if they
would mixe but a little loue with that loyalty that
he ſpeakes of, the Popes vermin coulde not bee ſo
well entertained in Dublin as they be. It is but folly
to diſſemble any longer, for if we did but looke
a little into the courſe of experience, wee ſhoulde
find, that this mocking & dallying with them, hath
done more hurt then good.
               For their largeneſſe of Hoſpitalitie, I will not depriue
them of their right: They are bountifull enough
of their meat and drinke, according to their
abilities. Now laſtly, for their manners and ciuility,
I confeſſe, Dublin is very well reformed, ſince M.
Stanihurſt writ his Chronicle. And now hee commeth
againe to ſpeake of the pleaſantneſſe of the
ſcituation, & by ſeeming, he would make it a town
impregnable. But I thinke M. Stanihurſt had little
skil in the Art of Fortification. Then he deſcribeth

it with ſo many Churches, with ſo many chapels,
with ſo many ſtreets, with ſo many lanes, with ſo
many Gates, and with ſo many Bridges, as I proteſt,
I hauing knowne Dublin theſe forty yeares, yet
know not where to finde the one halfe of them he
hath named; and a great many of thoſe that are to
be ſeen, when they are found, make but a ſory ſhew
in reſpect of the commendation he hath giuen.
               Maiſter Stanihurſt maketh mention of a certain
Tower ſcituat in Dubline, commonly called by the
name of Lſoudes Tower. Which as he ſaith, as it firſt
tooke the name from La Bell Lſoude, ſo it ſeemed
vnto him to be ſome Caſtle of pleaſure, for Kings
to recreate themſelues in.
               The pleaſantneſſe of the Tower is very well
knowne, in what caſe it was when M. Stanthurſt
writ his chronicle, fitter (in good faith) to haue made
a houſe of office, then for a Pallace to entertaine
Kinges, & yet I cannot tell what manner of Kings
they had in Ireland in thoſe daies; but if they had
no better houſes then Lſoudes Tower to recreate
themſelues in, they were the ſillieth Kinges that
euer I heard on: but I wonder if Copper Ally
had floriſhed whē Maiſter Stanihurſt writ his Chronicle,
as it doth at this day, what praiſes hee could
haue publiſhed in the worthyneſſe of that worke.
               To ſpeake the truth of Dubline as it deſerueth.
Firſt for the Town it ſelfe, it is conueniēt enough,
pleaſantly ſeated, as wel for the ſerenity of the ayre
as for the pleaſing walks that are round about the
Citty.
               The Cittizens themſelues, are wonderfully reformed

in manners, in ciuility, in curteſy: themſelues
and their wiues modeſt and decent in their
apparell (I ſpeake of the better ſort) and they are
tractable enough to any thing, Religion only excepted.
I had almoſt forgotten to ſpeake of honeſty,
but it is in Dublin as in all other places wher I
haue trauelled, an eaſie matter to play the Iugler,
to make a ſhew and appearance of honeſty, but to
keepe a due rule and a formable decorum in our actions,
thats the very point.
               The very names of goodneſſe and honeſty, are
many times the names of meere contempt, & who
dares find fault at his honeſty, that is a knowne diſſembler
both with God and the world.
               God bleſſe me for ſpeaking againſt pride, letcherie,
drunkenneſſe, or againſt Idolatry. I will not
ſpeake againſt Dublin, but in many parts of Ireland
it is more dangerous to be reputed an honeſt man,
then to be a knowne knaue: greater perill to bee a
dutifull ſubiect to the King, then to be a profeſſed
votary to the Pope.
               Men are not to be deemed by their outward appearance:
for Infidels, and thoſe that haue no beleefe
in Chriſt, will counterfait holineſſe: he is but
a fooliſh Painter, that cannot paint both white &
blacke with one Penſill. I will neuer beleeue him
to be an honeſt man, that will firſt ſweare obedience
to his Prince, and then will ſubmit himſelf to
the ſeruice of his Pope; that will goe to Church
openly, and heare a Maſſe priuily; that will liſten a
little to the Preacher when he is in the pulpit, but
will neuer come neere a Communion.
               
                  
God keepe me from being an honeſt man, according
to the deſcription that I ſee made of honeſty
now adaies. And I ſay Heraclitus was but a fool
to paſſionate himſelf with comiſerating the follies
of his age; but I thinke Democritus would laugh till
he were ready to burſt, if hee were nowe liuing in
Ireland, to ſee the commixture of manners & diſpoſitions,
how they are now carried.
               I will talke no more of ydle matters, but now a
little of Religion in Dublin: If there be one that
doth ſubmit himſelfe to his Maieſties procedings,
there is ten for one that is vowed to the Pope.
               Who knoweth not this to be true, that knoweth
Dubline; the Papiſts themſelues do reioice in
it, and they not loue to diſſemble the matter, but
they will ſhew it both by wordes and deedes, that
they are ſo, and will be ſo accounted; and I thinke
they would be angry with him that ſhould otherwiſe
report it.
               Among many other priuiledges that they haue,
one amongſt the reſt is, that if there bee any Man
within the Citty (be he free, or be he forraigne) if
he doe ſeeme to finde fault at their entertaining of
Ieſuits and Popiſh prieſts, they may by their Charter,
be at their choyſe whether they will loue him
or nay.
               If any man that is free-borne in the Citty, that
is conformable to his Maieſties proceedinges, and
doth ſhew himſelfe a dutifull ſubiect to his Prince,
it is at the Sheriffes choyce, whether he will bidde
him home to dinner or no.
               But Dublin is not yet ſo deſtitute, but that

there are ſome, aſwell learned Diuines, as other
graue and godly Cittizens and Townſ-men, that
God hath bleſſed with the light of his word, to ſpy
out all the Pageants of Popery, that do daily indeuour
themſelues to giue good example, ſeeking
no leſſe to aduance the glory of God, the honor of
their Prince, the good of their Countrey.
            
            
               CAP. XVI.
               Of ſome defects in the gouernment of Dubline.
               THis inclination to Popery, whereunto the
greateſt number of the Cittizens of Dubline
are ſo much adicted, is not onely preiudiciall
to things appertaining to piety and godlineſſe, but
it is hurtfull to matters that are belonging to ciuill
gouernment; for this diuerſity in Religion, cauſeth
oppoſition, and that the Maieſtracy of the towne
beeing principally ſwayed by thoſe of the Popiſh
crew (that doth far exceed the reſt in number) bringeth
a tolleration of Popiſh inormities.
               Firſt, where it is the vſe and cuſtome of euery
well gouerned Citty or Towne, that on the Sabbaoth
day, during the time of the diuine Seruice,
there is a generall reſtraint to all Inne-keepers, Tauerners,
Alehouſe-keepers, and to all ſortes of victualers
to ſhut vp their doores, & not ſo hardie as
to retaine any gueſts within the houſe, or to ſerue
either Wine, Beere, or Ale, without the houſe, till
the Seruice and the Sermon both bee ended: and
that this might be the better performed and ſeene
vnto, they haue certaine ſworne men to make

ſearch, and to preſent all ſuch as ſhall bee found to
offend in the premiſſes: the which offenders, by
all Officers that be of worth, bee they Maiors, Baylifes,
or Sheriffes, are euermore ſeuerely and ſharply
puniſhed.
               But in Dublin, then in the time of diuine ſeruice,
and in the time of the Sermon, as well in the forenoone
as in the afternoone, euen then (I ſay) euery
filthy Ale-houſe is thronged full of company, that
as it were in deſpight of our Religion, do ſit drunkening
and quaffing, and ſometimes defiling themſelues
with more abhominable exerciſes: ſo that
the Sabbaoth day, which God hath commaunded
to be ſanctified and kept holy, is of all other dayes
moſt prophaned and polluted, without any reprehenſion
or any manner of rebuke. And although
many godly Preachers, and ſome other of the better
ſort of the Cleargy, hath indeuoured a reformation,
ſo farre as their Commiſſion doth warrant
them, the which (indeede) is but by the way
of exhortation to admoniſh and perſwade: but
thoſe that haue authority to punniſh and correct,
and doth challenge to themſelues a ſpecial prerogatiue,
to mannage all affaires whatſoeuer within
their Citty, are for the moſt part of them ſo
blinded with Popery, that they can neither ſee, nor
be perſwaded that this diſhonoring of the Sabbaoth
day is any offence at all.
               I cannot tell from whence it ſhould proceede,
whither of ignorance or deſpight, that they ſhold
keepe ſo many Popiſh holy daies in Dubline (more
then euer were heard on in England) the which becauſe

they are allowed by the Pope, are therefore
kept, as it were in contempt of his Maieſties proceedings.
               There be ſome that are numbred in the Beadrole
of Saints, and haue their Feaſts ſolemnly celebrated
amongſt the Iriſh (eſpecially at Dubline) that of
my conſcience are damned Deuils in Hell.
               I know this will bee grieuouſly taken, and our
Papiſts will ſay my cenſure is very vncharitable, &
more then becommeth a Chriſtian to auouch, but
blind men can iudge no colours. And if our Catholiques
of Dublin, could duely conceiue how horrible
a ſinne it is, for a Subiect to become a conſpirator,
a Rebell, or a Traytor to his Prince, they wold
ſooner pronounce Thomas Becket to bee a damned
villaine in the pit of Hell, then euery yeare to celebrate
his feaſt with ſuch ſolemnity as they are accuſtomed.
I might ſpeake of ſome other ſuch like
holy ones, that bee inrouled in the Popes Calender:
And there is ſcarcely one weeke in a yeare,
but we haue one Popiſh holy-day or other ſolemnized
at Dubline, more then they haue at London,
and yet I thinke there be as wiſe men in London, as
any be in Dubline, and as true, and as loyall to their
Prince, but the vidimus of the matter is, our Londoners
are neither vowed nor ſworne to the Pope.
Can there bee a more daungerous matter, then
where impiety becommeth to bee lawfull, and by
the Magiſtrates leaue and liking, to take the cloake
of vertue. I might ſpeake heare of Fryers, Ieſuites,
and other of the pole-ſhorne order, well knowne
to be his Maieſties vowed and proteſted enemies,

that are yet entertained, vpholden and maintained in
Dublin, not without great contributions allowed vnto
them, by the Papiſticall ſort of the Cittizens, that
will grudge and murmure to giue a Souldier a nights
lodging, that is drawne in by the Lord Deputy, but
for the guard of himſelfe, and of his Maieſties Caſtle,
and for the preuention of trayterous practiſes.
               This harbouring and vpholding of Traytors, muſt
neceſſarily either put his Maieſty to a charge for his
owne ſecurity, or leaue his eſtate in a deſperate condition,
euermore ſubiect to the plots and practiſes of
his capitall enemies. And I can ſee no reaſon why his
Maieſty ſhould be drawne to an expence, by the miſdemeanors
of his falſe hearted Subiects, but that they
themſelues ſhould be made to feele the penalty of it,
if not in their perſons, yet in their purſes.
               But in Dubline, his Maieſty ſhould haue little
neede of Souldiers, or of any other martiall men to
put him to charges, were it not for the contemptuous
demeanor of the Popiſh ſort of the Cittizens: but if
vpon any vrgent occaſion, there bee but one hundred
of Souldiers to bee ceaſed amongſt them, the which
they themſelues by their obſtinate impugning his
Maieſties proceedings, doth many times inforce, they
will impoſe the charge (as much as in them lyeth) vpon
thoſe that they know to be beſt affected to Religion,
and that do ſtand moſt aſſured to his maieſty, both
in duty and obedience; and would not onely drawe
contributions from Forrainers and Strangers, ſuch as
haue neither Trade nor Traffique in the Towne, but
would likewiſe inforce it from his Maieſties Pencioners,
and other Gentlemen, that are there attendant
vpon the State, if they haue but a houſe or a chamber

within their Liberties.
               And they do not onely ſhew an vnwillingneſſe to
his Maieſtie in theſe trifling matters, but they do likewiſe
make manifeſt their ingratitude by many other
meanes. And whereas their Corporation hath been
dignified by ſeuerall Kings and Princes of England, with
many large priuiledges, and that they haue the whole
trade and traffique amongſt themſelues, no man to
buy or ſell within their liberties, vnleſſe he bee a freeman,
yet vpon any impoſition, though it dooth properly
belong vnto the Citty, and not ſo much but for
an annuall rent, which they are to pay to his Maieſty
for thoſe lands and liberties that they doe hold from
his Highnes, yet they would exact it from ſtrangers,
that are neither free, nor haue any manner dealing in
the Citty, but to ſpend their money, which only the
Cittizens doth gaine by; & there is neither merchandize,
nor any manner of commodity that is brought
from Spaine, from France, from Flanders, or from any
other part of England or Scotland, but they will haue
the whole bargaine to themſelues, not ſuffering any
man that is not free, to buy for his owne prouiſion,
no, not ſo much as a drinking glaſſe, but it muſt bee
had from them, and by that meanes he ſhall be inforced
to pay double the price.
               Thus the freemen, by vertue of their Priuiledges,
will reap the whole commodity among themſelues,
and they would make the Forraigners to pay theyr
rent, and to become contributors to any impoſitions
whatſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe them to aſſigne, and yet in
their demaundes, they haue neither certaine ſummes
ſet downe, what any man ought to pay, nor whoe
they be that ſhould pay, but the Sheriffes of Dublyn

are the men that do ceaſſe at their pleaſure whome
they liſt, and doth impoſe vpon euery man what they
liſt; ſo that if the Sheriffes of Dublin be a little ſtuft
in the head with a Pope (the diſeaſe being ſo common
amongſt them, that there are very few that doeth
eſcape it) where they ceaſſe a Papiſt at ſixe pence,
they will aske a Proteſtant tenne ſhillings, the which
if the party denaies to pay (or at the leaſt to ſatisfie
them to their owne content) they will breake open a
doore, contrary to Lawe and equitie (and I beleeue
farther then their Charter will reach vnto, if it
were well ouerlooked) they will carry away with
them any goodes whatſoeuer they be, that they can
finde.
               I could ſpeak of many other mattres, and I could
ſpeake by experience: for although I bee not a Freeman
of Dublyn, yet I was thus much behoulding to
the two late Shcriffes, that becauſe I would not giue
them tenne ſhillinges which they had impoſed vpon
me, at their owne will and pleaſure, (I know not why
nor wherefore, vnleſſe it were for writing a Booke
againſt the Pope) but they verie kindly drew me out
of mine owne houſe and carried me to priſon, where
they kept me forth-comming for one night, & this (I
hope) be very well knowne, by the ſame token, that
the verie next Sunday after, I coulde haue met with
one of them, in Hang-mannes Lane at an Idolatrous
Maſſe.
               But I cannot blame them, though they bee ſomewhat
ſparing of their purſes vnto the Prince, for with
out doubt, they are at greater expences with the pope;
but if they coulde drawe in his Maieſties Pencioners,
and thoſe Gentlemen that are to attend his Highnes

ſeruice, to bee contributers with them to thoſe payments
it pleaſed them to impoſe, I would more commend
their wiſedomes, then I can do their honeſties.
               This deſcription of the gouernment of Dublin, cannot
be a generall reproach to the Cittizens vniuerſally:
for as I haue ſaide before, ſo I ſay ſtill, that Dubline
is repleniſhed with many worthy Townes-men of all
ſorts; and amongſt the Aldermen themſelues, there
are are ſome few that are well knowne to be aſſuredly
confirmed, both to God and to his Maieſty, and that
doth hate and deteſt this Ieſuited generation of the
Popes Riffe-Raffe: but they are ouerſwaied with the
multitude, the Papiſts do farre exceede them in number;
and doe they not impugne the Prince himſelfe?
then alaſſe what can they doe, in a matter that could
yet neuer be redreſſed, neither by the preſcript of law,
nor by the intimation of loue.
               But were not this contemptuous diſobedience of
Subiects, enough to bereaue his Maieſtie of his royall
diſpoſition: but I confeſſe, it is not good to put a
Prince into any iealouſie, or to bring him into any
doubt or ſuſpition of his Subiectes; for theſe are
meanes, not onely to trouble a Princes mind, but alſo
many times to betake himſelfe to thoſe extraordinary
reſolutions as might be offenciue. But it is very
expedient for a Prince to haue due intelligence, aſwel
of his enemies as of his doubtfull friendes, in what eſtate
they remaine, what determinations they hould,
and to haue knowledge of their enterpriſes, what
courſes they vndertake, and what purpoſes they pretend,
but eſpecially thoſe Princes that are incertaine
and vnaſſured of the loue of their Cittizens and Subiects.
            
            
               
               CAP. XVII.
               Of the Trade and Traffique that is vſed in Dublin, and
from whence they doe exact their greateſt Commodity.
               THe Citty of Dubline is principally vpholden by
the Engliſh; for the Lord Deputy holding there his
Maieſties eſtate, and the whole body of the Counſell
of that Realme, together with the Captaines, Pencioners,
all Officers, as well appertaining to the Army, as
to the foure Courtes, all their ſeruants, frendes and followers,
being there for the moſt part reſident; this maketh
the Cittizens to raiſe their priſes in all thinges,
their Houſes, Chambers & Lodginges, are dearer rented
in Dubline, then they be in London.
               It is the nicitie of the Engliſh (that are euery day innouating
& deuiſing of new faſhions) that helpeth thē away
with their Sattins, their Silkes, their fine cloath,
both woollen and linnen, their new ſtriped ſtuffes,
their lace of Gold, of Siluer, of ſilke, and a number of
other gaudy deuiſes, that the Engliſh do vſe to buy at
vnreaſonable rates, that wold neuer be vented amongſt
the Iriſh themſelues.
               The trade that they commonly vſe is but to London,
from thence they do furniſh themſelues with all ſortes
of wares for their ſhoppes, for ſhipping they haue none
belonging to the Towne that is worth the ſpeaking of,
yet they will bee called Merchantes; and hee that hath
but a Barrell of ſalt, and a barre or two of Iron in his
ſhop, is called a Merchant. He that doth but ſel earthen
Pottes and Pannes, ſope, Otmeale, Trenchers, and
ſuch other like traſh, is no leſſe then a Merchant: there
be ſhopkeepers in Dubline, that all the Wares they are

able to ſhewe, are not worth a poore Engliſh Pedlers
Packe, and yet all theſe bee Merchantes. But now to
ſpeake the truth, there are ſeuerall Cittizens of Dubline,
that are very wealthy and men of good abillity, that
haue there Shoppes well repleniſhed withall ſortes of
wares, as wel Mercery, as Grocery, and Drapery, both
linnen and woollen, and there is neither Silk-man, nor
Milliner in London, that can ſhew better wares (for
the quantitie) then ſome of thoſe can do, that bee called
Merchantes of Dubline.
               
               But I am now to ſpeake of a certaine kinde of commodity,
that outſtretcheth all that I haue hitherto ſpoken
of, and that is the ſelling of Ale in Dubline, a Quotidian
commodity, that hath vent in euery houſe
in the Towne, in euery day in weeke, at euery houre in
the day, and in euery minnute in the houre: There is no
Merchandiſe ſo vendible, it is the very marrow of the
common wealth in Dubline: the whole profit of the
Towne ſtandes vpon Ale-houſes, and ſelling of Ale,
but yet the Cittizens a little to dignifie the title, as they
vſe to call euery Pedler a Merchant, ſo they vſe to call
euery Ale-houſe, a Tauerne, whereof there are ſuch
plentie, that there are whole ſtreates of Tauernes, and
it is as rare a thing, to finde a houſe in Dubline without
a Tauerne, as to find a Tauerne without a Strumpet.
               This free Mart of Ale-ſelling in Dublyne, is prohibited
to none, but that it is lawfull for euery Woman
(be ſhe better or be ſhe worſe) either to brewe
or elſe to ſell Aale. The better ſort, as the Aldermens
Wiues, and the reſt that are of better abilitie, are
thoſe that do brew, and looke how many houſhoulders
there are in Dublyne, ſo many Ale-brewers there
be in the Towne, for euery Houſhoulders Wife is a

Brewer. And (whatſoeuer ſhe be otherwiſe) or let hir
come from whence ſhee will, if her credit will ſerue
to borrowe a Pan, and to buy but a meaſure of mault
in the Market, ſhe ſets vppe Brewing: then they haue
a number of young ydle Huſwiues, that are both verie
loathſome, filthie and abhominable, both in life
and manners, and theſe they call Tauerne-keepers, the
moſt of them knowne harlots; theſe doe take in both
Ale and Beere by the Barrell from thoſe that do brue,
and they ſell it forth againe by the potte, after twoe
pence for a Wine quait. And this (as I take it) is a
principall cauſe for the tolleration of many enormities;
for the gaine that is gotten by it muſt needes be
great, when they buy mault in Dublyn, at haulfe the
price that it is ſold for at London, and they ſell their
drinke in Dublyn, at double the rate that they doe in
London: and this commoditie the Aldermens wiues
and the reſt of the Women-brewers do find ſo ſweet,
that maiſter Mayor and his brethren are the willinger
to winke at, and to tollerate with thoſe multitude
of Ale-houſes, that themſelues do euen knowe to be
the very Nurſeries of Drunkenneſſe, of all manner of
Idleneſſe, of whordome, and many other vile abhominations.
               I haue hitherto ſpoken but of Ale-brewers, that
are almoſt as many in number as there bee dwellinge
houſes in the Towne. There be likewiſe ſome three
or foure that haue ſet vppe Brew-houſes for Beete,
whereof they are accuſtomed to make of two ſortes;
that is to ſay: Strong Beere, and Ordinarie: their ordinarie
Beere▪ they doe vſe to ſerue to the Engliſhe,
that are there inhabiting in Dublyn, that doeth keepe
Seruantes and Families, and this Beere they do prize

at ſixe ſhillings the Barrell, which according to their
meaſure, amounteth to xlviij. s. the tunne, and in London
their iiij. s. Beere, that is ſolde after the rate of
xxiiij. s. the tunne, is better Beere by oddes.
               Their ſtrong Beere is commonly vented by theſe
Ale-houſe Queanes, Tauerne-keapers, (as they call
them) and this they do take at xij. s. the Dubline Barrell,
and that is iuſt after the rate of xvj. s. a London
Barrell, which amounteth to iiij.l.xvj. s. the tunne,
ſhameful for the Mageſtrates of the Towne to ſuffer,
conſidering the cheapneſſe of Mault.
               Here is now to bee conſidered, that there is almoſt
neuer a Houſeholder in Dubline (whatſoeuer Trade
he otherwiſe vſeth) but hee will haue a blinde corner
in his houſe reſerued for a Tauerne, and this (if hee
haue not a Wife of his owne to keepe it) ſhall bee ſet
out to one of theſe Women-Tauerne-keepers, ſhee
taketh in drinke both Beere and Ale, after the rate of
xij. s. the Dubline Barrell, ſhe payeth moreouer to the
party of whō ſhe hireth her Tauerne, vj. s. out of euery
Barrell that ſhe vttereth: if ſhe doth not get vj. ſh.
more for her ſelfe, ſhe will neuer be able to keepe her
ſelfe honeſt, ſo that here is xxiiij. s. made out of euery
Barrell of Beere, which commeth iuſt to ix.li.xij. s.
a tunne. How ſhamefull a thing to be ſuffered in a wel
gouerned Citty, let wiſe men iudge, for with thoſe
that be called honeſt, I will not meddle.
               I haue beene ſo long amongſt theſe filthy Alehouſes,
that my head beginnes to grow idle, and it is no
wonder, for the very remembrance of that Hogges
waſh which they vſe to ſell for ij. d. the Wine quart,
is able to diſtemper any mans braines, and as it is neither
good nor wholeſome, ſo it is vnfit for any mans

drinking, but for common Drunkardes; but I wil here
leaue my women Tauerne-Keepers to Maiſter Maior of
the Bull-Ringe to looke vnto, and I will now haue about
with our Dubline Bakers, that will be ſure to ſell
their Bread at double the price that they buy their
Corne: and although there haue been ſeuerall Maiors
of the Citty which haue ſeemed to be angry at the
matter, yet as long as I haue knowne Dubline, I neuer
knewe Maior, but hee was either aſhamed or afraid to
reforme it. But there be ſome that wil make ilfauored
reaſons, and will ſay, that the Bakers haue ſuch a kind
of dexterity, that they will make any Maior both deafe
and blind: I cannot tell how it commeth to paſſe, but
the Bakers do make a good ſhift for themſelues, for
they neither reforme their owne bread according to
the priſes of Corne, neither will they ſuffer the countrey-Bakers
vpon the Market dayes, to bring in bread
that is reformed to a true aſſiſe.
               Thus the Mageſtrates of Dubline doth tollerate
and beare with a number of inormities, vnfit to bee
tollerated in any well gouerned Citty, the which (as
I ſuppoſe) they do the rather wink at, whē they know
well enough that this extortion that is exacted by ſelling
of Bread and Beere, doth pinch none but the Engliſh,
thoſe that are to follow the State, & thoſe againe
that are of the poorer ſort of the Iriſh, for there is not a
Cittizen in Dubline (that is of any abillity worthy to
bee ſpoken of) but he hath a Farme in the Countrey,
that yeeldeth him Corne, both for Bread and Beere,
enough to find his owne houſe; but the Engliſh that
muſt goe to the Bakers and the Brwers, are made to
pay dearely for it (and ſo they do for euery other thing
that they buy) and as the Iriſh do know all this well

enough, ſo they haue therefore the leſſe care to redreſe
it: and yet if the Lord Deputy ſhould but withdrawe
himſelfe but for two yeares together into any
other part of the Countrey, the greateſt part of the
Cittizens of Dubline, would bee ready to begge, that
do now dwell in a malicious conceite againſt the
Engliſh.
               
            
            
               CAP. XVIII.
               Of the Ambition of the Iriſh.
               THe Iriſh are very Ambitious of Fame and renowne,
but it is with Heroſtratus, that ſought to
leaue himſelfe in recorde by burning the Temple
in Epheſus; ſo the Iriſh do hunt after Fame, and to leaue
themſelues regeſtred to poſterity, they will kill, they
will murther, they will rebell, and what action ſo vngracious
which they will not attempt, to leaue an odible
memorandome to their lowſie Bardes and Rithmers,
that can writ in the commendation of nothing
but of vice and villany.
               By this example of the Iriſh, wee may diſtinguiſh
betweene the louers of Fame, and the louers of Vertue,
and although it bee true that Vertue hath Fame
for an attendant, yet Vertue ſeeketh not for Fame: for
glory with the Crocodill flieth him that followeth it,
and followeth him that flyeth it; no wonder then
though there bee great difference in their values that
imploy them for Fame, from thoſe againe, that indeuours
for Vertue.
               This vaine oſtentation, wee ſee whereunto it leadeth:
and hee that ſeeketh renowne in a wrong boxe,
either by vnlawfull attempts, or baſe indeuours ſtumbleth

many times vpon Infamie in ſtead of Glory: ſo
he that hunteth after dignities by vnworthy deſertes,
in ſeeking after Eſtimation, betrayeth himſelfe to open
Deriſion.
               Amongſt the wiſe, a man is eſteemed but only for
his vertues. For Offices, authority, & Riches; al theſe,
are but the guifts of Fortune, but for a man to be exalted
to a dignity, and to bee deemed worthy of the
place by a common conſent, that marke is vnfallible,
for there magnificence doth manifeſt & make known
it ſelfe.
               The office of a Prince doth craue obedience in his
Subiects, but our affections are ſtill depending of his
vertues: if thus to a Prince, what hope is there then
left to a Peſant, that hath neyther vertue, witte, nor
honeſty wherewith to bleſſe himſelfe withall, and wil
yet throng himſelfe into a Dignity, and onely but to
make it durty.
               
                  Nero, demanding of a Souldior why he hated him,
was anſwered: Becauſe (ſaide hee) whilſt thou waſt
worthy of loue I honoured thee, but nowe thou art
become an enemy to vertue, I therefore abhor thee.
               
                  Ambition is no vice for any of theſe love-prized
Swaines. For when I ſee a fellow that is but baſe of
birth bare of of honeſty barren of wit, and that is but
dropt into a dignity without deſert, I neuer look vpon
ſuch a creature but methinks I ſee a Iacke anapes
in a ſattin ſute. This is a baſe Ambition, and right of
the Iriſh ſtampe, for there is not a people vnder the
ſun, that are more deſirous to be famed then the Iriſh
or that will aduenture vpon more deſperate reſolutions
then they, and but to leaue themſelues i
                     ••••••
                  d
 in ſome one of their Rymer-rolles.
               
                  
The miſerable malefactor at the very houre of his
death, when he is going to execution, doth euen then
affect Fame, and is muche more deſirous that his lokers
on ſhoulde ſee him take his death with reſolution
and without feare, then hee is to reconcile himſelfe
vnto God, and is more aſhamed that it ſhould be
ſaid, that his countenance began to change with faint
neſſe of courage, then he is of the crime that he hath
committed, how abhominable ſoeuer. And all this,
but that he might appeare conſtant; and to whome,
but to thoſe that do behold him, that are commonlie
more inconſtant then the wind.
               Sir Thomas More, whome Ballarmine (in his letter
to George Blackwal the Popes Archprieſt) ſo confidently
avoweth for ſo worthy a Martyr, was ſicke of this
diſeaſe, and at the laſt houre, when he was to take his
death for Treaſon, he did ſacrifice to Fame; for when
the Executioner was ready to ſtrike off his head, hee
prayed him, in any wiſe to be good to his beard, telling
him, that he ſhould find his necke ſo ſhort, that
if he were not very warie in the performaunce of his
buſineſſe, it might proue a blemiſh to his reputation.
               Methinks it to bee but an vnſeaſonable conceit, at
the laſt houre of a mans life to fall a ieſting with the
world for vaine oſtentation, and neglecting to ſeeke
the fruition of eternall felicitie, to reſt himſelfe vpon
the ſmoakie applauſe of Fame.
               It may ſometimes ſerue for a ſhroude to ſhelter a
ſhame, but it is an ill choſe time, to fall a ieſting with
the Hangman, when he may play too much vpon the
aduantage, if not by viuacitie or quickneſſe of wit, to
thruſt backe a ieſt vpon the Ieſter himſelfe, yet Ex officio,
he may do it by action, that doth pinch nerer the

quicke, then the bittereſt words.
               But if More were a Martyr as Bellarmine woulde
haue him, I ſay he was but a mocking Martyr, that
would fall a ſcoffing with the executioner, at that very
inſtant when he was to take off his head.
               But I haue heard of ſome others that haue been of
this merry diſpoſition, and I thinke aſwell worthy to
be Martyrs as More; one amongeſt the reſt that was
condemned to the Gallowes, and when the hangman
came to faſten the halter about his necke, hee deſired
him of all friendſhippe, that he would not bring the
rope too neere his throat: for (ſaid he) I am ſo tickliſh
about that place, that without doubt I ſhall hurt
my ſelfe with vnreaſoneble laughter.
               Such another, going to the place of Execution,
deſired the officer to ſhun a ſtreet that lay right in the
way as he ſhould paſſe, and to go a little about: The
Officer demanding the reaſon, hee told him, becauſe
he ought a Cittizen a little money that dwelt in the
ſame ſtreat, and he feared that if hee ſhoulde ſee him
paſſing by, he would arreſt him, and bring him vnto
ſome trouble of the law.
               I muſt not forget one more of theſe merry conceited
fellowes, who going to the gallowes to be executed,
was admoniſhed by his ghoſtly father to take his
death patiently, aſſuring him, that though his dinner
were ſomewhat ſharpe and harſh, yet he ſhould find
a ioyfull ſupper in Heauen. Alaſſe (ſaid the malefactor)
thats but a cold comfort to mee, for I neuer vſe
to eate any ſupper.
               We cannot iudge of any mannes aſſurance by the
boldneſſe of his death: for it falleth out many times,
that men in thoſe caſes, wil make great ſhew of reſolution

and courage, but for oſtentations ſake, and
there is not a people that are more inclined vnto that
then the Iriſh; but amongſt thoſe that haue moſt valiantly
reſolued themſelues to execution, it is yet to be
doubted whither in ſo dangerous an intent, conſtancy,
or obſtinacy had the preheminence.
               Euery Cowarde can diſpiſe death in miſery, for to
the diſtreſſed, life is but a ſcourge, and death their only
ſolace: but hee that can indure the calamity of all miſfortunes
with patience and conſtancy, more rather
deſerueth the Chariot of Triumph then Caeſar himſelfe.
Thoſe that in the times of execution are ſeene
to runne to their end and to haſten on the execution,
they do it with reſolution, but becauſe they will defeate
themſelues of time to conſider of the horrour
of death, for it grieues them not to be dead, but to die.
Heliogabulus, the moſt diſolute man in the world, had
a reſolution to die ſome deſperate death, as it might
apeare by thoſe prouiſions he had made for the purpoſe;
for firſt, he built a ſtately Tower from whence
he might caſt himſelfe, hee alſo cauſed cordes to bee
made of gold and Crimſin ſilke, wherewith to ſtrangle
himſelfe; he further prouided a rych golden Rapier
of purpoſe to murther himſelfe; and hee prepared
poyſons, and kept them in boxes of Emeraldes, and
Topaſes thereby to poyſon himſelfe.
               Euery man that dares aduenture to deſire death,
cannot be ſaid to be reſolued to dye; for many a man
that hath ſeemed to wiſhe for death, hath fainted againe,
when they haue beene put to the tryall.
               Pouerty, miſery, diſeaſes, & death it ſelfe are ſubiects
of a heauy burthen, that do waigh and grieue eſpecially
thoſe mindes that are but of the common

ſtampe: we had neede therefore to be very wel inſtructed
both how to ſuſtaine, and how to combat with
thoſe kindes of accidentes. The beſt aime we can take
whereby to iudge of a mans death, is but to conſider
of the manner of his life: for haue we knowne him to
liue conſtantly and quietly it is likely hee ſhould then
die reſolutly and repoſely, for it is to bee ſuppoſed,
that hee that konweth how to liue, knoweth likewiſe
how to dye.
               Amongſt all the benefites that Vertue beſtoweth
of vs, the contempt of death is moſt aproued and precious:
and as the place is vncertaine where death looketh
for vs, we muſt therefore be the more vigilant to
expect him euery where, for the premeditation of
death, is but a fore-thinking how to liue and die well.
It skilles ſo much the leſſe when death doth come, ſo
we be prouided for it, for all the time that we liue, we
do but ſteale it from death, and the continuall worke
of life, is in the end determined by death.
               The iollity of youth and the grauity of age are different
in this point, for the one looketh forward and
the other backward, youth delights it ſelfe with wanton
allurements, Age preacheth ſeuerity, and readeth
daily Lectures of temperance and of reformation, and
whether it wake or ſleepe, it doth not permit vs one
houre but to thinke on inſtruction, on patience, on
repentance, and on Death.
               I might haue inlarged this Chap. with other matter
of ſome perticular perſons in Ireland, that haue
ſought to make themſelues famous amongeſt theyr
Countrey-men, by thoſe endeuours, that were directly
preiudiciall to the dignity of the Prince, but I wil
here omit them, & for concluſion ſay, there is no Na-

in the world, that are more ambitious of Fame then
are the Iriſh, nor that dooth hunt after it with more
contrary courſes then do the Iriſh.
               
            
            
               CAP. XIX.
               Of the doctrin of the Pope, how it is embraced by the Iriſh▪
               
               THey ſay it was S. Patrick that purged Ireland frō
all manner of venemous Wormes, and it is the
Pope that hath poiſned it ten times worſe with
his Locuſt vermine of Friers, Monks & Ieſuites, & he
hath ſo infected the whole Countrey with Toades,
Frogs, & padocks, that in the habite of popiſh prieſts
do keepe ſuch a continuall croking in the eares of the
poore people, that they haue made them deafe to all
good councell. It is only the poiſon of the Popes doctrine
that inciteth to ſeditions, to Rebellions, and
that ſetteth ſubiects againſt their Princes. Look into
Bellarmines writinges, that hath taken ſuch paines in
behaulfe of the Pope, and you ſhall finde, that all his
Bookes are ſtuffed with no other Doctrine, but that
Popes may degrad Emperors, kings, Princes and potentates,
may abrogate their Lawes, may diſpenſe
with their ſubiects for their allegiance, that they may
take Armes againſt their Soueraignes, that they may
rebell; yea, and althogh Treaſon and murther be the
moſt hatefull offences that any man can commit, and
are moſt abhorred and deteſted of all men, yet they
are admitted, maintained, and vpholden by the pope,
and he doth not onely tollerate thoſe offences, but he
doth likewiſe giue pardons and diſpenſations to his
villaines, both to practiſe and execute them, as that
holy Pope, that gaue Parry plenarie indulgence and remiſſion

of all his ſins to murther Queene Elizabeth.
               
               A filthy Religion, that hath abaſed the ſimplicity
of all natures, and defiled the people of ſo many Nations,
not onely through Idolatry, and ſuperſtition,
but alſo by bloud-ſhedding, and deteſtable murthers,
as though it were lawfull and no offence (if it be done
vnder the colour and ſhew of Religion) to abandon
all honeſty and ſhamefaſtneſſe: inſomuch, that ſuch
horryble and deteſtable crewelty hath been ſhowne,
that their Alters haue beene oftentimes inbrewed and
ſtained with mens bloud, as though God were pleaſed
with thoſe horrible murthers, practiſed and committed
by thoſe abhominable wretches, that care not
how they defile themſelues with all kinde of beaſtlineſſe,
and deteſtable villany.
               This is the Religion which the Iriſh do imbrace,
and this Doctrine is it that hath deluded a number of
poore people of that Countrey, and hath ſet them ſo
oppoſite, that they deſpiſe to learne any thing from
the Engliſh, bee it neuer ſo neceſſary, that doth but
appertain either to Ciuillity, Morallity, or Humanity:
it maketh ſome of them malitiouſly to impugne the
proceeding of the Prince, it hath induced a number
of them into open Rebellion. And this Idolatrous
Doctrine is it that fitteth their turnes, that are ſo addected
and inclined to vndertake againſt the Prince.
The property of true Religion, doth euermore keepe
men within the bounds of duty, it illumineth them
with the true light of holineſſe, and ſanctimony; and
ſo deſirous are they which followe the rule and diſcipline
of Chriſt, by immitation to expreſe the gracious
goodneſſe and mercy of God, that in the ſame
they repoſe the whole ſum of Religion: therefore

neither prouoked with taunts, they are any thing moued,
and being vexed with ſlandrous reports, they are
not yet kindled with anger; and although they bee
ſometimes prouoked with iniuries, they do not go about
to bee reuenged: nay, rather they ſuppoſe that
triall to be laid vpon them, that they by a heape and
multitude of good turnes, ſhould abate the edge of
their enemies wrath.
               Whilſt the Popes doctrine had ouerwhelmed the
Realme of England, with the miſty fogs of darkneſſe,
what commotions, what rebellions, & what tumults
were ſtirred vp from time to time, by the commons
of that Realme: but after that the minds of men were
able to behold the extraordinary light of the heauenly
doctrine, they ſubmitted themſelues to that duty
and obedience, which the rule of Gods worde both
preſcribeth and commaundeth to ſubiectes: yet after
this, when Queen Marie had againe reeſtabliſhed the
Idolatrous Religion of Rome; when Hell was broken
looſe, and that the Deuils themſelues had ſtirred vp
the harts of our Engliſh Popelings to all cruell tyranny,
that they left no torture nor torment vnattempted,
that might haue wrought the ſubuerſion and ouerthrow
of Chriſtian Piety: what a multitude both
of men and women, ſuffered themſelues to be tortured
and cruelly tormented, through all the partes of
the Realme for the Faith of Chriſt, without any
manner of reſiſtance: and although this horrible cruelty
had continuance for fiue whole yeares together,
yet where was their heard of a Rebell that offered to
ariſe in armes, or by any meanes to oppoſe himſelfe
againſt that monſtrous tyranny.
               The Chriſtian Faith was firſt eſtabliſhed by preaching,

and the Diſciples and thoſe that followed
Chriſt, preuailed ſtill by ſuffering: the Pope vpholdeth
his doctrine, onely by perſecuting, by murther,
by Treaſon, and by tyrannie; ſuch diuerſity there is
betweene the doctrine of Chriſt, and the doctrine of
the Pope.
               It is truly reported of the French K. that was latelie
cruelly murthered, who many years ſince lying before
Rone, had intelligence of an enterpriſe that ſhould
haue beene attempted againſt his life, and being well
informed of the party that had vndertaken it, the king
chancing to deſcry this Gentleman thus deſcribed vnto
him, cauſed him to be called; who comming before
his preſence, the King perceiuing him alreadie begin
to tremble, as one doubting ſome bad meaſure,
ſaide vnto him: I am fully perſwaded, you fore-imagine
what I haue to charge you with, and your countenance
doth already bewray it, but I am ſo well inſtructed
in the buſineſſe you haue taken in hand, that
if you would goe about to hide it, you ſhoulde but
make the matter the worſe for your ſelfe; faile not
therefore as you tender your life, to confeſſe the truth
of all your purpoſe.
               The Villaine, that ſawe himſelfe thus diſcouered,
beganne to hold vp his hands and to plead for mercy:
but the King interrupting him in his pretence, ſaide
vnto him; Did I euer do you any wrong? Haue I euer
offended any friend of yours? or how happeneth
it? or what might mooue you to conſpire and enterpriſe
my death?
               The Gentleman with a verie fainte trembling
voice, and a ſelfe-accuſing looke, aunſwered him againe:
That no particular occaſion had euer mooued

him to doe it, but the intereſt of the generall cauſe of
his faction, for that he was perſwaded by ſome of his
ghoſtly fathers, that to root out (and in what manner
of ſort ſoeuer) to make away ſo great an enemy vnto
their Religion, would be an execution full of pietie,
and a worke of ſupererogation.
               Well then (ſaid the King) I will ſhew you the difference
of our Religions: yours perſwades you to kill
me hauing neuer done you wrong, but mine wils me
to pardon you convicted as you are: go your wayes
therefore and auoid out of my ſight, and let mee neuer
ſee you here againe, and henceforward be better
aduiſed in your enterpriſes, and take honeſter counſel
then thoſe that be of your owne Religion, and thus
he let him paſſe.
               We may here ſtill ſee the fruits of the Popes Religion:
but preſidents in Ireland do ſerue to little purpoſe,
if they make againſt the Pope; all the teſtimony
that the holy ſcriptures can afford, will neuer be credited
in that point. We beleeue in Ireland, that when
Chriſt came to worke the ſaluation of the world, hee
did not finiſh the work he came for, but left the greateſt
part of the buſineſſe to be performed by a Popiſh
Prieſt. We can tell how to worſhip a god that is of
our owne making, but we know not how to worſhip
the God that hath made vs: we know how to receiue
benefits and bleſſings from the Prince, but we know
not how to render that obedience that belongeth to
Subiects. My concluſion is, that as men cannot make
knowne their dreames till they bee awake, no more
can theſe acknowledge their faults till they meane to
amend.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XX.
               How the Papiſts of Ireland are neither afraid nor aſhamed
to manifeſt themſelues.
               THey ſay, a manne ought not to be aſhamed to
ſpeake what he ſeemeth not to thinke; it ſhould
then follow, that men ſhould not be aſhamed to
heare of that they are not aſhamed to doe. The Iriſh
are not aſhamed to manifeſt themſelues, aſwell by
wordes as by deeds to be profeſſed Papiſtes; they are
not affraid to confeſſe it, and it may well be ſuppoſed
that when men haue a daring to ſpeake ill, they haue
likewiſe an intent to do ill. But I muſt ſay, they are al
his Maieſties ſubiects, and ſo I thinke they bee, but I
pray God ſend his Highneſſe to haue neede of them
againſt the Pope, for if it came to voices betweene
them two, his Maieſtie would hardly bee able to reckon
with the Vſurer, after ten in the hundred thrughout
the whole Realme, but that the Pope would ſtill
be able to encounter him with ten for one. That the
Iriſh are thus inclined to the Pope and to poperie, I
ſhal need no other teſtimony then their own demeanors,
and I would bee glad for their owne ſakes, that
they could conuince mee of ſlaunder: but as I hope
they will not go about it, ſo I thinke they will not be
offended with me for ſpeaking, when they themſelus
are not aſhamed ſo publikely to manifeſt it. For, as
they do ſhew themſelues to be apparantly malicious
to his Maieſties lawes and proceedings, ſo they doe
hate and deteſt him, that doth but ſpeake againſt their
Pope, or that will take any exceptions againſt that
Catholick brood of the Pole-ſhorne order, that they

do both harbour in their houſes, and vphold with
their purſes (without doubt) to their great charge &
expences, conſidering the abhominable number of
thoſe Balamites, that doth ſo abound throughout that
whole Realme, in City, town & Countrey, that doth
daily practiſe againſt his Maieſties gouernment.
               And what Prince in the world would indure to be
thus croſſed by this contemptious demeanor of vndutifull
ſubiectes, and would not make them to feele the
penalty of their wilfull diſobedience, but that excelent
Maieſtie that is not onely inclined to all gracious
clemency in his owne perſon, but with the like royall
diſpoſition hee hath ſo prouided, that his Miniſters
and thoſe that he putteth in Authority in that Realm,
doth behaue themſelues in their gouerment with that
mercy & mildnes whereunto he himſelfe is addicted.
               If I ſhoud ſpeake of the gouernment, how it is mannaged
at this preſent, by that moſt honorable Gentleman,
the Lord Deputy that now is, who is likewiſe
aſſiſted with diuerſe other of his Maieſties Counſaile
of that Realme, Men in like maner of great wiſedome
and iudgement; I might perhaps faile in making a true
relation of their worth and worthines. I do therefore
appeale to the Iriſh themſelues, when they did euer
know Ireland to be better ſupplied, either with a Deputy,
either with a Counſell, either with a Clergy (I
meane thoſe of the Clergy that haue beene inueſted
by a lawfull Authority from the Prince) or that the
affaires of that Realme, were euery known to be mannaged
with more mildnes, with more mercy, or with
more loue and lenity then now they be: and I would
but demand of them againe, when they did euer know
the Papiſts of Ireland to bee more peruerſe, more obſtinate,

or more apparantly contemptuous then now
they are. I could yet ſay more, but I will wade no further
in this, and I am ſure the papiſtes themſelues (although
they will not let to lie for adantage, yet) they
they will not for ſhame deny this truth. The papiſtes
of Ireland are (as in other places) of two kinds, the ſeducers,
and the Seduced.
               
               The Seducers are thoſe, that vnder a little ſhewe of
litterature, or vnder the pretence of being Trauellers,
that they can ſay they haue bin in Spain, or at Remes, or
at Rome, or that haue bin Ieſuited, or that carrieth the
marke of a Monk, of a Frier, or a runnagate Prieſt, that
can but ſay a Maſſe, or read our Ladies pſalter; any of
theſe ſhewes, any of theſe pretences, or any of theſe
tytles, are enough to grace and credit a Dog, and not
only to bring him into a venerable eſtimation, and to
be holily accounted of, but to giue him that reputation
amongſt the multitude, that he ſhall be beleeued,
and he ſhall be beloued; for men are commonly beleued,
as they are beloued.
               And theſe ſeducing ſpirits vnder a counterfet ſhew
of holineſſe▪ are ſtill endeuoring to peruert the ſimpler
ſort of his Maieſties poore ſubiects, to withdraw
them from their duties, and to arme them with all
diſobedience and contemptuous demeanour towards
their Prince.
               The ſecond kind of Papiſts, that I haue ſaid to bee
ſeduced, are the vnlearned and ignorant ſort, that are
abuſed and miſled, by the onely inducements of thoſe
counterfait Hypocrites, thus formerly deſcribed.
               Now, if there be any comiſeration to bee had to a
people that are thus inchanted, theſe are to be pittied,
and it is for their ſakes onely that I haue endeuoured

theſe lines, the which if I woulde goe about to confirme
by any authoritie drawne from the holy Scriptures,
I know it would be to very litle purpoſe, when
there is no teſtimony that can be alledged, either frō
                  Peter, or from Paule, or from any other of the Apoſt.
or from Chriſt himſelfe, that will be either admitted
or receiued againſt the Pope. Whatſoeuer I haue
therefore related in this Deſcription, that may any
waies concerne the Iriſh, I haue neither inferred preſidents,
nor inforced other matter, but ſuch as they
themſelues are beſt acquainted withall, and what is
moſt frequent and conuerſant to their owue experiments.
And there is not a Nation vnder the ſun, that
are more apt to make collections of accidentes that
ſhall happen, or that will ſoner refer them to preſagements
of misfortune, then will the Iriſh.
               And although our Papiſts of Ireland, are generally
compacted of a dull mettall, that hath little ſence or
feeling but of ignorance & arrogancy, yet thus quick
ſighted they be, to looke into thoſe euents that doth
make nothing at all for their purpoſe, and are ſtarcke
blind on the other ſide, to diſcerne of thoſe matters
that do eſpecially concerne themſelues.
               If they woulde but remember, what a number of
runnagate ſhakerels the Pope hath ſent from time to
time, laden with his traſh: with his Buls, with his pardons,
with his Bleſsings, and with his Ban-bels, which
they take to be a ſtrong Superſedias againſt all perils &
dangers, what or whereſoeuer; and yet if there were
but halfe that ſanctitie in them that they ſuppoſe, they
could not all miſcarrie, ſome of them woulde take effect;
for they are aſſuredly perſwaded, that he that can
but furniſh himſelfe with a little holy-water, an holie

candle, an Agnus dei, a paire of hallowed beades, or
with ſome ſuch other of the Popes trinkets, he is free
from al misfortunes: & yet they haue ſeen the popes
Holy-banner that was brought amongeſt them from
Rome by D. Saunders, that holy embaſſador, ſent from
the Pope, and they were perſwaded, that where this
banner was once diſplayed, the very ſight of it hadde
bin enough to haue diſmayed a whole army of deuils;
but this vaine hope of theirs coſt a number of Rebels
liues, and ſent a many of Traitors heads to Dublin.
               
               They ſaw what becam of the Popes two holy prelates,
Ailyn and Saunders, whom the Pope had ſanctified
and al-to be-bleſſed: and thus hallowed, hee ſent
them into Ireland, in aſſiſtance of them that wer then
out in Armes againſt their Prince, and they ſaw what
became of them; the one was ſlain in the field among
a number of other Rebels, and the other finiſhed a
traytorous life by a miſcrable death, and died in the
Woodes, and as it was ſuppoſed, was deuoured by
Wolues: but others ſay, he died in the Wood Clannedi,
partly thorough famme, and partly of the Iriſh
Ague.
               They haue ſeene how many confederates, how many
conſpiracies, how many practiſes of Treaſon hath
bin plotted, hom many deteſtable exploits haue been
vndertaken, yet all of them diſcouered, and the practiſers
ſtil confounded, our ſilly Papiſts of Ireland haue
not onely heard of theſe things with their eares, but
they themſelues haue likewiſe ſeen it with their eies.
But they profite nothing, neither by hearing, nor in
beholding: they can woonder at them, and they can
ſay with the Egyptians, when they ſawe the Miracles
wrought by Moſes; The finger of God is here, but they

haue no grace to repent, it doth but hardē their harts,
it armeth them with deſpite both againſt God, and
againſt the Prince.
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               The inconvenience of Poperie, how it hurteth in Ireland.
               MIght we now iudge of the tree what it is by the
fruit, or (as the Papiſts themſelues are accuſtomed)
to deeme of all cauſes by their owne effects,
Popery could not hide it ſelfe, but that it would
appeare in it owne likeneſſe, loathſome to euery eie.
But it is very eaſie for a man to winke at that, which
himſelfe is vnwilling to ſee; but if we would not bee
enemies to our own diſcretions, to diſcern of things
with iudgement and reaſon, though reaſon it ſelfe be
but a gadding inſtrument, and is many times miſled
by our owne affections, it could not yet lead vs ſo far
aſtray, but it would vndoubtedly confirme vs, that poperie
is the onely plague-ſore, that hath ſo poyſoned
Ireland.
               It is Popery that hath drawn the people from that
confidence and truſt that they ſhould haue in God,
to beleeue in Saints, to worſhip Idols, and to fly frō
Gods mercy to other mens merits, and to ſet vppe a
Pope-holy righteouſneſſe of their owne works.
               It is Popery that hath alienated the heartes of that
people, from that faith, fidelity, obedience, loue and
loyaltie, that is required in Subiects towardes theyr
Soueraignes.
               It is Popery that hath ſet afoot ſo many rebellions
in Ireland, that hath coſt the liues of multitudes, that
hath ruyned that whole Realme, and made it ſubiect

to the oppreſſion of Theeus, Robbers, ſpoilers, murtherers,
Rebels and Traitors.
               It is Popery, that hath ſtill hardened the hearts of
that people, as well againſt God as againſt all goodneſſe.
               I haue knowne Ireland long, and I haue heard of
many odible exploites that hath beene accompliſhed,
by Murther, by Rebellion, by Treaſon, and by many
other villanies; but they haue beene euermore plotted,
conſpired, acted, and performed by Papiſtes: It is
the Papiſt that is ſtill the Authour, the vndertaker and
the Executioner of all manner of villanies, how barbarous,
how cruell, or how odible ſoeuer.
               God be thanked, Ireland was yet neuer ſo deſtitute,
but there hath been a number of good people natiues
of that Countrey, that hath zealouſly and religiouſly
profeſſed the Goſpel, yet I neuer heard of any of thoſe
that was euer tainted, ſtained, or detected with any
of theſe capitall crimes: no, it belongeth to Popery,
it is a parcell of the Popes doctrine; for hee auoweth
it to be a worke meritorious, for any of his Diſciples
to lie, to flatter, to counterfeit, to diſcemble, or to
enter into any action, be it neuer ſo baſe, bee it neuer
ſo abiect, be it neuer ſo ſeruile, yet if they can by any
of theſe meanes compaſſe a plot of villanie, they may
doe it by preſcription, he giueth them Buls, he giueth
them Pardons, he giueth them Diſpenſations.
               From hence it is, that the poore Popelings of Ireland,
doe thinke there is no other high-way to Heauen,
but that which leadeth by theſe damnable indeuours,
thus graced and countenanced by the Pope.
And they know againe well enough, that his holines
is in nothing beter pleaſed, then in thoſe that will impugne

and exploite againſt the Prince. The better
therefore to countenance the matter, and to giue thē
                  ſelues
oportunity, they pretend great loue and loyaltie,
they will proteſt ſubiection, perhaps they will go
to Church and heare a Sermon, and what care they
for taking of an oath which they neuer mean to keep,
the Pope is able to forgiue all, and this is the vvay
to giue them credit, whereby they may practiſe what
they liſt, and how they liſt, they know it well enough:
But if I would goe about to infer preſidents, I might
be infinite in example, to ſhew what murthers, what
maſſacres, what treacheries, and what Treaſons haue
bin performed, which the Iriſh could neuer haue been
able to haue effected, but by that honeſt repoſe there
hath bin had of their fidelity, and by that countenance
and credit that hath bin giuen them by the Prince.
               It is by our truſt that they compaſſe their treaſon &
it is our ſufferance that inableth them in all their miſchiefe,
and what they performe by fraud, by falſhood,
by periury, by breach of faith and fidelity, is ſtill aſcribed
vnto them, for wit, for pollicy, for valiance, and
is euermore reputed to their glory and our diſgrace.
               If I were demaunded of the drift of my lines wherevnto
they tended, I could not well make aunſwere on
the ſuddaine, yet I haue a meaning; but I am brought
into the laborinth of the Metaphiſickes, who wading in
a matter paſt their reach, woulde conclude of ſome
thing, but they know not what: I would approue by
reaſons, that the Iriſh are not to bee truſted, becauſe
they haue already ſo often deceiued: And yet I do reproue
my ſelfe, for I know there be in Ireland, a number
of worthy ſubiects that cannot bee detected, nor
their fidelity and truſt to their Prince by any meanes

impeached, and theſe doe not onelie deſerue to bee
countenanced, but likewiſe to bee cheriſhed; yet the
Traitor of Ireland, as well in words, in lookes, in apparance,
and in the whole courſe of his conuerſation,
doth ſo nearly reſemble and imitate the true meaning
man, that they canot be diſcerned nor diſtinguiſhed by
their outward ſhewes. It were therefore a deſperate
matter (and of no ſmall aduenture) to commit a truſt
to thoſe that are ſo hardly diſcerned. I will therefore
conclude nothing, yet I ſay, for him that is a knowne
Papiſt, I would neuer truſt his word, his promiſe, his
vow, nor (if it were for the Princes ſeruice) I would
neuer truſt his oath, for Papiſts when they ſweare faſteſt,
they commonly lie faſteſt.
               I haue diſcouered my ſelfe to the full, and although I
haue thereby made my follie the more apparant, perhaps
it may yet giue ſome little blaze of light to thoſe
that bee wiſe, for wiſe men may learne more from
fooles, then fooles from wiſe men: but the onely part
to play the foole well, is amongſt fooles to ſeeme to
be wiſe, yet I could bee contented to play the foole a
little, and ſo to be accounted amongſt our Iriſh Catholikes,
if they would vouchſafe, but to draw a litle ſpark
of wiſedome from my ouer much folly.
               There were many matters more to be wiſhed for, but
wiſhing in Ireland is out of date, and our Engliſh Recuſants
do know it well enough; they haue therefore
ſo planted themſelues through euery part of Ireland,
that they are more pernitious in their example, then
the Iriſh themſelues.
               I may now conclude (and I hope with a good conſcience)
that the Popery of Ireland, is the bar that excludeth
all regard of duty, both to God and the King.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXII.
               Whether there be any poſsiblity that the Iriſh ſhould mainetaine
a warre againſt the Kings Maieſty.
               THE broiles that hath been ſtirred vp by Papiſts
in Ireland are infinite, and they haue coſt the
price of many mens liues, and the expence of
great ſummes of Treaſure.
               But methinkes, it cannot be called a warre, that is
maintained by Subiects againſt their Soueraignes: It
is for Princes to make warre that are abſolute, not for
Peſants that are diſſolute: And for this Papiſtical generation,
that are euermore ſeditiouſlie contending
againſt their Soueraignes: I cannot do them ſo much
credite, to ſay they mainetaine warres, but that they
ſtirre vp tumults, diſcentions, vprores, commotions,
inſurrections, and giue them the beſt Titles that can
bee applied, and they are but rebellious, and they
themſelues are Rebels & Traitors that do firſt vndertake
them.
               Now, that the Iriſh ſhould haue any meanes or abilitie
to beare out a rebellion againſt our gratious
King, I thinke there is no Souldier ſo vnwiſe to affime
it.
               Wars are not to be performed without Souldiers,
nor ſouldiers can bee contained without pay; for beſides
men, Mony, Munition, armor, weapon, & a number
of other neceſſaries belonging to Warre, there is
neyther meanes to conquour, nor hope to defend.
               What may we now thinke of the Iriſh; firſt their
greateſt wealth, wherewithall to maintaine a warre,
conſiſteth in Otmeale and Butter: their wiſedome is

our ouer-ſightes, their ſtrength our ſufferance; And
they haue euer beene more beholding to their Engliſh
friendes with their Iriſh hearts, then to their wit,
their pollicie, their valiance, their wealth, or to any
other thing that Ireland could affoord them.
               They are altogether vnfurniſhed of all manner of
warlike neceſſaries, either for defence or offence, neither
are they able ſo to fortifie themſelues in any
ground of aduantage, but that we are ſtil able to fetch
them out by the eares, either by force or by engine:
they cannot deale ſo with the Engliſh: for they hauing
neither Artillirie to batter, nor meanes to approach,
a ſmall company of our Engliſh Souldiers
will make good any place againſt the whole forces
of the Iriſh, and although they be but ſlenderly fortified.
               And I would but learne how it were poſſible for a
people (howe valiant or politique ſoeuer) that hath
neither Mint to make pay, ſhipping to tranſport, that
hath no manner of prouiſion, no ſtore, nor ſtore-houſes
furniſhed with Munition, Pouder, Shot, Peeces,
Pikes, Armory, Weapons, nor with a number of other
Ingines and Implements belonging to the War,
without the which, a warre cannot bee maintained;
They haue no prouiſion for cariages, but what themſelues
are able to carry vpon their backes, neither are
they able to leauy new forces▪ nor haue they meanes
to ſupplie their olde, with conuenient neceſſaries belonging
to an Army. Now if it bee poſſible, that a
people thus diſtitute, ſhould be able to wage Warre
againſt ſo mightie and puiſſant a Prince, I will neuer
truſt experience againe ſo long as I liue. But let vs
looke into their abilitie, what they are able to performe

in the day of fight, and notwithſtanding that
I can take no exceptions to their ability of body, yet
being neither armed, with Corſlet, nor Pike (not in any
conuenient number nor in able ſort) by this defect
they are not able to make a ſtand vpon any firme
ground, where our horſ-men are either able to charge
or chace them, neither are they able to indure the incounter
of our armed Pikes: ſo that vpon any equall
ground, that yeldeth no other aduantage then the
vertue or valiance of him that doth command, and
where Horſ-men & foote-men may be both brought
to ſerue, the Iriſh are not able to abide.
               The Horſe-men of Ireland; againe, are not fit to
ſerue in the time of fight, neither againſt Horſe nor
foote, vntill it doth come to a flat running retraite,
and then in a chace they are good for execution, but
otherwiſe, they can ſtand in little ſteede.
               The reaſon is, by defect of their appointment, for
they are armed with a Skull, a Shirt of Maile, and a
Staffe, which as they vſe to cary, is of no ſeruice, but
for execution in a chace: and their Horſe likewiſe, being
as ſlightly furniſhed with a Padde, wherein the
Rider hauing neither Stirrops nor ſtay, no otherwiſe
then if he ſhoud ſit on the bare Horſe backe, is therefore
quickly vnhorſed and eaſely ouerthrowne.
               I might farther inlarge, how they are not able to
vphold any Garriſons, nor to maintaine a Camp, nor
yet to conteine themſelues in any company, one
whole weeke together, but that they muſt betake
themſelues to their Woods, to their Bogges, and to
their ſtarting holes.
               I know I ſhall bee incountered heere with preſidentes,
and they will tell me of more then twenty ſeuerall

Traitors, that hath maintained Rebellions againſt
our late gracious Queene: what ſums of money
they haue ſpent her; how many men they haue
conſumed hir, and yet how little ſhe preuaild againſt
them, notwithſtanding hir great expence, & the many
yeares expired in their purſute.
               To the end therfore, to make diſcouery why there
was no better ſeruice performed, I will vnrip thoſe
occaſions, that were the lets and impediments: the
which being made manifeſt, may giue ſome light for
his Maieſties future ſeruice in that Realm, and therefore
I hope not altogither vnneceſſary.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIII.
               Of thoſe lets and impedimentes that defeated her Maieſtic,
in her ſeruices againſt the Iriſh.
               IT is not vnknowne to all the world (I am ſure) in
what magnificent manner our late gracious Queene
behaued her ſelfe againſt the King of Spaine, the
Monarch of this part of the world, that hath kingdomes
at command, that hath Indies vpon Indies, both of ſiluer
and Gold to make pay to Souldiers, and to beare
his expences: that had the prime choyce of skilfull
Captaines, and of Martial men of al ſorts that Europe
could afford, that left no practiſe vnatempted, that either
Sapine, Rome, or Hell it ſelfe could plot or conſpire.
And all this (and much more then I haue ſpoken
of) imployed for many yeares together, to haue
ruined and ſubuerted this worthy Princeſſe whom he
ſo much maligned: but ſhe, not only preuented him in
all his purpoſes, but ſhe many times incountred him,
aſwell by Sea as by Land, and triumphed in ſeuerall

notable victories, and ſeuerall exploytes performed
againſt him, ſometimes at home in his owne dominions,
yea almoſt at his owne Court gates.
               Why then (will ſome ſay) if her Maieſtie were able
to performe ſo much againſt ſo mighty an enemy
as the King of Spaine, why could ſhe not finde meanes
to ſuppreſſe the Rebellions of ſo baſe and beggerly a
people as the Iriſh, that are ſo lightly accounted of.
               I anſwere, becauſe ſhe was neuer ſo ſoundly aduiſed,
nor faithfully Counſelled how to proſecute the
Iriſh, as ſhe was to incounter the Spaniard.
               
               It will bee yet againe replyed, what might be the
reaſon that her Maieſtie ſhould bee better aduiſed againſt
the Spaniard, then againſt the Iriſh? Alas, who
is ignorant of the cauſe, it is well enough knowne,
that there was neuer any great affinity betweene the
Engliſh and the Spaniſh, vnleſſe a little betweene Merchantes
for trade and traffique. But her Maieſtie had
not a Counſeller in England, that was a Spaniard born,
or that was combined with the Spaniſh, either by Marriage,
either by foſtering, either by goſſiping, or by
any other meanes wherby to confirme loue & friendſhip
betweene them: but as they were all noble and
honorable perſonages, ſo they were firme and aſſured
aſwell in their loyalty to their Prince, as in their loue
to their Countrey, and therefore in all their Counſelles
and conſultations, they more reſpected the honour
of their Prince, and the good of their Countrey,
then they did their owne priuate profits.
               Now in Ireland, there were diuers belonging to the
Counſell table, who although they were of Engliſh
birth, they were yet ſo linked and combined with the
Iriſh, aſwell by Marriage, as by many other meanes,

that I neuer knew ſo arrant a Traitor in Ireland, that
was deſtitute of Engliſh friendes, that would vndertake
in his behalfe, yea although he were out in open
rebellion, that, they durſt not apparantly aduenture,
yet by ſecret meanes and practiſes, they would both
ſtraine themſelues and try their friendes, to helpe out
a Traitor when it cam to a pinch.
               Of this combination betweene the Engliſh and
the Iriſh, I might ſpeake more then perhaps would
bee thought neceſſary to bee openly publiſhed; and
it ſhould ſeeme, that our progenitors many ages ſithens,
finding out the inconueniences, what hurt it
did, ſeeking meanes therefore to preuent it, they eſtabliſhed
by act of Parlament, that no man of the Iriſh
birth, ſhould haue charge or bee put in truſt, with
any Caſtle or place fortified, belonging to the Prince.
They were likewiſe prohibited, from diuerſe principal
affaires, and amongſt theſe prohibitions, the Engliſh
were likewiſe inioyned, neither to Marry, foſter,
nor combine with the Iriſh.
               
               I thinke our aunceſtors were not more carefull,
then we be now, but it ſhould ſeeme, they imployed
their cares better then we do now.
               Amongſt many reaſons that might bee rendered,
why the Engliſh ſhould bee ſo indeuouring
and helping to the Iriſh, there bee three eſpeciall reaſons,
more importing then the reſt.
               The firſt, is grounded vppon foreſight or prouidēce,
for thoſe of the Engliſh that haue ſettelled themſelues
with Landes or liuinges in the Countrey, do
finde it to bee a matter of approued policy, to combine
with thoſe of the Iriſh, that are moſt likelieſt

to play the Traitors, eſpecially, if they bee bounding
or bordring vpon him: for he thinketh by theſe meanes,
not onely to ſaue his lands and tenementes from
the ſpoyle of the party himſelfe that is moſt likelie to
endanger him but alſo by being in league and friendſhip
of ſuch a one, that is but in the ſtate and condition
of a demy-Traitor; that is, halfe in, and halfe out,
he hopeth by his meanes ſo much the rather to ſcape
ſcot-free, from the ſpoile of others: from which conceit
of theirs, this prouerbe doth ariſe: That it is good
to haue a Rowland for an Olyuer: or after our Engliſh
interpretation; a Theefe to encounter a Theefe.
               
               A ſecond reaſon, that induceth the Engliſh to bee
ſo vndertaking for the Iriſh, is grounded vpon conſideration,
peraduenture ſome hundred Cowes, ſome
times more, and ſometimes leſſe: for guifts and preſents,
though they conſiſt but in Cowes, in horſe, or
in ready money it ſelfe, will be receiued, and hee that
knoweth howe to ſteale from oue, and what to giue
to another, ſhall find friends.
               Now, a third reaſon, and that which moſt inforceth
the Engliſh to ſtand ſo firme for the Iriſh, is, for
that it concernes our owne free-hold: for wee are ſo
linked and combined with them, what by marryeng,
what by foſtring, and what by one meanes or other,
that we muſt not ſee them quaile, wee muſt not ſee
them confounded but their hurts will be to our own
detriments if not of our ſelues, yet of our children of
our brethren, of our Coſines, of our wiues, of our alies,
of our friends, or of ſome other ſuch of our families,
as we muſt put to our helping handes, wee muſt
not ſee them vtterly ouerthrowne.
               Who will demand now, how the Iriſh haue been

able ſo to dally with their Priuce, & to continue their
rebellions as in times paſt they haue done, when they
haue bin ſtill bolſtered out by the Engliſh, when they
haue had ſuch friends, that (if they could not preuaile
in Ireland) durſt aduenture to write into England, yea
ſometimes to the Queene hir ſelfe, and vnder thoſe
plauſible pretences of profit and pollicie, would perſwade,
what a ſparing it would be, both of money &
of mens liues, that a Traytor that had committed infinite
ſpoiles, and ſpent hir Maieſtie huge ſummes of
money, ſhould be brought in by compoſition, by pardon
or by protection, and how many waies it would
be auaileable to hir Highneſſe, that he ſhould be receiued
to mercie.
               And how many of theſe haue I knowne, that after
they had receiued all theſe fauours, and hauing again
ſtrengthened and enabled themſelues, haue watched
their oportunities, but to commit new ſtealths, and
to execute ſom other actions of villany, and thus going
out againe, haue been ten times more chargeable
then they were at the firſt.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               Of Pardons and Protections, how hurtfull in Ireland.
               AS I neuer knew the Iriſh to want Engliſh frends
that did vphold them ſo they are neuer deſtitute
againe of ſome others, to procure them pardōs.
               This Port-ſale of pardons, hath been the vtter vndoing
of Ireland: for what betweene thoſe pardons
that were ſent from the Pope, and the other againe
that were obtained from the Prince, euery Traytor,
euery Rebell, euery murtherer, euery Theeſe & euery

Robber, might put in practiſe what he liſted, without
dread or danger, for the Pope he diſpenſed on the
one ſide, and the Queene ſhe pardoned on the other,
and thus between them (as time and occaſion ſerued)
it was holden for the high way to preferment, for a
man to play the traitor, and to ſtirre vp Rebellion: for
he that was found to be moſt dilligent, moſt daungerous,
and moſt deſperate, in the execution of Treaſon,
ſhould not onely bee ſure to haue a pardon, but
hee ſhould bee likewiſe gratified with a penſion, or
with ſome daily pay, from out of the Princes Cofers.
               Now, who would forbeare to be a Traitour, or a
Rebell, or a Theefe, or to enter into any miſchiefe
whatſoeuer, that could ſtil warrant himſelfe a pardon
for a few ſtolen Cowes?
               This generality of pardons and protections, did
much harme in Ireland, for they ſtill gaue encouragement
to the ill diſpoſed to aduenture of any enterpriſe,
and to do any maner of villany what themſelues
liſted, and there wanted not thoſe that were fauorites
and followers to the Lord Deputy, that were ſtil hunting
after ſutes, that obtained both Pardons and protections,
and manie other Grants, that were ſo preiudiciall
vnto the ſeruice of our late gracious Queen,
that ſhe had been better to haue giuen them ſtipends
of ſome thouſandes by the yeare to haue maintained
them in England, rather then to haue ſuffered them
to haue made ſuch Traffique in Ireland, as they did at
that time.
               As theſe Pardons were the onely encouragements
to giue daring Traitours to attempt againſt their
Prince, ſo they were againe the verie cauſe of diſmay,

whereby to terrifie the ſubiect from the ſeruice of his
Soueraigne: for when a Traitour was out in rebellion,
thoſe that were bordering vpon him, that had beſt
knowledge in the ſtrength and faſtneſſe of his Countrey,
durſt neuer ſerue againſt him; for they knew wel
enough that there was not a Rebell in Ireland ſo fooliſh,
but that he had Engliſh friends to procure him a
pardon, and then they were ſure that the winding vp
would be (as it hath beene in many other things) that
he that ſhold oppoſe himſelf to ſerue his Prince faithfully,
ſhould bee left to the ſpoile of a Traitour, who
hauing once made his owne peace by pardon or protection,
would liue to be reuenged of as many as had
ſerued againſt him.
               Is it now ſo much to be wondered at, that her maieſtie
could haue no better ſeruice performed againſt
her Rebelles in Ireland, when by her ouer much clemency,
ſhee defeated her ſelfe of their ſeruices, that
were beſt able to ſtand her in ſtead.
               I might ſpeake further of Pardons, that hath beene
many waies more preiudicial, then I haue ſet downe:
but I wil conclude, That ſo long as there are any pardons
to be hoped for in Ireland, ſo long there will be
Traitors in Ireland: and ſo long as a proclaimed traitor
ſhall be able to compaſſe either pardon or protection,
ſo long the Prince ſhall haue no ſeruice performed
againſt any Rebell, either by Engliſh or Iriſh,
that are dwelling neere about him, and that can beſt
ſerue vpon him.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXV.
               Of che dallying out the time of ſeruice, and the delayes of
Ireland.
               THere is nothing wherein our Engliſh policy hath
beene more ouer-reached, then in mannaging
the Warres againſt the Iriſh, that were ſtill proſecuted
with delayes, and dallying out the time with
deluding parlies (which they tearmed times of Seſſation)
but vnder thoſe coloured-treaties, and counterfaite
truces, though wee let ſlippe both time and occaſion,
yet the enemy forgat not to take all aduantages.
For in thoſe dallying times of their deluding parlies,
the Rebels recouered Conaughe, they tooke Eniſkaline,
Monohan, the Blackwatre; they ſupplied themſelues
with Wine, with Aqua vitae, with Armor, with
Weapon, with Powder, with Shot, and with all other
neceſſaries whatſoeuer they wanted, from al the
parts of Ireland; yea, from out of Dubline it ſelfe.
               The Preſidents are innumerable, what practiſes
haue beene performed in the time of parlies. And as
Alexander wold not admit of any of theſe night-ſtoln
victories, ſo amongſt the Romaines, theſe entertaining
of Truces was baniſhed as an enemy to their ancient
proceedings, who were ſtill deſirous to fight by Vertue,
but not by deceipt.
               He only is iudged to be ouercome, that is not vanquiſhed
by craft, nor by fraud, nor by fortune, nor by
chance, but onely by meere valiance.
               The time hath beene, when it was neuer deemed
to be a worthy victory, where the enemies courages

were not daunted by true valiance and magnanimitie.
               But for the ſeruiees in Ireland, reſt is euermore
dangerous then raſhneſſe, and although it bee a foule
imputation for a Commander, to be reputed headie
or haire-brain'd, yet amongeſt the Iriſh, expedition
that is ſometimes vnſeaſonably taken, is more auaileable,
and hath euer concluded with better ſucceſſe,
then this temporziing & trifling out the time with
delayes and deluſions. For, the Rebel of Ireland, muſt
haue no leiſure to take his breath; he muſt be hunted
like the Fox that is new rouzed from his den, he muſt
be chaſed from Couert to Couert; and ply him thus
but one three Weekes or a month, and you quaile his
courage, his edge is taken off, and his pride is ſodainly
abated. But would ye haue a preſident, let me put you
in minde of the Traitour Odougherty, one of the Gallants
of the North of Ireland, a Champion of ſuch
worthineſſe, that the Papiſts were in great hope, that
he would haue proued no leſſe then a ſecond Tyrone;
but will you ſee what became of this mirrour of magnanimity,
he compaſſed a plot of Treachery, and of
Treaſon both, but ſuch a plot as he could neuer haue
effected, but by the truſt that was repoſed in him by
the Engliſh. For this is the ground worke of all their
villanies: we aduance them, wee countenance them,
we credit them, and wee inable them; and this truſt,
and this confidence which we repoſe in them, giueth
them matter to worke vpon; and by this meanes, Odougherty
performed his enterpriſe without reſiſtāce,
and as he neuer ſtrooke ſtroke in the exploiting of his
villany, ſo he neuer ſtrooke ſtroke after, till his heade
was taken of, neither durſt he euer ſhew his face after,
but in woods and Bogges, where he thought to catch

no harme. We ſee here the difference between expedition
and delay, for as Odougherty was ſpedy in the
execution of his miſchife, the Lord Deputy made as
quicke a diſpatch for the proſecution of reuenge, and
makinge a ſpeciall choice of a celected company for
the following of that ſeruice, there was one amongſt
the reſt (ſir Thomas Ridgway by name) who of a voluntary
diſpoſition (without weeting or knowledge of
his deareſt friendes) conueied himſelfe from his own
houſe, and cam to the place of ſeruice with the formoſt
man, and with the like ſpeede he ſo perſued the
Rebelles with ſuch iudgement, valiance and induſtry
(and many times with a farre leſſe company then the
Rebelles were in number) that they expecting a more
leiſurable purſute, ſuch as Tirone and other Traytors
had had before them (being now depriued of that
hope) they begane to faint at the firſt, and were in a
ſhort ſpace as eaſely ſurpriſed.
               Sedition durſt neuer yet attempt any thing valiantly,
and the multitude, hath euer had more courage
to rebell then to fight.
               Now to be ſhort, it was the expedition of the Lord
Deputy and the dilligence of the Treaſurer, that brake
the neck of this rebellion in a much ſhorter time then
hath been acuſtomed: And as this preſident of theirs
may giue a further light for his Maieſties future ſeruice,
ſo by this it may appeare, that if the Iriſh be wel
followed with a direct courſe, they are of no ſuch ability,
as ſome ignorant men haue dreamed & beleeued.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXVI.
               How Tyrone was ſtill ſupplyed with Souldiors, and all
other prouiſions for warre, at the Queenes charges.
               THe greateſt matter reputed to bee in the Iriſh in
times paſt was this, they had Trechery to contract
a plot of Treaſon, and wit to conceale till
they had performed it, and that being once effected,
their greateſt courage afterwards, whereby to maintaine
their Traiterous attempts, conſiſted in the hope
of a pardon; in the meane time, they kept themſelues
like foxes in their dennes, and wee hunting and ferriting
after them, if ſometimes by caſualty, we fortuned
to light vpon them, they truſted better to their heeles
then they did to their handes.
               It will be ſayed, that the Iriſh in the time of Tyrones
Rebellion, ſhewed themſelues to bee men of better
worth, then I do ſeeme to account of them. And it
is truth, that in that Rebellion of Tyrones, they put the
Queene to a great expence of Treaſure, and continued
the warre a much longer time then hath formerly
beene accuſtomed; but how it cam to paſſe, that
the Iriſh were ſo inabled on the ſodaine, to maintaine
their Rebellion, and to continue it as they did, whether
it were by any new ſupply either of ſtrength, corage,
force, or fortune, or by any other ability either
of body or minde, inſpired or infuſed into them more
then their predeceſſors haue had before them, this
would be knowne. And this I thinke were not vnneceſſary
to be deſcouered.
               I will not ſpeake how Tyrone was befrended by the
Engliſh, neither will I make any repetition, how the
Engliſh ſouldiors were generally enfeebled & brought

ſo weake that they were not able to perform a good
daies march (I will not ſay how it came ſo to paſſe,
but it is well enough knowne that ſo it was:) And although
that this penury wherewith our Eng. troops
were thus pinched, had been enough to haue abated
the courages of the moſt able minded men, yet that
was not it that made Tyrone ſo potent as hee ſhewed
himſelfe, nor that did ſo much enable him againſt his
Prince.
               The matter that ſtrengthened him, was the continuall
ſupplies, aſwell of men as of munition, armor,
weapon, powder, ſhot, hee was ſtill furniſhed with
Souldiors, ready armed and trained at her Maieſties
coſts and charges, and it was hir Maieſties purſe that
releeued him from time to time, with thoſe ſupplies,
that he himſelfe (otherwiſe) had neuer beene able to
haue compaſſed.
               Our Aunceſtors many yeares ſince, that had ſome
ſpeculation in the Iriſh diſpoſition, foreſeeing well
enough the danger that might inſue, by training them
vp in any warlike diſcipline, thinking to preuent the
inconuenience; they ordained by ſtatute, that no Engliſhman,
ſeruing in that Countrey with command,
ſhould retaine into his Company of one hundred ſoldiors,
aboue three Iriſhman at the vtmoſt, and theſe
were entertained rather for guides then for any other
expectation that was hoped for by their ſeruice.
               Whilſt theſe obſeruations were charily obſerued,
the Iriſh wer not able to make any encounter againſt
the Prince: and Ireland was able (not onely) to beare
it owne expences, but alſo to contribute to the princes
Cofers, ſome twenty or thirty thouſand pounds,
per An. as appeareth by auncient records that are yet

to be ſeene.
               By this wee might conclude, that it is better for
wayfaring men, to treade thoſe tracts already traced
out to their handes, then to ſeeke vnknowne waies,
that if they do not ſometimes leade aſtray, are ſure at
all times to leade the furtheſt way about: for if thoſe
Preſidents left by predeceſſors, had bin by vs as carefully
obſerued, as they were by them wiſely preſcribed,
the rebellious ſort of the Iriſh had not beene ſo
wel inabled to haue maintained their rebelions, as now
of late they haue done: But Tyrone was the man that
the Iriſh did extoll, and Tyrone was the man that was
beholding to his Engliſh friends; hee was beholding
to thoſe deluding parlies, to thoſe deceitfull times of
ſeſſaſion, that gaue him ſtill opportunity to helpe
himſelfe by many aduantages: ſometimes when hee
was driuen (as it were) to the very laſt gaſpe, & when
he was not longer able to hold out, then there was a
parle procured: by means whereof, he releeued himſelfe
with all manner of neceſſaries, and would lightly
enterpriſe ſomething, that was both to the diſaduantage
and diſhonour of the Prince.
               I haue already made mention of a preſcript, wherein
our Engliſh Captaines were inioyned, that in euerie
company of one hundred, they ſhould not retaine
aboue two or three that were of the Iriſh birth, but
during the whole ſeaſon of Tyrones rebellion, there
were ſome companies, that for euerie three of the
Engliſh, there were three and twentie of the Iriſh; and
to ſpeake truely, it might haue beene called a ſpeciall
and a choiſe company, that had not three Iriſh for one
Engliſh. How it fell out that our Engliſh Captaines
were thus inclined to entertaine the Iriſh, and to diſcharge

the Engliſh, I ſhall not neede to make relation;
there was a reaſon why, but they raked vp all the
Iriſh that were to bee gotten, that there was not a
Horſe-Boy left in the Countrey, but he was armed &
trained, and when hee had committed inſufferable
ſpoiles, away he went to the enemy.
               The Rebels themſelues ſent as many Rogues as they
were able to procure, to be thus armed and trained, &
to watch their oportunity to performe ſome exploit
of villanie, and ſo to make their returne.
               Beſides this, there were whole companies of the
Iriſh raiſed at hir Maieſties coſts and charges, & that
receiued her daily pay, that were as arrant Traitors, as
any were with the Rebels, and committed as manie
ſpoiles, killing and burning onely excepted.
               All theſe, ſtill furniſhed Tyrone with daily ſupplies
of Souldiers that were thus armed and trained at her
Maieſties charge, and he had the like helpes to ſupply
himſelfe with many other wants, but eſpecially with
powder and ſhot, wherewith he was ſtil releeued from
out the Queenes ſtore; ſomtimes by thoſe Iriſh bands
and companies, that made more prouiſion for the rebels,
then they did for themſelues.
               Sometimes again by ſome Gentlemen of the countrey,
who vnder the pretence of making themſelues
ſtrong againſt the Rebelles, woulde fetch out of the
Queenes ſtore, Powder, Shot, Armour, Weapon,
and what beſides was there to be had, wherwith they
ſtill ſupplied Tyrone, who otherwiſe had neuer beene
able to haue maintained one good daies fight.
               I might yet ſpeake further, how that euery pedling
fellow that kept a Shoppe, was ſuffered to ſell
Peeces, Powder, Swords, and ſuch other implements

of War, not allowable for euery man to ſell, & (conſidering
the ſtate of the Countrey) not ſufferable for
euery man to buy.
               I will heere couclude, how all that extraordinarie
Wiſedome, pollicie, and valiance, that was attributed
vnto Tyrone, was but our ouer-ſights, our negligences,
and our winking at that which was apparant
vnto euerie Wiſe mans eyes: and let the Iriſh proiect
vnto themſelues what they liſt (I ſay) if Tyrone had
beene as well hunted after as Odougherty was, he muſt
haue come vnto the verie ſelfe-ſame Market that Odoughertie
did.
            
            
               CAP. XXVII.
               That the Iriſh are more daungerous then neceſſary for his
Maieſties ſeruice in Ireland.
               IN euer read of any ſuch pollicie, where a rebellious
people, that were euerie day readie to reuoult
from their dutie vnto their Soueraigne, ſhould be
permitted to exerciſe chiualry, or ſhould be inured
with the practiſe of Armes: but I could ſet downe
a number of preſidents, how prudent and pollitique
Princes, when they haue beene ſo continually vexed
and vrged by rebellious Traitors, haue not only prohibited
them from the vſe of weapons, but haue alſo
reſtrained and depriued them from all manner of
practiſes appertaining vnto Warre, by the ſeuerity of
Lawes.
               I knowe amongſt the Nobilitie of Ireland, there

hath beene (as there are ſtill) manie honourable perſons
(& ſo there are of manie other Gentlemen) that
without all doubt are as forward, as readie, and as willing
to ſerue their Prince, as any other whoſoeuer. But
to ſpeake truely, ſithence I haue knowne Ireland, I neuer
knew anie of the Nobilitie of that Realme, that
was able to performe anie ſeruice (that was woorth
the ſpeaking off) with their owne Countrey-men, in
the behalfe of their Prince, no not againſt a mean Rebell:
ſuch a one as in a priuate quarrell, durſt not lifte
vppe a ſword againſt anie Noble man, that did dwell
neer or border vpō him. And this is a matter to be admired,
that any thred-bare Rebel ſhould be ſo apt and
hardie to oppoſe againſt the Prince, and ſo timerous
againe to offend a Nobleman of his owne Countrey:
and it is no leſſe ſtrange, that euery Nobleman of Ireland
ſhould be potent enough to right his owne cauſes
againſt anie of that ragged rabble, that dares but
look awry vpon him (as I could ſhew may preſidents)
and can performe nothing in the ſeruice of his prince,
no not againſt the moſt baſeſt Raſcall, that euer marched
vnder the Title of a Rebell.
               The Miſterie of this matter is eaſie to be decided,
for although I know that amongeſt the Nobilitie of
Ireland, there be ſome that would be both willing &
deſirous to do the Prince vnfained ſeruice in their
own perſons, yet they themſelues know well enough
that they ſhall neuer be followed in thoſe indeuours:
their owne houſhold ſeruantes would faile them in
ſuch a caſe; and hee that could bring a thouſand followers
into the field, in an action of Rebellion; is not
able to bring one hūdred, in the ſeruice of his Prince:
they are ſo vowed and proteſted to the Pope, that

they will not be induced to ſerue their prince, at the leaſtwiſe,
not in that due reſpect of loue, that ſubiects are boūd
and doe owe vnto their Soueraignes. Perhaps in ſomptiuate
quarrell between themſelues, they may perform ſom
exployt the one againſt the other, but it ſhall be don more
in reuenge of their owne mallice, then for any loue they
owe to the ſeruice. There is nothing, wherein the Iriſh do
more priuily deride vs, then in this conceit that we haue of
their helpe: & therfore they haue hatched vp this pretty intergatory:
Where was it euer knowne, that one wolfe woulde
prey vpon another. And it hath euer beene thought a moſt
daungerous thinge, to haue friendes and enemies both of
one Nation. But I know the Iriſh did neuer want friends,
to perſwade that their ſeruice is verie behoouefull: it may
ſometimes ſerue indeed, to help to ſtop a gap, but I anſwer
it will ſhortly after break down the whole hedge, and it is
but a madde part for him that would defend an entry, to
ſhut vp the wicket, and then ſet ope the great gate.
               The Iriſh do but betray the ſeruice and ſtrengthen the
enemie (I ſpeake of the multitude) and to haue them trayned
as heretofore they haue bin, (eſpecially thoſe that are
ſo much addicted to the Pope) I ſay it is dangerous, and a
groſſe ouerſight. I haue hitherto diſplaied, (though not
all that I know) yet ſo much as I think neceſſary, the which
although it pleaſe not all, yet I would bee glad it ſhoulde
proue profitable to ſome. I haue but glanced at things, by
giuing them a touch and awaie, which if I ſhoulde inlarge
but as they deſerue, I might write a whole volume in folio.
               The vertue of things is not ſo much in their magnitude
as in their qualitie, and ſo likewiſe of reaſon, which beeing
wrapped in a few words, haue the beſt tongue.
               My purpoſe is to profit, not to pleaſe; to intice, not to
intrap; to councell, not to controle; and I rather deſire to

make my friends penitent, then leaue them inſolent.
               I haue directed my lines but to the forming of good
manners, and moderating of affections, and who can be
ſilent in theſe matters here handled, if he loue his prince.
And yet I know, that nothing can bee ſo well or prouidently
ſpoken, but mallice will finde matter whereat to
carpe and repine: yet I hope my good intent will be the
rather born with al, in that I do but ſet down precepts of
good councell, but not decrees to be reſolued on.
               I hope it will be accepted of by ſome, that will reape
profit by it, and find fit aduertiſements and examples for
them to imitate: which if it doe, I ſhall thinke my time
and labor the better beſtowed: if otherwiſe, my care is
the leſſe, becauſe it hath contented my ſelfe, in keeping
me from Idleneſſe.
               But I know ſome will ſay, it were as good be ydle, as
ill occupied: Tis true, There is no endeuour wherein a
man may buſie himſelfe, that is more diſtaſtfull then the
writing of books (eſpecially if they be of a reprehending
humor) but it is to thoſe that haue guilty conſciences,
but to men of pure and honeſt life, they little force what
any man can either write or ſpeake againſt them.
               I may ſpeake ſomething by experience, for I my ſelfe
haue been miſtaken, and am reputed to bee an open enemy
to Ireland, and all but for writing a Booke, entituled,
The Suruey of Ireland, wherein I haue laboured nothing,
but the diſcouery of the Pope.
               But ſuch is the malignity of Papiſts, that they cannot
indure to haue their Idolatry checked, no not with preſidents
and examples that are drawn from the holy ſcriptures.
               Certaine Pagans offering outragious violence to a
Religious Chriſtian, mocking and vpbraiding him for his

Religion, they asked him in the end, what profite hee
had by his Chriſt: Is not this a ſingular profit, quoth
he, Not to be moued with your bitter wordes, but to
pardon and forgiue the wronges you do vnto me.
               I anſwer with the Chriſtian: Let the Papiſtsly and
ſlander how they liſt, I thanke God, I am taught by
the Religion I profeſſe, to put vp all wronges and iniuries,
whatſoeuer they can offer vnto mee, and not
only to forgiue them their vpbraiding and deprauing
of me, but alſo pray to God that hee woulde ſo open
their eies, that they may ſee the right way of their
ſaluation.
               I hope there is no man that will accuſe me of parciality,
to ſay I haue more forborn to ſpeake againſte
the follies of the Engliſh, then againſt the manners &
cuſtomes of the Iriſh: or that I doe otherwiſe diſtinguiſh
betweene them, but value them both alike, the
good, to be good, and the bad, to be bad. I confeſſe
I haue bin very plain with the Cittizens of Dublin, but
it is thoſe that are only addicted to the Pope, it is with
thoſe that haue ſo be-puſſeld themſelues in Popery,
that they yeeld to a number of diſorders, that are no
leſſe odious in the ſight of God, then iniurious to the
King: yea & to eclipſing the reputation of their City
if they did but well aduiſe themſelues, with diſcreet
conſideration.
               Perhaps it wil be imputed to me for an offence, that
I haue ſo avowed the greateſt number of the Iriſh to
be papiſts: But if Popery be ſo Catholike a matter as
they themſelues do beleeue, I haue then doone them
great honour and credit ſo to repute them, but if it be
a doctrine that ſeduceth, and that draweth ſubiectes
rather to Rebellion then to true obedience to their

Princes, is it not then beſt to ſpeake the truth, if it be
but to ſhame the Deuill?
               And now to purge my ſelfe from any malicious intent,
I do heere proteſt before the face of the liuing
God, and do further auow it by that Religion that
I do openly profeſſe, that I do know neuer a Cittizen
in Dubline, nor any other perſon that is a natiue borne
in Ireland, that I do either hate or diſlike; no, not hee
that hath done me the greateſt wrong, but do wiſh
him as wel as I wiſh to my ſelfe, that god would make
vs all wiſe, and ſet vs in the right tract that leadeth to
life euerlaſting.
               This is all the malice I beare them, this is all the
hurt I meane them, to this end and porpoſe I haue
written this Booke, not againſt any Papiſt in particular,
but againſt Popery in generall; for Popery in Ireland
is the original of a number of imperfections, that
otherwiſe would bee reformed, and it is Popery onely
that hath ſecluded the Engliſh and the Iriſh from
that perfect loue and amity, which elſe would be imbraced
on both partes aſwell to the glory of God, as
to the great benefit of this Countrey.
               God bring it once to paſſe, that wee might all
ioyne together as well Engliſh as Iriſh, in the true acknowledgement
of one God, of one Religion, of one
King, of one Law, and of one loue, this is all that I
wiſh for, and this is all that I haue indeuoured.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   