
      
         
            
            
            THE
HONESTIE
OF THIS AGE.
            Proouing by good circumſtance
that the world was neuer honeſt
till now.
            By BARNABEE RYCH Gentleman, Seruant to the Kings
moſt Excellent Maieſtie.
            
            Malui me diuitem eſſe, quam vocari.
            
            Printed at London for T. A. 1614.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE SYR Thomas
Middleton Knight, L. Maior of the
Honorable Cittie of London.
            
               MOST HONORABLE LORD,
to auoid idlenes, I haue with
Domitian endeuoured to catch
Flies, I haue taken in hand a
text, that will rather induce
hatred, then winne loue, I
haue ſpoken againſt thoſe abhominations,
that are not leſſe odible in the ſight
of the powers of heauen, then monſtrous to bee
tollerated heere vpon the face of the earth: I haue
graſped at greater matters, then (ſome will ſay) is
fitting to behandled by a Souldiers penne.
            The Adulterer will not indure it, the Drunkard wil
be angry with it, the Blaſphemer will ſweare at it, the
Bribe-taker will deſpite it, the Papiſt will malice it, to
conclude moſt Honorable) there is no guiltie conſcience
that will willingly entertaine it.
            Remayning then in ſome doubtfulnes of mind,
to whom I might bequeath it, that would eyther
grace or giue countenance vnto it, I was prompted
by Report of your Lordſhips worthineſſe that
now in the courſe of your gouernement in this
Honorable Cittie of London, you haue ſet vp thoſe

lights for the ſuppreſſing of ſeuerall ſorts of ſinnes,
that as they haue already aduanced your applauſe,
amongſt thoſe that bee of the beſt approoued honeſty,
ſo they will remaine for euer in Record to
your perpetuall prayſe.
            Let not therefore my boldnes, ſeeme preſumptuous,
that being altogether vnknowne to your
Lordſhip, haue yet preſumed to ſhelter my
lines vnder your Honorable name,
and thus in affiance of your Honorable
acceptance, I reſt to
doe your Lordſhippe
any other kinde
of ſeruice.
            
               Your Lordſhips to commaund
BARNABE RYCH
            
         
         
            
            To all thoſe Readers that
are well diſpoſed.
            
               GENTLEMEN, there are but fewe in
theſe dayes, that are willing to heare
their faultes: but they are fewer by a
great number that are willing to amend
them, Find faults, could neuer yet get
grace, for Adulation is crept ſo cloſely
into our boſomes, that ſmoothing Flatterie
is more dearely eſteemed, then reprehending
Veritie.
            
            I confeſſe my ſelfe to be ill beholding
to mine owne tongue, that could neuer flatter, liſpe, nor lye: Nature
hath made the carriage of my words to bee ſomething harſh
and dull, yet when they ſeeme to be moſt ſlow, perhaps ſometimes
they be moſt ſure: I ſpeake plainely, & I meane honeſtly: and although
my wordes bee not imbroydered with high morality, I care
not: for I leaue that to Schollers, Maiſters of Art and Methode.
            
            If my lynes be plaine and true, they ſo much the more reſemble
their Sier, and for children to bee like their Parentes, beſides the
Midwife will giue it a bleſſing, ſo it is a ſigne they be Legitimate: defectes
I know they cannot want, that in their procreation were bred
and borne before their time, for as I conueyued of them in an inſtant,
ſo I was deliuered againe in a moment: and theſe abortiue
brates that are thus haſtely brought into the world, though they
ſeldome prooue to haue any great vigor or ſtrength, yet I hope
theſe will proue to be of as honeſt and plaine dealing as their father.
I make no doubt but they will pleaſe as many as I deſire to content,
and thoſe are Good men, and Vertuous women: for the reſt
that are gauled, if I rubbe them vnawares, it is but Chance-medly,
and then I hope I ſhall obtaine a pardon of Courſe, proteſting
aforehand that I haue not aymed at any one particularly
that hath not a guiltie conſcience to accuſe
himſelfe: if any man will thinke them
to be too bitter, let him vſe it as an
Apothecaries pill, that the more
bitter, the better
purging.
         
         
            
            To the Muſes.
            Pierian ſiſters, Types of true Renowne,
            the radyant lights of Art and ſacred skill:
            I come not to implore a Lawrell Crowne,
            wherewith to decke my rude vntutred quill.
            Nor doe I ſeeke to climbe Parnaſſus hill.
            In briefe the world of Folly I vpbrayde,
            Yet dare not preſſe, Faire Dames to craue your aide.
            I ſmooth no ſinne, I ſing no pleaſing ſong,
            I cloake no vice, I ſeeke to bleare no eyes,
            I would be loath to doe Minerua wrong:
            To forge vntruths, or decke my lynes with lyes,
            I cannot fable, flatter, nor diſguiſe.
            Yet mounted now on Tymes diſcerning ſtage,
            I ſtand to note the Follies of our Age.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Honeſtie of
this age.
            
               WHEN Philip that was the Father of
the great Alexander, was leuying an
armie for the warres which hee intended
againſt the Athenians, and
that through all the partes of Macedonia,
the Countrey was filled
with the noyſe of ſhrill ſounding
Trumpets, and of ratling Drums:
and that the people in like maner, as buſily beſtirred themſelues
to helpe and ſet forward the ſouldiers, that were then
making readie to follow the Captaines.
            Euery man being thus in action about this great preparation,
in the midſt of all this buſines, Diogenes beganne to
rolle and rumble his Tubb, ſtill toſſing and tumbling it from
place to place, in that vnaccuſtomed manner that ſome that
did behold him, demanded of him his meaning in the matter:
why (ſaid Diogenes) do you not ſee this ſtrange alteratiō,
that euery man is doing of ſomewhat now on the ſodaine
and why ſhould not I be as buſie as the beſt? I cannot be idle
and although I can do nothing elſe, yet I will rumble my
Tubb amongſt them, if it be but to hold them company.
            I would apply this preſident in mine owne excuſe, that
nowe in this quicke ſprited age, when ſo many excellent
wittes, are indeuouring by their pennes to ſet vpp lightes,
and to giue the world new eyes to ſee into deformitie, why
ſhould not I that can doe little? yet apply my ſelfe to doe
ſomething, if it be but with Diogenes to rumble my Tubb:
yet I know I ſhall offend, for the world is ſo luld a ſleepe in
pleaſures lap, that they cannot indure any rumbling noyſe,

that ſhould awaken them out of that ſweete ſleepe of ſecuritie,
hee that would pleaſe the time muſt learne to ſing lullaby
to Folly: & there is no Muſicke ſo delightfull as the ſmoothing
vp of ſinne.
            How many worthy Preachers be there in theſe daies that
haue with Heraclitus bewayled the iniquitie of the time, and
that haue thundered forth the iudgements of God, which
the holy ſcriptures haue threatned to fall vpon impenitent
ſinners, but what doe lamentations auayle? they doe but
make a rumbling like Diogenes Tubb, the ſound is no ſooner
paſt, but it is as quickly forgotten: let them weepe therefore
that liſt with Heraclitus, I will make my ſelfe a little merrie
with Democritus, I will laugh at the Follies of the world, let
the world laugh as faſt againe at me, I looke for no better:
and not onely to be mocked at, but likewiſe to be wounded
and tortured with lying and ſlaunderous tongues.
            The blaſpheming wretch, that is ready to make the heauens
to tremble with whole vollies of oathes that hee will
thunder forth, but for the wagging of a ſtraw, will bitterly
ſweare and proteſt againſt me.
            The licentious Whooremaſter, that in hunting after Harlots,
conſumes himſelfe both in body and ſoule, will cenſure
me.
            The beaſtly Drunkard, more loathſome then a Swine,
when he hath ſo ouercharged his ſtomacke, that hee can no
longer holde (together with his draffe) will vomit out my
reproches.
            The finicall Foole, that by his nice and queint atyre may
well be reſembled to the Sea Mermayd ſeeming halfe a man
and halfe a harlot, will not forbeare to mocke & deride me.
            The bribing Officer, will bitterly curſe me.
            The Tradeſman and Shopkeeper, that doe buy and ſell
vanities, will grudge and murmure at me.
            
               
The country Swayne, that will ſweate more on ſun-dayes
dancing about a May poole, then hee will doe all the weeke
after at his worke, will haue a caſt at me.
            The infamous Harlot, that proſtitutes her ſelfe to euerie
vicious Lecher, will pronounce mee an open enemie to woman
kinde.
            Olde mother B. the bawd will ſhut her doores againſt me.
            Now what will become of me that ſhall be thus beſet with
ſuch a graceles company, let me beſeech your prayers, you
that be wiſe and iudicious, you that bee endued with wiſedome
and knowledge, let me yet finde fauour in your eyes,
I rather deſire my confirmation from thoſe fewer in number,
whoſe names are enrolled in the book of life, then from
the multitude, treading thoſe ſteppes that doe aſſuredly lead
to a ſecond death.
            And you good & gracious women, whom the holy ſcriptures
doe auow to be more precious then pearle, let mee intreat
your fauourable aſpect.
            You Damoſeles and yong gentle-women, that are no leſſe
adorned with modeſtie then garniſhed with beautie, I haue
euer regarded you with a reuerent eſtimation.
            You marryed wiues, that are ornified with honeſtie, wiſedome
and vertue, I doe acknowledge you to be the glory of
your huſbands.
            The whole ſexe of woman kinde in generall, aſwell olde
as young, that haue not tainted their owne credites with ouer
much immodeſt boldneſſe, I doe honour them, and I doe
proſtitute my ſelfe for euer to doe them humble ſeruice.
            I haue heard ſpeaking of the Golden Age of the worlde,
and ſome will ſay it is long ſithens paſt, yet ſome others doe
thinke, that the true golden age (indeed) was neuer till now,
when gold and gifts doe compaſſe all things: but if I might
giue my cenſure, I would call this, the Honeſt age of the world,
               
I confeſſe that in former ages the worlde hath beene ſimple
and plaine dealing, but neuer honeſt till now.
            Till now that Bribery, Vſury, Forgery, Periury, and ſuch other
like impieties, are honeſt mens profeſſions, & that thoſe
indeuours that in times paſt were accounted abhominable,
are now made vſuall trades for honeſt men to liue by.
            Till now that rich-men be faultleſſe, and muſt not be reprehended
in their drunkenneſſe, in their blaſphemies, in
their adulteries, they muſt not be blamed, nor howe ſoeuer
they oppreſſe and extort, the poore muſt not complaine.
            And who dares take exceptions, but to a meane Magiſtrate
that is crept into an office, perhaps by corruption, no,
it is dangerous to looke into his abhominations: but hee is
ſure to periſh that will but open his lippes to ſpeake againſt
his ill.
            And what a dangerous matter would it bee to call ſuch a
Lawyer, a Pick-purſe, that will take vpon him the defence of
a matter, that in his owne conſcience, he knoweth to be vniuſt,
and yet will ſend his Clyent home foure times a yeare,
with an empty purſe.
            And he that robbes the Realme of corne, and of all other
commodities, tranſporting it beyond the ſeas, is hee not an
honeſt trading Marchant, and what is he that dares call him
Theefe:
            
            And how many Tradeſmen and Shop-keepers are there
that to vent their counterfeite ſtuffe, will not ſticke both to
lye, to ſweare, and to vſe many other coluſions whereby to
deceiue, yet who dares tell him that he is but a common Coſiner.
            
            No, it is more ſafetie for a man to commit ſinne then to
reproue ſinne, and what an eaſie matter is it nowe for a man
to be Honeſt, ouer it hath beene in times paſt, when every vſurer,
euery briber, euery extortioner, euery picker, euery

robber, euery adulterer, and euery common drunkard is an
Honeſt man.
            And he that will otherwiſe depraue them, there is law for
him, he muſt ſtand to the mercy of twelue men, a Iury ſhall
paſſe vppon him, and hee ſhall be conuict in an action of
Slander.
            
            I am halfe aſhamed to ſpeake of the honeſt men that be in
this Age, and mee thinkes when I haue to doe with ſome of
them, I ſhould borrow his manners, that hauing to tell a ſober
tale to a Iuſtice of peace, would ſtill begin his ſpeeches
with Sir reuerence of your worſhips honeſty.
            
            The fellow had learned good manners, and we may well
put a Sir reuerence when wee doe ſpeake of honeſty nowe a
dayes, for euery rich man is an Honeſt man, there is no contradiction
to that, and this makes a number of them to gather
wealth they care not howe, by the vndoing of their
poore neighbours becauſe they woulde be honeſt.
            In former ages, he that was rich in knowledge was called
a wiſe man, but now there is no man wiſe, but he that hath
wit to gather wealth, and it is a hard matter in this Age, for
a man to rayſe himſelfe by honeſt principles, yet we doe all
ſeeke to climbe, but not by Iacobs Ladder, & we are ſtill deſirous
to mount, but not by the Chariot of Elyas.
            
            Vertue hath but a few that doe fauour her, but they bee
fewer by a great many in number that are deſirous to follow
her.
            But is not this an honeſt Age, when ougly vice doth beare
the name of ſeemly vertue, when Drunkennes is called Good
fellowſhip, Murther reputed for Manhoode, Lechery, is called
Honeſt loue, Impudency, Good audacitie, Pride they ſay is Decency,
and wretched Miſery, they call Good Huſbandry, Hypocriſie,
they call Sinceritie, and Flattery, doth beare the name of
Eloquence, Truth, and Veritie, and that which our predeceſſors

would call flat Knauery, paſſeth now by the name of wit
and policy.
            Then fie vppon Honeſtie, that is thus poluted by men, I
hope yet amongſt women, wee ſhall finde it more pure and
vndefiled.
            In former ages, there were many imperfections attributed
to women, that are now accounted no defectes at all, neyther
are they thought to bee any ſcandals to their reputations.
            
               Moſes ſeemeth in a ſort, to ſcoffe at ſome fooliſh nicities,
that were vſed amongſt women in his time Deut. 28.
            
            And the Prophet Eſay agayne reprehendeth the wanton
geſtures that were vſed by the daughters of Sion in his daies
at their Haughtineſſe of minde, at their Stretched out neckes, at
their wandering Eyes, at their walking, and their Mincing as
they paſſe through the ſtreets: then he ſetteth downe (as it
were) by innumeration ſo many vanities, as for breuities
ſake I will here omit to ſpeake of Eſay 3.
            
            As Salomon pronounceth the prayſes of thoſe women that
be good, ſo hee marketh out a number of capitall offences
whereby we might know the ill. And the ancient Romans
baniſhed out of their Cittie, all women that were found to
be diſhoneſt of their tongues: yet tollerating with thoſe others
that were well knowne to be diſhoneſt of their bodies:
thinking the firſt, to bee more pernicious then the laſt, becauſe
the infirmity of the one proceeded but from the frailtie
of the fleſh, but the wickedneſſe of the other from an vngracious
and a wicked minde: but now, the bitterneſſe of a
tongue, the pride of a haughtie heart, the ſhameleſneſſe of a
face, the immodeſty of a mind, the impudency of looks, the
rowling of wanton eyes, the lewdnes of manners, the lightneſſe
of behauiour, the looſeneſſe of life, nor all the reſt of
thoſe notes that Salomon hath left vnto vs (the true markes

of a wicked woman) all this is nothing, nor theſe imputations
are no blemiſh to a womans credit.
            Is ſhee not to be charged with the abuſe of her bodie, it is
well, ſhee is honeſt, what care we for the deformities of the
minde.
            Will you ſee now, a womans honeſtie is pent vp in a litle
roome, it is ſtill confined, but from her girdle downewards.
            Is not this a happie age for women, menne haue manie
faults whereby to taynt their credites, there is no imperfection
in a woman, but that of her bodie, and who is able to
proue that, one payre of eyes will not ſerue, 2. paire of eyes
will not be beleeued, there muſt be 3. witneſſes at the leaſt,
to teſtifie the matter.
            How ſhall we be now able to iudge of a Harlot, eſpecially
if ſhee be rich, and hath abilitie to bring her accuſer to the
Comiſſaries Court: wee muſt not condemne her by outward
ſhow, by her new compounded faſhions, by her paynting,
by her poudering, by her perfuming, by her ryoting,
by her royſting, by her reuelling, by her companie keeping,
it is not enough to ſay ſhe was lockt vppe with a gentleman
all night in a chamber, or that ſhe had beene ſeene in a ſtrangers
bedde: her Proctor will make you to vnderſtand a litle
Latine, if you be not able to proue Rem in Re, you haue ſlandered
her, you muſt not beleeue your owne eyes in ſuch a
caſe, but you muſt cry her mercy.
            This is it that doth make Harlots ſo ſcant, as they be now
in England, not a Strumpet to be found, if a man would ſeeke
from one end of the towne to another.
            A general corruption hath ouergrowne the vertues of this
latter times, and the world is become a Brothell houſe of ſinne:
It is enough for vs now if we ſeeke but for the reſemblance
of vertue, for the ſoueraigntie of the thing it ſelfe, we neuer
trouble our ſelues about it.
            
               
Both men and women that are the very Slaues of ſin, will
yet ſtand vpon their credites and reputations, and ſomtimes
putting on the viſard of vertue, will ſeeme to march vnder
the Enſigne of Honeſtie.
            
            Whether will you tend your ſteppes, which way will you
turne your eyes, or to whom will you lend your liſting eares
but you ſhall meete with vice, looke vpon vanitie, and heare
thoſe ſpeeches, that doe not onely tend to Folly, but ſometimes
to Ribauldry, other whiles to Blaſphemy, & many times
to the great diſhonor of God.
            Will you walke the ſtreetes, there you ſhall meete with ſir
Lawrence lack-land, in a Cloake lined through with Veluet,
and beſides his Dublet, his Hoſe, his Rapier, his Dagger,
not ſo much but the Spurs that hang ouer his heeles, but
they ſhall be beguilded.
            Will you nowe croſſe the way a little on the other ſide,
there you ſhall meete with Sir Henry haue little, ſo trickt vppe
in the ſpicke and ſpan new faſhion, that you would ſooner
take him to be Proteus the God of Shapes, or ſome other like
Celeſtiall power, then a vaine Tereſtiall Foole.
            
            Your eares againe, ſhall bee ſo incumbred with the rumbling
& rowling of Coaches, and with the Clamours of ſuch
as doe follow them, that are ſtill crying out O good my Lady
beſtow your charitable Almes vpon the Lame, the Blind, the Sicke
the diſeaſed, goood my Lady one peny, one halfepeny, for the tender
mercy of God we beſeech it: but let them call and cry till their
tongues do ake, my Lady hath neyther eyes to ſee, nor eares
to heare, ſhee holdeth on her way, perhaps to the Tyre makers
Shoppe, where ſhee ſhaketh out her Crownes to beſtowe
vpon ſome new faſhioned Atire, that if we may ſay, there be
deformitie in Art, vppon ſuch artificall deformed Periwigs,
that they were fitter to furniſh Theater, or for her that in a
Stage play, ſhould repreſent ſome Hagge of Hell, then to bee

vſed by a Chriſtian woman, or to be worne by any ſuch as
doth account her ſelfe to be a daughter in the heauenly Ieruſalem.
            
            I am aſhamed nowe to aske you to goe into any of theſe
Drinking houſes, where you ſhould as well ſee the beaſtly behauiour
of Drunkardes, as likewiſe heare ſuch ſwearing and
blaſpheming as you would thinke the whole houſe to bee
dedicated to loathſome ſinne, and that hell and Damnation
were both together there alreadie reſident.
            Will you now goe viſit the Shop keepers, that are ſo buſie
with their What lack you ſir, or what is it you would haue bought:
& let vs take a good ſuruey, what the cōmodities be that they
would thus ſet forth to ſale, and we ſhall find that as Diogenes
paſſing through a Fayre cryed out, O how many things are
here to be vented that Nature hath no neede of, ſo wee may likewiſe
ſay, O howe many gaudy trifles are here to bee ſolde,
that are good for nothing, but to maintaine pride and vanitie.
            If ſometimes wee happen to hyt vppon ſuch neceſſaries,
as are (indeede) behouefull for the vſe of man, let the buyer
yet looke to himſelfe, that he be not ouerreached by deceit
and ſubtiltie.
            Shall we yet make a ſteppe to Weſtminſter Hall, a little to
ouer-look the Lawyers.
            
            My ſkill is vnable to render due reuerence to the honorable
Iudges, according to their worthineſſe, but eſpecially
at this inſtant as the Benches are nowe ſupplyed, neyther
would I eclips the honeſt reputation of a number of learned
Lawyers, that are to be held in a reuerent regard, and that are
to be honoured and eſteemed, yet amongſt theſe there bee a
number of others, that doe multiplie ſutes and drawe on
quarrelles betweene friend and friend, betweene brother &
brother, and ſometimes betweene the father and the ſonne,

and amongſt theſe although there bee ſome, that can make
good ſhift to ſend their Clients home with penileſſe purſes,
yet there be other ſome againe, that at the end of the tearme
doe complaine themſelues that their gettings haue not bin
enough to defray their expences, and doe therefore thinke
that men are become to be more wiſe in theſe dayes, then
they haue beene in former ages, and had rather put vppe a
wrong, then fee a Lawyer: but I doe not thinke there is any
ſuch wiſedome in this age, when there are ſo many wrangling
ſpirits, that are ſo ready to commence ſuites, but for a
neighbours Gooſe, that ſhall but happen to looke ouer a
hedge: now what conceipt I haue in the matter, I will partly
make manifeſt, by this inſuing circumſtance.
            As the worthy gentlemen that haue beene Lords Maiors,
of the honourable Cittie of London, haue beene generally
renowned for their wiſedome in gouernment, ſo they haue
beene no leſſe famed for their Hoſpitality and good houſekeeping,
during the time of their Mairolties.
            Amongſt the reſt there was one, who long ſithens being
readie to ſet himſelfe downe to his dinner, with his company
that were about him, there thronged in on the ſodaine a
great company of ſtrangers, in that vnreuerent manner, as
had not formerly beene accuſtomed, whereupon one of the
officers comming to the L. Maior, ſayd vnto him, If it pleaſe
your Lordſhip here be too few ſtooles, Thou lyeſt Knaue (anſwered
the Maior) There are too many gueſts.
            
            Now I am perſwaded that if Lawyers (indeed) haue iuſt
cauſe to complaine of their little gettings, it is not for that
there be too few ſuites, but becauſe there be too many Lawyers,
eſpecially of theſe Aturnies, Soliciters, and ſuch other
petty Foggers, whereof there be ſuch abundance, that the
one of them can very hardly thriue by the other: And this
multitude of them, doe trouble all the partes of Englande.

The profeſſion of the Law, I doe acknowledge to be honorable,
and (I thinke) the ſtudy of it ſhould eſpecially belong
to the better ſort of gentlemen: but our Innes of Court, now
(for the greater part) are ſtuffed with the of-ſpring of Farmers,
and with all other ſorts of Tradeſmen, and theſe when
they haue gotten ſome few Scrapings of the law, they do ſow
the ſeedes of ſuits, they doe ſet men at variance, & do ſeeke
for nothing more then to checke the courſe of Iuſtice, by
their delatory pleas: for the better ſort of the learned Lawyers,
I doe honour them.
            They ſay it is an argument of a licentious commō wealth,
where Phiſitians and Lawyers haue too great comminges in,
but it is the ſurfeits of peace that bringeth in the Phiſitians
gaine, yet in him there is ſome diſpatch of buſineſſe, for if
he cannot ſpeedily cure you, he will yet quickly kill you, but
with the Lawyer there is no ſuch expedition, he is all for delay,
and if his tongue be not well typt with gold, he is ſo dull
of Language, that you ſhall not heare a comfortable worde
come out of his mouth in a whole Michaelmaſſe Tearme: if
you will vnlocke his lips, it muſt be done with a Golden fee,
and that perhaps may ſette his tongue at libertie, to ſpeake
(ſometimes) to as good a purpoſe, as if he hadde ſtill beene
mute.
            Let vs leaue the Lawyer to his ſtudy, and let vs now looke
a little in at the Court gate, & leauing to ſpeake of thoſe few
in number that do aſpire to the fauour of the prince, by their
honeſt and vertuous endeuours, let vs take a ſhort ſuruey of
thoſe others, that doe labour their owne aduancements, by
baſe and ſeruile practiſes, by lying, by ſlandering, by backbiting,
by flattering, by diſſembling: that haue no other
meanes whereby to make themſelues gratious in the eye of
greatneſſe, but by ſurrendering themſelues to baſe Imployments,
that doe ſometimes poyſon the eares of Princes, and

vnder the pretence of common good, do obtaine thoſe ſuits
that doth oppreſſe a whole common wealth, & but to maintaine
the pride and prodigalitie of a priuate perſon.
            In the Courts of Princes euery great man (placed in authority)
muſt be flattered in his follies, prayſed in his pleaſures,
commended in his vanities, yea his very vices muſt be
made vertues, or els they will ſay we forget our duties, wee
malice his greatnes, we enuy his fortunes: and hee that will
offer ſacrifice to Thraſo, muſt haue Gnato to be his Prieſt: for
the itching eares of vaine glory, are beſt pleaſed when they
be ſcratched by Flattery.
            
            By theſe ſteps of ſmooting, Courtiers muſt learne to climbe
and more hyts vppon preferment by occaſion, then eyther
by worthines or good deſert.
            In the Courts of Princes, Fornications, Adulteries & Rauiſhments,
and ſuch other like, haue bin accounted yong Courtiers
ſports.
            Honeſt men haue beene there oppreſſed, Rybaulds preferred,
ſimple men ſcorned, innocent men perſecuted, preſumptuous
men fauoured, flatterers aduanced.
            Let the Prince himſelfe be neuer ſo ſtudious of the publique
good, yet not ſeeing into all enormities, he is compaſſed
about with thoſe that be enormious: let Tryan preſcribe
good Lawes for eternall memory, yet where are they ſooner
broken, then in the Court of Tryan: let Aurelius ſtore his
Court with wiſe men, yet euen there they doe waxe diſſolute.
            A princes Court, is like a pleaſant Garden, where the Bee
may gather Honny, and the Spyder ſucke poyſon: for as it is
a Schoole of vertue to ſuch as can bridle their mindes with
diſcretion, ſo it is a Nurſery of vice, to ſuch as doe meaſure
their willes with witleſſe vanitie.
            It hath beene holden for a Maxime, that a proud Court,

doth make a poore Countrey: and that there is not ſo hatefull
a vermine to the common wealth, as thoſe that are Surnamed,
The Moathes of the Court: but Courtiers will not bee
eaſely daſht out of countenance, for it is a Courtiers vertue,
to be confident in his owne conceipt, and he that is ſo reſolute,
will bluſh at nothing.
            But now to make an end of this ſuruey of vanity, let vs yet
make one iourney more, and it ſhall bee to the Church, and
at that time when the Preacher is in the pulpit, and we ſhall
there ſee ſuch Hypocriſie, ſuch counterfeiting, ſuch diſſembling,
and ſuch mocking with God, that were it not but that
as his wrath ſo often kindled againſt vs for our ſinnes, ſhould
not yet as often be quenched againe by his mercy, it coulde
not bee, but that the iuſtice of God would euen there ataynt
vs.
            There you ſhall ſee him, that in his life and conuerſation
(to the ſhewe of the world) when hee is out of the Church
liueth, as if he made doubt whether there were any God or
no, yet he will there ioyne with the Preacher in prayer, and
will cry out O our Father which art in heauen.
            
            
               Hollowed be thy name (ſayth the common Swearer) who
with vnhallowed lyps, doth euery day blaſpheme the name
of God.
            And he that repoſeth his whole felicitie in the tranſitory
pleaſures of this world, that doth make his gold his God, &
whoſe heauen is vpon this earth, will there beſeech in prayer,
Lord let thy kingdome come.
            
            Another that doth repine at the ordinances of God, that
will murmure and grudge at thoſe viſitations wherewith it
pleaſeth him ſometimes to afflict vs, will yet make petition,
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heauen.
            
            There you ſhall ſee him to make interceſſion for his dayly
Bread, that will polute himſelfe all the weeke after, with his

daily drinke.
            But what a miſery is this, that the contentious, the malicious,
the wrathfull, and for him that doth ſeeke reuenge for
the leaſt offence that is offered vnto him, ſomtimes by bloudie
reuenge, ſometimes by ſutes of law, and at all times with
great rigor & violence, and will yet craue by petition, Lord
forgiue vs our Trepaſſes, as we forgiue them that treſpaſſe againſt
vs, drawing therby their owne damnation vpon their owne
heades, when at the day of the generall Seſſions, the great
Iudge ſhall ſay vnto them, Ex ore tuo, te Iudicabo, depart from
me thou curſed creature, thy portion is amongſt the Hypocrites:
for as faith without obedience, is no faith but the true
marke of an Hypocrite, ſo profeſſion ioyned with malice, is as
certaine a note of Hypocriſie.
            
            There you ſhall ſee the Extortioner, the Adulterer, the Blaſphemer,
vnder the colour of deuotion, ſo tranſforme themſelues
into a ſhow of ſanctimony, that during the time of the
Sermon, they doe ſeeme to bee Saynts, but being out of the
Church doore, a man would thinke them to bee Demy Deuils.
            
            There you ſhall ſee the Vſurer, the Briber, the Broaker,
with their books laid open before them, turning ouer leaues
as buſily, as if they were in their Counting Houſes caſting vp
of their debts, and calculating what ſummes were owing vn
to them: there you ſhall ſee the Marchant, the Shopkeeper,
the Tradeſman, and ſuch others as doe liue by trafique, by
buying and by ſelling, lifting vp their eyes, heauing vp their
hands, and making ſhow, as if they were inflamed with a hot
burning Feuer, of a fiery burning zeale.
            But they doe vſe Religion, as women doe vſe their paynting
ſtuffe, it ſerues but to couer their deformities, they haue one
Conſcience for the Church, another for the Market, and ſo
they keepe a good one for Sundayes, it makes no matter for

all the weeke after.
            Should I ſpeake now of women, they doe make as great
a ſhow of deuotion as men, and although there be a number
of them graue and godly matrones, zealous, and well inclined
marryed wiues, gratious and godly diſpoſed damoſels,
and yong maydens, that are no leſſe vertuous indeed, then
they doe make ſhowe for: yet there bee a number of others
that do rather frequent the Church to ſee new faſhions, then
to gather good inſtructions, and a number of them rather to
be ſeene themſelues, then to ſeeke God.
            Now what zeale is that zeale, that will neyther let ſlippe a
Sermon, nor lette goe a new faſhion: this ſtrange atiring of
thēſelues may well bring admiration to Fooles, but it breeds
laughter to the wiſe.
            You ſhall ſee ſome women goe ſo attyred to the Church,
that I am aſhamd to tell it out aloud, but harke in your eare,
I will ſpeake it ſoftly, fitter in good fayth, to furniſh A. B. H.
then to preſſe into the Houſe of God: they are ſo be paynted
ſo be periwigd, ſo be poudered, ſo be perfumed, ſo bee ſtarched,
ſo be laced, and ſo bee imbrodered, that I cannot tell
what mentall vertues they may haue that they do keepe inwardly
to themſelues, but I am ſure, to the outward ſhow, it
is a hard matter in the church it ſelfe to diſtinguiſh between
a good woman, and a bad.
            Our behauiours, our geſtures, and our outward attyres,
are tongs to proclaime the inward diſpoſition of the mind,
then away with this pretended zeale, let vs not make Religion
a Cloake for Impietie.
            
            If we will ſeeke Chriſt, let vs ſeeke him ſo as we may finde
him, in the high way of humilitie, but not of pride and Impudency.
            I thinke amongſt many women that are thus frequenting
Sermons, there be ſome that will catch at ſome prety ſounding

words, and let the matter ſlip, that they ought eſpecially
to attend: as the poore gentle-woman that was ſo diſmayed
at the Preachers wordes, who diſcourſing to his auditory
of the generall day of Iudgement, how we ſhould be
then called to a ſtricte and a ſtrayght account: the poore
gentle-woman being returned to her owne houſe with this
newes, beganne to fail into a ſodaine fit of weeping, which
being marked by ſome friends that were about her, they beſought
her to make knowne vnto them, the cauſe of her
griefe, her anſwere was, that ſhee was but now come from a
Sermon, that had ſo troubled her in her thoughts, that ſhee
could not refraine from ſheding of teares: thoſe that heard
her, thinking that ſhee had beene ſtricken with ſome godly
remorſe in remembrance of her former miſled life, beganne
to comfort her, telling her how God had mercy in ſtore for
all penitent ſinners, and her teares ſo diſtilled being an argument
of her heartie repentance, there was no doubt in her,
but to hope of ſaluation.
            Alas (ſaid ſhee) it is not the remembrance of my ſins that
doth thus perplexe me, but when I conſider with my ſelfe,
what a great aſſembly will then make their appearance at
the day of that generall Seſſions which the Preacher ſpake
of, it maketh me to weepe to thinke howe aſhamed I ſhalbe
to ſtand ſtarke naked before ſuch a preſence (as he ſaies) will
be then in place.
            See here the very height of a gentlewomans diſquiet, what
a ſcruple it was that thus incumbred her Conſcience, God
grant there be not many others that doth make the like colections,
and that will ſometimes be diſputing of the Preachers
wordes, which they be no leſſe able to conceiue, then
vnwilling to followe: there be many that will ſeeme to profeſſe
Religion as well men as women, and that with great
zeale and feruency, but they liue not thereafter, euen thoſe

that by their outward ſhow, do thirſt after knowledge, thoſe
that will turne ouer many leaues & ſeeke out ſeuerall Chapters,
and when they hyt vppon ſome interpretation to nouriſh
their ſenſualitie, they ſtay there, and are the worſe for
their reading.
            Sonne of man (ſayth God to the Prophet Ezechiell) my people
ſit before thee, and they heare my wordes, but they will not doe
them, their hearts goeth after Couetouſneſſe.
            To ſpeake againſt ſinne in this age, it is like the filling of
Daneas Tubs, and eyther they thinke there is no God at all,
or elſe they thinke him to be ſuch a one, as it were as good
there were none at all: for it is leſſe dangerous for a man to
commit ſinne, then to reproue ſinne.
            To reprehend Drunkenneſſe, Whordome, Blaſphemy, or to
ſpeake againſt that pryde, that God will ſurely puniſh, wee
muſt not doe it, they will ſay wee are too bitter, too byting,
too ſatiricall, and thus we are more afraid to offend vicious
men, then we are deſirous to pleaſe God.
            But tell me now thou beaſtly Drunkard, thou vicious Adulterer,
thou Swearer and prophaner of GODS holy name,
which of you, if you had a wife that had played the Strumpet,
if ſhee ſhould come vnto thee with ſubmiſſiue words &
ſhewes of repentance, and that vpō the hope of her amendment,
thou wouldſt pardon what was paſt, wouldſt thou not
thinke it much if thou hadſt forgiuen her once, that ſhee
ſhould afterwardes play the harlot againe, but if thou hadſt
ſo much kindneſſe to remitte the ſecond fault, if ſhe ſhould
yet come the third time, with one of her Roaring boyes in her
company, & ſhould play the Harlot before thine owne face,
(thou thy ſelfe ſtanding preſent) and would yet with ſmyling
countenance, & inticing ſhewes, offer to come & kiſſe
thee, wouldeſt thou not defie her, wouldeſt thou not ſpite at
her, wouldeſt thou not ſpurne at her, wouldeſt thou not abhorre

her.
            Then what doeſt thou thinke of thy GOD (if I may ſo
tearme him to be thy God) whom thou thy ſelfe haſt diſavowed,
and broken that contract, which was made between
him and thee, when thou wert baptized, that runneſt euerie
day from ſinne to ſinne, a whoring, till perhaps on Sundaies,
and then thou goeſt to Church with a ſmiling countenance
to diſſemble and flatter with God, and wilt ſeeme to come
and kiſſe him, nay thou commeſt to mocke him, & to ſpeak
the truth, to tempt him, for Sunday it ſelfe is ſcarce ouerpaſt,
but thou returneſt backe againe to thine Adultery, to thy
Drunkenneſſe, to thy blaſphemie, to thy vſury, to thy brybery,
to thy periurie, to thy pride, to thy vanitie, and to all
the reſt of thy former impieties: doſt thou not tremble now
at the iudgemēts of God, doſt thou not feare his vengeance
ſodainly to fall vppon thee?
            Perhaps thou wilt thinke thy ſelfe to be in no danger, and
wilt but ieſt at me, that would but put thee into ſome fooliſh
feare: well ieſt at it and ſpare not, but when Time hath done
his office, thou ſhalt ſee what will come of ieſting.
            They were wont to ſay, the world did runne on wheeles,
and it may well bee, it hath done ſo in times paſt, but I ſay
now, it goes on Crouches, for it is waxen old, blind, decrepit
and lame, a lymping world God knowes, and nothing but
halting betweene neighbour & neighbour, betwene friend
and friend, betweene brother and brother, and downe right
halting (ſometimes) betweene the Father and the childe,
the Son that will craue his Fathers bleſſing in the morning,
will wiſh him dead before night, that hee might enioy his
inheritance: And as the world is become thus lame & lymping,
ſo it is otherwiſe growne ſo far out of reparatiōs, that
(I thinke) there is no hope of amendment, the beſt remedy
were, if euery man would mend one, and that will not bee

performed in haſt, for we imitate nothing but what we doe
ſee, and whom doe we ſee ſetting vp that light, that might
ſhine vnto vs in example, no the world is become feeble, her
ſpirits are ſpent, ſhee is growne Bis puer, ſhe is become childdiſh,
and begins to doat a freſh on that ſhee ſometimes ſcorned.
            The poſſeſſion of gold, vnlawfully gotten, was wont to be
called a capitall offence, nowe there is nothing more deſired.
            In Diebus illis, they bent their whole endeuours to winne
honourable reputation, but now for popular praiſe & vain
oſtentation.
            Our predeceſſors ordained Lawes whereby to reſtrayne
the prodigall from ſpending their owne wealth in ryot and
exceſſe, but nowe there is no expence ſo laudable as that
which is ſpent in vanitie.
            In former ages, they thought him to be but a badde ſtates
man, that had aſpired to ouermuch wealth, but now there is
nothing more diſpiſed, then for a man to bee poore and honeſt.
            The olde faſhion was to doe well, but nowe enough to
ſpeake well.
            In the olde time to performe, but nowe enough to promiſe.
            Men were wont to bluſh when they went to borrowe money,
but now they are aſhamde to pay their debts.
            Flattery hath beene accounted the profeſſion of a Knaue,
but now, it is better for a man to flatter too much, then not
to flatter at all.
            The monuments of goodnes are ſo weather beaten, that
iniquitie and antiquitie, hath almoſt left no Charecter therof
vndefaced.
            If men ſhould degenerate as faſt the next age, as they haue

done but within the compaſſe of our owne memory, it will
be a madde world to liue in.
            Children muſt receiue by tradition, what is left vnto them
by example from their parents, they can go no further then
Imitation, & what was it but example, that brought downe
fire and brimſtone vpon Sodome and Gomorah, when the abhominations
of the elder, were ſtill imitated by the yonger.
            Children can neyther heare nor ſee, eyther at home or abroad,
but that which is altogether eyther vaine or vnlawfull.
            Howe is it poſſible that the daughter ſhould bee baſhfull
where the mother is paſt ſhame, or that ſhee ſhould bee continent,
where the mother is impudent.
            The olde prouerbe is, If the mother Trot, howe ſhould the
daughter Amble: but there be ſome parents, that doe thinke
the moſt ſpeedie way of preferment, is to bring vppe their
daughters in audacious boldneſſe, to make them impudent
and paſt ſhame.
            
               Cato depriued a Senitor of Rome, but for kiſſing his wife in
the preſence of his daughter.
            We doe not faſhion our ſelues ſo much by reaſon, as wee
doe by example, for cuſtome and example are arguments
good enough to make vs to follow any faſhion.
            We are become like Labans Sheepe, led by the eye, we conceiue
but of what we do ſee: and the vulgare ſeeing nothing
but apparances, maketh iudgement onely by that which is
ſubiect to the ſight.
            To bee vertuous, why it is a Capitall crime, and there is
nothing more dangerous then to be ſecurely innocent.
            Our auncients ſought for the true effectes of vertue, and
we onely but hunt after a vayne popular prayſe.
            How innumerable and (almoſt) ineuitable traps are ſet in
the tract of vertue, and that in all her walks, perhaps we may

hyt of ſome one now and then, that will kiſſe the vizard of
vertue, but ſhewe them the true face, and you turne all their
kiſſes into curſes, there be few that doe vndertake the tract
aright, no, our whole ſtudie is how wee may liue in pompe,
in pride, in pleaſure, but we haue no care at all, neither how
to liue, nor how to die well.
            Wee doe ſeeke rather howe to couer faults, then howe to
mend faults, yea, the moſt ſharpeſt and quickeſt witted men,
thoſe that bee called the wiſe-men of the world, what bee
their policies, or whereunto doe they apply their wits, but
to couer their naughtineſſe.
            If they haue a litle good amongſt a great deale of ill, they
thinke that good to be vtterly loſt, that hath not the eyes of
the world to witneſſe it, and to giue it an applauſe, ſo that
if they doe any good, it is but to the end to bee ſeene and to
be prayſed by men, for in ſecret they will doe nothing.
            If they forbeare to doe euill, it is for feare the world ſhould
knowe it, and were that feare taken away, they would ſticke
at nothing.
            I thinke there is not a more pernicious creature in the
world, then is a man, if hee bee both wiſe and wicked: for
where the wit is bribed by affection, there the weapons of
Reaſon, are many times wreſted, and ſometimes managed againſt
Reaſon it ſelfe, neyther is there any thing that maketh
vs to be more vnreaſonable, then that which we call Naturall
Reaſon.
            
            The wiſedome of the fleſh (that is indued with knowledge)
hath often times more indangered, then the feeble
force of ſimple ignorance.
            A wicked man indued with litterature, is the wroſt of all
men, and amongſt Chriſtians, none more pernicious then
the Holy Hypocrite.
            
            
               Origine hath left vnto vs, this caueat for our inſtruction,

               The Hereticke (ſayth he) that is of good life, is much more
hurtfull, and hath more authoritie in his words, then he that doth
diſcredite his doctrine, with the lewdnes of his life: ſo that we may
conclude thoſe vices to be moſt abhominable, that are moſt
deſirous to looke like vertues: now it were a hard matter for
me to diſtinguiſh betweene men, who were good and who
were bad, but if I might giue my verdict to ſay who were the
wiſeſt men nowe in this age, I would ſay they were Taylers:
would you heare my reaſon, becauſe I doe ſee the wiſedome
of women to be ſtill ouer-reached by Taylers, that can euery
day induce them to as many new fangled faſhions, as they
pleaſe to inuent: and the wiſedome of men againe, are as
much ouer-reached by women, that canne intice their huſbandes
to ſurrender and giue way to all their newe fangled
follies: they are Taylers then that canne ouer-rule the wiſeſt
women, and they be women, that can beſot the wiſeſt men:
ſo that if Ma. Maiors concluſion be good, that becauſe Iacke
his yongeſt ſonne, ouer-ruled his mother, and Iackes mother
agayne ouerruled M. Maior himſelfe, and M. Maior by office
ouerruled the Towne, Ergo, the whole Towne was ouerruled
by Iacke, Ma. Maiors ſonne: by the ſame conſequence, I
may likewiſe conclude, that Taylers are the wiſeſt men: the
reaſon is alreadie rendered, they doe make vs all Fooles, both
men and women, and doe mocke the whole worlde with
their newe inuentions: but are they women alone that are
thus ſeduced by Taylers, doe but looke amongſt our gallants
in this age, and tell me, if you ſhall not finde men amongſt
them to be as vaine, as nice, and as gaudie in their attyres, as
ſhee that amongſt women is accounted the moſt fooliſh.
            And howe manie are there, that if they doe thinke themſelues
to be but a little out of the Taylers diſcipline, they will
beginne to grow as Melancholy, and to looke as drouſily, as
the poore Amoriſt, that is but newly ſtricken to the heart,

with the coy aſpect of Dame folly, his deareſt beloued (and
ſcarce honeſt) miſtris.
            Wee are forbiden by the Scriptures to call our brother
Foole, this is it that makes mee ſomething to forbeare, yet
when I chance to meete with ſuch a newe fangled fellowe,
though I ſay nothing to him, yet GOD knowes what I
thinke.
            The holy ſcriptures haue denounced a curſe no leſſe grieuous
to the Idole-maker, then to the Idole it ſelfe: now (vnder
the correction of Diuinitie) I would but demaund, what are
theſe Puppet-making Taylers, that are euery day inuenting
of newe faſhions, and what are theſe, that they doe call Attyre-makers,
the firſt inuenters of theſe monſtrous Periwygs,
and the finders out of many other like immodeſt Attyres:
what are theſe, and all the reſt of theſe Faſhion Mongers, the
inuenters of vanities, that are euery day whetting their wits
to finde out thoſe Gaudes, that are not onely offenſiue vnto
God, but many wayes preiudiciall to the whole Common
wealth: if you will not acknowledge theſe to be Idolemakers
yet you cannot deny them to be the Deuils enginers, vngodly
inſtruments, to decke and ornifie ſuch men and women, as
may well be reputed to be but Idolles, for they haue eyes, but
they ſee not into the wayes of their owne ſaluation, & they
haue eares, but they cannot heare the Iudgements of God,
denounced againſt them for their pride and vanitie.
            Theſe Enginers of miſchiefe, that like Moles doe lye and
wrot in ſinne, till they haue caſt vppe a mount of hatefull enormitie
againſt Heauen, they may well be called, the Souldiers
of the Deuill, that will fight againſt the mightie hand of
God.
            There are certaine new inuented profeſſions, that within
theſe fourtie or fiftie yeares, were not ſo much as heard of,
that are now growne into that generalitie, and are hadde in

ſuch requeſt, that if they doe flouriſh ſtill, but as they haue
begunne, I thinke within theſe very fewe yeares, the worthy
Cittizens of London, muſt bee enforced to make choyſe of
their Aldermen, from amongſt theſe new vpſtart companies,
which in the meane time doe robbe the Realme of great
ſummes of money, that are daily ſpent vpon their vanities.
            As theſe Attyre-makers, that within theſe 40. yeares, were
not knowne by that name, and but nowe very lately, they
kept their lowzie commoditie of Periwygs, and their other
monſtrous Attyres cloſed in Boxes, they might not be ſeene
in open ſhow, and thoſe women that did vſe to weare them,
would not buy them but in ſecret.
            But now they are not aſhamed to ſette them forth vppon
their ſtalles, ſuch monſtrous Map-powles of Hayre, ſo proportioned
and deformed, that but within theſe 20. or thirtie
yeares, would haue drawne the paſſers by to ſtand and gaze,
and to wonder at them.
            And howe are Coach makers and Coach-men increaſed,
that fiftie yeares agoe were but fewe in number, but nowe a
Coach-man, and a Foot-boy is enough, and more then euery
Knight is able to keepe.
            Then haue we thoſe that be called Body-makers, that doe
ſwarme through all the parts both of London & about London,
that are better cuſtomed, and more ſought vnto, then
he that is the Soule maker.
            
            And how many Items are brought in for the bodies wantonneſſe,
but not ſo much as a Memorandum for the Soules
bliſſedneſſe.
            The bodie is ſtill pampered vppe in pompe, in pride, and
in the every dropſie of exceſſe, whileſt the ſoule remayneth,
poore, naked, and needy, and the Soule that giueth a feeling
to the bodie, doth not yet feele her owne euill, nor neuer reremembreth
her owne miſery, but in the euill which ſhee

there endureth.
            But he that ſome fortie or fifty yeares ſithens, ſhould haue
aſked after a Pickadilly, I wōder who could haue vnderſtood
him, or could haue told what a Pickadilly had beene, either
fiſh or fleſh.
            But amongſt the trades that are newly taken vp, this trade
of Tobacco doth exceede: and the money that is ſpent in
ſmoake is vnknowne, and (I thinke) vnthought on, and of
ſuch a ſmoake as is more vaine, then the ſmoake of fayre
words, for that (they ſay) will ſerue to feede Fooles, but this
ſmoake maketh Fooles of Wiſemen: mee thinkes experience
were enough to teach the moſt ſimple witted, that before
Tobacco was euer knowne in England, that we liued in as perfect
health, and as free from ſickneſſe, as we haue done ſithens,
and looke vppon thoſe (whereof there are a number at
this preſent houre) that did neuer take Tobacco in their liues,
and if they doe not liue as healthſome in bodie, and as free
from all manner of diſeaſes, as thoſe that doe take it faſteſt:
they ſay it is good for a Cold, for a Poſe, for Rewms, for Aches,
for Dropſies, and for all manner of diſeaſes proceeding
of moyſt humours: but I cannot ſee but that thoſe that doe
take it faſteſt, are aſmuch (or more) ſubiect to all theſe infirmities,
(yea and to the poxe it ſelfe) as thoſe that haue nothing
at all to doe with it: then what a wonderfull expence
might very well bee ſpared, that is ſpent and conſumed in
this needleſſe vanitie.
            There is not ſo baſe a groome, that commes into an Ale-houſe
to call for his pot, but he muſt haue his pipe of Tobacco,
for it is a commoditie that is nowe as vendible in euery Tauerne,
Inne, and Ale houſe, as eyther Wine, Ale, or Beare, &
for Apothicaries Shops, Groſers Shops, Chaundlers Shops, they
are (almoſt) neuer without company, that from morning
till night are ſtill taking of Tobacco, what a number are

there beſides, that doe keepe houſes, ſet open ſhoppes, that
haue no other trade to liue by, but by the ſelling of Tobacco.
            I haue heard it tolde that now very lately, there hath bin
a Cathalogue taken of all thoſe new erected houſes that haue
ſet vppe that Trade of ſelling Tobacco, in London & neare
about London▪ and if a man may beleeue what is confidently
reported, there are found to be vpward of 7000. houſes,
that doth liue by that trade.
            I cannot ſay whether they number Apothicaries ſhoppes,
Groſers ſhops, and Chaundlers ſhops in this computation,
but let it be that theſe were thruſt in to make vppe the number:
let vs now looke a little into the Vidimus of the matter,
and let vs caſt vppe but a ſleight account, what the expence
might be that is conſumed in this ſmoakie vapoure.
            If it be true that there be 7000. ſhops, in and about London,
that doth vent Tobacco, as it is credibly reported that
there be ouer and aboue that number: it may well bee ſuppoſed,
to be but an ill cuſtomed ſhoppe, that taketh not fiue
ſhillings a day, one day with another, throughout the whole
yeare, or if one doth take leſſe, two other may take more:
but let vs make our account, but after 2. ſhillings ſixe pence
a day, for he that taketh leſſe then that, would be ill able to
pay his rent, or to keepe open his Shop Windowes, neither
would Tobacco houſes make ſuch a muſter as they doe, and
that almoſt in euery Lane, and in euery by-corner round about
London.
            
            Let vs then reckon thus, 7000. halfe Crownes a day, amounteth
iuſt to 3. hundred ninetine thouſande 3. hundred
ſeuentie-fiue poundes a yeare, Summa totalis, All ſpent in
ſmoake.
            
            I doe not reckon now what is ſpent in Tauernes, in Innes
in Ale-houſes, nor what gentlemen doe ſpend in their owne

houſes & chambers, it would amount to a great reckoning,
but if I coulde deliuer truly what is ſpent throughout the
whole Realme of Englande, in that idle vanitie, I thinke
it woulde make a number of good people (that haue anie
feare of God in them) to lament, that ſuch a maſſe of Treaſure,
ſhould be ſo baſely conſumed, that might be imployed
to many better purpoſes.
            I haue hitherto peruſed the vayne and idle expences that
are conſumed in Tobacco, now by your fauours, a little to recreate
your wearyed ſpirits, I will acquaint you with a ſhort
Dialogue, that was ſometime diſcourſed betweene a Scholler,
and a Shoe-maker, which happened thus.
            A Scholler (and a maiſter of Artes) that vpon ſome occaſions
being here in London, driuen into want, hytting vpon
a Shooe-maker, beganne to make his mone, and told him
that he was a maiſter of the ſeauen Sciences, that was in ſome
diſtreſſe, and beſought him to beſtowe ſome ſmall courteſie
on him, for his reliefe.
            The Shoe-maker, hauing ouer heard him firſt wyping his
lippes with the backe of his hande, anſwered him thus: are
you a maiſter of ſeauen Sciences, and goe vppe and downe
a begging, I will tell you my friende, I haue but one Science,
and that conſiſtes but in making of Shoes, but with that one
Science, I doe liue, and with it I doe keepe my ſelfe, my wife
and my family, and you with your ſeauen Sciences to bee in
want, I cannot beleeue ye.
            Sir (ſaid the Scholler) I tell you a true tale, the more is my
griefe, I am a Scholler, and I haue proceeded maiſter in the
ſeauen Liberall Sciences, and yet (as my fortune hath conducted
mee) I am dryuen into diſtreſſe, and would bee glad
but of a poore reliefe.
            Aha (quoth the Shoe-maker) nowe I vnderſtand yee, you
are a maiſter of the ſeauen liberall Sciences▪ I haue heard of

thoſe ſame liberall ſciences before, but I perceiue they are
not halfe ſo bountifull to the Purſe, as they bee liberall in
name: well I am ſory for ye, but I haue no money to beſtow,
yet if good counſell would ſerue your turne, I coulde ſette
you downe a courſe, howe you might liue, you ſhoulde not
neede to begge.
            Sir (ſayd the Scholler) good Counſell commes neuer out
of ſeaſon, to a man that is wiſe, I will giue you thankes for any
aduiſe you will giue me that is good.
            Then (quoth the Shoe-maker) you ſhall let alone thoſe
ſame ſeauen Sciences that you name to be ſo liberall, & you
ſhall enter your ſelfe into any one of the 3. companyes that
haue nowe better taking, and are growne to be more gainefull,
then all the ſeauen Sciences, that you haue hitherto
learned, and put them all together.
            And what be thoſe three companies (ſayde the Scholler)
that you ſo much commend.
            They are three companies (ſayde the Shooe-maker) that
are now in moſt requeſt, and haue gotten all the Trade into
their owne hands, the firſt is to keepe an Ale houſe, the 2. a
Tobacco Houſe, and the third to keepe a Brothell Houſe.
            
            I haue done with my Dialogue▪
                and I thinke of my conſcience
the Shoe-maker aymed ſomething neare the marke, for
he that did but ſee the abundance of Ale-houſes, that are in
euery corner, I thinke he would wonder, howe they coulde
one liue by another, but if he did beholde againe, how they
are all repleniſhed with Drunkardes, euery houre in the daie
(and almoſt euery minute in the night) and did yet agayne
ſee their beaſtly demeanures, heare their blaſphemies and
their vngodly words, their ſwearing and their ribauldrie,
would tremble for feare, leaſt the houſe ſhould ſinke. For
Tobacco Houſes and Brothell Houſes, (I thanke God for it) I
doe not vſe to frequent them, but actiue mindes muſt haue

exerciſe, and I thinke to auoyd the inconuenience of a Brothell
Houſe, it were better of the twayne, to ſitte in a Tobacco
Houſe.
            
            It hath beene a great faction, that in former ages, would
ſtill vndertake to ſupport Bawdery, and they haue bin better
men then Iuſtices of peace, that would both countenance a
Curtizan, and boulſter out a Bawd.
            
            Theſe poore Harlots haue ſometimes bin brought to ride
in a Cart, when the Silken Strumpets (perhaps) haue ryden
in Coaches: but there are no Harlots nowe a dayes, but thoſe
that are poore, for ſhee that hath any friendes at all to take
her part, who dares call her Harlot.
            
            Some good mans liuery, the countenance of an office, the
bribing of a Conſtable, or any thing will ſerue and ſhee that
hath not twenty companiōs at a becke, that will ſtick to her
at a dead lift, let her ride in a Cart in the Deuils name, ſhee
deſerues no better.
            Should I now ſpeake of ſpirituall Whordome, which the
ſcriptures doe call Idolatry, I dare ſcarce ſpeake againſt it, for
offending of Papiſtes, that were neuer more dangerous, then
they be at this houre.
            I remember that many yeeres ſithens, I ſawe a fewe printed
lynes, intituled, The Blazon of a Papiſt, written by ſome
Herauit of Armes, that had pretily contriued a Papiſt in the
compaſſe of Armory.
            
            Hee firſt made deſcription of a Papiſt Rampant, a furious
beaſt, and although it be written, that the Deuill goeth about
like a roaring Lyon, yet the Deuill himſelfe is not more fierce
and rigorous, then is a Papiſt, where he is of force and abilitie
to ſhew his tyranny, witneſſe the murthers, the maſſacers
the ſlaughters the poyſoning, the ſtabbing, the burning, the
broyling, the torturing, the tormenting, the perſecuting,
with their other bloudie executions, euery day freſh in example,

infinite to be told, and horrible to be remembred.
            The next is a Papiſt Paſſant, this is an inſtrument of ſedition,
of inſurrection, of treaſon, of rebellion, a Prieſt, a Ieſuite,
a Seminary, and ſuch other as doe finde ſo many friends
in England, and in Ireland, both to receiue & harbour them,
as it is much to bee feared, wee ſhall finde the ſmart of it in
time to come: we haue then a Papiſt Volant, I thinke amongſt
the reſt, theſe can doe leaſt harme, yet they will ſay they flie
for their conſciences, when it is knowne well enough, they
doe both practiſe and conſpire.
            Then there is a Papiſt Regardant, he obſerueth times, occaſions,
places, and perſons, and although he be one of the
Popes lutely gencers, yet he walketh with ſuch circumſpection
and heede, that hee is not knowne, but to his owne faction.
            We are now come to a Papiſt Dormant, a ſlye companion,
ſubtill as a Foxe, he ſleepes with open eyes, yet ſometymes
ſeeming to winke, he lookes and pryes into opporrunities,
ſtill feeding himſelfe with thoſe hopes, that I am in hope,
ſhall neuer doe him good.
            There is yet againe a Papiſt Couchant, this is a dangerous
fellow, and much to be feared, he creepes into the boſome
of the ſtate, and will not ſticke to looke into the Court, nay
(if he can) into Court counſels, he will ſhewe himſelfe tractable
to common wealths preſcriptions, and with this ſhew
of obedience to law, he doth the Pope more ſeruice, then
twentie others, that are more reſiſting.
            The laſt we will ſpeake of, is the Papiſt Pendant, indeede a
Papiſt Pendant is in his prime perfection: a Papiſt Pendant
is ſo fitting a peece of Armory for the time preſent, as all the
Herauldes in Englande are not able better to diſplay him, a
Papiſt is then in chiefe, when hee is Pendant, and hee neuer
commes to ſo high preferment, but by the Popes eſpeciall

bleſſing.
            But if Lawes were as well executed as they be enacted, popery
could not ſo ſpread it ſelfe as it doth, neyther in Englād
nor in Irelande, nor it could not bee but that theſe diueliſh
practiſes of poyſons, of Piſtoles, of ſtabbing Kniues, and of
gunne-pouder traynes, would bee important motiues, to ſtir
vppe the conſiderations of thoſe that be in authority, to ſpy
out theſe maſked creatures, that haue tongs for their prince,
but doe reſerue their hearts for their Pope.
            But alas good Vertue, art thou becomme ſo faint hearted,
that thou wilt not diſcouer thy ſelfe, that art thus iniuried: I
wis thou hadſt neuer more need to look about thee, I would
I could wiſh thee for a time to put away Patience, and to becomme
a little while Cholericke, if not for their ſakes that do
loue thee, yet for thine owne ſecurity, if Vice dare take boldneſſe
to offend, why ſhould not Vertue take courage to correct:
but I know it is but loſſe of tyme to ſpeake againſt popery,
and as little it will preuaile to ſpeake againſt any manner
of ſinne, yet we want no poſitiue Lawes whereby to bridle
abuſe, but the example of a good life in thoſe that ſhould
miniſter the due execution of thoſe Lawes, would bee more
effectuall then the Lawes themſelues, becauſe the actions of
thoſe that be placed in authoritie, are receiued by the common
people, for precepts and inſtructions.
            But the greateſt number of them, doe rather ſhewe their
authorities in correcting of other mens faults, then in mending
their owne, and it is hard, when hee that cannot order
his owne life, ſhould yet bee made a miniſter to correct
the miſdemeanours of others: there can neuer be good diſcipline
amongſt inferious, where there is but bad example
in ſuperiours: but where ſuperiours haue beene more ready
to ſupport ſinne, then to puniſh ſinne, and when a Noblemans
liuery was countenance good enough to keepe a

Drunkard from the Stockes, an Adulterer from the Cart,
and ſometimes a Theefe from the Gallowes: when knowne
Strumpets, could vaunt themſelues to be ſupported and vpholden
by great perſons, and to receiue ſuch countenance
from them, that it was holden for a Maxime amongſt a great
number of young wantons, that to ſurrender themſelues to
the luſt of ſuch men as were in great place & authoritie, was
the next way to get preferment, and to winne them many
friendes.
            This was it that made a number of yong women (in thoſe
times) to ſhake off the vayles of ſhamefaſtnes, and to offer
the vſe of their intemperate bodies to common proſtitution,
though not verbally in wordes, yet vnder the ſhowes of
their gaudie and gadiſh attiers.
            I am not yet ignorant but that in theſe dayes there bee a
number of women, that in reſpect of any abuſe of their bodies
are both good and honeſt, and yet if wee ſhould iudge
of them but according to their outwarde ſhewes, they doe
ſeeme more Curtizan like, then euer was Lais of Corinth,
or Flora of Rome.
            
            The ancient Romanes prohibited all ſortes of people as
well menne as women, from wearing of any light coloured
ſilkes, or any other gaudie garments, Players and Harlotes
onely excepted, for to them there was tolleration in regard
of their profeſſions.
            There is mention made of a Canon in the Ciuill Lawe,
where it was ordayned, that if a man did offer violence to any
woman, were ſhee neuer ſo vertuous and honeſt, yet attyred
like a Strumpet, ſhee hadde no remedie agaynſt him by
Law.
            And we doe finde it teſtified, of a great Lady, who vppon
ſome occaſion of buſines, caſting ouer her a light coloured
vayle, and being thus met withall by a young gallant, hee

beganne to court her with complements of loue, the which
the Lady taking in great diſdaine, reproued his ſaucineſſe,
that would offer that diſgrace, to her that was honeſt, that
ſhee was not as ſhee ſeemed to be to the outward ſhewe: the
young gallant as angry as ſhee, returned her this anſwere.
            Be what you liſt to be (ſayd he) I know not what you be, but
if your honeſtie bee ſuch as you ſay, be ſo attyred then, or els
be as you are attyred: Vertue is neuer decked vp with externall
pompe, to procure reſpect, her very countenance is full
of Maieſtie, that commaundeth admiration, in all that doe
behold her.
            It hath beene queſtioned, whether Chaſtitie ioyned with
Vanitie, doth merite any commendation or no, but that a
proud and a gaudie garment ſhould ſhroud an humble or a
modeſt mind, it is Rara Auis in Terris▪
                a matter ſeldome ſcene
but this is out of doubt, that this ouermuch affected Folly,
doth liue with no leſſe ſuſpected Honeſtie.
            
            Shee is but an ill huſwife therefore of her owne credite,
that will bring it into conſtruction.
            The Philoſophers would ayme at the inner diſpoſition of
the minde, by the externall ſignes of the bodie, affirming,
that the motions of the body are the true voyces of the
mind.
            
               Auguſtus on a time of great aſſembly, obſerued with diligence,
what company they were that courted his 2. daughters,
Liuia and Iulia, who perceiuing the firſt to bee frequented
with graue and wiſe Senators, and the other againe to be
ſolicited, with witleſſe and wanton Royſters, he diſcouered
thereby their ſeuerall diſpoſitions: being not ignorant, that
cuſtome and company doth for the moſt part ſimpathize to
gether, according to the prouerbe, Simile Simili gaudet, like
will to like, quoth the Deuill to the Collier.
            
            A womans bluſh is a ſigne of grace, and a good woman

will quickly bluſh at many thinges, nay, it were enough to
make a vertuous woman to bluſh, but to thinke with her
ſelfe that ſhee could not bluſh.
            The bluſh of a womans face is an approbation of a chaſt
and an honeſt mind, and a manifeſt ſigne that ſhee doth not
approue any intemperate actions or any other wanton ſpeeches
or demeanores, that are eyther offered to her ſelfe, or
to any other in her preſence.
            The woman that forgetteth to bluſh, it is an argument
that ſhee is paſt grace, for ſhamefaſtneſſe is not onely a brydle
to ſinne, but it is likewiſe the common treaſury of feminine
Vertue.
            
            The bold audacious woman, cannot but be taxed of Impudency,
it is one of the notes that Salomon giueth, whereby
to diſtinguiſh a good woman from a bad.
            The beautie of behauiour, is more precious in eſtimation,
then the beautie of the bodie, and the woman that will
maintaine her credite, muſt not be too conuerſant: but the
time rather ſerueth to looke Babyes in womens Eyes, then to
picke out Moates.
            
            Yet I am ſory for ſome of them, that (I thinke) will care
little for going to Heauen, becauſe there is no good Coachway.
            
            
               Licurgus ordayned the Laconian women, the exerciſe of
their limmes, as running, leaping, wraſtling, heauing and
throwing of waights.
            Theſe exerciſes hee permitted, whereby to increaſe their
vigor & ſtrength, that their propagation & of-ſpring might
be the more ſtrong and ſturdie.
            But now, our women are trained vp in Idleneſſe, in ignorance,
in pride, in delicacy, & their iſſue (for the moſt part)
are leaning to their mothers conſtitutions; feeble of bodie,
weake in minde effeminate and fearefull, fitter to ryde in a

               Curtizans Coach vp and downe the ſtreets, then to beſtride a
ſtirring Horſe in the Fielde, and doe knowe better howe to
mannage a Tobacco-pipe, then howe to charge a Pyke or a
Lance.
            
            The Laconian women brought foorth a propagation of
men of haughty courage, able both in bodie and minde, to
ſerue their countrey, to defend and fight for their liberties,
but our women in theſe times, they bring a generation of
Mearockes, that doe bend their whole endeuours to effeminatenicitie,
to pride and vanitie.
            
               Cato being Cenſurer to make choiſe of a Generall for the
Panoman warres, openly diſgraced and diſmiſſed Publius, becauſe
he had ſeene him to walke the ſtreets of Rome perfumed:
but now our gallants doe thinke themſelues nothing
more diſgraced, if they be not ſo perfumed, be ſpiced, and
be poudered, that a man may well vent them the breadth of
a ſtreete.
            And from whence commeth this wearing, & this imbrodering
of long lockes, this curioſitie that is vſed amongſt
men, in freziling and curling of their hayre, this gentlewoman-like
ſtarcht bands, ſo be edged, and be laced, fitter for
Mayd Marion in a Moris dance, then for him that hath either
that ſpirit or courage, that ſhould be in a gentleman.
            But amongſt all the reſt of theſe ill becomming follies,
that are now newly taken vppe, (me thinkes) theſe yellow
ſtarcht bandes ſhoulde bee euer beſt ſuited, with a yellowe
Coate.
            
            I haue heard of a Gentle-man that proteſted himſelfe to
bee ſo fierce and furious, if hee were but a little diſpleaſed,
that during the time whileſt his anger did laſt, he neuer durſt
looke in a glaſſe, for feare he ſhould affraight himſelfe with
the terrour of his owne lookes.
            And are not our gentlemen in as dangerous a plight now

(I meane theſe Apes of Fancy) that doe looke ſo like Attyremakers
maydes, that for the dainty decking vp of themſelues,
might ſit in any Seamſters ſhop in all the Exchange.
            
            Me thinkes a looking glaſſe ſhould be a dangerous thing
for one of them to view himſelfe in, for falling in loue with
his owne lookes, as Narciſſus did with his owne ſhadow.
            I am yet perſwaded, that our women in this age are as really
endued with Natures abilities, as they haue beene in
times paſt, but they doe faile in that education that they had
in times paſt, they doe now (for the moſt part of them) ſee
nothing but vanitie, neyther doe I thinke, but that the ſame
defect is it, that ſo infeebleth their of-ſpring.
            But I cannot altogether blame the careleſnes of the world,
that it is become ſo ſparing of good endeuours, when there
is neyther rewarde nor recompence for good deſert, nor
ſcarce ſo much as a Memorandum, for the moſt honourable
enterpriſe, how worthily ſo euer performed.
            We doe read of forraine eſtates, euen at this preſent time,
what care they haue in rewarding the good, and puniſhing
the ill, and in theſe two poynts, that is, as I haue ſayd, in rewarding
and puniſhing, conſiſteth ſo high a policie of good
gouernment, that it may well bee ſayd, that the Turkes, the
Perſians, the Tartarians, and many other barbarous infidels,
haue built the foundation of their eſtates, eſpecially vppon
that ground worke, and haue aduanced themſelues to that
greatneſſe, that they be now growne vnto, onely by theſe 2
vertues, in rewarding the good and puniſhing the ill.
            For whom reward they, but Captaines and Souldiers, or
where vſe they liberalitie, but in the field amongſt weapons.
            How ſeuere againe are they, in puniſhing of thoſe, that do
beare themſelues careleſſely in their places and offices committed
vnto them, yea, they keepe no meane in diſgracing
baſe cowardly mindes, nor in honouring of haughty ſpirits,

and valiant Souldiers.
            
            But with vs, our Paraſites, our Panders, our Fauourets,
our Fidelers, our Fooles, our inſtruments of ambition, our
miniſters of our wanton pleaſures ſhall be rewarded, but wee
neuer cheriſh wiſedome, till wee haue cauſe to vſe her counſell,
and then (perhaps) ſhee may bee rewarded with ſome
Court holy water wordes, and which wee will beſtowe, but for
our owne aduantage, & when our turne is ſerued, our kindnes
is eſtranged.
            The world is not now the world that it hath beene, when
the ſauing of a Romane Citizen, was rewarded with honor,
the humoure of preſeruing our Country is now ſpent, there
is not a Curtius now to be found, and where ſhould we ſeeke
for another Sceuola.
            
            
               Deſert, may now goe to Cart, and he that cannot ruffell it
out in ſilkes, will hardly gette paſſage in at a great mans
gate.
            Hee that is thought to bee poore, is neuer thought to bee
wiſe, nor fit to haue the managing of any matter of importance,
all is well accepted that is ſpoken by authoritie, but
truth it ſelfe is not beleeued, if it proceede from the mouth
of pouertie.
            By this contempt of pouertie, vice hath beene aduanced,
and ſithens riches haue thus crept into credite, the worlde
is rather growne to giue way to the humour of a rich Foole,
then to followe the direction of a poore wiſeman.
            Let vs no we a little looke into the actions of this age, and
ſpeake truly, when was Vertue and Honeſtie more deſpiſed,
when was Pride, Ryot, and Exceſſe, more inordinate, when
was adultery, and all other vnchaſt liuing, either more apparant
or leſſe puniſhed, when were all manner of abhominations
more tollerated, when thoſe that ſhould miniſter correction,
will ſometimes fauour their owne vices in others,

euery man accounting that to bee moſt excellent in faſhion,
that is moſt taken vppe and en-vred, by thoſe that be moſt
vicious.
            
               Thou ſhalt not follow the multitude to doe euill, the commandement
of the liuing God, Exod. 23. but for theſe Adulterers,
theſe Drunkards, theſe Swearers, theſe Blaſphemers, they haue
made a ſacrifice of their owne ſoules to the Deuill, & haue
caſt of all care, both of honour and honeſtie.
            But to leaue the generall, and to come to the perticular, I
tell thee thou Adulterer, I ſpeake it to thy face, that beſides
the Poxe, and many other loath ſome diſeaſes, that are incident
to Whore-maiſters whilſt they liue in this world, thy hot
burning fire of luſt, will bring thee to the hot burning fire of
Hell.
            And I tell thee Diues, that pampereſt thy ſelfe in exceſſe,
whilſt Lazarus lyeth crying out at thy gate, readie to famiſh,
Lazarus ſhall be comforted, when thou ſhalt intreat, but for
one drop of cold water, to coole thy tongue.
            And thou beaſtly Drunkard, thou monſter of Nature, that
amongſt all other ſinners art the moſt baſe and ſeruile: if a
Drunkard were as ſeldome to be ſeene as the Bird of Arabia,
he would be more wondered at, then the Owle, & more loathed
then the Swine.
            
            How many Crafts men that will labour all the weeke, for
that which on Sun-day they will ſpend in an Ale-houſe, that
will there moſt beaſtly conſume in Drinke, that would relieue
their poore wiues and children at home, that other
whiles doe want wherewith to buy them Bread.
            
            But if Drunkenneſſe were not ſo common as it is, a number
of Tauernes, and Ale-houſe keepers, might ſhutte vppe
their doores, but the cuſtome of it doth make it ſo conuerſant,
that it taketh away the ſence of ſinne.
            The generallitie of it, I ſhall not neede to expreſſe, when

there is no feaſting, no banqueting, nor almoſt anie merrie
meeting, but Drunkenneſſe muſt bee a principall gueſt: and
what a glory is it after the incounter of their Cups, for one
Drunkard, to ſee another carryed away vppon mens ſhoulders
to the Beds.
            The fruits of Drunkennes haue beene very well knowne,
ſince Lot committed inceſt with his owne Daughters, ſince
Alexander kild his Clitus, and ſince Lucius pius obtained that
victory againſt his enemies, by making of them drunke,
that hee coulde neuer attayne vnto, ſo long as they were
ſober.
            When the fume of the drinke once beginnes to aſcend to
the braine, the mind is oppreſſed with idle thoughts, which
ſpurreth on the tongue, to contentious quarrelling, to ſlandering,
backbiting, to idle and beaſtly talking, to ſwearing
and blaſpheming, and in the ende, to ſtabbing and murthering.
            I neuer yet knewe a Drunkard to be fitte for any good or
godly exerciſe: and Caeſar was wont to ſay, that hee ſtoode
more in doubt of Brutus and Caſſius, that were noted to bee
ſober, then he did of drunken Marcus Antonius.
            
            Let him be of what title he liſt, if he be a Drunkarde, doe
but ſtrippe him out of his gay cloathes, and ſcrape his name
out of the Heraulds booke, and he is without eyther euidence
or preheminence of the baſeſt raſcall, that euer was drunke
in an Ale-houſe.
            
            Now I tell thee againe thou Swearer and Blaſphemer, that
the heauie curſe of GOD is ſtill depending ouer thy head:
thou that vppon euery light occaſion, doſt polute the name
of God, that is to bee reuerenced and feared, and doeſt ſette
that tongue which by the right of creation, ſhoulde bee the
Trumpet, to ſound forth his glory, thou doeſt make it the inſtrument
to prophane and blaſpheme his holy name.
            
               
How many blaſphemous wretches are there in theſe daies,
that do make oathes their paſtime, & will ſweare vpon pleaſure
& he that hath not for euery word an oath, & can ſweare
voluntarily without any cauſe, is holden to be but of a weak
ſpirit, a ſigne of want of courage: and he that ſhould reproue
him in his blaſphemies, they ſay hee is a puritan, a preciſe
Foole, not fitte to hold a gentleman company: their greateſt
glory, and the way to ſhewe themſelues generous, is to ſette
their tongues againſt Heauen, and to abuſe that name, at the
which they ſhould tremble and quake with feare.
            In the commandements of the firſt Table, God himſelfe is
the obiect, for they immediately appertaine vnto him, and
therfore, he that taketh his name in vaine (I thinke) diſpleaſeth
God aſmuch or more, as he that againſt the commaundement
of the ſecond Table, committeth murther, and therfore
thoſe poſitiue lawes, that doe ſo ſeuerely puniſh the actuall
breaches of the ſecond Table, without any reſpect to
the ſinnes that are committed againſt the firſt, were rather
ſette downe by the policies of men, then by the rule of the
written word of God.
            He that ſhould but touch a man in credite (if he be a man
of any ſort or calling) that ſhould impeach his reputation, or
ſlaunder his good name, there wanteth no good Lawes to
vexe and moleſt him, and to inflict thoſe puniſhments vpon
him, that they will make him to cry peccaui: but hee that
ſhould depraue God in his maieſtie, that ſhall depriue him
of his glory, or blaſpheme his holy name, there is no maner
of Lawe whereby to correct him, there is not ſo much as a
write of Scandalum Magnatum, to be granted againſt him.
            A common Swearer hath no excuſe to pleade in his owne
defence, but doth ſhew himſelfe to be abondſlaue to the deuill,
and a fire brand of hell.
            God himſelfe hath pronounced againſt him: The Lord

will not holde him guiltleſſe that taketh his name in vaine, and the
viſion of the flying Booke, ſeene by Zacharias, that was twelue
Cubits in length, and tenne in breadth, doth witneſſe that
the Curſes are many, that are written, and doe hang in record
againſt Swearers.
            
            I thinke Bribery is no ſinne at all, or if it be, it is but veniall,
a light offence, a matter of no reckoning to account
on.
            It is like the diſeaſe Morbus Gallicus, which in poore men
we vſe plaine dealing, & call it the Poxe, but in great perſonages,
a little to gilde ouer the loathſomneſſe, wee muſt call
it the Gowt, or the Sciatica: ſo that which amongſt inferiors
we call a Bribe, in ſuperiors it is called a Gift, a preſent, a Gratification.
            
            If a Lawyer for a fee of tenne ſhillinges, doe ſometymes
take tenne poundes, it is a Curteſie, a Beneuolence, but theſe
Curteſies and kindneſſes are beſtowed with aſmuch good
will as the true man, when he giueth his purſe to the Theefe.
            
            Yet he that hath iudgement to giue a Bribe with diſcretion,
may worke wonders, he may run through-ſtitch with any
buſineſſe.
            
               Iacob by ſending of preſents, may appeaſe the anger of
Eſau.
            
            
               Claudius by giuing of Bribes may eſcape correctiō, though
he commit ſacriledge in the Temple of Minerua.
            
            Thou ſhalt take no gifts, for the gift bindeth the wiſe, and peruerteth
the words of the righteous, Exod. 23.
            
            But to make an end of this text, I will but adde thus much,
that the giuing and taking of Bribes, and the buying and ſelling
of offices, are 2. ſuch plague ſores to a common wealth
where they be ſuffered, that they are no leſſe hurtfull to the
Prince, then preiudiciall to the poore ſubiect.
            Should I ſpeake nowe of Couetouſneſſe, of Vſury, and of

Pride.
            Couetouſneſſe is a ſin that euermore hath beene hated,
and Vſury is a ſinne that the world hath ſtill deteſted.
            But the pride of theſe times (if it were well conſidered) is
much more odious in the ſight of God, & many wayes more
pernicious to the common wealth, then both thoſe other of
Couetouſneſſe and Vſury, that are (and haue euer bin) accounted
ſo loathſome.
            Couetouſneſſe (I confeſſe) is the Curre, that thinketh
nothing to be vnlawfull that bringeth in gaine, it is the canker,
that eateth and deuoureth the gettings of the poore.
            It is the Viper that ſpareth neyther friend nor foe, vertuous
nor vicious, but where there is golde to be gotten, it teareth
the very intrailes of whom ſoeuer.
            He yeeldeth yet a reaſon for his ſcraping, and pleades the
feare of want, alledging, that his greedie heaping and gathering
together, to be but a Chriſtian-like care that euerie
man ſhould haue to prouide for his family.
            
               Simonides being demanded why he beganne to growe ſo
miſerable in his latter yeares, to fall a hurding vp of riches,
when he was readie for the graue, to acquit himſelfe of a couetous
diſpoſition, anſwered: becauſe (ſayd hee) I had rather
haue goods to leaue to mine enemies, when I am dead,
then to ſtand in neede of my friends, whilſt I am aliue.
            Thus wee may ſee there is not a vice ſo odible, but they
haue ſkill to maſke it, with the viſard of vertue.
            And the Vſurer on the other ſide, he pleades not guiltie:
nay, he will hardly be perſwaded, that Vſury is any ſinne at
all, or if it be a ſinne, it is ſuch a ſin, as it lies in his owne will
and diſpoſition, what manner of ſin hee himſelfe will make
of it, whether a little ſinne or a great ſin, or a ſinne of any aſſize,
that he himſelfe doth liſt to forme or faſhion it.
            Nowe the Vſurer doth acknowledge that the Scriptures

doe prohibite the taking of Vſury, and (ſayth hee) ſo God
himſelfe hath commaunded, Thou ſhalt not ſteale.
            
            Now for a rich man to be a Theefe, euery man can ſay hee
deſerues to be hanged: but for a poore man that is ready to
famiſh, and in his neceſſitie, hee ſtealeth a loafe of Bread to
ſaue his life, here is now a theft cōmitted, & a direct breach
of Gods commandement, yet to be comiſerated.
            From hence they would inferre a tolleration in ſome perſons,
namely, to men that be aged, to widdowes and to Orphanes:
and there be ſome that publiquely in writing, haue
maintained a tolleration to be had in theſe, and do thinke it
a matter drawing nearer Charitie, for theſe to make profite
of their money, rather then to waſte or ſpend awaie the
ſtocke.
            Here is yet a ſecond collection that is gathered by the Vſurer,
yet (ſayth he) if a man be driuen into that neceſſitie,
that he is inforced to ſteale (though it be but a loafe of bread
for his reliefe) yet the theft is to be accounted ſo much the
more, or ſo much the leſſe, in reſpect of the perſon from
whom it is committed, for in ſuch a caſe, to ſteale from him
that is rich, the robbery is nothing ſo intollerable in the eies
of the world as for him that is poore to ſteale from another,
no leſſe poore then himſelfe: therefore (ſayth the Vſurer)
we may take vſe of him that is rich, ſo we haue a conſcience
to him that is poore, and to fortifie his conceit, he alledgeth
certaine places of Scripture: If thou lend money to my people,
that is, to the poore, Thou ſhalt take no Vſury, Exod. 22.
            Here is nowe no prohibition but that we may take vſe of
thoſe that be rich, it is but the poore that are only excepted.
            And wee are yet agayne forbidden that wee ſhoulde take
no Vſury, but it is of thy brother that is falne in decay, Leui. 25.
            When the Deuill came to tempt our Sauiour Chriſt, hee
beganne with Scriptum eſt, and the Vſurer to ſalue vp that

ſinne that all ages hath deteſted, all places haue denounced,
& all good men haue euer abhorred, haue learned of the Deuill
to alledge the holy Scriptures.
            But Vſury is forbidden by Gods owne mouth, and therefore
ſinne, neyther is that reliefe to be found in it that many
do expect, for wher it maketh ſhow to giue, there it taketh, &
where it pretēdeth to ſuccour, there againe it doth oppreſſe.
            And therefore hee that ſeeketh to aſſiſt himſelfe by the
helpe of the Vſurer, is like the poore Sheepe, that ſeeketh in
a ſtorme to ſhrowde himſelfe vnder a Bramble, where hee is
ſure to leaue ſome of his Wool behind him.
            There hath beene queſtion made of Vſury, what it is, for
ſome woulde haue it to conſiſt onely, in the letting out of
money, according to the letter as it is written, Thou ſhalt not
giue to Vſury to thy Brother, Deut. 23.
            Other ſome doe thinke him to be as great an Vſurer, that
taketh exceſſiue gaines in any thing, as the other that taketh
vſe for his money.
            He would vpholde his reaſon thus, if a poore man that is
driuen into diſtreſſe, ſhould come to borrowe the ſumme of
twentie ſhillings of a monyed man, vppon a garment (or
ſome other pawne) that not long before had coſt him fortie:
promiſing within one moneth or two, not onely to redeeme
his pawne, but alſo to giue him reaſonable vſe for
the loane of his money.
            He is anſwered that to lend money vpon Vſury is againſt
the rule of Gods word, and therefore (to auoyde that ſinne)
if he will fell his garment out right, hee will buy it (if twentie
ſhillings be his price) but other money he will not lend,
nor a greater ſumme he will not giue.
            The poore man inforced by neceſſitie, is dryuen to take
that twentie ſhillings, and to forgoe his garment, which he
had beene better to haue pawned to an Vſurer, though hee

had payd him after ſixe pence, or eyght pence, yea, or after
twelue pence a moneth, if it hadde beene for a whole yeare
together.
            There bee ſome that will in no wiſe acknowledge this to
be Vſury, but let them diſtinguiſh howe they liſt, if I ſhould
giue my cenſure, I would ſay it were flat Knauery.
            
            Euery man can call him an Vſurer, that ſetteth out his
money, but hee that taketh aduantage of his poore neighbours
neceſſitie, as when he knoweth him to be enforced to
ſell for neede, he will then haue it at his owne price, or hee
will not buy: and when he is conſtrayned agayne (by occaſion)
to buy, he will make him then to pay deare for his neceſſitie,
yet howſoeuer he oppreſſe him eyther in buying or
ſelling (they ſay) it is no Vſury, it is but honeſt trade and
traffique.
            He that ſelleth vpon truſt, if it bee but for one moneth or
ſixe weekes, and maketh the buyer to pay fiftie ſhillings for
that which in readie money, he might haue bought for 40▪
is he not an Vſurer.
            Theſe Shop-keepers that can blind mens eyes with dym
and obſcure lights, and deceiue their eares with falſe & flattering
words, be they not Vſurers.
            Theſe Tradeſmen that can buy by one weight, and ſell
by another, by they not Vſurers.
            Theſe Marchants that doe robbe the Realme, by carrying
away of Corne, Lead, Tinne, Hydes, Leather, and ſuch other
like, to the impoueriſhing of the common wealth, bee
they not Vſurers.
            Theſe Farmers that doe hurde vppe their Corne, Butter,
& Cheefe, but of purpoſe to make a dearth, or that if they
thinke it to rayne but one houre to much, or that a drought
doe laſt but two dayes longer then they thinke good, will
therfore the next market day hoyſe vp the priſes of all manner

of victuall, be not theſe Vſurers.
            The Land-Lordes that doe ſette out their liuings at thoſe
high rates, that their Tenants that were wont to keepe good
Hoſpitalitie, are not nowe able to giue a peece of Bread to
the Poore, be they not Vſurers.
            If theſe, and ſuch other like Capitall Crimes, be not reputed
to be Vſury, let them guilde them ouer with what other
titles they liſt, I think them to be as ill (or worſe) then vſury.
            If the Bookes of Moſes be aduiſedly conſidered of, there be
as dangerous menaces againſt great Purchacers, as there be
againſt Vſurers▪ and God himſelfe hath ſayd, Thou ſhalt not
couet thy Neighbours Houſe, and our Sauiour Chriſt hath pronoūced
a wo, vnto him that ioyneth houſe to houſe, or lād to land.
            
            I would not haue men therefore to flatter themſelues too
much, or to thinke themſelues more honeſt then (indeede)
they be▪ for if we relye ſo much vppon the bare letter, hee
breaketh the commandements of God in as expreſſe a manner,
that hath money in his purſe, and will not lend to his
needie Neighbour, as hee that lendeth money to vſe: for the
ſame God that forbiddeth to take Vſury, ſayth againe, Thou
ſhalt not ſhut vp thy compaſſion, but ſhalt Lend: And Dauid in
his 112. Pſalme ſayth, A good man is mercifull and Lendeth.
            
            
               Our bleſſed Sauiour agayne in the 6. of Luke, Doe good &
lend looking for nothing againe.
            It followeth then, when a man is enforced by neceſſitie,
to borrowe, he that hath money and will not lend, is no better
then an Vſurer.
            And as he is thus commanded to lend, ſo he is enioyned
againe not to keepe his neighbours pawne, If thou take thy
neighbours rayment to pledge, thou ſhalt reſtore it before the ſunne
goe downe, Exod. 22. And for feare of forgetting, in the 24.
of Deut. it is yet againe Itterated in theſe wordes, If it bee a
poore body, thou ſhalt not ſleepe with his pledge.
            
            
               
So that wee may conclude, the Vſurer, that will not lend
but for gaine, the Miſer that will not lend at all, the Land-Lord
that racketh vppe his rents, the Farmer that hoyſeth vp
the market, the Marchant that robbeth the Realme, and all
the reſt what ſome euer, that doe oppreſſe the poore, they
are all in one predicament, and may bee all called the Deuils
Iorny-men, for they doe the Deuils Iorny worke.
            
            Here is now to be conſidered, that theſe loathed ſinnes of
Couetouſnes and vſury, though they haue pleaded in their
owne excuſes, yet they haue euermore beene condemned euen
from the beginning, and ſo they are continued euen at
this preſent houre.
            But this monſtrous ſin of pride, for the which the Angels
were throwne out of Heauen, & by the which the vengeance
of God hath beene ſo many times drawne vppon this Globe
of Earth, it is now growne into a faſhion, and it is become ſo
general, that it is but in vaine for any man to ſpeak againſt it.
            It is community that taketh away the ſence, and then example
is it that bloteth out the ſhame, for the power of example
being ſo common as it is, is a motiue good enough,
to perſwade that pride is no ſinne, which is in ſuch generalitie
amongſt them that be of the beſt account.
            Pride if in a Prince, it ruines the loue of his Subiects, if amongſt
Subiects, it breedeth neglect of dutie to the Prince,
if in any States-man, it draweth contempt, both of Prince
and Subiect: the pride of this age is growne to that height,
that wee canne hardly knowe a Prince from a peſant, by the
view of his apparrell, and who is able by the outward ſhow,
to diſcerne betweene Nobilitie and Seruilitie, to knowe a
Lord from a Lowt, a Lady from a Landreſſe, or to diſtinguiſh
betweene a man of worthineſſe and a baſe Groome, that is
not worth the clothes that belonges to his backe they doe
ſhine in ſilke, in ſiluer, in golde, and that from the head, to

the very heele.
            With titles, with worſhip, and with words, we may diſtinguiſh
eſtates, but we cannot diſcerne them by their apparell.
            It is pride that hath depryued the Angels of the ioyes of
Heauen, it hath beene the ouerthrow of kingdomes, & common
wealthes here vpon the Earth, it is the inhanuſer of all
our miſeries nowe in this age: it hath baniſhed Hoſpitalitie
and good houſe-keeping, it hath rayſed the rates and priſes
of all things, it breedeth dearth & ſcarſitie, it inforceth theft
and robbery, it is pride that filleth the priſons, and bringeth
numbers to the gallowes, it is onely pride, that impoueriſheth
Cittie, Towne, and Country, it is it that maketh ſo many
Towneſ-men and Tradeſ-men to play Banckropt.
            It is pride, that hath expelled our Yeomandry, that hath
impoueriſhed our Gentility, it hath repleniſhed the Realme
with bare and needie Knights, and it threatneth a worſe
ſucceeding miſchiefe, then I dare ſet downe with my pen.
            It is pride, that hath baniſhed Hoſpitalitie, and where hoſpitalitie
is once putte to flight, there charitie doth ſeldome
ſhewe his face, for charitie is ſo combined with Hoſpitality,
that where the one becommeth lame, the other immediately
begins to halt.
            I did neuer beleeue the Popes Tranſubſtantiation, but now
I ſee charitie is tranſubſtantiated into braue apparrell, when
we ſhall ſee him that in a Hat-band, a ſcarſe, a payre of Garters,
and in Roſes for his ſhoe-ſtrings, will beſtow more money,
then would haue bought his great grandfather, a whole
ſuite of apparrell to haue ſerued him for Sun-dayes.
            Thus we doe ſee, it is pride that waſteth and conſumeth
all things to vphold it ſelfe, it deſtroyeth both loue & hope,
it is pernicious in the poore, it is maligned in the rich, neyther
can a Prince himſelfe that is proud, bee able to ſhroude
himſelf from cōtempt of the vulgare, but he ſhalbe deſpiſed.
            
               
Marry the beſt ſport in this ſinne of pride is this, we ſhall
neuer ſee two proud perſons, but the one will enuie and deſpiſe
the other, for pride doth malice pride, & it will mocke
and ſcorne at that pride in another, that it will neuer marke
nor ſee in it ſelfe: it is a vice that is left deſtitute of all helpe
or defence, or of friendes, it was expelled from Heauen, and
it is the moſt conſuming plague, that may happen vpon the
earth, and the beſt reward that belongeth to it, is the burning
fire of Hell.
            
            Tell me nowe thou proud preſumptuous fleſh, haſt thou
not reaſon to turne ouer another leafe, when wrath ſeemeth
ſo to threaten, as though there were no ſauing fayth left vpon
the earth.
            
               Nature hath ſufficiently taught vs to lift vppe the hande
before the head, becauſe the head is more worthy then the
hand, and the ſpirit of God that hath created this Nature,
ſhould it not teach vs to forſake our owne willes, and to giue
place vnto his, without the which our willes could not be.
            We doe neglect the Iudgements of God, and notwithſtanding
the myracles he hath ſhewed vnto vs, we aske with
Pharao, Who is the Lord, but we doe not lay holde of them to
our inſtruction, perhaps we may ſometimes wonder at them
but neuer profit by them.
            I haue thus farre preſumed to thruſt my lynes into the
wide worlde, to abide the fury of all weathers, if they proue
diſtaſtfull to ſome palates, yet I hope there bee other ſome,
that will better reliſh them, for thoſe that ſhall thinke
them too tart, let them vſe them in the ſtead
of Veriuyce, for ſweete meates
are euer beſt reliſhed with
ſoureſauce.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Epilogus.
            Now after 23. Bookes by me alreadie publiſhed, to make them vp
iuſt 2. doſen, and for my laſt farewell to the Printers Preſſe,
I haue taſked my ſelfe to ſuch a kinde of ſubiect, as is better fitting
to be roughly rubbed with a reprehending veritie, then ſlightly to
be blanched ouer with any ſmoothing flattery.
            I knowe I ſhall offend a number, for I haue inueighed againſt
ſinnes and that of ſeuerall ſorts, perhaps ſome will ſay I am too bitter,
but can we be too ſerious in exclaiming againſt Pride, againſt
Adulterie, againſt Drunkenneſſe, againſt Blaſphemy, and againſt
ſuch other, and ſo great Impietie, as I thinke ſince it rayned
fire and brim-ſtone vppon Sodome and Gomorah, there was neuer
the like: if it be not now time then, both to ſpeake and to write
againſt thoſe abhominations, it is high time the world were at an
end.
            I haue not medled with any thing that is repugnant to religion:
And for matters of ſtate it fits me not to deale withall, for Satyryck
inueyghing at any mans pryuate perſon it is farre from my
thought; Yet I am ſure to want no cenſuring, but I haue armed
my ſelfe againſt all thoſe reproches, wherwith malice it ſelfe is able
to loade me, my ſoule and conſcience bearing witnes that my intent
hath beene no other, then to drawe men into a due conſideration,
how much they looſe of Time, in hunting after vanities: then lette
Detraction whet his tongue and ſpare not, if I diſpleaſe any, if
they be not ſuch as are but weake of Iudgement, I am then
ſure they bee ſuch, as doe knowe themſelues
to bee faultie.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   