
      
         
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of ship
               
            
            A
         
         
            
            
            The loſt Flocke Triumphant.
            
            With the happy Arriuall of that famous and worthy Knight Sr. 
               Thomas Gates: and the well reputed & valiant Captaine Mr. 
               Chriſtopher Newporte, and others, into England.
            ¶ With the maner of their diſtreſſe in the Iland of Deuils (otherwiſe called Bermoothawes) where they remayned 42. weekes, & builded two Pynaces, in which they returned into Virginia.
            
            By R. Rich, Gent. one of the Voyage.
            LONDON Printed by Edw: Allde, and are to be ſolde by Iohn Wright at Chriſt-Church dore. 1610.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               
                  REader,
            
            how to ſtile thee I knowe not, perhaps Learned, perhaps vnlearned: happily captious, happily enuious: indeed what or how to tearme thee I know not, only as I began I will proceede.
            Reader, thou doſt peraduenture imagine that I am mercenarie in this buſines, and write for money (as your moderne Poets vſe) hyred by ſome of thoſe euer to be admired Aduenturers, to flatter rhe world: No, I diſclaime it, I haue knowne the Voyage, paſt the danger, ſeene that honorable work of Virginia, & I thanke God am arriud here to tell thee what I haue ſeene, don, & paſt: if thou wilt be lieue me ſo, if not ſo to: for I cannot force thee but to thy owne liking: I am a Soldier, blunt and plaine, and ſo is the

phraſe of my newes: and I proteſt it is true. If thou aske why I put it in Verſe? I prethee knowe, it was onely to feede mine owne humour: I muſt confeſſe, that had I not debard my ſelfe of that large ſcope which to the writing of proſe is allowed, I ſhould haue much eaſd my ſelfe, and giuen thee better content. But I intreat thee to take this as it is; and before many daies expire, I will promiſe thee the ſame worke more at large.
            I did feare preuention by ſome of your writers, if they ſhould haue gotten but ſome part of the newes by the tayle, and therefore though it be rude, let it paſſe with thy liking, and in ſo doing I ſhall like well of thee: but how euer, I haue not long to ſtay: if thou wilt be vnnaturall to thy country-man, thou maiſt, I muſt not looſe my patrymonie; I am for Virginia againe, and ſo I will bid thee hartily farewell, with an honeſt verſe:
            
               As I came hether to ſee my natiue land,
               to waft me backe lend me thy gentle hand.
            
            
               Thy louing Country-man. R R.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Newes from Virginia OF THE HAPPY Ariuall of that famous & worthy knight Sir Thomas Gates and well reputed and valiant Captaine Newport into England.
            
               IT is no idle fabulous tale,
               nor is it fayned newes:
               For Truth herſelfe is heere arriu'd,
               becauſe you ſhould not muſe.
               With her, both Gates and Newport come,
               to tell Report doth lye:
               Which did deuulge vnto the world,
               that they at Sea did dye.
            
            
               Tis true that Eleauen monthes and more,
               theſe gallant worthy wights:
               Was in the Shippe (Sea-venture nam'd)
               depriu'd Virginia's ſight.
               And brauely did they glyde the maine,
               till Neptune gan to frowne:
               As if a Courſer prowdly backt,
               would throwe his ryder downe.
            
            
               
               The Seas did rage, the windes did blowe,
               diſtreſſed were they then:
               Their Ship did leake, her tacklings breake,
               in daunger were her men.
               But heauen was Pylotte in this ſtorme,
               and to an Iland nere:
               
                  Bermoothawes call'd, conducted then,
               which did abate their feare.
            
            
               But yet theſe Worthies forced were,
               oppreſt with weather againe:
               To runne their Ship betweene two Rockes,
               where ſhe doth ſtill remaine.
               And then on ſhoare the Iland came,
               Inhabited by Hogges:
               Some Foule and Tortoyſes there were
               they onely had one Dogge
            
            
               To kill theſe ſwyne, to yeild them food
               that little had to eate:
               Their ſtore was ſpent, and all things ſcant,
               alas they wanted meate.
               A thouſand hogges that dogge did kill,
               their hunger to ſuſtaine:
               And with ſuch foode, did in that Ile
               two and forty weekes remaine.
            
            
               
               And there two gallant Pynaſes,
               did build, of Seader-tree:
               The braue Deliuerance one was call'd,
               of ſeauenty Tonne was ſhee.
               The other Patience had to name,
               her burthen thirty Tonne:
               Two only of their men which there,
               pale death did ouercome.
            
            
               And for the loſſe of thoſe two ſoules,
               which were accounted deere:
               A Sonne and Daughter then was borne
               and were Baptized there.
               The two and forty weekes being paſt,
               they hoyſt Sayle and away:
               Their Ships with hogs well freighted were,
               their harts with mickle ioy.
            
            
               And ſo vnto Virginia came,
               where theſe braue Souldiers finde
               The Engliſh-men oppreſt with greife
               and diſcontent in minde.
               They ſeem'd diſtracted and forlorne,
               for thoſe two worthyes loſſe:
               Yet at their home returne they ioyd,
               among'ſt them ſome were croſſe.
            
            
               
               And in the mid'ſt of diſcontent,
               came noble Delaware:
               
               He heard the greifes on either part,
               and ſett them free from care.
               He comforts them and cheeres their hearts,
               that they abound with ioy:
               He feedes them full and feedes their ſoules,
               with Gods word euery day.
            
            
               A diſcreet counſell he creates,
               of men of worthy fame:
               That noble Gates leiftenant was
               the Admirall had to name.
               The worthy Sir George Somers knight,
               and others of commaund:
               Maiſter Georg Pearcy which is brother,
               vnto Northumberland.
               
            
            
               Sir Fardinando Wayneman knight
               and others of good fame:
               That noble Lord, his company,
               which to Virginia came
               And landed there: his number was
               One hundred Seauenty: then
               Ad to the reſt and they make full,
               foure hundred able men.
            
            
               
               Where they vnto their labour fall,
               as men that meane to thriue:
               Let's pray that heauen may bleſſe them all
               and keep them long aliue.
               Thoſe men that Vagrants liu'd with vs,
               haue there deſerued well:
               Their Gouernour writes in their praiſe,
               as diuers Letters tel.
            
            
               And to th' Aduenturers thus he writes,
               be not diſmayd at all:
               For ſcandall cannot doe vs wrong
               God will not let vs fall.
               Let England knowe our willingneſſe,
               for that our worke is good,
               Wee hope to plant a Nation,
               where none before hath ſtood.
            
            
               To glorifie the Lord tis done,
               and to no other end:
               He that would croſſe ſo good a worke,
               to God can be no friend.
               There is no feare of hunger here,
               for Corne much ſtore here growes,
               Much fiſh the gallant Riuers yeild,
               tis truth, without ſuppoſe.
            
            
               
               Great ſtore of Fowle, of Veniſon,
               of Grapes, and Mulberries,
               Of Cheſnuts, Walnuts, and ſuch like,
               of fruits and Strawberries,
               There is indeed no want at all:
               but ſome condiciond ill,
               That wiſh the worke ſhould not goe on,
               with words doe ſeeme to kill.
            
            
               And for an inſtance of their ſtore,
               the noble Delaware,
               
               Hath for a preſent hither ſent,
               to teſtific his care,
               In mannaging ſo good a worke,
               two gallant ſhips: by name
               The Bleſsing and the Hercules,
               
               well fraught, and in the ſame
            
            
               Two ſhips, are theſe commodities:
               Furres, Sturgeon, Cauiare,
               Blacke-walnut-tree, and ſome deale-boords,
               with ſuch they laden are:
               Some Pearle, ſome Wainſcot and clapbords,
               with ſome Saſſafras wood:
               And Iron promiſt, for tis true,
               their Mynes are very good.
            
            
               
               Then maugre ſcandall, falſe report,
               or any oppoſition
               Th' aduenturers doe thus deuulge:
               to men of good condition:
               That he that wants ſhall haue reliefe,
               be he ofhoneſt minde:
               Apparell, coyne, or any thing,
               to ſuch they will be kinde.
            
            
               To ſuch as to Virginia,
               
               do purpoſe to repaire:
               And when that they ſhall thither come,
               each man ſhall haue his ſhare.
               Day wages for the Laborer,
               and for his more content,
               A houſe and garden plot ſhall haue,
               beſides, t'is further ment
            
            
               That euery man ſhall haue a part,
               and not thereof denaid:
               Of generall profit, as if that he
               twelue pounds ten ſhillings paid,
               And he that in Virginia,
               ſhall copper coyne receiue,
               For hyer or commodities,
               and will the country leaue,
            
            
               
               Vpon deliuery of ſuch coyne,
               Vnto the Gouernour:
               Shall by exchange at his returne,
               be by their Treaſurer
               Paid him in London at firſt ſight,
               no man ſhall cauſe to grieue:
               For 'tis their generall will and wiſh
               that euery man ſhould liue.
            
            
               The number of Aduenturers,
               that are for this Plantation:
               Are full eight hundred worthy men,
               ſome Noble, all offaſhion.
               Good, diſcreete, their worke is good,
               and as they haue begun:
               May Heauen aſſiſt them in their worke,
               and thus our newes is done.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   