
      
         
            
            
            THE IRISH HVBBVB OR, THE ENGLISH HVE AND CRIE. BREIFELY PƲRSƲING the baſe conditions, and moſt notorious offences of this vile, vaine, and wicked AGE. No leſſe ſmarting then tickling. A merriment whereby to make the wiſe to laugh, and fooles to be angry.
            By BARNABY RICH Gentleman, and Seruant to the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            
               Mounted aloft vpon the worlds great ſtage.
               I ſtand to note the follies of this Age.
            
            Malui me diuitem eſſe, quàm vocari.
            LONDON, Printed for Iohn Marriot, and are to be ſold at his ſhop at the white Flower-de-luce neere Fetter-lane end in Fleet-ſtreet. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, SIR OLIVER SAINT IOHN Knight, Lord Deputy of IRELAND.
            
               Right Honourable,
            
            
               FOr want of a better cloake, wherby to ſhelter theſe endeauours of my vntutored pen, I haue borrowed an Iriſh mantle.
            I might haue clad them in a more glorious garment, I confeſſe that would haue made them more acceptable to the world, which graceth men now adayes more for their outward ſhew, then for their inward vertue: but this habit wherein I haue now ſuted them, carrieth no ſhew of pride, and is fitteſt for them to trauell in, that hauing firſt in all reuerent and dutifull manner preſented themſelues to your honourable view, and with like humbleneſſe againe beſought your Lordſhips fauourable paſport, and then to wander through the world, where they ſhall meet with men of diuers diſpoſitions, who ſeeing them come out of Ireland in this diſguiſed manner, hoping to heare ſome ſtrange newes, may entertaine them for a time, and howſoeuer their expectation bee anſwered, may ſuffer them to paſſe, ſome in reſpect of policie

ſome in reſpect of pittie, and ſome in reſpect of pietie.
            The lines I ſend, are like flowers that be of ſundry ſmells pleaſing and diſpleaſing, according to the diuerſity of mens complexions: if they offend any, I am ſure they bee ſuch as doe know themſelues to bee faultie: perhaps they may diſpleaſe ſome that are accounted to bee worldly wiſe, but not any one at all that is truly reputed to be godly wiſe: and in this cauſe I would not ſticke with Marcus Cato, to ſtand to the cenſure of my moſt deprauer Titus Gracchus. I haue graſped at abuſe, yet vnder generalities, and haue aduentured at many matters, whereof ſome not altogether vnneceſſary: Amongſt ſome others that be more ſerious, I haue mixed meaſurable mirth. I haue beene ſomewhat curious with the Painter, to giue euery ſhape his perfect ſhadow: I haue preſented all together to your honourable view, to the end that at your leiſure they might ſerue you to laugh at; for others, if they finde themſelues agreeued, let them lump and lowre. they ſhall but ſhew themſelues to haue guilty conſciences.
            If my ability were anſwerable to my good will, my ſeruice to your Honour would ſtreatch farre: In the meane time, pleaſeth it your Lordſhip to accept of his good intent, that liueth to doe you what ſeruice hee may, and ſo will reſt while he draweth breath.
            
               
                  Dublin the 
                  
                     24. of Iune 1618.
                  
               
               Your Lordſhips in all humble and dutifull affection, BARNABY RICH.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               GEntle-men, my cuſtome is rather to lay mee downe to ſleepe, then to ſit idle: yet now to auoyd both, I haue betaken my ſelfe to my pen. And therfore if the matters that I write of, fall out to be but of a drowſie diſpoſition, the wonder is not great. But hee that ſhould keep a reckoning how hee ſpends his time, and would ſet downe an Item for thus many weekes, for thus many daies ſpent in idleneſſe; and Item again, for thus many houres, for thus many minutes conſumed in ſleepe; the Arethmetician that ſhould caſt vp the account, ſhould finde the totall ſumme amount to iuſt nothing. If theſe lines therefore proue to bee any thing, they are better then either ſleep or idleneſſe.
            I haue meant them well; and I hope I ſhall not need with the Painter, that taking vpon him to picture forth the formes of ſundry beaſts, ſo vnperfectly performed them, that he was driuen to write ouer their heads, This is a Lyon, this is an Elephant, this is an Vnicorne: but what I haue aimed at, I haue gone ſo neere the marke, that although not leuelling at any mans priuate perſon, yet ſo directly expreſſing the condition of the time, that there is none (I thinke) to contradict it.
            But we are growne ſo wiſe and ſharp-ſighted in reading other mens writings; that thoſe paſſages that are but meant and ſet downe in a generall manner, they will draw to ſuch particular conſtructions, as the Authour

himſelfe neuer ſo much as dreamt on.
            They can poiſon euery mans labours with their lookes, and of euery line they can make a libell. But thou that art not partiall in iudgement, nor doeſt, not beare a guilty conſcience, iudge of theſe but as thou findeſt them true. And ſo farewell.
         
         
            To the diſcreet Reader.
            THeſe harmeleſſe lines, that haue none ill intent,
            I hope ſhall paſſe in mirth as they were meant:
            I bring no ſtrained ſtuffe, that might induce
            A cloaked ſhift, or forge a coin'd excuſe.
            What I intend, is but to make you ſport,
            By telling truth, to pleaſe the wiſer ſort:
            Truth is the marke that I haue aim'd at heere;
            And I haue hit the white, and ſhot ſo neere,
            That no deprauing tongue, nor wrangling ſprite
            Can wreſt awry, what I haue forg'd ſo right.
            For gald-backt Iades that ſtand in doubt and dread
            Of being rubb'd, let them forbeare to read.
            I wiſh theſe lines to their approoued wits,
            Where reaſon rules, and wit with iudgement ſits:
            Where vertue guides, and wiſdome ſwayes the minde,
            Let theſe read on, and cenſure as they finde.
            And what it is that I haue aim'd at now,
            The wiſe may iudge; for fooles I care not how.
            
               B. R.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               THE IRISH HVBBVB; OR, The Engliſh Hue and Crie.
            
               THAT which in England we doe call the Hue and Crie, in Ireland, they doe call the Hubbub.
            
            The intent of it was at the firſt, that when any Rebels or Theeues came to doe any robbery in the Countrey, they ſhould then raiſe the Crie (which they call the Hubbub) therby to giue notice to the Inhabitants round about, that they might combine and gather themſelues together in a maine ſtrength, either to rerouer any prey that the theeues or Rebells had taken,The reaſon of the Hubbub. or at the leaſt to make reſiſtance in their owne defence, and as much as in them did lie, to ſaue the Countrey from any further ſpoile.
            This was the firſt inſtitution of it, but they will now raiſe the Hubbub vpon other ſleight occaſions. If a couple of drunkards doe chance to fall together by the eares. If a man being drunk, or howſoeuer otherwiſe diſtempered, doth fortune to ſtrike his wife. If a Maſter or Miſtreſſe do but beat a ſeruant that hath well deſerued it, they will raiſe the Hubbub.
            
            Of theſe Alarmes and Outcries, we haue ſometimes three or foure in a weeke, and that in Dublin it ſelfe, among the baſe and raſcall ſort of people, and as theſe Hubbubs are thus raiſed in caſes of anger and diſcontent, ſo they vſe to giue the

               Hubbubs againe in matters of ſport and merriment. And there is not a people vnder the face of heauen, that will ſooner deride and mocke at any thing that is not in vſe and cuſtome among themſelues, then the Iriſh will doe.
            And as the Iriſh are thus pleaſantly conceited, to ieſt and to ſcoffe when they finde occaſion, ſo they haue as great facilitie in weeping, as Stanhurſt a famous man amongſt them, for his excellent learning; for firſt he was a Chonicler, then a Poet, and after that he profeſſed Alchymie, and now he is become a maſſing Prieſt. This Stanhurſt in his hiſtorie of Ireland, maketh this report of his Countrey-men: They follow the dead corps to the ground, with howling and barbarous out-cries,The prouerb of weeping Iriſh. pittifull in appearance, whereof (as he ſuppoſeth) grew this Prouerb, To weep Iriſh.
            
            My ſelfe am partly of his opinion, that (indeed) to weepe Iriſh, is to weepe at pleaſure, without either cauſe or greefe, when it is an vſuall matter amongſt them, vpon the buriall of their dead, to hire a company of women, that for ſome ſmall recompence giuen them, they will follow the corps, and furniſh out the cry (as Maſter Stanhurſt hath ſaid) with ſuch howling and barbarous outcries, that hee that ſhould but heare them, and did not know the ceremony, would rather thinke they did ſing then weep. Such a brutiſh kinde of lamentation, as in the iudgement of any man that ſhould but heare, and did not know their cuſtome, would thinke it to bee ſome prodigious preſagement, prognoſticating ſome vnluckie or ill ſucceſſe, as they vſe to attribute to the howling of doggs, to the croaking of Rauens, and the ſhrieking of Owles, fitter for Infidels and Barbarians, then to bee in vſe and cuſtome among Chriſtians.
            And yet in Dublin it ſelfe, there is not a corps carried to the buriall, which is not followed with this kinde of mourners, which you ſhall heare by their howling and their hollowing, but neuer ſee them to ſhed any teares. And from hence I thinke indeed ariſeth the prouerb, to weep Iriſh. So that it appeares, how the Iriſh haue wit and diſcretion, both to weep when they liſt, and to laugh at their pleaſure. And I am glad of it: for I will make a little bold to borrow ſome

of their agilitie; yet not to weepe without a cauſe, for that were right to weepe Iriſh; but to laugh, and to giue the Hubbub, when I ſee a cauſe, and neither to forbeare Iriſh nor Engliſh. For we daily ſee the pride, the drunkenneſſe, the ſwearing, the bawdery, the bribery, the popery, all the moſt lewd and idle vices: the beaſtly and diuelliſh faſhions the one doth vſe, the other doth imitate; wherefore then ſhould I not let them ſee themſelues, and their abominations, that ſo they may amend. If not, yet to let the honeſt plaine men view their follies, that ſo he may laugh at their fooleries. Doth not this deſerue the Hubbub to ſee vgly vice doth beare the name of ſeemely vertue, and drunkenneſſe reputed good fellowſhip, murther called manhood, lechery named honeſt loue, impudency good audacitie, pride they call decency, and wretched miſery they call good husbandry, hypocriſie they call ſinceritie, and flattery doth beare the name of eloquence, truth and veritie, and that which in former ages was called flat knauery, paſſeth by the name of wit and policie. If I ſhould weepe for any thing, it ſhould bee for ſome madde conceited greefe: Like the woman, that when her Husband was hanged on the fore-noone, ſhee fell a weeping in the after-noone, and did lament with ſuch vehement ſhewes of ſorrow, that her neighbours comming about her, began to exhort her to patience, telling her that ſhee was not the firſt woman that had had Husband hanged, and although the manner of his death was ſomewhat diſgracefull to the world, yet they wiſht her to play a wiſe womans part, and not to take ſuch greefe whereby to hurt her ſelfe for that which could not now be holpen: True, true indeed, anſwered this ſorrowfull woman, it cannot now be holpen, and I would be loath to hurt my ſelfe by playing too much the foole; neither doe I take this greefe The old Prouerbe. Its no more pitty to ſee a woman weep, tha
                     •
                   to ſe
                     •
                   a Gooſe goe bare-foot. for that my Husband was hanged, but for that he was not hanged in a cleane ſhirt: if his linnen had bin cleanly about him, his hanging would neuer haue greeued me.
            But me thinks if our women in this age were but halfe ſo kinde to their husbands as this poore woman ſhewed her ſelfe to be, that woman might weepe with great greefe and

anguiſh, that had not her husband hanged, and not onely in a cleane ſhirt on his backe, but likewiſe with a yellow ſtarcht band about his necke. For yellow bands are become ſo common, to euery young giddy-headed Gallant, and light heeld Miſtreſſe, that me thinks a man ſhould not hardly be hanged without a yellow band, a faſhion ſo much in vſe with the vaine fantaſticke fooles of this age, for I neuer ſee, or heard a wiſe man that did vſe this baſe and lewd faſhion.
            The lamentable teares of Heraclitus, bemoaning the vanities of his time, were now out of ſeaſon, who would regard them? I thinke it therefore better to laugh with Democritus; for a litle mirth (they ſay) is worth a great deale of ſorrow. But I thinke there be ſome will be angry if they be laughed at; and howſoeuer they incline themſelues to follow the fooles faſhion, yet they will not be mockt. But I will come ouer theſe fellowes with a prouerbe that many yeeres agoe I brought out of France, and thus followes the text: He that will make himſelfe a ſheepe, it is no matter though the Wolues doe eat him: and why ſhould it not likewiſe follow, He that will make himſelfe a foole, it is no matter who laughs at him.
            
            I cannot thinke that ſince the firſt creation the world euer afforded ſo many monſters of men, nor ſo few modeſt women, as at this preſent age. And he that writes with an vpright conſcience, muſt not flatter: and hee that doth behold the deformed vanities that are euery day hatched vp, and brought to be in faſhion, both in the Court, Citie, and Countrey, as well in England as Ireland, cannot chuſe but laugh. Now if any one be angry at my plaine ſpeeches, I know he wants either wit or honeſtie, and then it ſhall but augment my ſport, and make mee to laugh the faſter: for I am ſure there is no man that is not an enemy to his owne diſcretion, but will thinke I haue ſpoken truth; and there is no good man but will approue what is luſt: for fooles I care not.
            Now for women, I know there be a number as well of old as young, that are both wiſe and vertuous, that knowing themſelues to be free from all detection, will neuer be offended with my honeſt meaning: and as I loue and honour

thoſe that be good, ſo I neuer ment to pleaſe thoſe that bee proud and lewdly giuen.
            If I be offenſiue to any queazie ſtomacke, it rather proceedeth from ſome diſtempered humors in the party ſo offended, in that he knoweth himſelfe to be guilty of theſe crimes, and ſo may thinke I point him out for a foole, then of any fault of mine.
            May we not a litle ſcoffe at thoſe, that doe nothing elſe themſelues but make a ſcoffe at vertue? Is not the world come to that paſſe, that men doe rather glory in their ſinnes, then either ſeeke to reforme, or to ſhew any ſignes of ſorrow or amendment?
            Name mee but the Drunkard,Drunkards are the Diuels ſops. that ouer night hath bin carried like a beaſt to his bed, that is aſhamed of it the next morning, but is rather ready to laught at it, and to fall to his draffe againe afreſh.
            Is it not ſo with the Adulterer,Adulterers are wicked theeues. that doth take greater pleaſure in the vaunting of his adulteries, then he did in the acting? Looke amongſt all ſorts of ſinners: doe they not reioyce in their abominations, and make themſelues merry with their owne iniquities?
            Is not the man that feareth God become a laughing ſtock to thoſe vaſſals of vice and villanie?Theſe & diuers others are the common ſins of the time that heape Gods iudgments on this land.
            
            The proud peacocke, he lookes aſquint at him that doth not ſhine in ſilke, and gliſter all in gold.
            The drunken ſwad, he makes a wry mouth at him that will not be once a weeke drunke for good fellowſhip.
            The blaſphemous wretch accounts him for a Mecocke that cannot ſweare voluntary, and laſh out for euery word an oath.
            The vicious lecher will call him Puritan, that will not beare him company to a Bawdy houſe.
            The knowne harlot, that liues in daily adultery, will not ſticke to ſhoulder the honeſt woman, that was neuer detected, and will ſtriue with her for place and precedence. Vice doth ſo guard it ſelfe by tyrannie, that no body dares open his lips to reprehend it.
            Marke but the vicious Courtier, how he flatters, ſweares,

and forſweares, and damnes himſelfe to the Diuell, to pleaſe the eye of greatneſſe, tels falſe lies, and tales, to act any villanie, when murther ſhall accompany luſt euen to poyſon innocents. But God is iuſt, and doth reward them with ſhame here, and in death Hell doth attend them.
            The great-ill-man hath diſcharged honeſty for comming on his ground, and hopes to be Lord of as much ground as a Kite can flie ouer in a day. O Rauen, for he dips his bill in poore mens blood.
            The vnmercifull vſurer and his broker faſten their long talents vpon the decayed borrower; tell them of honeſty, they terme you pragmaticall, and talke of nothing but thouſands, as though they ment to ſpit ſhillings in the face of any that oppoſe them.
            The ſuttle Lawyer that pleads in ill caſes, ſells ſilence, takes fees with both hands, and like an ill Surgeon keepes the wound of his clyent greene, till hee hath emptied his purſe.
            The deceitfull Tradeſman that keeps a good and a bad weight, becauſe he hath a heart and a heart, holds honeſty an enemy to this thrift; becauſe hee meaneth to bee vnreaſonable rich, hee can bee content to bee vnmeaſurable ſinfull.
            The bold faced ſtage player that trades in poyſoning all ſorts and ages with verſes reeſed in the ſmoke of luſt, and blaſphemous ſcripture ieſts; theſe and the like ſtinke in the preſence of God, and one day God will ſend them all to him, whom in this life they ſerued.
            It is our ſinnes then that haue raiſed the Hubbub: the cry is vp, and it is become ſo loud and ſhrill, that it hath pierced the clouds, it hath aſpired the heauens, and it hath approched the preſence chamber of God.
            What is man that he ſhould be thus prone? He is vaine, fickle, weake, and wondrous arrogant: Then to fret him, he is euer ſwaied with loue, luſt, ambition, enmitie, compaſſion, ioy, iealouſie, feare, hope, deſpaire, ſadneſſe, with hate, reuenge, auarice, choller, and cruelty.
            But I thanke God for it, I am not ſo madde, to thinke

that I am able to terrifie thoſe with my words, that the threatnings pronounced by Gods own mouth cannot make afraid; when our Preachers may cry out till their throats be ſore, denouncing Gods vengeance againſt ſinne and wickedneſſe, are rather derided than beleeued.
            What folly were it in mee then, to preſume to induce thoſe to the feare of God, that I thinke haue no regard neither to God, nor the Deuill; that doe liue as though there were neither reward in heauen for the iuſt, nor puniſhment in hell for the wicked; that do demeane themſelues, not as though they were ignorant of God, but as though they did do their vttermoſt to deſpight him?
            The world is now too farre ſpent, to looke for either grace or goodneſſe vpon the earth; and the ſinnes of this age are growne ſo proud, that they are paſt all reformation.
            Were it not better for mee then to laugh than to weepe, and for companies ſake to be merry, and to ſport at their follies, that I thinke are priuiledged by Letters Patents from hell, to follow their owne luſts and pleaſures, and to feede themſelues fat for the Diuels owne tooth?
            What is become of our ancient bounty in houſe-keeping? Thoſe whoſe anceſtors liued in ſtately Pallaces, like Princes in their Countrey, brauely attended by a number of proper men, now come and liue in the Citie, where they are but inmates, rogues by ſtatute: and my young maſter and his boy ſpend that which was wont to maintaine ſo many. What is the reaſon of this? An ancient Father of the Church ſaith, Mutant oues pro auibus, boues pro piſcibus: They giue as much for a bird as their fathers for a fat Weather; and more for a freſh Salmon, then they for a fat oxe: and how ſcant a portion of theſe dainties comes to the almes basket, all men may iudge. Nay we may ſay they put all their fat Beeues into their imbroydered and perfumed doublets, their fat ſheepe into their skarlet ſlops, the eggs and flower that ſhould make the good pies and paſties, into ſtarch for their yellow bands; all the ſmoke that ſhould come forth of their chimneyes, is blowne out at their noſes: Finally, they make but a puffe of all their fathers left them.
            
               And now to begin my ſport, I cannot chuſe but giue the Hubbub, when I meet ſo many of my young Maſters paſſing thorow the ſtreets, attired ſo like ſtrumpets, trickt vp in the harlots trimme, for all the world like a Seamſters maide new come out of the Royall Exchange. Mee thinks they ſhould not ſweare an oath but by Gods daintie: they are not worthy to carry the name of men, that are ſo farre in loue with their owne deformities, as I thinke of my conſcience, if the ſoules of the deceaſed might looke downe from the heauens to behold the things that are done here vpon the earth, there be a number of parents that would be aſhamed to ſee the vanities of their owne children, how farre they are eſtranged, both in forme, faſhion, and condition, from the diſcipline of vertue, and the precepts which they themſelues had bin educated and trained vp in. Our mindes are effeminated, our martiall exerciſes and diſciplines of warre are turned into womaniſh pleaſures and delights: our Gallants thinke it better ſpend their lands and liuings in a whores lap, then their liues in a martiall field for the honour of their Countrey. Wee haue conuerted the coller of ſteele to a yellow-ſtarched band, the launce to a tobacco-pipe, the arming-ſword and gantlet to a paire of perfumed gloues; wee are fitter for a Coach then for a campe, and our young Gallants are now become ſo wiſe in their owne conceits, that they will take vpon them to know all things, that doe not yet know themſelues; and that which in former ages would haue beene accounted for a noiſome and a malapert kinde of ſawcineſſe, that they aſcribe to proceede from the viuacitie and quickneſſe of wit: but he that ſhould behold their courting complements when they bee in company amongſt women, could not chuſe but laugh and giue the Hubbub.
            
            They are ſo vaine to ſee to, ſo fooliſh in their words, and they haue ſo many diſtracted engines of action, as would ſooner turne a wiſe womans ſtomacke, then winne her loue.
            Parents doe well in being carefull to leaue their Heires large reuenues, for the moſt in number amongſt them would

neuer be able to liue by their wits; their greateſt ſtudy is but to follow pride and pleaſure; and this is it that fills the world ſo full of fooles.
            Gentle-men were wont to bring vp their Heires in the knowledge of Arts and literature, it now ſufficeth if he can but write his owne name in a Mercers booke, put his hand to an Obligation, or to a bill of bargaine and ſale, this is learning enough for a Gentle-man in theſe dayes.
            Nor I cannot ſee but that hee that would ſeeme to haue moſt knowledge, doth ſhew (indeed) to haue leaſt grace, nor they let not (ſo farre as I can perceiue) for being the more learned, to be any whit the leſſe fooliſh: the time hath beene a man would haue beene aſhamed to haue begg'd a recompence, but for ſome ſpeciall ſeruice performed for his Prince or Countrey: but now, for the drinking of an Health, for the lighting of a Tobacco-pipe, or for their laying of a Scene, to act a peece of villany.
            We buy Titles of honour with gold,Offices are gotten by flattery, and begged for no deſert at al that our Predeceſſours purchaſed with vertue, and wherefore but to defile a Dignity, to maintaine pride, and to ſeeke precedency? the time hath beene, that the Honours and Dignities were giuen not to the rich, but to the honeſt; and they were well puniſhed, that would ſeeke by money to oppreſſe vertue,Honeſty ſtands at the gate and knockes, and bribery enters in. that would firſt ſeeke by oppreſſion, by extortion, and by the ruines of the Common-wealth, to gather riches, and then (diſtruſting their owne vertues) haue no other means, whereby to aduance themſelues, and to take place of thoſe that were their betters borne, but by corruption and giuing rewards.
            It hath euer beene a thing deteſted amongſt the multitude, to ſee an vnworthy perſon, that either enclined to pride, to couetouſneſſe, to oppreſſion, or to ſuch other like, to bee aduanced, either to Honour or Dignity.
            Their high titles may ſometimes augment their reputatations, ſildome times either to mend their manners, or to benefit the Common-wealth; yea, we muſt needs confeſſe them to be honeſtly come by, that are ſo dearely and truely paid for, but yet all things well conſidered, it is but money

ill laid out to purchaſe a Dignity, whereby to run the Buyer into infamie, and endleſſe miſerie.
            I will not meddle with the Nobilitie of this age, that are well knowne to be nobly deſcended, as well from ancient as from honourable families, yet there haue been ſome others, that would faine haue runne currant for ſix ſhillings eight pence ſterling, that if they had beene brought to the Ballance, would haue beene found too light by a great deale more then the common allowance of two graines; but if they had beene tried by the Touch, or brought to the Teſt, we might haue ſworne, that all was not gold that did gliſter.
            To be vertuous in this madd age were vaine, when vice is altogether graced; I will raiſe the cry againſt the Courtiers, but if I ſpeake all that is true againſt the Courts of Princes, I ſhall be too tedious in my ſhort ſuruay of abuſes. Only this, Courtiers haue delight, not in vertue, but moſt of them in vice: what are they better for high bloud, high titles of honour, ſtately buildings, coſtly fare, rich raiment? all their pleaſures and dignities are but vanitie, vnleſſe endued with the rich robe of vertue: by the ſteps of flattery, moſt Courtiers learne to climb; the Courts of Princes are giuen to fornication, adultery & rauiſhments, which are counted young Courtiers ſports: in Court they oppreſſe vertue, honeſty ſcorned, innocent men perſecuted, Ribalds preferred, preſumptuous men fauoured, flattery aduanced: Princes courts are like gardens, where one gathers vertue, the other plucks vice, one ſuckes honie, another drawes poyſon.
            We doe read that in former ages, this inſatiate deſire of Honour was ſo bridled and curbed, that theſe oppreſſing practiſes were well enough preuented, and ſo circumſpectly looked into, that no ambitious perſon (contrary to the rules of honeſtie) ſhould either by briberie, or anie other manner of corruption, aſpire either to Office or Dignity.
            I could now laugh till my belly did ake, but for angring of my Lady, to ſee ſo many Madona's percht vp, that we are not able to know a Lady from a Landreſſe, wee cannot diſtinguiſh betweene thoſe women that bee of honour, from thoſe that are but baſe in parentage, whoſe beſt bringing vp

hath been in waſhing, in ſtarching, in ſcraping of trenchers, in filling the pot, yet not croſſe the ſtreets but in a coach.
            She that treads vpon the ground, or walkes on foot but the length of a paire of Butts, ſhee muſt haue a ſupporter,They will ride in a coach, though it be to a bawdy houſe and the footman keeps ſentinell at the doore. ſome luſtie young Stallion muſt lead her by the arme, or ſhe cannot goe.
            Now of mine honeſtie (foole that I am to ſweare) when I my ſelfe was young, and ſhould haue beene ſeene in ſuch ſort, to paſſe through the ſtreets leading a young woman, they would haue thought I had beene conducting of her to ſome Bawdy-houſe.
            But ſhould I ſpeake of women in generall (I will not meddle with Ladies of Honour) and I know amongſt the reſt, there bee a number as well of old as young, that are both wiſe and vertuous, who (knowing themſelues to be free from all detection) will neuer bee offended with mee for ſpeaking the truth, and as many vilde and vicious, both in court and countrey; and as I loue and honour thoſe women that bee good, ſo I neuer care to pleaſe thoſe other that be ill. I know againe there be a number, that (of my conſcience) are more honeſt then they themſelues do make ſhew to be, that a man would thinke by their outward appearance, they had made port ſale both of vertue and honeſtie, or what vertue or honeſtie they haue, they doe conceale; but for their vices, they are ſet open to ſhew.
            And doth not this deſerue the Hubbub, to ſee one of theſe old antiquities, I meane a Ladie that is ſo far ſpent in yeeres, that ſhee is readie for the graue, and more wiſdome for her to prouide her ſelfe a winding ſheet, then to ſute her ſelfe in coloured ſilkes, in gawdy attires, to couer her hoarie ſcalp, with a curll'd-perewig, and to looke out euery day for new faſhions.
            Wheh I ſee ſuch a Beldame (that is paſt child bearing) to be thus youthfully diſpoſed, it puts me in minde of the Prouerb, That our old horſe would haue a new ſaddle. And what is become of that modeſty that was wont to be amongſt young women, when maidens do now grow faſter into impudency and audacious boldneſſe, then they doe into yeeres or vertuous

endeauours; when ſhe, that as well in her apparrell as in her behauiour, doth ſhew her ſelfe to be now maſculine, doth then thinke her ſelfe to be moſt in faſhion.
            Are not our young women, in this age, trained vp from their very infancy, to be as bold, as inſolent, and as ſhameleſſe, as either Ruffian or Roaring boy? If they be once paſt fifteene yeeres of age, if their parents will not giue them husbands, they will prouide themſelues of paramours.
            Giue me leaue a little to tell you of the firſt Inſtitution of roaring, becauſe there is ſuch a number of that braue rabble-rowt in euerie citie, and almoſt in euerie countrey-towne. The firſt roaring was at the Tower by Roaring-Meg the great ordnance, for they ſluft her breech with venemous powder, and ſet fire to her touch hole, and ſhe roar'd. And then the Lyons being ſo neere, they roar'd. And then the Beares of Pariſh garden hearing the Lyons, they began to roare. And the Boyes comming to ſee the Beares, they learned. And euer ſince their hath beene a company of Roaring-boyes.
            They were wont to bee brougt vp in honeſt and vertuous exerciſes, now in wanton idleneſſe, in impudent and immodeſt boldneſſe.
            
               Theſe be fit for the Italian fines, not for any honeſt mans wife.She that is tongued like a Lawyer in the Tearme-time, that neuer ſpeakes but for profit, ſhe that can dance a ſynque-paace aboue ground, ſo lofty that a man may ſee her ſilken garter: ſhe that can both laugh and weep Iriſh: ſhe that can ſing come tit me, come tat me: ſhe that can play Ladies loue luſty Lads, on the Voyall de Gambo: ſhee that hath beene brought vp in the knowledge of tongues, and can ſpeake good Ram Alley: ſhe that can learne faſteſt to forget ſhame, Why, this is a Minion for a mans tooth; ſhee is fit to bee made a childe-bearing woman: there is nothing ſo much endeauoured amongſt women, as to blaze and ſet forth their beauties, and to this purpoſe they haue deuiſed many artificiall helps to ſet it forth. And becauſe to haue many Louers to be ſtill hanging about them, which they ſuppoſe to bee a teſtimony of this their borrowed beauty (the rather to intice and draw them in) they runne into behauiours of little modeſty. What a number of Knights, and Gentlemens ſons

in this age, are drawn in by theſe baſe and vile ſtrumpets, to ſpend both body and goods, lands and liues, to pleaſe and ſatisfie his honeſt whore, that muſt haue her face painted, her haire powdred, her locks curled, her ſilke petticoat embrodered with gold, her gownes of cloth of ſiluer, cloth of gold, and the yellow band and feather, with diuers other dainty deuices: ſo ſtrangely deformed, the Diuell can hardly inuent the like: ſo demeaning themſelues with ſuch wanton countenances and ſhameleſſe geſtures, that they doe manifeſtly make offer (and ſometimes doe giue themſelues for a prey) to thoſe men that are of a baſe and vicious diſpoſition,Cracke Chamber-mayds the Maſters whore the Seruing-mans wife. that will accept and ioyne iſſue with them, till they beginne to long for greene plummes, and then they will as quickly abhorre them, as they made ſhew ſuddenly to loue them, and then he leaues her fit to ſerue a brothell-houſe, vnleſſe ſome baſe-minded groome (as I know ſome ſuch there bee) will take her for a wife, and can bee contented to liue by his wiues bringings in; and theſe be they that doe help to repleniſh the world with Harlots and common Tweakes.
            She that hath born a baſtard to a man of note,It is holden a credit, to be a baſtard to a great man of fame and note, as this example ſheweth. ſhe thinks it to bee no blemiſh at all to her reputation; nay, ſhe thinkes the better of her ſelfe. I remember I haue read in a French hiſtory of a Duke of Guyſe, that was well knowen to keepe Monſieur Granduyles wife, who was a Gentleman of great eſtate, and likewiſe deſcended from an honourable Family, who after hee was dead, there grew ſome queſtion of his wiues children, whether they were legitimate and begotten by her husband, or baſtards to the Duke of Guiſe, for ſo the moſt of them were ſuppoſed; the eldeſt ſonne proteſted with a vehement oath, that he had rather be accounted the noble Duke of Guyſes baſtard, then to be reputed cuckold Granduyles ſonne, and in this humor hee forſooke his inheritance, and left it to his younger brother.
            Now (of my conſcience) a number of our gallant girles in theſe daies be of the ſame diſpoſition, they had rather be accounted an harlot to ſome great perſonage, then an honeſt mans wife. And all things conſidered, they are partly to bee excuſed, when ſuch harlots ſhall bee better graced, then the

woman that is honeſt, and my Laydy will take her into her owne coach, when Chaſtitie ſhall trudge on foot, and bee ſcoffed at.
            Beauty that is ioyned with honeſty is out of requeſt, who doth regard it? and a man were better to ſlander an honeſt woman, then to ſpeake truth of an harlot.
            We may call a ſcold, a ſcold, and it may paſſe without any great perill: but we cannot call a whore, a whore, but with danger; for if ſhee bee able to put on a ſilken outſide, and to fee a Proctor in the Commiſſaries Court, though ſhee bee a knowne ſtrumpet by the report of all her neighbours, yet we muſt not call her whore, vnleſſe we bee able to bring two other eye-witneſſes: and ſhe that is ſo open in her buſineſſe, that ſhee will haue two or three paire of eyes to looke vpon her, is fitter for a cart, then ſhe is for a coach.
            Well, bleſſing of his heart yet, that would ſay, Thought was free: and when I ſee a woman haue a painted face, with a powdred periwig, her breaſts laid open, her ſtomacke naked, almoſt downe to her nauell, to ſpeake truly, I know not what to thinke; but let her be as honeſt as ſhee liſt, theſe are but like Tauerne ſignes, that are hanged out but to call in cuſtomers, and they are indeede the Fore-runners of adultery, vice, and villanie. And if ſhee be honeſt that thus ſetteth her ſelfe to the ſhew, yet it hath beene queſtioned, whether chaſtitie ioyned with vanitie, doth merit anie commendations or nay: but this is without all queſtion, that this ouer-much affected follie doth liue with no leſſe ſuſpected honeſtie: ſhe is but an ill huſwiſe therefore of her owne credit, that will bring it into a vulgar conſtruction: but as the mouth of Wiſdome hath auowed, that A wiſe married wife is her husbands glory, ſo it were much better for a mans owne credit, to marry a wiſe harlot, then a fooliſh honeſt woman: A wiſe harlot, that can ſhelter her eſcapes with ſuch discretion, that the world ſhall neither ſee nor wonder at it; then a fooliſh honeſt woman, who although ſhe bee honeſt of her body, yet in her attire and outward ſhew, euery man doth thinke her to be an harlot. Nature hath not ordained all women to bee wiſe, there muſt bee ſome vaine, if it bee but to fit the humors of

thoſe men that are no leſſe fond then fooliſh. And as there be in women ſundry kindes of allurements, ſo there be in men as many ſeuerall deſires: for as ſome doe fancie thoſe women that be gawdy and gariſh in their apparell, and therewithall ſo lauiſh of their eyes, words, and geſtures, that they doe promiſe eaſily to be wonne, and doe giue a luſtfull hope to the beholders: ſo another luſteth after her that can ſeaſon her beauty with a ſharpneſſe of wit, and hath Art and skill to hide a thouſand crafts and ſubtleties, vnder a ſmooth tongue.
            Some are ſeene to dote vpon thoſe women, that can accompany their beauties with coy countenances, and ſcornefull words, that hideth not her thoughts, but careleſly ſpeaketh what ſhee thinks.
            But the man that is wiſe, intirely loueth her that is honeſt, ſober, modeſt, that ſo tempereth her ſelfe in all her demeanors, that vertue hath ſeemed to ſettle her ſelfe in her lookes and countenances, and that the graces are there heaped together like a pleaſant poſie, compact and made of many flowers, and that of the moſt faire and excellent in the garden: but where in Gods name ſhould a man go ſeeke for ſuch a wife? I thinke in Moores Eutopia or in Terra incognita, an Iland neuer found.
            Or what is become of that age, when ſimple beauty without any helpe of Painters Art, was beſt beſeeming an honeſt woman? when baſhfull modeſtie incloſed in a womans breſt, was the beſt lure whereby to induce honorable reputation? The Diuell hath here ſet another ſnare to catch Ladies and Gentlewomen, which beſides their coſtly clothes, they muſt not content themſelues with good faces of Gods making, but dainty painted faces, fit for painted Apes: now they do paint with Indian excrements, and beſmeare themſelues with Iewiſh ſpittle, too baſe and vile to chaſte honeſtie, that I do admire how Ladies and Gentlewomen can affect ſuch loathſome ſtuffe. I thinke one were better ſalute the backſide of an honeſt woman, then the artificiall face of one of theſe painted Iezabels.
            
            They were then beloued of the wiſe, of the vertuous, of

the learned; but now by the vaine, by the lewd, and by thoſe Hermaphrodites that are not worthy the name of men, and therefore to ſpeake truely, not worthy of honeſt wiues.
            Would you know who was the firſt inventers of this painting the face, and breſts? It is ſaid, an old Bawd, whoſe beaſtly youth procured her a hatefull age, and ſhee reſembling dame vgly, my Lady Hard-fauors chamber-maide, ſhee was ouer-ridden and ſurfeted, all the haire of her head fell off, her eyes were ſunke into her head, her noſe dependant long and ſlender downe to her chin, ſhee was mouthed like a Plaice from the one eare to the other, her teeth rotten with ſweet meats, and ſtinking yellow, her face and skin like the outſide of ruſtie old bacon, and ſhee ſpits in her hands to make her moyſt, her body, and leggs ſwelld with the dropſie as bigg as a mill-poſte: this neat and curious peece of bawdry would needs be made new and freſh againe, like the bloſſomes of May; hir doings and cuſtomers decayed failing, ſhee call'd to counſell three maine pillars of hir houſe, which was Miſtris Whore the younger, Miſtris Fructifier, and Miſtris Tweake the elder, and when they had drunke each one a quart of burnt ſacke, their wits were full ripe; and then ſhee queſtioned with them how hir ſelfe the old May-pole of miſcheife might be repaired, and they invented the Art of woman painting for the face and breſts, which to this day the women of that Trade doe continually vſe, and I am perſwaded not any other, which how beaſtly, odious, and vgly it is, I leaue to all honeſt women to iudge.
            What ſhould a vaine Fantaſticke do with a wiſe woman? No, ſhee that hath her face painted with white and red, ſhee that hath her bands ſtarched with blew and yellow, ſhee that in ſtead of a plume of feathers, can decke his Coxcombe with a paire of hornes, ſhee that can ſympathize with him in his owne folly, ſhee is fit for him, there is neither pot broken, nor water ſpilt betweene them, there will be a good accordance, it were pitty the banes ſhould be forbidden.
            We were wont to ſay, it was a wiſe childe that did know the owne father, but now we may ſay, it is a wiſe father that

doth know his owne childe. I proteſt, I do not know a diſhoneſt woman in England, nor in Ireland, of mine owne experience, but if we may giue credit to reports, or beleeue what they themſelues doe make ſhew to be by their outward appearance, there were neuer ſo many, and the trade is become to be ſo vniuerſall, that they cannot thriue the one by the other; their gettings doe but ſerue to ſhift off the time, till they become to be ſome foure or fiue and thirty yeeres of age, & then if they do not turne Bawd, they muſt either be turned into ſome Hoſpitall, or end the reſt of their life in a Spittle.
            But this plenty of Harlots hath done ſome good in the Common-wealth, it hath much abated the price of Bawdry; for now a whoremonger may haue his pot of Ale, his pipe of Tobacco, and his pocky whore, and all for his three pence, and that almoſt in euery by-Lane. A happy thing for poore Knights, that the market is thus beaten downe; for one of theſe high prizde Harlots, that muſt haue her ſilken gownes, hir guarded petticoates, her embroydered ſmocks, her needle-worke edgings, hir powldred perywigs, and hir coſtly Cates, ſhe is able to vndoe a whole halfe dozen of Knights, one after another.
            She will make him to ſpend his Reuenues, to ſell his land, to diſinherit his poſteritie, and his whole eſtate to be euermore doubtfull, and ſtill in danger of burning.
            She will leaue him ſo weake in his purſe, ſo feeble of his body, and ſo rotten in his bones, that the ſoueraignty of his Tobacco will neuer be able to cure him.
            I cannot tell how I ſhould paſſe ouer theſe matters without giuing the Hubbub: but let vs now looke into the apparell that is vſed, and that as well by men, as by women.
            There is nothing whereby a man may more readily iudge of the inward diſpoſition of the minde, then by the outward ſhew of apparell. Our words, our behauiours, and our outward attires, they are all tongues to proclaime the inward diſpoſition, either of men or women: for there is no doubt but that a phantaſticall attire is a plaine confirmation of a phantaſticke minde.
            
               But if I had as many mouthes, as Argus had eyes, I ſhould yet want words to expreſſe the foolerie of new faſhions, the onely cloke whereby to patronize the franticke humors of this madding age, is the multitude of madde men that doth vſe them, which now by cuſtome are growne ſo familiar, being practiſed by the multitude, that if they were acted but by a few in number, I thinke that if they themſelues did but ſtand by to behold them, they would account them to bee worſe then madde, that did ſo much affect them: but yet in this deformitie of faſhions, it is commonly ſeene, that wiſe-men doe ſometimes follow fooles.
            But of all occupations, I will bleſſe my ſelfe from being a Taylor, eſpecially to any of thoſe of the decayed Order: for when the Taylor hath ſpent his wits to fit him in the new faſhion, which he muſt fetch from France, Flanders, Italy, Spaine, and that he hath ſhewne his skill in cutting, preſſing, printing, racing, garding, and ſtitching, yet he ſweares he hath ſpoild his garment: And I cannot chuſe but laugh, to thinke how the poore Taylor muſt indure to bee call'd Rogue, Raſcall, Foole, Aſſe, Prick-louſe, Botcher, Bungler, and to ſuffer the worſhipfull Knight Sir Giles Gooſecap, to rage, to raile, and to ſweare that his garment is marred, hee hath cut it too long, too ſhort, too wide, too ſtreight, and he muſt be contented to indure all, and glad to get him home with his bill in his pocket, not daring to aske his money for a twelue-moneth after. For a womans Taylor, the beſt way to pleaſe my Lady, is to haue ſome intereſt in her Chamber-maide.
            It would be tedious to ſet downe what meanes hath bin vſed to draw in money for the ſupply of wares, what great ſummes of money haue bin raiſed from the pride and exceſſe that hath bin vſed as well by men, as by women, in their garded garments, their coloured ſilkes, their gold and ſiluer lace, and their ſuch other ſuperfluities: If theſe exactions were now looked after, I thinke it would draw deepe, when Cloth of Gold is thought too ſimple, vnleſſe it be ornified with ſome rich imbroydery, either of Gold or Pearle, for otherwiſe, he that his fathers beſt coat was but of homeſpunne

cloth, doth diſdaine to weare it.
            Pride is now become the mother of deuotion, for it driueth a number to Church, that goe thither more to ſhew their brauery, and to ſeeke precedence, then they do to ſerue God. The Sabboth day, which the Almighty himſelf hath commanded eſpecially to be kept holy, that day aboue all the reſt is moſt prophaned, and God is more diſhonoured with this monſtrous ſinne of pride vpon the Sabboth day, then he was when Lucifer was firſt depriued from the ioyes of heauen.
            If we keepe our dores ſhut vp during the time of the Sermon, we thinke we haue done enough. And there is a prouident care had, (if it were as carefully obſerued) that no Victualler in the time of Diuine Seruice ſhould retaine in his houſe any drinking or diſordred company.
            Doe but now finde me out the Tauerne, the Inne, or the Alehouſe, where God is more diſhonoured on the Sabboth day, then he is in the Church it ſelfe, and then at that very time whileſt the Preacher is in the Pulpit.
            Looke but vpon the abhominable pride that is there to be ſeene, and thou wilt ſay,O damned pride a maine ſtep to hell. it is fitter to prophane the Temple, then to doe God honour. The pride of this Age is greater then euer it was, both in Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen, and as well in thoſe that ſhould giue good example, as teach precepts, in high and low, rich and poore, all ſorts, all degrees, are exceſſiuely proud: and as it were in deſpight of Religion, to attire and pranke vp our ſelues in that pompe and exceſſiue pride, as were fitter for a Brothell-houſe, then for the houſe of God.
            I would not be thought to be too generall in my words, for God defend but there ſhould be many good and godly diſpoſed perſons that doe frequent the Church, that are no leſſe zealouſly inclined then godly deuoted: yet hee that ſhould duely conſider of the exceſſe that is vſed in ſuperfluous vanities, would rather iudge them to be the marks and monuments of a people that neuer heard of God, then to be in vſe and cuſtom amongſt Chriſtians when they be ſeruing of their God.
            
               We goe to Church indeed vpon the Sabboth, and we ſay it is to ſeeke Chriſt, but it is to ſeeke precedence, to diſpute of dignities, to ſtriue for places, to contend who ſhall goe before, and who ſhall follow after, and therefore to mocke Chriſt rather then to ſeeke him.
            Chriſt is to be ſought in lowlineſſe of heart and humbleneſſe of minde: we muſt ſeeke him in feare and trembling, in mourning garments, lamenting and bewayling our ſins: and therefore let thoſe counterfet hypocrites chuſe whether they will be angry or pleaſed, for I will laugh at them, and giue them the Hubbub too, that will ſay they goe to ſeeke Chriſt in pride and preſumption.
            We read in the holy Scriptures of three wiſe-men that came to ſeeke Chriſt, (the Papiſts would haue them to bee three Kings) but did they come in my pompe or pride to ſeeke him? It is written, they gaue him gifts, Gold, Frankincenſe, and Myrrh: and this (in the opinion of moſt learned Diuines) was preordained by God himſelfe to releeue the neceſſitie of Ioſeph and Mary, who were then preſently to flie into Aegypt for the ſafetie of the childe IESVS, whom Herod did ſeeke to murder.
            We doe read of Zaccheus, that came to ſeeke Chriſt, and he was driuen to climbe a Figge tree, but to get a ſight of him: the text ſaith he was rich, but his apparell could not be ſumptuous, that was fit to climbe a tree.
            Wee read againe of the Virgin Mary her ſelfe, that for three dayes together had ſought Chriſt, whom in the end ſhee found amongſt the Doctors in the Temple: but doe you thinke ſhe rode all this while in a Coach, that ſhee went thus to ſeeke him?
            Chriſt himſelfe came to ſeeke vs when we were loſt, nay when we had loſt ourſelues, and were ſold vnder ſinne: but when he came to ſeeke vs, and to ſaue the world, did he ſhine in ſilke, or gliſter in gold?
            How is this world changed? We cannot now goe to ſeek Chriſt, but we muſt be clad in ſilke, in ſattin, in veluet, in cloth of ſiluer, in cloth of gold. Euery vnworthy Madam, that her mother hath trudged many a mile on foote to goe

to market, ſhee cannot now goe to Church but in a Coach, if it be but the length of a Bowling Alley.
            The ſix dayes that God hath left vnto vs to follow our worldly buſineſſes, wee miſ-ſpend them with many foule abuſes; but the Sabboth day, that we reſerue onely to ſhew our pride.
            Thus vnder pretence of going to Church to ſerue God, we goe to Church to mocke God, and our comming home from the Sermon, doth rather ſhew vs to be returned from the celebration of thoſe filthy ceremonies which in the old time were ſolemnized in Rome to the honour of Flora, then to come like Chriſtians with any ſigne of repentance, or ſhew in amendment of life. We go to Church as we vſe to take Tobacco, more for cuſtome and good companies ſake, then for any good it doth vs.
            Could we but now marke what paſſe this age of ours is growne vnto: this age of ours, I ſay, that doth make ſo great ſhew to profeſſe Chriſtianitie: we are all now for pride and pleaſure; but let vs take heede, for pleaſure is but the forerunner of miſery and paine, and pride that hath depriued the Angels from the ioyes of heauen, is now growne ſo ſtately, that ſhe muſt haue her ſwindge, ſhe will not be reproued.
            Vertue cannot indure to be pent vp in the mindes either of men or women, that doe ſo far exceed and ſuper abound in vanities.
            Amongſt thoſe things that our Anceſtors did euer obſerue as notes whereby to know a harlot, there was none more ſpeciall then the gawdy and gariſh garments.
            
               Salomon againe he ſetteth downe the bold audacious woman to be a bird of the ſame wing; then what ſhall we ſay to her that carries all theſe marks about her, that is both light and vaine in her apparell, and that is both impudent and ſhameleſſe in her demeanor: this woman hath loſt her euidence, and ſhe hath nothing to ſhew for her honeſty.
            There is mention made of a Canon, whereby it was ordained, that if a woman had paſſed through the ſtreets attired like a harlot, howſoeuer ſhee had bin wronged by any man, or violently aſſailed, ſhe ſhould haue had no aduantage

againſt him by Law. But if that Canon were now in force, our ſtreets would neuer be without great quarrels; for their damnable new invented faſhions do ſhew themſelues to be no leſſe then monſters. Mee thinks it were good therefore, and as well for men as for women, to determine with themſelues how they would be accounted, and ſo to ſute themſelues in their apparell accordingly.
            Let men ſhew themſelues to be like men, that doe now ſhew themſelues like women, to looke like Maid-marrian in a Morris-dance, fitter for a Sempſters ſhop, then to fight for a Countrey.
            Our nicitie hath brought into obliuion, the examples left vnto vs by our anceſtors, they vſed none of this tricking, and this trimming vp of themſelues, this frizling of haire, this curling of lockes, this ſtarching with blew, with yellow, and with all the colours in the Rainebow, their beſt painting ſtuffe was duſt well tempered with ſweat, the true monument of Trauell, of Labour, of Induſtry, and of Action.
            Now for women, ſhe that powders her Periwigs, ſhe that paints hir face, ſhe that layes open hir breaſts, ſhe that beſpots her ſelfe with patches, and layes her ſelfe naked ſhamefull to thinke on, ſhe that diſguiſeth and deformeth hir ſelfe euery day with new faſhions, if this woman be honeſt, wherefore ſhould ſhe doe theſe things, vnleſſe of purpoſe, becauſe ſhee would be thought to be a harlot, but if the woman that doth thus diſguiſe her ſelfe doth not want a litle honeſty, I am ſure ſhee wants a great deale of wit.
            
               Their excuſe is, if we ſhould not follow the faſhion, none would regard vs: So they goe to hell for faſhions ſake they care not.Theſe vanities of vanities, what are they elſe but the traps and traines of hell? and whilſt the body is thus pranked vp in pride, the poore ſoule goes thred bare, and being made play-fellow with the bodies wantonneſſe, ſhe neuer feeleth her owne euill, but that euill only which the body indureth.
            But alas how few are there now left to tell the vpright and plaine dealing of our Anceſtors, what care they had of the common good, how prouident they were to reforme theſe ouer-exceeding vanities; but how few are there now that would either harken or regard it, or would either preſident or follow their examples?
            
               Or what ſhall become of after ages? What example of goodneſſe ſhall we leaue to our poſteritie? The younger ſort can but learne by tradition, what they receiue by example from their Elders: and what can they heare or ſee either at home or abroad, that is not altogether vaine and vnlawfull? And beſides the forwardneſſe of their owne natures which ſtill are ready to all impiety: they haue within doores the examples of their Parents to encourage them, that do think the readieſt way to preferre their children (but eſpecially their daughters) is to bring them vp in inſolency and impudent boldneſſe.We ſildome ſee grapes on thorns And how is it poſſible that the daughter ſhould bee chaſte, that is not able to number her mothers fooleries, nor to caſt a true account of all her vanities, ſometimes perhaps of her adulteries.
            If men and women ſhould but degenerate from the rules of vertue, as faſt the next age, as they haue done but within the compaſſe of our owne memories, they that ſhould liue to ſee it, may bid adieu to all vertue and honeſty.
            
               Democritus made himſelfe merry with the follies of his time, but hee could not haue halfe the ſport to laugh at, that our Age now affordeth: the ſinnes of thoſe times were but dull, dumpiſh, drowſie; they were not halfe ſo quicke ſpirited as now, that are become to bee more capering, more actiue, more nimble, and farre exceeding in agilitie, ouer they were in former ages.
            When Alexander kill'd his Clytus,
               A Drunkards life is moſt wretched, and his end is commonly moſt fearefull and damnable, as nine in one Shire haue made a lamentable example, the yeere 1617. He that firſt inuented that vſe of drinking healths, had his 
                     ••
                  aines beat out with a pottle pot: a moſt iuſt end for inuentors of ſuch notorius abuſes. And many in pledging of Healths haue ended their liues preſently, as example lately in London. drunkenneſſe would rather haue drawne teares from Heraclytus, then laughter from Democrytus; but it is now become to be more familiar, more conuerſant, more ſociable, and drunkenneſſe is now a continuall company-keeper in euery Tauerne, in euery Inne, and in euery Ale-houſe.
            But the baſe bruits that doe frequent theſe places, are not worthy the laughing at, I will therefore goe ſeeke out better company.
            There is no feaſtings, no banquettings, no merry meetings, but if it be not ſolemnized with a company of drunken ſots, that before they be ready to ſay grace after meat, if ſome of them be not carried away drunke to their beds, the

coſt is but caſt away, it is not worthy to bee called a feaſt. In former ages, they had no conceits whereby to draw on drunkenneſſe, their beſt was, I drinke to you, and I pledge yee; till at length ſome ſhallow witted drunkard found out the Carowſe, which ſhortly after was turned into an hearty draught: but now it is enioyned to the drinking of an health, an inuention of that worth and worthineſſe, as it is pitty, the firſt founder was not hanged, that wee might haue found out his name in the ancient record of the hangmans regiſter.
            The inſtitution in drinking of an Health, is full of ceremony, and obſerued by Tradition, as the Papiſts doe their praying to Saints.
            He that beginnes the health, hath his preſcribed orders: firſt vncouering his head, hee takes a full cup in his hand, and ſetling his countenance with a graue aſpect, hee craues for audience: ſilence being once obtained, hee beginnes to breath out the name, peraduenture of ſome Honourable Perſonage, that is worthy of a better regard, then to haue his name polluted at ſo vnfitting a time, amongſt a company of Drunkards: but his health is drunke to, and hee that pledgeth▪
               The Ruffingly order of drinking healths, vſed by the ſpendalls of this age. muſt likewiſe off with his cap, kiſſe his fingers, and bowing himſelfe in ſigne of a reuerent acceptance; when the Leader ſees his Follower thus prepared, hee ſoups vp his broath, turnes the bottome of the cup vpward, and in oſtentation of his dexteritie, giues the cup a phillip, to make it cry Twango. And thus the firſt Scene is acted.
            The cup being newly repleniſhed to the breadth of an haire, he that is the pledger muſt now beginne his part, and thus it goes round thoughout the whole company, prouided alwayes by a canon ſet downe by the Founder, there muſt be three at the leaſt ſtill vncouered, till the health hath had the full paſſage: which is no ſooner ended, but another begins againe, and hee drinkes an Health to his Lady of little worth, or peraduenture to his lighe heell'd miſtris.
            
            By theſe drunken deuices, God is diſhonoured, and that loue which in thoſe drunken fits they pretend to any man to bee deteſted and abhorred; yea, the prayers that a drunkard maketh vnto God, are rather to be derided, then beleeued;

but the woman they would ſeeme to honour by drinking her Health, is thereby diſhonoured, diſgraced and diſcredited; for Drunkards are ſildome ſeene to reuerence any woman, either for her vertue, or for her honeſty, but are more apt to ſlander thoſe that neuer deſerued it.
            Let vs a little define Drunkenneſſe. Drunkenneſſe is a vice which ſtirreth vp luſt, greefe, anger and madneſſe, extinguiſheth the memory, opinion and vnderſtanding, maketh a man the picture of a beaſt, and twice a childe, becauſe hee can neither ſtand nor ſpeake. Drunkenneſſe is the mother of outrages, the matter of fables, the root of crimes, the fountaine of vice, the intoxicator of the head, the quelling of the ſenſes, the tempeſt of the tongue, the ſtorme of the body, the ſhipwracke of chaſtitie, loſſe of time, voluntary madneſſe, the filthineſſe of manners, the diſgrace of life the corruption of the Soule; if there were no more to bee ſpoken againſt it, me thinkes this ſhould bee enough to deterre any Chriſtian heart from this beaſtly ſinne.
            I would I had now a chaire with a backe and a ſoft cuſhion, that I might ſit mee downe to laugh at the whore-maſter: but eſpecially at him that they call Senex Fornicator, an old Fiſhmonger, that many yeeres ſince ingroſt the French pox, the which although he ſometimes vſed to vent in ſecret amongſt his friends; yet hee will not ſo disfurniſh himſelfe, but that he will reſerue ſufficient for his owne ſtore, and the rather to conceale his commodity in priuate, and would not haue it to be openly knowen, he ſhelters them vnder ſtrange deuiſed titles; ſometimes he calls them the Gowt, ſometimes the Sciatica, and thus diſguiſing them vnder theſe falſe applyed names, he ſhamefully ſlandreth and belieth the pox.
            There be ſome others yet of a better diſpoſition,He ſhall not bee accounted a Gentleman, if that he doth not carry this marke of the pox about him, and you ſhall commonly know him, for hee goeth as though he trod on egges, and he neuer rides on a trotting horſe. that doe deteſt this fraudulent manner of dealing, that when they haue made ſome pretty ſhift to get the pox, they do ſet them forth to open ſhew, and finding them to be ſociable, familiar and conuerſant amongſt Knights and Gentlemen, will grace them with a wrought night cap, yet not in any deceitfull manner, whereby to couzen his Maieſties ſubiects, but will ſo lay them open to euerie mans view, that you ſhall ſee their

true pictures in diuers parts of the face, but eſpecially at the noſe: he doth not ſo hide them, but you ſhall diſcerne them by his complexion, by his ſnuffling in his ſpeech, his noſe is commonly as flat as a bowling alley, by his very gate as hee paſſeth and repaſſeth by you. If a Dogge doth chance to hit him ouer the ſhinns with his taile, he cries Oh, and perhaps, raps out an oath or two.
            You ſhall neuer ſee him play any match at the foot-ball, or to win any wagers at running, or leaping; he may ſomtimes dance the meaſures, but theſe Carrantoes and Scottiſh giggs are out of his element: heere is plaine dealing, and it ſhould ſeeme theſe poxes are honeſtly come by, when they are not hidden, but are thus layd open to euery mans view.
            But ſoft and faire, let mee now pauſe a little, for it ſtands mee vpon to take good heede how I raiſe the crie againſt the Blaſphemer, hee that will ſnarle and ſwagger, as though hee meant to kill the olde one; hee that will rumble out oathes like thunder or canon-ſhot, and will ſometimes burſt into ſuch a vaine of ſwearing, as if hee meant to make the powers of Heauen to ſhake and to tremble. They haue ſuch excuſes for their ſwearing; firſt, it graceth their ſpeech, & is an ornament to their phraſe. Secondly, it is a generall cuſtome, the moſt part vſe it, and few or none refraine it. Thirdly, they doe it from no bad minde, no wicked intent. Laſtly, if they doe ſweare, they are but ſmall oathes, and therefore to bee borne withall; but looke vnto it wicked blaſphemer, if God be not mercifull, thou wilt finde none ſo little but deepe enough, none ſo light but heauy enough, none ſo ſmall but great enough to ſend thee downe into hell. Heere you may ſee what theſe damned for ſworne Diuells of hell pretend for their diuelliſh act of ſwearing.
            But I care not if I tell you a hiſtory, which was many yeers agoe written in a ſtrange language, but now lately tranſlated out of Eſſex into Engliſh, and thus it followeth.
            
               
                  
                     •
                   ſtrange ſtory 
                     ••
                  d true.There was ſometimes a father that had three ſonnes, who at the time of his death, bequeſted by his will his whole eſtate, aſwell of lands, as likewiſe of goods and chattells, to that one of the three, that by reaſonable demonſtration

could prooue himſelfe to be moſt degenerate and declining, aſwell from humanity, as from honeſtie.
            After the death of this well diſpoſed parent, his three ſonnes appointed a day of meeting, to determine of their fathers bequeſt, when comming together, the eldeſt brother in a ſhort Exordium deliuered his fathers determination, how hee had diſpoſed his whole eſtate onely to him that could prooue himſelfe the moſt diſhoneſt, the which (ſayd hee) I hope I ſhall neither need to ſpend many words, nor to bring better teſtimony, then what your ſelues doe know, and of your owne conſciences will award in my behalfe.
            To ſpeake then to the purpoſe:The firſt ſonnes ſpeech. I am well knowen to you both, to be a common whore-maſter, that doe wholly encline my ſelfe to follow harlots, that doe ſpend, ſquander and conſume my time (day by day, and night after night) my goods, my bodie, my life and my lands, in Brothell-houſes, amongſt Bawds and Harlots, that are the very ſincks of ſinne; yea, all I haue, or euer ſhall bee wotth, ſo dearely doe I loue theſe proſtituted beaſtly queanes, that I cannot ſleep quietly in my bed for thinking of them;Whores are the Diuells hacknies and let to none but his owne ſeruants. that as Salomon hath ſayd, doe carrie death and damnation about them: Theſe be they that I haue ſo dedicated my ſelfe vnto, that neither the feare of God, the ſhame of the world, nor the admonition of friends is able to reſtraine me; whom neither the loue of an honeſt wife, the naturall care of dutifull children, nor the ſting of a guilty conſcience, can any whit at all mollifie. Tell me now, where ſhall you finde amongſt men a villaine more ſtained and polluted with loathed filthines, or more to be deteſted then is the whore-monger? If any of you two can ſhew your ſelues to be more degenerating from honeſty or humanity, I yeeld vp my right, I make no further claime.
            The ſecond brother being now to ſpeake for himſelfe, began in this manner:
            Brother, I acknowledge all that you haue ſaid to be true,The ſecond brothers ſpeech. and I confeſſe the whoremonger to be a moſt vicious villain amongſt men: but you haue yet ſhot ſhort of the mark you aimed at; for you are not ſo much enclined to follow that

filthy appetite of whoredome and adulterie, but I am as much and more addicted to baſe and beaſtly drunkenneſſe, baſe and beaſtly I may well tearme it,A Drunkard is beaſt and no man. for there is nothing whereby to diſtinguiſh a man from a beaſt, but the vſe of reaſon: for as man hath his being▪ ſo hath a beaſt: man hath ſenſe and feeling, beaſts haue both: man hath life, beaſts haue the like: but man hath the gift of reaſon, the only euidence he hath to ſhew that he is a man and not a beaſt. Now a drunkard hath loſt his euidence, for he hath neither the vſe of reaſon, of wit, nor of honeſty; he is fit for no good companie, nor godly exerciſe amongſt men; and amongſt beaſts, he is more loathſome and filthy then is a hog, that amongſt beaſts that are filthy, is yet the moſt filthy. Yea, there is nothing ſo pleaſing vnto me as the pot & tobacco-pipe, which makes mee haue a great paunch, my face ſet with rich carbuncles, my noſe pimpled like holly berries, there is no newes ſo welcome, ſo pleaſing, as Come ſhall we goe drinke, for a pot of old march-beere and a cup of ſacke, will make my noſe the riper: and this is my delight from day to weeke, and from weekes to yeeres, and heerein I take my whole delight.
            This (I hope) may then ſuffice, that although the whore-maſter be a creature that is moſt to be deteſted and abhorred amongſt men, yet the common drunkard, being a beaſt, and no man, is moſt digreſſing, as well from the bounds of humanity, as from the rules of honeſty: and therefore as our prouident father hath by his will determined, the inheritance muſt be mine.
            The younger brother, that was now laſtly to ſpeake, began in this manner:
            
               The third brothers ſpeech.Brother whoremaſter, & brother drunkard, I haue heard the allegations that you haue hitherto alledged for your ſelues, and I haue had much adoe to forbeare ſwearing: yet thus farre I concurre with you both, that the whoremonger amongſt men is the moſt vicious, and therefore the moſt to be abhorred and deteſted: and the drunkard I doe thinke indeed to be a filthy beaſt, not worthy to beare the name of a man: but if your owne poſitions be good, the inheritance is

mine. But brother whoremaſter, you thinke to carry away the prize, becauſe you are the moſt loathed creature amongſt men: And brother drunkard, you thinke to defeat mee, becauſe you are the moſt filthy amongſt beaſts; but I tell you in few words, and a little thing would make mee to ſweare, the right is mine, and I will haue it, that am neither man nor beaſt, but a damned Fiend of hell, a Diuell incarnate,A Blaſphemer is a limb of the Diuell. accurſed by Gods owne mouth. Zownds, a common blaſphemer is a creature more pernicious, then either man or beaſt.
            It is I that doe ſet that tongue, which by the right of creation ſhould be the trumpet to ſound forth the glorie of God, I doe make it the inſtrument to prophane and blaſpheme his holy name; to ſweare by his wounds, and by his bloud, by his heart, by his guts, by his ſide, by his body, by his ſoule.
            Can any Diuell of hell ſhew himſelfe to be more aduerſe? Giue ouer therefore your further claimes, for the inheritance belongeth to me, it is I that am a bondſlaue to the Diuell, a fire brand of hell, a wretch that is moſt accurſed, it is I that am all this, and therefore it is I that muſt inherit.
            Thus farre my Hiſtorie, and I thinke of my conſcience this laſt of the three brethren had the beſt right to that his father had bequeſted, for amongſt the ſonnes of men, there is not a more accurſed, then is the blaſphemer.
            But now it is accounted a Gentleman-like humor in him that can ſweare ex tempore, for matters of no moment, and they ſay it is a ſigne of courage: but to ſpeake the truth, it is a ſigne that hee is a reprobate wretch, forſaken of God, that doth vſe it: and as his life is deteſtable, ſo his death will bee damnable.
            What ſwearing and forſwearing againe amongſt Marchants, amongſt Shop-keepers, and amongſt all manner of Tradeſ-men, in buying, in ſelling, in bargaining, in promiſe-making, and yet what little regard in the keeping of an oath? We ſweare by the liuing Lord, by the power of God, the eternitie of God, the maieſtie of God, the life, the death of God; then we diuide our God, to rend him in ſunder with whole volleyes of oathes, as his heart, his bloud, his fleſh, his

ſides, his wounds, his hands, his nailes, his feet, his toes, and all the parts of his precious body: a wicked impudent age, that any people vnder the face of heauen ſhould dare to preſume thus to ſweare and forſweare our ſelues, regarding not our oathes, hauing ſtore of Gods iuſt iudgements on ſuch wicked blaſpheming wretches daily ſet before our eyes for examples vnto vs, and wee regard them not, neither amend our ſinfull liues.
            The Turkes and Infidells are more reſpectiue to obſerue an oath that they doe make in the name of their Mahomet, then we that be Chriſtians, when wee ſweare by the name of the liuing God.
            Our Gallants haue deuiſed ſtrange oathes, moſt fearefull to name, ſuch as were neuer inuented, but by ſome damned forſworne fiend of hell; and when they are at gaming, to heare them thunder forth theſe oathes, would make a Chriſtians heart to tremble. Nay, he is thought to be but an vnthrift, that will not forge, faine, flatter, ſweare and forſweare for his owne aduantage.
            The breaking of an oath that is made betweene party and party, is accounted to be no periurie: nay, whole millions of oathes that are vowed in the performance of promiſes, that are neuer kept, is accounted no diſhoneſty.
            If mens words, and deeds, and thoughts, did concurre in one, we ſhould vndoe the Lawyers, neither ſhould we need ſo many Scriueners to write obligations.
            I my ſelfe doe know a great number of men in the world, that are called honeſt men, yet I know but a very few (if it were vpon a payment of money) but I had rather take his bond, then his booke-oath.
            An vngracious age of ours this ſame, that if wee forbeare from doing euill, it is more for the feare of puniſhment, then for the loue of vertue.
            Mens honeſties are now meaſured by the Subſidy-book; he that is rich is honeſt, and the more a man doth abound in wealth, ſo much the more he doth exceed, and that as well in honeſty, as in wit.
            Hee that hath great friends, hath no faults; but hee that is

poore (if he be honeſt) I warrant him he will neuer be rich, for the time doth not ſerue for men to gather wealth by any honeſt precepts.
            We doe looke aſcew at vertue, when vice ſhall be ſaluted with cap and curteſie; and Arts and Sciences muſt now dance attendance, and waite vpon ignorance: and he that cannot ſometimes greaſe a foole with praiſes, may (peraduenture) die wiſe, but neuer wealthy.
            We purchaſe lands, and we build vp houſes with the ruines of the Church, with the ſinnes of the people, with the ſweat of other mens browes, with periury, with bribery, with oppreſſion, with extortion: it makes no matter how we get, nor how we liue, when at the time of our death, we may haue an Epitaph, or a Funerall Sermon, when amongſt a thouſand ſinnes that we haue committed, euen ſhamefull to bee ſpoken, yet if we haue done but one good deed be it neuer ſo litle, yet it ſhall be devulgated and extolde in a greater meaſure, then that of Curtius, when he offered himſelf into the deuouring gulfe for the ſafety of his Countrey: yet whilſt we liue, we doe make ſhew to haue great regard to our good names, that haue no care at all to our conſciences: We daily ſee the rich Landlord doth grinde the faces of the poore Tenants by cruell oppreſſion, extortion, and miſerable ſeruitude: for the poore Tenant muſt be at command, vnder his moſt tyrannous Landlord. This proud deformed wormes-meat, that whores, drinks, playes, ſweares, and ſwaggers, that conſumes body and ſoule, lands and life, nay hee will vndoe a whole hundred of honeſt poore men, to maintaine his deteſted and loathed appetite. But looke vnto it, thou whoſe guilty conſcience doth tell thee thy faults are apparent, and God doth heare the cry of the poore, who daily heapeth curſes vpon thy vicious ſoule, for thy cruelty too largely executed vpon them.
            But they are worthy to haue the Hubbub, and to bee well laughed at, that cannot cut out their owne conſciences, either litle or large, ſhort or long, or of what ſize or faſhion they liſt: they may learne of the Wolfe, that being inioyned by his ghoſtly Father to faſt, and for foure & twenty houres

to eat no more fleſh then in his conſcience did exceede the value of three halfe-pence;The wolfes conſcience and the Vſurers are much alike. the Wolfe departing homeward, meeting with a ſheepe and a lambe, valued the ſheepe in his conſcience to be worth a penny, and the lambe a halfe-penny, & ſo with a ſafe conſcience he deuoured them both: And he that will liue in this world, and cannot learne of the Wolfe to ſquare out a large conſcience, will neuer grow fat.
            It is but our owne denying or miſdenying, that makes or marres the matter. A ſtrong faith helps all: the leſſon is not new, Crede quod habes & habes, the Preiſt taught it long ago to a yong ſcholler that came to borrow his horſe.
            But it is a pretty thing this conſcience, I confeſſe, and it is good for a man to carry about him, when he goes to church; but he that doth vſe it in Faires or Markets, will die a begger, ſayes this wiſe world.
            I am moued with commiſeration toward the poore Country-man, that dwels too neere him that is rich, whom he ſhall finde to be ſo ſharpe-ſighted, that he ſhall reape no commoditie, but he will haue both an eye and a longing to it: and then if he be denyed, the poore man ſhall finde himſelfe ill neighboured. Would you haue a preſident? I will not be curious: There was ſometimes a poore Farmer, who dwelling neere a Gentleman,But although the Countryman cannot ſpare his Oxe, yet the Iuſtice often hath the horne. a Iuſtice of peace, that would haue bought a yoke of Oxen, which this Farmer could not ſpare, and therfore vpon neceſſitie was driuen to make deniall; wherevpon Maſter Iuſtice conceiued ſuch diſpleaſure, that after this repulſe, the poore man found himſelfe to bee continually croſſed and diſturbed, and from time to time, ſo many wayes wronged, that he came to this Gentleman to ſeeke iuſtice,Beware the Iuſtice, Countreyman. whom he found ſtill to be rather ſupporting thoſe that did oppreſſe him, then ſeeming any wayes to render him right: but perceiuing at the length the truth from whence it grew, in a ſubmiſſiue manner he came to Maſter Iuſtice: Why (ſaid the Iuſtice) do you thinke me to be your enemy? Alas (ſaid the Farmer) I do feele the ſmart of it, and am come in this humble manner to beſeech your good will: Why then (ſaid the Iuſtice) you ſee I can bite though I do not barke. I do ſee and feele it (quoth the

Farmer) but Sir, if I had a Dogge of that condition, I proteſt I would hang him as ſoone as I came home.
            There be many ſuch curs in the world now in theſe daies, that can both bite and whine, many of them more regarded for the authority they beare, then for any goodneſſe is in them: but I will now giue the Hubbub to him that will buy an office: and yet I thinke the buying of an office, and the buying of a dignity are much alike, they are both attained vnto by corruption. And vertue betweene them is betrayed, and bought and ſold for money; but ſince offices hath bin ſet to ſale, to Quicunque vult, the Prince and Commonwealth hath bin the worſe ſerued.
            The time hath bin when he that would ſeeke to buy an office, was thought vnworthy to beare an office, but the buying and ſelling of offices, and the giuing & taking of bribes, are two pernicious euils: and that Common-wealth may be thought moſt bleſſed, where offices are giuen to the vertuous, but not ſold to the rich, that doe ſeeke by their money but to oppreſſe vertue. There is not a more dangerous thing then to put an office into his hand that is both wiſe and wicked, or to arme him with power & authority that is of a couetous diſpoſition; the eye of wiſdom, that in former ages would looke into theſe enormities, was very vigilant and carefull to preuent them, and prouided Lawes, whereby to bridle (not onely theſe) but diuers other abuſes, which from time to time were hatched vp.
            
               Lycurgus made a Law againſt drunkenneſſe, Auguſtus Caeſar againſt pompous buildings, the Lucanes againſt prodigality, the Lacedemonians againſt exceſſe in apparell, the Aegyptians againſt whoredome, the Thebanes againſt negligent Parents, that brought vp their children in idleneſſe and inſolency. And God be thanked for it, wee want no good Lawes in England, whereby to reſtraine all manner of abuſes; but the examples of a godly life,The golden Law is the beſt. in thoſe that ſhould miniſter the due execution of thoſe Lawes, would be more effectuall then the Lawes themſelues; but ſome of them are rather inclined to their owne priuate profit, then the publique commodity, and can be contented to tolerate in others,

thoſe vices that themſelues are addicted to.
            
               Iuſtice is made blind by bribery: and authority daily abuſed.In the olde time they vſed to picture Iuſtice blindfold, with a vaile before hir eyes, ſignifying, that Iuſtice ſhould not ſee the parties between whom ſhee was to diſtribute, but ſhould performe hir office with equity and right, without any reſpect of perſons, but now they haue put hir eyes quite out, and haue likewiſe made her deafe, ſhe can neither heare nor ſee. I thinke they haue peckt out hir eyes with Capons, that were wont to bee brought vnto hir by couples, and ſometimes by halfe dozens: I cannot ſay how ſhe ſhould be come to be ſo deafe, vnleſſe by the neighing of Coach horſes, or the rumbling of Coaches: And Iuſtice hath her eares many times poyſoned with vngracious tales that be whiſpered vnto her: or how it comes to paſſe I know not, but blind & deafe they haue made hir, ſhe can neither heare nor ſee the pride, the adultery, the drunkenneſſe, the bawdery, the bribery, the popery, the impiety, ſhee cannot ſee a Recuſant, a Preiſt, a Papiſt, a Ieſuite, our abhominations runne currant, without controulment, for alas Iuſtice is bereaued the vſe of her ſenses, ſhee can neither heare nor ſee.
            She can a little ſmell, and ſhe can ſometimes vent a horſe, a hawke, a hogſhead of wine, ſugar, ſpice, fleſh, fiſh, fowle, or any thing that comes vnder the name or title of a preſent.
            She cannot indure the name of a bribe, he that offers hir a bribe, ſhe thinks him a foole, but for preſents let them bring them till their backs do ake, ſhe will make them more weary in giuing, then ſhee will be in taking.
            I would be glad to fortifie my ſpeeches with ſome example, although not of the time preſent, yet of the time paſt, and I remember a matter that I thinke will ſerue my turne, I cannot ſet you downe the yeere of our Lord, the day of the moneth, the certaine place or country, nor the names of the parties by whom it was acted, but true it is, and if reports may bee beleeued, and for a truth it hath paſſed many yeeres ago.
            There was ſometimes (in what Countrey I know not) but a Magiſtrate there was, but amongſt many controuerſies that were depending before him, there was one had bin of that

continuance, that the plaintiffe 
                  〈◊〉
                his better ſpeed, beſtowed a hogſhead of choice wine vpon this Magiſtrate for a preſent, whereof the defendant hauing gotten intelligence, to outwaigh his aduerſaries hogſhead of wine, he preſented this Magiſtrate with a very faire horſe,There be many men in authoritie of the Welſh mans minde, they had rather haue one eleuen ſhilling peece then all the Angells in heauen. which was likewiſe accepted and receiued: the plaintiffe vnderſtanding of this horſe thus giuen, began to deſpaire of his owne ſucceſſe, thinking his hogſhead of wine to be but loſt, bethought himſelfe yet to goe drinke ſome part of it, before it were all ſpent, and with this determination had himſelfe to dinner to this Magiſtrate, where diuers other gueſts being at the Table, and taſting of this wine, which they felt to be good, they began to praiſe and commend it one to the other, onely this Gentleman that had giuen it drunke apace amongſt the reſt, without any word ſpeaking either in praiſe or diſpraiſe, which the Magiſtrate himſelfe noting and marking, with a ſmiling countenance began to cheere vp his gueſt, ſaying vnto him, mee thinks I heare euery body praiſing my wine, but you your ſelfe; you ſay nothing to it, I would heare you ſay it were good. The Gentleman that had the horſe ſtill ſticking in his ſtomacke, anſwered him in the beſt Engliſh he could ſpeake, I ſai
                     •
                  , 
                     •••
                  d tooke to 
                     〈◊〉
                   was 
                     〈…〉
                   was makeſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   a 
                     〈…〉
                  .
            
            They all began to laugh at this Gentlemans to ad conceit, that did thinke a horſe had bin drowned in the wine, but the Magiſtrate that beſt vnderſtood his Engliſh would moue no further ſpeeches, but let the matter paſſe. How the Gentleman ſped after in his ſute, I cannot tell; for we ſee the world is come to that paſſe, that amongſt thoſe that doe follow ſutes in Law, he is commonly thought to haue moſt right, that is able to giue moſt money.
            For ſome Lawyers cannot ſpeake till their tongues be ript with gold, they had rather haue one eleuen ſhilling peece then all the Angels in heauen. Then is not this a miſerable age, when money makes new law, not honeſt Lawyers. We haue ſo many P
                     •••
                  dous in theſe dayes, that can alter the caſe, and for their owne 
                  〈◊〉
               , will rule: money to ſet men at ſtrife and variance, and hees but a fooliſh Lawyer, that cannot

empty his Clyents purſe, before he end his ſute.
            There is no Law, be it neuer ſo legitimate or truely begotten, which with wreſted glozes and ſubtle expoſitions they cannot baſtardize.
            They are pugnantia inter ſe, there is no agreement amongſt them, but what one confirmes to day, to morrow another will fruſtrate. And we haue as many petty-foggers, tramplers of the Law, that doe much wrong the Lawes of the land, that want both law, wit and honeſty, that liue only by ſetting their neighbours together by the eares, and then they prey vpon the poore ignorant people, they are as bad in a Common-wealth, as moths in a garment.
            There be ſome Lawyers more wiſe then honeſt, they come vp to London with an empty capcaſe, and the Clyent with a full capcaſe, but before the laſt Returne of the Terme, the money is all in the Lawyers capcaſe, and in requitall he ſtuffes the Clyents capcaſe with rotten papers:HELL a Tauerne neere Weſtminſter Hall. and this fellow is ſo conuerſant with the Diuell, that euery day he goes to Hell to breakfaſt.
            There be many miracles aſſigned to Saints, that (they ſay) are good for all diſeaſes, they can giue ſight to the blinde, make the deafe to heare, they can reſtore limbs that be cripled, and make the lame to goe vpright, they be good for Horſe, for Swine, and many other beaſts. And women are not without their ſhee Saints, to whom they doe implore when they would haue children, and for a quick deliuerance when they be in labour.
            They haue Saints to pray to, when they be greeued with a third day ague, when they be pained with the tooth-ach, or when they would be reuenged of their angry husbands.
            They haue Saints, that be good amongſt Poultry, for Chickins when they haue the pip, for Geeſe when they doe fit, to haue a happy ſucceſſe in Goſlings. And to be ſhort, there is no diſeaſe, no ſickneſſe, no greefe, either amongſt men or beaſts, that hath not his Phyſician among the Saints: And this is the cauſe (as may be ſuppoſed) why Phyſicians haue not ſo large commings in as Lawyers: for there is no controuerſie or ſute in Law, be it neuer ſo litle, neuer ſo iuſt,

neuer ſo honeſt, that hath either Hee-Saint, or Shee-Saint to defend or befrend it: Some will ſay, that it is a ſigne of a licentious Common-wealth, where Lawyers and Phyſicians haue too great imployments; and I thinke indeed, they are moſt happy, that haue leaſt to do with any of them both.
            I will not meddle with our Miniſtery, that I thinke of my conſcience, were neuer more reuerently to be regarded then at this preſent, and that as well for their knowledge, as learning; yet notwithſtanding the ſinceritie of Hely, his proud ſonnes deſerued the Hubbub: and there is nothing wherein ſome of our Diuines may be ſo much detected, as in giuing ſo much way to their childrens pride.
            I had thought here to haue ended my diſcourſe, and to haue woond vp my merriment with this old percloſe, And thus I bid you hartily farewell, the winding vp of euery ordinary letter, but as I was dipping my pen to haue taken vp inke, I heard a muttering of mens voices, as they were paſſing through the ſtreets, and looking out at a window, I ſaw foure young Roaring Boyes, that (I thinke) were new come from ſome Ordinarie, the one with a coloured feather in his hat; the other I marked well, had a long lowſie locke hung dangling by his eare, like a Derry Iriſh Glybei: the third was in a yellow ſtarcht band, that made him to looke as if he had bin troubled with the yellow iaundis: the fourth had a ſhort ſword, like that which we were wont to call an Ale-houſe Dagger, and that was truſſed cloſe to his ſide with a ſcarfe; they were all foure in white bootes, and gilt ſpurres, and they were conſulting as they went along, how they might ſpend the afternoone: The one gaue his verdict to go ſee a Play: a ſecond aduiſed rather to goe to Tables or Cards, two againſt two for a quart or two of ſacke: the third thought it better, that they might goe recreate themſelues a litle in a bawdy houſe: but the fourth ſware a great oath, that if they would go with him, he would bring them to the beſt pipe of Tobacco, that euer came out of the Weſt Indies.
            This was the man to whom they all aſſented, the very ſound of A pipe of Tobacco, made them all to run, as Swine to the draffe, when they heare the Maide begin to knocke

vpon the end of the Hogs trough. They ſay the Welchmen came all running out of Heauen, when they heard one without the gate, crying, Gaſſe bobby, Gaſſe bobby; but I thinke our Engliſhmen would run as faſt into Hell, if they did but heare a voice crying out, A pipe of Tobacco.
            
            But away theſe Gentlemen went together, and I began to wonder how a filthy ſtinking Antidote could ſo bewitch men to forget themſelues.
            In former ages, Gentlemen and Knights at their merry meetings were wont to ſpend the time in honeſt recreation; ſometimes in gaming, or other pleaſant ſporting; ſometimes in manly exerciſes, and indeuours of actiuitie; ſometimes in braue diſcourſings, in matters of wit and learning; but how there is no muſick pleaſing, but the pot, and the Tobacco pipe.
            O baſe conditioned time, is wit ſo farre ſpent amongſt Knights and Gentlemen, that they can imploy it to no better indeuours, but to imitate that abuſe, which is ſo common with euery Oſtler, with euery Tapſter, with euery Tinker, with euery Coſtermonger, with euery Horſe-boy: and to conclude, that is in ſuch vſe and cuſtome with euery rogue and raſcall.
            Me thinks the very community ſhould make knowne the vanity: for vertue was neuer knowne yet to be imbraced by the multitude.
            But they will ſay, there are both wiſe and learned, that do vſe to take Tobacco; hey more, there are none will take it faſter then ſome Phyſicians, that be accounted moſt learned.
            And there be as wiſe and learned, that could neuer bee brought to meddle with it, and there be many wiſe men, that of my knowledge (for the little good they haue found in it) haue giuen it ouer: And for thoſe Phyſitians that will take Tobacco ſo faſt, they haue (as other men) many faults worſe then that, vnffit for wiſe men to imitate, I will therefore make them no preſident, and Phyſicians are commonly accounted to be ſo much the more learned, that can beſt flatter fooles in their folly. But I haue heard as wiſe, as learned, and as honeſt Phyſicians as any be in England, that haue ſaid Tobacco

hath both killed and ſhortned many men liues.
            But let vs goe to experience, 
                  〈…〉
                of former ages,Tobacco hath ſhortned many a mans life, and brought many good mans heire to beggery. as of this of ours at this preſent, that hath taught vs, and ſtill doth teach vs, that thoſe that neuer medled with Tobacco, haue liued, and doe liue in more ſound and perfect health, then thoſe that take it faſteſt, But they will ſay there bee men of greater regard, then either Phyſicians, Gentlemen, or Knights that will take Tobacco, and therefore they are much to bee blamed, that will either write or ſpeake againſt it.
            The greater the perſon is, tanta maius crimen, his example is the more hurtfull, and he is rather to bee pittied for his infirmity, then imitated for his dignitie.
            But if the example of greatnes may be a confirmation of matters to make them true or falſe, then I dare confidently prouounce Tobacco to be the moſt vaine and idle toy, that euer was brought into vſe and cuſtome amongſt men, when wee haue a preſident, of him that is not onely moſt great,Sir, you are deceiued, for by Tobacco comes red noſes, the onely marke of good fellowes. but is likewiſe moſt wiſe, moſt learned, moſt worthy, moſt renowned; yea, and moſt worthy thus to bee accounted, that hath euermore impugned, detested and abhorred Tobacco.
            Let them then giue ouer to vaunt of their wiſe and learned men, and let them take the folly to themſelues, that like Spiders, can draw poiſon to hurt themſelues, that can bribe their owne wits to flatter their owne follies, that are carried away with the tempeſtuous whirle-windes of their own affections.
            Humours and affections haue a great hand ouer vs, and they doe both place and diſplace Reaſon at their pleaſure, and where Affection doth hold the Seat and Scepter in the Caſtle of the Minde, they may geſ
                  •
               e at many things, as they are led by opinion, but of very few according to truth: for where the heart is poſſeſt with any vehement affection, there Reaſon is exempt from his proper office, and their iudgement may eaſily be miſtaken, and there is no contending againſt them, amongſt whom Opinion is of ſuch force, as Reaſon is of no force.
            Our ſooty-mouthed Tobacconiſts can candie poyſon, and they doe ſo hugge their owne follies, that they are ready to turne all accidents into arguments, to fit their purpoſe.
            
               And this wee doe ſee by other experiments, that when men haue once beſotted themſelues vpon a folly, there is neither example of ſhame, nor perſwaſion of wit can make them to deſiſt.
            Would you haue an inſtance, for your better confirmation, it is not yet ſo long ſince this new-found-out foolery of yellow ſtarcht bands were taken vp, but that it is within the compaſſe of our owne memories.
            And I could heere diſcouer the names of two ſeuerall perſons that were noted to be the firſt that were ſeen with thoſe bables about their neckes in the Court of England,Pride hath ouerthrowen Kingdomes, and brought whole nations to vtter deſolation. the one of them being openly reprehended for his folly, was likewiſe admoniſhed to beware of Gods iudgements, that doth neuer faile to attend on thoſe new Inuenters of vanities, that doth not onely addict themſelues vnto monſtrous pride, but by their abhominable example doth induce others to doe the like.
            And as it was preſaged, ſo it came to paſſe; for this Gentle-man, vpon ſome occaſion very ſhortly after being in France, was there brought to an vntimely death, and that by an extraordinarie accident.
            The other remaines at this houre a ſpectacle of Gods heauy diſpleaſure.
            
               Miſtris Turners exclamations againſt yellow ſtarcht bands.Yet the open exclamation that was made by Turners wife at the houre of her death, in the place where ſhee was executed, cannot be hidden, when before the whole multitude that were there preſent, ſhee ſo bitterly proteſted againſt the vanitie of thoſe yellow-ſtarchtbands, that her outcryes (as it was thought) had taken ſuch impreſſion in the hearts of her hearers, that yellow ſtarcht bands would haue beene aſhamed (for euer after to haue ſhewed themſelues about the neckes, either of men that were wiſe, or of women that were honeſt) but wee ſee our expectation hath failed vs, for they beganne euen then to bee more generall then they were before. I doe exceedingly admire theſe idle-headed young Gallants, or ruffianly Roaring-Boyes, how they can walke the ſtreets with one of theſe baſe, odious, vgly, beaſtly bands, this new diuelliſh inuented faſhion, looking as though they

had ſcaped from the Diuell in hell, and there had ſcorched his band, where euerie one wonders to ſee this ape of faſhion, and points at him for a foole in this lewd example. Well honeſt Countrey-women, I bring you good newes: I wiſh you now to looke vnto your ſelues; if euer you intend to bee rich, now is the time: You know Tobacco is in great trading; but you ſhall be Marchants, and only for egges:Marchants for egges. for whereas one pipe of Tobacco will ſuffice three or foure men at once, now ten or twenty egges will hardly ſuffice to ſtarch one of theſe yellow bands: A faſhion that I thinke ſhortly will be as conuerſant amongſt Taylors, Tapſters,Thoſe that doe follow ſuch idle ridiculous faſhions, make their Tennants Freeholders within one twelue-month after their lands comes into their hands. and Tinkers, as now they haue brought Tobacco. But a great Magiſtrate, to diſgrace it, enioyned the Haugman of London to become one of that Fraternitie, and to follow the faſhion; and the better to enable him, he beſtowed of him ſome beneuolence to pay for his laundry: And who was now ſo briske with a yellow feather in his hat, and a yellow ſtarcht band about his necke, walking in the ſtreets of London, as was maſter Hangman? ſo that my young Maſters, that haue but ſithence fallen into that Trimme, they doe but imitate the Hangmans preſident, the which how ridiculous a matter it is, I will leaue to themſelues to thinke on. All that I haue endeauoured, is but to make good what I haue formerly auowed, That a Foole will not bee-brought to leaue his Bable, neither for the ſhame of the world, nor for the loue of vertue; and of my conſcience, if there were yet ſome other Lobcoculus, that to ſhew his dexterity of wit, would leaue his yellow, and betake himſelfe into greene, red, tawny, or to any other coloured manner of ſtarching, he ſhould haue followers, that would bring it into a faſhion: this is a true prouerb, A yellow band and a greene wit. So that as of theſe yellow ſtarcht bands, I thinke the like of Tobacco, it was firſt brought into England by ſome man of little vertue, and afterwards brought into cuſtome by thoſe of leſſe wit.
            But they ſay Tobacco is phyſicall, it is medicinable, it is precious for all manner of diſeaſes, and they doe attribute more vertue to their Tobacco, then Bellarmine doth to his Pope. They ſay it will make a fat man leane, a leane man

fat: he that hath fill'd his paunch till it be ready to burſt, they ſay a pipe of Tobacco will make him to diſgeſt; hee that wants meat to fill his hungry belly, a pipe of Tobacco is as good a bait, as halfe a dozen of Horſe bread for a Carriers horſe▪ it is like the Shoo-makers leather, that if your boots be too ſtrait, hee tells you it will reatch; if too wide, hee tels you, it will ſhrinke. So Tobacco, it is good for encreaſe, it is good for decreaſe, it is good to take before meat, it is good to take after meat, it is good to take betweene meales, it is good in the morning, it is good in the euening, it is good at mid-day,The world neuer found out ſo rare a weed, as theſe fooles would haue of Tobacco. it is good at mid-night, it is good at all times, at all ſeaſons, in the ſummer, in the winter, in the heat, in the cold, in the ſpring, in the fallt it is good for all complexions, for all conſtitutions, for old men, for young men, for all diſeaſes, proceeding either from hot cauſes, from cold cauſes, from drie cauſes, from moiſt cauſes: A man may take it as often as he liſt, as much as he liſt, as little as hee liſt, at the change of the Moone, at the full of the Moone, at the waine of the Moone; vnder euery Signe, vnder euery Planer, vnder euery Aſpect, vnder euery Climate. Now if the ſoueraignty of Tobacco be ſuch, as theſe men would perſwade, either Phyſicians be Dolts, that doe preſcribe vs ſo many obſeruations, or theſe be notable Fooles that doe thus take it. But the conceit that is holden of Tobacco, how precious it is againſt the French pox, may make ſome that doe feele themſelues to be diſtempered, to be the more enclining to it.
            Some other againe that be old Fiſhmongers, and loue to follow the game, doe vſe to fiſh thoſe pooles where they know the pox are eaſily caught, doe therefore take Tobacco, to preuent perills. But how vnwiſe art thou, that doeſt know thy ſelfe to be free from that loathed ſickneſſe, and wilt yet be ſucking at the Tobacco-pipe, that euery pockie companion hath be ſlauered before thee, whom wiſemen haue euer ſhonned to drinke withall in one cup? But let them be as free from that diſeaſe as they liſt, hee that is ſtill ſucking at the Tobacco-pipe, muſt yet take the imputation vpon him, that doth ſeeme with ſuch diligence to ſeeke out the remedy that is vſed for the cure.
            
               But I am not ſo madde to thinke that euery man that doth take Tobacco, doth therefore take it becauſe he feeles himſelfe to be diſeaſed; for then if his Maieſty had an imployment but of a ſmall company of men that were healthfull and ſound, they would hardly bee found out either in England or in Ireland. But this I thinke, that the greateſt number doth take Tobacco more for matter of cuſtome, then for matter of maladie. Yet one thing I haue noted, (marke it he that liſt) the Tobacconiſt that is obſeruatiue, that preſcribeth himſelfe ſet times and houres to take his Tobacco, at thoſe times and houres by himſelfe prefixed, will ſooner omit his praiers to God, then not performe his owne preſcribed ceremony in taking Tobacco: Hee that ſhould bring one of theſe to the Horſe-market in Smithfield, and there offer him to ſell, he could not warrant him to be ſound of winde and limb, but he muſt paſſe among the lades, that men doe vſe to put away for ſome hidden infirmity.
            Shall I craue your patience now, and but to ſpeake truly, there is not any man that maketh a cuſtome in taking Tobacco, but he hath ſome defect either in body or in minde; for hee that doth not take it for the cure of ſome infirmitie that he feeleth in his body, he hath both a defectiue and fooliſh mind, that is ſo ready euery day to choake himſelfe with an Indian ſmoake, ſo chargeable to his purſe, and that without either conſtraint, cauſe, or neceſſity.
            Heere I would now craue the cenſure of Diuinitie, whether this idle vanity, taken with ſuch exceſſe (whereby the bleſſings of God are daily abuſed) be not as hatefull a ſinne, and as much offending God, as either drunkenneſſe or gluttonie? I dare boldly pronounce, this exceſſiue taking of Tobacco, not only to be fooliſh, but alſo to be vngodly, and therefore to bee deſpiſed, deteſted, and abhorred by men, that be either good or godly: and he that doth vſe it, vnleſſe vpon neceſſity, as hee ſhall bee conſtrained for the curing of ſome griefe or malady, is to be laughed at, and deſerueth the Hubbub.
            
            Tobacco is like a Popes Bull, that Papiſts doe thinke to be a good diſcharge of all the ſinnes they can commit, from

the meaneſt to the maineſt, from the eating of an egge, to the murdering of a King. The Tobacconiſt hath the like conceit of his Trinidado, that he thinketh to be a good Superſedeas for all diſeaſes, from the aching of a tooth, to the French pox. The text that I haue taken in hand is but of ſmoake, and why ſhould I vſe any forcible battery againſt ſo vaine a vapour? but eſpecially to thoſe that haue dedicated themſelues to this idle vanity, that there is no ſequeſtration, that either wit or reaſon can afford, is able to ſeparate.
            
               Tobacco is the Heathens enriching, and Englands wilfull vndoing, and by the ſmoake thereof hath dried vp the hand of Iuſtice ſhe will not doe her duty.I haue formerly ſayd, that the firſt tranſportation of Tobacco into England, was not performed by any man, that was either of worth, or of any great account: So againe, it neuer grew into credit with any wiſe or temperate ſpirits, but (as it were) by an inconſiderate and fooliſh affectation of nouelties, drawne from a people that are Infidells and Aliens to God, truely reputed to bee the verie refuſe of the world. Shall I now ſpeake of the inconueniences that are drawne in by this immoderate taking of Tobacco?
            What reuerent tearmes might I then vſe, whereby to expreſſe the vnciuill behauiours of old Tobacconiſts? whileſt they are ſucking at their Tobacco-pipe, their ſlauering without regard of modeſty, their ſpitting, their ſpawling, the vncleanlineſſe of the ſight, the loathſomneſſe of the ſtincke.
            Firſt, it is drawne in at the mouth, then it is ſnuffled out at the noſe, whereby the aire is infected with ſuch a loathſome fume, that thoſe that bee ſtanders by cannot draw their breath, but they muſt ſucke downe ſome of that filthy vapour, that hath beene blowne out, if not through a pockie noſtrill, yet (for the moſt part) through a ſnotty noſe.
            And were it not as good manners for ſuch an vnciuill chimny-noſed Tobacconiſt, to ſpit in a mans face, as to puffe out his filthy vapor where it flies into a mans mouth? I might yet ſpeak of the idlenes, the drunkennes, the ſwearing, the ſwaggering, the blaſphemings, & of many other like enormities, that are all drawne in by this inſatiable taking of Tobacco.
            Amongſt the reſt, I cannot forget to commiſerate poore diſtreſſed Ladies and Gentle-women, that among the creatures of Gods making, are of the moſt delicate & pure conſtitution,

that muſt ſubiect themſelues to the baſe & barbarous cuſtomes of theſe rude and vnciuill Tobacconiſts, that doth ſo pollute and perfume themſelues with this loathſome and filthy ſtuffe, that a woman were as good to thruſt her noſe into a cloſe ſtoole, as to ſmell the vnſauoury ſent of her husbands ſtinking breath. If Nature had made mee a woman, as ſhe hath done a man, I cannot tell how I might haue prooued in honeſty, but I would haue beene one of the coyeſt female creatures, that euer knit a paire of browes in anger, but eſpecially to theſe Tobacco-Knights, I would haue baniſht them my company, they might ſometimes (peraduenture) haue talked with me before folkes, but I would haue bleſt my ſelfe from their further acquaintance.
            I haue talked ſo long of this filthy Antidote, that it hath made mee almoſt forget my good manners. The time hath beene, when if we did ſpeake of ſuch loathſome ſtuffe, wee vſed to put a ſir reuerence before, but wee forget our good orders: and the beſt is, I ſpeake but to ſuch as are vnmannerly in the taking of it, as I am in the ſpeaking of it. Let vs therefore ſet the Hares head againſt the Gooſe gyblets, if they will tax mee for my vnreuerent words, I will tax them for their vnciuill deeds.
            I remember a pretty ieſt of Tobacco. That was this. A certaine Welch-man comming newly to London, and beholding one to take tobacco, neuer ſeeing the like before, and not knowing the manner of it, but perceiuing him vent ſmoake ſo faſt, and ſuppoſing his inward parts to be on fire: cried out, O Iheſu, Iheſu man, for the paſſion of Cod hold, for by Cods ſpludty ſnowts on fire, and hauing a bowle of beere in his hand, threw it at the others face to quench his ſmoking noſe. If they grow angry, and will ſay I am a foole, I will laugh the faſter, and will ſay, there are not onely but alſo: It is a good Decorum for a man, to ſute his words according to his ſubiect. I haue hitherto ſpent my breath but to ſmoke 
                  〈◊〉
                Tobacconiſts, I will now conuert my ſpeeches 
                  〈…〉
                be of wiſdome and iudgement, to thoſe that 
                  〈…〉
                away with their owne affections, but tha
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                diſtinguiſh betweene good and euill, truth and 
                  〈…〉
               
               
and vice: to them I ſay; There is no man that doth vſe to take Tobacco, but he muſt take vpon him the imputation of ſome diſeaſe, or elſe hee muſt acknowledge himſelfe to be a foole: for (beſides the chargeable expences, which drawes deep in his purſe that plies it a pace) who would endure the vnſauoury taſte, the loathſome ſmell, the vnſeemly ſight, whilſt they are in taking of it, but for the cure of ſome infirmity? And by the rules of Phyſicke, there is no cure to be vſed, but where there is cauſe: Now what hidden vertue a ſmoakie vapour may haue for the curing of all diſeaſes is much to be doubted, or why ſhould we not rather ſuſpect it to bee more hurtfull then helpfull. There needes no other probation but this: It is ſmoake, and I neuer heard that ſmoke was good for any thing, vnleſſe to dry red herring. It is naught in the Kitchin, it is worſe in the Chamber, but for this ſmoake of Tobacco, the hatefulneſſe of the ſmell doth argue the Antipathie it hath againſt Nature: Now if the diſeaſe be but a Cough, a Colde, a Rheume, a Diſtillation, or ſome ſuch other like ſlight infimity (as the Tobacconiſt will acknowledge none that be more loathſome) the medicine then (in euerie wiſe conſideration) is much more noyſome then is the malady. I will not ſay but that Tabacco may be medicinable for ſome diſeaſes, and men that haue infirmities (if they finde eaſe in it) may take and vſe it as an Apothecaries Drugge: but if all bee diſeaſed that doe vſe to take Tobacco, God help England, it is wonderfully infected, and his Maieſtie hath but a few ſubiects that be healthfull in his whole dominions.
            But this exceſſiue and immoderate taking of it without neceſſity, is not onely a ſinne before God, but a great ſhame in the ſight of all good men, and there is no ſinne that deſerueth more bitterly to be reprehended, nor no ſhame that is more to bee mocked and ſcorned. And now to ſpeake truely what it is that maketh mee ſo bitterly to inueigh againſt Tobacco. If it would pleaſe the Reader aduiſedly to conſider what a maſſe of money is yeerely blowne away in the Tobacco pipe,It hath been accounted the ſum that may bie ſpent in England in one yeere in Tobacco is ſue hundreth and nineteene thouſand three hundred ſeuenty fiue pounds, all ſpent in ſmoake, beſides priuate ſpendings, beſides Gentlemens 
                     〈…〉
                  , and Tauernes, Innes, and Ale-houſes He that giueth to the poore, lendeth to the Lord. what huge ſummes of treaſure are conſumed in ſmoke within his Maieſties dominions, it would be

found a matter ſufficient to giue a yearely releefe to 2000. thouſand poore people that doe now ſwarme in Cities, Townes, and Countries, crying out but for a peece of bread to thoſe that will ſpend pounds in their ſtinking Tobacco, that will not giue two pence to thoſe poore creatures that God himſelfe hath recommended vnto vs to be comforted, cheriſhed, and 
                  •
               elecued.
            But we haue locked vp our doores, and barred out mercy, and we haue ſet open the broad gate to let in ambitious pompe, exceſſiue pride, and needleſſe ryot: how ſparing we be in that which God hath commanded, to giue vnto the poore? how prodigall againe in the ſeruice of the Diuell, to ſpend vpon Tobacco? He that giueth to the poore, putteth out for a large intereſt: God himſelfe ſtands bound as well for the vſe as for the principall. And he that thus lendeth, is ſure to be repayed, not with ten in the hundred, but with a hundred for ten. How happy is he then that is open-handed to giue to the poore? It is a ſmall ſubſtance, that cannot afford ſome pittance, if it be but a mite, and he that can finde out a penny for a pipe of Tobacco, might finde out ſome modicum to giue vnto the poore: and thrice accurſed is that outward brauery, that is not accompanied with ſome inward pitty: and he which ſpendeth all in Tobacco ſhall keepe nothing but rottenneſſe and ſmoake for his money.
            I would be loath now to ſhew my ſelfe ingratefull, to forget the place wherein I haue had ſo long reſidence, I meane the Realme of Ireland, from whence I learned firſt to giue the Hubbub, & where I hope I ſhall find ſome aſſiſtance that will helpe to raiſe the cry, ſome vpon cauſe of merriment, ſome vpon cauſe of greife, ſome that will laugh full merrily, ſome that will weepe as bitterly, ſome perhaps that may weepe Iriſh, but ſome againe that will weepe good Engliſh.
            
            Amongſt many occaſions whereby the Hubbub is raiſed in Ireland, there is not any one more inducing at this preſent then that of Pride,
               Of Pride. that within this ſixteene or twenty yeeres is crept into Ireland, and growne into that exceſſe, that the Hubbub thereby is arreared, and that as well in mourning as in mirth. There is not a people vnder the face of Heauen,

that be of a more haughty & proud ſpirit then are the Iriſh:
               The Iriſh are naturally proud. proud mindes they haue euer had, but for any pride in their apparell, they neuer knew what it meant, till they learnt it from the Engliſh. It was a great dainties within theſe very few yeeres, euen amongſt their greateſt Nobilitie, to ſee a cloake lined thorow with Veluet, they were not acquainted with any great ſtore of Sattin ſuites, they did not gliſter in gold and ſiluer lace, they were not acquainted with a paire of ſilke ſtockings, they had no Veluet Saddles, nor the greateſt number of them ſo much as a paire of bootes to draw on when they were to ride. For their Ladies and Gentlewomen (euen thoſe that were of the moſt great and honourable houſes) they little knew what belonged to this frizling, and this curling of haire:Theſe be euery Chambermaids attire, and odicus in the ſight of all modeſt & honeſt women. and for this lowſie commoditie of perywigs, they were not knowne to the Ladies of Ireland, they were not acquainted with theſe curling ſticks, ſetting ſticks, ſmoothing yrons, they knew not what to make of a Picadilly, they neither vſed pouldring nor painting ſtuffe, they knew not what a Coach meant, nor ſcarſe a ſide ſaddle, till they learnt them from the Engliſh: The onely pride of the Iriſh was in hoſpitality and good-houſe-keeping, in ſpending amongſt their fellowes, and giuing entertainment. He that was a Countryman (euen of the meaneſt ſort) would haue beene aſhamed to ſell either corne, cattell, or any manner of victuall,When Pride came vp ſtaires, Hoſpitality ran out at window. but to ſpend it in his houſe. Of all imputations, they could not indure to be reputed for churles, they thought it a greater defamation to be called a Churle, then to be called a Traytor.
            But it is our Engliſh brauery, that hath eaten vp our Irelands hoſpitality; for Pride and Hoſpitality could neuer yet dwell together vnder one roofe. It is Pride that hath expelled Charity, it hath conuerted our frugalitie into miſery, our plenty into penury: they haue learned of the Engliſh, to breake vp houſe-keeping, to racke their rents, to oppreſſe their Tenants, and all to maintaine pride.
            If I ſhould ſpeake of the enormitie in a particular manner, that within this ſixteene or twenty yeeres hath bin hatched vp in Ireland together with this pride, my wits would

not ſerue me to ſet them downe as they deſerue; I will therefore imitate the Painter, that was to figure forth the picture of the ſorrowfull Agamemnon, who wanting skill to expreſſe the dolorous aſpect of his heauy countenance, drew a vaile ouer his face, leauing it to the diſcretion of the beholder, to conceiue by imagination of that greefe, which himſelfe was not able with his penſill to manifeſt.
            We haue for theſe many yeeres, by a moſt gracious gouernment, inioyed the fruits of a moſt happy & quiet peace: but according to an old obſeruation, Peace brings plenty, Plenty brings pride, and Pride in the end is it that brings in penury.
            I will now a litle accompany the Iriſh to giue the Hubbub with them that do merrily laugh, to ſee ſome women that are but lately dropt out of an Ale-houſe; ſome that are but new crept out of a Laundry; and ſome that were ſcarſe able to pay for the hyre of a Carriers horſe, to bring them from London to Cheſter, that are now pranked vp in that pomp, in that pride, in that brauery, and do take that ſtate vpon them, that we are not able to know thoſe Ladies & Gentlewomen, neither Engliſh nor Iriſh that are of honorable eſtate, both by birth and calling, from theſe proud and new vpſtart changelings, that neuer knew what Gentry ment, neither themſelues, nor their mothers before them: we cannot know the worthy from the vnworthy, the woman of vndetected life, from hir that hath bin tainted: the beſt marke is, ſhe that by birth was moſt baſe, will ſhew her ſelfe to be moſt proud; and ſhe that hath greateſt cauſe to bluſh, will ſhew her ſelfe be moſt bold and preſumptuous; he that hath but one eye may ſee this, it is viſible to euery vnderſtanding.
            They be theſe that haue filled Ireland ſo full of new faſhions, by their ſtrange alterations in their Ruffes, in their Cuffs, in their huffes, in their puffes, in their muffes, and in many other vanities, that Ireland was neuer acquainted withall, till theſe women brought them vp.
            Hee that ſhould haue come to a Lady in Ireland, but ſome fiue or ſix yeeres ſithence, and haue asked her if ſhee would haue had a Shaparowne, ſhee would haue thought

he had ſpoken bawdy, and would haue wondred what hee had meant.
            They are now conuerſant to euery Chamber-maide, and ſhee that came but lately out of a kitchin, if her Husband doth beare an office (how meane ſoeuer) if ſhe be not ſuted in hir Shaparowne, in hir looſe hanging gowne, in hir peticoates of ſattin, yea and of veluet, that muſt be garded with ſiluer or gold lace, from the knee downe to the foote, her Husband may happen to heare of it, and (peraduenture) to fare the worſe till ſhe be prouided: for at euery meale ſhee will giue him ſo many pout-paſties, and carpe pies, that ſhee will make him weary of his life.
            The Peacocke when he marcheth in his maieſty, ſetting vp his glorious taile to behold his owne beauty, yet in his greateſt pride and preſumption, when hee beholdeth his blacke feete, he plucketh downe his plumes with ſhame and diſgrace: but our Ladies and Gentlewomen haue well enough prouided that their blacke feete ſhall neuer offend them, and therefore they doe weare ſhooes of all manner of colours: yet when they be in their greateſt prime of pride, if they would but looke backe into their own pedigree, they would come tumbling downe with Icarus, from the height of their preſumption.
            But his Maieſtie full little knowes what harme he doth to poore women, when he makes them Ladies: Alas for pitty, a woman is no ſooner Ladified, but ſhe hath loſt the vſe of hir legges for euer after; ſhe is preſently become ſo lame and decrepit, that ſhe cannot go to Church if ſhe haue not a Coach: And then the good Knight her Sir Timothy Twirlepipe. Husband (vpon meere loue and pitty) either begges from the King, or proules from the Countrey, to helpe to maintaine his poore lame legg'd Lady. But I am glad yet that I haue ſome good newes to impart amongſt our Ladies and Gentlewomen of Ireland, and they ſhall haue them, as I heard them, be they true or falſe, and thus they follow.
            There was now lately, and now but very lately, amongſt ſome other warlike prouiſions that were ſent out of England into Ireland for his Maieſties ſtore, there paſſed alongſt the

ſtreets of Dublyn towards the Caſtle, three carts together laden only with ſhouels and ſpades, which a yong Gentleman eſpying, called to another that was likewiſe ſtanding faſt by, & demanded of him, to what vſe ſo many ſhouels & ſpades might be imployed, which he thought were enough, if they meant to digge an high way downe to Hell: Nay (ſaid the other) there is another maner of imployment for them then you ſpeak of; for it is intended there ſhall be a faire Coachway made to Heauen, that is now ſo ouer-growne & choked vp, that there hath not a Coach paſſed that way, ſince Eliah rode thither in his fiery Chariot, but now there is ſome hope the way will be mended. I thought the ieſt ſomewhat profane, yet the newes would be a great eaſe for Ladies and Gentlewomen, that are growne ſo lame, that they cannot trauell on foot, that ſo they might go to Heauen as eaſily as they do vſe to ride to Church.
            I might ſpeake of ſome other vices, the rather exceeding amongſt the Iriſh, by the ill example of the Engliſh: And although the Iriſh haue vices enow of their owne, they need no incouragement to ſin, yet Ireland for theſe many yeares hath bin the receptacle for our Engliſh ronnagates, that for their miſ-led liues in England, do come running ouer into Ireland, ſome for murther, ſome for theft, ſome that haue ſpent themſelues in ryot & exceſſe, are driuen ouer for debt, ſome come running ouer with other mens goods, ſome with other mens wines, but a great number now lately, that are more hurtfull then all the reſt, and thoſe be Recuſants.
            And for people that be of theſe diſpoſitions, Ireland hath little need to be ſupplied from any place, that is ſo well repleniſhed with it owne ſtore, that it is better able to lend to others, then needfull to borrow of any. But amongſt theſe graceleſſe men, there haue bin as vngracious and wicked women, that when by their miſled liues, they haue infamed and made themſelues ſo notorious, that they were become odious to all honeſt company in England, haue then tranſported themſelues into Ireland, where they haue ſo inſinuated themſelues amongſt our Ladies and Gentlewomen, and not ſo much with the Iriſh, but moſt eſpecially with the Engliſh,
               
and that amongſt our gayeſt Ladies, by whom they were ſo entertained, graced, and countenanced, that thoſe women that had liued before in good name and fame, and finding themſelues to be but ſlightly regarded, thought it more wiſdom to forget their former modeſtie, and for companies ſake to follow the faſhion.
            If I ſhould now ſpeake of the periury of Ireland, they would goe neere to giue me the Hubbub, and to laugh heartily at me, that would ſeeme to find a fault at that, which they doe account to be neither ſinne nor ſhame. And to ſpeake truely, what account ſhould they make of an oath, that haue ſo many Maſſing Preiſts at hand, that will diſpenſe with more oathes in one houre, then a man is able to ſweare in a whole afternoone.
            
               Periury, old Ale, and Aqua-vitae, are three commodities that be of great antiquitie in Ireland, but eſpecially amongſt the multitude of thoſe that they call Catholikes: for Periury and Popery are ſo linked and conſorted together, that they are as kinde, and as neere allied as Drunkenneſſe and Lechery, the one cannot ſtand without the aſſiſtance of the other, they be Coadiutors, not to be ſeparated. A damnable Religion this Popery, that ſtill cryes out, Sweare, forſweare, hold no faith,What filthy forſworne Raſcall will not be a Papist, that what euer ſinne he doth may be forgiuen? keep no promiſe, play the Traitor, eat vp thy God, murder thy King, kill, ſtab, poyſon, maſſacre, burne, torture, torment, ſaw in ſunder, blow vp with Gunpowder: what act ſo villanous, ſo diueliſh, or ſo damnable, that a Papiſt will not enterpriſe in the ſeruice of his Pope? But our poore Papiſts of Ireland, haue learned the Colliers Faith, that being examined of his beleefe, anſwered ſtill, That he beleeued as the Church beleeued, that could not ſay truely that the Church was, nor knew not any one Article that is beleeued. So they ſay they beleeue at their Fathers beleeued before them; now what beleefe that is I will ſpeake truely: They beleeue the whole ſtory of the Bible, they beleeue that Chriſt was the Sonne of God, that he was borne of the Virgin Mary, they beleeue all the miracles whilſt he was vpon earth, they beleeue that he was crucified vpon the Croſſe, & they beleeue the whole ſtory both of the old and new Teſtaments; but

they doe not beleeue that all Chriſt did and ſuffered, was enough for their ſaluation, but that they muſt merit that by their owne good workes, by going on pilgrimage, by praying to Saints, and when they are dead by ſuffering in Purgatory. They doe not beleeue that Chriſt who came of purpoſe to ſaue the world, did perfect the worke he came for, but that he left it to a Maſſing Preiſt, to finiſh that which he himſelfe had but begun.
            So the Papiſts haue a ſtory Faith, but they haue no ſauing Faith, nor no beleefe to do them good: that which the Apoſtle hath proteſted to be the doctrine of Diuels, 1 Tim. 4. that they imbrace for the doctrine of Faith; we maintaine nothing, but what the Scriptures plainely approue, the Popes thred bare aſſertion is enough for a Papiſt.
            If we alledge Scriptures, they quarrell aſwell with the Tranſlation, as with the Interpretation: if we alledge Councels, they aske if the Pope haue allowed them: if we alledge Fathers, if they ſpeake againſt the Pope, they reiect them: but alledge the Popes determinations (though neuer ſo much repugnant to the truth) there they ſticke like reſty Iades, they will not be drawne out of that durty puddle: the ſumme of their Religion conſiſteth in the traſh of vnwritten verities, and the whole dependencie of their Faith, in this onely principle, That the Pope cannot erre.
            
            Vnder the pretence of Peters keyes, the Pope brings in pick-locks, and leauing to enter by Chriſt that is the doore, he giues his Popelings ſcaling ladders, Bulls of Scala Coeli, to ſcale the walls of Heauen, and like a company of theeues, to breake in at by-corners, and not to enter by the doore. Our Popelings of Ireland will needs proteſt themſelues to be the Kings louing Scyp-iacks (Subiects I ſhould ſay) but to ſpeak the truth, they are more liker Scyp-iacks then Subiects, that do entertaine and receiue into their houſes, Preiſts, Fryers, Ieſuites, and ſuch other of the Popes vermine, that are well knowne to be the Kings vowed and proteſted enemies: do they not manifeſt themſelues to be reconciled to the Pope, that will obſtinately impugne his Maieſties Lawes? that will not ſubmit with Chriſt to giue Caeſar his due? they may

ſometimes in publique ſhew pray for the King, but they are priuily plotting and working for their Pope.
            Well Vertue, I would thou couldeſt now and then be a little cholerick, and not to ſuffer thy clemency to be wronged more then enough, and for theſe diſſembling hypocrites that do preſume too farre, if thou canſt not win their hearts, it were good thou wouldſt rule their tongues.
            Although I haue thus ſpoken of Ireland in generall, yet Ireland is as al other Countries be, good people amongſt the bad, and his Maieſty hath as louing and as good Subiects of the Iriſh, as any he hath in England, or elſe-where: Now among theſe that be good, if there be a number that be hollow hearted, it is no maruell: for neuer ſhall Chriſtian Princes haue loyall Subiects, where Maſſing Preiſts are ſuffered to lurke in their Dominions: And in Ireland our Women Catholikes (for want of Apricocks) do preſerue Preiſts, Friers, and Ieſuites, and keep them in their Cloſets.
            The wiues they for the Popes Cockerels are well enough knowne to be of an excellent ſtraine for breed, where they be well cheriſhed, and much made of. A maſſing Preiſt is ſuch a medicine in a mans houſe that hath a child-bearing woman to his wife, that where they be retained to lye lydgers, it is ten pound to ten pence oddes, that the good Wife, or Lady, or Gentlewoman (or whatſoere ſhe be) will proue fertile, her Husband ſhall want no heires. I will conclude with this caueat to my good freinds: He that will eat egges on Friday, he that will goe to Church on Sunday, he that will ſay his Pater-noſter in Engliſh, he that will ſing Dauids Pſalms at a Sermon, he that will ſweare to the Kings Supremacie, let him dwell where he will in any part of Ireland, he ſhall be ſure to be ill neighboured.
            I haue hitherto ſported at the abuſes of the time, and made my ſelfe merry with the follies of this Age. I might yet ſpeake of many other vanities that deſerue the Hubbub, and to be well laughed at; but I will here ſtop and lay a ſtraw, for I know all that I can either doe or ſay is to no purpoſe: I do but make the world mine enemy; for he that ſpeaketh againſt ſinne in this age, either they mocke at him, or they

thinke him madde: Euery Drunkard, euery Whoremaſter, euery Blaſphemer, euery Tobacconiſt, euery Idolater, they are angry with him that doth reprooue them. O damnable world! we dare not reprehend ſinne, for offending of thoſe that are but the very ſlaues of ſinne. Wee doe liue as if there were no God, or at leaſt, as if wee had no ſoules to ſaue, and wee are ſo lull'd aſleepe in the cradle of ſecurity, that neither admonition or threatning will ſerue to awaken vs. Wee be like ſicke perſons that are brought ſo weake and feeble, that we can neither ſauour nor diſgeſt any thing that is good.
            Vice which now aboundeth in the greateſt meaſure, wee acknowledge in the leaſt; but the leſſe it is thruſt out, the more it eateth and feſtereth within. A gentle potion worketh but a weake effect in a ſtrong body; and it is with ſinne as it is with ſores, ſome cannot be cured without coraſiues. He is but an vntidy Chyrurgian therefore, that will apply a gentle ſalue to a cankred ſore. We are grown to the very height of all kind of impiety, and ſinne is become to be ſo ſupreme, that it thinketh ſcorne to be reprehended.
            But take this from mee, thou that art ſo farre ſpent, that thou liueſt in voluptuous idleneſſe, and haſt no care of thy ſaluation, thou that cryeſt peace, peace, and haſt God to bee thine enemie, that is the Author of peace, who hath proclaimed open warre againſt thy pride, againſt thy periury, againſt thy exceſſe, againſt thy vanity, againſt thy briberie, againſt thy couetouſnes; thou that art entred into a league with theſe and many other vices, and haſt broken the truce that was betweene God and thee; thou that haſt no feeling of thy ſinne, but that thou wilt ſtill perſeuer in thine abominations, thinke thy ſelfe to be depriued of grace, and take it for a ſigne that thy ſinnes are ripe, and thy confuſion is not farre off, but that Gods vengeance doth wait and attend thee with ſuch plagues and puniſhments, as ſhall make thy hardned heart to tremble. Hee that hath not the feeling of his ſinnes, muſt feele himſelfe to bee a reprobate ſecluded from Grace and Mercy; for amongſt the manifold mercies of God, there is not a more ſingular mercy, then when hee makes vs to feele our owne faults, whereby we are drawne to

repentance, and by repentance brought to mercy. Hee that hath not this feeling, ſhall feele the iudgements of God: for he that feeleth not his mercy, ſhall be ſure to feele his iuſtice.
            And doeſt not thou tremble to thinke of his vengeance? Hee that can wrap vp the heauens like a parchment ſcowle: he that can make the clowds raine downe plagues: hee that can make vs to refraine our meat, our drinke, our ſleepe: he that hath the Heauens, the Earth, the Elements, and all to fight vnder his Banner, is hee not to bee feared? hath hee not plagues in ſtore (thinkeſt thou) and not onely to afflict thee in this world, but in the world to come, to adde the encreaſe of an endleſſe and euerlaſting woe?
            I thinke of my conſcience, our Gallants of this age are growne into that humor, they thinke it time enough to hearken vnto God when their climactericall yeere is paſt; but if neither the admonitions that are daily giuen vs by godly Preachers, the threatnings denounced againſt ſinne by the holy Scriptures, the loue of God, the feare the Diuell, the ioyes of Heauen, the paines of Hell; if none of theſe can mooue vs to repentance, giue the Diuell his due, for he hath done his deuoure, he hath brought the world to a good paſſe, he may now ſit downe and reſt him, and hee may crie with the Angler: Hold hooke and line, and all is mine.
            
         
         
            
            APHORISMES, With other witty ſentences; the 24 of June. 1618.
            A Tradeſ-man liues all vpon What lacke you? for without Lacke, he is a Beggar.
            A Grocer is much ſubiect to anger, for hee oftentimes takes pepper in the noſe.
            A Lace-woman ſtands much vpon her inches, for ſhee meaſures her ware by the yard.
            A Butcher is the Farmer of death, for cutting of throats is his harueſt.
            A Cutler is a trade of terrour, for hee makes inſtruments of death.
            A Miller muſt be cunning in his cogges, for his ſtones will not worke without them.
            A Mercer is the maintainer of pride, for a ſilken coat makes a foole forget himſelfe.
            A Taylor is the gaine of meaſure, for hee can purchaſe lands with his ſhreds.
            A Dier is the figure of a Camelion, for he varieth ſo often in his Colours.
            A Smith is the agent of fire, for his water will not temper his mettall.
            A Coſtermonger is a Marchant of winde, for his ware is a great breeder of the chollicke.
            A Fidler is the honor of a cat, for he makes muſique with her guts.
            A Fife is a wry-neckt Muſician, for he alwayes lookes away from his Inſtrument.
            A Drummer is the pride of noyſe, for hee puts downe all but thunder.
            
               A Water-man goes backward with the world, and yet his liuing lies right before him.
            A Fletcher is a foole without a gooſe, for he cannot work without her feathers.
            A Bow-maker is the care of the horne, for if hee doe not nocke well, his ſtring will not lie leuell.
            A Tinker is a ſtopper of holes, but if his tooles be nought, he cannot worke kindely.
            A Cobler deales alwayes with All, for without All, he is nothing.
            A Drunkard is a kinde of Noune Adiectiue, for he cannot ſtand alone without help.
            A Brewer is the Chymiſt of malt, for he drawes his ſpirit to a great height.
            A Foot-man is the figure of Mercurie, for he goes as if hee had wings on his heeles.
            A Coward is the ſhame of nature, for he will be afraid of a woman in the darke.
            A Saylor is a ſea-rider, but if his horſe ſtumble on a rocke, hee may hap neuer to runne on land.
            An Vſurer is the Serpent with long teeth, for hee will eat into a whole Lordſhip.
            A Purſe-maker hath the aduantage of the Law, for he may cut a purſe without controlment.
            A Broker is a money-hackney, for he will trot all day long for his hire.
            A leſter is the venom of wit, for he ſtudies the knaue, but to cozen the foole.
            There is no creature ſo like a man, as an Ape, except a woman; for ſhe will be his counterfet to a haire.
            A Wife is the danger of if, for if ſhe be not good, woe bee to her husband.
            A Mayd is the bluſh of nature, becauſe ſhee wants the delight of reaſon.
            A Widow is the conſumption of loue, for nothing will help her but a new husband.
            A wanton wench is of the nature of a Trowt, for it loues alwaies to be tickled.
            
               Shee that hath the greene ſickneſſe, if ſhee will be well Recouered, ſhee muſt be well Couerde, for Cold is a nouriſher of the diſeaſe.
            A feminine factor is a kinde of Flemiſh Merchant, for his ware lyeth moſt in the Low Countries.
            A Bowler is a kinde of mad-man, for he ſpeaks to a dead thing, that heares him not.
            A Louer is the maze of wit, for when he is in, he cannot get out.
            A Paraſite is the pick-purſe of folly, for a wiſe man will ſhake him of like a lowſe.
            A Foole is the greefe of Time, for he knoweth not how to ſet him to worke.
            A Baker is a kinde of dry Cooke, for he roſts his meate without dripping.
            A Lawndreſſe is the hope of ſluttiſhneſſe, and yet Cleanelineſſe brings in her commoditie.
            A Warrener is the watch of a Conie, for if he ſleepe the Tumbler will be at his Burrow.
            A Woodmonger is the Farmer of Cold, for a warme Winter brings him a bare harueſt.
            A Wittoll is the ſhame of wit, for his patience is beyond his honeſtie.
            A Carter is a Muſician of the Ayre, for he makes tunes with his whiſtle.
            A Prentiſe is the hope of Trade, for if his Maſter dye, his Miſtris may make him free of the Occupation.
            A Widowes Iourney-man is foreman of her ſhop, for commonly he hath moſt charge of her ware.
            A Rich man commonly, is either proud or couetous, but if he be bountifull to Vertue, he is the wonder of the world.
            An honeſt man is the ſcorne of folly, but when theeues are hangde, true men may goe in peace.
            A faire woman is a ſweet obiect to the eye, but if ſhee lay hold on the heart, woe be to the whole body.
            A foule woman is the ſubiect of patience, for Reaſon muſt ſubſcribe to affection, to make a pleaſure of neceſſity.
            A poore man is the ſubiect of Pitty, but Charity is ſo

cold, that Beggers are ſeldome harbourd but in the ſtocks.
            Hypocriſie is a cloke of Villany, and he that weares it, is of the Diuels liuery.
            Better a litle in the morning, then nothing all day after, and yet better be faſting, then haue an vnholeſome breakefaſt.
            It is written that there were nine Worthies in the World, and if the tenth be a woman, tis pitty ſhee ſhould be concealed.
            Fat plough lands, and leane paſtures make the great loafe, and the litle butter diſh.
            A faint freind is like a fearefull enemy, for thone will do no good, and the other dare no doe hurt.
            A hot promiſe and a cold performance, is like a fart, for it dies in the breeding.
            Adam was the firſt Man that was deceiued by a Woman, but I feare Eue will not be the laſt Woman, that will deceiue a Man.
            A houſe ouer a mans head is a good harbour in the raine, but, if it be on fire about his eares, he were better be in the field.
            If all faults were written vpon foreheads, the world would be full of ſtrange faces.
            If all the thoughts of ſinne ſhould breake out into an itch in the fleſh, all the nailes in the world, would not be ſufficient to ſcratch them.
            A wiſe man will doe Iuſtice for vertues ſake, but a foole like a feather is caried away with the winde.
            A Clarke of a Church is the Abridgement of a Miniſter, for he ſhuts vp his ſeruice in Amen.
            
            A Sexton is a Muſitian of death, for he ſeldome towles the bell but to a Funerall.
            A Carrier is the poſte of Time, for he muſt make his returne, if it be but for letters.
            A Schoolemaſter is the terror of a Scholer, for if he can not ſay his leſſon, he muſt vntruſſe.
            The Gailor is the terror of the priſoner, for he tyrannizeth ouer the miſery of the diſtreſſed.
            
               In ſhuffling of Cards a man may foiſt in a knaue, but, if the fift be away the foure will do no hurt.
            An vnthankfull man is a villaine in Nature, for the diſcharge of his duty is without coſt.
            It is a wonder in wit, to ſee the force of will, how it ſubiects Reaſon, to the command of Affection.
            Loue is too ſtrong for any thing but it ſelfe, and yet, if Venus catch Cupids head in her lapp, when ſhee hath lull'd him aſleepe, ſhee will blinde him before he wake.
            When Vulcan will be tampring vpon mettall aboue his worth, the fault is not in Venus, if Mars teach him better manners.
            If Diana had not bin fained, ſhee had bin an admirable woman; and yet, if ſhee had liued to this Age, ſhee would haue bin laught at for hir niceneſſe.
            If Acteon be too buſie with Diana, let him looke to his dogges, for if they miſtake his head they will feede vpon his carkaſſe.
            If Cleopater had not kild her ſelfe for Anthony, a woman had neuer bin the wonder of loue.
            FINIS.
         
      
   