
      
         
            
            OF
the foolishnes of men
in putting-off the amendement of their
liues from daie to daie,
A godlie and profitable treatise for the
present time;
Written in the Latine tongue by that
reuerend and worthie member of
Christ his Church in this age,
Iohn Riuius.
            
               Newlie translated
by
Thomas Rogers.
            
               Ecclesiast. 5, 7.
Make no tarrying to turne vnto the Lorde, and put not off
from daie to daie: for suddenlie shall the wrath of the
Lord breake foorth, and in thy securitie shalt
thou be destroyed; and thou shalt
perish in the time of
vengeance.
            Imprinted at London for Andrew
Maunsel, and are to be solde at
his shop at the west
end of Paules
Church.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the most noble Prince, and
Lord, Maurice, Duke of Saxonie,
Elector of the sacred Empire, Landgraue
of Thuring, Marques of
Misna, &c. his most gratious
Prince:
Iohn Riuius, wisheth S.
            
               AMong all euils, well-nigh infinite,
which, to the astonishment of euerie
man, haue taken strength this daie
in the world, the securitie of men, in delaying
the amendment of their sinfull
life, is not the least; which when I remember,
and call into minde, which often
I doo, I am not a little amazed. And
surelie forsomuch as the life of man (as
holie Iob dooth witnes, and experience dooth confirme) is but
verie short; and a Christian should euermore consider that presentlie
he either must or maie die, (for our Sauiour willeth vs
to watch continuallie, to be readie against death,) the foolishnes
of men in prolonging repentaunce from daie to daie, maie
well make all men to wonder; vnlesse they be of the sect of Epicures,
supposing the soule to die with the bodie, and after death
no parte of man to remaine. For otherwise, he which hath anie
care of his owne saluation, and beleeueth there be after death
both rewardes for the godlie, and punishments for sinners, cannot
chuse but, not onlie for his owne part continuallie thinke of
repenting, while sinnes maie be forgiuen: but also in respect of
others, maruelouslie muze at their follie, which neglect a thing
so profitable, and so necessarie; and the more a great deale, for
that no man liuing is sure he shall liue, I saie not vntil night, but
an houre more, no not a minute or moment of time.
            But to saie nothing of the yonger and lustier sort, who thinke



they maie haue whatsoeuer they hope for, though fondlie, and
foolishlie they doo so: what doo doting and bald men in their
old age, when they should spend the time which they haue to
liue in none other cogitations, and workes, but such as pertaine
vnto the attainement of saluation? Surelie they thinke as little
of death as yong men doo: and so deferre the amendment of
their life, and neuer thinke while time is to repent, as though
they could promise manie yeeres moe to themselues; which
thing notwithstanding they should rather wish, than hope for.
Yea, which is more wonderfull, and showeth more plainelie the
dotage of old men, they blush not at foure score yeeres of age,
to marrie wenches vnder sixteene yeeres. What more? I am ashamed,
it greeueth me to saie it, so I maie liue, and so I maie
haue Christ mercifull vnto me. Then what? wantonlie, delicatelie,
riotouslie they spend the time, they loue, they make good
cheere, they plaie the whore-masters, they are sweete in ointments,
they take their pleasure; and as an old man in the
Poet saith:

                  Because my daies be short,
                  which I haue heare to liue;
                  To women, wine, and pleasant sport,
                  my selfe I minde to giue.
               
            
            The same doo our old men in words commonlie, in deedes
openlie saie, and confirme by their life. Neither doo they, which
commit these hainous offences, euen with hoare heads (for
whie should I be afraide to speake it) make anie great accoumpt
with themselues, or care of reforming their manners; but are
Christians in name onlie, but in deede and life nothing so.
            To come to the crooked old women, which haue had manie
husbands, what doo they? Surelie euen they too, when they are
most old, and full of wrinckles, make death a banquet (as the
Poet saith,) that is, they be not afraide to marrie yet againe:
whereas in deede, if they were touched with anie care of their
saluation, they should do better, if with Anna the Prophetisse, of
whom Luke. 2, 36, 37. maketh mentiō, they neuer went out of the



temple, but serued God with fasting and praiers night and daie.
I speake not of the yonger women, for whom, according to the
sentence of Paule, 1. Tim. 5, 14. 1. Cor. 7, 8, 9. it is better that they
marrie then to burne: but of old, and aged women, who in respect
of their yeeres can beare no children. For they, after the
manner of doting old men (of whom I haue spoken) bid honestie
fare-well, and care little what becommeth them. Such a
mischeef is in example. They alledge for them-selues solitarines
and pouertie▪ and other (as they thinke) iust causes at those
yeeres and likelie: but pretend they what they will, yet shall they
neuer prooue their intemperancie good either before God, or
men, howsoeuer they cloake and couer the same.
            We dallie too much with our selues, we doo yeelde too too
much to our weakenes, or lust rather; we suffer our selues ouer
easelie to be snarled by the allurements of the flesh; we cast
not awaie the tendernes of our minde, we resist not the snares,
and ingines of Satan by continuall praier; we tame not our
bodie with abstinence, and fasting. Hence come the teares, as
it is saide; and this maketh such old marriages, in those yeeres
which call for a new life, and a new conuersation. For it were
time then, not to thinke of the short time, which is to be spent,
but of the life to come which alwaie shall indure. When thinke
you they will begin to amend, and haue regard of their saluation?
When will they repent? When will they prepare themselues
vnto death, which marrie euen when they are going to
the graue? Either I am deceaued, or this is not the waie vnto
heauen, as the Tragicall Poet dooth saie.
            Alack, alack, whether is the godlines of Christians gone?
Howe fewe are they, if there be anie at all, which call into minde
the shortnes, and vncertaintie of this life; death alwaies at
hand; the iudgement seate of Christ; the last iudgement; euerlasting
felicitie in the heauens; the torments and cursed
state of hell? Neither the regarde of the kingdome of God, and
of an happie life dooth stir vp vnto godlines; nor the feare of
hell, and euerlasting destruction either reclame from offending,
or terrefie from sinne. Neither doo moste men giue credit
to the woord of God, and religion; or if they beleeue it, through



a vaine hope of Gods pardon toward the obstinate, and such as
perseuere in sinne; they moste foolishlie doo flatter themselues:
neither doo they endeuor by little and little to caste off wicked
custome, which in manner is turned into another nature. Slothfulnes
and securitie hath inuaded them, being drunke as it were
with prosperitie; they are lead awaie and fed with a false and
foolish hope of longer life.
            Manie also through confidence which they put in the Popes
pardons; in the superstitious woorship of S. Barbara; and in a
Friers cowle, thinke nothing at all of amending their life. Furthermore,
some are spilled either through wicked companie,
and too much familiaritie with vngodlie persons; or by
the Sermons of vndiscreete men, by such I meane, as preach
much of the forgiuenes of sinne for Christ his sake, and of Christes
righteousnes; but either nothing at all, or verie little at all
of dooing and following the will of God; and of the sanctification
of the spirit, wherebie we be renued vnto good woorkes.
            To be shorte: No man contemning earthlie, breatheth and
sigheth after heauenlie things; no man is touched with the anger
of God against wickednes; no man blusheth at the violating
of Gods commaundements; no man is reclamed either
from filthines through shame; or from sinne, through the feare
of God. So that euerie mans life is polluted with great sinnes,
and wickednes.
            And although I graunt, what Seneca in a certaine place
writeth, that Hereof our elders haue complained, hereof doo we
complaine, hereof they which liue after vs will complaine, namelie that
good manners be ouerthrowen, wickednes dooth raigne, the world waxeth
worse and worse, and falleth into all vngodlines: though I graunt
this, I saie, yet I dare affirme that in this corrupt, and wretched
age of ours, all manner vices haue so encreased, that hardlie
greater wickednes cannot be. For what sinne or wickednes at
this daie is wanting, which if it raigned, this age might be
saide to be the more vngodlie for that respect? When as
in deede we can neither patientlie abide to heare our
sinnes laide afore vs; nor quietlie suffer to be reprehended: or
if anie can, it is as much as if a tale were told to a deafe man



(as the saying is). For no man amendeth his life or manners;
no man reformeth his wickednes by contrarie vertues; no man
healeth his sinnes past, no not with the least good woorkes.
            I am greatlie afraide least in that daie of the great iudgement,
our outragious wickednes; our lust, couetousnes, dishonestie,
pride, riotousnes wilbe condemned by the egregious and
most excellent vertues of Heathen men; as by the abstinence
of Aristides, the innocencie of Phocion, the holines of Socrates,
the almes deedes of Cimon, the moderation of Camillus, the honestie,
iustice, and faithfulnes of both Catoes; and who can recite
all of them? Yea, I am afraide, the sobrietie of the Turkes, will
condemne our gluttonie, and dronkennes. Yea, and Sodom, Tyrus
and Sidon, will there laie before our face our extreame wickednes
euen in this new light of the Gospell; so that in the daie of
iudgement it shalbe easier for these, then for vs: as our Sauior
vpon like occasion threatened certaine townes, as Luke recordeth.
            So that it plainelie appereth, how farre we be in deede from
right Christians, though we desire to be compted so. For in
vaine taketh he the name of a Christian to him, that dooth not
leade a life aunswerable and agreeable to Christian profession;
and (as Paule saith) worthie of God. Had we anie wit, the verie
name of a Christian would make vs blush, and be ashamed to
violate the commaundements of God.
            O would to God, that at the length, though late, we would
repent, and turne vnto God with our whole hart, and not destroie
our selues by deferring our amendment; the which manie-times
God punisheth both with sudden death, vnawares,
and also with euerlasting destruction: that in deede it standeth
vs vpon to haue in minde continuallie both death and hell, and
the tribunall seate of Christ; and to thinke that the eares of
our conscience be stroken both with the terrible sounde of
that trumpe, summoning vnto the last iudgement; and with
the dredfull voice of the iudge, condemning the wicked and
vngodlie mates vnto the fire which neuer shalbe quenched.
Now if these things doo nothing mooue the obstinate, I see not
what hope at all is left: and whether there be anie he dooth



know, who knoweth all things, euen God alone.
            But omit we vaine, and vnprofitable complaints. Therefore (to
returne to our purpose) forsomuch as the securitie, & wickednes
of men in prolonging the correctiō of their sinfull conuersation,
is so great: I haue thought good, to seeke, out according to my
poore skill, some remedie for that matter, & to communicate the
same with the ruder sorte, if anie whit it may profit others. For
at the first I wrote the same for my priuate vse, that alwaie I
might haue before me that, which might waken me, as it were
out of the sleepe of too much securitie. Happie I saie much happie
is that man, which standeth in no neede of such a remedie
against the old man; nor of such a remembrance to cast-awaie
sloth. But, as I saide, the song which I sang to my selfe, I haue
thought good to impart with the simpler sorte, forsomuch as I
knowe in some respect it maie doo good; least with Aspendius
the Musicion, as the Prouerbe is, I sing within to my selfe. For
my desire is by all meanes to profit others.
            Which my labor I haue thought good to dedicate to you,
most gratious Prince, and that in none other respect, but to
leaue a publique monument of our obedience toward you.
Accept therefore these things in good part, after your
wonted goodnes, and protect vs, as you doo.
            
               At Misena, 
                  on S. Michaels eue, in the yeere
from the incarnation of our Sauiour Christ, 1547.
               
            
            
               Translated the 23. of Februarie. 1581.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Cap. 1.
            
               ❧A Preface vnto the
discourse following.
            
               
                  WOuld they,
which desire
to be taken for
Christians, so
much abhorre
and shun the
manners, as
they do at this
daie, detest the name and profession of
Epicures, and Sadduces! doubtles they
would as zealously not onely flie from
all euill, but also followe vertue, as now
they obstinately persist in sinne, and
liue in wickednes; yea, they would as
carefullie obserue the lawes of the
most righteous and almightie God, as
they liue securelie, without all feare of
his Maiestie. But in verie deede, our
life, deedes, and conuersation, dooth



shewe, that we more abhorre, and
feare the odious name of a wicked Epicure,
or Sadduceie, than we doo the
nature.
            For what? Thinke yee, they beleeue
the soule is immortall, who liue in
manner as Beastes? or be they perswaded,
there be either rewardes for the
godlie in heauen, or punishment in hell
appointed for sinners, who in euerie
thing dread not to violate the commaundements
of God; and run altogether
headlong into sinne, euen as
though they did either thinke that
God were but a vaine and fained thing;
or beleeue that when the bodie dieth,
the soule likewise perisheth, and commeth
vnto nothing?
            Notwithstanding, be it, that some,
who God knowes are verie fewe, doo
bothe feare God, and doubt no whit
that in time to come he will either
punish, or reward euerie man according
to his desert: yet what is he
whome the feare of Gods iustice dooth
reclame from sinne, or bring to amendment



of life?
            Wherein we haue iust occasion offered,
to lament and bewaile the condition
of vs all, and to maruaile at our
foolishnes, blindnes, and madnes, who,
in such a shortnes and vncertaintie of
this present life, so behaue our selues,
that, no not in crooked old age, when
the vttermoste daie of our life cannot
be farre off, much lesse in our youth,
while we are lustie, doo we take anie
care of reforming our manners.
            I therefore calling this follie, or madnes
rather of men, in deferring the amendment
of life, into minde, haue
thought it good to search out the causes,
whie in a matter of such importance,
as the saluation of the soule is,
we are so rechlesse, and secure. For
these being founde and brought
foorth, it will be an easie thing,
as I thinke, to finde a
remedie for this
euill.
         
         
            
            Cap. 2.
            The first cause why man
dooth not repent.
            
               IN my iudgement,
the
principall and
cheefest cause
hereof, is our
incredulitie.
For did wee
beleeue those
things which
are writtē in the sacred Scripture, of the
iudgement to come; of the voice of the
Archangel, and Trumpe of God; of
the tribunall seate of Christ, before
which all the sorte of vs are to appeare;
of the paines of the reprobate; of the
endles condition and felicitie of the
righteous; of the resurrection to come
bothe of body and soule, to an assured
part either of glorie, or of shame; did
we beleeue these things, I say, not to



be a vaine, or old wiues tale, sure I am,
we would studie to leade an other kind
of life, and not diferre the amendment
of our life, so as we doo from daie to
daie.
            For who is there so wicked, but will
either quake in bodie, or shake in
minde and harte, when he considereth
the iudgement to come? At which
iudgement all men must giue an accompt
before the tribunall seate of Iesu
Christ, not onelie of their words and
deedes, but also of euerie thought and
cogitation; where euery man as I may
say, shall pleade for his owne life.
            O horrible iudgement to the vngodlie.A description of the iudgement to come.
The remembraunce whereof at no
time should slip out of our minde. For,
as he saith, If the righteous scarcelie be
saued, where shall the vngodlie, and the
sinner appeare? The sonne of God himselfe
shall sitte a Iudge vpon all mankinde
that haue beene from the beginning
of the world: then will he be seuere,
sharpe, not intreated, which now
is an aduocate for sinners with God



his Father. All men shalbe summoned
to giue an accompt of their life
spent, vea, the hartes of all shalbe opened;
euerie mans conscience shall
accuse, reprooue, and condemne himselfe.
Laste of all, God seuerelie,
yet righteouslie, shall punish the wicked,
and of his mercie preserue the
godlie, that is, will rewarde euerie
man according to his workes, as Paule
dooth saie.
            Neither at this iudgement shall
wicked deedes onelie be iudged, as adulterie,
whoredome, incest, witchcrafte,
murther, backbiting, thefte, robberie,
sacriledge, quaffing, riotousnes, dronkennes,
vsurie, and such other sinnes;
nor euerie idle, scurrilous, vaine, filthie,
beastlie, light, fonde, foolish, rash, vnmodest,
and babling worde onlie (and
such like) wherewithall the godly eares
are iustlie offended; but also the secret
will, vngodlie wishinges, and cogitations,
with the wicked affections of
the minde, striuing against the lawe
of God, as anger, hatred, dissimulation,



enmitie, spight, enuie, euil-wil, disdaine,
couetousnes, desire of that
which is an other mans, and such
like.
            Therefore who beleeueth, that
one day there shalbe a iudgement, and
will not by the remembrance thereof
either be reclaimed, if he haue beene
wicked; or detained backe, if he be inclined
to fall into sinne? Well saide
one of the ancient Doctors, VVhether
I eate, or drinke, or whatsoeuer
els I doo, me thinkes I alwaies heare
this sounde in mine eares; Arise yee
dead, and come vnto iudgement. As
often as I call into minde the daie
of iudgement, I shake againe euen
at the verie harte, and all my bodie
ouer; and so foorth.
            If the flesh then prouoke anie man,
whether it be vnto lecherie, and vile
pleasure, or vnto gluttonie, and surfetting;
or to any other vices and wickednes:
let him remember the day of the
last iudgement. If either prosperitie
puffe vp the minde (as commonlie it



dooth;) or wealth make hautie, and
cruell; or honour, worship, or auctoritie
engender pride in any man; let him
foorthwith remember the iudgement
of Christ: If either anger vnto reuengement,
or enuie vnto disdaine, or
couetousnesse vnto couen and theft, or
the world vnto ambition, pride, or bely,
cheere, or the Diuell tempt thee vnto
blaspheming the name of God, and to
other sinnes and wicked facts; thinke
straight waie of the voice of the Archangel:
beleeue how thou must pleade
thine owne cause before the bench of
Gods iudgment, and frō thy verie hart,
do thou feare the heauy sentēce of that
Iudge, who doubtles will condemne
the wicked vnto euerlasting fire.
            Would to God, oh would to God,
this day of iudgement were at no time
forgotten! then would euerie man doo
his dutie. Both Magistrates then
would seeke the wealth and welfare,
defend the libertie, and maintaine the
lawes and rightes of the people committed
to their charge: and Subiects



then would giue lawfull obedience to
their Magistrates, and at no time either
repine at their Gouernors, or withhold
tribute, or custome; but willinglie
would render all feare and due honor
vnto them. Both Husbandes then
would loue their wiues,
               Eph. 5, 33. 
               euen as themselues:
And also wiues would feare their
husbands,
               Eph. 5, 22. 
               and be subiect to them, as vnto
the Lord. Then would Parents bring vp
their children in instruction,
               Eph. 6, 4. 
               and information
of the Lord, as the Apostle teacheth:
and children in the Lord would
obey their Parents,
               Eph. 6, 1, 2 
               and honor them with
all humilitie. Seruaunts then would be
obedient vnto them which are their Maisters,
               Eph. 6, 5.
               according to the flesh, with feare and
trembling, in singlenesse of their harts, as
vnto Christ: as the same Paule doth
admonish: and Maisters would be more
milde and gentle toward them,Ephe. 6, 9. 
               knowing
that euen their Maister also is in heauen.
Pastors then would haue that
care of the Lords flock, which they
ought to haue. Rich men would supplie
the lacke of the poore. Widowes



would continue in supplications and
praiers night and daie. The poore
would patientlie endure pouertie, sithe
it hath pleased the Lord to allot the
same vnto them. He which hath a
wife would so deale, as if he had none:
and he that is vnmaried, care onelie
for those thinges which may please the
Lorde. To be shorte; There is no man
but would doo his dutie, did he alwaies
remember the daie of the laste
iudgement, at which time God will
aske an accompt of vs of our whole
life, and of euerie deede, which we
haue doone, and so appoint either
punishment, or reward, according to
euerie mans desert.
            In the time of a great plague,Cogitations of men when they are sicke. when
death is before mens eies, we see how
all men (be they not dissembling
Christians) are carefull to reforme
and amende their manners. VVhat
then?Be such vvhen thou art vvhole, as thou vvert being sicke. Ought we not at all times, euerie
hower, yea and euerie moment,
to thinke of the amendement of our
life; to be touched with a true, and



bitter sorowe for our sinnes, and to
pacifie the wrath of God by repentance;
especiallie seeing, in respect of
vncertaine chances, death continualie
is imminent, and hangeth euerie
howre ouer the heads of all and euerie
of vs, as we are certainely to thinke.
Therefore who so is wise, will haue
such a care, as I haue shewed, as men
commonlie haue in a great pestilence:
at which time, as it were wakened
out of the sleepe (of securitie,) they
are wonte to take care, and to thinke
how to chaunge their wicked liues;
howe to flie and auoide sinne; how
to followe righteousnesse and godlines;
finallie, how to please God by
repentance, who is displeased through
our sinnes. Let euery man then perseuere
so, when he hath escaped the
plague, as he purposed to be when the
sicknes was hot.
            All men acknowledge, that the
houre of death is vncertaine, yet is
it moste certaine that one daie we
shall die.
            
               
Nowe what foolishnes is it, to feare
death, which euerie moment hangeth
ouer our heads; and in the meane time
not to thinke of amendment of life!
But thus it is. In aduersitie, as in the
time of the plague, of famine, of warre,
of Earthquake, of any greeuous and
dangerous sicknes of the body, we can
acknowledge the iust anger, & displeasure
of God against wickednes: but whē
things flowe foorth according to our
harts desire, we blush no whit to abuse
his goodnes, and liberalitie, neither doo
we call into minde, neither death ready
to take vs euery howre;1. The. 4, 16. 
               Nor the last
iudgement, nor the voice of the Archangell,
whereof Paule maketh mention
writing vnto the Thessalonians: Nor
the Trumpet of God: nor of Hell, either
the euerlasting punishment, or the vnquencheable
fire, nor finallie that vtter
darkenes where shalbe weeping and
gnashing of teeth. The memorie wherof,
should be fresh in our minde, both
when we rise from our beds in the
morning, and when we go vnto bed in



the euening; both when we dine, and
when we suppe, when we are washed
for health sake, when we deale in matters
that are serious: yea and when
we doo recreate our minde with honest
sporte.
            But these things, to wit the last iudgement;
the Lords tribunall seate, the
voice of the Archangell, the Trumpet
of God, the euerlasting torments of
hell, these, (I saie,) are but a meere fable
to the vngodlie. And as the Ethnicks
in old time esteemed all fained whatsoeuer
the Poets mentioned of Tartarus,
of Phlegeton; of the Iudges Minoes
and Rhadamanthus, of the place and
region of the wicked, and of the paines
of the vngodlie (whereof sprang that
of Seneca, saieng; The Poets haue battered
and terrified our mindes with vaine
feares: So verie manie count all toies
and fables, yea and thinke all but idle
threates which at this daie we reade in
the sacred Scripture concerning Hell;
euerlasting death; Hell fire, where
shalbe weeping and gnashing of teeth;



and touching the covniting hereafter
of the soule and bodie, either vnto
paine or glorie. VVhereas contrariwise,
these things strike a maruelous
terror without doubt into the godlie,
and such as feare God, yea being
but named, as the Poet saith.
            Thus you haue the firste, and
principall cause, as I thinke,
whie we so deferre the amendment
of our
life, as we doo.
            The remedie against this cause
you shall finde afterward,
in the tenth
Chapter.
         
         
            
            Cap. 3.
            The second cause why we
doo not repent vs of our wickednes.
            
               NOw let vs goe
vnto another
cause, which is
to wit, a great,
yet a false,
and vncertain
hope of pardō
at Gods hand.
            Through this hope Satan the continuall
enimie of mankind, deteineth mā
in wickednes; and by laieng daily before
his eies the mercie and lenitie of God,
forbiddeth him to dread his iustice.
            But as God mercifullie dooth pardon
the penitent; and like a father forgiueth
such as returne from vice vnto wel-doing:
so doth he leaue them neither vnpunished,
nor vnreuenged, who obstinatelie
persist in wickednes. So that in
vaine doo they hope for pardon, which
repent not from the harte.
            
               
Notwithstanding by proposing this
vaine hope, the diuell dooth so bring it
about, that man becommeth secure in
naughtines, and neuer taketh anie care
at all of amending his life, but vtterlie
despiseth the riches of Gods bountifulnes,
               Rom. 2, 4.
               and patience, and long sufferaunce, not
knowing that the bountifulnes of Godle
                     •
                  
deth him vnto repentance, to vse S. Paule
his wordes vnto 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Romanes.
            
            
               Heere that would be remembred,
which Iohn the Baptist, as it is recorded
by Matthew,Mat. 
                     •
                  , 1, 2 
               dooth saie; Repent (your
former euil conuersation) for the kingdome
of heauen is at hand: so would that
also which the Lord in Esaiah speaketh,
               Esa. 66, 2
Vnto whom shall I looke? Euen to him
that is poore and of a contrite spirite, and
trembleth at my words. Christ saith
moreouer by Luke,Lu. 13, 3, 5 Except you amend
your liues, ye shall all likewise perish. And
Peter in the Actes,
               Act. 3, 19 Amend your liues
therefore, and turne, that your sinnes maie
be put awaie.
            I omit sixe hundred places of Scripture,
tending to prooue, that no man



should haue hope, or trust to haue
their sinnes pardoned, but he which repenteth.
For, as I said, in vaine dooth he
looke for pardon, who doth not repent
from his hart. And although there is
no time too late to aske forgiuenes at
Gods hande, as plainelie appeareth by
the example of that Theefe, of whom
the Euangelists make mention, (For,
God desireth not the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turne from his waie,
and liue): yet who knoweth not, how
dangerous a thing it is to prolong amendment
of life from day vnto day?
For as the Poet saith,

                  No man so in Gods fauour is,
                  That to liue an other daie he can promis.
               
            
            Death taketh men oftentimes when
they little thinke thereof, insomuch
that they haue no space to repent, and
amend their liues.
            Here I will not recite what Plinie, in
his naturall Historie, speaketh of suddaine
death, because in these daies nothing
is more common. Manie yeares



are not passed, since two old men,
dwellers in one towne together, hauing
on a certaine night had vnlawfull
copulation with two harlotes, whom
they haunted, died both of them sudē
               lie,
the one of an Apoplexie, the other
thrust through with a Dagger. Now in
what dāger their soules were, let euerie
mā consider with himself for his profit.
            I am not ignorant, that good men as
wel as wicked, may suddenlie be taken;
and that, though the righteous (as he
saith) be preuented with death,
               Wisd. 4, 7. 
               yet shall
he be at rest: notwithstanding, how horrible
is it for an impenitent person suddenlie
to be ouertaken after such a sort▪
How manie haue we heard of, murthered
through contention, euen when
they haue beene at good cheere! How
manie slaine foorth-with, taken in adulterie!
How manie at the Dice and
Cardes suddenlie dispatched, euen of
such as they haue plaied withall! That
I speake nothing of them, which falling
from their Horse, haue brake their
neckes; which through Shipwrack



haue perished suddenlie; which finallie
either by the fall of houses, or other chances
haue beene bruzed into peeces!
            Therefore, albe God would the repentance
rather then the death of a sinner,
as vndoubtedlie he would: yet is
it a dangerous thing, in respect of vncertaine
chances, to deferre the amendment
of our life, in hope of Gods mercie.
For thou art in time to repent, while
thou art yet aliue, while thou art
strong, while thou art in health.
            But thus it is. The yong man giueth
himselfe to pleasure,Yong men loue not to repent. to bellie cheere,
to wine, to riot; and promiseth himselfe
manie yeeres, and a long life; and
therefore neuer thinketh of reforming
his manners, but deferres that matter
vntill he comes vnto age: yet is he not
sure whether he shall liue to be an old
man. For who among manie thousands,
attaineth to old age?
            Now being an old man,Old men vnwilling to amend. what dooth
he then? To morowe it shalbe doone,
saith he, and still to morowe it shalbe
doone: & so willinglie he deceaueth, &



vainelie dooth flatter himselfe, because
no man, as I haue saide, can promise
that he shall liue till to morowe; naie,
there is no man sure that he shall liue
till night.
            In the meane season, Death suddenlie
oppresseth him that deferreth, and prolōgeth
the reformatiō of his life, as euerie
daie almost we haue examples giuē,
yet doo not other mens harmes make
vs to beware: so mightelie dooth Satan
drawe on, and feede vs with a vaine
hope of Gods mercie, and of a long life.
            And although it neither ought, nor
in deede anie waie can be denied, that
the true penitent sinners at all times do
finde fauor at Gods hand; and that a
man neuer, no not at the point of death
should despaire: yet who is so foolish,
that maie haue that which is voide of
all danger, and will chuse that which is
ioined with great hazard euen of the
soule! Therefore to be out of all doubt,
let vs, while time is, thinke of amending
our liues, and not deferre the same
from daie to daie, especiallie because we



are not sure to liue till to morowe.
            
               Nowe concerning the mercie of
God, let vs remember continuallie
what Cyprian, in a certaine place dooth
say on this wise; As much as God is good,
and mercifull, in that he is a Father: so
much is he to be feared, in that he is a
Iudge: so will it come to passe that the
feare of Gods vengeance will reclaime vs
from sinne; and the vaine hope of his mercie
in too much securitie shall not deceaue
and corrupt vs.
            In this vaine hope of Gods mercie,The obstinacie of Popish Priestes.
how miserabley doo those Popish
Priestes deceaue themselues, who all
their life time keepe concubines; and
vnder the pretence of a single life, plaie
the whore-masters, are neuer punished;
nor yet thinke of changing their wicked
manners, nor of putting their concubines
quite awaie from them! Yea,
notwithstanding they know well their
owne filthines, and wicked life: yet
blush they not daie by daie almoste,
to doo the diuine seruice, to come vnto
the mysticall and diuine table, vnworthelie



to eate the Lords breade, and to
drinke the holie cup vnworthelie. Oh
how horrible, yea how dangerous is it
to liue in such state of life, wherein if
death suddenlie should strike thee,That which the Auctor speaketh vnto Priests: he speaketh first vnto all vvhich doo as they doo.
thou wert vtterlie cast awaie! In vaine
therefore doo they flatter themselues
with hope of Gods mercie, which keep
concubines in such sorte, and with
hardened hartes persist in wickednes,
neuer minding either to put awaie, and
forsake their harlots; or to change their
wicked liues by hartie repentance; and
to aske forgiuenes of their lewde behauiour
at Gods hand with teares and
sighing.
            But, some will saie, they aske God
mercie oftentimes; and oftentimes
they beseech his goodnes to forgiue
them. For after their euening praier,
saie they not euerie daie welnigh? Conuert
vs, O Lord, and turne awaie thy
displeasure against vs. Yea, and in the
ende of their Mattins too, doo they
not saie? Lord haue mercie vpon
vs. And at other times, that God



would haue mercie on them, spare,
and forgiue them: they praie, doo they
not?
            I heare you.Praiers of Popish Priestes vvhat. But with what earnestnes
of minde, with what heate and
zeale of spirite they doo so, I will not
dispute. Be it, they praie vnto God zelouslie,
earnestlie, and with a moste
hartie affection; what then? what good
do their praiers, vnlesse they put awaie
their concubines, with intent neuer
to take them againe; and vnlesse
they perseuere in a purpose, and
minde, to liue chastlie euer afterward;
in a studie of amending their
life; and finallie in continuall sorow
for their wickednesse committed?
Now, because they doo not this, as
their deedes plainelie show, who doubteth,
but either they thinke those
things written concerning the daie of
iudgement, to be but a fable; or that
they flatter themselues too too much
with a vaine and false hope of pardon
at Gods hande?
            O horrible face of the Popish Church!



They which aswell by example, as by
praier, should rule; gouerne, and teach
others; euē they so behaue themselues,
that others in them be maruelouslie offēded.Comparison betweene the Laie people, and Popish Priestes.
Whē the Laie people come vnto
the Lords table, with what reuerēce, as
it is meet they should, with what feare,
& trembling, with what zeale do they
approche? what preparation doo they
make before they confesse their sins, &
desire absolution! what care do they take
that no scruple remaine in their conscience
& minde! how certainlie, & firmelie
doo they purpose to amende their
manners, and to reforme their life!
            Nowe what doo the Popish Priestes?
Forsooth (as one of their owne crewe
reporteth) they from the wicked embracement
of an whore hasten vnto the
altar, and that commonlie, vnpunished,
without blushing. They are touched
neither with a care of amending
their liues; nor of putting awaie their
harlots; neither conceaue they anie
sorrow at the remembrance of sinne.
To be briefe, in name onelie and word,



they be Christians, but in deede and
truth they appeare plaine Ethnickes.
VVhat then? some may demaunde, is
there no hope of saluation of such?
Surelie, to speake my conscience, they,
who are such, as I haue described, can
haue no hope of mercie before God,
forsomuch as the Auctor of the Epistle
vnto the Hebrues dooth affirme,Hebr. 13, 4. that
VVhoremongers and Adulterers God will
iudge;
               Gal. 5, 21. and Paule saith, They which doo
such things, shall not inherit the kingdome
of God. VVherefore if the Papists
beleeue it to be true, as it is, which
the Apostle hath saide, what hope can
they haue to be saued, abiding in such
filthines of life? especiallie seeing they
neither vnfainedlie repent, nor will put
away their concubines. But if they
doo not beleeue it to be true, then falselie
doo they vsurpe the name of Christians,
and are not to be numbred among
the godlie: but should be to vs,
as our Sauiour dooth saie,Matth. 18, 17. 
               As Heathen
men and Publicans.
            
            How then doo Bishops tollerate such



vngodlie fellowes in their Churches?
Yea & why allow they such to preache
vnto the people? yea, why for mony do
they permit them to haue harlots? The
matter is manifest; so that it cānot be denied;
& so foule and abhominable, that
it neither ought, nor maie be excused.
And although they denie that they are
altogether vngodlie; because they haue
the name of God in honour: yet manifest
is it that they are not godly, because
they followe those things which are
cleane contrarie to godlines, as Hilarie
speketh of such like. And they are namlie
those, who, being not grieued at this
filthines, and wicked life of their shauelings,
show plainely that they abhorre
the honest & vndefiled bed, as the Apostle
saith, that is; the honest and lawfull
mariage of the ministers of the holie
Church. Oh horrible case to heare oh
wretched & miserable state of Christian
people! Come Lord Iesu, come, and
helpe thy Church, which now a long
space hath had those pastors vnder the
popish tyrannie: which are vtterlie in a



manner destitute of all Christian faith.
            They beleeue, will some saie, to haue
saluation through Christ. Go to, for
we will not striue much about that
point, let vs thinke it be so. What? Beleeue
they that, which the Apostle
saith, VVhoremongers shall not inherite
the kingdome of God?
               Eph. 5, 5. Gal. 5, 21. They beleeue so, I
thinke; neither maie we suspect the cō
               trarie.
Now forsomuch as they are of
that nomber (for that must needes be
grāted which no mā may denie) which
Paule, or the holy spirit rather by Paule
saith, shall not inherit the kingdome of
heauen; howe can they promise themselues
saluation through Christ? then
beleeue they, both that they shalbe saued;
and that whoremongers, as they
are themselues, shalbe condemned. Oh
immortal god, what blokishnes is this!
what blindnes of hart! what darknes of
minde! See they not what contrarieties
they speake? For if they haue an assured
trust that they shalbe saued (for that is
it which we call beleefe;) thē that is false
which Paule vnto the Ephesians dooth
write:Ephe. 5, 5. but if it be sin, as it is, to saie so,



they can haue no faith or trust that
God the Father is mercifull to them,
and pleased through Christ. Then
what is their beliefe? what makes them
to promise to themselues saluation?
what faith haue they?
            VVhat force our conclusion hath;
euen a blinde man maie see, as the common
saying is. For the Apostle dooth
propose and affirme,Eph. 5, 5. that No whoremonger
shall inherite the kingdome of
God. The whole world maketh the
Minor, and saith with one consent,
Popish Priestes are such. Hereof doo the
right Christians conclude, that no
Popish Priestes with their concubines,
shall inherit the Kingdome of God. All
men, though they haue but meane skil
in Logique, see that this conclusion
followeth of the former propositions,
which are manifestlie true, and granted
euen of our aduersaries. For this argument
is made in right moode and
figure. Popish Priestes therefore with
their harlots haue none hope to be
saued; neither doo they beleeue, as



they falselie reporte, albeit they feine
certaine vaine dreames to themselues
concerning faith. But some will saie,
It maie be, that they who to daie are
wicked, to morowe, or when God
thinkes good, may repent, and acknowledging
their faults, liue the time which
they haue to spend in the feare of God:
and therefore we should not so quicklie
despaire of anie mans saluation.
            I know it well, but it appeareth how
these felowes are onte to returne vnto
godlines; and how vnfeindlie they
repent. For what one of manie thousands
haue you seene heretofore, which
comming vnto himselfe, hath either
cast off his whore, or determined neuer
to haue companie with her hereafter? I
speake that which is well knowen, and
what we at this daie doo not onelie see
with our eies: but also euen well nigh
feele with our handes, if so I maie saie.
Not one of a thousand scarse, can you
finde, which from his harte at anie
time purposeth to amende, or to put
awaie his concubine▪
            
            
               
But to let these things go,The deformitie of the Popish Church. how abhominable
in the mene while (be it spokē
in the feare of God), & deformed is the
face of the popish Church; wherein the
pastors and rulers of the christian flock,
doo openlie to the great offence of the
Church commit wickednes; wherein
whoremaisters adhorte vnto chastitie;
impenitent persons vnto repentaunce;
they who are defiled with all impuritie
vnto holines! And these things are
doone, not in villages onelie: but in
townes also and citties; nor in a fewe
regions onelie, but in euery land beside;
and in all places where the Pope hath
dominion; yea the verie Bishops themselues
loking on, winking therat; what
saie I, winking thereat? permitting, and
approuing the same; who because they
do not seuerelie punish this wickednes,
as by their office they are bound, but as
I saide beforePage. 26. for monie permit them
yeerelie to haue harlots, by these their
pardons & dispenatiōs: beside that, it is
a speciall prouocation vnto sin (as one
doth saie,) they emboldē thē the more



in wickednes; & prick forward, & giue
such the head, whom they should bridle;
yea they bring it so to passe, that liuing
in open wickednes, they thinke
they sinne not; & so for their owne cō
               moditie
they giue them occasion obstinatelie
to persist in sinne: of which, as of
all their office, they shall one daie render
an accompt.
            What I praie you,The office of Bishops in punishing levvde Clergie men. may some demaund,
should Bishops do in this case?
I will tell you. They must (as the Apostle
teacheth) not winke at such wickedues,
much lesse allowe, and maintaine
the libertie of whoredome, but first admonish,
improoue, rebuke; afterward, if
these doo no good, remoue them from
their charge and gouernement of the
congregatiō where they are placed; thē
banish them from the temples and sacraments;
afterward being condemned
to the pit of hel, to excommunicate thē
frō the companie of the godlie, & finallie,
as Paule saith, deliuer them vnto Satā
for the destructiō of the flesh, that the spirit
may be saued in the daie of the Lord Iesus.


               
These thinges they should doo, if their
minde were to execute their office vprightlie,
and to be allowed before God
the iudge, who will aske an account of
them for all their doings. Cheefelie and
aboue all things they should showe themselues
an ensample of good workes, as
Paule admonisheth Titus,
               Tit. 2, 7. and be to
them that beleeue, an ensample in woord,
in conuersation, in loue, in spirit, in faith,
and in purenesse,
               1. Tim. 4, 12. as he warneth Timothie.
But at this daie, the Bishops for the
moste parte, showe themselues to be
such, as they suffer the Clergie to be:
whereby it falleth out, that what by the
licence, and what through the example
of Bishops: that they sinne more wilfullie,
and boldly. For as one saith; That
is thought to be well doone, which is
doone by example.
            But forsomuch as Priestes,Hovv manifold occasions be offered vnto Popish Priestes to repent. hauing
so manie occasions to repent, and to
forsake their wickednes (for they both
visit such as are extreamelie sicke; and
heare confessions of sinne; and comforte
the troubled conscience; and absolue



from wickednes, and reach foorth
the bodie of the Lord; and minister extreame
vnction; and are present oftentimes,
when men giue vp the ghoste:
beside, they sing Dirges, wherein it is
often repeated, that that daie is a daie of
wrath, a daie of trouble, and heauines, a
great daie, and a verie bitter; and often
mention is made of the dreadful iudgement,
of euerlasting damnation, and of
the theefe repenting at the last gaspe;
finallie, wherein request is made, that
neither torment of death maie touch,
nor chaine of the damned may binde:
furthermore, they attend on the Herse,
and followe the Corse; and with great
ceremonies burie the dead, and commit
the bodie to the earth: beside this, walking
in the temple they oftentimes
reade Epitaphes, and verses both written
and grauen vpon Tombes and Sepulchers;
wherebie occasion is giuen
to remember not onelie the dead: but
also death it selfe imminent euerie
houre, and also the last iudgement and
tribunal seate of the Lord, to omit other



things: and yet more then all this
in that sacrifice of theirs, for the dead,
they heare of the comming of Christ,
of the resurrection at the laste daie, of
the sound of the Archangell and trompet
of God, and manie other such
things) yet forsomuch as by all these
they cannot be brought vnto repentance,
one of these two things must
needes be true, that either they thinke
whatsoeuer they reade in the sacred
Scripture touching the iudgement to
come, is but a fable, and (as Epicures
do) perswade themselues that the soule
dieth with the bodie; or that they flatter
themselues too too much with a
vaine and false hope and confidence
of pardon at Gods
hand.
            A remedie for this cause you shall finde
afterward in the eleuenth
Chapter of this booke.
         
         
            
            Cap. 4.
            
               ❧A thirde cause why we
deferre the amendment of our life.
            
               A Thirde cause,
whie wee so
driue of the amēdmēt
of our
life, as we doo,
is our custome
of sinning,
which nowe
hath almoste
gotten to be an other nature. For as it is
verie harde for a man to bridle his nature:
so the strength of custome is almoste
inuincible, and therefore not vnrightlie
called an other nature:Custome another nature. Neither
was it ill saide of one, that those vices
be hardlie cut awaie, which growe vp
as we growe.
            We all know how daintelie and wantonlie
parents bring vp their children,Ill education of children.
euen from their cradels. They are



vsed to delicious fare, and pleasures
from their tender yeeres. They absteine
neither from foule and filthie
speech, not from wicked and blasphemous
oathes; to the dishonor of God.
They ruffell it out in their gorgeous
apparell of diuers colours, Soldier like,
with their parted brest, and their pained
hose. They do all things proudlie,
boldelie, impudentlie; but nothing modestlie,
and shamefastelie. They neither
doo honor their parents; nor reuerence
their elders, nor beare with their equals:
breefelie, what they minde, they thinke
they may doo. Neither shame of the
world, neither feare of God can driue
them from wickednes. They haue no
care of religion and godlines toward
God, much lesse of ciuilnes and honestie
toward man.
            VVhat neede manie words? Parents
now a dayes by their euill behauiour so
corrupt their children, that no correction
can make them to be good.Dutie of Parents. Whereas
in deede their parte is before their
children, neither to saie that which were



filthie to be spoken; nor to commit that,
which might not honestlie be doone:
but rather to leade such an honest and
vertuous life, that their children by
them maie haue a paterne how to liue
well, and by looking vpon their sayings
and dooings as into a glasse, learne euen
from their infancie, both what is to be
doone as good, and what to be auoided,
as wicked and abhominable. For whosoeuer
teacheth that by outward behauiour,
which he detesteth in his children;
while he chides them, he accuseth himselfe
of sinne and wickednes. And with
what face can he rebuke his children for
dooing amisse, who hath marred them
himselfe, by his wicked example? with
what coūtenance can he mislike naughtines
in them, the which another as seuerelie
maie rebuke in himselfe? Wherefore
let parents remember, that necessarilie
they are to leade an vpright, and
honest conuersation; that of necessitie
they are to fore-see, that no point of
dishonestie, nor filthines appere in their
life, & that to these ends that with more



auctoritie they may punish their children
when they goe astraie, that they be
not blamed for those vices, which they
rebuked their childrē for; & finalie that
their chiding may be to purpose, and
not lightlie set by of their children,
through their owne default. Hetherto
belonges that of the Poet,
How of a father canst thou take the face,
whē thou by mo vices, dost thy self disgrace?
& how for loosenes cāst thou beat thy child,
Thou an old man being thy self more wild?
            
            So dooth that in another Poet of
Nausistrata,
               Nausistrata. who blamed her husband
because he chid his sonne for being in
loue, when he knew himselfe guiltie of
greater wickednes VVith what countenaunce,
saith she, will ye chide him? And
which Antemona brought foorth in
Plautus,
               Antemona. 
               Is it meete, saith she, that a father
should giue such example? Art thou
not ashamed? But let vs heare that
yong man among declaimers, that accused
his father of madnes; My riot,
saith he, I impute to my father. I was not
brought vp straightlie enough in awe, nor



in a well gouerned house, which might order
the manners of a yong man aright, and
withdraw him from vices, whereunto, in
respect of his age, he is inclined. My father
in a sort hath inticed me vnto riotousnes,
&c.
               Tobias. So did not Tobias that godlie
man loued of God, who as the storie of
him dooth witnes, both instructed his
sonne, euen from his infancie to feare
God, and to absteine from all wickednes;
and also by his good life proposed
him an example how to serue the
Lord: and studied to showe himselfe
such in the sight of his sonne, as he desired
his sonne should be.
            In these daies when children be committed
to Schoolemaisters,Schoolemaisters. especiallie
to be accustōmed to vprightnes and honesty,
and to be brought vp in godlines,
good manners & learning; what is don?
I am ashamed, & loth to say it; yet will
I speake rather necessarilie then willinglie.
Scholemasters for the most part
(for all be not such) what to get fauour,
& to auoide the displeasure of parents,
bring vp their Schollers too nicelie, and



too wantonlie, and as it were loose the
raines of discipline, neither driuing
them by correction from wickednes:
nor alluring them by counsell vnto
well dooing. They neither teach them
Christianitie, nor instruct them in
godlines; nor traine thē vp to modestie,
and vertue.Mischiefes that growe by euill Schoolemaisters. Naie, they showe themselues
neither pure and holie to their
scholers, neither milde and affable, as
fathers; but ouer careles and dissolute,
as companions. Hence ariseth contempt
in them of their maisters; hence
come they headie and proude; hence
doo they loathe all goodnes, hence
intollerable stubbernes. What should
I speake of their prodigious attire? of
their vnseemelie apparell? of their ietting
vp and downe with Daggers by
their side? What should I mention their
prodigall and riotous expences, winked
at by their maisters? or their often, and
well nigh dailie rioting, banqueting,
gossiping, quaffing, plaieng, dauncing,
reuelling all the night together? to adde
nothing more filthie. I name that



which is well knowen, and those things
which are so certaine. that they cannot
be denied; and so shamefull, that they
may not be excused any kinde of waie.
            And forsomuch as Schoolemaisters,Dutie of Schoolemaisters.
(whose dutie were with all endeuour,
diligence, and seueritie, to bring downe
the boldenes, to tame the wildenes, and
to bridle the wantonnes of youth, both
by instruction, admonition, and correction,)
doo suffer the youth committed
to their trust, to be corrupted,
and carried headlong into all vice and
wickednes: what hope is there (of their
amendement) when they come vnto
riper yeeres, and to mans estate? For it
is vnlikelie, that either he will liue honestlie,
when he is old; which ledde a
wicked and filthie life, when he was
yonge: or that he which was naughtelie
brought vp in his childe-hood; will
in his man-hood be brought vnto good
order. Such a matter it is to be accustomed
to a thing from tender yeeres, as the
moste excellent Poet dooth saie. And
as another Tragicall Poet writeth,

                  
                  The minde easelie forgetteth not,
                  VVhat long time since, it learnd & got.
               
            
            Oh that cities would cōsider the waightines
of this matter,Chusing of Schoolemaisters. and yeeld in no wise
neither to affection; nor to affinitie and
kinred; nor to the cōmendation & sute
of their familiars, in choosing Schoolemaisters!
Surelie at euerie mans letter of
cōmendation, a Schoolemaister should
not be appointed: especiallie because it is
much to the benefit of a cōmon-weale,
to haue a godlie & learned teacher, that
will traine vp children in religion;Liberall. manners Liberall knowledge teach
them ciuilitie; and endue them with liberall
both manners and discipline.
            Notwithstanding, how in this pointe
now a daies men offend, no tongue can
expresse. For now there is no place for
godlie and learned Schoolemaisters,
whose honest life, commendable behauiour,
and faithfulnes is well knowen.
Vnlearned Sciolies doo euerie where so
creepe into the freendship & familiaritie
of mightie men, and so perswade thē
that they alone are thought to be meetest
(when they are as meete for that office,



as the Asse is for the harp, according
to the cōmō saying) to gouern Scholes,
and to bring vp children. And for their
doctrin it is such as no wise mā wil giue
a straw, or a burnt thred therefore: their
ignorāce is verie grose, notwithstāding
they can hide the same maruelous cunninglie.
And for that in respect of their
ignorāce & rudenes they carie none auctoritie,
the which a learned mā doth easelie
attaine, they lose the raines of discipline
to much, & maryong minds with
their cokring, that youth may the more
willinglie chuse thē for their teachers.
But, that I may returne to my purpose,
seeing that parents thēselues, with teachers,
& maisters do nussell yong children
in wickednes, giue thē the head to
do what they list; and haue no care at
all of gouerning, & restraining their desires:
what maruel, if hardlie, or not at
all they can leaue those vices in their
old age, whereunto they were accustomed
in their youth! custome so commeth
to a nature. And although,
when the daie of iudgement comes into



their minde, they thinke of repentance!
yet custome hath so marred them,
that, whether it be vnwillinglie or against
their knowledge: they fall euermore
vnto worser wickednes, and like
fooles neuer ceasse to prolong their amendment
more and more. Now what
good members of a Common-weale
shall we thinke they will prooue in
their old age, which in their youth are
so corrupted, through their parentes
meanes; and so ill brought vp, through
their maisters negligence?
            For whence come so manie adulterers
now a daies?Frute of ill education. so many corrupters of maidēs;
so many ruffins; so many bawds; so
manie vnthrifts and prodigall cousins;
whence are there so many dicers; & such
a nomber of most wicked cittizens? but
euen from this fountaine, as it were of
vngodlie and euill education of children?
For they had neede of a purgation
which laie the vices of this age
vpon the Gospell. It is not the Gospell
which causeth such wickednes; it is
wanton and ill bringing vp, it is negligent



& carelesse magistrates: that I saie
nothing of higher Princes, which must
beare the blame.Magistrates office. They who are in auctoritie
should most seuerelie punish
and correct sinne, not winke thereat.
If the Iulian lawe of adulterers,Punishment of adulterie. which
with death puuisheth adulterie, and violaters
of marriage; neither suffereth
the wickednes of whoredome to goe
vnpunished:Punishment of open offenders. if I saie, this lawe were againe
established; and if they which abuse
the name of God, and spue out
blasphemie against his holines, and
sweare by the crosse, by the woundes,
and blood of Christ; which when godlie
Sermons are making, be quaffing;
plaieng; gadding idlie vp and downe;
which obaie not their parents, nor giue
them due honor; which are mankillers,
and murtherers, and theeues, dicers, rauishers,
church-robbers, and Vsurers;
if iuglers, coseners, dronkards, gluttons,
and prodigall vnthrifts, if ill speakers,
backbiters, braulers, forsworne persons,
idle talkers, and liers; finallie, if they
which are apparentlie wicked, were not



wincked at, but seuerelie punished, neither
would there be such large scope
for vice and wickednes; nor all men
should crie out as they doo now, of
the loosenes of this world.
            Let euerie magistrate therefore thinke
vpon his office, and perswade himselfe,
that when Christ shall returne to iudge
the world, he must yeeld an accompt;
and learne of Paule, that he beareth not
the sworde for naught. For he is the minister
of God, to take vengeance on them
that doo euill, as the same Paule writeth
vnto the Romaines. And for so
much as Paule dooth witnesse, that the
Lawe is not giuen to a righteous man,
but to the laweles and disobedient, to the
vngodlie, and to sinners, to the vnholie,
and to the prophane, to murtherers of father
and mothers, to manslaiers, to whoremongers,
to buggerers, to manstealers, to
liers, and to the periured; and because in
his office the magistrate is a minister of
the lawe, doubtles he cannot be negligent,
or slacke and dissolute in punishing,
without great sinne.
            
               
VVherefore such as beare auctoritie,
and rule in the Common-weale must
remember, that loosenes of behauiour,
and wildenes must be tamed, and bridled
by euerie good meanes, and that mē
must be terrified from vice and wickednes,
from naughtines, and from all deceipt,
and deadlie and hainous crimes
through the feare of punishmēt. Vnles
they do so, they make themselues guiltie
of horrible sinnes, and shall aunswer
for the faults of others. For, as the Poet
saith:

                  He that may restraine vvickednes & vvil not,
                  Dooth vvill men to sinne, and spare not.
               
            
            I am afraide the seuerenes of Ethnickes
in punishing sinne,Pagans more seuere in punishing sin, then Christians. and cutting
off malefactors, wilbe a witnes against
our negligence and slothfulnes in that
point, at the daie of iudgement. They
had their punishments appointed by
lawes for offenders; there lacked no cō
               missioners
to cite them vnto iudgement;
they had examiners and iudges;



finallie, they had executioners, which
with all seueritie punished wickednes.
And so by that meanes wilde
heads were enforced to absteine from
il dooing; to bridle desires; to tame their
concupiscence; and not to rush headlong
into all wickednes, euen through
the feare of punishment. But now a
verie blinde man (as the saying is) may
see, how outward and ciuile ordering
of manners is decaied, by reason of impunitie,
and libertie which is granted,
in that such as are in auctoritie, doo either
negligentlie forgiue all, or not seuerelie
enough punish malefactors.
None correct whoremongers, and deflowrers
of maidens, no nor adulterers,
and other more hainous offenders, so
greuouslie as they should; none punish
either disobeiers of parents; or despisers
of their superiors; or backbiters of their
lawfull Magistrates; None represse of
apparell, either the prodigalitie for cost;
or the pride for color, & finenes; or the
lightnes for varietie; or the impudencie
for the monsterous new facions:



None doo forbid that infinite expences
vpon banquets; pompous & princelike
feasting; outragious quaffing; contentious
drinking; nor continuall sitting
at bellie cheere; none doo appoint punishment
for dicers; vsurers; ingrossers;
forestallers; back-biters; nor for such as
for-sweare them selues; nor for curssers;
not yet for blasphemers. I saie nothing
neither of those common Stewes in
manie townes; nor of the libertie
which popish Priestes haue to keepe
whores; nor of the impunishment of
all sinnes for monie, where the Pope
hath to doo.
            It is the part therefore of all in auctoritie
to meete with these mischiefes;
and without delaie to punish offenders,
that others maie take heede.VVhat correction or discipline is vsed. For
in correcting they must haue regarde
vnto these three thinges, either to amend
him whom they punish; or to
make others to beware of committing
the like wickednes, by his punishment;
or finallie, that such as are well giuen
maie liue the more safelie, the wicked



being cut off.
            Little good hetherto hath beene
doone by lawes; therefore the matter
must be gon about another waie, to
haue the better successe. For, as the
Apostle saith, the Magistrate beareth
not the sworde for nought. Let him then,
when occasion serues, drawe out the
same, let him strike therewith to the
cutting away of sinne, and let him haue
a care that he be not blamed for negligence
in that behalfe, that in respect of
discipline we be not worse than the
verie Ethnickes, nor giue occasion to
the enemies of Christianitie to thinke
ill (as they doo) of the Gospell, and of
our profession, because of our life and
ill behauiour. For what? Can the
Turkes beleeue that religiō to be good
whose professors they see with their
eies to be of all men the most wicked,
and prophane? They will obiect, and
cast in our teeth so manie whore-maisters;
so manie ruffins and spend-thrifts;
so manie dronkards; so manie adulterers;
so manie Epicures; that we maie



be ashamed to heare so much. They
will inueigh against our wickednes,
they will laie in our dish luxuriousnes;
they wil tel vs of our lecherie. And thus
for our behauiour sake, both religion
it selfe, and Gods word is ill spoken of;
& as Paule saith, The name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentiles through vs.
            
            And although, to iudge rightlie hereof,
in euerie age there hath beene riotousnes;
sumptuous feasting; costlie
dinners and suppers; surfetting; dronkennes,
who redome, adulterie, oppression,
iniurie, neglecting of well dooing,
and other such wickednes, which euery
man in his time hath found fault withall,
as Seneca doth saie, and no age that
hath beene voide of sinne:VVickednes neuer at such ripenes. yet loosenes
of life, neglect of order and discipline,
outragious wickednes, hath in this our
age so encreased, and got strength: that
it appeareth euen Atheisme and Epicurisme
hath inuaded the life of man, and
as it were beareth dominion among
Christians; lawes take no force, lust
ruleth altogether.
            
               
For these euils therefore it were the
parte of magistrates bothe spirituall,
and temporall, to finde some remedie,
as they whom God hath exalted, and
preferred by strength and honor,

                  Both for to rule the publique weale,
                  And subiects keepe in awe:
                  And for to watch both night and daie,
                  That each liue vnder lawe.
               
            
            That with all studie and seueritie,
they cut off wickednes; and both cherish
and defend the good, and through
the feare of punishmēt terrifie the bad,
and make them not onelie to fauour
religion, but also to aduaunce the same
by their well dooing.
            I saie therefore once againe, let magistrates
remember their duties: and
what wickednes they cannot vtterlie
supplant, let them punish; and though
they are not able to make men good
(which belongeth vnto God alone:)
yet endeuor they withall industrie that
we come not againe vnto Paganisme,


               
and prooue worse than Ethnickes. Aboue
all they should enact and looke
that parents bring vp their children in
the feare of God, and from their youth
teach them godlines, and good manners.
            And forsomuch as the well bringing
vp of children is much to the behoofe
of a Common-weale, for there-vpon
consisteth the safetie of Citties, magistrates
must haue a speciall care hereof,
and see that parents doo their dutie in
bringing vp their children aright vnder
correction. If this were doone, wickednes
would not take such roote, as hetherto
it hath: which otherwise by no
lawes can be auoided.Comparison betvveene lavves and good education. And whereas the
lawes doo punish wickednes, and ill
factes alreadie committed, and good education
keepeth a man from dooing
anie thing woorthie punishment; againe,
forsomuch as lawes reforme
what is doone amisse, but education
quite remooueth the same; it plainlie
appeareth, that this dooth more good
to the Common-weale, than lawes do.



That I adde not, how they which haue
naughtelie beene brought vp, doo afterward
cast off all feare, and reuerence
to lawes, wherebie punishments are
appointed to transgressors.
            And therefore it hath beene the cheefest
studie of wise gouernors,The cheefest care of Magistrates not with
what punishment they might afflict
the wicked and transgressors; but how
to bring it to passe, that their Subiects
maie commit nothing woorthie correction.
And because they trusted it
would be accomplished through the
good education of children from their
youth, either by their Parents, Maisters,
or Tutors, they tooke no small
care about this point.
            But from this digression now returne
we vnto our purpose.
            VVith this Chapter compare the twelfe
Chapter of this booke.
         
         
            
            Cap. 5.
            ¶The fourth cause whie
men are loath to repent.
            
               A Fourth cause
of procrastinating
the reformation
of our
wicked life,Prosperitie. is
wealth & prosperitie.
For it
maketh men
dronke oftentimes
with sweete fortune as it were,
and so secure, that seldom they thinke
of God, much lesse of amending their
liues. Therefore was it well saide of an
ancient wrighter:Prosperitie mother of Securitie. 
               Of prosperitie
springeth prodigalitie; and of prodigalitie,
as all other vices, so espciallie
impietie against God. And Seneca
affirmeth that mens mindes are luld
a sleepe with too much felicitie, as
it were with a continuall dronkennes.



Hetherto pertaineth that of Paule vnto
Timothie,
               1 Tim. 6, 
                     •
                  7 where he willeth him to
Charge them that are rich in this world,
that they be not high minded, and that
they trust not in vncertaine riches, but
in the liuing God,
               18. 
               that they doo good, and
be rich in good woorkes, &c. And if true
it be which Publius saide: Fortune
makes him extreamelie foolish, whom she
fauoureth: then it appeareth euidentlie,
how prosperitie dooth not onelie make
men secure, but is the mother of all
wickednes. For hence it is, that we perceaue
not the wrath of God against
sinne, which we ought continuallie to
feare; hence dooth drousines so occupie
our mindes, that we neither
dread the vengeance of God, nor think
that we shall either die, or appere before
the iudgement seate of Christ.
            Our Sauior in the Gospell after Luke,
               Example of extreme securitie.
dooth by an elegant similitude paint
foorth as it were this securitie of welthie
men; where that rich man, whose
ground had brought foorth fruits plenteouslie,
neuer thought of amending



his life, nor of repentaunce, nor yet of
helping the poore; but fixing his cogitations
vpon building greater barnes,
and of gathering his fruites into them,
thought thus with himselfe:Luk. 12, 18 19. 
               I will gather
all my fruites, and heape my goods
together, and I will saie to my soule; Soule
thou hast much goods laide vp for manie
yeeres, liue at ease, eate, drinke, and take
thy pastime. But, in this securitie, and
opinion of continuall felicitie, which
the churle conceaued in his minde,
what saith God at the lenghth? Euen
thus he saith,20. 
               O foole, this night will they
fetch awaie thy soule from thee.
            
            Thus you plainlie see, how the riche
man, while he dreameth of a secure and
quiet life, of dyning, and supping, and
faring deliciouslie, & liuing delicatelie;
while he thinketh all was well, Sudden
destruction came vpon him, as Paule
dooth saie. Therefore the holie Scripture
biddeth vs to VVatch continuallie,
and euermore to be readie against the
comming of the Lord. A goodlie admonition,
did we set therebie. But as



it fell out in the time of Noe, VVhen as
they did eate & drinke, marrie and were
married, so vpon the sudden were taken
all awaie by the flood. And as they all
suddenlie were destroied with fire from
heauen, when Lot was departed from
among the Sodomits: so euerie mans
last daie of life commeth vpon him
vnawares, when he looketh not
therefore.
            
               When S. Iames would driue awaie
this securitie from rich and fortunate
men,
               Iam. 5, 1. 
               what saith he? Go to now yee rich
men, saith he, weepe and houle, for your
miseries that shall come vpon you.2. Your
riches are corrupt; and your garments are
moth-eaten.3. Your golde and siluer is
cankred.5. Yee haue liued in pleasure on
the earth, and in wantonnes. Yee haue
nourished your harts, as in a daie of
slaughter.
            Here call into thy minde that rich
man in the Gospell,Luk. 16, 19 who after his delight
in wearing purple, and fine linen,
and in faring well and delicatelie euerie
daie, being dead, is now in hell tormented.



For wealth, pleasure, and ouermuch
prosperitie would not suffer
him to thinke of amending his life.
            
               Hetherto maketh that of our Sauiour
in Matthewe: A rich man shall
hardlie enter into the kingdome of heauen:
and, It is easier for a camell to goe
through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the kingdome of
God. Our Sauiour, as Marke recordeth,
expounding the same, dooth saie,
Children, how hard is it for them that
trust in riches, to enter into the kingdome
of God! It maketh also to this purpose,
that Christ calleth riches and
pleasure of this life, thornes, which
cheake the seede of the worde, and make
it vnfrutefull.
            This then is the cause,VVhy God sendeth affliction. Heb. 12, 6 why God
sometime sendeth aduersitie; and, as he
saith, chasteneth whom he loueth,
namelie that they maie shake off securitie,
and both be stirred vp to feare and
call vpon God, whom oftentimes in
prosperitie they forget; & be also compelled
to confesse their sinne, to repent,



and to thirste after heauenlie thinges,
despising earthlie. For in them which
haue the world at will, there dooth
raigne a maruelous securitie, which is
nombred among the deadlie offences;
and their mindes be inuaded with sloth
and carelesnes, and with a certaine
nummednes and sencelesnes, whereby
they neglect heauenly things; finallie
idlenes, faintnes, rechlesnes, vnwildenes
sleepines, and if you will haue it so,
(for by all these names I see I cannot
sufficientlie expresse what I thinke)
drowsines taketh them in such sorte,
that they haue no minde to doo well,
nor to liue honestlie. Such is the greatnes
of this vice.
            The Scripture also showeth, that
prosperitie maketh men not onelie secure,
but blinde also, and vngodlie
manie-times: which made Moses to
saie: VVhen he waxed fat, he spurned with
his heele thou art fat, thou art grose, thou
art laden with fatnes: therefore he forsooke
God that made him, and regarded
not the strong God of his saluation. They



prouoked him with straunge gods, and so
foorth.State of Dauid a secure sinner. This made Dauid, hauing ouercome
his enimies on all sides, when he
was quiet, and thought all things well,
not onlie to fall into adulterie: but also
to defile himselfe with the murder of
an innocent man. And he, who in the
persecution of Saule behaued himselfe
well, in prosperitie prooued wicked.
So greatlie hath he to looke that he fall
not, which thinketh he dooth stande.
Yea after he had committed those
sinnes, how secure was he for a long
space? For, though there hung no
daunger ouer his head, forsomuch as
God is mercifull, he went as well as the
best vnto the tabernacle, he kept the
Sabaoth and other holie daies; he was
at sacrifices making, and offered giftes;
to be breefe, his minde was without
care. But, when God by the Prophet
Nathan denounced vengeance,State of Dauid a penitent person. and punishment,
and stroke him with feare
and terror, then at the length comming
againe vnto himselfe, he considereth
what he had committed, and waieth



the greeuousnes of the sinne, and therfore
conceaueth much sorowe through
the remembraunce thereof, and plainelie
confesseth his offence, and humblie
craueth pardon of God, and desireth to
be washed from his sinne, to be clensed
from his wickednes, to haue the filth
of his vncleanes wiped awaie: yea, he
neither refuseth reuengement, which
God had threatened; nor praieth to
escape the punishment, which he had
deserued.
            Would to God the like securitie were
not in vs, who for the moste parte liue
so without care, as if all were well; we
neither confesse our sinnes, nor yet
feare the sharpe iudgement, and heauie
hande of God against wickednes. So
farre be we, from weeping so aboundantlie,
as we haue greeuouslie transgressed,
as that holie Martyr of Christ Cyprian
dooth saie.
            But to returne vnto our matter, and
to conclude in fewe words: No man
can be saued, but they whose sinnes be
forgiuen. And no mans sinnes be forgiuen,



except he aske forgiuenesse. No
man dooth aske forgiuenes, but he
who desireth to come into Gods fauor
againe. And no man desireth that from
his hart, vnlesse he be touched with a
sense and feeling of his wickednes.
And no man is sorie for his wickednesse,
but he that confesseth them, and
perceaueth the wrath of God against
sinne. But this dooth not a secure man,
for he is touched with no care of his
saluation. Hee to whom all things
fall out prosperouslie, & is (as he saith)
dronken with sweete fortune, is such a
person. Therefore it is euident, that
wealth and prosperitie is a cause,
that men haue no care of amending
their manners.
            A remedie for this cause reade afterward
in the thirteenth Chapter
of this booke.
         
         
            
            Cap. 6.
            
               ❧A fift cause why man
will not repent.
            
               A Fift cause of
deferring the
amending of
our manner
                  •
               
from day vnto
daie, is hope
to liue long.
For, although
none, no not
the yong man is assured, as he in Cicero
saith, that he shall liue vntill night: yet
there is none so old, but he thinketh
he may liue one yeere mo. The Poet
bringeth out an old man, exclaiming
on this wise: Can ye wish me, beeing an
old man 65. yeeres of age, in mine old
daies to become a married man, and to
take an old doting woman to wife?
            
            But now in these daies men well



nigh eightie yeeres of age doo marrie
yong girles scarse fifteene yeeres old.
So that they are of opinion that they
may liue as long as lustie yong men,
as it plainlie appeareth.
            Some perhaps will thinke it follie
and madnes for old men to become
wooers: neither will we reason for, or
against them: this onelie I note, that
such as at that age take virgins to
wiues, notwithstanding they are old
& dote, yet are they lead with a vaine
hope of vndoubted long life. So that
this hope is the cause, why no man
well nigh will earnestlie thinke either
of amendment, or of an accompt to be
giuen vnto the hiest iudge of his life
spent.
            Euerie man deferreth, and, as much
as in him lieth, puts off so profitable
and necessarie a matter. I am afraide
the verie Heathen hereafter in the last
iudgement will laie in our dish this
extreame negligence, in that either at
no time, or not earnestlie enough, we
thinke of reforming our manners, and



amending our life. VVhereas many
Heathen vsed continually, before they
gaue them-selues to sleepe at night, to
waigh with them-selues, according to
Pythagoras precept, what thing they
had done, either well or ill. VVhich
thing, Virgil, speaking of a good and
wise man, expressed on this wise:

                  He dooth not turne his eies to take,
                  the sweete and wished sleepe:
                  Till what he did the daie before,
                  he waies with motions deepe
                  Of minde: what did I pretermit?
                  what did I in due time
                  Thinkes he? what not? vnseemelie this
                  vnwiselie that same crime
                  VVhie haue I done? what ouer slipt?
                  in fonde opinion
                  Haue I stoode? or helpt the poore,
                  and wisht my deede vndone?
                  Or would I ought, which I should not?
                  whie, wretch, did I delight
                  In gaine, more then in godlines?
                  by worde, or eke by sight,
                  Haue I offended anie man?
                  vvhy to my nature vaine
                  
                     
Doo I obeie? and reasons lore
                  vvhy doo I so disdaine?
                  Thus pondring all things in his minde,
                  from morning vntill night,
                  VVhich he hath saide or done, forthwith
                  he taketh much delight
                  Of doing well; and praiseth all
                  vvhich vnto vertue tend:
                  But vvhat he vainlie saide or did,
                  doth much his minde offend.
               
            
            Seneca likewise speaketh somewhat
concerning this custome, which I can
not chuse but mention. He therefore
in a certaine place, speaking of calling
the minde euerie day vnto an accompt,
saith as followeth:
               Sextius. It was Sextius
woont euerie night when he went vnto
bed, to aske his mind, VVhat vice of thine
hast thou reformed? vvhat tentation hast
thou resisted? wherin art thou the better?
And straightway; VVhat goodlier thing
thē after this forme to examine the whole
daie? Oh hovv quiet, hovv sound, and
how free is the sleepe vvhich followeth after
the examination of mans time spent!



when the minde is either commended for
dooing well; or warned to beware of wickednes,
and man wilbe his owne watchman,
and like a seuere Censor,Seneca. bring his
owne life into question? This power doo
I vse, and debate the matter with my selfe
from daie to daie. VVhen the cādle is out,
I fast the whole daie, and measure all my
deedes and sayings. I neither doo hide
anie thing fro my selfe, nor ouer-passe anie
thing in silence. VVhy should I feare anie
of my faults, sith I may saie, looke you doo
so no more, for this time I forgiue thee.
At such a disputation you were too fierce,
doo not hencefoorth encounter with the
vnskilfull. You looke of such a man too
boldlie, and therebie you did not amend
him, but offend him. Looke hereafter, not
onlie that what you speake be true, but also
that whome you doo rebuke, will patientlie
heare the trueth when it is tolde
him. This and much mo thinges to this
purpose speaketh Seneca, which would
to God we would fixe in our mindes,
and followe: yea, and acquaint our
children with this godlie custome. For



did we so doubtles, either I am much
deceaued, or we should studie to liue
more aunswerable to our Christian
profession, than we doo.
            
            But what doo we knowe? we feast
merrelie together, we furnishe our
boordes with most daintie dishes: yea,
we spend not the daie onlie in quaffing,
but the whole night also in riotousnes;
(and what horrible vices of all sortes
tend vpon that kinde of life, we all
knowe) and before willinglie we giue
ouer, drinke ouercommeth vs, and so
we goe drunke to bed (what saie I we
go?) naie, manie times, because we can
neither stand stedelie, nor go but totteringlie,
we are lead: and manie times
plucked from the boord, and laide in
bed, where we lie buried as in a graue,
(for I can not otherwise better expres
the same) ouerwhelmed with wine,
and sleepe, and this is a dailie custome.
Scarce once in a yeere, doo we enter into
an accoumpt with our selues of our
life mispent, and aske mercie for our
offences; sildome it is that we purpose



to come againe into Gods fauor. And
when we doo so, litle too we minde to
continue in those thinges which we
haue set downe: so farre be we from
examining our consciences before we
go to rest, and from considering how
we ought to liue, or with sobs & teares,
and striking our breasts, prostrate vpon
the ground, from asking forgiuenes
of the Lord; from vowing a new life;
and from endeuoring to abide and persist
in that minde and purpose to liue
well.
            Yet for all this we are not afraide, in
such a cursed state of life to sleepe, and
to snort too in securitie; wherein if
sudden death should strike vs (as no
man is sure that he shall rise in the
morning, when he goeth vnto bed) we
are vtterlie damned, and cast awaie.
But litle doo we thinke of these things,
so greatlie doo we flatter our selues,
through a vaine hope of longer life.
Now for so much as commonlie we
see, many are deceaued through such
hope; how childish be we, naie, how



mad rather, which thinke our selues,
by a speciall priuiledge, exempted from
the number of such?
            Reade the foureteenth Chapter of this
booke, for the remedie against
this cause.
         
         
            Cap. 7.
            ¶A sixt cause which alienateth
mens mindes from repentance.
            
               THere is an other
cause,
whie manie,
vnder the dominion
of the
Pope, especiallie,
such as
are welthie &
rich, doo put off their amendement
from daie to daie. And that is not onlie
the trust of remission of their sinnes,
which they receaue by the Popes Buls,Popes B
                     •
                  . Pardons.
and Pardons; but also a vaine and false



hope of deliuerance from the paines of
Purgatorie, by annuarie sacrifices,
& masses, and by the praiers of Monks
and Friers; as also by the almes and
good deedes of their friendes aliue, as
by fasting, praying, watching, wandering
in Pilgrimage, and such like. For
some not onlie affirme, that the Popes
pardons are of power to obtaine forgiuenes
of sinne; and are not ashamed
to stand in it, that moneie is no sooner
throwne into their offering basen, but
foorthwith a soule flieth out of purgatorie
into heauen: but also are perswaded,
that by other folkes merites and
workes, the dead are holpen, which
thing Hillarie writing vpon Matthew,
doth denie. And Hierome agreeing
with him, as euen in the Canon lawe
he is cited, saith: In this present world
we maie helpe each other, either by praiers
or councell: but when we shall appeare
before the iudgement seate of Christ, he
affirmeth that euerie man must beare his
owne burthen. To be short, as death it selfe
findeth a man, so God iudgeth him.
            
            
               
VVhat an horrible securitie is it therfore,
to liue in sinne and wickednes,
and neuer to thinke thereof! were they
touched with any care of their saluation,
they doubtles would obserue some
meane in sinning, and euermore thinke
of the last daie of their life. As, to open
my minde by particulers, he which
beareth hatred against his neighbour,
would be reconciled, according to the
cōmaundement in the Gospel; VVhoremongers,
and adulterers, would remember
that God will iudge them, as the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrues doth
saie; Murderers, and sorcerers, and all
liers, would neuer forget, how their
part is in the lake, which burneth with
fire and brimstone, as Iohn in the Reuelation
writeth; Couetous persons, dronkardes,
and railers, would beare continuallie
in remembrance, that they shall
not inherite the kingdome of God, as
Paule writing not onlie vnto the Corinthians,
but also vnto the Ephesians,
dooth testifie; Rich men would be
sure to haue in minde, that our sauiour



saith, How hard a thing is it for them
that trust in riches, to enter into the kingdome
of God? Finallie, each of vs would
be mindfull of that euerlasting and vnquenchable
fire, which Christ in the
Gospel threateneth to the wicked, and
their fellowe-sinners; and euerie man
for his part would feare those wordes
vnto the foolish virgins, I know ye not;
those also vnto that idle seruaunt, Cast
that vnprofitable seruaunt into vtter
darknes: there shalbe weeping and gnashing
of teeth; and those too, of him
which lacked the wedding garment,
Binde him hand & foote; take him awaie,
and cast him into vtter darknes; and to
be briefe, that vnto the wicked, Depart
from me ye cursed into euerlasting fire.
            
            Oh too too obstinate are they whom
these thinges doo not moue; plainlie
Epicures, which beleeue them not; extremelie
wicked, which cōtemne them;
verie mad men, and vnmindfull of saluation,
which regard them not. Such
are they, which by purchased pardons,
doo thinke they haue got libertie,



and freedome to commit wickednes,
and through this vaine perswasion
driue off to amend from daie
to daie.
            An other cause of deferring and prolonging
repentaunce is, for that manie
are perswaded, if they maie worship S.
Barbara,
               S. Barbara. they shall neuer die vnpenitent,
and without receiuing the holie
Communion. For this superstition of
the worshipping of Barbara, hath possessed
the mindes of all worldlinges,
where the Pope hath to doo. And therfore
a fast is consecrated to her euerie
yeere to be kept: and Painters haue set
her forth in the likenes of one holding
a cup, and holie bread in her hand.
            Furthermore, manie haue a great
care, and long a fore doo prouide, that
when the houre of their death shall approche,
they may be adopted into Saint
Francis familie,S. Francis. and buried when they
are dead, in the habit of a Franciscane.
For this opinion is rooted in all their
mindes, that the diuel hath no power
vpon them, which can attaine thereunto:



inasmuch as the Monkes doo impart
vpon them, together with their
habit, all the merites and good workes
of their whole order, as namely Masses,
Church seruice, praiers, preachinges,
meditations, fastinges, abstinence, vigils,
pilgrimages, and such like. For
Monkes hereby, leauing alwaies that
which is sufficient vnto saluation, if any
thing happelie doo remaine, and be
superfluous, as lightlie there is, that
they communicate with other, not
Gratis, but for moneie. So that, as I
haue saide, this also is a cause, why
men, that haue bought the good deeds
of Monkes, and the communion of
godlie merites, at no time doo thinke
of amending their life.
            But in this place it is needeles to refell,
either this manifest error of popish
pardons; or the doting superstition of
worshipping Saints; or this wicked opinion
which manie haue of commucating
merites; especiallie, because
both others haue done it before now,
& we also in many places ere this, haue



oftentimes confuted them.
            A remedie for this cause, reade afterward
in the fifteenth Chapter.
         
         
            Cap. 8.
            ¶Of other like principall
causes whie we repent not.
            
               THus you haue
as I thinke, the
chiefest causes
whie we neglect,
and prolong
the amēdment
of our
life. There be
also other causes hereof, but they are
inferior causes, as vsuall liuing, companie,
and dealing with the vngodlie and
wicked,VVicked companie. which are touched with no
feare of God, much lesse doo pursue
godlines, or liue purelie and innocentlie.
They who haue any care of their



saluatiō, must with all endeuor auoide
the companie, and familiaritie of such
men. For, trulie was it saide, Ill wordes
corrupt good manners. And an auncient
Greeke writer saith, In liuing with
the wicked, thou wilt proue wicked.
            
            Here I would haue Parentes to remember,
that they are to vse great dilligence,
in keeping their children from
the companie, and familiaritie of the
wicked; and in marking what youth,
& of what conuersation they be, which
are ioined to them in much familiaritie,
or that liue together with them; or
finallie, which doo seeke their companie.
For such is a man, for the most
part, as is the companie which he vseth.
And surelie, well was it saide of
one, He that toucheth pitch, shalbe defiled
with it.
            
            
               But heare what an aduersarie of ours
doth saie: VVe take our manners from
such as we companie withall. And as some
diseases come to the bodie, and infect
them which touch it: so the vices of the
minde pollute them which are next. The



dronkard draweth his familiars vnto the
loue of wine. The companie of lasciuious,
doo effeminate euen the strongest man.
Couetousnes spueth foorth her poison vppon
her companie. Such is the force of
vertue, and of the vertuous on the other
side: and so foorth.
            
            He therefore that desireth to liue
godlie, holilie, and to keepe him selfe
pure, and whole from all infection of
wickednes, which euerie Christian
should desire to doo, must flie and auoide
the companie of the wicked.
For they which addict them-selues
wholie to keepe companie with such,
and abide with them from daie to
daie, making merrie, feasting, eating
and drinking together continuallie;
they sildome or neuer will thinke of
amending their life, neither can they be
driuen easilie from their pleasaunt fellowship.
            So that although they frequēt godlie
Sermōs, are admonished by good-men
in authoritie; yea, and them-selues too,



through the feare of Gods indignation,
doo desire to reforme their manners,
and that earnestlie: yet, I knowe
not how, they driue off from daie to
daie, and can neither vnfeinedlie repent,
nor at any time come home againe.
In the meane while, when they litle
thinke thereof, sudden death many
times striketh them vnawares. For, as
euerie man is sure to die: so the houre
of death is vncertaine. And therefore
we are willed in the scripture to watch,
and to be readie against the last daie
of life. Hetherto maketh that of our
Sauiour in Luke, where he saith, Be yee
prepared therefore:
               Luke. 14. 40. 
               for the sonne of
man will come in an houre, when
yee thinke not.
            
            Reade the sixteenth Chapter of
this booke.
         
         
            
            Cap. 9.
            
               ❧An other cause of deferring
repentaunce.
            
               THere is another
cause,
why many of
the common
people do prolong
and deferre
the correctiō
of their
life. For there be some, and those verie
zelous too, for we maie not thinke otherwise,
yet not circumspect enough
in this point, which in their Sermons
laie open the mercie of God, the remission
of sinnes, and such other thinges
tending vnto our redemptiō, they vrge
full zelouslie: but of newnes of life in
Christ, of holines, and quickening of
the holie spirit, they speake either nothing
at all, or verie litle. For, according
to the doctrine of Paule, he that



would be counted a Christiā, must die
to sinne, liue to righteousnes, cast off the
olde man vvith all his vvorkes, and put
on the newe, and so walke, liue, & proue
worthy the Gospel of Christ.
            Againe, God giueth the holie spirit
to such as beleeue and call vpon him,
which maie raise new motions in the
heart, and as it were regenerate the will
of man, and driue him vnto all duties
of godlines, and to all vertues seemelie
for a Christian; and finallie, to a life
aunswerable and agreeing to the profession
of the Gospell. Of which we
haue spoken at large in an other place.
            Oh how much are the mindes of
simple people offended by these and
such like speeches! Be thou, saie they,
an adulterer, a fornicator, a couetous
person, or defiled with any other vice
or wickednes; beleeue onlie, and thou
shalt be saued. As for the lawe, thou
needest not feare it: for Christ hath
fulfilled the lawe, and satisfied for the
sinnes of mankinde. These wordes
without peraduenture, doo much offend



the eares of the godlie, and open a
gap to the committing of wickednes,
and are a cause that men doo not think
of amending their manners, but perseuere
obstinatelie in vice and wickednes;
yea, and to saie the truth, animate such
as are ill bent vnto all impietie, and, as I
maie saie, cut off all occasion of repentaunce.
            How much better did Paule,
               Preaching of Paule. who, as
Luke in the Actes recordeth, did not only
preach vnto Felix, and to Drusilla his
wife, the faith which is in Christ; but
disputed also of righteousnes, and temperaunce,
and of the iudgement to come,
in so much that Felix trembled therat.
Yea, and the same Paule againe in the
Actes witnesseth, how that he shewed
vnto the Gentiles, not onlie that they
should repent, and turne to God; but
ouer and besides, doo vvorkes vvorthie
amendment of life.
            
            Thus you haue the causes in a manner,
why we are wont to prolong, and
deferre the correction of our life. Now
doo we purpose to shew what remedie



maie be found for this mischiefe, all be
in part we haue it alreadie.
            The seuenteenth Chapter of this booke, is
to be read for remedie of this cause.
         
         
            Cap. 10.
            ¶A remedie against incredulitie,
which is the first cause why
man doth not repent. Of which
afore Chapter second.
            
               AGainst this incredulity
therfore
of ours,
cōcerning the
iudgement to
come, the
paines of the
wicked, and
immortall happines of the godlie, the
authoritie of God our Lord and sauiour
Christ (vnles we had rather to be
counted, than in deede be Christians)
will preuaile out of doubt, if we remember,



and set, as it were, before the
eies of our minde, those sayings which
are contained in the holie scripture cō
               cerning
this matter. As that is (of many
to recite a few) in the 
                  〈◊〉
                after Iohn▪
The houre shall come, saith he, in the which
all that are in the graues shall heare his
voice. And they shall come foorth that
haue done good, vnto the resurrection of
life: but they that haue done euill, vnto the
resurrection of condemnation, &c. Againe
he saith, This is the will of him that
sent me, that euerie one which hath the
Sonne, and beleeueth in him, shall haue euerlasting
life: and I will raise him vp at
the last daie. Furthermore, in the Gospel
after Matthew, speaking of the last
iudgement, among other thinges, our
sauiour telleth of the sentence he will
pronoūce vpon the godlie on this wise:
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit yee
the kingdome prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. And on the other
side of the wicked, he saith; Depart
from me yee cursed into euerlasting fire,
which is prepared for the Diuell and his



Angels. And a litle after: And they shall
goe into euerlasting paine, and the righteous
into life eternall.
            
            O horible sentence of the Iudge condemning
the wicked vnto euerlasting
fire! Now, if the feare of earthly Iudges
doo astonish malefactors; how should
they stand in feare of the celestiall
Iudge? or how should their gilty cōscience
terrifie them? If thou art so afraid
of the Iudge in this world, from whom
notwithstanding thou maist appeale;
how much more oughtest thou to
stand in dread of that Iudge, to whose
verdict thou must stand?
            
               Depart from me yee cursed, he saith.
How horrible then wil it be, from God
him-selfe, who is the souereigne, and
excellēt happines, to be seperated; from
the fellowship of the righteous, and
holie spirites to be debarred; to be excluded
from the eternall blessednes of
the celestiall kingdome, which is such
and so great, that neither wordes can
expresse; nor the minde comprehend;
nor all the cogitations of man cōceaue



the same: and not onlie so, but to be
sent vnto extreame tormentes in hell,
and condemned vnto euerlasting fire,
the heate whereof is so extreame, that
our fire in comparison thereof is but
ice, and so continue worldes without
end among the diuels, voide of all hope
of better state.
            What? thinke you, that men would
liue so wretchedlie as they doo, if they
remembred these things? But they remember
not what Peter in the Actes
of the Apostles witnesseth, that Christ
is ordeined of God a Iudge of quicke and
dead; whereof Paule in like sort vnto
Timothie maketh mention. Againe, vnto
the Corinthians, he saith, For we must
all appeare before the iudgement seate of
Christ, that euerie man maie receaue the
thinges which are done in the bodie, according
to that he hath done, whether it
be good or euill. In which iudgement, as
testifieth the same Paule, He will lighten
thinges that are done in darknes, and
make the councels of the heart manifest,
so that all men shall behold the same.



The which how horrible it will be to
the wicked, no man can sufficientlie either
tell, or conceaue.
            For, if in this life, a wicked man,
whose wicked and shamefull vices and
wickednes are to be ripped vp, and repeated
in the face of a great multitude
of men, would wish rather to be swallowed
vp of the earth aliue, then haue
so many witnesses of filthie life to appeare
in sight: how thinke yee our
mindes shalbe troubled, when the harts
of the wicked shalbe opened, and all
our cogitations, councels, and doinges,
brought before the sight of the whole
world, of the Angels of God, and of all
the Saints in heauen? If here we deeme
it a miserable and wretched thing to be
led vnto prison; how miserable will it
then seeme, to be throwen into euerlasting
tormentes? If it be horrible to be
punished in this world, either with banishment,
or death; what will it be
hereafter to be banished worldes without
end, from the celestiall kingdome;
and body and soule to be put to euerlasting



death? If it be most comfortable
for the godlie, to heare God bidding
them to inherite the kingdome prepared
for them from the foundation of the
world▪
                how horrible doo we thinke
that the sentence of the Iudge will be to
the wicked, condemning them vnto euerlasting
fire prepared for the Diuell and
his Angels? If we beleeue these thinges
of the iudgement to come, of the reward
of the godlie, and due punishmēt
of the wicked, are true: why doo we
so liue, as though there were neither
heauen nor hell? If we doo not beleeue
these thinges, why will we needes be
called and counted Christians?
            Let vs therefore shake off securitie,
which possesseth our mindes, together
with that sluggishnes, cowardnes, and
blockishnes, and drousines which haue
inuaded vs. We argue not about nifles:
but about the saluatiō of the soule, the
possession of the kingdome of heauen,
about euerlasting life and blessednes.
            VVherfore now I saie, now while we
liue, and are in health; while we maie



be forgiuen; while he is our aduocate,
which will be our Iudge, let vs endeuor
to amend our liues: and neuer deferre
we the same till our sinnes forsake vs,
before we forsake them. Let vs alwaies
remember the daie of iudgement, and
the horrible voice of the Iudge, bidding
the wicked depart from him; also
the paines of hell, and the euerlasting
fire let vs neuer forget. Finallie, let
the shortnes of our life, the certaintie
of death, the vncertaintie when we
shall depart be euermore in minde: to
the ende that no man maie promise
him selfe so much as one daie, no not
one moment of life. To which effect
it was well saide of Seneca: It is vncertaine
in what place death will waite for
thee; therefore waite thou for death in all
places. And therefore the more vncertaine,
and short mans life is: the
more, while we maie, we are to
thinke of repentance.
         
         
            
            Cap. 11.
            ¶A remedie for the second
cause, whie we repent not
                  •
                mentioned
afore in the third Chapter.
            
               FOr (to saie
some-what against
the second
cause)
why shouldest
thou defer the
amendment of
thy life, in trust
and hope of Gods mercie? I graunt,
Christ when he came, called sinners,
but, vnto repentance for their life mispent,
not vnto libertie to sinne.
            The Lord gratiouslie (as he is mercifull)
doth forgiue: but such as repent;
nor them which obstinatlie persist in
wickednes.
            Christ bare our sinnes in his bodie on
the tree, saith Peter. I know he did:
but what addeth he? That we being deliuered
frō sin, should liue in righteousnes.
            
               
               Christ gaue himselfe for vs, saith Paule
vnto Titus. No man denieth that: but
what followeth in the same place? That
he might redeeme vs from all iniquitie,
and purge vs to be a peculiar people vnto
himselfe, zealous of good workes.
            
            
               Christ hath washed vs from our sinnes
through his blood, saith Iohn in the Reuelation.
I knowledge it: but not that
we should againe defile our selues with
sinne and wickednes.
            
               VVe haue an aduocate with God the
Father, saith Iohn, euen Iesus Christ: Not
vnles we repent, and so run vnto him
for helpe.
            But you vvill saie, I vvill hereafter
bewaile my sinne. But how knowest
thou, that thou shalt liue one minute
of an houre; much lesse so long a time
as thou vvilt prefixe for thy conuersion?
Call into thy minde, vvhat God,
vnto that Rich-man in the Gospell,
vvhich in his great prosperitie promised
long life to him-selfe, doth saie; O
foole, this night will they fetch awaie thy
soule from thee. Thou hast much to



feare, least the like happen to thy selfe.
            I hope (thou saiest) it will be better
vvith me then so. But vvhat if your
hope deceaue you? then maie some
one exclame and saie, O vaine and deceitfull
hope! Now if that should
come to passe (vvhich God forbid)
thou art vtterlie damned, and voluntarilie
throwest thy selfe into euerlasting
destruction. Yet you can not denie,
but it maie fall out so, our life is so vncertaine.
Then vvhat a follie is it, by
procrastinating repētance, to bring thy
saluation in hazard, vvhich thou maist
be sure of, repent thou neuer so soone?
VVhy then foorth-with dost thou not
amend, rather then vvith such daunger
of thy saluation, to feede thy vaine
hope?
            God is mercifull, me thinkes you
saie. So is he righteous too. VVhy
then standest thou not in feare of his
iustice, vvhose mercie thou dost trust
vntoo?
            
               I desire not the death of the wicked,
saith the Lord by the Prophet. True;



but what followeth those wordes? But
that the wicked man turne from his waie,
and liue. Therefore turne you vnto the
Lord (as Ioel adhorteth) with all your
heart, and with fasting, and with weeping,
and with mourning. Turne you
vnto the Lord your God, for he is gratious,
and mercifull, slowe to anger,
and of great kindnes; as the same Ioel
speaketh. Hetherto maketh that of
Ezechiel, If the wicked man will returne
from all his sinnes that he hath
committed, and keepe all my statutes,
and doo that which is lawful and right,
he shall surelie liue, and shall not die,
And a litle after, Haue I anie desire
that the wicked should die, saith the
Lord? or shall he not liue, if he turne
from his waies? Hetherto belongeth
that of Esaie, Let the wicked forsake his
waies, and the vnrighteous his own imaginations,
and returne vnto the Lord,
and he wil haue mercie vpon him; and
to our God, for he is verie readie to
forgiue. The Prophet sheweth how
that God is gratious and merciful, but



toward them which repent, and acknowledge
their sinne. Therefore doo
thou speedelie repent, turne againe
vnto the feare of God, aske forgiuenes
of thy sinnes with teares, and sighing,
be thorowlie out of loue with thy selfe
for wickednes perpetrated and committed;
leaue thine owne waie, and
turne vnto the Lord thy God; and
then assure thy selfe of saluation:
despaire not, neither doubt thou
of Gods mercie and fauour. In the
meane while; remember the saying
of our Sauiour, That ioie shalbe in
heauen for one sinner that conuerteth,
more then for ninetie and nine iust
men. Yea, let this aboue all the rest,
pricke thee vp vnto repentance; considering,
both how greatlie the verie
Angels desire thy conuersion, and how
much they reioice when thou dost amend.
            But that in the Psalmes likes thee
passing well, where it is saide, Thou,
O Lord, art a pittifull God, and mercifull,
slowe to anger, and great in kindnes.


               
Seeing you saie so, hearken vvhat in
the same booke of Psalmes is vvritten,
Thou hatest all them which worke iniquity.
Againe, The face of the Lord is against
them that doo euill.
            
            Some vvill yet saie, it is in the Gospel
after Iohn, that He which beleeueth in
the Sonne, hath euerlasting life. But
vvhat saith the same Iohn in an other
place? He that commiteth sinne, is of the
Diuel. And, He that saith, I knowe God,
and keepeth not his commaundementes, is
a liar, and the truth is not in him.
            
            
               Iohn Baptist witnesseth of Christ,
saying, Behold the Lambe of God, which
taketh awaie the sinnes of the world. But
what saith he beside? Repent. And,
Bring foorth fruites worthy amendment
of life.
            
            You vrge further that of Peter in the
Actes, saying, VVe beleeue through the
grace of the Lord Iesus to be saued. But
marke you not what in the same booke
is written? Amend your liues therefore,
and turne, that your sinnes maie be put awaie.
            
            
               
               Doth not Christ in the Gospel after
Iohn saie, God so loued the world, that he
hath giuen his onlie begotten Sonne, that
whosoeuer beleeueth in him, should not
perish, but haue euerlasting life? But doth
he not saie in Matthewe also? Not euerie
one that saith vnto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdome of heauen,
but he that doth my Fathers wil which is
in heauen.
            You beleeue I am sure, that which
Paule saith, That Christ Iesus came into
the world to saue sinners: beleeue also,
that neither enchaunters, nor whooremongers,
nor murtherers, nor idolaters,
nor theeues, nor couetous, nor proude persons,
nor dronkards, nor railers, nor the
factious, nor enuious, nor euil-willers,
shall inherite the kingdome of God.
For if you beleeue, that Paule, or the
holie spirite rather by the mouth of
Paule, doth speake the truth: you see
plainlie that you can haue no hope
of mercie at Gods hand, or assurance to
be saued, liuing awicked & filthie life.
For, as faith through the Gospel, acknowledgeth



God to be mercifull to
the penitent: so doth it know that he
is angrie and displeased with such as
obstinatelie proceede in sinne.
            There is no cause then, why through
hope and confidence of pardon at Gods
hand thou shouldest prolong thy conuersion,
and flatter thy selfe. Repent,
& come into the waie againe: and then,
doubt thou no whit, but thou maist
make thy selfe a large promise of Gods
fauour and kindnes. And as no man
can trulie repent, but he which hopeth
to be forgiuen, as it is well saide by
Ambrose: so none maie hope to beforgiuen,
which doth not vnfeinedlie repent.
            
               This one thing I will ad now out of
Iesus the sonne of Sirach, before I proceede
vnto the rest:
               Eccle. 5, 4. Saie not, saith he,
I haue sinned, and what euil hath come
vnto me?5. For the Almightie is a patient
rewarder, but he wil not leaue thee vnpunished.
Because thy sinne is forgiuen,
be not without feare to heape sinne vpon
sinne.6. And saie not, the mercie of God is
great; he wil forgiue my manifold sinnes.



For mercie and wrath come from him, and
his indignation commeth downe vpon
sinners.7. Make no tarying to turne vnto
the Lord, and put not off from daie to
daie. For suddenlie shall the wrath of the
Lord breake foorth, and in thy securitie
thou shalt be destroied, and thou shalt perish
in the time of vengeance. Hetherto
Ecclesiasticus.
         
         
            Cap. 12.
            ¶A remedie against the
custome of sinning, which is the third
cause of deferring repentance: as aboue in
the fourth Chapter hath bene showed.
            
               BVt custome of
sinning doth
hinder thee,
that thou canst
not amend, &
returne from
sinne vnto godlines.
For commonlie



it falleth out, that looke
what a man hath bene vsed vnto from
his youth, he pursueth in his age. Because,
as Cyprian saith, that is not quicklie,
and speedelie laide off, which is growen
to ripenes through long vse.
            For when will he learne to be a good
husband, which hath spent his time in
riottousnes, and daintie fare? And he
which glittereth in braue apparel, gloriouslie
set out with gold, and purple,
will hardlie attire him-selfe after the
facion of the simple sort. It cannot be,
but that with forceable intisementes, as
the manner is, wine must inuite, pride
puffe vp, anger set on fite, couetousnes
vnquiet, cruelty prick forward, ambitiō
delight, lust bring downe head-long,
and so foorth. So that it maie seeme
verie hard by anie meanes to alter custome,
which in a manner is become
another nature. Notwithstanding, if
you loue your owne wel-fare, you
must endeuor yet.
            But, you wil aske, how you maie so
do? Euen if you cast off that by litle and



litle through good custome, which you
haue got through euil custome: and if
you labour to plucke vp that by good
custome, which euil custome hath ingraffed.
And nothing is so hard (as Seneca
doth saie) which the minde of man
cannot ouercome. VVhat-soeuer the mind
went about, it hath brought to passe.
VVherefore to breake this almost inuincible
strength of custome, you must
addresse your minde chieflie there-vnto,
and not striue and labour onlie by
force to ouercome the same. And yet
you must striue withall, if you would
weaken, and plucke vp, and roote out a
thing which is fastened, and sticketh to
the rootes.
            VVherefore, set there-vpon couragiouslie,
at the least wise begin vpon
good hope, endeuor with a sure trust in
God, & doubt thou not but thou shalt
blessedlie go forward. For before thou
begin, thine olde custome perhaps wil
seeme vnuincible, but when you come
vnto the triall, straight-waie that, which
you thought would hardlie be done,



will seeme nothing so, or at least not
so difficult. So often-times that which
at the first we thinke heauie, when we
once go about the same, proueth light.
Brieflie, what the most excellent Poet
speaketh of Mnestheus companions to
this effect,

                  Their good successe doth make them bold
                  and stoute. They able are
                  Because they seeme to be. Nothing
                  their courages can dare:
               
            
            Thinke without peraduenture, will
fitlie be applied to thee. Onlie, as I haue
saide, go about the same with a courage,
hope wel, and euerie daie thy care,
and minde to liue godlie, wil like thee
more and more; and the loue of vertue,
than which, as one trulie saith, nothing
is more beutiful, nothing more
faire, more louelie nothing is, wil maruelouslie
inflame, and rauish thy mind.
And in the ende thou wilt vse much
ioiful gratulations to thy selfe for addressing
to reforme thy manners. Such



a pleasure, and euerie daie more profite
then others shall you reape thereby.
So that you wil confesse that to be true
which our Lord and sauiour Christ,
said vnto his Disciples in these words,
Ay yoke is easie, and my burden light.
            
            
               Hetherto belongeth that which Hierome
in a certaine place doth write: Too
much custome of sinning, saith he, maketh
tie waie to vertue seeme hard and vnc
                  •
               mfortable
to vs: but alter this custome
once, and you shall finde the waie to rightiousnes,
to be a goodly and pleasant waie.
So saith he no lesse trulie, then elegantlie.
            
            And if Stilpho the Philosopher, which
thing Cicero doth testifie, Being naturallie
enclined vnto wine, and women,
did by learning so bridle and subdue his
nature, that no man sawe him drinke at
anie time, nor yet beheld anie appearance
of wicked lust in him: Why maist
thou not through Gods assistance,
tame by litle & litle, and, as I maie saie,
cast of a wicked custome, yea, though



it be much ingraffed, and verie old! An
Ethnike subdued his nature, shall not
a Christian ouer-come custome? especiallie,
if earnestlie he bend him selle
there-vnto; if continuallie he looke
to himselfe; if after a sort he offer violence
to him-selfe, and yeeld not to
weaknes; if in consideration of mans
imbecillitie he call for Gods assistance
by earnest and ardent praier; if by
almes, and liberalitie vpon the poore,
he seeke after the fauour of God; finallie,
if he make petition that the
holie Spirite, which maie raise vp
newe motions in his heart, and
pricke forward his studie and
endeuors to liue wel,
maie be giuen
him.
            But proceede we to the rest.
         
         
            
            Cap. 13.
            
               ❧A remedie against the
fourth cause of prolonging repentance,
spoken of before in the fift Chapter.
            
               THey whom riches
& prosperitie
doo make
secure (for this
was the fourth
cause of prolonging
repentance)
should
often call into minde that horrible
voice of our Sauiour, extant in the gospel
after Luke: VVo be vnto you that are
rich: for you haue receiued your consolation.
VVo be to you that are full, for you
shall hunger. VVo be to you that nowe
laugh, for you shall waile and weepe.
Neither let them forget, what God
saide vnto the rich man in the Gospel:
O foole, this night wil they fetch awaie thy
soule from thee. Let other examples



be remembred also, of such, whome before
we cited, as were either drowned
suddenlie by the flood; or consumed
suddenlie by fire in Sodom. So would
both those rich men, whome the seruant
of God Iames biddeth, to VVeepe
and houle, for the miseries that shall come
vpon them; and that fine glutton also,
who being buried, was tormented with
the flames of hel fire.
            Let vs then from our hearts cast of
securitie; let vs not forget God in prosperitie;
let vs feare the wrath of that
Iudge, before whose iudgement seate
we are all to stand, to pleade our owne
cause, our owne conscience accusing,
and bearing witnes; either with vs for
wel-doing; or against vs for our wickednes.
            It falleth out for the most part, that
prosperitie puffeth vp the minde, that
rich men are proud, that wealth makes
men head-strong. We should therfore
continuallie vse wel our good fortune
and prosperitie: we should looke againe
and againe, least this temporarie



happines bring vs vnto eternal miserie,
and destruction.
            VVhat is then to be done? That Paule
writing vnto the Corinthiās, sheweth in
few words: Hereafter, saith he, let both
they which haue wiues, be as though they
had none; And they that weepe, as though
they wept not; And they that reioice, as
though they reioiced not; And they that
buie, as though they possessed not; And
they that vse this world, as though they vsed
it not; For the facion of this world
goeth awaie. In which wordes the Apostle
sheweth, that we must haue either
no care at all, or that our least care
should be either of wiues, or of prosperitie
or aduersitie; or finallie of riches
and wealth of this world: but that our
chiefest, yea, and onlie care is to be cast
vpon heauen, and heauenlie thinges.
            Not without cause did Paule commaund
Timothie, to Charge them that
are rich in this world, that they be not
high minded, and that they trust not in
vncertaine riches, but in the liuing God.
And Dauid in the Psalmes doth saie, If



riches encrease, set not your heart thereon.
Riches are not simplie condemned, the
which godlie men haue possessed: but
the trust in riches, and the pride and
hautines which ariseth from riches, is
condemned. For wealth commonlie,
and prosperitie, are woont to make
men haue stomackes, and hie mindes.
Hence that in the Comedie, Because
wealth is encreased, their mindes are
exalted.
            
            He therefore which hath gathered
riches, and enioieth the world at will,
let him both yeeld thankes to God for
the same; and take heede that he insult
not, and waxe high minded; yea, and
also let him againe and againe too, euermore
bring his fortune into suspicion:
but aboue all vse he dilligence,
that through securitie (as manie doo)
he forget not God; and that he neuer
leese the sense of Gods vengeance against
sinne, nor haue his minde either
occupied with idlenes, nor inuaded by
negligence.
            Of which vnles he beware, it is



doubles to be feared, least leaning too
much vpon present happines, he be
carried awaie with a false ioie; and least
flattering him-selfe with hope of long
prosperitie, the feare of God being quite
remoued, in the meane while he be oppressed:
as commonlie the death of
death commeth vpon vs, when we litle
looke for the same.
            Let vs therefore place before the eies
of our mind that saying of the Apostle,
VVhen they saie, Peace and safetie, saith
he, then shall come vpon them sudden destruction.
So then, as the same Apostle
warneth vs, let vs not sleepe, but let vs
watch, and be sober. Neuer let vs saie, we
shall haue peace, euill shall not come
vpon vs: or as they did of whome the
Prophet Esaie maketh mention, who
saide, VVe haue made a couenant with
death, and with hel are we at agreement:
Though a scourge runne ouer, and passe
through, it shall not come at vs.
            
            In the old, and also in the newe Testament
we maie finde many, both testimonies
of Gods displeasure against



wickednes; and examples of punishmentes
vpon the vngodlie, by the reading
whereof, euerie man to his profit
maie shake off carelenes in prosperitie.
For it is not our minde in this
place to alleadge all, least our booke
doo growe ouer-big. Let it neuer be
forgot, which Moses mentioneth of
mankinde, which was drowned by a
flood in the beginning of the world; of
the vtter consuming both of Sodom &
Gomor by fire; of the manifold, and extreme
calamities of the people of Israel;
of the often carying them into captiuitie
by barbarous nations for their cō
               tempt
of godlines; nor finallie, which
ecclesiasticall histories doo write, of the
ouer throwe, wasting, and destruction
of Ierusalem. For all these thinges are
writtē (as Paule writing vnto the Corinthians
doth saie) To admonish vs, vpon
whome the endes of the world are come.
            
            Now what punishment the Lord
hath laid vpon particular men for their
wickednes, it were long (as I haue said)
and needeles to show. I wil alledge but



one for example sake: When that noble
& deerelie beloued of the Lord, Dauid
I meane, at what time he was through
much prosperitie secure, had fallen into
the filthie sinne of adulterie, and increased
the greatnes thereof, by the
murthering of an innocent man; with
what miseries and calamities did God
afflict him, yea, after he had repented,
and was restored into Gods fauour againe?
For God plagued him both
with the death of his Sonne newlie
borne; and with the rebellion of his
owne children; and by his woful flight
from Hierusalem; and with violence
offered to his concubine by his owne
sonne; and with defection of his subiectes;
and finallie (to omit other
thinges) with a great slaughter of
his people. So horrible and hore
is the wrath of God against wickednes.
            If so holie a man, no not after his
repentance and comming into Gods
fauour, as the bookes, wherein the
Actes of the Kinges of Israell be



contained, doo witnes; if, I saie, so holy
a man after his repentance scaped not
vnpunished for his sinnes committed:
what thinke you shall betide them,
which are touched with no griefe of
their wickednes? which securelie doo
sinne, and proceede from one sinne
vnto another; finallie, which with
obstinate heartes persist in vngodlines?
            Let vs therefore cast off al slouthfulnes,
and that sleepie and drousie securitie,
when we haue the world at wil;
let vs liue in the feare of the Lord; and
make sure our saluation with feare and
trembling; let vs not suffer our selues
to be entangled with the wicked intisementes
of the flesh; and finallie, by
continuall praier, let vs resist the
tentation of Satan.
            And thus much for this point.
         
         
            
            Cap. 14.
            ¶A remedie against the
fift cause of deferring amendment of
life, contained in the sixt Chapter
of this booke.
            
               THey which in
hope of long
life, doo procrastinate
the
amendment of
their life, doo
vtterlie of purpose
deceaue
them-selues; and vainelie doo hope
for that, which greatlie they desire:
whereby, witting, knowing, liuing, and
seeing with their owne eies their destruction,
they perish, which is the extremest
follie that can be.
            If these men are nothing moued with
that which Philosophers (wise men I
meane among the Heathen, yet void of
true religion) haue left in writing, touching



the shortnes and vncertaintie of
this life, as he was, who saide that Man
is a bubble; and he too, who called man,
A dreame of a shadowe: yet let Iob, that
mā so beloued of God, moue vs, which
witnesseth that Man is of a short continuance;
let the seruant of God Iames
moue vs, which saith, that the life of
man is euen a vapor that appeareth for a
litle time, and afterward vanisheth away;
let the sonne of God, our Lord and sauiour
Christ, who cannot lie, moue
vs, who biddeth vs, VVatch, for we
know neither the daie, nor the houre.
            
            Finallie, if you thinke it most true,
let euen common experience moue vs.
Oftentimes thou art with such as are
grieuouslie sicke, without hope of recouerie;
thou art present when they
giue vp the ghost; thou hearest the verie
pangs of death; thou beholdest them
vpon the beare; thou followest the
coarses vnto the graue; thou seest them
laide into the earth; thou hearest the
pitteous crie of mourners; thou readest
Epitaphes engraued on tombes; thou



meetest manie in mourning weede: all
which thinges should stirre vp thy
minde to remember the shortnes of this
life, and how death is nigh at thine elbowe.
            If the death of others, whome we
knowe not, cannot moue vs; yet let vs
be moued through the death of our
friends and familiars; let our own dangers,
and grieuous sicknes, whereinto
we fall often-times moue vs. And we,
that consider not our owne infirmitie,
through the troubles of others; let vs
confesse our frailitie, and mortalitie of
mankinde, at least wise through our
owne weaknes where-withall we are
tempted. VVhich thing if we would
doo, we shall perceaue there is no cause
why we should flatter our selues with
a vaine and deceiptful hope of longer
life.
            But, som wil say, I may amēd my self,
& repent when I am old: in the meane
space I wil take my plesure. So you say:
But who is sure he shall liue till he be
old? Thinkest thou, which neglectest,



and ouer-passest the offered time, and
occasion to repent; thinkest thou, I saie,
to haue the like oportunitie when thou
thinkest good, for thine owne behoofe?
Thou art deceaued, surelie thou art
much deceaued, if thou thinke so.
God of his mercie, which desireth the
conuersion, rather then the death of a
sinner, when he thinketh good, calleth
thee vnto repentance; and, as he in
the Reuelation saith, Standeth at the
doore and knocketh. Therfore doo thou
open when he knocketh; hearken to
him that calleth; whether he calleth
followe him; and, neuer despise the riches
of his bountifulnes, and patience; least
for thine hardnes, and heart that cannot
repent, thou heape vnto thy selfe wrath against
the daie of wrath, as Paule writeth
vnto the Romanes. Let vs beare
in minde what the same Paule vnto the
Corinthians doth saie: VVe beseech you,
that ye receaue not the grace of God in
vaine. For he saith, I haue heard thee in
a time accepted, and in the daie of saluation
haue I succoured thee. Behold now



the accepted time; behold now the daie of
saluation. By which words the Apostle
sheweth, that the time which God
offereth for repentaunce, is not to be
ouer-slipt; and that like occasion is not
alwaies giuen. Hetherto belongeth
that vnto the Galathians: VVhile we
haue time, let vs doo good. And not vntrulie
saide an olde writer: He which
hath promised pardon to him that repenteth;
hath not promised another daie of
life to him that dissembleth his sinnes.
Take heede therefore, that by procrastinating
repentance, and that through
hope of longer life, thou wittinglie and
of purpose, doo not tempt the Lord,
whose goodnes inuiteth thee vnto repentance.
The which we are forbidden
by an expresse commaundement of
God in Deuteronomie.
               Deu. 6, 16.
            
            It falleth out many times, that men
are killed suddenlie, euen in brauling,
playing, and quaffing together; so that
he can haue no time to aske mercie at
Gods hand for his wickednes: when
as we in the meane while, through the



singuler goodnes of God, haue time
and space to returne vnto godlines.
Wherfore let vs not abuse this so great
mercie of our most gratious God, who
looketh and longeth too, as it were for
occasiō to shew mercie vpō vs. Amend
we our sinful liues, least being suddenly
preuented with death, as the Church
doth sing, we seeke time to repent, and
cannot finde the same. And certainlie,
He which hath promised pardon to him
that repenteth (as euen-now I said, and
must often saie) hath not promised another
daie of life, to him that dissembleth
his sinnes.
            
            But, as some saie, in the time of sicknes,
a sinner maie repent. He maie doo
so, I graunt: notwithstanding, marke
how many impediments come then in
the waie, which verie hardlie can be auoided.
For, to saie nothing of the
care vvhich the sicke hath of making
his vvil; of prouision for his vvife, and
children; of the paine of sicknes, and
such like, vvhich maie seeme of small
importance: how doth Satan bestirre



him-selfe then, vvhat engins doth he
set to bring the poore soule vnto desperation,
through laying his manifold
offences before his eies? For then chieflie,
if euer, he rippeth vp, and bringeth
into remembraunce whatsoeuer euil a
man hath either thought, or wild, or
said, or done; and such faultes, as of
them-selues are great and hainous, he
doth make much greater then they be:
and by all meanes doth studie to withdrawe
him from hope of saluation, and
to driue him vnto despaire for his manifold
and great offences. Hetherto
belongeth the griefe of a guiltie conscience;
the great feare of death before his
eies; the wofull and bitter cogitation
of Gods iudgement seate; the dread of
a seuere sentence, which wil sore dismaie,
and trouble the minde; the horrible
remembrance of the paines of hel:
and who is able to repeate all the impediments,
and causes which let men, that
they cannot so much as thinke of repenting
at that time?
            Doo not therefore, doo not, if thou



be wise, deferre the amendement of
their life, till the last daie. For that is
a verie dangerous matter: that I saie
not, how such a repentance, for so much
as of necessitie it springeth, and is extorted,
through the feare of damnation,
rather then taken in hand of pure
zeale, is of small force to get pardon.
            But no repentance is too late before
God. I confesse so much. For, At what
time so euer a sinner dooth repent him of
his sinne, I wil put all his wickednes out of
my remembrance, saith the Lord. And,
as the Prophet in another place, God
desireth not the death of a sinner, but that
he repent and liue.
            
            But what if sudden death take thee
vnawares; that thou canst haue no
time to lament, and to repent thee of
thy sinnes? For all men should looke
for that, which maie happen vnto all
men. Let the vnlooked for destruction
of them, vpon whome the towre in Silo
fell, as Luke recordeth, come into
your minde. VVhat if suddenlie you
should leese your wits and vnderstanding;



as we see many doo? The which
if it should fall out (as it maie happen)
then gone were all hope of repenting,
which the sinner had placed in prolonging
the amendment of his life. For
that maie betide thee, which hath happened
to others: that you maie thinke
you are not exempted from that which
is common to all men. For a true saying
is that of Publius, That maie happen
to euerie man, which maie happen to anie
man.
            
            Cast awaie therfore all hope of long
life, then the which vndoubtedlie nothing
is more vaine, & fleeting; neither
doo thou dreame of occasion, nor appoint
a time wherein thou wilt repent;
nor finallie, doo not thou nourish thy
foolishnes, or madnes rather in deferring
the reformation of thy sinfull life,
through this deceiptful hope. VVert
thou wise, thou wouldest repent at that
time wherein thou maist offend. For if
thou minde then to repent, when thou
canst sinne no more, doubtles thou dost
not leaue sinne, but sinne thee.
            
               
Furthermore, it is to be feared, least
seeing when thou maist thou wilt not
repent, that when thou wouldest, thou
maist not. For the iudgementes of
almightie God in punishing mans wickednes,
are vnsearchable. For as his
woont is of his goodnes and mercie, to
giue them space of repentance, vvhich
are prepared readie, and willing to receaue
mercie; yea, and in the meane
while with much patience and lenitie
to beare with sinners, vntill they returne
from their wickednes: so when
he seeth any man vtterlie bent vnto
vngodlines, and deriding Gods long
suffering, and so worthie damnation,
then ceaseth he to hold such a one back
from falling into destruction, and so
(according to the phrase of scripture)
blindeth the desperate, and hardeneth
the obstinate: neither dooth he looke
any longer for his conuersion, nor offereth
occasion for the damned to repent.
For God hath appointed a time
and manner for each man, the which
no man in wickednes maie ouer-passe;



and God will not prolong his punishment,
and paine of sinne. The which
should stirre vp all men to repent without
delaie, and to prepare them-selues
to receaue the grace of God.
            But for so much as we haue spoken
sufficient hereof, let vs hasten vnto other
thinges.
         
         
            Cap. 15.
            
               ❧A remedie for the sixt
cause of deferring repentance, declared
afore in the seuenth Chapter.
            
               THey, vvho
through the opinion,
which
they haue in
Popes pardōs,
doo defer the
correction of
their life, doo
trust to a weake staffe, and depend vppon
a tottering wall (as the saying is.)
So doo they in like sort, that worship



Saint Barbara, and wil be buried in the
habite of a Franciscane. For in all the
scripture what maie be found concerning
these toies? VVhat in all the old
Testament? In the Euangelical doctrine
what? VVhat in the works of the
Apostles? To conclude, which of these
thinges was obserued in the primitiue
Church; or else by a generall iudgement
and consent of the Church at all
times, receaued and allowed, as a thing
auaileable, and necessarie to saluation?
            Therefore, who doth not before death
bewaile his offences, he, albeit he haue
a thousand Buls and Pardons, shall neuer
be saued. And therefore, vnlesse
thou wilt be in doubt of thy saluation,
omitting these vices, thou must earnestlie
repent thy wicked life, and be
heartelie sorie at the remembraunce of
thy sinnes; thou must with teares and
praiers, beseech God to be good vnto
thee; finallie, thine onlie refuge must
be to runne vnto the merites of Christ,
in a strong hope that God the Father
wil be merciful to thee for Christ his



sake, whome for vs he hath deliuered
vnto the death. So wil it come to passe,
that God wil haue mercie on thee, forgiue
thy sinnes, and for his Christes
sake receaue thee into fauour. For, we
haue him our aduocate with God, which
praieth for vs, and doth reconcile his
heauenlie Father, who by reason of
our sinnes and wickednes, is offended
with vs, and maketh him both mercifull
and quiet, as Iohn in his first Catholical
Epistle doth teach.
            So then regard thou neither the
Popes pardons; nor the worship of
Barbara; nor the habite and weede of a
Franciscane, wherin there is no hope at
all to be saued. Run thou v
                  •
               to Christ
him-selfe, who is our mediator and aduocate,
as I said; the throne of grace; the
propitiation for the sinnes of the world;
and the Lambe killed frō the beginning
of the world, as in the Reuelation it appeareth;
brieflie, who is our righteousnes,
sanctification, and redemption, as
Paul vnto the Corinthiās doth witnesse.
            VVherfore (to returne vnto the purpose)



prolong not the amendement of
thy sinfull life for anie Bull or Pardon
from the Pope; especiallie, seeing our
life is so short, and the houre of certain
death so vncertaine. The which death,
for so much as in respect of vncertaine
chaunces, it is alwaies nigh, and maie
in this verie moment ouer-take a man
vnawares; doubtles, as one saith, can
not be farre off. How daungerous
therefore is it to liue in such a state,
wherein if sudden death should strike
thee, thou wert vtterlie damned?
            Then to auoide this daunger, see that
alway thou liue in the feare of God; acknowledge
thy wickednes; flie vnto
the mercie of God; aske pardon; and
hope & looke too for saluation at Gods
hand for Christ his sake. Beside, make
thou oftē recourse vnto the minister of
the Church; and craue cōsolation, and
absolution from him. And, that thou
maist be stirred vp vnto the remembrance
of the promise of pardon, and be
confirmed more & more of Gods mercie
to vs-ward, make often recourse vnto



the Lordes table; and, according to
Christes institution, both eate that bodie,
which some-time was a sacrifice
for the sinnes of mankinde; and drinke
the blood shedde foorth for the remission
of our sinnes: and so being
mindfull of the Lordes death, yeeld
thou heartie thankes to God for his so
great benefits, and with a grateful mind
sing thou Psalmes to him, both with thy
selfe at home, and with others in the
congregation of the faithful.
         
         
            Cap. 16.
            A remedie for the seuenth
cause, specified afore in the eight Chapter.
            
               AS much as
thou canst (to
come vnto other
thinges)
auoide euermore
the companie
of the
wicked; and
ioine thy selfe vnto the societie of the



good. And, as one councelleth, haue cō
               uersation
with such as maie make thee
better; and admit them into thy fellowship,
whome thou maist reclame
from vice vnto vertue.
            For it is behoouefull to marke what
companie one vseth, and who are his
dailie companions. For, as by the
familiaritie of wicked men, we are infected,
as with a certaine contagion:
so by dailie acquaintance of the godlie
and vertuous, we are in manner corrected
and amended. Seeke therefore
the amitie and friendship of these men;
but haue no dealing at all with those.
Salomon in his Prouerbes commaundeth
the same thing. Yea, and Paule
writing vnto the Corinthians, doth so
dehort vs from liuing, and hauing to
deale with the wicked, that he would
not haue vs so much as to eate and
drinke with them. If anie, saith he,
that is called a brother, be a fornicator,
or couetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or
a dronkard, or an extortioner, with such
one eate not.
            
            
               
I graunt, diuers other causes there
be, why he would haue such to be auoided,
either because we maie seeme
in no sort to allowe the sinnes and
wickednes of these men; or that such
whome all men doo so auoide and
shun, through shame of the world,
maie repent. Notwithstanding, it is
not the least cause, that the contagion
of wickednes doo not redound vnto
such, as are ioined vnto them in friendship.
For, as a litle leauen maketh a
great heape of doa to swel; so the example
of one wicked man doth corrupt
and infect a great many.
            And although it be hard and verie
difficult, to for sake their acquaintance
and familiaritie, with whome a man
merelie, a long time, & iocundlie hath
liued: yet earnestlie thou must endeuor,
and labour with carefulnes by all
meanes to depart, and plucke thy selfe
from their companie. If thou but
from thine heart once minde the same,
without doubt thou wilt finde better
successe then thou art ware of. And



for so much as, according to the Greeke
prouerbe, The beginning is as good as
halfe: and, as Horace doth write, He
which hath begunne, hath halfe done:
set vpon the same at the least, and despaire
not of the successe through consideration
of the difficultie.
            Now, as commonlie it falleth out,
if thou thinke of the bankets, the
feastinges, the reare-suppers, the reuelinges,
and such like fond and childish
things which thou hast vsed with
them; and if thou against thy will
remember thy companions, and merrie
mates, call into thy minde foorthwith
the shortnes of this life; the
nighnes of death; the last iudgement;
the tribunall seate of Christ; hel fire,
and euerlasting damnation. And
so, as the saying is, Thou shalt driue
out one naile by the force of another.
If these thinges come into minde, and
thou thinke thus with thy selfe: My
cup-mates and companions inuite me
vnto them; their suppers, dinners, and
potations, doo allure me: But what



doo I? Credite me, wouldest thou
saie but thus much with thy selfe, what
doo I? foorth-with, both reason would
ouer-come thy lust; and thy will
would listen to reason adhorting vnto
the best.
            Therefore, as I saie, thou must take
a space to deliberate, and make some
delaie. When any such thing, by the
suggestion of Satan, commeth into thy
minde, throwe awaie thy weaknes of
minde, and loase not the bridle by and
by to thy lust, for then thou wilt runne
as the Diuel would haue thee.
            Doo thy companions inuite thee
to the Tauerne? Call thou into thy
remembraunce, what our Sauiour in
a certaine place doth saie; Take heede
to your selues, least at anie time your
heartes be oppressed with surfetting and
dronkennes; what Paule doth write,
Be not dronke with wine, wherein is
excesse; And, Neither dronkardes, nor
gluttons shall inherite the kingdome of
God: what Peter saith, Be sober and
watch; finallie, what the Prophet Esaie


               
writeth, VVo vnto them that rise vp
earlie to follow dronkennes. Remember
that the authoritie of God, and of
his Apostles must be obeied; and not
the mindes of vngodlie persons followed:
that thou art to hearken to
thine Angel adhorting thee vnto all
goodnes; and not to obeie the Diuel,
pricking thee forward vnto wickednes;
finallie, that thou must resist the euil
spirit, and not grieue the holie Ghost.
            Wherefore doo not thou, I saie;
doo not thou destroie thy selfe, for the
sweete companie of thy cup-mates;
but so much as in the lieth, withdrawe
thy selfe from their familiaritie;
and make thou more
accoumpt of euerlasting
saluation, then of a
litle short pleasure.
         
         
            
            Cap. 17.
            ¶A remedie against the
last cause, which holdeth men from repentance,
entreated of before in
the ninth Chapter.
            
               NOw to prescribe
a remedie
for the last
cause, thinke
alwaie with
thy selfe, that
he vnfeinedlie
doth not repent,
neither that he either is, or maie
be counted a true Christian, that goeth
on forward in wickednes; neither
that he hath true faith, which continueth
in sinne against his conscience, and
committeth any outragious wickednes.
            Let vs not then be Christians in name
onlie, being farre from the nature; neither
let vs in wordes boast of faith: but
let vs trulie and vnfeinedlie repent,



turne vnto the Lord with our whole
heart, and reforme our sinfull conuersation
by wel doing: yea, let vs studie
by good workes to blot our wickednes
as it were out of the minde of
God, and through hope of Gods assistance,
not through our own strength
endeuor we to liue godlie, righteously,
innocentlie, vprightlie, holilie, chastlie,
soberlie, temperatelie, profitablie
to the Church of God, friendlie vnto
man, and, as Paule doth saie, as it becommeth
the Gospel of Christ.
            
            Furthermore, beg we of our heauenlie
Father, through our Lord and sauiour
Christ, that he would impart vpon
vs his holie spirit, which maie rule, gouerne,
instruct, sanctifie, erect, comfort,
and quicken vs, according as Christ
hath promised in the Gospel, that our
heauenlie Father wil giue the holie ghost,
to them which aske it at his handes. And
yet in the meane while let vs not resist
the holie Ghost, by yeelding to wicked
affections contrarie to our conscience;
neither yet expel and grieue him, to vse



the wordes of Paule.
            
            Let vs walke in newnes of life, not
insinfulnes; Let vs giue vp our bodies
a l
                     •
                  ing sacrifice, holie, acceptable vnto
God; let vs crucifie the flesh with the affections,
and the lustes thereof; let vs
keepe our selues vnspotted of the world;
Let vs be renued in the spirite of our
minde, and put on the newe man, which
after God is created in righteousnes, and
true holines; Be we followers of God, as
deare children; and walke we worthie of
the Lord, as it becommeth Saintes, supporting
one another through loue, endeuoring
to keepe the vnitie of the spirite,
in the bond of peace; let vs be gentle one
toward another, and merciful; let vs
loue our enimies, blesse them that curse
vs; doo good to them that hate vs; and
praie for them that hurt vs, and persecute
vs. Let vs giue to the hungrie meate,
to the thirstie drinke, to the needie reliefe,
to the harborles lodging, cloathing
to the naked; let vs visit the sick,
admonish the wanderer, teach the ignoraunt,
councel the troubled, comfort



the afflicted; let vs reconcile them
which be at variance, despise honour,
refuse promotion, abhorre couetousnes;
finallie, let vs endeuor euermore to
tame and subdue our ingraffed naughtines,
together with wicked affections;
& let vs not only, take heed to ourselues,
least at anie time our hearts be oppressed
with surfetting and dronkennes; but also
prepare we our selues in like sort vnto
praier, by abstinence and fasting. And,
among so manie subtilties and batteringes
both of the Diuel, the world,
and the flesh, let vs with earnest praier
call for the helpe of God, that we be
neither in prosperitie proude, nor out
of heart in aduersitie. VVhat so euer we
doo, let vs doo it to the glorie of God; let
no man seeke his owne, but euerie man
anothers wealth. Furthermore, let vs
be such, as maie offend no man; but
rather by good example prouoke others
vnto godlines and wel-doing.
And last of all, let vs praie continuallie,
and in all thinges giue thankes; let vs
set our affection on thinges which are aboue,



and not on thinges which are on the
earth.
            
            These be hard thinges, thou saist. I
know that; yet meete for Christians,
and necessarie to saluation. Let vs then
giue dilligence, to cast awaie this nicenes
of minde; let vs not pamper our
selues so as we doo; neither veeld to
our weaknes; nor finallie, of purpose
make the grace of God in vaine to vsward.
            Let vs not onlie, not wittinglie run
headlong into wickednes; but stoutlie
beside resist the Diuel, when he driueth
vs to sinne, and neuer cowardlie let vs
yeeld vnto him. And so what is there
so grieuous, but thou wilt iudge it
light, so thou maist attaine vnto euerlasting
life, and heauenlie loies? For
wel and wiselie was it saide of Paule,
I count that the afflictions of this present
time, are not woorthie of the glorie, that
shalbe shewed vnto vs. Hetherto maketh:
The thinges which eie hath not
seene, neither eare hath heard, neither
came into mans heart, hath GOD



prepared for them which loue him.
            
            For how great a thing is it, which no
force of wordes can expresse, not cogitations
comprehend, namelie, to be a
cittizen, and inhabiter of heauen; the
heire of God, the coheire of Christ; to
possesse the kingdome prepared for the
godlie before the foundations of the
world; euerlastinglie to behold the
most souereigne good; to enioie the
most comfortable contemplation of
Gods heauenlie countenance; to abide
in the societie of Angels; in the companie
of Saintes; in the number of the
righteous; with continuall Hymnes
and Psalmes, together with all the holie
Angels, and Patriarkes, and Prophetes,
and Apostles, and Martyrs, and
with all the godlie, now enioying blessed
immortalitie, and eternitie, to praise
God, euen the fountaine of all glorie.
            VVhat? Are not all the miseries and
troubles of this life, compared to the
glorie to come, euen to be iudged of no
waight; nor meete to deserue so great



a reward as is appointed for them; that
in verie deede we maie be ashamed of
our nicenes and securitie?
            And who is there, calling to remembrance
the kingdome of heauen; euerlasting
life; eternall happines; the exceeding
great and infinite ioie; the fellowship
of Angels; the societie of all
the Saints, which departing in the feare
of God, doo enioie felicitie worldes
without end: I saie, who calling these
thinges to remembrance, wil couet to
liue vpon earth, and not with Paule rather,
desire to be loased, and deliuered
out of the prison of the bodie?
            Let vs not then deeme those thinges
hard, which our sauiour Christ so often
beate into the heads of his, for the
attainment of this so vnspeakable happines:
especially, sith contrariwise, they
which obserue not the commaundements
of God necessarie vnto saluation,
are not onlie bereued of the felicitie
whereof we haue spoken, but are
cast headlong into hel among the damned;
where they are tormented euerlastinglie;



with extreme paines appointed
for the reprobate; iudged to hel fire,
and perpetuall death; throwen into vtter
darknes, where shalbe weeping and
gnashing of teeth; plagued with most
bitter paines and torments, which euer
shall endure, and that in the societie
and crew of Diuels and damned soules,
without all hope of better state: that is,
they shall continue worldes without
end in despaire, which more grieuouslie
shall vexe them then anie torment,
or then all torments beside.
            Now, whome would not these
things terrifie from sinning, as the feare
of hel; the paines of which there is neither
end, nor measure: euerlasting
death; vnquenchable fire; vnspeakable
tormentes; the fellowship of Diuels;
the societie of the damned; horror;
anguish; trembling, both euerlasting
for continuance, and vnmeasurable for
greatnes, such as neither mans minde
can conceaue, nor any mouth declare!
I saie, what man is there, but wil be terrifed
by that daie of wrath, as both the



Prophet, and Paule in his Epistle vnto
the Romanes calleth it, that daie of
trouble and heauines, of destruction and
desolation, of obscuritie and darknes, of
cloudes and blacknes; at what time he
wil reward euerie man according to his
workes?
            
            O that the cogitation and memorie
of these things were continually fresh
before the eies of the minde! vndoubtedly
then, either I am much deceaued,
or men with more dilligence would
obserue Gods commaundements; they
would study earnestly both to abstaine
from sinne and wickednes, and also to
liue vprightlie, and vertuouslie all the
daies of their life.
            Moreouer, what if here in this world
vertue sometime be rewarded, as wickednes,
and il behauiour is punished?
And to saie nothing of the conscience,
whereof we haue spoken at large in other
bookes, let vs bring out those
things which in a manner we doo feele
with our hand, much more see with
our eies. For, that I may begin with



the most vsual vice, what euils doo not
follow dronkennes and gluttonie? For,
as he in the Storie of the world doth
saie, Hence commeth palenes of the
face, hanging cheekes, sore eies, palsie
in the handes, ouglie dreames, and
vnquiet sleepe in the night. Hence
proceede stincking breathes, hed-aches,
weake memories, dul wits. Hence
are ingendered grieuous diseases, as
ache of the iointes, goutes, the falling
euil, as both Phisitions doo affirme, and
dailie examples testifie.
            Now, touching whoredome, how
in this our age doo we behold the same
to be punished with the French-pocks;
as also other immoderate venerie with
the palsie; with the blearednes of the
eies; with the quiuering of the sinewes!
            As for luxuriousnes, doth it not
bring manie a man vnto neede, and
beggerie? Adulterie, is it not sometime
punished, and they which commit
the same alwaies after infamous?
Besides, the angrie man, doth he not



oftentimes get hurt, and the proude
man hatred?
            What shall I saie of Enuie, is it not
a punishment to him which is giuen
there-vnto? doth it not eate vp, and
consume the enuious? As rightlie did
one saie,

                  The Sicilian Tyrans did neuer finde,
                  A greater plage then enuy to the mind.
               
            
            So did another,

                  Th'enuious man doth pine away in paine,
                  To see another florish wel, and gaine.
               
            
            Now to speake of couetousnes, is it
not euermore tormented, as with desire
of getting, so with feare of forgoing?
For that which a couetous man hath,
wil not content him: and that which
he hath, maketh him to feare, least he
loase the same.
            Thus you maie see, how that vice
and wickednes are often punished, yea,
in this world. Now, if these thinges
doo nothing moue vs, yet should
the euerlasting tormentes of hell,
threatened to the wicked in the holie



scripture, stirre vp euerie man with
all earnestnes of minde to amend his
naughtie life without delaie, if we beleeue
those thinges to be true, and
not a fable, which the holie scripture
teacheth, both of the eternall life
of the godlie, and of the punishment
of the wicked.
         
         
            Cap. 18.
            ¶What meanes a godlie
man maie vse, by the example of the
Author, to stirre vp him selfe vnto
a godlie life.
            
               
                  HEre I wil brieflie
declare, if
happily it may
giue occasion
to others in
like sort, to amēd
their life,
what it is wher
by I am greatlie incensed, and set on
fire, to followe vertue and godlines.



For thus many times I doo reason
with my selfe: What Riuius, what
if at this verie instant of time, thou
shouldest leaue this world, in what state
shouldest thou be? Art thou wel prepared
to die? For albe thou reposest thy
confidence, as it is thy part to doo so, in
the infinite mercie and goodnes of God,
haue you not neede for all that to stand
infeare of his iustice? How manie thousandes
of Christians; how manie young
men, old men, of middle age, women,
wiues vnwedded: finallie, of all degrees,
of all ages, and of all kindes, whose sinnes
are neither for number so manie, nor so
hainous as thine, and yet are damned
to euerlasting tormentes? O horrible
iudgement of God, yet a righteous iudgement.
How manie Iewes are in hel;
how manie Idolaters are punished with
perpetuall paines? The which had escaped
those paines, had they bene conuerted
vnto the faith of Christ, as we are
through the goodnes of God, seeing they
liued farre more vprightlie in the world,
then we haue done? O cursed ingratitude



of ours; O the hardnes of our harts!
I saie, what if it were saide vnto thee,
as it was saide vnto Ezechias? Put
thine house in an order; for thou shalt
die, and not liue: what wouldest thou
doo then? I thinke thou wouldest craue
longer life, that thou mightest bewaile
thy sinnes, repent, and aske God
mercie. VVhie then dost thou not
that daie by daie, all thy life long,
which thou vvouldest doo at such a
point?
            By these cogitations, as I saie, I am
woont maruelouslie to be inflamed to
liue well; to flie sinne, and to requite
mercie at Gods hand. Let
others then, as like this
woont, place the same
before their eies.
         
         
            
            Cap. 19.
            
               ❧How men should addresse
them-selues to liue well.
            
               THere is none
almost, but
thinketh enimies
should be
forgiuē before
death comes;
let him now
then forgiue:
none but desireth Gods fauour; let him
now then seeke the same: none but
would thinke to amend his life; let
him now then amend. Finallie, doo
that while thou liuest, and art well, doo
that through trust in God, which thou
wouldest wish to doo at the point of
death.
            That is, particularlie to expresse the
same, repent continuallie; feare the
Lord vnfainedlie; loue him heartelie;
trust in him alone; in aduersitie call



vpon him; in prosperitie thanke him,
alwaie see thou praise, extoll, acknowledge
his goodnes; sing Psalmes to him;
let him alone be euermore in thy praiers,
in thy cogitations, and in thy desires.
Commit thy selfe to his goodnes,
and submit thy wil to his. Follow
his example in doing wel to all men;
and endeuor to be like him in louing
thine enimies.
            Furthermore, be thou in troubles,
patient; in peace, modest; in thy office,
diligent; in thy liuing and apparel,
temperate. Be thou toward thy neighbour,
righteous; toward the poore, liberall;
in thy dealing with others,
milde, and courteous. Put vp iniuries,
pursue peace, loue chastitie, shamefastnes,
sobrietie; and in all thinges shew
thy selfe vp-right and vncorrupt.
            And, forasmuch as these thinges cannot
be attained by the onlie power of
nature, flie thou vnto the Lord for
helpe and assistance, acknowledging
thy weaknes, & the infirmitie of man;
praie God both humblie and continuallie,



to impart vpon thee his holie spirit,
the which Christ hath promised,
that the Father wil giue to them, that
desire him. If therefore thou craue that
the same spirit maie be giuen thee of
God, and shed vpon thee aboundantlie,
to vse the wordes of S. Paule, through
Iesus Christ, thou shalt finde that what
thinges of thy selfe thou couldest not
doo, through him thou shalt bring to
passe. Onlie be not thou thine owne
foe; neither doo thou voluntarilie
loase the bridle to thine affections; and
with all endeuor looke that thou feede
not thy wanton humor. For the holie
Ghost doth not assist cowards, sluggardes,
and such as idlelie sit with
their armes folded together; but those
which worke, and labour earnestlie to
tame their natural wickednes; yea, he
deemeth such worthie his aide, which
continuallie doo striue with the wicked
affections of the minde. Let vs
not then doo as that countrie-man
did, as the tale is, who, his cart sticking
fast in the myte, cried vnto God for



helpe, but stoode idlelie him-selfe and
would not helpe at all.
            Aboue all, be thou terrified from
sinning, and stirred vnto a godlie life,
through the presence both of God, who
euerie, and no waie can be auoided;
and of his holie Angel, thy keeper, and
guider, yea, and the beholder, and
witnes of all thy doinges. Now, if
thou wouldest for no good, that anie
man should come in, when thou art
committing anie fowle, and dishonest
fact: how much more oughtest thou
to abstaine there-from through reuenence
and shame of God, and his Angel?
Fearest thou to haue man priuie
to thy fact: and art thou not afraide
in the presence of God, whose eies beholding
all thinges no man can escape,
to commit that, which thou wouldest
not doo in the sight of man! Especially,
seeing he one daie shall be thy Iudge,
which now beholdeth whatsoeuer thou
doest!
            
               A certaine Philosopher councelleth
vs, So to liue, as though we liued in the



sight of all men: so to thinke as though
one might behold the most secrete cogitation
of the heart. Againe, saith he,
So doo all thinges, as though some man
sawe thee. It is doubtles good to appoint
a keeper ouer thy selfe; to haue one vpon
whome thou maist looke backe, whome
thou maist suppose is priuie to all thy cogitations.
A great part of wickednes
is left vndone, if one be present when a
man is about to sinne. Thus councelleth
an Ethnike, which I would haue
euerie man suppose to be spoken to
him-selfe.
            
            If therefore thou enterprise any thing
which is filthie and wicked, before thou
goest about the same, thus reason with
thy selfe: what is that I doo? Shall I
commit that in the sight of God, which
for my life I would not haue any man
to know? Should I driue awaie the
Angel appointed to ouer-looke me by
this crime: which would not loase
the friendship of a mortall man? Shall
I grieue the holie spirit; to make the
euil spirit reioice through my falling?



Hath Christ redeemed me with his
precious blood, that voluntarilie I
should giue my selfe into the bondage
of Satan? Hath he redeemed me from
sinne, to the end I should runne headlong
into wickednes? Hath he therefore
made me an heire of heauen, that
through mine owne default I should
forgo the same? Where is now my
zeale to God-ward? where is my reuerend
feare of his maiestie? where is
my faith and godlines? Is this the
thankes I giue to my God, for his so
innumerable benefites? Is this the
thankes I doo yeeld to Christ for my
saluation? Doo I thus submitte my
selfe to the direction of the holie spirit?
With this holines doo I approch
vnto the Lordes table? Looke I for
the comming of Christ after such a
sort? Shall death laie hold on me in
this state of life? Shall I go vnto the
iudgement seate of God in this pickle?
Shall I suffer mine affections to preuaile;
the weake flesh to ouercome;
sinne to raigne in my bodie? Am I so



voide of stomacke, and courage, that
I can-not resist the motions of the
minde? Doo I behold the better, and
yet chuse the worser still? These and
other thinges (for who can recite all)
thinke dailie with thy selfe; so wilt
thou not easilie doo that which is not
seemelie.
            Then, to come vnto an end, whatsoeuer
thou goest about, perswade thy
selfe, that God is present (as in deede
he is) and beholdeth all thy doinges;
and therfore stand thou in awe of him,
and let the reuerence of him with-draw
thee from wicked enterprises. For (as
the Poet saith,)

                  He witnes is, and Iudge also,
                  He so doth view the heart of man,
                  That euerie thought he wel doth kno,
                  And him deceaue no creature can.
               
            
            This also wil further thy zeale to
liue wel, if continuallie thou thinke
with thy selfe, how thou art the sonne
and heire of God, in the spirituall



regeneration, and, which is the greatest
honour, the brother, and heire
annexed with Christ. For who wil
not be inflamed mightelie vnto godlines,
and with a Christian feare, and
shame abhorre sinne, when he shall
call into remembraunce, how that
God is his Father? Doo not therefore,
I saie, doo not forget this benefite
at anie time; loue him, worship
him, serue him, honour him ouermore,
who hath made thee his
sonne by adoption; and neuer doo
anie thing which maie displease him
hencefoorth. Fulfil thou his wil, obeie
his commaundement, keepe his
lawes. Thinke with thy selfe, that
not onlie the participation of his inheritance;
but also the imitation of his
vertue and goodnes doth belong
vnto thee: so that although thou
canst not by imitation attaine vnto
that singularitie of goodnes which is
in the Father: yet endeuor thou earnestlie
to come nigh the same, and
thinke it a most shamefull thing to degenerate



there-from. And if at anie
time vnwittinglie thou cōmittest somwhat
contrarie to thy Fathers minde
(as great is mans frailtie,) let it much
grieue thine heart; punish thy selfe
therefore, thinke no paine grieuous
enough for thee, who hast offended
so mercifull a Father; and neuer be
quiet in minde, and at rest, til thou hast
recouered thine offence with greater
good deedes, and pacified thy Father
by vnfained repentance. So farre shouldest
thou be from sinning voluntarilie,
and from committing anie sinne against
thy conscience.
            And, who so remembreth howe
that he is the sonne, and heire of God,
the brother & heire annexed to Christ,
doubtles, wil be terrified from sinne
and wickednes, not so much for feare
of the last iudgement of euerlasting
tormentes, and of hel fire, which
neuer wil be quenched; as for feare
of displeasing his so louing Father;
and will endeuour to liue godlie, to



offend no man, after the example of
the Father, to doo well to all men,
not so much in hope of reward in
heauen, and of eternall ioie, as through
a certaine greate, and vnspeakable
loue which he beareth toward God the
Father.
            He which beleeueth, as Paule saith,
that his bodie is the Temple of the holie
Ghost dwelling in vs, easelie refraineth
from sinne, and polluteth
not him-selfe with filthie lust. Finallie,
who out of doubt thinketh
that he is adopted into the fellowship
of Saintes, wil not
neglect to emulate the
vertues of the Saintes,
namelie, zeale toward
God, and
loue toward
man.
         
         
            
            Cap. 20.
            The causes whie we proceede
not in wel doing, hauing purposed
to liue in the feare of God; with the
remedies for that infirmitie of man.
            
               BVt, some wil
say, what may
be the cause,
whie, minding
some-times to
liue chastlie &
soberlie, and
godlie, after
the wil of God, we doo not constantlie
fulfill, which wiselie we purposed?
            To aunswer in few wordes, the principall
cause is, the naturall wickednes
that is in vs, & the proanesse which we
haue to sinne, which cleaueth to our
bones and bowels; that is to saie, the
verie flesh that we beare about, which
hath a grieuous and troublesome combat,
and a continuall fight in a manner,



with the inner man, as witnesseth Paul.
So that we must resist the same, when
it inticeth vs vnto lust, and filthy pleasure,
vnto the vices of the throate and
bellie; vnto lasciuiousnes and wantonnes,
and vnto other vices and vnhonest
factes: and furthermore, we must
bridle the same by godlie cogitations,
exercises, watching, abstinence, and also
tame and bring it vnder by continuall
sobrietie and temperance.
            This made our sauiour Christ to wil
vs, To take heede, least at anie time
our heartes be oppressed with surfetting;
and Paule both to bid, that we be not
dronke with wine; and also to forbid
gluttonie and dronkennes; and Peter
to commaund vs, to watch and be sober.
VVith this we must ioine continuall
praier, and earnest calling for the assistance
of God, without which all our
endeuor to tame the flesh, and to suppresse
the force of the same, is vaine,
and to no purpose.
            Now hauing as wel as we can subdued
the motions of the flesh, there



be moreouer the world, and the Diuil,
deadlie enimies, with whome we
haue continual warfare; for they wil
not suffer vs to abide in our godlie purpose
of liuing wel. For the world
stirreth vnto ambition, pride, and riottousnes;
vnto anger, hatred, enuie,
impatience, back-biting; and ministreth
occasion to fall vnto other vices,
which no man is able to number, they
be so manie; it marreth by euil examples,
and corrupteth with offences.
            The Diuel for his part neuer ceaseth
to bring and driue man to contemne
the word of God; to mistrust his promises;
to conceaue amisse of him; to
persist obstinatelie in wickednes; to
blaspheme; to impugne the knowen
truth; to plaie the hypocrites; to be
superstitious; idolatrous; and vnto other
infinite and cursed wickednes.
            VVhat is now to be done in this
case, dost thou saie? Surelie, we must
valiantlie resist these enimies; we must
take a courage vnto vs; and by earnest
& zelous praier craue the helpe of God;



through confidence wherof we should
neuer giue ouer the battel. Touching
which point, let vs heare what S. Paule
writeth vnto the Ephesians: Finallie
my brethren, saith he, be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might. Put
on the whole armour of God: that ye may
be able to stand against the assaultes of
the Diuel. For we wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against principallities,
against powers, against worldlie gouerners,
the princes of the darknes of this
world, against spirituall wickednes in the
hie places. And by and by shewing
the armour by name, he biddeth vs, to
stand, our loines girde with veritie, hauing
on the breast-plate of righteousnes,
taking to our selues the shield of faith,
wherewith we maie quench all the firie
dartes of the wicked. He willeth vs to
take the helmet of saluation, and the
sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God: and adhorteth, to praie alwaies.
            
            Thus you see the armour, which we
must vse against our aduersarie the Diuel,
who intermitteth no daie, nor



houre, nor yet anie moment, but continuallie
laieth at vs, and raungeth about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whome
he maie deuoure, as Peter saith. Let
vs therefore hauing on this armour of
Paule, resist him valiantlie, and, he
wil flie from vs, so saith Iames. Let
vs call vpon God continually for helpe;
praie we God, that he wil not leade vs
into tentation; beg we at his hand, to
be deliuered, through Christ from that
euil, which is euermore an enimie to
mankinde. Aboue all, let vs take
diligent heede, least wittinglie we rush
vpon sinne, and destruction, wherevnto
Sathan driueth vs, and fauour
our owne weaknes: but with a courage,
let vs resist the Diuel, and desire
of God the eternall Father of our
Lord Iesu Christ, that he would
strengthen our weaknes. And for
so much as the Diuel doth not alwaie
set vpon vs openlie, but some-time
secretlie, and by vndermining, and
often-times (as one saith,) Doth flatter,
to deceane; doth laugh, to hurt; and



doth entice vs, to kil vs: Let vs vse
diligence, that we maie circumspectlie
auoide the snares which he hath set,
and prepared; and giue him no occasion
to assaile, and kil vs on the sudden.
            VVhere manifest feare is, saith Cyprian,
the weake is the more easelie taken.
Let vs therefore cast from vs all sluggishnes,
and our too much securitie;
let vs feare, that vnder euerie stone, as
the common saying is, there is a Scorpion;
and as though all were safe, and
at a good staie, let vs not be secure.
No man commeth sooner to destruction
(as that Heathen saith) then he which
feareth nothing: and the most vsuall beginning
of miserie, is securitie. Thinke
not foorth-with thou shalt haue peace, or
that thou art quit from all daunger, if
thou hast once obtained victorie ouer
thine enimies. Thou must euermore
keepe the battel, and be readie to fight:
as well said Cyprian, In the world we
are continuallie to wage battel with Satan,
continuallie we must fight against his
dartes, and assaults. VVe are to encounter,



               saith he, with auarice, with lecherie,
with anger, with ambition; we haue an
eger and continuall fight with carnall vices,
with the enticementes of the world.
Hardlie can the minde of man go against
euerie one, with much a doo it resisteth,
being besieged, and round about inuironed
with the armie of Sathan. If auarice
be laide flatte on the ground, lust riseth
vp; if lust be quenched, anger mooueth;
pride, puffeth vp; dronkennes,
allureth; ielosie, parteth friendship, and
so foorth.
            
            And, as we ought not to insult, if
we get a conquest: so must we not
despaire, or fling awaie our weapons
by and by, if we be ouercome. VVhat
must we then doo? Surelie to recouer
our honour againe, we must set
vpon our enimie with more courage;
and with a newe power make amendes
for our former faintnes, and foile: after
the example of that noble warrier,
whome Virgil maketh mention
of, which being beaten to the
ground with great force, nothing terrefied



with the fall,
            
               VVent to the fight more fierce againe,
               which did his courage fresh renew:
               And shame did make him fight amaine,
               So did his prowesse which he knew.
            
            Albeit we must not encounter with
the enimie, trusting to our owne prowesse,
but to the power of God.
            Thus you haue the causes, why we
doo not persist in our purpose of liuing
godlie, after the wil of God. For, as
I saide, one cause is, the wickednes ingraffed
in our flesh, and our proanesse
vnto sinne: another is the world, offering
infinite occasions and causes dailie
to offend; the last is, the Diuel who
continuallie is thinking of our destruction,
and ouerslippeth no minute of
time, either by open force, or by secrete
fraude, to ouercome vs.
            O God, father of our Lord and sauiour
Christ, proceede we beseech thee
in helping vs, in this hard, and continuall
warre which we haue with so manie



enimies; and for so much as of our
selues we are vnable to resist, confirme,
and strengthen vs with thy holie spirit,
that we maie both represse the motions
of the flesh, and neuer be corrupted
with the allurementes of the same;
and also valiantlie, resist as wel the
world offering so manie occasions continuallie
to sinne, as the Diuel casting
all sorts of dartes to hurt vs, and vsing
all meanes to bring vs to destruction.
And, that we maie not onlie abhorre
sinne and wickednesse, through a seruile
feare of Gods wrath and euerlasting
death, which the lawe doth bring,
terrefying vs with the anger and iudgment
of God, and striking men with
the terror of hell: but also, and the
more a great deale, maie be crowned
through childrens feare, which ariseth
from faith, with a certaine honest
shamefastnes, and through a religious
reuerence toward God, to commit nothing
at anie time, which maie offend
our most louing, and best father: Also
which maie make vs so of our owne



accord to doo wel, and to flie from
sinne, and so keepe vs through loue and
charitie in our calling, that when vnwittinglie
we shall cōmit any offence,
as great is our weaknes, it maie bring
such a sorowe and griefe to our minde,
that both we maie willinglie enioine a
punishment to our selues, and be loath
to liue; for that we haue offended so
merciful, and gratious a Father.
            Finallie, O eternall Father, graunt
for thy sonne, our Lord and sauiour
Christ his sake, that in such shortnes
of life, and vncertainty of death, we put
not of the amendment of our life, and
deferre the same from daie to daie: but
maie with speede endeuour to returne
vnto wel-doing, confessing our sinnes,
and vnfainedlie repent, and through
repentance, pacifie our heauenlie Father;
and with the Publicane in the
Gospel humblie, striking our breast,
craue mercie of God; and finallie wil,
and doo those thinges which are grateful,
and acceptable before God: that
we maie amend our wickednes by wel



doing; reforme vices with vertues; and
through Gods assistaunce spend the
time which we haue to liue in this
world, godlie, religiouslie, innocentlie,
purelie, soberlie, and temperatlie, to the
profit of the Church, the benefit of
mankinde, and the discharge of our
duties; and that in such mindes, and
godlie determination we maie continue
euen til our liues end, Amen.
            
         
         
            Cap. 21.
            A briefe repetition of that
which hath bene saide; with a
short conclusion.
            
               THus much I
thought good
to write of
mans foolishnes
in putting
of the amendment
of this
life.
            
               
The matter which I haue handled,
hath enforced me to vtter those
thinges which wil be as to the godlie,
comfortable; so to them which would
seeme, but are not vnfained Christians,
vnpleasaunt. For we haue
spoken much, and aboundantlie of
the shortnes, and vncertaintie of
life; of death in respect of vncertaine
chaunces dailie hanging ouer our
heads, and many times dispatching
men before they be aware; the which
all good men doo wish, and desire of
God in their godlie praiers, but the
wicked do abhorre. Also we haue spoken
of the generall resurrection, of the
comming of Christ, of the last iudgement,
when all men shalbe summoned
to giue an accoumpt of their life spent;
which daie wil be to the wicked horrible,
but comfortable to the godly. For
then, their redemption draweth neere;
then is the time, as one said in the Acts,
of comfort, and refreshing; and, as it
is in Tertullian, the daie of Christian
triumphing.
            
            
               
Furthermore, we haue told both
what rewards be appointed for the godlie,
and what punishmentes ordained
for the wicked. For the godlie shalbe
exalted vp vnto glorie, and liue a blessed,
and euerlasting life in heauen. For
who is able to expresse what a felicitie
it wil be, alwaies to behold God, and to
enioie the most comfortable contemplation
of his heauenlie countenance,
to behold him euen as he is, whome
now we doo see through a glasse darklie,
as Paule saith! to abound with all good
thinges? finallie, to enioie so manie
pleasures and delightes, as maie be neither
conceaued in minde, nor expressed
by wordes?
            On the other side, the vngodlie shalbe
throwen headlong into hel, to be afflicted
with vnmeasurable, and euerlasting
tormentes. No eloquence can
describe by wordes, nor wit conceaue
the smallest part of the paines which the
vngodly are to endure in hel being condemned
through the righteous iudgement
of God vnto euerlasting fire.
            
               
Last of all, we haue vttered diuers other
thinges, which, as I said, wil please
the godlie right wel; but trouble the
wicked: as of the sense of Gods indignation
against sinne; of casting of securitie
when we haue the world at wil;
of vnfained repenting; of reforming
our manners; of amending our liues;
of our continual fight with mightie enimies,
the world, the flesh, and the diuel;
and diuers such like things, which
are needles to be repeated in this place.
            Sharpe these are, and sowre to blood
and flesh: notwithstanding, as I am
perswaded, verie profitable. For, as one
in Curtius doth saie, Phisitions doo
heale sore maladies, with sharpe medicines;
and as Cicero writeth vnto Octauius,
No medicines applied vnto wounds,
doo so grieue, as they which are most wholsome.
            
            Now the eternall God, father of our
Lord and sauiour Christ, giue grace,
that this our booke, how so euer it be
written, maie in this corrupt and wretched
world, yet some-what keepe the



godlie in their calling, and confirme
them in wel-doing; if anie of zeale,
and wel-liking thereof shall reade the
same: furthermore, that it maie offer
some occasion to the wicked, to reform
them-selues; and that the salue which
is here prescribed to such as are sicke,
and almost past recouerie, maie haue
strength to helpe and heale them. This
he graunt, without whose helpe, all the
labour of man is vaine, and to no
purpose, euen God almighty, and
most righteous, to whome be
all praise, honour, and glorie,
now, and for euermore,
Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table wherein ye maie
finde all the Chapters, which are
contained in this booke.
            
               
                  A Preface vnto the discourse following.
Cap. 1. Page. 1.
               The first cause, whie man doth not repent.
Cap. 2. Page. 4.
               The second cause whie we doo not repent
vs of our wickednes. Cap. 3. Pa. 15
               A third cause whie we deferre the amendment
of our life. Cap. 4. Pa. 35.
               The fourth cause whie men are loath to repent.
Cap. 5. Pa. 55.
               A fift cause whie man will not repent.
Cap. 6. Pa. 64.
               A sixt cause which alienateth mens minds
from repentance. Cap. 7. Pa. 71.
               Of other like principall causes whie we repent
not. Cap. 8. Pa. 79.
               An other cause of deferring repentance.
Cap. 9. Pa. 83.
               A remedie against incredulitie, which
is the first cause whie, man doth not
repent. Of which afore Chapter second.
Cap. 10. Pa. 86.
               
                  
A remedie for the second cause, whie we
repent not, mentioned afore in the
third Chapter. Cap. 11. Pa. 93.
               A remedie against the custome of sinning,
which is the third cause of deferring
repentance: as aboue in the fourth
Chapter hath bene showed. Cap. 12.
Page. 101.
               A remedie against the fourth cause of prolonging
repentance, spoken of before in
the fift Chapter. Cap. 13. Pa. 107.
               A remedie against the fift cause of deferring
amendment of life, contained
in the sixt Chapter of this booke.
Cap. 14. Pa. 115.
               A remedie for the sixt cause of deferring
repentance, declared afore in the seuenth
Chapter. Cap. 15. Pa. 125.
               A remedie for the seuenth cause, specified
afore in the eight Chapter. Cap. 16
Page. 129.
               A remedie against the last cause, which
holdeth men from repentance, entreated
of before in the ninth Chapter.
Cap. 17. Pa. 135.
               
                  
VVhat meanes a godlie man maie vse, by
the example of the Author, to stirre
vp him-selfe vnto a godlie life.
Cap. 18. Pa. 146.
               How men should addresse them-selues to
liue well. Cap. 19. Pa. 149.
               The causes whie we proceede not in wel
doing, hauing purposed to liue in the
feare of God; with the remedies for
that infirmitie of man. Cap. 20.
Page. 159.
               A briefe repetition of that which hath
bene saide, with a short conclusion.
Cap. 21. Page. 169.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Faultes escaped.
            In the. 39. Page, and in the fift line, for,
My father in a sock, reade, My father in
a sort.
            In the. 122. Page, and in the second line, for,
Defer the amendment of their life, reade,
Defer the amendment of thy life.
         
         
            
            
               ❧
               Imprinted at London by
Iohn Charlewood, for Andrewe
Maunsel, dwelling in Paules
Church-yard, at the
signe of the Paret.
         
      
   