
      
         
            
            
            A
TRVE AND A
KINDE EXCVSE
Written in Defence of that Booke, intituled
A Newe Deſcription of Irelande.
            
            Wherein is freely confeſſed

                  1
The cauſe of the writing of that Booke.
                  2
How that Booke was brought into obloquy and ſlander
                  3
A Reuocation of all ouerſightes that through ignorance
were publiſhed in that Booke.
                  4
A Bulwarke or Defence of all truthes contayned
in that Booke.
               
            
            Pleaſant and pleaſing both to Engliſh, and Iriſh.
            
            By Barnabe Rych, Gent. Seruant to the Kinges moſt
excellent Maieſtie.
            The rebukes of a Friend, are better then the kiſſes of an Enemie.
            Malui me diuitem eſſe quàm vocari.
            LONDON
Printed for Thomas Adams.
1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
Syr ARTHVR CHYCHESTER,
Knight, Lord Deputy of Ireland: And to the right
Honorable Sir GEORGE CARIE Knight, Barron
of Clopton, together with the Honorable Syr
THOMAS RIDGEVVAY, Knight Barrone
                  •
               
Viz-treaſurer, and Treaſurer at Wars in
his Maiſties Realme of Irelande,
and one of his Maieſties pr
                  •
               uie
Councell in that Realme.
            
               MOſt Honorable Lords, and moſt Worthy
to be honored Knight. Let it not ſeeme
ſtrang (with all humblenes I beſeech it)
that I haue thus preſumed to couple you
together in the patronizing of theſe lines
that are neyther vnbeſeeming your greatnes,
nor vnbefitting your worthines. For to whom doth
more properly belong the patronage of thoſe things, that
(after a certaine manner) doe appertaine to the ſeruice
of his Maieſtie then to thoſe that are well knowne to bee
godly, wiſe, religious, and that are beſt affected to the ſeruice
of his Maieſtie?
            The matter that I haue taken in hand, (as time and
occaſion ſerueth) requireth to be graced and countenanced,
not onely by thoſe that are great, but likewiſe by
thoſe that are good, aſwell by thoſe that bee godly as by
thoſe that bee in greateſt Authority, and howe ſoeuer it
may bee ſayd, it hath paſt the hands of a ſilly workman,
yet I am ſure the ſtuffe is good: the which although I haue
not graced and garniſhed with that gorgious imbrodery,
that is looked after by curious eyes, yet I haue clothed
it with truth and plainenes. I would be glad to arme theſe
mine indeuours, with better deſerts then to preſent them

vnder the preſidents of the widowes mite, or the ſmal pittance
of water that was offered to Alexander: the examples
are ſtale, & too threedbare to bee preſented to your
viewe, ouer worne indeede by euery baſtard Poet: Let
mee then humbly offer them with a Souldiers faithfull
heart, that is ſtill armed to the proofe to indeuour any
thing that may tend to the glory of God, to the ſeruice of
my Soueraigne or to the good of this diſtreſſed Country
of Irelande, wherein I liue and drawe my breath.
            Might it pleaſe you nowe but to vouchſafe mee a
fauourable acceptance, I ſhall number it amongſt
your many fauours towardes
mee: And I will ſtill reſt my
ſelfe at your commandementes.
            
               In all humble and dutifull
affection
BARNABE RICH
            
         
         
            
            TO THE VVHOLE NATION
OF THE IRISH, BARNABE
RICH Souldiour, ſendeth all kinde and
friendly ſalutations.
            
               DEare friendes and Countrymen (for ſo I may
ſpeak in generall without offence to any mans
greatneſſe or exceptions taken at mine owne
vnworthynes) I haue yet once againe betaken
me to my penne to giue ſatiſfaction if it will
be to thoſe diſcontentmēts that haue bin wreſted,
and miſconceiued againſt my booke. Doe not thinke that I
goe about to ſalue vpp matters with diſſimulation for I confeſſe
my ſelfe to bee the veryeſt bungler at this ſame flattery
that ere putt penne to paper, I coulde neuer diſſemble cleanly,
and they ſay Qui neſciet diſſimulare, neſciet viuere, he
ſhall be ſure to get no friendes, and although friends in this age
are but like to an after game at Iriſhe that is both wone & loſt
with a caſt yet theſe fewe that I haue I thank God are aſſured.
            Men are beleeued as they are beloued, and good counſayles
are accepted as the party is eſteemed that aduiſeth, whoſe meaneſſe
many times doth wipe away beleefe. Yet other whiles it
hath pleaſed God, to vſe meane perſons for the ſetting forth of
his glory. Hyſtoryes doe make mention of A Chriſtian child
named Frumelius that being taken priſoner, and brought into
the furthermoſt part of Eaſt India, as he grewe in yeares, won
ſome of the Indians to the Chriſtian faith, & calling to his aſſiſtance
ſome fewe Chriſtian Marchantes, that were in thoſe
partes, he erected a Church, and brought many Indians to beleeue
in Chriſt and to receiue Chriſtendome. We reade the like
of the king of Iberia, who by the inſtructions of a Chriſtian
woman, beleued in Chriſt himſelf & cauſed all his people to
do the like. And what was your great ſaint Patricke, that you

holde in ſuch veneration, if there be any credite to be giuen to
your owne wryters, he kept hogges, and yet by Gods grace, &
ordinance he was the firſt inſtrumēt that drew the Iriſh to the
chriſtiā faith. But if it might haue paſſed for paiment in thoſe
dayes, what you thinke to be currant now, that you wil beleeue
nothing but what your fathers haue beleeued before you, Saint
Patricke, had beene better to haue kept hogges ſtill then to
haue ſpent his breath, to ſuch a froward generation. But your
prieſts will beare you beleeue that you retayne the ſame faith
now that Saint Patrick firſt planted. Do not beleeue thē they
haue mocked you long, & it would be ouer tedious in an Epiſtle
to ſet downe how Rome it ſelfe is declined nay how it is defiled
& poluted, & how the Pope with his whole Cleargy are
fallen from the ſincerity of true religion to maintaine their own
traditiōs & to ſet vp ſuperſtition & idolatry, & that within
theſe very few years & whereof there are whole volumes extat
for breuityes ſake I will here let ſlip to ſpeake of Fryer Mantu
an, of Albertus Magnus, of Platina, of Holcot and many other
of the Popes owne broode, that haue not onely exclaymed
againſt the pope himſelfe but in like manner againſt his whole
cleargy. And Palingenius, an excelent author & yet a Papiſt,
giueth this Item Let no Fryer, Monke, nor any Prieſt come
within thy doores▪
                I could wiſh that euery married man in
Ireland would be a little aduiſed by Palingenius to ſhut this
baudy broode out of there doores, for they haue euer more bine
a leacherous generation. Theſe be they that be your ſounders,
that haue had the guiding & gouerning of your faith. Theſe be
they that you beleeue and giue credite to, theſe be they that you
are perſwaded their prayers will helpe you. And theſe be they
that do make deuotion a cloke for ſedition that vnder the pretence
of ſowing religiō do hope indeed, to reape rebelliō. O that
you could now but open your eyes to looke into this Romiſh Impietie:
but I will no longer hold you with an Epiſtle but will
referre you to that which followeth.
         
      
      
         
            
            A
TRVE AND A KINDE EXCVSE
Written in defence of that Booke intituled,
A Newe deſcription of Ireland.
            
               1
The cauſe of the writing of that Booke.
               
                  IT is a meere vanity to gather treaſure, when a
man knowes not who ſhall ſpende it, and no
leſſe folly for him that will ſpend his wittes in
the writing of Bookes, when there are ſo many
malicious readers, that are ſtill ready to woūd
the beſt indeuours, with the poyſoned ſpeares
of ſlaunderous tongues.
               I haue bin diuers times it cited by my friends, amongſt the reſt
by ſome Aldermen of Dublin, to write an Apology (as they tearmed
it) wherby to ſatiſfie ſome cittizens & others, that were much
offended with my booke intituled. A New deſcription of Ireland.
               
               I thinke their meaning was, they would haue had me to haue
written a Reuocation, of ſome ſuch thinges, which (as they ſayd)
were not ſo probable as reprehending.
               I haue at their requeſtes indeuoured both, I haue acknowledged
a Reuocation of ſuch ouerſightes as through ignorance haue
paſſed my penne, which in their places ſhall be expreſſed, and I
haue againe ſet down an Apology in the defence of thoſe truths
that doe concerne the glory of God, and the ſeruice of the king.
               Vpon the peruſing whereof, I hope thoſe that neuer ſawe the
booke, and yet were drawne to a diſliking againſt it, by lying reportes,
will hold themſelues ſatisfied.
               For ſome other that will needes number themſelues amongſt
thoſe that haue guilty conſciences, if I haue vnawares rubbed
vpon any hidden ſore, it is againſt my will, I haue done it but as
the blindman ſhoots the Crowe, & being but a matter of chance
medly, I hope I ſhall obtaine a pardon of courſe, and ſo much
the rather when I proteſt I meant them no harme.
               To come now to my purpoſe, & to ſpeake truely, vpon what
occaſion I writ that book, if I ſhould ſay, that I was drawn vnto it

by commiſeration, and through a compaſſionate loue: I know
not how I ſhould be beleeued, eſpecially amongſt them that will
ſcarcely beleeue that God is a good man but as their ghoſtly fathers
will pleaſe to giue them leaue.
               But thou that art vpright of iudgement, and haſt wiſedome to
diſcerne of good and euill, to thee I appeale (but giue the ſequel
leaue, to plead it owne defence) then cenſure thou: For the lawe
of wiſedome is in thy mouth. Pro. 22.
               It is now ſome 40. years ago (or there abouts) ſince I firſt came
into Ireland, ſince which time, it is not vnknown how many commotions,
how many rebellions, how many murthers, how many
maſſacres, how many treaſōs, & how many reuolts, haue ther bin
ſet on foot, & frō time to time cōſpired plotted & put in excecutiō
                  ▪
               
               It is no nouelties to heare of wars, both forraine & ciuil ſometimes
of rebellions, ſometimes of treaſons. But to haue continuall
vprores areared by ſubiects againſt their Prince, to haue treaſon
vpon treaſon, rebellion vpon rebelliō to be euery day in action
ſtil in inſurrections, on in others neck, it is more thē ordinary▪
               
               Subiectes haue ſometimes betaken themſelues to armes, when
they haue been oppreſſed by tyrannous princes, & although they
haue no warrant in the worde of God ſo to doe, but are expreſly
commaunded to the contrary, yet to free themſelues from oppreſſion,
wrong and iniury, they haue ſome colour to countenance
their rebellion: but for the Iriſh, what can they alledge for
their traiterous demeanours againſt that late gratious Queene of
famous memory, that gouerned with ſuch mercy and mildenes,
that if loue and lenitie might haue mittigated the rigour of crueltie
what did ſhee neglect, that might not haue won them to a
dutifull obedience: if clemency might haue preuailed, with what
affability did ſhee gouerne fourty and odd yeares: if mercy, pitty
and compaſſion might haue moued them, what pardoning, what
protecting and what tollerating with offences: if bounty and liberality
might haue lenified their rebellious diſpoſitions, what cō
                  tributions,
what ſtipends, what pencions, and what dayly payes
out of her coffers, beſides other giftes and prefermentes, bountifully
beſtowed vpon thoſe that came begging and crauing to her
Court in England, and what was hee that was returned backe againe
without ſome gracious rewarde?
               
                  
From whence was it then that ſo many ſeditions, ſo many cō
                  motions,
and ſo many rebellions were dayly ſet on foote, and euery
day conſpired, practiſed and put in execution, ſtill one in
anothers necke.
               Why the world doth know it, they were the practiſes of Papiſts,
it is the poyſon of the Popes doctrine, that inciteth to ſeditions,
to rebellions, and that ſetteth ſubiectes againſt their Soueraignes.
               It is an Axiome of Theologie, holden and defended by Ieſuites
to murther Princes, and this is holden by their greateſt doctors,
as Sanders, Parſons, Alline, Stapleton, and diuers others: ſo that
popiſh religion teacheth, alloweth and defendeth treaſons, rebellions,
and periuries.
               And looke into their great Bellarmines writinges, that hath taken
ſuch paines in the behalfe of the Pope: and you ſhall finde
that his wholl doctrine conſiſteth in nothing, but that the Pope
may degrade Emperours, Kinges, Princes, and Potentates, that hee
may abrogate their lawes, may diſpence with their ſubiectes for
their alleadgeance, that they may take armes againſt their Soueraignes,
and that they may rebell: ſee heere the iuſt iudgement
of God, vpon that proude and wicked generation, whome
hee hath giuen vp to the monſtrous ſinnes of murther and treaſon,
the moſt hatefull offences, that the wickedeſt man can cō
                  mit,
and ſuch ſinnes, as aboue all other are moſt hated and deteſted,
and yet they are maintained, admitted, and vpholden by
the Pope, and that viperous broode, that be of his generation.
               The papiſtes doe ſeeke to compell but they will not bee compelled,
they grudge at eaſie penalties, and at ſleight reſtraintes,
when they themſelues, doe exact moſt cruell, and vnchriſtian-like
tragedies: what inquiſiting, what burning, what murthering
by hundreds, and by thouſands, without any reſpect, eyther of
innocency or of ignorance: but of what perſecution can our Papiſtes
of Ireland, charge that gratious Queene, vnleſſe becauſe
ſhee would not ſuffer the firebrand of Rome to take her crowne
from her head, and to giue her ſubiectes leaue by treaſon and rebellion,
to depriue her of her eſtate in that kingdome: they can
not ſay that ſhee euer inflicted any corporall puniſhment vppon
them for their religion, nor yet exacted any paymentes 
                     •
                  ut of

their purſes, as ſhee did from the recuſants in England.
               
               But Papiſtes will ſay, there is neyther law nor reaſon whereby
to compell men againſt their conſciences: but thoſe that are profeſſors
of the goſpell, if they be caught within the iuriſdiction of
theſe Ba
                        •
                     amites, they ſhall be compelled both againſt their conſciences,
and againſt the ve
                     ••
                  ty of Gods worde, or they ſhall indure
both torments, torture, and bitter death it ſelfe, if they will
not de
                     •
                  e their faith, but although Papiſtes are accuſtomed to
borrow their precepts, from Turkes and infidels, yet Chriſtian
Princes doe fetch no preſidentes from Tyrantes.
               How be it Saint Auguſtine, a father moſt reuerently receiued
in the primatiue Church giueth this memorandum: The Donat
                        •
                     ſt
                        ••
                      rather then they would be forced from their vaine fantaſies, ſlewe
themſelues, yet this did nothing fray the Church of God from compelling
them by the rigour of Princes lawes, without any reſpect of their wilfull
deſperation.
               
               Now whither a Chriſtian Prince, is not aſwell tyed in conſcience
to reduce his ſubiectes to the true knowledge of God, as to
teach them their obedience towardes himſelfe, I wil not diſpute,
though the holy ſcriptures doe furniſh vs with ſundry preſidents
making for that purpoſe, but 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   refuſed to gouerne thoſe
that were not found in the Chriſtian faith: for (ſayth he) I that
am a Chriſtian, cannot become your Emperour, that are the diſciples
of Iulian a 
                        〈◊〉
                      from Chriſt.
               
               Here might be a more ample addition concerning this matter
the wich I will not take vpon me to medle with.
               But that princes haue power to commaund for truth, and to
make lawes for Chriſt, ſtandeth not onely with probabilitie, poſſibility,
reaſon and nature, but alſo with euident vtilitie, neceſſitie,
religion and equitie, confirmed expreſſely by ſcriptures, and
plainly warranted by the lawes, actions & examples of the moſt
famouſly learned, and renowned.
               Who maketh any doubt but that the Almighty God in deliuering
the ſword into the hands of Princes, giueth them a direct
charge aſwell to prouide that true religion be maintained in then
realmes and dominions, as ciuil iuſtice miniſtred: and giueth
them no leſſe power to puniſh Schyſmes, hereſies, & Idolatries,
and ſuch other offences of the firſt table committed againſt God

as to puniſh murthers, thei
                     •
                  es, and ſuch like breaches of the ſecond
table, with ſuch other ſinnes of treaſon and rebellion as
concerneth but themſelues.
               But for this matter of conſcience, ſo much pretended by our
Iriſh Catholikes, I thinke there is neuer a papiſt in Ireland, that is
well able to diſtinguiſh truely of conſcience what it is.
               They make a matter of conſcience, of euery popiſh fantaſie,
of euery willfull opinion blindly conceiued, & obſtinately maintained,
without knowledge, wiſedome, or vnderſtanding▪ euery
hereticke, euery ſectary doth ſtand vpon his conſcience.
               The Turke that denieth Chriſt, and vpholdeth Mahomet, will
ſay as our papiſtes doe, his conſcience doth leade him ſo to doe,
& they can alledge, why thus did our fathers, they beleeued thus, &
in this beleife they both liued and dyed.
               The popiſh prieſts doe teach the Iriſh, to doe as their Fathers
haue done before them, and this doctrine is the right ready way
to leade to Hell: Walke you not in the precepts of your fathers, neither
obſerue their wayes, nor defile your ſelues with their Idols. Ezec. 20.
               Let them not bee as their fathers were, a diſobedient, and a rebellious
generation. Pſal. 78.
               Poore Ireland may rue the errours of their fathers, they haue
felt the fruites of their fathers Idolatries, of their rebellio
                     •
                  s, of
their contemptes, and of their diſobedience, both to God, and
their Prince, and they may ſay with Hezekia: Our fathers haue
treſpaſſed, and done euill in the ſight of the Lord our God, and haue forſaken
him, and turned their backes, and lo
                        •
                      our fathers are ſlane by the
ſworde. 2. Cron. 
                     •
                  9.
               And therefore it is a ſtrange doctrine that is taught by thoſe
ſhauelings, to teach the poore people to diſobey God, and to
followe their Fathers: our papiſtes are taught by their ghoſtly
fathers, as wee vſe to teach Parrats, that can ſay, Bewar
                        •
                      the Cat
Parrat, but knowes not what a Cat is: ſo they be taught to ſpeake
of the Catholicke Church, and the Catholike faith, and to
pretende then conſciences, when they lacke all vnderſtanding
of God and godlines: and yet the poore ignorant papiſtes will
keepe ſuch a ſt
                     ••
                  re with the Catholicke Church, the Catholicke
fayth, the Catholicke religion, the Catholicke ſeruice, and all
muſt bee Catholicke: but when their Ghoſtly fathers ſhoulde

come to an iſſue to make proofe in the matter, they are faine to
returne a Non eſt inuentus.
               
               Thus the people of that Countrey haue beene blinded and
led aſtray ſince I haue knowne Irelande, and thoſe ſeducing ſpirites,
their Fryers, their Ieſuites, and their ignoraunt popiſh
Prieſtes, vnder a pretence of Religion, ſeeke nothing elſe
but to hatch vpp and to drawe in Rebellion, colouring out all
their impieties, vnder the ſhowe of the Catholicke faith.
               By theſe holy pretences, they haue peruerted and miſledd
a number of good people throughout all the partes of that kingdome,
and that of all ſortes and degrees, that without doubt
would bee both tractable and conformable to the lawes of God
and the obedience of the Prince: their zeale in this religion
wherein they are ſo blindly ledd, is an euidence what feruency
they would ſhowe, if their eyes were once opened to beholde
the light of the Goſpell, now if the creatures of God are to bee
pittied, if there bee any compaſſion to be had, one Chriſtian to
an other, who would not commiſerate this people that are thus
carried away to their deſtruction, that are thus blindly ledd in
darknes, by theſe inſtruments of Sathan.
               Theſe thinges conſidered (though not affying in mine owne
witt or learning) yet nothing doubting but that there be many
good people in Ireland, to whom God hath giuen the ſpirite of
iudgement and vnderſtanding, for their ſakes therefore, and
further to expreſſe my good wil and the loue that I bare to that
Countrey, I indeuoured a Booke, which I intituled, A ſhort ſuruey
of Ireland. wherein I plainely diſcouered who it was that had
not onely blinded the ſimple and ignorant ſort, but alſo had ſeduced
thoſe that tooke vpon them to bee wiſe and learned: In
which booke I laboured nothing elſe, but ſo to diſplay the Pope,
in his perfect colours (and but according to the Scriptures and
as the word of God had teſtified of him) that I dare confidently
auowe, there is no Papiſt ſo ſimple, (or at the leaſt, if hee will
not ioyne obſtinacy with ignorance) but that hee ſhall playnely
ſee that Idolatrous prieſt, that hath ſo bewitched the worlde
with a ſhowe of holineſſe, to be that man of Sinne, to be that inſtrument
of the Deuill, to bee indeede that Antichrist, that hath
beene ſo much propheſied of, and of whom wee haue beene ſo

often forewarned by the holy ſcriptures.
               It is he that hath drawne the kingdomes of the world to drink
of the Cup of his abhominations: it is he that hath hardened the
heartes of this poore people of Ireland, aſwell againſt their God,
as againſt their prince: and it is he that I haue ſought ſo to diſcouer
to the Iriſhe, that he might no longer deceiue: and this I did
aſwell for the glory of God, for the ſeruice of my prince, as for
the loue that I doe beare to a number of that cou
                     •
                  try people, to
whom I doe with, as I doe to my ſelfe.
               I was not ignorant, but that it would be obiected, that I being
no Churchman, nor had no cure of ſoules, it would therefore be
thought a matter impertinent for me to meddle with.
               But I ſay, that the Lawe of God and the Law of nature both,
doe binde euery Chriſtian, to haue care (not onely of his friend)
but if hee ſhoulde ſee his enemie, in a dangerous path, that leadeth
into that peryll that hee foreſeeth not, I ſay hee that ſuffereth
his brother ſo to periſhe, and will not call vnto him, and
giue him warning of the danger, hee is guiltie of his death, and
his bloude will bee required at his hands that ſo ſuffereth him to
periſh.
               Thus we are taught by the word of God, & thus I am ſure we
are bound euer, chriſtian one to another.
               If my lines haue not taken that effect that I deſired, I haue
done my good will, and haue contented my ſelfe with the writing
of them, knowing mine owne intent, that was onely deſirous to
intice but not to intrapp, and rather purpoſed to profitte many,
then to offend any.
               The publiſhing of this booke, which (as I haue ſayd before)
concerned nothing but a diſcouery of the Pope, became offenſiue,
but not ſo much to the lettered ſort of papiſts (I meane, to
thoſe that doe proteſ
                     •
                  e knowledge and learning) as to thoſe that
were ignorant and vnlearned, that I am ſure doe not vnderſtand
the grounds of their own religion, nor do ſcarſly vnderſtād what
thēſelues doe read: but are better practiſed, in Geſta Romanorū, in
the ſeuen wiſe maſters, in beuis of hampto, & in the lying Legend,
then they be in the Bible or Teſtament, or in any other book that
doth concerne true godlineſſe: yet theſe were they that began to
grudge and murmure againſt me▪ avowing me to be a moſt malicious

enemie to Ireland, that neuer had any 
                     〈◊〉
                   meaning to Ireland
but haue pittied a number of poore people in that country, that
are capable of obedience and diſcipline, if they were not miſſeled.
               From this I tooke occaſion to write a ſeconde Booke, the
which I intituled, A New deſcription of Ireland: wherein I haue
in a more ample manner inveyed agaynſt Popery in generall,
but not agaynſt any one papiſt in particular, ſauing, that I haue
a little glanced at a diſgrace that was offered vnto me, by ſome
one or two that to ſhew themſelues to be others, ſtretched their
authoritie a little beyonde their boundes, and whereof I coulde
haue beene well reuenged, if I hadde beene but halfe ſo malycious
towardes them, as they ſhewed themſelues towardes
me.
               I muſt confeſſe, this diſcourteous dealing with mee, whetted
me ſo much the rather, to the writing of that booke, wherein
I tooke occaſion to make manifeſt the fruites of the Popes
religion, howe it not on
                     •
                  ly ſequeſtereth from GOD, and
all goodneſſe, but it is ſo farre contrarie to that Chriſtian
charitie, whiche our Poplinges will ſo much bragge of, that
beeſides it 
                     •••
                  teth to ſedytion, and rebellion, it breedeth a
contempte of thoſe thynges appertayninge to that moralitie,
that putteth a difference betweene ciuill people and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
beaſtes.
               Wee ſee it here in Ireland, where the very hat
                     •
                  ed they beare to
the goſpell profeſſed by the Engliſh, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , that are
not yet reduced to 
                     〈◊〉
                  , rather to 
                     〈◊〉
                   their accuſtomed
vncleanelines, and to retayne themſelues in their barbarous cuſtomes
and inhumane l
                     •
                  athſomenes, rather then they woulde
take any example from the Engliſh, either of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or any maner
of decency.
               Such malice is there in Popery, that it 
                     〈◊〉
                   and impugneth
the rules and principles, aſwell of Chriſtian p
                     •
                  et
                     •
                  , as of humane
ſocietie.
               To conclude, that poore booke intended for his maieſties ſeruice
eſpecially that is now ſo much exclaymed at, that they ſay is
ſuch a 
                     〈◊〉
                   and ſlander to the whole realme of Ireland: that
hath beene ſo 
                     •
                  ifted, ſo ouer-lookt, and ſo narrowly ſearched into,

to find eyther worde or ſyllable, that might be diſproued or
taken houlde on, is not yet taynted 
                     〈◊〉
                   detected with any vntruth:
A 
                     〈…〉
                   of,
what they are not aſhamed to doe 
                     〈…〉
                   mannes
cenſure that 
                     〈◊〉
                   a faithfull ſubiect to the King, that is not a papiſt,
that is not a traytor in heart▪ that hath not 
                     〈…〉
                   conſcience &
findeth 
                     〈…〉
                   to be 
                     〈…〉
                   any man that is not 
                     〈◊〉
                  , that
is not blinde on the one ſide, and will ſee too much on the other,
cenſure me in Gods 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               And now to winde vp all, I woulde be aſhamed, and confeſſe
my ſelfe to be worthy of puniſhment, if I ſhould write in the deprauation
of a countrey, that is reple
                     ••
                  ſhed with ſo many honorable,
with ſo many worſhipfull, and with ſo many worthy perſonages,
of all degrees of all eſtates, and of all profeſſions: and
as in that booke it ſelfe, I haue already acknowledged, and do yet
againe reacknowledge by that which followeth.
            
            
               2

                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  I Haue hitherto truely ſet downe 
                     〈◊〉
                   very occaſion

                     〈…〉
                   thoſe two bookes▪ the 
                     〈◊〉
                   as
I haue ſayd a true diſcouery of the Pope himſelfe
in particular▪ the ſeconde a detection of
popery in generall: wherein although I haue

                     •
                  ypped vp the barbarous cuſtomes, the vnciuill
demeanures, and the vncleanely behauiours that are vſed amongſt
the Iry
                        •
                     he in the remote parts of the country: yet I haue
not done it ſo much to vpbraid them with this their barbariſme,
as to make them to 
                     〈…〉
                   the Popes doctrine, that is
the author 
                     〈…〉
                  , and hath ſo bewitched them with
malice towards the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , for 
                     •
                  elig
                     •
                  ons ſake, that they will neither
drawe example, nor preſident from them, that might either
concerne the glory of God, or then owne good.
               But becauſe I ſee I ſhall haue occaſion hereafter, to ſpeake of
theſe matters in a more particular manner, I will 
                     〈…〉
                  
time deliuer, what hath beene the occaſion that my 
                     〈◊〉
                   was

brought into that miſlike as it was, amongſt ſome of the Iriſhe.
               
               There is nothing more diſtaſtfull in there double dealing
dayes then the writing of bookes, eſpecially if they be of a reprehending
humour: for theſe galde 
                     〈…〉
                  , that liue with
corrupted conſciences, are ſo afraide of rubbing, that they will
both wynch and kicke at any man that they thinke woulde but
touch their feſtered ſores.
               I haue read an olde author, that ſpeaking of the nature of the
ſwine, will needes perſwade that a hogge (by a certaine inſtinct)
doth knowe himſelfe to bee the moſt 
                     〈◊〉
                  , the moſt vnprofitable,
the moſt harmefull, and the moſt loathed beaſt amongſt
all others, and hauing this w
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  ing of himſelfe, that hee is good
for nothing, but as the prouerbe ſayth, Till 
                        〈…〉
                      to the pot, he
knoweth likewiſe that men doe neuer ſeeke to lay 
                     〈◊〉
                   of him
but eyther to hange a yoake about his necke, or other whiles to
thruſt ringes through his noſtrelles, or more likely to kill him
out right, and this is the cauſe (ſayth mine author) that the ſwine
doe ſo cry and yell (as they are ſeene to doe) more then any other
Cattell, when they are taken, or when a man doth but offer
to lay handes vpon them.
               An excellent reſemblance to a vicious man, that knowing his
owne guilty conſcience, to bee corrupt and wicked, and branded,
perhaps with ſome loathed deformities, doe thinke that a man
cannot write nor ſpeake any thing againſt vice or villany, but he
muſt rub him.
               Some of theſe Hoglinges (as it ſhould ſeeme) haue had the pervſall
of my lynes, and as I doe gather by ſome circumſtances,
haue not onely wreſted out matter to their owne diſcontent, but
haue ſought to whet on others to be as angry as themſelues: but amongſt
the reſt of theſe find-faults, that are ſo diſpleaſed with
my booke, what ſhould I ſay to him, that in the preſence and
hearing of no leſſe honorable then the Lord Deputy himſelfe,
would avowe, that booke to be no better then a libell, that was
firſt intended for the glory of God, for the ſeruice of his maieſtie:
And that was licenced to the preſſe by authoritie, that the
Kinges maieſtie himſelfe hath pleaſed to pervſe, that our gratious
yong Prince, vouchſafed the like, that was dedicated to the
moſt honorable and worthy Earle the Lord high Treaſurer of

                  Englande, and to bee ſhorte, that was both ſeene and permitted
by the moſt of the Lords of his maieſties moſt honorable counſayle.
               Now for him that in ſo ſaucy and malipert a manner, woulde
tearme that to be a libell, that hadde beene thus ſurueied and ouerlookt,
did rather argue a minde ouer loaden with malice, and
a tongue fraughted with lying and ſlandering, then any token eyther
of wit or modeſtie.
               But as wee are taught, wee muſt doe good againſt euill, and
the rather to ſhowe a charitable diſpoſition: I will doe as I am
taught, to pray for him, and in no worſe language then we bee
taught in the Letany, to pray for his Maieſties moſt honorable
Counſayle, That it woulde pleaſe God to indue him with grace, witte
and vnderſtanding.
               
               But that I am preſſed in mine own defence to make it known
howe my Booke became to be ſo exclaimed at, I woulde omitte
to ſpeake of one occaſion that was offered at an honeſt Aldermans
houſe at Dublyne, who kindly feaſting his neighbours and
good friendes, where a woman (if I may tearme her to bee a woman
that hath forgotten to bluſh) but ſuch a creature there was
that amongſt the wholl aſſembly, beeganne to picke quarrelles
both at me and my booke, belying and ſlaundering both it and
me, with ſuch falſe and vntrue reportes, that a number of thoſe
that had neuer ſeene the booke it ſelfe, beleeued all to bee true
that ſhee reported: And being thus caryed from hand to hand
I was brought into a generall obloquie throughout the whol citie
of Dublyne, but eſpecially amongeſt the citizens wiues, amongſt
the which there bee a number of graue, wiſe, and ſober
women, that I haue euer eſteemed and helde in reuerent regard
but we ſee the malice of a wicked woman will ſeeke reuenge, if
it bee but on a dogge, but what ſhould▪ I ſay to this womanne
reporter, that in ſome reſpectes I coulde reſemble to nothyng
more like then to a Pipe of Tabacco: and let her goe for ſmoake,
fortitude doth ſhew it ſelfe more worthy in ſuffering then in doing
wrong.
               
                  Iaſon the Theſſalian, beeing aſſayled and wo
                     ••
                  ded by an enemie
who hadde an intent to haue ſtabbed him, hadde an impoſtumation
opened, which ſaued his life: ſo the ſtab of diſgrace

that is offered by an enemie, may ſerue to cure & heale our neglected
and hidden infirmities.
               A wiſe manne may make great profite, by the reportes of his
moſt malicious enemies, who diſcouering his imperfections,
may learne thereby to mende his faults: but this argueth our vile
corruption, when our beſt offices are performed by our worſt
acquaintance.
               But now to ſpeake to the mayne poynt, howe my Booke beecame
to bee ſo contemptible to the Iriſhe: it was the papiſt indeede
that pyckt ſo manie quarrelles againſt it: and although
they would not openly manifeſt the matter, but tooke other occaſions
whereat to be angry, yet that was the hidden griefe, that
ſtirred vppe their Choler, they cannot indure to heare their holy
father ſo truely tranſlated, from the Vicar of Chriſt, to bee indeed,
the Vicar of the Deuill.
               
               It is truth, that in thoſe two Bookes, I haue made manifeſt
aſwell of the Pope himſelfe, what he is, as of his religion whereunto
it draweth, but without any malice or ill intent to any particular
man in Ireland, but in pittie and commiſeratiō of a great
number.
               And although that the Popes wholl broode of vermine, as
Fryers, Ieſuites, Seminaries, and other Popiſh prieſtes, haue
vowed themſelues agaynſt the truth of God, yet there be a number
of others, that are miſſe-ledd, and dayly ſeduced by theſe
blinde guides, that it may pleaſe GOD to open their eyes in
tyme, and to receiue the truth of the Goſpel with a ſober mildneſſe.
               He that beleeueth not to day, ſhall haue grace giuen him, and
he may beleeue to morrow, in the meane time, I doe not deſpiſe
him, but I doe both pittie him, and pray for him.
               Theſe be the men to whom I haue adreſſed my lynes, and doe
charitablie beſeech them, not to reſpect who it is that hath written,
but to conſider what it is that is written, let them then iudge
as it ſhall pleaſe God to put in their mindes.
               And although that at this tyme, my deſire bee rather to take
away offence, then to giue offence, yet I cannot diſſemble with
religion; but that I muſt needes make manifeſt this holy Catholicke
broode of Rome, that deceiueth the poore people of Ireland
                  
and (as our Sauiour ſayde by the Phariſes) that oppreſſeth
the poore widdow and fatherleſſe, that lyueth in idleneſſe, in
whooredome, in practiſing of murther, treaſon, rebellion, and
Summa ſummarum, in all manner of miſchiefe.
               They be the Agents and Factors, for the moſt inſatiable marchant
in the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , I meane the Pope that ſelleth Gods lawes,
his owne traditions, hee ſelleth ſinne, hee ſelleth righteouſnes,
hee ſelleth CHRIST, hee ſelleth the bleſſed Sacramente
of his fleſhe and bloude: hee ſelleth the workes of Saintes,
hee ſelleth Chriſtes merites, hee ſelleth the people of God, he
ſelleth holy orders, hee ſelleth pardon and remiſſion of ſinnes,
hee ſelleth GOD and all his ordinances, and all for money.
               But is not this a monſtrous hypocriſie, that the Pope will be
called the ſeruant of ſeruants, and yet will take vppon him to be
the Lord of Lordes, and King of Kinges?
               The Pope is a more deteſtable enemie to the true Catholicke
Church then eyther Turke or infidell, for thoſe that ſeeke to
vphoulde his abhominations, thoſe hee maketh Saintes, and
thoſe that doe impugne his doctrine by the ſcriptures, them hee
perſecuteth, and againſt thoſe Princes where hee cannot preuaile
with thoſe excommunications, his curſes, and his Bellowing
Bulles, them hee ſeeketh to confounde by poyſonyng,
by ſtabbing, or by murtheryng in one ſorte or another.
               Spoyles, maſſacres, and treaſons, euen to the deſtruction,
and murthering of Princes, by their ſeruantes and ſubiectes (if
a pryeſt doe but ſay the worde) are accounted iuſt, honorable,
meritorious, holy, but for a Prince to defende his owne right,
or in executing iuſtice vppon ſuch of the Popes Vagaboundes as
are ſent to ſeduce, to conſpire, and to practiſe villanie, he is an
hereticke, a ſchiſmaticke, a diſobedient childe to the Church,
and he muſt be poyſoned, ſtabbed, or blowne vp with gun-powder,
there muſt be ſome thing exployted againſt him, hee muſt
not liue, if God doe not defend him.
               This is the fruite of the Popes religion, and theſe be the practiſes
that are vſed by papiſtes, lette euery man therefore looke
well to his leader, that he be not blinde, for both the guids that

are blinde, and thoſe that are blindly led, ſhall altogether, fall
in the ditch, it ſhall be no excuſe to ſay, I was thus taught by my
ghoſtly father, or this is the fayth that our forefathers haue dyed
in.
               When the worde of God is preached vnto men that be wicked
vnto whom God hath giuen no grace to receiue it, then are they
nothing thereby amended, but their heartes are the rather, the
more obdured, and the more the word of God is preached vnto
them, ſo much the more obſtinate they become, and the more
miſchiefe they intend: after this manner the heart of Pharao was
hardened, when the woorde of GOD was deliuered him by
Moſes, hee hauing no grace to receiue it, the more Moſes
indeuoured to expreſſe it, the more ſturdie was he to withſtand
it.
               But what neede we trauell into Egypt to fetch preſidents, when
wee haue ſo many home examples heere in Ireland, where the
truth of Gods goſpell hath beene ſo long preached, and the
people euery day growne more obſtinate then other, that are rather
giuen vppe to beeleeue lies, legendes, fables, dreames,
viſions, olde wyues tales, and a number of ſuch other mockeries.
               The Papiſtes haue euer more beene full of Myracles, but in
their Legende of Saintes, and in many other fooliſhe Bookes,
they haue fayned them ſo groſſely, that they are aſhamed to
heare of them, but GOD ſometymes, ſuffereth thoſe that
haue no loue to his trueth, to bee deceiued by lying Myracles,
for as the children of the trueth, ſhall naturally incline vnto
the truth, ſo the children of the Diuell whoſe heartes are full
of lyes, ſhall naturally conſent to bee ledde away with lyes.
               I might yet inlarge a great deale of other matter, but my concluſion
is that the whole glory of the Popes Church is nothyng
elſe but traſh.
            
            
               
               3
A Reuocation of all ouer ſightes that through ignorance
were publiſhed in that Booke.
               
                  I Am come to the matter that is moſt of all
looked after, and that I am ſure is eſpecially
wiſht for, and that is A Reuocation of my ouerſightes:
I know not how to behaue my ſelfe honeſtly
in this buſineſſe, for to ſquare in out to
there contentments that doe deſire it, would
wound mine owne credit, & to reitterate thoſe things that might
pleade my excuſe, would ſooner breede a newe warfare of words,
then ſettle that quiet that I could wiſh: but they ſay, there is better
ſafety in an vniuſt warre, then in a patcht peace.
               I confeſſe, that if I had but halfe ſo farre ouerſhot my ſelfe, as
reportes were giuen out, a Reuocation in wordes onely would bee
too little to make amends, for I would acknowledge my ſelfe to
be worthy of ſhame and puniſhment both.
               But becauſe the booke is extant to be ſeene, & to anſwere for
it ſelfe, I thinke my beſt courſe will be to ſet down thoſe oppoſitions
that haue beene obiected againſt me, aſwell by thoſe that
were but miſinformed by other mens reportes, as of thoſe that
made malitious collections, exhibiting thoſe thinges againſt me
for ſlaunders, that were ſhamefull for them to bring into queſtion,
if they had beene well aduiſed.
               Me thinkes an eaſie perſwaſion might induce wiſemen to beleeue,
that he that will vndertake to inuey againſt Poperie, eyther
by word or writing ſhall want no enemies in Ireland, that wil
both rayle and rage againſt him, and will ſo ouer load him with
lies and ſlaunders, that if they can not breake his backe, they will
yet be ſure to cracke his credit: amōgſt the reſt of thoſe vntruths
that were obiected againſt mee, one is howe I ſhould affirme in
my booke that there is neither ciuilitie nor humanity to be found
amongſt the Iriſh, but that they are inclined to all maner of brutiſhnes.
               And although I neede no other anſwere to this but to turne
them to my booke, that they haue ſo ſlaundered and belied, yet
for better ſatisfaction I ſay, it is truth that I haue ſpoken of the

manners and cuſtomes that are vſed amongſt the Iriſh in ſome
partes of the Country, that are not yet ſo conformed from there
vnciuill demeaners, nor ſo perfected in the complements of humanity,
but that they retayned ſtill their accuſtomed vncleanelines:
now if I ſhould ſay that in ſome partes of England it ſelfe,
there bee many people that are both rude, ignorant, and verie
clowniſh, as it is well enough knowne there are ſo (indeede) could
this be a diſparagement to the whole realme?
               But they will ſay I haue made no exceptions amongſt the Iriſh,
but haue numbred them all to be in one predicament, let me
intreate them but to ouerlooke my Epiſtle to the Reader in that
booke where they ſhall finde theſe wordes.
               Doe not thinke mee to be ſo generall, but that I doe make a great differnce
betweene thoſe that are rude, vnciuile, vnreuerent, vncleanely,
and vntaught, and thoſe other againe, that are milde, modest, kind, curteous,
and that are euery way indued with wit, reaſon and vnderstanding.
And I doe make the like exceptions betweene thoſe that are irreligious,
ſuperstitious, Idolatrous, ſeditious, rebellious, that do retayne Ieſuites,
Seminaries, and other Traiterous Prieſts, then of thoſe that contrariwiſe
are profeſſors of the Goſpell, that doe imbrace the holy Scriptures,
and doe indeuoure themſelues in the ſeruice of God, and in obedience
to their Prince.
               I hope I may reuoke this without any diſgrace, I haue beene
charged with a lie, and I renounce it.
               A ſecond obiection was, that I had taxed the Iriſh in generall
to bee more ſauage and cruell then the Canibals.
               
               This is as true as the firſt, and needeth no other purgation,
then what is contained in the booke it ſelfe, and firſt in the 36.
page, I ſay that thoſe of the Iriſh that haue reduced themſelues to ciuilitie
(were it not for their Religion) are otherwiſe of very good conuerſation:
and aſwell in their manners as in the decency of their apparell, they
are very modeſt and comely. And in the 17. page, Although the vulgar
ſorte through their dull witts & their brutiſh education can not conceiue
what is profitable for themſelues and good for their Countrey, yet
there be ſome others, whoſe thoughts and minds are inriched with knowledge
and vnderstanding, that haue done good in the country, and whoſe
example heerafter may giue light to many others. For I thinke that if
theſe people did once vnderstand the preciouſnes of vertue, they woulde

farre exceede vs, notwithſtanding our long experience in the ſoueraigntie
of vertue.
               
               You may ſee now, I haue no ſuch conceite againſt the Iriſh,
in generall as they haue fabled, but that I thinke there be good
amongſt the bad, and bad amongſt the good, I might therefore
haue reuoked this accuſation, as he that reuoked a long relying
letter but with one word Ment
                        •
                     ris: yet I will not doe ſo, but I will
borrow a Lawyers plea, Non eſt factum.
               
               It is yet againe obiected againſt me, that I haue vpbraided the
whole Iriſh nation with their rebellious diſpoſitions: with their
cruelties, with their murthers, with their treaſons, and that I doe
make ſemblance as though there were neuer a ſound ſubiect in
Ireland, neyther in life nor religion: if theſe reportes were but
halfe of them true, I might be aſhamed to drawe any breath in
Ireland.
               
               
                  I would to God that neyther my ſelfe nor any other man beſides
could iuſtly reproue them for their rebellions, for then inſurrections,
and for their treaſons and murthers both, but to
thinke that there is neuer a ſound ſubiect in Ireland, it were pittie
I ſhould liue to haue ſuch a thought in Ireland, but let mee proceede
as I haue begun, let mine owne lines pleade mine own excuſe,
in the 52. page, I haue ſet downe theſe wordes. I know there
bee in Ireland a number of worthy ſubiects, that cannot be detected, nor
their fidelitie and truſt to their Prince by any meanes impeached, And
in the 111. page, I know amongſt the Nobilitie of Ireland, there hath
beene, and there are ſtill, many honorable perſonages, and ſo there are
of many other gentlemen, that without all doubt are as foreward, as ready
and as willing to ſerue their Prince, as any other whoſoeuer. And yet
againe in the 54. page of my booke, I haue often ſayd, that there be
many good people in Dubline, and ſo through all the partes of Ireland beſides,
men of all ſortes, of all profeſſions, and of all degrees that are not to
bee detected.
               What haue I omitted to commend in the Iriſh, (I meane of
thoſe that are worthy of any comendations indeede) but I haue
done them right, I haue giuen them their due, I haue not forgotten
thoſe that be feweſt in number that are godly affected to religion
as in the page, 91. God be thanked Ireland was neuer ſo destitute,
but there hath beene a number of good people natiues of that Country,

that hath zealouſly and religiouſly profeſſed the Goſpell. And therfore
thoſe that could ſpie out the diſcommēdations I haue giuen
of thoſe that be bad, and could not ſee the prayſes I haue giuen
to thoſe that be good, it ſhould ſeeme they are not perfect ſighted,
but I would I could intreate them yet to put on their ſpectacles,
and to looke into diuers parts of my booke that doe pleade
my excuſe, they ſhould find in the 14. page, this honeſt proteſtation:
I doe know neuer a man in Ireland that I doe hate, or that I do
wiſh any harme vnto, and therefore if I happen to glance at the abuſes of
thoſe that be all, let not thoſe that be good thinke themſelues thereby to
be detected, or ſo much as touched.
               
               
                  They ſhould find againe in my Epiſtle to the Reader: I would
not haue it thought, that I make any difference betweene the Engliſh &
the Iriſh, in reſpect of their birth, for I know there be as worthy men in
Ireland, as in England.
               
                  And in the laſt leafe of the booke againe, for a farwell: I hope
there is no man that will accuſe me of partiallity, to ſay I haue more forborne
to ſpeake againſt the follies of the Engliſh, then againſt the manners
and cuſtomes of the Iriſh, or that I doe otherwiſe distinguiſh betweene
them, but value them both a like, the good to the good, and the bad to the
bad.
               I knowe not yet therefore what Reuocation I ſhould make, but
to ſay that eyther I haue beene wonderfully miſtaken or ſhamefully
belied. I might yet ſpeake of other accuſations, that haue
beene greiuouſly inforced againſt mee, howe I haue mocked at
their Iriſh cuſtomes, ſcoffed at their holy welles, derided their
Iriſh Saints, and one in ſober ſadnes tooke it very greiuously that
I had termed, their Fryers their Ieſuites & their Prieſts to be the
Popes vermine.
               I warrant ye, they that could ſpie me out theſe faultes, they were
not blinde they were none of theſe heritickes, that will ſay the pater
noſter in Engliſh: but they ſay open confeſſion muſt haue open
ſhame Peccaui. I haue ſinned, and here I doe make open Reuocation
for I reuoke welles Saints Fryers, Ieſuites, Prieſts, Pope,
Deuill and all: And I would all that knowes me in Ireland would
take example by me and do the like.
               Thus much for Ireland in generall that they ſay I haue ſo detected
in my booke, & now for Dubline in particuler that I hope

I ſhall aſwell ſatiſfie and giue content.
               I haue written 3 ſeuerall Chapters the 15. the 16. and the 17.
that doe particularly concerne the Cytty of Dubline, the heade
of the 15. chap, A true deſcription both of the Cytty and Cittyzens
of Dubline.
               
               The head of the 16. Of ſome defectes in the gouernment of Dublin,
the head of the 17. Of the trade and trafficke that is vſed in Dublin,
               
               In the firſt of the three, which is the 15. Chap. I haue a little
croſſed Maiſter Stanihurſt that in his deſcription of the Citty of
Dublin, doth ſo floriſh it out with ſuch gorgious buildings (as he
termeth them) that the world doth knowe, when hee writte his
Cronicle, made but a ſorry ſhowe, to what it is now. But Stanihurst
ſought to pleaſe by flattery, and I by plaine dealing, he
paintes it out more gorgiouſly then truely, but my deſcription in
theſe wordes following. To ſpeake the truth of Dublin as it deſerueth
first the Towne it ſelfe, is conuenient enough, pleaſantly ſeated aſwell for
the ſerenity of the ayre, as for the pleaſing walkes, that are roūd about the
Citty on euery ſide: And this commendation, I thinke bee more
properly true, then that ſumptuous deſcription that Maiſter Stanihurst
hath made of it. Now how I am conceited towardes the
Cittizens themſelues let mine owne lines witnes: which doth like
wiſe follow in theſe wordes. The Cittizens themſelues are wonderfully
reformed, in manners, in ciuilitie, in curteſie, both themſelues and
their wiues, modeſt and decent in their apparell, and they are tractable
enough in any thing, Religion onely excepted.
               
               
                  And the very latter words in the ſelfe ſame Chapter are theſe:
Dubline is not yet ſo deſtitute, but that there are ſome, aſwell learned
Diuines, as other graue and godly Cittizens and Townes-men that God
hath bleſſed with the light of his word, that doe dayly indeuoure themſelues
to giue good example, ſeeking no leſſe to aduance the glory of God,
as the honour of their Prince, and the good of their Country.
               Mee thinkes theſe words were enough for thoſe that were wiſe
to number themſelues amongſt thoſe that bee good, and not to
finde fault with the reprehenſions of thoſe that bee ill.
               But heere is a matter now obiected againſt mee, that in this
Chapter I haue taxed the Cittizens of lacke of loue to his Maieſtie,
for their receiuing and harbouring of the Popes vermine,
which (they ſay) lies not in the Maior to redreſſe, but it belongeth

to a more ſuperiour authority, I proteſt I am ſorry that ther
ſhould be a man found in Dubline, that would take exceptions at
this, and theſe thinges were better to be buried with ſilence, then
to bee diſcourſed with diligence, but if it bee a fault to ſpeake
againſt the entertaining of popiſh prieſts in Dubline, that are wel
knowne to be his Maieſties proteſted enemies, I haue committed
that fault through ignorance: for I had thought, that the
Cittizens of Dubline in generall, that haue receiued ſo many liberall
giftes, ſuch gracious grants, and large liberties, from diuers
and ſundry Princes of England, and that are ſo bountifully
cōfirmed, by our moſt gracious King that now is, I had thought
the Cittizens of Dubline, in reſpect of their loue and duty to ſo
good and gracious a King ſhoulde at the leaſt haue reſtrayned
(though not puniſhed) that brood of vipers, that doth practiſe
nothing but treaſon and contempt, both againſt his Maieſtie &
his proceedinges.
               And I perſwaded my ſelfe againe, that the Mayor of Dubline
that is ſo great a magiſtrate within his owne precinct, that hath
the managing of all affayres within the Citty and that ſtandeth
vpon his prerogatiue within his liberties, and will haue no more
to medle but himſelfe, that may hang, that may draw, that may
puniſh, and hath his Maieſties ſword committed vnto him for
the ſame purpoſe, if all this be not ſufficient warrāt for the Maior
of Dubline, to hunt out of his iuriſdictions, thoſe ſowers of ſedition
thoſe peruerters of his Maieſties good ſubiectes and thoſe
malitious enemies to their king, it is pitty that he hath not a new
Charter, wherein theſe ſeruices might be better warranted vnto
him: I doe not ſpeake of the Mayor that is now of the time preſent,
but I ſpeake of all that are paſt, and of the reſt that are to
come: for if euery Mayor within his liberties, and euery Biſhop
within his dioceſſe throughout Ireland, would doe their duties,
God would be more honoured, the King better obeyed, and the
people vnited in that loue and amitie, that now is diſſipated, by
this contrarietie in Religion. In the 16. chap. ſpeaking of ſome
defects in the gouernmēt of Dublin, the greateſt fault that is ther
armed at, is the prophanatiō of the Sabboth day, that day which
God hath cōmanded to bee kept holy, & ſhould be dedicated to
his honor, that day is moſt polluted in Dublin, & euery alehouſe
frō morning till night is peſtered, with drunkards with blaſphemers,

I will not ſpeake of whore-hunters, but indeede with all
kinde of diſordered people.
               It is truth, that in England (and elſe where that I know in Chriſtendome)
there are drunkards, there are blaſphemers, & there
are whore-hunters too many, but the rate penal lawes to reſtrain
them, but eſpecially on the Sabboth day, and in England, there
is not any one permitted to keepe a tippling houſe, but hee
muſt from yeere to yeere enter into bond, and good ſureties
with him, to keepe good rule and order: and I thinke there is no
man that profeſſeth to bee a Chriſtian, be he Proteſtant or Papiſt,
that will thinke I haue offended in this, and therefore I ſhal
not neede to make any Reuocation in the matter, becauſe I hope
there is no man agreiued at it. I would be ſorry to reitterate the
occaſion that bred offence, betweene the two Sheriues and my
ſelfe: becauſe my deſire is rather to qualifie, then to reuiue matter
of vnkindnes, but what ſoeuer hath formerly paſt betweene
vs, I proteſt I am ſo free from malice towardes them, that I doe
not know them frō other men, when I meete them in the ſtreets,
what meaning they haue towardes mee, I know not, if it be good
I would be glad, if it be ill, I care not: the worſt I doe wiſhe vnto
them, is, that it would pleaſe God to inſpire them with his ſpirite
of truth, and as I wiſh it from my heart, ſo helpe me God.
               And although I muſt confeſſe, I haue euer hated Popery, yet
I proteſt I neuer hated papiſt for his religion, but pitted him, eſpecially
he or they that I know to be ignorantly led, and ſeduced
by others, for I hate not the man, though I hate his religion.
               And let me now craue pardon of the Cittizens of Dubline in
generall, but to lament that calamity pittifull to bee ſpoken of,
that in the Citty of Dubline, where the word of God hath beene
ſo plentifully preached in ſuch continuance: & that ſhould giue
light & example to all the reſt, both of citties and towns through
out all Ireland: and are not able to make a yearely choyce of a
Mayor and two Sheriues, that will either goe to Church, or willingly
take the oath of alleadgeance to his Maieſty, & that they
haue no other to imploy for his Maieſties ſeruice, but ſuch as
will impugne his Maieſties lawes.
               But they will ſay a Papiſt may bee a ſound ſubiect, I will
not denie but hee may bee ſo: but I will aske our Papiſtes of

                  Dubline or elſe where, but this queſtion, what they doe thinke,
whither at Rome or at Remes, or where ſoeuer otherwiſe, where popopery
beareth ſway, whither they would put a knowne proteſtant
in comiſſion for the ſeruice of the Pope: they would ſooner
put out both his eyes and carry him to a ſtake: but what a gracious
King is this, that ſeeketh but an oath for his ſecuritie: And of
whom? marry of thoſe that haue ſuch cunning to equiuocate and
haue ſo many diſpenſatiōs in a readines, that what they ſweare to
day they may reuoke to morrow & y• are taught by their prieſts,
that when they are brought before ſuch as they account for hereticks,
they may both ſophiſtically ſweare & ſophiſtically anſwere
               This I hope may ſuffice for a Reuocation of all ouerſightes that I
haue cōmited againſt the Cittizens of Dublin in the 16. Chap. of
my booke. And now to ſpeake ſomthing for the credit of that city,
& to deliuer truely but what I haue receiued from ſome of the
Cittizens themſelues, & not of the inferiour ſort, but from ſome
of the beſt Aldermen of the citty of Dubline, who foreſeeing the
partialitie that is vſed by officers of all ſortes (that bee papiſtes)
that doe execute there places not only to the great detriment of
his Maieſties ſeruice but alſo when any of his Maieſties beſt affected
ſubiectes, that are knowne to be religious, & haue conformed
themſelues to his Maieſties proceedings, if any of theſe ſhal
light into the laps either of a Sergeant, a cōſtable or a Iayler that
is a papiſt, he ſhall bee afflicted and exacted on with more rigour
& cruelty then if hee were amongſt Turkes or Iewes, where contrary
wiſe, if a papiſt be brought in queſtion although it be ſometimes
for his diſobedience towardes his Prince there is ſcarce an
officer that wil do his duty to aprehend him, or being aprehēded
there will hardly befound a Iayler that will ſcantle him with any
ſhort alowance belonging to an offender, but will rather entertaine
him as a friend, And the more repugnant he ſheweth himſelfe
againſt his Maieſties proceedings, ſo much the more fauour
the Iayler will ſhewe him. Theſe officers that I ſpeake of be ſuch
as are belonging to cities and townes corporat, yea to the citty of
Dubline it ſelfe, amongſt the which there are ſome that on ſunday
mornings will firſt heare a maſſe, then after that they will attend
the Maior to Chriſtchurch, & hauing put him into his pue, they
conuey themſelues from out of the church into a tauerne where

they ſit til the Sermon be done, that they muſt wait of the Mayor
backe againe to his houſe. I doe not ſpeake this in any malicious
humour, wherby to indignifie the city of Dubline, amongſt
the inhabitantes whereof, although there be ſome few that be ill,
yet I know there be a great nūber of moſt worthy citizēs that do
ſhew no leſſe zeale and feruency in the worſhipping of God▪
                   then
loue and loyaltie to the ſeruice of the king, who for the better aduancement
of thoſe affaires that doe belong to his maieſtie, do
wiſh and deſire, that not onely the Mayor and Sheryues in euery
Citie and towne corporate, throughout the Realme of Ireland,
ſhould receiue the oath of alleageance, but that there ſhould not
be a Sergeant, a Conſtable, a Iayler, or any other pettie officer
admited, but ſuch as are tractable to his maieſties proceedings &
ſubmiſſiue to take vppon them, the oath of obedience.
               But ſome perhaps will ſay, that the Citties in Ireland (no not
Dublyne it ſelfe) is able yeare after yeare, to make choiſe of a Mayor
and two Sheryues, that will willingly take the oath of obedience
to his maieſtie, the which if it ſhould bee true, (as God forbid
it ſhoulde ſo bee) what a gratious clemencie then in a prince,
that will ſuffer a people to inioy ſo large liberties, as euery Cittie
throughout that realme is commonly infranchized, that are ſo
repugnant, and oppoſite vnto him.
               To come now to the 17. ſpeaking Of the trade and trafficke that
is vſed in Dublyne: ſome of them doe exclaime againſt me, that I
haue wonderfully wronged the cittie in ſpeaking againſt their
multitude of Alehouſes, which they call Tauerns; but as good
lucke woulde haue it, there bee others beſide my ſelfe that haue
founde out that fault, and firſt a moſt reuerent and worthie magiſtrate,
the Lord chiefe Barrone of his maieſties Exchequer in
Ireland, who in his oration to the late Mayor of Dublyne, when
he came to take his oath at the Chequer barre, gaue him aduertiſements,
of that ſuperabundance of Alehouſes, and of the abuſes
and inconueniences that did grow by the ſufferance of them.
               There was a learned doctor likewiſe, that openly exclaimed at
the abhomination that was vſed in thoſe multitude of Alehouſes,
in a Sermon at Christ-Church, before the Lord Deputy and the
ſtate, and before maiſter Mayor himſelfe, and thoſe fewe of his
brethren, that doe vſe to come to Church.
               
                  
But if it be a fault in me more then in the reſt to ſpeake againſt
theſe things, let it paſſe for one of my ouerſights, for I ſee he that
ſpeakes againſt pride drunkenneſſe and lechery, ſhall want no enemies.
               There followeth now a grieuous quarrell, and aboue all the
reſt moſt bitterly agrauated againſt me, and there hath beene inquirie
made in the matter whither I haue belyed the Citie or no
in ſaying, the Aldermens wiues ſould ale: my wordes are, The
beſt ſort of women, as Aldermens wiues and the reſt of the able ſort, are
thoſe that doe brewe.
               
               Now let it be vnderſtood (as without diſſimulation I ment it)
that ſome Aldermens wiues did brew ale to the intent to ſell it againe
by the doſins, by the barrell, or by the great (as we call it)
is this ſuch an indignity to all to ſay that ſome haue done ſo: or
what diſcredite to her that ſhoulde ſo doe, any more to brew ale,
then to make malte, or to indeuour any other thinges, that belonges
to good huſwifery, that euery wiſe womanne is to vnder
take.
               It is not the brewing of ale, but the number of idle huſwiues,
that vnder the pretence of ſelling, do keepe filthy houſes, ſhamefull
to be ſpoken of, this is it that offendeth.
               But I can tell where this and worſe matter too, was agravated
agaynſt me to ſome Aldermens wiues, by a femall creature, and
by ſuch a one (I warrant you) that doth thinke her ſelfe to be in
as good requeſt as Pudding Tabacco.
               
               But let me ſay for mine owne excuſe, for the Aldermen of Dublyne
themſelues, there be many of them my good friends, whom
I dearely loue, there is not any one of them that I thinke to bee
my foe, or that I doe hate, and therefore to ſlander them with
matter of vntruth, I would be ill aſhamed.
               Now for their wiues in generall, and for all the reſt of the citizens
wiues of Dublyne (that be of the better ſort) I proteſt it confidently,
and I ſpeake it from my heart, I neuer heard women les
infamed or miſſe-reported, in any citty or towne whereſoeuer I
haue trauayled: ſo that if Thucidides rule be true, that thoſe women
are to be accounted moſt honeſt, that are leaſt ſpoken of, I
ſay the citizens wyues of Dublyne, may march in equall ranke
with thoſe women that are leaſt ſteyned or miſreputed.
               
                  
In a fewe wordes now to expreſſe mine owne meaning, firſt
for this conſtruction that is made againſt me about the brewing
of ale: I doe confeſſe of mine owne knowledge, that there bee
diuerſe Aldermens wyues, and many other women beeſides that
neuer vſed it: but if they hadd, it is not the brewing of Ale that
I find fault with, nor with the ſelling of it, by thoſe women that
are honeſt, but by thoſe that are well knowne to be ſhameful liuers,
it is agaynſt them and againſt no other, that I do exclaime.
               I doe acknowledge likewiſe that Alehouſes, and victuallyng
houſes be both of them neceſſary, and therfore howſoeuer they
interpret my words, thoſe that be wiſe, can conceiue of my meaning:
theſe typling houſes by honeſt houſholders, and not by
theſe knowne ſtrumpets, that vnder the colour of ſelling ale,
doe liue in that loathſomneſſe of life, too ſhamefull to bee ſpoken
of.
               There is yet one other vnkindneſſe conceiued agaynſt me, for
ſpeaking of the extortion that is vſed by the Bakers of Dublyne,
that will bee ſure to make their breade after double the rate, that
corne is ſould for: a matter eſpecially looked into in euery Citty
and towne. And as it appeareth in the Engliſhe Cronicle, the liberties
of London, haue beene ceaſed into the handes of the king for
this tollerating, with the inormity of Bakers, and it hath euermore
beene thought a matter moſt behouefull to puniſh (and
that with all extremity) this extortion in Bakers, becauſe it onely
pincheth the poorer ſorte, that are worſt able to beare it.
               I proteſt I cannot revoke this as an ouerſight, that I haue ſpoken
agaynſt the Bakers, but doe rather inforce it, that eyther
they ſhould be reformed or elſe that the country Bakers, that wil
make their bread according to a true aſſiſe might be ſuffered (as
they be in other wel gouerned Cities) to ſerue the market, which
euery man doth admire, is not ſuffered in Dublyne: And now to
ſpeake without diſſimulation, there is nothing wherewith the city
of Dublyne is more wounded with diſgrace, then in ſufferyng
ſo many filthie alehouſes, and in this bearing with the extortion
of Bakers.
               
               Thus you may ſee that although I haue glāced at abuſes that
are vſed by ſome that are ill, yet it is without any impeachment
of thoſe that be good, and therefore thoſe fault-finders haue but

diſcouered their malice, and done me no diſgrace.
               The truth is, the wholl drift of my Booke is againſt Popery,
how ſhould it then be befriēded in Ireland, where thoſe that wil be
afraid to reade it, will make no conſcience at all to ſlander it.
               I know not whither I may tearme it to be blindneſſe or obſtinacie,
or blindnes and obſtinacie ioyned both together, in a people
(ſencible and wiſe enough) that yet are trayned to neglect
the holy ſcriptures, to reuerence viſions lyes and fantazies: that
are led from the Church of God, to the ſuperſtitious, and abhominable
Church of Idolatry: that are wreſted from the obedience
of the Princes wholſome lawes, that inciteth to vnitie and
concorde, to the durtie decrees and ordinances of a ſuperſtitious
prieſt, that leadeth to deſtruction: that doth ſo neglect the means
of their ſaluation: that they will not ſearch for the truth, but are
ſo maliciouſly blinde, that they will not open their eyes to looke
towardes the light: that with the Iewes do throw ſtones at Chriſt
and will driue him away, when he commeth to preach, that with
the Nazarits, will thruſt him out of their citie with violent hands
when he commeth to offer himſelfe vnto them.
               I know not what I ſhould ſay of the people of Ireland, whither
it be through the confidence they haue in their prieſtes, or in the
diſtruſt that they haue of their owne iudgementes, or in the litle
credite they haue in Gods promiſes, that biddeth them ſeeke and
they ſhall finde: but ſomething there is that maketh them afraid
for they dare not looke on a booke, that is either repugnant to
their religion, or that doth contradict Popery.
               I haue not ſpoken theſe thinges againſt the Iriſhe, tauntingly,
to vpbraide them, but I ſpeake it louingly to admoniſh them: &
as the preacher that ſeeing ſome of his pariſhioners to frequent
his Sermons, more for faſhion ſake, and to take a little nappe of
ſleepe in the time of his ſermon, then for any zeale or deuotion
to the doctrine hee taught, yet hee wiſhed them ſtill to come to
Church although but to take their accuſtomed nap, hoping in
time to take ſome of them napping, and ſo to awaken them with
the power of Gods worde, to make them more attentiue to thoſe
thinges that did ſo nearely concerne their ſaluation: euen ſo ſay
I, let thoſe that haue read ouer my former booke, but to the end
to picke quarrels againſt it, & to ſlander it with vntruthes, let thē
                  
do ſo (in Gods name) with this that followeth, let them read it ouer
I care not with what pretence, let them be angry ſtill at mine
honeſt meaning, it may happen to enlighten ſome of their eyes
that haue beene long blindfold, and I care not to offend mame
ſo I may pleaſe ſome.
            
            
               4
A Bulwarke or Defence of all truthes
contayned in my Booke.
               
                  THe matter that I haue to defend is, that al that
I haue written againſt Poperie is true, and hee
that defendeth truth is armed with authoritie,
if all the world were againſt him, and hath law
full power to pronounce the Pope himſelfe
with al his Cardinals to be hereticks, the brood
of Antichrist, and the miniſters of Hell and damnation.
               In my former booke, I haue slightly touched the fruits of the
Popes doctrine how it ſtirreth vp ſubiectes againſt their princes
how it draweth to rebellions, treaſons, murthers, mutinies, miſchiefes,
and to all manner of impieties.
               Now to fortifie this, and to make it more manifeſt, I will further
approue, how this poyſon of the Popes doctrine, inciteth
the people, from that truſt they ſhoulde haue in God, to affie
themſelues in Saints, how it maketh men to flie from Gods mercie,
to other mens merits, howe it excludeth Chriſt, and ſetteth
vppe a Pope-holy righteouſneſſe of workes and deſeruings, and
to conclude, howe it draweth from God to the Deuill, and from
that euerlaſting life, which Chriſt hath purchaſed for vs with the
price of his bloude, to the fire of hell, and euerlaſting damnation.
               It is Popery, that maketh newe relickes, that ſetteth forth vnſhamefaſt
legendes, that deuiſeth falſe myracles, whereby to deceiue
the people, that giueth them pardons for money, for many
thouſand thouſand yeares, that promiſeth them helpe in their
needes, and effect in all their deſires, that maketh open ma
                     •
                  tes
of the giftes and graces of God, that cauſeth men to runn from
place to place, from Saint to Saint, from ſhryne to ſhryne to increaſe

their offeringes, and to deceiue the people.
               They are papiſtes that bragge of reuelations, of viſions, they
walke in wonders aboue their reaches, they take away Chriſt the
mercie ſeate, and will needes comprehend God in his maieſtie,
by the iudgement of their reaſon, and pacific him with their
workes.
               True Chriſtian diuinitie ſetteth not God forth vnto vs, neyther
in his maieſty, nor in any manner of ſimilitude, but ſtreightly
forbiddeth vs frō the curious ſearching of his maieſtie, which
is intollerable to the body of man, but much more to the mind,
wee muſt not therefore, bee curious to ſearch out the nature of
God, but diligent to know his will, as it is ſet out to vs in Chriſt:
there is nothing more dangerous then to wander with curious
ſpeculation, to ſearch out God, for as God in his owne nature
is vnmeaſurable, incomprehenſible, and infinite, ſo he is to mans
nature intollerable.
               Let him then that would bee in ſafety and out of perill, brydle
that clyming and preſumptuous ſpirit, and ſeeke to knowe God
but according as by the ſcriptures, he ſetteth himſelfe forth to be
knowne in his ſonne our Sauiour.
               Then hee that hath to deale in the matter of his iuſtification,
and deſireth to knowe how God is to be found, that iuſtifieth and
accepteth ſinners, let him know, there is no other, but the man
Ieſus Chriſt, that hath ſayd himſelfe: No man commeth vnto the father,
but by me Iohn 14.
               He that ſeeketh any other way, doth but wander, and hee that
ſearcheth any other knowledge, is as far aſtray.
               But to whom can we liken God, or what ſimilitude canne wee
faſhion vp, that may reſemble the brightneſſe of his glory?
               A moſt horrible Idolatry to figure out the Image of God the
Father, like an old man with a gray beard, with a tryple crowne
on his head like a Pope, the holy Ghoſt, they figure like a doue,
and the bleſſed trinitie with three faces.
               Now for the Image of Chriſt, there be ſo many ſimilitudes, as
there be workemen to carue or to paint him, when euery one vſeth
his owne fancie to drawe him into what forme or 
                     •
                  auour he
liſt, and therefore it was merily ſpoken by an Iriſhe man, who beholding
an image that had beene paynted for Christ, ſwore that

it looked ſo like an Engliſhman, that he loued it the worſe.
               
                  Zenophon would needes perſwade that if beaſtes could paynt
they would portray out the image of God in the liknes of a beaſt,
when God ſpake vnto the children of Iſraell, they ſawe no ſimilitude
whereby they might faſhion God into any ſhape or likenes,
they onely heard a voyce, which voyce they were willed to obſerue
and keepe: It is enough that wee beeleeue Gods promiſes,
but not to portray him out in ſimilitudes, nor to diſpute of his
wil, and for thoſe that haue beene curious to ſearch out the cauſe
of predeſtination, they haue bin wrapped in intollerable doubts,
the which Saint Paul concludeth to bee all onely the will of God,
for the proofe whereof he brought in the evident example, how
Iacob was choſen, & Eſau reproued, both before they were borne
and before they had committed eyther good or euill.
               The papiſt ſeeketh his iuſtification in his owne workes, the
which being well conſidered, is leſſe then himſelfe, for the worke
man is much more excellent then his worke: nowe if the article
of iuſtification bee once ſubuerted, then is all chriſtian doctrine
ouerthrowne, for who are they that doe impugne this
chriſtian righteouſneſſe, but Iewes, Turkes, Papiſtes and hereticks
for he that hath once loſt Christ, muſt neceſſarily fall into the
confidence of his owne workes.
               To forgiue ſinnes, to make righteous, to quicken and deliuer
from death, and the deuill, and to giue euerlaſting life, theſe are
not the works of any creature, no not of Angels, but of the ſoueraigne
maieſtie the creator, and maker of all thinges.
               
                  Chriſt (ſayeth the Apostle) hath giuen himſelfe: but for what hath
he giuen himſelfe, not for our good workes, not for our vowes, not
for our pylgrimages, not for our maſ
                     •
                  ing, not for our holineſſe,
nor for our righteouſneſſe, but for our ſinnes, Gala. 1.
               Here is now a downe fall to the Popes pardons, to purgatory
it ſelfe, to vowes maſſes and other abhominations: this gunſhot
beateth downe Popery, it layeth all works, merites, and all other
ſuperſtitious ceremonies flat with the grounde, for if our ſinnes
might be taken away, by our owne workes, merites, and ſatisfaction,
or whatſoeuer otherwiſe, what needed the ſonne of God to
be giuen for them.
               Now if we did but conſider of the greatneſſe of the price, that

the ſonne of God muſt needes be giuen for it, & would yet thinke
of any other ſatisfaction, whereby we might redeeme our ſelues
we ſhould be very iniurious, to the precious bloud of Chriſt.
               Wee might heere againe yet further conſider, that ſinne is a
mightie tyrant, that is not to be vanquiſhed by the power of any
creature, but by the infinite power of Ieſus Chriſt the ſon of God
that gaue himſelfe for it.
               Then what doe the papiſtes, that doe thinke to ouercome ſin,
by their owne workes and merites, but in eſtabliſhing their own
righteouſneſſe, doe deface and plucke downe the glory of God,
and moſt perniciouſly doe ſet at naught, the precious bloude of
Chriſt, which he ſo freely hath giuen vnto vs.
               But our Papiſtes I thinke, are vtterly ignorant of the grieuouſnes
of ſinne, & do dreame it to be of no great force nor power
but that it may eaſily be put away, by good workes, by a popes
bull or by a prieſts bleſſing.
               Then they make certayne diſtinctions, between ſinne & ſinne
ſome to be greater and ſome to be leſſer, when there is no ſinne,
how ſleightly ſo euer accounted of, but is rewarded with death, &
dānation, if Chriſt be excluded, neither is their any other meanes
whereby to repayre it but by the ſheading of his moſt precyous
bloud.
               Why then thou fooliſh holy Pope, wilt thou beare me beleeue
thou canſt make mee righteous, with thy Bulles, with thy pardons,
with thy indulgencies, or with thy other tra
                     •
                  h, that am euery
day, euery houre, euery minute and euery moment, a ſinner
committing ſinne againſt the almighty himſelfe, & that in grieuous
and haynous maner, as contempt of God, blaſpheming his
holy name, deſpiſing his holy worde, prophaning the Sabboth
day, with a number of other like concerning the firſt table? admit
that I haue not committed murther, theft, whordome, and
ſuch other ſinnes actuall agaynſt the ſeconde table, yet in my
heart what ſinne haue I omitted, but that I am a ſinner, and a
continuall tranſgreſſor of all the commaundements: why then
if my ſinnes be ſo infinite, ſo horrible and deteſtable, who could
repayre them, who could ſatisfie for them, but he that hath paid
the price with his bloud?
               But will you ſee now the ſubtiltie of Sathan, to thoſe that beegin,

to lay holde on Chriſt by faith, to them he ſeemeth feareful
putting them in minde of the grieuouſneſſe of their ſinnes, and
of that which is a ſmall fault, hee maketh a very Hell, and dryueth
them as much as he can to deſpayre of Gods mercies, neuer
ceaſing to accuſe their conſciences, and all to make them to flie
from their anchor holde: to them on the other ſide, that hee in
ſnareth, to truſt in their own works and merites, them he lulleth
aſleepe in ſecuritie, they make ſinne no ſinne, they thinke to repayre
it, but in going to a Saints ſhryne, in ſetting vp a holy candle,
or in forbearing to eate egges on Friday.
               There is nothing more contrary to the nature of fleſh & bloud
then to be reprooued in thoſe thinges, wherein they think themſelues
to deſerue greateſt prayſe, to ſay they be ſinners, vnrighteous,
wicked, the children of wrath, when they thinke they haue
made themſelues righte us and holy by their good workes, by
going on pylgrymage, by praying to Saints.
               The wiſedome and righteouſneſſe of the fleſh is growne ſo
proud and ſtately, that they cannot indure to heare of the righteouſneſſe
of grace and faith: but that righteouſneſſe, which
knoweth not the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt, is double ſinne: and
therefore theſe holy ſinnes that are committed, bearing the ſhew
of righteouſneſſe, are farre more daungerous then thoſe fleſhly
ſinnes indeede, that all the world doth acknowledge to be monſtrous,
and the more wiſe, righteous and holy, menn are without
Chriſt, ſo much the more hurt they doe to the goſpell.
               If wee ſhoulde compare blaſphemers, publicans and harlots,
to thoſe holy hypocrites, we ſhould finde them the more likely
to obteyne grace, for they when they offende haue remorſe of
conſcience and doe not iuſtifie their wicked doinges, but the other
dare affirme their idolatries, their wicked worſhippinges, &
their other abhominations, to bee the workes of righteouſneſſe
acceptable vnto God, and thinges auaileable to ſaluation.
               So long therefore, as the opinion of righteouſneſſe abideth in
men, ſo long there is alſo abiding incomprehenſible pride, preſumption,
ſecuritie, contempt of the grace and mercy that is promiſed
in Chriſt.
               The doctrine of the goſpell taketh from men, all glory, wiſedome,
righteouſneſſe, and giueth them to God alone, to whome

they belong, the goſpell is a doctrine, concerning Chriſt, which
is neyther law nor worke, but our righteouſnes, ſanctification &
redemption, That he might be made an oblation for the ſinnes of the
whole world, that our ſinnes might be forgiuen for his ſake, and not for
the workes of the law, nor our owne righteouſneſſe: we acknowledge
and confeſſe that there is nothing in vs that is able to deſerue
grace and the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes: but that at wee obteyne it by
the free mercy of God, onely for Chriſtes ſake, whereby we doe
not ſeeke to ſet forth mans worthineſſe, but Gods mercy offered
vnto vs in Chriſt.
               For Chriſt and the Law cannot agree together in the conſcience,
the one muſt giue place: and he that cannot beeleeue that
God will forgiue him his ſinnes, for Chriſtes ſake, how can he be
leeue that his ſinnes ſhall be forgiuen, for the workes of the law,
which no man yet was euer able to performe.
               They that doe mingle the law, and the goſpell together, doe
perueit both, for either Chriſt muſt remayne and the lawe giue
place or▪ the law muſt remayne, and Chriſt muſt giue place.
               For he that will needes couple the law with the goſpell, doth
not onely blemiſh and darken the knowledge of grace, which
Paul ſo often ſpeaketh of, but alſo he taketh away Chriſt with al
his benefites.
               
                  The law indeed was giuen to vtter ſinne, death and damnation,
whereby to driue vs to Chriſt. The Law is our ſchoolmaſter to
bring vs to Chriſt ſaith the Apoſtle Gala. 3. and our Sauiour himſelfe
in the ſixt of Iohn: Do not thinke that I will accuſe you to my father,
there is another that accuſeth you, euen Moſes in whome you
truſt.
               One place of Scripture conteyning ſome threatening of the
law, beateth downe all conſolations beſides, and ſo ſhaketh all
our inward powers, that it maketh vs to forget iuſtification, grace
the goſpell and Chriſt himſelfe.
               The law no doubt is holy, righteous and good, & conſequently,
the workes of the law are holy righteous and good, yet notwithſtanding
a man is not therby iuſtified before God, but made
the rather ſubiect to the curſe.
               And although there be nothing more neceſſary then the lawe
and the workes thereof, yet by the ſame a man may be brought

to the deniall of Chriſt, for of the lawe many times commeth a
truſt and affiance in workes, and where that is, there can bee no
affiance in Chriſt: the righteouſneſſe of the lawe is to fulfill the
law according to this ſaying of the Apoſtle, He that ſhall doe theſe
thinges ſhall liue in them, but the righteouſneſſe of ſayth is to beeleeue
according to this ſaying: The righteous manne dooth lyue by
fayth.
               
               Now the Papiſtes that doe ſo much indeuour to eſtabliſh the
righteouſneſſe of workes, doe thereby tread downe the righteouſneſſe
of Chriſt, for although it be true, that workes muſt followe
faith, yet in the worke of our ſaluation, there muſt bee no
medly, we muſt relye in the one or in the other: now faith worketh
not but beleeueth in Chriſt, who is our propytion, and remiſſion
of ſinnes, but the effect of the law is not to make righteous
and to giue life, but to ſhewe forth ſinne, and to deſtroy, and although
the lawe ſayeth, Hee that ſhall doe theſe thinges ſhall liue in
them, yet I would but ſee a Papiſt, that could poynt me out but
one man, that had ſo performed the workes of the law, to merite
eternall life by his owne deſeruings: who ſo euer ſeeketh to make
himſelfe holy by the lawe, what canne he imagine, but that God
beeing angry, muſt needes be pacified with good works, & what
workes can he now performe wherin he findeth not ſome imperfections,
his faſting, his praying, his worſhipping, his ſacrificing
he thinketh ſtill that he hath omitted ſomewhat, or that he ha
                     •
                  h
not done them as hee ought, they cannot therefore quiet his
conſcience.
               If our reward ſhould be according to our workes, there ſhould
no man be ſaued, when our beſt deedes (compared to the law)
are damnable ſinnes, neither by it is any fleſh iuſtified as it appeareth
in the 3. to the Rom. for the fulfilling of the law, is onely to
beleeue in Chriſt: neyther is it written in the goſpell, hee that
worketh, but he that beleeueth ſhall be ſaued, and therfore they
that doe ſeeke heauen by works, are ſuch as doe not vnderſtand
the treaſures that are layd vp for them in Chriſt.
               There is no man ſo fooliſh to condemne good workes (as the
Papiſt moſt ſlaunderouſly reporteth) but wee condemne confidence
in good workes, that ſhould eyther iuſtifie or make righteous
whereby the precious bloud of Chriſt ſhould be made altogether

vnprofitable, for thoſe that doe ſeeke their iuſtification
by Lawe, or workes, what is it elſe but a flat deniall of Chriſt.
               But here commeth reaſon now to debate the matter, who hearing
of iuſtification by fayth, beginneth to ſtorme: what ſayth it
are all my good workes then nothing worth? haue I faſted, haue
I prayed, haue I bin charitable in beſtowing my money to build
chappels to builde chanteryes, to giue perpetuities to maſſing
prieſtes, to buy Coopes, veſtments, Croſſes, and chalyces, &
are all theſe nothing worth, haue I laboured in vaine?
               In any caſe therefore when wee come to debate of theſe matters
away with reaſon, which is an vtter enemie to fayth, and leaneth
not to the righteouſneſſe of fayth, but to it owne righteouſneſſe,
or at the leaſt to the righteouſneſſe of the lawe: now wher
Law and reaſon are once linkt together, there fayth looſeth her
virginitie: for mans reaſon taketh more pleaſure in meaſuring
of God, by her owne imagination, then by his worde, and doth
thoſe with better will and greater zeale, that ſhee her ſelfe hath
choſen, then thoſe that God hath commaunded.
               And therefore if with the papiſt, we ſhould goe about to meaſure
the thinges appertaining to fayth and ſaluation, but according
to the rule of reaſon, wee ſhould finde both great abſurditie
and many impoſſibilities: for who can beleeue the articles of the
Chriſtian fayth, that Chriſt the ſonne of God was conceiued, and
borne in the wombe of the virgine Mary, that he was borne and
ſuffered, the moſt reprochfull death of the Croſſe: that the dead
ſhall riſe at the laſt day? and howe abſurde and fooliſh dooth it
ſeeme to reaſon, that in the Lordes Supper, the body & bloude
of Chriſt, ſhould ſpiritually be offered vnto vs, or that the Sacrament
of baptiſme ſhould be the receiuing of the holy Ghoſt:
or if we had no better ſpeculation then to looke with the eyes of
reaſon how could we ſee or beleeue the bleſſed trinitie? but how
fooliſh and impoſſible did it ſeeme in the iudgement of reaſon,
when God ſayde vnto Abraham that he ſhould haue a ſon of the
withered and barren body of his wife Sara? we may therfore conclude
and that vndoubtedly, that in the ſearching out of thinges
that are diuine, there is nothing more vnreaſonable, then that
which we call naturall reaſon: The wiſedome of the fleſh (ſaith Saint
Paule) is enmitie with God: And therefore when God ſpeaketh,

reaſon iudgeth his words to be hereſie.
               The papiſt doth attribute the merit of grace, and the remiſſiof
ſinnes, to the worke wrought, for they ſay that a good worke
before grace is auaileable to obteyne grace of congruence, beecauſe
it is meete and conuenient that GOD ſhoulde rewarde
ſuch a worke, but when grace by this meanes is once obteyned,
then the good workes following doe deſerue euerlaſting life as a
due debt.
               For the firſt worke before grace God is no debter, but beecauſe
he is iuſt and good, it therefore behoueth him to approue ſuch a
worke, and to giue grace for ſuch a piece of ſeruice: but when
grace is obtayned, God is become a debtor, and is conſtreyned
of right and dutie to giue eternall life: for now it is a worke don
in grace and therefore it maketh gratious.
               Now if a man, of his own abilitie may performe a worke which
is not onely acceptable in Gods ſight, but is alſo able to deſerue
grace of congruence, & get of right and duty eternall life, what
neede is there then of the grace of God, of the forgiuenes of ſins
or of Chriſt himſelfe? he might well haue ſpared his bloude and
bitter paſſion: we are able to craue for our ſelues, and to worke
our owne ſaluation by our owne deſeruinges.
               But if the Pope, with all his religious rable were not both blind
and malicious, they could not chooſe but ſee, and would not let
to confeſſe it to bee a moſt horrible blaſphemy, to thinke that
there is any worke whereby to pacifie God, when wee ſee there is
nothing that could appeaſe him, but that ineſtimable price, euen
the death of his Sonne: away then with theſe Popiſh ſatisfactions
of workes, of merits, of vowes, of ceremonies, both before
grace & after grace, throw them altogether with their firſt founders,
into the bottomeles pit of hell.
               
                  Whatſoeuer is not of faith, is ſinne, ſayeth the Apoſtle Rom. 14.
and therefore he that would deſerue grace by workes going beefore
faith, goeth about to pleaſe God with ſinnes by heaping one
vppon an other, and therefore thou canſt not deſerue grace by
thy workes.
               The Pelagians doe grant aſmuch of grace as the papiſtes do,
for they ſay that menne may haue a good purpoſe, and a loue
of grace, of their owne naturall ſtrength, for (ſay they) God
                  
hath giuen good Lawes: and a manne may keepe them of his
owne naturall ſtrength, or elſe the commandements were giuen
in vayne.
               And may not infidelles and miſbeleeuers attayne to this merite
of congruence? for the Papiſtes doe grant that it commeth
of naturall ſtrength, and yet it ſhould not follow of congruence
that they ſhall receiue grace, nor yet attayne to the remiſſion
of ſinnes, for howe ſhould a man without a ſpeciall grace abhor
his ſinnes: for if men may doe good before grace, then we may
gather grapes of thornes, and figges of thiſtles: we ſee now, that
the firſt parte of Chriſtianitie dooth conſiſt in the knowledge of
our ſelues, and of our owne vnworthineſſe.
               The ſeconde part (if thou wilt be ſaued) thou muſt not ſeeke
thy ſaluation in thy workes, but in Chriſt that was crucified and
dyed for thee, for God hath reuealed vnto vs, that hee will bee
vnto vs, a mercifull father, and without our deſertes (ſeeing
wee are able to deſerue nothing) will freely giue vnto vs remiſſion
of ſinnes, righteouſneſſe and life euerlaſting, for his ſonne
Chriſtes ſake.
               This is our beliefe touching Chriſtian righteouſneſſe, againſt
theſe horrible and monſtrous blaſphemies of papiſtes, concerning
their merite of congruence, and worthines of works.
               Chriſtian righteouſneſſe is Chriſt apprehended by faith, and
dwelling in the hearte, but to giue a true rule of Chriſtianitie:
firſt wee are to conſider that a man muſt be taught by the Lawe
to know himſelfe, and to vnderſtande that all haue ſinned, and
haue need of the glory of God, Rom. 3 and that There is not one righteous,
no not one: Pſal. 14. when a man is thus humbled by the lawe,
and brought to the knowledge of himſelfe, then followeth true
re entance, and heere hee beeginneth to ſigh and to ſeeke out
for ſuccour, and vtterly diſpayring of his owne ſtrength, hee
findeth this comfortable conſolation: Sonne, thy ſinnes are forgiuen
thee: beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt, who hath taken thy ſinnes vppon him,
whoſe stripes haue made thee whole.
               
               This is the beginning of health and ſaluation, by theſe means
we are deliuered from ſinne, iuſtified and made the inheritors of
life euerlaſting, not for our owne workes and deſerts, but for our
fayth whereby we lay hold vppon Chriſt.
               
                  
When we haue thus laide hold vpon Chriſt by faith, through
whom we are made righteous, nowe followe good workes; and
that is, to loue God aboue all thinges, call vpon him, giue thanks
vnto him, prayſe his holy name, confeſſe his goodneſſe & mercie
towardes thee, beginne nowe to loue thy neighbour as thy
ſelfe, doe vnto him as thou wouldeſt bee done vnto, helpe the
needy, comfort the afflicted, giue almes to the poore.
               Theſe be good workes indeed, for this hearing of maſſes, this
worſhipping and offering to Idols, this going on pylgrymage,
to the holy Croſſe, to Saint Patrickes Purgatory, this giuing to
laſciuious prieſtes: leaue this to the Papiſtes, the generation of
Antichriſt, and the reſt of that holy rable of the Popes Vermine,
that dares take thoſe priuiledges to themſelues, that doe properly
belong vnto Chriſt alone, he onely forgiueth ſinnes, hee
onely giueth righteouſneſſe and euerlaſting life.
               Good workes are outwarde ſignes of true faith, which do not
iuſtifie of themſelues, but are as teſtimonialles to the worker,
that he is already iuſtified, ſo that workes are out the fruites of
fayth: good workes are all thinges that are done within the limites
of the lawes of God, in which God is honored, and for which
thankes are giuen to God.
               
               That faith that bringeth forth good workes doth iuſtifie, but
the works doe not iuſtifie, and this iuſtifying fayth is the free gift
of God without our deſeruinges, for by this faith giuen vs thus by
grace, we attayne the benefite of Chriſtes death, which onely iuſtifieth
vs, ſo that good workes are the fruites of a good faith.
               Faſting is a good worke, but howe? not to abſteyne, from
the eating of fleſhe, and to pamper the panch with all ſortes of
fiſh, till it be ready to ſurfeit, not to refraine from the eating of
an egge, and to make no conſcience at the killing of a man: not
to make difference of dayes, and to forbeare from butter, cheeſe
and milke, but neuer to abſteyne (neyther faſting day nor other)
to liue in drunkenneſſe in whordome, and in all manner of loath
ſome ſinne and wickednes: not to faſt in the honor of a Saynt,
and to liue with bread and water one day, & the next day to glut
our ſelues, and to ryot and reuell it out with all exceſſe.
               And what are theſe prayers that are deliuered in a ſtrange

tongue, that are tallied vpon a payre of Beades, that are preſenſented
to Saintes, Images and Idoles, but the works of darknes,
of ſinne and of damnation?
               All ſuch religion where God is worſhipped without his word,
and commaundement, is idolatry, and the more holy it ſeemeth
in outward ſhowe, ſo much the more dangerous: this abſtinency
of the Papiſtes in forbearing of fleſh, and eating of fiſhe, their
praying vpon beades, their worſhipping of Saints, their vowes,
their pilgrimages are all Idolatry.
               We doe not reiect faſting, and other good exerciſes as things
vnneceſſary, but we ſay that by theſe exerciſes, wee doe not obtayne
remiſſion of Sinnes: and heerevpon, the papiſtes both ignorantly
doe iudge, and ſlanderouſly doe reporte, that wee
ſpeake againſt good workes.
               
                  Whether thou eate or not eate, thou art neyther better nor worſe ſaith
the Apoſtle, now if any man would ſay, if thou eate, thou ſinneſt
or if thou abſtaine, thou art righteous, hee ſhould but ſhewe his
ignorance: it is a ſmall matter to eate or not to eate, but when a
man doth beleeue, that in abſtaining, hee meriteth heauen, or is
thereby the more holy, heere God is denied, and Chriſt is reiected,
and the bleſſinges of God thereby abuſed, and to thinke
that life or ſaluation, or death, and damnation, dependeth in the
obſeruation heereof, is a deuilliſh ſuperſtition, and full of blaſphemy.
               It is truth the papiſtes doe faſt, they pray, they watch, they do
lay croſſes on them ſelues, but by this they thinke to appeaſe
the wrath of God, to deſerue grace, to worke their righteouſnes,
to make themſelues holy: by this, they take from God his Maieſtie,
his diuinity, his mercy: And doe attribute the worke of
their ſaluation, to their owne merites and deſeruings.
               Our Sauiour in the 6. of Mathew, reproued thoſe workes that
are not performed by faith: but what workes bee thoſe that hee
there rebuketh? euen ſuch as are commaunded by the ſcriptures,
and ſuch as euery true Chriſtian muſt put in practiſe, namely faſting,
praying, & deedes of almes: for the Scriptures themſelues
being once corrupted with gloſſes (as our papiſtes do accuſtome
and as they haue made manifeſt in their Remiſh Teſtament) is no
more Gods word: ſo thoſe thinges that are commaunded by the

Scriptures, being once peruerted, and alienated from their true
vſes are neyther to be accoūted for good workes or godly deeds:
now what are become of thoſe merits of congruence, before faith
when faſting, praying, and almes giuing are reprooued, Chriſte
heere deſtroyeth not faſting, praying, and almes deedes, but
hee preacheth againſt the purpoſe and intent, howe they were
peruerted, by the Scribes and Phariſees, ſo we that do ſeeke our
ſaluation in Chriſt onely, doe not ſeeke to deſtroy the deeds of
good workes (as the papiſtes vntruely doe report) but wee ſay
that thoſe that doe ſeeke their iuſtification in them (as the papiſt
doth teach) are moſt iniurious to the bloud of Chriſt.
               Turkes and Iewes doe giue almes as plentifully as any Chriſtians
doe, yet it is abhominable, for lacke of faith and knowledg
of the true intent.
               In the offeringes that were made by Abell and Caine, wee ſee
that though the workes that are performed by vngodly perſons,
doe make as glorious a ſhow, as the deedes of the godly, yet in
the ſight of God which looketh on the heart, the deede is good
becauſe of the man, and not the man becauſe of the deede.
               The wrath of God conſumeth theſe holy and faithles workes,
as it did Nadab and Abihu: And here if we did but turne our eies
vnto the Phariſees, which before the comming of Chriſt in his
fleſh, had layed the foundatiō of freewill, wheron they built their
holy workes: ſee what followed, vpon feruency and zeale, they
thruſt themſelues out of the holy reſt of forgiuenes of ſinnes, by
faith in the bloud of Chriſt.
               Mee thinkes the Phariſees and our papiſtes doe drawe together
in one line, for the Phariſees perſecuted Chriſt, becauſe hee
reprooued their holy workes, and our papiſtes are as angry towards
vs, becauſe we renounce their ſuperſtitious merites, and
ſeeke our iuſtification in the bloode of Chriſt.
               
                  Abraham beleeued God and it was imputed to him for righteouſnes
then Abraham obtained not this righteouſneſſe before God
through the workes of the lawe, for at that time there was no law
nor in foure hundred and odd yeares after, then if there were no
law, there could be neither worke nor merit, what then, but the
bare promiſe, which Abraham beleeued, and it was accounted to
him for righteouſnes.
               
                  
                  Abell and Caine, They offered their oblations vnto the Lord, but the
Lord had reſpect to the offering of Abell: you ſee now ſayth the papiſt,
that God hath reſpect to offerings, and therefore works do
iuſtifie: but what blindnes is this that will not ſuffer them to ſee,
that God had firſt reſpect to the perſon of Abell, which pleaſed
the Lord, becauſe of his faith, their workes were both one, they
both offered oblations: what was then the difference? Abell was
faithfull, and Caine an hypocrite, preſuming on his owne merit,
as our Papiſtes doe.
               It is truth, faith and good workes are neere neighbours, for
they ſtill dwell together in a righteous man, but as touchinge
their office, there is a great ſeparation, for the lawe can haue no
dominion but ouer the fleſhe, and faith alone muſt dwell in the
conſcience, and ſending Moſes away with his lawe, there ſhee
planteth Chriſt with his righteouſnes: for the bleeuing conſcience
muſt know of no law.
               He that hath once receiued Chriſt by faith, and knoweth that
hee is his righteouſnes and life, doubtles he will not be idle, but
as a good tree he will bring foorth good fruite, for the beleeuing
man, hath the holy Ghoſt, and where the holy Ghoſt dwelleth it
will not ſuffer a man to be idle, but ſtirreth him vp to all exerciſes
of piety and godlines, and of true religion, to the loue of God, to
the patient ſuffering of afflictions, to prayer, to thankeſgiuing, &
to the exerciſe of charity towards all men: but theſe good works
and this charity following faith, doe neither forme nor adorne
my faith, but my faith both formeth and adorneth them.
               Faith and workes therefore muſt be ſo taught, as the one hee
not confounded by the other, for he that teacheth works onely,
as the papiſtes are accuſtomed, then ſaith is loſt, if faith onely be
taught, then carnall men by and by begin to dreame, that workes
are not needefull.
               Faith is the beleeuing of Gods promiſes, and a ſure truſt and
confidence of goodnes and truth, and true faith is impoſſible to
be had without the ſpirit of God, for it is aboue all naturall power,
that a man in the time of affliction, when God ſcourgeth him
ſhould then beleeue, that God then loueth and prepareth for his
good.
               Faith giueth glory onely vnto God, which is the greateſt ſeruice

man can doe vnto him, for without faith God looſeth his
glory, his wiſedome, his righteouſneſſe, his truth and his mercy:
And to conclude, there is neyther Maieſtie, nor diuinity remaining
vnto God, where faith is wanting.
               The papiſt will ſay, that we muſt beleeue in Chriſt, and that
faith is the foundation of our ſaluatiō, but it iuſtifieth not except
it bee furniſhed with charity and good works: but faith of it ſelfe
is Gods gift, and Gods worke in our heartes, which therefore
iuſtifieth becauſe it apprehendeth Chriſt.
               Mans reaſon can not comprehend this, but thinketh of charity
and of workes, what I haue done, and what I haue not done,
but faith hath no other obiect then Ieſus Christ, the Son of God
deliuered to death for the ſinnes of the whole world, ſaith looketh
neyther to charitie, nor to workes: it ſaith not what haue I
done, or what haue I deſerued, but what hath Chriſt done, what
hath hee deſerued: the goſpell then truely anſwereth, that hee
hath deliuered me from eternall death and damnation, & therefore
a true and a ſtedfaſt faith muſt lay hold vppon nothing elſe
but vpon Chriſt alone.
               When I can feele and confeſſe my ſelfe to be a ſinner through
Adams tranſgreſſion, without my deſeruings, why ſhoulde I not
thinke my ſelfe to bee made righteous againe, through the righteouſneſſe
of Chriſt, without my deſeruinges?
               And therefore he that apprehendeth Chriſt truely by faith,
although he be neuer ſo much preſſed downe with the waight of
his ſinnes, may yet take comfort, and accoūt himſelfe to be righteous,
by that onely meanes, that he poſſeſſeth Chriſt by faith: if
this faith faile, and that it muſt giue place to workes or charity,
or to another helpe beſides, then it is but a fable that Chriſt is
the Sauiour of the world, and God alſo founde to bee but a lier,
that hath not performed, what he hath ſo confidētly promiſed.
               Let vs now acknowledge the lawe to be as it is, diuine and holy,
and let vs learne of it, both how wee ought to loue God, and
to demeane our ſelues towards our neighbour, & to aske counſaile
how wee ſhould be deliuered from ſinne, the power of the
Deuill, and eternall damnation: Let vs haue nothing to do with
the lawe, which in that poynt doth rather terrifie, then miniſter
comfort, heere let vs flie to the goſpell which teacheth vs, that

                  Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God hath payde the ranſome, with his
precious bloud and redeemed vs from our ſinnes, and here faith
alone willeth vs to receiue this, and to beleeue it: and therefore
when the lawe accuſeth and ſinne terrifieth, let vs looke vppon
Chriſt, laying holde on him by fayth, wee haue then preſent
with vs the conquerour of the lawe, ſinne, death and the deuill
himſelfe.
               Whoſoeuer will diligently conſider of the whole argument of
that booke called the Actes of the Apostles, ſhall finde that it teacheth
nothing elſe, but that the holy Ghoſt is not giuen by the
Lawe, but by the hearing of the goſpell: for when Peter preached,
the holy Ghoſt forthwith fell vppon all that heard him: &
in one day three thouſand that were preſent at the preaching of
Peter, beleeued and receiued the holy Ghoſt: Cornelius receiued
the holy Ghoſt, but not by his almes giuing, but Peter preaching
the goſpell of Chriſt the holy Ghoſt fell vppon him,
and of all the reſt that were preſent with him, ſo that the whole
ſumme and argument of that Booke is, that wee are iuſtified
by fayth onely in Chriſt, without our workes, and that the
holy Ghost is giuen, by the onely hearing of fayth at the preaching
of the goſpell, and not at the preaching or worke of the
Lawe.
               Well ſayth the papiſt, if the holy Ghoſt may be obteyned, but
by hearing of fayth and the goſpell preached, and that there is
nothing elſe required of vs: alas this is but an eaſie matter ſoone
performed, but the giuing of the holy Ghoſt, the forgiueneſſe of
ſinnes, the deliuerance from death, are matters of greater moment
then to be ſo eaſily attayned vnto: And therefore if thou
wilt obteyne theſe ineſtimable benefits, there belongs more to it,
then eyther hearing or beleeuing.
               Thus argueth the papiſt, and this ſeemeth conformable to a
mans owne reaſon, and this opinion is well liked, and the Pope,
and the deuill himſelfe will approue it.
               Thus the ineſtimable greatneſſe of the gift, is the cauſe that
wee cannot beleeue it, and becauſe this incomparable treaſure
is freely offered, therefore wee deſpiſe it: but lette Chriſtians
learne, that the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, Chriſt and the holy Ghost
are freely giuen vs by hearing of faith, and the goſpell preached.

And that wee muſt not ſo much thinke of the greatnes of the
thing that is giuen, nor of our vnworthines that are to receiue it,
as of the greatnes & gratiouſnes of the giuer: we muſt thinke that
it pleaſeth God freely to giue vnto vs, that vnſpeakeable gift as
Chriſt hath ſayd Luke 12. Feare not litle flocke, for it is your fathers
pleaſure to giue vnto you a kingdome▪
                   Let fooliſh reaſon now be offended,
let the papiſt neuer ſpare to rage and raile againſt vs, let
them ſay we teach men to doe nothing at all for the obtaininge
of ſo ineſtimable a gift but to heare the goſpel preached, let them
therfore refraine themſelues frō going to church, that they might
not partake with vs of this heauenly treaſure but for thoſe that
will exercyſe themſelues in righteouſnes indeede, let them firſt
exerciſe themſelues in the hearing of the goſpell & hauinge once
receiued that, let them giue thanks vnto God: and afterwardes,
let them exerciſe themſelues in thoſe good workes whiche are
commaunded in the lawe, ſo that the lawe and workes, may followe
the hearing of fayth: but to ſeeke any iuſtification by the
lawe or by workes we leaue the one to the Iewes, the other to papiſtes:
the papiſt teacheth that no man can haue any certayne
knowledge whither hee bee the child of God or no, but he that
doubteth of Gods good will towardes him, that man cannot beleeue
that he hath forgiuenes of ſinnes, but imagineth the tenth
article of the Chriſtian fayth, and maketh doubt of his own ſaluation,
the papiſt indeede, hath not this feeling, for it belongeth
to none but to him that hath the ſpirit of God: Knowe ye not your
ſelues, that Chriſt is in you except ye be reprobate perſons, ſayth Saint
Paule 2. Corin. 13. And in the ſixt to the Rom. Hee that hath not
the ſpirit of God is none of his.
               
               Now the ſpirit of God is the onely marke that is giuen to thoſe
that are elect, now the Papiſt that hath not this feeling, if Saint
Paules woordes bee true, is a reprobate, for he hath not the
marke.
               If any man feele in himſelfe a loue towardes the word of God
and willingly heareth, talketh, and thinketh of Chriſt, lette that
man know that it is not the worke of mans wil or reaſon, but the
gift of the holy Ghoſt.
               So agayne where the loue of the word and goſpel, is comtemned
diſpiſed, and vtterly ſet at naught, as we ſee at this day (but

eſpecially heere in Ireland) let them aſſure themſelues that it is
the worke of the deuill, that ſo blindeth their eyes and hardeneth
their hearts.
               Then what are the Papiſtes but the deſtroyers of the kyngdome
of Chriſt, and the builders vppe of the kingdome of the
Deuill: And as witch-craft couenanteth with the Deuill, ſo Idolatry
couenanteth with God: for thus many prayers, for
thus many Paternosters, for thus many creedes, for thus many
Aues, for thus many dayes of faſting, for thus many maſſes, for
theſe and many other matters the workes of the fleſh, ſuperſtitious
follies, and that Idolatryes.
               The Papiſtes doe imagine of GOD, to bee but a marchant
to ſell them his heauenly graces, for their ſtinking merits.
               If the doctrine of the Papiſtes be true, God nowe receiueth no
more to his mercie, but he receiueth vs to penance, which commonly
they linke together with holy workes, but what holy
workes? ſuch as feede them fat, and pampers them in idleneſſe,
and yet they would ſeeme to fayne that idoll their Pope to be ſo
mercifull that for a little money, there is neyther penance, nor
payne of purgatory, nor faſting, nor abſteyning from any filthy
ſin, eyther of whordome, treaſon, or murther, but he forgiueth
all, and ſendeth them to heauen and that with a trice: And as
they deale with God himſelfe, ſo they deale with the Saintes,
whom they woulde make as malicious and vengible, as the Poets
fayne their furies that tormentes the ſoules in Hell, if their
eues be not faſted, their Images viſited and worſhipped with a
Candle, or ſome other offeringes, which muſt bee perfourmed
in thoſe places, that they themſelues haue choſen to heare petitioners,
and to receiue their ſupplications: ſo that there is no
mercy remaining in God, nor in his Saints, but all reſteth in the
Pope alone.
               And the Pope is not onely more mercifull then God, but if
a manne may beeleeue our papiſtes, hee is more powerfull then
God: for God (ſay they) if a manne committe a ſinne, vppon
due repentance, hee forgiueth the offence onely, but not the
payne that is due to the offence, ſauing that hee turneth an
euerlaſting payne, but to a temporall payne, and appoynteth

ſeuen yeares plunging in purgatorie for euery deadly ſinne,
but the Pope abſolueth all, both a paena & Culpa, aſwell from
the payne that is due to the faulte, as from the faulte it
ſelfe.
               And whereas God forgiueth no ſinne but vpon due repentance
the Pope neuer lookes after that, money is the matter that hee
ſtandes vppon, he that hath money ſhal haue a plenary remiſſion
for as many horrible ſinnes as any man is able to commit, let
him chooſe whether he will repent or no, he ſhall be forgiuen, &
for a neede if a man be diſpoſed to committe a horrible murther
the Pope will giue him abſolution before hand.
               The whole doctrine of the Pope tendeth to couetouſneſſe to
robbe the ſimple and ignorant people, looke into their purgatory,
that onely ſerueth but to purge mens purſes, and wherefore
ſerueth pardons but for the ſame purpoſe, their offeringes to
Sayntes but to fill their bellies, their treatales and all other traſh,
what are they but meere coſenages and flat robberies?
               The infinite number of Popiſh prieſtes that be in Ireland doth
make a great commoditie amongſt the ſilly people, of this only
conceit, that for a little money beſtowed vppon them, they will
not onely vndertake to doe good workes for them, but will alſo
vndertake to ſtand between God and them, and to take all their
ſinnes vppon themſelues.
               Thus powerfull is the Pope if our papiſts ſay true, that he can
forgiue more then any can offend, but as for God, they make him
but an hypocrite, to forgiue vs the fault, but not the payne that
is due to the fault: but Pau
                        •
                     
                   ſayes he gaue himſelfe for our ſinnes,
if he gaue himſelfe to death for our ſinnes, without doubt hee is
no tyrant, as the papiſtes woulde make him: hee that will giue
himſelfe to death for vs, will neyther condemne vs, nor take pleaſure
in our torment.
               What vnkindneſſe in our papiſtes that without any authoritie
of ſcripture, will yet ſeeke to diſpoyle God of his honor, imagining
that he hath not deliuered vs aſwell from the paine as frō
the ſin: and what blaſphemy to thinke that Chriſts bloud, was
not ſufficient, to giue full remiſſion to his faythfull, aſwell for
the one as for the other: or for what intent ſhould the payne be
reſerued to ſatisfie towardes God, when all the paynes of Hell are

not able to purge one ſinne or to ſatisfie for it, which if it were,
in continuance of time, the damned ſoules ſhould be deliuered
from Hell.
               For our better vnderſtanding let vs heere conſider the ſinnes
which we doe commit, if they ſhould be meaſured by our ſelues
that doe commit them, they could be but finite: for of men that
are of themſelues but finite, how ſhould come that which is infinite?
but tranſgreſſion is increaſed according to the proportion of
him againſt whom it is committed: the ſinnes which we commit
then, are againſt the infinite Maieſtie of God, in regard of whom
our ſinnes are truely infinite: to an infinite offence, then doth
belong an infinite puniſhment, which could neuer be borne nor
remitted, but of that which was likewiſe infinite: God by his infinite
grace hath giuen vs his ſonne infinite as himſelfe to beare
it: our Sauiour by his infinite power, hath borne and ſwallowed
vpour infinite paine, and that further by his infinite obedience
purchaſed for vs Gods infinite grace: hee doth then forgiue vs
that debt which another hath payd him, hee doth furthermore
forgiue vs that puniſhment, which another hath borne for vs:
thus as in the ſinnes which wee committ, God had regard vnto
himſelfe againſt whom it was committed, ſo in the ſatisfaction
for the ſinne, he had the like reſpect to that which was done, by
our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and thus againſt an infinite
puniſhment hee hath oppoſed an infinite grace: the puniſhment
was infinite in reſpect of God, grace was infinite for his ſake
that ſuffered, who was likewiſe God and man, but if Chriſt hath
redeemed vs from the ſinne and not from the paine, as the papiſt
would perſwade, then grace ſhould looſe his grace, and we
ſhould ſtill remaine in the ſtate of damnation.
               Me thinkes our papiſts ſhould now be aſhamed of their Pope
that dates thus preſume to eclips the glory of Gods mercy, and
the worthines of Chriſtes ſatisfaction: but alas what ſhoulde I
ſpeake of ſhame vnto them that haue forgotten to bluſh? Chriſt
hath choſen vs before the beginning of the world, that we might bee holy
and without ſpot in his ſight. Ephe. 1.
               If through his choſing and election we be without ſpot in his
ſight, what buzzardly blindnes to ſuppoſe, that hee will yet haue
vs to be tormented in Purgatory, as theſe popelings do beleeue.
               
                  
But it will be ſayde, why who is ſo righteous but that hee may
ſay his Pater noſter of the which one part is Forgiue vs our treſpaſſes,
as wee forgiue them that treſpaſſe againſt vs? And it is truth, there
liueth no man vpon earth without ſinne: notwithſtanding, all
thoſe that were choſen in Chriſt before the foundation of the
world was layd, are without ſpot of ſinne in the ſight of God: ſo
that they are both ſinners and righteous: if wee conſider our rebellious
members, which as Saint Paul ſayth, are ſolde vnder ſinne
Rom. 7. then wee are greiuous ſinners, but contrary, if wee beleeue
that by the mercifull fauour of God, hee hath freely giuen
vs his Chriſt, and with him all things, ſo that we bee deſtitute of
no gift, as Paul doth teſtifie Rom. 8. then are wee righteous in
his ſight, and our conſcience at peace with God: and what haue
we then to doe with Purgatory?
               But leauing a number of teſtimonies, that might be cited out
of the holy ſcriptures witneſſing the promiſes: let this ſuffice that
is auouched by the Prophet Dauid, whom his 32 Pſalme ſayth
Bleſſed is he whoſe iniquitie as forgiuen, And making expoſition of
his owne wordes, hee proceedeth, Bleſſed hee whoſe ſinnes are
couered.
               
               Nowe who can couer his ſinnes from the ſight of God, who
ſetteth the moſt ſecret ſinners that are, in the light of his countinance,
that looketh into the very imginations of men, that are
nothing elſe but euill continually? or wherewith may a man ſo
couer his ſinnes, but that they will breake out? for what can be
hid from that peircing ſight that ſeeth in man, that he diſcerneth
not in himſelfe, that did firſt knowe him before hee was created,
and hath iuſtly calculated and caſt vp all his ſinnes, all his abhominations
before they were euer acted or done?
               But wherewith ſhall wee ſeeke to couer them, what with good
workes, as Adam did with figge leaues? it is hypocriſie, and the
holy hypocrit, & the proud Phariſee, is more odible in the ſight
of God, then the Publican or harlot.
               How then ſhall we couer our ſinnes, for couered they muſt be,
and we muſt appeare holy and without ſpot in his ſight: how are
they then to be couered they are then couered from God, when
they be couered by God, then are they couered from his wrath,
when they be couered by his mercy, and they ſhall bee couered

by his mercy, when they bee couered by the precious bloode of
our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, who is our propitiation & righteouſnes:
hee that ſeeketh any other couerture then this, ſeeketh but
with Adam to hide himſelfe in the thicket of a buſh, where the
iuſtice of God will finde him out.
               It followeth in the next verſe, Bleſſed is the man, to whome God
imputeth not his ſinne, and in whoſe ſpirite there is no guile: but why is
it not ſayd heere, bleſſed is he that hath not ſinned at all, or bleſſed
is he that hath not offended or tranſgreſſed the law? becauſe
it is ſayd elſe where that all men are ſinners, & the Apoſtle ſayth
If any man ſay he hath no ſinne, he is a lier, &c.
               
               Or why is it not ſayd bleſſed is he that can ſo conforme himſelfe
from a ſinner, to become no ſinner, that by his owne works
and merites, can make himſelfe holy.
               Becauſe the moſt righteous man ſinneth ſeuen times a day, yea
that great Apoſtle Paul himſelfe was left with a pricke in his
fleſh wherewith to exerciſe him, the which when he prayed vnto
God to haue it taken from him, he was anſwered: My grace is
ſufficient for thee.
               
               
                  He therefore can not be bleſſed that ſtands of his owne righteouſnes:
but Bleſſed is he to whome God imputeth not his ſinne, in
whoſe ſpirit there is no guile.
               But who is now this bleſſed one, or where is hee to bee found,
for if there be none bleſſed, but he that hath a pure and a cleane
ſpirit, where ſhall we ſeeke him?
               
                  But let vs compare the wordes as they ſtand, in the firſt verſe
it is ſayd, Bleſſed is he whoſe iniquitie is forgiuen, Bleſſed is hee whoſe
ſinnes are couered: it followeth in the ſecond verſe, Bleſſed is he to
whom the Lord imputeth not his ſinne, in whoſe ſpirit there is no guile.
               Why then to him whoſe iniquitie is forgiuen, to him the Lord
imputeth not his ſinne: And to him againe whoſe ſinne it hath
pleaſed God to couer, that man is reputed to bee of an vpright
heart: ſo that the wordes are expounded the one by the other:
thoſe then are not bleſſed that thinke to couer their ſinnes themſelues,
but thoſe whoſe ſinnes are couered by the mercy of God:
And who are thoſe whoſe ſinnes it pleaſeth God ſo to couer? euen
thoſe that doe diſcouer themſelues freely vnto him: the man
in whoſe heart there is found no guile.
               
               
                  
Not him that doth make ſhowe to be honeſt, and yet is full of
deceit, as our Merit-mongers, and Iuſtitiaries, that will acknowledge
no ſinne, but doe iuſtifie themſelues by their owne deſeruinges:
but bleſſed are thoſe that will confeſſe their ſinnes, and
righteous by conſequence, are thoſe whome God hath iuſtified
in forgiuing their ſinnes, imputing vnto them the righteouſnes,
of his ſonne: for ſeeing we haue loſt our originall righteouſnes,
we haue not in vs any righteouſnes greater, then to confeſſe our
vnrighteouſnes, neither can wee recouer any other righteouſneſſe
to helpe vs, then that the Father hath imputed vnto vs in
his Sonne.
               I haue hetherto proſecuted the impieties of popery, howe it
ſecludeth Chriſt, & burieth all the benefitts of his precious death
and paſſion: I might yet ſpeake of many other abhominations
that are hatched vp in the Romiſh Chruch, as their adoring of
Images, their publicke ſeruice in an vnknowne tongue, not vnderſtood
by the people, their ſacrificing of the ſonne of God to
his Father for the ſinnes of the world, their adoring the eliments
of bread and wine, with diuine honour in ſtead of Chriſt, their
ſhrift, their releaſing of ſoules out of Purgatory by prayers and
pardons, their inioyning of Prieſts to ſingle life, whereby they
doe liue in whoredome, and in loathſome and filthy vncleanes.
               Theſe, with many other ſuperſtitions, & errours in doctrine,
might yet bee ſpoken of, the which for the preſent time I omitt:
now what account God will exact, for his name blaſphemed, his
Sonne refuſed, his ſacramentes prophaned, and his worde thus
deſpiſed, is much to be feared, in the meane time, let vs beſeech
the Father of glory, to giue vs the ſpirit of wiſedome,
knowledge and vnderſtanding, and
ſo to inlighten the eyes of our minde,
that wee may knowe his wayes,
and bee led through faith vnto
the knowledge of him
that is all veritie.
               FINIS.
               
               
            
         
      
   