
      
         
            
            
            THE
EXCELLENCY
of good women. The honour and eſtimation that
belongeth vnto them. The infallible markes whereby
to know them. By BARNABE RYCH ſouldier
Seruant to the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            Malui me diuitem eſſe, quam vocari.
            LONDON
Printed by Thomas Dawſon, dwelling neere the three
Cranes in the Vinetree, and are there to be ſolde.
1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE GREAT
AND GRATIOVS
La the Lady ELYZABETH,
the renowmed Daughter of IAMES,
the mighty King of
Great BRITTAINE.
            
               GReat and gracious Lady, let
it not ſeeme ſtrange (with
all humblenes I beſeech it)
that an vnworthy ſouldier
ſhoulde offer lines to ſo
worthy a Lady: the dignity
of the ſubiect is it, that armeth
with boldnes, for to whom doth more
properly belong the patronizing of thoſe things
that are inciting to feminine vertue, then to your
Highneſſe, in whom Modeſty is ſeene to march
with Maieſty, Mildnes with Magnificence, Gratiouſnes
with Greatnes, and where bright ſhining Vertue, is
an Attendant to waite vpon Dignity.
            
            Of whom might I then make better choyce to
protect the worthines of women, then of her

that is the moſt worthy amongſt women.
            I aſſure my ſelfe that all vertuous women will
priuiledge mine indeuours, if any bee offended,
they are but ſuch as are vnworthy to be pleaſed.
            The warrant that I haue of your gracious diſpoſition
doth more imbolden me, then the hope
that I haue of mine owne vntutered penne,
yet with all humblenes and duty, bequeathing
my worthleſſe lynes
to your worthy protection
will reſt
            
               Alwayes to your Highneſſe
moſt humbly deuoted
BARNABE RYCH
            
         
         
            
            TO THE NVMBERLES
NVMBER OF HONORABLE
Ladies, vertuous Gentlewomen, and
to all the reſt of the mild, modeſt, and
worthy ſexe of womankinde.
            
               HOnorable and worthy Dames,
aſwell wiues widowes maides,
of all eſtates & degrees, whoſoeeuer
or whereſoeuer with all
humblenes and knees bēded &
bowed to the ground let me beſeech
your patience, that haue
vndertaken a ſubiect of that excellency
as would haue required
a more pregnant & excellent wit then I doe acknowledge
to be in my ſelfethe, brightnes of the ſunne is beſt diſcerned
by her own beames, and the excellency of women is
not to bee expreſſed, but by their owne merittes if I haue
therefore ſet vp too dimne a light to blazon your perfections,
let your owne vertues ſhine in that wonted oryentall
brightneſſe, as from your firſt creation (at all times
and in all ages) hath ſo illumined the worlde, with
thoſe high and rare perfections, as men may
well admire but neuer bee able to extinguiſh.
Thus deſiring ſtill to liue in
your gracefull loue and fauour
will reſt the moſt aſſured
at your comandements.
            
               BARNABE RICH
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Excellencie of good Women.
            
               WHen the Deuil at the firſt began
his temptation in Paradiſe
he attempted the woman, telling
Her ſhe wanted but one thing
to make her ſelf like God: I would
be loath therefore, either vaine
ly to magnifie or vily to imbaſe
the dignitie of women. That I
might then ſpeake of this ſubiect
without partiallity, and but according to a truth,
I will not implore the aſſiſtance neither of Apollo neither
of Pallas, nor yet of the Muſes, but will humbly beſeech
the help of the euer liuing God.
            For the woman of honeſt life, glory and admiration
attends on her, it is therefore euery mans part not onely
to reuerence her, but alſo to defend her honour and eſtimation.
            But the better to make tryal of womens perfection in
generall, let vs examine their firſt creation, wherein is to
be noted the ſubſtāce whereof they were formed which
was of the purified mettall of man.
            
            The place where they were created, which was in
Paradiſe.
            
            The time of the creation which was The laſt and therfore
the perfecteſt handy worke of the Creator. The cauſe
why they were created, which was To be a comfortable aſſiſtant
to man, that a man by marryage of a good woman
might paſſe through the laborſome toyles & turmoyles
of this life with the more eaſe, hauing ſo good an aſſiſāt
to the which doubtles God had reſpect when he ſaid It
is not good for man to liue alone, let vs make him a helper.
            
            
               
To this the Prophet Malachy doth likewiſe witneſſe
when he ſaith. Though God at the firſt had abundāce of ſpirit
yet hee made but one woman of one ribbe for the helpe and
comfort of one man.
            
            Why then a man that wanteth a friend for pleaſure
a ſeruant for profit, a counſellour to aduiſe him, a cōforter
to cheriſh him, a companion to ſolace him, a helper
to aſſiſt him, or a ſpirituall inſtructer to informe him, a
good & a vertuous wife doth ſupply all theſe occaſions
And therefore I thinke there is neither religion nor
goodnes in that man, that loueth not an honeſt and a
loyall wife.
            Here we ſee there firſt inſtitution, & where vnto they
were made, but if I ſhould now take vpon me to ſpeake
of the excellencie of thoſe women that haue from time
to time aſpired in the deepe capacity of Arts and ſciences
and haue ſo ſarr exceeded in all manner of knowledge
(that men haue not onely had cauſe to praiſe,
but alſo to woonder at them) I might heape together
a greater volume then euery mans leaſure would ſerue
to peruſe.
            But leauing the multitude and to ſpeake but of ſome
very fewe that are regeſtred in hiſtories to their perpetual
praiſe we do reade of Nicoſtrata called alſo Carmenta,
for the eloquence ſhe had in verſifying, of Laſterna &
Axi
                     •
                  thea two worthy dames moſt highly renowned amongſt
the ſchollers of Plato.
            
            Of Arath
                     •
                  a that wrot forty ſeuerall bookes, who read
openly in the ſchooles and (as it is written in hyſtories)
had 150. Phyloſophers that were her ſchollers.
            
               
                  •
               her is yet mention made of Aſpaſia that inſtructed Pericles
of Lelia Sabina, ſo renowned in Rome for her letters

of Amataſnuta, & others like learned in the Latine, but
wherein haue women beene inferior euen to the beſt
men, If we ſhould looke into a vertuous life who more
famed then Aemelia, Claudia, Tuſia, Nicaulia? for gouerne
ment, who more prouident then Zenobia; for wiſdome
Saba, that oppoſed Solomon; for actiuitie in warr Pentaſilea,
for poeſie Sapho, for policie Zoe: for poetry, Thalia,
for rethoricke Hilerna; for oratory Cornelia, for eloquence
Hortenſia.
            
            Let vs now ſee amongſt the elymentall goddes is there
not for matter of warre aſwell the goddeſſe Bellona, as
the god Mars? for ſcience and wiſdome, is there not a
Pallas aſwell as Apollo? for poeſie or verſifying are not
the nine Muſes as famous as Phebus?
            
            Further more theſe vertues of Iuſtice Temperance Fortitude,
Patience, pitty, Mercy, Charitie, Humilitie, and many
other like, are all of the feminine gender, yea the
Church of God is compared to a woman and figured
forth in femall ſhape.
            But leauing hyſtories that are infinit in example of
womens worthines, if we did but looke into euery ordinary
kalender, we ſhould finde out as many vigils of holy
women, as feaſtes of deuout men.
            By this we may ſee the Excellencie of good women; that
were neuer yet ſo ſcarce to be found as in the time of
Elias, that thought him ſelfe to be left alone to ſerue the liuing
God.
            But let vs yet draw nearer to this confirmation: when
our ſauiour himſelfe had his abode here vpon the earth
who conſpired againſt him, who ſought to perſecute
him, who tempted him, who condemned his doctrine,
who would haue ſtoned him, who ſayd he had a Deuill

with in him, who would haue intrapped him, who
practiſed his death? none but men Herod Annas Chaiphas,
Scribes Phariſees vnbeleeuing Iewes, yea Iudas himſelfe
that was one of his owne Apoſtles.
            
            Now contrary wiſe, who loued him moſt intirely who
imbraced his doctrine, who confeſſed him to be a Prophet,
who enterteyned him into their houſes, who miniſtred
vnto him euen of there owne ſubſtance? onely
women, Mary, Martha, the woman of Samaria, Ionna
Suſanna, and many others.
            It was a woman that poured a box of precious oyntment
on his head, they were men that murmured againſt
it and were offended that ſo great coſt was beſtowed
vppon him.
            It was Pilate a man that condemned Chriſt, and deliuered
him to the Iewes to be crucified: It was his wife
a woman, that willed her huſband To haue nothing to doe
with that Iuſt man.
            
            They were men that caried him to be crucified compelling
him to beare his owne Croſſe, they were women
that followed to the place where he was crucified bitterly
weeping and lamenting his death.
            What would you more they were women that ſtill viſited
his ſepulcher after his buryall, and it was a woman
to whom he firſt appeared after his reſurrection.
            It were needles to in large any further how many worthy
women haue conſtantly ſuffered death vnder
tyrantes for the name of Chriſt.
            
            I doe not inſerte theſe preſidentes with any pretence
to impeach men, or to doe them wronge, but according
to a teſtified truth, to do women right.
            And yet to ſpeake truly women are commonly more

abſtinent from all manner of vncleaneſſe then men either
are the moſt of them curbed in with any other bridle
then what they willingly put vppon them ſelues.
And that is the zeale of vertue and the deſire of good
name which to euery honeſt woman is more precious
then gold or ſiluer or any other gemme.
            It grieueth me now to thinke that there ſhould be a
woman found, to be accounted diſhoneſt, or that any
of them ſhould ſo farre ſtray from that Excellencie where
vnto ſhe was created, to be reputed ill. And yet in the
holy ſcriptures there is mention made aſwell of a Dalila
as of a Debora, of a Ieſabel as of a Iudith.
            
            And it is impoſſible indeed, that any good ſhould be
without the cōmixture of ill, becauſe there is no contrarie
without his contrary, there could be no right if there
were no wronge. And what were health if there were no
ſickneſſe, what happines, if no miſaduenture, what were
loue if there were no hate, and ſo of good if there were
no ill.
            And as a diſcorde many times maketh the muſicke
to be the more ſweete, ſo the woman of lewde life maketh
her that is good to ſhine the more glorious.
            There be a number of women in theſe dayes that of
my conſcience are both good and honeſt, and I am ſure
that they themſelues are deſirous ſo to be acounted, and
yet if we ſhould iudge of them by their outward ſhow,
as they vſe to pranck vp them ſelues in their light and
gaudy attire we ſhuld iudge them to be more Curtizan
like then euer was Lays of Corynth or Flora of Rome.
            
            It is a hard matter therefore in this age to diſtinguiſh
betweene the good woman and the bad but now
as there belonges no ſhame to him that in wreathing

a glorious garland, is ſometimes inforced to borowe
a handfull of flowers from a neighbours garden:
euen ſo, to adorne the ſubiect that I haue taken in hand
and the rather to beautifie ſo worthy a matter, I haue
borrowed the helpe of a learned diuine, who in a ſermon
by him preached in the praiſe of good women,
firſt borrowed his text out of the booke of Prouerbs the
3. Chap. and the 14. verſe where Solomon ſpeaking of
a vertuous woman, ſaith ſhe is like a marchantes ſhip &c.
            
            If their be any therefore that will preſume to find
fault with this deſcription now enſuinge, or that will
thinke the prayſes that are giuen to thoſe women that
are good, are ouer exceedinge, or the diſpraiſes of the ill
are too reprehending, let them vnderſtand that although
it were ſet downe by the hand of Solomon, a man (yet
ſuch a man as God himſelfe had approued to be the wiſeſt
amongſt men) yet it was the finger of God that firſt
directed it; who by the hand of Solomon hath ſet downe
the true notes and markes whereby to diſtinguiſh the
good women from the bad, the vertuous from the vicious,
the godly from the vngodly.
            The firſt in the 10 verſe of the foreſaid Chap. of a
vertuous woman he ſaith Her price is farrnemore precious
then pearles: And proceeding ſtill in her praiſe and commendations
in the 14. verſe he ſaith ſhe is like a marchants
ſhippe.
            
            He firſt prizeth her what ſhee is worth eſteeming her
to be more precious then pearle, then he likeneth her to
what ſhe doth reſemble and that is To a marchants ſhip.
            
            And as he ſetteth downe her value what ſhe is worth
and her reſemblance where vnto ſhe is like, ſo he giueth
certaine notes and knowledge of all her qualities how

ſhe behaueth her ſelfe aſwell within doore as without,
and firſt towardes her huſband She will doe him good and
not euill all the dayes of her life.
            
            Then he giueth other notes, what be her exerciſes &
how ſhe ſpendes her time She ſeeketh wooll and flax and
laboureth cheerefully with her hands: he forgetteth not to
giue vs ſpeciall markes of her ſpeaches, whereunto they
tend and how ſhe behaueth her ſelfe in her owne houſe
amongſt her family.
            
               She openeth her mouth with wiſdome, the law of grace is
in her tongue.
            
            
               She ouerſeeth the wayes of her houſhoulde and eateth not of
the breade of Idlenes.
            
            This deſcription of a good woman thus ſet downeby
Solomon, was not done without great conſideration for
he thought it not onely neceſſary to ſhewe what ſhe is
but alſo where vnto ſhe is like, that we might the rather
finde her out by ſome ſenſible reſemblance our ſauiour
Chriſt vſed the like when he reſembled his Diſciples to
ſalt and ſometimes likeneth himſelfe to a Vyne, to a Cornerſtone
and figureth his bleſſed body to Breade.
            
            He likeneth the kingdome of heauen to a Huſbandeman,
to a Graine of muſtardſeed, to Leauen, to a Nett, to a
Marchant, to a King and all theſe with many other like,
thus reſembled for certeine properties and ſimilitudes,
wherein the one is like vnto the other.
            Now a good woman ſaith Solomon, is like vnto a ſhip:
but what ſhipp? Like vnto a merchantes ſhip that bringeth
in.
            
            The Harlot is like to a ſhip too, but not like a marchantes
ſhip, but in truth like a Pyrat a Rouer, a Frebuter
and like ſuch a ſhip as lieth ſtill in waite for rapine and

for ſpoyle.
            An honeſt tradinge marchants ſhip is farre different:
and it was well noted by him that hath formerly ſet
downe the wife to be the ſhip, and the huſband to bee
the marchant, and the huſbands word to be the Routher
to the ſhipp, by the which ſhe muſt be turned, guided
and directed, ſhe muſt be a ſtirringe ſhip quicke of ſtirrige,
ready at a word of her huſband, ſhe muſt not be immoueable
like ſome womenne that a man were as
good to remoue a houſe, as to remoue them from their
willes, but a good woman is like a ſhipp but not like a
houſe.
            She muſt be directed by diſcretion, and ſtill ſhape her
couſe both by compaſſe and by carde. I doe not meane
at a paire of playinge cardes: for ſhe that directes her
courſe that way is but an vnprofitable ſhip for an honeſt
trading marchante.
            The compaſſe and the carde that an honeſt woman is
to vſe, is her countenance and her conſideration, which
muſt be modeſt and vertuous.
            She muſt be balanced with Sobrietie and Grauity that
ſhe be not ouer ſet with euery light puffe of winde, ſhe
muſt not ſet ſayle to euery gale that bloweth, but to the
winde of wiſdome, the winde of her huſbandes breath,
for that is it that muſt direct her in her right courſe; ſhee
muſt not be too high cargde, nor to tant Maſted for the ſureſt
ſafety is to beare a lowe ſayle.
            She muſt not ſayle but by leade and by line ſtill ſounding
the deapth and foreſeeinge the danger, ſhe muſt
looke out for Rockes, Flattes, Shelfes and Sandes: and diſcouering
any perill within her kenning to giue her huſband
warning, and (aſmuch as in her lieth) to helpe
him to avoyde it.
            
               
A further note is here left vnto me, that as a woman
is thus like a ſhip conſidered in her proper vertues, ſo
ſhe is likewiſe compared with her Owner and there ſhe
is like a ſhip indeed, for who ſo euer marries a wife may
well be called a Merchant venturer, for he makes a great
aduenture that adventures his credit, his reputation,
his eſtate, his quiet, his libertye, yea many men by marriage
do not onely aduenture there bodyes but many
times their ſoules.
            As the ſhip her ſelfe therefore muſt be very deliberatiue,
and neuer ſayle but by ſounding, leſt by her vnheedines
ſhe runs her ſelfe a ground: ſo he that goes about
a wife had neede to looke aſwell about him, leaſt hee
make ſuch a choice that for one daies pleaſure, he doth
purchaſe repentance all the dayes of his life after.
            They ſay a man ſhould rather chuſe a wife by his eares
then by his eyes, but for thoſe that will needes aduenture
of ſuch women as haue bene notoriouſly knowne
to be infamed, and being truly informed of them afore
hand, will yet needes marry them, they are like the fooliſh
Mariners Act. 27. who becauſe they tooke not counſayl
in the hauen which Paule had aduiſed, were inforced
after they put to ſea to reſolue vppon a wracke.
            A marchantes ſhip to be acounted well conditioned
muſt haue many qualities: but I ſay he is but a deſperate
marchant that will aduenture of a ſhip that is not ſtauch
            Shee is not a good marchants ſhip that is too tender
ſided that will ſtoupe to euery puffe, that doth but beate
vppon her quarter, and is ſo leward, if ſhe doe but bite a
little at a Bouline, that ſhe will hould no courſe but with
the winde in her poope.
            All theſe be ill conditions in a ſhip but eſpecially in

her that longes to a marchant.
            It is the property of a good ſhip to anſwere her Helme
readily and not to bee heard of ſtirreage but to feele
the Routher quickly and thereby to be turned, ruled and
directed in the courſe that ſhe ſhould hould, for that ſhip
that is not yeare of ſtirrage is apt to run into many perils
euen ſo that woman that is not ruled by her huſbandes
word but is croſſe and contrary to his directions is a
dangerous wife and runneth her ſelfe many times into
ſhame and infamy.
            But a good woman ſaith Soloman is like a Marchants ſhip
a worthy comēndation: And although the wordes haue
beene many times repeated yet they cannot be too often
itterated for amongſt all other ſhippes that croſſeth the
ſeas the marchant is moſt profitable both for himſelfe
and his country, for ſhe is a ſhip onely for trade and traffique
to inrich him, by which example a good woman is
taught in all her endeuours to reſpect her huſbandes
profite.
            And as the marchants ſhip is thus cōmodious, ſo of
all other ſhe is moſt peaceable vppon the ſea, for ſhe was
built for peace and not for warre, for marchantes are in
nothing more ſory then to heare of warres but amongſt
all other things an honeſt true trading marchant cannot
indure to heare of a Pirate, that liues not by honeſt traffique
but by common ſpoile, and as the ſhip of a Pirate,
(which is the true reſemblance to an adultrous woman)
is both loathed and ſhunned by the honeſt trading marchant,
ſo the time hath beene that a wicked woman wel
knowne to be infamed, was no leſſe abhorred by thoſe
that were honeſt but here good women are to learne,
that a marchant will in no wiſe conſort nor haue to doe

with a Pirate, but as he doth deteſt and abhorre her ſo he
ſeeketh by all poſſible meanes both to avoide & ſhunne
her, it ſhould be ſo amongſt good women, if it be not ſo
the greater is her blame that will admit of a C
                     •
                  rtizans
company.
            Againe the marchantes ſhip is a painefull ſhippe ſhee
muſt not be ſtill ridinge at ancker, or ready to runne into
euery porte or Hauer, but as ſhe muſt be obſeruatiue to
watch both wind and tide ſo to winn her voiage with
the more expedition, ſhe muſt ſome times be content to
beat it out at the ſea it ſelf although but with a bare and
a very ſcant gale.
            And a good woman is laborious, like the marchantes
ſhip that ſeekes to bring in, ſhee bringeth in by her good
foreſight, by her care, by her diligence, and by the wiſdome
of her gouernement.
            
               Shee ſeeth that her marchandize are good, her candle is not
put out by night.
            
            
               Shee riſeth while it is yet night and giueth the portion to her
houſhould and the ordinary to her maydes.
            
            
               She putteth her fingers to the wheele and her handes handle
the ſpindle. pro. 3.
            Now a good ſauer is not onely a good getter but like
wiſe a good bringer in.
            The adultrous woman, ſhee bringeth in too, but by ſo
many filthy meanes, as were ſhamefull to be ſet downe.
            And as ſhee bringeth in by coſening, by cheating,
by gaming, and by ſhiftinge, not by painefullnes
but by Idlenes, not by godlines, but by deuilliſhnes,
ſo ſhee ſpendes it againe as ſhamfully in dyſſolution, in
prodigalitie, in pride, in vanitie iuſt like the Pirate, that
when ſhe hath ſcoured the coaſt, and committed a number

of ſpoiles with as many paſſengers as ſhe meetes ſhe
conſumes it againe in the next harbour, in ryot, in drunkennes,
in voluptuouſnes, & in al manner of extraordinary
beaſtlines: heere is yet againe to bee remembred, what
hath beene already learnedly taught vs out of this text of
ſcripture, for heere is nowe to bee conſidered, that although
a vertuous woman, in many thinges may bee reſembled
to a ſhip, yet there be ſome particular qualities
belonging to a ſhip, that a good woman muſt not haue
and that is, one ſhippe may belong to many marchants
and one marchant may be owner in many ſhips but this
is a ſpeciall note of the vnchaſt woman, for ſhe cries ſtill
the more the merrier: a marchant, neuer ſayleth but with
a conuenient company no more then will ſuffice to handle
her ſayles and to tackle the ſhip as neceſſitied requireth.
            But the Pirat, is ſtill double and treble manned, yea &
ſo ouer peſtred with men, that ſhe hath more then ſhe is
well able to ſtowe: And all this ſhe vſeth as well for offence
as for defence and againſt none ſo much as againſt
the moſt honeſt trading marchant.
            So the adultrous woman doth ſtill play of the aduantage,
and ſhe ſhall haue tenne for one to take her part againſt
any woman that is honeſt.
            Let me but craue pardon to ſet downe what I my
ſelfe haue obſerued in this caſe.
            I haue ſeldome ſeene an honeſt woman (which is here
reſembled to a marchantes ſhip) to haue many friendes
to  
                  〈◊〉
                for her, that will quarrell for her, that will
fight for her, or that will be at any great coſtes & charge
by any meanes to ſupport her vnles it be a father, a brother,
a kinſman a huſbande or ſome ſuch like.
            
               
But Thucidides will needes approue that woman to be
moſt honeſt, that is leaſt knowne & I thinke indeed that
the moſt honeſt woman is leaſt ſpoken of, for they doe
pleaſe the leaſt in number, and vertue was neuer graced
by the multitude, now to ſpeake mine owne knowledge
I haue not heard of thoſe womē to be ouer much cloied
with honeſty, that are continually frequented with comers
of all ſortes and to haue adopted fathers adopted
brothers, adopted ſonnes, adopted partners, adopted
ſeruantes, adopted friendes, and ſuch a number of other
adopted companions as thoſe women of approued honeſty
are ſeldome ſeen to be acquainted with: doe you
aſke me how a diſhoneſt woman ſhuld induce this large
acquaintance.
            
               The lippes of a harlot (ſaith Salomon) drop like the honny
combe her mouth is more ſoft then oyle but her ende more bitter
then wormwoode and ſharper then a two edged ſword, her
feete goe downe to deathe and her ſteppes do lead to hell pro. 5.
            I ſay with Salomon, beware of the ſlightes of a Harlot,
ſhe hath a tongue to traine, eyes to allure, lookes to atract,
teares to excuſe Smiles to flatter, Inticements to prouoke,
Frownes to delay, Beckes, to recall, Lippes, to inchant, kiſſes
to inflame, a body to performe, and all theſe to poiſon.
            And as ſhee inticeth them thus by her ſlightes ſo ſhee
diſperſeth them againe at her pleaſure, for ſome ſhee
ſends to the phiſition to ſeeke for helpe, ſome to the ſpittle
that are paſt cure, ſome to weeping Croſſe to bewaile
there expences, ſome to the priſon there to lie and languiſh,
ſome to the gallowes to ende a wretched life, and
all to the deuill if they haue not grace to repent in time.
            Theſe wanton countenances, theſe immodeſt behauiours
theſe impudent domeanures be they not allurements

to make themſelues knowne, if in ſteede of theſe
amarous glances, theſe yeelding geſtures and theſe inticing
trickes, they would but ſhow a ſober demeanure
a modeſt regard, and a vertuous diſpoſition theſe lecherous
pigions, that doe ſo much followe the haunte
would forſake the douehouſe.
            O how many worthy women are their now in this
age, that might giue example, that can ſo temper themſelues
in all their enterteinementes that they cut of all
hope from the vicious minded.
            
               The vertuous woman girdeth her loynes with ſtrength (ſaith
Salomon) that is, ſhe ſetleth her mind with ſtaiednes and
continency, ſtrength and honour are her clothinge and in the
latter day ſhe ſhall reioice but for the harlot ſhe wayteth not
the way of life pro. 5.
            We may ſee here the difference between the good woman
and the bad, the one Salomon cloatheth with honor
and eſtimation the other he confineth in the highe
way of death.
            There is now one other qualitie that a good woman
muſt in no wiſe borrow from a ſhip and that is too much
rigginge, and it is a great deale of charge and to very little
purpoſe that is beſtowed on ſome ſhips in ſuperfluities
in the paintinge of Caage workes like the painting of
womens faces that being worne of with wind and weather
leaues loathſomnes behind to thoſe that do behold
it and then what Flags what Enſignes what ſtreamers, and
what pendants that ſerueth for no vſe but for pride and
brauery.
            But if I ſhuld ſpeak of the vanities that are vſed amongſt
a great many of women now a dayes perhaps I might offend
ſome and I would be glad to pleaſe all: but how many

gentlemen haue conſumed them ſelues by vphoulding
their wiues pride? how many Lordſhips are ſould
to vphould ladyſhips? and what is it that doth make ſo
many Cittizens and trades men, ſo commonly to play
Banckrout, but the exceſſive pride that is vſed by their
wiues.
            By this pride of women Hoſpitalitie is eaten vp and
good houſkeeping is baniſhed out of the country and
how many Items are ſtill brought in for the bodyes exceſſe
without any conſideration of the poore ſoules nakednes.
            But me thinkes it could not be ill taken for me to ſet
downe how the Prophet Eſay dallies with the wanton
geſtures of the vaine womē that were in his daies at their
stretched out neckes their wandering eyes, their walkinge and
their mincinge as they goe in the ſtreetes.
            
            Then he ſetteth downe a whole Royall Exchange ful of
vanities, ſo many to be rehearſed as I will forbeare at
this time to deliuer, they that are deſirous to knowe thē,
let thē looke into the 3. of Eſay from the 16. to the 24 verſe
where they ſhall finde that the wanton diſpoſed women
that were in that age hath left preſidents to thoſe that
are inclined to lightnes now.
            It hath been a queſtion, whether chaſtity ioyned with
vanity, doth deſerue any commendations, but I will not
diſpute, becauſe I will not offend: yet I doe thinke that
this ouermuch affected folly doth liue with no leſſe ſuſſpected
honeſty.
            Shee is an ill huſwife therefore of her credite and reputation,
that will doe any thing, to bring it into conſtruction,
that will giue any ſignes or ſhewes of lightnes,
whereby ſhee may be ſuſpected, becauſe a woman that is

once tainted in her honour, muſt be driuen to a harde
courſe of recouery ſhe muſt rubbe of the ſkinne to wipe
out the ſpot.
            Novv beſides this gariſhnes in apparell what are theſe
paintinge of ſhameles faces, this audacious bouldnes
in company, theſe impudent geſtures without modeſty
theſe wanton lookes, theſe inticing ſhowes, what are
theſe and many other thinges that might be yet ſpoken
of but the vauntcurrers of adultry.
            There is mention made of a cannon in the ciuill lawe
where it was ordeyned that if a man did offer violence
to any woman were ſhe neuer ſo vertuous or honeſt, yet
atired like a ſtrumpet, ſhe had no remedie againſt him by
lawe.
            But this exceſſe that is now vſed in apparell doth certainly
bring three thinges with it the firſt, Offence to God
the ſecond, It giueth hope to the vycious, and thirdly It
bringeth deſtruction to the huſbande.
            
            But the vertuous woman houldeth it a matter of conſcience,
to attyre her ſelfe no more coſtly then may well
ſtand with her huſbandes eſtate and abilitie, ſhe is loath
to bring him into debt or to ſet him on the ſcore for her
pride and brauery.
            She doth her huſband good, and not euill, all the dayes of her
life, ſayth Salomon.
            But ſhe doth her huſband little good that maketh him
to hange on the ſcore, aſwell to his owne hinderance as
to the vndoinge of other men, and but to maintaine and
vphould her pride.
            But as the ſinne of Adam beganne at Eue, ſo the ruine the
confuſion the extortion the oppreſſion yea and the ſacriledge
of many a man begins at the pride of his wife.
            
               
Euery Lady of the Lake, if her huſband haue no tennantes
of his owne to gripe and wringe yet if he can but
creepe into an office, or haue any thing to do in the commō
wealth he muſt prigge, he muſt proule, he muſt catch,
ſcrape and ſcratch (by all ſhifting meanes) to maintaine
his wiues pride and licentious manner of life.
            
               Cornelius Tacitus in his Annals maketh mention how
the Romans, when they vſed to ſend any officers, or other
miniſters with authority into any of their Prouinces,
they would not ſuffer them to carry their wiues with
them; A reaſon is rendred, becauſe in the time of peace,
women doe allure and corrupt the manners of men, by
their pride and vanity, & many times by their inticing
prouocations the courſe of iuſtice is checked and peruerted,
and moſt iniurious wrongs committed: and in
the time of warre, they do hinder the ſeruice by their temerity
and feare.
            And it hath many times fallen out, that whe
                  •
                after
accountes haue beene taken of thoſe that haue bin thus
authoriſed, there hath more ſhamefull matter appeared
againſt thoſe that haue extorted, bribed, and exacted, by
the inſtigation of women to maintaine their pompe &
pride, then could be approued to proceed by any other
occaſion.
            It is written of Epaminundas, the great commander in
the Athenyan warres, who hauing cōmitted to priſon a
baſe fellow, euicted for his looſe and laſciuious manner of life, was ſolicited by Polip
                     ••
                  ia
                     •
                  
                a captaine that 
                  ••
               dd
longe time beene a ſeruitour vnder Epaminundas for his
inlargement, but Epaminundas that was highly diſpleaſed
with this Baſe conditioned fellow, would in no wiſe
be wone to ſet him at liberty, till in the ende a wom
                  •
               n

that was openly knowne to be a common Curtizan, vnder
tooke the ſuite who comming to Epaminundas ſhe obtained
his liberty, and had the priſoner preſently deliuered
vnto her, which being vnderſtood by Polipodias, in an
angry fit hee chalenged Epaminundas of great vnkindnes
that would deny him ſo ſlender a ſuite, and would ſurrender
to a woman ſo generally infamed; to whom Epaminundas
ſaid.
            Content thy ſelfe Polipodias, for if thou couldeſt aduiſedly
conſider of the matter, thou wouldeſt not let to
confeſſe that the ſuite was fitter to be granted to a Curtizan
then to a Captaine.
            
            By this I do note the impudency of theſe common
creatures, that dare inſinuate themſelues into any preſence,
be they neuer ſo great nor neuer ſo good and dare
aduenture to vndertake any ſuite be it neuer ſo baſe or
neuer ſo ſhamefull, and by this againe I doe further gather,
that this kind of cattle ſhall preuaile, when thoſe
that be honeſt ſhall haue a deniall, I am afraid there be
too māy of theſe women ſuiters in theſe dayes if all were
knowne.
            But to ſpeake yet a little of the pride of theſe times I
might bouldly avouch, there is more treaſure ſpent and
conſumed in that onely ſinne then would ſerue to ſupport
an army in the field.
            The ſummes were infinite to be ſet downe that are
ſpent in vanities, but if I ſhoulde ſpeake of the vanities
in a particular manner, it were out of mine eliment, my
wits would not ſerue me.
            But alas for pitty, how woe begone is that poore woman,
that is out of the Taylers trim, that is out of the Imbroiderers
trim, that is out of the Haberdaſhers trim: but

ſhee that is out of the Atiremakers trim, ſhee is aſhamed
to ſhew her face, ſhee thinkes her ſelfe vnfitt to conuerſe
with honeſt company.
            And there is no remedy, but my Lady muſt be coacht
ſhe can not go to church to ſerue God without a coach:
ſhee that her ſelfe and her mother before her, haue trauailed
many a myle a foote, can not nowe croſſe the
breadth of a ſtreete, but ſhee muſt haue a coach: I would
not debarre thoſe Ladies or Gentlewomen, of any thing
that might eyther eaſe or pleaſe them: thoſe (I meane)
that from there infancy haue beene trained vp by there
able and worthy parentes, in a more dainty and delicate
manner, then thoſe other againe that neuer knewe what
gentilitie ment, for I make great difference betweene her
that hath beene nurtured vp in vertue, in ſobrietie, in modeſty,
and in the feare of God, from her that had no better
tuteringe then in ſeruitude, and in thoſe baſe functions,
that they do but be durty a dignitie that is beſtowed
vppon them who knowinge themſelues to be but
Home Spunne Cloath would yet be reputed to be of Scarlet
die.
            
            It is truth, nature is ſometimes holpen by Arte but
thoſe creatures are made vnperfect aſwell by nature as
by traininge vp: and how education is able to alter, wee
haue beene taught long ſithens by Licurgus whelpes.
            
            Thoſe women that be of highe parentage, and honorable
education, being from there infancy trained vp in
a diſcipline more noble and excellent, they cannot in
common iudgement, but proue more admirable aſwell
in the beauty of the body, as in the giftes of the minde.
            Where the other againe of baſe education that haue
not 
                  •
               ad there mindes manured with diſcipline nor thē
               ſelues

trained vp in the ſtudye of knowledge they muſt
be therefore the more imperfect, but eſpecially in thoſe
thinges that ſhould beautifie the mind.
            A further note is yet left vnto me, that as hee is not to
be accounted the beſt marchant to the common wealth
which bringeth in toyes and trifles, and ſuch other fantaſies
as are both vaine and needles, but that bringeth in
ſuch commodities as may beſt ſerue neceſſitie, neither is
ſhe alwayes the beſt wife that is muſt adorned with new
fangled vanities, but ſhe that indeuoureth moſt to doe
that which is moſt needfull.
            And as thoſe ſhippes that are ſometimes the faireſt to
ſhowe, are not alwayes the fitteſt for vſe, neither are thoſe
women the more to be eſteemed, but much the rather to
be ſuſpected that do prank vp themſelues with too many
murlimues.
            Yet in great and worthy perſons, ſuch as are of abilitie
and eſtate, the vſe of ornamentes are not condemned
for ſilke and ſiluer and gold it ſelfe were created by the
liuinge God and not onely for his owne glory but likewiſe
for neceſſities ſake, and may well be vſed by good
and godly perſons.
            It is written of the daughter of Auguſtus when on a day
being attired aboue her accuſtomed modeſty, whereat
her father taking no great pleaſure, yet for the preſent
gouerninge his iudgement with ſilence till the next day
when finding her in habit more cōuenient to his liking
O (ſaid he) how farre more ſeemely is this attyre for the
daughter of Auguſtus, then that which ſhee ware but
yeſterday, ſomuch to the diſguiſing of nature: to whom
ſhee aunſwered (and that with reuerence) then ſir, I vſed
my time to pleaſe my huſband, and now I ſtand to ſatiſfie

my duty towardes my father.
            The like example was vſed by that vertuous woman
Heſter, when ſhee proteſted to God that the ſumptuous
attyre which ſometimes ſhe vſed, carryed no other purpoſe
then to feede the likinge of that great kinge Aſſuerus,
that had choſen her for his owne.
            And Iudeth, when ſhee ſtripped her ſelfe out of her
ſackcloath, into more glorious garmentes, and decked
herſelfe with ſo many rich ornamentes, was it for any
other cauſe then to performe a ſeruice to the glory of
God.
            
            It is not the Frocke, therefore that maketh the Frier
the more deuout, nor the garmentes of euery woman a
true confirmation of incontinency of life.
            This therefore may well be avowed by the rules of
Chriſtian ſobrietie, that a woman, neither exceeding the
decency of faſhion, nor going beyond the limites of her
owne eſtate, nor ſurpaſſing the boundes of her huſbands
calling, I do not thinke but ſuch a woman may weare
any thinge.
            Prouided alwayes, that ſhee braues it not out with
other mens goodes, that ſhee hanges not in the Mercers
bookes, in the Goldſmithes bookes, in the Taylers booke,
maintaininge her pride with other mens purſes like Aeſops
Iay, that deckt her ſelfe with other birdes feathers
            This beauty which is ſo much eſteemed amongſt women
ſhould be a Looking glaſſe, whereby we might a farre
off, diſplay the Maieſty of the creator, and from thence
ſhould paſſe with the winges of our cogitations to the
contemplation of the higheſt fayre, which is the inuiſible
beautie of the almightie God, from whence as from
a fountaine all ſmaller riuers deriue their beauties.
            
               
And as beauty is a bleſſing to a woman, ſo ſhee ſhould
learne of her mother nature to hide it, who couereth euery
faire & precious thing vnder ſhelles barkes rockes
yea and in bottomles deapthes, and not to lay it open as a
thing common.
            Precious thinges are not euery day ſet to open ſale,
and beautie layeth open her riches, not onely in the Eliments,
but likewiſe in the compounds, not only on the ſuperficiall
partes of the Earth, but euen within the bowels
thereof where ſhee hordeth them vp as in a ſafe treaſury:
the beautie of the minde is much more worth then
the beauty of the body, the inuiſible of better eſteeme
then the viſible.
            A beautifull woman knowinge her owne perfection▪
ſhould ſo much the rather guide her ſelfe by the zeale of
honour and the bridle of ſhamefaſtnes, and not to violate
ſo vnſpeakable a treaſure with any ſignes or ſhowes
of immodeſtie.
            A beautifull woman being robbed and ſpoyled of
thoſe excellent ornamentes of Modeſtie, and Baſhfullnes,
ſhee remaines naked both in price and honour and is ſo
much the more to be hated and deteſted.
            The beautie of the body, is but a ſliding ſhadow that
quickly vaniſheth away, wee ſhould therefore turne our
eyes to the beautie of the minde which is indeed, the ſoueraigne
light that is free from all chaunge.
            If beautie it ſelfe be thus vaine and brittle, what is then
this borrowed beautie. and firſt how many vices are hidden
vnder theſe pai
                  •
               ted faces, what deformitie couered
with vailes & maſks, what crooked minds vnder ſtreightned
bodyes, what violating of honour vnder counterfeit
ſh
                  •
               wes of comlines neither can it bee called, a naturall

or bodyly beautie in them, who hauing torne the
ſanctified vailes of ſhamefaſtnes haue offered the vſe of
their intemperate bodies to cōmon proſtitutiō (though
not verbally in wordes) yet vnder the ſhowes of their gaudy
and gariſh attyres.
            For this painting of faces, I thinke it exceedes ſo much
the more in many women to pleaſe the eyes of men
which they thinke are the ſooner drawne to a liking by
ſome appearing beauty wherein they ſomtimes exceede
ſo farre, that in ſteade of making themſelues louely, they
many times become loathſome and odious, not onely in
the conceiptes of all honeſt men, but euen to thoſe to
whom they be moſt deſirous to pleaſe and content.
            But ſhee that is not aſhamed to falſiſie thoſe exterior
partes of the body is much to be ſuſpected that ſhee will
make little conſcience to adulterate the inward beauty
of the mind▪ how many women are there in theſe dayes
that do imploy all there ſtuddies and bend their whole
indeuours, but onely to the adorninge of there bodyly
beautie, as if they had beene created by God, but onely to
make themſelues appeare to be gaye and beautifull.
            And how many worthy women be there againe in
theſe dayes in whom the outward beauties of ther bodies
do but expreſſe the inward beautie of the mindes.
            Nature hath ordained in all good and vertuous women
this affection of ſhame faſtnes, which ſerueth as a reſtraint
to withhould them from thoſe artificiall abillimentes
that doe either ſmell of vanitie, or breed ſuſpect
of honeſty: for Baſhfulnes is it that moderates there
thoughtes, makes them modeſt in their ſpeaches, temperate
in their actions, and warie in all their deliberations.
The bluſh of a womans face is an approbation of achaſt

and honorable minde, and a manifeſt ſigne, that ſhee
doth not approoue any intemperate actions, or any other
laſciuious ſpeeches, and demeanours that are either
offered to herſelfe, or to any in her preſence.
            The woman that hath forgotten to bluſh, it is an argument,
ſhee is paſt grace, for Shamefaſtnes is not onely a
bridle to ſinne, but it is likewiſe the common treaſury of
feminine vertue.
            We haue hitherto heard, that a woman is likened to a
ſhip, the veruous to a ſhip of marchāts: the vicious to a pirate
or a robber: & there are many things that are like the
one the other, but euery ſimilitude is not the thing it ſelf
that it reſembleth the Deuill is like an Angell of light,
and copper is like gold, yet all is not gold that gliſtereth,
and if euill women were not ſometimes like to good,
which indeed they be not, they could not deceiue ſo many
men as they doe.
            Let vs now ſee likewiſe what the vertuous woman doth,
for being, is knowne by doing as the tree is knowne by
his fruite.
            
               Shee ſeeketh woolle and flaxe, and laboureth, ſhee putteth
her handes to the wheell &c,
            
            
               Solomon pointed her a houſe-worke it ſhould ſeeme,
ſhee muſt not be a gadder about the ſtreetes but a Home
huſwife: & although her degree be ſuch, that ſhee putteth
not her ſelfe to bodily labour, yet Shee ouer ſeeth the wayes
of her houſhould, ſhe muſt ſee to her children her ſeruantes
and her family.
            And a vertuous woman though ſhee bringe in nothinge
that is of her owne earning, gotten with her
owne handes, yet (as it hath beene worthily noted) great
thinges comes in by her: ſhee bringeth in by her diligence,

by her wiſdome by her gouernement and by her
good foreſight ſhee bringeth in with her eye.
            The Harlot is of an other condition, for ſhee rather
ſeeketh to ſpend in vanity, then to bring in honeſtly, and
what is lewdly gotten is commonly as lewdly ſpent.
            As the certaine markes of a vertuous woman, is to be
a good huſwife, and to keepe her owne houſe, ſo one other
eſpeciall note of the adulterous woman is:
            
               Her feete cannot abide in her houſe, but now ſhee is without
now in the ſtreete, and lies in waite at euery corner: Pro. 7.
            A diſhoneſt woman is hardly kept within her owne
houſe, but ſhee muſt be a ramping, and a royſting about
to make herſelfe knowne: but it ſhoulde ſeeme by the
proceſſe of the text, Gen. 31. that Iacobs wiues, Rahell and
Leah, were none of theſe fisking dames, that did vſe to
runne about to ſeeke out acquaintance: for although Iacob
himſelfe kept the fieldes amongſt the cattle, yet his
wiues were ſtill abiding in their fathers houſe, for when
Iacob was warned by God, to make his returne amongſt
his owne kinred: He ſent and called Rahell and Leah to the
fieldes vnto his flocke: he ſent, and the meſſenger founde
them, for they were not to ſeeke, but the pathes of a Harlot
are moueable, they are hard to be found (ſayth Solomon)
It was not ſo with them, for they were not ſo ſodainely
ſent for, but they were as readily found, and came away
with as great ſpeede: and ſuch expedition was made by
their willing readines, that Laban followed ſeuen dayes
iourny, before he could ouertake them.
            By this it might appeare, that Iacobs two wiues Rahell
and Leah, were no gadders amongſt their goſſips: onely
Iacobs daughter Dinah, in a gadding iourny to take the
gaze, made an ill voyage and came home with ſhame enough.
            
               
And Iacob himſelfe, though he were a good man, yet
hee had his infirmities, for as hee loued one wife better
then an other: ſo he loued one ſonne more dearely then
an other, which amongſt the reſt of his children cauſed
that malice and deſpite, as might haue coſt the life of
Ioſeph.
            
            And as Iacob was not free from theſe infirmities, ſo he
was ſubiect to other ſeuerall croſſes: firſt Laban beguileth
him: then his moſt dearly beloued wife, was a long time
barren: his ſonne Ruben defileth his bed, & committeth
inceſt with Bilhah, his daughter Dinah was rauiſhed in the
idle iourny ſhee made to viſite the daughters of a ſtrange
people.
            But if I ſhould ſpeake of the diſorders of his children
in generall, I might amplifie much more then properly
belongeth to the ſubiect that I haue taken in hand: but
theſe are examples for our learning, to teach vs to walke
warily, and to be very circumſpect how we gouerne our
ſelues in the affayres of this vncertaine world, where our
affections are apt and ready to leade vs aſtray.
            The matter that I would make euident is, that the holieſt
men may ſometimes be wronged by a diſloyal wife:
and heere is yet a further note to be obſerued: for Rahel
and Leah that had beene trayned vp in a generous manner
by Laban their father, (and were both of them aſwel
perfected by nature as by nurture) continued the honor
and dignity of their ſexe to their dying day; but Bilhah
that was a woman of a more ſeruile eſtate and condition,
ſhee wronged Iacob, defiling his bedde with one of
his owne ſonnes: the hyſtory is very well knowne, and
by the circumſtances wee may boldly conclude, that

whatſoeuer hee bee, that will take ſuch a wife as hath
beene trayned vp in a baſe education, let him be ſure
ſhee will ſhew her ſelfe no leſſe baſe in condition.
            But to returne to our former purpoſe, we haue heard
that the woman of honeſt life, keepeth her owne houſe:
Shee ouer ſeeth the wayes of her houſhold, but the other, her
feete can not abide in her houſe: but ſhee ſitteth in her doores,
inticing the paſſers by, to enter, but her gueſts that goe in are
in the depth of hell. Pro. 9.
            
               Depart from her therefore, thou that are wiſe, keepe thy
ſelfe aloofe from her, and come not neare the doores of her houſe
            
            Amongſt theſe inſtructions thus left vnto vs, there is
yet one other note ſet downe by Solomon, what the vertuous
woman doth: She eateth not the bread of idlenes.
            
            To ſpeake truly, ſhee that is ſo negligent to looke
into her houſhold affaires, that her diligence doth not
counteruaile her meate, ſhee is vnworthy to eate at all,
but our women now are growne to bee ſo dainty mouthed,
that the ordinary foode that their mothers were
brought vpp withall, is nowe become too baſe for the
daughters.
            All muſt bee dainty, though ſometimes creditors do
wring for it, yea, and their owne huſbands ſometimes
for company: like Eue the wife of Adam, who amongſt
all the trees in paradiſe, none woulde ſerue, but that
which was her husbands bane.
            I do not ſpeake againſt Hoſpitality, or good houſekeeping:
for bounty is neuer repugnant to honeſty, but doth
alwayes rather accompany it.
            The matter that I reprehend, is this prodigall nicity,
that is good for nothing, vnleſſe to verifie the prouerbe,
Farre fetcht and dear
                     •
                   bought is good for Ladies.
            
            
               
Theſe womens mindes that are not ruled by the bridle
of Shamefaſtnes, they doe ſet their whole deſires of
thoſe things which doe beſt befit their owne pleaſures
and delightes, and doe hunt after nothing elſe, but after
ſuch things as doe giue way to their owne contents, and
that is, to loue variety aſwell in meates, as in all other
things, to deſire nouelties, to follow delicacies, and are
common gueſtes at banquets, and are apt and ready to
frequent tables, that be furniſhed and peſtred with too
many ſuperfluities: the which doe naturally incline to
concupiſcence, for this diuerſity of nouriſhing meates
(being ſo much the more increaſed by ſweet and pleaſing
odours and perfumes) it carries them headlong to
the higheſt degree of Intemperance: for where Senſe beareth
ſway, and without the Curbe or Bridle of Vertue, is
made predominant: there Reaſon is made a Slaue, and
is ledd into a delight ſome kinde of Lethargie, to the end
it ſhould not be able to diſcerne that error.
            
            
               Such is the way of an adulterous woman (ſayth Solomon)
ſhee eateth and wipeth her mouth, and ſayth, I haue committed
no iniquity.
            
            Me thinkes Solomon in theſe words, hath painted out
the perfect picture of a harlot, as ſhee ſitteth at her table.
            
               Shee eateth and wipeth her mouth, and ſayth, I haue committed
no iniquitie.
            
            Shee eateth, but not of the labour of her handes, or
of her owne honeſt indeuours: but ſhee eateth the bread
of idlenes, and not of idlenes alone, but of that which
is brought in by ſinne, by wickednes, by deceipt, and
many times, by filthy abhomination.
            Yet ſhee ſitteth and ſimpereth amongſt the infortunate
fooles that frequent her, and (alas ſayth ſhee) I

am innocent, free from ill thought, I am not vengable,
I am not malicious: I am loath to offend any, I neuer did
wronge, alas I am harmeles,
            And thus ſhee wipeth her mouth & ſayeth, I haue committed
no iniquitie: when in truth there is nothing in her
but malice, there is nothing in her but miſcheife, there is
nothing in her but diſſention, but lying, but ſlandering,
but ſtirring of ſtrife, but drawing of quarrels, but ſetting
of men together by the eares, but coſening and cheating
to maintaine pompe and prodigalitie: and pompe and
prodigallity vphoulden againe thereby to draw in Fools
to be coſened and cheated.
            O beware therefore, of the ſubtleties of a Harlot, beware
of her hypocriſie, beware of her diſſimulation, beware
of her when ſhe once beginneth to counterfeit holines.
            
               Salomon ſcoffeth at thoſe holy Harlotes, and ſhee that
offered her ſelfe to euery mans luſt, he ſetteth out for ademy-ſaint
with peace offeringes to God. Pro. 7,
            
               Take heede (ſaith he) of the woman that is ſmooth of tongue
for looking out of my window in an euening, I ſaw a yong man
paſſing through the ſtreetes, and behould a woman met with
him, that was of a Harlotes behauiour, ſmooth of her tongue
and ſubtill in her heart: ſo ſhee caught him and ſhee kiſſed him
with an impudent face, and ſaid vnto him: I haue peace offeringes:
this day I haue paide my vowes, and I am come out
to ſeeke thee, and now I haue founde thee, come let vs take
our fill of pleaſure, I haue decked my chamber with rich ornamentes:
I haue perfumed my bed, all things are prepared: let
vs therefore ſpende the time in loue and daliance.
            
            This deſcription is made by Salomon in his booke
of Pro, Cap. 7. from the 10. to the 24 verſe.
            
               
One other note of the vertuous woman: Shee openeth
her mouth with wiſedome, and the law of grace is in her tongue
            
            The woman of modeſty openeth not her mouth but
with diſcretion, neither is there any bitternes in her
tongue: ſhee ſeemeth in ſpeaking, to hould her peace,
and in her ſilence ſhee ſeemeth to ſpeake.
            Her very countenance doth preach modeſty, ſobrietie
baſhfullnes, continency, temperance, ſtayednes humilitie
grace and goodnes:
            
               A Harlot is full of words Shee is babling and lowde (ſaith
Salomon) Pro. 7.
            She is bould, ſhe is impudent, ſhee is ſhameles ſhee is
immodeſt, ſhee will bluſh at nothing, ſhee is preſumptuous,
ſhee is a diſgrace to womanhood and fit for no company
but for the laſciuious, yet againe the vertuous woman
will doe her huſband good and not ill all the dayes of her
life.
            
            But the wicked woman is a reproch to her huſband,
and ſhee doth him more iniury, then all her good is able
to counteruaile, he ſhall find it in his purſe by her prodigalitie,
by her pride, by her vanitie: for ſhee maketh him
ſtill fitter to craue new credite, then to pay old debtes
            He ſhall find it in his credite and reputation, for he is
mocked ſcorned and derided, by as many as knowe him
and is pointed at as he paſſeth through the ſtreetes.
            To conclude a vertuous woman is a crowne to her huſband:
but ſhee that maketh him aſhamed is as corruption in his
bones. Pro. 12.
            We do ſee that a vertuous woman is compared in the
ſcriptures to be like vnto many thinges: for ſometimes
ſhee is likened to a marchantes ſhip, ſometimes to a lilie
ſometimes to a garden of pleaſant flowers, ſometimes to

a ſpring of ſweete water: Dauid likeueth her to a fruitfull
vine and here ſhee is compared to a crowne.
            We may ſee, a vertuous woman is like vnto many
thinges: but as Salomon hath ſaid pearles and precious ſtones
are not like vnto her: ſhee is ineſtimable.
            Theſe notes of women thus formerly ſpoken of, are
giuen vs by Salomon, whereby to diſtinguiſh the good
from the bad, for as I haue already ſaid there hath beene
both good and bad and that from the beginning.
            And as ſaint Paule, writing to the Corinthians, ſaith
there muſt be Heriſies that they that are proued may be known
            
            So ſay I: amongſt women there muſt be bad amongſt
the good that thoſe that are good may be the more glorious.
            As vertues then had their beinge in the world: ſo vices
did neceſſaryly accompany them and haue the like increaſing
or decreaſing the one as the other.
            It cannot therefore be ſaid: that vices do more abound
at this preſent then in former ages, but we muſt confeſſe
the like of vertues, that are more exceeding now then in
times paſt they haue beene for what is there remaininge
vnder the heauens that is not perfected.
            I dare bouldly avouch, there is no arte no ſcience no
occupatiō, nor handicraft, nor any other profeſſion what
ſo euer, but there is innouation, and from age to age, all
thinges are perfected bettered and drawne to a forme of
greater excellency then euer our preadeceſſours vnderſtood
of.
            And as by this continuance of time, goodnes is made
better, ſo ill is made worſe: & as good women are more
vertuous, ſo ill women are more vicious.
            From hence I would conclude, that as the world was

yet neuer deſtitute of good women, but that from age to
age it was ſtill repleniſhed, and that in moſt aboundant
manner: ſo I am perſwaded, that at this preſent howre,
good women are not onely as plentifull as they haue
beene in times paſt, but that they are nowe more ſuperexcellent,
then euer they were before, not for that the
good women of former ages, did omitte any goodnes
that then was known, but becauſe our predeceſſors were
ignorant (indeede) of many things appertaining both
to good and ill, that is now frequent and conuerſant almoſt
to euery vnderſtanding.
            Wee haue now learned from Salomon, the true notes
and markes of a good woman, both what ſhee is, and
whereby we may both know and finde her.
            And wee ſee it is not ſhee, that can ſhow the moſt impudent
face, it is not ſhee that can dance the moſt loftieſt
ſinquapace, it is not ſhee that is too lauiſh of her lips,
or to looſe of her tongue, it is not ſhee that hath forgotten
to bluſh, nor to be aſhamed at any thing, it is not ſhe
that is either too coy, or yet too curteous: why then? modeſtie
is it, that is the true marke of euery good womā, &
ſhee that hath once loſt that vertue, ſhe hath loſt her euidence,
ſhe hath nothing to ſhow that ſhe is a woman, but
rather a mōſter in the habit or ſhape of a woman, odible
in the ſight of God and hatefull and deteſtable before all
good men: if there be any that will impugne theſe teſtimonies
thus ſet downe by Salomon, they can be none but
ſuch as wil impugne the verity of the holy ſcriptures: for
if the ſcriptures be true Salomon was the wiſeſt that euer
was amongſt men: and out of the depth of this wiſdome
hee hath giuen vs theſe notes which he hath left
vnto vs in his bookes of Prouerbes, a booke firſt inſpired

by the ſpirit of God, a booke Cannonized allowed and receiued
by the Church.
            
            The infallible markes of a vertuous woman then, as
they are ſet downe by Salomon are theſe, ſhee muſt haue
modeſty, haſhfullnes, ſilence, abſtinence, ſobrietie: ſhee muſt be
tractable to her huſband, Shee doth her huſband good &c.
Shee muſt not bee a vaine talker She openeth her mouth
with wiſdome.
            
            Shee muſt be carefull of her family Shee ouerſeeth the
wayes of her houſhould,
            
            Shee muſt be full of exerciſes: Shee eateth not the bread
of idlenes.
            
            Now the woman that is impudent, immodeſt, ſhameles,
inſolent, audacious, a night walker, a company keeper, a gadder
about the ſtreets, if ſuch a womā may be nūbred amongſt
thoſe women that be good, then Salomon was a Foole,
that hath avowed the contrary, and then the ſcriptures
are vntrue that hath teſtified of his wiſdome, & God him
ſelfe is a promiſe breaker, and was not true of his word
when he ſayd vnto Salomon.
            
            
               I haue giuen thee a wiſe and an vnderſtanding heart ſo that
ther hath been none like thee before thee, neither after thee ſhall
ariſe the like vnto thee. 1. Kin. Cap. 3. if there be any therfore
that will yet make cauels, to the contrary, they doe
but bewray themſelues and ſuch vaine contenders,
are not worthy to bee aunſwered, I
will therefore here make an ende
and reſt my ſelfe
with ſilence.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Epilogus.
            Theſe harmeleſſe lynes, that neuer did conſpire,
            In any ſort, to ſlaunder or detect:
            I hope ſhall not be tortured on the racke,
            Nor wreſted to a miſconceiued ſenſe.
            I ſtrike at Sinne, yet ſing bright Vertues prayſe,
            If Gauld backe iade, with ſelfe miſdeeming eye,
            Will ſearch ſo neare, to rubbe his feſtred ſore:
            The faultes not mine, his errour is the more.
            What ſonge ſo ſweete, if Saintes themſelues woulde ſing,
            But Currs would barke, and Snakes are apt to ſting.
            The ſumme is this, I little force the ſpight,
            That ſcrues awry, what I haue forged right.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   