
      
         
            
            
            FOraſmuch as I haue lately ſeene two Letters vnder the hande of the late Lord Biſhop of Couentrie.
and Lichfield, and now Lord Biſhop elect of Norwich; the one dated 22. Septembris 1617. and the other
6. Nouembris following, directed to the ſeuerall Archdeacons, Miniſters, and Churchwardens
of the ſame Dioceſſe for ſupplying of the wants and defects of Bibles of the new and laſt tranſlation,
being of the greateſt letter and larger volume, as alſo Bookes of common prayer, in ſuch Pariſhes as they
were Wanting. In which buſineſſe his Lordſhip was pleaſed to imploy this bearer William Bramſgroue,
who hath already taken much paines therein. And for that I haue receiued credible information, that
many pariſhes within the ſayd Dioceſſe, are yet vnfurniſhed of the ſayd Bookes, notwithſtanding ſtrict
order by me giuen, in the late Metropoliticall Viſitation, holden there for the now Lord Archbiſhop of
Canterbury, and ſince that alſo by the late Lord Biſhop of Couentrie and Lichfield, for the prouiding thereof.
I therefore as Vicar generall to the ſayd Lord Archbiſhop, being Custos ſpiritualitatis ſede vacante, for
the better ſeruice of Almighty God, and edification of the people, haue thought meet to prouide for the
perfecting of that good work ſo well begun, and to that purpoſe do heereby will and require you to make
diligent inquirie, in euery pariſh within the ſayd Dioceſſe, of the defect and want of the ſayd Bookes; and
once more to admoniſh the Miniſter and Churchwardens of euery pariſh, to prouide the ſame with all
conuenient ſpeed, which if they ſhall refuſe or deferre ſo to doe, then foorth with to returne their names
vnto me, that if by my ordinary Iuriſdiction, they will not be brought to ſupplie that defect and abuſe,
that then by power of the Commiſsioners Eccleſiaſticall or otherwiſe, they may be inforced thereunto;
wherein, God willing, I will not faile to take a ſtrict courſe, betwixt this and the beginning of Michaelmaſſe
Terme next. And for that I finde by experience, that the people for the moſt part within that Dioceſſe,
are growne into extremes, that is to ſay, ſome ſo prophane or otherwiſe ſo backward in religion,
that they haue no regard of comming to Church, to heare diuine Seruice and Sermons on Saboath dayes
and Holy dayes; ſome others ſo preciſely curious, that they will bar his Maieſties Subiects from all lawfull
recreation on thoſe dayes, though it be after Euening Seruice and Sermon ended, it ſhall not be amiſſe
as you trauell for the diſpatch of your other buſineſſe, that you deliuer to ſuch Churchwardens of euery
pariſh, within that Dioceſſe for their better direction in this behalfe, this ſmall Treatiſe; (Conteining his
Maieſties declaration to his Subiects concerning lawfull ſports to be vſed) as ſhall be willing to receiue the ſame.
And I require you to make returne of the due execution heereof, at or before the beginning of Michaelmaſſe
Terme next.
            
               Giuen at London this 5. of Iune, 1618.
               
               THO. RIDLEY.
            
            To William Bramſgroue of the City of Litchfield Yeoman,
an Officer to the Prerogatiue Court of Canterbury, being
by me ſpecially ſent to view and furniſh the defectiue Churches
and Chappels, with ſuch bookes as are commanded by
publike authority; and to certifie accordingly.
         
      
   