
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧A moſt friendly farewell, Giuen by a welwiller to the right worſhipful Sir Frauncis Drake Knight, Generall of her Maieſties Nauy, which be appointed for this his honorable voiage, and the reſt of the fleete bound to the Southward, and to all the Gentlemen his followers, and captaines in this exploite, who ſet ſale from Wolwich the xv. day of Iuly, 1585.
            WHERIN IS BRIEFELY TOVCHED his perils paſſed in his laſt daungerous voiage, with an Incouragement to all his ſaylers and ſouldiers, to be forward in this honourable exploite. Publiſhed by Henry Robarts of London Citizin.
            
            Imprinted at London by Walter Mantell and Thomas Lawe.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHTVVORSHIPFVL AND THRISE RENOWMED GENTLEMAN OF our time Syr Frauncis Drake Knight, Generall of her Highneſſe Nauie and the reſt of the Fleete bounde to the Southwarde, Your worſhips poore countreyman, and faithfull well willer H. R. wiſheth you all the happines that euer this worlde can affoorde, with a proſperous returne from your determinate voyage, and honour anſwerable to your heartes deſire.
            
               
                  RYghtworſhipful,
            
            the Perſians honoured their Kings▪ (as I reade that neuer ſawe him) as he paſſed thorowe the Countreyes in his Progreſse he was preſented of many his wealthy Subiects with riche giftes, which he thank fully receiued. A poore Shepheard ſtanding by, and noting earnestly the curteſie of the King, was greeued at the heart, that he had not to bestowe as largely as the best: yet to ſhewe his zeale, he hyeth him hastily vnto a precious well not farre off, and dippyng therein his ſweatie hat, preſentes it full of water vnto the King: the which he ſo gratefully receiued, as he did the richest gift, noting in the poore ſwaine his zeale, and loue which by his ſimpleneſſe appeared to be more to him then many that were then preſent: My ſelfe (Worſhipfull ſir,) repreſenting the ſimple ſhepheard, humbly doe preſent theſe my rude labours vnto your handes, and doe craue of your Worſhippe fauourable acceptans of the ſame, accounting of it, as of the hat full of water, and conſidering the zeale of the giuer, not the worthineſſe of the gifte, excuſing

the boldneſſe of blinde Bayarde, whoſe will is farre greater then his ſkill, your Worſhippe ſhall then ſhewe your ſelfe in curteſie the rightfull heire of the Perſian King. Wherefore hearing of your Worſhips pretended voyage (being a curteſie amongest vs Engliſhmen) to repreſent vnto our betters whome we honour ſome ſimple gift as a farewell in writing whereby their names might be remembred in their abſence, and ſeeing none of the learned ſort haue vndertaken to write according to custome, I being the vnworthyest, yet the most willing, was lothe good Knight that you ſhould depart our Engliſhe coastes without ſome remembery to be publiſhed in prayſe both to your worſhippe, and the rest of your Gentlemen followers in this your noble exploit, who although by name I doe not knowe them as I woulde, whereby I might giue them their honour due vnto them yet euer as long as my tongue can ſpeake, or my ſimple hand holde penne to wryte, I will euer renowme your worſhip, and them whoſe ſeruice for Countrey hath bene ſuch as neuer Engliſh gentleman or other yet atchieued but you: therefore they that haue not giuen you that honor worthie your deſartes, haue ſought to robbe you of your worthines, a baſe thing in ſchollers and the learned who ſeeth other countreymen that hath not vndertaken the one halfe of your troubles to be regiſtred in the mindes of all men for euer, by their meanes which hath by wryting giuen them their deſartes: as the conqueſt of the Weſt Indyes can witneſſe, wherein many of theyr names is explained in other wryters alſo: then Engliſhmen what diſhonour doe you our famous Drake, that you haue left his name ſo long vnwritten of, whome fame hath bruited in all the whole worlde for his most famous enterpriſes, and hath made him to be admired▪ among his mortall foes for his valour, O noble Engliſh heart, neuer yet daunted, whome the report of any euill newes howe vehement ſoeuer they be, can let from thy determinate voyage wherein you may rightly be compared to that conquered Monarke, for valor of mind Alexander who although he was by his ſpies aduertiſed that the host of the Perſian King Darius was in a maner to be compared as a mountaine to his molehill, yet valiantly he gaue him the ouerthrowe, and atchieued the victorie, the like victorie thryſe famous Knight God ſende vnto you, that you may triumph ouer all your enemies like Alexander in this

exployt, all this happyneſſe with much more wiſh I vnto the most, valiant and fortunate Syr Francis Drake, that with ſuch honour and willingneſſe vndertaketh our princes ſeruice, yea, we are all bounde by duetie to pray for the happyneſſe of your estate for that there bee fewe, that are not the better for your last prosperous returne, which God for his mercy ſende nowe to be ſo happy, that as litle Dauid your power may be ſuch that you may beate downe all them that as Golias ſhall come to hinder you of any Iote of your determination, well worthy Knight, would my abilitie were anſwerable to my wil, then ſhould thy honourable name liue eternally amongest vs men on the earth: Ʋnthankfull Engliſhmen that can ſuffer your wohthy countreyman to r
                  〈…〉
               his, 
                  〈…〉
                 with vnthankefulneſſe, ſo ſoone to be forgotten, my ſelfe the vnworthyest of the Countrey haue long expected ſome thing from the learnee in your commendation, but ſeeing them all to be ſo vnmindfull of ſo worthy a perſonage, I baue thus rudely aduentured, though ſimply, to let all my good countreymen by publiſhing the ſame to vnderſtande of your Worſhips departure to the Seas, with all your worthy company, whereby they may ſee the valour that is harboured in your noble heart, and pray with me for your happy returne.
            
               VVOrthy Syr Francis Drake, that hath ſo nobly aduentured in many calamities three whole yeeres, continuing at fortunes hazard, eftſoones likely to be drenched in the raging floudes, and then in daunger of the vnknowen rockes, beſides many other perilles incident to ſea faring wightes, as falling into the handes of your profeſſed mortall foes which daily awaited your returne: yet all this can nothing daunt his worthye heart, nor any one whit diſmay him at all, for the Lorde which is moſt gracious in all his workes hath left you here among vs as a mirrour for our countreymen to looke into, by your example to mooue others to the attempting the like enterpriſes: many other Gentlemen there be in this our laude, but I knowe fewe that will vndertake the like, or none at all that can with ſkill ſo well perfourme it, or

                     〈1… pages missing〉
                  
                  
norant people like my ſelfe, I heare to ſay mutteringly, O Lorde, what doe theſe Gentiles meane ſo to roome from home that enioye ſuch wealth as they doe, and maye ſtaye at their owne pleaſure, but the rein they ſhewe their baſeneſſe, which is ſo vnanſwerable to the mindes of the valiant, as the flint ſtone to the precious diamonde, but ſuch are thoſe baſe fellowes as for gaine at home will not ſticke to doe any thing, when the noble minde abroade aduentureth for fame, which when with great peril they haue moſt valiantly atchieued, the enuiouſneſſe of our countreymen is ſuch as they diſdaine to giue them the honour they haue gained for their right as it is well ſéene by that worthye Knight Sir Humphrey Gylbert whoſe valour deſerued thankes of his countrey if they had bene gratefull, the which they be lothe to beſtowe vpon him, but he is dead, and in countreyes cauſe ſhortened his life, leauing many ſorowe for his death, yet I thinke it were great pity ſeeing his actions were ſuch, as your worſhip I knowe can witneſſe to be honourable that his valiant name ſhould ſo ſuddenly die with his bodie, without ſome remēbrance wherby his children hereafter might reape the rewarde of their fathers fame, and by his good actions be encouraged to imitate his wayes. This renowmed Knight as your worthineſſe is more then any I knowe, and that you haue ſo well deſerued, I truſt ſome learned which can write, will of their good nature emploie their paines to your praiſe & in learned ſtile regiſter your noble fame, whereas I poore I can doe nothing yet haue this rudely aduentured, thereby to ſhewe what zeale I haue to ſuch honourable mindes as your ſelfe, that in your abſence by theſe fewe lines publiſhed you may be remembred when you ſhall be abſent in this your honourable voyage, and the rather haue I vndertaken this becauſe I neuer ſawe any to bid you farewell from Englande, and partly for countries cauſe being borne in Deuonſhire where your worſhip was, theſe cauſes good Syr conſidered, firſt that by my ſimple writing it may encourage

others to write that can doe farre better, and then the zeale I beare to my countrey, and to all ſuch as venture for the common weale, I hope your Worſhippe will pardon the rudeneſſe of the writer, who wiſheth hartely your welfare and proſperous ſucceſſe in all your worthye enterpriſes, and daily ſhall beſéeche God to make you as fortunate as Alexander, and in all your voyage to ſhielde you from your enemies, as he did the Prophet Dauid from the handes of King Saul which perſecuted him, and ſende you a happy returne from this your pretended voyage and many ioyfull yeeres to liue here amongeſt vs, and when it ſhall pleaſe God after you haue ſpent here many happye dayes on the earth with much worſhippe and increaſe of al worldly felicity and that you muſt pay your due to death by nature, you may happely arriue to that port of all ioye to reſt with God in heauen where Chriſt is chiefe Pilate.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ROBARTES HIS FAREVVEL TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SYR FRANCES DRAKE▪ KNIGHT, and to his Gentlemen followers, who ſet ſayle at Wolwich to depart towardes their voyage the xv. day of Iuly. 1585.
            
            
               VVHen true report had blaſed abroad yt iii. yeres takē toile,
               Of that rare knight Syr Francis Drake through many a forraine ſoile.
               Who by his trauaile on the Seas vnto his endleſſe fame,
               Did purchaſe for his countrey wealth, and credit to his name.
               I did expect ſome Ouids pen to paint his worthy praiſe,
               Who when he dies ſhal ſtil remaine wt fame on earth alwaies▪
               
               But none hath writ that earſt I ſawe which makes me ſaye,
               The brunt was ſpread of trauiles his the Poets did diſmay,
               My minde was forward with yt firſt, but yet my heart did faile.
               That gainſt my will I forced was to ſtrike my ſimple ſayle.
               Yet hearing how ye ſecond time this worthy venterous knight.
               Doeth goe to ſeas accompanyed with many a worthy wight.
               My willing heart hath forced my pen thus much to vndertake,
               To him and to his famous crew▪ a farewell for to make.
               I doubt not but his noble heart will way of my goodwill,
               That boldely dares preſume thus much yt haue ſuch ſimple ſkil.
               And pardon me his countrey mā who writes for coūtreis ſake,
               And for becauſe no one as yet, did euer vndertake
               To tell vnto all Engliſhmen what dangers he abode,
               And eke what coūtryes ſtrāge he paſt, while he did rome abroad
               Yea all the worlde almoſt Sir Francis Drake hath ſeene.
               And welcomes great hath euer had where he on ſhore hath ben
               The Heathen Princes honoured him, & fauoures did him giue,
               And victuals ſtore of ſuch as did their bodyes all relieue.
               Yea this & many a ſtrange thing els there happened to him thē.
               When many of his company for feare ran backe againe.
               And gaue report that dead he was, and ſunke in foming flood,
               
                  Which newes to ſome right ioyfull was yt wiſhed him no good
               When ſuch as were his friēds indeed wt watry eies did waile.
               And wiſht their blood were ſhed wt his, ſo it might him auaile.
               All this our Poets might haue wrote if they his fame did tēder,
               Beſides the wealth yt he home brought a good cauſe to remēber
               You might haue taken this ſmal paines ye ſame by pen to ſhew,
               To make his name wt fame reſound & cauſe the world to know.
               When many a thouſand liued at home and ſlept wt quiet eaſe.
               Great paines abroad our Knight endured wt perils on ye ſeas.
               The dangers he hath paſſed through would make a many muſe
               That keeps their chābers cloſe wt ſhame & hearken after nuſe,
               But lōg may good ſir Francis liue which hath enricht our lād,
               The like was neuer ſeene nor heard ſince Englad firſt did ſtad.
               How like Vliſſes did he ſhewe his policies ech were,
               And like Achilles bearded his foes & daunted them with feare.
               The Lord hath bleſt him noble knight & with his mighty arme
               Defended him from forren foes that ſought to doe him harme.
               And brought him ſafely home at laſt where fauour he did gaine
               Of our good Queene wt welcomes great & thāks for takē pain.
               That he ſo nobly had imployed: to nobles all alike caſe,
               A wight more welcome then he was came neuer in this place.
               His credite ſince hath ſtill increaſed and God hath ſo him bleſt,
               That he the loue of all hath gaind from beſt vnto the worſt.
               What ſhould I ſay but this of him his deedes deſerue ſo well,
               That of all others which I know Syr Frances beares ye bell.
               For Bountie, ſure he doeth exceede to thoſe that doe deſerue,
               And feeds ye hūgry naked ſoules which els were like to ſterue.
               And ſuch as in his voyage laſt to ſea with him did goe,
               And by demeanor ill, hath brought them ſelues to careful woe.
               He daily doeth them ſtill relieue and all their family.
               A mirrour of a worthy minde fraught full of curteſie,
               O noble Knight what ſhould I ſay, my pen is to too baſe,
               To write thy fame, it rather doth thy worthy deedes diſgrace.
               What wrong hath poets done to thee that learning hath at wil
               That haue in giuing thee thy due not ſhewed forth their ſkill.
               
                  Who liueth now within the lande that merite doth ſuch fame▪
               
               Then learned poets giue it Drake that doeth deſerue the ſame.
               Would God my ſkill were ſuch thy praiſe ſo for to paint,
               That forren foes to heare thereof wt danted feare ſhould faint.
               And noble valiant Gentlemen that goeth with him to ſea,
               Although your names I do not know, Ile learn thē as I may.
               I knowe you goe to purchaſe fame, and that ſhall be your hier.
               And for to ſhew your valiancie it is your chiefe deſire.
               For daſtardes vſe at home to ſtay, and there will ſit & talke.
               When you in many a forren ſoile in danger daily walke.
               But nothing can diſmay your minds, your noble hearts to try?
               And idle drones which feare to fight you doe them all defie.
               Your generall a valiant Knight was neuer daunted yet,
               But brauely made his foes recoile, whē face to face they met.
               Now is your brauery to be ſhewē, there muſt you al take pain,
               Elſe looke for laſting ignominie when you returne againe.
               Wel, England hath to few ſuch Knights, yt dares to do ſo much
               againe to hazard life and goods, the perill being ſuch.
               He that doeth knowe the danger paſt, and venture doth againe.
               Is worthy haue a crowne of golde to counteruaile his paine.
               Well ſince that thou are going hence to take thée to the ſeas,
               Forſaking wife and countrey both, thy coſtly cheare and eaſe.
               To God thy voyage Ile commende, to whome I ſtill wil pray.
               To graunt thée life and ſafe returne to ſee that ioyful day.
               Wherein thou maiſt behold againe thy louing countreymen,
               Which wiſheth well to thee, & praieth for thy returne againe.
               Set forwarde noble minde, God ſend thee winde at will,
               With coaſt full cleare and weather faire, thy voyage to fulfill.
               And ſhield thee ſafe from foes, and ſuch as wiſh you death.
               Would that I might aduēture life to reaue thē of their breath.
               Good Eolus be friendly nowe, and ſende a happy gale,
               That captaine Drake & all his men on ſeas may ſafely ſale.
               And God that guides the heauens aboue, ſo proſper thée wt hap,
               That al the world haue cauſe to ſay, thou lieſt in fortunes lap.
               And this farewel x. thouſand times the mirrour of our yeeres.
               Farewel the Phenix of our age, whoſe acts admittes no peres.
               
                  Farewel you gallant Gentes, who here might liue at eaſe.
               Yet thruſt your heads for countries welth in haſard on ye ſeas.
               We be no Troians borne gainſt whō durſt Iuno iuſtly ſkold,
               Happy be we at your returne, your foes confuſion to behold.
               Thus whileſt my tōgue can talke or pen may paint thy praiſe,
               I wil ſet down what dreadles deeds were done wtin thy dayes.
               Thou Neptune god, if fauour ought might fierce Achilles find,
               Vouchſafe to ſende my countreyman a calmed waue & winde.
               Thy parting nowe is blaſed abroad, as euery tongue can tell,
               Thy ſhips are lancht, thy ſailes are hoiſt, Syr Francis Drake farewell.
            
            
               H. R.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Robarts his farewell to the ſaylers and ſouldiours appointed for this exploite.
            
               ANd ſayl
                     •
                  rs all and mates what euer that you be,
               which willing are wt this good knight, theſe exploits for to ſée.
               Let neuer courage quaile, but ſhew your ſelues like men,
               For good ſir Drake is generrall, come ſhewe your valour then.
               You heare before what he hath done, when he at ſea was laſt:
               And eke what knowledge he hath gaind of euery forreine coaſt.
               The worthieſt pilate in this land that euer I did knowe,
               Your ſelues I aſke to iudge with me, and many a thouſand mo▪
               
               And how he hath enricht the land, and ſtored it with gold.
               And how he did reward his men, my pen can ſcarſe vnfold:
               And honored them in al their deeds, bicauſe they did take pain,
               And frendſhip euer at his handes their duetie did them gaine.
               Yea, he dealt with them ſo bountiful, & gaue thē ſuch large pay,
               That he for it is worthy praiſe, they ſo of him will ſay.
               A very lambe vnto his frends, as euery toong can tell,
               But vnto ſuch that it deſerue, he is both fierce and fell,
               You know the valour of the man is more then I can ſay,
               Then feare not harts, but venture on, & pleaſe him al you may.
               Your foreward he himſelfe will be as euer he hath beene.
               In any point of ſeruice he will venture life and lim.
               Be valiant then you noble harts, & when you meet your foes,
               Apply your manhood all you may, for to increaſe their woes.
               And in your fighting euermore, thinke you are Engliſhmen,
               Then euery one of you I hope, will ſtay of Spaniards ten:
               Or any els what ere they be, that ſhall diſturbe your peace,
               And ſeeke by any kind of meane your quiet to diſeaſe.
               God and S. Georg you worthy wights, proceed triumphantly,
               In Princes cauſe let no one quaile, but all couragious be▪
               
               The Drum & Fife you warlike wights, ſhal euer by you 
                     ••
                  and,
               As long as any fight indures, for comfort by your hand.
               Gaine honor then, and hold the ſame, as ſong as ere you liue:
               But if like daſtards you do proue, o how your harts may grieue
               That euer noble wight ſhould truſt to ſuch a mate,
               As eats his vittails with the beſt, yet feares to ſhew his pate.
               
                  Once for to looke his foe in face at any time to ſee,
               God ſhield that any ſuch among this warlike crue ſhould be.
               Since you are they muſt honor win, thē trie your force on foes
               And ſhew your ſelues couragiouſly, apply your engliſh blows.
               Then valiant harts that ſeeke for fame, be ſure the ſame to gain
               For with her trumpe of glitring gold ſhe wil requite your pain.
               And at your home returne againe, ſuch praiſe for you ile write,
               Shall do you good to heare the ſame your trauell to requite,
               If you returne, as God I truſt will ſend you all againe, 
                     •
                  
               
               Your general wil reward you all as you imploy your paine.
               Be iuſt therefore and gentle too, ech looke vnto his charge,
               And ſee againſt your generall commit you no outrage▪
               
               Serue God, obey your gouernor, and him both loue and feare,
               You are cōmanded ſo my frends, your princes charge you bear.
               Then God ſhall bleſſe you ſtill if you doe liue in awe,
               If you offend he puniſh may by vertue of his lawe.
               Therefore agree in vnitie, and loue one with the other,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  d ioine your ſelues in amitie, as brother with his brother.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   in this cauſe you are as one, though many ſoules you be,
               Then fellowe mates looke to your ſelues, and neuer diſagrée.
               For whereas brawles be ſet abroch, and quarrellers remaine,
               It greatly will your general grieue, & vexe his hart with paine.
               To ſee that men which ought be wiſe ſo giuen vnto will,
               And in a harebraine humor ſeeke ech other for to kill.
               My louing frends and countrymen, let theſe my words auaile,
               And thinke vpon theſe ſimple lines, when ſhip is vnder ſaile.
               Thus vnto God I you commend, to whom I ſtill will pray,
               To ſend you ſafe among your frends, and ſhield you on the ſea.
               I meane you all good will, I truſt you take it ſo,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  engliſh 
                  
                     ••
                  ts. God keepe you all from wo.
            
         
      
   