
      
         
            
            A True Relation of a moſt worthy and notable Fight, performed the nineteenth day of Iune now laſt paſt, by two ſmall Shippes of the Citie of London: the Vineyard of a hundred and twentie Tunnes; and the Vnicorne of a hundred and fourtie Tunnes, againſt Sixe great Gallies of Tunes, hauing in them a thouſand and eight hundred men, of the Ile of Way-yorcke in the Straights: Our Shippes hauing in all Mariners. Merchants, and Paſſengers▪ fifty ſixe men.
            Written by H. R
            
            
            Imprinted at London for I. White, and are to be ſold by, T. Langley.
            
         
         
            
            To my eſteemed good Friend Mr. GYLBERT ROBARTES, all well wiſhes of true loue and contiuall happineſſe.
            
               YOur remote liuing from this famous Citie, old acquantance, and many louing friends, cannot chooſe but increaſe a longing deſire to heare ſuch Newes as may beguile ſome time with contemplating on them; but the vncertaintie of report for home-bred occaſions are ſuch, as makes me ſilent; yet to giue you ſome cauſe of admiration, and a good liking of men worthy, and moſt skilfull in their profeſsion, I haue made bold to commende vnto you, the hardy and moſt dangerous Aduenture of two worthy Shippes of London, and their Companies in their laſt Voyage for the Straights, made this paſſed Sommer, againſt Six great Gallies of the Turkes: wherein they ſhewed true volour, and gallant reſolution, gayning fame to them-ſelues, been a terrour to the enemie, and giuen a moſt worthy example for all of their coates: A pattorne worth recording for others to follow, a comfort to Owners, and Marchantes, that commit their Shippes and goods to ſuch mens gouernment, and a ioy to all thoſe that heare their deſerued comendations; to the further view wherof I leaue you, & pray God neuer to giue worſe ſucceſſe then they haue had, nor worſeminds, then they haue ſhewed to be in them, but euer encreaſe, for our Countries honour the number of ſuch, and keepe you and all others your good friends, for euer-more vnder his holy protection.
            
               
                  London 
                  this 2. of Februarie 1616.
               
               Your louing friend euer yours,
Hen. Robarts
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A True Relation of a moſt worthy Fight made the 23. of Iune 1615 by two Shippes of London, the Vineyard, and the Vnicorne: neere the Ile of May-yorcke with
               in the Straights, hauing but 56. Men and Boyes aboard, againſt ſixe Gallies of the Turkes, being of Tunes, in Barbery, and had in them of Souldiers, Saylors, & Slaues, 1800. men.
            
               LOuing Country-men, that we ſhould giue honour to them that doth truly deſerue it, is no more then Chriſtian charitie doth enſite vs vnto; and the holy Scriptures in many examples doth prooue vnto vs: as Dauid that kingly Prophet and man of God, was mette and entertained of the people with dauncing and ſinging his worthy Victories, obtayned againſt the enemies of GOD, and his King. Iephat that worthy Captaine, and ſundry others which I omit, were honoured

for their Victories with triumphes by the people, as holy Writ doth teſtefie.
            The Romans ſo honoured their Nation, and held honoure in ſuch heigh eſteeme, that were his byrth neuer ſo meane, or reputation ſo bace; yet if hee deſerued any honour in their Warres, they duely gaue it him, with all the honours they could deuiſe.
            The Greatians, and ſundry other nations had the like, ſo that thereby they gaue ſuch encouragement to all ſuch as followed them in their long Warres, that euery man enforced both Courage and ſtrength in hope of Fame.
            Whole volumes are filled with the Honors of theſe nationes, as wee which now liue, by true recordes can teſtefie, the ſundry Famous victoryes by them atchiued, and their excellent admired prowes. Theſe were the times of true loue and honour. This made the Coward hardy, and the faint-hearted Swaine, to aduance themſelues, in hope to gaine, vnto their poſterities euerlaſting fame. Oh that our Nation would immitate theſe true tipes of honour, to noriſh ſuch as aduenture their liues and eſtates, for welfare of their Country: then there is no doubt, but in time of troubles, when valour ſhould be ſhowne, wee ſhould finde many worthy perſons, vnder ſimple habites, that would purchaſe to their country honor, & fame to themſelues. But our Countries charity is too too cold, to giue Virtue her due in ſuch people, the more it is to be pittyed, that ſuch men as merit either by valour, or other induſtorous meanes, ſhould not be▪ foſt
                  •
               red and well rewarded. But ſuch is the hardneſſe of heart▪ in moſt, now a dayes, that Let a man aduenture their liues and libertie, in neuer ſo hardie an actions for ſaueguard doth of Shippe and good, when they looke for chearfull

countenāce at their returne, and ſome reward for their paines, they hardly get either good word, or good deed, (nay ſcarcely) their wages which God knoweth was neuer ſo hardly gotten, but with ſome Braules, and diſcontent: theſe doings, is often the cauſe of much loſſe to owners and Marchants, where if they nouriſhed the true Labouring by e
                  •
               ling with ſome ſmall reward, (yea) but ſometimes with a good word, it would giue encouragement to men, rather to loſe their liues, then part with that is committed to their charge, in my ſleight manner. Iudg you that read and know what you read, how many Ships and men of our Nation, hath been taken by theſe Pyrats, thoſe homecides that lurke about the South Cape, Barbery, & the Straights, to ſurpriſe ſuch as trade in honeſt Merchants affaires, the Owners and Merchants to their coſt, can beſt tell: of which no doubt, ſome haue been cowardly ſurpriſed, and others ouer-matched; whereby the Companies falling into their hands, are impriſoned, and often times made ſlaues to thoſe Heathen nations that tryumph ouer them, to the vtter ruine of them & their for euer.
            Theſe are things to be pittyed, & truly of all Chriſtians to be lamented: and I could wiſh that ſuch men that aduenture to the ſeaes, may with true compaſſion conſider of ſuch as doe deſerue well; ſo ſhall they be ſure to haue their ſeruice truly performed, and their Goods in better ſecuritie then often times they haue. But leauing that to God, who guideth mens hearts, let mee recoune vnto you a moſt worthy and valiant exployt performed not long ſince by two ſmall Ships of the Citie of London, aganiſt ſixe Gallyes of Tunes in Barbery, neere vnto the Ile of May-yorcke within the Straights; to the great commendations of the Maiſters and Company of them, as you ſhall further vnderſtand.
            
               
IN the beginning of this laſt Sommer, a Voyage by ſundry Merchaunts of London was pretended to certaine Ports within the Straights of Ieboraltarre; who for the Voyage had appoynted two ſmall Shippes, the one called the Vineyard, of the burthen of a hundred and twenty Tunnes, or there-abouts, whoſe Maiſter for the voyage, was Maiſter Richard Harrice of Lee in Eſſex; a very honeſt and religious man, and as valiant and full of courage, as otherwiſe of good gouernment: The other, the Vnicorne of London, of the burthen of a hundred and fourtie Tunnes, or there-aboutes; whoſe Maiſter for the Voyage, was Maiſter Gardner of Wapping neere London; a man endowed with honeſtie, religion, and vallour.
            Theſe two good Ships, being victualed for the vi
                  •
               
               age, and manned both Ships with fiftie ſixe men and boyes, Merchantes, and Paſſengers, in all, haueing taken in their Lading, and all ſitting for their vſe in the Voyage, after their ſolemne farewell taken of the Owners and Aduenturers, as the Merchantes accuſtome to doe, ſet Sayle from London, and ariued at Lee, where they made ſome ſmall ſtay exſpecting a faire Winde to proceede, whoſe hopes it pleaſed God to further, and on the twentie three day of May now laſt paſt, to ſend them their wiſhed deſires; which they neglected not, but taking oportunitie, ſet Sayle the ſame twentie three of May▪
                And was ſo fauored of him that ruleth by his Power both Winds, and Seas, that they were euer in the way of the Wind, vntill they came to the South Cape, where they had ſight of three tall Shippes, men of Warre, which were of Algeers, in Barbarie▪
                full of Ordinance and men.
            
               Theſe Ships gaue vs chace, which did in ſome ſmall manner diſmay vs; yet putting our truſt in God, whoſe pleaſure is to lay our feares and care vpon him, wee reſolued, if they were Friends, to bid them welcome; if Enemies, to defend our ſelues.
            Theſe Shippes wyning vpon vs, one of them came vp and hayled vs, bidding vs amayne: To whom ou
                  •
                Maiſter ſayd; Doe you your worſt, wee feare you not. Then demaunded they of whence we were? Our Maiſter Harrice, M. of the Vineyard anſwered, of London, and bound for Turkey; and aſked of whence they were? Of Argeor
                     •
                  , ſayd they.
            While they had this ſhorr parlie with vs, they tooke good notice of our Shippes, and ſaw the redineſſe wee were in to defende our ſelues: and imagining by our Maiſters rough anſwere, that we cared little for them, they made no longer ſtay, but ſprong their looffe, and bore roome againe into the Sea.
            Their departure ſo ſodainly, gaue vs ſome comfort, although wee feared them not: yet conſidering we come for Trafficke and not for Warres, wee rather deſired Peace, (if it pleaſed God) then Broyles; from which at that time, it pleaſed him to deliuer vs: Vnto whom for his preſeruation, we acknowledged ſuch hearty thankes and prayſes, as became vs.
            This Danger (by Gods permiſſion) being ouerpaſt, as Winde ſerued for vs, we put into the Straights. keeping our courſe for Leagehorne, which was the firſt Port of our diſcharge.
            When comming neere vnto May-yorcke, an Iland in the Sea, wee had ſight of ſixe great Gallpes men of Warre, all of Tunes, and one other Port vnder▪ the Turke. Theſe companions came with vs, applying

their beſt ſtrength of Oares and Sayles, to come to vs, wee ſeeing the ſpeed they made, began to coniecture wee ſhould haue more to doe with them, then wee willingly would: wherevpon our Maiſter M. Harrice, cauſed the Vineyards Boate to bee hoyſted out, the Vnicorne beeing farre from vs, and the Seas beéing calme and no Winde ſtirring, ſo wee cowed our Shippe to the Vnicorne, and furlde our maine Sayle, prouiding our ſelues as well as we could: which done, we went to prayer, humbly intreating his deuine ayde, that neuer leaueth his people, to helpe vs, and to bee our comfort in this diſtreſſe.
            By this tyme, the Gallyes were all in fayre ſight, ſo that wee might well deſery their numbers of men. Then fiue of them left to row, and the ſixt Gally came towards vs; and hayling our Shippes after the manner of the Sea, aſked of whence we were? Our Maiſter anſwered, of London, and bound for Turkey. Then cryed the Turkes, All friends, all friendes. Then did they enquire what Men of Warre wee had met withall, or ſeene without the Straights, or lately? Whom wee ſimply tolde of the three Shippes wee ſpoke with: ſo away they went from vs, making ſpeed to their fiue conforts, that ſtayed for them.
            The ſodaine and friendly parting with this Galley, gaue vs hope wee ſhould haue no further trouble with them, nor his fellowes; yet durſt not truſt them, but made ready to defend our ſelues, as ſodainely as wee could, getting as neere vnto the Vnicorne our conſort, as wee might, that beeing neere, wee might fight with more aduantage to our ſelues, and doe our enemies the more harme, if it ſhould ſo happen.
            
               This time the Gallyes helde counſayle togeather what they ſhould doe: At length, hauing concluded our finall ouerthrow as it▪ ſeemed, they all came vpon vs with all the violent force they could: and comming vp firſt with the Vnicorne, they powred into her their ſmall Shotte, as Hayle in compariſon. They lying ſo cloſe aboard, the Vineyard made their Shotte ſo hotte vpon them, that foure of them came aboarde her, and left the Vnicorne but two.
            In this conflict, wee poore men were not idle, but ſo applyed our Ordinaunce, which wee laded with Croſſe-barres, Caſe-Shoote, and Round Byllets, as greatly annoyed them.
            In the firſt encounter, wee had our Boatſon ſlaine and one other man, and three hurt▪ And the Vnicorne two men ſlaine, and two hurt.
            The Gallyes lying ſtill by vs, maintayned the fight very hotly, and plyed their Shotte vpon vs, that our turne Sides, and battered Stearne can yet witneſſe it: beſides our Sayles ſo ſhotte, that fourty poundes cannot make good that harme onely.
            Deadly and full of reſolution on both parties two full bowers by the Glaſſe, continued this fight; in which all our Companies, were faine to prooue Gunners, not onely the Maiſter and his Mates, but all the reſt: Amongſt which, I may not forget the paynes and induſtry of one of Maiſter Harrices Mates, M. Wotton; whoſe ſkill and readineſſe was ſuch, in applying the moſt part of our Ordinance in our quarter, which lay to doe the Enemie moſt ſpoyle, that hee did them great harme, and made them haue ſmall hope of

our conqueſt, which they expected.
            Bleſſed be the all powerfull God, who after two howers of very dangerous fight, one ſhotte from the Vineyard did them ſuch ſpoyle, as with a great and moſt dreadfull ſhrieke they fell all from vs, and went their wayes. And in good time for them; for I thinke if they had ſtayed longer, they had ſome of them ſunke by our ſides; as ſhould ſeeme by their ſodaine bringing foure of them vpon the Careere to ſtop their leakes.
            Thus by the mercie and power of our God, were wee freed from this great and dangerous perill wherein wee had like to haue falled, paſt hope of man, onely his Mercy that giueth victorie at his will, preſerued vs: To whoſe bleſſed name, all prayſe and honour be rendred, who not onely ſet vs free from our Foes, but at that inſtant, ſent vs a fayre leading gale of Winde: ſo wee cut our Mayne ſayle, and kept our courſe for Leaghorne, which was the firſt Port of our diſcharge; giuing GOD moſt humble thankes for our deliuerance.
            While wee made ſtay at Leaghorne, the Duke of Florences Gallyes, who are moſt tymes abroade in ſeruice, came into the Roade: in one of them was a Iew, who ſpoke with the Captaine of the Admirall Gally, and was with them when they ſet their mayned & hurt men a ſhore.
            This Captaine reported to the Iew beeing of his acquaintance, that there▪ were in theſe ſixe Gallies one thouſand eight hundred men of all ſorts: and in the fight with vs, had ſlaine a hundred and fiftie, and three hundred more hurt and mayned very dangerouſly.
            GOD haue the prayſe for our happy deliuery, and make vs mindfull of his great mercy ſhewed vnto his

poore ſeruants, that while wee haue any beeing in this world, wee may with all due prayſes, acknowledge his mercy towards vs.
            Thus haue you heard (to the glory of God, and the deſerued commendations, of thoſe valerous and vndaunced ſprights) The moſt reſolute and worthy Conqueſt of the ſixe Gallyes; who beeing not a handfull in regard of their multitudes, which were neere Tenn for one, and ſo well appoynted with Men and Munition, that they thought themſelues ſufficient, to encounter greater forces.
            But we haue euer heard and knowne, that victorie conſiſteth not in ſtrength of Horſe or Man, though they ve neuer ſo mightie: but in the all Powerfull hand of God, who in the middeſt of greateſt daungers, comforteth them, that with faythfull heartes call vpon him.
            And moſt truely, by thoſe worthy men Maiſter Harrice, and Maiſter Gardner, and there companies it appeareth, who doubtleſſe are gratious men in the preſence of God; ſuch is their gouernment, their zeale to God and his true Religion: ſuch doth God in all diſtreſſes comfort, for ſo is his promiſe, that neuer fayleth his ſeruants: It is his holy hand, that hath done this for them againſt all expectation of men. For which his bleſſed name be euer prayſed.
            And I wiſh moſt heartily, that ſuch Owners and Merchantes, which haue ſuch faythfull people to deale for them, would not ſhut their Purſes from rewarde, but open their handes with Bounty vnto them, that others may be encouraged to doe them the like ſeruice: If ſuch men would vſe this charitie, no doubt but their

bounty and good countenances to men aduenturing for them would make their ſeruice to be better performed, And this Kingdome be more better repleniſhed with able and ſufficient men to fight in their defence, if occaſion ſhould bee.
            You haue heard the true diſcourſe of this dangerous voyage, their happie deliuerance, and dilygent cares in performing the ſame; Who making foure Ports, viz. Maliga▪ Leagehorne, Naples, and Zant, as by Chartie-Partie they were bound, taking their Lading at Zant, was by the mercy of God, with Winds ſo fauored, that in good ſaffetie the Shippe and goodes ariued the twelf
                  •
                day of December, in the Roade of Limehouſe in the Riuer of Thames.
            
            To the eternall glory of God, the ioyce of our hearts, and comfort of all our friendes, where we were by thoſe worthy, Marchants our Owners of the Vinyarde Maſter Freeman, and Maſter Dunkcombe, with their Partners, leuingly welcomed, as well as by our aduentures and M
                  •
               rch
                  •
               nts, which were theſe: Maſter Freeman, Maſter Fiſhborne, and Maſter Barlymarke▪
                God haue the honour, and let all our praiers vs, that neuer Engliſh men, haue worſe ſucceſſe in their affayres, then we haue had.
            GOD of his mercy graunt vs all true, louing, and faithfull hearts, that God may haue his true 
                  •
               ond
                  ••
               , and our King▪ and Country faythfull ſeruice: to whoſe deuine, and all Powerfull name be all true prayſes 
                  •••••
               ed for 
                  ••
               er, 
                  •
               nd euer,
            Amen.
         
         FINIS.
      
   