
      
         
            
            
            
               The Vineyarde of
Vertüe collected, compoſed,
and digeſted into a tripartite
order, conteining XXXII. moſt
excellent plants of fruitful vertue:
In moſt beautiful and bleſſed
maner enuironing the true
elect Churche of God
vpon earth. Euery Plant conteining this
tripartite order: Namely 
                  Definition
                  Teſtimonie
                  Examples
               of vertue

            By R. R.
            
               Iohn.. 15.
               I am the true Vyne, and my father is the
Husbandman: Euery branch that bringeth
not foorth good frute, doeth my
father plucke away: and euery branch
that beareth frute, dooth my father
purge, that it may bring foorth frute
more abundantly.
            
            Imprinted by Thomas Dawſon.
         
         
            
            
            To the Godly, Vertuous, and
woorſhipful Gentleman. M. Edmund
Vvedale aliâs Vdale of Shirburne in Dorſetſhier,
long and happy increaſe of corporall, and
ſpirituall good graces in this lyfe with the
participation of eternall beatitude in
Chriſte Ieſus, for euer and
euer.
            
               WEE are taught in that ſacred
booke of diuine Wiſdō, this moſt ſacred leſſon,
worſhipful Sir, Sapient. 15.
Too knowe God, is perfect
rightuouſnes, and to knowe
his rightuouſnes & vertue,
is the roote of immortality. A ſentēce ſurely not
ſo ſhorte and ſweete, as effectually and at large
comprehending firme comforte from the Creator
God vntoo the creature man. From which
God as we may define godlynes to proceed, touching
his Godhead; and vertue alſo as touching
his manhood: ſo this godlines and vertue including
his perfect righteouſnes is according to the
meaſure of his grace, nowe and then infuſed vppon
mankinde. Lactantius Firmianus ſeemeth
to affirme this by his teſtimony, in libro de opificio

Dei cap. 12. Where he ſaith. Vir dicitur, eò
quòd maior vis eſt in eoquā in foemina, & hinc
virtus nomen accepit. And although here man
ſeemeth to haue the prerogatiue of vertue, as of
moſt fortitude valiancy or manhood in him: yet
we muſt not any thing exclude the feminin ſexe,
from the benefit of vnited godlines & vertue in
the Lord. For aſmuch as God by the mouth of
his Prophet Dauid auoucheth by example, too
compare as wel the godly & vertuous womā, as
the godly and vertuous mā, Like vnto the tree
planted by the riuer ſide which bringes foorthe
his frute in due tyme & tyde. Pſa. 1. ve. 3. But as
this true tree of godlynes and vertue according
to the prouerb may be planted by Paule; that is
to ſay by the holy Ghoſte, watered by Apollo;
that is, by mans continual exerciſe, and by God
and from God receaueth her increaſe: ſo it is
oftentimes ſeene, where God hath his Church,
there wil the Deuil haue a Chappel. Yea where
hath any goodnes, godlynes or vertue takē root
or floriſhed at any tyme, or in any age, but euen
there alſo enuy, malice & miſchief would haue
a fling? Plutarch in his morals could ſay, that as
the ſhadowe followeth the body: ſo enuy euermore
accompanieth vertue, and as where is no
body, there is no ſhadow, ſo where is no felicity,
there is none enuy. For the holynes of Dauid,
               
innocency of Iob, wiſedome of Solomon, fortitude
of Sampſon, and vertue of the moſte vertuous
amongſt mankinde could not auoide enmity
ſufficiently, when the almighty Iehouah,
and moſt holieſt Meſsias had his moſte cruell
and ſpiteful enemies, the Iewes, Scribes, & Phariſees,
euer emong inuaying againſt him, circumuēting
of him, & ſubuerting his doctrine. Of the
true knowledge of God, of his rightuouſnes, and
vertue rooted vnto immortality, in the hearts of
thoſe that beleeued in him. But in their greateſt
iolity of iuſtifying their owne wickednes, ſeeming
to thēſelues to haue perfect holines, when
they had not, bearing the worlde in hande that
they brought forth ſounde frutes of vertue, whē
they were filthily corrupted with alkind of vice:
Our ſauiour Chriſte euen then and therefore
ſcourging them out of the Temple of Hieruſalē,
to their ſhame and reproch, put foorth the parable
of the Vineyeard, and of the labourers. Luc.
19. as thereby not onely confounding their falſhood
and reuealing their painted hypocriſie: but
alſo vtterly diſcouered thē to be voide of al true
godlines & vertue, yea & alſo the moſt extreme
enemies thereof.
            Touching the defect of this tree of true godlines
and vertue, amōgſt the worldly wyſe Philoſophers,
it hath beene from tyme too tyme

apparantly prooued, that neither the Academici
reſident in place where they taught morall
vertue, the Peripatetici preiudicating euentes,
the Cynici of baſer cōuerſatiō, the Eudomenees
for al their woorking good effectes, the Philotethes
for al their arrogant glory in themſelues
diſdaining others, as though they only had perfect
zeale of trueth, the Phiſici, for al their skilfull
knowledge in thinges natural, neither the
Ethici, which taught their rules of good life and
manners, neither yet the Dialectici, of ſingular
dexterity in diſputing and reaſoning cauſes
naturall, coulde euer ſauoure the taſte of the
true knowledge of GOD and of his righteouſneſſe
and vertue rooted vntoo immortality: although
in deede they tooke vppon them a kind
of prophane, godly, and vertuous lyfe, which
they thought in themſelues to bee righte, which
alſo they taught vntoo the worlde in their
tyme.
            But they were farre wyde from the marke,
they wādered in darknes for want of light, they
ſwallowed the ſowre grape in wāt of the ſweet,
and they crackte the ſhel, but founde no kernell,
they were alwaies learning, but neuer learned
in the lawe of the Goſpell of Chriſte the Lampe
of light vnto ſaluation for as Lactantius Firmianus
ſaieth libro. 3. diuinarum inſtitutionum
               
they ſaw but a ſhadow, of true godlynes & vertue,
and not the light therof it ſelfe, and they laboured
al their life for it but they coulde neuer
finde it. Bicauſe (ſaith he) they eyther retained
an vngodly religion, or elſe altogither maintained
the ſame.
            
            But the Romiſhe Antichriſt, and his curſed
crew the ſuckblood ſucceſſors of the Scrybes &
Phariſees the broode of Belial, Nemrods neare
kinſmen and adherents of wicked Achab, haue
from tyme to tyme hearde ſeene, knowen and
perceaued, The affſpring of the roote of Ieſſe,
               Eſay. 11.
               which (as Eſay ſaith) ſhoulde ryſe too beare rule
ouer the Gentiles, and in whome the nations
ſhoulde beleeue. Alſo they haue bene toulde (by
the Doctrine of our ſauiour Chriſt in his ſacred
Goſpel, and by the teſtimonies of his Apoſtles,
Patriarcks, and Prophets) who was, and is and
euer ſhal bee the true vyne. The true huſbandman,
and the true labourers:Iohn. 15. yet of wilful blindnes
haue they refuſed too bee ingrafted in the
vyne of the true knowledge of God,Mat. 20. of his righteouſnes
and vertue rooted vntoo immortality.
Yet of obſtinate malice haue they not onely refuſed
the calling of the heauenly huſbande man
Chriſt Ieſus to come as labourers intoo his vinyearde:
But alſo with the wilde bore rooted vp
euery vyne of good doctrine in the Churche of

God & with the wicked huſbādmen ſlaine not
only their Maiſters ſeruauntes,Mar. 12. that is too ſay, a
nūber of godly preachers and vertuous perſons
ſent vntoo them; but alſo crucified the ſonne of
God anew, by their horrible diſordered inſtitutions
in their Churches and Synagogues.
            That moſt Princely Prophet Dauid (woorſhipfull
Sir) pronounceth al thoſe too bee bleſſed
which dwel in the houſe of the Lorde, that
is to ſay in the Churche of God, affirming further,
that they ſhal praiſe him deſeruingly world
without ende. Pſalm. 83. Surely, if the
Lorde GOD the holy one of Iſrael ſhoulde
preſently ſummon the husbandemen of his
Vineyearde throughout the worlde, too giue
perfect reckoning of due fructifying and happy
ſtate of his Churche at this day: I doubt whether
any Nation vnder the Sunne, haue founde
ſo greate felicitie and bleſſinges abounding in
them, as this little Iland of ours, hath had in her
of long tyme, neither that any Nation hath
better cauſe too praiſe his holy name, for his
gracious goodnes, then wee haue, euen worlde
without ende.
            Conſidering hee hath long ſince out of this
his Vineyearde in Englande pluckte vpp by the
roote that vnfruiteful figge tree of the PopesLuke. 12.
               
planting: Conſidering alſo that the vyne of his
glorious Goſpel hath long floriſhed, & ſtil doth
without the annoyance of any populer tree
of forraine Campania, maugre the malice of
her malignant aduerſaries, from day too daye
fructifying in the true knowledge of GOD &
of his righteouſnes and vertue vnto immortality.
            Wherefore as euery labourer in this Vineyearde
is bounden in duetie too bring with
him godly care for conſeruation and preſeruation
of the welfare thereof: ſo ought ech one
faythfully to laboure in true godlines and vertue
too ſuch effect, that whereas oure Sauiour
Chriſte ſaith, there are yet foure Monethes, &
the Harueſt wil bee heere anone: Wee ſhoulde
therefore be ready too reape the Harueſt of the
Lorde, that wee may receiue reward, & gather
our fruites into the barne of euerlaſting beatitude.
Iohn. 4.
            To this ende and purpoſe (worſhipful Sir,)
as one moſte ſimple of many others, and bounden
in duetie with them of better ability I
haue heere not onely brought my beſt good
will but alſo abillity therewith: as too furder
the welfare of the Churche of GOD amongſt
vs, if by any meanes it ſo pleaſe GOD may
poſſible.
            
               
I haue therfore (preſſing my ſelfe an vnworthy
labourer, lacking Columellaes cunning in
contriuing or trying, Palladius his experience
in planting and purging, and Verroes vertue in
aduauncing the beautiful beatitude of a vineyeard)
ſimply heere ſet downe the names & natures
of a fewe true vyne plantes, collected the
branches out of ſundry teſtimonies of ſacred
ſcriptures, and framed in order the fruiteful examples
of oure ſauiour Chriſte (or of as many
moſt excellēt godly and vertuous perſons as out
of the ſcriptures onely ſacred, I coulde ſelect) to
beautify and fructifie the ſtate of Gods Church
in this my natiue country: the patronaige wherof
I haue vowed vnto your woorthy woorſhip
(as amongſt others godly and vertuous Gentlemen
my good benefactors) at this preſent choſen
for your liuely ſinceare zele to Gods trueth,
your vertuous example of godly conuerſation,
and ſingular loue to al good learning (proceeding
from the roote and braunches of your woorthy
progeny eſpecially your right worſhipful, grandfather
M. Nicholas Vdale a man for al rare reſpectes
of true Godlines and vertue beloued of
God, his Prince the renoumed King Henry the
VIII. his godly and vertuous ſpowſe Queene
Katherin, and the bleſſed King Edward the VI.
and of al good and godly men) whoſe ſteypes as

you imitate, ſo therefore may you ſeeme woorthely
anſwerable too the protection of this and
farre better trauailes. To you therfore I ſay as a
valley repleniſhed with the vertuous plantes of
your vertuous progeny, and as a floriſhing plant
in theſe moſt floriſhing daies of our diuine Debora
Queene ELIZABETH, whoſe gratious
and bleſſed raigne, the Lorde prorogate
vnto the ende of the world) doo I with all
humble and hearty good will conſecrate this
Vineyard of Vertue. And bicauſe good meaning
hath many enimies in theſe dayes, and true
vertue neuer wanteth vniuſt enuie, I am in duetie
bound to praye vnto the Almightie continually,
that the Vineyard of the Lord ſo floriſhing
at this day in Englande, may be by him ſtill preſerued
from thoſe ſame popiſh perillous Coluoluoli,
whoſe propertie is, euer to be gnawing vppon
fruitfull vines. And that my good meaning
in this litle labour may be alſo defended agaynſt
that comberſome neighbour the Collecabedge
beeing farther contrariety of nature, namely,
colde and moiſt alwaies noyſome vnto the vine,
and onely refuſed of her aboue al other plantes,
roots, or trees. Vnto whom for her three harmful
diſcomodities in engendring Melancholy, in
breeding noiſom dreames, & hurting the lungs
in mans body, I may wel reſemble, pale maleuo 
               
                  〈16 pages missing〉
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               which cauſe Chriſt himſelfe affirmed that
many ſinnes were forgiuen her, for ſhe loued
much. Luke. 7. Iohn. 11.
            
               Paule the choſen Apoſtle of Chriſt Ieſus,
confeſſed that he eſteemed all thinges
as vile, in reſpect of the loue which he bare
to God. Phil. 3.
            For other examples of the loue of God,
looke. Matth. 21. 1. Iohn. 4
            ¶As the great and ineſtimable loue of
Chriſt the true Sámaritane appeare
towardes vs in creating, redeeming,
and preſeruing vs from death to life:
ſo ſhould we with mutuall loue, help,
ayde, and comforte our neighbours in
all good and needefull caſes. Luk. 10.
            The Centurion loued ſo his neighbours
and the nations neere adioyning, that hee
builded a Synagogue for them, ſo that too
ſhewe their mutuall loue towardes him,
they came to Chriſt, & beſought him that
he would vouchſafe to heale the Centurions
ſeruaunt lying ſick, which thing hee
accompliſhed. Luk. 7.
            The Samaritan expreſſed a notable
teſtimony and example of godly loue towards

the man which trauailed from Hieruſalem
to Hierico, who beeing robbed,
ſpoyled, and wounded by thoſe theeues,
was there pyttied by the Samaritane in
ſuch manner that he went to him, bounde
vp his wounds, powred wine and oyle therinto,
ſet him on his own beaſt, brought him
to a common Inne, and made prouiſion for
him to his greate reliefe and comforte.
Luke. 10.
            
               Thomas the Apoſtle ſurnamed Didimus
(what time our ſauiour Chriſt came
to Lazarus and ſaid plainly that hee was
dead) he for the loue that he bare (as it ſemed)
vnto Lazarus ſaid vnto the reſt of
his fellowe Apoſtles, Let vs alſo goe that
we may dye with him. Iohn. 11.
            For other examples of loue towards
our neighbour, looke in Abraham,
Gen. 18. Moſes, Exo. 32. Ionathas,
1. Reg. 18. and Nehemias,
2. Reg. 19.
         
         
            The iiii. Plant,
Hope or truſt in God.
            
               
               
                  Definition 
               
HOpe the very author of a Chriſtian
life toſſed and turmoyled with
chaunces, hazards, perils, ſorrowes, myſeryes,
calamities, and troubles in this
world, is the aſſured ſtay and comfort of
mans helpe and recouery in the Lord,
which hope beeing extinguiſhed, neither
may chaunces caſuall bee tollerate, hazardes
eſchewed, perils preuented, ſorrowes
aſſuaged, myſeries remedied, calamities
comforted, nor troubles reſtrained.
For as S. Paule ſaith this vertue
Hope may well bee termed the Helmet
of ſaluation. But this hope which hee ſo
calleth is alſo gouerned by the aſſured
promiſes of the true God and by preciſe
bounds is to bee diſcerned from humane
hope, which is falſe & vncertaine, which
Ariſtotle termeth, The Dreame of him
that waketh. For he counteth the hope
of man in man, to be nothing eſſe but golden
blaſtes of leaues which nowe & then
ſhake, now and then are ſtill and within
a while are vtterly blowen away. Wherfore
mans ſpeciall hope and truſt ought
to bee in God, whiche neuer fayleth his

faithfull ones, neither in this tranſitory
life, nor in the life eternall.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Haue hope and confidence in the
Lord, with all thy heart, and leane not
vnto thine owne wiſdome, think vpon
him in all thy wayes, and he ſhal direct
and guide thy footeſteppes. Prou. 3.
            They that hope in the Lorde ſhall
chaunge their courage, they ſhall take
them wings as Eagles, they ſhall run
and not labour, they ſhall walke and
not be weary. Eſa. 40.
            Hee that ploweth, ought to plowe
in hope to reape the fruite of his trauaile.
Cor. 9.
            Bleſſed is the man whoſe hope is in
the name of the Lord. Pſal. 39.
            Who ſo truſteth in the Lord, mercy
embraceth him on euery ſide. Pſa, 31.
            Bleſſed is the man which putteth
his truſt in the Lord. Hierem. 17.
            By hope in the Lorde we are ſaued.
Rom. 8.
            
               
                  Examples. 
               
               Abraham hoped againſt hope, that is,
he looked for the thing which was to bee

hoped for in the promiſe of God, yea although
the thing repreſented before his
eyes expreſſed no cauſe of hope, namly that
he ſhould bee the father of many nations,
&c. Gen. 13. 17. 22.
            
               Dauid amongst ſo many conflictes with
his enemyes, ſeeing that his hope & truſt
in the Lorde was neuer made fruſtrate,
taking great conſolation therin, amongeſt
others burſt out with theſe words, namely,
For this cauſe is my heart ioyfull, and
my tongue reioyceth, yea and moreouer
my fleſhe ſhall reſte in hope.
Pſal. 15.
            
               Iob the ſeruaunt of God, a perfect paterne
of patience, beeing oftentimes diuerſly
and greeuouſly afflected, acknowledging
the great mercies of God to be more
then mans miſeries confeſſed his hope to
be ſuch, that hee was ſure his redeemer
liued, and that he ſhould riſe againe out of
the earth at the latter day. &c. Iob. 19.
            
               For other examples of Hope looke
Iudi. 20. Tob. 2. Symeon, Luke. 2.
of Paule, Actes 13. and his admonition,
1. Tim. 6.
         
         
            
            The v. Plant,
The feare of God.
            
               
                  Definition 
                GOD hath ſo created men, that in
their mindes as it were certaine
beames of light ſhould enflame their
affections to bee earneſtly mooued with
the knowledge of Gods wrath & iuſtice,
ſeuerely beholding all thinges doone in
his ſight which are againſt his preſcribed
will and ordinaunce; and that men
knoweinge what doeth pleaſe him,
ſhoulde feare to violate or tranſgreſſe
from his gratious pleaſure, and knowing
alſo what doth diſpleaſe him, ſhoulde
ſeeke all meanes to auoyde the daunger
of his diſpleaſure. For as his holy worde
is a woorthy witneſſe of his will, ſo
ought wee to take good courage vnto vs
in fulfilling the ſame, and tremble with
feare to followe a wrong way.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                The beginning or ground of wiſdome
is the feare of the Lorde, that is,
to gouerne our life by the worde of
God, ſo to obey God and his holy

will. Prou. 1.
            The feare of the Lorde is a ſtronge
holde, and his Children are vnder a
ſure defence. The feare of the Lorde is
a well of life to auoyde the ſnare of
death. Prou. 14.
            The feare of the Lorde is the right
Gods ſeruice that preſerueth & iuſtifieth
the heart, and giueth mirth and
gladneſſe, &c. The feare of the Lord is
the roote of wiſdome, and her braunches
are long life. Eccleſiaſticus. 1.
            Whoſo feareth the Lord he ſhall be
happy, and when hee hath neede of
comfort he ſhall be bleſſed. Ibidem.
            
            I wil ſhew you whom you ſhall feare:
feare him which after hee hath ſlaine,
hath power to caſt the ſame into hell
fire. So I ſay vnto you feare him. Lu. 12
            Thou ſhalte feare the Lorde thy
God. Deut. 6. 10.
            Feare not him which killeth the body
onely, but rather feare him which
can deſtroy bothe body and ſoule in
Hell fyer. Matt. 10.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                The Lord God of Iſrael after hee had

drowned Pharaoh and his hoaſt in the red
ſea, was more feared of thoſe Iſraelites, &
they beleued in God, and gaue credite vnto
the words of Moyſes his ſeruant. Exo. 14.
19. and 20.
            
               Abdias the ſteward of the houſe of Achab
feared greatly the Lord God of Iſrael,
for when wicked Iezabel had ſlaine the
prophets of the Lord, he led with him 100.
of thoſe Prophets, & hid them from perſecution,
& was afraide. 3. Kings. 8.
            
               Tobias the elder, taught his ſonne Tobias
alſo euen from his infancy to feare the
Lord, & made to be called vnto his feaſt
ſuch perſons as feared God. Yea more fearing
God then the king, vnder whoſe iuriſdiction
he lyued, he tooke away the bodies
of thoſe that were ſlaine by the enemyes of
Gods church & buryed them. Tobi. 1.
            Other notable Examples of the true
feare of God are commemorated in
Iudith. 8. in Iob. 1. 2. 31. Ioſaphat,
2. Chr. 19. Loth, Gen. 19. The midwiues
for whome the Lorde erected
dwelling houſes. Exod. 1. Sara the
daughter of Raguel. Tobi. 3. and in
yong Tobias as it appeareth. Tob. 9.
         
         
            
            The vi. Plant,
Humilitie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                CHriſte God and man our onely ſauiour
& redeemer, the very fountaine
of all perfect felicitie exhorteth vs vnto
true Humilitie, and for that cauſe tryeth
and exerciſeth vs by ſo many miſeries,
as we bothe naturally feele in the fleſhe
and in the world alſo. So that leaſt wee
ſhould be either preſumptuous too much
in pride of hearte, and ouermuch diſdaining
others, the Lorde doeth by diuerſe
meanes reclaime vs to knowe his ſoueraigne
ſalue, by planting this vertue humilitie
in our hearts, whereby wee acknowledge
our ſinnes towards God and
man, our infirmitie of nature, and the filthyneſſe
thereof, and fortifie our mindes
and ſoules in the feare of God, and in
confidence of his onely diuine helpe, and
whereby alſo we are moued to performe
the dueties of our vocation in farre better
manner without diſdayning others,
to help them what lyeth in vs, and in all
aduerſities caſualties or miſeryes to bee
ſubiect and humbly to ſubmit our ſoules,

bodyes, and goodes, vnto the gratious
good will of the ſame our God and mercifull
ſauiour which will not ſuffer vs to
be tryed, tempted, nor troubled, beyonde
our ſtrength and abilitie of ſufferaunce.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Bleſſed are the meeke and humble
of heart, for they ſhall receiue the inheritance
of the earth. Matth. 5.
            The Prayer of him that humbleth
himſelfe in the ſight of God, pearceth
the very cloudes, til ſhe come nigh ſhe
will not bee comforted, nor goe her
waye till the hygheſt God haue reſpect
vnto her. Eccleſi. 35.
            Howe much greater thou art, ſo
much the more humble thy ſelfe towards
all men, and thou ſhalt finde fauour
in the ſight of God, becauſe great
is the power of God only, and he ſhall
be honoured of men, Eccleſiaſtes 3.
            Whoſo exalteth him ſelfe, ſhall bee
brought lowe, and he that humbleth
him ſelfe ſhall be exalted. Luk. 7. 18.
            Let the meeke brother reioice in his
exhortation, and the rich man in his
humility becauſe hee ſhall away hence

as the flower of the graſſe. Iam. 1.
            Haue patience when thou arte
brought lowe, becauſe in the fire is
Golde & ſiluer tryed, and men acceptable
vnto God are tryed by the furnace
of aduerſities.
            Except you be conuerted, & become
as one of theſe litle ones, you ſhall not
enter into the kingdome of Heauen.
Whoſoeuer therfore ſhal humble him
ſelfe as one of theſe little ones ſhall be
greateſt, &c. Matt. 18.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Chriſte Ieſus our Sauiour the ſyncere
fountaine of humilitie admoniſheth al men
to learne Humilitie of him, ſaying, Learne
of me becauſe I am humble & meeke
of heart. Matt. 11.
            
               The Angel of God, ſaid vnto Agar,
Returne againe vnto thy miſtreſſe and
humble thy ſelfe vnder her handes▪
Gen. 16.
            Abraham ſpake humbly vnto the Lord
ſaying, I will yet ſpeake vnto my Lord
although I am but earth and aſhes.
Gen. 18.
            
               Iacob humbled himſelfe very much

before his brother Eſau, and ſo pacified his
wrath. Gen. 33.
            
               Moyſes excuſed himſelf fiue times before
hee would take vpon him the leading
foorth of the people, which yet the Lorde
enioyned him, and hee was not perſwaded
vntil he perceiued that the Lorde was angry.
Exod. 3.
            
               Gedeon (when the Angell ſaid vnto
him goe, in thy ſtrength ſhalt thou deliuer
Iſrael) humbly aunſweared, Beholde my
ſtocke is weake in Manaſſes, and I my
ſelfe am the leaſte in the houſe of my father.
Iud. 5.
            Dauid beeing tryed in manifolde troubles,
and finding greate comforte at the
hands of God thus ſaid, It is good for
mee that thou O Lorde haſt chaſtiſed
me. Pſal. 119. verſ. 71. Note his humilitie
beeing crowned king by Samuell
1. King. 17. before Saule. 1. King. 19.
            The prodigall childe returning to his
father humbled himſelfe. Luke. 15.
            For other Examples, looke Saule.
1. King. 9. Eliſius, 4. King. 2.
         
         
            
            The vii. Plant,
Patience.
            
               
                  Definition 
                THis vertue Patience is of great
excellencie amongſt humane kinde,
and beſt beſeeming Chriſtians; namely
tending to this effect, that God may bee
duely obeyed in our aduerſities, ſo as we
doe nothing againſt the commaundements
of God, neither doe heape vppon
vs his heauy diſpleaſure, but that for
Chriſte his ſonnes ſake wee ſhoulde acknowledge
him by ſaith, to bee pacyfied
and mercifull vnto vs, that wee ſhoulde
looke for his helpe, and craue his mitigation
of ſuch afflictions as he in iuſtice
layeth vpon vs; and ſo in this Fayth &
hope ſhould patiently beare whatſoeuer
burden is layd vpon vs. For the word of
God doth highly extoll Patience, commaunds
vs to vſe the ſame, promiſeth
Gods help and deliuerance, and teacheth
that the godly ones are not heere afflicted
by chaunce, but by the will & knowledge
of God, not that we ſhould periſh,
but that we ſhould proſper more & more

after perils, and as Saint Paule ſayth
Rom. 8. beeing made like vnto the ſonne
of God by afflictions, ſhould with him
be like partakers of eternall glory.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                A patient man is better then one
that is ſtrong, and he that can rule his
affections is of more force, then one
that layeth ſiege vnto Cities. Prou. 16.
            The Furnace tryeth the veſſel of the
potter, ſo doth the tryall of troubles
proue thoſe that are righteous. Ecc. 27
            Troubles worketh patience, patience
maketh tryall, and tryal bringeth
hope. Rom. 5.
            My Brethren, count it for exceding
ioy, when you fall into diuers temptations,
knowing that the tryall of your
faith worketh patience, and patience
maketh your worke perfect that you
may be perfect and vpright, not fainting
in any thing. Iam. 1.
            Now therefore keepe ſecret thy ſorowe
within thee, and ſuffer manfully
whatſoeuer chaunces ſhal happen vnto
thee. 3. Eſdras. 10.
            Bleſſed is the man which ſuffereth

temptation, becauſe when he ſhall be
tryed, he ſhall receiue a crowne of life,
which God hath promiſed vnto all
thoſe that loue him. Iam. 1. 
                  •
               2.
            Bee patient therefore one with an
other, and confirme your heartes becauſe
the comming of the Lord is at
hand. Iam. 5.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus, the moſt excellent
mirror of perfect patience, was firſt
tempted of Sathan: Matth. 4. Deſpiſed,
hated, and diſdained of the wicked worldlings:
Ioh. 17. and laſtly perſecuted and
put to death by the curſed Iewes: Mar. 15
leauing vs example that we ſhould ſuffer
iniuryes doone vnto vs, and remit the reuenge
vnto him that ſayth, Mine is vengeance,
and I will rewarde againe. &c.
Deut. 32.
            
               Iſaac ſuffered gladly that iniury to be
offered him, when his Father Abraham
would haue ſacrifized him. Gen. 22.
            
               Ioſeph patiently put vppe the crueltie
of his brethren, when they ſolde him
and woulde haue put him into the pit.
Gen. 37. 45.
            
               
               Moyſes prayed for Mary which ſpake
ſo iniuſtly againſt him, & by his prayer ſhe
was healed. Numb. 12.
            Dauid fleeing from the face of Abſolon
ſaid patiently vnto Sadoch, If I finde
fauour in the ſight of the Lord, he wil
bring me againe. 2. King. 15. 16.
            
               Tobias when he became blinde ſhewed
a woonderfull Patience vnder the
Lords ſcourge, and againſt the deriſion of
his wife and his friendes. Tob. 2. 3.
            Other notable Examples, were
Iob. 1. 2. The three Children in
the Ouen. Dan. 5. and Eleazarus,
2. Machab. 6.
         
         
            The viii. Plant,
Perſeueration in godlyneſſe.
            
               
                  Definition 
               
               PErſeueration or continuaunce of
vertuous and godly life, is the limitted
path of perfection, which GOD requireth
of all his choſen ſeruants which
haue begun to runne the race of righteouſneſſe,
not to ſtay in the middeſt,

neither to ſtart aſide, neither yet to looke
back at any time, but to goe forwardes
without wauering, or diſtruſt in the acknowledgement
of God, and in the faith
of Chriſte conſtantly and for euer, ſo continuing
vntill the very laſt breath of our
life, and not to be diſcouraged by any ſiniſter
chaunces or aduerſities, neither
ſuffer our ſelues to bee ſeduced from ſo
good a purpoſe by any maner of meanes;
becauſe whoſoeuer haue once taſted the
comfortable ſweetneſſe of Gods good
graces, may be well aſſured if they continue
with a ſtedfaſt faith in Chriſte vnto
the end, they ſhall inherite the promiſed
rewarde, euen the Crowne of life for
euer. Apo. 2.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                My ſheepe heare my voice, and I
giue them eternall life, & no man ſhall
take them out of my hands. Iohn. 10.
            God is faithful which ſuffereth not
vs to be tempted aboue our ſtrength,
but giueth an end with tēptation, that
we may be able to goe thorowly with
our vocatious. Cor. 10.
            I will not leaue you deſtitute of

comforte but I will come vnto you, I
will pray my Father and he ſhall ſende
vnto you another comforter, euen the
ſpirite of trueth which ſhall remaine
with you for euer. Iohn. 14.
            My little Children deſpiſe not the
correction of the Lorde, nor faint not
when thou art chaſtiſed, for the Lord
chaſtiſeth euery ſonne which he receiueth,
Goe on forwardes in diſcipline,
God offereth himſelf vnto you as to
his childrē, for what ſonne is he whom
the father chaſtizeth not. Heb. 12.
            Put vpon you all the whole armour
of God, that you may bee able to reſiſt
in the euill day, and that you may
ſtand ſtedfaſtly in all thinges that you
haue done. Ephe. 6.
            So runne, that you may receiue.
1. Cor. 9.
            But whoſoeuer continueth vnto the
ende ſhalbe ſaued. Matt. 10.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Lorde and ſauiour Chriſte Ieſus,
giuing light to the borne blinde perſon, by
vertue of the holy Ghoſt made him conſtantly
perſeuer againſt the Phariſeis and

to withstand them.
            The Apoſtles constantly perſeuered in
preaching, teaching, and working woonders
in the name of Chriſte Ieſus paſſing
from place to place, and from countrie to
countrie. Acts. 1. 4. 11. 13. & 20.
            
               Ioſeph (notwithſtanding his Miſtreſſe
whome he ſerued, did dayly moleſt & ſeeke
to diſcredite him) yet he for all that ſhewed
himſelfe dutifull & faithfull in his ſeruice,
& continewed ſo to his great perferment.
Gen. 39.
            
               Dauid beeing ſore rebuked of his elder
brother, & alſo diſſuaded from his purpoſe
by Saule, did not yet any whit ſhrinke
from his purpoſe, but fought manfully &
ouercome Goliah. 1. King. 17.
            
               Ioab conſtantly perſeuered in the ſeege
of Rabbath, till he had woon the cittye.
2. King. 12. Alſo in the battell againſt
Abſolon. 2. King. 18.
            Although Nehemias was oftentimes
hindred in building, yet he ceaſed not from
his woork till hee had fullye built vppe
she wall. Nehemi 4. & 6.
            Eliachym the high Preeſt ſpake vnto
all the people of Iſraell, ſaying, Knowe

you that becauſe the Lord hath heard
our prayers, if you continew ſtill in
faſting & prayer in the ſight of God.
&c. Iudith. 4.
            The Sociates of Daniel, conſtantly
ſaid vnto the King of Babylon, be it knowen
vnto thee O King that we worſhippe
not thy Gods. &c. Dan. 3.
            Other notable Examples were Daniel,
Dan. 6. Suſanna, Dan. 13.
The vii. brethren, 2. Mac. 7. The
blinde borne, Ioh. 9. The Apoſtles,
Acts. 1.
         
         
            The ix. Plant,
True Inuocation vpon
GOD.
            
               
                  Definition 
                AS in the heart of man God (the
true knowledge of God, feare, faith
and loue of God) ought to ſhine and feruently
appeare: So our Prayer is the
moſte excellent inſtrumentall meane or
witneſſe of the minde, & ought godly to
confeſſe and pronounce the Lord God, &
ought rightly to vſe the name of God in

al puritie and ſanctifie or honor the ſame
with all dutifull, reuerent, and louing
feare. For to that ende hath God giuen
the benefite of the tongue and ſpeech vnto
men: eſpecially, that they ſhould declare
the goodneſſe of God towardes
them, that they ſhould praiſe him in his
holineſſe, pray vnto him for continuance
of his gratious goodneſſe, & giue thanks
vnto him for the ſame, & excite others vnto
the conſideration of their dueties in
thoſe reſpectes. For God requireth that
we ſhuld wt thankſgiuing, confeſſion, ſupplications
and prayers, come vnto him,
and to none other God, becauſe he hath
made vs as the ſheepe of his hands, and
people of his paſture. Pſal. 94. verſ. 7.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Thou ſhalt worſhip the Lorde thy
God, and him onely ſhalt thou ſerue.
Matth. 4.
            Whilſt thou liueſt & beareſt breath,
thou ſhalte confeſſe thy ſinnes vnto
God, and thou ſhalt praiſe him, & reioyſe
in his mercies, becauſe great is
the mercy of the Lord, and he helpeth
and is gracious vnto thoſe that turn
                  •
               
               
vnto him. Eccleſiaſtes. 17.
            Before thou prayeſt prepare thy
ſoule, and be not as a man that tempteth
God. Ibidem. 18.
            When thou prayeſt, thou ſpeakeſt
with God, when thou readeſt, God
ſpeaketh vnto thee. Aug. ſup. Pſal. 85.
            Prayer is good with faſting and almoyſe,
yea of more valure it is then to
heape vp treaſures of Golde. Tob. 12.
            The continuall prayer of the iuſte
perſon preuayleth much. Iam. 5.
            Greate is the vertue of ſyncere prayer,
for as a faythfull meſſenger, performeth
duetie enioyned, and pearceth
whether as no fleſhe can attaine.
Auguſt. ſuper Pſal. 65.
            Watch and pray, leaſt you fall into
temptation. Matt. 26.
            Verely, verely I ſay vnto you, whatſoeuer
good thing you doe aſke of my
father in my name, he ſhall ſurely giue
it you. Iohn. 16.
            You ſhall pray for all men, eſpecially
for Kings and Princes and thoſe in
authoritie. 2. Tim. 2.
            
               
               
                  Examples. 
               
Chriſte Ieſus our onely Lorde and ſauiour,
in teaching his Apoſtles to pray, ſetteth
vs to ſchoole by that example how to
pray. Luke. 11. Alſo he not onely prayed
for him ſelf, that the cuppe of bitter perſecution
might paſſe from him: Matth. 26.
but for his very enemyes & perſecutors
he prayed. Luke. 23. Moreouer he prayed
for all thoſe his choſen children which his
father had giuen him, that they might bee
ſaued. Iohn. 17.
            
               Paule the electe veſſell of God, gaue
thanks vnto God for al them of Theſſalonia,
& prayed for their proſperous proceeding
in the faith. 1. Theſſa, 1.
            
               Abraham prayed vnto the Lorde, to
ſpare the Sodomites from deſtroying
them. Gen. 18.
            
               Iacob prayed vnto the Lorde, confesſing
his infirmitie and want of abilitie.
Gen. 32.
            
               Moyſes prayed diuerſe times & was
hearde of the Lorde. Exod. 7. 8. 9. 10.
14. 17. 32. Num. 11. 12. 21.
            
               Samuel praying for the Iſraelites
againſt the Philiſtians was heard of God
1. King. 7.
            
               
King Ioſophat fearing ſore the power
and multitude of his enemies, which he
heard ſay came againſt him, prayed earneſtly
vnto the Lorde, and his prayer was
hearde. 2. Chro. 20.
            
               Manaſſes beeing king of Iuda, prayed
meruelous humby, deuoutly, & effectually
with a repentant heart. 1. Chro. 23.
            
               Ezechias turning his face to the wall
prayed vnto the Lord bitterly weeping, &
the Lorde hearing him, graunted his deſire:
4. Kings. 20. namely long life and
proſperitie vpon earth.
            
               For other examples of praiers, Anna,
1. King. 1. Dauid, 2. Kin. 12. Idem,
2. King. Elyas, 3, Kin. 18. Ioſophat,
2. Chro. 20. & Eſdras, 1. Eſdra. 1. 8.
Nehemias, 1. Iud. 4. & 8. Heſter. 4.
Ieremy. 11. Daniel. 6. 9. 13. Ionas,
Iudas Machabeus, 1. Mach. 4.
         
         
            The x. Plant,
Thankes giuing.
            
               
                  Definition 
                THankes giuing is a vertue which
ought to bee euermore grounded in

the heart & minde of man, and euermore
redy to be vttered wt the tonge, that good
thinges are not beſtowed vppon vs by
chaunce, or by good hap as we vſe to ſay,
but that God is rightly the author of all
benefits. And that it is our duties by this
our thankfulnes to exhort & inuite others
to the due acknowledging and ſeruing
of the true God: that they may alſo perſwade
themſelues, that it is God onely
which hath care ouer them, and that we
are heard by him, if we craue any thing
of him in faith. And therefore as hee is
altogither more ready to giue, then wee
to receiue, and more beneficiall and gracious
in giuing, then we are thankful &
dutifull towardes him: ſo are wee euermore
debters vnto him, and neuer able
to repay that we owe him, howbeit ſith
he requireth a thankfull heart and true
repentant life according to his will, wee
ought neuer to be ſlack or ſlowe, in teſtifying
our vtermoſt power & good willes
in giuing of thanks for his benefits, and
in liuing ſo thankfully, that his continued
mercie may bee a ſalue to our myſerie.
            
               
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Reioyce alwaies, pray without ceaſing,
and giue thanks in all things, for
this is the will of God in Chriſt Ieſus
towards you all. 1. Theſſa. 5.
            What better thing may we beare in
our minde, expreſſe with tongue, or ſet
foorth with penne, then Thankes bee
to God? Then this, nothing can bee
ſpoken more ſhorte, more ioyfully
heard, more thankfully vnderſtoode,
nor more frutefully be perfourmed.
Auguſtine in Epiſt. ad Marcil.
            
            Let euery one as hee hath receiued
the good grace of God, deſpiſe the
ſame vnto an others benefite, as the
good ſtewards of the manifolde grace
of God. 1. Pet. 4.
            The beſt conſeruer of benefites, is
the remembrance of thoſe benefites
receiued, and the continual thankfulneſſe
which wee ought to render for
the ſame. Chry. Homi. 25. ſuper. Matt.
            
            I exhorte you that you doe alwayes
giue thankes vnto the Lorde, if euill
chaunces happen vnto you, bleſſe yee
the Lorde, & thoſe euils ſhall be taken
away, if proſperous good things happen

vnto you, bleſſe the Lord, & they

                  •
               hall continue ſtill with you. Chryſ in
tract. de Symbol.
            
            Thankeſgiuing is a moſte pure &
perfect Balme, and therefore it requireth
a pure ſound, & profound veſſel
for the ſame. Brent. ſuper Can.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Chriſte Ieſus our Lorde and Sauiour
oftentimes lifting vppe his eyes vnto the
Heauens, would giue thankes, as in breaking
the Bread, in multiplying of Breade
to his Diſciples, in reuyuing Lazarus, &
in the inſtitution of the holy Euchariſt.
Matt. 26.
            
               The Lorde commaunded that his deliueraunce
of the Children of Iſrael out of
Aegypt, ſhould neuer departe out of their
mindes. It ſhall be (ſaith he) as a ſigne
in thy hand, and as a monument before
thy eyes, that the law of the Lorde
may be euer in thy mouth. Exod. 13.
            
               Moyſes and the Iſraelites ſung a ſong
vnto God, and ſaid, Let vs ſing vnto the
Lorde, that is to ſay, after they had meruelouſly
paſſed through the red Sea.
Exod. 20.
            
               
               Dauid when he heard the Reuelation
which God made vnto Nathan touching
the continuance of his kingdome, gaue very
humble & deuoute thankes therefore
vnto God. 2. King. 7.
            
               We ought heere in England to prayſe
God greatly for his goodneſſe, which proſpereth
the reigne of our ſo gratious ſoueraigne
lady Queene Elizabeth, according
to that ſaying, Bleſſed be God which
hath giuē vs Dauid a moſt wiſe Prince
to gouerne the people, &c. 3. Kin. 1.
and 15.
            When Tobias had recouered againe
his ſight, both he, his wife, & all they which
before had ſeene him blinde, glorifyed
GOD. Tob. 11.
            
               For other Examples of Thankeſgiuing,
looke Cyrus, 1. Eſdras. 1.
The Iſraelites, Iudith. 16. Nabuchodonozer.
Dan. 2. Iudas Machabeus.
2. Mach. 1. The bleſſed
virgin Mary, Luk. 1. Zacharias,
Luke. 1. Matt. 9. Luk. 7. and other
places.
            
         
         
            
            The xi. Plant,
True Preaching.
            
               
                  Definition 
                TRue Preaching is the meſſage of
the great God and embaſſage of
the higheſt King of kings: & the ſame is
an office of effectuall vertue & vertuous
effect of glad tydings, and of ſaluation
beſtowed vppon mankinde, by the Almightie
Meſſias in the light of his holy
lawe and Goſpell reuealed, and in the
true teſtification of his grace and gratious
goodneſſe towardes man, as S. Paul
deſcrybeth the ſame more amply in the
1. Cor. 14. & 1. Tim. 4. That is to ſay, it
conſiſteth in Doctrine, Exhortation, and
conſolation: and thervnto is applyed the
expoſition or interpretation of any parte
or portion of the Scriptures. The efficient
cauſes of which office and function
duely applied are theſe. The holy Goſte
by the will of God enioyning the Apoſtles
firſt to performe this office. Mat. 10
The tongue which ought to be the trumpet
ſounding the glory of God his wrath
towards ſinners, and mercie towardes

thoſe that heare his will and fulfill the
ſame. The faithfulneſſe, diligence, and
conſtancy by the Preacher obſerued
heerin, to the end that God may be obeyed,
rightly honoured and acknowledged,
& that many ſoules may be woon as coheyres
with Chriſt in his kingdome for
euer.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                And the Lord ſaide, I will rayſe vnto
them a prophet out of their Brethren,
which ſhall bee like vnto thee, and I
will put my woords in his mouth, and
hee ſhall ſpeake vnto them all thoſe
things which I ſhal preſcribe him: and
he that will not heare him ſpeaking in
my name, I will bee reuenged vppon
him. Deut. 18.
            Howe beautiful vpon the hilles are
the feete of him that bringeth & preacheth
peace? Eſay. 52.
            Man liueth not by bread onely, but
by euery word that proceedeth out of
the mouth of God. Luk. 4.
            Thou ſhalt heare the word proceeding
out of my mouth, and thou ſhalt
tell it them from me. Ezech. 3.
            
               
Goe your wayes throughout all
the world, preach the Goſpell to euery
creature, teaching al nations & baptizing
them. Matt. 28.
            Reproue, Exhorte, blame, and rebuke
with all patience, and doctrine.
1. Tim. 5.
            For the worde of God is liuely and
effectuall, and pearceth more then
doth a two edged ſwoorde, entering
euen into the deuiſion of the ſoule &
the ſpirite, &c. Heb. 4.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Ieſus Chriſte our Redeemer and Sauiour,
comming into this worlde to call
ſinners to repentaunce, firſt preached the
Goſpell and deliuered the Lawe vnto the
Prophetes,Luke. 5. he himſelfe affirming, that he
is the true light of the worlde, whome who
ſo did followe ſhould haue light of life.
Iohn. 8.
            
               Iohn Baptiſt preached repentaunce,
and the kingdome of GOD in the deſerte
of Iudaea and preuayled therein.
Matt. 3.
            The twelue Apoſtles were ſent of the
Lord to preach, & had power giuen them

to caste out vncleane ſpirites, & to heale
the diſeazed by vertue of the holy Ghoſte
and efficacie of the Goſpell, and namely
theſe for the teſtimonie of the trueth
ſuffered perſecution, Sainte Peeter was
crucifyed, S. Paule at Rome beheaded,
Saint Iames the brother of our Lord
ſtoned at Hieruſalem,
               Pantaleon in Chronographia Ecciſiae. 
               Iames the brother
of Iohn be headed there: S. Philippe
in Scythia, S. Bartholmewe in India.
S. Matthias in Iudaea, S. Andrew in Scythia,
S. Matthew in Aethiopia, ſuffered
martyrdome, all within the ſpace of 85.
yeeres after the birth of Chriſt.
            
               Ionas was ſent of the Lord to preach
at Niniue, fortie dayes respite before
they ſhould bee deſtroyed, and yet the Lord
knew that they would repent, whereby hee
ſpared them, and withdrewe his ſcourge.
Ionas. 3
            For other Examples, look in Acts. 2.
3. 4. 5. and 11. beſides other places
in Paule, Peter, Iames, and Iohn,
concerning Preaching.
         
         
            
            The xii. Plant,
Confeſſion vnto God.
            
               
                  Definition 
                COnfeſſion, is a conſtant and perpetuall
deſire (while we beare aboute
vs this earthly and corruptible tabernacle
of the fleſh) to acknowledge the true
doctrine of the Goſpell before God and
man, and to confeſſe our ſinnes and manifolde
infirmities vnto God, who onely
is the promiſed comforter in our myſeryes,
the only redeemer of vs from ſinne,
death, and hell, and the onely ſauiour of
our ſoules and bodyes in this life vnto
life euerlaſting. And this confeſſion
ought to bee ſo feruent in our mindes,
hearts, and ſoules, that no ſelfeloue of
our ſelues ought to reiecte the ſame. It
ought to be ſo frequented in our conuerſations,
that no worldly ſuggeſtions
oughte to ſeduce more or abandon vs
from fructifying therein. It ought ſo to
ſhine in all maner of perfection amongſt
the faithfull which ſauoure of Chriſt and
ſyncere liuing, that the very infidels (if
by any poſſible meanes it may be) might

by our godly life and vertuous examples
be conquered vnto Chriſt in this world,
that we with them and they with vs acknowledging,
confeſſing, and firmely
beleeuing in one eternall and euerliuing
God (as one ſheepfolde vnder one ſhepeheard
Chriſt Ieſus) may be gathered togither
in one faith againſt his comming,
to be called not onely but alſo to be adopted
Citizens of the heauenly Hieruſalem.
Apoc. 12.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                The Lord ſpake vnto Moyſes ſaying,
ſpeake thou vnto the ſonnes of Iſrael.
The man or the womā when they haue
done concerning all the ſinnes which
were wont to happen vnto men, and
haue by negligence tranſgreſſed the
commaundements of the Lorde, and
haue doone offence they ſhall confeſſe
their ſinnes vnto me. Num. 5.
            He that confeſſeth me before men,
I will acknowledge him before my
father which is in Heauen: and who
ſoeuer denyeth mee before men, him
wil I alſo deny before my father which
is in Heauen. Matt. 10.
            
               
with the hearte doe wee beleeue vnto
righteouſneſſe, but with the mouth
we confeſſe vnto ſaluation. Euery one
that putteth his truſt in him ſhall not
be aſhamed. Rom. 10.
            Confeſſion worketh the health of
the ſoules, is the vanquiſher of vices,
the reſtorer of vertues, the ſcourge againſt
the Deuils, what more? It ſtoppeth
the iawes of Hell, and openeth
the gates of that celeſtiall Paradice.
Auguſt. lib. De poenitentia.
            
            Let thy confeſſion be ſimple, humble,
pure, faithfull & frequent, naked,
diſcreet, gladly, ſhamefaſt, vpright, ſecret,
mornefull, ſpeedy, ſtrong, accuſing
thy ſelfe, and prepared to puniſhe
it ſelfe by repentaunce. Item, who,
what, where by whome, howe often,
why, how and when, to profite others
by faith. Bar. Amantius.
            
            Who ſo hydeth his ſinnes ſhall not
be ſaued, but he that confeſſeth them
and forſaketh them, ſhal obtaine mercie.
Prou. 28.
            
               
                  Examples. 
               
               Adam was admoniſhed of the Lorde,

after hee had ſinned to acknowledge his
fault, but hee after a ſorte layed it vppon
God & vppon his wife, and his wife vpon
the ſerpent, but afterwards hee repented
himſelfe. Gen. 3.
            
               Pharaoh the tyrant confeſſed that hee
had ſinned againſt God, and the Iſraelites
acknowledging God to bee a iuſt God, and
that he & his people were wicked. Exo. 9.
            Tobias, although he feared God from
his infancie, & kept his commandements,
yet hee humbly ſaide acknowledging his
faultes: We haue not done according
to thy commaundements, & we haue
not walked ſyncerely before thy face.
Tob. 3.
            The three Children and Sociates of
Daniel, which liued ſo holy amongſt the
Chaldeans (and for whom the Lorde had
wrought ſuch a meruaile in the fornace,)
did not at al murmure againſt the Lord, as
though they had ſuffered ſuch things vniuſtly,
but Azarias ſaid, We haue ſinned,
we haue doone wickedly. Dan. 3.
            Other notable Examples of Acknowledging
& confeſſing Gods mercies
and wrath for ſinnes, are extant in

               Daniel. 9. 2. Mach. 2. Matt. 3. &. 8.
Luke. 15. and 17. S. Paule and other
the Apoſtles of Chriſt, whoſe cōſtant
confeſſion of Chriſt and his Goſpel,
woon very many to the faith.
         
         
            The xiii. Plant,
Obedience.
            
               
                  Definition 
                OBedience towardes Gods lawes
and alſo the ordinances of ſuperior
power, as Kings, Princes, magiſtrates,
and officers appointed in the miniſterie
to the honor of God, and common vtilitie
of all men, is a moſt ſpeciall, neceſſary,
and godly meane to make vs both to
knowe God, our duetyes towardes him,
and to feare his iudgementes: as alſo in
him and for him to acknowledge our duties
towards thoſe that haue his authoritie
ouer vs vpon earth: and conſequently
euery one in his vocation to vſe al dutiful
ſubmiſſion towards his better and ſuperior,
that God may thereby be gloryfied,
and the common wealth fortified againſt
aſſaults of the deuil, inuaſions of forraine

enemyes againſt ciuil diſobedyence and diſcorde;
for to obay the will of God in righteouſneſſe
of life, is the perfect fruite of righteouſneſſe
vnto life euerlaſting: And to obey
the will of ſuperior power in the righteouſneſſe
of God, heapeth vp the bleſſinges of
peace, plentie, proſperous, ioyful, and happy
welfare, neuer decaying, but more and
more increaſing vnto the perfectiō of the life
euerlaſting, which dueties who ſo doth not
obſerue, are not onely curſed of God, woorthyly
puniſhed by him, & by man for him in
this life, but are reiected as reprobate from
the bleſſed ſocietie of Chriſte and his elect
for euer.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Obedience is better then ſacrifice.
1. King. 15.
            Who ſo keepeth the commandements
of God, ſhal not ſuffer any euill. Eccle. 8.
            The obedient perſon ſhall glory in victory
ouer his enemyes. Prou. 21.
            Wee ought to obay God more then
men. Acts. 5.
            Giue vnto Caeſar that which is Caeſars;
& vnto God that which is Gods Luke. 2.
            Let euery ſoule ſubmit themſelues vnto
the hyer powers, for there is no power

but of God, the powers that be, are ordained
of God, therefore who ſo reſiſteth
the higher powers reſiſteth the ordinance
of God, which who ſo reſiſteth ſhal
receiue damnation. Rom. 13.
            I exhorte you that prayers, petitions,
ſupplications & thankeſgiuings be made
for all men, but eſpecially for Kings, & all
that are ſet in authoritie vnder them, that
you may liue a peaceable and quiet life,
with all godlynes & honeſtie. 1. Tim. 2.
            Obedience is not to be put in vre with
ſeruile feare, but with entire affection of
loue, not for feare of paines or puniſhmēt
but for very loue towards iuſtice. Grego.
lib. 12. moralium.
            
            If thou wilt be wiſe therefore, be obedyent:
for ſo it is written, Deſireſt thou
wiſedome, keepe his commaundements,
and the Lord ſhall giue it vnto thee. Ber.
in ſermo. de Epiphania.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our ſauiour Chriſt obediently went with his
parents vnto Hieruſalem & was ſubiect vnto
them. Luc. 2.
            Becauſe Abraham obayed the voyce of
God, & kept his precepts & commandements,
therfore the Lorde promiſed Iſaac that hee

would multiply his ſeed as the fltars of heauen,
& he ſaid alſo, I wil giue all the nations vpon
earth vnto thy poſteritie, & all the nations of
the earth ſhalbe bleſſed in thy ſeede. Gen. 26.
            
               Noah diligently obeyed the Lorde in all
things which he commanded him to do before
the deluge, and he was ſaued. Gen. 6. 7.
            The children of Iſrael promiſed great obedience,
ſaying, All things which the Lorde
hath ſpoken, we wil doe, & we wil be obedient,
but afterwards with their works they
did contrary, for they worſhipped the golden
calf, but they ſmarted for it. Exod. 24. & 32.
            Becauſe Achan tranſgreſſed the commandement
of Ioſua the Lords annoynted, therefore
hee was ouercome in battell and afterwards
ſtoned to death of the people. Ioſu. 7.
            
               Saule offering burnt ſacrifice againſt the
commaundement of Samuel appointed of the
Lord was made a reprobate. Likewiſe becauſe
he ſpared Agag the king of Amelech, the ſtock
of ſheepe, and other precious things, and then
ſaid Samuel vnto him, Obedience is better
then ſacrifice. 1. King. 13.
            The Apoſtles obediently left their nettes,
& followed Chriſt our Lord. Matt. 4.
            For other examples of Obedience, looke
Abraham, Ge. 17. 22, Moyſes, Exo. 34.

               Numb. 9. Dauid, 1. King. 15. 17.
the man of God, 3. Reg. 13. Naaman.
4. King. 5. Tobias. 1. Heſter. 2 and the
Recabites, Iere. 35.
         
         
            The xiiii. Plant,
Concorde.
            
               
                  Definition 
                COncorde is a vertue, which eſteeming
very humbly of her ſelfe, reſtrayneth
and moderateth anger, charitably bearing
with others infirmities, forgiuing very iniuryes,
maintaineth peace of conſcience, and
common tranquilitie: and is earneſtly ſtubious
that neither any thing be committed by
vs offenſiue to the ſtate of the Church and
cōmon wealth, neither that any iniury ſhall
be offered by one or other to the diſturbance
let or hynderaunce of any good proceeding,
which is a gift ſo excellent beſeeming men,
that in the increaſe thereof, the ſocietie of
mankinde is compared to a ſecond heauen,
euen vppon earth: and euery ſoule that ſeeketh
the due obſeruation of Concorde is
compared to an Angell of Heauen. For as
the three perſons intrinitie is one Godhead
and one maieſtie diuine, vnder whome all

the Angels in heauen agree in mutuall vnitie
and concorde of minde: So ought mankinde
vpon earth, ſeruing this God in trinitie,
and trinitie in vnitie, be of mutuall concorde
in him, & in all thinges which he beſtoweth
vppon vs for our welfare, to ſhowe
naturall agreement of minde one towardes
an other to his glory.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Be you of like minde one towards an
other, hauing charitie, beeing of one wil,
and of one vnderſtanding, let euery one
by lowlyneſſe deeme others to be better,
neither let any of you regarde his owne
cōmoditie ſo much, but euery one of you
regard the commoditie of others. Phi. 3.
            I beſeech you for our Lorde Ieſus
Chriſts ſake, that you be at concorde and
vnitie one with an other, & that there be
no diſcentions amongſt you, but that you
be all one perfect body, of one minde &
purpoſe in the Lord. 1. Cor 2.
            Followe peace and concorde with all
men, and embrace holineſſe of life, without
which no man ſhall ſee God. Heb. 12.
            He that hath not peace in heart, word,
and work, ought not to be called a Chriſtian,
he that hopeth not in this putteth

bothe his foote yea and his whole life in
a ſlippery place, he anchoureth his Ship
in a tempeſtuous Sea, he enſnareth himſelfe
in the pit of deſtruction, and ſoweth
his ſeede in the ſand. Auguſtinus.
            
            As there is nothing more precious vnto
God thē the vertue of louing concord, ſo
the deuill deſireth nothing more then the
extinction of louing concord. Gre. in Paſt.
            
            Bleſſed are the peacemakers, for they
ſhalbe called the children of God. Mat. 5.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Lord and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus commaunded
his diſciples to haue peace amongeſt
themſelues. Mar. 9.
            When the fiftie dayes were come to an end,
the Apoſtles were all of one minde at Hieruſalem,
and there appeared vnto them clouen
tongues like fire, & they lighted vpon them, &
they were all filled with the holy Ghoſt. Act. 2.
            The Angels at the birth of Chriſt brought
glad tydings of peace, ſaying, Glory to God
on hye, on earth peace, and vnto men
a good will. Luc. 2.
            The Gabaonites hearing what Ioſua
had doone at Hierico and at Hai, came vnto
him, and as his ſeruants, made an acceptable
peace with him. Ioſu. 9.
            
               
               Phinees & others the Embaſſadors which
were ſent vnto Rubens ſonnes, hearing their
excuſe were pacifyed, and heard their wordes
with a great good will. Ioſu. 22.
            The people bleſſed all thoſe perſons, which
offered themſelues voluntarily to come and
dwell in Hieruſalem, which was interpreted
the viſion of peace. Nehemi. 11.
            The cauſe of peace which was in the time
of Onyas, is excellently deſcrybed: namely,
the ready gratious good will of a wiſe and
godly prince, & the goodneſſe of ſuch ſubiects,
2. Mach. 3.
            God is greatly to be praiſed, when he giueth
to his people quietneſſe, peace, & concorde, as
it was with Solomon & his people. 3. Kin. 5.
            
               Dauid exhorteth the faithful to pray for
the peace of Iſrael. Pſal. 121.
         
         
            The xv. Plant,
Amitie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                AMitie or friendſhip is a vertue, which
rendreth due beneuolence for mutuall
good wil receiued betweene man and man,
and bringeth foorth the communicating of
humane ſocietie, after ſuch ſorte that in nature

it ſociateth man with God, it maketh
the Country church and common wealth in
reſpecte of the Law, equall to the heauenly
habitacle of the moſt higheſt: and in vſe, it
maketh neighbours, companions of one office,
and brothers of one ſocietie, to proſper
with many mutuall benefites vpon Earth:
ſo as in common ſhee maketh a firme knot
of indiſſoluble felicitie vppon earth. Eſpecially
if they holde faſt the linck of fidelitie,
which ought to appeare in worde, work and
good wil, for this vertue hath woonderfull
effectes euen in the very brute and vnreaſonable
creatures, which doe aſſociate themſelues
with their like of kinde, which doe
nouriſh and defend one another, and which
do as it were ſtriue with nature, to ouercome
nature in naturall affections, and naturall
conditions. Howe much more then in due
beneuolence one towardes another ought
the woorthy will and minde of man, reſembling
outwardly the image of the Creator
of all creatures, both by word and work recompence
al dutiful deſertes, deſerued good
will from time to time.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Thou ſhalt loue thy friende as thy ſelf.
Leuit. 19.
            
               
Study not to work any euil againſt thy
frend, ſeing he puts his truſt in thee. Pro. 3
            Who ſo is a freind indede, at all times
wil ſhewe friendſhip, & a brother is tryed
and knowen in aduerſitie. Prou. 18.
            A faithful friend is a ſtrong defence,
who ſo findeth ſuch a one, findeth a treaſure.
Eccle. 6.
            Who ſo taketh away or withdraweth
mercie from his friende, forſaketh the
feare of God. Iob. 7.
            Better are the zealous ſtripes of him
that loueth faithfully, then the flattering
kiſſes of him that hateth extremely. Pr. 17
            Amitie is ſweete by reaſon of the vnity
of many mindes. Augſt. lib. 3 conf.
            
            A certain perſon ſpake rightly & wel of
his friend, when he tearmed him the one
half of his ſoule, for I vnderſtand that my
ſoule and the ſoule of my friend are both
one ſoule in two bodyes by reaſon of the
earneſt affection of loue. Ibidem.
            
            That is a right and neceſſary member
of amitie, which is ioyned with the glewe
of Chriſte, which not the vtilitie of
worldly ſubſtance, not the preſent of bodyes
onely, nor the deceitful and hollow-harted
flattery, but with the feare of God

and zeale of his holy woorde coupleth
togither. Hier. ad Paulinum.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                The Galathians ſhewed ſuch tokens of
true friendſhip vnto Paule, as hee confeſſed
that they receiued him, as if he had beene an
Angell. &c. Gal. 4.
            
               Oneſipherus his familie in the zeale of
God oftentimes refreſhed Paule, and viſited
him when he lay in priſon. Phil 4.
            Ruth bare ſuch faithfull friendſhip in the
Lord to his wiues mother Noemi, and ſaide
vnto her, Whereſoeuer thou goeſt, I will
go with thee: and whereſoeuer thou taryeſt
I will tarry with thee alſo. Ruth. 1.
            The ſoule of Ionathas and the ſoule of
Dauid was of faithfully fixed eche to others,
that Ionathas ſtripped him ſelfe of his owne
cote to giue it vnto Dauid. 1. King 18.
            Abner ſent Meſſengers vnto Dauid ſaying,
Be freends with mee, and my handes
ſhall be with thee, and I will bring all Iſrael
vnto thee. 2. King. 3.
            The 3. friendes of Iob when they hearde
of all the euill which had happened vnto him,
they came euery one from his dwelling place,
and vizited him with comfort. Iob. 2. 6.
            The Lorde commended the vniuſt Stewarde

which got himſelfe friendes by the wiſe
diſpoſing of his Maiſters goods: ſo likewiſe
ought euery faithfull Chriſtian iuſtly to ſeeke
the louing fauour of God in this life time,
that we may bee deliuered from death eternall,
to liue with him in ioy and bliſſe for euer.
Luke. 16.
         
         
            The xvi. Plant,
Gratitude.
            
               
                  Definition 
                GRatitude or thankfulnes is the true teſtimonie
of dutifull good will to bee
rendered in and for any benefite beſtowed
vpon the inferiour perſon by any of better
calling. And it is a vertue of excellent effect,
euen amongſt meaneſt perſons, which acknowledging
good will or any benefite priuately
beſtowed, doe alſo count them ſelues
bounden detters towards regratifying like
good wil, & ſo far as abilitie extendeth doe
requite the ſame, which proceedeth not but
from a woorthy mind obaying the commandemēt
of God, & the law of nature enioyning
the obſeruation of true meaning and equalitie
of good wil, which are the neceſſary
meanes whereby humane kinde is conſerued

and preſerued which ought alſo to
be teſtified by ſpeech as the inſtrument of
the minde, and by externall giftes as the
comprobation and ſatiſfaction of both their
expectations. Now the matter or ground
whence Gratitude groweth to be conſidered
off, contayneth ſeuen ſeuerall particularities:
Firſt, God, 2. our Parentes, 3. our
Schoolemaiſters, 4. our Magiſtrates, 5.
Miniſters of the Church, 6. our Countrie,
and ſeuenthly our benefactors and friends,
which calling this dutiful regratulation &
repenſation, leaſt we incurre that penaltie
of Ingratitude whiche threateneth, The
plague ſhall not departe from the houſe
of the vnthankful. Prou. 17.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                To him that giueth or beſtoweth any
benefite, there can nothing be requited
more thankful by the receuer, thē as if he
take that acceptably, which was beſtowed
willingly and with a good will. For he
dooth iniurie the ſpirite of grace, which
taketh not with thankful minde that benefite
of him that beſtoweth it. Ber. ad
Imericū cancel.
            
            A wiſe man wil examine al things with
him ſelfe, how much he hath receiued, of

whome, when, where, what and how:
Therefore we deny that no man can giue
thankes or bee thankfull but a wiſeman.
Seneca ad Luci. epiſto. 8.
            The remembrance of benefites receiued
ought neuer to wax olde. Idem lib,
de beneficiis.
            
            A good turne doone or freendly beneuolence
beſtowed, ought euermore to be
had in remembrance. Ibidem.
            
            Wee ought to render all poſſible requitall,
although we can not render ſufficient
woorthyly, as towardes God & our
Parents we are not able to render equall.
Ariſtot.
            
            For towards God, our Parentes, and
maiſters we can not make due requitall.
Ariſto. 8. &. 9. Ethicorum.
            
            Vnto whome ſo great thanks can not
be giuen as is due, to them yet muſt wee
yeelde ſuch poſſible thanks, as our minds
are able to comprehend. Cicero in Phil.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte the fountaine
of all grace and goodneſſe, for the entire ſorrowe
& repentance of Mary Magdalen and
other teſtimonyes of loue towardes him, forgaue
her her ſinnes. Luc. 7.
            
               
               Pharao a very tyrannicall King, did notwithſtanding
thankefully rewarde Ioſeph for
expounding his dreame, and highly exalted
him. Gen. 41.
            
               Iethro the Prieſt of the Madianites was
thankefull for that cauſe, whereas Moyſes
had ſaued and defended his daughters, when
they went to water their flock, wherevpon he
made him to bee called home to his houſe, to
eate meate with him, and gaue him one of his
daughters in mariage. Exod. 5.
            
               Dauid ſaide vnto Abiathar whoſe father
loued the ſame Dauid, tary with me & feare
not, if any man ſeeke to take away thy life, hee
ſhall alſo take away mine. 1. King. 22.
            By reaſon of the great good wil that Dauid
bare to Ionathas the ſonne of Saule, hee
made inquirie if there were any of his kindred
yet aliue, yea or no, and he ordayned Miphiboſeth
the ſonne of Ionathas to be a continuall
gueſt at his table. 2. King. 9.
            The Queene of Saba brought many gifts
vnto Solomon, and hee to gratifie her good
will, gaue her all ſuch thinges as ſhe deſired,
except thoſe things which ſhe of her voluntary
good will, had brought him as a Princely
preſent. 3. King. 10.
         
         
            
            The xvii. Plant,
Hoſpitalitie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                HOſpitalitie is rightly tearmed friendly
entertainment of equall perſonages,
and charitable harboring of inferiour perſons
for ſome good conſideration: although
nature hath generally appoynted all men a
resting place for a time (as Cicero ſaith)
and not a continuall dwelling place vppon
earth. And this is vſed amongſt men after
two manners, the one neceſſary without neceſitie,
as in entertayning thoſe wealthy
which trauel from place to place in worldly
affayres & are able to requite it. The other
needeful and not vnneceſſary, in harbowring
the poore abiects of this worlde, either
impotent, ſick, ſore, or otherwiſe, conſtrayned
to ſeeke releefe, help & ſuccour, which
are not able of themſelues to requite ſo charitable
deedes. Although yet who ſo ſheweth
compaſſion and ſuccour vppon ſuch: to
them doeth Chriſte our Sauiour acknowledge
and confeſſe, ſaying, That they gaue
him to eate when hee was an hungered,
they gaue him drink when he was thirſty,
clothed him beeing naked, vizited him

beeing ſick, and harboured him beeing
comfortleſſe, for the which cauſe hee ſhall
ſay vnto them, Come yee bleſſed of my father
&c. Matt. 25.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                The Scripture now and then commendeth
vnto vs this vertue Hoſpitalitie:
namely, Moyſes ſaide vnto the people:
Loue thou ſtraungers, becauſe thou and
thy brethren were ſtrangers in the land of
Egypt. Deut. 10.
            Forget not Hoſpitalitie, for by meanes
theereof haue ſome receiued euen very
Angels as gueſtes vnto them. Heb. 13.
            Before all things, haue mutuall charity
one towardes an other, in all godlyneſſe
and honeſtie. &c. Be harborours one towardes
an other without grutching.
1. Pet. 4.
            Welbeloued thou dooſt well, what ſoeuer
thou workeſt towards thy brethren,
and ſpecially ſuch as are ſtrangers. Ioh. 3.
            Hoſpitalitie is ſo thankfully acceptable
before God, that not ſo much as a
cup of colde water giuen with good wil,
but it ſhall bee rewarded againe and recompenſed
fine folde. Amb. li. de Officiis.
            
            Looke what rewarde he hath at Gods

hande which trauaileth in Gods behalfe,
ſuche a rewarde hath hee and ſhall haue,
which intertayneth wel ſuch a trauailer,
and their recompence ſhalbe equall, both
his which he relieueth for Gods ſake, and
his which trauaileth for Gods ſake. Iohn
Chryſoſt. ſuper Mat.
            
            Learne therfore without curioſitie good
Chriſtiā to miniſter hoſpitalitie, leſt hapily
he whō thou ſhutteſt out of thy houſe,
and whom thow denieſt ſuche charitable
reliefe, be Chriſte him ſelfe. 1. Auguſt:
contra haereſes.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte ſending foorth
his diſciples, affirmed to preache, whoſoeuer
ſuccoured them, ſuccored him: and whoſoeuer
deſpiſed them, deſpiſed him. Luke 10. when he
himſelfe went through the worlde, hauing not
where to lay his head, he was lodged at Marthas
houſe. Luke. 9.
            
               Abraham very diligently and gladly receiued
Angels into his houſe, and cauſed ſuch
thinges as was needefull and neceſſary for thē
being ſtrangers too bee miniſtred vnto them.
Gen. 18.
            
               Loth alſo entertaining Angels into his
houſe, whom he thought had beene men, did ſo

honour them, and ſo worthily entreate them
offering all things that were needeful for thē.
Therefore was he ſaued from the firie plague
of Sodom. Gen. 19.
            
               Rebecca alſo miniſtred godly help of hoſpitalitie
vnto thoſe ſtraungers which ſhee receiued,
furniſhing them with lodging, mans
meate, and Horſe meate for the time of their
abode. Gen. 24.
            
               Iethro with ſmal entreatie or petitiō made
receiued Moyſes gueſtwiſe, for the which
cauſe hoth Iethros daughter and his Nephews
were by Moyſes greatly aduanced and
hand in reputation. Exod. 9. 2.
            The ſpies which Ioſua ſente foorth were
frendly and faithfully entertayned by the harlot
Raab, and afterward let goe agayne. Ioſ.
2. & 6.
            
               Zacheus gladly receiued our Lorde Ieſus
into his houſe, and the ſame our Sauiour much
more made him reioyce agayne ſaying, This
day is health happened into this houſe.
Luke. 19.
            For other notable examples of hoſpitalitie
looke Iudicum 19. as Beniamin in Gaba,
Elias. 3. King. 17. the Sunanite,
4. King. 4. Iob. 31. the Apoſtles, Act. 10.
         
         
            
            The xviii. Plant,
Liberalitie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                LIberalitie is that vertue which proceedeth
from good will or affection of the
minde, of him which fauoureth either neceſſitie,
vtilitie, honeſtie, decencie, or ſincere
godlines eſpecially, not ſo muche weighing
the priuate ſatiſfaction of a mans owne
minde as in beſtowing his liberalitie to the
effectual reliefe, help, commoditie and comforte
of others, according to his power and
abilitie, in geuing and rewardinge not ſoo
much for worldly prayſe to be ſpoken of, as
of meere good wil for vertuous conſideration,
reſpecting what to geue, where to geue,
when, and to whom and wherefore. For
wee ought to take heede, as Seneca ſayth,
that wee deale not our almes at a wrong
dore, that is to ſay in beſtowing benefits in
vaine, as in geuing weapons too women,
bookes to ploughmen, and nettes too them
which be geuē to ſtudies of learning. Therfore
who ſo in beſtowing their benefits haue
theſe conſiderations, they ſurely ſaith Cicero
which for zeale to vertue and godly ſtudies,
are bountifull and beneficiall in this maner,

theſe men howe muche they profite many others,
ſo many moe worthy helpers and wel
willers ſhall they gayne vnto them ſelues,
and againe by cuſtome of this beneficencye
ſhal they be better prepared, and as it were
better exerciſed to deſerue wel of many men
Cicero lib. Offici.
            
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Riches well beſtowed and to good vſe,
doe gaine many friendes to him that ſo
employeth them Prouer. 19.
            For diſtributiō of almes to the poore,
reade Eccle. 4.
            For God loueth a cheerefull geuer.
1. Cor. 7
            Let not thy left hand knowe what thy
right hande doeth. Mat. 7.
            Let thy welſpringes flow abrode, and
thy riuers into the ſtreates. Prouer. 5.
            Geue, and it ſhalbe geuen vnto you, &c
Luke. 6. Miniſter vnto the neceſſitie of the
holy ones of God. Rom. 12.
            Forget not due beneuolence and good
wil one towards an other: for with ſuch ſacrifices
is God pleaſed. Heb. 13.
            Breake thy bread vnto the hungrye.
Eſay. 58.
            Euery one of a good purpoſe and meaning

that is to ſay willingly and francklye
beſtowe your benefites, not grudging or
with compulſion. 1. Cor. 7.
            Liberalitie is not defined in the quantitie
of the beneuolence geuen, but in the
qualitie of zeale or affection in him that
geueth. Hier. de viduis.
            
            That is called perfect liberalitie, when
a man with ſilence concealeth his benefits
emploied for the neceſſities of others,
whom the poore mans mouth commendeth
and not his owne lips.
            Moreouer perfect liberalitie is commended
by faith, becauſe by the conuenient
place and time eſpecially towards the
houſholde of faith. Ambro. lib. 1. de offici.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Lorde and Sauiour Chriſte Ieſus the
liuely and moſt large fountaine of liberalitie
perfourmed and alwayes wil performe, a hundred
folde in this life, and life euerlaſting in
in the world to come, to al ſuch as for his ſake
ſhall forſake all worldly goodds to follow him.
Mat. 19. Mar. 10. & Luke 18.
            Zacheus was very liberally diſpoſed, when
he ſaide vnto the Lord: Beholde Lorde, the
half of my goods I geue to the poore, & if
I haue doone any man wrong, I reſtore

him foure folde. Luke 19.
            The children of Iſrael with a diligent and
godly minde offered their deuotions to builde
the worke of the Tabernacle, and whatſoeuer
elſe was ncceſſarie for the ceremoniall vſe
thereof, ſo that the woorkemen were enforſed
to ſay vnto Moyſes, the people offereth more
then is neceſſarie or needeful. Exod. 25. 36.
            
               To bias endeuoured to imparte vnto the
brethren of his kindred ſuche thinges as they
needed, he alſo fed the hungry and clothed the
naked as appeareth. Tobi. 1.
            
               Godly, liberall, and mercifull was Iob vnto
the poore ſaying: I haue bin a comfort
vnto the hart of the widowe, and a father
of the poore Iob. 29. 31.
            The widowes Mite was a ſlender token of
beneuolence, and yet eſteemed by Chriſte with
the giftes of rich men. Luke 21.
            The Apoſtles againſt a dearth, determined
to ſuccour the brethren in Iudaea with corne,
which they ſent by Barnab. & Saule Act. 11.
         
         
            The xix, Plant.
Mercie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                MErcy is a woorthy vertue which may
bee rightly called not onely a griefe of

minde conceiued, ſorowing for an others miſery
& calamitie, eſpecially of good, godly,
learned, honeſt and vertuous perſons, but
alſo effectually working by external meane
to help, relieue, cōfort & ſuccour others, ſo far
as equity & brotherly charitie may extend.
This mercy and compaſſion ſaith Lactantius
Firmianus lib. 6. cap. 12. is a ſinguler ornament
appertaining vnto iuſtice, to ſuccour
and defende the Orphanes, Widowes and
helples, becauſe the whole law of GOD ſo
cōmaundeth. Beſides theſe as Cicero ſaith,
we ought to be merciful vnto thoſe eſpecially
which by reaſon of infortunitie, caſualtie
of goodes, or loſſe of liues, either for extreame
miſeries (and not for any maner of
treſpaſſe againſt God, and man greeuouſly
committed) do ſtand in neede of our commiſeration.
This vertue thus rightly to vſe
(ſayth he) of many vertues is mercy more
wonderful and more gracious. For men do
not in any thing more reſemble or come
neare vnto the likeneſſe of God, then in relieuing
and ſhewing mercy one towardes an
other. Heerein fortune hath nothing greater
wherof ſhee may, nor nature any thing better
whereof ſhe would impart from her owne
breſtes Cicero in Oratio. pro. Qu. Ligurio.
            
            
               
A great trauel is there ordeined for all
men, and a great burden for all the chidrē
of Adam, from the day of their birth, vntil
the day of their graue the mother of
all thinges. Eccle. 40.
            Mercy and trueth ſhall preſerue the
King, and with mercy his Throne ſhal bee
eſtabliſhed for euer. Prouer. 20.
            Bleſſed are the mercifull, becauſe they
ſhall receiue mercy. Mat. 5.
            Goe rather and learne what that meaneth:
I will haue mercy and not ſacrifice.
Mat. 9.
            Forgeue your offenders with mercy as
equitie requireth, & you your ſelues ſhall
haue your offences forgeuen you. Luk. 6.
            Who ſo hath this worldes good and
ſeeth his brothers neede, and ſhal ſhut his
compaſſion from him, how dwelleth the
loue of God in that man. Iohn 1. 3.
            Mercy is the ſafegarde of health, the
Ornamēt of faith, the offered ſatiſfaction
by Chriſt for our ſinnes. This is ſhe which
commendeth the iuſt, ſtrengtheneth the
holy ones, and aduaunceth the worſhippers
or ſeruauntes of God. Ioh. Chryſoſt.
ſuper Matthaeum.
            
            Mercy is there more bountifull, where

faith is more ready. Nothing ſo muche
cōmendeth a Chriſtian, as the charitable
mercye of one man towardes another.
Ambro. de officiis.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Sauiour and redeemer Chriſte Ieſus,
the moſt excellent mirrour of milde mercie,
by his example biddeth vs to be mercifull, becauſe
(ſaith he) your heauely father is mercifull.
Luke. 6. Alſo ſaying, you ſhall finde reſt
vnto your ſoules in ſo doing. Mat. 11.
            So had hee compaſſion vpon the woman
whoſe ſonne was dead, when he ſaid vnto her,
weepe not, ſo that hee raiſed her ſonne from
death to life. Luke 7.
            Vnto the ſicke of the Palſey, did he ſhew alſo
his meruaylous mercy, both in curing his
diſeaſe and forgeuing his ſinnes. Mat. 9.
            Vpon the woman diſeaſed with the blooddy
Iſſue, vpon the two blinde, and vpon the poſſeſſed
with a dumbe ſpirite, did hee worke his
wonderful mercies, to the greate admiration
of the multitude ſtanding by. Mat. 9.
            
               Ruben and Iudas were mooued with naturall
compaſſion to withſtande the other brethren
which would haue ſlayne their brother
Ioſeph, whom although they brought not againe
to their father, yet by their meanes his

life at that ttme was ſaued. Gen. 37.
            When the children of Iſraell had taken
200000. of their enimies, men, women & children
priſoners, they ſpared them, & ſent them
backe againe vnto their owne dwelling places
appareling thē and relieuing them. 2. Par. 2.
            
               Nehemias hearing of the miſerable ſtate
of the Citie of Hieruſalē, wept many dayes, &
both procured oportune helpe and counſell to
remedie the diſtreſſed ſtate therof. Neh. 1. 2.
         
         
            The xx. Plant,
Innocencie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                INnocencie is a moſt notable vertue, ſignifiyng
that purenes of minde which abhorreth
from all reuenge of priuate iniurie done
to vs by any man, & not onely in our ſelues,
ought this to be for our ſoules ſaluation, for
the ſauegarde of our owne life, goods, and
good name, but alſo inaſmuch as in vs lieth,
we are bounde to inſtruct, teach and exhort
this vertue vnto all others, that by all good
meanes they may be harmeleſſe of thought,
deede and woorde free from offence, blame,
or ſhame. So ought we to haue Adams innocencie
in our minds: before he was tempted

how cleare he was, and when he taſted
the fruite how much he had defiled him ſelf.
Wherefore let vs alwaies liue like litle infantes
in reſpect of true innocencie (which
as S Hierom. ſaith) proceede not in wrath,
remember not harmes doone to them, luſt
not after the eye, thinke not one thing
and ſpeake an other. This innocencie except
we haue (ſaith S. Herome) we ſhall not
as the children of God enter into the kingdome
of heauen. ſuper Matt. cap. 18.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Bleſſed are ye when men reuile you, and
ſhall falſly ſpeake al maner of euill againſt
you for my ſake. Mat. 5. 
                  ••
               .
            Verily I ſay vnto you, except ye repent
and become as litle children, you ſhal not
enter into the Kingdome of Heauen.
Mat. 18. 3.
            Who ſo receiueth one of theſe litle
ones in my name, receiueth me. And who
ſo offendeth one of theſe litle ones, which
beleeueth in me, it were meete that a Milſtone
were hanged about his necke, and
that he were caſt into the bottome of the
Sea ibidem. 
               
                  •
               . 6.
            You haue heard how it hath been ſaid,
an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,

But I ſay vnto you reſiſt not euill with euill.
Mat. 5.
            The ſimple beleeue euery woorde, ſo
long as the innocent cleane vnto righteouſnes,
they ſhal not be aſhamed. Pro 14.
            See that you render not euill for euill,
but alwayes perſiſte in dooing good. 1.
Theſ. 5.
            Who is innocent? hee which neither
hurteth others, nor himſelfe, for hee that
hurteth himſelfe, is not innocent. Aug.
ſuper Pſal. 35.
            Bee glad of thine innocencie and reioyce,
be glad I ſay, becauſe ſhe is harmeleſſe
in euery place, & ſafe in euery place.
If thou bee tempted, thou profiteſt: if
thou beeſt brought lowe, thou ſhalt bee
exalted, if thou fighteſt, thou winneſt: if
thou be ſlayne, thou ſhalte bee crowned.
Chryſoſt in Homil. Lord who ſhal enter into
thy holy hil euen he that is innocent of
his handes and pure of heart, which hath
not taken his ſoule in vayne, nor hath
ſworne to deceaue his neighbour, he ſhal
receiue blesſing from the Lorde and mercie
from God his Sauiour. Pſal. 25.
            That moſt innocent Lambe Chriſte Ieſus

our Sauiour in whoſe mouth was founde none
euil, & in whoſe heart was foūd no guyle, both
liued in innocencie as he taught, & died in inno
ēcie for our example, that we ſhould refuſe
no domage, daunger, nor iniurie for the teſtimonie
of a good conſcience towardes God in
true innocencie of life. Mat. 23. Iohn. 19.
            Suſanna was innocent from that heynous
fact, wherewith the falſe iudges charged her:
for teſtimony of which truth God ſent Daniel
his ſeruaunt to diiudicate the cauſe of her innocencie,
and to condemne the falſe iudges of
their miſcheuous malice. Dan. 13.
            
               Dauid ſerued Saule in all innocencie, truth, &
fidelitie, a long time: yet was he perſecuted by
him, but in the end he was crowned king after
Saule. 1. Reg. 28. vſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , ad 26. cap.
            
               Ioſeph was alſo innocent, iuſt, & faithfull
towards his Maiſter: albeit his Miſtreſſe
went about to tempt him & procure reuenge
vppon him, for not fulfilling her pleaſure. But
the Lord preferred his innocency that he foūd
farre more grace & fauour both with God &
man. Gen 39.
            
               Iob both iuſt and innocent before GOD,
though Sathan deſired God that he might diuerſly
touch him with vexation & aduerſity,
yet did he neuer departe from his innocencie,

but walked vprightly, glorified God and beleued
in his Sauiour. Iob. 1. & 2.
         
         
            The xxi. Plant.
Good counſell.
            
               
                  Definition 
                GOod counſell is a rare & excellent vertue,
priuately, neceſſary, & publikly beneficial
proceeding of good deſire to do wel▪
to eſtabliſh that which is preſent, to preuent
that which is to come, and to prouide for the
ſafetie of ſincere good meaning, that no ſiniſter
meanes of euill, moleſt, circumuent or
endomage the ſame. This good coūſel ought
he to ſeeke that wanteth it in due time. And
this good counſell ought he that hath it, to
giue it in due time. For as Solomon ſaith,
Words ſpoken in due time are like apples
of golde in a ſiluer diſhe. And that worthye
Saluſt admoniſhed his friendes firſt to aſke
counſell, before they begunne any thing, and
when they had taken counſell, to diſpatche
their purpoſe quickely. He that will doe any
thing well therefore, let him alſo conſider,
that as in delay to ſeek counſel bringeth dā
               ger,
and in raſhe taking counſell bringeth
repentaunce: ſo to worke by good counſell in
due time bringeth expected comfort & commoditie
from time to time. Let vs craue this

good counſell of the holy Ghoſt the comforter,
that in all thoughtes, words and workes
we may glorifie God, and edifie our ſelues,
and our chriſtian brethren alſo.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                My ſonne, doe nothing without coū
               ſell,
and thou ſhalte not repent thee after
the deede. Eccle. 32.
            Giue eare vnto counſell, and receaue
diſcipline, that thou maieſt be wiſe in the
laſt dayes. Prou. 9.
            Euen as water is in the deepe, ſo is
counſel in the heart of man: But who ſo is
wiſe, ſhall drawe out the ſame. Prou. 20.
            The wiſe man doeth all thinges with
counſel: But he that is fooliſhe, diſcouereth
his follie. Prou. 13.
            The heart of man with oyntment and
ſundry ſweete odours is made glad: ſo is
the ſoule comforted with the good counſels
of a friende. Prou. 27.
            A ſweet word multiplieth friends, & mitigateth
enimies, & a gracious tung, aboū
               deth
in a good man. Haue thou as many
freends as thou cāſt get, & but one coūſelour
of a thouſand. Eccle. 6.
            Let not the good counſell of the aged
eſcape thy hearing, for they haue learned
of their fathers', becauſe of them alſo,

                  •
               hou ſhalte learne vnderſtanding and in

time of neede ſhalte thou giue anſweare.
Eccle. 8.
            Through counſels are the determinations
of men eſtabliſhed, & with diſcreete
gouernement are warres to bee taken in
hande. Prou. 20.
            There is no wiſedome, there is no vnderſtanding,
there is no counſell againſt
the Lorde. Prou. cap. 21.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Lorde and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus that
moſt pure fountayne of cōfortable good counſel,
when by preaching and teaching the will
of his heauenly father, hee was ſent to diſtribute
the free ſaluation of mankinde, in the end
of one ſermon made by him vpon the Mount:
hee pronounced this counſell to our euerlaſting
comfort: viz. Euery one which heareth my
wordes and doth the ſame, ſhall be compared
vnto a wiſe man, that buildeth his
houſe vppon a rocke. Mat. 7.
            
               Iacob hearkened vnto the counſels of hid
mother, working all thinges accordingly. And
it came to paſſe that the Lorde proſpered him
greatly therein. Gen. 27.
            
               Ruben hearing the euil determinations of
his other brethren agaynſt Ioſeph reſiſting
the ſame, gaue counſell rather that he ſhould

be ſolde, whereby it fell out, that his life was
ſaued, and he afterward became a comfortable
helper of his brethren. Gen. 37.
            
               Iethro gaue good counſel vnto Moyſes, for
the welfare of the people of Iſrael, worthie of
imitation. Exod. 18.
            Through the good counſell of Abigail that
godly vertuous womā, Dauid was withdrawne
from ſhedding of Nabals blood: which if he had
done, would greatly haue procured gods wrath
towards Dauid for the ſame. 1. Reg. 25.
            
               Abner gaue good coūſel to Aſael whē he folowed
him, ſaying: Do not thou folow me, leaſt
I cauſe thee to fall vnto the earth. Which
thing to heare bicauſe Aſael contemned, he was
therefore ſlaine by him immediately. 2. Reg. 2.
            The elders gaue good counſell vnto Roboam,
but he to his owne harme gaue eare to the
counſell of the yonger in authoritie about him.
3 Reg. 12.
            Reade the good counſell of Eliſeus vnto Naaman,
and the good euent thereof. 4 Reg. 5. Of
Ioiada vnto Ioas the King, and the euent therof.
4. Reg. 12. 2. Par. 24. of Nehemias in building
the Temple. Nehem. z. of Tobias in
captiuitie. Tob. 1. of Iudith to the people. Iudith.
8. of Ionas to the Nineuites. Ionas. 2. 3.
of Mattathias to his ſonnes. 1. Machabes. 2.

of Iudas Machabaeus. 1. Macha. 3. 4. and 9.
Item 2. Mac. 8. & 15. and of the Apoſtles. Act.
2. 4. 10. 13. 14. 16. 18. 19. 20 & 26.
         
         
            The. xxii. Plant.
Diſcipline.
            
               
                  Definition 
                DIſcipline is a neceſſarie and needefull
vertue, moſt aptly to be applied of tractabilitie
in learning, godlineſſe, goodneſſe or
vertue, to beare in minde that we heare, to cō
               firme
in maners what we conceiue in minde,
and to vſe brotherly correction or admonition
with ſeueritie, according to the defect therefrom,
as Gregorius in his Morals ſayth, that
in this diſcipline ought to be admixed lenitie
with ſeueritie, and that there ſhould be made
a moderation thereof. Furthermore S. Auguſtine
writing de Moribus Eccleſiae, diſtinguiſheth
Diſcipline in two partes. The firſt
loue, and the ſecond feare, as who ſhould ſay,
loue in teaching, telling and admoniſhing the
learner: and feare in learning, following and
practiſing that which is taught. After this
ſort (ſaith he) where Diſcipline is, there is the
Ladie of true Religion, and of true godlineſſe,
which neither ſo blameth that ſhe burreth, nor

ſo chaſtiſeth that ſhee woundeth: But finally
beeing angrie, ſhee correcteth mennes maners,
and being zealouſly mooued ſhee preſerueth
them to perfection. Thus as Gregorius
Nazianzen ſayth: The wordes of the
nurſes are milke, if they be good, or poyſon
if they be ill. In Regiſt. cap. 7.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                A wiſe man by hearing becommeth
wiſer, and hee that hath vnderſtanding,
ſhall poſſeſſe the ſeate of authoritie. &c.
Prou. 5.
            Haſt thou children? bring them vp in
nurture, and from their childhoode make
them to ſtande in awe: Haſt thou daughters?
keepe their bodies in awe, and ſhewe
not a pleaſant countenance towards them.
Eccleſiaſticus. 7.
            My ſonne deſpiſe not thou the chaſtening
of the Lord, neither forſake him whē
thou art reprehended. For whomſoeuer
the Lorde loueth, him doth he chaſten, as
the father which taketh pleaſure in his
childe. Pro. 3.
            Who ſo reiecteth diſcipline, diſpiſeth
his owne ſoule: but hee that hearkeneth to
good admoniſhment, enioyeth his owne
hearts caſe. Prou. 15.
            
               
For whoſo deſpiſeth wiſedome and diſcipline
is vnhappy: and vaine is their hope,
yea their labours are without fruite, and
their woorkes are vnprofitable. Sap. 3.
            A man that is wiſe and well nurtured,
will not murmure when he is admoniſhed
to amend his fault &c. Eccle. 10. cap.
            
            I beſeeche thee my good brother, that
vnto all thoſe vnder thy iuriſdiction, from
the greateſt to the leaſt, thou wouldeſt declare
both the ſweete comfort of the heauenly
kingdome, and the bitter paines
of hell. And that thou beeing carefull for
their welfare, wouldeſt be as a watchman
ouer them. Bicauſe for euery one which are
vnder thy authoritie thou ſhalt render accountes
vnto God. Admoniſh them therefore,
and perſwade them too beware of
pride, ſlaunder, drunkenneſſe, fornication,
wrath, periurie, and couetouſneſſe. Auguſtinus
ad comitem.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our heauenly ſchoolmaſter Chriſt Ieſus.
euen as yet a childe, ſitting amongſt the doctors
in the Temple diſputed with them, profited in
wiſdome diſcretion and grace, before God and
men. Luc. 2. Being alſo the light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the glorie of his people Iſrael,

taught firſt his Diſciples the true doctrine of
ſaluation vnto al men, which whoſo beleued
ſhould inherite euerlaſting life. Mat. 10.
            This diſcipline was taught by the ſayd Apoſtles
by preaching of the Goſpel, as namely S.
Thomas at Parthia, S. Mathew in Aethiopia,
S. Bartholomew in India, S. Andrew in Scythia,
S. Iohn Baptiſt in Aſia, S. Peter in Galatia,
S. Philip in Scythia, S. Iames the brother of
Chriſt at Ieruſalem, Saint Iohn the diuine in
Pathmos, S. Iames the elder brother of Iohn at
Ieruſalem, S. Simeon the ſonne of Cleopha,
there alſo, and S. Paule at Rome, Corinth,
Epheſus, Galatia, and Theſſalonia, with Barnabas
at Antioch, teaching and inſtructing the
faythfull, as alſo reprouing the ſeduced and
erronious Diſciples, inducing them by all tractabilitie
and good order of diſcipline to bee reconciled
and eſtabliſhed vnto the perfect path
of rightuouſneſſe. Act. 15.
            This diſcipline (as the holy Prophet Moyſes
in Iſrael, Ionas in Niniuee, Elias and Elizeus
in Iſrael, Daniel at Babylon, Nathan at Ieruſalem,
and diuerſe other by the operation of the
holy Ghoſt, taught and perſwaded the kings and
nations of the earth, euery one in their degree
to learne their duties: So likewiſe haue the ancient
fathers of the Church, as Ioſeph of Aramathia

in England, S. Ignatius at Antioche.
Policarpus at Rome, Irenaeus at Lions, Origen
at Alexandria, Tertullian in Affrica, Cyprian
at Carthage, S. Hierom in Bethleem, S.
Auguſtine at Hipponeſa, S. Ambroſe at Milaine,
S. Baſil at Caeſarea in Cappadocia, S.
Gregorie Naziāzen, & S. Epiphan. at Cypres.
and others by their diuine giftes in preaching,
teaching, detecting, diſputing, correcting and cō
               futing
haue wonderfully profited the Church of
God vnto all poſteritie, cōfirming this diſcipline
of the Goſpel, albeit ſome of them more purer
than other ſome expreſsing the ſame.
         
         
            The. xxiii. Plant.
Virginitie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                VIrginitie is that vertue which the auncient
called pure and vndefiled continencie
of bodie and minde, which is a continual
meditation of the mind, and a continuall
exercitation of the bodie in the vncorruptible,
chaſt eſtate of life, refrayning carnal deſire, &
carnall dealing of the feminine ſexe with the
maſculine, euen from the firſt infancy vnto the
laſt cōtinued ſtate of continencie, as God ſhal
giue the gift thereof aboue worldly conſideration.
Thus ſaith Auguſtine, writing de bono
virginali. It is more bleſſed in the fleſh to

imitate the life of Angels, than by the fleſh
to encreaſe the nūber of mortal men. And
S. Hierom in his ſermō de Aſſump. ſaith: Of
good right was the Angel ſent vnto the virgin:
bicauſe vnto Angels, virginitie is euermore
knowne. And truly (ſaith he) to liue in
the fleſhe as beſide the fleſhe, is not an earthly
life, but a heauenly life. For to be an Angel is
a ſtate of felicitie, but to be a virgin is the
ſtate of ſurpaſſing vertue. But S. Ambroſe
more highly aduauncing virginitie, ſaith, that
virginitie farre ſurmounteth the ſtate of humane
nature, whereby men are likened vnto
Angels. Yet greater is the victorie of virgins
thā of Angels, bicauſe Angels liue out of the
fleſh, but virgins do triumph in the fleſh.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Bleſſed are the pure in heart, for they
ſhall ſee God. Mat. 5.
            For Virginitie is the treaſure whoſe precious
price is inexpreſsible. Gen. 24.
            Touching virgins I haue no commaundement
of the Lord, but yet I do admoniſh
them. &c. 1. Cor. 7.
            Let the vnmaried woman and the virgin
ſtudy for thoſe things which perteine vnto
the Lord, that ſhe may be holy in bodie and
ſoule. eodem.
            
            
               
No mā could ſay the ſong, but thoſe ſame
xliiii which were redeemed from the earth
Theſe are they which were not defiled in
the fleſh. Apoc. 14. For they are virgins and
followe the lambe whereſoeuer he goeth.
cap. eodem.
            
            Theſe are redeemed from amongſt men
as the firſt fruites vnto God and the lamb,
& there is no deceit found in their mouth.
For they are without ſpotte before the
throne of God. eodem.
            
            Whoſo hauing power of his owne will,
hath determined in his heart to keepe his
virgine pure, doeth well: alſo he which ioyneth
his virgin in matrimonie doth well,
but he that marieth not his virgine doeth
better. 1. Cor. 7.
            Remember therfore in this life to prepare
thee thy lampe of true godlineſſe, and
the oile of ſincere vetrue feruently luminating
thy bodie and ſoule, that with the fiue
wiſe virgins thou mayeſt enter with the
bridegrome Chriſt Ieſus, into the celeſtiall
ioyes of life euerlaſting. Mat. 25.
            
               Marie the bleſſed virgine and mother of
Ieſus Chriſt,
                  Examples. Maria interet. Stella Maris. by the power of the holy Ghoſt,
though ſhe conceiued and brought forth the ſauiour

of the worlde in the fleſh, yet ſeemed ſhee
to be ſtill a virgin vndefiled. When ſhe ſaying,
How may this be, for I know no man? her
ſiſter Elizabeth being full of the holy Ghoſt eſpecially
commended the holy virgin, ſaying:
Bleſſed art thou amongeſt women, &c.
Luke. 1.
            The ſame Elizabeth by the diuine prouidēce
one of the daughters of Aaron,Elizabeth interpret. Plenitudo dei a long time liued
vndefiled in the fleſh, walking in all the precepts
& teſtimonies of the Lord vnreprouable,
to the great admiration of Zacharias her huſband,
who was 
                  •••
               de by the Angel, that his wife
Elizabeth ſhould euen in her aged yeares miraculouſly
alſo beare a childe, which ſhoulde be
great in the Lordes ſight. Luk. 1.
            The virgins and women children, which had
not knowen carnall copulation amongeſt the
Medianites, were ſpared by the captains of Iſrael,
and by the commaundement of Moyſes
had their liues ſaued, when all the malekinde
were ſlaine with the ſworde. Num. 31.
            The daughter of the woman of Canaan being
ſore vexed with an euill ſpirite, was at the
inſtant prayer of her mother helped by Chriſt.
Math. 15.
            Philip the Euangelist had foure daughters
virgins which prophecied. Acts. 21.

               Euphemia, Dorothea, Tecla, and Eraſma,
virgins of ſincere, godly, and vertuous conuerſation,
for the teſtimonie of Chriſt, had rather
ſuffer martyrdome, then forſaking him to liue
in blindneſſe vnder Seruaſtus the tyrant. Pet.
de natal. lib. 3. cap. 29. Anno dom. 65.
            
               Vrſula of Englande, with the 11000. virgins
paſsing towardes Rome by Baſilea, with Pantaleon
the Biſhop of Baſilea, (homewards by
the way returning from the people called the
Hunnes) ſuffered martyrdome for the teſtimonie
of Chriſt at Colen in Belgia. Pol. Virg.
in Ang. 3. Anno. 460.
         
         
            The xxiii. Plant.
Sobrieetie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                SObritie, as Auguſtine ſayth (writing vnto
the holy virgins) is the armour or ſhield
of the minde and ſenſes, of all the members, &
of the whole bodie it ſelfe, the fortreſſe of Chaſtitie
and ſhamefaſtneſſe, the neighbor of Modeſtie,
handmayd of amitie & peace, the neare
alied vnto honeſtie, & the verie true ſhunner of
all vice & ſinne. Yea he addeth yet further and
ſayeth, This vertue Sobrietie, is the obſeruer
of true iudgement, the wiſedome of inſeparable
memorie and remembrance, the Cloſet of

ſecretes, the couering of priuities, the prompt
atchieuer of learning and doctrine, the diſcipline
of good artes and ſciences, togither reputed
as Ladie and miſtreſſe ouer humaine
wittes, and the handmaide of enterpriſes,
which is euer deſirous of good name, ordeyning
thinges wholeſome and profitable, and
a ſingular helpe to vertue, diſpoſing al things
with reaſon and alwayes coueting to keepe
companie with honeſt perſons. Thus much
out of S. Auguſtine, touching the definition of
this excellent vertue Sobrietie.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Being prepared with the loynes of your
minde girded, ſee that you hope ſoberly,
and perfectly for that grace which is
brought vntoo vs, and frame not your
ſelues to liue after your former inordinate
luſtes. 1. Pet. 2.
            The grace of God hath appeared vnto
vs, that wee denying and forſaking all vngodlineſſe
and worldly concupiſcences,
ſhould liue ſoberly, iuſtly, and godly in this
preſent worlde. 2. Tit.
            
            Beware that your heartes be not greened
with ſurfetting and drunkenneſſe, and
with cares of this life, & that the latter day
ſodenly ſteale not vppon you: for it ſhall

come vnlooked for, as a ſnare vnto all the
worlde. Luke. 21.
            Sobrietie, eſpecially in women, carieth
alwayes a lowly countenance towarde the
earth, remembring that ſhe came from the
earth: But drunkenneſſe hauing loſt all
modeſtie, lifteth vp her loftie lookes on
high. Auguſt. ad ſacr. virgines.
            
            Sobrietie with great trembling and ſilence
vttereth that worde which cannot be
reprehended: But drunkenneſſe both ſheweth
vnſhamefaſt ſpeach & countenance▪
               ibidem.
            
            Sobrietie is the mother of all vertues:
But drunkenneſſe is the fountaine of all
vices. Origen. hom. 57.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Lord and ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus as a ſingular
example of ſobrietie whoſe action is our
inſtruction, gaue commaundement vnto his Apoſtles
into what houſe ſoeuer they enired, that
they ſhould eate and drinke ſuch as they found,
as who ſay they ſhoulde bee content euen with
meane fare, and not ſeeke after any curious or
daintie fare. Luke. 10.
            
               Daniel had determined in his mind before,
that he would not be defiled with the meate of
Pharaos table, by means wherof God gaue him

and his ſociates knowledge & wiſdome. Dan. 3.
Eleazarus, although he was ſtricken in age, had
rather die a cruell death than hee woulde eate
ſwines fleſhe which was againſt the lawe. 2.
Mac. 2.
            The ſeuen brethren with their mother alſo
being compelled of the king to eate ſwines fleſh,
contrarie to the law, choſe rather to ſuffer moſt
cruel torments. 2. Mac. 7.
            Saint Iohn Baptiſt was of ſuch ſober life,
that his vſual meate was only locuſtes and wild
honie. Math 3. Math 11.
            The Lord commended the ſobrietie of thoſe
Rachabites, bycauſe they woulde drinke no
wine, as their father commanded them. Ier. 35.
         
         
            The xxv. Plant,
Chaſtitie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                CHaſtitie is a ſpecial vertue which ought
to perteine vnto euerie degree of humane
kinde, reteyning the puritie as well of the
minde being called the inward man, voyde of
wicked or vngodly cogitations, conſent, motion,
or any maner of purpoſe againſt the will
of God, as alſo reteyning cleanneſſe of bodily
geſture, in the outward man, voyd of wicked

and vngodly ſpeach, word & deed in al things
contrary to Gods holy wil. And although god
commaundeth that this vertue ſhould bee had
in due honor, & obſerued in al ages & degrees
of men and women, yet it ought with ſpecial
care to be regarded in the ſtate of wedlocke,
bicauſe when God hath lincked in mutuall
bōds of loue, & placed in two bodies one ſoule,
there ought to be no violation of this vertue,
nor no breach of this knot. For in this chaſtitie
& mutual loue conſiſteth wonderful felicity
and manifold comfort eche of other. Contrariwiſe,
if either chaſtitie be without loue, or loue
without chaſtitie, euery felicitie turneth into
infelicitie, & euery comfort into a corſey. For
Chaſtitie (as S. Bernard ſaith without loue, is
a lampe without oyle. Take away the oyle &
the lampe cannot burne: ſo take away loue, &
chaſtitie pleaſeth not. Ber. in epiſt. ad Senon.
            
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                O howe faire is a chaſt generation with
vertue: for the memorie thereof is euerlaſting,
bicauſe it is knowne before God, and
alſo before men. When ſhe is preſent they
folow her ſteps, and when ſhe withdraweth
herſelf, they deſire her, & for euer crowned
doth ſhe triumph, with conqueſt of reward
ouer the multitude of thoſe defiled. Sap. 4.
            
               
Bleſſed are the cleane and pure of heart,
for they ſhall ſee God. Mat. 5.
            The light of the bodie is the eye, if therfore
thy eye be ſimple, all thy whole bodie
ſhall be light. Mat. 6.
            For he that is ſtedfaſt of minde, maketh
none neceſsitie, but hath power of his own
will, and hath decreed this in his heart,
namely to keepe his virginitie. 1. Cor. 7.
            Know you not that your bodies are the
members of Chriſt. Shall you then take the
members of Chriſt, and make them the
members of an harlot? God forbid. Know
you not that your body is the temple of the
holy ghoſt dwelling in you. 1. Cor. 6.
            Separate not your ſelues one frō another,
except it be through both your cōſents for
a time, continuing in faſting & praier, leaſt
Satā tēpt you for your incōtinency. 1. Cor. 7.
Let the vnmaried mā care for thoſe things,
which pertein to the pleaſing of God. ibid.
            
            Let the vnmaried womā ſeeke that which
perteines vnto the Lorde, that ſhe may bee
holy both in body and ſoule. Ibid.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt the moſte precious,
pure, and vndefiled patterne of Chaſtitie,
as hee liued heere on earth moſte

chaſtely, ſo hath he left vs this leſſon as example
worthie of imitation, namely that there is no
treaſure comparable to the gift of chaſtitie.
Eccleſiaſticus 26.
            So long as our parents Adam and Eue were
in Paradiſe, they were in ſtate of virginitie, but
being once caſt out by the diſpleaſure of God, it
came then to paſſe, that Adam knewe Eue carnally.
Gen. 4.
            
               Ioſeph although he was a bond ſeruant, and
a yong man of elegant perſonage, without wife,
being earneſtly prouoked therevnto by his miſtreſſe,
woulde not giue his conſent to defile his
maiſters bed, and had rather diſpleaſe his miſtreſſe,
and be ſhut in cloſe priſon, than be would
loſe his chaſtitie. Gen. 39.
            
               Sara had ſuch care and continencie of her
bodie touching chaſte life before ſhee maried
Tobia, that in her prayer ſhe confeſſed, ſaying,
Thou knoweſt Lorde that I neuer deſired
companie of man, but haue kept my ſoule pure
and vndefiled from al carnall luſtes. Tob. 3.
            
               Iudith after ſhee had buried her firſt huſband
neuer knew any man, but kept her ſelfe a
chaſte widow▪ keeping the faſtes and feaſtes of
the Sabboth in the houſe of Iſrael, with deuout
faſting and prayer. Iud. 8.
            After that Phinees and other captaines had

ſubdued the Madianites, Moyſes commanded
that all the wicked women ſhould be ſlaine, and
that the virgins only ſhould be ſaued. Num. 31.
            
               Marie the bleſſed virgin and mother of
Chriſt, continued in the eſtate of chaſtitie by
diuine prouidence. Luke 1.
            
               Suſanna a ſingular example for chaſt maried
women. Dan. 13.
         
         
            The xxvi. Plant,
Repentance.
            
               
                  Definition 
                REpentance is a vertue profitable, both
to the bodie and the ſoule, & highly pleaſing
God. But it is vnderſtoode to bee a certain
remorſe of conſcience inwardly, and earneſtly
ſorrowing for any thing, ſpokē, done, or
thought beyonde the bounds of Gods lawes,
and mannes, either priuately or publiquely,
wherein deteſting and hating ſuch kinde of
dealing, we proteſt with minde and mouth, to
forſake from henceforth al former folly, looceneſſe
of life, and licencious luſtes, & in taking
a reuenge by heartie repentance, we profeſſe
and practiſe better wayes and dealings towards
God and man, in puniſhing the appetites
of the fleſhe with the abſtinence of the

ſpirite, and ſacrifice of ſorrowes vnto amendment
and newneſſe of life. Thus as S. Auguſtine
ſayth, who ſo ſhall truely repent, and
be looſed of the bandes of ſinne, to bee vnited
in the bodie of Chriſt, and ſhal liue well after
their repentance, as he ſhould haue done before
his repentance, after his reconcilement
whenſoeuer he dieth, he goeth vnto God, hee
goeth to the good reſt, he ſhal not be fruſtrate
of the inheritance promiſed in the kingdome
of God, nor ſeparated from the ſocietie of
Gods people. Aug. de poeneten. cap. 5.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Thus ſayeth the Lorde, if I ſhall ſhut vp
the heauens, ſo that there fall no raine, and
ſhould commaund the Locuſts to deuoure
the earth, & ſhould ſend a peſtilence vnto
my people in my wrath: yet if my people
which call vppon my name, do make their
praiers vnto me, do ſeeke my face, & repent
them of their ſinnes, I wil heare them from
out of the heauens. Parali. 7.
            Be not ſlow to turne vnto the Lord, and
deferre not of from day to day, for ſodenly
ſhal his wrath come, and in time of his vengeance
ſhall he deſtroy thee. Eccle. 5.
            Repent, for the kingdome of heauen is
at hand. Mat. 3. and 4.
            
               
Lay away from you according to your
olde conuerſation, the olde man which is
corrupted, by reaſon of the deſire of ſinne,
and be renned in the ſpirite of your mind,
and put on the newe man which is created
like vnto god, in righteouſneſſe and holineſſe
of truth. Ephe. 4.
            Turne vnto the Lorde, and forſake the
ſinnes, pray before the face of the Lord, and
leaue of to offend. Turne againe vnto the
Lorde, and turne away from thy vnrighteouſneſſe,
and more and more hate thy wickedneſſe,
and knowledge the righteouſnes
and iudgement of God, &c. Eccle. 17.
            There ſhall be more ioy in heauen ouer
one ſinner that truely repenteth, than ouer
99. iuſt which need no repentance. Luk. 15.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Chriſt Ieſus the righteous ſauiour of al man
kind, hath promiſed vs that he came not to call
the righteous, but ſinners to repentance. Luk. 5.
affirming that at what time ſoeuer a ſinner repenteth
him of his ſinnes, from the bottome of
his heart, that hee woulde put away all his
ſinnes. &c. Ezec. 1.
            When the people of Iſrael heard, that the
Lorde was grieued at the murmuringes in
the deſert, they mourned therefore, and woulde

haue done more in the morning than the Lorde
commaunded them. Num. 14.
            They at another time ſayde vnto the Lorde,
we haue ſinned, render thou vnto vs whatſoeuer
thou wilt, and they caſt away their Idolles
from them, ſo that, He ſorowed vpon their
miſeries. Iud. 10.
            
               Dauid quickely repented him, when Nathan
reprehended him of his fault. 2. Reg. 12.
            
               Achab the moſt wicked king of Iſrael, couered
his fleſh with hairecloth, and ſlept in ſackecloth,
and walked bareheaded before the Lord,
and his puniſhment for the faultes was diſpenced
with and forgiuen. 3. Re
                     •
                  g 21.
            
               Manaſſes being bound in chaines, and caried
into Babilon, verie much repented him before
the Lord, and the Lord reſtored him againe vnto
his kingdome of Ieruſalem. 2. Par. 33.
            
               Eſdras the prophet weeping for the ſinnes of
Iſrael, and making interceſsion for them vnto
the Lord, it was anſwered him, thus. If there be
repentance in Iſrael, I will then enter a league
with the Lord, &c. 1. Eſdr. 10.
            
               Iob although he was a man ſimple and right,
fearing God, yet I will do (ſayth he) repentance
in ſackcloth and aſhes. Iob. 42.
            The Nineuites beleeued the Lorde at the
preaching of Ionas, and they preached faſting,

clothing themſelues with ſackecloth and aſhes,
from the leaſt to the moſt, and they were deliuered.
Ionas. 2.
         
         
            The xxvii. Plant,
Simplicitie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                SImplicitie is a ſingular vertue, which properly
and plainly ſpeaketh and doth thoſe
things which are vnfeined, vncorrupt, without
ſimulatiō, adulation, colluſion, hypocriſie,
doubleneſſe of heare, or ſiniſter externall dealing
in doctrine and doings of life & maners.
Although this vertue hath ſomtimes her imperfection,
when in the ſimple mind, without
wiſdome & knowledge, ſhe (as ignorant) doth,
ſpeaketh, & thinketh not alwaies thoſe things
that are profitable for her, neither for others.
As the other ſimplicity ioined with wiſdom &
true knowledg, worketh euermore that which
neither can nor may redound to the iniurie or
deceite of herſelfe, neither to the iniurie or dececeyt
of any others, ſo as ſhe neither will deteiue
others, nor be deceiued her ſelfe in anie
thing, but keeping the race of integritie, and
method of perfection. It is taken in moſte
places of the Scripture for the true and perfect

affection of the minde, and in nature for
the true and vnfeigned godlineſſe, which is
both pleaſing vnto God, and profitable vnto
man. Thus, as S. Hierom ſayth, ſuper Oſeā
               
Prudence without ſimplicitie, is but meere
malice, and ſimplicitie without reaſon or wiſdome
is but meere fooliſhneſſe.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Let not your vnderſtanding be corrupted
from ſimplicitie in Chriſt, that is, from the
true knowledgement and faith in Chriſt, or
from true godlineſſe. 2. Cor. 11.
            Be you wiſe as ſerpents, and innocent as
doues. Mat 10.
            Bee as the ſimple children of God, and
vnreproouable amongeſt the euil and wicked
generation. Phil. 2.
            The ſimple ſhal poſſeſſe and dwell in the
land. Prou. 2.
            He that walketh ſimply walketh ſurely.
cap. 10.
            The iuſt which walketh in his ſimplicitie,
ſhal leaue a bleſſed poſteritie of children after
him. eodem.
            
            Thou ſhalt be ſimple if thou intangle not
thy ſelfe vnto the world, but wring thy ſelfe
out of the wretched familiaritie therof. For
in wringing thy ſelfe frō the world art thou

ſimple, but in entangling thy ſelfe to the
world, thou art duble. Aug. ſuper Iohn. ho. 2.
            The ſimplicitie of the iuſt ſhal direct thē
in the right way. Pro. 11.
            He that giueth, let him giue in ſimplicitie,
that is to ſay, in true and ſimple zeale to
do well towardes all men, not ſeeking any
curioſitie, or vſing captiouſneſſe, Rom. 12.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Lord & ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, the ſole &
ſingular patern of godly ſimplicitie, came ſimply
into this world, borne in a ſimple barne or ſtable,
ſimply in nature was obedient to his parents,
ſimply taught, and ſimply liued according to his
teaching, in whoſe mouth there was no guide, in
whoſe heart no deceyte, neither in any externall
doings, any harme. Mat. Mar. Luke. Iohn.
            
            His beloued Apoſtles, Peter, Andrew, and
others, of ſimple fiſhermen, poore, vnlerned, baſe
and abiect in worldly wiſedome, did he traine,
teach and inſtruct with the fulneſſe of the holy
Ghoſt, as well by his life and doctrine, making
them perfect followers of him, as alſo worthie
examples for his choſen ſeruants in this world:
whoſe teſtimonies are left vs for our worthy examples
of imitation. Mat. Mar. Luke. Iohn.
            
            
               Iob is commended vnto vs to haue liued alwayes
iuſt and ſimple in the ſight of the Lorde,

iuſt by warineſſe of wiſedome, and ſimple by innocencie
of meekeneſſe: ſimple, bicauſe he neuer
deſired to hurt any, but rather to profite al men:
iuſt, bicauſe he would not ſuffer himſelfe to bee
deceyued by any. Iob. 1. Beda de templo Solemonis.
lib. 1.
            All the Patriarkes and Prophets, were
men of ſimple life and conuerſation in the ſight
of God.
            S. Hierome writing de Sapientia Serpentina
& ſimplicitate Columbina, hath theſe
wordes. Vſe ſimplicitie of a Doue, that thou do
not deceiue or iniurie any man: and haue wiſdome
of a ſerpent, that thou bee not ſupplanted
in other mens ſnares, for otherwiſe in reſpect of
offence, it differeth ſmally, but thou ſhalt either
deceiue, or be deceiued. Hier. ad. Ruſt. Mona.
            
         
         
            The .xxviii. Plant,
Sinceritie.
            
               
                  Definition 
                SInceritie is to be vnderſtoode, for truth,
the verie bright beames of that ſhining
Sunne, which reuealeth the puritie of God,
and his worde, and diſcouereth the falſhood of
the Diuell and his workes. By which touchſtone
golde is tried from droſſe: By which

fanne wheate is ſifted from the chaffe, and by
which ſearce of ſinceritie, the ſweete ſauorie
Cinamon of ſaluation is ſeparate from the
bruiſed barke of bitter bale, by the operation
of the holy Ghoſt, which is therfore called the
ſpirite of truth and ſinceritie, bycauſe hee is
true and ſincere, that is, agreeable vnto the
will of God, and the authour which firſt expreſſed
the true doctrine of God, enclining
the hearts of men to aſſent and conſent vnto
the ſame true doctrine, to worſhip the true god
thereby, to honour and obey the ſuperiour
powers therby, to profeſſe with the heart, and
confeſſe with the tongue all one, in al worldly
dealings towards all men. That the name of
the true and euerliuing God may in truth bee
glorified: That the true and ſincere Church in
truth may be amplified, and increaſed: That
the true conſolations of Chriſt may in our
conſciences truly be multiplied, eternally to
our ſaluation, triumphing with Chriſt ouer
Satan, ſinne and hell, to reſt with him in the
ſincere ſeate of celeſtiall glorie.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                In ſpirite and truth do the true worſhippers
worſhip the father. Iohn. 4.
            Thy worde is the truth, ſanctifie them in
the truth. Iohn. 17.
            
               
God will that all men ſhoulde bee ſaued,
and come to the knowledge of the
trueth, that is, of the true doctrine of the
true God, and of the mediatour his ſonne
Ieſus Chriſt. 1. Tim. 2.
            The ſpirite of truth ſhall bring you into
all truth. Iohn. 16.
            The truth is great and ſtronger than al
things. 1. Eſd. 4
            We can do nothing againſt the truth, but
for the truth. 2. Cor. 13.
            If you remaine in the truth of my word,
you are my diſciples rightly, and my truth
ſhall deliuer you. Iohn. 8.
            Laying aſide all leaſings, let euery one
of you ſpeake the trueth vnto his neighbour.
Ephe. 4.
            The Lorde abhorreth lying lippes, but
who ſo ſpeaketh trueth ſhall bee ſafe for
euer. Pro. 10.
            Lorde who ſhall aſcende into thy hill, or
who ſhall reſt in thy holy place, euen hee
whoſe handes are innocent from harme,
whoſe heart is cleane, which hath not takē
his ſoule in vaine, nor hath not ſworne to
deceiue his neighbour. &c. Pſal. 23.
            This is our glorie onely, and in this wee
are glad as to witnes, we take our cōſcience

that we are exerciſed in the ſimplicitie and
ſinceritie of God, in this world, and not in
carnall wiſedome, but in the grace of God
&c. 2. Cor. 1.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour, is that ſhining ſonne
of ſinceritie, which rightly calleth himſelfe the
ſonne of righteouſneſſe. Sapien. the light of the
world. Iohn. 1. the way, the truth, and the life,
Iohn. 14. all whoſe wayes, as Dauid ſayth, are
mercie and truth. Pſal. 25.
            His Apoſtles, Prophets, Patriarks, Martyrs
and Confeſſors, haue preached this truth, practiſed
the ſame in life and conuerſation, & ſuffered
perſecution for the teſtimonie thereof.
            
               Iacob had this ſinceritie with him, when he
ſaid, let vs make an altar vnto the lord, bicauſe
he hath heard me in the day of my trouble, and
hath bene a companion of my iourney. Gen. 35
            
               Daniel had this ſinceritie of truth with him,
when all the wiſe men of Babylon were by Nabuchodonoſer
commanded to bee ſlaine, then
he being inſpired with the ſpirit of truth, exhorted
his ſociates to ſeeke for mercie of the Lord,
who reuealing a viſion vnto Daniel in the
night, by this aduertiſement of Daniel, the king
ſpared to execute his determined iudgement
vpon the ſayd wiſe men. Dan. 2.
            
               
When all the Diſciples of Chriſt were altogether
of one minde in praying, the holy Ghoſt
wonderfully diſcended vpō them, taught them,
comforted them, & directed them in the truth.
Act. 1. 2.
            This ſpirit of ſinceritie had the ſame Daniel
in diſprouing thoſe falſe Gods Bel and the Dragon,
and in worſhipping the true and euerliuing
God, mauger the malice of the malignant
enemies of the truth. Dan. 14.
         
         
            The .xxix. Plant,
Iuſtice.
            
               
                  Definition 
                IVſtice is one of the ſoure moſte excellent
vertues called cardinall vertues, whereout
flowe, as from out of foure pure fountaines al
the other ſprings of vertues, albeit theſe foure
called Cardinall vertues, namely, Iuſtice,
Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude, are
ſo tearmed of the Latin Erymologie Cardo,
which is in Engliſh the hindge of a doore: for
as the hindge doth catie the force of the doore
opening to and fro, and beares the ſtreſſe of
the ſame againſt all other ſtrength: ſo do theſe
foure vertues euery one in his propertie, cary,
ſupport, and beare certaine other vertues, as

it were impoſed vpon them, or rather depending
vpon their force and effect. As namely,
Cicero terming this Iuſtice the firſt Cardinal
vertue, ſayth, lib. 1. Offici. That ſhe is a
great brightneſſe and excellencie, whereof
good men are ſo called, whoſe firſt office is to
hurt no man, except he bee firſt prouoked by
iniurie. Againe, to vſe things common for
common, and thirdly priuate thinges as his
owne. But more truely and amply in his 2.
Rhetor. he ſayth, Iuſtice is an excellent qualitie
of the minde, to the profite of all men applyable,
rendring euery one their due title and
right: and her partes are theſe, Religion,
Pietie, Gratitude, Chalenge of right and
Equitie, Obſeruation, & Truth in al things
before God and man acceptable. Cicero. lib. 2
Rhetoricorum.
            
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                Bleſſed are they that hunger and thriſt
after righteouſneſſe, for they ſhall be ſatiſfied.
Mat. 5.
            The path of the righteous ſhineth, as the
light that is brighter and brighter vnto the
perfect day. &c. Pro. 4.
            There ariſeth light in darkeneſſe to thoſe
that are iuſt and vpright of heart. Be ioyful
you iuſt in the Lorde, and with continuall

memorie acknowledge his holines. Pſa. 96.
            The iuſt man ſhal flouriſh as the Palme
tree, and as the Ceder of Libanus ſhall hee
be multiplied in his ſeede. Pſal. 91.
            For righteouſneſſe ſtriue & grone thou
euen vntill death, and God ſhall ouercome
and vanquiſh thine enemies for thee. Eccl. 4.
            Iuſtice is that vertue which claimeth not
any thing properly perteining vnto others,
which giueth vnto euery one that which is
his, which neglecteth her owne cōmoditie,
equally to profite others, and according to
his will the firſt point of iuſtice perteyneth
vnto God, the ſecond to our Prince and
countrey, the third to our parent. & the iiii.
towards all men. Ambr. in Officiis.
            
            The iuſtice of the king is the peace of his
people, the defence of his Countrey, the
eaſie yoke of the people, the fortreſſe of the
nation, the ſalue of ſorrowes, the ioy of
men, the bright clearneſſe of the aire, the
calmenes of the ſea, the plentifulnes of the
lād, the ſolace of the poore, the patrimonie
of childrē: and vnto the king himſelfe this
inſtice is the verie hope of bleſſedneſſe to
come. Cypr. de 12. Abuſionibus.
            
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Almightie God the iusteſt udge ouer heauē
               
and earth, which in his iuſtice created al things
to his glorie, & vnto whoſe iudgement al things
are ſubiect, both in heauen aboue, & earth bylow,
hath left vs a notable teſtimonie of his iuſtice
mēcioned in the ſtorie of the naughtie ſeruāt
which would not forgiue the C. pēce. Mat. 8
            
               Abraham deſiring to ſeparate himſelf from
Lot his nephew, gaue him choiſe to take which
part he would, and ſo might the diſtribution bee
well delt, that the elder might deuide, and the
yonger chooſe. Gen. 13.
            
               Aſſuerus executed iuſtice duely vpon wicked
Aman, when he cauſed him to bee hanged
vpon the ſame gallowes that he cauſed to be ſet
vp for that good Mardocheus, moſt innocent.
Eſter. 7. 8.
            The men that accuſed Daniel for an offender,
were iuſtly put into the denne of the Lions,
at the king Darius his commaundement, and
they were ſcarce come downe to the bottome
of the denne, but the Lions tooke the men, and
altogether deuoured them euen to the verie
bones. Dan. 6. & 14.
            Much like true iuſtice was ſhewed vpon the
two falſe Iudges, for accuſing that godly and
chaſt Suſanna. Dan. 13.
            
               Antiochus alſo died an horrible death, being
for his crueltie iuſtly rewarded therewith

of the Lorde. 2. Mac. 9.
            
               Dauid would not receyue the altar of Arenna,
the Iebuſite, vnleſſe he had firſt rendred vnto
him a iuſt reward therefore. 2. Reg. 14.
            When Tobias heard the Kid bleat, which
was brought him, he willed them to looke that
it was not ſtolen, bycauſe he ſayd they ought not
to eat of any ſtolen thing, or of any ſtray. Tob. 2.
         
         
            The xxx. Plant,
Prudence.
            
               
                  Definition 
                PRudence or wiſedome, is the knowledge
directiue, both howe to chooſe & atchieue
thoſe things that are good, and how to eſchue
thoſe things that are euil, ſayth S. Aug. li. 1.
de lib arbit. This vertue Wiſedome (as
Ariſtotle lib. 1. Rhetor. defineth) is that vertue
of the minde, wherby we may prouide for
thoſe good graces, tending to felicitie in this
life, and for euer: and alſo whereby wee may
preuent thoſe euils tending to deſtruction in
this life and for euer. And Macrobius, hee
ſayth, wiſdome is a vertue directing al things
deuiſed in our minde, and externally enterpriſed,
according to the rule of reaſon, neither
doth ſhee any thing but that which is right,

and worthie of praiſe: and vnto her do theſe other
vertues alſo properly apperteyne: viz.
Vnderſtanding, Circumſpection, prouidence,
Docilitie, and warineſſe. But Tho. Aquinas
concludeth, that ſhee is the true and perfect
meanes whereby we are reconciled to God,
whereby wee iudge and preſcribe all things
tending to good vſe and ende in mans life, only
agreeable to God & good men. Ex be. Th.
            
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                All wiſedome commeth from the Lord
God, and with him hath it bene alwayes, &
is with him from all worldes. Eccle. 1.
            The roote of wiſedome is to feare the
Lorde, and her braunches are long life. eod.
            
            The children of wiſedome are the congregation
of the iuſt, and their generation
is delighted in obedience and loue. Eccle. 3.
            Wiſdome is better than ſtrength, and a
wiſe man excelleth him that is ſtrong. God
loueth no man but him which hath his
dwelling with wiſedome, for this is more
beautifull than the Sunne, and being compared
aboue all the courſe of the ſtarres, is
found more auncient than them al, for vnto
the light of the day aprocheth the darkſome
night: but malice ſhal not ouercome
wiſedome. Sap. 7.
            
               
A wiſe heart, and one that hath vnderſtanding,
will abſtaine from ſinnes: and in
the workes of righteouſneſſe ſhall he haue
proſperous ſucceſſe. Eccle. 6.
            If any of you lack wiſdome, let him aske
it of God, which giueth to all men plentifully,
and caſteth no man in the teeth. But
let him aske in fayth, nothing doubting,
Iames. 1.
            Poſſeſſe wiſedome, bicauſe ſhe is better
than gold, and embrace vnderſtanding, bicauſe
ſhe is more precious thā ſiluer. Pro. 16.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Chriſt Ieſus, the liuely fountaine of pure
and perfect wiſedome, euen in his childehoode,
hearing and queſtioning with thoſe Doctours in
the Temple, was for his ſingular wiſedome and
wiſe anſwers, greatly marueiled at of thoſe
doctors. Luke. 2.
            
               Paule the Apoſtle of Chriſt, was wonderfully
illuminated with the ſpirit of wiſedome and
heauenly vnderstanding, as appeareth. Actes.
16. 19. 20. 22. 23. 25.
            
               Abraham wiſely ſeparated himſelfe from
Loth, leaſt the ſheepeheards ſhould bee at diſcorde
amongſt themſelues. Gen. 13.
            He diſtributed wiſely vnto his children their
portions in his life time, leaſt after his death

they ſhoulde bee at variance amongeſt themſelues.
Gen. 25.
            
               Ioſeph wiſely admoniſhed Pharao of his
dreame, and gaue him good counſell in manie
things, Gen. 41. He wiſely counſelled his brethren.
Gen. 44.
            For other notable examples of the wiſdome
of God, wōderfully appearing in his elect. Looke
and reade. Iethro. Exod. 18. Moſes. Num. 13.
Ioſua. 21. & 8. Phinees and others. Ioſue. 22.
Dauid. 1. Reg. 17. 18. 21. 25. Solomon. 1. Reg,
3. Ezechias 4. Reg. 18. and. 2. Paral. 32. Zorobabel.
1. Eſd. 3. Tob. 4. Iudit. 8. & 11. Eſter.
4. and Daniel. 1.
         
         
            The .xxxi. Plant,
Temperance.
            
               
                  Definition. 
                TEmperance, the thirde vertue cardinall,
is the chiefe moderator and gouernour
of the motions of the inwarde man, and alſo
of the externall members of the outwarde
man, to refraine not onely from wicked and
peruerſe deſires, but alſo from the concupiſcence
of the eyes, immoderate vſe of the
tongue, vicious enormities of the bodie, and
euery other the members therof, keeping the

happy and golden meane in all things, abhorring
exceſſe, riot and intemperance of meate,
drinke, cloth, and ſuch like: whoſe partes are
baſhfulneſſe, Honeſtie, Chaſtitie, Shamefaſtneſſe,
Continencie, Humilitie, Courteſie or
Clemencie, Modeſtie, good order, Frugality,
and moderation: As Thomas of Aquina that
excellent learned doctor doth define them, properly
apperteyning vnto temperance: whoſe
properties at large I haue placed in the
next page in ſteade of teſtimonies, bycauſe
the knowledge of them is ſingular, and the effect
of them no leſſe worthie to be imitated, as
well of high as low eſtate, rich as poore, and
of the meaneſt perſon, as of the better perſonage.
            
               The teſtimomies of the partes of Temperance.
            
            
               
                  Testimonies. 
                Baſhfulneſſe is that part of Temperance
which bluſhing at the indecent ſpeech of
the tongue, or fearing that which is indecent,
refraineth her affections therefrom.
            Honeſtie is that part, wherby any perſon
embracing moderation, and diſcipline,
doeth exerciſe the ſame in obſeruing perſon,
place, and time.
            Chaſtitie deliteth her ſelfe in that integritie

and vnſpotted part of Temperance,
that as ſhe herſelfe keepeth her boundes, ſo
will ſhe by her examples mooue others to
obſerue the lawe of God and of nature.
            Continencie refrayneth the motion of
the will ſtirred vp by the aſſault of the paſſion,
that although a man ſuffer immoderate
luſtes, yet his will is not ſubdued or
vanquiſhed by euill.
            Humilitie refraineth the motion of vaine
hope, and wilfull boldneſſe.
            Curteſie or Clemencie, refrayneth deſire
of reuenge in anger or iniurie offered
or done.
            Modeſtie brideleth the motions of the
minde within, and alſo the deedes of the
outwarde man.
            Good order conſiſteth in knowing what
to do, and what not to doo, and herein to
continue firmely.
            Frugalitie, in keeping a meane touching
expences, giftes or beneficencie, that ſhee
may do that which ſufficeth, and not to ouerdo
beyond meaſure.
            Moderation in ſo vſing the ſame benefits,
which God and nature hath giuen vs, that
they may profite vs in vſe of them, and others
in beſtowing them.
            
               
               
                  Examples. 
               
Our ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus ſo tempered affections
of the bodie in himſelfe, that he refrayned
from foode in the deſert of Iudaea. 40. dayes
and fortie nightes, as a meete example of temperance,
for thoſe which either faſt with a defiled
minde, or altogither deſpiſe temperance in
diet. Mat. 4. Luke. 4.
            S. Iohn Baptiſt refrayned from delicate fare,
and onely contented himſelfe with locuſtes and
wilde home in the deſert. Math. 3.
            Our Sauiour Chriſt bearing furthermore
witneſſe of himſelfe, ſayd: Iohn Baptiſt came
neither eating bread, nor drinking wine and you
ſay he hath a diuell. Luke. 7.
            
               Helias beeing by the Angel refreſhed with
barley bread & water, walked with the ſtrength
of that bread and water, fortie dayes, and fortie
nightes, vnto the mount Oreb. 3. Reg. 19. &c.
            
            The beginning of mans life was onely contented
with breade, water, and apparell, and
a conuenient ſhade to couer his nakedneſſe.
Eccle. 29.
            When Dauid had deſired water out of the
well of Bethleem, to be brought him (tempering
his affections with rare moderation) hee woulde
not drinke, thereof afterwardes, bicauſe he had
before too much greedily deſired the ſame. 2.
Reg. 23.
            
               
Read of the temperance and moderation of
puniſhment which GOD had towardes the
wicked King Achab, bycauſe hee repented in
ſackecloth, tempering his ire (for killing of Naboth)
afterwardes ſorowing for the ſame. 3.
Reg. 21.
         
         
            The .xxxii. Plant,
Fortitude
            
               
                  Definition 
                FOrtitude the fourth and laſt cardinall vertue
(as it were quadrangle wiſe, planted
euerie one in his ſeuerall place enuironing
this Vineyarde) hath his definition as deriued
of the Latine woorde Fortis, which is,
ſtrong, and the proper Etymologie of this
word Fortitude, is as much to ſay, as ſtrēgth,
force and mightie courage of the minde, in
withſtanding euill, in defending good, and in
baliantly aduēturing againſt the troubleſome
threatnings of aduerſe fortune, with firme
truſt and confidence in God, which in reſpect
of godly life and true vertue in this life,
vtterly abhorreth and ſtriueth to vanquiſhe
all wicked pleaſures, vice, honours, riches,
enuie and ignominie, death and deſtruction,

to ſauegard and fortifie her ſelf with ſuch heauenly
vertues, that ſhe may liue for euer. And
vnto this fortitude doth Cicero aſcribe theſe
vertues properly apperteyning, namely faith
or Confidence, Pacience, mightie Courage,
Magnificencie, Conſtancie, & perſeuerance.
But this is onely allowable with God and
man, eſpecially in cryall of a right and iuſt
cauſe, in defending the truth, and depelling or
depreſſing the vnrighteous, vniuſt, and vntrue
quarels of the wicked, peruerſe, and malignant
members of Satan.
            
               
                  Teſtimonies. 
                My ſonne when thou commeſt vnto the
ſeruice of God, ſtand faſt in righteouſneſſe
and feare, & prepare thy ſoule vnto temptations.
Eccleſiaſticus. 2.
            The name of the Lord is a ſtrong defence,
vnto this fleeth the righteous, and ſhall be
ſaued. Prou. 18.
            Bicauſe thou, oh Lorde, art become
ſtrength vnto the poore, a defence for the
needie in tribulation, a hope in their miſerie,
and a ſhade from the heate. Eſay. 25.
            The Lord is my fortitude, and my hope.
Exod. 15.
            The eyes of the Lord do beholde all the
whole earth, and do giue ſtrength and courage

vnto thoſe which beleeue in him with
a perfect heart. Paral. 16.
            In the feare of the Lord is confidence
of Fortitude. Prou. 14.
            The way of the Lorde is the fortitude of
the ſimple. Prou. 10.
            The fortitude of yong men is their reioyſing
in the Lord. Prou. 20.
            The vngodly fleeth when no man purſueth
him: but the iuſt perſon as a Lyon
truſting in the Lorde, ſhall bee ſafe from
feare. Prou. 28.
            Be not afrayed (ſayth the Lorde) bicauſe
I haue redeemed thee, and called thee after
my name, thou art mine. When thou ſhalt
paſſe by the waters, I will be with thee, whē
thou walkſt in the fire, thou ſhalt not burn,
and the flame ſhall not be ſeene in thee, bicauſe
I am thy Lorde God, thy holy one of
Iſrael, thy Sauiour, &c. Eſay. 43.
            If God bee with vs, who ſhall be agaynſt
vs. Rom. 8.
            
               
                  Examples. 
                Our Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus, that fort inuincible
of perfect fortitude, both withſtood the conflicts
of Satan againſt him. Matth. and of the
Iewes, Scribes and Phariſees, which by all
meanes came to enſnare him. Mat. 16. 19. 21.

               Mar. 12. Luke. 20. and alſo with heauenly courage
of the ſpirite of truth in him, vtterly vanquiſhed
and ouercame them for our woorthie
example.
            Saint Stephen the protomartyr, otherwiſe
called the firſt witneſſe, conſtantly dying in confeſsion
of Chriſt and the truth, by grace and
fortitude in him, wrought manie maruelles,
reſiſting the Iewes in their wicked doctrine, ſuffered
grieuous death of beeing ſtoned for the
truth. Actes 6.
            
               Moyſes boldely and conſtantly ſtood before
Pharao, rebuking him, bicauſe he would not let
go the people of Iſrael. Exod. 4.
            He alſo ſaid to Ioſue which ſhould ſuceede
him: Be of good comfort, and take good courage
vnto thee, for thou ſhalt bring in this people vnder
thy correction. Deut. 31.
            
               Ioſua himſelfe with valiant courage (in the
ſeruice of God enioyned him) ſo conſtantly behaued
himſelfe, that he ſayd vnto thoſe princes
about him, go your wayes, and ſet your feet vpon
the neckes of thoſe fiue kings that withſtand the
will of the moſt higheſt. Ioſua. 10.
            For other notable examples of fortitude in
defence of the righteous and iuſt quarell of
God and his truth, looke and reade of Phinees.
Numb. 31. Caleb. Ioſua. 14. Ahud iudge

of Iſrael. Iudicum. 3. Gedeon. Iudicum. 6.
Sampſon. Iudicum. 14. Dauid. 1. Regum.
17. Eleazarus. 2. Machab. 6. The ſeuen
brethren. 2. Macha. 7. Saint Paule. Actes 11.
and others.
         
         
            The foure Arbours of amiable
amenitie within this
Vineyarde.
            
               The firſt Arbour,
Zeale to Godlineſſe.
               VVHo ſo being deſirous to view & ſuruey
this Vineyard of Vertue, hath

                     ••
                  tiſfied his bodily eyes with the beautifull

                     •
                  rāches of euery Plant, hath ſatiſfied his lon
                  
                     •
                  ing
mind with the taſt of the heauenly fruite

                     •
                  ereof, and delighteth in the ſweet digeſtion

                     •
                  ereof, vnto eternall ſaluation: Let him here

                     ••
                  uch ſafe to ſit down vnder my beames, and

                     •
                  rowd him vnder the boughes of my beati
                  
                     ••
                  de,
who being termed Zeale to godlines, do

                     ••
                  omiſe ſuch happy interteinment, & perform

                     ••
                  th bleſſednes, yt they ſhal not repēt thē which

                     ••
                  me to me: nay the lōger they tary with me,

the more ſhall they labour in loue with me 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and neuer be wearie of their well doing, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
when they thinke they haue done, they ſha
                     •
                  
newe begin againe: So that the more ofte
                     •
                  
they ſee, the more often they deſire, the oftn
                     ••
                  
they deſire, the oftner they ſhall be an hu
                     •
                  gred,
the more they hunger, the more the
                     •
                  
ſhall ſeeke to ſatiſfie, and the more that the
                     •
                  
ſatiſfie them, the more they will come to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
For the more they come to me, the better th
                     •
                  
fare. Wherefore whatſoeuer thou art, whi
                     ••
                  
after long looking, haſt liked, and in lyking 
haſt longed for the effectuall digeſtion of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
fruite of this Vineyarde. Diſdaine not he
                     •
                  
in this place to reſt after repaſt, and perſwa
                     ••
                  
thy ſelfe to be with Abraham, in the valley 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Mambrey,That is in the light of the Goſpel. ſitting in the doore of the tent 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the verie heate of the day: and that by rep
                     •
                  ſing thy delectation in this vertuous life, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
by his grace will appeare vnto thee, as 
                     〈◊〉
                  
than appeared vnto Abraham. Gen. 18. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
perſwade thy ſelfe, whiles thus thou re
                     ••
                  
thy ſelfe with me, (that as Iacob reſted hi
                     •
                  
ſelf in Aram after the Sunne was ſet) ſo ſh
                     ••
                  
thou not gather ſtones, but feathers of dow
                     ••
                  
to lay vnder thy heade, if thou ſleepeſt in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
place: and as hee ſawe in his dreame a ladd
                     ••
                  
reaching to the heauens, ſo ſhalt thou 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
thy ſelfe to be in heauen, euen whileſt thou yet
dwelleſt vpon earth. Gen. 28. Be alſo ſurely
perſwaded in thy ſelfe, that reſting with this
Seale to godlineſſe, thou art not ſleeping with
Samuel in the temple of the Lord, but waking

                     •
                  nd the readier for the Lorde, when hee ſhall

                     •
                  all thee to what ende and purpoſe he will.

                     •
                  . Reg. 3. To be ſhort, thou ſhalt not ſeeme to

                     〈◊〉
                   exerciſed in a Vineyarde of vanitie, but of
ſuch vertue, that Dauids houſe of Ceder trees
was not comparable to it. Solomons gorge
                  
                     •
                  us
dwelling places of pleaſure, nor yet the

                     〈◊〉
                   winged Chariot of Elias were more de
                  
                     •
                  ectable
for thy ſoules health in his life, and

                     〈◊〉
                   the life to come eternall.
            
            
               The ſecond Arbour,
Societie of good men.
               VVHileſt thou art yet plucking a cluſter
of grapes from this plant, here
there taking thy pleaſure in another place,

                     〈◊〉
                   repleniſh thy longing minde with delight
                  
                     ••
                  me
and pleaſant fruite, digeſting the ſame

                     〈◊〉
                   full: Come hither yet one ſteppe further vn
                  
                     ••
                  
me, which am called the ſecond Arbor, and

                     •
                  eſt thee nowe in the Societie of good men,
                  
For be ſure, thou haſt neither plowed in ſtony
ground, walked amongeſt weedes, beaten the
buſie waues, gathered Caterpillers for good
fruit, eaten ſowre grapes, nor taſted dregs &
wine lees, in ſtead of comfortable Muſcadell :
But thou haſt beſtowed thy labour in the land
which bringeth foorth good fruite, thou haſt
with the Bee borhe away honie out of ſweete
and fragrant flowers: thou haſt ſayled in the
portes of ſafetie, brought home ſounde fruite,
taſted of the wine of gladnes, and ſatiſfied thy
mind with cordial comfort in the companie of
men, not of bruite beaſts, and not of men, but
of good men, not onely of good men, but of
Angels, and not onely of Angels, but of the
Almightie, whoſe miniſters they are for thy
welfare & ſaluation, to accompanie thee vnto
the reſting place of eternal ioy & bleſſedneſſe.
And as Laban had verte ſmal ſtore of worldly
ſubſtance before Iacob came vnto him, and by
his companying with him was made riche,
Gen. 30. So thou which ſhalt imitate the vertuous
examples of theſe good and godly men,
dayly accōpanying, that is to ſay, meditating
and practiſing their vertues in life & conuerſation,
thou ſhalt be rich in the grace & fauor of
God for euer. Yea in often vſing the counſels
of theſe, thou ſhalt with Tobias hee ſure to

haue alwayes as gueſtes with thee ſuch men
as feare God. Tob. 24. Thou ſhalt thus conuerſant,
as Dauid ſayeth, bee holy with thoſe
that are holy, and innocent with thoſe that are
innocent, Pſal. 17. Yea thou ſhalt by companie
and conference with theſe good neighbors
dwelling in the middeſt of the vngodly, as
S. Iſydore ſaith, lib. 2. ſoliloq. glorifie God,
edifie thy neighbor, & damnifie thine enimie.
To conclude, whileſt thou as Peter did, remaineſt.
Mat. 26 firme in conformitie of mind
and maners with theſe Apoſtles, thou art in
the right way, and art eſtabliſhed in ſafetie,
but beware thou haſt no ſocietie with the chief
prieſts, as Pope, tyrant, hypocrite, infidel, nor
irreligious perſons which denie the Lorde of
hoſtes the giuer of ſaluation only. Thus with
Paule ſhalt thou paſſe the ſtormie rage of this
worlde, and all thoſe vnder thy charge ſafely
vnto the port of ioyes and bleſſedneſſe perpetuall.
Actes. 27.
            
            
               The third Arbour,
Obſeruation of the Sabaoth.
               AFter thou haſt laboured thus in the
Lordes Vineyarde with continual companie,
counſell, and comforte of the elect:

it ſhall behoue thee to call to minde, what our
Sauiour by the mouth of his ſeruant Moyſes
commanded ſhoulde be eſtabliſed for a peculiar
law amongſt the children of God, namely,
That thou ſhalt keepe holy the Sabboth
day. Which keeping holy of the Sabaoth, for
aſmuch as he himſelf firſt obſerued for our example,
when after his ſixe dayes workes hee
reſted the ſeuenth day and hallowed it, we
muſt therefore ſo conſtrue this reſt, and ſo accompliſh
the ſame in our life & conuerſation,
that in reſting from labour, we giue no liberty
to idleneſſe, vaine cogitations, vaine ſpeeche,
nor vaine deedes, ſo reſting as though we neuer
ceaſed to turmoyle, both bodie in vnquietneſſe,
and ſoule in deſolation. For what profiteth
this Sabothes reſt vnto the bodie, with
pampering her ſelfe in carnall pleaſures putting
on gorgeous apparell, wallowing in all
kinde of wicked ſenſualitie, caring not for the
affliction of the poore conſcience, which ſtarueth
for the foode of ſaluation, dieth naked in
her ſinnes, and ſinneth in her nakedneſſe of all
vertue, goodneſſe, grace and godlineſſe? For
as the diuine prouidence of the creator of all
creatures, ordeyned them a time of being: So
hath he determined an ende for the ſame: and
as the Sabboth is the reſting day after working

dayes: ſo is it a figure of the eternal reſt,
either in ioyes perpetuall for thoſe that liue
wel here, or in paines perpetual for thoſe that
liue wickedly heere. Wherefore who ſo will
rightly prouide for the reſt of ioyes eternal, let
him with the children of Iſrael in the vi. daies
of this life time, gather Manna in the deſert
of this worlde. Exod. 16. Let them ſo fructifie
in good examples of godly vertue, that they
may be readily prepared themſelues, and prepare
others alſo to that bleſſed reſt But let vs
take heed of gathering wood, that is to ſay, of
binding one ſinne to another in this tranſitory
Sabaoth, for as the man that ſo did gather
wood was ſtoned to death. Deut. 5. Num. 15.
ſo will God bee auenged of thoſe which miſpend
the Sabaoth day, according as it ſhall
ſeeme good vnto him. Wherefore, let vs with
the Apoſtles eſpecially beſtow the Sabaoth
as moſt fit and conuenient in hearing & learning
the word, wil, and law of God. Act. 13.
And while we liue in the wilderneſſe of this
world, let vs ſo frame our liues therafter, that
wee may at al times ſeeke the glorie of God,
our ſoules health, and the common comfort
and commoditie of our brethren, that we may
reſt with the Lorde of the Sabaoth in his celeſtial
kingdome.
            
            
               
               The fourth and laſt Arbour,
Immortalitie.
               NOwe that wee haue thus laboured in the
Lords Vineyard, and reſted in due obſeruation
of this appointed Sabaoth: let vs laſtly
contemplate the ende of our labour, & reward
of our dutiful performed paines in this Vineyard
of the Lord. For whether we labour or
no, yet we liue, as wee liue we die, as we die
we reſt till the iudgement day, and as we ſhal
then be iudged, ſo shall we receiue the iuſt deſerued
reward, either for painfull true trauell,
the triumphant crowne of immortality, either
elſe for ſlouthful & diſſembling negligence, the
troubleſome tormentes of neuer dying death.
For ſo hath the Lord of the Vineyarde determined
with all fleſh from the firſt creation of
the world. That we ſhal (as S. Paule ſaith, 2.
Cor. 5.) be al openly manifeſted before the tribunal
ſeat of Chriſt, there to receiue euery man
his owne workes that he hath done in his bodie,
whether it be good or euil. Wherefore as
it is ſaid, Eccle 15. God from the beginning
hath created man, & left him in the power of
his determination: he hath alſo enioyned him
to walke in his commandementes, and keepe

his precepts, if thou wilt keepe his commandements,
they ſhall preſerue thee, &c. Againe
he ſayth, The eyes of the Lord are ouer thē
that feare him, and he ſhal acknowledge euery
worke that man doth. Yea he hath promiſed
that the ſoules of the righteous are alreadie
in the hands of God, after their reſt in
the graue, and no torment of death ſhal touch
them. Sapi. 3. But as for the vngodly they ſhal
be caſt into vtter darkneſſe, where ſhalbe weeping
and gnaſhing of teeth. Mat 22. and ſhall
become the foode of fire vnquenchable. Eſay 9.
Wherefore whiles we liue in this mortalitie
of the fleſh, let vs ſo labour in al vertuous and
godly conuerſation, that we may find reſt vnto
our ſoules for euer in the Lord. To this ende,
let vs run the race of mortalitie, that we may
receiue the reward layde vp in ſtore for vs, by
the Lord and giuer of life, euen the incorruptible
crowne of immortalitie: that as true labourers
we may bee able to ſtande before the
face of our workemaiſter, Lorde, and ouerſeer
Chriſt Ieſus, & receiue euery one according
to his dayes labour. Mat. 20 That ſo ſtill as
profitable ſeruants we may be found working
when our maiſter ſhall come. Mar. 13. That
hauing on our wedding garment, wee may
watchfully wayte for the cōming of the bridegrome▪
                  
                  Mat▪
                   22. And ſo finally with the fiue
wiſe virgins attendant with lamps furniſhed
with oyle, we may be interteined with Chriſt
Ieſus, the ſonne of the eternal & euerliuing
God that immaculate lambe, almightie Meſſias,
the firſt and the laſt, Apoc. 22. when hee
ſhal enter into the new and heauenly Ieruſalem
to giue freely to thoſe that chirſt, the water
of life, and liuely fruite of his Vine in the
kingdome of his father. To whom, with the
father and the holy ghoſt, three perſons and
one God of incomprehenſible and eternall
Maieſtie, be all honour, glory, power, dominion
and prayſe, for euer and euer worlde without
ende. Amen.
            
         
         
            ¶A Meditation for true fructifying
in the Church of God, the true
Vineyard of Vertue, and for the
proſperous preſeruation
of the ſame.
            ALmightie, true, and euerliuing God,
which as the heauenly huſbandman compareſt
thy kingdome vnto a certaine man
which planted a vineyard,Mat. 20. went forth early to
hire labourers, & made couenant with thē. &c.

For as much as from the firſt day of the
worldes creation, thou haſt by thy diuine prouidence,
preordinated, created, and eſtabliſhed
thee a choſen Church, thy peculier people, as
the true planted Vineyarde: and by thy word
and holy Goſpel, haſt hired thy Patriakes,
Prophetes and Apoſtles, as the firſt true labourers
therein, by couenant of eternall ſaluation:
And from time to time alſo, haſt ſo called
and ſent the Nations of the earth into thy
Church and Vineyarde, when they ſtood idle,
without knowledge of thee, and of their ſaluation:
So we in England, amongſt others,
firſt called,Mat. 20. ſent in, and working with them at
thy gracious good pleaſure, haue yet afterwardes
with others beene founde idle without
at the thirde houre: And againe once more
laſtly called and ſent in at the ſixth houre, by
thy inſpeakeable prouidence, mercie and
grace, nowe ſtill continually labouring in the
ſame thy true Church and Vineyarde of thy
Goſpel and holy lawes, to the great admiration,
and woorthie imitation of thoſe which
at the eleuenth houre, by thee are to be called,
hired and ſent in, do with all humilitie and
heartie affection, duely and dutifully acknowledge
thy louing mercies and gracious goodneſſe
moſt abundantly thus beſtowed vppon

vs: And therefore moſt iuſtly are bounden by
all good meanes to become thankefull vnto
thee for the ſame. Wherefore thou▪ oh moſt
gracious God, thou louing Lord, and heauenly
huſbandman, our onely ſtay, ſupporter, and
comforter, graft vs in thee, ſtrength vs with
thy helpe, and make vs fruitfull branches of
thee the moſt flouriſhing vine in all heauenly
felicitie. Looke downe we beſeech thee from
the throne of thy grace, and with thy gladſom
countenance and louing fauour, beholde the
ſtate of thy choſen holy Church amongeſt vs.
viſite this thy Vineyarde with thy continuall
benediction, which thou haſt eftſoones tranſpoſed
out of Egypt. Thou haſt long ſince caſt
out the Gentiles from amongſt vs,Pſal. 79. and haſt
hitherto, and ſtil doſt eſtabliſh the ſame. Thou
planteſt the rootes of thy vines, & they ſpread
farre and neare. The ſhadow of them hath couered
the hilles, and the braunches haue ſpred
ouer the Ceders of the Lord. Vouchſafe (oh
God) we humbly beſeech thee, to heare our
prayers, and graunt our petitions, that wee
make vnto thee in the name of thy beloued
ſonne our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, Continue ſtill
thy louing kindeneſſe vnto vs. Bleſſe and preſerue
our moſt deare ſoueraine Ladie and gracious
Queene Elizabeth, with long life, and

increaſe of heauenly felicitie vpon earth. Proſper
and preſerue all her moſt honourable
Councellers, Nobles, Biſhops, paſtors, teachers,
and preachers, with all and euery other
member of thy true Church, and Vineyarde
in theſe our Countreyes. Chaſe away, vanquiſh
and ouercome all our enemies. Beate
backe, and abandon the malice of the Romiſh
Bore from the borders of thy vineyarde, and
all other enmyties of Satan and his ſeruants
utterly expell, amoue from vs, and vanquiſh
for vs, we beſeech thee, for the glorie of
thy holy names ſake, and for thy ſonnes ſake
our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Alſo as chriſtian charitie
bindeth vs, wee pray thee of thy great
mercies, to illuminate, helpe, and aſſiſt the
weake labours of ſuche as in forraine Countreys
are willing, but want help and comfort
to be called into thy Vineyarde. Make them
fruitfull plantes of thy grace, repleniſh them
with thy ſpirite of truth, and bleſſe them with
thy bleſſings alſo: that we with them and they
with vs, ſo manie as thou wilt call to ſaluation
in this earthly Vineyard, may be gratious
operation of thy holy Ghoſt, be made perfect
laborers in thy ſight, able to endure not only yt
very heat of the day,Mat. 20. but alſo euē to the laſt minute
of daylight: ſo ſhal thy ſeruāts ſet forth thy

wonderfull workes vnto the heathen: ſo ſhall
thy Vineyarde flouriſh in the Nations vpon
earth. And ſo ſhal thy choſen Church and congregation,
increaſing, fructifying, and triumphing
vnder thee her chiefe paſtor, guide, and
gouernour (receyuing with all thy elect thy
promiſed couenant of eternal ſaluation)
render all due honour, glorie and
praiſe vnto thee, now henceforth,
and for euer, world
without ende
            Amen.
            
               As the braunch can beare no fruite of himſelfe
except hee abide in the vine: ſo neyther can
you bring foorth fruite (ſayth our ſauiour
Chriſt) except you abide in me.
               
                  Iohn. 15.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧Imprinted in London by
Thomas Dawſon, dwelling at
the three Cranes in the
Vinetree.
            
         
      
   