
      
         
            
            
            A
BLOVV FOR
THE POPE:
Or,
A Discourse had in S. GILES
Church in Elgen of Murray, at a Conference
with certaine Papists, plainely
prouing, That PETER was neuer
Head of the Church.
            
            With a short Register of all the Attempts
and Murthers vpon Kings and Princes in our time,
by the persuasion of the Iesuits.
            REVEL: 14. 8.
            And there followed another Angell, saying, It is fallen, It is
fallen, Babylon the great Citie, for shee made all Nations to
drinke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
            Hieronymus.
            Heretici conuicti ad contentiones prosiliunt.
            August: de Ciuit: lib. 14. cap. 20.
            Non Theologi sed Cynici mores, conuitiari, & allatrare.
            LONDON,
Printed by G. Eld for Roger Iackson,
neere the Conduit in Fleetstreet,
1615.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable
Lord, IAMES, Lord
HAYES, Maister of his Maiesties
great Wardrobe.
            
               THe Spirit speaketh euidently,1. Ti. 4. 1.
That in the Later dayes
some shall depart from the
Faith, and shall giue heede
vnto Spirits of Error, and
Doctrines of Deuils. And surely, that
Prophesie, if at any time, is truly accomplished
in these our daies, on whom the ends
of the World are come: For Blindnesse and
Error is so vniuersally spread, like palpable
darkenesse, ouer the hearts almost of all,Esa. 1. 9.
that vnlesse the Lord had reserued vnto
vs euen a small Remnant, wee should haue
beene as Sodome, and should haue beene like
vnto Gomorrha. The sinnes of the People,
and negligence, with ignorance of Pastors,Ier. 3. 12. 15. Isay 59▪
               
are the cause hereof: for the hand of the

Lord is not shortened, that it cannot saue,
but our Sinnes haue diuided betwixt him
and vs, and hath made him hide his face,
that he should not heare. The iniquities
of the People haue commonly their beginnings
from their Teachers: Therefore
Christ,Math. 21. 12. when hee was to cure the disease
of sinfull Ierusalem, entreth first into the
Church, there to purge the impietie of the
Priests, which polluted with Couetousnesse
&c. the Sanctuarie of the Lord: Like
vnto a good Physitian, who searcheth the
Maladie from the roote. For this cause
are they styled Salt,Math. 5. 13. Watchmen, Light,
Trumpetters,Ier. 6. 17. Physitians, Souldiers; and
that they,Ez
                     •
                  . 33. 2. in time, and out of time, bee
able to Teach,Isa. 37. 8. Exhort, Rebuke, Improue,
with all Patience and Doctrine:2. Tim. 2. for who
conuerts a sinner from the error of his life,Iac. 5. 20.
saues him from Death, and couers the
multitude of Sinnes.Mat. 18. 15. The Church is a
Building,1. Cor. 3. 9. and Preachers Builders▪ as
the Church of Ierusalem was reared by
the People with the Sword in the one
Hand,Neb. 4. 17. 18. and Trowell in the other, so must
they with wholesome and sound Doctrine
teach and resist the Gainesayers: and if euer
there was need, now it is, when out of

that bottomlesse Pit there are risen swarms
of Locusts,Reu. 9. 2, 3 ouer-couering the face of the
Earth,Reu. 18. 3. making the People drunke with the
Wine of their Fornication and Idolatrie,
who haue taught the world,4. Sa. 2. 15. with the sonnes
of Elie, to take raw flesh, and sow Tares
among the Wheat.Luc. 24. 19. Now (I say) it is time
to be powerfull in deede and word before
God and the whole People: for he that will
doe and say,Math. 5. 19. shall be called great in the
Kingdome of Heauen. Ecclesia est Ciuitas
(saith one) propter Populi collectionem,
sponsa prepter dilectionem, Ouis
propter mansuetudinem, Ciuitas est, vigilate
ad concordiam: Ouis est, intendite
pastui, sponsa studere ornatui. Pastors
are Woers in Christs place, beseeching the
World to be reconciled vnto God. Wee
haue therefore to pray to the Lord of the
Haruest,Math. 9. 38. That he would thrust out faithfull
Labourers into his Haruest, in this
great Desolation, and time of Corruption,
when Antichrist hath setled his Throne in
so manie hearts, whome the Lord shall in
the end confound with the breath of his
Nosthrils.2. Thess. 2. 8. Wee must not be partakers of
others sinnes,Isa. 11. 4. in betraying the Truth with
silence, but Foxes being driuen away, let

the Bed of the Church be watched by 70.
of Salomons Worthies: Of the which, as
I am not fit to be named one of the meanest,
so haue I put in my Mite (for lacke
of a Talent) and snrowd me vnder your
Lordships wings, against all Rabzechez
Rayling:1. Reg. 1. 22. as Salomon with Nathans Conuoy
and helpe;2. Reg. 4. 13. the Shunamite by Elisha
his offer,Ion. 4. 6. were shadowed as with Ionas
Gourd; so doe I, induced by your Lordships
rare and singular vertues, cast my
selfe vnder the Mantle of Protection.
Kings haue waded in this Matter: Of his
Maiestie,The Oath of Allegeance. God willing, there will be more
apt occasion to speake hereafter. But it is
memorable in the most mightie Edward
the sixt of good memorie; to whome, on the
day of Coronation, when three Swords
were presented (signes of the Kingdomes
of England, France, and Ireland) craued
the fourth to be brought; which was (after
enquirie) the Booke of the holy Scripture,
the Sword of the Spirit: Which did also,
notwithstanding his tender yeares (for he
died at sixteene yeares of age) compile,Obiit 1553. 6. Iulii. amongst
other Treatises, a Comedie of this
Babylonicall Whore. Accept (Right Honorable)
this first of these Heads belonging

to this matter: and so I humbly and heartily
commend your Lordship to the grace of
God, which is able to build your L. further,
and giue you an Inheritance among them
which are sanctified by the Bloud of Iesus
Christ: in whose mercie I commit your
Lordship. Ianuar. 26. Anno 1615.
            
               Your Honors in
all humble dutie,
BARTHOL: ROBERTSON,
Minister of Gods Word.
            
         
         
            
            Simonis Rosarij Antithesis
15. Christi & Antichristi
Anno 1558.
            ECce tibi Lector vani ludibria Papae
            a Pedibus Reges quem iuvat esse suis.
            Qui tribuendus erat Christe praesumit honorem
            iactitat & sancti, se caput esse gregis.
            Dic mihi quaeso Biceps,Dist. 19. fietne Ecclesia monstrū?
            impie qua quaeso, talia fronte refers?
            Vah; nequit esse Biceps diuina Ecclesia? Christus
            qui caput est vnum; Papa quid ergo? Lupus.
            Huic caput est Christus sancti quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Pastor ouilis
            atque suo teneras, numine pascit oues.
            Attamen ille suis immensum territat Orbem
            Legibus, & Populi, subiicit Arte Duces.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST ARTICLE:
            That Peter was neuer
Head of the Church.
            
               THe vniuersall Church,1. Tim. 3. 1 Cant. 1. as it
is the Citie and Spouse of
the liuing God; so one
part there of Triumphant,
is the Companie of the
Blessed ones in Heauen, who had runne
their Race here,1. Pet. 1. 9. kept the Faith, and got
the end thereof, euen the Saluation of
their Soules: The other part is the Societie
of Mankind,Rom. 12. 3. knowne to God, renewed
in the Spirit of their Mind,Act. 15. 9. purified
by Faith,Ioh. 15. 3. waiting the comming of
the Lord Iesus to their Immortalitie. Of
this secundarie part, it is controuerted
betwixt Vs and the Enemies of the
Truth, who should be the Head thereof;
Whether solely and onely Iesus

Christ her Husband, who neyther can
admit, nor will allow, of Spirituall Fornication,
imparting Vitall and Heauenly
Life,Ioh. 14. 6. Light, Sence, and Motion
thereto.Col. 3. 4. Or whether there bee another
Head besides Christ: so that the
Church, Monster-like, hath two Heads
to one Bodie.
            Wee,Ephes. 4. 16. out of Paule, affirme, Christ to
be the onely true Head of his Church:
who vseth this Demonstration; Hee
by whom all the Bodie being coupled
and knit together by euerie ioynt, for
the Furniture thereof (according to
the effectuall power which is in the
measure of euerie part) receiueth encrease
of the Bodie vnto the edifying
of it selfe in loue, This same is, and
onely can be, Head. But so it is, that
Christ our Sauiour is the same, and
none euer can take vpon them iustly
so to doe to the Church, which is
the Bodie, Ergo &c. Yet the Aduersaries
to the Veritie contend, That
the Bishop of Rome, whome they
call Pope, should bee added vnto
Christ, to bee Head of the Church;
leaning vnto this, as to the speciall

Pillar and Ground they build vpon,
            
               Peter was the Head of the Church,
               The Pope is Peters Successor,
               Ergo
               The Pope is the Head of the Church.
            
            To the intent the whole Matter may
be the more cleare and euident, and
that a perfect Answere may be had to
the alledged Argument, these Heads in
particular are to be treated and discussed
plainely; viz.
            
            
               1 Peter was neuer Head of the Church.
               2 Peter was neuer Bishop of Rome, nor
yet in Rome.
               3 The Pope is not Peters Successor, nor
could succeed to him.
               4 The Pope is not Head of the Church,
nor Christs Vicar.
               5 The Pope is the verie Antichrist.
            
            First then, no man can denie, but if
Peter had beene constituted and ordained
Head of the Church, the rest of
the Apostles would or should haue
knowne it: For it stood them greatly

vpon, to vnderstand to whom they
should haue recourse in dangers, as to
their Commaunder, and vnto whom
they should giue obedience: to whom
also they should render an account of al
their proceedings, least they should
wander, bestowing their endeuours (as
it would appeare) vnprofitably, not gouerned
by any President, who should
either allow or disallow of their trauels
in their Apostle ship, &c. But so it is, that
they neuer acknowledged Peter Head
of the Church, nor of any of the Apostles,
much lesse of them all.
            Yea Christ, the wisdome of the Father,
in whom the Godhead dwelleth
bodily,Luke 11. 49. and in whom are the treasures of
knowledge and vnderstanding, leaueth
no place to the vaine Curiosity and foolish
inuentions of man, a little before
his death, as it were taking his farewell
and good night of them: for then wee
attend the last will and wordes of our
friendes most, they take deepest impression
in our mindes and memories, how
much the more aduisedly and deliberately
they are spoken, as it were, by the
heart, with great waight, not onely because

the time is short and imminent
certainty of death, (for Christ knew wel
his houre) but also for that men keepe
most eagerly that, whereof they haue
no long expectation of endurance and
continuance. Christ, I say, the night
before his death, after Supper, recommended
humility in his owne example
to his Apostles, not to be lookt on only,Iohn 13. 15.
but followed,Ibid. 17. did wash their feete: and
to signifie with due intimation, that nothing
in that whole action did come,
but of his prouident foresight & knowledge,
whereto he was priuy; yea, and
the Searcher of hearts did pry into the
Closet of Iudas Treason,Ibid. 18▪ 19. which Peter,
when Iudas was taxed for it, did desire
to know by the meanes of Iohn, who
leaned on Iudas breast: If he had been
Head, it was more competent in his own
person to haue demaunded it.
            And for that they should be vnwelcome
vnto the world, hee armes them
with constancy and patience against the
ignominie and shame of their future
crosses,Ibid. 31. 32. with promises of sending the
Comforter and other some heauenly instructions:
yea it was so farre from Iesus
               
mind & intention, to ordaine Peter head
of his Church, or of the rest of his Apostles,
that hee before them all and in Peters
owne presence perticularly foretells
his deniall,Ibid. 37. 38 if this was that Champion
(not to derogate to the Saint of God)
that was to be placed in primacie aboue
the rest, iudge yee? For when could Iesus
haue more opportune time, or the
Disciples better or quieter occasion
to declare and heare a Superior appointed
ouer them, then now, when
hee should fore-speake his defection
to him, and his Apostacie who so arrogantly
relied vpon humane strength
and fortitude; beside that lately he had
beene rebuked in the highest degree, by
Christ in calling him Sathan, for apparantly
Christ might haue forborne and
tolerated the future head of the Church,
and more mildly and softly entreated
him, as in these and such like termes.
Peter thy lapse wil procure thee to bee
lowest of all, because it will bee the
greatest of all, yet I will after aduance
and promote thee to bee highest and
head of all.
            Now hee was checked for intruding

himself into the ciuil Magistrates office,
who if he had beene to bee surrogate in
Christs office might haue beene borne
with,Ihon 18. 11. in some degree, yet so much as in
him was, hee hindred the mistery of our
saluation; At all these times was good
opportunity to conciliate to Peter in
so open audience and famous places,
both of the disciples and men without,
authority and credit, if it had stood with
Christs purpose to haue exalted and promoted
Peter to the dignity of beeing
head ouer his people and Church.
            But which is of greater moment, it
may be, Iesus would conceale and keepe
secret to himselfe the dispensation of
that charge vntill after his passion, or
then keepe it in his own person, not willing
to make any participant of the
same, vntill the time appointed in his
good pleasure thereafter: yet so it is, Peter
is heauily vpbraided after the Resurrection,
as 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Iohn 21. 22. a busie body in other
mens affaires.
            In that reasoning,Ioh. 14. 5 8. that Christ had
with the Disciples, premonishing them
that he was going and departing from
them, and with Thomas, pretending his

ignorance of the way hee should take;
if any, or Peter himselfe should haue
beene substituted in Christs roome, was
it not now? When so familiarly hee disputed
with Thomas,
               Ibid. 8. 9. I will not say, but
euen then he did answere to farre harder
and difficult questions; as the Vnitie
of the persons in one Deitie, and if
he should delay, and continue the deliuery
of his mind in that point, would he
not thinke you, once without ambiguity
and equiuocation, both euidentlie
and manifestlie thereafter haue declared
the matter?
            Yea,Ibid. 23. 24. 
               Iudas Lebbeus receiued a perfect
resolution of his demaund, in the oeconomy
and distribution in the matters of
mans Saluation, which was to some manifested,
to others hid: but of this transcendent
excellencie there is neuer a
whisper, and no maruaile, for he was to
reserue that point to himselfe vncommunicable,
not willing to diminish and
lessen the same, by diuoluing that function
to another, or though he had bin
weary (if so I may say) to beare that
burthen himselfe, as not of sufficient
power and abilitie to discharge it, to

the will of all his mysticall members,
which did receiue spirituall Sappe and
Iuyce of him, who is the roote, in the
which his Church is engrafted, by
a true, liuely, and sauing Faith.Rom. 12. And into
whom the Church, after a heauenly
and vnspeakeable manner (yet truely)
is vnited and encorporated, and so become
one body with him,Rom. 17. 
               Flesh of his
flesh, and bones of his bones.
            
            And we know it to be accustomably
vsed (for so did Moses to Iosuah at the
Lords owne direction, and Dauid to Salomon,
&c.) to establish the Successor in
the second roome, when one is eyther
to dimit, or giue signification of the
succedent, to preuent occasions of strife
and debate which might arise, and are
commonly bred for degrees of preferment;
but Christ remits and sends them
to no mans Soueraignty, but as it were,
manumits them, and of Seruants, chuseth
them his free friends, and as friends
haue most things common, cheefelie,
wils, councels and minds, so saith hee:
All that I haue heard from my Father, I
haue declared vnto you; but when said
he, either first or last, that Peter was

Head, or should be head of the Church,
which Christ knew to be immortall, and
Peter then mortall, which Christ told
him thereafter, and the manner of his
violent death. And that a man, no not
all the men in the world can viuifie or
quicken themselues: it is then farre off
that one can viuifie another. But wee,
when wee were dead in trespasses and
sinnes, are quickned together, in, with,
and by Christ, by whose Grace wee are
saued: and surely neither Peter nor any
of the Apostles, can transfuse or deriue
any of the spirituall Graces one to another,
in such sort as Christ by his Spirit,
saue onely, as all the disposers of the ministers
of God doe, by the liuely preaching
of the word, &c.
            Therefore if it had been Christs contentment
to haue vouchsafed that prerogatiue
vpon Peter, when that controuersie
anent Superioritie did arise; surely
he would not haue passed it without
Decision, he is not the God of Debate,
but will haue all things done in order,
for hee would haue this scrupple taken
out of the way, seeing them all as vpon
a stumbling block rush vpon it; A little

before in their gazing vpon the stately
building of the Temple and princely
Fabrick of that magnificent materiall
Church,Act. 1. and as they did after the resurrection
dreame of the restitution of the
Crowne and commonwealth from the
vnnaturall tyrannie of the Romanes to
whom they were Tributaries (for now
the Scepter had departed, and the lawgiuer
from betwixt Iuda his Feete) with
close mouth, neither than nor now did
he passe ouer, neither the matter & purpose
it selfe, neither themselues vnreproued,Mar 13.
but forespake the ruine & sacking
of the Towne of Ierusalem,Mat. 23. thereby
taking occasion to Prophesie the
consummation of the whol world,Luc. 21. with
the diuers Incidents at that period of
time, when it should happen, as in that
his Sermon most euidently shewes it
selfe. But in that so high a Question, so
earnestly tossed among thē nothing, the
world and Ierusalem both shall perish,
and they shall wax old as doth a garment
and as a vesture shall they bee folden
vp, and in Ierusalem (as was then
foretold) is not a stone left vpon a stone,
but the Church endureth for euer, and

such an euerlasting and eternall head
should it haue, which Peter in no wise
could bee. This was I say the meetest
time for remouing of the doubs, yet our
Sauiour did not command to acknowledge
Peter for head, which without all
contradiction he would haue done if he
had appointed him chiefe and principall
ouer the rest, if so it had beene
his intention, that the other Apostles
should haue acknowledged Peter for
their Lord and Master. Yet so it is that
flat contrarily he deliuers and giues his
Decree and Sentence, that there should
be no principalitie nor primacie among
them, but the greatest as the smallest,
&c. For so saith he, the Kings of the Nations
doe raigne, &c. but so it shall not
be among you. In the which words he
doth not onely recall them from such
gouernment and regencie as is amongst
the Gentils or Nations, but also hee
disswades and dehorts them from all
manner of Primacie; for Christ answered
to no other interrogation heere, but
such as they propounded; but they did
not enquire of the gouernment and
Lordsh., of the kings of nations, for what

was that forme of Regiment appertaining
or belōging to them, out of a primacy
which euery one of them affected
among themselues, and vnto the which
they would haue climbed, for they did
chide among themselues, and were diuided,
as it is said there: And forsooth
if any might haue looked for a high
place and promotion,Mat. 20, 20. the sonnes of Zebedeus,
Iames and Iohn,
               Mar. 10. 35. (Christs Cozens
concerning the flesh) wherevpon they
did ground their petition by appearance.
But there is no acceptation of
persons with God. Their mother as
meaning to finde greatest fauour both
in regard of her kindred with the Virgine
Mary Christs Mother, as also for
her Sexe and humble behauiour, but all
their suites were cast ouer barre, and
they simply denied for the causes there
alledged, which are not necessary here
to repeat, and besides those reasons
there set downe, they should haue remembred
that Christ before had closed
their mouth from such a subiect,Mar. 9. 33. and
therefore taught them,Iuc. 9. 46. that their desire
proceeded from ignorance and obiuion.
            
               
But it would seem Peter should haue
his ordination, if not immediatly from
Christ, in the daies of his Flesh, yet by
the authoritie of the rest of the Apostles,
who had receiued the holy Spirit
on the Pentecost in great aboundance,
but they neuer acknowledged
such place in Peter, whose preheminence
(if any had been) they would not
haue neglected;Act. 8. 14. yet so it is they tooke
vpon them boldnes to send both Peter
and Iohn from Ierusalem to the Samaritans,
whom they heard to haue receiued
the word of God, for whom also the
rest did pray and giue imposition of
hands. Now he who sends and directs
another is aboue him that is sent, else
how dare he vsurpe that title and right
as to command, either how can he look
for obedience, or perfecting any point
of dutie at the hands of him who is
sent if hee be not subiect to the senders
command & will, for it is not said the Apostles
requested, or entreated, or besought
Peter, but that they sent the other
Apostles, hauing, from their meeting
and present assembly enioined to
Peter and his Colleague Iohn, equall

with him in that charge, to vndertake
that iourney, for the benefit of the Samarirans.
If euer at any time, surely
heere, Peter might haue stood vpon his
estimation, and might haue reiected
their ordinance as arrogant and presumptuous
in extending their power
too much, if he had beene head of the
Church.
            It may be that Peter as hee was euer
very willing and prone to vndertake,
so heere hee would yeeld to his Brethrens
desire, but who can excuse the
Apostles; yea and the other Brethren
which were of Iudea, which could not
haue a like place and authoritie with
the Disciples of Christ, in many and divers
respects, which are not here to be
reckoned,Act. 11. 1. 2. 3. to haue accused and caused
Peter to giue a reason of his conuersation
and Doctrine among the vncircumcized,
in that he had entered vnto them
and eater with them after the receipt
of the word of God, if hee had been
constituted head of the Church, either
in Christs time here vpon earth, or yet
after his resurrection, by Christ or his
Apostles or by any other means whatsoeuer

remarkeable, who can say, but
that the Apostles haue done greatly amisse
in challenging their Superior and
not rendring that simple and humble
submission as in such matters is requisite,
and suppose it were tollerable in
the Apostles, who were in like rank and
estate with him; yet if Peter had been
mounted▪ to that degree, he could not
haue comported to heare himselfe so
disgraced as it were,ibid. 2. and contended against
by those farre inferiour to the
Apostles, and adacted to giue in his Apologie,
clearely expounding and dilating
the whol matter vnto them with
all the circumstances thereof. Peter,
if hee had been their Master and head,
might haue put them to silence for their
sudden strife with him, or else haue said,
I haue done no wrong, I haue reason
for my actions; and that may suffice that
I haue commandement by Reuelation
from aboue, wherevnto I am priuie my
selfe.
            
               Peter yet might haue deliuered in
defence of his proceedings to the Apostles
and Brethren of Iudea offended
at him, for Peters primacie had not

been divulged and made manifest to
the Church (if any had) or for persecution
and iniurie of the time it was
suppressed and holden vnder vntill more
conuenient time, while it should break
vp, either (truely) in Antioch, or at
Rome. But it is exceeding maruellous
that Paul should not many yeares after
haue got intelligence of the same seeing
it was such a necessary Head in the
Church as tending to calme & tranquill
all controuersies when refuge and appeale
should be made to him as vnto an
Oracle) for whom God sendeth in his
worke whatsoeuer, him hee furnisheth
fit and meet for the discharge thereof)
and being aduanced to bee head, his
graces should haue surpassed the other
Apostles, especially Paul, who cals himselfe
an abortiue issue and borne out of
time,Gal. 2, 2, 6. and it is credible that Paul would
not take that arrogancy vppon him, by
sundry arguments to contend, himselfe
no wise inferior to Peter, if Peter was
head of the church, & that hee receiued
no point of doctrine from him, or any
other of the brethren at Ierusalem, to
which hee did ascend by reuelation to

know his conformity with them.Ibid 9. Moreouer
in recompting certaine disciples as
Iohn and Iames, he placeth not Peter in
the first order and roome: this is farre
from his accustomed manner: who was
so meeke as a nurse to her children, and
who requireth his Galathians to bee as
he was,1. Thes. 2. 7. 8. for he was as they were, and to
giue to all men their duty,Gal. 4. 12. scare to whom
feare and honor to whom wee owe honor,Gal. 2. 12. but in Gods cause when hee did see
Peter, that he went not the right way
to the truth of the Ghospell, hee did
withstand him to his face before all men,
because hee was to bee rebuked, what
can bee more euident? We know when
Paul was rauished in the third heauen
and receiued vasions and reuelations,
fourteene yeares before hee manifested
the same, and heard words vnutterable:
but of this preferment of Peter, there is
not one siyllable, yea Paul was his contradictor
in this place, where, hee bringeth
his warrant, for in that matter and
combate with Peter hee did nothing
without expresse command, as not purposing
one foot in that voyage without
speciall reuelation; yea and if the subscription

and date bee true,Gal. 2. 2. hee wrote
the same Epistle to the Galathians from
Rome.
            Now in many other placees he comes
to intimate by the spirit of Prophesie
the condition of the world and the state
of the Church vnder Antichrist,
               1. Tim. 4. 1. but of
this prerogatiue of Peter at any time hee
hath not one word,2. Thes. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. but that three yeares
after his conuersion hee came vp to Ierusalem
to see Peter and staid with him
fifteene dayes, where Paul might haue
beene taught of others,2. Pet. 315. or of Peter himselfe,
and beene perswaded of this his
Primacy; after soe many yeares since
Christs ascention, and so many dayes conference
and society with Peter himselfe,
who doubtles would haue imparted to
Paul, whom hee cal'd his beloued brother,
all speciall comfort aud heauenly
grace particularly this point of the head
of the Church, if any other then Christ
had beene, land so much the more for
that Paul, of all the Apostles, makes oftenest
mention in all his Epistles almost
thereof, euer deferring that honor to
Christ onely, the Sauiour of the Church
which is his body, for Paul is farre off

from grudging and disceptation, but his
zeale must shew it selfe when Christs
truth is peruerted as hee himselfe witnesseth.Phil. 2. 14.
            
            Besides this three yeares after God
had reuealed his sonne in him that hee
might preach him among the Gentiles,Gal. 11. 8. 19.
because hee did foresee that this verity
should bee called in question, by them
who would establish another head of
the Church then Christ, hee conceites
a graue atestation,Gal. 7. 21. saying, in these things
which I write vnto you behold before
God I lye not, as also more plainely in
another place, whose preacher and Apostle
(saith he) I am constituted, I speake
the truth in Christ and lye not,
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. 2. 7 euen a
Teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity.
            Moreouer three yeares after his conuersion
he passed to Ierusalem and fourteene
yeares after hee ascended to Ierusalem
the second time, now in this seauenteenth
yeare after his calling to the
Apostleship, which fell in the yeare of
Christ, Anno 6. Paul testifies the Ghospell
of vncircumcision was committed
vnto him, as that of the Circumcision to

               Peter, and the Lord blessed and made
both their Ministeries effectuall,Gal. 2. 8. So that
it came to passe that Paul and Barnabas
did couenant and giue their right hands
of fellowship that they among the Gentiles,
Iames, Peter and Iohn (for so hee
rankes them) among the Iewes should
discharge their Apostleship; now it must
be of necessity that if Peter was head of
the Church, then hee was constituted
head both ouer Iew and Gentile, (vnles
they would say, that hee was but halfe
a head) but Paul affirmes and that by
their owne motiue and voluntary will,
that the Ghospell of the Gentiles was
committed to him and Barnabas and not
vnto Peter, how can we say then that he
was, or apoynted to bee, head of the
Church, seeing he was bound and tyed
by his owne faithfull promise, beside his
Commission, not to meddle with the
Gentiles in his Ministery, or was not
that an vnfirme head of the Church (if
so I may say) that had so mutilate a body,
seeing the one halfe as it were seperated
and seioyned from Peters Apostleship,
he hauing obliged himselfe by his
troth in his right hand to the contrary.
            
               
Againe if Christ would haue Peter to
bee an vniuersall Apostle both of Iewes
and Gentiles, how durst Peter without
speciall licence had and obtained of his
Author, and euident certainties thereof,
haue brought his calling into such
streighths and narrownes so hastily or
at any time after, that within foure and
twenty yeares he should enter in league
with Paul to dimit and forgoe, the
most dificult part, and of greater confequence,
because both that the benefit of
calling was not generally offered before
but counter-manded; which was a mistery,
as also for the multitude and greatnesse
of the Gentiles▪ for there was farre
more Gentiles then Iewes, whom the
Lord suffered to walke in their owne
waies while there was light, in some
measure,Eph. 4. 23. among the Iewes in particular
places and persons,I. Pet. 1. 19 although not generally
and amongst the greatest,Act. 13. 27. and yet
such as might make inexcusable, and
for this cause Peter not vnmindfull of
his charge, hee had contracted himselfe
vnto, as hee taught, with great liberty
and feruency among the Iewes, for
wheresoeuer he might haue occasion, as

wee see aboundantly in the Acts of the
Apostles, so likewise by writing an Epistle
hee taught the Iewes,1. Pet. 1. 1. Strangers
which dwelt heere and there throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
and Bythinia, contayning himselfe alwayes
within the limits and bounds of
his calling, requesting them to be mindfull
of the wordes of the prophesies
spoken so long time before,2. Pet. 3. 12 for vnto
Iewes was it that the oracles of God
were committed.Rem. 3. 2.
            
            And so did Paul also,Act. 13. 2. being seperated
to the worke,Rom. 1. 5. he was called to was sent
a faire off to the Gentiles by the Lord
by whom hee had receiued Grace and
Apostleship to the obedience of Faith
among all the Gentils for his name,Rom. 11. 13 and
therefore cals it, the exalting and adorning
of his Ministerie to bee called the
Apostle of the Gentils, working in the
Euangell of God, that the oblation of
the Gentils might bee acceptable, sanctified
by the holy Spirit,Act. 13. 46. 47. not but that
it behooueth the word of God to bee
first expounded to the Iewes, but since
they did repell it, and thought them vnworthy
of eternall life, he and Barnabas
               
did conuert themselues vnto the Gentiles,2 Tim. 1. 11
whose Preacher,Rom. 11. 14. Apostle, & Doctor
he cals himselfe, yet euer desiring
to prouoke his Kinsmen, that he might
saue some of them.
            And to whom I pray you can we better
giue credit vnto then to Peter himselfe:
for surely, although once he had
dissembled in that deniall of his Maister
in three-fold forme. And again▪ in that
euill example he had giuen to Barnabas
and others,Mar. 14. 66. 67. 68. when hee is precisely challenged
by Paul. Now would hee not
haue hid his Talent in the earth, but
that which was spoken to him in the
eare, hee would haue spoken vpon the
house tops, especiallie since he had promised
by Christs Praier, his Faith should
not faile; yea, and it was enioyned him
not to deny, but being cōuerted to confirme
his Brethren in the veritie of those
things he had heard and seene, as hee
did also abundantly; yet hee cals himselfe
no other then Apostle and Seruant,
not Superior: yea,2 Pet. 1 15. 16. 17. 18. hee names himselfe
a fellow-elder with them who are Elders.2. Pet. 11.
And if it be so,1. Pet. 5. 1. how can he he iustly
said to bee Lord and Prince ouer his

Brethren, and rest of the Elders,Ibid. 3. 4. 5. shall
wee giue him more then either Christ
bestowed vpon him, or that hee would
claime himselfe, or any of the rest of
the Apostles and Elders would acknowledge
him to be. And which is more,
he requests them to feede the Lordes
flocke which is amongst them, taking
diligent heede thereunto, not by constraint,
but willingly; not for filthy lucre,
but of a readie mind, not as though
they were Lords ouer Gods Heritage,
but to be examples to the Flocke, that
when the cheefe Shepheard shal appear,
they may receiue an incorruptible
Crowne of Glorie: he forbids Dominion
& Lordships ouer the Heritage of
God, if he had so done himselfe, and
affected Primacy in the Church, which
was farre from the mind of this Saint of
God, hee had wrongfully forbid that,
whereof he was culpable himselfe.
            Likewise who will not esteeme it a
great absurdity to repute all the Apostles,
which then liued, and all the company
of the faithfull to be Peters members,
and all things that appertaine and

belong to a spirituall body, to be communicated
by him to them, which must
be graunted, and that of most necessary
consequence followeth, if we condiscend
Peter to be head of the church:
but this of Paul onely, in place of all
that might be brought in, is plainly refuted,
who doth esteeme himselfe nothing
inferior to the highest Apostles,
here is no exception of Peter, or Primacy,Rom. 12. 16
which Paul (such is his modestie)
wold haue don if Peter had bin superior.
            And who would not contend Paule
to be Head of the Church of the Gentiles,
rather then Peter: because it is
proued already he is appointed both by
Christ, as also with consent of those
which were thought to bee Pillars of
the Church, and in price had conditioned
to be the Apostle of the Gentiles.
Now it is certaine, wee are not of the
Iewes, but of the Gentiles, if there should
bee any of the Apostles Head of our
Church, it must therefore be Paul, who
did correct Peters error in Antiochia,
               Gal. 2. 11.
the first place of his alleaged seat and
residence, to whom also euen their own

great Bulwark Tho: Aquinas. 2. secunda
quest. 33. sect. 4. & Gloss. ad Gal. 2. 11.
doth make Paul equal, but not superior.
            Besides this,Act. 20. 11. 
               Paul was sent to Rome
by God, that he should testifie of Iesus
Christ, as he had done already in Ierusalem,
whom the Lord did encourage
to that effect: the which also by an Angell
of God, sent to him by night, was
reiterate, saying; Feare not Paul, it behooueth
thee to be presented to Caesar:
               Act. 27. 23. 24.
And further,Act. 28. 30. 
               Paul was at Rome and
taught there two yeares, and the Romans
did thereby come to that perfection
of Religion,Rom. 1. 8. that their Faith at that
time was spoken of in all the world.
Here is a speciall designation of Paul to
goe thither, whither we heare of none
to be formerly sent, appointed thereto
by two seuerall Mandates, tending to
one Scope, who did enter into Rome,
exercised the Office from morning till
euening, expounding the Law and Prophets,Act. 28. 31. 32. &c.
testifying and perswading of
the kingdome of God in Iesus Christ,
and made his aboad there during the
space aforesaid in a house hired for himselfe,

and receiued all that came vnto
him, teaching with all boldnesse of
speech without let, what can bee more
craued in a good Bishop, then which we
find in Paul at Rome, but in all this time
there is no mention made neither by
Paul of Peter, neither Salutation sent
to him in any of all the Epistle Paule
sent to Rome, neither yet any remembrance
had of Peter in any of the Epistles
he sent from Rome; as that to the
Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians,
the second to Timothy, to
Philemon, vnlesse their subscriptions be
faulty: No remembrance I say, neither
any word of Salutation which Paul vseth
not to omit, and that very largelie,
yea, and not to forget euen the most obscure
men and women, so they be faithfull
of whatsoeuer degree. Now I pray
you, whether Peter or Paul hath best
right to claim the Superiority, or which
of these two shall wee adiudge to bee
Head of our Church (if either of them
be.) And by the way (Gentle Reader)
take a view, whether or not, Peter was
euer at Rome, at the least neuer in Pauls
               
daies, and if not then, hee neuer saw
Rome with his eyes, as shall be proued
(God willing) in our second Discourse.
            For the which cause Anthonius Pyranensis
Legatus did say, it was not lawfull
for men to reade Pauls Epistles: for I
know (saith he) by reading of them, men
may become Lutherans; and therefore
Ioh. Siluanus Atheseus. Pastor Herbipolis
confesseth, that the Papists doctrine was
false and Antichristian, and that he had
learned that out of Pauls Epistles: which
moueth Rhegius Gallicus Aristarchus,
when he had burnt 9. in Lyons for Lutheranisme,
publikely to proclaim, That if
the holy Church had not receiued Pauls
Epistles, & accounted them Canonique,
he would not repute them better or of
more credit then the Fables of Aesope.
And therfore are they named by them,
Armamentarium Lutheranorum. Fincelius
               Alue. exami. Part. 1. Chap. 1.
writeth, that Anno 1557. a Priest
in Forcham, a Citie in the Bishoprick of
Lamberg, in his Sermon, alledged Paul
to haue erred, and that the Sacrament
of the Supper should be receiued vnder
one kind only: And if it be not so, that

Sathan should take him away aliue from
out of his Pulpet, and so it happened to
the great feare of all the whole Diocesse;
as the History written by the said
Fincelius at length reports.
            And wee know the whole Scripture
is giuen by inspiration of God; and
is profitable, &c. that the man of God
may bee perfectly instructed vnto euery
good worke. And that Timothy from
his childhood hath knowne the Holy
Scripture, which might make him wise
to Saluation: Now since they conteine
all things necessarie to bee beleeued,
and that to beleeue the holy Church vniuersall
is one point of our Faith,Ephes. 22. & 4, 15. and
for that the militant Church here is one
part thereof:Col. 1, 38. & 
                     •
                  . 19. The head whereof is searched
heere by vs, and seeing the holy
Scripture directeth vs to no other head
then Iesus Christ, wherefore is it that
wee would bee wise aboue that which
is reuealed, yea rather foolishly enquire
for that which the Word of God hath
been silent in. And pursue after that
which cannot in any case become meet
to supply and minister the vertues and

duties requisite in him who should be
Head of the Church, and those neuer
were nor can happen in the person of any
mortall. Yea Paul takes vpon him
to institute Timothy and Titus to be Bishops,
and prescribes vnto them,1. Tim. 4. their
particular and seuerall duties,Tit. 2. yet hee
sends vs alwaies to another head, namely
Christ, and that which hee doth it is
not of any power he receiued of Peter,
               Gal. 1, 1.
for this he markes purposely as neither
did Titus create Bishops in Creta by
any ordinance deriued from Peter.
               Tim. 1. 1. I
ioine hereto that Paul accompanied
with Barnabas passed through all the
Churches of Asia,li. 7. 1. 11. in which they preached
and there,Act. 14. 23. by the Suffrages of the
same,Act. 20. choosed Bishops and elected
them, and in a word Paul in that most
solemne and most accurate Sermon,
rendred to the Bishops of Asia, neuer
enioined them to submit themselues
neither to Peter nor any other whatsoeuer
earthly wight head of the church.
And would hee obscure the same if it
had been commaunded him, or any
waies profitable vnto Saluation or quitting

the estate of the Church, for hee
declared vnto them all the counsels of
God,Act. 20. yea and foretels them that after
his departure there would greeuous
wolues rush in amongst them deuouring
the flockes and that euen of
themselues should men arise speaking
peruerse things to draw Disciples after
them, as hereticks doe at all times, but
he neuer remembred Peter vnto them,
who should put order to this proud attempt
and hainous tyrannie in the
Church. If hee had been made Superiour
to asswage the Furie and rage of
Tumults and Schismes: Paul would not
haue buried the same in the beds of
Obliuion, but he euer directs vs a farre
other course which is to CHRIST
onely.
            Surely Christ is a Priest for euer afterHeb. 7. 1. 2.
the order of Melchizedech leauing
no Vicar nor Successor but his Holy
Spirit which hee promised to send, and
lead his Disciples in all truth, and to
bee present with the Church for euer.
To the which Priesthood in the New
Testament neither by Paul, or whosoeuer

hee was that was Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrewes who speaketh
of this matter at length, is mention
made any to succeed the same, for hee
had neither beginning nor ending of
daies, as it was constituted in that Aronicall
Priest-hood to passe from man
to man, in Leui his posterity to the comming
of the Messias who hath by hisHeb. 9. 11.
owne blood entered in once into the
Holy place,Ephes. 1. 23. and obtained eternall redemption
for his Church which is his
bodie, euen the fulnesse of him that filleth
all in all things.
            And to the end neither Peter
               Iohn 18. 39. nor any
of the rest of the Apostles were otherwise
sent but as God sent Christ,Luk. 12. 14.
But his Kingdome and Regiment is not
of this world, for Christ tooke not vpon
him to iudge and distribute of earthly
and transitorie affaires, but hee by
his word and Sacraments, which are
the ordinary meanes to breed Faith,
and by the operation of his Holy
Spirit from aboue, doth effect the
whole purpose of mans Saluation, instilling
in mortall soules the immortall

seed of the Gospell of the Lord, by
whose power wee are kept through
Faith vnto Saluation, which is prepared
to bee shewed in the last time.
And this is that precious Balme farre
aboue that of Gilead,1. Pet. 1. 4. whereby Christ
the Head of his Church doth annoint
the hearts and cheere the mindes of
his own Elect with vnspeakable peace
descending from Christ as the Head
(like vnto Aarons Oyntment) vnto
his Church the members of his mysticall
bodie sonnes of God by free adoption,
Coheires with their Head
the Lord Iesus Christ. If flesh and blood
can accomplish these offices, let any
reasonable man iudge.
            It is now conuenient we heare what
our Aduersaries obiect in the contrarie,
that by this meanes the truth may
more brightly shine, and doubting
braines be resolued, as also that those in
whom the Veritie hath taken some
hold may be cōfirmed and established,
and way bee stopt to the vndermining
and subuerting of the simple and ignorant.
            
               
Scripture, say they, cals Peter first, and
why should wee deny him the place
which the word of God giues him.Mat. 10. 2.
               Answere. It is not one thing to bee called
first, and to be called principal Lord
or commander, for wee say Homer is
the first of Greeke Poets, hath he therfore
commandement or power ouer all
the rest: Peter in order may bee called
first, either in feruencie or magnanimitie
or such like, but his authoritie and
dignitie ouer the rest is denied. Secondly,
Paul making mention of Peter
about three and twenty yeares
thereafter, inuerts that order and placed
him betwixt the Bonerges,
               Gal. 2. 9, that is
Iames and Iohn the sonnes of Thunder,
to signifie that there was no hidden
mysterie in that ennumeration, yea,
and in the Catalogue, by sundry of
the Euangelists, the Disciples are permixt.Luk. 6. 14.
            
            But if vpon Peter (say they) the
Church was builded, hee must be Gouernour
and Head thereof: for so sayth
our Sauiour, Thou art Peter,
               Mat. 16. 18. and vpon
this Rocke will I build my Church.

               Answere. Albeit there might be framed
a Sillogisme in moode and figure,
as there cannot be, because there bee
foure tearmes (after the Schoole-men)
which cannot enter in a right Sillogisme
(besides the construction in the
Greeke and Latine Tongues, which altogether
ouerthrowes the Argument
alledged) yet the Assumption is denied:
for there is not meant Peter, on
whome the Church should bee builded,
but vpon Christ (as with manie other
auncient Doctors, August. Iohn,
Tract. 124.) Which Christ was that
Rocke which he confessed immediately
before to be the sonne of the liuing
God. So Lyranus in Gloss: marginali super
hanc Petram scilicet quam confessm est,
ibidem in Gloss: interlineari & Gloss:
ordinaria, Tu es Petrus scilicet à me Petra,
ita tamen vt mihi retineam dignitatem
fundamenti. Et Lyranus ibid. sayth,
Quod Ecclesia non consistit in hominibus
quia multi Pontifices & Principes inuenti
sunt Apostatasse à fide. And so also
Gregorius Nicenus in testimoniis Veteris
& Noui Testamenti. But in stead of all

these, Paule satisfieth vs when he sayth,
No man can lay any other foundation but
that which is layd, Iesus Christ.
               1. Cor. 3. 11. Then
Peter is not the ground: Which if it had
beene otherwise, beleeue we, that Paule
would be ignorant of it, or of purpose
denie so serious and earnest a matter.
Moreouer, if the Church was builded
vpon Peter, how was it, it did not fall
when Peter, at the voice of a Maid,
yea, and a long time thereafter, was
relapsed and reproued by Paule, as is
aforesaid, and whome Christ did vpbraid
with the most vile name of a Deuill.
Will the Building stand firme and
stable after the Ground is sunke or fallen?
or rather, is it not the Foundation
that vpholds and sustaines the whole
Fabrick? But that Church which Christ
promised to build vpon this Rocke,
could not fall: for so saith hee, The
Gates of Hell shall not preuaile against
her: She cannot therefore be founded
vpon such a tottering Mould as Peter
was.
            
               Paule boasts of himselfe (and that
truely) that as a skilfull Master-Builder1. Cor.
               
he had layed the Foundation: and shall
wee thinke, that Christ, the Wisdome
of God,Luc. 11. 49. would build vpon the Sand
where the Winds beat and Waters rise,
and made it fall, and not vpon that
Stone, hewen out of the Mountaine
without hands: And shall the Masons
of Salomons
               1. Reg. 5. 17. Church bee commended
for their Wisdome, that they should
haue brought-great Stones and costly
Stones to make the Foundation of that
materiall House, euen hewed Stones,
(which was figuratiue of Christ and
the Temple of his Bodie) and shall
wee not say, Loe heere is a greater
one then Salomon. The Fathers all
dranke of the Rocke that followed
them,1. Cor. 10. 4. and the Rocke (saith Paule) is
Christ.
            And certainely no man,Eph. 4. 4, 5, 6 yea the Deuill
cannot denie, but that there is one
Bodie, and one Spirit, one Lord, one
Faith one Baptisme, one Hope of our
Vocation, one God and Father of all;
and that this Church began in the
Creation with Adam and Eue, and
continued euer since in one Place or

other, Familie or Kingdome, sometimes
longer, sometimes shorter, sometimes
larger, sometimes narrower, and had
but one Ground, which now also, vnder
the Gospell, as by the Prophets
long since hath beene fore-told, the
Gentiles are ioyned thereto. But where
was this Foundation then? What was
the Ground that this Building leaned
to? For shame wee shall not say Peter
was borne then, vnlesse wee-should
make him as old as Adam and Eue,
or then (I tremble to speake it) elder
then them both; for the Ground of the
House must be first layd before Building
be made. Surely, if wee will trust
Paule, he will explaine the matter, That
neither Iewes nor Gentiles, beleeuers,
are anie more Strangers and Forrainers,
but Citizens with the Saints,Eph. 2. 20. and of
the Household of God, and are builded
vpon the Foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, Iesus Christ himselfe
being that chiefe Corner Stone in
whome all the Building, coupled together,
groweth vnto a holie Temple vnto
the Lord, in whome yee also (saith

hee to them of Ephesus) are built together,
to be the habitation of God by
the Spirit. If any point of all this can
bee attributed iustly to Peter, hee is
blind that cannot see. I know the Aduersaries
of the Truth will trust Peter
at least, who sends the Iewes dispersed
vnto the consideration of another
Foundation. If hee had beene that
Ground that the Church should bee
built vpon, would hee not haue claymed
it himselfe? If so be (sayth hee)
you haue tasted how bountifull the
Lord is,1. Pet. 2, 4, 5, 6. to whom you come as vnto a
liuing Stone, disallowed of men, but
chosen of God, and precious, and yee
as liuely Stones bee made a Spirituall
House, and a holy Priesthood, to offer
vp Spirituall Sacrifices, acceptable to
God by Iesus Christ. Wherefore it is
contained in the Scripture, Behold I
put in Sion, viz. the Church, a chiefe
Corner stone, elect and precious, and
he that beleeueth therein, shall not be
ashamed. Vnto you therefore which
beleeue it is precious, but vnto them
which be disobedient, the stone which

the Builders disallowed, the same is
made the Head of the Corner, and a
Stone to stumble at, and a Rocke of
Offence, euen to them which stumble
at the Word, being disobedient: where
liuely, as it were in orient Colours,
hee paints out that Romane Hierarchie
and Antichrist. For seeing they
stumble in disobedience at the Word
of God both in Doctrine and Manners,
dispensing with it, and substituting
in place thereof Councels, Traditions,
Ceremonies. For this cause
they forge to themselues another then
the true Head of the Church, and
would haue a pretended Entrie and
Passage thereto by Peter, without any
Warrant or Approbation in the Word
of God, as shall bee at length, in his
owne place (God willing) euidently
proued.
            
               But (say they) to whom the Keyes of
the Kingdome of Heauen was giuen,
him had CHRIST appointed Head
of the Church:
               Math. 16. 19 
               for hee had receiued

                     〈…〉
                   to binde and loose, remit and

                     〈…〉
                   sinnes: for al these tend to one

sense and meaning, and soe said Christ
that to Peter hee would giue them. Answer,
if Iesus had giuen the keyes, and
power to lose and bind, &c. to Peter only,
it had beene somewhat, but so it is,
that Christ promised the same in the
person of Peter, vnto all the rest of the
Apostles, as the foresaid Lyranus Gloss:
interliniari vpon the seauenteenth verse
of the same expoundeth, and soe hath
Gloss: ordinaria ex Hieronimo, Habent
eandem potestatem etiam alii Apostoli
quibus post resurrectionem dixit, accipite
Spiritum sanctum, habet eandem et omnis
Ecclesia in Presbiteris et Episcopis.
But why is mention specially-made
heere, of Peter and of the rest of the Apostles?
Answere ibidem ex Hieronimo,
Petrus specialiter accepit claues quod quicun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
ab vnitate fidei et societate eius se seperauerint
a peccatis solui et regnum coelorum
ingredi non possunt. And Ciprianus
lib. de simplicitate Prelator: in persona vnius
hominis Dominus dedit claues omnibus
vt omnium vnitatem denotaret.
vide Augustinum in Iohn: Tractat
129.
            
               
Secondly, it is answered, Christ
said not (do, sed dabo) which promise
Christ did perfect and accomplish
thereafter to all the Apostles, with
Peter,
               Ioh. 20. 22. Wheir the first day of the
Weeke, after his Resurrection, Iesus
stood in the middest of them &c. and
breathed on them and said, Receiue
the Holy Ghost (Is there a better Porter,
or Key-bearer, of the Heauens
then the Holy Ghost?) Whosoeuer
Sinnes yee remit, they are remitted
vnto them; and whosoeuer Sinnes
yee retayne, they are retayned, &c.
VVas Heauen euer more lockt, till
now? Then none could haue accesse
to Abrahams bosome, and enioy that
Inheritance, prouided for them before
the Foundation of the World was
layd.
            But to shut vp this matter, well
hath Augustine sayd, Tractat 11. &
124. & 501. super Ioh. If Christ gaue
the Keyes to Peter alone, then the
Church had not the Keyes after him
but as hee answered for all, so hee receiued

the Keyes withall. And what
account hath beene made of them by
the Pope Iulius the second, Aruoldus
Farronus, Burdegalensis, Gallicus
Historicus testifie: Which Gilbertus
Ducherins translates thus:
            
               In Galliam vt fama est Bellum
gesturus acerbum▪
               
               Armatam eduxit Iulius
Vrbe manum:
               Accinctus gladio Claues
in Tibridis Amnem
               Proiicit et saeuus, ralia
verba facit,
               Cum Petri, nihil efficiant
ad praelia Claues,
               Auxilio Pauli forsitan
ensis erit.
            
            And seeing Iesus our Sauiour did
commit the feeding,Iohn 21. 15. that is, the ouersight
of his sheepe and Lambes particularly
vnto Peter, would hee not

haue him had one degree or other
of preferment among the Apostles and
aboue the people of the world for
such direction was not giuen to the
rest of the Disciples.
            
               Answere. Hee that doth feede
the Lambes is not Lord but a Seruant,
for so hee saith, Feede my
Sheepe and not thine owne,2. Pet. 5. 3. yea and
Peter makes an opposition betwixt
Dominare in Clerum, to haue Dominion
ouer the Lords Inheritance,
and Pascere Oues, to Feed the sheepe.
Answere. Secondly, Peter was commanded
to feede the Flocke, not that
hee should presume aboue the other
Fellow Apostles, sed vt Apostolico
muneri redderetur, vnde per fidei elapsum
& Christi abnegationem excidit, saith
Augustine: Thirdly, it is answered,
for that hee specially directeth his
speech to Peter, if hee loued him,
and that three seuerall times, by Augustine
ibidem. Christus rogauit Petrum
num se amaret, ter, vt trini negationi
redderetur tri
                     •
                  a confessio, & 
                     ••
                  
                  minus

linguae amore quam timore seruiret.
For it was hee onely, among
the Apostles that so openly and cowardly
denied his Master, as it was
foretold him, for the which cause
no demand was directed to the rest
of their loue towards CHRIST, &c.
Fourthly it is answered to feed in the
Scripture by vsuall forme of speach, is
to teach and preach, &c. As also Lyranus
ibid. and Arias montanus do testifie,
with innumerabe others, and were not
the rest commanded to goe and teach
all Nations baptizing them? &c. Or is
it because Peter was commanded to
feede, were the rest enioined to bee
idle, remisse and negligent? Or rather
did not their sound passe through
the world, and as they were commanded
were witnesses vnto Christ both
in Ierusalem, and in all Iudea, and in
Samaria, and vnto the vttermost parts
of the earth. Yea, did they not direct
their wholesome and sound Doctrine
both to Sheepe and Lambes. First,
both yong and old, Master and Seruant,

Husband and Wife as it is euident
aboundantly in their writings
and Epistles, yea both to Iew and Gentils,
to those who are within, and
those who are without. And shall we
say therefore, that all they that did
feede were heads of the Church. Gerion
of whom the Poets Fable had
not so many heads, but the Church
shall haue many more which is most
absurd, for they are all enioined to
passe about the Lords businesse, yea
and Paul affirmes that the cure of all
the Churches did hang vpon him. To
this effect saith Cyprianus, Lib. de Dignitate
Eccles. Pastores, sunt omnes sed
Grex vnus ostenditur, qui ab Apostolis
omnibus vnanimi consensu pascitur;
Wherefore if all the Apostles were
enioined to feede the Flock of Christ,
then was not Peter onely. And if hee
were commanded for the causes before
specified so to doe, shall wee not
thinke, that Christ ascended on high
and led captiuitie captiue. And gaue
guifts vnto men, some to bee Apostles,

and some Prophets,Ephes. and some
Euangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers,
for the gathering together of
the Saints for the worke of the Ministerie,
and for the edification of the bodie
of Christ till wee all meete together
in the vnitie of Faith, and knowledge
of the Sonne of God vnto a
perfect man, and vnto the measure
of the age of the fulnesse of Christ,
Which charge the Holy Scripture euerie
where, and Histories of all times
doe report. And suppose it were so that
to feede the flocke would import him
to bee Head of the Church, then reason
I thus, Peter was appointed Head
of them whom hee was commanded
to feede, but no man will say, hee
was commanded to feede the rest of
the Apostles, (viz.) preach and teach
them their Gospell wherevnto they
were put a part and receiued by the
liuely voice of Iesus Christ, for vnto
them it was giuen to know the mysteries
of the Kingdome of Heauen. It
must needs follow therefore that hee

was not, at the least, head of the rest
of the Apostles, and so consequently
not head of the whole Church whereof
the Apostles were members. Yet say
they if Paul ascended to Ierusalem to
Peter to conferre his Gospell with him,
and from him receiue authority for the
confirmation of his Apostleship,Gal. 2. 2. 3. 4. 5. that he
should not tunne in vaine. Then it must
needs bee that Paul did acknowledge
Peter head of the Church. Answere,
Paul did not conferre with Peter onely,
but with Iames and Iohn also which
were esteemed of price, and pillers of
the Church Second answere, Paul himselfe
denyeth that he did receiue ought
of them, neither was inferior to them,
and truly if he had receiued confirmation
of his calling from them in that respect,
he had beene inferior: And that
which is of more importance, if Paule
had acknowledged Peter for his Lord,
and Head of the Church, How was he
so bold I pray you, to withstand him to
his face; and so publiquely, in presence
both of Iewes and Gentiles vpbraid his

dissimulation,Ibid. 11. alleadging him to bee a
Rocke of offence to others, who were
brought into the like dissimulation. But
thou wilt demaund what mooued Paul
from Siria aud Silicia, and other farre
distant bouilds, wherein he had planted
the Gospell amongst the Gentiles,
to take the second paines and trauaile
vppon him to passe to Ierusalem, if it
were not for the cause aforesaid. Answere.
Paul expresseth the cause himselfe
of his ascending to Ierusalem, was
to remooue and cut off that false rumour
which was spread abroad by false
Apostles,Gal. 2. 4. that hee taught otherwise
then the rest of the Apostles did: for
these false Brethren did conioyne Moses
and Leuiticall Ceremonies of the
Law, new Moones, Saboaths, Circumcision,
&c. with IESVS CHRIST and
Euangelicall Doctrine, as simply and
absolutely necessary vnto Saluation,
which Paul reiected to be done; yea,
taught,Cal. 5. 2. 4. that whosoeuer was circumcised,
was fallen from Grace, and that
by the workes of the Law, no flesh

should bee iustified, but by the Faith of
Iesus Christ, and not by the workes of
the Law.
            Thus then I reason, if Paul at that
time did ascend to receiue authoritie,
and confirmation to preach the Gospell:
then wee must graunt, that the
foureteene yeares proceeding, wherein
hee had trauelled in the Euangell,
hee had openlie taught without any
warrant, which is manifest absurditie.
            And last of all, if Paul receiued any
authoritie of Peter to publish the Gospell:
how is it that Paul declares, he
was an Apostle not of men, neither
by man, but by Iesus Christ, and God
the Father which had raised him from
the dead. It rests therefore, that Peter
was neuer ordained Head of the
Church: and that whatsoeuer the Aduersaries
of the troth alledge for the
establishing of his Primacie and Superioritie,
is friuolous, and cannot abide
the ballance of the Sanctuary, because
they are too light. Wherefore,

also in that third time Christ acquaints
his Disciples with his Resurrection,
most liuelie speaking and inuiting Peter
with the rest, to eate after his vnprofitable
labour all the night,Iohn 21. 3. 4. he did
not euen then, as it were, lastly designe
him to such a Supreame place. And
also he left vnto him a Propheticall declaration
what death hee should dye,Ibid. 18. 19.
and would he not haue signified vnto
him of this his great Stile in the
Church. And this did Peter himselfe
very well remember, and prepares himselfe
for such a departure; recommending
sundry good and profitable Obseruations,
Doctrines, and Lessons to
the Iewes,
                  
                     •
                   Pet. 1. 14. saying; I will endeuour
therfore alwaies, that ye also may be able
to haue remēbrance of these things
after my departure; but neither Christ
remembreth in the Gospell at any time,
neither the Apostles nor Brethren then
remaining of the Church, acknowledge,
neither Saint Luke the Compiler
of that Ecclesiasticall History of the
Acts of the Apostles recordeth, neyther

yet Peter leaues any succeeding
Monument of that meere vsurpation,
which cannot fal without great blasphemie
in any humane
Nature.
            Soli Deo Gloria.
         
         
            ¶Prophetia Frederici
Jmperatoris de Excidio
Romano, ad Gregorium
Pontificem.
            ROma Diu, titubans, varijs erroribus acta
            Corruet; & mundi desinet esse caput.
            O Roma, à Roma quantum mutata vetusta es,
            Nunc Caput es sceleris, quae caput orbis eras.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            
            A short Register of
Iesuits Attempts and
murthers, of Kinges and
Princes of our time.
            
               ANd that you may haue
an inspection how carefully
the Papists, who
bragge of Peters primacy,
haue fed the flock of
Christ, and diligently administred
the keyes: (nam potest atem dedit remittendi
non admittendi peccata Petro
Christus,) I will briefely remember
that decree published by the Pope in
the yeare of his great Iubile, proclaiming
himselfe Prince of all Kingdomes,1600.
as well in matters temporall
as spirituall: for he accompts it noe
sinne, to bereaue Kinges and Princes,
(the Lords anointed) of their
liues: A breefe recitall whereof is

heere set downe, and collected out of
the Iesuites Catichisme, published in
French, 1602. and experience in these
our dayes.
            
               Lowe Contries.
               The Prince of Orange was killed
by Balthesar Girrard borne in the
Contry of Bourgondy,1584. sent by the
regent of the Colledge of Triers.
               
                  Peter Pan;
                  1598. a Cooper, dwelling at Ipres
was sent to kill Maurice Prince
of Orange, and Earle of Nassau, the
other Princes sonne, by the Iesuites
and Prouincial of Doway, executed
at Leyden.
            
            
               Scotland.
               
                  Robert Bruce,
                  Iun. 22. accused & sore troubled
at Bruxelles, by father William
Chrichton, because he would not kill,
or cause to bee killed by some other,
Iohn Metellanus my Lord Chancellor
of Scotland.
               Maister Iames Gordon and William
Chrichton, Iesuites, perswaded certaine
of the Nobility of Scotland,1594. to
giue certaine Blankes which they deliuered,
to George Carr, and were discouered
by the indiscretion of Robert

Albercrome, &c.
               
            
            
               England.
               
                  William Parry at the desire of Bennet
Paulmeo, in Venice,1585. and Haniball
Coldrett
                        •
                     , at Paris, was induced to
haue killed Queene Elizabeth was Executed
Ianuary. Edward Squire executed
for intending to poyson the foresaid
Queene Elizabeth of good memory,
and the Earle of Essex, great
Marshall of England,1597. and after deputy
of Ireland, at the desire of father
Richard Walpole Iesuite in Spayne.
               
                  Henry Sammier of Luxembourge,1582.
Iesuite, plotted with certaine others
to bereaue the said Queene Elixabeth
of her life.
            
            
               France.
               
                  Peter Barriere borne at Orleance,1593.
by his first trade a basketmaker, purposed
to kill the French King either
with knife or pistoll in the midst of
his gardes, at the request of foure
Monkes of Lyons.
               
                  Henry the third, King of France
and Poland, was killed by Iames Clement,
a Dominican, the which also
had a caueat giuen in his Epitaph vpon

the tomb of his hart,1589. in the Church
of Saint Clow, neere Paris adioyning
to the house where he was slayne.
               Adsta viator, et dole, regum vicem,
               Cor Regis, isto conditum est sub marmore,
               Qui Iura gallis, Iura Sarmatis, dedit,
               Tectus eucullo, hunc sustulit Sicarius,
               Abi vi
                     •
                  tor?1594. et dole regum vicem.
               King Henry the fourth, striken in
the mouth, in his royall Pallace of the
Louure, in the midst of his Nobility,
by Iohn Chastall a Parisian, executed
the 29. of December 1594 the which
King also was afterwardes slaine by
Francis Rauiliack, borne at Angolesme,
after hee had built the Iesuites a
Colledge in la Fleshe, where the said
King was borne, and had reduced
them, and defaced the marble Pillar,
in the which was recorded that first
blow of the said Chastel, who was
but 19. yeares of age, brought vp in
the Iesuits schole in Paris.
            
            
               Italy▪
               
               Vpon Saint Steuens day in Christmas,
as Iohn Galeas Duke of Millan
went vnto the Church, three Gentlemen
of a Towne named Cases of the

families of the Empoignane Viscount
and Olgiate, at the discourses of Cola
Mentouan, doubted not to murther
him though they could hardly escape
the Dukes guard, for two of them
were slanie presently, the third hang
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               Portugall,
               
                  Sebastian king of Portugal was counselled
by the Iesuits, to vndertaken
iourney for the conquest of the kingdome
of Fesse, where he was slaine in
a pitch't field, lost boh his life and kingdome
togither.
            
            
               Aragon.
               
                  Antonio de Peres, Secretary of Estate
to the late king of Spaine, escaping
out of prison in Castile, hee with
the Iesuists, moued the Aragonians to
take Armes against the said king &c.
But thereafter by the same meanes the
Aragonians dissolue the armie, &c.
The king of Spaines forces enter Sarragossa,
where they pull downe houses
to the ground, kild the Nobillity,
raise a Cittadell withn the Towne, &
since that time the king of Spaine had
command there absolutely, as he doth
within the rest of his dominions; wheras

before the people of Aragon had in
their foundation from all antiquity very
great priuiledges, against the absolute
power of their kinges.
            
            
               Poland.
               
                  Stephan Batori, King of Poland, &
Sweden, was suboined to enter Sweden,
that the Iesuites might be admitted
there, Duke Charles his vncle &
Lieftenant Generall answered, the
people would neuer be brought to like
of that society &c. The King is bereft
of Sweden, & those places which were
gotten by the prowesse of Gustaue his
Grandfather, & kept by the wisdome
of his Father: Poland being not very
firme to him withall.
               And what shall be said of Iesuite
Garnet,
                  Gunpowder. that Arch Traytor? counted a
Martyr by vild blood-sheders, the like
conspiracy was neeer contriued since
the creation,Griffin and Wilkinson. yet that horible attempt
was approued by vnnaturall Papists of
this Land, and alowed by the Iesuites
Generall at Rome. And to end this,
their custome is not onely to perswade
to commit, but also to commend such
diuilish and odious slaughters. Like as

                  Iohn Duke of Burgundy when he had
caused Lewis Duke of Orleance, Sonne
and Brother to a King to be slaine.
Produced Iohn Pettit Iesuite, who passed
to the Ladyes Church at Parris &
preached that murther to be lawfull
&c. The which satanical violence was
stiffly mainetained by them, vntill Iohn
Gerson Chancellor of the vniuersity of
Parris got him to the Counsel of Constance,
holden by 141. Bishops, & procured
such attempts be cal'd herertical.
               Yea Iohn Guignard Priest, Regent in
the Coledge of Clairmont,1415. in the Citty
of Parris,Sess. 15. 6. Int. approued the most cruell
and barbarous paracide of King Henry
the third, by the foresaid Iohn Chastell
for the which he was led to the place
of the Greue, there hanged, and afterwards
burned. So did also Borgoin
Prior of the Iacobins defend the same.
But this is most memorable that Iohn
Marriana, Scholemaster to the now
King of Spaine, is not ashamed to
publish defences for the murther of
Kings, & dedicates it to the said King
Phillip the third, printed in Cenobio
Madrili 13. Decemb. 1598 and approued

by Frier Peter de Onna, to the
which the Vniuersity of Paris, agreeing
with the word of God,1413. opponed
it selfe and pronounced the committers
thereof heretiques.1610.
               
               If this be feeding the flocke of Iesus
Christ, any reasonable man may
iudge: One did say very well, it was
the duty of a good Shepheard to
sheare the shepe and not to flea them.
               If they would knowe further of the
Histories aboue aleadged, they may
haue them in their owne Historiographers,
And the Lord so blesse thee,
that thou maist make thy vse hereof, to
the glory of God, and honour of the
higher powers ordayned by him.
               Finis.
               
            
         
      
   