
      
         
            
               
                  
                  THE ANATOMIE of a distressed Soule: Wherein, The faults of the elect, are discerned from the sinnes of the wicked, spirituall defections cured, confused consciences resolued, all meanes of presumption and desperation remoued, the sicknesse, dulnesse, and deadnesse of the spirit releeued, crosses and temptations inward, and afflictions outward remedied, for the benefite of all that groane vnder the burthen of sinne, and feeling of Gods anger, thirsting for the sense of reconciliation in the blood of the Lambe.
                  
                  ROM. 8. 38. 39.
                  
                     I am perswaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come.
                     Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to seperate vs from the loue, &c.
                  
                  
                     LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes, for Daniel Speed; and are to be sold at his Shop vnder S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1619.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT Honourable, Sir Robert Nanton, Knight, one of his Maiesties principall Secretaries, and of his Royall Priuie Councell, grace and peace in Iesus Christ.
                  
                  
                     GOd leaues his own children oft to themselues, to driue them

from the weake holde of their owne strength, to relie onPsa. 30. 6. 7 himselfe▪ yet doth he heale their backeslidings, and louesCant. 3. 4 them freely, notwithstanding their reuolting and treacherous dealing against him. There is SatanHos. 14▪ 4 also sifting them, and fleshly lusts warring against their soules.Hos. 5. 2. 7 They may fall in their faith, by doubtting

of Gods fauour,Luk. 22. 13 and assurance of their saluation, erre in som1. Pet. 2. 11 maine points of religion, yea dwell inPsal. 22. & 51. & 77 that ignorance for a season, and maintain the same. They may fall also in their life, in some grosse sins,Act. 1. 6 yea sleepe in them vntill they be rousedCal. 2 vp, and then fall into them againe: and so2. Sam. 11 commit rebellion against God, and yet

remaine in the state of grace. For they are1. Tim. 4. 3 not senslesse, nor doe continue in their fals, hauing their conscience seared with a hot iron, without resistance, feare, or griefe▪ nor becomes in the ende a veryPsal. 19. beast, as doth the hypocrite, who falls as the Dromedary thatPsal. 44. cannot rise againe, but their corruption and temptation ouerrulingPsa. 49. 12
                     
them, dothPsa. 7. 3 mislead them, & cō
                     ming to themselues, condemnes thēselues for it, and cleares theEph. 2. 3. 7 Lord, iustifies him in his iudgements, and magnifies the riches of his mercy,Iob. 42. 6 who neuer forsakes his children, but will with the tentation also make a way to escape, that they mayRom. 3. 5 be able to beare it.
                  Of the which both

inward and outward temptations and afflictions,1. Cor. 10 for keeping of the conscience tender, and sensible of the least sinne, & Heb. 13. 18 wilfull fechting againe the light therof: of the checkes, feares, distractions, anguishes, horrible terrours, and swoundings, with remedies to the same, according to the measure of the Lords grace

bestowed vpon mee. I haue written here (I say) which I most humbly dedicate, to bee sheltered vnder the protection of your Worshippes fauour.
                  And I beseech the God of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Father of glory, to establish your heart in his holy feare, rectifie your iudgement, sanctifie your conscience, and

giue vnto you the spirit of wisedome, and reuelation, in the knowledge of him:Eph. 1. 17 18. 19 the eyes of your vnderstanding beeing inlightened, that you may knowe what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saincts, and what is the exceeding greatnesse of his power to vs ward, who belieue

according to the working of his mighty power▪ To whose euerlasting blessing I leaue you: and rests,
                  
                     Yours Worships in all Christian duties, Barthol. Robertson.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Christian Reader.
                  
                     
                        SInce it hath pleased God of his mercy to giue so good a passage vnto my former trauailes, I haue made bolde in confidence of thy fauour, to let this also see the light: I haue been moued thereunto by sundry of my friends, and truely I
                     
                     detest and abhorre idlenesse with all my heart, yet a brother who was in great confusion of conscience, to whom I resorted daily, looking if God would put his minde at greater libertie, from the thraldome & pangs of conscience, his case (I say) spurred mee to vndertake this taske: In the method I haue not beene curious, for the answere is paralelled to the interrogation
                     
                     so proportionably, as I could: to the which, I haue added prayers for euery day of the weeke, to season thy reading, which strike most vpon the the cord of thy conscience: and because the two extreamities, presumption, and despaire, doe most of all misleade men, I haue seasonably subioyned a short meditation of the infinit mercy and iustice of God,
                     
                     that to the perfecting of thy saluation, thou maiest sayle with an euen and plaine course, swaying neither to the left nor right hand, and I beseech God, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, to sanctifie these to thy vse, and thee to his glory.
                  
                  Amen.
                  
                     Thine, B. R.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The Anatomy of a distressed conscience: Containing the discouery of spirituall assaults with the particular remedies thereof, in Dialogue-wise betwixt the Lord and the Soule.
                  
                     Lord.
                     
                        WHy art thou angry; & thy countenance cast downe, if thouGen. 4. 6 7 doest wel, shalt thou not be accepted, and if thou doestIam. 5. 9 euill sin lyeth at the doore,

and the Iudge standeth before the dore.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     I haue been like a Horse or like a Mule (alas) whichPsa. 32 9 vnderstandeth not, and am made like vnto beasts that perish. I haue wallowed in my owne vomit, in the vanity of my mind haue I euerIer. 38. 26 walked, hauing my cogitations darkned, being a stranger from the life of God▪ through the ignorance thatEph. 4. 17 is in me, because of the hardnesse of my heart: yet somtimeTit. 1. 16 I doe professe, I did knowe God, but by my workes I deny him, and amIer. 28. 12 abnominable and disobedient, and vnto euery good

worke a reprobate: I haue walked after my owne imaginations, and after the stubbornesse of my wicked heart, I haue despised theRo. 2. 4. 5 riches of thy bountifulnsse and patience and long suffering, not knowing that thy bountifulnesse leadeth mee to repentance, but after my hardnesse of heart that cannot repent, haue heaped vppe vnto my selfe wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the iust iudgement of God, thus haue I liued in pleasure on the earth and in wantonnes, and haue nourishedIam. 5. 5 my heart as in a day of slaughter, and what shall now become of mee.
                  
                  
                     
                     Lord.
                     Thou hast cause poore soule to bemoane thy selfe,Iob 11. 20 for the eyes of the wicked shall faile, and their refuge shall perish, and their hope shall be sorrowe of minde, his owne counsell shall castIob 18. 7 him downe, his reioycing is but short and the ioy of an hypocrite is but a moment,Iob 20. 5 for the wickeds light shall be taken away, they are snared in the worke of their owne hands, thus I will try the righteous, but the wickedIob 38. 15 and him that loueth iniquity, doth my soule hate,Psa. 9. 16 for I the righteous Lord loue righteousnesse, and my countenance beholdeth the

iust man, many sorrowesPs. 11. 5. 7 shall come to the wicked, but thou (wretched soule) call vnto mee and I will answere,Psa. 32. 10 and shew thee great and mighty things which thou knowest not, I will instruct thee and teach theeIer. 33 3 in the way that thou shalt goe, and I will guide thee with my eye.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     Can the blacke Moore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may I also doe good that is accustomedIer. 13. 23 to doe euill, I did say alas it was not yet time that the Lords house shouldHag. 1. 2 be builded in mee, but did put farre away the euill day,

and approached to the seate of iniquity, as the smoakeIam. 6. 3 vanisheth so driuest thou sinners away, as waxe meltethPsa. 68. 2 before the fire so shall the wicked perish at the presence of God, how shold I then lift vp my horne on high, or speake with a stifnecke, for thou art iudge, and in thy hand is a cuppe and the wine is red, it is full of fury mixed, and thou pourest out of the same,Psa. 15. 8 surely all the wicked of the earth shall wring out and drinke the dregges thereof: thus the way of the wicked is as the darknesse, they knowe not wherein theyPro. 4. 19 shall fall, their owne iniquities shall take the wicked themselues, and they shall

be holden with the cordsPro. 5. 22 of their owne sinne, woe be vnto the vngodly therefore, which haue forsaken the lawe of the most high, forEccl. 4. 1 8. 9. 10 though they increase yet shall they perish, if they be borne, they shall be borne to cursing, and if they die the curse shall be their portion; so shall they goe from the curse to destruction, for the soule that sinneth it shal die the death.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     I will not giue the souleEzek. 18 of my turtle doue vnto the beast, what is thy sin writtenPsa. 14 19 with a pen of iron and with the poynt of a Diamond, and so grauen vpon

the table of thy heart, wiltIer. 17. 1 thou not giue thy minde to turne vnto mee thy God, is the spirit of fornication inHos. 5. 4 the middle of thee, and wilt thou not knowe mee thyIer. 13. 27 Lord? wilt thou not poore soule be made cleane? when shall it once be? I will answerZach. 13. thee with good words and comfortable wordes, arise my loue, my faire one and come thy way, for beholde the winter is past, the raine is ouer and gone, the flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is com, and the noyse of the turtle is heard in our land; arise my loue my faireCan. 2. 10 11. 12 one and come away, withdrawe not thy heart from mee, let me be thy hope in

the day of aduersity, I createIer. 18. 5 the fruite of thy lips to be peace as well to him that is farre off, as to him that is neere. As I liue I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his way and liue, turne theeIer. 33. 11 turne from thy euill waies, why wilt thou die (silly soule) I am patient towards thee, and would that all men should bee saued and2. Pet 3. 9. none perish, but would all men should come to repentance, and to the knowledge of the truth, yea and more aboundantly to shew the stablenesse of my counsell, I haue thus bound my selfe by an oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that I should

lie, thou mightest haue a strong consolation▪ who hast fled for refuge to layHeb. 6. 17 18. holde vpon the hope set before ihee.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     I am empty, & void, and waste, & the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and sorrowe is in my loynes, and my face gathersNa. 2. 10 blacknesse, for that which is crooked can none make straight, and that which is wanting cannot bee numbred,Eccl. 1. 15 woe vnto me miserable soule, for I haue rewarded euill vnto my selfe. It is the vengeance of the Lord, thou wilt take vengeanceEsay 3. 9 vpon mee, as I haue done,

thou wilt doe vnto mee,Ier. 50. 15 thou art a consuming fire & a iealous God, can my heartDeut. 4. 24 endure, or can my hands be strong in the day that thou shalt haue ro doe with mee, thy tempest goeth forth in thy wrath, and a violentIer. 23. 19 20 whirle-wind shall fall down vpon the head of rhe wicked, thy anger shall not reaurne vntill thou hast exeted and untill thou hast performed the thought of thy heart, in the latter dayes I will vnderstand it plainely, I am but as foame vpon the water, I haue plowed wickednesse and reaped iniquitie,Hos▪ 10. 7 15. and eaten the fruits of lies, I haue trusted in mine owne waies, in seruing sinne and liuing according to the

flesh, and must die for I cannotIoh. 8. 34 please thee.Rom. 8 13
                     
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Blessed is he whose wickednessePsa. 32. 1. 2 is forgiuen, and whose sinne is couered: Blessed is the man vnto whom I impute no iniquity and in whose spirit there is no guile, If any man say he1. Iohn. 18 hath no sinne, he deceiueth himselfe and there is no truth in him, If thou acknowledge thy sinnes, I am iust and faithfull to forgiue thee thy sinnes, and cleanse thee from all vnrighteousnesse,Gen. 3 If thou say thou hast no sinne, thou makest mee a lyer, thou maiest see Adams
                        Gen. 9 fall and feele it in thee, Noahs
                        
drunkennesse, Lots incest,Gen. 12 
                        Abrahams double deniallGen. 20 of his wife, Rebecca herGen. 27 lie and deceit, Iacobs lie, Simeon
                        Gen. 34
                        Gen. 37 and Leuie's murder,Exod. 2 
                        Rachels theft, the whole Patriarches bloody deuise againstNum. 20 their brother, Moses slaughter, Moses & Aarons
                        2. Sam. 11 murmuring, Dauids murther and adultery, Salomons
                        1. Kin. 11 idolatry, and finally, Mathew a publican, all theMat. 20 
                        Apostles ambitious, Magdalen a notorious sinner,Luk. 19 
                        Zacheus an oppressor & extortioner, the Theefe on the Crosse a notorious malefactor, Peter a denier, Thomas
                        Ioh. 18 Act. 9 a doubter, Paul a persecuter of Christ. But to this purpose appeared the Sonne of God, that he might loose

the workes of the diuell:Ioh. 3. 8 for surely there is none iust in the earth that doth good and sinneth not, for who can say, I haue made my heart cleare, I am cleane from my sinne, all like sheepEccl. 7. 22 haue gone astray, euery one hath turned to his owne way, yet I haue laide vpon my Sonne the iniquity of you all: For the trangressionPro. 29 of my people was hee plagued, though hee had done no wickednesse, neither was any deceit in hisEsa. 53. 7. 8. 9 mouth, hee was counted with the trespassers, and he bare the sinne of many and prayed for the trangressors: there is none good but I, when thou hast done all isMark. 10 commanded thee, yet art

thou an vnprofitable seruant, thou hast but doneLuk. 17. xo that which was thy duty to doe: now then there is no difference betwixt thee and others, for all haue sinned, and are depriued of the glorieRom. 3. 23 24 of God: and are iustified freely by grace, thorough the redemption, that is, in Christ Iesus my Son, whom I haue set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousnesse by the forgiuenesse of thy sins, that are passed through the patience of God; hast thou laid vp these things in thy poore soule.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     The heauen (alas) doth

declare my wickednesse & the earth doth rise vppe againstIob. 20. 27 mee, great is thy goodnesse which thou hastPsa. 31. 19 laide vp for them that feare thee, and done to them that trust in thee; but sinners areEsa. 33. 12 13. affraid, a feare doth come vpon hypocrites, who can dwell with the deuouring fire? Who shall dwell with euerlasting burningss? wee conceiue chaffe, and bring forth stubble, our breath as fire shall deuoure vs, and we shall be as the burnings of lime, as thornes cut vpEecl. 8. 8 shall they bee burnt in the fire, for wickednesse shallWis. 5. 17 20. not deliuer the possessor thereof; thou armest thy creatures to be reuenged of thy enemies, and the world

shall fight with thee against the vniust, which haue kindled a fire in thy wrathIer. 37. 4 which shall burne for euer, thou art wise in heart O Lord, & mighty in strength,Iob. 9. 4 who hath beene fierce against thee and prospered? who shall stand in thy sightPsa. 76. 7 when thou art angry? alas, my silthinesse shall bee discouered, and my shame shal bee seene.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     I will goe and returne to my place till thou acknowledge thy offences, and seekHos. 5. 15 my face in thy affliction, if thou wilt seeke mee earely, feare not, thou shalt not be ashamed, neither shalt thou

be confounded, for thy maker is thy husband, theEsa. 54. Lord of hoasts is his name, and thy Redeemer the holy5 one of Israel: the God of the whole earth am I called,6 for I haue called thee being as a woman forsaken and7 grieued in spirit, and a wife8 of youth when thou wast refused, saith thy God, for9 a small moment haue I forsaken thee, but with great10 mercies will I gather thee: In a little wrath, I hid my face frō thee for a moment, but with euerlasting kindnesse will I haue mercy on thee, saith the Lord, thy Redeemer: For this is as the waters of Noah vnto mee, for as I haue sworn that the waters of Noah shall no

more goe ouer the earth, so haue I sworne that I would not bee wroth with thee nor rebuke thee, for the mountaines shall depart and the hills be remooued, but my kindnesse shall not depart from thee, neither shall the couenant of my peace be remoued, saith the Lord, that hath mercy vpon thee, this is the heritage ofver. 17. my seruants, and their righteousnesse is of me, saith the Lord, nowe then encline thine eares and come vnto mee, heare & thy soule shall liue, and I will make an euerlasting couenant with thee, euen the sure mercies of Dauid, behold I haue giuen him for a witnesse to the people, and for a leader

and commander to them, therefore goe thou out withEsa. 55. 3 ioy, and be lead forth with12 peace, the mountaines and hills shall breake forth before13 thee in singing, and all the trees of the fielde shall clap their hands, it shall bee to mee for a name, and for an euerlasting signe that shall not be cut off.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     I confesse thy saluation shall bee for euer, and thy righteounesse shall not beeEsa. 51. 6 abolished, though I saide in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight, yet thou heardestPsa. 31. 22 the noyse of my prayer whē I cryed vnto thee, and am fully assured that thou

which hast promised, art alsoRom. 4. 21 able to doe it.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Thou doest well (beloued soule) to acknowledge thy sin, to deale with them as thou hast done, and as a iudge doth with malefactors, to apprehend, raigne, and condemne them, for he that hideth his sinnes shall not prosper, but hee thatPro. 28. 13 confesseth and forsaketh them shall haue mercy, for as thou hast declamed against thy sinnes, so haue the Saints before thee, for they acknowledged theirPsa. 32. 5 sinne vnto mee, neither didPsa. 51 hide their iniquity: for they

thought they would confesse against thēselues their sinnes vnto mee, and I forgaue the punishment of their sinnes, and so also myNeh. 9. 33 34. seruant said vnto mee, surely thou art iust in all that is come vpon vs, for thou hast dealt truely, but wee haue dealt wickedly. So did another protest against himselfeDan. 9. 5. and his people, wee sinned and haue committed iniquity, & haue done wickedly, yea haue rebelled & haue departed from thy precepts and from thy iudgements: Vncouer thou thy sinne and I will couer it, declare thou it and I will heare thee, in the worlde confession is confusion, but with mee it is farre otherwise,

for if thou acknowledge thy sinnes, I am faithfull and iust to forgiue thee all thy finnes, and to cleanse thee from all vnrighteousnesse, and truly deare soule, it is of my grace begun in thee, that thou breakest out in confession of them, willingly opening them and stripping them naked before my Maiesty, for he that is penitent before mee and my Angels (with whom there is greater ioy in heauenLuk. 15 for one that repenteth, then for ninty and nine that need not repentance) I will not sticke to confesse before the face of men: It is not of nature, for Adam whilstGen. 3 I pushed his conscience, couered himselfe with figge

leaues, I send a noyse and voyce, hee betooke him to the thicke wood, and last I vrged him with questions, yet hee shifted off his sinne to Euah, and this confession that the sight of misery and feare of punishment haue taken out of thee, is a heauenly preparatiue to a greater measure of my grace to be wrought in thee.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     If one man sinne against another, the Iudge shall iudge it, but if a man sinne2. Sa. 2. 25 against thee O Lord, who will pleade for him? yea he must be swallowed vp with2. Cor. 2. 7 heauinesse: If wee say wee haue a couenant with death

or with hell & are at agreement, though a scourge run ouer and passe through, it shall not come at vs; for wee haue made falshoode our refuge, and vnder vanity are wee hid: O but how innumerable haue beene punished for their trespasses, euen here in this worlde: Adam cast out of paradise,Exod. 32 the world destroyed by water, Sodome and Gomorrah by fire, Pharaoh by the Sea, Amaleck rooted out, 3 thousand killed for the worship of the golden Calfe, Nadab
                        Num. 10 and Abihu burnt with fire, Myriam stricken with leaprosie, for incredulity three hundred thousand besideNum. 12 young ones and seruants that came out of Egypt (except

                        Ioshuah and Caleb) fell in the wildernesse, Corath
                        Num. 16 & Dathan swallowed quick into the earth, Moses andNum. 20 
                        Aaron excluded the LandNum. 25. for murmuring, the Princes of the people hanged, Achan stoned, the tribe ofIud. 19. 20 
                        Beniamim ouerthrowen for the Leuites wife, Eli for not1. Sam. 15 correcting his children, Saul for sacrificing, and after him2. Kin. 11 all his house punished. What shall I say of those that died of the pestilence in Dauids dayes, the disobedient2. Sam. 24 1. Kin. 13 Prophet rent by the Lion, the forty children by the bores, for mocking Elizeus,
                        1. King. 2 of Geetze, or Hosiah the King, willing to burne incense,2. Chro. 26 with many more, as Ananias and Saphyra, Elimas
                        
the sorcerer, Iudas and Theudas and some of them for very meane sinnes to the iudgement of men, yea and the Galileans, whose sacrifice Pilate mixed with their blood, and the builders of the Tower of Shiloh which fell vpon them, which were not the greatest sinners, and vnlesse I repent I shall also be punished; Saue mee O Lord, and take the glory thereof to thy selfe, for, for not giuing it thee, Herod
                        Act. 12 was consumed of wormes, thus thou doest lay the wickeds way vpon their owneEzek. 11. 21 heads.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     The cause of all terrours

and troubles in thy minde, are thy sins: I see and thou knowest it, for they doe infect thy minde and conscience with their guilt, from which guiltinesse proceedeth a fearfull expectation of these punishments thou hast spoken of, to the which thou perceiuest thou art iustly liable, neither canst thou be freed from this guiltinesse and fearefull pangs, vntill thou (thy sinnes beeing done away) be reconciled to me: for then, and not before, shalt thou haue peace of conscience, boldnesse and confidence, when thou art assured that I loue thee, and thou mee, and so canst rest on my promises and prouidence, for there

is no feare in loue, but perfectIoh. 4. 8 loue casteth out feare, for feare hath painefulnesse, and hee that feareth is not perfect in loue: the wicked flye when none pursueth,Pro. 28. 1 but the righteous are bolde as a Lion, and thouh thou shouldest walke throughPsa. 32. 4 the valley of the shadow of death, thou wouldest feare no euill, because I am with thee, and with my rod and staffe comfort thee: So being iustified, and assured once of my loue, thou maist be fully perswaded, that nothing is able to seperateRom. 8. 39 thee from my loue, which is in Christ Iesus; where innocency is, there is security,Rom 5. 1 for where iustification and assurance of remission

of sinnes is, there is peace with mee, with the creatures, and ioy in the holy Ghost. Vse the meanes for obtaining of faith, as hearing, receipt of the Sacraments, prayer, meditation, conference; if thou bee not wanting to thy selfe, I will not be wanting vnto thee, and next approue thy faith by repentance, for I haue bound my selfe by promise, that all that turne from their sinnes, shall in my Son be reconciled vnto mee: for I craue▪ no more, but that thou beleeue onely, and bring foorth fruits of a new life; for this is thy part in the couenant with mee, for sinnes repented of, are forgiuen in my estimate, as

though they had neuer been committed, & because thou by these meanes art receiued vnto the protection of my prouidence; thou maist be vndoubtedly assured, that all things whatsoeuer (yea in thy iudgement, the worst also) shall make together for thy good, Be strong and of a good courage, it is I that am with thee, who can be against thee?
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     Is not thy worde euen like a fire O Lord? doth not my heart burne within me, while thou talkest with me,Ier. 23. 29 & openest to me the Scriptures, and manifesteth the word, which is like a hammerLuk. 24 32
                        
that breaketh the stone, thou onely canst quicken the dead in sinne, and callRom. 4. 17 those things which be not, as though they were, but (alas) how slow am I to beleeue,Luk. 24. 25 and how hard is my heart.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     The occasion of thy euill may bee outward, but the cause is inward, else neuer should Satan, flesh, or the world preuaile, my Sonne was assaulted, but Satan found nothing in him, neither was there guile in his lips, Satan doth offer, thou doest yeelde to tentations, if thou canst bee aduersary to thy corruption, Satan

shall be but as a Chyrurgion, which launceth thy impostumation to preserue life, howsoeuer hee purposeth to haue wounded to thy heart: Ioseph by grace restrained his corruption, concerning Putifars wife, Dauids eyes opened the vaile to his corrupted heart, so sin in him with Bethsheba grew to age, in what measure thou withstandeth thy corruption, in that measure thou art regenerate, and assured to preuaile against strongest tentations, thou maist easily espy thy corruption best, by thy afflictions or by affections, for such is a man as hee is in tentation; the heart of man carrieth commonly all the other

senses, for by it they are moderated and ruled, and therefore thou shouldest diligently keepe it: againe, it marres or makes all thy actions, for if it bee pure, thy affections are pure, yea though some defects bee mixed therewith, whatsoeuer commeth from a sound and sincere heart, in my eyes is accepted, and in my Christ accounded righteousnes vnto thee: if for sins sake thou leaue sin, though the lees thereof remaine in thee, though thou doe not all the good thou louest, but in loue desireth to doe it, though thou leaue not all the sinnes thou hatest, but in hatred of them I accept the good thou doest, the

euill thou desirest to leaueGen. 6 shall not bee imputed: thus striue to haue thy heartMic. 2 right within thee, with a purpose to approue thy selfeIer 17. 9 to mee, labouring to kill sinne, though the whole bodyPro. 4 15 16 of sinne be not slaine in thee. There is a wickednes in thy heart cannot easily be espied, the subtilty thereof is vnsearchable, which should bring thee out of loue with thy selfe, & watch diligently ouer it, it is like a mill euer grinding, thou must circumcise it, and make it to bleed to emptie it, for there is so much superfluous matter in it.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     Wash mee thoroughlyPsa. 51. 3. 5
                        
from my iniquity, & cleanse mee from my sinne O Lord, beholde I was shapen in iniquity, and in sinne did my mother conceiue mee, create in mee a cleane heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me, I feele alas in my corrupt heart such a world of sinnes, and in euery one of them a fault against thee my God, a guilt binding my conscience to the punishment of of eternall death, and a staine or blot imprinted in mee, as the fruite thereof, which is my inclination, euill disposition, prouenesse and aptnesse of heart to offend, which causeth me delight and liue in sin, which lying in sinne (and woe is

mee therefore) is a greater cause of damnation then the sinne it selfe.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Thou must beware of thy thoughts, which are the feet and wings, the soule walkes & flies by, yea the waggon and boate it is caried and failed in; for an euil thought if it long tarry in the mind, it will hardly be restrained before it come to the outwarde act, and such monsters of the minde should make thee affraid, & suspect thy falling in the action of sinne, by the affection of it; thou must therefore search thy heart, which is a bottomlesse pit of corruption,

and it is a speciall grace to gage it to the deepe, for hee that maketh conscience of his thoughts, will make conscience of his deeds; for if thy heart be found in my my statutes, thou shalt not bee ashamed; Keepe theePs. 119. 80 from thoughts iniected, as was Iudas, his, cast in his heart by Sathan, and ofIoh. 13 thoughts arising out of it, beware of staying in them, by taking pleasure in these immaginations, and delight in the sent of them; for consent of will, with mee is a full action, Iudas thought but to doe euill, and it is said, that thou doest, doe quickly; after commeth deuise to bring to passe the act that followeth, whence

ariseth a benummed conscience, after diuerse actions, then defence or excuse, then boasting of it, and this is the wickeds chayre, and steps to hell: then be ashamed to thinke that thou art ashamed to speake, for I seePro. 14 thy heart and thoughts, & know what thou art, striue against them, and if they yet remaine, haue indignation of them, feare and cry to mee that thou art troubled with them, and I will ease thee; for iustly doe I challenge thy heart, who gaue my Sonnes heart to be2. Kin. 20 18 pierced for thee: thus thou must obey against thine inclination, and naturall reason,Ier. 42. 6 For what is faith but a contrariety to reason? and

hope to experience? and lay not downe thine owne conclusions: I am wel pleased with thy intents which prepare thy heart to seeke mee, the seeds of all sinnes are in euery mans heart, which would appeare if I suppressed them not, the tongue is a worlde of wickednesse, what is the heart then, out of whose aboundance the mouth speaketh?
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     I know that in mee, that is, in this flesh, there dwelleth no goodnesse; but euery good and perfect gift is from aboue, from thee the father of lights, open my eyes I beseech thee, that I

may see the maruellous things in thy law, I cannot leaue (alas) my sinne, I haue vsed it so often and so long, it is so plyable to my nature, that I would rather lose my life, hauing long accustomed it, then now cease from it, and yet I am now and then tormented with the memory of it; my conscience is a snare to mee, yea an assize, a bench, a iudge, a iaylour, yea a hangman it selfe to me, and whither shall I flie poor wretch?
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     It is good to learne thy inward corruptions by thy outward senses, thy sense leades thee to sinne, because

thy heart leadeth thy sense, & thy corruption hath stolen away thy heart; for outward senses bewray thy inward affections, & therefore Christ will neuer bee sweet, vntill thou see, yea and feele in experience, thy naturall corruption, for none can hunger for righteousnesse except hee feele himselfe empty and wanting thereof, and where there is an exceeding hunger, there must bee an exceeding feeling, as a feeble and small hunger had the like feeling: comforte then thy selfe, in that thou feelest the impurenesse of thy heart, and want of vprightnesse and deadnesse to all goodnesse,

for the feeling of their wants is quicknesse and liuing, and this quicknesse and life is by my spirit in thee, and where my spirit is, there is life euerliuing, which is regeneration or life euerlasting; & the more thou doest feele the one, the more deepely doest thou weigh the feeling of thy confused estate, by which thou findest comfort in sorrow, & great light in darknesse: and in this, that thou both sighest and groanest for the hardnes of thy heart, it is a testimony that thy hart is not altogether hardned, for if thou feelest this in thy selfe, that thou desirest to loue mee, and to bee better, being wearied and

toyled with sinne; & comfort thy selfe, for it is in earnest of regeneration, for difference betwixt a motion to euill, and consent to it; for the body of sinne, wicked motions, and affecons, shall neuer bee out of thee while thou liue, thou must not onely striue to presse out the breath of sin, and close vp the eyes of it at the death of it, but to follow it to the graue, and couerReuel. 3. 15 12 22 it that it neuer rise, for this is to ouercome and receiue the crowne, not that the life of sinne can be here destroyed, but may well be weakened, as the mangled part of a Serpent cut in peeces, haue not that power to hurt as when it was whole

so corruptiō hath not siercenesse to preuayle against thee, how-soeuer the reliques thereof remaine but like a mighty Prince, which is become a poore prisoner.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     I by reason of my olde custome in sinne, doe often yeelde to tentations, I doe not abound more and more in wisedome and goodnes, but rather perseuere in sinne and rebellion, Lord thou knowest, and I feare (vnlesse thy mercy be the greater) the sentence of my conscience which is thy register, and my remembrancer, the wicked may bee secure, but neuer in safety,
                  
                  
                     
                     Lord.
                     Custome is worse a hundredGer. 42. 14 15 folde then nature, and doth greatly preuaile with my dearest children: Ioseph a good man, beeing among prophane men, had some smell of their wordes and lied: The Sodomites by their vniust conuersation, vexed Lots righteous soule, yet hee could haue found in his heart to liue still amongst them, therefore there is nothing more fit, then to auoid all occasions of sinne, and & to procure honest things both in the sight of God & man, and then in all actions to auoide euill, thou must learne to keepe that which

is good, and abstaine from all appearance of euill, bee sure it be good thou doest, but if it haue but a shew of euill auoide it, and if it be an ill fauoured thing to see to, flie it. If thou heare threatnings and tremble, heare promises and beleeue, pray in wants, be thankfull for mercies, and with reuerence receiue Sacraments, they keep thee from falling, and recouer thee when thou art fallen, it goeth wel with thee; to prosper and thriue in sinne, is a signe of my wrath, as the childe thatHeb. 12. 6 the father hateth is giuen ouer to be ruled by his owne pleasure, but I chastise my children whom I loue, that1. Cor. 11 32 they should not be condemned

with the world: again, thou wilt neuer leaue sinne, vntill thou knowe sinne to be sinne, and be truely sorrowfull for it: presse to resist the first motions of sin, for one breedeth many, & it is hard to get out of the clawes of the diuell, thou canst without great danger touch the young thorne, dallie with the young bore, and carry a young Serpent, but if these bee olde thou knowest the danger, cut the thorne in the roote, mussle the boare, bruise the head of the Serpent, yea destroy it in the very egge before it be hatcht; by the fall of others in sinne, thou maist be taught to stand, and rise if thou be fallen, and as cō
                        cerning

the accusation of thy conscience thou speakest of, thou shalt neuer labour to leaue sinne so long as thou art quiet in minde, vntill thou be stricken with feare, or cast downe with iudgements, then if thou looke to my highest maiesty offended by sinne, the benefits which bound thee to doe my will, how neare thy sinnes pierce mee, the purpose and ende thou tendest to in sinne, the time and place of transgression, & last if thou see the loathsomenesse and deformity of sinne: for that a stinching carrion is more tolerable to the sent, then a sinfull soule vnto me, if thou narrowly consider how huge and detestable

thy sins will seeme, for by them thou art made like vnto the diuell himself, I haue imprinted naturally in all a condemnation of sinne, that euen committing it, thou shouldest condemne it in thy selfe, and be ashamed of it before others, wo vnto them that are depriued of this naturall remorse, & to them that account that vertue, which I condemne for a crime, though it seem little to thee in committing sinne, it was very great in my Sonne in suffering for it, if sinnes were not so vsuall, they would seeme more palpeable and prodigious, and therefore the senses which are oceasions of sinne, ought to be well ordered,

to make a couenant with thy eyes, with thy mouth and eares, that thy heart walke not after them, that thy step turne not out of the way, and any blotIob. 31. 1. 7 cleaue to thy hands, he that seeth his corruptions truely will bee affraid of the least shew of euill, the oftner sin is, to haue the more griefe,Ps 42. 11. 9 is a note of my children, search then the bottome of thy thoughts, feele thy grief where it lyeth, finde out the cause, seek for remedy, least it proue incurable, if thou take it not in time, it will fester more and more, and infect all.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     O how truely is my body

called a body of death, thou shouldest take vp and haue to thy glory all my cogitations, but idle thoughts, imaginations and discourses come in my ninde, to the which alas I yeeld my affection, and doe not strike at my conscience in theIam. 1. 13 first motion, while reason is on my side, and wound it before it receiue a perfect shape, O that I might cherish and intertaine good motions and change them into prayer, not to smother them by other rouing2. Pet. 3 cogitations, making them either die presently, or quikly fall away, and thusPro. 14. 9 (alas) I make a mocke of sinne, yea I make a God ofRom. 2. 4. 5 sinne, and serue it in thy

steed, neglecting thy bountifulnesse, which leadeth me to repentance, if thou shouldest Lord suffer my conscience checke me, and Satan burden mee, with the least sinne, it would bee so heauy and grieuous, that a thousand worlds could not abide it, how could I then endure the greatest? Adam for eating of an apple was throwne out of Paradise, Moses for speaking of an angry worde died in the wildernesse, and was not suffered to goe into Canaan, Ezekiah did but shew his treasures, and for that he & all were carried to Babell, Iosiah did war against thine and his enemies, yet because hee asked not counsel

of thee was slaine in battell: these (for what sinnes are lesse) hast thou punished in thy deare children, O what shall become of mee in my great sinnes, if the iust shal scarcely bee saued, where shall the wicked appeare? if this shall bee done vnto the greene tree, what shall bee done to the dry? the least offence commeth not alone, but brings a legion of transgressions with it, yea the least made thy Son smart and accursed, and to say, my God, my God, ctc. and O that no sinne could escape mee without true & godly sorrow, for the lesse I fauour sinne, the nearer I am to▪ thy fauour, small meanes doe prouoke me to

it, but great meanes cannot reuoke me from it, the spirit is quickly quenched, the tender conscience is soone bruised, olde sinnes doe retire,Pro. 15. 15 new sinnes easily assault, and doe depriue mee of the company of a good conscience.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Thou must (deare soule) beware of all sinne generally, and must looke narrowly vnto some speciall sinnes, whereunto thy nature is most inclinable and subiect: for one dead slye will corrupt a whole boxe of oyntment. Oftentimes meditate of thy secret sins, which are hidden as it were

in the darke corners of thy heart, which I can reueale when I will, in making my creatures bring vnto light, thy friends to open them, thy owne mouth to testifie them, thy dreames to make them knowne, in sicknesse to raue on them, or in frensie to vomit them out, the sharpe torment of conscience make thee cōfesse one priuie sinne vnrepented, for if the Israelites made theIud. 17 
                        Beniaminites, fewer in number, and maintaining an euill cause twice to preuaile. It is not light that is heauier then all the world, I esteemMat. 51 one iot of my lawe, more then heauen and earth, secret corruptions be light, as Baltasar was in Daniels interpretation,Dan. 5. 27
                        
which is the losse not of an earthly kingdome such as his was, but of the kingdome of heauen; the maladies of the soule are contrarie to those of the body, for these the greater they be, the more we seele them, the other the lesse, while thy sinne is as a more, and may bee as it were blowen out, make thee free of it; when it shall bee a beame, it shall scarce be haled out with horses, it shold be thy earely and morning worke to cast out sinnes,Psa. 101. 8 tarry not while thy sinne be great, but pray with feeling of wants and sorrowe for sinne, else sinne will deceiue thee, and deceiuing thee will harme thee, make fatte

thy heart thou shalt not perceiue it, & blinde thy minde thou shalt not see it, for when wickednesse is at the ripest, then destruction is nearest at hand, wherefore while sinne is yet in the sprout, and hauing but a little course, is vnable to make any great breach, keepe it vnder and stay it, is is hard to get vnto the way of goodnesse, harder to continue in it, but hardest of all when thou art out of the way to come in again, when sinne breaketh out without controulement, and beareth the sway with delight, to the breaking of the peace with the conscience, it is very dangerous, thou oughtest of ten to say, direct my

steps in thy worde, and let no iniquity haue dominion ouer mee, keepe mee fromPs 119. 133 presumtuous sins, let them not raigne ouer mee, tarrie not I say vntill the deadPsa. 19 13 blow commeth, but resist the first stroakes of sinne, for then thou maiest be easily hardened thorough the deceitfulnesse of sinne, to day if thou heare my voyce,Heb. 3 harden not thy heart; the violence of sinne is so impetuous that thou mayest soone slip, but hardly rise: blessed therefore is the manPsa. 95. 8 that feareth alway, but hee that hardeneth his heart shall fall into euill; without sinne thou shalt not be, but pray it may be forgiuen, neither voyd of tentations (for

of all tentations not to bee tempted is the greatest) but that thou bee not ouercome of them.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     I perceiue (sweet Lord) there is difference betwixt slumbering and dead sleeping, betweene slippes and falles, betwixt infirmities and running headlong to vngodlinesse, betwixt error with griefe and desire to be freed from it, and ignorance wherein the wicked lie still gladly, and haue no care to be rid of it: I will with my whole minde leaue my sins from hence forth, & suspect the corruptions and motions of my heart.
                  
                  
                     
                     Lord.
                     It is not sufficient (poor soule) for thee to learne thy sinne, for thou maiest fall into it againe, and into worse if it bee possible, but thou must weep & mourne vntil thou com to som grief, and such as is answerable to the measure of thy sinnes, as it is saide, cleanse yourIam. 4. 8. 9 hands you sinners, and pufie your hearts you double minded, bee afflicted and mourne and weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your ioy into heauinesse: grieuous sins must be repented of with great griefe, a sore disease must be cured with sharpe medicines,

for men must mourne for their sins as one mourneth for his only sonne, and and be sorrowfull for them, as one is sorrowfull for the death of his first born, there must bee in them a great mourning, as the mourning of Hadradimmon, in the valley of Megiddan, for the death of the good King Iosiah, euen so must thou mourne, because thou hast pierced my Sonne thorough with thy sinnes, and wounded him with thy by-past abhominations, and thus thou must rent thy heart; for a sa man that looks vpon the Sunne, if hee turne his face away, remaineth turned vntill he turne himselfe againe, so hee that turneth

himselfe away by sinne, maketh himselfe a sinner, and so remaineth vntill he turne himselfe againe by hearty repentance, and therefore thou must diligently examine thy sinnes, not onely in acknowledging of them, but also in sense and feeling of them, for that will make thee, not to change one sin for another, but forsake all; not as Herod, who was contented to relinquish some,Mar. 10. 24 but not to seperate from his incestuous whore; and the young man would rather depart from me (albeit that I loued him) then from his riches. So did Ananias andAct. 5 
                        Saphyra, it must then bee a totall not partiall forsaking, for whosoeuer shall keepe

the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guiltie of all; for the keeping of sinne in part is the losingIam. 2. 10. of grace in whole, ye must not forsake sinne for a moment, or short time, but for euer, and not returne with the dogge to the vomit, and with the sow to the wallowing in the mire, least hauing escaped the filthinesse of this world, thou bee yet again intangled in the same▪ for sinnes not truely repented of, are meanes to fall vnto them againe, thou must not harbour secret sinnes in thy heart and breast, but rather desire to be religious then to seeme to be; for be assured there is nothing so secret but shal

be reuealed, whether it bee good or bad, thou must not then begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, and not only art thou thus to deale with thy grosse sinnes, but also with the inwarde corruption of thy nature, and the fruits thereof, which although thou canst not altogether blot out, yet beat it downe, and keepe it short, for while the tree remayneth in the earth, there wil alwaies spring foorth some buds; rest neuer from emptying this fountaine, from which these mudde springs are deriued.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     By reason of my inward

corruption (good God) I am impoysoned, for I see another lawe in my members rebelling against the lawe af my minde, & bringingRom. 7. 23 me vnto captiuity, the lawe of sinne which is in my members; oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer mee from this body of death: for if Satan (who neuer ceaseth) should do nothing to me, yet this would pull and drawe mee from thee, vnlesse it be suppressed, oh that bondage of sin to bee at the commandement of euery vile wretched lust! oh the master, the seruice and reward of sinfull persons, Satan that God of this world, and Prince that ruleth in the children of disobedience,Ephe. 2. 2
                        
hee putteth his vassailes to carry heauier burthens, and to toile themselues in baser workes then the cruell taske-masters of Egypt imposed on the poore Israelites, impenitent sinners are enthraled to euery bruitish lust, they must defile their bodies, corrupt their soules & consciences, and pollute all their works and wayes, when and in what manner soeuer the diuell will haue them, runne vp and downe like dregges to followe euery vaine delight, neuer peaceable by day, nor quiet by night, euermore labouring to workPro. 4. 16 out their owne ouerthrow, possessed with a spirituall phrensie, and led by the suggestion

of Satan, and then the wages of sinne it death, to endure endlesse torments in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: now Lord free mee from this slauery of sinne, that beeing translated from glory2. Cor. 3. 18 to glory, and hauing thy image renued in mee daily1. Ioh. 3. 3 more and more, I may purifie my selfe euen as thou art pure: oh that I might be fenced & armed against all enticements, it is a blessed thing to worke no iniquity; what should it profit a man to win the wholeLuk. 9. 21 worlde and lose his owne soule, it is better to suffer affliction with thy people, then to enioy the pleasuresHeb. 11. 25
                        
of sinne for a season; it is a ioy to liue a holy life, euen the life of thee the Lord God, the life of Christ, the life of Angels, to bee zealous of good workes, to feele spirituall ioyes in the inward man, to looke for a crowne of glory after I haue died the death of the righteous.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     And so it is true, therefore I say, search thy corruptions, whether thou grow in grace, or art consumed in some, I giue grace in measure, sometime more, andRom. 6. 2 some time lesse; but they that liue in ignorance and sinne, are deade for they sitLuk. 1
                        
in darknesse and in the shadow of death, for the life of sinne is the death of the man, when they sinne with pleasure and delight: the best flesh is most tender, and where it is most corrupt, there it is most hard, and where the flesh is nearest to healing, there it will more speedily and more freshly bleed, the more neare thou art to me, the more fearefull thou wilt bee, the more pretious thy conscience is, the more tender it is, for it is a quickning grace of my spirit whē thou feelest peace in conscience,Rom. 5. 5 and ioy in the holy spirit, when thou hast accesse vnto me, and reioycest vnder the hope of my glory,

for blessed is that people which can reioyce in mee, they shall walke in the peace of my countenance; vnto this peace of mindePsa. 89. 13 sincerity must bee linked, for blessed is the man to whom I impute no iniquity,Psa. 32 and in whose heart there is no guile, yea blessed arePsa. 119. 1 those that are vpright in the way; thou must make knowne thy faith by fruits, and feeling by sweete effects; for loue is carefull to please mee, and fearfull to displease, and blessed is that man that feareth mee and walketh in my wayes; this feare will breed a care of obedience of the word, and therefore blessed is hee that heareth the word of God,

and keepeth that thy heart may stand in awe of mee:Ps. 119. 161 let mee bee thy feare and dread, where my feare isEs. 8. 12 wanting, there is no tentation nor sin so great, but thou wilt fall in it, but remember I beholde all thy wayes, and tell all thy steps,Iob 31 hee that feareth not me shal feare the least of my creacreatures, liue in feare, and feare in loue, for tasting how gracious I am in all my Saints feare, least thou lose so good a Lord, this feare will make thee search thy owne corruption, the godly feare before affliction commeth, and then it ceaseth, but the wicked fear not vntill it come, and then they feare too much, for piety

trembleth in prosperity, and triumpheth in aduersity, I am alwaies God, and am to bee feared of thee, for thou art a creature, and also sinfull, an iron rod can easily break an earthen pot: if the commandement onely, keepe thee in obedience, thou hast not receiued my spirit, for my feare causeth obedience, and the lawe was not giuen to the iust, but to the vniust, and therefore learne to say with thy heart, I am a man that feare God, thou canst not reioyce in mee alwaies, faith is often faint, loue and little ioy is dead, feeling is fallen asleepe, yet if thou continue in my feare, thou wilt bee zealous of thy selfe, least

thou displease me, & mourn vntill these graces shine in thee againe, the godly, feare sinne more then exernall crosses; they that feare least, when my iudgements are threatned, doe feare most when they are executed, a good conscience breedeth true boldnesse, sinne breedeth a spirit of feare in the wicked, of euills to come, the godly say, my flesh trē
                        blethPs. 119. 120 for feare of thee, I am affraide of thy iudgements, for where feare is not there is security, security breedeth hardnesse ofPro. 28. 14 heart, hardnesse of heart bringeth Gods wrath.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     Wee must haue feare to

prepare vs to grace, & loue to continue vs in that grace; this feare (not that seruile and excessiue) bringeth vs vnto thee, helpeth our praiers, causeth vs waite & continue on our duties, I mustHeb. 11. 7 not bee without feare, neither trust in my selfe; forHab. 3. 16 when my assistance is weakest, sinne and Sathan is strongest; neither yet must I haue a cowardly feare. & fainting of heart to yeelde to tētations, but haue a moderate, and not a scrupulous feare; alawies being strong in thee, the Lord, my strength; the ioy of the Saints may bee temporally interrupted, but not finally & eternaly absent, they haue a iust and royall right in thy

Sonne Christ; and must maintaine it against all the staines and falls that they feare of the aduersary, thus Satan would weare to a dulnesse the edge of our prayers, and draw to tedidiousnesse the fruite of our faith, and therefore theyPro. 3. 5. 6 trust in the Lord with all their heart, and leane not vnto their owne wisedome, in all their waies acknowledgeRo. 12. 16 him, and hee doth direct their waies, they are not wise in their owne eies, but feare thee and departe from euill, so health shall bee vnto their nauell, and marow vnto their bones, they reioyce in his holy name, the hearts of them that feele thee, O Lord, reioyceth,

they seek the LordPs. 105. 3. 4 and his strength, they seeke his face continually, for surely their heart shall reioycePsa. 33. 21 in him, because they haue trusted in his holy name: they I say, doe seruePsa. 2. 11 the Lord in feare, and reloyce in trembling, oh thy louing kindnesse O Lord,Psa. 33. 6 is better then life, truely life is sowen for the righteous, and ioy for the vprightPs. 9711 in heart, but (alas good Lord) I doe euer feele within mee such procliuity and bentnesse to sinne, it is as thou saidst of my corruption, whose remnants will follow mee to the graue: I am ouer-mastered & ouerruled at all times by my actuall impieties against thee,

and my neighbours, offensiue and scandalous to all, without any Christian consideration, or holy remorse.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     The cause thereof, besides those I haue spoken, are, first, because thou findest not after thy sinne a present controulement of sinne, thou thinkest thou hast not offended: I oft suffer the spirit of slumber to ouertake trangressors, that I may by my spirit more perfectly waken my Saints: then doe the wicked take courage and transgresse, and doe wickedly, but I wilHab. 1 11 search them with light, and visite them that are frosen in their dregges, and say inZeph. 1. 12
                        
their hearts, they Lord wil neither doe good nor euill; so because the wicked are not taken in their sin, they stretch out their hand toIob. 21. 9 more wickednesse, their houses are safe from feare, neither is my rodde vpon them, they say vnto me depart from vs, for wee desire not the knowledge of thy wayes; but they shallIer. 12. 2. 3 bee as stubble before the winde, and as chaffe which the storme carrieth suddenly away: I shall lay vp his iniquity for his children, doth the way of the wicked prosper? yet are they prepared for the day of slaughter, and the worlde counteth the proude blessed,Mal. 3. 15 and they that tempt me, are

deliuered, but I haue a booke of remembrance, of them that feare me, and the armes of the wicked shall be broken, but the LordePsa. 31. 17 vpholdeth the iust man. The second cause is, because thou resteth in my vniuersal promises, which although they be true and comfortable, yet they can minister no true consolation to thee, except thou make a particuler application of them to thy selfe; by the word thou seest thy sinnes pardonable, yet it is another thing to haue sinnes remissible, and another to assure thy selfe that they are already remitted, for then thou wouldest search thy selfe more narrowly, and purge thy

selfe from inwarde sinne, as from outward, and bee wholly transformed vnto a new holy & righteous life, therefore the loue of righteousnesse departeth from thee, and thou retirest to thy olde sins againe, which will breed much sorrowe of heart, to remember thy former sinnes, to see the greatnesse of them, to apply my iudgements to them, and to prouoke thy selfe to sorrow for them. The third cause, is thy slacknes, in not espying thy mother, speciall and predominant sinne in thee, by marking the most checks of thy conscience, and the reproaches of thy enemies, whereof thou maiest easily bee shortly conquerour, if

thou labour for the contrarie vertue, for a man of vnderstanding knoweth whenEccl. 21. 7 hee slippeth, yea all the dayes of the afflicted are euill; but hee that is of a merry heart hath a continuall feast, yea and a scorner loueth not one that reprouethPro. 15. 15 him, neither will he goe vnto the wise: then learne to acknowledge thy speciall, secret, and seuerall sinnes, for the greatest hypocrite will generally complaine of sinne, but beeing dealt with in particular points, and application of them to their conscience, they are not able to distinguish one sinne from another: for thus indistinct knowledge cannot auayle

in any terrestriall matter, much lesse in the businesse of the soule.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     And I poore wretch in any perplexity of minde, cannot seperate the blinde and confused cause thereof, from the distinct & known, neither can eschew confusion of minde, by bringing my soule to some certaine obiect, and matter of my troubled heart, good God whence commeth this, and how shall it bee amended in mee.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     The righteous heartPro. 14 10 knoweth the bitternesse of his soule, and the stranger

shall not meddle with thy ioy, for a sound heart is the life of the flesh, and byPro. 15. 3 the sorrow of the heart the minde is heauie, giue not ouer they minde to heauinesse, and vexe not thy selfe in thy owne counsell, leaueEccl. 30. 21 off from sinne, & order thy hands aright: a stubborne heart shall fare euill at the last, and hee that loueth danger shall perish therein.Eccl. 3. 27 Now this disordered discerning of sinne, commeth of ignorance of my lawe, and selfe-loue, whereby thou art ashamed to manifest sinne, and rip it vp to the quick, seeke to a faithfull & sound friend, or Pastor, to whom thou maiest offer thy heart to bee searched deeply by

the lawe, bee continually with a godly man, whom thou knowest to keepe the commandements of the Lord, whose minde is accordingEccl. 37. 12 to thy minde, and will sorrowe with thee, if thou shalt miscarry, and let the counsell of thy owne heart stand, for there is no man more faithfull vnto thee then it, for a mans minde is wont sometimes to tell him more then seuen watchmen, which set aboue in an high Tower, and aboue all thus pray to the most high, that he would direct thy way in truth.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     What shall I doe, if my

griefe arise of any certaine or knowne sinne.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Then vnderstand, if thou hast done that sinne already, or else not yet committed it, but whereunto thou art tempted, for olde sinnes are represented oft to sinners, as not truely repented of, that they may the more mislike them, & that their particular sinnes may bring them to their grosse, greater, and generall sins, that there may bee a sense of both, least their griefe shold passe away without any fruit, and reason thus with thy selfe, if I bee so angry for this or that sin (whereof

thou art troubled, thy bowels swell, thy heart turneth within thee, and thou full of heauinesse) how vexed may thou be; the wickedsLam. 1. 20 bones are full of the sinnes of his youth, and it shall lie downe with himIob. 20. 11 11. 12 in the dust, though wickednesse bee sweete in his mouth, though hee hide it vnder his tongue, though hee spare it, and forsake it not but keepe it still within his mouth, yet his meate in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of aspes within him; I would therefore haue thee know (poore soule) that I2. Pet. 3. 9 would haue no man to perish, but all men to come to repentance.
                  
                  
                     
                     Soule.
                     How shall I then eschew sinne, and how shall I be acquited frō that sin which hath passed me?
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     I haue oft admonished thee of thy corruption, to make account to suppresse it, labour to espy thy secret sinnes, with truth, and not in shew; so hard a matter it is to search thy heart to the bottome, for there is not a more wicked headeEccl. 25. 13 then the head of the Serpent, and giue any plague but the plague of the heart, and therefore in respect of

sinnes past, sinnes present, priuie pride, hidden wants, secret corruptions, euer accuse thy selfe of some lurking hyprosie: for the godly tremble at the least motion of sinne, and say, I will runne the way of thePs. 119. 23 cōmandements, when thou shalt enlarge my heart, bind not two sinnes together, for in one sinne thou shalt not be vnpunished, and becauseEccl. 7. 8 thy sinne is forgiuen, be not without feare, or heape sinne vpon sinne, & say not the mercy of God is great, hee will forgiue myEccl. 5. 5. 6 manifolde sinnes, for mercy and wrath commeth from him, and his indignation commeth downe vpon sinners: the two fountaines

and grounds of sinnes, are the inward motions of the heart, and the outward occasions of the senses, especially the eyes, for whensoeuer a man heareth the word of the kingdome, and vnderstandeth it not, the euill one commeth and catchethMar. 13. 19 away that which was sowen in his heare; neither must thou drawe neare to mee with thy mouth, and thy heart farre off from me, and the things which proceed out of thy mouth, comeMat. 15. 8 from thy heart, and they defile the man, keepe thy heart therefore to lay vppeLuk. 1. 66 good and pretious things therein, as in a store-house,Pro. 4. 23 keepe it I say diligently, for thereout commeth life

againe, vertue & vice dwellPro. 2. 8 very neare together, learne to bee holily scrupelous, fearefull, and suspicious, for preuenting of sin to come, the heart of the wise shall know the time and iudgement, thirdly keep thy selfeEccl. 8. 5 from foolish venturing vpon the occasions which are the borders of sinne, when thou mayest beholde many of my children better fencedMat. 26 with grace then thou art, to haue beene snared: for the foolish will beleeue eueryGen. 3. 6 thing, but the prudent will consider his steps: let thy heart bee therefore inPro. 14 15 feare of God continually, set no wicked thing before thy eyes, hate the worke of them that fall away, let itPro. 33. 17
                        
not cleaue vnto thee.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     Alas good and mercifull father, I doe euer finde in mee so many allurements & intisements to sinne, which often I would eschew but cannot, which offer themselues to mee at euery minute, neither can I retire me selfe from them, albeit I doe sometime protest against them, and abhorre them, eyther before, or soon after the sinne is committed, with a very perfect hatred and loathsomnes.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Thou must seriously obserue,

first of the company to discerne good from euill, for good company hateEphe. 5. 11 the vnfruitfull workes of darkenesse, and in their eies an euill person is contemned, but honoureth them that feare the Lord: withPsa. 15. 4 sound iudgement labour to holinesse and sincerity of life, in all things haue a sight of thy corruptions, & mourne for them, doe good to the houshold of faith,Gal. 6. 10 which continue in one spirite, and in one minde, fighting together thorough thePhil. 1. 27 faith of the gospell, longeth for the appearance of Iesus Christ, but these are euill,2. Pet. 2. 1 that denie the Lord that bought them, & bringEphe. 5. 6 vpon themselues swift damnation,

by whom the wayof truth is euill spoken of,2. Tim. 3 and are of a prophane life, and hate to bee reprooued, but rather grow worse and worse, which persecute the Saints of God, and makeIoh. 16. 1 choyce of the pleasures of sinne for a season, who are affraide of death, and setLuk. 12. 10 vp their heauen and rest in this life, which put farre awayAm. 6. 3 the euill day, and approach to the sight of iniquity, to these thou must fay with Dauid, away from mee yee wicked, for I willPsa. 101. 6 keepe the commandements of my God, my eyes shall bee vpon the faithfull of the land, that they may dwell with me, and therfore thou must (beloued soule) bee

rather wearie of them, because they run the broad way, following first examples: secondly, multitudes: thirdly, time: fourthly, custome: fiftly, opinion.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     I hate vaine inuentions, but thy law doe I loue, thou art my refuge & my shield, and I trust in thy worde, teach me (good Lord) these things particularly, that I may ingraft them in my heart.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Follow the godly, but soHeb. 10 farre as they followe mee, their guide in the word, and

Iesus Christ the author and finisher of their faith, whichHeb. 13. 7 through faith and patience haue inherited the promises: for it is a signe thou art in the wrong way, if thou doe nothing but thatPro. 21. 2 the greatest part of the world doe, for how euill soeuer the way be, and whersoeuer it lyeth, euery mans way is right in his owne eyes, and will defend, or excuse whatsoeuer they doe. But I the searcher of the hearts, do say, your wayesEse. 55. 8 are not my waies, nor your thoughts my thoughts, because they are wrong waies: let euery man turne from1. Pet. 2. 11 his owne wayes, their thoughts are the Diuelles souldiers, which war against

the soule, they followe their Captaine, and thou followest them, thou may easily know whither thou goest; the heart of man is to mee as clay to the Potter, clay I say to mee, but waxe to the diuell; for it will haue much tempering and great adoe to bring it to mee, but very plyable to any worke that Satan shall put it to: for albeit thou shalt see neuer any euill example, nor bee tempted by multitude, neither outwardly assaulted at all, yet thine owne heart will teach thee wickednesse aboundantly, what auaileth it thee to forsake companies, and retaine thine olde heart still. For it is I that can restraine

the issue of thy corruptions,Eccl. 13 conforme therefore thy wil to mine, hee that toucheth pitch will be defiled by it, hee is blessed that doth not walke in the counsell of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sitte in the seat of the scornefull, for the wicked are strangers from the wombe, they goePsa. 1. 1 astray assoone as they bee borne; they are put out ofPs. 58. 3 the booke of life, blessed is hee whom I choose; and cause come to mee; but saluationPsa. 69. 28 is farre from the wicked, because they seeke not my Statutes, hate them therefore, that giue themseluesPsa. 65. 4 to doe willfull vanities; for they shall be consumedPs. 119 155 like the fat of lambs,

euen with the smoake shall they consume away: Thou must not then imitate them, but hate them with a perfect hatred, that hate mee;Psa. 31. 6 and bee companion to all such as feare mee. There is no path, wherein there isPsa. 37. 20 not a snake, either to sting or impoyson, thou canst see thy selfe sooner infected, they spy how thou art infected: it is my mercy to be good with the communion of Saints, so it is my iust iudgement to poure vengeance on the company of the vngodly, haue no fellowship with them in their sinne, neither draw in theirIer. 15. 19 yoak with them, take forth the pretious from the toile, let them returne to thee,

but returne not thou vnto them, rouse vp thy heart, and reioyce in the fellowshippe which is aboue, for because of vncleanesse, inordinate affection, and euilCol. 1. 6 concupiscence, my wrath commeth on the children of disobedience.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     Now doe I beginne to feele the heauy burthen of sinne more and more, with the which I am truely grieued, but I haue not duely (alas) repented me of them, I resolue to suppresse themPsa. 17. 3 with all my indeauour, but I feare my secret corruptions will breake forth, so aboundant is that roote of

bitternesse in mee, remember not against mee my former iniquities, but make haste, and let thy tender mercies preuent mee, for IPsa. 79. 8 am in great miserie, helpe me O God of my saluation, for the glory of thy name; and deliuer mee, and bee mercifull to my sinnes, for thy names sake; I will acknowledge my sinne vntoPsa. 32. 5 thee, neither will I hide mine iniquity, for I thought I would confesse against my selfe, my wickednesse vnto the Lord, and thou forgaue the punishment of my sinne: O that I might take heed vnto my selfe, & keepe my soule diligently,Deut. 4. 9 and thy seruant from euill, that the peace of thee O

Lord, that passeth all vnderstanding, may preserue my heart and minde inPhi. 4. 7 Christ Iesus, and now O Lord, who can vndestand his faults, keepe mee, thy seruant, also from presumtuousPsa. 19. 12 sinnes, let them not raigne ouer mee, so shall I be vpright, & made cleane from much wickednesse.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     First of all beware (beloued soule) of Sathans flieghts, and condemning thee by presumption, say not the mercy of God is great, hee will forgiue my manifolde sinne, for mercie and wrath come from mee, and my indignation

commeth downe vpon sinners, an obstinate heart shalEccl. 3 29 bee laden with sorrowes, and the wicked man shall heape sinne vpon sin, make thou no tarrying to turne vnto the Lord, and put not off from day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of thē Lord breake forth, & in thy security thou shalt bee destroyed, and thou shalt perish in the time of vengeance, binde not two sinnes together, for in one thou shalt not bee vnpunished,Psa. 143. 2 neither iustifie thy selfe before the Lord, for he knoweth thy heart, thouEccl. 7. 8 must not learne of Satans temptations, to bee bolde vpon sinne, neither vse pretensesIob. 9. 2 for it, as to say I am

not an Angell, that my nature is corrupt &c. The preacher is but a man as an other &c. and on the other part, beware of desperation, in mocking the ouerfearefull and superstitious; for Sathan will make of a Fly an Elephant, but saile with an euen course, and labour for measure, to bee sought in the word of God, which will teach not to decline, neither to the rightMat. 11. 19 nor left hand, but to keep the narrow way, for wisedome will be iustifled of her children.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     Remember O Lord thy tender mercies, and thy louing

kindenesse, for they haue been for euer, remember not the sinnes of my youth, nor my rebellions, but according to thy kindnessePsa. 25. 6. 7 remember thou mee, for thy goodnesse sake, O Lord, gracious and righteous art thou, therefore thou wilt teach sinners inPsa. 71. 17 the way, O God, thou hast taught mee euen from my youth vntill now, & therefore will I declare thy wonderous workes, make mee2. Tim. 2 flie from the lusts of youth, & sollow after righteousnes, faith, loue, & peace, with them that call on thee withIob. 13. 26 pure hearts, neither write thou bitter things against mee, & make me possesse the iniquities of my youth.
                  
                  
                     
                     Lord.
                     There are sins in youth, middle, and old age, negligence, in making conscience of sinnes done long agoe, maketh falling in great terror of minde; when violent remembrance of1. Cor. 11 them surchargeth the mind, therefore betimes learne to accuse them, that Sathan henceforth haue no place to doe it; for if thou iudge thy selfe, thou shalt not bee iudged: humble thy selfe1. Pet. 5. 6 therefore vnder the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt thee in due time, cast downe thy selfe before the Lord, and hee will lift the vp: I will surely gather

him that humbleth, and I will gather him that is castMich. 4. 6 out, and him that I haue afflicted.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     Willingly desire I Lord, to make that fruit of myEph. 5. 16 falles, but (alas) when I looke backe to my mispent time, which is vnrecouerable, and which I cannot redeeme, then great feare and torment assaults mee, and pinches so hard, that I am at my wits end.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Comfort thy selfe (poor soule) for in my best children, there is, first youthfull

loosenesse, and vnstayednesse of affections, the way to lewdnesse, so Dauid, O God, thou knowest my foolishnesse, and my faultsPsa. 69. 5 are not hid from thee, seest thou not what young men did in Sampsons daies in their feasting, and how hee reuealeth to the woman,Iudg. 14. 9 which he had concealed from father and mother, and Boas commendation of Ruth, that shee had not followed young men: whetherEccl 11. 10 they were poore or rich, for childe-hood and youth are vanity: and secondly there is in them weakenesse, the way to strong vanities, and so Dauid, as for me saith hee, myPsa. 73. 2. feet were almost gone, my

steps had well-neere slipt. Thus Abraham made his his wife say, shee was his sister; so the godly haue spent the time past of their2. Pet. 43 life, in the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in lasciousnesse, lusts, reuellings, &c. And thirdly, euen my Saints haue walked in wantonnes, in the door to open wickednesse, as gluttony, drunkennesse, and abhominable idolatries, which though they breake not forth at all times, yet make them lesse carefull to glorifie me, forGen. 20. 6 I keepe them that they shal not sinne against mee, and doe not suffer them to end their designements: other mens harmes may teach the blessed wisedome; labour

not onely to leaue sinne, which one may do for profit, feare, praise, or wearisomenesse, but also to repent of it for conscience sake.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     The grieuousnesse of my sinnes filleth mee with feare of iudgement, and this feare (I hope) will cause the power of sinne abate in me, thou Lord can giue me victory ouer sin, and make it as loathsome vnto mee, as euer it hath been pleasant; to reioyce in the Lord, to vse the meanes of my saluation diligently, and to seale vp the pardon of my sinnes in my heart, O God when

shall it bee? If thou wouldest haue destroyed mee for my by-past sinnes, thou wouldest neuer haue giuen mee vnfained hatred of thē: I consider thy mercy that striueth with mee, to bring mee to repentance, and thy iustice, that will confound such as resist: thy mercie hath giuen mee the meanes which thou hast denied to others; thou afflictest mee lightly, but confoundest others; thou gauest mercie, when thou mightest iustly haue punished, wherin thou doest as it were hire mee from sins: and shall I prouoke thee, and adde rebellion to sinne, O my God, I know there is a secret curse vpon euery sinner, which

will consume him, if he doe not repent; it hath gone out of thy mouth, thy word cānot change, because thou art vnchangeable.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     I haue tolde thee, that youth the flower of thy age is of great consideration, all this haue I done, saith theLuk. 16 yong man in the gospel, the prodigall maketh his foure stations, he hath his portion, his fathers ouer-fight, euill cōpany, but youth worse thē all: for youth hath a bundle of folly bound close in his heart, which best men haue had, neither could flee: for as a young man sets his way, hee will not departe

from it when hee is olde, vnlesse by my spirit hee is restrained; him that God will haue, his roabe must bee a branch of the Almond, that is the tree that first blossomes, the first fruites was Abels sacrifice, so much acceptable to me.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     O God, I am like the possessed, that was found after sitting in a good mind, that sweet wind hath come to me, that happened to Elisha, I haue felt that gentle calme, after the stormie tempest of my heart; now may I heare the golden trumpets sounding that ioyfull retrait, blessed are the

meeke in spirit, Lord teach me thy commandements, & I will run them, I shall haue encrease of strength, vntill I come to the mount of God: while I was in my element of sinne, I felt not the weight of it, as nothing is heauie in his owne element: but now I by thy grace will lay aside euery waight, and the sin which doth so easily beset mee, & runne with patience to the race that is set before mee:Heb. 11. 1 I finde my selfe within the fadome of thy mercie, and compasse of things recouerable: the first worke of thy spirit at his comming, is to conuince the worlde of sinne, that is, to make men knowe, that without

thy sonne Christ there is nothing but sinne, and then to rebuke the worlde of righteousnes, to make man see that Christ died not for his owne (for the prince of this worlde found nothing in him) but for our sinnes, that so we may see him in the lawe, with the wages thereof, and the summe in the gospell discharged: but good Lord, how shall I be assured that I am not vnder the curse, but vnder grace? for yet I finde such hardnesse in my heart, vnquietnesse and troubles in my spirit, my sins reboundedPsa. 51. 3 vpon mee with terrible fights, and fearfull visions which euer amazeth my vnsettled and wauering mind
                  
                  
                     
                     Lord.
                     The examination of thy sinnes, is that which first thou must begin with, and partly, those thou hast committed before thy calling, and partly, those that were done after thy calling; for these sinnes of knowledge, of all bite sorest, for sinne is most sinfull, when thou art intelligenced with my grace in the truth, sin after knowledge, workes either hardnesse of heart, or a troubled spirit, and therefore vnderstand that commonly, men before knowledge take the trouble of minde very heauily, and standing as if neuer any one had it

before but they, and after knowledge, Satan is readie to accuse them of sinne against the holy Ghost, as if euery sin of knowledge was a sinne of presumption: but learne thou that when tentation ariseth, to trie whether thou hast done that sinne, or such like already; for these tentations, are either corrections for someIob 20. 11 sinnes past, or punishment for sinne present, or as warning of sinnes to come: as thou may bee tempted to adultery, and not doe it, yet it commeth to thee againe, because thou repentest not for this same, or the like in thy youth cōmitted: again, when man will not bee admonished by publique or

priuate meane, there falleth tentation to sinne, differing from that wherein thou doest, and presently my iustice punishing one sinne with another, as the not repenting couetous, to fall into adultery, theft, or blood: and last there may tentation come vpon, that neither hee before, nor presently, doth like of, to aduertise, he may fall, therein hereafter:Ier. 13. 11 and to signifie that mans standing is not of himselfe, & none standeth but by my grace: Fo as the girdle cleaueth vnto the loynes of man, so haue I tyed my children to mee.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     Beside these inward trouarising

in my heart, which afflicteth mee most, the fruite of my corruption: I am pinched with sundry & diuerse outward afflictions, which agrauates and augments my sorrowe, Lord thou knowest them well, I cannot finde the cause of them, for I liue as honest and quiet as any, and iniurious (to my knowledge) to no man in my calling.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Vnder any crosse, endeauour to haue a cleane conscience, to comfort thee with, that there is no spirituall cause of these afflictions in thee, but that thy sufferings, are either for the

triall of thy faith, beeing assured that thou hast a good conscience in allHeb. 13. 18 things, blessed art thou that sufferest for righteousnesse sake: then feare not the wickeds feare, neither bee troubled but count it exceeding1. Pet. 3. 14 ioy, when thou fal into diuerse temptations, that the tryall of thy faith bringeth forth patience, & let patience haue her perfect worke, that thou may bee perfect and intire, wanting nothing, that thou may say, O Lord, thou knowest, remember me, and visit mee, reuenge me of myIer. 15. 15 persecutors, take mee not away in the continuance of thine anger, for thy sake I haue suffered rebuke, to

such belongs the kingdome of heauen: for it is betterMat. 5. 10 if it be the will of God, that thou suffer for well doing, then for ill doing. Thou1. Pet. 3. 17 maiest know and discerne hereof, by the sicknesse of thy heart, arising of the guiltinesse of sinne, which maketh thee suspect all thy waies: for the wicked manIob 15. 20. is continually as one that trauelleth with childe, and the number of yeares is hid from the tyrant, a sound of feare is in his eares, and in his prosperity the destroyer shall come vpon him; for thus the wicked may say, the thing that I feared is come vpon mee, and the thing that I was affraid of is come vnto mee, I haue

no peace, neither had I quietnesse, neithr had I rest,Iob. 3. 25 yet trouble is come; thus the sinners feare commeth like sudden desolation, and their destruction like a whirlewinde, for ease slayeth the foolish, and the prosperity of fooles destroieth them, impatient they are in aduersity, and proud in prosperitie; yet that they haue is as a bird in captiuitie, which beeing let loose will returne to her owne liberty againe: the righteous are escaped out of trouble, and the wicked shallIob. 11. 18 come in his steed: yea the godly account that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of theRom. 8. 18 glory which shall be shewed,

when as the wicked man dieth, his hopes perisheth, all afflictions endIob. 11. 1 in death, and can pursue the Saints no further, but I will bring an euerlasting reproachIer. 23. 40 vpon the wicked, and a perpetuall shame which shall neuer bee forgotten; for sinne not beeing cured in this world, endeth not in death; for what was in hope recurable, finite, measurable here, becommeth in hell incurable, infinite, vnmeasurable; which makes the godly say, how excellent is thy mercie O God, therefore the children of men trust vnder the shadowe of thyPsa. 36. 7. 8 wings, they shall bee satisfied with the fulnesse of thy

house, and thou shalt giue them drinke out of the riuer of thy pleasures, for with thee it is the well of life, and in my sight shall they see light, and yet neuerthelesse, for their manisolde good, and because I loue them, I chastise them: but the wicked are not in trouble as other men are, neither are they plagued as other men, and when they are raised vp, I will despise their image; but the godly are alwaies with me, I will holde them by my right hand, I will guide them byPsa. 73. 20 my counsaile, and and afterwardes receiue them to glorie.
                  
                  
                     
                     Soule.
                     Now I clearely perceiue Lord, my misery, from that corrupt fountaine in mee, O what a blessed estate haue I fallen from, what a woefull and miserable condition hath the transgression of Adam brought vpon mee, a generall infection and corruption, of all the powers and faculties of my soule and body, my soule (alas) spiritually 
                           〈◊〉
                        , my minde through ignorance vaine in all the discourses and imaginations thereof, the vnderstanding blinde, not sauouring the things of God, my conscience wounded, and neuer soundly

peaceable, my memorie fit to reckon euill, and forget good, my will altogether gaine-standing either to chuse or doe good, and my affection led by it, my conuersation loathsome to God and man, my thoughts both infinite and insatiable to euill, my members weapons of vnrighteousnesse, my best actions the greatest abhominations that minde can thinke, or tongue expresse. All the mischances of that hereditary pollution and actuall transgression which I am so propense and naturally willing vnto, as is the foule to flie, or the stone to goe downewarde, thou art I know a iust and righteous God,

who will not iustifie sinners.
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Be of good comfort, sin is transgression of the law, I haue decreed a remedy from all eternity, promised immediately after the fall, and exhibited in the fulnesse of time, my Son IesusGal. 4. 4 Christ to performe a full redemption for thee, and all the elect; which hee performed in obedience to mee the Father, in comming to redeeme and take thy nature vpon him, made obedient to the lawe in fulfilling it perfectly, which thou hadst broken, and inEsa. 53 vndergoing the punishment

due vnto thee, in obedience I say, in humility at his natiuityRo. 5 19 and whole life, suffering all the miseries that sin had drawne vpon thee, in his body, hunger, colde, pouerty, &c. in soule ignorance,Mat. 11. 13 temptation, faintnes, and then his death, the paines wee had deserued, but specially in his soule, griefe for the sinnes of the worlde, when hee pleadeth himselfe before my iudgement seate as guilty, for thee, who had neede of hisLuk. 22. 44 owne creatures, the Angels to comfort him, withdrawing of the Diety for the present, my curse vpon him for sinne, the power of Sathan preuailing for aGal. 3. 10 time, the horror of beeing

ouerwhelmed with my heauyMat. 27. 46 wrath for thee, his detaining vnder the power & Heb. 5. 7 sorrowes of death, these, and much more done in his humaine nature, accompaniedRom. 6. 6 with the merit and efficacie of the diuine nature, made them meritorious for thy saluation, beleeue in him, and thou shalt passe from death to life.
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     O well is mee, that the curse of the lawe is deriued from mee vnto Christ, that my nature beeing crusifyed with him, corruption in it may bee abolished, not to serue sinne hereafter, that hand writing of my sinne

is cancelled, and shall not come to remembrance before thee, the spots of my soule purged by his blood, by the which, the eternallHeb. 14. 15 testimony of grace is ratefied vnto mee, now sin, andHeb. 9 death, and the diuell, that hath the rule of death, is destroyed: thou hast deereRo. 6. 20 Iesus not onely not beene holden by the sorrowes of death, but also hath obtained a glorious conquest by thy resurrection, ouer all thy enemies, Satan, power of hell and sinne, in taking1. Co. 15. 5 away his sting and guiltinesse, thereof, the rage and fury of the same in weakeningRo. 7. 24 the force, and eating out the corruption thereof, death it selfe also, and theRo. 6. 21
                        
dominion thereof by the same meanes are subdued,Ro. 5. 14 and in the place of these there is recouered vnto vs2. Cor. 5 the fauour of our GOD whose children we are become in Iesus Christ, whoCol. 1. 20 giueth faith, peace of conscience, and ioy in the holy1. Ioh. 3. 1 Ghost, vnto them whereby they become fruitfull to allRo. 5. 1 good works, and in the end ceasing from all sinne, by him do attaine eternall glorie in the heauens,
                  
                  
                     Lord.
                     Yea and in heauen thou shalt be deliuered from all sorrow, haue perfect knowledgeRo. 7. 17 with me, perfect righteousnesse and holinesse neuer

to be changed, fulnesse of ioy, immediate fruitionPsa. 16 of, and coniunction with mee, perfect loue, triumph1. Cor. 13. ouer all enemies, where I shall be all in all, crowning1. Cor. 15 thee and all the elect with eternall happinesse & blisse1. Pet. 1. 4 for enermore,
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     And the Lord shall deliuer mee from euery euill2. Tim. 4 18 worke, and will preserue me vnto his heauenly kingdome, to whom be glory for euer and euer,
                  
                  Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  A HEAVENLY, AND comfortable Mould of Prayers:
                  
                  Full of feeling, tending to the calming of the conscience, for sinne; and all other incidents in this wretched life, for the benefit of all estates, and degrees of people, whether by Land or Sea.
                  IAM. 3.
                  If any man be afflicted let him pray.
                  
                     LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes: for Daniell Speed, and are to bee sold at his Shop vnder S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1618
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     
                     A Prayer for Munday at Morning.
                     
                     The houshold being assembled, the Master thereof, or he that shall be made the mouth to God-ward, shall with all holy behauiour say,
                     
                     Come let vs worship, & fallPsa. 95. 6 downe, & kneele before the Lord our Maker.
                     The houshold beeing assembled, shall pray as followeth.
                     
                        O LORD our God, true, iust and merciful,Psa. 19. 12 who can vnderstand his faults? wee come confessing and

mourning in the sense ofPsa. 38. 9 them, pouring out our whol desire before thee with plentie of teares, and bitter lamentations, and our sighing is not hid from thee; for wee were borne in iniquityPsa. 51. 5 and in sinne haue our mothers conceiued vs: how corrupt are our faults? our thoughts vaine? our words idle? & actions prophane? O what good haue wee omitted? and what euill haue we committed? how foolish and ignorant are wee?Psa. 73. 22 yea beasts before thee; and while we know thy wil, we prepared not our selues,Luk. 12. 47 neither did according vnto vnto it: O Lord how many sinnes and punishments haue wee beene heretofore

subiect too? how grieuous and heauie are they we presently groane vnder? Oh keepe vs deare Fathe from presumtpuous sins, let themPsa 19. 13 not raigne ouer vs: we and our fathers behaued our selues proudely, and hardned our necks, but thou, O God of mercies, gracious and full of compassion,Neh. 9. 16 of long suffering, and of great mercy, yet forsookest thē not: our Kings, Princes and people haue sinned against thee, yet compassion and forgiuenesse is in thee, O Lord our God, albeit wee haue rebelled againstDan. 9. 8 9 thee: and now our God, what shall we say after this? for wee haue forsaken thy commandements, therefore

abhorre wee our selues, andEsd. 9. 10 acknowledge vs worthy to bee cut off for euer: weeIob. 17 6 yeeld our selues to thy chastisement, for our iniquities are gon ouer our heads,Psa. 38. 4 and as a weighty burthen they are too heauy: for vs, wee are pricked in our hearts therefore, and what shall we doe? O Lord our God, most deare Father, our onely refuge is to fly vnto thee in Christ, hungring and thirsting after the least drop of mercy, which wee doe preferre before all earthly comforts in the world; intreating thee boldly and constantly in faith, to grant it, wating diligently and patiently, vntill thou answer vs, and raise some measure

of sense and feeling thereof in our hearts and senses, wee call thy mercies of olde to memory, how often grace hath been shewed vs from thee our God, whē thou didst lighten our eyes, and giue vs a reuiuing from our sinnes; wherefore most holy father, we begge most earnestly thou wouldst giue vs now also strength in Christ to forsake sinne in time to come, for in heart we thoroughly purpose neuer to commit the like sins againe, bnt thorough thy grace to be changed by the renewing of our mindes; to be fearefull of all occasions of sinne, and wiselyRom. 12. 2 hereafter to decline from sinne, and to bend all our

strength specially against our beloued sinnes, O wee heauily complaine of our weakenesse, dulnesse, deadnesse, and inability to any Christian vertue, yet will we by thy power be strengthened to loue, out of a pure heart, of a good conscience,1. Tim. 1. 5 and of faith vnfained, and constantly endeauoure to bee found in thyPhil. 3. 9 Sonne Iesus Christ, and to feele the power of his death and resurrection, in sub duing of all our sinnes and wickednesse, that the life Christ our Sauiour may appeare in our mortall bodies,Gal. 2. 19 and that not we, but Christ may liue wholly in vs, that wee may liue by faith in thy Son, who hath loued vs, and

giuen himselfe for vs: for his sake, grant O deare Father, that wee may practisc these Christian vertues, to the which wee finde our selues most aduerse and contrarie, that by thy grace wee may obtaine such victory and conquest ouer our most grieuous temptations and perturbations, and violence of sinne, as that wee neuer fall into them againe, and that albeit we finde in our selues pronenesse, and aptnesse to fall into some of these transgressiōs yet work in vs a godly resolution, & holy strife against them, groaning and panting vnder the loathsome burthen of vitious corruptions, for this cause O heauenly Father,

inspire in vs humble and submissiue mindes, to the power of thy worde, that wee may out of it haue our hereditary pollution discouered, and our corruptions more and more purged thereby, euer sighing for the day of our dissolution, and looking for the day of our Lord Iesus Christ, to our immortality, to whom with the Father and holy Ghost, wee render glory, praise, and dominion now and euermore.
                  
                  
                     On Munday Euening Prayer.
                     O Lord God, deare Father in Iesus Christ, repentance is thy proper &

peculiar gift, which thou giuest to all them that askeIam. 1. 5. 6 it of thee in faith, for as by nature wee haue it not, and therefore doe renounce our selues, seeing euery good gift is from aboue, from thee the father of lights, so the time of repentance is in this life, and here while we may it must bee obtained with all speedy diligence, for (alas) the longer we delay and deferre, the harder it is to bee got, and more doubtfull it doth proue to be had: the fittest time O Lord, is immediately after the sinne is committed, and while it is called to day, least wee be hardened thoroughHeb. 3. 12 the deceitfulnesse of sinne: our time here is as

a thought, it is cut off, andPsa. 90. 9 quickly doe wee flie away, wherefore deare father, we confesse the greatnesse of our sinnes committed by vs this day, how infinite in number, how dangerous & and deadly to our soules, how offensiue to them that are without, and to them also that are in Iesus Christ; wee acknowledge them, thou art faithfull and iustIoh. 1. 9 to forgiue vs them, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteousnesse, wee submit our selues O Lord our God, willingly to thy rebukes & chastisements, which iustlyIam. 4. 9. 10 thou mayest lay vpon vs, for the taming and subduing of our sinnes, wee sorrow and weep for them,

our laughter is turned into mourning, and our ioy into heauines, we cast downeIob 33. 26. our selues before thee O God, that thou mayest lift vs vp, and open our eares by our corrections: that our vncircumsied hearts may beLeu. 26. 41 humbled, and wee willingly be are the punishments of our iniquitie, O when wee cōtemplate the incōprehensible, infinite, and glorious Maiesty of thee our God,Gen. 39. 9 whom wee haue so heauily offendee, in doing so many, so great, and haynous wickednes, in sinning against thee, against thee only hauePsa. 51. 4 wee sinned, and done euill in thy sight; O the vilenes and abiectnesse of man, that durst thus commit such wickednesse

against thee, O God, how feareful by reason of our manifold iniquities, is our condition vnder Satan, for of whomsoeuerRom. 6. 6 a man is ouercome, euen to the same hee is in bondage, besides the dangers weeIoh. 8. 34 haue incurred by our sinnes, euen all the plagues and2. Pet. 2. 19 curses temporall & eternall, that are written in thyDeut. 29 booke: wherefore O most heauenly Father wee most heartily entreate thee, to remember the riches of thy mercie, in prouiding so excellent a remedy against sin, as the pretious blood of thy onely and dearely beloued Sonne: as of a lamb1. Pet. 1. 8 vndefiled, and without spot, when nothing else in the

world was auaileable thereto, whose sacrifice is daily and hourely effectuall vnto vs, timously preuenting sin, carefully furthering, and diligently sanctifying our cō
                        uersation from impiety, his blood cleanseth vs from all sinne, hee is the head of his1. Ioh. 1. 7 Church, and sauour of his body, leading vs by the guidance of his spirit toEph. 5. 23 perfection, O how excellent is the estate of them that are in thy Sonne? how many benefits and priuiledges haue they? hee died for our sinnes, and rose againe for our righteousnesse, hee ascended on high, and ledde captiuity captiue, and if weEph. 4. 8 now sinne (as wee cannot else doe, and wo is vs therfore)

we haue an aduocate with thee O Father, euen Iesus Christ the righteous: O how vnthankefully offend wee against the blood1. Ioh. 1. 8 of this thine annoynted, in not walking worthy of theEph. 4. 1 same, but treading vnder foot thy Sonne, and countingHeb. 10. 29 the blood of the coueuenant (so much as in vs lyeth) as an vnholy thing,Eph. 4. 30 wherewith wee were sanctified, do spight and grieue the spirit of grace, dulling, yea oftentimes quenching thy spirit in vs: thus liuing in sinne, we dishonor thee, but maruailous, yea wondrous is thy patience, it is thy mercyes that we are not1. Thes. 5 consumed, because thy cō
                        passions faile not; and therfore

when we consider deerRo. 1. 4 father, how small the number of those is, which shall bee saued, and that manyLam. 3. 12 shall striue to enter in, but shall not be able; and doe meditate vpon thy iudgements,Luk. 13. 23 from time to time & still continually inflicted vpon the world for sinne, and that if the righteous scarcely shalbe saued, where1. Pet. 4. 8 shall the vngodly and sinners appeare? whither shal wee slye from thee? O wee haue recourse vnto thy mercie, O forgiue vs therefore all our sinnes and offences, for his sake who was crucifiedAct. 2. 36 and did hang on the tree for vs, O giue vs thy grace, that wee may grow more and more therein, that

wee thinke often of our end, and of the fearfull day of iudgement, that sinne may haue little rest in vs, but that wee may rest in thee, this night, and euermore, through Iesus Christ thy Sonne our Lod, to whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, wee giue all glory, praise, and thankesgiuing, now and euermore,
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Tuseday at Morning.
                     O Lord God, eternall and euerlasting Father, with heuay griefe, & loathsome detestation of our sinnes, wee confesse them all vnto thee, O searcherRom. 7. 15 of the heart and raines,

there is not any creature,Heb 4. 13 which is nor manifest you thy sight, but all things are naked and open to thy eyes, we acknowled them (although our knowledge herein bee too short) and doe yeeld our vnsearchablePsa. 32. 5 hearts vnto thee, O God, blaming that corrupt fountaine of our hearts against our selues, vnto thee, who art ready and able to forgiue.Dan 9 7 O Lord vnto vs appertaineth open shame, but righteousnes belongeth vnto thee, wee are not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, wee detest our waies, and couer our faces, yea groane vnder the body of sinne, and desire to bee rid of it, and more carefullyRo. 7. 11
                        
hereafter to please thee, wee haue felt thy punishments, and displeasure, often before for sinne, and therefore now wee cannot cease crying out against our corruptions, and rebellions, O Lord wee cannot mourn enough at our priuy motions and prouocations to sinne, wee beare the traytor in our bosome, which giueth way vnto the temptation, which wee cannotIam. 1. 14 of our selues subdue and captiuate, and O Lord, we haue no certainty of our life, if to day, yea euen this houre thou wilt call vs, neither yet the assurance of the renewing and returne of thy mercie, which oft we haue refused, disdained and

contemned: Oh that wee soone, yea now, heartily repent, and earnestly conuert,Pro. 1. 24 the surer would be our acceptance, and the more cō
                        fortable our after conuersation, but O thou Sonne of Dauid haue mercy vpon us, O thou pittifull Samaritain, take vs vp, not halfe, but altogether dead in sinnes & trespasses; make vs liue the life of grace, that wee mayPhil. 3. 20 haue our conuersation in heauen, from whence wee looke for thee the Sauiour, that wee may walke worthy of the Lord, and pleaseCol. 1. 11 him in all things, beeing fruitfull in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of our God, in dying to sinne, and liuing to righteousnesse,

that wee may finde fauour, grace, peace, and contentment both with God and man, casting away euery thing that pressethHeb. 12. 1 downe, and renouncing our especiall sinnes, which hang so fast vpon vs, for this cause O Lord, make vs surrender our hearts vnto thee, and let our eyes delight in thy waies, for ifPro. 23. 26 there be a willing minde, it is accepted according to that wee haue, and not according to that wee haue not, keepe our soules therefore, that they be not couered with the spirite of slumber, and sleeping in sin, but that wee may stand vpEsa. 29. 10 from the dead, and thou wilt giue vs light: take

from stupidity, and senselesnesse, spirituall blindnesse, and hardnes of heart, thatEph. 5. 14 wee may walke circumspectly, redeeming the time which we haue lost, and alwaies be watchfull ouer our selues, that we may auoide presumption, by meditation of thy iustice, and despaire, by quicknesse and liuelinesse out of thy word; for apprehending thy comfortable promises, make vs hide them in our hearts, that wee may not sinne againstPs. 119. 12 thee, keepe vs that we may doe all things as in thy presence, and neuer yeeld to the inward rebellions and deceitfulnesse of the heart, but wrastle by thy grace against the backewardnesse

thereof, that wee may daily offer it vppe as a sacrifice of obedience vnto thy Maiesty, regarding and accounting all things but losse and iudging them to bee dung, that wee may win thy loue and fauour, and so liue in the time of our perigrination here, that we may continually feare our selues, & haue a holy iealousie of all our best actions, that when the chiefe shepheard shall appeare, wee may receiue1. Pet. 5. 4 an incorruptible crowne of glory, which is promised them that growe in grace, & in the knowledge of our2. Pet. 3. 14 Lord & Sauior Iesur Christ, to him be glory, both now and for euermore,
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     A Prayer for Tuseday at Euening.
                     O Most louing and mercifull Father, if the beauty and flower of all our best actions, which is prayer, bee so sinfully stained with our naturall corruption, (alas) how odious and abhominable are the rest of our sinnefull workes? thou findest no stedfastnesse euenIob. 4 18 in thy seruants, and layest folly upon thy Angels: how much more on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust: thou hast no need thatIoh. 2. 25 any should testifie of vs, for thou knowest what is in man, thou lightenest things

that are hid in darknesse, & makest the counsell of their1. Co. 4. 5 hearts manifest; our hearts are deceitfull and wicked aboue all things, who canIer. 17 9 know it? and if our hearts condemne vs, thou art greater then our hearts, and knowest all things: O what boldnesse might wee haue1. Ioh. 3. 20 towards thee, if our hearts condemned vs not, O whatRom. 7 treachery is in this our flesh, O the continuall readinesse that is in Satan, that goeth1. Pet. 5. 8 about like a roaring Lyon, seeking to deuoure vs; and thou O Lord lookest down from heauen, and beholdest all the children of men, frō the habitation of thy dwelling place thou beholdest vs all that dwell in the earth:

thou fashionest the heartsPsa. 33. 13 of euery one, and vnderstandest our works: O Lord aboue all things, giue vs an earnest striuing against our corruptions, a tendernesse of conscience in all our actions, a lowlinesse and humility in all our carriage, making conscience of the least sinnes, keeping our selues from the occasions, and all appearances thereof; and1. Thes. 5 because O Lord, thou hast not appointed vs to wrath, but to obtaine saluation, by the means of our Lord Iesus Christ, which died for vs, that whether wee wake, or sleep we shold liue together with him: grant we beseech thee, that we may entertain2. Tim. 1. 6 & stirre vp thy gifts which

is in vs, and the good motions thereof, let not thy spirit lye a sleep in vs, keep vs from terrors in conscience, from loathing, coldnesse, and deadnesse in Christian duties, and exercises, discontentment and blindnesse of minde, aptnesse to fall into those sinnes again, which wee either abhorre, or by thy spirit haue heretofore conquered, that we may rouse vp thy spirit, and labour more and more to be quickned in the inward man, euer making warre against some chiefe lust of the heart, to get the maistery ouer it, that by experimentall conquest of our owne, wee may learne in time to conquer all the rest,

and because our heart lyeth open to all temptations, grant wee beseech thee O deare Father, that casting downe the imaginations,2. Co. 10. 5 and euery high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of thee our God, and bringing in captiuity euery thought to the obedience of Christ, that we may follow after righteousnesse, godlinesse, faith, loue, patience, and meckenesse,1. Tim. 5. 11 that fighting the good fight of faith, wee may lay holdePsa. 27. 1 on eternall life, and now O Lord, thou art in this darknesse, of night our saluationPsa. 17. 15 and light, wee will beholde thy face in righteousnesse, and when wee awake, wee shall bee satisfied with thy

image, wherefore our heart is glad, and our tongue reioyceth, and our flesh alsoPsa. 16 9 doth rest in hope, and now the Lord deliuer vs from euery euill worke this night, and euer, & preserue vs vnto his heauenly kingdome,2. Tim. 4 through Iesus Christ our Lord and Sauiour, to whom bee praise for euer and euer,
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Wednesday at Morning.
                     VVEE confesse O Lord God, most mercifull Father, that in vs,Ro. 7. 18 that is in this our flesh, there is no godnes, in such bondage are we vnto sinne, that while wee are about any

good (as very seldome alas wee are) euill is present with vs, and wee are led captiue thereto, yet Lorde by thy grace, wee striue againstRo. 7. 25 that slauery in very great weakenesse, and wee thank our God througe Iesus Christ our Lord, that wee in our minde, in some small measure doe serue thy lawe, but in our flesh the law of sinne; for it is thou O God, which workest in vs both the will and the deede, euen of thy ownePhil. 2. 13 good pleasure: wee haue had our conuersation in times past (so miserable was our case) in the lusts of our owne flesh, in fulfilling of the flesh, and of the minde; and wee are by nature the

children of wrath, walkingEp. 2. 3 4. 5 after the course of this world, and after the Prince that raigneth in the ayre, euen the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience; but thou O God, who art rich in mercie, through thy great loue whereby thou louedst vs, euen when wee were deade by sinnes, hah quickned vs together in Christ thy deare Son our Lord: grant good God vnto vs a rectified iudgement, proceeding frō an enlightned and sanctified vnderstanding, wrought by a liuely faith thoroughEph. 4 13 thy worde, that wee may meet together vnto a perfect man, and to the measure of the age of the fulnesse

of Christ, vouchsafe gracious Father, according to the riches of thy glory, that we may be strenthened by thy spirit, and comforted in all the faculties of our soules, that wee may know and proue the loue of thy beloued Sonne Iesus Christ, that wee may be filled withEph. 3. 16 all the fulnesse of thee our God: giue vnto vs a sanctified conscience, keeping it sensible of the least euill, desiring to liue honestly, with a continull cheerfulnesse of well doing, and holyHeb. 13. 18 ordering and disposing of our affections, that we may set them on things that are aboue, and not on things which are vnder the earth: for crucifying of the flesh,

and natiue corruption therof, and in building more & Eph. 4. 25 more forward the new man, that wee may wake a most gracious conquest ouer our most vnruly thoughts, in fitting and conforming ourRo. 12. 13 outwarde actions, to thy most holy, acceptable, and perfect will, and serue theeDeut. 27. the Lord our God with ioyfulnesse, & with a good heart, for all thy blessings bestowed vpon vs both spirituall and temporall, that as wee haue receiued Iesus Christ our Lord, so wee may walke rooted and built in him, and stab lisht in the faith, abounding thereinCol. 2. 6. 6 with thanksgiuing, to preuent security: and giue thy grace alwaies O deare Father,

that wee may ioyne with this our faith vertue,2. Pet. 1. 5 & with vertue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance,6 and with temperance patience, and with patience7 godlinesse, and with godlinesse brotherly kindenesse,11 and with brotherly kindenesse loue, that we be14 not idle nor vnfruitfull in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ; that as this same very day wee beginne heere with thee, directing our prayers as incense before thee, so by these means an entry may be ministered vnto vs aboundantly, vnto the euerlasting kingdome of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ: that when we shall lay downe these our

tabernacles, we may receiue the end of our faith, euen the saluation of our soules; now the very God of peace sanctifie vs throughout, and wee beseech God, that our whole spirit, soule, and body, may be kept blamelesse both this day, and vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Spirite, three persons in one Godhead, we ascribe all honour, maiesty, dominion, & power, for euer and euer,
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Wednesday Euening.
                     LOrd God, heauenly Father, wee are comePsa. 95. 6 here to worshippe, and fall

downe, and kneele before thee our Maker, doe heere acknowledge with quaking and trembling soules, our wickednesse to be very great, and all the imaginatiōs of the thoughts1. Ioh. 3. 4 of our hearts are not only euill continually, but also wee doe commit sinne in transgressing thy holy law, yea the least sinne breaketh the whole law, and makethIam. 2. 12 vs guilty of the wages therof, which is eternall death, & endlesse condemnation: O how filthy and loath some is sinne in the greatest pleasure, and most ioyful actionsIob. 14. 4 thereof; by birth, wee are altogether tainted, defiled, and polluted with corruption, and vncleanesse, &

who can bring a cleane thing out of filthinesse, weEph. 4. 29 are prone, and desperately set to commit sinne with greedinesse, wee reioyce in doing euill (alas) we delight and repose our chiefe contentment therein, althoughPro. 2. 14 all the day long, thou O deare Lord, stretchest forth thy hand vnto vs, disobedientEsa. 65. 2 and gaine-saying people, who hate to bee reformed and pluckt out of sin, yea our best actions are but beautifull sinnes, wee are all vncleane things, and all our righteousnesse is as filthie clouts, and wee all doe fadeEsa. 64. 6 as a leafe, and our iniquities like the winde haue carried vs away: and we know good Lord, that hee that

committeth sinne is of the Diuell, for the Diuell sinned1. Ioh. 3. 8 from the beginning, but for this purpose appeared thy Son, O God, that hee might loose the workes of the Diuell, who was to that effect decreed from all eternity, promised immediately after our fall in Adam, but when the fulnesse of time was come, thou O most mercifull father, sentGal 4. 4. 5 forth thy Sonne made of a woman, and made vnder the lawe, that he might redeeme vs that were vnder the lawe, that wee might receiue the adoption of thy sonnes, who for vs hath obtained a glorious and meritorious conquest (his humaine nature being accompanied

with the efficacy of that his diuine) ouer theRo. 5. 14 curse, dominion and rigour of the lawe, chaining vppe Satan, and destroying for euer the power of hell, sin,Gal. 3. 10 death, and condemnation: O Lord our God, what can wee render vnto thee for so1. Co. 15 great graces and benefites, wee will take the cuppe of thanksgiuing, and call vponRo. 7. 24 thy name, O Lord for thy mercies sake, grant vs a full assurance of our acceptation into thy fauour through Iesus Christ, a constant desire of the promised happinesse, that wee may hunger and thirst after righteousnesse; a cheerfull expectation,Mat. 5. 6 and wayting for all these ioyes & spirituall blessings

thou hast blessed vs with in heauenly places, that weeEph. 1. 2 may willingly resigne our selues vnto thy holy obedience, embracing those meanes which thou hast offeredPsa. 37. 3. 9 for our saluation, that wee may trust in the, and doe good, commit our way vnto thee, and cast our selues vpon thee when all meanes shall faile, and restPro. 14. 32 in thee, yea, euen hope in death, reuerently depend vpon the truth of thy promises, although wee cannot see them as yet accomplished,Psa. 99. 4 albeit they seem against all sence and reason, & that this following night wee may not onely meditate of the true life of God, & day of resurrection, and our arising

to iudgement to render account for the workes done in our flesh, whether they bee good or bad, but also may rest in the sweetePhil. 1. 23 bosome of thy portection, desiring at all times to bee loosed, and to bee with Christ; euer thinking the time of our departure to be at hand, and therefore to fight a good fight, to finish our course, and keepe the faith, that henceforth there may be laid vppe for vs the crowne of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righteuos2. Tim. 6. 7 iudge shall giue vs at that day, and not vnto vs onely, but to all them also that loue his appearing: which shall bee cloathed in white array, and whose

names are written in the booke of life, purchased by the blood of our Lord Iesus Christ, who treadeth for vs the vine presse alone, to whom with thee and the holy Spirit our comforter, be all praise, power, honor and glory,
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Thursday Morning.
                     O Eternall God, and euerlasting Father, we from the bottome of our hearts do thanke thee for thy blessings spirituall and temperall, common & particular, that thou hast predestinated vs before the world begā, elected vs to be in thy Christ adopted sons,

called vs by thy spirit to this light of thy Gospell, and giuen vs assurance in faith, of thy vnchangeable fauour, renewing in some measure this corrupt nature, and framing thy image in true righteousnes, and holinesse in our inwarde man, not making vs not onely capable of grace, in the soule of wisedome, and spirituall knowledge; but also making some conformity in vs to thy will, in life and conuersation, these blessings wee haue receiued of thee freely, beside thy continuall prouidence, and ouer-sight ouer vs this night by-past and all the daies of our life, Lord enlighten our mindes that wee may know all

things in thee, and nothing any otherwise then as it commeth from thee, and as it hath relation to thee: for thou art all things in all, & all things do exist in thee, & therefore euery thing may be knowne in thee, & thou most merciful father known yea seene and felt in euery thing, euen in the least and basest creature: grant therefore, that we doe neuer rest in any thing till wee come to thee, and now beholde wee approach to renew that soundnes, wherewith wee laide downe, that no roote of bitternesse breake out at the first of this day, and to prouide for holy and setled courses in our callings all the day after, and so begin

a-new to liue the daily life of grace, that thy kindnesse and mercy may follow vs all the dayes of our life, andPsa. 23▪ 6 now haue we laid our selues downe in peace, which was thy gift, & doe awake with the comfort there of, thy mercies are renewed eueryLam. 3. 33 morning, if we should count them, they are more then the sand, when wee awake we are still with thee, good Lord assist vs that wee mayPs. 139. 18 daily weaken the olde man in vs, with the vitious lusts and sinneful concupiscences thereof, giue vs comfortable experience of this our corruption, that wee may be the more and more humbled in our selues, euer hungring and thirsting for that

righteousnesse which is in Christ Iesus, our Lord and Sauiour, weane vs from the loue of this world, and distrustfull cares for temporall things, cōfirm our faith stedfastly in the prouidence of thee our God, for outward benefites; giue vs confidence and boldnesse, euen to sue to thy presence, that wee may finde our life and powers quickned in holy duties, especially in prayer, zeale of thy glory, humility, patience, feare, & loue, that hauing liuely experience of the power of Christ raigning in our mortall bodies wee may haue strength to perseuere vnto the end: for this cause quicken our desires and purposes, for

well-doing, that wee may be humbled for our outwarde faylings and sinnes, and inwarde vnreasonable lusts, labouring more and more to discerne the deceitfulnesse of the heart, and vnsearchablenes thereof, that wee may bee euer enflamed to redresse the same: grant O heauenly Father, that in our calling this day, aboue all wee may desire to glorifie thee, ayme onely at thy loue, that wee may be stirred vp cheerefully to prosecute heauenly things, and euer renew our estate in Christ, by constant repentance, that beleeuing thy promises, and applying thē to our selues, wee may follow hard after the accomplishment

of them, by our obedience to thy commandements, root out of vs incredulity, and couetousnes; that setting bonds to these earthly desires, by true contentation, we may haue our eyes fixed continually vpon heauenly; purge out of vs hypocrisie & spiritual pride, keepe vs from the raigning sinnes of this our time, that wee may follow constantly after the mark, for the high price of our calling in IesusPsa. 86. 11 Christ, knit our hearts vnto thee, that we may fear thy name, giue vs a hatred of all euill, and loue of righteousnesse, preuent in vs presumption, that wee mayGen. 17. 1 worke out our owne saluation with feare and trembling,

that henceforth wee doe not liue to our selues, but to him that died for vs, and rose againe, and therefore resigning our selues, bodies, and soules, into thy hands O God, wayting for thy blessings vpon vs, in all humility and lowlinesse, notHab. 3 sacrificing to our selues, but giuing all glory to thee ourGen. 32. 10 God, for we are not worthie of the least of all thy mercies, and all the truth which thou hast shewedHos. 13. 9 vnto vs thy seruants, vpon thee is our fruit found, who is like vnto thee that taketh away iniquities, and pasbyMich. 7. 18 the transgression of thy heritage, thou retaynest not thy wrath for euer, because mercy pleaseth thee, thou

wilt turne againe, and haue compassion vpon vs, thou wilt subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sinnes in the bottome of the Sea, & that onely for the merits of thy dearly beloued Sonne Iesus Christ, on whom thou hast laid the chastisementsPsa. 52. of our peace, and doest giue thy selfe in him, who is thy loue, and in whom thou art well pleased; to whom, with thee, and the holy Spirit,Zeph. 3. 17 one very God immortall, inuisible, infinite, and mercifull, wee render praise and glory both now and for euer.
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     A Prayer for Thursday Euening.
                     O Eternall God, and euerliuing Father, wee here abase our selues before thee, in regarde of our vilenesse, and also of the vnworthinesse1. Cor. 10. of the seruice wee doe performe, for wee haue not subdued euery imagination in vs, that exalteth it selfe against thee, neither cut off the powerIoh. 6 and cords of sinne, our zeale is full of ignorance and selfloue, our religion replenished with hypocrisie, our profession with vaine-glorie, our well-doing accompanied with weariesomnes, our faith with carnalnesse,

and our afflictions with impatiency, how sluggish & remisse are wee in our callings? how haue wee been withdrawne in our vntamable lusts, wee haue not brought our thoughts in captiuity to thy obedience, wee receiue thy blessings with vnthankful hearts, neuer returning vnto thee praise; how haue wee wasted and neglected this so gracious a time of visitation, wherein we might haue builded vppe our selues in thee, and practised good vnto others: how carelesly haue wee kept our hearts, giuing occasion to SatanTit. 2. 13 thereby against vs; how much lycence haue we yeelded to the tyrany of the

flesh, in not liuing soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present worlde: how weakely and feebly haue wee wrastled againstEph. 4. 19 our corruptions, and which is most miserable, custome hath made vs so senslesse & past feeling, that wee cannot bee moued to beleeue that thy anger is so great, or our iniquities so hainous, or condition so wretched, as truely it is: and therefore wee are not affraid of thy Maiesty, who is a consumingHeb. 12. 29 fire, wee doe not tremble at thy iustice, who will rewarde euery man according to his workes, forRom. 2. 6 tribulation and anguish shal be vpon the soule of euery man that doth euill, neither

doe wee weigh and regard thy plentifull mercies, in knowing that thy bountifulnesse leadeth vs to repentance, wherefore we humbly beseech thee, to create a cleane heart in vs, and toPsa. 51. 10 renew a right spirit within vs; that we may more sensibly apprehend, how wretched, and miserable, and poore, and blinde, and naked we are; and now good God, according to the measure of that spirituall feeling, wee haue obtayned of thee, wee most entirely entreate thee, for Iesus Christ thy Sonnes sake, to forgiue all our sinnes whatsoeuer, whensoeuer, and wheresoeuer committed against thee, for by faith in his obedience

are we made righteous, who is the end of theRo. 5. 19 lawe for righteousnesse vnto euery one that beleeueth, Lord we beleeue, help our vnbeliefe: hee suffered for vs such miseries as sin hadRom. 10. 4 drawne vpon vs, that hee might sanctifie them vnto vs, both in the humility of his natiuity, his whole life, and his ignominious and cursed death: O what griefHeb. 4. 17 was it to him that he came to his owne and his owne receiued him not, but was betrayed by them, and placed before thy iudgement seate, O deare Father, as one guilty for vs: let ourLuk. 22 olde man O deare Father, be crucified with thy Sonne, that the body of sinne may

bee destroyed, that henceforth wee doe not serue sin any more; abolish for hisRom. 6. 6 sake that hand-writing that was against vs, that our sinnes may neuer come to remembrance before thee, who by his death hath ratefiedHeb. 9 the eternall testament of his grace vnto vs, for he was deliuered to death for vs, and is risen againe for our iustification; for thine owne annoynted sake O Lord, let the ioyfull light of thy fauour and countenance shine vpon vs, and be reconciled vnto vs, grantRo. 4. 25 vs true faith in thy Sonne, that beeing iustified thereby before thee, wee may haue peace of conscience with thee and our neighbours

thereby, that wee reioyce with ioy vnspeakeable, and glorie in the1. Pet. 1. 18 holy Ghost, and become fruitefull in all good works, and so by thee (our God) be made meete to be partakers of thee inheritance of the Saints in light, who hath deliuered vs from the power of darknesse, and hath translated vs to the kingdom of thy deare Son, in whom wee haue redemption thorough his blood, euen the forgiuenesse of sinnes, now the same Iesus Christ our Lord, and our God, euen the father which loued vs, & hath giuen vs euerlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, comforte our hearts this

night and euermore: and stablish vs in euery worde and good worke, in whose name we call vpon thee as hee hath taught vs, saying: Our Father &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Friday Morning.
                     NOt trusting in our owne worthinesse, for there is none, but in thy great mercies doe we present our selues before thee this morning, O Lord, in great weakenesse, to shew our thankefulnesse for thy vnspeakeable goodnesse, so plentifully bestowed vpon vs, most vndeseruedly: forIob. 25. 6 what are wee but wormes, and what is man that thou

art mindefull of him, or the sonne of man, that thou visitest him, wonderfully hast thon made him in his mothers wombe, hee is thePsal. 8. 4 image and glory of thee O God, thou mightest haue equalled him him with the vgliest and basest creatures, it hath pleased thee to1. Cor. 11. 7 spread forth the shadow of the wings of thy protection ouer vs this night, wee meditate in the dead of sleepe to haue our soules taken away in thy anger for the offences committed the day before, and all the daies of our life, and suddenly to haue beene arrainged at thy tribunall seate, yet thou wilt not the death ▪of a sinner, but rather that he conuert

and turne vnto thee, and now thou hast spared vs vnto this day, grant O gracious Father, that wee may euer meditate of the true life of thee our God, of the day of the resurrection of these our bodies, when corruption shall put on incorruption, and of our rising to that solemne and dreadfull iudgement: O Lord as thou hast banished this nights dardnesse away (wherein wee had a sweete repose and sound rest) that compassed vs: so grant we humbly beseech thee, that inward light in minde by the rising vnto vs of that Sunne of righteousnes, thy Son, the Lord Iesus Christ, that wee may mourne for

the ignorance and blindenesse that yet resteth in vs,Ro. 1
                              •
                           . 12 13. 14 and others also; the night is past, and the day is at hand, vouchsafe wee may cast away the workes of darknesse, and put on the armour of light: that wee may walke honestly as in the day, not in gluttory, or drunkennesse, nor in chambering and wantonnesse, not in strife and enuying, but that wee may put on the Lord Iesus Christ: praising his mercy and patience, that yet wee liue to praise him, and are continued in life to make our election more sure: such is the constancy of thy loue towardes vs, O Lord God, Father euerlasting, for

whom thou louest to theIoh. 13. 1 ende, day vnto day vttereth the same, and night vnto night teacheth knowledge: thou hast O Lord sealed vs to theday of redemption, and hast giuenPsa. 19. 2 vs earnest of the spirit of promise in our hearts, by the which spirit also, weeEph. 4. 3 beholde as in a mirror thy glory, O Lord, with open2 Co. 1. 22 face, and are changed vnto the same image from gloryEph. 1 13 to glory, O when shall we fully enioy the same in that2. Cor. 3. 18 life to come? when shall wee cease from all sinne, & haue perfect knowledge of thee, perfect righteousnes, and holinesse, neuer to bee changed, fulnesse of ioy, immediate fruition and coniunction

with thee our God, when thou shalt beePsa. 16 all in all, and triumph ouer all thine and our enemies; in that inheritance immortall and vndefiled, and that1. Cor. 15 fadeth not, reserued in heauen for vs: O Lord giue vs the grace, that we may keepe our selues in a holy1. Pet. 1. 4 temper, and peace of mind, by a constant course in all occurrents; and so prepare our selues vnto that crowne of glory, loking stedfastly vnto Iesus the author and finisher of our faith, to breede constant affianceHeb. 12. 2 thereof; for this cause O Lord, let the glorious light of thy great Maiesty neuer departe from the inwarde eyes of our soules, that we

may bee seriously affected with the sense of our wants, benefits purchased by thy Son our Sauiour, and perpetually assisted by thy spirit; to consider the great and manifolde blessings which wee haue receiued from thee, to prouoke vs to thankefulnesse, without which, all our prayers are vneffectuall, grant good Lord, we may seriously bewaile our neglect of prayer, and condemne our selues for our lip-labour, and customarie deuotions, our wearisomensse in well-doing, and our contentment with small & little feelings, and finally we may rest vpon the continual mediation of our blessed aduocate Iesus

Christ, who continually maketh intercession for vs, and is now both praying for vs, and ready to present our prayers to the throne of grace, and to couer all the infirmities and faylings of them, with the mantle of his euerlasting mercies, innocency, and holinesse; to him therefore with the Father, and the holy Ghost, wee render all glory, praise, dominion, & thanksgiuing, now and euermore.
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Friday Euening.
                     O Lord God, deare Father in Iesus Christ, thy beloued Son our onely

Sauiour, wee thee from our very hearts, for the least of all thy blessings (which are infinitely greater then wee can deserue) as well as for the greatest, and do as readily praise thee for thy mercies receiued, as wee were earnest to sue for the obtaining of them: and now we offer vnyo thee sacrificePsa. 116 17 of praise, for the preseruation of vs in our callings, which are thy ordinancesHeb. 13. 18 imposed on euery Christian: Lord forgiue vs for strayning our conscience in the least euill this day, giue vs thy mercifull assistance,1. Co. 7. 21 that wee may cleaue to, & reioyce in the good testimony thereof; that in simplicity and godly purenesse,

with singlenesse and contentment, by thy grace wee haue had our conuersation in the worlde; conuincing the hollownesse and hypocrisie of the same, which is the moath of well-doing: keehe vs good Lord, from vncertaintie and dulnesse in good things, preserue vs from corruption in iudgement, and Apostacy in life. Inable vs to holde to the ende, and so obtaine the crowne: for this cause O Lord giue vs an inclination and resolution of the heart to all goodnesse, that wee may iustifie and beautifie2. Pet. 1. 10 therby our professiō, giuing diligence to make our calling and election sure, that in doing these things wee

may neuer fall, and so bee deliuered from many inwarde pangs, and outward troubles: deare Father, grant wee may may euer haue righteousnesse in most precious account, prosecuting it with all zeale and courage, and rest with delight and contentation in it, and practise the same, not onely as our knowledge informeth, but euen desire beyond our knowledge perfection therein; Lord make vs renounce Nature, and holde on thy Sonne Iesus Christ by a liuely faith, and bring foorth the fruits of true righteousnesse in him; giue vs good God a holy and settled purpose to serue thee, a plaine and sound

dealing in our callings, daily repentance and coueuenanting with thee, for recouery of our decaies, make our hearts daily to be informed out of thy word, that wee may worke continually as in thy presence, with a full and strong perswasion of thy loue, and plentifull2. Co. 1 10 experience of the same; and preferre it aboue all things whatsoeuer, & morePsa. 4. 6 and more be assured of our acceptation into thy fauour, that no trouble, or dismay ouerwhelme vs with the weight thereof; but if it shall bee thy good pleasure wee be assaulted on euery side, yet wee bee not in distresse, if in pouerty, yet not ouercome with pouerty, if

persecuted, yet not forsaken; if cast downe, yet perish not; that euery where wee may beare about in our bodie2 Cor. 4 8 the dying of our Lord Iesus Christ, that the life of Christ may also bee made manifest in vs: vouchsafe vnto vs O Lord, the shield of true faith, whereby wee may beat back all the fiery darts of the Diuell, as carnall confidence, presumption, security, infidelity, distrust, and incredulity: giue vs a constant desire of the promised happinesse, purging and preparing our selues to it, perfect thy worke, in mortifying our sinnes, preserue thy graces in vs, with increase of new obedience; sustaine our

hearts against the deferring of thy promises, & in contrary tentations, make vs haue refuge vnto thee; to hold fast the hope which is set before vs, which wee haue as an anchor of our soules, both sure and stedfast:Heb. 6. 9 confirme therefore our faith against infidelity, and discontentment; our hopeIam. 1. 18 against despaire, our truth against errour; with the which, of thine owne will thou didst begette vs, that wee should bee as the first fruits of thy creatures: confound Satans kingdom, the worldes deceitfulnesse, and our hearts doubtfulnesse; inlighten our vnderstanding with this sauing knowledge of thee O God, confirme

& stablish our iudgements therein, quiet our conscinces, sub due our wils and affections to thee, and grant vs thy mercifull concurrence, that wee may finish our course with ioy: now Lord wee make our prayers to thee this night inPsa. 69. 13 an acceptable time, euen in the multitude of thy mercies, O God heare vs, in the truth of thy saluation wee will therefore lie vs downe, and also sleep in peace, forPsa. 4 8 thou Lord only, maketh vs dwell in safety: to God the Father our Creator, to God the Sonne our Redeemer, to the holy Ghost our sanctifier & comforter, we ascribe all honor, power, and glory now and euermore,
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     A Prayer for Saturday Morning.
                     PRaised be thou O Ood, which hast not put backPsa. 67. 20 our prayers, nor thy mercies form vs, our life (alas) is subiect to many fearefull breaches, and distractions, with many false shadowes, & appearances of good; for not onely doe we not shineMat. 5. 16 as lights before others, but also in respect of our euill example, we are stumblingblocks to them, we doe little alas, or rather nothing to edification, but to offence;1. Cor. 14 Lord, wee heartily mourne for all our sinnes, whereunto wee haue yeelded our selues this night,

and all our life time before, and do this morning renew our repentance and vowes vnto thee, more effectually then before; intending our callings more carefully and conscionably then we haue done, labouring both to auoide the outwarde acte of sinne, & to haue our hearts purged from the euill thoughts thereof: that wee giue no way to our corruptions, but bee masters of them, and so bee free from the rage amd slauery of the same, which is the greatest happinesse in this worlde: for if wee say wee haue fellowship with thee and walk1. Ioh. 1. 6 in darknesse, we lie, and do not truely; wherefore O Lord, grant that wee may

possesse contrite and broken hearts for all our sins, with remembrance of thee in our greatest security, awake and rowse vs vp from the dead sleep of sin, make vs desire euermore carefully to serue thee, looking for and hasting vnto the comming of that great day of thee our God; by which the heaaens beeing on fire, shall bee disolued, and the elements shall melt with2. Pet. 3. 12 heate: O sweete Father, make vs diligent now, that wee may bee found then in thy beloued Sonne Iesus Christ, our Lord and Sauiour, in peace, without spot, and blamelesse, hauing by thee increase of his grace in vs, experience of his

raigning in our mortall bodies, by whom wee shall haue strength and assurance to perseuere and continue to the end: for this purpose deare father, daily quicken our estate in Christ thy Son, by constant and serious repentance, that from thee our holy purpose being renewed, we likewise also receiue strength to practice accordingly, make vs ouercome the world by thy power, which hindereth our groth in grace, pressing vs downe, euen with our own weight: Enlarge our hearts, consciences, wills, and affections, that all the members of our bodies may be enliued; restrain and bridle our corruptions, that wee may

daily weaken them, heartily loath them, and groane vnder them, keepe vs from despaire, and ourwarde reproach, let not the time, multitude, and example of sinne, draw vs away which doe commit sin most greedily, and hide it most dangerously, let our hearts still cleaue vnto thee, and to thy word; that by it daily sent out of our selues, wee may obtaine new strength in thy Sonne Iesus Christ, to goe forward in well-doing, that discerning our inability thereto, wee may interest our selues in his pretious merits, that growing in grace, we may be perfected in glory; for the increase of glory, shall answer to the

increase of grace: Lord thou knowest, wee shall haue this day, as wee haue had heretofore, more tentations and oppositions of the world, humble vs, and make vs patient, that wee may by thy spirit preuailing in vs, be euen ioyfull in all our crosses, aduersities, and troubles whatsoeuer; charitable in iudging others, zealouse ouer our selues, holy and vpright in our duties and callings, that wee may more and more feare thee, O great and glorious God, more and more humbled in thy greatest mercie, more and more thankefull for the least of thy blessings, whereunto we haue obtained a right only in Christ

Iesus, who accepted of vs aboue the worth of our obedience, grant vs wee may be cast downe by serious meditation of thy maiesty, power, and goodnes, as also of our owne vnworthinesse; O how many are thy deliuerances from euill, preseruations, and goodnesse, acceptances of vnperfect seruice, renewing and increasing of spirituall and temporall blessings, preuentions of wickednesse, which we acknowledge to be thy great mercies in vs, confessing therewith ourPsa. 67. 6 manifolde wants, desiring humbly, faithfully, continually, and constantly, supplimentPs. 62. 11 of them, receiuing in the meane time euery present

blessing, as steps and pledges in our right to heauen; power, and mercy belongethPsa. 111. 9 to thee, O Lord, holy and fearefull is thy name, how gracious and mercifull art thou? slowe to anger, and of great kindnesse,Psa. 145 9 thou art good to all, and thy mercies are ouer all thy workes: teach vs to do thy will this day; for thou art our God, let thy goodPsa. 143. 10 spirit leade vs vnto the land of righteousnesse, to thee therefore, with the Frther, and the holy Spirit, be glorie, praise, & honour, world without end.
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     A Prayer for Saturday Euening.
                     LOrd there is risen vntoPs. 118. 27 vs, and wee haue apprehended light in darkenesse, wee haue waited thePsa. 112. 4 accomplishment of thy promises, in thy light we shall see light, and now heauenly Father, wee renew thisPsa. 64. 10 night the memory of the by-past dayes blessings, bestowed vpon vs most vnprofitableLuk. 17. 10 seruants, begging, yea more and more recounting that wee haue receiued, beseeching thee to giue vs grace, that wee doe not doate or rest vpon temporary things, but rather forget them in regard

of the the things of the life to come: Lord grant vs true wisedome, to thinke not so much what thou canst giue vs, but what is fit for vs to receiue; neither so much on what wee want, as what wee haue aboue many of thy most dear children, neither yet what we haue, but how we haue vsed it, and yet not so much what wee haue, as what we may haue if we doe beleeue, be thankefull and obedient vnto thee: how deare therforePs. 139. 17 are thy thoughts vnto vs O Lord? how great is the summe of them? if we should count them, they are more then the sand, when wee awake, wee are still with the; for when we called,

then thou heardest vs, and hast increased strength in our soules; thou art our God, heare O lord the noyse of our prayers, OPsa. 138. 3 Lord God, the strength of our saluation, thou art our hope, and our portion inPs. 140. 6. 7 the land of the liuing, let vs heare therefore thy louingPsa. 142. 5 kindnesse in the morning, for in thee is our trust: shew vs the way that wee shouldPsa. 143. 8 walke in, for we lift vp our soules vnto thee, deliuer vs O Lord, from all danger of body and soule, this night and euermore: for we hide vs with thee, and blessed is hee that hath thee the GodPsa. 146. 5 of Iacob for his helpe, whose hope is in the Lord his God, who is neare vnto all that

call vpon, yea vnto all thatPsa. 145. 18 call vpon him in truth; thou wilt fulfil the desire of them that feare thee, thou wilt also heare their cry, and thou wilt saue them; thou preseruest all them that loue thee, all flesh shall blesse thy holy name for euer and euer: what a prerogatiue is this thou grantest vnto vs, O heauenly Father, to attaine vnto by thanksgiuing, in that thou O God art the receiuer, and we the giuers vnto thee: and how much better it is to giue then to receiue and how small a tributerequirest thou for al thy benefits; teach vs rememberPsa. 116. 12 what wee haue receiued & heard, to hold it fast and repent, least thou come on vs

as a theefe in the night, andPhil. 4▪ 24 it may bee this same night, for we doe not know what houre thou wilt come, but Lord faithfull art thou, which hast called vs to the fellowship of Iesus Christ our Lord, who will also do it, for thy gifts are without repentance: yea, and wee haue thy Christ interceding for vs at this time, that our1. Cor. 19 faith faile not; and thy holy Spirit whereby we doe call Abba deare Father, doth abideLuk. 22. 25 with vs, and shall continue vnto the worlds end: deare father, whome thou once louest thou louest toIoh. 16. 14 the ende, and wee are married vnno thee in holinesse and righteousnesse, because it is thy pleasure and will,

we are vnited vnto thy Son our head, and giuen to himIoh. 13 of thee, and therefore wee are sure none shall take vsHos. 2 out of his hands, grant vs therefore euerlasting FatherCol. 2 according to the riches of thy glory, that wee may beIoh. 17▪ 17 strengthened by thy spirit in the inward man, that thyEph. 3. 10 Sonne Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith, and we being rooted and grounded in loue, may be able to cō
                        prehend with all thy▪Saints what is the bredth, and length, and depth & height, and to know the loue of thy deare Sonne Iesus Christ, which passeth knowledge, that wee may be filled with all fulnesse of thee our God, vnto thee therefore that is

able to doe exceeding aboundantly aboue all that aske or thinke, according to thy power which worketh in vs, be praise in the Church of Iesus Christ thoroughout all generations, for euer
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Sunday Morning.
                     O Lord our God, wee this day returne vntoHos. 14. 4 thee, who haue fallen by our owne iniquity, now againe doe wee take hold ofCant. 3. 4 thee, & will not leaue thee: wee feele in this our recouery, the vndoubted grace of thee our God, in the experience of these sensibleLuk. 11. 22 combates within vs, of the

flesh and the spirite, which are constant testimonies, & sure sealings, of our begun regeneration: now are wee mercifull Father ashamed of our faults, and do here this day promise to bee more fearefull of our selues, and not so venturous vpon the occasions which are the borders of sin, which haue also lessened thy grace oftentimesMat. 26. 75 in vs; but O Lord our God, hide thy face from our sinnes, and put away all our iniquiries, cast vs not away from thy presence, & take not thy holy spirit from vs, restore vs to the ioy ofPsa. 51. 9 thy saluation, and stablish vs with thy free spirit, whō wee haue (alas) so often grieued, especially on the

solemne day of thy Sabbath, wee haue polluted and prophanedEph▪ 4 the same, making vp thereby our transgression of the whole lawe, weeEsa. 56. 2 haue hypocritically professed, without any benefite heard thy word, so that iustly thou maiest deny vs the good occasion of this daies rest, for the which we haue deserued to bee henceforth secluded from so seasonable opportunity and visitation, thou hast offered vnto vs, that by hearing wee should heare and not vnderstand, and by seeing wee should see and not perceiue, yeaMat. 13 14 our hearts doe waxe fatte, and our eares dull of hearing, least we should vnderstand with our hearts, and

return that thou maist heale vs, giue vs therefore thy grace to rightly esteeme of this so great a mercy, and strengthen vs this day to sanctifie and appropriate it to the right end, to a speciall manner of hearing thee according to thy lawe, that wee shake off all impediments whatsoeuer, whichEsa. 56. 4 may with holde from the publique and priuate duties of vnfained godlinesse, in keeping our hands from doing euill, and choosing the thing that pleaseth thee, & taking holde of thy couenant, that thou mayst make vs ioyfull in the house of prayer, and accept of our sacrifices of prayer & thankfulnesse, vpon that thy holy

altar, euen Iesus Christ our Sauiour, that we may turne away our feete from doingEsa. 58. 13 our will on thy holy day, & call thy Sabbath a delight to consecrate it as glorious to thee, O Lord; honoring thee, not doing our owne wills, nor speaking a vaineEsa. 66. 23 word: and albeit we shall be assaulted O heauenly father, with many lets and incumberances, to perform this obedience, yet giue vs thy holy spirit, that we may preferre it to whatsouer motions sinne, Sathan, the flesh, or the world shal suggest to the contrary, euer directing our minde to the contemplation of that euerlasting Sabbath, when from moneth to moneth, and

Sabbath to Sabbath, al flesh shall come to worship beforeIer. 17. 21 thee: giue vs therefore O heauenly Father, thy grace to sequester our selues from all kinde of seruile actions, and outward imployments, with all froward affections and lusts, that we may study to enter into that rest with thy people, and cease from our owne works, as thou O Lord didst vnto thine: blessed God, strikeHeb 4 10 in our hearts in time of praier, a reuerent esteemation of thy glorious Maiestie, a feeling of our defects, and giue constant faith in thy sweete promises, faithfull remembrance of thy receiued blessings, louing and charitable affections towardes

our neighbours, and grant vnto vs mercifull Father, while wee heare, a wide and open heart to receiue, and holy ludgement to discerne, lowlinesse in minde, feeling in the inward man, and stability in the memory, and euermore in thy seruice bestow on vs an humble soule, an hungring and thirsting heart, that the blood of the Lord Iesus Christ which thorough theHeb. 9. 14. eternall spirit offered himselfe without spot to thee our God, may purge our consciences frō dead works to serue thee the Lord: vouchsafe on vs an vnfained loue to thy word, that wee may lay it vp and hide it in our soules, and euer

sanctifie our thoughts, that our whole meditations may be thereon, and practise the same in life and conuersation, that all men seeing our good workes may glorifie thee our heauenly Father, to thee therefore, with the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, we render all glory, praise and dominion, both now & for euermore,
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Sunday Euening.
                     GLory, praise, and honour, bee vnto thee most mercifull and heauenly Father, who hast appointed this speciall day and ministry of thy word, for our instruction: O Lord, grant

wee may feele our knowledge increased, our faith strengthened, our soules, mindes, and consciences, aboundantly thereby refreshed, good God thou hast promised that if any lacke wisedome thou wilt giue it him, yea & all other things in and with thy Christ; we beseech thee therfore make thy holy worde a power of life vnto life vnto vs, yea a power of saluation vnto vs that beleeue in parte, yea Lord wee beleeue, we pray thee helpe our vnbeliefe: for wee are fraught with blindesse and error, our affections frowarde, peruerse, and disordered, and reprobate to any good worke by nature, make vs good Lord

new creatures, that as new borne babes we may desire the sincere milk of thy word that we may grow thereby: annoynt our eyes with the eye-salue of thy holy spirit, Lord ioine to thy word that penetratiue vertue to pierce and finde out our so pregnant corruptions: for it is liuely and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two-edged sword, and entereth through, euen vnto the diuiding asunder of the soule and the spirite, and of the ioynts and marow, & is a discerner of the thoughtsHeb. 4 12 and intents of the heart, which we beseech thee by thy word to discouer, rip vp and ransacke to the bottome, giue vs a lowly heart

to make a lowly vse of reprehensions out of thy worde, and apply them earnestly to our selues, that the righteous may smite vs, which is a benefit, and reproue vs which is as pretious oyle that shall not breake our heads, that byPsa. 141. 5 them wee may be reclaimed from our froward & backwarde wills: and because good Lord our remembrance of good things is very short and faileable, and doth reserue very few good things against the houre of temptation, & day of death: make vs good Lord carefull euer to heare, meditate, pray, and conferre, giuing alwaies thankes with a plyable obediēce to thy lawes,

that in spirituall discretion, and heauenly wisdome, we may consummate our perigrination here, and worke out our saluation with feare & trembling: by thy grace establish our hearts in thy truth, that wee be not carried about with euery light winde of doctrine, but that wee may lay holde on the good, labouring daily to be led on to perfection: and most gracious Father, make vs not onely to see and feele our owne defects, but giue vs a heart to lament them, Lord freely and finally pardon them, for Iesus Christ thy deare Sonne sake, moisten and water our hard & dry hearts, with the dew of thy heauēly blessings, shoure

them downe vpon vs, for lightning of our minds, setling of our iudgements, cō
                        forting of our soules, and reformation of our mis-behauiours, grant we may yeeld a full assent to the truth of thy word, not measuring it after the crooked rule of our mis-leading affections, that wee be not of those which make a show of religion but deny the power thereof, and wee beseech thee for thy tender mercies sake, this night to subdue the flesh, which lusteth against the spirit, confound Satan, aduersary to our saluation, and keep vs against the example of the worlde, which is set in euill; that we may neuer be wearie to beginne

where wee left off in welldoing, neither yet breake off where thou requirest continuance of obedience, but goe from faith to faith, like the way of the righteous, which as the light shinethPro. 4. 18 more and more vnto perfect day, so shall wee glorifie thy name and our owne soules be strengtheded, the weake ones by our example bee confirmed andPhil. 5. 14 edified, the vnruly admonished, the feeble-minded comforted, and be patient toward all men, and shall dissolue from hence in thy fauour, whilst now we liue in thy feare, hauing in our mouthes a new song of thanksgiuing occasioned by thy new blessings day by

day, & heauenly graces bebestowed vpon vs in Iesus Christ our Lord and onely Sauiour, to whom with thee and the holy spirit, be praise, and glory, for euermore
                     Amen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  A MEDITATION of the Mercy and Iustice of God: Against declining either to the left or right hand, in presumption or despaire that wee may leade an euen course in Christianity.
                  
                  
                     LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes, for Daniel Speed; and are to be sold at his Shop vnder S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1618.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Right Worshipfull, Sir William Alexander, Knight, Secretarie, and one of his Maiesties most honerable priuy Councell in Scotland.
                  
                     MEn to make themselues as it were eternall, they write their names on their houses; Absolon reared a piller, is not this (said one) Niniuie which I builded for my glory, & Ninus to immortalise his father Belus, made for him an Idoll, in whose dominions while Terrah Abrahams father did dwell, he became with the rest an Idolater, these

would haue their fame & time ending together, but they haue shot short, of the seauen wonders of the world, nothing but naked names remaine: all these are mutilate inuentions, to the Iew departed, his brother or nearest kinsman must raise seed to continue his name in Israell, but children beeing the Lords gift, could not bee had when & as they would: books, with time that eates all, doth often smoother, may successiuely by concatenation of ages in the Presse as a new Phoenix reuiue, but all these to perpetuity are set apart as faulty. For as they all, monuments, children and bookes, are of this below, so shall with the same although neuer so olde bee dissolued, the godly man only and

his name doth euer indure, who hath it, and himselfe also written in heauen, and registered in the booke of life, for all consuming oblusion hath no place, your vertues and graces make you liue longer then any of these post-running records: but your goodnes for euer, with the Antient of daies, to whō I heartily pray that after your period shall bee faithfully finished here, you may be partaker of glory: thus I rest euer your Worships,
                  
                     In all Christian duty to be commanded,
                     Barthol. Robinson.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     
                     A. Meditation of the infinite Mercy, and Iustice of God, against declining either to the left or right hand, in presumption, or despaire that we may lead an euen course in Christianity.
                     
                     
                        II is certaine, Caine
                        Gen. 4. 13 his offence in his speech in extenuating the Lords mercy, was greater then that trespasse done by his hand, in shedding his brothers innocent blood, for he might haue obtained pardon for the same if hee had beene capable of it, for although

mans heart be deceitfull aboue all things, and that allIer. 17. 9 the immaginations of his thoughts be euill continually, and desperately wicked, so that none can knowe it, so deepe it is: yet infinitly more deepe, yea insearchableEph. 3. 8 are the riches of the mercies of Christ, for what proportion is there betwixt a sparke of fire, and the great vast gulfe of the Ocean to quench it, hee willMic. 7. 18 turne againe saith the Prophet, hee will haue compassion vpon thee, hee will subdue thy iniquity, & cast all thy fins into the depth of the Sea, for he retaineth not his anger for euer, because he belighteth in mercy, yea there is no Sea so

large but the Lord hath set a bound that it may not passe ouer, but as the heauenPs. 104. 9 is high aboue the earth, so great is his mercy towards them that feare him, as farre us the East is fromPsa. 103. 11 the West, so farre hath hee remoouer our transgressions from vs: this then so ample a depth of his mercy, easily doth swallow vp the shallow profundity of sin, how deep soeuer it be; for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is great redemption, beholde, hee doth not abhorrePsa. 103. 7 the confessing theefe, the weeping sinner, the hū
                        ble Cananite, the lately taken adultresse, the wrongfull customer, the contrite Publican, neither yet his

disciple that denyed him, nor that bloody persecutor of the disciples, yea not thē that crucified him but prayed for them: how great then is thy goodnes O LordPsa. 31. 19 which thou hast laide vppe for them that feare thee? and done to them that trustPsa. 33. 5 in thee, euen before the sonnes of men; for the earth is full of the goodnes of thePsa. 34. 8 Lord, taste then & see how gracious the Lord is, his louing kindnesse is betterPsa. 63. 3 then life, his mercy is aboue all his works, as oyle swimmeth aboue water: wherefore the Lord takes this1. Co. 1. 3 stile in commendation specially to himselfe, that hee will bee called the Father of mercy and God of consolation,

for it doth lye as▪ it were in his bosome, and is vnto him as his daughter, euen the bowels of compassion, hee accounteth his riches2. Sa. 12. 3 not to consist in kingdomes, heauens, or Angels, all which, although he possesse, yet he can create better if it were his pleasure; but hee is rich in mercy, forEph. 2. 4 there is nothing better, nothing greater, for his mercy is not onely aboue all his workes, but also it reioyceth against iudgement, and gloriously triumpheth ouer it: The mercy seate which was a type of Christ,Iam. 2. 13 in whom God is well pleased, was without the Arke but the testimony of the Tables of the lawe were

within, the same▪ mercie compassing and shutting vp iustice within it: Indeede the Cherubins with a fieryExo. 25. 17 sword debarred Adam from accesse to the garden again, but in this mercy-seate the Cherubins stretch out their wings on high, and couers the mercy-seate with their wings, so Christ stretcheth out his hands all the day long vnto vs, gathering vsRo. 10. 21 as the henne doth her chickens, yea and the lawe it selfe which is a proclamationMat. 23. 37 of Gods iustice, in the second cōmandement doth visite iniquity, vnto the third and fourth generation, but extendeth mercyExod. 20. vnto the thousand of them that loue him, herein therefore

doth mercy glory, and as is were boast it selfe, for where mercy is mentioned, there is no speech made of iustice, but when iudgement is denounced, there is euery place left for mercy which is promised to the penitent, so the Lord is gracious and full of compassino, what can hee deny vs that hath giuen his owne Sonne for vs, and hee that hath giuen his life for vs, cannot refuse to giue vs his mercy, so maiest thou say, vnto thee O my strength will I sing, for God is myPsa. 69. 17 defence, and the God of my mercies, for thou Lord hast not failed them that seeke thee, for as thy Maiesty is,Psa. 9. 10 so is thy mercy, yea and to

the sinfull hee doth say,Eccl. 2. 18 thou hast rauished my heart my sister my spouse, thouCan. 4. 9 hast rauished my heart, turne away thine eyes fromCan. 6. 4 me for thou hast ouercome mee; yes truely, that true and liuing Sampson for the loue hee did beare to thee was crucified of the Iewes, as that other Sampson was put to death by the Philistims.
                     
                     And what can more liuely portrait out his mercy, then when hee saith, I am pressed vnder, as a cart is pressed that is ful of sheaues, yea Lord great is thy pitty in delaying and prolongging thy wrath, thy mercie and moderation in inflicting it, great is thy goodnesse

in remouing thy anger and iudgements procured thereby.
                     
                        Dauid after he had slept as long as women vsually2. Mac. 7. goe with child, or there about, when hee had trauailed with iniquity, and had conceiued mischiefe, and brought forth falshood, for2 Sa. 24. 8 when lust was conceiued, it brought forth sinne, and sin when it was finished broghtIam. 1. 15 forth death: yet the Lord (such is euer his clemency) desired him to make choice of punishment, although Dauid had prouoked him to wrath, against the lawe of armes, wherein the weapons shold be in the election of him that is offended, and not in his that prouokes;

O that wee were wise and vnderstoode this,Deu. 32. 29 that we would consider our later end, and so, albeit we grieue his spirit often and diuerse times, yet so manifold are his tender mercies,Eph. 4. 30 that as about the time of forty yeares God suffered the Israelites manners in theAct. 13. 18 wildernesse, so hath hee euen to this day sparred vs, what could he haue done any more to his vineyard that he hath not done to it:Esa. 5. 4 let vs now at the last search and try our waies, and turne againe to the Lord, let vs lift vp our hearts with our hands vnto our God in the heouens, whom wee haueLam. 3. 41 pressed with our sinnes as with a talent of leade, forZach. 5. 7
                        
hee is not slacke concerning his promise, (as some men count slacknesse) but is patient toward vs, and would haue no man to perish, but2. Pet. 3. 9 would all men to come to repentance.
                     The wicked still say, because hee delayes his comming, either by continuation of present punishment, or prorogation of their life, where is the promise of his comming, for since the Fathers2. Pet. 3. 4 died, all things continue alike from the beginning of the creation, andPsal. 73. 11 doth God know it, say they, Is there knowledge in theIob. 22. 13 most high? can hee iudge through the darke clouds? the cloudes hide him that hee cannot see, and he walketh

in the circle of heauen, and so doe they think in their heart, God hath forgotten, hee hideth away his face, and will neuer see:Psa. 10. 11 the vision that is seene is for many dayes to come, and doth prophecy of the timesIer. 12. 27 that are farre off: but woe vnto them that drawe iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with cart-ropes, which say, let them make speed, let them hasten his worke, that wee may see, and let the counsell of the holy one drawe neare, andEs. 5. 18. 19 come that wee may knowe it. And when the seruant doth say in his heart, my master doth deferre his comming, and shall begin to smite the seruants, and

maidens, and to eate and drinke, and be drunken, the master of that seruant will come in a day when hee thinketh not, and at an houre that hee is not awareLuk. 12. 45 of, and will cut him off, & giue him his portion with vnbeleeuers.
                     Therfore beloued sinne not because grace hath abounded, for the grace of God which bringeth saluation vnto all men hath appeared, teaching vs that we should deny vngodlinesse and wordly lusts, and that wee should liue soberly & Tit. 2. 11 righteously, and godly in this present world: despise not therefore the riches of his bountifulnesse, and patience, and long sufferance,

knowing that the bountifulnes of God leadeth thee to repentance, least thou after thy hardnesse, and heart that cannot repent, heape vppe to thy selfe wrath againstRom. 24. 5 the day of wrath: and truely his long suffering is saluation, and repentance the way to bring vs thereto, that we may finde2 Pet. 3. 15 mercy with the Lord at that day: thus the heart of the penitent is like waxe, it is molten in the middest of their bowels, but the wickedsPsa. 22. 14 is as strong as a stone, and as hard as the nether mil-stone: thus they soweEze. 13. 18 pillowes vnder their armeholes, and make vailes vpon the head of euery one that standeth vp to winne

soules, lying in sinne, and presumptuously reposing vpon vaine perswasion of the mercy of God, which they euer abuse, truely his mercieCant. 1. 16 is that green-bed wherin his true members doe lie, howsoeuer the wicked make his mercy cloakes of shame, for as the Apostle saith, they haue theis liberty2. Cor. 4. 2 for a cloake of malitiousnesse, saying as the IewesIer. 7. 4 did, this is the temple of the Lorde, rrusting in lying wordes that cannot profit, but bee thou not deceiued, God is not mocked; let no man deceiue thee with vainGal. 6. 7 wordes, for, for these things the wrath of God comes vpon the children of misbeliefe,Eph. 5. 6 who rest in their

owne peace and security, when as hee that walketh vprightly, walketh onely boldly and in the feare of the Lord, is an assured strength: wherefore wellEccl. 5. 4. 5 doth the wise-man aduise vs, say not Gods mercy is great, hee will bee pacified6 for the multitude of my sins, for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation7 resteth vpon sinners, make no tarrying to turne to the Lord, and put not off from day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shalt be destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance: and againe say not, I haue sinned and what harme hath

happened vnto mee? for the Lord is long-suffering, he will in nowise let thee go: and concerning propitiation be not without feare to adde sinne to sinne.
                     Is not the mercy of God great? and nothing can be greater, & larger, as is said,Esa. 6 the Archangels and Angels in heauen, Prophets, Apopostles, Martyrs, and Confessors on earth, and allPsa. 136 things that liue, or yet are created, commend the same, & in one Psalme, euery verse (euen twenty sixe times) endeth with this, for his mercy endureth for euer.
                     O but beware hereof, this is Satans olde subtilty, whereby hee maketh man bolde on sinne, as hee did

                        Euah, you shall not die at all said hee, hee couereth and hideth the Lords iustice from mens eyes, and remoueth the euill day a far off; thus hee lieth in waite secretly, euen as a Lyon in his den, he lieth in wait to spoyle the poore, when he draweth him into his net, therefore heape of poore do fall by his might, but heePsa. 10 9 greatly enlargeth the Lords bountifulnes, and patience; for as it is true the Lord is mercifull, so is this true that hee visiteth the iniquity of the fathers to the third and fourth generation, & therefore thou must consider that which Dauid did sing, I wil sing mercy and iudgementPsa. 109. 1 saith hee, vnto thee O Lord

will I sing. And herein is God and his ministers, distinguished from Satan and his; for God euer conioyneth mercy and iustice together, but Satan harpes continually on one of them onely, as hee saith, peace,Ier. 6. 14 peace, when there is no peace, thus these monsters draw out their breast, and giue sucke to their youngLam. 4. 3 ones, thus the wicked is made to boast of his owne hearts desire, hee blesseth himselfe and contemneth the Lord; the deceiuingPsa. 10. 3 teachers wordes, are softer then butter, yet is there warre in the heart of him they are spoken to, their wordes I say are more gentle then oyle, yet are theyPsa. 55. 21
                        
swords, but if thou wilt bee cured, beloued, there must be put into thy sores both wine and oyle, that thou maiest suffer the wholesome and sound doctrine, and not resemble those, whose itching eares turne away from hearing the truth, on whom2. Tim. 4. 3 while they dream on peace and safety, then sudden destruction commeth as sorrow vpon a woman with1. Thes. 5. 3 childe, and they shall not escape any wise.
                     Whenas a childe hath a bird tyed by the foot, tosseth it to and fro vntill hee kill it; so these false teachers, & men seducing themselues, while they abuse the Lords tender mercies, as if they were bound to all

their youthfull sinnes, and antient follies, want only & insolently bragging of thē, and grieuing the holy spirit of Israel: they turne his mercies (I say) thus disdained by them, vnto the bitternesse of his wrath, fooles and children they may bee called concerning vnderstanding,1. Co. r 14 albeit they bee of a ripe age.
                     And like as an olde man beeing to passe ouer a narrow and small bridge, putteth on his spectacles, in which the bridge appeareth a great deale bigger then of it selfe it is, where hee falleth to the hazard of his life in the ditch, so they that wander from this mortality to immortality by the mercies

of God, not rightly esteeming the same, but walkes in the broade way that leadeth to destruction, they may I say, cry out, great is his mercy, which yet is not so great that it will fauour them which delay from time to time to turn to the Sauiour of mankinde, which haue made a couenant with death, and with hell are at agreement, though a scourge run ouer, and passe thorough, it shallEsa. 28. 15 not come say they, at vs, for we haue made falshood our refuge, and vnder vanity are wee hid, but what followeth hereon? -hey falling from the bridge of their vaine hope, and Satan that deceiued them, shall be

cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, then shall theyReu. 2. 10 with great griefe say to the mountaines and rockes, fall vpon vs, and hide vs from the presence of him that sitteth vpon the throne, andReu 6. 16 from the wrath of the lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? yes truely, they will wish any thing fall rather vpon them, then that they should fall into that lake.
                     O but can a Lambe wax angry, yea the more patient and slow the Lord is to punish sinne, the more irefullEsa. 65. 3 he is when in spite hee is prouoked to his face, which the very Saincts of God haue wisely fore-seen;

O Lord rebuke mee not inPsa. 6. 9 thine anger, saith hee, neither chastise mee in thy wrath: and the Prophet,Ier. 10. 14 Lord correct mee but with iudgement not in thy anger, least thou bring me to nothing, and no maruell, for euen the Angels in that vision had the face of a manEzek. 1. 10 and of a lion, euen as they were taught of the Lord: hee had the face of a lambe to take away the sinnes of the world, yea and the face of a lion to punish the sins of the world, for this is the day of grace and acceptable time, wherein mercy is offered to the penitent, which being neglected and contemned, in his day, the day I say of the Lord, hee

will vtter cruelty, wherefore the Prophet saith, woeAm. 5. 18 be vnto them that desire the day of the Lord, what haue you to doe with the day of the Lord? it is darknesse, and not light: but the godly contrarily desire the time to bee at hand, and therefore doe earnestly craue the appearance of the Lord Iesus,Ren 22. 10 saying, euen so come Lord Iesus, come and tarry not: which the wicked doe tauntingly and scornefully vtter, but as Sampson wasIudg. 16. 30 reuenged on the Philistims who iested at him, so beholde here is a stronger one then Sampson, for now by mercy hee is a man, that is sometime to be a lyon, and the man is that lambe that

taketh away the sinnes of the repentant: but then the lyon shall be to the wilfull and stubborne sinner, a boare to teare them in peeces.
                     And thus God suffereth with long patience, the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, and to declare the riches of his glory vpon the vessels of mercy, whichRom. 11 hee had prepared vnto mercy: Cast not away therfore beloued, thy confidence which hath great recompence of rewarde, for thou hast need of patience, that after thou hast done the will of God, thou maiest receiueHeb. 10. 35 the crowne, and be not one of them which with-drawe themselues to perdition, but

be of faith to the saluation of thy soule, if thou cast thy selfe downe humbly at his feet, water thy couch in thy earnest repentance with teares, if thou shalt with all thy soule aske mercy and forgiuenesse, God cannot deny himselfe, hee is faithfull, and will forgiue, euen for his owne Sonnes blood, as of a lambe without ipot and blemish, & let all them1. Pet. 1. 19 which are redeemed, thus refuse all things in regarde thereof, and cast downe their crownes before his feete, confessing them to haue beene, and now areReu. 4. 10 most vnprofitable seruants, and hee will put away their transgressions as a clowde and like a mist: O turne vs

vnto thee O Lord, for thouEsa. 44, 20 art our Sauiour, waken vs that we may strengthen theReuel. 3, 2 things which remaine that are ready to die, before our wickednes be full, and time of recouery past, so shaltGen. 15. 16 thou redeeme our life from the graue, and crowne vsPsa. 103. 4 with mercy and compassions, and thereafter bestow2. Tim. 4. 8 on vs the crowne of righteousnesse layed vp for vs, which the Lord the righteous1. Pet. 5. 4 iudge shall giue vs at that day, & not to vs only, but vnto all them also that loue his appearance; wee shall euen receiue I say thatTit. 3. 5 incorruptible crowne of glory at the appearance of of our chiefe shepheard, notRom. 11. 6 for the works of righteousnesse

which wee haue done (for our best are but glisteringGal. 5. 16 sins) but for his owne bountifulnesse, (and loue of his meer mercy, fauour, and grace, to vs which walke in the spirit, and do not fulfillGal. 6, 8 the lusts of the flesh: for he that soweth in the flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption, but he that soweth to the spirit, shall of the spirit reape life euerlasting: let vs then bee renewed inEph. 4. 23 the spirit of our minde, and put on the new man, whichGal. 6. 14 after God is created in righteousnes and holinesse, haue the worlde crucified to vs,Gal. 2, 20 and vs to the world, yea & that we may liue vnto God, bee crucified with Christ, and may in all soundnesse

of minde say, I liue yet, not I now but Christ liueth in me, and in that I now liue in the flesh, I liue by faith in the Sonne of God, who hath loued mee, and giuen himselfe for mee: O that once (to conclude) wee might thinke all things but losse for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Iesus our Lord, and iudgePhil. 3. 8 them but dung, that wee may winne Christ, setting alwaies our affections on things that are aboue, and not on things which are on the earth, that beeing dead to sinne, our life may bee hidde with God in Christ,Col. 3. 2. 3 that when hee that is our life shall appeare, we may also appeare with him in

glory, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, we render all glory, praise, maiesty, and dominion, both now and euer-more,
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                     A Heauenly & Christian caueat, whensoeuer, or wheresoeuer the Diuell by suggestions, the flesh by the corruption thereof, or the world by wicked example, would allure or entice thee to sinne, then seriously bethinke thee, and guard thee with these few Articles.
                     
                     1 VVEigh diligently the eternity both of life which is a reward of well-doing, as also of death & paine, for yeelding to the contrary, which both are such as the eye hath not seen, the eare hath not heard, neither yet can enter into the heart of man,

and shall rather by sense be felt. then by iudgement bee vnderstood.
                     2 Remember the nobility, worth, and dignity, of the nature of man, how gracious it is in the sight of God, while it standeth in grace; how abiect & vile it is subiect vnder sinne.
                     3 Consider the value of the rest, tranquillity, and peace of a good mind, both with God, thy selfe, and thy neighbour, for while thou sinnest God is against thee, to punish thee; in doing well Satan is against thee, to assault thee.
                     4 Make euery day a recitall of the Lords blessings vpon thee, in thy predestination and election, before

thou wast created, his gifts before thou camest to knowledge, and his preseruation of thee vntill now, from deserued plagues of of pestilence, sworde, famine, fire, and water, in place whereof, hee prolongeth thy life, giueth thee food, rayment, and health of body, giueth his presence in his word and Sacraments for thy soule, his spirit to thy effectuall calling to grace, benefites publicke and priuate, generall and particular, which are so infinitely and vndeseruedly poured on thee, while thou refusest thy loyalty to thy soueraigne, reuolts, & confederates with his greatest enemies.
                     
                        5 Meditate the paines of Christ in his whole life, what hee was before his incarnation, and what he became after, looke vnto his crosse, passion, and bitter death, and for whom he did vndergoe the same, and how wee rewarde him with despighfull vnthankefulnesse, distrusting his goodnes altogether, or else too much presumptuously re-lying thereon, in continuation of our sinnes, and postponing of repentance.
                     6 Consider, that without hearty and zealous remorse, neuer any shall attaine to life euerlasting, & that it is not a gift may bee had at all times, yea it is often refused, because the

pretious time of visitation was neglected, than it is seldome true & liuely when it is to late, that very often impenitency is tyed to sin, with the wages thereof.
                     7. That death is a faithfull doore-keeper, which will not suffer thee to haue more with thee out of this world of the goods thereof, but so much as thou bringest in with thee, which is nakednesse, crying, and griefe: the goods of faith, hope, repentance, and charity, shall onely accompanie and follow the conscience after death, which shall neuer be seuered from the soule, either in well or euill doing, but supplies in wickednesse all the offices of a

Court, cites, arrests, presents, iudgeth, beareth witnesse, condemneth or iustifieth, executeth & tormenteth eternally, for it is that worme that dyeth not.
                     8 Death as our shadow attendeth vs in euery place, which as it is most certaine, so the day and houre is most vncertaine to vs, for who knoweth the time, houre, or place thereof.
                     9 Looke that the longest liuer hath beene gathered to his fathers, and hath gone the way of all flesh, our life being but a sleepe, or shadowe of longer or shorter continuance.
                     10 Pause vpon the inesteemable good we lose by sinning, hardly recoueraable:

the infinite and vnspeakeable euill wee incurre thereby, how short pleasure is requited with vnmeasurable torment.
                     11 Remember the companions which euer attend vpon sinne, Gods high displeasure, the losse of the right which we haue to his creatures, the grieuing of his spirit, & the banishing of his good Angells from vs, confusion, storme and torture of minde, a fearfull expectation of Gods insupportable wrath, the sparkes whereof doe beginne but to be kindled here, beside the loath somenesse, wearisomenesse, and anxiety wee haue in the sweetest fits of sinne.
                     12 Consider the Patriarkes,

Prophets, Apostles, Martyres, and all the godly, how wisely they haue daunted and bridled their vitious willes and affections, and couragiously ouer-throwne the strong holde of sinne within them, for the crown of glory that was set before them, died in Gods fauour, and liued all their time in his feare, left testimony and cōmendation behind them, to the end of the world, of their strong and inuincible faith, but the memory of the wicked doth rot, and his posterity is plagued.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   