
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ Fames Trumpet ſoundinge.
            
            OR Commemorations of the famous liues and deathes, of the two right honourable Knights of England: the right honourable Sir VValter Mildmay, and Sir Martin Calthrop, Lord Mayor of this honorable Citty of London, who deceaſed this yeere 1589. Not onely neceſſary to bee ſeene, but alſo to be followed of euery worthy perſonage in their callings. Written by Henry Robarts.
            
            
               
                  Loe heere a Mildmay milde, a Counſeller moſt graue,
               
               
                  A worthy man in all his deeds, as one could wiſh or haue:
               
               
                  A Phoenix in this life, to God and Prince moſt iuſt,
               
               
                  In Commons cauſe and publicks weale, a man of perfect truſt.
               
            
            AT LONDON, ¶ Printed by I. C. for Thomas Hacket, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop in Lumberd ſtreete, vnder the ſigne of the Popes head. Anno. Domini. 1589.
         
         
            
            
            To the right worſhipfull, and moſt vertuous minded Gentleman, Ma, Anthony Mildmay Eſquire, Henry Robarts your worſhips in hart moſt affected, wyſheth the continuall encreaſe of all worldly promotions, and after death the life eternall.
            
               RIght worſhipfull, amongſt the famous Romaines, Grecians, and others of moſt fame in auncient times, theyr cuſtome was when any dyed of worth, to frame eloquēt Oracions in the deceaſeds iuſt cō
               mendation: which was vttered by ſome of great skill. (Accordingly) this little Ile doth hold the like zeale to their fauoured. The conſideration of which, (right worſhipfull) made me long expect ſome thing of your honourable deceaſſed Father, to be by ſome of learning publiſhed, in commemoration of him, and his zeale to Armes, Iuſtice, and learning. But ſeeing none ſo forward as my ſelf, I haue at laſt thus boldly aduentured, in naked bare truth, wanting eloquent phraſes, to beautifie his deedes of loue to his Country, and zeale to his poſteritie, written theſe lines, and humbly offer them vnto your worſhip, hoping your curteous nature wyll accept this Mite at the hands of a ruſticke welwyller, as if Alexander had offered a whole Talent.
            
               Your worſhips euer at command.
Henry Robarts.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ 
               The honorable life and death of the moſt famous and noble Counſeller, Sir VValter Mildmay knight, one of her highnes moſt honourable priuie Counſell, & Chaunceller of the Court of the Exchequer, who departed this life, at his houſe in great S. Bartholmewes, the 30. of May laſt paſſed.
            
            
               WHat ſhrikes, & plaints, what heauie mourning cryes
               Doo pearce mine eares, and fil my hart with mone?
               With wringing hands what meanes this wofull noyſe,
               Thoſe direful tunes from harts déepe ſpent with grone.
               Why walke you thus like men with gréefe forlorne,
               What wofull chance hath you behapt of late,
               What cauſeth thus ſo heauy mourning ſtate.
            
            
               Why gréeues the Phoenix of this Weſterne Ile?
               Why mournes her Péeres and Nobles of her land?
               What cauſe haue they all mirth for to exile,
               And Commons elie in ſuch ſad dumps to ſtand,
               At pleaſure theirs, which may ſo much commaund.
               No loſſe of treaſure nor Iewels of what ſtore,
               Could cauſe you thus with teares for to deplore.
            
            
               Tell then déere fréends, the cauſe of your annoy,
               Explaine the gréefe that doth your harts offend,
               Tell tell the cauſe you ceaſe your wonted ioy
               And whollie nowe to ſorrowes yoke thus bend,
               Yéelding ſuch ſighs as to the heauens aſcend.
               Such teares, ſuch gréefe, ſuch heauie morning mone,
               Mongſt Commons all, full ſildome hath béene knowne.
            
            
               When Common wealth doth loſe a noble fréend,
               A ſtaffe of comfort to the Commons all,
               A Iuſtice good, which poore mens cauſe will tend,
               And lend his eare to harken to their call,
               Such loſſe, ſuch lacke, the Commons harts doth gall.
               Loe ſuch an one hath late reſignd his breath,
               By curſed hand of 
                     •
                  ierce and cruell death.
            
            
               
               
                  Mildmay, graue Knight of Counſell to our Quéene,
               Of Th'exchequer Court the Chauncellor that was,
               In honors place that oftentimes was ſeene, He was one of the prime Counſell to her Maieſtie and Chaū
                     celour of the Exchequer.
               
               And highlie ſtood in fauour of her grace,
               By cruell death is reft from noble place,
               Entomb'd in earth his corps doo now remaine,
               The loſſe of whom doth cauſe vs thus complaine.
            
            
               
                  Mildmay by name, was milde in all his déedes,
               Pure was his thoughts, like gold his vertues ſhine,
               His vpright iuſtice fewe or none excéedes,
               To poore nor rich he neuer would encline
               But right with right, as Lawes did him aſſigne.
               To euery man he iuſtice did impart,
               As cauſe requird, and equitie of hart.
            
            
               For Princes cauſe, as his allegeance bound
               And ductie of that honorable place,
               He carefull was, his actions alſo ſounde,
               With conſcience pure he wayed euery caſe.
               As well for Commons, as profit to her grace.
               That Prince nor Subiects had iuſt cauſe to ſay,
               
                  Mildmay hath wrongd vs any kind of way.
            
            
               When poore complaind he ready was to heare,
               To eaſe their gréefe was théefe of his delight,
               When poore oppreſt was forced to appeare,
               In Exchequer Court, where he their cauſe might right.
               He was their help, he fréed their enemies ſpite,
               Yea, Mildmay euer was the man they ſought,
               Who many a cauſe to happy end hath brought.
            
            
               As Solon graue his counſell was full ſwéete
               When he was ſet mongſt Nobles of the lande, He neuer gaue any aduiſe that was againſt the benefit of the pore.
               
               For Commons good his counſell was moſt méete,
               And for their wealth, as for his Prince would ſtand,
               With reuerent care of what he had in hand.
               To glory of God, to Commons welth and good,
               Through grace of him that bought vs with his blood.
            
            
               
               Thus as at home, ſo in affaires abroade,
               When Prince did pleaſe his ſeruice to commaund,
               Ambaſſadour to King of France he yode He was Ambaſſadour in France.
               
               From gracious Quéene to giue him vnderſtand,
               What was his charge vnder her highnes hand.
               Which place of truſt he did diſcharge ſo well,
               As France reports his wiſdome did excell.
            
            
               His grauitie and bountie great withall,
               The French admire, and him a Caeſar name,
               
                  Cato for wiſedome, for proweſſe Haniball,
               
               His courage ſuch as gained endleſſe fame,
               Amongſt French Nobles which beheld the ſame.
               Where Mildmay liues, though death his life hath fane,
               And ſtill ſhall liue, eternized by fame.
            
            
               His valour ſhowne in perſon braue and ſtoute, In Queene Maries time he ſerued ag
                        •
                     inſt Wyat with 150. men on horſebacke at his proper coſtes.
               
               Ile not omit when Prince his ayde did neede.
               Seauen ſcore odde men on horſeback in a route
               All furniſht well to doe ſome noble déede,
               At his owne coſt, they forward did procéede.
               Againſt Sir Wyat to defende her right,
               For which deſert ſhe dubt him then a Knight.
            
            
               There did he ſhewe his noble valiant hart,
               In chéefeſt preaſe did Mildmay venture forth,
               Where like himſelfe he ſhewd his conquering hart,
               And with his ſword made proofe of mickle worth.
               Showing thereby his loyaltie and truth,
               To Prince to God, and to his Countrey both,
               As ſubiect good according to his othe.
            
            
               When Spanyards proude diſturbt our quiet land,
               And noble Lords did ſhowe theyr warlike traines,
               For Countries good all ſtates employd their hand,
               To fight for Prince, and put our foes to paines,
               Then Mildmay ſhowed without regard of gaines,
               A band of men, with horſe appointed well,
               Lead by his Sonne, whoſe valoure did excell.
            
            
               
               Who like a branche from Mildmaies loynes eſprong,
               Moſt Lyon like yong Anthony did attend
               On enemies backs, with branding blade to ha'rung
               Such valiant ſtrokes, as Spanyardes liues ſhould ende.
               Moſt reſolute in what he did pretend.
               Showing hereby a noble Mildmayes hart,
               Foe to all ſuch as ſought his Countries ſmart.
            
            
               Thus as in Court to counſell he was fit,
               So in the field like ſeruice he hath doone,
               His Counſell ſage, his prudent readie wit
               By golden trompe throughout the world doth run,
               Whoſe fame ſhall liue ſo long as ſhines the ſunne.
               For vertuous life, for counſell graue and wiſe,
               
                  Mildmay our Knight was held in worthy priſe.
            
            
               A booke in print nowe extant to be ſéene,
               Did Mildmay write vnto his laſting praiſe, A note to knowe a good man.
               
               Of counſell good all ſtates that may be ſéene,
               To frame their liues, both God and world to pleaſe
               As well in houſe as other kind of waies.
               By which is ſéene of Common welth his care,
               Such godly mind his liuing doth declare.
            
            
               His zeale to learning, and maintaine the ſame He foūded Emanuell Colledge in Cambridge at his owne proper coſtes.
               
               The world doth know if I forget to tell,
               In Cambridge Towne he late a houſe did frame,
               A Colledge faire, which hight Emanuell.
               
               Placing a manie of poore ſchollers there to dwell.
               For whoſe maintainance as by record appeare,
               He giues for euer four hundreth pound a yéere.
            
            
               And like a Patrone which did learning loue,
               With graue foreſight he poore men firſt there plaſt,
               Preſcribing rules from which they may not mooue,
               So long as Manuell monument doth laſt,
               Aworthy note for Nobles that are plaſt
               In high eſtate to imitate his waies,
               Which vertue ſought vnto his ending daies.
            
            
               
               A number more moſt charitable déedes,
               Swéet Mildmay did, which merits to be told,
               His rule in houſe, reléeuing pooremens néedes,
               Deſerues by fame to be engrauen in Gold.
               That as in glaſſe they able, may behold
               What famous works our Mildmay wiſe hath doone,
               Whoſe worth ſhall liue ſo long as ſhines the ſunne.
            
            
               Yet life muſt end, nature her due will haue,
               This wretched life a pilgrimage vnſure,
               We needes muſt leaue when death the ſome doth craue,
               No mortall fleſh his ſtroke that may endure,
               No golde or fe▪e his fre▪endſhip can procure.
               The olde the yong, the Prince, the Lord or Knight,
               To earth muſt pay what ſo is hers by right.
            
            
               This man of God, our noble Mildmay Knight,
               This Lampe of honor, this Iewell of our lande,
               To Death hath yeelded what was his by right,
               For what is he that death cannot commande,
               Yea all eſtates obeyes his direfull hand.
               And death in ſpite hath doone our Country wrong,
               By ſtriking him that might haue liued long.
            
            
               But as he liued ſo like wiſe did he die,
               A conſtant ſeruant of our Sauiour Chriſt,
               On him alone with faith did he relie,
               Hoping to reſt with him that is the hieſt,
               All popiſh rites with hart he did deteſt.
               Calling on God that with his blood vs bought,
               And by his death our free redemption wrought.
            
            
               
                  Mildmay farewell, thy loſſe we all lament,
               Our cheefeſt ſtaffe, thou Commons onely truſt,
               The poore and rich thy frindſhip oft ſhall want,
               For whom thy care was louing, kind and iuſt,
               Firme vnto all which did thy fauour truſt.
               Thy loſſe, thy lacke, we pooremen may complaine,
               When Prince and Peeres, to teares thy death conſtraine.
            
            
               
               Thy childrens teares might mooue a hart of flint,
               To ſée them waile their aged Sires deceaſe,
               From ſighes and ſobs that day nor night doth ſtint,
               Thy ſeruants ſorrowes likewiſe doth increaſe
               Crying out on death which ſo diſturbs their peace.
               Reauing from hence their Maiſter (vertuous Knight,)
               That gemme of worth, our Lampe of Engliſh light.
            
            
               Ceaſe worthie Gentils, ceaſe Mildmaies children ceaſe,
               Leaue to lament, leaue ſhedding bootleſſe teares,
               Your aged Knight with Chriſt doth reſt in peace,
               In heauenly ſeate as one of his coheares,
               A choſen place for thoſe his name that feares,
               Where you with him in glory once ſhall méete,
               And ſée him ſhine by Chriſt like Angell ſwéete.
            
            
               Sweet natures buds of Mildmaies famous trée,
               Surceaſe thoſe plaints, leaue fathers death to mone,
               And let his life and godly ending be,
               A Mirror good for you to gaze vppon.
               Yea let him reſt intombed vnder ſtone.
               But ſee your déedes, your actions, and your waies
               Doo gaine you fame, and father endleſſe praiſe.
            
            
               The fruite that ſprings doth ſhew the vertuous trée,
               Such doo you ſeeme as noble Sire hath béene,
               Your vertuous liues the world doth hope to ſée,
               Gaine Commons loue and fauour of the Quéene,
               In honors place like Mildmay dead to ſhine.
               Such loue, ſuch fauour euer doo I pray,
               Pleaſd God to grant ſwéet Anthony Mildmay.
               
            
            Finis.
            
               H. R.
            
         
         
            
            Londons Lamentation for the loſſe of theyr worthy and famous Lorde Mayor, Syr Martin Calthrop Knight. Who departed this life in Aprill laſt paſſed. 1589.
            
               IN Lacedemon, Lycurgus once did dwell,
               Renowned far for prudent ſage aduiſe,
               His counſell graue fewe liuing did excell,
               In Lacedemon helde he was of priſe,
               As with his yeeres, ſo did his credite riſe.
               His godlie life, his iuſtice vſde with lawe,
               From greeuous ſinnes his people oft did draw.
            
            
               
                  Cato in Rome, for wyſedome might compare,
               With anie one that liued in thoſe daies,
               Vnto his charge he had a fathers care,
               To traine them vp as God the beſt might pleaſe,
               He to the iuſt was friend at all aſſaies.
               And iuſtice vſed according vnto right,
               Without regard of poore, or men of might.
            
            
               
                  Lycurgus dead, Lacedemon mournd amaine,
               And wayld with teares his loſſe whom they did loue,
               Whoſe wiſedome knowne, their honors did maintaine,
               Yea oftentimes his counſell many proue,
               Whoſe conſcience cléere like to the Turtle doue,
               Did ſhewe his care to maintaine their renowne,
               That liu'de with him in this moſt happy Towne.
            
            
               For Catoes life whom death hath likewiſe reft,
               
                  Romes Conſuls mourne in weedes of wofull blacke,
               In Rome ſay they his péere there is not left,
               Which for his charge both day and night would carke.
               Vnto the Senate he may be a marke.
               To ayme aright, and iuſtice ſo to vſe
               As their eſtates by wrongs they nill abuſe.
            
            
               
               Amongſt the reſt that mourne their Conſuls want,
               Let famous London preſſe in place to ſhowe,
               In weedes of woe with teares for to lament,
               The loſſe of h
                     •
                  m for whom they ſorrowe ſo,
               Ye London Cittizens, now explaine your woe.
               For Calthrop graue, who late reſignd his breth
               And natures due, hath yeelded vnto death.
            
            
               Our Cato wiſe, our Calthrop peereleſſe Knight,
               Lord Mayor of London, bleſſed in her name,
               To earth hath yeelded what was hers by right,
               Ye in that yéere he to his honor came,
               By Death was forced to reſigne the ſame,
               To Londons loſſe, and Commons ſorrow great,
               For Calthrops death then cheefe in Iuſtice ſeate.
            
            
               
                  Calthrop Lord Mayor the Commons all thus cry,
               Which late did liue in tipe of hie renowne,
               Beloued of Prince, beloued of Commontie,
               Beloued of all in louelie London Towne,
               From high eſtate loe death hath taken downe,
               To reſt with him entombed in the earth,
               Vntill Chriſt come, that bought vs with his death.
            
            
               A worſhipfull of Drapers Companie,
               Was Calthrop graue, when he with vs did liue.
               Of birth a Gentleman of Norfolke Countie,
               As wel was ſeene by auncient cotes he geeue,
               For whoſe deceaſe his kinne and friends may grieue.
               Threeſcore odde yéeres by number of record,
               He liued in fame, and died at laſt a Lord.
            
            
               In Iunos right, with Matron wife he linckt,
               From out whoſe lines branches moſt ſwéete did ſpring,
               By whom he liues, though death hath cauſde him ſhrinke,
               Yet of his worth my Muſe a while ſhall ſing,
               And cheeflie touch one honorable thing
               
                  Calthrop performd not long before his death,
               His entertainment of Queene Elizabeth.
               
            
            
               
               When royall Prince of her moſt gracious loue,
               To famous London did pretend to come,
               Then Calthrop graue her Cittizens to proue
               Did notice giue, and warned all and ſome
               Each man ſhould ready be in his appointed roome,
               To giue her grace the welcome that was méete,
               For louing Subiects to a Queene ſo ſweete.
            
            
               Which by his doome moſt brauely was performde,
               In royall order ſparing for no coſt,
               By Calthrops counſell, whoſe honor yet conſernde
               In ſuch braue ſort as Cittizens may boaſt,
               Their paines and charges nere a whit was loſt.
               For graciouſly each thing ſhe did eſteeme,
               And gaue them thankes moſt like a royall Queene.
            
            
               But Calthrop chéefe with grace ſhe did reward,
               Through whoſe foreſight her welcome was the more,
               To Aldermen ſhe had a like regard,
               And curteouſly as ſhe had doone of yore,
               Vnto 
                     •
                  ord Mayor her princelie Mace that bore,
               With hartie thanks their zeale ſhe did requite,
               Which with ſuch pompe had pleaſde her princely ſight.
            
            
               Thus of our Queene did Calthrop merit fame,
               And fauour ſuch as ſildome hath béene ſhowne,
               For which deſerts honor extols his name,
               And fame with trompe ſhall make him better knowne
               In London Cittie, where he did ſit in throne
               Of Iuſtice, miniſtring his Princes lawes,
               As right requirde and equitie of cauſe.
            
            
               Whoſe care to rule in honourable ſtate,
               Was ſuch as London might full well beſéeme,
               He iuſtice vſed with ſuch an vpright rate
               As Salomon for wiſedome he had beene,
               Pleaſing to God and to our gracious Quéene.
               Religion pure be did ſo much regard,
               As zealous preachers dailie he preferd.
            
            
               
               Pittie had place within his tender hart,
               As manie in diſtreſſed ſtate can tell,
               Whoſe hand was ready alwaies to impart
               To ſuch as in behauiour vſde them well,
               As many in this Cittie walles can tell.
               To fatherleſſe, the widdow and the Mayd,
               His greateſt fauour neuer was denayd.
            
            
               The poore with wéeping wayle and wring their handes,
               And ſighing ſay, gone is our chiefeſt truſt,
               The priſoner poore which lies in ſorrowes hands,
               Defie the Fates that cloſde thee in the duſt,
               Who in thy actions was mercifull and iuſt,
               And with thy purſe was ready ſtill to giue,
               Their needie ſtate, thy bountie did reléeue.
            
            
               When they recount thy charitable déedes,
               And thinke howe death hath nowe bereft their ioy,
               Sad heauie lookes and teares from eyes proceedes,
               Curſing fell death the cauſe of their anoy,
               Which in his furie our comfort did deſtroy.
               Reauing his life which might haue liued long,
               Of enuious mind to doe the Commons wrong.
            
            
               If cruell thou hadſt wayde our Common good,
               Thou would'ſt haue ſpard to ſhred his vitall thred,
               And not haue ſought ſo ſoone his péereleſſe blood,
               That all the poore within thoſe gates ſhould neede.
               But Siſters thrée with thee had ſo decreed.
               That die he muſt, and death thou haſt thy right,
               The liuely truncke of Calthrop worthy Knight.
            
            
               Whom teares ne plaints, nor ſhriking wofull cries.
               Can call againe vnto his former life.
               His childrens mones nor ſeruants ſorrowing noyſe,
               Nor yet the plaints of his moſt louing wife,
               Whoſe teares like floods from eyes hath béene as riſe.
               But all in vaine, entombde he muſt abide,
               Vntill Chriſt come his choſen to deuide.
            
            
               
               
                  Calthrop farewell, thou peere of Common weale,
               Thou light to men to guide their wayes aright,
               Thy vertuous worth I cannot halſe reueale,
               Nor zealous life as thou deſerueſt reſite,
               Of thee my quill vnable is to write.
               But whilſt I liue graue Calthrop I will praiſe,
               Whoſe iuſtice ſhind like Phaebus in her rayes.
            
            
               Bleſſed art thou whom God hath pleaſde to call,
               Vnto his throne to reſt with him on hie,
               Plaſt next his ſeate in glory eternall,
               Where faithfull ſoules doth liue and neuer die,
               That on the blood of Chriſt vnfained doth relie.
               Amongſt which ſort, O Lord for Ieſus ſake,
               Accept vs all, and to thy fauour take.
            
            
               To famous London, ſweet Chriſt encline thine care,
               Maintaine their honour, her Lord Mayor doo bleſſe,
               To Aldermen haue thou a Fathers care,
               Whoſe paines are great thy Goſpell to encreaſe.
               Moſt zealouſly thy name which dooth profeſſe.
               Aduancing daily thy religion,
               Of zeale to thee, and truth to Engliſh Crowne.
            
            
               Whoſe redines for Prince and Countries good,
               Is daily ſeene when ſhe in neede doth ſtand,
               Their purſe their men, all bent to venture blood,
               Whether to ſea, or ſeruice on the land,
               Yea all alike be preſt at her commaund.
               God and S. George our London harts ſtill ſayth,
               For Countries cauſe, and Quéene Elizabeth.
               
            
            Finis.
            
               H. R.
            
            
            
         
      
   