
      
         
            
            
            SPIRITVALL ENCREASE: OR, Conclusions for pacifying the perplexed Conscience of the weake Christian.
            To him that hath shall be giuen.
            LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OKES, for William Lee, and are to be sold at his shop in Fleete streete, at the signe of the golden Buck, neare Seriants Inne. 1621.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ TO THE GODLY, AND euer-honored Lady, Anna, Lady Caluart, wife to the right Hon: Sir George Caluart, Knight, one of his Maiesties principall Secretaries, and of the most honorable priuy Councell.
            
               MADAME:
            
            
               AS Piety and Righteousnes are two noble vertues of the Regenerat part of the soul,

so Humility and Loue are the neuer-perishing fruit of such euer-blessed trees.
            The eminency of these in your Honor, hath encouraged mee (but alas what am I?) to entreat your Honor to shelter this vnpolished Treatise, vnder the shaddow of your Honors Patrocinie. In it your Honor may finde selected medicines out of Scripture, and the godly and learned of our time,Mr. Hooker. for the restoring of the Christian his weak conscience:Mr. Deering. not embellished

with deceitfull cauillations of humane wisedome, but arayed with the Euidency, Nakednesse and Simplicity of truth. In it your Honor may finde (I say) the wauering faith confirmed, not with cordialls of foolish empiriacks, but with the al-curing Balme of Gilead, frō Gods Sion; which dignifieth all mens actions here, & crowneth them in Christ hereafter.
            Thus (Madame) wishing eternall continuance of your Honors good and happy

beginnings, euer seconded with the fauour of God in Christ, I commit your Honor to him, who is able to doe aboue all we aske or thinke.
            
               Your Honors remembrancer at the Throne of Grace, B. R.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Contents of this Booke.
            
               A
               
                  ASsurance of the perpetuity of faith. fol. 13. Con. 9. & fol. 21. Con. 13. & fol. 33. Con. 18. & fol. 38. Con. 20. & fol. 66. Con. 32.
                  The true vse of afflictions. fol. 72. Con. 35.
               
            
            
               C
               
                  Christ dwelleth in vs by faith. fo. 30. Con. 17, & fo. 75. Con. 36.
                  Christ's obedience is ours. fol 99. Con. 46.
                  
                     To knowe the sufferings of Christ is our greatest consolation. fol. 184. Con. 75.
                  Confession of sinne a ready way to saluation. fol. 179. Con. 73.
                  The benefits of Gods chastisements. fol. 196.
               
            
            
               D
               
                  Doubtfulnesse accompanies our saluation. fol. 4. Con. 3. & fol. 55. Con. 27.
                  The benefit of desertion. fol. 7. Con. 5.
                  Degrees of faith. fol. 23. Con. 14.
                  Man must not depend on himselfe. fol. 89. Con. 41.
                  Doubting accompanies faith. fol. 147. Con. 62.
               
            
            
               E
               
                  Great difference of errors. fol. 83. Con. 39.
                  
                     Experience of God is goodnesse, strength and faith. fol. 163. Con. 68.
               
            
            
               F
               
                  The Christian is faithfull in weakenesse. fol. 2. Con. 2. & fol. 58. Con. 28.
                  How faith and feare be in a Christian. fol. 51. Con. 26.
                  The foundation of faith is Christ. fol. 59. Con. 29.
                  Difference of faith, fol. 62. Con. 30.
                  Faith sufficient to apprehend righteousnesse in Christ. fol. 115. Con. 51.
                  Death not to bee feared. fol. 198.
               
            
            
               G
               
                  God not changeable. fol. 70. Con. 34.
                  God will not forsake vs. fol. 79. Con 38.
                  
                     God offereth assurance of his fauour, in the first entrance to his seruice. fol. 91. con. 42.
                  The Elect are Gods free gift to Christ. fol. 182. con. 74.
               
            
            
               H
               
                  Hunger for Christ is a possession of him. fol. 1. con. 1.
                  A heart to hear, the gift of God. fol 11. Con. 8.
                  Hope and patience beareth the crosse. fol. 97. Con. 45.
               
            
            
               L
               
                  Faith the fountaine of our loue to God. fol. 16. Con. 11.
                  They liue to God▪ who appeare in themselues to be dead. fol. 76 con. 37.
                  By the Law of faith God pardoneth sin fol. 105. con. 48.
                  God will haue them that walke in light, to feele what it is to sit in darkenesse. fol. 151. Con. 64.
                  
                     Excellent loue appeared in Christs sufferings. fol. 192. Con. 77.
               
            
            
               M
               
                  Gods mercy. fol. 47. Con. 24.
                  Markes of our election. fol. 64. con. 31. & fol. 68. con. 33.
                  Christs merits most seene in our vnworthinesse. fol. 102. con. 47.
                  Ordinary meanes must bee vsed for the strengthning of faith. fol. 167. con. 70.
               
            
            
               O
               
                  There is a remainder of original corruption, while we are here. fol. 112. con. 50.
                  Our faith hath priuie operations secret to vs. fol. 154. con. 65.
                  
                     Preaching increaseth faith. fol. 9. con. 7.
                  Particular apprehension. fol. 15. con. 10.
                  Faith assures prayer. fol. 26. con. 15 & fol. 49 con. 25.
                  Particular application requisite to saluation. fol. 95. con. 
                        •
                     4.
               
            
            
               R
               
                  One righteousnesse here, & another in the world to come. fol. 43. con. 22.
                  Remission of sinne is iustification before God. fol. 108. con. 49.
               
            
            
               S
               
                  Saluation hangeth not vppon any sufficiency in vs. fol. 17. con. 12. & fol. 28. con. 16. & con. 23.
                  The holy Spirit is giuen to

the Elect. fol. 36. con. 19. & fo. 60. con. 29.
                  No man voyd of sinne. fol. 41. con. 21.
                  Sanctification and iustification euer goe together. fol. 1
                        •
                     8. con. 52.
                  The Serpent laboureth to peruert the simplicity of faith. fol. 156. con. 
                        •
                     6.
                  We neede not feare sinne, for Christ hath abolished it. fol. 169. con. 71.
               
            
            
               T
               
                  Trouble shal be rather matter of ioy, then of displeasure. fol. 174. con. 72.
               
            
            
               V
               
                  Weake assurance argueth weakenesse of faith. fol. 8. co. 6.
                  
                     Vnbeleefe is naturall to vs. fol. 6. con. 4.
                  Saluation not of our works. fol. 86. con. 40. & fol. 92. con. 43.
                  By our vnion with Christ we are faultlesse before God. fol. 188. con. 76.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Conclusions for pacifying the perplexed Conscience of the weake Christian.
            
               CONCLVSION 1.
               Hunger and thirst after righteousnesse and faith, is a sure possession of some measure of them.
               
                  EXPLANATION.
                  
                     IF man bee grieued for his vnbeliefe, and wish, & striue that it may bee otherwise; he hath the roote

of faith in him, from whence commeth this? but from a secret loue and liking which hee had of those things that are beleeued: no man can loue things which in his owne opinion are not▪ and if they thinke those things to be, which they shew that they loue, when they desire to beleeue them: then must it needs be, that by desiring to beleeue, they proue themselues true beleeuers; for without faith no man thinketh that things beleeued are: This Argument all the subtilty of infemall powers will neuer be able to dissolue.
               
            
            
               CONCLVSION 2.
               Man may remain faithfull

in weakenesse, though weake in faith.
               
                  EXPLANATION
                  Such is our weake and weaning nature, that wee haue no sooner receiued grace, but wee are ready to fall from it, for many and grieuous downe-falls haue beleeuers, yet still continue inuincible though we finde in our selues a most willing heart to cleaue inseparably to God, euen so farre, as to think vnfainedly with Peter, Lord I am ready to goe with thee into prison and death: yet how soone and how easily, vpon how small occasions, are wee changed, if wee bee but a while let alone, and left vnto our selues, for the

higher wee flow, the nereer we are to an ebbe, if men be respected as meere men, according to the wonted course of their alterable inclination, without the heauenly support of the Spirit.
               
            
            
               CON. 3.
               The assurance of our saluation is many times accompanied with feares & doubts, which doe perplex the soule of the most righteous.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The true worke of Faith, is, to assure vs of Gods loue, and to enioy that comfort, without let to cherish the same, and resist the contrary,

but the weaknesse of our faith, and strength of corruption is such, that we doe not alwayes attaine these, but as in the practice of good actions we sometime reioyce, and finding great infirmity in sinning, wee mourne for them, (such change by turnes are in the most regenerate) so in faith, wherein we receiue a Testimony of Gods loue, there is a change, because we apprehend not this assurance immediatly, as a principle, but by collection or conclusiō: so the alteration is in apprehēding of the premises wherupon the cōclusiō arose: for Gods promises and effects of grace appeare not alwayes the same: yea, sometimes

contrarie.
               
            
            
               CON. 4.
               The seedes of vnbeliefe are naturally sowne in vs, which euer casteth vp obiections.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Our heart by nature is full of mire & dirt, which trouble the springs of the water of life,
                     Ioh. 4.14. and therefore the dayes of faith are like the dayes of the yeere, some faire, some foule, some times in hell as it were, sometimes mounted to heauen, some times triumphing, sometimes striuing, euer counting what it hath felt, striuing to the same again, euer in feares

running vnto God, expecting better seeing a glimpse of light in darknesse, of hope in despaire, of comfort in distresse, of life in death, of heauen in hell, and if they lose the sight hereof, yet recouered it soone againe.
               
            
            
               CON. 5.
               Often God leaues vs to our selues, that wee may take the faster hold when we returne againe.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The taste of loue is the sweeter, and the ioy the larger, when we come to it out of the flouds of tentations, For afflictions brings forth patience,
                     Rom. 3.5.
                     
                     and patience experiēce, and experience hope; while by this meanes the loue of God is spred abroad in our hearts, by the holy Spirit which is giuen vs: the more trees on the tops of hils are blasted, the deeper roote they take.
               
            
            
               CON. 6.
               True faith euer giueth assurance, which is the greater, by how much our faith is the greater, and weakenesse of our assurance argueth the weakenesse of faith.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Euen in the true faith, thereRom. 12.6. is degrees (for there is

variety of gifts) which how little soeuer it be,Math. 17.20. yet is able to saue vs: that thou mayst learne what it is whereunto thou art to striue,Mar. 12.13 reioycing in that thou hast atttained to already, and to pray for that which is behinde, that God would increase thy faith: feeling of imperfections is the common frailety of all Gods children: and faith, that it may bee strong, must haue time to grow,
                     Col. 1.9. 2. Pet. 3.18 and haply seemeth weake to thee, when it is strong to God:Can. 4.12. 
                     For the ioy of the faithfull is as a garden enclosed.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 7.
               
                  As faith is by hearing, so it is ordinarily increased
                     Rom. 10.
                  
                  
by preaching, whereunto the weake beleeuer must attend.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  
                     Act. 13.26 Eph 3.29. 2. Cor. 5.20.Preachers are Proclamators, which teach euery beleeuer their interrest in the matters of saluation, which apprehend the promises vpon conscience of their owne repentance,Rom. 9.33 and faith: for where the seede shall grow, there it shall bring forth the fruite of faith, and it shall bring forth eternall life, for this assurance is giuen by the mouth of the Minister, by the word of Christ, which the faith of the hearer apprehendeth: the man warmeth the bed, & the bed

warmeth him: euery man hath not accesse to the priuy seale, but by the imprint there of in waxe, he knoweth it to be the priuy Seale.
               
            
            
               CON. 8.
               It is the Lord that giueth a heart to heare the voyce of Christ deliuered by the minister out of the Gospell.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  My owne heart could neuer minister comfort vnto mee, which is deceitfull aboue all things, and is rather cast downe with acknowledgement of misery, and therefore wee must dicerne

betwixt the true assurance of the heart, from carnall presumption, & floating fancies swimming in the head: for true assurance is accompanied with the Spirit of grace and prayer,
                     Psal. 27.8. by which the heart is conformed to the voyce of God, with ioyfull acceptance and affectionate desire of that which is vttered thereby, which is the fruite of the spirit of adoption,
                     Zach. 13 9 Mat. 9.23. Ps. 40.7.8. 
                     which beareth witnesse vnto our spirit, that wee are the sonnes of God, and beareth record that God hath giuen vs eternall life, for he is God that doth neitherly nor change whose foundation is sure,
                     Rom. 8.16 Iohn 5.6. 
                     for hee knoweth them that are his.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CON. 9.
               Thou mayst be assured of the perpetuity of thy faith; for God will not forsake the worke which hee hath begunne.
                     Phil. 1.6
                  
               
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The reason is: because that he who beleeues in Christ,
                     Rom. 9.33 Ioh. 10.28 Ier. 32.40 
                     shall neuer be confounded, and his sheepe shall neuer perish, but he will giue them eternall life: and although the godly oft times fall, yet God is faithfull in his promise to them,Phil. 3 12 
                     I will put my feare in their hearts, and they shall not depart frō me: resting in this, that they not onely apprehend

Christ, but much more, that they are apprehended of Christ,
                     Rom. 11.29, & 14, 8, & 8, 23. and not that they know God onely, but that they are knowne of him, for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance,
                     Ps. 23, 6 so that whether they liue or die, they are the Lords, for nothing can separate them from the loue of God which is in Christ Iesus, and therefore doe they boldly say, thy louing kindnesse and mercy shall follow mee all the dayes of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of God for euer.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 10
               Faith taketh hold of the particular apprehension, as to beleeue, that God is my

God, my life, peace, strength, deliuerance, and my saluation.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  We must not beleeue only, that he is these things in himselfe, but that hee is indeed, the same to vs: for because God is ours, whatsoeuer is his, is ours, for vs, and for our vse, his mercy, his power, his prouidence to watch ouer vs, both in life and death, for by couenant hee bound himselfe to the heires of promise, I will bee their God,
                     Ier. 31, 33 Esa. 25, 9 
                     and they shall be my people, and againe, Loe, this is our God, and wee haue wayted for him, and hee will heare vs, we will reioyce and be ioyfull in

his saluation: for that Christ hath already done for thee, is a greater matter then that he promised: so thou beleeue not onely that thy sin may forgiuen thee, by his mercy, (which is a beginning or foundation of Christ) but also that thy sinnes are forgiuen thee.
               
            
            
               CON. 11.
               Faith is the fountaine of our loue towards God: for while wee beleeue he is so mercifull vnto vs, it swalloweth vp our affections, and draweth our loue to him.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The loue arising of faith

so much felt in vs, assureth vs that wee are beloued of God, who loued vs first, and therefore place we the confidence of our saluation in him onely, to whom wee are vnited and made one with him, in whom we are incorporated, as members of his body: we dwell in him,
                     Ioh. 6.54.55 
                     and hee in vs, and as a faithfull Mediator, will performe the will of his heauenly Father:Ioh. 6.35 For of all that he hath giuen him, hee will lose nothing, but shall raise it vp at the last Day.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 12.
               Our saluation hangeth not vpon the sufficiency of our faith, repentance, or righteousnesse: for they are

neuer such as they ought to be.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  It is not the valew or worth of any thing in vs, that can merit pardon, but in faith there is a sincerity and truth required: For wee are Iustified freely by the grace of God,
                     Rom. 3, 34 Rom: 4, 16 
                     through the redemption which is in Christ Iesus, whom God hath set forth for an attonement for vs by faith in his blood, onely by faith I say tha
                        •
                      
                     it may bee of grace that the promise may be sure to the seede,
                     Gal. 3, 10 
                     that through the name of Christ euery one that beleeued in him, shall haue forgiuenesse of sinnes: for as many as are vnder the workes of the

Law, are vnder the curse, for it is written,
                     Gal. 5, 4 
                     cursed is euery one that continueth not in all things that are written in the booke of the Law, to doe them: now the Law is not of faith, but (he sayth) he that doth these things shall liue in them.
                     Rom. 4, 14 
                     Yee are voyded of Christ: yee are fallen from grace, that will bee iustified by the Law, for if they which bee of the Law bee heires, then faith is made voyde, and the promise is made of none effect:
                     Gal. 3, 18 
                     if the inheritance bee by the Law, it is no longer by promise: but God hath giuen vnto vs eternall life, and this life is in his Sonne.
                  
                  
                     So eternall life is the gift of God through Iesus Christ our Lord. Neither yet shall we

euer haue that fulnesse of grace here, to keepe perfectly the commandements: yet as grace increaseth, so wee increase in keeping of them in this life, and in the end, sinne being wholly abolished for euer, we shall bee fully conformed to the Image of righteousnesse, that God desired in the Law. Now Christ was circumcised for vs: and he that is circumcised,
                     Gal. 5.3 
                     is made debter to the whole Law, in the which circumcision hee entred bond for vs, and shed fewe drops of blood, as a pledge hee would shed all the rest for vs thereafter.
               
            
            
               
               CON. 13.
               By the grace of God begunne in vs, though mixed with many imperfections, our faith receiued further confirmatiō, that he which wrought this beginning of life, will go forward therewith to the end.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  God, who made vs partakers of one part of his promises, will also make vs partakers of the other, while wee take these first fruits of sanctification,
                     Mat. 5.6 as a pledge frō him of the performance of the whole: for if wee hunger

and thirst for righteousnesse, hate sinne, grone vnder the burden of it,
                     Heb. 12, 1 
                     hanging so fast on, this light of saluation shining in vs, though not fully cleere, may bee ouercast with clouds, yet neuer shal haue any night, for God doth accept our endeuour, and pardon our defects, and not onely by Christs death, as by the death of our sacrifice, by the blood of his Crosse,Exo. 12, 15 as by the blood of the Paschall Lambe, the destroyer passeth our vs, and we shall not perish, but also by his death, as by the death of our high Priest (for hee is Priest and sacrifice both) we are restored frō our exile,Numb. 15, 28 euen to the former forfeited estate, to the lād of promise.
               
            
            
               
               CON. 14.
               Our faith it selfe, is as infallable as the word of God that assured vs of it, but not alwayes so in our apprehension and feeling, for though the principall be true which wee beleeue, yet are wee iealous lest wee haue mis-applyed it to our selues.
                     Act 16, 31
                  
               
               
                  EXPLA.
                  There are diuers degrees of faith, little faith, great faith,
                     Mat. 8, 26 Mat. 15, 20 Rom. 4, 21 
                     & full assurance of faith, euen as a weak eie & a strong eie, he weake eye seeth weakely, and vnperfectly, and the strong eye seeth strongly,

and more fully discerneth the thing seene: a little faith beleeueth faintly, though truely greater faith beleeueth more stedfastly: full assurance of faith beleeueth vnder hope against hope: they were as wel saued from the biting sting of the venimous serpents, which were young and could not well perceiue, and the old which were bleare and sore-eyed, when they looked vpon the brazen Serpent, as they that were vigorous strong, and of most quick sight. This we see in the Apostles, We beleeue (say they) and know that thou art Christ,
                     Iohn, 6, 99 
                     the Sonne of the liuing God: which 
                        〈◊〉
                      was soone shaken, and therfore our Sauior telleth thē,

that hee did forewarne them of his death, and resurrection,Ioh. 14, 29 
                     that when it was come to passe they might beleeue, not with a new faith, but repaired and increased. Peter vpon Christs word beleeued that he should bee saued in the water,Mat. 14, 28, 31 but the faintnesse of his faith made him begin to sinke, and said, Master saue me: to whom he answered, O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? and so another time to the Disciples, which said, Master, saue vs, we perish:Mat. 8, 25, Christ answered, Why are ye fearefull, O ye of little faith? So this little faith is not voyd of doubt or feare, which is yet true faith, and maketh vs run to Christ; for sometimes

the godly by hasty cogitations, questioned their faith, and are ouer-taken, as Dauid in that case sayd, I am cast out of the sight of thy eyes:Psal. 31, 22 and therefore wee ought to pray,Luke 17, 5 Rom. 5, 1. 1. Ioh. 5, 13 
                     Lord increase our faith, that we may reioyce vnder the hope of the glory of God, which is the proper effect of faith, and to know by faith that wee haue eternall life, howbeit by occasions wee bewray great infirmitie in the apprehension thereof.
               
            
            
               CON. 15.
               Alwayes pray, and by faith rest assured,
                     1. Thes. 5, 17.
                   that vndoubtedly we haue that for which we pray according to his will.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  We pray for forgiuenesse of sinnes, not for that wee haue not assurance therof, but for that we desire greater assurance, that our hearts may bee enlarged, that the testimony of the Spirit may more freely sound into vs, Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee; for our faith hath sometimes a full, sometimes a wane: as Peter confesseth Christ to be immortall; another while he is afraid Christ should die.2. Cor. 5.7. Now here we walke by faith, and not by sight, and doe pray for the sight of that which we haue but by the comfort of faith & hope: so doe we beleeue that wee

are redeemed both in body and soule, and still yet we sigh in our selues,
                     Rom. 8, 23 2. Sam. 12, 13. 
                     wayting for the 
                           ••
                        demption of our bodyes. So the Lord hath taken away Dauids sinne, and yet hee prayed, Haue mercy vpon me, O Lord,
                     Psal. 51, 1. 
                     according to thy great goodnesse, according to the multitude of thy mercies doe away my offences: then doe wee pray we may inioy by realitie & possession, that which we beleeue, we already haue in Gods affection.
               
            
            
               CON. 16.
               We must withdraw our eyes from our selues, and assuredly beleeue, that wee shall receiue in him that promised.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  If we consider our meri
                        ••
                      we must despaire; but wee must depend vpon his promise, and his oath,
                     Heb. 6, 18, 
                     that by two immutable things, wherein it is vnpossible that God should lye, we might haue strong consolation, which haue our refuge to lay hold vpon that hope that is set before vs: and this is a commendable presumption when wee challenge God vpon his owne bond, and not vpon any sufficiency of our workes. Wherein, notwithstanding faith receiueth comfort and strength, by the good fruits and effects of grace, in the feare and loue of God, in faithfull care and

conscience & duty towards God and men, tokens of Gods secret election, fore
                     
                        ••
                     kens of future happinesse: so that a man called to God by fear, and framed to righteousnesse by loue, presumes that hee is of the number of them that shall bee blessed.
               
            
            
               CON. 17.
               To proue whether wee be in the faith, is to prooue whether Christ be in vs, for truly, faith is that whereby Christ dwelleth in our hearts.
               
               
                  EXPLA.
                  
                     Wee
                     1. Cor. 2, 12 
                     haue receiued not the

spirit of this world, but the spirit which is of God, that wee may know the things that are giuen vs of God. The origin
                        •••
                      of all other gifts, is the giuing of Christ vnto vs, For vnto vs a child is borne, and vnto vs a Sonne is giuen,
                     Isa. 9, 6 
                     in whom all the promises of God are, yea, and amen: and for his sake first made, and in him performed,2 Cor. 1, 20 whom the Father giuing to vs, and for vs, had 
                     Rom. 
                           •
                        , 32, 
                     altogether with him giuen vs all things 
                     1 Iohn 4, 13., the gift of the Spirit, the 
                     Act. 5, 31 
                     gift of repentance, the gift 
                     Eph. 2.8. 
                     of faith, the gift of 
                     Rom. 5, 17. 
                     righteousnesse, the gift of 
                     2 Tim. 1, 7 
                     loue, the gift of suffering 
                     Phil. 1:29 
                     for Christ, the g
                           •
                        ft of 
                     2 Pet. 1, 3 
                     all things pertaining to life and godlinesse, the 
                     Rom. 6, 23. 
                     gift of eternall life; yea, all manner 
                     Eph. 1, 3, & 3, 5. 
                     spirituall

blessings in heauenly thing, these be the vnsearchable riches of Christ, preached 
                           ••
                        to the Gentiles, a mystery which from the beginning of the world was hid in God, and not opened to the sonnes of men; nay, not to the very Angels was it knowne, so that when it was done, they did euen desire and delight to looke vnto it;1. Pet. 1, 12 the accomplishment of which riches, is in the ioy of heauen. And so now we are the sonnes of God, but yet we know not what wee shall be: for sinnes depriued vs of Paradise, a place on earth; but by the purchase of his blood, wee are intitled to a farre higher, euen the Kingdome of heauen: and his blood is not onely the

blood of remission, to acquit vs of our sins, but the blood of the Testament to bequeath vs,Mat. 26, 28 and giue vs estate in that heauenly inheritance: and all these things wee haue by faith in him, by which hee purified our hearts, and dwelleth therein by his Spirit, whose Temples we are.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 18.
               As wee haue a measure of true righteousnesse against sinne, wherein wee doubt not but God accepted vs, so haue we also a measure of true assurance against all feare and doubt, whereby our hearts rests perswaded, that God

will for euer preserue vs.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  God our wise father, both giueth comfort to his children, and also prouideth to keepe them within their bounds, that tasting of the ioy of saluation, and finding it thence-forth bitter and grieuous vnto themselues, to be distracted by perplexities and feares from the quiet enioying thereof, they may the more carefully endeuour to cleaue fast vnto him, & beware of any thing that should interrupt their ioyfull peace. We are ready by corruptiō to abuse comforts, and therefore God so ordereth the same, that they

are euer out of our owne nature or afflictions, nipping and snipping vs, that wee grow not proud, and rely on our selues to the destruction of our selues. God maketh sin the whetstone of righteousnesse; and affliction & trouble of minde, by distresse and fearefull doubts, whetteth and sharpeneth our faith and assurance, which by fighting increased, and the longer it wrastled, the stronger it waxed: as a man in danger of drowning, catcheth for hold to saue himselfe, so God sendeth variety of disturbances, that the minde should not gnaw and waste it selfe away; whereof the one is drawne away with the other, that wee should

not be steeped and dissolued with sorrow,Iob 2, 8. Ier. 1, 1. 2. Cor. 6, 4 
                     for if God correct with the rod of men, his mercy hee doth neuer take away.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 19.
               By this wee may know, we are in God, and God in vs, because hee hath giuen vs of his Spirit; which promised to men fellowship with himselfe, immortality to vs mortall, Iustification to sinners glorification to vs being abiects.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The originall of all this consisted in Gods election,

wherein he hath made vs his children and heires touching the hope of euerlasting life,
                     Tit. 3, 7. which we expect by title of inheritance, not by purchase of merit, hauing receiued for earnest and pledge therof the spirit of Christ, sanctifying and preparing vs thereto:Eph. 1.11. 
                     for not of the works of righteousnesse which we haue done, but of his mercy hath hee saued vs. Iohn the Baptist sayd, he was not worthy to loose the lachet of his shooe, who can then be thought worthy of that heauenly Kingdome? The Centurion of whom Christ gaue testimony, that he found not so great faith, no,
                     Mar. 1, 7. 
                     not in Israel, cōfessed of himselfe,Mat. 8, 10. 
                     I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter vnder my roofe,
                     
who then is worthy to enter vnder the roofe of heauen? but euery faithfull man may say with Daniel, To thee, O Lord,
                     Dan. 9, 7 
                     belongeth righteousnesse, but vnto vs belongeth confusion of face: and with Dauid, Enter not into iudgement with thy seruant,
                     Psal. 143, 2 
                     O Lord for in thy sight no man liuing shall bee iustified: and againe, If thou straitly marke what is done amisse,
                     Psa. 130, 3 
                     who shall bee able to stand?
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 20.
               By what our faith assures vs of present standing,
                     Rom. 8, 28
                   by the same, and as farre it secures vs against future falling.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  Faith looketh vpon God as a Father, who himselfe teacheth all his children, that they may be sure to learne:
                     Isa. 54, 13 Ier. 31, 33 Ier. 23, 54 
                     as a good shepheard, that so gathered the sheepe, that none of them shall bee lacking: as a good husbandman, that so senced his vine,
                     Isa. 27, 3 
                     & keepeth it night and day, that none assault to hurt it: as a Rocke, strong & sure,
                     Mat. 16, 18 
                     that the gates of hell shall not preuaile against the Church of the faithfull, that are founded and builded vpon it. It lookes vpon Gods promise, I will put my feare into their hearts,
                     Ier. 32, 40 
                     that they shall not depart from me: It looketh into the Mediation of Christ,

who had not prayed for Peter onely, That his faith might not faile,
                     Luk. 22, 32 
                     but for all that beleeue in him,
                     Ioh. 17, 11, 20. 
                     Holy father, keepe them in thy name; wherefore wee are kept by the power of God,
                     1. Pet. 1, 5, 
                     through faith vnto saluation.
                  
                  Hee that keepeth vs by faith, must be vnderstood to keepe our faith, not by any power of ours, but by his onely power; for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance; whom hee called and iustified, them hee glorified: because hee called and iustified none, but whom he had predestinated to glory, and therefore giueth them perseuerance for the attainement of the same glory: Yea and they also account all things

but losse, for the excellent knowledge of Christ Iesus our Lord, and doe iudge them but dung,
                     Phil. 3, 8 
                     that they may win Christ, and bee found in him, not hauing their owne righteousnesse which is by the Law.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 21.
               There was neuer any meere naturall man (for Christ was God also) void of all sinne.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Surely, if any at any time was, it must be she, who by speciall prerogatiue nine moneths togither, entertained Christ within the closet of her slesh, the hope of all the

ends of the earth, the honor of the world, the common ioy of men, but hee of whom all things had their beginnings had his beginning from her, of whose body he tooke the blood which was to be shed for the world, yet of her hee tooke that, which for her he payed.
                  The world cannot shew a righteous man, much lesse perfectly righteous; but Christ is made to vs wisedome,
                     1 Cor. 1, 30 
                     reuealing his Fathers will; Iustice in offering himselfe a sacrifice for sinne: Sanctificatiō because he hath giuen vs his spirit: Redemption, because he had appointed a day to vindicat his children out of the hands of corruption,
                     Rom. 8, 21 
                     into a glorious liberty.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CON. 22.
               There is a glorifying righteousnes in the world to come, as there is a iustifying & sanctifying righteousnesse here.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The righteousnesse wherewith we shall bee clothed in the world to come, is both perfect and inherent: that whereby here wee are iustified (such as is the faith of Abraham) is perfect but not inherent;Rom 4, 5 that whereby wee are sanctified (the workes of Abraham) is inherent,1. Ioh. 3, 7 but not perfect: for the righteousnesse wherein we must be found (if wee will bee iustified) is not our owne;

for in Christ God findeth vs; and the man altogether vnrighteous, beeing found in Christ, through faith God putteth away his sin, by not imputing the same, takes quite away the punishment due thereunto by pardoning it, and accepted him in Christ Iesus as perfectly righteous, as if he had fulfilled all that was commanded him in the law, for God made him sinne for vs,
                     2. Cor. 
                           •
                         21, 
                     who knew no sinne, that wee might bee made the righteousnesse of God in him; that is, such we are in the sight of God the Father, as is the very Sonne of God himselfe; this is, all men had sinned, God had suffered, God had made himselfe the sonne of man, and men are

made the righteousnesse of God;Rom. 11, 6 
                     and the grace which elected vs is no grace at all, if it elect vs for our workes sake.
               
            
            
               CON. 23
               There is no mans case so dangerous as his, whom Satan had perswaded, that his own righteousnesse shal present him pure & blamelesse in the sight of God.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The more wee haue our fruite in holinesse, the more we abound therein, the more neede we haue to craue that wee may bee supported and strengthned: our very vertues are snares vnto vs, it is

harder for Sathan to ouerthrow an humble sinner, thē a proud Sainct: if we could say (as we cannot doe) wee are guilty of nothing, God sees farther into our hearts, then we our selues can doe: with hands we neuer offered violence, yet a bloody thought doth prooue vs murtherers before him, our secret cogitations are laid in the eyes of God, and our best things intermingled with many defects. God respects the intention of the doer, which is seldome vpright: our best actions are prayers, but how in them are wee distracted? little reuerence to the great Maiestie of God, little remorse of our owne miseries, little influence of his mercies,

doe wee feele, vnwilling to beginne, and glad to make an end: wherefore wee must euer say, Lord beare with our infirmities, and pardon our offences.
                     Mat. 6.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 24.
               Onely man can escape the iudgement of God, by appealing to the seate of his sauing mercy.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  God had fixed the limits of his sauing mercy within the compasse of these terms:
                  
                     
                     God sent not his Sonne to condemne the world,
                     Ioh. 3, 17. 
                     but that the world thorow him might be saued, and thereafter mercy is restrained to beleeuers, for he that beleeues, shall not be condemned, hee that beleeues not is condemned already, because he beleeues not in the Son of God: and in another place mercy is restrained to the penitent: Of Iesabel and her sectaries, thus hee spake, I gaue her space to repent,
                     Reu. 2, 22. 
                     and she repented not, behold I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit fornication with her, into a great affliction, except they repent them of their work
                           •
                        s, and I will kill her children with death. If thou be therefore not altogether faithlesse and impenitent,

there is mercy in store for thee abundantly.
               
            
            
               CON. 25.
               Faith is the fountaine of prayer, and God in keeping of our faith, continueth our prayer, because the stream cannot faile so long as the fountaine faileth not.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Prayer is the breath of faith, which neuer ceaseth to breathe so long as it is aliue. Prayers are the beames of faith, if the light of faith bee not quenched, it certainely sendeth forth these beames

of prayer: wherefore they neuer giue ouer to pray, that it may bee fulfilled in them which is promised, Euery one that calleth vpon the name of God shall be saued.
                     Rom. 10.13 God vseth instruction of the word and Sacraments, and correction of crosses and tentation, to preserue both faith & prayer: by afflictions he fretteth off the rust, and blotteth away the ashes of carnall 
                        •
                     ecurity. Wherefore it is said, Lord in affliction they visited thee,
                     Isa. 26.16. 
                     they haue powred out a prayer when thy chastisement was vpon them. Thus God keepeth the fire of his Spirit continually burning in our hearts, opening our eares by his corrections,
                     Iob 33.16.17. to cause vs to ceasse from our euill enterprizes,

and to heale our pride, and to keepe backe our soule from the pit.1. Cor. 11. 
                     Wherefore when wee are iudged wee are chastned of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world,
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 26.
               Doubting or distracting feare, cannot stand with assurance of faith, but awfull and regarding feare is an vndiuided companion of true faith.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  As feare is opposed to faith, we heare God appointing his Ministers to call his

people from it:Isa. 35.4. 
                     Say vnto the fearefull, bee thou strong, feare not, behold our God commeth with vengeance, and hee will come and saue you: and againe, Feare not, for I am with thee, be not afraid,
                     Isa. 43.1. 
                     for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee and help
                           •
                         thee, and sustaine thee with the hand of my Iustice: And againe, Feare not, for I haue redeemed thee, I haue called thee by name, thou art mine: And againe,Isa. 54, 14 
                     Feare not, for thou shalt not be ashamed nor confounded: in righteousnesse shalt thou bee established, and be farre from feare; for it shall not come neere thee: this is the heritage of the Lords seruants, whose righteousnesse is of me: (for Christs merit is our righteousnesse.) And all this

is, because wee should rest in full assurance of safety without feare or doubt, because hee promised to preuent all occasions whence any feare should arise: And so he deliuered them out of the hands of their enemies without feare:Luk. 11, 74. and Christ died that he might deliuer them,
                     Heb. 2.15. 
                     who for feare of death were all their life time subiect to bondage: and now wee haue not receiued the spirit of bondage to feare any more,
                     Rom. 8, 15. 
                     but the spirit of adoption to cry abba Father; for God hath not giuen vs the spirit of feare, but of power,
                     2. Tim. 1.7. 
                     and of loue, and of a sound minde: for there is no greater bondage then that feare, when we are vncertaine what shall become of vs: but he said,

                     Feare not little flocke, for it is your Fathers pleasure to giue you the Kingdome.
                  
                  Now that other commendable feare doth not shake assurance of saluation, but the faithfull finding that in him, doth gather the greater assurance to himselfe. For the punishment of God is fearefull vnto him that dreades Gods iudgements,Iob 31.23. abhorreth wicked courses, laboureth in righteousnesse, is strong in the Lord,
                     Eph. 6.10 
                     and in the power of his might, and doe work their saluation with feare and trembling, with humility, and acknowledgement of their own frailety, and neuer to commit themselues to themselues, but to him who hathIsa. 26.12. 
                     wrought all our workes

for vs;1. Sam. 2.9 
                     for by his owne might shall no man be strong.
                  
                  Now there is difference betwixt absolute doubting, weake assenting, and interruption in assent with some feare; for the seeds of all impiety land in the corruption of the heart, whereby we are assaulted with doubt of the principall poynts of our beleefe; the wisedome, power, iustice, mercy of God; & yet do not wholly relinquish the assent thereof▪
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 27.
               In application of our generall faith to particular occasions, wee many times goe halting and lame, and

stagger somewhat at that, whereof our faith should giue vs full assurance by the will of God.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Thus did Sarah cast doubt of Gods promise touching the hauing of a child,
                     Gen. 18.12 who yet is said through faith to haue receiued strength to conceiue when she was past age,
                     Heb. 11.11 
                     because she iudged him faithfull that had promised. Thus did Moses call in question the power of God, as touching prouiding flesh for the people of Israel,
                     Num. 11.24 
                     when God promised so to do. So Dauid and Habacuck staggered as touching the prouidence of God,Psa. 73, 2, 
                           •
                         Hab. 1.2.13 and his

                     care of the iust and righteous men. So did the Disciples murmure concerning the Godhead of Christ, and the hope of redemption by him, which before they had imbraced: surely when we look vnto our selues in our greatest perfections, we are subiect to that amazed distraction, as to say,Rom. 10, 6. 
                     Who shall ascend into heauen? as if Christ were not ascended to make way for vs: and Who shall descend into the deepe? as if Christ had not died to deliuer vs from thence: we can neuer satisfie our selues, how either to escape the one, or to attaine the other.
               
            
            
               
               CON. 28.
               They are not faithlesse which are weake in assenting to the truth.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  As many as hold the foundation, which is precious, thogh they hold it but weakly, and as it were with a slender thread; although they frame many base and vnsutable things vpon it, things that cannot abide the triall of fire,1. Cor. 3.15 yet shall they passe the fiery triall, and be saued, which indeed, haue builded themselues vpon the Rocke, which is the foundation of the Church.Eph. 2.20.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CON. 29.
               The foundation of faith is not onely the generall ground whereupon we rest, when wee beleeue the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, but also it is the principall thing which is beleeued, that is Christ.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  There is a foundation of our faith, God manifested in the flesh, iustified in the Spirit;1. Tim. 3.16 and this, Thou art the Sonne of the liuing God,
                     Ioh. 1.49. 
                     thou art the King of Israel: and that of the inhabitants of Samaria: This is Christ the Sauiour of the
                     Ioh. 4.24.
                     
                     world. Which, who directly doth deny, doth vtterly rase the very foundation of faith: for Christ in the worke of mans saluation, is all, without our workes: for hee is that seede in whom all the Nations of the world shall be blessed; and among men there is giuen no other name vnder heauen,
                     Act. 4, 12. 1. Cor. 3. 
                     whereby we must be saued; other foundation can no man lay.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 29.
               The holy Spirit in the very moment when first he is giuen of God, bringeth with him infused vertues, proper and peculiar to the Saincts of God.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  There bee two kindes of christian righteousnesse, the one without vs, which wee haue by imputation; the other in vs, which consisteth of Faith, Hope, and Charity; as Abraham had not onely the one,Rom. 4, 23. because the things beleeued was imputed to him for righteousnesse, but also the other, because he offered vp his son. They are both Gods gifts, and the first by accepting vs for righteous in Christ; and the second by working christian righteousnesse in vs, by the spirit of adoption, which we haue receiued into our hearts; which maketh two kindes

of sanctifying righteousnesse, habituall and actuall.
               
            
            
               CON. 30.
               The wicked haue not such faith as that wherewith a Christian man is iustified.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  It is the Spirit of God which worketh faith in the Elect; the things which they beleeue, are not apprehended onely as true, but also as good, and that to vs: as good they are not apprehended by the wicked, as true they are. The Christian the more

hee increaseth in faith, the more his ioy and comfort aboundeth: but they,Is. 2.19. the more sure they are of the truth,Hos. 10.8. Luk. 23.30 the more they quake and tremble at it; for the wicked doe rather wish that they might then thinke that they shall ceasse, when they ceasse to liue, because they hold it better that death should consume them into nothing,Reue. 6.16 Ps. 51, 12. then God reuiue them vnto punishment. On the contrary, to the Elect there is no grief nor torment greater, then to feele their perswasion weake in things, whereof when they are perswaded, they reape such comfort and ioy of the Spirit.
               
            
            
               
               CON. 31.
               Faith giueth vs the comfort of saluation, because it beleeueth that, which the word of God hath deliuered, concerning them, in whom the signes & marks of our Election are found.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Faith giueth assurance of saluation by the Word of God, not only by apprehending the promise of life and saluation, but also obseruing such marks and tokens as the Word of God setteth down, to discerne them, vnto whom this saluation doth

appertaine: and therefore it doth not onely looke to that which Christ saith, that whosoeuer beleeueth shall haue euerlasting life;Ioh. 3.16. but because Christ also saith, hee that is of God heareth Gods word:Ioh. 8, 47. therefore the faithful man delighteth in the word of God, beleeueth concerning himselfe that he is of God, because the Apostle saith,Rom. 10, 13 
                     Euery one that calleth on the name of the Lord shall be saued: and this also doth the faithfull man vnfaignedly, calling on the name of God, beleeue of himselfe, that he shall be saued. And also the Apostle saith, that we know that we are translated from death to life, because we loue the Brethren: & all those things we know,

because our faith beleeueth all that which the word of God hath taught vs in this behalfe.
               
            
            
               CON. 32.
               The effect of faith is, to giue assurance of the present state, and of perseuerance also to future glory.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  
                     As many as receiued Christ, to them he gaue power to bee sonnes, euen to them that beleeue in his name.
                     Ioh. 1.12. Now to receiue, is to take in particular to a mans selfe, to apply to himself, to apprehend or lay hold of him with all his benefits, to make particular vse of Christ; so that true faith (according to the measure

of it) assures infallibly, not in general only, by principall, but in particular also, by conclusion, and application to it selfe: and as of his owne good will hee hath begotten vs by the word of truth,
                     Iam. 1.18. 
                     that we should bee as the first fruits of his creatures, so by the same true grace of God, that comfort is ministred vnto the faithfull, to say,1. Pet. 5.12 
                     Behold what loue the Father hath giuen vnto vs,
                     1. Ioh. 3.1. 
                     that we are called, and are euen now the Sons of God! and we know, that when he shall appeare, we shall be like vnto him: For thorow faith we receiue the promise of the Spirit. That is, Faith is the very hand, into which, being holden forth vnto God, hee giueth the Spirit which

hee had promised.
               
            
            
               CON. 33.
               When God giueth vs this light and feeling, that he is our Father, there followeth necessarily a certificate, that we are his children; this testimony cannot be counterfeited.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Neither the spirit of man himselfe, nor any other spirit can giue man that spirituall eye of the inner man, whereby to looke vpon God as a Father, that sincere and pure affection and inuocation, wherewith the faithfull soule tendereth it selfe vnto God;

but onely the Sp
                           •
                        rit of God himselfe,
                     Rom. 8, 15.16. 
                     which beareth witnes vnto our spirit that wee are the Sonnes of God: and because we are the Sonnes of God, he hath sent forth the spirit of his Sonne into our hearts, crying, Abba Father. Now this Spirit that beareth witnesse is truth, being the Spirit of Truth, and therefore beeing sent for a comforter,Ioh. 14, 17. surely in comforting he telleth and testifieth nothing but the truth: if then the Spirit of God beare witnesse vnto vs, that we are the Sonnes of God, wee know that it is true, and wee are sure wee are the Sonnes of God. And this witnessing properly standeth in the true spirituall inuocation, and calling on the name of God;

whereby, vpon all occasion, as children to a Father, make our recourse vnto him: for it is not incident vnto vs, to haue in our hearts & conscience that familiar and louely accesse vnto the Throne of Grace, but vpon cōscience of the spirit dwelling in vs: for this spirit of praier doth witnesse vnto the elect,Zech. 12.10 that they are the Sons of God.
               
            
            
               CON. 34.
               If God hath once giuen thee assured signes of his fauour, hee will neuer change.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  The Testament of Christ is still new; yea, though it were from the beginning, yet it is still the same, and the day passes not in which it was giuen, but it endureth still with the age of man. And thus it is not possible that our works should iustifie, which waxe olde, and are forgotten, So that the righteous man of an hundred yeares old,
                     Eze. 18.24. 
                     if hee leaue his righteousnesse, it hath no account: the saluation of the world is not thus, but alwayes new. If once I bee in the couenant, it is an euerlasting couenant, I was not taken vnder condition of time, nor no time

shall preuaile against mee; the saluation it selfe is not changeable (as Adam was in Paradise) but it is made sure in the body of Christ, vnited with the person of his Godhead. So the wayes also in which wee are led vnto it, they are īmutable; our faith is not quenched, our loue not extinguished, our hope faileth not, nor the holy Spirit can neuer be taken from vs, but still they are new euen to eternall life.
               
            
            
               CON. 35.
               We are ioynt-heires with Christ, and must attaine to our inheritance that same way which he did, beeing

first partakers with him in suffering, as we shall be afterwards in glory.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Faith expecteth all these things from God, because it is giuen vnto vs for Christs sake not only to beleeue in him,
                     Phil. 1, 29 
                     but also to suffer for his sake, beeing strengthned with all might thorow his glorious power, to all patience, and long suffering, with ioyfulnes.
                     Col. 1, 11, To this end, as the sufferings of Christ abound in them, so hee causeth their consolations to abound through Christ, & their hope is stedfast in this behalfe, because they know,
                     2. Cor. 1, 5, Heb. 13, 5, 
                     that as they are partakers of the sufferings,

so they shall be of the consolation, for faith resteth vpon that which is written, hee hath said, I wil not fail thee, nor forsake thee: therefore wee may boldly say,
                  
                     The Lord is on my side, I will not feare what man can do vnto me; he hath predestinated vs to be made like to the Image of his Sonne: and therefore hauing receiued the spirit to reueale vnto vs this secret of predestination, wee stand assured, that accordingly he will accomplish in vs the Image of his Sonne, that together with him wee may beare the crosse, and together with him also weare the crowne; and therefore shall so order all things, that there shall be nothing to come
                     
                     that shall separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 36.
               The cause of life spirituall in vs, is Christ, not carnally nor corporally inhabiting, but dwelling in the soule of man, as a thing which (when the minde apprehendeth it) is said to inhabite or possesse the minde.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The minde containeth Christ by hearing and beleeuing the Doctrine of christianity, with particular apprehension, as the light of nature doth cause the mind to apprehend those truthes

which are meerely rationall, so that sauing truth which is farre aboue the reach of humane reason, cannot otherwise then by the Spirit of the Almighty be conceiued, as in these sentences,Rom. 8, 10, Phi. 2, 15, Col. 3, 4, 
                     The Spirit is our life, or the Word is our life, or Christ our life, the meaning is, that our life is Christ, by the hearing of the Gospell apprehended 
                        •
                     s a Sauiour, and assented vnto by the power of the holy Ghost.
               
            
            
               CON. 37.
               The motions and operations of life are sometime so indiscernable and so secret, that they seeme

stone dead, who notwithstanding are still aliue vnto God in Christ.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The first intellectuall conceit and comprehension of Christ,Eph. 2, 5, is the seede whereof wee bee borne new; our first embracing of Christ, is our first reuiuing from the state of death and condemnation: Hee that hath the Sonne hath life,
                     1. Ioh. 5, 12 
                     and hee that hath not the Sonne hath no life: therefore if hee which once had the Son, may cease to haue the Son, though it be for a moment, hee ceaseth for that moment to haue life;1. Ioh. 5, 13 but the life of thē which haue the Sonne of God, is euerlasting in the world to

come:
                     Rom. 6 10 Eph. 3.6. and because as Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more, death hath no more power ouer him: So the iustified man being allyed to God in Christ Iesus our Lord, doth as necessarily from that time forward, alwaies liue, as Christ, by whō he hath life, liueth alwayes: for as long as that abideth in vs,Ioh. 14.19. which animates, quickneth and giueth life, so long wee liue, & wee know, that the cause of our faith abideth in vs for euer. If Christ the fountaine of life, may flit and leaue his inhabitation, where once hee dwelled, what shall become of his promise, I am with you to the worlds end?Mat. 28.20. If the seede of God which containeth

Christ, may be first conceiued & then cast out, how doth hee terme it immortall? How doth he affirme it abideth,1. Pet. 1.23 1. Ioh. 3, 9. if the spirit which is giuen to cherish and preserue the seed of life, may be giuen and taken away,Eph. 1, 14 
                     How is hee the earnest of our inheritance vntill redemption? How doth he continue with vs for euer?
                     Ioh. 4, 14
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 38.
               Wee are apt, prone, and ready to forsake God, but God is not as ready to forsake vs.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Our mindes are changeable,

so is not Gods, For whō God hath iustisied,
                     Num. 23, 19 
                     Christ hath assured, it is his fathers will to giue them a Kingdome. Notwithstanding, it shall not be other wise giuen them, then if they continue grounded and stablished in the faith,
                     Col. 1, 23 
                     and bee not mooued away from the hope of the Gospell,
                     1 Tim. 2.15 
                     & if they abide in loue and holinesse. Our Sauiour therefore when hee spake of the sheep effectually called, and truely gathered into his fold,Ioh. 10. 
                     I giue vnto them eternall life, and they shall neuer perish, neither shall any plucke them out of my hands; in promising to saue them, he promiseth no doubt to preserue them, in that, without which there can be no saluation; as also from that, whereby it is

irreuokeably lost. Euery error indeed in things appertaining to God, is repugnant to faith; euery fearefull cogitation, vnto hope: vnto loue, euery stragling & inordinate desire: vnto holinesse, euery blemish wherby either the inward thoghts of our mindes, or outward actions of our liues are stained; which by earnest repentance mercy doth restore to life againe in them, whom sin had made the children of death. But infidelity, extreame despaire, hatred of God, and all goodnesse, obduration in sin, &c. doth not stand where there is the least sparke of faith, hope, loue, and sanctity: euen as cold in the coldest degree cannot be

where heate in the highest degree is found.1 Ioh. 3, 9 It is true, no man liueth that sinnes not: Yet the man that is borne of God , hath a promise that the seed in him shal abide, which seede is a sure preseruatiue against obstinate heresie, & and pining discouragement of the heart: for greater and cleerer assurance we cannot haue of any thing then this, that from such sins foresaid, God shall preserue the righteous as the apple of his eye for euer: for if the iustified erre (as hee may) and neuer come to vnderstand his errour, God doth saue him through generall repētance; but if he fall into herisie, hee calleth him at one time or other by actuall repentance:

but from infidelity, which is an inward direct deniall of the foundation, hee preserueth him by speciall prouidence for euer.
               
            
            
               CON. 39.
               We must put a difference betwixt them that erre of ignorance, retaining neuerthelesse a minde desirous to bee instructed in truth: and them which after the truth is laid open, persist in the stubborne defence of their blindnesse.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Heriticall defenders, froward

and stiste-necked teachers of circumcision, the Apostle calleth dogs: silly men, who were seduced to thinke they thought the truth, he pittied, hee tooke vp in his armes, hee louingly embraceth, hee kisseth, and with more then Fatherly tendernesse, doth so temper and qualisie his speech he vseth toward thē, that a man cannot easily discerne, whether did most abound, the loue which hee bare to their godly affection, or the griefe which the danger of their opinion bred him. Their opinion was dangerous, Was not theirs also, who thought the Kingdome of Christ was earthly? Was not theirs, who thought the Gospell only should

bee preached vnto the Iewes? What more opposite to prophetical doctrine, cōcerning the cōming of Christ thē the one:Act. 15.5. concerning the catholike church then the other? Yet beeing admonished, found the mercy of God effectuall in conuerting them from their error.
                  So was there difference betwixt Pharisies: And the Pharisies which beleeued. Of the Galathians which were yet weak (he saith) You know God,
                     Gal. 4, 25, 28, 31. 
                     or rather are knowne of God, how turne you againe to impotent rud
                           •
                        ments?
                  
                     The Law engendreth seruants; they which are gotten by the Gospell are free: we are not children of the seruant, but of the free woman; and will ye

bee vnder the Law? Yet (he saith) if yee be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing; as many as are iustified by the Law are fallen from grace: and why? Because they know, that in grace and in Christ their saluation dothly, and so their hearts shall tremble and quake within them: he knoweth mans imbecillity, he hath a feeling of our blindnesse and weakenesse, how great it is.
               
            
            
               CON. 40
               Our saluation is not vpon vncertainty, if wee doe thus or thus, but God 
                     •
                  ramed vs to bee, and to doe, whatsoeuer belongeth to the attainement thereof.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  The Spirit, as he is the reuealer of the mystery of our election vnto vs, so is he the earnest of the effect of Gods predestination, by the gift whereof, God giueth vnto vs, the certaine assurance of all the rest that remaineth to be giuen; for he is the pledge of the inheritance promised, & as a hand-writing or bond of assurance of euerlasting saluatiō, making vs the temple and house of God; being the worker of holinesse in vs, that hee may bring our bodies to eternity, and so the immortality of the Resurrection, whilest in himselfe he accustomes them to bee tempered

with heauenly vertue, & to bee accompanied with the diuine eternity of the holy Ghost. And this earnest God neuer taketh backe againe, because it is so the earnest of our inheritance vntill the redemption of the possession;Eph. 1.13. 2 Cor. 1.21 22. & Cha. 5, 5. as that it is an earnest also, that in the meane time God stablishes vs in Christ, and that he hath created vs for this, namely, to clothe vs with immortality and eternall life; for God giuing earnest for the assurance of the end, doth thereby vndertake against all lets and impediments, that should hinder the atchieuing of that, that is earnested thereby: and therefore the things present, which thou hast attained

already, doe assure vnto thee those things that are yet to come.
               
            
            
               CON. 41.
               If man depend vpon himselfe, he hath iust cause to feare and doubt his own perseuerance.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The faithfull doe say with the Apostle, I know whom I haue beleeued, and I am sure that hee is able to keepe that which I haue committed vnto him against that day: euen my selfe, my faith, my hope, my prayer, my soule, my life; knowing my selfe to be a very vnsure keeper of my selfe.
                  
                     Thus faith yeeldeth a man to say, Behold O Lord, for I am thy seruant,
                     Ps. 116, 16 Ps. 119, 125 Ps. 143, 2 
                     I am thy seruant, O giue me vnderstanding that I may keepe thy commandements; enter not into iudgement with thy seruant. And because the faithfull is willing to beleeue that hee shall haue that that hee prayeth for, hee prayeth for perseuerance, because Christ saith, Beleeue that yee shall haue it, and it shall bee done vnto you. For God giueth to them that beleeue, so that hee that receiues, beleeueth himselfe to receiue; For this is the assurance that we haue in him, that if we aske any thing according to his will, he heareth vs; and if we know that hee heareth vs, whatsoeuer we aske, wee know

that we haue the petitions that we haue desired of him.
                     1 Io. 3, 4, 15
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 42.
               God euen in the very first entrance to his seruice, offereth vs assurance of his favour, and our saluation.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  At the first entrance hee saith to thee, as to the Iaylor, Beleeue in the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shall be saved:Act. 16, 31 Rom. 1, 27 And from the beginning as our faith is greater or lesse: so either strongly or weakely apprehendeth and embraceth this assurance: and in

this assurance we labour and endeauour to grow, and to goe on from faith to faith, from strength to strength, till wee learne to set the world at defiance,Ps. 84, 7, saying, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?Rom. 8.33 
                     Who shall separate vs from the loue of Christ?
               
            
            
               CON. 43.
               Our faithfull seruice or good behauiour, can neuer make vs assured of our saluation.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  God made that promise by former couenant, Hee that doth these things shall liue in them: and it auailed not, for they continued not in my couenant:
                     Gal. 3, 13, Heb. 8.9. 
                     And I regarded them not, saith the Lord. Therefore the Lord made another couenant or promise, not like the former, or conditionall vpon faithfull seruice or good behauiour, but absolute and without condition, the performance whereof should depend wholly, and onely vpon mercy: So that he would not expect as of vs, but doth vndertake to giue vs, and to worke in vs, whatsoeuer faithfull seruice, and good behauiour should be necessary thereunto.
                  
                     
                     Therefore he saith, I wil put my Law in their minds, and in their hearts will I write them, and I will bee their God, and they shal be my people; they shal all know me, for I will be mercifull to their vnrighteousnesse, and I will remember their sins and their iniquities no more. And so if wee intirely consider the whole worke of our saluation, it issueth absolutely out of the purpose and promise of God,: who intending the end, disposeth and worketh himselfe whatsoeuer belongeth to the accomplishment and attainement of the end.
               
            
            
               CON. 44.
               By beleeuing the Gospel,

I beleeue that Christ is giuen a Sauiour vnto me, to saue me, being one of his people, from my sinnes,
                     Mat. 1, 21 1 Thes. 1, 10
                   
                  & frō the wrath to come.
               
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The Gospell is the glad tidings of great ioy,
                     Luk. 2, 10.11. 
                     that vnto vs a Sauiour is borne, vnto vs a child is borne,
                     Is. 9, 6 
                     vnto vs a Son is giuen; that is, vnto vs that beleeue: and how beleeue I vnto vs, if I beleeue not vnto me? The Gospell is, that through the name of Christ, euery one that beleeueth in him, shall haue remission of sinnes; euery one that beleeueth in him shall not perish, but haue euerlasting life. If I beleeue the

Gospell,Act. 10.43. 1. Ioh. 5.10 I beleeue this. For hee that beleeues not God, makes him a lyar, because hee beleeues not the record, that God witnessed of his Sonne; and this is the record, that he hath giuen vnto vs, eternall life: and this life is in his Sonne. If then I beleeue in the name of the Sonne of God, and do not beleeue that God hath giuen me eternall life, I make God a liar in not beleeuing the report that God hath witnessed of his Son. Therefore he addeth, These things haue I written vnto you that beleeue in the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye haue life eternall.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CON. 45.
               Faith beleeueth the promises of God concerning our happinesse; and hope waiteth and looketh for the Lord, to reueale his righteousnesse, and to make the truth of his word and promises fully to appeare: and in this expectation is content with patience to beare the crosse which is incident to the profession of the name of Christ.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Confidence and reioycing of hope, groweth from

the full assurance of faith,Hebr. 3, 6, & 10, 22. whereby seeting aside the respect of our own impeachments, of our selfe wee beleeue with Abraham vnder hope,
                     Rom. 4, 18 
                     against hope, resting vpon his promise, who had taken vpon him to be the shepheard and Bishop of our soules, and is able to doe exceeding abundantly,
                     1. Pet. 2, 25 
                     aboue all that wee aske or thinke,
                     Eph. 3.20. Eph. 1, 20 
                     according to the power that worketh in vs. Whereby as he hath already wrought in vs, the like great worke as hee hath wrought in Christ, whē he raised him from the dead,
                     Eph. 2, 5. 
                     in that he hath raised vs vp, being dead in sinnes and trespasses, vnto the life of God: So wee rest perswaded, that hauing begunne this good worke in vs, he will performe

it vntill the day of Iesus Christ, not for our sakes, but for my owne sake will I doe it,
                     Eze. 36,22 
                     saith the Lord.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 46.
               Christ immediately and wholly is our saluation and righteousnesse, in whom, and not in our selues, wee are made the righteousnes of God;
                     1. Cor. 5, 21
                   his obedience was wrought in our name, and for our behalfe is imputed vnto vs, by faith in his blood.
                     Rom. 3.25
                  
               
               
                  EXPLA.
                  For Christs sake and in

him,Eph. 1, 3, 1. Cor. 1, 30 
                     God blessed vs with al spirituall blessings in heauenly things, for he is made vnto v
                           •
                         of God wisedome, righteousnesse sanctification, and redemption, that is, all in all; that hee that reioyced may reioyce onely in the Lord. And this saluation vnto which hee entitled vs by faith in Christ, consisteth not onely in the remission of sins;Rom. 3, 25 Rom. 6, 6 Eph. 4, 24 
                     but also in destroying the body of sinne, and restoring in vs the Image of God, in righteousnesse and holinesse of truth; hee hauing giuen himselfe, to purge vs to bee a peculiar people vnto himselfe; and to make vnto himselfe a glorious Church, not hauing spot or wrincle, or any such thing. And all this is begun and in doing, but is not yet

finished, and done in vs, it shall be fully perfected in vs, at the Resurrection of the dead. In the meane time, he giueth not vnto vs a full immunity from sinne, that he may take away from vs all reioycing in our selues;Tim. 1, 2, 4 that we may know at that day, that not for the workes of righteousnesse which we haue done,
                     Eph. 5.25 
                     but of his owne mercy hee hath saued vs.
                     2 Ti. 1, 3, 5 And yet no man is iustified by the righteousnes of Christ, who is not also sanctified by the Spirit of Christ. Yea, and the elects sinnes doe euen worke for their good, which are made a Triacle or preseruatiue against sinne: for they neuer so fall,1. Ioh. 3, 9 but that his seede remaineth in them, and his hand

is vnder to lift them vp againe.
                     Psal. 37, 24 Ier. 33, 16. Thus the Lord is our righteousnesse, Christ is to vs a Iesus, a Sauiour, by sauing vs immediately himselfe, not by giuing vs power to saue our selues, or to be our Sauiours.
               
            
            
               CON. 47.
               The worth of Christs merits is most cleerely seene in the true acknowledgement of our vnworthinesse.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Gods light is most cleerly seene in our darknesse, his

                     power in our weakenesse,
                     2. Cor, 12, 9 his goodnesse in shewing vs mercy, that are euill;Dan. 9, 7, his righteousnesse in the confession of of our shame,Eph. 1.6 
                     God hath appointed vs to be for the glory of his grace, and therfore he disposeth that no flesh shal reioyce in his presence,
                     1 Cor. 1, 29 
                     and that he onely may be exalted in that day, and reioyce that we haue found mercy with the Lord,
                     Is. 2.11. who couereth our sinnes with the mantle of his righteousnes; who seeth no iniquity in Iacob, nor beholds transgression in Israel. God seeth sinne with the eye of his knowledge, but by reason of that couerture,2 Tim. 1.18 will not see it with the eye of his iudgement: he seeth it with a discerning, but seeth it not with a reuenging

eye: for the iustified man delighteth in the Law of God as touching the inner man,
                     Rom. 7.23 Heb. 12, 1 Gal. 5, 17 
                     yet hee hath still in his members the law of sinne hanging f
                           ••
                        st on, and lusting and rebelling against the Law of the spirit of life. For though he hath within him an army of vicious desires, yet hath hee a will and desire of righteousnesse; hee hungreth and thirsteth, wayting to be satisfied, because according to his promise,
                     2. Pet. 3, 13 Mat. 5, 6 
                     wee looke for a new heauen, and a new earth, wherin righteousnesse dwelleth: the purpose of his life tendeth wholly to it, it is grieuance to him that he failed to performe it, and maketh him to cry out,Rom. 7, 24, 
                     Wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer mee from

the body of death? And therefore though he sinne, he sinneth not maliciously, purposely, and with desire and delight in sinne; but of ignorance and infirmity, by occasion, and by the creeping and stealing of sin vpon him.
               
            
            
               CON. 48.
               By the Law of faith God pardoneth sinne.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  God is a iust iudge, as wel when hee iudgeth by lawes of mercy, as when he iudgeth by the lawes of extremity; as well in the law of faith, as

in the law of workes: by the law of faith God forgiueth and considereth with fauour,Rom. 3.27 and if there bee a willing minde, it is accepted according to that a man hath,
                     2 Cor. 8.12. 
                     not according to that that hee hath not. And all this hee doth as a iust Iudge, because by law he doth whatsoeuer he doth; but in the rigor of the Law, which is the law of workes, he remitteth nothing, but requireth all,Mat. 5.26. 
                     to the vttermost farthing; nothing pleafeth but what is exact and perfect, and fully answerable to the rule.Ps. 103.4
                  
                  
                     2. Tim. 4So Paule expected, that God as a iust iudge, would yeeld vnto him the Crowne, not by the Law of workes, but by the Law of faith,

wherin God crowneth in mercy & louing kindnesse, because his crowne is a crowne of Iustice, not of Pauls owne Iustice, but of the Iustice of God; for it is iust with God to pay that he oweth, and he oweth that which hee hath promised, which is mercy to the beleeuing penitent, for Christs sake:Is. 53.6. 
                     For all wee like sheepe haue gone astray, and the Lord hath laid vpon him the iniquities of vs all for hee bore our sinnes in his body vpon the tree.
                     1 Pet. 2.24 Thy righteousnesse couereth in mee a multitude of sins; but in thee O Lord, what but the treasures of piety, the riches of Goodnesse?
               
            
            
               
               CON. 49.
               Wee are reputed iust by the forgiuenesse of our sins, and this is iustification in the sight of God.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  What are wee but iust in the sight of God, when there is taken from vs the imputation of all sinne? To be iust, is the same, as not to be a sinner: and in the way of faith, they to whom their sinnes are not imputed, are accounted not sinners, and therfore are accounted iust: for all the commandements of God are reputed to bee

done, when that which is not done is pardoned; and hee who is reputed to haue done all the commandements of God, is reputed iust. Hee therefore to whom God pardoneth that which hee hath done, is reputed iust, and that which God determineth not to impute,Rom. 3, 24 Eph. 1, 7, Col. 1, 14, Ro. 4, 6, 7, 8 Tim. 1, 2, 14. is all one, is if it had neuer beene: for wee are iustified through the redemption which is in Christ; and redemption is by forgiueness of sinnes; and the not imputing of sinne, is the imputing of righteousnesse without workes: now forgiuenesse of our sinnes is yeelded vnto vs by vertue of the merit and righteousnes which Christ hath wrought for vs, who was giuen for vs, and

gaue himselfe for vs,
                     Gal. 4, 5, Luk. 22, 10 
                     who was made vnder the Law to redeem vs, and therefore is iust and righteous for vs; and whatsoeuer he hath done, he hath done for vs, hee hath shed his blood for vs,
                     1. Thes. 5.10. 
                     died for vs, rose againe for vs, and hath fulfilled all righteousnesse and obedience to his Father for vs,Act. 3.26. and so very iustly is accounted ours.Mat. 3, 1
                           •
                        
                      Whatsoeuer hee hath done for vs, is no lesse then if wee our selues had performed the same for our selues. And thus by the imputation of Christs righteousnesse, our sinnes are couered, pardoned, and forgiuen, and we are reputed iust by the righteousnesse of Christ; because in the righteousnes of Christ is the forgiuenesse of our

sinnes, and thereby no accusation is liable against vs, either as hauing done that which we ought not to haue done, or done that which we ought not to doe: for who shal lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?Rom. 8.33 And as Adam did beare the person of all mankinde, and wee all were that one man; and therefore what hee did, was as done by all and euery one: So did Christ beare the person of all the Elect and faithfull, and was accounted as them all in one: not one that made the forfeiture, and another the satisfaction, because one Christ is both the head and the body: and therefore what hee did, is likewise as done by all and euery one of vs.
               
            
            
               
               CON. 50.
               In the Elect with sanctification, there is still a remainder of originall corruption.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Iustification in the sight of God, by the imputation of Christs merits, is alwayes accompanied with the sanctificatiō of the holy Ghost, whereby the inward quality of the man, though not wholly, yet in part is altered and changed; and is thenceforth further to bee renued from day to day. In part, I say, because together with

their sanctification, there is still remnants of originall corruption, by the touch & staine whereof, the holinesse & newnesse that is wrought in vs is defiled: for although originall corruption hath receiued a deadly wound, yet it is not wholly dead; it is dead indeede touching the guilt, but it is not yet dead as touching corruption and infection, and therfore doth infect the works of the most regenerate, for none is perfect as long as he continueth in this life. Indeed, God hath quickened vs together with Christ, and hath raised vs vp together, and hath made vs sit together in the heauenly places in Christ Iesus: but that is not yet really, but in hope:

yea, in our prayers there is much weaknesse and imperfections, and distractions; yet God respects the truth, and not the measure of our faith, pardoneth the same for Christs sake, who is our high Priest,
                     Exo. 28.38 
                     to beare the iniquity of our offerings to make them acceptable before the Lord: therfore the godly say,Ps. 143.2 
                     Enter not into iudgement with thy seruant, O Lord, for in thy sight no man liuing shal be iustified: The righteous fall seuen times a day,
                     Pro. 24.16. and dayly prayeth for forgiuenesse: and when by frailty he doth fal, God doth in mercy looke vpon him, as he did vpon Peter,
                     Luk. 22.61 and cause him to rise againe.
               
            
            
               
               CON. 51.
               Faith created in our hearts, is the onely sufficient supernaturall instrument to apprehend the free couenant of grace in Christ that is, Christs righteousnesse for our iustification.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Faith is the instrument to receiue, because it is the hand which wee stretch to heauen, to take holde of Christ, and to hold him sitting there: it is the mouth whereby we eate and drinke

Christ, because to beleeue is to eate: it is the stomack whereby we digest him, for he is to be digested by faith: it is the foot wherby we enter in possession of the benefits of Christ, and possesse so farre as we stretch the same: it is the vessell whereinto God putteth the oyle of his mercy: it is by faith wee touch him, and looke how much faith we bring to receiue, so much we draw out of the abundant grace of God. Now that whereby we are iustified, is the obedience of Christ, for by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous; and his obedience is his righteousnesse, and wee are made the righteousnesse of God in him, by apprehending and

receiuing the righteousnesse which is in him.Rom. 5, 15 2 Cor. 5, 21 Ier. 23, 6. He is called the Lord our righteousnesse, not who maketh vs righteous only, but who also himselfe is our righteousnes: and how should he be our righteousnes but by his righteousnes? therefore in apprehending & receiuing Christ by faith, we apprehend and receiue the righteousnes of Christ, to be our iustification before God; which is that merit and obedience of Christ imputed vnto vs. The efficient and finall cause of iustification then is, God in Christ Iesus, for our saluation, & the glory of his name: the Materiall is the merit & obedience of Christ: the Formall cause is Gods imputation

apprehended and receiued by vs; the instrument of this apprehension is faith alone.
               
            
            
               CON. 52.
               Iustifying faith is euer accompanied with godlinesse, and care of godly life.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  As naturall birth draweth not onely guilt, but also corruption, so faith wherein is our new birth, giueth not onely forgiuenesse of sinne, to iustification; but also sanctification to holinesse and newnesse of life. In the iustified man faith onely is

the seat and fountaine of spirituall life; because as the quickning faculty and power of the liuing soule, dwelleth in the heart, so Christ who is our life, dwelleth in our faith, or in our hearts by faith. But yet we consist not spiritually of faith onely, but many other vertues and graces are required, to make vp the perfection of a Christian man; to which as to the other members frō the heart, so from faith life is imparted and communicated, that in them wee may bee aliue to God: which are signes and tokens of a iustified man, not any causes of iustification, but a declaration and testimony of his being formerly iustified by the faith of Iesus

Christ. So good workes follow a man being iustified, but are not precedent to iustification: and nothing that man can doe, either by nature or grace, concurreth to the act of iustification as any cause, but faith alone; for our hearts are purified by faith;Act. 15, 9. 
                     by faith we reeiue the promise of the spirit; and the Law of the Spirit of Christ,
                     Gal. 3, 14. 
                     which is in Christ Iesus,
                     Rom. 8.2. 
                     deliuered vs from the law of sinne and of death. Neither is the very act of faith any part of our righteousnesse, but onely the merit and obedience of Christ, apprehended and receiued by faith, but as the heart giueth life to the body, not by the substance of it selfe, which is but flesh, as the rest

of the body is but by the vitall and quickning power of the soule, that is seated therin: and as the hand feedeth the body, not as beeing it selfe the food of the body, but by receiuing and ministering vnto it meate, wherby it is sustained: euen so faith iustifieth and giueth life by receiuing Christ, to bee our righteousnesse and life, in him receiuing forgiuenesse of sinnes, & inheritance among them that are sanctified vnto eternall life.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 53.
               When God promised, & tied the effect of his promise to the beleeuing of it:

not to beleeue that, in beleeuing whereof, wee are partakers of that which we beleeue: is to make God a lyar, and to frustrate that which he hath promised.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  By faith onely we accept of a promise, in all the benefits of God: wee are Gal. 4, 28 
                     the children of promise, 
                     Cha. 3.29 
                     heires by promise, 
                     Heb. 6.17 
                     heires of promise, expecting all things by the gracious promise of God, 2 Pet. 14. 
                     by promise to be partakers of the diuine nature, 
                     Gal. 3.14.26. 
                     the blessing by promise, 
                     Eph. 1.13. 
                     the spirit by promise, 
                     Gal. 3.18 
                     the inheritance by promise, 
                     1. Ti. 1.2. 
                     life eternall by promise, 
                     2 Pet. 3.13 
                     by promise

a new heauen and a new earth, wherein righteousnesse dwelleth: all which be promises in Christ, and are yea, 
                     2 Cor. 1.20. 
                     and in him amen, that is, for his sake first made, and for his sake to bee performed also. Now seeing God hath taught vs that by faith 
                     Heb. 11.13 
                     wee obtaine the promises, that wee receiue 
                     Gal. 3.14 
                     the promise of the spirit by faith, 
                     Ibid. 22. 
                     that the promise of blessing is giuen by the faith of Iesus Christ, to them that beleeue, that as 
                     Mat. 8.13 
                     we beleeue, so it shall be vnto vs, 
                     Mat. 21. 
                     that whatsoeuer wee desire when wee pray, if we beleeue we shall haue it, it shall be accordingly vnto vs. Why should wee then not beleeue such? God hath promised Christ to bee our righteousnesse, and that by

the faith of Iesus Christ, that is, by beleeuing in him, to bee that vnto vs which God hath promised: surely in beleeuing him to bee our righteousnesse, hee is our righteousnesse; and we are made the righteousnesse of God in him.
               
            
            
               CON. 54.
               The righteousnesse and merit of Christ is spiritually and really ours, within and without, in spirit and body, and soule, to sanctifie and cleanse vs vnto God.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  And this is indeede, not by receiuing Christs righteousnes really into vs, but by hauing righteousnesse imputed vnto vs, for his sake: for we receiue the righteousnes of God, euen as wee receiue himselfe, who so becommeth ours, as that we abide in him, and hee in vs; wee are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones:Ioh. 6, 56. Eph. 5, 30. we are really and truely by the power of his Spirit, one with him, and he with vs; & yet he is not personally and bodily brought vnto vs: faith seeketh Christ and findeth him, and holdeth him, in the Virgins wombe, in the manger, in the garden,

vpon the crosse, in the graue, in his Resurrection, and ascension to heauen, and in his now sitting at the right hand of God, making intercession for vs. Euery where faith embraceth him, and in euery of these, seeth him to bee ours, as hauing vndertaken and atchieued al these things for our sakes.
               
            
            
               CON. 55.
               For a speciall aptnesse in faith, hath God appointed it, to be the instrument for applying vnto vs the whole benefit of Christ.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  The will and ordinance of God, doth not without cause appoint one cōdition, when as well it might appoint another; neither appointed any thing to bee done, which is not more fitly to be done that way that he appointed, then any other way. But beside this, our iustification is by faith, that it may be by grace; for faith is the fittest meanes to set forth the grace of God. Secondly, that the promise might be sure to all the seede: for no otherwise can we rest assured of the promise of God, but as it is of Grace, who in our workes can finde nothing to

assure our selues. Thirdly, faith is specially appointed to exclude boasting,
                     Rom. 3, 27 
                     that no man should glory in his own doings, but that God should haue the glory of mans saluation.
               
            
            
               CON. 56.
               That man cannot haue fellowship with Christ by iustification, who by sanctification also hath no fellowship with him.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Doe not thinke, that hee that hath such a faith, as whereby being iustified, hee hath to reioyce with God,

can together therewith haue vnrighteousnes: for if he that beleeueth that Iesus is Christ, is borne of God, and he that is borne of God sinneth not; and if he doe sinne (that is, giue himselfe to sin) it is certaine that he beleeueth not; certaine it is, that hee that truely beleeueth, doth work the work of faith and righteousnesse, and all goodnesse. The root of all is faith, by which alone we are iustified, and so the barre of sinne is taken away, that before diuided betwixt God & vs: that so the sanctifying Spirit of God may haue accesse vnto vs, to work in vs the good work of God so to prepare vs to that inheritance, to the hope whereof hee hath called vs.
                  
                  
                     The theefe in his short time being vpon the crosse, had with his faith many good workes; the feare of God, hope, repentance, confession of sins, loue towards God and his neighbour, in reprehending his fellowes blasphemies, and defending of Christs innocency. The good workes of the godly are glorious and acceptable in Gods sight, for Christs sake, being done in his name and offered vpon the Altar of faith in him; the imperfection thereof is accidentall, & taketh not away the nature of a good worke, but maketh it an vnperfect good worke, which imperfection notwithstanding were sufficient to make the worke to

be reiected, if in rigour and extremity God shuld weigh the same, which hee doth not, but mercifully pardoneth it for Christs sake.
               
            
            
               CON. 57.
               The righteousnesse wherby we are to be iustified before God, admitteth no encrease as sanctification doth.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  It admitteth no encrease, because it must bee perfect, and the righteousnesse of Christ is alwayes vniforme and alike: if any thing bee taken from it, it is not perfect,

and if it be not perfect, it cannot iustifie before God: but to the first grace of sanctification, and all the succeeding increase thereof, is of grace: for God to the thankfull receiuing and vsing of his gifts, doth adde greater measure thereof;Mat. 2, 29 for to him that hath shall bee giuen, yet that which is added is grace for grace, and the rendring of one gift for another gift. God giuing occasion himselfe by one gift of the bestowing of another, as he giueth faith: and to faith that which we beleeue, as he giueth vs to pray, and so praier giueth that for which wee pray: so in all the rest hee giueth grace, and giueth to vse wel the grace he hath giuen,

and to the wel vsing thereof, hee giueth also further measure & increase of grace, that both in the gift & in the increase, al praise & glory may redound to him. The meanes in vs whereby this increase is wrought, is faith, which, as it first receiueth the spirit, so receiueth also the increase of it, whilest by the growth thereof, we grow more into Christ, and thereby more & more partakers of his life. By imputation of the merits and obedience of Christ, a man is a righteous the first day of his conuersion, as hee is in the end of his life, howsoeuer as touching sanctification and inherent righteousnesse, he grow much, and therein be renued from day to

day, in putting off the old man, and putting on the new, and stil cleansing from all defilement of the flesh and of the spirit, & finish his sanctification in the feare of God; for euery one that beareth fruit in me, my Father purgeth, that hee may bring forth more fruit. We must then grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect; but one thing I doe, I forget that which is behinde, and endeuour my selfe to that which is before, and follow hard toward the marke: the price of redemption in the shedding of the blood of Christ, one, and alike to all and euery faithfull man, but yet it is not alike apprehended

by euery one. There is perfect righteousnesse required of vs, and the same is yeelded vnto vs in Christ: there may be a difference in vs, but Christ cannot be diuided, neither is there in him any difference from himself, where hee goeth hee goeth whole; and therfore what he is to the strōg, the same he is to the faint and feeble soule: there is greater and lesse assurance, but the matter whereof each doth take assurance, is the whole mercy of God in Christ.
               
            
            
               CON. 58.
               When we teach Christ alone, wee exclude not our

faith vnto iustification, or Christ excluding our owne works vnto sanctification; for charity is inseparably with faith in the man that is iustified.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Faith is the onely hand which putteth on Christ vnto iustification, and Christ the only garment, which being so put on, couereth the shame of our defiled natures, hideth the imperfections of our workes, preserueth vs blamelesse in the sight of God, before whom otherwise the weakenesse of our faith were cause sufficient to make vs culpable; yea, to

shut vs out from the Kingdome of heauen, whither nothing that is not absolute can enter; so Christ without any associate, finished all the parts of redemption, & purchased saluation himselfe alone: yet for conueyance of this eminent blessing into vs, these things are required as most necessary.
               
            
            
               CON. 59.
               Our saluation is giuen to vs by Christ alone, yet to our iustification faith, to our sanctification the fruites of the Spirit, &c. are necessary.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  For our saluation it is requisite to be chosen and knowne of God, before the foundation of the world; in the world to bee called, iustified, sanctified; after wee haue left the world, to be receiued into glory. Now Christ in euery of these, hath somewhat which hee worketh alone, through him according to the eternall purpose of God before the foundation of the world, borne, crucified, buried, raised, &c. we were in a glorious acceptation knowne vnto God long before wee were seene of men. God (I say) knew vs, loued vs, was kinde to vs in Christ Iesus, in him we were elected to bee

heires of life. Thus God in Christ hath wrought in such sort alone, that our selues are meere patients, working no more then dead & senselesse matter, wood, or stone, or iron, doth in the artificers hands; no more then the clay when the potter appointeth it to be framed for an honorable vse: nay, not so much for the matter whereupon the tradesman worketh, he chooseth for the fitnesse which is in it, to serue his turne: in vs no such thing.
                  Now touching the rest, which is laide for the foundation of our faith, importeth further, that by him we are called, that wee haue redemption and remission of sins by his blood,
                     Gal. 5.8. 
                     health by his

stripes, iustice by him: that he doth sanctifie his Church, and make it glorious to himselfe, that entrance into ioy shall be giuen by him alone; yea, al things by him alone, howbeit not so by him alone, as if in vs, to our vocation the hearing of the Gospell; to our iustification faith; to our sanctification good workes; to entrance into rest, perseuerance in hope, in faith, in holinesse, were not necessary; which workes haue no power of satisfying God for sinne, or of vertue to merit both grace here, or glory in heauen; for workes are a thing subordinate, without which our sanctificatiō cannot bee accomplished: yet God doth iustifie the beleeuing

man, not for the worthinesse of his beleefe, but for the worthinesse of the person which is beleeued, that is, Christ; and God also rewardeth euery one that worketh, not for any meritorious dignity, that is or can bee in the worke, but throgh his mercy, by whose commandement hee worketh.
               
            
            
               CON. 60.
               That which we know either by sense, or by infallible demonstration, is not so certaine as the Principles, Articles, and Conclusions of Christian faith.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  If the things which wee beleeue bee considered in themselues, it may truely be said, Faith is more certain
                           •
                         then any science; & that meere natural men do neither know nor acknowledge the things of God, is no maruell, for they are spiritually to bee discerned, and they in whose hearts the light of grace doth shine, and are taught of God, are so yet weake in faith, and their assenting to the law scrupulous, mingled with feare and wauering: for the foggy dampe of originall corruption is so great, that no heart can be so inclined in the knowledge, or established

in the loue of that in which his saluatiō standeth, as that hee doth not doubt; and if any were such, what doth let, why that man shold not bee iustified by his owne inherent righteousnes? For righteousnes inherent being perfect, will iustifie, and perfect faith is a part of perfect righteousnes inherent: yea a principall part, the mother and roote of all the rest: and if it were thus, what need we the righteousnes of Christ? wherefore we must learne to challenge a strength which wee haue not; lest wee lose the comfortable support of that weakenes which indeed we haue.
               
            
            
               
               CON. 61.
               All men haue not equall certainety of faith, but some beleeuers are more scrupulous and doubtfull then others
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The reason is, there is 
                        •
                      double certainty: a certainty of euidence, as when the minde doth assent to this or that, not because it is true in it selfe, but because the truth is cleere and manifest to vs: for things most certaine in themselues, except they bee also most euident, our perswasiō is not fully assured, as

it is of things more euident, although in themselues they be lesse certaine: it is as certaine that there be spirits, as that there bee men, but wee bee more assured of these then of them: Now if there were equall euidence and truth there shold be equality of faith: Yea, that we see by the light of grace, though it be indeed most certaine, yet it is not so euidently certaine, as that which sense or the height of nature will not suffer a man to doubt of; as that the fire is hot, &c. Therefore God laboureth to confirme vs in the things were beleeue, by things whereof we haue sensible knowledge, for proofes must be more certaine, then is the thing prooued.
                  
                  
                     The other is a certainety of adherence, as when the heart doth cleaue and sticke to that which it doth beleeue, and this certainty is greater in vs then the other, because the faith of a Christian doth apprehend the words of the couenant, and promises of God, not only as true, but as good: and therefore when the euidence which hee hath of the truth is so small, that it grieueth him to feele his weakenesse in assenting thereto; yet is there in him such a sure adherence vnto that, which hee doth but faintly and fearefully beleeue, that his spirit hauing once truely tasted the heauenly sweetnesse thereof, all the world is not able quite

and cleane to remooue him from it, but he striueth with himselfe against all hope of beleeuing,Iob 13. 
                     For though he wold kill him, yet wil he trust in him. For why? This is his lesson, It is good for me to cleane vnto God.
                     Psal. 73.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 62
               Doubting doth alwayes accompany faith, yea in the most faithfull that euer did beleeue.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  If God did worke in vs like a naturall agent: as the fire doth inflame, and as the Sun enlightens, according to

the vttermost ability which they haue, to bring forth their effects, there should be nothing in the beleeuer but the incomprehensible wisedome of God, doth limit the effects of his power to such a measure, as seemeth best to himselfe. Wherefore he worketh that certainty in all, which sufficeth abundantly to their saluation in the life to come: but to none so great as attaines in this life vnto perfection; which is fittest for vs, that feeling still our owne infirmities, we may alwaies pray, Lord helpe our incredulity: Lord increase our faith. Indeed it is said, Abraham beleeued and doubted not; which Negation doth not exclude all feare, all doubting, but

onely that which cannot stād with true faith; it freeth Abraham from doubting through infidelity, not from doubting through infirmity: from the doubting of vnbeleeuers, not of weake beleeuers, as is euident, Genes. 17.17.
               
            
            
               CON. 63.
               The faith whereby wee are iustified cannot faile.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The seed of God, that is, the first grace which God powreth into the hearts of them that are incorporated into Christ, because it is an

aduersary vnto sinne: we do therefore thinke we sin not, but otherwise, by a distrustfull and doubtful apprehension of that which stedfastly we ought to beleeue, we are amazed: yet they that are borne of God do neuer so sin, as it doth extinguish quite grace. Our faith when it is strongest is but weake, yet euen then when it is at the weakest, is so strong, that vtterly it neuer faileth, it neuer perisheth altogether, no not in them who thinke it extinguished in themselues: howbeit through extremity of griefe, many times in iudgement the Elect are so confounded, that they finde not themselues in thēselues; for that which dwelleth in

their hearts they seeke: it abideth, worketh in them, yet still they aske where; still they lament, as for a thing that is past finding; they mourne as Ra
                           •
                        hel and refuse to be comforted; as if that were not which indeede is, and as if that which is not, were; as if they did not beleeue when they doe; and as if they did despaire quite when they do not: For truely, where faith maketh any doubt, there the sense is neuer satisfied.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 64.
               God will haue them that still walke in light, to feele now and then what it is to

sit in the shaddow of death.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  A grieued spirit is no argument of a faithlesse mind: men iudging by comparison either with other men, or themselues: at some other time, being more strong, they thinke imperfection to be a plaine depriuation; weakenesse to bee vtter want of faith; and therefore in heauinesse of spirit suppose they lack faith, because they finde not the ioy & delight, which indeede doth accompany faith. The Apostle Paule prayed, The God of hope fill you with all ioy in beleeuing, which is not an vnseparable companion therewith: for

                     the light would neuer bee so acceptable, were it not for vsuall entercourse of darkenesse: too much hony doth turne to gall, and too much ioy euen spiritually would make vs turne wantons. Happier a great deal is that mans case whose soule by inward desolation is humbled, then hee whose heart through abundance of spirituall delight, is lifted vp,
                     2 Cor. 12. 
                     and exalted aboue measure: better it is sometimes to cry, my God, my God, why hast hast thou forsaken mee? then to say with the Pharisey, I thanke God it is not with mee as it is with other men. God will haue them that should walke in light, to feele sometimes what it is to sit in darkenesse: yea, God sendeth

variety of disturbances, that the minde should not gnaw nor waste it self away, that wee should too much with Iob and Ieremy,
                     Iob 2.8. Ier. 11. grieue and lament. Thus hee driueth away griefe often with ioy, that wee should not bee steeped and dissolued in sorrow.
                  
               
            
            
               CON, 65.
               Our faith here may haue & hath her priuie operations secret to vs, yet known to him by whom they are.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Men do fasten their minds vpō the distrustfull suggestions

of the flesh, whereof finding great abundance in thē
                     selues, they gather thereby, vnbeleefe hath full dominion and plenary possession of thē; not marking the things of the spirit and of the flesh; because they be buried and ouerwhelmed with the contrary: when notwithstanding the Apostle doth acknowledge the spirit groanes, and that God heareth when we doe not. A man deceiued by a too hard opinion of his faith, will scarce bee comforted; yea, it doth augment his griefe, and will say, I haue sifted all the corners of my heart, and I see what there is in me, neuer seeke to perswade mee against my knowledge: reason

not with flesh & blood, dispute neuer with Satan, neuer doe yeeld, much lesse giue ouer: beleeue the word, and giue place to prayer and exhortation, and thou shalt finde light in thy greatest darkenesse. The comfort of the spirit may for a season be intermitted, but neuer the spirit of comfort shall leaue thee.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 66.
               Besides our corrupt nature, the serpent laboureth continually to peruert the simplicity of faith, which is in Christ.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  
                     I am iealous ouer you (saith the Apostle) with a godly iealousie, for I haue prepared you to a husband, a pure virgin, vnto Christ; but I feare lest as the serpent beguiled Euah through his subtilty,
                     2 Cor. 11. 
                     so your mindes should bee corrupted from the simplicity which is in Christ. This simplicity of faith taketh the naked promise of God, his bare word, and on that it resteth: which simplicity the Diuell ceasseth not to ouerthrow, corrupting the minde with many imaginations of repugnancy, & contrariety between the word of God and his promises therein, and those things

which sense or experience, or some other fore-cōceiued opinion and perswasion had imprinted. The word of promise vnto his people is, I will not leaue thee,
                     Hebr. 13. 
                     nor forsake thee: vpon this the simplicity of faith resteth, and it is not afraid of famine. But marke how the subtilty of Satan doth corrupt the mindes of that rebellious generation, whose spirits were not faithfull vnto God: they beheld the desolate state of the desert in which they were, and by the wisedome of their sense concluded the wisedome of God to be but folly;Psalm. 78. 
                     Can God prepare a table in the desert? Againe, the word of the promise vnto Sarah, was, Thou

shalt beare a sonne: faith is simple, and doubted not of it; but Satan to corrupt this simplicity of faith, entised the minde of the woman with an argument drawne from common experience to the contrary, An olde woman, Sarah, will shee bee acquainted with forgotten passions of youth? So the word of the promise of God by Moses, and the Prophets, made the Sauiour of the world so apparent vnto Philip, that this simplicity could conceiue no other Messiah then Iesus of Nazareth, the Sonne of Ioseph: but to stay Nathaniel to come and see, and should also beleeue, and so be saued; the subtilty of Satan casted a mist before his eyes, put in his head

against this the common conceiued opinion of all men against Nazareth, Is it possible that a good thing should come from thence?
                  Thus he bereaueth men for the time of all perceiuance of that which should releeue them, and be their comfort: yea, it taketh all remembrance from them, euen of things wherewith they are most familiarly acquainted The Israelites might know, that hee that led them thorow the Red Sea, was able to feede them in the wildernes. Sarah was not to learne, that with God all things were possible. Therefore diligently marke the conceit of repugnancy; beleeue not those things which are obiect to

the eies, but that which faith vpon promise of God doth looke for.
               
            
            
               CON. 67.
               The promises of Grace, protection & fauor, which God in his law makes vnto his people, doe not grant any such immunity, as can free & exempt them from all chastisements.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  God hath said, I will continue my mercy for euer towards them:Psalm. 89. so hath he likewise said, Their transgressions will I also punish with a rod: it cannot stand with any reason

that wee should set the measure of our punishments, and prescribe to God how great or how long our sufferings shold be; we are blind and altogether ignorant, what is best for vs: wee sue for many things very vnaduisedly, and vnwisely against our selues, thinking we aske fish, when indeed we craue a serpent; when we thinke wee aske that is good, and yet God seemeth slow to grant it, he denyes not, but defers our petitions, to the end we may learne to desire great things greatly.
               
            
            
               CON. 68.
               We must learn to strengthen

our faith by experience which heretofore wee haue had of Gods great goodnesse towards vs.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  By those things you haue knowne performed, learne to hope for those things that are promised: if thou knowest that thou hast receiued much, thou maist bee sure to receiue more; for to him that hath shall bee more giuen. When thou meditatest what thou wouldst haue, then search what thou hast had at Gods hāds; make this reckoning, that the benefits thou hast had, and hee bestoweth vpon thee, are bils obligatory

and sufficient sureties, that hee will bestow further: his present mercy is still a warrant of his future loue, because whom he loueth he loueth to the end.
                     Ioh. 13.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 69.
               The frailty of our nature, the subtilty of Satan, the force of our deceiueable imaginations are such, as doe threaten euery moment the subuersion of our faith, yet it is not hazarded by them.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  If wee could reckon vp,

as many euident cleare vndoubted signes of Gods reconciled loue towards vs, as there are yeeres, yea dayes, yea houres past ouer our heads; all these set together, haue not such force to confirme our faith, as the losse, and sometimes the only feare of losing a little transitory goods, credit, honor, or fauour of men: a smal calamity or a matter of nothing, can bre
                        •
                     d a conceit, and such a conceit, as cannot easily be remoued; as that we are cleane cast out of Gods Booke,
                     Psalm. 31. that hee regardeth vs not; that hee looketh vpon others, but passeth by vs, like a stranger, to whom we are not knowne.
                  When we thinke, looking

vpon others, and comparing them with our selues, Their tables are furnished day by day, earth & ashes is our bread▪ they sing to the Lute, their children dance before them; our hearts are heauy in our bodyes as lead, our sighes are many, our teares doe wash our beds wherein wee lye: the Sunne shineth faire vpon their foreheads, we are hanging like bottles i
                           •
                         the smoake, cast into corn
                           •
                        rs, like sheards of a broken pot, &c: This is our great weaknesse, and policy of Satan, which maketh vs measure God and good things according to our corruptions, when there is no such thing.
               
            
            
               
               CON. 70.
               The faithfull must vse ordinary meanes, for the strengthning and kindling of his faith.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  
                     Simon, Simon, sathan hath desired to winow thee as wheat;Luk. 22. here is our painfull tentation; but I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith faile not: this is our safety, no mans condition so sure as ours. The prayer of Christ is more then sufficient both to strengthen vs, be we neuer so weake, and to ouerthrow all aduersarie power, bee it neuer so strong

and potent: Yet his praye
                        •
                      must not exclude our labor
                        •
                      their thoughts are vaine who thinke that their watching can preserue the City, which God himselfe is not willing to keepe; and are not theirs as vaine, who think that God will keep the City, for which they themselues are not careful to watch? The husband man must not burne his plough, nor the Merchant forsake his trade, because God hath promised, I will not forsake thee:Hebr: 13. and the faithfull Christian must attend hearing, reading, praying, that he fall not into temptation. The meaning of Christ in these words, Father, keepe them in thy name, is not, that wee should bee carelesse to

keepe our selues; and so happy is he whose faith hath made him the child of God: nothing shall change his heart, ouerthrow his faith, alter his affection towards God, or the affection of God to him. Who can make a separation betweene him and God?Rom. 8. Hee knoweth in whom hee hath beleeued, and who hath shed his blood for him. Labour then to keepe the assurance of thy faith vnto the end, and by labour through the gracious mediation of Christ keepe it.
               
            
            
               CON. 71.
               Wee neede not feare sin, for Christ hath abolished it for euer.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  This is true, and euerlasting verity hath folded it vp; for howsoeuer wee feare and tremble, yet before the Lord,Col. 3.4. 
                     with whom our life is hid, there is not perill, but peace; not feare, but righteousnesse without end: let our sinnes be neuer so great, neither wee nor our sins can change the new Testament, that God is mercifull to our sinnes,
                     Ier. 31. 
                     and will remember our iniquities no more. Therefore this care is past, that our sins be many; the more they are, the greater is his mercy who hath forgiuen them. And this is the token which God hath giuen vs, that wee are

his, because wee are grieued with our sinnes; for Christ ouercame sinne with sufferings which belong vnto it:
                     Hebr. 2. and this is the badge of our redemption, to be made like him in afflictions:
                     Rom. 8. we haue sinne and abhorre it, we haue sense and feeling of Gods anger against it, and hell gapeth vpon our soules because of it; all is well, this is a blessed state, this was the Image of Christ when hee ouercame sinne; a mark of my redemption in my owne flesh, that I should not faint: for as the Sunne maketh day, and the night darkenesse, so this affliction for sin, is the badge, and cognisance of our certaine forgiuenesse. And now see the good of God, which

turneth all things to the best to those that loue him:Rom. 8. through feare of sinne the Deuill fighteth against vs; without feare of sinne wee could neuer haue boldnesse: through anguish of heart the Deuill would ouerwhelme vs with sorrow; without anguish of heart wee could neuer haue ioy.
                  In feeling Gods anger, the Deuill would make vs to despaire: without feeling his threatning, and trembling before him, wee could neuer haue strength of faith, that his mercies are for euer. In all suffrings I am like to Christ: they are marks of my adoption, that I am his child; for if wee bee without chastisements,Heb. 12. then are we bastards

and not sonnes: and what chastisements be these? He saith,Rom. 6. 
                     If wee bee planted with him in the similitude of his death, then shall wee bee also partakers of his Resurrection.
                  
                  Then as thou needest not care for sinne, for it is abolished; so needst thou not care for hell, for the nearer wee feele it, the further wee are from it.
                  Let them feare sin that feele it not, and let them bee afraid of condemnation that know not what it is: our eies haue bene kept waking, and we haue feene our sins; our hearts haue fainted before the anger of the Lord, and wee haue not despised our heauenly calling: therefore

in the day of trouble we shal haue rest, when destruction shall come vpon the secure like an armed man; & God most glorious Lord of lords although hee make sicknesse his messenger, and death his minister, till he shall destroy them both: yet his mercies are vnspeakeable that forgiueth vs all our sinnes,
                     Psal. 103. 
                     his goodnesse is great who hath regard to the children of men.Psal. 8.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 72.
               All trouble should be rather matter of ioy, then displeasure.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  This is our prayer, thy will be done,
                     Mat. 6. we must be contented with all hee hath done, that our hearts may beare vs witnesse, that of all things the Lord is most deare vnto vs: for if wee giue our heart to loue the Lord, our troubles shall seem neither great nor strong vnto vs; for what can be great if our heart bee prepared to say, We reioyce in afflictions,
                     Rom. 5. 
                     because they shall breede in vs a hope which shall neuer make vs ashamed? o
                        •
                      what can bee great, if God hath taught vs, that the momentany afflictiōs of this world,
                     Rom. 8. 
                     they are not worthy of the glory that shall be reuealed vnto vs:
                     
or what can be great if wee can reioyce in afflictions,Iam. 1. reioyce exceedingly when we fall into many and great tribulations? All is but vanity, what should dismay vs? Nay, how should we not be glad if death were euen at our bed sides, that we might euen once see the vtmost malice of the Deuill, and after for euer bee deliuered from him? O! how God is delighted with vs, when we bee faithfull to abide these light chastisements!Heb. 12. How many things haue all the 
                        •
                     odly suffered? are we not ashamed to refuse the crosse which they haue borne? yea, weight well thy case what it is, and thou shalt fee little cause of sorrow in it; or if

thou compare it with others, none at all: and it all things were as euill as thou couldst imagine, what then? Where is our loue to Iesus Christ, that gaue his pretious blood to the death vpon the Crosse for our sakes, if we will not leaue all for him? One haire cannot fall from our head but at his commandement; He is head of his Church, and all things happen they not vnto vs as he will?
                  Onely when wee sin, let vs bee sorrowfull to offend such a Sauiour, let it grieue vs more then death it selfe; but to remember againe so ass
                           •
                        red hope, we cannot but reioyce in the Lord,
                     Ph
                           •
                        l. 4. 
                     and alwayes reioice: so let Gods wil pe
                           •
                        swade you, that whether you liue, or

whether you die, you may bee wholly his. The world hath taken vp enmity against vs, and striueth dayly to separate vs from the Lord: but there is no ioy to this, that wee know our selues to bee the children of God, to bee ioyned to Iesus Christ, and made a chief member of a glorious body, with whom we shall be ioyned for euer. And what is this world to immortality? What are fulnesse of delights to the grace of God, the fellowship of Saints, the forgiuenesse of our sins, the loue of Gods countenance, the assurance of our life, the brightnesse of his glory, and these vnutterable eternall blessings? Let vs count then all things dung, that wee may

winne Christ, desire to be dissolued and be with Christ, that we may say, O death where is thy sting? All things of the world are but seruants of death, and serue to make his power more fearefull vnto vs: vanquish death, and thou hast vanquished all: height and depth, life and death, all is ours, and we are Christs.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 73.
               To confesse sin and not to hide it, is a ready way to saluation, & aduancement of Gods glory.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Satan is enemy to vs, and

his sleights are many: tread Satan vnder foote, and triumph with Christ, so shalt thou shame the Deuill: For hee that hideth his sinnes shall neuer prosper,
                     Prou. 28. 
                     but hee that confesseth and forsaketh them shall haue mercy. To Achan Ioshua said, I beseech thee giue glory to God, and shew mee what thou hast done. This is to giue glory to God, to confesse. So did Dauid acknowledge his iniquity: the Israelites before their absolution and forgiuenesse, confessed to the Priest, and thereafter their sinnes were layd on the beasts. Adam did cloake his sin, but we must be borne anew: So did Cain, but wee are of a better kinred then he. God will once reueale the 
                           •
                        ecrets

of hearts, and then wee shall reioyce, that there is nothing of ours hid: better to receiue the reproach of flesh, and after receiue the glory of God. Iohn his preaching began at confession: the prodigall Son called heauen and earth to witnesse his impiety: Paul did euer tell vs hee was a persecutor: the Theefe entred not into Paradise, til he first in the hearing of Israel, sayd, We are rightly punished, and receiue things worthy of that wee haue done. This then touched the glory of God, and therefore wee must fors
                        •
                     ke the loue of our selfe; we must not dissemble with him that cannot bee mocked, in the middest of the congregation I will praise thee,
                     
I will declare thy Name vnto my Bretheren, saith Christ. Gods graces must neither be locked vp in our hearts, but will burne within like fire: I haue beleeued, therfore I spake. A fire (I say) shut vp in our bones, wee shall bee weary with forbearing; I will speake thy name before Kings, and will not be ashamed.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 74.
               God hath giuen his Elect, as a free gift to Christ.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The Apostle telleth vs, Behold the children which thou hast giuen me:Heb. 2. This teacheth

vs to acknowledge his gift and grace, and not any wisedome in vs, why hee would choose vs; or any constancy in vs by which wee would cleaue vnto him; but God in his grace drew vs, that we might come vnto him, and with his power he strengthneth vs that we should abide with him: All that my Father giueth vnto me, commeth vnto me; and the reason is, because my Father hath giuen them to me, and he is greater then all: and hee prayeth oftentimes in that long prayer, for them that beleeue, because his Father hath giuen them vnto him: that we may be taught humility, that in vs, that is, in our flesh, ther dwelleth no goodnesse, but that he chose vs, he

did it of his free grace and mercy, which he would shew vnto vs: and as wee know, that once God hath freely giuen vs vnto Christ, so wee know our election standeth sure, because it is according to his promise who hath loued vs for euer.
               
            
            
               CON. 75.
               To know the sufserings of Christ aright, is our greatest consolation.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Christ suffered the death, ouer which the Deuil had power; the same death which is the reward of sinne, by bearing

it, he ouercame it, and he conquered no more then hee submitted himselfe vnto; for by death hee ouercame death: Heb. 2. and he hath brokē the force of it, no further then he had felt the sting of it in himself; for body and soule hee was made a sacrifice sor our sins, My soule is heauy vnto death:Mat. 26.56 yea he was astonished at his griefe, at the very entry at it, for his sweat was drops of blood falling from h
                           •
                        m,
                     Mar. 14.33 and God sent an Angell from heauen to comfort him.
                     Luk. 22.44. Was this for the death of his body? His seruants that receiue of his fulnesse, doe they not easily despise this death? that either they desire to be with Christ, or reioyce in the middest of it before the persecutor.

The Apostles did sing in prison; Paule gloried in his tribulations, which were many. And did hee cry out, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Here is no comparisō, that which made him tremble wold haue crushed them; that which made him sweate blood, would haue made them sinke into the bottome of hel; and that which made him cry, would haue held both Angels and men vnder euerlasting woe. But Christ was as water powred out,
                     Psalm. 22. 
                     and all his bones out of ioynt; his heart like waxe molted in the middest of his bowels; his strength was dried vp like a potsheard, and his tongue cleaued vnto his iawes; hee was brought with his sorrowes to

the dust of death,
                     1. Pe 1.2.24 
                     for hee bare our sinnes in his body; he submitted himselfe to the death of them, and by the wounds of his stripes we be healed. For our sinnes deserued not onely a bodily, but also a second death in hell fire: hee suffered the torments of body, and the anguish of the soule: the wrath of his Father, which wounded his flesh & spirit vnto death, would haue holden him in that condemnation for euer, if he had not bene stronger then we, that had deserued it: but beeing the Sonne of God, in whom the fulnesse of the Godhead dwelled bodily, the eternall Spirit that was within him, did loose the chaines of death and hell, of which it was impossible

that hee should bee holden; and hath left his enemies the Deuill, death, and hell, in ignominy and darknesse, and hath abolished them for euer.
               
            
            
               CON. 76.
               We are presented faultlesse before the presence of Gods glory, by beeing made one with Christ.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  Of Christ onely is it true, This is my well-beloued Sonne in whom I am well pleased: this is the Saluation wee haue by him, to bee grafted in him, and made partakers of his

life. All the faithfull before Christ, were righteous in him; for wee must leaue all our works in the earth where they were done, and they must dye with the corruptible hands and feete, with which they are wrought: we must go naked and bare, and offer nothing but that which is Christs; yea, our selues wee must present in his body, for in our owne persons wee cannot possibly be accepted. Euen as the Vine branch can haue no life except it abide in the body of the Vine; no more we either life or righteousnesse, except wee be, and abide in Christ.
                  
                     He is our substance, and being in the inheritance of glory; his righteousnesse is ours, his loue ours, his life our life, his Spirit our spirit, of his fulnesse we receiue all. This is a great mistery which the eye seeth not, nor heart can vnderstand: yet it is a reall ioyning with him, faith comprehendeth it; and when wee shall see that wisedome which is called vnity in one person, God and man, wee shall see the wisedome which hath made vs all, the body of that head and members, one of another; In him he is well pleased (I say) with vs. If that couenant wherin it was once promised to Abraham, to giue a land vnto the Iews; and all their rebellion could

not falsifie his promise; in him wee haue a couenant greater and better, therefore let vs trust vnto his promise, which cannot change his grace, nor repent him of his mercy for euer; for this is a holy couenant which shall not be broken: but God will make all our enemies our footstooles,1. Cor. 15. and will surely take vs vp into his glory: and briefly, the presence of God to which Christ leadeth vs, is a throne of Grace;Heb. 4. for by his merits we bee brought vnto God as before a Iudge, who from his tribunall Seat doth acquit vs for euer, of his own grace and free mercy: For whosoeuer looketh to bee iustified by any other thing, the Lord can no more shew

mercy vnto him, then he can change the property of his Iudgement seate, to make it no more the Throne of Grace.
               
            
            
               CON. 77.
               A perfect beauty of all excellent loue, appeareth in the great worke of Christs mediation; for hee became man. Secondly, Hee was ordained to accomplish whatsoeuer was betweene God and man. Thirdly, This was giuen to Christ by God, both by word and by oath, and all was to haue compassion on vs.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  Neither Angell, nor Archangell, nor Principalities, nor Powers, can doe this worke, to present flesh and blood vnto the Maiesty of God, when themselues are but spirits. He tooke not the Angels nature,
                     Hebr: 2. 
                     but the seede of Abraham. But in his sufferings his loue is most euident, in that it was so feruent, and so deepely rooted, that neither feare nor trembling, nor any anguish of spirit, could make him shake: nor the force of death, nor any bloody sweats, could pull it out of his bowels: & this is the depth of the Gospell, which the Angels doe desire

to behold: it skilleth not how many our sins are, and how great in our eyes; the Lord will scatter them as the clouds from the heauens, and they shall not turne away his louing countenance from vs: if our sinnes bee as scarlet, and not ours onely, but the sinnes of the whole world, they rested all vpon Christ; he prayeth for deliuerance, and hath obtained: and therefore we may say with boldnesse, forgiue vs our trespasses. We then which are laden but with our owne sins, should lift vp our hearts in the great assurance of hope, and heare with ioyfulnesse the word of promise, I
                     Heb. 8.12. 
                     will be mercifull to their vnrighteousnesse,

and I will remember their sins and iniquities no more. There is nothing comparable to his passions, by whose stripes we are healed, and therefore may bee fully perswaded,Rom. 8. 
                     that nothing shall separate vs from the loue of God in Christ: for the Lord hath appointed to giue to all that mourne in Sion, beauty for ashes, the oyle of ioy for mourning,
                     Esay 61.3. 
                     the garment of gladnesse, for the spirit of heauinesse: for hee was wounded for our transgressions,
                     Esay 53.5. 
                     and broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was vpon him: his prayers are ours, his supplications for vs, availeable for more sins then we are able to commit. This is the victory that shall ouercome

the world, euen our faith. For his Father hath broken him with one breaking vpon another, so he kindled his wrath against him, and accounted him as one of his enemies; hee cryed out aloud in silence, he could finde no ease, his face was wrinckled with weeping, and the shaddow of death was vpon his eyes: whē he was the brightnesse of glory, and the Sunne of Righteousnesse, that shined in the world; yet to see his dayes as it were at an end, and his enterprizes broken, his carefull thoughts to bee so deepe grauen in his breast, that they changed euen the day into night vnto him, and al light that approched into darkenesse.
                  
                     When his excellency was such aboue all creatures, that the world was not worthy to giue him breath, yet hee to bee made a worme and not a man, a shame of men,
                     Psalm. 22. 
                     and contempt of the people, all that saw him to haue him in derision, and to shut vp his life in shame and reproches, so vnworthy a reward of so precious a seruant. He was righteous aboue measure, yet was he accoūted among the wicked: and briefly, hee was called a glutton, but had his appetites bridled with all holy moderation; his behauiour without all reproofe, yet slandered as a friend of Publicans: hee loued the Law of his Father, that he would not suffer one

iot or title vnaccomplished, yet accused as enemy to Moses: he loued his Father with all his heart, and was obedient vnto him to the death, euen the death of the Crosse, yet they said he blasphemed: He was an enemy to Sathan euen to death, and by death ouercame him that brought death into the world:Heb. 2. he hated him with so perfect hatred, and held stedfast the enmity that was betweene them, vntill hee had spoyled his principalities and powers, and trampled ouer them in an euerlasting victory; yet they said he had a deuill: such a loathsome sinke was couered in the heart of man, and now the thoughts of many hearts made open.
                     Luk 2.
                  
                  
                     And if Moses, Ieremiah, Isaiah, and Paule, had sorrow for the Iewes of their time, how did Christs great loue boyle in sorrowes of heart, to see their destructions ouer whom before hee had wept, but prayed still, Father forgiue them, for they know not what they doe?
                  Behold therefore his person here, and know his loue: it was griefe to see all vertue troden vnder feete by them; and yet it was more infinite to behold Satan to preuaile against man to his euerlasting condemnation: and which is more, the sin that he hateth bee must take it vpon his owne body, and beare the wrath of his Father that was powred out against it:

the anger of his Father burned in him, euen vnto the bottome of hell: O! who can stand before his wrath,
                     Nah. 1.6. 
                     or who can abide the fiercenesse of his wrath? his wrath is powred out like fire, and the Rockes are broken before him! Yea, maketh the forlorne wildernesse to tremble! For thus the Sun is darkened, the Moone doth not shew her light, the Stars of heauen doth fall away, and the powers of heauen are shaken. Heere then is the picture of perfect loue; being full of goodnesse, is rewarded of euill; full of obedience, is punished as wicked; full of faith, yet had the reward of a sinner; Lord of all, yet nothing to doe him duty; the God of glory, yet

compassed with shame; the Author of life, yet wrapped in the chaines of death; the onely begotten and best beloued of the Father, yet cast off as a stranger; the beauty of the highest heauens, yet throwne down into hell; well might he say, The snares of death compassed me, and the paines of hell tooke hold vppon me, I haue found trouble and sorrow: he did say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
               
            
            
               CON. 78.
               We know then best, how we loue the Lord, when we feele by experience, what we will suffer for hts sake.
               
                  
                  EXPLA.
                  It is an easie thing to bee valiant before the combate; to dreame of a good courage before the heart bee tried: but indeed, to be vnshaken in the middest of the tempest, & to stand vpright when the ground trembleth vnder thee: this is to know assuredly thou art strong indeede. The heauen, earth, elements, were Christs enemies; his Father in whom he trusted, shewed him an ang
                        •
                     y countenance: yet said he still, Thy will be done, O Father. We must account it for an exceeding ioy when we sal
                           •
                         into sundry troubles: for what can be more ioyfull to the heart

oppressed, then to giue this in experience, that neither height nor depth, shall remooue him from the Lord? This was Abrahams glory, that hee would forsake his Countrey, and kinred,
                     Genes. 12. 
                     and fathers house, at the commandement of God, to goe whither hee would shew him. Iob his patience was not thorowly knowne, till all his goods were spoyled: and wee must haue witnesse that our election is sure, when wee may speake by experience, that neither life nor death can remooue vs from the loue of God. Thus the good ground is knowne what it is, when the heate cannot scorch it, nor briers and thornes turne the good corne into weedes,

but through all stormes it will giue nourishment vnto the seede, till it giue greater encrease to Gods honor and glory. This is a profitable experience, for before it come vnto vs, we know not how great the rebellion of the flesh will be.
                  The Apostles bragged, they would neuer forsake their Master, he alone had the words of eternall life, and they would not change him for another: they beleeued him, that they knew him to be the Christ, the Sonne of the liuing God, and there was no other Sauiour: but whē they saw the Crosse at hand, their courage fell downe, they forsooke him all. Peter said, he would dye for him, drew his sword, that he

had almost slaine one, but this boldnesse was but a blast of words, he swore hee knew him not. So experience is the greatest warrant to know what our selues can beare. The Lord and our duty requireth, that wee shold approue our selues the witnesses of the Gospell, in patience, in afflictions, in honour, in dishonour, in shame, in life, in death; but how violently the flesh will fight against vs, wee cannot well declare till wee haue made the triall.
                  And therefore in griefe of body learne to say with patience, I haue held my peace, O Lord, because thou hast done it: If thy minde bee full of sorrow, say, I will waite patiently

vpon the Lords leasure, he will heare my prayer.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 79.
               We should not be discouraged vnder the Crosse, since Christ is the patterne whose similitude we beare.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  
                     Those whom God hath fore-knowne, hee hath also predestinated to be made like vnto the image of his Sonne. Death once reigned through sinne, and hee hath found a way to rise from it again, into greater glory. This victory because it was too great for Sainct or Angell to obtaine,

he had appointed it to be the worke of his onely begotten Sonne: hee tooke vpon him our nature, to make, and in his owne person hee filled it with the fulnesse of miseries, with all sorrowes of flesh, with all anguish of minde, with persecutiō, with death, with sinne, with hell, with condemnation: and from all these, by the mighty power of his Godhead, hee is risen againe in our flesh, ascended vp into glory, and sitteth on the right hand of Maiesty, being a mighty Sauiour vnto euery one that shal follow him.
                  So that this is our glory in afflictions, we are fashioned by them into the similitude of Christ, and wee are made like

vnto him. So it pleased God when hee would bring many children vnto glory, to consecrate the Prince of their saluation through afflictions,
                     Heb. 2. 
                     and to make both him that sanctifieth, and them that are sanctified all one, that they that suffer with him, should also liue with him.
                  
                  So we when we feele many troubles to rest vpon vs, we may say, now we are like vnto Christ; especially when wee feele the greatest trouble, the minde oppressed, it maketh vs like vnto him: and to say, Now we supply in our flesh the remnant of the afflictions of Christ, in nothing in this world, as wealth, honor, &c. can I behold the liuely Image of Christ.
                  
                     Affliction and trouble, a minde broken with the remembrance of sinne, a troubled spirit, horrors of death, and a conscience burdened with the wrath of God: here light shines out of darknes, and hope out of despaire.
                  When I thinke my selfe furthest off from the Lord, them am I neerest vnto him: and when I thinke my selfe fullest of confusion, then the Image of Christ is most liuely within me. The Lord may hide his face for a while for a moment in his anger, a
                        •
                      he did from Christ, but hee will returne vnto me with euerlasting mercies, for the Image of his Sonne is cleere within me.
                  
                     
                     2. Cor. 4.
                     Wee are afflicted one euery side, but not so as that wee are shut from hope; wee are in pouerty, but not ouercome with pouerty: we are persecuted, but not forsaken; we are cast down, but wee perish not; wee are troubled in all things, fightings without, and terrours without, but God that comforteth the abiects, he will comfort vs. Vnto this he hath predestinated vs, that we should bee like vnto his Son in afflictions, and so be glorified with him in the day of honour.
               
            
            
               CON. 80.
               God sendeth vs sundry chastisements, especially the anguish of heart, and

affliction of the soule, that we should be warned, how to be free from the plague, when it commeth.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  The iudgements of God daily preached vnto vs, pierce deepe into the hearts of the true beleeuers, and the word that they heare, it worketh mightily in them,
                     Heb. 4. 
                     more sharpe in their eares then a two edged sword, and it entreth through them euen to the diuiding asunder of the soule, and of the spirit, and of the ioynts, and of the marrow, and examines all the thoughts and the intents of the heart: so that it is impossible that any part of thē should be hid, but they are

al open vnto iudgement, and heare the voice of the Lord. Then their sinne is reuiued in the middest of their bowels, their conscience hath no rest, they feele death working in their hearts, and hell is before them: they see sin on their right hand, and Satan on the left; shame vnder their feete, and an angry Iudge aboue them; the world full of destruction without, and a worm gnawing the heart within: the poore sinner knoweth not what to doe, to hide himselfe it is impossible, and to appeare it is intollerable: then hee breaketh out into loud crying, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the body of this death?Rom. 7.
                     
He giueth no rest vnto his eyes, nor sleep vnto his eyelids, vntil he find that, which is able to saue him from this wrath. In his bed by night hee seeketh him whom his soule loueth:Can. 3. in the streetes and open places hee enquireth after him, and after many daies in which hee cannot finde him, Christ sheweth himselfe at the last, a perpetuall deliuerer, a victorious Lion of the Tribe of Iuda, in whom he hath strong saluatiō: when he hath mourned because of the plague that was before him, Christ will approch neere, and wipe away al the tears frō his eies. So said he: When I heard the word of God, my belly trembled,
                     Hab. 3.16 
                     my lips shooke at the voyce, rottennesse entred into my bones,

and I trembled in my selfe that I might finde rest in the day of trouble.
                  
                  So is it with vs all, the plagues of God because they are pronounced against iniquity maketh the childe of God to feare, that foreseeing the harme he might pr
                        •
                     
                     pare himselfe.
                  For though Christ hi
                        •
                      himselfe at the first, the wounded spirit and troubled spirit must needes finde him out. We are ful of griefe, but we are chastised of the Lord, because we should not be cōdēned with the world: we dye with Christ,1. Cor. 11. because we should liue with him; we lament and weepe, but because Christ might wipe away all teares from our eyes: wee

are deliuered vnto death for Iesus sake, but because the life of Iesus should be manifest in our slesh. We beare about vs the mortification of our Lord Iesus, but because also the life of Iesus might bee manifest in our bodyes. We haue anguish of spirit and vexation of minde, for this cause, that when destruction shall come vpon the careles world, wee might lift vp our heads, and behold our redemption at hand: let vs then in patience poffesse our soules, for, for these causes wee are now afflicted, that wee may receiue mercy and finde grace to helpe in time of neede: and for this cause we tremble and are affraid, that after many prayers wee

                     might bee deliuered from the things which we haue feared.
                  
               
            
            
               CON. 81.
               That our life is in the hand of God, that we shold not be pleased with it, but as it pleaseth him, ready to lay it downe when it pleaseth him.
               
                  EXPLA.
                  This is the great commandement, to loue God aboue all, and this is the greatest obedience required of man, to be ready to dye at the will of God.
                  Against this commandement the nature of man striueth,

the delights of this life rise against it, we are loth to make our beds in the darke: we would see the Sunne, our eares would heare worldly elements; our flesh indeed is grasse, yet grasse hath a flowre, and our frayle bodies haue vanishing fantasies, agreeable vnto them, from which we cannot bee pulled away. So Patriarches and Prophets were afraid: yea, Peter and Paule loued that life which they saw in hope, but they did feele the death, which did fight in their members; they were men as we are, yet obtained at last, to bee dissolued and bee with Christ. If we be weaker then they, the graces of God shall bee more exalted in vs, and

wee shall also say at the last, Let thy seruant, O Lord, depart in peace. And 
                        ••
                     ough wee feare for a little 
                        ••
                     ile, yet feare shall bee cast out, and we shall say with a free spirit, O death, where is thy sting? Our greatest enemy & last, is troden vnder our feet; what else can hurt vs? The Lord of life hath crushed him in pieces vnder vs.
                  It is a blessed day that bringeth vs into this battel, a blessed sicknesse that maketh vs indure this fight; and most blessed end, in which wee get victory. This doth he who said, O death I will be thy death; for while wee liue, we liue in him, and no man can take our ioy from vs: and when we dye, we dye in

him and then death shall be no more death; for then the burthen of sinne, the malice of the Deuill, and terrour of hell shall cease. All things that fill with ioy shall be full within vs; as the fellowshippe of Saints and Angels, the forgiuenesse of sinnes, the Resurrection of the body, and life euerlasting, &c. yea, and the God of glory. Our eyes shall bee enlightned with a pure faith, and we shall think our time wearinesse, if then our time were prolonged, and be a soiourner in this body, in which wee are strangers from the presence of the Lord.
                  And the neerer our time approcheth, the gladder wee shall bee of the end of our

iourney, when our heart shal
                        •
                      feele it: For when the earthly house of this Tabernacle shalbe destroyed, wee haue a building giuen of God, a house not made with hands, but eternall in the heauens, where the God of al mercy, and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ shall bee before vs for euer.
                  There wee shall see the Patriarches of whom wee haue heard so much; the Prophets whom we haue loued; the Apostles whose society wee wish for; where our time shal not be tedious, and glory haue no change: O happy daies that shall neuer end! O blessed inheritance that shall neuer waste! There shall be no more sorrow, nor crying, &c. For the

first things are past, and what haue we here that can please vs? Feare of our enemy, griefe in pouerty, paine in labour, care in riches, vnstedfaftnesse in friendship, enuy in Authority, emulation in Honor, change in Nobility, feare in a Kingdome, what but vexation of spirit in all things that is vnder the Sunne? So true it is, Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity.
                  What then can disquiet vs, if in the face of Christ Iesus, we see our rising againe from the graue? Who hath giuen vs inheritance in pleasant places, and our portion in a happy lot: the dead man feareth no euill, he is only bitter to them that haue peace in

their riches: then we shalbe bold to say, Surely the Lord wil deliuer mee from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence:
                     Ps. 91. &c. 
                     I shall not be afraid of the feare of the night, nor of the arrow that flyeth by day, nor of the pestilence that walketh in the darkenes, nor of the plague that destroyeth a
                           •
                         noone: I haue set the most high to be my refuge, and there shal no eu
                           •
                        ll come neere my tabernacle. For among the dead I haue seene Christ, and in the graue I haue found the glory of God; and therfore do say, Let me dye with the righteous, and let my latter end be as vnto him: for Christ is my life, & death is my aduantage: why then should we not desire to see the louing kindnesse of the

Lord, which is better then life: Yea,Psal. 42.1. as the Hart longeth after the water brookes, so our soules long to see the Lord. Lord grant wee may haue euen here our conuersation in heauen, from thence looking for a Sauiour, euen Iesus Christ the righteous, who shall change this corruptible body, to make it like to his glorious body, in that blessed time which shall scatter away all affliction, and seale within vs the happy assurance of immortality, which shall bee in the presence of the God of Grace. Amen.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   