
      
         
            
            
            THE
ANATOMY
OF THE ENGLISH
NVNNERY AT
LISBON in PORTVGALL. DISSECTED AND
laid open by one that was ſometime
a yonger Brother of the
COVENT:
Who (if the grace of God had not preuented
him) might haue growne as old in a wicked
life as the oldeſt amongſt them.
            
               VIRG. Lib. 1. AENEID.
               —Caecum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   domus ſcelus omne retexit.
            
            Publiſhed by Authoritie.
            LONDON,
Printed by GEORGE PVRSLOWE, for
Robert Mylbourne, and Philemon Stephens: and
are to be ſold at the great South doore
of Rauls. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
VVORSHIPFVLL
Mr THOMAS GVRLIN, MAIOR
OF THE NO LESSE
ancient then loyall and wel-gouerned
towne of Kings-Lynne in Norfolke,
and his Worſhipfull Brethren
the Aldermen of the
ſame, &c.
            
               THE induſtrious and painfull
Sea-man, Right Worſhipfull
(that I may goe no
farther for an example
then mine owne profeſſion,
becauſe quod ſupranos,
nihil ad nos) being a long time croſſed with
vnfauourable windes, perſiſteth notwithſtanding
in attempting to attaine to his deſired
Port: which not beeing able to atchieue
directly and vpon a preciſe rhomb
or point, he maketh his way by diuers Maeanders

and crooked turnings, lying ſometimes
Eaſt, and anon Weſt, ſo neere his
courſe as the winde will permit, and by this
meanes at length he ankoreth in the wiſhed
harbour. Euen ſo my ſelfe hauing of a
long time deſired to recouer ſome fit occaſion
or meanes (as my moſt wiſhed port)
to expreſſe a thankefull minde vnto your
Worſhips, for no ſmall benefits formerly
conferred vpon me, (& benè apud memores
veteris ſtat gratia facti) could neuer through
contrarie windes of aduerſe fortune arriue
there in ſafety: but haue had a long trauerſe
to and fro, with little likelihood of fairer
weather, till now at length with my bowlins
ſharpe haled (pardon I pray you my ruder
Sea-phraſe) I haue doubled the Cape
of good Hope: from whence I am bold to
ſend you this firſt returne of what I long
ſince tooke vp of you vpon intereſt, it being
notwithſtanding no way of worth to
countervaile any (though the leaſt) part of
the debt I owe you. For it is now ſome
yeeres agone that I ſet ſayle from the Hauen
of your help, bound for the Port of Prudence,
               
(the Vniuerſity of Cambridge) beeing
fully fraughted with your fauour & friendſhip:
where, through mine owne negligence,
(let mee euer ſigh to remember it)
hauing foreſlowed my beſt market, and
letting go my moſt precious commodity,
(my Time) at an vnder-value, I remained a
great loſer by my voyage; not beeing able
to make vnto you (my Worſhipfull creditors)
ſuch ſatisfaction as you might iuſtly
expect. And now entring into a conſideration
of your gentle forbearance of me, I
doomed my ſelfe worthy to beare the
brand of Ingratitude, if I ſhould forget
you. Whereupon, not as any part of payment,
but as a recognizance and acknowledgement
of that debt and dutie, which I
owe to your Wps, I preſume to ſend you
this inſuing diſcourſe, being not more plain
in the manner, then true in the matter. If
you ſhall daigne to giue it fauourable acceptance,
I haue what I deſired, and in the
hope thereof (alwaies praying for your
proſperitie and welfare) I reſt
            
               Your Worſhips dutifull debtor,
THOMAS ROBINSON.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the indifferent Reader.
            
               READER, if the Title of this
Booke, being The Anatomy of
the Engliſh Nunnery at Lisbon,
doe make thee expect ſome
Chyrurgicall myſteries, or profound Lecture
vpon a diſſected bodie, let me ſatisfie thee, and
ſaue thee a labour of reading it; for thou art
much deceiued: the Author hereof is a man of
no ſuch Science; being better skilled in Ta
                  •
               kes,
Sheats, Braces, Bowlins, &c. (ſtrange words
perchance to thy vnderſtanding, and yet no
canting) then in veines, ſinewes, muſcles, and
arteries. Yet what hee promiſeth by the Title,
hee hath performed in the Treatiſe, and hath
truly anatomized this handmayd of the Whore
of Babylon; laying open her principall veines
and ſinewes in ſuch ſort, that hee is bold to challenge
the proudest Doctor of her acquaintance
to traduce his worke, or to taxe him of the leaſt
vntruth in what he hath written: for here is no

thing publiſhed, but what his owne experience,
being optima magiſtra, hath taught him, and
whereof he hath beene oculatus teſtis. Onely
the phraſe he vſeth is like himſelfe, blunt and
vnelegant; for ex quolibet ligno non fit
Mercurius: winke therefore a little at the method,
and ſuruey the matter it ſelfe with the
wide open eyes of thy vnderſtanding, and ſpare
not. And if thou be not already addicted too
much to Poperie, thou mayst peraduenture find
a preſeruatiue againſt it. Howſoeuer, here it
preſenteth it ſelfe to the view of the world; bee
it well or ill accepted, it maketh not much matter:
for the Authour will alwayes carry this
comfort about him, A good Conſcience is a
continuall feaſt. Vale.
            
               T. R.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
ANATOMY OF
THE ENGLISH
NVNNERY, AT LISBON
IN PORTVGALL.
            
               HAVING by reaſon of my Calling
beene oftentimes occaſioned
to trauell beyond the Seas: it ſo
chanced that I was once (through
diuers accidents) driuen to haue
ſome conference with father Seth,
alias, Ioſeph Foſter an Engliſh Frier in Lisbon, and the
ſole Confeſſor of a Couent of Engliſh Nunnes reſiding
in the ſame Cittie; who by his ſubtill and
wily fetches inticed me to abide with him in the
houſe, imploying me dayly in copying out certaine
Treatiſes of Obedience, which hee had compoſed
for the Nunnes. And after a while hauing depriued
mee of meanes to depart from him, by taking
away my apparell, and putting me into a diſguized
fooliſh habite (of which I was heartily aſhamed)
both hee and the Abbeſſe, with ſome others of the

ſiſters (as they cal them) neuer ceaſed to vrge me by
deepe-diſſembled intreaties & perſwaſions, vntill I
had giuen conſent to become a holy Brother and
Maſſe-prieſt in the houſe, for I had ſoone attained
to more skill in the Rubrick, then euery ſhaueling is
ordinarily accuſtomed to haue, and could readily
There are not a few Fryers and Prieſts that haue no other meanes to finde their Maſſe; and when they haue found it, (if you would hang them) they are not able to conſtrue two lines of it. find out and know any Maſſe by the great Letter
at the beginning of it; and more then that, I
could ſing Aue regina, & Salue Sancta parens, which
is learning enough in conſcience for any Abbeylubber,
vnleſſe hee bee too vnreaſonable. So that
now there wanted nothing to my taking of Orders,
ſaue onely that my minority and want of
yeeres hindred it; wherefore in the meane time I
continued in writing ouer diuers bookes for them,
and amongſt the reſt, the Regiſter of their Houſe,
whereby I came to ſome vnderſtanding of their eſtate,
beginning and ſucceſſe vntill this preſent,
which for the ſatisfaction of the Reader, I thought
good to ſet downe as briefely as I could, before I
proceed any farther, or ſpeake of their manners
and conuerſation.
            Firſt therefore for the Houſe. The Nuns thereof
doe challenge (and indeed truely) a ſucceſsion
from the Abbey of Sion in England, now belonging
vnto the Earle of Northumber land, 
               
                  See Stowes Chronicle at large. which houſe,
together with another Monaſterie of Carthuſian
Monkes, called Shyne, beeing both ſcituated vpon
the Thames, were erected and built by King Henry
the 5. at his returne from his famous Conqueſt in
France. In which two houſes, he eſtabliſhed an Order,

that to the end of the world there ſhould bee
an alternate courſe of Prayer; ſo that when the one
had finiſhed their deuotions, the other ſhould inſtantly
begin. And beeing thus founded, that of
Shyne was peopled with Carthuſian Monkes, & the
other with Nuns and Friers of St 
               Brigets Order.
            But when it pleaſed the Lord of his infinit mercy
to diſperſe and ſcatter thoſe thicke clouds of ignorance
and Superſtition, which had a long time bedimmed
the eyes, and darkned the vnderſtanding
of our forefathers, and that the glorious light of
the Goſpell began to bee more and more reſplendent
in the latter end of the Reigne of King Henry
the 8. then as well theſe Houſes, as all other of the
like ſuperſtition were ſubuerted, and aboliſhed, and
the people of them either diſmiſſed and ſent home
to their friends, or elſe continuing more obſtinately
in their blinde zeale, exiled; ſaue onely ſome few
who for withſtanding the Kings Supremacy, receiued
the reward of Traitors. Amongſt which Father
Raynolds the Confeſſor of theſe Nunnes was executed.
In memory of whom, they haue painted his
Picture & manner of execution vpon their Church
walles, eſteeming him as a holy Martyr amongſt
them, as good as either Althongh that Campian, Garnet, and ſuch other of the Ieſuites as dyed for Treaſon, are no canonized Saints; yet are they beatified by the Pope, which is the higheſt ſtep to canonization: and euery one of them is painted vp in the Ieſuites Churches, with the Title of Beatus Pater.
                St 
               Campian, or Beatus Pater
Henricus Garnet, although that amongſt the
Ieſuites theſe are little leſſe then Saints.
            After the death of this their ghoſtly Father, both
they and the Carthuſians of Shyne, tranſlated themſelues,
and diuers of their If they carried no reliques with them, it maketh not much matter, for little worth is that ſcull or dead mans bone, which will not by becomming a holy relick, adde ſomething to the Popes Exchequer. Reliques and trinkets
beyond the Seas into Flanders. And the ſucceſſors

of theſe baniſhed runnagates, are now the onely
ſtumpe which remaineth of that huge tree, that
whilome ouerſpred and ſhaddowed our whole
Country: which the Papiſts (in regard theſe two
houſes had both one foundation, and were as it
were linked and tyed the one to the other) do hold
as miraculous, and doe take it as a ſure ſigne and
token of their future returne from baniſhment;
The Regiſter booke of their bouſe, telleth of many of theſe propheſies which were ſpoken by ſundry of the Siſters vpon their death-bed. nay, ſome of the holieſt of our vnholy Siſters,
haue not doubted (I thinke in imitation of the old
Sybils) to propheſie of another golden age, when
they ſhall againe be inſtalled in Syon: but
Admiranda canunt, ſed non credenda ſorores.
            
            I know my Siſters at Lisbon for falſe prophets in
more things then one. In the meane time they of
Shyne remaine at Macklyn in the Low-Countries;
and the Nunnes of Syon, after many tranſmigrations
from Sierick-zee to their brethren at Macklyn,
and from thence to Roan, doe now reſide at Lisbon.
And this ſhall ſuffice for the foundation of
the houſe, and the ſucceſſe thereof till this preſent.
And now (by the way) it ſhall not be likewiſe much
amiſſe for the ſatisfaction of ſuch as haue not been
acquainted with Friers buſineſſe, in a word or two
to declare the originall of both theſe Orders, and
from what Patrons they firſt deſcended. For in
the Catholique Romane Church, amongſt all the
diſordered orders of ſwarming Locuſts, which
are almoſt innumerable, there is none but take
their beginning from one ſuppoſed Saint or other:
and as the reſt, ſo theſe.
            
               
For the Carthuſians ſprung vp from Reade Surius vpon the life of Bruno.
                one Bruno
in the kingdome of France, who is ſaid to haue
beene preſent at the Funerall of a certaine Prieſt
reputed for a holy man in his life: but when they
were executing the office of the dead for him, (according
to the vſe of the Papiſts) it ſeemed they
had beene deceiued in their imagination. For
when the Deacon was come to the Leſſon which
beginneth Reſponde mihi quantas habeo iniquitates,
&c. the dead man ſuddenly ſtart vp, and ſaid,
Vocatus ſum, or accufatus ſum, chuſe you whether;
whereupon they deferred his Obſequies vntill the
next day, being all amazed at what had happened;
when proceeding the ſecond time, and comming
to the ſame words againe, the dead body made
anſwer, Iudicatus ſum. Then the third time they began
their Seruice, and at the ſame Reſponde he ſate
vp and ſaid, Condemnatus ſum: wherewith this
Bruno beeing ſtricken into an extreme feare, and
much troubled, to thinke, that a man ſo generally
reputed for holy, ſhould yet be damned; determined
to lead a moſt auſtere and ſolitary life: and to
that end being accompanied with a few others,
whom he had made priuy to his purpoſe, he departed
to a deſart ſtupendious mountaine called Carthuſia,
where he liued (as they ſay) in great regularitie,
and from the name of that hill, they came to
be called Carthuſians; and to this day they pretend
more ſeuerity and ſtrictneſſe of diſcipline, then any
other Order of Monks or Friers what ſoeuer. Howbeit
they remained not long in ſuch ſolitarie and

vnfrequented places, but by little and little obtained
their houſes in euery great Cittie and towne,
as magnificent, yea and more ſumptuous then
their fellow-Locuſts, witneſſe the Charter-houſe in
London, which was once a Cage of theſe vncleane
birds.
            
            Now for the other houſe of Syon: the Nunnes
thereof take their beginning from their holy mothers
Reade the reuelations of Saint Briget.
                Saint Briget, and her daughter Saint Katherine.
This Saint Briget was of the blood Royall
of Suetia; a woman (queſtionleſſe) of a good vnderſtanding
and ſingular memory, howbeit miſerably
ſeduced and led away by the ſubtill allurements of
her ghoſtly father, by whoſe perſwaſions and
counſell, ſhe went to Rome as a Pilgrime, and comming
before the Pope, ſhe pretended to haue diuers
reuelations from God; amongſt which, one
was for the founding of this Order of Nunnes,
which was indeed the chiefe marke, that both her
ghoſtly father and ſhe aymed at. The reſt of her
pretended inſpirations, were for the reforming of
ſundry abuſes in the Church. Yea, ſhe ſpared not
to tell the Popes holineſſe of many faults in himſelfe:
but he (like a good blood-hound) quickely
ſcented her, and followed her footing, till he plainly
perceiued from whom ſhe was ſent: who (being
a fellow that might vpon diſtaſte prooue a Schiſmatique,
and make ſome reuolt in thoſe remote
Countries, from the Romane Church) he thought
beſt to be winked at; and thereupon condeſcended
vnto her requeſt, touching the erecting of a houſe

of this Order, and ſo diſmiſſed her. But ſhe liued
not long after, (whether his Holineſſe had procured
ſome modicum to bee miniſtred vnto her or no,
it is doubtfull) yet in her daughters dayes the buſineſſe
came to perfection: and the firſt Houſe of
this Order was at a place called Watſteen in Swethland,
from whence certaine Nunnes were procured
into England, to propagate their Rules and
Ceremonies in Syon houſe, at the time when it was
firſt built.
            The magnificence of this Couent in former
times hath beene by the report of the now-liuing
Nunnes very admirable: at this preſent it is not of
any extraordinarie repute; neither are the people
of it for birth and parentage equall to their predeceſſors,
who were wont to bee of good diſcent:
whereas now (ſaue onely a few) they are Recuſants
daughters of the meaner ſort, and ſilly tender-hearted
chambermaids, who haue had the cuſtodie of
ſuch Seminaries and Ieſuits, as reſorted to their
Maſters houſes in England, at ſuch times as they
haue beene mewed vp for feare of Croſſe and his
A perillous Curre to ſmell out a Ieſuite, or a Seminary, though they had beene neuer ſo cloſely cooped vp. Dogge, and durſt not aduenture abroad in any
of their ruffling diſguiſes, to ſeeke out for more
change of paſture; (like fathers Strange the Ieſuite)
where, making a vertue (or rather a vice) of neceſſitie,
the ghoſtly children haue miniſtred to their
ſpirituall fathers in all things. And by ſuch meanes
hauing gotten a clap, diuers of them It is no great miracle for a whore to become a Nunne; nor for a Nunne to become a whore. become
Nunnes. And with a rabble of ſuch like ſtuffe, is
this houſe of Syon much repleniſhed, there beeing

of them in all betweene 40. and 50. whereof onely
fiue are ſtrangers, and the reſt all Engliſh. The
names of ſo many of them as I can at preſent remember,
I haue at the end of the Booke ſet downe,
for the ſatisfaction of ſuch as deſire to know them.
            There are likewiſe three Friers, the Confeſſor
and two more; and a ſimple beſotted fellow, who
hath the title of a familiar. And well may they
call him ſo: for he will be drunke familiarly foure
or fiue times euery weeke; by reaſon whereof hee is
not apparelled in any religious habit, but goeth
like an ordinary ſecular man, to the end the Houſe
ſhould be the leſſe ſcandalized by him: for now ſo
many doe not take notice of his drunkenneſſe as
would, if they ſhould ſee him in a religious habite.
            And this is the whole company of the Houſe at
this time: but now if any man demand, how and
by what meanes they are brought thither; and by
whom they are maintained: let him know, that
there lurketh in England an arch-Traytour, one
This Flood cauſed the Ieſuites at Lisbon to ſpend a great deale of money vpon Powder, on a Feſtiuall day, a little before the Powder-treaſon in England ſhould haue been effected, thereby to make experience of the force thereof. And alſo perſwaded one Iohn How (a Merchant whom be had peruerted) and diuers other Catholikes, to goe ouer into England, and to expect their redemption there (as be called it) awhile. 
               Henry Flood a Ieſuit, who is the chiefe Agent for
the tranſporting of Nunnes, both to In all theſe places there are Engl
                     •
                  ſh Nunneries, but none that hath continued euer ſince the ſuppreſſion of Abbots in England, ſaue onely that at Lisbon. 
               Bruxels,
Greueling, Lisbon, or any other place; and whither
he pleaſeth to ſend them, thither they muſt goe. If
they haue no portion, and perhaps ſome little honeſtie,
they are not for the Ieſuits tooth, Aquila
non capit Muſcas, they muſt packe to Greueling, to
the poore bare-footed Clares. If they haue a ſmall
portion, that likes not the Iebuſite neither: a pound
of butter is nothing amongſt a cure of hungry
Hounds; nec vacat exiguis rebus adeſſe loui: then away

they trudge to Lisbon, where they are allowed
daily fiue crownes, and their bread, and many a
good almes beſide is often beſtowed vpon them.
But if they haue a good round ſumme for their
dowrie, ab Inferno nulla est redemptio, there is no
plucking them out of the Ieſuites Iawes; they are
ſtamped for Bruxels, and thither muſt they goe;
where Fitz-herbert and his fellow-Ieſuits wil quickly
diſpoſſeſſe them of all worldly cares and vanities,
and (like ſubtill Alchymiſts) refine them out
of their ſiluer and golden droſſe, into a more ſublime
eſtate and condition, and will cheriſh and
nouriſh them, euen in their owne boſomes: ſuch a
burning zeale haue they towards them.
            And this is the manner after which our Recuſants
daughters in England are trāſlated into other
Countries, to take vpon them the profeſsion of a
ſolitary life, and to liue in pouerty, chaſtity, and
obedience: which how well they performe, I ſhall
now (God willing) in part declare.
            Firſt therefore for their pouertie, I meane of
theſe Nuns of Syon, and they profeſſe themſelues
the pooreſt of any Engliſh, except them of Saint
Clares Order. It is well knowne, that they haue
ten thouſand pounds at vſe in the Towne-houſe of
Antwerpe; a great part whereof hath beene giuen
them by ſundry deceaſed Gentlemen in Flanders
and Portugal; and beſide their yeerly penſion. Likewiſe
when they remained in France, they had the
cuſtodie of no ſmall ſumme of money, which was
ſent to them to keepe for Doctor Lopez the Portugeſe,

as his reward for poyſoning our late Queene
Elizabeth of famous memorie, which after that
Traitor (hauing miſſed of his intent) was executed,
was remitted vnto them as an almes, as the Regiſter-booke
of their houſe, (from whence I had it)
ſhameth not to make mention.
            They haue likewiſe of late yeeres, through the
politicke plodding of their Confeſſor, Sic figulus figulum, ſic & fabrum faber odit. giuen
the Ieſuites noſes a wipe of two thouſands pounds,
being the portion of the two daughters of Sir A. B.
Viſcount M. whom a Nunne of the houſe (ſometimes
a Chamber-maid of their fathers) had inticed
from the Ieſuites. For which, and ſome other
like trickes about a Portugeſe Gentlewoman, the
poſteritie of lame 
                  Ignatius Loiola, a lame ſouldier, a Spaniard, the glorious Patron of the Popes Ianizaries, the Ieſuits 
               Ignatius could almoſt find in
their hearts to re-aſſume their Patrons firſt profeſſion,
and vi & armis to take reuenge vpon that old
hypocriticall Frier, which durſt preſume to be better
ſtudied in Nic. Machiauell then themſelues: yea
they ſo threatened him once, that he durſt not goe
abroad, leſt they ſhould worke him a miſchiefe.
Moreouer, they haue a daily penſion of 5. crowns,
and wheat more then ſufficeth for to ſpend in the
Houſe. They haue Vineyards, Oliue fields, cornground
and houſes, to the value of foure hundred
Euery mil-reis is twelue ſhillings and ſixe pence. 
               mil-reis by the yeere, which was the portion of
the Portugeſe aforeſaid, whom (being ſole heire to
her father, a man of great wealth) they perſwaded
to become a religious ſiſter in their Couent. What
ſhould I ſpeake of the ſale of their Maſſes. I meane
the reuenues in generall of the Sacristia or Reueſtrie?

where, though there bee but three Prieſts of
them, and therefore but three Maſſes; and that neuer
but vpon Feſtiuall dayes, for the Confeſſor
himſelfe will not ſay Maſſe vpon a worke-day, yet
they will take money of twenty men, and tell euery
one they will ſay for him. Then haue they their
boxes ſent foorth in the Indian and Braſilian ſhips,
with S. Brigets image vpon them; to which, in a
ſtorme the poore blinded people will contribute liberally;
and ſea-men that go on ſuch long voyages
will take vp a moneths pay or two aforehand, and
giue it for Maſſes to bee ſaid for their good ſucceſſe.
I haue knowne this in one yeere woorth ſixe
hundred mil-reis vnto them. Diuers other meanes
they haue to get money: as by putting a good
ſumme into the hands of a couple of young Merchants,
whom they haue peruerted to their Religion:
and theſe men deale for them vnder a colour.
So that I may boldly ſay, (for I haue heard
Foſter himſelfe ſpeake it, and I haue partly ſeene it)
that all charges and expences of the Houſe being
payed, they doe yeerely lay vp And it is no ſmall ſumme of money that he ſendeth to his kindred in Yorkſhire, that are Papiſts: but he will acknowledge none of them that are Proteſtants. ſixe hundreth
pounds. For the ſiluer that inſhrineth their Reliques,
and for their Church-plate, I know not how
to value it; but it is without doubt both plentifull
and maſsie; for there bee few of their rotten Reliques
but are ſet in ſiluer. They haue two armes
of Thomas of Canterbury, notwithſtanding all his
bones were burned in England, when Popery was
ſuppreſſed; ſo that they wil make of him a Briareus,
or a centimanus Gygas, as doubtleſſe he was in his

life, a very obſtinate Prelate to his Prince. And
for Saint Vrſula, ſhe muſt needes bee a diua triformis,
or a triceps Hecate; for they haue one of her
heades; and there is another of them at Collen, and
the third at Rome. Then haue they the bones of S.
Briget and her daughter, and ſundry Reliques of
Saint Auguſtine, from whoſe rule theirs is deriued.
There is Beleeue it who liſt. the milke of our Lady, the blood of
Hales, which was held ſo precious in England; and
(ſir reuerence) there is a piece of old Although they cannot abide the Ieſuits, yet they loue their Gallowes, becauſe thereby they get money. 
               Tyborne,
which the Ieſuites ſtole away out of England, becauſe
it had beene honoured by ſo many of their
brethren, which is had in little leſſe eſteeme then
the holy Croſſe: for (ſay they) as the Maſter died
on that, ſo his Diſciples died vpon this. And theſe
are all ſet in ſiluer, and richly adorned. Then haue
they a little childs legge, which I thinke they may
truly call as they doe; for they ſay it is a legge of
the Innocents; and doubtleſſe ſo it is, for I could (if
I were in the houſe) goe very neere Saxa ipſa trabéſque loquentur. a place in a
wall, where I could fetch out both legges and
armes of poore innocent baſtards, which might euidently
proue, that there is knauery in dawbing.
            And hauing hereby giuen a ſufficient inſtance
of their pouerty, I will now proceed to ſpeake a little
of their chaſtitie, which is as ſcarce and penurious,
as their pouerty is plenteous. Neither can it
be otherwiſe; for they haue Sodoms prouocations
to ſinne, Pride, Fulneſſe of bread, and abundance
of Idleneſſe. As for their pride, though it bee not
outwardly in gorgeous and curious attire, yet are

they poſſeſſed with a vain-glorious pride of hypocriſie,
and diſſembled ſanctitie. For their fulneſſe of
bread, who knoweth not that they (like the Caterpillers
of Egypt) doe eate vp the fat and beſt
fruits of the Land? for what the purueyors of the
Vice-rey haue forſaken in the Market, (as too deare)
I haue knowne the Cator of this houſe to buy at
vnreaſonable rates for their ghoſtly fathers Table,
and for ſuch of his Chickens as hee moſt affected:
whoſe greateſt (and indeed onely) care is, to proue
skilfull in the confection and dreſsing of ſuch dainty
cates as may beſt pleaſe their wanton palats.
And well doe they manifeſt the abundance of idleneſſe
that is in them, when at ſundry times playing
vpon their inſtruments for their fathers recreation,
they ſing him ribaldrous Songs and jigs, as
that of Bonny Nell, and ſuch other obſcene and
ſcurrilous Ballads, as would make a chaſte eare to
glow at the hearing of them, and which I would
ſcarce haue beleeued would haue proceeded out of
their mouthes, had I not heard them with my owne
eares.
            And now againe for the Houſe. Whereas all other
Religious Houſes are vnder the Iuriſdiction
of Prouincials of their owne Order mediatè, and vnder
the Biſhop of the Dioceſſe immediatè, yet this
is not ſubiected to either: For as for a Prouinciall
they haue none, in regard there are no more Houſes
of that Order; neither would the Arch-biſhop
of Lisbon take them into his iuriſdiction at their
firſt comming into Portugall, fearing leſt that being

ſtranger, and at that time pretending want and
pouerty, he ſhould afterward be driuen to ſuſtaine
and relieue them; they being forbidden to begge
by their rule. And ſo he put them off with a non noui
vos, telling them hee neuer knew or heard that
At their firſt comming into Lisbon they were little ſet by. And euery one maruelled at their order, and liuing ſo together. But now their diſſembling hath wonne them a little more credit. 
               frayles y freiras Friers and Nunnes ſhould keep
& dwell together all, ſub eodem tecto, vnder the ſame
roofe. Wherevpon they were conſtrained to entertaine
that famous Arch-Ieſuite Father Parſons
to be their ſollicitor to the Pope, who then tooke
them into his protection, and appointed his nuncio
apoſtatico, reſident in Lisbon to haue the care and
charge of them. And he againe being bribed and
preſented with gifts by Father Foſter, and dwelling
farre from the houſe, is ſatisfied with what he telleth
him, and neuer commeth to viſit the Nunnes,
as he ought, and to inquire and demand their grieuances;
but permitteth him to play rex ouer them
at his own pleaſure. Wherevpon it is pittifull and
miſerable to behold the condition of theſe ſilly ſeduced
women: for they neither dare nor can complaine
to any body, beeing ſeldome permitted to
ſpeake euen to them that are of the houſe as well as
themſelues, but onely at ſuch times when the Abbeſſe
is preſent: except it be ſhee that keepeth the
Grate, and ſome others that are in office amongſt
them: and theſe are all the yonger and more perſonable
Women, beeing by this Foſters politique
contriuing ſo placed of purpoſe, that by and with
them he may the more freely enioy the ſcope of his
laſciuious and ſacrilegious deſire. And theſe women

hauing predominance ouer the others whom
want of beauty and fauour hath made deſpicable
in the eyes of this old Sinon, doe (according to the
paſſionateneſſe of their mindes) more and more
vexe their poore fellow-priſoners. For it is the ſubtiltie
of this perfidious wretch, to ſet them at variance
among themſelues, and to cauſe them to accuſe
one another, to th'intent they ſhould not dare
to truſt one another with the complaint of their
griefes; and ſo whilſt they remaine in a iealouſie
of each others ſecrecie and aide, they ſhould neuer
be able to contriue any meanes to free themſelues
from his thraldome.
            At this ſlay doth he keep them: and not ſo content,
hee will make them to Article one againſt the
other in writing. It was my chance one day to finde
a paper of theſe Articles in a walke in the Friers
Garden, which had vnawares fallen from him; being
drawne by one Siſter Anne, alias Ioſepha Bingham,
againſt Siſter Suzan Bacon: Wherein the ſaid
Siſter If theſe ſilly oppreſſed women were examined by men of authoritie, and were aſſured to be free from ſuch a tyrannous Confeſſor, they would tell of horrible abuſes, 
               Suſan ſtood accuſed, for blaming her
ghoſtly Father, and the Abbeſſe and Prioreſſe of
partialitie to ſome of their children more then to
others. Alſo that ſhe had vpbraided this ſiſter Ioſepha
(being a deare darling of Father Foſters) of too
much familiaritie with Father Garnet the Powder
Traitor, This Siſter Ioſepha is a ſtout defender of the miracle in the Wheat Straw, which hapned as was ſaid at Garnets execution, although it be now proued a very counterfet and a falselye. whoſe carefull keeper ſhee had of a
long time been, when he lurked in England at her
Mrs houſe. Alſo that another of her ghoſtly Fathers
minions had a Baſtard by a Prieſt in England
(whoſe name becauſe ſhe is lately dead, I wil paſſe

ouer in ſilence) and that if ſhee had been a little
more honeſt, & a little leſſe perſonable, ſhe ſhould
not haue beene one of the vpper Regiment. With
this and a great deale more of ſuch like ſtuffe was
this paper farſed; and with theſe and the like accuſations
one of another are theſe ſilly women daily
buſied. So that I haue generally obſerued in the
ſuperiours of this houſe, an egregious neglect and
contempt of their rule and vowed profeſſion: and
in the reſt, an extraordinarie maligning and enuying
againſt one another. And ſo much the better
could I obſerue this and all other my Narrations,
by how much I grew to be a more neere and dayly
attendant about the Confeſſor; for at length, what
with my long continuance in the houſe, and the
ſmall ſuſpect they had of my forſaking them, and
what for want of one to ſerue him at all occaſions, I
became to be oftentimes admitted euen into his
priuate houſe of iniquitie, where he vſeth to ſit and
heare the Confeſſions of the Nunnes. In which
houſe being very darke, there is a grate of iron that
looketh into the Nunnes partition or ſide; and this
grate (howſoeuer it ſeeme ſubſtantiall and firme)
may be, and is with a ſleight eaſily taken out, whereby
the ſiſters haue free egreſſe and regreſſe into his
chamber when they liſt, and hee to them: for the
Abbeſſe hath her bed not farre from this Grate,
where there is alſo a chimny ſo conuenient that he
may take the benefit of the fire into this his roome,
in which he vſeth to dine and ſup, hauing his meat
ſerued him by the Nunnes through a Wicket in

the wall. And when he is merrily diſpoſed (as that
is not ſeldom) then muſt his dearling Kate Knightley
play him a merry fit, and ſiſter Mary Brooke, or ſome
other of his laſt-come Wags muſt ſing him one
bawdy ſong or other to digeſt his meat. Then after
ſupper it is vſuall for him to reade a little of Venus
and Adonis, the ieſts of George Peele, or ſome ſuch
ſcurrilous booke: for there are few idle Pamphlets
printed in England which he hath not in the houſe,
being either brought ouer to his ſonne Peter, the
drunken Familiar aforeſaid, by Sea-men: or elſe
hapning into the hands of Father Newman an Engliſh
Prieſt, who hath an office in the Inquiſition
houſe to peruſe all Engliſh books that are brought
into Lisbon. And hee, I truſt, ſhall haue the ſight
of this, wherein if he vſe a good conſcience, hee
muſt needs teſtifie with mee the truth of many
things herein contained; for he is one that knoweth
more of theſe people then any but themſelues, or
ſome that haue liued amongſt them.
            If I ſhould repeat all their vnchaſte practiſes, I
ſhould make the Chriſtian Reader bluſh at them:
or if I ſhould tell of all the obſcene bawdry which
I haue ſeene, I might recount as many irreligious
prankes as would fill a great Volume: but it ſhall
ſuffice for the skilfull by the length of their foot, to
iudge of the proportion of their whole body.
            And now for their Obedience, beeing the third
and laſt part of their Vow; I will not goe about to
vſe any Theologicall Definitions or proofes to tell
what Obedience is, and how it ought to be performed;

for it is beyond my element, and the Coblers
checke ſhall be my warning, I will not goe vltra
crepidam: but as I firſt determined, ſo I will
proceed; that is, to declare in what ſort they performe
their vow of obedience; referring it to the
cenſure of the iudicious, whether they do wel or no.
            It is certain that theſe ſilly women thus muzzled
in blindneſſe, doe liue in very ſeruile obedience vnto
their Superiours; and, in ſuch ſort, that without
ſtanding to diſcuſſe or examine the thing that is
commanded them whether it be lawfull or no, they
will readily performe it. For their ghoſtly father
hath compoſed ſundry Treatiſes for them of Obedience,
wherein hee pronounceth no leſſe then
damnation for the leaſt ſcruple or heſitation in the
performance of their Superiours commands. And
here let me tell the aforeſaid It behooueth father Newman for his own credit to looke to this. The like alſo hath he done with certaine meditations vpon the Paſsion, which hee requeſted Father Iohn Kenſington an Engliſh Ieſuite at St Rocks in Lisbon to peruſe and approue; beeing gelded likewiſe as the other bookes of Obedience were. Father Newman
what a tricke his old friend Foſter hath put vpon
him, which is this: Hauing made theſe bookes of
Obedience, he cauſed mee to write them out faire,
omitting in many places a Leafe, and in ſome two
or three together, which contained any falſe doctrine
and vnallowable perſwaſions to draw them
to obedience in vnlawfull things; and being finiſhed
in this ſort, he bringeth them to Father Newman
to be ſigned with his approbation and teſtimonie,
that there was nothing in them repugnant to the
Catholique ſaith; which beeing done, hee then
interserreth and ſoweth in the aforeſaid omitted
Leaues, and ſo deliuereth them to his daughters to
be practiſed, who take the approbation at the end

of the booke for a ſufficient warrantie of all the doctrine
therein contained. And this is a principall
furtherance to his ſacrilegious luſts: for I am verily
perſwaded that not one amongſt them will (for
feare of being diſobedient) refuſe to come to his
bed whenſouer he commands them: and that they
doe ſo, I haue manifeſtly ſeene and knowne. For
when I haue been his Chamberlain in the abſence
and times of drunkennes of the familiar aforeſaid;
hauing a Key to the Chamber doore, They forgate the old caueat, Cauté ſi non caſté.
                I haue
come ſometimes vnawares early in a morning,
when one might haue ſeene as great a miracle as
Scoggin ſpake off when he tooke a Frier a bed with a
Whore, & called out to ſee a wonder, viz. a Frier
with foure legges. And now I will a little digreſſe
to aske a queſtion of my Ignatians, who are the
chiefe teachers and allowers of equiuocation and
mentall euaſion; whether theſe kinde-hearted
ſoules being profeſſed Nunnes, and hauing vowed
neuer to come ouer the threſhold, did breake
their Vow or no, in comming thorow a grate? If
they ſay they did: why, their ghoſtly father will
diſpence with their Vow: but if they ſay they did
not; (as I thinke they will) what then? Marry I
thinke that when their blacke Synagogues at Rome,
Valladolid and Siuill doe ſend forth their Locuſts
into England, and they chance to bait by the way
at Lisbon, as they doe oftentimes: they deſerue to
enter commons with old father Seth for their legittimation
of the action. And to the end that no
man ſhould doubt, but a Ieſuite hath a carnall affection,

as well as a ſpirituall, to any of his ghoſtly
children, it ſhall not be amiſſe to interſert a merry
Tale for the Readers recreation of one father
Strange an Engliſh Ieſuite, as it was reported for
Inter caenandum bilares eſte. table-talke by a Nun of this houſe to her ghoſtly
father; ſhe hauing then beene a chamber-maid
in the place where it was done.
            This Father Strange was a yong man, and had
been lately before profeſt and prieſted among the
Ieſuites: and being come of good friends, and tenderly
brought vp in England, he fell very ſick ſhortly
after his profeſsion, perhaps by reaſon of the vnwholeſomneſſe
of the aire which neither at Rome
nor Valladolid is very pleaſant: wherevpon hee obtained
licence of the Rector to goe into England,
where he hoped both to recouer his health, and to
employ his talent of Prieſthood, for the reducing
of Heretiques to the Catholique Church of Rome.
And being arriued, he took vp this Nunnes Ladies
Chamber for one of his places of rendezvous:
where it ſo fell out, that as this ſiſter Anne (for that
is her name) ſate ſowing with her backe to her Ladies
backe and the Ieſuites, who were ſitting by the
fire, ſhee chanced to looke vpon a great Looking-glaſſe
which hung right before her, wherein ſhe eſpyed
what paines the late ſicke Ieſuite tooke to
ſhriue her Lady: neither had he ended his ſhrift,
before he alſo eſpied her looking in the Glaſſe; and
ſuſpecting that ſhee had ſeene all, (as indeed ſhee
had) Shee might haue knowne by this, what ſhe ſhould truſt to when ſhe was a Nunne: but it ſeemes ſhe was as good as her Miſtreſſe: and I am ſure that her Father Foſter is a good as the Ieſuite.
                he tooke her aſide in priuate, and told her
that he was fleſh and bloud, and could abſtaine no

more then another man, although at his profeſsion
he had vowed chaſtitie: and vſing many perſwaſions
to win her to be ſecret, he promiſed her,
that if ſhe ſtood in need of a ghoſtly father to abſolue
her from any of her ſweet ſinnes, (as he called
theſe) he would be the man ſhould doe it; neither
ſhould her penance be ouer-burthenſome vnto
her.
            By which may appeare both the carnall affection
of a Ieſuite, and the chaſte and ſober conuerſation
of a profeſt Nunne, and her ghoſtly father: of the
Ieſuit in doing it; of her, in not ſhaming to tell it as
a tale for recreation; and of the old fornicator, in
making himſelfe merry at the hearing of it; yea,
and reporting it againe in his iolly humors to my
ſelfe, and one Father Viuian a Frier of the houſe; among
a great ſort of ſuch like inuectiues which he
vſed againſt the Ieſuits, becauſe, a little before I
came away, they went about (if it had beene poſſible)
to extrude the ſucceſsion of any more Friers
in the Houſe, and to bring it vnder their gouernement;
which I beleeue they will ere long effect.
For I was told by an Engliſh Ieſuite at the Court
of Spaine, that father Foster is bound vnto the Ieſuites,
neuer to ordaine any more Friers in the houſe,
that ſo for want of ſucceſſors it may of force fall
into their hands; and vpon this condition the Ieſuites
permit him to liue quietly; which, if hee
ſhould not obſerue, they would quickly informe againſt
him of ſundry of his prankes which they
know well inough. And if this be ſo, (as like it is)

the Nunnes haue no knowledge thereof, for hee
feedeth them with hope of making new brothers,
which they ſeeme earneſtly to wiſh for: The Nunnes thought ſurely it ſhould be ſo, and if he did not meane ſo, yet I was loth to truſt to it, in regard of his daily earneſtneſſe with me concerning that matter. and
they would often tell me, they hoped ere long to
ſee me a profeſt brother of the Couent: but it pleaſed
God to diſpoſe better for me, and not to ſuffer
me to bee any longer lulled in ſinne and ſuperſtition:
for after I had beene two yeeres and an halfe
with them, I found a meanes to free my ſelfe from
them, before I had made any profeſsion or vow of
religion either to that or any other Order: for I
plainely ſaw, that theſe were led by a wrong guide,
who was ſo deepe plunged, and had continued ſo
long in all wickedneſſe and diſſembling, that hee
was growne inſenſible of ſinne; according to that
ſaying, Conſuetudo peccandi, tollit ſenſum peccati. For
he ſhamed not, vnder pretext of Religion, to perſwade
a young man, a Merchant in Lisbon (one
How doe you call him) to defraud his Theſe two brethren are both liuing in Lisbon at this preſent, and well knowne to moſt Engliſhmen that vſe Portugall.
                owne elder
brother of his eſtate; which matter was thus
effected.
            Theſe two brethren were by profeſsion Iewellers,
and aduentured their ſtocke ioyntly together:
the yonger brother (for that hee was a Bachelor)
being Factor for it beyond the ſeas. At length hauing
made many good returnes, hee tooke vp his
abode in Lisbon, as a place moſt conuenient for his
Trade; and falling into familiarity with this Father
Foſter, and Father Flood a Ieſuite, who then liued in
Lisbon, they perſwaded him to become a Romane
Catholique, and ſo ſoone as he could get his brothers

Stock againe into his hands, to profeſſe himſelfe
ſuch; which he accordingly did: and ſo (being
inſtructed by them, that it was meritorious to
coozen an Heretique, as they account all Proteſtants)
defrauded his brother, and would come to
no accompts with him, relying vpon the ſupportation
of theſe Hypocrites, on whom he beſtowed
liberall almes; giuing them many faire pictures for
their Church, and a horſe of twenty mil-reis price,
to fetch home their prouiſions to the Houſe, beſides
diuers other things: whilſt in the meane time
his brother was vndone, and could get nothing at
his hands by Law, in regard hee was a Proteſtant.
Whereupon hee was faine to petition in England
for redreſſe many times, and yet could not preuaile
to recouer any thing: yea, he refuſed to come into
his owne Country, or to obey the command of
the Councell, in giuing ſatisfaction for what hee
had in his hands. At length the Lord Roſſe comming
Ambaſſadour into Spaine, and ſtaying by
the way at Lisbon, (where he landed) decided the
matter betwixt them; and articles of agreement
were drawne by Father Newman, which my ſelfe
afterward wrote out faire for them: the tenour
whereof was this in effect: That either of the brothers
ſhould by a day prefixed, bring in a iuſt accompt
of all debts due vnto them, as likewiſe of all
debts which either of them ought: alſo that they
ſhould bring in all ſuch moneys and goods as did
any way as their owne belong vnto them: and that
they ſhould both depoſe and ſweare, that they had

truly laid open their eſtates. And this being done,
their debts which they ought, were to be payed out
of the whole ſumme, and the debts which were
owing to them, were to be added vnto it; and ſo
they to ſhare equally betwixt them whatſoeuer remained,
that by this meanes their eſtates might be
both alike. Now a few dayes before this was to
be put in effect, the yonger brother knowing his eſtate
to be farre better then the others, commeth
very penſiuely to his ghoſtly Father old Foſter for
counſell; who inſtructed him to come to the Abbeſſe,
and ſome other of the ſiſters at their Grate,
where they vſe to talke with ſtrangers, and there to
tell them that he was weary of the troubles and vexations
which attended a Merchants life, and therfore
he would renounce the world, and become a
religious man: and ſeeing that God had beſtowed
ſufficient wealth vpon him, he could not do better,
then to impart it to them; being ſuch holy Saints
as had preferred that kind of life in a ſtrange country,
before all worldly contents in their owne. And
thereupon at his fained requeſt, they ſent their
horſe to his houſe, and had him laden backe with
plate, iewels and money, which my ſelfe helped to
take from the horſe-backe, and carry into Foſters
Cell. He had likewiſe at that time a great quantity
of Cochenill in ſundry bagges, being at leaſt foureteene
or fifteene hundred waight, amounting to
no ſmall ſumme of money, which he had a little before
bought of the Indian Fleet, who that yeere,
and about that time put into Lisbon; and this was

brought into the Nunnery by night out of the
ſhippes, to defraud the King of his right, and was
vnder a colour, together with the other things, giuen
to the Siſters of the Houſe. By which dealing
he ſo imbezeled his eſtate, that when his brother
and he came to an accompt, there remained little
or nothing for him to receiue; being by this means
defrauded of all hee ſhould haue had. When as
preſently after this concluſion was made betweene
them, Father Foſter and the Abbeſſe ſend for their
ghoſtly child, giuing him thankes for the good wil
he had to beſtow his eſtate vpon them: but they
told him, (as was before determined) that ſo much
money and wealth was an hinderance to their deuotion;
and therefore they requeſted him to haue
it away againe: to which he ſoone condeſcended;
telling them, that now alſo his chiefeſt troubles
were ouerpaſt, (meaning, becauſe hee had done
with his brother) and that he perceiued it was not
Gods will to make him ſo happy, as (ſuch another
youth) Father Nicholas Price, who awhile before,
of a Merchant, became a Dominican Frier: and
therefore hee would liue as aforetimes; and when
he died, hee would bequeath all hee had to the
Church: and thereupon tooke home all his eſtate
againe, after he had by theſe aequiuocations and
euaſions, defrauded his brother.
            And now leſt this Treatiſe ſhould riſe to an ouer-bigge
Volume, I will haſten to an end, after I
haue in a few words ſet downe the manner of my
departure from them, which was thus:
            
               
After I had continued with them for the ſpace
of two yeeres and an halfe, and had plainly perceiued,
that all their outward ſhew of holineſſe was
nothing but diſſimulation, hypocriſie and luſtfull
ſacriledge, I began to conſider in what a miſerable
eſtate I ſhould be, if God ſhould at that time
call me out of the world; for I could well ſay with
the Poet, Video meliora, proboque, deterior a ſequor,
I ſaw and allowed of the beſt way, yet followed the
worſt: at length the feare of my ſoules health, and
a naturall affection to my kindred and countrey ſo
wrought with me, that I waxed reſolute in my determination
of forſaking them: but not knowing
how to effect my purpoſe without hazard of my
life, (for they would haue poyſoned me, if they had
knowne I would haue gone from them, becauſe I
ſhould not bewray their ſecrets) it came in my
mind to draw out certaine Articles in manner of
an information againſt them, which I thought to
exhibite to the chiefe Inquiſitors of the Citie. And
this might haue beene very dangerous vnto me, if
they ſhould not haue proceeded according to Equitie;
of which I was doubtful, fearing that Reade Muſgraue his Motiues, for forſaking the Carthuſian Monkes, and Romiſh Religion after he had bin 20. yeeres profeſſed. many
great men of other Monaſteries (being perhaps
in the ſame predicament) would haue ſtopped the
courſe of Iuſtice, propter honorem Monaſtica vitae,
for the credit of a Monaſticall life, as is many
times done: yet notwithſtanding I was reſolued to
vndertake this courſe, and had prouided my Articles,
which were theſe:
            1. That Father Seth, alias Ioſeph Foſter, the Confeſſor

of the Engliſh Nunnes of Saint Brigets Order
in Lisbon, did compell diuers youths his countrimen, againſt
their wils to remaine with him in the houſe: who
if they had any good affection to the Romiſh Catholike
faith before they came there, were ſoone brought into
diſlike of it, by reaſon of the ill gouernement which is
vſed in the houſe. And of this ſort I could haue inſtanced
in twenty, who within a few yeeres haue
beene recorded in their Regiſter booke, for Apoſtate
runne-awayes.
            
            2. He would daily without any companion goe into
the Nunnes Cloiſter or Side, and remaine there halfe
a day together, yea and ſometime, ſit and dine at their
Table with them: but euery day in their ſight, which
is expreſſely againſt their Rule. And this I could haue
prooued by the teſtimonie of diuers Portugeſes our
neighbours, who frequenting the houſe, haue oftentimes
obſerued and ſeene him going in, and
comming foorth; and haue ſpoken of it to my ſelfe
and others. Alſo the Nunnes themſelues would
haue auouched it vpon their examinations.
            3. He hath in his Cell, where he heareth their confeſsion,
a Grate, which I can ſhew how he vſeth to take
downe with a ſleight, thorow which the Nunnes paſse
to his bed by night. And for the further auouching
of this, I would haue brought in the drunken familiar
aforeſaid, who will many times in his drinke,
tell how he helped to make it firme, againſt a time
when there was a Viſitation intended by the Popes
Nuncio, and expected by them of the Houſe, although
it was not performed.
            
               
4. That in many yeeres paſt there neuer came any
Viſitor to the Houſe, to examine and vnderstand their
grieuances: neither haue they any Confeſſor extraordinarie,
as all other Religious haue, to whom they might
freely complaine of their Superiours oppreſsions. And
this needed ſmall proofe, for it would ſoone haue
beene apparant enough of it ſelfe.
            
            5. Through his politique plotting, he cauſeth whom
he liſt to be elected Abbeſse, (for they hold their places
but three yeeres) and her to diſpoſe of the Houſe
as he thinketh good. This alſo the Nunnes themſelues
would quickly complaine of, if they had one
to heare their complaint.
            6. That my ſelfe (being diuers times called into the
Nunnes partition or ſide, to helpe them to nayle vp
boords, ſet vp their Vines in the walkes of their Garden,
and doe ſuch like things which women could not
ſo well doe) did chance to make a hole in a hollow place in
a wall, (which had beene latelier dawbed vp then the
reſt) to ſet vp a Sparre to vnderprop the Vines; out of
which hole I pulled ſundry bones of ſome dead children,
and left many more remaining behind. And this the
place it ſelfe would haue teſtified to be true.
            
            Hauing thus prouided my Articles in a readineſſe,
I abſented my ſelfe from helping the Prieſt
at Maſſe that day, who being readie to go into the
Church, and miſſing mee, was faine to take another
Clerke, whilſt I walked vp and downe my
chamber, with a reſolute mind to depart the houſe.
At length commeth Father Foſter, (for he vſed euery
day to viſit me at vnawares, to ſee if he could

finde mee writing of any thing that diſliked him)
and eſpied vpon my table (which I had negligently
forgot) a blotted Copy of my Articles, beeing
the firſt draught of them: which when I ſaw him
take vp, I proffered to ſnatch out of his hand, but
miſſed of my purpoſe; and therevpon went downe
the ſtaires, and ſo tooke my way out at the gates:
but he (hauing ſoon perceiued to whom they were
intended) followed mee amaine, and quickly ouertooke
me, yea, euen before I was paſt his own wals;
and demanding of mee what I meant by ſuch doings,
I told him my intent; and bade him peruſe the
Articles at large, giuing him a faire copy of them
out of my boſom, where I had three or foure more.
            But as ſoone as he had read them, he waxed pale
as aſhes, and was ſo terrified, that he began earneſtly
to intreat me that I ſhould not proceed with my
purpoſe, and told mee that if I would bee ſecret, I
ſhould haue his good will to depart; whereof beeing
glad, I not onely promiſed, but performed ſecrecie,
(although indeed I ought not to haue done
it) not bewraying any of his prankes to my neereſt
acquaintance and friends; vntill ſuch time as hauing
occaſion a few months after to be at Lisbon againe,
he ſuſpected mee vniuſtly of telling tales of
his houſe; and meeting mee one day in the ſtreet,
he called me to him, and told me, that if I did not
preſently depart the City, he would haue my throat
cut. Vpon which his diuelliſh ſpeech I could not
refraine any longer, but in the open ſtreet I told him
of many of his vngodly actions, which came to the

hearing of diuers of our Nation, beeing men of
good qualitie, whereof ſome haue teſtified in England
to Honorable Perſonages in my behalfe, how
ready and willing I was to auouch and maintaine
whatſoeuer is herein contained, and much more:
which (although it be here omitted) I am ready at
all times truely to declare and ſet forth for the ſatisfaction
of all that deſire it: but eſpecially for ſuch
as haue either Daughters or Kinſwomen in that
houſe, in whoſe behalfe I am bound to intreat their
friends to enter into a further ſearch of their miſerable
eſtate and condition; and (hauing found my
words true) to vſe meanes, if it be poſsible, to free
them from ſuch horrible and ſacrilegious rapine
and ſpoile; themſelues not being able to ſend any
word thereof, becauſe all their Letters muſt bee giuen
to him to be ſent into England; which if they
contain any thing contrary to his mind, ſhal neuer
be ſent; for hee will peruſe them all. And likewiſe
when their friends ſend to them, the Letters muſt
firſt come to his hands, wherein alſo if there be any
thing that he miſliketh (for he will breake them
all vp) they ſhall neuer know of it. And here I will
conclude, hoping that the friendly Chriſtian Reader
wil be no way ſcandalized with any thing herein
contained. But as for the curious and captious
(eſpecially Romaniſts) if they taxe me for any thing
I haue written, let them know I haue done neither
them not any of their ſect any wrong in publiſhing
the truth. If any of them amongſt theſe inſuing
names finde either a Siſter or Kinſwoman, or

Friend, let him ſigh to thinke on their miſery, and
vſe his beſt indeuours to free them. I haue not ſet
downe-all their names, becauſe I cannot well call
them to remembrance; neither are many of theſe
chriſten names the ſame which they had in England,
it being vſuall at the Biſhops confirmation to
take what name they will: as alſo ſome of the ſirnames
are not their true names indeed; for the Papiſts
do many times change their names: but there
are few of theſe which are not right; and howſoeuer,
they are knowne to their friends by theſe.
            
               The Friers of the Houſe.
               Seth, alias Ioſeph Foſter, Confeſſor.
               
               Iohn Viuian. Nicholas Barrowes. two Prieſts.
               
                  Peter Conſul, a Familiar, that is, a Lay-Brother, but
a drunken one, God knowes.
            
            
               The Nunnes of the Houſe.
               Barbara Wiſeman, Abbeſſe.
               
               Anne Wiſeman Prioreſſe.
               
               Elizabeth Hart, Chantreſſe.
               
               Anne Wharton, Treaſureſſe.
               
               Anne, alias, Ioſepha Bingham, Portreſſe.
               
               Lucy Iohnſon, Notareſſe.
               
               
                  Dorothy Fowler, Keeper of the Reliques & Church
ſtuffe.
               Briget Browne, Lucy Browne, Daughters of St 
                  Anth: Browne, Viſc. Montacute.
               
               
                  Elizabeth Preſton, ſometime Abbeſſe, but now in

diſgrace with old Foſter.
               
               Anne Martin.
               Anne Markenfield.
               Suſan Bacon.
               Siſly Arundell.
               
                  Margaret Smith, alias Becket, and her Siſter.
               Mandlyn Shelly, Katherine Dendy, Elizabeth Cole,
three of the Kitchin.
               Martha.
               
                  Clara Dowman, indeed Anne Foster, the Confeſſors
Kinſwoman.
               Kath: Knightly. Mary Brooke.
two merry ſinging wagges.
               
                  Anne, A Chambermaid of St 
                  Anth: Browne.
               
               
                  Mary Barnes, a welbeloued friend of Foſters.
               
               
                  Mary Dimmock, a diſcontented yong Nunne.
               
                  M. Blinkſop, falſely reported by Father Foſter, to be
allied to diuers of the Nobilitie.
               Agatha.
               
                  Elianor and Angela: two Dutchwomen.
               Briget Mandanha. Maria Suarez. Maria Rodriguez.
three Portugeſes.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   