
      
         
            
            
            Englands Farevvell to Christian the fourth, famous King of Denmarke: With a relation of ſuch ſhewes & ſeuerall paſtimes preſented to his Maieſtie, as well at Court the fift day of Auguſt laſt paſt, as in other places ſince his Honorable paſſage thorow the Citie of London.
            
            The moſt Honorable Entertainement of his Highneſſe, aboord his Maieſties Ships in the roade of Gyllingame, neere the Citie of Rochester in Kent.
            
            With the Kings Entertainement aboord the Denmarke Ships, at Graueſend: As alſo their Honorable leaue-taking and farewell, Setting Sayle from Graueſend on Munday night, the eleuenth of Auguſt. 1606.
            By H. Roberts.
            
            Printed at London for William Welby. 1606.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               To the right VVorſhipfull Sir Iohn Iolles, Knight, Alderman and Sheriffe of the Citie of London, HENRY ROBERTS, your Worſhips true deuoted, wiſheth all increaſe of worſhip in this world, and after this life, the Ioyes Eternall.
            
            
               RIght VVorſhipfull, long ſince in thoſe imployments I had for the Iriſh affayres, in the time of our moſt dread and gracious Soueraigne, deceaſed, and euer ſithence, I ſought opportunitie, to make ſome ſhewe of my zeale vnto you, but time neuer fauoring the expectation of my deſired thought, I was enforced to keepe ſilent my loues intention. Yet now hauing ſome occaſion, through theſe great and moſt honorable fauours ſhewed vnto the gracious and renowmed

King of Denmarke, at his being heere, by our famous King, Nobilitie, and States of our Land, whereof many haue beene eye-witneſſes neere this honorable Citie: Yet conſidering, that many thouſands which deſired to ſee the ſame, haue been debarred of their contentments therein, and hauing beſtowed my time and charge, in noting from time to time, what hath been done in all honor to welcome this renowmed King in ſeuerall places, and ſundry honorable paſtimes (no doubt) to the eternall honor of his Maieſtie and this Land, I haue emboldned my ſelfe to publiſh the ſame vnder your VVorſhips protection, and beſeech you of your accuſtomed clemencie ſo to accept it, as it is faithfully entended: ſo ſhall I bind my ſelfe euer to your ſeruice, and in all duty reſt your VVorſhips,
            
               Euer to be commanded,
H. ROBERTS.
            
         
         
            
            
               Englands Farewell: Shewing the moſt royall Entertainement of the King of Denmarke, aboord his Maieſties Ships in the roade of Gyllingame, neere the Citie of Rocheſter in Kent.
            
            With the King of Englands entertainement aboord the Denmarke Ships at Graues-end.
            
            As alſo, their Honorable leaue-taking one from the other.
            
               THat there is no greater comfort to man, then perfit Loue to be maintained one with the other, there is few or none, but hauing Chriſtian charity, can teſtifie: for beſides the preſcript rule of God which commaundeth wee loue one another, it bringeth ſuch contentment to the minde, that there can be no Iewell of ſo rare and

high eſteeme, as the perfit loue of friends. How many great Potentates haue, in their inwarde thoughts, preferred the loue of ſome eſpeciall one in their pleaſures to ſolace with, and in their counſels to participate with in all paſſions both of body and minde, to be as a ſecond ſelfe!
            Such is the effect of Loue, that many haue hazzarded life, and what euer the earth did affoord them in theyr loue, to make it knowne. Some for theyr Countryes loue haue dyed, ſome for their friend, and many by aduentring honor of theyr houſes, by the force of theyr loue.
            If ſuch be the touchſtone of that vertue, and ſo highly ought to be regarded, how may all Chriſtians ioy therein, that haue or doe participate of the ſame! And how may we admire in this iron age, wherein ſo many vices abound, to behold the amitie of Neighbour with Neighbour, Nation with Nation, and Friend with Friend! Where, by the contrary, no torment on earth may be comparable to the inward griefs that hart endureth, where enuy hath domination. And truly is it ſayd and written of that horrible ſinne, by whom, & through whom many great outrages haue beene attempted and done. And dayly we haue ſeene the Subiect attempting the death of their Soueraigne, the Sonne the Father, the Husband the Wife, and many times the Wiues their Husbands. This helhound enuy, begotten by the Diuell, where it once foſtereth, neuer

giueth ouer his hoſte, vntill hee hath brought him to confuſion: of which wee haue too many examples. God graunt, wee that profeſſe Chriſt Ieſus in one ſimpathy of hart and minde, may aboliſh that Hag, and truly embrace that heauenly commandement, to loue one another, and that we all, ſubiects of this peaceable and moſt gracious Soueraigne King Iames, may be ſo vnited in loue to our maker, and duetie to his Maieſtie, that the Deuill neuer haue power, to cauſe vs forget the one or the other:
            But, that ſeeing his Excellency is the true touch of loue, not only to vs his home-borne people, but vnto all Chriſtian Nations what euer they bee that ſeeke his fauour or comfort, a Father to the Stranger, & a carefull maintainer of peace for his people, a true Ionathan to his Dauid, a holy anoynted of the Lord, in this moſt royall King, oh let vs all true ſubiects note, and noting, imprint in our hearts the rare, and moſt honorable loue of his Maieſtie ſhewed to the perſon of his royall Brother, King of Denmarke, betweene whoſe loues there may be no compariſon. The one, Loue cauſed to commit his Kingly perſon to the aduenture of feares and enemies, to ſee his Ioy, the comfort of his royall eſtate our gracious Soueraigne the Queenes Maieſtie, and their royall iſſue: whoſe loue, with brotherly loue hath beene ſo ioyfully accepted of their Highneſſe, as neuer hath beene ſeene in this land the like. Yea, ſuch a ſurpaſsing Ioy may it euer bee amongſt vs, that wee

can neuer thinke, ſpeake, or write too much thereof.
            Oh rare loue, oh kingly and royall preſident for all people to note, what hath happened ſince the ſixteenth of Iuly now laſt paſt, the day of this famous King of Denmarks firſt arriuall in Tilbery Hope, where he was entertayned, and brought from his Ship with his chiefe delight our dread Soueraigne, and the Prince, louingly welcomed by the Queene and States, and ioyfully receyued by all their Subiects, who with duty and zeale, made it knowne in all the beſt manner ſo ſhort time would giue leaue; yet ſuch it was, as his Princely minde was much delighted in the ſame, and no doubt doth applaude this honorable Citie, both for beawtie, wealth, and pleaſure: a moſt excellent note and honorable appearance of his gracious acceptance of their loues ſhewed, may be gathered, by his ſodaine and ſilent comming againe in perſon to view the ſtate of this Citie, and rare monuments thereof, who hauing ſeene it the laſt of Iuly in all royaltie, the Citizens in their rich attyre, the houſes garniſhed, and ſuch multitudes of people of all eſtates, in this manner enſuing came to view it.
            The next day being Friday, and the firſt of Auguſt, this royall King, knowing the zeale and loue of our Nation, whoſe loyaltie he neede not diſtruſt, accompanyed with the Earles of Nottingham, Suſſex, and others, in their Coaches came to S. Paules Church, where he walked, and viewed the ſame, and from thence, to the top of the Steeple, where he

tooke much delight to behold the beautious ſcituation of London, the pleaſant Gardens and Fields adioyning, the richnes of the Thames, ſo ſurniſhed with Ships of great countenance and worth, as he graciouſly applauded the excellency thereof. But amongſt all other things, he admired moſt, when the noble men accompanying him, did report the being of a Horſe vpon that place, comming vp ſuch a way of great danger and ſo 
                  •
               ye, that he tooke very good notice thereof, and wonderfully did admire the ſame.
            From thence he tooke his Coach with his company, and paſſed on to the Exchange, viewing the beauty of Cheape-ſide, and the riches of the inhabitants, the Goldſmiths, Mercers, and other wealthy trades, all the way ſetting their commodities to ſale: A ſight which may delight any Prince in the world to behold.
            To grace this Royall Exchange, ſo named by our late Royall Queene, his Grace walked round about the Pawneaboue, and viewed with great pleaſure the ſame. Then came hee to the Marchants walkes beneath, where it was told his Highneſſe the maner of our Marchants, and the houres of their meetings, where from all Countreys there was dayly newes to be heard by one meanes or other: Heere they make great exchanges of their Marchandize, make their traffike to forraigne Countreyes, ſhip their men for ſeruice; ſo that their greateſt affayres were euery day twice there effected.
            
               
There-hence proceede they by Cornchill, Gracious ſtreete, and Fanchurch, to the Tower of London, where our gracious Soueraigne, his deare eſteemed Brother King Iames, met his Highneſſe, and with Kingly welcomes entertayned him, and in his owne perſon conducted him to the offices of the Iewell houſe, Wardrope, of the Ordinance, Mint, and other places, where, to their Kingly preſence, in the Iewell houſe were preſented the moſt rare and richeſt Iewels, and beawtifull Plate, ſo that he might well wonder thereat, but cannot truly prayſe, or eſtimate the valew thereof by many thouſands of pounds.
            The like in the Wardrope, where, for rich Robes, beſet with ſtones of great price, faire and precious Pearle and Gold, were ſuch, as no King in the world might compare: Beſides the rich furniture of hangings, cloathes of eſtates, Cuſhions, Chaires, and Kingly furniture for his Palaces, as may cauſe much admiration, and bring great content to the beholders
            But paſsing then on to the office of the Ordinance, he well viewed the warlike prouiſion of the great Ordinance, which at an houre is ready for any ſeruice to be commaunded. Ouer euery peece the Ladles and Spunges hang to lade them withall: and the Traces and Collors for the Horſes to draw them away, when they ſhall need to ſerue.
            The armory and ſtore of ſmall ſhot ſo well maintained and kept, the numbers ready fitted of all ſorts

of Muskets, Caliuers, Petronels, Dags, and other ſeruiceable weapons, as Pikes, Halbards, Targets, Sheelds of ſundry faſhions, for varietie, antiquitie of the things, and the relating of their vſes, did make him with great and honorable admiration to behold them all very well, and commend them.
            Theſe rare, rich, and moſt admirable pleaſant ſights ouer-gone, their Maieſties aſcend to the Mint, which they viewed, and from thence to the Lyons, and other wilde beaſts there kept and maintained for his Highneſſe pleaſures and paſtimes, all kingly delights, and ſuch varietie, as I thinke the world cannot bring in one Countrey more ſtore, as it hath bin noted by many great Trauellers, who haue ſeene the greateſt Courts of the world.
            From this place, as they went to take their Barges, the King of Denmarke walked a turne or two vpon the Tower Wharfe, viewing the rich and forcible Ordinance there placed, whereof there was no ſmall ſtore, as his Maieſtie might well remember, by the honorable peale was made him the day before, at their ſetting forwards from the Tower, to goe through the Citie.
            When their pleaſures were well delighted with theſe ſhowes, the Tide ſeruing to ſhoote the Bridge, they tooke their Barges, and were rowed to his Maieſties Houſe, White Hall. At their going from the Wharfe, an honorable peale of great Ordinance was diſcharged, the Officers vſing great diligence and foreſight, and the Gunners applying themſelues

very paynefully for the performance thereof, the time being ſo ſhort, as truly they did all deſerue great commendations.
            This day brought with honor to end, they repoſe themſelues this night, and in the morning very earely, being Saturday, they hunted in the Parke of Saint Iames, and killed a Bucke.
            Then paſſed they on to Hyde Parke, where they hunted with great delight, ſpending the reſt of the forenoone in following their paſtime, and about the time of dinner returned, and there dyned; and about foure a clocke, their Barges being by commaundement ready at the Priuy ſtayres, they went by water to Greenewitch.
            The next day, being Sunday, her Maieſty was churched, to the great ioy of all the beholders, the two Kings being preſent at that time, where they heard a learned Sermon.
            This day they ſolace in their priuate delites, the Kingly Brothers, the Queene, Prince, and Nobles of both Realmes, ſhewing by all the meanes they can, their loues, by variety of delight to beguiſe time, and bid them welcome.
            On Munday, the fourth day of Auguſt, the Queene, who had not beene partaker of any their Kingly ports, accompanyed their Royall perſons, and the Prince, who were attended on by the Nobility, and gallant Courtyers, at which time, their ſport was to run at the ring; in following which, they ſpend that afternoone, where ſundry of the young Noblemen

prooued their skill at that exerciſe, but none exceld his Maieſty, and the Denmarke King, at whoſe good ſucceſſe the Queene was very much delighted, and tooke great pleaſure therein.
            The next day, being the ſolemne obſeruation of his Maieſties thankſgiuing for freeing his Highneſſe from the treacherous practiſes of the Gowryes, the forenoone of that day they ſpent in thankefulnes to God, whereof his Maieſtie hath a moſt religious and zealous care. The afternoone, for their delight, were the Beares and Bulls brought, in which ſport ſome time was ſpent, but made the ſhorter, by reaſon of the honorable exerciſe of Tilting: the Lords and Courtiers being readie armed, vpon notice giuen them, repayred to the Tilt-yard, euery one with his ſeuerall deuice, moſt gallantly mounted, and richly armed.
            To honor this royall preſence the more, the King of Denmarke armed very rich, and mounted on a moſt ſtately Courſer, came to the Tilt, and ran eight courſes, the firſt foure with the Lord of Effingam, whobrake their ſtaues moſt gallantly, three a peece, and foyled the other. Then the noble and moſt toward Earle of Arundell ranne with his Maieſtie of Denmarke, and brake three ſtaues a peece, to the great ioy of all the beholders. Then followed the reſt of the Tilters as they were appoynted, ſo gallantly behauing themſelues, as was both honorable and delightfull to that moſt gracious and royall companie. Night growing vpon them, they

were enforced to giue ouer their ſport, where, taking their humble leaues of the two Kings, the Queene, and Prince, they left the Tilt yard, and being vnarmed, returned to the Court, where, beſides former graces, and fauours ſhewed them by all their royall perſons, they receiued many thanks, and ſo ſpent the reſt of the euening in other delightfull ſport, till time of night called them to reſt.
            At this honorable exerciſe, the toward and moſt hopefull Prince ſhewed himſelfe in his Armour, beeing gallantly mounted, and a hart as powerfull as any, though that his youth denyed ſtrength. For this dayes exerciſe, all the Maſters of Defence and profeſſors therof, were ſummond with their weapons to ſhew their skill, that the King of Denmarke might ſee the manner of our fight, and the varietie of weapons practiſed for mens defence, as well in priuate quarrels, as their Countries ſeruice: but the time ouerſlipt, the Challenger Fencers, when they had marched with their Drums and Ancients about the Tilt yard, departed.
            The next morning, the King of Denmarke being deſirous to ſee ſome of their practiſe, they which were readie in the Towne, hauing warning to giue their attendance, in the morning early repaired to the Tilt yard, and there, in preſence of the two Kings, many of the Nobilitie and Courtiers, ſhewed both manhood and skill, wherein the Kings tooke great pleaſures, and gaue them Kingly thanks and fauours.
            
               
This ſport was made more ſhort, by reaſon of the Kinges going from Court, to ſee our Kinges Houſes neereſt London, and to hunt in their Parkes: After they had broken their faſtes, they ſet forwarde with their Traynes to Richmonde; there that night they hunted, and lay: and the next day dyned at Hampton court, and there hunted, and killed Deate, with great pleaſures: And ſurely the King of Denmarke was very much delighted, with the gallantneſſe of theſe royall Pallaces of his Maieſties; as did appeare by his earneſt noting of them, and often recounting of their paſtimes and pleaſures.
            From thence, they proceeded to Windſore; where he was entertayned by the King, moſt royally: heere was preſented vnto him, the Knights of Windſore; beeing all goodly Gentlemen, and ſuch as had ſerued Queene Elizabeth in her Warres; and for ſeruice done, preferred in their latter yeares, to this place of reſt: and are called by name of, King Iames Knightes of Windſore.
            
            Theſe goodly auncient Gentlemen, beeing in their Roabes of Purple and Scarler, with the Garter, and Sainct Georges Croſſe vpon them.
            Which goodly, and charitable maner, when the King of Denmarke was poſſeſt withall, and the order of their firſt foundation, and continuance, the King highly commended the Founder, and in cha
                  •
               itie wiſht, the ſucceſſors to the worldes end, might continue ſo honorable an action as that: whereof, by Gods grace, there is no doubt, his Maieſtie from his firſt comming,

hauing ſo graciouſly and moſt bountlfully ſhewed his zeale to that honorable action, by augmenting their portions, which were poſſeſt of thoſe places.
            Long did they not make ſtay in Windſor, by reaſon that the time began to ſhorten, for the King of Denmarkes departure, wherefore after ſome time ſpent in hunting, they ma
                  •
               e their returne to the Court at Greenwich, where her Maieſtie lay: and on Fryday, the eight of Auguſt there ariued, and ſo reſted till Mondav following.
            The next morning then, being Saterday the ix. of Auguſt, the tyde ſeruing fit for their purpoſe, this gracious and royall King of Denmarke, being now to take his farewell of thoſe he helde in eſteeme; with great curteſie, and many thankes, to thoſe of the Counſell, and Nobilitie, which ſtayed from following the Kings hee gaue them a Princely and moſt louing farewell: and ſo of many others of Honour and Worſhip, with many rich and bountifull Rewardes to the Officers of the Kinges Houſehold, and Guarde.
            Which done, the Barges giuing their attendance, theſe two Royall Kinges, the Queene and Prince Henrie, came aborde them; and were rowed by all induſterous meanes downe the Riuer of Thames, ſo low as North-fleete, or there aboutes; where they had their Trayne attending, and their Coaches: ſo paſſed they on the way to Rocheſter, leauing the way to Graueſend: all the way followed with ſuch numbers of people, as well from London, as other places, that it was to be wondered at.
            
               
Time hath brought them neare the Citie of Rocheſter; where they are met with the Mayor and Bretheren of the Citie, who with reuerence, deliuered his Mace vnto his Maieſtie; which graciouſly did accept the ſame, and redeliuered it to the Mayor, willing him to keepe it, and to vie it with Iuſtice, as before: Which done, the Mayor taking his Footecloth-Horſe, which was ready, and rode on before his Maieſtie, bearing the Mace before him throughout the Cittie, to the houſe of the Right worſhipfull Sir Peter Bucke Knight, one of his Highnes Officers of the Nauie: which houſe was the lodging of the king of Denmarke: whom our King there left to his repoſe, and returned himſelfe to the Houſe of the reuerend Byſhop of Rochester, Doctor Barlow: and the Queene & Prince to their Lodgings, which were all ſeuerall▪
            
            The next day, being Sunday, which Holy appoynted day of the Lord, their Maieſties came to the Cathedrali Church the Colledge, where they heard a moſt learned Sermon, by a reuerende graue and learned Doctor.
            The Sermon ended, their Dinners prepared aborde the Shippes, and their Boates and Barges attending them. They ſette forwardes to the Waters ſide, where euery Officer in his place, ſerued: the Right Honourable Earle of Nottingham Lord High Admyrall beeing preſent, Sir Robert Manſell, Sir Iohn Treuor, and others.
            The King had a Note deliuered him, contayning

the names of euery Shippe, what burthen they weare, and what Munition and Men they had: which Note, his Highnes obſerued, and viewed euery Shippe as they rowed alongſt, keeping their way, vntill they came to the Shippe, prepared for them to dine: which Shippe was perfumed with ſweete and pleaſaunt Perfume, and hanged with Cloth of Golde all the ſides within: wherein three Chaires of Eſtates was placed, for the two Kinges, and Queene.
            The dinner was furniſhed with all kinde of Daintie prouiſion, in ſuch aboundaot manner, that the King of Denmarke marueyled where ſuch ſtore of meate ſhould be dreſſed: And to ſee the manner of it, his Maieſtie tooke occaſion, after dinner, to goe vppon a ſpacious Gallarie made vpon Lighters, betweene the two royal Shippes the Elizabeth Ionas, and the White Beare; neere which two Shippes, ridde a great Hulke, which was furniſhed with Ouens for Baked meates; and had in it three faire Ranges to roaſt with: all which, his Maieſtie in perſon ſaw; and thorowout that Shippe, went from place to place, noting euery roome.
            The time paſsing away, the Kinges tooke their Barges, accompanied with the Queene, Prince, and Noblemen; and rowed on towardes Chartham, where they had ſight of all the Shippes▪ which were rich in Ancientes, Pendants, Hagges, and Streamers: and withall, ſo furniſhed with goodly Men, as might ioy their Maieſties to beholde: All which, made ſo glorious a ſhow, that might well amaze the miode of a man to thinke on, being a Friende; but torrifie the heart of the

proudſt Enemie, to ſee it.
            When their Maieſties had viewed the whole Fleete, they were rowed to the ſhore; where on a Hill, very conuenient, they might ouer-looke the whole Nauie, there was ordayned places for them: When being ſeated, and the word giuen, euery Shippe, in their due courſe, diſcharged orderly their whole Ordinaunce, in ſuch order and forme, the one Shippe after the other, as was greatly pleaſing to their Maieſties; and gayned great credite to the Gunners, performets of that ſeruice. The great Shot then diſcharged, was two thouſand three hundred, beſides the Health at dinner; which was begun with Shot, and anſwered.
            This welcome moſt Honorably performed, the Kinges gaue the Lord high Admyrall, and the Officers thankes, for their paines, and care taken herein, and returned to Rocheſter, to their Lodgings. That euening, the Gunners of the Nauie, ſhewed very excelent and rare Fier-workes.
            The next morning, being Monday, and the xi. of Auguſt, the Kings, the Queene, and Prince, with their traynes, ſet forwarde towardes Graueſend, by the way ſo followed with people, as was wonderfull, and did make the trayne of Courtiers admire: yea, ſuch was the multitude of people, Londoners, & others, which came to Rocheſter, that thouſands could get no lodginges, or meate for their money.
            The time hath brought theſe Royall perſons, neere to the Towne of Graueſend, where the Port Re
                  •
               ne of the Towne, with his Brethren, in very decent manner, preſented

them ſelues to his Maieſtie, and offered his Office vnto his Highneſſe: which graciouſly accepted the ſame, and deliuered it againe vnto him,
            So paſſed their Maieſties forwards to the waters ſide; at whoſe comming, they were ſaluted with a mightie peale of Ordinaunce from the King of Denmarkes Admyrall, and ſo from all the reſt of his Fleete: who hauing finiſhed, the two Block-houſes of Tylberie and Grauesend began; and thundered ſuch a Volye of Shot, as was highly to be commended.
            Aborde the Royall Shippe of the Denmarke Kings, are theſe Princes gone; where a moſt hartie welcome they receaue, and great cheare. The Ordinaunce often times diſcharging, vpon Healthes to all Friends: which Ordinaunce was anſwered by our two Block-houſes in ſuch order, as deſarues commendations.
            After dinner, the Gunners of the King of Denmarks Shippes, ſhewed their rare deuiſes of Fire-workes: the beautie of which was not to be ſeene, by reaſon of the brightneſſe of the Sunne, which dimmed the ſame.
            Dinner ended, and the tyde (which ſtayeth not) ſeruing to goe for London, our gracious King & Queene hauing brought his kingly Brother to his owne Shipp, from whence he brought him, after many kinde Adues giuen on euery ſide, as well by the Princes, as their Noble trayne, they commende his Maieſtie to Gods protection, and heartily wiſh his ſafetie in his owne Countrey: which ſolemne farewells accompliſhed, the King, Queene, and Prince, tooke their Barges to come for the Court, leauing the King of Denmarke to

Gods pleaſure, and fauour of the Windes; who ſent after them, a token of Princely loue, in the thundering noyſe of all the Ordinaunce from all his Shippes.
            Theſe Royall Companies parred, as you haue hearde, the King of Denmarke tooke order for Rewards to be giuen to all Offices of his Maieſties Houſeholde: which, as it is ſayd, was moſt bountifull. And for other places, aborde the Shippes to the Maiſters, like Rewardes.
            Thus haue I recounted in two ſeuerall Pamphlets, the whole Diſcourſe, and royall Entertainement of this moſt Royall King: whoſe pleaſures, and great welcomes in all places, no Prince but may admire.
            And moſt worthely was the loue of all men beſtowed on his Highneſſe, for all courteſie and louing fauoures might be exſpected from a King of his magnificence, was not wanting in him; as his gracious countenaunce ſhewed in all places. Beſides which, it hath very ſeldome, or neuer been ſeene, ſo many Straungers togeathers in this Lande, ſo well gouerned, and ſo kindly vſed: Such was his Princely care of them, and our Nation, for breeding of quarrells by any of his people, that of all other Vices, their charge was to keepe them from beeing druncke: and withall, inflicted vppon them a heuy puniſhment, for any that ſhould offende, contrary to his commaundement: for the execution of this his Maieſties pleaſure herein, hee appoynted a Marſhall, who had diuers men, as Officers vnder him, to haue a vigilent care

ouer them; which with all diligence performed the ſame: and ſuch as they found druncke, were brought to a Houſe appoynted for their Priſon; wheare their Thumbes were chayned togeather, and nayled by it to a poſt: where they remayned till ſome ſuite was made for their deliuerie, & hartie repentance for their faults; the due execution whereof, kept them in ſuch awe, that you ſhould ſeldome after the firſt weeke, ſee any of them out of order.
            A comfortable hearing it is to all Chriſtians, to ſee ſo vile a ſinne reformed. God graunt vs all to follow like examples of well doinges: preſerue our dread Soueraigne Lord King IAMES, the Queene, the Prince, and all the reſt of their Royall iſſue: And ſende this famous kingly Brother, a faire winde, and a ſafe and pleaſant paſſage to his deſired Port. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   