
      
         
            
            
            Haigh for Deuonshire.
            
            A pleasant Discourse of sixe gallant Marchants of Deuonshire.
            
            Their liues, Aduentures and Trauailes: With sundrie their rare showes and pastimes shewed before the King in Exeter.
            
            
               Besides many pretie mery Ieasts by them performed: as well in forraine Countries, as in their owne.
            
            Very delightfull for the Reader.
            
               Written by H. R.
            
            
               VERITAS VIRESSIT VVLNERE
               TC
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede, and are to be sold at his shop in Watlingstreete, ouer against the signe of the Cocke, neare Friday-streete. 16
                  ••
               .
         
         
            
            
            TO THE WORshipfull and most toward Gentleman, accomplisht with all vertues and graces of true Gentilitie, Henry Cromwell: sonne and heire to the honoured Oliuer Cromwell Esquire, high Sheriffe of the Counties of Cambridge and Huntington: H. R. your Worships professed humble seruant, wisheth increase of all honourable vertues, with long life, and eternall happinesse.
            
            
               IDelnesse is a sinne (saieth the Text) yet better idle, then ill imployed. That's as it is taken, (so saide the good wife that kist her owne Cowe): all men hath their humors, each Plant his propertie, the vildest weede dooth some good, and the vnskilful writer, may either delight or admonish. The ancient learned, tooke sometimes as great content to publish pleasant Ieasts, as to profit.
            If the learnedst writers had their pleasure in conceited myrth, my hope is the more, of your Worshippes fauourable acceptance of this Pamphlet: albeit it may seeme rude to your iudgement, yet therein may you note the maners of sundry people, where the verteous are honored, and the ignoble discouered. From the inferiousest flowers, the industrious

               Bee gathereth hony: the Rose is not cast away for her cankor: the sweet Eglentine disdained for the rough stalke, nor good mens worth blemisht by vnskilfull lynes: from the vertuous good notes may be takē, remembred and followed.
            Faithfull subjects, and good men in the common wealth, were these famous Marchants of whō I intreat, wealthy, charitable, and honest. How pleasant conceited or mery you find them in their wel ordered Ieasts, offending none, but desirous to do good to all, The censure of such, to your worship I humbly commend: with the zealous Presēt of his dutiful affection, that voweth himself in all power & abilitie, a deuoted seruant to you & all your worshipfull ancestors, from whose roote, your wor▪ being a liuely brāch, may by the assistāce of the omnipotēt deitie, many yeares in happines cōtinue among vs, the ioy of your renowned parents, your con̄
               tries general comfort, a firme piller, supporter, & maintainer of those honoured vertues & loue, by your auncestors gained, and long time maintained.
            
               At your VVor. seruice so long as euer.
H. Robarts.
            
         
         
            
            To the wel intending and courteous Reader.
            
               
                  AMongst many famous Marchants inhabiting the VVesterne confines of this fertile Ile, there was dwelling neer, and in the renowned City of Exeter, Totnes, Plymouth, Barnestable, and Tyuerton, many of great substance, as wealthy for vertue, as rich in coyne and credit: such they were as for pelfe passed not, niggardnesse came not neere their Mansions: their gates to the stranger alwayes opened, and their liberall hands releeued the poore. Two of which famous Marchants, viz. William & Oliuer, had residence in Exeter, Walter in Totnes, Otho in Plymouth, Iohn in Barnestable, and Robert in Tyuerton.
            
            
               These men whom God blessed with wealth, had thankfull mindes to the giuer, acknowledging his goodnesse, whose stewards they were: Noblemen for their bountie, myrth, and fellowship, loued them: and Gentlemen of their Country, desired their familiar company: their neighbours well esteemed them, holding their friendship in great regard: and the poore duly prayed for them, whom they dayly comforted. Loue and good opinions, generally they gained at home: lyking,
               
               grace, fauour and countenance abroad: where euer they became, friends flocked vnto them, no man enuied their happinesse: with forraine Princes and their subiects, who better esteemed, or more welcommed? with the best they brauedit: their countries credit, more then coyne preferred: their Prince in all places honoured, and countenanced their Country-men: in any action where fame was sought, who more forward? wrong they offered no man, nor could they brooke iniuries: in good causes as readie to fight as to feast: with vsury they dealt not: aduantages of bonds they sought not: Couetousnesse they abhorred: their honest Trade they liued by, gaining wealth with conscience, and worship by desert: in myrth and good fellowship they delighted, for Gold they cared not: hauing this Prouerbe common among them, (A straw for a Peck of Ryalls) hospitalitie they maintained, and did good to all that sought vnto them. VVhat worthie commendations they deserued, their ensuing History shall shewe you: (perusing which) if you finde they were not as merry companions as the maddest Greekes you euer met, Ile burne my Cap, say Cut is a Iade, the Shepheards Dogge a Curre, and a baked white Potte, no good meate.
            
            Vale.
         
         
            
            To the friendly Reader.
            
               IN Stories olde,
               It hath bene tolde,
               That many a Franion,
               And boone companion,
               In this Land dwelled,
               Which in vertue excelled:
               Whose plesant profession
               Wonne commendation,
               Despising nigardie,
               Fraughted with bountie:
               Mongst many such men,
               I frame my Pen,
               Vno you to tell,
               What of yore besell:
               Sixe Marchants bolde,
               More worth then golde,
               Whose names intolde,
               Are highly extolde:
               In Deuon, there dwelled,
               As fame telled:
               Gallants most braue,
               Valiant wise and graue,
               As few now a dayes,
               That euery wayes,
               With them might compare'
               Men excellent rare,
               Of sixe such men,
               Of whom my Pen
               Is now to vnfolde,
               Their stories olde,
               Greatly I feare,
               This many a yeare,
               You shall not heare,
               As to you shall appeare,
               So honest so kinde,
               So sranke of minde,
               From England to India
               
               You shall not finde:
               Farre they traueiled,
               Much they dispended,
               And trueth to faine,
               Fauour did gaine,
               Where ere they came,
               They had the name:
               For pelfe they carde not,
               For crowns they spard not,
               By sea they sayle,
               For Englands weale,
               And bring commodities
               From many Countries:
               The poore they fed,
               The naked clothed:
               A goodly rable,
               Of men seruice-able,
               This is no fable,
               They feed at their Table,
               When peace they inioy,
               Their stockes to imploy,
               To France and Spaine,
               
               
                  Flanders and Brytaine:
               
               
                  They venture the seas,
               Where so they best please:
               Of these famous men,
               And deeds done by them,
               When you shall heare,
               How farre and neare,
               They doe maintaine,
               A worthy traine,
               Of gallant men:
               You will say then,
               That worthy they are,
               To haue a share,
               In the worldes glory,
               And not to lye
               In darke obliuion:
               Thoe hence they be gone,
               In place where they liued,
               They neuer grieued,
               Either rich or poore,
               But sought euermore,
               Peace to maintaine,
               Not priuate gaine:
               Pleasant they were,
               And full debonayre,
               Curteous to all,
               Hating to brawle:
               There Prince duly,
               They serued truly:
               Valliantly in field,
               They made the foe yeeld:
               And one the salt seas
               Fought many stout frayes,
               In hazerd of blood,
               For their countries good:
               Men of Courage,
               And good equipage,
               Well they be deemde,
               And highly esteemde:
               All men of skill,
               Great matches they make,
               And would vndertake,
               With any that came,
               For all kinde of game,
               Shooting, and foote-ball,
               Wresling with all,
               A hundreth pound a fall,
               To any that call,
               Come that come will,
               They should haue their fil,
               For any round summe,
               As many as come,
               For thousāds they card not,
               For cheer they sparde not:
               Come Prince, come King,
               They wanted nothing:
               For all that come,
               Be he Lord or Groome,
               Mirth was their delight,
               Their purposes of might,
               Great charge to defray,
               Either to feast or play,
               The king they intertainde,
               And his fauour gainde,
               By great bountie,
               There minde were so free,
               Since other are named,
               And for their deeds famed
               Let these mery men,
               With fames golden pen,
               Be brought to vew,
               
                  Of that worthy Crew,
               Which take delight,
               Such praises to write,
               That in obliuion,
               They rest not vnknowne.
               For merry they were,
               As to you shall appeare,
               If you will read,
               Each seuerall deede,
               By them performed,
               Their myrth and glee,
               When you shall see,
               Say Deuonshirs Laddes,
               Are no clowns or swaddes.
               Your delight ended,
               Let them be so friended,
               In their behalfe to say,
               Would more such this day,
               In this land there liued:
               That so our foes greeued,
               And our enemies quell,
               So Gentilles farewell:
               My Rime here I ende,
               And to you commend▪
               
               Their storie at large,
               As I tooke the charge:
               Whose actions to vew▪
               
               Shall better please you▪
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A Table containing the contence of this Booke.
            
            
               HOw these gallant Marchants of the West, began first their familiaritie▪ and what happened them. Chap. 1.
               How these newe acquainted friendes iournied to Roane in Normandy▪ and what happened them. Chap. 2.
               How Robert and Iohn, were lodged in the Nunnery of Saint Bennets in Roane, and were by the Lady Abbesse, cured of their wounder. Chap. 3.
               How Oliuer for his vnreuerence in time of Procession, was committed to prison, and all his companions. Chap. 4.
               How Oliuer, Robert and Otho, departed to Burdeux: and William and his two compainions arriued in England. Chap. 5.
               How William after his returne to England, traded in the Citie of Exeter, where he wooed a wife. Chap. 6.
               How Iames, Williams prentise, abused his master to his loue, to hinder the marriage. Chap. 7.
               How the father and mother of Ioane, VVilliams loue, sent for him. Chap. 8.
               How Iames V
                     〈…〉
                   troubled in minde for his bad doings, and wha
                     〈…〉
                   because of his greife. Chap. 9.
               How the sixe marchants in their iourney to Bristow met by chance, and what chanced. Chap. 10.
               How VVilliam in his journey home from Bristow was robde, and how in mer
                     〈…〉
                  t his companie paid his losse. Chap. 11.
               How these famous Marchants for wrongs done them by the French nation, furnished the 
                     〈◊〉
                   shippes to the sea, with their victories. Chap. 12.
               How Ioane, VVilliams wife could not indure her seruant Iames, with his depart
                     •
                  e to Spaine. Chap. 13.
               How the king with his army marched to Exeter, and releeued the Citie, besieged by the Cornish rebels. Chap. 14.
               How VVilliam and his other friendes, to make the king sport,

made challenge to all commers: at wresling, hurling, and footeball. Chap. 15.
               How the Cardinall leauing the king at Exeter, iournied to London, and what iests happened. Chap. 16.
               How Iames, VVilliams seruant, being his Factour in Spaine, at one cast at dice, lost to the Dukes of Florence, and Medina, fitie thousand Duckets. Chap 17.
               How Iames trauelling from Callice to saint Lucas, encountred a Lady, widowe to a Cauileere of Spaine, in mans apparrel. Chap. 18.
               How Iames lay with the Spaniard, and found her to be a woman. Chap. 19.
               How Iames accompanied the Lady to Cheryes, and what entertainement she gaue him. Chap. 20.
               How VVilliam by one of hir neighbours, was made acquainted with Iames his mans fortunes, with his answere to him. Chap. 21▪
               
               How VVilliam, Otho, and Oliuer, from Plimouth passed to Spaine, and their fortunes. Chap. 22.
               How the English Marchantes arriued at Cheres, at Iames his marriage. Chap. 23.
               How Iames with his wiues honourable friendes, being at their cheere, VVilliam and his companie visited them, with their welcomes. Chap. 24.
               How Otho and Oliuer at the house of a Curtizan, was robde of their moneyes and apparrell. Chap. 25.
               How Iames at his master VVilliams departure, cleered all his accounts with recompance, and his wiues kinde fauors. Chap. 26.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  AA
               
            
            A pleasant discourse of six gallant Marchants of Deuonshire.
            
               CHAP. I. How these gallant Marchants of the West, beganne their first familiaritie, and what happened them.
               
                  THe famous Citie of Burdeux is scituated in Brittaine, part of the French Confines: in which Citie, yearely neare the moneth of September, is held a Mart of long continuance: to which Mart or Uyntage, from all places Marchants make their trafficke, for such wines as the countries thereabouts doth plentifully yéeld. Amongst many of sundry countries, which made their voyage to this famous Porte, thrée gallant youthes Marchants of great reputation, wealth, & credit, hauing to names, William, Robart, and Otho, all from the well knowne and honourable Citie of Exeter, had residence at Roane in Normandie: where their great affaires ended, hauing some idle time, and waying not the expence of a hundreth or two of Crownes, in a merriment, gaue faithfull promise each to other, to passe for Burdeux, as well to sée the manner of the Uyntage, and order thereof, as witnesse to themselues, whether report of the great fléete which yearely there laded might be true, as also to méete with some their countreymen of Deuonshire, and with them to frolicke: for which iourney, according

to time prefixed, being prouided. To Burdeux they are come, where they frequent the gallantest company of all Nations thereof, demeaning themselues in such manner, that their company was acceptable and desired of all men: cōpanions for al sportes, or exercises, whether gaming, drinking, sporting, or reuelling: what any durst do, they neuer refused it: such Boone companions they are, and so of all men estéemed.
               Not long after their comming to Burdeux, fortune bringeth with happinesse from the Westerne shore of England, a tall ship, well equipped and furnished, fit for the voiage: of whose arriuall, William and his accomplisses being aduertised, as men glad to heare of their countries welfare and friends, make such enquirie for the ships company, that in good time they are met, with three other gallants Merchants, (viz.) Walter, Oliuer, and Iohn: with whom as straungers méeting, and questions propounded and answered, William knowing curtesse, in kindnesse enuited the new arriued Marchants to his lodging that night to supper: which with thankes they accepted, and accordingly at the appointed houre came, where make no question, they were all as welcome, as friends in forrain parts may be to friends: spending the euening sometimes in discoursing of their Country and acquaintance there: sometimes in gaming, and often carowsing hralths to their Country, kindred, and friends.
               Amongst this delight, albeit Oliuer, Iohn, and Walter, were as wel pleased in their company, as countreymen might be: yet were their mindes other where: especially Oliuer and Iohn, who yearely traffickt for that Porte, had there loues neare adioyning, one dwelling at Bloys, the other at S. Martines: such as for beautie, wealth and reputation, might draw men of more worth to their liking: of whom Oliuer and Iohn, in priuate whisperings, tooke great care, entending that night to haue séene them, and deliuer such presents as they brought from England: had not this méeting of their countreymen preuented them.
               To all which priuate talke, William and Robert tooke

good héede. But William specially gaue eare, and ouerheard their speech: vnderstanding by many motions, that willingly they would haue bene frée from their companies, which he, could well haue wished them, to their best liking: but that he entended to search them as he could, and make tryall what mettall his countreymen were of: & for that purpose, when he had well lined their hoodes with the iuyce of Grape, a potion that maketh the coward bolde, and ouerthroweth the stoutest, William singleth from his companion, the best demeaned Oliuer, and with him, of many matters discoursed: betwéene whom, such enchatinting words passed, that an inuiolable league of friendship was profest, as nothing might haue power to violate: and consequently amongst them all.
               
                  William growing on this new-vowed friendship, to more familiar parly, besought Oliuer and the rest, hauing acquaintance in that place, to bring them to their femall friends in the Citie, where they might spend that night to sée the fashions of those damsels, for that they were straungers & had no acquaintance: for requitall of which, he promised them if they could finde opportunitie to come to Roane, where they had abiding, they would so quite their kindnesse as they should well like of.
               
                  Oliuer, as well disposed to mirth as his friend William, and as pleasantly conceited, imagined that his owne spéech to his companion Iohn was ouer heard, whereon this question was propounded, tooke in good part his words, and thankfully acepted all friendship offered, and cheare receiued. Beseeching pardon, not accomplishing his desire, whom he assured was of more continuance in the Citie, then himselfe, that had not bene full foure and twentie houres a shoare: and therefore rather ought to be a conductor to him and his companions, his experience being more then twentie such Idiots as himselfe in such causes. Therefore good brother (quoth Oliuer) rather let vs participate with your teminine pleasures, that being Ledgers are not vnprouided: and hereafter if you haue cause to vse vs, it may be we poore men may proue as kinde to you vpon like occasion.
               
                  
                  William thus pretily trumped by his friend Oliuer, returning the point of his own weapon into his bosome, thought it ill halting before a Cripple, and hereby iudged his countreymen no Clownes▪ nor their answeres to séeke, which on the sudden could giue them such bones to gnaw. Wherefore leauing to reply, least words in ieast spoken, might break their familiaritie by acceptions taking, they here with a fresh carouse, end their nights sportes, leauing euery man to his rest: taking this order with them by generall consent, that euery of them should not faile at times ordinarie for repast, to haue their dyets at one house, to be chosen by whole consent, where whosoeuer shuld be absent, not hauing such businesse as the company might tollerate, must forfet a summe by them to be agréed on. To this when they had all said Amen, and hands giuen for continuing their begun friendship, they betooke themselues to their rests.
            
            
               CHAP. II. How these new acquainted friends iournied to Roane in Normandie, and what hapned to them.
               
                  THese gallant youths (as you haue heard) vsing such continuall company, theyr liking encreased, and their familiaritie was admired, which was generally noted of all straungers in the Cittie of Burdeux, where they had commendations, not onely for their mirth, good fellowship, & company kéeping, but in regard of their businesse, (then whom) none more forward, vsing all times to fit purpose, if leisure permitted: who more frolike? or what were they in the whole company of any Nation, that durst vndertake these sixe gallants at any sporte, exercise, or gaming whatsoeuer, whether in pleasure or for coyne? whose purses were not tyed with miserie, nor did they account of Crownes before their countries honour.
               
                  
                  Oliuer, Iohn and Walters being well acquainted in Burdeux, well beloued and graced amongst the better sort of Marchants, with whom they did vsually trafficke, had offer of most the best Wines that came thither, whereby they made the sooner dispatch, laded their ship, and made readie wines for her second returne: which done, and they at leisure to take their pleasure, William, Robert, and Otho, were called away to Roane for supply of businesse, desirous of their good friendes companies, with many sutes importuning them for the same, whom after many denialls they graunt, prouiding them horses and other necessaries for their iourney: which done, and solemne farwell taken of their friends that staid behind, forward they set, as pleasant and merrily disposed as might bee, eache one glad of others company; framing occasions of solace, the better to beguile their time of trauell, continuing their iollitie all that night in their lodging, fearing no man, nor dreading any ill to betide them.
               But as the fairest dayes by cloudes are soone ouer cast, the greatest ioyes eclipsed with plaints, and all men subiect to crosses, so fell it out with these faithfull friendes, who taking their way by iourney as it laie, through the Forrest of Ardine, were beset with a company of Outlawes, Théeues which laie in ambush to entercept them: who comming neare the thicket where the treacherous villaines laie, suddenly issued, and furiously assailed them: first with their Pistolles, which daungerously they discharged against them, renuing the fight with their Rapiers: in which first assault, Robert & Iohn with their Pistolles were dangerously hurt, William, Otho, Oliuer and Walter, maintained the fight with great courage, so applying themselues, that in short time they made frée passage, in despight of those villaines which made sure account to haue had their spoile, of whom two were in fight slain, and diuers hurt, who trusted better to their héeles then staying, to saue theyr liues.
               
                  William and his company séeing so good a riddance of these companions, & none séene néere them, not assured what rescue

might come, made no stay, but binding vp the wounds of Robert and Iohn as they could, hasteneth on their way, making all spéede to a Towne not farre from them, where, by a Fryer skilfull in Chirurgery, they were dressed: this night reposing themselues, comforting their friends, and the next day taking with them such Implaisters, Balmes, and other prouision néedfull to their wounds, to serue till they came to Roane, they set forward, which within thrée dayes to their great content, they recouered.
            
            
               CHAP. III. How Robert and Iohn were lodged in the Nunnery of Saint Bennites in Roane, where by the Lady Abbas they were cured.
               
                  AS soone as these good friendes recouered Roane, and had housed their wounded companions, to ease them whilest other prouision was made: William and Otho being best acquainted, knowing the Ladie Abbas of S. Bennets to be a very charitable & skilfull woman in Surgery, made meanes vnto her, for fauour to be showne to their wounded friends, louing the Countrey (as many kisse the childe for the Nourses sake) after small entreatie, was content to accept them into the Monastery, whom she the more tendered, because they receiued their woundes by trechery of her Country men: but when she sawe their persons, she wonderfully affected them: for whom beyond ordinary, she caused prouision to be made, both for dyet & lodging, such their friends that visit them, her selfe dressing their woundes, and so applying them, that the danger of their griefes were soone past: which very much pleased the Lady, hauing a zeale to do them good, for that she held it meritorious,
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII. How Oliuer, for his vnreuerent demeanour at the Procession, was committed to prison, with his companions.
               
                  WHilest the two wounded men, Robert and Iohn, were recouering their health, their other companions kept in the Citie of Roane, youthfully imploying themselues, imboldned by the countenance of William, whose acquaintance were many, and friendes great: by which meanes sundry lewde prankes were not séene, which deserued imprisonment and punishment, (by their law) so long continuing their boldenesse without regarde, that a worse hap then chanced: Oliuer, being a very pleasant conceited fellow, (in his humour) chanced to be amongst a multitude, standing in the chiefe stréete of the Citie, to vew the solemne Procession passing by, where on a sudden, to the great admiration and trouble of the company, stepping to the Fryar that carried the rich Crosse, violently tooke it from him, and dashed it so furiously against the ground, that it brake all to péeces: which by the multitude was taken in such ill part, that by commandement of the Clergie, he, and as many Englishmen as were then in his companie, were taken, and to straight prison committed, where they were cruelly vsed, for whom no sute might preuaile.
               This mad pranke was generally spoken off, throughout the Citie of Roane, and by ill hap, came to the hearing of Iohn and Robert, who were now, by the helpe of God and the Ladies good indurstry well recouered: but by their friendes trouble brought to such melancholy, bewayling their ill hap (which was perillous) that nothing might mooue them to myrrth, or cause their content. Albeit yet the good Abbas and other their friends did what possible they could: that by their woe, many

greefes ariseth, the Aabbas sorroweth, and the whole company complaineth for their comfort, whom none but their friendes libertie can comfort, especially such of the Uirgins that exchanged there French puritie for English loue, estéeming more of the imprisoned English then the whole countrey. Amongst those that loue had tyed in liking, the Lady Abbas was not least in affection, who dayly dressing the woundes of Robert with her owne handes, beganne so well to bée pleased in his company, that shée forgat her Paternosters, her stomacke so wambled with this little god of loue, that hauing small time to cloath her, was often compelled to make her offerings a bed.
               
                  Robert, againe of an humble and thankefull spirit, hauing strength and ability to performe the office of a man, hath so well pleased the Lady, that shée rather desired priuate conference with Robert, (her new deuoted seruant) then to heare the sweetest Channon chaunte in the Quire, descant hée neuer so well, yet the Ladyes deuotion is colde to the Church, but burning to the Chamber.
               This loue of the Lady Abbas to Robert, must be the meane now to relieue their friends, and procure their libertie, whereof Robert promiseth himselfe assurance: to effect which, knowing the Ladie doated in his liking, and desired his health and contentment, he continueth his melancholly in such extréeme maner, demeaning himself in those passions, that his grief caused all the Nuns sorrowe, who neuer durst leaue him, fearing his distemper might cause him vse violent handes one himself, but with many good words perswaded him to comfort, whose eares were shut to the doctrine they preached.
               So long continued this franticke humour on Robert, that the good Lady ganne to finde want of her delight, and missed Roberts recourse to her lodging, which bred in her a great discontent, and more troubled in her want, then Robert was for his destressed friends. Wherefore to reclaime him from these sullen humours, shee studied and deuised all possible meanes she could to doe them good, for which hauing conceited a Plot,

she sendeth her secret kéeper with her ring, intreating Robert of the loue he professed her, instantly to visit her in her closet: which kinde message Robert refuseth, railing and exclaming against her, and her people, cursing and hauning, the Countrie, the citie, & Communaltie, that iniured his friends: continuing this fit so long, that the good Lady moued with remorse, in her night-gowne came to visite him: vnto whom hauing giuen much holesonie counsell, (which hée hearkeneth vnto) gently wringing him by the tender hands, she entreateth him to walk with her to her gallerie, where by solemne oath shée protesteth if he would frolickt it as he was woont, and no more be crossed with these passions, to ouerthrowe his owne estate and greene those whose ioy hée is, by that meanes shée had deuised, his friends ere two dayes be expired should haue their libertie, and he enioy his owne contentment.
               
                  Robert well pleased with these wordes, was in his minde more quieted, yet made no semblance thereof, but accused her of flattery and dissimulation, séeming in spéech so vehement, as if he would haue murdred all that came neare him: which the pitifull Lady with teares bewayled, vowing by▪ her holy Order, and by all rights of her honour, to perfourme her promise, or it shoulde cost all the wealth shée had, and hazarde of her best friendes, on which giuing him her hand, shee leadeth him like a good Nurse, carefull least harme should betyde her Infant: conducting him to that place where so often she desired his company, where hée still continued, vrging her to performe her promise.
               Earely in the morning, as carefull of her charge by vowe made, shée sendeth for the Prior of the Iacobins, an auncient▪ Benefactor to her house, whose shame shée had many times couered, and remitted his sinne offending with her Holy maydes. With this Iacobine, shée so by large promises and lamentable spéech preualeth, that in hope of performance, and frée accesse to the house at his pleasure, with libertie of his olde loue, the match is concluded, the Iacobine hath giuen his faith, swearing by his Cowle and Crooked staffe, he

will not leaue them vntill they were frée, which by his friends hee so laboured to those in authoritie, that by generall consent of the whole Clergie, the Englishmen enioyed liberty, and the Iacobine his pleasure.
            
            
               CHAP. V. How Oliuer, Robert and Otho, departed towardes Burdeux, William and his two companions, arriued in England.
               
               
                  
                     RObert by his great pollicie hauing purchased his countreymens libertie, and being both perfectly cured of their wounds, time drawing on, appointed for méeting their ship comming from England, after they had a while feasted with the Marchantes of the Citie, (desiring their company) and frollickt with his friends, which done, Robert and Iohn, willing to shew their thankfulnes to the Lady Abbas, which would receiue no money, they procured two of the best Iewels and rarest they could finde, which in all humblenesse they presented her, which she thankfully accepted: with a heauy heart giuing a loth farewell to her beloued Robert, with whom when shee had in secret conuersed, shee commended them to their prosperous iourney, whom she promiseth in her prayers to remember: giuing vnto Robert, a paire of Beades, so rich and beautifull as he neuer saw the like: a Crucifire and chayne valued at a thoutand crowns, with rewardes to Iohn: which don, she gaue commandement for her coach, and twelue of her honest Tenants well mounted, to accompanie them to Burduex.
               
               
                  Robert receiuing these great fauours, in requitall, tendered his loyall seruice, with many humble duties by vow to be performed: which was more vallued at her Ladiships handes, then all the wealth he could offer: such was the Ladies affection vnto him, whose absence, howsoeuer she for fashion sake

coloured, it causeth her heartes extréeme sorrow. But howsoeuer, the time is now come to leaue then his company brauely mounted, attend to bring him on his way, which made knowne, the Abbas bids farewell with many kinde fauours, and a million of Paternosters, Aue-maries, and Créedes, long fastings, often watchings, and a worlde of religious ceremonies for his good successe: what the other prittie pure soules doe for their loues, good Gentle-men imagine, for it is like they would be as well vsed as their mistresse.
               Onwardes nowe are our Gallants towardes Burdeux, where by the way, Robert acquainted his friende William and the rest of his company with his fortunes, continuing these pleasant discourses till they came to their lodging, where that night, they had mery chatting and carousing to their friendes, the Lady Abbas, and the sisters healths: the next morning they tooke their leaue one of another: Oliuer and his two friendes for Burdeux, and William and his companions, to Roane.
               
               
                  William had not long continued at Roane, but a ship arriued from Exeter, by the marchants whereof, he receiued the wofull newes of his masters death, with commandement from his mistresse and the executors, to gather in his debtes, make sale of such goods as hée had, perfect his accounts, and with the first ship, to come for England. All which, when hée had ouerpast his sudden sorrowe for the losse of so good a friend, like a carefull man, to please the liuing as hée had his disceased maister, with such effect followed his busines, that by the ships returne, hée was ready with the first to goe aboord: For which voyage, hauing shipped his prouision and such goods as hée had, hée inuited sundry his good friendes to banquet: which ended, with kinde imbrasings, hée biddeth farewell to them that wish his prosperitie at sea.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI. How VVilliam after his returne to England, traded for himselfe in the Citie of Exeter, and wooed a wife.
               
                  GOod Fortune & fauourable windes, hath safely landed William & other his frends, who being carefull, could not be quiet nor mery with any company, vntil he had deliuered his accounts, which to the good lyking of the widow and the Executors he performed, hauing their quittance generall: which done, aduised by his friendes, he seated him in a good place, trading for himselfe, with good successe, in which he so profited, that wealth increased aboundantly: gaining by his good behauiour, charitie, and good conscience, the generall good opinion of the whole Cittie: vnto whō many men tendred their daughters with great dowries: but that life liked he not. When he had with great care and labour spent some two or thrée yeares, substance encreasing, and customers flocking, he tooke to Prentise an honest Farmers sonne named Iames: shortly after this, as time ouercommeth all things, and experience maketh men wise, especially where man with man perswade.
               
                  William after many kind aduertisements of friends, continually putting him in minde of the comfort of marriage, and pleasures therein, the ioyes fathers haue of their children, and honours thereby obtained, was wonne at length to consider thereoft and resoluing to marry, offer was made him of a proper Mayden, the onely childe of a very honest and wealthy man, not farre from the Citie: with whose Parents the friend
                     •
                   of William hauing conference, hearing a very good report of the man, her Father agreed, promising a good portion with his daughter if they could like. Therevpon William was by his friends inuited to her Fathers house the Sunday following

to dinner: against which time, Ione (for so the Maydens name was called) in the best maner apparelled her selfe, knowing to what end this iolly wooer came, where he was welcome to her father, but better to the childe that longed to be a wife: Dinner ended, where wanted no good cheare, euery man betaketh himselfe to passe the time as best contenteth him. William not forgetting his errant was for a wife if he could get her, desired the maiden to be his conducter to the Garden, where after they had walked two or thrée turnes, viewing the bewtie thereof, and commending the pleasure of the same: William being a bashfull young man, after many friuolous questions, fearing to be counted a coward hauing such aduantage, solicites her for loue, with such pretie questions, and her wittie answeres, that William, after the first assault became valiant, whetting his wittes to answere her parley, wherein he so preuailed, that the skirmish waxing faint, his hope was the greater to scale the Forte without more danger. And like a conquerer might vaunt with honor, the Towne 
                     ••
                   his, though with some faint denialls, for modestie the said nay: yet vpon conditions, her father said Amen. Ioane writes Content.
               
               This short worke contented William well, who was now pleased in thought of marriage▪ hauing such hope in his sute, hating to be long a wooing, and rather chusing to liue euer without a wife, then tied long to lingring suites: yet to please Ioane whose ioy he now is, how well soeuer his choise and her answeres pleased, kept it to himselfe, comforting her father, and his friends, that all should be well he doubted not: but as they wished, after this first méeting and loue of either giuen secret to other, William euery day with letters solicited his Ioane▪
                   betwéen whom many pretie tokens was enterchanged, and of both parties accepted, all furthering loue and good liking: and was pleasing to father, mother, and his friends, before whom, shortly after they were made sure.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII. How Iames, Williams seruant, abused his maister to Ioane, hindering their loue.
               
                  
                     WIlliam assured by promise to his Ioane, and the Banes publikely asked, many his familiar friendes, some in iest, others in good sooth, bad God giue him ioy: his seruant Iames, enquiring of his masters forwardnesse of many, was somewhat discontented and greeued: considering the vncontrolled life hee then liued, and the care hée should haue to please a Mistresse, had many knauish deuises hammering in his head to breake the match, and to kéep his Master a Batcheler still. Amongst many other his practises, one onely hée intended to effect, if oppertunitie would giue him leaue: which not many dayes after sorted to his desires, and thus vnhappily he practised it.
               Diuers Marchantes of Exeter, Williams very good friendes, being ready to put to sea, inuited (as their custome is) their familiar acquaintance to their parting banquet, amongst which guests, William was solemnly bidden, Iames knowing his Maister safe for stirring, prouided a horse▪ and in al the hast poasted to Ioane, entending to try his wittes: whither hée came in the euening neare bedde time, who séeing the old man and his wife sitting at the doore, earnestly desired to speake with Ione: vnto whom he deliuered a very solemne message in name of his Maister, desiring her of all the loue shée doeth professe, spéedily to come vnto him, if she tooke pleasure in his life that was dangerously sicke on the suddaine: so strangely taken, as no life was expected.
               
                  This suddaine newes appalled the whole houshold, Ioane cried, the father lamēted, and the mother with wringing hands bewailed this vnhappie fortune of William: to satisfie whose minde, preparation was made for Ioanes iourney, Iames hearing what was broached amongst them, laughed to himselfe, and verie earnestly hastened the olde man to sende away his Ioane, vnto whom he made tender of his seruice, to be her conuoy for so small a iourney, if it pleased them▪ wherof her father was glad: loth so late to be troubled himselfe, or his seruants, to Iames deliuered her, commending them to good spéed. Iames possessed of his adopted mistresse, hauing her from her fathers house, bethought him of his entended knauery: hauing then the best oportunitie, with a déep sigh, & voice mournfull, as a graue man moued to pitie, began to commend her bewty, personage, good gifts, honest parentage, and wealth likely, with other her excéeding vertues, worthie for the best man in the Citie, to be vtterly cast away by marriage with his Maister William.
               
               
                  Ioane hearing these protestations, albeit her mind was cumbred with Iames his tydings, yet gaue good eare to his spéech: whereof taking the aduantage, cut him off, and with kinde words besought him to explaine his meaning, that marrying his maister she were cast away.
               Which Iames by no means, either for promise of fauour, gifts or entreatie would graunt against his maister, whose welfare he estéemed as his life, although it mightily concerned her good.
               These latter spéeches, put her into further dumps, causing more desire to be resolued. But Iames in no wise would grant, vntill by great oathes he swore her to conseale from all people, either the cause, or reuealer of the same. To all which couenants Ioane sware to be iust, and faithfully to kéep, which done he said: Sweete Mistresse Ioane, though my yeares deny me that experience which many good men proue, yet am I not so sencelesse, but can conceiue the pleasures parents haue in vertuous children, the ioyes in wedlocke, and the swéete content therein: where husband and wife participate in one simpathie of loue, and so much the more greeue, to sée such a one as your selfe,

marked of God to be the mother of many swéet Infants, wherein your fathers aged yeares should be blessed, and the world by procreation encreased, should be depriued of al rights due in marriage to the poorest begger: robbed of mothers honorable name, and pleasure therein, all procéeding from the imperfections of nature, in him whose wife by full graunt you are.
               
                  Ioane hearing these reports from▪ 
                  Williams owne seruant, who thought she sorrowed to the death, for his supposed sitnesse, wished his head off, so she were rid of him: entring into consideration of Iames particular spéech, the losse of wombes pleasures, and mothers delight, so nearely touched her, that as in a trance she had like to haue fallen from her horse, if Iames had not the more regarded her. Whose extremitie whē he saw, stricken with fear of his mistresse Ioanes wel doing, he wished that vndone which was begunne: yet taking heart of grace, knowing care must be comforted, cheared her with the best spéech he could: so long perswading, that she reuiued againe: calling to minde, the great losse of that she most hoped for: the thought of William was loathsome vnto her, wishing neuer to heare or sée him more: earnestly desiring Iames, as he tendered her life, to returne to her fathers house: for if she procéede, there is no hope but to expect death. Iames more willing to entreat her, then Ioane to craue, (for fashions sake) be sought her to go forward to his maister. But nothing might preuaile, home she would, no deniall could serue: whither Iames made such haste, that they came before the old man was in bedde.
               The sudden comming of Ioane with her guide Iames, much amazed them: especially séeing their dearest childe in such a pittifull case: and not-knowing the cause, thought verily that some hobgoblings or theeues had frighted them: which to assure them, finding Ioane in weake case, and not to be questioned, the mother and her maides were very carefull in hauing her to bed: meane while the father earnestly enquired of Iames, what the occasion of his daughters griefe was: who

like himselfe, so suttelly pleaded, that the olde man was not a whit the wiser: Iames hauing broached this deuise, how wel or ill so euer it spéedeth in the end. After he had in secret coniured Ioane by her holy oathes to remember her promise, with all spéed hasteneth to Exeter, where he discharged his horse, and recouered his maisters house, long before the company brake vp: William little suspecting what his man had bene about.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. How the Father and Mother of Ioane, seeing their daughters sicknesse increase, sent for VVilliam.
               
               
                  
                     IOane languishing in this conceited feare of her Williams want, gā grow so weak, that her friends had smal hope of her recouery, being in best cōfort when she might be alone: where with sighes and gréeuous cōplaints of her fathers rashnesse, she exclaimeth on her hard fortune, being so vnhappily marked aboue all the women she hath knowne: vtterly inueying against William, that knowing his imperfections, durst seduce any woman to his deceitfull loue: defying wealth, honour, and not caring to be married to the greatest Monarke, hauing those necessary wants.
               Her good Father, whose comfort was his Ioanes health, when he could not learne by all possible meanes the occasion, and sicknesse rather encreasing then ceasing, aduised by his kindred, sent for her Loue William, hoping his presence might comfort her: who like a kind man, leauing al to his man Iames▪
                   presently procured from the Apothecaries such comfortable drugges as he could get for mony, with sugars and spices of his owne store, hastning to his loue Ioane, where to her father and mother he was a welcome man. But Ioane tooke little

pleasure in his sight or company, his presence being so irkesome, and Iames his tale troublesome, William offering her kindnesse, comming to her bed side to speake with her, she violently thrust him from her, turning her to the other side, not caring for his courtesie or him, but earnestly entreated them to take him from her. This strangenesse which she shewed William, whom they thought would haue bene a comfort, more troubled them, then any other accident, especially William, whom it most concerned: who entred into all iudgements séeming reason, sauing the principall, which they neuer suspected. William censuring al things to the best of her whom he dearly loued, was therefore the more in spirit cumbred: yet pacifying himselfe as he best might, walked abroad, spending time vntill the euening, when he thought sléepe might better quiet her, and giue some better temper to her wittes: which happened not so well, for no sooner came he in her sight, but presently she followed her olde humor, to Williams great griefe, séeing other men well entreated and welcome to her, he onely despiced: in this chollericke humor he would haue left the house, and like to haue sworn by great oaths neuer to come thither more, had not the company which wished them both well pacified him: at whose request and great entreatie, he stayed, though in small content all night, to see if any alteration would be.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. How Iames was troubled in mind for that which happened, and what meanes was vsed to know the cause of Ioanes sicknesse.
               
                  IAmes hauing ended his businesse, being at some leisure, began to consider what wronges he had offered his Maister and his friend, and what might follow this diuellish practise, in this quandary, when he had wayted some time extraordinary for his Maister that came not, he gat to bed, where the guiltinesse of his foule offence so cumbred him, that he tooke

small rest. The morning no sooner gaue light, but Iames wearied with his nightes disquiet, got vp about his businesse, and not long after came William home, as heauie and full of passions as a man might be losing his delight, her Father and mother with wéeping neare wearied, and the whole housholde mourned for their disquiet. The old woman who had a motherly care of the Mayden, searching all wayes and meanes for her daughters health, principally noted the small content she tooke in Williams company, who hearing that he was gone, began more chéerfully to talke, calling for such things as she liked: this amendment caused her Mother to imagine, some discontent it was that troubled her, which would be her destruction if some meane were not found, to know the cause from whence it procéeded. To effect which, pollitikely she insinuates with an auncient Mayden seruant of theirs, that had bene her daughters bed-fellow euer since she was weaned, whome Ioane loued wel: to her the Mother maketh great mone, promising mony plentifull, and what other friendship they could do for her, if she could by any deuise attain the knowledge of her griefe, for that they were assured was the chiefest cause. The mayden wroght by her old Mistresse, promised faithfully to do her best to satisfie them, not forgetting her Maister & Mistresse good words, and rich proffers of mony, as one that could well handle the matter, watching in ye night with Ioane, vttred many faire words, bemoaning her extremitie, and pittying her distresse, saying she was perswaded that some secret sorrow cumbred her, willing whatsoeuer was in her minde, to reueale it to some one whom she best trusted therewith: which would be the more comfort for her in sicknesse: so might she the better ease her heart of sorrow, and haue meanes to releeue her: otherwise there was no hope of life. Ioane hearkening to her approued friendes good counsell, after she had sworne her to conseale what she had to impart vnto her, and the seruant promising faithfully to fulfill whatsoeuer she was enioyned, with many sighes which like smoke came from her stomack, out it came, which sore burned her hart and consumed her bodie: vttring wherof; she enueyed

against her Father, Mother, William, and all friends thereto consenting. The seruant hearing her, beléeued verily shee had found where the hurt lay, and smoothed her more to feele the bottome of her heart, which Ioane faithfully discharged at full, leauing nothing hid from her. With which newes, the Mayden laboured as a woman with childe to be deliuered, wayting opportunitie, to her Maister and Mistresse she came, and vnto them deliuered what Ioane vnder Benedicitie had reuealed: assuring her Maister that was the cause. Her mother at hearing thereof, grew into admiration how Ioane should come to knowledge of so great a secret, yet was glad at the heart, she had that giuen her to vnderstand.
               The better to eschew ill to such chances incident, with more tender compassion, bemoning her, that being a woman as shée was, should so be deluded, loosing the benefit of youth, the rytes to marriage in dutie appertaining.
               The olde woman finding by Ioanes trustie friend where her griefe laie, on the morrow came vnto her, inciting her, by the dutie of a childe, to let her know if any thing troubled her minde, and fréely speaking without blame, she should be comforted, if all the abilitie she had would procure it.
               
                  Ioane hearing her mothers spéeches, though modestie willed her conseale it, trusting her mother would be secret to her in like manner, reuealed the substance of Iames his tale & cause of her griefe: which the old woman was glad of, willing her to take comfort and be of good cheare, for she should not haue that wrong by her consent: blaming her most, for so long consealing the occasion, so highly to gréeue her selfe: which sooner made knowne, order had bene taken before that time, for a husband sufficient. Ioane well pleased with her mothers saying, assured of her loue, began to comfort her selfe in hope, and by little and little recouered some strength.
               Her mother whose secrets she could not kéepe, to a Gossop a neighbour of hers, reuealed the cause of her childes malladie, and the imbesilitie of William. So long this newes was carried, that it came by a Nourse dwelling in that parish, to Exeter,
                  
who told her Mistresse, which was wife to a wealthy Marchant, what common talke was through their parish of William. The Marchants wife, whose husband loued William wel, could not be quiet, but assoone as her husband came in, acquainted him with that report. The good man smiling at his wiues simplicitie, that was no better imployed then to spend her time hearing so bad a tale. Wife (quoth he) I hope your modestie is more, then to be a carrier of such tydings: to answere you, as I would do all others that speake it, I will on my oath iustifie, that he is a man sufficient for any reasonable woman: what I speake is trueth, I know it well: hauing bene his bedfellow almost thrée yeares, learning our language in Spaine.
               
               The Marchant acquainted William herewith, who in choller, accompanied with some friendes, hyed to the Farmers house, requesting to see Ioane, who would not be spoken with: wherfore taking her Father aside in priuate, he discoursed how he was abused: and vehemently protested he wold not be made a scorne by his daughter if she were a Lady: therefore willed to let him know the originall of this scandall, or by heauen he protested, the next Sunday at diuine seruice, in their parish Church, to quit himselfe of so great an ignomy, he would naked shewe himselfe, to her and their great shame, that deuised the same. The old man séeing William so angry, by mild spéech brought him to more reason, and at his intreatie discouered vnto him, what modestie forbad: on which assurance, her Father with his daughter and mother so preuailed, that taking his word for currant, and Williams for good payment, she apparelled her selfe, and came amongst them: where all broyles were ended, and promises faithfully giuen, neuer more to be remembred: and shortly after to both their contents were wedded. Ioane finding her man Iames to be a strife-maker, though she neuer for her oath discouered his doings, secretly enuyed him euer after.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X. How the sixe Marchants, William Oliuer, Otho. Iohn, VValter and Robert, in their iourny to Bristow met, and what hapned them.
               
                  
                     WIlliam hauing espoused his Ioane, placed her in Exeter, he following his businesse: which pleased Ioane and her Parentes well, who hath now found his manhood, and reproued the scandales. Not long after the mariage, was the Faire for Saint Iames at Bristow, to which, from all places of the West, commeth Marchants, Drapers, and Chapmen, to buy and sell: amongst which resort, these sire Marchants, William, Otho, Iohn, Walter, Oliuer, and Robert, being from their owne homes on their iourney at Tanton, by great fortune happily met, glad of one the others company: hauing taken their Inne earely, they bespake their dyets to sup togither, spending the time at bowels & other sports, till it was readie, as frollicke and merry as euer they had bene, none of them sparing, hauing all wealth sufficient: the next day to Bristow they came, where they lodged orderly togither, for no frends or acquaintance might part them. Night approaching, and their businesse for that time ended, William was by a Mercer of London, inuited to ye horshead a Tauern, to supper, which he refused, saying: If I come, I must bring my good friends and companions with me, for we go togither. Content quoth the Mearcer, you shall all be welcome. Whom William sought, and tooke them with him to the place appointed, where his friend the Mearcer and other Londoners met them▪ To supper they go, where wanted no cheare, wine nordaintie Musick, to whose company the Westerne Merchants were very welcome: supper ended, some betooke them to dice, others to dance, as best liked them. William, Oliuer, and Robert.
                  
standing ydle, séeing money so plentifull and gamesters so franke, fell in amongst the company, where the dice running crosse, Robert and Oliuer, was quite of all their coyne, William holding his owne in reasonable manner.
               The Londoners which were winners frumped them, and were pleasant, amongst which, one challenged William, to throw one cast for all his money before him, which was a good summe: which offer, Oliuer and Robert would haue taken, offering to pawne their wares in the hall to make it good, scorning to be braued by their betters. But William was the man they shot at, whom they entended, to giue as drie a shauing as his companions. William perceiuing whereat they aymed, was more moued with his companions that sought to hinder him then the others: and in choller thrust his money from him, challenging the proudest to couer it: who gaping for the money, making a sure reckoning it was their owne, was striuing who should be the man: which William séeing, laughed heartily, saying: by the holy Trinitie, I neuer saw carrion crowes more gréedie, then these good fellowes of my money: which win (quoth William) and in Gods name take it: when that is lost, if lost it wil be, I haue yet in money and credit with my neighbours, a thousand crownes more which you shall haue amongst you.
               The gamesters séeing his courage, left contending, couered the golde, for which William had a chance and woon it: wherat his companions showted. This losse set our gallants in a heat, which William perceiuing, thus cooled: Gentlemen, we are poore men of the West, and you of the famous Citie: yet all subiects to our Soueraigne, friends I trust we are, if not, say so. Care that wil: heare you friends, square not without cause, our money you wonne, and with good will had it, then be as well content to loose: if you be not well, loe there it lies, pawne it, and a gods name win it and weare it: if we loose this, we shall not beg to our homes.
               The Londoners séeing his gallant mind, commended him for his bountie, loath to be braued, put their heaps to one, and

had a chance for it. William minding to try what was in them, offered a thousand Crownes, praising his chance, either win the horse (quoth he) or loose the saddle, fortune cannot begger vs with one throw at dice, away the Boate, and a straw for a pecke of Ryalls. William shewing so pleasant a minde, and franke to the standers by, was wished well of all the whole cō
                  pany: but his iollitie quelled his gamesters, that they durst not praise their chances. The worse for William, whose fortune was to win their monies, and had all on the boord in his possession, which with frowning countenances, his fellow gamesters maligned: which William perceiuing, thus cheared. Gentlemen, you haue made vs poore men good cheare, bestowing on vs, Fidlers fare, meate, drinke, and money: for your sporte we thanke you: and that you may know we trauellers of the West be good fellowes, wishing no mans harme that would vs well, the shot I will pay: friends we met, and so wish to continue. Oliuer take here your principal you drew, and Robert yours: this hundreth pounds shall buy my Ioane pinnes: for the rest Gentlemen, if you scorne not a good fellows proffer, share it amongst you that be loosers.
               The Londoners which were farre spent in this brauerie, gaue him thankes: others better able to beare their losse, in scorne refused his profer, yet with a litle intreatie, wonne to take it: but generally, the whole company admired and praised William: who bestowed on them a costly banquet, rewarded the Musitians, largely paied the house and attendants. For that time parting company, with thankes to William for his cheare and large gifts.
            
            
               CHAP. XI. How William in his iourney homewards was robbed, and how for a couple of Connyes he made in meriment his company pay his losses.
               
                  VVIlliam and his companions ending their businesse, tooke their iourney by Bathe, where pleasantly they

spent a day or two, feasting and making merrie with their friends. From thence to Welles, and so to Bridgewater, ouer the downe called Poldonne, a place often frequented with such as lighten honest trauellers of their monies. These good companions passing the downe, the way faire and gréene, and they pleasanty discoursing, William of a necessarie businesse was enforced to stay behinde: wherin being earnestly imploied, came to him thrée tal fellows wel appointed, with short swords and bucklers, commanding him to deliuer his mony. William being thus surprized on the sudden, nothing daunted with their words, presently said. It is done like cowards and not men, to take me at such aduantage. Now I sée the old prouerbe verified, It is easie kissing a mans tayle when his hose are downe.
               If you be men, as you haue the forme of men, shew me faire play and do your worst. The théeues hearing him so pleasant, though their hast to be gone was great, dreading his company should rescue him, would trie what was in him, setting so good a face on it, willed him to chuse his first man, and best do, best haue. William hearing such good words from so bad mindes, tooke his Capcase from his Saddle bow, setling himselfe to such weapons as he had. Good fellowes (quoth he) for Gentlemen I scorne to name you: that you may say hereafter, you met with a true man and a good fellow, there lieth my money, twentie pounds I take it: on this condition, that if I hurt or foyle this good fellow, the money to be mine without more adoor further chalēge of any of you: if I receiue the like, the money is yours, & much good may it do you: with this consent of both parties, to it they went. William being a very tall man, held him play vntill his sword brake, when closing with him, William shewing a Deuonshire tricke, laid him flat on his backe, and might haue slaine him, had not his fellowes bin so neare. With this the fray ended, and William craued leaue to passe with his money according to promise: which they deliuered. William hauing it at his Saddle bow readie to take horse, two of them holding him fast by the armes, said.

(Gentleman) I doubt not but you wil confesse to your friends, we haue vsed you as our honest promise was, you haue your money and we all good friends: which considered, though our wants be great, yet euery honest man is their words maister: we will not steale, for that is forbidden: marrie we haue here two good Rabbets, which you shall buy. William hearing the théefe talke so much of honestie, blessing himsefe, saith: when the Fore preacheth, beware the Géese. My maisters (quoth he) I haue farre home, and my diet prouided in euery Inne if I haue money, I haue no vse for your Rabbets, therefore séek some other chapman. By our Lady (quoth the théefe) but you shall. Nay if you sweare (said William) I am content so your price be reasonable. What must I pay? all the money in your Capcasse (quoth they) therefore dispatch, for we haue businesse▪ Dispatch (quoth William) no hast but good: I must haue some more time to view my commoditie before I pay my money. With that they laid all hands vpon him to binde him, vnto which he was loath to subiect himselfe: wherefore willed them to take his money and let him go: to which, though they they were loath to agrée, yet vpon his oath that he should not pursue them, they shaked the money into their hat and bad him farewell.
               
                  William hauing his Rabbets, the dearest commoditie hee euer bought, hastneth after his company, who missing him, at the foote of a hill stayed his comming, vnto whom he shewed no maner of discontent, but ieasting, said: you my maisters of Barnestable and Tiuertonne, being so neare, make hast to be with your wuies, and misse all good bargaines: sée what I haue bought to make my Ioane merrie when I come home. Nay quoth one, though they be good and well worth the carriage, yet will they not kéepe so farre, the weather being so hote. Therefore let vs eate them to dinner, and be merry togeather before we part. Eat them quoth William, soft sirs, they cost me more. Why said they, you shall haue as much as they cost you with thankes. You say like honest men, said William, let vs ride no further then Bridgewater to night, and take my bargaine,

on this condition you pay me what they cost, and my selfe go cleare for buying and cariage. To which they all assented, and forward they set a round pace to Bridgewater, where they dined, bespake good cheare for supper, where the Rabbets were a dish: enuited their friends of the Towne, with whom they were very merrie at supper. William often demaunding how they liked their cheare, which they all commended. The guest gone, a reckoning was called and the hoast payed. Now Signior William (quoth Oliuer) what cost ye Rabbets? and wel remembred said Otho, we had like to haue forgotten them. Yea had said William, that is all one, forbearance is no quittance: giue me my present money as your promise was, and after I wil bestow on you to bedward a gallon of the best wine in the towne. You will gaine much by that said Robert. Get or loose I will do it. Tell vs then (quoth Walter) what cost they? My maisters I doubt not but you will all beléeue me: speaking on my credit, twentie pounds they cost me, and some odde money, how much I do not perfectly remember: wherefore pay me twentie pounds, and let the rest go. Muse not at my large account, for your haste was cause thereof: leauing me in such manner without regard: recounting all that hapned betwéene the theeues and him. Whereat though they were ashamed, and more gréeued for the daunger he was in, they could not forbeare to laugh. Well my maisters said William, ieast on, you shall not scape one penney better cheape: for as I am an honest man, you shall pay it, to teach you leaue your honest friends hereafter: whose life was by your negligence in great hazard. So iustly sharing the twentie poundes amongst them, turning it to a ieast, with a good will they deliuered it. William called for his gallon of wine promised, which they merrily drunke to wash downe the Rabbets: and the next morning when they had rid thrée or foure houres togither as their way lay, they parted euery man to his home faithfull friends, and true louers one of the other.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII. How these famous Marchants for wrongs done them by the Frenchmen, equiped twelue ships of worth, by authoritie of the King, and their successe.
               
                  THe Frenchmen in times past, hauing secret enuie against our Nation, some discord hapning betwéene the Kings of both the Realmes: great broyles were in hand on either partie, and many outrages by land and sea committed, the poore Marchants euer hauing the worst, whose goods were taken, rifled and solde, without recompence. Mongst those which had great cause to complaine of their losse, the Marchants of Exeter and the Westerne parts, had not their parts least: being men of trade, aduenturing euerie where, lost much: so long endured▪ without redresse, that vexed thereat, and some of them neare vndone, by humble suite to the King, obtained Letters of Reprisall, to serue against those and their Adherents which spoiled them: wherevpon the Marchants of Fxeter furnished and manned in warlike manner, sixe tall ships, at their owne proper charge: of which Fléete, they made choise of William for Admirall: who hauing the charge, minding carefully to accomplish what he had vndertaken, sent vnto his Consorts of the other Townes, requesting their companies and aide: who willing to accompany their friend, as also to recouer part of their losse, furnished in like manner, other sixe ships, themselues seruing for Captaines of their owne goods.
               
                  William hauing the charge of Generall, with such countenance demeaned himselfe, valiant and courteous, that euery man presaged good successe in his fortunes: that sundrie Gentlemen and men of valour made suite for to accompanie him.
               
                  
                  William carefull of what he had in hand, hauing the most his owne charge, slacked no time: but hearing of the arriuall of his Fléete at Dorthmouth, the place appointed of méeting, frollikes with his friends, viewing and mustring their companies, which were all goodly men, and well furnished. Not long after a faire winde blowing, to the fauour of God they commended their actions, and the equitie of their cause: putting forward with great resolution to the sea. At their going forth, taking their farewell after the manner of such seruice, as all the country admired and cheared their friends which were beholders thereof.
               These Gallants leauing our owne coast, according to directions, plied for Bell Ile, the trade, and other places fit to find their enemies. Of whose being vpon the Coast, the Admiral of France was aduertised, who by chance was then in the Road of Charleboyes, sharing English goods lately taken: and hearing of these warlike shippes, in the night fell lower to the mouth of the riuer, and in the morning taking the aduantage of the Tyde, came to sea. Where shortly by our Fléete, which looked sharpely out for them, they were discouered, and a view taken of their Fleete, which were twise as many, and more goodly ships: but William resolued to sée their courage and trie it: after he had called his fléete togither, and giuen direction for the fight, assured of his company, and their faithfull industrie, prouided euery way fit for the same, they Bare with the French, displaying Saint George ouer their toppes. The Frenchmen séeing these Gallants, rather thought them mad then otherwise, so to boorde them, hauing the oddes, especially on their owne Confines, stood with them, entending to haue compassed the whole Fléete, and so to haue made quick dispatch: Boording them, and carrying them away, wherein they were deceiued. For William  
                  
                     •••••
                     with more resolution, as they afterward found to theyr cost. Our Fléete comming vp with them, after a defiance with Trumpets giueth▪ 
                  William and his Uice-Admirall Oliuer, thrust amongst the Fléete, and in despite loorded

the Admirall, and tooke the Generall into their owne ship, leauing some men aboorde to kéepe her: and sending the French men all away with their boates, to séeke their fortunes. This onset beginning with good successe, added courage to our companies, and greatly discomforted the French, hauing lost their Admirall. Yet cōtinued ye fight very hotly foure or fiue houres: In which time many of the French lay drenched in the déepe, both men and ships. William keeping his owne, who was so well followed by his companions, that the French wearied with the fight, and their hope, past hope to escape, William and his company hauing the aduantage of the shore, lying betwéene them and the sea, yéelded themselues to his mercie: of whom being possest, he tooke the principall men prisoners, made choise of the best ships, and manned them with their Ordinance, such Marchandise and money, whereof they had a boundance aboord: freed many Englishmen they had taken: sincking the most part of the ships, sauing the worst to carrie men a shore. Which done, in despite of those on land which should contradict his doings, went into the Road of conquest, fired the ships in the Roade, and brought two Gallies away. This finished, when he had houered vpon the coast two whole wéekes, to sée if any durst come and finde fault with what was done: with great wealth and more honour to the countrey, he returned to Dorthmouth, recompencing his company, well satisfied for their losse, and richly stoaring the kings treasure, to the good liking of his Maiestie, who gaue thē many thanks: and generall ioy of the whole land, whose honour it was.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII. How Ioane UUilliams wife, for sundrie mad parts plaied, could not indure her seruant Iames: and his departure to Spaine.
               
               MIstresse Ioane growing now to more reckoning of her selfe, standing on her husbands aduancement, béeing

Maister Captaines wife, expected from her neighbours more honour then had of custome bene tendered, especially of her seruants: which Iames her man perceiuing, scorned to doo as she commanded, being the eldest seruant, the principall dealer for his Maister, hauing charge of all: which Mistresse Ioane stomacked much, and often wold crosse him with tanting spéeches, not forgetting the knauish pranke played betwéene his Maister and her: albeit she consealed the same. Amongst many the madde tricks Iames offered his Mistresse, this one she tooke most exceptions at. In the time of her husbands absence, her selfe lying in of a young sonne, many her neighbors banquetted with her, as the custome is in that Country, at which time with other Williams friends, sundry the best in the Cittie oft times to William▪
                   bad themselues to supper, against whose comming, all daintie vyands that money or friends could procure was prouided, all things fit to content: on these guestes, Ioane gaue strict charge, diligent attendance by her seruants be giuen, for the better credit of themselues and their Maister: which they promised to doo. The guests set, and their Cates orderly serued, Iames wayted in good sort, yet not to Mistresse Ioanes content, hauing many to imploy: some by chance wanted cleane Trenchers, for which, she tooke occasion in open presence to checke her man Iames, commaunding him to see if there wanted nothing on the Table: and willed him to bring in a whéele-Barrow, to carry away the bones and foule trenchers. Iames hereat moued, following her counsell, like a diligent seruant, ranne hastily for the same, and brought it to the Table. At which ieast the company had good sport, and long time busied them with laughter. But Mistresse Ioane, séeing her selfe before her friendes so scorned, frowned, powted, and swelled on Iames, and hardly could forbeare wéeping: yet let it passe amongst many other prankes, vntill her husbands returne from seas: vnto whom with teares, she complained her of sundry wrongs done by her seruant Iames. Which William like a kinde Maister, waying his youth, and good seruice he had receiued from him, sought to excuse with gentle words: perswading

his wife to the like. Which Ioane hearing, passing the bounds of modestie, she protested, that if he kept him longer in his house, he accounted more of him then of his wife: nor might she be brought otherwise to beléeue: and so vowed, that either one or other of them two, must part, if William entended to liue in quiet. William wisely waying the benefit of so good a seruant, was loth to leaue him, vntill by continuall clamours of his wife he was enforced: whom to content, he found meanes to send Iames his man to the ports of Cales and Saint Lucas in Spaine, with his marchandise that he had then shipped, as Marchant and chiefe Factor: on which motion made to Iames by his Maister, and assurance there to continue thrée yeares, which was all the time he had to serue, Iames was wel pleased, being perswaded of his Maisters loue, how much soeuer he was discontent with his Mistresse, whose enuy he was assured to be principall cause thereof: which with patience hée tooke in as good part as he could: prouiding himselfe to go with the ship: which being readie, his Maister deliuered him his chartie partie, and Billes of lading, with many good and graue aduertisements: So taking his farewell of Maister and Mistresse, & all his fellow seruants, he left behinde him this Adieu in writing, and so betooke him to his affaires.
               
                  Thogh parting be mourning
                  Where friendship is deere:
                  Yet better be packing,
                  Then stay longer heere.
               
               
                  Our William, sweet William,
                  
                  Is matched with Ione,
                  
                  Whose will, not VVilliams,
                  
                  Doth cause me to mone.
               
               
                  The wrath of a woman
                  May no man endure:
                  For where they maligne,
                  Their woe they procure.
               
               
                  Experience hath taught it,
                  And true it doth proue:
                  The Diuel and a woman,
                  Seld conquerd by loue.
               
               
                  A woman enuious,
                  Whose chance is to wed:
                  Were better be troubled
                  With a diuel in his bed.
               
               
                  
                  Therefore my good fellowes
                  From whom I must part:
                  Forget not to learne
                  This lesson by hart.
               
               
                  What euer your Maister
                  Appoint to be donne:
                  Regard your Mistresse
                  If blowes you will shunne.
               
               
                  The night Crowes fauour
                  Seeke you to obtaine:
                  More shall be your quiet,
                  But better your gaine.
               
               
                  For women how euer
                  They chance speak you faire:
                  Will alwaies be readie
                  Your woe to prepare.
               
               
                  If in the least sort
                  You crosse their intent:
                  They'l dye in the quarell
                  But they wil cause you be shēt
               
               
                  Say Iames for his farwell
                  This lesson doth giue:
                  And please your Mistresse
                  So long as you liue.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII. How the Kings Army marched to Exeter, to relieue the Citie, besieged by the Cornish Rebelles.
               
                  AMongst sundry Tumults, and rebellious assemblies, wherewith in times past this lande was afflicted, a route of Traytors were gathered togither in the West, verie mightie was their power, and their tyrannie more, who spared not to waste, spoyle, and ruinate, all along the whole Countrey as they marched together,

without regard of God, Prince, or naturall affection, of that clymat where they receiued life. The tyrannie of these Rebels bruted throughout the Country, euery man fled for safegard of their liues, wiues and children, to the noble Citie of Exeter: as a place of sanctuary from those blood-thirstie reprobates: Where the Rebels followed with their mercilesse army, and with strong siege begirt it: vsing all possible means they could, by force and pollicie to gaine the possession thereof: which in vaine they practised, many assaults they made, which were manfully resisted by the honourable and true liegemen Citizens of the same: and sundry valiant and daungerous scalies made by them vpon the enemy, weakening their force with great slaughter, and pulling from them of their store of victualls, to reléeue their wants, which were very many and great: yet dismayed they not, but continued their defence with great valour, and euerlasting honour vnto them. In this time of trouble, was William called to high office amongst them, in his owne person doing great and worthie seruice, to the incouragement of the multitude: whom of his owne bountie and charge of victualls he reléeued: sauing their liues both by valour and liberall store of prouision, famine had so generally possessed the same.
               Of these outrages by the Rebels committed, the King was aduertised, who gratiously tendering their distresse, and pittying those his louing subiects, whose vatour and constancy to him was such, spéedily leuied a power of men at armes, and with such hastie iournies as was requisite, marched towards Exeter for their reliefe. Of whose comming, the Rebels hauing knowledge, like a rable of faint hearted miscreants, raised their siege, and departed with bagge and baggage. The tydings of whose departure, by Postes to his highnesse was signified, who notwithstanding continued his iourney to Exeter, to sée their battered walles, and by his presence to encourage them and others his subiects to like loyaltie, if such chaunces should happen. Unto whom his Maiestie was most ioyfully welcommed, as appeared by their entertainment: which was graciously

accepted, as by his honourable thankes giuen did appeare.
            
            
               CHAP. XV. How VViliiam and his companions, Oliuer, Otho, and the rest, to make the King sport chalenged all commers, at wresling, foote-ball, and hurling, which he performed.
               
                  THe King whose countenance hath purchased the Cities libertie, reposed him amongst those his loyall subiects of Exeter, who to shewe their loue, inabled their greatest diligence. Amongst which, William and Oliuer, whose wealth was matchlesse▪ and best able to performe what they vndertooke: entending to shewe their Countries accustomed exercises of actiuitie before his Highnesse, made generall challenge throughout the Countrey of Deuon, and Cornwall, 24. men, to 24. chuse them where they could, at Exeter before the King, on a day prefixed, at these sportes, viz. wrestling, hurling, and footeball. This challenge giuen out, William that had his felicitie in kéeping men of actiuitie, chiefly excelled in these qualities: sent likewise to his friends, Walter of Totnes, Otho of Plymouth, Iohn of Barnestable, and Robert of Tyuerton, to furnish him with such men as as they could of their owne, which were able to maintaine the chalenge. Who hauing notise thereof, and knowing the assured day, fayled not their old friend William, but accordingly brought to Exeter twelue good men of theirs, to ioyne with William and his twelue. To encounter which, according to the proclamation, repaired to Exeter many worshipfull Gentlemen, with their followers, and sundry chiefe and well experienced in those qualities. William and his companions, willing to encourage their people, hath for the purpose, against the first day, suted all their company in Crimson Satten, with

scarlet Cappes and Feathers, vnder which, euery man to play in, wore a Wastcoate of like coloured Taffata. The time assgned come, and the King taking his place to behold this exercise of wrestling, appointed for the first dayes pastime, William and his friends aboue named, apparelled in Coats of black Ueluet and Chaines of Gold, accompanied with many Whiflers to guard the place, marched on to the Greene called Southing-Hay, without the Citie walles, followed with his appointed troupes, attyred as you haue heard: who taking their places, were instantly followed by the Country men. Then to answere them, apparelled in suites of purple Satten, and ledde by a Knight of great name, who passing by his highnesse place, bowed themselues, and marching once or twise about the rayles tooke their stande, opposed with the Citizens. This done, proclamation was made for the quiet of the Gamesters, who proceeded to their pastimes, wherein of both sides was shewed many manfull feates, and slights of pollicie, to his Maiesties great pleasure: who by generall voyce of the whole company, gaue the honour of that dayes exercise, to Williams Prentises & their fellowes. Which done, they marched away in order as they came, the Citizens tryumphing for their successe.
               The next day at the houre appointed, the King being placed, William with his company marched in like maner to the field, who were apparelled in Wastcoates, and Hose of white Laffata, with wrought Nightcaps on their heads, readie to their pastime of hurling. And the defendants in watched Laffata, likely suted. Where betwéene them, much valour and agilitie of bodie was shewed, as leaping, vauting, running and wrestling, wherein they excelled: and for their cunning, of the King worthily praised and rewarded, who highly commended the sport, wishing all his subiects such as they were.
               This dayes honour to the Prentises was likewise adiudged: who like Uictors left the field this second day, to the great contentment of William and his followers.
               
                  The third dayes sport which was footeball, appointed to be performed, William and his comperes marched to the field, his companies apparelled as before, in red and blew Taffata, and the Country defendants, in Orenge Tawny. No sooner entered they the field, their duties done, and the players stripped, the King to do them grace and encourage them to their play, caused a Noble man of his traine to cast vp their Ball, which came no sooner on the ground, but was taken at aduantage: then began the strength and nimblenesse of men to be tried, with lifting, throwing, and casting one the other, some with violence, others with fine slights, generally commended, continuing their sport without victory on either side, along time, vntill by vnhappie chance, one of Williams company, a proper man, and a Gentleman borne, was with a fall from a loftie mans armes, vnfortunately slaine. This Traget is more gréeued the King and all his company, then any thing, who commaunded their pastime to cease, adiudging the honour to Exeter Citizens, yet recompenced royally the defendants, and gaue them many gracious spéeches of commendation: but sorrowed more for the slaine Gentleman, then for the losse of a million of Golde. The Gentleman he caused with great pompe to be enterred, and gaue the prize euer after to Deuonshire and Cornewall, for those exercises: which continue them matchlesse to this day.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI. How the Cardinall for some especiall businesse, leaning his Highnesse at Exeter, departed towards London.
               
                  THe Cardinall then Legal from the Pope, accompanying the King on his iourney, hearing of Letters, and some spirituall ambassage ariued, tooke leaue of his highnesse, for his iourney to London: whom to accompany, William and his fellow Aldermen of ye city, addressed themselues:

ryding on, pleasantly discoursing of their pastimes and entertainment, vntill they came to the stones, markes of the Cities libertie, which the Cardinall taking notise of, said; Gentlemen I perceiue that here your liberties end, wherfore I wil trouble you no further: returne now I beséech you, and acknowledge my dutie to the King. William being of more spirit then many of the others, that thought not on their paines, in a pleasant humour thus said.
               Pleaseth your Grace to pardon vs, though here ende our Cities liberties, yet may we bring our friends further, and therefore will bring your Holinesse to the Gallowes and there leaue you: meaning a place of execution, distant from the Citie a myle and better.
               The Cardinall taking his words short, said: No no my maisters, turning it to a ieast, without any exceptions, and accepted their companies to that place: In which way thitherward, the Cardinals horse chanced to drinke in a brooke, where his horse so pleasantly conceited, would faine haue drunke, but he restrained him: which the Cardinall perceiuing, said. Syr, why let you your horse from drinking?
               Pleaseth your Grace (quoth he) he shall not drinke before your Graces horse hath done. At which the Cardinall laughed hartily, saying: Syr, I knowe not how to requite this great kindnesse, but if euer your horse come where mine may shewe like curtesie, assure you, your horse shall drinke first, in despite of his téeth.
               Thus passed they on the way merily, to their iourney appointed, to bring his Holinesse: where the Cardinall remembring his friends kinde proffer, said.
               Syr, I take it, this is the place, where by couenant we must bid farewell: wherefore I thank you for my great chéere and sport, and for your paines. This is the Gallowes I take it, whither since you would néedes accompany mée, here I meane to leaue you, and so to you all gentle friendes farewell. Where with moste friendly and louing imbrasings they left the Cardinall to his iourney, and the Citizens returned

to Exeter: where to the King they recomunt what hapned them: who tooke great pleasure therein, and often would vse in merriment, the parting of the Cardinall, with the Citizens. Who, a waeke after, feasted his highnesse and his traine, and so with great thankes left them.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII. How Iames UUilliams seruant accompanied the Dukes of Medina and Florence, at play, and how Iames at one cast, lost fiftie thousand Duckets.
               
                  
                     IAmes, the first seruant of William, continuing long in Cales and Saint Lucas, on his maisters businesse, by his good carriage and gentle behauiour had more credit then all the English Marchants there resident, or thither trading: not onely with the countrey, but with the Duke of Medina, who continually vsed Iames as a companion at all exercises, or play whatsoeuer: such was his bountie and nourture, who thought himselfe a Spanish Duke, or a Noble man at least. Fauour of all estates he had, as worthily deserued: his purse euer pliant to the poore, who euer sought him in distresse, whether Stranger or English, felt his bountie.
               These good parts of Iames, gained him loue and fauour, especially with the Duke, who being a. Prince of noble minde, fauoured no Nation like the English, or had pleasure with any but them. Frolike he was in their company, commending their bountie, and wondring at their costly fare and attire, which would cause him many times to leaue his owne Table and omit himselfe to their dyet, gracing them more then all Nations with his presence.
               The Noble Duke who by often resort to their house, and other times had noated their seuerall dispositions, and highly

commended them, purposed to trie at full what was in them, hauing on a time the Duke of Florence in his Court, vnto whom he had liberally spoken our Englishmens praise: and that he might better credit his spéech, he ordained a most costly banket: to which he inuited the chiefest of our English Marchants: amongst which, Don laques de Engleterre, for so hée named him, was not forgotten.
               
                  Iames, which cared not for coyne, but wayed his countries honour, against the prefixed time, suted himselfe very rich after our countrey fashion: and with his companions to the Court is come: where with great welcomes of both Dukes they were entertained, and feasted most costly with rare Cates, spending the time of dinner with mirth, and much pleasant parley.
               Dinner ended, to sundry sportes they fell: some dance, some discourse, other court the dames. Iames and other two of his companions, accompany the Dukes at dice: betwéene them was very great game, and store of money on each side walking. The Duke setting great summes which was neuer refused. The Duke of Medina perceiuing it, thought verily to make them turne crauen. Being somewhat discontent, loosing so much, and few Crownes before him, pulled a Iewell from his chaine, valued at fiftie thousand Duckets: daring in high tearmes, the proudest Englishman to throw at it. This sterne chalenge of the Duke, dismaied our gallants, who looking one on the other, strained curtesie who should accept it, none so so hardie to aduenture thereon, the value being so great, all their substance not able to counteruaile it, and loath to lie in prison for a cast at Dice.
               
                  Iames nothing the timerousnesse of his companions, chearing their faint sprites, said.
               Countreymen, what all amort? hath one proude word ouerthrowne you, that hitherto scorned to be dared, but like true Liegemen to our King, hath maintained his and our countries honour? No gallants no, were his King here and would pawne his Crown, making so peremptorie a chalenge,

my selfe would giue the aduenture thereon: if life, goods, of credit would answere the losse thereof. Therefore Saint George Englands honoured Patrone (quoth Iames) I am the man: and stepping to the table, clapped hand on the Iewel, and couered it with his pawne: promising to make good, the valued summe of fiftie thousand Duckets, if he lost it: which the Duke accepted.
               But in vnhappie time for Iames, who lost by fortune of the Dice, at that throw, not onely all the wealth he had gained, but his Maisters stock, and all the goods he had of other Marchants: to deale for as factor: all which neuer daunted his courage, nor could the Duke perceiue in his countenance any change, but with great chearefulnesse, drew the money he had of his owne, and borrowed of his companions all they had about them: he paide it in part, pawning his honest word for the rest, to be satisfied within ten dayes next following. Which don, spending some time in banketting, they tooke their leaues, all the company gréeued in heart for Iames, who in that humor had vtterly vndone himselfe.
               
                  Iames recouering his lodging, heauie in heart, although he were light of substance: began to consider of his estate, it gréeued him more for his good friends in England, his Maister, and such whose goods he had lost, then for himselfe. In these passions of discontent, when hee had a while, like one lost from himselfe remained, chearing his spirits, hee thus said.
               Base peasant, vnworthy the name of Englishman: what dishonor were it for thée and thy Nation, if thy cowards thoughts by these proud Spaniards could be perceiued? accountest thou more of trash then thy countries honour? or shal this pelfe alter thy former contented humour, drawing thy pleasant conceited minde, to a laborinth of cares, and so quite ouerthrow thy self? No, no, cease to sorow, a pound of care neuer paid one ounce of debt. Let this be thy comfort: thou wast for the time, companion to the greatest Prince in Spaine, then fail not to dispaire, quiet thy effects, follow thy businesse, and satisfie the Duke:

least this more disgrace thy countrey for none payment, then the insolent Spaniards, hath gained welth by his Indies. Lis farre better to die a begger in thine owne countrey, then here to be disgraced, and discountenanced: the which all those Gallants of my countrey, that shal come hereafter into these Confines, with Millions of gold cannot redéeme. Bestir thee then, make sale of thy goods, call for thy debts, & hauing the summe, glut the myser Duke with golde, though hereafter thou sterue.
               Thus said, leauing his studie, with diligence he applied him, against this promised time to procure the money, which by his friends he conueyed to the Dukes house, where he tendered the vtmost farthing.
               The Duke of a milde and honourable inclination, bethinking him what a great losse it was for a Marchant, tendering his estate when he had sundry waies discoursed with him, caused his Steward to returne him the one halfe of his money, deuiding it betwéene them: which Iames tooke in great scorne, and more gréeued to be found other in the latter ende, then at the beginning: yet with courtesie and thankes returned the same: saying to his companions, That neuer Spaniard should report he was Benifactor to an Englishman. So taking leaue of the Dukes of Medina and Florence, departed to his lodging, lamented of those Princes for his losse: but highly honored for his magnanimitie and haughtie spyrit, which made the Dukes censure him, to be doubtlesse, the sonne of some mightie Potentate, how basely so euer shrowded in those his accustomed attires.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII. How Iames trauelling from Cales to Saint Lucas, encountered a gallant Lady, widow of a Spanish Cauoleere of great honour.
               
                  IAmes this Deuonshire gallant, hauing finished with the Duke, and passed all accounts with his friends, satisfying all

such summes at full which he had taken vp, for clearing this great sum, had notise of the arriuall of certaine English ships at Cheryes. To which place he hired a guide and post-horse to heare the newes from England: taking his adieu of his companions, away he goeth, only accompanied with his guide. So long trauelling, that his horse being wearie, desired his Maisters lodging in the fields, for lodging that night he was not likely to recouer: his guide fearing some hard measure, being better horst left him, thorow his threatning spéech, which brought him to a very melancholy humour. While he was debating with himselfe what should betide him that night, hauing brought himselfe within such a Thicket or Groue of Drenge, Lemmon, or Pomgranat trees, casting vp his eyes betwéene the glimsing of the light, he espied a gallant Cauolere brauely mounted, vpon a swift running Genat.
               This sight hapning in a place so suspitious, more appalled him then the losse of his money, dreading more company and bad conditions, of some lurking théeues to take away his life: yet arming himselfe with courage, resolued to make them buy it dearely, if they did not ouermatch him: determining with himselfe for his owne safetie, he came nearer to his suspected enemie, who crossed him the way betwéene the trées in such manner, as might driue a man to doubt.
               
                  Iames comming vp to him, and hauing a vigilent eye, espied at his saddle bowe a Case of Pistolles, and a Case of Rapiers by his side, shewing in his countenance a sterne and heauie looke, which made him more mistrust, not without cause, holding on his course with such spéed as his tired Iade would make: (at length well ouertooke) the Spaniard hauing seene Iames, making lesse haste for his company: being met, according to the Spanish fashion, great welcomes is enterchanged with the Basilanus Manus▪
                   the Spaniard pacing easily by him, desiring his company, and questioning him, of what countrey and profession he was.
               
                  
                  Iames that neuer feared or shamed the name of Englishman, told him what he was, and how by villainie of his guide, he was thus distressed. Which the Spaniard hearing, tendered his estate being a strāger, swearing by his fathers beard (for he had none of his owne) that could he tell how to méete the villaine that offered the wrong, he would reuenge it on him with his life. This courtesie deserued thankes: which Iames very thankefully rendered him: yet trusted nothing more his good words: passing on the way, diuersly discoursing, the Spaniard courteous in words said.
               (Gentleman) albeit I haue bene no farre traueller, the better to yéeld the dutie therevnto appertaining, yet the law of humanitie tieth men by reason, one man to tender other in distresse: what my good or bad fortune may be, tis best knowne to him that guideth mens thoughts. I may perchance, be likewise distressed as you are now, where I should be glad of fauour. If therefore you dare commit the charge of your selfe to my company, I will be this might your conduct and warrantise from all harmes: your hoast a worthy Gentleman, and my very good friend, dwelling in these vallyes: where how euer you fare, your welcome shall be good, and so much the better welcome to my selfe, being of that famous Countrey of England.
               
                  Iames, that with Spanish courtesie could not be ouermatched, returned great thankes for so kinde an offer, howsoeuer he was affected to take or refuse it: holding it small wisedome to accept euery kinde profer of straungers, for feare of repentance: yet when he had considered how comfortlesse hée was left, with the perill he was subiect too, lying all night in those Desarts, rather consented to yéeld his lifes safetie to men endued with reason, then hazard it amongst vnreasonable beasts: wherefore commending his safetie to his power, gainst whom no enemie hath resistance, with many kinde thankes accepted the Spaniards fauour and accordingly was brought by him to the mansion of a very braue Gentleman: who hearing of their arriuall, commanded their horses to be well ordered: themselues

by the Maister and Lady of the place, with more then ordinarie entertainment.
               The Mistresse of the house and her daughters, kéeping them company in their chamber, while their supper was puruaying, where in pleasant discoursing, commending one the others Countrey, Iames for fashions sake praising the courtesie of Spaine, and the Spaniards the gallantnesse of England, and our Countreymen.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX. How Iames lay with the Spaniard his companion, and found him to be a woman.
               
                  THeir respast taken, and the night growing on, euery man requiring rest, a seruant of the house appointed for that seruice, demaunded if they pleased to lodge together, or haue their beds sunderly prepared: which question, Iames gaue the Spaniard leaue to answere, as best acquainted in the house, and loth to offend with boldnesse, any one, especially him who had prouided him of so good an hoast.
               The Spaniard hauing in his owne choise, to take a bedfellow, said: Gentle Englishman, séeing you haue put it to my direction, and the weather requireth warme lodging, let it please you, to accept me for your bedfellow this night, so shall our ease bée the more, and the seruant of the house lesse troubled.
               Thankes good sir (quoth Iames) for this great fauour, which I am carefull how to deserue: besides my payment, which I will largely in the house discharge.
               Sir (quoth he) our hoast is a Gentleman, bountifull and

courteous, who in his owne kinde nature, doth hold it meritorious, to entertaine straungers, especially such as are distressed.
               While they were at this parley, word was brought them, their lodging was prepared, to which they prouide thē. Iames and his bedfellow contending who should in courtesie make choise of their place: which in the end Iames protested should be the Spaniards.
               Where vpon to bed he goeth: Iames detracting time, lingering vntill he perceiued the Spaniard quiet a sleepe, then slipping off his doublet, wherein his most store of gold was quilted, he priuily conueied the same betweene the mattresses, whereon they lay. That done, and the doores fast made, to bed he hyeth, not so easily, but that his comming awakened his bedfellow.
               Who verie friendly bad hun welcome, with whom entering into discourse, the Spaniard entreated him, to shew him the difference if any were, betwéene the Spanish and his countrey Gentlewomen: which in such manner by Iames was accomplished, as the one was not more praised, neither for bewtie, or vertue, then the other commended: which equall iudgement, was thankfully balanced by him, that gaue him many thankes for the same.
               Continuing their parley, the Spaniard vnder Benidicitie, besought him yet further to tell him, if in time of all his soiournying in Spaine, hee had not made choise of any one to participate with in mariage, or that he had bestowed his loue and liking on any his countreywomen. All which questions, Iames could conceiue no reason of, nor to what end they were demanded. But simply answered the truth, he neither was married, or giuen consent to any, but his choise was yet fréely to be made, where fancie best pleased, and he was likeliest to obtaine.
               With this, laying his hand ouer Iames naked brest, féeling his body, he desired Iames to do the like: in search whereof, he found his bedfellow a woman: bewtiful, and of an excéeding

goodly personage, Iames astonied at this metamorphosis, was by her thus reuiued.
               Kinde companion and courteous Englishman, let not this suddaine motion dismay thée, for no disparagement shall it be, to lend thy loue and liking (if thou canst loue) vnto me, who am honourably descended, and sometime wife to a most noble gentleman, as is any in this Countrey: sister I am to the principallest man in account with our King: by whom if thou list to loue, thy estate shall be to honour aduanced: with my coyne, liuing, Iewels, and Plate, I will richly endowe thée: in such abundance, that thou shalt neuer néed i
                     •
                  hazard to aduenture thy life: my people shall honour thée, and maister shalt thou be of all my possessions. Then loue braue man, loue her that liueth in the swéete hope of thy contentment, and euer enioy the loyaltie of my true and spotlesse loue.
               
                  Iames that had many hammers beating in his braines, was more set a worke by this vnexpected chance, looking more for death, then to purchase so good a wife, his bedfellow rather resembling a Cauelere, then a Countesse, began to listen to the swéete notes of this pleasing Nightingale, tuning such high notes of honour, wealth, and Wedlocke, could hardly on the suddaine be wonne to credite her spéech, but rather coniectured to be some Curtizan, then a Lady of honour or worth: wherefore desirous to learne further, by faire words, neither denying or graunting her sute, he besought her in loue to explaine, for his better satisfying, the occasion of her disguise, and place of habitation, armed in such maner.
               Know my deare Loue (quoth she) for so let me entreate to call thée, my husband of whom thou shalt heare much honour, when thou shalt arriue at Cheries, hauing a deadly quarell, ah deadly I may too well say, for to him so it proued: being by his enemies watched, as harmelesse he was following for pleasure his Hawkes, was suddenly by the wretched homicyde surprised, and by his slaues, blood-thirstie villaines, 
                     •
                  utchered: whose death in mine owne person, sundry times as you sée me disguised, I sought to reuenge: working many meanes to accomp
                     ••••
                  
                  
my will therein, as this day I did, hauing assurance by some neare him, (which with money I haue subborned) to giue me intelligence of his trauel, which vnhappie, I haue vnfortunately missed, to my great discontent. Beléeue me gentle friend, that speakes no more but trueth, for no more but trueth will I say to thée, whose ioy thou art, and whose loue shall be more pleasing then the worlds treasury, as thy selfe shalt manifest when thou shalt come to thy iournies ende: if Cheries be the place thou entendest to go.
               Deare Loue (quoth she) I am troublesome vnto thée, which art weary and discontent: wherefore pardon me, and with this kisse, let me commit thée to thy swéete rest, which I hope shall proue both our contens.
               
                  Iames, that was not so bad a Pylat, but he had learned how many ancors longed to the Trade, commended her likewise to rest: albeit his owne was not like to be much, so many sundry thoughts encreasing of his swéet bedfellow, with whom he could wish friendship to be cōtinued, as wel in regard of her person, as her honour and great abilitie, which more affected, considering his estate, desirous to cleare with his good friendes in England, whom in a humour he had wronged, consuming their wealth, how euer he liketh or disliketh, in spirit is he cumbred: taking it for a great fauour of God, in his distresse to giue him this comfort in ieopardie of his life, in a wildernesse vnfrequented, where no reliefe was to be found, by her to be fauoured and preferred, he determined how euer to procure her Loue, and requite it: but not with sure promise to tye himselfe, that may not with conscience be recalled.
               While he was at his Memento, in an extacie what should betide him, the Lady awaked, imbrasing him in her armes, in in such kinde manner and proffers of loue, as might haue giuen life to Pygmalions Image. Whether it be Englishmens vnkindnesse to requite such fauour with disdaine, I referre to your censures. But how so euer it fell out betwéene them, the Lady was so excéedingly well pleased, as shée loued euer

after Englishmen, better then her owne Country men, to her death.
               The wearisome winters night is not more displeasant to a troubled spirit, then the griefe both conceiued in enioying so short a time of familiar contentment, well content of either part, to haue entertained their hard lodging for longer time. But Iames hastening to sée the end of these hoped fortunes, desired to be on his iourney, though better pleased with his Spanish bedfellow, then with all his Country men: protesting by no small vowes, that if all Spaniards in bed brought such contentment, he would neuer desire to lye with Englishman more.
            
            
               CHAP. XX. How Iames accompanied the Ladies to Cheryes, and what entertainment she gaue him there.
               
                  THe Sunnes bright beames so gloriously displaying, telleth these contented Louers the morning is farre spent, which hastened them to arise, making all the spéede they could to performe their iourney: for which being prouided, Iames tendered mony largely for his vyands, which of the Hoast and Mistresse of the house, was refused: wherefore bountifully rewarding the seruants attendants, they tooke their leaues, taking their horses which were well refreshed, spéeding them with all haste to Cheryes, where being arriued, Iames as it was betwéene them agreed, taketh his lodging in an Ostrey, by her assigned him, her selfe by a backe way, secretly conuayed to her owne house, appointing Iames to stay the comming of her Messenger, which should be his conduct to her.
               
                  No sooner arriued Iames in this place of contentment, but sundry of his Country men and acquaintance he meeteth, by whom he had certaine knowledge of the welfare of his Maister & all his friends in England. With this company a while he merily conuersed, perusing his Letters, and taking order for discharge of such goods as they brought, consealing the heauinesse of his hearts sorrow, and colouring his thoughts with showes of content.
               The houre being come of appointment, when he should visit his new acquainted friend, who fayled not her time, as carefull thereof, but accordingly dispatched her conducter for her Loue Iames, of whose comming, assoone as Iames had knowledge, taking leaue of his companions, he followed his guide to the house of the Gentlewoman, whom in her owne forme we call Madam Petronella: who desirous to shewe all kind welcome to her friend, prouided to giue him entertainmēt with most costly and rare cheare, thinking all things too little, how costly so euer, that mony or loue could procure, for a guest of so high extéeme, which might commaund his Mistresse and all she had.
               
                  Iames that came not before he was expected, was espied a farre off, of his kind Lady Petronella, who attended his comming at the gate, where louingly unbrasing him, she bad him most hartily welcome to his owne house: leading him by the hand to place appointed for supper. Iames, seeing this straunge chaunge of his new bedfellow, being now her selfe most sumptuously apparelled and adorned with rich Iewels of great value, was striken into a dumpe, eftsoones admiting her stately personage, beautie and grace, her modest countenance, and costly furniture of her mansion, which rather resembled a Paradice then any other thing.
               In midst of these extremities, which reason required to ende, calling himselfe to minde, and not forgetting his dutie to the kind Lady, he rendered many thankes, returning her imbrasings, with kisses, and interest, farre aboue ten in the hundred. The Lady hauing welcommed her Loue, as you haue

heard, to beguile time, while supper was readie, led him to her bed Chamber, which for the rare and rich hangings of Embrodery he neuer had séene the like: in which the armes of her late husbands auncestries and her owne, was with cunning wrought, in such manner as Art could not amend. To please his minde yet farther, she openeth her Closet, her Casket of Iewels, Chests of Plate, and bagges of mony: all which, with her selfe, she againe tendered him. Long had not Iames contemplated on this heauenly blessing of God prouided for him, when word was brought that supper attended their comming on the Table, at which they past the time with much pleasant parley, but chiefly the Lady desires, to discourse of English Ladies, and their guise, the maner of the Country, and such which Iames with rare perfection fitted to her content, passing from one discourse to an other, so long, that Iames calling to minde his Maister William and other good friends in England, his pleasant humour was abated, and his minde not on his halfepenny, (as our English Prouerbe is), but studied how to satisfie them, and maintaine his credit.
               To this alteration, Petronella gaue good héed, imagining that her Loue tooke litle regard of all her profer, wealth, loue, or beautie, yet to bring him from his passion, she said.
               
                  Signior Iaques, since our first acquaintance, which hath not bin long, regarding thy welfare, and tendring thy good, I haue diligently noted thy person, the onely content of my soule on earth, and with all, thy melancholy disposition, and déepe fetcht sighes, too too farre vnbesaeming thy selfe, which hath made me much admire, and causeth my great sorrow. The occasion whereof, if thou please to participate with me, my endeuour shall be to redresse it, if in my power it rest: if not, but that you conseale your hearts discontent, and therby fall to daungerous sicknesse, thou shalt encrease my griefe that loueth thée, and afflict on your selfe such a mischiefe as all thy friends will gréeue to behold.
               Pardon me deare friend (quoth she) and since thou art mute and wilt not say what thou thinkest, let me gesse, take

these keyes, the guard of thine owne treasury, which shall conduct thee to more coyne then all Cheryes can affoord: besides my Plate and rare Iewels, (all which) with what else I possesse, b
                     •••
                  ow, sell, or otherwise imploy at thy pleasure: only I craue, thou frolicke, and cast from thee these passiens: if this will not suffice, what commodities this Countrey affoordeth, bargaine for, I and my friends will furnish thée with them, on our credites: then my swéete Loue, seeing all, and all I haue is at thy commaund, leaue longer thus to care, and shew thy selfe as thou séemest, so shalt thou fill my heart with ioy, command in Cheryes, and be honoured of my Noble friendes for my sake.
               
                  Iames that with great pleasure heard the wordes of his swéete Lady, spoken in loue, and tender regarde of his good health, was more reuiued, then Rosa solies, or Aqua Celisties a fainting spirit: for which, yeelding praise to God for his comfort in this distresse, rendering all curteous thankes to Petronella, whom faithfully he assured to abolish all things should be displeasing vnto her, assuring her on the faith of an Englishman, that what she would request he would fulfill: and on this profer, a solemne vowe was consumate betwéene them, violable to endure to the ende of their liues. Taking their lodging togither, and full possession of all the wealth he had séene, they passed the night in content. Petronella blessed in her choyse: hauing some doubt, that Iames through his long aboad in Spaine, had learned the manner of her Country-men, who care not for a widow in marriage, how vnworthie so euer he be, and the widowe of good account, especially the Noble and Gentlemen.
               This thought arising in Petronella, which was loth to exchange her Loue, caused her earely in the morning to send for her Confessor, vnto whom she reuealed what had past, and had absolution: by whome all rytes and holy cerimonies was in the Chamber performed betwixt them, for which he was well rewarded, and they both pleased. Petronella at her husbands request, entreateth the holy Father to conseale what

was done, till time should giue leaue to summon his friendes to their marriage, to which he said Amen. And taking leaue, departed to his Colledge. Iames to his Countrey men, with whom he frolikes: Petronella to her prayers, thanking God for so good and kinde a husband.
            
            
               CHAP. XXI. How William by one of his neighbours was aduertised of Iames his bad fortunes, and how William gaue him his answere.
               
                  IT is commonly séene, that ill tydings suddenly tunne farre, as by this had fortune of Iames appeared, who hauing in his prosperitie many louing and kind friends that loued him dearely, at his downfall hath shewed themselues secret enemies, rather reioysing at his misfortunes, then any way tendering it. Amongst which enuious company, one being kinsman to a Marchant for whom William was Factor, by the first Poast aduertised in his Letters Iames his prodigalitie, particularly as it happened. The report whereof, was no sooner come, but William by his neighbour was aduertised thereof. The suddaine hearing whereof, somewhat appalled him, hauing his best part of wealth with him, yet pacifying choller, and framing himselfe to patience, he againe perused the contents of the Letters, the effect and particulars whereof, when aduisedly he considered, rather commended Iames for his good minde, doing his Country that honour, not to be dared with so great a Prince, but more admired his high spirit, scorning to receiue the one halfe offered him by the Duke. With these conceits being reasonably pacified, turning him to his neighbour thus said.
               Syr it is your bad hap to be the first messenger of any ill happe befallen me, and I pray God you may be the last: for your losse, I am more sorie then for mine owne: which I

will sée in some sort recompenced, in my mans behalfe: shewe me your accounts, and bate me but ten in the hundreth, and I will cleare you. Prouided this, that you do not by any scandalous spéech depraue my seruants reputation, that hath shewed himselfe a true Englishman, and by his losse gained his Country honour: preferring his reputation before coyne, and his credit aboue his life, for which I commend him: and ioy to heare he hath no otherwaies cōsumed my substance, nor what he had of other mens: and while I liue, his good deserts shalbe thought on, farre beyond those puling Crauons his Country men, that held it no dishonour to be by a straunger dared.
               
                  William being so earnest in his man Iames his cause, his neighbour was sory to sée him so moued, being of such countenance in the Citie, besought him of patience, desiring him, for that the example of ryot was perilous to be knowne amongst seruants, he would conseale it, and reforme his seruants at home, who spend their mony in Lauernes liberally, and procured theirs to do the like, and others: all consuming, both their goods and their owne stocks.
               
                  William, who tendered his seruants as himselfe, hearing this complaint, was more displeased then before: charging him with great vnkindnesse in such maner to withdrawe his loue from his people, who were for the most part Gentlemen of worship, being in number twentie, very proper men, well maintained, and of good education, the most of them, commonly on his affaires in other Countries: said in very great anger.
               Sir, sir, if your comming be to no other ende, then to teach me to order my seruants, you might haue kept you stil, where I care not how soone you be gone: if thou dreadest thy wealth consumeth too fast, looke more heedfully to them that spend it: for my men, what they do I allow: nor wil I fauour any one of them, that shall more account of his purse, then my credit: or dareth not spend an Angell with the best, being better men of byrth then my selfe, for as they spend they get: therfore if thou fearest their expences and doubtest thy people, kéepe thée at home with them, and looke better to their doings: and for my

man Iames, I wil be thy pay-maister, bring thy bils, & receiue thy money: but vse him in thy words well, least thou heare of it, and so when you will, begone: but neuer hereafter trouble me more with thy complaints, for it shall not any thing auaile thée.
               Here shewed William the perfect loue of a Maister to his seruants, whom he loued more deare then his children: neither should any wrong the poorest he kept: such was his care of them, that euery day their dyet was prouided with his own, and if his guests were but ordinary, they diet at his own table, or very neare him, where they would: amongst themselues, in name of good Beare, which they plentifully had, dranke Claret Wine, and Sacke with Sugar in Stone Pottes: which though he suddenly met with diuers times, yet would he rather smile, then take in ill part any of their honest doings.
            
            
               CHAP. XXII. How William and his friend Oliuer, accompanied with Otho of Plimouth, passed to Spaine.
               
               
                  
                     WIlliam that had a great stay on his man Iames, albeit he consealed trō the worlds watchfull eyes his conceit of him, and the greefe for his losse, had this comfort: that Iames being so braue and gallant a Marchant, either by his credit or friends would make all whole againe. Yet could he not be pacified, vntill hee might know the certaine estate of his Iames, which hee was perswaded, wold neuer be by reports, men being so diuersly ginen: some to speake well, others to deiame: for his better contentment, he acquainted his old friend Oliuer, who concluded to fraight a small Barke, with some commodities, to defray charges, and vnknowne to any, no not to their wiues, to passe for Spaine: and for this voyage, hauing prouided their goods, left their homes, in charge to their seruants, and to Plymouth they are

come of whose arriuall there, wheir Otho had notise, hee sought, and found them. Whom he inuited as his guestes to lodge in his house: where they were very welcome, and royally feasted. Otho walking on the hooe, with his companions, demaunded whether they came to buy commodities, or to ship some from thence. From whom they concealed their pretence, framing an answere that past for currant, betooke them to other parley: and sundry whyes, day by day, deferring time, vntill their Barke was ready, and halled into the sound, onely attending the comming of William and Oliuer: who onely had made the Maister priuie to their voyage to Cales, and their intent to carrie Otho with them for company: laying the plot to get him aboorde, which they easily accomplished, séeing the Bark in the sound, framed an excuse, to deliuer Letters for their men at Cales: so aboord in the ships beate they came, and were entertained in the Maisters Cabine, with such vyands as was for them prouided: passing the timè so merrily, that by the time Otho thought to go a shore, they had sight of the Lyzard: whereat he being astonied, the company in merriment comforted, when acquainting him with their businesse, he was better content: his chiefest care was for linnen and apparell, which they promised to supply. Otho, when he saw no remedie, began to frolike with the best, shortning their voyage with pleasant conceits.
               Scantly had one whole wéeke past his course, but drawing neare the Coast, and the day faire and cleare, a boy from the top descried the Clitts of Cales, the Roade recouering in good time: where displaying S. George, well were they could first get aboorde to learne the newes: no sooner our English Li
                     •
                  
                  gers entred the Barke, but finding those thrée friends, to most of them well knowne, they heartily welcommed them to that shore. Like entertainment gaue the visitors vnto them, who albeit they were straungers, by their factors, had knowledge of their great wealth, and what countnance they beare in their Countrey.
               Their salutations ended, William enquireth of a trustie

friend so Iames the newes of him, and where he was. Marrie Sir, in good time (quoth the Marchant) you arriue, to be a guest at his marriage. And drawing a Letter which by Poste from Cheryes that day he receiued, gaue it him to read: wherin he inuited all his countreymen to his marriage, with a relation of the fortunes befallen him, since his leauing Cales: which was great ioy to them all to heare, but most contented William, whom most it concerned: which made him thus pleasantly to beséech the company, to conceale their being, and with all expedition to land their commodities. Which done, (quoth he) like Countrey men and good fellowes, we will all go to him, as he requesteth: Iames is a good fellow, and may do as much for you. Tis a very good motion (quoth the company) wherefore to dispatch our businesse, let vs a shore, and prouide our necessaries. To which they condiscended, taking their lodging in the English house, where their welcome was great: there that night they reposed themselues, and the next day entered their goods in the custome house, and laid it a shore: against which time, waggons and horses were prouided for their iourney to Cheryes, where merrily they went, each one glad of others company, sunderly decoursing of Iames and his fortunes, with much varietie to beguile time.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIII. How the English Marchants arriued at Cheryes, with their welcomes.
               THis pleasant company made such spéede, that they drewe neare their iourneys ende: whither by the height of the Sunne, they perceiued (it was likely holding on theyr way) that they should come thither too early: wherefore instantly finding a place both pleasant and delightfull, they reposed themselues vnder the Pomegranet and Orenge trées, pleasing their owne

fancies with those fruites, and spending the day with such pastimes as was méet.
               Time that stayeth not, calleth them forwards: before their taking horse, the auncient English Marchants, William, Oliuer, and Otho, hauing a desire to trie their welcomes, thought it fit, to enter the Towne before the company, and lodge secretly in some other Inne, vntill the solemnitie of the wedding was consumate. And to this ende, desired the company of kindnesse so to let it passe, and to conseale their béeing there.
               The young men which durst not gainesay their Maisters, condiscended, granting them license to take their own course: and therevpon, directions being giuen, the Maisters hastneth to the towne, taking their lodging, closely kéeping them in their Chambers. About two houres after, and not long before the Sunnes downe full in the West, these gallant Marchants, in their brauerie, all curiously mounted, entered the Towne, taking their lodging in the best Osterie in the Towne: of whose comming, Iames being aduertised, he suddenly made his repaire vnto thē before they could shift their apparell, where you néed not doubt of their welcome by Iames giuen, to that place, where he entended to be a frée-Demson: as appeared by his cost and kind vsage: which with all kindnesses he shewed, in their iolytie carowsing healthes to all their friends in England: especially by name those worthy Patrons, William▪ Oliuer, and Otho, who they all very heartily wished present. But William chiefly was most desired by Iames, who little suspected he was so neare.
               Thus met these gallant youthes with ioy and great content, that not long since parted with sorrow and effusion of teares: héere was their olde passed sportes reuiued, and their friendship acknowledged, with firme confirmance vowed each to others, euery man heartily reioycing for Iames his good fortune.
               At the good spéed of this mirth, and knitting vp this new league, Iames his wife who had notice of their being, and what company they were, richly attiring her selfe, came to

the place where they all were: where she in all courteous manner, welcommed them to Cheryes. Beseeching them, of that loue and courtesie they beare their Countreyman her Husband, to accept his house for their lodging: where how homely so euer, your welcomes shall not be bettered amongst your dearest friends in England.
               This kinde profer of the Lady, so curteous and hartily performed, the Marchants admired, commending Iames his choise, to be absolute, the worthiest in all Spaine, for bewtie, wealth, and good entertainment, wherein they thought him blessed. Returning her many thankes for her kindnesse: besought pardon and libertie to take their pleasures in their lodging, which were like otherwaies to be troublesome vnto her, and her Husband. To which request, though vnwilling, she condiscended. Taking her leaue for that time, committed them to their ease and best content.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIIII. How Iames with his wiues honorable frends being at their cheare, was visited of VVilliam and his companions, and their welcome.
               
                  THe honest yong men which accompanied William and his friends to Cheryes, concealed their secret being in the Towne, that it was not knowne to any but themselues: where two dayes after their arriuall and great entertainment by Iames and his wife, that holy rights of Wedlocke was openly confirmed at the Church in presence of many of honor and great estimation, which betweéne them and the Priest, long before was consummat▪ to the good liking of both the parties, their friends, and honourable Allyes. Which done, great was their cheare, and ioyes more aboundant, where so good content was equally ballanced.
               
                  William and his company hearing by their espialls, how the time of dinner grew to end, was conducted to the Bridall house, where they entended to make triall of their welcome: who by a messenger, gaue Iames to vnderstand, that certaine Marchants lately arriued from England, desired to sée him. Which Iames hearing, gaue charge should be brought in. Iames sitting in his Maiestie as Maister of the feast, was attired in a gowne of wrought Ueluet, a faire Chaine about his necke, and other Abilliments fitly ordered. His

Bride richly suted, sitting by him. William beholding his man in this worshipfull manner, admired it: but more to sée that honorable company: whom he saluted with dutifull reuerence. Iames séeing his Maister, on whom his thoughts least harped on: and those other his ancient friends, albeit he could willingly haue done them that dutie to him appertaining: yet kept his place and countenance for that time: bidding them with a courage, welcome to Cheryes▪
                   commanding them to take their places as they came: where being set, Iames thus began.
               Fellow William, of all the men England might afford, the best welcome to this place: especially at this time, where so lately you haue bene often wisht. Braue Gallants of that noble Citie of Exeter, your companies hath cheared my spirits, to sée you all kinde louers and friends: fall to your vyands, and be merrie, for you shall all haue cause to be merrie here, as you shall finde.
               These kind shews of loue and courtesie, William and his friends more accepted, then if his supposed lost monies had bene instantly tendered him: the conceit whereof, being eyewitnesse of Iames happinesse, and that honour done him by the states present: for ioy made him forbeare his dyet, but hardly teares: vnto whom, and his company, Iames carued often, drinking healths vnto them & their frends in England. Which fauour, the whole company noted: who iudged them to be of worth: their countenance and attire shewing it. To whose welcome, the Spaniards in honour of Iames and his wife, added many good and kinde spéeches of fauour, which was more then ordinary in that proud Nation: all which, the graue Englishmen with like courtesie returned.
               Dinner ended with much mirth and pleasure, Iames in all louing and dutifull maner, imbraced his Maister William: and his friends rendering more then a Million of thankes for their paines that vouchsafed to honour him so, vnexpected at that solemnitie: yet could not his minde be satisfied, doubting some extraordinarie occasion brought them thither: loath that any question should be made of his ill husbandrie in the Towne, taking William into his withdrawing Chamber, he said.
               Deare Maister, and especiall friend: that you vouchsafed this vndertaken paines, to witnesse my happinesse this day, I render thankes: yet greatly feare, your comming so secret, and only trauell, hath bene on reports of my misdemeanor: for which, I am the more sorie,

that you whose years require rest, should in your age be so cumbred. But how euer, I am glad to sée you: end for your goods mispent, no losse to you shall redound: but your accounts, and all men of your Cittie, whose trust I was, shall be with such profit cleared, as you and they, shall haue no cause to blame my riotous demeanor. William to quite his seruant, hearing him so kinde to comfort him, and giue no occasion to discontent, frankely acquited him of all debts due to him: and for his comming at that time excused it, of a voluntarie match made with the Maister of the Barke, hauing his two friends a boord, and the Barke bound for Cales, to bring them vnawares away. While they were in their earnest talke, the Bride hauing some businesse, or taking occasion to giue them their Bene- Venew, séeing such shews of loue betwéen them, bad them according to their Countrey manner, very welcome. Beséeching them, to take her house for their Ostrey during their stay: wherein they should honour their Countreyman her Husband, and do her great fauour. To which, William and his Comperes were easily intreated, the rather to sée the order and manner of entertainment of the Spanish Gentlewoman, which they found costly, louing, and very kinde to Iames and all his friends, as they could command no more in their owne houses.
            
            
               CHAP. XXV. How Oliuer and Otho at the house of a gallant Curtizan, was robbed of their money and apparell.
               
                  IAmes in the Hauen of Blisse, ioyfull of his good friends company, loath on the sudden to forgo them: by great sute of his wife, whom they all honoured for her kindnesse shewed, consented to spend their time, fifteene dayes with them to frolike: where hauing leisure, they viewed the Churches and Monuments of the same, and all other places of content or pleasure. Wandring thus through the Towne, Oliuer and Otho being alone, chanced to passe by the house of a most rare and bewtifull Curtizan: who espying these strangers, seated her in a window opposite with the stréet, playing on her Lute. To whose tunes, two others chaunted excellent Dytties: vnto which, Oliuer and Otho gaue good eare: viewing and noting their persons and bewtie, sometimes passing too and fro by the window: which the Curtizan perceiuing, as they that were not to learn all fashions, sent her Pandora vnto them, inuiting them to taste a Cup of their Wine.

Who like men forgetting themselues, was suddenly entreated: entered into hells mouth, or the diuels apron: where they found the gallant descended into a lower roome to entertaine her pray, whom with kinde embracings, and shewes of fauour, she welcomemed.
               These courtesies, when Otho and his companion saw, as they that could their behauiour to all estates, returned her thankes with like fauour, gratifying her kindnesse.
               The Curtizan which saw the Fish nibling at the bayt, to bring them within tuch, as wel with pleasant parley as her other delights, thus said.
               Gentlemen for so I must call you) if vertue with your graces and attire ioyne in simpathy, straungers you seeme: and it may be, a gentlewomans courtesie, by your nice curiositie, misconstrued, & our kindnesse with froward scandals rewarded: blame me not Gentiles, to censure the worst: strangers you séeme, whom courtesie commandeth be wel entreated: and so much the rather haue I dained you this fauour for Englands honor: of whence, if I gesse not amis
                     ••
                  , you are: of which Nation I more tender the welfare, then of my natiue Countreymen: if vnder correction I may so say.
               Pardon Amoy▪
                   honourable Englishmen, that am so plaine, womens tongues are long hanged, and their harts thoughts at the end thereof: but howeuer you please to censure of my speech, if a Gentlewomans courtesie be not reiected, vouchsafe to accept a Cup of Wine, a Lymon, and a péece of Suger: this is all your cheare, but your welcome as much, as if my gracious Duke were present.
               The Marchants, albeit the conditions of those alluring Syrins were sufficiently knowne, yet was their mindes so besotted, that forgetting wife, children, and the rumours of euill speech, both hauing lustfull desires, Otho formost in the onset, thus said.
               Gentlewoman, like Vlisses enchaunted companions, so are we ouertaken, wondring at your bewtie and other good vertues: but more admiring your courtesie, vouchsafing in such familiaritie to accept of vs, wherein you shew your diuine nature, for nothing is so acceptable as courtesie: which if we reiect, should degenerate from what men ought, and staine our Countrey. With this gentle parley they fell to tasting their wine, and so to Chestes and Premi
                     •
                  o, till the day was spent, when they made haste to their lodging. But no excuses might serue, but sup they must, and afterwards hauing had good store of wine, to sléepe: bedtime drawing neare, the Curtizan not

assured of her pray, merrily said. Gentlemen, I sée our harsh musicke sounds not in your eares, they iarre too much: I wish your delight, and gladly would haue you frolike if there be anything in my power to content you. By your fauour (quoth Otho) if a man should challenge your word, you would be the first that would recant. If I doo (quoth she) let me be burned for an Heritick. I am very sory your hard opinion is such of me: for be it said, albeit not vaingloriously, neuer gaue I such cause to any Gentleman, to haue such thoughts on me: for what I promise, Ile performe▪ as it were the losse of my maydenhead, by holy S. Iulian I sweare. Nay, nay (quoth Oliuer) sweare not so vainely: yea, and nay, Cock and Pye, are sufficient for honest dealers. Trust me Lady, for my part, if I promise you, or any these pretie soules to be their bedfellow, you may take my bare word without any oath: if I faile, burne my Cap, and say Cut's a Iade. Is plaine dealing such a Iewell amongst you Englishmen (quoth she) and is it my good fortune to finde it? If you were of our Spanish minds, I should soone trie what mettall you English Marchants are made of: for your Gentlemē are gallants that I knew by good proofe, hauing a Pilgrimage by holy vow to S. Iames in Galisia, it was my good hap, to encounter for like deuotion, a Gentleman of England, whom I found so kinde, that for his sake, what ere he be shall come in my Pater Noster, he and his Countreymen are in my credit. Let that word stand (quoth Otho) and Mistresse, because an earnest penney bindes, I take this swéete Farme to mine owne, to haue and hold it this night, and for it there's my pawne, kissing her swéetely on the lips. As the Mistresse, so her seruants proued Tassells, gentle inough to come at any ture: how loftie so euer they Tower, downe they come with the Murren, as these honest Marchants found to their costs: who were scantly quietly laid in their beds, but a crew of Russians, birds of this neast, entred the house, swearing and tormenting with bitter oathes, they were assured some villaine was in the house, which they would finde. At which words, the Curtizan seemed to feare her husbands terror, and cried mainly out. Oh Sir, I am vndone: this is my husband returned from the Court, who if he finde you, will murther you. While they were in this feare, the Russians brake the doores, with two or thrée Toarches, entered the chamber, trailed the Curtizan by the haire from their bed, & threatned them with death. The Marchants in feare, pleaded for pittie: wherevnto no regard was giuen: but like tyrants they raigned ouer

them: vntill one of the companie in coole tearmes, calling the chée
                     •
                  e by the name of brother, entreated for them, and perswaded him to be as they séemed, men harmlesse, and for their Countrey, to which he vowed loue, be sought him let them passe. To whose words he began somewhat to listen, medigated his rage, content to let the birds goe, but so pruned them, that they had neither money, Iewell or apparell left, but naked in their shirts, driuen out at doores: threatned vehemently, that if they made any rumour of their losse, whereby any trouble might ensue, their liues should make them recompence.
               With this admonition, Otho and Oliuer lightly attired for sweating, walked the stréetes, and was by the Watch surprized: who enquiring the cause of their late walking, excused themselues, being strangers, that as they were taking ayre of the fields, they were by vagarant people, spoiled of all they had, and bound: where they had continued all the night without rescue, if one by fortune had not reléeued the other: who besought the Watch to be their conduct to the house of Don laques de Enylotoere, where they lodged: who like kinde people shewed them that courtesie, and were let in: excusing them in like manner, to William, and their host Iames and his wife: with whom their counterfeit coyne went for currant, and was of them pittied: but most of the Spanish Gentlewoman bemoned, that tendered more their welfare then her owne nearest of bloud. The Punelles glad that it past so well of their sides, without more suspect, kept their owne counselles, and was neuer knowne but in ieast in England, betwéene themselues.
            
            
               CHAP. XXVI. How Iames at his Maister William his departure, cleared his accounts, and his recompence, with the courtesie of his wife.
               
                  THe time of Williams promise with his ancient seruant Iames, for his stay after the marriage, grew now to end, and a parting time was come, how loath soeuer: against which, Iames by his Factors, had prouided readie at Cale▪
                   to be laden, the best Spice, Wines, and Suger, with costly and rich Marchandise, the Countrey could affoord, or money in many sought places might procure. William and his friends being all wearied of

that ydle life, hauing some businesse for fraught of their ship, could not be intreated longer to make their abode there. But prouiding for their iourney, Iames and his wife protested by religious oathes, to accompanie them to their Porte, which they performed: passing the time, by easie iournies, pleasantly solacing themselues, till they came to Cales: against whose arriuall, the seruants of Iames had puruayed their lodgings verie bountiful: in which they reposed them that night. Next morning gaue order for sale of their goods, and lading the Barke: which albeit, by those that vnderlook it, was suddenly done, yet Iames his owne ship and goods was as readie to set saile: for whom the wind fauourably blowing, the Maister gaue notice to William and his friends. At their leaue taking, Iame, hauing his billes of lading ready, and small hope euer to sée his Maister after that time, made him tender of the moneys he owed him, and those summes due to such other Marchants of Exeter he dealt for. Which by no meanes he would be drawne to accept, but for his neighhours willed him to haue regard: otherwise it might proue his greefe to heare him ill spoken of. Which kindnesse, Iames with teares accepted. And on his knees crauing pardon, besought his Maister to grant him one request, which William vouchsafed.
               Then Syr, for your neighbours (quoth he) for whom you wish recompence, to my honest Countreymen there left behinde you, their stocks with interest I will deliuer, for the whole time I haue detained the same. For your selfe, whom I know not how to deserue so great fauour, be now your words warrantife: for so I challenge your graunt: that seeing money or other commodities for that great summe, lewdly wasted by me, you wil not accept, in all humblenesse to my good Mistresse commend mee, and as a poore votary to her and you, deliuer these Letters, and other Papers therein closed. This ship halled into the Roade, shall waite vpon you, wherein I haue some seruants to attend you: if for your better ease, you will vouchsafe of her before your owne appointed Barke: and so in gods peace at your pleasure goe aboord.
               
                  William circumuented by Iames, could not tell what thankes to giue him, waying his loue and dutifull minde: though loath, would not gaine say his vrgeant request, but returned him many thankes: and after a solemne farewel taken by their friends, aboord they wēt, commended by Iames and his wife to happie fortune at sea, who could not forbeare effusion of many teares, for the losse of so good company.

Who with rich Iewels and much store, commended her to the father and mother of Iames, and Williams wife. Taking their last Adieu, they stayed to sée them vnder saile, sorrowing at full, for their departure: whom the heauens so fauoured, that in lesse then eight dayes, they recouered the hauen of Dorthmouth: from whence taking horse, they posted to Exeter, where they were all heartily welcome. Hauing reposed themselues two or three dayes, William by his seruants, gaue order for discharge of his goods, feasted the Spaniards, and them richly rewarded: deliuered Iames and his wiues tokens to all his friends in presence of his men, to whom he made a great banket: recounting at large their sonnes estate, with his happie fortune, enioying so louing and kinde a wife. Shortly after, furnishing the Sparash ship, with vendable commodities into that countrey, he dispatched them, with his kind Letters, and many Tokens, from sundry friends. So resting himself in quiet, he enioyed the blessing of God in that most famous Citie: a Patrone and father of the state, vntill the end of his dayes, which was not sudden: as hereafter shall be shewed.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   