
      
         
            
            A Golden Mirrour.
            Conteining certaine Pithie and figuratiue Viſions prognoſticating good fortune to England, and all true Engliſh Subiectes▪ with an ouerthrowe to the enemies.
            VVHERETO BE ADIOYNED certaine pretie Poemes written on the names of ſundrie both noble and worſhipfull.
            
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON, ❧ Printed by Roger Ward for Iohn Proctor, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop vpon Holborne Bridge. 1589.
         
         
            
            
            ¶TO THE HONORABLE, LORD GILBERT TALBOT, SONNE AND HEIRE TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE EARLE of Shrevvsbury, Knight of the moſt noble order of the Garter. &c. Increaſe of honour, and all felicitie
            
               WHereas about tvvo yeares paſt, I chaunced to haue offered me this preſent Treatiſe, vvhiche though I then accepted and gaue money for: yet, dreadyng leaſt I might be ouer raſhe in committyng it to the Print, eſpecially before I had fully ſeene into the end and purpoſe of the vvriter, vvhom I vnderſtood to bee a Gentleman of the North Countrey: yet novv after long deliberation, I finding this ſame both pleaſaunt and profitable, haue aduentured the charge of Printyng it. Pleaſaunt I ſay it is in regard of the inuention, and the more to be eſteemed of, conſidering that it foretold (as it were) the comming of the Spanyards and their ouerthrow to our great vnſpeakable good. Profitable it is in reſpect of example: for here among the due prayſes of many, thoſe tvvo moſt noble and loyall men your good honorable Father I meane, and the like right honorable the Earle of Darby, are ſet as ſpectacles or looking glaſſes, wherein all men may ſee a liuely pourtrayture of right Noble myndes in deede, for the right

of their Countreys vveale beyng moſt vigilant and ſtudious. Hereto bee adioyned of the foreſayd Authours doyng alſo, certaine Verſes penned vpon the name of my Lord Straunge, and ſundry others, vpon the names of diuers worſhipfull, whiche, for that they are tending vnto vertue and prettie inuentions full of wittie ſentences, I haue thought good to adde vnto the former Treatiſe.
            If any will contend, that ſuch graue matters as in the former part be intreated of, ought not be expreſſed vnder a colour of Dreames, let him but read Cicero his worke De ſomnio Scipionis, & he ſhall find there moſt graue & pithie matters, touching the vvell vſage of a Common weale, concerning the vnſtableneſſe and inualiditie of riches in compariſon to vertue, with the bleſſed ende of good men, and the wofull miſerie of the vvicked, all effectually diſcourſed vnder the name of a Dreame. Now my humble ſuite is that your honour will vouchſafe to take on you the patroſinie of this Treatiſe, to whom I haue thought beſt for to dedicate the ſame, and that you will herein reſpect not ſo much the ſlenderneſſe of the gift, or the vnworthines of the giuer, but will accordyng to your noble curteſie, take in good part the ſimple good will of me your poore ſuppliant, vvho, though I be able to deſerue nothing of your honour, yet will I euer pray for your good proſperitie.
            
               Your honors humbly deuote▪ IOHN PROCTOR.
            
         
         
            
            ¶THE AVTHOVR TO THE Gentle Reader.
            
               MY vvelbeloued in Chriſt, I haue made ready for thy reading a number of rare inuentions pend vpon the Ethimologie of the names, of diuers vvorthy perſonnages inhabiting the gentle natured countrey and Coūtie of Cheſter: A place planted with an infinite number of Gentlemen being of great vvorſhip, vvho in all their behauiours in euery reſpect, may welbe to many countreyes a ſpectacle, or Mirrour for many vvorſhipfull vertues, as dutie to her Maieſtie, obeyng the lavves, keeping good hoſpitallitie, louing and cheriſhing their ſeruaunts and poore tenants, vſing liberalitie to all men: being of nature lovvly, friendly, and familiar, vvithout any loftie proude ſtately vvordes or countenaunce to their inferiours, dayly and hourely feeding, and clothyng the poore people that vvant and craue for Chriſtes ſake. What ſhall I ſay there is no countrey comparable to the ſame, concerning the vertues aforeſayd. If Radamanthus, and Pryapus, did not corrupt ſome of them vvith their vgly vices. But as the beſt and moſt diligent husbandman can not vveede his Corne ſo cleane hovv preciſe ſoeuer he be, but ſome vvedes, as thyſtles, brackens or brambles vvill ſpring vp among the fayreſt and moſt ranckeſt corne of the vvhole fielde: euen ſo among many vertues it euer hath bene ſeene, and euer ſhalbe that ſome vices ſecretly ſhall lurke in ſome one corner or other according to the old ſaying, vvho liues vvithout a fault, or vvhat commoditie is vvithout his diſcommoditie? vvhiche argueth that Cheſhyre is not onely for theſe vices to blamed more then the reſt of our Natiue Countrey: Wherefore they are not alone

to be condemned: But vviſhing all to be reformed▪ I beſeech thee gentle Reader to beare in mynde his ſayings, that vvrit vpon the earth vvith his finger: and caſt no more ſtones, at this gentle Countrey, then thou vvould haue throvven at thy ſelfe: vviſhing the vvordes vvhiche ſhall flee out of thy mouth, to be fethered vvith ſuch indifferencie, as both thou, and they may be thankefully receiued among all their vvorſhips and theirs, with the reſt of the inhabitaunce of the ſame foyle. For if neceſsitie ſhould conſtraine thee to make triall of the good Nature of this Countrey, thou vvouldeſt not onely finde my reportes to be of troth, but alſo thou thy ſelfe ſhouldeſt haue iuſt occaſion to ſpeake more in their deſerued commendations and prayſe then I haue done: vvhiche I leaue to thy gentle iudgement, requeſting thee to take in good part theſe ſundry inuentions lately ſleeped out of my penne, vvherein I haue Poetically ſet dovvne diuers fictions, vvhiche ſhall (I truſt) be profitable to euery Reader, that vvill indiffrently iudge vppon the ſenſe, if hee haue knovvledge to vnderſtand me, accordyng to my good and faythfull meaning to my Coūtrey: But in theſe dayes not any thing is more diſdained then the trauell of the true meaning ſubiect, to vvrite againſt a vvorldlyng an Vſurer, a Papiſt, a Boaſting Thrazo, an Extortioner, a Tel-tale, a Pick-thanke, a Clavvbacke, a Periured perſon, a Tirant to his Countrey, or a Traytor, to her Maieſties Royall perſon, is ſo ſecretly diſdayned, and ſo enuiouſly noted of ſome vvicked vvretches, that by one meanes or other hee ſhall not eſcape an euill diſpleaſure, not a little to his great detriment and loſſes, but commonly to his vtter confuſion, all the vvhiche daungers (gentle Reader) doe not daunt my mynde at all, neither cauſe my penne to ſtaye one droppe of incke from paintyng the prayſe of the vertuous, or tellyng the troth to the Tyraunt, by familiar examples of the other euill diſpoſed perſons as a caueat to vvarne the vvicked, and to incourage the godly to perſiſte in vertue, vvhiche I beſeech the almightie that vve may all ſeeke the path of perfite righteouſneſſe,

deſiring to pray for peace, and to inſue the ſame. To honour and dread God, obey our ſoueraigne and gratious Lady the Queenes Maieſtie and her lavves, and finally one to loue another. Thus vviſhing thee and all thine, no vvorſſe then my ſelfe I ceaſe.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Golden Mirrours, verie ſignificatiue and pithie: with Ʋerſes vpon the Etimologie of the names of ſundrie Noblemen and Gentlemen.
            
               
                  WHen as the Stately Stagge doth haunt the mountaine toppe,
               And ſecretlye doeth doubt, the Hunters ſubtill ſleight:
               To Maxfield forreſt, with weary ſteppes I got,
               And Shutlings loe, did ſcale of monſtrous height:
               Where fominge bryniſh flouds in th'occident I ſée,
               And ſixe ſundry Shyres appeared vnto mée.
            
            
               Thus gaſing in the cloudes, theſe countreys far to vew,
               Meete vnderneath, the mountaine where I was:
               The kéepers came, the Stagg for to purſue,
               With bended bowes, and grayhounds, more and leſſe.
               And Gentlemen, with Gentlewomen braue:
               That thether came, a huntyng ſport to haue,
            
            
               But or the Courſe was ſet, tyme ware a way apace,
               And Boreas breth was blacke, and glummiſh chill:
               Which cauſed me, to ſéeke a warmer place,
               Vnderneath a rocke, on the other ſide the hill:
               Where houres thrée, I am ſure that I ſette,
               And watcht for ſport, vntill I fell a ſleepe.
            
            
               And in this ſlunthring ſléep, the richeſt Dreame I had,
               A ſight of blaſing bliſſe, and glorious Golden ſhow:
               I ſawe a virgin, in rich attire clad,
               
                  Whoſe vertues cauſde all men her name to know:
               For fame did ſounde her iuſt deſerued prayſe,
               Whoſe giftes of grace, her Royall race bewrayes,
            
            
               A Roſe as Ruby red, ſprang in this Ladyes hand,
               Whoſe fragrant taſt, perfum'd the loftie aire:
               Thrée Crownes vpon the ſame, by right did ſtand,
               Thrée Princely Lyons, this (Lady) honored there:
               The flower deluces did bow vnto the earth,
               Which did declare a Prince of famous byrth.
            
            
               And in a galland garden, ſtood this famous Dame,
               Inuironde round, with bryni
                     •
                  h waltring waues:
               With mightie mountaines, vaunting in the ſame,
               And riuers freſh, through valleys paſſadge craues:
               Where ſprings doe ſpoute, whoſe ſiluer ſtreams doe guſh,
               Through ribs of rockes, them ſelues doe dayly puſh.
            
            
               Many Cities buylt of fame, and honour great,
               Of worſhip, worthy Townes, of riche and manly ſhoe:
               Wherein me thought, was Iulius Caeſars ſeate,
               With ſtately buyldings, many thouſands moe:
               Of comely creatures, ſo populous to view,
               The like was neuer ſéene, if euery one were trewe.
            
            
               Of wealth there was no want, but grace there wanted ſome,
               Will playd ſuch wicked partes, and priuate gayne:
               That in this garden, the poore men ſeldome wonne,
               And yet there durſt not one of them complayne:
               The litle fiſh ſtill flieth from the whale,
               Yet what's deuoured, God Neptune knowes not all.
            
            
               Then came Morpheus with Linces eyes, in his fiſt
               Which ſparkled like the fire, among the cloudy ſkies:
               Hold theſe (ſayd he) and ſée what ere thou liſt,
               Nothing can be vnknowen vnto the wiſe:
               
                  Which when I had, but preſent in my hand,
               I heard and ſaw, but ſcarſe could vnderſtand.
            
            
               But by the blaſing beames, of Lynces eyes,
               I ſawe much more, then Argos many away:
               And heard report, what wordes from him there flies,
               And who they were, that did this dame obay:
               So did I view a vyle and wicked brood,
               That lately dranke, of vglie ſtigian floud.
            
            
               From out whoſe mouthes, they belched bulles of lead,
               Which rored and beld, in th'eares of ſome by ſleight:
               A foxe their ſier, a wolfe their ſupreame head,
               Their frendes are traitors, I know not what they hight:
               Thus ſtill I ſtood, theſe nouelties rare to view,
               And warely watcht to ſée what would inſewe.
            
            
               And as I ſtanding there, to ſée the ſame,
               Dropt into doubtfull dumps, of that and this:
               Vpon the ſodden preſently there came,
               A valiant hounde, as white as ſiluer is:
               And did behold this Lady in the face,
               As one right ready, to obay her grace.
            
            
               Streight came an Eagle, ſoring in the ſkyes,
               With Golden fethers, delighting all mens ſight:
               Who ſtooping ſtraight, fell downe vpon his knees,
               To doe his duetie, thus he left his flight:
               (And ſayd) Madame, the Lord preſerue thée ſtill,
               Thus doe I pray and haue, and euer will.
            
            
               This Hound and Eagle, with foote and wing ſo preſt,
               In ſure ſeruice vnto this excellent Dame:
               Thoſe that had dronke of Stigian could not reſt,
               But by the one or other ſtraight was ta'en:
               No Bull durſt bell, neare where there byding was,
               
                  This noble Hound, no craftie Foxe let paſſe.
            
            
               A voyce I heard, that all the world did heare,
               That thundered from, the golden trumpe of fame:
               And true report him ſelfe, was preſent there,
               And made a challenge, to performe the ſame:
               The wordes were theſe, the Lyon well may truſt,
               That Hound and Eagle, that neuer were vniuſt.
            
            
               They both be ready, alwayes for to obey,
               The Prince and Lawes, they truely loue in heart:
               No blotte of blame, from firſt vnto this day,
               Their banners blanckles, of any euill part:
               Their ſeruice ſhowes, they ſprang of ſpotles race,
               As at theſe dayes, appeareth by their grace.
            
            
               And with theſe wordes, the voyce was ceaſt and gone,
               And at the gaſe I gaſtly quaking ſtood:
               Birdes, beaſt and foules, in flockes was many a one,
               Whereas a number, ſeem'd of Vipers blood:
               (I iudge yt ſo) becauſe they ſought the ſpoyle,
               Of none ſo much, as of their natiue ſoyle.
            
            
               Then looking vp and downe, both heere and there,
               To heare report: and vewe with Lynces eyes:
               Me thought that Iupiter, deſcended from the ayre,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   midd a ſhower, of ſiluer droppes he flies:
               And Saturne followed, with his chollericke looke,
               And furious Mars, his blade, about him ſhooke.
            
            
               Then Miſchief calde, for (treaſon vndertruſt)
               Helpe now (quoth he) or els I am ore' throwen:
               Then ſayd Iupiter, thou wretched Théefe vniuſt,
               I am the God, that makes ſuch villaines knowen:
               For treaſon thou, ſhalt reape thy iuſt rewarde,
               And I this Virgin, in proſperous raigne will garde.
            
            
               
               Then Eccho, ſhe was cald, that liues in woodes,
               And rocky ragged tours, and Dales with Dymbles déepe:
               Where riuers runne with waltring waues in floudes,
               For that (that ſhe) could neuer counſell kéepe:
               Sayd Iupiter, come Eccho, vnto mée,
               Reueile all thoſe theſe dayes that traitors bée.
            
            
               But at this word me thought a number fled,
               Some others wiſhte them fiſhes in the Sea:
               An other ſorte began to hyde their head,
               And many other did ambodexter play:
               For Eccho did all traytors trades bewray,
               As Iupiter commaunded, ſo ſhe did obey.
            
            
               Thus Eccho charg'd to tel all things that's hard,
               Iupiter commaunded woodes, waters hilles, and dales:
               Mountaines, medowes and valleys to regarde,
               With cabbins and caues in England and in Wales:
               What people they receiue, ſith vipers be abrod,
               That neither honor Prince, ne yet almightie God.
            
            
               Except you know them, ſtay them all (quoth hée)
               He charg'd the ſtones to tell that lye in ſtreet:
               So did the Eagle to all the foules that flée,
               Commaunded them to watch, with whom they meete,
               That by your voyce the Serpents may be knowen:
               That ſéeke to haue our (onely ioy) ore throwen.
            
            
               And preſt accomplere, ſayd the noble Hound,
               With ſterne and ſtately countenance all about:
               (All enemies) what ſoeuer to confound,
               My preſent ſeruice ſhall put you out of doubt:
               In place my perſon, ſhall the triall make,
               If any enemy dare, approche the ſtate.
            
            
               Then Neptune rouſde him ſelfe vpon a rocke,
               
                  Amid the bryniſh fomyng floudes he ſate:
               The gates of all his pallace did vnlocke,
               And ſend for Triton, his pleaſure to relate:
               Whoſe trompet ſoundeth ouer in the ſeas,
               For to declare ſuch newes, as Neptune pleaſe.
            
            
               When Triton came, and had his duetie done,
               God Neptune bad him ſound his trumpet vp:
               And in the ſeas commaunds all creatures come,
               That of the fomyng floudes did drinke or ſup:
               And tell Caribd and Silla I am here,
               And doe commaunde them, preſently appeare.
            
            
               
                  Triton trudg'd and ſounded Trumpet ſtraight,
               At voice wherof, appeared great and ſmall:
               The Seas did mount of mightie monſtrous height,
               All liuing creatures attended on the VVhale.
               A mightie muſter I neuer ſaw the like,
               It paſſeth all my ſkill the halfe for to indite.
            
            
               When all aſſembled wear
                     •
                   before this God,
               
                  Triton ſounded ſilence in paine of preſent death,
               And then came Mercurie to charme them with his rod:
               That none durſt ſpeake that time that beareth breath:
               Thus ſilence made, quoth Neptune now prepare
               My pleaſure to fulfill, that here my Subiectes are.
            
            
               Said Neptune, ſith to you it's not vnknowen,
               But that on Tellus all my floods do ſtay:
               On whom I reape the fruites, on earth that's ſowen,
               And doe maintaine my ſtate both night and day.
               He ſends me word that Vipers are abord,
               That would deſtroy th'annointed of the Lord.
            
            
               Which Ladies vertue mooueth all the Gods.
               As Iupiter himſelfe for to defend the ſkies:
               
                  And to prepare for all her foes ſuch rods,
               As Iuſtice can by any law deuiſe,
               So that her Foes on earth cannot eſcape,
               Mark now ſaid Neptune what I will debate,
            
            
               Then for Eolus, Triton ſound his Trump,
               VVho preſently did perſonally appeare:
               who was vpon the ſodaine in a dump,
               Till Neptune tolde him ſoftly in his eare.
               VVhich when he knew, what was the cauſe in déed,
               He willingly with Neptune did procéede.
            
            
               And then ſaid Neptune, I charge my furious Flouds,
               To ſwell and rage, vp toward the cloudie ſkies:
               VVith gréedy Iawes deuoure vp their bloods,
               That harme againſt her noble ſtate deuiſe.
               To thée Caribdis and Sylla, thus I will,
               That night and day their ſhips and them you ſpill.
            
            
               Then ſaid Eolus with a bluſtering blaſt,
               I for my part ſhal make their courſe but ſhort:
               I will breake Anker, Cable and alſo Maſt,
               So that deſtruction ſhall acquite their ſport.
               But whom (ſaid Eolus) that it pleaſeth you,
               I'le blowe his ſailes, the Traitors to purſue.
            
            
               And as this word, Eolus mouth had paſt,
               God Neptune muſing whom to chooſe therefore:
               The mightie Iupiter ſendeth with a blaſt
               A faithfull Foule, for ſeas none like of yore.
               A Drake adreſt to paſſe through euery ſtorme,
               To ſwim the flouds, this Virgins foes to charme.
            
            
               Then ſtept out Nature that ſecretly lay hid,
               And did auouch the choice was by her made:
               And Mars himſelfe to take the charge did bid,
               
                  And there withall did giue this Drake his blade:
               And Neptune bad him welcome to the Seas,
               Eolus promiſt him to blow hys ſayles alwayes.
            
            
               And when this valiaunt Drake receiued charge,
               And to the purpoſe as before I ſed:
               And his commiſſion reachyng wide and large,
               Me thought ſome foes farre of hoiſt ſailes and fled:
               An other ſorte to Crikes began to flye,
               Becauſe they knew they had deſerued to dye.
            
            
               But Drake not dreading, layde to his breſt to ſwym,
               The fomyng flouds to ſearch for forrain foes:
               The Gods in all exploits were ſtill with him,
               And Eolus in his ſayles, a luckie blaſt ſtill blowes:
               No foe he feares though he can Spaniſh ſpeake,
               He venters if they byde, their force to breake.
            
            
               And as I kend him farre, as eyes could ſcry,
               And all his faithfull followers at that tyme:
               A warlike Winter, appeared in the ſky,
               Yet Phebus frendly did vpon them ſhine:
               
                  Eolus Furbiſher, was ready for to ſcower,
               The Spaniſh cloud, that miſchief meant to power.
            
            
               And ſéeing a ſight my eyes began to tyre,
               With flouds ſo furious, and eke ſo many ſayle▪
               
               Streightwayes I heard, and ſaw ſuch gunnes on fire,
               The tremblyng earth, my féete began to fayl:
               The ſkies were dimd, the Seas of fire flamd,
               As though this word Riſe Deadmen had bene nam'd.
            
            
               Foes fled that could, ſome ſanke into the Seas,
               The reſt priſoners that crau'd of Drake their life:
               An other ſorte ſought boggs and woods for eaſe,
               Thus Neptunes Drake, by force doth ſtinte their ſtrife:
               
                  The Gods of this Drake, doe make ſuch a treaſure,
               That Sancta Dominga. he had at his pleaſure.
            
            
               Thus fire and ſmoke, daſht Drake out of my ſight,
               But that I heard for ioye the Sireus ſing:
               And that I had a glimring of ſome light,
               Els of this Drake, no other newes I bring:
               But ſurely the Gods, the helme doo hold,
               Where Drake doth ſwym: what néedeth more be told.
            
            
               Then turnde I backe, this garden for to view,
               For Morpheus twitcht me ſharply by the eare:
               And ſayd it's beſt, thy charge to looke vnto,
               And with thy pen, let diligence appeare:
               Now ſhalt thou ſée (quoth he) a happy ſight,
               And comfort that, among the poore doth light.
            
            
               Whereat I ready for to view the ſame,
               A number infinite, did preſently behold:
               That did reioyce, to heare of vipers tane,
               That ſought ſuch miſchief, as before I told:
               With ſinging, ringing▪ and clapping handes they ſayd,
               God ſaue our Noble Quéene, our mother and a mayd.
            
            
               The younglinges leape, like lambes vpon the leyes,
               The lame reioyſt, and laught, to heare the newes:
               The poore ploughmen, vnyokt, and preſent playes,
               The traueller, his iorney doth refuſe:
               And all with chearefull voyce did ſing and pray,
               God ſaue our Noble Quéene Elizabeth alway.
            
            
               The prayers of the poore, did pearce the ſkyes,
               The ioy of the people, ſpread ouer all the earth:
               The vertues of the virgin, throughout all kingdomes flyes,
               For all her faithfull ſubiectes, vnfainedly made mirth:
               
                  Poore clout-ſhooes gate their clubs, and willingly attend,
               To wreke there miſtres cauſe, both life and good will ſpend.
            
            
               The noyſe whereof, ſo ſounded in the ayre,
               And with the roring cannons on the ſea:
               That heauen and earth, in euery part might heare,
               How nigh ſoeuer, or els how farre away:
               The thumping of the ſame ſo frighted me,
               That on the mount I wakened where I ley.
            
            
               My limmes be numde, as cold as any ſtone,
               And Phoebus bathing in the Occident floud:
               I could not ſtand when as I would haue gone,
               My ioynts were froſen, congeled was my bloud:
               Diſmounting thus the hill, I did retyre,
               To maiſter Leigh of Ridge, a Gentle Squyre.
            
            
               To whom I told my Dreame, both more and leſſe,
               From firſt vnto the laſt in eche degrée:
               Who wi
                     •
                  hed me, my pen, for to adreſſe,
               To ſet it downe, that all the world might ſée:
               God ſaue the Quéene, (ſaid he) the Eagle, and Noble hound,
               And all that traytors be, almightie God confound.
            
            
               
                  Amen (quoth I) and he that would not ſo,
               I wiſh he were the firſt, to féele deſerued woe.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               
                  The Godeſſe chaſt, that Dian hath to name,
                  
                     Is much abus'd by vermin that deuoure:
                  
                  
                     In forreſt, park, and chace, her galland Game
                  
                  
                     Is vexed ſore, and daungered euery houre:
                  
                  
                     Which cauſeth her, to ſend for ſure Hounds,
                  
                  
                     To hunt the wolues, out of her Stately Grounds.
                  
               
            
            
               
               WHen as Aurora with rudie chéekes prepard,
               Her Oriental pallace Phoebus to receiue:
               The Chriſtall ſkyes, vnto the earth declard,
               That Flora would reſtore, what Hyemps did bereue▪
               
               Which cauſed birds to bruſh, them on the bowes,
               And many for to walke, their chambers did refuſe.
            
            
               And I my ſelfe then weary of my booke,
               To be partaker of the pleaſant ayre:
               Into a forreſt faſt by the way I tooke,
               Wherein my ſight, did hautie hills appeare:
               And rocky towers, did ſcale the loftie ſkyes,
               Whom vnderneath, déepe dales and dymbles lyes.
            
            
               Thus for to féede my gredy eyes at gaze,
               By wandring long I weary was at laſt:
               Till ſodenly, my witts were in a maze,
               My eyes did dazile, and all my ſenſe was paſt:
               I ſet me downe, a while to rubbe my browes,
               The poore Knights pallace of pleaſure to peruſe.
            
            
               But in a dreame or trance, that tyme I was,
               As did appeare, by ſightes I ſée full rare:
               I heard ſuch hunting of hounds both more and leſſe,
               That ſcarſe I can, the twenteth part declare:
               And euery hound, was called by his name,
               The Hunters hallowing did declare the ſame.
            
            
               The ragged hills and rocky towers reporte,
               By Ecchoes, voyce, the queſt of Noble hounds:
               The which to heare, it was a worthy ſporte,
               The merry voyce from earth to ſkyes rebounds:
               The Goddeſſe, Nymphes, with ſpéedy foote doe follow,
               With ſounde of merry horne, moſt pleſantly they hallow,
            
            
               Thus as I heard this heauenly hunting there,
               
                  I parted from the place, where then I ſat:
               To haue a ſight, of that which I did heare,
               Vp higher the hill, with expedition gat:
               Where vnder a buſh, not farre where I did ſtand,
               I ſaw a Nymphe with bended bow in hand.
            
            
               Whoſe preſence then I durſt not well approch,
               Her ſtrange attire, and ſparkling lookes were ſuch:
               But cloſly kept me vnderneath a roch,
               Becauſe harme haunteth ſome for medling much:
               Thus as I ſtood to heare this merry queſt,
               I heard the names of houndes that hunted beſt.
            
            
               The followers chear'd the houndes with mery voyce,
               With pleaſant notes of worthy warbling horne:
               And cald vpon the houndes that were of choyce,
               Who leade no chawle, the game they found ſo warme:
               And many houndes of ſundry names there where,
               Of mightie mouthes, ſo did their ſound apeare.
            
            
               I heard the hunts-man, call on duetie ſtill,
               Obedience raung'd, from duetie quite away:
               Pleaſure he ran riot, with his fellow will,
               Rufler rudely rou'd, and would no whit obey:
               Loue well found the perfit, whereat the hunts-man blew,
               And ſayd, here Talbot, take it, for thou art euer trew.
            
            
               Bowman bruiſht the brakes, through thicke and thin,
               Diligence followed dutie, with merry open mouth:
               Yet ſcarſe could duetie bring obedience in,
               He was ſo rudely raung'd ore farre into the ſouth:
               The hunts-man neuer ceaſt, but hallowed ſtill and blew,
               And ſayd, here Talbot, take it, for thou art euer trew.
            
            
               Findeall, and hold faſt, both hunted together,
               Through thicke and thin, both night and day:
               
                  Reuell and ringwood ſpared no weather,
               Ouer hills and dales, they take the way:
               Whereat the hunts-man, both hallowed and blew,
               And ſayd, here Talbot, take it, for thou art ſtil trew.
            
            
               Talbot, treaſure and truſtie, followed duetie faſt,
               And louewel laboured luſtily night, day, and houre:
               The hunts-man did rechat, with horne a merry blaſt,
               
                  Dianas Nymphes did follow with al their might and power:
               Thus one, or other, neuer ſeaſt but blew,
               And cride, here Talbot, take it, for thou was euer trew,
            
            
               Theſe hounds hunte together, with a gallant queſt,
               But that Mendall was behind aboue a myle or more:
               And fauor hunted counter, with diuers of the reſt,
               Which marde ſome ſport, beſhrow their harts therfore:
               But to the truſty hounds the hunts man hallowed ſtill & blew,
               And ſayd, here Talbot, take it, for thou art euer trew.
            
            
               The wolfe, and foxe, both fled before the hounds,
               The beaſtly belling bull, lay coucht in cabbin cloſſe:
               And wicked wéeſels, fled from Britanian grounds,
               The tygar trudgeth, dayly to his loſſe:
               The hounds queſt merrily, the hunts-man euer blew,
               And ſayd, here Talbot, take it, for thou art euer trew.
            
            
               The concord of their cry and merry queſt,
               Cauſ'd al the hills, and mountaines to reioyce:
               The rocky woods, recordes both Eaſt and Weſt,
               To euery eare, the noble pleaſant voyce▪
               
               The Nymphes let arrowes flée, and ſtill the hunts-man blew,
               And ſayd, here Talbot, take it, for thou art euer trew.
            
            
               Thus ouer hills and dales, theſe hounds did mount,
               
                  Diana in her chariot, followed very faſt▪
               
               Till to the quirry, a number out of count,
               
                  Were brought to reape their iuſt reward at laſt.
               Where preſently, the Mort the Hunts-man blew,
               And ſaid, here Talbot, take it, for thou art euer trew.
            
            
               The heads and quarters of theſe Carrens vile
               I did beholde, where kites and Crowes did eate,
               A marke for many that do themſelues exile
               From Dueties doctrine, and deale by déepe deceit.
               For by this ſame it doth appeare full well,
               That ſacred Gods of euerie thing can tell.
            
            
               The heauens did declare a ioyfull time,
               By chriſtall ſkies, and Phoebus golden gleimes:
               The Larke aloft into the cloudes doth clime,
               And euery Hunter, his wiſhed pray obtaines.
               Till at the length, away the Hunts-man blew,
               And ſaid, that noble Talbot euermore was trew.
            
            
               This heauenly hearing ſo delighted me,
               I wiſht this hunting laſt for euermore:
               Moſt pleaſant dreame it was that ere I ſée,
               But loe, what lucke did light (alas) therefore,
               A friend of mine by chance that way did paſſe,
               And wakened me, aſleepe where then I was.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Verſes pend vpon the Etimologie of the name of the right honorable, Fardinando, Lord Strange.
            
               FAme in her flight, by chance found me
               Aſléepe vpon a banke,
               And in a furie, ſaid that ſhe
               Would yeeld me litle thanke,
               To ſléepe when thou ſhouldſt wake, and write,
            
            
               
               Sith I (ſaid ſhe) wil now indite.
               Ariſe (quoth ſhe) write after me,
               My ſentence doe not change,
               Here ſhalt thou view a creature true,
               Who may be called Strange.
               
            
            
               And if thou learned be quoth ſhee,
               Beholde the noble Wight:
               Whoſe modeſt minde apeares to be
               A wiſe and vertuous Knight:
               Deſcent of noble Parentage,
               And rareſt creature of his age:
               A man ſo fixt and firme of fayth,
               That neuer yet did change,
               And ſtandes to trueth for life or death,
               This man is very Strange:
            
            
               Recorded is his life by mée,
               Within my houſe of fame:
               From age to age his memorie
               Shall ſtill aduance his name.
               (Quoth ſhe) becauſe his noble giftes
               Doe put his equals to their ſhiftes
               Let poore men iudge, that want refuge,
               That find their Landlords change,
               He takes th'olde rent, and is content:
               Which may be called Strange.
            
            
               Doubtleſſe (quoth Fame) thou maiſt be bolde
               To write what I ſhall ſay:
               Strange is his vertues to beholde,
               Among the reſt this day:
               He ſerueth God in humble wiſe,
               His Princes foes he doth diſpiſe.
               His lowly minde men euer finde,
               Still fixed not to change.
               
                  Which winnes mens harts in euery parts,
               And that muſt néedes be ſtraunge.
            
            
               Eſtéemde he is, of Noble Prince,
               And of all gentle blood:
               His like before his tyme, nor ſince,
               For vertuous giftes and good:
               I neuer knew, nor neuer ſhall,
               Though I to mynde with pen ſhould call:
               All hiſtories of auncient age,
               Yet I ſhould finde ſome chaunge:
               His part he playes vpon the ſtage,
               Excéedeth very Straunge.
            
            
               No pride perceiued in his breſt,
               No hautie heart he beares:
               And where is néede, to helpe vs preſt,
               And thus he ſpends his yeares:
               No harme to any hath he wiſht,
               Nor for a poore mans profite fiſht:
               Doubtles his life, to man and wife,
               Doth ſhow in him no chaunge:
               But ſure, eche houre vnto his power,
               Among the reſt, is Straunge.
            
            
               Of worldly wealth, he makes no coumpt,
               He wayes his honor more:
               Loue to his ſeruants doth ſurmount,
               And to his tenaunts poore:
               Of countrey ſtill, he taketh care,
               And for the common wealth prepare:
               Remembring well, that fame will tell,
               What people loue to chaunge:
               Therfore I ſay, this preſent day,
               He may be called Straunge.
            
            
               
               Death doubts he not, in Princes cauſes,
               So true of faith is hée:
               To ſerue and proſecute her lawes,
               He cares not who they bée:
               Refuſing neither night nor day,
               All tydes, and tymes, he takes the way:
               No fauor feare, no frend, nor foe,
               Can cauſe his mynde to chaunge,
               No gayne nor payne, can tempt him ſo,
               And that is very Straunge.
            
            
               If I ſhould make report (quoth Fame)
               Of halfe his golden giftes:
               Except that Tullie were thy name,
               Thy pen were put to ſhiftes:
               Go to therfore, and write (ſayd ſhe)
               And I therewith abroad will flée:
               And euery eare, of him ſhall heare,
               That neuer yet did chaunge:
               But ſure as rocke, and all his ſtocke,
               And that is onely Straunge.
            
            
               He loueth men, much more then ſhéepe,
               That ſome doe moſt delite:
               He pities people poore that wéepe,
               When wrong hath wrought them ſpite:
               He gently heares their gréeued cauſes,
               And doth with iuſtice vſe the lawes:
               By force he wayes no wight with power,
               Nor mynde, with winde doth chaunge:
               As many doe this preſente houre,
               But now that is not ſtraunge.
            
            
               Not markes and pounds, but hawkes and hounds,
               Is euer his deſire:
               He layes not gether poores mens grounds,
               
                  He is no countrey ſtroyer:
               He liues in loue, of rich and poore,
               Sufficient he doth call his ſtore:
               Full well knowes he, that men muſt dye,
               And therefore will not chaunge:
               But liues content, with auncient rent,
               Which argues to be Straunge.
            
            
               Thus did I write, and Fame indite,
               Me thought that preſent tyme:
               For in the ſenſe, I had delite,
               To ſtudie euery line:
               Loe this in ſléepe, me thought I heard,
               Of Fame, which bad me take regard:
               With painefull pen, to tell all men,
               That it might neuer chaunge:
               Then out of ſight, ſhe tooke her flight,
               And bad me thinke of Straunge.
            
            
               Then wakened I, with wéeping eyes,
               To call my Dreame to mynde:
               Becauſe I ſee, ſuch men as theſe,
               In England hard to finde:
               Alas therefore, what ſhould I ſay,
               It is the cauſe poore men decay:
               Vice taketh place, for want of grace,
               So many loue to chaunge:
               Thus haue I pen'd, and alſo end,
               My Dreame of Noble Straunge.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Verſes penned vpon the Etimologie of the Name and Title of the right vvorſhipfull Lady, the Lady Iulian Holcraft of the Vale Royall.
            
               THe head which ſtill with ſtudie is oppreſt,
               Of force muſt finde, ſome way to eaſe the ſame:
               All trauellers muſt haue a tyme to reſt,
               Or els their limmes, with wandring wilbe lame:
               So I a weary ſitting at my booke,
               Into the fieldes to walke the way I tooke.
            
            
               High on a hill to mount I did delite,
               To view a Royall Vale, that was below:
               Where riuers run, with ſtreams as chriſtall white,
               And pleaſant woods, about the ſame did ſhow:
               Wherein did bounſe the Buck, with Hart, & Hynd,
               The Faulconer ther for hawkes, may paſtime finde.
            
            
               Eche ſpray was ſprouted out with buds,
               Vpon the which Merula ſingeth ſwéet:
               The Ro Bucke roreth in the ſhrubs,
               The fertill medowes, taſt of flowers ſwéet:
               Which vapurs did perfume the ſtarry ſkyes,
               That from this vale ſo Royally doth riſe.
            
            
               Loe thus bewrapt in viewing this proſpect,
               The ſight I ſee, my ſenſe ſo ouer threw:
               The chriſtall ſtreames, my eyes had ſo reflect,
               The ioy thereof my iudgement ouerthrew:
               That downe I ſate to ſtudie at the ſame,
               Till Morpheus had my drowſie head ore' tane.
            
            
               And thus a ſléepe to me approched neare,
               A gallant Dame, preſenting great renowme:
               Which ſayd ariſe thou ſlugg, why ſléep'ſt thou here.
               
                  Come goe with me, where thou ſhalt haue a roome:
               I looked vp and did Melponia ſée,
               I roſe and crau'd, her pardon on my knée.
            
            
               Doubtles (quoth he) at Helicon thou art,
               (Recorded thée) where thou ſhalt ſtill remayne:
               But yet moe counſell take before we part,
               In haſt prepare, thy pen for to proclayme
               The vertuous life, a Lady leadeth here,
               As dayly ſhall by iuſte reporte appeare.
            
            
               In laſting letters, pen this Saras gift,
               Whoſe mildnes may full well Rebecca teach:
               And Rachels vertues, all would put to ſhift,
               The ſteps ſhe treades no lyuing wight can rech:
               From blooming youth, vnto theſe preſent dayes,
               Of Alceſt, ſhe: doth iuſtly beare the kayes.
            
            
               In heart ſo méeke with ſpotles thought is ſhe,
               That wordes in waſt, be baniſht from her breſt:
               No idle looke once glanceth from her eyes,
               The poore mans plaints, to heare her eares are preſt:
               Her liberall hand, doth hungry belly fill,
               Who wants her helpe, ſhe is their comfort ſtill.
            
            
               Vnto her frend, as ſure, as marble rocke,
               To foe not yelding, but as reaſon will▪
               
               Of ſ
                     •
                  eaches ſhe, both beares the key and locke,
               In (tyme) to vſe all things, ſhe hath the ſkill:
               In iudgement ſhe can play Apollos part,
               A Goddeſſe ſhe might be, for lerned art.
            
            
               Liue ſhe doth, in loue of rich and poore,
               Her race ſo rarely run, hath not bene knowen:
               Her lampe of light, thus burneth euermore,
               With newes thereof, loe Fame her trump hath blowen,
               
                  At Heſpias, in chaire of ſtate this Dame
               Hath chéefeſt place, for to aduance her name.
            
            
               In worldly ſtormes ſhe beares her ſailes ſo well,
               No ſuddaine blaſt can worke her any wracke,
               From out her preſence vice ſhe doth expell,
               And Vertue yet would neuer ſée him lacke:
               Her iuſt deſerued praiſe ſhée doth not ſéeke,
               She is ſo humble, and lowly in her ſprite.
            
            
               And to the ſtranger ſtill ſhe hath regard,
               To ſhowe ſuch courteſie as worſhip craues:
               Her neighbors cauſe with her is euer heard,
               Lo thus this Lady ſtill her ſelfe behaues.
               She beares no minde that ſoreth in the ſkie,
               Nor yet too lowe ſhe lifteth not to flie.
            
            
               Not cankered Enuie can theſe words deny,
               If Spite ſhould ſpeake, he muſt declare the ſame:
               For Vertue vaunts her name into the ſkie,
               With golden Trumpet, ſounded vp by Fame,
               Would God therefore her daies ſhould euer laſt▪
               
               Then might a number think their ſorrowes paſt.
            
            
               Her bloſſomes bréede the fruites of noble ſtate,
               Whoſe taſt doth comfort rich and poore theſe daies
               By Natures works, of God theſe giftes they gat
                     •
                  
               
               That euery wight ſhould iuſtly ſpeak her praiſe:
               At Helicon the Muſes do delight:
               With golden pen this Ladies life to write.
            
            
               Of many vertues moe: I could declare,
               To occupie thy pen, if Tully were thy name:
               That wanting Tyme I am compeld to ſpare,
               Behold Sir Phoebus doth confeſſe the ſame:
               For now he batheth in the Occean Sea,
               
                  Which is the cauſe I muſt depart away.
            
            
               Looke now therefore, thy pen doe witneſſe beare,
               
                  Melpomen ſaid, for ſo thy duetie is:
               And make report what thou of me doeſt heare,
               And tell the world that I commaund thée this.
               For Iuſtice euermore hath this regard,
               That euery creature reape their due reward,
            
            
               Doubt neither friend nor foe to ſpeak a trueth▪
               
               Conſider thou art bound by duetie much.
               Remember Time will bring all things to prooffe,
               And ſith it doth thus much thy credite touch,
               For to diſcharge thy ſelfe from bearing blame,
               Thy pen I wiſh to write vpon this Dame.
            
            
               And with theſe wordes ſhe vaniſhed away,
               And I did wake foorth of this pleaſant dreame,
               The night was come, and baniſht was the day,
               The cloudes obſcur'd Dianas face with raine.
               Then to my ſtudie ſtraight I did prepare,
               This Ladies words Melpomen to declare.
            
            
               Theſe are the newes, and all the newes I haue,
               God ſend good newes this yeare, and euermore.
               Our noble Queene the euerlaſting ſaue,
               And God increaſe your Ladiſhip with ſtore,
               God bleſſe my Lady Counteſſe, and her birth,
               Her honor, and your worſhip long life with ioy & mirth.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Verſes penned vpon the Etimologie of the name of the right Woſhipfull, Sir Edmond Traffard, of Traffard, in the County of Lancaſter, Knight.
            
               SVch was my hap of late to walk, the lofty hils to view,
               For to reuiue my weary wits, which ſtudie ouerthrew:
               And forth I paſt from high to higher, and ſo to th'height of all,
               Where viewing of the countrey round, at length to mind did call
               The wonders great, and workes of God: when all a Caos was,
               And lapped vp vpon a lumpe, as hard as beaten braſſe,
            
            
               In muſing at thoſe daies and theſe, my fleſh began to quake,
               To call to minde the wretched waies, that worldly men do take:
               And as I drowned was in dumps, came Morpheus with his mace,
               So that my ſences did obey, and yéelded to his grace.
               No ſooner thus aſléep, but ſtraight in drowſie dreame I ſée
               A Lady ſwifter then the wind, call'd Time approching nie.
            
            
               Riſe and awake (quoth ſhe) to me, why ſléep'ſt thou on this hill?
               The wordes I ſpeake I charge thée ſtraight, record with painfull quill.
               Then did ſhe ſhake a razor ſharpe, and with a frowning face,
               And thretning ſpeach, ſhe ſaid the world ſhold ſuddainly giue place
               For I am Time which executes the ſecrete will of God,
               In euery age of wickedneſſe, by Time they féele the rod.
            
            
               Els had not flouds ore'flowed the world, for vgly ſinfull vice,
               If Time had not bin preſent ther, which cauſ'd thē play their prize
               I Time ſhipt Noah into the Arke, and all the charge he had,
               And I was ſhe firſt foūd him and by doues, which made him glad
               Lo thus at firſt and euer ſince vnto this preſent houre,
               By Time were builded Cities great with many a loftie tower.
            
            
               Down haue I caſt thē all againe, olde walles doe mencion make,
               And Cities now, & buildings braue, I (Time) ſhal cauſe to quake.
               Although the bragging Worldling raiſe his houſe into the aire.
               
                  I Time will vaniſh al away, as no ſuch thing were there▪
               
               My blade is whet, I wait but when to vſe the mortall edge:
               On whom I light, my order is to haue the life in pledge:
            
            
               My ſiſter Atrapos, the Poets do faine the fatall Dame,
               Who can doe nothing wanting Time, ſhée doth vſurpe my name:
               Ne Lachices, nor Clotho can the diſtaffe dreſſe at all,
               But when that I doe point the Time, they come when I doe cal:
               So that I Time doe beare record from firſt vnto the laſt,
               Of preſent daies, of daies to come, and daies that now are paſt:
            
            
               Of yong and olde, of rich and poore, the vertue Time doth prooue,
               On whom to waite, both king and Prince, and all eſtates behooue:
               No ſtate can ſtart by night or day, that Time can not eſpie,
               Nor ſecret ſhift ſo cloſely lapt, but Time the trueth ſhall trie:
               I Time therefore am come to thée, of wonders great to tell,
               Therefore it ſtands thée much vpon, to vſe thy pen as well.
            
            
               Doubt not to write, what I declare, nor feare not who ſhall ſée
               What drops fall from thy painfull pen, but beare thy ſelfe by me:
               For lo (ſaid Time) the fire burnes that Mars hath ſet on fire,
               See now his cruell mortall blade, that blood doth ſtill deſire:
               The fearfull ſkrikes of innocents, from far doeſt thou not heare▪
               
               Remedileſſe (alas) they crie, and die in deepe diſpaire.
            
            
               And now behold how hūger haunts with chéeks both pale & leane,
               This bloudy butcher, furious Mars, and all his wicked traine:
               And greedy ſpoile, ſpares not to ſpill, to pray on others good,
               Rauening Rape with maid and wife runs headlong to the wood.
               For Fauor flies, and force takes place, and vice doth vertue kill,
               Fained Friendſhip now layes on lurtch, his faithful friend to ſpil.
            
            
               And Shift in ſhackles now inuents to kick againſt the ſpur,
               And yet Diſſembling euery day, lies coutching like a cur:
               Reuenge is feeing of his friends, in hope to haue a day,
               But ſée where Iuſtice is at hand, his guerdon for to pay.
               
                  Death doth prouide dame Peſtilence, to worke the later woe,
               Likewiſe deſtruction, with his frends, doe wiſh it to be ſo.
            
            
               Know this (ſayd ſhe) moe plagues then theſe are 
                     •••
                  ming neare at hand,
               No creature liuing but ſhall féele, the ſame on ſea and land:
               In top of all their worldly truſt, ſhall come the wofull newes,
               Great terror in the hearts of mē, whē God theſe whips ſhall vſe:
               Time ſhal try all, this is moſt true: the Scripture ſaith the ſame,
               Therfore I charge thée ſend abroad, theſe ſayings in my name.
            
            
               Now riſe (quoth ſhe) and turne thy face towards the Occean ſea,
               A triple foorded riuer ſhall, direct thy ready way:
               Where thou ſhalt finde Antiquitie, the maker of the place,
               Whoſe name hath bene Tyme out of mynde, before the conqueſt was:
               Thus ſodenly ſhe tooke her flight, and vaniſhed away,
               And I in trembling feare did wake, not knowing what to ſay.
            
            
               Sith dreames be vayne, of Poets pennes, and Fables of delite,
               So doe I pray, that all proue falſe, that heare I did indite:
               Beſéeching God with Neſtors age, your worſhip may increaſe,
               With health, and wealth, and Newe yeares ioy, and ſo my pen doth ſeaſe.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Verſes penned vpon the Etimologie of the name of the right vvorſhipfull Maiſter Peter Leigh, heire apparant to the valiaunt Gentleman▪ Sir▪ Peter Leigh, of the linne, Knight.
            
               PEruſing auncient bookes of late,
               I founde a ſtorie ſtraunge:
               Which told me that, the earthly ſtate,
               Should haue a ſoden chaunge:
               
                  And all that is, ſhould nothing bée,
               Whereat I muſed maruellouſlye.
            
            
               Erſte neuer was my barren brayne,
               So ſodenly be rapt:
               For to perceiue that all was vayne,
               I thought it great miſhap:
               Sith once I thought the world ſhould laſt,
               To heare deſtruction, made me baſht.
            
            
               Thus as I muſed at the ſame,
               My wearie wittes, with ſtudie toild:
               By Morpheus, meanes a ſléepe did frame,
               Leaſt Naturs gifts, ſhould haue bene ſpoild:
               But as I ſlept, a dreame full rare,
               I had, which gréeues me to declare.
            
            
               Enuironde round about was I,
               From loftie ſkyes, with golden gleymes:
               Wherein I ſaw, a Goddes flye:
               Thriſe ſwifter then Syr Neptuns ſtreames,
               A razour in her hand ſhe bare:
               And fiercely did theſe wordes declare.
            
            
               Remember well (quoth ſhe) to mée,
               Make ready pen, and inck, to write:
               The wordes that now I ſpeake to thée,
               Sith that I know, thou can indite:
               Tyme is my name, young once I was,
               Though now, I weare and waſt alas.
            
            
               Loe I am ſhe that preſent was,
               When Heauen, Earth, and Seas were made:
               From age, to age, what came to paſſe,
               Vnto this houre I know the trade:
               Although that worldlings Tyme forget,
               
                  Yet to accompts I call their det.
            
            
               Els thoſe that fléete, and flow in wealth,
               Would quite deuour the poorer ſorte:
               Sith might alwayes forgets himſelfe,
               And makes of wrong a common ſport:
               I Tyme therfore this bloudy knife,
               Doe beare vnwares, to ſhut their life.
            
            
               In Tyme that's paſt, what Cities great,
               Whoſe walles, and towers ſcald the ſkyes:
               Were mounted vp, to be the ſeat,
               For earthly Gods, this Scripture tryes:
               Which lyeth now layd loe with ſoyle,
               And who but Tyme, that made the ſpoyle.
            
            
               Great caſtles to defend the foe,
               With walles of force, long ſith were built:
               Their towers torne, doth plainly ſhoe,
               That Tyme compeld them for to yeld:
               Whoſe ruine doth theſe dayes declare,
               That Tyme bids euery man prepare.
            
            
               Haue I not bene, the cauſe (quoth Tyme)
               That euery man theſe dayes doth build:
               Whoſe pride therein, ſo farre doth ſhyne,
               That all the poore thereby are ſpild:
               But as their goodes, is now their God,
               I Tyme therefore, ſhall bring a rod.
            
            
               Erſte ſuch a whippe as I ſhall bring,
               From mightie loue, was neuer féel'd:
               I all their buildings downe will fling,
               To flée themſelues, ſhalbe compeld:
               The ſword ſhall vengeance take for ſinnes,
               And thoſe ſhall loſe, theſe dayes that winnes.
            
            
               
               So that if Ouid were aliue,
               The Metaphor would paſſe his pen:
               The father, and the ſonne, ſhall ſtriue,
               And ſharpe reuenge conſume all men.
               The Tenaunt ſhall his Landlord hate,
               And neighbours be at great debate.
            
            
               So Loue, and Charitie, ſhall waſt▪
               
               Pride, and Enuie, ſhall increaſe:
               And pure chaſtitie, diſplaſt,
               But whoredome, he ſhall neuer ſeace:
               And Vſurie, ſhall fill his baggs,
               While poore Tromtroth doth walke in raggs.
            
            
               Quit voide of grace (quoth Tyme) I ſée,
               The greateſt number, at this day:
               For Symon Magus, ſubtilly,
               By cloaked craft, can catch his pray:
               The world runs headlong after gayne,
               Whoſe pleaſure Tyme ſhall turne to payne:
            
            
               Vndoubtedly this raſour ſharpe,
               (quoth Tyme) ſhall preſently diſpatch:
               Yet none ſhall know, when to depart,
               No where, nor when, I make the match:
               But ſodenly the thréed I cut,
               Thus wordly ioyes, by me are ſhut.
            
            
               You ſée (quoth Tyme) the alteration,
               You ſée, how lucar leades the way:
               You ſée, theſe dayes, abhomination,
               By errour, faith you ſée decay
               By bribes, true iuſtice blinded is,
               By following will, ſome wade amiſſe.
            
            
               
                  Edelſ
                        •
                     a now, deceiueth vs,
               
                  By outward ſignes and alſo ſhoe,
               Faire wordes be framed marueilous,
               To worke the hearers griefe and woe.
               But now ſaid Time, the day's at hand,
               All things ſhall waſt on ſea and land:
            
            
               Reuenge from ſkies with fiery flames,
               Shall now at hand deuour and waſt
               All mortall men vnto their ſhames,
               Except where grace and vertue's plaſt.
               Thoſe that beléeue, and God doe feare,
               As Angels then ſhall ſtraight apeare.
            
            
               And with theſe wordes ſhe tooke her flight,
               And bad me boldly write the ſame:
               When Time was gone I was afright,
               For all the world me thought did flame:
               With Thunder then the earth did quake,
               Which wofull thing did cauſe me wake.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Verſes penned vpon the Etimoligie of the name of the right worſhipful, M. Thomas Leigh of Adlington, in the Countie of Cheſter, Eſquire: purporting the nature of Time.
            
               THe thorny thumps that Thought did thacke within my wofull breaſt
               Had pincht me ſo, that Naturue crau'd for help to purchaſe reſt.
               Of ſtudious works I weary was, into the fieldes I fled:
               My purpoſe was by wholſome aire, for to refreſh my head.
               And as I wandred vp and downe, vnder a buſh I ſate,
               Some ſecrete thing me thought that time, came in my painful pate.
            
            
               
               Lo thus at laſt with muſing much, a ſléepe came in my eie,
               Erſt neuer ſuch a dreame I had, nor thing ſo ſtrange did ſée
               I ſaw a Lady called Time, which flew as ſwift as winde,
               Geue eare (quoth ſhe) for preſently I will expreſſe my mind.
               Haue care vnto my ſpeech (ſaid ſhe) and mark my ſayings well:
            
            
               Els out of wiſdomes worthy waies I muſt thy wits expell.
               See here the wings wherwith I fly, behold the knife I beare.
               Sée here the preſent ſpeed I make: yet Time no man doth feare.
               Quite void of care I ſée the world, they mount with Icarus now,
               Vndoubtedly ſo that they gaine, to get they care not how.
               Yet I Daine Time will call to count the ſtouteſt of them all,
               And giue vnto the loftieſt mind, a troubleſome tombling fall.
               Remember Time began all thinges, at firſt when all was made,
            
            
               Time at the laſt ſhall cauſe againe al thinges to waſt and fade.
               Haue I not caſt Ieruſalem vnto the ſlymy ſoyle?
               Of worldly welth I make but duſt, though worldlings daily toile
               My nature is as I began, ſo for to make an end,
               And cauſe in time both quick and dead both for to bow and bend.
               Such is my nature, that I muſt make tryal of all trueth,
            
            
               Looke from the firſt vnto the laſt, let ancient bookes be prooffe.
               Erected I haue Cities great, ſo haue I Caſtles ſtrong,
               In euery part of all the world, theſe buildings lie along.
               Great is my force, let Scripture iudge, which ſaith al things ſhal waſt,
               How can the greateſt kingdome then eſcape my force at laſt.
            
            
               Els worldlings wold ſtill brag and beſt vpon their good and land.
               So I dame Time ſhould haue the tant which haue thē in my hand
               Such buildings now be mounted vp by ſuch as feare no fall,
               Quite void of care the builders be, to leaue the ſame at all,
               Vntill I Time with razor ſharpe, do cut their vital thred.
               I ſée there is not any now, the latter day doth dread.
               Eſtéeme they doe their goods and lands, and Time to come forget
               
                  Remēbring not that Time at laſt ſhall cauſe them pay their det.
            
            
               Mark but how hours waſteth daies, and daies the wéeks deuoure
               And wéekes conſume meneths you ſee by prooued proofs ech houre.
               And moneths do ſwallow vp the yeare, & years do conſume men.
               Al this doth chance by me dame Time, yet who knows where or when?
               And with this ſpeach ſhe took her flight, and bad me take my penne.
               For to record the words ſhe ſpake, and publiſh to al men:
               But when I ſaw that Time was paſt, alas ſhe gréeu'd me ſore:
               That I in Time did not take Time, I dayly wéepe therefore,
               Thus haue you hearde my drowſie dreame, though Time be gone, and fled,
               And I her ſayings ſtill record within my heart and head.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            A Pſalme pend vpon the Etimologie of the name of the right Worſhipfull, Thomas Leigh of Adlington, in the Countie of Cheſter, Eſquire: To the note or tune of, Domine ne in furore. Pſalme. VI.
            
               
                  THy mercie Lord, my faith perſwades,
               although my ſinnes be red:
               How I ſhall be made frée to thée:
               by Chriſtes blood that's ſhed.
               Of all my wandring wilfull dayes
               and rechleſſe rudefull toyes:
               My faithfull hope is for to mount,
               to thee in laſting ioyes.
               And as I wickedly did ſinne,
               I faithfully repent:
               Such is thy mercie that I knowe,
               my teares ſhall thée content.
            
            
               
               Loe heare my teares the witneſſe is,
               my ſin doth grieue me fore:
               Eſtéeme O Lord my wofull plaintes,
               I truſt t'offend no more.
               In thée my onely hope remaines,
               on thée is all my ſtay:
               Geue eare vnto my wofull cries,
               when I ſhall paſſe away.
               Haue minde vpon thy mercy Lord,
               forget thy wrath and yre,
               Erect my Spirite into thy bliſſe,
               I humbly thée deſire.
            
            
               Els all my teares and grieuous plaintes
               returne without rewarde:
               So ſhall I weare, and waſt in woe,
               my cries ſhall not be heard:
               Séeme not therefore to turne thy face,
               accept my wofull ſuite:
               Quit me from Sathans nets and ſnares,
               his traps good Lord confute.
               Vnto thy Maieſty O Lord,
               I dedicate my ſelfe:
               Yéeld I doe my ſoule to thee,
               and leaue the world my wealth.
               Accept thereof, thou glorious God,
               thus ſtill on thée I crie:
               Reuenge not Lord, but mercie haue,
               and neuer let me die.
            
            
               All glory be vnto thy name:
               and to thy onely ſonne:
               And to the holy Ghoſt, with whom
               to vs thy kingdome come.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Verſes penned vpon the Etimologie of the name of the right worſhipfull Lady, the Ladie Marie Edgarton of Ridley, in the Countie of Cheſter.
            
               THe toyled minde and weary wit that ſtudy doth oppreſſe,
               Nature mooueth many waies, the ſame for to redreſſe:
               Which cauſed me to leaue my booke, my ſences to reuiue,
               And wandring, walked heare and there, the time away to driue.
            
            
               High vp a hill with wearie ſteps, the haughtie rockes I ſcal'd,
               Among the which I heard a voice, that ſore my heart appald:
               Among the ſhrubs I ſhrouded was, where in a trance I ſate,
               Or els ſome drouſie dreame it was, that then and there I gate.
            
            
               Erſt was I neuer in the like, for there me thought I ſée,
               An armed man with bloody blade with ſpéed approched ny:
               His face as fierce as flames of fire, his hands imbrewd in blood:
               And like a Lion in his rage, before me ſtamping ſtood.
            
            
               Lo here (quoth he) my name is Mars, that am the bloody God,
               The gleids that glow within my breaſt, bréeds miſchéefe al abrode
               Kings and kingdomes by the ears I dayly vſe to ſet,
               Murther is the thing I craue, and peace I ſtill forget.
            
            
               And now (ſaid he) pull foorth thy pen, and write my ſayings all,
               For preſently a wonder great, appeare before thée ſhall:
               Se here (quoth he) Megera comes with crawling ſnaky haire,
               Lo in the boſomes of the beſt, ſhe throwes them here and there.
            
            
               Doſt thou not ſée what wrath ſhe works, that lurketh cloſe in breſt
               And doeſt not view what kingdomes I to mortall war haue dreſt
               The Meſſenger I am (quoth he) that Iupiter doth ſend,
               to execute his wrath on ſuch, that doe his Grace offend.
            
            
               In vttering of theſe words to me, far of I did heholde,
               
                  How Spoile was cōming & his mates with al the ſpéed they could
               Whereat the ſkrikes of innocents, with wiues & virgins cries.
               And grieuous groues of murthered men did pierce the ſtarry ſkies
            
            
               My fleſh did tremble at the ſight, to ſée the Flames of fire,
               The rubbery both of rich and poore, Diſtruction did deſire,
               And vgly monſtrous Rauiſhment defilde both maid and wife,
               The worldly Muckſcraps for their goods did daily looſe their life.
            
            
               And then came deſperation poſt, to put the reſt in feare,
               And grudging Griefe and future foes, cauſe many to diſpaire,
               Yea Hunger haunted armour bright, with cheeks both pale & lean
               And pierceth through the ſturdy ſtéele, and wrought a mortal pain
            
            
               Reuenge as gréedy as a gripe, made hauocke where he came,
               Diſtruction with his naked blade diſtroyed many a man:
               Dearth was lodg'd in euery houſe, and kept both land and ſeas,
               And almoſt all both olde and young bewaild the wofull daies.
            
            
               In all thys hurlyburly there, Loue ſhrank his Neighbours all,
               And charitie was chac'd away. Pride ſlipt and had a fall:
               Myrth in euery nooke did mourne, and pleaſure pained ſore,
               Tom Troth was ſworne for to depart the place for euermore.
            
            
               Enuiron'd round about was peace with bloody men of of war:
               Of Charity obſcured was the blazing lampe and ſtar,
               And Peſtilence as fier red, the ſtouteſt cauſ'd to ſtoope,
               That Lamentation wrang his handes the countrey round about,
            
            
               Death was the laſt that laid on lurtch, the finall end to make:
               and for a brag, his bloody dart about his head did ſhake:
               (quoth he) behold, theſe miſchieue mates that on S. Mors attend,
               Gainſt whom no creature can preuale, til I diſpatth their end.
            
            
               Great were the brags that Mars did make, and fierce his fury was
               and ſware an oth with preſent ſpéed all this ſhould come to paſſe:
               
                  Then did he turne himſelfe about, and Albion Iſle he thrate,
               Which was of Mars no ſooner ſaid, but forraine foes heard that:
            
            
               Els had I ſlept a longer ſléepe vpon that haughty hill.
               But that the roring Cannons voice me thought was thūping ſtil
               And noyſe of armed men was ſuch, that (alfright) I wakte,
               Thus raſhly ruſhing vp for feare, from thence my way did take,
            
            
               Refuſing neither hedge nor ditch, nor ſparing thick nor thyn,
               No ſtep ſo foule my ſpéedy féete made ſpare to ſtep within:
               Thus runninng raſhly in this race, with panting brethles breath,
               I reſted by a pleaſant poole, faſt by a litle heath.
            
            
               Thus reuoluing with my ſelfe what were the beſt to doo,
               Whether to tell this dreame or no, ſith dreames be call'd vntrue:
               Which maz'd my mind with triple trance what way were beſt to take,
               This dream for to reueile, or els to dround in Lethea lake
            
            
               Of th'one and th'other being baſht: the liklieſt way to chuſe,
               At length thought good to pen my dreame, in ſtéed of better newes
               Beſéeching God to bleſſe this Iſle from Mars and all his mates,
               And graunt vs peace. God ſaue our Quéene and al the noble ſtates
            
            
               No other newes for this new yeare I can your worſhip tell,
               But that I truſt in ſpite of Mars that all things ſhall be well.
               Beſéeching God that ſits to iudge, to guyde your dayes in peace,
               With health, long life, and ioyfull years, and worſhip to increaſe.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Verſes penned vpon the Etimologie of the name of the right Worſhipful. M. Peter Warberton of Arley, in the Countie of Cheſter, Eſquire.
            
               PRepare a place aboue the ſkies,
               Where Angels reſt in ioy:
               Out of all mundane thoughts ariſe,
               Which workes the ſoules annoy,
               Of Time watch well the ſtealing ſteps,
               Take heed of youth that age forgets,
               All thinges haue time, by power deuine,
               And Time conſumeth all,
               She hath cut off the mightieſt kinges,
               And ſo the reſt ſhe ſhall.
            
            
               Emperour, King and Kaiſar she
               Doth mount vpon the ſtage,
               And all that ſhall aduaunced be,
               Time raiſeth in ech age.
               So Time diſmountes them all againe.
               Some from great ioy, to ſhame and paine,
               Thus rich and poore ſhe euermore
               Cuts off both great and ſmall:
               The Captaine ſtout and all his rout
               Shée ſpoyles, and euer ſhall.
            
            
               Therefore watch well, this haſtie Dame,
               That makes thys mortall ſpéede:
               As all our Parents felt the ſame,
               With vs ſhe will procéede:
               Time flies apace ſhe taries not,
               She grantes no grace if men forgot,
               At firſt ſhe is as ſugar ſweete,
               But ends like bitter gall,
               Let Worldlinges watch that be aſleepe,
               For Time no doubt they ſhall.
            
            
               
               Remember Tyme, built Cities great,
               Which now is wildernes:
               With many a coſtly and ſtately feat,
               That now conſumed is:
               And Tyme, theſe dayes builds many hours,
               Which ſhall in Tyme, be none of ours:
               For as the ſeas, doth ebbe and floe,
               So Tyme doth with vs all:
               Now chuſe who thinks of Tyme or noe,
               All thinges conſume ſhe ſhall.
            
            
               Who marketh Tyme, in theſe our dayes,
               Her workes be wondrous ſtraunge:
               For thoſe that erſte did beare the keyes,
               By Tyme doth office chaunge:
               And from the hall, to kitchin comes,
               And at the length, bide fortuns domes:
               As captiue ſtand, to hold vp hand,
               To liue or dye at all:
               Who can preuaile: when Tyme doth deale,
               Which will conſume and ſhall.
            
            
               And doth not Tyme make infants ſtrong,
               Of young and tender age:
               When ſix and thirtie yeare hath ſprong,
               Theſe luſtie blouds on ſtage:
               Marke Tyme when all this race is run,
               Vnlooked for croukt age doth come:
               And by no meanes but onely Tyme,
               Therfore lets watch her all:
               Sith downe ſhe caſteth, ſuch as clyme,
               And euermore ſhe ſhall.
            
            
               Right thus of age, Tyme maketh duſt,
               And ſo ſhe doth of youth:
               And Tyme ſtill tryes, all things that's iuſt,
               
                  And brings vs all to prooffe:
               And Tyme ſhall at the later day,
               The filthy factes of men bewray:
               Not ſparing one, nor leauing now,
               But to accompts bring all:
               And thus hath ſhe perſwaded mée,
               She doth and euer ſhall.
            
            
               Els could not now, the world be old,
               Which at the firſt was young:
               For Tyme, her ſelfe now waxeth cold,
               Her limmes be not ſo ſtrong:
               As in her firſt beginning ſhe▪
               
               Nor halfe of Nature francke and frée:
               Her loftie lookes, I read in bookes,
               Beginneth for to fall:
               Her galland cheare, begins to weare,
               Yet she ſhall end vs all.
            
            
               Remember then all thinges begun,
               Muſt haue an end at laſt:
               For when the vitall, thréed is ſpun,
               The mortall knife makes haſt:
               For Attropos doth tend on Tyme,
               As wayting mayde by power diuine:
               Vnlooked for, or men be ware,
               She breakes both heart and gall:
               And when ſhe ſmiles ſhe worketh wiles,
               For to conſume vs all,
            
            
               Thus trudgeth Tyme and tarrieth not,
               To tend vpon her pray:
               And layes her ſnares, in the euery plot,
               To twitch all ſtates away:
               Therefore iudge if the world be vayne,
               That gréedy gapeth, ſtill for gayne.
               
                  One brother ſelleth now an other,
               And worldly wealth rules all:
               But Tyme doth watch, for to diſpatch,
               For ſo at length ſhe ſhall.
            
            
               Of this beware, and marke it well,
               For Tyme, is now at hand:
               That Tyme all pleaſures ſhall expell,
               Aſwell by ſea as land:
               Not one but all, ſhall taſt of woe,
               Of very force, it muſt be ſoe:
               Els ſinne, would ſincke, and vice would drinke,
               The workes of vertue all:
               So Tyme conſumes▪ thoſe that preſumes,
               Loe thus ſhe doth and ſhall.
            
            
               Such is the force of Tyme ye ſée,
               Such is the ende of all:
               Here may we ſée that vanitie,
               Doth worke our mortall thrall:
               Quite now your ſelues, from worldly mucke,
               Leaſt Tyme vnlookt your liues to plucke:
               Vndoubtedly in Tyme fore ſée,
               To win the way to reſt:
               And helpe the poore, which is the ſtore,
               For which God thinkes you bleſt.
            
            
               If Tyme cut of, all liuing thinges,
               And ſtill bringes all to nought:
               And ſhall to iudgement bring the kinges,
               Aſwell for déede, as thought:
               Then let the meaner ſtats take héed,
               To watch and pray with preſent ſpéed:
               Els in the ſnares, of Tyme vnwares,
               We muſt to iudgement all:
               
                  Remember this, great néede it is,
               For Tyme conſume vs ſhall.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Verſes penned vpon the Etimologie of the name of the right vvorſhipfull George Brereton of Aſhly in the Countie of Cheſter Eſquyre.
            
               GRace growes and ſprings, where vertue vaunts her ſelfe,
               Els wicked men, would ſwallow all by wealth:
               On euery man, God doth his gifts beſtow,
               Regarding moſt where vertue ſéemes to grow:
               Great is his mercy to vs euery hower,
               Els how could Dauid, conquere Saules great power.
            
            
               Beware therefore, of Mydas wicked mynde,
               Refuſe the world, whoſe pleaſures men doth blind:
               Erect thy ſteps, in grace and vertues pathe,
               Remember that in wiſedomes well thou bath:
               Eſtéeme no wretch, whoſe tongue ſhal paint or gloze,
               There pick-thanke pranks, ſhall but thy worſhip loſe:
               Of friendes to come, it's vaine to hope too much,
               Nor preſent friendes, their frendſhip greatly tutch.
            
            
               Enter not where doubtes are of returne,
               So néedes not care, though after claps doe ſpurne:
               Such wiſedome warely, ſhall prouide thy way,
               Quite from the ſnares, that ſhould thy ſtate decay:
               Vnto the poore ſtretch out thy ſtretched hand,
               In Princes cauſe, looke faithfully thou ſtand:
               And pitie ſtill where power hath oppreſt,
               Remember this, and men ſhall thinke thée bleſt.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Verſes vpon Ieffrey Shackarley of Holme and Shackarley, Eſquyer.
            
               IN preſent bliſſe, watch warely future harmes,
               Els Sirces ſhall bewitch thée, with her charmes:
               Flye from the ſteps, of ſuch as feare not God,
               For els offenders iuſtly féel his rod:
               Regard that man, that plainly telleth truth,
               And baniſh thoſe, that fabling flatterie ſooth,
               Yeld curteſie to them that gentle are.
            
            
               So Truth thy worſhip, ſhall abroad declare,
               Haue no regard to lend thy eares to ſuch:
               As ſhall with lyes true faithfull meaning touch,
               Condemne no man, till thou his aunſwere heare:
               Know this by Scripture, iuſtice hath no peare,
               Conſider patience proueth, vertues mynde:
               And worſhip worketh euer after kinde,
               Remember them, that craue for Chriſtes ſake:
               Leaſt God his gifts, away from thée ſhall take,
               Endure firme in ſayth, obſeruing law,
               Yeld to thy Prince, a iuſt obedient awe.
            
            
               Doe thus and ſo, the golden trumpe of Fame,
               By true report, ſhall iuſtly ſay the ſame.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Verſes vpon Maiſter Hugh Sharkerly, the ſonne and heire of the ſayd Ieffray, Eſquyer.
            
               HAue patience preſent, when wrath would wreke his will,
               Els wiſedome wants, that guideth men from ill:
               When youthfull royes, would raſhly rule the rayne,
               Geue eare to age, who tels that all is vayne:
               Haue care to watch the world and feare no foe.
            
            
               
               So wiſedome ſhall, thy witte declare and ſhow:
               Haunt not the ſteps, where Cupid leads the way,
               And let no toung, thy counſell once bewray:
               Conceile nothyng, that duetie bids reueile,
               Know ſubiects muſt, nothing from Prince conceale:
               Conſtraine no man, not more then power is,
               And heare no picke-thanks, telling that and this▪
               
               Reach to the poore, that craue for Chriſtes ſake,
               Let reaſon rule, when will would hauocke make:
               Endure ſure as all thy ſtocke hath done,
               In doing ſo thou ſhineſt like the ſunne.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Vpon Maiſter Ieffray Shackcarley Eſquyre.
            
               IN Fortunes frendſhip watch her chaunging face,
               Els ſodenly, ſhe may diſmount the beſt:
               For thoſe that moſt, doe ſtand within her grace,
               From age to age, haue cauſe to truſt her leaſt:
               A prooffe too playne, looke whom ſhe luls in lap,
               You ſee at length, ſhe ſpoyles with ſome miſhap.
            
            
               She ſetteth ſome, on throne of ſtately ſeat,
               Higher then the reſt, on golden mounts to vaunt▪
               
               And yet at laſt, proues but a poyſoned bayt,
               Compounde with guile, the worldlings to inchaunt:
               Know this of Fortune, where ſhe ſéemes to ſmile,
               Cuſtome there doth teach her worke a wyle:
               And thoſe that in her flouds, boyſe ſayles the harte,
               Reuenging ſtill themſelues vpon their foes:
               Loe ſodenly there 
                     〈◊〉
                   fall is next,
               Entrapt with ſnares, that workes moſt wofull woes,
               You 
                     ••
                  e that Fortune, faileth none but ſuch.
            
            
               As in theſe dayes, doe truſt her ouer much.
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               Lenuoy.
               When raging flouds, of ſurging ſeas be hert,
               And Boreas blaſtes, againſt the rocks doth ruſh:
               The preſent fall, by Nature is the next,
               And quiet calmes remaines in euery buſh,
               So likewiſe ſuch, as Fortune fauoreth moſt:
               By her diſpleaſure, ſodenly is loſt.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            Verſes penned vpon the Ethimologie of the name of the right vvorſhipful Lady: The Lady Iulian Holcraft, of the Vale Royall.
            
               THe golden trump, that Fame doth ſound,
               Proclaimes to euery eare:
               Where vertue is, for to be found,
               By workes it doth appeare:
               As gold commends, the precious ſtone,
               So worſhip ſhowes, her ſelfe alone:
               As Phoebus doth excéede a ſtarre,
               So gentlenes doth ſhow:
               How can Dame Fortune mount more harre,
               Then place her darlings ſo.
            
            
               Enuie nor ſpite can not preuayle,
               Where vertue vaunts with grace:
               Old auncient wrath of force ſhall faile▪
               
               And vices ſhall geue place:
               Where worſhip worthily ſhall ſhow,
               There iuſt report, the Fame ſhall blow:
               And euery eare, ſuch newes ſhall heare,
               As due deſert doth craue:
               Loe Ladyes all, behold you ſhall,
               Who ought moſt honor haue.
            
            
               
               A Dame well deckt with modeſtie,
               As worſhip doth behoue:
               And garmentes lynde with lenitie,
               When patience list to proue:
               With ſtomachers, of pure pitie,
               And head geare, that is wiſe and wittie:
               And liberall myndes, all people binds,
               To honor ſuch 
                     〈◊〉
                   hart:
               Doe thus and then, the harts of men,
               You win in euery part.
            
            
               In ſtormes when wiſedome is the cloake,
               No blaſt can blemiſh ſuch:
               This is the way for to prouoke,
               Your Fame the ſkyes to touch:
               Vnto the poore, ſ
                     ••
                  etch out your hands,
               God ſhall your ſtore, increaſe, and lands:
               Loue them that plainly tels you true,
               And baniſh golden ſpeach:
               Pick thankes miſchief dayly brew,
               And all mens harts they ſigh.
            
            
               Yeld not, vnto a cruell foe,
               Where truth is on your ſide:
               And warely watch a friend to know,
               That ſtedfaſtly will byde:
               And where you may reuenge in déede,
               Let mercy preſently procéede:
               Nothing doth pleaſe, the Lord alwayes,
               So much as mercy ſtill:
               For mercy binds, all noble myndes,
               To ſaue and not to ſpil.
            
            
               Haue mynde that all that is begun,
               Muſt haue an ende at laſt:
               The end, no King, nor Prince, can ſhunne,
               
                  Sith Time all thinges will waſt,
               Of Time her trade you ſée it ſtill,
               Time buildeth all, and giues the fall,
               To all things quicke and dead:
               The lucky life is to be wiſht,
               The end is to be dread.
            
            
               Lo here the fruits of vertues rare,
               That in one lady is▪
               
               Conceiue the ſame, and ſtraight prepare,
               For worſhip teacheth this,
               Remember where is courteſie,
               That riſeth of gentilitie:
               Of mercie, grace and charitie,
               Comes bleſſings of the Lord.
               For if theſe want aſſuredly,
               They ſtill remaine abhorr'd.
            
            
               Beholde how vertue beares the keyes,
               That vnto bliſſe doth lead,
               A Lady liuing at theſe daies,
               Whoſe worſhip Fame doth ſpread,
               Her name I will not now expreſſe,
               Sith iuſt report doth all confeſſe.
               But as I prooued, ſo I praiſe,
               And will doe till I die,
               Her liberall hand her heart bewraies,
               Aboue the ſtarrie ſkie.
            
            
               God bleſſe her ſtill from time to time,
               From dangers, woe, and paine,
               That ſhe in worſhip ſtill may ſhine,
               And long in health remaine:
               And God protect her noble birth
               Long for to liue in ioy and mirth.
               And that their honors may increaſe,
               
                  As ſand vpon the Sea,
               And this to pray I will not ceaſe.
               But call on God God alwaies.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            The laſt Dreame that Morpheus did ſhowe vnto the Author, vvas of a Lambe, that appeared vnto him, and ſeemed as though he ſpake for the Time, by the prouidence of the Gods: as follovveth.
            
               LAſt at my booke in ſtudie where I ſate,
               My wits worne weak, my ſence was groſe and lame,
               A droſie dump began to pierce my pate,
               That in mine eie, a ſléepe began to frame:
               Which when I ſpied, yet reaſon bad me riſe,
               And ſluggiſh ſléepe alwaies for to diſpiſe.
            
            
               To ſhun that ſloothfull vice my hauke I tooke,
               I calde my Spannels, and to the field I went:
               A flight to finde, both brake and buſh I ſhooke,
               till too and fro, thrée howers full were ſpent:
               Thus wandring long, my Spannels found of game,
               And I made haſt with ſpéede to flie the ſame.
            
            
               The Partridge ſprang, my hauke fled from my fiſt,
               With open Iawes my Spanniels cried the game,
               With ſpéedy foote, no hedge nor ditch I miſt,
               Through thicke and thin I ran, to ſée the ſame.
               But out of ſight both hauke and Partridge flew,
               Till I by following, into a Deſert drew.
            
            
               And being thus in vncouth place not knowen,
               Both Hawke and Spanneils loſt and from me fled:
               And I with toylling trauell ouerthrowen,
               Dame Nature came, and thus vnto me ſayd:
               
                  Preſerue thy ſelfe (quoth ſhe) thy hawke is gone,
               And take ſome reſt, for other helpe is none.
            
            
               To whom I did obey and downe I ſat,
               Vpon a bancke and leaned to a thorne:
               And reſted there till Morpheus hit my pat,
               With his drowſie mace, & ſaid to me in ſcorne:
               Well met Faukoner, what haue you kild to day,
               Cho ho hath croken bill, her maiſter left aſtray?
            
            
               Let Hawkes and Spanels packe and follow me,
               (Quoth he) for now thou ſhalt in déede attend:
               Although thou meant, gainſt duetie from me flée,
               I pardon thée, although thou did offend:
               So many times though I haue troubled thée,
               This is the laſt, I promiſe faithfully.
            
            
               Thus like a lump or clod of clay I was,
               For why? my vitall ſprite with Morpheus went,
               For to behold what he would bring to paſſe,
               With weary ſtips to wait I was content,
               Til at the laſt a Lambe did vs approche,
               Who did thys ſentence brauely to vs broch.
            
            
               
                  Que brantare lafe, es cauſa muy fea.
               
            
            
               Which wordes made me no little for to muſe,
               To heare a Lambe in language ſtrange to ſay,
               
                  Thoſe that breake ſaith, do all the Gods abuſe,
               
               
                  And are detected at the latter day.
               
               Then ſayd this Lambe, ſith Robinſon is here,
               Before he paſſe ſome wiſdome ſhall he leare,
            
            
               Wel ſaid my Lambe (quoth Morpheus) let vs heare,
               Some ſayings graue out off Experience ſchoole:
               Sith thou his Scholler, learned many a yeare,
               
                  And hath bene Vſher for to ſée good rule,
               I pray thée now vnto my Clearke declare.
               The flatterers feats, and ſée that none thou ſpare.
            
            
               And with theſe wordes he mounted ore a hill,
               And Lambe and me left by a riuer ſide,
               Stay, ſtay (quoth Lambe) reſt here and if thou wil,
               Til of my ſpeach thou haue experience tride,
               And ſaying thus, he ſtept into his caue,
               And brought a glaſſe of Skill exeéeding braue.
            
            
               Lo here (quoth Lambe) and then began to bleit,
               And made me ſignes to looke within the glaſſe:
               Here maiſt thou ſée (ſaid he) of déepe deceit,
               The total ſum, I meane of more and leſſe.
               And by the ſame before thou paſſe ſhalt prooue,
               Who is thy friend, and who diſſembleth loue.
            
            
               I gréedily the glaſſe began to graſpe,
               Wherein I ſaw a number that I knew,
               With honnied mouths, yet natur'd like the waſpe.
               That at the length their ſtings againſt me threw
               But yet I did diſſemble all the while,
               Becauſe I would perceiue their fraude and guile.
            
            
               Then looking ſtil within thys glaſſe I ſee
               The loftie lookes of ſome that ſpake me faire,
               And in their friendſhip ſo imbraced me,
               That outwardly true meaning did appeare,
               When Morpheus Lambe perceiu'd I did thē truſt
               Take heed betime (quoth he) they are vniuſt.
            
            
               Theſe are Camallians that change to euery color
               They ſhowe like gold, but inward worſe than braſſe,
               Looke what they promiſe makes no purſe the fuller,
               As by experience proofe declares no leſſe.
               
                  Of forrein frayes they tell a bloudy tale,
               But commonly they quarrell with good ale,
            
            
               Therefore (ſayd he) truſt not an alehouſe frend,
               Beléeue them not that are accuſtomed to lye:
               A boaſting ſouldiours tale, hath neuer end,
               And flattering wordes, be falſe ſo ſhalt thou try:
               Rough trées, rough fruit, rough taſt doe beare,
               Sée vice and vertue ſhowes, in whom they doe appeare.
            
            
               And therefore truſt not the vntruſtie man,
               To doe and ſay, doth differ much ye know:
               Great difference is, twixt Orpheus ſkill and Pan,
               
               You know the ſenſe, what néede I more to ſhow:
               And therefore he, that violateth fayth,
               Is worthy as I ſayd to ſuffer death.
            
            
               Stay yet ſayd Lambe, behold more of this glaſſe,
               Sée where one bounſeth in a players gowne:
               Furde like a foole, as nice as ere ſhe was,
               The braueſt tipling tib; that is within the towne:
               While ſhe at tick tacke, tryes to proue her chaunce,
               Her huſband is content, a hornpipe for to daunce.
            
            
               She is well cuſtom'd, both with rich, and poore,
               Fye of Gentillitie, for ſhe can ſpeake no French:
               
               Which blemiſheth, her banner, and craks her credit ſore,
               And yet notwithſtanding, ſhe is a bounſing wench,
               She dayly doth vſurpe, a Gentlewomans name:
               I lift to ſpeake no more of her, for bearing blame.
            
            
               And with theſe wordes this Lambe agayne did bleyte,
               And as it ſéem'd by countenaunce morned much:
               And ſayd oh fooliſh Poliphils drowned in conceite,
               Why thinke you of your ſelues, as though there were none ſuch:
               You play Sabinas part, that proud laſciuious Dame,
               
                  Whoſe vgly life the Poets, haue penned to her ſhame.
            
            
               Fiue hundreth Aſſes milke, ſhe dayly had the bathe,
               For to increaſe her vice, and bewtie to preſerue:
               As at theſe dayes, our countrey women craue,
               Out of a little hyde, a thong to large they craue:
               For euery poore mans daughter, now is prankt in ſilke,
               Which doth Sabinas bath, incounter made of milke.
            
            
               Theſe baſe-borne birth, Galeriaes heart excéeds,
               That Neros golden pallaces did diſdayne:
               They thinke them flowers, which are in déede but wéeds,
               For truth, doth try them, counterfetted playne:
               As ſome men haue, of veluet ſcabarts made,
               That dayly couers, a ruſtie canckered blade.
            
            
               Of poyſon Poets write, that Cleopatra dyed,
               No, no, (quoth Lambe) it is a lye in déed:
               Her death came thus, in ſtories as I read,
               By a bodkin that ſhe bought, her heart did bleyd:
               With which ſhe vſ'd, to curle her golden haire,
               Wherewith ſhe kild her ſelfe, it doth appeare.
            
            
               Loe heare you lewde laſciuious wanton ſort,
               That doe delite, to paint your ſelues in pride:
               No doubt but you, ſhall ſmart for youthfull ſport,
               When mettell ſhalbe, by the fire tryde:
               When flaming fire (I ſay) the gold ſhall try,
               In Plutos pit, you ſhall for euer cry.
            
            
               Thus prating promiſers, hold ſtill your fruitles brags,
               Among your potts, your promiſes performe:
               Els will the wiſe, perceiue your wardrop rags,
               And to your ſhame, will laugh you all to ſcorne:
               You miſtres tipler, that would ſo gentle bée,
               For all your furs, your tricks the world doth ſée.
            
            
               
               Learne to ſpeake French, and if you wilbe gentle,
               For French muſt make you miſtres, that's moſt ſure:
               Becauſe your birth is, very baſe and ſimple,
               And you a tipler, whoſe life is nothing pure:
               Learne to know thy ſelfe, thy neighbours know thée well,
               
                  Per foy merritriciam, els will I ring thy bell.
            
            
               And then aloude this Lambe to laugh began,
               To Limbo lake (quoth he) la iambe les piedz packe:
               
                  Les leures of ſuch, inticeth many a man,
               To vtter confuſion, and euerlaſting lacke:
               Loe miſtres tipler, if you will gentle be,
               It's more then tyme you come, to learne this French of me,
            
            
               And at theſe wordes, a while this Lambe did pauſe,
               And ſpying me, a weary of the Tyme:
               Vpon the earth, began to ſcrape his clawes,
               Friend Robinſon (quoth he) thy liſtning eares incline:
               For now women, that good and vertuous were,
               I purpoſe by my ſpeach, thou preſently ſhalt heare.
            
            
               
                  Poſthumia was of euill ſore accuſed,
               For merry countenaunce, of ill ſhe was condemn'd:
               
                  Minutius, her huſband, her company refuſed,
               And home agayne his wife, did to her parents ſend:
               If countenaunce then, ſo great a vice was thought,
               What ſay you by the act, this day that's dayly wrought.
            
            
               In Calcedon, both mayds, and matrons vſ'd,
               Vnto a ſtraunger, but one chéeke to ſhow:
               
                  Hierous wife, all peoples breth refuſ'd,
               Except her huſbands, no mans els did know:
               No ſhowes in Egypt, neuer women had,
               The cauſe was this, they hated for to gad.
            
            
               When in Boetia, the Damſels, married were,
               
                  A noble cuſtoms worthie note they had:
               A vertue rare, no doubt it did appeare.
               In thoſe I ſay, that loued not to gad:
               Her coyche was burn'd, that day ſhe married was,
               Which ſignifi'd, from home ſhe would not paſſe.
            
            
               The daughters of Liſander, refuſ'd the rich attire,
               That from Sicilie, was as tokens ſent:
               Leaſt that the pride thereof, their hearts ſhould fire,
               The glittering ſhow, they did no deale commend:
               For vertue was, the iewell that they ſought,
               All ſtately dealings, baniſht from their thought.
            
            
               Loe heare ſayd Lambe, the life that Ladies liu'd,
               The ſimpler ſort, according calling went:
               One at an others ſtate enuied not, nor gréeu'd,
               Ne yet the Tyme in lewdnes neuer ſpent:
               No wandring vnto waks, thoſe dayes did women vſe,
               Nor gadding vnto greens, their life for to abuſe.
            
            
               Then was the huſbandman, and all his children knowne,
               By ſuch attire, as them became to weare:
               Th'artificer, by pride was not orethrowne,
               Then malice in mens mynds, did not appeare:
               Nor no man would, breake promiſe at that Tyme,
               Faith, loue, and charitie, in hearts of men did ſhine.
            
            
               Now poore mens pride, hath brought the world to nought,
               Their children as I ſayd, ſo pranck in pride:
               Incountring Gentlemen, as neare as may be thought,
               The common wealth, in England hath diſtroyde:
               And filthy flatterie, theſe dayes is ſo imbraced,
               The cogging crew away true meanyng chaſed.
            
            
               And with theſe wordes, this Lambe, lookt on me faſt,
               Marke well my ſpeach (quoth he) an other tyme:
               
                  For now thou ſéeſt that Phoebus maketh haſt,
               Into the Occidentall flouds for to decline:
               In tyme to come truſt thou no flattering friend,
               Nor tipling tib, except, to much thou ſpend.
            
            
               The Meritrix, the furred foole doth vſe▪
               
               Spy thou and at her mates a litle while:
               For ſhe, and they, ſhall reape, they may not chuſe,
               The fruits they graft, vpon their ſinfull ſoyle:
               As euery wight, doth know their vice vntold,
               Shall ere they dye, their woful end behold.
            
            
               Thus preſently came Morpheus backe agayne,
               How now my lambe (quoth he) haſt done my will:
               Haſt told my Clarke, thy mynde & meaning plaine,
               That of the world, he may haue better ſkill:
               I haue my Lord (quoth Lambe) done what I may,
               Plainly vnto Dunſtable, to direct the way.
            
            
               I thanke thée ſayd Sir Morpheus for the ſame,
               I will that he, and thou, this preſent tyme depart:
               For that he beares abroad, a writers name,
               I will not ſtay him longer from his act:
               Thus ſodenly I wakened out of ſléepe,
               In Dreaming long, this lambe became a ſhéepe.
            
            
               Thus bluſhing brood, awaken I from ſléepe,
               And on the ſoden, daſht in drowſie dumps:
               Began with ſpéed, for to plucke vp my féete,
               Becauſe the place, did put me to my iumps:
               This deſert was, alas vnknowen to mée,
               My Hawke, nor Spannels could I neuer ſée.
            
            
               But what this lambe by Morpheus meanes did ſay,
               With diligence, I pen'd that other day.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Authours name in Verdict.
            
               REmember Lord for Chriſtes ſake,
               by mercy to forgeue,
               In iudgement on thoſe people now,
               that ſinnefully doe liue.
               Condemne them not that retchles are,
               and doe thy lawes forget,
               Haue mercy on all them, that truſt,
               Chriſtes bloud ſhall pay theyr det.
               Againſt my wofull cries oh Lord,
               ſhut not thy mercy gate,
               Receiue my ſinfull ſoule oh God.
               to enter in thereat.
               Doe not condemne me for my guilt,
               let mercy thée perſwade.
            
            
               Reuenge not Lord, my wofull workes,
               when I in ſinne did wade,
               Oh God moſt high and mighty Lord,
               in whom is all my truſt.
               Be mercyfull to thoſe which are,
               before thy eyes vniuſt,
               In time of trouble ſtill I cald,
               vpon thy holy name:
               Now doe I cry to heale my ſoule,
               and truſt thou hearſt the ſame.
               Such is thy mercy promiſed,
               to them that doe relent:
               
                  O, Lord that thou forgeueſt ſuch,
               that faythfully repent:
               Nothing oh God, doth gréeue me more,
               then doth my careleſſe race.
            
            
               Of wicked wilfull wretched workes,
               I call to thée for grace:
               
                  For why my ſinnes craue puniſhment,
               and are as ſcarllet red.
            
            
               And yet I truſt for to be ſau'd,
               by Chriſtes bloud that ſhed:
               Looke downe with louing eyes oh Lord,
               and heare my wofull cry:
               Thy grace extend to guide my féete,
               leaſt I ſhould wade awry:
               
                  O Lord my rude and careleſſe life,
               with wild and wilfull blade:
               Now gréeueth me for conſcience doth,
               my ſoule in thée perſwade.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            MY dayes I ſée, are vayne on earth, my time doth ſteale away:
            My youth is paſt, and age drawes neare, my health doth ſtill decay.
            My lennow limmes grow dry & ſtiffe, my bones be full of payne:
            My former pleaſures workes me woe, I chaunge to duſt againe.
            I not delite in mondane mucke, nor in theſe pleaſures vayne:
            But in thy kingdome is my ioy, where thou doeſt aye remaine:
            Take heare my faithfull ſacrifices of iuſt repenting heart.
            In tyme of death deliuer Lord my ſoule from Sathans darts:
            All honor glory be to thée, and to thy onely ſonne:
            Who with the holy ghoſt be prayſe, thy will on earth be done.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            AT LONDON PRINTED BY ROGER WARDE, for Iohn Proctor, are to be ſold at his ſhop on Holborne bridge.
            
               Anno, 1589.
         
      
   