
      
         
            
            
            SEVEN TREATISES, CONTAINING SVCH DIRECTION AS IS GATHERED OVT OF THE HOLIE SCRIPTVRES, leading and guiding to true happines, both in this life, and in the life to come: and may be called the practiſe of Chriſtianitie.
            PROFITABLE FOR ALL SVCH AS HEARTILY DESIRE THE SAME: IN THE WHICH, more particularly true Chriſtians may learne how to leade a godly and comfortable life euery day.
            PENNED BY RICHARD ROGERS, PREACHER OF the word of God at Wethersfield in Eſſex.
            
               DEVT. 33. verſ. 12.
               The beloued of the Lord ſhall dwell in ſafetie with him, who protecteth him all the day long.
               PSAL. 84. verſ. 10.
               One day in thy Courts is better then a thouſand other where.
            
            
               DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS
               RD
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for THOMAS MAN, and ROBERT DEXTER, and are to be ſold at the braſen Serpent in Pauls Churchyard. 1603.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT VERTVOVS, HIGH, AND MIGHTIE PRINCE, King IAMES, our dread Soueraigne, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. long life, happie daies, and moſt proſperous raigne.
            
               MOſt gracious and dread Soueraigne Lord, I haue not preſumed vpon this dedication, as being ouertaken with the forgetfulnes either of your Maieſties greatnes, or mine owne pouertie: For I confeſſe, that if compariſon were made that way, I might worthily be blamed of preſumption. But the truth is, that I laid in balance your mind rather then your Maieſtie, and the argument rather then my penning of it. In this I confeſſe I preſumed and I truſt without deſert of blame, that as you haue preferred godlines before glorie in the middeſt of this glorie which God hath brought you vnto: ſo you will preferre a treatiſe of godlines, thus ſimply furniſhed, before a glorious ſtile. Which is not ſeldome repugnant to the ſimplicitie of holie things. And yet my meaning is to confeſſe to your Maieſtie, that this argument deſerued both a more learned and more gracious penne then mine. To which I would with al my heart haue giuen place, if I had either ſeene before me, or heard behinde me the footſteps of any tending that way that I goe, though I confeſſe, there are ſome to bee ſeene trauailing in waies neere adioyning to this.
            
               Concerning your Maieſtie, I am perſwaded, that you repoſe your greateſt greatnes in the communion of Saints, and not in your ſeuered calling which is tranſitorie: and therefore will account your ſelfe honoured by the augmentation of grace, and the furtherance of true holines. Your Maieſties owne affaires muſt be permitted to inioy their opportunities, and your godly wiſedome to inioy your choice in this varietie of reading. But I doubt not, but your godly heart will perſwade you to receiue a booke of this kinde with a gracious hand, though it were to no other end, but to begin to Gods people in the entertaining of any true hearted motiue vnto holines. And this to ſay the truth, is that wherein I haue made bold to vſe your gracious and renowmed name, to aduantage my intent of furthering the people committed to your charge in their paſſage to ſaluation. Let it therefore (I moſt humblie ſupplicate) pleaſe your Maieſtie to giue allowance to my endeuour and drift, and to pardon my ſlips: for my meaning hath been to ſeeke the honour of God in this work, and to borrow helpe in this Dedication, of the grace he hath giuen you for ſuch purpoſes.
            Thus reioycing, with the reſt of Gods people, for the comfort wherewith the Churches heart is comforted by you, and deſiring the lineall deſcent of theſe kingdomes to your Maieſties royall poſteritie, till Ieſus Chriſt with his glorious comming obſcure all the glorie of the world, I beſeech the holie Ghoſt to be with your ſpirit, and keepe your Maieſtie in Chriſt vnto the end.
            
               
                  Your Maiesties most humble ſubiect RICHARD ROGERS, Miniſter of the Goſpell.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
            
               
                  THe children of this world are in their generation wiſer then the children of light.
               Luk. 16.8. The truth hereof may appeare in the Papiſts; who diſcerning that their bookes of Controuerſies, ſtuffed with manifold vntruths, fallacians, and corruptions, were not able to gaine ſufficiently (though ſmall gaine be too great for ſuch merchants) to their Babyloniſh kingdome,Reuel. 18.15. 
               Iam. 3.6. haue ſet themſelues and others on worke (being all ſet on worke of Hell) to penne certaine treatiſes, tending to inſnare and intangle the minds of ignorant and ſimple Chriſtians, in the corrupt and filthie puddle of Popiſh deuotion. In this reſpect I perſwade my ſelfe, it is come to paſſe (not without the gracious prouidence of God) that the author hereof hath been incouraged in himſelfe, and by others, to write theſe Chriſtian directions, as a counterpoyſon to all ſuch inchauntments of Papiſts, who would by theſe meanes beare men in hand, that al true deuotion dwelt amongſt them▪ and were incloſed and tyed to their Cels and Cloyſters: In which vncleane cages it is vnpoſsible for any true ſpirituall and holy meditations to haue their abiding: for as much as euen the very mindes and conſciences of ſuch vncleane birds,Tit. 1.15. are defiled with damnable errors, and Idolatries. Wherefore I would earneſtly aduiſe, and heartely intreate thee (Chriſtian Reader) to imbrace this booke, wherein thou ſhalt finde good precepts, and holy directions, not deliuered by rote (as from a Parrat) out of the bookes and writings of other men: but confirmed by the ſingular experience of one, who hath long laboured the conuerſion, and confirmation of many other; but eſpecially the mortification and quickning of his owne ſoule and conſcience: one, whom indeed I haue euer eſteemed another Greenham: and herein more happie then he; becauſe he hath liued to penne, and peruſe his owne labours, and may yet liue (by the mercie of God) to correct and amend whatſoeuer ſlip of his penne (for in a long worke one may happily take a nap, two, or three) ſhall be ſhewed vnto him. Reade it therefore (beloued Chriſtian) and that with diligence: and thou ſhalt finde (I doubt not) more true light and direction to a true deuout and holy life, then in all the Reſolutions of the Ieſuiticall Father Parſons (though neuer ſo refined, as a brick newly waſhed) or meditations of Frier Granatenſis, or any Popiſh Directories whatſoeuer. And ſo I commend thee and all thy holy labours in this and all other good bookes, eſpecially in the booke of bookes (I meane the holy Bible) to the rich and mercifull bleſsing of God our Father in Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               
                  Blackfriers London
                  this 26. of May 1603.
                  
               
               Thine in the Lord, STEPH. EGERTON.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
            
               WHat be the priuiledges and high fauours of God Almightie, wherwith he hath preferred this age, and in ſpeciall our nation aboue all before vs, ſince the daies of the holie Apoſtles, needeth more meditation to moue our ſelues to thankfulnes, thē proof to cōuince our aduerſaries, who though they ſhould gainſay it, ſhall gnaſh their teeth and pine away in griefe to behold it. Among all (I may ſay with the Prophet and the Apoſtle) this is chiefe, that God hath ſo cleerely ſhewed his word to Iacob, his ſtatutes and his iudgements to Iſrael; and hath committed to vs his holy oracles: Wherein I meane not only that we haue the Goſpell ſo publikly and plentifully preached, which (though great) is common to vs with many: but withall, that in ſome admirable manner, God hath reuealed his ſecrets vnto vs, ſuch as wee know no Church vpon the earth, in which the true ſenſe of the Scriptures and ſound doctrine thereof, are more ſincerely embraced and profeſſed. Yea with what ſtore of rare and excellent lights the Lord hath furniſhed this our Church, he is blind that ſeeth not, and malitious that wil not acknowledge it: wherein though generally it falleth out by humane frailtie and Sathans ſubtiltie, that there is more light of iudgement, then integritie of conſcience; yet herein God hath not left himſelfe without witnes of many worthie Chriſtians both Preachers and profeſſors of the truth, who liuely expreſſe the forme of holie doctrine into which they are caſt, ſuch as vpon my vttermoſt perill I dare profeſſe, the deuouteſt Papiſt neither hath nor poſſiblie (in that profeſſion) can attaine vnto, lacking true faith the right mother and nurſe of a godly life. And herein to giue one inſtance in ſteed of many, take and examine ſtreightly this one work, and if it breathe not out more ſound godlines in one leafe, then all their artificiall compoſed treatiſes of Reſolution (which in their eſtimation are chiefe in this argument of a godly life) let me beare my deſerued blame. I leaue the life of the writer of that Popiſh booke to ſuch as ſeeme vpon better knowledge to haue ſet out the ſame. And for the Author of this Treatiſe, I may not in modeſtie ſay what I know, but could and doe deſire that his life were ſo knowne to all, to whom his writing ſhall come, as it is to ſuch, who haue heard the doctrine and ſeene the practiſe hereof in himſelf theſe well neere thirtie yeeres. But to ſpare the perſon for his life time, and to foretell what you ſhall finde in his labours. In my ſimple opinion it might in one principal reſpect be called the Anatomie of the ſoule, wherein not onely the great and principall parts are laid open, but euery veine and little nerue are ſo diſcouered, that wee may as it were, with the eye behold, as the right conſtitution of the whole and euery part of a true Chriſtian;

ſo the manifold defects and imperfections thereof. Whereto be added moſt approoued remedies for the curing of all ſpirituall diſeaſes, with like preſeruatiues to maintaine our health, in ſuch ſort as may be enioyed in this contagious ayre, and ſo in a ſecond reſpect may be called the phyſicke of the ſoule. In both which how welcome it ſhall be to all that loue their ſoules health, I neede not doubt: onely I would deſire the Chriſtian patient, not to be offended with the largenes of the work (as too deare for the poore, and too much to be read ouer in long time) but conſider with me, that if the arte of bodily phyſicke be ſo long, as the father of that arte teſtifieth; then is it no marueile, that this ſpirituall phyſicke doth as much exceed the other in length, as it doth in dignitie. And yet for the reliefe of ſuch as deſire to profit by his labour, great care hath been taken ſo to ſet out apart euery ſeuerall matter, that by the helpe of the Table they may be directed to the particulars, which I perſwade my ſelfe will be ſo farre from glutting any, though neuer ſo weake ſtomacke, that it will rather procure him a better appetite. For ſimply to ſay, as I feele, I haue not read in any mans writing a more ſauourie ſtile and better reliſhed. All which I leaue to euery one to ſpeake as they finde, and ſo with my ſtrongeſt deſires doe commend the fruite of theſe labours to the bleſſing of God.
            
               Ezechiel Culuerwel.
            
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian Reader.
            
               CHriſtian Reader, I am conſtrained in commending this ſpirituall bleſsing vnto thee, to begin with the excuſe of a good deed. For although it be a good deede to commend this commendable worke, yet muſt I plead the pardon of my defectiuenes in doing it, by alleaging my calling thereto; and impleade the fulſomnes of the maligners of ſuch holy enterpriſes, who for the moſt part diſtaſt all things but vanitie.Iob. 34.3. 
               The eare (ſaith Elihu) trieth words, as the mouth taſteth meate, to wit, if the eare be truly ſpirituall; otherwiſe there is an vncircumciſed eare,Act. 7.51. where there is an vncircumciſed heart: and he that hath an vnmortified eare, which is an affection to carnall eloquence, cannot eſcape a reprobate ſenſe in iudging of the wiſedome of God. An itching eare requireth a clawing ſtile, and the moſt readers ſeeke after that which this treatiſe purpoſely eſchueth. But wiſedome will be iuſtified of her children, and the godly hearted will lay that vnlooked for imputation vpon affectation of braue words, which the holy Ghoſt laieth vpon womens brauerie, mentioned in the 3. of Eſay, which ſoone after in the 4. chap. verſ. 4. by paſſage of ſpeech he calleth the filthines of the daughters of Sion. Something I graunt may be yeelded by way of indulgence to the weake; but he that ſeriouſly ſeeketh the Lord, will not be offended nor cloyed with that ſimplicitie, which offendeth not God by turning away the mind by trifles from a bent purpoſe of ſound edification.
            The matter of this booke is right worthy to occupie the minds of men, and will be receiued of the gracious peruſers of it. The reſt of the profeſſors, which like wanton and full fed children begin to play with their meate, & brooke nothing but conceited writing and ſpeaking, are to be bewailed; and as for the dogs they are to be deteſted and denied holy things. The bleſsing and comfort of grace brought S. Paul to account all things as dung,
               Philip. 3.8. in compariſon; and their illumination (how great ſoeuer) is vnſanctified, which are not ſo minded: and if any man loue godlines indeed and be good mettall,Rom. 6.17. he will bleſſe the fire which is ordained to melt him, and the mould which is made to caſt him in: but they which make the founder to melt in vaine,Iere. 6.29.30. ſhall be called reprobate ſiluer. It is part of the bleſsing of a worke to bee wrought by a bleſſed inſtrument: and although it be ſacrilege to interuert the praiſe of God; yet it is of religion to take notice of Gods choſen veſſels, and all men are more affected by ſuch. This is the aduantage of this booke, I meane the long approued godlines of the Author, as he is a Chriſtian; and his zealous painfulnes, as he is a Miniſter. And if it pleaſe God that his pen may be as his tongue hath been, a tree of life, the very leaues thereof will cure him of the ſting of Serpents tongues. That which S. Luke teſtifieth of Barnabas, may (after Gods admeaſurement) be ſpoken of him, and hoped of his labours,Act. 11.24. 
               that he was a good man, and full of the holie Ghoſt and faith, and much people ioyned themſelues to the Lord. Receiue therefore (good Reader) this prouiſion which he hath made for thee of holeſome meate, not caring for conceited cookerie, but remember that godly hunger is the beſt ſauce for heauenly foode.
            
               Thine in Chriſt, FRANCIS MERBVRY.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE ENTRANCE INTO THE BOOKE, OR PREFACE TO THE READER, which containes theſe foure things: Firſt, the generall ſumme of the whole. Secondly, the reaſons why it was ſet foorth. Thirdly, the matter and argument of euery particular treatiſe. Fourthly, a directing of the Chriſtian reader, how to reade it with moſt profit.
            
               IN ſo great varietie of all learning, as God hath furniſhed this age withall, it were not onely needleſſe, but arrogancie and follie, for me to put any in hope, that I goe about to teach that, which hath not been taught, and ſet foorth alreadie by godly and learned brethren. But yet, leaſt any ſhould thinke my labour vaine, in that which I enterpriſe, I would all ſuch might vnderſtand, that howſoeuer I ſhall bring no other thing, then ſome haue, in generall, or in ſome part heretofore publiſhed; yet they ſhall not be glutted with the ſame thing in particular, whether they reſpect the treatiſe and argument it ſelfe, or the manner of following and proſecuting the ſame. At leaſtwiſe, I may ſay, that there hath not come to my hand any booke directly tending to this end, which I propound here in the ſeauen Treatiſes following, to helpe the frailtie of Gods children, and namely, by ſetting before their eies as in a glaſſe, the infinite, ſecret, and deceitfull corruptions of the heart: from whence (without a gracious regarding of the ſame) ſore and dangerous euils doe ariſe and breake out in their life. Neither haue I ſeene any treatiſe, and direction particularly drawne and gathered for mens liues to gouerne and order them, which tieth them to daily vſe of the ſame throughout their whole courſe: of both which my purpoſe is moſt chiefly,The intent of the author, and generall ſumme of the whole booke. as well faithfully as louingly, to intreate, and to aide my poore neighbours and brethren, with that which I haue gathered by reading, and noted by experience, if by any meanes I may be able hereby, to make the Chriſtian way any thing more eaſie and pleaſant vnto them, then many finde it: and to bring it into more price, then the moſt doe value it at.
            In few words, this is that which I aime at, that ſuch as haue taſted how good the Lord is, and haue felt the power of the life to come, by any worke of faith and Chriſtian life, which they haue obtained by the preaching of the Goſpell, may after that, ſee their wants, their infirmities, their corruptions, rebellions, hindrances, & other diſcouragements, from that bleſſed eſtate wherinto

they are entred: and how they may euery day in the beſt manner, remedie, or at leaſt wiſe weaken and diminiſh them, and that they may alſo behold their liberties and prerogatiues, which they haue by Chriſt: as the certaintie of Gods loue, deliuerance from the feare of the great and euill day, peace and comfort through faith, and the bleſſednes of ſuch an eſtate, and daily inioy the ſame. And therefore, not to be as men that haue no ſuch priuiledges, either caſt downe with needeles feare, or poſſeſſed with an earthly or vaine reioycing, or deſtitute of incouragement to walke forward in an heauenly courſe:The fruite and benefit of it to the true Chriſtian. But that they may be mery in the Lord, and yet without lightnes; ſad and heauie in heart for their owne ſins, and the abominations of the land, and yet without diſcouragment, or dumpiſhnes: reſting and beleeuing in God, without bold preſumption, and fearing their owne weaknes, but yet without dreadfull and deadly deſpayring. And that thus the Chriſtian man, and he who is faithful indeede, may ſo carrie himſelfe in his courſe, as he may haue no thought or purpoſe to reuolt and turne from this hope which is ſet before him, but be perſwaded that he is infinitly incouraged, to hold out conſtantly therein, againſt all that might come in his way to the contrarie. And that the vngodly may ſee how ſuch are bleſſed in compariſon of other, and what they themſelues goe voyde of which they might inioy,What the vngodly may learne by it. and therefore may ſeeke how to become not almoſt, but altogether Chriſtians with them.
            
               
                  The ſecond point.
                  The reaſons of ſetting out this.
               To theſe (I ſay) who haue ſet themſelues in a full, and reſolute purpoſe to paſſe their daies godly in the midſt of many encombrances, and to walke with the Lord, ſo far as of fraile fleſh may be obtained (how weake ſo euer in their owne perſwaſions) to theſe (I ſay) I deſire in this treatiſe of mine to be ſome helpe and aſſiſtance, and to ſpeake plainely, that ſuch as would faine doe well,The firſt. and yet cannot tell how, may hereby be eaſed and relieued. And if any (who yet are in ſuperſtition,The authors deſire that they might profit by it. hypocriſie, prophanenes, or as yet in darknes) deſire to be partakers thereof alſo, and ſo to like of that aduice and inſtruction, which is written for the beleeuers, that they be willing to depart from the wicked, crooked, and curſed way, which they haue walked in: I ſhould be ſo farre from enuying them this bleſſing, that (although this was not ſet out directly for them) yet they may vnderſtand, that with ſuch a willing mind, as I haue vndertaken this worke for their good who are in Chriſt alreadie; with the like, I am readie to further and helpe forward them, who thinke and know themſelues as yet to be ſtrangers from Chriſt altogether; and to reioyce, if I might vnderſtand, that they haue been moued hereby with their brethren, to become the true diſciples of Chriſt.This worke eſpecially tendeth to better the good. Indeede I haue not laboured ſo much, to perſwade theſe to returne from their miſerie, and to become penitent, becauſe many both examples of the like, and reaſons to moue them, are plentifully, plainely, and in good order, extant among them alreadie; and for that I know, that for the moſt part, they profit not by our writing, who doe not before regarde and take good by our preaching: and yet they ſhall haue my beſt aduice in the end.
            But as for ſuch as haue alreadie been in the truth of their hearts conuerted vnto the Lord, and vnfainedly been called backe from the former luſts of their ignorance, and the faſhion of the world, after the which ſometime

they framed themſelues: for ſuch (I ſay) I know it is the earneſt deſire of their hearts, that they may as well haue a path-way to godlines, and a direction to the ſame lie by them, to the which they may alwayes at neede reſorte, when publike helpes by ſermons cannot euermore be enioyed: as alſo to be made more fit thereby, to profit by them, when they doe repaire vnto the ſame. And although I looke not for it, that ſuch account ſhould be made of this booke among the greateſt number, who haue reſolued with themſelues either not to learne or imbrace any thing more, thē alreadie they haue, eſpecially proceeding from a meaner perſon then themſelues: or to ſcorne whatſoeuer agreeth not with their humor, and to cauill and quarrell with that, which naturall reaſon doth not allow; yet (wiſhing better things vnto ſuch) I am not diſcouraged, but for their ſake who would deſire the ſame in practiſe which here they ſhall finde by reading, I will goe forward in this enterpriſe.
            I know it can doe the beſt no harme.It is of vſe to all ſorts of good chriſtians, and that was one reaſon of ſetting it out. I am ſure (truſting and looking for the bleſſing of God) that it ſhall do many good, ſuch I meane as would doe well, if they knew how; and would grow wiſer, ſounder and more conſtant in faith and a godly life, if they had helpe and direction thereto plainely ſet before them. And I am not aſhamed to ſay,The ſecond reaſon of ſetting it forth. that for mine owne furtherance as well as other mens, and the better carriage of my ſelfe through this my pilgrimage; I haue been willing to gather ſome ſuch things together, as in this ſmall volume I haue contriued.The third. Neither had it come into the hands of others, vnleſſe ſuch as are of account aboue my ſelfe for their gifts, as well as my neighbours,The fourth. among whom I haue preached the doctrine, had perſwaded me to ſet it forth. Beſides all that hath been ſaid, I haue chiefly in this enterpriſe (as God doth know) ſought this, that this vnperfect & weake labour of mine may ſtir vp and moue ſome of my godly brethren (who for the habilitie and grace which God hath giuen them, if their leaſure had been as much as mine, might tenne-fold more profitably and ſubſtantially haue vndertaken it) to enlarge and perfect the ſame, the argument being ſo needfull and profitable, to the further benefit of Gods Church and people.The fift. Another reaſon of ſetting out this treatiſe was this, that they who deſire it, may ſee, by the diligent marking of the ſame, the beauties of the Chriſtian life more clearely, then by many Chriſtians liues it can bee ſeene, and that it may bee brought into greater account with many, who thinke it (through errour) ouerburdenſome.
            And partly alſo I was moued hereunto by this reaſon,The ſixt. that the Papiſts caſt in our teeth, that we haue nothing ſet out for the certaine and daily direction of a Chriſtian, when yet they haue publiſhed (they ſay) many treatiſes of that argument. For anſwere to the firſt poynt of this obiection, they cannot deny (but that they care not what they ſay, to bring the people out of loue with our religion) they cannot (I ſay) deny, that both in catechiſmes, ſermons, and other treatiſes, there is ſet forth by vs that which may cleerely direct Chriſtians, and ſtir vp godly deuotion in them, though all be not gathered together into one volume: for the ſecond part concerning their treatiſes, I graunt there are two which I haue ſeene,

ſet forth by them in our Engliſh tongue, the one called a Chriſtian Directorie, the other the Exerciſe of a Chriſtian life, wherein the author doth, though both ſuperſtitiouſly and nothing properly, goe about to teach and giue direction for euery day in the weeke; (the one bearing the name of Robert Parſons the King of Spaines confeſſor: the other by an Italian a Ieſuite Doctor in Diuinitie,
               Iaſper Loarte. and tranſlated into Engliſh by ſome fauourite of Poperie) the firſt is nothing leſſe then a direction for a Chriſtian though it be called a Directorie, tending rather to perſwade men to reſolue with themſelues to leaue ſome groſſe euils, then to ſhew them ſoundly how to attaine pardon, or teaching how to liue chriſtianly: the other is a ridiculous tying men to a daily taske of reading ſome part of the ſtorie of Chriſts paſſion, and ſaying certaine prayers throughout the weeke euery day a taske; but indeede nothing leſſe then directing, after the will of God, him who deſires to leade a Chriſtian life. Both of them I dare boldly affirme, being deceiued themſelues, doe deceiue others, eſpecially the ſimple, who is not able to diſcerne and trie the lying ſpirit in them. The one, that is to ſay, Parſons, hath vnder a pretence of a holines and deuotion, ſet downe ſundrie impediments to reſolution: But yet they are put in among other things to take away the harſhnes and tartnes of manifold errours of merit, and other ſuperſtition mixed with them and vpholden in that religion, and as it were, with ſugar to ſeaſon them, which elſe no taſte could abide, and in the depth of a ſubtill heart, put in, to make the world beleeue, that the Popiſh religion is the onely holy religion, and the profeſſors thereof the godlieſt liuers; when yet Antichriſt is their captaine, and head, or (as they will not deny) the Pope of Rome, who yet doth, and for theſe many yeares hath vpholden and maintained open, and almoſt infinit hereſies and abominations.
            And as their religion and worſhip is compoſed and framed of hereſies and lies, and a confuſed heape of ſuperſtitions, and outward dead workes, euen Iewiſh and Heatheniſh ceremonies; ſo the perſons themſelues who profeſſe they know moſt, and that they are able to giue rules vnto others, vpholding and building vpon ſo rotten foundations, are furtheſt off from well guiding others, ſo that no man may euer looke by any Popiſh direction to liue chriſtianly. Although I will not diſſemble what I thinke, namely, that ſome doe meane more ſimply and truely then the reſt, and thinke that they ſerue God aright hauing deuout minds, but being ignorant of the truth, muſt needes be deceiued.
            But of Maiſter Parſons booke of Reſolution, ſeeing he and ſome other haue ſet it out in a gloſing ſtile to inſinuate with the ignorant and vnlearned reader, that he ſeekes no other thing but to draw him to pietie and godlines, I cannot forbeare, but I muſt ſay a little, which otherwiſe I would not haue done. And the rather, for that I know, he hath ſnared many ſimple peoples conſciences thereby, who being themſelues willing to be led in a right way, beleeue that he meanes as he ſpeaketh; and therefore are left, I ſay, deceiued, and in a bottomles gulfe; out of the which, if God helpe them not ſome other way, it is not poſſible for them to get. And this I ſay firſt, for the deliuering of ſuch out of the ſnare and maze in which

they haue loſt themſelues by reading of that booke, that although there be a pretended ſhew of godlines in it, and much ſuperſtition; yet the beſt of it is farre from true pietie and godlines, ſeeing that, and euery part of it proceedeth from faith ioyned with aſſurance of Gods fauour,Heb. 10.22. Act. 15.9. which is that alone that purifieth the heart, and maketh it able to bring fourth fruits of amendment of life; without which, mens beſt actions are wrought by the ſtrength of corrupt nature, and are fruites of the fleſh, and workes of darkenes, and ſo abominable. And yet this faith doe Papiſts make no reckoning of, neither therefore can the booke of Reſolution teach or hold it.
            Further, I ſay that the law onely is vrged in that booke, without teaching the poore ſoule that may be terrified thereby, how to lay hold on the promiſe of eternall life, and without the Goſpell:Eſay. 61.1. Ezech. 34.4. Ioh. 8 32. the truth and glad ridings whereof, is onely able to ſet at libertie the conſciences of ſuch as are ſtrangled by the threats and terrible curſe of the law: for if that truth make free (as our Sauiour ſaith) then are men free in deede. And whereas it may be obiected to me, that I doe the author of the booke open wrong in ſaying, that he ioyneth not the Goſpell with the law; for he that readeth it, may finde, that he ſpeaketh of Ieſus Chriſt, that he was giuen by his father to the world, that many might be ſaued; and of the promiſe: and how ſay I then that he teacheth the law without the Goſpell? I anſwere, that he doth indeede mention both the promiſes of the Goſpel, and alſo Chriſt; and this he doth in that chapter which is intituled [diffidence in Gods mercie] but yet is that true that I ſay:Rom. 1.16. For the Goſpell is the power of ſaluation to him that beleeueth: and it is not the Goſpell if it be not beleeued: for that is a part of the deſcription of it: Now beleeuing or faith hath aſſurance going with it, as I ſhewed out of the epiſtle to the Hebrues: Which the author of that booke with the reſt of his religion, doth flatly deny; and therefore it is cleere, that he doth not teach the Goſpell, neither in that booke doth plainely and ſoundly guide the wandring ſoule which ſeeth it ſelfe loſt, to finde remiſſion of his ſinne, and euerlaſting life; and conſequently, that he doth not direct his reader to liue godly, as I ſaid, but holdeth him in darknes and in the ſtate of damnation, and deceiueth him.
            And what reckoning he maketh of faith (which the word of God preferreth before all other things, and ſaith,1. Ioh. 5.4. that it ouercommeth all difficulties in the world) we may ſee by his owne words, in his preface fol. 6. I exhort the diſcreet reader (ſaith he) of whatſoeuer religion and faith he be, to enter into the carefull ſtudie and exerciſe of good deedes, aſſuring him, that this is the right way, to obtaine at Gods hands the light of true beliefe. And a little after he ſaith, It is more eaſie to beleeue as we ought, then to liue, as we ſhould. Here we ſee, he preferres good deedes before faith: as if the fruite ſhould be ſaid to be more precious, then the tree that beares it. And yet as not marking what he ſaid, he vttereth theſe words a little before, which cannot ſtand with the other: Our fathers receiued one vniforme faith from their mother the holy Catholike Church, and did attend only to builde vpon that foundation good workes and vertuous life, as holy Scripture commaundeth vs to doe. Here he affirmeth, that good

life commeth from faith. Thus while he ſpeaketh ſuch contraries, ſometime, that good workes muſt be built on the foundation of faith; and with an other breath, that good life is the right way to bring faith, (and yet all may ſee he ſpeaketh of one and the ſelfe ſame faith in both places) muſt he not needes by ſo teaching, deceiue the ſimple reader while he not being able to vnderſtand what is taught, cannot poſſibly practiſe that which he ought?
            And it was not to be doubted (to ſpeake euen in charitie as in conſcience we ought) that the ſaid author promiſing in that his booke of Reſolution, that he would adde two other parts to it, (as thereby confeſſing, that it alone was an inſufficient worke of it ſelfe, to be ſet forth; and therefore dangerous to intangle and ſnare the ignorant) and yet cannot in eighteene yeares finde a time to fulfill his promiſe; it was not to be doubted (I ſay) but that he was well content to deceiue and trouble many that ſhould reade it: As if one ſhould but preach the wrath of God for ſinne to a hundreth perſons, (whereas his booke hath been in the hands of thouſands) and ſhould come no more in eighteene yeares, to helpe them out of feare and doubt, and how to liue afterwards, it would be condemned and that iuſtly, and cryed out of by all aduiſed people. And yet we may conclude, without any doubt, knowing his religion what it is (if euer he had any ſuch meaning, to ſet out two other parts) that they ſhould haue been as ſound as this one is, that is to ſay, vnwholeſome, full of damnable errors, and vncomfortable: For can men gather grapes of thornes, or figges of thiſtles? No more can any ſound fruite be reaped or comfort gotten by falſe and vnſauorie doctrine. But for Parſons deuotion (whereof his booke beares ſo great a ſhew) or how little of the labour was his, or how little honeſtie is in the man, yea rather how great iniquitie: let them of his owne religion teſtifie, I meane the ſecular prieſts in their bookes againſt the Ieſuites.
            But to ſay no more of Parſons: The other hath little in him worthie any account or reckoning, and to this purpoſe very nothing. To goe forward therefore, ſeeing this was one cauſe why I tooke this worke in hand, becauſe the Ieſuites caſt in our teeth the want of ſuch bookes, as may direct a Chriſtian aright through his whole courſe towards the kingdome of heauen, and yet that which they teach tending thereto, is but as poyſon in a golden cuppe; although, as I haue ſaid, there are many of my brethren, who had been fitter for this ſeruice then my ſelfe, if they had not been imployed ſome other way: yet I nothing doubt by the helpe of God, to frame out of the word of God by that little helpe of my knowledge and experience, ſuch a direction for Chriſtians (all oſtentation, and compariſon of learning ſet aſide) as ſhall giue them ſmall aduantage of boaſting, and ſhall be both more pleaſing to God, and more for the comforting the heart of him, who liſteth to be directed by it, then poperie can affoord: and withall, a direction, that hath not only been ſhaped out after the rules of the Scripture, but alſo ſuch as hath been and is practized and followed ſo farre forth, as of ſinfull fleſh may be looked for, both of miniſter and people, and approoued of thoſe who haue excelled, & gone before many, in both.
            
               And although I denie not, but that many things might haue been farre better ſet downe, and expreſſed, then I am able to doe; yet that none thinke me to haue taken in hand a matter aboue my reach, and wherein I haue no skill, thus much I ſay, that for theſe twentie yeares and more I haue aymed at this, in my reading, preaching, and liuing, and in the obſeruing of my ſelfe, and the example of others, what communion and neere acquaintance there may be betwixt God and a Chriſtian, what hold may be laid on the promiſes of God, what ſtrength may be gotten againſt ſinne, what freedome and libertie we may haue by faith, what ſetlednes and conſtancie in a godlie life, what comfort, and reioycing the children of God by his free graunt, may haue, euen in this life, and that both ſound and conſtant, which ſhall not be taken from them: alſo how farre the ſpirit may ouercome the fleſh, and how the diuell may be reſiſted. And more eſpecially for theſe ſeauen yeares and more, I haue more particularly ſet my ſelfe about the matter, which in this booke is contained (which how weakely ſoeuer it be performed, I haue therein a good conſcience:) Firſt, to ſhew, both how a man may become a true beleeuer, be brought into the fauour of God, and afterwards how he may be directed to leade his life daily: And therefore I haue not ſuddenly nor vnaduiſedly ſet vpō this. And what helpe I haue been able to get from others, as my conuenient opportunitie hath giuen leaue, I haue not neglected. The which I ſet downe (as I ſaid) that none may thinke me fantaſtically to haue gone about to broch ſome noueltie, but rather to offer that to the people of God, which hath with good aduiſe been gathered for their edifying.The ſeuenth reaſon. But now to returne, the laſt reaſon mouing me to take this worke in hand, is, that they who haue inioyed my miniſterie aboue theſe twentie yeares, might haue me (as many of them haue oft deſired) after a ſort putting them in remembrance of that which I haue taught them in my life time, many yeares after I ſhall be taken from among them. This ſhall ſuffice to be ſpoken of my intent and purpoſe in this treatiſe, with the reaſons thereof.
            Now it remaineth further to acquaint the reader with the order,The third point in the preface. which I vſe in the ſame, and to giue ſome inſtructions, that hee may reade it with the more profit; and that it may be more plaine and eaſie to vnderſtand (which I doe eſpecially intend) then otherwiſe it ſhould be. Firſt, therefore, becauſe I haue written it for their ſakes chiefly, which are truely called to be Gods Children, and haue an intereſt in his promiſes, as being conuerted to him from the ſubiection of the diuell: firſt I ſay,The contents and particularly of the whole booke, in ſeuen ſeuerall treatiſes. my purpoſe is in the formoſt treatiſe to ſhew, who are his, and who they are which in an holy, and humble manner may reſt ſatisfied in his promiſes, againſt all dreadfull feare and doubt which might diſquiet them: that ſo neither the looſe liuers may deceiue themſelues with an opinion of that, which belongeth not to them: nor Gods children be depriued of that,The firſt treatiſe. which is their owne, and the ignorant of both ſorts that liſt, may learne to know better and amend their eſtate. In the ſecond, I meane to ſhew,The ſecond treatiſe. what courſe of life ſuch perſons muſt walke in, throughout their dayes, and how they are to carie themſelues both towards God and men, which I thinke expedient to lay forth as cleerely as I can, and in ſome ample manner for

the more full ſatisfying of the ignorant ſort. From theſe two, all the other points handled in this booke doe ariſe.The third treatiſe. Therefore in the third, I will ſhew what are the meanes whereby this life may be maintained, and how the beleeuer ſhall vſe the ſame, to the end that this whole and great worke of worſhipping & ſeruing God, may not be taken for a bare matter of knowledge, as the moſt doe make it: or (which is little better) for a ſeruing of God by halues, as too many profeſſors of the Goſpell doe vſe it: but for a faithfull regarding of our wayes, that they may be ſhaped out after Gods will.
            
               The fourth treatiſe.Now this practiſing of the godly life is performed by following a daily direction to guide vs, and whiles we doe euery day with conſcience ſet our ſelues to honour and obey God, as in our callings, and by other occaſions offered, we ſhall be able, and not wanderingly and vncertainly, as we haue been wont to doe. And ſo this ſhall bee ſet downe in the fourth treatiſe. And this is one of the points in this booke which requireth to be read againe and againe, as being neither commonly intreated of, and of ſingular vſe to ſuch as deſire to take good by it, eſpecially not being able otherwiſe to guide themſelues.The fift treatiſe. In the fift, I make the reader acquainted with the lets, which will hinder him (though he be willing to be directed daily) from this courſe, except he will be perſwaded to arme himſelfe with ſuch helps, as wherby he may withſtand them: and remedies againſt theſe lets ſhall in this fift treatiſe be ſet downe, as farre as ſhall be thought expedient.The ſixt treatiſe. The ſixt ſhall ſet before thee ſundrie priuiledges and bleſſings, which God doth peculiarly bequeath vnto, and beſtow vpon his beloued ones, beſides ſuch benefits as they haue in common with the men of the world. By the which, as by other reaſons, the faithfull may ſee themſelues perſwaded,The ſeuenth treatiſe. with much more chearefulnes, and greater willingnes to leade a chriſtian life daily, and to ſhine as lights in example to others. In the ſeuenth and laſt, ſuch obiections as may be brought and alledged by any, either weake chriſtians, or carnall cauillers, againſt the practiſing of the daily direction, ſhall be ſufficiently anſwered; that thereby the truth appearing more clearely, many ſuch as deſire vnfainedly to doe well, and yet haue not learned to guide themſelues by any plaine direction, out of the Scriptures, may haue this as an helpe vnto them to ſee that which the Scripture hath reuealed hereof. All which, though I direct not this worke to the vnreformed, may be in ſtead of an exhortation vnto all looſe and careles perſons, (though more briefly, ſeeing there is enough written of that argument) to moue them to rouſe vp themſelues, and to awake out of their deadly ſleepe, and not to caſt away their ſoules for the loue of their ſinnes, (which they may be ſure that God will finde out howſoeuer they hide them) but to ſeeke betimes, that they be vnburthened of them, caſt them vp as a moſt filthie gorge, and auoide the vengeance of Gods wrath which wil otherwiſe moſt ſurely come vpon them for it: For though ſinne be ſweete in the committing of it, yet it will be bitter, when it comes to be repented of: and moſt bitter, when without repentance, it muſt be accounted for.
            
               The fourth point of the preface, directing the reader, how to reade this booke with moſt profit.Now it remaineth to direct the reader how to beſtow his time profitably

herein, and how he may reade it to his benefit. For I doubt nothing, but he that ſhall be conuerſant in it, deſiring to be directed in his courſe, ſhall thinke his time well ſpent, ſo as he be helped to vnderſtand the ſame. Firſt therfore let him reade the contents of it briefly ſet downe in the table before the booke, to helpe his memorie; then the marginall notes of the chapters. And if he conceiue and vnderſtand the ſhort ſumme of it ſo ſet downe; then let him reade the booke it ſelfe, till he be acquainted with and vnderſtand it: wherein if his capacitie be the weaker and ſhallower, he muſt deſire the helpe of ſome which are more skilfull (and better able to ſee the drift, ſcope and meaning of it) then himſelfe, eſpecially in ſuch points of it, as are more hard and difficult, either to vnderſtand, or to practiſe. For although many ſhall haue no neede of this directing of them to reade it with profit, becauſe they can eaſily direct themſelues when they once know the generall parts, and argument of it, as before is mentioned: yet becauſe my deſire herein is as well to helpe and benefit the plaine, and ſimple, (ſuch as many of them are, amongſt whom I haue preached the ſame) as well as to bring the wiſer and more learned ſort acquainted with the practiſe of it, therefore I know they ſhall haue neede thereof.
            Now when they ſhall vnderſtand it in ſome good ſort, let them weigh and conſider, how far forth they haue had vſe of it heretofore, as whether they haue according to the firſt part of this booke, by the miniſterie of any ſound preacher of the Goſpell, attained to the aſſurance of their ſaluation, and of the forgiuenes of their ſinnes, wherein if any will take it as granted, though falſely, (as they are moſt readie to doe ſo, who haue leaſt felt the burthen of their ſinnes, and therefore are indeed furtheſt off from it) herein, I ſay, if any will needs deceiue themſelues, I cannot helpe it, but they are like to reade the reſt with leſſe fruit and comfort, and to goe without the vſe of it in their liues, whatſoeuer they hope for. And therefore ſuch I aduiſe to take moſt paine in the firſt part: I meane in the doctrine of it, and reading other treatiſes concerning the matter, as Maſter Mores and other catechiſmes; and Maiſter Perkins workes, namely, his booke intituled the graine of muſtard ſeede: And to raiſe all the doubts they can to any experienced teacher or brother, and to looke for, and ſee thoſe things worke vpon them which are taught there, both the doctrine of humiliation, and alſo of iuſtification and deliuerance.
            If this be attained, let them conſider for the better aſſuring themſelues hereof, that they cannot but affect, loue, imbrace, and delight in the doctrine of ſanctification, and repentance from dead workes, I meane they ſhall deſire to practiſe the godly and chriſtian life when they ſee that it is the commaundement of him who loueth them moſt dearely, and what it is, and wherein it conſiſteth, which is the ſumme of the ſecond treatiſe of this booke. And to this end, let them reade, and by marking ſeeke, (as ſuch who would finde) that they may ſee what ſinne there is in them which they are not willing nor deſirous to forſake (if there be any) or among duties generally appertaining to all, or particularly touching themſelues, which they cannot ſubmit themſelues vnto. If there be either of theſe found in them, as that they cannot leaue nor be brought to renounce ſome particular

ſins, nor obtaine of themſelues to be ſubiect to ſome ſpeciall duties, as thinking it too ſtrict (as thus it may be with many, and no doubt is) ſuch muſt know, that it is the doctrine of the Scripture, that all the commaundements of God be had in account of vs,Iam. 2.10. Heb. 13.18. Matth. 5.18. and conſcience made of one as well as of another: which if they ſee and acknowledge according to the word of God, they cannot but ſubmit themſelues thereunto, if they haue rightly imbraced the doctrine of the former treatiſe, that as in iudgement and knowledg they yeeld; ſo their heart and affections may goe with the ſame. And ſo doing, God will worke in them by little and little (ſeeking it by prayer of faith) euen as he wrought the like in them before, and weakned ſuch rebelliouſnes in their hearts alreadie.
            If therefore the teachable and chriſtian reader be thus farre wrought vpon by the ſpirit of God, that he thus fauour, approoue, and giue ouer himſelfe to be made truely repentant, which is that that is required in the ſecond treatiſe of this booke; then is he fit to occupie himſelfe about, and to be conuerſant in the third and fourth part of it, that is to ſay, in the doctrine which requireth a daily walking in a Chriſtian courſe, by the vſe of ſuch helps as are appointed of God for that purpoſe; and ſome of them alſo daily, as in the proper place ſhall appeare. For euery true Chriſtian is to know, that the religion and worſhip of God muſt be in vſe and practiſe among the imbracers of it, as well one day as another. But how ſhall any be able to keepe his heart in frame, and reforme his life daily by the meanes which God hath appointed, as in the third and fourth part of this booke is required: except he be firſt a liker, and an allower of all knowne points of dutie, and doe hartily renounce all euill, as is required in the ſecond part? Which being done, let him looke to grow daily more ſtrong in faith, whereby he may hold, and keepe faſt the certaintie of Gods fauour daily, and conſtantly. And not as too many (and yet the people of God) doe, who are not acquainted with this: that their confidence ſhould be maintained daily, or a good conſcience in their particular actions regarded, and that on one day as another, but thinke it enough at ſometimes to haue this care. Neither let any looke to repell this as too ſtrict, vnder pretence of weightie affaires, and their owne infirmitie. For this is but the deluſion of the diuell, as ſhall be ſhewed, who will eaſily perſwade it to be more then needeth. This is that which muſt be learned out of the third and fourth part.
            And when this is vnderſtood, approued, conſented vnto, and aymed at, the fift part of the booke ſhall be cleare and eaſie to vnderſtand, and what vſe he ſhould make of it, namely, of the lets and hinderances which the diuell raiſeth vp to hold him backe from this courſe of life, and the practiſe of the ſame: of the which ſome I will ſet downe, and helpe him the better to know many others thereby. And he that ſhall indeuour to direct his life, and take heede to his wayes, as he ſhall by Gods word be taught, ſhall breake through many of the lettes, which yet ſhall ſtrongly hold backe and hinder other men, as the fift part will ſhew: and if he be for a ſeaſon withdrawne from a godly courſe, yet he ſhall there finde helpes and remedies to recouer againe; and little eaſe, otherwiſe.
            
               And if there be any difficultie in conforming a mans ſelfe after this forementioned doctrine (as I deny not but the fleſh will finde many) yet againſt them all, let him proceede and reade with good regard the ſixt Treatiſe, wherein are ſet downe the manifold and goodly prerogatiues and priuiledges, which God hath bequeathed to his people to hearten them on, and incourage them to godlines, and to make the chriſtian life eaſie; and he ſhall ſee great light, and finde exceeding force therein, to ſtirre him vp to goe forward mightily againſt all fainting. And then he ſhall not be moued for all the obiections, cauils and fleſhly reaſons which he ſhall reade in the ſeuenth part. For the comfort and experience, which he ſhall partly enioy alreadie, and partly hope for and expect afterwards, ſhall make thē vaniſh away as ſmoke, although otherwiſe they are able to hurt and ſting, as fier. And then when in the due conſideration of the whole, he ſhall ſee what the bleſſednes and manifold good things are, which he in part hath alreadie, and ſhall afterwards inioy both here and in the life to come, he ſhall ſee what infinit cauſe he hath to praiſe God for his portion, that he hath rather beautified and bleſſed him with his fauour and graces then many other, whereby he may walke ſo comfortably, and that in this vale of miſeries, to Gods kingdome.
            And thus I aduiſe thee (good reader, as I know it ſhall be beſt for thee) to beſtow thy trauel about this booke: wherein I appoint thee no certaine time, nor houres, ſeeing all which would profit by it, cannot ſpend their time alike about this, or any other ſuch exerciſe. But this know, that this booke tendeth to teach thee the practiſe of thy knowledge, and not to know onely: and that I haue gathered together into this one, the things which are diſperſedly contained in many other. And therefore in that reſpect, ouer and beſides the ordinarie reading of the holy Scriptures, thou maieſt beſtow the more time about it, as thy leaſure will permit, conſidering that once or twice reading a booke for practiſe, is not enough.
            Laſtly, ſeeing the whole matter herein contained, is to ſerue thee and ſtand thee in ſteed, as ſetting before thee a direction to gouerne thy whole life, thou muſt not thinke thy labour and time much, though thou beeſt occupied in it for many yeares together: for as much as the fruite ſhall be greater, the longer that thou haſt been exerciſed in it: and yet thy labour leſſe, yea eaſie and pleaſant: for ſo ſhalt thou grow better acquainted with the vſe of it, which in one word is to make thy life more ſweet and ſauorie, then thou couldeſt looke for, that is, happie here, and hereafter, for euer. Reade therefore not onely to be able to report what thou haſt found here, but eſpecially to finde it thine owne which I doe teach: and to be ſetled daily in the gouernment which this doctrine drawne out of his word offereth thee, ſo as thou maieſt ſee that God, in the ſetting forth of it, hath directed me.
            Reade with a quiet, teachable and a meeke ſpirit, deſirous of that which I labour to bring thee to, rather then with a curious head to carpe and cauill; or cenſure that which thou doſt not practiſe nor follow. A dramme of grace is better then a pound of cenſorious wittines: remember that all our naturall gifts, and faculties of our ſoules ſhould be ſanctified: I goe about

to make thee ſee thy ſelfe inwardly and outwardly to be trained vp in Gods family: where the heart muſt be well ſeaſoned, as well as thy whole life well ordered, till thou findeſt that which many a thriftie perſon doth in his outward eſtate; namely, that diet to be ordinarie with him, which ſometime had been feaſting cheere: for, when a poore man by his trauell and paine hath brought this to paſſe, hee thinkes his eſtate good, and that which pleaſeth him exceedingly well: So, labour thou in thy ſpirituall worke and ſeruing of God, to finde that gaine, and thriuing therein, that thou maieſt make thy ſoule as ioyfull euery day, and at as great peace with God, as ſometime thou ſcarcely haddeſt obtained once in the weeke or month. Which grace and prerogatiue that thou mayeſt make much of, when thou haſt it, looke backe and remember with thankes vnfained how farre thou haſt been off from it, and how little hope thou once haddeſt of obtaining it, when thou wert eaſily maſtered of thy ſinnes and paſſions, and know that it muſt coſt him many a prayer, and grone for it, who is yet without it, before he ſhall be partaker of it.
            
               RICHARD ROGERS.
            
         
         
            
            THE SVMME OF ALL THE SEAVEN TREATISES, AND THE CONTENTS OF euery Chapter in them.
            
               
                  The firſt Treatiſe ſheweth, who be the true children of God.
                  
                     Chap. 1. OF the ſumme and order of this firſt Treatiſe. pag. 1
                  
                  
                     Chap. 2. Of mans miſerie. pag. 3
                  
                  
                     Chap. 3. Of the knowledge of redemption and deliuerance. pag. 7
                  
                  
                     Chap. 4. How this knowledge worketh, and namely, 
 
                        firſt, that God maketh them beleeue their miſerie, and be troubled in minde for it. pag. 9
                        
                        Secondly, they conſult in this caſe what to doe. pag. 13
                        
                        Thirdly, they are broken hearted and humbled. pag. 15
                        
                        Fourthly, a ſecret deſire of forgiuenes. pag. 15
                        
                        Fiftly, they confeſſe and aske pardon. pag. 18
                        
                        Sixtly, they forſake all for it, and highly prize it. pag. 19
                        
                        Seuenthly, they applie Christ and his promiſe. pag. 20
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Chap. 5. Of the lets of faith, and namely in the behalfe of the Miniſter. pag. 24
                  
                  
                     Chap. 6. Of the lets that hinder faith on the behalfe of the people. pag. 28
                  
                  
                     Chap. 7. What deſire breeds faith. pag. 34
                  
                  
                     Chap. 8. How the weake in faith ſhould be eſtabliſhed. pag. 37
                  
                  
                     Chap. 9. The difference of beleeuers from them that are none. pag. 44
                  
                  
                     Chap. 10. Of the eight cōpanions of faith. pag. 54
                  
                  
                     Chap. 11. How weake faith is confirmed. pag. 64
                  
                  
                     Chap. 12. The ſweete fruit and benefit of the preſeruing and confirming of our faith. pag. 68
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The ſecond Treatiſe declareth at large, what the life of the true beleeuer is, and the conuerſation of ſuch as haue aſſured hope of ſaluation.
                  
                     Chap. 1. THe ſumme and order of this ſecond Treatiſe. pag. 72
                  
                  
                     Chap. 2. That a godlie life cannot be without vnfained faith, nor this faith without it: which is the firſt point in the firſt generall head to bee handled. pag. 74
                  
                  
                     Chap. 3. That for the leading of a godlie life, is required faith in the temporall promiſes of God, and hartie aſſent and credit to the commandements alſo, and threatnings in the word of God, as well as faith to be ſaued. pag. 79
                  
                  
                     Chap. 4. Of the heart, and how it ſhould be clenſed and chaunged, and ſo the whole man, which is ſanctification, tending to repentance and a godly life. pag. 86
                  
                  
                     Chap. 5. Of the renouncing of all ſin: which is the firſt effect of a renued heart in the true beleeuer. pag. 96
                  
                  
                     Chap. 6. Of the diuers kindes of euill to be renounced, and namely of inward againſt God and men. pag. 102
                  
                  
                     Chap. 7. Of other euils and ſinnes, moſt properly concerning our ſelues. pag. 108
                  
                  
                     Chap. 8. How the minds and hearts of the beleeuers are taken vp vſuallie, ſeeing they renounce inward luſts. pag. 114
                  
                  
                     Chap. 9. Of the ſecond kinde of euils or ſins to be renounced, namely outward. pag. 124
                  
                  
                     Chap. 10. Of foure ſorts of ſuch as hope for ſaluation; and yet renounce not open ſinnes, and outward offences. pag. 126
                  
                  
                     Chap. 11. Of certain obiections raiſed from the former doctrine, and anſwers thereto: as why we ſhould put difference betwixt men: whether the godly may fall reprochfully, and what infirmities they may haue. pag. 134
                  
                  
                     Chap. 12. Of the keeping of the heart once purged, in that good plight afterward. pag. 140
                  
                  
                     Chap. 13. Of the ſumme and manner of handling this ſecond part of a godly life: and particularly of the

rules to bee obſerued for the effecting of it: namely, knowledge and practiſe. pag. 147
                  
                  
                     Chap. 14. Of the anſwering of ſome obiections about the former doctrine, and of the other two vertues which helpe to a godly life. pag. 154
                  
                  
                     Chap. 15. Of ſome particular duties pertaining to God directly in the firſt, ſecond, third, and fourth commandements. pag. 160
                  
                  
                     Chap. 16. Of certaine duties to men, in the fift, ſixt, and ſeuenth commandement, the obeying wherof is a part of a godly life. pag. 167
                  
                  
                     Chap. 17. Of ſome duties to men in the 8, 9, and 10. commandements. pag. 175
                  
                  
                     Chap. 18. Of certaine reaſons perſwading to the practiſe of a godly life: which is the fourth generall part of this treatiſe. pag. 191
                  
                  
                     Chap. 19. Of anſwers to obiections brought againſt the neceſſitie of practiſing this godly life. pag. 200
                  
                  
                     Chap. 20. The laſt obiection againſt the godly life anſwered. pag. 208
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The third Treatiſe laieth foorth the meanes, whereby a godly life is holpen and continued.
                  
                     Chap. 1. WHat the meanes are, and the kinds of them, and of the ſumme and order of this Treatiſe. pag. 211
                  
                  
                     Chap. 2. Of the publike helpes to increaſe godlines: and namely the miniſterie of the word. pag. 213
                  
                  
                     Chap. 3. Of the ſecond publike helpe, namely, the Sacraments. pag. 217
                  
                  
                     Chap. 4. Of publike prayers: alſo of the priuate helpes in generall. pag. 222
                  
                  
                     Chap. 5. Of the firſt priuate helpe, which is watchfulnes. pag. 226
                  
                  
                     Chap. 6. Of meditation, the ſecond priuate helpe. pag. 235
                  
                  
                     Chap. 7. Of the third priuate helpe, which is the armour of a Chriſtian: and of the three firſt points of it. pag. 259
                  
                  
                     Chap. 8. Of the laſt point, which is the benefit of this armour. pag. 272
                  
                  
                     Chap. 9. Of our owne experience, and what a ſpeciall helpe it is to the leading of a godly life: alſo of the vſe of cōpanie and familie exerciſes. pag. 278
                  
                  
                     Chap. 10. Of prayer and the parts thereof, thankeſgiuing and requeſt, whereunto is added confeſſion of ſins. pag. 282
                  
                  
                     Chap. 11. Of reading. pag. 288
                  
                  
                     Chap. 12. Of the extraordinary helps. pag. 291
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The fourth Treatiſe directeth the beleeuer vnto a daily practiſe of a Chriſtian life.
                  
                     Chap. 1. OF the ſumme, order, and parts of this treatiſe. pag. 294
                  
                  
                     Chap. 2. Of the firſt reaſon, why there ought to be a daily direction to guide the beleeuer. pag. 297
                  
                  
                     Chap. 3. Of the ſecond reaſon of a daily direction, conſiſting of two branches. pag. 299
                  
                  
                     Chap. 4. Of the third reaſon of the daily direction. pag. 303
                  
                  
                     Chap. 5. Of the fourth reaſon. pag. 307
                  
                  
                     Chap. 6. Of the 5.6.7. and 8. reaſons. pag. 310
                  
                  
                     Chap. 7. Of the deſcription of the daily direction. pag. 313
                  
                  
                     Chap. 8. Of the neceſſarie parts of the daily direction, being the 2. branch of the 2. part of this Treatiſe. pag. 316
                  
                  
                     Chap. 9. Of the illustration or more full declaration of the former parts of the direction. pag. 320
                  
                  
                     Chap. 10. Of outward duties of life, moſt commonly to be done daily, but not of neceſſitie. pag. 333
                  
                  
                     Chap. 11. Of the benefit and commendation of the direction. pag. 337
                  
                  
                     Chap. 12. Of the declaration of the firſt dutie of awaking with God. pag. 346
                  
                  
                     Chap. 13. Of the declaration of the ſecond dutie, of beginning the day with prayer. pag. 349
                  
                  
                     Chap. 14. Of the declaration of the third dutie, about our callings. pag. 353
                  
                  
                     Chap. 15. Of the declaration of the fourth rule or dutie, directing vs in companie. pag. 364
                  
                  
                     Chap. 16. Of the declaration of the fift dutie, how wee ſhould behaue our ſelues in ſolitarines. pag. 376
                  
                  
                     Chap. 17. Of the declaration of the ſixt dutie, of vſing proſperitie well. pag. 385
                  
                  
                     Chap. 18. Of the declaration of the ſeuenth dutie, of bearing afflictions rightly euery day they come. pag. 393
                  
                  
                     Chap. 19. Of the declaration of the eight

dutie, namely, of vſing religious exerciſes in our families. pag. 396
                  
                  
                     Chap. 20. Of the declaration of the ninth and laſt dutie, of viewing the day. pag. 399
                  
                  And here followeth a prayer, containing the ſumme of the life, which is to be daily led of a true Chriſtian. pag. 404
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The fift Treatiſe ſheweth the lets, which hinder the ſincere courſe of the Chriſtian life before deſcribed.
                  
                     Chap. 1. OF the ſumme and order of this Treatiſe, and how it agreeth well with the former. pag. 411
                  
                  
                     Chap. 2. Of Satans properties and attempts againſt vs in generall, and our help againſt them. pag. 414
                  
                  
                     Chap. 3. Of the diuels troubling the weake beleeuer about his faith, and if he doe not preuaile againſt him one way, he ſeeketh by another. pag. 417
                  
                  
                     Chap. 4. Of Satans hindring the continuance of faith. pag. 422
                  
                  
                     Chap. 5. Of Satans hindring the beleeuer from liuing godly: and how many waies: and namely, by keeping him in a wandring & vnſetled courſe; and alſo of the remedie againſt it: and firſt by occaſion of that, how he holdeth backe the wicked. pag. 425
                  
                  
                     Chap. 6. Of another let: the leauing of our firſt loue. pag. 432
                  
                  
                     Chap. 7. Of a third let in this firſt kinde, namely, the want of the ordinarie preaching of the word of God. pag. 437
                  
                  
                     Chap. 8. Of the ſecond kind of generall lets: namely, the vnmortified affections wherewith he oppreſſeth the beleeuer. And firſt of feare that they ſhall not perſeuere: and of pride in their gifts. pag. 441
                  
                  
                     Chap. 9. Of other vnruly affections, touchines, peeuiſhnes, &c. pag. 447
                  
                  
                     Chap. 10. Of worldly luſts, and namely the loue of carnal pleaſure, and the inordinate deſire of riches. pag. 451
                  
                  
                     Chap. 11. Of the remedies of this worldlie luſt: namely, couetouſnes, and exceſſiue loue of riches. pag. 458
                  
                  
                     Chap. 12. Of the third kind of lets generall, whereby the beleeuer is hindred from going forward in a godlie courſe. pag. 467
                  
                  
                     Chap. 13. An example of a couenant made by certaine godly brethren, declaring what manifold lets the faithfull haue in this world (fit to illuſtrate the former doctrine) contained in the two next chapters following. In this chapter of the firſt part of it, namely a complaint. pag. 477
                  
                  
                     Chap. 14. Of the ſecond part of the couenant, namely, the remedies againſt the complaint mentioned in the former chapter. pag. 487
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The ſixt Treatiſe ſetteth downe what priuiledges belong to euery true Chriſtian: and how he may haue his part in them.
                  
                     Chap. 1. OF the ſumme of this Treatiſe: the reaſons why it is ſet out: the order of it: and of the diuers kinds of priuiledges. pag. 493
                  
                  
                     Chap. 2. Of the firſt priuiledge. That the beleeuers may knowe in this life, that they haue eternall life. pag. 495
                  
                  
                     Chap. 3. Of the ſecond priuiledge, namely, that God is with his alwaies, after hee hath aſſured them of his fauour. pag. 498
                  
                  
                     Chap. 4. Of the third priuiledge, how God giueth grace to his children to liue godly, and of the firſt branch. pag. 502
                  
                  
                     Chap. 5. Of a ſecond branch of the third priuiledge. pag. 505
                  
                  
                     Chap. 6. Of the fourth priuiledge, how the godly may riſe againe when they are fallen. pag. 514
                  
                  
                     Chap. 7. Of the fift priuiledge, namely, the gracious helpes by which he hath granted them to grow in faith and godlines. pag. 519
                  
                  
                     Chap. 8. Of the ſixt priuiledge, namely, of the right vſing of proſperitie. pag. 524
                  
                  
                     Chap. 9. Of the ſeuenth priuiledge: concerning the afflictions of the godlie: and namely of the firſt branch of the ſame: that is, how they may be free from many of thoſe troubles, which doe light on and meete with the vnreformed. pag. 529
                  
                  
                     
                     10. Of the ſecond branch of this priuiledge, concerning the afflictions of the faithfull: namely, that God deliuereth them out of many, when the wicked ſtill remaine in theirs. pag. 535
                  
                  
                     Chap. 11. The third branch of this priuiledge: that wee may haue much good by our afflictions. pag. 539
                  
                  
                     Chap. 12. Of the eight priuiledge: of growing in grace. pag. 543
                  
                  
                     Chap. 13. Of the ninth priuiledge: that the beleeuers ſhall perſeuere vnto the end. pag. 549
                  
                  
                     Chap. 14. Of the tenth and laſt priuiledge, inioyed perfitly in the life to come, but begun here. pag. 560
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The ſeuenth Treatiſe containeth the obiections and cauils, which may be brought againſt the doctrine before ſet downe, and an anſwere to them.
                  
                     Chap. 1. OF the ſumme and order of this Treatiſe. pag. 569
                  
                  
                     Chap. 2. The firſt obiection (that there needes no direction daily, beſides Gods word, and therefore this is needles) anſwered. pag. 570
                  
                  
                     Chap. 3. Of anſwering this obiection, that no ſuch direction can be obſerued daily. pag. 575
                  
                  
                     Chap. 4. Of anſwere to this reaſon againſt the practiſe of daily direction: that it is toylſome and inconuenient, taking away al pleaſure from men, and hinders their labours. pag. 577
                  
                  
                     Chap. 5. Of anſwere to another reaſon againſt daily directing of vs, that it would breake off all ſocietie and fellowſhip among men. pag. 581
                  
                  
                     Chap. 6. Of the doubts and obiections, which weake Chriſtians ought to propound vntill they bee ſatisfied: namely, how they may attaine to ſuch direction daily, and anſwere thereto; and other like, namely that they count it hard, and what ſuch ought to doe. pag. 583
                  
                  
                     Chap. 7. Of other obiections of the weak; as that they cānot ſee how they ſhould walke thus, while they liue in ſuch an euill world: and other like obiections, with anſwers thereto. pag. 587
                  
                  
                     Chap. 8. Of the obiection of weake Chriſtians who cannot reade; and another of them, that are troubled through ſome Scriptures; and anſwers to both. pag. 590
                  
                  
                     Chap. 9. Of the obiection, that Miniſters may follow daily direction, but yet not therefore the people, and of ſuch as obiect, that better counſell is giuen by the author then hee himſelfe will follow: with anſwere to both; and a larger anſwere to the firſt obiection in the ſecond chapter. pag. 593
                  
                  
                     Chap. 10. The concluſion of the whole booke, containing an exhortation to good and bad. pag. 599
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST TREATISE, SHEWING WHO BE THE TRVE CHILDREN OF GOD.
            
               CHAP. 1. The ſumme and order of this first Treatiſe.
               
                  ALthough my chiefe purpoſe be to direct the true Chriſtian, who is already a beleeuer,  how to walke daily through the courſe of this life, in ſuch wiſe as he may finde a very ſweete and effectuall taſte of eternall happines, euen here (which few doe thinke can be obtained) yet I haue thought it meete: firſt, to ſhew who are true beleeuers, and the children of God,Hovv any may knovv they be the Lords. and how men are brought vnto this eſtate, and thereby may know that they are ſo. Partly for them who deſire to be directed in a Chriſtian life, that  they may haue this ready at hand by them, to ſhew them that they are the Lords, notwithſtanding many doubts be oft raiſed by Sathan againſt them, and that others may learne to know it, who are yet ignorant of it, as without the which, in vaine ſhould they goe about a godly life. Which as it is the weightieſt and chiefeſt poynt of all others in diuinitie, and the ground of the reſt which I haue taken in hand to intreate of; ſo it is with the greateſt regarde to be dealt in, whether we reſpect thoſe, which vnfolde and lay open the ſame, or thoſe, which deſire to be inſtructed, and perſwaded in the truth thereof.
               For it comes to paſſe by our corrupt nature, and ſlownes of heart to beleeue,  and Sathans ſubtiltie many waies beguiling vs,Most are deceiued in the aſſurance of ſaluation. that we in nothing more deceiue our ſelues, then in, and about the aſſurance of ſaluation: for proofe hereof, we may vnderſtand that ſome, yea, many thouſands thinke that no man can know whiles he liueth here that he is the Lords,
                     1. Papists think it impoſſible. neither can haue any aſſurance of his fauour till his death, vnleſſe it be by ſpeciall reuelation. And this is the error of the Papiſts. On the other ſide,
                     2. Carnall Proteſtants thinke it eaſie. many thinke that this is not ſo hard a queſtion, as that any that profeſſe the goſpell ſhould

doubt of their ſaluation (notwithſtanding our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith that his  flocke is but ſmall,
                  Luk. 12.32. Matth. 7.14. Luk. 19. Matth. 7.21. and that in compariſon but few ſhall be ſaued.) And this is the opinion of our common Proteſtants, which ſay Lord Lord, and yet are not prepared to doe the will of the Lord, and therefore farre from entring into the Kingdome of heauen.
               
                  
                     3. VVeake Christians full of doubting.Beſides both theſe, many poore ignorant ſoules thinke whiles they doe well and ſerue God, they may be aſſured of their redemption by Chriſt: but if they be by any meanes hindred from pleaſing God, yea, though it be by meere frailtie, and corruption of nature, then they can haue no hold thereof; which vncertaintie, though it cleaue vnto many who are deare vnto the Lord, yet it is to be counted their error and ſinne, and they muſt be brought  to a more ſtaied iudgement, then thus to thinke: that either there is changeablenes with God, or to be ſo much their owne enemies, as by meanes of this error to fill their liues with ſuch vncomfortablenes, and depriue themſelues hereby of this aſſurance of Gods loue, which is the ſtrongeſt perſwaſion to true godlines.
               Theſe are ſome few of a great many doubts and erronious opinions about this matter, as after ſhall appeare. For reſolution whereof, though many things muſt be ſaid, yet the matter it ſelfe may cleerely and ſoundly be ſet downe in few words.
               To the end therefore that theſe and ſuch like many ſee how farre differing  Gods thoughts are from mans, and (as I haue ſaid before) that al which haue receiued this doctrine, may haue it before their eyes daily in ſome eaſie and familiar manner to confirme them, I will, as God hath made me able, ſet downe that which is expedient for this point: and this I haue thought good to referre to theſe three heads.Three generall heads, or parts of this first treatiſe. Firſt, to ſhew how a man may attaine to this, to know that he is the child of God, and how God worketh it by his ſpirit in the hearts of thoſe which are his. Secondly, how the weake beleeuers may vphold themſelues in temptation, and ſo be ſtaied, as ſeeing that they differ apparantly from thoſe, which are not the Lords. And thirdly, how they may afterwards more eaſily prooue that they haue true faith, and be able to  confirme and preſerue the ſame: and finde how much ſuch an eſtate is to be deſired.
               
                  Three branches of the first head.And for the plaine declaration of the firſt point hereof, theſe three things muſt be handled. The firſt, the cleere knowledge of mans miſerie. The ſecond, of his redemption and deliuerance out of the ſame. And the third, how both theſe ought to worke vpon their hearts, and what fruite they will bring foorth by the operation of the holy Ghoſt in ſuch as ſhall be ſaued: That is to ſay, that the one which is the knowledge of miſerie, will wound and humble their hearts, when they ſhall ſee thereby, that they are but dead and damned people. The other will heale the ſores of their hearts, and lift  them vp againe, to the beholding of all their ſinnes pardoned, and their woe remoued ſo, as if they had neuer been preſſed downe with the ſame. And to this ſhall be adioyned a diſcourſe of the lets of faith, and what deſire it is from which it commeth.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 2. Of mans miſerie.
               
                  TO begin therefore with their miſerie,The firſt head. and briefly to ſpeake of it, and the next branch (ſeeing they are of others largely handled) no man muſt think that it is the eſtate wherein God at the firſt created them,The firſt point of mans miſerie. either Adam the father of all the world, or his poſterity which was then in his loines.
               
                   Sure it is (I ſay) that it was not thus with mankind in the beginning: for God then made all things good, and man amongſt other creatures hee made holie, and happie,Gen. 1.26. Heb. 2.7. the lord of all the creatures which were vpon the earth, little inferiour to the Angels, indued with infinite bleſſings, full of beautie and glorie. So that when it might be ſeene that nothing was wanting but this, that he was not altogether free from loſing this bleſſed eſtate, yet euen there the diuell tooke an occaſion againſt him,Reuel. 12. Gen. 3. and deceiued him, and his poſteritie, and caſt them from that happie condition which before they enioyed.
               And yet if this had been all the harme that mankind by the malice of the  diuell ſuſtained, it had been little in reſpect of that which fell vpon him. For behold, beſides the loſſe of his felicitie, he was plunged into extreame miſerie and deſolation, which conſiſteth of theſe two branches,Two parts of mans miſerie: firſt his ſinne. Gen. 6.5.
                   that hee doth alwaies, and in all things offend God, being able to doe nothing but that which diſpleaſeth him, as hauing his heart alwaies and onely euill. And ſecondly, that he in all this is odious to God, and moſt iuſtly accurſed of him.Hoſea 1.2. Coloſſ. 1.21. Mans ſinne vvhat.
                   Mans ſinne is not onely that tranſgreſſion of Adam in moſt vnnaturall and treacherous rebellion, and diſobedience, whereof hee is moſt iuſtly guiltie with Adam, and hath his part (as being to ſtand or fall with him) but another which riſeth out of this, euen that infection of all the powers and members  both of the ſoule and bodie. Which as poyſon put into a cup of wine doth make it deadly, diſperſing it ſelfe into the ſame: in like manner this corruption or concupiſcence, which by the firſt ſinne of Adam is ſpread ouer his poſteritie, doth poyſon his whole nature:Euery part corrupted. ſo that no ſound part is found in him from the crowne of the head to the ſole of the foot. And from hence it is that the vnderſtanding, euen the excellenteſt power of the mind,
                     
                        Ʋnderſtanding. Epheſ. 4.17. is filled with blindnes and darknes, and ſauoureth not the things which are of God. The conſcience is wounded, ſeared, or defiled ſome other way,
                     Conſcience. 1. Cor. 2.14. Heb. 10.22. and neuer ſoundly peaceable. The memorie forgetting good things wholy, or remembring neither good or euill aright, and as it ought, as experience forceth the  beſt to complaine. The will is captiue and of no ſtrength to doe good,
                     VVill. Rom. 8.5.6. neither wanteth habilitie to that which is euill. And thereafter is he caried of his affections, as a chariot on her wheeles, onely to that which diſpleaſeth God. What ſhould I ſay more? For who can chuſe but bewaile and lament ſuch a diſtreſſed and wofull eſtate of the ſoule of man, which ſomtimes hauing been framed after the image of God, in true holines and righteouſnes, is now both emptie of that grace, and filled with all filthines of ſinne and

vncleannes? But alas, who beleeueth this or conſenteth to it, that it is true  that man (who hath ſo good an opinion and high conceit of himſelf) ſhould yet be indeed ſo farre off from that which he dreameth of, and in ſuch bondage and ſlauerie, as hee would ſeeme to be fartheſt off from the leaſt part thereof?Conuerſation. But (to goe forward) if his conuerſation and courſe of liuing, which is the vntimely fruite of this bitter roote, were laid out in her colours (which I muſt onely very briefly touch) it were able to make him who thinketh himſelfe moſt innocent, to appeare moſt vile and loathſome in his owne eyes, aſhamed of himſelfe, and to hide himſelfe in a dungeon that no other might behold him. For (to ſpeake of the actions of the minde) what are his cogitations about heauenly matters,Thoughts. but errors, falſehood and Iyes? What are the  wiſhes and deſires of his heart,Deſires. but earthly, and fleſhly, in degree one aboue another, till he being led away of his concupiſcence, is inticed, and ſo conſenteth thereto,Outvvard behauiour. defendeth it, and is hardened? What is the outward behauiour, but an yeelding vp of the members of the bodie, as inſtruments and weapons of ſinne, euen the ſinne of the tongue, and ſinne of the life? in ſo much that he is all waies, and in all things, and therfore out of meaſure, ſinful. As Paul though he liued after the moſt ſtrict order of the Phariſees, which was in ſhew farre aboue many; yet when he was conuerted could ſay, I was a blaſphemer,
                  1. Tim. 1.15. Rom. 8.7. 
                  an oppreſſor, a perſecutor: So that it is moſt truly verified which is written, that he neither is, nor can be obedient to the law of God, and that he can do  nothing but ſinne.
               The ſinnes of man are as the haires of his head, and ſand of the ſeaſhore, innumerable, and his beſt actions (as his prayers) are no better then abominable before God,Prouer. 28.9. Iohn 9.31. Pſalm. 50.16. as Salomon ſpeaketh: He that turneth his eare from hearing the law, euen his prayer ſhall be abominable. Oh, it is not imagined of thouſands that there is any ſuch euidence to be brought againſt the inhabitants of the earth,Fevv thinke it thus. euen the vnworthie ſonnes of men, which yet were ſometime by creation the ſonnes of God. For the moſt vngodly which can be heard of, will haue ſome goodneſſe to be found in them: ſo farre off is it, that they will yeeld to this cenſure, that all their life is ſinfull. And therefore it is no marueile  though men account of themſelues as they doe, euery one flying to this ſhelter, that he hopeth he is not the worſt of others. For the cleerer laying open of theſe ſinnes particularly, ſome view of Gods law thorough euery commaundement is to be taken: which I would here my ſelfe haue ſet downe, but that I ſhall be occaſioned in another place to doe the ſame.
               But all this ſinne which thus ruleth and raigneth in man, making him not much vnlike the diuels themſelues, is but one part of the miſerie which he is in, yea and the leaſt of the two, in their eyes and iudgement, who are the greateſt number in the world.
               
                  The ſecond part of mans miſery. The curſe first on the body.The other part thereof is, that for this ſinne he is ſubiect to all thoſe fearefull  and horrible plagues which God hath threatned, and executeth in the world vpon the committers thereof, and to that endleſſe puniſhment of condemnation in the world to come, which is the principall and moſt iuſt deſert of euery ſinne. The particular vexations and calamities which belong to ſinners in this life are innumerable, and not to be expreſſed: but ſome for the reſt it ſhall be fit to mention, and the rather for that many thouſands neuer

                   dreame of, and much leſſe are troubled with any ſuch matter. And firſt, as the curſe of God is vpon all creatures for mans cauſe; ſo it is leſſe to be doubted, that it is caſt vpon man himſelfe. So that whatſoeuer he doth, or whereſoeuer he becommeth, the wrath and anger of God followeth and accompanieth him: Curſed he is in the field, and curſed in the houſe, curſed in his basket,
                  Deut. 28.15. 
                  and in his ſtore: and as Moſes ſpeaketh of all the creatures, wherein he ſhould take his repaſt and delight, ſaying: Curſed is the earth for thy ſake,
                  Gen. 3.17. 
                  thornes and briers it ſhall bring foorth vnto thee. From hence come all the dearths, famines, penurie, and pouertie, which euery where are cried out of. In his bodie, ſickneſſe, diſeaſes of many kinds, aches, gripings, ſwellings, burſtings, and other  paines intolerable. In the ſenſes, deafnes, blindnes, numnes, and ſuch like, which ſhould make any heart to quake and tremble to heare them but named. As for friends and kindred, wife and children, father and mother, or whatſoeuer may be thought of, which men are wont to take greateſt pleaſure in: how can they delight mans heart ſoundly, or be pleaſant vnto him, when they are mixed with this ſauce? The Lord accurſeth them, hee will bring him to iudgement for them, euen for enioying them whereto they haue no right nor lawfull libertie, as being not intitled to them by Chriſt, who is heire and Lord of all.Heb. 1.2. If there were but a ſword hanging with the point downward ouer a mans head, which were ſitting at a royall banquet,  what pleaſure could hee take in the varietie of his dainties? But it is another manner of ſlaying a man, if oft in one houre hee muſt be conſtrained with feare to remember and thinke on it, this moment will they take thy ſoule from thee.
               But this goeth not ſo neere mens hearts as it ought,Men ſhift off this. whiles they haue one obiection or other (as it were water) to quench the force and heate of it. For all men (they ſay) are not in this miſerable eſtate, except ſome one or few, who be wearie of their liues, and make all their other delights vnpleaſant to them for the ſame. This (as vnwiſe) they obiect,This curſe is to all. becauſe they are moued with nothing but that which they ſee with their outward eyes, the voyce of  God pierceth not their hearts, although it pronounceth as well to him that eſcapeth al theſe (if any ſuch could be found) as to him who hath bin plagued with them all, euen to one as to another without reſpect of perſons: Woe be to the inhabitants of the earth, becauſe they haue ſinned! So long as this word ſhall be true, no mans eſtate is better then another, all are vnder the wrath of God: Therefore let no man deceiue himſelfe, God is not mocked. How this ought to affect the heart of him that heareth it, we ſhall ſee hereafter: but hee that hardneth his heart at the hearing of this, becauſe he feeleth not, neither ſeeeth any ſuch thing, ſhall ſurely come to euill.
               I haue not yet ſpoken of the plagues and puniſhments which take hold  vpon the ſoule, which are yet more fearefull then thoſe of the bodie,The curſe vpon the ſoule. if ſo be they could as eaſily be diſcerned. A man to be giuen vp to his owne vilde luſts, like a brute beaſt to wallow in filthines, who might haue ſhined as an Angell in goodnes, is there any of iudgement, which counteth it not amongſt the moſt fearefull iudgements? To be vtterly darkned and deſtitute of the true knowledge of God and of the life to come (the knowledge wherof is the beautie of the world) and to be haſtning to endles woe, and yet not

to vnderſtand it: what part of miſerie can be greater in this world? To be ſo  hardned in heart as to be paſt all feeling & remorſe, to fall into vtter deſperation without recouery by any thing he can do: ſuch madnes, frenſie, & heaps of the like, can any thing be thought more full of horror? and all theſe is wofull man vnder. There is none which hath not brought himſelfe into the depth of them all: which is all (I may ſay truly) that he hath to glorie of. So that I thinke it cannot be denied but that he is miſerable: vnto the which to adde (as the ſhutting vp of all) the remedileſſe feares, and deepe doubts, which oft bring anguiſh here, the paines and torture of both ſoule and bodie in the end of this life, when both muſt take vp their dwelling in he
                     •
                  ; who ſo ſhall heare it, muſt needes confeſſe, that there wanteth herein no  piece of miſerie. But ſeeing the Scripture it ſelfe calleth it paine vnſpeakable, I wil not go about to deſcribe it, leaſt I ſhould any way ſeeme to make it leſſe then it is. It is ſufficient for this purpoſe that it is moſt extreame, eaſeleſſe, and endleſſe. This I haue ſaid of the miſerie of man, and of both the parts of it, as I did purpoſe, and that in as few ſentences as well I might, and fewer in deede, then ſuch a weightie matter would haue required, but that it is elſewhere handled by others. And I haue determined to ſay no more then I muſt needes, of thoſe things, which are ſet foorth at large both plainly by many learned brethren, and in very good ſort and order alreadie.
               
                  The neceſſitie of this knovvledge of mans miſerie.Theſe two points of mans miſerie are to be knowne as an eſpeciall part of  Gods truth, of him whom the Lord will ſaue. For hee which knoweth not this, ſwelleth, and is puffed vp, and goeth on in deepe ſecuritie, and cannot doe otherwiſe as long as hee is ignorant of this point: therefore the Lord bringeth him, on whom he purpoſeth to ſhew mercie, to the preaching of his word, and namely his law, which ſheweth him his ſinne and damnation: ſo that he ſhall cleerely vnderſtand it, and that he as well as any other is vnder the power of it.
               But here I thinke it not vnſeaſonable to adde this (ſeeing ignorant people, which lie yet in their ſinnes, doe harden their hearts at the hearing of this) that none haue iuſt cauſe to quarrell with the Lord: for if any thing ſpoken  of in this argument, diſpleaſe them, they may thanke themſelues. But to him they are infinitly beholding, that hee brings this hidden ſecret to light among them, that they ſeeing the plague which is comming towards them, may auoide it, and be rouſed out of the preſent daunger in which they are. And further they may vnderſtand, that God alloweth not his miniſters, who publiſh this meſſage of mans wofull eſtate, to deliuer it barely and nakedly, and to preach the law onely, but to ioyne the glad tidings of the Goſpell with it in their miniſterie, and to preach remiſſion of ſinnes with the vrging of repentance, and with the pricking of the peoples hearts by terror and ſorrow for their ſinnes: as our Sauiour, Iohn Baptiſt, and other his faithfull ſeruants  did. For as none can beleeue, except they repent; ſo none can repent, vnleſſe they beleeue.
               And therefore, I alſo, in the former point hauing ſhewed how this knowledge of his miſerable eſtate muſt be preached vnto him that ſhall be ſaued, am now to ſhew, that he prepareth other doctrine moſt fit for him that hath learned the former: namely, that he cauſeth moſt ioyful and glad tidings of a

                   full and ſufficient remedie againſt all ſuch miſerie to be preached vnto him, without which, how intolerable ſhould the condition of ſuch be?
            
            
               CHAP. 3. Of the knowledge of redemption and deliuerance.
               
                  THis remedie therefore I will firſt lay foorth,It muſt be knovvne as vvell as our miſerie. and then ſhew how God will haue him to vnderſtand and know it, that when he is inlightened to know the will of God both in  the miſerie of man and in his redemption, he may (as God hath appointed) haue them both, worke kindly on him, and ſo know himſelfe the child of God, and heire of ſaluation; ſeeing without ſome knowledge of both, no man is either rightly humbled or exalted. And although there be many which know both points, ſo as ſome can teach them to others, and yet haue vſe of neither: yet can none be ſaued without the knowledge of both. The ſumme of all, which is to be knowne of him, is contained in this ſhort ſentence: Chriſt Ieſus preached (as he is reuealed in the Goſpell) is ſaluation vnto all that beleeue:
                  Ioh. 3.16. 1. Tim. 1.15. 2. Cor. 5.21. Act. 4.12. 1. Ioh. 2.1. and more fully in this ſaying of S. Iohn: God ſo loued the world that he gaue his onely begotten  ſonne, that whoſoeuer beleeueth in him ſhould not periſh, but haue euerlaſting life. And againe, S. Paul: This is a true ſaying, and by all meanes worthie to be receiued, that Chriſt Ieſus came into the world to ſaue ſinners.
               
               Out of theſe places, as alſo many other, to the full and plaine declaration of this remedie, theſe foure things are to be conſidered. Firſt, what it is, and wherein it conſiſteth. Secondly, by whom it is wrought. Thirdly, how it is brought to light and reuealed. And fourthly, how it is receiued and imbraced. Now as concerning the firſt,The firſt point about the remedie. the onely ſufficient remedie for the ſauing of man, is to ſatisfie Gods iuſtice, which by ſinne is violated: without which ſatisfaction, the wrath of God cannot be appeaſed, nor his fauour obtained,  and ſo there can be no redemption. For how ſhould the Lord be perfectly iuſt, if he ſhould chaunge this righteous ſentence of his law, that euery tranſgreſſor is curſed, and only the perfect keeper of the law bleſſed? Now then Gods iuſtice is ſatisfied only by theſe two meanes: Firſt,Gal. 3.10.12. by ſuffering the puniſhment due to ſinne, which is the curſe of God; and the perfect keeping of the law,Heb. 9.22. and 12.14. without which there can be no deliuerance from ſinne and condemnation. The onely remedie of our miſerie conſiſting herein, wee may cleerely ſee that it is out of our ſelues, and not in any other creature: for neither we, nor any other creature for vs, is able either to ſuſtaine the curſe, much leſſe to ouercome it: or perfectly to fulfill the law, which is impoſſible to  fleſh. Whereby is quite ouerthrowne the foundation of Poperie,Rom. 8 3. and all opinion of merite, or of any thing in man to auaile to his iuſtification.
               But to goe forward to the ſecond point, to ſhew by whom it is purchaſed:The ſecond point about the remedie. This remedie, which could be had by no other, is appointed by the Father, vndertaken and wrought by Chriſt, and ſealed in mens hearts by the holie Ghoſt. It is wrought (I ſay) and found only and wholy in Ieſus Chriſt, God and man, who being perfect God tooke our humane nature on him; and in

both became a moſt mercifull Mediatour betwixt his father and vs, to reconcile  vs to him: and both ſuffered the full weight of Gods curſe due to our ſinne, by the power of his Godhead ouercomming the ſame, as alſo fulfilled the law for vs, whereby he fully ſatisfied the iuſtice of God. So that moſt truly it is ſaid,Act. 4.12. that ſaluation is in no other, but that in him onely is the whole remedie of the miſerie of mankinde to be found: There is giuen no other name vnder heauen (as the holy Ghoſt ſpeaketh) whereby we muſt be ſaued: So that whoſoeuer hath the Son (as S.1. Ioh. 5.12. 
                  Iohn ſaith) for to redeeme him, hath life, and he that hath not the Sonne, hath not life. And to make vp the whole matter: if any ſhould aske how Chriſts redemption is made mans, he is to know, that God his father of his marueilous loue gaue him freely (euen as hee had long before  promiſed him) with all his whole worke of redemption, as the Apoſtle ſaith:Rom. 58. 
                  God declared his loue to vs, that when wee were yet his enemies, he ſent Chriſt to die for vs, that whoſoeuer beleeueth in him, ſhould not any longer lie vnder Gods wrath and periſh,
                  Ioh. 3.16. 
                  but haue euerlaſting life; he being giuen vs of his father to be our wiſedome, righteouſnes, ſanctification and redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. Now if by him alone God hath brought this moſt ſoueraigne remedie to mankind, againſt the intolerable woe, which by ſinne is come into the world, and is (as hath been ſaid) gone ouer all men, the popiſh practizers may bluſh and be aſhamed, who part ſtakes betwixt him and creatures, and ſo aſcribe not the whole worke of our ſaluation to Chriſt alone.
               
               
                  The third point about the remedie.The third thing, namely how this diuine myſterie and ſecret is brought to light, is (in the peaceable and flouriſhing eſtate of Chriſts Church) the glorious Goſpell: which becauſe it containeth the moſt worthie and acceptable meſſage of mans full redemption by Ieſus Chriſt, is called of S. Paul, the power of ſaluation to all that beleeue.
                  Rom. 1.16. The vſe of the which Goſpell is, to manifeſt that righteouſnes in Chriſt, whereby the whole law is fully ſatisfied and ſaluation attained. The which being ſoundly and plainly publiſhed and preached by the faithfull miniſters and meſſengers of God, and namely this part of it, that mankind is fully redeemed by the bloud of Chriſt Ieſus, the onely begotten ſonne of God, manifeſt in the fleſh, doth bring great and  exceeding ioy:Luk. 2.10. and is imbraced of them which know the value and price of it,Matth. 11.12. with all poſſible welcomming of it. And this, though more darkly, as the times were, the Lord cauſed to be taught vnder the law in types and ſhadowes, prefiguring Chriſt to come and to be exhibited; euen as he ſaith in Ioh. 5.46. Moſes wrote of me: though indeede now vnder the Goſpell farre more cleerely and plainly, that it may now be verified, if euer, that Chriſt by preaching him, hath been crucified in our eyes. So that by this, is this myſterie of ſaluation (purchaſed by his death) manifeſted vnto vs.
               
                  The fourth point about the remedie.Now the fourth point remaines, how this tidings of Chriſts deliuering man from the feare of the wrath to come, is receiued in the world: and that  is by faith. For there is no way to receiue Chriſt and all his merits (the full medicine of mans miſerie) but by faith. This true faith therefore is to be knowne, what it is, and how it is wrought: that ſo by it hee may receiue Chriſt and be ſaued. Now this true faith, which for the worthie effect of it, we call iuſtifying faith, is nothing elſe but a ſound beleefe in that promiſe of life,Matth. 11.28. that poore ſinners comming vnto Chriſt, he will eaſe them, that is,

                   free them from all woe, and reſtore them to all happines here and for euer:Act. 26.18. and to be ſhort, ſo to giue credit to Gods word,Hebr. 4.1. Rom. 10. as hee reſt thereon that hee will ſaue him. Which true faith is wrought in him by the miniſterie of the word, reuealing this mercie and truth of God: and by theſe, the holie Ghoſt inlightening him to conceiue, and drawing him to beleeue, and ſo vniting him to Chriſt: which whoſoeuer hath thus receiued, is hereby made the child of God (ſo as he himſelfe ſhall ſee it) and an inheritour by ſure hope of eternall life. This therefore is to be knowne of him who ſhall be ſaued, and his iudgement is to be ſetled in this truth, before he enioy it as his owne, or can haue his part in it. He muſt be able to ſee cleerely and ſoundly that God  hath made this Chriſt Ieſus his ſonne Lord ouer all creatures, conqueror of the diuels, deliuerer of the captiues, & comforter of the heauie hearts: ſo that by him there is as full pardon of ſinne purchaſed,Rom. 5. as euer was by Adam procured guiltines and condemnation. And thus much of theſe two firſt points, that he whom God will effectually call to the aſſurance of ſaluation, muſt haue knowledge in generall of mans miſerie and Gods mercie by Chriſts redemption.
            
            
               CHAP. 4.  How this knowledge worketh, and namely, the firſt worke that God maketh them beleeue their miſerie, and to be troubled in minde for it.
               
                  THere is yet wanting the true imbracing and applying of Chriſt, with all the merits of his death and paſſion,The third poynt of the first part of this Treatiſe. to this man that hath the foreſaid knowledge, or elſe he can in no wiſe be happie. Let vs ſee therefore how this knowledge worketh in him, on whom God will ſhew mercie, how God by the light and helpe of it draweth him forward, vntill he beleeue for his owne part, and in his owne perſon, which the other,  who haue onely the generall knowledge before mentioned, neuer attained to. And this is the laſt of the three points, which I purpoſed to handle about this matter, namely in ſhewing who is the child of God. Which being done, the queſtion in hand ſhall appeare and be manifeſt. This onely by the way it ſhall be fit to admoniſh the reader of (as I ſaid before) that he is in no way to the kingdome of heauen, who is yet voide of this knowledge altogether, of his miſerie (I meane) and of the remedie: which kind of people, although they are leaſt troubled in their conſciences of all other men, but are merrie,
                     Rom. 7.9. They are most light, who haue most cauſe to mourne. as though no daunger were comming toward them (and therefore keepe a courſe in their liues which is after the faſhion of the world) are to be pitied  and prayed for, and to be perſwaded to heare the word preached, rather then to be allowed in their madnes and follie. Who verifie moſt rightly the ſaying of the Wiſeman: That there is a way that ſeemeth pleaſant to them,
                  Prouer. 14.12. Act. 14.16. 
                  but the iſſues thereof are the way of death. God ſuffering them (as he did the Gentiles) to walke in their owne waies.
               But to leaue them as ſufficiently conuinced of a wofull eſtate, euen by the teſtimonie of men, who haue any iudgement, and to goe forward with that

which is in hand, that is, to ſhew how this doctrine worketh in him, who by  it ſhall come to true faith and aſſured hope of ſaluation, we are to know, that he remaineth not an idle and vnprofitable hearer, as ſometime, and as many other ſtill doe, but is ſecretly drawne, he cannot tell how, by the vnſpeakable worke of the ſpirit of God to be perſwaded, that the doctrine taught doth conerne him;Col. 1.9. the Lord giuing him with his knowledge, wiſedome, which is a gift of the ſpirit, whereby he applleth generall things particularly to himſelfe: and that he thereby ſpeaketh vnto him, as well as he doth to any other, in the denouncing the threats of the law,Rom. 15.4. and euerlaſting damnation: and (his eyes being now opened to beleeue this) he thinketh himſelfe the miſerableſt of all other, who before nothing at all regarded the welfare of his  ſoule, but thought himſelfe in as good caſe to Godward, as any other. Hee now perceiueth (I ſay) himſelfe not onely a loathſome creature in Gods ſight, through the Ieproſie of ſinne, but withall a moſt curſed and damned creature, ſubiect to all Gods plagues in this world, and to condemnation in the world to come. For although the world lie in darknes, and beleeueth not the law of God, leaſt it ſhould be conuicted by it (and therefore cannot beleeue the promiſes of the Goſpell) yet God otherwiſe prouideth for his, that they by ſeeing and feeling the deſert of their ſinnes, may haue an appetite thereby to ſeeke mercie and forgiuenes, which without it is vnſauourie to them: as our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith, The whole haue no neede of the Phiſition, but  the ſicke, Matth. 9.12. Neither let this deepe impreſſion of the doctrine of the law preached (being no leſſe ſenſible to the partie that feeles it, then the print of the ſeale is to our eye in the ſoft waxe:) let it not (I ſay) be counted a meane and common mercie: In deede it is meanly accounted of, the doctrine of it being ſo common and oft taught. For as it is ſaid of faith, Luk. 18.8. that when the Sonne of man commeth, he ſhall finde it rare in the world: ſo in ſome ſort wee may ſay of this, that it is rare, that men, who know that all are vnder the wrath of God, till the Sonne of God make them free, doe beleeue indeede that it is ſo with them, and euen their owne caſe.
               Oh, men ſhunne this as death (and yet without beleeuing it there is no  life) for did they beleeue it perſonally for their owne parts, they could not but lay it to heart: ſo as the whole powers thereof ſhould be taken vp with the cogitation of it (as it is with vs at the ſudden hearing of heauie newes) yea all the powers of the minde and heart would be affected with it, euen as a man is by the ſting of an Adder, or when he is pricked with the point of a ſword: ſo (I ſay) it is with him that doth vnfainedly beleeue his owne miſerie, without exception caſting away all deluding conceits which might hinder it: ſuch a ſudden alteration it ſhall worke in him, how farre off ſo euer hee was before that from it.Act. 2.37. And that is liuely ſet foorth in the example of the three thouſand that were conuerted at Peters ſermon: who for their eſtate  before, had been of them that crucified Chriſt, and euen at that preſent time were mockers and railers at the Apoſtles, ſaying, they were drunken with new wine: yet when on the ſudden the Lord arreſted them by his word and challenge, and with his ſpirituall ſword, by Peters skilfull handling the ſame, had wounded and ſtriken them (ſo as they could not ſcape nor reſiſt the power and ſtroke of it) they were pricked in their harts, as if an arrow had pierced

                   their liuer, crying out immediatly, that the paine which they felt within them was intolerable: which they expreſſed in their words when they made their mone euen vnto them whom they had ſo lately railed vpon; now ſpeaking with new tongues (which is admirable) Men and brethren, what ſhall wee doe? Euen thus in ſome ſort doth the Lord worke, when hee maketh them to giue credit to this his thundring voyce by his law arraigning men for their ſinnes: which is no leſſe fearefull to them then the roaring of a lion, when yet other men, whoſe ſinnes are as great, and haue as good cauſe to be feared, and to faint vnder the burthen of them, are not a whit mooued thereat: not moued, I ſay, through the commonnes of it, any more then the  fowles are afraid of the ſcar-crow, after they haue been long accuſtomed to it, who in time dare ſit vpon the head of it, and plucke ſtrawes out of the very noſe thereof.
               And this I doe the more ſtand vpon, to make this point cleere, becauſe I haue obſerued by long experience, how groſſely the people of our age doe ſuffer themſelues to be bewitched about this matter. For to bewaile them who are ſoone healed, if they be pricked at all, and them who fall deadly to raging at the Miniſter, if their hearts be vexed by hearing their daunger: I ſay, to bewaile the eſtate of them, there is yet a third ſort (in number an hundred for one of the other) who were neuer troubled in conſcience for their  ſinne, or the woe that it hath purchaſed them; neither doe once dreame that ſuch a thing is needfull for them: but eate, drinke and ſleepe, ſome play,Matth. 24.27. and ſome worke; and, as they did in the daies of Noah, imbrace this preſent euill world, prophane, merrie, yea and light-hearted, when (as S.Iam. 4.9. 
                  Iames ſaith) they ſhould houle and mourne: and as though they feared no more then they would make men beleeue they doe, are neuer ſcared, till the very time and houre of death, or deadly daunger. But what do they then? when they haue called in luſtily, as men at a banquet, I meane, when they haue taken their pleaſure and liued therein? I ſay, when they ſee their reckoning, and day of accounts is neere, then what doe they? where is their mirth become? Oh,  they die as Nabal, that is, as fooles, and are as he was, when he heard he ſhuld die, as a ſtone, and a blocke: or deſpaire, as Iudas did, and ſome of them die as he died, that is, ſooner then they needed (as well as they loued their life.) And the beſt ſort of them are but as they that are ſpoken of by the Prophet, that is, they haue no bands in their death: they die quietly, perhaps with a Lord haue mercie on vs: but they not regarding bleſsing in their life,Pſalm. 73.4. Luk. 13.2. it is now farre from them at their death, and therefore dying without repentance, let other be feared by them.
               And yet while the world is full of ſuch people (as I haue ſaid) behold, as if they yet wanted ſomething to make them miſerable, how this vnſauourie  and dangerous ſpeech is ſpread farre and neere among ſuch,The lavv is to be preached. by many miniſters as well as common perſons: who crie out, that it is pitie that ſome are ſuffered to preach the lawe: and that ſuch vrging of mens conſciences for their ſinnes, is enough to driue the people to deſperation: and ſuch like. When yet S.2. Tim. 4.2. 
                  Paul commaunds that the word be preached with all authoritie, which men may not be able to reſiſt, and with conuincing of the conſcience. And S. Luke in the Acts commends the fruite of that doctrine ſo highlie,

euen that they were pricked in their harts for their ſinnes, without which  they had neither repented,But not vvithout the Goſpell. nor obtained pardon of their ſinnes. Indeede, if any preach the law alone without the glad tidings of the Goſpell, or vrge repentance without the incouragement of Gods mercie through Chriſt and forgiuenes of ſinnes, he were worthie to be ſharply reproued, and to bee reſtrained till he ſhould amend ſo dangerous an error and ſo grieuous a fault. But if any finde fault with the ioyning of both together, when experience and Scripture doe ſhew, that no other kinde of preaching can profit and doe good in the Church, they are earneſtly to be deſired, if they doe it of ignorance, to be taught; if of a worſe minde, to deſiſt from it. But this ſhall ſuffice for anſwere to this ſpeech, raſhly and vnwiſely caſt foorth to cauſe many to  ſtumble at. I returne to that from which I went aſide a little, to perſwade thoſe which are teachable, that God doth vſe to make his law to caſt downe ſuch as he purpoſeth to lift vp againe, as I haue ſaid.
               The Scripture yeeldeth many complaints and cryings out of Gods ſeruants, who acknowledged as much: Some when they had once eſcaped the daunger of their former woe;1. Tim. 1.13. as that of Paul to Timothie doth teſtifie; I was a blaſphemer, a perſecutor, and an oppreſſor: Some in the time of their diſtreſſe, as by that in Ieremy;
                  Ierem. 21.18. Iudg. 2.3. & 10. 1. Sam. 7.2.3. 
                  I heard Ephraim complaining thus: Conuert me O Lord, or els I cannot be conuerted: and they in Sam. 1.12.20. with many other. And God be thanked, although they are but a few of ſo many thouſands as haue liued  in former ages, yet he hath not left this vnwitneſſed by many in this our age, of whom ſome are fallen aſleepe, and others remaine amongſt vs vnto this day, who with bitter complaints, ſalt teares, and dolefull groanes, no leſſe ſenſibly, then Iacob ſorrowed when he thought that a wild beaſt had deuoured his ſonne Ioſeph, Gen. 37.34. haue confeſſed the depth of their woe, ſighing and ſeeking, if by any meanes they might finde eaſe and deliuerance: although the moſt are hardned, and can bee brought to no ſuch abaſement.
               
                  Obiection.And if that which I haue ſaid before to this purpoſe perſwade not men to thinke ſo: but this which I ſay is the leſſe beleeued and regarded, ſeeing  many, and thoſe as great ſinners as moſt others, are as merie, or at leaſt as farre from any wound or ſting of conſcience as any, which a man would thinke were not like to be, if they were in ſuch depth of miſerie: Let them know, they haue little to take comfort in that;Anſvvere. for (as I haue ſaid) this is ſo with ſome, becauſe they neither know nor beleeue this, but they lie in ignorance and vnbeliefe, and therefore neither ſuſpect, nor feare any ſuch thing, and ſo it is with all the world vntill they haue knowledge by the law: and Paul ſheweth that it was ſo with him, till the law reuealed it to him, for ſo he ſaith Rom. 7.8. I once was aliue before the Lawe, that is, I thought myſelfe in moſt perfect ſafetie: euen through this ignorance I ſay, and vnbeliefe it is, that this  which I haue ſayd lieth as dead, and not a man of a thouſand dreameth of, or is feared with any ſuch matter. And this is furthered by the vnskilfulneſſe and careleſneſſe of the Miniſters, who as the Lords watchmen ſhould awake their people out of their deepe and deadly ſleepe, when they yet haue ofttimes healed the hurt of the daughter of Gods people with ſweete words, ſaying, peace, peace, when there is no peace, Ierem. 6.14. For with ſuch as by the

                   loue and labour of their faithfull teachers haue been wiſely plied and followed, it may be ſeene to be otherwiſe; and there ye may find many (though all take not good thereby) which haue knowledge of and beleeue theſe things, which bewrayeth the blindnes and bondage of the reſt, almoſt the whole world, who would laugh out, and mocke at this doctrine, and make al beleeue that there is no ſuch matter. But I haue bin long in this; I will now proceede to the next point, and ſhew further how God worketh in him, whom he will ſaue, when he hath brought him thus farre.
               
                  The ſecond worke: they conſult in this caſe what to doe.
                  
                  AFter that he ſeeth by the doctrine which hee hath heard, how the caſe ſtandeth with him, namely that he is guiltie before God of eternall puniſhment and wrath, and ſeeth not how to eſcape the ſame hanging ouer him; the Lord directeth him and guideth his heart to enter into further conſideration with himſelfe of and about his preſent eſtate, and conſulteth what to doe in that his extremitie. Neither doth he this lightly or houerly (as many) after he hath heard the neceſſitie of that dutie taught him, and the ſame earneſtly vrged vnto him: but mindeth it ſeriouſly, and goeth about it as a matter of life and death.
                  
                      That God thus moueth him to deliberate in ſo weightie and doubtfull a caſe, no man neede to call it into queſtion, when nothing is well done without it, in earthly matters of any moment, where the wit of man is the chiefe or only agent and dealer. For we know that raſhnes doth nothing well: how much more then may we think, that God will not ſuffer him, whom he meaneth to bring to ſo great honour as the aſſured hope of ſaluation is, to goe about it without due regard and conſideration? eſpecially, he dealing by ordinary meanes, where they may be had and come by? But that he entreth into conſultation what to doe,Ierem. 8.6.7. it is euident by that the Prophet Ieremy ſaith with a vehement complaint, when the people were called to repentance, and  the Prophet waited to ſee what fruit ſhould follow, that there was none that ſaid, What haue I done? that is, none entred into conſultation about the matter. Therefore it is ſaid, that the prodigall ſonne,Luk. 15.17. who reſembleth moſt rightly the ſinner, and in his returning home to his father reſembleth the penitent ſinner in turning to God: that he did before that, come to himſelfe, and ſay, How many hired ſeruants in my fathers houſe haue bread enough, and I die for hunger? Which, what other thing was it, then to conſider and deliberate what he were beſt to doe? And the Steward queſtioning with himſelfe what to doe, when hee was warned to giue an account of his ſtewardſhip, doth plainly teach this. Beſides all that hath been ſaid, if the godly who had fallen, could  not repent before they remembred and conſidered their fall, and from whom they were fallen, as we reade of the Church of Epheſus,Reuel. 2.4. and Peter before he wept bitterly remembred the words of Ieſus, and how he had tranſgreſſed againſt them: Vpon all theſe conſiderations, let vs not doubt, but that God draweth his, to conſult about their eſtate what they ſhould doe, being in anguiſh and diſtreſſe of mind. And that they may looke for little good to come of their caſting downe, and ſorrow, which by the law is conceiued in

them, if they doe not in the moſt ſerious manner, as they be able, and as the  caſe requireth, thinke and deliberate about it. And therfore they whom God watcheth ouer, if they be not able to counſel themſelues, yet the Lord guides them to aske counſell of others, as the forementioned example in the Acts, and of the woman of Samaria doth teach: And in what manner hee doth this, & what thoughts he hath about the ſame, is not hard to coniecture; but euen as other in the ſame eſtate, mentioned in the Scripture doe teſtifie: namely what he is to doe, and whether there bee any hope, how hee was bewitched to come to that eſtate;The complaint of the penitent ſinner. what he hath loſt, and depriued himſelfe of, in this his eſtrangement from God, by following and ſeeking his owne will, and fooliſh libertie: he ſeeth an end is come of the curſed race which he hath  runne, and that little time which he hath yet remaining, will alſo full ſoone be gone: His delights, ieſts, merrie conceits, dreames, and vaine hope that hee had of long life, of promotion, increaſe of riches, of good cheere with his companions, or ſuch like, alas they are gone! he is aſhamed to thinke what deceiueable pleaſures they were. And as for ſafetie and ſound peace, he ſeeth how farre off from them he is. He ſeeth that his former life will be called to an account, and is alreadie. And although he thinketh of delaies, excuſes, or other vaine ſhifts and deceiuing of himſelfe: yet he ſeeth that theſe cannot put away the deadly remembrance of his wofull eſtate, eſpecially when hee conſidereth, that God will not be mocked, nor his word be fruſtrate, which hath  bewraied his miſerie.
                  He will therefore conſult no longer with fleſh and bloud, as he hath done, but putteth away all fleſhly and carnall ſhifts and holds; and by Gods gracious direction taketh counſell by the knowledge that hee hath; and conſidereth that no man can come to Chriſt, if the heauenly father draw him not by his ſpirit: And therefore although the ſorrow of hypocrites vaniſheth away, and commeth to nothing, yet by Gods gracious working in him, it becommeth an occaſion of humbling and breaking of heart vnto him, and of much other good, as hereafter wee ſhall ſee. Alſo he conſidereth that God is ſlow to anger, and readie to forgiue ſinners, being gracious and full of mercie: And though that  thought be repelled through the remembrance of the greatnes of his ſinne, and vnacquaintednes with the promiſe; yet there is no doubt, but that he is ſecretly vpholden by it from dreadfull deſpayre. Thus while preſent comfort faileth he ſorroweth ſtill, and the more deeply, for that he thinketh verely that he hath no part in it: and therfore being cut off that way for the time, he cannot but returne to think of his deſolation and woful condition, which breedeth deepe ſighs and ſorrowes afreſh: And he breaking foorth, as one full, which can hold no longer, it wrings out ſuch ſtrong cryes, Oh miſerable man that I am! what ſhall I doe? how ſhall I eſcape this fearefull vengeance? In this heauines, he accuſeth himſelfe, and complaineth: but to auoide that  miſerie, he ſeeth it impoſſible; and to go vnder it ſtill, he feeles it intolerable. And although he knoweth that there is a remedie, and what it is (which yet many in ſuch heauines and abaſement doe dimmely and weakly know, and therefore their ſorrow is the more) yet can he not apply it to himſelfe by any meanes. In this extremitie therefore of his, and being in this ſtreight and diſtreſſe,Rom. 7.24. he crieth out with Paul: O wretched man that I am! who ſhall deliuer me?
                     
                      And therefore the Lord guideth him to ſome inſtructour, as hee did Paul to Ananias, Act. 9.17. or ſtayeth him by the publike miniſterie, or by his owne knowledge bringeth him, as wee reade of the prodigall child, Luk. 15.17. to counſell himſelfe by that which he hath heard.
               
               
                  The third worke: they are broken hearted and humbled.
                  THe former conſultation by Gods working, bringeth this reſolution to him, that he will no more looke backe to his old Sodom, what hard conditions ſoeuer he go vnder, and ſo he falleth to relenting, his heart is broken,  and he humbled and abaſed, and in this ſpirit of meeknes ſaith,Luk. 17.9. as Paul did after he was caſt down, Act. 9.6. Lord, what wilt thou haue me to doe? And now he ſeeth that the Lord hath him at aduantage (as a man bound in chaines) readie and attendant to whatſoeuer it pleaſeth him, who before, for his ſtiffe-necked ſtubbornnes was neither to be entreated, commaunded, nor feared. This vnfained humbling of himſelfe before God, for all his wants, breaches, and wounds in conſcience, is a beginning of all goodnes and grace, which man feeleth in himſelfe, and caſteth off pride, and the ſtrength of an high minde: and what knowledge of religion, or any other good gifts ſoeuer a man hath without humilitie, he is but vnreformed and vnmortified. An happie  diſcipline and nurture to be wondred at, that can ſo ſoone and ſuddenly breake the clods of ſo hard an heart, and ſo eaſily winde him as a twigge or wand, whether it liſteth him, who could not before, any more then the great tree in the leaſt manner, be bowed.
                  Thus muſt the Lord worke and ſhew his wiſedome and power vpon this vnframed and crooked perſon, before he can be made right and ſtraight. But what then (perhaps you will ſay) and what is this man the neerer to Gods kingdome, and the ſight and knowledge of his redemption, out of his forementioned miſerie? I anſwere, Very much euery manner of way. For being thus humbled, he is now eaſily to be perſwaded: and being by the ſame ſpirit of  God enlightened, whereby he was caſt downe with heauines and feare before, he is fit to thinke of, and to remember the ſweete promiſes of God, which before though he had heard, yet ſaw that he had nothing to doe with them, and therfore durſt not hearken after them: Now he can thinke of that, which by preaching he ſometime heard, as one who may be in hope to be the better for it, that God is of that nature, that he may be entreated, and reconciled to him.
               
               
                  The fourth worke: a ſecret deſire of forgiuenes.
                  
                      ANd by ſuch conſiderations he raiſeth vp himſelfe, and the Lord kindleth in him an eſpeciall deſire of the forgiuenes of ſinnes, and of the fauour of God, which cannot be right and well ordered, if it did not proceede from ſome hope that God will be entreated of him.
                  Here therefore he ſetteth before his eyes, more cleerely then he could before, the nature of God, how louing and kinde he is: how readie to pardon: and how how great ſinners (who might more eaſily be diſmaied then he) haue

found fauour with him. It is alſo (by Gods good directing of him) much to  the helping forward of him, that he remembreth none are exempted from this benefit,Matth. 12.20. Matth. 11.24. Matth. 5.4. but ſuch as exempt themſelues: And that the bruſed reede eſpecially, ſhall not be broken, nor the contrite heart deſpiſed, but the heauie laden comming to him ſhall be eaſed, and they who mourne ſhall be comforted, being bleſſed alreadie.
                  
                  And although through ignorance, and ill building vp, many are farre from thoſe thoughts & affections a long time (the diuell working vpon their weaknes) and God ſo diſpoſeth it alſo, that euen ſome ſuch as haue the beſt meanes and helpes to ſet them forward, may feele and ſee their owne weaknes for a time; yet doth he worke thoſe things in them at one time or other, if he purpoſe to ſaue them: and this feruent deſire (I meane) though in ſome  with more timorouſnes, and this hungring after mercie which God ſtirreth vp in him, and this earneſt longing after a remedie by Chriſt, is ſuch and ſo feruent in him, that as a man appointed to death ſetteth not by all the pleaſures and gaine in the world, in compariſon of a pardon, without which he cannot haue ioy in any thing: So this poore ſinner feeling the terrour of Gods curſe, and knowing that there is no releaſe for him, but only in Chriſt, (whom if he haue,Matth. 9.12. Luk. 7.38. he ſhall be ſaued; and if he haue not, he ſhall periſh euerlaſtingly) doth aboue all things in the world ſigh after him, longing to bee made partaker of him.
                  In this hunger therfore and thirſt of his, after pardon, how welcome think  we ſhall good tidings be now vnto him? Such a man ſo low brought, and ſo abaſed in his owne eyes, and ſo farre from all hope of worldly remedie either in himſelf or in other; if he might be ſtaied with any word of comfort at that time, how acceptable were it like to bee vnto him? Much more welcome doubtleſſe then all the promiſes of the Goſpell haue euer been to him before, or then all things in the world be now to him beſides. Then if hee might haue the courſeſt diet, it would be ſweete and moſt ſauourie, to whom an hony combe before,
                     Prou. 28.9. Matth. 15.27. Luk. 15.17.18. 
                     was not pleaſant: nay, crummes vnder the table are comfortable refreſhings to him; who before, was glutted with the childrens dainties. Oh, how glad ſuch an one would be, if he might be receiued of his  heauēly father to be but as an hired ſeruant, who could not before be brought to like of the place of a ſonne? But he that could bring him tidings of righteouſnes, that is, a meſſenger ſent of God to tell him that God will be mercifull to his offences,
                     Iob. 33.23. 
                     and thinke vpon his ſinnes no more, this ſhould be vnto him an odde man, and one of a thouſand. Then to heare that Ieſus Chriſt hath vanquiſhed ſinne, death and the diuell, who had power ouer him, and brought to light immortalitie and life to him, and hath giuen him perfect righteouſnes to couer his ſhame, and to make him comely and well fauoured in the ſight of God, and that hereby he is fully reconciled to him againe: all the former diſgrace, anguiſh of minde, and deadly thraldome abandoned, what thinke  we can be more welcome?
                  Is it to be thought, that a man being in this caſe before mentioned, filled with miſerie from top to the toe, not knowing where to hide himſelfe, not ſeeing how to go vnder the burthen of his griefe, would make no reckoning of this meſſage? as if a man thirſting almoſt to death ſhould refuſe to drinke; or one at the place of execution ſhould reiect his pardon. Among other

                      thoughts, this is not the leaſt profitable which God enableth him to faſten vpon, that laying (as it were) his eſtate in a paire of ballance, he ſeeth that there is no hope of mercie, but certaine condemnation by lying ſtill in the eſtate, wherin he hath liued; and that he cannot appeare before Gods iudgement ſeate in it: now on the otherſide, he conſidering that God calling ſinners to repentance, & giuing his ſon to redeeme euen great offenders, that it may be (as the King of Niniueh ſaid) he will haue mercie vpon him; ſo that there is ſome hope by ſuing and ſeeking in humility & remorſe vnto God: thus the Lord ſtill bringeth him on. And whereas ſome other in this caſe haſteth out of his ſorrow, if by any meanes he may either break through it, before it hath  humbled him, or wrought any ſuch effect, as to long after a remedy & deliuerance, or els ouercome of it: yet the ſoule of the poore ſinner whom God meaneth to ſaue, being meekned & humbled, waiteth till God doth further ſtay and vphold it, with continued ſighs & deſires, that the bright beames of his fauour through Chriſt might ſhine vpon him, he deſiring aboue al things to be vnburthened of this woe, & pardon of his ſins, and yet hath no power perhaps to pray for that which his ſoule moſt feruently deſireth. After this and ſuch like manner (as hath bin ſaid) is his conſultation & reſolution: and this is his mind, & thus he deliberateth and caſteth with himſelf: for though he in this caſe is not able to expreſſe his meaning, yet if he could vtter that  which he conceiueth, he would ſay, that theſe are his very thoughts and conſiderations with himſelfe. In which eſtate of his, although I affirme not that he is able to applie the remedie to himſelfe, yet this generall hope which hee hath found by the promiſes, that God is kind and mercifull to broken hearted ſinners, doth cauſe him to ſtay himſelf, that he may perhaps be ſo to him: and reſolueth vnfainedly and with full purpoſe, to goe forward in ſeeking forgiuenes of his ſinnes at Gods hands, this way he will take, if he periſheth he periſheth: yet ſome hope he hath; he reſoluing with himſelfe that he will neuer walke in his former deadly eſtate, but that he will confeſſe and lay foorth his long continued wickednes, vnto the Lord, though it be againſt himſelfe:  neither will he ſpare himſelfe, wherein he hath moſt pleaſed his owne heart: for why? he ſeeth what and how vaine the deſires of it be: and therefore is reſolute neuer to turne to them any more: yet (he being well inſtructed) maketh not this purpoſe of forſaking ſinne any meanes of his iuſtification, but in deteſtation of his former wickednes is moued and drawne by God ſo to doe. This reſoluing therefore, is one ſteppe or degree by which he paſſeth vnto the fuller certaintie of that happines which he ſeeketh: and he hath receiued a great meaſure of grace and fauour, when he hath attained to it: therfore Sathan who knoweth this, holdeth men by many ſtrong cords from it, that although they bee long about it, yet as faint chapmen who are bidding  ſtill, for the ware which they would haue, but yet buy it not: euen ſo doe they. For when they haue been well counſelled to make haſte in ſeeking the Lord, as that which is beſt of all for them, yet profit or pleaſure, friendſhip or feare holdeth them backe: who although in their heate and haſte, being ſore driuen by ſicknes, tempeſts, feare of death, or the like occaſions, they doe raſhly purpoſe and proteſt, that they will neuer be the men, which they haue been; yet doe but how for a day (as it were) like the bulruſh, with the wind: and

therefore they are farre from the truth of it: But he of whom I here ſpeake, who hath ſo neerely and deeply looked into his eſtate (which the other haue not done) he (I ſay) cannot be drawne backe, to his former looſenes and licentiouſnes, nor holden and kept in it any longer by any torture, becauſe he well knoweth that none is like terrible to it.
                  Now if it be asked, what he is the better for his reſoluing: to the end it may more cleerely appeare, I anſwere, that when this is wrought in him, his heart is mollified, humbled and ſoftned, as Pauls was; who after hee ſaw that God ſet himſelfe againſt his going to Damaſcus to perſecute his Saints, and threw him down on the ground,Acts. 9.6. ſaid: Lord, what wilt thou haue me to doe? And when he is brought to this point, his heart is both full of relenting, and ſorrow  for diſpleaſing God, though not in ſuch ſort as afterward it ſhall be, (which from another not hauing thus reſolued, is farre off) and is now an heart of fleſh,
                     Ezech. 36.26. 
                     not of ſtone, in which, the ſauing grace of God being offered, may be planted and receiued. And all this is wrought in him by the marueilous and ſecret operation of Gods holy ſpirit; who as he beginneth, and finiſheth the whole worke of his receiuing Chriſt; ſo doth he the middle part of the ſame: for it is not in any other, thus to bow and bend mans heart. Neither doth Gods ſpirit that onely, as with an hammer breaking and bruſing the clods of it, but alſo doth leade him further.
                  
               
               
                  The fift worke: they confeſſe and aske pardon.
                  FOr with theſe holie affections in this poore ſinner, there is wrought an encouragement and ſome more bold acceſſe to God by the ſame ſpirit, to confeſſe his ſinnes to God, euen as particularly as he can, eſpecially thoſe in which he hath taken moſt pleaſure, and which haue moſt preuailed in him: and to ſay with the prodigall child, I will goe vnto my father, and confeſſe, father, I haue ſinned againſt heauen and thee,
                     Luk. 15.18. 
                     &c. how much ſoeuer it goeth againſt him: and as he confeſſeth his ſin, ſo he powreth out earneſt praiers to him for the pardon of thē, through the mediation of Chriſt. All which, howſoeuer  they ſeeme to him to be no great matters (who is not as yet a competent and ſufficient iudge in this caſe) yet the Scripture commendeth them to be great, euen the fruite of ſome little and weake faith,Rom. 10.14. and him, who obtaineth them, to be in eſpeciall fauour with God: as in the forenamed parable is moſt liuely to be ſeene: where the father (reſembling God) is ſaid to haue met his loſt ſonne before he came at him, and to haue imbraced and kiſſed him, after that hee was reſolued in himſelfe to goe and ſeeke to him for fauour and pardon, and to acknowledge his faults vnto him, &c. Now was there any thing (thinke we) in the naturall father, which is not much more in the father of mercie? who exceedeth all the fathers of the earth in kindnes and compaſſion. Thus the  Lord by his holy ſpirit worketh in the hearts of his children, and with all theſe forementioned graces, which he giueth them, he draweth them to priſe and value this benefit of redemption ſo highly, as the wiſe Merchant doth the field,
                     Matth. 13.44. 
                     wherein the pearle is hidden, ſelling all to buy it: ſo doe they (I ſay) ſet light by all things, in compariſon of this, and are caried with this mind, that they will forſake whatſoeuer may hinder, for the obtaining of it.
               
               
                  
                  
                      The ſixt worke: they forſake all for it, and highly prize it.
                  BVt what then? (ſome perhaps will ſay) do you affirme that theſe things can do a man any good without faith? (for of this nothing hath yet bin ſaid) and doe you affirme a man to be iuſtified (for ſuch an one is he who is in fauour with God) hauing no faith? or that any thing is accepted of God which he doth (as his deſire to bee forgiuen, his hungring after it, his humiliation, acceſſe to God in prayer and confeſſion of ſinnes) all theſe being without faith? or if not ſo, do ye then ſay that we our ſelues muſt thus prepare our ſelues to receiue faith? but that is to attribute free will vnto man being yet in the eſtate of miſerie and bondage, and vnrenewed, as being yet  without faith. To the firſt I ſay, that although none of theſe be faith, yet I ſay, that they are not without it, as I will more fully ſhew afterward: neither that God is pleaſed with any man, neither he himſelfe is iuſtified, but only by it: but wee cannot diſcerne or ſet downe the very moment when faith is wrought: but when the other forenamed graces of God are effectuallie wrought in the heart, then is this of faith wrought alſo by the ſame ſpirit: neither can hee that hath receiued this faith into his heart, ſo certainly and eaſily iudge of it, as of thoſe other gifts which accompanie it. To the latter obiection, I anſwere, that I am farre from aſcribing to man vnrenewed, any inherent goodnes, whereby he may prepare himſelfe to receiue faith: he is,  I ſay, deſtitute of all goodnes in his will, and of power to doe good: ſuch graces are giuen him of God, as was ſaid before. For God findeth all men in their filthines and gore bloud, as the Prophet Ezechiel ſpeaketh:Ezech. 16.6. and ſhe whom he vouchſafeth to make his beloued ſpouſe (I meane his Church) he raiſeth out of the duſt, waſheth and clenſeth her from her filthines wherein hee found her, and then taketh her to him to delight in, as his deare and onely ſpouſe. It is the Lord therefore which is the author,
                     Heb. 12.2. 
                     and finiſher of his faith who ſhall be ſaued: and he, as he hath abaſed him, and filled his heart with ſorrowes for the ſame purpoſe; ſo it is he that ſoketh it by little and little, and ſeaſoneth it in time with faith, hope, and comfort: This is his only worke.  And although it be hard to determine whē faith is wrought (as I haue ſaid) and how long dreadfull feare continueth: yet by meanes of the knowledge of his miſerie, and redemption, God worketh them both in his heart, and that when, and in what manner it ſeemeth beſt to his wiſedome; ſo that it may be ſeene that it is ſo. And thus I hauing anſwered theſe two obiectiōs, I wil now proceed, morefully to ſhew how he guideth & bringeth home this loſt ſheep, as I had in ſom ſort proceeded to do, before I was occaſioned to digreſſe a while, by reaſon of the two former queſtions now anſwered.
                  To proceede therefore with this perſon whom the Lord wil ſaue, when he hath wrought thus farre in him earneſtly to deſire the remedie againſt  his miſerie, he leaueth him not there, as many through ignorance & wāt of wiſe building vp, are held longer at this ſtay: and although not lying in vtter vnbeleefe, yet not bold to applie Gods promiſe to their ſoules; euen as there are many, who haue had compunction of heart, that neuer goe further; but waueringly are off and on; and whē the deſire is not accompliſhed, the heart fainteth, and they for all their deſire, ſeeing it vaniſheth away, & is not conſtant, fall away altogether. But God goeth further with this perſon, as I haue ſaid.
                  
                     For he hauing now with the skilfull merchant weighed the price of this  pearle,
                        Matth. 13.44. He whom God loueth highly priſeth the pearle. namely, to haue Chriſt to become his, hath it in ſuch eſtimation, that he counteth meanely of all things, in compariſon of this: and in good aduiſednes ſelleth all that he hath, to buy it. But what hath he (you will aske) of his owne, to purchaſe or come into the poſſeſſion of it? As for his goods and riches, whatſoeuer he inioyeth, they are not his owne, but an others, and borrowed:Luk. 16.12. (yet many thouſand poore ſoules which ſhal be ſaued, haue little or no wealth at all) but this precious pearle is not bought with money. What hath he then (ye ſay) to procure it?Eſay. 55.1. verily, he hath nothing, but an intereſt and hold in ſinfull pleaſures,He hath nothing of his owne but ſin. and worldly luſts. But alas (ſome man will ſay) what doe ye naming of them, as things any thing worth? But I  ſay againe, I muſt mention that which he hath of his owne: and that is his ſinne: which though euery reaſonable man will ſay, that it is not worth the mentioning, yet it was ſometime, more precious to him then ſiluer, and in account aboue the pureſt gold:Yet hard to renounce that. and therefore to renounce it, is no eaſie nor ſmall matter. And yet (ſo well it falleth out for him) there is no other thing required of him, to the attaining of the forementioned pearle, then the caſting away and the forſaking of that his ſinne. For ſo the Lord plainely teſtifieth: he that denyeth himſelfe, he ſhall be my diſciple: and whoſoeuer forſaketh any thing (that is,Matth. 19.29. which God condemneth) he ſhall haue an hundreth fold more then he forgoeth, (ſo bountifull a rewarder is the Lord of  all that ſeeke him) and afterward, eternall life.
                  Therefore, when this ſilly ſinner vnderſtandeth, and giueth credit vnto it: as deare and pleaſant as his ſinnes were vnto him, that he could neither by feare nor ſhame, neither by allurements or perſwaſions before that, be brought to abandon and waxe wearie of them; yet now, he diſclaimeth and cryeth out of them,But he deſpiſeth it. Hoſ. 14.9.
                      and in an vtter deteſtation of them, ſaith: as Ephraim ſaid of Idols (in which ſhe had ſo much delighted) What haue I to doe with them? A thing all may ſee to be verie admirable. A man to forgoe that, which he loued beſt of all, yea better then life it ſelfe, (for how many loſe their liues for their ſinfull pleaſures?) yea and that willingly and readily, only  for the hope of that, which as yet he hath not, is it not admirable? and muſt not that hope (thinke we) be ſure and certaine, though in him ſo weak as yet,This is a great worke of God. that they cannot profeſſe it? Thus doth the Lord worke in the heart of him, who ſhall imbrace Chriſt for his Sauiour, that nothing ſhall ſeparate betwixt them.Ioh. 6.44. It may well be ſaid, No man commeth to him, except the father draw him by his ſpirit: for otherwiſe, we reade, that it is as hard for a wicked man to become good,Ier. 13.23. as for the blacke More to chaunge his skin, or the leopard his ſpots.
                  And whereas it may be ſaid, there are many, when they are pricked in conſcience for their ſinnes, who doe thus cry out of them, for the time; but  it appeareth afterwards to haue been but a blaſt, and as it may ſeeme, a ſodaine paſſion, which vaniſheth away, and commeth to nothing: I affirme the ſame, and grant it to be ſo: but this is a farre other thing, and this worke of grace to forſake all,He forſakes not ſinne as the wicked. for the hope of mercie and forgiuenes of ſinne, differeth as much from that raſh and ſodaine cracke of fearefull crying out of ſinne while onely terror oppreſſeth; as cannon ſhot differeth from the

                      ſhot of paper: the one caſting out the diuell for bearing any more dominion in him, the other ſeeming to fray him with bold and lowd words (I defie the diuell, &c.) but driuing him away in deede, no otherwiſe then the popiſh holie-water: as may be ſeene in comparing both ſorts together. For example: though Ahab gaue ſignes that he forſooke his ſinnes,1. King. 21.27. Ioel. 2 13. 1. King. 22.8.26. by rending his cloathes, (but not his heart) putting ſackcloth vpon him, and faſting; yet he ſhewed by and by after, that al was but a ceremonie, by wilfull reſiſting and diſobeying the meſſage of God by the prophet, and boldly affirming, that he hated him: Yet on the other ſide, Zacheus did farre otherwiſe: for how he receiued Chriſts doctrine, he declareth by the fruites following:Luk. 19.9. reuenging  himſelfe for his ill gotten goods with a reſtoring fourefold, and giuing halfe the reſt to the poore: and Chriſt alſo teſtified of his forſaking and leauing his gainfull vnlawfull trade, by open affirming him to be the ſonne of Abraham. An other example: the people,1. Sam. 7.3.4. whom Samuel perſwaded to forſake their ſinne, for the hope of the promiſe, did not only lament after God, but they did in deede forſake it: they did caſt away Baalim and Aſhtaroth, idoles, which they ſo delighted in: declaring thereby, that they found by the prophets miniſterie, a farre greater treaſure: that is, the mercie of God in forgiuing them their ſinnes: according to that, which is written ſince;Pro. 28.13. but true before, euen ſince the firſt mans repentance: He that confeſſeth and  forſaketh his ſinne, ſhall finde mercie. But their fathers, who made as great profeſſion and ſhew as they, returning to God and ſeeking him early:Pſal. 78.36. yet they did but flatter him with their mouth, and diſſemble with their tongue, for they were not faithfull in his couenant.
                  But theſe ſhall ſuffice: like vnto the which, there are many more: Let it be graunted therefore, that this is a mightie and admirable worke of Gods ſpirit, which thus perſwadeth this ſillie ſoule, which is trauailing hard to finde peace & reſt vnto his heart, thus (I ſay) to bid farewel to his ſweeteſt delights for the hope of the gaine that is ſet before him: For theſe two goe together: highly to eſteeme and priſe the promiſe of life and happines: and for the  ſame, to deſpiſe and ſet light by the things which were beſt beloued. And yet this, as impoſſible as it is to any other, in thoſe whom God chooſeth out of the world, he worketh it as ſenſibly, as we may diſcerne the wilde beaſt to be tamed; and the cleere and ſunſhine day to be ouercaſt and darkned. For God kindleth a feruent deſire & longing after that glad tidings (namely that he will freely beſtow it vpon him that thirſteth after it) till he hold and inioy it, as his owne. And that which S. Paul ſaith of himſelfe,Phil. 1.7.8. that when he began to ſee the beautie of this bleſſed meſſage, he counted thoſe things loſſe, which had been vantage to him, yea very doung for Chriſts ſake, that he might win him: the ſame is verified in all ſuch as I now ſpeake of, euen  whoſoeuer he be: and then he is truly come home, no more to be caſt off or forſaken of the Lord. And this gracious affection is thus riuited into him, and as it were writtē with an adamant pen, neuer to be raſed out any more, to the end it may alwayes after remaine and be found in him after experience: as it ſtandeth with great reaſon it ſhould: euen as it was with Moſes, when he was of a ripe age, full fortie yeares old, he did ſhew the fruite of it, as many other wayes, ſo this one: that he refuſed to be called the ſon of Pharaos

                     daughter, and to inioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon. And when this worke is  wrought in him, that he forſaketh all things for this which he ſeeketh, and ſo highly priſeth it, then he is fit to apply it: as followeth: which is the laſt worke.
               
               
                  The ſeuenth worke: they apply Chriſt and his promiſe.
                  FOr by the doctrine of ye promiſes, which he heareth, or hath heard publiſhed and preached vnto him, he draweth his hart to applie thē to himſelfe, and to faſten vpon them as his owne, euen as if they had bin properly made to him: he perſwadeth him by that which he heareth, no longer to feare God as a terrible Iudge, and ſo ſlauiſhly to abide in his former bondage,God ſealeth vp his promiſes to the beleeuer
                      as one in danger of damnation ſtil, and vnder the curſe; but ſealeth vp his ſaluation in his heart, and maketh it as effectually his, as any bargaine is made ſure to vs, when he, who ſold it, hath ſealed it vnto vs, or giuen earneſt thereof.2. Cor. 1.22. And therefore it is that the Scripture doth ſo often vſe this phraſe of ſpeech, We are ſealed vp by the ſpirit of promiſe, and by the ſpirit of our God: to giue vs to vnderſtand, that as nothing is with greater ſecuritie aſſured vnto vs then a writing ſealed; ſo there cā be no ſurer way for a man to hold this redemption and ſaluation, then by hauing it ſealed vnto him by the ſpirit of God: who onely knowing the minde of the father and of the ſon, doth make the ſame knowne vnto his minde, and beare witnes to his ſpirit that he is  the Lords:
                     
                        Rom. 8.16. The beleeuer reaſoning with himſelfe. and teacheth him thus to reaſon. If God will forgiue him, who hath receiued grace to ſeeke without fainting & wearines, who longeth for it in a melting heart for offending him, who deſireth it more then al earthly pleaſure and profit, and is willing to caſt away all impediments that may hinder it: if he will forgiue ſuch, and he hath framed me to be ſuch a one; then (doubtles) he will be mercifull and forgiue me.
                  Thus God maketh him (of whom I ſpeake) to ſee cleerely that he is his, no more to be ſeparated from him, when he hath opened his heart, as he did the heart of Lydia,
                     Act. 16.15. and cauſeth him to beleeue that the ſonne of God who was giuen to the vnworthie world, is giuen to him, being one of the ſame. For  if earthly fathers be kind to their childrē crying to thē, how much more the father of fathers?
                        Luk. 15.20. He weigheth all things hereto belonging. For we muſt think that this afflicted perſon now mentioned, doth often and deeply weigh the truth, vnchangeablenes, and perpetuitie of the pretious promiſes which hee heareth preached vnto him; yea and that with more delight, then he doth any thing els; he weigheth what may be like to hinder and hold him from hauing his part in thē: and when he conſidereth that God, who willeth him not to feare, is greater thē al that letteth him; what hee may, hee remoueth it, though neuer ſo precious to him; and conſidereth what doth giue him greateſt encouragement, and ſo imbraceth the ſame: we muſt think when he once cōceiueth the incomprehenſible  excellencie of eternall life, and how it maketh the ſoule alwaies cheereful euen here: we muſt think (I ſay) that he weighing what his miſery is without it, counteth it the moſt ſoueraigne medicine to heale his ſore: and therefore he is readie to vſe any meanes, and beſtow any diligence to come into the poſſeſſion of it, and to make it his owne, eſpecially when he ſeeth that it is ſo freely and mercifully offered.
                  
                     
                      Thus ſetting his heart vpon it, as that which hee ſeeth would make him more happie, then all the world; though for a time he hath not been able to attaine vnto the aſſurance of it (the diuell holding him backe by many lets and ſubtilties, abuſing his errour, weakenes, and ſimplicitie thereto) yet the Lord ſuffereth him not to giue ouer, till he hath waded thorough and ouercome all hinderances. And if this be too hard to doe by himſelfe,He ſeekes helpe of others. he ſeeketh the helpe of others, whereſoeuer they may be come by, men of deeper inſight, and greater iudgement and experience in and about the will and purpoſe of God, concerning ſaluation, by whoſe louing trauaile, counſell and labour he groweth more expert and reſolute, and ſo ſetleth his heart in beleeuing,  as he ſeeth he hath good cauſe, and ſtrong incouragement, to his full quiet and contentation: The Lord himſelfe ſpeaking thus: If any thirſt,
                     Ioh. 7.37. 
                     let him come to me, and I will giue him the water of life to drinke. So that as Iacobs hart failed when he beleeued not his ſonnes report that Ioſeph was aliue, and the chiefe gouernour vnder Pharaoh; yet when they told him the words of Ioſeph, and ſhewed him the Chariots which he had ſent to carrie him,Gen. 45.26.27. the ſpirit of Iacob reuiued, and he ſaid, I haue enough, &c. Ioſeph my ſonne is yet aliue. So though the goodnes of the meſſage ſhall be ſo farre beyond the expectation of him to whom it is brought (as fearing the cleane contrarie) yet when hee ſhall weigh and conſider aduiſedly the truth of the matter, and certaintie of  the promiſes, and therein behold the depth of loue which is in God, and that to the broken hearted, though vnworthie, it quickeneth the ſoule, and refreſheth it aboue all that can be expreſſed: And ſo hee beholding his eſtate without theſe promiſes, and what neede he hath of them, and who it is that offereth them, euen he who cannot be gainſaid, that is, the Almightie, he imbraceth them, and by little and little, as he gathereth more ſtrength by the infalliblenes of them; ſo he beleeueth them, and taketh exceeding comfort by them, giueth God thankes, and (as he hath good cauſe) he cannot ſatisfie himſelfe therewith, nor (as he thinketh) haue enough of them.
                  And thus doth his ſoule ſtay vp it ſelfe: for ſeeing God doth giue it freely  to him, and he deſireth it aboue all other things, as ſeeing that he cannot bee ſafe without it, who is hee which ſhall hinder it? Thus are all teares wiped away, the ragges are caſt off, the robes are put on:VVhat will follow of applying Chriſt. the ſpouſe is betrothed to Chriſt her husband, and ſhe by faith made partaker of all the good things which he bringeth with him: who is giuen vnto his Church, not poorely nor bare; but to be her wiſedome, righteouſnes, ſanctification, and redemption.
                     1. Cor. 1.30. And he that hath thus put on the Lord Ieſus, God will know him for his, whereſoeuer he findeth him, neither ſhall any take him out of his hands, ſo ſaith our Sauiour himſelfe: My ſheepe (whom in the verſe before he calleth thoſe which beleeue in him) My ſheepe heare my voyce, and I know them, and they follow me,
                     Ioh. 10.27. &c. 
                     and  I giue vnto them eternall life, and they ſhall neuer periſh, neither ſhall any plucke them out of my hands: for my father which gaue them me, is greater then all, and none is able to take them out of my fathers hand. Like vnto theſe are they all, who ſhall glorifie God in this life, ſeparated from the world, though annoyed by the people of it, as the ſillie ſheepe are by the goates: whoſe conuerſation what it is, another place ſhall declare, and lay foorth hereafter. And this is faith, which making them inwardly perſwaded in ſome ſort by ſo cleere euidence,

(as I haue ſaid) cauſeth them outwardly in time to profeſſe the ſame more  boldly, & without feare, as occaſion ſhalbe offered: although it be for ye time, both weake and faint, yet is it ſound and ſure; and after experience in a godly life (I meane the life that is led by faith) it ſhall be ſtrengthened, better confirmed, and procure withall, reſt to their ſoules. For where the forementioned graces are, as true contrition, the heart broken with ſorrow, and meekened, hungring and pining for mercie and grace, confeſſing and forſaking the ſinne, with accuſation and deepe groanes for pardon; there is ſome true meaſure of ſauing faith; for Gods graces are not ſeparated: for our Sauiour pronounceth them bleſſed which haue theſe graces: but none are bleſſed without faith:Mat. 5.4.5. Pſal. 48. therefore faith is there alſo; becauſe the ſpirit of Chriſt dwelleth in  ſuch, and he dwelleth in his by faith, therfore it muſt needs be in them. Which thing I doe the rather ſtand vpon to proue, ſeeing it is rather tried and diſcerned by theſe, then knowne by it ſelfe without other holy affections going with it, and for that many of tender age in Chriſt, and yonglings, cannot be certaine and throughly perſwaded that they haue faith, and conſequently, that their ſinnes are forgiuen them, and yet by infallible ſignes and tokens we know that it is ſo. I ſpeake of the leaſt meaſure of it: for of the ſtronger faith, the queſtion is eaſier. And the weakeſt meaſure of faith I call that, when an humbled ſoule longeth,A deſcription of the ſmalleſt meaſure of faith. and almoſt fainteth for Gods mercie in Chriſt; and although he be not aſſured of it, yet he ſeeth that it cannot be denied: and therefore waiteth for it, and is ſtaied from deſpaire. I ſay he ſeeth that it cannot be denied, but that God doth graunt pardon to him againſt his ſin: becauſe he ſeeth himſelfe to haue obtained many graces and workes of the holy Ghoſt, which cannot be in a reprobate, as was ſaid before; and thereby he is holden from deſpaire and dreadfull feare. And yet through weaknes and want of experience cannot call God father, though he cannot ſuffer the contrarie thought to haue any place in himſelfe: and therefore the thing that he moſt laboureth to be ſatisfied in and reſolued of, is, that he may haue ſome cleerer light, and lay better hold of it, that Chriſt hath redeemed him indeed; yet is he as the child firſt taught to goe alone, who at the firſt is weake  in the ioynts, but in time can runne about: ſo ſhall it be with the ſoule which thus longeth and lamenteth after God.
                  This I haue ſpoken for their ſakes who more hardly doe lay hold on Gods mercie, and doe with more difficultie applie the promiſe to themſelues: the which to doe with all poſſible care, and not to be turned aſide from examining our ſelues ſoundly and throughly by any let, is a grace of the greateſt importance. And he is wiſe indeede, who will not ſtay before he haue it: which wiſedome God will teach them whom he loueth: for though many very ignorant and careleſſe hearers doe hardly, yea neuer come to any reſolution of faith; yet ordinarily, where people are ſoundly, cleerely and wiſely  taught, it is otherwiſe: for (to ſpeake of them, who ſhall be ſaued) the word ſo preached,How God worketh faith. by little and little ſoketh and diſtilleth into the hearts of many of them. And though they know not when this gracious worke of God was wrought, for the moſt part, as neither can we diſcerne and ſee the plants and hearbes when they ſhoote out, though in time wee ſee it is ſo: yet ſome there are, whom God in ſpeciall manner doth priuiledge at one time

                      and in one day to receiue that grace, and gift of aſſurance, which others are long labouring and trauailing for, before they attaine it:Luk. 19.9. As our Sauiour Chriſt pronounceth of Zacheus: This day is this man become the ſonne of Abraham, and ſaluation is come into his houſe. So Lydia, and they in the Act. 2.37.Faith vniteth to Chriſt. And this is the faith whether it be weake or ſtrong which vniteth to Chriſt; and maketh them that haue it (which is a myſterie and riddle to the world) to haue and enioy their hearts deſire; yea and indeed more then they could deſire or thinke, namely, to be truly the children of God, and thereby happy. Euen the ſame faith, for which Chriſt pronounced Peter bleſſed: who when hee ſaw him but in baſe eſtate the ſonne of man, yet for the words which  Chriſt had ſpoken, and his miracles, had beleeued him to be alſo the ſonne of God, the annointed of the Lord, and his Sauiour, he pronounced this of him: Bleſſed art thou Simon, for fleſh and bloud hath not reuealed it vnto thee,
                     Matth. 16.17. 
                     but my father which is in heauen.
                  
                  This faith though Peter had, and he hath it of whom I ſpeake, euen whoſoeuer it be whom the Lord maketh bleſſed (for both weake and ſtrong are partakers of one and the ſame precious faith, 2. Pet. 1.1.Common profeſſors haue not this faith.) yet the common profeſſors and hearers of the Goſpell haue it not, becauſe they doe not looke that the Lord ſhould reueale it to them, without which they cannot haue it, but take counſell of their owne wiſedome and reaſon, which doe hinder and  hold them backe from it. For reaſon thinketh it an abſurd thing, and to bee laughed at, that a man ſimple in the world, & a ſinner, eſpecially ſore burthened with his miſerie, and confeſſing the ſame, ſhould yet be more happie before God, and in his owne knowledge, then all the worlds good can make him: Mans wiſedome (I ſay) can neuer be perſwaded of this; but faith holdeth it for truth, and enioyeth ſuch an eſtate with good ſecuritie. And how God reuealeth any ſuch thing vnto men (which yet is plainly ſaid he did vnto Peter) they cannot tell nor ſee: except this be it, when they thinke and haue a good hope that it is ſo: as though ſuch a thing might be wrought in them, and they not know how, the change which it worketh being ſo apparant:  or that God might reueale this ſecret myſterie of faith to them, & they not aware of it; yea and that (which is more) eſpeciall ſignes accompanying it.
                  But ſuch men ſhould vnderſtand, that as it is the gift of God to beleeue,
                     
                        Phil. 1. How God worketh faith. and he draweth men hereto by his ſecret working grace: ſo yet, hee doth it by meanes outward, euen whiles men obey his ordinance in attending vpon the preaching of his word, and waite for this worke, ſeeking it and praying for it daily: his miniſters ſo ſpeaking, and the people ſo reuerently hearing,Act. 14.1. that they may beleeue: and if not in the time of hearing, yet after by their owne examining of their eſtate, and comparing it with the doctrine taught,  as I haue ſhewed before in the perſon whom the Lord will ſaue.VVhy many want faith. And this thing verely men doe not, that is, heare, trie their eſtate by the rule taught them, weigh after examination, and remoue lets, vntil they may ſee that they haue found that which they ſought, and that there is no iuſt cauſe to hinder it. Few will beſtow any labour, or beate their braines about any ſuch matter, nor any trauaile of the minde: for that is vnſauourie and vnwelcome vnto them. Therefore it is, that after ſo long preaching of faith, there is (as our

Sauiour foretold) little faith in the world,
                     Luk. 18.8. few haue acquaintance with it, (though they cannot like in any wiſe to be ſo thought of) as by this which I haue ſaid may appeare, and ſhall better appeare (I truſt) by that which ſhall follow.
                  
                     The concluſion of this third part.But before I goe any further, I will, for the readers better remembrance, conclude that which I haue taken in hand in this third branch of the firſt part of this booke to proue, that is to ſay: although there be many departings from the right way leading to eternall life, and many breakings off from it, and though it be eaſily conceiued but of few: yet he whom the Lord will chuſe and repute for his, ſhall both ſee into it, & diſcerne it from al by-paths, and walke in it; and ſo be partaker of happines by beleeuing. Whereby alſo  appeareth who is the Lords, and who it is that in reuerent boldnes may (though it is at the firſt hardly obtained) aſſure himſelfe againſt all the ſubtilties of the diuell and other curſed ſpirits, that he ſhall ſee the Lord in the land of the liuing: euen he who hath been truly humbled in the ſight of his miſerie, ſeene Chriſt Ieſus the onely deliuerer of ſuch, and therefore himſelfe hath, and doth beleeue in him vnfainedly.
                  And thus I haue ſhewed how both the doctrine of miſerie and redemption ought to worke, which is the third point. But ſeeing we are ſo fearfull at the firſt beginning of our effectuall calling, that wee dare not reſt perſwaded that we haue any faith: theſe few markes of it following I haue ſet downe  in a briefe manner, which both accompanie the weakeſt faith: and where they be found,
                        Markes of faith. Ioh. 3.23. Seeing God commandeth vs to beleeue. Pſal. 77.3.8.9.10. 1. Pet. 2.2. Pſal. 32.5. are infallible tokens, that in ſuch a perſon there is ſome true meaſure of iuſtifying faith. That is to ſay, firſt, if wee ſtriue againſt doubting, Iudg. 6.17. Secondly, if we not feeling faith, complaine bitterly of the want of it. Thirdly, if we ſeeke feruently to be ſetled in beleeuing. Fourthly, if we deſire to ſearch out the ſinne which may poſſibly hinder vs, and to expell it. And ſome one of theſe, or other graces like them, ſhall euer be ſeene in the beleeuer by ſuch as can iudge, though not alwaies perceiued of the partie himſelfe.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. 5. Of the lets of faith, and namely in the behalfe of the Miniſter.
               
                  ANd now that I haue ſhewed, how by faith men are made the people of God (and conſequently iuſtified thereby) who were before his enemies, and his beloued, which ſometimes were not beloued, I would here ceaſe to ſay any more of this matter, but that I conſider that euery truth is not by and by receiued; and ſo I feare, I may ſay of this, eſpecially becauſe  it is oft bewailed and complained of in the Scriptures, that few haue this faith, and that it is ſeldome or rarely found in the world: which thing, wee who marke the courſe and practiſe of the greateſt part in the world, doe ſee may well be ſo: I will therfore here ſpeake to my deare and weake brethren ſomewhat more at large to ſatisfie them, and ſet downe the chiefe lets that hinder faith on the behalfe of the Miniſter. Now ſeeing that faith ſo honoureth, inricheth,

                   and beautifieth men, as we haue heard,Many deceiued in faith. it ſhould (doubtles) bee farre otherwiſe with thouſands of them which thinke they haue it (but are deceiued) then now it is, if they did enioy it. Yea, and to come more neere to our ſelues, for whoſe cauſe chiefly I wrote this, the multitudes in our parts of the land which profeſſe that they haue it, and by no meanes can abide the contrarie ſpeech to goe, or opinion to be conceiued of them, ſhould, if they had it indeede, aſtoniſh and feare all Epicures, Atheiſts, and Papiſts, and other hypocrites, which now differ little from them. They ſhould make the religion (I ſay) of thoſe which haue any (as it is in it ſelfe, a lumpe of lies, and an heap of hereſies) to appeare ſo indeed; and the other, who regard none at all, to  bee abhorred, as they deſerue to be: whereas now, they being the feweſt which haue attained to any true fruite of the Goſpell, are gazing ſtockes, and reproches to ſuch as haue no more then a bare name, or vaine opinion thereof, euen to many of the profeſſors themſelues, as to the reſt of them, which are enemies to the truth. According to the complaint which the Prophet Eſay made in his time, ſaying: Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath giuen me, are as ſignes and as wonders in Iſrael, Eſai. 8.18. In few words therefore let vs ſee what is the cauſe why ſo many, who boldly affirme that they beleeue, and looke verely to be ſaued by the death of Chriſt,
                     1. Let of faith, the diuels bewitching. 2. Cor. 4.3.4
                   are yet vtterly deſtitute of the ſame. It is briefly ſet downe by S. Paul, to be this: If our Goſpell be hidden, 
                  (as it is hidden to none but to them that are loſt) the god of this world hath blinded their mindes, that the light of the glorious Goſpell of Chriſt ſhould not ſhine vnto them. He plainly ſheweth that the fault is in men, that they are content to be blindfolded and holden backe, though the diuell be the bewitcher of them, and ſo keepeth them from ſo great a treaſure, as is brought vnto them by the Goſpell. But as wee truly ſay that man is faultie in this, that he openeth his eares, and giueth credit to Sathans deceitfull ſuggeſtions: ſo becauſe God did ſee what would come to paſſe thereby, he did therefore ſet watchmen, who ſhould giue his people warning thereof, namely, how Sathan holdeth them from beleeuing by ſome of his ſubtill traines, to the end they might  preuent them: therefore wee muſt know that this fault,Fault of not beleeuing in Miniſter and people. whereby men are letted from beleeuing, is either in him who ſhould bring the tidings, that is, the watchman, who is the Miniſter; or in them who ſhould receiue the ſame, that is, the people and hearers: for if the lets be not remoued in both, faith is rarely, or not at all come by.
               It is cleere therefore (to begin with the Miniſter) that if he be one which teacheth not at all,
                     In the miniſter. Prou. 29.18. they that depend vpon him cannot know what loue God beareth to them through Chriſt,
                     1. Not teaching. or at leaſt they cannot know it to belong vnto them: for as much as faith commeth by hearing of the word of God preached vnto them: and as our Sauiour ſaith: If the blind leade the blinde,
                  Rom. 10.17. Matth. 15.14. 
                  both will fall  into the ditch. Therefore it is too manifeſt, that in ſome pariſhes,Prou. 29.18. not one man knoweth himſelfe to be ſaued (I ſay, if he depend vpon his Miniſter) but all ſuch knowledge is a myſterie to them. And yet if that were the onely let on the Miniſters behalfe, it were well with many people:
                     2. Seldome teaching. but where ſeldome teaching is, the hearers muſt needes be ignorant of this matter alſo: becauſe this heauenly truth, to teach how men may know that they are the elect of God, and without wauering, cannot be ſufficiently and cleerely enough laid

foorth by the skilfulleſt teachers ſeldome teaching; neither, if it could, were  the hearers able to conceiue and vnderſtand,
                  Heb. 8.11. 
                  remember and be familiarly acquainted with it; ſo as they may be able to trie themſelues, and to proue their eſtate to be good; all which yet is meete and neceſſarie. For though I know that the grounds and generall truths are few, vpon which this matter dependeth: yet the breaking of them ſmall to the peoples benefit, requireth labour, and time,Phil. 3. 1. Theſſ. 2.11. plainenes, and loue: yea, to teach the ſame thing oft, for their ſafetie; and in a nurſelike or motherly affection to ſtut and ſtammer with them: that is, to apply our ſelues vnto them, and to giue them here a little, and there a little, now a line, and then a line; and yet to count all little enough to make them ſauour our meſſage: at leaſt, and to be ſaued by it. Howſoeuer many Miniſters make  their reckoning, that a little may ſerue, and the people be ſo blockiſh (they ſay that nothing will enter into them) yet the well aduiſed will not refuſe to heare and weigh the rule of S. Paul to Timothie, that attendance ſhould be giuen to teaching,
                  1. Tim. 4.13. 2. Tim. 4.1. and that they ſhould be readie to doe that dutie in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, and to put the people in minde of the ſame daily (though they know this thing) as well as to attend to reading priuately,2. Pet. 1.12. to make them fitter for that dutie:Ioh. 21.17. Chriſt hath laid no weightier buſines vpon them, calling it the pawne of their loue to him, to whom he hath giuen this charge, to this end that this may be well and throughly done,1. Pet. 5.2. and the rather ſeeing the people depend vpon them.
                  
               
               
                  Neceſſitie of often teaching.They will alſo conſider, that the people haue many infirmities, much dulnes, ſlipperie memories, and ſundrie other pulbackes; all which doe ſhew the neceſſitie of often teaching. The which being ſo, I profeſſe with griefe, it aſtoniſheth me oft, when I thinke of the too great ſlacknes, and vnwillingnes of many who haue gifts; that they hearing, and knowing, that he who hath an office, muſt attend vpon it: and againe, that woe is pronounced to them who doe it not:Rom. 12.9. Ezech. 33.3. Ierem. 48.10. 1. Pet. 5.5. and that as they loue Chriſt, they ſhould feede his lambes, and his ſheepe: and alſo that the flocke dependeth vpon them: Yet that they can be content to take the commoditie, and to refuſe the labour, and as ſome doe count it, too baſe a thing to diſcharge that dutie. But howſoeuer they can eaſily ſhift it off before  men, they ſhall not be able to anſwere it with peace, to God. But yet where this is remedied, there may be lets enough on the Miniſters behalfe to hinder the hearers (yea though they ſhould be willing to be taught) from comming by faith.
                     3. Let of faith in the Miniſter not plaine teaching. As if he ſhould teach often, and yet doe not carefully acquaint himſelfe with the peoples weakenes, and want in conceiuing the doctrine, which is to bee deliuered vnto them; but ſhould ſpeake aboue their reach, little to their vnderſtanding, and conceiuing, and conſequently little to their edifying. There is nothing more like to hurt the people, then ſuch a kinde of teaching, when they ſhall haue a learned man to preach vnto them (whereby they are readie to thinke their caſe farre more happie then others) and yet  they ſhall not be able thereby to receiue light, edification in faith and godlines, and ſound comfort: that is not eaſie and plaine to them, which he himſelfe vnderſtandeth. Although it were to be wiſhed that ſome things were not put foorth by them to the people, which they themſelues haue not tried by the Scripture, and cleerely ſeene into of the ſpeakers, before they vttered them. I vtter not this to grieue any of my brethren, who deſire to doe good

                   in the Church of God, hauing receiued gifts of God thereunto: but to put all in minde to labour to be vnderſtoode, as well as to ſpeake the truth. And that ſome may more eſpeciallie know, that the neglecting of plaine ſpeaking, is a chiefe cauſe of little fruite of their labours; it neede not be taken heauilie: for I know men of ſingular learning, and gifts, who haue already much altered the manner of their teaching, framing themſelues to the diligent hearers capacitie, and more and more deſire to doe the ſame daily, rather then to be commended for learned men, of them which neither conceiue nor vnderſtand them. Yet my meaning is not to nouriſh or perſwade to rude, abſurd, and barbarous teaching, which were more fit to make them which  ſhould teach, ridiculous, and the Scriptures themſelues without authority or credit, as alſo to mocke the people: but that by their plainenes, in the euidence of the ſpirit, reuerence might be procured to their Miniſterie among the hearers: and that their doctrine might be approued in their conſciences, which is approued of the Lord, as being drawne from his word, and eaſilie conueied to their vnderſtandings,2. Cor. 5.11. Matth. 7.29. that ſo they may proue that they preach with power and authoritie, and not as the Scribes.
               
               There is but one thing more,
                     4. VVant of Catechiſing. which in my iudgement doth hinder profiting on the teachers behalfe: and that is, when by Catechiſing, the chiefe grounds of faith be not briefely and cleerely taught, in right and good order,  the one depending vpon, or following the other, as they ought, by fit coherence and agreeing together, that the people may ſee the way cleerely to ſaluation: and thereby they may the better make profit of their whole Preaching and Miniſterie alſo. As that repentance be not required of the people before faith: that faith be not warranted to be in the people,Matth. 9.12. when they ſee no neede thereof by their ſinne and miſerie; becauſe it is cleere, that they can finde no ſweetnes in Chriſt, who feele not their ſinnes bitter and ſower. Alſo that a man be taught, that he no ſooner beleeueth, then he is made a new creature, and ſo is changed in heart and in life:2. Cor. 5.17. 1. Pet. 2.2. and that the new borne deſire to growe by the ſincere milke of the Word. It were a great furtherance to their Miniſterie,  if, where the grounds of Religion be plainely and ſoundly taught, the Miniſter did by conference and queſtioning, in his Catechiſing, and by examination at Communions, trie how the doctrine is receiued; ſeeing for want of this, a better opinion being conceiued of many by the teacher, then he knoweth cauſe why; they are vnſound in many neceſſarie things, who yet for their often hearing are thought to be ignorant of no neceſſarie poynt of knowledge, which the Miniſter hath often taught.Miniſters ſhould haue authoritie to examine the People. It were much to be wiſhed that the Miniſter, who is willing to take this paine (for it is tedious and vnwelcome to many) might haue authoritie to proue ſuch as heare him, how they profit: as well to build vp thoſe which are weake the better, when he  ſeeth wherein their want is greateſt; as alſo to purge out the leauen of Poperie, and other errors ouf of them which are infected therewith. Whereby alſo this benefit might come, that if any ſculking Ieſuits or Prieſts, or other Papiſts, or heretikes, ſhould creepe into any of their Pariſhes and Townes, they might by the diligent care of the Miniſter well furniſhed with knowledge and authoritie, be remoued, or reclaimed. And otherwiſe the people being neuer proued how they haue receiued the truth, neither by authoritie

inioyned to be ſubiect to triall of their ſoundnes, as well as to reſort to the aſſemblie, doe through cuſtome lye hardened in their ignorance and ſuperſtition, and ſtill remaine wilfull in their old dregges.
               
                  Commendation of Catechiſing.A Miniſter able, and painefull through loue, in few neceſſarie points iointly laid together (labouring with the people) to make a ſufficient Catechiſme, might be well aſſured, that he ſhould call ſo many to the fellowſhip of the pretious faith,Heb. 6.1.2. 
                  as God had appointed there, vnto eternall life: and without this, it is found too true, that much preaching doth the leſſe good, as ſhall appeare better vnto ſuch as liſt to looke more deepely into it. And I could with all my heart deſire, that they (ſo many as neglect this worthie worke, and neceſſarie dutie) might be conſtrained to attend vpon it with all diligence:Good life of Miniſters.
                   which being done with a very Chriſtian care had of giuing good example, and ſhewing themſelues, in all good conuerſation, lights vnto their flocks, and free from reprochfull faults, great good muſt needs inſue. And there ſhould not onely be a recouering of the due credit and reuerence to the Miniſterie, which the popiſh Prelacie and barbarous rudenes, blindnes, and ſhameles life of many vnder the Goſpell hath loſt, but alſo it ſhould bring many home to God, who otherwiſe muſt vtterly periſh: And if with this there were a willing and ready mind in them, to ſatisfie them priuatelie by conference,Priuate conference. who ſhould reſort to them vpon ſpeciall neede and occaſion, to comfort them in their heauines, and to ſtirre them vp to religious and  godly communication in their meetings priuately, and at their table, by their own examples, rather then to be companions with them in profane, worldly and needeles talke, that ſo they might as well ſpeake good things in priuate, as teach the truth in publike (as Chriſt did;Luk. 20.21.) I make no doubt, but that God would plentifullie bleſſe their harueſt.
            
            
               CHAP. 6. Of the lets that hinder faith on the behalfe of the People.
               
               
                  Lets of faith in the people. Diuels bewitching.
                  BVt if the Miniſter be framed both in life and doctrine, as were to be wiſhed, thus to giue warning to the people of Sathans malicious intents, and other impediments; and ſo ſeeke to winne them to the faith: yet are there ſuch ſwarmes of euils in the people, and ſo many kinds of them, that except, they for their parts be willing to be counſelled, and to receiue their meſſage and doctrine, they ſhall finde, that through one let or other, few of them ſhall be partakers of this pretious faith which I ſpeake of. To ſpeake more plainelie, my meaning is, Sathan layeth infinite ſtumbling blockes in their way:Light eſteeming the Goſpell. for when God by the Preaching of the Goſpell  ſheweth the world how their ſinnes are pardoned, and their deadly woe remoued in Chriſt, they will not marke it, nor take any paines about it, but eſteeme of it as of a light matter, as though God did ſeeke his owne good by making ſuch an offer to them, rather then theirs: and that he muſt be more beholden to them for hearing the way to ſaluation preached, then they to him for teaching them; and ſo count it not thanke worthie. Other haue

                   weightier matters (as they thinke) to looke after, namely, their pleaſures,
                  Luk. 14. 
                  and their profits; with the beautie and loue whereof, the diuell dazeleth their eyes, that they ſee nothing there, that is, in their preaching, which can prouoke them to be in loue with it: although that which can ſaue them be onely there to be had. So by one deceite or other he preuaileth ſo farre with them, that they beleeue not, no not euen they, who hearing, receiue the doctrine with liking it, and for that very cauſe thinke that they beleeue.
               And what is cleerer at this day, then this, that of many thouſands which receiue the glad tidings of eternall life by our preaching, willingly,Fevv that receiue the doctrine haue faith. or at the leaſt without reſiſting our doctrine; yet few, yea very few attaine to the power  of faith, neither declare any worke thereof to bee in them? For either they feele no neede within themſelues, whereby they ſhould be driuen to ſeeke helpe out of themſelues, in Chriſt; or if they doe, they by and by, before they ſuſtaine any ſmart, lay their burthen vpon him: ſo that he is neuer ſought, nor cared for of them, but when their need pincheth them; and then they beleeue in him (they ſay) but be indeede no more ſtaied and confident by their faith, nor in their liues reformed, then they were before: and ſo ſerue him with their tongues, and lips, and follow their owne luſts in their hearts; or ſtaggering ſtill betwixt hope and doubt, at a bluſh reioycing, and not able to render a reaſon why; and at another time caſt downe as farre againe, in token  of no ſtay nor peace. Now of all theſe how truly are the Apoſtles words verified, the Goſpell being hidden from them? that is, the promiſes of it not being beleeued of them, what other cauſe is there then this, the diuell by one meanes or other hath ſo blinded them all, that they beleeue not: and as for this latter ſort, they ſeeing their miſerie what it is, and how vnauoidable by any way that they can finde out, how could they (if they were not inchanted and depriued of their right minde by the diuell) be content to goe without the remedying thereof, it being ſo freely and graciouſly offered them?
               The which thing alſo,Practiſe of true Chriſtians. is prooued further to be true by the practiſe of true Chriſtians, who hauing ſure hold and taſte by faith of Chriſts merits, will  admit no deluſions that deceiue the other, whereby they might be depriued of the aſſurance thereof. But although they haue temptations,Heb. 4.1. ſtrong and fierce, as well as the other, yet they ſo looke to the greatnes of Gods loue, and the truth and certaintie of his promiſes, and the benefit which they reape thereby, that although with ſtrong fighting, and lowd cryes through depth of ſorrow, they are in combat with Sathan; yet they will not giue ouer, nor yeeld their right into his hand. But as one in the perill of drowning taketh hold of a naked ſword, though it cut him deepe, rather then yeeld his life to the water: ſo they chuſe to keepe their faith with ſome great difficulties, rather then to giue ouer their ſoule, which is vpholden onely thereby, into the  diuels hand, and themſelues into perdition. Whereupon we heare ſuch ſpeeches teſtifying ſore conflicts betweene Sathan and them,Iob. 13.15. Pſalm. 23.4. 
                  Although thou kill me (O Lord) yet will I truſt in thee: and, Though I walke in the middeſt of the vale of death, yet will I not forſake thee. By which appeareth, that the ſame god of this world, is not wont to caſt miſts onely before the eyes of the beſt, but euen attempteth ſore to take away all the light of their faith from them, as hee doth keepe it from the other altogether: But God hath taught their hands to warre,

and their fingers to fight (as it is in the Pſalme) the which skill, becauſe the other  want, they are foyled.
               
                  None beguiled by Sathan, but wilfull and fooliſh.And thus by this which hath been ſaid, let all learne to know, that none are kept voide and deſtitute of the fruite of the Goſpell, and the beleeuing of the ſame vnto ſaluation; but ſuch as willingly put their neckes in Sathans yoke, and are contented to bee depriued of the crowne of righteouſnes and life, through their owne follie; whiles others, more wiſe then they, will by no meanes let it goe. But to the end that euery ſort may ſee themſelues as in a glaſſe, and what their ſeuerall lets are, I haue thought good to ſet them down briefly and particularly; or at leaſt ſo many, as whereby the moſt are hindred by the diuell from imbracing and beleeuing the promiſe of life: that all  which liſt,Particular lets of faith. may ſee how they are held backe from their happines and peace: And theſe they are briefly.
               
                  
                     1. Some thinke it impoſſible. Pſalm. 14.1.
                  1. Firſt, ſome thinke it impoſſible to be aſſured of their ſaluation in this life, and therefore ſeeke not after it.
               
                  2. Not neceſſarie. Matth. 19.22.2. Others think it poſſible, but not neceſſary, that men ſhould buſie themſelues about it, for the obtaining and keeping of it, and that they may be ſaued without ſo much adoe.
               
                  
                     3. Too hard.3. Another ſort are ſuch as thinke it both poſſible and neceſſarie, but they ſee it ſo hard to come by, that they are loth to take the paines, therefore they will not goe about it.Luke. 14.18.
                  
               
               
                  4. Careles.
                  4. Another ſort are careles, and as ignorant, as they are careles; euer learning, but neuer comming to the knowledge of the truth: who though they come to heare, yet regard not when God ſpeaketh vnto them out of his word,Luk. 8.12. their minds being taken vp about other matters: Now by this manner of hearing, they come not to vnderſtand the doctrine, much leſſe affect it.
               
                  
                     5. Feare loſſe.5. Others ſee that if they ſhould labour ſo after heauenly things, they muſt loſe their liberties in ſinful pleaſures, which they wil not by any meanes forgoe: and contrariwiſe, that they muſt ſuffer reproch, and afflictions, with the children of God:Heb. 12.16. Luk. 8.13.14. and therefore they looke not after the promiſe of the life to come: as Eſau.
                  
               
               
                  6. Preſume. Ioh. 2.23.24.6. Others are preſumptuous, who through ſelfeloue perſwade themſelues that they doe beleeue, and yet keepe ſome one ſinne, or many in their hearts, which they will not renounce; contenting themſelues to thinke they haue faith,Matth. 8.21. Reuel. 3.17. when they haue it not; and ſo neuer ſeeke for the truth and power thereof. As, they would follow Chriſt, but firſt they would goe burie their father.
               
               
                  7. Neuer broken hearted. Iere. 4.4. & 8.67. Others with theſe, though not ſo groſſe offenders, were neuer broken hearted through the ſight of their ſinne, and miſerie; and therefore the doctrine of faith cannot enter.
               
                  8 Feare continuance. Acts. 26.27. Ioh. 6.60.66.8. Others thinke, that though they begin, yet they ſhall neuer continue, or  hold on in a godly courſe; or els doe take offence ſome other way: and therefore will neuer goe about it: or hauing begun, will ſoone reuolt againe.
               
                  
                     9. Too ſlightly ſeeke it.9. Others will ſay, it is a comfortable thing to know our ſelues to bee the children of God, and they hope they are ſo: they ſpeake well of the Goſpel: they are glad to heare it, and like well of the promiſe of eternall life, but they neuer goe about to faſten it to themſelues, by meditating of it, weighing the

                   truth and vnchangeablenes thereof, and making their account to liue by it,Reuel. 3.1. and to be conformed to it.
               10. Others like well of it, as the former,
                     10 Sudden flaſhes ſoone out. and ſometimes weigh and conſider the doctrine, and thereby thinke themſelues to be in good caſe: but this comfort is ſudden, and quickly gone againe. And thus they are driuen and toſſed to and fro; yet being cloſe men, will not diſcloſe their hearts, and lay open their doubts to ſuch as may helpe them, and helpe to ſet them at libertie from their lets: although they be vtterly vnable to helpe themſelues.Matth. 7.26.
               
               Theſe are the chiefe lets, whereby the people are holden from this grace of beleeuing, without which, it is impoſſible to pleaſe God, or to be his children.
               
               And now that I haue ſet downe a taſte of both kindes of lets, I thinke it not amiſſe to ſtay a while in ſpeaking to both ſorts of them, by whom theſe ariſe, that is to ſay, the Miniſters and people. And firſt,An exhortation to the miniſters I turne to you my brethren in the Miniſterie: And you I exhort to conſider your duties laid foorth at large in the word of God, ſometime by the names and titles which he giueth vs, and ſometime in plaine commandements and charge. The names are many; as watchmen, Ezech. 33.7. Cant. 3.3. labourers, Mat. 9.37. the ſalt of the earth,
                  The titles of Miniſters. and light of the world, Matth. 5.13.14. ſhepheards, Ioh. 21.15. and the good Scribes which bring out of their treaſurie both old and new things, Matth. 13. and ſtewards  to giue euery one his portion, 1. Cor. 4.1. and nurſes, 1. Theſſ. 2.7. with ſuch like. In cōmandements thus: Take heed to your charge, and to the whole flock,
                  Their charge. 
                  ouer which the holy Ghoſt hath made you ouerſeers, to feede the Church of God which hee hath purchaſed with his bloud, Act. 20.28. And againe, to Timothie: I charge thee before God, and the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who ſhall iudge the quicke and dead at the appearing of his kingdome, preach the word, be diligent in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, conuince, reproue, exhort, with all long ſufferance and doctrine. 2. Tim. 4.1.2.
               All which with the like, what other thing doe they teach, but that all ſuch as the Lord hath put in truſt with his people, bought with ſo great a price,VVhat their practiſe ſhould be. ſhould loue them tenderly, as nurſes doe the yong children, and beare their  weakneſſes kindly, rather then break their hearts with ſorrow? Alſo that they ſhould prouide for them liberally and with good allowance, and teach them the whole counſaile of God, as good Scribes: and regard all ſorts as the Lords ſtewards, by wiſe applying themſelues to all. Then that they ſhould be diligent and painfull, as the Lords workmen and labourers, going before them as lights to guide, in example of vncorrupt life in all wiſedome and grauitie, but eſpecially (as Chriſt taught his Diſciples at his departing from them) in humilitie, Ioh. 13.14.15. not thinking themſelues too good,2. Cor. 4.5. 
                  for Chriſts ſake to be their ſeruants. And to the end, they may bring them to him,2. Cor. 11.2. 
                  and preſerue them as chaſt ſpouſes to him their onely husband; to doe them good priuatly, as  their needes ſhould require, by confirming the weake, comforting the afflicted,
                  2. Tim. 2.
                        •
                     . 
                  admoniſhing the vnruly, and being patient towards all, Ezech. 34.4.5. 1. Theſſ. 5.14. Theſe duties (I ſay) the Lord inioyneth vs by the forementioned titles which he giueth to his Miniſters, and by the commaundements and charges annexed thereto. Now, as we would be glad he ſhould heare vs in the time of our neceſſitie, and eſpecially in our laſt and ſolemne day of our departure from this life: ſo let vs heare him thus calling vpon vs to haue compaſſion

on his ſillie,Incouragemēts to the Miniſters to do their dutie. ignorant and ſhiftles people. And although the burthen that he  laieth vpon vs is great, yet are not our incouragements for that purpoſe exceeding great alſo? The honour that hee putteth vpon vs to be his ambaſſadours,
                  The firſt from their honour. and to bring the meſſage of ſo great a king, and the meſſage it ſelfe not about things tranſitorie or earthly, but eternall, what can bee like vnto it? Beſides,The ſecond, frō their comfort. the comfort which wee may reape both by our priuate ſtudie in giuing attendance to reading, and as hauing that, as our ordinarie labour to talke with God (as I may ſay) and his good ſeruants, when other men muſt toyle and trauaile in all weather, with much care and trouble: and alſo the comfort by our preaching, which may eaſily be greater to vs then to them which heare vs, oh what can be in this life, comparable vnto it? whereby alſo  our hearts are ſweetly ſeaſoned, and our liues farre better gouerned, and wee more ſafely kept from euery euill way, as Salomon ſaith, Prou. 2.10. vnleſſe we be careleſſe of our owne good. More then this, we haue incouragement and perſwaſion to doe our duties in this behalfe more cheerefully, by conſidering that ſo many as we turne from their euill waies,The third, the peoples benefit. ſo many ſoules we are counted to ſaue, Iam. 5.20. And this wee ſhould doe now, whiles wee may doe it in peace, and whiles there are many willing to heare, whoſe example may draw on others: who, if they ſhould not be taken, whiles they may, will not afterterwards perhaps be brought on, though we ſhould neuer ſo much deſire it: fearing that which the Apoſtle ſaith, 2. Tim. 4.3. that the time will come, when  they will not ſuffer holeſome doctrine, and hauing their eares itching, ſhall after their owne luſts, get them an heape of teachers, and ſhall turne their eares from the truth, and ſhall be giuen to fables.
                  The laſt, from our reward. And laſtly, we know, that the reward after this life, is a ſtronger motiue then all theſe, which I haue mentioned: (but I am ſure, that all together are moſt ſtrong, and ſhould be to vs as the threefold cable that is not eaſily broken) and that is ſet downe in Daniel thus:Dan. 12.3. 
                  They which inſtruct others ſhall ſhine, as the light of the firmament, and they which turne many to righteouſnes, as the ſtarres, for euer.
               
               This is that which I thought meete to ſay to my brethren in the Miniſterie, who according to their diuers eſtates, places, people, and other occaſions, ſhall (I know too well) meete with diſcouragements enough: but if they be wiſe againſt the greateſt of all other, which are within them, I meane the diſtemperatures and contradictions, and diſputes of their owne euill hearts, I doubt nothing, but that the other ſhall be reſiſted and ouercome. All obiections which might trouble and hinder from this worke,How to anſwer the obiections which might diſcourage vs. and dutie, are infinite: Therefore only looke to God, and haue him going alwaies before you, and let his word be the man of your counſailes (in which eſtate alone, ſound, and durable peace is to be found) and he will teach the teachable aboue their expectation, and giue wiſedome to the ſimple, and ſtrength to the weake, that by him, they ſhall finde that eaſie, which otherwiſe were impoſſible: I meane  to ſwallow vp diſcouragements, and finde the greateſt ioy in the diligenteſt performing of dutie.
               
                  An exhortation to the people to embrace the Miniſterie.Now I turne to you, my brethren or people and hearers: who (as I haue ſaid) raiſe vp lets and hindrances to too many againſt your ſelues, though ye had none offered you by your Miniſters. Whoſe caſe (for the greateſt part) I pitie and bewaile, that you are ſo farre from knowing and duly conſidering

                   this great mercie of God towards you, in ſending his preachers among you, that very few of many, ſee the end of their miniſterie; and therefore receiue them not as from God, as the inſtruments by whom ye may beleeue, and be reformed, and conſequently look and waite for the accompliſhment of your happines, after ye haue firſt taſted how good the Lord is to them by their preaching vnto you. Know ye therefore,The firſt reaſon. that God hath appointed them as meſsengers of your reconciliation with him, who were farre ſequeſtred from him before, and eſtranged: and wheras he might haue taught you by other meanes, and led you thorough this long and weariſome wildernes by other guides, he hath ſeene this the fitteſt way to doe it, by men his miniſters, ſeeing yee  ſhould neuer haue been able to heare the Lord himſelfe, if hee ſhould haue ſpoken to you, no more then the people of Iſrael were,Exod. 20.19. when they cried out at the hearing of his voyce, and ſaid, Lord ſpeake thou no more to vs, but let Moſes ſpeake to vs, and we will heare him in all that thou ſhalt ſay to vs by him. Heare them therefore, who are able to deliuer the Lords meſſage vnto you; whoſe preaching is life or death to you: and if ye deſpiſe them in that their meſſage, ye ſhall doe all one, as if ye deſpiſed the Lord himſelfe that ſent them. Heare them (I ſay) in the Lords ſteed, in all that they ſhall ſay to you from him. Learne by their miniſterie to ſee your ſelues to be the ſonnes and daughters of God almightie, who, before the miniſterie of the word worke vpon you mightily, are his enemies,  your hearts being ſet on euill workes, and vnder his wrath iuſtly. Suffer your ſelues to bee launced, purged, wounded, ſeeing ye cannot otherwiſe be healed. Receiue the holeſome word of exhortation, and be content to put your neck in his yoke, and willingly ſubmit your ſelues to his word, that ſo ye may glorifie God for his loue towards you, in and by their labour and trauaile among you, that ye may thereby gaine more, then if you had al abundance and your hearts deſire.
               Which becauſe you ſee not, I will ſhew you how great it is in ſome ſort: and that is ſo much, as if you attaine it, ye owe no leſſe then your owne ſoules to them for it, Philem. 19. For they ſhall not only ſaue themſelues,
                  The ſecond reaſon. who ſhal performe  this dutie of teaching amōg you, in ſuch maner as hath bin before ſet down, but they ſhall ſaue you alſo, who intertaine them as Gods meſſengers, 2. Tim. 2. and be meanes to make you ſee your ſelues happie, both here and for euer. Which being ſo, who can ſufficiently admire the blindnes,The peoples ſin. nay the wilfull blindnes of the people, the careleſnes, yea the bold careleſnes and blockiſhnes of them, who ſee nothing of this which I ſay, though wee ſpeake oft of it and aloud among them, that they may regard it. I thanke God to ſee ſome thing, that I ſee in ſome perſons; I meane their reuerent and thankfull receiuing of the Goſpell, and their care to be reformed by it: but that in ſo long a time of peace and free paſſage to the Goſpel vnder her Maieſties moſt proſperous  raigne, ſo few make that the flower of their garland, and their beſt portion, it is moſt worthily to be bewailed. Which teſtifieth too cleerely, that either there are many enemies of the Goſpell among vs, beſides Prieſts, and Ieſuites, and open Recuſants: and among them that loue it (as they pretend) many of them loue darknes more then light, becauſe their deedes are euill, and who doe not eſteeme Gods meſſengers as ſent from him, for their ſingular benefit. For then would not ſome (and thoſe not a few) denie them their due

which God hath giuen them that labor among them; nor withhold their earthly  things from them, to whom they deliuer ſpirituall: nor eſteeme meanly and baſely of them,How the people hinder themſelues. who would faine win them to God: Neither would many of the people lay ſuch blockes in their owne way as they doe, deſcanting of them in ſuch wiſe, as they will be ſure that none of them ſhall doe them good. For rather then they would haue nothing to except againſt them, if they cannot finde thoſe accuſations, that are iuſt, they are content with any ſhew, why they ſhould refuſe to bee counſelled and perſwaded by them. And therefore, if they be old, they ſay, they dote, and know not what they ſay: if they be yong, they haue no iudgement nor experience: if they be wealthie, then they are couetous: if poore, then baſe and contemptible: if they be maried, they can  not follow their callings, but the world: if vnmaried, then they liue ſuſpiciouſly. And thus (to ſay no more) it is fearefull to ſee how little the people (in one reſpect or other) are ſeaſoned with the ſweete fruite of the Miniſterie: and therefore, if ye feare God, regard your owne welfare and peace, and will not come to iudgement, imbrace the Miniſtery reuerently, as Gods meſſage, and the greateſt and moſt lets of faith are remoued.
               Thus I hauing ſet downe theſe lets which doe chiefly hold from faith, both on the Miniſters part and the peoples, and hauing ſaid ſomewhat to both in way of exhortation, ſeeing out of theſe two kinds of men, God chuſeth out his elect: I conclude, that there are many lets from faith, but yet withall  it may be ſeene,There are fit remedies to theſe lets. that there is apparant remedie to be found againſt them, (as I haue ſaid) and how ſubtilly ſoeuer the diuell bewitcheth and holdeth men backe by them, yet the Scripture offereth greater grace, by the which they may breake through all hindrances and diſcouragements, which may keepe them from it, if the Miniſter and people would make conſcience of their duties.
            
            
               CHAP. 7. What deſire breedes faith.
               
               
                  BVt ſeeing it were both long to ſtand in preſcribing remedie againſt all theſe lets, and the way for all, hath been ſet downe to come by faith alreadie: I will therefore briefly ſtirre vp and aduiſe ſuch as are in good way, and haue made ſome good entrance, that they may ſee what to take heede of, and what to imbrace, and to ſeeke faith by the meanes, and in the manner which before I haue ſet downe, and a little to ſtrengthen them after they haue attained to any true meaſure of it. Wherein it is to be marked (becauſe I before highly commended a good deſire) that a naked and bare deſire of ſaluation, now and then ſtirred vp in  men, is not to beleeue, as many thinke, although without any ground: But ſeeing ſuch as haue a deſire ſometime, are they for the moſt part, whom God doth make beleeuers (for while men are voide of that, there is little hope to be conceiued of them) I will therefore ſhew (for the helpe of them who doe anything looke after true happines) what deſire it ought to be, and whereto it groweth if it be true and ſincere, that it may not deceiue them. For we may

                   finde many, who haue ſometime deſired it earneſtly, and yet neuer obtained it, as Balaam, that a man could hardly haue ſhewed any difference betwixt their deſiring of it, and the deſire of ſuch as haue attained to it indeede, for that inſtant. But in time it hath appeared, that it was but ſudden, or of ſhort continuance, and failed before it obtained that which it ſought: as by them who in the Goſpell are ſaid to haue ioyed in that which they deſired to heare,
                  
                     Mat. 13.20.21 True deſire giues not ouer. but it vaniſhed; whereas the deſire of the other cannot be ſatisfied without it: but mourneth, and longeth for it, and pineth for ſorrow when any thing commeth in the way, to weaken the hope, which was conceiued of it, till that bee remoued, which hindred them from that benefit. Therfore ſuch muſt know  that their deſire, which is ſometime fleeting and ſomtime faint, muſt become both feruent and conſtant: as in the parable of the pearle may be ſeene:Matth. 13.45. That as ſoone as it was found, the value of it being knowne of the skilfull Merchant, he neuer reſted till he had gotten it for his owne: for wee muſt know that he, who thus deſireth it, is forcibly drawne hereunto by God, who hath ſhewed him his great neede of it, and what he ſhall gaine by it, and thereby hath prepared and made him fit to receiue it: for otherwiſe,High account of it. if God draw not men to the valuing of it, it is of no account with them.
               Now further, this deſire, if it be the worke of Gods ſpirit, is ſtrengthened hereby: namely, while hee prizeth, and valueth it according to the worthines  of it, as farre as he is able: that is to ſay, thus, that in his account it farre ſurmounteth, and excelleth all the world, with whatſoeuer is of account in it: he eſteemeth of it, as a moſt pretious treaſure to beleeue: becauſe hee knoweth that he which beleeueth is deare vnto God, and ſhall be ſaued.
                  Luk. 7.50.
               
               And ſo muſt faith and aſſurance of eternall life be valued indeed,2. Pet. 1.1. of him who ſhall finde the bleſſing of it: for which cauſe S. Peter calleth it pretious faith. Now who can eſteeme thus of it, as that it is better then all profit, pleaſure and preferment, but he muſt needes thinke, all his praying for it, hearing the word which worketh it, his queſtioning about it, and his trauaile and labour in meditating of the promiſes, whereby the ſpirit of God writeth it in  the heart: but he (I ſay) muſt needes thinke all his paines well beſtowed in ſeeking it, yea and infinitly recompenced, though he hath long waited the Lords leiſure for the enioying of it? Al which meanes another man thinketh very needleſſe, and that it is meere follie to make all this adoe to come by it; and yet he will ſay it is better then the world alſo: but he can content himſelfe (when he hath heard the promiſe) without any ſetting of his deſire in it, to waſh away all with a word of courſe, that he hopeth to be ſaued by Ieſus Chriſt, as well as other: Which ſlight eſteeming of it, is too cleere a token,Difference betwixt ſound and vaine deſire. how farre hee is from it. Now who ſeeth not the difference betwixt theſe two, to be this, that the one is led by the ſpirit of God, whereby the father of heauen  doth reueale this ſecret myſterie of faith to him, and doth wonderfully draw his heart vnto it: the other is led by fleſhly reaſon, as his guide: which is the greateſt enemie to this worke? For our reaſon thinketh it vnneceſſarie to ſet more by that which we cannot ſee with carnal eyes, then by that which we haue in preſent poſſeſſion, and ſee it, handle it, enioy, and vſe it: therefore no man doing thus, is led by the ſpirit of God, which aſſureth him, who is led by it, that God hauing promiſed glorie greater then the world (though hee

ſeeth it not) he ſhall finde no leſſe, then is promiſed: therefore he ſetteth more  by it, then by all things here before his eyes.
               And this is the way to beleeue in God indeede, though wee ſee him not, that by this our confidence in him, wee may haue ioy and peace. And becauſe this faith is counted farre more pretious then all worldly wealth: therefore he who thus accounteth of it, will ſet himſelfe to ſeeke it willingly and readily,Heart vpon Gods promiſes. as I ſaid before. And therfore as the word teacheth him, he will haue his heart vpon the promiſes of God, becauſe they are his treaſure, muſing on them, vntill he hath al difficulties and doubts of any moment, remoued from him,Gods will we ſhould beleeue. which God for his part will not be vnwilling to graunt. And in his meditation he ſhall ſee that he is not more deſirous to beleeue, then God is that  hee ſhould ſo doe: hee ſeeth that God, for his greater aſſurance of it, doth through loue intreate him:2. Cor. 5.19. 1. Tim. 1.15. 1. Ioh. 3.13. of friendſhip counſelleth him, and of his authoritie being able to performe, commandeth him to beleeue: as if hee would hereby ſhew that none hath authoritie to hinder or forbid the ſame: He ſeeth further, that as hee may receiue this promiſe, hauing ſo ſtrong incouragement, ſo he can no otherwiſe be ſaued, nor happie. All this hee ſeeing, and weighing deeply, beginneth to ſtay himſelfe, and to lay faſter and ſurer hold on eternall life: and ſeeth that it cannot otherwiſe be, but that he ſhould be ſaued, how farre ſoeuer he was from this perſwaſion before. And now he beginneth to conclude with himſelfe, that he is deliuered indeed from all feare  of hell, and the diuell: for hereby his heart is more humbled and meekened to be ſubiect to the will and gouenment of God, without which, this faith is not attained. To whom this counſell yet is to be giuen (though he be come to ſuch great preferment) that after hee hath by the forementioned meanes gotten this faith and confidence, that he beware of all occaſions which may darkē or put out the light of it: As that he be not too bold to reaſon and queſtion againſt himſelfe for yeelding to this truth lately receiued, and beleeued of him, before he be well grounded, and haue gotten ſome experience, but follow his rule that guideth him:Jf any doubting ariſe. for example, If any doubting ſhould ariſe, any lying ſpirit ſhould ſuggeſt, and trouble him with feare of falling away  hereafter, or that he cannot tell whether he be predeſtinate or no, or that many haue been as forward as hee, and yet haue in the end fallen from God, or any ſuch like: he is to be counſelled to hold them all for ſpirits of errour, and Sathans inſtruments to delude and terrifie him. And becauſe they ſpeak otherwiſe then Gods voyce, which ſaith, Beleeue, lay hold of eternall life, cast not away thy confidence,
                  Iohn 3. 1. Tim. 6. Matth. 13. Coloſſ. 2.5. Ioh. 10.27. who alſo ſaith: The plants of the Lord ſhall flouriſh and grow vp as the graine of muſtard ſeede, till it haue branches and bowes: And againe, Be ye eſtabliſhed, confirmed, and abound in faith. Therefore he is to lend no eare to thē; remembring that which is written: My ſheepe heare my voyce, and the voyce of a ſtranger they will not heare. It was the firſt degree to the vtter vndoing of her  ſelfe,Not to hearken to any contrary voyce. Gen. 3.
                   and her poſteritie, in our grandmother Eue; that when God had giuen libertie to eate of all the trees, excepting one; that ſhe reſted not in this word, but opened her eare to a falſe and lying ſpirit, in the mouth of the ſerpent, which vnder a faire colour, perſwaded, or rather couertly inticed, & drew her (contrarie to the word of God) to eate of that one tree alſo, which was forbidden: whereas ſhe ſhould haue been aſtoniſhed to haue heard the Serpent

                   ſpeake at all, eſpecially in that manner. It is a dangerous thing to ſet ſo light by the word which God ſpeaketh, that wee dare ſo much as hearken to any voyce which ſpeaketh the contrarie. For ſhe by giuing eare to the Serpent went further, and gaue him ſpeech alſo: and yet neither ſuch ſpeech, as wherby ſhe cut him off by holding her ſelfe to Gods word; neither (if ſhe would needes anſwere) referring him to her husband (as ſhe ſhould haue done) who heard God ſpeake, and receiued the charge of not eating of euery tree, from himſelfe.
               We muſt learne ſome wiſedome of the Adder,Pſal. 58.5. 
                  who ſtoppeth both her eares that ſhe may not heare the voyce of the charmer, charme he neuer ſo wiſely. And if any  doubt doe ſo trouble him, who hath attained through Gods grace to this weake faith, let him aske of them who haue inſtructed him,Act. 2.38. 
                  the men and brethren, who if they haue kindly pricked, can as well skill to heale: and therefore alſo remoue ſuch doubts, as for want of ſure laying hold on the promiſe, haue troubled any.
               And further, if he which is weake in faith, after laying ſure hold,Remedie againſt feare of continuance. ſhall yet be diſmaied thus, that hee cannot keepe (for any continuance) his faith ſtrong and ſtedfaſt; but feeleth it flitting: he is to be anſwered, that a childe which beginneth to go by a ſtoole or forme, is not ſtrengthened, as he which is by long vſe and cuſtome ſetled in his ioynts: in like manner it fareth with  weake beleeuers: and yet, after that ſuch ſhall haue experience of their own ſinceritie, and care,Matth. 11.29. to keepe a good conſcience in longer continuance of time, they ſhall be well and fully ſetled in their faith, to their great contentment and comfort.
               And thus I conclude, that what lets ſoeuer there be,Concluſion of the former. which hinder men from beleeuing (as that they be vnworthie: they ſhall fall againe to their old courſe: they ſhall neuer be able to attaine to it: or if they haue not like certaintie of it alwaies, therefore they conclude, that they neuer had any at all, or any ſuch like) yet he who earneſtly deſireth it, will not vtterly faint, except in temptation, when hee muſt bee well plied, and helped; and when hee is  not his owne to guide himſelfe aright: nor ceaſe or giue ouer till he be perſwaded that all teares are wiped away: and therfore will refuſe no meanes to attaine to it, by attending on God, and waiting his leiſure, & reuerently conſidering the incouragements and perſwaſions which haue been ſet downe,Luk. 22.31. Luk. 12.32. Ioh. 13.1. & 10 27. & 17. that ſo he may lay ſure and ſtrong hold of Gods promiſes and Chriſts prayer for him, I haue prayed that thy faith faile not (as one in his caſe may doe) and ſo by little and little ſhall ſee himſelfe to be in the number of true beleeuers, no more to be caſt out from them.
            
            
               
                   CHAP. 8. How the weake in faith ſhould be eſtabliſhed.
               
                  ANd thus to paſſe to the ſecond head of this firſt treatiſe,The ſecond head. vnderſtand that theſe two things are here to be handled: firſt, how the weake beleeuers may and ſhould bee ſtaied in their vehement temptations. Secondly, how they may further proue, that they differ from ſuch as

are not beleeuers, although they ſeeme ſo. Of theſe weake ones, there are two  ſorts: ſome leſſe, ſome more: both ſhall be better vnderſtood by that which ſhall ſeuerally be ſaid of both. And herein I deſire my brethren, who are better ſetled, not to thinke this labour ſuperfluous: but to meaſure the weake by their owne weaknes at their firſt beginning, and to thinke that as the gift of faith is moſt excellent, ſo there cannot be too great helpe yeelded to the weake, in directing them to come by it. Concerning the firſt therefore, although I haue by ſundrie tokens ſhewed, who are the children of God, and how euery faithfull Chriſtian may iudge of himſelfe hereby; yet for want of experience, and by vehemencie of temptation, they cannot ſo boldly and confidently reſt, and ſtay themſelues by generall doctrine, nor applie it to  themſelues; thoſe I meane which are weake Chriſtians, yet ſuch as haue attained communion with their brethren in faith and godlines: therefore though the aforementioned properties of true beleeuers, may be cleerely ſeene and diſcerned to bee in them, and they themſelues alſo will confeſſe, that they haue been ſtaied (ſaue in temptation) and that ſome of them oftentimes haue found ſingular comfort in Chriſt, and deſire much to be with him: yet ſoone they are driuen from their hold, and cauſed to ſuſpect their comfort to be a vaine fancie, and ſo fall into much feare and doubting, that they are none of the Lords. They muſt know therefore, that ſeeing there is no ſhadow of changeablenes with God, that it is their owne weaknes ſo to think, as the Prophet confeſſeth of himſelfe in the like caſe,Pſal. 77.13. after he had long wreſtled and ſtroue with that temptation: for he that hath been aſſuredly perſwaded of Gods loue toward him at any time in his whole life, ought not to caſt away his confidence after,Heb. 10.35. nor ſuffer himſelfe to be depriued of it, being his chief treaſure.The firſt perſwaſion to vphold a weake faith. But though this may be a ſtay to a weake conſcience, who is ſometimes afflicted in this ſort; yet I ſay further, that ſeeing hee cannot be ſatisfied, till his doubtfulnes (which by all his might he ſeeketh to ſubdue) be remoued, and his ſoule ſet at libertie againe by ſome new light in Gods promiſes: therefore he is to be perſwaded that he labouring after, and groaning to reſt his wearied and heauie heart on theſe, he cannot miſcarry, nor be forſaken of  the Lord in the loweſt depth of his diſtreſſe.The ſecond perſwaſion to vphold a vveake faith. For ſome one or other teſtimonie and propertie of the new birth ſhall euer be found in him, although hee alwaies feeleth it not, neither perceiueth it himſelfe; whereby it ſhall be manifeſt, that he liueth to God the life of God: euen as hearing, breathing, mouing, feeling, and ſuch like, are infallible tokens of life in the bodie, which by many likelihoods appeareth to be dead. And if to his owne iudgement it ſeemeth, that all hope is cut off through the rage of the diuell, and ſtrength of the temptation: yet it is, as if a man were ſuddenly ſtriken downe to the ground with ſome violent blow, and amazed, who yet afterward recouereth himſelfe againe: ſo that euen he, which feeleth not that he hath faith and  life, is not yet without it, ſeeing hee is not without that worke of the ſpirit, which alwaies accompanieth it; although indeede he hath neede of eſpeciall and ſtrong comfort. And this is mine anſwere.
               But if this bee not enough, but thou wilt marueile, why God doth thus deale with thee, and ſuffer thee to fall to ſuch depth of doubting, ſorrow, and feare, although he loueth thee; yea and that after thou haſt felt ſuch comfort

                   to thy conſcience: I muſt make mine anſwere more full and large, for the further ſatisfying of thee herein. I ſay therfore, although this be by the wiſe prouidence of God, that many of his truly begotten children (who therefore haue had ſound comfort in Chriſt) doe fall ſometimes, and that very dangerouſly, and do greatly wauer, and doubt oftentimes, and ſo become vncomfortable; which the Lord diſpoſeth: leaſt by their ſudden chaunge from ſo damnable and vncomfortable an eſtate to ſo happie and ioyfull, they ſhould bee lifted vp, and conceited, and ſo become ſecure and preſumptuous (the forerunners and cauſes of a fearefull fall) yet this is certaine, it ought not thus to be on our parts: for it is (as I haue ſaid before) a weaknes, which muſt  be withſtood and ouercome. For the attaining whereto, the occaſion of this doubting in him who hath once beleeued, muſt be ſearched out, and ſo remoued: which ordinarily is our own infirmitie, neglect of dutie, and ſleightnes in the manner of performing the ſame, or ſome particular ſin; alſo pronenes to ſinne, a nouriſhing of the ſame and ſtrength of it, or long lying therein: whereupon the tender conſcience feareth that his former comfort was but deceitfull and vaine, and ſo doubteth of his owne eſtate.
               For the right remouing hereof, this is duly to bee conſidered, that as the roote of our comfort in Chriſt is not the ſtrength of our Chriſtian life:A third perſwaſion to vphold a weake faith. ſo the weaknes herein, ought not to breed doubting of our ſaluation by Chriſt.  But for as much as all our comfort ſtandeth in this, that God, who iuſtifieth the vngodly, hath freely giuen his ſonne, and in him is reconciled to vs, who ſo heartily deſire his fauour, hauing been his enemies: and hath by his Goſpell called vs, and by his ſpirit wrought in our hearts a ſure perſwaſion hereof; wherby we which were dead in ſin, are made aliue to God, & ſo are new borne: and therefore begin to be chaunged, firſt in affection, and then in conuerſation by little and little. Therefore if we haue this aſſurance of our new birth, though there be in vs much weakenes of the ſpirituall life, yet we ought not to doubt, whether we be Gods children, ſeeing he that is new borne can neuer die.
               
                   But rather wee are to remember firſt, wee are but children,The fourth perſwaſion to vphold a weake faith. and therefore weake. Secondly, we are very ſubiect to many ſpirituall diſeaſes; ſome ſuch as take away ſenſe of life: and therefore wee muſt ſeeke to be cured, and not deſpaire of life, becauſe it is certaine that no ſuch can periſh. So that if we ſee, that we haue turned our harts from our chriſtian courſe, & offended God, or (which is more) if we haue ſuffered our ſelues to be ſeduced any manner of way, we muſt not deſpaire, or doubt of the ſafetie of the whole perſon, when any one part or member is diſtempered, and ill at eaſe; but cure it,A fit ſimile. and labour to reſtore that to health againe: as if it be thine heart, thine eye, thy hand, or any other part which hath offended; reſort thou to the Phiſition Chriſt Ieſus;  make thy complaint, that thou art heauie, and wouldeſt faine returne againe from whence thou art fallen: and be confident for his owne promiſe ſake, who calleth with ſtretched out armes, ſaying, Returne thou which wandreſt,
                  Eſai 55.1. Matth. 11.28. 
                  and thou who wouldeſt finde eaſe and comfort, come vnto me, and I will refreſh thee: beleeue in me, and I will ſatisfie thee in that which thou hungreſt for. Now if they who haue fallen and offended God, may turne home againe to their firſt husband with good welcome: ſhall not they much more be beloued of

him, and therefore comforted by him, who haue not prouoked him, but are  onely held downe through feare and infirmitie?
               And thus I hauing anſwered the doubts of this ſort of Gods people, weak in faith: I had purpoſed to haue proceeded no further to deale with them which haue the ſeale of God, and which are marked to eternall life: but to haue diſcloſed the packe of counterfeits, and to haue proued that many ſuch, as ſay they are Chriſtians, and the elect of God, and are not, but doe lie; that they are nothing leſſe then the children of God (for as the weakeſt in faith muſt not be depriued of their priuiledge, as to thinke they are not ye Lords: ſo muſt not the moſt glozing hypocrites be ſuffered to conceiue a falſe opinion or hope of that which is none of theirs: as to dreame of happines) This, I ſay, I had  purpoſed next to haue entred into: but in the meane while, it commeth into my minde (by occaſion of ſuch, as I haue anſwered alreadie, that is, the faithfull; who hauing receiued much comfort through their hope, after an effectuall calling,Another ſort weake in faith, and how they are to be comforted. haue yet after that, been troubled with doubtings) by occaſion of them (I ſay) I called to mind another ſort of Gods deare ſeruants, who are weaker then they, deeplier grieued, and therefore more tenderly to be regarded: leaſt that they being bruſed reedes, ſhould be altogether broken, and as ſmoking flaxe ſhould be vtterly quenched.
               
               And theſe are they, who hauing manifeſt ſignes of faith, and the new birth in them: yet by the ſubtill and cruell malice of the diuell (although not without  the wiſe diſpoſing of the Lord, to their great good, and example of others) are brought to this bondage, that they are perſwaded that they are vtter reprobates, and haue no remedie againſt their deſperation. They feele (they ſay) the wrath of God kindled againſt their ſoules: and anguiſh of conſcience moſt intolerable: and can finde no releaſe, notwithſtanding their continuall prayers made vnto the Lord, and in their iudgement ſtand voyde of all hope of the inheritance promiſed, expecting the conſummation of their miſerie, and the fearefull ſentence of eternall condemnation. Now this vehemencie of temptation, though it bee enough of it ſelfe barely, to ſhake and terrifie the afflicted; yet when melancholie ſhall herewithall poſſeſſe  the partie, then is it made farre more grieuous: for that raiſeth exceſſe of diſtruſt, and feare, and perſwadeth it ſelfe of miſerie, where there is no cauſe, and is the very ſeate of the diuell, being an apt inſtrument for him, both to weaken the bodie, and to terrifie the minde with vaine and phantaſticall feares, and to diſturbe the whole tranquillitie of our nature: and one chiefe propertie of this, is to feare a man without iuſt cauſe. So many as are troubled with this latter, I exhort to reade the treatiſe of Melancholie, ſet foorth by Doctor Bright Phiſition, Anno 1586. vnto the which alſo I may referre them, for the former point: that is to ſay, if they be deeply touched with the conſcience of ſinne alone, how they may be comforted and deliuered out of it. But ſeeing it is both appertaining to the matter which I haue taken in hand, to ſay ſomewhat thereof, and the other treatiſe not alway at hand, I wil partly borrow from thence, where it is largely and profitably ſet downe: and partly adde my ſelfe ſomewhat for the ſtaying and perſwading of ſuch weak ones,Perſwaſions to the weake to vphold them. as their caſe requireth.
               And firſt they muſt be perſwaded, that they are not vnder the wrath of

                   God; neither is his anger kindled againſt them, for all their feare that oppreſſeth them, when their eſtate is to their owne feeling, euen at the worſt: becauſe they haue not ſinned againſt the holy Ghoſt: which ſinne onely is able to ſhut them out from hope of ſaluation; and yet many of them in their temptation do thinke that they haue. And to proue that they haue not committed that ſinne, it may appeare by this: that they haue not maliciouſlie ſet themſelues againſt the truth and Goſpell of God: nor wilfullie perſecuted it againſt their conſcience, but doe imbrace it heartily, and loue the ſame, which they are not able to denie. But it is a meere deluſion and temptation of the diuell, which holdeth them in this terror and bondage: which time will diſcouer,  and lay open, as they themſelues ſhall hereafter moſt plainely ſee and diſcerne: which, many ſuch as they are, in the like caſe haue found in the end. And though it be a temptation of the enimie purpoſed of him to their confuſion: yet from their louing and mercifull father a triall of their faith, and patience, and other vertues. Indeed the ground hereof, is their owne weakenes (as I ſaid before of the former ſort of Gods Children) vpon the which the diuell worketh, although not to wring from them their hope (which he ſhall neuer be able to doe:) yet to wearie their liues with heauines and diſcomfort.Sathan worketh vpon vs by ſuggeſtions. And this our infirmitie Sathan doth ſometime aſſaie without meanes, that is, onely by ſpirituall ſuggeſtion: ſometime by meanes and outward  occaſions of euill, and forcible perſwaſions to ſinne and rebellion againſt God. For the firſt of theſe two, it is certaine, that he after a perſonall manner to the ſoule, though not in bodilie ſhape to the eye, without meanes of outward things, tempteth vs, in the very ſecret thoughts of our hearts. For he, being a ſpirit (and by creation moſt excellent) hath acceſſe vnto our ſpirits, to trouble them, and diſorder all their actions: as we ſee corporall creatures with corporall and bodilie force to annoy one another. And as he is a ſpirit, ſo the long experience (which he hath of our corruption, and miſerie from age to age) giueth him knowledge of our minds more perfectlie, who gathereth it by the leaſt ſigne of our inclination and will: not that he knoweth  our hearts (for that is proper to God only) but through his long acquaintance with our nature, he conceiueth our intents and purpoſes, and that oftentimes without ſignification, either of ſpeech or geſture. And thus he being able to diſcouer the vanitie of our minds, by the knowledge of our vniuerſall corruption: as he ſeeth occaſion, and whereto we moſt incline, he ſuggeſteth his temptations to ſinne and diſobedience.
               Now if to theſe two we adde his malice (for he is not called the enuious man for naught) and his vnſearchable ſubtiltie, and exceeding ſtrength;Sathans properties. and that which is greater then all the reſt, that he moſt hurteth, when it leaſt appeareth, when we leaſt ſuſpect it: for which cauſe it is ſaid, that hee changeth  himſelfe into an angell of light, 2. Cor. 11.13, 14. we ſhall not meruaile, though without any meanes, or outward occaſions, he raiſeth great terror, and diſmaidnes, eſpeciallie the Lord giuing him leaue ſo to doe, for the good of vs which are exerciſed with them. For beſides that,Sathan tempteth and perſwadeth to ſin, which we delight not in. we are inticed ſometime to the ſinnes, which by nature we loue: we are alſo (eſpeciallie ſuch as are thus brought low, in the anguiſh and bitternes of their ſoule) tempted to ſuch euils as are very ſtrange, and ſuch as we abhor the very leaſt conceite of them;

and finde not the leaſt part of our nature to incline to them; though otherwiſe  we complaine of great frailtie: as to haue thoughts to blaſpheme God, to be tempted; to lay violent hands on others, not moued thereto by any hate or malice; or to deuoure our ſelues, to diſpaire and diſtruſt of Gods mercie and grace: all which ſinnes with ſuch other, the partie hath neuer had delight in, when hee was yet ouertaken with ſome other ſinnes, and had his heart drawne after them indeed; and yet he is feared with the guiltines of thoſe,He laboureth to dimme our knowledge, and the ſight of Gods grace in vs. which he euer loathed. And when the diuell can faſten vpon ſuch as this weake perſon is, in this wiſe, he eſpeciallie laboureth to dimme their knowledge and iudgement, that they may haue no ſure hold of any point of doctrine, which may ſoundly comfort them, that thus he may, like a Lyon, deuoure  them more ſpeedilie: For when they cannot be perſwaded in their iudgement, that God can, or will pardon them, how are they able to deſire, or pray for it, when it ſhall be beaten into them, that they haue no faith, nor any better things in them than reprobates? how can they be moued to ſtirre vp that weake faith which they haue? no more can they deſire good meanes, as counſell, reading, or any ſuch like, when he hath ſtricken this deadly blow in their conſciences, that God hath forſaken them.
               And this be ſpoken of the diuels tempting the children of God (when, and whom it pleaſeth the Lord for their triall) and that without the helpe of outward meanes, or any occaſions to worke by: the which I purpoſed to  ſpeake of to no further end, but for the helpe of ſuch as are ſometimes deceiued, and ſo oppreſſed after the ſame manner. Here is no fit place to ſatisfie them who would be glad to know more of this matter.
               To proceede therefore, and ſo to draw to an end herein: As he doth oft without any meanes, deepely faſten vpon the weake conſciences of Gods people, to feare and diſmay them; ſo doth he the ſame much more eaſilie by the helpe of outward meanes: ſo that, when he hath couered their hearts with darkenes, and brought them into a dreadfull feare of Gods wrath; and plucked their armour from them,He troubleth much by outward obiects. whereby before they had reſiſted him, he holdeth them at this vantage, that euery thing which is before them, is made  matter to increaſe their diſtreſſed eſtate. And therefore if they ſee a knife, all their thoughts are to deſtroy themſelues; if they goe by water, they are vehemently perſwaded to drowne themſelues; and ſo are they tempted to ſtrangle themſelues, if either the place giue them any occaſion, or the inſtrument wherewith they ſhould doe it. So if they ſee any merry, their heauines is the more increaſed, ſeeing (ſay they) we ſhall neuer come out of deadly ſorrow and diſpaire: if they ſee a dogge, they wiſh that they were ſo: when they ſhould eate their meate, they thinke it wil increaſe their damnation; and dare ſcarcely take the meaneſt ſcraps to relieue nature: And if any Scripture be recited to them;The obiections of the weake in temptation. oh, it belongeth not to them, they ſay: they are paſt hope: and whatſoeuer we anſwere them (be it neuer ſo fit for them, and to doe them good) yet they are neuer ſatisfied; but raiſe new obiections againſt themſelues, as being nothing ſatisfied by that which was ſpoken to them.
               It were infinite to ſet downe their ſpeeches and thoughts like vnto theſe, which I haue now mentioned; which the diuell draweth from them by ſuch occaſions, as he worketh by: but all this is (as we ſee) through their owne letting

                   goe their hold of Gods promiſes, and mercies in Chriſt: which yet ſometime they haue imbraced, and felt great comfort in; or at leaſt, could not deny, but that they had part in them. And it is the vnſpeakeable goodnes of God, that they are not vtterlie ſwallowed vp; but kept through his ſecret grace, though not ſeene of them: and that all other of his deare ſeruants, are not plunged into the ſame depth of diſtruſt and diſpaire, that there might be no one to comfort and counſell another; but diſcouragements on eueryſide.
               For it is not to be attributed to Sathan, or any want of ſubtiltie, readines to hurt, ablenes, malice and crueltie; that either the one ſort is at all preſerued, or the other more freed from the like meaſure of languiſhing and feare,  or (which is the ſenſeleſſe ſicknes and diſeaſe of this age, and farre more dangerous) from bold ſecuritie and preſumption: but (as I haue ſaid) the Lords keeping of them both: Neither is it any meruaile to vs (though it be not marked of the vnbeleeuers) becauſe the Lord hath his eye euer vpon his beloued ones (as Dauid ſpeaketh, Pſalm. 41.12.) That he may ſee that no hurt befall them; euen as a mother hath her eye alwaies on the young child which beginneth to goe, that it get no knocks.
               But now to conclude, ye will aske, what remedies are to be vſed againſt ſuch ſore aſſaults? Firſt I ſay, that ſeeing their conſciences beare them witnes, how much theſe temptations are repugnant to their deſires and liking;  and chiefely raiſed and procured by Satan in them, who abuſeth their ſimplicitie: therefore there is no cauſe, why they ſhould be ſo diſcouraged,Remedies againſt Sathans temptations. and out of heart, although he hath haled, and violentlie carried them to ſuch miſerie; as though they had taken glorie in offending God: this (I ſay) let them marke, as ſoone as they be fit to heare it; and the rather, they are to count them to proceede from him, than from themſelues; becauſe they are ſuch, as are altogether contrarie to their former conuerſation, and to nature it ſelfe: and ſuch as haue no enforcement, nor inticement, but from him.Further remedies. They are further to conſider, how much it doth diſpleaſe God; that they are remoued from their faith, and giue place to the ſpirit of error: and therefore they  ſhould gather more godly boldnes and confidence in him, on the one ſide, and more ſtrength againſt Sathan, on the other ſide. For if God calleth and incourageth vs to truſt and beleeue in him: and we ſtanding in need thereof, would moſt gladly (as we will all ſay in ſuch a caſe) imbrace his promiſes made in Christ Ieſus, who is he, which ſhould hinder vs? If the Lord will iustifie and cleare vs, who ſhall condemne vs? Neither let them after all this, be ſtill obiecting, that they feele ſmall ſtrength of faith and hope, as many of Gods deare children doe, for thereby the enemie may take great encouragement to their owne diſaduantage: for what if they feele not the ſweete taſte thereof,What wee ſhould doe, when we feele not the ſweete taste of Gods mercies. which ſometime they felt; ſhall they iudge therefore themſelues to be vtterly bereaued  thereof? If the ſoule be now ſicke, and taſteth not the ſweete meates of conſolation, which it was wont, was it therefore alwaies ſo? Will they meaſure themſelues by that which they preſently feele, when the ſoule hath loſt her taſte? Or rather by the times paſt (as the Prophet, by his example teacheth them in the like caſe) whileſt it ſtoode free from the diſeaſe of temptation, when they found comfort in the ſpirit, through an acceptable meaſure of faith.
               
                  
                  A fift perſwaſion to vphold vveake faith.Further, the triall of their faith is likewiſe to be taken, by thoſe fruits which  are euident to the eye of others, who can iudge more ſincerely, then the afflicted themſelues, whoſe vnderſtanding is much altered by Sathans terrours. And here (as in fitteſt place) I alleage the ſtrong faith of the woman of Canaan, when Chriſt ſeemed to giue her the repulſe vtterly, yet ſhe would not be moued from her faith, when firie darts were thruſt into her, three or foure one after another. The ſame I ſay to other their obiections of like ſort, as I haue ſaid to theſe: As when they reaſon thus againſt themſelues, that they do not liue as Gods children doe, nor ſo holily, as God requireth, and therefore they cannot haue ſuch comfort, as they haue. What then? are they reprobates? haue they no grace, becauſe they want that which they would haue? Ought they not to conſider,A ſixt perſwaſion to vphold the weak faith. that they being the Lords plants, take not their full perfection at once: but according to the nature of a plant, require a daily watering and dreſſing, whereby in the end they attaine to a full growth in Chriſt? Oh, but they feele not the teſtimonie of Gods ſpirit, which might aſſure them! I anſwere, neither doe any of Gods children at all times feele it: but that they may ſee their owne frailtie, God doth, as it were, hide himſelfe ſometime for a ſeaſon (as the mother doth from the child to try the affection of it to her) that they may with more earneſt deſire mourne for Gods wonted grace: and when they haue obtained it againe, may with more ioyfulnes of heart praiſe him: and yet God doth not withhold comfort from his, many  times,Deut. 33.12. when they walke heauily, who (if they could giue credit vnto him) may aſſure themſelues that they may liue in ſafetie vnder his protection all the day long: but their owne frailtie, and the vehemencie of the temptation, which oppreſſeth them,A ſeuenth perſwaſion. diminiſheth the feeling thereof. But patience and conſtancie, with a reſolute mind to beare Gods triall, will bring a good end: yea and by the meeke going vnder Gods hand in theſe, they ſhall learne experience, afterward to wade thorough greater; and yet in the middeſt of them, to haue hope, that ſhall not make them aſhamed.
               
               
                  Rom. 5.4.5.And thus it may appeare, that although the weake faith of Gods deare ſeruants may be many waies aſſaulted, and their ſaluation by meanes thereof, to their feeling, be doubted of: yet that ſuch are vndoubtedly the Lords, and cannot be taken out of his hands; becauſe they are not deſtitute of faith (as I haue proued) whereby they apprehend Chriſt, though weake: and which hath brought vnto them much comfort in times paſt; though for a ſeaſon the Lord working all for their good, it ſeeme to them farre otherwiſe. And of the former point of this ſecond head or generall part of this treatiſe, that is, how the weakeſt of Gods people are to be vpholden in vehement temptations, thus much be ſaid.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 9. The difference of beleeuers from them that are none.
               
                  NOw followeth the ſecond point, wherein for the cleerer manifeſtation of that which hath been ſaid, I muſt now diſcerne from the former ſort, ſuch as haue great ſhew of faithfull ones and beleeuers,

                   and yet are nothing leſſe, and ſhew that the weakeſt Chriſtians, of whom I haue ſpoken, may ſee their eſtate apparantly different from theirs; who yet come neereſt of other, vnto beleeuers: and then anſwere ſome doubts, which I know doe ſticke in the mindes of diuers about this matter.
               And firſt whereas ſome may maruaile, that I in the deſcribing of Gods children, haue not reſted in theſe as infallible markes thereof, namely, 1. ſorrow for their miſerie, 2. confeſſion of their ſinnes to God, 3. feare of his diſpleaſure for the ſame, and 4. deſiring ſome kinde of amendment of life; ſeeing they are alſo in them, who are effectuallie called of God: I anſwere, I haue followed the Scripture herein, and that I haue in ſhewing who are the  Lords, made mention, rather of thoſe graces of God, which are properly belonging to the faithfull, then of them, which may be in hypocrites, and hollow hearted profeſſors. Seeing we finde both by Scripture and experience, that theſe forenamed affections, and many good and commendable vertues (as they ſeeme to be) may haue place in thoſe which doe not appertaine to Gods election: For a man may be much burthened with the weight of his ſinne, his conſcience terrified by the ſpirit of bondage;Matth. 27.3. 1. King. 21.27. he may be penſiue afterward for his ſinne committed, and wiſh it were vndone, afraide for the puniſhment, and may promiſe amendment, and walke heauily, and expreſſe it by outward ſignes: and yet not releaſed, nor ſet free from that which he  feareth. So the ſame perſon, by the hearing of the promiſes of the Goſpell, may finde ioy, and delight in the glorious tidings, which it bringeth: and take ſenſible pleaſure in the exerciſes of religion:Matth. 13.20. 
                  He may haue a taste of the life to come, as Balam; he may reuerence and feare the Miniſters of God, as Herod,
                  Numb. 22. Mark. 6.20. and begin to amend ſome faults in his life, as hee and others, of whom wee reade in the Goſpell did; and yet for all this (though fearefull to thinke of) not ſealed vp to ſaluation: euen thus farre a man may goe in the profeſſion of Chriſtian religion; and yet a ſtranger from the power of faith, from the life of godlines, and from that, which accompanieth both; I meane, a good and peaceable conſcience.
               
                   Of the which argument, becauſe much is written, and where the Goſpell hath been preached (of ſome places I may ſpeake of mine owne knowledge) it hath been often handled, and largely, I thinke; I may ſay the leſſe. Neither doe I ſpeake that, which I haue ſaid, about this matter, to diſcourage any: but partly to driue them from deceiuing themſelues, which loue to ſtay themſelues, they care not vpon what rotten hold, and broken ſtaffe; partly to make the true teſtimonies of eternall life to be more pretiouſly eſteemed of thoſe which haue them: and ſuch as are without them, to beſtowe more diligence in ſeeking of them. For the weakeſt faith findeth Chriſt Ieſus no more to loſe him, ſeeing he hath ſaid, that he will not breake a bruſed reede,
                  Matth. 12.20. 
                  nor quench  the ſmoking flaxe; and the moſt glorious ſhewes of godlines, and boldeſt crakes, and moſt loude boaſtes of faith, where yet it is not indeede,Luk. 18.14. ſhall all vaniſh away in the ayre, and come to nothing, not hauing any part in him: euen as Sauls bragges, that God had deliuered Dauid into his hands, when he was ſhut in the citie, were fruſtrated to his owne ſhame, 1. Sam. 23.14. & 24.5. The which, how true it is, may appeare not only by ſome examples mentioned out of the Scripture, but alſo by the liues of ſundry in the Countrey,

                  who haue receiued the Goſpell with ioy, and been much caſt downe by the force  of the lawe: But as their humbling hath been a bowing of themſelues for a ſhort time, like a bulruſh with the wind; ſo their ioy hath been a ſuddaine flaſh of fleeting mirth, not well grounded in them, and an inlightning of them with the generall knowledge of ſaluation, rather then a ſealing of the aſſurance of their owne in their hearts for continuance.
               
                  Forwardnes in religion was ſometime in many. Hebr. 6.5. Exod. 22.
                  Oh, how many haue after the report made by others, what great change the Goſpell had wrought; how many, I ſay, haue reſorted to the hearing of it, and giuen good and commendable hope of their owne change alſo, and repentance; who yet were ſoone wearie of the Lords yoke, and of being ſubiect to his holy gouernment? how many haue forſaken the fountaines of the water  of life,
                  Ier. 2.13. which could haue refreſhed their ſoules in their neceſſitie with ſound comfort, and haue digged to themſelues broken pits, which can hold no water to comfort them? And ſo haue ſtarted aſide, like a broken bowe, and haue returned ſhamefully to their vomit,
                  2. Pet. 2.22. 
                  and as the ſowe which was waſhed, to wallow againe in the mire? Which I ſpeake not, as though God had not both called out of this life many amongſt vs (within theſe yeeres in her Maieſties raigne) of ſingular hope, and left a comfortable companie amongſt vs ſtill, with others dailie comming on;Apoſtataes. but to caſt their ſhame as dung in their faces, who haue fallen from that feruent deſire of the ſincere milke of the word (which once they had) to the world,Iohn 6.66. 1. Iohn 2.19. to prophanenes, and to careleſnes. Theſe (as the Scripture  ſaith of Iudas) went out from vs, but they were none of vs: for if they had been of vs, they would haue continued ſtill with vs. For when either proſperitie hath been graunted them,Iames 5.8. they haue waxen wanton, and haue turned the grace of God into looſenes:
                  Matth. 13.21. or when affliction hath followed them, they haue growne wearie of their profeſſion, ſaying as we reade in Eccleſ. 7.12. That the former dayes were better, and wiſhed againe for the merrie world, which they inioyed, and the pleaſant life (as the Iſraelites did their fleſh pots) which they paſſed in ignorance of God,Exod. 16.3. and the luſts thereof in ſuperſtition, and ſuch like: and ſo haue fallen from the grace of God, and haue departed from him, to whom yet they had profeſſed themſelues to haue been infinitly indebted, as for his other benefits;  ſo eſpecially for his Goſpell, in the which they ſeemed to take no ſmall delight for a ſeaſon.Iohn 5.35. But theſe when I conſider their falſehood towards God, and their double dealing, that they would not giue their hearts to him to beleeue his mercies,Matth. 19.29. to be their onely treaſures, and ſo hold faſt their confidence in him (who would ſufficiently haue recompenced their forſaking of the world) I ceaſe meruailing at them, although they are fallen from an high account and eſtimation among the ſeruants of God,The fals of many Profeſſors haue made them vile. vnto a vile and reprochfull eſtate, to be reckoned with the vnbeleeuers; ſome of them making this their chiefe religion, rather to be iudges and cenſurers of their brethren, then to hold and retaine loue and fellowſhip with them. For whom yet, I will not  ceaſe to intreate the Lord dailie, that if any of them belong to him, it would pleaſe him to awake them, and to bring them home with the prodigal ſonne, in the ſight of thoſe who haue ſeene their reuolt: that ſo, not onely themſelues may be ſaued, though they take ſhame in the world; but others alſo, who were imboldened to ſinne by their example, may be reclaimed.
               Thus, the loue of theſe men hath conſtrained me, a little to go aſide in lamenting

                   their miſerie, becauſe I haue knowne many of them, who hauing ſhined as lights for a ſeaſon, are become miſtie cloudes to hinder light from others: whom I alſo counſell to conſider, that they haue not been driuen away from their holy profeſſion by perſecution (which if they had been,Some haue fallen away before trouble came. might haue giuen better hope of them to their brethren, that meere weakeneſſe had hindered them) but they haue gone away from their first loue, and broken off their fellowſhip with their brethren, euen in the time of the Goſpell flouriſhing, and preached in ſome places with more power, then when they were in the beginning moſt earneſtly ſtirred vp to imbrace it: yea, and ſome of them then forſooke their good beginnings, not when Moſes 
                   was gone aſide from them, for the ſpace of fortie daies, but whileſt he was amongſt them, and in the middeſt of their tents, calling vpon them to be ſound and conſtant, and to goe forward, as he had done long before: and himſelfe alſo (to Gods glorie be it ſpoken of ſome) with great courage and cheerefulnes of good example going before them. And therefore ſeeing their ſinne is the greater, they are to be aduiſed to looke for better aſſurance of their ſaluation, and whom they haue offended, that ſo they may repent,Let ſuch repent. and now take ſurer hold of eternall life, with the hand of their faith, rather than by ſo weake and ſmall occaſions to let it goe. For if they had in the feeling of their ſinne, feare, ſorrow, and other diſtreſſes for the ſame, been vnfainedly  humbled, their hearts mollified, and they reſolued to ſeeke the forgiuenes thereof, and righteouſnes thereby, and that through the free imputation thereof by Ieſus Chriſt: they ſhould ſoundly haue had their diſeaſes healed, their ſorrow and doubtes expelled, and true comfort miniſtred from their faith in him, which would ſo effectually haue wrought in them, and haue raiſed ſuch an vnfained loue to God againe, that they would for no cauſe haue been withdrawne; but rather haue ſet themſelues to growe in godlines with their brethren, then in the leaſt manner to haue returned to their former lusts of their ignorance;2. Pet. 1.9. from which they profeſſed themſelues to haue been purged.
               
               
                   This I haue written for their cauſes, who haue been content to be deceiued with an opinion of happines, and yet to be voide of it: who becauſe they haue had ſome light in the beholding of their ſinnes, and haue been wounded in conſcience for the guilt of them, and puniſhment due to the ſame; haue therefore perſwaded themſelues, that they haue been effectually called, when yet they haue not ſeene nor found this, that their ſinnes haue been pardoned to them: and in token thereof that they themſelues,2. Cor. 5.17. haue been changed in will, affection, and conuerſation: and ſo haue become new creatures. For though they alleage (and that iuſtly) that in the conuerſion of Paul, the people mentioned Act. 2.37.Iudg. 10.16. 1. Sam. 7.3.5. the returning of the people of Iſrael to  God, in the time of the Iudges, and in the dayes of Samuel, and in ſuch other examples; the holy Ghoſt ſetteth downe their trouble of minde, their pricke of conſcience, and their great abaſing of themſelues, which I graunt are wrought in ſuch, as haue been truly penitent: yet there hath been ioyned alſo with theſe, an earneſt hungring after Gods mercie, an vnfained faith, the ſpirit of adoption ſealing vp their ſaluation vnto them, and the liuelie fruites of the ſame: They haue beleeued that God hath become their moſt

louing father through Chriſt Ieſus, who was before their fearefull iudge;  and they haue hereby been inforced to loue him therefore,1. Pet. 1.8. and to ſeeke now to pleaſe him with all their hearts: and theſe graces haue ſet them forward in a godly life to bring forth fruites, beſeeming their profeſſion.
               
                  1. Tim. 1.4.But theſe men furniſh not themſelues with faith, a pure heart, a good conſcience, change of their life, through the louing of God; but they let time end their griefe of mind, and their woundes of conſcience are healed outwardly with opinion that it is ſufficient repentance, onely to be ſorrowfull: ſome not abiding the gripes of griefe, and yet not finding ſound comfort againſt them, haue caſt them off, and therefore in affliction are from time to time vexed with the returning of them againe, becauſe they were neuer driuen away  kindly, nor aright. If they ſhall further defend themſelues this way, that they thought their courſe was good, to be thus caſt downe, ſeeing the lawe was preached to them, which conſtrained them thus to doe: and if they will aske, why we preached the iudgements of God to them, if we ſaw it not meete for them to be humbled?The Law is not to be preached without the Goſpell. I anſwere: firſt, the law was neuer preached alone by any diſcreete teacher, who himſelfe was skilfull in the doing of his dutie, but the Goſpell with it. Secondly, the law was not, nor is not preached to hold men vnder, with the yoke of feare and bondage; but to cauſe men to ſee their ſinne more cleerely:VVhy the Law is preached. and thereby their puniſhment to be due; that ſo they might come to themſelues in truth, and ſet more ſtore by  Gods mercie, and Chriſts merits, which onely can ſaue their ſoules, and miniſter them comfort. Thirdly, we haue not as from God approued, nor wiſhed any to reſt in any workes of the lawe, or the beſt actions which they could doe, when as yet they had no faith, nor perſwaſion of the remiſſion of their ſinnes, truly ſetled in them: but to haſte from thence with all ſpeede; and to trie themſelues both by rules and doctrine, as well as by their owne experience,2. Cor. 13.5. 
                  if Christ were in them, that ſo through him they might become acceptable. Now then if they haue heard and receiued one part of our Miniſtery, and not the other: if they haue placed happines in the repentance, which they haue fancied; and not in the knowledge of God through Chriſt, which  we haue vrged; they haue been deceiued through the ſubtiltie of the tempter: if they haue ſought to pleaſe God, for feare of his vengeance, and not becauſe they haue found deliuerance from death, by his vndeſerued fauour; they haue laboured in vaine, and been with-holden from the principall fruit of the Goſpell preached. But no meruaile, for many are the ſleights, by the which the diuell keepeth his poſſeſſion in ſuch, as are not yet eſcaped his wiles and ſnares, in the which he holdeth them; not without their own good liking. He diſcourageth ſome from hope and confidence, that they are the Lords; becauſe they haue been more deepely pricked for their ſinne, and longer holden in doubtfulnes, then other of Gods children are; and that  none haue ſo great temptations and conflicts, as they haue: But haue not they theſe afflictions to bring them vnto God?How men abuſe their afflictions through Sathans vviles. And others he diſmaieth, and holdeth vnder with the contrarie: as that they cannot be Gods children, becauſe they haue neuer had that deepe ſorrow, and long lying in it, for their ſinne, as many of their brethren haue had: As though mens examples, and not rather Gods word ſhould be their rule to follow. So he ſuggeſteth this to

                   ſome others, that their eſtate could not be good, ſeeing they haue not had their liues full of ſome outward croſſes, as ſome of the godly haue: and yet on the contrarie, many haue been long holden captiues with theſe cogitations, that they durſt not thinke themſelues to belong to Gods election,Pſal. 73.13, 14. ſeeing they are euery while vnder one croſſe or other. Thus the diuell (whoſe malice and ſubtiltie few doe know, fewer doe well weigh, but feweſt of all doe wiſely and carefully reſiſt) the diuell, I ſay, holdeth numbers occupied about theſe and ſuch like points: wherein the triall of their happines, and certaintie of their peace doth not conſiſt. And becauſe religion and holie doctrine doth affect them, and that he ſeeth they will needes imbrace the  ſame, he laboureth to keepe them at this ſtay, to hold themſelues contented with that ſhadow, though they be vncertaine of their eſtate to Godward, and remaine in ſuſpence and little hope of their ſaluation: and ſo hee permitteth them to haue the letter of the Scripture in their mouth, and to talke generally about religion, or (if occaſion be offered) about ſome queſtions,Pſal. 50.16. and matters concerning the ſame; but they hate vtterly to be reformed. Who ſeeth not that he holdeth theſe in errour and bondage, as groſſely as he doth the other before mentioned?Looke to that which is principall. who trouble themſelues about opinions and conceits, which are not the chief and maine points to occupie themſelues about; as though happines conſiſted in them, but may faile of eternall life (for all  that) when they haue all done?
               For neither doth this commend a man to God, whether he hath long continued in griefe of minde, feare of conſcience, and doubtfulnes of ſaluation: but that he be well freed and deliuered from ſuch trouble, and diſcharged of his feare: I meane that hee can heartily thanke God through Ieſus Chriſt, that he ſeeth and feeleth himſelfe ſet at libertie, and by him is made happie: for if the truth of God and his promiſe make him free, then he is free indeed.Ioh. 8.32. Neither is this with a man, or againſt him in aſſuring himſelfe of ſaluation, whether his life be full of afflictions and croſſes, ſeeing God keepeth not alwaies, an euen hand in theſe things; for they are common both to good and  bad: but that a man know himſelfe, though a wretched ſinner; yet through faith, to be iuſtified and acquitted before God: and therefore is at peace with God,
                  Rom. 5.1. in himſelfe, euen ſuch as paſſeth all vnderſtanding, whether his croſſes bee many or few.
               There are many things of like ſort, with which Sathan doth blindfold ſundrie of good hope: as that, for hauing ſome infirmities, or falles breaking foorth in them, therefore they cannot be beloued of God: and when they finde that in ſome ſort they can ouercome them, then they think they are the beloued of God: in neither of which a man is to place his ſafetie. For both the deare Saints of God may poſſibly be led out of the way,When a man is none of the worſt, he may be farre from being good. to commit ſomewhat  offenſiuely: neither is he to promiſe well to himſelfe, who ſometimes keepeth from ſinnes, which at other times he hath fallen into: for it may be, that there is no great occaſion offered him that way; or he is otherwiſe buſied, ſo as he is not ſo eaſily carried after ſuch temptations; or ſome ſinnes of another ſort as grieuous, doe hold him vnder. And therefore ſeeing many are deceiued this way, partly for want of knowledge and grounded iudgement in the truth, and partly whiles they haue through long cuſtome been

detained and holden in ſuch ſnares, they are to be deſired in the moſt earneſt  manner, that they would beſtow ſome of their time and meditations about the ſubſtance and marrow of their happines, to ſee that they haue a part in it indeed:1. Pet. 1.10. and as S. Peter ſaith, to giue all diligence to make their calling and election ſure: and in trying by all meanes, whether their faith, their hope, their patience, and loue be ſound, though vnperfect; and true and effectuall, though weake and feeble: for vpon theſe the matter dependeth.
               And if they can be certified, that the ſpirit of God ſince, and through their hearing of his Goſpel preached vnto them, hath ſhed ſuch grace into their harts, as to make them partakers of the fruites thereof, they ſhall not neede to bee troubled about the other: and if they contrariwiſe finde that they doe yet  want theſe, they muſt fully purpoſe to ſeeke for them; and not to feed themſelues with a vaine and a deceitfull hope, ſtaied vpon no good ground nor foundation at all.
               And here I muſt further require, that ſuch as, to whom God giueth any worke of his ſpirit, and whoſe hearts he ſeaſoneth with good affections and deſires through the Goſpell, ſo as they ſenſibly feele themſelues to looke after eternall life, that they would cheriſh, and make much of theſe holy ſparks of grace kindled within them: and whiles they bee warme in them, to blow them vp euery while, with the bellowes of feruent prayer, and to inflame them by acquaintance, companie, and conference with ſuch, as in  whom they ſee God hath wrought the ſame things before them; and in greater meaſure, then in themſelues: alwaies highly reuerencing Gods gifts in them,Iam. 4.2. that they may the ſooner come by them: and that the things which they ſee but dimly, they may behold more cleerely, and their doubts may be reſolued to them, and they may finde comfortable incouragement to goe forward.Let the vnſtaied ones vſe all meanes to be conuerted. But eſpecially, they muſt giue attendance daily and diligently to the doctrine of faith and godlines, where they may enioy that ſoundly preached vnto them: aſſuring themſelues that if they finde not that the one thing aboue all things, chiefe and neceſſarie, they loue it not, as Mary did, Luk. 10.42. and then they ſhall not haue their part in it. But otherwiſe they may know, that God, who doth ſhew himſelfe kind and louing to ſuch as ſeeke him not, (as it is written,Eſai. 65.1. 
                  I was found of them that ſought me not) will not hide himſelfe from them which doe ſeeke him; ſeeing he findeth all in their filth, when he calleth them to repentance, euen the beſt. And finally, they muſt waite vpon him, deſiring him in his good time (notwithſtanding their vnworthines) to draw them by his ſecret grace vnto him. But this ſhall ſuffice to haue bin ſaid of them who thinke themſelues Chriſtians and are not, but doe lie: and of them who haue left their firſt loue of the Goſpell and of their brethrē, which ſometime (as it ſeemed) they had. Which two being of the forwardeſt ſorts of profeſſors, who goe for true beleeuers, and yet being none indeede, doe  iuſtifie the eſtate of the weakeſt ſeruants of God, to be approued of him and happie, being farre different from them. Which although I haue by the way as it were ſpoken to admoniſh both: yet principally and moſt chiefly, I haue done it, for the vpholding & comfort of Gods weake ſeruants, who may ſee him moſt louing and gracious vnto them euen in that, I meane their abaſement and humiliation: which they ſometime thought to be their vtter and

                   extreame miſerie. And thus much of the ſecond point of the ſecond part or generall head: namely, of the ſtaying of the weake Chriſtians, and how they differ from vnbeleeuers.
               Thus I haue, not as I would, but as I could,The third head ſet downe my meditations vpon this firſt point, to ſhew, who are the true people of God, and giuen occaſion to many, who haue little to ſay for themſelues, why they ſhould claime any right or title in that great purchaſe, to conſider of their eſtate more deeply and ſeriouſly then they haue done. If theſe, who are almoſt Chriſtians, and (as I may ſay) not farre from eternall life, being many of them vſuall hearers of Sermons, would inquire about their eſtate, till they ſhould  ſee it good, as I am ſure the other may bee well ſtaied by this which I haue written, I ſhould not be a little comforted, whom for their good (which I heartily deſire and pray for) this I beſeech to heare me in. What wiſedome ſhall they ſhew, to be careleſſe in ſo weightie a matter as this is, concerning their ſaluatiō, and that their care in matters tranſitorie can neuer be enough? or what ſound comfort doe they looke for, whiles they reſt but in vncertainties about the aſſurance thereof, which yet to miſſe and goe without, is their vtter and perpetuall deſolation? But they hope they are in good caſe, and perſwade themſelues that they are in the eſtate of grace. I am farre from enuying it them: I would to God that I could hope ſo too.
               
                   But what euidence or proofe haue they of it? They can anſwere, none, but this, that they profeſſe Chriſt, and loue the Goſpell, and contemne Poperie. They heare Sermons oft, and thinke not well of them who doe not ſo. Some of the forwarder ſort, doe thinke verely ſometime, that they beleeue, and ioy therein, and ſometime weepe at a Sermon: but this is their anchor that they hold themſelues by, long after: when they be able to ſpeake of ſuch times and actions done in them. But when they haue been at the beſt, haue they then put foorth themſelues a little further, to demaund: are theſe things ſufficient markes and teſtimonies of our ſaluation? or if they be not, do they inquire what be? And do they not ceaſe trying their ſtate, till they can proue  it to be good indeed? and vntill they finde reſt to their ſoules that cannot deceiue them? Nay rather, they come not to this at all, that they can applie Chriſt to them: that ſtudie is vtterly vnwelcome to them and vnſauourie. They can doe any thing but that: and why ſo? Verely, euen to the end they may be deceiued: as men that haue matter at law, and are in ſute, boaſt much of their caſe, but yet are very loath to come to triall of it: and why are they afraid ſo to doe, but for that they know they haue no good euidence to ſhew for it?
               They may be compared in this, to King Nabuchadnezzar:
                  Dan. 4.26. he was very earneſt to heare the interpretation of his dreame, and could not be ſatisfied  vntill he heard the ſame. But this was not all that behooued him to doe. For when he ſaw that God gaue him twelue moneths to repent of his pride (for the which, his dreame told him his kingdome ſhould depart from him) he forgot his dreame like a dreame, and did not repent, but at the twelue moneths end began a freſh to increaſe his pride, crowing and boaſting of his wealth and honour, thus: Is not this great Babel, which I haue built, for the houſe of my kingdome, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my maiestie? Wherby

we ſee, that he was more deſirous to know what his dreame meant, then  to bee warned by it: Euen ſo, theſe profeſſors (which I ſpeake of) are very carefull to heare the glad tidings of the Goſpell preached, and cannot bee withdrawne or diſſwaded from it: but to lay their eſtate with it, and to take this warning by it, that they will receiue the print of it vpon their hearts and liues, and bee caſt into the mould of it; that (I ſay) they cannot be brought vnto: for then they ſhould finde it to be the power of ſaluation to them, for the which end it is preached.
               But what is the cauſe that they going ſo farre before many other, who are profeſſors alſo, cannot be brought to goe beyond them in this as well? and herein to be equall to the beſt louers of the Goſpell? I meane, in prouing and  examining,2. Cor. 13.5. Rom. 8.9. 
                  whether Chriſt be in them, without they be reprobates: and whether they haue not the ſpirit of God, without which they be none of his? The maine cauſe is this:Ierem. 5.3. Their hearts are not vpright: nor they will not deale plainly with the Lord. They cannot ſay in truth: Search me (O Lord) and ſee if there be any vnrighteouſnes in me, which I doe hide within me: and it ſhall be remoued out of thy ſight:Iob. 20.12. Nay it is certaine, if they might come to triall, that they doe keepe ſome ſinne (as Iob ſaith) euen as a child doth ſugar vnder the palate. Sundrie faults, I graunt, ſuch will refraine both themſelues, and driue them out of their families: but yet for all that, they will not bee brought to this, to make profeſſion that they will be willing to be reformed in what part  of their life ſoeuer they may bee iuſtly chalenged: for then they ſhould not blemiſh their religion, as the beſt of that ſort doe.
               Neither doe they ſet their priuiledges, which they haue by the Goſpell, before all other things alwaies: they thinke it ouer ſtrict, that they ſhould be tied ſo narrowly: and that it is neither beſeeming wiſedome, credit, ciuilitie, policie, grauitie, or ſuch place and calling as ſome of them may bee in, to ſhew what is in them (though they be zealous) they ſay, but too baſe a thing for them; when yet the Scripture ſaith, I beleeue, and therefore I haue ſpoke. And againe,2. Cor. 4.13. Pſal. 69.9. 
                  The zeale of thine houſe hath conſumed me. And againe, if this be to bee vile and baſe,2. Sam. 6.25. Pſal. 16. 
                  I will yet be more vile for the Lords ſake that hath honoured me. Yea  and they thinke it is more then needeth, that all their delight ſhould be in the Saints which are on the earth,Pſal. 133.2. and ſuch as excell in vertue: and that they ſhould be companions with ſuch as feare God; when yet the communion of Saints is more pleaſant and ſweete then was Aarons ointment, and more fruitfull then mount Hermon was, with the dew, and Sion and her vallies about her, with the ſiluer droppes that fell vpon them. Yea for the preciouſnes thereof the Church ſpake thus of it:Pſal. 137.6. 
                  If I preferre not Ieruſalem, that is, the welfare of Gods people, before all ioy that I haue on earth beſide, then let me loſe my beſt delight.
               
               To returne, they of whom I ſpeake, though in their owne opinion, and in the iudgement of ſome others, they be in right good ſtate to Godward: yet  God, whoſe thoughts are not as mans, and the truth which muſt giue good report of them, as well as men, iudgeth and determineth of them farre otherwiſe, if that be the beſt that can be ſaid of their faith and repentance, which I haue ſet downe. For the elect and deare children of God doe farre otherwiſe:Matth. 13.44. Luk. 10.42. They hauing found the pearle, ſell all that they haue to buy it; though they are occupied about many things, yet that one (euen the word of God)

                   is chiefe with them. Their loue of it, is ſtrong as ielouſie,Cant. 8.6. that admitteth no recompence; and as death that cannot be reſiſted. They caſt not away their confidence, if they once grow to ſee what recompence of reward it hath:Hebr. 10.35. Reuel. 3.11. Iohn 1.12. 1. Cor. 14.1 Matth. 15.6. nor will not ſuffer any to take their crowne from them, euen their honour that they haue in being the Lords ſonnes and daughters. They couet ſpirituall things, they hunger and thirſt after righteouſnes: they with good and honeſt hearts receiue the word, and bring foorth fruite in due ſeaſon.Luk. 8.15. They if they haue offended their moſt louing father,Cant. 3.3. cannot be quiet till they returne and come home againe, and ſay, wee haue ſinned. And if they be in worſe eſtate then this, they like it not, vnleſſe it be when they are fallen aſleepe,Cant. 5.2. and haue forgotten  themſelues.
               And yet what doe they in all this, more then they ought? feeling for all this, their wants and burdens, of which they complaine and crie out. And whereas they are mocked and euill ſpoken of, for this, that they doe thus carrie themſelues in the loue of heauenly things, and in the hope of immortalitie, farre more feruently then they who are not intitled to any ſuch thing: it is hard to ſay, whether they who offer them this iniurie, doe moſt offend in hindring the honour of God thereby, or their neighbours welfare,Ioh. 6.27. or their owne ſaluation? For God commaunds, that wee ſhould labour rather for the foode that abideth to eternall life, then for that which periſheth. And  what doe we offend then, who doe ſo? and is it not our gaine and benefit, if we doe ſo? Therefore let men for ſhame, and feare of iuſt damnation, deſiſt from ſuch madnes.
               But to returne to them to whom I ſpeake, and to conclude in a ſentence or two to them, and ſuch as they are: I ſay therfore, giue no reſt to your ſelues, till you can prooue that you be in the eſtate of ſaluation: You haue many waies ſet downe, by which you may doe it, euen in this treatiſe; in other godly mens labours; and eſpecially in the Scriptures. Loſe not all your labour which you haue beſtowed in ſeeking to be ſaued: I meane your reading, hearing of Sermons, praying, and confeſſing your ſinnes (it is loſt, if you attaine  not that which you ſeeke.) You are not farre from it, a little more humilitie and truth of heart, will bring you further into the eſtate of happines, then that ye can fall any more from it. Be neuer ſatisfied, till ye haue more then an vnrepentant perſon can haue. You count it no toyle to ſweate in hay and harueſt: This is another manner of ſubſtance; if ye once had part in it, ye would not forgoe your portion for a kingdome. And thinke this of me, who am not aſhamed to be ſaid to haue giuen you this counſell, I know what I ſay in thus prouoking, and labouring to perſwade you: if ye refuſe, neuer looke to come to the like offer. And to you, and as many as deſire ſaluation,Iohn 6.70. how farre off ſoeuer as yet ye be; know that ye are in the eſtate of diuels,2. King. 2.13. if ye continue  as ye be: and ye are the liker to continue ſo, the longer ye liue, if while ye be called, ye refuſe. You are as outlawes: Gods care reacheth not to you, neither are you vnder his protection, being his enemies; but he or ſome of his ſergeants will arreſt you, when you thinke not of it: and hell will receiue you; and the happines which other ſhall haue, will flie from you: which God forbid.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 10. Of the eyght companions of Faith.
               
                  NOw I haue ſpoken of thoſe, who are weakeſt in faith, and haue the ſmalleſt meaſure of it, and haue laboured to ſtay them in their temptation: I haue alſo ſhewed the cauſes of their conuerſion, the loue of God the father in giuing his ſonne: the loue of the ſonne in reconciling them to God, and deliuering them from all their miſerie: the word of promiſe  preached to bring them tidings of this: Gods ſpirit, aſſuring them by working faith in them, and perſwaſion thereof: (and to this end I haue ſet down theſe, becauſe in the ordinarie comming to eternall life, there is no other way:) yet ſeeing theſe are not ſo eaſilie felt of vs, as they are ſure and infallible groundes in themſelues, to vs of ſaluation: therefore I will adde ſome other effects, or rather properties of true faith, which doe accompanie the aſſurance of the loue of God, and of Chriſt Ieſus in vs, and are the workes, or fruites of the holy Ghoſt by the Goſpell, which, although they be not of like authoritie with the former; yet are they eaſilier felt to be in vs. So that both ſorts of euidences laid together, and meeting and concurring in one  and the ſame perſon, ſhall giue him moſt cleerely to vnderſtand, that as God hath graciouſlie beſtowed it; ſo we may effectuallie receiue and hold it as our owne: and that with more certaintie euery day, as our ſaluation ſhall euery day be neerer, then when we first beleeued. And thus I come vnto the third generall part of this treatiſe; wherein (ſeeing I hope the weakeſt beleeuers are or may be ſomewhat ſtaied by that which I haue ſaid already) I now purpoſe in this laſt part, to ſhew how all ſuch of Gods people, as are ſtaied from ſtrong feare & trouble of mind; may by other cleere euidences, haue further proofe and triall of their faith, and be able to preſerue and confirme it, and how much ſuch an eſtate is to be deſired for the benefit it bringeth. And firſt, to  teach the beleeuer to trie that he hath this excellent gift of faith, theſe eyght graces being companions of it, and more eaſilie perceiued and diſcerned, then faith it ſelfe, will cleerely teſtifie that where theſe be, there ſhall that be found alſo.
               
                  
                     The firſt inſeparable companion of faith, is ioy. 1. Cor. 1.3. Rom. 5.5. 1. Pet. 1.8.This true beleeuer therefore whoſoeuer he be: firſt, as ſoone as he ſhall perceiue that God (farre otherwiſe then he looked for) hath giuen him his ſonne to bring life vnto him, and to be his wiſdome, righteouſneſſe, ſanctification, and redemption, he muſt needes feele in his heart great ioy and comfort, as we ſee in the example of the Eunuch, when Philip had conuerted him, he went away reioycing, Acts 8.39. and in Samaria, where when he had preached Chriſt  there, and had brought them to repentance, there was great ioy in the Citie, Acts 8.8. And what maruaile? for how can a man be perſwaded by good and infallible grounds, that greater happines is giuen him of God then all the world is worth,Pſalm. 126.1. but he muſt needes reioyce with ioy vnſpeakeable, as they which dreame? For is there any naturall man ſo ſenſeles, that if he ſhould vnderſtand that ſome portion of goods, as an hundreth pounds value by the

                   yeere, were befallen him; yet he ſhould not feele his heart made ioyfull thereat? and can this honour befall any (that he is highly in fauour with the Lord of heauen and earth, and thereby of a child of wrath, made heire of heauen for euer) but it muſt needes glad his heart exceedingly, and raiſe ſenſible ioy in him, which cannot be expreſſed? as in him who found the pearle.
                  Matth. 13.44. But doe common profeſſors thus, or worldlings? when they manifeſtly bewray that they are glutted with the tidings of it? So that, as the Eunuch before mentioned, immediatly after he had been inſtructed in this myſterie of faith, went on his way reioycing;Act. 9.17. & 19. and as Paul ſoone after his conuerſion was marueilouſly comforted, although before as farre from it, and as deepely caſt downe as any:  ſo let it not be doubted of, but when God hath once inlightened the heart of any (which before ſate in darkenes) to ſee himſelfe vndoubtedly ſaued, but that it raiſeth vp in him ioy vnſpeakeable, and glorious in his meaſure.Rom. 5.1.
               
               Indeede it ſhall not perhaps ſo much be ſeene, or appeare to another, as by good euidence it is felt of himſelfe. Neither ſhall a ſtranger, that is, a man otherwiſe affected, be partaker of this ioy: but that it accompanieth them, who are by faith made aſſured of their election; our Sauiour Chriſt teacheth,Luk. 10.20. ſaying, Reioyce not that the ſpirits are ſubdued vnto you, but rather reioyce becauſe your names are written in heauen.
               
               And whereas it may be obiected, that it is ſore ſhaken and ſlaked by afflictions,  let that trouble none: for no affliction for the time preſent is ioyous, but grieuous: and yet we reioyce euen in them through hope, that maketh not aſhamed, Rom. 5.4. Beſides, we haue it here but in part, as we haue all other graces: and yet affliction (after we haue been exerciſed with it aright) ſhall make our ioy the greater in the end;Hebr. 12.11. when Gods former graces ſhall be reſtored to vs, which we were wont in him to finde: therefore Saint Peter ſaith,1. Pet. 1.8. 
                  Though ye haue not ſeene, yet ye loue him: in whom (though ye ſee him not) yet ye beleeue in him, and reioyce with ioy vnſpeakeable. Now ſeeing it muſt needes be thus, it may well proue to vs, that the common opinion of faith, which moſt haue where the Goſpell is preached; namely, that they beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt, deceiueth  them, and is nothing leſſe then true. For were they perſwaded of their happines, how could they chuſe but feele withall, their ſoules more ioyfull and glad within them, then all the commodities of this life could make them? For we no ſooner know our ſelues iuſtified before God by faith;
                  Rom. 5.1. Iohn 14.27. & Philip. 4.7. 
                  but we are at peace with him: and ſuch peace as paſſeth all vnderſtanding. Which after we know how ſweete and pretious it is, we will by no meanes forgoe againe: although for want of ſtronger faith and ſounder knowledge, it is more flitting in ſome: and yet euen that maketh them complaine, vntill they be inlarged: and he that hath not this witneſſe within him, ſhall not doe beſt to ſooth vp himſelfe with a vaine confidence. Thus I conclude, that ioy and peace  are inſeparable companions of faith.
               But here me thinkes, I heare ſome obiecting thus. If you zealous folke, who glorie ſo much of the aſſurance of ſaluation, and for that very cauſe be ſo ioyfull, ye agree not within your ſelues: for ſome which are of your mind, are euer ſad and ſorrowfull? To this I anſwere, that many deſire to be ſure, and grone for it, in the Lords eares; and in time, ſhall be comforted, being already pronounced to be bleſſed: and ſometime they are aſſured for a ſeaſon,Matth. 5.4.
                  
and then are cheerefull: and before this, they cannot be ſo, as they, whoſe  hearts the Lord hath opened more cleerely to behold that excellent myſtery. But further I ſay, that it ſhould trouble no wiſe bodie to ſee them mourne for a while after that, which ſhall (being atteined) make them merrie for euer after. And it is a meere cauill in them, that twit Gods weake ſeruants for that which giueth ſo iuſt cauſe of mourning, namely their doubting, ſeeing they deſire nothing more then to be aſſured. And if they doe not mixe their feare and heauines with melancholy paſſions, they offend not in lamenting after God, while they long aboue all things, to behold Gods louing countenance towards them: But if their heauines make them waſpiſh, tuchie, froward, vnquiet, & raſh in cenſuring them who are not in their eſtate; I ſay theſe as mad  and frantike paſſions are to be condemned. But theſe obiecters ſay, that this ſad countenance and behauiour in them, who are more religious than the moſt part of others, cauſeth many to ſhun religion, and to be afraide to ioyne themſelues to their acquaintance and company, and to meddle with muzing on the Scriptures, or on Sermons, more then to heare and reade them, and ſo trouble themſelues no further. To this I ſay, that we are not ſo to looke to exemples, that we hurt and hinder our ſelues thereby from that benefit, which the Scriptures doe moſt certainely direct vs vnto. But if men would weigh things indifferently, they who are ſo ready to challenge many good Chriſtians for their heauines (which yet they know tendeth to the ſeeking  of comfort) might ſee their owne fault greater, whoſe mirth for the moſt part is ioyned with lightnes and profanenes, holding goodnes and grace out of the company,Ierem. 9.23. Luk. 10.20. Eccleſ. 7.8. and not a reioycing for that they know God to be their moſt louing father; without which, their ioy is but follie, yea madnes; as Salomon ſpeaketh of laughter, which teſtifieth ſuch ioy. But to end this in few words, let ſuch as haue true hope in God, though weakely, moderate their heauines, that they may offend as few as they may: and they that finde fault with them for that, let them know, that they ought rather to pitie and pray for them, and interpret all in the beſt manner, and looke that their owne mirth and cheerefulnes be well warranted them, or elſe it were farre better for them to haue  part in the others heauines. And for anſwere to this, thus much.
               
                  The ſecond companion of faith; holy admiration.But to goe forward; as the due conſideration of the greatnes, and perſwaſion of the certaintie of his benefits, will raiſe this ioy in the heart of him that poſſeſſeth it: ſo likewiſe it will cauſe him to maruaile with reuerence, to ſee his ſtate ſo changed; himſelfe to be brought from ſo lowe a depth of extreame miſerie, to ſo high a degree of honour and glorie: and ſo to be enriched by this fauour of God, that he ſhall oft feare on the ſuddaine, leaſt it ſhould not be ſo, wondring at the greatnes of the ſame: as Iudas the good Apoſtle did, who conſidering the great kindnes of Chriſt, brake forth into theſe words:Iohn 14.22. 
                  Lord, what is the cauſe, that thou wilt reueale thy ſelfe to vs, and not  to the world? Yea, and the woman of Samaria, which had long lien in blindnes and ſuperſtition, and in the fruites of both, that is, in cauilling and mocking; yet when our Sauiour had ouercome her euill with good, and conuerted her, her heart was ſo ſet on the benefit which ſhe receiued by him, that ſhe forgat her water-pot (which in her, who ſauoured before only of the earth, was a great matter) and went, admiring at her owne change, to tell her

                   neighbours of that welcom newes, which had befallen her, and was a meane of their conuerſion alſo, Ioh. 4.28.29. But Sauls conuerſion did ſo cauſe him to wonder at Gods worke therein, that it cauſed alſo them that beheld it to admire it & to be amazed, when they ſaw him preach the doctrine, which he before purſued, with the imbracers of it, Act. 9.21. So great admiration doth this precious faith worke in them that obtaine it. And yet if this holie and reuerent admiration at ſo great good things befallen thoſe, or other ſuch, ſhould but then onely immediatly after the receiuing of them be felt, the benefits might ſeeme the ſmaller: but it is farre otherwiſe, if it be duly nouriſhed and maintained: for they are ſo ſweete, and ſo farre aboue all that they can aske, or  looke for, that except it bee through mens owne default, they are euery day new and freſh, and ſo farre from bringing tediouſnes, that the oftner they be daily conſidered, and the longer they be inioyed,Gods ſauour the longer it is inioyed, the ſweeter. the more they will cauſe wondring at the loue of the giuer, and what ſhould moue him to beſtow ſo great a portion (euen more then the whole world) vpon ſo vnworthie an one, as would haue thought a little before, that it had been an happie eſtate, not to haue been at all. The Sunne in the beautie and ſtrength thereof, doth not more cauſe the eye to dazle, then the viewing and beholding of this glorie, which God communicateth with his beloued ones, doth aſtoniſh and abaſh the heart to thinke of it: which is ſo true that Dauid the man of  God, did many yeeres, after hee felt himſelfe beloued of God, fall into this holie admiration, as that God ſhould doe ſuch great things for his ſoule,
                  Pſal. 116. v. 8.139.34. 
                  as deliuer him from the neathermoſt graue, by which he meant hell.
               And therefore it cannot be without groſſe bewitching of many profeſſors by Sathan, that if they haue, at the hearing of this tidings publiſhed, meruailed a little, they thinke they haue receiued this benefit with that reuerent account, that it deſerueth, though after it waxeth a common thing with them: for this they ſay, it were fooliſh daily to bee wondring at one thing, as when we firſt heard of it.
               Full well all ſuch declare what fruite they reape by it: but if they did daily  conſider their vnworthines, they ſhould ſee more cauſe to wonder euery day, then at the firſt, if compariſon may bee made in ſuch a caſe: It is to be wondred at, that God pardoneth ſinnes daily, in that his mercie continueth daily to pardon them, and for that it being ſo great,Pſal. 118.4. ſhould bee ſo induring alſo. For who can thinke vppon his ſlippes, and rebellions (I ſpeake of the beſt of vs) which breake foorth from him daily, for the which the wrath of God is iuſtly prouoked againſt him; and what might bee feared thereby, and how notwithſtanding them all, hee may come to God for refuge by Chriſt, and bee without feare, as if hee had not ſinned:1. Ioh. 2.2. yea and hold faſt his confidence, that God yet loueth him: who (I ſay) can conſider  this, but hee muſt needes bee aſtoniſhed at the inioying of ſo great kindnes; when a curſed man, no better then ourſelues, muſt be ſued vnto, and intreated by vs, and all the friends that we can make, and being diſpleaſed, muſt be pacified with gifts, and yet hardly holden from vexing, impriſoning, and purſuing vs to the death, and may not be intreated? Therefore magnifie the louing kindnes of our God for euer, euen as it indureth for euer, Pſalm. 118.4. For though naturall reaſon, euen fleſh beare a great ſtroke in this matter: yet wee

are not debtters to it: and we haue great cauſe whiles we liue, to doe this.
               
               So that, although I confeſſe, that in nature it is otherwiſe, that a man cannot alwaies admire the greatnes of ſome rare deliuerance, or fortunate eſtate befallen him by his friend, which at the firſt raiſed great admiration; yet it ought to be farre otherwiſe with the ſpirituall man being a beleeuing Chriſtian: he, I ſay, hauing the louing countenance of God ſhining daily vppon him as before, which is a treaſure vnualuable, ſhould wonder at the continuance of it; eſpecially ſeeing he prouoking the Lord with his ſinnes daily renued, might therefore feare that ſuch former comforts as had been inioyed, might haue been turned into as great ſorrowes, and his light into darknes, rather then be continued and multiplied. And this he ſhall do, vnles through  vnthankfulnes (the corruption of nature leading him thereto) hee burie the ſame in obliuion, and begin to affect too much, and to bee ouer neere glued to things preſent and temporarie, ſetting the creature before the Creator, and the gift before the giuer. For thereby, he ſhall (no doubt) ſlacke his meruailing at that kindnes of God, that hath neuer end, although it be moſt precious: whereas otherwiſe, he ſhall be able from day to day, to beare downe all tranſitorie things before him, with the eſtimation and high prizing of it. And this of the ſecond companion of faith, namely, holy admiring the greatnes of Gods kindnes.
               
                  The third companion of faith, loue.But that I may not dwell vpon this matter, who haue purpoſed but in brief  manner to ſhew what a traine of heauenly companions do attend vpon this faith, and certaintie of Gods eternall fauour, and to leaue the meditation of and vpon it, to the reuerent and deuout reader: Another therefore is heartie and vnfained loue, in him (who feeleth this loue of God ſhed into his heart) returned to him againe. The which although in hollownes and hypocriſie, the moſt affirme boldly to be in them towards God, before they haue found and felt themſelues to be beloued of him; yet the Scripture teacheth vs that it is farre otherwiſe,1. Ioh. 4.19. Ioh. 15.16. 
                  ſeeing we haue not loued him, but he hath loued vs firſt. But when we ſee indeed what great things God hath done for vs, from what dreadfull bondage he hath deliuered vs, vnto the which in all our life we were in danger, and to what gracious liberties and priuiledges he hath reſtored vs, by forgiuing vs all our ſinnes; then we ſee iuſt cauſe to ſay with the Prophet: I loue the Lord,
                  Pſal. 116.1 Luk. 7.47. 
                  becauſe he hath done ſo great good things for my ſoule: and with the woman to be thus affected, that ſeeing many ſinnes are forgiuen vs, therefore wee muſt needes loue much. So that although before this we were louers of pleaſures, more then louers of God, as others are: yet now that we know Gods bountifulnes towards vs, and the vanitie of our fond delights, we haue our harts more ſet vpon God, then vpon the beſt pleaſures which we inioy.
               
                  The true beleeuers feele ſenſibly the loue of God to ſhadow the loue of other things.And although ſometime before this wee loued father, mother, friends, goods, more then God, when wee were meerely naturall: yet now that wee  know God, yea rather are knowne of God, we haue our hearts ſet on him, as being our chiefe treaſure. For this our ſpirituall kindred with Ieſus Chriſt, hath knit vs to him with a farre more neere bond of loue: and therefore wee reſt in him, ioy in him, and ſatisfie our ſelues with him; for there ſhall be euer cauſe ſo to doe, and that without wearines. There is no end of his bountie and kindnes, his mercie indureth for euer: and who doth not ſee that ſuch infinite

                   loue of God to vs, may prouoke and raiſe vp in vs, truth of loue to him againe, that we be euer filled with the fulnes of him, as it is ſaid of the ſpouſe in the Canticles: I am full of loue yea ſicke, chap. 5.8? And yet they who ſhall ſay to vs for thus doing: What is thy welbeloued more then another welbeloued? We may anſwere them, that know not the loue of our welbeloued: Our welbeloued is the chiefeſt of ten thouſand: wholy delectable: his head, as fine gold: &c. Cant. 5.10. But indeede, I muſt ſay: except wee haue taſted of this, our loue ſhall be cold enough towards him, as may be ſeene too commonly, euen in many who worſhip God with vs, that all the loue and mercie of God which they boaſt of, cannot make them forſake their vile luſts.
               
                   But to proceede: where theſe before mentioned are found,The 4. companion of faith, is thankefulnes. how can there be but vnfained thankfulnes, and acknowledging of this gift of God to his great praiſe, when we ſhall weigh what he hath done for our ſoules, and what ſolace he hath filled our liues withall, which otherwiſe muſt needs be full of deadnes, or deceiueable and vnſauourie follie? They muſt of neceſſitie worke the ſame affections in vs which were in the man of God, mentioned in the Pſal. 116.12. What ſhall I giue vnto the Lord for all his mercies? I will praiſe his name before his congregation, and commit my ſelfe wholy to his gouernment hereafter, who heretofore hath regarded me ſo gratiouſly: yea and we ſhall be prouoked daily, to this honouring of him, euen to ſing a new ſong of praiſes to him,
                  Lamen. 3.23. 
                  
                  who will renew his kindnes, and goodnes daily vpon vs ſtill: ſo that we ſhall ſay that his firſt receiuing of vs, was but the beginning of our happines. So it ſhall follow, that our hearts being daily exerciſed in praiſe and thankſgiuing, the more wee doe it, the more wee ſhall ſee cauſe to doe it ſtill, and ſo ſhall waxe thankfull ſtill in all that God ſendeth, and ſo in all parts of our life, euen in our troubles, as it is written, In all things be thankfull.
                  1. Theſſ. 5.18. And although the world ſee none other cauſe, but to murmure and rage in their afflictions, yet ſhal we ſee Gods fauour to vs euen in them, and knowing that they turne, as well as benefits, to our good; wee ſhall praiſe God, euen for them alſo: for it becommeth well the righteous (who know how greatly they be occaſioned hereto) 
                  thus to be thankfull. It is the loue of God that conſtraineth vs, and inlargeth our harts to Godward, and giueth vs matter and occaſion of ſinging and making melodie to the Lord, and of praiſing him, alone, as well as in the aſſemblie of the righteous: and no meruaile (whereas without that ſweete ſmell of his loue, wee ſhould be vtterly lumpiſh, and farre from all cogitation of any ſuch matter.) And I ſay, it is no meruaile that continuall and oft thinking on Gods kindnes ſhould make vs thankfull: for how ſeruiceable, yea how ſlauiſh ſhall ye ſee a poore man to a benefactor to him in his bodily neceſſities, though it be but a little? when he can be content to loſe his life for him, Rom. 5.7. and the very borrower is a ſeruant to the lender.
               
               
                   Theſe formentioned affections, which accompanie faith in vs,The 5. companion of faith, is a deſire of an holy communion with God. 2. Cor. 5.1.
                   doe take ſuch taſte and ſweetnes in God (he making vs ſo acquainted with his fatherly kindnes and bountie) that we finding no ſuch welfare in any eſtate beſide, doe now deſire to be with him, that we may ſee his glorie, and ſo long after his bleſſed preſence, that we deſire nothing more then being vnburdened of this earthly tabernacle, and priſon of our bodies, euen to be with Chriſt to ſee his glory. For thus wee reſolue with our ſelues vpon deepe conſideration, and certaine

triall, that if we might haue our choiſe, whatſoeuer we ſhould wiſh: one day in  ſweete communion with God, and ſo paſſed and beſtowed in his ſeruice (as our frailtie is able to attaine to) is better then a thouſand in all varietie of earthly pleaſures.Pſal. 84.11. 
                  Gods preſence in heauen to be preferd before it on earth. And if his fauour be ſo much to be deſired here, where we ſee but as in a glaſſe; and his benefits, which he beſtoweth vpon his beloued ones ſo ſweete, where we are but ſtrangers: what thinke wee ſhall they appeare to vs, when we ſhall ſee him, in his maieſtie, as he is? and when we ſhall inioy the pleaſures of his houſe in fulnes for euer? Yea, I ſay, if here, where we liue but in a vale of miſerie, God doth ſo ſhew his bountie towards vs; what (thinke we) ſhall our eſtate be,Reuel. 14.13. Pſal. 16.11. Reuel. 22.20. 
                  when we ſhall reſt from our labours, and haue fulnes of ioy with God at his right hand for euermore? The beleeuing and weighing of this, hath cauſed  Gods deare ſeruants to ſay, Come Lord Ieſus, come quickly: And againe, I deſire to be diſſolued,
                  Phil. 1.23. 
                  and to be with Chriſt.
               
               And this (if wee be not groſſely deceiued) ſhall cauſe vs, euen when our daies ſhall be at the beſt, to receiue, and hold faſt this minde and heartie deſire to go home, and be euer with the Lord. And if this heauenly affection, & holie deſire be a companion to true faith, it might be meruailed, where their faith is become, and where it lieth a ruſting, who make ſo little haſte home, and haue ſo ſmall deſire to be with Chriſt, where he is in his fathers houſe, that they may ſee his glorie (and where there are many manſions, euen for vs as well as for him) that they cannot abide to heare of departing thither,1. Sam. 25.37. no more then Nabal:
                   who when hee heard of his death, he was as a ſtone: and who are ſo beſotted with that which is viſible, that they haue no longing after that which is not ſeene with eye but eternall: when yet all ſhould know this, that the preſence of God in heauen is farre to bee preferred before his preſence here on the earth, yea when our eſtate is at the beſt.
               
                  The 6. companion of faith, to forſake the vvorld. 1. Pet. 2.10.
                  But to ioyne the next companion of faith to this, from which it cannot be ſeparated. This maketh vs ſigh oftentimes, and to deſire to goe hence, and (that which we thought would neuer haue been) to become ſtrangers and pilgrimes here, and ſo to haue no more to doe in this world, then we needes muſt. And this I may truly ſay, is more then was like euer to haue been, if it be conſidered,A great grace not to be tied to the vvorld.
                   how exceedingly we haue been tied to the world, what pleaſure it hath been to vs, to thinke what we haue here, and may haue: how we haue ſought to fulfill the luſts of our heart, the luſt of our eye, and what pride, and what glorie we haue had in the things which we haue loued beſt: yea and how like vnto mad men, wee haue neſtled, and delighted our ſelues here (where yet we haue had no certaintie of abiding til to morrow) as though we ſhould haue continued alwaies: and yet who ſeeth not, that euen then when we ioyed moſt in our life, we were but as the bankerupts, which flouriſh in their kinde, and occupie with other mens goods? So that, in which we gloried, was not our owne: goods, and glorie which wee tooke ſuch pleaſure in, they were anothers,Luk. 16.12.
                   they were but borrowed: In which times, God was not knowne of vs, nor the daily courſe of his liberall dealing with his faithfull ones, was not once dreamed of. And therefore we being earthly minded, could not ſauour of heauenly things, but onely of the earth.
               But ſince that the Lord hath by faith perſwaded vs of his fauour, and granted vs to ſee, what varietie of holie & heauenly delights may be inioyed of vs

                   in this our Chriſtian courſe, in compariſon of the pleaſanteſt eſtate, that euer we liued in before, we haue (as I haue ſaid) determined with our ſelues to renounce our former courſe: to hold all things here, as tranſitorie, vaine,Matth. 13. and ſoone flitting away, and beleeuing that we our ſelues are with al other things, daily drawing to our end; we deſire to haue nothing to hold vs here, rather then to abide here in the fleſh, which ought to admoniſh vs, that we keep faſt a willingnes to die, and when wee haue gotten it, that wee loſe it not againe:A great liberty to be vvilling to die, ſuch only are fit to liue. and the rather, ſeeing it is that alone which maketh vs fit to liue, while we remaine here, as we ought. Euen this grace accompanieth faith in vs, after that it is effectually wrought in vs: I ſay not,1. Cor. 7. that wee loath the benefit of life  which God hath giuen vs here, neither doe we forſake our particular callings in the which we are commaunded to abide,
                  The forſaking the world, is not to leaue neceſſarie duties. neither condemne wee the moderate care of maintaining our ſelues and ours, and prouiding for our outward eſtate, retaining (in all theſe) heauenly mindes: but we renounce the corruption that is in the world through luſt, 2. Pet. 1.4. and prophane abuſe of earthly affaires and dealings, which will not ſtand with the practiſe of Chriſtianitie, nor with the word of God.
               Which I ſay for two cauſes: The one, becauſe in ſome reſpects it is lawfull, yea holie, to deſire to liue; namely, to doe good in the Church:Phil. 1.20.21. and wee may and ought to ſay with Dauid, I will liue and not die, to ſet foorth the praiſe of  the Lord. The ſame I ſay of dealing in our earthly affaires,Pſal. 119.17. to the end we may not be burdenſome to others, and of performing the duties of our particular callings: in the which actions, we may haue proofe of the grace that is in vs; I meane patience, righteouſnes, hope, faith, loue; that ſo our whole conuerſation may bee well ordred, and proportionable to other holie duties: and therefore in theſe reſpects we may be willing and content to liue, while God will haue it ſo, that wee may ſhew foorth the vertues, which he hath giuen vs, amongſt men: which otherwiſe ſhould be hidden, and it could not otherwiſe be ſeene of men, that any can poſſibly liue godly, who hath an hand in the world; when in the meane while God forbiddeth not the actions mentioned,  but commaunds them: only he chargeth, that in doing of them,Luk. 21.34. we be not tainted, neither haue our conſciences defiled.
               The 2. cauſe, why I ſay, that we ſhould not contemne life, and other lawful liberties, is, becauſe vpon this principle falſely grounded, and as falſly vnderſtood (that wee ſhould forſake the world) diuers haue troubled many weake people & abuſed them; ſaying and teaching (and that vnder a great pretence of godlines) that when we begin to be deuout, and to ſauour of religion, wee ought to leaue the world: that is to ſay, depart from our earthly callings, and dealings, and alſo from the ſocietie and fellowſhip of men who are occupied therein. And to the end that greater deuotion and pietie may be bred in vs,Cloyſtring and ſuch like no point of godlines. 
                   we are (ſay they) to goe aſide into Abbeyes, Frieries, Armetages, and Cloyſters, where we may neither heare nor ſee any ſuch dealings. And as the opinion is plauſible to the ignorant and vnſtable, though palpable to them that are ſtaied in iudgement: ſo it hath deceiued many,2. Cor. 10.14 and the diuell hath ſhewed himſelfe as an angel of light in perſwading, that ſuch a kinde of life is the higheſt degree of holines, although it hath been and eaſily may be proued to be the denne and depth of abomination.
               
                  For though many haue of a good meaning at the firſt, gone apart from  ſecular affaires; and betaken themſelues to liue in ſequeſtred places, becauſe they would not be troubled with earthly dealings: yet ſubtile theeues aroſe afterwards, of the popiſh prelacie, who abuſed this to horrible miſchiefes: for we muſt not be ignorant of this, that when men will venture without their warrant, the longer they doe it, the further they fall into the depth of ſinne; as a man once gone out of his way, goeth further aſtray, till he ſeeke to come in againe. Which hath been the cauſe, why much wickednes hath in time broke forth in the Papacy (where the people haue been hartned to this monaſticall life, and ſuperſtitious deuotion) as idlenes, whoredome, ſodomitry, hypocriſie, and moſt cruell murthering of the ſoules of many infants which were  misbegotten. So that (not to digreſſe too farre) this is the ſecond reaſon, why I made plaine my meaning, in ſaying that the contempt of the world is not, the wearines of our life, the leauing of our affaires in the world, or the forſaking of our particular calling; as though no man may be godly and a beleeuer that vſeth theſe: but to proue that one may be a contemner of the world that vſeth them all; and by conſequent, that he who is ſure of his ſaluation by faith, may haue this grace to deſpiſe the world: which I haue ſet downe as the ſixt propertie or inſeparable companion of faith.
               
                  The ſeuenth companion of faith, is ſhame for our former vnkindnes to God.To proceede therefore, when we ſee that we be thus made rich by the Lord, after that we haue faſtened on his promiſes, (whereas we were before  ſo vnlike to find the leaſt part of ſuch preferment) we begin to lament our former vnkindnes to our God, which we dailie offered him, when as yet we knew no ſuch thing; and are ready to be reuenged on our ſelues for it: as the woman in Luke bewailed her vnkindnes, which ſhe had ſhewed to her Lord and Sauiour before, and did now witnes it, after ſhe had felt his loue ſo ſweete,Luk. 7.44. Act. 2.13. 
                  by waſhing his feete with her teares, and wiping them with the haires of her head. For we cannot be ignorant, that when he ſought vs, we fled from him, and refuſed to come: ſuch fruites we yeelded him of all his patience and long ſuffering,Deut. 32.32. whereby he ſought to winne vs: we were as the vines of Sodome, and our grapes as bitter as Gomorrha: euen as much as if we had offered  him the venome of Dragons in a cup, and the poiſon of Aſpes to drinke. It was the vnſpeakeable mercie of God,
                  Lament. 3.22. Iob. 21.14. 
                  that we were not conſumed, when we regarded not to know him, nor to haue acquaintance with his waies: though he ſent his miniſters dailie amongſt vs,The beleeuers reuenge themſelues for their former ſinnes. to reclaime vs. We therefore now are aſhamed to thinke what we haue done, and are deepely grieued to remember that we ſhould finde him ſo louing and gracious to vs, who had done all this iniurie vnto him.
               And therefore we ſorrowing thus, haue been brought to a greater care of ordering our waies aright,2. Cor. 7.11. and deſire to pleaſe him; yea, to be euen angrie with our ſelues, and to ſeeke an holy reuenge at our owne hands, that thus we  may declare, that we doe vtterly condemne our former courſe: of the which who would haue ſaid, that the Lord would euer haue pardoned it, and haue brought vs to be wearie of it? But thus it hath pleaſed him to get himſelfe honour in this world, by ſhewing himſelfe gratious and kinde to vs ſo vnworthie ones,1. Tim. 1.16. 
                  that we may be examples (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of himſelfe) to all that ſhall in time to come beleeue in him to eternall life: that they may the

                   more eaſilie be perſwaded, that he will receiue them to mercie. Euen this made Dauid ſay, Remember not, O Lord, the ſinnes of my youth: and againe,
                     Pſalm. 25.6. & 130.30.
                   
                  if thou ſhouldest looke ſtreightly, what is done amiſſe; who ſhould abide it?
                  The eight companion of faith, is to conuert and bring on others. And to come to the laſt, we ſeeing and knowing our ſelues thus to be redeemed out of ſo deepe miſerie, we wiſhing the ſame good to our brethren, which we our ſelues haue receiued of God, declare vnto them how we are redeemed, as occaſion is offered, as Philip and Andrew did priuately, Iohn 1. and Paul publikely being called thereto.Acts. 9. 
                  For we cannot chuſe but ſpeake the things which we knowe (the loue of God constraining vs) as well to them, who knowe the ſame, that we may reioyce together; as to them who know it not, that they, being yet  in the eſtate wherein we were, may be perſwaded to make ſpeede out of it.2. Cor. 4.13. And the rather remembring,Luk. 22.42. that as it is our dutie being conuerted our ſelues to ſtrengthen others: ſo alſo becauſe, if we turne any from their euill waies, we haue been meanes to ſaue ſo many ſoules from death.
                  Pſalm. 66.16. Neither are we of their mindes, who thinke it both vnciuill, and vnſeaſonable, either among ſtrangers, or their owne neighbours, to acquaint the ignorant and wandring ſoules with this heauenly matter, or to build vp the weake in the more ſound and cleere certaintie of it: but pitying their miſerie, who cannot helpe themſelues, we thinke it meete to benefit them with whom we are conuerſant,
                  1. Theſſ. 5.14. with that which we haue found to be greateſt happineſſe to our ſelues. And although  our naturall corruption doth leade vs another way, and our vntowardnes to good things, doth counſell vs to refuſe the labour, and to count it toyle and tediouſnes to doe ſo: yet we knowing it to be a manifeſt ſigne of our loue,1. Theſſ. 5.11. and ſo of our faith, and a dutie commanded vs of God; we deſire therefore rather to neglect our owne pleaſure which we might inioy in the libertie of other talke, then to let goe ſuch good oportunities, with hope of the fruite which may come thereby. And mee thinkes, ſeeing edifying talke is one meanes to ſeaſon our ſelues with grace,
                  Edifying talke, good for our ſelues and others. 
                  and to ſtabliſh our owne hearts more conſtantly in a good courſe, as well as to glad the hearts of others, me thinkes (I ſay) if we haue comfort by our beleeuing, and know the benefit of faith  effectuallie our ſelues, it ſhould doe vs the more good, the oftener that we ſhould vſe it, and giue hope to vs thereof alſo towards other. The greateſt diſcouragement is, that men (with whom we are wont to communicate ſuch things) are dull, or earthly minded, or light hearted: ſo that we ſeeme to preuaile little thereby with them: but ſeeing we know it to be a due which we owe to our brethren, we ought to be patient towards them,
                  
                     1. Theſſ. 5.14. Vſe it, as it may be, though we ſee not preſent fruit of it. bearing with their ignorance, infirmitie; yea, and with their waiwardnes alſo, waiting to ſee if God at any time will giue them better mindes: and not tie him to worke when we would, nor to thinke our labours to be ſuch, that if we ſee not preſent ſucceſſe and bleſſing, we may therefore iuſtly leaue off. But the truth is, this grace is  rare to be found in the world, becauſe men are louers of themſelues amiſſe, rather than of their brethren, to ſeeke their good: for while they labour themſelues too much, in medling ouer greedilie in the world, or in taking vp their delights ſome other way amiſſe, there is ſmall place left to this dutie: and where they liue with others, vnkindly, and vncharitably, their talke is ſutable to their hearts, that is, vnkinde, froward, and harſh; ſeeing two cannot walke together, if they be not of one mind, Amos 3.3. Or if they conuerſe more

familiarlie with them, and turne their meetings and companie to idle, light, vaine, and worldly talke; ſuch can haue ſmall part in this buſines, nor conſequently any great teſtimonie of their faith, nor comfort thereby (if they haue occaſions offered them to ſhew their loue) ſeeing ſhe goeth not without her traine:Prou. 10.21. Pſalm. 119.13. whereof this is one, to exhort, and admoniſh one another: and with our lips to feede many. Theſe with ſuch holy affections conſtantly ſetled in our hearts, are inſeparable companions of faith vnfained, as I haue ſaid; although it is not to be denied, that a reſemblance of all theſe eight may be in the wicked by ſtarts, and in their good mood, their affections may thus be ſtirred vp to ſhew for the time, ſome likelihood of them (eſpecially, where they are vnder ordinarie teaching) which yet otherwiſe, and at other times  for the moſt part are vnſauorie, and weariſome to them. And thus to make an end of this matter, theſe are the graces which doe accompanie him which beleeueth, and who holdeth this aſſurance of happineſſe, from the forementioned grounds of Gods promiſes, Chriſts working of our ſaluation, and the vniuerſall publiſhing of this tidings by the Goſpell to all beleeuers: That by theſe infallible grounds to build his faith on, and thoſe graces following and accompanying it, which haue been ſpoken of, euery one may proue himſelfe, whether he be the Lords: and if at the ſame time, he find it not ſo, yet how to goe about to recouer himſelfe againe, ſeeing it cannot be, that he who hath had theſe faſt ſetled in him at any time, ſhould be any long time to  ſeeke of the true way to happines, (except in temptation, when he is groſſely bewitched, and blindfolded) but he ſhall finde it againe.
            
            
               CHAP. 11. How weake faith is confirmed, and the comfort of it.
               
                  ANd now a little, I will adde yet further (as I promiſed) for the ſtaying and ſatisfying of thoſe which haue attained to lay hold of Gods promiſes, and haue ſome meaſure of true  faith, how ſmall ſo euer it be. They who haue tasted how good the Lord is, by any ſmall light of true faith, they finde and feele it to be ſo ſweete, that in feare of forgoing and loſing it againe,1. Pet. 2.2. they deſire aboue all things to know how they may hold and keepe it. And it is indeede the moſt neceſſarie queſtion that they can moue. This queſtion I thinke very fitly to be anſwered in this place, becauſe it is the doubt of them which are newly borne of God: for otherwiſe of the dailie and continuall growing in faith, it is more fitly to be ſpoken of in another place, where I ſhall ſpeake of the new life, and the holy courſe of ſuch as are the Lords people already. Therefore to this queſtion, it is thus to be anſwered, that as they came by that little meaſure, which they haue by this meanes, that they were led by God to thinke it the moſt precious iewell in the world; of the which when they were perſwaded, they thought it no paine by hearing,The firſt means to hold and to be confirmed in faith. meditating, and praying to ſeeke to beleeue: euen ſo let them ſettle, and accuſtome themſelues to doe ſtill.
               And if they doe deſire to keepe and hold their faith from day to day, till

                   they ſee that it is paſt the danger of loſing, let them daily account it their chiefeſt happineſſe, which they haue in this life, euen their preciouſeſt treaſure and beſt portion: which if they doe, their heart will be euer vpon it;Matth. 6.21. Matth. 13.44. Reuel. 3.11. Hebr. 10.35. their feare will be vſuallie, leaſt they ſhould loſe it; they will thinke it moſt neceſſarie to regard, and looke to it, whatſoeuer they haue beſides it, worth the looking after: Euen as the husbandman will more eſpeciallie regard his cattell, and corne, being his chiefe ſubſtance,A ſimile. 
                  The best things muſt beſt be regarded. then his pullen which is ſmaller and of leſſer value. And otherwiſe euery ſmall occaſion will hinder them from nouriſhing and looking to it: and euery trifle and fond deſire of their owne, will carrie them after it, and cauſe their hearts to be taken vp with it:  and much more, their earneſt buſines, and waightie affaires, for the which they thinke, that any exerciſes of religion ought by good right to be neglected, and to giue place to them: for we are not ignorant of the diuels enterpriſes;2. Cor. 2.11. what ſwarmes of euill luſts, and noiſome delights, and other matters of like ſort, he filleth mens heads withall, euen ſuch as he knoweth doe like them beſt, that they may minde no better things: and euen ſuch eſpeciallie as are in the way to know Gods great kindnes towards them, that they may be,Euill must be auoided, and lawfull liberties ſoberly vſed. after ſome ſort, put out of the way againe. Therefore not onely theſe, which are euill of themſelues, muſt grow loathſome to them; but they muſt alſo be ſober, and moderate themſelues, euen in their lawfull liberties and dealings ſo,  as that one thing be thought needfull of them, whatſoeuer they goe about,Luk. 10.42. euen this; to nouriſh their faith, and to hold faſt their hope of eternall life, and Gods fauour, ſeeing God, who giueth it, doth neuer change his minde,
                  Iohn 13.1. 
                  nor repent him.
               
               And that they may doe this the better (which is too ſlacklie performed of many,The ſecond meanes to confirme faith. who yet haue felt ſome ſweetnes in the promiſes) they are further to be directed, that daily and oft, (which few will be brought vnto) they ſend vp ſtrong prayers to God for it, and that they doe of ſet purpoſe ſeparate themſelues from all other things in the moſt conuenient manner, that they can, to call to remembrance the manifold and gracious promiſes of God:  that they meditate and conſider deepely of them; of the nature and truth of them; of the vnchangeablenes and perpetuitie of them;Exod. 34.7. 
                  how louing alſo and kind God is: that thus their faith may be confirmed in them: and ſo bring their hearts by little and little to a new courſe and cuſtome, that they may haue more neere acquaintance with Gods nature, his mind and purpoſe towards them: how louingly he is affected to them: how little they neede to feare his anger and diſpleaſure: and how free they may be from doubting and wauering. For it muſt be well conſidered and oft thought vpon, that weake bleeuers, who are priuie to themſelues of their many doubtings, doe ſoone let ſlip out of their memorie, and ſo out of their hearts, ſuch grounds of their  faith, as they haue ſometime holden and imbraced, after hearing publikely, or any ſuch like meanes inioyed of them: they doe ſoone (I ſay) let them ſlip,True beleeuers are ſoone faint and fearefull. vnleſſe they can bring themſelues to reuiew and call them to mind vſuallie: Yea, and further; vnles they do prouide to helpe their feeblenes of heart and memorie (as they ſhall be able) with ſome pithie and cleere prooues of their ſaluation and ſafetie; ſuch as they haue before reſted on, and found comfort by: as this, Come to me, all ye that are heauie laden, and I will eaſe you:
                  Matth. 11.28. and let them

reaſon thus from it: If Chriſt call them that are loden, and promiſeth to eaſe  them, and therefore they may come boldly, that is, beleeue his promiſe, and claſpe about it, and inioy it as their owne: then may I, being ſuch an one, doe ſo, and take it as ſpoken to me, as well as Peter, Paul, or any other. Thus ſhould the weake applie it.Ioh. 7.37. Another: If any thirſt, let him come to me, and I will giue him the water of life to drinke.
                  1. Ioh. 5.14. Hoſ. 14.2.3.4.5 Prou. 28.13. And many other ſuch: as in the margine.
               Some of theſe and ſuch like are oft to be thought on, and applied, as I haue ſaid, if wee deſire to keepe in the ſafe eſtate, which I haue ſpoken of; that is to come to God in prayer when we will, with boldnes and confidence: and yet when we doe not pray, not to be afraid of him, but to walke in any of our actions without ſlauiſh feare before him. And if we doe not thus, we ſhall by  and by wauer & wander either on the left hand or on the right,
                  Luk. 1.75. & go out of the royall way; euen that way of which the Prophet ſpeaketh, when he ſaith: Thou vpholdeſt me in mine integritie, & ſetteſt me before thy face continually. As if he ſhould ſay,Pſal. 41.12. 
                  They muſt much helpe their weaknes and oft. thou wilt ſee that I take no hurt, being euer in thine eye, as ye child in the mothers eye, that it may haue no daunger. I ſay, in this royall way wee ſhall not keepe ſafe and ſound, except we doe (as men dimme of ſight, vſe of ſpectacles) helpe our ſpirituall eye ſight with oft looking in the glaſſe of Gods word and promiſes: which I ſay not, as though God did change his minde ſo oft (ſeeing there be ſo many doubts in vs) who is euer one and conſtant; but for that wee haue riuen memories, wandring affections, and deceitfull  hearts, in all which reſpects we haue neede of ſuch helpe and remedie. And if it trouble any at the hearing of this, asking, what ſhall the weake doe, who cannot doe thus? I anſwere, they that know not this, cannot doe it: but yet is not their eſtate therefore to be reſted in, no although they feare God; only let them follow that which they know: and they who know this, which I now teach, will neglect nothing willingly of that which I ſay, though they be weake; for it is their owne gaine and aduantage, which they would not loſe: yet I meane not that they ſhould neglect their particular calling for all this, ſeeing both may well, yea and ought ſtand together. Thus therefore let Gods children keepe themſelues from feare and doubting, when they are in greateſt  daunger of both, by an oft and ſerious weighing, how gracious and good the Lord is vnto them, that it may comfort them euen at the heart. And for a teſtimonie hereof, let them vſe to trie in ſmaller benefits, how they can beleeue that God will keepe couenant with them; for thereby ſhall they haue further proofe, with the former, to their conſciences, that they grow to beleeue him in greater. For although there muſt be ſome meaſure of true iuſtifying faith, before wee can doe any thing acceptable to God, Hebr. 11.6. yet for the confirming of it, wee muſt obſerue how Gods word is performed in other things alſo.
               
                  
                     The 3. meane to confirme faith. 1. Theſſ. 2.10.13. & 1. Theſſ. 3.10. Luk. 22.19.And to this purpoſe they are alſo to helpe their weakenes in faith, by ordinarie  and reuerent hearing the glad tidings of reconciliation publikly preached vnto them: for that is one ſpeciall end thereof, as the Apoſtle ſaith; and therefore are the Sacraments alſo giuen by God, which ſeale vp this truth in their hearts, which they haue begun to taſte of: Doe this as oft as ye doe it, in remembrance of me. With theſe two they muſt carefully retaine a viewing of their ſinnes,Lam. 3.40. which by examination they haue found out: They muſt, I ſay, be

                   daily kept within that compaſſe, and keepe vnder their hearts,The 4. meane to confirme faith. by a meane and baſe thinking of themſelues from fulnes and loathing of Chriſts death, as it is made too common a reckoning of. Neither can it be felt ſweete and pleaſant of any, except their ſins be felt bitter and tart. And beſides all this, their former experience is not the leaſt helpe to eſtabliſh and ſettle them in this perſwaſion: that for as much as they cannot denie,The 5. meane. but that they haue beleeued with ioy, and receiued much eaſe to their heauie hearts thereby: therefore much more now they ought, and lawfully may reſt and perſwade themſelues ſo againe. And therefore to ſay with themſelues,Pſal. 77.9. 
                  it is but their own weaknes, when they are pierced thorough with ſuch doubts: from God there is  not the leaſt occaſion offered, who is euer one and chaungeth not:
                  Iam. 1.17. for all this might they haue with Gods good liking; and worſe eſtate then this they neede not to be in, if they would be aduiſed by him, and not by the euill cuſtome of their hearts, whereby they are eaſily brought to thinke, that faith and other graces will dwell in them, though they be ſleightly cared for, and regarded: which conceit is moſt falſe and erronious.
               And that the Lord giueth his beloued ones ſuch bold and free acceſſe to him, to know his minde toward them,The faithfull haue neere acquaintance with God. They are called his friends. Ioh. 15.14.15. Epheſ. 2.4. Zach. 2.8.
                   and to haue this holie acquaintance with him (which can hardly be perſwaded to the weake in faith, at their firſt comming to him) hereby it may appeare, that he ſaith, he will not count them  as ſeruants, but as friends, with whom he will communicate his very ſecrets, as farre as ſhall be expedient for 
                     ••
                  em to know them: and as Paul ſaith; God of his rich mercie hath loued vs thr
                        ••
                     gh much loue. God ſaith, they are as the apple of his eye, and therefore deare vnto him: he telleth them that hee hath taken from them the ſpirit of bondage, that they ſhould no longer be afraid of him,
                  Rom. 8.15. Luk. 1.74.75. Phil. 4.4. but ſerue him without feare: and to reioyce in him alwaies: which cannot be, except they knew his minde, and affection to them, yea and that more cleerely then the ſonne can know his fathers, or the wife her husbands minde. And therefore if they who haue begun to lay hold on eternall life through beleeuing, ſhould by ſome occaſion loſe the feeling comfort of their faith; as by Sathans  fearing them, with their coldnes, falles, weakneſſes, or ſuch like: yet are not they to giue place vnto doubting; eſpecially being ſuch as haue felt aſſuredly the loue of God by Chriſt ſhed into their hearts:
                  Let no place be giuen to doubting. Ioh. 13.1.
                   but to count it their frailtie and timorouſnes, and that without cauſe; euen for that they were not better acquainted with the will of God, who loueth to the end all ſuch as he hath once loued.
               
               And yet this is not without the moſt wiſe prouidence of God, who diſpoſeth all theſe weakneſſes of theirs to their good, that they may be humbled the more in themſelues, and riſe to their faith againe; and to the glorie of God, who bringeth backe againe, thoſe who were almoſt in their owne feeling,  at the brinke of hell. The ſame I ſay of other lets which they may bee ouertaken by, as of their loſing of the ſenſe of their faith,How faith is weakned. through neglecting the meanes whereby it ought to haue been preſerued; or by ſleightnes in the vſe of them; or by letting looſe the heart after ſome vanitie or worldlines, which it luſted after; or being diſquieted, and vnſetled otherwiſe: this is not their refuge to ſay, we muſt be content to goe without it: and it is impoſſible to hold it: when wee haue beſtowed all our trauaile, we haue done it but in

vaine:Reuel. 2.5. But as they eſpie their weaknes, ſo let them remember how they haue fallen,
                   acknowledge it to the ſhame of the euill heart, and ſo recouer that one thing which is amiſſe, and hold their confidence as before, and let not the whole frame, and well ordered courſe of their life be broken off for that one thing:A ſimile. as he that hath ach in his teeth, or a wound in his legge, doth not neglect the health of his whole bodie for that, but ſeeketh the redreſſe of that one, that the whole may be in good caſe, as it was before.
               And ſeeing it helpeth much to the nouriſhing of our faith, among all other times, to ſeaſon our hearts, in the morning, if it may be, with the recording and thinking vpon Gods promiſes of his loue and ſaluation: therefore, if the morning meditating on the promiſes, with earneſt prayer thereto adioyned, ſhould by any neceſſarie occaſions, or weightie affaires, or other lets of neceſſitie be intermitted, being the thing which ought moſt carefully to be looked to; yet let them prouide, that this dutie be not altogether omitted, as though it were ſome light matter, which needed no ſuch attendance to be giuen vnto it: but let it, aſſoone as it may, with conueniencie be performed, if they deſire to paſſe the day in ſafetie and peace; as knowing otherwiſe that Sathan in this their weaknes will giue them little reſt. And ſo ſhall they haue it as a ſtrong weapon through the day to ſhield them from the violence and furie of the enemie.
               But this is not the place to ſhew how the day is to be paſſed; that ſhall follow  after, but onely by the way, as in moſt fit or 
                     •
                  ace to aduiſe how the weake Chriſtian is to keepe his faith.
               
                  
                     
                        The ſixt meane to confirme faith.
                     
                     Compare Exodus 4. with chap. 10.
                     
                  The ſixt meane to hold and confirme faith, is the examples of others, whom of weake, wee haue ſeene to become ſtrong in faith: as Moſes, with whom as God hath been, and with other his good ſeruants to ſtrengthen them: ſo will he be with vs, till he perfecteth in vs in like ſort the work which he hath begun. And this be ſpoken of the meanes, by which weake faith is helped and confirmed.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 12. The ſweete fruite and benefit of the preſeruing and confirming of our faith.
               
                  NOw if any thinke the looking to theſe meanes, and this daily diligence for the preſeruing of faith to be ouermuch, let them vnderſtand, that the benefit is moſt great which it bringeth. And if this anſwereth them not, let them heare the Apoſtle,1. Cor. 2.4. who ſaith, that our faith conſiſteth not in the wiſedome of men, but in the power of God: as if he ſhould ſay, that  it is not a matter ſo ſoone wrought, as it is ſaid to be in vs, but a gift wrought by God, and therefore (by ſeeking it, as he hath appointed) and to be nouriſhed, and continued, as hee hath preſcribed, which is by ofte recourſe to God, and much ſearching out of our hearts for and about the ſame. And therefore (as I haue ſaid) if men make it not the chiefeſt of all other things, as it is in it ſelfe,No outvvard meanes confirme faith, if we prize it not the beſt of all things. and hold it faſt, as the firſt and principall: it is not their hearing▪
                  
                   and reading about it, nor their talking of it, that ſhall be able to profit them. I will rehearſe a ſpeech of a godly Chriſtian preacher, and one that deſerued to be heard, whom I haue oft been preſent with, when he vttered the ſame.
               Whiles I thought verely (ſaid he) that I had faith,A pithie ſpeech of a vvorthie perſon. but yet held it not by the ſureſt grounds, I thought of it ſometimes, and was glad to thinke that I had it: holding my perſwaſion thereof, by ſuch euidences as I had before inioyed, rather then I could tell what ſure warrant I had then of it: but I tooke no great paine to cōfirme it by daily meditating on the promiſes, neither beſtowed any more diligence in and about that, then vppon other duties. But  when I ſaw more cleerely how gainfull and beautifull a grace it is, and how I muſt liue by it, hauing no leſſe neede of it, then of the ayre to breathe in: I ſought more certaine ground of it, and that with greater care then I had before: and ſince I knew that I had it by more, and thoſe infallible arguments and teſtimonies, I could neuer be wearie of looking to and increaſing it (as I had learned how) but for ſome yeeres ſpace haue done, and do euery day nouriſh and ſtrengthen it, and I recreate my ſelfe in thinking what benefit I haue by it, vntill my gaine thereby, and pleaſure therein, doe keepe me there with delight, more then in all paſtime; and the labour which I beſtow about it, is ſo farre from toyle or weariſomnes, that it is my greateſt ſolace: neither  doe I thinke or feele my ſelfe to be armed to the well going through the affaires of the day, before I haue prepared my ſelfe thereto,Pſal. 9.14. by refreſhing my ſoule, with conſidering Gods aboundant loue and fauour towards me, and reſt vppon it as mine owne. But when I haue done it, I am (by good heede taking) cheerefull, and in good eſtate, all the day after: and ſo I am (in reuerence be it ſpoken) ſaid he, perſwaded, that I ſhall continue to doe.
               Now to make vſe of this Chriſtian ſpeech, becauſe it is according to knowledge, and I haue ſaid nothing of him, which is not as needfull for vs; and his practiſe agreeth with the doctrine of the Scriptures: if wee will ſpeake euery man the truth, what comfort, or well ordered eſtate can be in our liues any  day without it? And when that true and liuely beholding of Gods gracious kindnes is not preſent with vs to begin the day, what going forward in it, is to be looked for? but in vnſauourie lightnes, and ſo be deceiued:The chiefeſt thing euery morning is to remember Gods loue. or in care and ſorrow, and ſo bee diſquieted? Therefore if men were wiſe, they would ſee that they could not well want this any day; eſpecially ſeeing God hath giuen libertie to them to inioy ſuch ſweet communion with him by meanes of this pretious faith: but they would conſider their end, how vncertaine it is, as all other things which they inioy, and therfore be readie for it, at one time as well as another, which they might doe, if they held faſt their confidence, that bringeth with it ſo great reward. And how ſhall wee leade our whole life by  faith, in our particular parts thereof, beleeuing that God will guide and bleſſe vs, as we ſhall heare in the next Treatiſe, if wee be not firſt well ſeaſoned and acquainted with this iuſtifying faith?
               But, alas, we verifie the ſaying of our Sauiour,Gods children not ſo wiſe for their good, as the bad for theirs. though to our great ſhame it may bee ſpoken: that the children of this world are wiſer in their kinde then we: who if they bee diſappointed of their deſire one way, haue twentie ſhifts to ſeeke it another. But it is too manifeſt, that the moſt part, euen of the better

ſort, and thoſe who haue taſted of this faith and aſſurance alreadie, doe not  thinke this poſſible to keepe, yea and increaſe it from day to day: and therefore go not about it, but are content to hold it by ſtarts, now and then, when it is reuiued in them by ſome ſpeciall helpe of preaching.Many good Chriſtians haue not halfe the comfort they might haue. Epheſ. 5.18. Deut. 33.12. Pſal. 90.
                   And thus doing, they ſee not the twentith part of Gods bountie and fatherly affection towards them, who giueth them not ſome taſte now and then of his abundant loue, but would haue them filled with it, and that continually; yea and thereby to be in ſafetie all the day long: which if many of Gods ſeruants did beleeue, as they doe any article of their faith, that it is true; how greatly ſhould their heauie hearts bee made ioyfull, and their heads lifted vp with cheerefulnes, whereas now deceiueable mirth, or vnprofitable ſorrow holdeth them  downe, either at their labour, or from it, ſeeing they haue not this boldnes to reioyce in the Lord alwaies, and that becauſe they beleeue not alwaies, neither thinke that they may, or can poſſibly attaine to it.
               And by this meanes, that they are ſo ofte caſt from their hold, of faith, and ſo of peace, and conſtancie therein, the diuell weakneth and holdeth backe ſundrie (which are comming on) by their example: thinking themſelues well in the caſe they are in, rather then in following them, except they ſaw ſome beautie and excellencie in their liues, more then is in themſelues.
               
                  Vnſetling of our ſelues from nouriſhing faith, is full of dangers.Beſides this, they not holding their perſwaſion for continuance, as well as  for ſome ſpeciall time, doe bring much vnprofitablenes into their liues, and ſometimes daungerous outſtrayings, and giue many offences, which otherwiſe they ſhould not: by al which, their heauines is increaſed, and ſomtimes long lien in. And that which is hardeſt of all the reſt, they either dare not riſe vp againe out of their ſorrow, or know not how they ſhould: and ſo they make the moſt part of their life to bee very bondage, which through beleeuing ſhould be moſt ſweet libertie: & thereby inioy not many comfortable fruits of faith in their liues, which other Chriſtians doe. And whiles all this commeth to paſſe, we muſt needs ſay, that God is not honoured of them, nor his praiſes ſo in their hearts, as they ſhould, and might be; if they from time  to time did nouriſh and liue by this their faith and confidence. But though I would haue it receiued, that much ſweetnes accompanieth this faith, yet I meane not here to ſet downe the priuiledges, which accompany it and a godly life; that is done in another place.
               
                  This ſpirit of bondage therefore, which holdeth them oft in feare, I earneſtly wiſh were abandoned: and that this wauering and needles doubting, which poſſeſſeth ſo great part of their life (eſpecially when any great affliction arreſteth them, or lieth long vpon them) were as farre from them, as the Eaſt is from the Weſt: ſo that they might ſee the aboundant fauour of God farre greater towards them, then euer they did: and that by how much they  may inioy it more vſually, then euer they thought it poſſible. And as for them that count their aduice and direction for the preſeruing of faith, they ſhall goe without the fruite of it; till they ſee that they loſt not their labour, who were thought to doe too much, ſeeing they did more then themſelues could be perſwaded to doe. Therfore (as I haue ſaid) let all ſuch, as to whom God hath ſealed vp their ſaluation by his ſpirit, by the which he hath giuen

                      them an earneſt of it, be diligent to heare and marke the promiſes daily: ſo ſhall they waxe familiar, and well acquainted with the mind and purpoſe of God, howſoeuer the prophane worldlings make them common things, and are ſoone wearie of hearing thē. Let thē weigh thē alſo, and applie them to their owne ſoules daily by priuate meditation: let them learne of other the faithfull ſeruants of God, how they doe moſt eſpecially preſerue their faith. And let them be throughly perſwaded, that how croſſely ſoeuer things come to paſſe, yet the Lord ſeeketh their good by them, and doth not delight in their ſorrow and troubles: for if hee did, he could a thouſand waies make a riddance of them, but ſendeth them ſpecially for their benefit and good; ſo  ſhall they grow rooted, and eſtabliſhed in their faith, as the graine of Muſtard ſeede, which after rooting becommeth a ſtalke,The longer we liue, the better we ſhould be. and hath branches and boughes: and as that groweth, ſo ſhall ſound peace and ſafetie, and ſtrength againſt their corruptions; yea and theſe meanes whereby it is preſerued, how weariſome ſoeuer they haue been ſometime, ſhall become eaſie and pleaſant, and from time to time more and more, ſo that they may be aſſured that they haue cauſe in all things to be thankfull.
                  Many haue found ſmall cōfort through their life. And that ſhould be thought a rare and ſpeciall benefit, if wee conſider how many thouſands haue not an houre of this comfort through the yeere, no not through their whole life. And thus much to ſhew who is the Lords, and how the weake beleeuer is to be vpholden:  and how he differeth from him who is not, and what graces accompanie them who beleeue; and how hee who hath faith ſhould grow till hee be ſetled; and what eaſe and gaine is found thereby. And by that which hath been ſaid in this treatiſe, it may bee gathered: that although this faith bee in ſubſtance one, and the ſame: yet that there are three degrees of it.2. Pet. 1.1. The firſt is the weakeſt and leaſt meaſure: when there is yet no aſſurance in the beleeuer; and yet inſeparable fruits, and infallible tokens of it: as I haue ſet down. The ſecond degree is, when ſome aſſurance is wrought in the beleeuer at ſome time, but very weake: and is often to ſeeke and wanting, and recouered againe by entring into due conſideration of his eſtate, and of the truth  of God, who hath promiſed it. The third is the higheſt degree of it, though more ſtrong and better ſetled in ſome then in other: and this hath aſſurance accompanying it for the moſt part vſually, vnleſſe the beleeuer doe quench the ſpirit in himſelfe; or the Lord (to ſhew him that he ſtandeth by grace) do leaue him to himſelfe, for his owne glorie, and the better eſtabliſhing of him afterwards.
               This I haue ſaid for their cauſe, who being tender and weake in faith, would deſire ſome helpe herein: the larger handling of the helpes is to bee ſought in the third part of this treatiſe, where the helps to preſerue the whole heart, and conſequently faith, and all godlines in the beleeuer, is ſet downe.  Now I thinke it conuenient to leade forward this beleeuer to ſet this faith of his a worke by a godly life, and teach him what manner of courſe and eſtate that is: which is the ſecond treatiſe of this booke.
            
            The end of the firſt part of this Treatiſe.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND TREATISE, SHEWING AT LARGE WHAT THE LIFE OF THE TRVE BELEEVER IS, AND THE CONuerſation of ſuch, as haue aſſured hope of ſaluation.
            
               CHAP. 1. The ſumme and order of this ſecond Treatiſe.
               
                  HItherto I haue ſhewed, who are they whom the Scripture  calleth beleeuers, and the ſonnes, and daughters of the Lord Almightie. Now, it is neceſſarie, and followeth in order, to ſhew what the life of the true beleeuer is: and how he, who hath faith, muſt behaue himſelfe throughout his whole conuerſation: for as yet nothing hath been ſaid of that. But that treatiſe; namely, what the life of the true beleeuer is, was reſerued to this place, for auoiding confuſion: and without it, a man could neither well ſee the excellencie,Iames 2.26. and beautie of faith, which without workes is dead: neither could the beleeuer know how to occupie himſelfe throughout his  life, but muſt of neceſſitie be idle and vnprofitable: who yet muſt ioyne with his faith,
                  2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7 
                  vertue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godlines, brotherly kindnes, and loue, &c.
               
               This (I ſay) is the argument and matter to be handled in this treatiſe. And ſeeing there is much difficultie about this point, as about the other, in the former treatiſe; and ſeeing it is of greateſt weight and moment of all other, except that:Diuers opinions about godlines. Matth. 27.3.
                   it muſt with like care be looked into and laid forth. For ſome thinke, that repentance and godlines, is nothing elſe, but griefe for ſome offence committed: and ſo Iudas might haue been godly. Some thinke, that to amend ſome thing which was amiſſe, is godlines, eſpecially, if they alſo doe  ſome good therewith; and ſo Herod that cauſed Iohn to be beheaded, might haue been godly:Mark. 6.20. 
                  For he reuerenced Iohn, and when he heard him, he did many things. Some thinke, that if they haue been well moued at the hearing of the word of God, and doe bowe themſelues before God, for the time, in outward ſignes of repentance only; that then they be godly in deede: but ſo might Ahab haue been godly. Some, if they can ſhut vp all their vaine talke,

                   bad dealings, fooliſh ieſtings, with ſuch other merriments at their meetings, in this manner [Lord haue mercie vpon vs, we are all ſinners] that then they haue repented: and ſo the common ſort of wicked ones, may be ſaid to repent and to be godly. And laſtly, popiſh contrition, auricular confeſſion, and ſatisfaction, is thought in poperie to be good repentance: which (as they vnderſtand them) are as farre from it as any of the former. Theſe are ſome few, of a great many opinions about this matter; all which are moſt dangerous and erronious: It is therefore very neceſſarie,Jt is neceſſarie to vnderstand wherein a godly life conſiſteth. that we may vnderſtand the will of God aright concerning this, and what to leane vnto, that we be not deceiued.
               
                   My purpoſe is therefore in this treatiſe, to ſet downe at large what a godly life is, and wherein it conſiſteth, that he who deſireth it, may ſee,The neceſſarie connexion of this treatiſe with the former. whether his courſe and behauiour be ſuch or no: and the triall of this muſt be made of him, who hath tried himſelfe by the former, that the one may be ſeene to goe with the other, and both together as twinnes; ſo that he who hath not both, may be truely ſaid to haue neither. And in laying forth this matter, I will follow this method and order: to referre all that ſhall be ſpoken about it,Faith and a godly life, are as twinnes, and goe together. The heads of this treatiſe are foure. to foure generall heads or parts. The firſt, that a godly life muſt of neceſſitie goe with the faith before ſpoken of: and that it is the foundation and ground thereof, whereby we receiue and giue credit, not only to the promiſe of our  ſaluation; but alſo to all other promiſes of temporarie benefits appertaining to this life, and alſo to the whole word of God, with a mind to relie vpon it, and to be guided by it. This is the firſt head of this treatiſe. The ſecond, that there muſt be a pure heart in him who muſt lead a godly life: a pure heart, I ſay, renued and changed from that it was before, as Ezekiel ſpeaketh,Ezek. 36.26. 
                  I will take away your ſtonie or hard heart from you, and put a new heart in you: This muſt of neceſſitie be in him who ſhall liue godly, and ſo conſequently, that the whole man be changed. Thirdly, I will ſet downe the firſt part of a godly life; and ſhew that it is a renouncing and forſaking of all ſinne, both inward and outward. And fourthly, I will adde the other part of godlines, declaring that  it conſiſteth in a full purpoſe of the heart, and a true indeuour of life, to obey God in all things, euen vnto the end. By which alſo may be gathered a ſhort deſcription of this life of the beleeuer; that it is ſuch a conuerſation, as being grounded on faith in a ſanctified perſon, renounceth all euill, and practiſeth good duties, though weakely, yet conſtantlie afterward. And to theſe foure ſhall be annexed reaſons to perſwade to a more cheerefull practiſing of this godly life (ſeeing the beſt need ſpurres) and the anſwering of obiections, which might with-hold and hinder from it. All which conſidered, it ſhall not be hard for him that will learne, to vnderſtand plainely and cleerely, what the life of the beleeuer is, and withall, whether he which profeſſeth himſelfe  to haue true faith, be alſo in his life and conuerſation reformed, and how he may be ſo. So that although there be many meaſures of grace, and ſome are in many degrees before other in this eſtate and condition of liuing godly: yet euery one in whom theſe things ſhall be found, may proue himſelfe godly, howſoeuer he wanteth ſomewhat, which many others haue. And of the ſumme and order of this treatiſe in generall, thus much be ſaid.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 2. That a godly life cannot be without vnfained faith; nor this faith without it: which is the first poynt in the first generall head to be handled.
               
                  THus, hauing ſhewed what the ſumme of this treatiſe is, and the order and parts of it, I will now proceede: and firſt, ſeeing I haue taken in hand to deſcribe the life of the beleeuer, and what the godly life is, which he muſt leade: I will indeuour my ſelfe to helpe and direct him herein; as God hath inabled me, that as in the former treatiſe he may proue and ſee himſelfe to haue faith to be ſaued, ſo he may learne by this, to ioyne with his faith, godlines.
               But before I lay forth this godly life at large, in this chapter, I will begin with the firſt point of the firſt generall part of this treatiſe, that is, that ſeeing godlines cannot be without iuſtifying faith, but ſpringeth and ariſeth from it, as the branch from the tree;Iames 2.18. for ſo Saint Iames ſaith, Shew me thy faith by thy workes: therefore where no true iuſtifying faith is, there can be no godly life. And ſo he,Where true faith is not, there is no good life. Epheſ. 2.3.
                   who is no true beleeuer, cannot haue any ſparkle of godlines in  him; but is vtterlie deſtitute, and voide thereof, euen altogether vngodly, as the Apoſtle writeth: We all had our conuerſation ſometime as other diſobedient men, in the lustes of our fleſh, doing thoſe things which liked vs: where we ſee, that this was the life of all, euen the beſt, to be ſtrangers to the life of godlines, and the children of wrath, before they beleeued, Epheſ. 2.8. But leaſt any through ignorance might ſay: though we did that which liked the luſts of our hearts, yet we did not onely ſo, nor all that we did, was not ſuch, but ſome good we did amongſt the euill which we committed, (and if it be ſo, they thinke that the one may anſwere for the other:) I further ſay to them, out of the place to Titus 1.15. Vnto the pure, are all things pure: but vnto them that are defiled and vnbeleeuing, is nothing pure; but euen their minds and conſciences are defiled: to the Hebrues,Heb. 11.6. that without faith, it is impoſsible to pleaſe God, whatſoeuer things we doe, but all is abhominable, odious, and vile before him. For as is the fountaine, ſo are the riuers which runne from it; and as is the heart, and the cogitations of it, ſo are the actions which proceede from it: but the cogitations of the heart are alwaies,
                  Gen. 6.5. No good thing in the vnbeleeuer that pleaſeth God. Gen. 9.6. Prou. 28.9. Pſalm. 50.16. Gen. 4.4. 
                  and onely euill. So that (to returne) in the vnbeleeuer there is no good thing that pleaſeth God: his beſt actions are turned into ſinne: his praiers, almes, reading, hearing, confeſſions, thankeſ-giuings, and whatſoeuer elſe, they are all abominable in him; and God will neuer be pleaſed with his workes and ſeruices, vntill the perſon, namely, euen he himſelfe be accepted  of him; and that is not till he beleeue: as it is in the epiſtle to the Hebrues 10.38. The iust ſhall liue by faith, but if any withdraw himſelfe [that is, thorough vnbeliefe] my ſoule ſhall haue no pleaſure in him, ſaith the Lord.
               
               And this is the worke which God requireth of him, aboue, and beyond all workes, that he beleeue in his ſonne, that he hath alreadie wrought his happines: and therefore that he ſhall be ſaued by him onely. Now if a man,

                   before he haue ſome ſure tokens of Gods loue, and conſequently ſome meaſure of true faith, cannot ſo much as enter into a godly life, nor haue any thing which he doth, approued of God (as we haue ſeene, and the Scriptures doe more fully proue): how dangerouſly then doe many thouſands deceiue themſelues? of which number, ſome are verely perſwaded that they loue, feare, and ſerue God, not knowing what faith is: other thinke they haue repented truly, becauſe they haue mourned and been ſorrie for their ſinne, by fits at ſome time; yet haue no faith, nor any conſtant deſire of it: and others, becauſe they doe many things in their owne nature good, imagine themſelues to liue godly, when yet a man may doe many good actions, and for all  that, they ſhall not be good to him, as long as faith the principall is wanting in him, as hath been ſaid.
               And if any count this doctrine hard, and ſay, that if this ſhould be true,No new doctrine. it were the next way to driue many to diſcomfort, yea and to deſperation: let ſuch know, that if any deſpaire becauſe their wicked liues are condemned of God, the doctrine is not to bee blamed, but the perſons themſelues, who ſhould rather repent; for the doctrine is the doctrine of the Scriptures:Jt is hard only to the obſtinate 2. Pet. 3.16.
                   and al ſound Diuines both old and new haue taught it. And if it be hard, it is hard to the ignorant, vnstable, and obstinate, who indeede can take little comfort by it, but peruert all things to their owne destruction: and although they deſpaire  not, yet their caſe will be no better in the end then deſperate, if they ſo abide. But the truth of God may not be buried for mens frowardnes, who can not away with it.
               But let this ſuffice to ſhew, that no man can leade a godly and Chriſtian life, before he hath ſome meaſure of true faith, as it hath been ſet downe and deſcribed in the former treatiſe. And as I haue ſhewed,None that haue faith can liue wickedly. that no man liueth godly which beleeueth not: ſo it is on the contrarie, to be marked, that no man who beleeueth, and nouriſheth and preſerueth his faith, can liue wickedly, nor faſhion himſelf after men of the world, or returne to the offenſiue, and vnſauourie courſe, which he walked after before: but as he is new borne,2. Cor. 5. 
                   ſo hee is a new creature, and (as hee doth except at the firſt beginning of his conuerſion, or in vehemencie of temptation) knowing himſelfe to be of the number that ſhall be ſaued, he honoreth him who will ſaue him: for his loue conſtraineth him ſo to doe. Which although it bee moſt true, and will be granted of the greater part: yet becauſe many content themſelues to affirme it onely, and other in a generall manner doe coldly goe about it, I meane to honour God and ſhew foorth the fruits of faith (which they think they haue) as though any little would ſerue, I thinke it very meete to ſet downe ſome ſpeciall proofes of it, that cannot be excepted againſt.
               And firſt, by that place to Titus: The grace of God, that hath appeared,
                  Proofes of the former. Tit. 2.12.
                   
                  teacheth  vs to denie vngodlines and worldly luſts: and to liue holily, righteouſly, and ſoberly in this preſent life; he ſaith plainly, if we be once inlightened by that diuine grace and gift of the Goſpell to ſee our ſelues partakers of ſaluation: we are by the ſame knowledge, taught (and ſo learne it) to renounce our old conuerſation. So that euen as a ſcholler plainly taught by his maſter, becommeth skilfull in thoſe points wherein he was inſtructed: ſo is a man taught, to ſee God worthie all honour, and to giue it him, by caſting away the workes of darknes, when

he ſeeth that he hath brought him out of moſt wofull bondage, into the glorious  libertie of Gods children. And is it any meruaile? For what will we not be readie to doe, for ſuch a one as hath but once ſaued our liues from death? How much more doe all they which know that they are diſcharged for euer from fearefull damnation, ſee infinite cauſes why they ſhould chaunge their wicked liues (which ſo much diſpleaſed God) and are alſo readie to doe the ſame? Be not therefore deceiued, God is not mocked by them, who profeſſe they looke to be ſaued, and doe not bring foorth fruiteworthie amendment.
               
               
                  Faith is not content with a wandring deſire of godlines.It is not a bare wandring deſire to pleaſe God, which this pretious faith, and aſſurance of ſaluation worketh: but it frameth alſo the man vnto it, and teacheth him in ſome true and acceptable meaſure to goe about it. The tidings  of this treaſure appeared ſo glorious to Agrippa, being a King, and therefore acquainted with earthly felicitie; and a Heathen, and therefore vnfit to ſee very eaſily into ſpirituall things:2. Cor. 5. yet this appeared ſo glorious tidings to him, when he heard it by Paul, not preaching in the pulpit, but ſtanding a priſoner at the barre,Act. 26.28. that it cauſed him at the firſt to ſay: Thou haſt almoſt perſwaded me to become a Chriſtian. And therefore he, who hath not onely heard a ſound of this heauenly newes with his eares (which yet did weigh equally againſt a Princes kingdome in a Heathen mans iudgement) but hath beleeued it to bee his owne, and that for euer: doe we thinke, that any thing will be thought too deare for him,Goſpell deſpiſed, becauſe it is not knowne. who hath freely giuen it him? And therefore  when I ſee one curſed man raile againſt the doctrine of Gods word, and his faithfull ſeruants: another to loue the Chriſtian life, but from teeth outward, and diuers men diuerſly bewitched; but all of them to loue darknes more then light, becauſe their deedes are euill, Ioh. 3.19. I meruaile not at it: they do after their nature and kind. As they are not obedient to the will of God, ſo neither indeed can they be; who yet for all this, know not any cauſe why they ſhould accuſe themſelues: but if they might ſee what kindnes God offereth them, euen to bee made happie, and might beleeue the ſame, ye ſhould ſee them changed, as ſenſible as euer was Saul, of a perſecutor to become a preacher; ſo they of oppreſſors, mercifull perſons, and reſtorers of that which  was ill gotten; and of prophane, holy: and ſo to bee conuerted, as that wee might ſay of them, compared to the beſt ſeruants of God, the lambe and the lion doe eate together.
               
               
                  Many would be thought beleeuers, vvho liue not a godly life. Hoſ. 7.8.
                  But to let theſe goe, as too groſſe, I would wiſh ſuch to weigh theſe Scriptures aright; who will take no nay but that they belong to Gods election, when yet their goodnes is as the morning dew, ſoone vaniſhing and blowne away; or as a cake halfe baken. Let them ſee how well this becommeth them, to bee ſometime forward, ſometime backward: in ſome things, zealous, and yeelding to the will of God: in otherſome, ſinning againſt their owne knowledge: and when they be ſtraying from dutie, to make no haſte to it againe;  neither to ſee that any thing is amiſſe in them: nay to be put in minde, and reproued, though neuer ſo iuſtly, and kindly, they cannot beare it. It muſt in no waies bee denied them, that they beleeue, and are ſure to be ſaued: but where is the ſpirit which S. Paul ſpeaketh of, in thoſe which know themſelues ſaued?Rom. 7.4. which, as an husband, ruleth and beareth ſway, which commaundeth holy and heauenly motions and affections into the heart, not ſuffering poyſoned,

                   and earthly corruptions to defile the ſame? where is that authoritie and gouernment ouer the members of the minde and bodie, as ouer a wife, that they may bee well ordred? where are the traines and companies of all ſorts of good fruites, as their children? and comely ornaments alſo, & beautifull to adorne and ſet out their liues? when a profeſſor of the Goſpell ſhall not be able to denie, that his heart is corrupt, by fretting, raging, and vnquietnes for euery ſmall trifle, and yet not once trembling for it, nor ſaying,Phil. 2.12. Ierem. 8.6. what haue I done? or els looſe, vaine, and fooliſh by other occaſions, and all this without repentance. Where is his teſtimonie, that his heart is a good treaſurie, and nurſerie of good things? when his tongue ſhall be walking, not onely  vnneceſſarily, and idly, but in vnſauourie and offenſiue ſpeech, in fooliſh ieſting, taunting, railing, mocking, lying, ſwearing, ſlandering, curriſh and churliſh ſpeaking; how are the powers and members of the bodie in ſubiection, as a wife vnto the power of Chriſt, which ruleth as an husband, in the heart of Gods beloued ones? where is thoſe mens religion, which S.Iam. 1.26. 
                  Iames boldly ſaith is none, where the tongue is thus vngouerned, what ſhew ſoeuer be made thereof?
               And ſo I might goe forward to conuince many of our countrimen, who haue often heard me, and other of Gods Miniſters vrging them after the ſame manner, in our Sermons: and doe know, I tell them the truth, that ſuch  things are in them indeed, who yet ſeeme to be religious. I haue ſaid it oft, and now ſay it with griefe, that all theſe, who haue ſuch things raigning in them, are not onely their owne enemies, but alſo to our preaching of the Goſpell of Chriſt: neither is their reioycing good, who glorie in their faith and hope, when yet they are thus earthly and carnally minded.
               They muſt know it (howſoeuer they beleeue) that God hath ioyned with faith, vertue, and godlines, patience, temperance; and that who ſo beleeueth, is thereby turned from his old conuerſation. For mine owne part,Too haſtie repentance ſeldome ſound. I haue long miſliked this haſte, and ſudden ſhewes of great repentance in men, who in their firſt acquaintance with the word preached to them, haue not only profeſſed  that they haue repented (when beſides ſome gripes of grief, they haue not knowne what repentance meaneth) but they haue thought themſelues able almoſt on the ſudden to cenſure, yea to condemne other, and teach them; and ſo although with boldnes enough ioyned with as much ignorance, they haue taken in hand to doe. I ſpeake not of ſuch as are humbled in their hearts for their ſinne, who deſire nothing more then to be ſet at libertie from the feare which oppreſſeth them, learning daily to beleeue, and to be grounded therein; who dare no otherwiſe beleeue their ſinnes forgiuen them, then they walke humbly before God and men: but of ſuch as paſſe from ſorrow for ſin without faith, to newnes of life, as they imagine,Note. which  was neuer, nor euer ſhall be attained; leauing the learning of faith,Change of life without faith, vaine. and aſſurance of Gods fauour, which is the beginning, and worker of all new life, as a thing ſoone gotten: and therefore it is ſo ſleightly laboured for of them, and ſo to ſeeke with thē, for want of thorough prouing whether they haue it or no, that many are driuen againe to ſeeke for it, many yeeres after, they thought they had been ſure of it, yea and (that which is more to be lamented) many of them neuer attaine vnto it at all. It ſtandeth with no ſound reaſon,

that young beginners in learning of any trade, ſhould by and by, become  occupiers,A ſimile. and ſetters vp; or that they ſhould rule well, who haue neuer learned to obey: ſo it ſtandeth not with religion, that they ſhould count themſelues good Chriſtians, or that they ſhould be ſo indeede, who haue not taſted of Chriſt, and the benefit thereof; neither learned him, as the truth is in him, that is, to put off the old man with his affections and lusts, and to put on the new: and who haue not felt him ſo good and bountifull to them, that for his ſake they be readie to doe any thing.
               This I haue ſpoken by occaſion of the matter in hand; namely, that faith bringeth alwaies with it new life; in ſo much, that when it is ouermatched with the fleſhly corruption, yet it raiſeth ſighings and ſtriuings in the heart  till it be ſubdued, that I might at leaſt preuaile with ſome of my brethren, that they pleaſe not themſelues in thinking they haue faith, when their liues are filled,It is vaine to thinke we haue faith without a new life. not only with many offenſiue actions; but alſo with cuſtome and commons in the ſame: whereas he which is honored with the title of Gods ſeruant, muſt be known by the liuerie of vncorrupt life, and proue by his ſauour and ſmell of good conuerſation, that he came from God, and is not of the earth,1. Pet. 3.4. that ſo he may ſhew himſelfe to be a man of God indeed: his rootes muſt be faſtened as the trees of Lebanon:Hoſ. 14.6. he muſt flouriſh as the Lillie, and finde the graces of God as dew to quicken them. For of this be we ſure, that whatſoeuer men alleage, why their liues cannot beare the  mould and print of ſound doctrine,Rom. 6.17. and yet they will needes goe for the approoued ſeruants of God; it is a ſtrong deluſion which perſwadeth them ſo.
               And therefore ſeeing the Scripture doth (as I haue ſaid) ſo fully, and ſo often ſet downe this truth vnto vs, that ſuch as haue obtained mercy of God, are taught and guided by him: ought not men to ſettle themſelues to another courſe, then in times paſt they walked in, being now deliuered from ſo great bondage?Luk. 1.75. For to that end, as they haue heard, they were deliuered. Wherefore,Matth. 11.29. if any be aſſured of ſaluation, let them either willingly be ſubiect to the Lords yoke, I meane his commandements, and commit their whole  life to him to be gouerned, and be diligent to doe good workes; or elſe let them hold their peace: for they are nothing leſſe, as in time it ſhall appeare, and hath done already in many ſuch as they are,Tit. 3.8. to their coſt: and be they well aſſured, that God will not be ſlacke to reuenge ſuch boldnes. But I will ſhut vp this matter in one ſentence. Saint Paul to the Epheſians moſt liuely deſcribeth this life, which is to be led of them which are ſure of Gods fauour:Epheſ. 4.22. ſaying, Put off, or lay aſide, as concerning your conuerſation past, that old man, that is, that corrupt nature; and ſo the powers of your mind and bodie, which were infected with deceiueable luſts: and be renued in the ſpirit of your mindes, (euen where the force of reaſon ſhould be greateſt) that ſo you may put on  the new man which is to be ſanctified, that the powers of your bodies and mindes may be renued, and changed alſo: ſo ſhall ye be framed, to bring forth righteouſneſſe, and true holineſſe, wherein ye ſhall carrie ſome reſemblance of God.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 3. That for the leading of a godly life, is required faith in the temporall promiſes of God, and hartie aſſent and credit to the commaundements alſo, and threatnings in the word of God, as well as faith to be ſaued.
               
                  NOw I haue ſhewed, that true iuſtifying faith and a godly life, muſt of neceſſitie goe together, and that the one cannot  be without the other: I will goe to the ſecond point in this firſt generall head or part; and proue that it is neceſſarie to the leading of a godly life, to beleeue and giue credit to the whole doctrine of the word of God, to be led and guided thereby, as well as to haue faith in the promiſes of ſaluation, and forgiuenes of ſinnes. This I ſay therefore,The beleeuer muſt beleeue other promiſes beſide that of ſaluation. 1. Cor. 1.30.
                   that he which beleeueth in Chriſt to ſaluation, muſt not ſtay himſelfe and reſt therein only, as though he were giuen vnto vs of his father to be our righteouſneſſe only, and to make for vs a way to eternall life: but to be our wiſdome alſo, to make vs wiſe; our ſanctification, to make vs holy, and alſo our redemption and deliuerance, to ridde vs in his good time,  from all calamities and miſeries, which here befall vs: This, he that truly beleeueth, muſt be perſwaded of: and that all the promiſes of this life,
                  1. Tim. 4.8. 
                  and of the life to come, which ſerue to confirme him in obedience (whether the great and principall, as of the graces of the ſpirit; or the ſmaller, as of bodily ſafety and preſeruation from dangers, ſo farre as they ſhall be good for him) doe belong vnto him.
               And beſide both theſe, he muſt beleeue,Alſo the threats and commaundements. that both all the commaundements which teach obedience, and the threatnings, becauſe they reſtraine the contrarie, are ſet downe for him particularlie, as well as for any other, to binde his conſcience thereunto: theſe alſo, I ſay, muſt he beleeue,Rom. 15.4. according  to that of Saint Paul: Whatſoeuer things are written aforetime (as either promiſes, threats or commaundements) they are written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might haue hope. So that he is bound to depend vpon this word of God, written in the canonicall Scriptures, and to build his faith thereon (in ſuch wiſe, that he dares ieopard his ſoule vpon the truth and doctrine of them) euen as he is to looke for ſaluation, only by our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: euer counting that for ſinne, which ſhall be found to iarre or iangle with the ſame, either in his heart or life.
               But though all, who haue hope to be ſaued, ſhould doe this;The beleeuers doe not thus. 1. Cor. 3.1.
                   yet it is manifeſt, they doe not. They make not conſcience of many ſinnes: they looke  not to many promiſes; they feare not many threats: all which doe much teſtifie againſt them, that they be not ſo well fenced, as they might be: and by meanes hereof, they holde euen the promiſe of ſaluation it ſelfe more weakely. And this commeth to paſſe the more commonly,The cauſe why. that they be no better ſtabliſhed and rooted in the truth to beleeue it, becauſe theſe things (as they be worthieſt and moſt excellent) ſo they be not plainely, ſoundly, and thoroughly beaten into the people, and that againe and againe, till they

that are willing,A ſecond. haue them for their owne. And another cauſe is, for that the  people, who haue ſome taſte of this doctrine, namely, how they ſhould ioyne good life with their faith, take not paine, when they haue been well taught them, to call them to minde and digeſt them: onely they haue pieces and fragments of many good points, but rarely it ſhall be found, that one Chriſtian among many groweth to ſee this, which I now ſpeake of, by teaching; much leſſe hath it in vſe and practiſe for his owne: that is, to giue credit to one part of the word as well as to another; and not euery one to take that which liketh him.
               
                  VVant of this faith worketh much inconuenience.And therefore when they haue ſome work of true faith in them; yet they ſee not how to ſet vpon repentance, and a godly life: how to begin, and how  to proceede therein, but are off, and on, now forward, then backward, and ſcarcely at any time ſetled and ſtaied: the which although it be ſo, in great part through their owne weaknes, yet is it alſo in reſpect of their ignorance: I ſpeake of the better ſort of people, and ſuch as haue receiued the firſt fruites of the ſpirit. Whereas, if they were perſwaded that they ought to make conſcience of all ſound doctrine that they heare, and to giue aſſent to euery part of the word of God, and ſubmit themſelues thereto, promiſes, threats and commandements; they ſhould hold more firmely the perſwaſion of their ſaluation, and alſo be better prepared how to flie euill, and how to doe dutie, and how to truſt God in all kindes of his promiſes. Therefore it is ſaid to the  Hebrues:Heb. 4.2. 
                  To vs was the Goſpell preached as alſo vnto them: but the word that they heard, profited not them, becauſe it was not mixed with faith in thoſe that heard it. Againe,Heb. 11.6. Rom. 14.23. 
                  Without faith, it is impoſsible to pleaſe God. With the which agreeth that which is written by S. Paul to the Romanes: Whatſoeuer is not of faith, is ſinne: that is, whatſoeuer we doe, not being perſwaded in our conſciences, that we pleaſe God in doing of it, we ſinne againſt him. Now then, when our iudgements be not ſetled in this doctrine and truth, and conſequently, we follow no ſuch rule in our actions, muſt wee not needes wander vp and downe the more vnprofitably and heauily; or, when we be at the beſt, muſt we not needs be doubtfull and vncertaine, whether wee pleaſe God or no? whereas our  chiefe care ſhould be, leaſt we doe any thing which might craſe or cracke our faith: eſpecially, when it is tender and weake, and like the bruiſed reede, which is eaſily broken.
               
                  The beleeuer muſt beleeue that he ſhall be ſanctified.Therefore if any beleeue to be ſaued, let them beleeue alſo that they ſhall be ſanctified (for with one and the ſame faith we beleeue both) and that they ſhall receiue grace from God to bring foorth fruites of amendment of life, and that they ſhall be made able by him through the hearing of the holie Scriptures, to caſt off their old conuerſation. This faith much auaileth to the furthering of the deare children of God in a godly courſe, euen at their firſt comming vnto God, as it doth alwaies after, to liue by it. And although God  by the ſame ſpirit regenerateth them, by the which he aſſureth them of their adoption: yet is it wrought in them much more hardly, and in greater feare, when they doe not firſt know and be perſwaded in their iudgements, that it ſhall be ſo. And though it can be but weake in any, at their firſt conuerſion to God,And particular promiſes of benefits and deliuerance. yet ſhall they ſooner wade through their doubts, and grow out of their feare, if they haue this faith as a foundation to vphold them, and incourage

                   them to goe about it: But otherwiſe, they ſhall faint and feare oft times, and be without hope (nothing is more cleere then this, if we obſerue it in weake chriſtians.) And thus muſt they be perſwaded alſo concerning all bleſſing, good ſucceſſe, deliuerance out of troubles, or patience and meekenes to beare them, as well as to beleeue the forgiuenes of ſinnes: and finally, whatſoeuer God ſaith in his word, either the forbidding of any ſinne, or the requiring of any dutie, they are bound to beleeue it as the truth of God; to depend vpon it, and to be built vpon it: and to truſt him vpon his bare word,And precepts and threats, euen the word it ſelfe. Rom. 1.5.
                   and to ſuffer themſelues to be led by it (and that becauſe it is his word) hauing in them alwaies a ſetled purpoſe to doe ſo: and this is called by the Apoſtle, the obedience  of faith. For they muſt be reſolued of this, that to whom God giues Chriſt, to them alſo he giues all things needfull for this life, and the life to come, in and by Chriſt.
               And thus Noah did not only beleeue that he was made heire of righteouſneſſe;Examples of ſuch as did ſt. Hebr. 11.8.
                   but alſo, that he and certaine of his houſehold ſhould be ſaued in the flood: and Abraham likewiſe beleeued not only, that he was iuſtified, but alſo went to a place which he knew not, only ſeeing God commaunded; and abode in the land of promiſe, as in a ſtrange countrey; and beleeued, that he ſhould haue a ſonne in his olde age. And they who beleeued among the Iſraelites in the Sauiour which was to come, of whom Moſes, though darkely, had taught before:Iohn 5.46. the  ſame beleeued other promiſes, as that the walles of Iericho ſhould fall downe,
                  Ioſ. 6.10. 
                  after they had bin compaſſed about ſeuen daies. Many other ſuch examples, who ſhewed themſelues not only to beleeue the promiſe of forgiuenes of ſinnes, and of eternall life, but alſo other temporall promiſes; yea and precepts alſo and threats, which God had ſet downe in his word, very profitable for vs, to this purpoſe: many ſuch (I ſay) both thoroughout the Scriptures; and namely, in that eleuenth chapter to the Hebrues, are ſet downe vnto vs. And this generall faith, (ſo called, for that it giueth aſſent and credit to the word of God, in the elect, as well to one part as to another, with an honeſt heart ready to obey it) euen this faith (I ſay) muſt be planted in them, as well as faith to  be ſaued, becauſe by it, as well as by this, Gods people muſt liue afterwards, and be vpholden.
               And this doctrine, becauſe it is occupied about the promiſes of this life, and the commandements of God, which are to guide vs to full ſanctification here, I did not therefore ioyne it with my diſcourſe of faith in the former treatiſe; but referred it to this place as the fitteſt, where I teach how to liue godly: to the attaining whereof, the beleeuing, that I haue ſpoken of, is a ſpeciall helpe and furtherance. And ſo I wiſh the chriſtian reader to marke well that which I ſay about this matter: for it is one of the hardeſt points in all chriſtianitie to practiſe, and one of the darkeſt to conceiue and ſee into, and  to be rightly perſwaded of, and ſetled in: and a point in deed leſſe ſtoode vpon and taught and made cleere by Preachers themſelues, in their Sermons and Catechizings; and yet our liuing by faith, throughout our whole life, which is the fruit of it, is as plainely taught and brought to light in the Scriptures, as any need to deſire it: and namely in thoſe places to the Hebrues and the Galathians: one, The iust ſhall liue by faith: the other, I liue no longer,
                  Hebr. 10.38. Gal. 2.19. 
                  but Christ in me, and the life that I leade is by faith in the ſonne of God. As if they both

ſhould ſay; Chriſt by his ſpirit doth draw his faithfull ones to be led and guided  by the word of truth which he hath ſet downe to them: and they deſire no other life, then that which there they are moued and perſwaded vnto, whether we meane the commaundements or promiſes.
               
                  This kinde of faith not oft beat vpon by teachers.I ſaid that this beleeuing which I ſpeake of, is not much laide open in publike teaching, but only this (which is the effect of it) that we ought to be obedient to the word of God: and therefore it is, that the forwarder ſort of good hearers (except ſome few,The leſſe conceiued, and in vſe with the better kind of hearers. who haue been throughly made acquainted with it, and exerciſed in it by long experience) doe little ſee into it: namely, that they may vndoubtedly be perſwaded, that God will make them able to obey his will, as they are fit to reach vnto it: and that he hath promiſed, if they once  come to know that they are beloued of him, that he will afterwards be with them (to quicken their will, and draw their affections, and ſtrengthen them to doe their duties:Luk. 1.28.) as it was ſaid by the Angell to Mary, Haile, thou that art freely beloued, the Lord is with thee. Many of Gods deare children, when they are ſomewhat ſtaied about the aſſurance of their ſaluation, after that they haue been long labouring about it, and then come to heare that they muſt leade new liues; many of them (I ſay) are willing to goe about it: but they are much diſcouraged, becauſe they ſee not how they ſhall be able. And leaſt any ſhould obiect,Obiection. that Paul himſelfe was ſo troubled, who ſaid, To will, is preſent with me;
                  Rom. 7.18. 
                  but I finde no meanes to performe that which is good: I anſwere, he  complained not of that which I doe;Anſwere. that is, that he had no hope in God, nor no promiſe of ſtrength from him to performe: for he ſaid the contrarie in ſundry places.Philip. 4.13. 
                  I am able to doe all things through the helpe of Christ which ſtrengtheneth me. And againe, I liue no longer, but Christ in me: but he complained, that for all the hope of helpe that he had, yet the rebellion of his fleſh, and nature that was vnreformed, did mightily reſiſt him. And this hinderance he had, and we all ſhall haue while we liue. But what is that to this, that beſides this rebellion of the old man, they haue this alſo to hinder them: that they cannot tell, whether they ſhall haue ſtrength to make them able, or no: nor whether God haue giuen them any promiſe, that their burthen ſhall be  made light: and that Chriſt himſelfe will beare the greateſt part of it for them, that ſo it may be made eaſie?
               This it is, that killeth the heart of right good chriſtians, when they are ignorant of it, and when they be not well grounded in it, and throughly perſwaded of it, that God will make them able and fit for ſo great a worke, as the leading of a godly life is: euen like the burthen of the Iſraelites, who were inioyned their taske of bricke that they had made in times past,
                  Exod. 5.11. (which worke was hard enough) and yet themſelues to ſeeke and prouide their ſtrawe. This, I am ſure, hath troubled many,VVhat cauſeth tedious troubles to many christians. who yet were willing and readie to doe any duties required of them, and hath been the cauſe why they haue gone about the ſeuerall  actions of their life, the bearing of their trouble, and the offering vp of their prayers, the more deadly and vncheerefullie; and therefore the more aukely and weariſomely.
               
                  The teſtimonie of good chriſtians.And for the benefit of many good ſoules, I will ſay that which hath been acknowledged vnto me, by ſundrie well approued chriſtians, when I haue in conference ſet downe plainelie to them the point which now I write of:

                   namely, how neceſſarie it is to beleeue in generall, whatſoeuer other promiſes or precepts in the word of God, as well as the promiſes of ſaluation by Chriſt. Oh, haue many ſaid, if wee could haue holpe vp our ſelues, out of diſtruſt, feare, and vncomfortable dumpes, by applying the promiſes of God concerning grace neceſſarie for vs, outward deliuerance from daungers, and good ſucceſſe in our lawfull dealings of this life; wee might with much eaſe and peace haue ſtaied vp our ſelues, when for want therof, we were ſore plunged, and almoſt fainted: and with halfe the toyle which wee vſed for it, wee might haue vpholden our ſelues in hope & with comfort. For many houres, yea and ſometime daies, wee haue beate our braines and reaſoned to and fro  with heauie hearts, how to wade thorough ſome afflictions, and how to bee contented with ſome accidents which were like to fal out and come to paſſe: and this we did, becauſe we miſſed of the right way of truſting to Gods prouidence, that he would turne all to the beſt: without which reſolution, who can quietly reſt in any vncertainties here below? So effectuall and good a meane it is, to be led by faith, and to haue it as a daily companion with vs. By which wee hauing perſwaſion of the greateſt benefit of all other, namely Chriſt: we might the more eaſily haue aſſured our ſelues (we ſee now) of any ſmaller, whether any trouble, to haue a good iſſue out of it; or any good thing (as it ſhould haue been expedient for vs) to inioy it. And wee may ſay  truly, wee know nothing to haue been the cauſe of ſo much and ſo long vnprofitablenes and heauines theſe many yeeres, as this: that we haue not been rooted and grounded in faith, as we haue had a care to pleaſe God. For wee being ſubtilly vndermined by Sathan to hold in this errour of vnbeleefe (although wee ſee manifeſtly that the ſeede of faith was in vs) it was the cauſe why in all other good things we went forward the more ſleightly. So that we ſee great cauſe to ſeaſon our hearts with beleeuing throughout our whole life, whatſoeuer labour it coſt vs. To this purpoſe was the ſpeech of thoſe Chriſtians.
               And to goe forward, who doth not know, that when ſome certaintie of  ſaluation is attained of men, yet for all that, in as much as it is but weake, that they haue many heart griefes for this, that they ſee they haue a long weariſome pilgrimage to goe thorough; and little knowledge and perſwaſion of any great guiding of them through all the feares and difficulties of it?An exhortation to the Ministers. Pitie therefore the diſtreſſed eſtate of Gods poore people, ye ſhepheards of his flocke. Although this is but one point of many which ye are to teach them: and arme your ſelues with that minde, which was in the Apoſtle:2. Pet. 1.12. who ſaw it meete as long as he ſhould abide in this tabernacle, to put the people in mind of al things neceſſarie to ſaluation from day to day, though they knew and were ſtabliſhed in them. And let me with your patience, ſay one thing more to you, which if ye will  be aduiſed by me, will be much to your owne benefit, and of thoſe that heare you. Aboue all things, ſeeke to haue that your owne and effectually wrought in your ſelues, which you teach the people (for you know that the Phiſitions who practiſe by experience, are beſt able to deale with their patients). Eſpecially in this matter of faith, labour to be more exerciſed: how you haue vſe of it, in beleeuing for your owne parts, either precepts or promiſes, and content not your ſelues with bare knowledge of the truth. And ſo doing, ye ſhall

make good gaine of that which you ſhall teach, if your hearers ſhould not: and yet ſuch teaching, while ye bee ſure that it hath done your ſelues much good, ſhall ſet ſuch an edge on your doctrine by your more liuely, cheereful, and powerfull deliuering of it, that it ſhall farre more eaſily procure an appetite in the people to receiue it, as they did in Iohn Baptiſts time with greedines,Matth. 11. and as it were with violence; and ſo, that if they be not brought to the true practiſe of Chriſtianitie by it, they will not bee brought to it by any other teaching.
               And this I wiſh, that ye be not of the minde that ſome haue been of (for it is no opinion fit for the Miniſter of God) that is to ſay, that they thinke, though ſome preach by experience, yet no man is bound to do ſo: as though  it were in mens choice to doe which they liſt; when wee know, that the good ſhepheard doth go before the ſheepe,
                  Ioh. 10.4. 
                  and they follow him: And if he goe before them in example of good life, then he cannot chuſe but teach them by experience, that which he himſelfe doth practiſe in his good example. And ſo, hee that ſhall thinke that he is not bound to teach by experience, as well as by the letter, concludeth that hee is not bound to bee a good man himſelfe, who teacheth.
               
                  Let faith and godlines be oft taught.Now I haue ſaid what I purpoſed, I will goe forward. In teaching, labour much in this manner, which I haue mentioned, to beate into the people, (with making it plaine to them, how they may be aſſured of their ſaluation, as I haue taught in the firſt treatiſe) beate in (I ſay) this doctrine of beleeuing, that God will miniſter all helpe to inable them to liue godly. For in both points (if view might be taken throughout this dominion) it ſhould be found that the people are ignorant and to ſeeke; both how to come to the aſſurance of ſaluation, and alſo how they ſhould be rightly taught to leade a godlie and a Chriſtian life. And how commeth this to paſſe, but becauſe men teach not oft (of which all may ſee what neede there is) or els they doe not in commiſeration of the peoples weak capacitie and memorie, beate vpon theſe things among all other againe and againe.Phil. 3.1. So S. Paul hath left behind him his practiſe for our inſtruction, ſaying: It grieueth me not to write (when hee cannot  come to preach them) the ſame things to you, and for you, it is a ſure thing. And we ſhould know, that it is no ſhame to preach the ſame things oft, yea in our owne congregation; but meete and fit (eſpecially if they bee theſe ſpeciall matters) vnleſſe we contend for the vaine praiſe of men, and will ſhew our pride by ſeeking after nouelty,The ſame things without vaine repetition and barbarouſnes. rather then our deſire of the peoples edifying. Yet I nouriſh not barbarouſnes, nor the vttering vnſeaſonably and vnſauourly either of the ſame words and ſentences, or in boſome Sermons, the ſame things: but in the euidence of the ſpirit, and in renuing our labour and paine, euen about the ſame doctrine which we taught before, it ſhalbe ſo farre from being weariſome and tedious, that the beſt hearers ſhall affirme that they  cannot heare them too oft, but deſire with all their hearts to heare them againe.Act. 13.42.
               
               And becauſe I am by fit occaſion come to vtter this, I will adde one thing which ought worthily to preuaile much both with Preacher & people. And that is this: that in this long and gracious time of peace and libertie, of free preaching the Goſpell, he is a rare priuate man (that I goe no further) who is

                   able, plainly and ſoundly to ſet downe, how a ſinner may know himſelfe to be in the ſtate of ſaluation, and aſſured that he is the child of God; and when he is ſo, how hee ſhould bring foorth the fruites of repentance, and leade a godly and Chriſtian life. I know it is the holie Ghoſt, who alone can worke this in mens hearts, but I ſpeake of the expreſſing and ſetting down theſame. And though I doubt not but that ſome conceiue it, yet if they did that well, they could in ſome ſort vtter it alſo: as wee are commaunded to take vnto vs words to expreſſe that which we conceiue; as well as to haue matter in our minds.Hoſ. 14.2. And although the knowledge of this in generall, doe bring men in liking with it: yet who ſeeth not, that the particular vnfolding hereof, by fit coherences  knitting one point with another, is the way to make it vnderſtood and conceiued aright? By the which the hearer is farre more eaſily brought to haue the effectuall worke thereof in him.
               And thus to returne againe to that from whence I digreſſed not vnneceſſarily, and ſo to draw to an end about it: Although people profit thus far that they get ſome true taſte of ſaluation by preaching; yet they ſhall very much ſtagger and goe backe, and coldly ſet vpon the practiſe of godlines, if they be not well grounded in beleeuing, that God will build them vp more ſtrongly from day to day, and perfect the good worke in them which he hath begun, euen to full ſanctification in the feare of God.
                  A ſimile. If a chiefe and maine poſt in a building  be wanting, will not the whole houſe bee ſoone ſhaken? ſo if a Chriſtian, who muſt reforme his life, goe about it, not beleeuing that God will make him able; he may be ſure he ſhal want a maine helpe hereto, euen that which will goe nigh to pull downe all that is ſet vp. For if he haue not faith, to beleeue that God will ſtrengthen him; what ſtrength hath hee but his owne? which is as fit for ſuch a worke to bring it to paſſe, as a child is to build a great Caſtle by his skill. But if he be well ſetled in this confidence (his heart alſo being purified and chaunged; which (as we ſhall heare afterwards) is neceſſarily required; he ſhall goe about it with cheerefulnes and readines; he ſhall be incouraged to pray as his neceſſities ſhall giue cauſe; hee ſhall be kept from  fainting and diſmaiednes, when his ſtrength is not very great, and riſe vp againe when he is fallen: all which ſhall be great meanes in ſuch a caſe to vphold him, and ſet him forward to depend vpon God, without any great vnſetling of him (and yet ſhall he not for all this, be without ſenſe and feeling of his infirmities:) which another as willing to obey God as he, ſhall neuer be able to doe; but euery while caſt downe and diſmaied, vntill hee get the ſame furniture. And this muſt here be marked, that there ſhall be the better proceeding herein, of euery weake Chriſtian, as his knowledge ſhall be greater in the word of God: which before grace came (as fire to the ſtubble to kindle and ſet it a worke to burne) although it were idle and vnprofitable in  him, and lay voide, and vnoccupied, as timber lieth by, till the building goe forward: yet it ſhall then helpe much to the leauing of euill, and the doing of good, eſpecially after experience in time, ſhall be ioyned to both. And when all theſe meete together in an vpright hearted Chriſtian, how weake ſoeuer, if he acquaint himſelfe familiarly with the promiſes of eternall life, and treaſure vp in a good conſcience the certaintie of the forgiuenes of ſins from day to day: then this is he who hath laid a ſtrong foundation of a godlie

life, vpon which it ſhall be no hard matter to ſet the building of his life ſutable  and proportionable afterwards:Matth. 7.25. ſo that, although the raine fall, and the flouds come, and the winde blow, and beate vpon that houſe, yet it ſhall not fall; for it is builded on a rocke. But he who laieth not this foundation, but buildeth on the ſand, ſhall ſoone his building turned ouer. And thus the caſe ſtandeth with many in theſe daies, who therefore are caſt downe oft times from their good beginnings, becauſe they had not skill to make them more ſubſtantiall and ſure. And I feare not to affirme (the Lord witneſſing to that which I ſay) that the offenſiue liues of many, with many ſtartings aſide from the good way which they haue entred into, and the crooked and halting ſteppes that they make groſſely in the ſight of men, who yet durſt not ſomtime before quench  the ſpirit in themſelues, not hurt their tender conſciences ſecretly in the ſight of God: theſe (I ſay) are chiefly from hence, that they laid not the foundation aright, nor made not their firſt entrance into a Chriſtian life, ſound and ſure. Among other things, they haue failed for the moſt part in this, of which I doe moſt ſpecially ſpeake in this place, that they haue not been builded vp in this faith and perſwaſion, that God will further their weake beginnings, and fortifie their hearts againſt the ſtumbling blockes and diſcouragements, which ſhall ſtand vp in their way. I haue now onely ſhewed that this faith ſhould bee in a Chriſtian, when hee firſt ſetteth on a godly life: but how it ſhould accompanie him after throughout his life, that ſo he may liue by it, being the ſame to the whole life that the eye is to the bodie, I ſhall in place fit for it, if God will, declare and ſhew ſo farre as ſhall be expedient.
            
            
               CHAP. 4. Of the heart, and how it ſhould be clenſed and changed, and ſo the whole man which is true ſanctification, tending to repentance and a godly life.
               
                  ANd now that I haue ſhewed, that true godlines commeth  from faith which iuſtifieth, and that the one cannot bee without the other; and that with the ſame faith wee muſt beleeue all other his promiſes alſo, made to his children; and all doctrine that doth inſtruct vs to obedience: I will goe forward. Now therefore, to the end, the beautie of the godly life may bee ſeene in ſome ſort, and that the beleeuer may bee able to practiſe it, and know that hee doth ſo: I will, as I propounded, ſpeake of the heart: which is the ſecond generall head in this treatiſe, and the next to bee handled, according to the diuiſion made in the firſt chapter. And thus I will ſpeake of it: firſt ſhewing, that it muſt be renued and chaunged; and then (in  place fit) that it muſt be kept ſo afterwards: for both are neceſſarie to the beleeuer. And when he is reſolued to be guided by Gods word in all things, as he hath been taught before, and ſo to liue by faith, and then hath an heart fit to yeeld it ſelfe to do ſo: who doth not ſee, that the worke is in good forwardnes (to liue godlie) and (as wee ſay) by ſuch a good entrance and beginning, halfe at an end?
               
                  
                   Here therefore vnderſtand and know, that the heart which is the fountaine from whence the practiſe of godlines muſt growe and come,The heart the fountaine of godly life, must first be purged. ought to be purged and clenſed: and conſequently, the bodie it ſelfe, ought to be firſt made a fit inſtrument for the ſame (to the accompliſhing of that which is good, and to the well ordering of the life) in which two, conſiſteth the ſanctification of the whole man: We muſt thus be changed before we can will well, or liue well: euen as a filthie and vnſauorie veſſell muſt be well and thoroughly ſeaſoned, before it can be put to vſe and occupied: and we muſt hate ſinne with a deadly hatred, and haue the power of it abated in vs, and loue goodneſſe and righteouſneſſe, and be renued in them before we can  bring forth fruites of repentance and amendment of life. But to the end we may ſee it more neceſſarie, that this change and ſanctification of the heart ſhould be wrought, and alſo what an excellent grace and gift of God it is; it ſhall be meete to lay forth the nature and diſpoſition of the heart: what it is ſince the fall of our firſt parents in it ſelfe, and of it ſelfe, before there be any worke of grace in it, and before the moſt exquiſite cunning and workemanſhip of the holy Ghoſt in reforming and renuing thereof, be ſhewed vpon it. And when we haue ſeene into it, know we that as is the heart; ſo is the life,Like heart, like life. both before the clenſing and change of it, and after. And according to the prouerbe, like tree, like fruite: for a good man, out of the good treaſurie of his heart,
                  Matth. 12.35. 
                  
                  bringeth forth good things: and the wicked man out of the ill treaſurie of his heart, bringeth forth euill things. This heart of man therefore muſt be good, and holy, and pure: it muſt be brought to yeeld, and ſubmit it ſelfe willinglie to better inſtruction, then naturallie it hath been acquainted with; that ſo it may bring forth fruite of amendment of life, and be readilie diſpoſed vnto euery good worke.
               But (as I ſayd) that men may not deceiue themſelues, who for the moſt part being ignorant about the heart, and the nature and properties of it, doe thinke that they may liue godlie, whatſoeuer corruption doth infect the heart; it ſhall be requiſite to know it better, and how all godlineſſe is but fantaſie  or hypocriſie, vnto the heart be reformed and changed. We muſt haue it clenſed and well ſeaſoned, and afterwards kept ſo, that it may be no longer an enemie to vs, or an hinderer of vs, in any of our good actions: but contrarilie, that by the helpe of it, we may dailie goe forward in well doing; at leaſt by ſtriuing, or after a repulſe, to returne againe. For this we are to know,The heart is a dungeon of iniquitie. that the heart of man before it be emptied, is a dungeon of iniquitie: before it be inlightened, a denne of darkenes, before it be clenſed, a puddle of filthineſſe: and that which Saint Iames ſpeaketh of the tongue, may much more be ſaid of the heart, that before it be tamed, it is an vnruly euill.
                  Iam. 3.8.
               
               If then ſuch an heart be the guide of our life, how monſtrous, and loathſome  muſt that life needes be? Hereby therefore it is cleere, that the heart muſt be purged of this corruption, as I haue ſaid: it muſt be changed from this nature and cuſtome; that when any departing from ſinne ſhould be, or any dutie to God offered, this may not be a pulbacke, and hinderer, but ready to giue conſent thereunto; and a furtherer thereof, in ſubduing the corruption of the ſame, from time to time. For who ſeeth not that this were otherwiſe a toile moſt tedious, yea, a thing altogether impoſſible; as oft as we

ſhould goe about any good dutie, then to haue our heart to ſeeke (as they ſay) and to be ſet in frame:A ſimile. as if an husbandman ſhould alwaies be driuen to mend and ſharpen his plough ſhare, when, and as oft as he tilleth the ground; or a Carpenter to grinde his tooles ſo oft as he goeth to worke: but much more, ſeeing the heart is backward, and not willing, and ready to any good thing, yea rather rebellious againſt it; muſt not all of neceſſitie the more prepoſterouſlie goe forward?A view of the filthines of the heart. But to proceede, more particularlie to anatomize and deſcribe the heart, and in few words to ſay much of it; we muſt know that it is ouerſpread with vnbeleefe, deceitfull, vnruly, looſe, hardned, wilfull, vaine, idle, blockiſh, cold in goodnes, and without ſauour, and ſoone wearie of it: high, big, proude, diſdainefull, ſelfe-louing, vncharitable, vnkind, conceited, impatient, angry, fierce, enuious, reuenging, vnmercifull, froward and tuchie, churliſh, ſullen, medling, worldly, filthie and vncleane, louing pleaſure more than godlineſſe; vnprofitable, repining, earthlie, greedie, or couetous; idolatrous, ſuperſtitious, vnreuerent, hypocriticall, diſobedient to betters, iudging raſhlie, hardlie reconciled: and in a word, prone to all euill: is it not then hardlie tamed? Which muſt needes be graunted, when the moſt part of people vnder the Goſpell, doe either not know, nor ſuſpect this, and therefore are farre from abilitie to hunt theſe corruptions out: and they who know it, doe yet loue them as their owne fleſh, and therefore be neuer the neerer to the purging out, or remouing of them.
               
               It is not without cauſe therefore, that Salomon ſaith, there are ſeuen abominations in the heart,
                  Ierem. 17.9. that is many. And Ieremy in like manner affirmeth, that the heart of man is deceitfull and deepe aboue all things: who can gage or ſearch it out? Euen I the Lord (ſaith God) am the ſearcher or finder out of it. Therefore alſo our Sauiour to ſet out the nature of the heart, ſaith: Out of the heart come euill thoughts,
                  Matth. 15.19. 
                  murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, falſe testimonies, ſlaunders. Muſt it not then needes be a filthie ſinkehole, out of which ſo vnſauorie ſtinkes doe ariſe? So that it may truly be ſaid, the heart of man is euill aboue meaſure: and in the kindes thereof, in number as the ſparkles that come out of the furnace; and as the ſand of the ſea ſhore, which is innumer
                     ••
                  le. And what ſhould I  ſay more? The time would be too ſhort to proceed further, and I ſhall haue occaſion, in another place, to ſpeake of the ſame. But by the way, this is worthilie to be lamented, that where the Scripture is ſo plentifull in deſcribing and ſetting out of the manifold and foule defilements of the heart, that men are ſo blind in vnderſtanding them; and ſee ſo little, when the holy Ghoſt bewraieth ſo much. And hereof it is, that they feare ſo little danger, and ſuſpect ſo little hurt to be comming towards them thereby, in the middeſt of ſo great and iuſt cauſe to feare and ſuſpect both. For who is merrier or more ſecure, than he that hath moſt ſinne in his heart to witnes againſt him? Which being ſo, who doth not ſee that ſuch a draft-houſe is to be emptied, and that  much grace and water of life had neede to be poured in, to ſweeten and ſeaſon it, before it be fit to be imployed to good vſe, and to be made a temple for the holy Ghost to dwell in, and a good treaſurie, that out of it, a good man may bring forth good things? Yea, an admirable thing it is, that it ſhould euer be brought to good.
               
                  What the purging of ſinne is.But to go forward now, to ſhew what this purging of the heart is, and how

                   it ſhould be purged. For the firſt, we muſt know, that it is a renuing in holines and righteouſnes by little and little, of all true beleeuers, they being firſt deliuered and freed from the tyranie of ſinne, and feare of damnation: for a man is no ſooner ſet at libertie from the feare of euerlaſting death, and the wrath of God, but he is alſo ſenſiblie drawne to let goe his holde, and intereſt in ſinne, which before he had; and feeleth the ſame to receiue a deadly wound in him, and the power thereof to be abated and crucified: And ſo, findeth that verified in him which the Apoſtle ſetteth downe to the Romans; that is to ſay, How can ſuch as are dead to ſinne, liue any longer therein?
                  Rom. 6.2. And withall, he is quickened and ſenſiblie ſtirred vp to a loue and earneſt deſire of  things holy and heauenlie, euen that he may pleaſe God;Epheſ. 4.23. 
                  and being renued in the ſpirit of his minde, doth affect and long after righteouſneſſe and true holines. And herein conſiſteth this purging and changing of the heart, which I now ſpeake of, and ſuch a thing it is, ſhewing it ſelfe by an hatred of ſinne, and a delighting in goodnes. Which no power nor will of man can effect: for it is an enemie thereto.
               And although this new change be not ſuch, as that it is able to beare down all the old corruption, that raigned in him ſometime, and to intertaine holy things only: yet it is a mightie alteration, that goodnes hath any place in him in truth, which was before ſo farre from him, and ſinne and euill hunted out  in will, and deſire, which alone bare ſway before.He that dieth in this weake estate is ſaued. For there is (without queſtion) the firſt fruite of the ſpirit, which will afterwards bring forth an increaſe of the ſame for continuance: which worke of grace and ſanctification (if he in whom it is wrought ſhould not liue to ſhew forth any further fruite of it) is an infallible marke of Gods election and loue towards him, and can no more be in a reprobate, then light can be in the bellie and bowels of the earth. But if any will demaunde, what becommeth of this grace in time;Holy deſires be oft times quenched in the beleeuer. becauſe it is too cleere, that it is not only dimmed, but euen choaked alſo in many, in whom it began to ſhine and giue light: ſuch muſt vnderſtand, that God doth ſtrengthen and continue this grace of holines and ſanctification,  as it is nouriſhed, eſteemed, and ſet by; and as men do ſtir it vp in themſelues by asking after it, when they miſſe it, and prouoke themſelues to pray for ſuch good affections, and cannot be ſatisfied without them. As Dauid did often, ſometime one way, and ſometime another: Why art thou heauie, O my ſoule,
                  Pſalm. 43.5. 
                  and why art thou ſo diſquieted within me? Alſo,Pſalm. 103.1. 
                  praiſe thou the Lord (O my ſoule) and all that is within thee, praiſe his holy name. And thus, and by the like means, we ſhall cheriſh our ſparkles, which (as the fire is blowne vp with bellowes) ſhall not ordinarilie faile vs, not be extinguiſhed in vs, eſpeciallie for any long time, (except in time of temptation, or when melancholy oppreſſeth vs) vnleſſe through our default and folly. Thus vnderſtand what it is,How the heart is purged. to haue the heart  purged and changed, that thereby it may be fit to ſet vpon a godlie life.
               The next thing is, how this is done; and how it commeth to paſſe, that men after they haue receiued the grace of iuſtifying faith, doe finde and perceiue in themſelues ſuch an alteration from that which was before? euen as if a benumming colde ſhould be on the ſuddaine turned into a glowing and burning heate. I ſay, this is the proper and wonderfull worke of God:By the power of the holy Ghost. who mortifying our worldly luſts and euill deſires in vs by his holy ſpirit, doth reforme

vs, and create this holines and ſanctification in vs. He it is, S. Luke ſaith, 
                  that purifieth our hearts.
                  Act. 15.9. He kindleth good affections, and ſubdueth the contrarie in vs. There is no other beſides him in heauen, who can worke it: much leſſe on earth that can ſet his hand to it. Which if that man of ſinne had duly conſidered, he would not haue arrogated to himſelfe a greater worke then it, (which alſo is inſeparable from it) namely, the authoritie of forgiuing ſinnes. The Lord (I ſay) by his holie ſpirit, it is, who ſtirreth vp in our hearts godlie motions and good deſires: namely, of knowledge, good gouernment, feare of him, communion with him and his people, the deſire of ſpirituall reioycing, and ſtrength againſt infernall foes, and ſuch like: which good affections when they be kindled in vs, hee ſuffereth not to vaniſh away, but teacheth vs  to feed and nouriſh them by reading, meditation, & prayer. And the ſpirit of the Lord which raiſeth vp and worketh in vs theſe holy affections, is therfore deſcribed by theſe moſt excellent titles: for it is called the ſpirit of wiſedome, ſtrength,
                  Eſai. 11.2. 
                  feare of the Lord, &c.
               
               
                  This is at the firſt turning of a ſinner to GodAnd this he doth to his deare children, when they are firſt brought to this happie chaunge (euen in their firſt entring into the eſtate of grace) to the end they may loathe, as ſtinking garments, the old cuſtome, in which they had long lien; I meane, the vnſauourie draffe of their owne cogitations, deſires, and luſts of their hearts: the leaſt daunger whereof, was this, that they deceiued them. Theſe, when they ſee what varietie there is of better matter to ſeaſon  and occupie their mindes and hearts withall,A ſimile. they doe ſhunne and flie from, as one that had eſcaped the loathſome priſon, doth crie out when hee muſt be brought backe to it againe. And although I denie not, but that they muſt hold and retaine the ſauour and ſmell of their old filthines and profanenes, which in times paſt, as bands and chaines, did keepe them in captiuitie: yet is not their condition,Euen this is a gracious work. for all that, to be counted meane and little worth, becauſe they haue not full deliuerance from it, but happie and highly to bee iudged of, in that they haue obtained deliuerance in part, and doe ſee how they may be partakers of a farre better.
               I ſpeake now but of the beginning of a Chriſtians change, when hee can  diſcerne no more in himſelfe then this, namely, that hee hath with faith vnfained, an heart ſanctified, and purified from his naturall corruption and wicked diſpoſition. And without regard of the fruite hereof, euen the whole worke of Chriſtianitie, which ſhall follow this happie beginning (then the which, he deſireth and longeth after nothing more) the weake Chriſtian, that hath his part in this, thinkes himſelfe, euen for this exceedingly indebted to God. True it is, that no man is to ſtay and abide in this eſtate, but is to proceede further, euen to repentance, which commeth from it; as hereafter ſhal be ſeene.VVe muſt not ſtand at a ſtay in this. But yet ſeeing the clenſing & purging of the hart, at the firſt conuerſion of a ſinner, is a diſtinct worke of the ſpirit, and in man but the beginning  of all the worke of Chriſtianitie, which ſhall follow it; I would not paſſe it ouer in ſilence: and the rather I ſay ſo, becauſe it is but darkly and confuſedly ſeene into and diſcerned. And although it bee but as the graine of Mustard ſeede, in compariſon of the tree it ſelfe, to the full growth and perfect age in Chriſt: yet is it in poſſibilitie, nay in certaine and ſure hope, euen the ſame, and alreadie of the nature of it; and therfore hath part of the reward alſo. And

                   now it tarieth but for further building vp in knowledge and grace, that ſo it may appeare to other, as it is in it ſelfe, the eſtate of a regenerate perſon, and new borne vnto God.
               But for al this which I haue ſaid of this matter, namely, both what this chāge of the heart is, and how it is wrought by Gods ſpirit, yet one thing is wanting, which the diligent reader will deſire to know: That is, why the Scripture ſaith, that although it be God which purifieth the heart, yet that it is aſcribed to faith; their hearts were purified by faith, ſaith S. Luke: And S.Act. 15.9. 1. Ioh. 3.5. 
                  Iohn (which is little difference) attributes it to hope, ſaying, he that hath this hope, purgeth himſelfe: To this I will ſpeake ſomewhat at large, ſeeing it is a point of great moment  and weight. It is true indeede, that our hearts are made new,Hart is purged by faith. and purged by faith: wee knowing thereby our ſelues to be made the beloued of God. For it is faith in the pretious promiſes of God which the holy Ghoſt worketh in vs (whereby wee flie the corruptions that are in the world through luſt) and which purgeth the heart,Act. 15.9. Act. 26.18. caſting out the draffe and filthines which was in vs. And vntill our minds be thus inlightened that wee ſee cleerely that our ſinnes are forgiuen vs, and we vnited to Chriſt, and made one with him, and partakers of the graces of his ſpirit; wee neuer come out of our ſelues, neither haue any deſire to heauenly things: but our wiſedome is earthly, diuelliſh,
                  Iam. 3.15. 
                  and ſenſuall.
               
               
                   For we being not yet aſſured of the happines of heauen,VVorldly delights ſo ſought for, becauſe the heauenly are not felt. doe know no better delights, then our blind and deceitfull hearts do dreame of here on earth. The which though wee ſee by experience, that they are ſhort and momentanie (ſeeing they who haue greateſt part in them, cannot keepe them long) yet we, who haue leaſt part in them, will neuer forgoe the loue of them, vntill we ſee how we may certainly inioy better (which may cleerely bee ſeene in the poorer ſort of people deſtitute of grace, that although they haue no wealth, yet it doth their hearts good to talke of it, in token that it is the thing which they loue beſt of all). And hereof it is, that many thouſands, through ignorance, paſſe their time in ſport, play, paſtime and pleaſure: accounting that  the onely life that is to bee wiſhed, to liue deliciouſly for a ſeaſon. Others,Iam. 5.5. in quarrelling, contention, murmuring, debate, ſuites, and accuſing of their neighbours: The moſt tolerable, and honeſt courſe ſeemeth to be the ſpending of mens yeeres, in, and about the worldly goods. And thus are men occupied, although one ſort diuerſly from another, yet all to bee pitied, ſeeing they walke amiſſe: I ſpeake of ſuch as know no better. Notwithſtanding, no one of theſe can be brought to miſlike his courſe, or to turne his hart and delight from it, vntill he be aſſured of a farre better portion. No, although wee bring tidings hereof vnto them, ſo as they beleeue that it is true, and haue great liking of the ſame: yet, till they ſee that it may be their owne, they will  not ſo much as goe about the diſpoſſeſſing of ſuch vnſauourie and fond luſts from their hearts.Hebr. 11.6. Hoſ. 1.10. But when they beleeue that God is a plentifull rewarder of all that ſeeke him, and that they who were once no people, are now freely made his people, and beloued of him, which were ſometime not beloued: then their hearts turne, and aske after him: then they deſire to know more of his will and mind: and repent that they were ſo ignorant before, and that ſo long time; and that they drunke vp the draffe of vnſauourie puddles, euen deceitfull pleaſures, when

they might haue drunke of the ſweet ceſternes which were able to refreſh  their ſoules with the water of life. And although there are many doubtings before they be ſetled in this perſwaſion, & aſſured of better delights: yet they are no ſooner reſolued of their ſaluation,So ſoone as any are aſſured of Gods fauour▪ ſo ſoone are their harts changed. and what liberties they haue by Chriſt, whereby they are made happie (which how it is attained, hath been ſhewed in the former treatiſe) but ſo ſoone are their euill harts and affections changed, ſo farre as the iudgement is inlightened, and they contrarily affected to that ſin, which they liked before: as ſeeing now cauſe ſufficient why they ſhould doe ſo; for they receiue from Chriſt by his ſpirit both will and power thereunto.Gal. 5.6. For faith worketh by loue, and ſo cauſing them to loue God, and for his ſake their brethren, it maketh them alſo readie to doe any thing  for him, whom they loue; and therfore to auoide and caſt off all allurements to euill, and ſinne, which he cannot abide.
               
                  Faith purgeth only as the inſtrument.So that it is faith which purifieth and changeth the heart, not as the chiefe and higheſt cauſe; for that is the holie Ghoſt (as hath been ſaid) which at the ſame time, when it aſſureth vs of our reconciliation with God, doth worke this change and ſanctification alſo: which is a purging of vs from the corruption of our owne nature,Col. 3.9. and an induing of vs with a new qualitie, and diſpoſition of minde, whereby wee begin to will well, and ſincerely to goe about the things which pleaſe God:Rom. 6.4, and both by the merits and power of Chriſts death and reſurrection. Which I do aduiſedly mention againe briefly, for the  weaks ſake, who ſhall (the point being ſomwhat hard to conceiue) the better vnderſtand the one by the other. And theſe two, faith and a pure heart, cleere and appeaſe the conſcience from accuſation and checkes, and worke moſt ſweete peace and holy ſecuritie, Rom. 5.1. For from faith and a pure heart ariſeth a good conſcience, that is, a quiet and excuſing conſcience (euen as true loue to God and to our brethren proceedeth from both.1. Tim. 1.5.) And theſe do ſet on work the will to hate ſinne, which before it loued: and contrariwiſe cauſe the affections, as feare, hope, loue, ioy, &c. to be well ordered, in ſuch ſort, as the whole man is carried thereby (euen as the chariot on the wheeles) agreeably: and the heart being thus renued, doth worke that glorious repentance  in vs (a thing much in ſpeech amongſt profeſſors of the truth, but little in vſe or ſet by) being both a purpoſe of the heart, Act. 11.23. an inclination in the will,
                     True repentance. 1. Theſſ. 5.23. 2. Cor. 7.1. Col. 3.9.10.15 Pſal. 119. verſ. 44, 57. and a continuall endeuouring in the life Act. 24. verſ. 16. to caſt off all euill, and to obey God both inwardly and outwardly, according to the meaſure of knowledge in euery one: For when we are ſanctified, wee are deliuered from the tyrannie which ſinne had ouer vs, into the libertie of the ſonnes of God, to walke righteouſly, and obediently; that we receiuing new increaſe of grace from Chriſt daily,Rom. 6.2. 1. Pet. 2.24. may hold faſt the ſame libertie vnto our end.
               This I haue ſaid, ſeeing it maketh way to the renouncing and forſaking of  ſinfull life, and to the practiſing of the contrary (of the which more ſhall be ſaid anon) it ſo neceſſarily following the change of the heart: and for that the reader may the better ſee, that if he can finde his heart to goe with this doctrine, and that he hath a part in it; he may be aſſured, that all that I ſhall ſpeak of hereafter, being of the ſame kinde, and neceſſarily depending vpon it, ſhal the more eaſily be receiued of him to his ſingular comfort: and that all men

                   may ſee (whatſoeuer the wicked world doth glorie of) that without this effectuall clenſing and purging the heart, there is no ſound repentance,VVithout the change of the heart, there is no amendment of life. and currant and true fruites of amendement to be found amongſt them.
               And this though all true Chriſtians cannot expreſſe, as I haue ſet it down: yet the moſt ſimple, when they heare mention made of it, can affirme,The ſimpleſt Chriſtian finds ſome meaſure of theſe. that they finde it ſo, to their no ſmall conſolation and contentment.
               Now I hauing ſhewed that the heart, and conſequently the whole man muſt neceſſarily be changed and purged, before good life can come from it;Prooues that this change is wrought by faith. and wherein this chaunge conſiſteth; and how it is wrought: I will returne to this laſt point, from which a little I digreſſed, that by faith in Chriſts promiſes,  and by ſpirituall vnion with him this change is wrought. To this end (as I ſaid) S. Peter doth plainly lay foorth this truth vnto vs, that the heart is purged by faith, when he ſaith: By the pretious promiſes which wee haue from God,
                  1. Pet. 1.4. opened.
                   (and they are made ours by faith) we are made partakers of the diuine nature, or the graces of the holie Ghoſt, by whoſe heauenly power, we are able to flie the corruption, and naughtines both of our hearts and liues, which is the principall let of our obeying God. And therefore that corruption being ſubdued in vs by a ſtronger power then it ſelfe, we haue libertie to goodnes; whereas before we were in bondage: And not only ſo, but the nature and qualities of our harts being changed, we are no more they, who we were before; but are led contrary  to our former courſe. The which ſelfeſame thing, though not in the ſame words, S. Paul by a moſt apt ſimilitude ſetteth downe, ſaying:Rom. 7.5.6. opened.
                   
                  When we were in the fleſh, the affections of ſinne which were by the law, had force in our members, to bring foorth fruite vnto death: but now we are deliuered from the law (he being dead of whom we were holden downe) to ſerue in the newnes of ſpirit, not in the oldnes of the letter. Here he deſcribing the firſt eſtate of life, wherein all liue, diuelliſh, and vnrenued, and ſetting as contrarie to it the regenerate and happie eſtate of Gods children after they be changed, maketh this compariſon: That as our corrupt hearts like an husband ſtirred vp euill deſires in vs, hauing the powers both of minde and bodie as the wife at commaundement, and both  theſe together brought foorth all ſorts of euill workes to our deſtruction: ſo the ſpirit, that is, the power of Chriſt being giuen vs, ſtirring vp holie affections in vs, is as an husband, and hath the powers both of minde and bodie (as the wife) at commaundement, and both theſe together bring foorth all ſorts of good workes (as children) to our ſaluation. Whereby it is manifeſt, that although there be nothing in vs, as of ourſelues to do the will of God, and to bring foorth fruites of amendement; yet God, who purgeth the heart by faith, putteth alſo a new nature into it, and maketh vs loue, and delight in the good and holy things which before wee loathed; and to loathe the euill which we once loued.
               
                   And for this purpoſe, to make more full this matter, which I haue entred into, which of the ſimple (I know) is hardly conceiued; that no exception may be taken againſt it, conſider what our Sauiour ſaith: he compareth himſelfe to a vine, and his beloued to branches of the ſame. To teach vs,Iohn 15.1.2. that as the branch beareth no fruite if it grow not in the vine, but being cut off, withereth: ſo if we be not knit to him by faith, wee can beare no fruite. But as the branch abiding in the vine ſucketh ſappe, and draweth iuyce from it, and is

fruitfull: ſo all faithfull, and true beleeuers receiue ſtrength from him, and  grace,Epheſ. 4.16. by the which they crucifie their owne lusts, reſiſt their corrupt will; and ſo bring forth fruite according to the will of God. For from him the whole bodie gathereth increaſe fit for it: who in manner of the ſoule, quickeneth all the members.Gal. 1.4. Luk. 1.74. And to this end, Chriſt wrought our ſaluation, and gaue himſelfe for our ſinnes, to deliuer vs from this preſent euill world. And from him we haue receiued a minde to know God:
                  1. Iohn 5.20. Luk. 7. Pſalm. 50. Rom. 6.6.11. an heart to loue him: a will to pleaſe him; and ſtrength alſo in ſome ſenſible meaſure to obey him, as he ſaith: Know ye, that ye are dead to ſinne, that is, ſo made partakers of the vertue and power of Chriſt, that naturall corruption hath loſt her vigour, and force, to bring forth moſt bitter fruites:By this change, the beleeuer ſenſibly diſcerneth his preſent ſtate from his former. and alſo, that ye are aliue to God, that is, haue  ſtrength to liue holilie through Ieſus Chriſt: which grace although it be not perfect, yet it is ſuch, and that in the weakeſt beleeuer, that there is apparant difference by it, from his former eſtate; and ſuch as whereby a godly life is not irkeſome to vs, as before, but ſweete and pleaſant.
               
                  The weake troubled, that this change is ſo ſmall.That which moſt troubleth the weake about this matter is, that this change of the heart, and renewing thereof, is ſo hardly ſeene, and ſo meanely felt within them; that they cannot ſatisfie themſelues in wiſhing, and deſiring to be more changed: And although before, their open groſſe faults did not accuſe them, yet now their inward corruptions doe diſquiet them: now idle motions and vaine thoughts, and fantaſies much trouble them: in their praying, reading, and hearing, they cannot be ridde of them: now they feare that they beleeue not (euen after they haue receiued to beleeue with ſtaiednes of minde and peace) and all becauſe they want the feeling comfort of their faith oftentimes: their vnkindnes to God much greeueth them, and beſides, their vnfruitfulneſſe: to be ſhort, they haue many accuſations againſt themſelues.Yet this is a note that their ſtate is good. All which duly conſidered, doe teſtifie in deed another eſtate of their minds, then was before; though through their weakenes, and the diuels malice, they feare hereby ſometimes, that they are not renued, and changed at al. But that is not to be maruailed at, for as much as they were ſo lately drowned in ſinne, and had no delight in goodnes: it muſt needs be ſtrange vnto them  to be perſwaded, that they are in any better caſe, then they were; ſeeing the motions of ſinne doe trouble them now, which did not before, and they haue not skill nor ſtrength enough to thinke, that it is a good ſigne of their welfare to be grieued for them (as it is in deede) but they thinke it a ſigne of their miſerie, that they haue them at all. And yet in that they doe ſo earneſtly ſeeke to be better ſtaied, euen from idle and vaine wandrings, and labour to ſee their ſpirituall pouertie, and their inward corruption of ſelfe loue, priuie pride, diſtruſt, &c. they may haue cleere teſtimonie, that they (though but in part) are truely reformed.
               
                  This change of the heart, is the foundation of a godly life.And this change of the heart, they haue neede to be perſwaded of, who  deſire to liue chriſtianly (which ſhall be no hard matter for them to proue, if they compare themſelues with that which I ſaid, about this matter, and finde it ſo with them) but otherwiſe they ſhall but coldly goe about any ſeruice of God whatſoeuer: this pure heart (I ſay) comming from faith vnfained, muſt be as a ſtrong foundation laid in them, vpon which only a godly life can be builded, that they may not neede to feare, that they are of a double heart: for

                   God abhorreth that in his ſeruice, and doth not accept the heart by halues, nor to be ſerued by halues, as Saul did, 1. Sam. 15.3. but will haue the whole to be giuen vnto him. He will not be loued a little:Note. for that is neither beſeeming his greatnes, neither fit for them to offer, who receiue ſo great good things at his hands. And as none can doe this, but ſuch as ſhall ſee ſufficient cauſe hereof; namely, that they are infinitely indebted to him for his bountifulnes towards them; ſo will he, that ſuch ſhall make him their chiefeſt delight, and treaſure, as other doe the world; and therefore to account it no tediouſneſſe, nor toile to labour for it, till they haue obeyed the voice which ſaith,
                     Prouer. 13.26 Jf men at first gaue God their hearts, then ſhould their whole life be better. 
                  Giue me thine heart, my ſonne. And if all men did at the firſt imbracing of the Goſpell,  thus giue their hearts wholy to the Lord (as all they doe who vnfainedly beleeue in him) then ſhould we ſee it a common thing to haue God honoured in the world, his true religion, and worſhip aduaunced, and there ſhould be no ſuch difficultie to pull men out of their filthie and ſinfull liues, but they ſhould be as readie to ſeeke it, as the godlieſt Preacher is, in Gods name to vrge and require it. But ſeeing that will not be, let them, which ſee better, what the infinitnes of Gods fauour is towards them,Not a peece of the heart. giue him their hearts againe, as they are commaunded, not a peece of their heart, but their whole heart: Euen as the burnt offering in ſacrifices, was not in part the Lords, another part the Prieſts, or his who did offer it, but it was wholy the Lords: ſo  God will haue thoſe, whom he maketh reckoning of,Leuit. 1.13. to turne to him with their whole heart, that ſo (as farre as their knowledge leadeth them) they may be at his commaundement: not halting, not flitting, not giuing him their ſeruice ſometime, and at other times refuſing and holding backe by ſuch occaſions, as ſhall fall out; as for their owne pleaſure, profit, for mens friendſhip and fauour, or ſuch like: for ſo doing, they ſhall neuer be fit to renounce either their will, or luſts, when they are inticed to euill by them, but muſt yeeld, and giue place to them; which kind of vnſauorie and fickle ſeruice God abhorreth. But if we freely giue ouer our ſelues wholy to God, and be reſolued to be guided by him in all things, and to this end, waxe better  ſetled daily in the aſſured perſwaſion of Gods fauour (which is better then all things beſides) ſo that we may alway ſee cauſe why we doe ſo; then and not before, ſhall we haue good euidence that our hearts are changed from their old cuſtome in ſinne, and renued. And although men will long halt,Many hardly brought to giue their whole heart, therefore giue ouer. and driue off, before they will be brought to this, hoping that leſſe may ſerue, and that they may pleaſe God without all this adoe, (as accounting it too hard) yet muſt they be brought to this, when all is done; or elſe they ſhall ſee, that all is in vaine that they doe beſides, what faire ſhewes and colours ſoeuer they ſet vpon their doings.
               For want of this ſoundnes, and through purging of the heart, as the people  of Iſrael made many turnings to God, when he puniſhed them,Pſalm. 78.35. but euer turned backe againe from their couenants, and promiſes of amendment:Iudg. 2.11. euen ſo at this day, there are many vowes to God of holy life, and purpoſes of repentance, but none of them hold, nor take any good effect, though ſome in longer, ſome in ſhorter time, doe vaniſh away, and come to nothing: becauſe men goe to worke in their moode, and haſtilie, not ſufficiently conſidering how weake ſuch foundations are to beare vp ſo great, and weightie buildings,

as the whole courſe of their liues to be holilie paſſed. Iudas his preaching  and working of miracles, (who was companion with the other Apoſtles:) Ahabs haſtie repentance in haire cloth, and aſhes: yea, Iehu his zeale for the Lord of hoaſts: with all other ſuch ſhewes, as for a time, in the eyes of men ſeemed to be great godlines,1. Sam. 15.4. together with Sauls ſpeedie executing of Gods commaundements againſt the Amalekites: they had a time to be bewraied, and brought to light to the world, to haue been, either meere hypocriſie and fained godlines, or ſuddaine and raſh attempts, or without roote from the heart, euen the beſt of them.
               Therefore firſt let this be knowne of vs, that before the euill life can be renounced, God purgeth and maketh cleane the heart, that ſo it may be fit for  ſo great a worke. But ſeeing the heart is falſe aboue meaſure, and they ſooneſt deceiue themſelues, who doe leaſt ſuſpect, and feare danger; let it thoroughly be weighed, which hath before been ſet downe: that there is deadly hate of ſinne and corruption, and that with much ſtriuing againſt it, with gripes of griefe when it preuaileth, and contrarilie, great ioy, when it is ſubdued: this (I ſay) is in him,Ezech. 36.25, 26, 27. whoſe heart is truly renued.
            
            
               CHAP. 5. Of the renouncing of all ſinne: which is the first effect of a renued  heart in the true beleeuer.
               
                  We muſt be changed before our liues can be amended.
                  NOw the heart being renued and changed, muſt be kept ſo: but of that afterwards, in more fit place. In the meane ſeaſon, I will paſſe to the effect of this clenſing and change of the heart, and ſhew what worke it bringeth forth in him that is thus renued and changed. For I hauing ſpoken of the clenſing of it, as I purpoſed, namely, that it muſt, with the whole man, be changed and renued, before the life can be amended; it followeth,What the life of the beleeuer is. that I ſhould now further proceede to this; that is, to the deſcription  of the chriſtian life, whereby I meane true repentance; or the life of the beleeuer, as I propounded: which is the building that muſt be ſet on that foundation: and that conuerſation, which commeth from the forenamed change; and is a renouncing of all ſinne, and a care to walke in a new life, (to glorifie God thereby, euen vnto death) as was ſaid before. Concerning which, more particularlie (as I promiſed) this firſt is to be marked, that (the godly life ſtanding in theſe two parts: that is, the renouncing of ſinne, and practiſing of godly duties) all vngodlines,All vngodlines, not ſome onely is to be renounced. and not ſome part or kinde only, is renounced of the true beleeuer, and of him who will ſoundly profeſſe to liue godly: and they are brought to this power and grace, who truſt in the liuing  God, and are indeede godly, that they are out of loue and fauour with the whole courſe of iniquitie, which was their only delight, and pleaſure before. They are ſo changed from that which they were, that now they hauing taſted of heauen and happines (being become the beloued of the Lord:) they freely and willingly bid farewell to all the follies of their former times, and the vnlawfull liberties, (with the which they were deceiued) at leaſt in affection

                   and deſire, as their frailtie doth permit: for they know (who haue ſo farre been inſtructed) that they cannot loath ſome ſinne and loue other; that were but halting: but as he who taught them that they ſhould not commit adulterie, taught alſo they ſhould not lie, nor ſteale: in like manner they, who are taught of him, doe ſo iudge, and therefore diſclaime the one and the other. For how can they loath one ſinne, and loue another? which were to do contraries? And as pure and ſweete water, and filthie cannot come from one fountaine: ſo neither doth the heart reformed, ſend foorth good and euill. So that as one in priſon hardly dieted, feedeth with great appetite and greedines vppon ſcrappes and parings, and is well at eaſe if he may fill his bellie with them;The beleeuer loatheth his former filthie life. 
                   who yet when he is ſet at libertie, and conuerſant with his friends, where hee findeth varietie and plentie, cannot fall to his old fare againe; but wondreth now, how he could finde ſauour in euery mans leauings: euen ſo it is with him who hath beſotted, and made drunken himſelfe with the deceitfull baits of ſinne, who if like a ſwine he may fill himſelfe with that which his heart deſireth, and his eye luſteth after, he is ſafe and hath what he would: but when he ſhall ſee his eſtate as in a glaſſe, how ſhamefull and daungerous it is, and hath but taſted of the heauenly priuiledges and liberties of a Chriſtian, he caſteth out that former draffe as vomite, and by no meanes can be brought to be in loue with it againe. Behold ſuch honour giueth God to his ſeruants,  that their old conuerſation wherein they liued ſometimes with the reſt of the world, and could by no meanes be drawne from it,Reuel. 3.9. they haue it in moſt vile account and deteſtation, and they which were of the ſynagogue of Sathan ſhall worſhip God among the faithfull. This is the power of faith (which hath changed their heart) that it is able to make him, who hath it, to ouercome, I ſay not, himſelfe, but euen the ſpirituall craftines, whereby the diuell deceiueth many thouſands, and euen the poyſoned baites and allurements of the world alſo.
               O power vnconquerable, and not to be matched!Power of faith, and gaine thereby. If there were any earthly ſtay or fleſhly hold in any ſort comparable to it (which is impoſſible) in  what price and reckoning ſhould it be had, think we? If there were any thing which at mens requeſt, could giue the life of their enemie into their hands, or helpe them with long life, or ſatisfie their deſire with abundance of wealth, and varietie of ſinfull pleaſure, oh how welcome ſhould that be? But conſiſider (O ye ſeruants of God) and behold it, ye mightie and wiſe of the world, here is a greater, and another manner of treaſure, then all theſe: and bringeth other delights, then theſe are able. This ſuffereth you not to pine away with deſire of your enemies death: but it will make you as it did Dauid,
                  1. Sam. 24.10.11. to turne your hearts towards your greateſt enemie (which is true manhood and wiſedome) and to preſerue his life, when you had him in your hands to kill him.  And this ſuffereth not you to hunt about the world for varietie of ſinful pleaſures, as though there were no better vſe to bee made of the time, which is ſo pretious: but this will make you (with Moſes) to renounce them when yee might haue them, and to finde greateſt pleaſure in doing ſo,Heb. 11.24. and yet in forgoing them, to thinke your ſelues plentifully rewarded.Heb. 11.6.
               
               Finally, this will not ſuffer you to fret and to be vnquiet in thinking vpon the day of death, and to put the remembrance of it farre from you by wiſhing

long life: but it will make you ſigh and groane to be out of your life, and with  
                  Paul to account it a priſon to liue in the bodie ſtill:
                  2. Cor. 5.3. and as the Preacher ſaith, to reckon the day of death when you muſt liue here no longer,Eccleſ. 7.1. 
                  better then the day of birth, which is the beginning of life. O ye men of this world! if ye can tell vs of greater commodities, and tidings of better things then theſe, and aſſure vs how we may come by them, wee will forſake and leaue all, and reioyce with you:Vanitie of worldly ioyes. If ye cannot, but rather your beſt things are thoſe which I haue ſpoken of alreadie; namely, great riches, pleaſures, your enemies death, and deſire of long life to your ſelues, the vanitie, vncertaintie, and danger of the which I haue ſet downe alreadie;1. Timot. 3. then renounce you all that ye cannot ſafely keepe; and reioyce with vs: doe but taſte and ſee how good the Lord is: and when you  ſee what is beſt, imbrace it: or els I will pronounce the ſaying of the Prophet againſt you: which in time ſhall moſt ſurely finde you out, and take holde of you,Act. 13.41. although you hide your ſelues from it. Behold, and wonder, and vaniſh away: for I will worke a worke in your daies, that if a man tell you the truth, ye ſhall not beleeue it.
               
               More might be ſaid of this point, but the treatiſe is too long: now I will returne againe to ſhew that the beleeuing Chriſtian doth renounce the ſinfull courſe,1. Ioh. 5.19. which all the world beſides lieth and walloweth in though ſome more then others) who, as I haue ſhewed, that he renounceth al kinds of wickednes: ſo hee doth it not in ſome good moode onely, neither crieth out of  his old conuerſation,He renounceth ſinne in good aduiſednes, and not in ſome good mood onely. Hoſ. 14.9. Epheſ. 4.24.
                   when he ſeeth ſhame or daunger approch, he doth not (I ſay) then onely ſignifie his miſlike of it; but vpon good deliberation, hee maketh proteſtation no more to haue to doe with it: as Ephraim was counſelled to ſay, being called to repentance: What haue I to doe with Idols, which yet before had been her glorie? So whatſoeuer others doe, he is reſolued to forſake it: and caſteth off all ſuch behauiour, as a loathſome and ragged garment. And this is it which our Sauiour acquainted his Diſciples and followers with,Matth. 16.24. after that they had teſtified (Peter anſwering for the reſt) that they beleeued in him vnto ſaluation: He that will be my diſciple, muſt denie himſelfe, which is as much as vngodlines, and worldly luſts: for then onely indeed, and not till then, are men fit to heare of any ſuch thing; but doe keepe out of the ſound of ſuch doctrine,For want of this ſetled denying our ſelues, diuers neuer attaine true godlines. as much as they can: which is the cauſe at this day, that many profeſſing the Goſpell, yet neuer know what this meaneth, namely, to abſtaine from the filthie luſts which fight againſt their ſoule.
               
               Others which doe, and muſt needs heare ſuch things taught, that all Gods ſeruants doe, and ſhall diſclaime their liues paſt, and be aſhamed of them, it is pitie to thinke how coldly they receiue it. Some of them ſcorne it and mock, and ſo turne it off that way: ſome neuer conceiue it: ſome are often accuſed and made afraid to ſee their liues ſo farre off from that which is taught them, but ſoone forget it, becauſe they ſee the moſt of the world to doe ſo. Some  are euer in learning how to depart from euill, and to forſake their ſinnes: but the diuell holdeth them at a ſtay, that they neuer obtaine it, becauſe they goe about it prepoſterouſly, not yet beleeuing aſſuredly that they ſhall be ſaued. A few find the way, the Lord directing them to beleeue: which, others, who will not be taught of God how they ſhould beleeue, but by their owne reaſon, doe neuer reach vnto.
               
                  
                   But I haue not yet ſpoken of the worſt ſort of all, who heare this doctrine:VVorſt ſort of Proteſtants, who hate this doctrine. For they hate them who teach it, moſt deadly: they raile on them and diſgrace both them and it; and if they can, bring them into danger for teaching of it: although their pretence ſhall be another thing. Yea doubtleſſe (I ſay more) if by her Maieſties gracious authoritie and protection wee did it not, (which more preuaileth with them then the authoritie of God, from whom and in whoſe name wee teach it) their poyſoned and malicious ſtomackes would ſuffer none to walke peaceablie, who plainly and ſoundly publiſh it. Theſe therefore are farre from ouercomming themſelues: and yet whiles many ſorts in the world are thus farre off (as I haue ſhewed) from victorie  getting ouer their wicked hearts, and conſequently their liues;Gods ſeruants are at vtter defiance with the world. in the meane while the ſeruants of God, who know what the Lord hath done for their ſoules, renounce all inordinate deſires, and wicked actions: that they haue afterward no more fellowſhip with the vnfruitfull workes of darknes, howſoeuer they were ſometime chiefe doers in committing of them. So that as the true repentant people of Iuda, who had before offended God by Idolatrie, when they were brought captiues into Babylon, loathed the ſight of falſe gods: and as the good people, who repented by Ezra his preaching,Ezra. 10.12. did put away their ſtrange wiues, how deare ſoeuer they had been vnto them: and as Ephraim was heard complaining thus; I am aſhamed and bluſh,
                  Iere. 31.19. 
                  that now I beare the reproches  of my youth; ſo loathſome and weariſome it was vnto her: So are they who haue felt the ſaluation of God, at vtter defiance with the corruption of the world. And yet if this were done but for a time, or for companie,They leaue not ſin for a time, nor by conſtraint, or for company, feare, &c. or by conſtraint, and for feare, or any ſuch like corrupt end, it were not worth the ſpeaking of: for it is to be ſeene that after theſe ſorts, iniquitie is left of many: which kind of renouncing euill is little to their reioycing, and ſhalbe to their reproch, when it ſhall appeare in how euill manner they haue gone about it. I will not digreſſe, but this I muſt ſay: wee haue had too much experience in our parts, and (I doubt not) ſo haue others, of ſundrie perſons, who once accounted their teachers burning lights, and for a ſeaſon they receiued and reioyced in  them, caſting off their old courſe in the ſight of men readily: but ſome for companie of thoſe, who perſwaded them; ſome for feare of the woe which hung ouer them; and others for good report, as long as they could hold out: but theſe, becauſe they renounced them not, neither vpon good conſideration abiured them, they returned to them againe, as the dogge to his vomite: Whereas ſuch, who truly beleeuing do of conſcience renounce ſinne, doe as they in Nehemiah, came to the oath and the couenant,
                  Nehem. 10.29. Abiure ſinne.
                   
                  that they would neuer take againe their ſtrange wiues, which they were commaunded to put away, nor looke back to Sodome any more: nor (being waſhed) wallow againe in the mire.
                  Not our owne ſtrength. Which I ſay not as though their word, proteſtation, or oath, could alone by any  ſtrength thereof, performe ſuch a weightie vow: but becauſe therewith they duly conſidered what cauſe they had to doe ſo: how infinitly they were bound to God to diſcharge it: and how firmely they were perſwaded,Phil. 4.13. Rom. 9.31. that God would make them (who had made them willing alreadie) able alſo to doe it.
               
               And therefore although they ſaw not that helpe preſent, with eye; yet they hoped for that which they ſaw not, and therefore waited patiently for it, till it ſhould be granted them. And thus both faith and hope being nouriſhed

and ſtrengthened in them from day to day, they who are the Lords, do  finde both will to deſire, and ſtrength (though not perfect) to accompliſh, to the peace of their hearts, that which they haue ſet vpon and attempted; I meane a departing, and that with willingnes, from their former intemperance.Got with much ſtriuing. Indeede it muſt be graunted, that this is not obtained without much ſtriuing againſt the ſame, and that it will coſt many prayers to weaken ſuch corruption, and to hold ſuch rebellion vnder: of meditating vppon Gods promiſes alſo: much ſighing, and ſorrow to ſee what vnlikelihoods there are of ſubduing ſuch vnruly paſſions, through our owne manifold weakneſſes. But what then? Is it much, if ſo great a worke require our watching thereto, and diligence, when God is pleaſed that it be beſtowed that way, and without  it no common worke will goe forward?
                     No diſcouragement. Matth. 19.29. Or is that any iuſt cauſe of diſcouragement to vs, to take paine for ſo great profit, when we are ſure of it before we goe about it?
               
                  Faithfull alwaies preuaile not.But it may bee demaunded, doe God ſeruants alwaies preuaile in ſtriuing againſt euill? and obtaine that which they ſeeke thereby? for otherwiſe (ſay ſome) what diſcomfort and diſmaiednes will come thereby? I ſay, that as God oftē helpeth them, that they ouercome; ſo they are oft ouercome themſelues of their affections againſt which they ſtriue: but yet they haue learned not to be troubled at this,
                     Yet finde comfort. 1. Pet. 1.5. as at any ſtrange thing, as if their hope were either wholy or chiefly vpholden hereby, and as though they held their happines  by feeling onely; when they are taught, that by grace they ſtand. Neither yet on the other ſide, doe they make light of it, when they are foiled and preuailed againſt:2. Cor. 12.6. Pſal. 116.11. but as they reioyced in meaſure, and gaue God the glorie, when they felt ſtrength of grace againſt their temptations: ſo after they come to themſelues againe, they are troubled, and ſorrowfull chiefly for diſpleaſing God,2. Cor. 7.8.9. & they take view of their owne frailtie, ignorance, & negligence better, and confeſſe the ſame to God, and take ſhame to themſelues: and caſt not away their confidence, but bee incouraged, and heartened both to hope for pardon, and alſo to bee more circumſpect in looking to their waies afterwards.
               
               
                  No hurt by abaſing.Now tell me, if Gods children be thus brought low and abaſed, ſomtimes to pull downe and aſſwage the ſtrength of pride in them, what fearefull matter is hereby fallen out? what raſing out of their faith is there hereby procured? or what great cauſe of complaining is this? when it is manifeſt to all who can iudge, that the thing which through ignorance and weake faith they feared would ſeparate them from God, doth faſten them more neerely vnto him: and through his working, that which they thinke to bee cauſe of great ſorrowing, is turned indeede into ſound reioycing, and that for this cauſe eſpecially, that they doe better know themſelues hereby, and haue experience of his grace working in them; which otherwiſe they ſhould not  haue had.
               
                  Gaine of our falles to purge vs.I cannot more liuely compare the malice of Sathan in this caſe, then to one who thruſting thorough his enemie, and purpoſing to kill him, doth thereby let out the vlcer and corruption out of his bodie, and ſo preſerue him. After the ſame manner is it with Gods children: much priuie pride remaineth yet; and much ſecret fauouring of, and bearing with themſelues is in them;

                   which is like to worke them great ſorrow and daunger: the diuell therefore ſore thruſting at them, and ſeeking to wound them with the feare of Gods anger, becauſe of their ſinnes, or ſome eſpeciall fall, doth thereby purge that corruption out of them by their ſeeing and confeſſing & forſaking the ſame, preuenting and watching againſt it afterward, and reſorting vnto God by prayer of faith for pardon thereof, and that in earneſt ſort; ſo that they doe,Prou. 28.13. or may thereupon, obtaine it.
               And thus we may ſee that euen then when Gods ſeruants are maſtered of their affections, and in fighting againſt them, are found the weaker: yet euen thoſe falles of theirs, doe turne to their exceeding good, afterwards. And  therefore it is not their vndoing, when any ſuch thing falleth out,This is only to the beleeuer. as for want of faith, and experience many doe often feare. But yet let this (which I ſay) be wiſely receiued: that to the true beleeuers it ſhall thus come to paſſe, and not els: leaſt any hearing this, ſhould after he hath fallen, be little carefull to riſe vp againe in ſuch manner as I haue ſhewed, and yet thinke all ſhould bee well with him notwithſtanding, which is not poſſible.
               Thus by occaſion of this obiection I haue bin longer then I had purpoſed in this matter. By this it may appeare,Beleeuers can renounce all. that how vnskilful ſoeuer the Chriſtian beleeuer was, and as vnable, as he was vnskilfull to renounce his ignorant and ſinfull luſts before the Lord became his teacher; yet ſince that he taught him  to fight, he hath growne expert in that ſpirituall battell:Vnbeleeuers cannot. whereas others who haue not beleeued truly, ſhall find it is as poſſible for a black Moore to chaunge his skinne, or the Cattamountaine her ſpots, as for a man accustomed to euill, to leaue it. As Chriſt ſaid of the rich man: It is as eaſie for a camell to goe thorough the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heauen: ſo no more can a wicked man renounce his courſe: for the wiſedome of the fleſh, that is, of man vnrenued, is an enemie to God, becauſe it neither is, nor can be ſubiect vnto him. If this were throughly ſetled in mens hearts,No dramme of goodnes in a naturall man. that there is no dramme of goodnes in them, by which they might be able to turne from their former wicked waies, but that their carnall wiſedome and reaſon, to the which they moſt  cleaue, doe hinder and hold them backe from it; whereby it commeth to paſſe that it is ſo hard for them to renounce al that which is euill: would they not thinke it worth all labour and trauaile to come by it? who now are content to be deceiued in thinking that they haue it, and yet are vtterly without it? Neither can this bee otherwiſe with them whiles their hearts are vntamed, and remaining in their old eſtate: but when they be indued with new qualities, they ſhall finde this both poſſible and eaſie (as hath been ſaid) to commaund their luſts and deſires (which were ſometimes vnruly) and haue them in ſubiection by little and little.
               
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 6. Of the diuers kinds of euill to be renounced, and namely of inward againſt God and men.
               
                  BVt to proceed: as we haue ſeene, in what manner ſinne is to be renounced; ſo let vs now conſider the diuers kindes of euill, which are to be renounced, before we lay foorth the good fruits and duties which proceed from the ſame. And theſe kindes of euill are of two ſorts,Diuers kinds of euill to be renounced. either inward or outward.
               
               And to ſpeake diſtinctly of them (that I may proceede) we are taught, that in the godly life,Firſt inward luſts. in whomſoeuer it be found, the luſts and concupiſcences which reigne throughout the world, and make them whom they rule, to be as bruite beaſts: theſe corrupt luſts (I ſay) with all other ſuch defilements of our actions, are in the godly life renounced, according to the light which we haue to diſcerne thē; yea the faithful deſire to abſtaine from thē, as men who haue receiued another manner of ſpirit then the men of the world, and therfore can take vp their delight in better things: and who know the hurt which theſe vnruly euils bring with them, whatſoeuer ſhew of pleaſure they offer. And although all haue conflicts with them,Not all in like meaſure. and doe not hold them vnder in a like meaſure; yet of the weakeſt of Gods children they are hated, and ſtriued againſt, when they are once ſeene and perceiued. But by theſe inward euils, I meane not the natiue infection of the heart, for of this I haue ſpoken before,The effects of our naturall corruption here be meant. Iam. 1.14.
                   but the fruits hereof, namely, the wandring, noiſome, & blind thoughts, fleſhly deſires, and worldly luſts, which ariſe from the hart ſo infected, which are contrarie to the commaundements of God, and tending directly to the deſtruction of them, who bring them foorth: So that as the hands, feete and eyes be the members of the bodie,A ſimile. and doe whatſoeuer the bodie hath need of;Col. 3.5. euen ſo theſe are the members, and as the armes, feete and eyes of the  heart, and execute and performe whatſoeuer it deſireth. And although they are ſo many that no man can number them (euen as the fountaine of the heart is ſo deepe that no man can gage it) yet becauſe they are much vnknowne, I will giue ſome helpe in the vnderſtanding of them, and ſo much the rather, becauſe they being vnknowne, many neuer miſlike their liues, neither are aſhamed nor wearie of them, though they bee ſtained ſhamefully with them, and ſo become moſt abominable. And firſt the roote of all the reſt is vnbeleefe,Heb. 3.12. when a man not giuing ſound credit to the word of God, and the holie Scriptures, dareth be bold to harbour the ſame whatſoeuer is forbidden in them.
               
               
                  Three ſorts of luſtes.From hence growe out, euen in thoſe which profeſſe; three armes, or boughes, of the which euery one ſhooteth forth as branches, innumerable worldly luſts:A view of ſome corruptions. firſt, impious againſt God: ſecond, iniurious to men: and the third ſort, moſt properlie concerning themſelues.
               
                  
                     1. Againſt God and his honour and worſhip in the firſt Table.As touching the maieſtie of God, as mens hearts are full of blindenes, and couered with darkenes; ſo it goeth againſt them to be taught the true knowledge

                   of the true God:Iob. 13. it is death to them to be drawne out of their ignorance: they cannot abide to heare of his iudgement day: they would there were none: they rebell againſt the ſpirituall and true ſeruing of God,Acts 24.25. and that which they yeeld him, is a will worſhip, euen that which phantaſie,Iob. 21.14, 15. Matth. 15.9. cuſtome, or fleſhlie wiſdome teacheth them.
               And whereas he requireth that confidence ſhould be put in him, for continuall defence, deliuerance, and ſuccour in ſoule and bodie,Distrust. they are carried with diſtruſt, as with a whirlewind, and therefore their hope is faint, or none at all, before they ſee their deſire accompliſhed. In their great dangers,Jn aduerſitie. when meanes to come out, doe faile them, they are ouercome with feare, and almoſt  beſide themſelues. In loſſes impatient, and full of murmuring,Jmpatient. receiuing them as from a cruell iudge, and ſorrowing for them deadly. And as ſome haue their hearts thus boiling in their trials, and afflictions: ſo others haue their hearts ſwelling againſt God in obſtinacie and contempt for his afflicting them, and are looſe, careles, and deſperate, whatſoeuer pincheth them:Obstinate. yet in a ſcoffing ſpirit they ſay within themſelues, let him doe his beſt, yet will we not turne vnto him, nor ſeeke vnto him: (oh horrible blaſphemie, fearefull to be once named!) that I ſay nothing of them, who aſcribe all to blinde fortune, (in curſing of the which, they curſe God;) or as the Atheiſts doe, to nature. Are not theſe loathſome gueſtes to lodge in the hearts of Chriſtians?Loathſome gueſts. 
                   I doe not goe about to ſet downe the poiſoned corruptions, and luſts of Heathens, Turkes, and Atheiſts, as they are properly called, that is, ſuch as deny God vtterly, for ſo ſhould I neuer haue done; but to lay forth ſome part of the corruptions which dwell, and abide in the hearts of ſuch as goe for Chriſtians: that many of them who can beare out matters boldly here among men, may ſee what villanie and treacherie they commit againſt God. This is a little of a great deale of the diſhonour which they offer to God. And as this declareth what rebellion is in men vnder the croſſe:Jnward corruptions in proſperitie. No thankefulneſſe. ſo how they behaue themſelues towards him in the daies of their proſperitie, experience teacheth, and I could ſhew at large, if the time would ſuffer me to declare it.  As for thankefulnes, there is little or none in them: I appeale to their owne conſciences, what doe their hearts yeeld to God the whole day thorough, for his manifold mercies; and if ſome doe, yet is it done onely in words for a faſhion onely, and from the very teeth outward: and yet many are aſhamed euen at their table to doe that. They reioyce in the merry world, whileſt they haue eaſe, and plenty; they looke for no other, but wiſh it alwaies ſo:Carnall reioycing. yet what grace doe they deſire the more, although they haue their fill, but are rather more headſtrong, and inordinate? And if they aske ought of God, it is to beſtowe it on their lusts, being made drunken with their pleaſures:Iames 4.4. Drunke with pleaſures.
                   ſo that they are louers of them, more then louers of God, and become inſenſible thereby, and paſt  all feeling. If ſome be not thus hardened, yet ſhall they be found to haue ſmall deſire to furniſh their hearts with the beſt gifts, when yet they ſee, that he which hath giuen the one, is as readie to giue the other alſo. And as for the true worſhipping of God, how farre are the moſt from taking pleaſure therein; when yet one day beſtowed in it is better then a thouſand in any delights beſide? For ſuperſtition and blind deuotion carrie many to falſe worſhips: affirming boldly, that they cannot reſt in that manner which

God preſcribes in his word,Ioh. 4. Ioh. 5. that is, to doe it in ſpirit and truth: though God  ſendeth vs to the Scriptures to know his will and minde; but the will-worſhip which they deuiſe to themſelues, and which they take vp by tradition, as to repreſent God by an image, and Chriſt by a Crucifixe, that onely pleaſeth them: and their deuotion is frozen and cold, except it be helped by ſuch counterfeit deluſions. And many of them which imbrace the truth, and retaine the right manner of worſhipping God according to his word, yet are content to be deceiued, while they denie that which onely maketh the other well pleaſing to God, and ſauourie to themſelues, that is, to doe it with their heart and ioyfully,Matth. 15. without which God telleth them plainly that in vaine they worſhip him. And as in their worſhipping of him, by the vſe of religious exerciſes, their harts take no delight; euen ſo in his ſeruice, throughout the courſe of their priuate conuerſation, how vaine, prophane, and diſſolute are their hearts, what pleaſure is it to them to pleaſe him, though it ſhould be their meate, drinke and paſtime, and how lightly are his iudgements paſſed ouer, how fearefull ſoeuer they be? ſo farre is it off, that they can expell their hypocriſie and other ſinnes.
               Moreouer, they haue no deſire in peace to bee taught the true vſe of it: namely, to haue peace with God, and as much as in them lieth to be at peace with all men,
                  Deut. 28.46. Rom. 12.18. no, not in their owne houſes, which yet to be without, is a little hell to them.Abuſe of peace. And as for the Lords Sabboth, and other many good  meanes appointed on the ſame to ſeaſon and change their hearts, they ſenſiblie loath them, or finde no ſauour in them: neither is it any part of their thought, to ſeeke any comfort in them (although they be the chiefe flower of a true Chriſtians garland:) or if ſome of them doe, it is in ſuperſtitious deuotion, wiſhing that religion vp againe, whereby God is diſhonoured highlie: but as their fathers before them did, euen ſo doe they paſſe through the world,Pſal. 8.5.6. as ſhadowes, their mindes looking no higher: ſo that though they were made to honour, yet they not vnderstanding it, are like the beaſts that periſh.
               
               Theſe may ſerue for a taſte of the corruptions and worldly luſts, which men not worſe accounted of, doe ſwarme with, directly tending to the diſhonour  of God: from which with the reſt that follow, when wee ſhall ſee how God deliuereth his beloued, we ſhall haue cauſe to loue the godly life more heartily, which is by Gods grace freed from ſuch intemperancie: freed, I ſay, ſo that it ruleth them not, neither reigneth in them, although ſometimes in ſome thing it preuaile againſt them, till they repent of it: which grace none of the other doe finde, nor obtaine, when they be at the beſt.
               
                  VVicked luſts towards man. The 2. table, fift Commandement. Contempt of betters.But to goe forward: to acquaint men with ſome of the vnbridled and worldly luſts, which carrie them after the hurt of their neighbour: what vnreuerence, contempt, and obſtinacie appeareth to be in the hearts of many againſt their betters, diminiſhing that authoritie, credit, and eſtimation, which  God hath giuen them, ſo that place, yeeres, and gifts are had in meane account of them? Where is that ancient reuerence which younger men in the Miniſterie haue giuen to thoſe who haue gone before them in labours, gifts, and good example? they imagining themſelues able to doe farre better then their elders, and therfore ambitiouſly aſpiring to that which they ought not: and lifting vp themſelues aboue them, when yet they ſhould haue learned to

                   honour and ſubmit themſelues to thoſe of low degree?
                  
                     Rom. 12. Vnthankefulnes to men. What vnthankfulnes in the people, to them which labour for their peace and welfare in their outward eſtate, and are inſtruments to conuey the glorious Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt vnto them? I meane Chriſtian Princes, and gouernours? How many eſteeme of them, who labour to make them happie and to liue for euer? what wiſhing is there that there were none ſuch, which is all one as to make ſure worke to goe to hell? How doe many hunger for their death (yea though they be their naturall parents) by whom they might be inriched and preferred, although to make their follie and madnes the better appeare to themſelues and others, the Lord taketh them oftentimes away before them? What  ſtoutnes, ſaucines, and boldnes in youth towards their ancients and rulers,Saucines in youth. till it breake out from within and ſhew it ſelfe in geſture and words? which bringeth forth ſuch rudenes and barbarouſnes, as were too bad among Heathens. But I will containe my ſelfe.
               Further, whereas the ſoule of our neighbour ſhould be moſt pretious to vs, how doe many reioyce to ſee them fall into any ſin,Reioyce in euil. deuiſe to make them offend, as to be drunke, to leaue off hearing Sermons, and fret or diſdaine at them who liue Chriſtianly; rather then to reuerence the graces of God in them? And whereas wee ſhould loue others as our ſelues, that is, indeed,
                  1. Ioh. 3.18. 
                  and vnfainedly, not in word and ſhew onely; yet how truly is it verified through the  world, that through the ſtrength of their luſts, one man is a woolfe, yea a diuell to another? What anger, which cannot bee appeaſed? what deadly hatred one againſt another? what earneſt and bitter ſeeking of reuenge;VVrath. and yet they goe not once to their heart to take ſhame for them? How eaſily and readily doe men take the leaſt occaſion from others of hard conceiuing of them, and yet how vnmeete doe they thinke it, that others ſhould take the leaſt diſpleaſure by the greateſt occaſions which they offer them? What little care is there that none be hurt by them, but a churliſh ſenſeleſnes, of it, if it be ſo, rather then pitie and compaſſion in ſteede of it? As concerning cutting off broiles betwixt men, who is warie to auoide occaſions thereof, ſometime  by readines to loſe ſome part of their right, as Abraham did to Lot,
                  Gen. 13.8. & 9 and comming to lawfull and equall conditions of peace, which were but their dutie? Nay rather,No bearing. men bethink them of all meanes to prouoke others further then they haue done. And as for bearing of them, if they paſſe bounds toward any, what meekenes or mildnes is there in vs to forbeare them, and to be patient and long ſuffering towards them? and when it may well bee done,Prou. 12.15. to paſſe ouer their offence and burie it? where is any pacifying of wrath in mens ſelues, and a free forgiuing of them,Epheſ. 4.32. but rather a ſeeking of reuenge for the ſmalleſt wrong? This is farre from the Apoſtles rule:Rom. 12.15. No fellow feeling.
                   
                  Weepe with them which weepe: reioyce with them which reioyce, and be alike affected towards all men. 
                   In theſe kinds of fleſhly luſts, the commonnes which I ſee of them, and the bold iuſtifying of the ſame, hath made me ſomewhat the longer.
               Now I come to that kinde of theſe fleſhly luſts,Vncleane luſts. which are moſt properly ſo called: And they are, when men let looſe their hearts to filthie vncleane thoughts and deſires, with purpoſes of defiling their bodies, which ſhould be kept holie to the day of mariage, and after to the end of their life. What varietie of vncleane wiſhes and deſires doe occupie them? how are they inflamed

through euery obiect, of ſuch perſons as pleaſe their eye, and ſo are  caught and deceiued with that which is pretious in them? And leaſt that ſhould not be enough againſt thē, they reſt not in this, which is moſt ſhamefull;Feed their luſts but they delight to blow vp theſe burning luſts further, euen to occupie their thoughts in all talke of vncleane matters, to feede their eyes wantonly, that they may ſhew themſelues to be thoſe, whom the Scripture deſcribeth, namely, to haue eyes full of adulterie: and to ſuch places their delight is to goe, where they may haue that carnall humour ſatisfied, or incenſed by all prouocations, that thus the pretious treaſure of the minde which is fit to haue receiued moſt diuine matters, and to haue made it more like vnto the Angels, is made a ſtinking brothel-houſe,Zach. 12.8. and a nurſerie of filthines: What beating of  their braines is there about deceiuing and intrapping innocent Virgins, and modeſt Matrones to bring them to their lure? for common ſtrumpets, and ſuch harlots as haue been defiled alreadie, may be come by with leſſe ſtudie. I ſpeake not of the practiſe of the worſt ſort of the people of our land, but of them which are ciuill, liue outwardly in ſome honeſt courſe: yea and many of them maried perſons themſelues, and for want of better, beare office to ſee good order in townes, of which ſort there are many thouſands, who are poſſeſſed of theſe deceiueable luſts, neighing after their neighbours wiues, as the Prophet ſpeaketh, and ſo ſtopping the courſe of a Chriſtian life, from the which ſome of them otherwiſe had not been farre off. But this for a taſte.
               
               
                   I will proceed vnto that kind of luſt which is the greedie deſire of money and gaine,Couetouſnes. if they may come by it, whoſoeuer ſmarteth by the loſſe of it. What a ſea of euils is there in this kind? how many waies, and that all the yeere through, are mens heads occupied about this, how they may by ſome new deceit, winde ſomewhat from others? what vnſatiable deſire is there of other mens goods? and how doe men reſolue that they will be rich, though the Apoſtle to Timothie doth ſhew them the danger of that purpoſe?1. Tim. 6.9. What repining is there in all ſorts to ſee others get that which they themſelues can not come by? How doth the mightie deuiſe to pill and make bare the meaner ſort, the Landlord the poore tenaunt, till he hath fleeced him of all, and  left the bare carkaſſe? whereas the predeceſſours of them both liued together before them in loue and good will, the one well contented, the other well refreſhed vnder him and ſufficiently maintained? which is one maine cauſe of ſo great beggerie. How doe many, without regard of other, follow this point of wiſedome, that they may haue ſome commodities wholy in their owne hands, that ſo they may raiſe an vniuerſall dearth for the ſatisfying of their priuate appetite? In common dealings, nothing (to ſpeake of) is ſweete to men,Prou. 9.17. 
                  but ſtolne waters, as it is in the Prouerbs, when men can ſee how to get more then their owne: the borrower (though he hath found friendſhip) yet ſeeketh & bethinketh how to defraud the lender, if by any meanes  he might pay it backe no more: ſo doth the lender deuiſe new kinds of vſury and oppreſſion againſt the borrower, whereby ſo many thouſands are vndone:1. Theſſ. 4.4. Pſal. 15.6. when the Lord commaundeth ſtreightly that there be no oppreſsion nor vſurie at all: So of the ſeller, and the buyer; the loue of equitie and indifferencie is thruſt to the walles amongſt men, if it ſtand not with their gaine.
               
                  
                   And this they will doe, who are otherwiſe not voide of religion: by all which it may be ſeene how mens minds are occupied, and with what good ſtuffe their heads are filled.
               But to draw to an end in the laying forth of theſe worldly luſts, tending to the hurt of our neighbour in his goods; and to goe to another kinde:Lust against our neighbours name.
                   whereas men ſhould ſeeke to preſerue the good name and credit of others, as their owne, they are carried to nothing more prepoſterouſly, thorough their vnruly luſts. For how rare are thoſe men, which take well, and interpret in the better part things done, or words ſpoken doubtfullie, but rather ſuſpect as ſoone as they heare them, that all was done of malice, and therefore conceiue  hardly againſt them by and by: ſo ſtrong are their rebellious luſts, that they cannot be held in: what deepe conceits therefore doe ariſe,
                     Surmiſes. 1. Sam. 22.8. and raſh ſurmiſes of them, (as they did in Saul againſt Dauid and Ionathan his ſonne) and all thorough miſtaking of that which was rightlie done, and honeſtlie meant and ſpoken? how doe their hearts burne hereupon (thinke we) to ſpeake and doe, not ambiguouſlie and doubtfullie againſt them, but reſolutelie whatſoeuer commeth into their head, as Shemei did againſt Dauid?
                  2. Sam. 15.7. So that they thirſt to defame them by word or writing: yea, and if many yeeres before there were any offence committed by them, of which they are priuie, although they concealed it till then, and made light of it: yet now,Exod. 2.14. Libels.
                   (if it hangeth  them) are ſet on fire in their mad moode to diſcloſe it: as the wicked Hebrue did abuſe Moſes. What inuentings of libels,Pſalm. 50.22. and deuiſing of new ſlaunders; yea, againſt our owne brother and mothers ſonne: and with ſuch ſhameleſſe boldneſſe, and impudencie, that Iezabel was not able to goe beyond them in that facultie. And by theſe, it may be geſſed not doubtfullie what ſwarmes of outragious luſts doe lurke ſecretly in their boſomes, who yet ſee little, or nothing amiſſe in themſelues, and oftentimes ſet as good a ſhew vpon their doings in the ſight of others, as the beſt: nay, I ſay more, who ſhall with a Iudas his kiſſe imbrace them, whom behinde their backe they thus abuſe. And none of theſe foule and ſhamefull faults would breake out openly  by mouth and life, if they were not nouriſhed ſecretly in the heart before.
               But that I may ſhut vp all that I haue to ſay of theſe ſorts of worldly luſts, leaſt many ſhould obiect,Though not alwaies, yet theſe be common. that although they graunt that ſometime they be led with theſe frenſies, yet they be not alwaies ſo bad: I ſay that is ſmallie to their commendation and reioycing: for as they are now too oft and common, ſo ſhould they be commoner, if other things did not breake them off. But can they denie this, that whereas their deſires ſhould tend to good, and leade them to God, that yet they are the moſt of their time taken vp in wiſhing  ſomewhat of their neighbours to their hurt? Whereby, beſides their deceiuing of their owne hearts, and ſpending their pretious time in dreames  about things which come not to paſſe; ſo they plainely ſhew what they would haue: wherein, although ſome containe themſelues at one time without conſenting to that which they haue fooliſhly wiſhed: yet haue they no more gouernement ouer their hearts, but to offend after the ſame ſort at another time: and what a deceiueable, vnprofitable, & weariſome life is this, (to ſay nothing of the perill which commeth to their ſoules hereby) thus to become ſeruants to their own luſts, who are created of God to ſo ſingular ends?
               
                  Thus I haue in ſome ſort laid forth the luſts of the heart againſt God and  men thoroughout the commaundements, the which ſwarming in wicked men,Theſe luſts be cauſes of all woe. as I haue ſhewed, and ruling and carrying them, are the cauſes of all diſſolutenes, licentiouſnes, and diſorder in their liues, and of many ſore puniſhments thereby. By that which I haue ſaid of this matter, it may appeare, what a ſingular mercie of God it is vnto his children, that their hearts are not nurſeries of ſuch draffe, but that they abhorre it rather: For though this grace of renouncing ſuch filthines be little regarded of the common ſort, but counted preciſenes, yet ſhall it be an ornament in theſe before God, and a moſt precious comfort vnto themſelues.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 7. Of other inward euils and ſinnes, most properly concerning our ſelues.
               
                  NOw follow the branches of earthly corruptions, and worldly luſts,Euill lusts concerning our ſelues. which although they doe offend God; yet they doe not directly concerne the perſon of God, or of their neighbour, but eſpeciallie themſelues, that in ſome ſort I may diſcouer and bewraie the loathſome kennell from whence  all ill life doth come: which few doe well knowe, and therefore ſuſpect in no ſort the danger that they are in: a taſte of the which, as of the former, but more briefelie, I will ſet downe. And they are ſo euill and monſtrous, that though men who are poſſeſſed of them, deale neither with God, nor men directly; yet their hearts are too lamentablie, yea, and that for the moſt part continuallie incumbred with them: theſe outragious luſtes of theirs doe ſometime ſo wilfully carrie them (as it were a ſtreame) that miſſing of their will,Fretting when croſſed of their will. 1. Sam. 31. Acts 16.
                   euen that which they would haue, they deſire nothing more then to be out of the world; forgetting all Gods kindnes toward them: and yet when God calleth them hence indeede, they cannot abide to  heare of it, but rebell againſt it, more then againſt any thing in the world.
               
                  Exceſſiue delight in abundance.Againe, they are ſo vnruly, that if God giueth them the bridle, and follow them with abundance of his outward benefits, they haue no delight in them, except they abuſe them moſt exceſſiuelie in eating, and drinking, not to liue thereby, but to ſurfet, to be pampered ſo as they be fit for no good thing: in play from one kind to another,Iames 5.5. 
                  counting it pleaſure to liue deliciouſly for a ſeaſon: in coſtlines of apparell, and curious trimming vp of their carkaſes, not mindfull of the neceſſities of others, howſoeuer their ſuperfluity would helpe to apparell many which goe naked. How doe they pleaſe themſelues, and imagine that others doe admire them for the ſame? yea and for all this, oftentimes  (that I ſay nothing of them which runne in debt for it) wringing and powling others, for the maintenance of it; ioying beyond meaſure in their children, though little caring for their good education: which is the very pride of life ſo manifeſtlie condemned.Pride of life. Vpon theſe, and ſuch like, their hearts are ſet in their plentie,Iohn 2.13. and contrarilie fretting, murmuring, and vexing their hearts, when they fall into neceſſitie: although they heare that a good name is

                      better than golde; yet they will followe their appetite ſo groſſelie, vntill the fruite of it cauſeth them to loſe credit, and good name, as if it were nothing worth. What ſhould I ſay of their priding in their wit, wealth, beautie, ſtrength, wiſdome, and other gifts? when they are, who knoweth not what, if it were but by this deſcription, and when as alſo they know not how long they ſhall inioy them: they account of to morrow what they will doe,
                  Iames 4.13. 
                  and cannot tell what may fall out to day. Their lightnes, vnſetlednes,
                     Frowardnes. Prou. 27.1. and wilfull frowardnes for euery thing that doth diſpleaſe them; their vaine, idle, and deceitfull deſires of things, which become not the grauitie of ſuch as are borne to a better life; their deadly pangs of ſulleines, when nothing will pleaſe them; with  their curious heads, which are euer medling in things not pertinent to them; with their ſottiſh ſelfe loue, that ſo much blindefoldeth them from ſeeing that any thing in them is offenſiue, with innumerable other concupiſcences,Selfe lov
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   that dailie come from them: may eaſilie perſwade them to confeſſe that their hearts are burthened, and loaden, though they had not outward ſinnes to preſſe them downe, and to ſay that it is diuine power and grace from aboue, that muſt purge theſe and ſuch like vnſauorie draffe out of them. And yet theſe, and many other ſuch are renounced as they come to be knowne of Gods ſeruants, and are reſiſted according to the wiſdome which God hath giuen them, although in others they rule and raigne. And the obtaining of  grace to doe this, is one part of the chriſtian life, as I haue ſaid. For they making the word of God their guide, haue this benefit by it, that they are made wary and circumſpect againſt their euill and noiſome corruptions, as Dauid ſaith in the Pſalme 19.11. where he ſetting downe many vſes and benefits of the law and word of God, as that It is more to be deſired then fine golde, and more ſweete then the hony combe; addeth this: Moreouer thereby is thy ſeruant made circumſpect and wary. And Salomon ſaith the like, Prou. 2.10. When wiſdome delighteth thy heart, and knowledge entreth into thy ſoule, then ſhall counſell preſerue thee, and vnderstanding ſhall keepe thee from the euill way: And what way is worſe, then the deuices and deſires of our euill hearts? Saint Paul likewiſe, to ſhew  that God hath giuen this grace to his faithfull ones, ſaith 2. Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our warfare, are not carnall, but mightie through God to cast down holds: casting down the imaginations, and euery high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captiuitie euery thought to the obedience of Chriſt: and to the Epheſians 4.22. If we haue learned Christ aright, we haue been taught to cast off, concerning the conuerſation in time past, the old man, which is corrupt through deceiueable lusts.
               
               Thus therfore now hauing laid open the packe of theſe worldly luſts,A ſpeciall part of a godly life to renounce theſe. and proued that the Lord by the Scripture giueth greater grace to his, then to obey them, Iames 4.6. Rom. 6.16. I will proceede now to ſhew, that this is a  ſpeciall peece of chriſtianitie, thus to hold vnder, and reſiſt them; ſo as in ſome ſort, we may be made able to ouercome them. No man will greatlie denie this, if he be aduiſed: for what ſhould hinder one (if he be vnburthened of his paſſions, and inordinate deſires which binde him from dutie as cords) but that he may goe forward without let, readilie, and roundly? This being alwaies vnderſtoode, that he is not without dailie ſtriuing to obtaine it, and cloſed about of infirmities ſtill.Hebr. 3.12. 
                  It is the euill heart that cauſeth men to fall

away from the liuing God:
                  Iuſts marre al. 
                  they are their fleſhly luſts which fight againſt their ſoules,
                   that both hinder them from walking with God,1. Pet. 2.10. Iam. 4.1.2. and will bring deſtruction in the end: euen theſe luſts, as S. Iames ſaith, which fight in our members, they are that carrie vs violently and fooliſhly after them from our ſetled peace, to fret and rage (as enemies in warre, one againſt another) when wee haue not our deſires ſatisfied, nor obtaine what wee would. Therefore theſe being weakened, and their force reſtrained, we may cleerely ſee, that with eaſe and cheerefulnes the Chriſtian life ſhall be ſet vpon: for as our Sauiour Chriſt, becauſe he was voide of all corruption and ſinfull deſires, therfore the prince of this world attempting him (as hee doth other men) yet found nothing in him which he ſought, fit for his purpoſe; and as Adam in the time of his innocencie  ſtood free for a ſeaſon from falling, when as yet his heart was not tained: euen ſo our hearts being clenſed and purged from their natural corruption, although not wholy ridde of it, and our troubleſome luſts and paſſions being appalled and weakened within vs, and hauing receiued a deadly wound, cannot ſo maſter vs, as that we ſhall not loue, deſire, long after, and do the will of our God, though, in reſpect of that which we ought, weakely, and vnperfectly; yet in reſpect of that which otherwiſe wee ſhould doe, both ſoundly and in good ſort.
                     This ſhall be accepted. Pſal. 130.3. 1. Ioh. 2.2. And this will God accept for holie ſeruice, and not looke ſtreightly what is done amiſſe, but pardon our ſinnes becauſe of our aduocate: ſo that notwithſtanding our obedience be farre from that it ſhould be; yet we  may reſt therein, euen ſuch as it is, with ſound peace, voide of feare.
               And thus farre, God in great mercie, hath made vs partakers of the knowledge of his will, that wee hauing our deſires in this wiſe ſubiect to him, as I haue ſaid, wee may poſſeſſe our ſoules after in peace and heauenly manner. Therefore if any man,He that obſerues theſe, is occupied in a godly life. Iam. 4.7.
                   whoſe heart is purified by faith, doth exerciſe himſelfe in knowing theſe his ſoule and ſhamefull luſts, and marke how he is led away of them, and deceiued by them, and which of them doe moſt trouble him, and ofteſt preuaile againſt him, and therefore by the helpes which God hath giuen him (which ſhall be ſet downe in the next treatiſe) doth reſiſt them; let not him doubt, but that he is occupied in the godlie life, and that he is come  out of the ſtinking Sodome, of his old ſinfull courſe: and thus doth the godly man carrie himſelfe, and at this marke doth hee chiefly aime. For the true wiſedome which is from aboue, of the which euery godly man hath his name, that is, he is called wiſe, this wiſedome ſheweth it ſelfe in all manner of holy conuerſation in meekenes, and ſuffereth not the contrary luſts to dwell and abide in the heart, as bitter enuying, prouokings one of another, ſwellings, tumults, and ſtormings one againſt another, with ſuch like, as euery one hath his meaſure. In deede all men haue not ouercome themſelues alike;All ouercome not theſe alike. no not euen they, who haue ſet themſelues to this worke of plucking downe the ruines of their old building: for they who haue great and cleere knowledge of the will of God, and of the whole myſterie of godlines, ioyned with affection, they are the moſt forward:The better ſort. And to ſpeake plainlier, they who make faith and a godlie life their treaſure indeed, finding and feeling that they are greater riches and pleaſure to them, then gold or all ſubſtance, and in their account take them ſo, as in their iudgement they know and will ſay, they ought to be ſo; they are the men, who will take moſt paine to withſtand their luſts and deſires; they get

                   moſt victorie ouer them, and are leaſt ouercome of them: they (it muſt needs be graunted) haue greateſt aduantage ouer them, and know beſt what fruite in ſound peace, and many other waies is reaped thereby. And ſuch examples, God be bleſſed, we haue, and thoſe not a few in the Scriptures, who haue attained to this, I meane, to a great meaſure 
                     Moſes meeke, Numb. 12.3. Abraham beleeuing, Rom. 4.3. Ioſeph continent, Geneſ. 39.10. Daniel zealous for the Lord, Dan. 1.8. & 6.11. The woman in Luke full of loue, Luk. 7.47. with many more ſuch. Therefore they ruled their euill hearts from the contrary corruptions.
                     The weaker are not to diſtruſt for not matching the beſt.
                   of ſuch grace: and by their good example, there are through Gods goodnes in this age many, who haue inioyed great libertie from God this way, that no man may thinke this (which I am now about) to bee a thing impoſſible to attaine vnto, neither denied to be granted vs of God, as it ſhall be ſought and cared for. But, as I ſaid, all Gods ſeruants haue not one and the ſame, therefore not this excellent meaſure.
               
                   To goe forward then, for the edifying of the reſt, who, by Gods grace, are many more then the former, who all deſire to leaue and forſake their noyſome corruptions, and rebellious willes; but yet haue nothing the largenes of heart, and meaſure of grace, which ſome others haue, I would willingly ſay to them that which the Lord hath reuealed vnto me: That they be not troubled at this, that they bee behind others of Gods ſeruants in the ouercomming of themſelues, and haue not gotten maſterie of all affections in ſuch ſort, as ſome haue done: neither doubt they that faith and godlines are vtterly to ſeeke with them, becauſe of this. For all beleeuers haue not their part in one and the ſame meaſure of mortification, and grace: all men cannot reach  and attaine to that which ſome do: all know not alike; all value not goodnes and libertie from fleſhly luſts alike: and therefore cannot take paines for the ſame, as ſome others doe: ſome receiue thirtie fold, ſome ſixtie fold, and ſome an hundred fold, by that which they heare. It is commendable and meete, that we ſhould walke, as wee haue the beſt, for our examples; and to follow them, as they are paternes of good things vnto vs: but to ſtay at this, that wee are not at all in Chriſt, becauſe we are not in all points like vnto ſome other in ſubduing our affections, that is in no ſort to be yeelded vnto, if that which is in vs, be in vs in truth. Which thing I ſpeake for their cauſe, who both thinke, and oft vtter the ſame, ſaying: Oh I am not, as ſuch of Gods children! they are  happie, for that they are not troubled with frowardnes, impatience, anger, wearines of good exerciſes, wandring in hearing of Sermons, reading and prayer, and ſuch other like carnal deſires, as I am: and yet the ſame perſons both haue had a true taſte of eternal life, and earneſt combates with their corruptions: yea and while they complaine, they teſtifie their going forward in ſubduing their corruptions, farre otherwiſe then they who are not ſo troubled; and doe declare plainly that they loue the grace which they mourne for, and hate deadly the corruption, which they complaine and crie out of. Therefore let no man meaſure himſelfe by another: but in that little which he knoweth, let him be faithfull, renouncing fleſhly luſts, as he ſeeth what an  excellent eſtate of life it is to be freed from them, I meane, not to bee in bondage to them: for there is no libertie like this: all other, when wee ſeeke to fulfill our owne deſire, is vtter ſlauerie and bondage.
               And theſe things being rightly conſidered, it may appeare,Theſe luſts are reſiſted of all beleeuers in their meaſure. that in a godly life the inward luſts of the heart, and knowne corruptions of it, how common ſoeuer they bee in the world, are reſiſted and declined from, of all true Chriſtians in their meaſure, according to that which is alleaged by the Apoſtle

S. Peter: We hauing most pretious promiſes giuen vs of God, are made thereby  partakers of the grace of the holie Ghoſt, by the which wee are able to flie the corruption that is in the world, and reigneth amongst the vngodly. If they then who imbrace and beleeue the promiſes, and therefore haue faſtened vpon a godlie life,They who be ruled by their luſts, cā claime no part in a godly life. doe flie the luſts and corruptions which others delight in and imbrace; it followeth on the contrarie, that they, who are ruled and led by them, can claime no part in a godly life. For he that is ſo minded cannot be but carnall: eſtranged from God, and a bondman of hel: which if it were weighed, would cauſe many thouſands, who now thinke themſelues good Chriſtians, to take ſome paine to bridle their intemperate and vnruly hearts, & to be wounded for the ſame deeply, who contrarily giue libertie to them in moſt things that  they deſire.The weake may ſtay for their comfort in theſe three ſpeciall graces. Let ſuch weake Chriſtians (to omit theſe) reſt their hope in ſome certain eſtate: and not ouerreach themſelues with things which they canont compaſſe: I meane by reſting in ſome certain eſtate, this: Firſt, that they haue a cleere knowledge of their ſaluation. Secondly, that they account it as their chiefe treaſure. And thirdly, be ſet forward in ſome plaine and good courſe of life, whereby they may grow in faith, and the obeying of God, though with ſome ſtriuing. But if they walk deſtitute of any of theſe three, they ſhall be ſnared much with feare, & vnquietnes, while they feele that all is not well with them: oft fearing that they haue not begun aright, nor were euer truely called: and yet (if they ſhould forgoe this hold) ſeeing there is ſome liuely  ſparkle of the new birth in them, let them not breake off and faint vtterly, as the wicked doe,Cant. 3.3. but moane and ſeeke home againe, as a bird wandring from her neſt, leaſt otherwiſe they walke heauily many moneths, it may be, yeeres, before they finde deliuerance. And vntill they doe ſo ſet themſelues to nouriſh their faith with great care & diligence,Note. their godly life (with what labour and toyle ſoeuer it be) is but a building vp and a pulling downe: for one day they ſhall like, and another day miſlike: ſometime they may feele themſelues well ſtaied, and oft otherwiſe without peace. Yea and I ſay againe, when they are ſtaied, yet if they hold not this as their beſt riches, to ſolace their ſoules euery while (as they may well and eaſily doe, hauing ſo many good helpes among  them) with this ſweete fauour of God, which may ſurmount all other follies and delights, in their perſwaſion and eſtimation, they ſhall not either abide long in that poſſeſſion of peace, or like the courſe of their life which they leade: but the diuell who knoweth their weaknes, and enuieth their godly and ſweete eſtate, will raiſe many occaſions to vnſettle and trouble them.
               
                  Theſe three muſt be earneſtly laboured for.Theſe three things therefore being of ſo eſpecall price, muſt bee more regarded, and ſought after of ſuch as want them, more carefully then they haue been: and preachers not onely heard teaching theſe, but alſo conferred with about the ſame: that the peoples hungring after the ſame, may whet on and  incourage their teachers with all willingnes and readines to reſolue & comfort them comming vnto them,Luk. 8.1. Matth. 13.36. as the people in the Goſpell: or rather as Chriſts Diſciples came oft to him to be taught, and haue their queſtions anſwered. And although other doctrine is not to bee neglected, yet I would haue all to know, that nothing is ſo neceſſarily to bee learned as theſe three are, of ſuch as haue alreadie attained to the knowledge of true happines by

                   Ieſus Chriſt, what other things ſo euer be wanting. All goeth forward vntowardlie, without theſe, as I haue ſaid. And as a man knoweth nothing profitable vnto ſaluation before he beleeueth: ſo after he beleeueth, he knoweth nothing profitablie to growe on with comfort, in his chriſtian courſe, without theſe three faithfullie and carefullie looked vnto and preſerued.
               For my part, I doe thee to vnderſtand,A chiefe end of this booke, is to ſet forward a weake Christian. that it was the moſt principall regard I had in ſetting out this booke, to helpe and direct the weake Chriſtian thoroughout from his firſt entrance into the knowledge of Chriſt Ieſus, that he vnderſtanding and beleeuing, what a rich portion God hath beſtowed vpon him, he may make ſuch account of it, as it deſerueth, that is, eſteeme it  farre better then all that he hath; and then inioy the fruites of it in an holy life after, as God hath taught him. Who ſo trauaileth faithfullie in purchaſing theſe things (and yet the purchaſe is eaſie and cheape enough,How to make godlines a pleaſure. euen without money) ſhall goe forward readilie, and with eaſe, and make no toile of godlines but pleaſure: neither haue his teeth watering after the greateſt mens dainties, but they after his. He ſhall not be at the point of them, whom I deſcribed a little before by their ſpeech in the way of obiection, who ſometimes are driuen to doubt of their calling, but be able to guide himſelfe, how to riſe when he is fallen, and to returne when he is ſtept out of the way:Note. and to walke in moſt ſweete ſafetie vnder Gods protection all the day long,Deut. 33.12. as  ſhall be ſeene afterward.
               Thou wilt aske me, what thou ſhalt haue for thy portion:Gaine of your courſe. I ſay not this meaſure, nor that of heauenlie peace, full contentation, and other graces: neither as this man or that: but ſuch as for the beautie and brightneſſe of it, ſhall cauſe thee to maruaile, and to ſay, as it is, euen more then thou couldeſt haue asked. If thou further demaundeſt, how thou ſhalt attaine to this: that thou maiſt thus knowe, eſteeme, and keepe it: this preſent treatiſe (beſides all helpe of publike Miniſterie, and priuate conference) ſhall teach thee: neither doe I doubt, but that in one part or other of it, the humble and teacheable reader ſhall finde it.
               
                   But yet further to ſatisfie thoſe who cannot reſt, becauſe of the want of ſuch graces as God affordeth to ſome of his children; they are to vnderſtand, that as we cannot, nor may not appoint the Lord his times, and meaſures; ſo we can ſhew no reaſon, why we ſhould not hope for that which he hath promiſed, if we ſeeke it as he teacheth vs, and as hereafter ſhall be ſhewed.Why God withholds ſome grace from his. And if the Lord, in this caſe, increaſeth not our faith, knowledge, experience, ſtrength ouer our corruptions, our comfort, and ſuch like fruites of his ſpirit, (as we haue no cauſe to feare it, while we feruently deſire it) he knoweth ſufficient cauſe why he doth not: that is, becauſe he knoweth it ſhould not be good for vs, if he ſhould giue vs them: So that his holding backe, is not,Note. for  that he is vnwilling to beſtowe them vpon vs, but becauſe he ſeeth that they would be to the hurt of vs; as that we may be vnfit to vſe them well (but rather as many doe) to waxe proude of them: for the which cauſe the Apoſtle himſelfe ſaith, That the Lord did denie to him a gift, which he had oft,
                  2. Cor. 12.9. 
                  and earneſtly praied for. And for this cauſe God may denie bleſſing to his owne faithfull ſeruants, as alſo to trie them, whether they loue them ſo well, that they will ſeeke after them ſtill, and yet this ought not to be taken hardly of them. But

otherwiſe (theſe excepted) if they grow not,Cauſes in our ſelues of not growing. it is moſt iuſtly to be imputed  to their owne fault; as their ignorance, or darke ſight in knowing how they ought to labour for theſe graces,Jgnorance. and their ſlouthfulnes in refuſing paines taking,Slouth. 
                  Fauouring ſin. or ſleightlie and houerlie going about it, and fauouring themſelues againſt their conſciences, and not remouing out of their way ſuch clogges as they ſaw to hinder them: Or if theſe be not the cauſes, then is it their owne timorouſnes, and vnbeleefe; they fearing that ſuch heauenlie grace as they ſeeke after,Timorouſneſſe. ſhall not be giuen vnto them, wherein they doe God no ſmall diſhonour:Iames 1.6. 
                  who is more ready to giue then they to aske: and giueth plentifullie to them which aske, and casteth no man in the teeth; but then they must alſo aske in faith, and wauer not, but that they ſhall receiue; for if they wauer, they can receiue nothing.
                   Can the Lord prouide more ſtrongly and ſurely,Remedie of our vnbeleefe. to remedie our diſtruſt, then by ſpeaking in this wiſe vnto vs, to imbolden vs, who are ſo ſore letted and hindred by vnbeliefe, that when wee doe that which in vs lieth to pleaſe him, and to grow on in grace; yet we ſticke faſt in it, as in the myre of vnbeleefe? and when we haue done all, yet we doubt, God will not graunt vs our requeſt? ſo ingrauen in vs it is: thereby ſhewing that we can hardly beleeue further, then we can ſee. I know mens anſwere herein is this; they dare not be ſo bold, as to aſſure themſelues that they ſhall haue the grace which they pray for and ſeeke: But I ſay, let an euill conſcience be taken out of the way, and their doubt may ſoone bee at an ende. Oh but they are afraide, leaſt  they ſhould preſume? What? when God promiſeth and commaundeth vs to truſt him? Reuerence (no doubt, leaſt we ſhould be too bold and light-minded in dealing about ſo holy matters) is a vertue much to be ſought after, and imbraced: but we muſt be able to put a manifeſt difference betwixt a full perſwaſion of that which God promiſeth, and an vnreuerent boldnes to challenge that which he promiſeth not. And therefore to returne, faile not thou (to the accuſation and wound of thy conſcience) in ſeruing Gods prouidence, and in vſing the meanes faithfullie to growe and increaſe in his graces and gifts, ſtaying vpon the Lord by faith: and aſſuredlie he will not faile, nor diſappoint thee.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 8. How the mindes and hearts of the beleeuers are taken vp vſuallie, ſeeing they renounce inward luſts.
               
                  How the minds of the godly are occupied.
                  BVt to returne to the renouncing of our luſtes: If ye aske me what manner of perſons they be who are at defiance with this vnſauorie ſtuffe, and what thoughts ſuch haue, as expell theſe corruptions, and haue them in heartie contempt, ſeeing the minde is euer buſie,Three ages of Gods children. and ſeldome vnoccupied? I anſwere, that the perſons are, as I haue ſaid, ſinners, as others be, but ſanctified: and weake, but willing to be better; and that their thoughts are according to the diuers growths and ages of Gods children, 3. Childhood. 1. Pet. 2.1. 2. Middle age. Epheſ. 4.14. 1. Olde age. Heb. 5.14. Heb. 12.12, 13which are three. The higheſt degree, is olde age, or the experienced eſtate: which yet is not the perfect age in Chriſt, for that ſhall not befall vs vntill the

                   life to come, but a firme, conſtant, and ſetled going forward vnto that perfection. The ſecond, is the middle age in chriſtianitie, in which, as young men in wraſtling, we haue courage againſt our ſinfull luſtes; but yet like vnto them; we haue many foiles, and are oftentimes cooled in our courage, though we ſometime preuaile. And in this eſtate, we are very fitly compared to the graine of muſtard ſeede, after that it is ſhot vp, and hath a blade and ſtalke, till it come to haue boughes and branches to ſhelter the fowles of the ayre; ſo in this we are euer growing, though ſlowlie: and this degree of chriſtianitie, is betwixt olde age and infancie. The third is childhood or infancie, the loweſt and the laſt, the which is principallie diſcerned by an earneſt deſire of the ſincere  milke of the worde; and namely of the promiſe of the forgiuenes of ſinnes: which although ſome of theſe deare children of God cannot with full aſſurance lay holde of, yet this their hungring deſire after it (which cannot be ſatisfied without it) with a ſenſible feare to offend God, is a true ſigne thereof. And this is the loweſt degree of true beleeuers; which eſtate is at firſt, weake in reſpect of the other two, as it is in the naturall bodie: for in the young babe, it is firſt weake, and after groweth to greater ſtrength, as it groweth in yeares: yea, and this is an excellent eſtate, in reſpect of the counterfeit, which haue moſt neere reſemblance of it, in whom may be ſeene ſome flitting motions after good things, but in time, they vaniſh and goe away, as they came.  Theſe degrees of the ſpirituall birth being thus deſcribed, which by the Scriptures may eaſilie be diſcerned, I will now ſhew,Heb. 5.14. Epheſ. 4.14. 1. Pet. 2.2. The higheſt degree of Chriſtians.
                   about what things the thoughts of theſe three are chiefelie occupied, or deſire at leaſt to haue them occupied, though they doe not euer attaine to that which they deſire. And to begin with the firſt, ſome of Gods elect, through long experience, and much acquaintance with the practiſe of a godlie life; haue obtained grace to guide them more conſtantlie then others: whereby they ſo ſerue God, that they may pleaſe him with a reuerent awe of his maieſtie, which holdeth them within bounds, and in holie and religious feare of offending him, while the other often breake out more eaſilie. And this eſtate, though it be to be aimed  at, of all godlie people; yet it is not obtained, but of ſuch as haue accuſtomed their mindes to the heauenlie courſe, and to whom good meditations and thoughts, to ſhunne and auoide euill, are become a pleaſure; and as well to be able to diſcerne the ſame by their vnderſtanding, and iudgement,Heb. 5.14. as to haue their will in good ſort at commaundement to follow the good, and ſhunne the euill. Such as Saint Iohn calleth fathers, in his epiſtle (ſaying,1. Iohn 2.13. 
                  I write vnto you fathers) becauſe they had knowne the Lord, and his manner of dealing with his people, and had experience of the diſcipline and gouernement of his houſe in a godly life a long time.
               Now ſuch as haue been trained vp in the obedience, which the Scripture  teacheth, from their youth, are able,Heb. 10.24. vpon their ſo long triall of Gods directing them in that courſe,Matth. 13.31. not onely to goe forward cheerefullie and readilie themſelues, but alſo to perſwade and hearten on others. And ſuch therefore, thorough this grace receiued at Gods bountifull hands, are much freed from this bondage, and ſeldome ſo groſſelie holden vnder of their corrupt luſtes, as others, ſauing that God will make them ſee their weakenes from time to time, eſpeciallie to ſubdue pride in them, which is ſoone kindled in them, and

to holde them vnder: they haue therefore their mindes vſuallie ſet vpon  ſome one or other of the infinite heauenlie inſtructions, which from time to time they haue treaſured vp in their hearts, both out of the Scriptures, and the fountaines of other holy men; whereby, although they are not quickened as they would, and deſire to be, yet they are held from much euill. The particulars, of Gods vnutterable kindnes, of mans mortalitie, the momentanie eſtate of all things vnder the ſunne, the bleſſed eſtate of the elect, the endles woe of the damned, &c. who can recken? They haue much time taken vp in the beholding and meditating of Gods maieſtie, as they can conceiue of him, his power, his wiſdome, his euerlaſting being: of his iudgements, and how he is prouoked: of his patience, and long ſuffering towards the  world; his dailie pulling of them from their pleaſures, who thought they ſhould neuer be taken from them: and their owne eſtate, and ſeuerall parts of their liues much occupie them;Prou. 14.8. how they may keepe in their way: For it is the wiſdome of the prudent to vnderſtand their way. Alſo, how they may hold out conſtantlie the profeſſion of their hope with ioy vnto the ende: how they may reſiſt all occaſions of euill (for they preſume not without dailie helpe from God for all their ſtrength) they conſider what lets they ſhall finde from Sathan, the world, and their owne hearts: how they may order well their particular actions in, and through the day, in their callings, giuing to all men their due: that they may proſper, and alſo, that they may make a good account  at the ende of the day,Prou. 2.10.11. and ſo at their laſt ende. They who haue theſe, and the ſeuerall particularities vnder all theſe contained, to occupie their mindes about,Prou. 6.22. is it doubted, what thoughts, deſires, and occupying of their heads,2. Pet. 1.8.9. and hearts they haue, to keepe them that they may neither be idle, nor vnprofitable? The thought they take daily (vnleſſe they be much blinded) is in the greateſt part, this: how they may haue a good conſcience in all things, pleaſing God,Acts 24.16. Coloſſ. 1.10. and how they may be prepared for the croſſe, and to keepe the ſame minde vnder it, that being exerciſed therein oft and much, they may reape the fruite of righteouſneſſe,Hebr. 12.12. euen moſt ſweete peace: and as their ſaluation groweth neerer,
                  Rom. 13.11. 
                  then when they first beleeued; ſo they may be fitter, and readier to  meete the Lord; their latter daies being farre better than their former: to be merie whileſt they thinke he hath bleſſed them,Reuel. 2.22. Acts 2.25, 26. and neuer at eaſe, nor to thinke themſelues well, but while they are vnder his gouernement.
               Haue ſu
                     ••
                   no other things to doe, but that with the ſcumme and ofscourings of the world, they muſt aske how to ſpend the long ſommers day, and the weariſome winter nights? Although others, who are prophane, haue not,Pſalm. 1.2. Pſalm. 119.67 yet with theſe we may ſee, it is otherwiſe. What? doe men thinke, becauſe the diuell hath filled the moſt parts of the world with darkenes, ſo that the moſt ſee none of theſe things, and hauing no experience of, nor acquaintance with them, doe not deſire to be partakers of them: doe men, I ſay, therefore  thinke, that there is no other, nor better way to take vp their mindes, then as they doe? but like brute beaſts, and wilde Iriſh, to paſſe their time, or to iumpe with the world, and ſo to be like others? Oh land! oh people, infatuate and ſottiſh! that vnder the Goſpell, and the ſame ſo long in thee continued, yea, and that in many places ſo fruitfullie and faithfullie preached, art yet to ſeeke of the true fruite of the Goſpell; and art not led to God by it,

                   more then if there were none: oh that men created of God to liue for euer, ſhould be content to bee ignorant, and without care or loue of the infinite good things which are reuealed to be knowne and delighted in of them! The Lord hath done great things for thee (ô man!Luk. 19.42.) but they are not wonderful in thine eyes: this bleſſed time is the day of thy viſitation, but it is hidden from thee.
               But to returne: I haue ſhewed thee, how ſome of Gods people haue their minds exerciſed, when they haue chaſed away the noyſome droue of ſuch vncleane luſts, as were wont in times paſt to poſſeſſe them as well as other;The beſt are moleſted ſometimes with luſts. yet doe I not conclude that theſe are not at all troubled with euill thoughts and  vaine deſires, as though I would preferre them before the Apoſtle himſelfe, who ſaid, that the meſſenger of Sathan (euen ſome prickes of corruption) was ſent to buffet him: and at another time, Oh wretched man that I am,
                  2. Cor. 12.9. Rom. 7.24. 
                  who ſhall deliuer me from this bodie of ſinne! Nay I am ſo farre from ſaying ſo, that I contrarily affirme, that their pureſt actions are mixed with corruption: and no better then good water running thorough an vnſauourie veſſell; as their faith, loue, vprightnes, mercie, &c. Now then, if God ſhould look vpon their faults, though they may be kept from foule and filthie vncleanneſſes, how ſhould they be able to abide it? no, if it were no more then vntowardnes and vnfitnes to the duties of their callings, and to other good works, and much weariſomnes therein.Not comparable to the Apoſtles. 
                   I doe not (therefore) forget my ſelfe in ſpeaking thus of ſome of Gods ſeruants: for whatſoeuer I ſay of them, let no man gather that it is a making of them equall with the ſingulareſt of the Apoſtles. For we know what Paul could ſay, of his ioy in his ſufferings, and that oftentimes, and the ſtrangenes,
                  2. Cor. 12.4. 
                  and varietie of them, of his lifting vp into paradiſe, and that he had heard ſuch things, as are not lawfull for a man to ſpeake.
               
               Theſe and ſuch others, I thinke, God gaue him as priuiledges,Paul had ſpeciall priuiledges. which were meere arrogancie and oſtentation for any man among vs to dreame of, or compare with him in: ſeeing our ſufferings (to ſpeake of them who haue ſuſtained the greateſt afflictions for the Goſpell in our age) haue bin ſmall: and  the other things mentioned to haue bin ſhewed him, are more extraordinarie: but to haue our minds and hearts ſo clenſed, & purged from the ſtrength of corrupt luſts, as I haue ſaid, to haue no fellowſhip with them: and when they are kindled in vs, to haue grace and ſtrength ordinarily, and vſually againſt them, and to ſee and know how to auoide them;Zach. 12.8.9.10. it is ſo farre off from arrogancie to thinke that it ſhould be ſo, that it is farre vnbeſeeming the grauitie and age of fathers in Chriſt, and ſtrong Chriſtians, not to haue it ſo. So that as ancient men, who haue liued long, are called fathers for their age, skill,Theſe be fathers. and experience: ſo theſe for their time and long continuance in Chriſts ſchoole are called fathers; and therefore ought to haue wiſedome and knowledge, how  to walke thorough the world (though a wildernes) in ſafetie: how to withſtand the diuell in his aſſaults (though ſubtile) and skilfull alſo in their courſe and cariage of themſelues, how to be paternes of good life vnto the younger ſort.
                  Tit. 2.4. And thus they hauing their minds eſtabliſhed with grace, and vnburthened of ſuch affections and thoughts, they may rightly, and in good ſort, goe about their workes and dealings: as labouring, bargaining, iourneying, companying, ſeruing their prince, and doing any other lawfull actions; and yet

not be diſtempered by them: which things for want of ſuch a well ordered  minde, no other men can doe, as by the complaints of the better ſort may bee ſeene, and by experience of the bad ſort is perceiued, and daily found. And this for the higheſt degree, and greateſt meaſure of grace in Gods children.
               
                  The third ſort of the godly, in battell.The ſecond ſort is compared to yong men, who then are in their ſtrength, rather then when they are either children, or old men: ſo ſome of Gods ſeruants are as yet neither experienced nor throughly acquainted in the Chriſtian battaile as the fathers, nor vtterly ignorant of it, as the new borne Chriſtians: theſe are eſpecally occupied in fighting againſt temptations, and reſiſting and ouercomming their vnruly deſires, which hale and draw them after  the ſame. Therefore, as they who are yong men in age, and in their luſtie yeeres, are commonly of this middle ſort of Chriſtians (if they bee truly religious:1. Ioh. 2.14.) ſo S. Iohn writing to them, doth ſhew them what is their chiefe and principall worke: that is, to reſiſt the diuell, and his ſtrong aſſaults, which in them, luſtie and ſtrong, are not eaſily ſubdued: and perſwadeth them to this combat, not only by telling them what a glorious victorie it ſhall be to them to vanquiſh ſuch an enemie; but alſo that they may bee ſure of it, as if they had got it alreadie. Theſe knowing by the light of the Scriptures and the Commaundements, how corrupt their hearts are, and how many ſinfull thoughts and deſires doe ſwarme in them, they watch their hearts; whereas  before they knew of any daunger, they little looked after them: they pray againſt them now, often, and earneſtly: they haue ſome feare in companie, and alone by themſelues (which is no part of euill mens thought) leaſt they ſhould be ouercome by any ſuch affections, as they are in danger of, and yet they are oft ouercome. They do alſo oft times conſider how they may auoid the occaſions of ſinne, leaſt thereby they ſhould be inticed and ſo diſquieted in their mindes, and breake out to the offence of their brethren, and the reproch of their profeſſion among the bad: anger, impatience, frowardnes, fretting,Sinne is odious to them, though not euer ouercome of them. ſenſible deſiring of their neighbours goods, as wife, ſeruant, or ſuch like, which in times paſt were common matters with them, and their delight, their hearts haue now ſuch ſmart and wound for the ſame, that they grow to beware of them, wearie of them, aſhamed to thinke that ſuch vices ſhould bee found in them: and count it no needleſſe nor loſt labour to haue their care thus ſet on worke, that they may auoide them. Therefore ſuch as know the vſe of faſting ioyned with their prayers, do vſe it as occaſion ſerueth, & as their neede requireth, that they may the eaſilier purge out that old ſower leauen. They renue their couenants with the Lord to pleaſe him better, when they ſee how they haue ſlipped and fallen from their good purpoſes; and yet are ſoone vnſetled againe. They are in very good caſe this day or weeke, to withſtand any ſinne; and yet to morrow or next weeke vnſetled and ſenſiblie diſtempered;  in their proſperitie ſoone forgetfull of their feruent care which they had, and then as much miſliking themſelues for it, when they ſee it: and to bee ſhort, they are much grieued for their ſinnes, and yet oft ouercome of them by inward ſuggeſtion and outward occaſions. And what is ſuch a life, but a combat and conflict? which, although it may ſeeme miſerable, yet is it ſafe: and the life that is voide of this, is the life full of woe and dangers. Furthermore,

                   whatſoeuer their earthly dealings are, although they neglect them not, yet they are not moſt deepely and earneſtly ſetting their hearts vpon them (as farre as they can eſpie it in themſelues) but often looking to the principall, and that which is moſt worth, that they may finde peace betwixt God,Theſe are ſometime diſcouraged. and their hearts. Through ignorance and vnacquaintance in their Chriſtian courſe, knowing, what hardneſſes and difficulties are in their way, they are many times diſcouraged; but they, who haue laide their foundation ſtrongly, riſe vp after ſome heauines, and diſcomfort, out of their ſleepines and ſecuritie, complaining thereof, and come to themſelues againe.
                     Cant 3 2.3. Glad to vſe all helpes. All good helpes that they can inioy, they are glad of, publike, or priuate, and thus (I meane,  by the ſtrength hereof) they haue oft and much refreſhing of their minds, and put away much tediouſnes, fearefull panges, and dangers of euill: by all which, and ſuch like, it may be perceiued, what the thoughts of ſuch are, and how their hearts in great part are occupied. And although they haue not, as the former ſort which I haue ſpoken of, abilitie and ſtrength to occupie and exerciſe their ſenſes and minds ſo continuallie and conſtantlie to be heauenly hearted, and to haue God their guide ſo ſenſiblie, as they (for want of experience, and perhaps knowledge to) yet are they much delighted with the good examples of ſuch as goe before them, and giue them light: and to be framed after them, as they are after Chriſt, is the thing which they moſt looke  after and deſire.
               They hauing thorough Gods goodnes preuailed ſomewhat, eſpeciallie at ſometimes againſt their ſtrongeſt corruptions, which were wont to beare too much ſway in them, they earneſtlie are ſet againſt the ſmaller,Set againſt ſmaller ſinnes. and ſuch as ſeeme leſſe dangerous; as the idle, and vnprofitable rouings of their braine: (which do not directlie ſo much carrie them after euill, as hinder them from good, blindefolding their iudgements firſt, and then poyſoning the will afterwards) as the dreaming of outward peace, and proſperitie, of long life, of pleaſure, and profit; vaine wiſhings of that which other haue, being things pretious in their eyes: Which they are oft tickled with, till they come  to better remembrance of themſelues; much like the Apoſtles (when they were yet weake) dreaming of promotion, of an earthlie kingdome, and who ſhould be greateſt among their fellowes: which toies and other like building of caſtles in the ayre, the diuell had filled not onely their heads, but alſo their hearts with the delight of them ſometimes, and their mouthes alſo with the talke of them, as their chiefeſt pleaſure.
               So that they hauing thorough cuſtome long lien in them, they cannot ſo eaſilie and readilie caſt them off, though they ſee the ſhame and vanitie of them. Their labour therefore (of their mindes, I meane) is in great part, this: to keepe themſelues from being taken vp of them, ſeeing good meditations  are hindered, yea, and eſtranged hereby; ſometime preuailing, ſometime preuailed againſt, whereby their ſorrow is the more: but they doe not all this while, ſee the happines of this their combate, which ſeemeth their greateſt miſerie. Becauſe it is certaine,Theſe be held vnder their infirmities for their good. that for their great good they are holden vnder of their infirmities, euen that they may be the more humble, when they ſee themſelues ſo vnperfect, and corrupt, who yet had dreamed ſometime before, that they were voide of that corruption (though the more was their ignorance)

a long time before: and their ſhort mourning ſhall bring after deliuerance  from that bondage, great meaſure and continuance of reioycing: whereas if they were not held downe after this manner, they ſhould forget what they were in times paſt, when they liued vnder the power of darkeneſſe and the bondage of ſinne. By this which I haue ſaid, it may appeare how the mindes of theſe are occupied, and that this ſecond age and growth in Chriſtianitie, is a ſtriuing rather, betwixt feare and hope, ſorrow and ioy, then a ſuperioritie ouer the vnrulie affections: and an eſtate ſtanding in neede of counſell and helpe, rather then fitted and experienced to counſell, direct and ſettle others. But the more ſure they be of their ſaluation, the more expert they ſhall be in the battaile.
               
               
                  The third ſort of the godly.Now the third ſort of the people of God, are compared to little children: of the which, ſome are as it were in the birth: of whom the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I trauaile in birth againe, till Chriſt be formed in you: who, though they as yet know it not, are deare to God, and haue ſure tokens of it, as I haue ſhewed in the firſt treatiſe: and they haue many properties of the other young ones, which are of this third ſort. The other be ſuch as are young, and hang vpon the breaſt, that as ſuch growe to know the father and mother, when as yet they know nothing elſe; crie after them, and deſire the breaſt, whereby they are nouriſhed, and ioy and take their pleaſure in theſe: euen ſo it fareth with this third ſort of Gods elect, if they be well  grounded in the truth, and haue rightlie been taught, how weake ſoeuer they be,1. Iohn 2.14. except in temptation. For they (as the Apoſtle ſaith) know the father: ſuch light and vnderſtanding they haue of the Goſpell, that though they know not how to ſerue him; yet they know that his fauour is all in all to them: in ſo much, as if ſome of them haue not full certaintie that he is tenderly affected towards them, they ſo long after it, that nothing can ſatisfie them without it: About which their thoughts are chiefely occupied, and in the which their delight is, after they know what it is worth; and in the meanes of their ſpirituall nouriſhment, which is the word of God; and not leaſt of all in this, that they may not in the leaſt thing offend or diſpleaſe God. This Saint Peter
                   ſetteth forth by the ſame ſimilitude of young children, when he teacheth young Chriſtians, how they muſt looke to growe vp in their ſpirituall life; Deſire (ſaith he) that ſincere milke of the word,
                  1. Pet. 2.2. 
                  that ye may growe thereby.
               
               And theſe are the eſpeciall things which are moſt apparantly to be ſeene in them, by others; and felt of themſelues: who alſo are much troubled for want of ſtronger faith, thirſting after, and ioying in the ſenſe and feeling of Gods louing kindnes. True it is, they haue little minde to the ſinne, which they were wont to offend in; yet that is not ſo much to be counted ſound practiſe of godlines, (for that they oft times little marke and conſider how they are tempted and inticed, hauing their minde taken vp in that, wherein  they moſt deſire:) but are more like to freſh and vnexpert ſouldiers, who haue not, as yet, been feared in the field: but where they ſee that they haue offended God, they take it heauilie. Their calling is cheerefullie followed, whileſt their ſmall faith is vpholden, by cleauing to the promiſe: and as vncheerefully, when that faileth, moning and pining, if it be long wanting. There is great danger to be feared in both theſe their eſtates through Sathans malice and

                   ſubtiltie, which they yet are ignorant of, and vnacquainted with, as they are with moſt of the other hindrances of their going forward.
               The one of them is, leaſt whileſt their comfort continueth,The firſt danger in comfort. they ſhould neglect their lawfull buſines, as thinking it to be the greateſt let which they haue: ſeeing by meanes thereof, they cannot attend to reading, praying, and thinking of Gods loue, to the quickning of their hearts when they would: although when they haue leaſure and opportunity to ſuch duties, they haue no ſuch deſire for the moſt part; neither doe they vſe it commonly to the moſt and beſt aduantage of their ſoules as they might. Here Sathan appeareth as an Angell of light.
               
               
                   The ſecond danger is, leaſt when they be voide of this comfort,The ſecond danger, when they feele want of comfort. they fall into heauie dumpes, diſtruſtfulnes, and feare that all was but a ſhadow, and a dreame: from hence may ariſe deſpaire for a time; and after, a ſleepie and ſecure conſcience, as fearing that the Lord will no more reſtore to them the grace that they were wont in him to finde. Here the diuell ſheweth himſelfe as a roring Lyon. But before experience teach how to deale herein, counſell and helpe of other, who are able to miniſter it, with calling vpon God, (as well as ordinarie hearing of Sermons) is chiefelie (when they are ſo weake, that they cannot helpe themſelues) to be ſought for, and regarded. And the rather, for that their childiſhnes doth require the ſame: For many follies,Many defects of theſe. 
                   weakeneſſes, groſſe ignorance are in the moſt of them, and many deceiuings of themſelues, many phantaſies, and ouerſights are carried about of them: yea, and theſe not only long lien in, if they be troubled with melancholy, and not teacheable, following carefully the light which God reuealeth to them; but alſo the luſts which ruled them before, will hardly be maiſtered, but keepe their hold, and abide in great ſtrength to their diſgrace and diſcouragement: eſpecially when after that they haue a while ioyed in their ſaluation, they afterwards not well knowing how to occupie themſelues, ſhall waxe idle and vnprofitable, and ſo growe to their olde courſe againe, when they cannot get into a better, which Sathan doth mightily labour to bring  them to.
               For we muſt remember, that they are compared to children,Young Chriſtians compared to children. for that they ſhould daily growe out of childiſhnes; and not looke, as it were, to be alwaies ſet on the lap. Which wiſdome God giueth, teaching euen his weake ones to know themſelues better from day to day: and to looke to beare ſome croſſes (which God ſendeth for the exerciſing of their faith and patience) becauſe he their father doth ſee it meeteſt for them to haue it ſo; and to prepare them for greater by little and little: And as children growe to leaue childiſhnes, ſo they ſhould begin to miſlike ſuch faults as they eſpie in themſelues, and not to thinke, that they ſhould be from time to time borne with and winked at in  them.
                     Theſe muſt growe. Matth. 13.31. Therefore our Sauiour compareth the eſtate of his Church and people in the firſt age and beginning of it, to a graine of muſtard ſeede, which being once rooted, how ſmall ſoeuer it be, groweth forward from appearing aboue the ground, to be a blade, and ſo to branch: Teaching his thereby, that they ſhould ſo looke to go from one degree to another, that though they did not knowe what was to be done of them in this their chriſtian courſe, when they firſt entred into it: yet now after they haue been trained vp in it for a

ſeaſon, and haue taſted of the promiſe of life, they ſhould haſten thither, thorough  all lets which might hinder them; and purge out, as they come to eſpie them, many vnbeſeeming qualities and cuſtomes, as excrements. And ſeeing their happines is not here below, therefore they may not dreame of any ſuch thing, that is, to haue their heauen here: nor for their profeſſions ſake looke, that the ignorant and wicked world ſhould commend and eſteeme of them; but contralily:Pſal. 88.9. yea, perhappes of their owne fleſh to be deſpiſed and hated for it.
               
                  Their dutie.They are to begin to know the multitude of fleſhly luſts, which ſecretly lurke within them, ſeeing they are now much fitter to diſcerne and finde them out in themſelues, then euer they were at any time, the Lord tenderlie  dealing with them, as not to ſhew them all at once, which were enough to diſmay them; nor how many afflictions abide them, which were like to confound them. Their religion muſt not be to eſpie faults in other (for that religion is ſoone learned) and to hold a vaine and deceitfull hope of their own righteouſnes, when it is but froth: for that is readie enough to take holde on them, eſpecially where they are not vnder good teaching. Neither let them thinke much to heare a rebuke, which ſauoureth in them of much pride and blindnes; nor to thinke euery good thing rare and admirable in themſelues, when many euils are within them, which they doe not yet eſpie and finde out: but reuerence Gods graces in others, that they may the ſooner be like  them.
               Thus I haue ſhewed in ſome ſort what are the thoughts, affections, and deſires vſually, and for the moſt part of the weaker ſort of Gods children (about matters of the ſoule) this being added, that they are grieued, when they are led of the contrarie: and this is to bee vnderſtood of that part of their eſtate, which is free from ſtrong and vehement temptations: for otherwiſe, it may beſt be gathered out of the former treatiſe how it is with thē; the which I haue partly laid foorth and deſcribed plainly, and partly ſet downe in the way of exhortation. For the ſame things that I exhort them vnto, are the verie anatomie and repreſentation of their hearts, except the diuell hath caſt  them into ſome ſpirituall ſicknes, as I haue ſaid: which he doth to many of this weake ſort, as alſo he may doe, and doth where hee can enter, with both the other ſorts alſo.Gods children are in danger ſometimes to be dazeled and without feeling. My meaning is, that the children of God weak or ſtrong, doe not onely ſtep aſide ſometimes from the peaceable eſtate, wherein they deſire to keepe: but alſo are in daunger (without continuall watchfulnes, and earneſt and oft praying) to be ſenſibly dazeled, as men not knowing where they are, and ſtript of grace vtterly to their owne feeling, as if there had neuer been any: Which I ſay, that none may be diſmaied (as they might eaſily be) if they ſhould heare onely the beſt of the ſtate of the godly, and not vnderſtand ſomething of the worſt alſo; and yet, euen that worſt part God turneth  to their good, as they in time by experience doe eaſily perceiue. But if any thinke that this laſt ſort of Gods children (which indeed is the weakeſt of the reſt) or either of the other, bee nothing differing from the vnregenerate in their thoughts and deſires: they muſt know, that the ſecreteſt hypocrite, which of all vnreformed ones commeth neereſt them, is yet farre differing from the weakeſt true Chriſtian: as both may bee ſeene by that which hath

                   been ſaid of both, and as the ſame hypocrite would confeſſe, if he might bee conuerted. And I will in few words ſhew as much as ſhall be expedient. For when a godly man diſlikes himſelfe moſt, yet euen then he is farre before the beſt of the other: who haue not their mindes occupied about heauenlie matters; the thought thereof is tedious vnto them: they deſire no acquaintance therewith: neither delight they to thinke how they may be better reformed; neither can they bee brought to put themſelues in the weights of the Sanctuarie, that is, to trie their eſtate by the word of God: But their thoughts and deſires are about carnall libertie, pleaſure, profit, long life, reuenge, &c. euen as their ſpeech is, that commeth from their hearts, frothie and vaine,  idle and vnſauourie, earthly and worldly. And when it is any better, it is either by conſtraint of others, or to ſhew the pride of heart, or for vaine glorie, or to ſome ſuch end, or els they are ſoone wearie of it. So that, it may trulie be ſaid, that the deſires and thoughts of Gods people, euen the weakeſt, differ much from others, who are vnrenued. And this may in ſome ſort ſhew the vſuall thoughts and deſires of this third kinde of godly people, as of the two former. As for the diuers meaſures of ſpirituall growth in them, in degree one aboue another, as I haue followed the Scripture in the ſetting out thereof; ſo I thought good in a word to put the reader in minde of this,Theſe degrees may in ſome reſpect fall one into another. that euery action mentioned in the three kinds of our eſtate, muſt not preciſely be ſo appropriated  to that kind, in which it is reckoned, that it may not alſo pertaine to one of the other: but for the moſt part, the affections which are reckoned to euery one, are moſt proper to that, to the which they are referred. Neither is any to think that theſe cogitations, which I haue ſet downe to belong moſt properly to euery kind of age in Chriſt, are the only meditations & thoughts of them; but that amongſt others (according to the diuers occaſions of euery one) they haue oftentimes theſe, and ſuch like occupying their hearts, but more oft deſiring, then inioying them: whereas others which are not partakers of the promiſe of life, haue ſeldome any good thoughts; or if they haue, they are fleeting and momentanie, and either cauſed by feare, or prouoked of  others, and as I may ſay, violent, ſo that they abide not; and not voluntarie, ſeeing they haue not the ſpirit of Chriſt, which only doth worke them. And all this that I haue ſaid of the three ſorts of Gods people, may cleerely be illuſtrated and proued by the many examples out of the holy Scriptures, who of weake became ſtrong: As Moſes,
                  Exod. 3.11. who was firſt afraid to looke Pharao in the face, deſiring that another might goe who was meeter then he:Exod. 10.29. yet afterwards hee was not afraide to doe his meſſage boldly and thoroughly in the name of the Lord. And Peter, who in his middle eſtate, as I may ſay, was ſo faint and fearfull, that hee was ſtriken and flighted with the voyce of a ſillie damſell, Luk. 22.57. yet after, when he grew to the degree of a father, was not  abaſhed at the threat of the high Prieſt, Act. 5.29. and yet both theſe were weaker then in either of theſe eſtates, at their firſt beginning: As the plants, corne, and graſſe, are firſt tender, then ſtronger, and at laſt ſetled and at their full growth. And thus much of the cogitations and affections of the three ſorts of Gods children, that it may be ſeene that they are not caried about of their luſts as the vnregenerate: but haue their hearts occupied in farre better manner.
               
                  And thus to returne, and to ioyne this which followeth to the end of the  ſeuenth chapter (for this former came in by way of a parentheſis, to anſwer a queſtion propounded in the entrance into it.) Now that I haue ſpoken of inward luſts and ſins of the heart, and ſhewed how they are diſliked and renounced of all true beleeuers: it followeth, that the ſame be proued, concerning the outward ſinnes of the life, that they abhorre and ſhunne them alſo; that all may ſee, they haue little cauſe to pleaſe themſelues, or to reioyce either.
            
            
               CHAP. 9. Of the ſecond kinde of euils or ſinnes to be renounced, namely outward.
               
                  Outward wickednes to be renounced.
                  TO reioyce either about their ſaluation, or the goodnes of their heart, if their behauiour be ſtained with outward wickednes, & their holie profeſſion blemiſhed with open and ſhamefull ſins, is vaine: which is the more to be marked, ſeeing many boaſt that they haue good harts to God, whē their liues are wicked.1. Sam. 7.4. Vide Iudg. 10.14. Hoſ. 14.1. When Samuel willed the people to trie their repentance to be ſound, he willed them to put away Baalam and Aſhtaroth,
                   that is, their ſtrange gods, and ſhamefull Idolatrie which they had delighted in. And Paul telleth the Corinthians, that they muſt clenſe themſelues from all filthines of the fleſh,
                  2. Cor. 7.1. 
                  as well as of the ſpirit. But the leſſe ſhall be needfull to bee ſaid of this, ſeeing the whole courſe of the Scriptures, both doctrine and examples, as alſo common reaſon doth teſtifie the ſame, that none can proue their hearts vpright, if their behauiour be offenſiue and euill.
               
                  
                     2. Pet. 2.20. Beleeuers must forſake their former ſinnes.For doctrine firſt, that of S. Peter doth plainly ſhew it, where he ſaith, If a man after he hath profeſſed a Chriſtian courſe by acknowledging the forgiuenes of his ſinne, and the hope of euerlaſting life, ſhall yet be intangled againe in his old ſinnes, and ouercome of them, the latter end of that man is worſe then the beginning: for it had  been better neuer to haue acknowledged the way of righteouſnes, then afterwards to turne from the commaundements giuen vnto him: And they that do ſo, are moſt fitly compared to dogges which returne to their vomite, and to ſwine which hauing been waſhed,
                  Iam. 1.25. 
                  doe wallow againe in the mire. S. Iames alſo is bold to ſay, that if the tongue onely be vnbridled (be the reſt of the life reformed how it can) euen that one diſorder in a man profeſſing the Goſpell, ſhall be enough to teſtifie againſt him, that his religion is nothing worth, but vaine. If his religion be in vaine, he can neither haue any part in ſaluation, nor in a godlie life: How can we which are dead to ſinne (ſaith the Apoſtle) liue any longer therein?
                  Rom. 6.2. The reaſon is, ſeeing they which are dead to ſinne, are ſo made partakers of the power, vertue and grace of Chriſt, that naturall corruption hath loſt here force to bring foorth bitter fruites. So that neither men can profeſſe religion without caſting away their old behauiour, but they muſt be diſſemblers▪ neither can they bee truly godly, but they muſt endeuour to walke free from offenſiue euils (this alwaies prouided, that theſe offenſiue euils be ſuch, as are knowne of the parties to be ſinnes.)
               
                  
                   As for examples, they are many and cleere,Examples. which ſet this truth plainely before our eyes. When Ioſeph ſaw that he could no otherwiſe keepe fauour with his miſtreſſe, & hold ſtill many other liberties, which in his place he did inioy, vnles he would defile his body, & giue ouer himſelfe to her whooriſh demaund: becauſe he was a godly man, he would neuer conſent;Geneſ. 39.10. although he brought vpon himſelfe thereby, vtter diſpleaſure, and for ought he could ſee, perpetuall miſery: How can I (ſaid he) doe this great wickedneſſe, and ſinne againſt God? Moſes being a very man of God, refuſed, when he might haue inioyed it, to be called and counted the ſonne of Pharaohs daughter an idolater,Hebr. 11.24. and choſe rather to leade an hard life with the people of God in the wildernes,  then to liue in ſinfull pleaſures for a ſeaſon.Luk. 19.2. 
                  Zaccheus one of the chiefe tole-gatherers, an infamous man counted by the very multitude (in ſo much that they thought hardly of it, that our Sauiour Chriſt would goe into the houſe of ſo bad a man) yet when Chriſt had conuerted him, whileſt he abode that day with him, and for proofe thereof, had pronounced of him openly, that he was that ſame day made the ſonne of Abraham, who at his entring in vnto him, was a manifeſt oppreſſor, and poler of the people, what did he? A thing ſeldome ſeene in ſuch as haue their hearts nailed to their goods, and haue their whole delight taken vp in them: He reuenged himſelfe vpon his couetous, and miſerlike minde, and his greedy deuouring of other mens  goods: and as ſweete as they had been to him in times paſt, yet to ſhew how this ſinne was in account with him, he giueth halfe of them to the poore: and made restitution with the rest fourefolde, to ſuch as he had wronged.
               Oh worthy example to all oppreſſors, or Vſurers! with whom all is fiſh that commeth to net: and which (whoſoeuer ſmart for it, begge, complaine, yea and pine away for very ſorrow of that which they haue loſt) will not forgoe any peece of their appetite: herein comming behinde Iudas the traitor. Oh happie Zaccheus! who haddeſt learned in ſo ſhort time,Luk. 7.37. that which many of thy companions in ſinne, as greedie as thou wert, as vnmercifull to the poore, as violent in drawing from others, to the inriching of themſelues, can  neuer learne in all their life time. Full truly doe they verifie the Scripture, which ſaith, It is as eaſie for a Camell to goe thorough a needles eye, as for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of God: Well it were with them, if they could learne of thee to caſt vp their gorge, and to ſet leſſe by that, which aboue all things, yea aboue God himſelfe, though to their owne perpetuall ſhame and woe, they haue made their delight.
               But I muſt proceede. To ende therefore with laying forth any more examples: how forcible is that of the woman in the Goſpell of S. Luke, who hauing been (as Zaccheus had) a woman of notorious life; yet when ſhe ſaw that her many and great ſinnes were forgiuen her, had her vnchaſte life in ſuch  deteſtation, that in token thereof, ſhe made her eyes which had allured men to vncleaneneſſe, a baſen of water to waſh Chriſts feete, and her haire of her head, which had been abuſed to the ſame purpoſe, (now in token of vtter renouncing ſuch vngodlines) a towell to wipe his feete: and yet this deteſtation is not ſaid to haue been ſhewed toward ſinnes, which had not greatly troubled them, but they were thoſe, which had ſtucke moſt neere them.
               Now if theſe with many other could not allow their ſinnes, which by nature

they loued, and by cuſtome they had long lien in, we need not doubt, but that other, leſſe inticing them were much further from them, and renounced of them: that it may truly be concluded, that the beleeuer in Chriſt forſaketh his olde ſinnes, though they were neuer ſo pleaſant vnto him.
            
            
               CHAP. 10. Of foure ſorts of ſuch as hope for ſaluation; yet renounce not open ſinnes, and outward offences.
               
               
                  BVt we need not ſpend many words about this matter, that the ſeruants of God haue, and ought to caſt off outward ſinnes.The vngodly will ſcorne profeſſors, if their liues be faulty. Another thing here is chiefely to be regarded; and this I thinke good to aduertiſe the chriſtian reader of: that there are many who ſeeme godly, and are not; that he may take more heede to himſelfe, leaſt he be found of the number of any of them. I referre them all, to foure ſpeciall kindes: the firſt are groſſe offenders, whom euery vile perſon which knoweth them to haue made greater ſhewes of godlines, then the common ſort doe (and yet not to be lights in good liuing) nor ſuch indeed, as they go for, but deceiuers; euery  vile perſon (I ſay) will be readie to laugh them to ſcorne, and hath reaſon enough, he thinketh (they being ſuch) to bring them into diſgrace. For when ſuch a prophane perſon once hath found out their hypocriſie and hollownes of heart, by open and oft committed euils, he is the further off from all little reuerence (which yet he ſhewed to them before) and hath Chriſtian religion it ſelfe in meaner account for their cauſe. I will not deny, but (ſuch is his ſhame) that if any walke ſincerely indeed, and without iuſt cauſe of rebuke, yet he is little moued at their example, neither greatly reuerenceth them, or takes any good by them, but reprocheth them rather. But that is becauſe he hath ſeene ſo many, who beſide ſome outward appearance of zeale, were little more gratious in their liues, or better then himſelfe; and therefore he is hardened to thinke ſo of all the reſt. Which wilfull blindnes and hardnes of heart, though it be too fearefull a ſigne of Gods vengeance to him, and that God hath giuen him ouer into his owne hearts deſire; yet in the meane while, this in great part may be iuſtly attributed to the liues of thoſe, who profeſsing godlineſſe, in their deeds denied the ſame, and were nothing leſſe then they went for.2. Tim. 3.5.6. Whoſe curſed courſe of liuing (I meane them which haue cauſed others to fall moſt dangerouſly) doth witnes and ſpeake fore againſt them: and they are enemies to their own ſoule, and nothing the men they goe for: and ſeldome haue I ſeene ſuch to be reclaimed from their euill  cuſtome and courſe when they haue long lien in it, and to be brought to any ſuch change, that in charity, better hope might be conceiued of them, but as they liued, ſo they haue died; that little other good could eaſily be reaped by thee, but this, that ſuch as knew them might beware of them. For when they be ſo groſſe in their liues, that for all the appearance of religion, they be iuſtly ill ſpoken of among the prophane: it had been better they had neuer

                   made any profeſſion at all: As in that one example of Saul is to be ſeene, who though he offered ſacrifices to the true God; yet did things odious in the eyes of the wicked world, 1. Sam. 22.18. and ſuch as the worſt of his ſeruants could not be brought to approue, and ioyne with him in, ſaue that one, euen curſed Doeg the Edomite.
               To the forementioned ſort,The ſecond ſort of bad profeſſors, ignorant and careleſſe. if we ſhall adioyne three other kindes of bad ones, it ſhall eaſily appeare that there are infinite perſons liuing among good Chriſtians, and of ſome ſo accounted of alſo, at leaſt of themſelues; who yet haue not renounced open and apparent ſins. The firſt of theſe three kinds, are the rude & common ſort of people: and as ignorant for the moſt part, as they  are rude & barbarous. They feare no danger, and their own ſpeeches do beſt bewray them: when they be reproued, their ſhift & anſwer is, that their hearts are as good as the beſt mens, though they cannot talke greatly of religion, nor make no ſuch ſhewes as many can: and as for their liues, they hope they ſerue God, as Chriſtian people ought; and keepe their Church, and haue no acquaintance with any which hold falſe opinions, but haue the good will of their neighbours, and if need were, could get the hands of many, for their honeſty. Indeed, (they muſt needes ſay) they haue ſuch euill nature, that they cannot but be angry, when they haue occaſion offered them; and reuile, and reuenge when men prouoke them: and that ſome are ſo euill, that  they can neuer be in charity with them: and though there be hard agreeing betwixt them and their wiues, yet it laſteth not long, though it be often: neither haue they many times had their neighbours to ſet them together, they thanke God: and they thinke the beſt couples iarre ſometimes. They giue their ſeruants and children liberty to doe what they will, and to goe where they liſt, on Sabboths, and at ſome other daies, as long as they will doe their buſines: and if they happe to curſe and ban, or ſweare,Note the wofull eſtate of the rude ignorant. (they ſay) they were greatly vrged to it: and though they doe not like this ſinging of Pſalmes, and Prayers, and reading in their houſes (for they thinke there is reaſon in all things) yet they loue as well to heare their owne man ſay ſeruice, (I ſpeake in  their owne phraſe) and ſometime to heare a good pulpit man too, as the beſt: They are no common gamſters, they ſay, but after they leaue worke, when they haue any good company, ſuch as they themſelues be, and on the Sunday out of ſeruice time. The world being ſo hard as it is, they are faine (they ſay) to put away their bad ware for good, and to mixe droſſe with corne, and to make a lie in commending of that which is euill, or elſe they cannot liue: And if they be tolde that God will caſt ſuch into hell for their euill liues, they hope, they ſay, in moſt things, they ſerue God as well as others; and God haue mercy on vs, they ſay, if we ſhould be damned for euery ſuch thing: and we repent when we haue done: we cannot be ſaints here: we will ſet  our good will to Gods, and that which we cannot doe, we hope Chriſt hath done for vs: and if the hardeſt ſhould fall out, yet if we may haue but one houre to repent vs before we die, we truſt to doe well enough.
               Theſe with many more ſuch ſpeeches, which lay open their heart, and eſtate which they are in, towards God; to euery man that can iudge, are ſutable fully to the courſe of their liues: and therefore he that iudgeth by the Scriptures, will thinke them farre from euerlaſting life. And yet as groſſe and

brutiſh as they are, there want not ſuch who ſhould tell them the truth more  plainely, who yet hold thē vp with good hope of their ſaluation, in ſo dangerous eſtate as they are in: which they themſelues ſo flatter themſelues in, that they had need to be driuen from their deceitfull hold by all meanes poſſible, and not vpholden therein: not vnlike to them in the Prophet Ieremy, where he ſaith,Ierem. 8.11. 
                  They haue healed the ſores of my people with gentle words, crying peace, peace, when there is no peace. Alas, the Apoſtle might ill ſay, that he, to whom the Lord hath giuen aſſured hope of ſaluation, muſt renounce vngodlines, of neceſſitie, if a man loaden with ſuch a burthen, might yet as one that runneth well, attaine to the crowne of glorie in the Lords kingdome!
               If any maruaile what I meane to ſet downe this rabble of euill qualities, it  may pleaſe him to vnderſtand, that it is the thing which I am to proue, that no ſuch life ſtuffed with groſſe iniquities can be that life, which God will accept of: and yet, many thouſands thinke otherwiſe, and their opinion being moſt welcome to theſe, whom I haue deſcribed, it was moſt meete that I ſhould by ſo good occaſion, debarre ſuch ignorant men, hauing no good conſcience (as much as in me lieth) from ſuch boldnes.
               
                  Many laugh at the rude for their homely ſpeeches, who yet are like them in qualities.Beſides, I would wiſh others (who doe not perhaps vtter their mindes ſo rudelie and plainelie as theſe, but are more ſubtile to beguile themſelues) to take me as ſpeaking to them, if their liues be corrupted, and defiled with theſe, and the like offences; and yet will needs hope and truſt for ſaluation: for it is to be feared (and therefore I account this watchword not in vaine) that many a one will be readie to laugh, when they heare the homelineſſe of their ſpeeches,Note. who had more need to weepe for being ſo like them in qualities.
               
                  A third ſort. Ciuil Profeſſors.But to proceede: There is a third ſort, which come yet more neere to the godly life, and may ſeeme to haue great wrong offered them, if they be not ſo taken: who becauſe they keepe within ſome ciuill courſe of honeſtie, and are free (ſome of them eſpeciallie) from groſſe offences, thinke themſelues to be of the beſt ſort of good liuers, and ſcorne to be accuſed, though their open faults are many: whom though God doth ſufficiently brand, when he ſaith, 
                  That harlots ſhall enter ſooner into his kingdome then they:
                  Matth. 21.31.5, 20. yet becauſe they take no warning by his word; he doth further bewray them, and ſet them out in deed to be knowne, ſuch as he neuer tooke pleaſure in, by ſuffering now and then, here and there, in all ages ſome ſuch to hang and drowne themſelues, or to die in deſpaire, or other miſerable manner, if poſſibly he might bring ſome of the reſt to repentance. Theſe perſwade themſelues that they doe liue godly, and yet by apparant proofe of Scripture may ſee plainelie, that they doe not ſo: for of ſuch our Sauiour ſpeaketh when he ſaith to his Diſciples, Matth. 5.20. Except your righteouſneſſe exceede the righteouſneſſe of the Scribes and Phariſies, ye cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen. Theſe (it feareth me to vtter  it, but that it is Gods truth) as farre off as they be from Gods kingdome, goe in ſundrie points farre before the two former ſorts, who yet thinke their eſtate to be good. Oh therefore how many periſh! And Some of all theſe 3. ſorts are ſometimes prickt in conſcience. yet ſome of all theſe three ſorts, are ſometime pricked in conſcience, and ſore diſquieted in themſelues for their ſinnes (which is hardly procured and wrought in the moſt hearers, no not euen by oft and ſound teaching) but yet in deed this is only a

                   ſlauiſh terrifying of them, for feare of the puniſhment:Exod. 9.27. 1. King. 21.27. in which feare they doe alſo confeſſe their ſinne, and that in teares ſomtime. There may be ſeene in them alſo a leauing for the time of ſome of their old euill qualities, that a man would marueile at them, as Iohn Baptiſt did, when he ſaw the Phariſies reſort to his baptiſme. For this is but externall, in ſome things, and for a ſeaſon as Herod, who did many things at Iohn his teaching: and as Ephraim in Oſee,
                  Mark. 6.19. Hoſ. 6.4. Mich. 6.6 
                  whoſe goodnes was as the morning dew. In their trouble they ſeeke the Lord, but they ſeeke him not, as they who would find him: for then would they not leaue off to ſeeke, vntil they had found him (as the church did in the Canticles, chap. 3.3.4.) Neither doe they regard his waies, when their trouble is ended; as Iob ſpeaketh,  deſcribing the hypocrite thus: The hypocrite doth not pray, that is,Iob. 27.8.9.10. Theſe be hypocrites.
                   ſerue God alwaies: meaning, in one condition of life, as in another: in peace as in trouble. Yea more particularly, whē God ſmiteth and plagueth them (either by their enemies, diſeaſes, loſſes, and ſuch like) they couenant religiouſly with him, that they will neuer fall from him any more: but they flatter him with their mouth,
                  Pſal. 78.36. 
                  and diſſemble with their tongue, their heart is not vpright with him; neither are they faithfull in his couenant. They will ſharply tell others of their faults, though they be but ſmall; yea though they be but ſo in their opinion: as though they could not abide that God ſhould bee diſhonoured: but they themſelues will not take a reproofe, they hate to be reformed. They are zealous in ſome things;Pſal. 50.16. Ioh. 3.19. 
                   but it breaketh out many waies, not to haue been true godlines by their inconſtant feruencie and other paſſions.
               They heare the word of God willingly ſometimes,Sudden flaſhes of grace. and ſome of them ſpeake of it with ioy, and wonder at the heauenly wiſedome of it; but it vaniſheth away and fleeteth: whereas if it had been ſound, it would haue increaſed and continued, as the hearbe that taketh roote in good ground, becommeth fruitfull. So they attaine to many good gifts of God, whereby one would thinke ſometimes that they were not farre from eternall life; but they either burie them in a napkin, and doe no good with them, or vſe them amiſſe, as Iudas did Chriſts communion with him, to their owne hurt, while they  dare bee bolder by meanes of theſe good gifts to offend God, then if they had them not.
               But if I ſhould reckon vp the beadrolles of groſſe faults which they ſuffer in themſelues, and nouriſh (yet vnder the name of infirmities) it ſhould eaſily appeare, to ſuch as haue any iudgement in the Scriptures, that they cannot be reckoned among the beleeuers, and beloued of the Lord. For howſoeuer he gather his elect out of all theſe kinds, yet are none of them to be accounted for his, while they abide and continue ſo. From theſe faults therefore let the beleeuers ſeparate themſelues.
               A fourth ſort, and thoſe diuers from theſe now mentioned may be added,A fourth ſort of bad profeſſors, ſchiſmatikes, inordinate liuers. 
                   who, being ſore ſtumbling blockes, and offences to many, deſerue to bee reprooued with the former: ye ſhall know them by the deſcription which I ſet downe of them, by rehearſing their particuler properties: who if they repent not, will in the end (though I hope better of ſome of them) prooue no better then the reſt. Among whom they are to bee counted, who ſeeming to be of the forwarder ſort, doe yet offend dangerouſly, and ſuffer the ſame blemiſhes before men, to breake foorth in countenance, ſpeech, behauiour (againſt

ſuch as they miſlike, though farre better then themſelues) which teſtifie  that their hearts are inwardly poyſoned in the ſight of God: who for their zeale that they haue towards the worſhip of God, do thinke ſo well of themſelues, that they cannot brooke nor abide any other, who differ from them in iudgement, about ſome things; though they haue no cleere ground in the word of God. And if they bee at variance with any (how honeſt and godlie ſoeuer) yet cannot affoord them a Chriſtian and friendly countenance, nor ſpeake a word to them,They are taunters, railers, and ſlaunderers of their brethren. without taunting, girding, rating or wounding them, and in their abſence deface and defame them very vncharitably, for ſomewhat which they miſlike in them: and yet oft times without any iuſt cauſe at all. Yea, and ſome of them being themſelues but priuate men (but put the  caſe ſome of them bee in the Miniſterie) and men vnlearned, doe make it a great piece of their religion,And cenſurers of others. to cenſure ſharply, and deſcant arrogantly of their betters and ſuperiours: ſo that it is well knowne that many of them haue turned vtterly to become Schiſmatikes, and others haue not been farre from them. Which kind of zealous profeſſors, I do the more boldly reproue, becauſe ſome haue thought me a fauourer of ſuch: their readines in receiuing the Goſpell I haue well liked, and as I haue been able, furthered it: but this arrogant, bold, and vncharitable ſpirit of theirs bringing forth ſuch fruit, as I haue mentioned (neuer taught them in any ſound Miniſterie) I vtterlie miſlike, and haue done from time to time, ſince I had any iudgement. Who  hauing been content for ſome yeeres ſpace,Soone ride in their own conceit. to be taught (as ſeeing great need thereof) haue in a few yeeres, I may ſay moneths, outgrowne their teachers, (in their owne iudgements) and haue thought almoſt none of them, good and meete enough, or ſufficient for them: and therefore ſome of them haue giuen themſelues (as they ſay) to grow by their priuate reading, when they might haue been taught alſo in the publike aſſemblie: which ſome of them refuſe to doe, eſpecially by the miniſterie of ſuch as they are exaſperated againſt: and ſo, for the ſeruing of their owne cankred humour, they ſinne againſt God in breaking one of the greateſt commandements. I giue herein a taſte of the reſt of their qualities of like ſort: Is this behauiour ſeeming  Chriſtians?
               To whom may bee referred theſe, who goe for zealous perſons, who liue inordinately,
                  Tit. 3. without attending vpon any honeſt trade, idle, vnprofitable, buſie bodies,Inordinate liuers. and counting it godlines to talke of the faults of others; yea and oftentimes ſpeake to pleaſe ſuch as are in the companie, and this not by vnawares, or ſuddenly, at ſome one time; but oft, and without any heartie repentance (for then they would amend:) which when they haue done, how can they deſerue any ſuch name of reuerent Chriſtians, or to bee ſo accounted? when they, who will be thought forwarder then other, ſhall not looke alſo, that they liue more without offence then other,Worſe in dealing then men who profeſſe no religion. but in their dealings one  with another ſhall be worſe then ciuill men, who haue no religion: what a reproch is it to thē? when there ſhalbe contending in words, bitternes, open braules, vnſeemely crowings one ouer another, caſting one another in the teeth with their infirmities, reporting in all companies what wrongs they haue ſuſtained one by another, laughing for ioy when they are fallen, whom they miſlike; when there ſhall be froward and curriſh anſwers, taking all

                      things in the worſt part, and for no perſwaſion,Rom. 1. remitting any thing of their vttermoſt due, toward ſuch as be in their dāger. What reckoning is to be made of their religion? when men will be taken for earneſt profeſſors, and yet they ſhall be found hollow, and double in their dealings, one ſpeech to ſome, and at ſome time, but contrarie at other times, to other perſons; and ſo be void of plaine dealing: ſo that for commoditie, they depart from manifeſt dutie. What are they in reſpect of that which they do pretend? when they dare yet feede their eyes with vnchaſt lookes, thereby making way to the defiling of their bodies, when they will nouriſh the occaſions thereof, although not ſo openly, as others doe, by companie, talke, amorous lookes, laſciuious and  wanton ſtage-playes: and to conclude, when they carrie about them ſuch other bad qualities, though more ſubtilly couered and ſecretly hidden in them; let no ſuch pleaſe themſelues in their ſeruing of God, by praying, hearing the word, or in the beſt things that are in their liues, for all their hope is but deceiueable; they are groſſely guiltie of great vngodlines, the which the true Chriſtian hath baniſhed from his life and renounced.
               Now if this ſort (partly mentioned alreadie, and partly to be mentioned) who (I muſt needes ſay for ſome religious duties which they do) come moſt neere of all other to the godlie life (as no doubt they doe) doe yet faile of it, and haue little part in it: I ſhall not neede to ſhew how farre others (of what  profeſſion ſoeuer they bee) are off from it, I meane Papiſts, the Familie of loue, which ſect are no better then coloured Atheiſts; or any other ſuch: of whom, as a matter needleſſe, I will now be ſilent.
               For the benefit and good of the offenders whom I haue bewraied, and to gather into a ſumme, that which I haue ſaid of the renouncing of inward and outward euils: this I ſay, if by any meanes, I may ſet before their eyes, and perſwade them, how odious their eſtate is (and I ſay it in compaſſion of them) that neither the inward rebellious luſts, which I haue ſpoken of, nor the outward behauiour which I haue mentioned, is any way or in any manner beſeeming the Chriſtian man. But whiles the Lord vrgeth this at his  peoples hands, that they haue no fellowſhip with ſuch vnfruitfull workes of darknes,
                  Epheſ. 5.11. 
                  but clenſe themſelues from all that is euill, both of ſoule and bodie: ſo long ſhall it be reprochfull for all which reioyce in the name of Chriſtians,2. Cor. 7.1. to bee either in their hearts ſtained with ſuch corruptions, or in their liues defiled with ſuch treacheries. Which being ſo, is it not to be wondred at, eſpecially, ſeeing the will of God is ſo cleerely reuealed, that this ſhould be ſo harſh & vnſauourie a thing; yea & fooliſh euen among ſuch as will be thought zealous, that wee ſhould ſo particularly ſift our ſelues from theſe, when yet the Lord by the Prophet requireth that this be done againe and againe, ſaying, Soph. 1. Fanne your ſelues, fanne your ſelues, O nation not worthie to be loued? It is manifeſt in the  better ſort of thoſe forenamed, that in their particular actions, & daily courſe of their liues, there is ſmall moderation of their affections, and vnbridled deſires, or watchfulnes ouer them: ſo that well ordered gouernment is as farre off: and therefore raſh and vndiſcreete going about their matters is almoſt euery where to bee ſeene, which, beſide offence to God and men, bringeth bitter repentance (if any) to themſelues.
               Beare with me (gentle Reader) though I go farre and abide long in them;

it may be ſome ſhall take more good at the hearing of them, and their hearts  more relent, then euer they could be brought to doe at the committing of them.Other diſorders of ſuch profeſſors. Earthlines. Such frowardnes, heartburning, and moſt ſore broiles there are one againſt another, and that for trifles: ſuch earneſtnes is alſo in their worldly dealings: and yet deadnes of heart, and little courage in matters of the ſoule: ſuch nimblenes and vnweariednes in the one, and ſuch tediouſnes and irkeſomnes in the other, that all which ſee their conuerſation in the one and the other, would geſſe that the things which they contend about, were matters of life and death, the other very light and of ſmall reckoning: ſuch griping of the poore and needie, in their ſales, couenants, and other dealings, eſpecially not forgoing or yeelding the leaſt piece of their right (be their neceſſitie  neuer ſo great) nor any regard had of their diſtreſſed eſtate, who can thinke of it without lamentation?Note. Such giuing mens ſelues the bridle in their merie makings (I ſpeake ſtill of ſuch as fauour the Goſpell) to talke what they will, ſo as it be not meerely impious, how vnprofitable ſoeuer it be to edifying or hurtfull to example,Matth. 12.36. when yet for euery idle word men ſhall giue an account: when as alſo ſuch times of friendly meetings ſhould be vſed for the gaining of one another to God, or confirming one another in their moſt holie faith, as alſo for the prouoking to loue. Such vnquietnes in the gouernours of families, for euery thing that is not to their liking, as pettie loſſes, and diſcommodities in houſe, or without, by neighbours or ſeruants, when yet their owne vnrulie  hearts and impatience doe make their loſſes farre greater then they are, and they ſhould haue learned to be prepared in the day for the troubles thereof: (I vnderſtand this of profeſſed Chriſtians) let ſuch as exceede theſe in euill, little reioyce in themſelues.Vnquietnes. Such broiles and breach of dutie betwixt huſband and wife, ſuch ſtrife, and oft contentions, that euery ſmall occaſion of diſſenting one from another about any thing, muſt bring peeuiſhnes, heartburning, ſtrangenes, ſowernes; yea and oft times abſence from bed & boord: ſo that they muſt commonly haue a day of debating the caſe before it can be forgotten and digeſted: who can think, how common it is, without deep bewailing it? And where more agreement is betwixt couples, yet to marke  how little one is the better for the other,Heb. 10.25. to Godward in knowledge, faith, amendement, meekenes, patience, by reading, praying, communing togither, and watching ouer one another, for their mutuall good (which yet they ſhould doe to others) and therein be helps each to other,Gen. 2.18. as well as in things of this life: to marke, I ſay, how little good is done betwixt them, is it not worthily to bee complained of? And yet of theſe two things the latter is thought needleſſe to be vrged, as though weightier matters were in hand alwaies: the former is defended, that ſometime iarres muſt needes be, and it cannot be otherwiſe, and therefore not to be ſpoken againſt.
               Againe, in ſuch as receiue the Goſpell with good liking: how doth the  pride of life (I meane iolitie in earthlie things) beare ſway in them, the fitteſt bane of many other to poyſon them? What reſting of themſelues is there in the commodities, pleaſures, preferments of this life (which yet they may loſe ere to morrow) in eaſe and proſperitie, in wife, children, friends (great benefits no doubt) and in that which they haue? and in the ſumptuous apparelling of themſelues, thinking themſelues thereby, to be others then they

                   are; and therein not only to impoueriſh themſelues, but in all outlandiſh and monſtrous manner to diſguiſe themſelues, thinking that others admire them as greatly, as they doe themſelues: how doe they fill their hearts with theſe, and pleaſe themſelues therein, I ſay not till they diſpleaſe God, but till they are eaten vp of the loue of them; yea and their religion ſo quailed and cooled in them, that ye may eaſilie ſee, that they loue darkenes more then light, and pleaſures more then God, howſoeuer they hold ſtill with the Goſpell, leaſt their iniquitie ſhould be too manifeſt to them? I may ſay, as many haue confeſſed, and I hope by this, and ſuch like remembrance, ſome other will be admoniſhed to remember, conſider, and confeſſe, that they haue ſo offended in  ſome of theſe, that their conſciences haue accuſed them, that the life thus led is not the life which God requireth, nor theſe are not the works which faith affoordeth: neither is this a denying of themſelues, to giue all to themſelues, which heart wiſheth, or eye luſteth after:Luke 9.23. neither is this to take vp their croſſe dailie, that is, receiue meekely the troubles which God ſendeth them, without which yet, they cannot follow Chriſt, nor be his diſciples.
               What ſhould I ſpeake of them, who although they will boldlie affirme,Ill educating their Children. that they will not beare with the ſinne of any, (no not their owne children) to offend God for their ſakes; yet will take part with them hauing done wickedlie, and bolſter them vp, when they ſhould be puniſhed, though it be to  the offence of many? What grieuous eye ſores are they to many, who ſuffer ſuch as are vnder their gouernement, not only to runne after their pleaſures at ſuch times as they ſhould ſerue God, and neither teach them their ſelues, nor bring them where they may be taught, but alſo are priuie to their ſtealing of their neighbours commodities: yea, beare their ſaucines, ſtoutnes, and malepartnes, and annoy other with ſuch intolerable burthens, vntill they be checke mate with the moſt auncient elders; and at laſt, come to a fearefull ende themſelues, and kill their parents with ſorrow and griefe? But alas, what ende is there of complaining, (I ſay againe, not of irreligious, prophane and blockiſh men, but of ſuch as looke verilie to be ſaued) if I ſhould  not plucke my pen from paper? For I haue ſaid nothing of the hollownes in friendſhip among Chriſtians, as they are accounted: how their loue is mixed with much diſsimulation in word only, not in heart and in deede:
                  Rom. 12. 1. Iohn 3. Prouerb. 20.7 and how hardly credit may be giuen to their faire words, or countenances? But as for faſhion they were ſhewed; ſo according to the faſhion of the world, they are changed into another affection, then they promiſed: I haue not mentioned many of the ſtrong corruptions and ranke rebellions breaking out in ſome Chriſtians, and thoſe of no common hope among their brethren.
               I haue ſcarcelie mentioned this,Vncharitable ſurmiſes. what deadly ſuſpitions and hard conceiuings they haue of many, better men then themſelues; how imperiouſly they  iudge, and maiſterlike they cenſure them, whom they are not worthie to liue with: when yet it is giuen vs in charge, that we be not many maisters: yea,Iames 3.1. and theſe faults are committed many times, when no occaſion is giuen; which maketh their ſinne the greater: and if there were any, yet meekenes and lenitie, which ſhould be in all reprouers, might eaſilie remoue them, whereas froward and vncharitable condemning doth no good. A poiſon which dwelleth; as I haue ſaid, moſt principallie in the Schiſmatikes of our time, and

ſuch as haue leaned that way: who if they had not deceiued themſelues, in  thinking themſelues the moſt zealous of others, they ſhould haue alaide the bitternes of their ſtomacks with humilitie and loue, whatſoeuer they thinke of themſelues. But here an ende of theſe things.
            
            
               CHAP. II. Of certaine obiections raiſed from the former doctrine, and anſweres thereto: as why we ſhould put differences betwixt men: and whether the godly may fall reprochfully, and what infirmities they may haue.
               
               
                  Ob. Are all ſuch damned.
                  BVt me thinkes I heare ſome obiecting thus: what? are all damned, and out of the eſtate of grace, which commit any of theſe ſinnes? And may not many of theſe offenders notwithſtanding their faultes, be the children of God? And if men commit ſuch faultes, doe they not (thinke we) repent afterwards? (I ſay, if they doe, that obiection is anſwered) Alſo they ſay, they cannot abide that ſuch differences ſhould be made of men. And haue the godly, whom ye ſhoale out of others, no faults, but are they without infirmities? are they ſo pure, that they liue not as other  men? and doe not their liues gather vp the common ſinnes of the time, as holy as they be? and doe they not lie in them alſo for a ſeaſon, as well as they who are not thought ſo holy? Which if it be ſo, why ſhould we haue ſuch differences of men?
                     God ſhoales out ſome from others. Pſalm. 1.2.50.16. 1. Theſ. 1.9. Iohn 1. & 10. why ſhould one be ſhoaled from the other? I anſwere, as for differences of men they are put, by the Lord himſelfe, both in name, conuerſation, and reward: to the Theſſalonians, he ſaith: The Lord ſhall recompence tribulation to them which trouble his: but to thoſe which are troubled, peace and reſt: and the end of the Miniſterie is to ſhoale Gods elect and beloued ones from the world, and to bring them to his ſheepefold.
               
                  
                     Infirmities in all. Matth. 7.22.25.34.As concerning infirmities, it is defended by no Chriſtian, that the moſt  godly which liue here, are voide of them, but rather confeſſe that they be burthened ſore with the weight of them: and ſo may they be, although theſe foule euils be not common with them, nor long lien in of them, which I haue ſpoken of; of whoſe infirmities I will ſay more, when I haue ſatisfied in ſome ſort theſe obiections.
               
                  The godlie ſomewhat infected with common corruptions.Therefore where it is demaunded, if they be not partakers of the ſame ſinnes, that other men are; I denie not, but that it is poſſible for them in ſome ſort, and for a time, to be carried after the ſtreame of the euill example of ſo many, which are in the world ſo common, and almoſt vniuerſall: for the beſt liue, where Sathans throne is, (euen as the Iſraelites and the Aegyptians dwelt  together:) whoſe vnſauorie and ſtinking breath, what maruaile were it, if the whole and ſound ſhould be infected with it? And further, as they may poſſiblie haue their part in the ſinnes of the vngodly; ſo I denie not, (if God beare not the greater authoritie with them, and be not the more regarded of them) but that they may alſo lie ſtill in the ſame loathſomenes for a ſeaſon, though ſmallie to their comfort. This to be true, both lamentable examples

                   of the Scripture doe ſhew in Noah, Lot, Dauid, and Peter: and wofull experience among vs in all ages doe teſtifie. But what then? Are they therefore giuen ouer of the Lord to lie and abide in them, and being waſhed to wallow againe in the mire?
               And as I deny not but that it may be poſſible,Difference betweene the fals of the godly and the wicked. and is too cleere by wofull experience, that the beſt may be ſnared with the ſinnes of others; ſo yet, I ſay, that when they fall, it appeareth plainelie, that it was the ſubtill malice of the diuell, watching his opportunitie ſo narrowlie, that he deceiued them, rather then that they were giuen ouer like wicked men; to lie therein, and to adde ſinne to ſinne without combat and conflict, as though they had made a league  with ſinne, and were without God in the world, as the other be. And the rather I ſay this, becauſe when they haue been awaked,Cant 5. and come to themſelues againe, they are ſo ſtrangely amaſed at their offence,Note. and ſo tremble to thinke what they haue done, and can haue no peace within themſelues vntill they returne: and that after they haue got out, they are made more warie and vigilant againſt the like another time: the which of the wicked cannot be ſaid,Cant. 3.4, 5. in any of their repentings, till God change their hearts in deed, although in ſuddaine, and raſh feare they may be flighted, till it vaniſh away againe like ſmoake, and ſo come to nothing.
               Laſt of all, when haue they fallen dangerouſlie, who had ſo well begun?The godly fall not, but when they are ſecure and take libertie. 1. Sam. 35.24.
                   
                   Hath it been, while and when they haue held on in their courſe of Chriſtian dutie? Haue they been violentlie carried from the platforme and direction of a godlie life, whether they would or no, as not knowing what they did? or how they were brought to it? Yea rather, haue they not at ſuch times giuen themſelues the bridle, and ſuffered their mindes to runne too farre, after that which they tooke pleaſure in, and offended by? And haue they wiſely auoided the occaſions of ſuch miſchiefe and danger at ſuch times, as they vſuallie were wont? Neither obiect here, that a man cannot be at all times watchfull: and the wiſeſt ſhall or may bee ſometimes ouercome? I anſwere: were they warie, but as they haue been vſuallie,  in which times they were preſerued from ſuch reprochfull falles? For if it were ſo with them, they could not thus offend: but if they haue been wearie of Gods gouerning of them, and haue thought long till they haue gotten more libertie to the fleſh; and to be at their owne hand with the world, and to count ſtollen waters ſweete: it is no maruaile though they haue ſmarted with Dinah, for ranging and ſeeking to haue their will amiſſe: for if his owne children prouoke him,Pſalm. 89.31. he muſt puniſh euen their ſinnes with the rod, and their offences with the ſcourge, till they returne and ſay, wee haue ſinned.
               God hath promiſed to keepe vs in all our waies,
                  Pſalm. 91.11. wherein he appointeth vs to  walke, and whiles our mindes are leading vs thither, we are in no danger,Philip. 3.13. and he hath promiſed vs ſtrength to walke in them. But if wee will runne out of our bounds, with Shemeia,
                  2. Chron. 16.9 Philip. 4. where our owne hearts tell vs that we are in daunger, is it any wonder, if afterwards it take hold of vs? And was it not thus with that deare ſeruant of God, whom the Scripture commendeth by this title, that he was a man according to Gods minde? that when that one time befell,2. Sam. 11.4. (more to his reproch, then all other) he was found to giue himſelfe the bridle

of vnlawfull libertie,Pſal. 51.5. and to ſhaking off the ſecret reigne of holie feare, more  then vſually he did. And who denieth but that in ſuch a caſe, if they refuſe to ſtand vpon their watch, they may become like other men? but yet for all that, is there great difference betwixt the one and the other, as hath bin ſaid: the one offending in that ſort, ſeldome, neither then long lying therein: the other making it his practiſe to breake out, one way or other. And therefore we muſt know, that when we haue obtained once to beleeue, and thereby to haue our poyſoned hearts purged and made cleane, as it is the greateſt of all other benefits;Prou. 4.23. ſo it is and may bee kept, by ſuch meanes as God hath prouided, and not loſt any more, but confirmed and continued in the feare of God. But then, as we be one with Chriſt, and partakers of him, and as branches  of a vine, which ſucke our ſappe and draw our ſpirituall ſtrength and nouriſhment from him: ſo it is required of vs (and we willingly yeeld to it) that we hold faſt the beginning of our abiding in him,
                  Heb. 4.1. Heb. 3.12. that is, our faith, vnto the end, and that we take heed that there be not at any time in vs an euill and corrupt heart, which will make vs fall from the liuing God, to our owne deceitfull imaginations and deſires, and ſo to fall dangerouſly, and to purchaſe heauines thereby, our bellies full.
               
                  How we may be fenced.And this let euery one endeuour to doe, and he ſhall ſee himſelf ſo ſtrongly fenced, that through Gods bleſſing, which faileth not in ſuch a caſe, he ſhal be free from the diet of the careleſſe liuers (who are euery while ſhaken) becauſe  they who walke vprightly, walke ſafely: but he that peruerteth his waies, God will finde him out, Prouer. 10.9. For whereas many of Gods beloued ones procure ſore wounds in their liues, and anguiſh thereby, it is but the fruit of their owne labours, who will not bee held within holie compaſſe, but pleade for ſome vnlawfull libertie, and count it ſtrictnes more then needeth (by harkning too much to the vnruly fleſh) to tie themſelues to any certaine directing of themſelues in his ſeruice, (when yet his ſeruice is perfect freedome) whoſe euils I defend not: but yet I ſay, as I haue ſaid, if they be his, they ſhall riſe and repent with Peter, if they haue fallen with him, when yet the wicked ſhall lie ſtill and waxe worſe.
                  2. Tim. 3.13.
                  
               
               But ye demaund, and would needes haue me anſwere, whether I can warrant ſuch as feare God,No warrant of not falling deadly. that they ſhall neuer fall into ſome reprochfull and dangerous euill, as other men doe, as well as they may breake out ſome other waies. If I might anſwere a wiſe and ſober demaunder, I would not refuſe to ſpeake my minde; although it may in part be gathered by that which I haue ſaid alreadie: vnto ſuch a one therefore I ſay (for if any other ſee his owne practiſe not to agree with my anſwere, let him impute it to his owne ſinne rather then to my raſhnes) I ſay therefore, ſeeing rare and deare ſeruants of God haue fallen thus into ſhamefull ſinnes, it may ſeeme ſcarce poſſible for the beſt in theſe latter times, being far inferiour to ſome of them in grace, to be free from the like fearefull falles.VVe may be preſerued from foule falles. But yet wee muſt know, that ſome other of his good people God hath preſerued from that kinde of ſhamefull ſinnes and ſtaines, as Enoch, Abraham, Caleb, Ioſua, with many others: and therefore it may of vs be hoped for, eſpecially ſeeing it is no other thing then we are commanded to haue ſpeciall regard and care of:2. Pet. 1.5. Col. 1.2
                        •
                     . Iam. 1.27. that is, to liue without iuſt reproch in the middeſt of a crooked generation and vnſtained. Saint Peter ſaith,

                  
                  If ye haue theſe things, ye ſhall neuer fall: that is, dangerouſly,2. Pet. 1.10. to take any great hurt thereby.
               Therefore by theſe, and ſuch other perſwaſions, wee ought to be incouraged; for to vs there is good hope to obtaine grace hereunto. But ſeeing all Gods children cannot alike be perſwaded, that they ought to giue all diligence hereunto; euen that they may be vnrebukeable amongſt men, as Paul did,1. Cor. 4.3.4. and ſo taught other to doe; but thinke it impoſſible to liue ſo conſtantly,Act. 26.18.19. but that they ſhall ſometime breake out dangerouſly: Therefore ſuch muſt be taught wiſedome by experience, and ſome of them being more proud then others, muſt haue their pride humbled, and healed by ſuch medicines:
                     The firſt end, why God ſuffers ſome to fall ſo.
                     Some to be humbled by their falles. VVhy many fall.
                   for grieuous  falles are phiſick for pride; and many who haue ſome grace, but not the grace which is ſufficient for them, are daungerouſly proud, becauſe they haue not fallen ſhamefully, that is, into ſome odious crime: and yet they haue fallen ſhamefully (if they could ſee it) in that they are dangerouſly proud: If God therefore ſeeth it meete to abate their pride thereby, they may poſſibly fall after ſuch a manner. Or if it be for the more manifeſting of his glorie in forgiuing them ſo great a treſpaſſe, they may alſo fall dangerouſly.The ſecōd end, to magnifie his mercie in forgiuing great ſinnes. Ioh. 21.15.
                  
               
               This doth our mercifull father ſee expedient oftentimes, as both in Peter and Dauid it came to paſſe, as alſo in others: who doubtleſſe loued the Lord, more then ſome others of his faithfull people, which neuer fell in that manner (as Peters anſwere, and Dauids Pſalmes doe cleerely teſtifie) yea, and ſuch loued him the more, Luk. 7.47. euen for that very cauſe, ſeeing they obtained mercie againſt ſo great ſinnes of theirs, and fearefull iniquitie.
               Yea and to adde a third end, God is highly magnified by others,A third end why the faithfull fall in regard of others. which know and ſee this, that hee hath forgiuen ſo great offences, in ſuch as haue fallen grieuouſly: who otherwiſe beholding the heauenly courſe of ſuch excellent ſeruants of his, how holie and ſincere it was (ſaue in ſome ſuch offence) ſhould haue been vtterly diſcouraged, yea and like to haue deſpaired of their owne good eſtate: and the rather for the high opinion that they conceiued of them, if they had not ſeene or heard of theſe their falles. For theſe  cauſes therefore the Lord may, and often hath, let ſome of his deare ſeruants fall dangerouſly: firſt, for the humbling of them: and ſecondly, for that they may ſee his exceeding bountifulnes in pardoning ſo great ſinnes; that they may loue him the more: and thirdly, that others farre weaker then they, yet faithfull, may be incouraged to beleeue that their ſins ſhall be pardoned, and their weake ſeruice accepted of him; for as much as they haue ſeene that God hath pardoned great offences in ſome, otherwiſe farre more excellent then they: which if they were not perſwaded of, ſhould be diſcouraged much, becauſe of the great graces and gifts in them,1. Tim. 1.16. farre exceeding thoſe which are in themſelues.
               
                   And otherwiſe, or in other reſpects,Otherwiſe no feare of falling they neede not feare that God taketh any pleaſure to caſt them downe, who deſire to ſtand (when his propertie is rather to raiſe vp them that are fallen:) or that hee ſeeketh euery aduantage,Pſal. 130.3. againſt their infirmities, who doth not look ſtreightly what is done amiſſe of them;
                     Luk. 1.54. Gods tendernes ouer his. but helpe their weakenes, ſupplie their wants, and deliuer them from ſuch dangers, as they feare, ſo far as it is expedient; or els make them able to beare them. For proofe whereof, they may remember, how he kept them, when

they had ſmall skill or abilitie to keepe themſelues,Deut. 33.12. after that they firſt imbraced  his promiſes: will hee not much more keepe them ſafe, now they haue experience of his kindnes, and the power of Chriſt working in them? Nay, that which is more,Rom. 5.10. 
                  when they were his enemies, he gaue his ſonne to die for them: and now they are reconciled vnto him, and approued of him, as his beloued ones, ſhall they not much more be preſerued (by his liuing in glorie) from the fearefull iudgements, which in his wrath he executeth againſt the vngodly of the world?
               
                  
                     Col. 1.23. Sweet comfort to the weake.Therefore if thou beeſt grounded and eſtabliſhed in faith, and holdeſt faſt the beginning of thine ingrafting into Chriſt, be of good comfort, thy greateſt danger is paſt: for can he that loueth thee dearely, meane hardly againſt thee? Is there with him yea and nay, with whom there is no ſhadow of chaunge? The Lord witneſſing to that which I ſay, with reuerence and thankfulnes beleeue it: either thou ſhalt not fall reprochfully; or if thou doeſt, it ſhall be thus, as I haue ſaid,Note. euen ſo as it ſhal turne to thy good: and it neede to be to thy great good, which cannot be without the great offence of ſo many as ſhall know it. For though ſuch as ſhall periſh may turne this which I ſay,Rom. 8.31. 2. Pet. 3.16. Tit. 1.15. Cant. 3.4. to their owne great hurt, as they doe the Scriptures alſo (ſeeing to the vncleane all things are vncleane:) yet if thou ſhouldeſt ſlide, the Lord would hold thee vp, and make thee ſtand more conſtantly after. The world ſeeth no whit of this, but counteth it all arrogancie, boaſting, and falſehood, becauſe indeed they beleeue no more then they  ſee, or then their reaſon and fleſhly wiſedome can prie into; which is an vtter enemie to this heauenly truth: but ô faith, what pretious ſecrets art thou able to reueale to vs of Gods minde and will?Cant. 2.14. and how ſafe is he (yea in this dangerous wildernes of the world) in whom thou dwelleſt, ſeeing the Lord hath ſaid:1. Ioh. 5.4. 
                  This is the victorie that ouercommeth the world, euen our faith?
               
               And this for anſwere to theſe obiections: Now as I haue promiſed, I will ſhut vp this part of Chriſtianitie, concerning the renouncing of inward and outward euils,VVhat infirmities the godly be ſubiect to. concluding what infirmities the godlie ſhall be ſubiect vnto: which ſhall both ſufficiently proue, that they count not themſelues without ſinne, as they are charged by many: yet for all this, that they are not companions  with the vngodly in harbouring and nouriſhing theſe worldly luſts and vngodlines, which I haue ſpoken of. The leſſe ſhall neede to be ſaid of this, ſeeing it may, and that not obſcurely, bee gathered, by that which hath been ſet downe: both that they doe not (with the Puritanes) dreame of any ſuch perfection,Luk. 17.10. Rom. 7.24. but that when they haue done all, they are vnprofitable ſeruants, and ſay with the Apoſtle: Oh wretched men that we are! and alſo, further then they are glad to be ruled by God, they feare the ſame falles that others doe. But becauſe they are not al ſpiritual, that is, ſpiritually minded wholy and altogether, as they are not wholy fleſh, that is, corrupt, but both theſe contraries fighting together (as the Apoſtle ſaith) one againſt the other, are in their  ſoules:Gal. 5.17. therefore it commeth to paſſe, that they are ſubiect through this concupiſcence and infection which is in their fleſh, both to the diuels ſuggeſtions, and deluſions of the world, and they may bee caried after diuers and ſtrange luſts, and to commit outward ſinnes one after another further forth, then by the grace of Gods ſpirit their corruption be bridled, held backe, and ſubdued. But if that grace bee quenched or quailed, then euill deſires are

                   kindled, and gather ſtrength to bring foorth fruite accordingly.
               And this may be, yea and no doubt is,The ſtate of weaker Chriſtians. the eſtate of the many of Gods ſeruants: ſuch eſpecially, as for want of good experience, and acquaintance in the Chriſtian life, and battaile, are more eaſily deceiued, and beguiled then others are. And hereof it is, that many haue been ouertaken, and oft doe ſlide, and fall daungerouſly, and are carried from keeping a good conſcience, and from well doing: And diuers commit thoſe ſinnes which they had long abſtained from, hoping that they ſhould neuer haue fallen into them any more: But what then?Theſe much differ from all wicked. Are they therefore like to the ſundrie ſorts of the former wicked ones, of whom I ſpake before? No, nothing leſſe: for either they are  wary and watchfull againſt them, before hand, leaſt they ſhould fall; and it is their greateſt care, that they may not fall into them: or when they ſee how they haue been ouercome, and deceiued, they lay it to heart by and by,Phil. 2.12. bewaile it, and are much humbled to ſee how they haue been circumuented, and cannot be quiet, whiles they ſeeing God offended, are not reconciled to him againe. And on the contrarie, if they preuaile ouer their ſinnes, and hold vnder their affections, and keepe their conſciences excuſing them, that ſo they may walke with God and abide in his fauour;1. Iohn 3.21. then are they more ioyfull then they, who haue all that their hearts can wiſh.Pſalm. 4 8. And although all haue not the like knowledge, how to doe and goe about it; yet it is the earneſt  deſire of their heart to haue it ſo: In token whereof, euen the weakeſt which are new borne, are heauie and cannot be comforted, for that they ſee continually how they haue diſpleaſed God.
               And to this purpoſe I might ſay much more, whereby all that can iudge, may ſee, that theſe ſinnes are of infirmitie committed by them: and that they are haled and drawen to doe ſuch things, as in no wiſe they would, when they are come to themſelues, and when the ſpirit of God ouerruleth and ſubdueth their looſe and ranging affections: neither would they haue been carried after them, euen then when they were haled to the committing of them, but that they were weake to performe that, which faine they would haue  done. I ſay, who doth not ſee, that theſe men ſinne not like the other, but in ſuch wiſe as the beſt, and deareſt of Gods children in all ages haue done, who neuer fully ſatisfied themſelues (no not the beſt of them) in that which they did.
               And this is properly ſinne of infirmitie, when partly of knowledge,What ſinne of infirmitie is. but more through frailtie, an offence is wrought to the diſpleaſing of God: and when of ſuch an one it is committed, as becauſe he hath his heart ſanctified, would not doe it:Note. and yet becauſe the power of corruption at that time is greater in him, then the ſtrength of grace, therefore he was ouercome of it, and forced to yeeld to it.
               
                   But I demaund whether any ſuch combat or conflict be found in the vngodly, & workers of iniquitie, in them of whom I haue before ſpoken.Wicked ſinne boldly. Haue they feare before the ſinne committed, leaſt they ſhould fall into it? But by what ſigne doe they proue it, and by what reaſon can they perſwade it? who neither watch againſt it, neither haue their hearts out of loue with it: nay they are ſo farre from ſtriuing againſt it, that they are ſet on fire to commit it, and would hate him deadly, which ſhould earneſtly diſſwade, much more

withhold them from the committing of it: or doe they after the committing  of it,Their ſorrow is carnall. bewaile it for that God was offended thereby, and for their vnkindnes againſt his maieſtie, and for his diſhonour thereby? It may be for feare of hell, and damnation, if they be neerely vrged, and leaſt it ſhould come to light, and ſo bring reproch and puniſhment vpon them; They may bowe themſelues like a bulruſh for a ſeaſon. Which kinde of men (that I may prooue it to be true,Note. which I ſay of them) when that pange and qualme is ouer, are not onely mery and quiet againe, when yet they haue no word of comfort from God, but are readie to the like ſinne againe; yea and many of them commit it againe indeede a little while after.
               But will any call this, wholeſome and Godly ſorrow which bringeth repentance?
                   Alas! it is as farre from it, as is the Eaſt from the Weſt. Neither haue they any ſtrife or combat before, or after the committing of ſinne, as diſtracted in themſelues for that, which they haue done; or fearefull, leaſt they ſhould commit the euill which they goe about, further then this, that their conſcience may ſecretly tell them it is euill: but they repell it, and will in no wiſe heare the ſame: And therefore they ſinne not, as Gods children doe; that is, by infirmitie. And thus much for anſwere to the former queſtions: And of the firſt part of godlineſſe alſo of the life of the beleeuer, this be ſaid.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 12. Of the keeping of the heart once purged, in it good plight afterward.
               
                  The heart purged, muſt ſo be kept.
                  NOw I hauing ſhewed how God maketh the heart new, and changeth it, before it be fit to be imployed in well doing, and in bringing forth fruites of amendment; and alſo how it being changed, renounceth euill both inward and outward: we muſt know how to keepe it in good plight afterward; that ſo we may be able from time to time, to continue  that courſe which by the firſt change was begun, and ſo to doe any ſuch duties as we are bound to performe: which otherwiſe cannot be. For as veſſels, which haue been vnſauourie, are not only once ſeaſoned, but kept ſweete afterwards, that they may be fit for vſe; and as men vſe to purge their ſprings from that which might ſtoppe them: ſo are our hearts to be preſerued in the ſame ſort, that they become not bitter and corrupt, as of themſelues naturallie they are prone to be. For the beſt haue neede of this helpe whiles they carrie fleſh about them, therefore much more young beginners. It is the Lords commaundement,
                     Prouerb. 4.23. How the heart is kept. that when our hearts are once clenſed, we ſhould keepe them ſo with all diligence, that is, watch, trie, and purge them from all defilements, whereby they are wont to be tainted, and poyſoned. We muſt watch them, leaſt we ſhould, for want thereof, be deceiued with the baites of ſinne: we muſt examine and trie them, ſeeing no man can watch ſo carefully, but that much euill will creepe in: and we muſt purge out that filthie droſſe of concupiſcence which we find by examining, that it ſet not our will on fire to ſatisfie, and performe the deſires thereof.
               
                  
                   And the man of God,Pſal 119.9. who was beſt acquainted with the heart among many thouſands, both how euill it is, and how it is in the beſt manner to be looked vnto and preſerued, he hath taught the ſame: that the ſeruant of God, who hath by his mercie his former life purged by the forgiuenes of his ſinnes, muſt keepe it from new infections hereafter, by taking heede, and looking to the ſame, according to Gods word.
               
               This is plaine to them that haue experience in the Chriſtian life, that men walking among ſo many ſnares of the diuell, baites of the world, and meeting with ſo infinite rebellions, and luſts of their owne hearts, as cannot be expreſſed, but as we finde them out by obſeruing them, are not without  continuall danger and hurt, if they be not acquainted with this holie watch and ward, that their knowledge may be as a light to them in this dark world, and their prouident care as a preſeruatiue from the infection of ſinne, which in all their dealings will meete with them: yea and (that I ſay nothing of them, who are without Chriſt in it) euen the beleeuers themſelues (I meane) doe find much annoyance, and diſcomfort in their liues,Luk. 12.35. which neither they needed to feare, neither ſhould finde, if this counſell of the Prophet were pretious to them.
               And to this end, that they who haue their hearts thus clenſed, as I haue ſaid, may continue them ſo ſtill,Great labour thus to keepe the heart. they muſt know that it is no idle occupation thus  to doe: but they muſt be content and glad to weane their hearts from many vnprofitable, and wandring thoughts and deſires, which hold them here below, and with the which others are caried away, as with a whirlewinde: and to ſeaſon them with holie and heauenly meditations, as namely, of Gods goodnes, of their own frailties, and of their duties; that by the helpe of theſe, they may the better containe themſelues within their bounds, and breake not foorth into dangerous euils. Theſe are eſpeciall helpes for the well ordering of their hearts ſtill, who haue at any time brought them in order alreadie: this being added, that their reading priuately, their hearing publikely, with their oft and earneſt prayers, and Chriſtian conferences bee wiſely,  and at due times adioyned hereunto: of the which here is no fit place to giue any rules more particularly, becauſe I haue appointed to direct men how to vſe theſe, when I ſhall come to ſpeake of the helpes and meanes which are to be vſed for the well gouerning of their hearts and liues, in the next treatiſe.
               And thus the heart being renued and kept, it is eaſie to renounce euill, which otherwiſe is impoſſible: for euery one that liſteth may ſee,VVith this heart eaſie to renounce euill. both by Scripture, Pſalm. 32.4, 5, 6. Hebr. 10.38. and by experience (notwithſtanding our affections are ſtrong, vnruly, and moſt hardly ſubdued) with what eaſe we may renounce and forſake them, and haue power ouer our will and appetites,  when our hearts bee thus renued and kept maſtered: That is to ſay, when firſt they are purged, and our corrupt nature changed into a better by beleeuing the forgiuenes of our ſins, and a partaking of the graces of Chriſt, and after, watched ouer and obſerued that they continue ſo: who doth not ſee that the ſtubbornneſt & wilfulleſt heart which hath moſt rebelled againſt good inſtruction and reformation, yet when it is thus looked vnto, will be tamed? And to ſpeake more particularly (for the weake chriſtians ſake) when a

man hath once felt damnation, the iuſt reward of ſuch a courſe; and on the  other ſide full deliuerance from the ſame to be freely giuen him of God: and thus hath his heart humblie turned towards God againe to loue, and delight in him: who doth not ſee (I ſay) that ſuch a man daily hauing in remembrance this vnſpeakable kindnes of God towards him, and the wofull eſtate that he was in otherwiſe; that he will be loath to diſpleaſe this his ſo gracious God? Who doth not ſee, but that his heart alſo hauing ſuſtained ſo many checkes from God, for the diſorders of it, and accuſations, for the manifold euils of it, and that he weaning it daily from the old luſts thereof, and ſeaſoning it with grace by faith receiued daily, which vanquiſheth them, and inuring it with the helpes that may nouriſh it from time to time; but that it ſhall  with great eaſe ſerue God in this life, and haue nothing the toyle and labour that others haue, in the going about any good dutie, or reſiſting any ſinne? Let men ſay what they will,An ill gouerned hart cauſe of all diſorder. it is the euill gouerning of the heart, and letting it looſe to follie, wandrings, and needleſſe phantaſies, that cauſeth it to be ſurfeited with all manner of iniquitie; and the moſt know not their hearts how deceitfull, corrupt, and vnholie they be: I ſpeake not onely of the wicked of the world, as the reader may ſee, I am faine often to put him in minde, but euen of thoſe whom God hath ſeparated from the prophane ſort to ſerue him. And although, according to that which they know of the will of God, they haue ſome care to auoide offences; yet doe not many of them ſeeke, nor  ſet themſelues to know that which they might, of God, nor of their owne duties: neither to grow forward in many good things, as they might doe, beleeuing aſſuredly that God will ſupplie their wants, and helpe their infirmities, as he would they ſhould; but rather doe many things to the great offence of others,Little acquaintance with our hearts brings great bondage. and al for that they are ſo little acquainted with their hearts (which (in many) are tuchie, froward, wilfull, worldly in a daungerous manner) nor with Gods minde and will: by meanes whereof, ſome maintaine dangerous opinions: As that the law, in no wiſe, is to be preached; that Papiſts and Proteſtants diſagreeing in fundamentall points of religion, may yet agree together, and be ſaued, and ſuch like. Many alſo waxe ſecure and ſlouthfull, and  that in no common ſort, and otherwiſe blemiſhed daungerouſly more then with common frailties: and are not, for the moſt part, rouſed vp, but by ſome of Gods ſharpe chaſtiſements, as in taking away their deare friends from them: afflicting their owne bodies with ſome ſore ſicknes, dieaſe, and feare of death, their minds with darknes and ignorance, feare of Gods wrath and heauines, which they thought ſometime ſhould neuer haue taken hold of them. The vſe of the which being learned by the word, they are much checked and humbled to remember their boldnes, pride, and other faults: and ſomewhat quickened by a liuely hope, that God will againe bee intreated: alſo their hearts bee brought to ſtoope and bow to the will of God, more  meekly and readily, and not ſo ſtifly to ſtand in their owne conceit, as before they did. After this manner, God is forced to call backe many of his: but had it not been better for them, without theſe ſharpe corrections, to haue made it their meate and drinke before, to pleaſe him in all things? But thus, their hearts being inlarged and inlightened, they ſee themſelues readilie to withſtand ſundrie temptations, which before they did ſo hardly reſiſt and

                   gainſay, that they found it a continuall irkeſomnes and toyle to goe about it: or (that which was worſe) through hardning of their hearts, they would not ſee them at all, which was a ſore blemiſh vnto them.
               Now theſe and ſuch like, will any ſay, outſtrayings in them, till God by chaſtiſements call them backe againe, that they be not the fruites of an ill ordered heart? euen as I ſaid before, it is the ill gouerning of the heart, that cauſeth ſuch excrements to come from it, and ſuch diſguiſing of the perſon, in whom it breaketh out ſo offenſiuely; the which therefore had need to bee looked vnto with all holie and religious care: which is the point now in hand. And although it bee the exceeding fauour of God,An high grace to liue well, without the whip. to correct ſuch  faults in his children, and to purge them out and amend them by ſome fatherly afflictions, rather then they ſhould remaine to the vtter ruine of the perſons: yet had it not been much better, that they ſhould neuer haue giuen occaſion thereof? and that they had been carefull to keepe themſelues within compaſſe, as ſome other of their brethren doe? Who though they be not (no not the beſt of others) exempt from the common frailties of Gods elect, yet doe they ſo labour to eſpie, hinder, and hold their corruptions vnder, in ſecret ſifting them, and ſuing vnto God with groanes and requeſts; that they breake not foorth openly to the iuſt offence of others, at leaſt rarely: ſo that it may bee ſeene, they keepe their hearts with all obſeruation and diligence, more  then the other doe.
               And yet for all that hath been ſaid, I denie not, but that the deareſt children of God may poſſiblie, nay eaſilie, as we haue ſeene, and are at ſometime holden vnder this bondage by Sathans ſubtiltie, ſome more then others:The faithfull in part thus kept downe. ſo that for a time they ſhall be more drowned in the loue of earthly things, or be caried away by thoſe which are ſinfull, then obtaine a delight in heauenly. But by the ſpirituall armour of Chriſtians, if they be once well exerciſed in it, they may and doe thus farre preuaile, that they recouer themſelues againe, and get ſuperioritie ouer their hearts, and finde and feele that God is chiefe, and all in all with them, to delight and ioy in him (as I doe not ſee  why it ſhould bee otherwiſe with any ſuch as haue truly taſted how good the Lord is) and then they ſhall cut off numbers of ſuch earthly and noyſome pleaſures, as they were wont to ſolace themſelues with amiſſe, before they conſidered more aduiſedly of it. But will any gather, that I doe make ſo light a matter of ſinne (whiles I thus ſpeake) as though I thought, it might be ſhaken off as a burre hanging on our garment; which the holie Ghoſt ſaith,Sinne is not ſhaken off as a burre. Heb. 12.1.
                   
                  cleaueth faſt to vs, and is euer about vs? For I know ſinne is raging, and the diuell is ſtrong as a lion in his ſuggeſtions and aſſaults, and hardly gainſaid, ſhewing himſelfe as an Angell of light, and wee ſeelie to diſcerne, and weake to reſiſt: yet this I muſt ſay, that the mightie Lion of the tribe of Iuda is ſtronger, and  Chriſt giueth wiſedome to finde out his ſubtilties:2. Cor. 2.11. and greater is the ſpirit of God which is in vs, if wee confidently beleeue and truſt thereto, then the ſin which deceiueth and inticeth vs to the ſame.
               But we haue not this grace (ye will ſay) and therefore what is it to vs?Grace to vanquiſh ſinne. This may be obtained, and more and more from day to day. we haue had it (I ſay againe, ſo many as I ſpeake of) and haue been taught, and haue a promiſe to ouercome by faith: and therefore we may doe ſo ſtill: and that better and better euery day, the more experience wee haue. And although,

I graunt that theſe things are hard to ſuch as are not throughly ſeaſoned  with the knowledge of this doctrine, nor inſtructed oft, and made familiarly acquainted with the wil and louing kindnes of God (whoſe caſe is much to be pitied, and their growings cannot be great) yet it is moſt certaine, that where theſe things are often taught, and vnderſtood, it ſhall goe farre better with them then with others. And they ſhall with eaſe get victorie ouer their ſpeciall corruptions, as ſlouth, diſtruſt, and ſuch like: where as they, who are not acquainted and ſeaſoned with them, ſhall not haue experience of Gods power in helping them to ouercome the ſame; but be ſeruants vnto them, which they might otherwiſe haue maiſtered. Examples hereof, as we haue many; ſo that of Dauid doth declare it, when he was conſtrained to cry out of  it,Pſal. 51.5. ſaying: Againſt thee (O Lord) I offended, and did this great euill: as if he ſhoull haue ſaid; my ſinne had neuer broke out openly in the ſight of men, if I had not let looſe my heart firſt, in the ſight of God.
               Such gouernment therefore, as euery of Gods ſeruants according to the meaſure of their knowledge, may haue ouer their hearts, I wiſh might be kept and continued: which doubtles, although it ouercome not all temptations; yet ſhould it weaken them very much, and diminiſh their ſtrength, ſo that the curſed fruites of them ſhould not ſo eaſily, nor ſo often breake fourth to annoy them.Luk. 6.45. 
                  The good treaſurie of the heart if it were carefully kept, would bring foorth better things. If ye aske what; my meaning is, not, that onely in  the exerciſes of religion, as prayer, reading and hearing, we ſhould haue helpe and furtherance thereby, to worſhip God feruently (which commodity were not ſmall) but in our common actions, affaires, and buſines, we ſhould reape the benefit thereof. For though it be no common thing to be found in the world; yet if men had a continuall care ouer their hearts, to keepe them well ordered, they ſhould ſhew it in their talke and dealings: at the market, in their buyings and ſellings, in their families, and among their neighbours, as well as among ſtrangers, and in all things about which they may lawfully be occupied. In all theſe, I ſay, men ſhould behaue themſelues plainely and ſimply;Gal. 5.22. iuſtly, peaceably, patiently, meekely, kindly, gently, faithfully, temperatly, and humbly, (of what ſtate and degree ſo euer they be, and yet without any diſgrace to them; nay the greateſt honour and credit) yea and mercifully alſo, as occaſion ſhould be offered: which (I thinke) if they were found in chriſtians (as, where elſe are they to be looked for?) they would no leſſe ioy the hearts of them who ſhould behold them, then adorne and beautifie them,A peece of heauen to liue with ſuch as keepe their hearts well. Pſal. 120.5.6.
                   who ſhould be paterns of them. And who can ſay otherwiſe, but that it were a little heauen, to deale with, and liue among ſuch? Euen as we ſee it is a peece of hell, to dwell with them that are of the contrarie diſpoſition: As Iacob muſt haue been conſtrained to abide with Eſau, and as Gods people in their captiuitie, did with the Edomits. God of  his ſingular loue (I confeſſe) reſtraineth many from the exceſſe of euill, that they would otherwiſe doe: ſeeing otherwiſe, none could be able to liue by them: But whereas ſome are thus bridled by good lawes, and ſome for ſhame and vaine glory, doe depart from much iniquitie; and thus patch vp a kinde of life among men: yet know they, that without religion (that is, a feare of breaking out of chriſtian bounds) which onely is to be found in an

                   heart well gouerned) they ſhall neuer pleaſe God,VVithout it nothing ſauory. nor haue fauour nor approbation, no not euen of common men. But of this we may complaine and cry out, till we haue worne our tongues to the ſtump, without redreſſe. For the fowle ſtaines, and ſhamefull blots which are contrary to the forementioned vertues, are ſtill vſuall (as they haue been) almoſt euery where, both in many of the miniſtery and people, and ſo will bee; as though godlineſſe were tied to the Church walles, and to the pulpit. And for a further illuſtration and proofe of the benefit of the well guiding of the heart, this I haue ſaid.
               Thus we may ſee that the heart being well ordered,Fruite of a well ordered heart. will neither ſuffer the  affections to ſtray farre, nor willingly harbour euill luſts: and though they may creepe in by ſtealth; yet by examination, we ſhall finde out many of them, and ſhall be readie, when they are found, to purge them out, and expell them alſo, before they ſhall (being ſo neſtled in vs) be able to poiſon our liues. Oh gaine vnualuable! for who can ſay leſſe of it? that by the benefit of a well ordered heart, we may conquer many daungerous ſinnes, which others (for want of it) doe vſually commit, with ſhame and much ſorrow accompanying them. Now when we ſee the fruite of this well ſeaſoning and keeping of our hearts, in frame, what ſhould be in more account with vs? yea, what ſhould hinder it from being ſo? or what ſhould we thinke more  needefull to be done, then the labouring for it, when we ſee it ſo great a treaſure; and ſuch fearefull bondage for want of it, to come vpon vs? But, alas,Good moode. this looking to our hearts by fittes, now and then, when the good moode taketh vs, as it is too common, ſo it is moſt daungerous; and ſuffereth not chriſtians to ſee, much leſſe to inioy one halfe of the ſweetenes, which God bequeatheth to them: I meane, if we gouerne and looke to them, but as men in the world commonly looke to their outward ſeruing of God: that is, to pray when night commeth, goe to the Church when the Sabboth commeth, to faſt when Lent commeth, and repent when death commeth. And ſo the wiſedome of the fleſh counſelleth vs to looke to our hearts ſometime:  but that we reſolue and arme our ſelues that the heart bee thus looked to in all that we doe (as frailty will permit) and care had ouer it, that it follow the light of knowledge going before it, oh that is thought too heauie a burthen, and an eſtate too vncomfortable! To reioyce alwayes, to pray continually, in all things to be thankefull: as the Apoſtle commaundeth, 1. Epheſ. 5.16. Day and night to be meditating on the word of God,
                  Pſalm. 1.2. and the varietie of the infinit good things contained in it, and aiming at it, as at a marke, how we may walke after it:
                  
                     Pſal. 119.15. Heart may alwayes be looke to. oh that is counted tediouſnes, and bondage intolerable! And yet none of all theſe precepts can be vnderſtoode of the outward actions of our life, the eare, and tongue cannot doe theſe things alwayes: but the heart may meditate,  reioyce, praiſe, and pray at all ſeaſons, and vpon all occaſions, if once it hath gotten a pleaſure in them, for it ſhall neuer want occaſion. And if we can obtaine to haue God in our remembrance more vſually then we were wont, or then others deſire to doe, and ſpend our thoughts and ſet our delight on him: ſhall we thinke any thing too good for him? ſhould we not conſtantly take vp our hearts in heauenly cogitations, as we are willed, Col. 3.2. when we ſee, that all other are but vanitie and vexation of ſpirit? If it

pleaſeth him to aske our hearts, as he doth, when he ſaith, My ſonne giue me  thine heart:
                  Pro. 23.26. ſhould we not thinke our ſelues happie that he will take any thing at our hands,Pſalm. 116.12. when Dauid being a King, wiſhed that he had any thing that would pleaſe him?Another cauſe why the heart ſhould be lookt to, other wiſe it will not be readie to any duty. This taking vp of our delight in the looking to our hearts, as we are able, ſhould the more be ſought after of vs, if it were but for this cauſe, that if wee haue not rule ouer them in our common actions thorough our life, we cannot haue them at commaundement in the chiefe ſeruices of God. And from hence it is, that chriſtians of good hope, doe complaine,Note. and that oftentimes with bitternes, that their hearts are ſo ſwarming vſually with vaine thoughts, euen whiles they are in hearing and praying: the reaſon is, becauſe at other times they are vſually ſo occupied throughout  the day, feeding vpon their delights, that God is almoſt wholy out of their remembrance, eſpecially to direct and leade their hearts: and therefore alſo their actions, and ſpeeches are much offenſiue in lightnes, raſhnes, and vnreuerence: The which being common with them in the daily courſe of their life, they cannot poſſibly haue them otherwiſe at hearing or praying. All which yet are contrarily done, when the ſtrength of concupiſence, I meane, the corruption of the heart (which is without meaſure euill) is mortified and aſſwaged firſt;How we may be fit to pray and meditate. and then ſtill ſubdued after and reſtrained, and daily ſeaſoned with good meditations, and watched ouer, that it may be kept cleane, and fit to dutie.
               
               
                  The onely way to curbe our luſts, is to looke to our hearts.And thus I conclude; that the onely way to curbe vp, and hold in our intemperate luſts, and euill deſires, that they breake not out into further vngodlines, is, that our hearts be firſt purified through beleeuing that our ſinnes are forgiuen vs, and wee made partakers of Chriſt his grace; and ſo our conſciences appeaſed: and that they bee continued in the ſame good order afterwards.
               
                  Without this ſmall fruite or comfort.And they, who wil not ſee and follow after this, but thinke to abſtaine from ſinfull temptations, and ſerue God in an honeſt and godly life, howſoeuer the heart be little looked after, ſhall reape a ſleight fruite of their trauaile; neither leade the life which is approued of God (as hath been ſaid) nor finde the  comfort which they imagine they ſhall haue, at leaſtwiſe which they heare, to be graunted by the Lord.Matth. 19.29. But it commeth to paſſe, as it is written, that as they ſerue him, ſo he ſerueth them: for as they ſerue not God in heart, and deed,Matth. 6.6. & 15.7. but in word; ſo their peace is not in heart and deed, but in word: their ioy,Note. not in ſoule, but in countenance: a falſe comfort (and that appeareth in time of neede) as they gaue to him a falſe worſhip. It is profitable for vs to weigh this: for ſuch as crie out of vs, as of Preciſians, for teaching and vrging this, doe proue, to their coſt and ſhame oftentimes, that they had been happy if they could haue receiued this our doctrine, howſoeuer they reproch and ſpeake ill of our liuing. Who ſhould not haue branded themſelues with  ſinnes, that they could neuer after weare out the ſtaine of them any more; if they had been as the ſtricteſt Preciſians before.
               It hath been ſhewed, how the heart being kept pure and cleane, the vnruly deſires and appetites which ariſe from thence, ſhall be kept vnder in vs, and the power of them ſhaken and weakened: this is thus to be vnderſtoode: that euen as, if our hearts were altogether pure, all our thoughts and deſires

                   ſhould be altogether holy, and none of them vncleane:This clenſing of the heart is not perfect. ſo our hearts being purified and clenſed, but vnperfectlie, and in part, our deſires therefore cannot be (in the perfecteſt and beſt Chriſtians) altogether good and pleaſing to God, but vnperfit: that is to ſay, many of them euill, and many which are holy, yet mixed with euill and corruption. Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that the holieſt ſeruants of God, both carrie about them the noiſome remnants of ſinne whileſt they liue,Hebr. 12.1. as loathſome ragges (for they cleaue fast vnto them) and alſo they complaine and grone vnder them as heauie burthens,Rom. 7. ſaying, Oh wretched men that we are, who ſhall deliuer vs? And againe, If thou, O Lord, ſhouldest looke ſtreightlie what is done amiſſe, who ſhould be able to abide it?
                  Pſalm. 130.3. 
                   This (I ſay) is the perfection of the beſt: that they, who charge vs to challenge a puritie to our ſelues, may be aſhamed.This clenſing though weake, is a great priuiledge. But yet leaſt wicked and vngodly men ſhould thinke this a ſmall gift and priuiledge, that Gods ſeruants haue in this, that they be in part renued, and ſo be brought to thinke, that there is no great difference betwixt the godlie and themſelues, they are to knowe, that to haue our hearts changed but in meaſure, ſo as it be in truth, is a benefit of greater value, then the whole world: and what meruaile if the ouercomming of malice, and reuenge (but one affection) be of greater value, then the winning of a Citie? Prouerb. 16.32. And whereas they thinke there is no difference betwixt the one, and the other, they may vnderſtand, that the  meaneſt perſon hauing a cleane heart, though not perfect, is by infinite degrees happier then the moſt gloſing profeſſor which wanteth it, the one ſaued, the other damned: as we reade of the poore Publicane,
                  Luk. 18.9.10. 
                  and the vaine glorious Phariſie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 13. Of the ſumme, and manner of handling this ſecond part of a godly life: and particularlie of the rules to be obſerued for the effecting of it: namely, knowledge and practiſe.
               
               
                  ANd thus (Chriſtian reader) I haue ſet downe to thee, one part of the life, which God requireth of thee, whoſoeuer thou art, who lookeſt for ſaluation at his hands, being a beleeuer in Chriſts: that is, that thou ſhouldeſt renounce the euill luſt which ſwarme euery where in the world, and vngodly life following the ſame: and how this ſhould be done, and how farre thou maiſt attaine hereunto, euen ſo farre as mans frailty will permit, and not as the vnbeleeuers: only be ſure that thou haſt this in ſome meaſure wrought in thee in truth.The ſecond generall branch of the life of the beleeuer. But in all this thou haſt been taught  onely to caſt off that which is ſinfull and naught; which to doe, is (no doubt) a great part of godlineſſe: but there hath been nothing ſaid of the manifold pointes of dutie on the other ſide, and of the goodneſſe which is to be found in vs, and in the which, Gods people muſt ſhine as lights vnto the world:
                  Matth. 5.16. Prouer. 19.22▪
                   For this is the glory and beautie of a man, as Salomon ſaith: That which is to be deſired of a man, is his goodneſſe. Of this life therefore, which muſt be wrought in ſtead of the former euill conuerſation, and bringeth foorth fruites of amendment,

and conſiſteth in the doing of good workes, I am now to intreate  and ſpeake.More hard and excellent to doe good, then to eſchew euill. And as this is more hard to attaine to, then the other: (as hard as that is) ſo it is farre more pretious, and beautifull to bee doing of good, then to auoide euill; though he is a rare man, who is not to be charged that way.
               The which I ſay, firſt, that they may ſee what a great portion they haue euen in this world, whom God hath framed thereunto, how contemptible ſoeuer their eſtate be to them, who know it not, neither can iudge of it according to the truth.
               
                  Not to reſt in that.And ſecondly, that they, who reſt in it, and can ſay, they hope, yea ſee no great euill in them, may know, that if they bee not alſo giuen vnto good  workes, the greateſt perfection that they can reioyce in, is this, that they are but halfe chriſtians.
               But the matter is much and large, which muſt needes be handled in the laying forth of this point, to ſhew fully and cleerely for the ſimple hearted Chriſtian, what this part of a godly life is: therefore I will make no longer ſtay in any thing (as neere as I can) then I muſt needes.
               Firſt then, I will ſet downe ſome generall rules to direct thee how to practiſe all duties commaunded,Three branches of this ſecond part of this treatiſe, and which they are. Obiections, if any be. Neceſſitie of rules to liue well by. which otherwiſe might be done to ſmall purpoſe: then I will more particularly ſhew, wherein this part of godlines, or of doing good, doth conſiſt: that is to ſay, in duties of holines to God: and in  righteous dealing towards men, with reaſons of both: laſtly, I will anſwere ſome obiections brought againſt the godly life.
               And where I ſay I will giue thee rules which ſhall helpe thee to practiſe the godly life, marke them well: for becauſe this point is not well learned, therefore many which would gladly liue well, attaine to it in no good ſort to bring it in credit with others, but meete with many vnſetlings, diſcouragements, and coolings of their zeale, yea oft times dangerous outſtrayings: neither finde the going about it ſo pleaſant, as toileſome and tedious. And it is ſo in great part, becauſe it is a worke whereto they haue not been trained: but as they partly ſee by the examples of others, and partly alſo doe geſſe themſelues, but not able to direct their waies ſoundly, as Gods word teacheth. Now the generall rules are theſe: Firſt, knowledge of dutie, with a delighting therein. Secondly, practiſe of that which wee know; the which practiſe or indeuouring to follow that which we know, is that liuing by faith, or labouring to keepe a good conſcience, which the Scripture ſo oft and diligently commendeth vnto vs. And for the better furthering of vs herein, theſe vertues are neceſſarie: vprightnes, diligence, and conſtancie.
               
                  The firſt rule to liue well, is knowledge.And to begin with knowledge, as it is in all ſciences, profeſſions and trades, that they who goe about to practiſe therein, muſt needes haue ſome cleere and good vnderſtanding of thoſe things which appertaine to the  ſame; ſo much more in this practiſe of Chriſtian duties, it is requiſite, that he who beleeueth in God (for ſuch an one onely can be a practiſer here) ſhould haue ſome true knowledge, what is good and godly, that he may diſcerne it from the contrarie, and of things good, which are the beſt; ſo that by knowledge I meane,Knowledge what. ſuch an inlightening of the minde to vnderſtand the will of God about good and euill, that wee haue with it ſpirituall wiſedome to applie

                   and referre the ſame to the well ordering of our particular actions, that we reſt not in ſeeing the truth onely, but approoue and allow of it, as that which is fit to counſell and guide vs: but yet ſo,And to grow in this knowledge. as euery one is able to conceiue and attaine vnto that which I ſay, that both he may grow and increaſe in this knowledge, who is indued with the greateſt meaſure of it alreadie: and he may not be diſcouraged that hath any true meaſure of it at all. This knowledge, S. Peter ſaith, muſt be ioyned with faith (that particular duties,2. Pet. 1.5. Rom. 2.29. as patience, temperance, and ſuch other like may be practiſed) and that not in the letter onely, but in the ſpirit. And it is that, of which our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith:Iob. 13.17. 
                  If ye know theſe things, happie are you if ye doe them.
               
               
                   This heauenly vnderſtanding, if it be loued and delighted in of vs,VVith this knowledge muſt goe a delight in it. Prou. 2.4.
                   and deſired as gold, and ſought after as ſiluer, and not weighed and eſteemed of vs, as a thing common and of no value; will with her beautie ſo inflame our hearts, and ſet vs on fire with the loue thereof, that we ſhall thinke long, till we haue been led by it to the practiſing of that which we know (being the way to the King palace) which is farre more pretious then the knowledge it ſelfe, and will moſt certainly follow the ſame. Therefore Salomon ſaith:
                     Prou. 2.10. Without this delight no fruit of knowledge. 
                  If knowledge once enter into thine heart, and wiſedome delight thy ſoule, then ſhall vnderstanding preſerue thee, and counſell ſhall keepe and direct thee. And they who haue not this knowledge in greateſt account, and delight not in it, whatſoeuer learning, or  wiſedome they haue, they are as farre from practiſe of it, or bringing foorth the fruite thereof in their liues, otherwiſe then ciuilly, as if they were blinde and ignorant like the common ſort: which in Nichodemus,
                  Ioh. 3 10. 
                  a great man in Iſrael, and other of the Phariſies and Scribes is eaſie to be ſeene.
               And this is the cauſe why many which are learned, and of the Miniſterie, or otherwiſe, wittie, and acquainted with the Scriptures, are farre from a godly life indeede, for that they haue not their hearts led by Gods ſpirit to loue and delight in this knowledge of Gods ſacred will (vnles it be for ſome earthly aduantage, which they hope for thereby, or for vaine glorie) more thē all other things beſide: nor ſpiritual wiſedom to ſquare their actions therby,  to the end they may follow it as their guide in their whole courſe, as ſeeing it worthy to ſet their delight therein: but account that a fooliſh thing, and eaſie to be attained (when yet it is the moſt pretious, and the hardeſt of all other) yea, a farre more hard and difficult matter, then the getting of all their learning by labour and ſtudie. What then doe I ſay? that their learning and great knowledge is nothing?Knovvledge an excellent gift. or doe I goe about to deface and make both odious? No, I am farre from it: but rather I ſay freely, that they are great and excellent gifts of God: and by many degrees, they may be neerer to an happie eſtate who haue them, then ſuch as want them.
               But yet this I ſay, that many which haue them, haue not therewith that  which giueth an edge to them, and which maketh them profitable, ſweete, and pretious both to themſelues and others: they haue not the ſalt of grace,But without the ſalt of grace vnſauourie. 1. Cor. 13.1.
                   which onely maketh them ſauourie, nor the loue which onely maketh them fit to edifie (whereas knowledge without it, puſſeth vp, and the tongues of Angels to expreſſe it, were but as a tinckling cymbale:) Neither haue they eye-ſalue to ſee that, except in humilitie they be content, yea glad to be led in their dailie conuerſation by the light and helpe of the ſame; they haue no other fruite

of it then earthly and tranſitorie: in oſtentation, and comparing with others, to diſgrace them, and to be counted great maſters when they attaine to great applauſe; when yet indeede many of them haue not the ſweete fruite of it themſelues, nor ſhew that amiable vſe of it to others, as ſome meane countrie men which labour faithfully to make conſcience of that which they know. And I ſay with the Pſalmiſt, that he who hath fewer gifts of vnderſtanding, ſo as he liue after them which he hath, is wiſer then they: for thus hee ſaith: Thou haſt made me wiſer then my teachers,
                  Pſal. 119.99. 
                  then the ancient, or men of experience, becauſe I haue kept thy commaundements. Therfore with the Wiſeman I conclude, that the delighting in this ſpiritual knowledge, which I haue ſpoken of, is one ſpeciall thing, neceſſarie to the leading of a godlie and vpright life; without  the which the minde is not good, and conſequently the life cannot bee approoued:Prou. 19.2. ſo that they, who care but little for knowledge to guide them, haue as ſmall pleaſure in the godlie life, whatſoeuer they thinke of themſelues: to the ſhame of ſuch I ſpeake it,The ſecond rule. who ſay in their hearts, they know enough for their parts (for if they knew more, they muſt follow more.)
               Therefore condemning both bare literal knowledge, without the loue of, and delighting in it; and much more the loathing and contempt of it: I proceed to ſhew, that with ſuch a well affected heart, we muſt practiſe that which is commaunded vs,Col. 1.10. that is, ſeeke to walke worthie the Lord, and pleaſe him in all things. And this practiſe is the ſecond rule to direct vs to the life of the beleeuer, and is both inward and outward: inward, when in reſolution of our minds, and deſire and purpoſe of heart we doe it, Pſal. 119.10. Act. 11.23. Outward, when in our liues wee expreſſe and declare the ſame in our walking, Act. 9.31.
               
                  Practiſe, is firſt in an heartie deſire.But to begin with the firſt. We muſt haue our hearts prepared and readie to bee ſet on worke, and imployed in any good ſeruice to God, or our brethren, as I ſhewed at large before in the renouncing of euill (and therefore the leſſe ſhall be ſpoken of it.) And this well ordering of the heart, is a moſt precious grace of God, as without the which, no good can be well done. But when wee haue ſuch awe ouer our affections, as to chooſe, deſire and delight  in that which we know to be good, and as occaſion ſhall be offered; yea and to bee vehemently grieued with that which hindreth vs therein: the members and powers of our mindes ſhall be readie to put in vre and practiſe the ſame.
               Therefore this inward readines of the minde and feruent deſire of the heart (we ſee) muſt be blowne vp in vs, and nouriſhed as a ſparkle or coale of fire: that (as it may bee obtained) there may bee ſome abilitie and ſtrength thereunto. For the which cauſe, the Lord requireth, that wee loue him with all our heart,
                  Deut. 6.5. 
                  ſoule and might.
               
               This ſtrength although where it is not knowne, there is felt no want of it: yet ſuch as ſee it requiſite in their actions, doe ſoone feele it to be miſſing, and a great piece of the beautie of thoſe workes which are done without it, to be wanting. As when they are gone about coldly and in deadnes of ſpirit: and ſo likewiſe, they can beſt tell, how well it beſeemeth their actions, who haue obtained it of God, and teſtifie it throughout the courſe of their liues. For when men vnderſtand, that God hath ſo appointed, that they ſhould be zealous

                   in doing their duties, as remembring that of him they ſhall receiue their reward, and that his buſines ought to be gone about feruently and with conſcience;Ierem. 48.10. though they haue no great example of ſuch practiſe in the world, it will harten them on with courage vnto the ſame, by the helpe of his ſpirit, which leadeth thereto. And yet if the zeale of Gods houſe conſumed them, as the Prophet ſaith, it did him; this were no perfection, but that which ought to be laboured for, as euery one may attaine it; and in the whole courſe of mens dealings and duties to God, ſome meaſure of it: in ſo much, as where it is not found and inioyed of men, they ſhould count it their ſinne.
               And here this one thing is to be conſidered, that our affections of chooſing,  and imbracing good things be ſo ordered, that they may be equally more ſlacke or ſtrong, as the goodneſſe of the thing ſhall be greater or leſſer:Our affections muſt be ſtronger, as the good is greater. (as in praying to God, rather then giuing their due to men.) Alſo that (in an equall compariſon) the duties of holines to God, be preferred before duties to men: and with more bending our force and ſtrength, when we goe about to performe them, rather then theſe.
               And if it be demaunded here, how we ſhall come by ſuch grace,
                     How we come by this grace. Epheſ. 4.22. 2. Pet. 1.4. as whereby we ſhall be able to imbrace, chooſe, and follow the good, which we know: I anſwere: that we receiued ſuch grace, when we firſt beleeued in Chriſt; whereby our hearts were purified, and clenſed from the ſtrength of our old corruption: 
                   which (if we remember) doth warrant vs not onely, that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath taken away the guilt, and puniſhment of our ſinne, and imparted to vs, and giuen freely his obedience; but alſo grace and will to loue pietie, and goodneſſe; and power, as to kill ſinne, ſo to quicken vs to newnes of life.
                  Rom. 6.4.5.
               
               So that if we feele it not vſually, and ordinarily, we haue loſt and forgone it, either through our forgetfulnes, ſlouth or careles negligence: or if it be through infirmitie weakened in vs, wee ought to ſtirre vp our ſelues with cheerefull confidence, to the recouering of it againe, and not to be content to be ſpoiled of ſo great a treaſure. But if this earneſt deſire after goodneſſe, and vehement zeale of honoring God by that which we know, be quenched:  whether it be ouerwhelmed with ſorrow, feare, or ſuch like paſſions, or dulled and made blunt in vs through lightnes, and in following the deſire of our hearts amiſſe, we are in no wiſe fit to honour God in any ſeruice. Thus much of the firſt part of practiſe, namely inward.
               I will now goe forward with the ſecond part,As we deſire, ſo must we indeuour to do good. Pſal. 122.8, 9.
                   which is a branch of the ſecond rule, and helpeth forward to the leading of a godly life; that the beleeuers may, by it, be able to guide themſelues aright, and with much eaſe, in reſpect of thoſe, who be not acquainted therewith. And this it is, that in well doing, we ſtay not in our good deſires, and in the readines of the heart to doe good, but procure, accompliſh and performe the ſame duties outwardly; that  we indeuor at leaſt, euen where we cannot performe, as occaſion ſhall be offered, and that in one commaundement as well as in another, ſo farre as it may be obtained. So that in all parts of ſanctifie and holines, which ſhall be wrought in, and by vs, this ought to be as a perpetuall law, that all the members of our bodies, and our particular actions, may all become moſt fit inſtruments and helps to ſhew forth, and expreſſe the ſame. And that is it, which the Apoſtle to the Romans meaneth, when he ſaith:Rom. 6.12.13. 
                  Let not ſinne raigne in

your mortall bodies, that ye ſhould obey it in the lustes thereof, neither giue ye your  members as weapons of vnrighteouſneſſe to ſinne, but giue your ſelues vnto God, as they which are aliue from the dead, and giue your ſelues as weapons of righteouſneſſe vnto God.
               
               
                  All parts of our bodies giuen to ſerue God.By this we ſee, that not only the heart with her members, that is, the cogitations and deſires in thoſe which are iuſtified by faith, muſt be conſecrated to the honour and ſeruice of God, but alſo the bodie with the parts thereof; the eare in hearing, the tongue in ſpeaking, the eye in ſeeing, &c. that ſo we ſhould be his wholy: and in one part of our life, as well as another, doe that which pleaſeth him.
               No man doubteth, but that we ſhould doe good works, as well as haue  our mindes and hearts inwardly purged,Make a trade of godlines. 1. Tim. 5.
                   but that we ſhould be diligently giuen vnto euery good worke, and make a trade of godlines, to applie and follow it; ſo that while we doe one good dutie, we ſhould not neglect another (which in good husbandrie about things of this life is much regarded:) that few will grant, or be readie to yeeld thereto: yea and that our conuerſation ſhould be in heauen, that is, that our common courſe of life ſhould be heauenly,2. Cor. 6.3. whileſt we liue here vpon earth: and that we ſhould not only giue no occaſion of offence in any thing, but alſo in all things ſeeke to approue our ſelues as the faithfull ſeruants of God. Thus much of the rules: the vertues which further vs herein followe, which are, vprightnes, diligence, and conſtancy or  perſeuerance.
               
                  The firſt vertue is vprightnes.The firſt then of theſe vertues, which ſhould make our practiſe both inward and outward more pure and perfect, is vprightnes, and that is, when in a ſingle and true heart, we loue, chooſe and deſire, and doe any good thing, ſpecially becauſe God commaundeth,Deutr. 18.13 Epheſ. 6.14. Iohn 1.17. and for that end. This vertue was commended by our Sauiour in Nathaniel, when he ſaid: Behold a true Iſraelite, in whom there is no guile. Many actions, otherwiſe feruent enough, for want of this ſinceritie, are but froth (as were the hot enterpriſes of Iehu againſt idolaters) and cauſe them who haue long pleaſed themſelues therein, at length, to crie out of their doings (though admirable in the eyes of others) and to ſay, they were but hypocriſie.
               There are many ſtarting holes in the denne of our hearts, and many waies we can deceiue ourſelues, that the good which we doe, is not as it ſeemeth: but as it is not all gold that doth gliſter, ſo the touchſtone of Gods word doth finde much droſſe therein:Pretences in good actions. yea, the Lords weights of the Sanctuarie doe proue them light and windie, which in our iudgements and perſwaſions were weightie and ſubſtantiall.
               We are brought oft times to be earneſt in good cauſes, and to further them, as for friendſhip of others, and for companie ſake: ſo for malice, for our commoditie, vaine glorie, and for feare of ſome ſore puniſhment or danger, if we ſhould doe otherwiſe: when our pretence in all theſe, is, that it is good, and commaunded; yea and we meane well many times, and are feruent in a good thing without theſe euill reſpects; and that partly for the commaundement of God: but not only, nor reſolutely for that, but more for other conſiderations, then that: Therefore we are found to be others, then we would. Although I would not be taken, as though I ſhould meane, that there

                   were no vprightnes, if any feare,Pſal. 130.3. or other fleſhly reſpects ſhould be mixed therewith (ſo as we be not ruled by them) for otherwiſe our beſt actions are mixed with corruption.
               And thus I conclude this point as the former, and ſay with the Apoſtle:1. Cor. 1.12. 
                  This ſhall be our reioycing (if we haue any worthy the ſpeaking of) that in ſimplicitie, and godly purenes we haue our conuerſation in the world among men: This vertue therefore (I meane faithfulnes, and vprightnes) going with our practiſe, in performing the duties which we knowe, ſhall both ſet our ſelues about them with more roundnes, and (as farre as they can be diſcerned) ſhall cauſe them to ſhew more beautie to others, and raiſe more admiration in  them.
               Now if this ſhould be thought needeles of ſome which ſhall reade it, that I ſpeaking of the true Chriſtian, doe vrge and require vprightnes and ſinglenes of heart in practizing godlines, ſeeing I haue ſaid as much before in the chapter of renouncing ſinne: I anſwere, that it is alike requiſit in both: and that as well we ſhew integritie in the practiſe of good duties, as in the forſaking of euill. And thus with the rules, I haue ſet downe one of the vertues namely vprightnes: which is neceſſarily to be learned and kept of all ſuch as hauing obtained the gift of true faith, doe ſet themſelues to lead a godly life: I ſay, ſuch as haue true faith, becauſe no other haue any poſſibilitie  to enter, and ſet vpon it. And if thou thinkeſt to ſet vpon the godly life without it, thou ſhalt offer to God a broken peece of worke:Neceſſitie of thoſe rules and vertues. no better then the offering of Caine; although it ſhall ſeeme to thy ſelfe, to be as holy as the ſacrifice of Abel.
               
               But if thou haſt taſted aright of this gift of faith, and then going about to leade a godly life; thou being ſoundly inſtructed in theſe rules, before ſet downe, and perſwaded that they with the vertues here added, muſt guide and helpe thee to the right performing of all dutie; then (euen as skill and vnderſtanding of the rules in any ſcience or trade, with willingnes and indeuour, maketh the workeman fit to vſe and practiſe it) thou ſhalt finde great  eaſe, not onely in withſtanding the deceitfull baites of ſinne, but alſo conſtantly breake through many and diuers lets, which thou ſhalt meete with, that they ſhall not withhold thee from going forward in thy Chriſtian courſe. For it is mens naked, and vnarmed venturing, and going abroade in the world (which is as a ſhop of vanitie and inticements) it is this, I ſay,Vnarmed venturing abroade is cauſe of ſore wounds. that maketh them come home with ſo many deadly wounds, fearefull falles, and greeuous offences, (I ſpeake of the better ſort of people, as well as of the common profeſſors, though the worſt ſeldome feele them) and they ſhall neuer finde it otherwiſe till they doe better addreſſe themſelues and be furniſhed, as hath been ſaid, to this great worke of Chriſtianitie.
               
                   But becauſe I haue appointed a more conuenient place hereafter, where I ſhall more fully ſpeake of the armour, which God hath prepared for the ſafekeeping of his, I referre the reader thither, for more full ſatisfying of him about this matter. Onely one or two obiections, which may ariſe from the doctrine which I haue ſet downe, ſhall more fitly be anſwered here.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 14. Of the aunſwering of ſome obiections about the former doctrine, and of the other two vertues which helpe to a godly life.
               
                  Obiect. We cannot doe as we deſire.
                  AS firſt this, whereas theſe rules haue been ſaid to be able to carrie the Chriſtian beleeuer, in a well ordered courſe of liuing, ſome obiect thus: It falleth out often times, that we haue a very good deſire to doe that, which we know, pleaſeth God; but wee finde no ſtrength to performe. And  further, they ſay; we doe not ſo much maruaile that we attaine not that which we ſeeke, when the Apoſtle himſelfe maketh the ſame complaint, where he ſaith, to will is preſent with me, but I finde no way to accompliſh that which I deſire. I will not anſwere this as the deuouteſt Ieſuites doe, namely, that God giueth his grace, and we may receiue it if we liſt, although we haue no aſſurance of his fauour by faith: which is a meere mocking of poore people, whiles they are warned to ſeeke that with vnſauorie and vncomfortable wearying of themſelues, which they can neuer poſſibly finde:Anſwer. 1.
                   But this I ſay, if this be oft and earneſtly deſired of thee (as it was of Paul) Gods grace ſhall be ſufficient for thee.
               
               And further, if thou haſt neuer ſo feruent a deſire to ouercome euill, and to doe that which thou knoweſt to be good, and yet haſt not thy heart poſſeſſed of the fauour of God,
                     2. The beſt deſire without aſſurance of Gods helpe is vaine. and taken vp therewith, but ſtandeſt waueringly affected about that matter, thy deſire is not that deſire which I haue ſpoken of: neither therefore able to helpe thee in that which thou wouldeſt; it being no fruite of faith.1. Iohn 5.4. For this it is, that ouercommeth all lets in the world, and no other thing, euen this faith I meane, whiles by it we are perſwaded that Chriſt Ieſus ſo loueth vs, that he is readie to doe any thing which is expedient for vs: becauſe of the great fauour that he beareth vs, whereby we are made able alſo,Phil. 4. and in whom we can doe all things, as ſhall be expedient  for vs.
               For as nothing can ſeparate it from vs, ſo he thinketh nothing too good, or too pretious for vs. So that he, into whoſe heart his loue is ſhed plentifully, is perſwaded, that as he hath ſaued him from the greateſt daunger of hell; ſo he will much more ſaue him from the ſmaller, of being ouercome of his corrupt luſts: and that he, who hath beſtowed by free graunt and ſure promiſe, the greateſt benefit vpon him, namely, the kingdome of heauen; will not denie him the ſmaller,Rom. 5.10. Rom. 8.30. that is, grace to liue Chriſtianly here on earth. For he that hath giuen vs Chriſt, by whom we haue the former, how ſhall he not with him giue vs other things alſo? And if, not as we would, yet that is beſt which he giueth.
               
               Now for the other part of the obiection, that Paul himſelfe did not finde grace to ouercome the rebellion of the old man,VVhy Paul ouercame not all rebellion. that is, his corrupt nature: I ſay, it is true, that fullie and perfectly he did not: to the end, that he might alwaies haue a marke of his vnworthines, and ſin remaining in him, and thereby remember, that it was of only mercie that he was pardoned, and the grace of God, that kept him from falling away from him. And for both theſe cauſes,

                   that he might be abaſed, and kept humble vnder ſo great grace as hee had receiued: in regard whereof, he had (as he confeſſeth himſelfe) been exalted and lifted vp aboue meaſure: and laſt of all,2. Cor. 12.9. that he might from time to time finde ſweetnes ſtill in the forgiuenes of his ſinnes. But although he was not perfect here, as an Angell; yet was he not caried of his luſts into groſſe iniquitie (as ſome dreame, becauſe he cried out and complained, I am carnall,
                  Paul was not caried into groſſe iniquity. 
                  ſolde vnder ſin: O wretched man that I am!) And it was neceſſary that he ſhould miſlike and be grieued with the ſmalleſt rebellion or reſiſtance of goodnes, and with ſome vnfitnes to his calling which he felt ſometimes, and to other good duties: but yet Gods grace was ſufficient to keepe him, that he fell not into  that depth that he might haue done.
               But I haue in effect anſwered this alreadie by another occaſion.VVe may looke for the like grace that Paul had in our meaſure. Now to applie this to our ſelues, and not to bee glutted with it as many are, I ſay; that wee likewiſe through the ſame grace in our meaſure, may looke with good cheere to bee deliuered from the yeelding to our wicked luſts, which moſt dangerouſly incumber vs, as hee was from his: wee being reſolued, that our moſt louing father (for the tender care hee hath ouer vs) is alwaies looking downe from heauen, and beholding who is vpright hearted towards him (how weake ſoeuer) that he may ſhew himſelfe ſtrong towards him,
                  2. Chron. 16.9. and thereby ſupplie his weaknes. And thus the deſire to keepe a godly courſe being ſoundly planted  in vs, and the ſame proceeding from faith alſo, who doubteth but that it may haue ſtrength to doe ſuch outward duties as are required, though weakly:1. Chron. 28.
                        •
                     
                   to endeuour at leaſt (which God will accept) though wee doe not alway preuaile ouer ſuch ſtrong corruptions, as oftentimes for want of ſuch grace doe maſter vs. But in thus ſpeaking, I ſhew what Gods children may confidently looke for, not what euery one obtaineth. And except the ſinne of incontinencie, againſt the which God hath prouided a lawfull remedie,2. Cor. 12.9. Rom. 7.25. wee haue both promiſe from God, and wee by the power of our faith, doe inioy ſuch victorie ouer other ſinnes, as whereby wee may walke without iuſt reproofe amongſt men, and keepe our peace toward him alſo: this being added,  that when we are craftily deceiued by the vnceſſant malice of the diuel, (although not without our owne ſlouth, ſleepines and ſecuritie) we haue acceſſe, as in time paſt, and recourſe to God by the meanes of our aduocate,1. Iohn. 2.1. and doe recouer our hope and hold againe.
               Thus I haue ſhewed, how they who haue a will and good deſire, may look for ſtrength alſo to performe in ſome good ſort, the duties which ſeeme ſo difficult and impoſſible to them, ſo that they neede not be greatly troubled with that obiection: howſoeuer there are many, and thoſe alſo fauourers of Chriſtian religion, who neuer finde nor feele the ſame. But becauſe many of Gods deare ſeruants finde it not thus oft times, neither are able to ſay,Many weak
                        •
                      diſcouraged for want of this victorie. that  they feele this, but contrarily doe complaine that their life is full of diſquietnes, for that they cannot ouercome the force of anger, impatience, raging, frowardnes, and ſuch like, neither liue godly to their contentation, although they deſire it: becauſe I ſay theſe may be diſcouraged by this doctrine, I would haue them vnderſtand, that I haue not in the former anſwere to the laſt obiection ſet downe, what euery godly Chriſtian doth or ſhall feele (as I ſaid before) but what God of his bountifull liberalitie hath prouided, that

they may feele and find:Many know not their libertie. and how their eſtate may be bettered, and their ſpirituall  libertie enlarged.
               Beſides, many good people doe not know this, in a long time what God hath bequeathed them: nay, many of them neuer know one of the many ſweet liberties and priuiledges of Gods children; but only receiue ſo much light from the father of light (and therefore are rightly called the children of light) as whereby they ſee the way to his kingdome:Epheſ. 5.8. and according to the knowledge they haue of his will, thereafter they declare and ſhew it forth in their liues; but nothing as they might, and as ſome others doe.
               Now to proceede to the other vertues which further our practiſe of a godly life: ſuch as receiue and deſire to attaine to the grace which I haue  ſpoken of, that is, to be more ſound and better ſetled in an holy courſe, they are and muſt be glad with all their heart to be diligent and painefull in this worke of the Lord,The two next vertues, diligence and conſtancie. and to abide conſtant therein, that they may by theſe two vertues adioyned, nouriſh all good deſires, and holy endeuours, after they be once planted in them: and hold out the contrarie, whileſt they be not yet greatly troubled with them: and ſet on worke their knowledge in ſuch practiſe, as it may well be ſeene whoſe ſeruants they are.
               
                  Diligence and conſtancie bring great matters to paſſe.This diligence and conſtancie, in whatſoeuer they be vſed, they bring great things to paſſe, whether it be in any trade, or in the ſearching out of things obſcure and hard to be found out, when only the light of reaſon is  followed: and who doubteth then, but that in holy duties, wherein men are guided by the ſpirit of God, moſt excellent effects are brought forth of them? Neither is any dutie indeed well performed without them: for which cauſe S.2. Pet. 1.5. 
                  Peter ſpeaking of the godly life, teacheth that all diligence muſt be added thereto: Giue all diligence (ſaith he) to ioyne with your faith vertue, as if he ſhould ſay, that all is loſt without it: and Ieremy ſaith, that he is curſed,
                  Ierem. 48.10. Iam. 1.25. 
                  that doth Gods buſines negligentlie: And of conſtancie, what ſaith S. Iames? He that looketh in the perfect law of libertie, and abideth therein, if he be not a forgetfull hearer, but a dooer of the worke, ſhall be bleſſed in his deede, that is, in ſo behauing himſelfe.
               
               
                  VVhat diligence.Therefore, by the firſt of theſe two, namely, diligence, let them be readie to take all occaſions and opportunities to the doing of ſome good, and to ſhunne idlenes and vnprofitablenes, that ſo they may bring foorth much fruite redeeming the time wiſely,2. Pet. 1. 
                  Epheſ. 5.15.16. while they may: and that with a thouſand times more gaine then others doe: and not as ſlouthfull, and vnthriftie perſons,Rom. 16.19. & 12.9. paſſe it ouer idly and vnprofitablie, for the pleaſing and ſatisfying of their fooliſh appetite, for the preſent time.
               
                  
                     Conſtancie. Iohn. 8.31. & 15.5.By the ſecond, namely, conſtancie, and continuance, let them not onely keepe their hearts and liues in the ſame good eſtate, which by diligence they haue alreadie nouriſhed in themſelues, but alſo waxe more fruitfull, and  their hearts more inlarged: and ſo daily become followers of euery good worke,
                     Gaine of theſe. Reuel. 2.19. 2. Tim. 4 8. vntill their latter yeares be better then the former, and vntill they haue finiſhed their courſe with ioy. And being once acquainted with the gaine that theſe bring with them, they ſhall doe as the merchants (who hauing their mindes ſet vpon their aduantage, ſuffer not themſelues to range after pleaſures, but buſily follow their trade which bringeth in commoditie) ſo

                   that whatſoeuer part of the Chriſtian life they are occupied about (holding theſe for their companions) they may count it the moſt happie time, which is ſo beſtowed. For in ſo doing, they weane their hearts and mindes from much draffe and worldly luſts, which would, if they might be lodged there, much annoy them: and thereby they are much more readily diſpoſed vnto dutie, then ſuch as will not imbrace them: who being contented with any vncertaine and deceiueable perſwaſion of Gods fauour, and refuſing to bee holden within ſuch narrow ſtreights and compaſſe of this holie and Chriſtian counſell, that is, of going forward by diligence and conſtancie in their courſe, breake out oftentimes to their trouble, daunger, and diſcredit; when  the other are quiet and merie.Many pay deare for their liberties. And becauſe they account it bondage to bee held in after that manner, therefore they finde that they pay deare for their liberties, when they be after conſtrained to repent the ſeeking of them,Note. and yet cannot eaſily recouer their inward peace which they loſt for them, nor ſhake them off againe, when yet moſt gladly they would.
               And for want of theſe two, and through the contrarie,Want of theſe daungerous. ſlouth and inconſtant vnſetlednes, in that they doe not ſettle themſelues to one good thing or other, euen the moſt of the godly doe not finde that ſweete fruite in their life, which is to bee found, namely, of ſafetie vnder Gods protection from time to time: but by improuidence, and wearines of well doing, they doe by  little and little plunge themſelues into ſome deepe vnſetlednes, out of the which, it is hard to ariſe againe. Therfore Salomon in two words hath fitlie expreſſed them both, ſaying: Let the feare of the Lord be in thy heart continually:
                  Prou. 23.17. which is as much, as a diligent care to pleaſe him with conſtancie therein.
               Thus as I haue ſaid, to theſe former rules and vertues which guide vs to liue godlie, theſe two are commanded, diligence and conſtancie. By the one,Epheſ. 5.6. that we be readilie prepared, as wee ought to practiſe good, and ſo reſiſt euill: whereas ſlacknes and no care, or too little, is condemned. By the other, that thereby wee may continually goe forward in doing good, and fleeing euill:1. Theſſ. 5.3.6. Gal. 5.7. wherein all ſtaying, ficklenes, or going backward, is very dangerous. Hereto  belongeth that to the Corinthians, when he hath ſaid:1. Cor. 15.58. 
                  Awake to liue righteouſly, and ſinne not, he addeth, Be ſtedfaſt and vnmoueable, alwaies abounding in the worke of the Lord: knowing that your labour is not in vaine. And after; Watch,
                  1. Cor. 16.13. 
                  ſtand faſt in the faith, quite your ſelues like men, and be ſtrong. And this is neceſſarie aboue all things, that ſo wee may become that ſimplicitie which is meete for them who are in Chriſt.
               Now that this our diligence and care in all good duties ought to bee for continuance, and euen while life laſteth; let vs know, that the Lord commaundeth it to all his children: according to that which is written,Matth. 24.12. Ioh. 8.31. & 15.7. 
                  He that abideth to the end, he ſhall be ſaued. And in another place, If ye continue in my  word, and it abide in you, then are ye my diſciples indeed: and, Aske what ye will, and it ſhall be done to you. And yet this might bee ſpoken to ſmall purpoſe, if the Lord had not promiſed as much to his faithfull ſeruants; that they ſhal haue grace to perſeuere giuen them from aboue: as he ſaith by the Apoſtle: He that hath begun this good worke in you, will performe it vntill the day of Ieſus Chriſt:
                  Phil. 1.6. Alſo to the Theſſalonians: Faithfull is he that hath called you,
                  1. Theſſ. 5.24. 
                  which will alſo doe it. If it be demanded, how he will inable them, ſeeing there are many feares

in their life of finall falling away: the ſame Apoſtle anſwereth this, in the  Epiſtle to the Coloſſians, ſaying: To the end ye may walke worthie of the Lord, (and pleaſe him in all things) and be fruitfull in al good works,
                  Col. 1.10.11. 
                  & increaſe in the acknowledging of God, ye muſt be ſtrengthened with all might through his glorious power vnto all patience and long ſufferance with ioyfulnes. And S. Iohn ſpeaketh to the ſame purpoſe,1. Iohn 4.4. thus: Greater is he that is in you (that is, the ſpirit of God) then he that is in the world, that is, the diuell. The fruite of ſuch a courſe is both an happie end here (as it is written:Pſal. 37.37. 
                  Marke the end of the vpright and iuſt, for the end of that man is peace) and happines for euer after. As wee reade where Paul ſaith: I haue fought a good fight, I haue finiſhed my courſe, and kept the faith:
                  2. Tim. 4.8. 
                  from henceforth is laid vp for me the crowne of righteouſnes, which the Lord  the righteous Iudge ſhall giue me at that day: and not to me onely, but to all that loue his appearing. But I haue been long in the former points, and by occaſion haue ſhewed throughout the whole diſcourſe of the godly life, that it muſt be continued to the end: I ceaſe now to ſay any more.
               Thus hauing ſet downe theſe vertues which muſt guide vs to practiſe the godlie life throughout our whole courſe, it may eaſily bee ſeene how euerie man who is come thus farre, may prooue himſelfe a repentant perſon, and be apt and fit to bring foorth the fruits of amendement in his particular actions, and how his whole conuerſation may bee ſuch as may beſeeme a man of God, ſo farre as humane frailtie will ſuffer: wherein, becauſe wee follow  Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe,Other two vertues, humilitie and meeknes. Matth. 11.29.
                   wee muſt know, that all our duties muſt be practiſed in humilitie and meeknes: for ſo he ſaith, in ſubmitting your ſelues to my doctrine, and in leading the godly life, learne of me to be humble and meeke.
               
               As if hee ſhould ſay, if ye bee hautie and high minded, ſo as ye deſpiſe the ſimplicitie of my doctrine, and thinke it too baſe a thing for you to be ſubiect to; or froward and vntractable, that in ſome points ye wil hold back, though in ſome other ye be obedient, ye can neuer liue godlie, as God requireth of you. Theſe therefore muſt haue no place in Chriſtians, either Miniſters, or priuate perſons, but the contrarie vertues, as I haue ſaid: which are oft times in the Scriptures ſet downe together,Epheſ. 4.2. Col. 3.12. as well as in this place: that wee may  know how needfull it is, that they ſhould alwaies goe together; and that although there bee many goodly gifts in a man, yet if he hath not theſe, they ſhall loſe their credit, and beautie amongſt thoſe which behold them, and withhold their commoditie from him who wanteth them.
               
                  Theſe alwaies neceſſarie.And theſe two are not particular vertues which ſometime only may haue vſe, but ſuch fruites of the ſpirit as neceſſarily are required in all actions: ſo that at no time, humblenes of minde, and meeknes of ſpirit may be wanting. All theſe vertues (I confeſſe) are common, as well to the forſaking of euill, as to the doing of good: and ſo vnderſtand it, though it be put out of place. But I ſet them down here, ſeeing the former part of this treatiſe was ſo large. And  that which I haue ſaid of this matter, I wiſh to be well obſerued, that the life of the beleeuer is a continuall proceeding in the departing from euill, and endeuouring after duties, in ſuch manner as hath been ſaid: and a ſetled courſe in repentance, and a conſtant walking with God; and not an idle, or vncertaine ſtumbling vpon ſome good actions (whiles a great part of his life is neglected, and not looked after) he muſt not be ſometime at commaund,

                   and readie to offer his ſeruice to God in ſome good moode, and after take his owne libertie to doe what he liſteth.
               The Lords ſeruice is not like the diſordered ſeruice of many vnreformed gentlemen, where, beſides the attending at table and on horſebacke, the attenders may runne where they will: but it is like to a well gouerned familie, where all are appointed their office and place, in one thing after another to be well occupied, and kept from idlenes; and yet not diſcharged thereby, to doe what they will after. So our Sauiour teacheth it ſhould be with his ſeruants, as with a ſeruant in a familie: who when he hath wrought in the field,Luk. 17.
                        •
                     . is not by and by diſcharged of other duties, but then doth buſines at home:  ſo they, when they haue been fruitfull, and haue purpoſed to doe all that is required of them, haue done but their dutie.
               So that the end of one worke is the beginning of another:Deut. 18. and yet al without toile and tediouſnes. For ſo hath God prouided, that his ſeruants may be merie at their worke, yea whatſoeuer they ſhall put their hand vnto; and the more duties they do, redeeming the time from idlenes, and vnprofitablenes,Matth. 11.30. Deut. 12.18. the merrier. There is much work in the Lords familie, as there are many places to ſerue in: And the ſlouthful & idle ones, howſoeuer they can haue place ſometime in earthly gouernment, yet are they expelled from thence. And this is that which Saint Peter warneth vs, that we be neither idle, nor barren,  which we ſhall auoide, if wee be filled and furniſhed with the traine of heauenly vertues: as knowledge, faith, loue, patience, godlines.Iohn. 15.5. And herein is our heauenly father glorified, if we bring foorth much fruite.
               To this end we muſt know that Chriſtianitie is fitly compared to a trade, wherein men goe from one worke to another: and a Chriſtian hath many ſins to weede out, and to labour againſt, and therefore not careleſly to marre all his worke in an houre, that he hath well followed ſundrie daies: as he that loſeth all that he hath by a caſt at dice. He hath alſo many duties to looke vnto, towards God, his neighbour, and himſelfe: wherein it ſhall bee found requiſite for him to be carefull, after the doing of one, to goe to another: and  not to admit any thing againſt the peace of his conſcience, no not in his recreations, nor in his weightieſt worldly dealings, feaſtings, companie, &c. but to ſee the vnitie of the ſpirit kept in the bond of peace.Epheſ. 4.3. And as the Phiſitions doe wel direct, that for the preſeruing of bodily health, it is good to riſe from our meate with an appetite, and not to ouercharge the ſtomack: ſo it is none of the meaneſt rules for maintaining our ſoules health, to keepe alwaies an appetite to ſome new dutie, when we haue performed the old, and not to be ſo wearied in the doing of one, that wee bee vtterly vnfit to goe about another.
               This one thing being thus from time to time carefullie regarded, ſhall  make all the reſt well and rightly vſed, and the whole life thereby kept in frame and good order. For thus to bee ſetled in our Chriſtian courſe, that with full reſolution we be willingly weaned from our euill luſts and corruptions, or readilie diſpoſed to one good dutie or other, and not wearie, but it be forthwith diſliked (as we neede not, ſeruing ſo bountifull a maſter as we doe, who haue God the commaunder of our worke, and a promiſer of bleſſing vnto it:) Thus (I ſay) to be ſetled, who can ſay, but that it is a ſingular teſtimony

of their ſpirituall welfare to all that practiſe it, and a furtherance of a  godly and well ordered life.
            
            
               CHAP. 15. Of ſome particular duties pertaining to God directly in the firſt, ſecond, third, and fourth commaundements.
               
                  The ſecond point in this ſecond part of godlineſſe, wherein this performing of good duties doth conſiſt.
                  NOw the rules and vertues hauing been ſet downe, which helpe to the practiſe of a godly life, I will ſhew in what points this life conſiſteth, and ſet downe a ſumme of it: but  more briefly I will doe it, becauſe it may in ſome ſort be gathered by the deſcription of the vngodly life: and alſo for that no man can ſet downe all the particulars of it, but they muſt be learned and knowne of the true Chriſtian, out of good catechiſmes, and by daily and attentiue hearing of his ordinarie teacher, who is able to inſtruct him herein, and by a diligent ſearch into his owne life by the commaundements.
               But yet to helpe the weake, that they may ſee how to drawe out of this whole treaſurie, and rich hoard of the commaundements, for the better ordering of their wayes, through their whole courſe, that which ſhall be neceſſarie  (ſeeing they ſhall not alwaies haue other helpes at hand) I will ſet downe ſome of the chiefeſt, throughout them all. And firſt thoſe duties which directly pertaine to God (following the order, which I did in ſetting downe the ſinnes before:) According to that which is in the Apoſtle, where he ſaith, that the knowledge of ſaluation teacheth vs to liue holily, &c. and to giue vnto God, the things which are Gods.
               
                  Duties towards gods perſon.And firſt of all, to begin with the duties of the firſt commaundement (the life and light of all the reſt) it is firſt required, that we ſeeke and deſire to know God,Knowledge of God. though not perfectly (which we cannot doe) yet as he may be knowne of vs, as his word doth reueale him to vs: that in his nature and properties, he is ſpirituall, infinit, pure, holy, righteous, onely wiſe, conſtant, omnipotent, onely good, one in eſſence, three in perſon: and in his workes; as his conſtant decree, and execution of the ſame in creation and gouernment: in all moſt admirable; as wee ſee in the earth with hir furniture, wherewith we are beſt acquainted: although that be but as his footeſtoole, to conceiue of his glorie in heauen, which is as his throne. But alas, this knowledge of God is weake euen in many a true Chriſtian beleeuer: but that euery one is then fit to learne it aright, when he is once a Chriſtian. Furthermore, we muſt acknowledge, that is, allow, and in heart, yeeld and conſent vnto the truth of thoſe things which we know of him: that then we may ſafely and  boldly beleeue in him, and cleaue to him. For this knowledge of his maieſtie cauſeth al his faithfull ones to be truely knit vnto him, and to fixe their whole delight in him:Pſalm. 73.18. ſo that, they ſay with the Pſalmiſt: Whom haue I in heauen (O Lord) but thee? and who is he on earth, whom I deſire in compariſon of thee? So that none is, as the Lord, vnto them.
               We thus cleauing vnto him, and knowing our ſelues to be ſafe vnder his

                   winges, grow to put our confidence in him,Truſt. that he will helpe vs in all our neceſſities and tribulations. And from this confidence, ariſe many other Chriſtian duties:Hope. as to hope and looke for that helpe which in confidence we aſſure our ſelues of, from the Lord: yea although meanes be wanting, yet we giue glorie vnto God;Dan. 3. as the three children which being caſt into the burning fornace, committed themſelues vnto his protection, although at that time they ſaw no likelyhoode of helpe at all. Againe, through this confidence, we are not afraide, no not in greateſt daungers, but are patient,Patience. and without murmuring hold our peace, becauſe we know,Pſalm. 3.7. the Lord hath done it: and that which is more, we count it good for vs that wee are afflicted,Phil. 4 10. Rom. 52. Col. 1.11. Ioy. Phil. 4.4. Pſalm. 4.4. 
                   and receiuing all as from a father, doe reioyce ſoundly, and heartily in them, through hope at leaſt. And through the ſame confidence, we reioyce in euery condition of life vnſpeakably: yet no otherwiſe, then as we be afraide to doe any thing, which may diſpleaſe God, as I ſhall ſay afterwards: becauſe we know, that although this is weariſomnes to the wicked; yet there is cauſe continually offered vs, to be carefull, that in all things we may be approoued of him.
               And ſeeing we behold, how all good things doe flow to vs from God,
                     Thankfulnes. 1. Theſ. 5.18. therefore we offer vnto his maieſtie, this other dutie, in all things to be thankfull: namely, with a kinde heart teſtifying, that all our well-fare commeth  from him: and ſo doe we in our wants, and neceſſities lift vp our hearts vnto him by prayer, for the obtaining of the things which we want.Requeſt. And when he thus bountifully imparteth to vs all good things, which yet are but the ſmaller fruites of his fauour, (and yet, if they were not enough, he would ſend vs more and greater) who doubteth that with al our hearts and ſtrength, we are affected to loue him, more then wife, children, houſe, land,Loue. or whatſoeuer is of greateſt price in the world beſide? yea that in compariſon thereof, the beſt things of price, are reckoned but as doung?Phil. 3.8. Cant. 2.4.5. Pſalm. 16. And in token of this true loue to God, we giue our ſelues to ſolace our ſoules in him, as Dauid, euen when he was in daunger of his life, did comfort himſelfe in his God,  1. Sam. 30.6. becauſe it is ſo ſweete and beautifull, to thinke and meditate oft times vpon the infinit good things that doe flow from him vnto vs:Deſire Gods preſence. but moſt of all deſiring to inioy his preſence in heauen, which ſhall be with fulnes of pleaſures for euermore.
               And further, becauſe all which know God, and put their confidence in him, and loue him, are ouerwhelmed as it were, with the infinitnes and excellencie of his glorious maieſtie, therefore they are drawen to behaue themſelues more reuerently, and vprightly before him,Reuerence. then before the greateſt potentates in the world: and therefore are prepared to walke before him continually in an holy and childlike feare,
                     Feare. 1. Pet. 1.17. Act. 9.31. deſiring that he will teach them by  his wiſdome, direct them by his prouidence, and bleſſe their whole courſe, ſo as they may comfortably feele the ſame, through their life.
               Now beſides theſe duties of holines which we owe directly to the perſon of God, meerely ſpirituall and inward,The ſecond commaundement. there are other whereby we worſhip him outwardly, which alſo are parts of this holines towards God: it followeth therefore, now to mention ſome of the chiefe points of this externall worſhip of God both publike and priuate; and in what manner it ſhould be

vſed:Gods worſhip. but before it is to be knowne, that he will allow of no other meanes of  worſhipping him outwardly, then he hath appointed and preſcribed himſelfe in his word.Iſay 1.12. Iohn 4.23. And therefore the office of the miniſterie it ſelfe (by which God is truely worſhipped publikely) muſt not be an office to ſacrifice and ſay maſſe for the ſinnes of the quicke and dead (which Gods word plainely condemneth) neither muſt it be any other then that which God acknowledgeth for his:Miniſterie. that is, a publiſhing and preaching of the Goſpell, and glad tidings of ſaluation by Ieſus Chriſt to penitent ſinners and beleeuers,Rom. 1.16. and a miniſtring of the ſacraments, which he hath ordained for the comfort of them.
               Such miniſters they muſt be at the leaſt, which ſerue him, whatſoeuer graces  they haue beſide, if they would that God ſhould acknowledge and take them for his: and after ſuch outward manner muſt they worſhip him in all dutifulnes of heart, both magiſtrate and priuate perſon, who will worſhip him aright: And amongſt the publike ſeruices of God, theſe are ſome and the principall,Publike prayers. with prayers by voice expreſſed, thankſgiuing, confeſſions of ſinnes,Cenſures. and ſinging of Pſalmes, the fruite of the lippes; with the cenſures of admonition, and excommunication, as cauſe doth require: which I knit together for breuitie ſake, ſeeing I haue onely taken in hand, to ſet downe ſhortly, what the partes of Gods outward worſhip are, (not largely to handle them) that all may ſee the better hereafter, when I ſhall come to it, how  the daily direction for a Chriſtians life, may fitly bee drawne out, and made vp of the whole body of godlines layde together in the commaundements.
               
                  Publike faſts.To theſe may be added, publike faſts, when the people of God by ſome eſpeciall calamities either hanging ouer them, or alreadie vpon them, or for greeuous tranſgreſſions againſt God, do abaſe and humble themſelues more earneſtly and feruently,
                     Ioel. 2.12. Extraordinary thankes. to intreate God againſt them: Alſo publike thankſgiuing for ſome rare benefit or deliuerance ſent vpon the Church: In all which publike actions the Lord requireth ſtreightly,Heſter. 9. beſides, that we ſhould loue, deſire and procure them by all meanes that we can; ſo, that we ſhew  all reuerence in the vſe of them: as by bowing our neckes in making our prayers,Luk. 18.13. Iohn 11.41. lifting vp of our hands, or eyes, as occaſion is offered; ſo caſting downe of lifting vp the countenance with cheerefulneſſe, as the matter heard requireth.
               
                  Priuate worſhip.An other part of Gods worſhip is, when the moſt of theſe now ſpoken of, are vſed priuately of vs: Alſo the talking and conferring of the word of God, in mutuall inſtructing, admoniſhing, exhorting, comforting, or any way elſe which is fit for edifying; as ſinging of Pſalmes, and thankſgiuings in Chriſtian families, both ioyntly and ſeuerally, according to their particular occaſions and oportunities, and namely at meate and at reſt. And to conclude, we muſt all both magiſtrate, miniſter, and people carefully auoyde, and watch againſt all occaſions of ſuperſtition and idolatrie: and be zealous againſt the ſame, to the rooting out and aboliſhing of them, as much as in vs lieth: and carefully retaine, and hold our company and familiaritie with the true profeſſors and worſhippers of God; and continue daily our frequenting of the places of publike aſſemblies of Gods people, and not breake off our fellowſhip,

                   as the manner of ſome is: Neither giue or take occaſion, one or other of vs, in our ſeuerall eſtates or places, of hindring or cooling our holy and comfortable proceedings in the Lords pure worſhip and ſeruice.
               But ſeeing the Scripture teacheth, that he is not a Iew, which is ſo onely in the eyes of men; neither is the drawing neere with the lips and bodie onely,Manner ſpirituall. ſpirituall: therefore the manner of doing theſe duties in Gods outward worſhip, is alſo to be learned (as in a word I haue touched before) that as in themſelues they are good and godly; ſo they may, as they come from the beleeuers, be alſo ſweete and ſauourie in the Lords noſtrils, namely, that (as they proceede from faith) ſo they may be ſeaſoned with holie affections, as oft as  they are offered to him.
               So that wee are to know this, that when wee ſhall ſet vpon any part of his worſhip, which now hath been ſpoken of, it is highly diſpleaſing to him, to goe about the ſame lightly, raſhly, falſely, hypocritically, and vnprofitably: for that were abominable to him, as a dead ſacrifice. But contrarily, wee muſt vſe them with al high reuerence, being prepared rightly before: wel affected in the vſing of them: and ayming at the moſt profitable end which he hath appointed, that ſo we may be approoued and allowed of him.
               Now if I ſhould particularly declare how and after what manner, euery part of the outward worſhipping of God ſhould be vſed, as I haue ſhewed in  generall; I ſhould tarie too long in this matter:Hovv Gods worſhip is to be vſed. The word. Act. 26.18. Preparation. 1. Pet. 2.1. Iam. 1.21. Act. 10.33.
                   but in ſome few of the principalleſt particulars I will ſhew it, that thereby may be ſeene what is required in the reſt. In the preaching of the word, being the way to inlighten vs, firſt with faith; and after, to ſettle and eſtabliſh vs in the truth; wee ſhould come prepared to the hearing of it after this manner: laying aſide all filthines of heart and hands, which might hold out wiſedome, we being readie and deſirous to receiue it with a hungrie ſoule: and therefore not raſhly, and little regarding what we goe about; neither comming with a captious and malitious purpoſe to heare. In the action it ſelfe, we ſhould be thus affected:
                     In hearing. Iſai. 61. Act. 2.37. with our whole ſoule to marke and weigh the matter, that ſo we may bee touched  with it accordingly: that is to ſay, with hearing our faults, wee ſhould bee pricked, and relent: with hearing promiſes, beleeue,2. Theſſ. 3.4. and receiue comfort by them: by doctrine of dutie, to be fullie reſolued to practiſe it: and therefore not to haue our heads full of other matters, running vpon our profits and pleaſures, or in hypocriſie: and though wee take ſome delight in that which we heare, yet not to bee contented to reſt therein, without the feeling of the true worke of it in vs. After wee haue heard,Hauing heard. wee ſhould giue all diligence to muſe and conferre of the things which we haue heard, examining them by the Scriptures, with the good men of Theſſalonica:Act. 17.11. and finding agreement betwixt both, with more boldnes to ſet our ſelues forward in euery good  way by the helpe thereof.
               This is the right manner of hearing the word of God preached, which the Lord hath taught his people to endeuour after: as whereby he warranteth them ſingular fruite and bleſſing. And although this be but the vſe and helpe of one part of Gods worſhip; yet if wee were alike directed in all the reſt, how greatly (thinke wee) might a Chriſtian bee holpen and enabled to the true worſhipping of God by the ſame? which now being not knowne

of many, neither reuerently practiſed, is a thing moſt vnſauourie and irkeſome  vnto them. Not much vnlike to this, is the true manner of the priuate exerciſe of Gods word in reading and conferring vpon it:How conference and reading ſhould be vſed. that with high reuerence in hope to get profit thereby, and praying earneſtly for the ſame, we ſhould goe about it: whiles we are at it, withdraw our mindes from all other things; and after, applie it profitablie and readilie to vſe it.
               
                  How the Lords Supper ſhould be receiued.To the Lords Supper, if we deſire to finde it (as it is in it ſelfe an heauenlie banquet) we ſhould ſee that we come in our wedding garment, meet gueſts for ſuch a table, apparrelled with the robe of faith and repentance; without which, the Lord of the feaſt will neither looke vpon vs, nor welcome vs, but expell vs rather.
                  Matth. 22.13. In the time of our receiuing, we ſhould be heauenly minded, much comforted and made glad, as feeding vpon ſuch dainties, whereby our ſoules and bodies ſhal liue happily for euer. And afterwards, to be thankfull to the giuer of ſo great good things; and a long time after, to retaine the ſtrength we receiued by them, to the end wee may feele ourſelues readie to teſtifie the ſame by all dutifull obedience for the time to come.
               
                  Hovv prayer ſhould be made. Matth. 6.9.
                  Of prayer alſo, which ſhall be more fully ſpoken of in another place, there is an holie and reuerent vſe to be made (though many are little acquainted with it) namely, that we ſhould ſeriouſly weigh Gods almightie power, and how fatherly he is affected to vs, which two things ſhould be our pillars to leane vnto, ſo that we may be the better prepared thereto: that whileſt wee  are in powring out of our prayers vnto him, wee may through this confidence,1. Tim. 2.8. feele our ſelues effectually moued to lift vp pure heart and hands vnto him with cheerefulnes:Pſal. 116.13. and after bleſſing receiued, bee made more readily diſpoſed to pray often with thankſgiuing. And theſe are ſome of the chiefe duties to God, and in ſuch manner, as is before mentioned, they are to bee performed vnto him.
               
                  The third commandement. Luk. 1.75.
                  Now further we are commaunded not onely in his worſhip, but alſo in our whole life, euery where to ſeeke his glorie: for ſo he hath willed vs, that we ſhould frame the whole courſe thereof holilie throughout the ſixe daies, that ſo we may glorifie him therein. And who doth not ſee, that this ſhould  be ſo? namely, that in our life and behauiour we ſhould as well walke worthie the Lord in al things, as in the worſhipping of him both publikely and priuately, as we haue been directed before? That ſo there may be in theſe two commandements, fully laid foorth vnto vs, a ſumme of all outward duties, which in the ſixe daies we ought to performe vnto him: and in the due practiſe of both, we may ſhew foorth the fruite of that knowledge, acknowledgement, faith, feare, and loue of God, and all other inward graces, which we haue bin taught to honour him with, in our hearts, by the firſt commandement. Therfore, as I ſaid, the duties inioyned vs in this third, doe moſt fitly go with thoſe of the two former: that not onely in the time of preaching and prayer, and  ſuch like exerciſes of religion, but alſo in our common and vſuall ſpeech and actions, we declare what a worthie and reuerend eſtimation wee haue of the Lord: as by ſpeaking all good of his name, word, and workes: and in our lawfull callings, by ordering and behauing our ſelues wiſely and graciouſly: that al which liue with vs, may ſee that our religion is ioyned with the power of godlines: And that this bee done of vs in all eſtates and conditions of our

                   life, both in proſperitie and aduerſitie: and that as many as wee can preuaile with (our owne familie and charge eſpecially) wee labour to perſwade vnto the ſame: yea and if wee at any time fall by infirmitie, yet that wee acknowledge the ſame, as cauſe requireth, and ſo returne to the Lord againe;Ioſhu. 7.19. as Ioſua exhorted Achan to doe; To be ſhort. Whether we eate or drinke,
                  
                     1. Cor. 10.31. In all things to glorifie God. 
                  or whatſoeuer we doe els, all is to be done to the glorie of his name. And in mentioning the commoneſt of our actions, as our eating and drinking, he excepteth none; to the end, that wee may carie our ſelues in a ſtaied and well ordred courſe continually, whileſt wee ſhew that in the ſmalleſt matters, and in our actions, which ſeeme leaſt weightie, we be afraid to offend: as in our common talke,  that it be ſauourie, and for edifying. And ſeeing we vſe the name of God very oft both in our common ſpeech, and particularly in an oth; his mercie, iuſtice,Col. 4.4. Pſal. 118.5.12. wiſedome, and power are to moue our hearts, as oft as we haue cauſe to ſpeak of him, with all high reuerence to vſe the ſame. But more eſpecially,In an oth. when iuſt occaſion of ſwearing by him is offered, wee ſhould diligently conſider the perſon of the Lord, how he is a reuenger of all ſuch as take his holy name in vaine: and the matter it ſelfe, about which wee ſweare, that wee doe it in truth, in righteouſnes and iudgement. In truth,In truth. ſo that whatſoeuer be affirmed or denied, may truly and for certaintie be affirmed or denied: and whatſoeuer be vowed or promiſed, be promiſed and vowed without fraud, and ſimplie.  In righteouſneſſe, that there bee a iuſt cauſe of our ſwearing,In righteouſneſſe. and that which is agreeable to the will of God. In iudgement,In iudgement. that it bee done aduiſedly, not lightly, or raſhly, but that we may take comfort in performing that great dutie aright, namely, that wee haue made knowne the truth, which being made knowne by vs, hath cut off ſome great doubt and controuerſie.
               And ſo ſhould wee in the beholding of the workes of God (as the firmament; with the Sunne, Moone, and Starres: the earth with her furniture,In beholding Gods workes. as the corne, graſſe, trees, and her large proſpect) take ſweete feeling of Gods Maieſtie, and beautie which ſhineth in them, reioycing with reuerence, that he hath giuen vs this cleere glaſſe to behold his face in (although this wee  muſt know that in all theſe inferiour creatures and workes of his, wee ſee not any part of his throne, but onely ſome part of his footſtoole:) which ſhould moue vs therefore, in all our actions to beware of hypocriſie.
               Seeing therefore we haue daily vſe of theſe, I thought good to make mention of them (yet in as few words as I could ſo large matters) how wee ought to vſe them: let the reſidue bee learned by ordinarie hearing thoſe, who being furniſhed with gifts fit for this purpoſe, are appointed of God to make his people ſound and skilfull in them: that they may ſhew to the world, that the honouring of God, as it is ſet foorth in his word, is another manner of life then the world is acquainted with, and ſo bringeth another manner of  honour to him, and comfort to men, then the imbracers and louers of the world can be partakers of.
               Thus I haue ſpoken of the behauiour which inwardly and outwardly, both in Gods holie worſhip and in our whole conuerſation towards God directlie, we are to ſhew in the whole ſixe daies throughout our life.
               That which followeth next, is that part of holines & obedience which is to be giuen to the Lord, one day in ſeauen:The 4. commandement. Nothing differing from all the

three former,Holy keeping of the ſeuenth day. Exod. 20.10.
                   ſauing that, all our owne workes though lawfull on other daies, are on this day, as much as is poſſible, to be laid aſide, that is, except in caſe of neceſſitie: and the whole day to be beſtowed in his worſhip, and ſeruice, and in things directly tending to the ſame. So that, by vertue of this part of Gods honour, we are not reſtrained from our ſinne onely (which we are forbidden euery day) but from common labour alſo, which is an hinderance from the conſecrating of the whole day vnto God: And therefore lawfull workes being forbidden, we may aſſure our ſelues, that much more he condemneth the intermixting of vaine and fooliſh Enterludes and Playes, with ſuch like miſſpending of the time: and the filling of mens mouthes as well as their heads with worldly cares and dealings, to too common on that  day, although not tolerable on other.
               But becauſe the Lord knoweth how prone, and readie we are to wearines of well doing,Varietie of holy exerciſes. therefore he hath not onely appointed ſome part of this day to be paſſed in publike, and other ſome in priuate exerciſes of godlines; but alſo he hath giuen vs great varietie of both ſorts, that ſo the whole time may be beſtowed without tediouſnes and toyle; euen from our preparing our ſelues to the ſanctifying of it, at our vpriſing, vnto the laſt duties at our lying downe: which mercifull and wiſe regarde of his, ouer vs, if it cannot mooue vs to giue our ſelues to practiſe this part of holines (whatſoeuer our excuſes be) we plainely ſhew, that our mindes are earthly and carnall, and  that we doe but fauour our ſelues in worldlines, or profanenes, idlenes and eaſe, when we reaſon againſt it, as being too preciſe.
               
                  Publike aſſemblies.The publike duties, are the reuerent aſſemblies of Chriſtians in the preaching of the word, in prayer, and adminiſtring of the ſacraments, on that day eſpecially to be vſed, howſoeuer on other dayes by occaſions oft intermitted: All of them are moſt bleſſed helps for the eſtabliſhing of vs in an holy life. Of the priuate, ſome doe particularly concerne our ſelues alone: ſome are as well for the benefit of others,Priuate exerciſes. as for our owne comfort: for our ſelues, we are to meditate on the works of God, vpon his wonderfull workes, which he hath done for the ſonnes of men;Pſalm. 92. that ſo we may feele his goodnes many waies;  and from the ſweetnes which we perceiue in the creatures, we may be lifted vp, to behold the beautie and fauour of the creatour.
               We are alſo to thinke of the doctrine which we haue heard, that it may the eaſilier be imprinted in vs. And on this day we are more freely to conſider of our eſtate: how we proceede in the religious keeping of our couenant with God: and how we grow in the aſſurance of Gods mercie, and our redemption: or whether we goe not backe, or ſtand not at a ſtay. And euery way as our neede ſhall moſt require, we are to vſe our examinings of our ſelues, meditations and thankſgiuings on this day, not only for our preſent comfort; but for our more fruitfull walking all the weeke following. Conference of good things, tendeth as well to the edifying of others, as our ſelues. Beſide the which there are other duties to be don to them, as to do the workes of mercie to them, as well in viſiting them in their ſickenes, releeuing their neceſſities, breaking off their diſagreements, and reconciling them who were at variance, as in ſpirituall comfortings of them, as God doth inable vs. And theſe al laid together are as a continuall direction for the holy vſe of the

                   Sabboth to vs (euen as the daily direction which I ſhall adde afterwards, is to ſerue a Chriſtian daily as long as he ſhall liue:) for the profitable and heauenly ſpending of the Sabboth is the market of the ſoule, in the which, he, who is wiſe, will prouide and ſtore himſelfe for all the other dayes of the weeke, wherein it is like he ſhall haue little helpe, but much diſcouragment, as in the world may be ſeene. And this holy paſſing of the Sabboth muſt be religiouſly regarded of al the Chriſtian family, as the charge giuen to the gouernor thereof doth ſhew: and of the ſtranger alſo who ſhall come vnder his roofe. This is the ſum of the holines, which we are to ſhew towards God: he that deſireth to heare more fully of this matter, which I may not handle at  large, let him reade ſuch treatiſes as are written of that argument.
            
            
               CHAP. 16. Of certaine duties to men, in the fift, ſixt, and ſeuenth commaundement, the obeying whereof is a part of the godly life.
               
                  NOw followeth another branch of the ſecond part of this godly or Chriſtian life, requiring of vs righteous dealing towards all men: Where by the way, this is to be carefully  regarded, that ſeeing there is an apparant diſtinction and difference betwixt thoſe forenamed duties of holines to God, and theſe of righteouſnes to men which ſhal follow, and yet both alike commaunded; therefore that no man diſioyne in his practiſe, or ſeparate the one from the other, ſeeing the Lord hath ſet them downe ioyntly together. I ſpeake this, becauſe there are many,Duties to God and man not to be ſeparated. who delighting in hearing the word preached, and prayer, and reading (which are duties directly appertaining to God; yet are very negligent in performing that which is due to men; as in doing workes of charitie to the poore, liuing peaceably and comfortably in mariage, or in ſhunning haſtie iudging of their brethren,  and in being dutifull to ſuperiours, as magiſtrates, parents, maiſters, (when yet they commaund in the Lord:) and ſo, contrarily ſome ſhall be found doing many things commendable to men, and no religion in them towards God. Which thing, if it be of ignorance, is a ſhamefull blemiſh in them, who are guiltie of it, ſeeing they haue had ſo long a time graunted them of God, in which they might haue learned better: but if after it bee knowne, it remaine ſtill;Iam. 1.27. it plainely teſtifieth that there is in them a wilfull diſobedience againſt God, and that the beſt of their workes are in vaine.
               And before I enter into the particular duties of righteouſnes to all ſortes of men, it is here as in the fitteſt place to be taught,Beare loue to al. which cannot be afterward  ſo conueniently added: That we haue this minde in vs, that we beare loue towards all men euen our greateſt enemies; from which ground and roote of loue, we may be readie to performe all the duties, which we ſhall know to belong to them from vs, required particularly in the commaundements following: And ſecondly, that we ioyne with it an other generall vertue,Brotherly kindnes to Chriſtians. which is brotherly kindnes to Chriſtians, which are brethren with vs, which is an holy and eſpeciall loue of one faithfull brother towards another. And theſe

two,1. Pet. 1.7. are thoſe which Saint Peter ſpeaketh of, when he ſaith, ioyne with brotherly  kindnes, loue: where this vertue is, they haue learned to giue euery one of the faithfull their brethren (according to the knowledge wherewith God hath inlightened them) the ſeuerall duties required in the ſecond table. A rare and ſingular gift of God; which if we could ſee the practiſe of it, what light of good example it giueth, and what profit, it would inflame vs wonderfully to the practiſing of it.
               Now follow the ſeuerall parts of righteouſnes to men, as they are diſtinctly ſet downe in the ſixe commaundements following,The fift commaundement. to be performed of Chriſtians, and which helpe to make vp the ſecond part of a godly life. In all which,Many duties to our neighbour. although there are many more particular duties to be mentioned  then were in the former part (becauſe we haue ſo many dealings, and that with infinit perſons) yet I will ſet them downe with the like breuitie as neere as I can, that I haue done the duties of holines to God, leauing the reader to learne the other (as I haue ſaid before) by other ordinarie meanes.
               
                  Duties of inſeriours.And firſt the dutie which men owe as they are inferiors to others, and the ſuperiors to them againe, come here to be conſidered, both generally, and one particularly towards another. Where this is required of all inferiours, that they ſo carry themſelues in their whole courſe to them, which by Gods appointment are aboue them, or excell them, that they may ſhew in their whole courſe that they honour them: for ſo the will of God is, not to require  any one eſpeciall action or dutie of them, but that their whole conuerſation be ſuch towards them, that the perſon which they take vpon them, and the place wherein they are, may haue more credit and eſtimation among men, and be vpholden and maintained in ſuch ſort, that they may weigh downe all wicked practiſes of men againſt the ſame.
               
                  Common to all inferiours.The duties in generall, which belong to all inferiours, doe ariſe from this one, as from a fountaine, that is to ſay, ſubiection: which is a voluntarie acknowledging,Subiection. Rom. 13.1.
                   that they are ſet vnder thoſe, which are their ſuperiours by Gods ordinance and appointment. The which when men are perſwaded of, they will readily goe vnder any dutie that appertaineth to them. And  from hence iſſueth inward reuerence towards them,Reuerence. as to thinke highly of them for that perſon, which God hath put vpon them: and therefore alſo to giue them that outward reuerence, which is due to them: as to riſe and bowe to them,
                  Iob. 32.4. to giue them the higher place, libertie to ſpeake before them, and to giue them reuerent titles; and ſubmitting themſelues to them euery way, as it is meete: which if in loue it be not regarded, and the benefit, which God hath appointed thereby to come to their inferiours, conſidered, that ſo there may be a preſeruing of the dignitie and worthines of ſuch perſons and places amongſt men, all confuſion and barbarouſnes muſt needes inſue and follow.
               
               
                  Superiours duty.And for this cauſe the ſuperiours againe for their parts muſt ſee, that they carry themſelues towards them as brethren, in all curteſie, ſauing their authoritie: and further alſo that they goe before them, both in all innocencie, and example of good life. And becauſe there are ſome ſuperiors to vs by ciuill authoritie,Diuers kinds of ſuperiours. as princes and other magiſtrates; and ſome eccleſiaſticall, as Church officers; ſome by nature as parents; ſome by age, as the gray headed,

                   and ſome by gifts, as of knowledge, experience, and other graces: therefore both their inferiours to them, and they to their inferiours (beſides the former duties in generall ſet downe) haue ſomewhat ſeuerally to looke to,Subiects and ſeruants. one towards the other. To ſuch as haue authoritie ouer them, inferiours muſt ſubmit themſelues, in bearing their rebukes, and receiuing their corrections willingly, and without reſiſtance, by not anſwering again,
                  Tit. 2.6. by ſtomack or countenance; yea though they ſuffer wrongfully: which commaundement Saint Peter giuing to ſeruants toward their maſters,1. Pet. 2.19. who are not ſuperiours of the higheſt power, or of greateſt authoritie, doth much more binde other inferiours to be ſubiect thereto.
               
                   And further beſides this, ſuch inferiours are charged by God to be obedient onely to their lawfull commaundements;
                     Rom. 13.6. Obedient. ſo that God be not thereby depriued of his due: for this cauſe ſubiects pay tribute to their Princes: & hold both their goods and liues ſo, as they be at their commaundement. And ſeruants, which will teſtifie and ſhew, that they count their maſters worthie all honour,
                  Tit. 2.9. do frame themſelues to ſerue them with faithfulnes and diligence, not with eye ſeruice: by the one, ſeeking their profit and good truſtily; by the other,Col. 3.23. 
                  doing their duties with care and painfulnes, euen as to the Lord himſelfe.
               
               So all high Magiſtrates, both Kings,
                     All in authoritie as Princes. Pſal. 78. two laſt verſes. 2. King. 11.17. and ſuch as are in authoritie vnder them, owe this particularly to the people, ouer whom they are, to regard, that  the Goſpell of Chriſt Ieſus be publiſhed freely and purely by the Miniſters thereof, thorough their whole dominion, to bring the people to God: and the ſame dominion to bee well gouerned, by the right executing of wholeſome and good lawes, that the people may liue an honeſt and quiet life vnder them. So alſo Maſters for recompence to their ſeruants, are charged by the Lord,Maſters. to ſhew themſelues, as well good and bountifull towards them in recompencing their labour and trauaile to the full, as beſides it, to doe that which is iuſt and equall vnto them, the which they for their parts doe owe to them againe: which is to prouide that they may bee taught in the congregation, and at home: as alſo of themſelues, to ſee that no neceſſaries, in meate, drink, work,  and honeſt intermiſſion in due time bee wanting; neither that they with whom they haue ſo couenanted, bee kept ignorant, and vnexpert in their trade.
               Another kinde of ſuperiours, are kindred by nature,Childrens duty. and parents in the fleſh, to whom their inferiours and children for the ſingular benefits which they receiue from them (except they degenerate farre from their duties) do acknowledge much to be due to them againe. Among which, this is not the leaſt, that they ſhew themſelues forward in the imbracing of holie inſtruction according to the ripenes of their yeeres.Iob. 1. Luk. 2. That their reuerence and obedience continue (of children I ſpeake) euen vnto their end, although with  more libertie, when they ſhall be of more ripe yeeres, their parents themſelues conſenting thereto.Geneſ. 24.55. 1. Cor. 7.36. Alſo that they make no mariages without their conſent. That in token of thankfulnes, they be readie to helpe their neceſſities. And that they be carefull alſo to doe their duties,Numb. 30.4. Gen. 47.12. Ruth. 1.16. & 3.6. Parents. Prou. 22.6. euen to thoſe which ſhall ſucceed their parents, by way of ſecond mariage: For their parents are bound to teach them from their youth, as was ſaid of ſeruants; to keepe them from idlenes, to traine them vp in ſome lawfull and honeſt trade, to

gouerne them wiſely, and kindly, to prouide for their neceſſitie of mariage, and to miniſter things needfull for this life,2. Cor. 12.14. as they ſhall be able, and as they may doe it religiouſly and lawfully.
               
                  
                     Miniſters. Matth. 13.52. Act 26.18.Of thoſe ſuperiours which excell their inferiours in gifts, the Miniſter of God is chiefe: who is furniſhed with knowledge and grace to conuert many to God, and to perfect them, as Gods inſtrument vnto the day of Chriſts comming. And ſo particularly,Ezech. 34.4. & 6. 1. Theſſ. 5.14. 1. Cor. 9.22. to lift vp the faint-harted by comfort, to ſtrengthen the weak, to direct him that wandreth vncertainly for want of knowledge, and to waite with patience; and by becomming all to all, that he may gaine ſome to God. Therefore the Lord hath giuen him a great honour with them whom hee preuaileth with,1. Cor. 4.15. Hearers. 1. Cor. 9.11. not to bee counted their teacher onely, but their father: they who  know their duties, for this heauenly communion, which they inioy with God himſelfe, and with Ieſus Chriſt, by his miniſterie, doe with gladnes make him partakers of all good things for this life,1. Theſſ. 5.13. 
                  and haue them in ſingular loue for their workes ſake. And this they doe, beſides the ſubiection, reuerence, and obedience (which they haue in common with all inferiours) who are willing to be taught, and reioyce to be counted obedient children in the faith.
               
                  Strong Chriſtians.Among theſe which I count ſuperiours in gifts of the mind, they are to be reckoned, who are ſtrong Chriſtians, and whom God hath indued with a liberall portion of heauenly grace, wiſedome, experience, &c. more then other of their brethren, and who know their libertie which they haue by  Chriſt in things indifferent, and abuſe it not. Towards theſe, the weaker ſort muſt know,Weaker. that it is their dutie, not to iudge them who vſe their libertie, which they haue by Chriſt, neither to count them as prophane men for doing that, which they themſelues dare not doe; but to thinke them ſuch, as God will confirme vnto the end: and to conſider that they themſelues had more neede to bee ſetled in the knowledge of the truth, then to take vppon them to cenſure thoſe which are wiſer then themſelues. The dutie of the ſtrong is to beare their infirmities,Rom. 14.3.4. neither to pleaſe themſelues in the things which they doe, but to build vp the weake, and to vſe their libertie aright, ſeruing Chriſt therein, and ſeeking the good and benefit of their neighbour: which  is done, when for his ſake they abſtaine (when neede is) euen from things lawfull: and then it is neceſſarie, when their weake brother by their example is led to doe that which he hath no warrant of, and therefore his conſcience is defiled and wounded thereby, and ſo he waxeth the more backward in the ſeruice of God.
               
                  Excelling in gifts.But beſides theſe gifts in the ſtronger ſort, ſuch as God hath beautified with any gifts, which others doe want, ought to bee had in honour and account for the ſame, and not ſaucily and proudly to be contemned: for by ſuch, God helpeth forward the welfare of thoſe who do want the ſame. And namely,Ancient in yeeres. Iob. 32.4.
                   the ancient in yeeres and gray-headed are of the yonger ſort to bee  eſteemed, and had in reuerence: as Elihu hath giuen example in the booke of Iob; who being in the companie of ſage and graue men, himſelfe but yong, did keepe ſilence a long ſpace: and when he ſpake, he ſaid, he did ſo reuerence their age, that he was afraid to ſpeake.
               And if wee can frame our ſelues to giue theſe duties to our betters and inferiours, it ſhall be the eaſier to regard the dignitie and worthines of thoſe,

                  
                  which are our equals, which in that one ſentence of the Apoſtle is taught vs:Our equals. Fom. 12.10.
                   that when the caſe ſo ſtandeth, that we might ſeeme as worthie perſons as others, and not any thing inferiour to them in the iudgement of men; yet let vs giue ouer our right vnto thē (if it be any) and in giuing honour to them, go before thē. And when we haue had experience of carefull practiſe in giuing this due to our neighbor, we ſhall both perceiue our want,By examining, ſee our wants and neede of Chriſt. and be aſhamed to ſee how manifoldly wee ſometime failed herein (which without faithfull examining will neuer appeare, by meanes of our ſecret ſelfeloue) and what benefit wee haue of Chriſts righteouſnes in this one commandement, to couer our ſo great vnrighteouſnes againſt it, and thereby ſet our ſelues more earneſtly  to grow ſound in the duties of it. This point of humilitie is for good cauſe required of vs towards our neighbour,Iohn. 13.14. that wee may the more readilie yeeld to other duties which follow.
               And this of the duties which we owe to the perſon of our neighbour:Maintaine our own reuerence. to the which, if we adde this, that wee be carefull to maintaine our owne reuerence and credit among men, by a courſe beſeeming our holy profeſſion, we ſhall doe well. Now we are to ſee what God inioyneth vs towards their life. To name the duties onely, and barely to mention them, doth little good to the moſt that ſhal reade them, either for vnderſtanding or practiſing of them: and to ſtand long I may not, the leaſt that can be ſaid of the particular duties  in euery commaundement (though breuitie bee ſtudied for) is more then I meant to bee occupied about: the wiſe reader muſt haue conſideration thereof. The duties to their liues are many:The 6. commandement. Bodily life and health. and thoſe both to the bodily life, and the ſpirituall. From whence wee muſt fetch for our daily practiſe, all that wee are bound to performe, about this part of dutie. And to the preſeruing of bodily life, health and welfare in our neighbour, as much as lieth in vs, it is required at our hands: firſt, that he ſuſtaine no hurt by vs,
                     Hurt not. Exod. 21.22. or any of ours, as farre as we can hinder it, in ſtripe, wound, bitter taunt, or hard handling any other way, either he or his, whereby his life might be made vnpleaſant, while he liueth harmeleſſe amongſt vs: nay though he ſhould ouerſhoote  himſelfe towards vs, and prouoke vs; yet God will haue vs armed againſt ſuch offences, by that mildnes of ſpirit, which changeth our boiſterous nature into ſweete amiablenes (verifying that which is written by the Prophet, the lambe and the lion ſhall feed together, Eſai. 11.6.) whereby we are made able, and fit to liue euen with bad perſons: Which mildnes teacheth vs, to beare much and ſuffer farre, rather then to bee angrie in our owne cauſe;Prou. 17.19. Prou. 19.11. which how weightie ſoeuer it ſeemeth to vs, is no better then follie and madnes: therefore not to deſire reuenge at their hands, but to wiſh ſtill their good.
               And for our owne parts, wiſely and carefully, both in words and in deeds  to auoide, and cut off all occaſions of diſcord; yea though it be with the forgoing of ſome part of our right, as Abraham did to Lot; and to procure peace,
                  Gen. 13.7. ſo farre as it may be, without offence to God, or the hindring of our own ſaluation: and taking al things in good part, as far as poſſibly we may.1. Cor. 13.7. Oh how much doth he comfort the life, and glad the heart of his neighbour, whoſe earneſt endeuour it is, to liue thus with all men! though it be a gift of God, which ſhould ſhine euen in the rich themſelues, as the Apoſtle ſheweth, ſaying:

                  Charge them which are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, but eaſie to  be liued withall.
                  1. Tim. 6.17.
               
               
                  Doe good to their liues.But yet is it further required at our hands, that beſides the hurting no man (as hath been ſaid) we ſhould doe them good. And indeede, ſuch ſhould our whole courſe be towards others, that we might make eaſie as many mens burthens as we can,1. Iohn 4.11. ſeeing God in the riches of his mercie, hath vnburthened vs of ſo intolerable weight, as preſſed vs by our ſinne: euen as he hath loued vs therefore, ſo from hence it is, that we haue loue one to another, as to haue care of their life, and welfare, to maintaine it, as their neceſſitie ſhall require, and our abilitie can performe: To manifeſt it in their miſeries by pitying them, and hauing a fellow-feeling of the ſame with them, and ſo to teſtifie it both by words and deedes; as our Sauiour by doing the the ſame in pitying the people,
                  Matth. 9.26. 
                  who were diſperſed as ſheepe without a ſhepheard, gaue vs example, to doe the like: And as their troubles and calamities ſhall be the greater;Pro. 3.27. ſo the more ſpeedily to lend our helpe to them, to eaſe them, as much as in vs lieth.
               
                  Shew mercie.That this may the better be conceiued and practiſed of vs, we may take two examples for all the reſt, to ſhew it in: for this being ſo needefull, and that oftentimes (I meane, to ſhew mercie) and ſo much complained of, to be wanting, I will ſtay a while in it. The one is in the diſtreſſed caſe of ſeruants, who if all hard meaſure being offered them, they muſt yet not be ſuffered to  anſwere for their innocencie, their burthen ſhould be great: Iob therefore ſhewed himſelfe to haue learned this compaſſion effectually, when as he ſaith,Iob. 31.13. & 14. 
                  If I did contemne the iudgement of my ſeruant, and of my maide, when they did contend with me, what then ſhall I anſwere, when God ſtandeth vp againſt me? For he that made me in the wombe, hath he not made him? This (all men muſt needes ſay) is mercie to the life of our neighbour indeede, when wee ſhall ſhew compaſſion to them, whom we might oppreſſe, as being not able to reſiſt vs.
               
                  Viſit the ſicke.The ſecond example is of ſuch as our Sauiour ſpeaketh of, who viſited him in his members (though many other who ſaw their miſerie did not ſo) ſaying:Matth. 25.35. 
                  When I was hungrie ye gaue me meate: Here by his owne words, we may ſee, that true compaſſion will ſhew it ſelfe by releeuing in time of neede, and ſhutteth not vp it ſelfe with an vnſauorie anſwere,Iam. 2.16. as Iames ſpeaketh, God prouide for you. And as we ſhould ſhew our helpe, chiefely to the needie and poore, ſo ought we euer to be readie to helpe all other with whom we liue, as they ſhall ſtand in neede of it, by counſell, trauaile or the like: euen as Simeon did his brother Iudah againſt the Cananites:Iudg. 1.3. and the reſt of the tribes did Gideon againſt Midian,
                  Iudg. 6.35. and the Amalekites.
               But I will with adding a little more now make an ende of this dutie towards the life of our neighbour: That which I haue ſaid thereof, may teach, how pitie is to be ſhewed to the bodily neceſſities, as to the whole life of the needie and afflicted; and likewiſe how we muſt be readie to helpe all ſortes that are diſtreſſed: and therefore much more to be harmeleſſe and innocent. Vertues they are of ſingular price, though little ſet by in this euill world: and yet he that is voyde of them, were better be out of the world. For both of them are accompanied with other vertues, which doe ſet out

                   the worth and beautie of them; euen as a chaine of golde, rings, and bracelets doe beautifie, and adorne a comely perſon. For the latter, that is, innocencie and harmeleſnes, is accompanied with meekenes, patience, and long ſuffering, without ſtanding ſtifly vpon an offence, or hotly purſuing it, but eaſily paſſing by it. Alſo he that is harmeleſſe, is gentle, tractable, and ſoone intreated to forgiue a treſpaſſe, though ſome can neuer be brought to it: he is alſo peaceable and communicable, and fit to be liued with; which vertue is rare to be found. Therefore the innocent and harmeles man is much to be ſet by: and as profitable to him who liueth with him, as of himſelfe, he is commendable. And this is to be ioyned with the other vertue, which in this  place, I before commended, namely helpfulnes: and which hath adioyned to it, mercie and tender compaſſion to ſuccour them that be in miſery: and kinde heartednes and goodnes, as the ſcripture calleth it, to preuent euill and daunger from our neighbour, before it take holde of him. And thus much of the dutie which we owe to the body and life of our neighbours.Pitie to the ſoule. That which remaineth, is of the regarde and compaſſion which is to be had ouer their ſoules particularly. That ſeeing the multitude of bad examples is one eſpeciall imboldening of the world in euill: we,Good example. who are marked more then others, how we liue after the Goſpell, which we haue in ſo great price, ought both to walke warily towards ſuch, as are yet in vnbeliefe, as well as vnblameable  amongſt our brethren, that ſo we may hope, that one time or other, it may pleaſe God to call them home,1. Pet. 3.1. as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh to the beleeuing wiues: And who ſeeth not, that good example and innocent life, doth more moue the ignorant, and vnſtayed perſons at the firſt, then the doctrine, becauſe though they heare it, yet they vnderſtand not the power and authoritie of it, neither are able to weigh the ſoundnes of it, vntill they ſee the beautie of it appeare in practiſe: And therefore he ſaith; Let your conuerſation be pure, that they which obey not the word, may be wonne by you.
               
               With this holy example of life, another dutie is required, that all occaſions be taken, and the oportunities vſed of winning men to God,
                     1. Cor. 10.33. VVin and confirme others. and of  confirming them who are in Chriſt alreadie, and peace making, and reconciling ſuch as be at variance, and obſeruing one another, and prouoking to loue, and good workes, the fruites thereof, by inſtruction, by exhortation, admonition,Heb. 10.24. conſolation and ſuch like. If the deſire of the ſaluation of our brethren were ſuch, when oportunitie ſerueth, and eſpecially in companie, as that for the ſame, we could neglect our owne eaſe, and vaine liberties in idlenes, and vnprofitable talke; there is no doubt, but by kinde and wiſe dealing with them, we ſhould preuaile with ſome: eſpecially this one thing being added,
                     1. Theſ. 5. Helpe the poore. (a thing of all other moſt looked after) that with godly counſell, we pitied the neceſſities of thoſe that be in wants, as their caſe requireth, and that with  the bowels of compaſſion, whereby both their hearts are comforted,Rom. 12. and they better prepared, to take good by our counſell and inſtructions,Phil. 7. euen as Boaz did to Ruth in both, when his kinde and ſweete words to her with his friendly dealing, cauſed her to ſay, Oh my Lord, thou haſt comforted me,
                  Ruth. 2.13. 
                  thou haſt ſpoken to the heart of thine handmaid.
               
               Theſe two former duties being rightly obſerued and duly regarded,The ſeuenth commaundement. that is, that we honour the image of God in our neighbour, as it ſhall appeare to

vs, and that with this humilitie we ioyne tender loue to his life and perſon, as now hath been ſaid: we cannot reſt there, but we muſt declare the ſame loue in not hurting or greeuing him in any good thing that he hath, and ſetteth by: neither can we in truth ſay, we loue him, when we can be content for all that, to doe the thing which we know, will offend and vexe him. And therefore euery Chriſtian which hath this loue in him,Not to attempt our neighbours honeſtie. will be readie to giue his neighbour his due in this commaundement, not to attempt his honeſtie and chaſtitie, which is principally forbidden in this precept. So that through this loue to our neighbour, and all that is his, we muſt liue ſo innocently and chaſtly, that none may haue cauſe to complaine, that they be hurt or annoyed by vs, this way: and that we our ſelues doe warily ſhunne, and auoyde all occaſions, whereby wee know wee might bee in daunger thereof.
               
                  Our minds and bodies muſt be chaſte.Therefore for the better obtaining of this at our hands, God requireth this of vs, that both our mindes and bodies be chaſte: the one pure from vncleane luſts, deſires, and thoughts tending to vnchaſtnes: the other kept in honour (for ſo the Apoſtle calleth it) free from all executing of ſuch vncleane deſires by any ſtrange pleaſures, which he condemneth. And therefore that all the parts of our bodies be kept continent, as well as the face, eyes, eares, tongue, hands, and feete be turned away from ſuch occaſions, as may leade thereunto.
               
               And this is commaunded to the vnmarried, and to thoſe which are married;Vnmaried. but yet with ſome conſideration, and regarde had in the ſame. The vnmarried, that they ſee, that through an eſpeciall gift of God, their abſtaining from marriage be according to the rules before ſet downe. And for this cauſe, that they be very wary and circumſpect in the vſe of all lawfull liberties, as of meates, drinkes, apparell, ſleepe, recreations: and that they giue themſelues deuoutly to all exerciſes of godlines, and amongſt the reſt to faſting with prayer, as they in wiſedome ſhall ſee cauſe, alwayes remembring,1. Cor. 7.32. that the vnmarried are they who may beſt care for the things of the Lord; how they may pleaſe him. By the which meanes notwithſtanding, if they ſhall  feele and perceiue, that they cannot ſerue God with peace, as in time paſt, but that their mindes and bodies are haled, and diſtracted, the one by ſtrong luſts carrying them, the other by burnings; they muſt know, that they are called to the vſe of the remedie, which God hath in this caſe prouided for their behoofe and reliefe, that is, the change of their eſtate, marrying in the Lord.
               
                  Maried.The married couples being cut off (as I haue ſaid) from all other, ſaue themſelues, muſt know that their ſinne is tenne fold greater then the others, if they ſhall be found either ſecretly attempting, or openly defiling themſelues, whereby it may be ſeene, that they doe not regarde and conſcionably  ſeeke to preſerue the chaſtitie of their neighbour, a thing prouided for by the Lord moſt principally in this precept: but rather let them know how to vſe their libertie rightly, which God hath in this behalfe, graunted them: That is to ſay, that they marrying in the Lord, may alſo liue in the Lord together: and (to ſpeake more plainly) as they haue married, with hope, they ſhall finde more helpe thereby vnto godlines, then they could haue inioyed alone

                   without it (ſeeing mariage was ordained by God himſelfe, an helpfull eſtate many waies, Geneſ. 2.18.) ſo they dwell together according to knowledge,
                  1. Pet. 3.7. to performe the more eaſily all duties one to the other for their mutuall helpe, and comfort in the communion of their goods, graces and perſons.
               But though God accounteth the mariage bed vndefiled, and the vſe of it lawfull, for the increaſe of poſteritie, and the ſubduing of concupiſcence: yet to the end that Gods people may remoue from them much vnſeemely prophanenes therein, which the irreligious ſort inuēt to themſelues, who neuer vſe to looke further into their liberties, if they vnderſtand once that they be lawful; and to the end they may haue the right vſe thereof, God hath taught  them to ſanctifie the mariage bed with prayer and thankſgiuing, and that nothing be done betwixt themſelues to the wound of conſcience, or the breaking of their peace. And that is the true vſe of it, when they are made the more fit and cheerefull thereby, to all duties of holines, or at leaſtwiſe neuer the vnfitter, which is to liue in mariage, euen as if they were not maried, and ſo liue more happily: whereas to liue otherwiſe, is a great abuſe thereof. And as for the Papiſts malicious railing on maried perſons, that they liue in ye fleſh, and ſerue not God, as Pope Siricius: to their ſhame be it ſpoken, yt God hath made knowne his wil in this commandement, as cleerely as in the reſt: and giuen grace to thē which feare him, to obey him in the ſame either miniſter or priuate  perſon, more then to them, who in pride & hypocriſie, or in blind intention haue vowed againſt it. If they had complained, that the maried eſtate is through the ignorance and prophanenes of the world much blemiſhed, and (for ſo honourable an ordinance of God) defaced, the moſt being careles in the vſe of their liberties, they had ſpoken to good purpoſe, and might haue had many to confirme their ſaying: But to chalenge holines as proper to themſelues in their vowing againſt it, is rather arrogancie and follie, then ſound reaſon which requireth a ſubſtantiall anſwere; eſpecially, except they could ſhew vs more glorious proofes of holineſſe in their profeſſed Votaries.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 17. Of ſome duties to men in the 8.9. and 10. commaundements.
               
                  ANother part of righteous dealing with our brethren is,The 8. commandement. that they be not iniured by vs in their goods, which God hath giuen them, for their neceſſarie vſe and comfort in this life:Not to iniurie in his goods. And therefore, as we would deſire our ſelues to inioy with ſafetie, and without feare, the portion which by Gods  goodnes is fallen vnto vs, euen ſo ſhould our neighbour liue by vs without daunger, or iuſt cauſe of complaining, that he is any way annoyed by vs. Loe this is the order which God hath taken and ſtrongly prouided for, that if he be regarded amongſt vs, we ſhall not dare be bold to iniurie one another in the ſmalleſt piece of his commodities, but giue him his owne, as the commaundement chargeth vs, ſaying, Thou ſhalt not ſteale:
                  Rom. 13.8. and as another Scripture ſaith: Owe nothing to any man but this, that ye loue him.
                  
And if we loue him, how can we grieue him, in withholding that from him, (as was ſaid before) which is deare vnto him?
               
                  Not lay claime to that which is another mans.So that, where the caſe is plaine, that any thing is another mans, we cannot ſo much as lay claime to it, but God is deſpiſed of vs. But ſeeing it is doubtfull oft times whoſe the right is; and the moſt contentions, and vncharitableneſſes ariſe from hence,In controuerſie. that it cannot eaſily nor cleerely be ſeene into, whoſe it is indeed: here therefore, although men without Chriſt, will not eaſily be aduiſed, yet the Lord hath prouided, 
                     •
                  hat his ſeruants ſhall be ordered, for the retaining of loue and righteous dealing: That partly they ſhall forgoe ſomewhat of their owne right,
                     Gen. 13.8. To forgoe part of our right. as Abraham did to Lot (if it ſhall be thought expedient) rather then to breake the bond of loue; partly, if it bee in ſuch a  matter as is made doubtfull by the ſubtiltie, negligence, or other default of either partie (as when a bargaine is made, and yet left vncertaine in ſome point, which after breedeth contention) the damage ought to fall on him, through whom it came: and if it be otherwiſe ſo difficult, that it cannot betwixt themſelues be determined, let other men of wiſedome take it in hand, that if it be poſſible,1. Cor. 6.5. Matth. 5.40. ſuite of law may be auoyded; and yet if that cannot be, let it in loue be proſecuted.
               Thus much generally, to ſhew, that God will haue equitie maintained in the comming by, and inioying of our commodities, and no man wronged in the leaſt part of his goods by vs. But for the more cleere beholding of our  duties in this branch of obedience,Diuers ſtates. or righteouſnes (ſeeing they are many) it is very expedient, to lay them foorth more particularly, according to the diuers ſtates of men. Therefore, as ſome are meerely poore men, and by Gods appointment and ordinance, doe liue by almes: other can in ſome ſort partly maintaine themſelues, but not without the helpe of others, by borrowing of them:Luk. 3.10. and the third ſort is able to lend, or to giue, or to do both: therefore according to theſe diuers ſorts of men, the ſeuerall points of righteous dealing one with another, muſt be ſpoken of: and thoſe which are beſide this, ſhall be conſidered afterwards.
               
                  The dutie of them who liue by almes.They who haue no other way to liue, or to be maintained, but by receiuing  mens beneuolence, haue their proper dutie aſſigned them of God, about their neighbours goods, firſt to know, that their poore eſtate is allotted them of God, as the rich mans is alſo: according to the Scripture, which ſaith,
                     1. Sam. 2.7. Contentation. 
                  The Lord maketh poore, and he maketh rich: and therefore he is to liue in it with contentation. As alſo hee may doe, if hee know God to be his father through Chriſt his redeemer:1. Tim. 6.8. for there is incouragement enough from thence, to liue contentedly and comfortably in any condition, in the which God ſhall ſet him: For want of the which, it is, that neither poore nor rich are contented without hunting after that which is another mans. Now as it is the poore mans dutie, to be contented with his portion: ſo it is in no ſort  tolerable in him,Not to grudge. Matth. 20.15.
                   to grudge at other mens abundance; for ſhall his eye be euill ſeeing God is good? Neither ought he ſo much as to wiſh the ſame, and ſo to iniurie his neighbour: but to receiue thankfully that which befalleth him, acknowledging ſuch to be Gods inſtruments,Rom. 16.3.4. and as it were his hands, wherby he miniſtreth to his neceſſities. And becauſe the people of God, which either ſent reliefe to the poore of other Churches,Rom. 15.26. as they of Macedonia, and

                   Corinth to Ieruſalem; or who prouided for their poore,2. Cor 9.2. Act. 4.34.35. as they in the Acts; they did it to incourage them, to remaine and abide conſtant in the doctrine of the Goſpell: therefore the poore which liue with vs, muſt know this, and looke to performe this dutie alſo, that hauing ſuch incouragement, they make it their chiefe worke to liue godly and obediently: That is to ſay,Liue godly. to glad their hearts, who refreſh their bodies, when they may ſee their innocent conuerſation, and zeale to Godward according to their knowledge.
               But I lament the eſtate of the poore,Iuſt complaint of our poore. euen as I doe many thouſands of others, to thinke how few of them are fit to heare this their dutie with any hope to be the better for it: and what an vniuerſall blindnes and ſecuritie is  amongſt them; ſeeing they are as farre from the deſire of true knowledge, as they are from poſſibilitie of obtaining it, yea though there bee offered vnto them a plaine and eaſie manner of teaching them: which as it is at this day for the moſt part, in that eſtate to be ſeene, ſo it ſeemeth to haue been vſuall among ſuch long agoe; that the poore liued for the moſt part without care of religion, as by Ieremy his words doth appeare. Who when he had, after inquirie, found, that there were few that ſought the truth, he ſaid:Ierem. 5.4. 
                  Surely they are poore; for they know not the law of the Lord: I will get me to the great men, for they haue knowne the way of the Lord: but theſe haue altogether broke the yoke, and burſt the bonds. God moue the hearts of them (in whom it lieth to redreſſe  it) to pitie the one and the other: and to haue a greater care of their good (by prouiding that they may bee taught the ſaluation, and happines of Chriſtians) then they (being yet ignorant) haue care of themſelues: Euen to be meanes to bring light to ſome of them, who haue long ſate in darknes,Act. 26.18. and eſpecially for the obtaining of the forgiuenes of their ſinnes, and the change of their liues.
               But I muſt remember, that I am in ſetting downe the duties of all Chriſtians about the goods of their neighbours: although intire pitie hath moued me to make this ſhort digreſſion. The laſt dutie therefore of this ſort of poore people, is, with the former, that as much as they be able, and their bodilie  infirmities of age, blindnes, lamenes, and ſuch other, will ſuffer them,Auoid idlenes. that they redeeme their time from idlenes, and conſequently from other euill paſſing of the ſame, to doe any profitable worke which they are fit for, euer tying their hearts, eyes, and hands from pulling to them, or deſiring that which is anothers.
               The ſecond ſort that I am to deale with here, are they, who cannot liue by their labour alone, but ſtand in neede of the helpe of others by borrowing ſome thing of them, that ſo they may the better prouide for themſelues, and theirs. Their dutie is, carefully and faithfully to purpoſe the reſtoring of that, which they borrowed, at the day appointed, and that with thanks.The dutie of the borrower. Repay truly. 
                   And therefore in no wiſe to abuſe their creditor, by a diſhoneſt denying of it, or vnwillingnes to repay it: thereby, and by other delayes ſeeking to defraude him, and thinke hardly of him, if he requireth it; which to doe, is as if they counted it their owne, and a kinde of theft: and ſo they ſhut vp mens compaſſion from lending: For a chiefe cauſe of little lending,Kind of theſe. Pſal. 15.14.
                   is euill paying. It is further required of them, that they borrow not without neede;Borrow not without need. as many doe, to maintaine themſelues in play, and idlenes: for by that

meanes they depriue him, who hath neede indeede to borrow, ſeeing the  lender cannot pleaſure both. And although they finde fauour to borrow for their neceſſitie, yet they muſt not looke to borrow that, which they are not like to pay againe, by taking more dealings into their hands, then their abilitie will ſerue vnto: for many vndoe themſelues, and others, by that meanes: much leſſe may they borrow to lend to another for vſurie, as we call it.If they cannot keepe day. Laſtly, if their ſimple meaning in purpoſing to repay it at the due time, be diſappointed; yet their care muſt be, to ſatisfie their creditor, and content him, with promiſing new day, and paying part, and euery way that they can (except it be forgiuen them altogether) to ſhew, that they were not faultie, nor negligent in this matter.
               
               
                  The dutie of the giuer.And this for the borrower: now as concerning ſuch as are able to giue, and to lend, firſt I will ſet downe their duties in thoſe reſpects, and how they ſhould vſe their goods, to the end they may continue this dutie of lending and giuing ſtill: after, I will ſhew what rules of righteous dealing they muſt vſe in the getting and increaſing of their goods, with all men, and in all kindes of their dealings, that ſo they may be free from this common euill, of wronging any, in their commodities.
               
                  
                     How to giue freely. Matth. 5.42. Rom. 12.8. Philem. 7.They who giue, muſt giue freely, not by compulſion, and cheerfully, deſiring thereby to relieue and comfort them who receiue it, for charitie and conſcience ſake; as the neceſſitie of the poore body requireth, and their abilitie  will giue leaue: and ſo, as they may giue to one, as well as to another, and continue the ſame duty:Iam. 2.16. 2. Cor. 8.3. Act. 4.35. Numb. 36.12. and in greateſt neceſſitie to ſtretch out their hand the more largely, without the which neceſſitie they may continue their patrimonie and inheritance, to their poſteritie.
               
                  The dutie of the lender.The lender is bound to helpe his neighbour, ſuch an one (I meane) as I haue deſcribed the borrower to bee: if hee bee able to forgoe it, and for the appointed time that he hath lent it, not to require it againe: and to receiue it at the due time without any commoditie; much leſſe to compound or agree with him for any: for whiles he pretendeth to ſeeke his poore neighbours commoditie, and yet thereby laboureth to ſeeke his owne  aduantage, with the others hurt, that were intolerable. But yet it is lawfull for him to take a pledge of him, if he doubt of his credit, ſo that it bee not his bed,Exod. 21.26. or ſuch a neceſſarie thing as he cannot well ſpare: And yet if he ſee that it cannot be repayed without hazard of his vndoing, he muſt beare with him, and ſhew compaſſion either for a time, or forgiuing it wholy vnto him.Matth. 18.25.
               
               Theſe things conſidered and wiſely regarded, what ſhould it greeue them, whom God hath indued with riches, and the commodities of this life, more then they neede (to the end he may proue them, what liberalitie they will ſhew to their poore fleſh) to reach out their hand, as they ſee moſt  neede both in giuing and lending, and there eſpecially, where God hath placed them,Men ought to be moderate in ſpending, that they may lend. and to their owne kindred? And for this cauſe, men ought to know, that they ſhould be more moderate in ſpending waſtfully vpon others (where they neede not, neither doth any charitie binde them) or vpon themſelues in diet, apparrell, or ſuch like: conſidering that he which hath made them able to giue, might and could haue made them ſtand in

                   neede to receiue: and therefore we haue the poore alwayes amongſt vs,
                  Deut. 15.11. 
                  that we may doe good to them. But all is too little for mens ſelues, by meanes either of a licentious waſting; as exceſſe and needeles ſumptuouſnes of clothing, and prouiding for their bodies, or by a miſerable pinching and hoarding vp for their poſteritie; that they may exceede and paſſe their bounds; and that they may match any of their equalles to the vtmoſt: whatſoeuer commeth in by the yeare, or by the quarter, they haue a bottomles bag to put it in; none are the better for it, but themſelues and theirs: whereas indeede, none are more the worſe for it, then themſelues, and theirs, as we ſee it oft to come to paſſe; they themſelues comming to an heauie reckoning for it, their children for  the moſt part, ſpending it waſtfully. But I cannot now bring examples, which in ſcripture and experience, are innumerable. And whereas there are two ſortes of them, who haue goods for their deſtruction:Two ſortes haue goods to their deſtruction. the one hath no other thought abiding with him, but about encreaſing, though he know not why, and perhaps haue neither childe nor brother: of whom it is verified, that the couetous neuer doth good, till he be dead,The couetous doth no good, while he liueth. like the water in the ice, which neuer is profitable, vntill it be thawed. The other ſort goe ſo farre in ſatisfying the deſire of the heart, and the luſt of the eye, and take ſuch pride, and iolitie in their life, whiles they haue that, which they would, that in ſtead of giuing and lending, they haue not ſufficient at the yeares  end to ſatisfie all their expences: what doe I ſay, to ſatisfie, when they are a whole yeares reuenue afore hand in charges, beſides other debt: ſo that they,The lauiſhing ſpenders hurt ſuch as they ſhould doe good to. who might with Iob haue comforted the hearts of many poore men by lending, are faine to greeue the hearts of many, and thoſe meaner then themſelues, by borrowing; or which is all one, by deferring of them, who haue neede to vſe it being their owne, that they may verifie the words of the wiſe man chap. 5.12. There is an euill ſicknes that I haue ſeene vnder the ſunne: to wit, riches reſerue to the owners thereof for their hurt.
               
               And thus much of lending, whereby this one thing may appeare,Lending needefull. that lending is an helpe appointed of God, for the reliefe and eaſe of the poore (without taking any thing for it, and ſo oppreſſing him thereby with vſurie) which could not otherwiſe maintaine their charge;Exod. 22.25. Luk. 6.33. rather then for the benefit and behoofe of ſuch as are well able to liue. Which ſort of men yet if in ſome extremitie, they ſtand in neede, and haue no way to prouide for it, but by diminiſhing of their inheritance, or by impairing their ſtocke and trade, in ſuch a caſe for a preſent neceſſitie, ſhall not offend,Rich borrowing ſhould recompence the lender. if they require and ſeeke helpe by borrowing, for ſome ſhort time (ſo as they be readie to affoord the like helpe againe in the like neede:) But to do this for the increaſing of their patrimonie, or for any long time, and any great ſumme; otherwiſe then by agreement betwixt both parties, that the like gratifying of his  part may be performed, if he will require it, there is no band in Chriſtianitie ſo ſtreight, that it tyeth the one partie to lend it; nor any libertie therein ſo large, that it giueth leaue to the other to requeſt it. Both which, I draw from the generall law, which all muſt be ſubiect to: namely, Whatſoeuer ye would that men ſhould doe vnto you, the ſame doe ye vnto them: and contrariwiſe.Matth. 7.12▪
                  
               
               Now concerning ſuretiſhip,Of ſuretiſhip, this briefly is to be ſaid (ſeeing it is of the like nature vnto lending.) Although it ſhould pitie vs to ſee a man fallen into

daunger to his creditour through any default; yet no dutie bindeth vs to take  vpon vs for him, to meddle where we haue nothing to doe, except it were in a matter of ſo ſmall value,Luk. 10.35. Pro. 22.26. & 6.1. that by benefiting him, we ſhould not hurt our ſelues greatly. But otherwiſe wee haue commaundement oftentimes to beware of it: As where it is ſaid; Be not thou of them who are ſureties for debt: And againe: If thou haſt ſtriken hand, and entred into ſuretiſhip, thou art ſnared: And ſo by needeles dealing in other mens buſines, they bring vpon themſelues needeles troubles, and are alſo oft hindred from following their owne calling.
               
                  How farre we may be ſurety.But yet leaſt we ſhould thinke that in no caſe, this dutie were to be performed, we muſt know, that for ſuch as are knowne of vs to be approued  Chriſtians, or our brethren, with good aduiſe we may, that is, ſo farre as we are able to beare the burthen:Geneſ. 42.37. as Ruben did offer a pledge to his father, for the ſafe bringing backe of Beniamin his younger brother. But if any ſuch weight ſhould lie vpon it, as that our vndoing and vtter impoueriſhing ſhould thereby be procured,Pro. 22.27. I ſay with Salomon, Why ſhouldeſt thou cauſe thy bed to be taken from vnder thee, when thou haſt nothing to pay? For of thee it ſhall be required.
               Now the duties of righteouſnes which follow, are ſuch, as we are bound to performe towards all in our common dealings, whereby we encreaſe our commodities: that in none of them, we be iuſtly charged to doe them any  wrong.
               
                  Lawfull vocation. 1. Pet. 4.10.
                  Firſt therefore let euery man ſee, that his vocation and trade, by which he getteth his liuing, be approued of God, and profitable to men, as the Apoſtle willeth: and therefore, that they be no idle perſons, Paraſites, Ieſters, Iugglers, ſturdie Rogues, Players, or other gameſters, dicers, carders, and ſuch like.Deale lawfully. Then, that they deale lawfully in euery part of it, that righteouſnes may be preſerued by them: In buying and ſelling, that the one giue his peny for his penyworth;Deut. 15.15. Leuit. 25.14. fully ſatisfying alſo the trauaile of the other, and coſt that he hath been at: and that the ſeller performe his peniworth as good as is agreed for,Amos. 8.5. and faithfully: and therefore deceitfull ware, vniuſt waights, vnequall  meaſures, delay in time, wherein it ſhould be performed, and ſuch like, ought to be farre off from the practiſe of a ſound Chriſtian: for herein promiſe is to be kept,
                  Pſalm. 15.4. 
                  though to the mans hinderance that made it.
               
               The ſame I ſay of hiring, and letting, that neither partie alone be regarded, but indifference vſed (as much as may be) for the mutuall good of both, vntill the time agreed vpon,Partnerſhip. betwixt them, be expired. Partnerſhip and fellowſhip in bargaining, when both are at the like coſt, or the ones labour and trauaile goeth with the others money, by their mutuall agreement, this kinde of contract (I ſay) giueth no libertie to the one to prouide for himſelfe, without regarding the other; but faithfully and truely to deale, that they  may both be partners in loſſes, and in gaine: neither iuſtly openeth the mouth of others, to condemne it.
               
                  Vſury vnlawfull.Theſe being the moſt vſuall kindes of contracts, doe ſhew the nature of the reſt, which are in vſe amongſt men, and doe leaue no place to that oppreſſion in the world, called vſurie, or any other ſuch ſeeking of mens priuate profit in their dealings, without regard of the common benefit of both:

                   when both parties are not prouided for, to their contentation and ſatisfying according to equitie, and to the meaning and prouiſion made by God in that behalfe: which is, that the one without the other ſhould not be benefited nor inriched; but the one to haue care and conſideration of the other,Regard had of both parties is no vſurie. and the commonwealth of both (as I haue ſaid) reſpected. Which if it were regarded betwixt both parties, could in no wiſe be iuſtly complained of; neither is ſuch dealing of the nature and kinde of vſurie, whether it be in hiring and letting, or in any other kinde of contract whatſoeuer: but that common dealing for ten in the hundred, or nine, or eight, or any ſuch like, which is without due conſideration of the commonwealth and vpholding of both, is  vtterly to bee condemned. Which if it bee well and duly conſidered,Matth. 7.12. will ſoone anſwere all conſcionable men, about the queſtion of vſurie and oppreſſion, that there can bee no vſe of them in the Church of God,Vſury and oppreſſion haue no place among Chriſtians. nor the Chriſtian commonwealth: the Law-maker hauing ſaid of both, as of witchcraft & of idolatrie, there ſhalbe none ſuch in Iſrael, that is, among Gods people. And as for teaching others their dutie (eſpecially in money matters) who haue not giuen themſelues in full reſolution to be guided by Gods word, Preachers may ſooner weare their tongues to the ſtump, then they may preuaile with them. But there is another thing, of which, ſome profeſſing the Goſpell, deſire to be reſolued, and that is about the buying and ſelling of annuities:  and whether they be not vnlawfull.
               Of this therefore by ſo good occaſion, as is here offered, I thinke it conuenient, to ſet downe the wil of God and our duties:Of annuities. and the rather for the ignorance of many about this point, and for the ſatisfying and anſwering of the well diſpoſed Chriſtian. For this purpoſe, we are to know,VVhat they be that by annuities are meant, certaine yeerely rents or reuenewes comming in, for ſome yeeres ſpace: and that the owner may ſell them quite away for his owne behoofe, there is no more doubt, then there is of ſelling his patrimonie or inheritance it ſelfe (if it be expedient) which is (as we call it) perpetuall.
               Now further,Two kinds of them. there are two ſorts of annuities bought and ſold among  men. The one is, a yeerely ſumme of money for yeeres, when the ſeller hath no ſuch annuitie, but as hee hopeth to make it of his labour and commodities. The other is, a certaine reuenew, rent, or part of rent, which he inioyeth, and is willing to forgoe it. The firſt ſort is full of daunger, and cauſeth much wrangling, diſagreeing, and contention betwixt the buyer and ſeller.The firſt kind full of danger. And no meruaile, when that is bought & ſold which the ſeller hath not: I meane, when there is no ſuch, either for him to inioy at his time, who hath bought it, or for the other to performe that hath ſold it: Much like them,Men muſt not ſell that which they haue not. who ſell Hops or Corne, before they ſee whether they ſhall haue any to performe or no. In this caſe, the change of the price cauſeth the one partie to repent him,  and ſo hee ſtudieth how hee may ſhift for himſelfe, by what meanes ſoeuer.Forehand bargaines ſeldome end well. And indeede no former bargaines doe commonly end without iarres and controuerſies: neither ought any to make them, before the proofe of their commodities, except they be both able to beare, and alſo willing to ſtand to the vttermoſt of the hurt, that may befall them. But to returne to annuities: let not him who is wiſe and peaceable, meddle with this firſt kind of them.
               Now concerning the ſecond, there is no doubt (as I haue ſaid) but that a

man may helpe himſelfe with his owne:The ſecond kind not vnlawfull. and therefore ſuch annuities may  be lawfully and Chriſtianly bought and ſold. But where (then) is the daunger in this kind of trafficke? I anſwere, it may be on the behalfe of both parties.Yet abuſed on the ſellers behalfe. On the ſellers, by fraudulent and craftie dealing: as if he haue either ſold the ſame annuitie before to another; or if he know it to be litigious, and incumbred, and ſo he ſelleth ſorrow and trouble to his neighbour, in ſteed of a commoditie. This dealing is ſo groſſe, and branded with the marke of infamie and diſhoneſtie by the Lord himſelfe, that I need ſay no more of it. On the buyers behalfe,On the behalfe of the buyer. the ſin and offence is, when he knowing the other muſt ſell, and within a certaine time, holdeth him off, as though hee cared not for it, to the end he may haue it, not according to the worth of it, and as many other  will giue, but for a little; perhaps halfe the value, and ſo copeth him vp, and ſucketh out of him no ſmall aduauntage.Such buyers are grinders. This is a grinder of his neighbour. Thus come in the annuities that gripe more then ten in the hundred, when the ſeller might, if he had had good meaſure, haue made his benefit almoſt as much more.Some annuities worſe then ten in the hundred. This dealing, if it be vſed towards the wealthie, is ranke oppreſſion, when the buyer lieth thus in the winde, as it were, and will not giue according to the value: but if it be practiſed vpon the weake ſtated, and men behind hand, it is as the plucking off their skin from their bodie. If it be asked, what commoditie a man may reape lawfully this way: I ſay, if he buy the annuitie or rent of him,How to redreſſe ſuch abuſe. who is wealthie, ſo as there be plaine dealing, he  may ſafely inioy the benefit which the other offereth: If he be but weake or in debt who ſelleth it, let him be ſure he giue to the vttermoſt value, and in token that hee doth ſo, let him not bee vnwilling to releaſe him againe afterwards: which ſhal alwaies proue, that he ſeeketh no aduantage by him. And this of annuities, both to direct a Chriſtian how to deale in them, and to anſwere ſuch as thinke (without any ground) that no dealing about them is lawfull, what our libertie is. Now that all may come by, and inioy their right in theſe, and in all other vſuall contracts, exchaunges, ſocieties, and dealings amongſt men (for want whereof are the moſt broyles and contentions in the world) let this be, for concluſion marked, that truth in words, equitie  in deeds, and ſimple meaning in purpoſes and thoughts, is to be firmely and conſtantly retained: and where that hath not been practiſed, full reſtitution is to be made.
               
                  Reſtitution.Now another dutie is, to reſtore to the right owner, the thing which wee finde, if we can know him, and not to count it our own. Alſo to reſtore faithfully and without delay any thing which is committed to our keeping for truſt, and not to defraud the partie: whether executors of the will of the dead, or guardians, that take vpon them the care of orphanes liuing: that as the beloued Diſciple Iohn being put in truſt by his Lord and Maſter, with Mary his mother to regard her, was faithfull, and tooke her home to him, Ioh. 19.27. euen ſo may they bee true and iuſt in that which is committed vnto them. The Lawyer alſo, to take no cauſes into his hands, which he ſeeth can haue no good end with equitie, and thoſe which he doth become defender of, to ſhew all honeſt faithfulnes, and diligence in following of them: That they in whom it lieth, make no delaies in the ending of the ſuites which come before them, but with all expedition poſſible diſpatch the ſame: that

                      their light may breake foorth cleerely as the noonetide. Which grace is commended in Iob thorough all the world, where it is heard of,Iob. 31.16. that he reſtrained not the poore of their deſire, nor cauſed the eyes of the widow to faile, by long waiting for her requeſt.
               
               Laſt of all, to ſuffer all men to inioy their owne, and as neither by play, lotteries, laying of wagers, neither by force, violence, or any kind of oppreſſion; ſo neither by deceit and craft, we ſeeke or procure the hurt of our neighbour, to increaſe our owne profit. And thus I haue ſet down a ſumme of the chiefe duties, which our God hath bound vs to performe towards our neighbour, concerning his goods, that we be found no way vnrighteous in our practiſe  and dealings with him, but ſuffer him to liue ſafely by vs, as hee truſteth to doe:Prou. 3.29. wherein though I haue laid out nothing in any large manner (which was not my purpoſe to doe further then need requireth) yet he that conſidereth how many duties here are to be performed, ſhall ſee it the more needfull to haue a briefe rehearſall of them, being ſo many; to the which, as to a glaſſe, he may repaire when hee will, rather then to deſire ſome few of them, handled more largely, with omiſsion of the reſt. In theſe duties performing, who ſo ſetteth himſelfe to delight, and maketh it his pleaſure to walke after theſe rules; and when he can finde by due obſeruing himſelfe (that he hath taken any thing wrongfully) to turne backe vnlawfull gaine: as his libertie ſhal be  great with the Lord, and his confidence ſtrong, when hee ſeeth that for his cauſe and for the hope of the reward promiſed him, he can be willing to denie himſelfe, and his owne will: ſo his example ſhall be highly commended, and do much good amongſt men: And yet this ſhould not be to ſeeke with ſuch as goe for Gods ſeruants, as it is written: It is ioy to the iuſt to doe iudgement. And let it bee remembred that I here teach them,Prou. 21.15. who profeſſe that they are willing to learne, not the ſcorner. To conclude: let not onely the forementioned ſinnes againſt this commandement be auoided, and the contrarie duties practiſed: but let vs euery way ſo vſe our goods, that wee may be thereby more fruitfull in euery good worke, then we could be if we wanted  them: elſe how ſhall we be able to giue a good account to our Lord and Maſter, and to ſay: Behold, Lord, here are thy fiue, or two talents: I haue gained with them many more? Luk. 19.18.
               The next dutie wherein we are to ſerue our neighbour through loue,The 9. commandement. and to deale righteouſly with him, is about his name. Herein our loue muſt ſhew it ſelfe to be ſuch, that we be afraid to vexe or grieue him this way, as well as in his perſon or goods. The ſinnes haue been mentioned more at large, which are committed againſt this commaundement, the duties ſhall bee put in a narrower roome. One of the which is,To reioyce in our neighboure credit. 3. Iohn 2.
                   to reioyce in the good report of as many as we can heare, and be perſwaded of: as the Apoſtle did for the  good name of the elect Ladie, who had ſo carefully walked after the Goſpell her ſelf, yt by her feruent trauaile, he had found her children alſo doing the ſame. This reioycing for the good name of others, baniſheth this ſecret repining at the ſame, and enuying them for it,
                     Gal. 5.26. 1. Theſſ. 5.14. Sorrow for their infirmities. and the poyſoned deſire of vaine glorie, out of our ſelues; to the which belongeth this: that we ſorrow for their infirmities: ſo farre it ought to be off from vs, to report them, or heare them of others with delight.
               
                  
                  Hope the beſt.Another is, to hope through patience for better things, then as yet can  be ſeene in men,Epheſ. 2.5. 1. Cor. 6.11. Matth. 7.1. Tit. 3.2. remembring what we our ſelues haue been ſometime: and therefore not raſhly to iudge and condemne ſuch, ſo much as ſecretly, and leaſt of all to make them odious in company by vttering their crimes, or allowing others to doe ſoe, of whom we haue good hope. Concerning the reſt who ſinne boldly, I ſay: Let Baal pleade for himſelfe: for ſuch as defame themſelues by their wicked behauiour, are not iniuried by vs in giuing warning of them. It is alſo further required of vs here, that as we ſhall be able, and may get good oportunitie thereunto,To couer faults. we helpe to couer theſe faults of theirs through loue, who may be recouered and brought to repentance: and yet not by flattering them therein, or diſſembling the ſame (for that is rancke  hating of them,Leuit. 19.17. when we by ſuffering them to goe on in their ſinnes, cauſe them thereby to come to ſome open ſhame and puniſhment:) but doe we rather,Iam. 5.20. as the Apoſtle Iames expoundeth this hiding of faults, ſaying: He that ſhall conuert a ſinner from going aſtray, ſhall ſaue a ſoule; and hide the multitude of ſinnes.
               
               
                  Rebuke.Thus we ſhould labour to keepe them from an euill name (who are not ſhameles) and ſo from further daunger, by this our telling them of their faults; which if they be not yet gone abroade, may by it be amended: But as for open and bold defamers of others, they are not to be dealt with priuately, when their ſlaunder is ſpred farre, but to be cenſured by the magiſtrate, that ſo taking ſhame for their ſinne, they may be brought to repentance. And this remedie, as it may, ſo it ought to be ſought and vſed in loue, euen as the other by reproofe and admonition: and by theſe meanes (the Lord bleſſing them) both ſorts may blot out the remembrance of their ſins, both before God and men.
               
                  Not to diſcloſe vnmeete ſecrets.To this dutie belongeth another, much agreeing with the former: that is, not to bewray a ſecret, when it may ſafely and without diſpleaſing of God, be kept in: For both this and the former go ſo heauily to the heart of our neighbours, when they heare that we haue no regard of them, where it might doe them good; neither doe ſpare, by inlarging of the report of that which  was ſecret before, to encreaſe their miſerie and infamie: though they haue loued vs before, yet now their hearts are turned from vs (though that be their ſinne) for that they ſee vs not bearing a part of their griefe and ſorrow with them, but to publiſh that, which we know of them, by want of loue to them. For euery truth,Note. and the whole truth, is not alwayes to be vttered; although all kinde of lying and ſlaunder be alwayes to be abhorred. I ſay further, if we ſhould ſpeake of mens faults with bewailing them,Not to ſpeake of faults. or with a deſire that they, to whom we vtter them, might helpe to redreſſe them; yet could we not be iuſtified in ſo doing, except we haue vſed all meanes which we know, to amend them, and (when there is no other remedie) goe about the opening  of the ſame, as it were, vnwillingly; and in louing faithfulnes, reueale it onely to ſuch a one,Matth. 18.15. as is likeſt and fitteſt to reforme them, and not pleaſe our ſelues therein: In which caſe the houſe of Cloe ſent word to the Apoſtle Paul,
                  1. Cor. 1.11. 
                  that there were deſſentions in the Church of Corinth. But here let this be conſidered, that all reports of mens faults are not to be admitted, leaſt we ſhould nouriſh the ſlaunderer, Prouerb. 25.23. nor all ſuch reports to be reiected,

                   or coldly reproued, leaſt wee ſhould imbolden the offender, and the committer of them, 1. Sam. 2.22.23. but ſo farre as they may be prooued; that the guiltie may be duely cenſured, as Paul did the Corinthians: but not without proofe, leaſt the ſlaunderer ſhould be fleſhed: for the which cauſe Dauid ſaid to Saule in this very caſe, why doth the King giue an eare to them which ſay, Dauid ſeeketh to kill thee? 1. Sam. 24.9. It is moreouer required of vs, that we vphold the good name of our neighbour, when we be in place, where he is vnchriſtianly and reprochfully ſpoken of, that ſo we may cauſe ſlaunder and enuie to ceaſe: and not to deliuer him being innocent,
                     Pro. 14.25. To defend his credit. Act. 26.15.
                   in ſuch a caſe, when we may, is little differing from defaming him, our ſelues. Which  was the ſinne of thoſe cruell Iewes mentioned in the Acts; who when Paul was accuſed as an euill doer, ſtoode by; allowing the ſame againſt him, who knew, that thoſe things were not ſo; and if they had rightly learned to practiſe this part of dutie, would haue anſwered in his defence. But the neglect of this dutie is the greater, if it be done in a publike caſe before many, as that was againſt the Apoſtle, when the Iudge will not giue ſentence, the deponent will not ſpeake the truth on the ſide of him, who is falſely and vniuſtly brought in queſtion; and the accuſer will not let his ſuite fall, as they ſee they ought, and ſhould doe: but indirectly at leaſt, doe purſue him, either making a ſmall crime in him to be an odious offence; or when he is innocent  and cleere, yet charge him as a treſpaſſer.
               It is our dutie alſo, by our hand writing,To giue teſtimonie. or any other credit bringing vnto him, whoſe good conuerſation is approued of vs, to free his name from vniuſt reproch: yea, and if the caſe be waightie and vrgent, ſo farre as we be priuie to his innocencie, not to be vnwilling to free him by our oath. There is yet another thing, wherein our loue ſhould ſhew it ſelfe towards our neighbour, as neceſſarily as in any of the reſt: And that is, by vprightnes of heart,Take all in beſt part. and kindnes to interpret all ſuch of his ſayings and doings, as may be well taken, in the beſt part; and not for ſome little blemiſh, and as it were halfe a fault, to deface the whole: and to be free from ſurmizing and conceitednes  about that which cannot be proued, and brought to light:Matth. 1.19. As godly Ioſeph is commended to haue been in iudging of Mary; and as the Apoſtles, who iudged ſimply of Iudas himſelfe, ſo long as they ſaw him not conuicted. And this wee ſhould doe the rather, not to ſtand vpon the vttermoſt, as through vncharitablenes being able to beare with nothing: For who doth not know, both how prone our nature is to be medling, and going too farre? about ſuch vncertainties: and alſo,Iohn. 13.28. that when we haue concluded and giuen ſentence, as though there were no doubt in the matter, yet it falleth out oftentimes, that we were (and that to our great ſhame) meerely ledde with raſhnes, and vtterly deceiued? (which cannot be more cleerely ſeene, then  in Saul againſt Dauid and Ionathan, both by bare conceit againſt both, 1. Sam. 22. and by hearkning amiſſe to Doeg againſt one of them, verſ. 11.Luk. 7.39.) To our ſhame, I ſay, becauſe what ſhame almoſt can be greater, then firſt to take that in the euill part, which was neuer ſo meant? and from ſo thinking of it, to proceede to raſh iudgement accordingly? Like him in the Goſpell, who ſeeing our Sauiour to admit a penitent woman neere vnto him, who had before that, bin an offenſiue liuer, proceeded immediatly to this concluſion:

                  If this man were a prophet, he would ſurely haue knowne what manner of woman this  is,
                  We ſhould cenſure our ſelues. 
                  for ſhe is a greeuous ſinner. But this taking all things in ill part will not be amended in vs, before we begin to cenſure our ſelues ſharpely for knowne offences which lurke in vs: wherein, when we ſhall ſee how ſlenderly and coldly we ſet vpon them, we ſhall be inforced to confeſſe, that our rigour was too ſeuere againſt others, eſpecially for bare ſurmizes of faults, which had no ſufficient ground. As for thoſe, of whom we through charitie thinke the beſt, when yet we ſometimes ſee them prooue otherwiſe, and our ſelues deceiued in them, I ſay it maketh no matter: we haue done but our dutie, to be charitabile minded towards them. And as for them, their ſinne is their owne, and ſhall double their puniſhment, in as much as they haue deceiued  our hope, which we had of them: for if there were any ſparke of goodnes in them, our good hope of them, would make them aſhamed to deceiue our expectation.Not too credulous. Yet let vs not be fooles in iudging well of them, whoſe mindes and purpoſes we know to be euill by their words, conuerſation, and long knowledge of them, or by ſuch like teſtimonies of their profanenes and boldnes in ſinne: for that were vnſauorie and ſilly fooliſhnes: and (whiles we would goe about to be charitable) to ſhew our ſelues vngodly in calling euill good:
                  Matth. 10.17. and to forget the commaundement of our Sauiour, who ſaith,To note out euill men. 
                  beware of men: therefore much more beware how ye commend them. Of ſuch we ſhould make no ſcruple nor doubt to know, and thinke of them  to be wicked as they be, and to giue warning to others, who are ſimple and innocent; and therefore might eaſily be deceiued, and mocked by them: as Peter did to them who were conuerted, when he ſaid to them; Saue your ſelues from this froward generation,
                  Act. 2.40. meaning thoſe who had been their companions.
               Thus it behooueth vs to examine our dealings with our neighbors credit, and good name, that as we haue learned to thinke and conceiue: ſo we teach our tongues to ſpeake the beſt of all men,Tit. 3.2. and ill of none, whoſe doings haue not in an obſtinate and ſtifnecked manner ſpoken worſe of themſelues:Pro. 15.1. ſo that they haue caſt away their good name themſelues (although  more pretious then gold) and not we, who giue that due to them (in making this account of them) which they themſelues ſeeme to deſire, and doe moſt truely deſerue: So we ſhall in this part of righteouſnes alſo, as in the former, make our reioycing ſound. But aboue all that hath been ſaid of this argument, let our chiefeſt care be, that we ſtaine not our owne good name and credit any way, but maintaine and preſerue it.
               
                  The tenth commaundementThe laſt part of dutie to our neighbour, is to acquaint our hearts with the thoughts and deſires of his good: and to bring our ſelues to this cuſtome and practiſe,To acquaint our hearts with deſires of our neighbours good. that whatſoeuer in theſe fiue former precepts and fountaines of neighbourly dutie, we are commaunded to performe to him, the ſame  by vertue of this, we oft wiſh, deſire, and delight in, ſeeing our God will haue it ſo, that thus the contrarie luſtings after that which is his, may (as the moſt vnſauorie vomit) be caſt vp, and auoyded of vs. But this dutie of deſiring that our neighbour may proſper, which ſhould be felt to dwell in vs, as a daily gueſt,This is a great ſtranger. and which ſhould riſe vp and lie downe with vs, and throughout our courſe accompanie vs, behold it is at this day, ſuch a ſtranger to the

                   moſt, euen who goe for good Chriſtians,Note. that it is almoſt buried amongſt men, ſaue that God of his goodnes hath ſome few, who keepe it in remembrance, that the reſt may know,Few examples. that ſuch practiſe he looketh for of all his ſeruants. For though it be written in the booke of God, neuer to be raced out by the Serpents ſubtiltie, yet except ſome liuely paterne of it may be ſeene in mens liues, the practiſe of it, as of many other excellent truths beſide, doe grow into vnaccuſtomednes, euen as the manifeſt and cleere path, being not vſually troden, is ſoone couered with weedes and graſſe.
               And this part of righteouſnes muſt finde more care in vs for the performance of it,This a helpe to all the reſt. becauſe the well regarding of this dutie maketh vs the better able  to ſerue our neighbour in all the former. And ought we not to weane our hearts from dreaming after any thing that is his, when wee can in no wiſe abide that the like meaſure ſhould be offered vs? and alſo becauſe wee haue conſecrated our hearts to the Lords vſe, to bee taken vp in the delighting in thoſe things which pleaſe him? And if wee loue him, wee ſhould conſider, that loue thinketh none euill of our neighbour, nor intendeth any hurt againſt him: yet when his profits, and lawfull liberties, and delights are wiſhed to be ours, I denie not but we can and doe perſwade our ſelues, that for all this we loue him: but the Scripture which ſaith,Matth. 7.19. 
                  as ye would that men ſhould doe vnto you, euen ſo doe ye vnto them, ſhall condemne vs for it. Alas, doe we not ſee, that  all the incouragements and helpes, which wee haue in this life (through the exceeding naughtines of our hearts) are all little enough to carrie vs through all hindrances? and ſhall we then adde ſorrow to ſorrow vpon ſuch, as wee our ſelues are? or repine, that they may more eaſily go on to eternall life, by ſuch helpes as God giueth them? and therefore deſire that which is pretious to them, that ſo they may be holden backe, if not vtterly oppreſſed, through the want of them with heauines? It was farre from him, who ſaid,Act. 26.29. 
                  I would thou wert altogether as I am (that is, vnfainedly a Chriſtian) but yet without the bands which I haue.
               
               Therefore let vs know, and reſt in this, that the marke which we muſt aime  at, is this: that in liuing with our neighbor, we deſire neither his hurt in perſon, goods, or name; but count it the greateſt ioy yt wee haue by our fellowſhip and acquaintance with him, when we can reioyce in his welfare & proſperitie both outward and inward:Reioyce in his welfare. and therefore heartily deſire and wiſh it from time to time, and in one thing as well as in another, and giue thoſe thoughts or luſts ſmall reſt in vs, which ſtirre vs to the contrarie: That ſo wee may declare, that we haue the ſame ſpirit which was in the Apoſtle; which taught him to ſay; I wiſh that thou proſperedſt, euen as thy ſoule proſpereth.
                  3. Ioh. 2. And here to ſhut vp this matter with a word or two of ſobrietie (which is a vertue more properly concerning our ſelues,We ought to liue ſoberly. rather then the perſon of God or our  neighbour, conſiſting in the moderating of our affections in the vſe of things lawfull) this I ſay in few words: that we muſt haue ſpeciall care to vſe al our lawfull liberties, both in the workes of our calling, and in buying, ſelling, moderatly and aright. And the ſame I ſay of eating, drinking, mariage, recreation, proſperitie, youth, age, beautie, friends, ſtrength; becauſe I would briefly conclude with the Apoſtle in this wiſe:1. Cor. 7.29. 
                  This I ſay (brethren) becauſe the time is ſhort hereafter, that they which haue wiues, be as though they had none: and they

that weepe, as though they wept not: and they that reioyce, as though they reioyced not: and they that buy, as though they poſſeſſed not: and they that vſe the world, as not abuſing it. For the faſhion of this world goeth away. He therefore that looketh to theſe things ſo, that hee liue in the vſe of his lawfull liberties, to make them ſerue him (that he may better ſerue God) and not he them; that man may be ſaid to be ſober indeed, and he ſhall haue great reioycing, whatſoeuer the world thinke of him.
               Theſe duties I haue thought good to ſet downe together, as it were in one view, before the eyes of the reader, that hee may fetch from hence, light to ſhew him the way, and matter to ſeaſon his heart and life, when he ſhal waxe emptie, barren, and forgetfull. And for the more large and full handling  of them, or the exact ſetting downe of all particulars, it was not my purpoſe, and it would haue been too large, ſeeing in one Catechiſme or other, and in ſundrie treatiſes, as alſo by ordinarie teaching (ſuch as inioy the ſame) may be ſatisfied in that thing: which particulars, all true Chriſtians muſt be very carefull to know, after that they be willing to be directed. Now after what manner wee may draw a daily direction out of this whole treaſurie of godlines, it ſhall in fit place hereafter appeare, when I come to ſhew what way God hath taught vs to walke in, throughout euery day.
               And now I hauing finiſhed that which I purpoſed about the ſinnes to bee renounced, and the duties to bee practiſed in a godly life; here vnderſtand  that this renouncing of euill and turning from it, and the contrary practiſing of dutie,The renouncing of euill and the contrarie, is all one with repentance. is nothing els but repentance, and the ſelfeſame thing. And the bringing foorth of the fruites of amendement or of repentance, is all one with that liuing by faith, which the Scripture calleth the life of the righteous, or a Chriſtian conuerſation. The which I make mention of, that none may thinke, that the godly life, the liuing by faith, and the repentant life, are diuers things the one from the other: which might raiſe much trouble in many to thinke: ſo that when they haue laboured much and trauailed painfully in one of them, they ſhould bee new to begin in the other. But ſeeing the holie Ghoſt in the Scriptures doth lay foorth the life of the  beleeuer in ſundrie manners of ſpeech (euery one ſetting out the nature and propertie thereof for the more full and cleere vnderſtanding of it) it is meete we ſhould not be ignorant of it.
               And as I ſaid, that this godly life which I haue written of, is all one with the bringing forth fruits of amendement or of repentance, & liuing by faith, and no ſtraunge nor new or diuers thing from it, thus in few words I ſhew. Concerning the one,Act. 26.18. I meane the bringing foorth the fruites of repentance, what is it els, but for the perſon who is aſſured of ſaluation and of the forgiuenes of his ſinnes, to turne to the Lord, and to come vnder his gouernment, from the power of Sathan and ſinne? and in full purpoſe of heart to labour  to be reformed from day to day more and more? And what other thing in ſubſtance, hath been ſpoken by me in the deſcription of a godly life? And thoſe things about it I haue chiefly handled; which may eſpecially inſtruct the beleeuer,Liuing by faith and liuing godly, all one. what true godlines is, and how hee may bee able to practiſe it. Now for the other, of liuing by faith, what is it alſo but a relying vpon the word of God, with full purpoſe to be guided by it, either by reſting vpon his

                   promiſes (I vnderſtand not here the promiſe of ſaluation) or obeying his commaundements? And a godly conuerſation is euen the ſame: that is, an endeuouring to liue after the word of God, which teacheth vs to beleeue, that he will inable vs thereto, and bleſſe vs therein. So that, he that liueth not godly, liueth not by faith: nor hee liueth not by faith, who doth not liue godly.
               And now to ſhut vp this point, namely, wherein a godly life doth conſiſt: a little more I will adde, of liuing by faith, as I promiſed in the beginning of this treatiſe, where I ſhewed that this faith to beleeue the ſpirituall and temporall promiſes of this life, muſt be conceiued and wrought in vs, before we  can liue by it. We are therefore to know, that after the Lord hath giuen this gift of faith (for it is the gift of God) he requireth,
                     Phil. 1.29. The godly liue by faith. that wee ſhould liue by the ſame faith: and that is, not only to beleeue throughout our life, that we ſhall be ſaued in the life to come; but alſo, that we ſhall haue whatſoeuer is expedient to bring vs ſafely thither, giuen vs freely by the Lord in this life: I ſay,1. Tim. 4.8. faith reacheth to, and laieth hold of the promiſes of both, euen as God hath giuen vs both. So that to liue by faith, is a moſt glorious and rich prerogatiue, as we may ſee: and ſo ſhould we be able by good proofe and experience to ſay, if we would be perſwaded, but to take a taſte of the benefit and ſweetnes that it bringeth: for if we did but taſte of it, wee would neuer ſuffer our  ſelues to be withdrawne and plucked from it any more, as farre as in vs lieth.The fruite of ſuch a life. For by this faith, we are confident, and reſt quietly about our ſaluation from time to time; whereas others, who liue not by it, doe wauer and are oft vnſetled, euen the beſt; and therefore much diſquieted. By this, we walke in newnes of life, and all the parts of it: and by it, we may be aſſured in our prayers to be heard: againſt fearefull ſinnes to be preſerued; to haue the rage of our ſtrong luſts weakned: and to haue grace againſt them, although not alwaies to preuaile (which were not expedient for vs) yet at leaſt, to be in combate with them, which is euer a good teſtimonie of our ſafetie: for thereby, wee prooue that wee be of the militant Church of Chriſt. Yea and to goe further;  by this, if we liue by it, we haue deliuerance from many ſharpe and bitter afflictions, and beare thoſe which we muſt goe vnder, more meekely and patiently, becauſe it maketh vs depend on Gods promiſes, and not to tye or ſtint him to any ſet time, any manner of deliuerance, or any meaſure of affliction. And by it wee walke in our callings more cheerefully, and with leſſe toyle and vexation, then they that haue all ſhifts, and cunning ſleights and deuices to gaine by: I ſay that which is incredible to the worldlings, politikes, and hypocrites (but that is a heauie iudgement of God, that though they be told the truth, yet they ſhall not beleeue it.) For when wee are perſwaded, that our callings are approoued of God, and profitable to men,Faith maketh earthly buſines to be done cheerefully. by  maintaining the ſtate of Church, common-wealth, or any familie; and that they are thoſe, in which God will bee ſerued of vs: then wee take them in hand, not like drudges and droyles, who doe their worke for feare of the whip, nor like hirelings, who worke only for wages, and ſo they muſt ſtarue, if they did not worke: but we conſider, we ſerue the Lord, who is a bountifull paymaſter, and hath promiſed a large bleſſing vnto vs: and becauſe wee doe Gods worke and buſines; therefore we are aſſured that he will aſſiſt and

further vs therein, that both we may goe about it more willingly, and that it  may the better go forward: And therefore we disburden our ſelues of much needleſſe and troubleſome care and thought taking (ſeeing he hath ſaid, Caſt your care on me,
                  Heb. 13.5. 
                  for I will care for you.) Neither doe we make reckoning of our commoditie what it ſhall be, before God doe ſhew vs; but when wee haue ſerued Gods prouidence by lawfull labour & trauaile, and vſed the meanes, we commit the ſucceſſe to him: and the fruite of our paine, we receiue with thankfulnes (whatſoeuer it be) and that we take for our daily bread.
                  Faith maketh our croſſes more eaſily borne. And if we be croſſed in the good things which wee goe about (as euery calling and trauaile ſince ſinne came into the world, hath affliction and ſorrow adioyned to it) we doe here, by faith, conſider, that this is by the prouidence and good  pleaſure of God, who ſometime croſſeth our good and lawfull attempts, leaſt wee ſhould be glued too faſt to theſe earthly things: and wee remembring, that God loueth vs deerely, and that of loue he chaſtiſeth vs, ſo as they, and all other our miſeries, ſhall in the end turne to our good, and therefore we reſt and vphold our ſelues in our eſtate with contentation. And this may bee vnderſtood of all other earthly dealings and actions, which are lawfull, and for the which we haue warrant in the word of God: aſſuring our ſelues, that whiles wee ſee God euer going before vs in them (as wee ſhould more looke to it,Act. 2.25. that we finde it ſo, then to our greateſt profits and weightieſt dealings) this faith ſhall vphold vs in the quieteſt eſtate and moſt ſweete peace: ſuch as all the carnall wiſedome of man ſhall neuer finde nor inioy. For to ſpeake,The vnbeleeuers life miſerable. as the truth is, what a life doe the vnbeleeuers of the world leade, who will not learne what this life of faith meaneth? what ſinne doe they commit in all kindes of their dealings, to the end they may bring that to paſſe which they would haue? for in God they haue no hope (for if they had, they would be counſelled and commaunded by him.) And although this doe not appeare and breake out, by and by, to the ſight of ſuch as are ignorant like themſelues; yet I would haue them anſwere me to this: From whence is it,The proofe of it. that they are often arraigned and forced to crie out fearefully; they are damned, and there is no mercie for them from God; they haue  done againſt their conſciences, and what ſhall they doe? &c. From whence come theſe ſpeeches and complaints, I ſay? doe they not prooue, that they ſinned againſt their knowledge dangerouſly, though they would not ſee it then?1. Sam. 28.15. and that God will be reuenged vpon their wickednes, though for a while they beare al out boldly, as Saul did? Therfore be we well aſſured, that the ſinne of ſuch lieth at their doore: and one time or other it will find them out. For beſides their neceſſarie affaires and buſines, they runne into many needleſſe and ſuperfluous dealings, which muſt needes fill their heads with cares, and their hearts with ſorrow: And in their lawfull labours, they are ſo farre from depending vppon God for ſucceſſe, that they are euer fearing  deadly, leaſt they ſhould be croſſed, and inordinately ſet on hope that they ſhall proſper and gaine: in both which, when they be diſappointed, how like to mad men are they? neuer contented with their ſtate and condition. In which caſes, how can it otherwiſe be, but that they be toſſed, as the chaffe with the winde? and neuer quiet nor cheerefull, but when they haue what they would: whereas if they did by faith build on Gods promiſes, they

                   ſhould not neede to be vexed, as they are, with ſuch diſtractions, nor to ſpend their precious time as they doe in worldly cares: For they ſhould finde better ſucceſſe and more bleſſing with leſſe care and toyling of themſelues, if they would reſt on God and put their confidence in him, and they ſhould with free hearts and more quiet mindes, haue alſo more time to looke after the heauenly life.
            
            
               CHAP. 18. Of certaine reaſons, perſwading to the practiſe of a godly life: which is the  fourth generall part of this treatiſe.
               
                  THus I haue after a ſort declared what the Chriſtians, and the beleeuers life is, and in what duties it conſiſteth: and haue diſcloſed in ſome ſorte, the ſinnes, which inſteed of this godlines doe poſſeſſe men: The whole I confeſſe hath been large and long: but therefore it muſt be conſidered, that the Chriſtian life is in a manner all the ſubſtance of religion, and that which muſt giue light and lend helpe to vs in all things while we liue: and therefore ſo great a matter containing all duties of all  perſons with the right manner of performing them, could not with any playnenes and profit to the moſt, that ſhall reade it (in my iudgement) haue been ſet downe more briefly. Onely this is here to bee looked vnto: that he may cleerely and ſoundly know, what is good, and what is amiſſe in ſome particular manner, and be the better able to gouerne himſelfe by that knowledge euery day, as he ſhall haue occaſion, which as I ſaid, ſhall further be declared in place moſt expedient: And to make this ſumme of a Chriſtian life, his glaſſe (as it is here, and by other writers ſet downe, according to the word of God) whenſoeuer hee ſhall repaire vnto it, to ſee himſelfe therein: Now heare ſome reaſons, why the beleeuer ſhould leade his life  thus.
               And firſt I will begin with that, which deſerueth the firſt place,The firſt reaſon▪ why the beleeuer ſhould liue godly, is, that God may be glorified by this aduancing his. and of right, ought to preuaile with vs: that ſeeing this Chriſtian courſe doth ſo highly honour God, it ought without all exception, to be ſought out and attained of vs: And how highly God is glorified in it, euery one may ſee, when euen ſinfull and contemptible perſons, who much diſhonored him by their bad conuerſation, yet after being reformed, are made fit to glorifie him? and if this be in their new birth, and regeneration at their firſt comming to God, how much more (thinke we) ſhall it be in their life afterward? A miſerable caytife to be made a Kings ſonne, is admirable: but behold, here  is more: for in Chriſtianitie, we finde, that he which was the bondman of the diuell, and of the familie of hell, is aduanced to the honour of the ſonne of God, and made heire and inheritour of the kingdome of heauen. And if this be honour to Princes, that they can giue great gifts, what is the Lords honour, in and by them, whom he indueth with other gifts, then all princes haue to giue?
               It was a great part of Salomon his royaltie, that he gaue ſiluer, as ſtones;
                  VVhat honour God hath, by the grace of his. 
                  and

goodly Cedars, as the wilde figge trees: the Lord giueth graces and poſſeſſions, that neither ſiluer nor golde can purchaſe: and an habitation that neither Cedars nor any Almond trees can make reſemblance of. It is a great honour to God, that hee hath made and faſhioned man ſo excellent a creature of ſlime:Iohn. 6.70. but it is a greater honour, that he hath of a rude, vnbridled and vncleane diuell, made a well ordered, ſober, and meeke Chriſtian: yea a ſanctified perſon;Eſay. 11. as the Scripture calleth him: for by his holy ſpirit through the worke of the Goſpell, he hath made of an extortioner, and oppreſſor, a liberall and bountifull giuer,Luk. 19.7. & 8. as Zaccheus: of an adultereſſe, a penitent woman, reclaimed from the courſe of vncleane life,Ioh. 4.18. & 29. Luk. 7.38. Act. 9.15. as the woman in Luk. 7.47. and of a perſecutor, a preacher: yea himſelfe a perſecuted man, euen Paul the  Apoſtle. And how doth ſuch a change (thinke we) when it is ſeene of men, and the reporte of it heard among ſuch as knew them before, cauſe them to ſay:Matth. 5.16. 
                  The Lord hath done great things? And ſuch grace doth God giue, to them (I meane) that feare him,Prou. 16.7. that he cauſeth by their light which ſhineth among men,
                  The beſt things of Gods ſeruants, are within them. euen their very enemie; to be at one with them: yea to ſpeake well of them, and to glorifie their father which is in heauen. And yet their beautie is (to ſpeake as the truth is) chiefly within, and not ſeene with eye.
               As all was not heard of Salomon a farre off, which was to be ſeene at home: and yet not all ſeene, that might be knowne to be in him. The faithfulnes, innocencie, and rare continence of Ioſeph, with other graces which were  in him, when they brought him into ſuch fauour, credit and admiration amongſt men, how (thinke we) was God honoured, who was the giuer of them?1. Sam. 2.30. 
                  Thus doth God honour them, that honour him, that he may be all in all, and by them ſhewed, to be moſt honourable. And to ſpeake of our owne time, wherein we liue,God is not without honor euen in this our age. notwithſtanding it affoord not ſo many examples of ſo excellent gifts and graces of holy life (though in learning and knowledge few haue gone beyond it) as ſo long libertie vnder the Goſpell might iuſtly challeng (which ſinne (I pray God) be not laide to our charge, but ſpeedily repented of:) ſo yet we will not be aſhamed to affirme, to the great praiſe of God, that both many gratious and godly people, ſince the raigne of our  moſt noble Prince, haue been alreadie gathered to their fathers, who in the dayes of their fleſh, did honour God highly; and many remaine (God be bleſſed) amongſt vs, who haue, and doe, and to their end ſhall (we doubt not) to the great comfort of many weake ones, commend the power of the Goſpell preached amongſt vs, and cauſe that vnfained thankes be giuen to God by many for them. And that both of the miniſterie (though nothing be more ridiculous to the Papiſts our aduerſaries) the Lord hath raiſed vp many, who both preach ſincerely, and diligently, and walke warily and worthie the Lord, Col. 1.10. and vnoffenſiuely ſeeking to pleaſe him in all things: and of the people, he hath drawne not a fewe, who doe beautifie their profeſſion, and carrie  themſelues vnrebukeable, among them who can iudge aright, and are free from reprochfull and daungerous euils. In ſuch (as I haue ſaid) is the Lord made admirable: As it is written: In Sion (his Church) ſhall God be praiſed: and why? becauſe for them he hath done great things.
               
               The Lord maketh the weake ſtrong, the ignorant prudent, and ſuch as ſate in darkenes to ſee great light: holy and glorious is his name: Yea further

                   the Lord teacheth his beloued ones in their proſperitie,How God graceth his children. to count themſelues but ſtrangers in this world: he cauſeth the things of greateſt price, to be little ſet by of them in compariſon of his treaſures, which are not ſeene: This honour haue many of his Saints. The Lord giueth ſtrength in tribulation aboue hope, and maketh anguiſh and ſorrow to become comforts:Note. falſe accuſations, and contumelious reports, to be crownes to their heads and chaines of golde to their neckes which beare them. And to be ſhort, he teacheth his, to ſucke ſweetenes out of ſowernes, and to make good vſe of all eſtates: and they are able to doe all things through him that maketh them able;Phil. 4.13. yea perſecution it ſelfe he maketh tolerable, and ioyfull; and (when our weakenes can ſee ſo  farre) the greateſt aduancement.
               If theſe gifts of God with other ſuch, doe not greatly honour the Lord in the congregation of the righteous, and if they which inioy them, being gratious and of high eſtimation, doe not moſt highly commend the giuer, which is God, where will men ſay, that God is honored at all? And ſo doth the Apoſtle require, that it ſhould be with Gods people:
                     1. Pet. 2.12. The peace and ioy of the godly. 
                  Haue your conuerſation honeſt among the Gentiles, that they which ſpeake euill of you as of euill doers, may glorifie your father which is in heauen. And yet I haue ſaid nothing of their peace of conſcience, which Salomon ſaith, is as continuall banquetting to them:
                  Prou. 15.15. Saint Paul ſaith, it paſſeth all vnderſtanding: euen in this one thing,Iohn. 14.27. Phil. 4.7. which the  vngodly (becauſe they haue not) they therefore know not (for the ſtranger is not partaker of the childrens ioy) know not (I meane) as it is felt and knowne of them which haue it:Prou. 14.10. In this one thing (I ſay) doth God get himſelfe great glorie: For they beleeuing in their hearts, they cannot chooſe but vtter with their mouthes, their deliuerances, and the wonderfull things that he hath done for them. And though they be for the moſt part contemptible in the world, yet is the meaneſt of them more happie,Pſal. 84.11. then the greateſt of the world.
               And if theſe things be well weighed, which haue been ſaid of this matter, it ſhall not be marueiled at, that the Prophet thus ſpeaketh in the Pſalme: 
                  Glorious things are ſpoken of thee, O thou citie of God! Yea glorious indeede,Pſal. 87.3. as we here inioy them (though we haue but a ſmall part of our glorie in this life) and ſo glorious, that if they could be ſeene with eye, they would ſo inflame men with the beautie of them, that they would force them to ſet all their loue vpon them. And thus by the graces, which are in the life of Gods ſeruants, and which are not to be found in other men, it may be ſeene, how God is honoured of them; the contrarie whereof, is done moſt apparently by the vngodly, as much as lyeth in them. Therefore to conclude this firſt reaſon, except we can like to ſee Gods name ill ſpoken of, his Goſpell lightly accounted of, and his perſon diſhonoured, and that by our ſelues (the  recompence whereof cannot be borne nor abidden of vs) let vs not onely come out from the vncleane conuerſation of the vnbeleeuers, but let vs ſo lay hold on eternall life, that we preſſe hard vnto the marke, for the price that is ſet before vs, and let the words of the wiſe be as goades to pricke vs forward,
                  Eccleſ. 12.11. out of our ſlouthfulnes; and as nailes to faſten vs ioyntly and cloſely to Chriſt our head without hypocriſie, that we faint not neither fall away, but grow vp vnto the perfect age of Chriſtians: that ſo we may giue good teſtimonie that God is truely honored

of vs, when our conuerſation ſhall be ſuch, as his word laieth foorth  to vs.
               
                  The ſecond reaſon.Another reaſon, why men ſhould with full reſolution addreſſe themſelues to paſſe the time of their dwelling here in reuerence and feare, is; becauſe it is the only eſtate wherein they can proſper, and be in ſafetie:The proſperitie and ſafetie of Gods ſeruants thereby. Heb. 12.28. 1. Pet. 1.17.
                   and when they are ſtripped of this heauenly robe, they are naked and expoſed to infinite falles, ſhamefull reproches, and dangers, out of the which they ſhall finde it no eaſie matter to deliuer, and free themſelues againe. For this, conſider what Salomon ſaith:Prou. 2.10. 
                  When wiſedome once entreth into thy heart, and knowledge delighteth thy ſoule, then ſhall vnderſtanding keepe thee, and counſell ſhall preſerue thee, from euery euill way, and from the ſtraunge woman, and from thoſe which leaue the way of righteouſnes,
                  
                  They which delight in Gods ſeruice, finde the ſweete benefit of it. Iob. 31.35. Pſal. 91.11.
                   
                  to walke in the waies of darknes. When a man ſetteth himſelfe to ſeeke the Lord, and is willingly weaned from vnlawfull liberties, and hath made it his paſtime to be well occupied, hee ſhall not feare the accuſations of his aduerſaries; for he hath made innocencie his defence: neither ſhall he fall iuſtly into the reproch that other doe. For why? he hath ſetled himſelfe againſt it: when thouſands ſhall fall on euery ſide, yet ſhall he ſtand, and not be remoued: Yea the longer hee is acquainted with this eſtate, the better hee ſhall like it (howſoeuer to the worldly man it be moſt irkeſome and vnſauourie) and be much grieued, when through naturall corruption and vntowardnes, hee ſhall feele and perceiue himſelfe to be any whit weakened or cooled.
               
               
                  They who haue experience, beſt know it.And how much ſuch an eſtate is to be deſired (as they can beſt tell which haue any time inioyed it, though ſuch as know it not, finde no want of it) it ſhall better appeare hereafter in place more conuenient, when I ſhall ſpeake of the priuiledges of true Chriſtians: yea and though he be drawne by his calling and neceſſarie occaſions, to affaires and dealings in the world, where no prouocations to breake off this courſe ſhall be wanting; and be occupied amongſt men of all ſorts, which ſhall be a ſtrong coard to draw him after them: yet ſhall he be the more eſtranged from them, and loathe them, by as much as they are differing from that vprightnes, which he hath purpoſed to walke in.Returne again. And if he be vnſetled or broken off at any time, yet ſhall he neuer  thinke himſelfe well, nor where he ſhould be: but as the bird which is wandring from her neſt, and as a ſtranger heauie in heart from his owne countrey, vntill he returne to his place againe.
               And if any ſhall thinke this little, and of ſmall account, which I haue ſpoken, and among the reſt, a man to liue vnrebukeable in the middeſt of a froward and filthie generation (for I reſerue to a further place, as I haue ſaid, to ſet down the manifold prerogatiues that accompanie ſuch a life) let ſuch compare it with the liues of thoſe,Theſe are free from many euils, which others fall into. which count it ouermuch ſtrictnes to looke carefully to their waies, and they ſhall finde it by infinite degrees worthie to be wiſhed and preferred: for what is there in the liues of ſuch men, as haue but  this world in poſſeſſion, to draw one to be in loue with it, who looketh for a better? I will not ſticke to goe further: that not onely common profeſſors of the Goſpell (who yet lie dead in their ſinne) may bee conſtrained to commend and reuerence them that haue attained to it, as knowing how infinitly they be bleſſed aboue themſelues: but euen ſuch alſo, as haue receiued ſome likelihood of grace from God, yet ſlenderly going about to nouriſh the ſame,

                   ſhall ſee many outſtrayings, and offences in their liues, which the other ſhall be diſcharged of.
               For it is not enough that we purpoſe no wickednes, nor euill,For want of arming many fall where 
                        〈◊〉
                      feared little. but we muſt be ſtrongly armed alwaies with full purpoſe againſt it; eſpecially that, whereto we be moſt prone, and wherein wee haue had by wofull trials, experience of our weaknes. For while we doe commit none, yet we make a way for it to enter into vs a freſh, while we become ſecure, and improuident.
                     1 Examples of this, Peter. Matth. 26.72.
                   This which I ſay, is manifeſtly to be ſeene in Peter, whō no man wil iudge ſo vncharitably of, that he came into the hall of the high Prieſt with any mind or purpoſe to denie his maſter: yet his ſleight regarding of his maſters ſo weightie admonition  & watchword a little before, that is (Sathan hath deſired to ſift you:) and that raſhnes of his, neither caſting with himſelfe, what daunger might riſe by occaſion of the place and perſons there (as Chriſtian wiſedome would haue moued him) neither weighing his owne weaknes, how eaſily he might bee ſnared, hauing no commaundement to be there: into what lamentable woe and bitter anguiſh did it bring him, by his fearefull denying and ſwearing that he knew him not?
               And can wee, in charitie, iudge any leſſe of the old Prophet that dwelt in Bethel, when he hearing of the man of God that came from Iuda,
                     1. King. 13.18. 2. The old Prophet of Bethel. to crie out againſt the Idolatrous Altar of Ieroboam, did curteouſly inuite him to his  houſe, as he ſaw his dutie did require: but being anſwered, that he was commanded to eate no bread in that place: at that word he began to ſtomack it, that he being a Prophet of God, ſhould not bee beleeued, and did haſtily replie vpon him againe, ſaying, that an Angell was ſent to him, who commaunded him to bring him into his houſe to eate: But the Scripture ſheweth vs that he lied. And the like example is that of Iuda the Patriarke,
                     3. Juda. who went out in the morning to his ſheepſhearers, thinking of no ſuch matter as fell out by the way;Gen. 38. but meeting with a woman in harlots apparell, hauing not ſtrongly armed himſelfe againſt all ſinne, agreed and lay with her.
               By all which it appeareth, that when men feare not their frailtie, and arme  not themſelues againſt the ſame, they come home men leſſe godly, then they went out: and for that they will take no warning from the Lord of the ſlipperie paths that they walke in here in the world, therefore they caſt themſelues into fearefull daunger. And what is more plainly prooued, then this by daily experience; that as God directeth vs, when we commit our ſelues to him;Prou. 3.6. Prou. 10.9. ſo when we willingly betake our ſelues from his gouernment, we run headlong into many and daungerous euils?
               And yet when I conſider the courſe of mens liues (and thoſe none of the worſt) how egarly and greedily euery one, for the moſt part, is giuen and ſet about his worldly buſines and commoditie, hauing little thought of heauenly  rules, in the meane while, to moderate him therein: this walking with God ſhall be thought ſo needleſſe a companion for them, yea and vnwelcome, that they would willingly haue their earthly troubles increaſed,Note. rather then that ye ſhould faſten vpon them ſuch a burthenſome yoke of commandements, as this is, to walke armed againſt euill. For if ye will force their thoughts with delectation to bee taken vp in fearing, and auoyding ſinne, and in labouring ſtill to bee better, this ſtrict chaining of them, is a taking

away of their whole comfort: for it is death to them, to goe about to bridle  their thoughts, and vnruly deſires: ſo that ye may perſwade them to any thing, ſaue that which ſhould be in them: and therefore is there ſo ſmall ſhewing forth of the light of the Goſpell in mens liues. Yet doe I nothing doubt, but where men of God doe faithfully (in the pitie they haue of their brethrens miſeries) ſhew them the way to this, by doctrine, and liuing, that ſome ſhall growe by little and little to a liking of it. But oh happie they, who haue choſen this way of Gods teſtimonies to walke in;
                  Hoſ. 14.6.7. 
                  for their ſoules ſhall be bound vp in the bundle of life, and they ſhall flouriſh as the plants, and growe as the Lily: and faſten their rootes as the trees of Lebanon. Their branches ſhall ſpread: and their beautie ſhall be as the Oliue tree, and their ſmell as Lebanon. And thus much of the ſecond  reaſon.
               
                  The third reaſon: for a godly life no exerciſe of religion without this can profit vs.And what ſhall we ſay further? for no exerciſe of religion, nor godly meanes of the beſt ſort can doe them any good, who will not reſolue themſelues to come to this faithfull practiſe of true religion and obedience to God his commaundements: nothing ſhall be found more true then this, if we will ſuffer it to come vnder triall. For to begin with the Scripture: What did all the priuiledges of the ſtifnecked Iewes profit them, the law, circumciſion,Pſalm. 147.19.20. the couenant, and ſacrifices? There were no greater prerogatiues to any people or nation vnder the ſunne: And they alſo did in the outward practiſe of religion,This is exemplified in the Iewes. ioyne with the beſt of their brethren, both in keeping the  appointed dayes, and places in the worſhipping of God, and alſo in being readie to offer their extraordinarie ſeruices to him, and that voluntarily: yet what ſaith the Scripture from their firſt comming out of Egypt both in the wildernes and afterward?1. Cor. 10.5. 
                  In many of them God had no delight, but ſlew them: Many thouſands of them at ſundrie times periſhed, for their falſe heartednes, that when they had bin deliuered out of their daungers, they did not cleaue faſt vnto the Lord, as in their afflictions, and anguiſhes they promiſed to doe; but ſtarted aſide like a broken bowe.
               And therefore, how doth the Lord take vp this complaint againſt them, Oh that there were an heart in them,
                  Deut. 5.29. 
                  that they would feare me and keepe all my commaundements  alwaies?
                  Pſal. 78.34. &c. And in the Pſalme: When he ſlew them, they ſought him, yea they turned and ſought God earely: they remembred that God was their ſtrength, and the moſt high God their redeemer: but they flattered him with their mouth, and diſſembled with their tongue: for their heart was not vpright with him, neither were they faithfull with him in his couenant. And after that he ſaith of other generations:Hoſ. 6.4. 
                  Oh Ephraim! how ſhall I entreate thee? Oh Iudah! what ſhall I doe vnto thee,
                  Pſalm. 81.13. 
                  which I haue not done? And againe: Oh that my people had hearkened vnto me! and that Iſrael had walked in my waies! I would ſoone haue humbled their enemies, and turned my hand againſt their aduerſaries.
               
               Thus we ſee becauſe they did not ſeeke him daily, in the vprightnes of  their hearts, all the helpes of religion did them no good, brought them no wiſedome, experience nor comfort: all which, on the contrarie, Gods faithful ſeruants inioy. For Dauid the man of God vttereth this ſweete ſpeech, and the like through the booke of Pſalmes: Thou haſt made me (O Lord) more wiſe then my teachers:
                  Pſal. 119.99. Pſal. 119.67. 
                  then mine elders, and men of experience, becauſe I haue kept thy commaundements: before I knew thee I went aſtray, but ſince, I haue brought my feete

                      into the way of thy teſtimonies. The religious women, of whom we reade in the Goſpell, after that they ſawe the power of the Scriptures,Luk. 8.2.3. and had their hearts humbled and meekned by the wiſdome of them, how did they growe in holy affections, & Chriſtian duties, painefully labouring to attaine more knowledge by hearing Ieſus his ſermons from day to day?
               For when the word is receiued into a good and honeſt heart, both it and all other holy exerciſes with it, become profitable to ſingular vſes.The contrary is to be ſeen in the godly. But where men propound not this, with themſelues, to be caſt into the mould of holy doctrine, and to be faſhioned after it in their liues, it is farre otherwiſe. For to ſay nothing of them who from the beginning of the weeke to the latter  end, aske not after God (ſo little ſauour they finde in the Scriptures, or ſweetenes in him) yet this is worthie our conſideration: that there are thouſands which come to Church and heare prayers and ſermons, who for all this, are neuer the better to themſelues; and the moſt of them doe more hurt to others by their offenſiue life, nothing faſhioning themſelues after the doctrine of faith and amendment. Of whoſe lamentable condition, what other cauſe can be ſhewed but this, that their hearts are hardened with the deceitfulnes of ſinne; ſo that they walke afterwards, in their olde wayes ſtill: and that they ſee no ſuch beautie in the truth, which ſhineth amongſt them that they will be ſubiect to it: though Chriſt raigneth onely by the power thereof in the  hearts of his? Iohn. 18.37.Rom. 1.19. For ſeeing they haue not beleeued and reuerenced that which they ſaw and knew, the Lord hath kept backe his grace from them, which he did not owe them, and ſo giuen them into Sathans hands to make them bondmen in euill at his pleaſure. The which people being not renued and changed in their mindes, and ſo brought to a louing and delighting in good things, their lippe-labour in their ſeruing of God, and time which they giue to it, commeth to nothing; neither commendeth them any whit to him; neither leaueth any fruite thereof to themſelues.
               And yet we muſt know, that there are others of the ſame companie, at the ſame time, and vſing the ſame meanes with much bleſſing of God vpon  their liues, who alſo declare, as I haue ſaid, that they haue effectually receiued into their hearts the heauenly doctrine, which hath ſounded amongſt them: for why? they haue ſet themſelues to ſeeke the Lord. By whoſe gaine in godlines the greater it is (as there is no compariſon betwixt all the pleaſures of the world and it) ſo much we may ſee the other to haue loſt. And is it not lamentable to ſee, that any ſhould take ſuch a courſe?All prayers, &c. loſt, yea worſe. that they ſhould beſtow all their prayers, confeſſion of ſinnes, and hearing of ſermons in vaine? I might more rightly ſay, to their iuſt condemnation in the day of the Lord: Men will not be made fooles in any thing ſauing in this: though fooliſhnes in all other things is not to be compared with this.
               
                   What man is there to be found, who being deepely in debt and greatly behinde hand, when he hath ſowen his field, will be contented to reape no fruite of it, or being in ſuit of law, wil lend his money to his aduerſary to hold plea againſt him? But ſuch men are amongſt vs (I ſay not) who take much paine to come to eternall life, and yet are well inough content to goe without it (For being louers of pleaſures more then louers of God,
                  2. Tim. 3.4. they knowe that they cannot haue it:) but as though the diuell were not ſtrong enough to accuſe,

and inchaunt them, they doe negligently, yea willingly offer him aduantage  by keeping in a bad courſe (though they know how to come out of it) or grow worſe and worſe to their ſpeedie confuſion.
               Or who is it, which being warned out of his houſe, yea and that in earneſt manner, will yet delay, and neglect to ſeeke and prouide for himſelfe, till he be caſt into the ſtreete?
               
                  Great woe by prophane life.But concerning the matter which I deale in, if mens prophane liues and ſlouthfulnes, driuing off their repentance from day to day, were but perpetuall beggery, and going about all the dayes of their liues from doore to doore, I would haue ſaid nothing (though it were pitifull to ſee any caſt themſelues into ſuch miſery:) but they ſell themſelues bondmen to hell without recouerie, and are as ſtubble before the Lords wrath, which is a fire to burne them, and therefore it requireth more earneſt calling vpon. The Lord commended the vniuſt ſteward, not for his particular act, but becauſe he had done wiſely: who,Luk. 16.3. when he had warning to be put out of his ſtewardſhip, he prouided elſewhere to be receiued. But ſuch warning will not preuaile, nor ſuch wiſdome faſten vpon theſe men, vntill, as they haue liued in pleaſure and libertie of the fleſh, they die in ſorrow and vtter bondage, and ſo receiuing a iuſt recompence of their liues, they finde, though too late, how true this is, which I ſay.
               And if this be the eſtate of many, who yet doe commonly reſort to heare Gods word, who wil reade at home, yea and haue praiers in their houſes, (for  this I am ſure many of our countrie do; whoſe caſe yet, becauſe I know, I doe heartily bewaile,What ſhall be the ſtate of ſuch as heare not Gods word. for that the Chriſtian life is not for all this, aimed at, almoſt, in many of their actions) good Lord, what ſhall the eſtate of others be, who come as farre behinde them,Note. as they doe behinde the beſt of Gods ſeruants? euen thoſe others (I ſay) who being the greateſt part of the people, are not troubled with any thought of God or diuell, heauen or hell, throughout the weeke? but hauing their heads filled, and their time continually taken vp in matters of the world, and in hearing and telling newes and tales (yet many of them nothing concerning themſelues) and leauing their callings, doe buſie themſelues with other mens matters needleſly, and ſpend many dayes  in the weeke in idlenes, prating, vaine games, and paſtimes, and cannot finde one houre in it to bethinke themſelues of any account giuing to their heauenly Lord and maiſter (though to that very end they are ſet here) that once yet at laſt they might begin to returne vnto him.
               But I haue taried longer about this matter then I meant: Therefore leauing them who trouble not themſelues greatly with godly exerciſes, I will returne to ſuch, who are in profeſſion, and in ſhew farre before them; and yet becauſe they doe not hartily and faithfully ſeeke to be bettered (I meane) to be ſetled in a Chriſtian life, doe therefore reape no good by the meanes which they vſe. But ſome perhaps may thinke ſome hardnes in this ſpeech, and may obiect thus:Obiect. you diſcourage vs. doe wee not therefore repaire to the word and vſe good meanes, to the end we may become faithfull and vpright, and get good by them? and haue not they, who haue moſt profited in godlines attained vnto it hereby? why then doe ye affirme (they ſay) and that to the diſcouragement of many, that if our hearts be not reformed, the meanes doe vs no good?
               
                  
                   I anſwere,Anſwere. that it is farre from my meaning to raiſe the leaſt diſcouragement to any; in whom, if I knew but the ſmalleſt deſire to be reconciled to God, I would be moſt readie to cheriſh and to ſtrengthen the ſame:The leaſt deſire of good
                        •
                     es in men, is to be cheriſhed. and he that exerciſeth himſelfe in reading, hearing, prayer, God perſwade him ten fold more, if he deſire to profit thereby: neither doe I doubt,Note. but that ſuch ſhall ſee in time to their great comfort, that it is not in vaine to waite patiently on the Lord, for a bleſſing vpon his own ordinance. But this I ſay, when men either thinke, that they doe as much as they neede, while they ioyne themſelues to the exerciſes of religion, and reſt contented therein, and ſee not that they are enemies to God, vnder his curſe, and without faith, and therfore without God  in the world, and ſee not their wants and emptines of grace, how they are fraught with many ſinnes vncontrolled, and ſtrong rebellions not reſtrained; let not ſuch looke to glorie in their meanes vſing: their reioycing is not good, their eſtate is wofull, and that in no meane degree. They may be ſaid vnto, as they of Laodicea were in the Reuelation by the holy Ghoſt:Reu. 3.1
                        •
                     . 
                  Thou ſaiſt thou art rich and needeſt nothing, and knoweſt not, that thou art miſerable and blinde, and poore, and naked: I counſell thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, and eyeſalue?
               
               And marueile not, that I haue ſaid, that ſuch, whoſe hearts are not purged by faith, receiue no profit by the exerciſes of religion, as might further be ſhewed  by many more examples of Capernaum, Corazin and Bethſaida: For euen the deare children of God, when they waxe wanton againſt the Lord,
                  Gods children growing careles loſe the fruit of good exerciſes. Pſal. 89 31.
                   and grow ſlouthfull in performing their duties to God, or doe them in a ſleighter manner, then they ſometime had done: as he puniſheth their tranſgreſſions other waies; ſo doth hee this one way chaſtiſe them, that they ſhall feele no ſweetnes, nor finde no ſauour in the beſt things they ſhall doe, or exerciſes of religion which they ſhall goe about.
               And this it is, that we heare many, euen good people complaine of, that they cannot profit at a Sermon, their hearts are rouing elſewhere all the time (almoſt) of prayer; reading is irkeſome to them, and they withdraw themſelues  euen from good companie: All which with meditating about their eſtate, were wont to bee the things wherein they tooke greateſt delight and comfort: what is the cauſe (thinke wee) that they are now become ſo contrarily minded? Surely this;Note. they haue waxen wearie of their reuerent attending vpon God (as all good things doth the fleſh ſoone turne into wearines) and begin after the manner of men, with whom they liue, to ſeeke their vnlawful libertie ſome way, not being circumſpect enough about ye keeping of the beſt things, in price and eſtimation: and when the Lord ſeeth this, hee taketh from them the priuiledges which they enioyed before; he dimmeth the light of their mindes, that they ſee not ſo cleerely; and ſhutteth vp their  hearts, that they delight not in the matters which were wont to be of greateſt account and reckoning with them.
               With what ioy (may it be thought) did Dauid performe the duties of religion after his hainous ſinne in the matter of Bethſhabe and Vriah? when it is cleere that he ſlept in it (as it were) all the time before Nathan the Prophet was ſent to awake him, and bring him to repentance. Or what comfort (is it to be thought) had Ionas in thinking of his happines, or vpon any part of the

true worſhip of God, which yet had vſually been his whole delight, after he  fled away from the preſence of the Lord? who labouring to forget his ſinne, (as may be gathered by his haſtie paying the hire of the Ship-maſter before hand, that he might be ſure to be caried away frō the fulfilling of the Lords commaundement) ſuch a palpable blockiſhnes was caſt vpon him, that hee laid himſelfe downe to ſleepe in moſt great daunger,Ionas 1.5.6.7. in which the Heathen marriners fell to prayer, and came to him to awake him: and after, being vrged to examine himſelfe by them, did not very haſtily come to the confeſſing of it.
               To omit others, the daily experience that Gods children haue of their many complainings, vnquietneſſes, diſcomforts, & ſuch like tediouſnes (which neede not to preſſe them, but for the conſcience and remembrance of ſome  treacherie againſt God, and too vnkind and vndutifull dealing with him) do ſufficiently prooue, that God taketh away euen the heart and life (as I may ſay) of prayer, knowledge, and other meanes of religion, and leaueth his children without comfort in the vſe of them, when they waxe wanton againſt his maieſtie, and keep not holie compaſſe, as they haue experience, that both they may and haue done, and as he in his word hath taught them to doe. By all which it may appeare, that much more they who worſhip him with vncleane hearts neuer waſhed nor purged,Tit. 1.15. cannot receiue into them the ſweet and holeſome liquour of his grace, by what outward exerciſe ſoeuer they preſent themſelues before him. Thus much of the reaſons, why the beleeuer  ſhould labour with all diligence to practiſe this godly life.
            
            
               CHAP. 19. Of anſwers to certaine obiections brought againſt the neceſsitie of practiſing this godly life.
               
                  ANd now that I haue added theſe reaſons to the deſcription of the Chriſtian, which beleeueth in God, I would ceaſe to ſay any more of this matter, if I did think, that men, who  haue receiued the Goſpell among them, were perſwaded and reſolued to yeeld to this doctrine, and to caſt away all clogges and cloakes of ſhame, feare, and other lets, and heartily goe about to practiſe the ſame willingly, when they haue heard it: But I know there are few ſuch.This ſtreight courſe not eaſily yeelded to. Act. 26.28.
                   For they who doe thus, doe not onely themſelues walke after the rule which I haue ſet downe, aiming thereat, as at a marke, but alſo deſire that many other were as they be.
               But the multitude of ſuch, as haue either no faith, nor grace, but onely heare our doctrine, who yet profeſſe that they looke for ſaluation by Chriſt, doe thinke, that this which I haue drawne out of Gods word, and ſet down  for their edifying, is more then they neede to looke after, or trouble themſelues with: which kinde of perſons ſeeing they ſwarme euery where, I doe oft ſay and profeſſe, that I oppoſe my ſelfe throughout this my booke againſt that their damnable opinion and practiſe, and doe bend the force of Scripture and ſound reaſon againſt them. For while theſe thoughts preuaile with them and poſſeſſe them, they do but reaſon againſt their owne benefit, comfort

                   and happines: yea, and euen many of thoſe, who haue further taſted of the Goſpell, of whom it becommeth vs to hope well; yet are for the moſt part, ignorant of the courſe, which I haue deſcribed, and content themſelues with this, that they haue ſome good affections at ſome times and flitting deſires to liue honeſtly.
               And therefore, I would meete with ſome of the obiections, which they alleage, why they ſhould be no further dealt withall, but ſuffered to goe on as they doe in a fruitles, dead and dull manner. Some of theſe ſay,Firſt obiection, againſt the godly life: this life cannot be led. they hope their deſire is to pleaſe God, although they cannot doe it as ſome doe: and namely, ſuch as endeuour to follow this doctrine which in this booke I propound.  For my part, I doe not marueile, that they ſhould as it were ſhrinke and hold backe from ſuch a courſe, though they would ſeeme religious, as hauing not yet ſeene how great incouragement God hath giuen them to walk in it; neither what great cauſe they haue to lay hold of ſuch incouragements, hauing many things to hinder them. Theſe perſons therefore, ſo many of them as will be teachable, and not reſiſt the truth wilfully, I will anſwere; and giue them ſome worthie examples of ſuch as haue gone before them herein: that they may not thinke, they are preſſed too farre, and to do more then they need (if poſſibly they may ſee their error, and ſo finde greater libertie and delight in well doing.) The which being done, they ſhall ſee  what difference is betwixt the eſtate they are in, and that which they are ſtirred vp and called vnto.
               And that which hath perſwaded and moued me to this, is, (as I partly ſaid in the firſt entrance) for that I ſee many of good hope, and ſome not without a right and true beginning in this holie courſe, to bee kept at a ſtay,Many long kept at a ſtay. or driuen backe, and ſeeme not to know what the Chriſtian life is, nor in many yeeres to come thus farre, as to be perſwaded how pleaſant and profitable it is, and by how many degrees to bee preferred without all compariſon, before any other courſe. For many of the forwarder ſort, though they would not willingly forſake it, yet complaine, that they find much tedious heauines, ſtrong  diſcouragements, and many relapſes which breed doubtfulnes and feare.Complaine of much tediouſnes. Some which are weaker, are vnder deadly dumpes, ſtrange queſtionings, whether they ſhall goe forward or no,Doubt of going forward. and ſuch ſmall comfort they finde in their profeſſion, that they declare plainly, that they are farre from the ſtaiednes which I ſpeake of: and this not at the firſt onely, but many yeeres after they haue liked well of the Goſpell.
               Diuers others account the Chriſtian life, mopiſh, ſolitarie,Obiection. Chriſtian life mopiſh. and ſuch an eſtate, the which they hold great wiſedome to auoyde; that I ſay nothing of the Atheiſts, whom I vouchſafe no anſwere. Now therefore except theſe can be otherwiſe perſwaded, that the godly life is neither irkeſome in it ſelfe,  nor full of deadly diſcouragements, except, to the fleſh,Rom. 8.12. 
                  whereto they are not debters, neither without great comfort; yea euen in tribulation (through hope which deceiueth not) but ſuch an eſtate,Rom. 12.12. as hath cauſed many for the delight they haue found in it, to refuſe all other, which could not ſtand with it: except (I ſay) they can be thus perſwaded, what likelyhoode is there,Phil. 3.8. that they ſhall euer be brought to be acquainted with it?
               For anſwere to all, let ſuch vnderſtand and know, that this Chriſtian life

is not to be peeced vp with ſome good actions in the which we may reſt,Chriſtian life is not in ſome good actions. Mark. 6.19.
                  
                   neither conſiſteth of good intents, and in chopping and changing our courſe from good to euill, and contrarily: but it is the ſame which I haue ſaid, euen the keeping of our hearts ſincere and vpright, and vnfainedly bent to walke with the Lord after all his commaundements throughout our whole courſe, according to our knowledge: and that in ſuch wiſe, and with ſuch delight, that he who hath experience of it, would not change it for any other: for why? it yeeldeth an hundreth fold for one in all carnall liberties or delights, which we forſake.
               And that it muſt be thus with the people of God, and may poſſibly be alſo, that of the Prophet doth plainely declare, that the man which may reioyce  and ſpeake of his eſtate with comfort indeede, is he which doth not by fittes and at ſome odde times,Pſal. 119.97.98. lift vp his heart to God: but who doth ſo loue his law, that he meditateth in the ſame all the day long, as he himſelfe did, meaning this, that his thoughts ſhould leade him to God from time to time; and when they are occupied about euill, or ranging in the world vnprofitabile and amiſſe, that he ſhould by and by without dallying, or delay, call them backe againe. And what (thinke we) doth he meane in another place, when not ſpeaking particularly of himſelfe, but generally of all which are the Lords,Pſalm. 1.2. Pſalm. 119.9. he ſaith? The bleſſed man doth exerciſe himſelfe day and night in this, that he may pleaſe God (as his word directeth him) and haue peace thereby  with him, and ſo may teſtifie, that God is his treaſure, becauſe his heart and loue is ſet vpon his commaundements. He doth not meane that we, who will be happie, muſt be occupied in prayer, hearing or reading onely both day and night; neither yet doth he meane, that in ſome pange, or when we thinke good, we ſhould be occupied thus, and well affected, and haue our liues well framed: but this he meaneth, that he, who is godly and happie indeede, indeuoureth to this, that his minde may delight in, and be poſſeſſed of good matters, or rightly vſing lawfull: or carefully reſiſting thoſe which are ſinfull.
               
                  Phil. 3.20.And it is the ſame, which the Apoſtle ment when he ſaid, our conuerſation  is in heauen, though we are on earth: teaching therein himſelfe and all other Chriſtians, that their whole courſe (ſo farre as mans frailtie would permit) (and how farre it may permit, let this treatiſe out of Gods word teſtifie) ought to be a ſetled and conſtant carrying of themſelues (as I ſaid before) throughout their liues in ſuch ſort, as they might ſhew and approue themſelues to be men of God.Examples of godly men. If we deſire to ſee examples of theſe things, the Scripture ſetteth out many vnto vs: and namely the life of our father Enoch, that in his time,
                     Enoch. Geneſ. 5.24. which ſoone after the creation of the world was corrupted, he did yet walke with the Lord: as if it ſhould ſay, he did ſo liue in the world amongſt men, that he had yet, through his life, an heauenly and moſt happie  communion with God.
               
                  
                     Abraham. Geneſ. 12.7.
                  Abraham, though he be not exempted from infirmities, yet from the firſt time of his calling vnto his death, what a rare paterne did he ſet before the eyes of men in his example, of a man conſecrated to God, and not earthly minded? For whereſoeuer he came, he ſet vp an altar vnto the Lord: declaring thereby, that no change of place, time, or companie, could withholde

                   him from following the Lord, but as the firſt left countrie and kindred at his commaundement, when he knew not as yet whither he ſhould goe, or what ſhould become of him: So when he had leaſure after to returne,
                  Heb. 11.15. 
                  yet he refuſed; becauſe he ſought a better countrie, namely, heauenly, witneſſing ſtill more and more, that his obedience was ſound and faithfull,Geneſ. 12.4. Compared with Gen. 25.27. by looking to another inheritance, vntill an hundred yeares were fully complete in an holy courſe.
               And of Iob, how cleerely doth the holy Ghoſt witnes this,Iob. 1.1. whereof I ſpeake? In ſomuch, that he not onely withdrew himſelfe, and departed from the corrupt examples of the people of his time, but alſo had a particular regard  of the actions of his life, both towards God and men:Iob. 31. all. For proofe whereof, his ſtrong faith with patience, prayers and ſacrifices doe teſtifie the one: his iuſt dealing with all men, and mercifulnes to the poore, with rare wiſedome in gouerning his owne family and in carrying himſelfe toward all, doe ſhew moſt cleerely the other: All which were not at times, but vſually and ordinarily performed, and through his courſe of life looked vnto and continued.
               And yet another thing I muſt needes adde (as I am perſwaded) very admirable:Iob. 3.25. that he did vſe to acquaint himſelfe in the middeſt of his proſperitie with the looking for a change, and did learne in his greateſt abundance to want:  and being in ſo high a place, yet he was not puffed vp;Iob forgoing his goods without any great griefe did inioy them when he had them, without any great loue. Therefore loue thou the world little while thou haſt it, ſo thou ſhalt loſe little when thou forgoeſt it. becauſe he conſidered how fleeting and momentany all things were: and that his proſperitie was lent him onely for a ſhort time, and was not a patrimonie or inheritance to him for euer: So that when he was afterward tried with loſſe of all (which was exceeding much) it might appeere, that he was but little moued with it, becauſe he had loued it but a little, when he did inioy it: The which gratious man thus vſing the world, as hath been ſaid, holding all ſo ſtrangerlike, while he had it, and ſo willingly foregoing it, when God would require it, how could he doe it, without a diligent looking to his wayes, and the directing of the thoughts of his heart in a very particular manner, and that in and  about worldly goods, in which caſe men thinke no bounds ſhould be preſcribed them.Note.
               
               As for Moſes, although it was a rare grace,
                     Moſes. Heb. 11.24. when he was of full and ripe yeares, to refuſe to be maintained as the ſonne of Pharaohs daughter, and to inioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon; yet it is more marueilous, how in example he went before the reſt, in the things which God required: and ſhining daily more and more, as the Sunne till the noone tide; not weary of his ſeruice, as many are, but liking better of it, the longer experience he had of it: ſo that there was no good being elſewhere to him: and ſo accompliſhed eightie yeares in that righteous and holy courſe.
               
                   As for Dauids practiſe, beſides the Lords commendation of him,
                     Dauid. Act. 7.46. 
                  that he was a man after his owne minde: ſo that we may ſee more particularly, how he paſſed his time, that one place of his Pſalmes doth cleerely ſhew,Pſal. 119.10. where he ſaith: This is the courſe of my life, after the which I frame my ſelfe, as the bleſſed of the Lord alſo doe: with my whole heart I ſeeke thee, O Lord, as thy word teacheth me: the which ſo farre as I haue receiued, I lay it vp, and hide it in my heart, as treaſure: and ſo farre as I doe not vnderſtand it, I deſire to be further taught of thee: I vſe to ſpeake

of thy wonderous workes, and of thy wiſedome: I take more pleaſure in thy teſtimonies, then in all manner of riches: and I daily meditate and muſe thereon. By theſe, with many other ſuch properties of a godly man mentioned in the ſame Pſalme, we may conclude without doubting, that a minde thus exerciſed was not voyde of a life full of anſwerable fruites:Pſal. 55.17. And three times a day he did vſe to refort to God ordinarily in prayer and thankſgiuing, after a ſolemne manner,1. King. 15.6. beſides other occaſions oft moouing him: that ſaue onely in that one matter of Vriah the Hittite, we ſeldome reade of a man more taken vp of an heauenly heart, then he was.
               I make mention of theſe holy ſeruants of God, the more particularly ſetting downe their courſe of liuing, their properties, and their whole eſtate, rather then ſome of their actions and holy works, to this end; That they, who loue to haue ſhort worke made of this matter, and content themſelues with this, as a ſufficient warrant of godlines, if they can reckon vp ſome commendable workes in their liues (whereas the baddeſt haue ſomewhat in them that is commendable) may not iudge ſo of a godly life, deceiuing themſelues: but may make it their whole conuerſation to be godly, not fauouring themſelues in any knowne ſinnes, or actions doubted of to be ſinnes, but ſifting themſelues daily,
                  Lam. 3.40. 
                  to ſearch and finde them out: neither withholding themſelues from new duties, which they haue not been wont to practiſe, but teachable and readie to heare, whatſoeuer the Lord hath to require of them. And my meaning is, that after we haue made an entrance into a godly life, we ſhould not hold on by fittes, now and then (as I ſaid) and be off and on, as many are: but conſtantly goe forward, as our yeeres growe vpon vs, and carefully to indeuour, that in one thing as well as in an other, we may pleaſe God in reuerence, and in feare.
               Neither is it my purpoſe in all this, to perſwade, that beleeuers muſt haue ſome godlines (for that muſt be attained to,We muſt grow. alreadie; of all ſuch as I direct my ſpeech to) neither that they ſhould reſt in that which they haue: but looke vpon ſuch to follow them, who in the Scriptures are ſet before them, as the forwardeſt Chriſtians,Phil. 3.13. and holieſt examples: So that they acquainting  themſelues ſtill with their owne wants, weakneſſes, and corruptions, which they beare about them, may daily gather ſtrength againſt them, and proſper as the Lords plants, in euery part of their life to become fruitfull.
               So ſhall they know by experience what this meaneth, which I ſpeake of, namely, to walke with God continually, and after a certaine manner (although wandering on the earth,Double benefit of Chriſts death. wrapped in with infirmities) to haue their conuerſation in heauen with him. And ſo ſhall they more cleerely and fully behold the benefit of Chriſts death; that it was not onely to ſaue them from eternall death, and to bring them to euerlaſting life; but alſo to worke the death of ſinne our moſt deadly enemie, and to mortifie it, and to purchaſe  for them a comfortable paſſage thither alſo, through the inioying of many goodly bleſſings in this life, as pledges of the ſame, though it be otherwiſe but a vale of miſerie, to all ſuch as finde not this for their portion. For this is to be knowne, that as euery one excelleth another in the graces of the ſpirit, thereafter is his meaſure greater in the priuiledges of a Chriſtian, more then others, and with more ſound and continuall comfort doth he paſſe his

                   daies, and free his life from reprochfull and fearefull euils. And the more that any godly man increaſeth in goodnes, and goeth beyond that eſtate, wherein he hath ſometime been, in knowledge and in an high eſteeming of it, and the right vſe of the ſame; the more ſhall his life be filled with matter of ſound and pure reioycing.
               Therefore to conclude this matter: ſeeing the godly and Chriſtian courſe of liuing is not a ſeruing of God when we thinke good, but from time to time; nor a looking to ſome of our actions, when others are not regarded; nor an eſtate vnpleaſant to the ſpirituall man, whom the holy Ghoſt directeth, but eaſie, ſweete, and comfortable; ſeeing alſo we haue heard by many  examples of godly men (otherwiſe not without their infirmities any more then we) that this life hath been practiſed in al ages: I conclude,The elect muſt take vp this yoke. that the elect and beloued of the Lord ſhall yeeld to the imbracing of it, and muſt take vp the ſame, though it be a yoke to the corrupt luſts not yet ſubdued: and that ſuch as ſee not cauſe to ſubmit themſelues to Gods commandements one as well as another, but will take their libertie in ſome euill, after the deſire of their hearts, cannot glorie with any ſound peace of a godly life.
               And conſequently, that the life of the common Proteſtant,Life of the common Proteſtant no godly life. which counteth it preciſenes to be abridged of any libertie that he hath been wont to vſe, or yet liketh to inioy (how vnlawful or offenſiue ſoeuer it be) is nothing leſſe  then a godly and Chriſtian life: for ſuch a one will come to the light,
                  Ioh. 3.21. that whatſoeuer is not as it ought to be, may be made knowne, and ſo remoued. But he that will not be touched, nor ſuffer his actions to be cenſured, nor reprooued, though he be farre from this practiſe, but pleaſeth himſelfe in the things which he doth, is (without all queſtion) fraught and filled with infinit euils, and a bondman to his own luſts, whatſoeuer opinion he hath of himſelfe, and let ſuch a one know, that his damnation ſleepeth not. But many of theſe with whō I haue to deale, ſuch as goe for good Chriſtians,Another obiection against this godly life. and who in ſundrie of their doings are of vs well to be liked (though God iudgeth the heart) many ſuch (I ſay) doe keepe at a ſtay, or content themſelues with this, that they doe no great  euill (although they doe little good) becauſe they ſee few liue better,Obiect. 2.
                   by whom they might take any great light to amend. To ſpeake plainly,None now liue ſo. they thinke there are none in theſe daies, who doe follow the ſteps of the holy fathers, whoſe liues I commend: which kind of perſons may be eaſily conuinced, and I will ſay no more, then I needes muſt. The truth is, that the generall ſtate of thoſe men, who imbrace the Goſpell, is much to be bewailed. For although they are infinitly the worſe, by reaſon of the ſwarmes of Atheiſts, Papiſts, Familiſts, and others, both Heretikes and Machiuilians, which with their ſtinking breath doe poyſon many thouſand inhabitants, which dwell in the land amongſt them: yet beſides this, the abomination is great without  reſpect of them; through ignorance, little reuerence to the word, cuſtome in euill, and ſleight executing of ſundrie good lawes among vs: but this ought to be no offence to any. For who would looke for any other then loathſome life in the greateſt number, as it hath alwaies been? Chriſt himſelf affirming, that his flocke is but ſmall, Luk. 12.32.
               But notwithſtanding this, in ſome places, and thoſe many, throughout her Maieſties dominions, where the Goſpell hath been ſoundly preached

and painfully,Many good lights amongst vs. eſpecially in an ordinarie miniſterie continued: ſuch particular  parts of this Realme will teſtifie, that there haue been, and are many, not of the Miniſterie onely, but of the people alſo, who haue been lights vnto thoſe which haue knowne them, and liued amongſt them, and whoſe names haue ſounded, and that moſt iuſtly, a farre off, where they themſelues haue neuer come: My ſelfe haue knowne many, and yet doe (the Lord multiplie the number of them, and the grace which he hath giuen them, a thouſand fold,The communion of Saints the ſweeteſt life. and be highly praiſed for them) with whom to haue liued, and bin conuerſant, hath bin the next choice vnto heauen it ſelfe, and to the communion of Gods Saints there, which ſome of them doe alreadie inioy.
               Their names I ſpare for ſundrie cauſes; but ſuch they were, whiles they  here remained, and ſuch they are, of whom I ſpeak, who yet remaine (though I know but few of thoſe many (I hope) whom God hath beautified his Church withall) as may iuſtly take away this offence from any, who ſhould thinke that wee haue none which may be paterns and lights to others of this Chriſtian, innocent, and fruitfull life: yea rather, it may perſwade them that there are many ſuch, as by good and long experience can teſtifie, that which is elſewhere written,Pſal. 19.12. 
                  that in ſeruing God there is great reward, and that godlines receiueth many bleſsings,
                  1. Tim. 6.6. 
                  as the fruites of Gods promiſes, euen in this life.
               
               And they do not as many, that is, giue ouer and faint, as though the Chriſtian life grew weariſome and tedious to them; but the longer they haue continued  therein, ſo much the more ſetled and conſtant they haue been in the ſame, increaſing daily in faith, and other graces, and hold on their fellowſhip ſince they knew firſt the power of the Goſpell:
                  Phil. 1.5. Yea many there are at this day (to Gods glorie be it ſpoken) who haue ſo effectually tasted how good and ſweete the Lord is, that they haue been incouraged to adde to the times, and to their trauaile in the ſeruice of God, as prayer, reading, for one houre in the weeke many, and for a little labour in looking to their waies,A vvorthie grovving. watching their hearts, and ſearching out their ſinnes, much and oft: for the profit which they haue found thereby.
               
                  Chriſtians must grovv from their firſt vntowardnes in Gods ſeruice.And whereas they haue ſometime gone about theſe ſpirituall duties vntowardly, whiles their mindes (though renued) were weakely ſeaſoned with grace: yet after they haue with much cheerefulnes and delight gone about the ſame, when they haue had more acquaintance with the chriſtian courſe. The remembring of the houres of holie aſſemblies by keeping holie day on the Lords Sabboths in the word and prayer, and other priuate houres of calling on God, and reading of his word, how pleaſant and ſweete is it vnto them,Their grovvth muſt be ſeene in duties to men, as well as to God. before they come to it? And yet if they ſhould reſt in theſe, I would not thinke them worthie ſo great commendation, not adioyning therewith other duties to men. But when they haue found ſuch delight in the former worſhipping of God, they haue alſo walked more roundly and fruitfully in  their particular callings, in their families and other companies, and their wordly matters (in which moſt men doe highly offend God, and think they may deale in them as they thinke good) they carefully endeuour to be directed in them by ſuch rules, as his word teacheth them. And ſuch as theſe are, God hath ſet amongſt others, that they may learne of them, and be ſhadowed as it were,Matth. 13.32. vnder the wings of their good example.
               
                  
                   And this is the paterne of the life which God would haue vs to leade, from the which the whole world well nigh are ſtrangers, though little to their reioycing; and principally they, who ſcornefully refuſe all ſuch inſtructions, as require more then they doe, or be willing to practiſe. Indeed it muſt be granted, that theſe being few in reſpect of them, who ſet themſelues to vphold the corrupt eſtate that the world hath euer lien in: they haue not therefore many to commend their good examples, as the other haue; but rather are ill ſpoken of, becauſe they will not follow the ſame exceſſe of riot that others doe, 1. Pet. 4.4. and eſpecially where they dwell: for the diuell enuieth their credit and good report. And yet the worſt in their controuerſies and needs,  when they are driuen to truſt ſome, will ſooneſt chooſe them to be comprimitters for them, as knowing them to be men of good and vpright conſciences, rather then others: as wee reade Saul did ſo account of Dauid (when he ſpake according to ſound reaſon) and made him ſweare to him, that he would be kind and friendly to his posteritie after him, 1. Sam. 24.22. And ſuch honour haue the Lords people.
               
               And therefore to turne a little to theſe obiectors, let them not thinke that our age affoordeth none, which are fit to be examples to them;What vſe of ſuch lights muſt be made. Prou. 14.6. Pſal. 16.3.
                   but let them rather be wiſe to diſcerne them (at leaſt, that which is pleaſing to God in them) which is not hard to ſee, for thoſe which are willing to vnderſtand, but  eaſie to be found out of ſuch as deſire it. Let them reuerence, and be in loue with ſuch as excell in pietie and vertue; and with the pretious things which are in ſuch: let them aime at this alſo, that they may bee like them, and not lie ſtill in the darknes, to the which they are accuſtomed. And ſuch of them, as God hath bleſſed with ſome better liking of knowledge, let them loue and frequent the companie of ſuch as deſire neither to be idle, nor vnprofitable, ſeeing he hath ſet ſuch amongſt them, to farre more great and ſingular purpoſes, then they can by carnall eyes ſee or diſcerne. Let them labour to ſee their owne wants, cauſe them to make much of thoſe who may helpe to ſupplie them, and of whom they may learne to come by thoſe graces, which they ſhould without  the helpe of ſuch, neuer haue attained vnto.
               And if they carrie themſelues in ſuch humilitie, and reuerent account making of their betters, in whom there is a greater meaſure of Gods gifts, they ſhalbe no longer led with their former doubts, whether any are before them in the Chriſtian life, but they ſhall praiſe God highly for ſetting ſuch lights and examples before their eyes, by whom they may be directed: and when they are ſo farre inlightened, they ſhall ſoone alter their language, and ſpeake with new tongues: as they in the Acts (chap. 2.13. compared with 2.37.) who in their prophanenes, railed on the Apoſtles, and ſaid, they were drunken with new wine, in the fore part of the day: but being conuerted by Peters Sermon, they  had learned to come in humilitie to them with the reuerend titles of men and brethren, asking counſell of them, whom they had ſo abuſed, rather then of any other; what they ſhould doe to be ſaued. And this for anſwere to the ſecond obiection.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 20. The laſt obiection againſt the godly life anſwered.
               
                  THere is yet another obiection, that I will anſwere, and it might be a great weakning of the holie courage of the ſeruants of God, if they ſhould not be well fenced againſt it. And this it is:The third obiection: againſt the godly life. Seeing we teach publikely the ſame, which I haue before ſet downe of the eſtate of the godly, and profeſſe without feare, that thus the people of God muſt  walke, and wee affirme that Gods is not pleaſed with this darke and dead life, which is led by mens good intents, without any certaine rule to guide them, much leſſe with that which is contrarie to godlines, diuers take great offence hereat, and ariſe vp againſt vs in this manner, ſaying: Ye goe too farre, and bragge of that which is not in you: and againe, remember how many haue fallen, which were more like to haue ſtood then you, as Dauid, Peter, and others. It is therefore good (ſay they) for all men to profeſſe no more then others doe, that there may bee no great wondring, when any great treſpaſſe ſhall be committed by them. To which kind of men, for the better ſetling and quieting of Gods weake children, I anſwere.
               
               
                  Anſwere.By the grace of God, bragging is farre off from vs, as wee alſo heartily deſire it may be:1. Pet. 1.17. & 4.1. neither doe we goe too farre, his word being our warrant. But wee are not afraid to vtter that which wee know; nay wee dare not doe otherwiſe, though it be againſt our ſelues, as much as others, if wee ſhall ſet light by it at any time: neither feare we, that ſhamefull falles, ſhall any thing the ſooner take hold of vs, for ſpeaking the truth boldly, but remoued more farre from vs,Prou. 19.23. whiles we are nothing more afraid, then to offend thereby. And if either our pride or boldnes ſhould breake out ſo farre, as that it ſhould cauſe the Lord to chaſtiſe vs,Bitter fruit of declining. or that wee ſhould be ſo careles, and improuident ouer our ſelues, that Sathan ſhould againe bewitch vs with the deceitfulnes of ſin, we looke for none other,Mich. 7.7. but to beare our burthen of an vnquiet minde, and the reproch due to vs thereby, and our puniſhment, which ſhall befall vs, becauſe of our offence:VVe ſhall recouer. but though we ſhould ſo be ouertaken, yet ſhall we riſe againe: and though many of vs ſhould fall from our ſtedfaſtnes; yet for all that, this is true, namely, that God will haue the holie and Chriſtian life, which I haue ſet downe, practiſed of others: and howſoeuer wee ſhould be turned out of the way for a ſeaſon, and whatſoeuer might become of vs; yet he that is able of ſtones to raiſe vp children to feare him, will prouide true worſhippers of him, whatſoeuer become of vs: and the truth of God remaineth, that ſuch as will be worſhippers of him,2. Tim. 2.19. Fall of Dauid.
                   
                  muſt depart from iniquitie.
                  
               
               As for Dauid, by the great wiſedome and goodnes of God, his fall was a glaſſe to behold Gods mercie in, not to imbolden any to ſinne thereby: and that like treſpaſſers who poſſibly might deſpaire,1. Tim. 1.16. ſhould not caſt away hope of forgiuenes. The ſinne it ſelfe aroſe from the nouriſhing, and giuing place ſecretly to his heart in ſuch vnlawfull deſires (as by his eyes were occaſioned) ſuch as in this treatiſe I labour to call men from; as appeareth by his owne

                   confeſſion in the Pſalme, where hee ſaith: Againſt thee, O Lord,
                  Pſal. 51.4. 
                  againſt thee haue I done this euill: as if he ſhould haue ſaid, though my offence be horrible before men, yet from hence it came, ſeeing I feared not before God ſecretly, whiles yet the offence came not foorth openly. And this I ſay, that we may learne to beware of inward temptations, and outward occaſions of ſinne, and boldly profeſſe to doe both.
               And thus I hauing anſwered this doubt of Dauid, that no wiſe bodie need to take hurt by it: yet becauſe I know how ſome doe draw ſuch examples to libertie in ſinning, and euen this one example as much as any other, turning it againſt themſelues, which they ſhould take good by; I will adde this one  thing, which I would otherwiſe haue omitted, ſeeing I haue made mention of it before: That Dauid did that which was right in the ſight of the Lord,
                  1. King. 15.6. 
                  and turned away from nothing, that he commaunded him, all the daies of his life, ſaue only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. As therefore it was no vſuall thing with him, neither did he oft thus offend in caſes ſo well knowne vnto him: ſo it is no cauſe why wee ſhould be diſcouraged from a ſound courſe, for feare, leaſt we ſhould fall after the like manner, but watch in all things, that wee may be the further from ſuch feare.
               
                  Peter (to ſay ſomewhat of him) before Chriſts aſcenſion,Peters fall. howſoeuer hee was faithfull, and in many parts of his life commendable, yet had he no ſuch  great ſtrength and growth in grace, that wee ought to be content to be as he was: but rather looke to bee lights and good examples in all good workes, leaſt we ſhould fall away daungerouſly, when ſuch an one as he was, did denie his maſter. I knowe God can correct the deareſt of his ſeruants in as fearefull a manner. But (bleſſed be his name) wee know thus much of his minde, that he taketh no pleaſure in their troubles, neither delighteth he in their ſufferings, much leſſe doth he take aduantage of their infirmities.Lam. 3.33.
               
               He draweth them out of deepe dangers, when they haue plunged themſelues into them. And if we prouoke him not,If we prouoke not God, no feare of ſoule luſts. there is no feare of reprochfull euils to be ſent vpon vs by him: and therefore, if we count it pleaſure to  pleaſe him, and to bee watchfull againſt the occaſions of ſinne, this giueth vs holy boldnes and confidence, that we ſhall be kept from fearefull falles,
                     Note. 2. Pet. 1.10. rather then to be afraid of them, by being too godly: Neither was Peter thus armed, when he ſo offended, but as we may eaſily ſee, therefore he fell, becauſe he was naked and vnarmed.
               And ſo it is with all others in this caſe, that ſo diſhonour God as he did. Now if he did fall, and we may alſo fall, whiles we are yet not without confidence in God, what is to be thought of our beſt actions, if we ſhould doe as many would haue vs, namely, to ſhew and profeſſe no more then others do; & ſo make cōmon profeſſors examples, to be rules for our liues: what ſhould  our liues then be, but a very dunghill fraught with vnſauourie filthines, and not an offending of God lightly now and then? Neither let men ſay,Obiect. they can liue no otherwiſe then they haue done, nor diſcontentedly ſay, wee would haue them take no delight in any thing; but husband and wife muſt ſit and looke heauily one vpon another: neither may neighbours be merrie together.
               For ſuch may vnderſtand, to the firſt point of their obiection, where they

ſay, they cannot leaue the courſe, in the which they haue liued (that is in ſmall  knowledge of God and his will; following the world with greater pleaſure then the word of God: and hauing their other reioycings in things here below, & vſing their labour but euen as toyle &c.) they may (I ſay) vnderſtand, that if they cannot change ſuch courſes, their owne mouthes ſhall be their accuſers: for ſuch cannot be in good ſtate. For I vrge no other change vpon them, then they themſelues ſhall be forced to confeſſe to be required by God of them, and that for their beſt.
               
                  Great folly not to deſire a better condition.And being ſo, I would aske this of them, who is he, which hauing liued long in a cottage full of penurie and wants, cannot frame himſelfe to a more wealthie eſtate, if it befall him, and to enioy greater abundance of all good  things meete for this life, and that becauſe he hath of long time been accuſtomed to a meaner and poorer condition? Is any ſo deſtitute of common reaſon, or ſo wilfull, that when his diet may be wholeſome and ſweete, his apparrell cleanely and ſeemely, his habitation commodious, and well fenced againſt all annoyance of winde and weather, he will yet refuſe all theſe being offered him, for a portion in pouertie, where his wants cannot be ſupplied?Note. And yet what compariſon is there betwixt theſe things, and the high degree of felicitie, which in the Chriſtian courſe I propound, in reſpect of the deceiueable, vaine, and painefull pleaſure (for ſo I may moſt iuſtly call it) which they inioy, who follow their old cuſtome, and luſt of their ignorance?
               
               Therefore they muſt needes confeſſe, that their blindnes is to be bewailed: alſo the heardnes of their heart, and deepe vnbeliefe, which holdeth them at this ſtay, that howſoeuer we can bring them tidings of a better; yet hauing been long bewitched with their darkenes, and ſinne, as the people were with Simon Magus his ſorceries,Act. 8. they cannot change their old courſe.
               
                  All carnall delights onely loſt.To the ſecond part of their obiection, where they with miſliking, ſay, we would haue them delight in nothing, that they haue, as wife, children, goods, neighbours? if I would haue them liue after ſuch rules as I preſcribe them:
                     Anſwere. Epheſ. 4.22. Rom. 7.5. & 8.7. I anſwere: that their whole conuerſation muſt be put off indeede, wherein  they haue liued after the manner of the world. That ought to be no ſtrange thing to them, which is ſo common a truth in the Scriptures; euen all that they hold of their owne,Rom. 12.1. both in heart and life, as farre as can be, muſt be auoyded:Matth. 16.24. and therefore their lightnes, reioycing in euill, taking pleaſure in the creatures more then in the creator, & the making of theſe things their chiefe delight: all theſe with corrupt mery-makings, muſt be pruned off from them, (euen as we would pare off the vnderboughes which ſucke vp the ſappe and iuyce from the good vine branches:) which, if they were fitte to ſee it, haue troubled themſelues and others, more then all their fond liberties haue pleaſured them, and therefore both they and others ſhould be the more  glad of ſuch change. And what account is to be made of ſuch reioycings with wife and other friends, which muſt bee repented? But if it be according to knowledge, who forbiddeth it? when it is well knowne, that both the marriage and other fellowſhips, which true religion hath made amongſt people, is of all other, ſweeteſt and moſt comfortable. As for other, let them be broken off.
               
                  
                   For what haue they loſt (to ſpeake of the beſt) who doe ſo, but that which may be ſpared aſwell, as the paring of their nayles? If any will ſpeake better of it, it is onely he, whom God hath not taught to ſpeake. Therefore to conclude, as theſe and ſuch other obiections are too friuolous, to iuſtle out a godly life from the practiſe of true Chriſtians and beleeuers: ſo when it ſhall be gone about, as I haue taught and ſet downe in this treatiſe, then they ſhall leade the life of faith, euen the life which pleaſeth God: and conſequently, then they ſhall liue happily in euery eſtate and lawfull calling whatſoeuer: For he walketh ſafe and ſure who walketh vprightly.
                  Prou. 10.9. And he that doth otherwiſe, and peruerteth his wayes (as I haue ſhewed how, by going from  the truth which he knoweth) God will finde him out, and he ſhall meete with plagues and ſorrow enough.
            
         
         
            
                THE THIRD TREATISE OF THIS BOOKE, NAMELY, OF THE MEANES WHEREBY A GODLY LIFE is holpen and continued.
            
               CHAP. 1.  What the meanes are, and the kindes of them, and of the ſumme and order of this treatiſe.
               
                  I Haue ſet downe a deſcription of the life of the beleeuer: by the which all, who deſire to bee acquainted with it, after they haue obtained the gift of faith, may walke godly and ſafely through their pilgrimage, euen ſo many as haue at any time in truth began, and gone about the ſame. Now ſeeing this Chriſtian life is vpholden and continued by meanes,Chriſtian life is vpheld by meanes. and euery one  which ſhall ſet vpon it, will be deſirous to know them, as he hath good cauſe, and how to vſe them aright, becauſe the hinderances and diſcouragements from the ſame are many and great; I will therefore (as it is meete I ſhould) ſhew what I vnderſtand by the helps, and meanes: and which they are; alſo the kindes of them, their nature, and how they ought to be vſed, ſeeing that God hath promiſed, by the right and reuerent vſe of them, and the ſame conſtantly continued, to giue ſuch grace, euen to weake

ones whereby they ſhall be able in truth as hard as it ſeemeth, to leade this  godly life, and ſenſiblie to diſcerne, that they doe ſo. For as it was not begun without meanes, ſo neither can it grow without them.
               Now as this doth wonderfully declare the goodnes and kindnes of our God, in ordaining of them for our exceeding great benefit and comfort: ſo we muſt know, that it is required of vs, and earneſtly looked for at our hands, that we vſe them with ſuch care and conſtancie, as that they may be moſt profitable vnto vs, that ſo we may finde that fruite of them which God promiſeth.
               Theſe meanes whereby God hath appointed that his people ſhall continue,VVhat theſe meanes be, and their kinds. and growe in a godly life, are ſuch religious exerciſes, whereby Chriſtians  may be made fit to practiſe a godly life: and they are partly ordinarie, that is, ſuch as are commonly and vſually to be practiſed, of which ſorte there are many: and partly extraordinarie, at ſome eſpeciall time, as faſting, and ſome rare ſolemnities in feaſting and thankſgiuing. And both of theſe are either publike or priuate.
               
                  The publike helpes and which they be.The publike, ſuch as are vſed in our open aſſemblies: ordinarlie, theſe are  three. Firſt, the miniſterie of the word read, preached, and heard, as the Lord  preſcribeth. Secondly, the adminiſtration of the holy ſacraments, and worthy  receiuing of the ſame. Thirdly, the exerciſe of prayer with thankſgiuing and ſinging of Pſalmes. But becauſe the publike cannot be daily had and inioyed, (and yet we neede daily reliefe and helpe) neither although they could, were they ſufficient to inable vs,The priuate helps, and the kinds of them. to honour God, as it becommeth vs: therefore, God hath commaunded vs to vſe priuate exerciſes; whereof theſe eight be chiefe. Firſt, watchfulnes, meditation, and the armor of a Chriſtian; vnto the which, is to be added our owne experience: and theſe properly belong to euery one alone by himſelfe. The next are the vſe of company by conference and family exerciſe; and theſe are properly to be vſed of a mans ſelfe with others: the laſt two, which are prayer and reading, are common to both. The neceſſitie whereof is ſo great,The neceſſitie of the priuate. that if they be not knowne and vſed rightly and in good ſort, the publike will proue but vnprofitable, and the whole  life out of ſquare, as ſhall be ſeene when we come to handle and ſpeake more particularly of the right vſe of them.
               And of the helps or meanes to continue a godly life, which they are, and the kinds of them, thus much be ſaid. Now I will (as I promiſed in the entrance into this treatiſe) more fully ſhew, what euery one of theſe, is; and what force they haue (God working thereby) to vphold the weight of a godly life: That all who liſt to conſider it wiſely, may ſee it, and ſo many as will vſe theſe meanes, may proue, and finde it themſelues. And firſt I will begin with the publike: and afterwards, ſpeake of the priuate. And I will ſo handle and ſpeake of euery one (according to the skill which God hath  giuen me) as may make moſt for this preſent purpoſe, that is, moſt largely of thoſe meanes which with their vſe, are leſſe knowne; and more briefly of thoſe, with which men are moſt acquainted.
               Neither let this trouble the reader, that I haue made mention of ſome of thē by other occaſions in ſome other places: for whereas it may be obiected, that theſe meanes called helps, are ſpoken of in other treatiſes of this booke,

                   as parts of a Chriſtians dutie. I anſwere, it is true: for I haue ſpoken of vprightnes, one piece of the armour, and of watchfulnes and prayer, in the former treatiſe; and ſo of the reſt. And there I ſpeake of them as of common duties and parts of godlineſſe, as the loue and feare of God be: but here I ſpeake of them as ſpeciall helpes to godlineſſe: for though I denie not, but that all the duties of a Chriſtian man, are alſo helps to liue happily; yet who doth not ſee, that theſe here mentioned, as the Word and the Sacraments, watching and prayer with the other, are more properly ſo called? as more ſpecially fitting vs for the right performing of all duties. Beſides, in other places, I ſpeake of them by occaſion, and therefore more briefly: but here, of  purpoſe; and therefore more largely. But let it ſuffice, that I vnderſtand theſe which I mention in this treatiſe, to be helpes and meanes eſpecially.
               And more particularly of the armour and of the parts thereof, this I ſay: becauſe otherwiſe, I muſt haue giuen a watch-word about it afterwards, when I come to ſpeake of it in due place: that though I ſpeake of all the parts of it by occaſion in one treatiſe or other; yet there I ſpeake of them for the moſt part, as particular duties to be done in our ſeueral actions: but here I ſpeake of them, as of ſuch duties as muſt alwaies abide, and be lodged in our hearts: and that we may haue thē, as a Larderhouſe, alwaies full of good and holeſome victuall, and not as one diſh to ſerue for ſome occaſion; where  we may obſerue, that though the one is not without the other, yet there is a manifeſt difference betwixt them, ſo that the one is not the other. And ſo I take it, the Apoſtle meant in the Epiſtle to the Epheſians: where when hee had named diuers duties, as mercie, loue, kindnes, Epheſ. chap. 4. & 5. which are parts of the armour; yet he ſaith after, Epheſ. chap. 6.14. Stand faſt in your armour, when ye haue put it on: as if he ſhould ſay, it is not enough to ſhew kindnes, mercie, to ſome perſons at ſome time, and to haue the vſe of the other parts of the armour when occaſion ſhall be offered; but to put and keepe them on, that ſo we may euer haue thē in a readines to be vſed: Euen as women doe not onely trimme and dreſſe their houſes with flowers, but they  haue alſo their gardens be ſet and filled with them, from whence they may haue them alwaies for ſuch vſes. This I thought good to ſay about the matter in hand, to free the reader from ſome doubts. Now I will proceed to the next chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. 2. Of the publike helpes to increaſe godlines: and namely, the miniſterie of the word.
               
                  
                  TO begin therefore with the publike meanes and helpes, whereby God hath appointed to ſtrengthen the beleeuer, and ſettle him in a godly life; know wee, that the word is the firſt and principall. And there ſhall neede no great marueiling at this, which I ſay, if we mark the royall and moſt excellent commendations, that we heare, and reade of the Scriptures, which are this word of God.Truth. For beſides that they are by good euidence and teſtimonie proued to be the very truth and

word of God (not the phantaſies of mans braine) which hee willeth vs to  ſearch,Ioh. 5.39. ſending vs vnto them, if we deſire to know his mind and will towards vs:Authoritie. ſo the authoritie of them is ſuch, that by whomſoeuer it be gainſaid or called into queſtion, we neede not bee troubled at it, and ſo be diſcomfited: no although it were an Angel from heauen (if any ſuch thing were poſſible) much leſſe the man of ſinne,Gal. 1.8. who yet chalengeth authoritie to be heard before them.
               And that we may not doubt, but that all Gods will is reuealed in them, we are taught,
                     Sufficiencie. 2. Tim. 5.16. that they are all-ſufficient, that is, containe whatſoeuer is able to make one either an inheritour of ſaluation, or a true Chriſtian, in which two conſiſteth true felicitie. Now for the plainnes and euidence of the heauenly  matter,Plainenes. that is contained in them, by the meanes which God hath vſed, and the order that he hath taken, for laying out the ſweetnes & beautie of them, they are in the moſt neceſſarie points, eaſie to be vnderſtood and conceiued euen of the ſimple and ignorant. For beſides that, he hath commanded them to be reuerently and diſtinctly read in the aſſemblie,
                     Epheſ. 4.11. Expoſition, and preaching. he hath giuen vnto his Church moſt excellent gifts (I meane paſtors and teachers) to interprete and teach his whole counſell out of them; and to ſhew the people how to profit by the doctrine of them: and to make the right vſe thereof, in ſuch wiſe applying the ſame to them, as if they had been particularly, and onely appointed for them. And in like manner, he hath prouided to haue theſe his holie  Scriptures turned into thoſe tongues and languages, which are vnderſtood of the diuers and ſundrie nations of the world, that thereby they may, as the good people of Theſſalonica and Berea did,Act. 17.11. conferre the Sermons which they heare, in their owne tongue, with the Scriptures; and ſo finde more cleere light and comfort by them. All which being conſidered, it may not hardly be gathered, what a ſingular helpe, a ſound ordinarie miniſterie of the word is,1. Theſſ. 3.10. 1. Pet. 5.2. to build vp more ſtrongly a weake Chriſtian in a godly life. For we muſt conſider that God hath appointed this preaching of his words to perfect the faith of his elect, and therefore S. Peter chargeth the ſhepheards to feede the flocke of Chriſt which dependeth on them: and our Sauiour (Peters
                   Schoolemaſter) requireth,Iohn. 21.15. that as hee loued him, ſo he ſhould feede his lambes and his ſheepe. And it being preached with authoritie and power to perſwade (not as the word of man,1. Theſſ. 2.13. Heb. 4.12. which is but weake and frothie, but as it is indeed the word of the liuing God) it is mightie in operation, and ſharper then any two edged ſword, working in the people of God as a kind and forcible medicine vpon a diſeaſe, and ſo becommeth the power of God vnto ſaluation to them.
               
                  Benefit to the vnregenerate.But to ſay nothing of the benefit, which this ordinance of God bringeth to the vnregenerate, who as yet walke in darknes (for it is not pertinent to my purpoſe in this place to ſpeake of that, which yet is a mightie and great  meane to conuert them from their old conuerſation,1. Cor. 14.24. Act. 26.18. and from the power and bondage of Sathan vnto God) to omit that (I ſay) behold the manifold vſes and daily helpes that the regenerate and people of God haue by it.To the regenerate. Firſt therefore,
                     1. Knowledge. they are cleered from error and darknes about religion, and manners (wherewith otherwiſe they are fraught and much incumbred) and grow more ſound in the knowledge of the truth, and ſee more particularlie

                   into the way and whole courſe of Chriſtianitie: which thing others euen of Gods children wanting, are ſo vnſetled, and ſo holden vnder of ignorance and blindnes, in many needfull points,The vertues of the pearle. that they muſt needes finde the leſſe fruite of the Chriſtian life (as if it were not to be inioyed at all) and ſo become more dimme paterns of holines to others. Wherein this is more,2 that they who vſe theſe meanes diligently and reuerently, doe grow ſetled and eſtabliſhed in their knowledge from day to day: whereas others, who are deſtitute of this gracious helpe (do what they can) muſt want this (although they may haue ſome benefit by priuate reading) if they loſe not ſomewhat of that which before they had.
               
                   Againe, this quickeneth them in their drowſines:3 it cheereth them in their heauines: it calleth them backe from their wandrings. I ſpeake briefly of ample and large matters (wherein I might be long, and that alſo not without the readers good liking and deſire) it raiſeth them vp if they haue fallen: it counſelleth them in their doubtfull caſes; and wherein they are to ſeeke of aduice: and by experience of Gods dealing with them in all eſtates (how he bleſſeth them in well doing, and contrarily) by the experience, I ſay, which they haue, this preaching of the word of God ordinarily, is a meane whereby they are faſt ſetled in a godly courſe,4 and keepe well when they are well, rather then fickle and inconſtant in the good cariage of themſelues, as  many are. And what a benefit is this? How is it ſought by many with teares, and yet of few obtained? yea of ſundrie Chriſtians thought to be impoſſible to be reached vnto, becauſe they know it not.
               And yet to this (as great as it is) doe euen they who haue had as weake beginnings in the Church of God, as any other of their brethren (by this heauenly direction taught out of Gods word) attaine and grow vnto. For when in a ſound, plaine, and orderly manner, Gods will is laid foorth in preaching, this helpe many do get by it, that they doe gird vp the loines of their mindes, that is, learne to lay aſide, and caſt off that which would hinder them; their inward corruptions eſpecially: they prepare themſelues to follow the  rules, which leade and guide them to their dutie: by this they eſpie their weaknes, and how they are holden backe when they haue fallen; and which is the right way of proceeding: and this is the better done, the oftner that they are put in minde thereof. So that, this is the Sunne which giueth light to them in all places: and the rule by which they frame all their actions; and therefore a Chriſtian man though weake, being deſirous to learne, doth by this finde marueilous furtherance towards the godly life.
               Beſides this which I haue ſaid,The fift benefit of ordinarie preaching. the true Chriſtian by his ordinarie hearing is taught, to giue ſome part and time of his life to reading of the Scriptures, and other good writers, as is ſaid in another place; and that with good fruite,  vnderſtanding and comfort: whereas without it, he were like to neglect, and be wearie of that labour, and in ſteed thereof, to giue himſelfe to idlenes, and to bee vainly occupied; or though hee ſhould vſe it, yet to doe it with little knowledge, comfort, or any other profit.The ſixt. And when a man is framed thus by the miniſterie of the word, hee becommeth a light and an example vnto others, in token that he hath found great helpe by it himſelfe.
               Therefore if he may by the preaching of the word ordinarily be led into all

truth neceſſarie for him to know, and bee deliuered from errour in religion  and manners; if he may be eſtabliſhed and confirmed in the knowledge of the will of God; if he may be reformed in his affections and life daily, more and more encreaſing therein, and ouercomming himſelfe better thereby; if hee may both be brought to beſtow ſome time of his life (as his calling will permit) in reading, and ſo as that he may finde profit thereby; and finally if he may become an example in time vnto others: I may boldly affirme and conclude, that the ordinarie preaching of the word is a ſingular meanes whereby God hath prouided that his people ſhould grow and increaſe in a godly life. Now then, they ſo vſing it, as they haue elſewhere been taught, namely in the ſecond commaundement, that is, comming to heare with meekenes and hungrie  harts, and being attentiue in hearing, and applying it to themſelues, they reape the fruite, which I haue ſaid.
               And if this be eaſily graunted and yeelded vnto, I ſay no more but this: I would to God that they, who are in great account for their religion, and doe oft and commonly heare the word, did finde it ſo, and did reape this fruite by it, and were holpen al theſe waies vnto godlines, which (God doth know) is ſeldome ſo. And therefore where this ſound and plaine teaching is wanting, how much more muſt the people needes be out of frame? But where the diligence, skill, loue, and plainenes in a good order of teaching cannot be found fault with in the Miniſter, it is certaine, that the fault is in the hearers: That they, though otherwiſe they may belong to the Lord, yet are not reuerent and attentiue in hearing, are not prepared before to heare, or els doe not digeſt willingly that which they haue heard; but are ſurfeited of ſome dangerous qualities in their liues, or corruptions in their hearts: among which, this is a ſpeciall one, that as they thinke of the perſon who teacheth, ſo doe they of his doctrine, and not otherwiſe.
               Now if in this one meanes, ſo great helpe may be gotten, what may bee thought, when this and others go together? But I conclude with this exhortation,1. Pet. 5.2. 2. Tim. 4.2. Luk. 19.44. 
                  Feede the Lords flocke which dependeth vpon you: and be inſtant in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, O ye Miniſters of the Lord. Know the day of your viſitation, and the  things which belong to your peace, by preaching, O ye people, who liue vnder the miniſterie of the word: lay vp now in your harueſt againſt the time of your neceſſitie: and this be ye perſwaded of, that ye ſhall haue neede of all that you gather. Seeke to inioy this libertie of the miniſterie of the word, ye that want it: and if ye may inioy it as eaſily and with as little paine, as you doe your market, thinke it worth your labour, if ye can no eaſilier come by it:Prou. 23.23. Matth. 9.37. and buy wiſedome whatſoeuer it coſt you, but ſell it not, whatſoeuer ye may get for it: pray the Lord of the harueſt to thruſt foorth labourers plentifully into the harueſt,
                  Ioh. 4.35. ye that are white vnto the harueſt to be laboured amongſt, and deſirous to be brought into the Lords barne.
               
               Laſtly, all ye that haue the ouerſight of the Lords miniſterie, ſee them teach ſoundly, plainly, faithfully and diligently, who are called to it: and go before them your ſelues painfully, as lights and good examples: that many thanks may be giuen, and prayers made to God by the people for you, when you ſhall giue them ſo good occaſion to remember you, and for warming their hearts and comforting them with ſuch good diet for their ſoules and liberall prouiſion,

                   and that in the day of accounts ye may haue many to witnes the godly care that ye had ouer them.
               And thus much of the firſt publike helpe for the encreaſing and nouriſhing of a godly and Chriſtian life, in all ſuch as haue truely entred into it, that is to ſay, the word preached.
            
            
               CHAP. 3. Of the ſecond publike helpe: namely, the Sacraments.
               
                  
                  THe next meane or helpe publike, are the Sacraments, which (of the two) are more darkely ſeene and found to be helps to godlines, then the word, among the moſt part of thoſe who are partakers of them: both becauſe men haue ſeldomer vſe of them, then of other doctrine; and alſo, for that they be not ſo fully inſtructed in the ſame. And of the two Sacraments, which God hath left to his Church, in this latter age to be inioyed, Baptiſme is leſſe ſeene and perceiued to be an helpe, then the Lords ſupper: In ſpeaking whereof, I purpoſe only to ſtand vpon this which I haue taken in hand, namely, to ſhew the Chriſtian reader, how the Sacraments are  meanes and helpes to ſet him forward in a godly life (as too few doe make them) and to leaue him for other knowledge about the Sacraments (which is exceeding large) to thoſe who haue written of them at large, as M.P. Martyr, M. Caluin, M. Beza, and to ordinarie teaching.
               And this alſo I will doe with as much breuitie as I can: Therefore firſt ſeeing the Sacraments are helps neceſſarily adioyned vnto the preaching of the word, and doe viſibly confirme and ratifie that, which the word doth teach: and the couenant betwixt God and the beleeuer made,The Sacraments confirme that which the word teacheth. is moſt ſurely ſealed vp, and effectuall on both parts by them, thereby it may appeare, what helps they are, both to the ſtrengthening of faith, and incouragement to godly  life: which that it may more plainely appeare, let this which I haue ſaid, be thus vnfolded to the Chriſtian reader. God hath freely granted to euery faithfull perſon, that he will neuer call his ſinnes to a reckoning: but will be his God,
                  Iohn. 13.1. 
                  and loue him to the end through Chriſt; for the making good of this promiſe, he hath put to his ſeale, and hath cauſed the ſame his promiſe and will to be eſtabliſhed in the ſacrament, by ſo euident and infallible a ſigne as cannot deceiue. Now therefore doth not this ſacrament alwayes remaine to the faithfull receiuer, to whom it is made out, and graunted; a cleere witnes, that whatſoeuer benefit is promiſed, is his: and as oft as any doubt hereof might, through weakenes ariſe to the partie, is it not hereby ſufficiently remooued?  and therefore they are called of the Apoſtle,Rom. 4.11. 
                  ſeales of the righteouſnes of faith.
               
               And as God hath thus couenanted for his part;VVhat, God and the faithfull doe couenant, each to other in the Sacraments. ſo hath euery beleeuer againe in his owne behalfe couenanted to truſt in God alwayes, to indeuour to walke before him continually in vprightnes of heart, and innocencie of hands: Now of the truth of his heart the ſacrament is a ſigne; which he hauing receiued, hath openly profeſſed thereby, that he hath giuen and conſecrated

himſelfe vnto the Lord, and is now no more his owne, to liue as carnall will  would deſire. Is not therefore the ſacrament, though it be not alwayes receiued, yet is it not alwayes before his eyes, as it were, to tell him what he hath done; yea and that not raſhly nor by conſtraint, but with good aduiſe, as knowing, that he ſhall neuer haue cauſe to repent him of ſo doing? ſeeing he beleeueth, that ſtrength in meaſure ſhall be giuen him of God, to performe that which he hath promiſed and ſealed?
               Is not then the Sacrament a continuall ſpurrer forward of him to performe his couenant? Is he not by the freſh remembrance of it, incouraged againſt temptations, wearines of doing his dutie, and ſuch other hinderances?Rom. 6.2. Doth it not cauſe him to ſay againſt them all, how can I that am dead to  ſinne,
                  The Sacraments are myſteries to the vnbeleeuers, but not ſo to the faithfull. 
                  liue any longer in it? So that although to others the Sacraments be a myſtery, and hidden thing, and as a booke written in Hebrew or Greeke, which a ſimple man opening findeth nothing profitable for him, but ſaith I cannot reade it (and yet the booke containes moſt fruitefull matter, if a skilfull reader taketh it in hand:) although I ſay, he who is ignorant, finde no helpe nor benefit by the Sacraments; yet the true beleeuer hauing been ſoundly inſtructed therein, beholdeth much in them, to incourage and ſet him forward in the godly life, hauing as ſure hold of Gods fauour, and helpe by them alſo, as the ſame God, who cannot lie, is to be beleeued.
               This may for the edifying of the ſimple, bee ſeene particularly in the  two Sacraments of our Church at this day,Baptiſme how it is and helpe. baptiſme and the Lords ſupper. For euery faithfull Chriſtian which hath been baptized, may as long as he liueth, haue this benefit thereby, that as by his ingraffing into Chriſt, he is one with him, and therefore ſeeth that while Chriſt liueth, he muſt and ſhall liue alſo: ſo he hauing thereby perpetuall vnion and fellowſhip with him, doth drawe ſtrength and grace from him, euen as the branch doth from the vine, that ſo he may liue the life of a Chriſtian. If then he haue that power of renewing him (which is ſignified and ſealed by baptiſme) namely the power of Chriſts death mortifying ſinne, and the vertue of his reſurrection in raiſing him vp to new life; is not baptiſme throughout his life a forcible meanes  to helpe him forward in a Chriſtian courſe, as oft as he doth duely conſider it?
               
                  The Lords ſupper how it is an helpe.So in the Lords ſupper, the faithfull communicant, by the oft receiuing of it, is not onely by the bread and wine aſſured that his ſoule may be comforted by Chriſt, and ſo inioyeth the ſame; but alſo is ſpiritually ſtrengthened to all good duties; ſo that he findeth a moſt ſoueraigne helpe by it, to growe vp vnto a perfect age in Chriſt Ieſus. And this ſhall more appeare, if we conſider how manifoldly the faithfull Chriſtian is furthered, and ſet forward in the well framing and amending his life thereby, both in preparing himſelfe to it before it come;VVherein worthie receiuing conſiſteth. in the action and preſent vſe of it, when he doth  come thereto; and after the inioying of, and departing from it. Of which three, ſeeing they may ſerue as well for a perpetuall rule to examine himſelfe by, and to direct him in the right vſe of it alwayes after, as well as to proue the matter which I haue in hand (namely, that the Sacraments are great helpes to godlines) I will ſtay a little while about them.The manner of preparing our ſelues to the Lords ſupper.
               
               And for the preparing or making him fit to receiue with profit, this is the

                   manner how it ought to be done, namely: Firſt, that he proue and trie himſelfe in theſe things, whether he haue the knowledge of mans miſerie, of his redemption, of his renewing, and of the nature and benefit of that Sacrament, with the knowledge of other principall points; all which it is meete that he ſhould haue, who looketh for comfort by it. Secondly, that he hold faſt his faith in the promiſes of ſaluation, which God hath wrought in him before, by the preaching of the Goſpell: the which at this time may not be wanting, but holden faſt, and after, particular falles recouered. The third is, that he keepe his heart diligently to the renouncing, and ſubduing of all ſinne, and readie to any dutie that he ſhall be called vnto. Fourthly, and more particularly,  that he haue no ſwelling, nor riſing of heart againſt any man or woman, no although they be his vtter enemies: but be reconciled to them, and at peace with them, as he deſireth to be with the Lord. And fiftly, that he being thus qualified, deſire (as he ſhall haue opportunitie) to be partaker of this Sacrament, and to receiue the benefit which God offereth by it. And this is the manner of examining a mans ſelfe: vnto the which rules he that is ſutable, he is a welcome gueſt to the Lords table.
               But becauſe much ſlouth, forgetfulnes, darkenes, corruption and weaknes do ſoone gather together, and ſo grow vp euen in good men, to the choaking of theſe forenamed gifts of God, that ſuch as haue ſometime found all theſe  in themſelues, yet at the time of receiuing cannot finde them; therefore at the comming to the Lords ſupper, God giueth eſpeciall charge, that if in any of his people theſe graces ſhould by their owne negligence and default,VVhat is to be done, when we cannot prepare our ſelues. be weakned, dimmed and decayed, that they doe not raſhly put themſelues forward to it in that caſe; but ſpeedily ſeeke to recouer themſelues againe, by a due examination of their eſtate according to the forementioned rules: Which if they do then more hardly and difficultly obtaine, and going about it, cannot ſee cleerely that they are thus furniſhed, as they were ſometimes, they may thanke themſelues; the fault is their owne, for that they did ſo long neglect the ſame, and did not labour, when they were well, to keepe well  conſtantly: Let them not ceaſe therefore till they recouer; which of them that knowe how, being ſanctified, ſhall be obtained. Now the recouering of themſelues is on this manner: Let them goe apart by themſelues, and laying all other things aſide, ſeriouſly enter into due conſideration, what accuſeth them, and troubleth their conſcience, which in no wiſe may be omitted: then whatſoeuer bee found amiſſe (be it ſlouth, careleſnes, worldlines, diſtruſt, vncharitablenes, or any other like ſinne) let it be ſenſibly and heartily bewailed, acknowledged, renounced, Prou. 28.13. and laſtly, a recouering of their faith, by apprehending Gods mercy, Prou. 28.13. and their wants therein, and in their repentance, ſupplyed againe, by renuing their  couenant with God. This manner of behauiour in Chriſtians before they offer themſelues to the Lords ſupper, is neceſſarie after they haue fallen (as I haue ſaid before:) and herein ſtandeth their preparation to receiue the Lords ſupper. Which preparation is one of the three things neceſſarily required of them, who ſhall with profit come vnto the Lords ſupper.
               And can this preparation be any leſſe then a great helpe to all,How preparation to receiue worthily is an helpe to liue well. which ſhall inioy it? He who was before ſnared in the world, who had been filled with

ſtrong corruption, as with poyſon, fallen into ſome particular ſinnes, who  had neglected the nouriſhing of his faith, been at ſome bitter variance with his neighbour, or had done any ſuch other like thing: now by this preparation calling himſelfe home, repenting and returning as this examination teacheth, doth he not finde thereby a ſingular helpe (thinke we) to the recouering of his ſtrength, and the doing of his former workes againe? And if he haue done none of all theſe offences (and therefore ſhall not neede to offer ſuch violence to himſelfe) but hath kept a Chriſtian courſe in his life, and followed a good direction to the peace of his conſcience (as I doubt not but many doe) yet as oft as he ſhall repaire to this Sacrament in this eſtate ſhall he not be much confirmed and more ſtrongly ſetled in the duties of  Chriſtianitie, when he ſhall by examination finde and ſee, that he (though fraile) is a meete gueſt for the Lords table, and therefore welcome; and not thruſt out of the companie, for want of his wedding garment? Shall it not be a great comfort at many other times, as oft as hee ſhall remember and thinke vpon it: and that it hath been thus with him alreadie when he receiued, and thus may be alſo, as oft as he ſhall repaire vnto it againe? So that euen the preparation to the Lords ſupper, is a great meane to goe forward in godlines.
               
                  How the faithfull ſhould be at the ſupper of the Lord. Iohn. 6.55.
                  Now to come to the action itſelfe, when a man rightly prepared, inioyeth the preſent benefit of the Sacrament, and there is comforted and made glad  by the words of Chriſt himſelfe, the maker of the banquet, who biddeth him welcome and to be merry: ſaying, his body (which is meate indeede) and his bloud (which is the onely holeſome and ſauourie drinke) are prepared for him; how can he but be much heartened and be ſet forward in a Chriſtian courſe, when he ſhall be thus reuiued and quickned in his ſoule with the ſpirituall duties which by true faith he feedeth vpon, and that no leſſe ſenſibly, then he eateth the breade and drinketh the wine?
               And yet thus much I will ſay, that if this merry making at the Lords boord, were either in hollownes on the behalfe of him that biddeth (as it is with many men who inuite other to their table) or onely a temporarie  and earthly benefit, on the behalfe of the receiuer, it were not ſo much to be accounted of: but it being farre otherwiſe, namely, both in goodnes and perpetuitie, a benefit that hath no companion, euen a continuall feaſt; it hath therefore great force to ſtirre vp the partie to honour God. And from hence it is, that the communicant, as one admiring the goodnes and kindnes of God there declared to him, and of himſelfe felt and inioyed; breaketh forth into praiſes and ſaith,Cant. 2.4. as is figured in Salomon his ſong, O Lord, thou haſt made me drunke with the wine of thy ſeller! how ſweete is thy loue, and thy kindnes paſt finding out?
                  Pſal. 116.12. 
                  What ſhall I render to the Lord for all his mercies?
               
               Is it hard now to ſee, is it hard now to iudge, how this heauenly banquet  doth for the preſent time, and in the receiuing therof, or may at leaſtwiſe, inlarge the heart of the faithfull ſeruant of God, and make him fit for dutie, and fill his heart with comfort, while he communicateth in the ſupper with the reſt of the faithful, ſo welcome to the Lord, who inuited him to it? For there, he may and ought to meditate on the daintines of the banquet; on the loue of him that ordained it; on the communion he hath with Chriſt and his

                   graces, and on the outward ſignes, what they aſſure him of; and on the word preached, which ſheweth him all this: All theſe things, with ſuch like, he may thinke on and apply to himſelfe. For although the fleſh ſtriueth againſt the ſpirit, as well herein, as in other workes of it; yet the faithfull communicant in his meaſure, findeth his heart readie to yeeld vp to the Lord in this heauenly banquet, no leſſe, then I haue ſaid, euen the ſacrifice of praiſe and thankes, though all doe it not in a like meaſure.
               And euen ſo to come to the third point, it is of the ſame force, after he hath receiued the Sacrament,After receiuing the faithfull communicant is fitter to liue godly. and inioyed the benefit therein beſtowed vpon him, to hearten him on, and ſtrengthen him to euery good worke; euen  as a man well refreſhed with meate, is made ſtrong to labour: this Sacrament (I ſay) doth after the receiuing of it (where right vſe is made of it, according to Gods appointment) through the remembrance and due conſideration of the kindnes of God therein offered and reaped, eaſily carry on the ſeruant of God in a feruent deſire of all well doing. In all that I ſay of the Sacrament, the wiſe reader (I doubt not) vnderſtandeth me, not that this alone, without other meanes and helpes doth this; but as the Lord in great fauour to his Church, hath prouided varietie of them for it,One helpe being vſed, another is not to be neglected. as the weakenes of it doth require, as ſome publike, ſome priuate: ſo he hath made this amongſt the reſt to be one, by the which, as by the reſt, a godly life is  much furthered.
               Which I thought very meete to adde, becauſe of all other helps to the practiſe of Chriſtianitie, I am perſwaded, that the Sacraments are leaſt thought, or found to be ſo: and that they are vſed for the moſt part, without the benefit which God hath ioyned with them, that is, in ceremonie onely. And this holeſome or right vſing of them, becauſe it is little ſeene or inioyed; therefore is there ſuch negligence in repairing to them, and vnreuerence, diſorder, yea and prophane behauiour in the adminiſtring and receiuing of them, which is the principall matter that is to be regarded about the Sacrament, and looked vnto both of the miniſter and people.
               
                   But it is not my purpoſe to enter into this treatiſe: I conclude this point therefore, that ſeeing the Sacraments doe ſeale vp the promiſes of God to the faithfull receiuer, vnder a viſible and infallible ſigne, and againe binde him (in reuerence be it ſpoken) to the performing of his couenant, and ſeeing particularly the firſt Sacrament of baptiſme doth ingraffe him into Chriſt, and that other of the Lords ſupper doth by ſo holy preparation before he come, with ſuch comfort miniſtring in and at his receiuing, and ſuch ſtrengthening of him after, worke vpon him, as hath been ſaid; that therefore the Sacraments are ſingular helpes for all true beleeuers to growe in a godly life. And conſequently, I ſay of the receiuers of them, as of them  which vſe the other helpes, that he who is not made more able to conquer his luſts, and weaken the ſtrength of ſinne, and is not more hartened to the life of godlines, doth abuſe them, and ſeeth not Gods purpoſe in ordaining them. Which ſinne how ſeuerely God will puniſh,1. Cor. 11.30. the Corinthians example doth teſtifie and proue.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 4. Of publike prayers: alſo of the priuate helpes in generall.
               
                  THe publike prayers ſolemnly offred to God in the congregation, and praiſing of him with Pſalmes, is another of theſe publike helpes. In the which, if that minde be in vs, with the which we haue been taught to come to all holie exerciſes, and ſo be prepared for them; who doubteth but that wee may receiue much helpe by them? yea and the  better a man is, the more he ſhall profit by them. For when the faithfull, from God himſelfe, haue a promiſe that they ſhall be heard in all things that are good for them, euen the moſt excellenteſt, and doe then emptie their hearts by confeſſing their ſinnes, and with the reſt of the godly, lift vp their ſpirits and voices together in praiſing him; is there any doubt, but that they are afterward in priuate more cheerefully bent to ſerue him? And in that the ignorant (which in the beſt places is the greateſt number) take no more profit by them, it is not long of the exerciſes, but that they are vnfit to receiue benefit by them: and a preiudicate opinion in ſome that they can take no good by them, and therefore partly in ignorance, partly in raſh zeale, they giue themſelues to  ſleight and negligent hearing of them. The direct remedie to redreſſe both faults, as farre as in man lieth, were an ordinarie able miniſterie: whereby both the ignorant might (beſides other good things) learne rightly how to vſe them: and the preiudicate ones (which conceiue the worſe of them, for that they ſee ſmall fruit to follow of them) ſhould be ſilent and haue nothing to ſay againſt them, except with the Browniſts, they will deſpiſe all publike aſſemblies. But whatſoeuer the ignorant get, the children of God may find eſpeciall good refreſhing by them: which is that thing that I haue to prooue and perſwade. For when beſides our owne priuate ſupplications and thankſgiuings, we haue by the Lord himſelf, appointed for vs theſe alſo in publike: and that in ſo ſolemne a manner, the whole aſſemblie conſenting with vs in the ſame,Matth. 18. and God preſent amongst vs to aſſiſt vs, as he hath promiſed; the very ordinance of God (who is the author of them) doth promiſe a bleſſing therto, as oft as we are partakers of them. So that if we come with reuerence, and a feeling of our wants, with an earneſt deſire and confidence to obtaine the things which we pray for, in true repentance, we ſhall receiue fruite of them accordingly. But herein a preiudicate opinion, which is a raſh iudgement, doth much harme.VVhat holdeth ſome from publike prayer. For by reaſon of this, that the Miniſters haue been, for the moſt part diſordered perſons and ignorant, and too many remaine ſo ſtill; and thereby haue brought themſelues, by Gods iuſt iudgement, and their  owne deſerts, as the ſonnes of Ely did, into diſhonour and diſcredit: it hath come to paſſe, that through raſh and prepoſterous iudgement, many haue had an euill opinion of that, which hath been done by them, and of the ſeruing of God which they haue vſed; and therefore haue thought that they haue had good cauſe to ſequeſter themſelues from being preſent at the ſeruice of God, which is performed by them; and thus they obiect againſt it.
               
                  
                   Another ſort haue thought all ſet formes of prayer are to be diſliked,How others are withholden. and ſuch onely to be allowed and offered vp to God, as by extemporarie gift are conceiued and vttered according to euery ones neceſſitie: which opinion is alſo to be reformed: Of both which I will ſay ſomewhat being obiections, though otherwiſe it bee beſides my purpoſe to diſcourſe of them at large. This I ſay, as I haue taken in hand, that publike prayer, as hath been ſaid of preaching and Sacraments, is a great helpe to godlines, to all ſuch as haue any meaſure of true godlines: or elſe it is long of themſelues, who, through the ignorance and darknes that is in them, doe not know, that they ought to pray alwaies with all manner ſupplications and giuing of thankes; and therefore  publikely as well as priuately, when many hearts are powred out to God rather then few, or one alone: or if they know this, their ſinne is the greater, in that they reſiſt and ſpurne againſt it.
               For to fortifie this that I ſay, to the firſt obiection I anſwere;Anſwere to the firſt obiection. although it be not to bee denied, but that the example of ignorant and vnreformed, eſpecially notorious perſons in the Miniſterie hath done, and doth much harme; yet if either they cannot be conuicted, or if their crimes be ſuch, as cannot remoue them out of their places; there is iuſt cauſe of griefe, that ſuch ſhould haue any thing to doe in Gods matters, which are ſo weightie and to be dealt in with al high reuerence: Yet, if this burden muſt be borne, I aske, if  among many ſweete liberties which we inioy, wee may not ioyne in prayer with them, if wee can pray in faith, ſeeing their vnworthines cannot withhold the fruite of Gods promiſe from vs, which is to one kind of prayer as well as to another, aske and ye ſhall receiue, that your ioy may be full.
                  Ioh. 16.24. And as it is farre from me to be a patrone of ſuch, or to iuſtifie them: ſo yet, while wee may inioy the miniſterie of better, I would not refuſe to bee partaker of the prayers which are offered vp by them. Who can blame him, who deſireth to pray with better then they be? and yet better to ioyne with them ſometime, then to leaue the aſſemblies publike altogether.
               Concerning the next obiection,Anſwere to the ſecond. that though the miniſters be not offenſiue  as the former, yet they ſhould vſe no ſet forme of prayer, but as they are moued by Gods ſpirit: I anſwere, it is a fond error ſo to thinke. For as there be neceſſarie things to be prayed for, of all men, and alwaies, and thoſe are the moſt things which we are to pray to the Lord for: ſo there may be preſcript formes of prayer made concerning all ſuch things. Which being ſo, what letteth that in the reading of ſuch formes either of confeſſion of ſinnes, requeſt, or thankſgiuing; what letteth (I ſay) that the hearers hearts may not profitably goe with the ſame, both to humble, to quicken, and to comfort? For is the reading it ſelfe vnpure, when the miniſter in his owne behalfe and the peoples, vttereth them to God? I ſpeake not (ye ſee) of the  matter of prayer, but of reading it: for if the matter be erroneous and naught, the pronouncing of it maketh it not good, any more then the reading doth: if it be good and pure, being vttered or pronounced, the reading cannot hurt it or make it euil. And as the Church in the Scripture did and doth now ſing Pſalmes vpon a booke to God, and yet though it vtter a preſcript forme of words, I hope none will ſay, that it is a ſinne to doe ſo, the heart being prepared: in like manner, to follow a preſcript forme of words in praying,

is no ſinne: and therefore ought not to be offenſiue to any.
               
               If it be ſaid, how can men repeate the ſame forme of words daily, as they doe in the reading of publike prayer, but it muſt needes be coldly done, and ſo abhominable to God? I anſwere, it is not the oft praying for the ſame things, that maketh it odious to God, but when it is done with an vnreuerent, vnprepared, and corrupt heart; for cuſtome, not feruently and in faith. And further to ſatisfie them, they may know that in all Churches, and the beſt reformed that they would alleage, there is a preſcript forme of prayer vſed: and therefore they who are of minde, that it ought not to be, muſt ſeparate themſelues from all Churches. Alſo if a ſet forme of prayer were vnlawfull, then neither were the Lords prayer (which is a ſet forme of prayer  preſcribed by our Sauiour himſelfe) to be vſed. Which yet though it bee ſometime to be vſed in the forme wherein it is ſet downe: yet ſpeaking of it by this occaſion, I thinke it not amiſſe to adde this one thing. That though our Sauiour tied vs to the matter of this prayer, as being perfect and full: yet he tied vs not to the words themſelues, ſeeing wee cannot either thinke on, remember, or deſire at one inſtant, all the particulars contained in the ſame. And beſides, we by crauing particularly the things which we ſtand in neede of, are more ſtirred vp and moued.
               But theſe thus anſwered, I will proceede, perſwading all good Chriſtians to lay aſide contention, and endles, and (many of them alſo) needles queſtions  about this matter: And to reſolue with themſelues, ſeeing it muſt of al, who are well aduiſed, bee graunted, that the publike prayers are an helpe to ſtirre vp Gods graces in vs, and to conuey to vs the many good bleſſings of God which wee want, beſide other notable effects: therefore, to looke to themſelues euery way ſo carefully, that they may euer keepe themſelues fit to be helped and benefited by them, and with the ſame well ordered hearts and minds to attend vnto, and applie to themſelues the prayers which either before and after the Sermon are vttered, or the other, which through the whole action of Gods worſhip are read in their hearing: And not to be led by opinion, that they can take no profit by them; nor as the common ſort  doe, who after long going to Church, doe prooue too truly, that they haue taken no good by them, being not indeede able to ſhew how they ſhould pray,The booke of Common prayer in the Letanie, and exhortation after Baptiſme. or behaue themſelues in that action. But ſeeing they haue libertie to heare Gods word preached where they may moſt commodiouſly inioy it, (for ſo they are willed not onely themſelues, but to call vpon their children to heare Sermons, and the Miniſters are vrged as well by their preaching, as by their liuing, to giue good example) therefore to take their part in both, with cheerefulnes and thankſgiuing: And in ſinging of Pſalmes, ſuch as can not reade, ſhould attend to them who are neereſt them in the congregation, that they may ioyne with them, and conſent to the action of praiſing God  with the reſt of the aſſemblie; and not to gaze, and toſſe vaine imaginations and phantaſies, where they ſhould lift vp pure hearts and hands to God. And as for ſuch as refuſe to come to take part in the worſhip of God, altogether, as the Browniſts and ſuch like, let them beare their ſhame before men, and their peace ſhall be ſmall to Godward, while they ſit at home with their owne bare reading for their diet, who ſcorne the beſt liberties of the word

                   preached, prayer, and the Sacraments in the publike aſſemblies. For ſo I vnderſtand they doe, as well otherwaies, as by the confeſſion of themſelues, and that before the Magiſtrate, examining what they did while, by the whole moneth and quarter, they abſented themſelues from the publike meetings: anſwere was made by the examinate, they ſate at home and read by themſelues. Let all iudge by what ſpirit ſuch are led and guided.
               Now hauing deſcribed and ſhewed the nature and vſe of the publike meanes,Neceſſitie of priuate helpes. I thinke it needfull before I doe more particularly enter into the diſcourſe of the priuate, to ſay ſomewhat of the neceſſitie of them, as well as of the publike. For that thouſands of the profeſſors,The priuate helpes in little acquaintance with men. And that alſo with ſome of the godly. and of them which are of  the viſible Church (amongſt whom wee muſt hope that God hath many of his elect) are little acquainted with the priuate, but doe thinke it needles for them to hearken after the ſame. And beſides, ſome of the deare children of God for want of ordinarie teaching, haue little vſe of them: and therefore it is much the worſe with them.
               For theſe cauſes therefore, and ſuch like, this is to be knowne and holden in firme perſwaſion, that the priuate are (in ſome ſort) as needfull as the publike: for they may be vſed at all times, whereas the publike cannot; as in perſecution. For it being of neceſſitie that as our bodies, ſo our ſoules ſhould haue ſome daily refreſhing: therefore ſeeing the publike cannot daily bee  had, we muſt vſe priuate, as I ſaid before: and therefore they are both authoriſed and commaunded by one God. And the publike are but a part of the helpes, which God hath prouided for the profiting of his Church: and therfore without the priuate, they doe the leſſe profit.
               For mens comming to Church (beſides which a great number know no other ſeruing of God) cannot doe that good to the beſt Chriſtians,The publike without the priuate, cold. which is to be looked for, if it bee not accompanied with theſe: as may bee ſeene in euery part of the publike worſhip of God. For hearing of the word read and preached, doth little profit, where it is not ioyned with preparation to heare reuerently and attentiuely, and where it is not muſed on after, yea and as occaſion  ſhall offer, conferred of alſo: and if reading priuately (where it may be inioyed) be not vſed; what is more manifeſt then this, that almoſt al in a congregation doe by and by forget that which they haue heard, and make little vſe of it in their liues? And what greater cauſe can be rendred hereof then this, that they neuer looke after matters concerning their ſoules, when they are about their priuate dealings, and (as we ſay) out of the Church?
               Euen ſo, what vſe doe ſuch make of the Lords Supper? who (for the moſt part) beſides that they cannot tell how to prepare themſelues to it; ſo if ſome Miniſters, more carefull ouer the peoples ſoules, then others, doe teach and examine them about the knowledge they haue, yet cannot they be brought  to trie themſelues indeede, in what true faith and vnfained repentance they come: ſeeing they are not wont, through the whole quarter before their receiuing, to beate their braines, or trouble themſelues about ſuch matters: Whereby it may be gathered for certaintie, that whatſoeuer the Scriptures ſpeake in the commendation therof, they be in little account and reckoning with them. And if they doe not priuately before the receiuing of the Sacrament, nouriſh theſe good graces of God in themſelues very carefully (for I

ſpeake euen of the better ſort of Chriſtians, as well as of others) who ſeeth  not, that they ſhall haue much adoe, to bring their hearts, willingly to ſift themſelues, and to ſeeke for thoſe gifts at that time?
               So to ſay the ſame of the publike hearing of prayer in the aſſemblie, it is not onely to bee doubted, that they pray there in hypocriſie, drawing neere to God with their mouthes, their hearts being farre from him, if they doe neglect to pray alone, and ſecretly to God, and in their familie: but alſo the publike prayer groweth common with them, that is, weariſome, a bare ceremonie, and for faſhion (ſo farre is it off, that they be eaſed and comforted by it) as I can prooue by too ſure experience at this day, in ſuch as haue not learned to make conſcience of priuate prayer, but doe ſeparate the one from the other.
               
               
                  No excuſe for neglecting priuate helps.And by this which I haue ſaid, it may appeare how neceſſarie it is, that the priuate helpes ſhould be vſed of al ſuch as haue their part in the publike. And beſides, as our neceſſities doe require it, ſo the Lord commanding the ſame, he hath giuen time and libertie from our other buſines and duties either in familie or otherwiſe, to vſe holily and continue the ſame: So that our worldly affaires ought to giue place to them, which through ignorance many count ridiculous, and fooliſh; and others, though they will not ſpeake ſo groſſely, yet being giuen ouer to the world ſo griplie, will put aſide little, or no buſines for the ſeruing of God. Although it is manifeſt, that where God  is moſt purely, and beſt ſerued, their other buſines, as theſe earthly, haue beſt ſucceſſe.
               Theſe few lines I thought good (before further diſcourſing of the priuate helpes) to ſet downe, that they which vſe them conſcionably, may not thinke that they doe any more then they ought, and haue neede of: they who vſe them but ſlackly and coldly, may beſtowe greater diligence therein, and that amongſt all ſorts they may bee had in better regarde, if they deſire to ſee good dayes here vpon earth.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 5. Of the firſt priuate helpe, which is watchfulnes.
               
                  ANd to begin with them, according to the diuiſion made of them, in the entrance into this treatiſe: the firſt priuate help is Watchfulnes: worthily ſet in the firſt place, ſeeing it is as an eye to all the reſt, to ſee them well and rightly vſed. And it is a carefull obſeruing of our hearts, and diligent looking to our waies, that they may bee pleaſing, and acceptable vnto God.VVhat it is. And firſt, that it is an obſeruing of the heart, Salomon
                   prooueth, ſaying: Aboue all obſeruations, obſerue thine heart: for from thence commeth life.
                  Prou. 4.23. And that it maketh a man to looke diligently to his waies, who ſo is watchfull indeede; let the words of the prophet teſtifie; I thought I will take heede to my wayes,
                  Pſal. 39.1. 
                  that I ſinne not with my toung: I will keepe my mouth as with a bridle. And that by both theſe, God is pleaſed, it appeareth by the contrarie: For ſo it is ſaid, Hebr. 10.38. He that withdraweth himſelfe from liuing by faith,
                  
                  (which cannot be without watching) my ſoule (ſaith God) ſhall haue no pleaſure in him: euen as he delighteth in the contrarie. This is in ſundrie places of the Scripture commended vnto vs, that we ſhould haue a great care how we liue, and watch ouer all our waies. Saint Peter ſaith, 1. Pet. 5.7. be ſober, and watch: as though he ſhould ſay, notwithſtanding we haue ſobrietie,It muſt goe with ſobrietie. that is, a well ordering of our affections, which is a moſt fit vertue to keepe the life in frame; yet without watchfulnes, it will be loſt, and depart from vs.Matth. 26.41. Mark. 13.33. &c. So our Sauiour ioyneth it with prayer where hee ſaith, Watch and pray, leaſt ye fall into temptation: As giuing vs to learne thereby, that the force of the one, is much weakned and abated without the other: and that men ſhall make but  cold prayers, if they watch not their liues, yea and for oportunitie to pray alſo.
               And both render their reaſon why watching ouer our ſelues carefully, ſhould be a companion to vs: ſeeing without it, we are by and by plunged into many noyſome temptations by Sathan, & our owne ſinful hearts. Beſides,The neceſſitie of it. the neceſſitie of this one helpe may eaſily be ſeene in our owne experience, by the contrarie ſinne, careleſnes and ſecuritie. For what doth more eaſily grieue the holy ſpirit of God, and quench it in vs, then that whatſoeuer chaſeth away godlines? or what doth ſo ſet open the dore to all confuſion?
               And further, becauſe of the vrgent neceſſitie of it,
                     2. Tim. 4.5. What manner of watchfullnes we ſhould vſe. Saint Paul warnes Timothie  to watch in all things: not in ſome one or few, but in all; and therefore at all times, in all places, with all perſons, and by all occaſions. It cauſed that holy man of God King Dauid to couenant and profeſſe this, that ſeeing he ſaw he could not diſcharge dutie to God, without an eſpeciall regard and taking heede to his life (by reaſon of Sathans vigilancie:Pſal. 101.2.) I will watch or doe wiſely (ſaith he) till thou come vnto me: I will walke in the vprightnes of my heart, in the middeſt of my houſe. And that I may not be thought to ſpeake abſurdly, becauſe I ſpeake otherwiſe then moſt mens practiſe doth approoue, view other Scriptures, and thou ſhalt ſee this truth more cleerely: For I muſt make this foundation ſtrong; ſeeing there is a great weight to be ſet vpon it.  In the third to the Hebrewes;Heb. 3.12. 
                  Take heede that there be not at any time in any of you an euill heart: this that he ſaith at any time, what can it meane leſſe, then that from time to time, the heart, and the manifold affections and deſires thereof, ſhould be looked vnto, and taken heede of, leaſt thereby the Lord ſhould be offended? &c.
               This taking heede therefore to thy ſelfe, and to thy heart eſpecially (becauſe from thence the words and actions doe come) muſt be thy companion from time to time, and thou muſt ſet this watch before the doore of thy lips, and thou muſt be well acquainted with looking diligently to thy waies, that it may goe well with thee, and that thou maieſt proſper. But if thou beeſt a ſtranger  vnto it, and it vnto thee, looke to fall often (I meane) to fall daungerouſly,He that watcheth beſt, ſleepeth ſometimes. (for otherwiſe he that watcheth moſt warily, cannot be free from offending) looke to finde many woundes in thy ſoule, and to want many comforts in thy life.
               And this I may boldly ſay, is the cauſe why many, and thoſe not euil men, doe make many iarres in their liues, and breake often into vnſeemely actions, and doe many things againſt their holy profeſſion, which they by and by

couer with the gentle name of infirmities, when indeede they doe rather  wilfully fulfill the deſires of their hearts, and raſhly and intemperately giue themſelues the bridle, refuſing vtterly in thoſe caſes this holy watchfulnes; yea and ſticke not to count it bondage, and a depriuing Chriſtians of their libertie, and too ſtreight an holding of them in: whereas, who ſeeth not, that watching is that to the life, which the eye-lid is to the eye; and that which the eye it ſelfe is to the whole body: and as it doth eaſily fall into many annoyances, except it be carefully and wiſely guided from wind and weather; ſo it fareth with thy ſoule and life, when thou doeſt not take heede to them, as Gods word and good inſtruction teacheth thee: for a due looking to thy waies, is the ſafety to thy life.
               
               
                  Much euill for want of watching.And becauſe this is ſeldome welcome to men, and little in vſe; therefore is a wel ordered and ſetled courſe, which ſhould be diligently kept of them, a meere ſtranger to thē. But contrariwiſe, becauſe they are ſecure for the moſt part; therefore they haue at leaſt both their hearts out of frame, and their liues voyde of good order. For what other thing is to bee ſaid, when thoſe which goe for religious ſhall be ſo hot, haſtie and furious, that they are not fit to be liued with,1. Sam. 25.10. 2. King. 5.25. as Nabal? Others ſo vntruſtie, and ſo hollow, that they cannot be dealt with, as Gehazi? Alas, I am weary of ſo often reprehending, and complaining of the vnreformed qualities and actions of the moſt part of them who goe for Chriſtians, and many of them (it may be thought) are ſo  indeede: and yet vntill they will take knowledge of this want of watchfulnes, and learne to bee acquainted with it, they ſhall neuer be at better ſtay, but out and in, off and on, neuer ſetled.
               
                  How a Chriſtian muſt frame himſelfe to it.But they muſt goe about it, to purpoſe and ſet their minde and delight vpon it, if they deſire to be the better by it. They muſt be content in this behalfe, to be dealt with as children, whom we will not ſuffer to handle, much leſſe to play with kniues: and as people diſtracted are kept in from water for feare of hurting themſelues; ſo muſt Chriſtians abſtaine, as the Apoſtle ſaith, and by all meanes weane themſelues from that which their hearts would naturally moſt deſire,
                     1. Pet. 2.10. VVhat he muſt weane himſelfe from, who is watchfull. Pſal. 131.2.
                   
                  euen their euill luſts which fight againſt their ſoules to deſtroy  them. They may not be ſo bold as to venture into any companie, without reſpect, nor to fall into any talke which liketh them, nor to giue themſelues any libertie in their deſires; the prophet ſaith, he behaued himſelfe as one weaned from his mothers breaſt. And as experienced Chriſtians cannot but remember how they lay open to danger and offences by all occaſions, before they became watchfull, and ſince doe ſee, what a benefit it is to them, and keepeth them in ſafetie on euery ſide: ſo they may eaſily know and bee able to diſcerne, how ill it goeth with all ſuch as walke not accompanied with it: which by little and little muſt be gotten, eſpecially, becauſe it is one of the helps, yea and that of greateſt vſe (as I further will ſhew in the next treatiſe) which God hath commaunded vs to vſe for our daily benefit.
               But as our Sauiour admoniſheth vs, prayer is to goe with it, as that which doth quicken,Prayer muſt goe with watching. and (as it were) put life into it, and that cauſeth it to be continued with much cheerefulnes, and little tediouſnes, whiles we conſider that God will bleſſe it vnto vs, euen as by praying we beleeue: therefore he ſaith, Watch and pray, leaſt ye fall into temptation: where alſo he doth (and that

                   not obſcurely) aſſigne and point out the time wherein we ſhould watch, namely, euen ſo long as we are in daunger of being tempted and drawne to ſinne. Which I obſerue, becauſe many good Chriſtians not hauing well weighed it, doe thinke it very much they ſhould diligently ſtand vpon their watch, as thinking that it depriueth them of much ſweete libertie, and therefore doe, as they thinke, with good reaſon diſlike and refuſe to be guided by that doctrine: although with little good aduice, as they who will not bee contentious, may eaſily ſee, by that which hath been ſaid about this matter.
               And for mine owne part, I thanke God, I can ſay, that many godly Chriſtians  in my knowledge, haue reaſoned againſt the carefull vſe of it, when they heard it firſt vrged, & before they had experience of it (for they thought it very much, that all which they had done in raſhnes, haſte, and without good aduice (as their whole life had been little better) ſhould be brought in queſtion:) and yet ſince, they hauing found the fruite of it ſo ſweet, and the gaine ſo great, after better aduice, they would in no wiſe forgoe it againe, and be let looſe to their former raſhnes and ſecuritie. So I doubt not, but that many, to whom God hath giuen ſome taſte and ſauour in heauenly things,VVatchfulnes is counted too ſtrict, till men be wel acquainted with it. for want of experience may at firſt, thinke the vrging of this watching, to be ouer ſtrict; yet after further inſight into it, as both commaunded vs of God,  and it ſelfe of ſingular gaine, they ſhall ſee their errour, and rather pray moſt earneſtly to haue their part in it, then to hold their former iudgement. I ſpeake not, as though any which feare God were meere ſtraungers to this grace and gift of God (for I know they are not without it ſometimes) but for that either in their iudgement they are not reſolued, that it ought to be in vſe with them from time to time, that is to ſay, one time as well as another: or if they be, yet they haue too much neglected it.
               As for them which obiect, that they cannot be ſo mortified as ſome are,The anſwere to them who ſay, they cannot watch. nor bee alwaies obſeruing themſelues as ſome doe, contenting themſelues with that which they haue, I ſay, it is a ſpeech much vnbeſeeming Chriſtians,  who are to profeſſe growing forward to more watchfulnes, as to all other kinds of grace. And yet I count their caſe better then theirs, who thinke they can ſerue God (they hope) without all this adoe: For they indeede beare themſelues in hand, that whiles in ſome generall ſort they pray at ſome time, and goe to Church, they neede not greatly examine their other behauiour beſide, or take heed vnto the ſame. Let all ſuch pleaſe themſelues as they liſt, ſure it is, they reſiſt God: and greatly to be lamented it is, that men being profeſſors of the Goſpell, ſhould haue ſo little vſe of this ſo gracious a helpe, ſo often preached vnto them.
               But to let them goe, ſee thou, whoſoeuer thou art, who deſireſt to walke  with God in peace, that thou circumſpectly looke vnto thy ſteps, and the ſeuerall affections of thy heart, what and how thou carrieſt thy ſelfe, as I haue ſhewed, how thou oughteſt to endeuour thy ſelfe to watch in all things. And this is the rather to be marked and learned, becauſe it lendeth helpe to all the other rules which hereafter follow, for directing thee in al the actions of the day, as I haue ſaid: Becauſe (as it followeth) neither in company with others,VVe muſt watch in the particular parts of our life. nor alone by thy ſelfe canſt thou pleaſe God, nor in proſperitie nor aduerſitie,

except thou beeſt warie and watchfull to be led by Gods word therein. So neceſſarie to a Chriſtian is this vertue, that the Apoſtle S. Paul to the Epheſians giueth this warning:Epheſ. 6.13. 
                  When ye haue put on the whole armour, and withſtood the enemie, by it; yet after take heede that ye ſtand faſt: leaſt by the ſubtile and continuall attendance of the enemie, your fall be the greater. Which may eaſily be, if wee conſider amongſt how many occaſions and prouocations we walke, and how ſhiftleſſe we are to auoide them: yea rather how readie of our ſelues to like well of them, and giue place vnto them.
               
                  VVhy we ought to watch.Our euill luſts, wherewith we be full fraught, doe carrie vs headlong into ſundrie iniquities, in ſo much that wee can goe about nothing, but wee may feele (if we can diſcerne) that ſome one or other of them is in our way to hurt  vs, and at hand to moleſt and diſquiet vs: or if we cannot eſpie it for the preſent time, yet it may be perceiued afterward that it was ſo.
               If we be occupied in holy and ſpiritual duties, we haue ſhame and hypocriſie on the one ſide to hinder vs: dulnes, wearines, vntowardnes, and many ſuch like poyſoned corruptions, on the other ſide to breake vs off. If we haue to doe in things lawfull, and indifferent, and of their owne nature not euill, as recreation, or earthly buſines, we are ſecure and careles how we doe them: we haue boldnes to defend our ſelues, be the manner of doing them, and our end and purpoſe neuer ſo vaine and euill. If we go about any euill thing, we haue reaſon and ſtrength of perſwaſion from the pleaſure and profit to goe  through with it, and to ſee no danger that accompanieth it, but to extenuate it,Eccleſ. 7. and not to looke to the end, as we ought to doe: but all ſound reaſon to diſſwade vs is weake, the diuel ſhewing himſelfe at ſuch times as a tempter, who yet will afterward come to vs as an accuſer, when we ſhould repent.
               Therefore if wee be not skilfull to know theſe diſordred luſts, diligent to eſpie, preuent and auoide them, and ſo haue this foreſaid watchfulnes ouer our liues, as a helpfull companion with vs; it cannot otherwiſe bee, but that wee commit many things vnbeſeeming vs, contrarie to the holie doctrine which wee profeſſe to follow; and that in many things through the whole courſe of our liues. Now when a man is thus carried of his intemperate  affections, and bringeth foorth the loathſome fruite thereof, what comfort can his life affoord him? Euen all ſuch to whom it is a ſad matter to abridge themſelues of their fooliſh will and vaine deſires, and to whom it is a death to withdraw their heart frō that which they long after, or to pluck back their eye from that which it delighteth in, they muſt feede vpon froth, and take comfort in follie: but as for the ſound and conſtant ioy of them who haue made a watchfull life their greateſt quiet (who haue therefore libertie and free acceſſe to ſolace their ſoules in the varietie of heauenly pleaſures) this ioy (I ſay) they are ſtrangers vnto, neither can they be partakers thereof.
               For hereby the Lord hath freely graunted vs to finde and inioy another  manner of liuing here in this world,VVhen one is not watchfull, ſome one croſſe maketh many bleſſings vnſauourie. then the moſt doe know or beleeue, euen a peaceable life to Godward, ſafe and ſweete, I meane, ſo farre as of ſinners in a vale of miſerie may be inioyed; which whoſoeuer be voide of, although they haue varietie of earthly pleaſures and delights, yet one vexation comming among them, ſhall make all comforts vnſauourie and irkſome vnto them:Examples. Exod. 8.
                   As may appeare in Pharaoh, when but ſome one of the plagues

                   of Egypt were vpon him: in Nabuchadnezzar,
                  Dan. 2. when hee had his fearefull dreame: and in Balthazar, when in the middeſt of his iolitie, that fearefull and vnwelcome hand-writing on the wall at midnight was ſeene of him:Dan. 5. and among all theſe there is none in whom this doth more liuely appeare, then in Haman, who for all his wealth, honour and promotion, could not ſatisfie himſelfe, while one meane man, yea a ſtraunger, Mordecai, refuſed to bow to him.
               And to come neerer to ſuch of whom the true God was more heard of or knowne, the ſame may be ſaid of Saul; who although hee were a King, yet when the Lord anſwered him no more, his heauines was deadly:1. Sam. 28. of Nabal 
                   likewiſe, who when he heard he muſt die and goe from all, he became ſenſeleſſe through ſorrow and anguiſh, and was as a ſtone: and of Zidkijah,
                  1. Sam. 25. who for all his boaſting of the ſpirit of God, yet being a falſe Prophet and a flatterer, was driuen to hide himſelfe from chamber to chamber,
                  1 King. 22. when the arrow of the Lord was ſent foorth againſt him, when the Kings ſhelter could not keepe him, as Michaiah told him. All theſe when they had but ſome one diſturbance in their life, how did it make all other delights vnpleaſant vnto them? So that I may truly ſay, that as the life which is paſſed in watchfulnes, is free from many, and thoſe alſo the greateſt diſcomforts, and filled with the contrarie peace: ſo whatſoeuer a man inioyeth according to his hearts deſire, yet  not looking to his waies warily, to keepe himſelfe from euill, feare and ſorrow ſhall euer befall him, vnleſſe (which is worſe) he be hardened: ſo that his life ſhall be found to haue little in it, worthie the reioycing in.
               And what cauſe there is to vrge this part of Chriſtian dutie of continuall watching, we may ſee by the example of our grandmother Eue,
                  
                     1. Tim. 2.14. How the beſt haue offended, when they haue not bin watchfull. who being in the eſtate of innocencie, and therefore the liker to haue been kept from euill; yet ſeeing ſhe was not circumſpect and watchfull to hold cloſe to the commaundement, wee ſee ſhe became the cauſe of tranſgreſsion vnto her huſband, and conſequently of the vniuerſall miſerie of her poſteritie. The like we may ſee by the example of king Dauid, whom though the Scripture doth  renowne with as great commendation for his meditating in the law of God, as any man: yet for that he was not armed with a watchfull heart at that one time when he walked on the roofe of his palace;2. Sam. 11.2. behold how the diuell had laid a baite for him (which he, as wiſe as he was, could not diſcerne) and by his ſubtill and ſecret handling of the matter, caught him in his ſnare: So that hee receiued ſuch recompence for the letting looſe of his heart at that time, both in outward reproch and inward anguiſh and bitternes of ſoule, that by good right ſhould make other men cleaue faſt to watchfulnes, and be faithfull vnto the Lord; yea and to beware with all diligence, that they dallie not with the baites of ſinne at any time, nor giue their hearts the bridle, vntill they be  gone ſo farre, that they cannot, before great offence be committed, be called backe againe. The experience that I haue gathered, ſince I began to looke more aduiſedly into this thing, I meane into the neceſſitie and benefit of a watchfull courſe, which hath bin long enough to teach and aduiſe both my ſelfe and others vpon ſo long a triall (well nigh theſe thirtie yeeres in ſome manner as I haue been able) this experience (I ſay) doth make me the bolder and earneſter in it, to perſwade ſuch as haue truly imbraced the Goſpell,

that they would adioyne herewith this godly watch, a ſpeciall nouriſher and  ſtrengthner of their faith, to ſettle themſelues therein whatſoeuer they goe about, or take in hand: as that their talke be not idle and frothie, but ſauourie and poudred with ſalt; that their actions be ſuch, as they may defend with peace of conſcience againſt their accuſers; and that they labour to ſuppreſſe, and to bring into ſubiection euen their wicked thoughts and deſires, and weaken euen the bodie of ſinne it ſelfe, I meane the old man with his luſts. For behold and this know, that euen amongſt thoſe who reioyce in the teſtimonie of a good conſcience, ſuch doe alwaies honour the Goſpell moſt; moſt ſtop the mouth of the gainſayer, and doe carrie themſelues moſt conſtantly and continually in an euen and good courſe, ſo farre as they haue knowledge, who haue been  wiſe this way,Other gifts much beautified by this: and contrarie. and who haue determined with themſelues to ſtand vpon their watch from time to time. And on the other ſide, ſuch as in whō many good things may be ſeene (I ſpeake both of teachers & hearers) and are for ſundrie cauſes much to bee accounted of; yet being noted for raſh and vnſtaied in their actions, and not ſo much looking to themſelues, by wiſe gouernment of themſelues, haue done the leſſe good to others by their example, and haue cauſed the other gifts which they haue to be the leſſe regarded. God be gloried for the good that is done by this in many: but if it were more commonly imbraced and taken vp of many moe, who for knowledge are able to ſeaſon and giue light to numbers, they ſhould not be moſt in diſgrace  who haue leaſt deſerued it, nor many pleaſe themſelues in a looſe and vnprofitable courſe, which beſide that, it withholdeth from them much ſound comfort, it is a ſore blemiſh in their liues. Yet this I thought good to adde, for as much as the Romiſh Church, eſpecially they who will ſeeme more deuout then the reſt,The watchfull obſeruing of mens traditions, is farre off from this. ſtand much vpon their diligent keeping of the cuſtomes of their mother Church, and the precepts of the ſame, who might therefore ſeeme to themſelues, and be thought of others to be before others in godlines: let all know, that this which I haue ſaid of watchfulnes, leaueth not the leaſt piece of commendation to them. For they watch to keepe the obſeruances of men; but watchfulnes muſt bee vſed for the obeying of the  commaundements of God: they ſuperſtitiouſlie watch to obſerue ſome houres and daies and times, wherein if they performe any thing in outward working, they thinke themſelues more holy then others, though other times be little regarded: but the watchfulnes which pleaſeth God, tēdeth to euerie houre, day and time, as well one as another. And to ſpeak of their beſt watch which they keepe ouer their liues, yet from their owne words I conclude, that it cannot be allowed of God, becauſe it commeth not of faith, that is, of aſſurance of the fauour of God, and conſequently that he will bleſſe it (for this faith, which they call the Proteſtants faith, they vtterly renounce) without which yet,Heb. 11.6. 
                  it is impoſsible to pleaſe God.
                  
               
               Now to grow to an end about this matter. It is further to be marked, that (becauſe true Chriſtians, & the deareſt ſeruants of God do cōplaine of ſome eſpecial infirmities, wherewith they find thēſelues more troubled then with any other) they muſt be more ſuſpitious of, and vigilant againſt them, then others. And becauſe the diuell doth more eaſily winde them into ſome ſins, then others (as he ſeeth their diſpoſition and inclination, and thereby the

                   greater daunger they are in, by meanes thereof) therefore they are taught in wiſedome and experience to haue a more narrow eye ouer them, and more eſpecially to auoyde the very occaſions of them whereby they haue fallen. For example, put the caſe, that ſome are ſtrongly tempted to the ſinne of vncleannes, who being blindfolded about that which they deſire,We muſt ſpecially watch againſt that infirmitie, which moſt anoyeth vs. doe count it no offence, though they paſſe their bounds very greatly in wantonnes of eye, in libertie of ſpeech that way, or ſecret deſires, of though they ſee themſelues ſnared therewith; yet hauing through long cuſtome nouriſhed their hearts in ſuch lothſome delights, and too faintly miſliked their offence when they ſaw it, haue brought themſelues into bondage to their luſts.
               
                   In this therefore if there be not much occupying of the heart againſt this ſinne, to ſee into, and weigh the lothſomnes, ſhame and danger of it; how vnbeſeeming it is Gods ſeruants to be ſubiect to ſuch ſlauerie; if it be not acknowledged heartily to God, earneſt and daily prayers as occaſion ſhall be offered, ſent vp to God againſt it, with confidence both of pardon and power to mortifie and weaken it, with ſtrong and many reaſons to diſgrace and renounce it, and the occaſions of nouriſhing it wiſely and watchfully auoyded; euen this one ſin, though they ſhould neuer offend groſſely, would hold the conſcience in great vnquietnes, cauſe the parties to wander in deepe ſorrow, and make them vnfit to Chriſtian duties: yea if there be not  more labour beſtowed there, then in other parts of the life, it will make euery thing to goe forward much the worſe, and in other actions of the life much confuſion to grow; and the longer they haue nouriſhed ſuch vaine dreames, the more hardly they ſhall awake out of them, euen when they gladly would. And that which I ſay of this one, I may as truely ſay of the reſt, if they haue been harboured. To this purpoſe, is that complaint of the people of Iſrael in their repentance and turning to God: wherein they declare that one ſinne did more trouble them, then ſome other.
               For thus they ſay in their confeſſion: We haue ſinned againſt thee, O Lord,
                  1. Sam. 12.19. 
                  but eſpecially in asking vs a king, beſides all our other ſinnes. And as it troubled  them moſt when they asked pardon of God; ſo it appeareth in the ſtorie, that of all other ſinnes they were moſt drawne by that to offend God: For when they would needes haue a King againſt the will of God,1. Sam. 8.19. and Samuel was ſent from God to tell them what a manner of one he ſhould be, if they would needes haue one contrarie to Gods mind; it is expreſly ſaid, that the people would not heare the voyce of Samuel, but anſwered, nay, but there ſhall be a King ouer vs, and we will be like all other nations. Therefore as their ſin, whereby they did moſt offend God, put them to greateſt trouble: ſo muſt thoſe eſpeciall ſinnes, which haue preuailed againſt Gods children, be moſt watched againſt and auoyded.
               
                   And is there not great reaſon in it, foraſmuch as they haue moſt diſquieted them, that they ſhould bend the moſt force of their ſtrength againſt them? Euen as if ſome one troubleſome perſon in a towne ſhould diſquiet the whole, all would lay their helpe together to remoue and keepe him out;An illuſtrating it by ſimilies. And as in an houſe which hath many and great commodities, and yet ſome one ſore annoyance, as a principal chimney caſting ſmoke, with great ſpeede that ſhall be redreſſed, more then other things, which yet are to be regarded

likewiſe: ſo in the life of ſound Chriſtians, wherein many good bleſſings  of God may bee reaped and inioyed, the chiefe ruines are to be chiefely looked vnto, although the meaner are not to be neglected. And great labour muſt bee taken about it, and watching againſt that ſinne, which moſt preuaileth in vs; and much more, then againſt ſome other, by which there is leſſe danger to be feared.
               And this helpe (as I haue declared how) if it be vſed, and the meanes faithfully practiſed from time to time,The fruite of ſuch watching. let no doubt be made (ſeeing God hath promiſed ſucceſſe thereby, euen greater grace in the vſe thereof, then the ſin ſhall be able to reſiſt) let no doubt (I ſay) be made, but that they ſhall maiſter it, ſo farre, as it ſhall bring peace; vnleſſe it be the caſe of vnmarryed  perſons, to whom God hath appointed marriage for a lawfull remedie, when by none of the forementioned, or the like meanes, the gift of continencie can no longer be enioyed.
               This aduiſe how vnſauorie and vnwelcome ſoeuer it be to ſuch as are wedded to their luſts, and will offer no violence to them: yet ſuch as know the ſmart that is raiſed by this ſinne, and that ſometime the deere ſeruants of God haue been deceiued by it, will be glad to bee directed and helped againſt it. And that which I haue ſaid of this, I may ſay of pride, worldlines, anger, malice, reuenge, vniuſt dealing and lying, that as euery man is more eaſily ouercome of, or hurt by them, more then of other ſinnes; ſo hee  ſhould haue a more continuall feare of them, watchfulnes againſt them, and beſtow more time in ſeeking the rooting out of them: that ſo the wealth and ſafetie of the whole life may be preſerued, when ſuch noyſome ſores, as did moſt of all impaire the ſame, be cured.
               But if men be either ignorant of this dutie, or cannot be perſwaded to ſet themſelues to the entertaining of it, and to get acquaintance with it, they muſt looke to liue deſtitute of a chiefe part of godlines; or if it be but now and then in ſome eſpeciall actions and parts of our life, regarded and looked vnto (as it is done of them who are not greatly experienced in the practiſe of Chriſtianitie) it will make the godly life in great part to be bereaued both  of her gaine and beautie.
               Our hearts muſt not range where they liſt, nor our delights bee faſtned where we pleaſe; but our eyes, our tongues, our eares, hands, feete, and the whole powers of our mindes,If we be but turned out of the way, we muſt ſpeedily returne. Phil. 2.12. Prou. 28.14.
                   and members of our bodies muſt beholden within compaſſe. In ſo much, that if we ſee, we haue but broken out of our conſtant courſe a little, & that our conſciences begin to checke vs, we ſhould tremble to thinke what we haue done: and feare alwayes for the time to come, leaſt we ſhould offend. We muſt watch when we are well, to keepe well: and when we haue been deceiued, to returne ſpeedily againe: we muſt watch in trouble, againſt triefnes and impatience: in proſperitie, againſt wantonnes  and lightnes, Iob. 31.1. If we could frame to this, we ſhould doe well enough, as he that looketh to his foote in a ſlippery place, ſhall not be hurt. And if we may by watching ouer our ſelues, haue our whole life in ſafety, and welfare; are we not worthie to ſmarte, if we cannot doe ſo much for ſo great a benefit? Therefore, moſt worthily doe ſuch ſuffer hardnes and ſorrow, who will in no wiſe be brought to take heede to their waies; but cry out, that

                   it is preciſenes and a kinde of death vnto them, to be reſtrained from their noyſome and dangerous liberties: From whence ariſeth boldnes and wilfulnes, which cannot want much ſinne. But this watchfulnes doth God require to be in vs, and to be accounted no tediouſnes, but had in high price: and he that with an honeſt heart and good conſcience ſubmitteth himſelfe hereunto, he ſhall be able to proue by good experience, that watchfulnes is a great meane to maintaine a godly life. Thus much for the more plaine and full handling of this firſt priuate helpe, called watchfulnes.
            
            
               
                   CHAP. 6. Of Meditation, the ſecond priuate helpe.
               
                  NOw followeth the ſecond, which is Meditation:VVhat it is. And that is when we doe of purpoſe, ſeparate our ſelues from all other things, and conſider as we are able, and thinke of ſome poynts of inſtruction neceſſarie to leade vs forward to the kingdome of heauen, and the better ſtrengthening of vs againſt the diuel and this preſent euill world, and to the wel ordering of our liues. I ſay of purpoſe, ſeeing we both muſt  minde ſuch things in good aduiſednes, and ſet our ſelues about them reſolutely, when we take them in hand; that they may be done with more reuerence and profit: and alſo ſeeing it falleth out for the moſt part, that we ſeldome enter into meditation of heauenly things, when we doe not intend them, but are ledde by the obiects of our mindes, eyes, or eares an hundred waies amiſſe, or if any good thought ariſe, it is repelled by and by, and goeth no further. To proceede I ſay, that when we meditate, we ought to ſeparate our ſelues from all company and troubleſome occaſions,Matth. 6. as our Sauiour commaundeth vs to doe, when we pray priuately (theſe two being companions) as in our chamber priuatly, or in the field, or ſome commodious place,  that we may the better performe it: the ſmalleſt occaſions ſoone breaking vs off from ſuch ſeruice of God.
               And I ſay laſtly, that we muſt there ſet our minds on worke, about the cogitation of things heauenly, by calling to remembrance ſome one or other of them which we knowe: and ſo debate and reaſon about the ſame, that our affections may thereby be moued to loue and delight in, or to hate and feare, according to that which we meditate on; ſo that we may make ſome good vſe of it to ourſelues. And this ſpirituall exerciſe of meditation is euen that which putteth life and ſtrength into all other duties, and parts of Gods worſhip. And this the holy Ghoſt reporteth of Iſaac the Patriarke,Geneſ. 24.63. 
                  
                  that he went out into the field toward the euening to meditate. Which had not been commendable, if he had not vſed ſo to doe (ſeeing it is the right kinde of ſuch holy duties to be oft in vſe) being taught of his father Abraham, who was the friend of God, and very familiar with him, and therefore (we may be ſure) had much communion and talke with him. As alſo our father Enoch did, who for proofe hereof, is ſaid in his whole life, to haue walked with God.
               
               And this are all ſuch as deſire to take any good by it, to know: that they

muſt be acquainted throughly with this ſweete and heauenly communing  with the Lord and themſelues, which was called of the Fathers of ancient time, their Soliloquie, that is, the talke which they vſed to haue alone by themſelues: That as men wearied, deſire reſt; ſo wee by the varietie and multiplicitie of buſines in this world, being troubled and diſtracted, may ſeeke eaſe to our mindes by meditation.
               For otherwiſe wee may muſe and thinke vpon any good things, and ponder our words and actions which wee doe, to ſee them done aright: which yet is not this kind of meditation that I now ſpeake of, but that watchfulnes mentioned before; which is a warie regarding, and taking heede to our waies, in one thing after another. Which yet the Prophet calleth meditation  alſo:Pſal. 119.97. Ioſh. 1.8. as where he ſaith, All the day long doe I meditate on thy word: and in Ioſua; Thou ſhalt meditate day and night on the booke of the law: which wee know, could not be vnderſtood of meditation by intermiſſion of companie, or other actions, and buſines, but in their whole courſe a circumſpect care and regard that they might bee done after the word. And the matter of this our meditation,The matter of meditation. may be of any part of Gods word: on God himſelfe, his wiſedome, power; his mercie, or of the infinite varietie of good things which wee receiue of his free bountie; alſo of his workes and iudgements: or on our eſtate, as our ſinnes, and the vilenes of our corruption, that wee yet carrie about vs, our mortalitie, of the changes in this world, or of our deliuerance  from ſinne, and death: of the manifold afflictions of this life, and how wee may in beſt manner beare and goe through them, and the benefit thereof, and the manifold and great priuiledges which wee inioy daily through the ineſtimable kindnes of God toward vs: but ſpecially of thoſe things which we haue moſt ſpeciall neede of.
               Theſe and ſuch like are the matter of our meditation, and as oft as we goe aſide to thinke with purpoſe and deſire of heart vpon theſe things, or any of them, for the better calling of our mindes out of the world, then we are ſaid to meditate: ſo when in or about any of theſe, we ſigh, moane, complaine to God, or reioyce, and are quickened in our hearts by ſuch occaſions, euen  that alſo is meditation, and moſt commonly ioyned with prayer. Of which two holie exerciſes the booke of the Pſalmes is full, namely that 119. Pſalme: where the man of God ſetteth downe his meditations, which he had in euerie ſtate of his: as either lamentation, complaints, or ſupplications in his affliction; or ioy and thankes for deliuerances and proſperitie.
               By this vnderſtand, what manner of exerciſe meditation is: Euen ſuch an exerciſe it is, which is required of thee from time to time (as may be conuenient) through thy life, that by recording holie and diuine things, eſpecially thoſe which may make thee ſound in the matter of thy ſaluation, a little time (when thou maiſt beſt) may bee beſtowed of thee to drie vp thy fleſhly and  bad humours of earthly mindednes and worldlines, &c. or to quicken thy dull heart, leaſt after thy ſleepe in ſinne, the diuell maketh thee forget thy former well ordrednes. And becauſe I am too ſure that few are acquainted with it, though it bee an helpe moſt profitable to godlines, I will ſomewhat more at large ſpeake of it, that the practiſe of it may be more common: and that they which vſe it with the other helps, may much more cheerefully go

                   through their courſe.The neceſſitie of meditation. How neceſſarie this heauenly exerciſe and recourſe to God is, may eaſily be conceiued, for that the hearts euen of good Chriſtians are ſo ſeaſoned with vnſauourie thoughts, deſires, and delights of follie, vanitie, and much other naughtines (ſeeing the beſt are chaunged and reformed but in part) that they thinke it vtterly impoſſible to bring them to any better point; and therefore many by this errour doe not greatly goe about it: yet if ſuch noiſome poyſons be ſuffered to lurke and remaine in them, we know, they doe not onely, as ſowre weedes choake the plants of grace in them, but alſo grow vp, and bring forth moſt noiſome and dangerous fruits, as by wofull experience men feele and trie.
               
                   And for the weeding theſe out of the ground of their hearts,What our meditations ſhould be of our ſinnes. there is no meanes ſo auaileable, as this conſidering oft, and deepe meditating on them: namely, what ſwarmes of wicked cogitations and luſts, do lodge in the heart, and to finde them out, alſo to bring them into a vile account, to be wearie and aſhamed of them, and ſo to entertaine better in their roome. I ſay there is no helpe more auaileable to hunt and purge them out, becauſe although by the word we know them, by conference we doe reuiue the remembrance of them, and by reading we doe both: yet all theſe runne out of our riuen heads,
                  Heb. 
                        •
                     .1. and abide meanly with vs to ſuppreſſe our corruptions, and to tame our harts vntill wee bring our ſelues to often and much muſing and debating of the  good things which we heare and reade of, that ſo we may digeſt them; and of the euils which wee heare, that we may abandon them: euen as worldlie men ponder deeply their affaires which are weightie.
               Now when we ſee ſo farre into the danger of them, and be wearied with the noiſomnes of them, that we will tie our ſelues oft to gage theſe hearts of ours, to ſift our thoughts, to accuſe and condemne them,Meditation purgeth out ſin. as we find cauſe by the filthines and ſhame of them, and herein will deale truly, as we loue our ſoules: then doe wee begin to breake the knot of ſuch curſed ſwarmes, and to chaſe away the lurking litter of prophane thoughts and deſires out of our hearts; then we waxe more watchful againſt them after, and make more conſcience  of them, adioyning thereto, inward and earneſt requeſts to God for aſſiſtance and bleſſing: Then alſo we ſhall furniſh our hearts more gratiouſly with heauenly cogitations and holy deſires: all which make greatly for the well paſſing of our daies. Therfore no man that will weigh how great things are wrought in our hearts, by holie meditating vpon our eſtate, and vpon Gods bountifulnes towards vs, namely, euen a framing of vs after the image of God, ſhall neede to doubt how neceſſarie it is.
               And ſo much the more wee are to thinke it, becauſe it is well knowne by Scripture, and tried by experience, that our hearts are deceitfull aboue meaſure: and thereby we beare our ſelues in hand,Our hearts are deceitfull. that if wee doe once obtaine  thus much of them, that wee can commend that which is good, and ſpeake againſt euill, we are readie to thinke our eſtate to be right marueilous good, when yet in the meane while,Rom. 2.28. Zach. 12.12. if wee doe not finde our hearts in our ſecret meditations (and when wee ſearch our thoughts alone by our ſelues, how they ſtand affected) that we can feele vnfained hatred of euill to be in them, and loue to goodnes: wee doe but deceiue our ſelues. And in euery little triall, we ſhall finde it otherwiſe then wee would thinke: I meane, that ſinne

ſitteth neerer and is faſter glued to vs, then wee did imagine.
               
               For as he which goeth to warre, is firſt trained and made fit to vſe his weapon at home:VVe muſt ſet againſt our ſinne in our priuate meditation, before we can caſt it off in company. and the ſcholler trieth maſteries priuately, before he come forth to diſpute openly: So a good Chriſtian will trie what he can doe againſt his affections and ſinne, alone by himſelfe in his ſolitarie meditation, and reſolue againſt the ſame (accordingly as he ſeeth the difficultie thereof to require) before he can in his common dealings, with all ſortes and companies, be ſtrong from temptations and falles, and free from offence giuing in his words and deedes. And therefore on the contrarie, this is the cauſe, why ſo many bewray themſelues to be hypocrites before men, for that they haue no triall of the truth and ſimplicitie of their hearts alone by themſelues, in iudging and proouing the vprightnes of them before God, and therefore haue not ſought ſtrength of him againſt their infirmities.
               Oh how doth this communing with the Lord in ſecret, and debating with our ſelues about our mortalitie and corruption, and of his fauour in vanquiſhing them; how (I ſay) doth this, as oyntment mollifie our hard hearts, and make them to relent, and doth relieue them pleaſantly with the ſweetnes of it? How doth this eſtraunging of our ſelues from worldly impediments, drawe vs into neare and heauenly communion with our God? How doth it make vs acquainted with the manifold rebellions of our nature? with our blindnes, ſecuritie, earthlines, and infinit other loathſome filthineſſes, which neither wee our ſelues will take knowledge of, while we carry our ſelues in many things as good Chriſtians amongſt men; neither any other (but ſuch as doe know it) would euer thinke, that ſo much poyſon could be incloſed in ſo narrow a roome, as within the compaſſe of one ſilly man.
               
                  Other ſweete benefit of meditation.Oh the fruite and benefit, which by our meditation and priuate prayer we reape, is ſo great (the ſpirit of God changing our hearts thereby, from their daily courſe and cuſtom more and more, and bringing the heauenly life into more liking with vs, and making it more eaſie and ſweete, which with the men of the world is ſo yrkeſome and vnſauorie) that none can well  expreſſe or conceiue it, but he which hath felt the ſame? For by it, God bringeth to paſſe, that the ſugred baites of earthly delights and tranſitorie pleaſures of the world (though Sathan kindleth an exceſſiue and an inordinate loue of them in vs) become not deadly poiſon vnto vs, as they doe to many, the Lord teaching vs to ſee the painted vizor and deceiueable picture of them by looking into them throughly, that we may beware of them.
               And as the Scripture noteth, how the men of God, who are moſt commended there for their pietie, as Moſes, Dauid, Paul, and others, were much taken vp of this exerciſe; ſo I dare boldly affirme, that the moſt godly of our  time, may thanke God much for their acquaintance with it, and much vſe of it: and others that are ſtrangers to it, how wiſe and forward ſoeuer they be in practiſe of Chriſtian dutie, ſhould be much more purged and cleanſed from euill, if with their other ſeruices of God, they were conuerſant in this meditation ioyned with their priuate prayers, and this ſecret talking with God, and with their owne hearts.
               
                  
                   And therefore although I looke not by this ſpeech to perſwade prophane men and ſuch as are addicted, and giuen ouer to the full inioying of their hearts deſire in the things of this preſent world, to regard this practiſe of muſing: yet my hope is, that I ſhall eaſily preuaile with thoſe;2. Theſ. 3.4. 
                  Who haue been readie and willing long agone, if they might haue had any plaine direction to teach them how to vſe it; to preuaile (I ſay) with them, to haue it in greater reckoning, for the neere and inward acquaintance which they may haue with God by it, as by little and little they ſhall be inabled. But the truth is indeede, that it is new and ſtrange to ſuch as haue not been accuſtomed to it,Meditation, a ſtranger to many. though people of good hope: in ſomuch, that when they heare by the word  of God, that ſuch a dutie is required by him at their hands, they are readie (though it tend to their great benefit) to reaſon againſt it, as needles, and too hard to be attained vnto, contenting themſelues to ſerue God without it rather, then to imbrace it immediatly, vntill they may ſee further into the neceſſitie, benefit, and poſſibilitie of it. And for the firſt two, how neceſſarie and profitable it is, I haue ſhewed; as alſo it will further appeare by that which followeth, of the lettes which doe hinder it, and the remedies againſt them. And then I will ſhew how poſſible, yea in time how eaſie it will become; and then will the benefit and fruite thereof, moſt chiefly appeare. And concerning the letters how many and great ſoeuer they be, before I  ſpeake of them, I haue no doubt, notwithſtanding them, by Gods aſſiſtance to make the way ſo eaſie, and plaine to the true Chriſtian to meditation (in this treatiſe of and about it) that by the ſame, the difficulties and diſcouragements which doe moſt trouble them, ſhall be remoued, or at leaſt weakned, that howſoeuer ſome take no profit by it, they ſhall haue the way ſhewed them in a few leaues, which they alſo may learne in a few weekes, to make good benefit of it, which otherwiſe they may (without helpe) be voyde of for many yeares.
               To ſay ſomewhat therefore of the impediments firſt,The lets of meditation, are diuers. which hold Gods people ſtrangers from the vſe of meditation with profit, they are of two ſorts:  For either they are ſuch as hinder them altogether from going about, or entring into it; or elſe they keepe them from taking any good thereby, although they ſet apart all other things of purpoſe, that they may giue themſelues (for the time) wholy thereto. Of the former ſort, there are three:The firſt let and the remedie thereof. The firſt is, when a Chriſtian knowing this dutie to be required of him, goeth about it, either in the morning (as I here perſwade, if it may be) or at any other conuenient time, but he hath no matter in readines to meditate vpon: he is emptie, barren, and vtterly to ſeeke about what to beſtowe the time,VVant of matter. and his cogitations: for although he hath heard many things in ſermons, and wanteth many graces, which might driue him the rather to meditation  the better to come by them, and carrieth about many corruptions, and hath receiued many bleſſings and mercies from God; yet the diuell holdeth him, as it were blinde, forgetfull, and his minde confounded (it being occupied and taken vp vſually other waies amiſſe) ſo that he can finde nothing to muſe or conſider vpon, whereby he might ſeaſon his heart.
               Which when he ſeeth, and thereby that he cannot proceede in the dutie which he hath been taught to performe, and deſireth alſo to doe the ſame:

he is exceedingly diſcouraged, made heauie hearted, and thereby the more  hardly perſwaded to goe about it any more, but vnable to aske the way to redreſſe the ſame. For they who are ſo ſnared and ouermatched by the diuell, can hardly ſeeke remedy, if any thing be amiſſe with them, but leaue of altogether from the good, in the which they perceiue themſelues to be ſtopped: which is cleane contrarie to the practiſe of the children of this world, who are ſo wiſe in their kind, that if they be diſappointed and broken off,Luk. 16.2.3. from their purpoſe one way, they will ſeeke the accompliſhment of their deſire many other waies, rather then to be fruſtrated.
               Now againſt this Let, I haue ſet downe hereafter in this treatiſe a way to remedy it: vnto the which I referre the reader; that is to ſay, certaine  rules to helpe him to meditate, and examples alſo to ſet him on worke: yet leaſt euery weake Chriſtian ſhould not be able ſufficiently to direct himſelfe, this I adde further and more particularly, that it ſhall be expedient for him, principally to propound to himſelfe, as he is able theſe foure things (till he ſhall be better able) to helpe himſelfe, to muſe of them. Firſt, of his vnworthines, vilenes, and other his ſeuerall corruptions, and ſinnes. Secondly, of the greatnes of Gods bountie in forgiuing ſo many, and ſubduing daily more and more the dominion of ſinne and Sathan in him. Thirdly, he is to thinke how he may be guided through that preſent day, after the rules of his daily direction, eſpecially thoſe that ſeeme hardeſt to be followed, both the well  ordering of the heart, and framing his life, ſo farre as they agree with Gods word. Fourthly, let him meditate on the ſeuerall parts of the Chriſtian armour, how God hath appointed to ſtrengthen him thereby, and by the other helps, which I ſet downe to be vſed daily, for his better going forward, and how ſweete his life ſhall be by theſe helps in many reſpects more, then otherwiſe it can poſſibly be, and how to watch againſt all lets which may ariſe to hinder him from this courſe.
               Theſe or ſo many of them as he may conueniently, when he goeth about it, if he hath no other thing more neceſſarie, and in the beſt manner that he can be directed (through the counſell of any who is able) theſe (I ſay) are  an eſpeciall remedie to helpe him, who for want of matter to meditate on, ſhould neglect or omit it; and for varietie, thoſe meditations which I ſhall ſet downe, ſhall helpe him forward alſo. For there is no true beleeuer (how weake ſoeuer he be) but he is fit (if he be willing) to follow this direction.
               
                  The ſecond let, and the remethereof.The next impediment of the firſt ſort that hindereth a Chriſtian from meditating, is an vnfit minde vnto ſpiritual and heauenly duties, as when it being carried after other deſires, is ſlow and vnwilling to be occupied in cogitation or conſideration of any holy matters: and therefore letteth paſſe this meditation, as finding himſelfe vtterly vnable to enter into the ſame. He that knoweth, it ſhould be performed (it may be) is ſometime grieued for the omitting of it: but if the minde be impotent, as hauing loſt her former ſtrength for the time, it is conſtrained to yeeld to the omitting of it. Now for the redreſſe of this, I anſwere, if he who omitteth it thus, through the vntowardnes of his heart, and vnfitnes to good duties, be ſuch an one as hath learned and reſolued to ſerue God euery day, he can the more hardly

                   beare this diſordrednes of the minde, and therefore he will ſeeke more ſpeedily to haue it remedied: But if hee hath not yet obtained any ſuch gouernment of himſelfe, but doth dutie to God more generally, ſeldome, and vncertainly, it muſt needes be the more hardly redreſſed: for it is manifeſt, that ſuch an one hath giuen his minde more libertie to wander in the world from the Chriſtian courſe.
               The remedie to both, as they can receiue it, is one and the ſame; although not to both alike eaſie: yet ſeeing they are both the Lords, let them bring their minds to theſe conſiderations, and ſay with themſelues, I haue receiued a minde to pleaſe God, to be teachable and readie to any dutie: I haue oppoſed  my ſelfe againſt mine owne will, and the diuels ſecret and malitious counſell, though ſweet to the fleſh: I am not a debter vnto it: how can I then yeeld to this vntowardnes of my heart, and ſo ſinne againſt my God? Where are the manifold and comfortable priuiledges, which hee hath giuen me, that I might bee faithfull to him? Am I wearie of my peace, and doe I haſte after mine owne ſorrow? Lord therefore bring backe this ranging heart of mine from the deceitfull dreames, or feares, or doubts that it hath been ſnared in: and reſtore it to the libertie which it was wont to inioy, that is, to ſolace it ſelfe in thy fauour, and communion with thee, and to count it my greateſt happines to commune with thee, when I may. And this gift being decaied, through  mine owne fault, and Sathans crueltie and ſubtiltie, reſtore againe vnto me, and forgiue my weake loue towards thee, who haue prouoked thy maieſtie, (if thou wouldeſt bee prouoked) to frowne and looke amiablie on me no more.
               Thou Lord chargeſt me, thus to ſeeke thy face, euen thy ſweete preſence, which I haue gone from, and for a time been blinded, as hauing no abilitie to muſe of any good things, and haue not ſeene that I was ſeduced, till I perceiued that I had loſt this ſweete libertie: now therefore (O Lord) ſhew thy louing kindnes in my diſtreſſe and weakenes, and reſtore to me this libertie of my minde, which many of thy children doe finde.
               
                   Thus fall into conſideration with thy ſelfe, and diſcourage not thy ſelfe, who haſt learned to vſe all thy wants to humble thee, and to bring thee neerer to God, rather then to goe further from him: So that I conclude, that the remedie to ſuch a one, as through an vnſetled heart, cannot meditate of any parts of Chriſtianitie and godlines, hauing otherwiſe knowledge; yea the beſt remedie is to meditate of his preſent vnfitnes, looſenes of heart and earthly mindednes, to count it as an heauie burthen, to accuſe his heart, and ſo to bring it to relenting, by conſidering how farre off it is preſently from that mildnes, humblenes, heauenlines, and readines vnto dutie, which haue been in him at ſome other times. But let no man giue any libertie in any ſort  to his euill heart (when it is turned away from cheerefulnes and willingnes in any part of Gods ſeruice to goe forward therein) for that were to bring him into vtter bondage. And this for redreſſe of the ſecond let.
               The third followeth, and that is want of opportunitie, & leaſure,The third let, and the remedie thereof. by reaſon of neceſſarie buſines taking vp the time: vnto the which may bee added this, that there is no conuenient place to ſome, wherein they may goe apart from company, as the ſea-men, or ſuch as muſt go farre from their dwellings, when

they ſhould vſe it, as hauing neither choiſe of roome, and yet the ſame taken  vp with children, and ſtirring vp and downe within, and compaſſed round with other houſes adioyning without, as in ſmall and poore families it is to be ſeene. To them which alleage that they are hindred by neceſſarie buſines, I denie not, but ſuch may, and doe fall out ſometimes, eſpecially to perſons who are occupied about many things:Luk. 10.42. whom I exhort, to weigh (as it behooueth all ſuch to whom this belongeth) that one thing is neceſſarie: and that the ordinarie workes of their callings are not to put this dutie out of place: for if they doe, it is by the vnskilfulnes, or vntowardnes of them who commit this fault: but the one of them is appointed of God to goe with the other, and both of them to ſtand together to the vpholding of their inward  peace. And if they ſay, that their hindrance is not thereby, but by workes more then ordinarie, I further beſeech them by the mercifulnes of God, that they ſeeke not cloakes for their ſlouth; neither hold themſelues backe from ſo profitable duties, by occaſions of no great weight or importance, but rather for yeelding to the fleſh. I call thoſe buſineſſes, occaſiōs of great weight, when the omitting of them, although they be but houſehold, or worldly affaires; yet may trouble them more at that time, then the omitting of their meditatiō, which may be performed another time, but their buſineſſes cannot: As it commeth oft to paſſe, that the neglecting of neceſſarie worke, through want of diſcretion, and heede taking, when it ſhould bee done (although  in the meane while, prayer, reading, meditation, or ſuch like be gone about) troubleth the mind (I ſay) with ſo deepe griefe, through ſome great diſcommoditie ſuſtained, that in long ſpace it is not quiet and at libertie to ſerue God any way againe. And ſeeing God requireth to be honoured of vs in al things, euen in theſe earthly, as well as ſpirituall, therefore we muſt not think, it pleaſeth him whē any man ſhall through zeale without knowledge, doe that at one time, which ſhall quench zeale for want of wiſe heed taking, for many times after: but if any man will hereby let looſe ye bridle any thing the more to worldlines, let him know, that he hath frō hence no ſuch liberty.
               Now to returne, if any through neceſſarie lets ſhall be conſtrained to let  paſſe this dutie of meditation, hereby let it appeare to haue been neceſſarie, and without his fault, if hee ſupplie this dutie after his neceſſarie labour ended, and take heede that in no wiſe it be omitted altogether, vnleſſe hee can be aſſured with peace, that God in the omitting of it hath been remembred ſome other way. And ſo I ſay of the hindrance, which commeth by want of conuenient place, that muſt be done which may moſt conueniently, ſeeing there is nothing gained by neglecting that dutie, in the doing whereof ſtandeth our peace and welfare. And thus much of the lets which hinder altogether from meditating about our eſtate, that wee may be the fitter thereby vnto prayer and good life.
               
               The other lets are ſuch as hinder vs from the good and profitable vſe of it,Two abuſes of meditation. The firſt, to vſe it ſleightly, and ſo to make a ceremonie of it. when we breake through the three former, and theſe may rightly be called abuſes of it: and are two, which in few words I ſet downe thus. The firſt is a commonnes or cuſtomarines in it, when we through perſwaſion that it muſt be continued, doe it houerly and ſleightly, and ſo make a ceremonie of it, not ſo much looking how our hearts are well affected in and by it, as that we

                   may not bee iuſtly charged for omitting it.The remedie, we muſt be perſwaded, that it is worthie to be delighted in. Which ſinne is eaſily and ſoone committed in priuate prayer alſo, and ſuch like good exerciſes, when our mindes are not holden with a taking delight in them: and hereof it is, that all the ſeruing and worſhipping of God is with the moſt, but onely for faſhion: of all which it is ſaid by God in the Prophet; In vaine doe they worſhip me.
                  Eſai. 29.13.
               
               The ſecond is when, although wee bee deſirous to vſe it,The ſecond, when we be clogged and fraught with phantaſies and cares. and that for our helpe and edifying, yet our heads are ſo full of trifling and wandring phantaſies, or worldly matters, that wee cannot minde thoſe heauenly things, which are ſo contrarie to them: And from hence ariſeth a wearines of it, & an haſtning to more libertie, that our hearts may raunge where they liſt, which is that  which they moſt of all deſire. And although through the very corruption of nature, the beſt of Gods children doe complaine, that they doe not the good they would, and therefore not this good ſometimes (notwithſtanding they miſlike that it ſhould bee ſo, and reſiſt it:) yet the eſpeciall cauſe of this vnſauourie, weariſome, and vntoward taking in hand, or ſetting vpon ſo holy and heauenly a part of Gods worſhip, is another beſides this: that is to ſay, the letting looſe of our hearts all the day (as I haue had occaſion to ſay in another place) diſordredly, without watching ouer them, and calling them backe from ſuch endleſſe rouings; that they may not forget God, but bee held within holie compaſſe, whereſoeuer we become, or whatſoeuer we goe  about: for there muſt not be in vs at any time an euill heart.
                  Heb. 3.12.
               
               Euen this (I ſay) is the cauſe why we cannot haue our hearts at commandement in meditation and prayer to attend vpon God reuerently, when we would. For when wee haue at our pleaſure giuen them ſcope through the day to faſten their liking where they haue deſire, it hath been hard for vs to weane them from it, when we would. And whiles we will be at this point, it will neuer bee better with vs in our meditation:The remedie, we muſt carefully ſet our ſelues againſt the corruption of our hearts. no although God hath appointed the ſame to be an eſpeciall helpe to the well framing of our liues, and that our minds be brought into an heauenly eſtate thereby, if we would frequent it: yea although we appoint ſome eſpeciall time thereunto, yet ſhall  we be turned from muſing on good things to wandring, and ſhall hardly faſten on any good matter, hauing yet certaine principall points concerning our eſtate to ſet vs on work therein; ſo many trifling phantaſies and dreames ſhall ſwimme in our braine to hold out better.
               And till theſe by little and little be dried vp with the flame of heauenly and feruent affections, vnſually poſſeſſing our hearts in ſtead of them, it will neuer be otherwiſe with vs but worſe and worſe. And it is a thing to be wondred at, that ſeeing none of our actions any day can be well done when our hearts are not good, and ſo preſerued and kept (which without circumſpect care and watch ouer them cannot be) it may be wondred at (I ſay) that wee  ſhould yet bee ſecure and negligent about the keeping of them from ſuch daunger to our ſelues and others, as we know will thereby inſue.
               Therefore as the Lord by his Prophets hath cried out againſt the people in ſundrie ages, that they periſhed becauſe they would not vnderſtand,
                  Pſal. 91.11.12 13.14. 
                  nor at all conſider their eſtate, and as there ſhall be an end of their deceiueable delights, although they cannot be brought to thinke of their end and account: ſo hee ſpeaketh as plainly, and hath done from time to time of this, that although in

the world we ſhall haue tribulation,
                  
                     Ioh. 16.33. Ioh. 15.19. VVe muſt haue our conuerſation heauenly. Phil. 3.10.
                   euen we whom God hath choſen out of the  world; yet ſeeing we are ſtrangers here, we cannot neither may we place our hearts delight and felicitie here, but our chiefeſt comfort muſt be to haue daily communion with God, and to haue our conuerſation in heauen, with him, (vnto the which, meditation is a ſingular helpe) and what waightie matters ſoeuer we be buſied about, yet to remember our maker in them all, that he be pleaſed and truſted in of vs.
               And in that many, euen of Gods ſeruants doe (through their corrupt nature) loath this heauenly Manna (I meane to be oft and daily in muſing on the things which concerne their peace) and haue their teeth ſet on edge with the deceitfull pleaſures of worldly men,Men loſe a great part of their ſweete and bleſſed liuing here, ſeeing they will not vſe meditation. who know no better: euen  this (I ſay) though there were no other thing, doth cauſe, that they inioy not the tenth part of the priuiledges and liberties which God hath prouided for them in this their pilgrimage. Neither can any thing (if it be weighed) be leſſe tolerable in the ſight of almightie God, then whereas he hath giuen vs his Scriptures, which tell vs his minde, and therefore teach vs how we may commune with his maieſtie, and for our behoofe, hath giuen vs an earneſt charge to ponder them in our heart, to haue them in minde, to make them the matter of our cogitation,
                  It is vtterly vnbeſeeming, that the weightieſt matters ſhould be ſlightly regarded. 
                  delight, talke, and practiſe; yet that Chriſtians of good hope ſhould not be better acquainted with this heauenly courſe, nor be occupied thus, but by fittes, very ſeldome and coldly, as if God had been  earneſt with vs about a trifle, or as though he had offered vs great iniurie to mooue vs thereunto.
               So that although I cannot ſay, it is no part of their thought, which ſhould ſeaſon all their thoughts (as I may ſay of many lying proteſtants, who doe ſhunne and flie all conſideration of heauenly matters, leaſt they ſhould trouble and diſquiet them:) yet it is too manifeſt that they ſauour too ſlenderly of Gods preſence and companie; who ſhunne it, by being ſtrangers to this meditation, whereby they may haue fellowſhip and companie with him.
               Therefore to remedie this trifling out the time when we goe about to  meditate and pray priuately, and to obtaine that we may be fit to performe this dutie,The former remedie more fully and cleerely ſet downe. and not bee carried at that time after wandring, wee muſt remooue that which hindreth vs from it: I meane we muſt tie vp our looſe hearts throughout the daie from their deadly cuſtome of ranging after vaine, fond, and deceiuable thoughts, dreames and delights: we muſt weigh how little worth this is, to haue our cogitations faſtned vpon things tranſitorie, much leſſe about thoſe which are filthie, but rather bring them to be taken vp in thoſe which are heauenly. This we are called vnto: and vntill we can learne to doe thus, that how weightie ſoeuer our dealings be, yet we count this the chiefeſt to keepe peace with God, and euer feare to offend  him: it will be an hard matter to bring ourſelues to meditate, and pray with cheerefulnes and fruite.
               Now that I haue ſet downe the neceſſitie and profit of meditation, whenſoeuer we liſt to vſe it, and the eſpeciall lets thereof, I will now in that which followeth,Rules and examples of meditation, follow. onely helpe the reader with ſome rules to guide himſelfe the better herein, vntill it be more familiar vnto him (and then he ſhall vſe it better

                   then all rules ſhall teach him) and I will ſet downe with the ſame, ſome examples in particular meditations, which ſhall agree with euery good minde which readeth them: that ſuch as be not yet able to helpe themſelues by entring into their owne eſtate and heart, nor to draw matter from their owne experience to meditate on, may learne by this which I write and ſuch like; and others that can, may yet when they be vnfit by troubles and other occaſions, helpe themſelues by theſe examples which I ſhall propound to them. Onely there is required teachablenes and diligence to conſider of them, and profit by them, and that whatſoeuer be hard to them, they would craue the helpe of ſuch as can reſolue them. As concerning the rules, I haue had  occaſion in other reſpects to make mention of ſome of them, but not ſo,Foure rules to direct vnto meditation. as the reader may eaſily gather them as rules. Here therefore I will ſet them downe together.
               The firſt is, that he, who deſireth to haue helpe by meditation,
                     1 Rule. doe weigh how ſlippery, fickle, bad, and wandring his heart is infinit waies,Ierem. 17.9. to his exceeding hurt; and that he muſt of neceſſitie appoint ſome ſet time, to checke, reclaime,Pſalm. 55.17. and weane it from the ſame.
               The ſecond,2 that he watch ouer his heart (hauing been ſo oft deceiued by it) throughout his whole life, and haue it in ſuſpition, that ſo it may be more fit to be drawne to ſuch heauenly exerciſes, and be ſtaied therein,Pro. 4.21. &c. 
                  and  attend vnto the ſame.
               
               This being obſerued,3 let him (if hee bee able) draw matter of meditation and prayer from his owne wants and infirmities; from Gods benefits; from the changes and mortalitie of this life. I haue before ſet downe, what hee ſhould chiefly meditate vpon: of loue, humilitie, meekenes, peace of conſcience, the glorie of Gods kingdome, his loue, and the contrarie: but eſpecially of that which for the preſent time, ſhall be moſt auailable.
               If he cannot thus doe, let him reade before, ſome part of the hundred and nineteene Pſalme: ſome of the epiſtles of the Apoſtles: Chriſts ſermons,4 Ioh. 14.15.16. or  ſome part of this direction, or ſome meditations, which follow, ſo many as conueniently he may, or any good matter fit for this purpoſe to ſeaſon & wel affect his mind: that ſo he may learne how to performe this duty, and quicken vp him ſelfe to it oft & from time to time, when he once knoweth how. If he cannot reade, he muſt deſire more helpe of others: and for want of helpe, he muſt needes looke to goe the more ſlowly forward, either in the right, and kinde vſe of meditation, or in any part of ſound godlines, and Chriſtianitie: ſeeing we cannot be ignorant of this, that the old ſubtill fowler ſets his ſnares and nettes ſo thicke in our way, that we haue no ſhift, but to fall into them, and light vpon them, except with the winges of meditation  and prayer wee mount vp on high aboue them, and flie ouer them.
               Now follow the examples or particular meditations, which I thought good to adioyne to that which hath been ſaid of this matter, to teach the ignorant; and to helpe euen the ſtronger Chriſtians, when they be not ſo fit to helpe themſelues; and neuer out of ſeaſon or vnprofitable to either of both: I ſet ſome of them downe more briefly, that they may giue occaſion

to the perſons when they are fitteſt for breuitie, to diſcourſe of the matters  contained in them (ſeeing they be ſuch as ſhall euer concerne them) and apply them to their owne eſtate more at large to moue their hearts to practiſe them. I ſet downe ſome of them more largely and fully, that ſuch as feele themſelues more barraine and vnable to call to minde ſuch good things, as they would be glad ſometime to thinke on, may with leſſe trouble be ſatisfied, while they ſhall neede no more but to reade them (ſo many of them at one time as may be fit to moue their affections) and then to conſider of them, and examine themſelues by them, whether they be with them, or againſt them, that the end thereof may be peace to them by their readines alwaies to yeeld to that which they ought. I haue not ſet downe too few, leaſt they ſhould ſoone grow too common; nor too many, leaſt they ſhould be too tedious, ſeeing the booke it ſelfe is large, and they ſerue not onely for meditation, but alſo to helpe the practiſe of the whole booke. This I thought good to ſay about this thing.
               But conſider and be reſolued of this one thing, that thou muſt nouriſh and hold faſt a loue and liking of this duty: ſo that when thou art barraine and vnprofitable in thine owne ſenſe and feeling, yet thou mayſt then be willing to be well ſeaſoned by it, and reſtored to thy former grace againe. For if thou beeſt not ſo affected, thou ſhalt finde no ſauour in it, as neither in any other good helpe whatſoeuer:Prou. 27.7. 
                  ſeeing to him, that is full, an hony combe is  not ſweete. And though I ſet downe the points that thou ſhouldeſt meditate on in ſentences not applyed to thee: thou muſt apply that which is ſet downe generally to all Chriſtians, to thy ſelfe, as if it were ſpoken onely to thee.
               
                  Particulars to muſe on. Pſal. 73.25.
                  As thus for example, if thou wouldeſt meditate on this point (The Lord is all in all, and who is like vnto him:) thinke after this, or the like manner, in applying it to thy ſelfe: O Lord, whom haue I in heauen but thee? and whom doe I deſire on earth in compariſon of thee? For thou art my portion and my ioy, of whom I make my ſongs euen in the night ſeaſon: I ſigh to be vnburdened, and deſire to be diſsolued, and be with thee: Oh when ſhall I come into thy glorious preſence? &c. And  ſo draw all other holy ſentences to thy behoofe and vſe. If thou wouldeſt meditate on this point, becauſe of mens wandring and inconſtant profeſſion of the Goſpell without fruite;Reioycing. it is both wiſedome and our happines to reioyce in our owne going forward, not in other mens: and in prouing our ſelues, we may reioyce in our ſelues, not in other, Gal. 6.4. Lift vp thine heart to God, and pray him, that it may be ſo with thee.
               
                   No man ſhall be fit to gouerne himſelfe aright before men, if he doe not vſually acquaint himſelfe with,Chriſtian life. and frame himſelfe after that Chriſtian courſe, firſt before God.
               
                   No man can reſt in his priuate meditations and prayers before God, if a  well ordered life, as a fruite thereof, appeare not before men.
               
                   When a man looketh ſo diligently to the ſeuerall parts of his life and calling,Watchfulnes. that he may haue peace thereby, it is well.
               
                   It is a point of Chriſtian wiſdome, to be moſt circumſpect and beſt armed, where we be weakeſt.
               
                  Of falles.It is no way tolerable to lie ſtill, if a man be fallen, Ierem. 8.6. but to haue

                   recourſe to God againe, if we be ouertaken; though with much adoe we obtaine it, Exod. 33.8.
               Although in a well ordred courſe,Priuiledge of a godly life in trouble. all croſſes and incumbrances be not vtterly remoued: yet many by it are auoided, and others profitably ſuſtained, Prou. 19.23.
               It is ſome grace to vſe proſperitie well, that is, that a man may cheerefullie  and fruitfully paſſe his time: but if wee be voide of this vnder the croſſe,Reioycing wee may gather, that the benefits of God make vs merrie, and not our reſting in this fauour of God.
               It is a good thing to reioyce in our Sabboths, and communion with Gods  
                   people: but ſo, as wee reſt not euen in them, but in this, that God is our portion in all eſtates and places. Pſal. 119.57. 2. Cor. 5.16
               When many earthly troubles take hold of vs at once,Croſſes. wee muſt carrie our ſelues very ſoberly and gratiouſly, if wee be not vnſetled from willingnes to dutie by ſome of them: Frowardnes, impatience and forgetting our ſelues being ſo readie, by the ſmalleſt occaſions, to breake out of vs.
               We ſeldome inioy commoditie, when we doubt of the lawfulnes or conueniencie  of keeping or comming by it,Worldlines. but the Lord maketh it as ſowre and diſcommodious in the end.
               Wee ſeldome haue in great price any thing below, as houſe, land, &c. but  
                   the Lord croſſeth vs ſome way in it, that we may loue it with meaſure.
               Reioyce not at the firſt hearing of heauenly things only; but more ſoundly continue it, when thou knoweſt them more ſoundly and better by experience.
               Prepare and look for affliction before it come, leaſt thou be beſotted with  thy peace and proſperitie: and alſo,Afflictions. that the burden of trouble may be eaſier when it commeth.
               In the middeſt of tribulation (becauſe that eaſily oppreſſeth) thinke of the  beſt priuiledges which thou haſt, that is, Chriſt with all that commeth with him. 1. Sam. 30.6. Dauid, and Pſal. 77.
               
                   The greater thy troubles are, the greater muſt thy ſtrength bee, and the  more godly muſt thou be.
               When thy heart can reſt in God, and the pleaſures which come thereby,Sobrietie. take in hand all thine affaires ſoberly, that thy ioy be not quenched thereby. It would make one wonder to ſee, how by ſuch occaſions the heart is vnſetled.
               Deadnes of ſpirit,Of falles. loggiſh vnprofitablenes (if not wound) take hold of a  man, when he doth not faithfully make vp any breaches made in his conſcience, by true returning to God.
               The Lord is not farre off from vs, nor hard to be intreated, when after any  
                   fall or eſcape wee turne to him in humilitie and repentance. 1. Sam. 7.10. and 12.22.
               Of the manifold vexations that fall into our liues,Troubles. wee may obſerue that the moſt of them doe become annoyances to vs, through our owne fault: that wee either preuent them not when wee may, or beare them not as wee ought, or make not vſe of them as we might doe.Conference.
               
               The talking of the commodities of this life is ſo ſauourie and ſweete to

fleſh, that being in it, wee hardly get out of it, no not when better things are  in ſpeech before.
               
                  Calling.When our callings become a pleaſure to vs, to diſcharge them faithfully for the Lords ſake, what outward helpes of bleſſing ſoeuer God ſendeth vs, they ſhall make our liues ſo much the more eaſie and comfortable: but theſe without the other are but deceiueable vanities.Col. 3.23.
               
               
                   The place wherein Chriſt vſed to pray often, and had found much comfort,
                     Affliction. Luk. 22.39. Ioh. 18.2. Dan. 6.10. in the ſame he was taken and betrayed; but yet he continued his godly cuſtome euen till he was led away: ſo muſt we looke to haue our beſt places of prayer and walkes, made traps for vs: for the ſubtiltie of the world know our haunt, and where to find vs. But let vs perſeuere, that if we be taken euen  there, wee may reioyce: as being found well occupied when the Lord ſhall come.
               
                   Although for want of proofe, we count all afflictions hard; yet when wee haue experience (Heb. 5.13.14.) and haue bin exerciſed in bearing them, and ſee that the feare is more then the thing it ſelfe; our confidence in God will make them eaſie, when our cauſe is good: But yet by degrees, that is, when we can firſt beare ſharpe words and firie contentions of men, after ſtripes, impriſonment, and ſo death. As Moſes, Exod. 3.11. compared with chap. 10.25, 26. and the Apoſtles, Act. 5.41.
               When matters of more importance then our ſaluation is, fall into our  hands,Matth. 6.33. let vs bee occupied in them with more feruencie, then in that: but if there be no ſuch, why ſhould we more earneſtly looke after them? and why ſhould not that be with greateſt delight wrought on, and looked after?
               
                  Loue of God.How can we ſay, we loue the Lord, when wee be not euer willing to goe home to him, and in the meane while to be as neere him in all communion, as we may?
               
                  Godly life.Chriſtianitie and practiſe of godlines is compared to a rich and gainfull trade (Prou. 3.14.) wherein little profit commeth in, except it be well followed, and diligence vſed in it, and one thing not letted nor ſlacked for another.
               
               To haue a willing mind to be well occupied, and matter about which we may, and time to beſtow therein, and freedome from lets therefrom, is an eſtate much to bee made of; and yet for the moſt part, they who haue almoſt all outward incouragements, cannot tell what to doe with them.
               
                  Of death.Whereas the very name of death is fearefull, when men heare that they muſt be readie to ſuffer for the Goſpell (and therefore many are diſmaied) we muſt know that we are the more vnwilling to heare of it,1. Pet. 1.24. 1. Cor. 7.29. 1. Ioh. 2.13. becauſe wee accuſtome our ſelues to loue this world, and our life here, too well; which muſt be leſſe ſet by. And God, by diſeaſes, and the miſerable eſtate of things in this world, and by many other meanes, can make our liues loathſome and death  welcome: which if wee would thinke much of, the hearing of it would be more welcome. But begin in time, leaſt it bee too late, when wee can ſtay here no longer.
               
                  VVatch and pray.It is needful, beſides our ſet times of prayer in the day, to haue oft recourſe to God by watchfulnes and prayer, in all our dealings; leaſt we goe too farre in ſurfeiting our hearts with them, and (as we can) to looke to God ſecretly,

                   though not ſo ſolemnly as at other times, praying him to keepe vs. Neh. 2.4.Nehem. 2.4.
               
               Whatſoeuer taſte of good things we haue gotten,Priuiledge. and how ſweete ſoeuer they ſeeme; yet it is certaine, that God hath yet much more then wee can thinke of, if they be the matters which wee haue in greateſt price: but being ſet light by, and the meanes neglected which preſerue them, they die.
               That eſtate is to be made much of,A good eſtate. wherein we are not onely delighted in ſeruing God by the duties we doe preſently;Pſal. 119.16. but alſo as ioyfull to thinke of them which are to come, and the more, the better they be.
               It is a ſingular mercie,Priuiledge. that wee take comfort and delight in the things which we hope for, and in the ſeruice of God; which to the world are moſt  irkeſome and tedious.
               The more ſure of Gods fauour thou art by faith,Faith. the more humble alſo thou art, and not contrarily, Matth. 15.27.
               They are worthie of great puniſhment,Fulnes. who ſet light by the plentie of that grace, the crummes whereof Gods hungrie ſeruants doe ſet great ſtore by.
               What is more liuely to our vnderſtanding then the heauenly and ſpirituall courſe of a Chriſtian, in comfort and godlines, throughout the Scriptures; as Rom. 5.4.5? and what is more vnlike it, then the liues of men?
               One eſpeciall point of profiting, is,Sight of our miſerie. to know our owne vilenes and miſerie better daily, that ſo we may come to know the ineſtimable bountie of God,  and what wee are beholding to him, for receiuing increaſe from him in pardon and other graces.
               As exceſſe of eating and drinking doe bring ſlouth and ſleepe:Luk. 21.38. Iam. 5.5. ſo ſurfeiting our ſoules in pleaſures, cares, &c. rocketh vs aſleepe, and maketh vs vnwilling and vnfit to ſee what is amiſſe. In ſteed whereof, ſobrietie, that is, a ruling of our paſſions, and watchfulnes are to be our daily companions. 1. Peter 5.7. Pſal. 5.8.
               We muſt not flatter & deceiue our ſelues with the calling to mind of the forwardnes and care that hath bin in vs in times paſt,
                     Phil. 3.14. How needfull it is to ſet our ſelues to goe on through difficulties. hereby to gather ſlouth vnto the fleſh, which is readie to take the ſmalleſt occaſions that may be to  fauour it ſelfe, and to make vs grow cold and ſlacke in duties: but we are to looke to continue and increaſe any good and forwardnes (which hath bin) for hereafter: as to delight more in walking with God in a Chriſtian courſe, and to hold faſt our faith and comfort euen in trouble, and not to thinke our ſtate the worſe for it. But with our Sauiour to deſpiſe the ſhame of the croſſe,
                  Heb. 13.13. although it be euen to the thruſting of vs out of the world: and therfore much more in proſperitie, to be fruitfull in all good workes. Ioh. 15.8.Col. 1.11.
               
               Seeing it pleaſeth the Lord to let vs know, that we haue this pretious and bleſſed libertie, al the day long to be with him, to inioy his preſence by faith,Deut. 33.18. to ſolace our ſelues in bold affiance in him, and that for all good things; and  to be free from the feare, terrour and anguiſh, which hunteth the vngodly: It were pitie that we ſhould, for ſome deceiueable follie, depriue our ſelues of ſuch ſound happines and peace, as he alloweth vs, euen here, to be partakers of.
               When men receiue not the word with meeknes, that it may be ingraffed in them,
                  Perſeuarance, Iam. 1.21. and doe not ſo heare, that they may beleeue (Act. 14.1.) but take a taſte and a liking, at the moſt: I denie not, but for ſome cauſe, one may hold

out longer then another: but if they goe not forward, ye ſhall ſee them fall  vnto nothing: for a momentany and weake deſire is not enough to hold vp a godly life, but a delight in it, which faith worketh.
               When we are afflicted, and the wicked ſpared, our ſtate ſeemeth to them moſt vile. When we are both in proſperitie, they ſeeme more happie, thē we. When they and we be both afflicted, they count our ſtate happier then their owne: But eſpecially when they are afflicted, and we ſpared, Exod. 14.25.
               
                  Depend on God.We may not aſſigne the Lord in what place, ſtate, condition, or in what companie we would liue, but as ſtrangers wait on him, euen as the hand-maide on her miſtres, for whatſoeuer he will allow vs. And when great afflictions come, yet not to be diſcomforted, nor vnquiet, but cheerefull ſtill through  hope, as may be obtained of vs, as we were in proſperitie, leaſt we ſhould declare, that we ſerue God for our belly and eaſe: and ſeeing our God is neuer changed in any ſort, we not to change.
               We are readie moſt commonly to be called away by death, before we be fit, or haue learned how to liue.
               
                  There muſt be growing daily.Looke what care, conſcience, zeale thou haddeſt, when thou firſt imbracedſt the Goſpell, what reuerent admiration at the excellencie of it, and what loue towards it; the ſame at leaſt retaine, and be ſure thou keepeſt ſtill afterwards. And howſoeuer thy heart was weaned from the inordinate loue of the world, and vaine delights, which might quench thoſe which are ſpirituall: ſee that the longer thou liueſt in this vale of miſerie, thou doeſt not drinke vp the draffe of it, and faſhion thy ſelfe after the iniquitie of it: nor the more knowledge thou haſt, that thou beeſt not the more ſecure. For thus it is with many at this day, who therefore doe ſmart for it.
               
                  One ſinne or other commonly trouble vs.If a man be a diligent obſeruer of his courſe of life, he ſhall ſeldome finde himſelfe free from all kindes of offences, but one ſhall trouble him much, if another be weakned; yea and without much faithfulnes and ſtrength of grace ſhall preuaile againſt him. But if there be care, that they weigh not downe the affections in being too much taken vp of them, it is well: for the Chriſtian mans life is a continuall battaile, and when it ceaſeth, we are readie  on the left hand,Subtiltie in our liuing doth moſt deceiue our ſelues. or on the right to fall to euill and danger.
               As we are ſubtill to beguile our ſelues, ſo we doe eſpecially in this one thing, that where we either are perceiued eaſily, when we be out of the way, or be afraide of ill report; there we can frame our ſelues to ſobrietie, and to the keeping of meaſure in our liues: which is no ſure token of peace and ſafety to our hearts, though for the preſent time we auoyde offence. But where we are daily conuerſant, and therefore ſhall haue more occaſions to runne into ſome treſpaſſe (eſpecially with our inferiours, before whom we thinke we ſhould not regard how looſely we behaue our ſelues) there we looke not ſo carefully to our ſelues,2. Cor. 1.12. Iob. 31.13. To loſe grace.
                   which ſhould moſt chiefly be don of vs.
               
               By this, that we ſee that grace is giuen to a Chriſtian at his firſt conuerſion, to haue victorie, and to get ſtrength ouer great ſinnes, long delighted in; it appeareth how they abuſe grace, who haue long been counted the Lords people; when they many yeares after, do yeeld and giue ouer themſelues to ſodaine and weaker temptations, and are eaſilier ouercome of them, though they haue leſſe force in them.
               
                  
                   Learne to know the preciouſeſt liberties, though there be many lawfull.
               It is wonderfull, that a man knowing that he ſhall not inioy the grace now that he had twentie yeares agone, except he be as carefull to keepe it, as he was then to come by it: yet that men ſhall be ſo loath to ſtriue for it by ſuch holy indeuour of hartie prayer, when they waxe weake: and though they bee reſolued neuer to offend in the reprochfulleſt ſort; yet that they loue to linger after the ſame in affection and deſire, which neither they can haue without vnutterable woe, neither dare ſet their mindes to inioy, though they might.
               Keepe downe carnall libertie, and thy ſpirituall libertie ſhall be great; and  reſt on God, and it ſhall make thee ouercome the hardeſt things.
               No man can liue long and comfortably, as Pſalm. 34.12.13. vnleſſe he flie from euill and doe good, and that betimes, Eccleſ. 12.1. and why not? ſeeing heathen men got learning and friends in their youth, that the waywardnes and tediouſnes of their old age might be mitigated.
               Seeing in age we are awaked by the leaſt voyce of a bird: and yet take no pleaſure in the ſweeteſt noyſe of the muſicall inſtruments: By the firſt we learne to be partakers of that reſt and Sabboth which belongeth to the people of God; from the which, God commaundeth in the Canticles,Cant. 2.7. that we be not awaked. By the other we are to learne, that being waſhed and well  refreſhed with the wine of the holy Ghoſt, we may ſing to God cheerefully, and when we cannot heare others ſing we may heare our ſelues, and be delighted therein.
               That we muſt remember God, walke with him, and ſerue him by dayes and not by weekes, and months onely: that proueth Pſalm. 90.12. Teach me to number my dayes: where he ſets himſelfe to it by dayes and daily.
               The godly may doe that with delight, which is tedious and weariſome to the wicked, that is, to walke with God at large and at libertie, Pſalm. 119.45. and take pleaſure in good things, whereby they may auoyde many troubles vtterly which would oppreſſe them: ſeeing the greateſt ſins bring the greateſt  ſorrowes: and ſuch afflictions as God ſhall ſend may bee eaſilier borne of them, when the other ſhall rage and turmoyle themſelues, Lam. 3.39.
               Such varietie of good things is in Gods word, that we may haue by the meditation thereof, good prouiſion to keepe our liues from ſhamefull euils: and though by Sathan we ſhould be turned away; yet by our knowledge and experience we may returne (who elſe can?) and when we cannot doe good, yet we may keepe from euill.
               While we haue peace in the land, we are at variance in our townes and houſes: and when we haue all, we are oft times not at peace with God.
               Husbandmen long for their fruites; but we doe not ſo, for that which we  pray for: whereas we ſhould waite for that which we pray and hope for, and ſo we ſhould be ioyfull when we obtaine it. For if we bee beloued of God, then we may looke for any good.
               If we can reioyce at the conuerſion of a ſinner, then are we Chriſts friends; and therefore deare vnto him, Luk. 15.6.
               If all ſtolne libertie coſt men as deare, as rouing fancies doe ſome, they would make ſmall haſte after them, Pſalm. 51.4.11.
               
                  Few doe make due reckoning of the benefits which they preſently enioy, but are euer diſcontentedly gaping after new: but when they be taken from them, then they ſee what they once had, Lam. 1.7.
               Neuer better liking in health and bodily welfare, then when we are moſt heauenly minded.
               In this time of hardnes of heart which is in the greateſt number, and this ſpirit of ſlumbring, this is to be moſt lamented: that there are few to lay it to heart, and morne for it; but ſenſeles, or taking part with them.
               Seeing the moſt finde no ſauour in prayer, and yet the Scripture chargeth vs neuer to be wearie of it, know that there is precious fruit of it: and that is, when we praying in faith and repentance are anſwered from God;  that we are heard either in aſſuring vs of benefit, or helping vs againſt ſinne: both which when after prayer we beleeue more ſtrongly, we are well ſatiſfied, and comforted, Ioh. 16.24.40. pray often.
               Many profeſſors doe not onely drowne themſelues in the world, but alſo when they come in company, they poyſon others, with caſting the ſmoke of their naughtie hearts vpon others: ſo farre off are they from checking themſelues, for any of their ſinnes.
               There is no iuſt cauſe of doubting of Gods fauour, by our outward afflictions, or our inward infirmities (both which yet doe often cauſe vs to doubt) but by ſinne, which we willingly commit, and lie in: and it is iuſt  with God, to haue it ſo, as in Peter Luk. 22.62.
               When we are well humbled, God will ceaſe to afflict, Matth. 11.29. Let the deſire of them, who thinke they haue it aright, be ſound, that it may begin well: ſecondly, feruent, that it may grow: and conſtant, that it may continue; then it ſhall ſeeke for reconciliation with God: which in a touched and humbled heart is a ſigne of faith; and will after growe to greater ſtrength, for the hungrie deſire after grace is a ſanctified affection; yet hath the wicked no whit to thinke his ſtate good, fleſhed for all this: for they haue onely flitting deſires to doe good which come to nothing; but the other hath reformation of life with it.
               
               Let outward afflictions the greater they be, as loſſes, diſgrace, diminiſh the infirmities which are inward of the minde (as impatience, and rebelliouſnes of heart) not increaſe them.
               Before ſinne be committed we extenuate it as Eſau; after it is committed, we contrarily aggrauate it, as Iudas. For the diuell comes firſt as a tempter; after, as an accuſer.
               We ſhall neuer want ſomewhat to exerciſe vs, ſinne, or trouble: neither were it profitable for vs, to the end we may be euer in combate.
               Though we doe a good thing, yet if it be not in knowledge, it is ſinne, Ioh. 13.17.
               
               No good thing abideth long with vs in his ſtrength, and beautie, without new quickning: yea quailing and deadnes ſometime groweth vpon vs, what meanes ſoeuer we vſe.
               We cannot reſt in any eſtate, how proſperous ſoeuer, except we ſee the Lord goe with vs to guide vs.
               We ſhould not ſuffer our ſelues to be carried from the beſt things, whatſoeuer

                   weightie dealings or matters be in hand: and hauing been imployed in Gods buſineſſe, in liuing fruitfully and cheerefully among men, we ſhould be loath now to faint and chaunge our courſe.
               When wee feele any wearines in a godly courſe, by what occaſion ſoeuer it be, the diuell hath met with vs. Complaine therefore and relent wee, for our vnkindnes, and wandring from God, and he will be found, and returne right ſoone. Hoſ. 4.3. Cant. 3.3.
               It is well prooued, that faith and godlines are the vpholders of our ioy and peace, Rom. 5.1.6. and 2. Cor. 1.12. and that they make an hard eſtate eaſie; and a proſperous, fruitfull. 2. Cor. 6.10. Act. 9.31.
               
                   Among many reaſons to moue vs to goe vnder afflictions meekly, theſe are two. Thinke that God will exerciſe and frame vs: for hard times (Lam. 3.27.) and perhaps an end of our daies, is at hand. Matth. 24.39.
               God is not only the ſame to vs in afflictions, that he hath been, but will be felt more ſweete, when the world becommeth more bitter.
               That ſeeking of eaſe, profit or pleaſure, ought to be reſtrained, which holdeth from ſeeking the common good of others.
               We may obſerue, that when our Chriſtian ſtate is at the beſt, it is no better then it had neede to be: but when wee conſider how many waies wee might decline, we may thanke God it is no worſe.
               
                   Hardly is a good Chriſtian brought to giue ouer many vaine liberties, ſome hee will, but not others: but after his excurſions from God, hee hath much adoe to returne into a good courſe againe. This cauſeth much vncheerefulnes in the life: and till we cleaue to him with delight to ſerue him, it will neuer be otherwiſe.
               A great difference there is, betwixt the continuall obſeruing and viewing of our life from day to day, and the doing of it by fits now and then: in the one we are ſafe, cheerefull, and fruitfull: in the other, raſh, offenſiue, and after vnquiet for it, walking in feare and with little comfort.
               If thou wilt finde Chriſt ſweete, thou muſt euer finde ſinne ſowre.
               
                   If thou wouldeſt forgoe thy riches willingly, and readily; vſe and enioy them ſoberly and moderatly: ſet little by them, and loſe little.
               It is to be feared, that many profeſſing the Goſpell with ſome liking, doe onely generally aime at godlines, and therefore they haue many vnſetlings and rangings out: but they doe not particularly looke to themſelues; therefore they gather not experience, nor finde any great fruit of it.
               Feare euer to offend God, and thou needeſt feare no other perill: as ill tidings, Pſal. 112.7. Exod. 20.20. for he keepeth thee, Pſal. 32.7. and 91.11.
               It is ſtrange, that we hauing no good part in our life, but through the well  framing of our hearts; yet that wee ſhould thinke it much to keepe them in compaſſe, Prou. 4.23.
               They who can neglect, and ſet meanely by a little vaine glorie and credit with men, may gaine and enioy much peace with God.
               A man by Gods ſpirit ſhall doe a thing well, which another without it ſhall doe very ill: Ioſh. 6.4. compared with 1. Sam. 4.4.
               Looke not to tie God to thee in thy neede, who regardeſt not him in thy eaſe. 1. Sam. 4.5.
               
                  They are rare men, who are not led by their paſſions into extremities, ſeeing  they are rare, who ſo looke to themſelues, that they may keepe from extremities, 1. Sam. 4.5.6.
               Many at their death hold that they ought to be godly: but is it not good at one time, which is at another?
               He is a rare perſon, who is in fauour with God, when he afflicteth, Pſal. 2. verſ. 12. and he oft afflicteth; becauſe wee ſhould beleeue that he will deliuer vs.
               It is follie, yea madnes, to be heauie to death for any earthly thing, when yet a man deſires nothing more then life.
               All our life ought to be a prouiding for a good end: and a keeping away  of woe by ſinne, which few will doe (for they will not loſe an inch of their libertie) and yet but for this what were the life of Gods people?
               When the Scripture telleth vs of the happineſſe of the Church, as Pſalm. 89.11. and 87.3. we may thinke we come ſhort very much, when we eſteeme not our eſtate better then the beſt of the world.
               If wee would euer through the day be at peace with God, and know wee are pardoned, wee muſt be euer readie to remoue our ſinnes, which raiſe a controuerſie betwixt vs.
               We would willingly pleaſe our ſelues in ſome vnlawfull liberties, when we haue pleaſed God in ſome duties. But a wiſe man will keepe well, while  he is well, and not trouble himſelfe with an ill conſcience, when God doth not trouble him with hard afflictions, ſeeing it is written (Hebr. 3.12. and 1. Cor. 10.31.) whether we eate, we ſee many fall fearefully and offend, but few returne againe: therefore it is to be feared, that many periſh, or at leaſt are in great daunger.
               The more grace we perceiue in any man and conſtancie, and the more he is like to God, the better we ought to loue him, as Chriſt did Iohn, and contrariwiſe, Ioh. 13.23. Pſal. 15.4.
               This is a worthie thing: when in feare of, or by great afflictions, our innocencie and repentance is ſo ſound, that wee haue bold confidence to  claime Gods promiſe of helpe in the time of neede, and are vpholden by it from the ſtrength of feare, till wee ſee an iſſue, as Iſrael did in feare: reade 1. Sam. 7.8.10.11.
               Where there is wilfulnes in ſinning, there is great difficultie in relenting: as alſo no power nor boldnes in beleeuing.
               As for ſuch as count it more then needeth to ſeeke and to make chiefe reckoning of godlines, let them learne what theſe Scriptures meane: are they not for vſe? Pſalm. 87.3. and 84.11.12. One day in thy houſe (O God) is better then a thouſand elſewhere: And Pſalm. 4.8. Trie out therefore the truth of them.
                  
               
               When we become to the higheſt degree of ſeruing God with much trauaile, yet wee abide hardly and a ſhort time therein: at leaſt much vnprofitablenes and barrennes will meete with vs againe after, euen by meanes of our corrupt hearts: which being ſo, we neede not thinke that we be too forward, when we be at the beſt.
               Many beginning well in godlines, haue fainted and quailed, or been iuſtly

                   reproched before their end, that others may the more feare their owne weaknes.
               When pettie troubles ariſe in families and other waies, we ſhould ſtay our ſelues thus: Theſe are ſmall, in compariſon: and I muſt looke for greater. Heb. 13.5. and 12.4.
               The carefull obſeruation of our hearts and waies, is an eſpeciall meane to keep vs from euill, and to ſee our infirmities better, that we may bow to God and obtaine pardon of them.
               Where new knowledge is not ſought, there is the leſſe ſauour in, and vſe of the old: and when men make not good vſe of the old, the ſeeking of new  is but noueltie.
               Seeing the conſcience is ſo tender, and ſo ſoone pricked, a man would meruaile how they do, who make many breaches therein, and ſolder them vp ſlenderly and eaſily.
               Men hauing experience of Sathans malice and continuall dogging them to euill, it ſhould teach them to truſt better to their armour, and leſſe to themſelues.
               Diſpoſe thy outward affaires with wiſedome, and ſo as thou ſpend not ouermuch time about the ſame, when thou maiſt doe it in a little: whether it bee in companie by talking thereof (for commonly when wee enter talke  thereof once, wee cannot tell when to make an end:) or whether it be alone by our ſelues in conſulting; for thoughts of the world doe tickle vs: and that may be determined in a few ſentences, and in a part of an houre, which may hold vs worke the moſt part of a day, yea many.
               If any of Gods children will waxe bold againſt the Lord and break forth to ſeeke libertie amiſſe, he ſhall ſurely ſmart for it. Pſal. 89.31. If mine owne children breake my lawes and keepe not my commandements, I will puniſh their ſinnes with the rodde, and their offences with the ſcourge. And if they ſinne openly againſt their conſcience, they ſhall one time or other, and one way or other, come to ſmart for it openly: As Ioſiah, 2. Chron. 35.22, 23.
               
                   God afflicteth ſometime to correct pride, leaſt wee ſhould be lifted vp aboue meaſure, 2. Cor. 12.7. and ſometime to inſtruct vs and make vs wiſe in our courſe, and conſtant as we were not before, Pſal. 119. and ſo to bee wiſer and afraid to offend. Pſal. 119.
               Men haue neuer too much wealth, but the more is euer welcome: Why ſhould not wee doe the like in ſpirituall things, euen whoſoeuer hath moſt (1. Cor. 14.1.) and greateſt part therein? For a while, we finde ſweete ſauour in an holie eſtate oft times: but the ſtrength of feruent deſire is ſoone cooled many waies, namely by feare of outward troubles, and loſſes, &c. for if that take hold once, it eateth deeply.
               
                   It is too cleere, that many profeſſors doe but aime at a godly life, and therfore they are ſoone vnſetled when they be at the beſt: and gather not experience for the time to come to be directed.
               Where we ſuſpect that conceits grow, if wee goe not about to pull them vp, they will be too deeply faſtened in a ſhort time.
               Though a man pray and meditate and keepe a better courſe in his life then ſome doe; yet if he doe it but ſleightly, that the fleſh preuaileth much

in hindring the well performing of it, all will ſoone come to naught, it  may be perceiued by the ſway it beareth in other parts of life; and then let it be ſpeedily amended.
               It is good ſo to taske our ſelues with duties, one or other at all times and in all places, that ſo doing we may cut off occaſions of much ſinne.
               Let no ſin be ſleightly paſſed ouer or committed: For when it commeth to remembrance in trouble, it will be an heauie burthen, and pinch vs to the heart.
               Seeing in age our company will be tedious, and we ſhall be left alone without company, let vs learne in our youth, to ioyne the Lord to our companie;Ioh. 14.22. Reuel. 3.20. and to haue him our familiar: that we may be neuer leſſe ſolitarie, then when we are alone.
               He that can ſinne freely, and giue it no vent out againe, by repentance, though he will not ſee, nor remoue it; yet ſeeing he knoweth he muſt, Lam. 3.40. he ſhall not thriue nor proſper in Gods familie, nor taſte of his dainties by faith.
               
                  Sundry neceſſarie obſeruations for a Christian, fit alſo to meditate vpon.
                  1. THat we keepe a narrow 1. Pet. 1.15. Pſam. 39.1. Epheſ. 5.15. watch ouer our hearts, words, and deeds  continually.
                  2. That with all care the Epheſ. 5.16. Col. 4.5. time be redeemed, which hath bin idly, careleſly, and vnprofitably ſpent.
                  3. That once in the day at the leaſt priuate Col. 4.2. prayer and meditation bee vſed.
                  4. That care be had Luk. 14.15.16. Heb. 10. to doe, and receiue good in companie.
                  5. That our familie be with diligence and regard Deut. 4.9. & 6.7. Geneſ. 18.19. inſtructed, Prou. 31.27.28. watched ouer and gouerned.
                  6. That no more time or care be beſtowed in Col. 3.2. matters of the world, then muſt needes.
                  
                  7. That we ſtirre vp our ſelues to Heb. 13.16. Gal. 6.10. liberalitie to Gods Saints.
                  8. That we giue not the leaſt bridle to wandring Col. 3.5. Epheſ. 5.3.4. luſts and affections.
                  9. That we prepare our ſelues to Matth. 16.24 beare the croſſe, by what meanes it ſhal pleaſe God to exerciſe vs.
                  10. That we beſtow ſometime not onely in Dan. 9.3.4. &c. 20. Lament. 1.1. mourning for our owne ſinnes, but alſo for the ſinnes of the time and age wherein we liue.
                  11. That we 1. Cor. 1.7. Tit. 2.13. looke daily for the comming of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, for our full deliuerance out of this life.
                  12. That we vſe (as we ſhall haue opportunitie, at leaſt as we ſhall haue neceſſitie) to Iam. 5.16. acquaint our ſelues with ſome godly and faithfull perſon, with  whom we may conferre of our Chriſtian eſtate, and open our doubts, to the quickning vp of Gods graces in vs.
                  13. That we Eccleſ. 7.4. Phil. 1.23. Reuel. 22.20. obſerue the departure of men our of this life, their mortalitie, the vanitie and alteration of things below, the more to contemne the world, and to continue our longing after the life to come. And that we meditate and muſe often of our owne death, and going out of this life, how we

                      muſt lie in the graue, all our glory put off; which will ſerue to beate downe the pride of life that is in vs.
                  14. That we Deut. 17.19.20. Ioſh. 1.8. Pſam. 1.2. Dan. 9.2. reade ſomewhat daily of the holy Scriptures, for the further increaſe of our knowledge, if it may be.
                  15. That we Nehem. 9.38. 2. Chro. 34.31. enter into couenant with the Lord to ſtriue againſt all ſinne, and eſpecially againſt the ſpeciall ſinnes and corruptions of our hearts and liues, wherein we haue moſt diſhonoured the Lord, and haue raiſed vp moſt guiltines to our owne conſciences, and that we carefully ſee our couenant be kept and continued.
                  16. That we 1. Pet. 1.14. 2. Pet. 2.20.21.22. marke how ſinne dieth and is weakned in vs, and that we  turne not to our olde ſinnes againe, but wiſely Matth. 11.8. 1.Theſ. 5.22. auoyde all occaſions to ſinne.
                  17. That we Reuel. 2.4. fall not from our firſt loue, but continue ſtill our affections to the liking of Gods word, and all the holy exerciſes of religion Iam. 1.19. diligently hearing it, and Iam. 1.22. Rom. 2.13. faithfully practiſing the ſame in our liues and conuerſations: that we Eccleſ. 4.17. prepare our ſelues before we come, and meditate and confer of that we heare, either by our ſelues, or with other: and ſo marke our daily profiting in religion.
                  18. That we be often occupied in Epheſ. 5.20. Pſal. 116.12.13 & 118.15. meditating on Gods benefits and workes, and ſound forth his praiſes for the ſame.
                  
                      19. That we Phil. 1.23. 2. Tim. 4.7.8. exerciſe our faith by taking comfort and delight in the great benefit of our redemption by Chriſt, and the fruition of Gods preſence, in his glorious and bleſſed kingdome.
                  20. Laſtly, that we make not theſe holy practiſes of repentance common in time, nor vſe them for courſe.
                  And theſe I haue ſet downe to helpe thee to meditate. And who ſees not now, by that which hath been ſaid, that a good heart may be able to meditate? That as the exerciſe itſelfe is both very needefull for all Chriſtians, and many wayes gainefull, ſo none may haue iuſt cauſe to complaine, that they cannot tell how to make vſe of it. But let vs remember, that beſides the  benefit and gaine of it, it is one of the priuate helps that God in his wiſe and mercifull prouidence ordained for his deere children to make their life ſweete and comfortable here,Perſwaſions to vſe meditation. which otherwiſe would bee yrkſome and painefull, euen to them who are beſt able to paſſe it well. And therefore to neglect it, ſhall not onely bee groſſe vnthankfulnes: but a charging of the Lord with a worke meerely needeles. Let vs alſo, for the better heartning of ourſelues hereunto conſider the vncertaintie and ſhortnes of our life, and the warnings which God hath giuen vs of our mortalitie, not onely by the doctrine of his word and common experience, but more eſpecially, within theſe few yeares, by taking from vs ſo many worthie inſtruments of his glorie,  as I muſt needes ſay, if it be well weighed, will worke in vs a leſſe deſire to liue, ſeeing they liue not with vs. And this, among all the reſt of the vexations and moleſtations of this life, ſhould whet and ſharpen vs to meditation,Juſt cauſe to complaine of the want of meditation in all ſortes of men. Luk. 23.28.
                      that we might the more ſhake off the burthen and weight of the inordinat deſire of liuing here, as boults from our heeles.
                  But as it is too true, that the righteous periſheth, and no man almoſt conſidereth it, that they are taken away from the euils which ſhall meete with ſuch as remaine

behinde: ſo, who is meete to heare our Sauiours words, weepe for your ſelues, and for your children? and therefore to muſe and thinke deepely of it, that he may doe it. So that meditation ſhould be one with vs, whatſoeuer ſhould be the other: That it might not be verified in vs, which was complained of by the Prophet Ieremie: I ſtoode and hearkned when God reproued the peoples ſecuritie,
                     Ierem▪ 8.6. 
                     to ſee, if any would returne; but there was none that ſaid, what haue I done? As if he ſhould ſay, there was none, that pondred in his heart, how God was offended.1. Tim. 4.15. 
                     Paul willed Timothy to meditate and throughly exerciſe and ſeaſon his minde with the doctrine which he deliuered to the people, euen to be taken vp of it, that both he himſelf might be throughly ſeaſoned with the doctrine for euery part of his life; & that he might feede his hearers the more plentifully.
                  
                  
                     Eſpecially in the miniſter.But alas, how ſleightly is the Apoſtles admonition regarded of a number euen in the miniſterie? who, though ſome of them reade much, and teach good things in their ſermons, when they doe preach: yet haue they ſmall vſe of their knowledge; neither deliuer any thing by their owne meditation, more then they finde in their commentaries; whereas, if they did, they ſhould draw aboundant matter out of their priuate readings. Beſides that, many receiue whatſoeuer they finde in their bookes, ſeeing they meditate not vpon it: and ſo, as they can the leſſe ſpeake priuately of the ſame things (which they deliuer publikely) to the edifying and conſolation of him, who demaundeth a queſtion of them, ſeeing they ſpeake onely out of the booke: euen ſo, they are the meanlier and more weakely furniſhed with the doctrine, which they teach, to make their liues fruitefull, becauſe they doe not weigh the vſe, benefit, and neceſſitie of the doctrine in their hearts: and this, beſide other great inconueniences, cauſeth ſome to fill their ſermons with authorities of men, to proue the truth of God: which is all one, as to ſet vp a candle to giue light at noone tide, and to prop and hold vp a great and weightie building with a weake and ſlender pillar. So that this is iuſtly to bee complained of in the miniſter or people, if they bee not acquainted with this meditation.
                  As for the obiection of the one or the other, that they haue the world to  looke after,Obiection. and to care for (for this is the probableſt defence that they haue, for the omitting and neglecting of it) they ſhould know it to be their ſinne, that they will thus ſet God againſt himſelfe,Anſwere. as though he ſhould commaund them to doe that, which hindreth them from an other dutie commaunded. Nay rather, they ſhould thinke, that following of the world to be too much, which is not moderated and ordred by the due conſidering, how far, and in what manner they ſhould deale in the world: that is, not to be hindred from holines by it. If they be rich, they haue the leſſe cauſe to be holden from it, by worldly care. If they be poore, they haue the more neede of it, to moderate their care, that it exceede not, nor carry them to vnbeliefe. For it muſt  be remembred, that I ſpeake of ſuch, as ſay, they eſteeme moſt preciouſly of the greateſt riches,We ſhould not beheld from meditation, by worldlings example. which is godlines. And what example ſo euer they haue of the contrarie in the multitude of worldlings, among whom they liue; yet they muſt know, though others will not, that they are not ſet here in their places, and callings, to doe as looſe and retchles ſeruants, when they goe to market: who when they ſhould buy prouiſion for their maiſters

                      familie, neglect that which they ſhould chiefly intend, and fall to drinking, play, and other ill rule with their companions.
                  Neither ſhould they be like bad husbands, who reckon what they haue comming in, but not what muſt goe out of their hands, who are not like to vphold their occupying long. But they muſt be like the wiſe builder,
                     Luk. 14.30. 
                     who looketh whether he be able to make an end, when he hath begun: So ſhould they euery while, be looking and wiſely conſidering, whether they take the courſe to finiſh the building of their chriſtian life, euen to the full perfecting of it, which is another manner building, then any made with hands. And he that will meditate on this ſeriouſly, and ſuch other good things as further this, he ſhall  not neede to feare the fall of his building, but that it ſhal ſtand in al weathers, till he inherit a building made without hands, which is immortall. And he that loueth to ſmell on the ſweete ſauours, more fragrant then Aarons oyntment, which in his Soliloquies with God and in his meditations he receiueth of him, euen the ſweete odors and graces of the ſpirit; he ſhall ſmell of Gods preſence in his talke, companie, and dealings: which wil teſtifie, that he came from God. And eſpecially on the Sabboth, when the whole day is appointed of God to it, and the like ſpirituall ſeruices (the word preached giuing ſo gratious occaſions:) that man ſhall be able to ſay, that meditation is a wonderfull helpe to faith and a godly life.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. 7. Of the third priuate helpe, which is the armour of a Chriſtian: and of the firſt three points of it.
               
                  THe third priuate helpe is the armour, which was next mentioned among the reſt. This being not ſo cleerely vnderſtood, nor the vſe of it ſo well ſeene into, requireth a more full handling, then I purpoſe to vſe in the moſt of the reſt.  And this armour God in his mercie hath appointed to furniſh the Chriſtian ſouldier withall in his warfare, againſt all his ſpirituall enemies, that by the helpe thereof, and the other meanes in this treatiſe mentioned, he may be able to be directed aright from time to time, and keepe a good courſe in his life, and beate backe the ſtrong and ſubtill aſſaults of the diuell, that he be not led by, nor ouercome of them, nor of the manifold bad paſsions and euill deſires of his own heart, which otherwiſe will draw him continually after them. But before I proceed any further, I will ſet downe the points, worthie to be learned and practiſed in and about this armour, that the reader may ſee better how to make right vſe  of it.
               Firſt therefore I will ſhew what this armour is, and the chiefe parts of it.Foure points to be conſidered touching the Chriſtian armour. Secondly, that a Chriſtian life cannot ſtand without it, nor be practiſed of any, except he be armed, as God hath taught and appointed him to be. Thirdly, how it is gotten and come by, and how wee ſhould put it on. Fourthly, how we may, by the helpe of it, practiſe godlines from time to time, and be able to ſtand faſt in our Chriſtian courſe, and reſiſt in the time of daunger. By

all which, God will make vs able to liue chriſtianly, which is to haue our conuerſation  in heauen with our God, as he requireth.
               
                  The firſt point ſheweth what the armour is.The whole complete armour therefore, is the ſpirituall furniture of the gifts and graces of the holie Ghoſt, by which, God doth deliuer his from all aduerſarie power, and bring them to the obedience of his will. I ſpeake not here of thoſe who are to bee called, but who are effectuallie called alreadie: and they by the helpe of this armour,2. Cor. 10.4. doe not onely caſt downe ſtrong holds of temptation, and ouerthrow imaginations, and euery high thing which exalteth it ſelf (in the opinion of him that is tempted) againſt the knowledg of God: but alſo bring into ſubiection euery euill thought in them, to the obedience of Chriſt. And this armour is that which is ſet downe to the Epheſians,Epheſ. 6.14. the parts whereof  are theſe: Truth or ſinceritie; righteouſnes; the ſhooes of peace, or preparation to beare the croſſe;
                  The parts of the armour. 
                  faith, the helmet of ſaluation: which in another place he calleth, hope, and the word of God. This is the full furniture of a Chriſtian, by the which the Lord hath taught him to fight againſt the diuell, and his inſtruments, and thereby to preuaile, in and through their captaine and head Chriſt Ieſus.
               And although there are other points of armour ſet downe in other places of the Scripture, yet are they but parcels of this, or the ſame in other words expreſſed. Neither ſhall there neede any other: for he who is attired and armed with this, ſhall not in any point be vnprouided, or to ſeeke of ſtrength in the time of neede. But yet doth not euery man ſee by and by how theſe  may be accounted armour, therefore will I deſcribe them ſeuerally.
               
                  VVhat ſinceritie is.Sinceritie or vprightnes is that weapon of the ſpirituall warfare, and that fruit of the ſpirit which ſhould accompanie the whole conuerſation (not ſome few actions of a Chriſtian) by the which hee is ſimple and without fraud and hypocriſie bearing ſway in him, both towards God and his neighbour: and it may the more cleerely be diſcerned by conſidering the perſon in whom it is found, namely an vpright man, whom (in the deſcription of Nathaniel) our Sauiour Chriſt calleth a true Iſraelite in whom there is no guile: which vertue although it be a part of the Chriſtian armour,Pſal. 32.2. Matth. 5.8. yet that it is rare, not onely the beſt doe ſee, but euen the bad ſort doe complaine: according  to the words of Salomon:
                  Prou. 20.6. 
                  Many men will boaſt, euery one of his owne goodnes, but who can finde a faithfull man? that is to ſay, who will prooue himſelfe to bee ſuch an one indeede, as hee will ſeeme to be, by word and ſhew? For to ſay the truth, men are ſo infected with hollownes and glozing, and through cuſtome and continuance therein ſo confirmed in it, that vntill God changeth the heart,Ierem. 13.23. 
                  Ieremies words are true of this one, as of other euils, It is as poſsible for him who is accuſtomed to euill, to returne and doe good, as for the blacke Moore to change his skinne, or the Leopard her ſpots.
               
               And this veritie conſiſteth as well in holding and keeping the truth, I meane the ſound knowledge of the word of God in our iudgement, as the  practiſe of it in a good conſcience. Which I ſay, becauſe there are ſome, who profeſſe great friendſhip to the Goſpell, who yet maintaine ſtrange opinions not according to the truth of it: as that the law ought not to be preached in any wiſe: and that there ſhould no differences of men be made; when yet the Scripture putteth difference betwixt good and bad, both in their life and in rewards, Pſalm. 1. The holding of ſuch opinions therefore, ſtandeth not

                   with ſinceritie: which freely admitteth all opinions to bee meaſured and cenſured by the word.
               Now therefore if this be ſinceritie and vprightnes to be free, not onely from double heartednes and halting, but alſo, to be readie to yeeld a francke aſſent and practiſe to the truth; and alſo if this vertue bee one part of the Chriſtian armour: he who is voyde of this, muſt needes lie open to great danger, both by error in opinion and by corruption in life: for he wanteth that which ſhould defend him. And contrarily, he who ſeeketh to pleaſe God vnfainedly, his conſcience bearing him record, that he hath ſome true meaſure of this ſinceritie, and ſtill laboureth after it, that is, to be ſimple and  plaine (though politike) in his words, actions and meaning, he hath this part of the armour: the vſe whereof how great and gainefull it is, ſhall appeare hereafter. And ſuch a thing is veritie or ſinceritie. But let this be added, that if any will purpoſe this in ſome things, yet not reſolue to ſhew it in all, euen this is the man, who is farre from ſinceritie.
               Righteouſnes is that part of the armour,What righteouſnes is. and ſuch a gift of the ſpirit whereby our hearts are bent to all manner of goodnes, and righteous dealing, approouing of it as moſt excellent, deſiring feruently and delighting in it;Prou. 28.1. Pſalm. 7. and that becauſe it is good: and diſliking and hating all naughtines and euill. And he who looketh to be preſerued in manifold temptations to  ſinne, and to keepe in obedience to all kind of duties both towards God and men, whiles he liueth, had neede to haue no leſſe, then this firmenes and conſtancie of a righteous heart, and to be ſo throughly perſwaded of the beautie and price of this one part of Chriſtianitie, namely, innocent and righteous dealing, that though infinit occaſions ſhall ariſe to diminiſh the credit of it; yet he may cloath himſelfe with it, as with a garment, and weare it as an ornament, that ſuch an one he may ſhew himſelfe to be in his actions,Phil. 1.11. that he may cauſe others to be in loue with it alſo. Which vertue ſo ſhined in Ioſeph, that ſundrie times, when he might haue wrought euill without feare of reuenge to his brethren, who had giuen him ſtrong occaſion, he  would not: nay, when he might haue been preferred, by hearkning to his whoriſh miſtreſſe, he refuſed it with deteſtation (though thereby he procured to himſelfe no ſmall danger) ſaying, how can I doe this great wickednes and ſo ſinne againſt God? Geneſ. 39.9.
               He that ſeeth into this vertue, and liketh it ſo, that he will be wary that he commit no vnrighteous thing againſt God nor man, as farre as his knowledge guideth him, but ſetleth himſelfe to doe that, which is pleaſing both in the ſight of God, and before men: he hath this part of armour, and is fenced with the breſtplate of righteouſnes. Such ſhall ſay with Iob,
                  Iob. 31.35. 
                  If mine aduerſarie write a booke againſt me, I will put it behind my backe (reade it, who will) and  glorie in mine accuſations. The beautie of this grace and vertue is ſuch, as may appeare in the examples of thoſe who were found innocent when they were charged and accuſed, as in Dauid towards Saul, 1. Sam. 24.17. that if it could be ſeene with eye, it would exceedingly prouoke men to be in loue with it. And let all marke how fitly theſe two ſinceritie and righteouſnes, or innocencie doe goe together.
               To be prepared with the ſhooes of peace by the Goſpell, is this,Shooes of peace▪
                   that we

hauing receiued forgiuenes of our ſinnes, and aſſurance of ſaluation through  faith by the Goſpell,Rom. 5.1. and thereby found moſt ſweete peace to our conſcience, we are now by this Goſpell, as they who are readie to take a long iourney, ſhodde and prepared to be readie to deny our ſelues, and to take vp our croſſe, and follow Chriſt, throughout this our pilgrimage. This part of armour did our mercifull father ſee meete for vs, his weake children, ſeeing we are ſo diſmayed at the beholding,Luk. 22.57. Luk. 22.33. or hearing of troubles to be at hand, although before they come, we were cheerefull. He would therefore that we ſhould not faint, nor be diſcouraged, no not euen by them: but lift vp our heads, and be of good comfort, ſeeing they are but for a ſhort time, & our peace is continuall:Phil. 4.7. Ioh. 16.33. beſides that, for the exceeding greatnes of it, it paſſeth all  vnderſtanding: and therefore it is able to keepe our hearts comforted, euen in our tribulations, through hope at leaſt. Which our Sauiour foretold, that the faithfull ſhould haue, but he armed them moſt gratiouſly againſt them.
               Neither is there indeede any other thing, that is able to ſtay vs from deadlie vnquietnes and bitter anguiſh at ſuch times. For ſeeing we are going to God, and that muſt be through moſt dangerous rankes of cruell enemies, as through a wildernes of robbers, this is our incouragement to goe on manfully, in that we know by the doctrine of the Goſpell, that we take our iourney to God who is at peace with vs. He therefore, who hath this peace by the Goſpell, is armed with this part of Chriſtian armour, called the ſhooes  of preparation, as the ſouldier with his braſſie bootes, againſt all ſuch hard and ſharpe afflictions, and troubles; which as pikes in the way, would otherwiſe ſo wound him, that he ſhould not be able to ſtand in the battaile; he is armed (I ſay) becauſe he thus thinketh with himſelfe,Rom. 8.31. Pſal. 27.1. 
                  if God be with me, who can be againſt me? the Lord is my ſaluation and light, whom then ſhould I feare? the Lord is the ſtrength of my life, of whom then ſhall I be afraid?
               
               
                  Faith.To haue this ſhield of faith, is to build our perſwaſion on Gods faithfull promiſes, that Chriſt Ieſus is ours: and that God hath giuen him to vs, to obtaine forgiuenes of our ſinnes and ſaluation by him; yea and all other good things alſo,Rom. 8.32. meete for this preſent life: As the Apoſtle ſaith; He that hath giuen  vs his Chriſt, how can he, but with him giue vs all things alſo? So that he which hath embraced theſe pretious promiſes and reſteth vpon them, as certaine and not doubtfull, no more to be remoued, and vnſetled, as (if it be well weighed) there is no cauſe he ſhould: he hath this part of the armour, and therefore ſhall not be ouercome by thoſe fearefull temptations of Sathan to ſtrong diſtruſtfulnes,Col. 1.23. which as firie darts be deadly to all which are not thus armed with a true and ſound faith: and ſuch an one may be rightly ſaid, to put on the Lord Ieſus, which cannot be done but by faith.
               
                  VVhat hope is. Rom. 12.12.
                  This hope is a ioyfull longing, and ſtedfaſt deſire, Luk. 2.30. (as we may ſee in old father Simeon) and looking for the performing, and accompliſhing  of all thoſe mercies temporall and eternall, which God hath promiſed, and we by faith are aſſured of. For this the Lord would haue vs to know, that he hath made no one promiſe to vs, but he meaneth to fulfill it, that we may ſee it, and glorifie him, for ſuch louing kindnes of his towards vs: and therefore would haue vs alſo in reuerence to hope perfectly,
                  1. Pet. 1.13. that is, confidently and conſtantly to the end, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, for ſuch gratious gifts, as he

                   hath bequeathed vnto vs. The which holy boldnes, whiles we are propped vp withall, our hearts are ſo well ſatisfied and contented, that we paſſe our dayes cheerefully, and walke in our callings ioyfully, ſeruing God therein: we like our portion marueilous well, and we inioy our proſperitie with much thankfulnes.
               And all this we doe, becauſe we haue hope from God of all good things which ſhall be meete for vs; yea and all this we doe, not after the fleſh, or becauſe we haue whatſoeuer heart can wiſh, or eye luſt after (for our God indenteth not with vs after any ſuch manner) but becauſe we haue ſome meaſure of godlines with contentation, and haue learned to be perſwaded, that to  be beſt for vs, which he bringeth to paſſe; and ſo to hope ſtill, that all things ſhall fall out to vs for the beſt, becauſe he hath ſo promiſed.Rom. 8.28. And if it were not for this ſweete hope, our liues ſhould be moſt weariſome, except we ſhould ſuffer them to be meerely diueliſh. And without this of the armour of hope, all other hope is vaine and deceitfull, and as the ruſh without mire and moyſture which withereth: and as the ſpiders webbe which is ſodainly ſwept downe.
               Laſtly, the armour of the word, which is called the ſword of the ſpirit,The word of God. is to be well inſtructed in the ſound and liuing knowledge of the Scriptures, and to digeſt the ſame, and ſeaſon our vnderſtanding with it, in ſuch wiſe, 
                  that we may know the will of God, and haue the ſame in remembrance, in the things which moſt concerne vs (as we can) that thereby we may at all times, and in all caſes be readily led by it. That this may be a light to our feete,
                  Pſal. 119.105. 
                  and a lanterne to our ſteppes, as the Prophet teacheth: that ſo neither hereſie in opinion, nor errour in our life which ſhall be daungerous,1. Pet. 3.17. 
                  may carry vs away from our ſtedfaſtnes in our Chriſtian courſe: no nor ſo much as deceiue vs ſecretly, but we may be able to draw forth this ſworde of the ſpirit, and to ſay, it is written▪ that ſo no ſuch thing may be done of vs.
               Such knowledge therefore of good and euill, cannot be wanting in vs, nor the daily increaſing of it be neglected, but fore and perilous wounds  will by the aduerſarie pearce our ſoules: ſo farre is it off, that the moſt experienced and skilfull Chriſtian ſhould thinke, he knoweth enough. Yet leaſt any ſhould deceiue himſelfe about this, thinking that he hath knowledg, this (I ſay) that if he be not counſelled and guided by that he vnderſtandeth,2. Cor. 3.18. Prou. 1.6. Prou. 9. 
                  He knoweth nothing, as he ought to know. For the feare of offending God is the beginning of wiſedome, and he that keepeth (that is) faithfully indeuoureth to keepe the commaundements of God, is moſt wiſe. And ſo ſpeaketh our Sauiour to his Apoſtles:Ioh. 13.17. 
                  If ye know theſe things, happie are ye, if ye doe them. This knowledge therefore, and the experience that we learne by it, how we haue proſpered, by liuing after it; is that part of Chriſtian armour, which is called the ſword of the  ſpirit: and who doth not ſee, what a ſingular and neceſſarie helpe it is, to the practiſing of a godly life? for as a blind man is without a guide; ſo is a man without it.
               And thus I haue giuen the reader a taſte of the armour of a Chriſtian, what it is: who by due conſideration of the power and vſe of euery part of it, may eaſily ſee, that he who is furniſhed with the ſame, may be able to doe wonderfull things, in reſpect of him, which goeth to worke by his owne aduice

and power, or (which is all one) by mixing it with the word of God. And  yet ſo doe the moſt, who profeſſe the Goſpell: they will not altogether exclude the commaundements of God, ſo that they refuſe altogether to be gouerned by them: yet for all that, they will not binde themſelues to be ruled by them, in one thing as in another: and therefore doth their life, and talke iarre and iangle, in reſpect of the knowledge of dutie which they haue, and is euen harſh and vnſauourie to good and bad, and to themſelues alſo, if they would but ſearch and looke into their waies ſeriouſly and carefully at any time. And this briefly bee ſaid of the firſt point concerning the Chriſtian armour, to ſhew what it is, and which are the parts of it.
               
                  The ſecond point, that the Chriſtian life cannot ſtand without it.Now to go forward to the ſecond, which is, that the Chriſtian life cannot  ſtand without it. He that is willing to liue Chriſtianly throughout his life, (for God giueth vs no libertie of intermiſſion or ſtay) hee muſt not be content to haue this knowledge of the armour ſwimming in his braine, or lying by him in a booke, but to be digeſted of him, and made his owne, and no more ſtand at the putting on of this holie armour, then to doubt of the truth of it: he muſt alwaies bee readie to cloath and furniſh his ſoule with the ſeuerall parts of it (to couer the nakednes and ſhame thereof, and to make it comely and well fauoured in the ſight of God) as his bodie with apparell: and to arme it therewith as the ſouldier is with his Corſelet, head-piece, ſword, &c. becauſe by it, God hath appointed to defend him, from the ſpirituall  craftines of his deadly enemie the diuell, and from the deceitfulnes of the moſt noiſome ſinne.
               And moſt ſure it is, to him who will look into it, that all other good helps to godlines, as prayer, reading, conference, though in themſelues very profitable; yet they doe Chriſtians the leſſe good, if they be without the armour. And therefore when the Apoſtle had taught the Epheſians to practiſe the particular duties of Chriſtianitie, he ſendeth them to this armour, to enable them to ſtand faſt therein, without the which, the diuell (he telleth them) would with his ſubtill baites and deluſions, draw them from whatſoeuer he exhorteth them vnto; yea although they had deſire to bee obedient to the  ſame.Epheſ. 6.13. Thus he writeth, ſaying: Take vnto you that whole armour of God, that ye may be able to reſiſt in the euill day: that is, in the hard time, when Sathan bendeth all his force againſt you, and proclaimeth (as it were) open warre; as well as when the daunger ſeemeth to be ſmaller: and hauing done all things, that is, reſiſted your enemie, ſtand by the ſtrength thereof, and keepe your ſelues armed ſtill againſt new aſſaults. By this it is cleere, that ſeeing the diuell is a profeſſed enemie of ours, and one that woundeth vs ſecretly, when wee are not aware, and is at hand to doe vs moſt harme, when we doe not ſo much as dreame of any ſuch matter: it is cleere, I ſay, that if wee be not prepared againſt ſuch daungers, we muſt needes be ſore hurt. Who goeth foorth naked  and vnarmed vnto the battell, where ſo many kinds of weapons are readie to take away his life? nay all is little enough, though hee be armed in euerie part.
               That which I ſay in generall of the whole, will better appeare if wee goe through euery particular part of it. For who will aduenture to goe barefooted among thornes and ſtubbes, yea to runne vpon the pikes, but hee will be

                   well ſhod? euen ſo,Shod with the preparation. who will be bold to goe thorough the manifold ſtormes and tribulations of this life, which riſe vp in his way, in euery place, not to pricke his feete, but to pierce and goe thorough his heart: as it is ſaid of Marie her troubles, that they ſhould pierce thorough her ſoule, euen as a ſword,Luk. 2.35. which goeth to the intrailes: who (I ſay) will go thorough theſe ſtormes, but he will be well armed againſt them, and ſtrongly prepared and ſetled to ſtay himſelf vpon God by the peace and comfort which he draweth from Chriſts owne words, euen theſe: Though in the world ye ſhall haue tribulation, yet be of good comfort, for I haue ouercome the world?
               
               And that which I ſay of this one kinde, I may in like manner ſay of all the  parts of the armour which God hath furniſhed a Chriſtian with: that he can walke in no ſafetie thorough the Campe of this world without them,The ſhield of faith. and euery of them. Who can be free from deſpairing of Gods mercie (which is a firie and venimous dart) or els from dreadfull doubting and feare (which are companions thereunto) or (which is as deadly and daungerous) from preſumption, vaine hope, and deceiuing of himſelfe, which hath not the ſhield of faith; and is not certaine thereby of eternall ſaluation; and of the fauour of God to guard him in this life? And though this man had no other thing to make him vnhappie: yet who doth not ſee, that euen this is enough to make al his pleaſures vnſauourie, if he ſhould either feele the one, or might be perſwaded  of the other?
               Beſides, what is his life (euen at the beſt) when hee hath no truſt in Gods manifold promiſes? And although theſe things being not ſeene with eye, be as little thought vpon of the moſt part in the world; yet the Scripture hath concluded, that there is no ſound peace to any ſuch; yea rather that the diuel hath, as a raging lion, his paw vpō their throte ready euery houre to take away their ſoule: as the Apoſtle ſheweth (though this ſeeme leſſe, ſeeing it is not knowne nor felt) whereas if they were ſhielded by this faith, and that in their neede, it ſhould not be ſo with; them but thereby they reſiſting him,
                  1. Pet. 5.7. Iam. 4.7. 
                  hee ſhould flie from them.
               
               
                   Againe,The breaſt-plate of righteouſnes. to ſhew how impoſſible it is to bee in ſafetie without the other parts of the Chriſtian armour; how can any man walke innocent and harmeles among his neighbours, though others ſhould walke ſo towards him, except he hath put on the breaſt-plate of righteouſnes;Prou. 3.30. and armed himſelfe with this cogitation, to doe no man any wrong; and not onely ſo, but alſo to doe no other iniquitie or euill, which might offend any, or wound his owne ſoule? How many waies ſhall hee be carried to ſinne againſt God, and his neighbour? I ſpeake not of an vnbeleeuer, who can doe nothing but ſinne; but euen of a Chriſtian, who hath an heart which hateth ſinne: yet euen he, if he indent not from time to time a freſh with his heart, againſt all vnrighteouſnes,  and the parts of vnholie life, he ſhall be disfigured with many blemiſhes, and diſgrace himſelfe and his holie profeſſion alſo, by his many vnlawfull actions: ſo farre is it off, that innocencie is in his heart, and in his hands, and that he liueth vnrebukeable, and without blame amongſt men.
               And therfore it is that S. Paul teaching the Corinthians how they ſhould be apparelled with the parts of Chriſtian armour, as puritie and vprightnes,
                  2. Cor. 6.4.5. &c. 
                  knowledge of the word of God, and with patience and long ſuffering, which hope ingendreth,

doth among the reſt, commend to them this one, by his owne example, namely, the armour of righteouſnes, both on the right hand, and on the left, that is, in proſperitie and aduerſitie, that ſo they ſhould giue no occaſion of offence in any thing, but in all things approoue themſelues as the ſeruants of God.
               
               
                  The ſvvord of the ſpirit.The ſame may be ſaid of the other parts of the Chriſtian armour, that I haue ſaid of the ſhooes of peace, of the ſhield of faith, and of the breaſt-plate of righteouſnes. For if there be not ſome cleere and ſound knowledge of the word of God (which as a ſword may cut the bands of ſinne aſunder like a cord) how ſhall a Chriſtian be able to diſcerne the deceitfulnes of ſinne, but be led by it and taken with it, as with a baite? How can he chooſe, although he be zealous and deſirous to doe well, but to be led into many errours, and ſo  goe without the ſweete life, which in Chriſtianitie is to be found, if hee haue not well learned and digeſted this in the depth of his heart, it is written, to the contrarie?The girdle of truth. So if he be not girded, as it were, with ſinceritie, that hee may be adorned with it whereſoeuer he become, and all other good gifts of God in him be bound together by that, that hee hath them in truth, that hee delighteth in them indeed;Prou. 20.6. how ſhall he be infected with hollownes and hypocriſie, what ſhew of holines ſoeuer appeare in him?
               
                  The helmet of hope.To conclude, what can there be in his life daily, but fainting, vncomfortablenes, and ſundrie diſcouragements, whiles he is weaned from the fooliſh and vaine delights of this world, and ſeeth not the pleaſures of heauen with  mortall eyes; what can there els be to him (I ſay) if the hope of ſaluation be not as an helmet, to keepe life in his ſoule: and with this hope of ſaluation, which cannot deceiue him, a cheerefull hope of well paſſing the courſe of theſe conflicting daies alſo vnder the wings of Gods protection, till he come thither? As for other hope, who knoweth not, that all other hope of earthly peace, or long life, is like to a broken tooth, and ſliding foote? But by this hope, tediouſnes is remoued, and cheerefulnes to waite contentedly in this pilgrimage for a full deliuerance, is obtained. Therefore how truly may this bee ſaid, that the Chriſtian life, without the armour of God, cannot be continued?
               
               For if euery part of it be ſo needfull throughout our life (as hath bin ſaid) who ſeeth not, that euen ſuch an one, as hath receiued grace from aboue, by the preaching of the Goſpell, to be borne a new, and to be begotten to a liuely hope; yet for all this, ſhall not thriue, nor proſper, without diligent and vſuall nouriſhing of this new birth in him, nor grow vp to a perfect age in Chriſt, deliuered from the hindrances by the world and the diuell, except he be ſtrongly armed, as God hath taught him to be?
               This is ſo truly verified in all Gods children, that euen they who are not the forwardeſt of others, yet if they haue any ſtrength againſt euill at any time, they haue it from God thus, euen by the meanes of the armour. If they  were not ſometimes armed, they ſhould make as great breaches, and fall as dangerouſly, one day as another: and yet if they were acquainted with this armour thoroughly, they ſhould make their worſt and moſt vncomfortable day in the weeke, equall with the beſt and the happieſt (which they ſometime inioyed) in heauenly paſſing of their time, and in ſweete comfort. And for want of this armour (either for that men know it not, or for not hauing

                   vſe of it) the infinite irkeſomneſſes, heauines, diſtraction, dumpiſhnes, doubting, and feare doe vexe them, and ſuch like deadly poyſons doe occupie the hearts euen of Chriſtians, as alſo light reioycing in a fleſhly manner, vaine hope, phantaſticall dreames of peace and ſafetie, where none is. And for want of this, their liues alſo before men are kept from ſhewing foorth light and good example in one thing, as well as in another: yea rather, they are harbourers of ſundrie euill qualities, in ſo much that few are incouraged to waxe better by them, nor to ſuſpect that any thing is amiſſe in them, but are hardened to goe forward in their old courſe ſtill.
               And if it be thus with ſuch, as haue ſome good and ſound beginnings in  Chriſtianitie, let no man meruaile, though they, who are vtterly deſtitute of faith, and of other parts of the Chriſtian armour, be ſo farre off from good life as they be, ſeeing they renounce this arming of themſelues, which I haue proued, that a Chriſtian life cannot be without.
               And now by this which hath been ſaid of the armour hitherto, it is the eaſier to vnderſtand what it is, and what the parts of it are,The third point is how the armour ſhould be put on. and how the Chriſtian life cannot ſtand without it. Now I will proceed (as I haue promiſed) to the third point in this matter concerning the armour, namely, how it ſhould be put on, and be worne, that ſo wee may better ſee how to take that good by it, which God offereth vs. For which end and purpoſe it is to bee  marked, that euery true beleeuer in his firſt conuerſion to God, is thereby made partaker of all things pertaining to life and godlines,
                  2. Pet. 1.4. and therefore is not deſtitute of any common grace of a true Chriſtian: hauing them, as a childe lately borne, all the parts and faculties of ſoule and bodie, though weake in all: amongſt which, theſe that are here compared to armour, are principall.
               This being ſo, a faithfull Chriſtian need not wonder, when he is willed to haue this grace, and parts of this holie armour in a readines; hee neede not wonder (I ſay) where he ſhall haue it, or doubt how to come by it:Luk. 17.31. For we ſee he hath it alreadie; and as our Sauiour Chriſt ſaid; The kingdome of heauen 
                  (that is, the glorious raigning of his in the elect) commeth not by obſeruation, neither ſhall men ſay, loe here, loe there; for the kingdome of heauen is in you: So (I ſay) this armour, which God hath appointed to defend his militant Church withall, from infernall ſlauerie, it is not to be ſeene, nor to be gazed vpon with the eye, but it is in the faithfull, and poſſeſſeth their ſoules, euen now, when many will (perhaps) aske how ſhall we come by it? or, where is it? For if any ſhould imagine, that he hath it not after beleeuing (as through ignorance he muſt needs) can ſuch an one chooſe, but be exceedingly troubled about this, how hee ſhould come by it, and put it on?
                  Col. 3.13. Ephe. 6.13.14 for ſuch a charge the Apoſtle giueth.
               
                   Let vs know therefore, that this armour is not alway to bee in ſeeking, (which had not need to be, whē it ſhould be in occupying) but the Lord according to the neceſſitie of it, which he ſeeth to be in euery one of his children, againſt the infinite dangers of the world, doth prouide it for euery one of them; and furniſheth thē with the ſame. Euery one of them hath ſome meaſure of true faith and hope, though this be weake in them: euery one hateth iniquitie, and is readie to worke righteouſnes, according to his skill:

and the moſt feeble Chriſtian hath an vpright heart, and ſome ſpirituall wiſdome  to diſcerne good from euill (which yet a man of greater knowledge, if he be not inlightened with the ſpirit of regeneration, cannot) although one more then an other. And the ſame I ſay of the reſt.
               
                  Obiection.But ye will obiect, why doth the Apoſtle will vs to put it on, if we haue it alreadie? and will ſay, this doubt is not yet anſwered, neither can ye tell what he meaneth by that, when he ſpeaketh thus, Put on the whole armour? To this I anſwere, that his charge is, that Chriſtians ſhould not haue this ſpirituall armour, as men in time of peace, haue bodily armour hanging by, and ruſtie, and vtterly vnfit for vſe; but as ſouldiers haue theirs in battaile, that is, girded to them, and put vpon them, and this alſo whiles the battaile continueth: So he commaundeth vs, that we let not the parts of this armour ſo to be vnoccupied in vs, that we haue no feeling of it, and ſo no benefit by it, but be ſure continually that we haue it on, and readie for vſe; that we lie downe with it, and riſe vp with it, and be well aduiſed, that through the day in all places, and whatſoeuer we goe about we haue it with vs, as farre as we can be able.
               
                  Epheſ. 6.14. Col. 3.13.This is his meaning when he ſaith, put on the whole armour: and in an other place, put on tender mercie, and kindnes, as the elect of God. For our battaile laſteth all our life long; and our enemies be deadly, and all our ſtrength is by our armour: Therefore who ſeeth not now, that a Chriſtian can ſafely be  no time without this armour? If this be darke and hard to any, euen they may know themſelues to be thoſe, who haue not skill to put on this armour, and who haue been ignorant of the vſe and power of it: they haue not well learned the will of God about the neceſſitie and benefit of it. And therefore euen ſuch, though they may be the Lords; yet doubtles the diuell holdeth them in ſtrong chaines of darkenes, and ignorance: and therefore alſo in great ſlauerie and bondage, which God for his part hath ſhewed them the way to come out of, if they could once come to ſee the ſame, and be perſwaded that they haue a part in it.
               For through the vnskilfulnes of men in the right vſe of the armour, and  vnacquaintance with euery part of it, the liues euen of the deare ſeruants of God, are much blemiſhed, and vnglorious amongſt men, and to themſelues (beſides the idlenes, and vnprofitablnes, of them) exceedingly vncheerefull. Therefore, ſeeing God hath giuen them all helps needefull for their defence from this preſent euill world, from ſubiection to Sathan, and their owne damnable luſts; ſeeing alſo he hath taught them to know this their libertie and priuiledge, to haue the daily aide and benefit of their armour, for the ſtrengthening of them in all good duties, I know nothing to remaine doubtful, which ſhould neede to trouble them hereafter, no not the weakeſt, ſaue this one thing: namely, how this armour ſhould be put on.
               
               Now to haue the feeling of euery part of this armour (faith againſt diſtruſt at any time, hope againſt fainting, vprightnes againſt hypocriſie, knowledge againſt the deceitfulnes of ſinne, righteouſnes againſt all kinde of iniquitie, and the preparation of the Goſpell of peace againſt croſſes) to haue (I ſay) this armour in a readines to ſafe cundict and keepe vs throughout our life in the practiſe of our Chriſtian direction, this is to be done:

                  
                  Watchfulnes continuall, and prayer hartie and oft is to be vſed of vs;Matth. 26.41. which alſo is preſcribed of the Apoſtle himſelfe, when he ſaith (after he willeth the Epheſians to take to them this whole armour) pray alway withall manner of prayer,
                  Epheſ. 6.18. 
                  and watch thereunto with all perſeuerance, &c.
               
               We ſee God will haue vs perſwaded that this whole armour may be had and put on, and therefore to pray to him for it. But in any wiſe, theſe prayers he will haue to be made without doubting and wauering,
                  Iam. 1.6. without which manner of praying, we cannot looke to receiue any thing. For it hath pleaſed our good God, ſeeing we are ſo prone to doubting, to giue vs a moſt ſure word of promiſe, of all ſuch things as we haue neede of, that if we  thinke God to be credited, we may looke for them without feare or wauering.
               He that hartily craueth this, as a thing which he cannot be without (ſeeing he asketh according to the will of God) and that which God commaundeth him, as we ſee Epheſ. 6.14. he hath and obtaineth the ſame which he deſireth, 1. Ioh. 4.16. and Matth. 6.7. aske and ye ſhall receiue.
                  Gen. 21.16.17. For if Hagar praying in her diſtreſſe was heard, when ſhe ſaw not how; and if our Sauiour did ſay to the woman of Samaria, if thou haddeſt but asked,
                  Ioh. 4.10. 
                  I would haue giuen thee water of life: is it to be doubted of, that Gods deare ſeruants ſhall be denyed their requeſts? If a naturall father will giue that which is meete to his  childe, who yet neither knoweth alwayes what is beſt, neither is at all times ſo kinde as he ought; ſhall we call the readines of our heauenly father into queſtion, eſpecially about ſuch a gift, as both he hath bidden vs aske,Epheſ. 6.14. yea and alſo take? yea and ſuch a gift, as without the which, we cannot honour nor ſerue him aright?
               This I ſpeake to hearten and incourage all, to pray oft and earneſtly (which is in ſo little requeſt in the world) for this gift, that they may know that by this meanes, they ſhall put on this holy armour of God, eſpecially when they ſhall herewithall, watch, that they doe receiue ſtrength by their prayers, indeede ſo to doe. And if this be not found and obtained by ſuch  as yet doe pray for it, let them know, that they pray faintly and coldly, or ſlackly and negligently: for otherwiſe this is the way to put vpon vs the whole armour; as Dauids dealing with Goliah doth prefigure,1. King. 3.9. Pſal. 51.12. & 77.5. and the example of the Saints of God for the particular parts of it; as by their eſpeciall neceſſities they haue been prouoked: as Salomon for wiſedome. Dauid did thus vſually ſtirre vp his faith, which was the putting on of it, which before lay by, as it were, vnoccupied, and ſo of the reſt. And to get wiſedome, whereby to be prepared for the croſſe, and to beare it meekely,Iam. 1.6. the Apoſtle willeth to pray without doubting.
               
               With our prayer, holy meditation is to be vſed of euery part of our armour,  when we haue been taught it, till we know the vſe and benefit of it. And vntill the matter of it bee more familiar to vs, conferre about it with ſuch as haue knowledge and experience therein: that whatſoeuer is hard to be vnderſtood or practiſed, may bee made eaſie. This I ſpeake for the benefit of the weake, ſeeing euery thing is moſt hard to them, before they haue attained to it, although it be neuer ſo plainely ſet downe to them. And reade either this which I haue for thy ſake written of this argument, or any ſound

treatiſe concerning this matter. Stirre vp, and perſwade thy ſelfe hereto, by  this reaſon, that thou walkeſt naked, except thou be clothed with it: and as an vnarmed man fighting with many ſtrong enemies throughly furniſhed; ſo art thou in this world without it.
               And when by reading, hearing, or conference, thou ſhalt ſee what helpe commeth by thine armour to the well framing of thine heart and life, and by meditation ſometime on the ſeuerall partes of it (as I haue preſcribed) and haſt dulie weighed and muſed vpon the ſame, to affect and ſeaſon thy heart therewith, and by prayer haſt with confidence deſired of God, that euen thou particularly maieſt finde, as thou ſhalt ſee cauſe, thy ſelfe ſtrengthened with euery part of this armour: when (I ſay) thou haſt done this, then haſt  thou put it on. This is the way of putting it on: that when thou knoweſt euery part of it, and whereto it ſerues, and canſt be willing to walke in this ſpirituall attire, thou mayeſt be kept ſafe (as they ſay) from winde and weather, euen from world and diuell.
               For then ſhalt thou, hauing this grace of beleeuing, hoping, righteous liuing, vphight meaning, &c. bring forth the fruite of it, as thou ſhalt haue occaſion through the day, that is to ſay, to giue credit to Gods promiſes from time to time: to hope at one time, as well as another: to be vpright and without fraud in one thing as well as in another; and yet remember that I can ſpeake to thee, when thou art at the beſt, but as to a man ſubiect to infirmities;  and laſtly to giue duties to God as well as to men, and to one man, and in one action, as well as in another: which to doe, is to ſhew forth the fruite of the armour of righteouſnes. And the ſame I ſay of the reſt.
               
                  The armour being put on, muſt be kept on. Phil. 4.4.
                  But with all this, it is to be knowne and regarded, that as it is thus to be put on: ſo it is after the ſame manner to be kept on. For example: for the retaining, or recouering of this one peece of the whole armour, I meane peace, or reioycing,Prou. 15.15. 1. Theſ. 5.16.17 which we ſhould not be voyde of at any time, continuall prayer is required: for he hauing ſaid, reioyce euermore, he addeth, pray continually. And as Saint Paul ſaith, that by this putting on of the whole armour, a Chriſtian may ſtand faſt in the euill day of temptation,
                  Epheſ. 6.14. 2. Pet. 1.5.6. which is the hardeſt time: So  Saint Peter ſaith, that if we giue all diligence hereto, that we ioyne with our faith, vertue, knowledge, patience, &c. (which who knoweth not, that it is cheefely done,2. Pet. 1.10. by watching and prayer?) we ſhall neuer fall, that is, dangerouſly: to take any great hurt, or annoyance thereby. Whereby, he ſheweth that he agreeth with Saint Paul, namely, that for the furniſhing of our ſelues with the graces of the ſpirit, which are the ſeuerall parts of the armour; continuall care and diligence bee vſed by prayer and watchfulnes, which is the only way to put and keepe it on.
               But here let the reader remember and conſider to whom the Lord ſpeaketh, when he willeth to put on, and to haue in a readines this armour againſt  all ſpirituall craftines: For as he, who is not yet reſolued fully to be a Chriſtian,Euen the weakeſt Chriſtian as well as the ſtrongeſt, muſt weare the armour. and to leade a godly life, is vtterly vnfit for this armour, and hath neither minde nor deſire to it, neither can poſſibly put it on: ſo on the contrarie not onely the ſtronger Chriſtian; but alſo the new borne babe, and he, euen the weakeſt youngling in Gods familie, who hath neuer ſo ſmall abilitie to reſiſt ſinne, and withſtand the ſame, God hath bidden him to take it

                   to him, and to gird himſelfe with it, and to put it on. It is munition appointed to him of God, to ſaue him from daunger, euen the greateſt that can bee raiſed againſt him: who therefore ſhall withhold him from it? It keepeth his ſoule and his life; what ſhould therefore make him ſo ſlauiſh to feare, and full of diſtruſtfull phantaſies, and diſcouragements, as to caſt away his weapons, and wittingly to offer himſelfe into the lions mouth? Euery ſuch therfore muſt put foorth himſelfe to be more bold with reuerence, to take vnto him this armour which none can want with ſafetie) when hee ſeeth who incourageth him, euen hee that is able to ſtrengthen him, to the obtaining of that which he ſetteth him about, namely, God all-ſufficient. He muſt be more  bold to keepe his crowne, and honour, euen this holie armour,Reue. 3.11. which is more pretious to him, then life it ſelfe, and ſuffer none to take it from him.
               This I ſpeake for their ſakes, who deſire, as much as I exhort them to:2. Theſſ. 3.4. who yet doe but weakly know, that there is ſuch armour, or that it hath any ſuch vſe to make a Chriſtian ſtrong againſt ſin and Sathan: much leſſe doe themſelues receiue any ſuch benefit by it, to their knowledge; and yet are not without it, that they may ſee their caſe better then they haue thought it, and that God hath prouided for them farre better, then they were perſwaded. Therefore let them, for whom God hath prouided this, not onely not be ignorant of it hereafter, but neither let them be ſlouthfull, or backward to get  a part in it, by putting and keeping it on.
               And therefore let them vrge themſelues (if they waxe cold or vntoward) to vſe the meanes before mentioned, wherby this armour is put on and held in a readines. And if the meanes themſelues grow vnſauourie with them, ordinarie prayer (I meane) and watchfulnes, as they may eaſily doe, if the heart be diſcouraged or ſet in euill delights, let them driue out that diuell with faſting and prayer, and giue no reſt to their eyes, nor eaſe to their hearts, vntill they haue in ſome comfortable manner, recouered their firſt loue and ſtrength, which they had once by this armour; I ſay, let them not reſt till they haue recouered it againe.
               
                   And let them perſwade themſelues, that fearefull daunger is not farre off from them, if they awake not, and that ſpeedily. For although it be at the firſt, with a weake Chriſtian in the putting on of this ſpirituall armour, as with a freſh ſouldier, in putting on his bodily armour, namely, to account it ſtraunge and weariſome, as not being acquainted therewith; and therefore to wiſh to be vnburthened of it: yet weighing with himſelfe, that God hath giuen it him for his ſingular benefit, he will be admoniſhed, and take counſell to doe otherwiſe.
               
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 8. Of the laſt point, which is the benefit of this armour.
               
                  ANd thus to come to the laſt point in hand, hee which will learne to put on this armour, and to goe cloathed with it through the day, ſhall finde euery thing true which God hath ſpoken, and I haue here ſet downe vnto him; that is, that by reſiſting the diuell, he ſhall flie from him: and hauing theſe parts of it faſt tied to his ſoule, the depth and ſubtiltie  of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt him, which is the fruite and vſe of it; as no man ſhould neede to doubt, if he could take delight in being watchfull to be thus occupied.2. Cor. 10.4. For as S. Paul writeth to the Corinthians, The weapons of our warfare are not carnall or bodily, but mightie through God, to caſt downe holds; euen imaginations, and euery high thing that is exalted againſt the knowledge of God, and bringing into captiuitie euery thought to the obedience of Chriſt. So that, whether the diuell and his inſtruments doe aſſault by craft and deceit, or by force and might, the Chriſtian being armed, as hath been ſaid, and furniſhed with that ſtrength, ſhall mightily preuaile againſt them, and preſerue himſelfe.
               Such is the power of this armour, that euen of one part of it, the Scripture  giueth wonderfull commendation,1. Ioh. 5.4. 1. Pet. 5.7. aſcribing to faith alone victorie ouer the world, and all the deceits of it. S. Peter likewiſe ſaith, that hee who is ſtedfaſt in faith,
                  Mark. 9.23. 
                  reſisteth the diuell himſelfe. So our Sauiour ſaith, All things are poſsible to him that beleeueth. For all things are not onely poſſible, but alſo eaſie which we doe deſire, hauing a promiſe of God, for the performing thereof, vpon which wee firmely reſt. As the benefit of this one part of our armour, faith, is ſingular great, and the power of it mightie: ſo it may be ſaid of the reſt, and namely of a pure heart.
               
               For euen this one is able to carrie vs thorough ſtrong temptations, that we ſhall not halt, and deale hollowly, as men of the world doe, but ſimply and  in a good meaning; yea it keepeth vs merrie and ioyfull, as the Apoſtle ſaith, when ſuch as want it muſt hold down the head: and that I ſay no more, it maketh our eſtate happie,Matth. 5.8. according to that which is written; Bleſſed are the pure and vpright in heart.
               
               Now therefore, if ſome one part of this heauenly attire and armour be ſo helpfull, and of ſo great vſe, what thinke wee the whole to be? Yea, as I ſaid, to be cloathed with the whole complete armour of a Chriſtian, is ſuch a ſafe walking againſt the ſubtilties of the diuell, the allurements of the world, and the deceitfulnes of ſinne, that a Chriſtian may be vnwounded, whiles he goeth through many daungerous attempts; yea and inioy moſt ſweete communion  with God throughout the day thereby, and yet without flattering of himſelfe and daungerous ſecuritie.
               As, in particulars, he being reſolued to put on, and to cloath himſelfe with righteouſnes, and preparation for the croſſe, by the defence and ſhelter of the doctrine of the Goſpell, whiles hee is to warre here in this life, ſhall be brought hereby, to meekenes, patience, and long ſufferance with ioyfulnes,

                  (when God afflicteth him) by the one; and to loue thoſe which are his enemies, and to be innocent towards all (becauſe theſe are branches of righteouſnes) by the other, and not to be led after the contrarie euils: for all theſe duties, and many more (ſuch are the fruits of the tree of righteouſnes, which God hath planted and watered, in the fruitfull ground of his heart) al theſe, I ſay, ſhall he bring foorth, and many more aboundantly.
               Likewiſe, he who hath ſet himſelfe to ſeeke wiſedome as gold, and to lay vp vnderstanding as treaſure within him, he ſhalbe taught the good and perfect way, when others ſhall euer reele and fall; yea when they ſhall walke in by-waies,
                  Prou. 14.6. and be wandring (although ſeeking it) and that for euer, he ſhall ſee the way before  him, as the Kings high way, broad and plaine; and know the will of God, which ſhall be his guide: and therefore his ſteps ſhall be pleaſant, as in the plaine and knowne way, in reſpect of the rough, and that which is vncertaine.
               And the like fruite I would ſet downe of the reſt, but that I haue done it alreadie, and would not grow tedious, ſeeing much matter to ariſe. If therefore wee can like to be accompanied with this holie traine; and loue to goe armed with theſe weapons; with that meaſure of knowledge which God hath taught vs, and to enioy new increaſe daily; armed with righteouſnes and godlines which we can reach and attaine; vpholden in that hope,Pſa. 119.11.12 which  he hath put into vs; ſtrengthened with that faith in all his promiſes, which, at our firſt imbracing them, we receiued; and prepared and ſtaied in our afflictions, with peaceable and quiet hearts, by the Goſpell, as he hath incouraged vs: then ſhall we be able to liue in all eſtates which God ſhall ſet vs in, and in all places which hee ſhall bring vs to; and chaunge by no occaſions, ſeeing he hath ſtrengthened vs, vntill we ſee an end of all difficulties and vncertainties.
               And all ſuch as conceiue the matter which is preſently handled, ſhould thinke this aduice and counſell ſo needfull for them, of going thus armed thorough the battaile of this life, that they ſhould not think themſelues readie  any day, till they haue put on the Lord Ieſus with his wiſedome, righteouſnes, ſanctification, and redemption: that is done, when by faith they count him theirs; that ſo they may as farre as Chriſt can helpe them (and wherein can he not?) want nothing. And when by the helpe of this, we ſhall be defended againſt the euils of the day (for behold and this know, that to this end is this mightie armour bequeathed vs by our God) then haue wee acquited our ſelues well, and brought the worke of that day to a good end, that ſo we may doe one day after another.
               And thus to bring this whole matter of the armour to an end alſo: whoſoeuer thou art, who canſt be perſwaded reſolutely, to be thus armed thorough  this warfare of thy life, thee will I not doubt to leade into the only ſafe way, yea pleaſant, profitable, beautifull, honourable, and the onely happie way. And thou thy ſelfe ſhalt ſay it in a ſhort time, when through ſome experience thou ſhalt bee able to compare it with all the daies of thy life paſt, euen the beſt of them, and ſhalt finde it, euen at the firſt entrance into it (which is the weakeſt) farre to exceede them in their greateſt beautie. For the longer thou ſhalt abide in it; the better thou ſhalt finde it, and the more it will make thee

to be in loue with it, for that thou ſhalt ſee a continuall vſe of it, and no eſtate  to be comparable to it.
               Neither maketh it any matter, how ignorant thou art (for that perhaps may diſcourage ſome) if thou haſt knowledge enough to ſee this to be the beſt of all other wayes; nor how weake thou art, if thou beeſt ſtrong enough to be perſwaded to walke in it: and geſſe what thou ſhalt want of that which I haue ſaid, when God ſhall giue thee an heart thus inclined, as bidding farwell to all courſes which he approoueth not, to ſettle thee in this, which he commendeth to thee.
               And when thou ſeeſt that thou art acquainted with this armour, and how it helpeth thee daily to liue innocently and chriſtianly, then conſider what  thou haſt, how rich it maketh thee, and what great priuiledges the Lord hath giuen thee:1. Sam. 25.34. and then as Abigaile ſaid to Dauid, when thou ſhalt reape ſuch fruite of it, thou ſhalt not repent that thou tookeſt ſuch counſaile: be glad of them, be highly thankfull for them, more then if thou haddeſt found great treaſure: weigh what protection againſt the diuell, thou haſt thereby: what ſafe-conduct from falles: what feare and doubts thou art deliuered from: what miſts of ignorance, as ſcales from thine eyes, are pluckt from thine heart: what ſtrength againſt thy ſtrongeſt infirmities thou findeſt; how eaſily thou maiſt turne into the way againe, if at any time by weakenes thou haſt ſlipped: yea conſider moreouer what peace to thy conſcience thou  haſt, and reſt to thy ſoule: when thou ſeeſt, not onely more cleerely then before thou wert thus armed, that there is no condemnation to thee; but alſo that God now fighteth for thee and maketh thee fit to reſiſt the deceitfulnes of ſtrong temptations, who wert before ſo faint and impotent in reſiſting them.
               In few words to ſpeake what I thinke meete, concerning this matter, thou canſt neuer ſufficiently eſteeme of this bleſſed eſtate, although thou art not vtterly free from all temporall afflictions thereby. Oft times ſhalt thou be thinking, it is too good to continue: till thou remembreſt that there is no ſhadowe of changing with God. Oft times thou ſhalt wonder to ſee, what a  liberall portion God hath giuen thee, to haue ſuch ſweete communion with him, and to haue confidence and boldnes before him, in all difficulties: when the moſt part of the world is euer ſubiect to moſt dreadfull feare of his vengeance, as oft as he ſhall ſhew them the danger wherein they lie. And when thou ſhalt ſee and feele all this, how much it is worth, to be thus fenſed in from daily vexations, which moſt men are turmoyled withall; then thou ſhalt not neede to doubt, whether thou ſhalt be willing to keepe on this armour ſtill, for thou ſhalt ſee that thou canſt not feele thy ſelfe well without it.
               
                  Obiection.Now whereas it may be obiected, who, or where is the man, which findeth  this libertie in his life? or what arming of a man is able to ſet him in ſafetie from the manifold euils, which moſt men complaine of daily? I affirme of my knowledge in all reuerence giuing the praiſe and glory of it to God,Anſwere. that there are many ſuch, who to the peace of their conſcience enioy it; and I as little doubt, that there are many more whom I know not: And yet I am perſwaded, that thouſands euen of Gods deare ſeruants are holden

                   backe from this bleſſing through the malice of our common enemie, who are kept at a ſtay by his ſubtilty, either ignorant of this libertie, and thinking that God doth not honour any of his ſeruants with ſuch priuiledges while they liue here, and therefore count it preſumption to looke for any ſuch thing: or if they know it, yet doe fauour themſelues in their preſent wants and infirmities, and doe vſe ſmall violence againſt the ſame: and ſo they are holden backe from inioying this comfort and bleſſednes in their liues, which they might otherwiſe be partakers of.
               For let all know this, that the ſuffering of their hearts to take their fill in the delights of this world, and little paines taken in muſing vpon this heauenly  eſtate, and their ſlight praying for it, is the principall cauſe (ſeeing God hath promiſed to worke by meanes) why Chriſtians haue not further acquaintance with this armed life, and the bleſſed fruites thereof: and many other attaine not hereto, ſeeing they neuer vnderſtand (although they are not vtterly without faith) that God hath appoynted them to liue after any certaine direction throughout their courſe, and to be armed thereunto, but in a generall manner onely ſerue God, without any great watchfulnes ouer their particular actions.
               Now if they count this burthenſome, they muſt bee content to bee brought to ſhame ſometimes for their doings, and ſometimes to terrour  and torment of conſcience, for their ſlippery walking, and ſmall regard of honoring God, aſwell in one duties as in another, ſeeing theſe are properties of ſinne, which cannot be ſeparated from it, that howſoeuer they oft feare no ſuch thing, yet one time or other it will finde them out. This diet, I ſay, they muſt oftentimes looke to be kept at (who ſettle not themſelues ſoundly in the Chriſtian life) euen to finde here much ſhame and ſorrow, which other of Gods ſeruants ſhall be voyde of. And if it be ſo with them, iudge what is the eſtate of the hypocrite, and prophane ſort?
               But that none may bee troubled at that which I haue ſet downe of the power and vſe of the armour: as thinking that which I haue ſaid,Obiection. but a meere  fancie and vntruth, ſeeing the enemies which wee fight againſt, are ſtrong and raging; and many good ſeruants of God haue been ſubdued of them in temptation: whereas I haue not ſpoken much (ſay they) of the conflicts and combats, which they haue with the allurements of ſinne, as though they reſiſted and ouercame them with eaſe, and without any great ſtriuing: To ſatiſfie ſuch, I anſwere that the ſpeaking of conflicts belongeth to another treatiſe, namely the fift, where I handle the doctrine of the lets; here I onely ſpeake of the armour, according to the parts of the diuiſion ſet downe;Anſwer. and yet none can vnderſtand me (if he marke) that I thinke ſinne and our luſts to bee eaſily ouercome, which I call furious and raging; or  Sathans ſuggeſtions by obiects or without, to be ſoone reſiſted, which I ſay, are both ſlyly wrought to deceiue vs, and to haue mightie force to draw and allure vs: but rather euery diſcreete reader may gather, that I count it the moſt hard and difficult of all other things to ſubdue, and conquer them, becauſe I ſhew ſuch neceſſitie of walking armed continually againſt them. For what can I ſay leſſe, then that we muſt ſtriue manfully, and ſtand vpon our watch, and that we cannot be crowned except we ſtriue lawfully, that is, ſtedfaſtly:

yea and that for all our armour, we being vnskilfull, or faint and timorous  in vſing it, nor onely we may be, but alſo are oft times foyled, as if hope of victorie and of preuailing againſt them, were paſt.
               All this I ſay: and yet in the weakeſt eſtate, we are not forſaken of God, though in ſome diſtreſſe for a time:
                  1. Cor. 4.8. 
                  nor ſwallowed vp, though we be in ſorrow: nor in deſpaire, when we be in ſome diſcomfort, but when we are at the loweſt ebbe, that in ſome temptation we yeeld and be ouercome of it: yet euen in that we are not ſo miſerable as others who ſtriue not at all, but are for a while left to our ſelues to ſee our weakenes, that afterwards wee may gather more ſtrength, and (as it were) fetch our breath, that we may take better hold, and reſiſt more valiantly; eſpecially when through any of our owne defaults, we were ouercome: And yet whenſoeuer it is ſo with vs, who can deny, but that it ſo came to paſſe, becauſe we were no better armed? and for that we were either vnskilfull and vnexpert, or ſlouthfull and ſlacke in vſing it? So that, I ſay ſtill, as I ſaid before, that whatſoeuer our temptations and aſſaults be, by the helpe of our armour, as Chriſt our captaine hath taught vs to weare and keepe it on, we preuaile and thereby reioyce; euen as contrarily, we muſt needes ſorrow, whiles we bee naked and vnarmed in the battaile. But we may for iuſt cauſe be vpholden, and warre cheerefully againſt all kinds of enemies,Ioſh. 1.8. 2. Cor. 10.4. when (as Ioſua) we haue promiſe of the victorie, the weapons of our warfare being mightie.
                  
               
               And thus I haue ſhewed, how the third helpe, namely the Chriſtian armour is an eſpeciall furthering of vs in a godly life.Two obiections. The firſt. But becauſe I know, that this which I ſay, will ſeeme to ſome very doubtfull, and ſcarce like to be true, that for want of putting on, and keeping on this Chriſtian armour, their eſtate is both vnglorious and vncomfortable (who yet are of this minde, that they may be Chriſtians good enough, though they know it not) I will therefore ſatisfie ſuch as I can,The ſecond obiection. in few words. Other ſome thinke, that although it is fit and meete for ſtrong Chriſtians, yet that weake ones ought not to be troubled with the ſeeking for it, but may content themſelues to ſerue God as they can, without it: their reaſon is this, leaſt whiles we lay  ſuch ſtrong loade and burthens on them, being yet but weake, we diſcourage and driue them out of heart, altogether.
               Theſe two obiections indeed, the wit of man after the hearing of this preſent doctrine of the armour, will be readie to put forth, and he that is paſt both theſe doubts, and troubled with neither of them, I thinke (nay, I know) that he hath ouercome much, and hath well profited. For the ſatisfying of thoſe who are weaker, I will anſwere a little to both. To the formoſt, why ſhould any thinke,The firſt obiection anſwered. that they may be good Chriſtians without this, ſeeing they muſt needes graunt, that if they walke nakedly, they cannot walke ſafely (euery man being a blinde guide to himſelfe:) I deny not, but that a  Chriſtian fearing God, and beleeuing in him, may be ignorant of this armour; but then let not ſuch ſay, that they may ſerue God well enough without, it, which is here obiected: for that is farre off from the moſt zealous, and he who thinketh himſelfe forwardeſt, yea and hath a large heart filled with holy deſires, is farre off from it. For what ſubſtance of godlines is there in ſuch a life, that it ſhould be a ſeruing of God aright, and as it is behoofull?

                   ſeeing it ſhall be found both idle and vnprofitable, or a wandring courſe, and that which is in no wiſe to bee reſted in without the helpe of the armour: from which they haue their ſtrength to liue well, whoſoeuer hath any meaſure of grace to liue godly, as by conſidering the force and vſe of the armour may be eaſily ſeene. And therefore it is a ſpeech at the leaſt, full of ignorance, to ſay, we may ſerue God as it is meete, although wee haue no acquaintance with the armour.
               For the ſecond obiection,The ſecond obiection anſwered. that it ſeemeth to bee too heauie a burdening of weake Chriſtians, to impoſe and lay it vpon them, it is as vnſauourie as the former. For they who are new borne (which ſort is the weakeſt and feebleſt  in Gods familie) are no ſooner brought out of the thraldome, and feare of damnation (wherein Sathan held them before) but if they were able to ſpeake, they would firſt aske for this, that they might euer abide in the eſtate of ſaluation, wherein they now ſee themſelues to be, and neuer forget Gods kindnes, but daily and hourely feele and enioy it: alſo to honour him for it, to teſtifie their thankfulnes, to pleaſe him in all things, and in all eſtates, and for this cauſe to know his will: for all which purpoſes the armour ſerueth: This (I ſay) is their nature, and this deſire is in them, euen when they are at the weakeſt, as the young infant crieth for nouriſhment. So that none ſhall need to feare, that they be preſſed ſore by offering them this, being euen that  which they moſt deſire and long for. The ſeede doth no more naturally deſire to pricke vp out of the ground, and ſo giue hope of an harueſt, though it be held backe by ſtormes and cold, then the young Chriſtian doth deſire to be holpen forward in the forementioned graces, and cloathed with them, as he is able to reach to them. And what other thing is this, then to deſire to be well armed, to the end that God may be daily honoured and obeyed of him, and he himſelfe may proſper and keepe his ſoule in ſafetie? True it is, he is not ſetled herein to his contentation: and who marueileth at it? hath not the young child, and tender plant their ſeaſon to grow vp in? but when they ſhoote foorth and flouriſh (as they may doe, for their time) will not all ſay,  that they proſper, though they haue their wintring, as well as their ſommering time? So it is with the beloued, though weake Chriſtians, and children of God: who although they haue many diſcouragements and hindrances, as the ſtormie cold is to the young plants, and many ſore doubts, feares, diſcomforts, as nippings of their growing, by the diuell, and their owne ſtrong reliques of their corruptions; yet do they, being rooted in good ground, and well watred, and weathered (as there is none to the armour, which Gods word teacheth) grow vp and proſper as the Lords plants.
               But it may be, that ſome beholding diuers zealous and godly Chriſtians, (for in reſpect of the common ſort they may ſo be accounted) who haue bin  both pricked in conſcience for their ſin, and ſeemed to haue receiued comfort, and to be earneſt louers of the word, and the greateſt bringers on of others to religion in many places, who yet ſeeme not to be thus armed againſt ſinne; therefore much leſſe new borne babes in Chriſtianitie are fit to bee vrged with it: to this I ſay, what effects of the Miniſterie ſuch haue had, it skilleth not, neither how they haue been affected by hearing the word, nor with what zeale they profeſſe it: and therefore no good reaſon, that if ſuch haue

not had vſe of it, therefore that weake Chriſtians ſhould not be forced thereunto. For it hath been prooued, that the weakeſt, if they be the Lords, doe deſire it: and therefore the other (in what account ſoeuer they goe) if they doe not ſo, but can thinke themſelues in caſe good enough without it, are hereby brought into ſuſpition of baſtardie, and that they are not the Lords, though ſome things worthie commendation may be in them, more then in many others. Neither ought this which I ſay, ſeeme ſtraunge: for both in Scripture, and in experience, many haue ſhined as lights for a ſeaſon, and in ſhew of zeale and godly life, haue been (both of the Miniſters and people) in account aboue the moſt: who for all this, haue ſhamefully fallen from their firſt loue, ſuch as it ſeemed ſometime to be. And therfore no marueile, though this vrging of the Chriſtian armour doe not ſauour greatly to them, which yet is ſauourie to the new borne in Gods houſehold.
               But of thoſe men, which haue ſeemed forwarder then they are, I haue here no fit place to deale further with them: onely let them conſider what daunger it carrieth with it, to haue been in likelihood of goodnes, and now not to be:Prou. 4.18. and whether this be with the righteous to ſhine daily more and more, as the light doth, vnto the perfect day. I conclude that which I propounded to anſwere, that the putting on the armour of a Chriſtian, is not too ſtrong meate for the yongeſt that is nouriſhed vp in Gods houſe, nor too weightie a burden to lay vpon them, but the very ſame, which of all other things they  moſt deſire, as they can diſcerne it, that they may more fruitfully and cheerefully ſerue God thereby.
            
            
               CHAP. 9. Of our owne experience, and what a ſpeciall helpe it is to the leading of a godly life: Alſo of the vſe of companie and family exerciſes.
               
                  Of our owne experience.
                  I Haue ſhewed how the forementioned three priuate helps, (watchfulnes, meditation, and the Chriſtian armour) are  ſingular furtherances of vs to a godly life: Now I ſhould paſſe to the next, that is, to the vſe of companie by conference. But I muſt here ſtay a while, to lay foorth the benefit of experience, which I had done in handling the doctrine of the Chriſtian armour, ſeeing it belongeth to one part of it: but I could not conueniently ſpeake of it there, but as I haue done, briefly, leaſt among all the parts of the armour, which I haue deſcribed in a ſhort manner, this which is but a branch of one of them, ſhould haue been diſcourſed of more largely, then all they together, which I did not thinke expedient. Now therfore of this our experience, as it ſhall be fit for the preſent purpoſe; namely, what an helpe it is, to confirme vs in faith and obedience: which ſhall bee prooued, after that I haue ſhewed what it is, and how farre it reacheth. Now it is a branch of that part of the armour,What it is. which is called the ſword of the ſpirit, that is, the word of God: and that knowledge which we learne by proofe and triall for the bettering of vs. I call it a branch of it, ſeeing there is another beſides it: and I ſay, it is the knowledge which wee gather by proofe, ſeeing

                   the other is that which men get out of the letter of the Scripture onely, and ſo haue it but by rule. For by the word of God we learne both: and that ſuch knowledge doth better vs, ſhall appeare afterwards.
               Now, if wee will ſee more cleerely what this experience is, conſider of it after this manner: Compare it with experimentall knowledge in all trades and ſciences, what a difference there is betwixt it, and bare and naked skill in the ſame without experience. So it ſhall the better appeare what this is, in matters which are heauenly and ſpirituall, in reſpect of the bare knowledge, that men haue by rule or inſtruction onely. He that hath been trained vp in an occupation, it may be, hee hath got knowledge and skill in his ſcience or  trade: but he is not able to vſe it to the beſt aduantage and his owne greateſt profit, neither how, where, and when, to buy and to ſell, and how to diſpoſe of all things, that hee may not decay and grow behind hand, but thriue and proſper. Theſe (I ſay) and ſuch like, he is ignorant in, and all for want of experience: All which, he that hath been exerciſed in, and acquainted with, is able to doe, as God ſhall ſee good to bleſſe him in the ſame.
               Euen ſo it is in the ſpirituall trade. For a man that hath bin taught ſoundly and plainly out of the word of God, & catechized in the principall points of Chriſtian religion, is able by the helpe thereof, to make a confeſſion of his faith, and giue an account of the hope that is in him: and to anſwere ſoundly to  queſtions that ſhall be put foorth to him. But all this is but the knowledge of the letter, if hee goe no further: and may delight a good man to ſee it in him, rather, then yeeld any great fruite, towards Gods kingdome, to himſelfe. But the Chriſtian, who hath had the proofe of this knowledge, that is, how it hath been effectuall to him: how it hath aſſured him of his owne ſaluation: reformed and chaunged him, and caſt out the filthines of heart and life, which was in him before, and ſo hath wrought in him many other waies; he (I ſay) that hath experience of this, hath receiued another manner of bleſſing then the other, and is like daily to receiue much more.
               Such a thing is experience: for hee conſidereth, obſerueth, and applieth  the things which he heareth, ſeeth, and doth, to his owne vſe: and by things paſt thus duly regarded, hee learneth and getteth wiſedome to aduiſe and guide him for the preſent, and the time to come: no otherwiſe, then the experienced husbandman doth in his calling and dealings. And by this wee may gather what experience is. Now to ſhew how farre it reacheth, we may vnderſtand, that it maketh vs wiſe in all things, which are profitable to godlines, and eternall life: in ſo much, as our life is little worth if it be not helped by this. For till wee begin to marke how true euery part of Gods word is, and that God doth daily execute that in the world, which he ſaith in his word, he wil bring to paſſe, we reuerence it not, neither regard it, but only in ſpeech and in ſhew:  till we marke and obſerue, how God puniſheth the hollow hearted, and the workers of iniquitie, we feare not to doe ill: and ſo on the contrarie, till we find how ſweete and pleaſant a thing it is, to be gathered vnder the Lords wings, and what a ſhelter and defence he is to his faithfull ſeruants, wee make no reckoning of his ſeruice, but it is vnſauourie and vnwelcome to vs. But the experience of Gods dealing toward vs, and of the carriage of our ſelues toward him, in what courſe we beſt proſper and finde moſt reſt to our ſoules,

this bringeth the true feare of God, which is the onely wiſedome. For the  due conſideration and remembrance of the time paſt, and Gods worke therein, is a forcible meane, through his bleſſing, to make vs goe forward better and better in the Chriſtian way. For when wee can ſay, vpon good proofe and triall,Experience of the fruite of a godly life, the beſt meane to continue it. that wee haue ſeene that it hath alwayes gone well with ſuch as are vpright in heart, and innocent in their liues, and with our ſelues, when wee haue walked after the ſame rule; and that when wee haue kept our ſelues from the defilements of the world, we haue ſeene good dayes, and liued comfortably: this eſtabliſheth vs in the ſame courſe moſt firmely and conſtantly afterwards: and when wee haue obſerued, that God hath puniſhed ſecuritie, an ill conſcience, raſhnes, and wilfull ſinning (as they are very blind  that marke not that) this experimentall knowledge bringeth great wiſedome, in the choyce of our wayes, and cauſeth vs to take heede to our ſelues, that it may goe well with vs.
               
               So when we are able to ſay we haue in our troubles humbled our ſelues to God, confeſſed our ſinnes, and ſought pardon in faith, and had hope to ſee a good ende of it,Experience how affliction hath beſt end and is a rule for euer after. Pſal. 120.1. 1. Sam. 17.34.
                   and patience to beare it, and haue (though it ſeemed very vnlike for the time) found and obtained it; this is a cleere demonſtration to vs, that therefore in the like trouble, we ſhall finde the like bleſſing by the like meanes vſing. And this experience neuer faileth, if wee rightly ground it, that is, if that which wee haue marked to bee wrought by God, hath been agreeable to that which in his word hath been ſpoken by him. This wee finde to haue often ſtirred vp the deare ſeruant of God,Pſal. 77.10.11. 
                  Dauid, both to bee comforted in his affliction, becauſe before he had ſo been, and alſo to bee conſtant in a godly life, becauſe that hee had marked that it euer bringeth a peaceable ende.
                  Pſal. 37.37.
               
               And what maruaile ſhould this be to any, who are trained vp in the Lords houſe? For this we know, that as in all trades or ſciences, the beginnings are hardeſt and fulleſt of diſcouragements; ſo it fareth with Chriſtians, namely, that their firſt entrings are moſt doubtfull, and fulleſt of weakenes: yet who cannot remember that euen then, God wrought moſt louingly for  them, and dealt moſt tenderly with them, when their faith was yet ſo weake and young, that they could not well diſcerne it? For how hath he kept many of them from ſore falles, holden them from manifold and great afflictions, and not brought many of their ſinnes to light at once, leaſt they ſhould haue been diſcouraged (euen as he hath promiſed to regard their weakenes) whereas otherwiſe they muſt needes haue been driuen to great extremitie?
               Theſe and many other ſuch like, why hath the Lord done them, but that his children ſhould marke and obſerue them, to learne experience by them againſt the times which ſhall come after? and that they might ſafely and  boldly promiſe vnto themſelues, greater proofe of his aſſiſtance and fatherly kindnes towards them? And why hath he giuen a good end of their former chaſtiſements when they penitently deſire it? euen to this end, that their hope may be ſtrengthened for the times that ſhall come after: As the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of himſelfe and other godly people; God hath deliuered vs, doth deliuer vs: and we truſt in him, that yet hereafter he will deliuer vs. Alſo

                   why preſerued hee them from fearefull falles, when they earneſtly craued it; or made the way of godlines more eaſie, then they could haue hoped for? but to hearten them on to looke more confidently for the like grace and bleſſing, when they haue now receiued longer proofe of Gods kindnes toward them, and of his keeping promiſe with them,2. Cor. 1.10. if they ſhall ſeeke him in the ſame dutifull manner that they were wont to doe?Eſay. 59.1. 
                  For the Lords hand is not ſhortned that he cannot helpe, but is neerer to them,Rom. 5.5. as they are better acquainted with him to beleeue it. So that as men who haue found out the way to bring in profit, cannot be diſſwaded from it: euen ſo it fareth with theſe.
               
                   But wofull it is, that where ſo great benefit and gaine might bee reaped by ſo ſmall trauaile,VVofull that men learne not experience. euen by marking Gods manner of dealing with his ſeruants: yet that ſo few ſhould be brought to this wiſedome, and perſwaded to ſeeke out the beſt and happieſt way,
                  Prou. 14.6. which yet is not hard to them that would gladly finde it. For I muſt ſpeake the truth, and God hee knoweth it, that few ſet themſelues about this worke to get this experience, when yet they haue oft ſmarted for their fooliſhnes: but for all that they loue to lie in it ſtill, more fooliſh then children, who cannot bee made to come nigh the water, when they haue once been in perill of drowning: and ſo they verifie the words of Chriſt, Prou. 1.22. O ye fooles, how long will ye loue fooliſhnes? Which  is the cauſe, why not onely the moſt part of hearers are dead and cold practiſers: but euen many of the teachers, though they do boldly vtter that which they haue read, yet are faint followers of that which they teach: or conceale much of that which they ſhould deliuer, becauſe they finde the contrarie to be done of themſelues, which they ſee, they ſhould teach others; and would ſhunne the reproch of the prouerbe; Phyſition heale thine owne diſeaſe. But they who turne their thoughts, conſideration, wiſedome, and ſtudie, to this, marking what is the bleſſed courſe of life, and how it is attained vnto: as they ſhall declare that they are wiſe; ſo ſhall they bee ſure to finde a ſingular helpe to godlines, which they ſhal neuer repent of trauailing  for.
               It followeth in the next place, that we ſee, how God hath prouided no leſſe helpe for vs in companie, which becauſe we haue much vſe of,The fourth and fift priuate helpe. and occaſion to be often in it,Of the vſe of company in familie exerciſe, and conference, &c. therefore leaſt we might poſſibly returne out from it worſe then we went into it (as the moſt companies are ſuch as doe make men more corrupt then they were before) therefore the Lord hath taught his people how to carry themſelues in all their meetings with others, in ſuch wiſe, as not onely they may ſhunne the harme which is eaſily gotten therein, but alſo haue much helpe and furtherance thereby to goe better forward in Chriſtian duties. But this point is handled at large in the next treatiſe.  Therefore I referre the reader thither.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 10. Of prayer and the parts thereof, thankeſgiuing and requeſt, whereunto is added confeſsion of ſinnes.
               
                  The ſixt priuate helpe.
                  HAuing now made mention of the two firſt kindes of the priuate helpes, the third followeth, containing the helps which may be vſed by ones ſelfe alone, or with others alſo: as prayer and reading. Prayer is a calling vpon God according to his will: and hath theſe two parts: thankſgiuing, and requeſt; whereunto is added the confeſſion of ſinnes.Thankſgiuing. Thankſgiuing is that part of prayer, in which, we being comforted by ſome benefit, which in fauour God beſtoweth vpon vs, are drawne to loue and praiſe him, and ſhew forth the fruites thereof. In the which deſcription we ſee three duties to be required of vs, and three motiues or perſwaſions,Three perſwaſions to moue to thankſgiuing. to drawe vs to performe them. I will firſt mention theſe latter, and then proceede to the duties. The firſt motiue is knowledge and remembrance of ſome benefit receiued or promiſed vs.The firſt. 1. Sam. 25.32. Geneſ. 24.27. Luk. 17.15.
                   Which may be ſeene in the thankſgiuings of all Gods ſeruants; as in Dauid after that he had receiued the ſauorie and ſeaſonable counſell by Abigaile: and in Abrahams
                   ſeruant, when God had bleſſed him in his iourney to Aram. The ſame may be ſaid of the leaper, when he ſaw that he was clenſed, after he had made requeſt for it to Chriſt. And where there is no knowledge and due conſideration of ſome particular mercie, how can there be any true, and hartie thankſgiuing, howſoeuer in words there be a proteſtation for faſhion ſake? as in them who ſay, we muſt thanke God for all, when yet they conſider of nothing that moues them thereto.
               
                  The ſecond.The ſecond motiue to thankſgiuing, is ioy and gladnes of heart for the benefit which we thinke of, or call to minde: As appeareth by the pſalme, in them which returned out of the captiuitie,Pſal. 126.1.2. ſaying; When the Lord brought  againe (that is, turned away) the captiuitie of Sion (his Church) we became like them that dreame: then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with ioy. And except we finde ſuch ſweetenes in Gods benefits either alreadie receiued, or by faith embraced, being promiſed; the dutie of thankes can in no good ſort be performed: But that is verified which is commonly ſpoken, that is, a worke is vntowardly done which is not cheerefully gone about.
               
                  The third.The third thing that ſhould moue vs to this dutie of thankes, is that which is moſt fit to worke the foreſaid ioy, and that is a perſwaſion, that the benefit, for which we giue thankes, commeth to vs from Gods fatherly loue: which is a farre greater matter to make vs glad, then the benefit it ſelfe, which is beſtowed on vs.Pſalm. 116.5. to 16. For if we ſhould feare that it is ſent as a ſnare to intangle vs, or to heape hot coales vpon our head, and to make our condemnation the more iuſt, ſmal ſweetenes ſhould we finde therein, but that which would be quenched with that feare, and by an accuſing conſcience.
               As for example, what hartie ioy, or ſound thankes could that of the

                   Phariſie be, though in tongue he gaue the one,Luk. 18.11. and in countenance ſhewed the other, when he had not this perſwaſion? But God be thanked, it is not ſo with his beloued ones: but they knowing that their moſt louing father hath giuen them his Chriſt, which is the greateſt, doth much more of fauour giue them all other things, which are of leſſe account; which both reioyce their hearts, when they remember any of theſe his bleſſings, and ſtirreth them vp to a much more heartie performing of this dutie.
               And as theſe three former things muſt be found in vs to moue vs to true thankfulnes for our comfort: ſo to make it effectuall three duties are required. Firſt, a continuance of our loue to God. Secondly,Three duties required in thankſgiuing. a deſire to ſet foorth  his glorie, and in words to profeſſe and confeſſe his goodnes. Thirdly, a further proceeding in obedience, and walking worthie his kindnes. For how can we chooſe but loue and ſet our hearts vpon him,
                     1. Loue of God. when wee may ſee the fruites of his fauour on euery ſide, whither ſoeuer we turne our ſelues, and the ſame euery morning renued? Euen as the Prophet ſaith: I loue the Lord,
                  Pſal. 116.1. 
                  becauſe he hath heard my requeſt, and for his great and many mercies, which there hee reckoneth vp. So that they, whoſe loue is ſet vpon the gift it ſelfe, and the benefit; being little affected towards the giuer and beſtower of it, how wide ſoeuer their mouthes are open in giuing thankes; they are farre from the right offering of thankes to God.
               
                   Now if we loue the Lord, we cannot but be carried with a feruent deſire,
                     2. A deſire to ſet foorth his glorie. 2. Cor. 4.13.
                   that God might bee knowne and beleeued on by others, that they might come out of darknes: neither can we ſatisfie our ſelues in ſeeking to aduance and magnifie him. As wee may ſee in Dauid, who being ſtirred vp by the conſideration of Gods benefits, had this affection in him, thus declaring the ſame: What ſhall I render to the Lord, for all his benefits? As if he ſhould ſay, Oh,Pſal. 116.12. that I knew, and could ſatisfie my ſelfe herein. And where this affection and deſire is, can it otherwiſe be, but that by all good opportunities, there ſhould be an expreſſing, and an acknowledging of this his goodnes? Euen as the ſame perſon ſetteth himſelfe downe to vs for an example, I will praiſe the Lord,
                  Pſal. 111. 
                  
                      and call vpon him with thankſgiuing: and elſewhere in the congregation in heart and tongue: and with inſtruments well tuned and of many kinds.
               Now with theſe before mentioned, if this laſt propertie be adioyned,
                     3. A further proceeding in obedience. 
                  that we walke worthie his kindnes, and within holie compaſſe, which is to doe the will of our heauenly father, then doe wee rightly performe this dutie of thankſgiuing. The which one, if it be wanting from the reſt, maketh them all lame and maimed, and as odious to God, as the mortlings and vntimely firſt borne of the beaſts, which were offered to him in ſacrifice. And how with our thankſgiuing reformation of our liues ſhould goe, Moſes ſheweth, by ſetting downe the daunger of the contrarie, ſaying:Deut. 6.10, 11, 12. 
                  When the Lord thy God  hath brought thee into the land, which he ſware to thy fathers, Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob, to giue thee, with great and goodly cities which thou buildedſt not: and houſes full of all manner of goods, which thou filledſt not: and welles digged, which thou diggedſt not: vineyards and Oliue trees, which thou plantedſt not: and when thou hast eaten and art full, beware leaſt thou forget the Lord (in ſteed of remembring his kindnes and bountie) but feare and ſerue him. So the Pſalmiſt ſaith:Pſal. 50.16. 
                  What doeſt thou taking my word in thy mouth, either in thanks, prayer, or ſpeaking of it, and

hateſt to be reformed by it? And theſe are the three duties, neceſſarily required  to be in true thankfulnes.
               Thus I haue ſhewed what thankſgiuing is, and what properties are required in it, to the end it may rightly be performed to God. Now then, if this dutie be thus performed of vs, in aduerſitie as in proſperitie; for ſo God will haue them doe, who worſhip him aright, Iob. 27.10. and alone by our ſelues, as well as in companie with others, that ſo we may be free from hypocriſie in offering it: muſt it not needes be a ſingular helpe, with the reſt, vnto godlines?1. Theſſ. 5.19. I ſay, when wee ſhall many times from day to day, thinke vpon Gods louing kindnes, how great it is, and hath been towards vs, and finde ſweetnes in his benefits, as being perſwaded that wee haue them in Gods fauour;  when for them, we ſhall haue our hearts inlarged to loue the giuer, declare his goodnes to others with a deſire to honour him, and be more readie to our particular duties; when wee ſhall frame our ſelues in all eſtates to this thankfulnes: is it not a mightie and forcible meanes to mollifie the hard hart, and to hold vnder the ſturdie corruptions of it, ſo that they may be ſubiect to God, yea euen when ſtrong prouocations doe draw to the contrarie?
               Then we cannot be ignorant that thankfulnes is one helpe, and that not the leaſt, to the continuance of a godly life: whether wee vnderſtand it of that ſolemne thankſgiuing, which wee adioyne ordinarily to our ſupplications; or that which now and then wee doe vſe in a more briefe manner by  any occaſion offered.Confeſſion of ſinnes another helpe to a Chriſtian life. And this of thankſgiuing. With this we are to adde ſupplications, which alſo containe confeſſion of our ſinne: all which three are indeed but one action generally, but particularly haue euery one of them an eſpeciall and ſeuerall vſe. Therefore it followeth to ſhew, in what ſort we ſhould make confeſſion of our ſinnes, and our priuate requeſts to God, that they may much more be helpes to godlines altogether, when one part, euen thankſgiuing is ſo great an helpe alone.
               And firſt, of confeſſion of ſinnes, as in order it is to bee vſed, next vnto thankfulnes: and afterwards, of the making or offering vp of our requeſts and ſuites vnto God,1. Ioh. 1.8.9. Pſal. 32.5.6. and namely, for the remiſsion of ſinnes, with the which, it is  euer to be ioyned. Now this is an acknowledging of our ſelues to be guiltie, and worthily to haue deſerued Gods wrath, and manifold puniſhments, for our grieuous faults and offences: and an acknowledging of them alſo, with a free and humble bewailing of them before the Lord; ſuch as are vnknowne to vs, in a generall manner, but thoſe which wee doe know (according to the nature of them) particularly. And this dutie is rightly done and practiſed of vs:Foure things in confeſſion. firſt, when we feele our ſinnes odious, and burdenſome to vs. Secondly, when we accuſe our ſelues of them to God. Thirdly, when we confeſſe them to him (hauing examined our life) and that we ſtand at his mercie deſeruing to be condemned. And fourthly, when wee abaſe our ſelues thereby, and ſo  are meekned, and our pride abated. In all the confeſſions of the ſeruants of God, all theſe foure are to be found; that I may ſhew it at once, and not ſtand long about euery one of them. As in Dauids confeſſion, after that Nathan the Prophet had accuſed him, ſaying, thou art the man, euen this great offender, he anſwered,2. Sam. 12.13. 
                  I haue ſinned: in which one word, he found and ſhewed al things that are required in a true and penitent confeſſion: that is, that he both had

                   his ſinne in a deteſtable execration, accuſed himſelfe to God of it, confeſſed that he had iuſtly prouoked God againſt him, and was greatly humbled by it. In the Pſalme, if any doubt of this,Pſal. 51.4.5. hee may ſee them particularly deſcribed. The ſame may be ſaid of Daniel his confeſſion in the ninth chapter;Dan. 9.5. and in the Publicanes, when he knocking on his breaſt, and looking downe to the ground, as aſhamed to looke vp, ſaid, God be mercifull to me a ſinner.
                  Luk. 18.13. All theſe are likewiſe in the confeſſion of the prodigall ſonne. The firſt in theſe words, he came to himſelfe, and entred into conſideration of his life paſt, with himſelfe, whereby he felt his burden ſo great; that ſecondly,Luk. 15.17. Verſ. 21. he commeth and accuſeth himſelfe to his father; and thirdly, what hee thought of his deſerts,  may eaſily be gathered, when he asked not ſuch mercie, as to bee counted a ſonne, but thought it a large fauour to haue the place of an hired ſeruant:Verſ. 19. & 21 which alſo doth cleerely lay foorth his abaſement.
               What manner of confeſſion therefore we ſhould make ordinarily in our prayers to God, by this may be ſeene: (if it be otherwiſe framed, that is, out of our owne braine God will reiect it) and then ſhall we not (as many doe, to their little comfort) coldly confeſſe our ſinnes in generall, nor for faſhion,1. Sam. 12.20. but in particular, and thoſe eſpecially, by which wee haue moſt offended God. Now this confeſſion being from time to time oft made vnto God, ſhall not ſuffer vs to goe farre, and lie long in any ſinne, but hunt it out, before  it be warme and neſtled in vs. And when we ſee euery while, in comming to confeſſe our ſinnes, how we haue burthen enough of our ſinne, although we ſinne not wilfully; who ſeeth not, but that we ſhall be much preſerued euen by confeſſing them in this manner that I haue ſet downe, from daungerous falles and offences? So that the very confeſſing of our ſinnes, which is but one branch of our prayer, is of great force to ſtrengthen vs in a godly life.
               And as for the obiection of them, which ſay,Obiection. that the oft comming to performe this duetie, will make it common, and without force to kill our ſinne: I anſwere them thus:Anſwere. God hauing promiſed by this and ſuch other  helpes to chaine vp the vnrulines of our nature, doth graunt to his ſeruants (for all the rebellion that remaineth in them) much to preuaile againſt it; ſo that ordinarily they may finde eaſe by theſe helpes, and a cheerefull readines to the vſing of them; much more then they, who by cuſtome in earthly matters, finde hard things eaſie.
               Thus I hauing ſhewed how thankeſgiuing and confeſſion of ſinne ſhould be vſed, and being ſo vſed, what helpes they are to godlines, it remaineth that I ſpeake to the ſame end, of requeſt making to God:Requeſt another helpe to liue godly. how that ought to be done, that the like fruite may be reaped thereby: Of the which the leſſe ſhall neede to be ſaid, ſeeing this point is after handled, and  more is written of it, then of the former two. Requeſt is that part of prayer,What requeſt is. in which we earneſtly power out our ſuites vnto God, in contrition of heart, according to his will, with a comfortable hope that through Chriſt wee ſhall be heard, and therefore forſaking the ſinne which might hinder our ſuite. Wherein briefly note theſe foure things neceſſarie to be ioyned with this dutie whenſoeuer we goe about it.
               The firſt is, that we ſhew this contrition of heart,
                     1. Sam. 1.15. The firſt thing in requeſt. by being preſſed with

feeling our wants, vnworthines, miſerable eſtate, and manifold neceſſities, earneſtly deſiring to be pardoned and eaſed, which ſhall not be found hard, if our confeſſion of ſinnes be hartie,Luk. 18.13. and according to the rules before mentioned: For he can moſt freely make requeſt to God, who can moſt hartily accuſe and complaine of himſelfe. And our praying to God, is but cold and counterfeit, when we be not touched with our owne vilenes, and ſo conſequently,Matth. 5.3. Pſal. 145.19. Matth. 15.28. the better feele our neceſſities, which wee deſire to haue relieued. But if this be, we ſhall neither pray in lip-labour, which God abhorreth,Luk. 18.1. nor thinke our ſelues too good to waite Gods leaſure, if at firſt hee graunt not our requeſts, but continue them as he commandeth.
               
                  The ſecond thing in requeſt.The ſecond is, that we aske of God no other things, then by his word he  alloweth vs to pray for, and therefore are agreeable to his will; and ſuch as we haue a promiſe to obtaine, and that in ſuch ſort, as hee hath promiſed them:1. Ioh. 5.14. and ſo doing, we ſhall not pray in vaine. Therefore the Apoſtle ſaith, this aſſurance we haue of him,
                  Ioh. 13.14. & 15.7. & 16.24.
                  that if we aske any thing according to his will, he heareth vs. Which rule, as it ſuffereth vs not to hunt after our owne deſire and will: ſo it is no ſmall benefit, that whatſoeuer we ſtand in neede of, asking it according to his will, it ſhall be giuen vs. And who would deſire to haue that, which our louing and moſt prouident father doth not ſee good for vs? which if it content not ſome, marke what they get thereby: For they aske, but they obtaine not, becauſe they aske amiſſe: and further, they loſe all their labour  in praying, thinking themſelues good Chriſtians if their lips be going, when God in the meane ſeaſon, counteth their ſuppoſed deuotion to be but much babling,The third thing in requeſt. being done in ignorance of his will. From this ſecond, ariſeth the third, that ſeeing wee haue ſo great incouragement, ſo pretious promiſes of ſo many and great good things, as God hath bequeathed to vs;Iam. 16. therefore wee ſhould quicken our ſelues to come in faith and confidence, and oft times and cheerefully to this dutie. Euen as men doe come cheerefully, and with good hope goe to their approoued neighbours in their neceſſities to borrow, when they haue often promiſed them to lend. And no maruaile it is though there be both ſeldome praying, and vntoward  going about it, where faith is wanting to ſet them forward, and aſſurance of obtaining, to bring them on, with comfort. And in great wiſedome and loue, hath God giuen vs leaue to reioyce in making our prayers to him, by this beleeuing, that we ſhall receiue ſomewhat thereby (according to that which he ſaieth in Saint Iohn:
                  Ioh. 16.24. 
                  Aske, and ye ſhall receiue, that your ioy may be full) both becauſe wee haue many things throughout our life, to make vs ſad and heauie; and alſo becauſe we are by naturall diſpoſition ſo ſlow and vnwilling to this dutie, and diſtruſtfull when we offer it. And if we be not ſo fully reſolued of this, for want of experience, that both we ought, and may with cheerefulnes come to pray, and with gladnes be occupied in it (conſidering, he is our moſt louing and deare father, who cannot forget nor put off kindnes toward vs) then let the effects of prayer, and the fruites that haue been reaped thereby, perſwade vs of it, which are ſuch, as will eaſily drawe vs with delight to vſe it, though by the fleſh, wee be as with cords haled backward.Three effects of prayer. Of the which effects of it, I will briefly ſet downe ſome, and they are eſpecially three.
               
                  
                   The firſt is,
                     The firſt. Iam. 4.8. Ioh. 16.26. Reuel. 3.10. that by prayer wee are made acquainted (a great word to ſpeake) yea and in a ſort familiar with God, and know his minde and will, and how he is affected to vs, being admitted to ſpeake to him. The ſecond is, that it giueth life to Gods graces in vs, which before lay in vs halfe dead;The ſecond. as faith, hope, care of dutie, vntill by the bellowes of prayer they bee reuiued in vs: for we are dull, forgetfull, vnprofitable, faint in hope, and our comfort dimmed ofttimes; when yet in, and after prayer, wee are well refreſhed againe, euen as the fire is quickned by blowing: as in that worthie example of Queene Eſter is to be ſeene; who being timorous (as we may gather) before prayers made to God, was mightily incouraged and ſtrengthened  after prayer, in a moſt weightie matter. The third effect of prayer is,The third. that it reacheth out to vs in our greateſt neede, the good things and gifts of God which our ſoules deſire; as it is written: Aske, and it ſhall be giuen you:
                  Matth. 7.7. yea ſuch things, as we thought ſometime had not been to be looked for: ioy in heauines, light in darkenes, and hope for deſpaire, as by the ſong of Anna 1. Sam. 2.1.2. after her effectuall prayer, 1. Sam. 1.10.The fourth thing in requeſt. But I will end with fourth and laſt propertie of prayer; that when we pray wee bring not with vs the ſinnes, which will turne away the eares of the Lord from hearing vs. And theſe ſinnes are any which be not repented of, but lien in, or nouriſhed in vs, ſecretly at the leaſt, and not renounced:Prou. 28.9. This Salomon confirmeth in theſe  few words when hee ſaith, Who ſo turneth away his eare from hearing the law, (and ſo any part of it,Pſalm. 7.4. being of like and equall authoritie) euen his prayer ſhall be abhominable. And Dauid agreeth with him ſaying, euen as he powred out his requeſts vnto God, if there be any wickednes in my hands (for all my prayer) ſhall that excuſe me, ſhalt not thou, O Lord, finde it not? But when our requeſts ſhall be made to God with theſe properties (for in ſuch manner doth God require them to be offered vnto him) the Chriſtian who obſerueth them, ſhall reape no ſmall fruite thereby: whether he intreate for remiſſion of his ſinnes, or for any good thing whereof he ſtandeth in neede, or againſt any calamitie or burthen, wherewith he ſhall be diſtreſſed; yea he ſhall thereby  preuaile with God for others, as for himſelfe: and what incouragement thinke we doth this adde to a godly life?
               But when all theſe three parts of Gods worſhip now ſpoken of,Iam. 4.8.9.10. 1. Sam. 7.7. ſhall reuerently and humbly be adioyned together, I meane thankſgiuing, confeſſion of ſinnes, and requeſt (which ordinarily in our prayers ought to goe one with the other) how much more gainefull (thinke we) are they to the poore Chriſtian ſoule? eſpecially ſeeing by confeſſion of ſinnes, hee acknowledgeth himſelfe a guiltie perſon, and debter to God, that ſo he may be the ſlower to runne further in debt with him. By making his ſuites, he declareth, that he is a begger, and ſtandeth in neede of all things, as hauing nothing  of his owne (if he know himſelfe well) but ſinne and filthines, Reuel. 3.17. and by giuing thankes he confeſſeth, that whatſoeuer he hath, or inioyeth, he receiueth it of God. All of them make him to ſee himſelfe infinitly indebted vnto the Lord: his pride to be abated: his heart ſtirred vp to ſeeke vnto him, and inlarged to loue and obey him. And if he be fallen, this prayer of faith will raiſe him vp: if he be heauie, this will comfort him: if he be dull, this will quicken him. Oh, who can reckon vp the infinit and maruellous

commodities that come of prayer, if it be accompanied of the forementioned  properties?
               Therefore I conclude, that ſeeing it is a preſent remedie to the oppreſſed heart, a preſeruer of the godly minde, a giuer of ſtrength to the weake, an eſpeciall meanes to make a man fit to liue in euery eſtate, wherein God hath ſet him, &c. I conclude (I ſay) that it is a ſtrong and mightie helpe to the godly life. For pray well, and liue well, and keepe thy ſelfe in caſe fit to performe this dutie, as thou haſt been directed, and thou ſhalt not neede to feare in thy life, any great annoyance. But how this, with ſome other of the helps, are to be brought into vſe euery day, that the fruite of it may be more certaine, ſhall be ſet downe in the next treatiſe of the daily direction, which  is the place fit for it.
            
            
               CHAP. 11. Of reading.
               
                  The ſeuenth helpe is reading.
                  THe next helpe to godlines is reading (as oft as may be) the Scriptures and approoued good authors. The which exerciſe and dutie, that the Chriſtian, whom I goe about to informe,Rules about reading in generall. may finde it an helpe to the furthering of him  in godlines together with the other, ſome direction I will giue him about the ſame. And firſt, ſeeing it is to be vſed, and that as oft of euery one, as conueniently maybe, this is one caution, that it be not neglected:The firſt rule. and the booke of God laid aſide, and couered with cobwebbes, or not ſo much as in our houſes at all. For let the beſt know this, that if they vſe not reading, they ſhall finde much more incumbrance in their life, vnſauourines, vnquietnes, vnfruitfulnes, and vncheerefulnes, with other ſuch, yea though they vſe other helps.
               
                  The ſecond rule.And ſecondly the ſame in effect I ſay of them which reade ſeldome, euen when they muſt needes, for feare or ſhame. Both theſe faults are too commonly  committed euen of Chriſtians: and that becauſe ſome of them for following the world one way or other, can finde no leaſure thereunto: otherſome taking their full ſcope in play, and pleaſures, cannot attend to ſuch ſad matters, whiles the other are ſo welcome to them. Others through idlenes, ſlouth and ſwarmes of vaine cogitations or dangerous luſts carrying them, or through groſſe ignorance, needles, and idle talke, neglect ſo good a worke, and neceſſarie dutie: whereas, if they had learned to make conſcience of this duty, they might ſhake off much of noyſomnes, by watching their opportunities, whereby they ſhould not neede to feare, but that their labour therein, ſhould be plentifully rewarded.
               
               
                  The third rule about reading.Thirdly, ſeeing bookes, which are fit for the building of them vp in godlines, muſt be read of them, therefore they muſt not beſtow their time in reading filthie, lewd and wanton bookes, no nor needles and vnprofitable bookes,Eccleſ. 12.14. 
                  the reading of many ſuch being but weariſome to the fleſh, and vanitie: much leſſe ſuperſtitious pamphlets, and Machiuels blaſphemies (which it is a ſhame ſhould be ſuffered to come into mens hands) nor the ſubtill deuiſes

                   and deceitfull dreames and errours of the Church of Rome, except they be able for their ſound iudgement to diſcerne them, that ſo they may be the better able to deteſt, and giue others warning of them.
               But the bookes which are to be read, are the holy canonicall ſcriptures, and other ſound and godly authors, as I haue ſaid.The 4. rule. Wherein this as a fourth rule is to bee obſerued, that in the reading of the Scriptures, they reade not here and there a chapter (except vpon ſome good occaſion) but the bible in order throughout, and ſo, as oft as they can; that ſo by little and little they may be acquainted with the hiſtories, and the whole courſe of the ſcriptures (hauing before the grounds of Chriſtian religion layd) and  ſo may haue the more comfortable and liberall vſe of them.
               And in reading of other good bookes, they are to be counſelled rather to reade ſome one or two well penned, either of the whole Chriſtian religion, or any particular argument, & matter, and them often, rather then a leafe of one and a chapter of another, as idle readers vſe to doe for nouelties ſake. Often, I ſay, becauſe a good book is of the moſt part of Chriſtians little ſeene into, at once or twice reading ouer, much leſſe the vſe of the doctrine of it reaped and inioyed of dull heads, ſlipperie memories, and weake practiſers, ſuch as it is too well knowne, that the moſt Chriſtians are. And therefore the moſt not hauing leaſure to reade many bookes, ſhall finde moſt profit by diligent  going ouer of the ſame often, making their choice of the beſt and neceſſarieſt, by the helpe of their faithfull teachers.
               Now as concerning the manner of reading;Rules more particularly about the manner of reading. it muſt bee with an heartie good will to learne and profit thereby, deſiring God to prepare vs with reuerence: to lighten our vnderſtandings, that we may conceiue that which we reade, and ſetling our ſelues for the time of our reading to be attentiue, and  ſo to abandon the wandring of the heart, as much as may be: the which will  be the eaſilier done in reading, if it be well watched ouer (as hath been ſaid before) in our courſe of liuing. Alſo it is duly to bee regarded, that wee  applie that which we reade,Rom. 15.4. wiſely to our ſelues (ſeeing all that is contained  in the Scriptures, is written for our inſtruction and comfort) as perſwading our ſelues that all precepts of dutie and good life, are ſet downe to direct vs (not others onely) to the practiſe of the ſame: that all ſinne is forbidden vs, and that all the generall promiſes which we reade to be made to the Church, are to bee beleeued of vs, whether they appertaine to this preſent life, or to the life to come; and the comforts that accompanie them.
               Likewiſe, that all exhortations and admonitions quicken and ſtirre vs vp from coldnes, deadnes, and drouſines: and all reprehenſions to checke vs for faults eſcaped: and all threats to feare our boldnes, and appale our ſecuritie, which is too eaſily and readily kindled in vs, that ſo wee may make that vſe of them, which the Apoſtle requireth when he ſaith, that all Scripture is giuen by inſpiration of God, and is profitable to teach, conuince, to correct, and inſtruct in righteouſnes: and thereof in matters as well concerning God as men; and amongſt men, all particular kinds: and therefore Prince and ſubiect, noble and baſe, men and women: and more particularly in families, husbands and wiues; parents and children, maſters and ſeruants. Thus to reade, that thereby

wee may be made fit vnto euery good worke, and to glorifie God thereby, is vndoubtedly to make our reading, as it is appointed of God an eſpecial helpe and meanes to grow forward in a godly life: and therefore wee are commaunded to ſearch the Scriptures:
                  Ioh. 5.39. Act. 17.11. and (with the godly people of Berea) to compare our hearings, and our readings of them together. For reading is much commended to be one of the three duties that make vs happie, the Apoſtle ſaying thus:Reue. 1.3. 
                  Bleſſed is he that heareth, and readeth, and keepeth the contents of this booke.
               
               But this one thing I cannot omit, that the benefit and comfort of this exerciſe of reading being ſo great, and the ſubſtance of the Scriptures being ſo brought to light as it is,A proofe of negligent reading. and ſuch varietie of good bookes being granted vs of  God; that yet, euen ſuch as looke after eternall life delight ſo little in them. I ſpeake not of the prophane and vnruly, whom nothing will moue to reade, no nor ſo much as to heare Sermons, till God make them ſee how they haue deceiued themſelues. But I am ſure, it is one ſpeciall cauſe, why heart is taken from many learned and godly men to ſet out any new workes in print, ſeeing the profeſſors of the Goſpell doe beſtow ſo little labour and time in reading of thoſe which are extant alreadie.
               
                  Two obſeruations about reading.And herein theſe two things, I thinke meete to adde, in regard of ſome Chriſtians; that ſuch as haue not the gift of reading, may endeuour to follow the foreſaid rules,The firſt. by vſing the helpe of others: exhorting all by their loſſe  and diſcommoditie to haue reading in greater reckoning, then it is with moſt at this day.The ſecond. The ſecond is, that beſides the former rules, ſuch as haue better helpes of vnderſtanding, memorie and leaſure, doe, beſides their publike hearing, note their doubts, and as they ſhall haue opportunitie, ſeeke reſolution of them, at their learned paſtors hands, or of ſome others: and mark the coherence of the Scripture, how it hangeth together: and the agreement that one place hath with another, that thereby that which ſeemeth darke in one, is made eaſie in another. This ſhall ſuffice to haue ſaid, for making ſome better vſe of reading, then commonly men doe. And though there are other things beſides theſe, which the learneder may take profit by: yet they being  more out of the reach of the greateſt number of Chriſtians, they doe not ſo neerely nor neceſſarily concerne them. And it muſt bee remembred, that I propround not to ſay, as much as may bee gathered together about reading, but how it may bee profitably vſed to helpe the Chriſtian to be fruitfull in a godly life. And that which I haue ſaid, is auaileable thereunto.
               For hee that ſhall conſider, how many waies the conſcience is appeaſed, the iudgement inlightened and inlarged, the heart perſwaded, the memorie relieued, the affections moued; and in a word, the whole man drawne by that which he may reade, ſhall not neede to doubt how great the benefit of reading, together with the other helpes, is. And that it being vſed as oft as poſſibly  it may, in ſuch manner as hath bin preſcribed, and ſo many good things drunke in and receiued of vs, as wee ſhall meete with in our reading; who doubteth but it ſhall be a ſingular helpe and furtherance with the reſt, to a godly and Chriſtian life? For a mind well ſeaſoned before, ſhall be vndoubtedly better ſeaſoned and refreſhed, when it ſhall vſually and oft drinke of the water of life, out of the ſweete fountaine of Gods word by reading. And of

                   the helpe of reading: and ſo of al the ordinarie meanes both publike and priuate, whereby a true Chriſtian continueth a godly life, and groweth to further ripenes and perfection therein, thus much be ſaid.
            
            
               CHAP. 12. Of the extraordinarie helpes.
               
                  NOw follow the extraordinarie helpes, which are not commonly nor daily in vſe, but ſometime,The extraordinarie helpes to a true Chriſtian life. and that according  to the extraordinarie occaſions which the Lord offereth. And theſe are eſpecially two: firſt, ſolemne thankſgiuing: and ſecondly, faſting, with prayer more then vſuall adioyned.The firſt extraordinarie help; is ſolemne thankeſgiuing. VVhat it is. The firſt is when in ſome rare and vnlooked for deliuerance out of deſperate danger, wee doe by the commaundement of God, and examples of the godly before vs, in a moſt feruent manner, yeeld praiſe to God for the ſame, and reioyce heartily in the remembrance and conſideration of it, tying our ſelues (as it were) in a renuing of our holy couenant, more firmely to the Lord, and teſtifie both theſe by ſignes of vnfained good will to our brethren.
               
                   All which are to be ſeene moſt cleerely and liuely in that famous example of Heſter and Mardocheus, that I mention no other, for breuitie ſake:An example of it. who being with the reſt of Gods people in thoſe countries, marked out, and as ſheepe appointed, by Hamans ſubtiltie and cruell malice, to be ſlaine; did yet by prayer and faſting obtaine deliuerance, when to mans iudgement,Eſter 4.16. & 9.1. all hope was paſt: and not that onely, but alſo their hearts deſire againſt their aduerſaries, with great fauour of the King (whom God had made of an heauie enemie a mightie friend) and much wealth and proſperitie: whereupon they cauſed a day and time to be appointed,Eſter 9.18, 21. in the which the Lord might be praiſed; and they might expreſſe their reioycing, and ſend portions one to another, 
                   to teſtifie their loue vnto them.
               And this is that ſolemne thankſgiuing, which I call one of the extraordinarie helpes to ſet vs forward in godlines:It is to be vſed according to the occaſion. which of all Gods people by the like occaſion is to be offered vp to God, differing (as ye ſee) apparantly from this dutie daily performed, as in feruencie of the ſpirit; ſo in other ſolemnities: beſide a longer time of continuing the ſame.Publikely. This dutie (when the occaſion of it, belonging to a whole Church, is publikely performed) ought to be accompanied with the preaching of the word, to quicken the aſſemblie to the more liuely profeſſing of their thankfulnes, accordingly as their ſolemne feaſts vnder the law, were with an holie conuocation. And if the cauſe  of this extraordinarie helpe be priuate concerning ſome one perſon alone,Or priuatly. or a familie, or ſome few, then it is to bee offered in priuate of them (whom this great benefit concerneth) with Pſalmes, and praiſings of his name, ſpeaking of his workes, and reading Scriptures tending to that end: as Pſal. 105.Scriptures fit for it. 106.107.
               And becauſe I finde one place very fit for this purpoſe, which teacheth a moſt right manner of the practiſe of this dutie, whether we ſhall be occaſioned

publikely or priuately to doe the ſame, I thought it very expedient here  to put in the ſame: which manner of praiſing God was appointed by the man of God, Dauid, at the ſetting vp of the Arke of God in the tabernacle. Some of the words are theſe: Praiſe the Lord, and call vpon his name; declare his workes among the people:
                  1. Chron. 16.8. to 16. & 29.10. to 15. 
                  ſing vnto him, ſing praiſe vnto him, talke of all his wonderfull workes: Reioyce in his holy name: let the hearts of them that ſeeke the Lord, reioyce. And this of ſolemne thankſgiuing.
               
                  The ſecond extraordinarie helpe is faſting. What it is.The other extraordinarie helpe is faſting, ioyned with moſt feruent prayer. And this is a moſt earneſt profeſſion of deepe humbling our ſelues, in abſtinence with confeſſion of ſinnes and ſupplications (for the greateſt part of the day at the leaſt) to God, to turne away ſome ſore calamitie from  vs, or for obtaining of ſome eſpeciall bleſſing. This deſcription in few words I will lay open for their cauſe, who perhaps haue not read nor heard much of this exerciſe of faſting, neither haue bookes at hand to helpe them  to the right vſe of it: I ſay we muſt be deepely humbled, and make earneſt profeſſion of it, more then in the ordinarie abaſing of our ſelues. For though as oft as we doe pray, and confeſſe our ſinnes, we ought to doe them hartily, and deepely: yet neither in the like continuance of time, nor in the ſame meaſure of feruencie can they alwayes be, as at and in this exerciſe, they ought to be.
               
                   Secondly I adde, that with this; abſtinencie muſt be adioyned: I meane  thereby, that we muſt depriue our ſelues herein of the lawfull pleaſures and liberties of this life, as meates, drinkes (more then for neceſſitie) coſtly apparrell, earthly dealings (which yet at other times are free for vs, to inioy) thereby declaring, that we haue by our ſins made our ſelues vnworthie of them.  And thirdly, in that I ſay it muſt be done the moſt part of the day, that is, to the end that by this long time of our humiliation and abaſement, our hearts may be more caſt downe, and throughly touched with our diſtreſſed eſtate,  then in a ſhorter time they are like to be. Fourthly, ſupplications, which containe our ſuites and confeſſion of ſinnes, are added, to teach vs, that the chiefe  part of this exerciſe conſiſteth therein. Fiftly, in that this is done for the remoouing  of ſome great calamitie,2. Chron. 20.6. that is to be vnderſtoode, either of ſome ſore affliction outwardly hanging ouer vs, or the whole Church, or alreadie vpon vs; or for ſome greeuous ſinne committed, or long lien in of vs. The which when weaker meanes remooue not from vs, theſe are inioyned vs of the Lord,Dan. 3.18. 2. Cor. 12.9. to deliuer vs from them, wholy or in part, or elſe to ſtay vs, that we may reſt our ſelues on God, that his grace ſhall be ſufficient for vs.
               
               And here we muſt know, that to be required, which I ſaid to be in thankes, whether priuate or publike, that to enable vs to this dutie the rather, we muſt in the one, vſe the benefit of ſermons, and fit ſcriptures to ſtirre vs vp hereunto, and in the other to meditate of the like ſcriptures priuately, for the well  carrying of our ſelues through that ſo weightie a buſines: but in both, let this be regarded, that we take them not in hand, except we come in true and vnfained repentance, which as ſurely, as we bring thither: ſo ſure we may be, that God will be with vs there, and heare vs, which will make the whole action more ſauorie,2. Chron. 20.12.13.27.28. and the end of it to be with comfort, which is the right manner of taking it in hand. Now therefore the nature and qualitie of this

                   exerciſe being in ſome ſort laid out vnto vs, as the former was, if we duly weigh the force and vſe of them both in their proper kind, namely, how the one raiſeth vs to a ioyfull recording of Gods wonderfull kindnes: the other bringeth vs loue, for our owne vilenes, more eſpecially remembred: both of them doe exceedingly draw our hearts in more loue and obedience to God, who can deny, that they both, in the time, wherein they are to be vſed euen as a long time after, are moſt effectuall meanes to ſet vs forward in the godly life?
               To ſay more of the meanes and helps, I haue not thought it expedient. Therefore to end this whole treatiſe of the helps, theſe few cautions I would  wiſh to be had of thee, the diligent reader,Cautions how to vſe the helps mentioned in this treatiſe. (to the end thou maieſt haue the right vſe of them) namely to vnderſtand them well, and conſider throughly of them, and of the commoditie, which they may bring: and ſo with a quiet and meeke heart ſet vpon them, in that manner that thou haſt them ſet downe vnto thee: And incourage thy ſelfe hereunto by this reaſon, that ſeeing ſome one of them hath ſo great force, to the wel framing of the heart and life (each in his kinde) then all of them together, being ſo vſed, muſt needes bring a more large and liberall bleſſing that way.Haue them in high account. But as they are pretious and haue an excellent end, ſo hold ſtill that account and eſtimation of them, and vſe them with all high reuerence, as frailtie will permit,Vſe them not for faſhion. and not for faſhion (as the counſell of fleſh will be) to make the beſt things vile and common in a ſhort time. Neither giue place to wearines and ſlacknes in vſing of them,Vſe them conſtantly. either in the firſt entrance, or after longer continuance: yet if by vnawares, or any other way, theſe faults eſcape, be diligent and readie to eſpie them,If they waxe vnſauoury, giue no place to ſuch deceit, but mone to God for the former grace. and hide them not, but checking thy corrupt heart, confeſſe it to the Lord in ſecret, and he will heare thee and forgiue thee; and then ſet vpon the vſe of the forementioned helps, freſhly and ſauourly againe as thou diddeſt before.
               There remaineth onely this, at what time, ſo farre as we may know it, we ſhould vſe them, and which of them ſhould be vſed euery day: and which,  otherwiſe; which is a poynt moſt needefull to bee knowne. But this requiring another place, cannot conueniently bee done here, but ſhall follow in the next treatiſe of the daily direction.
            
            The end of the third treatiſe.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH TREATISE, DIRECTING THE BELEEVER VNTO A DAILY PRACTISE OF THE Chriſtian life.
            
               CHAP. 1. Of the ſumme, order, and parts of this treatiſe.
               
                  NOw that I haue ſhewed who is a true beleeuer, and  next, deſcribed the godly life, in the ſecond part of this booke; and haue ſet downe laſt of all, the helps and meanes by which a Chriſtian groweth in the ſame: it might ſeeme that any ſeruant of God hauing theſe three before him, ſhould neede no other direction to helpe to the practiſing of this godly life, but might eaſily doe the ſame. And ſo ſhould I thinke (hauing been once of that minde) but that I haue perceiued by diligent marking and experience,This treatiſe is neceſſarily to be ioyned with the former. that it is ſeldome ſeene and hardly found ſo. Generally (I confeſſe) it is obtained: but particularly it is with them, as with the ſurgion, who hauing learned what is a good medicine for a daungerous ſore, can lay it to; but hauing not particular skill how to prepare the ſore, how to diet the partie, and when and how to apply the medicine, doth long keepe him at one ſtay, or ſometime better, ſometime worſe, but healeth him not; neither doth by degrees bring it to any good eſtate: ſo the Chriſtian who hath onely ſome knowledge how and by what meanes he muſt growe in godlines, and reſiſt the diuell, and ouercome his ſinne, ſhall finde it hard and awke in particulars, and on one day as well as another to doe it with peace, except hee haue full reſolution as well as knowledge and skill how, to vſe and apply the meanes euery day to the diligent obſeruing of his wayes, both at home and abroade, that he may haue the teſtimonie of a good conſcience, and reioycing thereby.
               
                  The generall ſumme of this treatiſe.And this is it, which I meane in this treatiſe, to acquaint the reader with, namely, that the godly life, which is to be continued by the many helps before ſet downe, is neither left to men ſometime to be practiſed, and at other times may be neglected, nor generally (which is far off from Gods meaning

                   and will) but particularly in al their actions, and euery day, and throughout the day, to bee looked vnto and regarded. This is my meaning, and that which I ayme at in this preſent treatiſe: which is thought of many to be too ſtrict a tying of men to dutie, who are ſo giuen to ſeeke carnall libertie: and it is counted ſtrange that they ſhould be holden within bounds euery day and hower, who are not wont to call themſelues to any great account through the whole weeke or more: who if they be reprooued neuer ſo iuſtly once in a yeere; for it is to be feared, that few reproofes are vſed (to ſuch a point the world is come) they count them nice and too holie which rebuke them, they are ſo little vſed to it: Will they not (thinke we) ſtraine hard to caſt off this  yoke of watching and obſeruing their liues, and (as they ſhall ſee cauſe) to finde fault with themſelues throughout euery day?
               I haue had experience how hardly ſuch haue been able to heare a kinde and friendly rebuke for fooliſh ieſting, ſwearing, vnſeemely talking, &c. but they haue counted it preciſenes: there is no doubt, but they will impatiently beare it, to haue their whole bad courſe controuled and brought within compaſſe.Some good Chriſtians thinke ſtrange to be held in compaſſe euery day. It is out of queſtion therefore (I ſay) that both ſuch as I haue here ſpoken of, and many better then they, and which haue the Chriſtian life in more reuerence, then many ſuch, hauing giuen themſelues much libertie in their liues, will thinke it ſtrange that euery day care ſhould be had ouer their  hearts and waies. But why thinke they ſo; but for that partly through ignorance and ſecuritie, and partly through cuſtome in both, they haue long bin eſtranged and held backe from it, and ſo are vnacquainted with it? Alſo they ſee few examples to leade them to it. Among whom, yet (God be bleſſed) there are ſome, yea numbers, I am well aſſured, who if they knew better, would imbrace it.
               Such therefore, as are readie to caſt any miſts of fleſhly obiections before the eyes of the ſimple, and moſt of all to put out their owne light, that thereby they may be hindred from ſeeing the pathway of this chriſtian direction, to the end they may not walke in it, I exhort to heare me patiently: To whom, as to all other who ſhall regard it, I offer a cleerer knowledge of the  will of God, which hath long been ſmothered by the bold contempt of ſome, and a ſafer way to their owne happines, then is commonly found of the moſt Chriſtians, that is, that as I ſaid, they muſt euery day looke to their waies and liues, and ſettle themſelues conſtantly therein, and not think they doe well till they doe ſo, but hold it for a great offence to God and a bold tempting of him (howſoeuer they offer him ſome manner of ſeruice:) and therefore ſhall pay deare for it, when they dare let any one day in the weeke paſſe by them without good regard had of pleaſing God.
               This was the principall end of my writing,The end why this treatiſe was written. euen to helpe to bring the  Chriſtian life into practiſe, and conſequently into price and eſtimation with profeſſors; yea with ſome good perſons and people, more then it is. For though in word many profeſſe themſelues followers of Chriſt, and that they ought ſo to doe; yet with their deedes they denie him,
                  Tit. 1.16. 
                  and the power of godlines alſo. And likewiſe though the Chriſtian life be in ſome account with others, yet it commeth to paſſe,Note. that it is not in chiefeſt reckoning with them aboue other things, without the which it is neuer practiſed to any purpoſe. Which

is one great cauſe, why both many weake Chriſtians are not better then they  be, and why the bad and vnreformed perſons pleaſe themſelues in their ignorance and looſe eſtate, and make ſo ſlow haſte (as they doe) to amend and be changed.
               For they ſee in many hot profeſſors, that there is no euen and conſtant courſe kept in the practiſe of godlines one time as wel as another, and in one thing as in another. Generally we ſay all (as I ſet downe before) wee muſt liue godly:Few doe reſolue to liue godly euery day but in particular the godly life is ſeldome and hardly found, euen amongſt thoſe who ſay ſo. And as for any certaine time when this ſhould be practiſed (as no time ſhould be free from ſome part of it) though wee affirme that it ſhould be ſo to the end of our life, it is ſo little conſidered, that it  is moſt cleere that ſundrie euen good men do ſhine but dimmely, & are too often times, yea and too groſſely, out of the way. And as there are many which doe not honour God by a good conuerſation (as they know they might) if they would bend themſelues to it (for this point of wiſedome is eaſie to him that would vnderstand, Pro. 8.9) ſo a great number (who gladly would) cannot tell how to goe about it.
               For many a one may approoue of a Chriſtian life, and giue good precepts to another, finding them in the word, which he neuer followed nor practiſed in his owne life. And thus, whiles it is not found nor ſeene by experience, what is the beautie, fruite, and comfort of this Chriſtian life, but amongſt  few, and they for the moſt part not of credit with the men of the world, to perſwade that which they know, it lieth dead in a manner: and ſo Gods exceeding kindnes in appointing vs ſuch an happie and ſweet way to his kingdome, is not onely not enioyed, but of the moſt counted weariſome and tedious.Note. I ſay more, it is vile and in no reckoning nor account with many, without which they forgoe a great part of their happines. It is not miſſed among men, nor asked after, though it be the beſt of all other.
               It might worthily grieue him who knoweth the gaine, beautie, ſweetnes, and honour of it, to ſee ſo many hunt after all theſe, where they cannot bee come by; and if they bee attained, yet as a flower they ſoone fade and are  gone: and to beſtow no labour for them, where they may all be had, and conſtantly kept and enioyed. And whereas it is graunted, that one day in the godly life is better then a thouſand elſewhere:
                  Pſal. 84.10. Prou. 8.11.18. yet what curteſie is amongſt men who ſhould begin to make proofe of it? and what holding backe is there, leaſt they ſhould doe too much? And therefore that this Chriſtian life may be brought into ſome more eſtimation and reckoning with men, then for a long time it hath been with the moſt, I haue taken ſome little paine to vnfold and lay out this happie eſtate, and to teach a more ſound vſe of it, then the moſt that profeſſe, haue acquaintance with, by ſhewing how it is to bee made an euery daies worke, and to be brought into daily practiſe, that ſo the  whole being ſeene in her parts, euery thing in it may be better perceiued and diſcerned, with the manifold priuiledges and benefits thereof; as a great houſe,A ſimile. when the ſeuerall roomes of it, are with their furniture particularly viewed, and not confuſedly beheld.
               
                  Daily directing of our liues after Gods word, is a ſafe and peaceable eſtate.For by the faithfull obſeruing of our liues through the day, and taking heede thereto by the helpe of ſuch rules, as God laieth out to vs in his word,

                   we ſhall ſee our ſelues carried through the diuers and manifold actions of the day, ſafely and peaceably; ſeeing the following of a well ordred courſe bringeth greateſt peace and ſafetie: and thereby wee ſhall learne what to auoide, and what to imbrace, and that with ſuch eaſe and freedome from vnquietnes and daunger, that we ſhall ſay, wee neuer ſaw the fruite of godlines ſo ſweete and great, nor the true ſeruing of God (though to the fleſh a yoke,
                  Matth. 11.29. as it is meete it ſhould be) ſo eaſie, ſafe, and comfortable. And thus hauing declared what I intend and propound in this treatiſe, with ſome reaſon thereof, I will ſhew how I meane to handle this point.
               Firſt therefore I will by good proofe declare,The parts of this treatiſe foure. that the beleeuer and true  Chriſtian muſt haue direction for his life euery day, and that Gods word doth lay it out to him, and leaueth it not to himſelfe, to ſerue God by the  great, nor the groſſe, as we vſe to ſpeake.
               Secondly, I will ſhew what this direction is, and what are the parts thereof.
               
               Thirdly, I will helpe him againſt all thoughts of counting it too tedious, by ſhewing how much to be deſired it is, yea profitable, and comfortable.
               And fourthly, I will adde an inlargement of the direction and parts thereof, more briefly handled in the ſecond point of this treatiſe. But I will ſay no more of the daily directing of a Chriſtian in generall at this time, nor of  the fruite and comfort that it bringeth, nor in the commendation of it: it ſhall ſpeake for it ſelfe, what benefit the faithfull practiſe of it doth bring to euery one, as he ſhall endeuour to performe this dutie carefully; and for that I haue appointed in the third part of this treatiſe to ſpeake more particularly of the benefit of it.
            
            
               CHAP. 2. Of the firſt reaſon, why there ought to be a daily direction to guide the beleeuer.
               
               
                  THerefore to come to the firſt point, becauſe it is like it will be denied to bee neceſſarie, by many, whoſe practiſe little ſauoureth of it, I will ſet downe ſome reaſons to prooue the neceſſitie of it, namely, that wee ought to bring the godly life into euery daies practiſe: and that not at aduenture, as euery man thinks beſt, before he haue learned how to goe about it, but to be directed therein by ſome certaine rules in the word of God, without which, he ſhall faile exceedingly, whoſoeuer he be. Theſe I will ſet downe, both to take away all ſcruple and doubt from the weake  Chriſtian, that I goe about to draw him after any noueltie, whereof God is not author (though I feare it is ſomewhat too new to moſt men:) and to ſet before the eyes of the careleſſe and prophane, how farre they are off from that which they thinke they haue: and I hope to them that haue well begun alreadie, it ſhall not be vnprofitable, though I know that the vrging of this (that it muſt bee looked to euery day) will be ſo vnſauourie to many (with whom little godlines will ſerue) that the diuell will open the mouthes of

ſuch, to diſgrace and diſcredit (as much as lyeth in them) whatſoeuer is  more then they are willing to follow, till they moſt diſgrace themſelues among thoſe who are godly indeede.
               And firſt to ſhew, that Gods word doth direct the Chriſtian beleeuer, how hee ſhould liue euery day (and therefore that it is to bee knowne and practiſed) all that liſt,The firſt reaſon, conſiſting of proofes out of the word. 1. Pet. 1.17. 1. Pet. 4.2.
                   may eaſily ſee, by that which the Apoſtle Saint Peter writeth, namely, that we (who call God father) ſhould paſſe the whole time of our dwelling here in feare: and that we ſhould ſpend as much time as remaineth of our life, not after the luſt of men, but after the will of God. Now therefore if we bee commaunded to liue in the feare of God and according to his will, the whole time of our dwelling here, vnto our end; then are we commaunded to doe this  euery part of this whole time; and conſequently euery day, and throughout the day,Heb. 3.12. as we may attaine to it: Whereunto belongeth that which is written to the Hebrewes 3.12. Take heede that there be not at any time, in any of you an euill heart, therefore not any day.
               To the which moſt liuely agreeth that which wee reade in the ſong of Zacharias the father of Iohn Baptiſt,
                  Luk. 1.75. Luke 1.74.75. who teſtifieth that, God had ſworne that he would grant vnto vs, that we being deliuered out of the hands of our enemies might ſerue him in holines and righteouſnes before him all our dayes without feare. By all which it followeth, that we ſhould cal in our hearts and affections from carrying vs diſordredly, and againſt dutie euery day; and in one day as  well as another to conſecrate our ſelues to God, and according to our knowledge to walke with him, whatſoeuer our workes, dealings, or buſines be, that therein wee may keepe our peace with him, and declare that we feare and honour him thereby: which is it, that I contend for, and ſeeke to drawe Gods people vnto, and would thinke I had obtained a great matter at their hands, if we agreed and conſented herein.
               For it is too manifeſt, that this is farre off from the very perſwaſion of many,Many, if God be publikely worſhipped on the ſabboth looke no further. who are yet to be hoped well of, and yet reſt in this, that ſo as the ſabboth be paſſed in religious exerciſes, it is not ſo great a matter, if the other dayes be parted betwixt God and them: I meane, they looke not to be called to  ſo narrow a reckoning, as to ſee their words and workes, eſpecially the thoughts of their hearts, to be framed after the will of God. Nay the Sabboth it ſelfe is farre enough off from being had in due regard, euen of the moſt which goe for Chriſtians, but is ſpent idly and vnprofitably, if not in worldlines or vanitie, eſpecially a great part of it, euen almoſt as much of it, as is free from publike exerciſes; and yet I would euen that part of the day were not iuſtly to be complained of, that men did preſent themſelues reuerently before the Lord to their profit when they come together, 1. Cor. 11.17. But what may then be looked for of ſuch vpon other dayes?
               
                  Many of good hope thinke it not needefull to liue godly euery day.It is too manifeſt, that it is not ſo much as ſetled in the iudgement of many  which are of the forwarder ſort, that euery day our greateſt care ſhould be, how God is pleaſed and ſerued in it, and that it ought to bee our chiefeſt worke: and yet where men thinke ſo; how many make conſcience of it, or ſhew, that they dare doe no other but hold faſt and nouriſh their good deſires to ſerue God, day by day, one day as another; ſo that there might be felt and found ſome agreeablenes betwixt euery dayes ſeruice, the one and other,

                   except it be to make them all alike in ſecuritie? For then there ſhould not be in many, that profeſſe with the beſt, ſuch bold taking of libertie, on ſome dayes to be ſecure and licentious; and others, who beare ſhew aboue many, ſhould not haue ſo many apparant and foule blemiſhes, and yet mixed with ſundrie good actions (which iarre witneſſeth, that no euen nor conſtant courſe is ſought after of them) that I ſay nothing of their many ſecret wounds of conſcience. All theſe and ſuch like patternes in Chriſtians (as they are hoped to be) doe prooue, that few are acquainted with this, to looke to be guided in the whole courſe of their liues by the word of God, one day as well as another: and therefore that they goe aſtray daungerouſly, ſeeing  Gods word directeth vs how to liue euery day.
            
            
               CHAP. 3. Of the ſecond reaſon, of a daily direction conſiſting of two branches.
               
                  BVt let vs proceede to other reaſons: Therefore,Prou. 10.9. Gal. 6.16. Pſal. 119.9. for further proofe thereof, I ſay, that ſeeing it is commaunded vs in the ſcriptures that we keepe a certaine courſe in ſeruing God, and walke in a certaine and plaine beaten way, namely, after the word; and the  ſame courſe is commaunded there alſo, to bee daily and euery day: it followeth therefore, that the Chriſtian life is a certaine, daily, and euery dayes directing of vs in our way, and not an vncertaine, generall,VVhat is ment by this daily direction. and confuſed liuing according to knowledge when we thinke good. By a certaine direction I meane, not that the ſelfe ſame particular actions and duties ſhould be euery day, but yet all euill auoyded euery day, and ſuch good done as in our calling and life ſhall be occaſioned.
               And ſeeing it is ſo, if wee diſpence with our ſelues to lay aſide this care any day (as though it were allowable before God, and lawfull for vs ſo to doe) euen that libertie taking is our ſinne, and that intermitting of dutie any  ſuch day is a breaking off of our courſe, and a going out of the way, euen into croſſe paths and by-wayes; wherein the leaſt danger, is to returne backe againe: Which if it were but the loſſe of one dayes iourney (eſpecially when we goe about any matter of weight) would be no ſmall griefe, eſpecially, when our buſines is weightie and requireth ſpeede; and therefore much more in this Chriſtian courſe, being the high way to heauen, from whence when wee haue ſtrayed willingly, wee cannot eaſily come into the way againe, but rather goe further to our exceeding hurt and daunger. This with much inconuenience beſides, will follow, if the word of God requiring a daily walking with him after ſuch rules as hee giueth vs, wee notwithſtanding  ſhall not regarde them, but walke at randon; and ſome day frame our ſelues thereunto, and ſome day not at all: or one day keepe compaſſe, and another day none: or be well occupied in ſome part of it; and in the other, doe what we liſt.
               But for proofe of both points of this reaſon ſomewhat is to be ſaid, that ſo waightie a matter, and ſo hardly perſwaded to many (namely, that euery day wee are to follow ſome certaine direction for the well ordering of our

liues througout the ſame) may not depend vpon my bare report and credit.
               
               For the firſt poynt therefore, that a Chriſtian muſt bee directed in his whole life,The proofe of the firſt part of the ſecond reaſon, namely, That a certaine courſe of godlines is commaunded in the word. Pſal. 119.9.
                   and therefore may not be left to his owne diſcretion and gouernment, that which is written in the Pſalme doth cleerely proue it: when a queſtion was put forth by Dauid the man of God in the perſon of a young man (who of all other is hardlieſt kept in order) for the edifying of the whole Church, ſaying: By what meanes may a young man, who hath had his ſinnes pardoned, clenſe his wayes afterward, that ſo he may be bleſſed? He anſwereth the queſtion himſelfe, thus: Euen by taking heede thereto according to thy word, O God. And as he taught this in doctrine, ſo he brought his owne  example in the ſeuen verſes following, to ſhew that hee ſought to proue himſelfe happie the ſame way. And this all will graunt, that Gods word muſt be our guide: in generall tearmes this will be affirmed of the moſt, but what is this which they ſay?
               For they obiect through the ignorance that is in them, and other infirmities carrying them, as a whirlewinde, that they are not to bee vrged to follow this word of God ſo particularly; for it diſtracteth them ſore, but euery man in the ſtate he is in (they ſay) is to carry himſelfe, as he thinkes good in his common actions and buſines: they hope men be no children, to be appointed what they ſhould doe: when yet, God ceaſeth not to ſound this  in our eares continually, 1. Cor. 10. Whether we eate or drinke, &c. So that I may well anſwere them that God hath not onely left his Scriptures among vs, to the end we ſhould in ſuch a looſe manner looke after them, and fall into groſſe errors for not knowing them, and ſo become nothing the better for them: but he hath taught vs to draw (as it were) a copie, and a certaine platforme for our liues out of the ſame, the poore, the rich; the old, the young; the married and the vnmarried: all are (I ſay) to draw out of them, direction for their vſe.
               And what other thing is contained in the words of the Prophet? for in ſaying that we muſt take heede to our wayes, that is, our courſe of life and the  actions thereof, doth he except any one more then another? So that it is manifeſt both by the doctrine of the word of God, as alſo by the examples thereof, that not onely there ought to be a generall guiding of Gods people by the word, but alſo a particular trying of their wayes thereby, and that this ought to be as a trade to be followed in one poynt as in another, according to the knowledge of euery one, and therefore to be made an ordinarie courſe, to ſeeke to haue direction in all things. So that in the more actions of our liues, that we are ignorant and to ſeeke, whether we doe them lawfully or no; the more wee muſt ſee our debt to God, and finde fault with our ſelues, that we may ſee the greater neede to ſue for pardon, which few  doe ſee. And therefore are the particular duties ſet downe almoſt in euery epiſtle, both which all Chriſtians ought to performe, and the contrary ſins, that they may ſee according to the occaſions offered, how to imploy themſelues: and alſo more ſpecially of men and women; old and young; rich and poore; maiſters and ſeruants; both inward affections, and externall actions: all which, to what end ſerue they, or why ſhould they haue been

                   ſet downe, but to teach this, that men muſt tie themſelues ſhorter, and denie many noyſome liberties, which now they take and runne after: and alſo to teach, that euery part of a Chriſtians life requireth direction, that hee muſt ſhun that which is naturall (I meane his owne) and be guided by that which is ſpirituall, namely, by the word of God.
               And therefore it is not to be counted as a common ſinne, but as the head of many ſins, that (as though the Scriptures were among vs but for faſhion, or for the deciding of ſome rare and hard doubts, and controuerſies in religion, which is but one vſe of them) the moſt thinke themſelues by their naturall wit and skill, able to direct their waies: which opinion with their practiſe,  what doth it differ from that which is written of the Heathen Gentiles? God in times paſt ſuffered all nations to walke in their owne waies, Act. 14.16. And this be ſaid for the proofe of the firſt part of this former reaſon: namely, that all their actions muſt bee ſquared after the rule of Gods word, throughout their life.
               The ſecond part of this reaſon, namely,The ſecond part of the ſecond reaſon: namely, that it muſt be brought into practiſe euery day. Prou. 28.14.
                   that it ought to be daily and euery day, and ſo through the day, the ſaying of the Lord doth cleerely prooue: Bleſſed is the man that feareth alwaies. And againe, 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eate or drink, or whatſoeuer ye doe elſe, doe all to the glorie of God. And to Ioſua, 1.8. Thou ſhalt meditate and exerciſe thy minde in this booke of the law day and night: as if he  ſhould ſay, early and late, all times of the day, that his heart being well ſeaſoned with the ſweete ſauour of knowledge, his tongue might vtter the ſame, and hee might be exerciſed by the helpe thereof, in the manifold actions of his life. S.1. Tim. 5.10. 
                  Paul alſo when he writeth of the widow that ſhould be choſen to looke to the poore, deſcribeth her by this one note, whereby a good Chriſtian is diſcerned amongſt men, namely, if ſhe haue been daily giuen to euery good worke.
               
               And hee whom it may well beſeeme vs to follow, did not onely make it his daily trade to bee directed by the doctrine of Gods word, but euen through the day did the ſame, diuiding (as it were) the day into one good  doing or other, for theſe are his words: Oh Lord, what a loue haue I to thy law?
                  Pſal. 119.97. 
                  all the day long is my meditation in it, that is, I am muſing ſtill how I may pleaſe thee, whatſoeuer my actions are, which I goe about; Againe,Pſal. 71.15.
                        ••
                     
                   
                  Euery day will I praiſe thee: Euen ſo (if it may be) let vs be doing good, and that in an holy and right manner euery day, and when wee cannot; yet let vs auoide and ſhunne euill. But if thou wilt doe neither, nor endeuour after the ſame conſtantly from day to day, then renounce Gods word, and doe what thou luſteſt.
               And why ſhould not mens hearts be daily giuen to the Lord, who is moſt worthie of them? what haue we to doe in the day more neceſſarie, as it ſhall appeare one day to all, who now will take no knowledge of it? Weigh what I  ſay, and the Lord giue thee vnderſtanding, that in thy heart and life thou maiſt euery day ſerue him: doth the holie Ghoſt, Prou. 4.23. and 25.25. when hee ſaith, Keepe thy heart with all diligence; and againe, let it be in the feare of the Lord continually, doth he (I ſay) meane any certaine time, or one day, and not euery day? ſo when rules for praying are giuen, are they not to direct vs in all our prayers for euer? If thou ſaiſt, why is this then ſo ſtrange to men? I ſay, firſt naturally men deſire to ſatisfie God with a little, and ſoone to haue done

with him, and few will weigh particularly and daily, what they ought to be, and how to walke one day, as well as another, but are content to goe the eaſieſt way to worke (as they thinke) and ſlubber vp their ſinnes: and are therefore neuer long confident in, nor bold with God, as they might bee, and as ſome others alſo of his deare children be, and they themſelues alſo perhaps ſometime haue been. Whereas if it were the matter which is in account with them, who doubteth but that it would be daily looked to.
               
                  Obiection.Againe, if ye ſay, why are wee troubled with theſe nouelties now, more then in times paſt? I ſay, men are content to haue ſuch things to be nouelties vnto them,Anſwere. with which they deſire not to bee acquainted: for els, theſe are not nouelties in the Scriptures, and that is ſeene, ſeeing there are diuers, who, as they haue learned it to be the will of God, that al good duties, as they may, ſhould euery day be practiſed: ſo they doe carefully and conſcionably prune off that behauiour in the day, which could not well be thought vpon and remembred at the euening, without an vnwelcomed wound and accuſation. For what can leſſe be gathered out of the Scriptures before alleaged, then that Chriſtians ſhould bee daily giuen to euery good worke, that is, to aime thereat, though when they haue done all, they may finde themſelues to bee much behind hand, and vnprofitable ſeruants?
               
               
                  Act. 24.16.And what meaning elſe hath this Scripture? Herein I exerciſe and occupie my ſelfe, that I may haue a good conſcience both before God and men alwaies, that is, (I take it) one time as well as another: and therefore much more one day as well as another, ſeeing it reacheth further, that is, euen to one part of the day as well as the other. The which if it can bee done, except a man doe tie himſelfe to take heede to one, as well as to another, I know not what to make of it. And if he had meant herein, but a generall looking to his conſcience, he could as eaſily haue ſaid and left out the words (before God and men) which include both inward and outward actions: likewiſe, the word (alwaies) and to haue reſtrained it to ſometimes. The like ſaying is in another chapter: To the which thing hoped for,
                  Act. 26.7. 
                  or to the which promiſe made to our fathers, our twelue tribes ſeruing God day and night alwaies, doe truſt to come. He ſaith not barely  that they ſerued God (which all will graunt ought to be) but that they looked to it, day and night, euen early and late, yea and alwaies, that is to ſay, conſtantly, and with continuance.
               And as theſe and ſuch like Scriptures doe prooue that a godly life ſhould be alwaies and euery day: ſo in other places of the word, the ſame thing is ſet downe in another manner, as by that in the Pſalme may bee gathered: where the Prophet expreſſeth it by the meanes and helpes, whereby ſuch a life is led,Pſal. 145.2. that is, by prayer and praiſes, ſaying thus: euery day, or according to the Hebrue words, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  on euery day, I will bleſſe thee and praiſe thy name for euer and euer. So that howſoeuer few aime at it, that they may by their owne  experience haue the proofe of it; yet it is euident by the Scriptures, that it ought to be thus, which is the thing that I haue taken in hand to prooue, that there may be more conſcience made of it among the godly hereafter. Therfore if the Scriptures commend vnto vs a certaine courſe to walke in with God, and a particular directing of our liues (of what calling or eſtate ſoeuer wee be, according to his word) and further requireth the ſame to be daily

                   kept and followed of vs (as hath been ſhewed) then Chriſtians muſt bee guided by ſome daily direction in the leading of their liues.
            
            
               CHAP. 4. Of the third reaſon of the daily direction.
               
                  FVrthermore, if ſo many parts of a daily direction, as will ſufficiently direct a man, be inioyned in the word of God, to be daily vſed, then a certaine and daily direction is commaunded  of God: but the firſt is manifeſt and cleere: therfore the latter cannot be denied. Now for proofe of this, that ſo many parts of direction, as may well guide a Chriſtian through the day, are ſet downe in the word of God, it is cleere: for we are directed there, how to begin the day, how to proceed in the ſeuerall actions of the ſame, and how to end it, I exclude not any one. We are directed alſo how to carrie our ſelues in companie, how alone, how at home, how abroad: how to beare troubles when they come, and to prepare our ſelues for them before they come: and how to vſe proſperitie, as health, friends, peace, libertie, goods, and whatſoeuer bleſſings beſides, God ſhall any day  beſtow vpon vs.
               In al theſe (I ſay) with other ſuch, we are directed in the word of God, and how wee may euery day, as well as ſome one, ſerue God in them, as occaſion ſhall be offered, which ſhall more cleerely bee ſeene afterwards in ſundrie particulars. Which if it be ſo, what ordinary actions in any lawfull calling are to be done of a Chriſtian through the day, but God hath in his word guided him how to doe them, in ſuch wiſe, as hee by the helpe thereof, may with peace and comfort bring it to an end: and contrariwiſe, he that knoweth his will therein, and walketh not after the ſame, ſhall neither finde peace in his life, nor happines after. Which, if it were duly weighed and conſidered,  would keepe Chriſtians in another and that more ſafe, well ordred, and heauenly courſe, then they now are which know it not, or haue not conſcience to ſeeke experience of it: whereas without it, many, who might bring great glorie to God by their liues, and themſelues liue very ſweetly; yet becauſe they are ſtrangers from ſuch a daily courſe keeping, doe neither of both, or at leaſt, very meanely: and yet becauſe they haue no acquaintance with any better, are not content to be diſquieted, and rouſed out of that vnprofitable courſe wherein they are.
               But becauſe I thinke it will be looked for, that I ſhould prooue that by the Scriptures, which I haue ſaid of the parts of the direction, that ſo many as  may well guide a Chriſtian throughout the day, are as well particularly required euery day at our hands to be obſerued, as generally all our life long: I will therefore ſatisfie the teachable reader in that which hee deſireth. And firſt where I ſaid, that we are guided by the word how to begin the day, and how to goe through it; Salomon in one ſentence directeth to both: for when he had ſaid,Prou. 6.22. 
                  The commaundements and inſtructions ſhould be alwaies bound to our hearts, that is, had in continuall remembrance, and tied about our neckes, that is,

as iewels had in ſpeciall account: hee addeth; that at our awaking, they ſhall  talke with vs, and when we walke, they ſhall leade vs. As if hee ſhould ſay, if the word of God be carefully kept in mind, and held in precious eſtimation, it ſhall guide vs from the morning to the euening, euen from our vpriſing to our lying downe: ſo that, God hath not left the gouerning of our liues in our owne hands, as though hee had taken no order for them, but hath appointed in his word how the whole day ſhould be paſſed.
               And further where I ſaid more particularly, that the Chriſtian life, which we are daily to leade, conſiſteth in a carefull declining from all euill, and contrariwiſe in well liuing, and bringing forth the fruites of faith and amendment of life: and alſo in the vſe of ſuch helps and meanes, by which this faith and  holy life are nouriſhed, and preſerued: It is very true: For there are no meanes neceſſarily to be vſed euery day, nor any parts of godly life, which we are bound to performe daily, but the ſcripture doth particularly require thē to be vſed daily.The parts of a godly life to be practiſed daily. That which I ſay of the helps ſhal be proued afterwards. And for the parts of good life, which we muſt needes practiſe daily, they are, that we ſhould be daily occupied in thoſe good workes, which in our place and calling, we can ſee to bee required of vs: as brotherly kindnes, loue, ſobrietie, patience, iuſt dealing towards all, mercifulnes, meekenes, and ſuch like. And theſe be like neceſſarie all the dayes of our life, as in any one; ſo that it is our ſinne, when we doe the contrarie.
               
               Furthermore, the workes which muſt of neceſſitie be done daily, are to carry our ſelues both in proſperitie, and vnder all bleſſings rightly, that is, cheerefully, thankfully, and fruitfully: and in our afflictions patiently and with contentation. And who doth not know, that theſe both ſhould bee daily?In proſperitie. For, firſt that praiſes and thankſgiuing in our proſperitie are required to be daily, as long as that eſtate abideth, conſider what the pſalmiſt ſaith, my tongue ſhall talke of thy righteouſnes daily, Pſalm. 71.24. and that meant Saint Iames,
                  1. Theſ. 5.19. Chap. 5.13. In our proſperitie to ſing praiſes, and Saint Paul wiſhing vs to giue thankes in all things, bringeth vs to the ſame dutie euery day.
               And although the word (daily) be not there mentioned, and where he  ſaith, reioyce in the Lord alwayes, Phil. 4.4. yet who doubteth that he can meane any leſſe then this, when hee ſaith, in all things: euen ſuch, as come to paſſe daily and euery day? and yet euen this word (daily) is in other Scripture vſed.Lam. 3.23. For as the mercies of God are renewed daily vpon his: ſo Gods people are in the example of the man of God (whoſe praiſe is ſo great in the Scripture) taught, that as they enioy them euery day; ſo they are euery day to ſound forth his praiſe thankfully and cheerefully, as ſuch who feele and acknowledge thereby, the exceeding ſweetenes of Gods louing kindnes and benefits, and that is to make the true and right vſe of them.
               
                  In afflictions.And as daily praiſes are to be offered for benefits, ſo muſt the patient and  right bearing of afflictions bee daily alſo, and earneſt prayers to God made for the remouing of them; as we reade the Prophet Daniel did daily, and three times in the day,
                  
                     Two things required about afflictions. Iam. 1.5. 2. Chr. 20.3.4. Lam. 3.27. Dan. 6.10. But about afflictions God requireth theſe two things of vs: the one that we ſhould prepare and make readie our ſelues to beare them as from him, in ſuch quiet manner, as that we be not vnſetled nor troubled at the heart by them, when we heare of them: the other, that when

                   they come, we ſhew our ſelues to be ſuch indeede,Pſal. 32.6.7. 2. Sam. 15.26. and through the incouragement which we haue from him, we ſubmit our ſelues (euen as our necke vnto the yoke) willingly to goe vnder them. Now though no wiſe man doubts, but that Gods meaning is that we ſhould be patient and obedient in one as well as another, and one time as well as an other; yet that it may plainely be ſeene, it is to be knowne, that both theſe are giuen vs in commandement euery day.
               For firſt God hath taught vs in the fourth petition (giue vs this day our daily bread) ſo to pray for all things needefull to this preſent life,Firſt that we prepare our ſelues for them, before they come. as his moſt wiſe prouidence ſeeth meeteſt and beſt for vs; and therefore if he in wiſedome  doe ſee afflictions fit for vs, though we are not to pray for them, we offer our ſelues readie to receiue them, and take them as a part of our daily bread; or elſe we vnderſtand not what God teacheth vs to pray for, nor what we offer to him in making that prayer. For we deſire of God in it bleſſing fit for the time, wherein we are euery day: and therefore not onely in peace and proſperitie, the bleſſing of thankes, &c. but vnder affliction, patience, contentation, and ſuch like graces, euen the thing of the day in the day, as Agur ſaith,Prou. 30.8. that is, euery thing in his time, and as the time requireth. For in proſperitie, the time requireth one bleſſing; in affliction another: that ſo wee may hang on God euery moment.
               
                   By this it may bee ſeene, that Chriſtians ought euery day to prepare for troubles, and that is a ſpeciall part of their dutie in the day.Second, that we beare them rightly, when they come. Luk. 9.23.
                   The other thing about afflictions is, that wee beare them willingly when they come euery day. And this is that which our Sauiour Chriſt teacheth, when he ſaith, he that will come after me, muſt deny himſelfe, and take vp his croſſe daily: and this is an other part of our dutie in the day, ſo needfull to be looked vnto, as none more.
               So that God hath taught his, that whether their life be incombred with afflictions, or whether it be paſſed in the vſe, commodities and benefits, they ſhall in both eſtates learne of him how to be directed daily. Yea and to ſhut  vp this poynt, and make it more full: not onely euery day he hath directed vs how to liue in both eſtates, but euen through the day alſo, according to that which is written by Moſes in Deuteronomie:Deut. 33.12. Matth. 26.41. 
                  The beloued of the Lord ſhall dwell in ſafetie vnder his protection all the day long. When Chriſt ſaith watch and pray, leaſt ye fall into temptation, what day, or part of the day, doth he warrant vs to be free from daunger, without theſe meanes, as experience alſo ſheweth?
               By theſe things which I haue now ſpoken of, namely, daily to be giuen to euery good worke, and to looke to our ſelues, that both in proſperitie and aduerſitie we be daily well ordered; we ſee that a Chriſtian may be able to  gouerne himſelfe ſafely through the day, although hee had no further direction. But yet more particularly the word of God doth direct them how to paſſe the day in their calling, in company, alone by themſelues, and conſequently in all the actions of the day. Which becauſe I haue appointed afterward to prooue it, and would auoyde tediouſnes in not repeating it againe, I will deferre it, till I come to the more particular handling of the daily direction.
               
                  But yet the meanes and helps, whereby a godly life is preſerued daily, as I promiſed before,Helps to a godly life are to be vſed daily. and leaſt I ſhould not ſo particularly handle them in the direction following, I will in few words ſet downe: and ſhew, how God hath inioyned ſo many of them, as doe neceſſarilie helpe to the practiſe of godlines, daily to be vſed; and though not the ſame, yet one or other, as prayer, meditation, exhorting one another, praiſe and thankes, attending to the publike meanes of the word daily, as oft as we may inioy it. Theſe meanes God doth not onelie inioyne daily to bee vſed, but alſo in ſuch wiſe, as he who weigheth how the commaunding of them daily to be vſed, goeth with the commaunding of the godlie life daily to be continued by the helpe of them, ſhall cleerelie ſee, that God meant not coldlie and ceremoniouſlie to  haue them performed of vs; but that of them both, a true and holie ſeruing of him daily, ſhould bee framed: that ſo we might be one daie, as another, and not fickle and chaunging alwaies, as otherwiſe we muſt needes be.
               
                  
                     Prayer and praiſes. Pſal. 55.16.17 & 119.164. Prou. 6.22.For prayer and praiſes, in Dauids example thriſe in the day, we are taught to offer them: beſides occaſions at other times of the daie, which a man that looketh well to his waies ſhal finde to be many. Watchfulnes, which is a due conſidering of our waies, & a taking heede to them, is required to be through the daie,
                     Watchfulnes. Pſal. 119 97. and all the daie long, not on ſome, more then other. Our exhorting one another,
                  
                     Exhortation. Heb. 3.13. is commaunded to be daily, as we ſhall haue occaſion, howſoeuer the practiſe of it be ſtraunge, and out of vſe with many Chriſtians, who yet  are they which ought to vſe it, if any bee; and this when wee haue opportunitie, is to be vſed to ſupplie the roome of other helps which cannot then be well inioyed.
                     Reading. Ioſh. 1.8. As for reading the booke of his law and ſpeaking of the infinit wiſedome of God reuealed in the ſame, howſoeuer that place of Ioſua doth not ſo preciſely and ſtrictly tie them to euerie daie, as other ſcriptures doe to prayer, thankſgiuing, &c. (becauſe the daie may poſſiblie be paſſed in the ſeruice and worſhipping of God aright without that, but not without theſe: and a good Chriſtian may neceſſarilie bee hindred from that, by other duties for a time more neceſſarie) yet who doubteth,How farre we are tied to them daily. that euen that was commaunded by the Lord to be vſuall and oft, that is, ſo farre daily vſed, as  when more neceſſarie things in the way doe not occupie vs? The ſame I ſay of publike hearing the word of God,
                     Publike hearing. Pro. 8.33. Act. 2.46. as may be gathered by that in the Prouerbs, in theſe words: Bleſſed is the man that watcheth daily at my gates, and giueth attendance at the poſtes of my doores. And the like is the ſaying of Saint Luke of the godly who were in Ieruſalem, that they continued daily in the temple, hearing the Apoſtles doctrine. I goe not about to tie any (as I ſaid) to the vſe of the ſame particulars euery daie, which cannot poſſiblie be vſed euery daie, but onely of thoſe that may: and of the reſt, but one or other, that we may be well able to anſwere for the Chriſtian paſſing of euery daie. The ſumme therefore is this, that God hath commaunded, and in his word ſet downe ſo  many parts of a daily direction for a Chriſtian, as by the which hee may bee guided holily and ſafelie through euery daie: and therefore that one daie as well as another, is to be conſecrated vnto God, and not left free to our ſelues, to paſſe it, as we thinke good, and as too many (in a very vnprofitable manner) doe, and yet ſuch as profeſſe the Goſpell.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 5. Of the fourth reaſon.
               
                  ANother reaſon for the perſwading of vs to looke to the daily guiding of our ſelues in ſome certaine manner, is,The daunger that followes the neglecting of it. Matth. 26.41. Heb. 3.13.
                   for that hee, who will let looſe his heart any day or time of the day to any intemperance, or vnlawfull libertie, doth fall into ſome of Sathans ſnares, and is caught with the deceitfulnes  of ſinne immediatly, ſome way or other, if he be not hardened alſo: yea though he be the beſt of many, hee ſhall finde to his coſt how needfull the counſell of the Apoſtle is, watch in all things;2. Tim. 4.5. and therefore at all times: ſo that there ſhal be no time wherein he may caſt off feare of euill, that ſo he may be the man which is ſpoken of, Bleſſed is he that feareth alwaies.
                  Prou. 28.13. Yea he ſhall find that he is more weakened and indaungered by one daies negligence in little regarding his ſoule and his actions (whiles other things of leſſe value are carefully looked to) then in an hundred, wherein his care and conſcience were continued, beſides that, he ſhall not eaſily recouer himſelfe againe. For although God keepe his children from many euils, while they deſire it:
                  Pſal. 32 6.7. Pſal. 91.11. 2. Sam. 7.14. 2. Chron. 16.9. Prou. 10.9. Pſal. 89.31 
                   yet if they be ſecure, hee leaueth them to themſelues, and doth puniſh their ſinnes, as he doth other mens. And who would bee willing to haue his life filled with many feares, diſquiets, reproches, and ſuch other croſſings, when he might be free and merrie? But beſides, nothing is better prooued to vs then this, that the enuious man watcheth all opportunities, yea when men leaſt ſuſpect it, to ſow tares with the good ſeede; to vnſettle them,Matth. 13.25. to ſteale away their heart and loue from God, to giue it vnto creatures. And therefore much more, when we haue remitted our care, and left off our watch (whereby hee knoweth and ſeeth,Matth. 12.44. that we are now as an houſe ſwept and trimmed vp readie to receiue ſuch a gueſt) much more (I ſay) doth he then take his opportunitie to 
                  enter and keepe poſſeſsion in vs more ſtrongly, and ſo depriueth vs of our former liberties. And euen as Sampſon, when his lockes were clipped off, was afraid and troubled at the voyce of his wife, ſaying:Iudg. 16.20. 
                  The Philiſtims be vpon thee Sampſon; but yet thought with himſelfe, I will ariſe and eſcape their hands, as in times paſt, but could not: ſo when the diuell hath ſecretly ſtolne our hearts from our true treaſure, euen from attending vpon God,Pſal. 130.5. Pſal. 123.2. and hath fixed them vpon ſome other thing, as pleaſure, profit, aduauncement, or ſuch like; wee thinking to doe as in times paſt, when we had our hearts at commandement, doe goe about it in vaine: For our ſtrength which we had ſometime, is gone, and we by ſeeking libertie amiſſe, and ſhaking off the Lords yoke, doe finde  by experience the fruite of ſuch follie, I may more fitly call it madnes. It is not therefore without cauſe, that wee are ſo earneſtly warned by the holie Ghoſt, that we keepe our hearts with all diligence: And againe,Prou. 4.23. Prou. 23.17. 
                  Let thy heart be in the feare of the Lord continually: which a man would thinke ſhould be vnderſtood by vs of one day as wel as another, that it be not neglected at any time. For although God will direct and guide vs in the way wherein he hath ſet vs, as I haue ſaid, yet out of this way (if we will needes waxe wearie of it) we ſhall

finde nothing but awknes and croſſing of vs, wandring and vncomfortablenes, becauſe that in no ſuch ſtate hath God promiſed to gouerne vs. But ſtirre vp the gifts of God which are in thee, and that powerfull grace, which thou haſt receiued, daily pray to haue renued in thee, by ſuch direction as may be giuen thee, and thou ſhalt finde thy ſelfe to bee ſet forward with ſuch eaſe, as thou wilt beware that thou forgoe it not againe.
               Moreouer, if any would ſhake off this doctrine, as ſifting him more narrowly, then he can well like of: and therefore would for the ſeeking of more libertie to the fleſh, cauill at theſe Scriptures, as miſalleaged, ſuch an one muſt needes maintaine, that there is ſome time, and ſome daies, more libertie giuen to man, then at other times, and on other daies. But hee is driuen from  that hold by manifeſt Scripture, as hee is tied to a daily direction by the former. For to the ſtopping of ſuch mouthes, is that written by the holy Ghoſt: Take heede that there be not at any time,
                  Heb. 3.12. 
                  in any of you an euill heart, and ſo a departing thereby from the liuing God: If not at any time, then much leſſe any day, wherein are many times, ſeeing it is manifeſt that there are many times, yea houres in the day, wherein the heart may ſtart aſide from God, that is, from doing his will: So that nothing ſhall be gained by reſiſting the truth, but it ſhall turne to the ſwifter damnation of them, which doe it. Men may ſay (I denie not) that it is hard to haue that rule ouer their hearts: but it will not ſerue them, to the reiecting of the truth (which God hath brought to light  to them and made manifeſt to their conſciences) but that they muſt for all that, grant, that it is a dutie to be yeelded vnto of them, and therefore to bee ſet vpon and gone about rather then reſiſted, aſſuring themſelues, that an honeſt endeuour ſhall not be in vaine.
               
                  Jlluſtration of the former matter by ſimilitudes.And if we ſee this in common reaſon, that a man which hath a long iourney to trauaile, as an hundred or two hundred miles, will not count this ſufficient directiō, to go on Eaſtward or Weſtward, as his way ſhal lie, or by a generall rule only;The firſt. but will take a particular note by what townes he muſt goe euery day, and how hee muſt paſſe from one to another: what marueile ſhould it be, that they who are to trauaile this great and long voyage to the  kingdome of heauen, yea and that through this large and weariſome wildernes of the world, doe not reckon their way generally by the yeere, but particularly by euery day, and through the day conſider the diuers kindes of dutie, which they are to performe, as a part of the way by which they ſhould goe, that at night they may reioyce, that they are ſo much neerer their iourneys end (and that in ſafetie and quiet) then they were in the morning at their ſetting foorth, and haue not (with the greateſt part) loſt their labour, by going out of their way?
               Euen as Moſes teacheth vs, by his owne example in the Pſalme, where hee ſaith:Pſal. 91.12. 
                  Teach vs, O Lord, to number our daies (that is, to conſider the ſhortnes of  our life by the daies of it) that we may applie our hearts to wiſedome: that is, in thoſe few daies thereof. And as the Steward of ſome Noble mans houſe doth not make a generall reckoning and account of much money laid out, but writeth the particulars, daily and hourely as he giueth out and receiueth, that hee may not bee deceiued:The ſecond. ſo and much more (as the Chriſtian life is more precious then all earthly treaſure) doth the wiſe man looke daily to

                   his waies, and through the day, that his account may the leſſe trouble him at his lying downe, and conſequently at the day of his death. Yea, and more then that, ſo will hee euen ſet downe many parts of his life in writing alſo, ſuch as are principally to be kept in record (as Gods benefits, and his owne ſinnes) as he is able, and all to helpe him to be better directed in it.
               To the ſame purpoſe of daily looking to our waies,The third. our Chriſtian life is compared to a courſe or race: that as they which runne keepe their bounds and courſe, and goe not aſide out of the way: ſo ſhould they who runne in the Chriſtian race, looke before them, and ſee that they keepe in their way, and not runne on vncertainly, or wandring they know not where, whither, nor  how, by peruerting their waies.
               It is alſo compared to an high way,The fourth. in the which if we guide and keep our beaſt, although it be loden, it commeth ſafely to the market with the cariage or burden: but if we ſuffer it to goe out of the plaine way into cartrakes, and to climbe vp to the browes and rough waies, it is caſt and wearied: ſo if we keepe in the knowne and beaten way, we goe on our Chriſtian courſe ſafely, although with ſome difficultie, and with many incombrances: but if wee peruert our way, and goe out of it, by and by we fall into daunger,Prou. 10.9. Pſal. 89.32. we know not how great: as by wofull experience many fearing God haue found it with them, who then wiſhed they had been circumſpect, when it is too  late.
               So it is compared to a rule, to guide vs: that as well in our talke with other,The fift. as alone by our ſelues, in our earthly buſines, as our ſpirituall ſeruice of God: in our affaires abroad, as well as our dealings at home, and in one thing as well as another, we ſhould haue certaine direction for euery part of it. And the very ſame thing did the faithfull ſeruant of God S. Paul teach Timothie,
                  2. Tim. 3.10. 
                  his beloued and naturall ſonne in the faith, by his owne example when he ſaid: Thou haſt knowne my courſe, and manner of liuing, &c. as if hee ſhould ſay, what hath been my daily carriage of my ſelfe (for elſe hee could not haue ſpoken ſo) and particularly, that it hath been beautified with faith, loue, patience in  great afflictions and perſecutions, with gentlenes to all, and long ſuffering, and bearing much at the hands of vnworthie perſons: thou haſt knowne alſo my minde and purpoſe, what I haue deſired yet further.
               The ſame is to be ſaid of other faithfull ſeruants of God,Gen. 5.22.23. Gen. 6.5. Heb. 3.2. as Enoch walked with God: Noah was a iuſt and vpright man, and walked with God: And Moſes was faithfull in the houſe of God. Which ſpeeches vttered of the holie people of God in thoſe times, wherein things were ſet downe more darkly, what can they teſtifie of them leſſe, then this which I ſay?
               So that it is manifeſt, both by the doctrine of the word of God, and alſo by the examples thereof, that not onely there ought to be a generall guiding  of Gods people by the word, but alſo a particular trying of their waies therby, and a framing of them thereto: and that this ought to be as a trade, to be followed in one point as in another, according to the knowledge of euerie one, and therefore to be made an ordinarie courſe of them euery day, to ſeeke to haue direction in all things.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 6. Of the fift reaſon, ſixe, ſeuen, and eight.
               
                  The fift, that daily direction is fitteſt to keepe vs well, while we be well: and to raiſe vs vp being fallen.
                  FVrthermore, if a certaine direction daily to guide vs, doth beſt keep vs well, when we be wel, and when we ſtep aſide or wander out of the way by any occaſion, if this be fitteſt to bring vs eaſily to conſideration of our ſelues, and hold vs from going further from God: if (I ſay) it be the beſt and fitteſt eſtate, thus to order well, and ſettle our liues, in compariſon  of any other; then who doubteth, but that it is chiefly to be laboured for, and looked after, and holden as moſt neceſſarie? But that it is ſo, who can denie? who will ſay, but that he which reſolueth with himſelfe euerie morning, to looke to his waies all the daie following, and to keepe a good conſcience towards God and men, and for that purpoſe ſetteth himſelfe to follow ſuch ſpeciall and particular rules, as by the which this may be beſt effected, ſhall in farre better ſort performe this (bringing the daie to a good end) then they, who though they be in Chriſt alſo, yet are not ſo prepared and well furniſhed?
               I meane ſuch as haue onely a minde to doe well in generall, but doe not  particularly ſet themſelues to obſerue their waies, but as it falleth out (which is the caſe of many) much leſſe doe they one daie as well as another, keepe an euen courſe: for they omitting their care any one daie, are the eaſilier brought to the like ſecuritie many daies after. Which men, although I denie not, but in ſome of their actions, and at ſome time, doe honour God highly, and performe many duties well (and that is for the moſt part when they haue been quickned by the preaching of the word, or their owne meditation and prayer, or reading, &c.) yet they being vſually carried, by ſuch libertie taking to themſelues, farre out of the way, doe pull downe againe that, which they had builded, and cauſe their holy profeſsion to be ill ſpoken of, and the former  commendation of them to become ridiculous: and are themſelues ſoone vnſetled by euery light occaſion, dulled by worldlie dealings, vnquiet by prouocations, incenſed to reuenge by iniuries, and much eſtraunged from the life of godlines in many points; whereas ſome proportion and ſutable agreement ſhould bee in the whole courſe of Chriſtians. And yet thus it will be, as I haue ſaid (which is bad enough, if it bee well weighed) with ſuch Chriſtians, as doe not learne how, and ſeeke with all diligence, to be able to preuent ſuch daungers.
               
                  All good Chriſtians being alike ſubiect to ſinne, muſt alike be fenced againſt it.For they being ſubiect to the ſame infirmities, occaſions of offending, and prouocations inward and outward, vnto the which the beſt armed people  of God are; and yet not ſo afraide and ſuſpitious of them, not daily making it the chiefeſt matter to walke well fenced againſt them (as the others doe) which without a dailie and continuall watch (as farre as frailtie will permit) cannot bee, they muſt needes finde much diſcontentment in their liues, and diſcomfort, as alſo far more looſenes and diſtemperature, then the other doe. Beſides this, they not accuſtoming themſelues to any certaine

                   courſe of walking with God, nor following any direction to order their waies, they doe bring this burthen vpon themſelues, that when they are fallen, they lie long, and hardly riſe vp againe, and make it alſo an harder matter for them to ſerue God (as they were wont to doe) vnleſſe (which is worſt of all) they make a light matter of ſinne, and ſo returne too haſtily for mercie to God, before they haue well weighed and conſidered their falles and offences: And by this, conſider on the contrarie, what the ſafetie of the other is, who count Gods ſeruice perfit freedome, and therefore will not be drawne from it at any time; or if they fall, yet lie not ſtill, becauſe they haue ſetled themſelues to be well guided daily.
               
                   Beſides all that hath been ſaid,The ſixt reaſon drawne from the ten commaundements, being perpetuall. this appeareth cleerely that God looketh for it, that Chriſtians ſhould euery daie be directed as well as ſome one daie, by the order that he hath ſet in the tenne commaundements. For whereas all dutie to bee performed of vs, is either to bee ſhewed towards God or men: he to teach vs in what ſort and manner this is to bee done, hath thus ſet downe his will vnto vs, ſaying. Concerning my ſelfe,A commaundement, a perpetuall rule to worſhip God by, daily. for the ſixe daies throughout the weeke, yeare, your whole life, worſhip and ſerue me, both inwardlie and outwardlie, as in the three firſt commaundements I haue bound you; and on the ſeuenth daie, as the fourth commaundement inioyneth. And this is your direction in all dutie to me for euer.And to liue with men daily. Concerning  men, without any reſpect of any daie or particular time, frame your ſelues daily and alwaies, as the ſixe laſt commaundements doe require. Who doth not ſee, that the Lord, ſetting downe his minde in the commaundements after this manner, hath of purpoſe ſet downe a perpetuall direction for his people throughout their pilgrimage?
               For though all ſee it not, neither conſider it, what then? Shall the will of God be of no effect, becauſe of the ignorance of men? but they who ſee the will and meaning of God aright in them, ſee no leſſe thē this, that I haue ſaid. Neither let any obiect here, that there is no other direction giuen vs, then generally to follow the commandements for our guide, ſeeing euery commandement is  to be vnderſtood ſpiritually: and therefore reacheth to all particulars of that kind, yea euen thoſe which are inward. For he ſetteth downe more then that, namely, that both on the ſixe daies and euerie of them, one euen courſe of worſhipping and ſeruing him be vſed and aimed at in our particular actions; and on the ſeuenth daie, another perpetuallie to bee obſerued on the ſabboth for euer, diuers from the former. And becauſe the duties that wee owe to men are in the ſixe laſt commaundements indifferentlie, on all the ſeuen daies to be performed: therefore indifferentlie on the one, as well as on the other (and not at our pleaſure when wee liſt, or as we thinke good) our care to practiſe and faithfullie endeuour after them, is to bee continued,  and ſo the contrarie ſinnes in like ſort are to be renounced. Now in that many of Gods people ſee it not to be thus, nor make any ſuch vſe of it, it is by reaſon of their ignorance of Gods will in the commaundements, and vnwillingnes to take paine about the ſame, and vnacquaintance with a daily endeuouring and ſetting themſelues to the particular practiſing of dutie in euery commaundement, according to their knowledge, as euery one hath heard the ſame laid open vnto him.
               
                  
                  The ſeuenth reaſon, holines ſhould be on all daies. Gal. 4.10.
                  But further, that we ſhould thus be fullie reſolued euery daie to liue religiouſlie, and that in particular, and not ſerue God by the groſſe; it is plainelie declared in the Epiſtle to the Galathians: namely, that we ſhould not eſteeme one day aboue another, neither attribute holines to one, more then to another, and ſo neglect one in regard of another.Obiection. And although it may be ſaid, that they in ſo putting difference in daies, did therein ſhew themſelues ſuperſtitious; but we are not ſo to bee iudged of, though wee doe not as carefullie worſhip and obey God one daie as another:Anſwere. I anſwere, that both in that place and to the Coloſſians,Col. 2.16. he rebuking that ſinne of putting difference in daies, doth condemne as well our ſecuritie, who ſeeke not to glorifie God as ſincerelie and holilie, on one daie as another; as their ſuperſtition who  groſlie thought one daie holier then another. And conſequentlie, looke what certaine and cleare rules the Scripture giueth vs, for directing our liues one daie, the ſame muſt conſcionablie bee applied to euery daie. And in this reſpect the ſabboth it ſelfe, though appointed by God to holie exerciſes more then other; yet is neither in it ſelfe holier then other; nor we to thinke, that we may be leſſe holie on other daies, then on that: but ſo to looke to our hearts and our waies, that although euery daie cannot bee as the Sabboth, through want of the helps, which on that daie we may inioy, and by reaſon of many hinderances, which fall out on other daies rather then on it: yet wee ſhould endeuour to walke in the ſanctification of our hearts, and innocencie  of life on the other daies, as well as on that.
               
                  The eight reaſon drawne from our conuerſation. Phil. 3.20. Phil. 1.27.
                  And to conclude, if our conuerſation muſt be in heauen, euen whiles we liue here on earth: that is, if our whole practiſe and courſe, not ſome part of it, ought to bee ſquared out after the heauenly patterne of the word of God: then who ſeeth not, that we muſt be ſetled after ſom godly directiō one day as another, to glorifie God in our conuerſation?Obiection. Neither let any obiect, that becauſe the ſeuerall actions of our life are many and infinit, therefore no certaine rules can bee propounded to bee followed of vs:Anſwere. for as many as they are, both throughout the daie, and the whole yeare, yea our life; yet may they all be brought vnder, and fitly referred to a few rules, which will ſhew when we  be well gouerned, and when it is otherwiſe with vs.
               And if it were not thus, that we both may and ought to be daily guided by ſome certaine and good direction, and haue our hearts alſo readily diſpoſed, ordinarilie and for the moſt part, throughout the daie, vnto euery good worke: then in vaine ſhould that be written, which being ſpoken of Dauid muſt be practiſed of all the faithfull: I beheld the Lord alwayes before me (that is, I liued by faith) that I might not be ſhaken, Act. 2.25. Or if we will ſay, we neede not that conſtant heede taking, it muſt needes follow, that our hearts would be ranging out ſo many waies amiſſe, that we ſhould be driuen to exceeding toyle to bring them backe againe: and yet ſhould not alwaies  obtaine it neither, though wee laboured for it earneſtly. And ſo we ſhould make a deadlie and endles toyle of godlines, and yet be farre from the power of it, and fall ſo oft and ſo dangerouſly, that it would breede ſore diſcouragement from ſeeking to riſe vp, and recouer our ſelues againe; much leſſe ſhould we perſwade other by our example to feare God: and we muſt of neceſſitie leaue vndone many duties which ought to be done, and ſo breede

                   miſerable diſtractions, ſo that the life of God in vs ſhould weakely and litle be diſcerned. Lo, ſuch effects would follow this looſeneſſe and libertie-taking, when according to that which we know of God, we ſhould not honour him as God.
                  Rom. 1.21. As I am my ſelfe priuie to it, that it is the caſe of many weake brethren, who yet (it is to be hoped) feare God: and yet for that they will oft take libertie which God alloweth them not, (ſtolne waters being ſweete to them) they purchaſe for an inch of vaine pleaſure, an elle of ſorrow; and when they would after come backe againe to an holy courſe, either they dare not, or know not how to do it, or be aſhamed: as the idle ſcholar is to goe to his booke againe, when (through his negligence) his fellowes are got before him. And  by this which hath bene ſaid, it may eaſily appeare, that the Lord doth require in his word, that ſuch as beleeue vnto ſaluation, ſhall renew their care to glorifie him in their Chriſtian conuerſation, and therefore euery day to be conſtant therein, and ſet themſelues earneſtly thereto: and if they fall by infirmitie, not to lye ſtill, but ſpeedily recouer. He will alſo haue them to know that it is a ſore blemiſh in them, to be looſe and vnſtable in a godly life, ſometime hauing their hearts in awe, and ſometime not, and ſo their tongues and liues after the ſame manner: which ſeruice God abhorreth.Note. And therefore we may be ſure, that much more the diſordered life of many profeſſors, and ciuill perſons whoſe irreligious liues are couered with ſome outward exerciſes  of religion, are nothing leſſe then pleaſing to God, but vtterly abhominable. Now ſeeing all duties cannot be practiſed euery day, and yet euery day muſt be paſſed holily: we muſt of neceſſitie ſee how to be guided daily; ſo that neither we neglect thoſe which muſt be done daily, nor our conſciences be not troubled for omitting thoſe, which we are by no neceſſarie bond of Gods word tyed to performe, Act. 23.1. And of the reaſons why the beleeuer ſhould be directed euery day to liue godly, which are the ſumme of the firſt part of this treatiſe, thus much.
            
            
               
                   CHAP. 8. Of the deſcription of the daily direction.
               
                  I Hauing now prooued,The ſecond part of this fourth treatiſe. that the word of God ſetteth out vnto vs direction for our liues euery day: it followeth to ſhew, what this directiō is. And although it may in ſome ſort be gathered by that which hath bene ſpoken alreadie, yet to the end we may more clearely ſee the will of God, and our duties for the  more eaſie guiding of vs through euery part of our life, I will further lay foorth and deſcribe the ſame. Yet let none think, that I meane to ſet downe to thē particularly what actions they ſhall doe euery day, for they are for the moſt part variable, & innumerable (on the ſixe daies eſpecially) & therfore impoſſible to be inioyned; but only ſuch as bind the conſcience euery day, & cannot without ſin be omitted: & yet ſuch, as are neither too many to be learned to

the troubling of the memorie; nor ſo few, but that they yeeld great furtherāce  to the true Chriſtian for the well paſſing of the day. This daily direction then of a Chriſtian,A deſcription of this daily direction. is a gathering together of certaine rules out of Gods word, by which we may be enabled euery day to liue according to the will of God, with ſound peace: and therefore the following of ſuch direction is a faithfull and conſtant indeuour to pleaſe God in all things euery day, as long as we liue here to the peace of our conſcience, and to the glorifying of him. Let this deſcription be opened more plainely, and then I will ſet downe the parts thereof. And before I go further, I thinke meete to giue the Reader to vnderſtand, that I ſet not downe this, as preſcribing any other direction, then Gods word hath taught: but whereas through common ignorance and  negligence in obſeruing that which God hath taught, the moſt do faile, this may be an helpe to bring them to ſee the light, after which they ought to walke. It is firſt called an indeuour to pleaſe God, to teach vs, that neither full perfection is required by God, nor to be looked for in the beſt Chriſtians, nor to be thought that it is intended of me to feare any weake conſcience with it, or thruſt it vpon him; but onely to ſhew, that the will and deſire of the heart, and the indeuour of the life in the beleeuer, is accepted of him through Chriſt, and as well pleaſing to him, as our actions themſelues ſhould be, when they cannot be performed. 2. Cor. 8.12.
               And if it were not ſo, what comfort could we haue, who ſee daily, that  we are holden backe from many duties, which yet becauſe we know we deſire with all our hearts, and ſtriue to performe them, we haue peace to Godward? And thus are the places to be vnderſtood, which make mentiō of keeping the commaundements, that they are bleſſed which keepe them, as Pſal. 119.2. and .8. Luc. 11.28. Bleſſed are they which heare the word of God and keepe the ſame: as is to be ſeene by conference of other places, as 1. Chron. 28.7. If Salomon thy ſonne ſhall indeuour to keepe my commandements, I will establiſh his kingdome for euer: And in Hoſea, 6.3. then ſhall we indeuour our ſelues to know the Lord. In which places, the keeping of Gods commaundements is interpreted by the holy Ghoſt in the Scriptures, to be an indeuouring to  know and keepe them. And this indeuor is euery day neceſſarily to be found in vs to pleaſe God, euen as euer we did any day, neither can it be neglected of vs at any time but God is offended.
               For it is a neare companion to the feare of God, euen a fruite of it, which muſt be in our hearts continually.Prou. 23.17. Which is to be marked the rather, for that we ſee how commonly it is neglected many dayes of Chriſtians, and how they thinke it meere bondage to be tyed to this care of looking to their waies, without which yet,Mat. 26.41. they lye open to all the craft and malice of the diuel, being taken of him at his will.
                  Epheſ. 6.14. And therefore it is, that when the Apoſtle hath charged the Epheſians to take vnto themſelues the whole armor of God, he addeth, that they must ſtand faſt in it, and giue 
                  Epheſ. 4.27. 
                  no place to the diuell. So that as we  muſt not be preaſſed with practiſe of that which is out of our power, but reſt with peace in this, that we indeuour and go about it: neither can there be leſſe offered to God of vs then this, but we ſhall be iuſtly charged to be ſecure and careleſſe.Act. 24.16. And this meant the holy Apoſtle, when he ſaid: I indeauour alwaies to haue a good conſcience both before God and men.
               
               
                  
                   But we muſt remember, that this indeuour muſt be heartie and conſtant:The third thing in this deſcription is, that our indeuour be heartie and conſtant. heartie, & not conſtrained or hollowe, that our beginning may be good as well as our proceeding; and conſtant, that we faint not, but hold out therein. For many make faire ſhewes, but they are not ſound and true from the heart, and therefore ſoone vaniſh: other meane well in practiſing that which they haue bene taught, but ſeeing they do not ſtrongly renew their couenant from day to day, and that with as good courage and deſire as they beganne firſt, and nouriſh and preſerue integritie; they therefore breake off and waxe faint and wearie, before they haue brought their worke to an end, that is, before  death. Wheras we ſhould know, that foraſmuch as the diuels attempts will euer be great, with new deuiſes and by new occaſions in euery part of our life, to breake off our care: (and yet we can neuer grow cold in it, but it ſhall be to our coſt, ſeeing whenſoeuer it ſhall be ſo, it will be our great ſin) therefore we ſhould go as chearefully about it, as at the firſt we began it, (I meane, to continue our care) that ſo we may proue our ſelues to be conſtant, and not charged (as they in the Pſalme 78.34.) to be vnfaithfull in our couenant.
               
               The third thing in this deſcription is, whereto our indeuour ſhall tend:The third part of the deſcription. Luk. 16.13.
                   euen to this, that we may pleaſe God in all things; for God will not admit anie  into his ſeruice to do it by halfes: neither can we ſerue two contrarie maiſters. This is Saint Paules prayer for the Coloſſians: That they might walke worthie the Lord, euen that they might pleaſe him in all things,
                  Col. 1.10. and in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes: Pray for vs: for we truſt, that we haue a good conſcience,
                  Heb. 13.18. 
                  deſiring to liue honeſtly in all things. Now, who doth not ſee, that this is a worke of great weight, and requireth the taking vp our hearts wholy from other hinderances, that we may attend to this? And therefore this much condemneth the backwardneſſe and rebelliouſneſſe of ſuch, as looke not after this dutie: eſpecially we may ſay ſo, if we adde the other two points in this deſcription mentioned: as, that this muſt be daily, and continue to our end.
               
                   Both which points are included by the Apoſtle in this one word (alwaies) when he ſaith. Act. 24.16. Herein I do exerciſe my ſelfe,
                  The laſt points. 
                  that I may haue a good conſcience both before God and man alwaies: that is, both through all the dayes of my life, and to the end. And hereto agreeth that of Salomon, Prou. 4.26. Ponder the path of thy feete, and let all thy waies be ordered aright. If all our waies muſt be ordered aright, then no day can be excepted, but euery daies actions and waies muſt be ordered aright. So Paule Act. 26.7. when he would note the conſtant and continuall courſe of the fathers in a godly life, ſaith thus: The twelue Tribes inſtantly ſerued God day and night. And this dayly walking with God, is the life which honoreth God, 1. Cor. 10.31. and that  onely which worketh our ioy and peace, 2. Cor. 1.12. as the laſt part of the deſcription of the daily direction declareth.
               By this which hath bene ſaid though it may in ſome ſort be gathered, and that of the moſt of Gods children, how the day ought to be paſſed of them; yet for the ſimpler ſort, whō I do chiefly reſpect and regard through this my whole labour, for their ſakes I ſay, I will adde vnto this direction ſomewhat more particularly a briefe ſumme of ſuch rules, as of neceſſitie muſt guide vs, and which do bind the conſcience to a daily practiſe of them, which I may

call the neceſſarie parts of it, and they (among others) are theſe:
               
            
            
               CHAP. 8. Of the neceſſarie parts of the daily direction, being the ſecond branch of the ſecond part of this Treatiſe.
               
                  FIrſt, that euery day we ſhold be humbled for our ſins, as through due examination of our liues by the lawe of God we ſhall ſee them.
               
               2 Euery day we be raiſed vp in aſſured hope of the forgiueneſſe of them by the promiſes of God in Chriſt.
               3 Euery day we prepare out hearts to ſeeke the Lord ſtill, and keepe them fit and willing thereto.
               4 Euery day we ſtrongly, and reſolutely arme our ſelues againſt all euill and ſinne, fearing moſt of all to offend God.
               5 Euery day wee nouriſh our feare and loue of him, and ioy in him more then in any thing, and endeuour to pleaſe him in all duties as occaſion ſhall be offered, looking for his comming. 2. Theſ. 3.5.
               6 Euery day our thankes be continued for benfites receiued, and ſtill  certainely hoped for.
               7 Euery day we watch and pray for ſtedfaſtneſſe and conſtancie in all theſe.
               8 Euery day we hold and keepe our peace with God, and ſo lye downe with it.
               And this is the direction which euery Chriſtian muſt practiſe euery day in his life, and theſe are the neceſſarie parts of it, which may not be omitted any day at all without ſinne: nor careleſly and wittingly without great ſinne. To the which,Obiect. if it ſhold be ſaid, that they are darke and hard to be vnderſtood, much more to be put in practiſe; yea and although they could, yet do they  not ſufficiently nor throughly guide a Chriſtian: I anſwer, he that vnderſtandeth ſo much in the Scriptures,Anſwer. as that he knoweth thereby himſelfe reconciled to God, and ſo haue ſure hope to be ſaued, and to be one of them, whom God hath choſen out of the world from the reſt which ſhall periſh; he can eaſily vnderſtand the meaning of this direction, and the points and parts thereof, and is fit to be directed by it, (as for any other, it is but to accuſe and conuict him of infinit iniquities in his life,Rom. 7. and of guiltineſſe of eternall damnation thereby) although through the law of his members, which rebell againſt the law of his mind, and through ignorance, and the malice and ſubtiltie of the diuell, he be much diſtracted on the other ſide, and hindred from that  which he ſeeth he ought to do, vntill experience haue made him better acquainted with it.
               But this is the battell, which he muſt feele and haue with his luſts, and which euery true beleeuer muſt be exerciſed with daily: and yet this reſiſtance and rebellion againſt Gods grace,How the beleeuer ſhould be enabled to keep the rules of direction. which he feeleth by this corruption and ſinne daily, is a moſt fit whetſtone to ſharpen him the more to imbrace and follow theſe rules in this direction ſet downe, becauſe he ſhall ſee, that by

                   them he is made ſtrong againſt theſe his rebellions daily by litle and litle, whereas without ſome ſuch direction, he could in no wiſe be able to reſiſt.
               Now whereas it is obiected, that although it ſhould be practiſed,Obiection. yet it is not a ſufficient directing of him, for, and throughout the day; ſeeing euerie rule and point hath not his certaine time ſet downe, in which it ſhould ſerue, and in the which it ſhould be required: to this I ſay,Anſwer. that we muſt not imagine, that there is any ſuch direction, as though thereby we might keepe from ſinne any houre of the day: but this direction teacheth, how by the wiſedome of Gods ſpirit according to the meaſure of our knowledge, we may be led through euery part of the day in peace and ſafety, and do all  the outward actions of the day, as by occaſion we ſhall be called thereto, more purely, and dutifully, and with more eaſe and chearfulneſſe, then otherwiſe might be looked for; eſpecially after we haue by longer experience bene exerciſed therein: for God doth teach his children wiſedome: when, and how to vſe thankes, and when to make requeſts, what ſinne to oppoſe themſelues againſt, as their weakeneſſe ſhall require, what duties to follow, how to watch ouer their heart, and life; and by all, to find and obtaine reſt to their ſoules.
               
               And although through infirmitie, which is in the beſt,Although through infirmitie we come ſhort, yet much eaſe ſhall vve find in ſeruing God, by following direct. they ſhall neuer fully reape the fruite, which the rules do leade vnto, for they faile through  ouer-ſight, raſhneſſe, and by other naturall corruption are much feebled, and therefore muſt needs come ſhort in performing duty, as they ought: yet through the grace that God giueth his, they find and ſtill may obtaine by the helpe hereof, ſuch eaſe in the ſeruing of God through the day, as they thought before impoſſible, and neuer looked to inioy, that they may truly ſay, notwithſtanding the ſinne that cleaueth to them, that they haue oft moſt ſweete communion with God, and hold their ſinne in great ſubiection to their admiration, which was wont full ſore to imbondage them. Neither ſhall this ſeeme ſtrange or doubtfull which I ſay, if it be well conſidered.
               For hath not the Lord promiſed to make his children partakers of the diuine  nature, euen the grace of his holy ſpirit, whereby they ſhall flie the corruption that is in the world through luſt? hath he not ſayd,2 Pet. 1.4. that if they watch and pray, they ſhall not fall into temptation? but be deliuered from euill?
                  Math. 26.41. and that if they reſiſt the diuell, he ſhall flie from them? and by the armour of a Chriſtian they ſhall ſtand faſt againſt all infernall ſubtilty? And hath he not ſayd,Math. 6.13. Iam. 4.7. Epheſ. 6.14. that the weapons of our warfare are mighty, caſting downe ſtrong holds, which ſeemed impoſſible to be caſt downe? hath he not taught vs that he is greater which is in vs, then he that is in the world?
                  2. Cor. 10.4. hath he not promiſed them his ſpirit the comforter, which the world cannot haue,
                  1. Ioh. 4.4. Ioh. 14.17. 1. Cor. 10.13. 
                  that they might not be here as Orphanes and deſolate? and that he will lay no more vpon his, then he will make them able to  beare?
               
               And what ſhould I ſay more? hath he not giuen them ſingular prerogatiues, that they being vpholden by them,The prerogatiues of a Chriſtian. may paſſe by the deceiueable baites of the world, that they may not poyſon them? And by this litle which I ſay, of a great deale which might be ſayd out of the Scriptures to the like purpoſe, doth not God harten and incourage his to truſt in him for that ſtrength and grace which ſhall be ſufficient for them?
                  2. Cor. 12.9. & hath he not taught them

daily to thinke much of theſe things? Now then, when his poore ſeruants  come to know his mind, and will in them, and how he is affected to them: yea which is more, when they ſhall be further inſtructed, that his will is, that they ſhould daily occupie their minds in thinking of theſe and ſuch like things, is it any great maruell if they grow more heauenly minded, and be more conſtantly ſetled in an holy courſe? and ſo become acquainted with the practiſe of duty more vſually and continually then they were wont, when either they know not that any ſuch thing was required of them daily, or how to bring their hearts daily to like of it?
               And when they ſhall be well and throughly perſwaded (whatſoeuer the wandring and inconſtant courſe of the moſt be) that God requireth of them, that euery day they ſhall warily ſhunne euill, waite to honor him in the proper duties and ſeruice, which they owe to him, & count it their chiefe worke to do ſo daily: to pray oft, and to ſpeake to him in thankſgiuing, daily renew their faith, and hope of ſaluation, and other temporall fauours of his; when, I ſay, they ſhall ſee that God commeth thus neare to them, whiles they are abſent from him here on earth, and offereth them this familiaritie as his friends, and not vſing them as ſeruants, is it to be maruelled at, that they accept of it daily? and when they haue taſted once, that this may be their vſuall and ordinarie diet (this ſweete communion with God, I meane, which was wont to be but their feaſting now and then) is it to be thought ſtrange, that they  ſhould reach out their hand to this their welfare?
               No, no: if God once perſwade his, that they may walke in his fauour euerie day, and with more acceptation and better welcome, then when they could haue but a ſmall glimſe of it, once in a weeke, moneth or quarter, they will not ſtarue when they may banquet,Note. they will not eate achornes with ſwine when they may be fed with Angels foode, they will not ioy in the company of wicked men,Ioh. 14.23. Reu. 3.20. when they may haue communion with the God of glory, and with his deare ſeruants departed out of this life by the good memoriall which they haue left behind them: and with thoſe which remaine here ſtill;Pſal. 16 3. being ſuch, as in whom the Prophet had all his delight. Neither  will they want or any day forgo the liberties of the children of God, namely confidence, peace, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt; to ſolace themſelues in earthly things (which bring great bondage) with the ſonnes of men.
               Indeed I deny not, but whiles Gods people are tied ſhort of the cleare knowing their liberties, and are holden in blindneſſe and ignorance of theſe things, as many are, but that they are alſo kept in vnbeleefe, not being perſwaded, that God affoordeth ſuch liberties to them: and then moreouer, the penury of good examples to go before them herein, do much hinder and hold them backe from inioying their part in them. But who doubts if they knew theſe things, & were perſwaded of them, but that they wold be as ioyfull to heare of this heauenly and happie newes, as they were to haue the tidings  of ſaluation at their firſt calling, as being now better able to diſcerne the beauty of heauenly things then when they firſt beleeued?
               Theſe and ſuch like, which God doth admit his deare children vnto, ſhould be taught them oft, and plainely, and wiſely, and fitly applied to them. Miniſters ſhould dwell in them:1. Tim. 4.16. and know by themſelues, who haue in a long

                   time growne but in ſmall inward acquaintance with them, that the people do not in two or three teachings of them, no nor ſo many yeares teaching, reach to the cleare vnderſtanding, much leſſe the vſe and fruite of them: not onely becauſe they require practiſe, but daily and continuall practiſe: and that of them, they were wont to haue their hearts and their heads taken vp and poſſeſſed of worldly cares, and worldly luſts, which with no ſmall, but much labour and loue of the Miniſter in teaching, as well as the peoples liking, reuerence and diligence in hearing and praying, muſt be beate out againe.
               And yet (which is moſt pitifull to thinke) through this, that few are by diligent  and ſincere preaching brought to Chriſt at all by true conuerſion, it cometh to paſſe, that there are very few, for the moſt part, in one congregation who are fit to heare or be taught this doctrine. And thoſe that are, do ſeldom meete with it:Note. and therefore they ſeeing how hard it is to get neceſſarie helpes for this life, and that care to be in greateſt requeſt among men in the world, euen they alſo grow ſicke of the ſame diſeaſe, and while the chiefe thought is how to liue, and their helpe ſmall to liue daily to God, they haue leane ſoules, and now and then, onely are in a well ordered courſe, and that with much ado, ſo farre is it off, that they haue any daily taſt of heauen in this life.
               
                   Which, how common ſoeuer it be to be found almoſt in euery place where God hath any Church, yet we muſt not thinke, that it can be no otherwiſe: as though common Chriſtians were not able to reach and attaine to any daily ſeruing of God ioyfully, if diligence were vſed in beating things into them oft: (for both we may find here and there ſome few, who do happily inioy that care and liberty daily: and alſo many mone and long for it at firſt, when they haue but a dim ſight & ſmall taſt of it) but they are not trained to it, nor furthered in it, to whom otherwiſe it ſhould be moſt welcome. And though men thinke that Chriſtians haue other things to looke after, then the worſhipping and ſeruing of God: yet I ſay, in good aduiſedneſſe,Note. 
                   tha if they could obtaine this, to giue God his due daily with all good conſcience, euen this were the neareſt way for them, to come by all things which they haue need of in this world, as our Sauiour ſaith:Math 6.33. 
                  First ſeeke the kingdome of God and his righteouſneſſe. And therefore I haue written this treatiſe particularly of the daily directing of the people of God, who haue already conſecrated and giuen ouer themſelues vnto his ſeruice, that it may put them in mind, that this their couenant with God is to be renewed daily, and their beſt care to pleaſe him, that euer they had, euen their firſt loue, to be ſtill continued, and that they muſt daily abide in his loue. And in a word,Ioh 15.10. the rules which I haue before ſet downe for the keeping of the heart in good  plight and order, one day as well as another, and ſo conſequently the life; muſt from day to day be aboue all other things looked to and regarded: whereas otherwiſe there are things innumerable, as traines and ſnares layd by the diuell, to deceiue, diſtract, and vnſettle them, and ſo they ſhall find it a hard and weariſome worke to returne againe. And if any ſee ought in this which I ſay, fit to benefite him, let him be carefull to helpe on others.
               
                  But I will returne to that from which by occaſion I digreſſed: that is to  ſay, that we ſhould inure and acquaint our ſelues with theſe rules which are before ſet downe for the well ſeaſoning and ordering of our hearts, that thereby we may be fit to gouerne our liues euery day, and that by the helpe of them both, we may be fenced from great dangers, and walke with God all the dayes of the life of our pilgrimage: and this is that liuing by faith, which the Scripture maketh mention of,Habac. 2.4. when it ſaith: The iust ſhall liue by his faith. And which is ſayd to haue bene the life of our fathers (who yet were much more darkly led and guided then we) as is to be ſeene in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, where it is ſayd of Abell, Noe, Abraham, and many other:Heb. 11.13. 
                  All theſe died in faith, in the which they had liued and continued  vnto their end. And Paule ſpake it of himſelfe, who was an example to all Gods people:Gal. 2.20. 
                  I liue no longer, but Christ in me, and the life that I leade is by faith in the Sonne of God. This forme of direction, that we ought to be guided by euery day, or any other agreeable to the Scriptures, is both by good reaſon, and the teſtimony thereof proued vnto vs to be that which we muſt follow, that ſo we may liue by faith (as I haue ſayd.) For (to ſay a litle for the inſtruction of the ſimple) ſeeing euery day is one part of our whole life, wherein we are by great likelihood in danger to offend and prouoke God, yea euen then when we haue the feweſt ſtops in our way to hinder vs, and moſt helpes to further vs, it ſtandeth with moſt ſound reaſon according  to the word of God, that we be fenced & prepared to paſſe one day as well as another, if we make account well to paſſe and go through our whole courſe. And therefore to ſee how this forme of daily direction, is drawne out of the word of God, let euery part of the whole proue, and teſtifie vnto vs.
            
            
               CHAP. 9. Of the illuſtration or more full declaration of the former part of the direction.
               
               
                  The firſt point of the daily direction.
                  FOR the firſt point, that we muſt be diſpleaſed with our ſelues, and humbled for our ſinnes euery day, as ignorance, deadneſſe of heart, raſhneſſe, vncharitableneſſe and wrath,Humiliation for ſinne. or any other, that ſhall giue vs occaſion: yea, euen the body of ſin it ſelfe, that verſe of the Pſal. 51.3. doth proue: where Dauid ſeeking pardon of his ſinne, acknowledged it to God, ſaying: I know mine iniquity, & my ſinne is euer before me; thē no day to be forgotten. So the Apoſtle ſaith, the ſunne muſt not go downe vpon our wrath,
                  Epheſ. 4.26. meaning thereby, that we muſt ſoone  forget and forgiue, and compound our controuerſies, and breake off our ſtrife; and not lie therein till the euening: therefore daily confeſſe, and be humbled for thē, which cannot be done (we know) to the pleaſing of God, except our harts be broken with relenting and melting for them. And if the ſunne may not go downe vpon our wrath, neither (by the like reaſon) any other

                   ſinne may be ſuffered to lurke or abide any ſuch time in vs, who doth not ſee, that it ſhould be a good part of our care throughout the day, both to caſt out ſuch draffe, (as we haue drunke in) by lamenting our eſtate, euen as it ought to be another part of it, to hold and keepe it out?Iob. 1.5. And if Iob when his ſonnes and daughters did feaſt together for the preſeruing of loue euery day in their courſe; if he (I ſay) did command them to ſanctifie and cleanſe themſelues euery day, and did in like manner, offer burnt offerings for them himſelfe euery morning, becauſe he thought they had ſome way diſpleaſed God, would he (thinke we) on other dayes, when they were like more to offend,  count it a needleſſe matter for himſelfe or them to do the like? which clearly teacheth vs, that we ſhould purge and cleanſe our hearts from all ſuch ſin, as might infect them, euen euery day: we ſhould do this (I ſay) as well as vpon any one, ſeeing there is cauſe and need euery day, and when we go through the day in the beſt maner that it may be paſſed,Pſal. 6.6. new guilt by ſin ariſeth againſt vs: that if Dauid for his great & grieuous ſins, did euery day waſh his bed, & water his couch with teares, for a ſpace (as he teſtifieth:) can we thinke but that he kept ſome proportiō on the other daies (although he had not euer the ſame particular cauſe) in lamenting, bewailing, and acknowledging his ſins? eſpecially ſeeing we reade of him, that three times in a day his vſuall maner  & cuſtome was to praiſe and pray vnto God. And if the wicked are ſaid not to be vp and readie any day, as the Prophet ſpeaketh, vntill they haue wrought ſome miſchiefe, (ſo naturall and ordinarie a matter it is with them:) ſhould any doubt, but that we ſhould hold it for one peece of our chiefe worke, daily to caſt downe our ſelues before the Lord, and to humble our ſelues, in the heartie confeſſing of our ſinnes? And it was one of the principall things that God meant to teach vs, by the morning and euening ſacrifice, & prayer daily in the lawe of ceremonies. But I would all good Chriſtians did as duly and conſcionably perfourme this dutie to God euery day, and bind themſelues reſolutely thereto, as the word of God doth clearely proue that they ought  to do ſo: as for them who may pleaſe themſelues in outward humbling of the bodie, and confeſſion of the mouth; in a word, they muſt know, that the chiefe glorie of it is inward.
               The ſecond point followeth, namely,The ſecond point. that euery day we ought to be raiſed vnto a cheareful and liuely beleeuing, that our ſinnes thus bewailed,Forgiueneſſe of ſinne. confeſſed and repented of, are forgiuen, and freely remitted vnto vs, for and through the onely and ſufficient ſatisfaction of Ieſus Chriſt. And for the proofe of this, it is ſufficient, that theſe two are neuer parted, but go together, as Peter ſaith: Repent, and ye ſhall receiue the forgiueneſſe of your ſinnes: and in Hoſea the people were thus taught to ſeeke and come by it:Act. 2.38. 
                  Returne vnto the  Lord from your iniquities, and then ſay to the Lord, Take away all our iniquitie,
                  Hoſ. 14.2.3. 
                  and receiue vs graciouſly: and he will heare your rebellion, and loue you freely, for his anger is turned away from you. And our Sauiour commanded his Apoſtles to abide in his loue, euen as they had taſted how ſweet it was. Now then,Ioh. 15.9. if euery day we ought to turne from our ſinnes, we ought alſo euery day to embrace the promiſe of mercie. Beſides, in that the Church of God is taught this for an article of her faith, to beleeue her ſinnes to be forgiuen; and the articles are firmely and conſtantly to be holden and beleeued, and all vnbeleefe

is ſinne at any time: therefore as we are to be raiſed vp by faith in Chriſts merites, that our ſins are pardoned now, euen ſo we are at other times, and one day as well as another to be ſo vpholden.
               Againe, as in our common prayer which is called the Lords; which ſerueth for euer to ſquare out our prayers by,Peti. 
                        •
                     . and therefore for euery day, the word (this day) is expreſſed, ſeruing for euery day of our life; that wee may know, that there is no day of our life, wherein this prayer in effect is not to be made; no day wherein we pray not for our daily bread, euen all neceſſaries for this preſent life: ſo is there no day in which we aske not, and ſo in which we ought not to enioy it by faith, I meane, the forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes. And if euery morning Gods mercies be renewed,Lamen. 3.23. of which this is chiefe; then we alſo muſt in the ſame manner imbrace them by faith as our owne, and ſo partake them. So that this bindeth the conſcience alſo as the former, that euery day the true Chriſtian muſt be perſwaded of the pardon of his ſinnes, and that no day he ſhould looſe his part in ſo great a treaſure, though it is to be feared, that many good Chriſtians enioy it not. Neither indeed can this ſecond rule be faithfully obſerued and kept, but it will cauſe all the other to be well looked too and regarded. Bring we therefore our hearts daily to count it our treaſure, that ſo they may delight in it: (for where our treaſure is, there will they be alſo) and then we haue well and wiſely prouided for our ſelues in  that day, and our greateſt toyle is ouer (as they ſay) for the whole day following. And this will be done, if, as it is the greateſt of all other: ſo we reſolue, that none is greater with vs. To ſpeake more largely of theſe pointes here, is not my purpoſe, for that they haue bene handled before in the firſt and third treatiſe: onely thus much, to referre this beleeuing of pardon to euery day. And this is here to be looked for of the reader, that euery one of the points and partes of this daily direction (the which I haue taught in other parts of this booke, how they ſhould be attained and come by) muſt be kept of a Chriſtian euery day.
               The third point is, that when we ſhall be ſtrongly haled after ſinne, (for  we muſt know that euery day giues occaſion thereof) that we ſo account of the libertie of our hearts and minds,The third point Preparation and arming of our hearts againſt euill, & readie to good. to keepe them well diſpoſed and armed againſt all ſinne, and moſt of all, our ſpeciall infirmities, that we let them not looſe at any time in the day, to be hardened with the deceitfulneſſe of any ſinne, but kept with all diligence poſſsible, from the loue and liking thereof, that ſo our outward actions may be well ordered. Therefore is that charge giuen in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes,Heb. 3.12. 
                  that our hearts be not made nought, and rebellious at any time, and therefore by conſequent on any day, whiles we ſuffer them to be hardened with the deceitfulneſſe of ſinne. And agreable to this, the Lord in Deuteronomie, aunſwering Moſes (when he brought him word, that the  people would willingly be ruled by him, although before they refuſed ſo to be) ſaid: This people hath ſaid well all that they haue ſaid: but Deut. 5.29. 
                  oh that there were an heart in them, that they would feare me, and keepe all my commandements alwaies; then it ſhould go well with them.
               
               So that we muſt ſee ſuch neceſſitie of holding maiſterie ouer our hearts, and keeping them in feare of offending, that we may make a daily practiſe of it, and ſo keepe them for continuance: neither can we otherwiſe ſhew our

                   ſelues to regard that waightie charge of the Lord giuen vnto vs:Mat. 22.37. 
                  Thou ſhalt worſhip the Lord with all thy heart and ſoule. For they who are euery while off and on, vnſetled in their harts, can neuer be long well ordered in their liues:Prou. 4.18. therefore the Lord requireth this conſtancie, that we muſt euery while be looking to them, euen alwaies, that ſo we may be out of daunger. Behold how needfull a thing this is, to keepe and hold this maiſterie ouer our hearts daily: when nothing goeth well forward, where they with the affections of them be not well ruled. But this ſhall be ſhewed in the next ſection following. Neither let men obiect their neceſſarie buſineſſe (though they will not pleade for carnall libertie, they ſay) and multitudes thereof, which will diſtract  their hearts. I aunſwer, of multiplicitie of earthly dealings, which will hinder holy peace, let wiſe Chriſtians beware: and ſo doing, if (as farre as they are able) they ſet themſelues to haue care of all parts of Chriſtian obedience, their hearts ſhall in good manner prouide thereby, for the well ordering of their earthly buſineſſe alſo, which is one part of it, and none of the meaneſt.
               Now from this heart well gouerned,The 4. Flee euill, the next two points (as two armes of a tree, from the bodie or ſtocke) do iſſue and come: The firſt,
                     5. Follow good. that we ſhold euer keepe from euill: which ſhall not be hard, if alwaies and euery day we be held in feare of offending, as we are directed before. The ſecond, that we  alwaies indeuour to pleaſe God, and therefore in all things; and as was ſaid in Deuteronomie, to keepe all his commaundements: which all may ſee, cannot be if we haue not our hearts ſo prepared to ſeeke the Lord, that we may be readie in one dutie as well as in another, to ſhew our ſelues obedient.Deut. 5.29. All which three, namely, 1. to haue a heart to feare God, 2. to flie euill, 3. and pleaſe him in all things, in that one Scripture before mentioned are required daily to be found in vs; ſo there is no man but may eaſily ſee reaſon, why it ſhould be thus: firſt, ſeeing the one cannot be without the other: ſecondly, the keeping of ſuch agreableneſſe betwixt our hearts and liues is our beautie and honour. And on the contrarie, it is moſt harſh and offenſiue, when they which  beare a faire ſhew, and are content ſomtimes to be gouerned, ſhal yet at other times be nothing ſo.
               I will ſay ſomewhat the more of theſe two, ſeeing it is one of the chiefeſt cauſes, why I entred into this preſent treatiſe, as may appeare by that which I haue alreadie ſaid: namely, that the Chriſtian ſhould be euery day free from all reprochfull euill: inſomuch as if by any occaſion he be turned out of the way, yet he ſhould ſpeedily returne, and alſo that he ſhould be daily giuen vnto euery good worke, watching his oportunitie thereto, that ſo he may haue a good conſcience in all things, and may bring foorth much fruite, that God may be glorified. Yet I meane not that he ſhould ſpend the whole day in reading,  prayer, hearing of Sermons,A godly life daily, conſiſteth not onely in the exerciſes of religion. or other religious exerciſes (excepting the Sabbath) but in one lawfull thing or other about his calling; or any other in ſtead thereof, which may be as well defended, and as pleaſing to God as the duties of his calling.
               More particularly to appoint or preſcribe is hard,VVe may ſerue God in our ordinarie and meaneſt works. and this is plaine enough for euery true beleeuer to vnderſtand, and apply vnto himſelfe: for I exclude not the commoneſt and meaneſt ſeruices and workes, ſo as they be ſuch as

God alloweth, and without vitious affections gone about of him: as in the  man,The man in his. plough and cart, ſowing and reaping, and all worke thereto belonging, if he be called thereto; or other worke in the man of occupation, as he hath bene trained vp and fitted for: as alſo all prouiſion of things neceſſarie to the maintenance of his familie by lawfull skill and honeſt meanes; and paying, and receiuing of that which is due.
               
                  The vvoman in hers.In the woman, to haue care, that all be frugally and thriftily done within the houſe and without, which is vnder her hand; that ſhe be diligent to ſee her children chriſtianly brought vp according to their age, her houſhold to haue all that is meete in due ſeaſon:Prou 3
                        •
                     . and more particularly among the reſt, ſpinning, ſowing, knitting, being done as to the Lord, and being thoſe works  which he appointeth them, and ſuch like, are commendable, that they may be neither idle nor vnprofitable. And theſe I name in ſome particular manner, leſt any ſhould thinke, that I go about any new-found out holineſſe to tye Chriſtians vnto, as ſome will be ready inough to imagine and thinke, when they ſhall ſee and vnderſtand that they muſt euery day be well occupied, (which few will be tied to) and doing of one good duty or other.
               And yet this I adde, that as theſe and ſuch like muſt be done, and in one or other of them the ſixe dayes muſt be beſtowed, yet (I ſay) this muſt be added,They muſt be done by faith. that all theſe lawfull workes muſt be done of them in faith, that is, they muſt know that God commandeth ſuch workes to be done of them, and therefore they do them readily and willingly, not for neceſſity onely, or for feare of puniſhment,Not for carnall reſpects. or ſhame of the world, or becauſe they would be rich: all which are carnall, ſenſuall and diuelliſh reſpects, as I ſayd before in forbidding all vitious affections in mens lawfull actions; neither do they pleaſe God which thus go to worke.Committing the ſucceſſe to God. And further they muſt do theſe lawfull workes in perſwaſion and confidence that God will bleſſe them therein, and giue them good ſucceſſe, and take that for their daily bread and bleſſing, which God in their thus-going to worke, doth beſtow vpon them.
               And laſtly, they muſt do theſe without adding the common ſinnes, which wicked perſons do vſe at their worke,Auoiding the common ſinnes that prophane ones ioyne vvith them. as ſwearing, lying, negligence, idleneſſe, falſhood and deceiuing, curſing, quarrelling, impatience, and contention. Theſe and ſuch other of their owne deuiſing the wicked do bring in, among the lawfull workes which God commaundeth them to do, and mixeth ſuch euils with the doing of the workes, which of themſelues are good,Men diſgrace and marre their lavvfull callings, by their ſinnes. that they vtterly marre, and deface them thereby, depriue themſelues of Gods bleſſing, and it cauſeth their callings and trades to be meanely accounted of, and in diſcredit with ſuch as are not able to iudge, as though none could vſe them better: whereas others as poore as they, and as much put to their ſhifts, yet taking better direction, and depending on God, and carefully abſtaining from ſuch ſinnes, as are wont in the moſt to accompany  their lawfull workes and dealings, do liue in them contentedly, peaceably, and holily, and do in that manner put honor and beauty vpon their callings, and teſtifie that God hath to ſingular ends and purpoſes appointed and giuen them vnto vs.
               And thus would God haue Chriſtians go to their worke, and do all their

                   lawfull buſineſſe, not as hirelings, onely in regard of their bellies. And this were a goodly and moſt beautifull ſight to behold in all ſorts, maiſters, ſeruants, buyers, ſellers, and euen in the poore labourers; yea, cutters of wood, and drawers of water: and they that are of meaneſt place in families may liue godly in them while religion rules their actions, and while they deſire to do them as they are taught in the word of God.The true Chriſtian only may, and ought to be mery at his vvorke. And they who go to worke after this maner, may be merry at their worke, and merry at their meate: and yet I meane not as the prophane and earth-wormes, who ſometime are merry when they haue more cauſe to be heauy, ſeeing neither they nor their  worke are pleaſing to him; but the other may reioyce and be glad by Gods allowing, yea commanding it them, where he ſaith: Reioyce thou and thine,
                  Deut 12.18. 
                  before the Lord thy God, in all that thou putteſt thine hand vnto. And againe: Serue the Lord thy God (that is,Deut. 28.46. in that thou art appointed by him to do) in ioyfulneſſe and with a good heart for the aboundance of all things. And this is the mirth and ioy of heart, which the Apoſtle willeth vs to take our part in, ſaying: Speake to your ſelues in Pſalmes, and Himnes, and ſpirituall ſongs; ſinging,
                  Epheſ. 5.19. 
                  & making melodie to the Lord in your hearts, with thankes for all things through Ieſus Chriſt. In this ſort hath God allowed his ſeruants, who haue learned and are reſolued to obey him in all things, to reioyce, and go about their worldly  affaires; and in like maner, doth he allow them to vſe all their lawfull liberties in this life: all which, he knoweth they haue need of, to allay the tartneſſe, and aſſwage the painfulneſſe and griefe which through their afflictions are infinite wayes ready in all places to meete with them. And not to do lawfull buſineſſe and workes thus, and with the three former rules ſet downe, but as the vnruly and diſordered people of the world do them, is to make the lawfulleſt and excellenteſt callings baſe and meane, and to the perſons themſelues moſt hurtfull while they ſtand forth againſt them as accuſations, for that they haue vſed them vnlawfully, which in themſelues are very honeſt and lawfull: which I ſay, that I may anſwer the brutiſh and irreligious  ſort, who ſay they know no difference betwixt thoſe who are counted godly, and themſelues; ſeeing they are faine (ſay they) to worke for their liuing, as well as we, their godlineſſe will not feede them. The difference let them learne from that which I haue ſayd.
               I haue alſo ſpoken this by occaſion, for the ſatisfying of the ſimple-harted, that they may not thinke that (in requiring that we ſhould liue euery day in a godly maner) I do vrge any to leaue off, and lay aſide their callings and buſineſſe: and yet this I ſhew to be required by the Lord; how, and in what maner thoſe lawfull workes ought to be done of them, that he therein may be pleaſed. And ſo I conclude, that the beleeuer ought euery day to arme and  frame himſelfe to a godly life, and to caſt off all that ſauoreth not thereof (as in ſome which are moſt vſuall actions I haue ſhewed) ſeeing his whole conuerſation muſt beſeeme the Goſpell; remembring what the wiſe man ſaith:Philip. 1.27. Eccleſ. 9.10. 
                  All that thine hand ſhall find to do, do it with all thy power, for there is no worke in the graue whither thou goeſt.
               
               Which if it were perſwaded throughly to men, that it ought to be ſo, and that it is as neceſſarily to be looked after, as their maintenance, health; yea, or their life it ſelfe (which none wel aduiſed wil deny:) then ſhould there not

be this poſting it off from one to another, which now there is: nor this  refuſing to be ſubiect to God in this maine and great commaundement of doing all to his glorie,
                  1. Cor. 10.31. which they that refuſe, do refuſe godlineſſe it ſelfe: And there ſhould not be this parting of ſtakes betwixt God and our ſelues, that ſometime we will be forward, and ſometime backeward, in ſome things obedient, but in others denying our obedience, which cauſeth ſuch patching and peecing of duties,Heb. 12.14. as is farre from holineſſe, without which yet, we ſhall neuer ſee the Lords face; whereas yet by conſtancy in duty, and keeping of a daily courſe, therein much dulneſſe, deadneſſe, barrenneſſe, ſlouth, idleneſſe, and the fruits thereof, lewd luſts, and many ſuch dangerous euils ſhould be auoided, with which euen many good Chriſtians (to their great heart-ſmart  afterwards) are annoyed, becauſe they know not how to do better.
               
                  The ſixt point:The ſixt point of our daily direction in thankfulneſſe: I meane, a renewing of this duty to the Lord euery day,Thankfulneſſe. that ſo we may ſtill ſee and acknowledge our ſelues indebted vnto him, and be the fitter to go vnder any of his fatherly chaſtiſements, which he ſhall lay vpon vs, which without it, will preſſe vs downe, and raiſe bitterneſſe in our hearts: and alſo that by it, we may the ofter call to mind Gods many kindneſſes, to cheare our harts, which are too ſoone forgotten of vs. The Prophet Ieremie forceth this daily duty to be continued of vs,Lament. 3.23. when he ſaith, that the mercies of God are renewed vpon vs daily: and what followeth vpon that, but this, that our hearts ſhould conceiue, and our mouthes ſhould ſet forth and declare his praiſe accordingly? For if we be commaunded as the Pſalmiſt teacheth, to continue this duty long after his benefits be receiued (as he ſaith,Pſal. 118.7. 
                  Let Iſrael now ſay, that the Lord is gratious, after his bountifulneſſe had bene declared vnto them) how much more ought we to praiſe the Lord daily for his mercies renewed vpon vs?
               Therefore, did Dauid the faithfull ſeruant of God force himſelfe to performe this duty as too ſlouthful in his owne iudgement, though we reade of none more continually occupied in it, Pſalme 103.3. ſaying: Praiſe thou the Lord, ô my ſoule, and all that is within thee, praiſe his holy name: and further he  ſaith, that he will be euer ſetting forth his goodneſſe, and praiſe his name alwayes.
               
               And yet that none may hinder this duty in vs by ſaying, we are not bound to follow, no not good examples in all things, let vs well weigh the commandement of God by the Apoſtle,1. Theſ. 5.18. ſaying: In all things be thankfull: as if he ſhould ſay, that our whole life ought to be a thankſgiuing; and therefore it is no life, when we cannot be thankfull. And what the thankfulneſſe is which ſhould daily be in vs, looke in the former treatiſe.
               
                  The ſeuenth point:The next duty to be daily performed of vs,VVatch and pray. is watchfulneſſe and prayer: of which two, as the firſt ought to be continuall, euen to ouer-ſee our whole worke in and through the day, and to looke before vs that all may be done to  the glory of God (for as the eye-lids preſerue the tender eyes from annoyance, ſo doth this our life from offence, and our feete from falling:) ſo this latter, namely prayer, is to be as an helpe and hand-maid vnto that.
               And although I preſcribe no certaine rule, nor ſet houre to the ſolemne performing of this duty,1. Theſ. 5.17. becauſe we are taught to pray alwayes, at any time as we ſhall haue fit oportunity, yet ought our hearts to be lifted vp to God often, hauing euer occaſion: and ſometime ſolemnely, and by ſet prayer

                   powring out our complaints, and making our requeſts vnto him. Both of them are ſo farre to be in vſe with vs, as we are deſirous to retaine ſound peace and quiet minds toward God, and to be free from, or at leaſt, not to be ouercome of temptations: which ſeeing we are ſubiect vnto euery day, it cannot be doubted of, but as the one ſhould not ceaſe, I meane watchfulneſſe, but be working in vs continually, and keepe vs waking out of ſpirituall ſlumber throughout the day; ſo the other which is prayer, ſhould quicken and ſharpen it, and both of them ſtrengthen vs, being oft and vſuall with vs, againſt all occaſions, which might elſe ouer-match vs.
               And can any be ignorant, when our Sauiour taught vs to pray euery day  for our daily bread, but that we ſhould pray euery day for grace to be guided aright and comforted, there being as great need of it, and more, then of the other? The ſame thing he meant, when he vttered a parable to them to this end, that they ought to pray alwayes, and not to waxe faint: but euer willing, though not euer able. So that the life of a Chriſtian is no day well paſſed, when prayer (as it hath bin before deſcribed) is not one member & part of it.
               The laſt point of our direction is, that we by meanes of all theſe,The eight▪ Peace. as our faith, and feare of diſpleaſing God, &c. may keepe and hold faſt our holy and moſt ſweete peace with God, and our reioycing,
                  2. Co. 1.12. which is the fruite of this Chriſtian walking, and an vnſeparable companion vnto the ſame. I haue  taught this in generall before: onely now I ſhew, that it is daily to be kept and maintained of vs, in ſuch wiſe, that as we regard our bodily maintenance while we liue here, ſo ſhould we prouide that this our peace, which paſſeth vnderſtanding, be not broken off betwixt God and vs. If it be asked how this ſhall be; the Apoſtle ſaith,Rom. 5.1. 
                  If we be iuſtified by faith in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, we haue and do inioy it. And we haue heard, that the Lord hath both giuen liberty, yea and commandement to his children, that they ſhould daily beleeue and lay hold on eternall life, and reſt themſelues in the aſſurance of his loue: and how can this exclude that peace which we ſpeake of?
               Nay, our reioycing in the Lord, which is rather a degree beyond this  peace, we are commaunded to entertaine and retaine alwayes, that is,Phil. 4.4. at all times, that none may imagine that I meane, we ſhould onely ſome one time in the day or other poſſeſſe and inioy it. Neither indeed is any part of our life any day pleaſant vnto vs without it. Therefore the Apoſtle doth very fitly meet with an obiection of ours in the forenamed Scripture, thus: that if any of vs dare not preſume ſo farre as to take our part in cōtinual reioycing in the Lord, or if we ſhold thinke, that the Apoſtle was not well aduiſed in offering ſo great libertie vnto vs, he repeateth his words thus (againe, I ſay, reioyce:) as if he ſhould ſay, you who are carefull ouer your ſelues, and ouer others, (for to ſuch he ſpeaketh) be ye merry and ioyfull in the Lord from time to time,1. Theſ. 5.16. 
                   yea and ſo as no worldly ſorrowes do breake it off.
               Now I haue ſhewed what are the neceſſary graces which ſhould accōpany the life of the beleeuer daily, I wiſh him to view thē all at one ſight together; to ſee if he may well be without any of them: as without certainety of the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes, without feare of offending God, a thankfull heart, and chearfull watching and praying againſt euill, &c. And he cannot walke voide of any of them, ſo yet: he muſt not thinke but that there are

other particular actions beſide theſe, but they be all to be well ordered and  gouerned by theſe. And now ſomewhat I will ſet downe about them, not vnprofitable and needleſſe. I haue briefly proued, that ſome certaine manner of directing a Chriſtian daily, is required in the word of God, and that it is no fancie of mans braine, thus nearly and narowly to looke to himſelfe: and haue ſet downe a draught thereof out of the Scripture, and therefore men muſt know,Aduertiſement to the Reader about the direction. that it is their ſinne, when they are not guided by theſe rules in the daily courſe of their liuing: I ſay, when theſe accompany them not, whatſoeuer their calling is, or the actions which they are occupied about, it is their ſinne, whether it be of ignorance, that they know them not (which is the leſſe, if they be willing to learne:) or careleſneſſe, or wilfulneſſe, that they do not, or will not, regard them; and being ſinne, it is to be reſiſted, ſeeing no ſinne is to be borne withall, or reſted in.
               And that it may be thought more neceſſary to be daily guided in this maner, we muſt know, that theſe graces which I haue ſpoken of, are not at ſome one time or other of the day to be thought or ſpoken of (thinke not this to be my meaning, in ſaying we muſt haue them euery day) for ſo, we might poſſibly be litle the better for them (as if once in a day a man ſhould pray, giue thankes, looke to his waies, to his peace, &c.) a man might do all theſe & the like, and yet not of neceſſitie well guided for all that, through the day: but this I meane,VVhat the beleeuer is to vnderſtand by the direction. that this holy furniture ſhould cloath and beautifie our  ſoules throughout the day, and haue their ſetled abode in vs; and not ebbe and flow as the tide doth, nor go and come as paſſengers that tary not; but home-dwellers: as for example, that our peace ſhould not be broken off by any occaſion,Note. our watching ſhould not ceaſe, we ſhould keepe our ſelues from euill the whole day, and ſo likewiſe be ready to one duty or other, and we ſhould cheriſh our weake faith from time to time,
                     Heb. 10.35. and caſt not away our confidence, Flowers for a Christian to ſmell on. retaining minds thankfull, and walking in the ſtrength of our prayers, though we be not euer vttering and expreſſing in words either prayers or thankes.
               So that our hearts may be well ſeaſoned with theſe, as the chiefe things, which we ſhould regard and looke after, and yet neglecting no needefull worke that muſt be done, but doing it much the better by meanes of theſe; and ſo the froth of our owne braines, as endleſſe and needleſſe wandrings, vaine cogitations, and fooliſh and noiſome deſires, ſhall be much reſtrained and allayed in vs. This is it (all wiſe men do know) that moſt troubleth vs, and of the which,The vnruly heart, the chiefeſt trouble that a man hath. we be euery day in greateſt daunger; I meane, the looſenes and diſorderedneſſe of our hearts: for they, as they be neuer vnoccupied, but prone to euill a thouſand waies; ſo if they be not bridled, holden vnder, and ſuppreſſed, they are ſo ſoone fixed vpon ſome obiect that commeth in the way, that they carie vs headlong after it, we being then impotent for the time  and vnable to reſiſt, when we haue let them looſe, and giuen them ſcope.
               
                  Some fruit of it.And from thence ariſe (I ſpeake of the better ſort of vs) great heauineſſe and vnquietneſſe, to ſee ſuch chaunges wrought in vs: and this is the beſt that commeth thereof, vntill we recouer our ſelues againe, if a worſe thing follow not, that we fall not into ſome further vnſetledneſſe and diſtemperature, which will cauſe no ſmall annoyance. Now what is a like remedie

                   againſt this, and all other baites of this deceitfull world, which the diuell layeth in our way,Daily directiō, the chiefe remedie againſt it. as to haue our hearts daily fenced thus with watch and ward againſt them, as I haue ſaid, to hold ſuch ſinne execrable alwaies, to keepe in loue with pietie and goodneſſe, to retaine hope and confidence that God will make vs ſtrong againſt them, to liue in his fauour ſtill that we may want nothing that is good, and to enioy moſt ſweet and ſound peace to comfort vs ſo to our liking, that we may not neede to haſt greatly or gape after ſuch allurements, which are no better then deadly poyſon? What (I ſay) is like this precious remedie, to keepe vs in ſafetie euery day? Which God hath  therefore giuen vs, that we may be preſerued from infinite fearefull dangers, which are in this world, and that we may alſo liue with much comfort; yea, he that giueth his heart to the Lord, that it may be taught all theſe rules of the daily directing of a Chriſtian, can tell how true this is, and what reward is found and enioyed daily of ſuch as take delight in them.
               But many Chriſtians, who beare a good affection to the Goſpell,Some Chriſtians (ſay what may be ſaid) will go no further in practiſe of religion, then they be already and generally meane well, yet will not particularly trouble themſelues (as they count it) to be brought in their whole courſe within a narrower compaſſe, and to a more neare acquaintance with the Lord, yea when they heare that it is to become by, but would faine beare themſelues in hand, that they are  well inough; when yet they are oft conſtrained to feare, yea and to feele the contrarie: for what do they find but much wearineſſe and griefe, checkes and accuſations, yea and are ſometime alſo noted of others, to be but cold and barraine profeſſors, when they haue followed ſo much and ſo farre the deuiſes and deſires of their owne hearts? And beſides this, how much detract they from the beautie and excellencie of the godly life, and what iniurie offer they vnto it, when they are able no further to commend it then as they find, (for as they find, ſo they will ſpeake of it) whereas it cannot ſufficiently be eſteemed and accounted of: neither can the ſeruants of God, who haue experience of the benefite of it, ſatisfie themſelues in ſetting out the excellencie thereof.
               
                   I deny not, but there are many, who for want of knowledge, do not ſee that which ſundrie others of their brethren do, and yet are faithfull in that which they know: but they reſt not ſatisfied with their preſent eſtate, but long much to ſee the will of God more clearely, and deſire feruently to attaine to greater meaſure of grace. And to all ſuch I know, how welcome it will be to haue more cleare direction, then as yet they haue found: and ſuch I would haue know, that for their cauſes I was perſwaded to vtter that, which God hath reuealed to me ſo farre as concerneth them. But as for ſuch as like ſo of their preſent eſtate, that they haſt not to be acquainted with any better, (ſeeing  there is euer in Gods children a deſire to grow, and a longing to be better) whatſoeuer they thinke of it, and how highly ſoeuer they account of themſelues in it, they ſhall go forward euery one his way, till they be as blind as the moule, as deafe as the adder, as dumbe as he that openeth not his mouth,
                     Reu. 3.17. The wicked ſhall waxe vvorſe. and as vnprofitable as the ſalt that hath loſt the ſauour, and is good for nothing but to be troden vnder foote, and caſt vpon the dunghill.
               
               Neither let the people of God count this any burthen to be thus directed:Incouragement to the teachable but it is their fleſh and corrupt wiſedome which burdeneth them, whereto

                  they are not debters. And what do I perſwade vnto, but the vſe of, and continuance  in that holy condition, which euery true beleeuer hath taſted of, and had his part in, but that many ſuch through ignorance and vnacquaintedneſſe with it, haue not attained vnto ſtedfaſt continuance in it? But to return a litle to the other:A bewailing of them vvho reſt in their ſtate, not ſeeking to be bettered. ô people to be lamented and euer pitied, that they being borne to great honour euen here in this life, ſhould forgo it ſo contentedly, and ſuffer others to enioy it: whom I require to heare me, ſaying vnto them, that if they were wiſe and well aduiſed, though they might liue as their heart deſireth here, and ſhould neuer be called to their account for the ſame, yet they would flie from a licencious life, being but a ſweet poiſon, and would  chuſe to ſpend one day godly, (euen for the fruite and pleaſantneſſe of it) rather then a thouſand dayes otherwiſe: which many heathens in their kind, and according to the light and knowledge they had, as Cato, Scipio, and others did, that is, in morall vertue and honeſtie, to the perpetuall ſhame and iuſt reproch of many which go for Chriſtians.
               And this is that which I go about, that in this ſhifting and godleſſe world, ſome who are very willing alreadie to be guided well, but are vnable to direct themſelues, may haue ſome helpe by this which I haue written: who if they ſhould be hindred thus, namely, that they thinke, for all that can be ſaid, yet there will be wandrings out of the way, earthlineſſe of mind, frowardneſſe, and much rebellion, and therefore to ſmall purpoſe it might ſeeme to be, to take great paines for little profite: I ſay (by the grace of God) their profite ſhall be great, and their paines ſmall, for the benefite which they ſhall reape by it, yea in time it will become pleaſure to them, after they ſhall accuſtome themſelues daily to ſeeke the Lord in ſuch manner, as I haue here taught, and as his word preſcribeth, and they ſhal ſee their ſtrongeſt rebellions much weakened, and euill deſires much abated and aſſwaged in them, and they themſelues prepared and made fit by this well ſeaſoning of their hearts to make the actions of their liues correſpondent.
               And to vphold our ſelues in holineſſe thus as it is required of vs, no leſſe  helpe is needfull,1. Theſ. 4.3. then the daily keeping of our hearts in this eſtate, which I haue ſet downe. For although while the heart is thus looked vnto, (as it wold be of vs, if we counted it the neceſſarieſt worke that we haue to do throughout the day) while the heart (I ſay) is thus looked vnto, euery thing doth well follow our hands, and much good is done in our liues: ſo yet, except we make great prouiſion, that this worke may be daily and conſtant, we cannot chuſe, no not the beſt of vs, but we ſhall commit many things in our liues vnbeſeeming our profeſſion, and ſmally to our owne comfort. And howſoeuer the rebellious world cannot away with it, yet (as I ſaid before) all the godly, if they knew it, and ſo farre as they do know it, do aime at it, &  would thinke themſelues happie, if they could be partakers of this libertie: I meane, when they can and do aduiſedly, and with good conſideration keep ſtedfaſt daily in this holy and ſweet courſe, and are not peruerted and turned out of it, as ſometime they haue bene.
               I confeſſe, all are not in a like meaſure enlarged, either by knowledge to ſee the excellencie of it, (as I haue ſaid) or in heart to deſire it, ſeeing they are not acquainted with it: but yet when they do ſee, how God of his abundant

                   kindneſſe, hath ſhewed them a way to make their liues more pleaſant, and his ſeruice more eaſie, then they haue thought or could find; they will wiſh a part in this wiſedome, thus to guide themſelues, before all other pleaſures, though the fleſh ſhould neuer ſo much rebell againſt it. And it muſt be granted, that the heart will ſtriue ſore againſt the continuance in this courſe,The fl
                        •
                     ſh will ſpurne againſt daily direction. and rebell and be diſcontented with this, that all vnlawfull libertie ſhould euer be denied vnto it. But as they ſhall ſee more clearely into this bleſſed eſtate, and haue daily more experience, both that God doth giue them power to mortifie and ouercome themſelues, and make this holy courſe ſweet vnto them,  the more their harts ſhall be ſet vpon it, to deſire and long after it, and to haue it in an high account, which is the greateſt matter, and the hardeſt peece of worke to be obtained, eſpecially with continuance and ſtedfaſtneſſe therein.
               For if it were mens pleaſure and delight throughout the day to be well occupied one way or other, and in all that they ſhould go about, to haue their hearts readie to guide them aright therein, all other gaine-ſaying deſires of the fleſh ſhould ſoone be withſtood and reſiſted, and the occaſions, by which they were wont moſt of all to be hindered and withdrawne, ſhould be ſhunned and auoyded. And this may much ſet them forward in this courſe, that if they ſeeke to retaine conſtantly any one of theſe eight rules,Follow one of theſe rules throughly, and all the other vvill be familiar. 
                   which are ſet downe to guide them daily, they may know, that it will be no hard matter to enioy all the reſt with it, ſeeing they hang together as linckes of a golden chaine. For they cannot arme themſelues with a mind free from the loue of ſinne preſent, but they muſt be repentant for their ſinne paſt, and embrace forgiueneſſe by faith, and find reſt to their ſoules, and filled with thankes: and ſo I ſay of the reſt, if they know this point of Gods will, that he requireth it, that one of them ſhould daily go with the other, as indeed the one cannot be without the other.
               And if any ſay, belike I go about to make men perfecter and holier,Obiection. then the Lord euer did, and to perſwade, that they may ſerue God without ſtrife  and battell with their owne luſtes and the diuell: I aske them againe, if this courſe of daily keeping our hearts in frame, and ſpirituall gouernement can be without moſt diligent obſeruing of our wayes, and ſtrong ſetting of our ſelues againſt all aduerſary power? And further, I anſwer,Anſwer. that I go about no other thing then this, that Gods ſeruants may be beſt fenced againſt the common corruptions which are in the world through lust, and may honour God in the beſt maner, and themſelues liue with the moſt comfort, and that they may know and be perſwaded, that he of his mercy hath prouided this ſweete path-way to heauen, for his poore ſeruants, who are deſpiſed in the world. And they who haue not as yet experience of this ſeaſoning of their  hearts with grace daily, I wiſh them to deſire it aboue all other things, and in no wiſe to hold themſelues contented without it, if they deſire to do well and to ſee good dayes. And let me obtaine this at the hands of all well meaning Chriſtians, that they beleeue it.
               But now I hauing ſpoken of the foundation, that ſhould be layd in the heart of all Gods people, vpon which the building of a godly life euery day is to be ſet, and without the which (indeuored after of euery one) it can in no wiſe ſtand; and that is, an heart indued with the ſeuerall gifts of the ſpirit,

which I haue ſet downe; I haue thought it very meete and neceſſarie to adde  one thing to this which I haue ſaid: and it is that, which the diligent reader will require and looke for, eſpecially if he be not well experienced in the practiſe of chriſtianitie.Obiection. And this it is: why men are not directed how to leade their liues daily, and to gouerne their tongues, as well as to rule and beautifie their hearts, and why they haue not direction how to do all their outward actions daily: (for of theſe, they ſay, no rule hath bene ſet down in this whole treatiſe) but onely of the well ordering of the heart; whereas that toucheth but ſome part of mens duties in the ſight of God: but all other things are left (as it ſeemeth) to our owne diſcretion, which are to be done in the eyes of  men.
               To the which I anſwere, that the heart of true Chriſtians being kept thus purged from euill,Anſwer. and ſeaſoned graciouſly, (as we haue heard) good life and behauiour will come from thence,
                  Pro. 4.23. as Salomon ſaith: and according to the diuers occaſions, which ſhall fall out to euery one daily, his knowledge ſhall and will guide him either in his calling, or in the ſupply of it, by other neceſſarie duties: but more particularly, they muſt not looke that there can be any certaine direction giuen of the outward parts of our liues, which of them ſhold be done euery day:No rule is nor can be giuen, what outward vvorkes are to be done daily, ſeeing they are variable and infinite. becauſe the actions of our liues are variable for the moſt part and innumerable, as all do know; and therefore cannot all be done vpon  any one day: and men are conſtrained by ſundrie occaſions to do ſome duties one day, & ſome on another: and oft it falleth out, that ſuch as they muſt of neceſſitie do on ſome one day, or elſe they ſhall ſinne; (as following their callings painefully and diligently) they cannot do on ſome other, but they ſhall ſinne; as to viſite their parents on their death bed, or make peace betwixt men, when it is required at their hands.
               But further, and to the more full ſatisfying of ſuch as would deſire it, this I ſay; that although there can be no certaine and perpetuall rules giuen more particularly, which are as neceſſarie one day as any, (except we would lay burthens on Gods people which he himſelfe hath not done) and thoſe concerne  the heart inwardly, not the outward conuerſation: yet there are certaine duties of the life perfourmed in the ſight of men more commonly and vſually, then ſome other; and they are ſuch as do concerne all true people of God, and for the moſt part, fall out euery day at leaſt one or other of them, if not al. Theſe therefore which ſhall be of ſo great vſe among Gods ſeruants, I thinke not amiſſe to ſet downe, and ſo to ſatisfie their demaund ſo farre as Gods word giueth leaue: not of neceſſitie to tye any to the practiſing of them euery day, (which I would haue well to be marked) but as euery one ſeeth that he is bound: yet ſome one or other of them muſt be done euery day, as we ſhall ſee afterwards. And for the other which do not bind the conſcience  euery day, (which I do ſet downe now immediatly following) and yet are profitable, and helpfull to liue well and happily: let a Chriſtian vſe them, and ſo many, and as oft as he may, and as he hath occaſion offered him, and as he gaineth thereby in godlineſſe, and winneth peace to his heart, and knoweth not how to do better, ſeeing it is an hard thing for the moſt Chriſtians to ſee particularly, how to paſſe the day in the particular parts of it from one houre to another, (eſpecially when they muſt intermit the workes of their calling)

                   but it ſhall be in an idle & very vnprofitable maner, without ſome ſuch helpe and furtherance. A briefe ſumme therefore of theſe I will ſet downe, with ſome ſhort explication, and vtter my mind more fully of them afterwards. And they are neuer done aright nor in their kind, except they proceed from the heart well ordered, as I haue ſaid before. And they are in number nine: the firſt whereof is this:
            
            
               CHAP. 10. Of outward duties of life, moſt commonly to be done daily,  but not of neceſsitie.
               
                  THE firſt, that we awake with God.The firſt outward dutie: To awake with God.
               
               That is to ſay, that as ſoone as we haue broken off our ſleepe euery morning, we bend and reſolue with our ſelues to giue vnto the Lord the firſt fruites of the day:The ſame more fully. and that either directly, by thankeſgiuing, confeſſion of our ſinnes, and requeſt making for our ſelues and Gods people, we lift vp our hearts to God in a briefe manner: or indirectly, that is, though we tye not our ſelues to this manner and forme,  yet that we make it our firſt worke after our awaking, to common with, and looke vp to God, drawing our hearts to the loue of and reioycing in him; that he being firſt in account with vs, may be alſo throughout the day chiefe with vs, and preſent to guide, bleſſe and comfort vs: and that we do this, till in a more ſolemne maner we ſee our ſelues apart from other things to prayer.
               The ſecond, that we prouide (if it may be) ſolemnely and vpon our knees,The ſecond outward dutie. Morning prayer. Hoſ. 14.2.
                   to make profeſſion of our repentance by confeſſion of our ſinnes, requeſts made to God, with thankſgiuing, taking to vs words, as Hoſea ſpeaketh, that is, with our mouths vttering them, preparing our ſelues by meditation hereunto.
               
                   That is, before we enter into the affaires and dealings in the world,The ſame more fully. (if it be poſſible) we make this our firſt worke of the day: and in our confeſſion, let our ſpeciall ſinnes be mentioned, by which we haue moſt diſpleaſed God:Hoſ. 14.4. Pſal. 111. & 116.1. in our thankes, let ſome particular fauours of God be remembred: in our requeſts, let vs craue pardon of our ſinnes with faith to obtaine it, and all other neceſſaries; & namely, that we may well go through the day, and haue Gods bleſſing in all that we ſhall ſet our hand vnto in the day. To proceed the better in all theſe, let vs meditate either on ſome of Gods mercies, or our owne ſinnes, or on ſome other things profitable; that by meditation and prayer before we enter into our affaires, we may be the better prepared to paſſe the  whole day after in much better ſort, then otherwiſe we might be like to do.
               That (if it ſhall then be moſt expedient) we with our minds ſtill kept well ordered, betake our ſelues to our calling and vocation.The third: Our calling.
               
               That is,The ſame. that we willingly and diligently ſet our ſelues to performe dutie in that worke or ſeruice, for the which we are fitted, and to the which we are called: and therein abide as we are able, except any waightier matter drawe vs from it: aſſuring our ſelues, that we pleaſe God no leſſe therein, then in

obeying his other commaundements. And that we be therefore chearefull  therein, (it being the buſineſſe that God hath ſet vs about) and confident, that we ſhall find good ſucceſſe, ſeeing we haue a promiſe of bleſſing from him; and ſo doing, that we take heede, that we mind not our profite in ſuch wiſe, that we coole any grace thereby, or quench holy affections in vs: but that we be fit to go from it to ſuch other duties, as ſhall be meete, that ſo we may do our earthly buſineſſe with heauenly minds, which is an high point of godlineſſe, and make them and holy exerciſes, helpes one to the other.
               
                  The fourth: The right vſe of companie.That in all companies we behaue our ſelues, as we are taught of God, and as it becommeth vs: eſpecially ſo, as we leaue no ill ſauour behind vs.
               
                  The ſame.That is, ſeeing ſome part of the day is vſually beſtowed in companie: therfore  in what cōpanie ſoeuer we ſhall be, either of our owne familie, or ſtrangers, ſuperiours or inferiours, and how oft ſoeuer, that we haue ſpeciall regard to be harmeleſſe, and free from giuing any ill example, carefully marking and ſhunning the occaſions thereof, and prouocations thereto. And that we be readie by all oportunities, to take any good that we may, either by example or communication from others: or do good our ſelues by offering both. And that in any of our dealings with men, about or in the things of this life, we neither hurt or do wrong to any, but rather ſuffer it, knowing how we are giuen to loue our ſelues, and in matters of profit eſpecially, with the neglect of others: which among Chriſtians is a ſore blemiſh.
               
               
                  The fift: Solitarineſſe.That we do not ill ſpend the time in our ſolitarines, or when we be alone.
               
                  The ſame.I meane, that at ſuch times, as wherein we ſhall be free from companie, we haue the like care of our hearts and behauiour being alone, that we were taught to haue of them both, and of our talke in companie. For example: that in our behauiour we attempt or go about no euill, as ſtealing, whoring, or committing any vnlawfull thing, &c. and concerning our hearts, that we ſuffer them not to wander after needleſſe and vaine things, but hold them within this compaſſe, that either our thoughts be of thoſe things which are lawfull, as the well ordering of our buſines, and yet that alſo with moderatiō: or of things holy and ſpirituall, as the glorie of the life to come, Gods loue  to vs, and care ouer vs in this world, and ſuch like; conſidering and remembring, that we muſt redeeme the time to the beſt vſes we can, and in conſcience moſt approue of; or if our thoughts be at any time of things euill, that it be onely to bring vs into further hatred and deteſtation of them, and not to ingender and raiſe vp a liking thereof in our hearts, which Sathan euer intendeth, though we had no ſuch meaning, nay rather purpoſed againſt it, when we firſt entred into thought of them.
               
                  The ſixt: Proſperitie.That we vſe our proſperitie and all the lawfull liberties of this life, ſoberly, and ſo as we ſeeke to be the better by them.
               
                  The ſame.Foraſmuch as our merciful father beſtoweth vpon vs many great bleſſings  euen here where we be ſtraungers, both in token that he can affoord vs them; and to ſhew, that pietie and the feare of God are not without reward, no not in this life. 1. Tim. 4.8. Therefore it behooueth vs to be circumſpect and warie, that we ſwell not, neither be inſolent, becauſe of our proſpering; neither idle and looſe in our liues, and ſo abuſe the ſame to carnall libertie: but to be more rich and fruitfull in all good duties both to God and men; becauſe we know,

                  
                  that he which hath receiued much, of him ſhall much be required, Amos 3.2.Amos. 3.2. And that herein is our heauenly father glorified,
                  Iohn. 15.9. 
                  that we bring foorth much fruite, Iohn 15.9. And ſo we haue the right vſe of Gods benefits, which is a greater treaſure then the benefits themſelues, 1. Kings, 3.1. King. 3. as we may ſee by the fearefull ends of ſuch, as had many great bleſſings, but regarded not how to vſe themPſal. 37.36. Luk. 12.18.20..
               That we be ready to receiue our afflictions meekly and patiently,The ſeuenth: Affl
                        •
                     ctions. and ſo be found indeed where we are tried with them, that our patient minds may be knowne to all.
               
               
                   Our liues are ſubiect to many calamities, and euery day to ſundry: yet,The ſame. 
                  doth not the Lord chaſtiſe vs, for that he taketh any pleaſure in our ſufferings, but of very loue ſendeth them for our benefit, namely,Lam. 3.33. to weane vs from the exceſſiue loue of the world, and to purge out our droſſe thereby,1. Cor. 11.31. 
                  that we might not periſh with the world, but haue proofe of our faith and patience:Iam. 1.2. which cauſeth the greateſt ioy of all other. Therefore we muſt not fret and be impatient in them, but confeſſe, that they are neceſſary and meete, as oft as God ſendeth them, and therefore waite to ſee a good end of them;1. Pet. 1.6. that ſo we may haue experience of great good by them,Rom. 5.5. which may make vs hope for the like after, and that without fainting.
               
                   That we conſtantly keepe and vſe the exerciſe of prayer and thankſgiuing in our families,The eighth: Family exerciſes. and ſuch other helpes to maintaine the knowledge and true worſhip of God, and of true happineſſe amongſt vs.
               For ſeeing we are forgetfull of our duties,The ſame. and eaſily drawne away by the world, we haue need to haue daily and oft acceſſe to God, and our ſeruants eſpecially, who haue litle other priuate helpe. Theſe exerciſes of Religion are, prayer, reading, chatechiſing and conference, with ſinging of Pſalmes, &c. and that theſe or ſuch of them as are common to the whole family, be vſed at the moſt conuenient times when the family may come together: and that we indeuor to do the ſame together twiſe in the day at leaſt, prouiding  to performe the duty of it with chearfulneſſe and reuerence, knowing that we haue therein communion with our God, and moſt ſweet refreſhing of our ſoules thereby: alwayes remembring, that this ſhall not be ſo aukely gone about, nor ſo hard as many find it, if other duties before mentioned, be carefully looked to.
               That before we lye downe at night,The ninth: A viewing of the day at our lying downe. we looke backe to the workes of the day, how we haue paſſed it, that where we haue had bleſſings, we may be thankfull, and proceede in the like courſe after: where we haue faulted and failed, we may reconcile our ſelues to God, and ſo lye downe in peace.
               
                   For ſeeing we haue ſome ſpeciall infirmities to make mention of,The ſame. and ſome particular benefits to giue thankes for, and to powre out our complaints in ſpeciall maner, it is meete (as we ſhall be able) that we ſhould thus view, and go through the ſeuerall acts of our life in the day, calling them to remembrance as we can: that where we ſhall ſee that we haue receiued helpe and ſtrength to liue well, and to keepe peace with God by the rules and duties preſcribed, otherwiſe then we were wont before we did ſo particularly obſerue our wayes, we may with praiſe to God, reioyce and take comfort in

our gaine, and more conſtantly hold out in the ſame courſe; and where we  haue failed, we may be willing to ſee and acknowledge our faults, laying hold of pardon, and looke better to our ſelues after: and ſo making agreement with the Lord, as being reconciled to him, and leauing no accuſations nor checkes to our conſciences, we may lye downe in peace, and fall aſleepe in that ſtate (euen as we awoke with it in the morning) ready to make our bed our graue,Heb. 11.13. and ſo ſhew our ſelues to be pilgrimes and ſtrangers as our fathers were.
               
               And theſe are the duties of our liues, falling out ordinarily, and moſt commonly to be done euery day, at leaſt ſome of them, and none more vſually then theſe, which I haue added: that thus, while theſe are well looked to, the daily direction, which doth (as we heard before) concerne the heart, may not want matter to occupy and ſet on worke the life, ſo as it may neither be idle nor vnprofitable: and alſo to the end that euery Chriſtian may learne and ſee more clearly, what maner of thing a godly life is: for many are ignorant of it, and many who gladly would, for want of cleare vnderſtanding of Gods will herein, cannot tell how to go about it. Numbers thinke it to be a doing of ſome one or few duties, whatſoeuer the courſe of their liues be beſides: neither yet to be tied euery day vnto that. Some thinke it is but to go to Church on the Sabaoth: and one thinketh one thing, and another another.Againe the daily direction is deſcribed. To whom and to all other I ſay, that it is no leſſe then a daily, and carefull  looking to our hearts and liues, as I haue ſet downe, (though it tye no man vpon neceſſitie to any certaine outward worke or duty daily, as I haue ſayd) and a returning againe to this holy courſe, if by any occaſion we haue departed from it, yea though it haue bene but for a ſhort ſeaſon.
               And becauſe we are not, neither can be, alwayes ſetled to abide at home in our owne houſes, where it were eaſier to keepe ſome euen and equall courſe in our liues, as we are directed by Gods word, yea and ſomtime we be forced to be taken vp both in the trauell of the mind and body, more ſpecially about ſome weighty matters, in which caſe we ſhal be ready much more  eaſily to forget our ſelues, and ſo become vnſetled; therefore let this watchword be remembred and regarded: that if any ſuch thing fall out, as by haſty and long iourneys, attendance vpon ſuites or great perſons, change of dwelling place, or change of our eſtate from ſingleneſſe to mariage, from pouerty to wealth,Note. or the contrary (as vnuſuall matters do more eaſily vnſettle) that in theſe, I ſay, and ſuch like, when any ſhall fall out, we be more carefull at ſuch times to be fenſed againſt all ſuch occaſions, then when we be voide of them: and that we do this, as we loue our peace and communion with God.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 11. Of the benefite and commendation of the Direction.
               
                  NOw I will proceed to the third point, namely,The third part of this fourth treatiſe. of the neceſſity, profit and comfort of the daily direction: and then more largely ſpeake of theſe nine duties, ſeeing a Chriſtian ſhall find ſo great vſe of them, that he may  be in ſome ſort helped thereby daily. Of this third part I ſhall not neede to ſay much, if that be well marked and conſidered, which I haue ſet downe of the two former. For if it be graunted, that God directeth vs daily how to go through the whole courſe of our liues,Note. and that he teacheth vs what manner of guiding vs this daily direction is (both which haue bene proued vnto vs:) who can doubt,The daily directing of our ſelues, a great gaine to vs. but that it muſt needs be a thing of great account and reckoning, and of ſingular vſe, and gainefull? eſpecially to all ſuch as being of an vpright heart, are yet not ſo exerciſed in the Scriptures, nor ſo experienced (by meanes of the darkneſſe and blindneſſe that yet is in  them, and of ſundry other lets and diſcouragements) that they are able by their owne priuate helpe to draw out of all their readings, hearings and knowledge which they haue gotten, any indifferent forme or direction to gouerne themſelues.
               Beſides, many ſuch inioy not the miniſtery of the Goſpell ordinarily, but as they get it by their painefull trauell abroad; and many (the more is the pity) do not tye themſelues conſcionably to preach the moſt neceſſary doctrine to their people, yea (I may ſay with griefe) are altogether vnfit to do it: and the diligenteſt Preachers and beſt able (for the moſt part) tarie not long to ſeaſon the hearers throughly with ſuch matter; but by death,Many things to hinder from daily direction. or other  occaſions, are quickly remoued, or ſo mightily diſcouraged by their people and the diuerſe kinds of crabbed, teachy, ſcornefull, hollow, proud, prophane, and the like ill qualities of them, or ſome other wayes, that rarely it may be found, (what an admirable and lamentable thing do I vtter in this golden time of 44. yeares peace, ſcarſely to be hoped for halfe ſo long againe!) yea rarely (I ſay) it may be found, that in all this time there are growne many able to guide themſelues with ſweete peace, through their troubleſome liues. And we who know, that men without direction by Gods word, wander and walke in vncomfortable darkneſſe, what can we better do for the eaſing and helping of them to their hearts deſire, and ſatisfying of their neceſſities, then 
                  ſhew them the eaſieſt and plaineſt way to eſcape and come out of it,1. Cor. 11.17. as God hath ſhewed vs?
               And therefore for mine owne part, I haue endeuoured in this worke to do the ſame: and although neither fully nor perfitly to ſet downe in a litle roome that will of God which is diſperſed throughout the canonicall Scriptures; yet, ſo farre as God hath reuealed vnto me, that, which I count the beſt treaſure and commodity, that God hath beſtowed vpon me in this tranſitory

life; and that which how ſmall ſoeuer it may ſeeme in the eyes of any, yet of  whomſoeuer it be imbraced and eſteemed, ſhall be no leſſe then I haue ſayd, that is, neceſſarie, gainefull and comfortable.
               The reaſon is great: for that, whiles we walked before without ſome certaine direction, we were neuer long ſetled, eſpecially with religious minds, how to beſtow the day nor the parts of it, in the actions of our liues, neither how to begin, nor how to end it; and therefore were much wearied and diſtracted with forgetfulneſſe and raſhneſſe (I ſpeake of good people) vnſetled oft, and yet knew not how, neither how to returne againe. But ſince we haue bene guided more clearly and particularly,VVhat benefit it bringeth. we haue ſeene much better how one thing commeth to be done after another, and one duty not neglected for  another, and ſo haue bene deliuered from much toile and tediouſneſſe: by it we learne how to riſe out of fals, and to keepe well whiles we are well. It is profitable for all ſorts, in what lawfull trade of life ſoeuer they liue, hauing already begun to change their liues, and thereby being fit and meete to practiſe it. And ſuch are all that by faith in the Sonne of God are ſet free from their ſinne, and aſſured of his fauour.
               No other can well ſet themſelues about it, but ſhake it off, as they do al other good things:VVho are fit to vſe it. which I thought meete to put the reader in mind of, that although he ſhall not ſee this doctrine commonly practiſed in the world, yet he may not thinke it for all that, any nouelty which Gods word doth not  warrant, or therefore needleſſe for himſelfe to go about. For ſome (no doubt) will be ready to count it ouer-ſtrict and more then needeth, to be tied to any ſuch thing, and to perſwade themſelues, that they may with ſome few duties doing, pleaſe God as well as they, who ſpend their whole life in ſearching out infinite points of Gods will to practiſe the ſame: and they count that an eaſie way to heauen in compariſon of the other, which they thinke long and tedious.
               But let ſuch vnderſtand that they are not fit to make their vſe of it. They muſt be other maner of perſons whom I ſpeake to, or go about to perſwade: for they who will weigh things aduiſedly, ſhall conſent (I doubt not) to that  which I ſay; and ſhall ſee further the daunger of theſe men, who content themſelues to ſtand at a ſtay, rather then to be led ſtill forward in a fruitfull and holy courſe: and ſo being much idle and vnprofitable, imagine and conclude by and by, that it can be no otherwiſe with men, whiles they here on earth be abſent from God; and ſo likewiſe that the chriſtian life is not ſuch, or ſo pleaſant as the Scripture euery where affirmeth it to be; which is nothing elſe then to charge it with falſhood and lies: but many of Gods deare ſeruants do know it, and find by experience, that this Chriſtian life hath no match, abounding in delights; yea, and thoſe moſt ſound, permanent and vnſpeakeable.
               
               To returne therefore to them whom God in mercy hath called to aſſurance of their ſaluation, for they by ſuch direction as I ſpeake of, ſhall ſee the Chriſtian life more eaſie by many degrees, then euer they found it whiles they walked after no certaine direction before:Particular vſe and benefit of it. ſuch (I ſay) both poore and rich, Miniſter and people, one and another, may learne, and that euery day through their life, how to keepe company, how to be ſolitarie, how to be occupied

                   in their labours, how to ceaſe from them, how to riſe and how to lye downe, and how to beſtow the other times of the day; not diſcouraged at night though they did not all duties, (which in one day cannot be) but quiet and chearfull, ſeeing they did thoſe which by good direction they ſaw moſt neceſſary. For they ſhall be taught by it to keepe a certaine proportion and agreement in their actions, that as one ſauoreth of Religion, and a godly mind, ſo may the other alſo: and as they ſpeake and heare the word well, ſo they may haue their thoughts good alſo, & their harts purged from whence both theſe do come: and as in their prayers to be holily affected, ſo in their husbandry, houſwifery, feaſting, iourneying, buying, eating and other dealing:  that ſo euery part of the day in the diuerſe actions of it, may haue the proper due thereof; which if it may be obtained, is not meanly to be accounted of, if we conſider how many thouſands, neuer taſt of this dainty through the yeare (which we may inioy euery day:) yea, and for the want of it, haue a wofull and a deceiueable paſſing of the time, and for the moſt part weariſome and tedious.
               Beſides,Other benefit of it. we may by the benefit of it ſo be occupied in our earthly and common buſineſſe, as from the ſame we may come readily and willingly to heauenly exerciſes (whereas the moſt come vntowardly:) and alſo in the ſame buſineſſe we may haue our minds heauenly, and therefore our actions  which are done thereby to be there after.
               And whereas many euen of good hope are wont to complaine and ſay, that longer then they be in praying, reading or ſuch like exerciſes, they cannot keepe in any well ordered courſe, any long time in the day together, but are diſtracted like others of the world which vſe neither reading, nor prayer: yet we by the helpe which God giueth vs hereby, when we neceſſarily intermit them, and ceaſe from them for a time (being occupied in our calling or other profitable duties) we (I ſay) may hold a good and well ordered courſe in our other actions and buſineſſe in and through the day notwithſtanding.A third particular vſe and benefit of it. And more then this, when we can bring our hearts to looke carefully to this  as to our harueſt, we ſhall get ſuch a diſtaſt in euill, in reſpect of that which we had ſometime, that we ſhall haue great liberty to forſake and contemne it.
               And here for the better incouragement of the reader to looke more carefully into this matter, and not to be diſmayed by the ſtrangeneſſe and vnaccuſtomedneſſe of the thing to the which I perſwade,An example of ſome vvho imbraced this doctrine, hovv they profited by it. I will faithfully report vnto him the ſpeech of ſundry Chriſtians, long taught, and of the beſt ſort of ſuch as had profited by the preaching of the Goſpell (as farre as I could iudge) in thoſe parts. When they firſt heard of any forme of daily directing them, whereby men are taught to be euery day kept in the ſame holy compaſſe,  that they ſhould be any day: ſome conceiued it not at the firſt hearing, ſeeing they had not bene acquainted with it: ſecondly, ſome ſmiled at it, as thinking it impoſſible to be brought into practiſe: thirdly, ſome confeſſed that their hearts did riſe againſt it, as perceiuing, that it was a certaine rebuking in great part of their former liues, which was a thing vnwelcome to fleſh.
               But it appeared to be a fault in all three ſorts, by this that they did afterward

correct themſelues. For when they ſaw further into it, and weighed  the benefit of it more deeply, they were of another iudgement, and ſayd as a fourth ſort did ſay when it came firſt to their hands; that they did highly approue of it, and that it ought to be ſo, and that for want of ſuch helpe and direction, they had bene much confounded and troubled in their courſe, and that they would haue thought themſelues happy if they could poſſibly haue attained to the practiſe of it; wiſhing that they had bene acquainted with it long before. For they ſaw in peruſing the parts of this daily direction, which I haue here ſet downe, that their hearts and liues ſhould be freed from many incumberances hereby, wherewith they were before annoyed: and that they ſhould ſerue God and liue with men, much more chearfully then  they did before. And this is the ſumme of their firſt ſpeech, which diuerſe honeſt and well diſpoſed Chriſtians vſed: which I report for the further incouraging and perſwading of the Reader to a more free and willing receiuing of this courſe, which I offer and ſet before him.
               After this, they were aduiſed, and exhorted to go about the practiſing of it according to the ſeuerall points thereof,Hovv to deale about the direction to make it profitable. after the right and cleare vnderſtanding and due conſidering of it; and to ſhew faithfully, how they felt it to helpe them forward in well paſſing the day, more then when they walked without it in the world: and which points of it, they found hard to be obſerued: and how they were letted, or what liberty they found more by it, in  the gouerning of their liues, then when they looked not after it. Thus they were counſelled to make triall of it by the moneth, and ſo by the quarter of the yeare, and to ſignifie, whether any ſuch daily courſe might poſſibly be faſtened vpon Chriſtians, and with fruit, which (doubtleſſe) few are acquainted with. And after triall made priuatly by themſelues, they inioying alſo the publike Miniſtery to the further inlightning of them about the ſame, they confeſſed freely, to the praiſe of God, that they found and obtained more vſe of their knowledge, more conſtancy in their courſe, and ſweete delight in ſeruing of God then they euer looked for, or once could haue asked of God, before they did in ſuch particular maner looke to their waies, though  they had ſet their hearts to ſeeke the Lord ſome while before. For they ſayd, when they did conſider, that God ought as well one day haue his due at our hands as another (which they had not thought vpon ſo throughly; but now by the helpe of this, they began to ſee more clearly: and that it was nothing beſeeming the greatneſſe and goodneſſe of God, that he ſhould be ſerued by fits, and vncertainly; ſome day a litle, ſome day nothing at all) they confeſſed, that they framed their minds of conſcience, to looke to their wayes more conſtantly and carefully, and that in one part of the day as another: and more eſpecially, that they did vſually conſider of, and call to mind Gods loue and kindneſſe in his many mercies much more often, then in times paſt when  they thought of them but ſeldome. And hereby, they ſaw ſuch bleſſing of God vpon their labours and indeuors,VVhat fruite theſe men reaped by the helpe of direction. that they were able with chearfulnes and without tediouſneſſe to paſſe the day in their calling, and in the performance of other neceſſarie duties either at home or abroad as occaſion was offered, which they could neuer do before, for any long time together: they were not vnſetled by matters about family, nor ſo eaſily and readily paſſing

                   their bounds, and ouer-ſhooting themſelues, in dealing about their worldly affaires: they were not ſo ſoone prouoked to vnquietneſſe by loſſes or other of Gods chaſtiſements, nor to breake out into heart-burning, fretting and vncharitableneſſe againſt ſuch as offered them hard meaſure in ſpeech or otherwiſe: they did now more narrowly view their deſires & affections, which way they caried them, and what deceitfulneſſe was in them; which yet for many of them, they had not before ſuſpected, or at leaſt, litle laboured againſt them: and how oft they had ſmarted by them, when they had not this regard daily. They ſaw they could willingly do one good thing or other in the day, for the moſt part, or at leaſt keepe themſelues from euill, and were not  maiſtered of idleneſſe, or buſying themſelues needleſly in other mens matters: they were not vſually ſo vntoward when they went to prayer, nor walked in many of their actions ſo looſely, as they well remembred they had done before: they now could find matter to ioy in, and make their ſongs of, (euen the many kindneſſes of God, which haue no end) whereas their ioy was wont to be in thinking of that which they had, or deſiring that which was other mens, or dreaming of long life, &c.
               And aboue the reſt, this did exceedingly comfort them, that whereas they had oft times before that, bene much ſhaken with feare, that they ſhould not with any peace perſeuer to the end: now their experience in ſubduing their  vnruly affections, and ſetting themſelues to frame their liues to Gods will as they were able, and that for ſome continuance one day as another, did giue them ſtrong hope, that they ſhould much more eaſily do the ſame hereafter: yea and were perſwaded, that if the Lord ſhould exerciſe them with harder afflictions, then they had as yet ſuſtained, that he would alſo vphold them euen therein; and that as they ſhould increaſe, ſo ſhould their comfort increaſe,
                  2. Cor. 1.12. whereby they ſhould be made able to beare them. So that this daily tying of themſelues to record and thinke vpon Gods kindneſſes towards them, in that he had made them happie, both here, had giuen them ſure hope of happineſſe for hereafter, and the ſubmitting themſelues to be guided daily, did greatly  amend them (as we ſee by their owne confeſſion) in their whole courſe. And what maruell though it was thus with them?Great differēc
                        •
                      betwixt a daily guiding of vs, and an vncertaine. For is there not (thinke we) a great difference betwixt a daily, and a ſeldome or vncertaine view of our eſtate? betwixt a particular obſeruing our waies, and a generall courſe in Chriſtianitie? For although men may haue without ſuch like helpe and direction, oftentimes their hearts well affected, yet will it be nothing like with thē, as when they do with a reſolute and conſtant purpoſe aboue all other things looke to this one, and not to be remoued from it, ſeeing it is the beſt of all,1. Cor. 10 3. daily and through the day to hold fast the profeſsion of their hope with ioy, and to be careful to pleaſe God in one thing as in an other. For then doth Chriſts  commendation of Marie reach alſo to them, that they count one thing needefull; and they haue choſen the good part, and it ſhall not be taken from them: when they can teſtifie to their owne conſciences, that in their weightie buſineſſes and dealings, and in their matters of pleaſure and profite, they be thus indifferently caried about them; that this one thing is ſtill counted needfull, that is, by faith to reſt in God, and ſtill to be ruled by his word.
               But to end my report of theſe Chriſtians, for proofe of that which they

ſay of the benefite of the daily direction faithfully obſerued: they alleadge  that it was not wont to be thus with them, no not ſince they had embraced the Goſpell, had hope of ſaluation thereby; nay, and that they were wont, as ſoone as they had bene out of their beds, by and by to haue their hearts ſet vpon ſome light and fooliſh matter, or to haue falne into iarres and brawles, or to be caried into the world, and ſo earneſtly ſet vpon the ſame one way or other, as that all goodneſſe was forgotten: yea, and this alſo euen ſince they had receiued ſome care to pleaſe God, and that prayer a ſpirituall dutie of all other moſt vſually intended to be frequented of them, yet by the leaſt occaſion was put by and omitted. And when the morning (which being the firſt part of the day, ſhould be conſecrated to the ſeruice of God, if in any conuenience  it may be) hath bene thus prophanely ſpent and taken vp, the whole day after (we may be ſure) hath bene ſutable for the moſt part and anſwerable. So that they haue not felt that ſweetneſſe in their liues, which by teaching they had heard to be graunted of God to his people to enioy: but contrarily, they felt much weariſome paſſing of the day, and clogging of their hearts with their corruptions; which ſince they tooke this order, hath bene farre otherwiſe with them, yea euen in the new entrance into it (which we all know to be then weakeſt) much trifling out the time in companie by talking needleſly of other mē, or of their dealings, was wont to be cōmon with them; and in ſolitarineſſe a ſpending of their thoughts and deſires after the  like manner vainely, vntill they were able more wiſely to diſcerne how to giue euery dutie in the day his time, and how to occupie both the one and the other throughout the day. But they haue with heartie thankes to God proteſted, that after they had attained to this, they ſaw farre more clearely into the practiſe of Chriſtianitie, then euer before they did, and found the Lords yoke farre more eaſie to them, and themſelues ſetled with more ſound peace in the leading of their liues. This report of ſome Chriſtians, whom I know well, I haue ſet downe (where by this little, the reſt may be coniectured) for the better encouraging of the reader to be acquainted with a daily direction for the courſe of his life, and that he ſhould not reſt in a generall and  vncertaine obedience to God. And let nothing that I haue ſaid of them, be thought needleſſe or vnmeete for vs, as long as we can ſee good reaſon for this which they did.
               But know wee, that this kind of ſeruing God, both may bee, and is, and hath bene (God be thanked) vſed of many of Gods ſeruants, though I will not ſay in a like maner, and ought to be of the reſt, as euery one ſhall be able to ſee into it. And therefore I purpoſe to thruſt no fancie nor conceit vpon any, but that which all well aduiſed perſons muſt iuſtifie, to be the commaundement of God: and which bewrayeth too plainely, that many profeſſors of the Goſpell haue not ſo much ſought for the ſound practiſe of a  godly life, by reading the ſtories of holy men in the word of God, as to report generally that they haue bene holy; neither haue reaped that benefit by the Scripture, in enioying a ſweet life aboue other men, as the Lord in much mercie hath affoorded them.
               For though the ſect of the Family of loue, the Church of Rome, and ſundrie other lying ſpirits do fancie a courſe which the Scripture knoweth not,

                   and ſome of them alſo fantaſtically haue for euery day in the weeke, deuiſed an order to be followed, as the reading of certaine taskes, nothing leſſe then proper to direct their liues: yet in this, which I here propound, namely, that we ſhould be daily directed in our whole courſe, I haue followed no fancie and dreame of man; but haue in all good conſcience ſpoken from God, and drawne it from the Scripture both for the learned and ſimple, high and low, one and other, and is neuer in vaine to the right vſer of it: although I deny not, but that a skilfuller handler of it, might haue ſet it downe farre more exquiſitely.
               But from whence is the difficultie that it is no more in practiſe, being a  treaſure of ſo infinite value, and that ſo many pray, and ſome of them often, to leade a godly life; yet when and where they ſhould not, there they fauour themſelues, and ſay, they are weake and vnable? From whence I ſay is this,VVhat is a ſpeciall hinderance from vſing daily direction. but from hence, that they will put no diligence thereunto, to obſerue their waies in which they proſper, and contrariwiſe? alſo there is no aunſwerable trauell, nor labour for skill and experience in this Chriſtian courſe, to that which is in all other; but euery litle is tedious to them and weariſome. They are ſeuen yeares at other trades to learne them, though they be apt to them, and forward in them, before they are thought fit to occupie by themſelues.
               But yet without ſeuen yeares or ſeuen moneths diligent exerciſing of the  rules of chriſtian life, (for before they be conuerted to the obedience of God, what reckoning is to be made of their profeſſing?) they will be thought fit to do as the beſt in this trade of chriſtian liuing, although it be cleane againſt their nature. Nay I ſay more, he is a rare man,Note. who can be perſwaded to be guided by religion and the rules thereof, but ſeuen weekes conſtantly, I may truly ſay ſeuen dayes: for if he who would but ſo long giue ouer himſelfe to liue by faith, and walke with God, he would neuer ſeeke to be looſened, and ſet at libertie againe to his old life, but would renounce it vtterly, ſo great ſhould his aduantage be in this courſe and trade.
               And as I know, that this is the maine and greateſt cauſe, why ſo fewe are  lights and examples to others, ſo when people are taught the truth clearely concerning this matter, (for I am ſure that it is neglected of many through ignorance) let them either reſolue to be gouerned through the day, and from day to day, or let them looke to find ſmall reioycing in the chriſtian life with much vncomfortableneſſe, which otherwiſe need not to be. And therefore in the feare of God, let men thinke and iudge of themſelues as Gods word teacheth them: yea, let them profeſſe as they be, or let them looke to find as they be, and not as they profeſſe. But as the moſt do handle the matter,Note. they ſhall find it harder to practiſe a chriſtian life after ſeuen yeares twiſe told, then the hardeſt trade after halfe ſeuen. And as it is with many of them who neuer  learned their occupation well, that they are neuer skilfull in it, nor thriue by it as others do: ſo one eſpeciall cauſe why many neuer practiſe godlineſſe to the welfare of their ſoules, neither proſper nor be well liking therein, is: becauſe they neuer ſoundly learned how to liue godly for continuance, and conſtantly one day as an other;Note. but peeced and patched vp the ſame with here a good deede, and there another, and in being ſometime deuout and zealous, the moſt of their actions being vnregarded: and of many of them it

may truly be ſaid, the power of godlineſſe was neuer throughly rooted and ſetled  in their hearts.
               Theſe rules and the like for the daily directing of a Chriſtian, are to be well conceiued and approued in our conſcience to be ſuch as are very fit and profitable to guide vs, (the which, whoſoeuer hath the ſpirit of God, doth or may diſcerne) becauſe they are according to the word of God, and practiſe of his children, and ſo he yeeldeth to them: and of euery ſuch they are duely and daily to be regarded, ſo farre as God giueth him to conceiue of, and ſee into them: this indeuouring to practiſe them will bring a man increaſe daily of ſound libertie and freedome from bondage to his boiſterous paſſions and vnruly life, and recompence an hundred fold in ſweet peace all his loſſe in  earthly and vaine delights, which he was wont to make the flower of his garland.
               And ſeeing they will worke vpon the ſimpleſt whoſe heart is vpright, and which the Lord hath opened to conceiue them, therefore when thou ſeeſt that thou art ſuch a one, and that thou haſt felt them, (theſe rules of directiō I meane) to perſwade and draw thee on to follow them,An exhortatiō to vſe it, and againſt the making of it common. forgo not this libertie, neither fall from this holy beginning, neither quench thou this flame of grace: but cheriſh it in thee daily, and truſt not the fleſhly wiſedome of thine heart, (whereby thou mighteſt be diſcouraged) ſeeing thou haſt often proued and found it deceitfull: but inquire into it ſtill euery day, leſt ſome poiſon  ſhould lurke ſecretly in any corner of it, to waite thee a miſchiefe, and to giue oportunitie to thine enemie to make thy hurt yet greater, and therefore caſt it vp as vomite: and if, after thou haſt had ſome good vſe of this or ſuch like direction, thou ſhalt feele it to waxe common, and vnſauourie to thee, (vnleſſe thou art ſure, that thou chaungeſt for the better) take courage vnto thy ſelfe, and caſt out that diuell by faſting and prayer. Prouide that thou mayeſt continue it, and happie ſhalt thou be both here and hereafter: and if thou thinke this be litle that I ſay, tell me how thou ſhalt ſpeede better any other way.
               Thinke not vpon the many yeares in the which thou art to continue it, to  diſcourage thy ſelfe thereby, as though thou tookeſt in hand a thing vnpoſſible, or toileſome, for the beginning is the hardeſt: and as young children are to be led here a ſteppe and there another, till they can go alone; ſo go thou about it firſt by weekes, and ſo by moneths, till thou haſt gotten experience for a whole yeare or more: after which time, thy difficultie will be well ouer; and thou ſhalt find it a more eaſie yoke and light burden to thee by many degrees, then thou wert wont. And while I exhort thee to the diligent regarding of this daily direction, I do not call thee either from ſeeking knowledge, or from the practiſing of any neceſſarie dutie which might be required at thy hand: but I encourage thee to both; as that thou ſhouldeſt ſo ſtore and ſtuffe  thy ſelfe by all meanes as thou canſt, that out of this ſtore and treaſurie thou maiſt fetch matter daily to furniſh thy life withall, and be made fit vnto euery good worke in the day.
               This is ſuch a guide as is able to carrie thee ſafely, as I haue ſaid: howbeit, if it ſhall pleaſe God to bring to light a plainer and ſounder, be readie to embrace it; but reſt thankefull to God in the meane ſeaſon for the helpe thou

                   maiſt haue by this. But for my weake brethrens ſake, whom (while I goe about to helpe and ſet forward,) I would be loath to hinder and diſcourage, this I thinke good to adde: that they who cannot yet apprehend the whole, neither ſee it poſſible to be guided by euery of theſe rules which I haue ſet downe, let them be readie to do better then they haue done, as they ſhall be taught; let them be willing to adde ſomewhat to their hearing, reading, and prayers both in time to do them ofter, and in feruencie, to quicken them to indeuour more carefully to practiſe that which they ſhall be able. I know all cannot be partakers of the ſame meaſure of grace, and yet one and the ſame direction is fit for the ſtrong, and the weake; and he is in good way, who is  willing to be directed: onely, this is the caueat which I giue to my brethren:Note. Let not that be deſpiſed in a ſcornefull manner, which men well vnderſtand not; nor vpon ſtomacke refuſed or miſliked, which they ſufficiently weigh not, and all becauſe it cutteth off many parts of bad behauiour, which they cannot readily caſt off, & depriueth of vaine liberties, which they were wont to vſe when they knew no better. He that frameth himſelf faithfully to be led by any one of the fore-mentioned rules conſtantly, will deſire and ſhall obtaine a part in the reſt as I haue ſaid: although there be not preſent ſtrength to accompliſh that which he deſireth, ſeeing faith in him is weake, whereby he ſhould come by and attaine it. And to ſuch I ſpeak, not doubting to aſſure  euen them, that God will giue them a bleſſed fruite of this trauell, how farre ſoeuer they feele themſelues off from poſſibilitie of taking good by the ſame.
               And as I deſire to helpe theſe, ſo I would be glad to ſatisfie others, as much as I can, though they be as yet further off from eternall life then they.Obiection. And therefore if any ſuch ſhall demaund (when they haue ſeene and conſidered theſe rules for their daily direction:) What ſhall men do through the day beſides the looking to their waies and hearts, as is before ſet downe? for nothing (they will perhaps alleadge) hath bene ſaid of the ſundrie actions and the particular kinds of the dealings of men, which go through their hands in the day, which are things indifferent, and may either be done, or left vndone: &  it would be looked for (ſay they) that in a direction for the day it ſhould be preſcribed, how euery thing, yea the doubtfulleſt actions ſhould be done, and ſomewhat ſaid thereof, that men may ſee what to go forward with, and what to lay aſide.
               To ſuch as would aske this queſtion,Anſwer. not much differing from another before propounded, I aunſwer: that none may imagine, that I go about any ſuch thing as to preſcribe what particular actions, cōpanies, or dealings euery Chriſtian ſhould vſe and be conuerſant in euery day, (that were no leſſe abſurd then vnpoſſible to dreame of) or of things indifferent, which of them he ſhould do, and which are to be vndone: but this I ſay, whatſoeuer behauior,  actions, words or companie will not ſtand throughout the day with theſe, (I meane with the rule of Chriſtianitie in the Epiſtle to Titus. 2.11. namely,Tit. 2.11. 
                  to liue ſoberly, righteouſly, and godly) let them auoide them: and whatſoeuer going about them, or manner of doing them, will not ſuffer them to deny vngodlineſſe and worldly luſts of all ſorts through the day, let it be farre off from them; as in their talke, ieaſting, ſcoffing, quarrelling, idle words, and all other vnbridledneſſe of the tongue. In their behauiour, lightneſſe, looſenes, ſawcineſſe,

ſowerneſſe, loftineſſe, ſtubbornneſſe, and all vnrighteouſneſſe, let thē
                   be ſtraungers vnto them; and whatſoeuer elſe is of ill report, let them haue nothing to do with it any day.
               Which, they who are carefull to liue vnder an ordinarie miniſterie, ſhall in time more particularly be acquainted with: ſo ſhall they find moſt ſweet and ſound peace to their ſoule, and haue their life multiplyed with true comfort. And if they thinke this hard, as though they ſhould ſuſtaine ſome great loſſe hereby, what do they looſe but that which they are well ridde of, (although no other gaine were to be gotten hereby) euen that which only troubled thē, namely,1. Ioh. 2.16. 1. Pet. 2.11. 
                  the lust of the heart, the luſt of the eye, and the pride of life. All which fight against their ſoule, and after their fill in them, will bring them to deſtruction. And this for the ſatisfying of all reaſonable perſons, who yet through ignorance may thinke it much to be tyed to any rules, whereby their liues ſhould be guided daily.
            
            
               CHAP. 12. Of the declaration of the firſt dutie of awaking with God.
               
                  The fourth part of this treatiſe.
                  AND of the firſt three parts of this treatiſe, thus much. Now for the better vnderſtanding of the nine laſt mentioned  duties, and more cleare inſight into them, (eſpecially for the helpe of them, which cannot ſo eaſily gather ſo large a matter out of ſo few wordes) I will more fully open euery branch thereof one after another. And whereas I teach Chriſtians in this place firſt, when they awake to be with God,VVe ſhould accuſtome our ſelues to good thoughts at our awaking with God. and to accuſtome their thoughts to be holy, I meane indeed ſo much: that ſo ſoone as they awake, they ſhould be taken vp about heauenly things, (for where their treaſure is, there ſhould alſo their hearts be) as to thinke of Gods kindneſſe and loue towards them, and that they abide ſtill in his fauour, as at any time before: the remembrance whereof at our firſt  breaking off our ſleepe, what can be like ſweet and comfortable? euen as a priſoner condemned but to temporall death, doth on the contrarie, at his awaking out of ſleepe, fall into moſt dreadfull thoughts and feare. They are alſo to thinke how they haue bene refreſhed by their reſt, and kept from the manifold dangers of the night, &c. by the which many haue miſcaried. And all theſe and ſuch like meditations ſhould ſalute them, when they firſt awake, to this end, to reuiue that foundneſſe of heart, wherwith they lay downe the night before (if they lay downe as became them:) and alſo that no roote of bitterneſſe breake out of them to ſtaine their actions at their firſt entring into the day: which were very like to be, if it ſhould not be preuented, and held  out by ſome ſuch gracious thoughts.Three good fruites of holy awaking with God. Alſo by this meanes, they prouide well for the better keeping their liues in frame all the day after: without the which regard had, in purpoſe to performe it aſſoone and as well as they can, they are ſo ready to range and go aſtray one way or other, that although they did lye downe the night before in peace, and with quiet and meeke hearts; yet, the diuell (as we know it well) watching his oportunitie, they may eaſily be

                   vnſetled; and ſo, runne into ſundrie euils, which cannot be auoided.
               All which being conſidered, who doth not ſee, how great a meane this kind of awaking with God is, and how worthily it may be reckoned for one of our duties, to indeuour to take vp ſome time thus when ſleepe departeth? Neither let any obiect, that this is more then poore Chriſtians can attaine to (for all ſuch would faine attaine to that grace, if they were taught how, and directed) the Lord hauing framed and fitted them for it, euen by this, that he hath made them Chriſtians, and therewithall hath giuen them hearts, which are willing thereunto: but yet euery man in his meaſure, and as he hath receiued of God, which giueth to no man nigardly, who ſeeketh heartily. And  if this ſatisfie not ſome, who deſire to begin the day aright after their firſt perfit ſhaking off of ſleepe and awaking: let ſuch for their better direction, breake their minds to thoſe who through longer experience are better exerciſed in the wayes of the Lord then themſelues.
               Onely this caueat and watch-word I giue, that if through barrenneſſe in good things thou art not able to ſet thine heart a worke (when ſleepe is gone from thee) to faſten vpon ſomewhat that is profitable to thy ſoule,Vſe vvhat meanes may be, to giue to God the firſt thoughts. or to thy companion, if thou haſt any with thee: ariſe, if it be conuenient: if not, and that thou feeleſt thy heart to be caried vnto prophaneneſſe, or to cauſe thy mouth to ſinne any way, checke thy ſelfe, rebuke thine heart, and ſo take occaſion,  euen by thy euill, to do good: And remember him, who at his firſt awakings in the morning, did thus giue vnto the Lord the firſt fruits of the day, as I haue taught thee to do; as in the Pſalme, where he ſaith: O Lord,
                  Pſal. 5.3.4. & 119.147. 
                  thou wilt heare my voyce early in the morning. Early in the morning will I direct my words vnto thee and will looke vp: and in the Prouerbes,Prou. 6.22. 
                  Wiſdome ſhall commune with thee when thou wakest, and guide thee when thou walkeſt.
               
               The words of the Pſalme, although they be not to be vnderſtood only of the time of our firſt awaking, yet they include that time, as well as any other in the day: but that place of Salomon doth plainely ſhew, that it ought to be as vſuall and ordinary, to ſet our hearts on worke about ſome holy and heauenly  things when we firſt awake, as it ſhould be, to looke to be guided by Gods word all the day through. And there is no doubt, but if this Scripture and ſuch like were beleeued, and well weighed, directly tending to this end, to teach Chriſtians to take vp their hearts in holy cogitations and heauenly deſires, before the diuell hath poyſoned them, and euilly imployed them: and further, if they would be willing to ſee this firſt letting looſe their hearts to ſundry ſinnes (as ieſting, vaine laughter, light and looſe talke, iarring, contention, depth of worldlineſſe, and ſuch like) to be one chiefe cauſe of an vnprofitable, yea an offenſiue life in the day afterwards; it ſhould be farre better with them then it is.
               
                   I meane, if they would thus do, they ſhould find much more eaſe in ſeruing of God, and fruite therein, and comfort thereby, both in the morning and all the day after: whereas I ſee with mine eyes, & heare it with mine eares, that many paſſe the day very vnbeſeeming Chriſtians, who haue long ſought the Lord (though only in a generall manner indeed:) and others ſee, that it is not with them ſo well as both it might and they themſelues know it ſhould be: who do perhaps ſome one time in the day now and then go to prayer,

but otherwiſe they haue litle regard of many their actions: & yet their prayers  which they make, are not, for the moſt part, powred out to God, till their heads and harts both are ſo filled and fraught with the world and other matters, that they haue made themſelues in a maner vnfit to pray.
               And as for ſuch as ſay, they haue other matters to thinke on as ſoone as they be awake, and they cannot beſtow their time after that manner, it may pleaſe them to know, that as for the time (if their heart were ready and did know how to do this duty) it might very ſufficiently and well-nigh be performed in ſo much time (for a need) as the Lords prayer diſtinctly vttered might be ſayd ouer in. For in ſuch a ſpace might a Chriſtian lift vp his heart to God, and ſalute him with an holy remembring of his fatherly kindneſſe, and namely, for preſent preſeruation in ſoule and body, and confirme himſelfe in his former ſound-hartedneſſe: which, if he did no more, were a true and right awaking with God, and the onely right way to thinke of other things as they ought.
               Therefore with thine heart thus ſeaſoned (if it may be) addreſſe thy ſelfe to be ready to any duties which thou haſt to do, and be ſtrongly perſwaded and confident, that God, who loueth thee ſo dearly (as in thy prayer thou beleeuedſt, and in thy thankſgiuing thou didſt acknowledge) that he (I ſay) will be with thee, to guard thee from all aduerſary power of Sathan and his inſtruments,Ioh. 14.16. which might riſe vp againſt thee, and by the comfort of his holy  ſpirit keepe thee from euill: for he which hath all power in his hand looketh downe from heauen,
                  2. Chro. 16.9. 
                  and beholdeth all the earth, to ſhew himſelfe ſtrong with them, which are of an vpright heart towards him: and therefore be incouraged thereby, with confidence to ſet vpon any duty, and to withſtand any euill.
               And further, remember that thou art armed by God with all furniture meet for the ſeruant of God, with faith to beleeue all Gods promiſes, with hope to be kept from fainting, with righteouſneſſe to performe all duty, with ſincerity to do it with a ſingle heart, with knowledge of the word of God to direct thee aright, and with the preparation of the Goſpell of peace to be ſhod againſt troubles and dangers in thy voyage to Gods kingdome. Remember  all theſe, and that thou haſt not the right vſe of theſe, except thou beeſt ſetled againſt the diſcouragements, which might ſtand vp in thy way. And therefore be chearfull and of good courage, although there are many things which may, one time or other, put thee to trouble; and many occaſions of vnquietneſſe and vnſetledneſſe may ariſe, which alſo would otherwiſe vndoubtedly ſoreſhake thee. Thus before thou goeſt about any thing, it is requiſite for thee to renew thy faith, that thou mayeſt reſt freſhly on God for his protection throughout the day, and waite to ſee it ſo, and obſerue that thou mayſt be guided by him, and make thy heart mery in him: conſidering, that he is more to thee then all the world beſide. And this for the declaration, and further laying open of this firſt duty, as with any conuenience it may be done, to teach vs, how to awake with God.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 13. Of the declaration of the ſecond duty, of beginning the day with prayer.
               
                  NOw when thy heart ſhall after thy firſt ſhaking off thy ſleepe be lifted vp to thy God, ſet thy ſelfe to the next part of thy duty; prayer,Dan 6.10. confeſſion of ſins and thankſgiuing in ſolemne maner vpon thy knees; caſting off and renouncing ſuch fooliſh and fruitleſſe thoughts and fantaſies as were wont and  ſtill may hold thee from this duty: and ſet vpon it, as ſoone as thou canſt conueniently, yea,If it may be, begin the day vvith ſolemne prayer. if it may ſo be, let it be the firſt worke that thou ſhalt take in hand in the morning ſeaſon (except in time of ſickneſſe, when thou keepeſt thy bed, and then ioyne it with the former rule, and make of both one: and pray ſhortly when paine giueth thee no further libertie, but yet feruently and more often.) But if it cannot be thy firſt worke, yet let not thy deferring of it be a breaking it off, if thou mayſt performe it: neither let a light occaſion cauſe thee to deferre it; for ſuch ſhall neuer be wanting, eſpecially thine owne vnwillingnes, or ſlouth: but when for ſome eſpeciall and weightie cauſe thou  doeſt deferre it, returne (if it may be) after thy neceſſarie buſineſſe ended to the performing of it, & therwith, renew thy couenant of amendment of life.
               And to expreſſe my meaning about this more plainely, remember and acknowledge the kindneſſe of thy God in benefits daily and hourely receiued both to ſoule and bodie: and ſometime particularly,And herein thankes. that ſo thou mayſt be more nearly knit vnto him, and delight in him. For daily and oft thankfulneſſe to God is of great force to ſubdue thee vnto God, and to maintaine a thankfull heart in thee all the day following.
               And let another part of this morning worſhip of God adioyned to this, be an hearty recording and viewing of thy ſinnes,And an examining and confeſſing of ſinnes. a bewailing and confeſſing of  them to God, and accuſing of thy ſelfe, with an eſpeciall remorſe for thoſe which haue moſt troubled thee, and be humbled vnder the burthen of them: that ſo thou mayeſt ſee thy ſelfe a wretched perſon, and infinitely indebted to God, and ſo withhold thy heart from inſolencie and ſecuritie, and be broken-hearted, that thou mayſt the better abide ſo after. And with both theſe ſend vp loud cries vnto the Lord, through Ieſus Chriſt,And requeſt. confidently looking for pardon of them, that thus thou mayſt find the death of Chriſt daily freſh, ſweete and ſauorie to thee, which the moſt do make too common and vnſauorie.
               And pray alſo in faith for grace and power to mortifie thy ſinne, and to  direct thy wayes, and for all earthly bleſſings; and by thine owne neceſſities be moued with compaſſion towards thy brethren, euen the whole company of the militant Church, who haue the like need of Gods bleſſing as thou haſt: and (withall) that thoſe which are yet without,
                  Col. 1.3. 
                  and ſtrangers from the commonwealth of Iſrael, may be brought home: that thus thou mayſt both teſtifie thy loue to them, and daily remember and conſider, how thy ſelfe and all other do depend vpon him for whatſoeuer is good and neceſſarie.
               
                  And to helpe forward this dutie the better, ſome meditation or muſing  vpon ſuch things as may aſſwage the bitterneſſe and corruption of the heart,Alſo meditation. and ſeaſon it with grace, were a thing moſt requiſite, as euerie one may be brought to it. As for example: ſometime, of our mortalitie; of the vncertaintie and ſlipperie eſtate of all things vnder the Sunne; of the change of perſons, times, eſtates; of the glorie of the kingdome of heauen: ſometime of our ſaluation, to make it more ſure; of the duties we are to do in the day, and how we may keepe our ſelues from the defilements and ſinnes, which we are in danger to fall into; of the occaſions by which we are moſt like to be led to euill; and of the helpes and meanes, with the ſundrie priuiledges of a Chriſtian, which we haue to withdraw vs from the ſame; and ſometime of  any particular branch of any of theſe, and the corruptions of the heart, and of the Chriſtian armour: of ſome of theſe or of the like matters, let meditation be raiſed before prayer be entred into, if it may be.
               And becauſe meditation is much out of vſe euen among Chriſtians, and therefore it will be found the harder matter to go about and take it in hand; I haue therefore ſet downe In Treatiſe 3. at the end of Chap. 6. Of meditation. ſome meditations of all ſorts, both briefly and in larger manner to helpe thoſe, which without helpe cannot draw matter from their owne experience to meditate vpon, as I haue before ſet downe a ſhort Treatiſe about the ſame; that through the helpe of both, they may want nothing about this dutie and Chriſtian exerciſe, ſo that their hearts be framed and fitted thereto. This part of Gods worſhip, namely prayer, confeſſion of ſinne, thankſgiuing and meditation, being conſcionably and carefully vſed and gone about before thou entreſt into thine affaires and dealings in the world, thou ſhalt, in no meane ſort, be prepared and enabled to paſſe the day in thy ſeuerall duties doing, as thou art directed. All which may be well diſcharged and performed (after they be once well vnderſtood how they ſhould be practiſed) in one quarter of an hower, and leſſe if need be.
               And by this thou mayſt ſee, what this part of the dutie tendeth to, and what it requireth of thee, and how thou ſhouldeſt performe it. And as for  them, which thinke that the doing of this ordinarilie, is more then is needfull, of whom euerie litle dutie done to God, more then they haue already or do vſually performe, is thought too much; let them know that the gaine is verie great.The gaine of this is great. And as concerning them, which make a light matter of it, ſaying: that they are not now to begin this exerciſe in the morning, but do and haue continued it, and yet they ſee no ſuch fruit to come of it: To ſuch I anſwer, that I feare that to vſe it as I haue ſet it downe,No common thing to vſe prayer aright. is not ſo common in practiſe, as diuerſe do take it to be: or elſe they ſhould not ſay, that litle profit commeth by it. For all ſuch obiecters are vndoubtedly farre from the right vſe of it; and one of theſe wayes they ſwarue from it: that either they come not vnto it  with an humble and well ordered heart; or they know not how to be occupied in it; or elſe ſome ſpeciall ſinne is in the way to cauſe that it cannot as Incenſe, aſcend vp to God. The leaſt of theſe faults may eaſily hinder the profit and darken the beautie of it.
               I doubt nothing, but that at ſometime diuerſe Chriſtians in an holy and right manner do diſcharge it: but reuerently and confidently to do it, laying

                   all other things aſide which hinder it, that I dare not affirme of many: which cauſeth the benefit of it, the leſſe to appeare to them. Which kind of men, if they cannot conſtantly tye themſelues to it with delight, when yet they may very well, they ſhould ſhame and put themſelues to rebuke, for omitting it through ſlouth and vnwillingneſſe; if by no other reaſon, yet by the practiſe of ſome of the deuouter ſort in popery: who although they ſerue God ſuperſtitiouſly, yet they obſerue their houres appointed to them after their blind maner (hauing only a confuſed and deceiueable hope to be heard, I ſpeake of the beſt of them) to the ſhame of ſuch as who knowing better how to worſhip God aright, thinke it too much to tie themſelues to any thing  more then they vſe to do: and that is, when they thinke good, or be driuen to it in ſickneſſe, feare, &c. or in any other maner, (many times) that is, without the right and true properties of it: and then ſometime I graunt, and that in the morning (perhaps) they betake themſelues to it.
               But howſoeuer it be with ſuch: the holy Ghoſt hath greatly helped the frailtie of Chriſtians hereby, who are by naturall corruption (cleauing faſt to them) prouoked in the morning as ſoone as they are vp, to be raunging abroad in the world, and according to their delights, dealings and occaſions to be caried after them, either in vanitie of mind, and lightneſſe; or in vnquietneſſe, contention, quarrelling and worldlineſſe, minding litle for the moſt  part but things earthly: and entring after this manner into the day, do for the moſt part go further frō God all the day after. For this cauſe the holy Ghoſt hath taught them, that they ſhould preuent theſe daily inconueniences, by taking vp their minds and hearts to farre better vſes: that is to ſay, that after their awaking with God, they ſhould (if it may be) repaire to God more ſolemnely, which is done by meditation of Gods power, mercie, &c. by thankfulneſſe for benefits receiued and promiſed, by freeing themſelues from guiltineſſe of Gods wrath, by confeſſing their ſinnes, and praying for the benefit of forgiueneſſe, and for grace in the day againſt the euils thereof, and for good gouernement throughout the ſame; that they being well ſeaſoned thus  in the morning, they may retaine the ſauour, and hold the ſtrength of ſuch a gracious beginning (as I haue ſayd) all the day after.
               And (to ſpeake more plainely) that they being thus well fenced with this ſpirituall reuiuing of their minds, and hartening of themſelues againſt all aſſaults, before they enter into the field with their enemie, they may be well armed againſt the batterie of temptations and prouocations, which will vndoubtedly meete with them: and ſo keepe their liues from the force of them, and from hurt by them in farre better maner, then ſuch can do, who being naked and deſtitute of this furniture, do lie open vnto them, whatſoeuer conceipt they haue of their owne wiſdome and ſtrength.
               
                   And this which I haue ſayd being well conſidered, I do not ſee what exception can be brought againſt this part of dutie, vnleſſe anie will further cauell about the time, which I ſaid need not be much, after we haue well learned how to beſtow the ſame. To the which I tye no man, hauing ſhewed what time the performance of ſuch a dutie doth require: and otherwiſe, I leaue it to all to conſider, whether their willingneſſe, ſufficiencie in gifts, and their leiſure will yeeld more time, or not ſo much; ſo as there be a faithfull

diſcharge of the dutie, in ſuch ſort as they may reſt therein with peace, and may feele themſelues more fit to walke warily, and ſtrengthned againſt the dangers which fall out in the daie: which they in no wiſe ſhould doubt of, if they do it ſincerely. And now I haue ſaid of this ſecond dutie what I haue thought conuenient to him which deſireth to vſe it to his profit; teaching him that is ignorant, how to practiſe it; and exhorting him that (through neceſſitie of importunate buſineſſe at ſome time) is conſtrained to omit it in the firſt beginning of the day, that yet afterwards he watch his beſt leiſure and oportunitie to performe it: and laſt of all, anſwered obiections, as I haue ſeene it expedient.
               This onely remaineth to be added: that we muſt conſider, that theſe duties  (which here I ſet downe to be as oft performed as they may; and of which this is one) do ſerue to keepe & ſettle vs in the practiſe of the daily direction before mentioned. Whoſoeuer therfore deſire to reape the fruit hereof by that which I haue ſet down, knowing how to vſe it, but yet being often neceſſarily hindered; let them performe it when and as oft as they can: but they which are free from ſuch buſineſſe, ought fully to reſolue and determine with themſelues, daily to performe it if they be able; and not ſlouthfully, nor for the fauouring of the fleſh to neglect it, as oft as they feele themſelues vnwilling to vſe it: for then ſmall fruit is to be hoped for, as I haue ſayd before. Neither indeed, can any ſuch omitting of it be any way excuſed, ſeeing we  ought not at any time to be vnwilling to ſuch duties, (if it were alwayes expedient to be with the Lord in this manner) vnleſſe we could proue to our conſciences, that we are taken vp in things more neceſſarie. Neither can this deſire be quenched in vs (which the ſpirit of God hath kindled) but by our owne fault, whiles we haue through lightneſſe, raſhneſſe, or in ſeeking ſome other vnlawfull libertie, expelled and baniſhed the ſame from vs.
               But for as much as all other duties go well forward, whiles the heart is kept in loue and liking with theſe holy exerciſes, and not otherwiſe (for pray well, and liue well; and contrarily:) therfore this grace and heauenly affection cannot, neither may well be wanting in the ſeruants of God. Inſomuch  that they which are not neceſſarily letted (as, by pouertie; or otherwiſe, as want of leiſure) are not to make this to ſtand in ſtead of their familie exerciſe in the morning (as being loath to beſtow more time in ſuch holy communion with God, then they muſt needs:) but rather they muſt begin the day with this after they are riſen, and afterward with their houſhold as the oportunitie ſhall permit; I meane, as it will beſt ſtand with euerie ones buſineſſe in the familie. And eſpecially preachers and ſtudents, and thoſe which do inioy many & great means, and who are not holden downe with pouerty, and ſuch multitudes of outward calamities and hinderances, and whoſe diſcouragements be but ſmall in reſpect of other mens; ſuch (I ſay) ſhould not offer  to God ſo nigardly ſacrifices, as they who can do no otherwiſe: but as they haue receiued more, many wayes then their brethren; ſo they ſhould render more then they, both in this and other duties: for otherwiſe, who ſhould be examples and patternes to the weaker ſort, if ſuch ſhould not? and yet that I may diſcourage none, he that ſhall offer but his mite (with the poore widow) willingly, hauing no more, hath done as much as any other who hauing

                   greater gifts haue made longer prayers. Now if after the declaration of this dutie in this maner, ought remaine doubtfull: let them ſeeke reſolution at their faithfull teachers hands, that ſo they may more freely and with more profite continue it.
            
            
               CHAP. 14. Of the declaration of the third dutie, about our callings.
               
                  
                  THE third dutie concerneth our callings and particular trades, the which we may be fit and readie to enter vpon, when our minds be thus well prepared, as in the two former duties hath bene declared. Know we therefore that with this well ordered heart we are to take the ſame in hand, euery one as he is to be employed, throughout the day ſo long as is expedient, that we may ſafely and comfortably bring it to an end. About the which argument my purpoſe is not to write a treatiſe of all matters appertaining hereto, but ſo farre to ſpeake of it, as I may ſhew that which I intended, namely this: ſeeing it is a great part of our life, to doe the  workes of our callings, and a chiefe part of a godly life to do them aright, therefore to direct a Chriſtian how to pleaſe God in the ſame; contrarie to the opinion of many, (and thoſe not of the worſt) who imagine (but moſt vniuſtly) that their calling is ſuch a let to them from the practiſe of religion, that thereby (though they had no other) they are hindred from ſeruing God aright. But they ſhall better be anſwered hereafter.
               Firſt therefore I will proue,Three points handled in this chapter. that all Chriſtians muſt liue in ſome lawfull vocation.
               Secondly, that they muſt with practiſe of other godly duties, faithfully and diligently walke in the ſame.
               
                   Thirdly, (which will follow vpon the two former) that they who do ſo, which the children of God only can do, may highly pleaſe God therein, and find great helpe and furtherance thereby to paſſe the other parts of the day well and chriſtianly.
               And for the firſt of theſe three,The firſt point: All muſt liue in ſome lawfull calling. Gen. 3.19. Epheſ. 4.28.
                   it is cleare by the words of the Lord himſelfe (In the ſweate of thy face thou ſhalt eate thy bread:) that all men are bound to trauell and labour (though not with the hands) in ſome painefull eſtate of life, wherein they may ſerue God, and if need be, they may prouide for themſelues and theirs. At leaſt wiſe, they may be good members in the Church and Commonwealth, as is meete for them to be, not idle and vnprofitable.  Vnto the which rule the higheſt magiſtrates do ſubmit themſelues, being appointed of God to their places, that the people may liue a quiet and peaceable life in all godlineſſe and honeſtie: and therefore very vnmeete it were, that any inferiour to them,2. Theſ. 3.6. ſhould raunge and liue without compaſſe in the world inordinately, as though they were exempt from the Lords gouernment. But I, as I haue ſet my ſelfe to do throughout this booke, will deale onely with thoſe who hauing ſubmitted themſelues vnto the will of God in other things, are

therefore readie to heare his voice in this.
               
               All ſuch muſt know and religiouſly perſwade themſelues, if through ignorance and long cuſtome therin they ſhold think otherwiſe, that they muſt of conſcience betake themſelues to ſuch an eſtate of life, leſt otherwiſe liuing without a calling, as rogues, theeues, couſiners, cōmon gameſters, paraſites, & other diſguized perſons,The daunger of not liuing ſo. they ſhould loath labour, liue vpon others, & waxe idle; and ſo runne either into hereſie, ſects, curious queſtions, and fond opinions, or elſe into looſe behauiour, and wicked companie: and then finding no ſauour in their religion, ſhould fall away from the truth, and grow ſenſleſſe, and frozen in their dregges and filthineſſe. As, not onely we may reade in the Scriptures, that ſome haue done, which alſo were members of the  Church: but haue ſeene many carrying good ſhew of zeale, and hauing many good parts in them, whereof ſome became prophane and vaine in their liues: others held ſtraunge opinions, and ſeparated themſelues from the Church of God, amongſt whome they had liued familiarly before; neither were they to be blamed by men with any reprochfull crime, which might be like to bring them thereunto, ſaue onely this, that they exerciſed no calling, but went about from place to place, and ſetled themſelues in none, neither could be perſwaded by the deareſt of their friends ſo to do. But although a man could aſſure himſelfe,All ſhould abhorre the liuing without a calling. that he ſhould neuer fall to ſuch a depth of ſinne, through the neglect of a vocation and following of a lawfull trade of life (as  there ſeldome cōmeth any better fruite therof:) yet, what man wold but ſo much as liue vnprofitably (if he may be well employed) when God hath made him for a farre more excellent end? and bring diſcredite and ill report, and that iuſtly, vpon himſelfe, hauing bene had in good account before of his godly neighbours and brethren; or liue inordinately, and ſo voide of comfort, and that for neglecting the ordinance of God?
               
                  The 2. point: Men muſt labour diligently therein.But to ſay no more of this firſt point: the next and the nigheſt degree hereunto, that may be, is; that many walke looſely and careleſly in their calling, and are ſlouthfull and negligent in the performance of the duties thereof (whereas they ſhould faithfully and diligently be taken vp in their honeſt  and lawful vocation:) which comming either of the ignorance of their duty, or of a mind too much giuen to ſeeke carnall libertie, or of both; cannot be without daungerous diſcommodities. For what ſhould the multitude of Chriſtians do through the whole yeare, if they ſhould not euery one walke and be daily occupied in ſome certaine eſtate, ſome at home, ſome abroad, and therein haue triall of their faith, patience, and obedience? not that they might thereby waxe worldly minded and the further from God, but get encouragement to ſerue him better as ſhall be ſaid afterwards. For God in appointing but one Sabbath of all the ſeuen dayes,Men ought to be diligent therein, ſeeing they haue ſixe dayes thereto in the weeke, and but one Sabbath. hath ſufficiently declared, that they cannot attend onely to ſpirituall actions, as prayer, meditation, reading, and ſuch like: and therefore hath for the moſt part of the weeke appointed them to ſhew foorth their knowledge and religious keeping of a good conſcience, in being occupied about things of this life in their honeſt calling, wherein they may haue worke enough to be employed and taken vp. Of the which matter as the Scripture ſpeaketh many things to great purpoſe, ſo the Apoſtle chargeth euery man to abide in that ſame vocation,
                  1. Cor. 7.20. 
                  wherein he was called:

                      and commaundeth them in the name of our Lord Ieſus,
                  2. Theſ. 3.6. 
                  to withdraw themſelues from euery brother that walketh without labouring, that ſo he might be aſhamed. And that one place of Salomon is worthy our conſideration, to the perſwading of vs to faithfulneſſe and diligence in our calling, and to loath ſlouth and idleneſſe, where he ſaith: The ſluggard luſteth, but his ſoule hath nothing:
                  Prou. 13.4.11. Prou. 20.4. 
                  but the ſoule of the diligent ſhall haue plentie. And againe: The riches of vanitie ſhall diminiſh: but he that gathereth them with the hand, that is, with his owne labour, ſhall increaſe them. And againe:L. pro. 18.9. & ca. 24.30, &c. 
                  The ſlouthfull man will not plough becauſe of winter, therefore he ſhall beg in ſommer but haue nothing: yet a woman that hath a diligent hand, buildeth and vpholdeth her houſe: with many other ſuch  like. In which he doth not onely ſhew what commoditie a mans labour and diligence in his calling bringeth, and contrariwiſe: but eſpecially commendeth painefulneſſe and trauell, how good, and beſeeming Chriſtians they be. He alloweth not (we ſee) ſlouth, idleneſſe, and ouer-reaching heads, in the ſeruants of God; but ſheweth, that it agreeth well with the beſt of them to be diligent and well occupied: and that it is not too baſe and vnbeſeeming the honour of their profeſſion, to labour and take paines; which the diuell too readily perſwadeth many: yea, and therefore he ſaith in another place, (ſeeing a meane and poore eſtate might be thought reprochfull) that better is a litle,
                  Prou. 15.16.17. L. pro. 17.1. 
                  euen a diſh of greene hearbes with peace and loue, then a ſtalled oxe with an vnquiet  conſcience and ſtrife. It is the more lamentable to ſee how numbers degenerate in this point to their owne great hurt, and drawing others after them. Some not ſo well aduiſed and ſtayed as were meete for them, are euer medling in other mens matters, and leauing off their owne calling ſpend much time in prying and ſearching into other mens liuing, titles of their lands and leaſes: and buſying themſelues needleſly, yea and oft times to the great hurt, offence and iuſt complaint of them, with whom they liue and ſeeke to haue to do. Others, as buſie-bodies, and as though religion conſiſted therein,Ill parts in neighbours, hindering diligence in mēs callings. do as it were make a trade of obſeruing other mens faults, neglecting too much their owne: and ſow diſſention, and ſet debate betwixt neighbours, and with  their euill tongues, bite and reproch ſuch as are better then themſelues. Others trifle out their precious time in ſeeking of acquaintance, not ſuch wherby they may take good or do good, but ſpend it in play, ieaſting and merry-making amiſſe and prophanely, &c. Others occupie themſelues in dealings and merchandize, not appertaining vnto them, but farre aboue their abilitie,Men ſhould not deale aboue their abilitie. yea, and skill alſo many times, occupying their trades with other mens goods; and whiles they keepe within no bounds, by ayming at great matters without any warrant, do gaine leſſe then nothing for their labour, and diſable themſelues to their owne calling: beſides this, that their vnwiſe dealings that way, and departing from that buſineſſe, which they were more fit for, and  appointed vnto, doth iniurie, yea, and vndo others oftimes as well as ſpoile themſelues, till they come to this: that they cannot digge, and to begge they are aſhamed. There are many other waies beſide theſe, drawing men from their callings, which ſeeme pleaſant, but the iſſue thereof proueth farre otherwiſe: whereby many and thoſe alſo of good hope, haue giuen themſelues to ſeeke their libertie, and to be vnburthened from their callings, wherein whiles they remained they thought themſelues to be in a kind of priſon; and therefore

till fooliſh experience had taught them how they had bene deceiued, could  in no wiſe be perſwaded to ſerue God in them, as had bene moſt meete for them to haue done. Theſe men and ſuch like, of which ſort there are many in the world, might haue kept both peace to their conſciences, and good report, and bene freed from many euils, if they would haue hearkened to the voyce of God,2. Theſ. 3.10. which ſaith: He that laboureth not, let him not eate. And again: that man is borne to labour, as the bird to flying. But they depart from the ordinance of God, and ſhew that (howſoeuer they profeſſe themſelues to be religious) they fell to theſe indirect courſes from diligence in their callings for want of religion, which onely doth rightly direct men how to follow them, as it doth to order all other things aright. But it may well be a dutie of ſome  account commaunded of God, to make conſcience of diligence in our particular callings, it is ſo few mens caſes to performe it.
               But whiles I commend faithfulneſſe in mens calling, and find fault with negligence therein, I attribute no godlineſſe to the very act of labouring; neither defend,Euery good labourer is not a good Chriſtian. that they are good Chriſtians all, who are diligent workemen, and painefull labourers in any calling; magiſtracie, miniſterie, or any other. I haue ſaid otherwiſe to them which marke well my words: onely this I ſay, that to a faithfull Chriſtian who reformeth and ſtudieth daily more and more to amend his life, diligence in his outward calling is no ſmall helpe to liue well and godly, and to keepe him from many euils: but otherwiſe, if there  be not good gouernment ouer the heart and life daily, he may find ſorrow and miſerie enough, ſeeing he will not take his direction from God.
               
                  The third point: that our walking in our calling diligently, pleaſeth God.But the right following of our calling (to enter into the third branch) is in ſuch manner and ſort to vſe and walke in it, that it may be no let nor hinderance to vs from exerciſes of religion, and growing in grace thereby: for no ſuch labour doth God approoue of. But contrariwiſe, we muſt ſo play the good husbands, that we become not worldlings, and ſuch as find more ſweetneſſe and pleaſure in our earthly dealings and the comming in of our profites,VVe muſt ſo vſe earthly dealings, that we neglect not ſpirituall duties. 1. Cor. 10.24.
                   then in our heauenly trafficke through the practiſe of Chriſtianitie: we muſt ſo follow our owne buſineſſe, and ſhunne medling in other mens  matters vnneceſſarily, that we be not ſhut vp in our owne, without regard of our brethren, or care for their matters (when cauſe ſhal require:) for that were great vnkindneſſe and want of charitie towards them, ioyned with too much ſelfe loue toward our ſelues. To be ſhort, we muſt ſo vſe the world, as though we vſed it not: not lifting vp our hearts when we proſper, nor caſting them downe with deadly ſorrow, when we ſuſtaine loſſes and diſcommodities; but ſo carie our ſelues throughout, that we may be patternes and examples to other of right vſing the world: for ſo hath the Lord appointed men to liue in, and vſe their vocations.
               And this kind of walking in them, is highly pleaſing and acceptable to him. For they who thus ſet vpon common actions and worldly buſineſſe are not caried after their owne earthly minds, as men of the world; but ſet the Lord before them, and looke what he will haue done: they bridle their deſires, which would elſe carie them after them. So Moſes was faithfull in all Gods houſe: and Ioſua in his place: and Iob who had much to do in matters of profite and commoditie, yet was a rare patterne to all men of vſing the world aright;

                   euen earthly things with an heauenly mind: that they may haue the more to accuſe them, and that iuſtly, who will not in farre meaner affaires take him for their example. This regard muſt be had of all Chriſtians, and of all ſorts both of rich and poore, one and another, in their earthly dealings, (though it be a leſſon moſt hardly learned) that whiles we auoide ſlouth and idleneſſe on the one ſide; yet walking in our callings we be not worldly minded on the other ſide: that it may come to paſſe, that our calling being one part of Chriſtian obedience and dutie to God, may not onely for the time while we are occupied in it, witneſſe well to vs, that we pleaſe him; but alſo make vs more fit to other chriſtian duties after: and that we ſeeing this maner  of paſſing our time to be enioyned of God, (who hath promiſed bleſſing thereto, and ſeeth what is good for euery one) and conſidering duly with our ſelues the infinite fruite that commeth thereof, we may more willingly, and of conſcience betake our ſelues thereunto: that ſo we may find in this faithfull walking in our calling, a peaceable courſe of liuing here, which may bring happines with it in the end.
               The neceſſitie and benefite of this in a Chriſtian, few do ſufficiently know or conſider. For all are naturally giuen to ſeeke libertie amiſſe,Pro. 9.17. and ſtolne waters (as it is in the Prouerbe) are ſweet: and many who zealouſly profeſſe a godly life, not painefully following ſome lawfull calling, doe by wofull practiſe  proue this to be true; and ſo ſhall find much ſorrow in their dayes, which others ſhall be free from.
               Now to the end we may thus chearefully go about them, as knowing that God alloweth ſuch workes of ours, and ſo thereby be diſpoſed more readily to other parts of dutie, (which we ſee to be no common thing in the world) firſt this muſt be conſidered:Ioſ. 1.8. that it is the Lord that ſetteth vs in our callings, and hath promiſed to be with vs, and to giue vs good ſucceſſe in them, and to helpe vs beare all tediouſneſſe therein; and further,By what means our callings may further vs in godlineſſe. Coloſ. 3.24.
                   that he hath willed vs to do all ſuch duties for his ſake, in ſuch manner as if we did them vnto him, and from him to looke for a reward. Now what true Chriſtian is  there, who, if he beleeue this, is not encouraged to do his buſineſſe readily and willingly? who would not be glad to do any thing which might pleaſe God? and whoſe heart ſhould not be ioyfull to go about the Lords worke, whereby tediouſneſſe, vnquietneſſe and manifold vnſetlings are remoued? And ſo ſhould we not grow out of frame, but haue our minds readily prepared to other duties. And moſt ſure it is, that mens callings and labours are ſo burthenſome vnto them, euen for this cauſe, that they do not thinke thus of them. Neither are ſuch chearefull at their worke, but onely for the gaine, that moueth thē, or for that they muſt needs: & being ſo vnwillingly & corruptly occupied in them, neither are they fit for any good thing or dutie after.The Miniſter hardly delighteth in reading as heauenly a calling as he is in. The  Miniſter who is conſecrated by the Lord euen to diuine ſtudies and paſſings of his time, and hath it enioyned him for his calling that he attend daily to reading priuately, and to doctrine and exhortation publikely; how hardly obtaineth he it of himſelfe (as heauenly and ſweet a calling as it is) to abide and hold out therein? yea and how few do it, (I ſpeake euen of ſuch as haue receiued good gifts of God, not of the worſer ſorts onely,) but trifle out their precious time as other do? As though it were litle to be regarded which is

written: He that winneth ſoules is wiſe: and they that haue inſtructed others, ſhall ſhine as the ſtarres. Dan. 12.3. And therefore of others whoſe calling is not to be occupied through the day in that heauenly maner, how were it to be looked for; if they ſhould not of conſcience tye themſelues thereto, and walke chearefully and faithfully therein? But when men ſhall know, and may be bold to remember and conſider,There are many encouragements, to follow our callings diligently. that they are appointed by God to beſtow the moſt part of the time in their callings, (though they be not meerly ſpirituall actions) to the end that they may with better appetite returne to exerciſes of religion againe after; and that they haue a promiſe of bleſſing therein:The firſt. with what peace may they be occupied in them, and ouercome that tediouſneſſe and weariſomeneſſe, which would otherwiſe cleaue vnto them? Thus I could wiſh, that Chriſtian men tooke their callings to be in ſuch ſort enioyned them of God, that they neither durſt neglect them, nor yet find them burdenſome and weariſome to them: but that they could wiſely ſee, how, when, and why to intermit them, that is to ſay, for neceſſarie and profitable cauſes and conſiderations; as, for the miniſterie of the word, the viſiting of friends, moderate, lawfull and neceſſarie refreſhings of themſelues: and in good ſort to returne to them againe more fitly.The ſecond. Furthermore, we ſhall not be vnſetled by the workes of our callings, nor weariſomely caſt them off, when we ſhall be able to ſee, that we haue practiſe of moſt duties in Chriſtianitie therein, as diligence, obedience, faith, patience, truth, &c. and thereby  learne experience, that God who hath giuen vs wiſedome, chearefulneſſe, patience, and the reſt heretofore, to beare the burthen of them contentedly and willingly, when in the prayer of faith we asked it of him, will doe the like for vs, and miniſter the ſame grace to vs, for the time to come.
               
                  The third.Thirdly, we ſhall not be hindred from dutie by our labours, but furthered thereby in the waies of godlineſſe, when we conſider that the Lord hath made them the chiefe meanes of our maintenance, aſſuring vs, that we ſhall be fed: that ſo we may put away diſtruſt, and depend vpon God ioyfully, and not be driuen to depend vpon vnconſcionable men for neceſſaries.
               
                  The fourth.Laſtly, Gods people, by a faithfull and diligent walking in their calling, haue proofe how God keepeth them in the way to eternall life, and in the way of peace, and freeth them from many dangers and ſinnes (which fret as a canker:) for whiles they be diligent in their callings, they commit themſelues and the courſe of their dealings to God, who hath promiſed to keepe them in all their wayes; and therefore to free them from the euils which meete with others, and ſo to hold them on in their way. Their good ſucceſſe they aſcribe to God; therefore it is a double comfort to them: their croſſes which ariſe, they know are ſent vpon them by his prouidence for their good; therefore though they be bitter to the fleſh, yet they (who are well aduiſed vnder them) reſolue, that they are neceſſarie for them. And the  hardeſt which can befall them, while they offer themſelues to be guided by God therein, is euer to be borne and gone vnder, rather then the ordinarie euents, which follow the idle and ill husbands, as we call them. And a man would thinke, that it were an eſtate to be wiſhed and choſen to liue in (if it be well conſidered what plagues meete with the rangers and diſordered perſons, who are not ſubiect to God) to be in account and fauour with God, as

                   godly Chriſtians walking in their calling religiouſly, are; ſeeing it is ſayd of them, Deut. 28. Bleſſed are they in the field, and in the houſe, their ſtocke and ſtore, &c. Now I haue ſayd that which I purpoſed of this point, for the directing of them who ſtand in need of this inſtruction, how to vſe their callings aright: a litle I will adde, to anſwer ſuch doubts as may ariſe in ſome minds, from that which hath bene ſpoken.
               And firſt it may be demanded, whether gentlemen,Obiection. and other who are bleſſed with abundance of things neceſſarie for this preſent life,VVhether gentlemen are tyed to a calling. ſhall be bound to ſome certaine calling, wherein they ſhould ſerue God by their trauell therein, benefit others thereby, and keepe themſelues from the dangers  before mentioned accompanying thoſe who liue without a calling. Or whether it be not their calling, to liue as gentlemen vſe to do: in riding and going vp and downe, to ſpend their liues in paſtimes, pleaſure, and doing what they liſt. I anſwer, as in all the reſt,Anſwer. I ſpeake to ſuch as are willing to be reformed: and to ſuch I ſay, If they be called to beare any office,VVhat they ſhould do, who beare office. let them attend vpon it, and ſeeke to be fit for it, and worthily diſcharge it: and therefore let ſuch be acquainted with the lawes of the Realme, as well as with the lawes of God; and be counſellors and helpers to their neighbours about them: that they may be beloued of them, when they ſhall ſee, that with chriſtian conuerſation they ſhall inioy other parts of good neighbourhood by them alſo.  And let them labour to ſee their families well gouerned, and be carefull (as Chriſtians may with good conſciences) to vphold their outward eſtate, and to continue it to their poſteritie. And ſuch as beare no office, let them (being exempted from the labour about the executing of it, which is inioyned to the others) be occupied as they.
               And ſeeing they are to ſerue their Prince and countrey with body and goods, aduice and counſell, both in peace and warre;VVhat they, vvho beare none. they ought by all meanes to ſtudie how to prepare themſelues to turne the many houres and dayes, which the moſt of that eſtate ſpend in games and paſtimes, to other more profitable and neceſſarie vſes. Let them alſo be the firſt who ſhall prouide  and take order for the maintenance of the poore, to ſee good order in in their towne, helpe to beate downe ſinne, and puniſh euill doers, and ſet at one ſuch as are at variance, and haue their hand reached out oftner and more liberally then all ſhall behold, and yet for example ſake, go before others in doing good according to their abilitie, not refuſing to exhort and ſtirre vp, as occaſion ſhall be offered, to loue and to good thingsHeb. 10.24.. Theſe, one or other of them, are the workes of their calling: wherein they ſhall be lights to other, render a good fruite of their wealth to God, and cauſe many to bleſſe God for their loue and labour. And what can they leſſe do then this, if they do but conſider, that of them moſt ſhall be required who haue receiued moſtAmos 3.2.?
               
                   And for the better and more happie effecting of that which I haue ſayd, let them labour by all meanes to prouide, that good teaching may be inioyed and well vſed while they may, and put in practiſe that which is in the Prouerbe, 23.23. Buy wiſedome whatſoeuer it coſt: but ſell it not whatſoeuer yee may haue for it. And if they be wiſe, let them inioy the more libertie in the reading daily of the Scriptures and other good bookes: which is, with other ſuch like exerciſes of ſtudie, the chiefeſt and principalleſt commoditie,

which they reape by their riches: I ſpeake wiſedome to them, which are  ſound hearted to receiue it. But if they thinke, that God hath made their portion greater then other mens to the end they may runne the further out of order, and that they may ſpend their pretious time idlely, vainely, and at their pleaſure, without rendring account thereof; I am ſure they prouide worſt for themſelues, and ſhall wiſh they had bene poore men, who would haue made no ſuch queſtions about the beſtowing of their time, but would willingly in that meane eſtate haue ſerued God without reaſoning. As for their lawfull and honeſt recreations which are onely in good ſort and maner to be vſed, as I ſhall ſay in the next Chapter; they not making the ſame an occupation, nor themſelues ſlaues to ther luſts and pleaſures, this which I ſay, withholdeth  them not from the right vſe thereof. But of this inough: ſeeing my purpoſe is not to make treatiſes of euery matter I touch.
               
                  The ſecond obiection.I will proceed to another obiection: The poore Chriſtians would (they ſay) take pains willingly in their callings, but can by no means maintaine their charge:Anſvver. what therefore ſhall they do? To whom, as I can ſay no leſſe, but that they muſt not for all this, caſt away their confidence, but beleeue that God hath many wayes to deliuer and prouide for his, and that it hath not bene lightly ſeene that God hath bene wanting to his, no not in their outward need; and therefore though their triall ſhould be vnto death, yet to truſt by lawfull meanes to find helpe:The poore vvho cannot follovv a calling, muſt be relieued. ſo I muſt further ſay to others, who (neglecting  their duty) do ſuffer them to want & might relieue them; that God will iuſtly bring it againſt them, & lay it to their charge: ſuch (I meane) as both by that good & chriſtian law of this land (worthy with al care & conſcience euer to be executed) are made ouer-ſeers of the poore;By the vviſe care of the diſtributes or ouer-ſeers. Deut. 15.11. And by other vvho haue more then needfull. Iam. 2.13.
                   & ſuch alſo as hauing ſuperfluity, & much more then neceſſarie food & apparell, yet are not rich in good workes, neither do good to the poore, which are amongſt them for that purpoſe. Iudgement ſhall be to ſuch without mercy, becauſe they ſhew no mercie: who if they be liuing members of Chriſts body, which is the Church, muſt pity the bowels, and glad the hearts of their poore brethren. But rare are they, who do any more this way then they needs muſt; though mens left  hand ſhould not know what their right hand doth: but they ſtriue and fall out one with another, euen for that they are inioyned by authoritie to giue that litle which they do. And for the poore themſelues, as they may make their mone to ſuch as are fitteſt and readieſt to relieue them: ſo they muſt beare their burden the more eaſily, becauſe they haue hope in Chriſt, and are by him exalted higher then moſt of their betters (I ſpeake of the godly:) conſidering that all Gods ſeruants haue their ſeuerall croſſes, to make them meete for the Lord.
               I am ſory to ſpeake it, but it is too true, that of ſuch as need the helpe of others to the maintaining of them, there are too few who haue eares to heare  that which I haue to ſay to them from the Lord, Ierem. 5.4. For they are fooliſh,Ier. 5.4. as the Prophet ſaith: and know not the wayes of the Lord, nor the iudgements of their God. But for the few that do feare God, I ſay: let them ſo go to their worke,Perſvvaſion to the poore to contentment. as I haue taught al true chriſtians to do; that is, that they make it not an vncomfortable toile, but waite for the promiſe, that they ſhall be fedPſal. 33.19.: and ſtay vp themſelues by the examples of the poore widow, and

                   the word that ſaith: Man liueth not by bread only: and againe,Deut. 8.3. 2. King. 4.7. & 1. King. 17.14. Pſal. 34.10. 
                  The Lyons ſhall be hunger-bitten, but they that feare him ſhall not want: and againe, The Lord hath many wayes to deliuer his: and know they thereby, that ſooner ſhall the ſtones be turned into loaues of bread, then they ſhall be forgotten, and ſtarue for hunger; or elſe, he will prouide better for them.
               But to leaue this, I may not omit one other obiection,The third obiection. which is much amongſt men: that whereas I haue taught, that if a man be neuer ſo good a labourer, and diligent husband, and ſo walke painefully in his calling, yet none of all this commendeth him to God, if he be not religious alſo; men reply and ſay, that ſuch of all other are moſt negligent in their buſineſſe; as ſeruants  by name, who (they ſay) when their minds ſhould be vpon their worke,Some vvill haue no ſeruants that are religious, to do their vvorke. are found oftentimes at their booke and at prayer; other of them ſitting idly, and litle regarding their maiſters aduantage: whereas they who occupie not themſelues about religion, but are held in by feare, or drawne on by hope of reward, are for their maiſters profit, and go to their worke luſtily. Wherupon ſome haue gone ſo far, that they haue vſually vttered this ſpeech: that whē ſoeuer they make choice of ſeruants, they will neuer chuſe any which are religious. Which latter ſpeech (I anſwer) if it were not added,Anſvver. the former part might more charitably be interpreted.
               For it is not to be denied, but that as in other ſtates,Many ſeruants that profeſſe, are hypocrites. 2. King. 5.
                   ſo there are many hypocrites  among ſeruants, who make profeſſion of religion, as Gehazai and many did whom we reade of: againſt whom I denounce by the word of the Lord, that they ſhall beare the puniſhment of their iniquitie: But to grow to this abſurditie from thence, that all religious ſeruants are ſuch, and that they would not chuſe ſuch to be ſeruants to them; the leaſt ſinne that it can be made, is: that it is a raſh and a carnall ſpeech, and ſo much the more faultie, by how much he that vttereth it, goeth for the better Proteſtant. For ſuch declare that ſo their buſineſſe be done, they can beare any rudeneſſe, brutiſhneſſe and diſorder in their ſeruants, and ſo the diſhonoring of God thereby: for all ſuch behauiour muſt be looked for, more or leſſe, in ſuch as are not religious.  But commonly ſuch maiſters are iuſtly met with by the ſeruants, whom they ſo preferre before thoſe which are religious.
               Againe, whereas they in that ſpeech condemne all which profeſſe, it is well knowne, that there are manie ſeruants who in their particular calling, in that they are ſeruants; as well as in their generall, that they are Chriſtians, do glorifie God highly, and ſhine as lights in their places to the ſhame of their accuſers. And yet ſuch maiſters might iudge of their ſeruants religious and chriſtian practiſe by their owne, that all dutie is not by and by to be looked for at their hands, which haue ſome loue and liking of the Goſpell. Are they themſelues ſo vnblameable in their whole courſe, that others may not ſee as  great wants and faults in them, as they ſee in ſeruants? It is to be feared, that ſuch (who will ſo ſpeake as I haue ſhewed) do not giue them alwayes the beſt example: but if they do; let them catechiſe them alſo, beſide the publicke teaching which they inioy, who being alreadie willing to liue chriſtianly, yet if they be not diligently and louingly taught, cannot ſo ſoone be brought to any great perfection. And this being done let them proue, whether religious or prophane, be the beſt ſeruants.
               
                  Laſtly, of mens vocation this I adde: that I haue not ſo vrged the neceſſitie  of laboring in it, but that if ſome through extreame pouerty & want of ſtocke be inforced to giue ouer occupying, as hauing no other remedie (through the hardneſſe of their harts, who will forgo nothing to the reliefe & ſetting vp of ſuch & the multitude of other poore folke) if it be thus (I ſay) that they haue no other remedie, nor be able to labour in any lawfull calling, they may with the peace of their conſcience receiue almes & pleaſe God therein, keepe their confidence in him, and grow forward in the further knowledge & practiſe of their dutie, as other Chriſtians do (though this which I ſay, ought to be no ſhelter for the ſlouthful and idle.) Which thi
                     •
                  g if many were perſwaded of (as it is pity that any ſhould doubt of) they ſhould beare their poore eſtate more  indifferently; and the ſhame that many haue of it, more cōtentedly then now they do.Note. For that is now their calling to truſt in God, and to hope for that reliefe, which ſhall be ſufficient for them, as they did before their decay.
               Furthermore, neither would I haue any to thinke, that this which hath bin ſpoken, doth ſimply denie a chriſtian man libertie to alter and change his calling: which although it ought not haſtily nor lightly be done (ſeeing it is very probable, that a man may be beſt able to deale in that, wherein he hath bene trained vp and experienced) yet vpon neceſſitie and the decay of his former tradeLuke 16.3., and vpon other ſufficient and waightie conſiderations (of which ſort there may fall out many) he may inioy libertie ſo to do: which to  ſet downe in this place, were too farre a departing from the point in hand.
               And thus much be ſayd of this matter concerning mens outward vocatiō: whereby among other things this may be ſeene, that although the moſt do complaine that they are much hindred from a fruitfull walking with God, by their earthly callings; yet that is their error, or ſome way their great ſinne: for a man fearing God may preſerue faith and godlineſſe by a warie & Chriſtian walking in them, & practiſe many chriſtian duties in the ſame; as patience, & truſt in God, &c. and conſequently may pleaſe him therein to the great contentment of his owne hart. And therfore, if any man find his calling to be a let vnto him from ſeruing God religiouſly, and well ſpending of the day, let him  know, that the hinderance of him frō this is in himſelf: euen ſome vntowardneſſe, intemperancie, and rebellion of his hart, either becauſe he knoweth not how to vſe his calling aright; or elſe, becauſe he hath giuen himſelfe too much liberty to depart frō folowing that which he knoweth. But otherwiſe, if he indeuor to incourage himſelf by the afore mētioned perſwaſiōs, to vſe it aright, he ſhal ſee euery day more clearly much cauſe to praiſe God for the proofe of his loue to him and bleſſing ſo many wayes therein (ſo farre off ſhall it be from being an encombrance vnto him, as moſt complaine that they find it:) yea, I dare be bold to aſſure him, and that by the Lords owne teſtimonie, (for to him that hath, ſhall be giuen, and he ſhall haue abundance) that he  ſhall find by a conſcionable diſcharging of dutie in it, much libertie and holy boldneſſe with God. So that, this third rule of a religious walking in our calling, reaching to ſo great a part of our life, though it may ſometime be omitted,Luke 8.18. is (we ſee) much to be regarded; and other duties of equall neceſſitie, when that muſt wholly or in part be intermitted, muſt be performed. But this is to be vnderſtood according to the helpes and incouragements, that

                   euery man hath one more then another, thereafter he muſt be more fruitfull: that none may be diſcouraged on the one ſide, whē he cannot do as he wold; or made ſlouthfull and negligent (when he might do much more) on the other. Thereafter (I ſay) ought euerie man both in his particular vocation, and in all other points of Chriſtianitie, bring foorth more fruite: as,The miniſter hath more meanes to further him by his calling, then a priuate man. the Miniſter in reſpect of his calling, which is to be occupied in reading and teaching of other, and whoſe labour is a meane to helpe him forward in a godly life, becauſe it is an acquainting of him with the Scriptures and the mind of God ſo properly, as cannot be ſayd of other mens labours: the miniſter (I ſay) in ſuch reſpects, oweth more dutie to God (which he may alſo be  able to performe) then the priuate man. So the wealthy man,So the vvealthy, rather then the poore. in that he needeth not be carefull or penſiue about neceſſaries, (but it is his great ſinne if he be) hath more liberty to remember God, and to ſet vpon duty with chearfulneſſe, more then the poore; who is through meere neceſſitie conſtrained to his great griefe, to cut off many times of reading, conference, and of publike hearing (which for the moſt part, the other need not:) though he be not thereby diſcharged from fearing to offend God, &c.
               And whereas men alleadge, that the rich is letted by reaſon of his wealth, and therefore cannot ſo eaſily apply himſelfe to walke in a ſound courſe: not what he doth, but what he ought and may do, is to be conſidered. For as he  ſhall ſhew himſelfe vnthankfull to God in groſſe manner, who ſhall thus go about to make Gods bleſſings, ſtumbling blockes and hinderances from hartie loue and obedience to him, and from libertie in his ſeruice more then others can haue: ſo he ſhall neuer do it but to his great coſt. In like maner they, which dwell among many good neighbours, who are as watchmen to them, and haue an ordinarie teaching miniſterie that can build them vp, are to ſhew themſelues more rich and plentifull both in the exerciſes of religion, and in the particular duties which belong to Chriſtians, then they can do, which want either the moſt, or all of the meanes which others enioy.
               And according to this equitie, the auncient Chriſtian, who through long  experience is better acquainted with the louing kindneſſe of the Lord, ought in better ſort diſcharge himſelfe of the fore-mentioned and other duties, then he who is a nouice, and a young ſouldier in this ſpirituall warfare. Therefore Saint Iohn writing to the elder Chriſtians to put them in mind,1. Iohn. 2.14. vrgeth them by the ſame reaſon, ſaying: I write vnto you fathers, becauſe ye haue knowne him which is from the beginning. As if he ſhould ſay: Ye haue experience, that it is no labor loſt to ſerue him: but ye hauing had acquaintance with the godly life, and the bleſſed fruite of it from your youth, ye are able vpon ſo good and long triall, both to proceed conſtantly your ſelues in your courſe, and alſo to hearten on the yonger.
               
                   And the ſame I ſay of all others, whoſe part hath bene greater in peace, health, freedome from diſeaſes, in holy fellowſhip (eſpecially of mariage) or in whatſoeuer other bleſſings of God:Note. they (I ſay) who haue inioyed more bleſſings of God then other of their good brethren, ought by good right to go farre before them as ſhining lights, both in variety of duties, and in more gracious performance of the ſame; and ſooner returne when they perceiue themſelues to haue wandred, and more firmely to ſettle themſelues to hold

out in their good courſe. And therefore it behooueth them to gaine all occaſions, which others neglect, to the redeeming of the time from idleneſſe, wandring dreames of earthly happineſſe, and needleſſe and filthie ſpeech, and ſuch other like: alſo to pray oftner, then at ſet and appointed times: to ſtirre vp their faith in the manifold and rich promiſes of God, taking comfort thereby vſually: and while they may and while God giueth them oportunitie, to refreſh and do good to many by compaſſion, loue, counſell, reliefe; and with all theſe to keepe a proportion in their particular vocation, ſo as they may haue it an helpe, and not a let to them: that ſo the Lord may ſay to them,Mat. 25.23. Well good and faithfull ſeruants, becauſe ye haue bene faithfull, &c. enter into your Maiſters ioy.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 15. Of the declaration of the fourth rule or dutie, directing vs in company.
               
                  NOw followeth an other dutie for the guiding of vs in companie: that is to ſay, when by any occaſion we be in place with others, that with the ſame well ordered harts, with the which we haue bene taught to diſcharge other  duties in the day, we carie our ſelues in companie: becauſe it is a part of our life in the paſſing of the day, very diuerſe and diſtinct from that wherein we are ſolitarie and deale with our ſelues. And although a man may be both in his calling and in companie at once; yet, as I haue ſhewed how euery one ought to be conuerſant in his calling, without reſpect had of companie: ſo now I ſhew particularly, how companie ſhould be vſed without reſpect of mens callings. Now as the companies be of many ſorts with which we are occaſioned to be occupied, and the matters infinite which fall out to be debated of in the ſame; ſo can there not therefore any certaine and particular  rules be giuen to direct our ſelues in them: but yet ſome generall obſeruations may helpe vs much; the rather, ſeeing they to whome I direct my ſpeech and who may take profite by this, haue attained to the heartie deſire of keeping a good conſcience alreadie, and haue (for a great part of them) ſome meaſure of ſound knowledge of the will of God, which will greatly further them in the ſame.
               And becauſe all companies among men are not for and concerning trafficke in earthly dealings, and matters about this preſent life, as bargainings and couenants:Company meet in diuerſe reſpects: but ſome are among neighbours and friends, partly for the increaſing of loue, and partly to make merrie; and otherſome by other occaſions, and ſome by accident without any purpoſe thereof before: in all which kinds, we often take much hurt, and be in farre worſe caſe by them for want of good direction and heed-taking, then we were before we entred into thē: Firſt therefore I will ſpeake of thoſe companies,Eſpecially two. wherein we haue more libertie to benefite our ſelues one by another to God-ward, as hauing no weightie dealings to hinder vs: and then of the other which belong to the affaires

                   and dealings about this preſent life, how to vſe them.
               In both which generally,A generall rule in both. this is a generall rule to be obſerued in all companies: That we feare daunger, and be harmeleſſe in them and without offence, leauing no ill ſauour by example behind vs: but more particularly,Note. 
                  More particularly in ſome. the marke which we are to ayme at in all our familiar companies is this, That wee ſhould not ruſh vnaduiſedly into them as moſt men do, but determine before to do good in them to others as we be able, and to helpe them forward vnto eternall life by all good oportunities we can; or purpoſe to take good of others, as occaſion ſhall be offered.
               
                   This rule (to make no doubt of the former, Mat. 18.7.8.) is according to the Scripture, that as we ſhould draw vnderſtanding out of them,Pro. 20.5. whom God hath plentifully enriched with it: ſo we ſhould be moued with pitie and compaſſion towards them, who are ignorant and careleſſe: or though they were neither of both, yet many wants and infirmities at leaſt they haue, as we our ſelues haue;Col. 3.12. 1. Theſ. 5.13. and therefore haue neede beſide the preuenting of other daungers, to be exhorted, ſtirred vp, called vpon and inſtructed; that ſo both they and we might be edified and built vp in our moſt holy faith,Iude. 20. Prou. 10.20. Iam. 5.20. and haue our loue and mutuall peace confirmed betwixt vs: that ſo our lippes may feede many, and through Gods goodneſſe we may be meanes to turne ſome from going aſtray out of their way;1. Sam. 23.16. and we may haue alſo cauſe to thanke  God for the like by others, and reioyce in our Chriſtian fellowſhip together. All which vſes, Ionathan and Dauid enioyed in their meetings, the one by the other.
               And to what great purpoſe ſhall it be to inioyne watchfulneſſe ouer the other parts of our life, if in companie we haue not an eſpeciall regard of it, thereby to take all good oportunitie to make our companies profitable? For daily experience teacheth how many occaſions of offending God, and of troubling our ſelues are offered and occaſioned therein: and were we not better be abſent one from another, then in ſuch ſort meete together? Beſides, what an vnruly member the tongue is, though it be ſmall,Iam. 3.6.8. the Apoſtle declareth  when he ſaith: That it ſetteth on fire the whole bodie, and is it ſelfe ſet on fire by hell. And as for the heart which ſetteth it on worke, who is ignorant how readie that is euery way as the companie ſhall be, to offend, either by teachineſſe, conceipts, miſconſtruing; or by looſeneſſe, and lightneſſe, and ſuch like? And both theſe being well conſidered,The dangers that are by companie. how many companies ſhall be found, where one is not the worſe for another? where one corrupteth not the other? where there are not fallings out, quarrels and debate; or prophane and endleſſe talke of the world, ieaſting, vaine and idle ſpeech, if not filthie communication and ribaldrie; or where there is not buying and ſelling of thoſe which are abſent? And as for lying,Hoſ. 4.2. ſwearing (as Hoſea ſpeaketh)  with ſuch other abhomination, it goeth through the land: and where theſe faile, what other ſpeech is in ſtead of them moſt commonly, but telling of tales, needleſſe newes, and ſuch like fooliſh and heatheniſh talke, euen in ſuch as profeſſe; which were bad enough for them which haue not heard of the Goſpell?
               The moſt tolerable communication amongſt the reſt, which is vſed, is (as I haue ſaid) to be deepe in and about the world and matters of commodity;

wherein, as I deny not but that there is a lawfull vſe permitted to men, ſparingly, ſoberly, and wiſely, when, and ſo farre as there is cauſe: euen ſo, as it is moſt commonly vſed, it is made well nigh as bad as the other; that it hindreth and holdeth away all other matters profitable, and drowneth the perſons ouer head and eares in it. Now ſeeing we know it is thus, ſhould not this common and daungerous corruption,They ſhould moue Chriſtians to ſeeke to preuent them. preuailing and continuing thus in moſt companies, cauſe the ſeruants of God to bewaile it, ſeeke to ſtay and to hinder it; and euery one for his owne part, both Paſtor and people, as much as in him lyeth, labour earneſtly to redreſſe it?
               And therefore what is more needfull about our companie, then to haue it euer in purpoſe to learne and get ſomewhat where we may in companie: and  to helpe forward others, which we may do any good vnto, as we are able; or to make ſome other good vſe of it? That we may haue teſtimonie within our ſelues,Seeing our companies ought to be other. that we had made better vſe of our companies, then the moſt ſeeke to do, or then we in times paſt had done our ſelues. And whatſoeuer exceptions may in probabilitie be brought againſt the performance of this dutie, which after (as conuenient place ſhall require) I will anſwer; yet for thoſe who reioyce in the hope of the life to come, when they meet together, it ſhould not be counted hard amongſt them, to meete with this mind: that they might make the beſt vſe of their companie in ſome good talke about ſuch things as might be profitable,Euen to do good, or take it. and for the mutuall edifying of them; prouoking  one another thereby to greater loue,Heb. 10.24. Heb. 3.13. as ſeeing and feeling cauſes therof, and what decay of it there is; for ſo hath the Lord commaunded: Exhort one another daily while it is called to day.
               
                  The Heathens prouoked themſelues mutually to loue.And, if among heathen men, friendſhip was increaſed by aduiſing one another, and by good turnes done and receiued mutually one of another; ſhould not Chriſtians much more bind themſelues one to another, as by other pledges of loue: ſo by this one, that there be drawing on to dutie, to grow in the knowledge of the Goſpell, and to auoide the daungers which might otherwiſe be fallen into? That ſo there might be more mindfulneſſe one of another in abſence, when there was reaped ſo great good fruite of the  one by the other in preſence.
               By reaſon of mens callings and diſtance of places, there is ſeldome meeting amongſt good men:Seeing Chriſtians can meete but ſeldome, they ſhould be the better for their meeting. if therefore when they meete, they ſhould not be the better one for another, they might repent for good cauſe, that they had loſt their gaine, which in that time they might haue had in their calling at home: beſide that, it would accuſe them after their departure, that they had neglected ſo good oportunities, which when they would, cannot be enioyed.Note. I know there is cauſe why this ſhould be looked vnto, euen amongſt good people, ſeeing through the corruption of nature, the diuell layeth ſtops enough in the way of the beſt: whereby, although he cannot bring them to  the common euill courſe of other men, to walke in exceſſe of riot as they do; yet he keepes them from the good, which might be done betwixt them: as may iuſtly be complained of, where I haue acquaintance.
               So that Chriſtians whenſoeuer they meete, either of purpoſe and by conſent, either for neighbour-hood and (as we ſay) to make merie, or by any other prouidence of God, and yet not about trafficke or earthly dealings; this

                   mind ought alwaies to be in them, that I haue mentioned: and therefore, the one to ſeeke to benefit and edifie the other by good ſpeech, waiting for,Pro. 25.11. and taking the beſt occaſions thereof and oportunities thereto; they beginning, who for their giftes are fit to bring on the reſt; not entring beyond their skill and reach, neither the one croſſing the other: but through loue bearing one with another, and one helping another (for loue is their greateſt vpholder:) and therefore either conferring of the things which they haue learned,The maner of Chriſtians meetings together. or ſtirring vp themſelues mutually to hearing of Sermons, to diligence in going forward, to inoffenſiue walking, and alſo ſinging of Pſalmes together: and if there be any occaſion of reprouing, exhorting, admoniſhing, or comforting  one the other, to do it priuately if the matters be priuate, and betwixt ſo many as it concerneth, in meekneſſe of ſpirit and a thankfull receiuing of ſuch duties: and that they that offer the ſame, be readie to ſubmit themſelues in humilitie againe, to receiue the words of exhortation, as they through their weakeneſſe ſhall giue occaſion.
               The ſimplicitie of the times hath bene ſuch,Much more this ought to be infamilies. as men haue met louingly together in this manner, prouoking one another thereunto: but it is iuſtled out with a proude conceipt of their owne wiſedome, who count it too baſe now to conuerſe together after ſuch a manner. But as this dutie is to be mutually imparted among neighbours: ſo much more it ought to be in vſe and force  in particular families, beſides the ordinarie worſhip of God in prayer and familiar inſtruction: where, euen the ſeruant who is the meaneſt member therof, hath libertie (ſo as it be in humilitie and wiſedome) to make his complaint, as Iob permitted his ſeruants to do;Iob. 31.13. that thus peace and godly vnitie may be maintained, and all may grow vp and be edified more and more. Which duties we are not to doubt, to haue bene performed in the families of the noble gouernour Ioſua, and of Cornelius a valiant Captaine,Ioſ. 24.16. Act. 10. ſo farre as there was knowledge of the ſame amongſt thē, ſeeing it is ſaid: That the feare of God was in thoſe families; and ſuch liuing together in one houſe, doth giue good teſtimonie, that God hath a litle Church there indeed: but of this  in another place.
               But ſeeing there ought to be no leſſe vſe of all theſe fruites of companie betwixt the godly Paſtor and his people,Alſo betwixt the paſtor and people. then amongſt thoſe whom I haue mentioned: therefore let the former rules moſt eſpecially be obſerued of thē, and ſomewhat more; that is to ſay, mutuall conſent betwixt them, that their conference be of the things which are moſt fit for the eſtate of the perſons: which, by good warrant from God, (who requireth ſuch wiſedome, labour and loue) and approued experience of men, ſhould be after this manner: That ſuch as are ignorant, and yet willing to be taught, ſhould be taught (queſtion-wiſe) the grounds of Chriſtian religion, and the way how to be  ſaued, and to amend their liues. They who haue knowledge hereof, ſhould be laboured with, to make vſe of it: namely, to be humbled by the law, comforted by faith in Chriſt, and to be reformed in their liues. They who are ſtayed in theſe chiefe matters, ſhould be taught how to grow by the helpes, and auoide all impediments: that ſo their life may be full of fruites and comfort. And they who haue profited thus farre, ſhould haue libertie giuen them to demaund queſtions of their paſtors for their edifying, euen as to be queſtioned

with by them for their inſtruction, about any particular doubts in the  whole religion and true worſhip of God; and in confuting the contrarie: or about any point touching conſcience in the practiſe of dutie. I will not ſay what gaine the teacher himſelfe might reape hereby, beſide the poore people, neither are many haſtie to proue: but oh times! oh dayes! yea, oh people to be lamented: ſo happie by the long raigne of thy Prince and continued peace, as thou mighteſt haue bene; and ſo litle of this fruite to be enioyed, or Chriſtian dutie practiſed! The beſt thing, euen the pearle and tidings of the kingdome, to lye as wares out of requeſt, not asked after, and that through vanitie and folly! Theſe and ſuch like, (as God hath giuen wiſedome to both parties) ſhould be endeuoured after betwixt the paſtor and people, when no  other neceſſarie things do hinder: which maner of meeting were (no doubt) like to be as a ſtrong band to tye them in loue and chriſtian peace together. And this I haue ſeene, and that not in one place nor two: but I muſt ſay, as it bringeth a ſweet life, ſo the diuell layeth many blockes in the way to hinder it; that while they liue ſtraunger-like and conceipted one with another, or looſe, worldly and vnprofitably, they may be as others be, who haue no acquaintance with the Goſpell. For let men thinke and ſay what they will, there is not one halfe of the benefite that might be enioyed, no not of many profeſſors themſelues, by the preaching of it.
               But to proceed: it is an harder thing for a man which feareth God, to haue  vſe of this rule before ſet downe,Hard to make good vſe of meeting in ill companie. that is, the libertie of good talke in the companie, when he ſhall by occaſion light among ſuch as are not of his owne mind; and the worſer the perſons be, the harder. It will be counted harſh, if not ridiculous, among ſuch whoſe tongues (as they ſpeake) are their owne, to vſe them as they liſt, though the beſt way be taken for entring into it.
               Here therefore, another conſideration is to be had of vs for the making of beſt vſe of the time:How we ſhould go about it. namely, that we waite for ſome fit occaſion to be offered by ſome of the company; which (though they purpoſe no ſuch thing) will from their talke ariſe, if we attend vpon it as Paul did before Agrippa: if not, then ſpeake we of the workes, iudgements or bleſſings of God which are among  them, or freſh in memorie; by the which we may in as wiſe a manner as we can, vtter ſomewhat to the holding out of euill at the leaſt: and further it ſhal be expedient to like and commend that which is well ſpoken by them,Act. 26.28. the rather to faſten vpon it, ſo farre as it may be done without ſuſpition of flatterie, and hurtig of them. By which manner of dealing, I haue oft ſeene the euill which began among men, and appeared; to be ſtaied and ſuppreſſed: and attendance giuen to better communication, being wiſely and kindly offered.
               But here, loue towards them muſt ſhew it ſelfe, which will make our labour ſeeme ſmall to vs,Note. while we ſeeke all oportunities to winne them, and  whiles we are content to forgo our owne pleaſures & liberties in other talke, that we may do good to them. To this purpoſe, it were meete that when we ſhould reſort to any ſuch company,How to ſtrengthen our ſelues to that. yea or any other, we ſhould bethinke vs of ſomewhat before; as of ſome good queſtions among them, of whom we might learne; and ſome other good matter fit for edifying, as the company ſhould require, it being ſuch as we might do any good vnto: eſpecially

                   ſeeing godly communication is ſo ſeldome in place, but baniſhed vtterly from moſt companies. This may be thought of many, who go for good Chriſtians, ſomewhat too much, to haue ſuch regard of others: but it is (indeed) ſlouthfulneſſe and want of loue, not to ſeeke the good of our brethren; and ſelfe-loue, to ſeeke that which pleaſeth the fleſh, in trifling out the time, with the neglect of the good of others and our ſelues.
               The which if Preachers of the Goſpell eſpecially, and other Chriſtians would conſider, I know it would be farre better with the people, and much more good done in many places, then there is now for want of it, and they themſelues ſhould haue no cauſe to repent it. And though there ſhould be  no great likelihood of any good done thereby for the preſent time,VVe ought not to be diſcouraged from edifying talke by any occaſion. 1. Theſ. 5.11.
                   yet ought we not for all that to be diſcouraged, foraſmuch as we are commanded to vſe edifying talke: and we ſee, that good things take not alwayes effect by and by, but afterwards in time, as the Lord ſeeth beſt, it may preuaile with them; as alſo we may ſee it appeare in many in ſome part of their life, and in others, (many times) at the day of their death: and yet if no good ſhould be done is it not to be liked that euill is remoued?
               But if men which feare God, be not reſolued to ſeeke ſuch profitable and Chriſtian vſes of their meetings, in ſome ſort when they may be inioyed: I would wiſh them to thinke,Better to be at home in our calling, then abroad to do vvorſe. Eccleſ. 5.2. Mat▪ 12.36.
                   that it ſhall be better for them to attend vpon  their familie and their affaires and charge at home, rather then frequent company much abroad, ſeeing in much common talke there is much ſinne, and for idle words men ſhall giue an account. I graunt that neighbourhood and loue amongſt Chriſtian men, is nouriſhed by meetings; as, feaſtings together, and ſuch like: but theſe are not hindred but much helped, whiles our tables, after we are refreſhed and haue ſhewed tokens of loue therein, be ſeaſoned with good communication, and a carefull regard had to keepe out that which is euill and needleſſe: and if there be any to whom this is vnwelcome, who perhaps will not be thus directed in the vſe of company-keeping, let him ſet downe a better, and I ſhall be well pleaſed in his refuſing of this aduice  and direction, and with all my heart learne of him.
               And as for them which obiect: that they haue not bene acquainted with ſuch communication when they meete, and therefore looke not after it; they ſhould rather bluſh at their ignorance, and want of experience in ſo manifeſt a duty: for our talke ſhould be to the edifying of the company:Col. 4.6. Ioſ. 1.8. 1. Tim. 4.12. and all ought to follow their teachers in it, who are commaunded to be examples to their flocke in the ſame: Be an example in communication. Neither let any pleaſe themſelues in this, that they will not looke after ſuch preciſeneſſe: It were more to be commended and better to be liked, if they had ſayd, They were ſory, that they had not their benefit in ſuch a ſweete libertie,A vviſe and ſauorie ſpeech of a learned man. as God hath  vouchſafed vs. It was the ſpeech of a learned godly man: I neuer depart out of company, where I haue wholly omitted good ſpeech hauing oportunitie, but I am checked and accuſed.
               But to go a litle further: if it ſhall fall out that we be to our griefe in company, as beſet with ſcornefull, prophane and brutiſh perſons, ſo that we ſee no oportunitie nor place for any good, it ſhall be our wiſedome to keepe our ſelues from hauing any fellowſhip with their vnfruitfull workes of darkneſſe;

vſing Sampſons wiſedome (when we feare any ſuch thing) by ſauory ridles or  ſuch like, to breake them off, and to giue apparant tokens of our miſlike if we can go no further to the ſuppreſſing of it; fearing otherwiſe, leſt while we are ſilent whē God ſhould be honored, the ſtones in the ſtreet ſhould ſpeake: yet let all be done wiſely and peaceably, and regard had how and when to ſpeake.Shunne ill company. And this is to be done vntill we can conueniently depart from them, and be carefull after, that we fall not into the like company againe: For ſo doth Salomon counſell,Pro. 14.7. Prou. 14.7. Depart from the company of a fooliſh man, when thou ſeeſt not in him the words of wiſedome. I ſpeake of ſuch company as one ſpake of Rome: If he go thither, at the firſt time he ſhall ſee an ill man: if he like ſo well that he go the ſecond time, he ſhall know him: but if he will  needs go the third time, he will ſurely bring him home with him.
               But in other companies we muſt be carefull (as hath bene ſhewed vs) that we baniſh euill, and indeuor after ſome good, both for our owne benefit & other mens;Col. 4.6. as it ſhall be the diſcharge of a good part of our duty (who are commanded that our talke ſhould be gratious and poudred with ſalt:) ſo it promiſeth great bleſſing to all ſuch as are carefull in looking to the ſame; as they haue ſeene,They vvho haue vſed good ſpeech longeſt, can beſt report the fruite of it: both to young beginners in the Goſpell: and alſo to ſtronger Chriſtians. who for theſe twentie or thirty yeares haue had experience, that it hath profited them greatly who haue carefully vſed it, in compariſon of thoſe who haue not regarded it: ſo that not onely the firſt beginners in the practiſe of Chriſtianity, haue bene well ſtirred vp to care and conſcience, and haue learned many good points of Chriſtian religion and duty by it; but euen they of longer continuance in Chriſts ſchoole, haue bene much comforted and perfited by vſing all oportunities this way for their edifying.
               It may be a ſhame for vs in the going about a duty which hath great promiſe of bleſſing, to be ſlacker then Heretickes, Papiſts and Sectaries are in that which is but the deuice of their owne braine; who by oft talking of their religion and opinions, haue drawne many into their errors.
               As for thoſe who obiect againſt it, that it is more then needeth, and they ſee not that men are tied to it, and they meete to be mery: I ſay to the firſt part of the obiection, that they who like it not in friendly and familiar meetings, but thinke it more then needeth, muſt needs looke litle after it amongſt ſtrangers and ill-willers to goodneſſe; where it will be ſo much the more vnwillingly gone about, becauſe they know not how the company is affected: and ſo amongſt ſuch as bring this obiection there ſhall neuer be time for it, nor vſe of it;Epheſ. 4.29. but the words of the Apoſtle ſhall lye dead: That our communication ſhould miniſter grace to the hearers. For anſwering the ſecond part of their obiection, I haue proued as much out of other Scripture: ſo that none ſhould account that an imbondaging and tying of him which God requireth, whoſe ſeruice is perfit freedome; and let them looke who haue a commandement from God to vſe it, what defence they haue by the corrupt  example of men which neglect it, for their ſo doing.
               
                  Col. 3.16. Epheſ. 5.4. Iam. 5 13.For the laſt point of their comming to be merrie, I aunſwer: that if they be merrie in honeſt and ſeemely mirth, they will not be againſt good communication, which ſeaſoneth their lawfull mirth that it may not paſſe bounds:Note. and let them ſuſpect, that it ſauoureth too much of the fleſh, which they account honeſt mirth, if for it, the other become irkeſome vnto them:

                   neither do I ſeeke to depriue men of the one, neither aboue that they are able, to tye them onely or alwaies to the other; but to indeuour to make beſt vſe of our companie, becauſe it is with vs in this one dutie as in the reſt, that he which commeth moſt forward in it, is yet much behind:Note. and yet this I would ſay further of their merrie talke; though communication of things lawfull and indifferent, be to be allowed, yet I would (if I might) chooſe, (when there is libertie for both alike) alwaies to preferre that which is holy, and to edifying.
               And (to conclude) ſo I would be taken, in that which I haue vttered concerning this matter, that how meete and profitable ſoeuer I affirme this communing  of good things in companie to be; yet if we light vpon ſuch, who haue ſome liking of the truth, and yet haue not felt ſuch ſauour in it, nor found ſuch fruite by it, but that they count it an ouer-charging, and too ſore a preſſing of them, to be much holden to it; I ſay, we lighting vpon ſuch,A caution about godly talke vſing. ought to haue regard of their weakeneſſe, and to bring them on as we ſee they may in beſt ſort be preuailed with: and let this be well regarded of vs, for it is farre from me to beate any ſuch thing into their heades, as to make them thinke, that our religion alloweth no talke but of the Scriptures; when both it alloweth, and we deny not, but (any thing which hath bene ſaid notwithſtanding) that the learned may haue their talke of learning, the magiſtrates  of gouerning, and the common people of their ſciences and trades, how they may come to more skill and attaine to further perfection in them, or of any other lawfull things to a good end.
               But this is to be obſerued generally, that in all theſe kinds of meetings, whatſoeuer the perſons be, we leaue no ill example among them, which as an ill ſauour, may caſt ſuch a rancke ſmell in the companie that it procure as well ſhame and ſorrow to vs, as hurt and offence to thoſe which are preſent, and reproach to their profeſſion, as alſo an imboldning of the bad to be worſe. And thus much for the vſe of our company in the which we haue no neceſſary dealings about the things of this life.Of reproofe or admonition. To the which I will adde the  duties of our reprouing, exhorting and comforting one another, ſeeing theſe are religious actions practiſed in company, though there be but two that meete together. And firſt for reprouing or admoniſhing of a Chriſtian, who hath giuen offence and iuſtly deſerueth to be rebuked: we muſt be ſure that the fault is committed by him, and not charge him vpon bare report,Prou. 18.13. Ioſ. 22.12. much leſſe for that which is no ſinne (though in our conceipt it be ſo) but a thing indifferent:How it ſhould be. and we muſt beware that we be not iuſtly to be charged with the like offence; for then we take away the grace and force of our reprehenſion,Math. 7.9. vnleſſe it be knowne that we do warily decline ſuch ſinnes our ſelues: and with a mind to reclaime him and turne him from his ſinne in loue  though it pricke, ſeeing the woūds of a louer are faithfull,Prou. 27.6. Gal. 6.1. & he that telleth the truth ſhall find more fauour at length then he that flattereth: and for a priuate offence, priuately; though if it be open and well knowne, it maybe in the cō
                  pany of many and more ſharply, as the offence is greater and the perſon,1. Tim. 5.20. one that may be more offēſiue, as a miniſter; alwaies laboring that it may appeare, that God findeth the fault and reproueth, and not we who are but his inſtruments to do his wil. But this age hath moſt boldly,It is litle regarded. yea ſcornfully diſpiſed this

ordinance of God: which troubleth the conſciences of many good Chriſtians;Leuit. 19.17.
                   ſo that when God commandeth it ſo ſtraightly on the one ſide, and men reiect it ſo inſolently and reſolutely (that I ſpeake no further) on the other ſide, they cannot tell what to do betwixt both.
               
                  
                     Of exhorting. Act. 11.23.And as for exhortation, which is a ſtirring vp of them to proceed in the wayes of the Lord, as Barnabas did the people in the booke of the Acts; and as Paule doth oft require it to be vſed among Chriſtians: ſo doubtleſſe he that laboureth in ſuch a worke,1. Theſ. 5.11. Heb. 3.13. doth diſcharge an excellent duty. But he muſt be a man ſo free from worldly incumbrances, and ſo looking to the neceſſitie of the performing of it, (through the coldneſſe that is in men) and to the good that commeth by it, that he may ſtirre vp this gift in himſelfe, whoſoeeuer  he be, that hath any ſuch; and not be diſmayed, if ſucceſſe follow not by and by, as he would wiſh. I haue ſeene much good done by it, euen in the mouth of priuate men. And if it were kindly vſed of Chriſtians, as they ſhall haue occaſion, and much more by the Miniſter, there would much good bleſſing followe it: but if men take not heed, the Diuell doth ſo craftily hinder it, that it will take ſmall effect, but rather be fruſtrate and broken off. That will be, if he who ſhould be occupied in this ſeruice to God, be a looſe liuer himſelfe, he ſhall do no good by it to others; and he ſhall ſoone waxe weary of it: and eſpecially if he be not very watchfull in his earthly dealings, that there grow no conceipts, ſtraungeneſſe and other  diſlikes by meanes of them, betwixt him and others: for they will ſoone hinder it.
               But here I cannot omit to bewaile the vnſeaſonable ſpeeches of ſome, as alſo vncharitable, and diſcouraging: that (as though they ſaw no vſe of theſe duties, namely of exhorting, admoniſhing and reprouing; nor of the Apoſtles commanding, that they ſhould be continued) aske: What Papiſts any conuert from their poperie hereby: whereas it is well knowne, that the common ſort of them admit ſmall talke about religion, their common anſwer being this, They meane not to reaſon; except the learneder ſort of them, who of a wilfull and malitious mind againſt religion and Prince maintaining it, do of  ſet purpoſe abuſe their gifts to the peruerting of the truth. But God be thanked, this charge of exhorting and rebuking one another, was giuen before poperie was hatched: and there ſhould haue bene need inough of it, though it had neuer bene bred, and ſo it ſhall be a Chriſtian duty much pleaſing the Lord (without any regard of them who ſcorne it) whereſoeuer it be wiſely and religiouſly vſed: and (without controuerſie) much bleſſed; this being regarded of them towards whom it is vſed,Heb. 13.22. which is written: I beſeech you brethren ſuffer the words of exhortation.
               For conſolation alſo and miniſtring comfort, it is another worthy duty: when in mens bodily ſickneſſe or trouble of mind,Of comforting the heauy-harted. or otherwiſe in their  wants, we do eaſe their ſorowfull hearts, with ſweet words from God, wiſely and fitly applied to them, and comfort them as he hath comforted vs. When a penitent ſoule counting that his greateſt miſerie, which is a token of his greateſt happineſſe, (I meane the feeling of the burthen of his ſinne, deſiring nothing more then to be eaſed) ſhall be brought to be perſwaded ſo, and that his ſinne is forgiuen him,Act. 8.39. what can be like comfortable to him? For he ſhall

                   be one of a thouſand to him that can do it, as we reade in Iob.
                  Iob. 33.23. So when another in caſe of bodily diſtreſſe or neceſſitie, ſhall in like ſort be ſpoken to, as the woman of Canaan was by our Sauiour, ſaying:Matth. 15·28. O woman great is thy faith, be it to thee as thou deſireſt; what a reuiuing of her was it (thinke we?) Not much vnlike to the dealing of Boaz with Ruth, a deſolate and poore widow, and a ſtrannger; which cauſed her to breake foorth and ſay: O my Lord, thou haſt comforted me, and ſpoken to the heart of thine handmaid.Ruth 2.13. Philem. 7. For if the diſeaſed perſon be much cheared by Phiſicke bodily, what maruell though ſpirituall comfort worke vpon the ſoule mightily? It ſhould be in requeſt therefore, aboue all other priuate matters, euen as it is the waightieſt:Vpon the ſoule. 
                   that there ſhould be not Miniſters onely, (who yet chiefly ſhould do it) but euen priuate Chriſtians alſo, who ſhould be able in ſome meaſure to comfort one another in their heauineſſe: but this alſo is to ſeeke with men. Not one of many can ſpeake to the purpoſe to a ſicke bodie to comfort him, but vnſauorily, that which may more increaſe his heauineſſe, by telling him they are much grieued for his ſickneſſe, &c. when (who ſeeth not?) they had need of other comfort.
               As for other companies, they are of another kind: ſome about honeſt refreſhings, ſome about bargainings, couenants-making, & other agreements; & ſome about ſuites, debates, controuerſies, and ſuch like: and although there  cannot certaine rules be giuen concerning them all;Ciuill company how to be vſed. yet they muſt be all gone about and done in ſuch wiſe, as that they may be ſutable and correſpondent to the other parts of Chriſtian life, that there be no breaking off our comfort with God by looſe and careleſſe doing of them, but that we hold the vnitie of the Spirit in the bond of peace: neither that there be a following of the faſhion of other men in them, but that we being armed with ſuch grace as is fit for thoſe occaſions, may ſhew, that we are attired with the furniture of Chriſtians, which wee ought continually (as with ſeemely apparell) to be cloathed with, to make our whole conuerſation comely.
               
                   For example: to ſpeake of chriſtian recareation,How recreatiō Rules. wherein a part of companie keeping is taken vp for the moſt part,The firſt. which is an exerciſe not ſeparate frō godlines, of ſome thing that is indifferent for the neceſſary refreſhing of the mind or bodie, or both: who doubteth, but that God hath taught his ſeruants how to vſe it; although others will neuer come vnder any rule or gouernment? For they who will not be ſubiect in other parts of their liues to Gods commaundements, much leſſe will be controlled or directed by them in this: wherein they imagine they haue free libertie to vſe it as they liſt. Such therefore as do claime the benefite of it, muſt be as carefull to vſe it aright as to looke to enioy the libertie of it, not as they who if they once get  this by the end, That it is lawfull, neuer enquire further of the lawfull manner of vſing it. The time when it may be vſed, is not when we liſt,2 but when we haue neede of it through wearineſſe and other vnfitneſſe: for to that end the Lord appointed ſuch intermiſſion for vs. And though ſome deſire it not greatly to driue away from themſelues annoyances of mind or bodie thereby; yet to otherſome it is not to be denyed in either of both thoſe reſpectes, they being carefull to vſe it; as God doth allow: and in going about it, becauſe

through the corruption of our hearts we become eaſily vnſetled by  ſuch actions,3 it ſhall be very expedient to ſtrengthen our ſelues by ſome looking vp to God in our vſe thereof, that we may take no hurt to our ſoules whiles we refreſh our ſelues; ſeeing all the creatures of God are good, to the faithfull vſer of them, if they be receiued with prayer and thankes by which they are ſanctified: and he who counteth it too harſh and ſad a matter to deſire grace of God to vſe it aright, may well feare that hee ſhall offend in it.
               
                  4For the kind of our recreation: it muſt be honeſt and of good report, that ſo we giue occaſion to none by our liberties taking ſo vnſeaſonably, to embolden others againſt conſcience.5 The manner ſhould be in moderation of our  affections in it;
                     Command. 10. as anger, choler, contention, ſtrife, coueting that which is our neighbours, and ſuch like: and in moderation of the time, how long we continue it, remembring that it is a refreſhing tanquam ſomno cateriſque quietibus, as he ſaith; that is, as a man that is wearied, doth deſire reſt, and to giue himſelfe to ſleepe that he may be refreſhed by it: and it muſt not be an ouerlaying of our ſelues, or a toyle vnto vs, or wearying of vs, ſo that neceſſarie duties of the day be omitted by it;6 neither get ſuch an intereſt in vs, that we cannot leaue it when we ſhould.
               
                  7Our companions therein ſhould not be men of euill name for corrupt life and notorious offences, but ſuch as be readie to heare of it if they be ouerſhot. Our end: to be the fitter to the duties of our calling, not couetous cōtrarie to the tenth commaundement, nor ſeeke our gaine thereby, nor to increaſe our liking of ſuch paſſing of our time, and ſo to draw vs after the ſame oftener then might ſeeme expedient for vs, or from one kind to another, ſpending out our precious time therein as though we were to yeeld no account of it;Epheſ. 5.16. that we may not be ſeruants to our luſtes. And as this may ſomewhat direct vs in companies where we meete to refreſh our ſelues; ſo he that is not willing thus to vſe recreation, ſhall wiſh in time, that he had neuer bene acquainted with it:Pro. 21.17. beſides that, it is not ſaid in vaine: He that loueth paſtime ſhall be a poore man.
               
               Now for other companies in which we meet about our earthly affaires, God hath taught vs vertues fit to vphold and carrie vs through them, as all other parts of our life, in peace and in good ſort: whereas without them, full daungerous hurts might eaſily take hold of vs therein, by ſuch meanes as we litle ſuſpect. Therefore to ſpeake particularly of our bargainings and other couenants,In bargaining, how we ſhould behaue our ſelues. they ought to be without hollowneſſe, deceipt, vndermining and ſuch other vnconſcionable dealing; that ſo we may be ſimple and our meaning good,Note. our words plaine, our agreements reaſonable, our promiſes kept, our couenants performed, except conſent on both ſides to the contrarie: but where the aduauntage ſhould fal out againſt the poore and needy, there mercie  and compaſſion would be required.
               
                  Jn ſuites and controuerſies, how.In ſuites and controuerſies great charitie is to be ſhewed; and in this to be ſhewed, namely; that although no compromiſe can be made (which if it may with any indifferencie be obtained, is in no wiſe to be neglected:) yet that the queſtion or caſe betwixt vs about words, goods, or other matters, may not turne vs from the purſuing of the thing to the perſons, nor to breake

                   off our Chriſtian loue, howſoeuer we receiue hatred and deadly malice for our good meaning.
               Strong patience alſo muſt be laboured for to beare the coſt, the trauell, the toile and tariance, with all other griefes and moleſtations, which fall out thereby, or may poſſibly be offered vs, vntill we ſee the end and iſſue. But eſpecially if it ſhould ſtand with the aunſwering for our ſelues in accuſations of any crime before the magiſtrate: with this patience,Act. 5. would wiſedome and chriſtian courage with modeſtie and meekeneſſe be neceſſarily adioyned. And by the helpe of theſe the Lord hath brought to paſſe, that the frowning lookes, and cruell faces of tyrants and perſecutors haue not bene feared, their  bloudie threats haue not daunted the people of God, much leſſe haue they turned them from their moſt holy faith and profeſſion; but they themſelues who haue vexed them, haue appeared to be more tormented in their conſcience at the beholding of the graces of God in them, then they who haue bene bodily tormented by them. And this for the vſe of companie be ſaid, as in ſuch breuitie I could: which aduice and direction the reader muſt receiue in all companies one day as another to guide him therein.
               And to ſhut vp this fourth dutie, let this be added: that not onely in our companies we be harmeleſſe and giue good example; but euery way and in all our dealings with men, whether they be priuie to it or no, innocent and  iuſt to all, and mercifull and pitifull to the needie and oppreſſed:Note. and the rather, for that we are ſo naturally giuen to regard and ſeeke our owne profite, whoſoeuer ſuſtaine loſſe thereby; and therefore to be alwaies thus reſolued, that rather then any ſhould haue iuſt occaſion to complaine of our iniurie or hard dealing, we are readie to depart from ſome peece of our owne right, as Abraham did to Lot. And becauſe it is moſt mens calling,Gen. 13.8. & 9. euery of the ſixe daies to haue dealings with ſome other, therefore let the true Chriſtian arme himſelfe with this mind, euen thus to liue and conuerſe with them in all that they haue to do with them: for many of them are ſo deceitfull and vnconſcionable, that they will abuſe the moſt innocent and honeſt Chriſtians with  ſlaunderous tongues and falſe reports, if they cannot get what they would at their hands. Now what would ſuch do, if they had any iuſt cauſe giuen them to open their mouthes? But beſides, euen honeſter men, if they deale together, either for that they do not plainely ſet downe their minds; or if they do, yet one ſuſtaineth the loſſe in the end, when both looke to gaine: I cannot tel how it commeth to paſſe, that there ariſe hard thoughts betwixt them, that loue is broken off, or ſo cooled, as the diuell hath apparantly ſhewed, that the perſons wanted care and wiſedome: therefore ſuch ſhould ſo looke to their actions,2. Theſ. 1.7. that they may haue no ſuch accuſations come againſt them at euen or in the iudgement day, nor prouoke the Lord to meaſure out to them after  the ſame manner againe, which they may be moſt ſure of.
               Yet one thing remaineth, which moſt fitly is here to be placed:Obſerue and reuerence the graces of God in others. that ſeing we ſhall in hauing companie, fellowſhip and affaires with ſundrie men, behold many gracious examples among the reſt, as worthie patternes of godlineſſe, that we be diligent to marke and learne,Note. and follow whatſoeuer in thē may better adorne & furniſh vs, as the Apoſtle taught: Be ye followers of me,
                  1. Cor. 11.1. Mat. 11.29. 
                  as I follow Chriſt: & that we carie not that high opinion of our ſelues, as that we

ſtand in no ſuch neede of others becauſe we haue ſomewhat more then the  common ſort of the world, but in humilitie and meekeneſſe make that reuerent account of Gods gifts in others,Iam. 4.2. rather then enuie and diſdaine them, that we may with all ſpeed ſeeke to enioy the ſame our ſelues: and much more to follow the good examples of ſuch as are commended to vs in the Scriptures; as Abraham the father of the beleeuers in faith, Moſes in meekneſſe, Ioſeph in chaſtitie, Dauid in the loue of Gods worſhips and holy exerciſes, Caleb in conſtant following of the Lord to the end, &c. This the holy Ghoſt exhorteth vs to, in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes: Follow the faith and conuerſation of ſuch, and conſider what hath bene the end thereof. A neceſſarie watchword for numbers in this age, ſo degenerated from the godly  courſe of the reuerend Auncient that were before them, that they haue not onely not knowne the God of their fathers, but alſo diſgraced that zealous ſeruing of God which they vſed.
               The examples of ſuch therefore as I ſet downe before, ſhall be no ſmall helpe, being oft before vs, to chaſe away from vs friuolous and hurtfull fantaſies, faintneſſe, diſcouragements and wearineſſe of well doing; and cauſe that the multitude of contrarie examples ſhall not hurt vs by their pride, boldneſſe and licentious life; and to ioyne vs faſt to Ieſus Chriſt though not now ſeene of vs; and that we may hold the profeſſion of our faith with ioy vnto our end.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 16. Of the declaration of the fifth duty, how we ſhould behaue our ſelues in ſolitarineſſe.
               
                  NOw I will paſſe to the next duty: which is, to guide and teach vs how to cary our ſelues and paſſe the time, when we are out of company, ſolitary by our ſelues alone. And this it is, that ſeeing a great part  of the day many times is paſſed, when neither our callings are in hand, neither we occupied in any company; we muſt haue the ſame eſpeciall care ouer our hearts and behauiour when we are alone, that we were taught before to haue in company. And as we are counſelled by the Prophet,Pſal. 119.9. that if we deſire to reforme our wayes, and ſo to liue bleſſedly, we muſt take diligent heed to them all, one as well as another, as Gods word directeth vs: ſo this being one part of our wayes euerie day, (for the moſt part) to gouerne our ſelues chriſtianly at all times when we are by our ſelues alone, we muſt haue a ſpeciall regard and  care of the ſame.
               
                  Sundry occaſions to ſinne, in ſolitarines.For who is able to reckon vp all or the moſt part of the occaſions, whereby we are moued and prouoked to offend and let looſe our hearts to ſinne, when we are alone, and how infinite kinds of euill we may be brought vnto at ſuch times, when there is none preſent by feare or ſhame to hold vs from them? Nay I ſay more, the moſt iniquities which are done in the ſight of the

                   world, were firſt inuented and purpoſed onely in the ſight of God; and the ſinnes which openly are committed, haue bene in warping and working ſecretly before: which the Prophet did plainely expreſſe, when in bewailing his ſinne which was come into the eyes of men, he ſayd thus:Pſal. 51.5. 
                  Againſt thee only (ô Lord) haue I ſinned: as if he ſhould haue ſayd, I offended thee ſecretly by vngodly deſire, before I proceeded in the ſight of men to giue offence.
               And ſo ſaith another Scripture,2. Sam. 11.2. that Dauid walked on the roofe of his houſe, and ſaw from thence a woman, &c. And to ſhew more fully, that it is a fit time for the Diuell to occupie our heads in ſundry kinds of euill when we are alone,Gen. 3. Matt. 4. it is noted that our graund-mother Eue was ſet vpon by Sathan  when ſhe was alone, her husband not being with her. And our Sauiour was aſſaulted by him, when he was in the wilderneſſe out of the company of men; with many other ſuch ſayings. Which I alleadge not as though I were of opinion, that there is no danger to be feared in company, (I haue before ſayd the contrarie) but to ſhew that there is many wayes ſore danger of falling when we are alone (and ſo we the more naked to reſiſt:) which was the thing that I intended to proue, which our wofull experience (I am full ſure) confirmeth; who are no ſooner from company, alone, but ſwarmes of vaine, fooliſh, and (if they be not chaſed away) of noiſome and perillous thoughts and deſires (as a ſwarme of Bees about a mans eares) are ſolliciting  and offering themſelues vnto vs.
               Now then ſeeing the caſe ſo ſtandeth, who doth not ſee, what need there is of ſome good helpe to keepe our ſoules from annoyance at ſuch times?Be not vnoccupied in ſolitarineſſe. And not onely ſo, but alſo to ſtirre vp our ſelues vnto the doing of ſuch duties, as we ſhall ſee to concerne vs moſt: that ſo we may make this ſolitarie part of our life (which is not ſmall) to be ſutable and correſpondent vnto the reſt.
               And for ſome plaine and certaine direction herein, we may conſider the things which we are occupied about in ſolitarineſſe.VVhat are the things which vve are occupied about in ſolitarineſſe. Now we know that all matters which go through our hands or heads while we are out of company,  are either ſimply holy, or vnholy, or things indifferent: now our owne neceſſitie, and Chriſtian wiſedome will teach about which of all theſe we haue moſt cauſe to be occupied; and let vs not be ſlacke and negligent to marke and obſerue that, but let our circumſpect care and watchfulneſſe (which muſt alwayes accompany vs) euer foreſee that: for without it, we ſhall do nothing well. And therefore if in iourneying, walking, ſitting ſtill, or lying in our beds, &c. we ſhall remember, that we are held downe with any ſinne or infirmitie, let vs muſe vpon the occaſion of it, vpon the vileneſſe,Either thinke on our ſinne, to ouercome it: ſhame and danger of it, how hard it is to renounce it, how God is prouoked thereby, and therefore how to be abaſed vnder it; and ſo in confidence craue  pardon of it, and grace to weaken it. If we haue need and cauſe to take order for ſome earthly buſineſſe, which otherwiſe will turne vs to great trouble,Or on things indifferent, to diſpoſe of them: let vs with good aduice thinke with our ſelues how to diſpoſe of it to our peace. If neither of both theſe giue vs occaſion to be occupied, then let vs watch ſuch good oportunitie of being alone to make benefit of the time, by ſetting our ſelues to muſe vpon ſome holy things, (as the loue of God, our mortality,Or muze on heauenly, to ioy in them. &c.) or inioy the libertie of talking with our God by prayer, thankſgiuing,

reading, reioycing in him, &c. or, if we haue any other neceſſarie duty to be  done, (as we ſhall be able when we be from our calling) let that be gone about. And if it be obiected, that it is an hard matter thus to do: I muſt needs ſay, it will be hard to haue our hearts thus at commandement when we are by our ſelues, eſpecially for ſuch as cannot reade; but yet let vs conſider againe, that we cannot be better occupied: what did I ſay? better? nay we can hardly be otherwiſe occupied without ſinne. And this aduice for the redeeming of the time when we are alone, as long as it is the counſell of the Lord that we ſhould thus gaine it from euill, I am not moued what they ſay againſt it, who neither vſe their ſolitarineſſe thus, but as though thought were free, giue their hearts libertie to roaue and raunge any where. Sure I am, we  cannot be too prouident and carefull that way: and the beſt follow this rule ſloughly inough, by reaſon of the vntowardneſſe which remaineth in them, and the infinite occaſions which do prouoke them: and yet the fruite will anſwer the labour that ſhal be beſtowed. For if we ſhall with this vigilancy hold in our corrupt hearts, and hunt out, and ſcare away the aſſaults of the Diuell on euery ſide, as by the wiſedome which God hath giuen vs we ſhall we able to do; we ſhall neuer ſuffer them to cary vs foorth in any ill courſe or way; but in ſtead thereof, procure great libertie and freedome from ſuch ſeruitude.
               Yea, if we will be thus circumſpect and watchfull in this time of our ſolitarineſſe, (wherein we are otherwiſe in great daunger to fall many wayes, as hath bene ſayd) we ſhall come the better furniſhed into company after, to behaue our ſelues therein as becommeth vs: yea if we will be watchfull, I ſay, againſt the froth and draffe of our hearts, to expell and hold out idleneſſe, vanitie of mind, euill deſires, and wandring luſts, &c. it is incredible what aduantage it will bring vs: no leſſe, (I dare boldly affirme) then that hundreth fold ſpoken of in the Goſpell for one; that is, that whoſoeuer forſaketh ought for Chriſts ſake,Mat. 19.29. (it being that, which he cannot allow) ſhall receiue euen here an hundreth times more contentation, peace and comfort, then he ſhould haue had by following his will and deſire therein, &c.
               
               And whatſoeuer ſtrangeneſſe and abſurdity any men ſhall thinke this to be,Obiection. to haue ſuch an eye to our ſelues, that our well ordered courſe be not broken off, in the time when we ſhall be alone, (by ſetting our ſelues about things holy, or diſpoſing of things lawfull, or watching carefully againſt thoſe which are euill; and that we may not be at our owne choice to do or deſire what we liſt and thinke good, without this ſtrict tying of vs to ſome certaintie) they which will not be contentious, I truſt ſhall eaſily be anſwered.Anſvver. To whom, this I ſay for anſwer, (much like as I ſaid to them who thought it too hard) and let it be well weighed: that there is no time wherein we ſhall be alone, in which one of theſe three ſhall not be neceſſarie, or wherein  any other thing beſides almoſt, ſhall be tolerable or allowable. For what time of our ſolitarineſſe can there be, wherein we ſhall not haue ſome lawfull thing and that which is indifferent to thinke of about our family, our croſſes or other buſineſſe, and to preuent daungers imminent, to remoue or eaſe troubles preſent, or ſome other ſuch way to diſpoſe of matters for our peace, and for the good of others? or wherein we ſhall not haue cauſe to bewaile

                   ſome infirmitie which oppreſſeth vs; or to caſt with ourſelues, what an heape and dung-hill of corruption is lodged within vs, and complaine of it, and to ſee and know it better? or wherein we ſhall not haue iuſt cauſe to breake out into the praiſes of God, or ſome ſuch like paſſing the time about ſome holy matters (as hath bene ſayd) whereof there is ſo great variety and ſtore? I ſpeake to thoſe which haue vnderſtanding to iudge diſcreetly, and to whom nothing that I ſay, ſhould be harſh or vnſauorie; as hauing receiued from God a wiſe and vnderſtanding heart to diſcerne, and a promiſe of ſtrength, and therefore ſufficient incouragement to do his will in this part of their life readily and gladly, rather then to deſire with earthly minded perſons to range  after noiſome and vnlawfull liberties.
               Indeed I do not deny, but that as we cary fleſh about vs, which is a burthen to weigh vs downe, ſo we ſhall neuer diſcharge this duty, nor ſo purely follow this direction for the well taking vp the time when we be alone, as were to be wiſhed: but yet for all that, we muſt learne and indeuour to follow the rules which are giuen vs, and that daily better and better, and not to ſuffer our ſelues to paſſe ſuch times ſecurely and without regard, or full purpoſing of well beſtowing the ſame as we are directed, although we ſhall not attaine fully to that which we would. For if this be intended of vs faithfully, as euery one is inabled of God, we ſhall not need to repent vs of the time ſo  paſſed: but we may haue peace in that which we go about.
               And what ſhall we aime at in labouring to be thus directed, more then the deare ſeruant of God Dauid did,Pſal. 19.14. who as he prayed God that the words of his mouth might be alwayes acceptable in his ſight in what company ſoeuer he ſhould come: ſo did he likewiſe, that the meditations of his hart might pleaſe him, whereſoeuer he ſhould become. And ſo in another Pſalme he teſtifieth what his practiſe was: namely, that he did hide his word within his hart,Pſal. 119.11. that he might not at any time either in company or alone ſinne againſt him. And let all know, that it commeth from a moſt dangerous cuſtome of giuing their hearts libertie, (when they are by themſelues alone) that they range after  what fanſies and folly they liſt in company, and that they are ſo vntoward and vnwilling to betake themſelues to better vſes. And ſuch muſt do as they, who in eating and drinking haue ſtuffed themſelues ſo full, as that they are prouoked to vomite. And moſt lamentable it is, that after ſo long inioying of the Goſpell, there is ſo litle acquaintance with, or gouernement ouer the manifold diſorders and vnrulineſſe of the heart, when God hath giuen vs vnderſtanding hearts, to looke after and thinke vpon things which are excellent. But this complaint is made in another place.
               That which remaineth to be ſayd of this point (Vſing our ſolitarineſſe aright) is, that as I haue ſet downe the rules by which we ought to be guided  herein: ſo I giue a ſhort caueat, or watch-word about the ſame. As firſt,Fiue caueats or admonitions. whereas I haue ſayd, that when we be free from the workes of our calling, and out of company, after we haue entred into the affaires of the day,The firſt. one vſe of our ſolitarineſſe is, that we may deale about things lawfull, and bethinke vs how we may beſt diſpoſe them. Many things are to be conſidered, about this for the auoiding of danger: as, that we beate not our braines to ſearch curiouſly into others to iudge and cenſure them, neither buſie our

ſelues in their matters needleſſely,1. Tim. 5.13. as Paule ſpeaketh of women; that is, further  forth,1. Cor. 10.24 then we are called thereto, and ſo may become helpefull to them: which thing whiles many neglect, they ſpend much time in thinking of thoſe matters which do nothing appertaine to them; and in the meane while, make themſelues the vnfitter for their owne neceſſary duties.
               
                  2Furthermore, we muſt take heed, that while we deale in our owne matters,1. Tim. 6.9.10. we drowne not our ſelues in the cogitation of earthly things ouer long, that is, further then need is, and ſo we begin to take ſweetneſſe, and feele our hearts brought in loue with the creature and the commodities of this life; and thereby to haue our loue weakened towards the Creator. For this is not chriſtian wiſedome (though it be the wiſedome of the world) to increaſe our  loue toward the things of the world; but by all meanes poſſible to diminiſh it, and ſo the leſſe to ſet by them.
               
                  3 
                  Mat. 6.6.7.8. Mat. 15.8.9. Againe, whereas another vſe of our ſolitarineſſe is, that we ſhould bend our minds to holy and heauenly things when we are alone; this is a ſpeciall caution herein, that we do not for all our oft recourſe to this duty, goe about them with the leſſe reuerence, whether we go to prayer, or ſet our ſelues to reading, or enter into any meditation. The which admonition I know to be very needfull, for that I ſee many to ſet leſſe by and lightlier to eſteeme the moſt holy exerciſes of piety, euen for the cōmonneſſe of thē: who yet, when they firſt inioyed them, could neuer ſufficiently commend, eſteeme, or haue  their full of them.Ioh. 5.35. For as our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith of Iohn Baptiſt: Iohn was a burning light,Gal. 5.7. and for a ſeaſon ye delighted in him; and as the Galatians ran well for a time, but were letted: ſo I may ſay of this, that diuerſe for a while take pleaſure in the vſe of priuate helpes to godlineſſe; but they are ſoone broken off,Mat. 24.12. their hote zeale is quickly cooled. And this (if they were well rooted in the beginning) is, for that they do not daily nouriſh the eſtimation and loue of them, nor ſee daily the neceſſitie of them: but many dayes ſuffer them to be omitted, which they would not do, if they did not begin to be glutted with them. Therefore reſolue thy ſelfe of this, that thou haſt daily neede of ſuch holy exerciſes, and to haue ſome time in the day by thy ſelfe alone  to call thine affections home from wandring in the world, and to haue thy ſecret and ſweet talke betwixt God and thy ſoule; that thou mayeſt therby vnburthen thy ſelfe of the loade of worldly cares and deſires, which by too earneſt dealings haue growne vpon thee. And what day doth paſſe, wherein thou haſt not as great neede, as thou haſt had vpon any other, of meditating vpon Gods vnchangeable loue to thee, of the continuall and daily benefite of Chriſts death to heale the ſore of thy ſoule through ſinne? what day goeth ouer thy head, in which thou haſt not neede to confeſſe thy ſinnes, to ſee them better, and to bethinke thy ſelfe how thou mighteſt grow more conſtant in godlineſſe?
               
               
                  4Another thing to be taken heede of here, is: that thou thinke not ouer-wel of thy ſelfe, for that thou ſhalt do ſomewhat more in the ſeruice of God, then others; and for that cauſe looke to be borne with in ſome of thy faultes. We are herein too like Peter, (though in other parts of godly feruencie we come ſhort in following him) that whiles we looke to one thing, what grace wee haue receiued, we halfe triumph before the victorie; litle or nothing marking

                   how many good things we are without: whē (yet) the Apoſtle ceaſſeth not in his owne example to teach vs, that we ſhould forget the things which are behind vs, (that we ſhould not be fleſhed and made any thing the more ſlow and careleſſe by them) but we ſhould looke to the things which are before vs, and which yet remaine to be done of vs, and be caried to the marke, euen to the reward of our heauenly calling. Phil. 3.14.
               Finally, for the vſe of ſolitarineſſe in renouncing things vnlawfull,5 thou art to beware, if at any time when thou art alone thou entreſt into the conſideration of the manifold ſinnes which raigne in the world, and ſome of thē ſuch as do ſometime much ſnare and take hold of thee, that thou be not ſecretly  allured and drawne to like of ſome of them, whiles thou goeſt about to refraine and waine thy ſelfe from them by muſing on them.2. Cor. 11.14. For the diuell can chaunge himſelfe into an Angell of light, and cauſe that to ſeeme the greateſt pleaſure vnto thee, which is rancke poyſon; nay, (which is more) when thou goeſt about to diſgrace it to thy ſelfe, euen then to bee brought to like and be ſnared with it.1. Tim. 5.4. And as Saint Paule hath giuen charge to Timothy, and in him to all true miniſters of the Goſpell, that when they ſhould execute this one part of their miniſterie, namely, to exhort young women, (which was a good thing) they ſhould beware they mixed it not with euill, by vnchaſt thoughts ariſing in their hearts; and therefore he ſaith,  Exhort the younger women with all pureneſſe and chaſt mindes: ſo I ſay, in thy ſolitarie muſings of thy ſinnes (which is alſo a good thing) let the like regard be had: that is to ſay, that whiles thou intendeſt to grow further out of loue with them, the diuell tickle thee not with new deſire of them, or ſome other. For thou art blind through thine owne ſelfe-loue and corruption: but eſpecially when the diuell goeth about any ſuch matter, he will blindfold thee more ſtrongly, that thou ſhalt ſee that which liketh thee, in ſinne;Note. but not that which will ſlea thee: and the ſtrength of thine affections, being ſet on fire by a deepe impreſſion of that which they like, will more forcibly hale thee forward, then a bare weake deſire to auoide the ſinne, ſhall be able to  hold thee backe. And if thou beleeueſt not this, thou haſt (I dare warrant thee) found it ſo alreadie; and howſoeuer thou thinkeſt that thou hateſt ſin, thou ſhalt be drawne vnto it againe, vntill thou perceiueſt that thou art wounded, vnleſſe (which is worſe) thou be hardened.
               To this end remember, how Iuda going foorth about a lawfull and honeſt thing, namely: to ſee his ſheepeſhearers, intending no euill;
                     Gen. 38.18. Euen while ſin is diſliked in ſome ſort, it is reuiued. yet becauſe he went not armed, he defiled himſelfe by the way with an harlot. To the like end many more examples may be brought. And hereof it is (to illuſtrate that which I ſay, by an inſtance or example) that ſometime ſuch as haue liued in malice with their aduerſarie, do (vpon better conſideration) purpoſe  to agree with him, and pray, that they may no longer beare hatred: but euen then (a thing worthie to be marked) the manifold iniuries, vnkindneſſes and indignities are ſo amplified by the diuell, which their corrupt heart alſo liketh full well to aggrauate, that they rather depart after their prayer with triumphing ouer their aduerſarie, then ouer their ſinne; and being ſtrongly incenſed againſt him, they be very ſlaues to their ſinne. So haue many Chriſtians of good hope, oft times by themſelues reaſoned & debated in their harts,

how they haue bene haled and drawne to vncleane deſires, till they haue  bene checked for their ſinne, miſliked it, and accuſed themſelues for it, &c. and yet at the ſame time, (ſo couertly Satan worketh) or at the leaſt ſoone after, haue either ſet forward and reuiued ſuch vnruly deſires, or (which is worſe) haue nouriſhed them and ſo runne further. So I may ſay of all other iniquities that which I haue ſaid of theſe, that while they purpoſe alone by themſelues to thinke how ſhamefull and odious their ſinne is: yet for want of good experience and due conſideration, they ſuſpecting no ſuch daunger as the diuell intendeth againſt them, he ſendeth them away many times either as ill armed to reſiſt it as they were before; or elſe ſo handleth the matter, that they grow to a further liking and entertaining of it.
               
               And is it any maruell? For when they are thus ouer-matched by Sathan, (that while they go about to thinke of the renouncing of their ſinne, they are brought contrarily to like of it) this diſaduātageth them ſore much more, and holdeth them more ſtrongly in feare and perſwaſion that they ſhall ſtill liue in bondage and ſubiection to it, then if they had neuer at all gone about to reſiſt it:A ſimil. as he who maketh a fray, when he hath proued the ſtrength of his enemie, and hath felt and perceiued his owne weakeneſſe to be farre greater then he looked for, is much diſcouraged from attempting the like another time. And many of theſe ſleights are in our common aduerſarie the diuell, which diuerſe true hearted (yet vnexperienced) Chriſtians not knowing nor  being acquainted with, are much aſtoniſhed when they firſt proue it to be ſo, and are diſcouraged for long time after when they ſee what hard ſucceſſe they haue had. And it muſt teach vs all to come better armed then that we ſhould thinke, with a bare deſire to ouercome our ſinne, or in hauing onely a cold miſlike of it: theſe weapons fray not ſo mightie and ſubtile an enemie. But we will take no knowledge of it, and that we haue neede to walke in feare alwaies: and therefore we muſt of neceſſitie ſmart, for that we would not be warned, till we ſay as many haue ſaid: Oh that we had bene wiſer. Therfore both at ſuch times when we enter by our ſelues into the conſideration of our ſinne, to the end we may grow further out of liking with it, and at all other  times let vs indeuour to follow that which hath bene ſaid concerning this point, namely: that we deale wiſely in our owne behalfe, as by the former cautions we haue bene aduiſed.
               Thus in ſome ſort I haue ſhewed how we ſhould looke to our ſelues when we are alone, and how we ſhould be occupied in that time of the day wherein we are free from the workes of our calling and from companie, that is to ſay: In keeping our ſelues from idleneſſe and vaine wandrings, and if it may be in doing ſome good, at leaſtwiſe readie and prepared thereto, that we may alwaies euen alone as in companie ſuſpect our ſelues, and paſſe our time in feare, and be mindfull of Sathans enterpriſes. Alſo ſuch caueats or cautions as  I haue thought needfull, I haue added, whether we be occupied about things lawfull, or things which are holy in our ſolitarineſſe, or in auoyding things which are euill: and if for all that which I haue ſaid of directing vs to the well ſpending of the time alone, it ſhall not be able to perſwade ſome, I thinke it the beſt way to ſhame them with the examples of the heathen Philoſophers, and to ſend them to learne of them, who refuſe to be taught of the Scriptures.

                   And amongſt the reſt Marcus Tullius Cicero may be one,Heathens examples may ſhame Chriſtians in the vſe of ſolitarineſſe. who although he knew not Chriſt nor his doctrine, yet he had ſuch a continuall loue to learning and vertue, that as his writings do teſtifie how he was occupied in the eyes of others; ſo this one of his ſayings ſheweth, how he paſſed his time alone: I being wearie (ſaith he) of liuing amongſt wicked men, with whom all places in a manner do ſwarme, I betake my ſelfe vnto ſolitarineſſe, as much as I can; yet that none may thinke me to trifle out my time idlely, (that I ſay no more) let my bookes (which were many volumes) ſpeake, how in my ſolitarineſſe I haue bene occupied.
               But let vs heare another which was before Tully, whoſe example is recorded  of him, and of that wiſe man Cato, expreſſed in his owne words, thus: Publius Scipio African, the firſt of that name, was wont to ſay, That he was neuer leſſe idle or vnoccupied, then when he was free from buſines; and that he was neuer leſſe ſolitarie, then when he was alone. Which ſpeech manifeſtly declareth, that he did vſe to thinke of weightie matters, when he had laid the doing of them aſide for a ſeaſon; and that he was wont to commune with himſelfe, when he was alone.
               So that, neither he was idle at any time, and yet that he had no neede of companie to find him occupied. And whereas moſt men cannot tell what to do when they haue not ſome worke to ſet themſelues about, but become vtterly  idle, except their heads be running after ſome euill; he was both profitably exerciſed, and the better quickened and ſharpened by ſuch intermiſſion to returne to publike affaires and buſines againe. Therefore (as hath bene ſaid) he by the keeping of his mind occupied, and by ſearching out thoſe things which by muſing and contemplation he attained vnto, was neuer either alone or vnoccupied. This was reported of Scipio a Heathen, who could occupie himſelfe in no better things then momentanie and earthly; as moral vertues, gouernment of commonwealths, and the ſearching out of naturall cauſes of things: which all are done by mans reaſon.
               But ô wofull people we, that the like cannot be ſaid or truly reported of vs  who haue ſuch varietie of heauenly things concerning the immortality of our ſoules, the glorious riſing againe of our bodies, and the incomprehenſible and euerlaſting happineſſe, which God hath bequeathed and freely beſtowed vpon vs to be enioyed of vs, ſome here and ſome hereafter in the world to come, and yet we are ſoone glutted with them! that in our ſolitarie refreſhings and recreations of our minds, we can ſeldom looke vp aboue that which we may ſee with our eyes; as though ſuch heauenly matters had no ſauour with vs, but were weariſome and tedious! This Scipio, when he had bene much taken vp in ciuill affaires and dealings amongſt men, could with pleaſure and delight thinke by himſelfe alone of things profitable, of wiſedome,  learning, ciuill gouernment in warre and peace, &c.
               But we, if we haue taken a litle paine in companie, we giue our minds the bridle in our intermiſſion & ſolitarines, to thinke of that only almoſt which they deſire: and as for ſerious matters we bluſh not to ſay, We wil not meddle with them, but lay them aſide: whereas who doubteth but that (the end of all our knowledge being Vſe and practiſe to keepe our hearts in an heauenly manner ſubiect to our God from time to time) we haue farre greater neede

of meditation and keeping of our minds in frame, then this Scipio, or ſuch  like in their kind. How rare are thoſe men, and yet ridiculous for their labour, who acquaint themſelues with this meditating of the law of God, and of the infinite varietie of holy things therein, although the man of God, whoſe praiſe is ſo great in the Scripture, could make it his worke both in the day and the night ſeaſon?
               And therefore ſeeing I can no otherwiſe helpe to redreſſe this wretched cuſtome of neglecting this benefite and libertie of oft meditating, and profitable vſing of ſolitarineſſe in them, who might well vſe it: I will ſay no more but pray for ſuch as know not by experience how good and gainefull it is, in ſtead of all idle and vaine wandrings and fantaſies, wherewith they ſwarme  for the moſt part when they are alone.
               And I will not ceaſe to bewaile the vnhappineſſe of the men of our daies, who in the vſuall and daily trifling out of their precious time, declare that they are ignorant of their beſt portion, which is, to haue daily communion with God; but are wiſe to deceiue themſelues in forgoing it for folly and ſinne. And therefore it is no maruell, though of many wiſe and learned, yet there are ſo few, which both find an heauenly ſweetneſſe in their owne liues, and are fit to ſeaſon others therewith, becauſe they are not oft and vſuall daily with the Lord in their ſoliloquies, that is, in their communing betwixt God and themſelues in their prayer and meditation;Exod. 19.20.21. and alſo ver. 9.10. and in hauing recourſe  to him, ſequeſtred from the companie of men, as Moſes the man of God had.
               Which part of Chriſtian comfort both might and ought to be more generally enioyed of the ſeruants of God, without either the leaſt ſauouring of Monkerie, much leſſe without the eſtabliſhing and the bringing in of it againe, which ſome prophane Proteſtants litle knowing the vſe of, will be readie (I doubt not) to imagine and ſay: as they peruert all other things to their owne hurt. Although I could wiſh that they had no earthlier minds (I allow not their doing) then ſome of them had, who firſt left the dealings of the world to liue apart out of companie. As for the Popiſh progenie, who would be thought (as it were, by apiſh imitation) to follow and be like them, they are farre from it, as they are from ſound religion in their profeſſion.
               But to returne: although I commend ſolitarineſſe, I would yet thus be vnderſtood, that ſuch as are troubled with melancholie, by meanes whereof they are much vnable to gouerne themſelues, and the rather through ſtrong and vehement temptations, when they are oppreſſed with them; that ſuch (I ſay) ſhould not be preſſed with it and vrged to it, to be long or much alone, for feare of caſting themſelues into further and more daungerous dumpes and extreame heauineſſe, as experience hath taught, till they may be ſtronger, and therefore with leſſe daunger may be permitted to the libertie of it, as other Chriſtians.
               
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 17. Of the declaration of the ſixth dutie: Of vſing proſperitie well.
               
                  THE next dutie to be obſerued, is: that with the ſame ſanctified and ſound heart we enioy all our lawfull liberties and commodities of this life rightly and ſoberly, from day to day, whiles the Lord graunteth them vnto  our vſes: and whatſoeuer croſſes and afflictions befall vs in the day, (as both theſe are diſtinct parts of our life from the former) that we goe vnder them patiently, meekely and thankfully. Theſe two parts of dutie are required, not at ſome one time in the day, (as the firſt and ſecond rules haue their certaine time, in which they are to be performed) but (as ſome of the other parts of daily direction) throughout the day: becauſe there is no part of our life in the day, but it is either exerciſed with ſome croſſe or with likelihood and feare of it; or it is free from both, and enioyeth ſundrie benefits of the Lords; or (that which is the moſt vſuall and common caſe of Gods ſeruants) it is mixed and compounded  of both: which of all theſe ſoeuer be our eſtate, we are in great danger, if we be vnprouided for it: I meane; if we be not watchfull in either of them to carie our ſelues vprightly, and before the time of both if we pray not feruently with full reſolution to it. And to ſay ſomewhat diſtinctly and ſeuerally of both, (although it be my purpoſe to ſay as litle as I may, ſeeing I haue by occaſion ſpoken of both in another place:) of the firſt I will ſpeake in this chapter; and in the next of the other.
               It is not hard to vnderſtand what I meane by proſperitie: properly,VVhat is meant by proſperitie. euen all pleaſures and delights, which may lawfully be enioyed of the ſeruants of God in this life, as health, riches, friends, peace, mariage, and all that appertaine  thereto, as wife, children, &c. Theſe therefore which are things that a man would moſt deſire, with freedome from afflictions which might impaire the ſweetneſſe of them,Mat. 9.23. Iona. 4.8. we muſt know that it is a moſt difficult thing to poſſeſſe them without great daunger to our ſoules: and therefore the liuing in ſuch an eſtate, as to abound in many good bleſſings of God, (which the world counteth happineſſe) is compared to a ſlipperie way, in the which a man is euer ſliding and readie to fall. Now then,An hard thing to forgo things which we loue well. to looke to our ſelues daily that we be not hurt, what leſſe worke is it, then as if a man iourneying all the yeare through, yea and all his life long, ſhould be conſtrained continually to be looking to his feete and ſteppes? which thing how vnwelcome it would  be and weariſome, if it were but one day, who doth not ſee and perceiue?
               Now the caſe being like in this part of our trauell and ſpirituall iourney; therefore that we may be free from the hurt which might meete with vs herein, theſe two points ſhall be needfull to be conſidered and learned: Firſt,The tvvo generall points of this chapter. how hardly in proſperitie we walke ſafely from day to day towards the kingdome of heauen: ſecondly, how and after what ſort we may do it though it be hard, and how we may grow to the right vſe of the ſame: which who ſo

attaineth vnto, ſhall find no common, nor ſmall eaſe in his life ouer others do, and paſſe by manifold and grieuous dangers which few auoide.
               And firſt, although a man ſhould much better performe all Chriſtian duties euery day,The firſt point in this ſixt duty. who hath feweſt afflictions to draw his heart from them, and who hath moſt helpes by peace & wealth, to ſet him forward therein: yet (as men go to worke) we ſee it is cōmonly cleane contrary. For by reaſon of this, that men are ſo readily caried to vſe all earthly things amiſſe, euen to their owne hurt and hinderance, and ſo hardly brought to be the better by benefits; it commeth to paſſe, that it is found by experience with vs for the moſt part, as we read in ages paſt that it was with men then: that is, the more that a man hath of theſe earthly commodities,Note. the leſſe he is inriched with ſpirituall  grace; and as they are increaſed & multiplied, ſo this decaieth and is diminiſhed. And yet I do not here ſpeake of the wicked of the world (as oft times I put the Reader in mind:) but euen of thoſe which go before others in the imbracing of the Goſpell. For euen of them, many are very faultie and blame worthie in this matter: and therefore they had need to be willing to take knowledge of it by the leaſt watch-word, and amend it; and not tary with the world, till they be ſhamed for it and confounded.
               Yea, and this is the more to be marked, becauſe ſome of theſe, whiles they haue bene vnder the croſſe,The greater ſinne, to be vnfruitfull in proſperity, vvhen it hath bene purpoſed in affliction. haue bene humble and kept within good compaſſe in their liues, and haue had oft recourſe to God in their prayers (as they  haue confeſſed it was meete for them to do.) But why ſpeake I this? becauſe when the Lord hath giuen them deliuerance, they haue ſhewed thēſelues to haue bin no ſuch perſons as before, but haue ſoone gone from their former care and haue kicked vp their heele, waxing wanton in their proſperitie, euen as they were forgetfull of their former calamities, Pſal. 119.67. So that it may truly be ſayd, that few by earthly things are drawne on and incouraged to the loue of heauenly:In ſundry kinds of Gods benefits, litle good done. Act. 9 31.
                   which yet is the end that the Lord hath in giuing them. If they haue reſt from perſecution and trouble, and inioy peace in their daies, how many do with the Churches mentioned in the Acts, take the benefit of it; that is, to edifie and build vp themſelues the more ſtrongly in knowledge, faith and godlineſſe, and draw others thereto by their example?
               And if their plenty of Gods outward benefits be ſuch, that they may eate of the fat and drinke of the ſweete: yet how many find the Lords ſeruice more ſweete daily to them, then they find his outward benefits? But they do rather after the manner of others, begin to reſt in them many times and to ſay, Here is good being for vs: whereas the more men haue, the more they ſhould looke that they ſerue him with ioy for all their abundance. And further, if they haue time at will, wherein much good may be done to themſelues and others,Epheſ. 5.16. Pſal. 90.12. is this their chiefeſt care to redeeme it to euery good vſe becauſe the dayes be euill, and to apply their hearts to wiſedome, ſeeing they  haue but a while to liue? Nay, that were too ſad a matter for them to heare of. But numbers of them take vp a great part of the day moſt commonly in the pleaſures and delights, which are by euill cuſtome in euery ſeaſon of the yeare affoorded.
               Wherein, for the ſatisfying of them to the full, if the publicke duties of Gods worſhip in the familie (which ſhould be daily continued for the benefit

                   of the whole company) be not neglected oft times, yet how come they to them, and in what caſe are their hearts to the performing of them, when they ſauour of nothing elſe but their vaine, if not vnlawfull, pleaſures? Which complaint, if euer, may now in this generation be made of the better ſort of Chriſtians, and that alſo moſt rightly,Numbers through long peace and proſperity worſe then ſometime. when many of the gentry of this land and others, who had for certaine cauſes iuſtly mouing them, for ſundry yeares together baniſhed out of their houſes the vſe and practiſe of dicing and carding, with ſuch prophaneneſſe and diſorder as accompanieth the ſame, haue within theſe few yeares (as though they could no longer forbeare) brought them in againe: A lamentable fruite of their wealth, peace, and proſperitie  among many other ſuch. But if it be duly conſidered,Oh vvhat good might haue bene done in the time of this long peace. what good might haue bene done through our land in this long time of peace and plentie, and how the oportunitie, euen the time of our viſitation (as fit for holy duties, as faire weather for harueſt) hath bene ouer-ſlipped, (that I ſay no more) it ought iuſtly to wring out plenty of teares for ſo great tranſgreſſion.
               But I will containe my ſelfe.Riches, one peece of proſperity, hardly well vſed. Our Sauiour ſpeaking but of one part or peece of proſperity, namely of riches, ſaith: Oh, with what difficultie ſhall they who haue riches, enter into the kingdome of heauen? If he ſpeake thus of riches, what (thinke we) is his iudgement of them which with riches haue  many other kinds of bleſſings? with how much ado ſhall ſuch go into the kingdome of heauen; and much more, gouerne themſelues rightly from day to day? And what maruell, ſeeing a rich mans riches are his ſtrong city,Prou. 18.11. and thereby he is bold to do many things wilfully, which he durſt not ſo preſumptuouſly do if he had them not. They are baites, and do often draw his heart to be ſet vpon them, that whiles they are in requeſt and chiefly accounted of, there may be no place for better things to rule and raigne there, although for ſhame and feare they are not altogether reiected; euen as it may be ſayd of play: Where that is entertained, good bookes are litle red and occupied.
               
                   It was the laſt temptation that the Diuell attempted our Sauiour withall (The glory and wealth of the world, I meane:) to teach vs this, among many other things; That if the other two be ouercome, yet the Diuell looketh to preuaile by this. What ſhould I ſay of the innumerable hurts which euen good men ſuſtaine by theſe benefits and good bleſſings of God, as that they hate one another, contend with and deceiue one another, and make themſelues ſtrangers one to the other thereby: and (which is none of the leaſt euils among other) their harts are ſo knit to them, that they conſider not how they take in hand their worldly buſines, nor how they vexe & trouble their poore brethren (if any fall into their hands;) but go to worke againſt them cruelly,  or at leaſt in raſhneſſe, with which nothing is well done. If we ſhould but conſider how they beate their braines about them euery way, who are yet wealthie alreadie, beſtowing all their wiſedome in deuiſing how to increaſe and bring them in, when it were to be looked for,Ioh. 6.27. Mat. 6.33. 1. Tim. 6.6. that the great riches [godlineſſe] ſhould be much more ſought after: If, I ſay, we ſhould conſider this, we ſhould enter into a very maze. By which, and many ſuch like, it may with bitter complaint be lamented (of the which we haue bin long admoniſhed:)

that Religion in theſe many yeares of our peace, hath brought forth much  wealth to the Church, but the daughter hath deuoured and eate vp the mother.
               And that this which I ſay, may not be vnderſtood onely of riches, know we that all lawfull liberties do worke the ſame effects, that men, for the moſt part,Pſal. 119.67. become worſe by them, as in the Pſalme the Prophet declareth: Before I was afflicted I went aſtray, that is, when I had my libertie: and therefore this ſhall ſerue to ſhew, with how much ado they which haue them, walke daily in a Chriſtian courſe; and the rather, the more variety of earthly delights they inioy with them. Now therfore it being thus, what cauſe haue all ſuch as are louers of the truth (whō God ſuffereth to liue in peace, health and proſperity) to be wiſe and wary againſt ſo many dangers, and warned by the hurt of ſo many who haue gone before vs? and to learne how they may not be hindred nor holdē backe any way by their proſperitie; but ſet forward rather, and that many wayes, as it is moſt conuenient? The watch-word is not in vaine and needleſſe, which was giuē to our fathers Deut. 6.11.: When thou haſt eate & art full: beware leſt thou forget the Lord. But I will proceed. Therefore as I haue now declared the one of theſe two points, that is, how hard it is, to vſe proſperity aright: ſo I will go forward with the other, namely how this maybe, that we may well vſe it, that it may be no ſnare nor hinderance to vs.
               And to this end we muſt conſider, how nearely we are knit vnto the ſame  as hath bene ſayd,The ſecond point in this ſixt rule. how naturally we deſire to haue all that our hearts do long after without regard, whether it be good or euill for vs: which cauſeth vs to eſteeme of all ſuch things more highly then becommeth vs, and therefore to ſet our greateſt care vpon them, and to ſeeke to inioy them, whatſoeuer better things we looſe and depriue our ſelues of for them. This inordinate loue which we beare to any lawfull libertie or bleſſings pertaining to this life, muſt be by all meanes poſſible weakned and abated in vs, which we haue too much through our owne folly ſtrengthened and increaſed. And to obtaine this, as we ſhall be able, ſome perſwaſions I will briefly ſet downe. Firſt therefore, this ſpirituall drunkenneſſe is to be expelled, and the inordinate  loue of earthly things to be weakened and abated by diligent earneſt viewing and weighing, how momentany and flitting all things of the greateſt reckoning vnder the Sunne,Eccleſ. 1.2. are; and how vncertaine hold we haue of them, euen when we thinke our ſelues moſt certaine and ſure of them. And further, by valuing and pricing them thereafter, as the Lord himſelfe teacheth vs to do,1. Cor. 7.29.30 &c. Luc 12.15. Prou. 23.4. ſaying: The faſhion or ſhadow of this world paſſeth away. And againe: Happineſſe doth not conſiſt in the things which a man poſſeſſeth; and of riches which is counted the chiefeſt of all the reſt, he ſaith: Why doſt thou weary thy ſelfe to grow rich? ceaſe from thy wiſedome: why doſt thou caſt thine eyes vpon them? for they are nothing.
               
               
                  The ſecond.Alſo, we ſhall by litle and litle breake off this neare knot of amitie betwixt our hearts, and earthly peace and proſperity, (as well as we loue them) if we wil ſuffer our ſelues to be perſwaded, how many waies we be in dāger of ſore plunges by means thereof: and that the Scripture giueth them many titles & names drawne from the effect which they worke in moſt men, as that they are ſnares,Mat. 13.22. thornes, choakes, becauſe they intangle vs, pricke, and hold in and

                   ſmouther the many graces of God in vs, that they bud not out and fructifie. And ſo ſaith Saint Paul, that they pierce vs through with many ſorowes,1. Tim. 6.10. being meere vexation and affliction of ſpirit, when men haue giuen themſelues after the courſe of the world, to ſeeke what is the ſweetneſſe of them. Few Iobs do know and find out the deceiptfulneſſe of riches, vntill after they haue proued it, they complaine too late, and in vaine begin to repent, and ſay: We are deceiued.
               Beſides,The third. it is an eſpeciall good helpe to weaken the loue of theſe earthly things, if we often record, that they are not our owne, but borrowed:Luke. 16.12. and therefore, as no wiſe man reioyceth for the ſtocke of money which he hath  borrowed of another man, (which he muſt returne home againe) as if it were his owne: ſo it is ſmall wiſedome for vs, who are appointed to ſaluation by Ieſus Chriſt, to delight in and ſet our hearts vpon the things of this life, which are but lent vs, and may euery day be required againe of vs: but our owne riches which ſhall neuer be taken from vs, as the knowledge of God, the loue of our brethren, ioy and peace by the holy Ghoſt; theſe ſhould ſo ſo make vs in loue with them, that the loue of the other might be ouer-ſhadowed thereby. Thus if we can thinke of all outward commodities of this life, & hauing this iudgement of them, will daily meditate one time or other of the momentany condition of them with vnfeined prayer to God to renounce  and forſake our old loue and acquaintance with them; we ſhould find this knot more and more to be broken, and our thoughts not to be caried after them with ſuch earneſtneſſe and continuance.
               And if we could poſſibly thinke what hurt they haue done vs,The fourth. euen our ſelues alreadie (for what vnſetlings from a Chriſtian courſe do we (in a maner) ſuſtaine, but they are one cauſe of it, if not the onely?) I am perſwaded, if we could rightly thinke but of this one thing, we would abate our greedineſſe, and put the knife to our throat, as the wiſe man wiſheth in the like caſe;Prou. 23.2. that is, to reſtraine our appetite. But as experience hath taught, that mens latter thoughts are, for the moſt part, better then the former (as they may well  be, ſeeing they come with more mature deliberation:) ſo it may be ſayd with griefe, that when we haue played the fooles, by letting looſe our former thoughts to worldly luſts, and cheriſhing of them, we ſeldome haue the grace to light vpon the latter; that is, to digge and weed them out, vnleſſe (perhaps) vpon our death-beds we complaine, when yet oft times it is too late.
               Furthermore,The fift. it would not a litle helpe vs forward to a ſlight and meane eſtimation of all earthly proſperitie, if we would daily accuſtome our ſelues to muſe vpon the examples of ſuch, as haue inioyed the ſundry commodities as plentifully as any of vs do, and yet haue bene taken from them, and  ſome of them in their flouriſhing age vntimely; as leauing to the reſt of vs, who yet remaine, a manifeſt ſpectacle of our mortalitie, and a warning of vs to a moderate vſe of them, that we might not iuſtifie the worlds practiſe.
               And it is another ſpeciall meane to the contemning of the world (though it go againſt nature) to vſe to viſite them,The ſixt meane. as others alſo in their ſickneſſe (as we ſhall be able) and there marke how they then ſpeake of them; that ſo we may ſee, how litle good their commodities can do them, in compariſon of

that good which they haue kept from them, and conſidering how greedily  they haue bene ſought after of them: for one would looke that things ſo ſought,The ſeuenth. ſhould haue more excellency in them then euery one ſeeth. And beſides that, by going into the houſe of mourning, we may ſee and ſo be put in mind of our owne death and departure, which cannot too oft be thought vpon, and which is the end of all fleſh; that thereby we may ſomewhat more like ſtrangers, learne to vſe the world after: beſides the thinking that we muſt giue an account how we haue gotten and vſed them.
               Thus I haue in ſome ſort, ſhewed how and by what meanes the loue of all earthly things ſhall be weakened in vs, without the which we can neuer vſe the lawfull pleaſures and profits of this life moderately and rightly: this one  thing being added, that this aduice be the more carefully and conſtantly regarded, ſeeing the danger were like to be great by the neglecting of it.
               And now vpon this which hath beene ſayd, it clearly and neceſſarily followeth, that if thus we get ſuperiority and dominion ouer our hearts and affections in the vſe of earthly things, then our actions and dealings about theſe lawfull liberties, ſhall be well ordered in the ſight of God and men, to the great quietneſſe and peace of our conſcience: for the righteous is bold as a Lyon. For who doth not know, that as the heart is affected either well or ill:Luke 6.45. euen ſo it draweth the wordes and workes after it, to be like and ſutable? which is the cauſe why I labour to perſwade  Chriſtians, to the ſubduing of the luſts and intemperate rebellions of the heart, and to haue in meane reckoning and price all things here below, that they may be the leſſe offenſiue in the whole courſe of their earthly dealings. For when we be thus reſolued in our hearts conſtantly, watching thereto, that we (as God hath taught vs) will ſo farre forſake all, as we ſhall thereby be hindred from following our Lord Ieſus Chriſt in any point of his holy commandements; we are ſtayed from manifold abuſings of our liberties, as wealth, peace, preferment, and ſuch like.
               And when we can containe and keepe our hearts from coueting and deſiring any way to vſe our proſperity vnlawfully, we ſhall neither iniure others  in any thing that is theirs, nor haue our commodities as ſnares, thornes and choakes to ſtrangle and hurt our ſelues; but in the inioying of all bleſſings of this life, ſhall be ſober and fruitfull in good workes, and more feruently longing after the treaſures of the paradiſe of God. Which fruits of proſperity few do reape, but runne into exceſſe and paſſe their bounds one way or other: ſo truly it is ſayd, That as it was in the dayes of Noe, ſo it will be in and vntill the comming of the ſonne of man: They eate, they dranke, maried wiues and were maried, &c. that is, they chiefly regarded theſe things rather then the manner how, or the end why; and more then they did conſider, wherefore the Lord ſet them in this world. And this be ſayd of the firſt branch of  this dutie; that is, of the vſing of proſperity, and the lawfull liberties of this life rightly: and how God teacheth his children daily as their ſtate ſhall require, to do the ſame accordingly, as it is one of the duties which is of neceſſity to be obſerued daily of all that deſire well to beſtow the day, and to giue a good account thereof at the euening and end thereof.
               
                  Obiection.Yet to ſuch as obiect and aske, If I will debarre them of their mirth and

                   pleaſures, which in their proſperitie and through the benefit of their wealth they may inioy, I will adde this briefe anſwer:Anſwer. I wiſh they proſpered in health, ſtrength, earthly commodities and peace, ſo as their ſoules might alſo proſper. And I thanke God I am not ſo enuious againſt the welfare of any of my good brethren, but that with the Apoſtle I can and do pray,Act. 26.29. that they might be altogether Chriſtians; that is, true and faithfull ſeruants of God without the bands or other hardneſſe which ſome other of Gods people do ſuſtaine and go vnder.
               But ſeeing proſperity is a ſlippery way, it is meete that all ſuch as deſire to be free from dangerous fals, ſhould looke diligently to their ſteps: and ſeeing  that our Sauiour himſelfe hath taught vs that it is an eſtate full of danger, they ſhould not thinke much to be admoniſhed & put in mind daily,2. Pet. 1.12. to take heed that they ſtand ſure and in ſafety. It is not enough, (thinke we) and a great fauour of God, that he giue vs liberty to inioy his earthly benefits, vnleſſe we abuſe them to the fulfilling of our fleſhly deſires? Doth Chriſt allow vs any otherwiſe to take our pleaſure on the earth, then that it may not hinder vs from following him by temperance and ſoberneſſe, by humbleneſſe and meekneſſe, the way to heauen? Or doth he beſtow more on ſome then vpon others, that they who haue much ſhould ſet on edge the teeth of others by licentiouſneſſe?
               
                   We are called (and that moſt fitly) ſtrangers: to teach vs, that we ſhould not be medling, nor intangle our ſelues here ſo, as we ſhould be vnready and vnwilling to go home. And that is a right ſtranger-like liuing in the world, and an inioying the lawfull liberties of it, that we be made more fit thereby for the heauenly life, and not to linger after any thing here or cling about it, ſo that we being tied to any lawfull pleaſure or profit we ſhould not as free citizens of heauen be daily ſomewhat nearer it, and readier to go to it. And do we thinke that they are ſuch ſtrangers, who pleade for ſuch a liberty and reioycing here, that their owne conſciences do tell them that they are not willing and readie to die? Are they ſuch ſtrangers, who are priuy in their owne  hearts, that their reioycing is moſt for the commodities and delights of this world, eating, drinking, paſtime, mariage, gaine and ſucceſſe in their dealings, &c. who if death ſhould come vpon them, whiles they are in the middeſt of them, muſt needs cry out and ſay: O death, how vnwelcome art thou vnto vs who haue our pleaſure in theſe?
               It is the Lord that ſaith by his Prophet: Let not the rich reioyce in his riches,
                  Ier. 9.23. 
                  nor the ſtrong in his ſtrength, nor the wiſe in his wiſedome: but he that will reioyce, let him reioyce in this, that he knoweth me. And it is our Sauiour which ſaith: Woe be to them which now laugh, for they ſhall houle and weepe:
                  Luke 6.25. 
                  woe be to them which are full, for they ſhall be hungry. And againe: Sonne,
                  Luke 16.25. 
                  thou in thy life  time receiuedst thy pleaſure, therefore now art thou tormented. Laſtly,Iob. 31.25. 
                  Iob that was deare to the Lord, ſayd: If I haue reioyced for that my hands haue gotten much, and for that my riches are great, euen this were to deny the Almighty. Therefore know we, that our reioycing ought not to be earthly: yea, as a godly man may not be glad for that he hath much, going no further; ſeeing that were but to be tied to the creature, and to reſt in a broken and a deceiptfull ſtay: ſo neither may he reioyce in any other earthly thing whatſoeuer,

but he ſetteth it as well as riches in the Lords place, from which it ought to be baniſhed. Now the heart of a Chriſtian is the Lords temple and dwelling place;Pro. 23.26. and he it is that muſt dwell there, as he himſelfe hath ſaid: Giue me thine heart, my ſonne.
               
               That muſt be where the treaſure is: it muſt haue no other treaſure in heauen but him, nor any on the earth in compariſon of him. So that it may be ſeene of all ſuch as deſire to be ſatisfied, that God hath not giuen to his faithfull ſeruants earthly proſperitie to naile their hearts to it;Pſal. 73.25. but to proue them, whether any thing be ſweeter to them then he himſelfe who hath giuen it, that is, whether the gift or the giuer be in greateſt requeſt with them; and that all which he giueth them, might be an occaſion to knit them nearer vnto  him; who will yet giue much more to them which depend vpon him: to this end (I ſay) all Gods benefites ſerue.
               And I haue not denyed in all that I haue ſaid, but that it becommeth the beſt of Gods ſeruants to labour for earthly maintenance, that they may be able to giue rather then to receiue, and that without any iuſt offence they may do it: and that they ought to acknowledge it for a great mercie of God, that he reacheth out his hand to helpe them with neceſſaries, euen here where they be ſtraungers, and to prouide for their bodily neceſſities; and therefore to be thankefull, yea and ioyfull in this reſpect, that they are freed from much care and diſtruſt, and haue the way made more eaſie thereby to the heauenly  life: for want whereof many of their deare brethren are in much penſiueneſſe and ſorrow. But yet may they not in any wiſe take ſuch ſweetneſſe in thoſe things, that they forget or neglect better: but alwaies remember, that they ſerue to a further end, that is, to ſeeke better; and are not themſelues the end of their hope, in which they ſhould reſt.
               And ſo to conclude: it remaineth that we in no wiſe reioyce, nor put our delight in any tranſitorie thing, but with moſt great diligence we vſe all earthly benefites of God daily and throughout our life, moderately. And this is to enioy our proſperitie aright, and to make that part of our life ſweet and ſauorie to vs indeed which is paſſed therin. And this is that which I haue thought  conuenient to be ſaid of this ſixt rule, namely: that it is a great part of godlineſſe, euery day to looke to this with due regard, that we moderately and fruitfully vſe our lawfull liberties, and all the commodities earthly of this preſent life.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 18. Of the declaration of the ſeuenth duty: Of bearing afflictions rightly euery day they come.
               
                  THE next part of our life not yet mentioned, is that which is vnder the croſſe and in affliction. Our dutie here is, that when and ſo often as it ſhall pleaſe the Lord to trie vs therewith, and to chaunge the courſe  of proſperitie or any part of it: yet that with the ſame well ordered heart, which I haue ſaid ſhould accompanie our other actions and parts of our liues, with the ſame (I ſay) we be prepared to receiue it from him:1. Pet. 4.12. and count it no ſtraunge thing to be exerciſed with it; and the rather for this reaſon (as the Apoſtle admoniſhed the godly of his time) that we are predeſtinate thereunto,Rom. 8 29. 2. Tim. 3.12. euen to be like vnto Chriſt in afflictions; & alſo, ſeeing through many of thē our way lyeth to the kingdome of heauen.
               And all may ſee how needfull it is for vs to hearten on our ſelues by theſe  and ſuch like perſwaſions,How we may beare our afflictions rightly. to be willing to beare our croſſes meekly & with chearefulneſſe, becauſe we do ſo ſoone ſhrinke backe at the hearing of them,
                  Ioh. 11.8. as the Apoſtles did when they heard that their maiſter would go into Iury againe, where the Iewes before had ſought to ſtone him; and ſeeing they be ſo vnwelcome to vs by nature, although we be ſubiect to many and ſundrie,Heb. 12.11. and that daily. It muſt not be with vs, as it is with the moſt: that is, that we loue not to heare of them when we haue bene awhile free from them, and ſo hope ſtill for earthly peace, of the which we haue no promiſe: but reſt perſwaded euery day, that our heauenly Father knoweth what is beſt for vs; and as he ſeeth affliction or freedome from it to be meeteſt, ſo he will alwaies  bring it to paſſe.
               To this end we are admoniſhed of the Prophet,Lament. 3.27. to accuſtome our ſelues  to beare the yoke in our youth, that we may be the better acquainted with it when it ſhall be put vpon vs: that ſo we being tamed and ſubdued by it, and our proud and rebellious hearts brought vnder of him, we may beare it with the more eaſe and comfort; encouraged hereby, that if we be able to beare afflictions contentedly, and with quiet and meeke ſpirits, (which is the hardeſt part of our life) we may eaſily prouide, to haue our whole life ſweet and ioyfull.
               Furthermore, to this end that we may be readie to waite vpon the Lord  
                   patiently in our chaſtiſements,Iob. 1.6. we muſt conſider that euery day Sathan intendeth miſchiefe againſt vs, and he knoweth our weakeneſſe to be greateſt in bearing the croſſe, and therefore will not leaue vs vnaſſayed as much as in him lyeth: and not ſo onely, but alſo will terrifie vs with this perſwaſion, that they be greater then they are, and feare vs with the oft and much thinking of them, that our ſorrow may be increaſed. Againſt all which his curſed vndermining of vs, we hauing ſo great encouragement from the Lord, ought to be

thus ſtayed: that ſuch of them as we can, we may auoide; and the reſt, we  may go vnder contentedly, waiting for a good iſſue, euen as in faith we pray for it:Reu. 3.19. ſeeing our God will haue vs perſwaded, that of very loue and faithfulneſſe he correcteth vs whenſoeuer we be corrected of him. But becauſe we faile many times in obſeruing theſe rules, and therefore find not grace then, to beare them aright, whiles they are vpon vs: nor afterwards get any wiſedome, experience or comfort thereby; we muſt diligently and faithfully marke,VVe muſt marke how we be affected in and vnder the croſſe. how we be affected vnder them: that if we ſhould be oppreſſed with confuſed and vnprofitable heauineſſe, diſtruſt or any other daungerous paſſions, we might learne before, that they be no fit companions for vs; and ſooner get out of them, after we eſpie them in vs, and ſo betake our ſelues to better  gouernment.
               And that this labour be thought no more then neceſſarie, we muſt know, that by Troubles we do not onely meane great & vnwonted loſſes, long ſickneſſes,Not only great troubles, but alſo thoſe which are cō
                     mon, muſt be borne meekly. perſecutions, and ſuch like: but thoſe alſo which fall out verie oft and commonly, as vnkindneſſe and diſcourteſie in neighbours; vnthriftineſſe, vnrulineſſe and diſobedience in children; vnfaithfulneſſe and negligence in ſeruants; diſcommodities and harmes in family matters; with ſuch like: all which to beare, without vnquietneſſe, impatience and vnſetling our ſelues out of the Chriſtian courſe, muſt be thought no meane nor ſmal gift of God; nor without daily and continuall watchfulneſſe and wiſe regard to be attained  vnto.
               And I do the rather make mention of theſe troubles, which for the moſt part ariſe in our families as well as other waies, becauſe many Chriſtians do thinke through ignorance, that we are not to be directed in theſe common things, nor to be called to our reckoning and account for offending by impatience, anger, back-biting and heart-burning againſt any man, and for ſuch like paſſions: which declareth, that as it is an hard thing for Chriſtians to walk in the vprightneſſe of their hearts,Pſal. 101.2. by perfourming other duties in the midſt of their houſes; ſo it is no leſſe hard and rare in this bearing of diſcommodities and other troubles, to ſhew themſelues lights and examples to the reſt of  their familie. But theſe vnquietneſſes, which are counted ſmall, are not to be admitted at any time in our liues, ſeeing they vnſettle and draw vs out of our  courſe. Therefore that neither one nor other kind of affliction become vnſetlings of vs, this counſell we muſt take from the Lord, which I haue now ſet downe:Luc. 9.23. Iam. 5.10.11. that euery day we arme our ſelues againſt the feare of ſuch as may come, and againſt impatience by ſuch as alreadie are come vpon vs.
               Let vs thinke it no toyle to watch and looke to our ſelues thus, if we may by this meanes be rid of that which is toile indeed, yea greater toile; and eaſe our ſelues on the contrarie, an hundred fold. For we ſhall not onely prouide well hereby,Rom. 5.5. Pſal. 120.1. againſt thoſe which are preſent: but as experience and proofe  of Gods helpe bringeth hope which maketh not aſhamed; ſo by our experience we ſhall find the like in our troubles to come. What ſtrength got Ioſua by this,Experience is a great helpe in trouble. that he had oft times beleeued Gods promiſe, and found that he neuer failed him truſting in his word which he had ſpoken concerning victorie ouer his enemies, or deliuerance from them? Inſomuch that he after ſome proofe of Gods keeping promiſe with him, in bringing him ouer the riuer

                   Iordane, in giuing Iericho and the citie Ay into his hands, in the battell againſt the fiue kings of Canaan; he triumpheth in his hope of conqueſt, (the Lord hauing promiſed to him victorie ouer them) and therefore ſaith to his ſouldiers and men of warre, before he ouercame them:Ioſ. 10.19. The Lord hath deliuered them into your hands, and therefore be of good courage.
               And what other thing made the Apoſtle Paule in great afflictions to ſtay himſelfe vpon God, and to caſt his care vpon him, but this experience and long proofe which he had of Gods tender care ouer him. It was (I ſay) that which made him expreſſe the ſame in theſe words:2. Cor. 1.10. God hath deliuered out of great tribulations, and doth deliuer daily, and I am ſure alſo that he will  deliuer in all time to come. This experience if we haue (as who may not haue it in many afflictions, if he haue reſted vpon God therein?) it ſhall be a ſtrong weapon to defend vs from fainting, diſtruſt or diſpairing, and to keepe vs from vnſetlednes, and able to vphold vs in an infallible hope of a good iſſue, euen before it come. But to this end we muſt hold our ſelues faſt to the prop of Gods promiſes, and lye cloſe to them, as an anker: and thus we being armed, we ſhal ſee the Lords deliuerance for vs, as clearely as we may diſcerne the arrow to flie in the ayre.
               It is a great point of wiſedome, to learne of God,Jt is our wiſedome, to be guided by God in bearing our troubles. Heſt. 4.16.
                   thus to beare our trials and troubles, that firſt we commit the ordering and diſpoſing of them to him  as Heſter did, by faſting and prayer of faith: ſecondly, that we vſe all lawfull meanes whereby we may haue a good ſucceſſe and end, as ſhe did in going to the king for helpe againſt Hamans diuelliſh deuiſes: and then the third will follow, that God will turne them to the beſt. Theſe three in one ſhort verſe the Prophet ſetteth downe together, ſaying: Commit thy way to God,Pſal. 37.5. and be thou doing good, and verily he will bring it to paſſe.
               But if we will not be directed by the Lord in bearing our afflictions, (as the rebellious heart will be ſoone readie to caſt off his yoke) but will take counſell of fleſh and bloud, as Saul and many ſuch haue done,Pſal. 73.3. & 4 yea and Dauid at that one time (though ſmally to his comfort:) then this ſhall follow, either  for want of preparing our ſelues meekely for them before they come, or for not thankfully receiuing them when they are come, they ſhall ſore flaight and aſtoniſh vs, and raiſe in our hearts ſuch paſſions and diſtemperature, as will vnſettle our whole courſe and bring vs out of frame. In which eſtate as we ſhall be vtterly vnfit to any ſeruice of God: ſo ſhall we be alſo vnmeet for any Chriſtian ſocietie with men, we being ſo confounded in our ſelues for our vnwelcome troubles, and ſo diſguiſed in our ſpeech, countenance and behauiour, by yeelding and giuing place to the frowardneſſe and vnbridledneſſe of our hearts. By all which, who doth not ſee,How we adde new troubles to the old. that we do both adde new troubles vnto the former, and make them which God ſendeth vpon vs,  farre more grieuous then otherwiſe they ſhould haue bene? For all who haue experience, can tell, that the intemperance of our hearts, and the impatience which is ſuffered to beare ſway in vs, do raiſe many diſtractions and vexations in our liues, which we might elſe haue bene voide of: and the Lords trials and fatherly chaſtiſements are thereby made farre more irkeſome vnto vs.
               And of this ſeuenth dutie thus much: whereby we may ſee, how neceſſarie it is for vs daily, beſide the well beginning of the day and care for right

vſing our proſperitie moderately, that we be alſo very watchfull, that our afflictions  breed no diſorder in vs, but be quietly borne: that ſo all parts of our liues throughout the day, and the whole courſe of our waies may be ordered commendably and aright: that euen in the dayes of health and peace, we looking for our chaunge, and labouring to bring our hearts to more humilitie through continuall watching, and oft and earneſt prayer, we may not onely not count it ſtraunge, when euen ſharpe viſitations ſhall take hold of vs, but in reſpect of the end thereof, (which is to do vs much good) we may with willingneſſe receiue and go vnder them; eſpecially, ſeeing (as hath bene ſaid) our moſt louing father hath fully certified vs, that he hath no other meaning in ſending them.Lament. 3.33 And here marke, that as poore and rich are both taught  their dutie in common together: ſo there is ſomewhat to be learned of them both ſeuerally: the one to be more ſpecially armed with contentation vnder his pouertie; the other with humilitie and ſoberneſſe, for the right and well vſing of his wealth and plentie.
            
            
               CHAP. 19. Of the declaration of the eighth dutie, namely: Of vſing religious exerciſes in our families.
               
               
                  VNTO all the former duties which we muſt labour to perfourme, this is to be added (to the end we may enioy as many liberties as we can:) that with the ſame wel gouerned heart, which we haue bene taught to bring to the perfourming of them, we look that both in the morning and at euen, as it ſhall ſtand beſt with the well performing of other duties, we and the other parts of our familie, do reuerently worſhip God together; that is to ſay, that we ſolemnely vpon our knees make confeſſion of our ſinnes, and requeſts to him with thankſgiuing. And becauſe it is required, that the word of God ſhould be  taught by vs to our children and charge, Gen. 18.19. therefore, that when we may conueniently, we inſtruct them as they be fit to conceiue, in thoſe things which are moſt neceſſarie for them, training them vp to anſwer to the ſame; and that they be incouraged to haue acquaintance with the Scriptures  and to be exerciſed in them from their childhood, 2. Tim. 3.15. that ſo the word of God may dwell in them plentifully, Col. 3.16. and to edifie themſeues in ſinging of Pſalmes to the praiſe of God, & the putting of themſelues in mind of the heauenly melodie and reioycing, which they ſhall haue with the Lord and his Saints in his kingdome. Euen this (I ſay) is another of thoſe duties which is as oft as may be to be perfourmed in our families; I ſay, as oft  as may be, becauſe no mans conſcience ſhould be accuſed for the omitting of it on ſome dayes vpon neceſſitie which may fall out: but yet no man for all that may faine neceſſitie, to paſſe ouer a dutie of ſo great vſe, and for ſo long continuance, euen throughout his life, except he ſupply the omitting of it, in ſome anſwerable ſort otherwiſe.
               And whereas by the examples of Gods holy ſeruants, this dutie of calling

                   vpon God is commended to vs as to haue bene offered to God three times in the day; the other, of teaching their families, as a thing ordinarie and vſual:Pſal. 55.17. Dan. 6.10. what cauſe is there why we in whoſe dayes the light of the truth ſhineth more clearely then it did in theirs, ſhould be behind them in any ſuch duties ſometime by our ſelues, ſometime with our families, vntill we might ſay: that we haue bene ſutable to them, in teſtifying our loue to God whome we obey in perfourming them, and the religious care of our owne good which we are ſure can neuer be enough? As for the daily continuance of this dutie from time to time throughout our life, although I doubt not but that many do it now and then, who yet will not tye themſelues vnto it conſtantly, and  therefore reape the ſleighter fruite of it; ſome reaſons I will alleadge to perſwade them.
               And firſt, it may pleaſe ſuch to vnderſtand,The first reaſon concerning duties in the familie. that our neceſſities do require it one day as much and as well as another (except neceſſitie hinder, as hath bene ſaid before) ſeeing ſome are rude, ſome worldly, ſome ignorant, and the beſt are forgetfull: and we find, that euery day bringeth with it ſufficient cauſe to renew our faith and ſtrength againſt ſinne, and all kinds of diſcouragements, and to honour and praiſe God (if it be well conſidered) for his daily fauours and kindneſſe. For ſuch duties being in vſe daily, do hold vs from ſome euill, which we ſhould otherwiſe do.
               
                   Beſides, ſeeing particular families are the members and parts of the church, and euery gouernour is that in the familie, that the Miniſter is in the congregation: therefore if they be not accuſtomed to worſhip and ſerue God at home, how ſhall they be able to do it with profite in the aſſembly? eſpecially ſeeing experience teacheth, that the mind being vnſeaſoned all the weeke at home, is further off from goodneſſe on the Sabbath; and yet all which is done this way both publikely and priuately, is litle enough euen in the beſt Chriſtians.
               And that we come the oftener and more chearefully hereunto, as oft as  it ſhall behoue vs, we muſt know and conſider, that we haue therein communion  and fellowſhip with the Lord, and are admitted to ſpeake and breake our minds vnto him, and ſo haue our ſoules moſt ſweetly refreſhed thereby, as if we met before him publikely. And what is like vnto ſuch libertie, that in a reuerent ſort we may be admitted to ſpeake vnto the Lord, and to haue him make aunſwer to vs againe? So that, it ſhould not be hard for vs to be brought to enioy ſo great commoditie, but rather to count our ſtate the more happie the ofter that we may be partakers of ſuch a benefite.
               Againe, it is meete that we ſhould in this ſort haue our recourſe to him  daily, to the end that our whole conuerſation may ſauour of him; that as all aboundance of heauenly odours (that is, of ſpirituall grace) do flow from his  Maieſtie to all that are about him and by the prayer of faith come neare him, more fragrant then Aarons ointment: ſo we being conuerſant with him in this heauenly manner, may hereby, as by a ſweet preſeruatiue, keepe our ſelues from all annoyance of Sathan and the world. And therefore it is no wiſedome for vs to be long from him in this manner, eſpecially hauing ſuch free acceſſe vnto him whenſoeuer we liſt. This reaſon ſhould the eaſilier perſwade vs, becauſe we ſee how by occaſion of earthly dealings, our earthly

minds draw vs to be altogether earthly: in our talke one to another, churliſh, hote, bitter, or light, prophane, raſh: and ſo in our behauiour teſtifying nothing elſe but a worldly mind. And is any thing more to be deſired then the chaunging of this courſe? But what is fitter then this, when we ioyne daily together in ſuch holy manner againſt it, euen there where the faults are committed? And thus I hauing ſhewed, that there is no cauſe why we ſhould thinke much to tye our ſelues daily as we ſhall be able to theſe duties, weigh now a litle what companions we haue in the Scriptures in the performance of them.Examples. Abraham. Gen. 18.19.
                   
                  Abraham is renowned of God for his diligence and faithfulneſſe in the perfourming of theſe exerciſes of religion in his familie: for inſtructing them, and therefore (no doubt) praying with them, ſeeing all things are  ſanctified by the word and prayer,
                     Ioſua. Ioſ. 24.15. 1. Tim. 4. Ioſua alſo who profeſſed openly that he and his houſhold would ſerue the Lord, did, not darkely, declare therein, that the chiefe parts of Gods ſeruice were not neglected, that is, prayer,
                     Act. 10.2. Cornelius. thankes, and the teaching them their duties. And Cornelius hauing this commendation in the Scripture, that he feared God with all his houſhold: and beſides, that he was giuen much to prayer; hath left ſufficient teſtimonie, that both he prayed with his houſhold as well as priuately by himſelfe alone, and alſo that he laboured and vſed the meanes of inſtructing the ſame, whereby he might bring them to that feare of God which was in them. Therefore ſeeing ſuch worthy ſeruants of God haue gone before vs in the performance  of theſe duties in their families; and ſo haue continued them (as there is no doubt) as they haue ſeene their daily neceſſitie to require, and that they reaped ſingular fruite thereby: therefore it ſhall be neceſſarie for vs, oft and vſually to meete together for the priuate worſhipping of God in our familie the whole together, be it ſmall or great.
               For this may all ſee and eaſily know, that God hath commanded that parents and fathers of families ſhould rehearſe his lawes continually vnto their children,Deut 6.7. and (as it were) whet their memories with them by talking of them in their houſe, and when they lye downe, and when they riſe vp, and to bring the word of God into familiar acquaintance with them: which is no  more then he ſaw neceſſarie for them.
               By the which commandement we may ſee, how this latter age of ours is degenerated from the holy cuſtome of religious exerciſes in our families, which were in vſe ſo many thouſand yeares agone. For there can be no time found throughout the day, nay the whole weeke, in many Chriſtians houſes, to be occupied about ſuch matters; and yet (which maketh their ſinne the greater) how are they letted from them? by more weightie occaſions? No: but partly through ignorance, ſo that they could not; through the trifling out of the time in idle and vnneceſſarie talke or folly: and partly through continuall taking vp of it in one worldly thing or other, or nouriſhing teachineſſe  and ſuch like;1. Pet. 3.7. by which their prayers (as well as all other good things) are broken off: whereas they ſhould do it by themſelues alone alſo, rather then neglect it with their houſhold; the Lord ſo requiring of vs the one, that we ſhould do the other alſo; and not ſo tyed vs to one time, that we ſhould looke after it at no other, (for it ſhould be oft times, as we heard in Deuteronomie:) but thereby teacheth vs in wiſdome to appoint to our ſelues

                   ſome certaine time or other for that his ſeruice, leſt we ſhould obſerue no time but omit it altogether.
               And as for the fruite of this dutie, if it be perfourmed with reuerence of vs as the Lord himſelfe hath taught vs,Ioh. 16.24. it is an opening of the doore of his treaſurie vnto vs; as we who haue any experience, can truly ſay: That by it we haue not bene meanely enriched. So that ſuch prayer and holy exerciſe is ſutable and anſwerable to the other parts of chriſtian dutie which are to be perfourmed throughout the day, as by the other duties before mentioned may appeare. And ſo our prayer (as I ſaid before of the vſe of it in the morning) ſhall be an helpe to godly life, to make vs liue better: and our good life  an helpe to our prayer, that we may pray more feruently.
               Therefore (to ſay no more of this point) becauſe I haue before ſet downe after what manner we ought to pray, and preſent our ſelues before God in euery Chriſtian exerciſe, if we purpoſe and indeuour conſtantly to continue the ſame about euening and morning; there remaineth no more but this, that we take heede to our couenant indeed, and that we breake it not off by euery light occaſion: neither giue place to ſuch lets as Sathan will raiſe vp in our way; as, by the vntowardneſſe of our heart, by ſleepe and ſlouthfulneſſe, the comming in of ſtraungers, and occaſion of ordinarie buſineſſe; neither vſe it for faſhion: yea and this let vs know, that if the ruler of the family performe  not this dutie, yet is the Chriſtian familiſt to perfourme it by himſelfe. And of the eighth rule thus much.
            
            
               CHAP. 20. Of the declaration of the ninth and laſt duty: Of viewing the day.
               
                  NOW the laſt dutie remaineth: that thou muſt with the ſame wel-ordered heart, whereby thou haſt bene taught  to go through all the actions of the day, looke backe before thy lying downe how thou haſt paſſed it,VVhat a Chriſtian ſhould do at or before his lying downe. how farfoorth thou haſt walked with God in it as thou art directed and taught; and wherein (as thou art able to remember) thou haſt offended, whether thou haſt remitted thy care and watch, and how thou haſt wandred thereby after the deſire of thine owne heart. That thy ſoule may reioyce in the bleſſing which thou haſt found, (ſo farre as thou haſt bene guided aright) and thou mayeſt by this experience hope more confidently, that thou ſhalt with more eaſe keepe the ſame courſe hereafter: and for thy ſtrayings and infirmities  be ſorrowfull and diſpleaſed with thy ſelfe, that ſo thou mayeſt both humble thy ſelfe and craue pardon for thy ſin,Ioh. 5. & be the more carefull to ſin no more in that manner. This I am ſure euery ſound-hearted Chriſtian muſt needes approue of, and thinke him in good caſe who thus lyeth downe to his reſt. For this is indeed to lye downe in peace and ſafetie, that it may be ſutable to his awaking and entring into the day on the morning.
               And the benefite and fruite of this trauell who would not be glad to

reape and enioy, which is, continuall ſafetie and a proſperous eſtate, whiles  a Chriſtian thus ſetteth himſelfe to paſſe the dayes of his pilgrimage, and one of them as another, when his heart is looking after his actions in and through the day that God may be pleaſed? This were to lead a ſtranger-like life indeed and a walking with God: which is no more then ſhould be aymed at by him, and the neceſſarieſt worke which he hath to do. Such an one ſhall well proue that he ſeeketh a kingdome elſewhere, and looketh not for his heauen here. And if it be asked, whether we looke hereby to be voide of ſinne: I ſay no. But yet if in this courſe there haue (notwithſtanding the care of pleaſing God in the day) ſome thing eſcaped, which ought worthily to trouble vs (as by Sathans malice and vigilancie, and our owne corruption may eaſily come to  paſſe:) yet by this order taking with our ſelues that hath bene mentioned, it ſhall not ſleepe with vs; but we hauing ſo farre preuailed with our ſelues, as thus to hunt and purſue it,1. Ioh. 2.2. and to expell and baniſh it, and ſo reconcile our ſelues to our God (as it is ſaid: If any man ſinne we haue an Aduocate) before our lying downe, what a quiet and ſweet eſtate is this like to be?
               
                  Obiection.But it is (will ſome ſay) an offering of great violence to our ſelues to doe thus daily, and more then Gods word impoſeth vpon vs: therefore except it be proued to vs by authoritie of Scripture, we will leaue it to ſuch as liſt to be ſubiect to it. To whom I anſwer: That the violence which is offered, is but to the fleſh,
                     Anſwer. Rom. 8.12. to the which we are not debters; and therefore are not to take  thought to fulfill the luſts of it, but to hinder them rather: which ſhall be graunted of neceſſitie, if it be prooued that God commaundeth vs to offer ſuch violence to our ſelues, and that he ſtraightly chargeth vs that we lye not downe in our ſinnes, neither be bold to ſleepe in them: the which, what other thing is it, then that we ſo conſider and looke backe vnto our actions in the day, that we may haue peace when we lye downe at euen?
               The words of the Lord, which I alleadge to this purpoſe are theſe: Be angrie,
                  Epheſ. 4.26. & 27. 
                  but ſinne not: let not the Sunne go downe vpon your wrath, neither giue place to the diuell. In the which words there is more required, then in this place I vrge: but yet, euen that alſo. For the Apoſtle teacheth, that if anger be kindled  in vs for want of heed-taking, yet that we ſhould ſoone allay the ſame: but if through the hardneſſe of the heart, after ſinne is committed it is not by and by acknowledged and repented of, but it remaineth and boyleth in vs; yet we muſt force our ſelues to relent and craue pardon of it before the Sunne go downe, and ſo before we dare giue our ſelues to reſt, leſt the diuell preuailing ſo farre with vs, we find it harder afterwards to remoue it.
               
                  A reaſon.Now we know, that other ſinnes are in a like deteſtation with God that anger is; and therefore that they muſt be no more ſuffered to abide within vs then it: and conſequently, if we be priuie in our ſelues to any like ſinne that we haue offended, we ſhould expell and driue out the ſame as poiſon, that it  lodge not, nor remaine with vs. And to doe this, it is neceſſarie that we take ſome conuenient time to vs, both to ſearch and enquire what we haue done, and withall to purge ourſelues from it accordingly.
               But here if any thinke that this was not intended of the Apoſtle, that wee ſhould before we fall aſleepe, conſider how we haue paſſed the day; neither will I preciſely vrge the houre or time ſo particularly: (for indeed he requireth

                   it to be done ſooner, rather then that it ſhould be deferred:) ſo I ſay likewiſe, that if this care be conſcionably kept at ſome other time of the day, that there be peace maintained betwixt God and vs, it is well; but if that be not perfourmed before, at leaſt before our lying downe it ought to be: which alſo, is the time very fit to commend our ſoules into the hands of God, not knowing whether we ſhall riſe in the morning.
               Beſides if it be required by the holy Ghoſt in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes,
                     Heb. 3.12. Another reaſon that we take heede that there be not at any time, and ſo any part of the day, in vs an euill heart, we being forgetfull and ſlow to obſerue ſuch a charge; can any deny, but that he doth there as well require, that we ſhould ſometime  looke backe to ſee how we haue regarded the charge that is giuen vs? And is any time ordinarily and for the moſt part fitter for that buſineſſe, then whē we haue ended the day? except ſome ſpeciall ſinne committed in the day do require a more ſpeedie examining of our ſelues before.Iob. 1.9. And if Iob (as we read of him) did euery day of his childrens banquetting together, offer ſacrifice to God and pray for them, and commaund them to cleanſe their hearts and ſanctifie thēſelues, (for ſo it is ſaid that Iob did euery day) adding this reaſon, Leſt they might therin offend God: is it any maruell, if we in our own perſon do retaine this care euery day, and vſe this practiſe? For euen as men who are in great occupyings, do not onely write their takings and their layings out,  but do alſo at euen conferre them together, leſt any delay of time ſhould cauſe forgetfulneſſe (and yet this labour they thinke needfull about things that ſhall periſh:) ſo is it much more neceſſarie in the accounts of our ſoules that we ſhould do; that is, daily looke what we gaine or looſe,Pro. 3.22.23. that we may procure to our ſelues thereby moſt ſound ſafetie, and prouide alſo the better for the time to come to do the like, and that with more eaſe. There is nothing againſt this dutie ſo much, as the prophane cuſtome of the world, to whom all goodneſſe and controlling of their licentious courſes is vnſauourie, and therefore vnwelcome and ridiculous. But let ſuch go: know we, that if we deſire to giue an eaſie reckoning to God at our latter end, it is our wiſedome  and the beſt prouiſion we can make for our ſelues, to yeeld with all conſcionableneſſe, a reckoning to the Lord at the end of euery day: and ſo much the rather, becauſe we loue no after reckonings to be brought againſt vs; which may iuſtly be feared, when we haue not indeuoured faithfully to do the ſame frō day to day, but are accuſed by our conſciences,Note. that we haue dealt too ſlightly; yea hollowly ſomtime, & too much fauouring our ſelues in paſſing by many particulars, which we were willing to be forgottē & buried.
               That which we may reade in heathen Poets, as Pythagoras, and others concerning this matter,The heathen poets did vrge it. may and ought worthily to put to ſhame a number of Chriſtians. They wrote, that a man ſhould looke backe at the end of the day,  how and in what manner it hath bene ſpent and paſſed: which cogitation (it is to be feared) hath not once entred into the heart of many, which profeſſe to know God in Chriſt. For ſuch as ſee any cauſe of going about it, this I will ſay to helpe them forward: that the more circumſpect they haue bene in obſeruing of their wayes, and the more diligently the gouerning of the hart and life be kept throughout the day; the more readily and willingly ſhall they go about this view of the day-ſpending at their lying downe: neither ſhall

it be caſt off, or neglected and vntowardly taken in hand, but when they  haue bin too ſecure & ſlight in doing the duties of the day. Neither would I lay vpon any a burthen, which they be not able to beare: calling God to record, that I ſeeke in this as in the reſt which I haue ſayd, onely the glory of God, and the further peace and comfort to all the faithfull, and the high pricing and eſtimation of a godly life, which will be much ſet by where the life is ſo looked to in the day as I haue wiſhed, and at our lying downe viewed in this manner: and therefore wiſhing euery one according to the light and grace which he hath receiued to conſider, whether he can ſay any leſſe but that they walke moſt ſafely & moſt confident, who go about (as they ſhall be able) to make an end of the day in this maner. And the reaſon why this is required, as the laſt worke beſide prayer in the familie, is, becauſe a Chriſtian hath ſomewhat to mention and deale about, and complaine of particularly concerning himſelfe, which he cannot ſo well be ſatisfied in, when he prayeth in company. And he that hath moſt warily looked to himſelfe in the day, and ioyned with the family in duties of humiliation at night, ſhall ſee cauſe inough to adde this duty to both: as we reade it written of Maiſter Bradford, (who had much inward communion with God) that he was neuer ſatisfied in the duties he did through the day, and namely in praying at the Chappell (when he was fellow of a colledge) and in his chamber with his puples, vntill he had alſo powred out his heart to the Lord by himſelfe alone. But yet  notwithſtanding this which I haue ſayd, ſpeciall regard ought to be had of the many bodily infirmities, diſeaſes and ſickneſſes, with the feebleneſſe of mind, ignorance and other incomberances, which Gods deare children ſhall be afflicted with: for they cannot doe as other may, and therefore as euery one ſhall be more oppreſſed then other, ſo he muſt needs be the more reſpected. For in ſuch caſes the bare lifting vp of the heart to God ſincerely, is as much; and mercy (I know) is better then ſacrifice: but withall, this muſt be graunted, that the more godly euer one is, the more he will bewaile his wants, and ſo this among the reſt; which doth no leſſe in a well ordered heart, then a kind purgation, diſcharge the ſoule of all  ſuch droſſe as remaineth to waite him a miſchiefe. Thus I haue more largely, as I haue thought it expedient, gone ouer theſe parts of the life of a Chriſtian, which for the moſt part are euery day to be done, the better to direct him therein: and ſo likewiſe I haue ſayd that which I intended of this whole Treatiſe. It remaineth now to ſee how the practiſe of it is by Sathan and our ſelues broken off and hindred: which is in the next Treatiſe to be ſet downe and handled. But firſt, I thinke good to adde theſe two things: The one, that as I haue ſet downe rules for daily direction: ſo for the helping of the weaker ſort ſome example alſo be ſhewed vnto them thereof: The other, what vſe is to be made of the whole Treatiſe.
               
               
                  After what maner a Chriſtian ſhould view his paſſing of the day at night.
                  AS concerning the firſt this I haue thought expedient to ſay: When thou goeſt alone by thy ſelfe for this purpoſe, firſt call to mind the ſeuerall actions (as thou canſt) from thy firſt awakening: how thou diddeſt awake

                      and (as ſoone as thou wert ready) take order about neceſſaries which muſt be done, and then wenteſt to prayer, after to thy calling:Hovv a Chriſtian ſhould vievv the paſſing of the day. then haddeſt occaſion to be in ſome company, and how thou diddeſt looke to thy ſelfe therein: if at another time in the day thou waſt alone, or at exerciſe of prayer in family or at meate: in another part of the day haddeſt ſome croſſe befall thee, and ſome ill newes brought vnto thee: or if thou haſt dealt and communed about worldly affaires, buying or ſelling, how thou diddeſt it, and what care thou haddeſt therein. Theſe or any other like vnto theſe whatſoeuer actions or the maner of them, or whatſoeuer the cogitations and deſires of thine heart haue bene, whether they were good or bad, call to mind  as many of them as thou canſt. Thus looke backe (as thou art able to remember) how thou haſt ſpent the day from one thing to another, and from one place where thou haſt bene to another: which though at the firſt it ſhall ſeeme ſtrange and hard to do, yet in time will be more eaſie. When thou haſt thus done, thou ſhalt ſee how thou haſt had vſe of any of the nine duties ſet downe, which are the common and ordinary actions of the day: and how the eight inward graces which ought to be companions to vs euery day, haue accompanied thee: and then, ſo farre as thou mayeſt truly do it, giue thankes for all grace whereby thou haſt bene guided, and humble thy ſelfe in confeſſing thy defaults, and praying as thou ſhall ſee cauſe.
                  
                      I haue ſet downe a paterne and example to direct thee therein, which as thine eſtate doth agree with it, follow.
               
               
                  A forme or example of viewing or paſsing of the day, when we are ready to lie downe at euen.
                  I Thanke thee, ô Lord, for my awaking with thee,An example thereof. and that with a willing and ready mind I entred into the day after, with calling vpon thee (if thou diddeſt ſo) and for that I had liberty and oportunity thereto: and that afterward I went chearfully to the duties of my calling, or ſupplied the omitting  thereof, ſome other way with a good conſcience: and that I was wary in company and in ſolitarineſſe, and in my proſperity, and vnder my chaſtiſements that I might not offend; but that I did ſome good as I could: and that I had part in family exerciſes, and had care in my earthly dealings that I might not be made worldly by them: that I haue taken any benefit by meditation and reading (if thou haſt done ſo:) and now at the end of the day, that I looke backe how I haue paſſed the day.
                  Thus, as theſe or any of them haue bene done of thee, call them to mind, as thou canſt, and how they were done: and as they and ſuch like are the chiefe actions to be done in the day; ſo proceed in giuing thankes for doing  them (or ſo farre as thou haſt) with thy mind ſeaſoned with the graces, which ſhould direct all the actions of thy life through the day: euen theſe eight, thus:
                  I alſo thanke thee (ô Lord) that in theſe actions and parts of my life, I haue not done them in opinion of any goodneſſe in me, but by thy grace: and haue thereby humbled my ſelfe for my ſinnes, and imbraced pardon by faith: and by the ſame faith, haue bene holden from many ſinnes, and kept in doing

many duties, as loue, mercy, vprightneſſe, and the workes of my calling: and haue had ſome conſideration of my mortalitie, and looked for thy comming: [on the Sabath, that I haue attended to ſanctifie it in publicke and priuate exerciſes] and that I haue held the peace which paſſeth vnderſtanding: and had thy kindneſſe in remembrance thankfully, with ſome vſe of watching and praying: and now viewed the paſſing of this day in this poore maner: let experience bring hope of better doing this from day to day. (And if thine heart go with the mentioning of theſe, thou ſhalt find ſauour in them.) But ſeeing I haue faulted and failed many wayes, both in good doing, and the right maner of it: and in following the deuices and deſires of my heart too much (here if any particular action or corruption be remembred of thee, bewaile  it, accuſe and iudge thy ſelfe and renounce it, that thou mayeſt find mercy in that thy need:) I confeſſe and renounce the ſame, praying for Chriſts ſake to be pardoned; that I may lie downe in peace.
                  The ſecond thing which I ſayd I would adde, was the vſe of this doctrine. For the vſe of the doctrine of this Treatiſe,The vſe of the doctrine of this Treatiſe. Of daily guiding thy ſoule and life, it may be gathered out of that which hath bene ſayd of it; and out of this laſt paterne or example ſo farre as thou ſeeſt nothing in it, which God approueth not. And that is in few words: that euery day and through the day, thou weane and withdraw thine heart from any ſuch noiſome baite or prouocation, as ſuffereth thee not to ariſe in the morning, to walke through the day, and to lie downe at night in peace and ſafety vnder Gods protection: and euerie day, I ſtill ſay, wiſhing thee to remember, that if thou beeſt negligent and careleſſe but one day, that may fall on thee to vexe thee long after, which ſhould not elſe fall out in thy whole life. And that part of life which will not ſtand with this, let it, as deadly poyſon, be carefully auoided and reiected of thee.
                  
                     Here followeth a prayer, containing the ſumme of the life which is to be daily led of a true Chriſtian.
                     
                     A forme or paterne to teach and direct a Chriſtian how to begin the day with meditation and prayer, and confeſſion of ſinne, and thankes after he hath firſt awaked with the Lord: containing in it the matter of this Treatiſe, neceſſarie for him to practiſe throughout the day following, and for euery day. The ſumme may be drawne out of it more briefly.
                     
                        The entrance.O Lord God moſt mighty and mercifull through Ieſus Chriſt, let that  mind be in me which is in thy faithfull people, and with the which thou delighteſt to be ſought vnto, ſound and without hypocriſie, humble, meeke, teachable to euery good thing, fitly and readily diſpoſed vnto euery good worke: let me be framed this morning to the liking of the Chriſtian courſe, as I haue learned it out of thy word, and haue tried that it is the only happie eſtate which here can be inioyed. And with this mind let me

                         enter into my meditation, thanſgiuing, confeſſion of ſinnes and prayer. For whom haue I in heauen (ô Lord) but thee? or whom do I deſire on earth in compariſon of thee? who doeſt whatſoeuer it pleaſeth thee, and haſt all creatures euen the Diuels ſubiect to thee: who, as thou haſt filled the whole earth with thy goodneſſe; ſo particularly thy mercies are wonderfull to me, and that my ſoule knoweth right well. And as in thy fauour is life and happineſſe: ſo thou as one abounding in loue and compaſſion, haſt counſelled, yea and commanded vs for our owne good to ſeeke it, that we might be happie by it. And yet, leſt we ſhould be deceiued with the deluſions and baites of this world and ſet our delight on them, thou ſoundeſt this alarme in our eares  daily, that all things in this world are tranſitorie, vaine and ſoone flitting away, and we our ſelues with them daily drawing vnto our end. Thou haſt cauſed this to be publiſhed in our hearing, that all fleſh is graſſe, and the glory and beautie of it, as the flower of the field that fadeth: and that all things below the more they haue bene delighted in, the more deeply they ſhall ſting and vexe vs when they forſake vs. And leſt we ſhould iudge and hope of our eſtate after the deceiptfull dreames of our owne braine, as we are moſt eaſily inclined to do, thou haſt liuely ſet out our whole ſhape as in a glaſſe, to be full of miſerie and curſedneſſe, if we haue not yet attained to know that we are thy ſonnes and daughters, & that our names are written in the booke of life.  Theſe all and ſuch like while I meditate vpon, as alſo, that thou wouldeſt haue vs euery day make our ſaluation more ſure, & to be perſwaded of thine vnchangeable loue; I wonder at them, and moſt of all to conſider thine ineſtimable and vnutterable kindneſſe in them all.Thankſgiuing. This draweth from me (as there is exceeding great cauſe) vnfeined thankes, with ioy vnſpeakeable and glorious, eſpecially for that I ſee, thou haſt done all this for me, euen the vnworthieſt of other: that for my ſake thou gaueſt thy deare ſonne to death, that he might bring me to euerlaſting life: that to me among other, thou wouldeſt haue the glad tidings of it to be brought and preached, to the end that I may know my ſelfe as ſurely to be one of thine, as if I were gathered vp  to my fathers to inioy thy preſence moſt glorious already: that of me among the reſt of thy choſen ones, thou haſt an eſpeciall regard and care againſt all things that might hurt me, and wilt continue the ſame euen to my liues end, when I ſhall feare neither trouble nor danger, neither Diuell nor hell any more: that thou haſt granted me to know it by faith, and in token thereof haſt ſanctified me and made me able to loue goodneſſe and loath euill in ſome meaſure: that thou haſt wrought repentance in my heart, whereby I indeuour to forſake all knowne ſinnes, and to pleaſe thee in all things: that thou haſt giuen me a delight in thy word, whereas many find litle ſauour in it: that thou turneſt mine afflictions to my good, and teacheſt me the right  and ſober vſe of my proſperitie: that thou giueſt me acceſſe vnto thy maieſty by prayer, when I will and for whatſoeuer is needfull: that I haue liberty to vſe all other helpes for the maintaining of a godly life: that I may riſe vp when I haue fallen and offended thee, and returne to thee againe: that thou haſt giuen me to ſtriue againſt ſinne and Sathan as a ſouldier of Chriſt, and makeſt me to find ioy in the Chriſtian life, and thy ſeruice to be perfect freedome. And yet for all this, that thou giueſt me hope of nearer communion

with thee: that thou aſſureſt me, that through thy power I ſhall be inabled  to perſeuere in this chriſtian courſe to my liues end, and that after it I ſhall be receiued into glory.
                     And further, that thou haſt not onely beſtowed theſe great priuiledges vpon me, which are proper and peculiar to thine owne children, but alſo haſt in moſt gratious maner prouided for the continuance of theſe vnto me, and miniſtred abundantly vnto me the good things of this life: as, to liue vnder a moſt Chriſtian and religious Prince and King defending and maintaining the Goſpell againſt all Antichriſtian malice and tyranny and other aduerſary power, and the ſame truly and ſincerely preached, and by whom our liues, liberties and liuings are peaceably continued. I thankfully alſo acknowledge  thy great mercy for the fellowſhip which I haue with thy good ſeruants in liuing with them, and for that credite and fauour which thou granteſt me among them: alſo for conuenient habitation, competencie of thy outward bleſſing, good liking, contentation and agreement in mariage [or if ones ſtate require it, out of it] for health and ſtrength to walke in my particular calling, and the benefit of a lawfull calling it ſelfe, for freedome from grieuous paines and diſeaſes; from ſuite and ſeruice, burden and bondage to Pope and tyrant and all other vnreaſonable ones: for bleſſing and ſucceſſe in my lawfull affaires [other benefits mention, as thou ſhalt haue cauſe.]
                     Theſe thy mercies with many other daily renewed vpon me, both to the  comfort of ſoule and body, do cauſe me (I ſay) to thinke my ſelfe infinitly beholding and bound to thy Maieſtie, and to ſay: ô Lord, what is man, that thou ſo delighteſt in him? and againe: What ſhall I render vnto thee for all thy kindneſſe, which hath no end nor meaſure? This loue therefore conſtraineth me (contrary to my corrupt nature) to be moſt willingly ſubiect to thy will and holy gouernement: this maketh thy commandements not to be to me, as ſometime they were, burdenſome and vnwelcome, but ſweet and pleaſant: this cauſeth the ſtrength of mine vnruly luſts and vnlawfull deſires to wanze and be weakened in me, contrary to that which ſometime I haue found: and perſwadeth me, that euen my afflictions and the hardeſt parts  of my life are ſent, not in thine anger and diſpleaſure, but of fauour and mercy; and that for my good thou doeſt of very faithfulneſſe, cauſe me (when ſo euer I am chaſtiſed) to be corrected. And ſo, for thine afflicting of me alſo, I am and more learne, daily to be thankfull. And the rather I ſee iuſt cauſe hereof, becauſe I am priuy in mine owne heart, how litle cauſe I giue of this tender handling, and moſt kind regarding of me: yea rather, I ſee cauſes innumerable, why I ſhould be giuen vp into a reprobate ſenſe; and both be made an example vnto others in this life, of miſerie; and after, be caſt into endleſſe woe.Confeſſion of ſinne. For beſides mine originall ſinne wherein I was conceiued and borne, my whole life (before I was called to know thee to be my Sauiour through  Chriſt my redeemer) was nothing elſe but an vtter departing from thee, and a diſhonoring of thy name. In euery cōmandement and branch thereof, I was rebellious, and diſobedient to thee, and that as many times as I haue haires vpon my head. And ſince thou haſt waſhed me from my wickedneſſe, and purged me from my ſinnes, whereas I thought I ſhould haue roundly and readily liked and ſubmitted my ſelfe to thy holy will, which is the rule of

                         righteouſneſſe; yet I haue fealt, and do daily, that I am hindred much from that good courſe which I deſire; not doing the good which I would moſt willingly, but oft times that which I allow not: and yet beſides this, I perceiue, that there is much ſinne in me which I know not (as from time to time ſince my firſt beleeuing in thee, I haue by litle and litle eſpied and found out:) ſo that moſt iuſtly I may ſay: Oh Lord, who can tell the manifold errors of this life, or how oft he offendeth thee? And as for the deceiptfulneſſe of ſinne, who is wiſe inough to diſcerne it in many things? as when we ſhall be angry for a iuſt cauſe; when we ſhall giue our eye and heart liberty to pleaſe themſelues in that which they deſire; when we grow weake in faith,  whiles we be about our lawfull buſineſſe; and ſuch like: which becauſe I feele my ſelfe to be incombred with, and with many ſuch, I do here as moſt vnworthie in my ſelfe, acknowledge the ſame,
                           1 Pray for pardon, and ſo for the right vſe of this maner of beginning the day. and humbly ſue vnto thee (ô heauenly father) for thy deare ſons ſake Ieſus Chriſt to pardon ſtill my ſins & corruptiō, who do confeſſe, that I offend thee ſo oft in the day as I cannot expreſſe: & this morning to receiue me gratiouſly into thy fauorable protectiō, that I may be ſatiate & repleniſhed with thy louing kindnes, ſo, that al the day after I may retaine the ſauour of it; haue my heart ſo ſweetly ſeaſoned with it, that I may find & feel all my actiōs as good things to proceed out of the good treaſury of it: and not to be fleſhly, rebellious & corrupt, as proceeding from  a roote of bitterneſſe. And as for the ſinne which is hidden from me, reueale and bring to light vnto me, that I may be ſhamed and humbled thereby, and not abuſe thy pardoning of me to bold licentiouſnes, making that a colour of euill in me: but let me plucke downe all pride of my heart, and ſee my ſelfe daily, and ſo this day, more indebted to thy maieſtie, then otherwiſe I could poſſibly thinke my ſelfe to be; and to ſend vp more oft and earneſt prayers againſt the ſame. Thus (good Lord) let me ſenſibly feele this mornings worke to be effectuall through thy bleſſing, (euen as it is thine owne ordinance, that I ſhould begin the day thus) that I may haue my heart inlarged hereby, to do my other duties with more cheare and fruitfulneſſe: and that I  being thus perſwaded of thy fauor, may alſo be aſſured that thou wilt be with me, to aſſiſt me and bleſſe me in all the lawfull workes & actions which thou haſt appointed me this day to do. And ſeeing thou haſt appointed,
                           2 Prayer for diſcharge of duty in our calling, and for bleſſing in it. that we ſhould be occupied in ſome trauell and worke profitable to the commonwealth, which alſo may keepe our ſelues from idleneſſe, incline my heart to obey this thy commandement, not onely for other cauſes, but chiefly becauſe thou wilt haue it ſo, and with chearfulneſſe that may ſhake off tediouſneſſe and vntowardneſſe, as farre as of my frailtie may be obtained. In the workes of my calling let me keepe my heart from all diſtemperature, diſorder and rebellion, and containe my ſelfe from euerie euill way: in the good ſucceſſe  which thou giueſt, let me not be lifted vp with lightneſſe: in the contrary, not caſt downe with immoderate heauineſſe. Let me ſee good and ſufficient cauſe of intermitting the ſame as oft as I ceaſe from it,
                           3 For that part of the day vvhich is paſſed in company, that it may be aright. and let my mind be ſtable and well ſetled to follow thee, though the actions of the day be many and variable. In all companies let me frame my ſelfe this day, to be harmeleſſe and innocent at home: let me be warie againſt the common euils which are in families, as brawling, diſagreeing with any, anger, vncharitableneſſe,

reuiling, prouoking, or being prouoked by others; but forbearing and  forgiuing, if I haue ought againſt any; ſo let me be free from fooliſh ieſting, ſlandering of others, lying, vnprofitable and needleſſe talking: So abroad, let me not faſhion my ſelfe after the euill example of the world in theſe or the like, but humbly carying my ſelfe towards mine equals, giuing honor to my betters; and making my ſelfe equall with thoſe who are my inferiours, as knowing my ſelfe what I am. And not onely ſo, but as I ſhall haue oportunitie, graunt (good Lord) that I may do good by exhorting, teaching, comforting and admoniſhing, and offering my ſelfe to take good by receiuing the ſame where I may, that thus I may leaue no ill ſauour in any place; but with comfort,
                           4 For the right vſe of ſolitarineſſe. call to mind the companies that I haue bene in, and not with  an euill conſcience. And that part of the day which I ſhall haue free from the fore-mentioned duties to be alone, whether iourneying, ſitting, walking or lying, graunt (moſt mercifull father) that my heart may be weaned from vaine cogitations and fond deſires euen the ſecreteſt: and that out of the good treaſurie of my heart, I may raiſe holy and profitable meditations; oft muſing of the heauenly things contained in thy word, namely, thy mercies, of mine owne mortality, troubles, ſubiection to ſinne and Sathan: and how I may order aright all my lawfull affaires, and diſgrace and bring in diſcredite with my heart all iniquity and the very apparance thereof. Let me aime at theſe things this day,
                           5 For chearfulneſſe in Gods ſeruice. as at a marke. And whereas (moſt mercifull father) we  are wont to go to prayer, hearing, conferring, and reading of thy word with much vnwillingneſſe and vntowardneſſe; and to be ſleepie and vnreuerent therein; graunt, that I may be armed againſt theſe: and contrarily may ſtirre vp my ſelfe to chearfulneſſe and gladneſſe when ſuch times in the day come, ſeeing thou haſt appointed them to be eſpeciall helpes for my weakneſſe; labouring, that my heart may be affected with them, and ſtrength obtained thereby from Chriſt Ieſus my head,
                           6 For confidence in all eſtates. to go forward in my ſeuerall duties. Let me in all theſe and other actions this day, hold faſt my confidence in thee, that thou haſt a fatherly care ouer me, both in turning my afflictions (which it ſhall pleaſe thee to ſend) to my great good, and granting me many ſweete  bleſſings for my further incouragement: that when I ſhall be perſwaded, that they are both,
                           7 Iuſt dealing to all, and mercy to the needy, and to hurt none in goods, name, &c. from thee of a fatherly cōpaſſion and tender care, I may greatly be vpholden and comforted. And whatſoeuer I ſhall haue to deale in with any man, though I be not in preſence with him, let me euer giue that which is due to him, as farre as I ſee it to appertaine to me: eſpecially in the commodities of this life, that none may haue any iuſt cauſe to complaine of any iniurie done by me: neither may I haue any wound of conſcience at any time for ſuch gaine or ſubſtance, and the rather for that I am giuen too much to looke after mine owne right:
                           
                              8 For the right vſe of proſperity and aduerſitie.
                           Here remēber to pray for outvvard benefits and ſucceſſe in earthly dealings.
                         and with this, let mercy and compaſſion be ioyned, that I may as thou haſt inabled me, glad the hearts of ſuch thy poore  ſeruants, as whoſe neceſſities it moſt appertaineth to me to relieue. And ſo long as in thy fatherly wiſedome thou haſt purpoſed to grant me health and proſperitie, let me vſe and inioy the ſame with much thankfulneſſe; and ſoberly, humbly and meekly cary my ſelfe in that eſtate, not thinking my ſelfe any thing better then ſuch as want it: let me not diſdaine others, nor my ſelfe be drowned in idleneſſe, ſenſualitie and ſortiſh eaſe; but let me be ſo

                         much the more profitable in euerie good worke whiles thou giueſt me ſo many helpes thereto, then in afflictions I could be; that ſo I may ſerue thy maieſtie with a ſound mind and bodie, ſo farre as thou ſhalt ſee it expedient. And yet not promiſing to my ſelfe continuance of peace and proſperitie, but to looke for my chaunge: to learne to be abaſed, and to want: and contentedly, thankfully and patiently to take vp that croſſe which thou ſhalt allot vnto me; receiuing much comfort in the triall of my faith by thy chaſtizing of me, and for that I know that in great mercie and loue thou doeſt it. And (good Lord) keepe from me heauie iudgements which are aboue my ſtrength: and when thou freeſt me from manie troubles,
                           9 Againſt vnſetledneſſe by any occaſion. let me in no wiſe  trouble my ſelfe with an euill conſcience. And becauſe I am occupied about many things in the day, and therefore am more readie (through the Diuels malice and vigilancie, who ſeeketh all occaſions againſt me) to be vnſetled and brought out of frame, graunt (moſt louing Father) that I may at ſuch times remember, how I ought to haue a ſtayed mind and conſtant, euer counting one thing to be neceſſarie in the middeſt of all my buſineſſe, dealings and varietie of actions: and that is, that I may highly prize thy word, that ſo I may do thy will; ſeeing I haue then moſt need of this grace of faithfulneſſe and care, when the danger is greateſt. And yet,
                           10 In ſliding to returne ſpeedily, and not to lie ſtill. if I ſhould be ouertaken with any forgetfulneſſe, and vnawares be preuented by Sathan, ſlipping  into any ſecuritie, raſhneſſe, earthlineſſe of mind, or ſuch like blind-folding of me that I ſhould be thereby vnſetled, and this my courſe of holy walking be broken off; yet (good Lord) leaue me not ouer-long in that danger: graunt me to eſpie my fall and offence whatſoeuer it be, and not to hide it in any wiſe, but ſpeedily to acknowledge it, that I may obtaine mercie for it at thy hands, & ſo may returne to thee againe, becauſe I haue ſufficiētly ſeene and tried that it is no liuing, but worſe then death,
                           11 For locking backe and examining the actions of the day. to haue thee at any time againſt me. Laſtly, I moſt humbly beſeech thee, that I may ſo warily cary my ſelfe throughout this day in all that I go about, that I may not be vnwilling to view my doings and what hath bene done amiſſe, at euening, and reuerently  looke backe and examine how I haue ſpent it, and that by theſe rules whereby I haue prayed to be directed: and that I may be willing to ſee where I haue failed, that I may the better know what badnes doth ſtill remaine in me;After requeſt made for good life, put next a requeſt for the reuerent vſe of all good helpes; as, this beginning of the day, or for the vvell practiſing of the godly life. that ſo I may haue iuſt occaſion to humble my ſelfe and confeſſe my ſinne to thee, and may make an end of all breaches, not lying downe in any of them vnrepented. Let me count this no burthen nor toile to do it, (as the moſt of the world do, who thereby prouide ſo many after-reckonings for themſelues, that they cannot anſwer one among a thouſand of them.) And by all my weakneſſes, neglects of dutie and out-ſtrayings let me not be diſcouraged to leaue off this daily looking to my waies, but to increaſe my care rather.  And wherein ſo euer I ſhall ſee and find, that I haue obtained grace in any good ſort to be guided by the direction which thy word ſetteth before me, there I may be ioyfull and thankfull that thou makeſt any part of my dutie eaſie to me, which I know to haue bene farre otherwiſe. And thus let me haue good proofe, that in all the cariage of my ſelfe and in euery part of my life I am a ſtranger on earth, as my forefathers were; and lie downe in peace at night, euen as this morning, through thy goodneſſe, I appeare before thy

Maieſtie. And for the nouriſhing and preſeruing of this Chriſtian libertie in  me, and that I may walke after this direction carefully, let my prayers be oft (as I may be able to offer them) and earneſtly continued this day, and watchfulneſſe adioyned thereto, as thou haſt taught me: that although this manner of liuing be not regarded in the world, yet I hauing obtained of thy Maieſtie to make it my delight, and knowing the incredible gaine that commeth by it, I may be reſolute and throughly perſwaded to make it my practiſe, not onely this day, but euerie day hereafter whereſoeuer I ſhall become, or in what eſtate and condition ſoeuer I ſhall be. That by the faithfull continuance of this Chriſtian courſe, I may ſee my profiting daily in the denying of my ſelfe and litle eſteeming of this world, and ſo haue good teſtimonie that I  liue by faith: and that when I ſhall be gray-headed, and waxe old, I may haue mine old age bleſſed vnto me, and not full of tediouſneſſe and wearineſſe, idleneſſe and vnprofitableneſſe, waywardneſſe, frowardneſſe and ſuch like annoyances, whiles I acquaint my ſelfe now with the renouncing and forſaking my will in theſe and ſuch like: that thus my latter dayes may be better then my former. And for the obtaining of grace to the practiſing of all duties this day,The armour. arme me with the armour of a Chriſtian, that my particular actions may by the helpe thereof be well ordered: that by the armour of faith I may be able to beleeue all times, and be kept from doubting and diſtruſt in thee what occaſions ſoeuer may be offered me of the ſame; that I  ſtanding and abiding in faith conſtantly, may find and feele the ſweet fruite and benefit of that part of my armour: and that I may be ſo ſetled in hope, that I may not faint euen in ſtreights, though I ſee no way (to mans reaſon) of good iſſue, but by patience may be vpholden. That I may ſo be cloathed with the breſt-plate of righteouſneſſe, that I may not feare any daunger by falſe accuſations and malitious tongues; but may bring forth plentifully the fruits of righteouſneſſe in all my dealings, and mine innocencie may ſhine as light in the world. That my knowledge, by thy word may direct me to diſcerne good from euill, truth from errour, and ſo may keepe my feete from falling, by the deceiptfulneſſe of ſinne. That I being ſhod with the ſhooes  of peace, may not onely haue peace of mind in the time of health and proſperitie, but be prepared thereby to go on my iourney of this life euer, in ſickneſſe and tribulation alſo. And laſtly, that I may be ſo girded about with ſinceritie and integritie, that I may be farre from all hollowneſſe and hypocriſie, and may cary my ſelfe in plaineneſſe and ſimplicitie throughout. And that behauior in my heart or life which will not ſtand with this courſe, let be, as I haue prayed, as ſuperfluous rubbiſh cut off and caſt from me, and let me haue nothing to do with it, that my life may be free from dangerous and reproachfull euils. And whatſoeuer elſe thou knoweſt expedient for me, bodily or ſpirituall, in this life or that which is to come, graunt it to me for  Chriſts ſake: to whom with thee (ô Father) and the holy Ghoſt, be all honor and glorie for euer. Amen.
                     This prayer is not ſet downe to vrge anie to vſe it daily, but as anie ſhall ſee cauſe; and ſometimes to ſtirre vp thoſe that feele themſelues dead and vnfit to pray, by reading it ouer: and euerie thing in it, ſo farre to be applied, as the ſtate of the perſon ſhall require.
                  
               
            
            The end of the fourth Treatiſe.
         
         
            
            THE FIFT TREATISE, SHEVVING THE LETS  VVHICH HINDER THE SINCERE COVRSE OF THE CHRIſtian life before deſcribed.
            
               CHAP. 1. Of the ſumme and order of this Treatiſe, and how it agreeth well with the former.
               
                  
                  AS it is the loue of God, which conſtraineth and inableth vs to loue him, and therefore to indeuour to obey him; ſo the wicked who are not beloued of him, cannot loue nor ſerue him: therefore it were infinite, and not to my purpoſe here, to make a large diſcourſe of this, What lets hinder them from the ſame, ſeeing it is no one particularly, but many which hold them from a godly life, as alſo from faith. But ſeeing the moſt of the impediments which hinder them altogether, are alſo ſtops and ſtayes to Gods deare ſeruants, ſo that they be not ſo cleare lights in giuing good example as they  might, and as were meete for them: therefore for the better furthering of them in the way to a godly life, I will by that occaſion lay foorth ſome of them which hinder both: but chiefly I will ſhew how the poore children of God be holden backe, and ſo become more offenſiue; and giue ſuch helpe as I can againſt the ſame: for that is the point which I propound in this Treatiſe to acquaint the Reader with. And firſt to ſay ſomewhat generally before I proceed.
               He that faithfully vſeth the daily direction ſet downe before, or the like,He that is guided and directed by the former doctrine is in litle danger. ſhall be furniſhed daily with the munition that a Chriſtian ſhall need againſt his greateſt enemies, and (as I haue ſaid) ſhall find reſt to his ſoule daily: which  otherwiſe is not to be found nor enioyed conſtantly of any, neither the beautie and felicitie of a godly life in any ſort poſſeſſed as it may. For though I dreame of no perfection in this life, yet he that walketh in this royall way, ſhall not doubt where he is, and whether he be out of his way; as other ſhall from time to time: he ſhall be accompanied throughout the day and from day to day, with faith, hope, loue, humilitie, meekeneſſe, righteouſneſſe, vprightneſſe, patience, temperancie, ſomewhat armed againſt trouble, hauing

the word (according to the meaſure of his knowledge and faith) readie to  guide him what to follow and what to refuſe.
               Now therefore it might ſeeme needleſſe to ſay any more about this matter. And indeed this I ſay, that he who is ſetled firmely in the practiſe of that which is before ſet downe, ſhall find euery day leſſe to hinder him then other, and the Chriſtian life more eaſie to him. But becauſe we are not ignorant of Sathans enterpriſes (who,But they muſt know what dangers will be in their way. as he is firſt hardly caſt out, and with much ado: ſo he is afterward more fierce and ſubtill to hinder ſuch as haue eſcaped his hands) therefore I will not beare the reader in hand, that this direction, or the like, will be as eaſily obſerued and kept conſtantly, as read and learned, leſt he finding it otherwiſe, ſhould be diſcouraged and ſet further backe: but as I  haue ſaid of the parts alreadie, with how much ado they ſhall be practiſed; ſo I ſay much more of the whole, that ſeeing it is a chaining vp of the vnruly thoughts and deſires of the heart, it will at the firſt ſeeme the more difficult. But although they eſcape that firſt plunge (I meane, not to renounce and caſt off the practiſe of it altogether through the difficultie and hardneſſe which ſeemeth to be in it, but will conceiue hope that God will ſtrengthen them to abide conſtantly therein; which is a great conqueſt:) yet they muſt know, that there will fall out very many lets to hinder and hold them backe one time or other, and one way or other, to make the doctrine which ſhould direct them, without fruite vnto them. The diuell (as I haue ſaid) will lay ſundrie  blockes in their way, to hinder them from going forward in and after this courſe of liuing by faith daily.
               Beſides theſe, there are ſome which deſire to pleaſe God from their harts though not acquainted with any direction how to be guided, but come farre behind them:The weaker and the ſtronger Christians must be helped. we muſt therefore ſeeke, how to proppe vp and bring on thē which are thus weake, as well as giue rules to the ſtrong; and indeuour to bring them by litle and litle to this eſtate, as well as teach the other how to keepe in the good courſe which they haue attained to. Finally, we muſt in a wiſe and tender regard of their frailties (as forgetfulneſſe, earthly mindedneſſe,Chriſtians must learne how to returne when they are gone out of the way. coldneſſe, ſlouthfulneſſe, alſo of their ignorance and other wants of  experience) teach them (as God hath taught vs) how to riſe when they are fallen, & to come into the way when by occaſiō they are gone out: that thus they may not be too much diſmayed by their infirmities, but rather ſtrongly encouraged to haue better acquaintance with the life of a Chriſtian, ſeeing there are ſo many helpes, meanes and incitements thereto granted to them by God. Alſo to make them better ſee themſelues, the vileneſſe which remaineth in them, and Sathans malice and other of his properties, how many things he layeth in their way to make them ſtumble thereat: that the reading of theſe may hold them from ſecuritie, and from faintneſſe and wearineſſe (in their Chriſtian courſe) whereto they are moſt inclined of themſelues  though they were ſet forward thereto by no other.
               Now although, as oft as a man practiſeth not this or the like daily direction, it is certaine that he is letted; yet euery one ſeeth it not to be ſo by and by, neither how or by what he is letted; much leſſe how to redreſſe it: therefore is this place and treatiſe of the lets moſt needfull, to ſhew what lets will lye in our way to hold vs from following good direction, and from practiſing

                   of the Chriſtian life daily; that they being knowne, may be preuented and auoided, ſo farre as we may haue peace, (which ſhall be, if the rules for directing vs be carefully obſerued:) or at leaſtwiſe if we be hindred any manner of way, yet we may ſee how, and ſo hauing remedies at hand, we may be glad to repaire ſpeedily vnto them, and thereby returne into the way againe.
               And therefore I haue thought it expedient to ſignifie the ſame in this chapter, and that my purpoſe is, to ſpeake in the whole treatiſe following, of theſe and ſuch like matters of purpoſe, for the helpe and comfort of ſuch as cannot yet find the Lords yoke to be eaſie, nor his commaundements pleaſant and ſweet vnto them at one time as another, in one point as in another,  but toileſome and burthenſome. So that although I haue in the firſt treatiſe ſaid ſomewhat particularly for their ſakes, as I could take fit occaſion to do: yet becauſe I know that many who are willing to liue well and chriſtianly, do make a toyle thereof, and do not find any great pleaſure in the duties of it; and therefore make queſtion oftentimes (ſeeing they find it ſo hard) whether they were beſt to go forward, or no; eſpecially when they haue bene driuen to commit any ſhamefull ſinne: therefore I thinke it very expedient to remoue theſe daungerous thoughts, and ſhew them ſome way to come out of this vncomfortableneſſe.
               Now the maine and chiefe lets are, the diuell with all his force, ſubtiltie  and malice; and our euill hearts ſo farre as they are vnreformed: and by means of both, all things in the world, though not in their owne nature, but by thē made occaſions to vs of falling and offending God. Whereby may be gathered, what I meane by lets and hinderances in this treatiſe,VVhat is meant by lets. euen whatſoeuer may hold vs backe from peace with God. Now all theſe and euery of them is able to breake off our courſe in godlineſſe, that we ſhall not bend our minds otherwiſe then in ſome generall ſort and manner to worſhip God, and liue with men: and although they preuaile not ſo with all, that they breake off their courſe altogether, yet ſome one part or other of the godly life ſhall be neglected; and ſo one day after another, it ſhall continue with them in ſuch  wiſe, that their reioycing in the Lord ſhall faile, neither ſhall their light ſhine amongſt men, whereby God might be glorified. In this darkneſſe and bondage the moſt part of Gods people are holden: ſo that although they haue ſome litle ſight of redemption, and dimme hope at ſome times that their ſinnes are forgiuen them, yet neither enioy they their part in this any long time, nor their ſweet libertie in godlineſſe, which they ſhould haue in all eſtates; both which the Lord hath graunted to enioy, as I haue ſhewed before. They muſt therefore learne carefully to reſiſt all ſuch lets, as they ſhall know to ſtand vp in their way to hinder them: of theſe therefore I meane to giue a taſt, and of the chiefe and moſt of them, that we may ſee and diſcerne  them, and ſhew ſome helpe againſt them.
               And firſt generally I will ſet downe the properties of the diuell, as,Firſt, of lets in generall. his malice, ſubtiltie, crueltie and the like, by the which in ſundrie ſort he worketh vpon the hearts of poore Chriſtians, and deceiueth them infinite wayes: and together with theſe, I will ſet downe the encouragements which God hath giuen them againſt the ſame, which be farre greater then many of them do thinke.
               
                  
                  Then after, of the particular kinds of them, and vvhat they be.And ſecondly, more particularly of the ſeuerall kinds of lets and hinderances  which Sathan raiſeth vp againſt them; and the kinds of them; and which they be; and how he vſeth their hearts and the world as his inſtruments to ouerthrow them: and the particular remedies againſt the ſame, wherby ſuch as are incumbred with any of theſe lets, may count it no ſtrange thing, neither be diſmayed thereat; and by this which they ſhall reade, may be prouided of ſome helpe and deliuerance.
            
            
               CHAP. 2. Of Sathans properties and attempts againſt vs in generall: and our helpe againſt them.
               
                  TO begin therefore firſt generally, euen he it is, Sathan I meane, that withſtandeth vs in euery good thing, (as I haue ſaid before) and leadeth vs amiſſe many waies,1. Pet. 5.8. although we ſee our ſelues ſet free from the infernall woe. And therefore it is,Iob. 1.7. that our hearts cannot ſo ſoone be raunging though it be neuer ſo litle, but he is readie to meete with them and ſet them forward in ſome euill;The diuell meeteth with vs on euery ſide: and by his moſt ſlie ſubtiltie, he faſteneth our liking and our affections  there, before we can be aware of it: ſo that we maruell after, to ſee ſuch a ſuddaine vnſetledneſſe in vs, and ſuch a chaunge from a wel-ordered courſe wherein we were before. And hereby it is alſo, (of him I meane) that we can deale about nothing but we may poſſibly, and be oft times, ſnared with it: he knowing how to vſe all outward objects to our hurt,Both by proſperity to ſnare vs and by croſſes to vexe vs, at home and abroad, as wealth, beautie, friends, libertie, peace, and all bleſſings; and contrarily, loſſes, ſickeneſſe, diſgrace, &c. If that we be at home, he workes by domeſticall affaires: if abroad, he taketh occaſion from thence. So that whereſoeuer, or whatſoeuer we do or be occupied in, the Scripture teacheth vs, that he is about vs how good ſoeuer we be, if not in vs as in the men of this world: and that which is moſt  daungerous of all,VVhen we leaſt ſuſpect it. he doth moſt craftily deceiue vs when we do leaſt ſuſpect it. More particularly to lay foorth this, I cannot here conueniently.
               If therefore men be ignorant or vnexperienced of his working and properties in themſelues, it is not to be maruailed at though they beare their deadly wounds about them through his vnceſſant malice and ſubtiltie: for it is not poſſible, but that euery naturall man one way or other ſhould be deepely bewitched, made ſenſleſſe and fooliſh with pleaſures, profites, dreames of earthly happineſſe to come, feare, ſecuritie, hard-heartedneſſe, or ſome ſuch like. And this is the eſtate of the world at this day; euen thus are all vnbeleeuers deceiued, and holden (as it were) in bands; and cannot, either  ſeeke or deſire, or know how to get out. But if any be more expert, and haue their hearts exerciſed in diſcerning good and euill, & how both are wrought and what hindereth both; if God teach them to know this myſterie and ſecret, of Sathans caſting miſtes before their eyes to rocke them faſt aſleepe in ſinne, and haue had proofe of theſe things in themſelues; they ſhall farre more eaſily ſee into it, and know by the helpe that God hath left them, how to

                   ſhunne his deadly wounds, and to ſee his poyſoned baites, and to auoide them.
               It is not to be denyed, but that in this manner, Sathan beſetteth all people, (though litle obſerued and ſeene of vnbeleeuers) and moſt of all, vs,Luc. 22.31. whome he is openly and reſolutely ſet againſt. All of vs therefore are to know his enterpriſes, properties, practiſes, vigilancie, his malice at all times, and in all actions and companies: and how by his diuerſe ſleights he dealeth according to the occaſions offered, and as our weakeneſſe may moſt eaſily be diſcouraged. But what then? are we therefore to faint? God forbid.VVe may not faint though we haue the diuell againſt vs. I ſay further, (as before) if he doth not onely kindle the concupiſcence that is within  vs and our owne luſts, to be more ſet on fire to do the euill which we are inclined to; but alſo baiteth the outward things with poiſon, which we deale about, that he may dazle our eyes, and caſt vs from our hold, that is, that we may not keepe ſtill in the Chriſtian courſe: yet ought we not for all this to be diſmayed.
               For we know, that euen theſe,Reaſon why. although they cannot but trouble vs for the preſent time, yet ſhall turne to our exceeding good, by making vs to ſet more ſtore by Gods protection then we did before, and to abide vnder his gouernment more continually; ſeeing we do ſo ſoone ſmart when we ſhake it off (as it were) neuer ſo litle. When therefore we ſhall perceiue our ſelues to  be hindered and diſtracted from our peaceable courſe and continuance in a daily good courſe, God would haue vs know that we ſhould not faint and be diſcouraged; but in confidence and full perſwaſion of recouerie, and obtaining fauour, confeſſe humbly both our wandring and vnſetledneſſe of heart, and much more our hearkening to Sathans deluſions, (whereby we were ſo farre eſtranged from God) and forſake them, that we may find mercy.
               The Lord would haue none of his to be raunging from vnder his wings, and much leſſe (if any be fallen through infirmitie, or beguiled by Sathans ſubtiltie) would he haue them thinke, that he will therefore ſhake them off: who hath made it manifeſt and well knowne in the Goſpell:Luc 15.6. 
                  That he ſeeketh  vp that which is wandering and loſt. This muſt be throughly perſwaded vnto Gods children, that they may neither be diſcouraged (as they muſt needes be otherwiſe) in their fals, from ſuing to God: and yet,1. Ioh. 2.1.2. not boldly abuſing his lenitie, but well encouraged by his great loue to returne to him againe. For although the diuell be a mightie enemie and cruell,Properties of the diuell. Reu. 12.10. Reu 12.3.
                   for which cauſe he is called A great red dragon; and The accuſer of the brethren; and as ſubtile, vigilant and malicious, as he is ſtrong: yet they for their parts are not naked and altogether vnarmed: neither doth their ſtrength reſt in themſelues, but they deriue and draw it from one that is mightier then he. They haue libertie,Coloſ. 1.11. nay commaundement to be ſtrong in the might of Gods power, that is: to be  fully perſwaded, that if there be any ſtrength in God himſelfe, (who we know holdeth all diuels in ſubiection) theirs it is, and for them, and they may take it for their owne: euen as if any poore man in a purchaſe ſhould haue by a rich friend laid out for him and freely beſtowed on him, whatſoeuer he ſhould want. Yea, one part of their armour (I meane faith) is able alone to ouercome all lets which they ſhall meete with, and to thruſt backe euen the fierie darts of the diuell, which burne and ſting moſt ſharpely.
               
                  They muſt alſo conſider, who and what manner perſons they are; not enemies  to God as in times paſt, but beloued, deare and precious vnto him, euen ſonnes and daughters;Other reaſons to ſtrengthen againſt Sathan. 1. Pet. 2.9. 2. Cor. 6.18. Rom. 5 10. Rom. 8.1.
                   and therefore not like to be vnnaturally forſaken or left to themſelues in their neede and neceſſitie: and if when they were enemies they were reconciled by his death, how much more being reconciled, ſhall they be ſaued by his life? and being alreadie deliuered from the greateſt feare, that is, of damnation, they may be well perſwaded, that the combates which remaine to be betwixt Sathan and them, cannot be deadly and to their ouerthrow, but to exerciſe their faith; that after they haue truſted God a litle and waited vpon him,Heb. 10.36. to ſee his helping hand here, they may after their conflicts receiue their reward.
               
               This I ſpeake not to make any ſlacke and careleſſe, but to encourage them againſt theſe lets which follow,Incouragemēts may not make vs ſlacke. which by his ſubtiltie ſhall ſeeme greater then they are: that they may not be faint-hearted and diſcomforted, ſeeing there is no cauſe. For it hath pleaſed the Lord and ſo he hath promiſed, by ſtriuing,Iam. 4.7. Heb. 10.37. reſiſting Sathan, and ſuffering a litle, afterwards to take them into glorie: (as our Sauiour himſelfe did go that way, Heb. 12.2.) and yet not to be without honor, euen here (if we iudge rightly) where and whiles (to the iudgement of the fleſh) they are in the middeſt of reproch. This caueat I giue vnto the beleeuers before hand, putting them in remembrance that I muſt oftentimes call them backe to the conſideration thereof: that they may be  vpholden in the greateſt likelihoods of danger.
               And they muſt be warned to learne wiſedome by their experience, that when they ſhall be able in ſundrie trials to eſcape and bee deliuered from the foile and perill which they feared,VVe muſt learne wiſdom by experience. Rom. 5.4.
                   and to ſee that God hath vpholden them therein by faith in his promiſe and hope in his helpe, and that thereby they haue bene taught to vſe ſuch meanes as haue brought a good end of their cō
                  flicts; they may afterwards be emboldened to waite for the ſame grace again, in the like neceſſities and ſtraights: and ſo to grow to haue that acquaintance and communion with God, that they may with confidence looke to obtaine greater things at his hands then theſe, and to encourage and hearten on others  (who are weake) to do the ſame.
               Now if any ſhould feare, that all this looking to our ſelues is more then needes:Our greatest prouiſion against Sathan, cannot be too much. he is to know, that if our hearts were ſound, and ſo kept without liking of euill (as ſometime the meaneſt Chriſtian feeleth it,) there were no danger to be feared, no not from the diuel himſelfe, much leſſe the world, according to that of Salomon: Keepe thy heart with all diligence, for thereout commeth life:Prou. 4.23. and they who haue any experience, find nothing more true, then that they walke at great libertie, when their hearts are well ordered. But ſeeing few can heare this ſaying, that our hearts ſhould be holden in ſubiection to Gods will from time to time, and our deſires and thoughts (though fond  and fooliſh) captiuated; therefore Sathan taketh his aduantage thereby, to make them ſlaues and bondmen to his ſuggeſtions and deceitfull inticements, to bereaue and make them voide of all ſound iudgement; and thus, to come to do thoſe things which ſometimes they were aſhamed of, or at leaſt haue iudged very hardly of others for doing them.Rom. 2.1.
               
               And thus it commeth to paſſe, that beſides the hinderance we haue by our

                   euill hearts, when we ſhall haue conſidered and well pondered how many wayes the diuell letteth and hindereth vs, we ſhall ſee good cauſe to prouide the ſtrongeſt helpe and defence that we can againſt the ſame. Now then, that it may more clearely be ſeene, what daunger and feare we are in by him, which may eaſily breake off our courſe in godlineſſe;Al Sathans purſuings of vs, tend either to ouerthrow our faith, or to hinder a godly life. ſome of his bad ſleights and practiſes are more particularly to be laid foorth, which though they be many and diuerſe, yet may be fitly drawne to theſe two heades: Either they do all ſet againſt our faith; or elſe directly ayme at the extinguiſhing and burying of godly life in vs: wherein if the diuell can preuaile againſt vs, he hath gotten what he would, and we haue loſt that wherein our glorie ſtood.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 3. Of the diuels troubling the weake beleeuer about his faith: and if he do not preuaile against him one way, he ſeeketh by another.
               
                  AND firſt for the former, to declare how he troubleth the weake faith of Gods children (for I omit to ſhew, how he leadeth them captiues who are in his ſnares, being  taken priſoners of him to do his will, and how forcibly he holdeth backe ſuch as do but begin to looke after eternall life; that they ſhall be long in cheaping but neuer buying, although it be without mony:) his malice,Sathans malice againſt weake and new called Chriſtians. Reu. 12.17.
                   crueltie and diligence do euidently appeare in the new borne Chriſtians, which are made the children of God by faith; as S. Iohn ſaith: The dragon made war with the remnant of the womans ſeed which keepe the commaundements of God, and haue the teſtimonie of Ieſus Chriſt. How many heauie diſcouragements he preſſeth downe their weake faith withall, that they may ſhake it off vtterly, and be perſwaded infinite times that they haue none at all,  Chriſts words to Peter do prooue, ſaying: Simon, Simon,
                  Luc. 22.31. Sathan hath deſired to winow you, that is: to ſcatter and caſt you out. And how mightily he preuaileth with many for a ſeaſon ſo farre, that they are altogether in a maner without comfort, the diſperſed Churches in the Apoſtles time knew then, and they now know beſt who haue felt and found it ſo.
               Alſo it would hardly be beleeued, if both Scripture and experience were not cleare witneſſes in this behalfe, how he terrifieth them with their owne wants, ignorances, infirmities and vnworthineſſes: alſo with feare of ſhamefull falles, which it ſeemeth to them that they are vnlike to auoide; and the rather when he brings to their remembrance ſuch good ſeruants of God, as  haue fallen in the like manner before them.
               Beſides theſe, what vnſetlings doth he worke in them whiles he feareth them with this, that for all their care they ſhall neuer hold out in their faith and holy courſe of life vnto their end; but by perſecutions, and other afflictions, which ſhall be ſtirred vp againſt them, or by other prouocations they ſhall be turned backe? All which with many other, he oppreſſeth them with: and all to the end they may caſt away their hope and confidence, & conclude

reſolutely, that they haue no faith. The which though the ſleepie and drowſie  profeſſors are not moued with: yet with his weake children it ſo preuaileth, that they haue no greater affliction. And in that our Sauiour himſelfe was mightily ſet vpon by him about this thing, Whether he were the ſonne God or no: what other thing did it ſignifie then this, that none of vs ſhould eaſily attaine to this honour, to know our ſelues to be the children of God and reſt quietly therein, but we ſhould find Sathan (our aduerſarie) a moſt mightie hinderer of vs in our going about it?
               For wherein can he ſhew his malice more fully, or verifie the Scripture more clearely,Mat. 13. Gen. 3. which ſaith: That he is enuious man? and again: That there ſhall be enmitie betwixt the ſeed of the woman and the Serpent, and that he  ſhould treade vpon his heele?The ſmall taſt of true faith, is moſt ſweet to the vveake. 1. Ioh. 5.13.
                   Indeed, this is to be graunted, that euen their weake faith which they haue, is ſweet vnto them; and God doth ſometime ſhew them, how happie a thing it is to be in his fauour and freed from condemnation, Saint Iohn thus ſpeaking to them: I write vnto you that beeene, that you may know ye haue eternall life. And by reaſon of the litle taſt and fruite of their weake faith, God ſo vpholdeth them, that they can neuer be contented to forgo it: and therefore would they moſt chiefly be occupied in thinking of it, to nouriſh and ſtrengthen it (if they knew how and were able) as being their chiefe treaſure.
               But the diuell knoweth, that there are all thoſe wayes which I haue before  ſpoken of, and many other, to diſmay them and trouble their minds about the ſame; and that their weakneſſe is eaſily wrought vpon, (for he watcheth his beſt oportunitie) whereby he may driue them into feare, doubting, heauineſſe and ſuch like. And the want of outward bleſſings in many doth much increaſe it, from the which they ſhall neuer be free long together, but euery while be troubled,How they ſhold helpe themſelues againſt all lets that trouble them about faith. till they grow better acquainted with the nature and propertie of Gods promiſes, namely, how true, vnchaungeable, and perpetuall they be; euen as God himſelfe alſo is: alſo except they prize them aboue all other things, and ſend vp earneſt prayers to God daily and oft for this faith to be rooted in them: which they muſt do moſt willingly and gladly, as  in the firſt treatiſe I admoniſhed, that it being more and more daily ſetled in their hearts, they may feele their doubting and feare to vaniſh as faſt, as they perceiue their hold in the promiſes of God to waxe ſtronger: and by thoſe meanes, by which I taught the weake beleeuer there to ſtrengthen his faith, let him looke to be vpholden againſt the lets which I haue mentioned before, or any other whatſoeuer may trouble him.
               It is alſo to be graunted, that God doth ordinarily ſtabliſh mens faith the ſooner and more eaſily by the cleare,Further helpes. ſound, and moſt skilfull and wiſe applying of Gods promiſes by his Miniſters and meſſengers, whom he appointeth to that worke: (and as this is done more weakely and darkely, the greater and  longer is their combat & conflict:) but how cleare and plaine ſoeuer the wil of God about our ſaluation be to vs, who haue experience of the truth which is taught vs; yet it is not ſo by and by to them who do but newly imbrace this glad tidings, although they would moſt gladly enioy the ſame. How much more then, when they are yet but weakely grounded, and in this eſtate do want an able miniſterie to ſet them forward: (which is many poore

                   Chriſtians caſe:) alas, how much more (I ſay) muſt they needes be kept long at one ſtay, or (which is worſe) forget and looſe the hold which once they had?
               But although they be free from this daunger; yet the diuell working vpon their infirmities, caſteth many moe miſts before their eyes then we can reckon vp, whereby he keepes them vnder. Yet all this is done by the moſt wiſe prouidence of God, diſpoſing euen theſe hinderances which Sathan layeth in their way, to the moſt earneſt ſtirring vp of them to faſten and lay hold on his mercie; beſides the which, they ſee nothing but deadly vnquietneſſe. And this vſe all ſuch weake ones are to make of their doubting,VVhat vſe vveake beleeuers ſhould make of their diſcouragements. Prou. 8.33. 1. Theſ. 3.2. & 10. Ezek. 34 4. Eſa. 61.1.
                   feare of condemnation,  and the trouble of mind which goeth with it: and therefore to giue daily attendance vpon the miniſterie of the word, which doth helpe to ſupply that which is wanting in their faith: to receiue helpe priuately of their teachers, and others who are experienced; and as well themſelues to vſe daily to meditate vpon Gods promiſes, as alſo to pray oft and earneſtly to God that nothing may hold them back or be a let from ſafe reſting vpon the ſame; eſpecially ſeeing their hearts are ſo ſet vpon and poſſeſſed with the loue and deſire thereof, that nothing can ſatisfie them without it. For do they not ſee, by all that hath bene ſaid to this purpoſe from the firſt entring into this matter, that they are the perſons to whome Chriſt ſaith: Beleeue? and again:Mat. 7.7. Mat. 92.20. 
                   Seeke and ye ſhall find? and alſo to whome he ſaith: I came not to breake the bruiſed reede, nor to quench the ſmoking flaxe? Yea they are thoſe to whom he ſpeaketh, as he did to Peter: I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith faile not;Luc. 22.31. Ioh. 7.37. and to whom he ſaith: Seeing ye thirſt after the water of life, I will giue it you. But if they be ſtayed by theſe meanes in time, (as it is the thing to the which they muſt come) and be vpholden thereby, the Lord ſo bleſſing them; yet the diuell giueth them not ouer, euen then, as though he were vanquiſhed and ouercome. For the preſent time indeed, he being thus reſiſted, flyeth from them (as Saint Iames ſaith) hauing done his beſt, and yet hath not preuailed againſt them: which to their ſingular comfort they may obſerue,Iam. 4.7. that  this their experience may bring them ſure hope of victorie againe in the like conflict. But (as I ſaid) he hath not giuen them ouer,The diuell leaueth not off to troub
                        •
                     e the weake beleeuer, though he be vanquiſhed. Luk. 4.13.
                   as though he feared they were too mightie for him: but departeth for a litle ſeaſon, as it is written; that as one taking breath, or gathering new ſtrength, yea rather as one chafed, he commeth more eagerly and fierce afterwards. Now, if he can driue them from their hold; the diſcomfort which they take thereby, doth weaken that courage and labour to be wel gouerned in their liues, which was in them before, how ſmall and weake ſoeuer it ſeemed to them to be:Mat. 12.45. and therefore they that haue ſuch tender conſciences, and being (as I may rightly tearme them) bruiſed reedes, to the end they may not be broken and ſo holden  bake from their chearefull proceeding in the true ſeruice of God, muſt thus be ſtayed vp (as I haue ſaid) and recouer themſelues from time to time, euen as oft as they ſhall be aſſaulted and diſcouraged. And this, with that which I ſaid in the firſt treatiſe, may (through Gods bleſſing) be a remedie to the weake ones in ſuch a caſe.
               Now if by Gods bleſſing and their diligence, they find ſome ſtay to their faith, and reſt to their ſoule thereby; and then become more ſecure by reaſon

of their former good ſucceſſe (as it is too common a thing, that Gods children  ſhall ſoone waxe too ſecure,VVhen the diuell preuailes not against the beleeuer one way, he attempteth another: By dravving him to preſumption. and voide of that ſerpent-like wiſedome till they haue bene taught by longer experience:) let them know, that he watcheth his oportunitie to ſet vpon them ſome other way; and namely, to drawe them to preſumption and too bold truſting in God without certaine ground of his promiſe: and he taketh occaſion thus to do, from their former beleeuing in God, and leaning to his fauour in time paſt when they ſped ſo well thereby. This ſubtiltie is ſo ſecretly wrought, that they ſhall hardly perceiue, yea or ſo much as ſuſpect the ſame, eſpecially hauing ſmall knowledge and being vncircumſpect in obſeruing their thoughts and waies. And whiles they thinke their eſtate to be right happie & good, they are led through this boldneſſe  into ſome euill:VVhat fruite that bringeth foorth. as, into priuie pride, or a good opinion of thēſelues, &c. ſleight and negligent vſe of meanes publike or priuate; and thereupon, an aduenturing perhaps to do that which is ſhamefull and reprochfull to them.
               This the diuell did hope to bring our Sauiour Chriſt vnto, when he ſawe his firme confidence which he had in his Father, at his firſt tempting him to diſtruſt:Mat. 4.5. for then he perſwaded him vpon the hope he had in God, to caſt himſelfe downe from the pinnacle of the temple, and not to feare any daunger. But though he found no ſuch thing in him as he looked for; yet in Peter, he aſſaying the ſame, was not diſappointed. For he hauing with great commendation made profeſſion of his faith, was too preſumptuouſly caried immediatly  to giue counſell to his maiſter (which boldneſſe was intollerable) but ſuch counſell as tended to his diſhonour, and our vtter vndoing if it had bene yeelded vnto, namely: Not to giue himſelfe for the ſinnes of the world; for the which cauſe he was reproued and repelled, and that moſt iuſtly, with the name of Sathan, for that he had in that action ſo rightly reſembled Sathan, who had thruſt him forward vnto ſuch great boldneſſe.
               And do not many by the like occaſion fall and offend daungerouſly? As, becauſe they are the children of God,Many, ſeeing they beleeue, thinke they ſhall be allowed in their actions done of ignorance: and for that they truſt in him, and therfore knowing and confeſſing that they are beloued of him, they hope he wil not ſuffer them to fall greatly, but will keepe them though they ſee not how? They are perſwaded (although falſely and amiſſe) that the things which they do in ignorance and vnbeliefe, are yet to be allowed and commended in thē becauſe they meane no euill; and being (as I ſaid) beloued of God, they preſume aboue that which they ought; and that they may promiſe much to themſelues (that they are priuiledged from offending) becauſe there is ſomewhat in them more then in others. Yea, when men grow to haue any hold of the aſſurance of Gods mercie, it is litle knowne of many, how the diuell taketh occaſion from that which is good, yea the beſt thing in them, to hold them back from honouring God (in ſuch ſort as his children ſhould do:) but keepeth them in blindneſſe, that they ſhall not ſee that to be euill which they  do, though it be very offenſiue and palpable.
               For would it be thought, that ſuch might be brought to be ſo blinded in that which they do,And they think alſo, that they are iniuried, if they be not approued therein. as to thinke, that if their courſe be not liked (when it is indeed iuſtly to be miſliked) nor their opinions approued though they be fond and vnſound, yet that they are hardly dealt withall of thoſe which think ſo of them? And thus it commeth to paſſe, that many dare be bold to neglect

                   good meanes publickly and priuately; or to vſe both very negligently, ſleightly and vnreuerently, which ſometime they durſt not do; and to make light account of a ſin in word or deed, which ſometime they would not alow ſo much as in thought. And thus many priuate mē take vpon thē to expound the Scriptures, hauing no gifts of interpretation, toungs or knowledge thereto; becauſe they thinke that the children of God may and ſhould do ſo. Such dreames and fantaſticall pangues Sathan raiſeth in the hearts as well of ſuch as haue had ſome taſt and feeling of Gods fauour, as of others who haue gone about the ſame (fooliſh fleſh too eaſily liking of, and conſenting thereto:) that if Chriſt be with them, and God loue them, vnder that colour all  ſhould be borne with that they do. Wherein who ſeeth not that Sathan driueth at this, that their profeſſion may be made ridiculous among other, and they themſelues after ſome ſore foile, may be diſcouraged from their profeſſion altogether. I muſt needs ſay it is lamentable, that ſuch as God hath inlightned ſometimes with ſome ſure hope of his fauour and of the life to come, ſhould ſo be deceiued and made to degenerate: but yet that it may be ſo, by Sathans malitious and ſubtile vndermining of thoſe which are not ſetled and conſtant, the oft rehearſing of ſuch offences in Peter by name, and in other of the chiefeſt Apoſtles, doth plainely proue; although it is greatly to their ſhame, and litle to their comfort which are in this eſtate: neither ſhall  they need to glorie much or pleaſe themſelues therein; becauſe ſuch as haue attained to greater grace then they, are no other way but by the power of Gods ſpirit guiding their hearts, preſerued from ſuch like offences.
               But this I haue ſpoken firſt, that I may admoniſh thoſe who haue found themſelues deliuered from the feare of Gods wrath ſometimes; yet,Let all weake beleeuers take heed of the leaſt preſumption. to beware of all boldneſſe and preſumption in the leaſt maner, and to looke carefully to the preſeruing and maintaining of their faith by all means, and learne to liue by it while they haue Gods word a light to their ſteps: for by it they abide in Gods fauour, and are further vpholden in their Chriſtian courſe; and without it, if they will be bold to venture as litle children without a ſtay,  they ſhall ſoone ſee to their coſt what danger they may grow vnto.
               Secondly, that they may aduiſedly conſider (their faith and confidence aſſuring them of ſo great good things from God daily) that this loue of God conſtraineth them to giue themſelues ouer to God as they are able: and therefore in reuerence and holy feare to carie themſelues ſo, as they haue the word a lanterne and light to their ſteps,Pſal. 119.105. and to ſuſpect all other boldneſſe to be raſh preſumption; which the Diuell according to his wonted maner and cuſtome laboureth to draw them into, that he may hinder them as much as he can, from inioying the full fruite of their faith here, although he cannot altogether depriue them of ſaluation it ſelfe. In humilitie let them thinke  baſely of themſelues, that they may keepe farre from this bold preſumption.
               And let not this be ſpoken to the weake Chriſtians onely,Let ſtronger Christians alſo be vvell armed againſt preſumption. although they are moſt eaſily deceiued thus for want of knowledge or ſound experience: but let the beſt alſo know, that it falleth out oft times in one houre or day, when men waxe ſomewhat more careleſſe in vpholding faith and a good conſcience, which commeth not to paſſe in manie yeares. And for ſuch as are

in feare and danger of this,Mat. 15.27. & 28. Prou. 28.14. let them know, that the greateſt meaſure of faith  doth bring anſwerable meaſure of humilitie, and teacheth ſuch to feare their owne infirmities and Sathans crueltie, and to obſerue themſelues leſt they fall; and haſt not, no not in the ſmalleſt maner, to lay hold of Chriſts mercie while they walke preſumptuouſly: and ſo afterward let them keepe well when they are well, rather then boldly to tempt God by doing the contrary. And this let all ſuch take for their remedie againſt that ſubtiltie of the Diuell in drawing them to preſumption.
            
            
               CHAP. 4. Of Sathans hindering the continuance of faith.
               
                  AND thus I paſſe to another of his ſlie and malitious practiſes, beſide tempting of vs to vtter vnbeliefe and preſumption. For if he preuaile againſt vs neither of both theſe wayes, but that we ſet our ſelues as we haue bene taught, to vphold and prop vp our weake faith daily; yet he doth moſt ſtrongly aſſault vs, watching all oportunities thereto, that we may not be rooted and ſtabliſhed therein;The diuell holdeth them who haue attained faith, to be oft to ſeeke of it. that after much labour and many prayers we ſhall be doubting from  time to time, and held backe from daily nouriſhing and preſeruing the continuance of that heauenly gift, that we ſhould not liue by it, nor grow more ſound and experienced in it, after we haue once obtained it of God: which cauſed the Apoſtles to pray thus, though Chriſt was conuerſant with them: Lord increaſe our faith. And although we be commanded neuer to caſt away our confidence, nor to come to prayer or any other duty at any time without this our faith; but as oft as we pray in the day to be able to call God Father, and not to be vnarmed of that whiles we be in this warfare:Epheſ. 6.14. yet becauſe it is the preſeruer of our life and peace, and that whereby all the benefits of Chriſt are conueyed vnto vs throughout our life, therefore doth he hold the moſt  of them which haue inioyed it and felt the ſweetneſſe of it, from poſſeſſing it daily.It is ſtrange to many Chriſtians, to heare that they muſt liue by faith. Heb. 10.38. 2. Cor. 5.6. Heb. 10.22.
                   And he maketh that as harſh and ſtrange to many euen of Gods ſeruants to heare, That the righteous liue by faith; and when they haue buried and loſt the power and operation of it, that their life is no life to be accounted of: euen as it is ſtraunge to the moſt of the vnbeleeuers, to heare, That we muſt draw neare to God with the aſſurance of faith at any time or at all.
               And from hence it is, that among holy Chriſtians, (though weake I muſt needs ſay) theſe ſpeeches are heard: What muſt we euer beleeue, and daily hold our faith? as though this were a matter not heard of, and a ſpeech doubtfull:Rom. 1.17. when yet the Scripture ſheweth plainely, that we muſt walke from faith  to faith daily; and that, not onely to more aſſurance of iuſtification, but to a greater meaſure of ſanctification alſo: that our life may be a liuing by faith, according to that which the Apoſtle ſaith to the Galathians:Gal. 2.20. 
                  In that I now liue (in the fleſh in this mortall body) I liue by faith in the ſonne of God, who hath loued me and giuen himſelfe for me. By the which words it is manifeſt, that in his owne perſon he ſheweth how the faithfull being vnited to Chriſt by

                   faith, do thereby draw and (as it were) ſucke ſpirituall grace from him daily, whereby they liue, that is to ſay, leade a ſpirituall life, or rather Chriſt liueth in them.
               Now therefore if the iuſtification of Gods people, and the holineſſe which they ſhew foorth in their liues, do ariſe from hence, that they beleeue God hath promiſed them 
                     1. Pet. 1.5. Take heed faith faile not: ſtrength to waite for ſaluation and to liue well: then it muſt needs follow, that faith failing, mens ſtrength to the doing of any good thing vtterly faileth alſo. And therefore if we be perſwaded, after we haue once receiued grace to beleeue, that we are thereby well inough, though we labour not to grow daily,But labour to grovv in it. and to hold faſt thereby the hope of forgiueneſſe  of our ſinnes, and of other grace; how groſſely doth the Diuell bewitch vs? By what meanes ſoeuer he do it, whether by keeping vs ignorant of this truth; or otherwiſe buſieth and occupieth vs in the world, that we thinke not of it, nor at all looke after it; or whether we be holden from it any other way: all as one. And although this is a thing, with which men of the world are not acquainted, yet they who haue learned to know what the excellencie of beleeuing is, and haue felt any power of it working in them; they are to know that they can neither liue comfortably, nor do any thing well without it: for Heb. 11.6. without faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God.
               And as the people of Iſraell in that one part of their life daily roſe vp perſwaded,  that the wals of Iericho ſhould fall after God had foretold it them;Ioſ. 6.14. and for prooſe thereof did euery day compaſſe them, blowing trumpets of rammes hornes, as they had beene commanded: ſo in our longer conflict not with Iericho but with him, who is called the Prince of the world, this our faith is to lie downe with vs, and to riſe vp with vs, and through the day to accompany vs. And nothing is more to be lamented then this:Though there be but little faith, yet it is not miſſed. that though it be rare and ſeldome found in the earth (the Diuell holding men in vnbeliefe ſtrongly, as it were in bands) yet it is not wanted or once miſſed: and the godly themſelues (for the moſt part of them) ſcarcely haue any great vſe of it, in reſpect of that which they might haue. Neither is this point made ſo  familiar and well knowne to manie Chriſtians, who yet haue a long time imbraced the Goſpell euen with good liking, (though ſome of greater experience are better ſetled.) Neither do many of them grow to ſee that their life is a continuall and daily conflict with ſinne and diſtruſt; neither are they acquainted with the ſubtile ſleights of the Diuell, how couertly he bringeth to paſſe, that they forget they are purged from their ſinnes, and therefore led after other deceiptfull allurements in the world. I ſpeake it for that I ſee, how hardly they can be holden in the daily ſtrengthning and nouriſhing of their faith, who yet haue truly (though weakly) taſted how ſweete it is, and Chriſt thereby, through the preaching of the Goſpell. And no maruell, if they cannot  be brought as ſome others are (and yet they but weake alſo) to ſet their delight therein as in the beſt treaſure.
               And for that ſo few are to be found, who hauing had comfort by it twenty or thirtie yeares agone, when they firſt heard of it and receiued it; or in later yeares, as many (it is not to be doubted) haue alſo had (for I dare not be ſo vncharitable as to iudge otherwiſe of them:) for that ſuch (I ſay) who haue inioyed much comfort by it, do not now; nor haue ſince that, inioyed the

ſame ſtil: what is the cauſe of it? Is it any other then this (that for ſundry yeres  paſt, and now alſo, they haue ſo ſleight fruite of it) that Sathan hath ſtolne away their hearts after the loue of preſent things euerie one his way, and cauſed them to loſe that high eſtimation of the Goſpell which once they had of it (though they ſtill commend it;) they not wiſe inough in the meane while to obſerue, how they were deceiued & blindfolded by him; nor once to miſſe or cōplaine of their loſſe whiles they may liue at eaſe, & proſper on earth in the meane while. And that it hath bin thus with many, (& therfore alſo is ſo with others ſtill) hereby it hath appeared, that at their death they recouered their decayed faith: & ſundrie haue more deeply deſcended into thēſelues then of late before they had done, and haue called to remembrance the ſeaſons in  which they had reioyced through their faith in another maner then in their latter dayes; much bewailing alſo the loſſe of ſo great a benefit as they by the decay of it had ſo long time ſuſtained, euē great liberty of mind to walke with God, & that boldneſſe and freedom of good conſcience, which the wiſe man ſaith is a cōtinuall feaſt.Prou. 15.15. Such therfore as ſee what the diuell pulleth frō them by darkning and burying this ſure truſt & cōfidence in God,Hovv to remedie this let. & how it goeth from thē couertly as the Sun frō her line, before they be aware if it be not wel looked to: ſuch (I ſay) muſt learne to put thēſelues forth, & cōſider what ſtrōg hold they haue (& they muſt ſticke to it) when they may ſay:Pſal. 27.1. 
                  The Lord is my helper, whom then ſhal I feare? & again: I ſhould vtterly haue fainted, but that I beleeue  verily, &c. Such muſt learne of Gods ſeruāts to waxe more bold with reuerence,Pſal. 22.4. & 5. Iob. 13.15. & reſolute: and ſeeing as Dauid ſaith, Our fathers truſting in thee, were not confounded, therfore to cry: Though thou kill vs, yet will we truſt in thee. And ſuch muſt leaue that worldly wiſdom, whereby they thought it needleſſe and fooliſh to nouriſh it in thēſelues daily; & muſt become fooles in the eſtimatiō of men, that they may be wiſe by the teſtimony of God, to keepe their faith as they would their life; & that, by oft recourſe had to the Lords promiſes which faile not, neither chāge; prouoked therto by their daily infirmities and wants, thinking oft & much of thē, and praying for grace to apply them to thēſelues, & growing ſtronger by experiēce: that thus they may clearly ſee Gods louing  kindneſſe daily to them, and not at ſome one time only, and that ſo they know themſelues to be in continuall ſafetie thereby, as their hearts deſire; which is to ſet the Lord alwaies before thē,Act. 2.25. that they may not be ſhaken: ſo ſhall they not be ſnared in Sathans bāds,2. Pet. 1.10. as otherwiſe they muſt needs be, neither greatly fall (I mean, to their hurt) although they be not free from tēptation. Theſe are the chiefe hinderāces of faith, wherby the diuel troubleth Gods ſeruants, holding ſome in feare that they haue none at all, who yet ſomtime haue felt the contrary: drawing others to preſume, &c. & keeping others from confirming it and growing therein daily, whether we reſpect faith in the particular promiſes of this life, or of life eternall. And theſe laſt mentioned, though they are not ſayd  properly, to preſume as the former, yet (as it is hard to hold any good thing long) they letting looſe their hearts, and being much occupied in the world, and hauing many dealings, being alſo in many companies, and meeting with many croſſes, (beſides their owne forgetfulneſſe and frailtie) are darkened and diſtracted in themſelues; and not being feruent and diligent in vſing good meanes, do doubt and feare. And this is the eſtate of many, and thoſe

                   of long profeſſion vnder the Goſpell. Which ſort of people till they ſettle themſelues conſtantly to walke with God, and will be content to keepe a narow watch ouer their hearts and liues, can be at no better ſtay. For by theſe meanes they preſerue their faith, and keepe peace with God ordinarily, as we ſee by experience: or eaſily recouer themſelues againe, if they be dimmed and ouer-ſhadowed.
            
            
               CHAP. 5.  Of Sathans hindring the beleeuer from liuing godly: and how many wayes; and namely, by keeping him in a wandring and vnſetled courſe; and alſo of the remedie againſt it: and first by occaſion of that, how he holdeth backe the wicked.
               
                  NOw it followeth that it be likewiſe ſhewed, how he letteth the beleeuers from a godly life:Sathā hindreth from a godly life. ſo that euen good Chriſtians and they who feare God, ſhall yet be kept backe from many duties, which both they would do, and are heauie and wounded for not doing them; he  deceiuing them with ſome ſinnes which do afterward fill them with deadly diſcouragement. But becauſe there are ſome who are holden vnder of dangerous and damnable lets, and yet thinke themſelues the people of God:Sathan letteth the vnregenerate from duties diuerſe vvaies. for diſcouering of ſuch, by the way before I ſpeake of the impediments which hinder Gods children, I will (as I promiſed) briefly ſet downe ſome of thoſe lets whereby he hindreth ſuch altogether from practiſing a godly life, though they thinke themſelues ſound Chriſtians, and yet are not, but do lie:Reuel. 3.9. that they may glory in themſelues no further then they haue cauſe, that is, nothing at all; but may know that they who are letted by theſe, are not godly; and that true  chriſtians indeed, may know, that though they are ſundry wayes letted, yet not like them.
               Now theſe haue an heart long accuſtomed to euill,The first let. (which were not hard for them to ſee, if they would enter into the ſifting of it:) and by meanes of this, they cannot giue themſelues ouer to be readie to do Gods will in one thing as in another, but thinke it fooliſhneſſe to do ſo: and the beſt of theſe do but performe ſome outward taske of prayer and confeſſion of their ſinnes, for faſhion or feare or ſome ſuch like cauſe; but not looking for any ſtrength thereby, to be any whit the more godly; neither in their actions will be tied to be otherwiſe directed, then as ſeemeth good to themſelues.
               
                   Againe they neither attaine to ſound and cleare ſight of the forgiueneſſe of their ſinnes,The ſecond. neither will they labour for it by applying to themſelues the promiſes of God, but hope their ſtate is good without that; ſo that their life, when they be at the beſt, is but a bold preſuming of Gods mercy, without any warrant: and therefore either in that falſe confidence they die, whoſe eſtate (yet) cannot be good; or elſe when it pleaſeth God to awake them out of that ſpirituall ſleepe,Pſal. 78.35. they confeſſe the truth plainely that they are in wofull

eſtate.
                     The third. 1. Sam. 15.24.30. Ioh. 3.20. Pſal. 50.21. And therefore they are vnwilling to enter into conſideration of  the annoyances which ſin bringeth: but if they do, yet it ſhall not touch nor greatly trouble them, neither will they trie to the full which of their actions be ſinnes, but they haue ſoone done with ſuch matters, though they be neuer wearie of that which likes them. I ſpeake of the forwardeſt ſort of them which are vnrenewed.
               
                  The fourth.Neither are they long perſwaded, ſaue onely in their good mood which laſteth not, that the godly life is the onely happie life; that is, to liue as I haue deſcribed it; namely, to haue our conuerſation in heauen, and to mind ſuch things eſpecially aboue all other, whiles we are abiding here on earth: but are ſtrongly ſetled in this opinion, for the moſt part, that their owne (though  all may ſee vpon how weake ground) is the beſt courſe, when yet daily care of holineſſe is irkeſome to them, and that all ſuch as go further then they, are but preciſe and fooliſh and full of fantaſies (for ſo are they for the moſt part accounted of, who in particular draw the rules of religion into practiſe;) and yet they do not ſo eaſily reſt herein, but oft their conſcience (will they, nill they) telleth them, that the godly life is beſt.
               
                  The fift and ſixt.To conclude, either they are ſnared in ſects and opinions aboue their reach (which cannot ſtand with godlineſſe:) or elſe they are ſo ignorant of the will of God in the Scriptures, that if they had no other incombrance, that were enough to hinder them from ſo much as entring into a godly courſe: or ſo hollow, looſe-minded and wilfull, that none can perſwade them to do better. And therefore, what the comfort of ſuch is, may be eaſily coniectured.
               Theſe, (that I rehearſe no more, which are infinite) yea, euen ſome of them are ſufficient hinderances from a godly life, in whom ſoeuer they be found: ſo that, although the moſt will put themſelues foorth for godly, yet being branded with any of theſe markes of Sathan, they ſhall ſufficiently be knowne to be farre off from ſuch as they would be taken for, namely, true Chriſtians. For remedie, ſuch as are willing to ſeeke after any, I referre them to the firſt Treatiſe of this booke: wherein I haue ſhewed what way ſuch ſhould take  to be deliuerred out of their miſerie.
               
                  The lets of Gods people from ſome proceeding at least in godlineſſe, are generally three.Now I will proceed to ſet downe the lets, whereby Gods children are holden from practiſing the godly life. And ſeeing many weake Chriſtians can eaſilier tell that they are hindred from it, then they can tell what hindreth them, as it is in bodily ſickneſſe: I will therefore lay open ſome of the lets, whereby the Diuell doth chiefly ſtay and hold them backe from going forward; and direct ſuch as are troubled with them, how they may in ſome ſort be helped againſt the ſame.Three generall lets. And theſe generally are three, (to the which the  particulars ſhall be referred.) For either the Diuell keepeth them in the wanting of ſome good things, without which they cannot conſtantly proceed  
                   in a godly life: or he preſſeth them downe with ſome euill things, as inward  or outward ſinnes, which take away their courage from godlineſſe: or elſe vnſetleth them ſo by occaſion of things lawfull, that they are holden thereby from a Chriſtian life.
               
                  The firſt general let containeth 3. ſpeciall lets.Of the firſt ſort I ſet downe eſpecially three: (for I do not vndertake to mentiō all particulars, which were infinite) the reſt will be diſcerned more eaſily

                   by theſe. The firſt is,The first. when the Diuell holdeth vs out of a ſetled courſe in godlineſſe which all the godly ought to liue in daily, though he cannot breake it off altogether. The ſecond is the want of our firſt loue,The ſecond. though we hold and keepe ſome courſe in godlineſſe more then many do. The third is,The third. want of a ſufficient miniſterie, though we be troubled with neither of the two former.
               If theſe three be not in our way, I ſee not much which may greatly hinder vs. For if we be reſolued to conſecrate our ſelues wholly to God while we liue; and indeuour to nouriſh and preſerue that feruencie which at our firſt calling God wrought in vs, ſo that ſuch holy ſparckles be not quenched; and  then that we haue the word of God ordinarily to blow vp and cheariſh the ſame: doubtleſſe, we are in the ſafeſt and beſt way to liue happily that in this life can be inioyed: although all haue not the like meaſure of grace and experience, by meanes whereof it cannot be alike with all, though they be voide of theſe fore-mentioned lets, (as I ſhall haue occaſion to ſhew after) namely, what trouble and diſquietneſſe the Diuell raiſeth in ſome weake, yet deare ſeruants of God, by occaſion of ſome want of graces in them which others haue.
               But while I ſhew how the Diuell hindreth vs,Sathan hath no abſolute povver. Iob. 1.12. Math. 8.30. 1. Pet. 5.8.
                   I do not meane that he hath any abſolute power or authoritie of himſelfe, but as God giueth it him for  the triall of his, and the puniſhment of his enemies: but the power which he giueth him, he doth moſt cruelly, ſubtilely and malitiouſly exerciſe with all diligence, that he may deceiue euen the beſt, and ſo deſtroy them if it were poſſible. Neither let any aske how he can thus deceiue and bewitch vs? for the ground of all temptations being our owne weakneſſe, he being a ſpirit hath acceſſe vnto our ſpirits to trouble them: and through long experience knowing our nature, and practiſing our miſerie from age to age, he is able with eaſe to worke our annoyance in all reſpects.
               And this giueth him knowledge of our minds more fully, who vnderſtandeth the ſame by the leaſt ſhew and inclination of our affection and will; not  that he knoweth our hearts perfectly,He knovveth not our hearts and thoughts. (for that is proper to God onely) but by his long acquaintance with our nature from Adam to this day: this maketh him not onely to expect any outward ſignification of ſpeech or geſture to conceiue our intents and purpoſes by; but alſo out of our vniuerſall corruption (whereof he hath continuall proofe) to diſcouer the vanitie of our minds, and the thoughts of our hearts: which after he hath found, he ſetteth vs forward (as he ſeeth occaſion whereto we muſt inclne) to diſobey God and his holy commandements.
               But I will returne to the lets whereby the Diuell deceiueth the ſimple, that they ſhine not as lights to honour their profeſſion in a godly life.Yee first ſpeciall let in the godly from holineſſe, ariſing from VVant. They tie not themſelues to any direction. Math. 5.19. Pſal. 50.23. Phil. 1.27.
                   The firſt of  the three (I ſayd) is by holding them from being ſetled in an holy courſe. As for example: he ſo handleth the matter, that many true hearted Chriſtians ſhall not know how, or not thinke it meete, to tie themſelues to any rules or order of paſſing the day and leading their life, but walke (as it falleth out) with ſome generall care, and a good meaning at ſome time; whereas the Scripture teacheth vs to be directed particularly in our thoughts, words and deeds touching euerie commandement, that our whole conuerſation may

beſeeme the Goſpell. Now therefore if we paſſe the day, and looke not before  vs what we go about, that we may be caried with care for the right performing of our duties; who ſeeth not, that euen this one is a ſufficient let to him who is holden vnder of it, as not being able to anſwer for many of his actions done to the offence of God and men in the day, as he might haue bene? For in that experience which I haue, I cannot ſay that this one let is remoued from very many, euen of thoſe which giue good hope that they would do well; and therefore it blemiſheth many of their actions.
               Some do propound to themſelues a courſe of paſſing their time and framing of their liues in ſome points commendably, (as for example: in their calling to be occupied in ſome labour) but do not religiouſly behaue themſelues  therein, ſhewing patience where they ought and as they haue occaſion, nor iuſtice and innocencie, and ſo walke in the feare of God; and therfore do not find the ſweetneſſe which a godly life yeeldeth, whereas that were a right and good directing of them: but herein they rather followe the example of others in thinking they do well, then are led by any commandement of God, or warrant of his word; and therefore they not wiſely foreſeeing how many wayes the Diuell will go about to hinder them euen in that, are ſoone broken off from that good purpoſe which they made, and are vnſetled againe: whether it be by their ignorance and folly, or pretence of other occaſions; whatſoeuer was the meane thereof, the Diuell was the worker  of it.
               They are no wiſer nor deſerue any greater commendation then the former, who at ſome times and for a ſeaſon keepe and obſerue ſuch order and direction to leade their liues by, as they haue learned out of the holy Scriptures;It is ſlightly done. but by litle and litle they fall to do it in a ſleight and common manner, euen for faſhion in great part, and rather through cuſtome and for ſhame (and ſo waxe ſoone veary) then with delight and comfort: and all becauſe their hearts go not with their actions conſtantly, neither do they regard or looke to their conſciences in one thing as in another, that they may be kept in peace. In all which though they cannot ſo much be blamed for any great  euill they do, yet their inconſtancie in declining ſo ſoone from their good beginnings, is no ſmall blemiſh in them, although they lie not long therein. Whereby who doth not ſee that the Diuell watcheth them narowly, that he may ſpoile them of their liberties and bring them into ſore dangers; although few of them giue themſelues to know by whom this is wrought, neither marke what letted them, or put them out of their courſe, much leſſe preuent or reſiſt them? Nay, which is more to be maruelled at, ſome are ſo groſſely deceiued by him, that they are not grieued (for the time) that they were letted, but glad to haue excuſes for their breaking out. Againe, when they are diſtempered in their courſe and fallen into euill thereby, yet know they  not how to recouer, but fall further; or be afraid to go about their recouerie. Some, when God giueth them an inckling of his diſpleaſure, yet go forward till he ſtrike them with more maine blowes; and then they become blockiſh vnder great afflictions: as we reade of Ionas, when he fell aſleepe notwithſtanding his ſinne,Ionas 1.3. after he was told of the great danger which did then hang ouer him.
               
                  
                   Theſe and ſuch like, whiles they are ſecretly brought vpon the people of God, do they not (thinke we) manifeſtly proue that Sathan hath beguiled them? And whiles he bringeth them to this point, doth he not greatly deface the beautie of a godly life in them? Do not ſome of them feare, that they are departed from God vtterly, no more to returne, though this (I ſay) ſhould not be? And they who go not ſo farre from ſound iudgemēt, are they not yet much appalled? where is their former peace and ſpirituall reioycing in God their portion? what is become of their conſtancie in watchfulneſſe, and holy care?Heb. 10.35. where is their ſtrong confidence which they ſhould not caſt away? their feruent prayers, their fruitfulneſſe in ſundry duties when they  feele themſelues neither fit to be in company, nor to be occupied in their calling, nor without danger to be alone by themſelues? I thinke theſe are the fruits of lamentable wants in ſuch good things as ſometime they inioyed: and not bare wants; for ſuch ſhall the beſt of vs haue whiles we liue, and yet not be without peace, nor vnſetled: but theſe which I haue ſpoken of, both vnſetle and diſtemper them whom the Diuell oppreſſeth with them. So that it may truly be ſayd, that this is one ſpeciall kind of lets whereby he hindreth the going forward of Gods people, euen in holding them from conſtancie and ſtedfaſtneſſe in liuing godly from day to day, and from renuing their couenant with God from time to time: without which grace it is  not poſſible for them to be free from ſore blemiſhes, and inward vexation, and outward reproach thereby, which the beloued of the Lord ſhould be farre from. And although through Gods tender kindneſſe, (whereby he keepeth them that they be not vtterly forſaken, and will keepe them to the end) although (I ſay) through this goodneſſe of God, all theſe turne to their good; yet that is not long of them or of their ſecuritie and ſleight ſeruing of God, the Diuell intending no other thing thereby but the diſhonor of God and their ouerthrow. If any ſhall ſay, There are none but go aſide theſe waies: I anſwer, It is therefore the more neceſſarie that we ſhould be warned thereof, and fenced againſt them. And by this it may appeare, what a maine let  and hindrance this is to Gods people from a Chriſtian life: to be deſtitute of direction how to pleaſe God, and thereby to be vnſetled and wander in their courſe of liuing, as though there were no certaine way appointed them of God.
               The remedie to all theſe is appointed by God,The remedie and brought to light by his word, and inioyed and practiſed of ſundrie of his faithfull ſeruants, who were ſometime kept voide of it by the enuious man, as euen many thouſands of them are ſtill by his malice depriued thereof vnto this day. And this remedy is, firſt that we ſuffer our ſelues eaſily to be perſwaded that all our ſpeeches in the commendation of a godly life in generall, are but wind, except we faithfully  indeuour to bring it into practiſe euerie day;Is, to be daily well ſetled. and therefore prouide (as we may be taught) and that aboue all other things, to giue to euerie part of the day ſome duty; or when we be weakeſt, that we mind no euill, (as in the former Treatiſe of my booke I haue proued) ſeeing the Lord in appointing the day to the ſeuerall actions which are to be done in it, doth not paſſe by and omit theſe (wherein men thinke they haue greateſt libertie to forget God) namely, eating and drinking; but yet with them extendeth his charge

to all other things alſo,1. Cor. 10.31 ſaying: Whether we eate or drinke, or whatſoeuer we do  elſe, let all be done to the praiſe of God. Is it not for this cauſe, that we are rebuked of our Sauiour,Luc. 16 8. ſaying: The children of this world are in their generation wiſer then the children of light, &c. namely, for our improuident and ſhiftleſſe regard of our growing on in a chriſtian courſe to heauen-ward; when yet the men of the world, if they be diſappointed of their earthly commodities one way, will ſhift for them another? If we find this impoſſible in all points, ſhall we therefore yeeld and giue place, and ſeeke ſhelter for our vntoward hearts, which would do no more in the ſeruice of God, then we haue done in times paſt? or ſhall we ayme vnto no further perfection then we liſt? And if there be hardneſſe in practiſing ſome part of chriſtian duties at the beginning, yet  let there be no reſiſtance againſt it, but our wants acknowledged, that we may ſee the greater cauſe to grow forward: yea, and know we, that the worke that we haue euery day to do,1. Cor. 10.31. euen our chiefeſt and onely worke is, to ſee God truly ſerued and honoured of vs in one thing or other.
               For ſuch as cannot better direct themſelues, I haue indeuoured to be ſome helpe vnto them in the former treatiſe,By the doctrine of the former Treatiſe. vntill a perfecter may be come by. This or any other which thou approueſt in thy conſcience, vſe reuerently and acquaint thy ſelfe with it, and thou ſhalt find it ſweet and gainefull: leaue not off the practiſing of the rules of it, or the like, by litle and litle; for then ſhalt thou neuer gather any ſound experience of the good that is gotten therby;  but as thou mayeſt, obſerue it better and better, and ſo become more expert in it: ſo doing although thou ſhouldeſt ſometime be turned out of the way, yet thou ſhalt by one part or other of it, learne how to returne againe. For doth a man go out of the way,
                  Ier. 8.4. 
                  and not returne againe? Yea, tye thy ſelfe reſolutely to a daily walking with God in faithfulneſſe, for it is as a watch tower to keepe from daunger, and as an hand continually to hold vp from falling: and conſtantly giue credit vnto him, that as he hath promiſed to his, reſt with himſelfe for euer; ſo he will alſo keepe them by his power to the day of reſurrection.
               This confidence being preſerued, and heartie prayer oft vſed, and watchfulneſſe  againſt thine eſpeciall infirmities, with oft and due conſidering what a precious treaſure this courſe of life is, ſhall preſerue thee againſt this wandring courſe which Sathan intendeth to bring thee into; by which thou ſhalt be vnſetled in the ſeruing of God, the leaſt euill whereof, is vnquietnes of mind, or idleneſſe and vnſetledneſſe, if not hardneſſe of heart. Theſe remedies the better and longer time that thou haſt had experience of, the more thou ſhalt perceiue the diuels force to be weakened towards thee: and thou canſt not be greatly indaungered, except thou beeſt ſlouthfull in exerciſing of them.
               And that do they proue vnto vs, who although they are not altogether  voide of them, yet they thinke it too much to make them daily armour vnto them; alleadging for themſelues, that this is euen to deny to Chriſtians the libertie which God hath giuen them. And therefore at this ſtay they keepe, and will not be drawne from it, till God bewray to them more clearely the diuels ſubtiltie in holding them there, and what they haue loſt by the hote maintaining of their vaine liberties; that which they loſe for them, being far

                   more precious: and how for want of daily and more heartie embracing of theſe good meanes, they are driuen by experience to ſee and confeſſe, that they were kept long in bondage.
               If therefore through our neglect of theſe we be otherwiſe fallen into Sathans hands then we were wont, there is no other remedie but that we beare our puniſhment for a ſeaſon, euen heauineſſe and reproch, becauſe we haue ſinned: but although we haue thus fallen, yet let vs riſe againe,Micah. 7.8. Hoſea. 6.1. and that betimes: for he hath ſmitten vs, and he will heale vs. Let vs not harden our harts againſt God when he hath ſo iuſtly chaſtiſed vs, but as humble children, let euery of vs ſay: My father, my father, we are aſhamed that we haue turned  aſide from thee: for why ſhould we prouoke our God any while, after wee once ſee his frowning face beginning to ariſe vpon vs, we being his ſonnes and daughters, vnleſſe we thinke it a ſmall thing to haue him frowne vpon vs?
               I ſtand the longer in this point, becauſe I haue experience by many, how hardly they dare or can be perſwaded to craue pardon with confidence, after that they haue bene caried by their rebellious hearts to offend in ſomewhat,Pſal. 32.5. which they knew to diſpleaſe him. Of whoſe weakeneſſe regard muſt be had: and for ſuch eſpecially haue I taken this labour in hand, though I know that for ſuch as haue experience, leſſe might haue ſerued.
               And yet whoſe caſe ſoeuer it ſhall be of vs all in triall,Iona. 1.5. we ſhall find it no  eaſie matter, after careleſſe or wilfull offending of God, to haue immediatly vpon the ſight thereof, relenting and tender-hartedneſſe: and when we durſt a litle while before prouoke him, ſo ſoone after to be bold to beleeue in him, that euen that ſo great a trecherie, ſhall be pardoned: for canſt thou beleeue forgiueneſſe of thy ſinne, who beleeueſt not that thou muſt forſake ſinne? No, no, relenting commeth not by and by in the beſt who haue thus offended God; but hardneſſe of heart, till after awhile when there hath bene a conſidering of the matter, and of the ſtate in which they are: that ſo they may waxe aſhamed of their ſo great vnkindneſſe. (But otherwiſe, where there is boldneſſe in ſinning, there is no ſtrength in beleeuing.) Thankes be vnto  God for his vnſpeakeable mercie, that many of theſe times fall not out to his deare ſeruants, who are reſolutely prepared to ſtand vpon their watch; for it is an heauie worke when that betideth vs: and they who ſee not this, ſee litle in the myſterie of godlineſſe. And as I would haue my good brethren farre from lying ſtill, and abiding in vnbeliefe at ſuch a time when they haue caſt themſelues into it by their owne default; ſo yet to let all bold preſumers vpon God, and abuſers of his mercie vnderſtand, that Gods bountifulneſſe is not ſet foorth in the Scriptures, to adde drunkenneſſe to thirſt in men,Deut 29.19. and to giue them libertie to ſinne who are alreadie too forward that way; this I ſay: That as the people of Iſrael perceiuing God to be iuſtly diſpleaſed with them  for their treſpaſſe of the calfe, and therefore remouing the tabernacle where his preſence was, a farre off from them and their tents,Exo. 33.8.10. they durſt not preſume to go to the tabernacle to ſeeke the Lord, who in diſpleaſure was departing from them; but they ſought him a farre off, that is, ſtanding in their tent doore and worſhipping: ſo let thoſe who ſee their ſhame and nakedneſſe by ſinning againſt God, bluſh and be aſhamed; yet, becauſe he neuer taketh away his louing kindneſſe from thoſe whom he loueth, let them ſhew themſelues

as guiltie perſons, though at the firſt afarre off, and with much difficultie  to ſeeke vnto him,1. Ioh. 2.1 that they may be receiued againe.
               And thus I haue made mention of the firſt let which hindreth from godly life; euen the want of daily direction to ſerue God by: and haue ſhewed how Sathan holdeth Chriſtians in daungerous vnprofitablenes, by keeping them vnſetled in a godly courſe; and withall haue ſet downe ſome helpe againſt the ſame.
            
            
               CHAP. 6. Of another let: The leauing our firſt loue.
               
               
                  The ſecond ſpeciall let ariſing from want
                  NOW followeth the ſecond let in this firſt ſort, that is: that many ſuch as do hold on in ſome Chriſtian courſe, do yet loſe and fall from their firſt loue, not for a ſhort time, as they before mentioned, but euen for years & dayes as they ſay: whē yet, they hauing once receiued it of the Lord at their firſt effectuall calling and conuerſion, it ought to grow vp with them and accompanie them throughout their life, to make euery part of it more ſweet and comfortable. And great reaſon there is, why it ſhould be ſo: for if we be truly conuerted vnto God, the longer that we haue bene trained vp in his houſe (which is the militant Church) and taſted of the diet of his ſeruants how good it is in compariſon of any other; the more we had need to take liking of his ſeruice, and with all chearefulneſſe to liue in it afterwards, which at our firſt entrance we ſaw ſo great cauſe to like and approue of. In ſo much, that although wee ſhall haue ſtrong perſwaſions to waxe wearie and ſlouthfull therein; yet there are many more and greater conſiderations to moue vs to conſtancie and good liking in the ſame.
               But that it may the better be ſeene what our firſt loue is, I will in fewe  words lay foorth the ſame.Act. 26.18. We are to know therefore, that when God firſt called vs from darkneſſe to light, and from vnder Sathans tyrannie and feare of hell to ſee our ſelues deliuered from them, which we ſaw were by our ſinne due vnto vs;Hoſ. 14 5. and that yet for all that, he would pardon our ſins, receiue vs graciouſly and loue vs freely,
                  
                     Ioh. 14.24. VVhat our firſt loue is. whereas before we were his enemies: this aſtoniſhed vs, and after due conſideration, inflamed our hearts and cauſed vs to admire this kindneſſe of his, and to eſteeme and preferre it before all pleaſures, and to haue our hearts knit to him for it: for this loue of his conſtrained vs to loue him moſt feruently and dearely againe.2. Cor. 5.8. Rom. 5.5. Ioh. 15.9. & 10 Ioh. 21.15. Pſal. 116.1. 1. Ioh. 5.1. Rom. 10.15. Luc. 7.47. Pſal. 119.97. Gal. 5.6. Heb. 10.32. Which our Sauiour Chriſt knowing well, asked of Peter in that caſe, if he loued him not more then the reſt; euen  as Dauid alſo calling the ſame to mind, brake out into theſe wordes, ſaying: I loue the Lord, becauſe in the ſorrowes of death he heard and deliuered me.
               Thus when we firſt ſaw the exceeding loue of God and Chriſt to vs, we could not (I ſay) but loue him ſenſibly and heartily; and therefore our brethren; and ſo his word and Miniſters that brought vs tidings of it: for we no ſooner beleeued, but faith that worketh by loue, wrought this in vs. And ſeeing

                   we loued him, we therefore began to keepe his commaundements. And this is the cauſe why Gods people are affected thus, and delight in his ſeruice,Ioh 14.16. and one in another, as they haue perſwaſion of their true conuerſion; and do therefore other duties readily, which others will not ſet vpon, nor go about: and this is that which the Scripture calleth Our firſt loue. Thus feruent are Gods children in the beginning, to the admiration of many;Reu. 2 4. Math. 2.12. and no dutie is thought too great for them to perfourme to him, as he thinkes nothing too good to beſtow vpon them. Yea, it may truly be ſaid, If euer we loued,Phil. 3.8. we loued God and Chriſt more then any thing; as Paule ſheweth to the Philippians: and our brethren; as it is in the Pſalme,Luc. 10.42. Pſal. 119.97. Pſal. 16.3. Gal 4.15. 
                  All my delight is in the Saints  vpon earth: and the Miniſters; as Paule ſpeaketh, I beare you witneſſe, that to do me good, you would haue plucked out your eyes.
               
               Now then, to come to our purpoſe, when this loue ſhall waxe cold (as here our Sauiour chargeth many with it, and many now a dayes are iuſtly to be charged for it) is it not an intollerable trecherie? When we ſhal let ſlake in vs the conſideration of ſuch loue of God to vs in Chriſt, which neuer faileth,Ioh. 13.1. nor chaungeth towards vs; and we thought ſometime, that it could neuer be forgotten of vs: is not this ſlaking of our loue towards him, a iuſt cauſe of complaint againſt vs? And do we not declare thereby, that either we be growne dull, ſlouthfull: forgetfull, or that we thinke, that the Lord hath ceaſſed  to be mercifull? Is it not a plaine teſtifying, that we thinke we are not regarded and prouided for by him, ſo as we may continue all wonted duties and ſeruices towards him? Yea rather, are we not iuſtly to be charged that we are couenant-breakers,Hoſ. 1. or haue (as adultereſſes) broken our faith to our firſt husband?
               Whereas we hauing ſo long enioyed the priuiledges of his people and citizens, ſhould now much more do ſo, and looke confidently for the promiſed reward, our ſaluation being now nearer then when we firſt beleeued.
                  Rom. 13.13. For why ſhould pleaſure or profite, wealth or fauour, things preſent or to come, put out of place that loue of God in vs, or cauſe vs for thē to be rebuked? Why  ſhould not our workes be more at the laſt, then at the firſt;Reu. 2.21. as our knowledge is more, and our experience greater? And therefore who ſeeth not cauſe ſufficient, that our affections of firſt loue ſhould continue?
               I may iuſtly make a heauie complaint of the decay thereof in many Miniſters, whoſe glorie and crowne it was ſometime,1. Theſ. 2.19.20. Ioh. 4.34. to ſee the peoples profiting in godlineſſe, as Paul ſaith; whoſe meate and drinke was, to do the will of their Father, and who did well prooue that they loued Chriſt more then all other things, by their diligence in feeding his ſheepe and lambes:Ioh. 21.15. and what prey or bootie ſoeuer they haue met with, and got ſince, ſure I am, that ſome of them do ſometime wiſh thoſe ſeaſons paſt, were now preſent ſtill. And whatſoeuer  cauſes of this decay they alleadge, yet when they weigh their caſe vprightly, they can ſay no leſſe, but the fault is principally in themſelues. How many of the people alſo may I ſpeake of, who verifie that ſaying of Chriſt:Ioh. 5.35. 
                  Iohn was a burning light, and for a ſeaſon ye delighted in him? who neither can honour God, as then they did, nor giue that light to other? All which I wiſh to conſider that which was ſaid to them that had offended in the like caſe: I haue ſomewhat againſt thee, becauſe thou haſt left thy first loue: Remember from whence

thou art fallen and repent, &c.
                  
               
               Thus I haue in ſome ſort laid foorth this firſt loue, which God by his ſpirit worketh in all his elect children when he firſt bringeth them home, and maketh them to know how greatly they are bound to him for their ſo admirable deliuerance and happie conuerſion. And herewith I haue ſhewed, how eaſily both teacher and hearer leaue and depart from the ſame, and fall from it, though otherwiſe they keepe ſome courſe in ſeruing God; as the Church of Epheſus did, whom yet the Lord reproued ſharpely for that they had loſt this.Reu. 2.2. For thus he ſaith: I know thy workes, and thy labour, and thy patience, and that thou canſt not beare with them that are euill, &c. Neuertheleſſe I haue ſomewhat against thee, that thou hast left thy firſt loue.
                  
               
               
                  The cooling of loue foretold.Our Sauiour likewiſe in Saint Mathew foretelleth, that this ſhould be one thing among many other worthily to be complained of, That in the latter dayes (in which theſe wherein we now liue,Mat. 24.12. are reckoned) the loue euen of many good Chriſtians, (as alſo of ſuch as ſeemed by good likelihood to be ſo) ſhall decay and waxe cold: whereby, what other thing did he meane then this; that mens affection in the worſhipping and ſeruing of God, the zeale of his glorie, loue to their brethren, and feruencie towards the preaching of the Goſpell, ſhould be ſore and much abated ouer it was in the beginning, when they firſt embraced it and were enlightened by it to beleeue in him. And as though he would teach,Hard to recouer our first loue being loſt. that it ſhould be a very hard thing to recouer this  firſt loue againe, he giueth this watch-word in the ſame place: [But they that continue to the end ſhall be ſaued.] Whereby (me thinke
                     •
                  ) he doth liuely admoniſh and warne all ſound-hearted Chriſtians,Take heed in time. to looke heedfully and carefully to nouriſh and preſerue that holy, pure, and firſt ſparkle of grace kindled in them, againſt all that might come in the way to quench and put out the fame.
               As though he would ſay: Although all pietie and chriſtian care of honouring God be not extinguiſhed in men; yet if they decline thus farre, to ſuffer their earneſt and feruent affection and loue to God and goodnes, to be cooled in them:The danger great: euen this is a blemiſh not to be borne or allowed; and a ſinne, which both God cannot nor will not beare and paſſe by in them, and which ſtriketh at the very life and ſaluation of thoſe that offend in that manner; and ſuch a loſſe as will be hardly recouered againe. And, though in other wordes, yet fully to the ſame purpoſe, Saint Paul ſpeaketh to the Theſſalonians, when he ſaith:Theſ. 5.19. Col. 3.1. 
                  Quench not the ſpirit: as if he would ſay, The worke of grace wrought in you by the ſpirit of God, to fixe your delight on heauenly things, and not on the earth; and whereby ye were caried to ſet vp in your hearts, the Creator and the things which he commaundeth, before the creature: this worke of the ſpirit deſtroy ye not; neither let your feruent deſires and holy affections which haue bene kindled in you therby, be as fire which water quēched.
               
               Now then, if the words of our Sauiour both to the church of Epheſus, and his propheſie of that which ſhould come to paſſe in the laſt dayes, how the loue euen of the godly ſhould waxe cold (which he ſpake as a thing both admirable, and to be much lamented;) and withall, this exhortation of the Apoſtle,VVhich many find and feele. of not quenching the ſpirit, be of any weight with vs: why is it at this day with many (which are of good hope, that they appertaine to God) as it

                   is, and as we ſee it to be? that is to ſay, that their good beginnings haue bene turned into vnlike, euen daungerous proceedings?
               For in many it may be ſeene, of whom it may as truly be ſaid, that they are nothing like the people which once they were, when they firſt embraced the Goſpell.Giuing iuſt cauſe to others to lament their caſe. I might iuſtly make the complaint of any which haue bene but abated in their zeale and feruent loue of good things, (of which ſort there are innumerable:) but I would I might not alſo charge numbers that they are diſguiſed, being ſo farre off from forward and zealous profeſſors (which once they were) that (as Saint Paule complaineth of the Corinthians) they are now full ; yea, they thinke it meere fooliſhneſſe to hunger after knowledge,1. Cor. 4.8. and  thirſt after grace; and as new borne babes, to deſire the ſincere milke of the word,
                  1. Pet. 2.2. 
                  that they may grow thereby: who if they thinke much to be ſtill called babes, and ſo to deſire milke; yet I hope, though they be men growne, they muſt ſtill hunger after ſtrong meate. But howſoeuer it be, and howſoeuer ſome haue degenerated from their firſt loue more then others, it is too fearefull to ſee, (I ſay not, how many haue no affection, neither beare any heartie good will to the ſincere preaching of the Goſpell, neither at any time euer did:Heb. 5.14. for who can number them?) but it is too fearefull (I ſay) to ſee how many of them are chaunged who began well: and (as the Apoſtle ſaith) Ranne well;Gal. 5.7. but they haue bene letted in ſuch wiſe as they obey not the truth.
               
                   If wearineſſe of, at leaſt wiſe, litle pleaſure taking in the publike miniſterie,Signes, or effects thereof. neglect of priuate conference and of exhorting and edifying one another, vntowardneſſe to good workes and ſhaking off loue to the brethren, imbracing the world and the entertaining of ill companionſhip, with hart-burning againſt the Preachers for telling them the truth, whom ſometime they loued and reuerenced highly; and if the making of no conſcience of open ſinnes, where ſecret and ſmall ones could not ſometimes haue bene abidden: if (I ſay) theſe and ſuch like in men, where the contrarie haue bene, be ſignes that the firſt loue is cooled and ſore decayed; there are enough, who giue iuſt cauſe of complaining.
               
                   Euen theſe (I ſay) are ſufficiently conuicted, to haue left their firſt loue, who are thus eclipſed and darkened as I haue ſaid. For how can others be drawne by their examples, when they ſee them not to hold out the profeſſion of their hope with ioyfulneſſe as they were wont? Nay, how can they chooſe but be more backward in religion and diſcouraged by the ſame? Indeed I confeſſe, it requireth the whole man to be taken vp and employed in this worke, that God may be ſerued of vs with ſuch chearefulneſſe and readines as he was at the beginning: but what then? Can we for all that denie, that we ought to be employed with all poſſible care therein? And what day cometh ouer our heads, wherein God giueth vs not encouragement hereunto? For  what day do we not, or may we not, make our hearts merrie with the Lords fauour freely graunted vs, and his louing countenance ſhining vpon vs?
               And can it be any leſſe then our great ſinne,To keepe our firſt loue, a hard worke. to haue our hearts going after ſtraunge delights, which ſhall ſhoulder out this which is the greateſt? I grant we are renewed but in part, and that much corruption remaineth to cloy and incumber vs; and through Sathans malice and vigilancie, not onely to hinder, but euen to hold vnder goodneſſe in vs; eſpecially through ſo many

occaſions and prouocations as we walke ſubiect to in the world. But yet for  all that,Yet a dutie commaunded by the Lord, may we not ſhake off our feruencie and diligence in doing the Lords worke. And although we cannot auoide it, but we ſhall be nearely laid at, and narrowly beſet with all manner of hinderances, both allurements and diſcouragements; ſo as we ſhall be broken off againe and againe: yet muſt we therefore know, that our life is called and ſo we muſt find it, euen a continuall battell with our luſts worldly and vnruly, and our affections vnmortified: and we muſt accuſtome ouerſelues hereto carefully,VVho alſo encourageth vs thereto. ſeeing the Lord hath promiſed, to teach our fingers to fight and our hands to warre: that in time wee may be expert, rather then cowardly to faint, or trecherouſly to run away.
               Yea but ye will ſay: We are ignorant in many points how to behaue our  ſelues; which procureth vs no ſmall diſaduantage. And I ſay againe, by the grace of God, that ignorance ſhall not greatly hurt vs, which we cannot be without: but ſhall ſerue to humble vs onely. Yea, but we are forgetfull alſo, (ye will ſay) & that much troubleth vs. To this I anſwer, as to the former: It is not this that can vnſettle vs, if we adde not thereunto our owne witting & wilfull negligence. And if ye obiect, that for all our care and watch to nouriſh and preſerue grace and holy affections in vs; yet who is ſo circumſpect and vigilant, but he ſhall be vnſetled and turned out of his courſe before he be aware? I aunſwer againe: Howſoeuer this be or come to paſſe, it is but to the end we ſhold riſe vp & recouer by making our mone to our God, who cānot  be without pitie towards vs: yea, if we haue felt bitterneſſe ariſe in our hearts againſt this chriſtian courſe which is the Lords yoke, and vnder our afflictions; yet let not this diſmay vs from clinging and cleauing to him; we are his, and he will forgiue and receiue vs againe. I haue obiected the hardeſt that is wont to hinder and breake off our firſt loue: and were our hearts daily ſet to count it our greateſt worke to keepe it, (as how great are our helpes and encouragements hereto?) God witneſſing to that I ſay: though many doe, who will not be counſelled; yet we ſhould not be they who ſhall loſe their firſt loue.
               And thus much of this ſecond let ariſing from want of ſome neceſſarie  thing, namely, of our firſt loue: where in the way of aunſwering obiections, I haue ſet downe the remedie againſt it.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 7. Of a third let in this first kind, namely: The want of the ordinarie preaching of the word of God.
               
                  AND now to make an end of this firſt kind of lets,The third ſpeciall let, ariſing from vvant. we are to know, that there is another want which Sathan laboureth to hold vs in, and the fitteſt of all other to  bring on the two former: and that is, The want of an ordinarie and ſound miniſterie of the word of God, wherby the way to ſaluation and godlineſſe is plainely and in good order,2. Tim. 4.1.2 with loue and diligence taught ſo oft in the weeke, as the people can conueniently attend vpon the ſame. Which being the light of the world, and (as it were) the Sun that warmeth all the creatures of the earth with his influence: ſo it can but warme and inlighten them who are within the ſound of it, as the Sunne doth that part of the earth to the which he can ſpread his beames.Note. And although many vpon whom this heauenly light ſhineth, are not made fruitfull like a garden by the heate of the  Sunne; but rather as a dunghill, to ſauour worſe: yet ſuch as enioy not this grace of the Goſpell at all, can be but as the ſhadowed places where no Sunne commeth, which bring foorth nothing, or elſe that which is ſoure and vnſauourie.
               God be bleſſed for thoſe which are painefull labourers, but yet for the infinite thouſands who know nothing, neither can know, I would that all which will be called the Lords Miniſters, did diligently and faithfully prophecie, and that the Lord would poure his ſpirit vpon them plentifully for that purpoſe. If Peter could ſay no leſſe, but that it was meete,
                  
                     Num. 11.29. 2. Pet. 1.12.13 Beleeuers muſt be daily put in mind of heauenly things. 
                  whiles he continued in this tabernacle, to put the people in remembrance of heauen and the way to it, yea though they were ſtabliſhed in it alreadie no more to be remoued:  who doubteth, but that it muſt needs be a ſore want to be without that help? For ignorance is a great and vſuall impediment of ſinceritie and good conſcience: for when the mind erreth or miſconceiueth, it doth miſleade the conſcience and deceiueth the whole man. For where that is not, beſides the thouſands which periſh for want of it, euen the godly (if any be there) cannot ſee their wants in grace, their corruptions of heart, and the many occaſions by which they offend in their life; neither the depth of Gods loue, how he hath taken order to draw them out of all theſe; nor be refreſhed with the oft remembrance of theſe things, as their need requireth.
               But this is a large field to walke in, and not of me in this place to be long  taryed in: but yet I will not ceaſe to pray and hope for that which is wanting, as to be highly thankefull for that which we haue, namely: that the Lord of the harueſt would thruſt foorth labourers into the harueſt,Mat. 9.38. and eſtabliſh the libertie of the Goſpell preached by authoritie, and continue to vs the glorious light and ſweet and deepe inſight into the will of God thereby, which we haue attained, and many moe might alſo haue done the ſame, vnder her Highnes moſt proſperous raigne and long peace: for whome many thankes

be giuen to God amongſt vs.
               
               Now ſeeing by the wanting of this ſound miniſterie ordinarily inioyed, euen the moſt of Gods beloued do want the greateſt part of their beſt priuiledges,VVhat they want, who vvant that. or full weakly inioy them, let all welwillers to Sion procure this as much as in them lieth, both by their feruent prayers and other Chriſtian endeuours; and let ſuch as deſire to be more free from Sathans ſnares, prouide whiles they may, to be partakers of this benefit. As for ſuch as inioy it, and price it not aboue all that they haue, or euer can inioy in this world, but eſteeme it as a thing which they ſet litle by, yea and could want it well enough,Mat. 8.11. & 12. I will ſay no more to them but this: Many ſhall come from other places to ſeeke comfort there, both from East, Weſt, North and South, and ſhall ſit  downe with Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob in the kingdome of heauen, and they themſelues ſhall be caſt out into vtter darkneſſe, where ſhall be weeping and gnaſhing of teeth:Amos 8.11. & 12. and that of Amos: Behold, the dayes come, ſaith the Lord God, that I will ſend a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirſt of water, but for hearing of the word of the Lord. And they ſhall wander from ſea to ſea, and from the North euen vnto the Eaſt ſhall they runne to and fro to ſeeke the word of the Lord, and ſhall not find it.
               
               They who ſhould weigh, how the Diuell hath laboured in all nations and throughout all generatiōs to hinder the paſſage of the Goſpell, (as, if that one booke of the Acts of the Apoſtles onely were peruſed, doth appeare in  that time) might eaſily be perſwaded, that the preaching and eſtabliſhing of it, is a ſingular and rare treaſure (howſoeuer blind men can iudge of no colours:) and therefore that the want of it is none of the ſmall lets, whereby Chriſtians are hindered, if poſſibly many might be perſwaded of it.
               For how ſhould a poore Chriſtian riſe vp when he is fallen by any occaſion, or come into the way againe when he is ſtrayed out: or how ſhall he be ſtrengthened being weake, or be comforted in his heauineſſe; if he haue not this at hand ordinarily, to bring tidings of Gods will to him, and euery way to ſupplie his many wants: euen as if the trumpet ſound not, who can prepare himſelfe to the battell? Therefore it is, that there are ſuch maine blockes  layd in the way of Gods ſeruants, that either they cannot inioy this bleſſing any long time, or in any good ſort and manner, to build them vp and direct them euerie way as is meete; or if they haue all this, yet they ſhall hinder themſelues and one another.
               For it is to be lamented, to ſee how few can rightly vſe ſuch liberties and make their profite of them while they inioy them: as to draw out of their teachers, vnderſtanding, and humbly pray and labour for ſpirituall wiſedome whereby they may haue the right vſe of their knowledge in euerie particular action: and in the ſpirit of meekneſſe to helpe build vp one another, and to be lights to the ignorant by giuing good example;  but worldly minded, or contentious, or paſſing their time vainely and prophanely. And if this complaint may iuſtly be made where the Goſpell is purely and plainely preached (as who doth not ſee that it may?) then what need many words to proue what hauocke there is of goodneſſe, where the word of God is not in place to rebuke the euill and vphold the contrarie? no leſſe, (doubtleſſe) then as if haile-ſtones in the harueſt ſeaſon, which battereth and

                   and beateth downe the corne: no leſſe (I ſay) doth the Diuell with his bad inſtruments make a ſpoile of religious and chriſtian life. So that it is apparent how ſore an impediment the want of ſound, familiar and diligent preaching of Gods word is; Salomon including many hurts and dangers in one word,Prou. 29.18. ſaying: Where that is wanting, the people periſh.
               
               The ſame I ſay of other helpes to the building vp of a godly life,The not vſing the daily helpes to godlineſſe, is a great want that much hind
                        •
                     reth a Chriſtian. which I haue ſpoken of in another place, that if we ſuffer our ſelues to be hindred by the Diuell from the daily & reuerent vſe of them, he ſhall ſufficiently preuaile in holding vs backe, that we ſhall not flouriſh as plants in the Lords orchard: I meane if we do not conſecrate our ſelues to God, pray and meditate daily as  I haue directed before to do, if we delight not in reading, or take not the benefit of chriſtian exhortation and conference, watching ouer one another, and prouoking to loue and good workes,Heb. 10.24. and to take good by examples of one another: and if we be not more humbled by our chaſtiſements, and our hearts more inlarged to ſerue God by his daily benefits: but trifle out our pretious time after the manner of men of the world, finding no ſuch ſauour in any of theſe as we do in earthly delights, namely, eating, drinking,Mat. 24.38. ſleeping, playing and dealings about our profits; the Diuell hath what he ſeeketh at our hands, and keepeth vs farre enough off from our beſt portion. Finally, the want of our whole armour, or any part of it,The vvant of daily keeping on the armor, is a great want. whereby we defend  our ſelues from euill on euerie ſide, this (though all the other were preſent) ſhould ſenſibly appeare to be wanting, for the daungers and fals which we ſhold ſuſtaine for want of the ſame. The remedy againſt the wāt of the word preached, is to relieue our ſelues with it, where we may with moſt cōueniēcy inioy it: but rather that we ſue eaneſtly to liue vnder it: which would be more generally granted of God, if it were (as a benefit which cannot be wanted) ſought for & deſired. But whether of both ſo euer be, let vs ſo partake it, that we may feel our ſelues ſēſibly (as by good diet) refreſhed,1▪ Pet 2.2. & 2. Pet 3.17. & grow in grace & in the knowledge of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt: for which end it is among vs.
               The remedy of all the other wants, ſeeing it is a faithfull practiſing of the  daily direction, of the which I haue ſpoken largely alreadie, or any other ſuch: therfore it is ſufficient to ſhew the Reader; that all theſe wants the Diuell will hinder him by, to the end that he may hold him back from the practiſe of the godly life,Prou 23.23. and conſequently from the ſweete fruite which he might inioy thereby. The which I ſpeake to this end, that he may be on the other ſide more incouraged reſolutely to giue ouer himſelfe thereunto daily: ſeeing thereby all theſe euils and perils of this life ſo vnwelcome and ſo much feared, may be in great part auoided.
               If any obiect,Obiection. that theſe firſt kinds of lets (though not ſo particularly) are ſet downe before, and the remedies, as here they are, and therefore that this is  ſuperfluous: let ſuch know, that I therfore ſet theſe downe particularly,Anſvver. to let thē ſee that a well ordered courſe is a remedie for and againſt all diſeaſes: and therefore I mention the manifold lets in this Treatiſe, which come in the way to hinder it, that they may ſee the better to ſet themſelues againſt them, and not to thinke their labour loſt, which they are moued to beſtow in acquainting and exerciſing themſelues throughly in the practiſe of Chriſtian direction from day to day, as it is drawne from Gods word. And thus much

of the firſt kind of lets, whereby the Diuell hindreth vs through wants in  good things; he taking occaſion from the corruption of our nature, whereby we are prone to euill and vnapt to good, to ſtrengthen ſinne in vs.
               
                  Many vveake ones troubled with feare of their owne vvants, vvithout cauſe.Now I haue ſhewed how the Diuell troubleth many weake Chriſtians by the wants before mentioned, here I thinke not amiſſe, to ſhew how ſome are troubled by feare of their owne wants without cauſe. For experience teacheth, what deadly heauineſſe he raiſeth vp in the hearts of many of Gods deare children by occaſion of their wants in grace. And among the manifold hurts which he bringeth by meanes thereof to many weake Chriſtians, this one is not to be omitted: what grieuous and ſore diſcouragements he oppreſſeth many tender conſciences with, while they eſpie ſome gfts of God  in other, which they thinke be not in themſelues; though they ſeeke aboue all things to pleaſe God, as hauing had ſome ſweet feeling of his fauour through faith. Theſe (I ſay) when they conſider and deeply weigh their owne emptineſſe of grace and barrenneſſe, their manifold infirmities alſo which they beare about them; the Diuell abuſeth their weakneſſe to an heauie and vncomfortable ſorow, which is alſo as vnprofitable to them.
               In which ſtate he driueth them to find out in themſelues many diſorders and fals, ſundrie out-ſtrayings from their Chriſtian courſe, and how they cannot preuaile ouer their corruptions; and ſo maketh the innocent ſoules, not onely to thinke that they be farre worſe then they are, but alſo troubleth  and diſquieteth them beyond meaſure: inſomuch that they haue bitter ſobs, and make ſore complaints againſt themſelues; in the meane while forgetting (through vnthankfulneſſe) Gods manifold kindneſſes towards them, and what cauſe of reioycing rather, and thankſgiuing they haue offered vnto them.Some are long troubled in this manner. And in this caſe he keepeth ſome of them many yeares together, perſwading themſelues that none are ſo bad as they, nor ſuch hypocrites, &c. when yet the things whereof they do moſt accuſe themſelues, are meere infirmities, and not any groſſe or palpable treſpaſſes. This deſcription of them (that I ſay no more of them) who ſeeth not how apparently it bewraieth the Diuels malice and ſubtiltie in hindring, yea ſnaring them (as I may ſay) in  ſuch ſort, as they cannot wind out any way? when yet (as hath bene ſayd) there are no ſincerer-hearted Chriſtians then they, nor who ſeeke the Lord more hartily, for that meaſure of knowledge & experience which they haue.
               Now if they are bleſſed who feare and who are troubled for ſome wants in grace,Prou. 28.14. Mat. 5.3. who is ſo blind that he ſeeth not, that euen by this which is their ſorow, and in their owne account euen their miſerie: yet by this (I ſay) they proue themſelues to be bleſſed and happie? The ſpeciall remedie for theſe is godly boldneſſe,Remedies: Godly boldnes. to conſider what God hath done for them in giuing them ſuch hungring hearts after good things: which could not be, except they had taſted of thoſe ſweete graces alreadie, and had ſome part or portion of  the ſame.Thankfulneſſe. They muſt be perſwaded to more heartie thankfulneſſe to God, and ſee this their humilitie, meekneſſe, loue of God and deſire of heauenly things, to be iuſt cauſes hereof. Their vnkindneſſe to God they do well to acknowledge, and that is an eſpeciall grace of God in them; and that they find in their nature, rebellion againſt goodneſſe: but yet, not ſo, that they ſhew themſelues more vnkind by not confeſſing that they haue much cauſe to

                   reioyce, from him.
               And therefore let them beleeue,There is great cauſe of reioycing in that, for which they are heauy. that their eſtate is rather to be highly accounted of, (euen as it is) ſeeing the thirſtie (as dry ſponges) drinke vp much grace, and the humble ſhall find reſt to their ſoules; then that for ſome wants of grace they ſhould caſt downe themſelues halfe deſperately, as though God regarded them not, when yet their eſtate is the eſtate of all Gods children: among whom, euen the beſt haue many wants of grace, and know but in part, nor beleeue but in part, although they haue through experience learned better then the other to ſuſtaine the ſame. For where faith is in Gods promiſes (without which they cannot heartily loue heauenly things) they  muſt know that they haue a liberall portion, and therefore ought to lift vp their hearts out of their deadly dumps: and as theſe and ſuch like directions do counſell them, let them grow forward, but without diſcouragement; yea though their meaſure be ſmall, and they in their owne iudgement be the backwardeſt of others.
               Of ſmall beginnings come great proceedings; of one little ſparckle,VVeake beginnings in grace being ſound, promiſe great increaſe. a mightie flame; and the talle Okes were ſometime but ſmall akornes: he hath well begun, who hath in truth begun; and he hath much, who feeleth that he wanteth much: and he who in an humble and a meeke ſpirite hungreth after knowledge and grace, hath made good proceeding towards the  attaining of both, and ſhall in time be ſatisfied therewith. This I ſpeake to incourage thoſe, whom Sathan abuſeth by occaſion of ſome wants of good things in them: when in the meane while (if they knew ſo much) there is no cauſe; but contrariwiſe, of reioycing. Thus much of the firſt kind of lets.
            
            
               CHAP. 8. Of the ſecond kind of generall lets: namely, The vnmortified affections wherewith he oppreſſeth the beleeuer. And firſt, Of feare that they ſhall not perſeuere: and of pride in their gifts.
               
               
                  NOw I hauing ſhewed how the former kinds of lets ſhould be remoued: the ſecond kind followeth, which containeth the ſinnes and corruptions that are in vs, whereby the Diuell hath exceeding great aduantage againſt vs, to hinder vs from this heauenly courſe which we ſhould walke in. And they are, beſides the ignorance and blindneſſe that is in vs, (of which I haue ſpoken before) our vnruly and vnmortified affections, and the worldly luſts: which if they preuaile and be ſuffered to rule in vs, they thruſt  out with violence all grace and goodneſſe. Of theſe I will mention ſome particulars, euen the moſt dangerous (if compariſon may be made) of all the reſt: and the Reader may the better iudge of the other. I adde [if compariſon may be made] becauſe they are all ſo raging, that when they are ſtirred vp in vs and ſet on fire, a man cannot tell which is moſt odious in it ſelfe, and worketh moſt furiouſly, and that moſt diſguiſeth vs who make our ſelues bondmen thereto. For proofe of that which I ſay: when filthie luſts are kindled,

and haue gotten ſome ſtrength in a good Chriſtian (though that be neuer  without his owne great fault) how doth it trouble and diſquiet him, yea wound and accuſe him, he thinking it the loathſomeſt and moſt ſhamefull of all others (as indeed there need no worſe thing to annoy and diſturbe him;) and it cauſeth him oft to ſay: Oh, what can be more irkeſome, vnſauorie and ſhameful then this?1. Sam. 12.19.20. Euen as the people ſaid in Samuel of their wilfulneſſe: We haue ſinned many other waies, but eſpecially in asking a King: ſo I ſay, that ſin ſeemeth to a penitent chriſtian (when he commeth to himſelfe) moſt odious, wherewith he hath felt his heart moſt intangled. But to proue that true which I ſayd; ſo doth he cry out of the reſt, when he remembreth how he hath beene deceiued by them: a worldly and greedy mind ſeemeth moſt  weariſome and vnbeſeeming of all other to him, and biteth moſt deeply, when that hath poſſeſſed him: and when he hath offended by anger, malice, feare, impatience, peeuiſh conceitedneſſe and the reſt, he ſaith the ſame of them; euerie one for the time wherein it hath bene the chiefeſt prouoker of him to offend, is moſt cried out of, euen as if there were no other to be compared with it: thus he ſpeaketh of them, I ſay, when he repenteth. And by this it may appeare, (when there are many of theſe euery while aſſaulting and, as it were, arreſting a poore Chriſtian; which ſuffer no other good thing to be in place where they be) that if he be not ſtrengthened & armed againſt theſe and ſuch other of that kind, he can neuer keepe a ſetled courſe and daily  continue the ſame in a godly life. Of theſe therefore, as I ſayd, I will mention ſome, that the beleeuing Chriſtian may the more carefully auoide them. And herein this aduice is not vnprofitable, that euery one marke, with which he is moſt incombred and moſt eaſily ouercome of: as feare, anger, vncharitableneſſe, &c. and by what occaſions he is readilieſt drawne to them: that he may the more preuaile ouer them by ſuch helpe as he ſhall haue miniſtred to him. The remedies ſo farre as I ſhall adde here, ſhall either be ſet downe ſeuerally with the ſeuerall lets, or one remedie for ſundry lets: or where neither is, know that the daily direction which we haue beene moued to practiſe, ſhall be the remedie in ſuch a caſe. And among the vnmortified affections I  will begin with that which troubleth the moſt of them,The first kind of them, is feare and doubt of perſeuering, by meanes of afflictions, &c. till God giue them releaſe or deliuerance: and that is, A fearfull doubting of their perſeuerance. I meane, that poore Chriſtians ſhall not ſo ſoone begin to be drawne out of the world, to any liuely hope of ſaluation and care of pleaſing God, and ſo haue eſcaped one bondage, but he plungeth them into another; holding them vnder dreadfull feare and diſtruſtfulneſſe, that they ſhall not perſeuer to the end of a godly life, eſpecially in ſore trials, and when perſecution and ſtrong temptations ſhall come.
               
                  It eaſily taketh hold of vveake ones.And this feare he doth faſten vpon them the more eaſily, ſeeing that affection of feare is moſt nearly glewed to them: and beſides, when they ſee examples  of faintings in many profeſſors; and how cruel the vngodly, prophane ſcorners, Atheiſts, Papiſts and perſecuters are, among whom they liue, this feare is ſoone ſtrengthened and confirmed in them. For which cauſe our ſauiour forewarned his Diſciples of it,Mat. 10.28. ſaying: Feare not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the ſoule: but rather feare him, which is able to deſtroy both ſoule and body in hell:Phil. 1.28. and Saint Paule: In nothing feare your aduerſaries, &c.
                  
                   For this cannot be predominant but it feebleth vtterly the powers of the mind, (as the raiſing of the mudde in a ſpring,Hovv it letteth them. troubleth the pure water) and conſequently holdeth backe the inſtruments of the body from practiſing well any kind of dutie. In theſe fetters therefore of feare, and moſt painefull and irkeſome ſtreights, he holdeth them: or if any eſcape, and ſo begin to reioyce in their hope againe; yet ſhall they not attaine thereto, nor grow therein, (diſtruſting themſelues, and reſting in the promiſe of God) nor be deliuered out of their feare but with much difficultie and ſtriuing: and yet if they be, it ſhall not be at once, but by litle and litle; while the word of God ſoketh into their hearts, as the ſoft raigne into the hard ground. For I muſt confeſſe,  that as all paſſions are troubleſome, and do much vnſetle vs for the time: ſo feare and ſorow do this moſt of all, eſpecially when the things about which we feare and which cauſe ſorow, are moſt deare and pretious to vs. For how were the Apoſtles oppreſſed with both,Example of it in the diſciples. not onely at their ſcattering from their maiſter at his apprehenſion before his death, though he had with many perſwaſions and ſtrong reaſons prepared them for it: but euen while he was yet conuerſant with them? and namely that one time, when he went into Iudea to raiſe Lazarus from death? Who anſwering ſayd to him, when they heard him prouoke them to go thither: Maiſter,
                  Iohn. 11.8. 
                  the Iewes ſought lately to ſtone thee, and doeſt thou go thither againe? As if they ſhould haue ſayd: Except they  had bene weary of their liues, there was cauſe inough to make them vnwilling, yea fearfull to come there. And ſo it is with vs,The example applied. that how great comforts ſoeuer we haue inioyed by the heauenly doctrine of the word of God which we haue heard; yet as if we had neuer receiued any, when we heare any newes of trouble comming towards vs, we are on the ſudden ſo taken and oppreſſed with it (yea though it be but a litle) that it vnſetleth vs out of our preſent eſtate of peace and quietneſſe wherein we were, and wholly poſſeſſeth all our ſenſes, and ſcattereth our former comforts, as if they neuer had bene any: whereas the Lord hath to that end vnder-propped vs before with ſtrong conſolation, that when afflictions come we might the better beare them and  retaine our peace with him, ſuch as his word had before warned vs of; as it is ſayd in Iohn, beſides many other places: Theſe things I haue ſayd vnto you,
                  Iohn 16.33. (ſpeaking of his comfortable doctrine, which he had before taught them) that in the middeſt of your tribulations ye may haue peace in me.
               
               This feare and faintneſſe therefore vnder the croſſe,Hovv Sathan troubleth vs vvith this let. we muſt know the Diuell will ſtrongly aſſault vs with, and thereby buffet vs ſo reproachfully for that we reioyced ſo, yea & boaſted of Gods fauor before, and yet now in our afflictons we find not deliuerance many times, but we are rather made ridiculous to the world thereby, and a gazing ſtocke therein: beſides the fainting of our owne hope, which is more then all the reſt. He will inſult ouer vs  in ſuch extremities, as he ſpared not to do to our Sauiour himſelfe: Where is now your God? Let him deliuer you now, if he loue you ſo dearely; or elſe know,Mat. 27.43. that ye haue put your truſt in a bruiſed reed: renounce him therefore, and ſhift for your ſelues, except ye will miſcarie; for there is no helpe for you in him: euen as his curſed inſtrument Rabſhakeh, Captaine of the King of Aſſyria, did perſwade Ezekiaes men, not to truſt in or depend on the God of Iſraell in their trouble.
               
                  
                  Hovv to remoue it. Heb. 13.
                  And therefore that we may find ſome eaſe in our troubles, let vs gather  ſtrength from him, who will not faile, neither can be reſiſted: his word is the ſword that muſt cut off this Goliahs head: and our faith is the hand in which we muſt hold it.Pſal. 30.5. 2. Cor. 4.17. Heb. 12.11. 2 Cor. 9.10. Iam. 1 3. And thus God ſaith in his word to all his: This ſhort trouble of yours, is to bring you a long comfort afterwards, when yee haue indured it a while: and they are ſent you, that my power may appeare in your weakneſſe, and that you may haue proofe of my grace dwelling in you; as faith, hope, loue, humbleneſſe, obedience: and to make the world contemned, and all that is in it (as our fleſhly luſts,1. Pet. 2.11. which fight againſt our ſolues) to be renounced, that they may not annoy vs: and to cure many diſeaſes, as careleſneſſe, high mindedneſſe and too much eaſe-taking in the world; for the rodde bringeth wiſedome;Gen. 42.21. Rom. 8.28. & P
                        •
                     al. 119.71. Hoſ. 6.1. Pſal. 120 1. Mat. 5.12.
                   and Ioſephs brethren ſayd: We ſuffer theſe things worthily, for that we ſinned against our brother. They are not (I ſay) ſent, but for our good; and they driue vs more feruently to God; and cauſe vs to call on him: yea, and they make vs happie whiles we ſuffer them, (and like vnto Chriſt himſelfe, who was called the man of ſorrowes) and giue vs matter of reioycing after: and therefore we ſhould be thankfull for them.Pſal. 50.15. But we do not a litle bewray our vnkind dealing with God, who are ſo vnwilling to heare of them. For it is no leſſe then a great gift;Phil. 1.29. yea, a priuiledge vnto vs, as the Apoſtle ſaith: To you it is giuen for Christ, that not onely ye ſhould beleeue in him, but alſo ſuffer for his ſake. And what vnquietneſſe doth it raiſe in vs, when we refuſe and impatiently  caſt off the Lords yoke? the very feare of it is farre greater then the ſuffering it ſelfe. Therefore we ought to reſolue with our ſelues, when we ſee the will of God is we ſhall ſuffer it, that it is the beſt for vs & very expedient; as Chriſt ſayd to his Diſciples when he was to depart from them:Ioh. 16.7. 
                  It is expedient for you that I go:Lam. 3.27. and therefore indeuour to bow and ſubmit our neckes vnto the yoke, praying for that power which our God ſeeth we haue need of,1. Cor. 10.13. Iam 1.4. Dan. 3 25. 2. Cor 4.9. aſſuring our ſelues of helpe in due time, yea though he ſometime deferre it. For if he call vs to ſuffer, he will moſt certainely ſuccour and deliuer vs: that ſo we may find it verified in vs which is written: We are afflicted on euerie ſide, yet not in diſtreſſe, perſecuted; but not forſaken; cast downe, but we periſh  not. And the meditation of this ſhall (through Gods goodneſſe) be a preſeruatiue to vs in our afflictions.
               
                  1. Pet. 5.7.Saint Peter teacheth ſuch as are diſtracted with theſe feares, ſo that they vnſettle them and diſquiet their minds, to caſt their care vpon God, for he careth for them.
                  Phil. 4.6.7. And the ſame in effect, ſaith Saint Paule: Be nothing carefull and penſiue, but in all things let your requeſts be ſhewed vnto God in prayer and ſupplication with giuing of thankes: and the peace of God which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, ſhall preſerue your hearts (from Sathan who ſeeketh by vnquietneſſe to take your peace from you) and ſettle your minds in Chriſt Ieſus. So that, if God haue either any credite with them, that they dare truſt him in ſaying, That he will vanquiſh their vnquietneſſe that made them penſiue: or, if they beleeue that he hath any helpe in him,Ioh. 10.28. ſo that he is able to helpe, they may with reuerence be bold in their diſtreſſe to looke for it, and promiſe it to themſelues; and yet ſo, that as they truſt in him, ſo they tempt him not, but pray for it in token that they beleeue in him, and vſe the meanes to remoue ſuch penſiueneſſe from them.
               
                  
                   This remedie is found to be throughly proued and ſufficient, as oft as it is applied to any ſuch kind of diſeaſe. And herewith let them weigh the examples of other ſeruants of God; Moſes, Peter, &c. who after greater grace receiued, beleeued more ſtrongly. But if they neglect and paſſe by ſuch remedies, and ſo fall from feare and doubting to boldneſſe and preſuming, that is, to go from one extremitie to another, they are groſſely bewitched, and muſt be taught by experience to prouide better for themſelues. Which I ſay,The heed of indirect meanes, and deceiueable remedies. ſeeing many are caried to vſe indirect meanes; as, by forgetting their feare, putting it away by merry company and paſtime, or by hoping that no ſuch thing ſhall befall them any more; and ſo waxe ſecure and careleſſe: and thus not onely they are deceiued in looking for that which ſhall not come to paſſe,  that is, to thinke that they ſhall be ſafe and without daunger after; but alſo herein, that they thinke themſelues the more religious and godly for that they haue had ſuch trouble, when yet they were without fruite of it. But when the Popiſh holy water ſcareth away Diuels, then ſhall theſe remedies ſtay and comfort them in their troubles.
               But beſides theſe lets, the Diuell hath another way,The ſecond vnmortified affection is, Pride and an ouervveaning of themſelues. Reuel. 3.17.
                   whereby he hideth the full beautie of the Chriſtian life from many who haue well begun, namely, by raiſing in them a proud conceipt and opinion of their profiting in knowledge and godlineſſe: like them of Laodicea, who ſayd, they were rich  and needed nothing. So that when they haue but newly begun, yet they ſhall thinke themſelues to haue no great need to go forward: and by that meanes they neuer attaine to the ſweete priuiledges which are to be inioyed of them, euen in this life.Example of it in the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 4.8.
                   And after this maner he puffed vp the Corinthians when they had receiued the Goſpell, as by the Apoſtles writing to them here, chap. 4. and elſewhere, it appeareth: Now ye are full, now ye are rich, and raigne as Kings: thereby ſhewing them their ſlackneſſe in proceeding to grow forward in the knowledge of Chriſt, and their loathing and weariſomeneſſe of paines taking, and their pride and contempt: which was no ſmall enemie to their profiting.
               
                   The Apoſtles were deceiued by him after the ſame manner,In the Apoſtles. who when our Sauiour told them that they ſhould receiue great light of knowledge and other increaſe of grace, when he ſhould ſend downe the holy Ghoſt vppon them; they but dimmely vnderſtanding him, imagined that they had them alreadie, ſaying: Now ſpeakeſt thou plainely, and thou ſpeakeſt no parable:Iohn. 16.29. imagining that they had the full vnderſtanding of his ſpeech, when they miſconceiued his meaning. Such as I ſpeake of, being ſtrongly poſſeſſed of this ouer-weaning of their gifts, is no ſmall enemie to true knowledge and godlineſſe. But this vſe the Diuell teacheth men to make of Gods gifts, euen to be the worſe for them, and to waxe inſolent by meanes thereof when they  be glutted with them: imagining that they haue more then others, when the more they haue indeed, the more they ſhall deſire; and ſeeke to be brought nearer to God by the ſweet taſt that they haue of his gifts already. Whatſoeuer tetch againſt any perſon, or other corruption be ioyned with this action in men, (as it is too common) yet the chiefe ſinne in it is pride, which ſcornefully reiecteth to heare and learne thoſe things which all do know they haue need of. And what commeth of this, if it be not ſtayed and ſuppreſſed,Dangerous effects of it. but a

waxing wearie of learning any more then they know, and a neglecting of diligence  and care to grow better, a meane account making of thoſe which are good, and an acquainting themſelues with looſe and irreligious perſons, or a falling into ſects, ſciſmes and hereſie? or if they doe none of theſe, yet they bring vpon themſelues that curſe in a melancholicke ſolitarie life, (hauing made themſelues vnfit euen for good companie:) Wo to him that is alone, as Iudas: Mat. 27.5. So that they verifie the ſaying of our Sauiour, that for not vſing it well,Luc. 19.26. they loſe euen that grace which they had.
               
                  The remedie. Reu. 3.17.
                  Such are taught to preuent this daunger, by acknowledging that they are poore, and blind, and naked, and therefore to furniſh themſelues yet better: and ſeeing they attribute ſo much to their owne wiſedome, to learne of the  Apoſtle:1. Cor. 3.18. 
                  that they muſt become fooles, that they may be wiſe: and that they know nothing as they ought to know: and whatſoeuer they haue, yet to hunger and thirſt after more, and to couet ſpirituall things ſtill, and to pray with the Prophet:1. Cor. 14.1. Pſal. 119.12. 
                  Lord, teach me thy ſtatutes: and not to pleaſe themſelues in that which they haue practiſed alreadie, comparing themſelues in a blind manner with thoſe which are like, or rather farre behind themſelues; but be better acquainted daily with their owne wants, weakneſſes and corruptions, that more ſtrength may be gathered againſt them: and to looke vpon them, which in the Scriptures, and now, are ſet before them, as the forwardeſt Chriſtians and holieſt examples. And as this is the remedie to auoide theſe ſnares of the diuell  for the time to come; ſo it is the helpe and remedie whereby they muſt redreſſe their eſtate, who haue thus bene deceiued by him alreadie. If they haue fallen to this point, and ſee it not, their daunger is the greater: and a token it is, that they haue vnfaithfully, or not at all viewed and examined their purpoſes and doings ſo many long dayes as they lye in them; or very houerly and to ſmall purpoſe, which is farre from the dutie of ſuch as haue firmely couenanted the contrarie.
               In this caſe therefore we ſee what a benefite of God it is, that he hath appointed vs daily an examination of our wayes,Examine our wayes. that if at other times, any vnbeſeeming thing ſhould haue paſſed vs; yet we might by this laying our actions  with the rules which ſhould guide vs, ſee our wandrings or other tranſgreſſions.Note. But if the diuell enter ſo farre as to faſten hollowneſſe and falſheartedneſſe vpon vs, which is, when we are not willing to ſee our trecheries; or in ſeeing them, yet counting them no great diſgrace or matter of accuſation againſt vs, (neither are we willing to riſe out of the ſinnes which haue paſſed vs, bringing pleaſure or commoditie vnto vs:) here as the diuell beguiled Eue through his ſubtiltie, ſo he hath done vs. What is to be gone about in this caſe, but that we duly and ſeriouſly conſider that which the holy Ghoſt hath ſaid in the Prouerbes:Pro. 28.13. 
                  He that hideth his ſinne ſhall not proſper; remembring this,Pſa. 32.4. & 5 that though it go ſore againſt our nature to ſhame and confeſſe againſt  our ſelues, yet the longer we forbeare to do it, ſo much the more bitter it will be vnto vs after: and therefore it will behoue vs to take againe to vs the ſinceritie and ſimplicitie beſeeming the Goſpell, and to gird our ſelues with the girdle of truth,Another vnmortified affection: Slouth. which we ſo ſhamefully caſt off?
               If otherwiſe, he ſeeing our diſpoſition, ſhall carrie vs to luskiſhnes, ſlouth, idleneſſe, ſo that this ſaying in the Prouerbes be verified in vs: A lyon is in

                      the way; or any other of that curſed litter, that we begin to take ſweetnes therin which is no better then poyſon; and that the works of our lawfull calling waxe loathſome and vnſauourie to vs; and the meanes to vphold godlineſſe, become vnwelcome; or other parts of the Chriſtian courſe, irkeſome and tedious: do we not know, that as we ſow, ſo we ſhall reape? and if to the fleſh, that of it we ſhall reape corruption? What is to be done then of vs, but this: namely, That we looke to the roote and fountaine of this miſchiefe?Remedie. And if it be growne by litle and litle, trace it out by footſteps: know that thou art beguiled. For thou before didſt delight and take pleaſure in godlineſſe, as finding no ſafetie elſewhere, and renouncedſt all whatſoeuer might hinder and hold  thee from the chriſtian courſe: and what ſhame is it that thou ſhouldeſt after be much backwarder? Remember alſo, that eaſe ſlayeth the fooliſh:Prou. 1.32. Prou. 14.12. and the way that ſeemeth pleaſant to the fleſh, is the way to death. And how hard ſoeuer it be to go backe out of this courſe, yet God hath encouraged thee thereto infinite wayes; eſpecially by this one, that he (in any thing that he ſetteth thee about) will be with thee, and not leaue thee, nor forſake thee:Ioſ. 1.9. Epheſ. 3.19. but will giue thee more then thou couldeſt aske or thinke, and therefore much more that which thou doeſt deſire. The longer thou art led by any ſuch ſlauerie, the more hardly thou knoweſt thou ſhalt find recouerie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 9. Of other vnruly affections; tetchineſſe, peeuiſhneſſe, frowardneſſe, &c.
               
                  AMONG the inward lets of godlineſſe, (I meane the vnſtayed affections of the heart) though the particulars are infinite, this is not the leaſt, when it waxeth tetchie, peeuiſh and froward either againſt perſons or things being croſſed by them, that we cannot  haue our will, yea though it be but in trifles. For ſuch is the nature of ſinne (to the end it may ſhew it ſelfe to be out of meaſure ſinfull) that we may be taken in ſuch a time with the deceiptfulneſſe of it, and found ſo naked and vnarmed, that the ſmalleſt matter may be an occaſion fit enough to make vs trefe and fretting, as if one ſhold ſtumble at a ſtraw, wheras at another time great prouocations could not moue vs; and all for that the deſire of the heart is not ſatisfied as it wiſheth:1. Sam. 24.7.8. & 25.13. (as Dauid could not be angry with Saul for all the iniuries with which he purſued him, and yet was caried headlong by his paſſions againſt Nabal for one diſcourteſie offered him.)  Which is neuer done, but a ſenſible diſquietneſſe of mind and vnſetledneſſe of heart doth ariſe therewith, which ouerthroweth the wel-ordered courſe: ſeeing he that is led and caried of his luſts as the cart drawne by wild horſe, is made vtterly vnfit for the time, to pray or walke before God in peace, or to do any other dutie acceptable to him. And therefore who can deny but that ſuch are caught with the deceitfulneſſe of ſin, as well as he who is ouercome of anger, wrath, or any fleſhly luſt another way?
               
                  And if in this tetchineſſe, we haue to do and deale with men, our peruerſeneſſe, ſullein and diſguiſed ſtomacke cannot be hidden: no, although we would hide and conceale it from the ſight of men, yet ſuch is the nature of it, that it ouerwhelmeth and couereth grace from ſhewing it ſelfe or exerciſing any power in vs, as the cloude couereth the ſight of the Sunne, and as though we had alwaies bene impotent, and had neuer enioyed any other eſtate: and it blindeth the iudgement from ſeeing the fouleneſſe of ſuch diſguiſing: and hardeneth the heart, that for a time it cannot relent for it, nor be humbled vnder it, vntill the burden grow ſo great to the ſoule, that it can no longer beare it; and the partie come to himſelfe, and can no longer ſuffer or abide it. It may be perceiued how this cankred corruption taking hold of a  man, (not otherwiſe deſtitute of grace) ſo carieth him to be incenſed againſt ſome perſon or thing, that it can no way be ſtayed or contained. A ſhadow of this appeared too euidently in two rare ſeruants of God, Paul and Barnabas:Act. 15.39. when they diſſenting betwixt themſelues about taking Marke into their companie, were ſo ſnared, that they departed one from the other; and with no leſſe offence to others then checke to themſelues, brake off their fellowſhip for a time.
               In ſuch a caſe therefore, this is to be done for the redreſſe of it: that ſeeing it is an high offence to God,Remedie. a needleſſe and fond troubling of our ſelues, and a bereauing vs of godly wiſedome, yea and of common reaſon, (that I  ſay no more) this (I ſay) is to be done: that we make diligent ſearch & inquirie, whither we be prone and diſpoſed to ſuch ſeruile and baſe maiſters, and ſo ſhake off that yoke of bondage: and if we haue fallen into it, and haue bene deceiued and diſguiſed with it, that as ſoone as we can, we do in trembling and deteſtation of our ſinne, ſeparate our ſelues from all other affaires and dealings, and fall into the conſideration of the vnſeemelineſſe and abſurditie of it with all ſpeed poſſible, till we feele & perceiue our ſtomack to fall and relent; which will be by litle and litle, if we harden not our harts, but go aſide of purpoſe, that we may faithfully debate the caſe betwixt God and our ſelues. The Lord hath promiſed, that ſuch going apart one frō another, yea (if need  ſo require) euen the husband apart, and the wife apart: that ſuch ſeeking of him ſhall find him,Zac. 12.12. Mat. 7.7. and ſuch diſlike of our corruption (and namely, of ſuch impotencie for want of grace) ſhall be the next way to recouer it againe: and when we haue ſeene what we haue gained thereby, or rather how much we haue loſt; that (as our Sauior admoniſhed in the like caſe) we go our way and ſinne no more in that manner, leſt a worſe thing befall vs. And this for a taſt of the corruption.
               Now when we ſhall conſider, how many of theſe ſores there are to blemiſh,An other: is wearineſſe of well doing. wound and feeble the ſoule, that it may be (as it were) in the ſeuerall powers thereof made vnfit to euery good worke by one or other of them;  and how the diuell waiteth as a fowler, hauing ſet his net to catch vs with one or other of his ginnes & ſnares: what conſtancie and care (thinke we) had there need to be kept in a Chriſtian mans life, to the end he may be rid of them, or that he may not lye long in them, or not fall from one to another: which is the cauſe,Phil. 2.12. 2. Pet. 1.5. why we call vpon men, as the Apoſtle teacheth vs, that they ſhould worke on, that is, hold faſt and maintaine the aſſurance of their

                   ſaluation with feare and trembling, giuing all diligence to ioyne with their faith; vertue, knowledge, &c.
               But if we eſcape this ſnare, are we out of daunger? Nay,An other vnruly aff
                        •
                     ction that much troubleth vs: wearineſſe in going forward. he hath many more to catch vs in. For through our ignorance or vnbeliefe, he maketh the Chriſtian life ſeeme ſo difficult and tedious to vs, that we ſhall waxe faint and be wearie of proceeding therein, or at leaſt in ſpeciall duties thereof: who knoweth not how fickle and inconſtant we are in all good things, and how ſoone vnſetled? Inſomuch that oftentimes, euen when we haue renewed our couenants after ſome fall, or daungerous coldneſſe eſpyed and repented of; yet ſhall we by litle and litle, fall to our old bias againe. Now if herewith  good means faile, we are ſet ſo much the more forward herein: as we reade of the people of Iſraell, euen in the ſhort abſence of Moſes from them,Exod. 24.18. & 34.28. Exod 32.1. being but fortie dayes.
               I do not ſpeake of the vnfitneſſe and naturall vntowardneſſe of the mind, or vnaptneſſe of the bodie to Gods worſhip, or to the duties of our particular callings, which being ſometime in the beſt of Gods people, are by moderate and honeſt recreating of them (if they cannot otherwiſe) expelled and ſhaken off:Rom. 7.19.21. but I ſpeake of the vnwillingneſſe that the fleſh feeleth to hold on conſtantly in dutie, further then it liketh; and that is, not vtterly to caſt off the yoke of Chriſt, but to ſerue God and it ſelf too. For there is nothing more deſired  of it, then when ſome duties haue bene perfourmed to God, that it may haue libertie, as it liketh, to occupie and ſet on worke both heart and hand in ſome manner to the diſpleaſing of God. For euen as the hypocrites and vnreformed perſons do neuer ſerue God heartily, but from teeth outward; and ſeeing Gods ſeruice is holy and pure, but they carnall and earthly minded, cannot at all delight therein: euen ſo Gods children being ſanctified but in part, haue many prouokings of them, by that wiſedome of the fleſh that remaineth in them, to be wearie of liuing godly, and are troubled with ſtrong reaſons to induce and draw them thereunto.
               And this is ſo true, that euen the beſt after they haue renewed their couenant  with the Lord to be more fruitfull and conſtant, & alſo do purpoſe the ſame with full reſolution: yet by litle and litle, they ſhall feele that feruencie of theirs weakened and cooled, and ſenſibly declining, euen as the Sunne toward his going downe. For which cauſe, the Apoſtle doth oftentimes ſtrongly fence the Chriſtians againſt it: ſaying, Be not wearie of well doing.Gal. 6.9. 1. Cor. 16.13. And againe: Stand faſt in the faith: quite you like men, be ſtrong. And thus if we curbe not in the vnruly affections and luſts, which would ſoone faſten vpon vs, and do not oft record our many ſweet liberties which we find in ſeruing God, (which ſhall alſo be greateſt, when we haue continued longeſt:) we ſhall find this too true by our owne experience, namely, what wearines  groweth vpon vs now and then eſpecially, of holding on chearefully and dutifully in our Chriſtian courſe.
               For as the diſeaſes in the nether parts of the bodie do make the heart heauie and the head to be diſtempered, and they being healed do eaſe and quicken both: euen ſo, theſe vnmortified affections of ours being out of order, do trouble the ſoule and diſquiet it; & therfore the well ordering of them, is a ſingular chearing and comforting of the ſoule and mind. Herein therefore

we muſt know and be perſwaded that Gods grace ſhall be ſufficient for vs, who by the diſgracing of them by his word,Remedies againſt theſe corruptions. will weaken them in vs, and will make the way eaſie vnto vs euery day more and more vnto the godly life, and take away the difficulties which ſtand vp to hinder vs: euen as we ſee how he encourageth vs thereto,Mat. 11.31. ſaying: My yoke is eaſie and my burden is light. Moreouer, though the diuell cannot breake vs off vtterly from a daily care of pleaſing God,Sathan laboureth to vnſettle and diſcourage vs with reproches. yet he will ſo labour to vnſettle vs with reproches, ill opinions vniuſtly conceiued of vs, falſe reports and diſgrace with our betters, which ſhall meete with vs in euery place; that we ſhall be much diſquieted, if not vnſetled for the time, or ſtirred vp to bitterneſſe, & take counſell how we may be reuenged, with ſundrie other diſcouragements: euen vntill we enter into  the ſanctuarie of the Lord, and come to due conſideration of our eſtate againe;Mat. 5.12. namely, that the Lord is not chaunged toward vs for all that, but willeth vs to reioyce, ſaying: If you be ill ſpoken of for my ſake and the Goſpels, reioyce and be glad; for great is your reward in heauen. But whatſoeuer may ſtand vp in our way to prouoke fainting and wearineſſe in our chriſtian courſe, we haue ſtrong and many perſwaſions againſt them: as, that we ſhall reape our reward without wearineſſe, Gal. 6.9: euen a crowne of righteouſneſſe, 2. Tim. 4.8. But becauſe the matter ariſeth more large then I looked for, (although I ſtudie with all breuitie to ſet downe the diuerſe kinds of vntamed affections, barely with their remedies) I will therefore ſhut vp this ſecond  ſort of lets with naming the particulars onely, which are not alreadie mentioned: that the reader may know, and ſo be able to diſcerne them, and ſo beware of them as of the reſt.
               So he ſometime prouoketh vs to vniuſt anger, (which is no better then a ſhort madneſſe) eſpecially when we can ſay,The laſt of this kind of ill affections here mentioned, conſisting of many. we had cauſe offered vs: ſo eaſily doth he turne our affections againſt vs, which God teacheth vs to vſe to good ends and purpoſes. At ſome other time, he poiſoneth vs with deadly conceipts and heartburnings againſt ſuch as we diſlike; alſo with looſeneſſe and lightneſſe of heart; alſo with raſhneſſe and haſtines, wherein we do nothing well; with lumpiſhnes and melancholie, and with diuerſe ſuch like: the beginnings and firſt riſinges of the which, although our owne hearts do breed, yet the ſtrength of them is of Sathan. By all which, as he ſeeth his beſt opportunitie, he ſo poſſeſſeth our hearts, that they are no more fit (in that ſort, being vnſetled) to be employed in any part of Gods ſeruice; then the running water when it is ſtirred and troubled in the bottome, is for our neceſſarie vſe. And thus it may appeare, how many of Gods deare ſeruants are holden backe by occaſions of their owne corruptions (the diuell adding ſtrength thereto) from ſhining as lights in a chriſtian courſe: and when God hath mercifully begun in them the life of godlineſſe, how they do afterwards (though it be litle to their commendation or reioycing) breake off or hinder  their growing forward in the ſame, through ſome great fault of their owne; not ſubduing their rebellious hearts, as God teacheth them, neither ſtirring vp and cheriſhing the good gifts of God which were giuen them before, as they might with eaſe haue done, being taught and ſhewed how: eſpecially, their fault is this, that they haue giuen themſelues to many fond and vaine liberties, both in ſpeaking, thinking and liuing; which to be pulled from, it

                   would ſeeme to them (when they ſhould but euen heare of it) to be as the cutting off a peece of their fleſh. I ſpeake not now of the vnreformed, for their vſuall courſe is ordinarily thus, neither are they in any order before men except they haue their owne mind ſatisfied.
               For the remedying of theſe and ſuch like, this is no ſmall helpe, that they ſet themſelues to marke their diſpoſition and inclination better, to what ſinne they are moſt prone: and beſides, except they haue a wiſe care to keepe themſelues beſeeming the Goſpell, eſpecially in thoſe parts of their liues which lye open to greateſt daungers, that therein they be beſt furniſhed: and if they take a foile and ſuſtaine a checke to their conſcience, yet to ſeeke the curing  and eaſe of it by due humiliation ſpeedily. But this will not much preuaile, except their owne hearts haue bene brought to take ſound delight in the chriſtian courſe, and waine themſelues from that which they ſhall know to be againſt it, and to be glad to be aduiſed and directed how to recouer. But of this ſecond kind of lets thus much.
            
            
               CHAP. 10. Of worldly luſts: and namely, The loue of carnall pleaſure, and the  inordinate deſire of riches.
               
                  BVT further, as he findeth beſt oportunitie, he deceiueth vs many other wayes; and namely, in taking vp our hearts in endleſſe, fooliſh and vaine deſires of things, which we neither can nor ought to enioy; as the luſt of the heart, of the eye, and the pride of life: and ſo feeding vs with the ayre, euen with moſt vaine and deceiptfull dreames, beſotteth vs with too much pleaſure-taking in tranſitorie liberties and commodities of this life; which pull our mindes as  much from godly duties, as they carie them after ſuch vnſauourie follies. About many daungerous fantaſies he occupieth our heads, that we may neglect the ſeeking of better things, eſpecially in the time when we ſhould be beſt occupied.
               I meane by theſe, all ſorts of worldly luſts, which are more noyſome and daungerous then the euill affections mentioned before: though (one would think) we had litle need to be ſhaken and diſtempered with greater then they, but rather ſtudie how to make them weakened and ſubdued in vs. Theſe worldly luſts, are luſts of the fleſh which belong to the preſent ſtate of this life and world: as the exceeding loue and deſire of pleaſures, riches and eſtimation,  or honor, &c. For if he can faſten our delights on theſe, we are caried headlong, as the chariot by wild horſes is ouerturned. I will ſhew the daunger we are in by meanes of theſe worldly luſts in two kinds: The luſtes of the fleſh, properly ſo called; and the inordinate deſire of riches and cares of the world. How a true Chriſtian may poſſibly be diſguiſed by theſe, (I ſay) that he ſhall be thereby as another man, and ſometime groſſely ouercome of them, I will firſt ſhew, and then adde ſome remedies againſt them. The firſt

is,Carnall pleaſures. when he ſhall be drowned in ſenſualitie, and the ſottiſh pleaſure of the bodie, ſo that he is blind and imporent; and hath no power to conſider, what the Scripture ſaith:Prou. 31.30. Fauour is deceiptfull, and beautie is a vaine thing. And what is the cauſe of this? for it would not eaſily be beleeued, that a true Chriſtian ſhould fall ſo farre.How it commeth to paſſe, that Chriſtians fall thereby. The cauſe is this; that he hauing giuen his heart libertie to deſire ſtolne waters, and to count them ſweet, when he ſhould rather haue loathed and caſt them vp as vomite, and haue made a firme couenant againſt the nouriſhing of ſuch delights; and he hauing giuen his eye leaue alſo to feed it ſelfe with ſuch ſights: he was made vtterly blind. And that being done, his prayers became feeble and weake (though ſometime attempting it) to expell and driue out ſuch ſottiſhneſſe; but it lodged in him, and made him a ſlaue vnto it. Which cannot be plainelier ſeene then in Sampſon;
                     Iud. 15. Example therof in Sampſon. a man of great gifts (as may be gathered by the ſtorie) but made ſo impotent by the looke of a woman, that he yeelded himſelfe to her lure moſt reprochfully: and being caught with that which was precious in her, became a foole in Iſraell, who had bene wiſe enough before to rule the whole land. And to this bondage doth a man,VVhat an heauie estate it cauſeth. Pro. 6.27.
                   indued with grace, bring himſelfe, when he will not ſee the daunger, which he cannot but know is readie to meet with him: For can a man take fire in his boſome, and not be burnt? No more may ſuch an one, who will be caried of his raging luſts, looke to be free from great euill and daunger. But behold further, what goeth with it? euen this, that he  is ſenſleſſe at the ſight of it, when he ſhould rather tremble to behold in what eſtate he is. For beſides, that he knoweth he doth euill (which makes his ſin the greater) his prayers are loſt which he beſtoweth about it, his burden of conſcience is importable, the loſſe of grace thereby is vnſpeakeable, the griefe of the godly that heare of it,Iam. 4.17. vnutterable; and the reioycing of the wicked, vnſatiable.Note. And yet this is not ſo to be taken, as though it could be no otherwiſe with any of Gods people; for many are free from that ſlauerie, who yet haue the ſame allurements: but they giue not place to their vnruly deſires, beleeuing that which is taught them, How deare it will coſt them. Oh ſubtilties of Sathan, hardly to be diſcerned! and deceiptfulneſſe of the heart, not to be truſted! ſo ſoone to let looſe, not a filthie man or woman onely, giuen ouer to euill deſires, (who can do no other but fulfill the ſame to the vttermoſt) but a ſonne and daughter of Abraham, who doth loath and abhorre ſuch wickedneſſe: and yet to be taken in ſuch a time, that they ſhould be readie to venture vpon that which muſt needs worke their vndoing; and to wiſh that, by the enioying whereof they were better be dead! But I muſt ſay, ſuch do purchaſe to themſelues the iuſt fruite of their labours: for though they may be ſealed vp by the ſpirit of God to ſaluation, (for of ſuch onely I ſpeake) yet what then?Beware of the leaſt occaſions, eſpecially where vve are vveakeſt. Ought they not therefore to be more holy, and beware of the leaſt occaſions of emboldening them to ſinne? And of all other ſinnes, to be  moſt ſuſpicious and fearefull of thoſe, to the which they know that they are moſt prone and inclined? and by the committing whereof, they are ſure, that their ſhame and ſorrow muſt needes be greateſt? Which two, when they are by their iuſt deſerts, once brought vpon them, they will confeſſe with vs then,No preciſeneſſe to beware of ſinne. that we cannot be too circumſpect and warie: and that it is no preciſeneſſe, to beware of the deceiptfulneſſe of ſinne at any time, or in any place

                   or companie: the which grace (yet) and care was thought to be too much auſteritie, till they ſmarted ſo bitterly for the want of it. But euery one can tell that this is true: He that ſtandeth furtheſt from a raging flame,A ſimile. is freeſt from burning; and he who goeth farre off from the brimme of a riuer, is ſafeſt from drowning: A word to the wiſe is more, then an hundred ſtripes to a foole. And I pray God, that numbers of them who mocke ſome for their preciſeneſſe,Pro. 17.10. haue not oft times iuſt cauſe to bluſh and be wounded for their bold ſinning, I meane, as well the ſinne which I now here ſpeake of, as other kinds: and all for this, that they were no more preciſe. For if they may be deceiued and ouercome who are thought to be ſtrict; namely,If the warieſt be ſometimes deceiued, much more the ſecure when they will at ſometimes  be too ſecure: what may be thought of ſuch, whoſe vſuall courſe is Careleſnes and a truſting to their owne wiſdome, who count it their diſgrace and ſhame to be affraid of ſinne?
               But to returne to the godly, how good is it to learne and be able to hold in theſe fleſhly luſts, as it were, with bit and bridle; that no ſuch wofull things befall them at any time, neither that they make themſelues fooles in Iſraell,How to auoide the daunger. Ioh. 15.10.
                   nor ſpectacles to the prophane world to become their paſtime? All which they ſhall auoide, if they make their greateſt reckoning to abide in the fauour of God from day to day, and hold faſt the aſſurance of it,Mat. 11.29. and not count it too baſe a thing for them to doe: Secondly, if they continue vnder Chriſts gouernment,  to be willingly ſubiect to him, and to put on his yoke: Thirdly, if they giue not libertie to their wicked luſtes, to range after the cogitations and deſires which may ſooneſt poiſon them;Col. 3.5. but follow their particular callings diligently: And laſt of all, if they will ſhunne and auoide the occaſions and obiects of ſuch miſchiefe; and namely,Gen. 39.10. thoſe which we reade that holy Ioſeph did eſchew in the like caſe, being tempted by his whoriſh miſtreſſe, that he would not hearken to her, nor come into her companie.
               Another way which the diuel layeth open to obſcure and weaken the godly life in vs; & that, by another of theſe worldly luſts, is:The ſecond worldly luſt. Cares of this world, or worldlineſſe. Heb. 13. Peti. 4.
                   to fill vs with noyſome cares about the things of this life. A common euill vnder the Sunne; and not  the ſinne of the poore man onely, (which yet is not allowed of God, no not in him: for euen he is taught to depend vpon God, being commaunded to pray in faith, Giue me this day, &c.) but it is rather more common to the rich,Prou. Eccleſ. 4.4. as Salomon ſpeaketh: I haue ſeene a rich man, as if he had nothing: And againe; There is one who hath neither ſonne nor brother, yet there is no end of his trauell, neither is his eye ſatisfied with riches, neither doth he once ſay: For whome do I labour, and depriue my ſoule of goodneſſe? This thorne where it groweth, it ſuffereth no good thing to grow by it, but choaketh it, and ouerſhadoweth any other gifts of God whatſoeuer. For a worldly mind is a monſter of many heades, and infecteth the vnwiſe with her poyſon, that not  onely the common ſort, who haue ſmall practiſe of religion; but euen the beſt ſort of people are made drunken with the dregges of her golden cuppe: and this is reached out ſo ſecretly and ſubtilly, that hardly ſhall one perceiue the daunger of it, vntill he haue taken hurt by it. Which worldlineſſe where it faſteneth vpon a man, it deuoureth godlineſſe, as if there had bene none before; and ſo chaungeth the beſt men who are not aware of it, and who feare not the daunger of it, that they ſhall become moſt vnlike themſelues.
               
                  But in deſcribing of this, I cannot vſe the like breuitie as in the former. Nay, I muſt needes confeſſe, that it troubleth me very much, how to lay open this packe, it is ſtuffed with ſuch ſtore of contagious and infected wares; and yet men are ſo greedie to catch them vp hauing reſpect onely vnto the gaine, and therefore vnfit to be diſſwaded from the trafficke thereof: ſo that few may be noted for examples in vſing the world aright. Saint Paule ſetteth out this ſinne which is compact of ſo many, this roote which hath ſo many branches,1. Tim. 6.10. when writing to Timothie and charging him to make this his text in preaching to ſuch as haue riches, he ſaith: The loue or deſire of money is the roote of all euill: which while ſome luſted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced themſelues through with many ſorrowes; Againe: They which will be rich, fall into temptations and ſnares, and into many fooliſh and noyſome luſtes, which drowne men in perdition and deſtruction.
               
               By the helpe of this Scripture & ſome other, I will firſt lay out ſome of the branches of this roote, and ſome of the heades of this monſter which deuoureth pietie and religion ſo faſt; and the deadly daunger that commeth from thence, & the remedie againſt it: that all theſe cōſidered, we may ſee what iuſt cauſe there is that men ſhould be circumſpect in this behalfe, in a more eſpeciall manner throughout their dayes, beſides the generall care which they haue ouer their liues. And firſt a litle, of the ſinnes of this kind committed in and about the affaires and dealings of Chriſtians, (for my purpoſe is to awaken  ſuch as are willing to be directed, not to ſhew all the ſorts of euill which are practiſed in the world:) then ſomwhat of the ſinnes committed by the occaſion of riches, without reſpect of mens dealings; and the daungers that accompanie both. To theſe two, I will referre that which I meane to ſpeake of this firſt point.
               
                  Daungers in worldly dealings: Greedineſſe.In dealings, ſome of the ſinnes which good men are like to fall into, are: Greedineſſe in ſeeking and getting their commodities, when they conſider not who is hurt thereby, ſo they may get; nor what daunger they purchaſe themſelues in things which are more precious: with the which as a daily companion goeth Haſtineſſe and raſhneſſe,Raſhneſſe in couenants-making, &c. when couenants and promiſes  are vnaduiſedly made, and afterward ſeldome performed and kept; being as faſt repented of as they were entred into, becauſe raſhneſſe doth nothing wel. This way, in and about the world, many abuſe the peace which they inioy. But if there be any ſhew or hope of profite ſet before vs (with what hard conditions ſo euer) we are commonly ſo moued and tickled therewith,VVhen riches increaſe, the heart is on them. that it may be ſeene apparantly, we be much vnſetled and almoſt made drunken thereby; as when we firſt enter vpon our inheritance and commodities, whē they come in more roundly by the riſing of prices, or great gaine in our bargaines, or any ſuch like.
               
                  Looſeneſſe and lightneſſe.Another euill of this ſort, is the deceiptfull looſeneſſe and light-heartedneſſe  in our affaires, which ſhaketh off all reuerence and feare in our actions; and admitteth no ſuſpicion, much leſſe queſtion, whether we walke ſafely in the meane while; or, as though our commoditie-ſeeking were our heauen and happineſſe; and as though, becauſe we haue ſome libertie giuen vs of God herein, therefore we may caſt off care of better things, and paſſe meaſure in them without check or cōtrolement: ſo that we ſenſibly feele our deſire abated

                   to the Goſpel and heauenly things. To this is annexed (as a familiar companion) fooliſh, exceſſiue and earthly reioycing,Earthly reioycing. when we haue ſucceſſe to our liking, and gaine comming in. And from this ariſeth reioycing in our wealth (which Iob durſt not do, but ſaid; That had bene a denying of God) and pride of life, as alſo a lifting vp our hearts aboue others,
                     Pride &c. Iob. 31.24.25.28. liuing in pleaſure and wantonneſſe, exceſſe in diet and apparell, and nouriſhing our hearts as in a day of ſlaughter, diſdaining our inferiours, repining at our betters, with a greedie and haſtie ſeeking to go beyond our equals; and infinite others like: for euen in theſe may Gods ſeruants be drowned.
               And ſo on the contrarie: if we thriue not,Fretting when we thriue not. nor attaine to that which we  looke for, what commeth from vs but fretting and vexation of heart, for that we obtaine not our deſire, that is, the good ſucceſſe which we hoped for?
                     Deut 7. VVe depend not vpon God for the iſſue. So that before the iſſue commeth, we do not with contentation reſt vpon God, and meekely commit the ſucceſſe to him: no, but rather vnquietly and diſtruſtfully carie ourſelues vntill the triall come. Beſides theſe, there are other kinds of offending, which a Chriſtian man may fall into: as when he ſhall ouer-lay himſelfe with ſuch multitudes of worldly dealings,VVe ouerlay our ſelues with worldly dealings, and no time left for better vſes. Prou. 23.3. Our fully herein. that there can be no place nor time giuen to holy exerciſes of prayer, or regard had of chriſtian walking in his ciuill or common actions; but all the wiſedome which God hath giuen him to farre more excellent purpoſes, is beſtowed this way, euen  to be rich: then the which folly, what greater may fall into one who thinketh himſelfe wiſe? For what hath he prouided for himſelfe, but care, toile and miſerie couered with iolitie while he liueth, and the fruite of his follie at his death; that he being turned out of all here, he is much vexed and diſquieted, hardly brought to caſt off this burthen, and heartily to repent this his diſguiſed eſtate; is hardly receiued into euerlaſting habitation after, but hath worſe prouided for himſelfe, then the meaneſt godly perſon which liued vnder him?
               I graunt it is to be allowed that Salomon ſaith: A diligent hand maketh rich: and, The ſlouthful commeth to pouertie. But that none may be deceiued  with miſ-vnderſtanding his wordes,
                     VVhat diligence is good. Prou. 3. Prou. 28. let him be the interpreter himſelf what diligence it is which he alloweth to grow rich by; euen ſuch and no other, as will giue him leaue to ſeeke wiſedome as gold, and to lay it vp as treaſure, and to labour for vnderſtanding aboue all things: ſuch alſo, as in the middeſt of his diligence to become rich, he be affraid to offend: and ſuch, as it may not be his trauell that he doth moſt looke after. Such an euill is to be ſeene in the world (I meane, euen amongſt men otherwiſe well to be hoped of) that they do not marke, when the ſweetneſſe of gaine comming in is felt, how godly duties grow as bitter and vnſauourie to them, which was wont to be otherwiſe with them. Laſt of all, beſides theſe before named, in chriſtian  mens dealings, worſe things for the getting of this worlds good, may come to paſſe: that is, that vnlawfull meanes may be practiſed,Other ill kinds of dealing. as iniuring one of another, whiles either by deceipt in bargaining or otherwiſe it be offered; or whiles violence be ſhewed, oppreſſion and rigour, and there be none againſt them able to reſiſt it: more particularly, whiles men, contrarie to Gods commaundement, do put their money to vſurie.
               If in this ſort or the like,Deut. 8. we ſhould be prouoked in our affaires and dealings

to go to worke, (as it is the manner of the moſt to do) we ſhould ſo blemiſh, yea deface the chriſtian life, whatſoeuer graces of God ſhould be in vs, that we lying open to our aduerſarie but in ſome of theſe for want of a particular regard had againſt them, we ſhould need no other occaſions to make our liues irkeſome,Other abuſing of riches out of worldly dealings. reprochfull and vncomfortable. But I haue hitherto laid foorth onely ſome of the diſeaſes that grow out of a worldly mind in mens dealings: but there is no leſſe euill incurred of an earthly minded man, though otherwiſe religious, (euen whiles he is free from all affaires) wherby his profites and ſubſtance are increaſed. For he who doth not yet ſee the deceiptfulneſſe of richs, how they blindfold the heart that it cannot ſee clearely the beautie of chriſtianity; alas, how is he led about of his fantaſies (like a foole) to  dreame of the happineſſe of his outward eſtate? Oh, what pleaſure is it to him to thinke of that which he hath? How is his heart made drunken with the fleſhly reioycing in his wealth and welfare? How doth it delight him to think what libertie he hath in the world by reaſon of his abilitie, to pleaſe himſelfe in that which his heart carieth him to, or his eye luſteth after? when yet he is ſo much the more miſerable, becauſe he hath nothing to reſtraine him from ſuch libertie. How doth he caſt in his head what he will do hereafter, and within ſome few yeares how conueniently he will haue all things about him, (I ſpeake ſtill of a Chriſtian: for euen ſo may ſuch an one be beguiled for a ſeaſon;Luk. 12.20.) and before the time be expired he is taken away from all, like the  foole in the Goſpell, and laid in the earth?
               And thus his ſpiders webbe which with much care and long time was in working, is now ſuddenly ſwept away in one moment. It were infinite to ſay that which might here be vttered, and to very good purpoſe, how many waies and how farre the poore ſoule may be led to deceiue it ſelfe; and finally to be vtterly vndone being altogether bereft of all heauenly furniture, through the fooliſh and ſottiſh dreames of earthly felicitie, which do oftentimes faſten euen vpon good men ſometime vnawares, through the corruption of the heart and the commonneſſe of this euill which they ſee in the world.
               
               
                  Men, ſlaues to their riches.All which how clearely do they proue, that riches are commaunders and maiſters, and men ſlaues and ſeruants to whatſoeuer they will force them; and get ſuch ſecret loue and liking in their hearts, that it will be a matter of great difficultie to breake their fellowſhip, and yet a greater vexation of the hart when it muſt be broken? There is ſuch a neare agreement and liking betwixt our nature and them, that we can talke with them as with a friend; and are led by them to many euill purpoſes and ends. So that we may poſſibly be brought to abuſe them to the ſatisfying of our luſts, both in exceſſe, licentiouſneſſe, pride and the ioynting of our aduerſaries; and what not (that I ſay not much of the deceiptfulneſſe which there is ſmall hope to make men  ſee: that is, to become very ſlaues and droiles for the aduancing of their childrē, neglecting for that cauſe whatſoeuer oportunities God offereth them of doing much good)? For it may be ſeene, that many rich men haue ſeemed to liue to no other end, then to leaue great wealth to them whom (yet) they laboured not to make fit to vſe it aright, and therefore prouided to the vndoing of them.Philem. 7. And yet to comfort the hearts of their poore brethren with thē,

                   or to apply them to any ſuch ends, they are backward and ſlow, yea too pinching, ſpary and nigardly, as if all were too litle for a few bellies. And as they hardly come from vs to good vſes, ſo are we as much pinched and vexed with feare of loſing and forgoing them: that it is not in vaine commaunded,Luke 21.34. That we beware we be not ſurfeited with cares of this world, and that we make them not thornes and choakes to hurt and annoy vs.
               By theſe or any of them, or the like, as euery Chriſtian is moſt prone to offend:Great heed to be taken. ſo if he ſhall not wiſely and circumſpectly preuent the ſame by this Chriſtian watchfulneſſe through the day, beſides other helpes before ſet downe, auoiding all occaſions and weaning his heart from all noiſome loue  thereof, learning alſo contentation, and nouriſhing a mercifull hart to the neceſſities of the poore, with ſuch like remedies as ſhall be ſet downe; he ſhall be conſtrained to complaine of grieuous diſtractions of his mind, diſquietneſſe, and vnſetling himſelfe hereby, beſides the hurt which others ſhal take by him. And thus it may appeare by this which hath bene ſayd of this matter, how needfull it is, beſides a generall watchfulneſſe in and throughout the day, to be more eſpecially affraid of ſome ſpeciall weakneſſes which we cary about vs, and to be armed againſt ſome ſpeciall diſcouragements and hinderances by worldly goods.
               I haue ſhewed ſome of the abuſings of worldly goods, both in mens dealings  and out of them: the daungers that accompany them, who knoweth not without large laying out of them, ſeeing they follow them, as the ſhadow doth the body? For though I ſpeake not of them who are drowned in the world, whoſe God is their belly and their wealth:Some of the better ſort, not vvilling to beare hovv to vſe riches aright. it is too apparent, how honeſt and good Chriſtians haue (for the moſt of them) no heart to heare how they ſhould vſe their worldly wealth, how many daungers they are ſubiect vnto thereby, and how their loue is glued to the ſame; but they thinke themſelues able to guide themſelues in vſing and diſpoſing of their riches and commodities: therefore do they fall into no meane or common dangers. That whereas they might haue libertie aboue  others, to leade a ſweete and godly life, and to draw many to the ſame: yet they get litle knowledge, faith, experience, comfort and other grace, themſelues; neither are many of them prouokers of their neighbours to a religious courſe, to loue and to good workes, by word and example. And beſide this, that if they ſinne as other men, they are ſure to meete with the puniſhments of other men; in iuſt reproaches and an ill name deſeruedly, in an euill conſcience and many vexations, beſide many bad dealings which they find at the hands of wicked perſons, which they might haue bene voide of: beſide theſe, (I ſay) what a iudgement is it, that they being borne to honour, haue depriued themſelues of it?
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 11. Of the remedies againſt this worldly luſt: namely, Couetouſneſſe and exceſsiue loue of riches.
               
                  BVt to ſet downe ſomewhat more clearly and diſtinctly for helpe and redreſſe of this ſinne of couetouſneſſe and worldly luſt, becauſe I haue ſomewhat largely ſpoken of the ſame: I could wiſh that the remedies and reaſons  to redreſſe theſe many and dangerous ſinnes, (and to preuent the ſame,The ſecond point about this matter, hovv to redreſse it. where they haue not as yet broke out in many of Gods people) that the remedies (I ſay) and reaſons againſt them were well marked, and alſo the direction how to vſe them both, (as followeth) duly regarded. And to begin with the remedies which I will here ſet downe, they are foure, euen as the reaſons alſo are. Firſt, he that deſireth to be free from great blame and offence by the vſe of worldly goods, and conſequently to hold faſt his peace with God thereby, (as I know not what morall action is more to be deſired) let him looke to this as he would to the auoiding of the collicke or ſtone:The firſt remedie. That no man be hurt or  ſuſtaine loſſe and danger by him; but let him throughly be perſwaded of it indeed, that he ought to do thus: as we are ſtraightly charged by the Apoſtle:1. Theſ. 4.6. 
                  See that no man oppreſſe or defraud his brother in any matter. So that, as we will be ſure that none ſhall wrong vs, ſo farre as we be able to reſiſt it, (and therefore we need not be bidden to regard our ſelues:) ſo becauſe few of vs will be carefull to ſee others with whom we deale, to inioy their right, but will be ready rather to plucke from them; therefore is this charge giuen vs towards others (not a litle foiling to this ſinne of worldlines, if it be regarded.)
               
                  The benefit of this remedy.For then we ſhall be free from all the ſinnes againſt our neighbour, condemned in the eighth commandement (as far as we can diſcerne them) both  in bargaining, (which are not a few) and alſo in other dealings with men, (which are almoſt innumbrable:) neither ſhall we deſire it in our harts, to iniure them, ſeeing the law that bindeth vs is ſpiritual. And what a treaſure were it, ſo to mind this charge in all our dealings with men through the day, that we might haue the bleſſed and ſweet fruite of it at night, when we are to lie down? Oh, what liberty may ſuch haue, as look faithfully to this? (In like maner, do not ſorowes inough abide thē who reſtraine not their harts from ſuch iniurying of men with full reſolution?) Again, he who will be ſubiect to this charge of the Apoſtle, and couenant holily, to vſe this firſt remedie throughout his life, namely, that none ſhall ſuſtaine wrong or hurt by him; ſhall be  free from many branches of couetouſneſſe: yea, he that is armed to do no euill this way, or if he haue, doth correct and redreſſe it, ſhall ſhew himſelfe to be a man that hath ſtrugled commendably with the world and earthly goods, and alſo to haue gotten great victory thereby. And therefore are there few ſuch; becauſe few do tie themſelues to ſuch couenants. Which kind of men, if they could be free from blame in many other things, yet

                   ſhould they ſufficiently be branded for worldly and couetous, if they be found vnarmed againſt this.
               The ſecond remedie is: not onely that we hurt them not,The ſecond remedie: To do good to all. but alſo that we do them good. Which is to be vnderſtood of all with whom we haue to do. Euen as that Scripture teacheth, confirming this rule: namely, That we ſhould owe nothing to any, but this, That we loue them.
                     Rom. 13.8. The firſt ſort to vvhom vve ſhould do it. Princes. And this reacheth (and is of vs to be performed) to foure ſorts of men: (1) to Princes: (2) to teachers: (3) our owne families: and (4) to others, our poore neighbours and brethren: to all which, we owe a ſeuerall duty not to be neglected. For breuity ſake to our Chriſtian Prince we owe tribute and other duty by our goods,Rom. 13.7. as  we ſee it to be required of vs both in peace and warre. About which I ſay no more but this, that as all drawing backe and vnwillingneſſe to performe duties neceſſarily impoſed, is euill: ſo this is not a ſmall blemiſh, when ſuch as go for good Chriſtians, do commonly contend and raiſe ſtrife about their payments, and do not rather proportionably diſcharge the ſame with willingneſſe. The next is,
                     The ſecond: Gods miniſters. 1. Cor 9.14. Gal. 6.6. to the vpholding and maintaining of the Miniſterie and the Goſpell preached: which due, they who being able, are not ready to diſcharge, but draw their neckes out of the coller: beſides that, they ſhew they are neither friends nor fauourers of that holy ordinance of God; ſo they proue, and that too truly, that they reape ſmall benefite by the  preaching of the glad tidings of it.The poore mans duty in this caſe. So that euen the poore who are able to giue nothing, are in no better caſe, if they be not in affection and good example with the beſt and forwardeſt, in token, that if they had abilitie, they would not be behind others in that duty.
               The third ſort to whom we owe this, To make thē partakers of our goods,The third: Our family. are our owne familie, as wife, ſeruants and children: who muſt haue this performed by vs, to haue all good neceſſaries prouided them at our hands, as foode and rayment, with what ſoeuer elſe conuenient for them; that they may be the better incouraged and more inabled to liue chriſtianly, and to walke in their callings diligently and chearfully. And if we be occaſions to them of neglecting their duties, by pulling from them any of their neceſſarie  helpes, yea if we haue not a care to ſee that they inioy them; we in ſo doing, ſhew our ſelues worſe then infidels. And yet on the other ſide,1. Tim. 5.8. will not the Lord allow vs to fall into any other kind of ill dealing,Note. as coueting that which is anothers, or irreligious ſeeking to increaſe our owne for the maintaining of our charge: but that care and trauell of ours, in our particular calling, which auoideth both theſe; (that neither religious worſhipping and ſeruing of God be neglected of vs, nor our neighbour wronged nor iniuried by vs) that is the manner of prouiding for our families, which is beſeeming and meet for vs.
               
                   The fourth and laſt ſort of them which ought to haue a part in our goods,The fourth: The poore. (ſo that the giuing of that to them which we owe them, may helpe to hinder and abate couetouſneſſe in vs:) this laſt ſort, I ſay, are the poore,Deut. 15.11. whom we ſhall alwayes haue among vs (as our Sauiour ſaith) that we may do good to them.
                  
                     Ioh. 12.8. Not to hurt them. Therfore much more we muſt take it as graunted, that we may in no wiſe hurt or wrong them, which we may not offer to any other, (though with ſome, all is fiſh that commeth into the net (as they ſay;) and they care not who forgo it,

ſo that they may haue it.To ſhew compaſſion to them. Iam. 2.13.16.
                  ) We muſt know further, that to theſe we ow mercy  and compaſſion: and that, in this manner, namely, to giue them for their preſent need: to lend to them for their vpholding in their trade: to beare with them when they haue it not to pay at the due time: and to remit it to them altogether, when they cannot, and yet faine would diſcharge it: and to helpe them vp againe who are decayed: (Alwayes looking to this, that the ſubtile and ſlouthfull be excepted.
                     Lay ſomewhat aſide for this purpoſe. 1. Cor 16.1. 1. Tim. 6.18. 2. Cor. 9.6. 2. Cor. 8.7. Rom. 12.) And for the performing of theſe duties, let ſomewhat be layd aſide as God bleſſeth vs, either quarterly as we receiue it, or otherwiſe, as God bringeth it to our hāds; not thinking the tythe of our gaine and ſauings in the yeare to be too much for them. The Apoſtle willeth men to be rich in good workes and not nigardly; & God cals Giuing a grace. And know we, that the Lord loueth this, that we do it with chearfulneſſe, and (where much is not) that the widowes mite was highly accepted. And thus I haue ſhewed who are the perſons, and in what maner our hearts ſhould be inlarged towards them. And this briefly be ſayd of the ſecond remedie againſt a worldly and couetous heart: which being layd with the firſt, ſhall not be found a ſmall meane to diſfigure and maime ſuch a ſinne: eſpecially, when they ſhall both go with the other two which follow.
               
                  The third remedie. To take heed that riches be not meanes to dravv vs to ſinne.And theſe do concerne our ſelues, as the former teach vs how to deale with others. The firſt of them is, that they hurt vs not: that is, that they be not meanes to draw vs to much ſinne, which will as poyſon in the body, worke vs much euill. And this they may do, as well in thoſe that haue them, as they may in them who ſeeke, and cannot come by them. In thoſe who haue and inioy them, the danger is to be feared, which Salomon ſpeaketh of: that they be not to vs as they be to the moſt, our ſtrong holds. The riches of a man,
                  Prou. 18.11. ſaith he, are his ſtrong holds: and make him, as the Apoſtle ſaith, to be high minded. For thus he writeth to Timothy: Charge them who are rich in this world,
                  
                     1. Tim. 6.17. Riches puffe vp the mind. VVhat comes of it. 
                  that they be not high minded. For if they puffe vp our minds, and make vs ſwell, they will draw vs on to any ſinne: as licentiouſneſſe, idleneſſe, vanitie and boldneſſe in euill, whiles we thinke we haue that which will beare vs out, and hold vs vp againſt any which might riſe againſt vs; vntill the fruits  of them breake forth in vs more bitter then gall or wormewood. Againe, they will make vs worldly, prophane, nigardly, diſcontented: for he that loueth ſiluer, ſhall not be ſatisfied with it: and he that loueth riches, ſhall be without the fruite of them, Eccleſ. 5.9. Alſo they will fill vs with ſlauiſh feare of loſing and forgoing them: and what will inſue of this bondage, but a weariſome and tedious troubleſomneſſe? that they will not ſuffer vs to reſt; but (as the flies of Aegypt, which with no beating off, did ceaſe to diſquiet the people) with care and penſiueneſſe will torment vs waking, and with fearfull dreames ſting and wound vs ſleeping, yea breake off our ſleepe altogether, when we ſhould take and inioy it: till, as a moth, which taketh away  the beauty of a garment, they conſume and eate vp all the ſpirituall grace that was in vs?
               This is ſome part of the hurt that riches may do vs, euen as they do procure and bring all theſe with many other to the men of the world; as agreeable to Salomons words:Eccleſ. 5.12. 
                  I haue ſeene an euill ſickneſſe vnder the Sunne: riches reſerued to the owners thereof, to their euill. Theſe ſinnes therefore, with their like,

                   and the woe that they bring, if we will wiſely and carefully preuent and auoid, (as who doth not ſee, that great diligence muſt be vſed for the ſhunning of the ſame?) we ſhall helpe in good ſort to breake the necke of this couetouſneſſe: which otherwiſe will beare ſway in vs, howſoeuer the name of it be odious to vs. Now ſuch as haue not riches in any plenty, but are poore,Sinnes of the poorer ſort, about riches. may haue worldly minds as well as the other; and are more like to couet, to be diſcontented, fret, and to uſe vnlawfull ſhifts to come out of their wants: whereby no ſmall hurt doth inſue vnto them. All which,Hovv to auoid them. true Chriſtians muſt learne to reſiſt and withſtand, and to ſee what allowance God affoordeth them, and not what their greedy appetite would deſire. And beſides  other meanes by which they reſiſt, let them labour in their calling diligently, both they which want, and they who haue much: for that becommeth vs all well, ſo as with it we prouide, that we be not hurt by the worldly goods, that is, by diuerſe ſinnes which they cauſe, whereby we ſhould vtterly diſgrace our profeſſion. And thereby and by no better way, we ſhall proue that we are not couetous, while we arme our ſelues againſt al ſuch euils as riches do cauſe men to commit for the exceſſiue loue that they beare to them: a great number of the which I haue ſet downe. And this of the third remedie.
               The fourth and laſt is this:The fourth remedie: That vve prouide, that vve be bettered by our vvealth. that we not onely prouide that we be not hurt  by them, but alſo that we looke to it carefully, that we be much bettered by them towards Gods ſeruice, more then if we wanted them. For although poore and rich are commanded to conſecrate themſelues to God, yet they may beſt do it, who haue moſt helpes thereto. And who can deny,
                     
                        Pſal. 16. The vvealthy haue more helpe to godlineſſe, then others:
                     More time and freedome to religious exerciſes.
                   that in the wealthy eſtate there are many more helpes hereto, then are to be found in the needie and poore, (this being graunted, that both ſorts feare God, with whom onely I haue here to deale)? For firſt, they haue more time and freedome then theſe, to all exerciſes of religion and the worſhip of God, both publicke and priuate: I meane, they may ofter inioy the preaching of the word, haue recourſe to reading, Chriſtian conference in good company,  meditation alſo and prayer: (which, how great helpes they be to the keeping of a ſetled courſe in godlines, hath bin before ſet downe:) whereas the poore, beſides that they ſhall looke to themſelues commendably, if they be not diſcouraged and made impatient by their wants; ſo they cannot for the moſt part, take the benefit of the afore-mentioned helpes in any ſuch ſort as the other may.
               Now if any here will obiect and ſay, (as indeed he may,Obiection: 
                  Moſt are worſe for their wealth. if he marke the courſe of the moſt wealthie at this day, yea euen of thoſe who will ſeeme religious:) That theſe benefits of God do rather draw mē away from feruency and forwardneſſe in a godly life, then further and helpe them thereto:Anſwer: I anſwer,  that if it be ſo,Such are bad vſers of good things. it is the ſinne of the perſons who are ſo vnthriftie vſers of Gods bleſſings, and their groſſe vnthankfulneſſe to him, who do thereby prouoke him to take away his bountie from them, or to giue it them in his wrath and heauie diſpleaſure. For I am ſure the Lord teacheth them the contrarie, namely: that where much is beſtowed, there much ſhall be required: and that this is the end of the abundance of all good things which he giueth vs, that we ſhould ſerue him with ioyfulneſſe and with a good heart.
                  Deut. 28.47. Indeed,

as men go to worke in the world who haue receiued great riches at  Gods hand, it is hard to proue, that they be moſt fruitfull: but let ſuch know that their account ſhall be the greater. Therefore, the obiection being thus anſwered, it remaineth cleare and without controuerſie, that men who haue receiued greater outward benefits of God then others, may and ought to be the better for them to God-ward (as from whom iuſt cauſe of care and thought taking is remoued) then the poorer ſort, who lie open to them both.
               This good therefore we muſt ſee that we do to our ſelues, who haue receiued of him the commodities which many of his deare ſeruants do want,As vve proſper outwardly, ſo ſee that our ſoules thriue. that we hold the profeſſion of our hope with ioy from day to day, that we may ſay it truly, that our ſoules are much more well liking by the abundance  or neceſſaries of this life which we haue: or elſe, we ſhall neuer be able to free our ſelues from the blemiſh of worldlineſſe. But if this grace accompany the three former in vs, we ſhall well declare that we nouriſh an heauenly mind, and labour againſt this great ſin of coueting & worldlineſſe.
               But to go further: our riches ſhould do vs other good, beſide that which I haue ſpoke of.VVhat further good our riches may do vs. Luke 16.9.
                   For we ſhould make them our friends to helpe vs into euerlaſting habitation: ſo our Sauiour counſelleth vs, ſaying: Make you friends of your riches: and that is, by laying them vp in the Lords hands while we be carefull to beſtow them on Gods poore Saints. For thus, we giuing them to the poore, do lend them vnto the Lord, and do (as it were) put them in his  hands: and ſo whatſoeuer we lay out, ſhall plentifully be payed vs againe, euen an hundreth fold,
                  Mar. 10.30. in peace (which paſſeth vnderſtanding) in this life; (though not alwayes in riches againe) and in the world to come, eternall life. Yea verily, ſuch acts ſhall not be forgotten, but ſhall be witneſſes and teſtimonies of our faith: (for why do we giue but becauſe we beleeue in the liuing God,Heb. 11.6. 
                  who is a plentifull rewarder of all that ſeeke him, and the ſauiour of all that beleeue in him?Reuel. 14.13.) and the workes of ſuch ſhall follow them. Euen thus ſhould we do ourſelues good with them: and therefore we muſt not thinke all too little for our ſelues and thoſe which are ours.Men make thē
                     ſelues drudges for their children. And it will one day be wiſhed, that we had thus done good to our ſelues by them, rather then to be  ſeruants, yea ſlaues to our children in prouiding greedily for them, (for it ſo falleth out with the moſt) while we dare ſcarcely take any part of our goods to honeſt and neceſſarie vſes, leſt we ſhould thereby plucke from them: therein verifying the ſaying of the wiſe:Eccleſ. 5.15. 
                  This is an euill ſickneſſe, that in all points as we came, ſo ſhall we go: and what profit haue we, that we haue trauelled for the wind, that is, in vaine and for nothing? Oh the good that many might do with their goods (I ſay not, to others, but euen to themſelues) if they were carefull to beſtow well but ſome part of that which they haue!
               But this is no place to bewaile ſuch caſes: neither haue men almoſt any eares to heare, or hearts to lament ſuch neglects of duty. To conclude therefore  this laſt remedie againſt couetouſneſſe and worldlineſſe, the monſter of many heads: euen this good, which I haue ſayd, we might do to our ſelues with our riches (euery one in his ſeuerall eſtate, who is able to giue and hath no need to receiue:The fruite of all theſe remedies.) which if we did carefully looke to, who ſeeth not, how it would chaſe away the groſſeneſſe and daunger of this foule ſinne? And therfore much more if all theſe remedies be vſed: (1) that we do no man hurt:

                  (2) but good, as occaſion ſhall be offered: (3) nor hurt our ſelues by them, but benefit our ſoules; we may be bold to aſſure our ſelues that we ſhall diſgrace couetouſneſſe in vs, one of the greateſt miſchiefes that the Diuell can worke vs. For if we did take heed, that no man in any dealings might charge vs iuſtly with vnmercifulneſſe or iniuſtice; nor our owne conſciences: if our hand and our heart did go where we are bound to releeue and diſcharge duty:Note. and if we did wiſely ſhunne the ſinnes which by riches we are prouoked vnto (as needleſſe ſpending, and nigardly ſparing, and their affinities) and take benefite to our ſoules, and by more religiouſneſſe looke after the life to come; we ſhould bind this ſinne in bands and chaines, which will otherwiſe  breake our hearts with griefe, and drowne both ſoules and bodies in vtter deſtruction.
               And the poore (whom in this argument I haue litle mentioned:Direction for the poore. who are not therefore free from couetouſneſſe, though they haue no great ſtore of riches) ſhall beſt teſtifie, that they be not (as the moſt of their condition) tainted with this ſin, if they hold faſt innocency, contentation, yea thankſgiuing: that is, if they hurt not others by ill ſeeking goods; but be content with their eſtate, though it be meane, and thankefull to God for it, ſeeing they deſerue not euen the pooreſt eſtate. For of both, this may be ſayd: If their conuerſation be in heauen, that is, gouerned by heauenly rules, then may they well go  through their dealings on the earth. And ſeeing the ſnare is in vaine ſet for that which hath wings: therefore, they flying and mounting with the wings of watching, meditation and prayer, ouer the ſnares which are layd for them, ſhall ſafely auoid the deceipts of him who ſeeketh to intrap them. And this be ſayd of the remedies againſt worldlineſſe and couetouſneſſe: the reaſons follow briefly, which ſhould diſſwade vs from the ſame.
               The firſt is: ſeeing we cannot inioy them long,The firſt reaſon. VVe cannot inioy our wealth long. Luke 16.2.
                   but either they ſhall be taken from vs, or we from them: and yet this ſhort time is alſo vncertaine, as in the parable of the ſteward is declared, to whom it was ſayd (euen as it were vnlooked for:) Come, giue an account of thy ſtewardſhip, for thou mayeſt be  no longer ſteward. This is the ſlipperie eſtate of all things here below: as by Scripture is proued, all to be vanity;Eccleſ. 1.1. and by experience which teacheth what alterations and changes there are euery where, both by death and otherwiſe: which while it is layd to heart, and ſeriouſly thought on, doth much quaile the pride of life in vs: and therefore alſo will weane vs from the loue of the world, and to the contempt of it.
               The ſecond reaſon is: ſeeing the riches of this world are not our owne,Riches are not our ovvne, but borrovved. Luke 16.12.
                   but borrowed, as our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith: If ye haue not bene faithfull in another mans goods, who will giue you that which is yours: where he likeneth them to things that a man borrowes of his neighbour. Now we ſee, that no man  maketh reckoning of that which is another bodies, as his goods & ſubſtance: if he valew his eſtate, he counteth himſelfe neuer the richer for that which he oweth, and is euer about to pay it backe: and the honeſter man will be the more carefull to reſtore it: but to flouriſh and beare it out with another mans goods, and occupie with them when they are required and called for, it is neither the part of a wiſe man, nor of one which loueth quietneſſe and peace. Now then, for vs to buſie our ſelues endleſſely and griply about

wealth, as though it were our proper heritage, when the owner is euery day  calling for it,1. Tim. 6.6. what madneſſe is it to be counted? And yet if it were our owne, it were the ſmaller riches; godlineſſe is the great: and though we are occupied about many things, yet that one is neceſſarie.
               
                  2. Tim. 2.4.And if he that goeth to warre, doth not intangle himſelfe with the affaires of this life: ought not we much more to be free from ſnaring of our ſelues with the goods of this world, when neither they are our owne, and when we are called to another maner of battell, where they are ſure to get no victory who are intangled in the world? But theſe words [mine and thine] are ſo commonly in our mouths, that we giue manifeſt proofe thereby, that although we know that our goods be borowed, yet we do not greatly remember or  thinke vpon it; and that we are tied with ſuch loue and liking to them, that we price them farre aboue thoſe which are our owne proper goods indeed, I meane,Knowledge and grace, our proper goods. knowledge and grace. But let this be inough to the wiſe, that for this very cauſe they ſhould loue them litle: becauſe they be but borrowed.
               
                  
                     3 If vve be not faithfull in the ſmaller, much leſſe are we in the greater.The third reaſon, which ought to perſwade vs to vſe the world ſoberly, that ſo we may not be tainted with worldlineſſe, is this: For that if we be not faithfull in this, (which is but litle in reſpect of the great and pretious treaſures of ſaluation and happineſſe) we will not, neither ſhall be faithfull in them, but ſhall ſhew our ſelues not too meane as we beare the world in hand when we profeſſe, that we ſeeke eternall life by the Goſpell preached: but ſhall  proue that all our prayers, confeſſions of our ſinnes, and hearings are in vaine, and that we ſhall be neuer the better for them. And what a point of madneſſe were that?Luke 16.10. And yet our Sauiour affirmeth it to be ſo, ſaying: He that is faithfull in the leaſt, he is alſo faithfull in much: and he that is vniust in the leaſt, is vniuſt alſo in much. And who doth not ſee it to be ſo? For he that will wound and trouble his conſcience for a litle commoditie, will he not much eaſilier do it for a greater? and he that will ieopard his ſaluation for a penny, will he not much more do it for a pound? and he that will hazard it for a pound, will he not do as much for an hundred?
               
                  Obiection.Neither let any obiect this: That ſome will indanger themſelues by a great  robberie,Anſwer. who will not haue their hand in ſmall pilfring. For, as that is no proofe of faithfulneſſe in the perſons: ſo it cannot ouerthrow Chriſts words which cannot be reſiſted, that is to ſay; If a man will make ſhipwracke of conſcience and credite for a ſmall benefit, he will do it much more for a greater. A great and maine reaſon doubtleſſe,The abuſe of riches, a heauy vvitneſſe againſt men. why a man ſhould be true and truſtie, plaine and ſimple in and about worldly things, and commit no vnrighteouſneſſe, neither offer any iniurie to inrich himſelfe thereby; when that ſhall be an vtter diſcharging him of the fauour of God, and a fruſtrating of all his hope of heauen and happineſſe. Therefore if we looke for any benefit by Chriſt, any comfort by the Goſpell, and any communion with the Saints, and in a  word, if we looke to reape any fruite of our holy profeſſion; looke we to it, that we be reformed in this part of our conuerſation; and if we deſire to vſe well and rightly things ſpirituall which are the chiefeſt, let vs not be looſe, or (which is worſe) vnconſcionable in theſe earthly things which are the meaneſt.
               The fourth and laſt reaſon to perſwade hereto, is this: that we ſhall giue

                   an account, as of other things which we haue done in our life,VVe ſhall giue an account. whether they be good or bad; ſo eſpecially of our getting, vſing and forgoing of our goods and commodities: as appeareth by the parable of the talents,Math. 25.14. deliuered to be occupied, till it ſhould be demanded how they were imployed:
                     Luke 16.2. Hovv it ſhall be demanded. and by that of the ſteward, who was called to giue an account of his ſtewardſhip. The account which ſhall then be demaunded, ſhall be according to the doctrine which hath bene ſet downe in the foure remedies: namely, whether we  haue not vſed them to the hurt and iniurying of others: and how long, and wherein. And ſecondly, whether we haue done good with thē, as we in conſcience  haue ſeene our ſelues bound to do, and as occaſion hath bene offered.  Thirdly, whether we haue not our ſelues yeelded to commit ſome noiſome  and fearefull ſinnes, for and by occaſion of them, which we ſhould not otherwiſe haue bene bold to do. And laſtly, whether we haue bene furthered  by them to euerlaſting life.
               By this we ſee, we may not deale and behaue our ſelues about theſe earthly commodities, as we ſhall thinke good: for we are but ſtewards and diſpoſers of them, as the owner our Lord and maiſter hath appointed. Wherein as we haue failed, we ſhall haue litle cauſe to reioyce, conſidering that whatſoeuer we haue gotten and gained, yet the worſt is behind:Note. euen our account giuing, which we ſhall not be able to yeeld, no not one of a thouſand. And  though I deny not, but there is mercy with the Lord,
                  Pſal. 130.4. and plentifull redemption: yet it is, that he may be feared of vs for the time to come, in occupying our goods and talents as he hath commaunded: and it is alſo for them that tremble, when in remembring and thinking how ill they haue vſed them,Ier. 8.6. they ſay penitently within themſelues, What haue we done? But to the reſt ſhall be tribulation and anguiſh, when they not wiſely caſting their reckoning before, ſhall be vrged to it by the Lord, they being vtterly vnready for it. In this regard therefore, as in all the former, we ſee good cauſe to withſtand carefully this ſinne of worldlineſſe.
               Theſe are the remedies,Direction how to vſe the remedies and reaſons. and reaſons which perſwade to giue a foile to this  couetouſneſſe: now heare the direction in few words, how to vſe them both. For although we know them, yet if they do but ſwimme in our braine, and be talked of now and then, they ſhall be ſo farre off from doing vs the good they may do, that we ſhall the rather deceiue our ſelues with a falſe conceit of practiſing them, when yet we remaine drowned in ſome groſſe point of worldlineſſe ſtill. Therfore it is neceſſarie, that we nouriſh and retaine a mind willing to ſee and find out what is amiſſe in vs this way: and then, as the ſins of this kind are moſt daungerous and many; that therefore we force our ſelues from day to day to ſtoupe and ſubmit our ſelues in an honeſt and good heart, to vſe theſe remedies, and be perſwaded by theſe reaſons, till we find  eaſe by them, through practiſe of them: that is, a ready mind to vſe the world ſoberly and aright, and deſirous (leſt we ſhould deceiue our ſelues through ſelfe-loue) both to learne by the publicke miniſterie, and by our priuate reading, as alſo by the helpe of any faithfull brother, (which can ſhew vs) what blemiſh remaineth to annoy and hurt vs. Thus vſing both remedies and reaſons from time to time, (for this muſt be no worke of a dayes or a yeares continuance) with feruent prayer to God both to ſee and caſt out ſuch excrements,

we ſhall not need to doubt, but that we ſhall be bleſſed in our  worke.
               
                  A preoccupier.And yet this I will adde: (becauſe I know that the matter which I haue ſet downe for the redreſſe of couetouſneſſe, will ſauour but harſhly in the taſt of worldly minded Chriſtians) that I do not in all that I haue ſayd, ſpeake or except againſt any libertie that God alloweth his people, about the vſe of the world (for ſome will be ready ſo to gather.This forbiddeth the vſe of no lavvfull liberties.) For concerning skill and wiſedome in mens trades, dealings and occupyings, I am ſo farre from counting them points or properties of couetouſneſſe, that I hold them for comely ornaments, if they be not choaked and ouer-growne with the weedes of their corruptions.As in particular. Yea I ſay more, that ignorance and vnskilfulneſſe (if ye except  the contrarie extremities: ſubtilty and craftineſſe) is one of the greateſt occaſions of euill dealing among men. Alſo I deny not but that forecaſting and thrifty prouidence in a familie,Gen 41.35.36. is both lawfull and meete, and that no more be ſpent, then for neceſſarie and comfortable vſe; to make prouiſion alſo of things needfull in the fitteſt time, ſo as it be without fraudulent dealing in fore-hand bargaines; alſo good husbandrie, warineſſe in their doings, ſure bindings of men in their contracts and couenants; and ſufficient ſecuritie (for mortalitie ſake) euen betwixt the beſt, by writings or witneſſe; and a taking heed of ſuretiſhip (as Salomon willeth) that one be not vndone by another;Prou. 6.1. diligence alſo in mens callings; with ſuch other like: religion and Gods word  alloweth them all.
               
                  Note.And all to this end, that the more outward dangers a man can auoide, the more free he may be to liue godly. But ſeeing it falleth out commonly, that the wiſeſt are the worldlieſt, and theſe fore-mentioned liberties are much abuſed of earthly minds, and ſuch do too eaſily paſſe their bounds, and much nigardly nipping go vnder the cloake of frugalitie and honeſt ſparing; therefore theſe fore-mentioned liberties (which being well vſed, are alſo commendable vertues) grow into ill report among the ignorant and vnſtayed: which otherwiſe are not reproachfull, neither deſerue any blame. And this I haue ſpoken to meet with an obiection, which might riſe in the minds of ſome by  occaſion of that which went before. And if this content them not, they ſhew themſelues iuſtly to be ſuſpected of worſe meaning, then in their obiection they pretend.
               As for them who ſay: If they had riches they might ioynt their enemies, and ſtand againſt them, and do many other things which now they cannot for want of them; it is not worth the anſwering. For God doth not giue theſe his bleſſings to men to beſtow them on their luſts,Titus 3.14. but to profitable and neceſſarie vſes. And where men do not make that reckoning of them, and learne not to be maiſters ouer them rather then to be ſeruants and ſlaues to them; what one among a thouſand is the better, but the worſe for them? And therefore to a reaſonable man I would ſay: What if we could in diet and apparell, countenance and controling of others, flouriſh and pleaſe our ſelues, alſo in other iolity, libertie and exerciſe? what were we the better? All men ſee, that we may want theſe better then the pairing of our nailes, and that we may pleaſe God better without them, and that we ſhall not haue ſo many things to let and hinder vs, if we be free from them. We haue promiſe

                   of ſufficiencie, if we deſire to liue vnder his gouernemnt: and without that, curſed is all plentie. But here an end of this matter.
            
            
               CHAP. 12. Of the third kind of generall lets: whereby the beleeuer is hindered from foing forward in a godly courſe.
               
                  
                  NOw followeth the third kind of generall lets, which do much hinder a Chriſtian from fruitfull and chearfull walking through his pilgrimage, as becommeth him. And to this I referre all the outward occaſions, whereby Sathan draweth vs to euill, and by the which he ſtirreth vp moſt poyſoned thoughts and affections in our hearts, though the things themſelues, whereby he vnſetleth vs, be not euill: as,VVhich are outvvard things, not euill of themſelues. by afflictions and chaſtiſements; by proſperity and abundance, or variety of Gods bleſſings; by family matters at home, by our worldly (yet lawfull) dealings abroad; by that  which we ſee and heare; by chaunge of our eſtate, place, acquaintance, and other our affaires; by the deepe ſecuritie, and bold ſinning of others, who feare no iudgement day; by the hard handling of thoſe which liue godly,Mat. 24.12. by ſuch as are mightie and in authoritie, who (yet) ought not to be terrors to to ſuch as do well: and to be ſhort, by other things innumerable; yea,Rom. 13.3. to ſay the truth, we go about nothing in the world how lawfull ſoeuer, no not our prayers themſelues, and hearing of Sermons, which are the holieſt actions of our liues, but from them all doth he take occaſion to hurt and wound our ſoules: as I will for the better inſtruction of the Reader, in as few words as I can, ſet downe and ſhew; to rouſe and ſtirre vp ſuch as haue care to do well,  to become more vigilant againſt his ſleights and ſnares when they ſhall better know them, and be mory wary in all their wayes; and that they may ſee, that there are cauſes ſufficient, why they ſhould daily be ſetled in a godly courſe, when they haue ſo many occaſions on euerie ſide to hinder them.
               And to touch theſe in order: Firſt,Afflictions ill vſed, great occaſions of vnſetling of vs. how iuſtly is this to be complained of almoſt vniuerſally, that for all the encouragements we haue to the patient and well bearing of our afflictions; yet rare is the man, who is not made worſe, and whoſe heart is not hardened againſt God by them,Heb. 12.11. rather then the perſon more meeke and humbly minded? For if they be heauie and grieuous they do oft times raiſe bitterneſſe and impatience: and if they continue long,  they will commonly worke a feare of Gods wrath for ſome ſinnes, although repented of, yet comming a freſh into his remembrance.
                     The right vſe and end of afflictions. Heb. 12.7. Pſal. 119.71. 1. Cor. 11.31. Iam. 1.2. &c. The Lord hath taught vs in many parts of his word, that his corrections are ſent from him to all his beloued ones, as from a moſt louing father, and for their great good; that they may not periſh with the reſt of the world, but haue triall of their faith and patience thereby, and ſo moſt ſound ioy: ſo farre is it off, that he taketh pleaſure in hard handling of vs, but doth all for our good: yet how

many are ſo wiſe, as to make theſe vſes of their afflictions, as God would haue  them;Abuſe of them. but contrarily, are led by the diuell to impatience, fretting, frowardneſſe and moſt painefull penſiueneſſe: all which do vexe them more by many degrees, then the troubles themſelues. For this doth he often ring in their eares:Iud. 6.13. Pſal. 34. 1. Cor. 10.13. Rom. 8.28. How can it be, that he loueth you, and yet afflicteth you thus? Againe, God hath taught them, that he hath many waies to deliuer his; and promiſed, that their afflictions ſhall not be aboue their ſtrength, and alſo that he wil ſend a good end of them: which being weighed, were enough to vphold them: but Sathan waſheth away all ſuch encouragements, and carieth them headlong from reſting vpon Gods word with peace; and yet for all this his preuailing againſt them, they ſee not themſelues to be made his bondmen. And thus it may eaſily be ſeene, that the diuell doth vſually take occaſion by the chaſtiſements of Gods children, to turne them aſide from their ſtedfaſtneſſe in a godly life: neither can it be otherwiſe, if they will not prepare themſelues for them before they come, that their vnruly paſſions may not breake out ſo impatiently againſt God, as there is litle cauſe why they ſhould when he telleth them, that of very loue and faithfulneſſe he afflicteth them. This the diuell had experience of in the dayes of Iob, when he ſaid: Lay thy hand vpon him, and thou ſhalt ſee that he will curſe thee to thy face: and although he was deceiued in Iob, yet he hauing had long triall of the nature of man, ſpake the truth in the generall, as hauing long proued, how readily it is caried to vnquietneſſe  by occaſion of the croſſe.
               He therefore who hath learned in proſperitie to want and be abaſed, and to looke for a chaunge before it commeth,Remedies. that he may not in the ſame be chaunged from a godly mind; he it is that ſhall be deliuered in the time of affliction from manifold diſturbances, yea although they be ſore and great. But if our troubles be many and grieuous, (as no man can warrant himſelfe to be free from either) it is to be knowne, that all the priuiledges of Chriſtians, and their whole armour, will be litle enough for the enabling of vs to ſtand ſafe and vpright in them, and to keepe our hearts in the peaceable and faithfull ſeruing of God. And otherwiſe, our froward nature being ſodainly  prouoked by loſſes, iniuries, heauie tidings, diſappointings of our hope, or other ſuch moleſtations when we looked for no ſuch things before, will paſſe her bounds in a moment, and carie vs into ſundrie vnquietneſſes. And when we are vnſetled in ſuch a manner, we do eaſily fall into further degrees of impatience and fretting, whatſoeuer we thought of our ſtrength before. And therefore our Sauiour ſaid:Ioh. 16.33. I haue giuen you many comfortable inſtructions, that in me ye may haue peace when tribulation commeth. And I haue not maruelled when I haue often heard, that many vexations and bitter anguiſhes of mind haue poſſeſſed the liues of ſome Chriſtians by reaſon of their croſſes: who hauing many commendable parts in them, haue not for all that, ſuch  wiſedome to prouide for themſelues better ſhelter againſt the time of neede (God yet miniſtring ſuch varietie of helpes to them) to the end they might not be deſtitute. Theſe therefore if we enioy not the benefite of daily, to make the heauenly life ſweet and pleaſant vnto vs in the middeſt of ſo many croſſes as we meet with,Rom. 5.4.5. and namely, hope which experience bringeth; it can no otherwiſe be, but that there ſhall ariſe many vnſetlings, diſcouragements

                   and vnchearefull times, euen vnto them which haue receiued ſome good fruite by the Goſpell: ſo farre off ſhall it be from them, to learne experience of Gods helpe in their need, whereby they might hope for the like afterwards.
               But to ſay ſomewhat of other occaſions by which the diuell hindereth our proceeding in a godly life:The diuell hurteth vs much by proſperitie. if we liue vnder abundance and outward bleſſings of God, enioying health, peace, ſufficiencie of all things for this life, are we then free from daunger on his behalfe? Nay rather, then is our perill greater, when we haue ſo many more ſtrong allurements and deceiueable prouocations to ſet our delight vpon the things of this world, then when we were  holden vnder of afflictions: for he worketh vpon our hearts by occaſion of theſe commodities (which many other do want) to puffe vs vp with pride, and high-mindedneſſe, and ſo imbolden vs to ſay, (becauſe we haue much) Who is the Lord? and to forget our ſelues to be mortall men,Prou. 30.9. when we be not in pouertie, wants and ſorrowes, like the common ſort of others: and to make our riches, peace, health and ſuch like, our ſtrong hold.
                  Prou. 10.15. But theſe are not the one halfe of his ſlie practiſes, by the which he maketh proſperitie (as much as in him lyeth) to be our bane, euen as it is to men of the world: for he ſubtilly maketh drunken our hearts with the loue of our goods, and ſo holdeth out the loue of the chriſtian life and the true loue of God from vs:1. Ioh. 2.12. for the one  of theſe cannot ſtand with the other. The particular infections which from theſe generall diſeaſes, the diuell ſeeketh to bring vpon our ſoules, and all by occaſion of wealth and worldly pleaſure, who ſo weigheth but indifferently, ſhall eaſily be brought to confeſſe, that happineſſe conſisteth not in the things which a man poſſeſſeth: neither that the rich man is the happie man, but is moſt commonly the miſerable, the wofull man, and he, whom the diuell doth ſo much the more eaſily draw to grieuous iniquities becauſe of his proſperitie; and when he hath rocked him aſleepe, then he ſecretly murdreth and woundeth to death his ſoule, no leſſe palpably then Iael did the bodie of Siſera.
                  Iud 4.21.
               
               For who doubteth of this, that as proſperitie it ſelfe is Gods bleſſing, and  commeth neither from the Eaſt, nor the Weſt, much leſſe from the diuell: ſo yet, that all the miſchiefe which commeth thereby, is his procuring and ſubtill and ſecret bewitching of them who haue this wealth, and liue in this proſperitie? According to the ſaying of the Apoſtle:2. Cor. 4.4. 
                  It is the prince of this world that blindeth mens eyes, who beleeue not the Goſpell; that being in darkneſſe (whether they be poore or rich) they may not be able to ſee how to vſe their eſtate aright. And our Sauiour ſaith: It is the diuell,
                  Mat. 13.19. 
                  who ſtealeth the word out of mens hearts, when they haue heard it (whether they be poore or rich:) ſo that although it teach them both how to walke; the one in contentation, the other in lowlineſſe and doing of good workes; yet neither of them is a whit the better:  and therefore the rich man, (for of him I am to ſpeake) if he be not poore and meane in his owne eyes, and fruitfull in doing many duties and in bringing foorth much fruit, ſeeing the diuell ſo watcheth and hindereth him,Mat. 19.24. 
                  can no eaſilier enter into the kingdome of God, then the camell through the eye of a needle.
               
               Neither let any man obiect, that the diuell deceiueth not a godly man thus: for except he haue learned to vſe his proſperitie aright, as in Gods word

he is taught;1. Tim. 6 17. as, not to be high minded, but to be more plentifull in good  workes thereby, (as I haue ſaid) then otherwiſe he could; to loue it litle, ſeeing it is not the great riches, which Saint Paul ſpeaketh of, but the meane and ſmall; and except he haue learned to want alſo, as God ſhall trie him: if (I ſay) he be not thus armed, euen he who is otherwiſe the child of God, may be haled by the diuell to daungerous euils, and to a grieuous ouerthrow, and that by the occaſion of his proſperitie and welfare.The right vſe of proſperitie. And therfore it is an eſpeciall point of wiſedome while God giueth vs peace, health, and a ſafe enioying of our outward commodities, to take heed that we reſt not in them, neither make them or any other to be fleſhly holds or proppes to leane vpon: for full eaſily they will be caſt downe with very ſmall blaſtes of aduerſitie and  trouble: and howſoeuer we went for zealous perſons before, yet full faintly ſhall we perfourme our duties, being readie to be led about by the diuell ſo many wayes, by occaſion of our proſperitie, and yet (perhaps) moſt of all, when God ſhall ſend a chaunge.
               But let Gods louing kindneſſe ſhewed to our ſoules, (becauſe it is renewed vpon vs euery day) prouoke vs in all eſtates, to be true and faithfull to him: and let vs not ſerue him for his outward benefites; although I deny not but that we may haue more libertie thereby, both to doe our duties to him and to our brethren, and that more plentifully then in wants and neceſſitie. And as it behoueth vs thus to vſe proſperitie, as that we may not abuſe it: ſo, if we haue (by any occaſion) bene turned out of the way, let vs ſuſpect our falſe hearts the more afterward; to withdraw them further off from the loue of the world, and in token of our repentance and pardon obtained, to reuenge our ſelues;Luk. 19.8. yea, if there be cauſe, to make reſtitution as Zacheus did.
               But to proceed: Another occaſion the diuell taketh of quenching grace in vs,Another let, is by family-matters. by family-matters: about the which he ſo buſieth and occupieth our heades, that right good Chriſtians do perceiue themſelues ſooner to take hurt thereby,Note. then they can eſpie it; and ſee themſelues vnſetled thereby, before they are aware. And that is, in the varietie and multitude of worldly affaires, when either they are more then with the practiſe of chriſtianitie we can looke to; or being not ſo, yet they being ſundrie and diuerſe, our hearts are wholly taken vp with them, and ſo they become vnſetled and vnprofitable, eſpecially becauſe we are wont to deale raſhly, looſely and vnaduiſedly in the moſt outward things we go about. For otherwiſe, we taking our lawfull workes in hand aduiſedly and watchfully, and walking circumſpectly in our diuerſe affaires, the diuell cannot ſo eaſily preuaile againſt vs, whiles we are carefully taking heed to our wayes, and confidently perſwaded, that God alloweth vs and is pleaſed with vs in the doing of them. But (to ſay the truth) the moſt part euen of good Chriſtians,The better ſort ouertaken this way. attaine not to this grace in houſhold  affaires and matters about their maintenance, thereby ſo moderately and warily to carie themſelues, as that they auoide the common hurts which the moſt men do ſuſtaine, that is: an vnquiet mind, diſtracted or vnſetled with ſome other corruption by occaſion of ſo many dealings. In which caſe they make themſelues (as I haue ſaid before) vtterly vnfit to do any good for a time: yea and ſo abide for a long ſpace, if they haue not the more tender conſciences

                   to call them backe the ſooner.A cauſe therof. For both they themſelues haue bene wont through cuſtome, to be haſtie, forgetfull and vnwatchfull in theſe matters; and haue ſeene it ſo common a thing with others to do the ſame, that although they come euen from prayer, or from a Sermon, yet can they hardly ſpeake or do any thing about their buſineſſe and dealings, but they ſhall too eaſily ſhew and bewray, how farre they be from hauing their conuerſation in heauen, while they are occupied here on the earth; and that, it being a thing ſo common to be vnſetled, wounded and ſore ſhaken by earthly dealings and commodities.
               And another great cauſe there is of this ſinne, and that is:Another cauſe. a perſwaſion  rooted in them, that no man how godly ſoeuer he be, can go about them with an heauenly mind; and that a Chriſtian is not tyed to meaſure and ſquare out his earthly and domeſticall affaires after the rules of Scripture, but that euery man is to do herein as he ſeeth good; & that he can do ſuch things of his owne head, without helpe of the word of God. Which opinion is ſo deeply ſetled in mens minds through ſathans crafty beguiling of thē, that the moſt euen of thoſe who be of good hope, are both at home, and about their dealings in the world, with wife, ſeruant, neighbour or ſtraunger, oftentimes more like bruite beaſtes or franticke perſons, then ſober and religious Chriſtians. And it may be eaſily gathered, that they tye all religion for the moſt  part, to the publike place: that is to ſay, to go to the church once in a weeke, to do as others do there, and to order other matters after their owne diſcretion. So litle do ſuch conſider what the Apoſtle hath taught:1. Cor. 10.31. 
                  Whether we eate or drinke, &c. And againe: Do theſe things, as though ye did them not.
               
               Now when men giue this libertie to themſelues, not to be directed by God in their moſt common dealings, and when the diuell hath brought thē to this point: who ſeeth not, how euery thing which they are occupied about,Fruites of the heart vnſetled, by occaſion of family-matters. is made a let and a ſnare to them, and becommeth a blocke in their way, which they ſtumble at? A man ſhall not ſpeake to his wife, but he breaketh into frowardneſſe: one neighbour contendeth, falleth out with, and raileth at  another for a matter of nothing: and one is vnquiet with ſeruants, vexed at children, yea curſing them that euer they were borne, impatient and wayward at euery thing which goeth againſt him: fretting, if any man ſaue a penie by him, though it be by good and lawfull dealing: reioycing, if he can pull ought to himſelfe from any: and infinite other ſuch. And this is the life of many: yet, who is wiſe to ſee and marke this, but that the diuell may leade the moſt (as it were) blindfolded, whither ſoeuer he will?
               A wiſe man will therefore (I hope) better conſider this,How to remedie it. and learne to diſburden himſelfe of multitudes of worldly dealings and buſineſſe, ſeeing they ſuffer not the mind to be free: and to ſubdue his affections, ſo (as I haue before  taught him) that he may haue them ruled and vnder gouernment, in one part of his life as well as in another, and about family-matters as well as thoſe which are moſt weightie. Other remedies cannot be ſet downe: but ſeeing this euill riſeth from the heart which is ſtuffed with ſundrie corruptions, (as diſtruſt, too great delight-taking in the world, raſhneſſe, deſire of getting, feare of loſing, &c.) that therefore it be carefully kept, purged from theſe, and that he be wel armed, (as I haue counſelled before) and particularly

with that part of the armour which is requiſite againſt this point of Sathans  deceiuing him (as, righteouſnes, patience, & ſuch like:) ſeeing he who is thus bewitched by him (as hath now bene ſet downe) highly diſhonoureth God, and reprocheth his profeſſion: but faith muſt baniſh diſtruſt, and hope muſt chaſe away doubtfulneſſe and feare: and he muſt know, that whatſoeuer he wanteth of them and ſuch like graces, to ſuppreſſe the ſaid noyſomeneſſe of the heart; ſo much the greater ought his trauell be, till he attaine vnto them, and yet when he hath them, to ſtand faſt in holding them: and if he know not his ſinnes to be doubtfulneſſe, diſtruſt and feare, &c. let him take to him the ſword of the ſpirit, euen the word of God, which may clearely ſhew them to him: more particular remedie muſt be ſought according to any particular  ſinne, by well obſeruing theſe in generall.
               
                  Chaunge of company an other lot. Gen. 19.30.
                  Furthermore, the diuell taketh occaſion by chaunge of companie, dwelling and acquaintance, to ſteale away mens hearts from goodneſſe, as he did thus deceiue Lot; and to neglect the vſe of good meanes publikely and priuately, as the maner of many is; and to chaunge religion (as they ſay) with the place.Good company, rare. And no maruell, when neither the word of God meeteth with them where they become, to awaken, inſtruct and admoniſh them; neither good neighbours to obſerue and prouoke them to loue and good works, nor to admoniſh them,1. Cor. 15. when they haue turned out of the way: but contrarily, euill talke and companie is found in ſtead of them: for ſuch force we reade to  be in them, that they are able to corrupt euen good manners. But although they meete not with theſe, yet the diuell taketh occaſion by the very change of place, to make them change their maners: which mightily ouer-weigheth with good men, that they ſooner gather ruſt (as coldneſſe, looſeneſſe, &c.) from other, then they ſhall ſeaſon them with goodneſſe: and when they liue not with ſuch as know them to haue bene forward Chriſtians, it is a ſtrong prouocation to them, and a tempting of them to be like others, and to become more backward then they were before, as we may heare of many: for they ſhall be ſet vpon by the wicked traine, till they haue found out what is in them, that if they cannot draw them to euill, they may leade them with  deſpite and reproch.
               
                  Godlineſſe not ſet by in the world, but contemned.Againe, when we ſee how litle account holineſſe and chriſtian practiſe of dutie is in the world, either in high or low, for the moſt part; yea and that wiſe men are growne to count it meere fooliſhneſſe and niceneſſe, to make conſcience to do thoſe duties, whereunto our knowledge leadeth vs; is it not (thinke we) a ſtrong cord to draw vs after the multitude,The godly, by this occaſion, ſtumble. eſpecially when they who boldly contemne goodneſſe, ſhall yet be ſeene to be merie and luſtie, and without feare as though they had done nothing but that which they can iuſtifie, and as if there were no feare of the iudgement day at all? How mightily he preuaileth euen againſt the godly by this occaſion, the example  of the Prophet doth plainely declare.Pſal. 73.8.9. &c.
                   For when I ſaw (ſaith he) the wicked, licentious, and to talke preſumptuouſly, and ſet their mouth againſt heauen, &c. yea (and more then this) to vtter it boldly: [How doth God know it?] and for all this, yet they proſpered in the world and increaſed in riches: Certainly, I (ſaid he) haue cleanſed my heart in vaine, & waſhed my hands in innocencie. So that the licentious courſe of bad men ſo commonly continued, and

                   oft without plagues, as to Gods ſeruants they ſeeme to be: and contrarily, their owne life to be (as it were) a continuall mourning and a ſowing in teares; it is (no doubt) through Sathans malitious ſubtiltie, a ſore weakening of the courage of Gods people, that they do not grow forward daily from grace to grace.
               But how much more (thinke we) ſhall we be imbondaged and kept back from beautifying the Goſpell daily in our conuerſation,Beware of familiaritie with the 
                        ••
                     cked. if we ſhall be ſo vnwiſe as to like of, and ioyne our ſelues to the companie & familiarity of ſuch? For then muſt we grow to be of one mind with them: for two cannot walke together (as the Prophet ſpeaketh) but they muſt be of one mind:Amos. 3.3. therefore 
                  Salomon aduiſeth vs, that we ſhould depart from the fooliſh man,
                  Prou. 14.7. 
                  when we perceiue not in him the lippes of knowledge. q.d. if he declare his folly (that is, his wicked ſtate) by ſhamefull ſinne, and by his ſpeech bewray that he hath no ſauour in good communication; but deſpiſing and ſcorning knowledge and inſtruction, and hating to be reformed. And againe:Prou. 13.20. 
                  He that walketh with the wiſe ſhall be wiſe: but a companion of fooles ſhall be afflicted, that is, take part with them of their puniſhment. We reade of Ioſeph,
                  Gen. 39.10. when he was importunately vrged from day to day by his whoriſh Miſtreſſe to adulterie, that he not onely conſented not, nor hearkened to her to lye with her, but would not ſo much as be in her companie. And that was a ſpeciall cauſe, why Dauid 
                   would not go home with Saul, when he reconciled himſelfe kindly to him,1. Sam. 26.25. and bad him come againe, the ſecond time: for he knew his Court was full of flatterers, lyers, ſlaunderers, and malice-bearers. But the allurements to ill companie are ſo forceable, the perſwaſions ſo many, and Sathans ſleights ſo ſubtill to deceiue, euen thoſe who haue ſome feare of God, that they preuaile with too many to their coſt, while the hope of pleaſure, profit or preferment doth blind their eyes in ſuch wiſe, as they do not onely quench, yea and ſo grieue the ſpirit of God in thē, that therby they be left deſtitute of the power and effectuall working of it: but alſo are led captiues by the diuell into many ſinnes, and are ſnared in them, as the bird in the net, that they cannot  tell how to winde out.
               For helpe againſt this let, let vs be made as wiſe as we may,The remedie by the former counſell and example to ſhun it: but if we be once woond into it, common perſwaſions or ordinarie prayers will do vs but litle good, (though euen they are farre enough from vs, when we be brought to like of ſuch fellowſhip) nay, that kind of diuell is not caſt out eaſily, but by faſting and prayer, &c. And yet this is not ſo to be takē of vs, as though the Scripture did not giue greater ſtrength, then that theſe or ſuch like temptations ſhould ouercome vs. For if we enter into the Lords ſanctuarie, and weigh vpon what ſlipperie places the vngodly ſtand, and how ſoone they are cut downe (whē 
                   yet Gods promiſe ſtandeth faſt for the ſafety of his:) euen this one part of armour, well handled for our owne defence, and wiſely vſed againſt the aduerſarie, doth ſet them at great libertie, which were ſo deepely plunged into daunger.
               But it were endleſſe to ſet downe all occaſions whereby the ſimple who wold do wel, are hy the diuell beguiled.Many other occaſions wherby Sathan beguileth vs. Our outward ſenſes he ſo poiſoneth that we ſhall haue no right and pure vſe of them if we be not well ſtayed,

(and yet it ſhall belong before we can eſpie and ſee it;) that one ſhall not heare  that which agreeth with his nature, though it be ſhamefull and euill, but he ſhall be tickled and affected with it, often remembring it with liking thereof, and pleaſing himſelfe in thinking or vttering of it (be it a fooliſh ieſt, a ſecret nip, a filthie rime, a fooliſh tale, a groſſe lie, &c.) till it haue taken ſuch hold of him, that he cannot ſhake it off when he would. One ſhall not caſt his eye aſide, but it ſhall be as a glaſſe-window to let ſinne into the heart, and cauſe it to be delighted with the beauty of a ſtrange woman, and to be taken with her eye-lids: nor one ſhall not ſee any man earneſtly following the world, or too ſeriouſly occupied about his profits with ſucceſſe therein and ſweete commings in, but we are drawne and (as it were) tickled with the like; and ſo our  minds begin to be ſnared and intangled, and itching to be doing where we ought not. And ſo we are ready to be led by occaſion in other things innumerable:

                     1 We cannot ſee our enemie, but we haue our hearts riſe againſt him.
                     2 Nor hurt our foote neuer ſo litle, but we curſe.
                     3 If a thing go not forward as we would, we fret and become impatient at it.
                     4 If we be prouoked neuer ſo litle, we ſtorme.
                     5 If we be told of a fault, we ſwell and conceiue ill, Prou. 9.7.
                     6 If we be abſent awhile one from another, we waxe ſtrange.
                     
                     7 If we be merry, we waxe light, &c.
                  
               
               What go we about, wherein we may not ſenſibly and eaſily perceiue, that the diuell is at hand to hurt vs? ſo truly is it ſayd, that he raungeth about the whole earth to bewitch, not the vngodly alone (whom he hath ſure inough already) but euen Gods people; as may clearly be ſeene and felt of vs, if we giue him neuer ſo ſmall aduantage. This I haue ſayd of ſome of the lets, to ſtirre vp the Reader to obſerue others by them; as, coldneſſe, deadneſſe of ſpirit (a neare companion to ſlouthfulnes) which cauſeth men to ſay: A Lion is in the way, when they haue quenched the ſpirite of grace in themſelues, which ſometime made them willing and ready to their duties. Then, Delay  and driuing off good attempts, til the ſeaſon and fit time be paſt, wherin they ſhould either reſiſt euill, or do good: a common euill euen among the better ſort of Chriſtians, to let paſſe the oportunitie; and vnder this pretence, that they cannot do the good which they would, therefore to do none at all: whereas we are taught, that a word in ſeaſon is like apples of gold and pictures of ſiluer; ſo is a thing in ſeaſon: and we haue bene taught, not to driue off from day to day. To theſe may be added, a careleſneſſe in obſeruing and looking to our hearts and wayes, which grow faſt vpon vs: a yeelding too readily to temptation; whereas we ought in ſuch caſes to put a knife to our throate, and weane our appetite, Pro. 23.2. A common cuſtome and boldneſſe in ſinning: when yet we ſhould feare all our wayes, Iob 9. Prophaneſſe: which yet ought not to be among Gods ſeruants, Heb. 12.16. Looſeneſſe of the eye, eare and tongue: though the holy Ghoſt hath commaunded, that we ſhould be ſlow to ſpeake, Iames 1. and our Sauiour hath willed, to plucke out ſuch an eye, Math. 5. and both teach, Prou. 15.32: That he who turneth his eare from inſtruction (much more if he ſhould lend it to euill words) deſpiſeth his

                   owne ſoule. Now therefore in ſo many aſſaults, by ſo many occaſions taken againſt vs, and that euerie day one or other, yea many of them by ſo malitious and ſubtile an enemy, to no leſſe danger of ours then the loſing of our ſoules; who eſcapeth, vnleſſe he be armed? What wiſe man will not prouide carefully againſt theſe and ſuch like annoyances? And if he know not how, yet he will count his labour beſt beſtowed in learning: then ſhall he vnderſtand his way aright, and know that he walketh in ſafety. And thus doth Salomon deſcribe a wiſe man, ſaying: It is the wiſedome of the prudent,
                  Prou. 14.8. 
                  to vnderſtand and his way. This I haue ſayd, that the Reader may ſee what manifold lets there are, firſt in our ſelues through the corruption that is within vs: and  then without vs, by the Diuell raiſed vp againſt vs, (which is not perſwaded to many, as were meete it ſhould:) that we may ſee iuſt cauſe to be better acquainted with the armour of Chriſtians and other helpes before mentioned, by the which onely God hath appointed ſafe deliuerance from theſe forementioned lets and annoyances.
               He who ſhall be found willing to liue after a Chriſtian direction daily, ſhall more eaſily be brought to feare, and ſo withſtand theſe and like occaſions, that they diſguiſe him not, making him to ſeeme as other men, who feare not God. Wherein more ſpecially, we muſt looke to our ſelues, that we wiſely auoide and preuent the occaſion of theſe, ſeeing we know how we  haue ſmarted by them: and when we cannot altogether auoide them, yet to arme our ſelues by reſolute couenant and feruent prayer againſt them; and when we haue bene ouercome by any of them, we muſt ſee it, and marke our weakneſſe, and pray more earneſtly, and giue not ouer: and Gods grace ſhall be ſufficient for vs, both to quiet our minds by hope of pardon, and to weaken our ſinnes afterwards.
               And by theſe impediments from the conſtant holding out in a godly life,VVhat obſeruations are to be gathered from this doctrine of the lets. it may be ſeene, that it is no idle occupation to be a true Chriſtian, and to continue ſo: and that his worke is not a ceremonious tasking of himſelfe with reading ſome prayers or other things, when he thinks good or be inioyned it;  which yet (as litle labour as it coſteth men) would be neglected oft,The firſt. both of miniſter and people, if they were not tied to it.The ſecond. Alſo we may ſee what need the ſeruants of God haue, to guard themſelues ſtrongly, and ſo to abide, as hath bene ſhewed before: and to be acquainted with Sathans crafts and pollicies, and by what means they be repelled and reſiſted.The third. And that their temptations are ſomtime ſo forcible, that they are not ſubdued and ouercome,The fourth. but giue them a fall into ſome open ſinne, (for the which cauſe S.2. Cor. 5.20. 
                  Paul admoniſheth, that men quench not the ſpirit, 1. Theſ. 5.19.) yea into the ſame ſinne after repentance; but to the end they may riſe againe by the remedies appointed for them by the Lord himſelfe in that behalfe. And here we may ſee  therefore, how they be toſſed as the ſhip by the waues of the ſea:The fift. ſometime aloft in vaine hope and confidence, that they are ſafe and in good eſtate, and yet nothing ſo: and at other times, caſt downe and plunged into the depth and bottome of feares, yea of very diſpairing: which was the eſtate of Peter, when neither he, nor any other (when he forſware his maiſter) thought he could haue bene pardoned. And this is their miſerie, that they are euer for the moſt part caried (when they be not well ſtayed and faſt ſetled in faith and

hope) into extremities. And yet (a thing moſt admirable) they are neuer ſafer, thē when they are thus exerciſed. For as the yron that is vnoccupied, doth ſoone waxe ruſtie, and the ſtone that lieth ſtill, is couered with moſſe: ſo they, if they be not examining and obſeruing themſelues, conſidering their ſtate, watching ouer their hearts, fore-ſeeing dangers comming, and learning experience by things paſt, and in ſuch like maner occupied for the time preſent, they waxe barren and vnprofitable, euen the beſt; and in time, do breake out dangerouſly.
               And as they are in no eſtate ſafer, then when they are thus exerciſed: ſo would not they themſelues be put out of that courſe, neither are weary of it, though they depriue themſelues of many liberties thereby; but deſire to hold  conſtantly in that well fenced and ſafe courſe, (this being added, That they may haue the grace which is ſufficient for them.The ſixt.) Furthermore, by theſe impediments with their like, ſo many and ſore, the faithfull may ſee what they are beholding to God, & how deeply they be indebted to him, that for all the rage and violence of their temptations; yea ſo ſore, as ſometime they may commit a ſinne of preſumption,Pſal. 19.13. and be in ſome kind of diſpairing: yet God ſendeth a calme againe,Pſal. 77.11. and a deliuerance out of their deepeſt ſorrowes and feares. For as Iacob wraſtled with the Angell; and when he was hurt, would not depart til he had bleſſed him: euen ſo, the ſeruants of God haue conflicts with the Lord himſelfe:Gen. 32.28. who keepeth them downe with one hand and holdeth  them vp with the other, that ſo he may exerciſe their faith, that it may not be vnoccupied. Laſt of all, by this doctrine of the lets of faith and godlineſſe in the children of God that they ſhine not out ſo clearly in them, we may ſee, that they behaue not themſelues in their ſtriuing againſt ſin and in going vnder their afflictions, as the wicked do: (who the more loade the Lord layeth on them,Exod. 8. Pſal. 23. Iob. 13. the more they murmure and rebell:) but they when they haue the greateſt ſufferings, they ſtriue to truſt in him, and in ſome meaſure do ſo; and are ſtrengthened with greater power of Chriſt, and ioyfulnes: Col. 1.11. Alſo they, though they feele the power and rebellion of ſinne, as well as the other,Pſal. 130.1. &c. Prou. 9.17. yet they hate it with a perfite hatred, and would not be  drawne with the coardes of it at all, and ſo looke to Gods mercy through Chriſt: But the other, would not let go their hold of ſinne, the taſt thereof is ſo ſweet to them: if they breake off, it is againſt their will, and for feare of Gods wrath,Math. 7.22. neither lay they hold indeed of pardon. Theſe obſeruations Gods ſeruants may make by this doctrine of the lets, and many other ſuch, to their ſingular benefit. And what ſhould I ſay more? For it were infinite almoſt, to ſay all that might be ſayd to the like purpoſe.
               Now it remaineth, that in few words they be put in mind, that they acquaint themſelues better and better with the Chriſtian life; and daily delight and ſolace themſelues in it, I meane, in one part or other of it (for it hath  great variety.The great remedy againſt them all.) For howſoeuer there fall out many difficulties in their liues; yet know they, that they ſhall be fewer and weaker, as they themſelues grow more in knowledge, and ſtronger in faith and other grace. And although before they be brought to yeeld themſelues to them, many darke miſts are caſt before their eyes, to extenuate and make ſmall the ſinnes which they ſhould commit, both by hiding the puniſhment, and couertly obiecting the

                   mercy of God: yet let them know, that if they haue once committed them, they ſhall be aggrauated as faſt on the other ſide, as that there is no mercy for them with God. And let it be remembred, that occaſions to prouoke to ſinning, ſhall neuer be wanting, nor in no place, but ſhall be miniſtred, rather then not at all, euen by things not euill of their owne nature (as hath beene ſayd) as ſhall be fit for the diſpoſition of euery man, yea euen in the aſſembly of Gods people, that they may not be bold at any time to caſt off feare of danger. But let them fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold of eternall life, and follow ſuch good helpe as they haue receiued and learned of God: and ſo doing, though they find not the comfort ſome time, which they deſire,  but feare, becauſe of their preſent ſtriuings and conflicts; yet I dare aſſure them (the Lord hauing ſpoken it) that they know not the happie fruite and end of that which ſeemeth their greateſt miſerie: for they ſhall reape the fruit of righteouſneſſe in peace, when they haue bene exerciſed with their trials, and haue waited a while with patience.
            
            
               CHAP. 13. An example of a Couenant made by certaine godly brethren, declaring what  manifold lets the faithfull haue in this world; (fit to illuſtrate the former doctrine:) contained in the two next Chapters following. In this Chapter: Of the firſt part of it, namely, a Complaint.
               
                  AND becauſe I haue ſhewed what impediments our vnſtayed affections and worldly luſts are, from a conſtant courſe in a godly life, and what remedies are to be vſed againſt the ſame: I will adde an example of the practiſe of diuerſe well minded Chriſtians, wherein the weaker ſort may ſee this more clearly: ſeeing examples helpe  much to ſuch as they are, to make better vſe of rules to direct them.
               In the yeare 1588, there met in a Chriſtian mans houſe certaine well minded perſons, which dwelt in one towne together, with whom alſo the Preacher of the place did meete at the ſame time. Their meeting was for the continuance of loue, and for the edifying one of another, after ſome bodily repaſt & refreſhing. And yet know, that they were no Browniſts: for they were diligent and ordinarie frequenters of publicke aſſemblies with the people of God. Neither were their meetings Conuenticles, for the diſturbing of the ſtate of the Church and peace thereof; as many imagine that there can be  no priuate fellowſhip among Chriſtians, but it is to ſuch ends: the contrary may be ſeene by their conference. Theſe with one conſent, fell into communication how the caſe ſtood betwixt God and themſelues.
               Some accuſing and complaining of themſelues, that they had not vſed their long continued peace and libertie of the Goſpell to the end for which God did ſend both: but that they had bene dimme lights. The reſt conſenting, and by occaſion offered among them all (well nigh twentie perſons)

ſundry reaſons and proofes were ſet downe, to make their complaints more  weighty; and alſo what euill fruite they did ſee to proceed from ſuch a dead and vnprofitable courſe of liuing: and yet the perſons ſpoken of, did as farre exceed the common ſort of them that profeſſe the Goſpell, as the common profeſſors do exceed them in religion, which know not the Goſpell.
               When they had proceeded thus farre, it was demaunded, whether there were no way to come out of this weariſome and vnprofitable life, not beſeeming ſuch as imbraced the Goſpell. If there were any: what might be the fitteſt and beſt remedies to come out of ſuch bondage (for they counted it no better:) and betwixt them they agreed vpon certaine, with ſuch good liking, after they heard and conceiued them, that it might apparently  be ſeene, that their heauy hearts were much eaſed, when they did but ſee a way to be deliuered from that yoke of bondage; whiles their plentifull teares were turned into chearfull countenance. The concluſion was this, they did couenant faithfully and ſeriouſly, to ſet vpon theſe remedies forthwith and ſpeedily; thinking that ſuch a weighty matter had need of no delay: and thereupon, deſired the Preacher to ſet downe the ſumme of their conference and communication together, for the better putting of them in rememberance of it to practiſe it; as alſo that they might ſee what the ſumme of their conference was: which, ſeeing they agreed vnto, they called a Couenant.
               
               Now it may be, ye looke to heare what fruite there came of this: ſurely euen this meeting was a great whetting them on to inioy the publicke miniſterie more chearfully and fruitfully afterwards: and this meane with others, both publicke and priuate, did knit them in that loue, the bond whereof could not be broken, either on their part which now ſleepe in the Lord, whiles they here liued; nor in them which yet remaine, by any aduerſary power vnto this day. And this I ſet downe to this end, as well that godly conference may be had in more account among Chriſtians; as principally, to ſhew what hinderances there are from a faithfull proceeding in a ſound and godly courſe, and how neceſſarie it is, that all good remedies ſhould be vſed  to continue the ſame: this was the chiefe end why I did mention it. And the ſumme of this couenant I haue here ſet downe in the words following:
               
                  The true report of a conference, had betwixt certaine well minded Chriſtians, (Anno 1588) who ſaw that they had not liued according to the knowledge which they had, nor to haue anſwered to their profeſsion, as they might and ought to haue done: containing a complaint of their coldneſſe and negligence, with remedies againſt the ſame; and a couenant to returne to God by repentance: profitable for many in theſe dayes.
                  
                  
                     An entrance into the matter.WE weighing aduiſedly and by due conſideration here of late, the glorious and goodly beauty of a Chriſtian life, as it is commended and ſet forth in the word of God; how full of heauenly comfort it is ſayd to be vnto all ſuch as make it their treaſure; and how amiable, yea and fruitfull alſo it is (in whomſoeuer it be) vnto others which truly know the price and excellency of it; and we ſo dimmely and darkly beholding the image of this in

                      our ſelues, who yet had hope, and that not ſmall, that we had a part therein: we ſaw iuſt cauſe why we ſhould confeſſe, that we had bene much wanting herein, and that the patterne of our life was farre vnlike this rule, when we compared the one with the other: and therefore complained with bitternes, that we had fallen into a deepe ſlumber, being rather ready to thinke our ſelues in ſafety, then carefully looking to thoſe teſtimonies in our ſelues, which might indeed aſſure vs of it. Whereupon we fell into an heauie and bitter complaint in this maner, with plenty of teares: Oh, we ſee now,The complaint. that we haue not walked with the Lord, as by diligent marking the examples of other deare ſeruants of his, we haue found that they haue done: nor honored  our God in the courſe of our life, according to the mercifull occaſions and incouragements which he hath giuen vs. The feruent care and earneſt zeale which we ſee required in the people of God, hath bene much wanting and cold, in reſpect of that which we might well haue attained vnto. And as we ſee now more clearly, that our blockiſh and vnprofitable life was not glorious to God, nor beſeeming vs who ſhould haue ſtood foorth among the reſt of Gods people to giue light vnto others: ſo we did many times feare it before, and thinke, that whatſoeuer vnprofitableneſſe and coldneſſe is to be ſeene in many other weake Chriſtians who behold and liue with vs, it might rightly be imputed to vs, from whom and ſuch other they commonly take  direction. This and the like we complained of: and leſt we ſhould ſeeme to make it a matter of courſe, and to ſhew no manifeſt cauſe hereof, let vs conſider ſuch proofe of the ſame, as our wofull experience hath yeelded and affoorded.
                  That this complaint therefore may iuſtly be made,The firſt proofe of the iuſtneſſe of this complaint. it appeareth in all thoſe duties pertaining either to God or man: our ſelues or other. For in all we haue failed manifoldly: whereas yet by meane or indifferent heed-taking, in great part we might haue done better. Concerning God, we haue not purchaſed ſuch glory to his name, and ſhewed foorth his louing kindneſſe to the ſonnes of men, as we ought and might haue done: neither glorified his Goſpell,  as, if it ſhould haue bene taken from vs, we would haue promiſed to do.The ſecond proofe. Further, it may appeare hereby, that we ſee we haue not profited in the knowledge of the will of God anſwerably to our time, and to the helpes which we haue inioyed for that purpoſe.Seeing the negligent ſeeking of knowledge by studie, is one meane to come by knowledge, we must not ceaſe, till we can haue delight in ſtudie and reading. For many of vs are as yet but weakly ſetled in the chiefe points of chriſtian religion: much leſſe are we fit hearers, with ready minds to put in vre any doctrine which ſhall be neceſſarily, ſoundly and faithfully deliuered vnto vs. Nay, we muſt needs confeſſe to our ſhame, that the meanes to come by knowledge, haue bene very negligently vſed of vs: as, ſeldome reading; and in hearing, not vſually preparing our hearts before we come, with caſting off the ſinnes which might hinder vs, and comming  with meekneſſe: neither in hearing, haue bene diligently attending and hearkning to the voyce of God; neither after our hearing, haue vſually meditated or communed with other of that which we haue heard.The third proofe. So that this hath not bene our delight, but with much vnreuerence (for ſo holy and heauenly a ſeruice) gone about. Moreouer, we haue not ſo tamed our corrupt nature, and ſo ſet our ſelues againſt the ſame in many particulars, ſo as we haue preuailed ouer it in our temptations: (for we haue thought

this too tedious and irkeſome for vs:) but we haue fauoured exceedingly  and giuen too much libertie to our ſelues in our ſinnes; not readie to miſlike and withſtand the ſame, as either ſome of vs ſometime haue done, or as we haue ſeene other of Gods ſeruants to haue done as Ioſeph (Gen. 39.) did in onetime; Moiſes (Hebr. 11.24.) in another. Yet the meanes which we vſe ſometimes to obtaine grace, if they were continued, would bring to paſſe ſome effects this way not to be complained of: therefore ſeeing we thus faile herein,The deſire accompliſhed, doth (vvithout great grace) make a man more ſecure and in greater daunger. we muſt needes complaine bitterly. And what is like to be a greater hinderer of true godlineſſe in vs, then this tender bearing with our ſelues in our ſinnes, as being hardly brought to offer any violence vnto them: when yet we know, that the ſmalleſt euen of our euill luſtes, do fight againſt our  ſoules, are ranke poyſon vnto vs, and haue need to be driuen out with moſt ſtrong medicines?
                  And as concerning the daunger of fauouring our ſelues in our ſinnes, though ſecret and ſmaller then many ſinnes ſeeme, theſe fearefull effects haue followed: that hauing winked at the ſmaller, we haue ruſhed and bene plunged into greater: and not chaſing away light and wandring deſires, we haue fallen into deeper and more dangerous delighting in thē,The daungerous fruite of fauouring our ſelues in our ſinnes. which hauing once taken hold of vs, could not with ten times ſo much ado be remoued: yea by this ſleight ſtriuing againſt ſome, we haue bene ouercome of many and ſundrie other. Some haue taken great hurt by worldlineſſe, decaying as faſt  in grace and goodneſſe, as they haue gone on with too much intemperancie and exceſſe in that deceiueableneſſe: ſome haue growne into great coldneſſe, and in apparent ſecuritie haue not eſpied their eſtate once to be chaunged; but haue kept a kind of perſwaſion, that they haue bene in as good caſe for all this, as euer they were when greateſt care was in them: ſome haue bin readie with conceitedneſſe and froward iudging to breake off their courſe of Chriſtian walking ſometime, and their fellowſhip and communion with their brethren. Oftentimes ſuch an acquaintance hath growne by this fauouring of our ſelues in ſome one, with falling into many, yea and thoſe very perillous, (as ſtrangeneſſe betwixt neighbours, hollowneſſe, vntruſtineſſe, iarrings, a growing after the common ſort, ſlow growing on in that which yet was our profeſſion, with many other ſuch annoyances) that it may well be ſaid, that fearefull effects haue followed this bearing of our ſelues, euen in vs who haue bene thought to be of the forwarder ſort. Now when theſe and ſuch like vnſauourie fruites haue come from vs, and that we haue in ſuch like manner (as hath bene ſaid) walked in the world, what hath bene our eſtate and condition, but that which might well enough beſeeme ſuch as haue in no carefull ſort bene profeſſors of religion?
                  Our comfort hath bene flatterie, and deceiuing of our ſelues: our feruencie and zeale, which ought ſtill to haue increaſed, hath bene benummed and  turned into ſenſleſſe bockiſhneſſe: our companie vnprofitable, if not hurtfull and dangerous: and when we haue in any manner looked into our ſelues, wound of conſcience and terror hath bene found within vs, ſhame and reproch hath bene without; or (which is worſe then both) hardneſſe of heart hath ouergrowne vs. As for the Lord, neither could we, neither durſt we haue our recourſe vnto him: and from any beſides him, we knew no

                      ſound cōfort could be attained. To forget this our miſerie, was impoſſible; & to be thinking of it, intollerable: and ſo betwixt the one and the other we could not be (when we were at the beſt) but moſt vncomfortable. But yet we liuing through Gods goodneſſe, vnder the miniſterie of the word, could not be ſo forgetfull of that which had bene in vs, nor ſo blockiſh in thinking and conſidering of that which was taught vs, neither all religion ſo vtterly extinguiſhed in vs, but that the ſparkles of zeale which were in vs, muſt needes be kindled one time or other: by meanes whereof, we were enforced to ſee a maruellous decay of godlineſſe, and a chaunge from that which had bene in vs; and thereby were driuen into exceeding heauineſſe, to behold from what  we had falne, and yet vtterly vnable to recouer our ſelues againe for the time. If ſometime by more earneſt ſtirring vp of our ſelues, we could obtaine this of our ſelues, to humble our hearts before God by prayer, confeſſion of our ſinne, &c. (which yet in ſuch a caſe we were brought to very hardly, whē we had greateſt need:) yet we may behold here what a bitter fruite we reaped (and that alſo long continuing with vs) of our forenamed liberty ſeeking, and for giuing the beginnings of ſinne ſuch intertainment within vs.
                  Another proofe, that this our complaint is iuſt, is:The fourth proofe. that we haue not ſo growne in grace and in the fruites of godlineſſe, that we haue bene hereby amiable in the eyes of God and of his good ſeruants, neither haue we taken vp  our delight in labouring after them: as for example, In our afflictions and trials we haue not felt our ſelues contented, that the Lord ſhould exerciſe vs as it hath bene ſeene good to him: we haue not ouercome impatience in them, much leſſe reioyced in bearing them, Act. 5.41. We haue not taken occaſion by Gods bleſſings, of libertie, peace, health, fellowſhip one with another, proſperitie & ſuch like, to be more fruitfull and chearefull in doing all good duties, as occaſion hath bene offered: lowlineſſe, meekeneſſe, kind-hartedneſſe, faithfulneſſe to men, ſinceritie to God in the good things which we haue done, haue oft and much bene wanting: very ſparie and niggardly we are in prayer, meditation, triall of our ſelues, and labouring to know ſinne  better, and confeſſing againſt our ſelues that which we know: ſoone wearie of well doing, yet not grieued at it; vnwearied in things needleſſe. We ſo hardly and ſlightly ſee the neceſſitie of practiſe of many duties and precepts, which by doctrine are commended vnto vs, that we reſt in that which hath bene, and coldly ariſe vp to any new or further proceeding. Our crucifying of our ſelues to the world, that we might be content to be deſpiſed and of litle account in it; or our crucifying of the world vnto our ſelues, that it might not bleare our eyes with the vanitie and deceiueable inticements and baites of it, hath bene very faintly gone about of vs: our experience in marking the courſe of Gods dealings towards vs, in comforting vs after well doing, in letting vs  feele that an hundred fold for the forſaking of any part of our will: alſo in this chaſtiſing of vs for our ſecuritie or other defaults, alas it is very ſmall. So that neither may it be ſufficient for vs to encourage others to a godly life vpon our owne triall (it is ſo weake;) neither is it ſuch, as miniſtreth any great wiſedome or direction to our ſelues to hold on in a good courſe: and yet how frozen and faint our perſwading and encouraging of others is, when we are not well ſetled our ſelues; it may be conſidered with griefe enough to him

that liſteth to weigh it. Our litle watching of our hearts againſt folly, or of our  whole life, that in our ſolitarineſſe we might commune with the Lord and our owne hearts, in companie be fit to do good or take good, that euill might be farre from vs; may iuſtly ſhame and feare vs to thinke of: our litle labouring through loue (as our callings will permit) to be fruitfull and occupied in that which might increaſe our peace, and vphold our chriſtian eſtate, is lamentable. And thus by this, and ſuch other like, it may eaſily appeare, that ſeeing we may charge our ſelues in this wiſe, we haue good cauſe to complaine, that it is not with vs as it ought to be.
                  
                     The fifth proof.And from theſe accuſations ariſeth another: that we take too liberall an vſe of lawfull things; neuer ſuſpecting that any hurt or daunger can thereby  come vnto vs; as in diet, apparell, ſleepe, the vſe of mariage, dealings in the world, and talking thereof: forgetting that which the holy Ghoſt hath taught vs; that is, that theſe lawfull things, namely, pleaſures and profites, are called ſnares, and therefore eaſily able to intangle men and hold them faſt; ſo as it ſhall be hard for them to runne the race of chriſtian dutie required of them: and that they are ſaid to preſſe men downe; that by meanes of them, they cannot with ſuch chearefulneſſe and fruite liue vnto God. Wherein to be directed, this may ſerue vs for a rule: that as euery one of vs can ſee what is ſufficient, ſo we beſtow no more time about the world then we needes muſt, neither in talke nor other dealings: fearing withall, leſt we ſhould be caried  to loue it too much: wherein the more that euery man laboureth to ouercome himſelfe, that his chearefulneſſe in good duties may not be hindered; ſo much the more he ſhall haue to reioyce, that he hath bene content to abridge his owne delight for better things.
                  Another proofe of this our iuſt complaint, is: that we haue had litle feeling of the wants and miſeries of others.The ſixt proof. To ſee how many thouſands walke ignorantly; other many, in ſecuritie, hypocriſie, ſuperſtitiō, &c. many to haue fallen away vtterly, after they had receiued a taſt of the Goſpell: who ſhould not be moued at the beholding of it? and pitie them, as much as in him ſhold lye? and not to be content, that we our ſelues ſhould do well, whiles we ſee  ſo many in calamitie. But it cannot be denyed, but that their eſtate, either of the deſolate beyond the ſeas, in many countries; or of the diſtreſſed ones amongſt vs, doth litle touch or come neare vs: whereby as our prayers are weake which are made in their behalfe, ſo are the other fruites of our compaſſion ſmall and few. For as liberalitie is cold in reſpect of the abilitie which many haue, ſo few of vs are grieued at their euils, or go about to call backe and reclaime ſuch as we may: we haue not much ſet our minds on this, how we might beſt preuaile with, and draw our kindred, acquaintance, familiars, families, &c. neither of purpoſe to order our wayes ſo, as we might by our holy conuerſation winne either theſe, or ſtraungers to God: neither to ſtrengthen  the weake, and helpe forward ſuch as haue bene at a ſtaggering. And that which is more, if we haue done any of theſe, yet we haue done it more houerly and coldly, whether with our families, or other with whome we haue had to do that way:The cauſes of theſe defaults. not in meekeneſſe, loue, compaſſion, bearing as there hath bene cauſe with them, or heartily ſeeking to winne them vnto God.
                  
                     The firſt.The cauſe hereof was no one; but yet chiefly our euill hearts: which for all

                      the taſt of holy doctrine, and light which we had of the life to come, yet being cleanſed and renued but in part, were euermore in reſpect of our corruption prone to euill, and vnapt to goodneſſe; ſo that, not onely after good meanes vſing, they caried vs to a forgetfulneſſe of that good which was offered vs, either in prayer, conference, or the miniſterie of the word, and to a ſenſible deſire at leaſt of ſome declining; but euen in the time of our enioying of them, our hearts deceiued vs, that we could not make (I ſpeake of the moſt times) any great vſe or profite of them at all. But that the euill of the heart may the better appeare, and ſo the cauſe of our vnprofitableneſſe the more clearely be ſeene, it ſhall be good to ſet downe ſome of the particular  corruptions of it, and how eaſily they breake foorth and ſhew themſelues by the ſmalleſt occaſions. Now the heart is deceiptfull, whereby when we are towards or in the way to great daunger, yet we are not willing, or not able to ſee and decline it. It is hardened in great part,VVhat corruption may be rooted out: and what are ſo hereditarie, that they cannot. ſo that it is not eaſily brought to relenting, nor to be touched, and to melt: and ſo good meditation and the fruitfulleſt doctrine doth hardly affect vs. Frowardneſſe, which diſquieteth and diſtempereth the whole life; peeuiſhneſſe, when we cannot abide any word vttered, but it is taken in ill part, and moſt rancke poyſon guſhing out againſt them that diſpleaſe vs; and impatience and vnquietneſſe vnder our afflictions and croſſes, are in it: hypocriſie alſo. It is alſo idle and ſlouthfull in  going about dutie: yea and vntoward in the ſame. It is fraught with ſelf-loue, which is, when we fauour our ſelues too much, and pleaſe our ſelues in our ſinnes, when yet the ſmalleſt prouocations thereto, ſhould diſpleaſe vs.
                  Earthly-mindedneſſe is another ſtreame running from this fountaine, when we are drawne to the loue of the commodities of this world, and are led with a deſire of growing rich: which ſnareth vs, and calleth backe our minds from liuing holily, and cauſeth ſuch as wiſely reſiſt it, not to haue their treaſure in the earth. In prayer great coldneſſe and wearineſſe of wel-doing poſſeſſeth (as it were) this heart of ours, when by any occaſion we haue attempted it: anger, malice and reuengement, in degree one exceeding the other,  do eaſily appeare to haue their abode in this hart: pride of heart, though ſometime priuie, is one among the reſt, which poyſoneth our beſt actions, and ſoone ariſeth when any good hath bene done of vs: the repining at the gifts of other, doth many times aſſault vs: what barrenneſſe and emptineſſe of Gods grace is too commonly found in vs, our wofull experience doth cauſe vs to remember: vncleane deſires (among the reſt) are here: an innumerable rabble of other vnſauourie, daungerous and carnall thoughts do ſwarme in vs: and temperancie and moderation is ſo meanely reached vnto, that we can hardly be merie without lightneſſe; ſad without vnfruitfull dumpiſhneſſe; beleeuing God without preſuming; or feare him without ſome  doubtings and inclinings to diſpairing. Theſe here ſet downe, with others many like vnto thē, hauing place in our harts, & long continuance, without any occaſion offered do ſet themſelues a worke in vs; but eſpecially by occaſions do fearefully breake out from vs, we being (if we could marke it) not long without ſome of them whatſoeuer we go about. What maruell though other cauſes did not go with them, if by meanes of theſe we ſhould haue our beſt actions blemiſhed, yea poyſoned, and our common behauiour and

courſe of life to be vtterly vnholy?
                  
                  But now, when theſe ſhall be let looſe in vs, when they are not holden in as it were with bit and bridle, when they ſhall gouerne vs, and not wee them,The ſecond cauſe. but we become ſlaues & ſeruants vnto them: how can it be otherwiſe, but that our liues ſhould giue litle light vnto men and glorie to God; and for all our profeſſion of the Goſpell, and the account that we make of it, yet that the fore-mentioned offences be found in vs? And this is the ſecond cauſe why we bring foorth no greater fruites of amendement. For when our harts which in themſelues are too euill, ſhall wander where they will without checke, and feed themſelues by occaſions without controulment, litle watching ouer them, or keeping in of them with diligent care and obſeruing of  them; full eaſily and right ſoone is this vnſetledneſſe and vnprofitableneſſe, which we complained of, ingendred in vs: and ſo, bringeth foorth fruite accordingly, euen like vnto it ſelfe, as hath bene ſaid. Now for our owne parts, we cannot but confeſſe and remember againſt our ſelues, that we haue either not knowne many of theſe forenamed corruptions; and therefore could not vſe any violence againſt them: or if we haue ſeene them in our ſelues, yet haue we made light matters of them, dallied with them, and delighted in them; and if time or other dealings haue not brought vs into the forgetfulneſſe of them, yet with ſome ſodaine ſighes and weake miſlikings, they haue bene beheld of vs: which hath bene no decaying nor cutting off of ſo ranck corruptions, but that they haue budded foorth againe immediatly, and ſo haue ſowred our actions with their bitter leauen moſt daungerouſly. Whereas, if we had bene iealous ouer them, if we had firſt cleanſed and purged our hearts of them; if we, knowing that the greateſt offences before men, are firſt nouriſhed in the heart to the prouoking of God, and therefore had ſet our ſelues againſt them: we ſhould haue ſeene, that with much comfort to our ſelues, in ſound practiſe of dutie, we ſhould haue proceeded in our chriſtian courſe, as being hereby at libertie from ſuch bondage to our luſts; according to that which is written: Iam. 4. Reſiſt the diuell and he ſhall flie. And in this eſtate we haue pleaſed our ſelues moſt commonly,A cauſe of the former cauſe. becauſe we haue ſought eaſe to  the fleſh, and haue bene loath to take ſuch paines, as to abridge and cut off our manifold vaine delights and fleſhly liberties.
                  Oh, it hath bene a death to vs, when we muſt be rowzed out of our luskiſhneſſe, and be enforced to graunt, that ſuch a life hath bene but meere ſecurity: when we muſt confeſſe much againſt our ſelues (which hardly we haue bene brought vnto;) and yet not reſt there, till we haue alſo obtained of our ſelues to caſt it vp as an vnſauourie gorge. For when in our decay in grace we haue feared ſecretly, that all hath not bene well with vs; and yet for all that, becauſe we would feele no ſmart, and it was irkeſome and tedious to vs, to thinke that we muſt enter into a ſtreighter courſe: we haue lyen ſtill in it as long as we  could or durſt:Prou. 1.32. ſo truly is it ſaid, That eaſe is a ſweet poyſon and ſlayeth. We dreamed like the Apoſtles in their fooliſhneſſe, of an earthly happineſſe: that it was the ſweeteſt life of all,Mat. 20.21. to thinke what riches and treaſures we had alreadie, and more hoped to come vnto daily: to feed our appetite with thinking on our outward peace, in hoping (though without warrant) that it ſhould be continued: to imagine how we might here be ſetled after our

                      hearts deſire, though we neuer perhaps ſhold attaine vnto it; and not weighing, that although we at any time might, yet how rotten a foundation we had laid in ſo doing, which could not abide the wind and tempeſt. This eaſe it was which would haue ſlaine our ſoules, and was the cauſe of our ſo great looſeneſſe. An eſtate of life full of daunger, and full of deceiptfulneſſe: with which (yet) none haue euer ſo beſotted themſelues, (being holdē captiues of the diuell at his pleaſure) but they who haue eſcaped the daunger of it, haue as highly reioyced; and, as from a bottomleſſe dungeon, haue kept themſelues with all care, from falling againe into it.
                  Now we falling into this fond eaſe, loathed to take ſuch paines in running  the race of chriſtianitie, and in labouring to keepe in, our ſelues vnto dutie. When we had bene any time vnexerciſed with croſſes and afflictions it was bitterneſſe to thinke, that againe we muſt come vnder them (ſo litle did we hope for any comfortable or fruitfull vſe of them:) and when we had bene proued with them, for the moſt part we were vncomfortable in them. Wherby it appeared, that whatſoeuer we thought of our ſelues and of our great profiting, that our ſtrength was neuer great, becauſe we were found weake in trials, Prou. 24.10. Hitherto it belongeth, that we were ſo vntoward to the vſe of any good meanes: I ſpeake not of the looſe and negligent vſing of them, which was a fruite of this vntowardneſſe, (for that hath bene  ſpoken of before) but of our great vnwillingneſſe to breake off our luskiſh and ſottiſh courſe of life. As for example: to priuate prayer vtterly vnapt, when we ſhould yet ſee much neceſſitie of it: as being loath to awake our ſelues out of our ſpirituall ſleepe, and loathing the painefulneſſe of going about it. Againſt publike meetings we felt ſenſible rebelling, as ſeeing that the looſeneſſe and libertie which we delighted in, muſt be made odious to vs, and our ſelues thereby diſquieted: we feared, and were in a iealouſie of our good brethrens companie, by reaſon of an euill conſcience, thinking that we muſt be of one mind with them; and that could not ſtand with our vnſauourie liking. And what a ſlauerie is it, that we ſhould bring our ſelues to ſuch a  point, that we muſt obey our filthie luſtes, and become ſeruants to our vile rebellions? What madneſſe is it, that we ſhould depriue our ſelues of the beſt things, and yet contented to abide ſo ſtill? And by this it may appeare, how many defaults are like to breake out from our liues, when ſuch daungerous eaſe and looſeneſſe haue their harbour in our hearts.
                  And yet another cauſe why ſo litle good hath bene done,The third cauſe we may remember to haue bene, that we haue looked ſo narrowly to the liues of others, to gather hurt thereby; not remembring that we ſhould follow none further then they follow Chriſt: of which, ſome being of the better ſort, and others of the common, we haue taken exceeding great hurt by them both. For theſe  latter, when we ſee how they haue many times continuance in outward peace and proſperitie, ſo that they are merrie, and take no thought about prouiding for the iudgement day, neither are withholden from any intemperancie of liuing; though we become not like vnto them, yet as men not ſo fully perſwading our ſelues of their miſerie,Pſal. 73.12.13. we begin to thinke that it is but vain for vs, to labor greatly after innocencie, & to ſhine as lights, which (we ſee) is litle regarded. And ſo we grow to iuſtifie our owne courſe of life, as very ſufficient

and well liking to the Lord: yea and beſides this, we gather ſome rubbiſh  and ſcurfe from them, by beholding, by dealing, and being too conuerſant with them. And if of theſe, ſome be leſſe euill then others, and retaine ſome points of honeſtie, and of better behauiour in them; yet what a groſſe bewitching of our ſelues is it, to compare our ſelues with thoſe, of whoſe happineſſe we haue no perſwaſion? Now as the liues of this bad ſort of men are laid too neare vs, & we may ſee that we are weakened in our courſe by thē: ſo the liues of the firſt ſort, euen right good men, we either litle or not at all doe profite by; or (that which more is) we many times take hurt by them.
                  For as concerning their beſt actions and moſt commendable duties, we do not vſe to haue them in reuerent admiration, eſpecially if the perſons be  daily amongſt vs: but we count them common things, and meeter for them then for vs. Yea and we thinke, that we haue ſome other gifts and parts of our liues comparable to them: ſo that we can be content to go without thoſe graces, and to loſe the benefite of ſuch good examples: which yet for this cauſe God ſetteth vp as lights amongſt vs: that we might neuer pleaſe our ſelues in our liues, till we had wonne this at our owne hands, To frame our ſelues after their examples, which are moſt gracious and godly amongſt vs. And further, we will not thinke, but that euen ſuch men haue alſo manifold infirmities in them; though we know them not. But if we do, it is enough to perſwade vs, that euen then when many things ought iuſtly to be remoued out of vs, yet  we are to be well thought of, and to be accounted commendable.
                  And theſe are the ſpeciall cauſes, that ſo iuſtly much fault may be found in our liues;The fourth cauſe, which is compounded of many. vnto the which briefly theſe may be added: that we haue not bene carefull to be ſtraungers to ſuch companies, where we might be eaſily corrupted, or cooled and diſcouraged: neither taken occaſion to be in good companie, or to haue made profite of the ſame when we were in it: but in a common manner ſpent ſuch times, either in endleſſe or needleſſe worldly talke, or ſome other way vnprofitably; rather framing our ſelues to their humours, and to approue of their euill cuſtome, then bethinking our ſelues how to ſtop them.
                  
                  A fifth cauſe hath bene: that we haue not laboured to nouriſh our delight and ioy in the benefite of our redemption:The fift cauſe. but diminiſhing the price of it, as though it were nothing ſo great and precious as it is commended to be: or ſoone forgetting it, for that it is of ſmall account and litle reckoning in the world; do feede vpon vaine and deceiueable pleaſures: and ſo taking part with the world, do alſo with the world grow vnſeaſoned with grace: and therefore euery ſuch man after his manner becommeth vnprofitable. For when we begin to make a common thing of that aſſurance of our ſaluation, (which without compariſon is the chiefeſt and moſt precious treaſure of all other) and do not maintaine and preſerue the preciouſneſſe of it by all good  meanes, we muſt needes in ſtead thereof, make account of other vaine reioycing, and ſo the care of godlineſſe waxeth ſmall.
                  And laſt of all, that we hauing ſometimes felt our ſelues vnfit to be well occupied,The laſt cauſe. we haue fallen to idleneſſe: and therewith acquainting our ſelues, haue (for the time) neither eſpied it to be a fault, and ſo reſiſted it in the beginning, by miſlike of the ſame; neither haue betaken our ſelues to our callings

                      to the hindering of the ſame; as being miniſters, to attend to reading; or being priuate men, to labour euery man as it hath behoued him. And thus much for the proofe of the iuſtneſſe of our complaint, and of the cauſes thereof.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 14. Of the ſecond part of the Couenant, namely: The remedies againſt the complaint mentioned in the former Chapter.
               
               
                  NOW foraſmuch as in the weighing of the truth of theſe things, we could not but be grieued heartily: (as who can behold ſo great depth of corruption and the fruite of the ſame, ſo many wayes with deadly vncomfortableneſſe threatning his confuſion, but muſt needs ſeeke and vſe all poſſible meanes, ſpeedily to pull himſelfe out again?) we therefore immediatly after the due conſideration of our wofull condition, turned our ſelues to bethinke vs, what remedies we might apply to this fall, if thereby we might  poſſibly recouer our ſelues againe: and alſo make them helpes for hereafter, that we may as well continue in a fruitfull and cheareful courſe vnto the end of our liues; as at all, to returne into the right way againe. Firſt therefore,The firſt remedy we thought thus, and tooke order as followeth: that ſuch of vs, as did find our fals to be ſo great, and our offences ſo dangerous, that either for our too too great delight in them, or long lying therein, we could not by our vſuall prayers and humiliation, or by helpe of any ordinarie and daily practiſes of repentance, by hearing the word and preparing our ſelues for the Lords ſupper; come to peace of conſcience, and obtaine confidence and godly boldneſſe with the Lord: ſuch (I ſay) ſhould humble our ſelues before the Lord with  faſting and prayer, without which meanes ſuch diuels are hardly caſt out. Eſpecially, becauſe we had let go the hold of our faith, and had ſuffered the ſame to faile in vs; (which when it commeth to paſſe, what can there be in our life but meere vnſauourineſſe; to ſpeake of the beſt?) our faſting tended to this, that we might more forcibly pray for the recouerie of our faith, and cleare beholding of Gods louing kindneſſe reſtored to vs againe. That in ſuch manner we being abaſed in his preſence (as there is iuſt cauſe that ſuch ſhould be) and beleeuing againe his old accuſtomed mercy, we might in ſome good meaſure be purged from our former vnſauourineſſe, yea noyſome vncleaneneſſe: and ſo made fit to renue our couenant with the Lord againe, concerning  more holy walking with him. And if we ſhould find, that our hearts might be brought to vnfained diſpleaſure with our ſelues for our former defaults, without faſting: then we determined to turne vnto the Lord with all our hearts in ſinceritie, ſo as we might obtaine comfort and releaſe at his handes, as if faſting had bene adioyned thereunto.
               After this, our couenant was to know our hearts better: how euill they are: what falſhood, fickleneſſe, lightneſſe and ſuch like naughtineſſe,The ſecond remedie. and varietie

of corrupt affections we carie about vs; that thereby we may be enforced  to take more paine to weaken them daily. For we ſaw, that if we be not diligent to ſearch them out,An euill heart marreth all. as by occaſion we ſhall be moued to do, we ſhall both walke in continuall vnſetledneſſe, and in an vncomfortable eſtate, becauſe we can go about nothing, but ſome one of theſe or other ſhall be eſpied to carie vs ſome way amiſſe in the ſame. And thus we purpoſed to note and find them out in vs, by a diligent view of and taking heed vnto our waies, that ſo we may be in daily combate with them. A worthie worke therefore and commendable we ſaw it, to take knowledge of them, and not to be content to be blind in the beholding of them (becauſe we are neither eaſily brought to confeſſe and ſee them; and yet that he which hideth them ſhall  not proſper): that ſo we may behold more filth and venome in them, then we would haue thought could haue bene in vs. And we agreed, that if we ſhold be vnwilling to diſcouer this packe, that euen this willingneſſe to hide them, is one of the moſt daungerous euils among the reſt.
               Now further, becauſe the knowledge of our hearts, (if we ſtay there) I meane,The third remedie. of the manifold euill luſts of them, doth make vs the more headie and greedie to fulfill them, when we know them by the lawe of God to be condemned in vs: we haue further faithfully determined to watch ouer them with all diligence, that neither any of thoſe which haue alreadie bene mentioned, neither any other (as farre as we may know them) may lurke or haue  their abode within vs with our liking, but that we may purge them out: and not thoſe only which are apparently groſſe, but euen ſuch as are more ſecret, being not yet come neare their ripeneſſe: and therefore whereſoeuer we become, or in whatſoeuer we haue to do, not to neglect this part of Chriſtian dutie; but eſpecially there and then, where and when we ſuſpect or haue cauſe to feare more danger thereby: as in vehement and ſtrong temptations, and grieuous and long continuing afflictions, there to ſtand the more vpon our watch, &c. So that whether we be in companie or alone, in dealings abroad or matters at home, by one occaſion or by other, yet ſtill to haue this purpoſe fixed in vs, that as farre as our fraile memorie will ſuffer vs to remember  it, we may go forward in the watching and obſeruing of them. Which muſt the rather be done; becauſe, as the heart is the fountaine of life, and frō thence we haue it, That we liue; ſo from thence we muſt fetch the beginning of well liuing: from an euill and vncleane heart, commeth no part of good life, no more then good fruite from an euill tree. But all the abhomination of the life, euen the moſt odious and vile, (as adulterie, murther, idolatrie, hereſie, &c.) they haue their beginning there, they are conceiued and nouriſhed there, they haue their proceeding from thence; and God is long and grieuouſly diſhonoured there for the moſt part, before man by the fruite of it can be or is offended.
               
               So that as by the Romains law, it was ſtreightly enacted: that their ſprings ſhould be carefully preſerued from all filth which might attaint and poyſon them, that their riuers and water conduits might be ſweet and wholeſome: ſo it muſt neceſſarily be, that the heart of man being once renued and made cleane, it ſhould be kept and continued ſo; that being a good treaſurie, good things may be brought out of it continually of all ſorts, as occaſion ſhall require.

                   For here we take it as graunted, that all which ſhall haue their part in this couenāt, or haue already deſired to haue, muſt be renued in their minds, and haue their hearts purged and made cleane by faith in the Sonne of God; whereby their ſinnes may be defaced and all their old conuerſation pardoned, their ſoules through the ſame with moſt comfortable and ſound peace enlightened; and ſo their hearts purified, both to will and alſo to liue well and godly. Of the which making cleane and purging the heart, as this is no fit place to ſpeake: ſo they muſt haue learned it and haue attained to it who are here mentioned, that is, ſuch as haue couenanted vnfainedly to watch and obſerue the ſame. Therfore (to returne) ſeeing the heart is a deepe dungeon  and pit, full of all vncleane thoughts, and yet deceiuing men; ſo that they ſhal thinke farre otherwiſe, and ſuſpect no ſuch thing (as 1. King. 15.8.) ſeeing in all their actions ſome one or other portion of it is readie to corrupt and ſtaine euen the beſt of them, ſo that not the holieſt parts of Gods worſhip can purely and holily be fulfilled without the careful holding in of it: it is worthily and for iuſt cauſe, made one part of this wholeſome remedie of the well ordering of our liues. So that, if any be giuen to ſeeke the libertie which God hath not allowed him, to let looſe his heart after any folly and vanitie, and counteth it too great ſtreightneſſe and preciſe curiouſneſſe to keepe a dominion and a ſuperioritie ouer it, ſo as he might thereby bring it into ſubiection; he is iuſtly  to be pitied, if he cannot be otherwiſe perſwaded: but if he thinke that way to build vp a godly life, vntill the Lord call backe his word (which now ſtandeth for a perfect direction of well liuing) he ſhall neuer attaine to that which he ſeeketh.
               Now this watching ouer the heart, that it may be with the more fruite,VVith watching, there muſt go feare of offending. 2. Cor. 7.2. Deut. 5.29. Pro. 28.14.
                   muſt haue accompanying it a ſuſpitious and iealous feare, leſt at any time it breake forth into ſuch delights as are worldly, carnall, &c. Of the which feare, for the great good that it doth thoſe who are ledde by it, the wiſe man ſaith: Bleſſed is the man that feareth alwayes, that is, his euill heart in one point or other, and therefore taketh the more paine about it. This being ſo  farre to be vnderſtood and practiſed, as our weaknes will giue leaue, (i. ſo as we do not willingly nouriſh idleneſſe and vnprofitable liberty and looſneſſe in vs) we are to take view of the fruite which it bringeth vs; and to meaſure by dayes, by weekes, and ſo forward, what eaſe to our conſciences, what chearfulneſſe to our ſoules, and what better fruit in walking in our callings more then we were wont, is reaped of vs and inioyed. And when we ſhall ſee that there is no compariſon betwixt the one and other: that is, betwixt a wandering heart, and betwixt a circumſpect care, we may more fully be reſolued to hold out in this courſe ſtill: becauſe although much fooliſh and fleſhly licentiouſnes is forgone, (which is naturally moſt deſired)  yet it frameth and maketh vs fit for the Lord, & weaneth vs more and more from the world, and is a meane by which with great eaſe and readineſſe wee go on in our Chriſtian courſe. For this is that which we hope for hereby. And there ſhall be no doubt,Pſal. 19.14. but when the meditations of our hearts ſhall pleaſe the Lord, that the wordes of our mouthes, and the practiſe of our liues ſhall alſo be acceptable in his ſight. To conclude this point: it is againe to be remembred, that we weane our heart from earthly delights: which oftentimes

tickling it with a pleaſant ſweetneſſe, do ſteale it away from heauenly  things, and hold it here below: and ſo by little and little bring it to find a contentation here, and breed a weariſomneſſe in that godly life. And further, that we be very wary that our hearts be not ſtolne from a liking of good waies, neither brought out of frame by loathing our duties, and ſo depriued of their peace: eſpecially, that we be not hurt nor wounded that way, where there is greateſt cauſe of feare and daunger: nor brought into ſubiection to thoſe ſinnes, to the which by nature we be moſt inclined: as to the loue of the world, vncleannes, breaking off of brotherly affection, &c. And here, if at any time we ſhould be ouertaken, (which is not to be doubted of, no not of the moſt circumſpect and beſt aduiſed) we reſolutely purpoſed not to ſleepe  nor ſlumber in our ſinne, neither promiſe to our ſelues forgiueneſſe too eaſily:Note. but firſt to awake our ſelues, to be amazed that we ſhould let go the ſtrength and hold which once we had; to rebuke and checke our ſelues ſharply, till ſhame and ſorow for ſo offending, may humble vs: and then we may be bold to aſſure our ſoules, hauing an aduocate with the father, Ieſus Chriſt the righteous, that we are receiued of him againe.
               
                  The fourth remedie, compounded of many.And to the end, that in this worke we may more happily go forward, and this watch be the better kept: our purpoſe was to auoide carefully all outward hinderances, and to auoide occaſions of quenching Gods ſpirit in vs, as we ſhall haue wiſedome to ſee them: as, too farre entring into dealings or  talke about the world, to call our ſelues backe from all exceſſe that way: alſo vnprofitable and dangerous company and acquaintance, any vnneceſſary and idle talke: and whatſoeuer elſe like vnto theſe. And contrarily, to be carefull to continue with diligence and delight, not onely the exerciſe and vſe of ſuch holy meanes of meditation and prayer, as well by our ſelues as with others alſo, reading, hearing and conference, &c. but alſo with minds to reape fruite by the ſame: which is not alwayes intended, nor ſought for ſo oft as the things themſelues are vſed. As for example: ſeeing the readieſt and beſt way to nouriſh and continue this holy deſire, and carefull watching ouer our hearts, is increaſe of knowledge, by the helpe of hearing and reading  (for zealous and holy affections are like a flame of fire, which without the adding and putting to of wood, as new matter, will ſoone be quenched and extinguiſhed; ſo will our looking to our hearts, and obſeruing of them, be looſely and lightly continued:) it is our purpoſe to ſtir vp our ſelues with more earneſtneſſe hereunto, becauſe we know that we ſhall otherwiſe fruſtrate and make vaine our whole couenant.
               That is to ſay, as foloweth: We do acknowledge, that our negligence and vnreuerence in theſe, haue ſo greatly depriued vs of fruite in vnderſtanding and iudgement, as well as other wayes, that before our hearing we truſt we ſhall prepare our harts by caſting off that which would hinder vs: namely, rebellious  gainſaying the truth, ſecurity, hardneſſe, worldly affections, &c. that with meekneſſe and teachableneſſe, we will bring honeſt and good hearts to the hearing of the word; & in the action it ſelfe, be attentiue, and marking that which ſhall be taught, ſo as it may worke in vs, and raiſe vp anſwerable affections to that which we ſhall heare; as ioy by comfortable doctrine, feare by that which moueth fear, &c. & after we haue heard, we wil beware that it periſh

                   not in vs through our owne default or negligence, in minding other matters more then that which we haue heard (whereby we ſhould bury it in forgetfulneſſe:) but carefully ſeeke oportunitie to muze vpon it by our ſelues; or commune of it with others, as our ſmall abilitie will ſuffer vs; or both. And when we ſhall haue learned to put in vre this part of the remedy, we intend to marke how this with the former doth bring our minds better in frame: that we may both take incouragement (in beholding any fruit) to continue it; and in ſeeing the contrary, to marke where the fault lieth, that it may be remoued.
               And to ſharpen our deſire to heare and reade the more willingly, ſeeing  there is much vntowardneſſe in our nature to ſuch exerciſes, and we haue ſtrong temptations to perſwade vs that it is as needleſſe, as we feele it irkeſome: we haue ſeene it neceſſary for vs to ſtirre vp our dulneſſe, not onely by the commaundement of God, that we ſhould ſearch the Scriptures, (and ſo, reade thē) & that we ſhold giue eare daily to the Apoſtles doctrine, (and therfore heare the ſame in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, that by both, the word of God may dwell plentifully in vs;) but alſo to haue in freſh memory the power of the Scriptures: which, beſides that they are able to ſaue our ſoules, ſo they can fill vs with goodneſſe and comfort euery way, as we ſhall haue need, and haue done ſo often in times paſt vnto vs. For many times we haue bene  brought ſo low in feeling of any preſent cōfort; to ſuch a barrenneſſe & emptineſſe of all good inſtructions; ſometime (which was worſt of all) to ſuch an vnſauourineſſe in the good things of Gods word, and ſo vnapt and vntoward to them; that we thought in our weakneſſe it would neuer be otherwiſe with vs: yet when we haue come againe to the miniſterie of the word, the Lord hath ſcattered our darkneſſe, raiſed vs out of our deceiueable dumpes and drowſineſſe, and ſhewed vs ioy and comfort againe: ſo that we haue bene taught thereby, that this is the fountaine which refreſheth vs in our vnſatiable thirſts, and cooleth the heate of our ſinne; and finally, giueth greater grace, then Sathan for all his ſubtilties and tyranny.
               
                   And further,The fift remedie. becauſe experience hath taught vs that we eaſily loſe that in the world amongſt the manifold incombrances, diſcouragements and dealings thereof, which we learned of the Lord by any good meanes; we haue faithfully couenanted for the better keeping of our hearts watchfull, and ſafe frō euill, once in the day (if it be poſſible) to ſet apart a time from all other law full and neceſſary duties, for meditation and priuate prayer, to the ſeaſoning of our hearts with grace, and to the ſtabliſhing of them againſt all temptations, afflictions and other hinderances. Not, to free our ſelues hereby from other times of communing with the Lord, as occaſions ſhall be offered, & neceſſity ſhal require: but becauſe our vntoward harts would otherwiſe draw vs  altogether to breake off this duty, if we ſhould not determine of ſome ſpeciall time; therefore one quarter of an houre, or as euery one ſhall find himſelfe able, we haue ſeene meete to appoint hereunto, if we can haue good oportunity; that is to ſay, if God giue vs minds fitly diſpoſed thereto, and miniſter profitable and plentifull matter accordingly: or if we faile in both, ſo much the more to take occaſion by our preſent wants and infirmity, to repaire vnto God.
               
                  And becauſe the morning when we ariſe, is both meeteſt to be imployed  that way, as wherein our minds are beſt able to thinke vpon heauenly matters, when we haue not yet bene about our worldly affaires; and for the moſt people, the beſt time that may be ſpared: therefore we haue purpoſed to allot the firſt part of the day thereunto, with this prouiſo, that if through neceſſarie occaſions we ſhould be hindered from it, we may yet carefully performe it on ſome other part of the day. And although at the firſt we ſhall ſee ſome vntoward beginnings herein, by which, diſcouragement from the continuance hereof might ariſe, yet we reſolued with our ſelues, that it is ſome profiting to begin, though in weakneſſe: and there is hope that good proceedings, and great, ſhall come euen of ſmall beginnings, being faithfully entred  into. And if by theſe meanes we ſhould not become better ſeaſoned in our harts, it is litle to be hoped for, that other meanes ſhould do vs the good that we haue need of. But when the day is thus begun, that wiſedome communeth with vs in the morning, and awaketh vs with heauenly ſalutations, we are for the moſt part kept more ſober, and continent from all out-ſtraying the whole day following: for when good things, either concerning the life to come and the glory of it, or the vanity and change of this preſent life, are deeply digeſted and throughly thought vpon, it is no ſmall occaſion to make vs more ſtranger-like to this preſent world, and to cary about vs greater freedome ouer our ſecret corruptions.
               
               And becauſe it is hard, eſpecially for priuate perſons to haue alwayes matter in a readineſſe, which is profitable to meditate vpon: (for he that ſhall be furniſhed herewithall, muſt be one which hath a daily obſeruation of his life, without the which grace, euen the learneder ſort ſhall be to ſeeke:) therefore ſome points were ſet downe for thoſe which are leaſt able to helpe themſelues; that by ſome few of thoſe which are very fit & auaileable, they may ſet themſelues on worke, and by them learne to find out others like vnto them, which do moſt nearly tend to the well ordering of the life. By which meanes appointed and found out for their helpe and furtherance, if yet vnfitneſſe of mind & an vntoward heart ſhall hold them backe, being troubled with cares  of the world, or deceiued with dreames of vaine pleaſures (which make the meditation of heauenly matters loathſome:) they are to know, that they can haue no better occaſion offered them to the performing of this duty, then for them to complaine of, and ſeeke redreſſe euen againſt this euill and earthly heart, of which they preſently complaine: and as they can bring that vnder, ſo to proceed in muſing of, and praying for ſuch grace as they ſhall ſee moſt needfull.
               Laſtly, we concluded to obſerue, what fruite we reape by theſe remedies: what releaſe of our ſtrong and vſuall maladies and diſeaſes:The ſixt remedie. what weakning of any ſuch luſts, as ſometimes had ſtrongly preuailed againſt vs: Alſo  what liking we find of this manner of dealing with our ſelues; or contrarily, whether we feele any watchfulneſſe ouer our hearts throughout the day, ſince we entred into this couenant: and whether any bettering of our waies by the ſame: whether in company we haue bene more wary of taking or doing good according to the occaſion offered: in our dealings, more carefull not to be found offenſiue. And weekly, and by daies, to marke it, and to communicate

                   our eſtate with ſome faithfull brother, with whom we may freely and faithfully open and impart our whole courſe: what meanes, and how farre foorth we vſe them: what we ſee cauſe to complaine of: and what is more required of vs, then that which we do: that thus we may be ſet forward, counſelled and confirmed; and ſeeing what courſe we ought to take for the bringing of this to paſſe, we may be ſtabliſhed in a Chriſtian life. For it doth not a litle helpe to haue this communion with ſome. Alſo, that we our ſelues ſhould be helpers of others, where either any do require the ſame duty of vs, or through baſhfulneſſe dare not be bold, or through ſimplicity cannot do it: yet we ſeeing that they ſtand in need of ſuch counſell  and direction, ſhould through loue ſhew them what we can, and what we haue learned in this behalfe. And here we purpoſed for the hope of the great fruite of this communion, to auoide ſtrangeneſſe: which as it breaketh off all profit betwixt vs, ſo it giueth feare of ſome ſecret conceiptedneſſe and that much loue is wanting. This direction, if it be read ouer (as we ſhall ſee cauſe and may do it cōueniently) with a mind deſirous as wel to ſee what is amiſſe in vs, as alſo in faithfulneſſe to vſe theſe remedies: we may be bold (the Lord working by meanes) to aſſure our ſelues, that we ſhall not labour herein in vaine. And when we haue attained hereto, we determined not to reſt in that, but to be directed ſtill by ſuch rules as Gods word doth miniſter to vs.
               
                   Now hauing ſet downe remedies,Perſwaſions to vſe this direction. by which we may raiſe vp our ſelues out of any declinings from a godly life, we added ſome reaſons to perſwade vs thereto, for as much as we may be ſure that hinderances and diſcouragements inough ſhall meete with vs to withhold vs. Firſt this:The first. that by ſuch a courſe and ſeeking to walke with God, as the former remedies do direct vs vnto, we are brought to a moſt ſweet and holy communion with the Lord: in compariſon whereof, nothing is to be deſired. For it is an honor and prerogatiue which the world neither knoweth, neither can attaine vnto, To get principalitie ouer him, who is the prince of the world, that is, the diuell; and to obtaine grace againſt our owne euill hearts in well ruling them: which is a  greater honour, then to ſubdue kingdomes. Alſo that hereby we haue libertie, with godly boldneſſe to come before the Lord in our complaints and prayers; being aſſured, that whatſoeuer we ſhall aske of him according to his will, it ſhall be granted vs: and that our peace and comfort hereby is ſo great, that none who hath but euen taſted of it, would chaunge his eſtate for any other: and that the conſcience of ſuch men is not beaten and diſquieted with helliſh and fearefull torments. In this caſe a man need not feare malicious accuſations, becauſe he hath bene circumſpect in looking to his wayes: and therefore (deſeruedly) euill ſpeeches can take no hold of him; ſeeing he that is carefull to pleaſe God, cannot iuſtly incurre the rebukes of men. As for euil  tidings, he is free from the feare of them, becauſe he hath armed himſelfe to looke for the hardeſt. And they who like not this ſtate, (which al things conſidered, ſhall be found to be the richeſt part and beſt portion) they muſt feede themſelues with folly, and take their fill in vanitie, till their miſerie ouertake them in the mid way, and deſtruction meete with them when they litle thinke vpon it.
               Moreouer, howſoeuer this indeuouring after a godly life,The ſecond perſwaſion. hath euer of the

world bene litle regarded; yet the happieſt and men of greateſt commendation  for godlineſſe, haue alwaies preferred it, and made it as the flower of their garland, and the crowne of their reioycing: we haue a cloud of witneſſes, and not all in one age, who haue walked with God, euen from Enoch and thereabout to this day, who teſtified this daily looking to their liues, to be the beſt thing of all. Now if by theſe and ſuch like perſwaſions we be brought to like of it,An admonition or caueat. we faithfully couenanted with our ſelues to vſe theſe remedies which haue bene ſet downe for continuance, and to make our beginnings ſound and ſubſtantiall; ſo as they may be able to beare and vphold the waight of all that ſhall preſſe them downe. For although our temptations be ſtrong and many, yet may none of them preuaile thus farre, as to make vs  breake off this our happie couenant: for if we be not ſtrongly armed againſt this, we ſhall eaſily find that hinderances enough will ariſe, which will quickly weaken the power of our beſt purpoſes, and fruſtrate all that we haue taken in hand. Here will inward lets come in our way; and thoſe, of many ſorts: as, to thinke it more then needeth to liue thus: alſo that many who are godly, do not thus: the inordinate loue of ſome ſpeciall ſinne may withhold vs: and much dulneſſe, vnprofitableneſſe and rebellion, may make vs vtterly vnable to hold foorth this courſe. Many outward diſcouragements alſo and hinderances will be readie here to ſtand in our way; as houſhold troubles, and diſquietneſſe by them, diſorder in ſeruants and children, vntowardneſſe and ill  ſucceſſe in buſineſſe, want of bleſſing ſomtimes where it was hoped for, loſſes, &c. alſo much toyling & occupying our ſelues about theſe things below, with neglect of our heauenly and chriſtian calling. Theſe are ſome of a great number, and the commoneſt whereby holy duties do moſt eaſily grow out of place and vſe with vs. Let this rule therefore (ſaid we) be well regarded of vs, and that which followeth ſhall be the eaſier: for many loathſome wearineſſes will in ſhort time ariſe, which (if it be poſſible) will breake vs off from this enterpriſe.
               
                  An admonitiō: that this direction be neither left off, nor vſed for cuſtome onely.After this, we ſaid: that if we with diligence continue it, we muſt beware we make not a common thing of it; ſo as, though we vſe it, yet no fruite nor  bleſſing returne to vs by it. The which as it falleth out moſt vſually in the doing of good things, ſo in this the beſt of others, it is moſt to be feared. In the firſt ſetting vpon many duties ſome chearefulneſſe may be ſeene in vs, and ſome time and trauell beſtowed: but alas, within a very ſhort time, we grow full of them: they become irkeſome and tedious to vs; and though we do not vtterly breake them off, yet we may perceiue, that without any great ſweetneſſe and delight we go about them. The reaſon hereof is, that our fleſhly hearts can like of no good thing long. If therefore either of theſe two wayes, we depriue our ſelues of the benefite of growing forward by theſe forenamed remedies: that is, by the negligent vſing of them, or the leauing off of them;  yet the fault muſt be quickly eſpied, and not long lyen in: for that is more dangerous, then can eaſily be beleeued.
               To the better attaining hereof, we may vnderſtand, that we may grow to a commonneſſe in a good thing two wayes: either when we be in proſperity; in which eſtate, it will be very hard to ſee our great need to vſe feruencie and zeale in holy duties and ſeruices of God, when we ſee varietie of earthly delights

                   ſet before vs to enioy; and we without controulement of any perſon, may take our fill of them. Therefore if in this eſtate, we perceiue any loathſomeneſſe of well doing to grow vpon vs, we muſt charge our ſelues with fickleneſſe, inconſtancie, falſhood againſt God, ſecret diſſembling, vnfaithfulneſſe, &c. If we ſhould be content thus to fall from the Lord; and if we be not readie without contradiction to ſtirre vp our ſelues to a fruitefull and chearefull vſe of chriſtian meanes againe; yea, if we be the worſe for Gods benefites: we muſt looke that he wil take them from vs, and cauſe vs to yeeld him other manner of fruites by the want of them. Alſo we muſt here call to mind, whiles with delight we ſerued the Lord, what comfort and godly  boldneſſe with him we found: which now, if we begin to decline from him, we can enioy no more, but may looke for ſome ſuch recompence as ſhall be meete for reuolters: yea and we muſt tell this (we ſaid) to our owne hearts without flatterie, that if we waxe wearie of the Lord at our pleaſure, it is to be feared, and that iuſtly, that he will ſhake vs off in our feare and neceſſitie, & we ſhall not dare to ſet vpon this chriſtian care again, if once we be glutted with it; and though we do, yet ſhall we not find it eaſie for vs to go forward, although we ſet vpon it againe, but that one time or other we ſhall be like to be driuen backe: which iudgement is fearefull aboue many, and next vnto deſpaire. We muſt thinke that the Lord dealeth tenderly with vs, if we may  haue libertie to glorifie him by manifold encouragements, in outward bleſſings: whereas many haue thought it a ſingular priuiledge and great kindnes of his towards them, that they may do it in impriſonment, in bonds, in pouertie, in reproch, &c. And generally, we ought to thinke, that if we thus vſe his benefites, that we grow more vndutifull towards him then many which want them, it is time for him (as hath bene ſaid) to take them from vs, and to beſtow them vpon ſuch as will yeeld and render vnto him better fruite of them. And if this ſhould be any occaſion of licentiouſneſſe to vs, that many, yea, the moſt of ſuch as haue a great portion in earthly commodities, do delight in them, and take them not to be giuen them of God to the  end that they ſhould liue more holily, or be the fruitfuller in chriſtian duties by them: we muſt anſwer to our ſelues thus againe, that we neuer were taught it of God, to follow examples, no not of the beſt men, contrarie to expreſſe rules of Scripture; much leſſe, the euill examples of the multitude, and common ſort of ſuch as reiect all Scripture.
               Now though we fall not this way by meanes of our proſperitie, (for that were very groſſe) yet if we ſhould more couertly deceiue our ſelues by thinking thus, that we haue ſufficiently profited by this direction now, and therfore may ceaſe; and neglecting to ſee our wants, daungers, infirmities and diſcouragements which are in our way (as in time paſt) and ſo caſt off this trauell:  againſt theſe deceiuings of our hearts, we muſt reſolutely be perſwaded of the manifold perils outward and inward, which are in our liues; which full ſoone (if we grow cold and remiſſe in a godly life) do begin to take hold of vs: & therfore to keepe our ſelues well whiles we be well. And thus we muſt vſe our ſelues, as hath now bene ſet downe, that we may not vſe the practiſes of godlineſſe after a common manner. But many, whiles the Lord reacheth foorth encouragements to them, and filleth their liues with outward bleſſings,

do accuſtome themſelues to ſome commendable courſe: who when  God chaungeth their proſperous eſtate, do immediately chaunge with it; that is to ſay, whiles daungers and great afflictions take hold of their liues, they are ſo diſtreſſed and grieued for them, that they grow froward, impatient and diſquieted thereby, and are vtterly vnfit to continue ſuch godly meanes as before they vſed, for the growing forward in a godly life. Hereby is great daunger to be feared: therefore if poſſibly by any of Gods chaſtiſements we ſhold fall thus farre; yet we muſt confeſſe ſuch ſlippes with griefe, and with ſhame and aſtoniſhment behold our falles, and ſettle no peace in our hearts, till we haue returned and recouered our ſtrength againe, and ſo returne to our firſt eſtate againe: which alſo moſt certainely we ſhall, if with  the ſeruants of God in all ages (as the Iſraelites, 1. Sam. 7.4. Heſter and Mardocheus, Heſter. 4. Iehoſaphat, 2. King. 20. and others) we confeſſe our ſinnes with melting and broken hearts, yea our particular ſinnes of murmuring, impatience, fretting and ſuch like; that ſo we may be receiued of our heauenly father for his Chriſts ſake, to mercie and forgiueneſſe.
            
         
         
            
            
            THE SIXTH TREATISE SHEWETH WHAT  PRIVILEDGES BELONG TO euery true Chriſtian: and how he may haue his part in them.
            
               CHAP. 1. Of the ſumme of this Treatiſe: the reaſons why it is ſet out: the order of it: and of the diuers kindes of priuiledges.
               
               
                  THe next thing which commeth in place to be ſpoken of, is concerning the priuiledges and liberties, which God hath bequeathed vnto and freely beſtowed vpon his people and beloued ſeruants. I do not meane any of his benefits which he ſuffereth the vngodly to enioy, (which yet are farre more ſweet and ſauoury to his children than to them) but I meane thoſe which are peculiar to the faithfull, whereof the other haue no part nor portion. The which,The wicked haue no part in the priuiledges of the faithfull. although all the faithfull enioy not, and therefore feele not ſo great contentation in  their liues as they might doe, yet they haue free grant and liberty of the Lord ſo to doe, if they knew the will of God in that behalfe; or if knowing it, they be not holden backe through vnbeliefe, as being ſtrongly perſwaded that they doe not belong vnto them.Some of them proper to ſome of the faithfull in reſpect of their calling. I know that of thoſe many and great bleſſings which the children of God partake, ſome are peculiar and proper to ſome in reſpect of their callings, offices and places, which are not common to all: but I intend to make mention onely of thoſe, which one may poſſeſſe (although not in a like meaſure) aſwell as an other.
               And this I do for ſundry and diuers cauſes: partly,Three reaſons why this doctrine is handled. that the godly may ſee their riches in ſome ſort aſwell as other men know theirs; and knowing them,  may enioy them to their great contentation, which few of them doe as they might: and that if by any occaſion they ſhould be,The firſt reaſon. either by the baits of this world, by their owne forgetfulneſſe, faint-heartedneſſe, diſtruſt or other weakneſſe of their owne, or by Sathans malice, put out of the poſſeſſion of them, or any of them; yet by conſidering and remembring theſe or ſome of them, they might be able to returne home againe from whence they ſtraied, and that more eaſily and willingly than many do, or thinke it poſſible for them to doe

by any meanes; eſpecially when they ſhall ſee that whereſoeuer they caſt  their delight, yet they ſhall be driuen with wearineſſe to ſay, that they finde no where ſo good liking and ſafetie, as at home, I meane in Gods houſe, that is, vnder his nourture and gouernment.
               
                  The ſecond reaſon.Another cauſe why I ſet downe theſe priuiledges of Gods ſeruants, is, that the wicked which wander from God, and are not in his fauour, may ſee, what they goe without, and what great good things they depriue themſelues of, by their ſinnes. By forgoing of the which, (to ſay nothing of the deceiueable and miſerable eſtate wherein they liue) if they ſhould but weigh and conſider what they loſe and forgoe, which others enioy, and they likewiſe might, it would deeply vexe their hearts as oft as they ſhould thinke of it: euen as in hell the reprobate ſhall finde this not the leaſt part of their torment, to ſee others in ſo happy condition, which they are vtterly cut off from all hope of attaining to.
               
                  The third reaſon.Laſtly, that I may hereby (if poſſibly) helpe to bring the Chriſtian life into ſome better credit & account, both with the one and with the other: which to my no leſſe griefe than admiration, I ſee to lie as dead wares little asked after, in the world. For many, euen of the godly, do not eſteeme of the Chriſtian life, and of the wiſdome which ſhould governe vs, as they ought to doe, that is to ſay,Prou. 8.11. as of a treaſure more to be deſired than any earthly thing, be it  honour, wealth, pleaſure, and that at all times. And as for the vngodly they haue no liking of it, but the moſt of them ſcorne, deface, abhorre, and diſſwade from it, counting it preciſme and puritaniſme, truly and conſcionably to go about to practiſe it, and thorowout their liues to ſet themſelues to bring foorth the fruits of it, when yet there is no happineſſe in any other eſtate; for into it alone, (as hath beene ſaid) do all the heauenly and excellent priuiledges fall.
               If any, on whom this rebuke doth iuſtly take holde, ſhall contrarily anſwer, that they doe honour the Chriſtian life and delight in it, although they doe miſlike indeed (they ſay) that men ſhould be to preciſe in vrging others to duty, and in framing themſelues to a certeine kinde of excellency and ſingularity aboue others: I ſay, let ſuch cleare themſelues from fault by this, that they acknowledge that God hath bequeathed to his deare children better things than the world hath; and therefore that ſuch as beleeue this, and haue a part in it, cannot content themſelues to honour God ſo ſleightly as they doe which haue them not, but acknowledge that they owe much more than they can performe, when they haue done all that they can: alſo let them indeuour to haue in common theſe priuiledges with the reſt of Gods ſeruants, and let them thus prooue, that they delight in godlineſſe indeed: ſo ſhall they ceaſe from their ſpeeches, and agree with vs, and haue good warrant of their ſafetie and  welfare; and otherwiſe, I meane vntill they doe ſo, they ſhall but bite at them who are in better caſe than themſelues. This ſhall ſuffice in generall, to haue ſpoken of the priuiledges of the faithfull, and of the reaſons why I make this Treatiſe of them.
               Now particularly I will ſet downe ſome of the chiefe (for who can mention all?) of the which though ſome haue beene made mention of by occaſion

                   in other places of this booke: yet ſeeing they haue not beene handled of purpoſe, and that euery Reader can not gather them together, nor know them to be ſo, nor haue them before him in view at once, except they be ſpoken of to this end, to ſhew the beauty and price of them; therefore they being ſo neceſſary to be knowne and inioied, I count it no loſt labour to doe it. And for more eaſe and leſſe tediouſneſſe in reading of them, becauſe they are many, I will bring them all to theſe two heads.
               The firſt kinde of our priuiledges and prerogatiues,The kindes of the priuiledges. which true Chriſtians haue allowed and allotted to them of God, are ſuch as be inioied in this preſent  world, wherein they haue many things to incourage them to a chearefull honoring of God. The ſecond ſort, is of thoſe liberties and peculiar bleſſings, which God hath in ſtore for them in the life to come: which with the former being daily weighed and duly conſidered, doe in marueilous maner ſet before them and commend to them the ſingular loue of God, and make them ſee themſelues ſo beholding to him, that they are ſet forward with exceeding cheerefulneſſe in their chriſtian courſe and warfare.
            
            
               
                   CHAP. 2. Of the firſt priuiledge: That the beleeuers may know in this world, that they haue eternall life.
               
                  OF the firſt ſort, this is one (which the rich men of the world, who want it, cannot purchaſe with all their ſubſtance:) I meane, that they may know and bee perſwaded that they are beloued of God, and that their names are written in heauen, and therefore although they be ſtrangers heere for a while, yet that they ſhall vndoubtedly be ſaued; whiles in the meane ſeaſon,  others who are farre from it, doe pleaſe themſelues with laughing at their folly, ſaucineſſe and madneſſe (as they count it) for that they fancie ſuch things to themſelues. Whereby they declare (in thinking there are no ſuch to whom this is reueiled) what a priuiledge it is,Luc. 12.32. Luc. 10.20. to know ſo much of Gods will and minde, to be partakers of ſo great a treaſure, as the mightie ones doe confeſſe is vtterly hidden from them. Now for proofe of it, that God alloweth them to know it, what is more manifeſt than this which is written by Saint Iohn? Behold, what loue the father hath giuen to vs,
                  1. Ioh. 3.1. Ioh. 1.12. 1. Ioh. 5.13. 
                  that we ſhould be called the ſonnes of God. And againe: As many as receiued him, to them he gaue prerogatiue to be the ſonnes of God, euen to them that beleeue in his name. Alſo: Theſe  things haue I written vnto you that beleeue in the name of the ſonne of God, that yee may know, that yee haue eternall life, &c. But this matter hauing beene largely handled in the firſt chapter, may with fewer proofes ſatisfie ſuch as deſire to heare more of it.
               Therefore as this is not to be doubted of, that true Chriſtians know themſelues, or may by ſome euidences, (euen the weakeſt) to be beloued of God, and that they ſhall be ſaued: ſo how great a priuiledge this is, let them learne

(who ſet little by it) of Chriſt himſelfe, who hath valued it at a greater price  then all the world:Mat. 16.24. 
                  What ſhall it profit a man though he ſhould winne the whole world, if he looſe his owne ſoule? or what ſhall a man giue for recompence of his ſoule? Now if the knowing of this ſecret, that God loueth vs, be a priuiledge of ſo great account, yea though a man ſhould know it but dimly, and if he ſhould know it but once in all his life: what a manner of priuiledge then is this to be accounted,Rom. 1.17. that we may grow from faith to faith, and from a darker knowledge of it to a clearer from day to day,A Chriſtian may haue better aſſurance of his ſaluation, then any man can haue of the things he holdeth in this life. and that, with better aſſurance then we hold any thing in this life by ſeale, writing, witneſſe, or any other way that law can deuiſe? For indeed the benefit of knowing this ſo great a  treaſure to be fallen vs, were by many degrees leſſe, if it were, when it is once knowne to vs, afterward to be doubted of and called into queſtion againe, and that our aſſurance might not both grow greater, and daily continuance of the ſame be obteined.
               
                  This priuiledge is the greater, ſeeing the longer we enioy it, the better we know it.But thanks be to God for his vnſpeakable mercy, who hath prouided, that the longer we liue, the better we may know it. For the longer that we haue beleeued Gods promiſe, and beene acquainted with it, who doubteth, but that we may much more cleerely be perſwaded of it, then in former times when we firſt beleeued, and when we had not as yet ſo often conſidered it, nor ſo deepely weighed what might hinder and weaken our faith, or come againſt it? For at the firſt enlightning of our hearts with this ſunne-ſhine of faith, we haue many miſtes and cloudes caſt before our eies, to dim & darken it: many doubts ariſing from our owne weakneſſe, vnworthineſſe & feeling of our ſins when we haue had as yet little experience of Gods tender compaſſion & care ouer vs, or at leaſt when little marked of vs; much feare troubleth vs then, becauſe we ſee many things to accuſe vs, and for that we doe not many duties which we heare taught vnto vs; but when we are better acquainted with him, we more eaſily beleeue, that he will forgiue them all vnto vs. And as the yoong childe is not able to ſtand and go alone, till time hath brought more ſtrength: euen ſo it fareth with vs. But when we haue after longer time ſeene the will and  minde of God to be conſtant & vnchangeable,
                     1. Chron. 28.7. God requireth nothing more, then an vnfeigned care to pleaſe him. our own care to pleaſe God to be vnfeigned though vnperfect (more then which nothing is required of vs) and that the beſt of Gods ſeruants haue had the ſame infirmities as well as we, & that we haue liberty, when we ſee our weakneſſe to ſeeke pardon of the ſame at the hands of our good God; theſe and ſuch like conſiderations after longer time, when we haue oft weighed, God hath giuen vs greater ſtrength of faith, and ſtrengthned vs to waxe more confident, euen as we haue withall become more humble and obedient. So farre is it off, that this aſſurance the longer time we haue inioied it, ſhould be further off from vs.
               
                  
                     Obiection againſt the ſure holding of this priuiledge, anſwered.
                     On cauſe of doubtfulneſſe is, the neglect or careleſſe vſing of the meanes whereby faith is confirmed.
                  And as for that many obiect, that ſundry of Gods children, after they haue  knowen it, doe fall to doubt of it after, this gainſaieth not that which I affirme. For that it may be and is thus, I deny not; the deuils ſubtilty and malice being ſtronger then men haue faith to reſiſt it. But the trueth is, that as the godly are renewed but in part: ſo through corruption they may waxe wearie oftentimes of that care which ſhould procure their welfare, and may (as no doubt but many doe) neglect to nouriſh their faith daily, and ſlake their

                   delight in vſing reuerently the beſt meanes for the conforming of the ſame: and therefore, ſuch doe the oftner taſte of the hard dyet of other men, becauſe they will ſometimes chooſe to follow their waies.
               Beſides, there are others which though they offend not that way,A ſecond cauſe is, diſtruſt. yet they giue too much place to diſtruſt, hauing no iuſt cauſe, by an euill conſcience, which is the greateſt enemie to faith: and heereby they depriue themſelues of the benefit of this faith and confidence.Pſ. 77.9.10. Which kind of people muſt labor to ſtay themſelues by the perſwaſion of ſuch Scripture as is written of purpoſe for their comfort, as: Take my yoke vpon you, and yee ſhall finde rest to your  ſoules. alſo: A contrite heart God will not deſpiſe, &c. Mat. 11.29. Pſal. 51.17. Mat. 12.20. Pſa. 43.5. But to returne, ſeeing they may hold & abide in Gods loue, and hold faſt this knowledge of it, the longer they liue, they ſee this muſt be granted them alſo:Ioh. 10.28. That none ſhall take them out of the Lords hands or cuſtodie, but that he will care for them vnto the reſurrection day.
               Wherein this is a further degree flowing from the former, that this loue of God being ſhed into their hearts plentifully by the holy Ghoſt,
                     Rom. 5.5. This priuiledge is the greater for the ioy it bringeth. it maketh them more quiet, ioyfull and better ſatisfied, then all that can be deſired of them beſides, according to that which Saint Peter ſaith: Though we ſee him not, yet we beleeue in him, and we reioice with ioy vnſpeakable and glorious.  For what is there in the world, that can raiſe the like ioy in our hearts, as this, that we know that we ſhall ſee the good pleaſures of the Lord in the land of the liuing (that is,2. Cor. 5.1. in his militant church heere) and haue an houſe not made with hands, but eternall, in his triumphant heereafter? who doeth not ſee, as the former ages haue found and felt, and they who yet remaine on earth ſhall finde, that to all other things, euen the beſt, there is an appointed end? And therefore the ioy that men conceiue for them, is but flitting and momentanie, not vnſpeakable and euerlaſting. So that the peace and ioy which ariſe from the certeinty of our ſaluation, is woorthely rekoned as a ſingular priuiledge, in as much, as it doeth not onely exceed all worldly treaſures; but  alſo, becauſe it is proper to the children of God,Reu. 14.3. and the other haue no part in it.
               And further, this ſhould better appeare,This priuiledge is the greater by conſidering the woe of the reprobate, who want this. how great a priuiledge it is to be beloued of God, if we could poſſibly conceiue the dreadfull feare of the reprobate in deſperation, and how little comfort ſuch an one taketh in all his wealth and delights which he hath in this world (in whatſoeuer price and account they are with fooles:) but would giue them all for one quarter of an houres feeling of Gods louing kindneſſe and ſweet countenance towards him, if it could be inioied, and the ſound peace and comfort that commeth with it. And therefore if any will know the benefit and greatneſſe of this priuiledge,  let him aske of them, who hauing hardned their hearts through vnbeliefe, are growne into deſpaire: who with weariſome ſighes and groanes, that cannot be expreſſed, doe thinke with themſelues and ſpeake many times: Oh how happy are thoſe which are ſaued? yea, and what would they giue, if they had it, how many thouſand worlds, for a part in Gods kingdome? Or if the damned ſoules in hell could ſpeake, they would tell you, whether this be a prerogatiue, to be kept ſo ſafely from the torments thereof, and honoured

with the aſſurance of heauen and happineſſe; as partly may be gathered by  that which Saint Luke writeth of the Epicure in the Goſpel,Luc. 16.24. ſaying: Oh that the tippe of a finger were dipped in water to coole my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.For want of the ioy of this priuiledge, the vaine delights of the world are hunted after. This priuiledge is yet greater, ſeeing it may be inioyed dayly and to our end. And without it, (I meane, where this is not inioied) I doe maruell, that vaine, deceiueable and tranſitorie, yea loathſome and filthy pleaſures are ſo hunted after, as they be: euen till they iuſtle out all remembrance and regard of heauenly things altogether. And this ſweet liberty peculiar to Gods children, which I now ſpeake of, is ſo much the greater by this, that we may inioy it all the day long, and ſo throughout our life, and are not ſtinted nor tied to one houre or time wherein we may poſſeſſe it: and alſo  becauſe the longer time we be partakers of it, the ſweeter it is vnto vs, ſeeing we doe the better know the benefit of it, and that none hath power to depriue vs of it. And thus much of the firſt priuiledge; namely, The certeintie of our ſaluation, whiles we are in this life: which, if we weigh throughly what we haue beene and what we haue deſerued, will (I thinke) be thought no ſmall nor meane gift, but great and woonderfull, and yet proper to the beleeuers: ſo that all people which ſhall vnderſtand it, may woorthily and for good cauſe commend the Chriſtians life, to the which it properly perteineth, and wiſh and trauell to imbrace and be partakers of it moſt willingly; euen as we read, that in ages paſt it was ſaid by the Lord, that ten men out of all languages of the  nations, ſhall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Iew, and ſay: We will goe with you, for we haue heard that God is with you, Zach. 8.23. And if there were no other priuiledge, but this one to be inioied, whiles we liue heere; yet were our porcion exceeding great, ſeeing ſo many thouſands who heare of it would thinke their eſtate right happy and good, if after many yeeres paine and heauineſſe in ſeeking it, they might inioy it.
               But, glory be to God on high, theſe are not all the precious benefits and prerogatiues, which God hath willingly bequeathed his ſeruants, beſides all other outward bleſſings which they haue in common with the vnbeleeuers. Of theſe therefore, or ſome of them, which either they doe, or may enioy  daily in the ſeuerall actions and parts of their liues, to make the ſame well pleaſing to God, acceptable to men, and more eaſie and ſweet to themſelues then the moſt doe finde them; of theſe (I ſay) it followeth next to ſay ſome thing.
            
            
               CHAP. 3. Of the ſecond Priuiledge: namely, That God is with his alwaies after he hath aſſured them of his fauour.
               
               
                  BVt to paſſe to the ſecond: if they might onely know, that they ſhall be ſaued after they depart out of this world, and ſhould in the meane while be neglected and left as orphans, deſolate and expoſed to all iniuries and diſcomforts, the priuiledge, which I haue ſpoken of, ſhould be the leſſe (although nothing is to be

                   compared vnto it:) but God hath promiſed ouer and beſide that,
                     God hath a ſpeciall care of his, euen in this world. Rom. 5.5. Pſ. 30.6.7. Luc. 13.34. Deut. 32.10. to haue a fatherly care ouer them, euen in this life alſo, and to teſtifie his loue plentifully vnto them many other waies: which ſpecial care he hath not of other, though he ſuffereth them to liue. 1. Tim. 4.10. Alſo he is their ſhelter from tempeſts and ſtormes of troubles; and keepeth them ſafe vnder his protection, as the hen doth the chickens vnder her wing: yea, he keepeth them as the apple of his eie; and counteth them his friends, communicating with them his ſecrets,1. Tim. 4.10. & Mat. 10.30. Pſ. 1.3. and declaring and making knowen to them the hidden treaſures of his kingdome, and in euery eſtate will ſaue and vpholde them by his prouidence:  ſo that they may proſper and be well liking in reſpect of other, though they haue all outward abundance. And if God who is rich in all good things and hath all power in his hands, be their ſhepheard, what can they want?Pſ. 23.1. if he be with them (as he is) who can be againſt them? if he honour them,Rom. 8.31. 1. Sam. 2.30. Pſ. 1.1. whoſe diſgracing of them can hurt them? yea, if he make them bleſſed, who can depriue them of it?
               But when I haue ſaid what I can of their eſtate, I muſt confeſſe I haue ſaid little, ſo great and precious are the particular prerogatiues which they haue bequeathed vnto them. And yet beholde,
                     And in this ſafety they are, when his anger is kindled againſt others.
                     
                        Pſ. 2.12. Beholde the greatneſſe of this priuiledge in one part of it:
                     
                        Hebr. 1.14. Namely, the honour that they are in thereby.
                   in this high account they are with God alwaies, when his anger is kindled againſt other which are his enemies.  And what comfort may be conceiued by the beleeuing, conſidering and applying of all theſe unto the faithfull heart? And that I may the eaſilier perſwade the weake Chriſtian, that theſe things are not little, conſider if any one of theſe commodities, which I haue ſaid, doe, by Gods free grant, pertaine to the beleeuers, that by ſome one they may value and eſteeme the reſt: conſider therefore, firſt the honor that they haue in being called The ſeruants of God (than the which title and name the angels haue no greater) to declare the honour that goeth with it: which partly may appeare by another compariſon, and that alſo more familiar to vs. For looke, how high and honourable the office and place is, that is inioyed vnder a Prince (whither it be L. Chancellor,  Treaſurer, or the like) more than the ſame is vnder an inferior perſon:
                     The greatneſſe of this priuilege is ſet forth alſo by this title that Chriſt giueth them, of being called not ſeruants but friends.
                     
                        Ioh. 15.15. Alſo in that we are ſonnes, heires & fellow heires with Chriſt. Rom 8.17. Exod. 19.5. Furthermore, the godly are the treaſure of the Lord, and therefore the delight of his heart.
                   euen ſo by many degrees, the honour of being ſeruant vnto the moſt high, is farre greater than all other which here may be attained.
               And yet as though this were not enough to be called The ſeruants of the Almighty, Chriſt himſelfe ſetteth out their eſtate to be yet more glorious, when he ſaith: I haue not called you ſeruants but friends, to whom I haue communicated my ſecrets and minde, vnto the which a ſeruant is not commonly admitted. And yet euen this is not ſo admirable, if it be laied with that which in another place is written: That God hath adopted vs to be his ſonnes and heires, yea fellow-heires with Chriſt himſelfe. Not much vnlike hereunto, is that which is  written in another place: If ye will keepe my commandements, ye ſhall be to me the moſt precious of all the earth, though all the earth be mine. If the godly be his precious treaſure, how can they but be delighted in of him, ſafely kept alſo, and preſerued from all that might annoy them? and being ſo deare vnto him, how will he ſuffer them to want any thing that is good? And therefore Kings for their honour they are called, though not earthly, inferior to the angels indeed; but yet, through hope, the moſt precious people among all nations,

though all the earth be his:The godly are alſo called kings for their honor. Exod. 19.5.
                   whereby they rule ouer Sathan the prince of  this world, by faith, and tread vnder their feet the kingdome of darkneſſe and ſinne, and ſo become conquerors ouer him and the world. For the Scripture teacheth them this wiſdome, the ſpirit giueth them this grace, and witneſſeth this to be true,1. Ioh. 5.4. that he which hath faith, ouercommeth the world: that is, maketh that, which is in it, as the luſt of the fleſh, the luſt of the eye, and the pride of life, to be ſubiect to him. An honour which Kings and Princes, for the moſt part, attaine not vnto: for many of them aſwell as of others, worſhip the beaſt, and offer to him their crowne, and willingly ſubmit themſelues to his ſlauery. And this honour which he bequeatheth to his faithfull ones, is one  commodity and fruite of his provident care and fatherly regard that he hath over them.
               And yet in that there is no end of this, but that he will continue it towards them throughout their life,God will continue this honour to them. and that in more certainty and aſſurance, it is ſo much the more to be had in admiration: whereas in the meane while, they who are none of his, nor nourtered in his family, which is his church, cannot inioy the leaſt part of this liberty, they cannot beleeue nor be perſwaded of any ſuch thing at any time, neither dare they promiſe to themſelues, that he will be with them, and be a ſhelter vnto them; but for want thereof they ſmart, being hardened in their hearts, and let looſe after their owne deſire, to commit  any ſinne that their heart luſteth after, euen with greedineſſe; and that, becauſe the lord hath not that eſpeciall care ouer them, that he hath ouer his owne beloued ones to keepe them from it.
               This prerogatiue (I ſay) the wicked men of the world, and vnregenerate, not onely haue not while they remaine in that eſtate,The wicked haue no part in it. neither doe ſo much as fervently and conſtantly deſire it, nor cannot; being no more able, then the blind man is to ſee, or the new borne child to walke: and therefore in ſtead of theſe liberties they are ſtill in bondage, and for the moſt ſweet dainties of gods children, they are fedde with draffe, euen with fancies, dreames and deceiuable pleaſures. But contrariwiſe, that which was ſpoken to Mary the mother of  
                  Ieſus,
                  Luc. 1.28. thou being freely beloued of the lord, he is euer with thee afterwards, to preſerue thee whom he hath loued: the ſame may be verified of all gods children; after he hath once receiued them into fauour, forgiuing them all their ſinns,Whom God once loueth, he loueth vnto the end. he is with them euer after, to watch ouer and care for them; that ſo they may be preſented ſafe before him, when he ſhall appeare for their euerlaſting deliuerance.
               By which it may be ſeene, how excellent and how much to be deſired, the eſtate of the pooreſt of Gods children is,
                     The eſtate of the pooreſt child of God, is farre better that the beſt of the vngodly.
                     Experience teacheth the trueth of theſe things. Eph. 3.19.
                     
                   aboue the flouriſhing youth that liueth at hearts caſe, or the mightieſt monarch or prince that is vnreformed. It might ſeeme therefore, that euen this honour that God giveth to his ſervants, which I have already ſpoken of, were enough. And I confeſſe, that if I might haue had my choiſe, when I was in the depth of helliſh anguiſh and miſery, I ſhould not haue asked the tenth part of it: the lord hath therefore giuen more, then we could haue asked or thought: yet theſe are not all the priuiledges, which God hath beſtowed vpon his beloued ones, as ſhall be ſeene. For heereby they walke in greater ſafety, then if they were guarded with an army

                   of men: yea, if whole armies of enimies came againſt them, as againſt Eliſha, yet have they more with them, then againſt them.2. King. 6.16. For the angels of God doe pitch their tents about them to keepe them.Pſal. 34.7. And how great a prerogatiue this is, they can beſt tell who beleeue it, although they muſt needs commend it who doe but heare the report of it. For they know and haue experience of it, who receive theſe promiſes into their hearts by faith, and beleeue that God will performe the ſame vnto them, who are not at any time depriued of them but onely through their vnbeliefe.
               I graunt, that all gods children inioy not this, neither ſay I any ſuch thing:  but this I ſay and affirme freely, that to every age in Chriſt, both the weake,Why they inioy not this conſtantly. the ſtrong and the middle age, there is more granted by God, then is inioied of them: not that God doth in words ſeeme to offer that,Note. which he meaneth not to performe, but becauſe men either know not, or beleeue not through ſathans malice, what their liberties are: or if they doe,Men not knowing, or but faintly beleeuing the liberties of the children of God, depriue themſelues of much comfort that they might conſtantly enioy. yet it is ſo faintly beleeued, that they are holden backe by euery occaſion almoſt, to forgoe and be diſpoſſeſſed of them. Which all muſt grant to be through their owne fault, which may eaſily appeare to him who is willing to ſee it, thus: whereas the ſpirituall riches, which beautifie the ſoule, are the greateſt riches, and therefore ſhould moſt be ſought after, eſteemed and delighted in: many euen of good  hope, which will grant this with vs, will not yet beſtow any more trauell for the ſame (be they neuer ſo great priuiledges which god offereth them) then they did in times paſt; that is, with leſſe delight and feruency, then they ſhew in following and looking after their earthly commodities. They cannot (I ſay) be brought to ſet an higher price vpon the graces of God, and the heauenly liberties, which belong to Chriſtians, then vpon tranſitory things, which ſoone paſſe away.
               And this in few words is the chiefe cauſe, why not only earthly minded men attaine to nothing, but euen ſome ſuch as haue receiued the firſt fruites of the ſpirit, grow not to any great experience what the excellent eſtate of a chriſtian  is, and how great priuiledges God granteth many of them to inioy. Alas,Note. if men taſt but a little of beliefe that their ſinnes ſhall be forgiuen them, they hardly goe any further to daily proceedings in their faith (though they are taught that they ſhould grow from faith to faith) and ſo to liue by it,Rom. 1.16. but ſtand at a ſtay for the moſt part, euer ready to call into queſtion, whether they haue it or no. What are ſuch the better for the infinit good things, which God hath in ſtore for his, which alſo diuers of their brethren inioy already, in reſpect of that which they may attaine to? but rather as though they were no ſuch, they walke either heauily, nothing able to beare off the diſcouragements which they meet with, by ſpirituall helpes and incouragements which they haue not;  or rather in worſe caſe, that is, not ſeeing, when they are hindred at all. I deny not, that the diuill doth ſubtilely and vigilantly ſeeke to blindefold them, weaken their faith, and ſet manifold ſtoppes in their way: but wherefore haue they beene taught this, that the ſcripture giueth greater grace,Iam. 4.6. 1. Ioh. 4.4. but that the eie ſhould beleeue it, and finde it ſo then? And againe the greater is he which is in them, namely the ſpirit of god, then he that is in the world, that is the diuill?
               And yet al theſe & other ſuch excellent priuiledges which appertaine unto

them,All the priuiledges of the godly are no more then God ſaw needfull for them. 1. Pet. 1.6.
                   are no more then God did ſee they ſhould ſtand in need of to helpe  them beare the burden of tribulation, reproch and other diſcouragements which heere of neceſſity muſt meet with them: which would ſhake them ſo, as they would make them to faint vtterly, if they were not vpholden with props and ſtaies moſt mighty. Conſider this yee that forget God and aske not after him: but eſpecially, yee ſeruants of his who deſire to doe his will. For theſe things doth God indeed: I meane, he bequeatheth many goodly and ſweet liberties to his, and many of his beloued ones find them and feele them; and you that doe not ſo, behold what yee looſe and goe without. Claime therefore with reuerence that which is your due, I meane which god hath beſtowed  vpon you; and beware, leſt through your default, the priuiledges of Chriſtians ſhould not be thought as great as the Lorde in his word affirmeth them to be, whiles you inioy them not, as though they were no ſuch.
               
                  Pſal. 87.3. Rom. 5.5.The Lord hath done great things for vs, as it is written: Honorable things are reported of thee, O thou citty of God. And if it were not ſo, and if the loue of God were not ſweetly ſhed in our hearts through the holy ghoſt; yea, if we were not perſwaded that the Lord is a plentifull rewarder of them that ſeeke him,Heb. 11.6. and that all the afflictions of this life are not worthy the glory which ſhall be ſhewed vpon us, we might ſoone be cauſed to caſt downe our countenance and be diſcouraged:1. Ioh. 3.3. Reuel. 2.13. who are not onely ſtrangers heere and therefore  not knowen nor regarded, but we are among profeſſed enimies, who, the more we differ from them, the more we are hated of them, and therefore in feare of continuall and infinite dangers by reaſon of them and their captaine; and, but for that the Lord hath promiſed to be with vs and guide vs, we ſhould vtterly faint and be diſcouraged.
            
            
               CHAP. 4. Of the third priuiledge: How God giueth grace to his children to  liue godly: and of the firſt branch.
               
                  BVt that it may better appeare how great this priuiledge is, (and ſo I may proceed vnto the reſt) let vs further heare, what worthy and ſingular fruits doe flow from this fatherly eare and moſt louing prouidence of God ouer his, and accompany the ſame thorowout their liues; which though they ariſe and proceed from the former, yet I will ſet them downe as particular priuiledges diſtinctly by themſelues. And becauſe it is not ſo eaſily ſeene and conceiued of many, much leſſe beleeued, I will more particularly lay forth the ſame: and  firſt this third; the ſumme whereof is this, that who ſo are thus cared for of God, he beſtoweth this grace vpon them, that they learne of him that which none can learne elſewhere, nor any but his choſen ones can learne, that is how to liue, and goe through their whole pilgrimage according to his will; and how to die, and goe from this vale of miſeſy, that they may afterwards be taken vp into glory: euen this prerogatiue he granteth them. And it hath theſe

                   two branches: the one, that they may be fruitfull in good life; the other, that they may be kept from foule offences.The firſt branch of it.
               
               Now concerning the firſt; namely, the holy life which God teacheth them to lead, this is not the leaſt,
                     They haue grac to liue well. Mat. 11.29. 2 Pet 1.8. 1. Tim. 5.10. I might rightly ſay there is no greater treaſure here to be inioied: that they need not count the Chriſtian life comberſome, vnſauory, and an heauy and tedious burden as the moſt doe, but an eaſie yoke, an eſtate wherein they need neither be idle nor vnprofitable, but readily prepared vnto euery good worke. Now that they may be able to doe this, to be ſetled conſtantly in a godly courſe, and wiſe to preuent and auoide the hinderances  that lie in their way, and to aime at the commandements of God as at a marke, that they may keepe them: is not this a benefit,Pſ. 119.1▪ 2. Pſ. 1.2. yea a ſingular priuiledge, when the prophet calleth him an happy man that is inabled of God thereto? and Chriſt himſelfe teacheth, that it is the chiefe happineſſe which can be inioied in this life, to keepe the word of God which we heare,Luc. 11.28. that it may direct & guide vs? yea, that one day in his houſe,Pſ. 84.2. that is ſpent and paſſed in the militant church and as his ſeruants doe, is better then a thouſand in any eſtate beſides?
               And although it be an eſtate full of happineſſe, yet let no man maruel that I ſay Gods beloued ones may haue this liberty and prerogatiue to walke and  liue in it:Phil. 4.13. for the Lord inableth them thereunto by whoſe power they can doe all things; he giueth them an heart not defiled and vncleane,Ezek. 36.27. The reaſon.
                   as it was ſometime, but purged and clenſed in good ſort, and therefore now it is able to like and loue his will which ſometime it loathed: and they who beleeue and are perſwaded, that God will beſtow and doth daily offer this grace of ſanctification vnto them, they receiue it, and thereby are ſtrengthened to doe that good in their life, which they can loue with their heart, and which they approoue of and allow in their iudgement.
               Now if this liberty of Gods ſeruants be not either knowen of ſome good Chriſtians, or not beleeued,Why ſome good people inioy not this. Pſ. 77.7.
                   I deny not but euen they (as yet) may goe without  this priuiledge in great part, accordingly as we may ſee in many. But this need not be, if they knew and were perſwaded of Gods liberality and bounty towards them, as ſome others are, who is ſo farre from denying grace hereto, that he hath pleaſure to ſee them vſe it well to whome he granteth it. And vntill this be, that they draw by faith daily ſtrength from Ieſus Chriſt to ſubdue their luſts, they cannot obtaine to finde the Chriſtian life eaſie to them, as ſome others doe, but goe to worke by their owne ſtrength in all their duties, and by the vertue of their praiers hoping to preuaile againſt their ſinnes; which indeed are not conquered by any ſuch meanes, but remaine in their old ſtrength ſtill: the which they ſeeing, that for all their labouring and ſtriuing  againſt them, yet they doe not finde that they are weakened or abated in them, but that although they toile themſelues much, yet they profit little; they begin to be diſcouraged and faint, euen in vſing the meanes which they did, beholding how they ſticke faſt ſtill in the mire wherein before they lay: and ſo they being diſcouraged, fall into ſome great ſorow, or which is little differing, breake out into ſecurity and looſeneſſe. And this ſlauery they are brought vnto, through the malice and ſubtilty of the diuil, who ſeeing their vnableneſſe

to beleeue the promiſe of God, (which is, that he will ſtrengthen them againſt  their ſpeciall infirmities) doth play the Lion, holding them vnder with vnbeliefe.
               Againſt the which their remedy muſt be this, that they reſiſt ſtedfaſt in faith:1. Pet. 5.7. that is, that they yeeld not to this diſtruſt, which long hath oppreſſed them, but by little and little ſuffer themſelues to be perſwaded that their caſe is farre better then they conceiue (which ſhall neuer be hard to perſwade them:God hath not taken care of his, to leaue them in the midway. Ioh. 14.18.
                   who found true deliuerance from the ſpirit of bondage) and that the Lord hath not taken them into his fauour to leaue them at ſix and ſeuen (as they ſay) in the world, and to make them ſhift for themſelues as orphans, and  to truſt to their owne wiſdome and ſtrength to preſerue them from ſathan and ſinne: but that he as a father caring for them, hath ſufficient power in his hand to ſtrengthen them, and requireth this of them, that they ſhould beleeue it: which they cannot doe but thereby they are mightily ſtaied and vpholden,The beleeuer ſhall be ſet at libertie from his ſpeciallest ſinnes. and by the ſame faith ſhall more and more be vpholden daily; vntill they ſee themſelues ſet at great liberty, and that it was the diuill who before held them in feare and bondage.
               
                  Obiection.The common obiection will heere be put foorth vnto me: that they would (if they durſt be ſo bolde) beleeue with all their hearts, that God will ſubdue and ſlea their ſinne and lead them forward to liue godly, if they could firſt ouercome  ſome particular ſinnes which doe moſt trouble them: but as long as they preuaile in them they dare not thinke (they ſay) that God will giue them that grace,Anſwer. which he doth vnto others. But to anſwere them, I haue ſaid before, that they haue no power in them of their owne whereby they may weaken any ſinne in them, but this they muſt obtaine by faith, as well as grace to liue: and that commands them to doe, ſo that they may know, it pleaſeth them that they ſhould doe ſo.1. Ioh. 3.23. And till that: they are holden from their owne right through the deuils craft, who hideth from them (as their euidence) this confidence in God; euen as, if a ſubtile man ſhould keepe backe from his neighbour, any part of his lande or liuing. I conclude therefore, that Gods  children (who pardoneth their infirmities through Chriſt,Pſ. 130.3.4. and will not looke ſtreightly vpon them) haue this prerogatiue, that they may lead their liues acceptable to him:What the libertie of a Chriſtian is that he may and ought to attaine vnto. and if they be carefull to know, what liberty he hath giuen them whereby they may obtaine ableneſſe thereto, they may walke woorthy the Goſpell indeauouring to pleaſe him in all things, and ſo to be vnrebukeable in the middeſt of a wicked and froward generation; although (as I haue ſaid) through the deuils tirannie and the vnbeliefe of their owne hearts, many euen of them, are farre from inioying this priuiledge.
               The which, as it is accompanied with happineſſe it ſelfe, ſo that it may be ſeene to be a priuiledge indeed peculiar to them, know we, that as for other it  ſhall not neither can be ſo with them; they haue no part in this treaſure, no not euen they,No wicked man can liue godly. which at ſometimes will ſeeme more holy then the reſt. The wicked (I ſay) haue no fitneſſe nor aptneſſe to receiue this grace [To liue godly] no more then a dead man is fit to riſe againe and walke, or the blacke Moore by waſhing to change his blacke skin. And therfore although they like well enough of the name of it, yet that they are ſuch as deny the power of it,

                   heereby it may appeere, that as the worſt ſort of them like dogges and ſwine tread it vnder feete and ſcoffe at it; the common ſort count it and tearme it preciſeneſſe, and loue to be conuerſant with thoſe that are of their owne mindes: ſo the beſt ſort of them are ſuch as finde in themſelues and know, that they haue no pleaſure in it. No better is the patched life of the beſt ſort of papiſts, who liue not by faith, but pleaſe themſelues in this, that their works are good if they doe the outward works which God and their church commend. All of them remaine and continue in the damnable eſtate they were in at the beginning.
               
                   Neither doe I maruell at this, which the Scripture affirmeth ſo plainly,Rom. 8.7. that the vngodly are not obedient to the will of God, neither poſſibly can be.Rom. 7.9. For I my ſelfe (ſaith Paule) when I was in darkeneſſe and liued after the luſtes of mine ignorance, was greedily ſet to commit ſin. Therefore if it be impoſſible for a man vnrenued to forſake ſome particular ſinne, but by infinite degrees much more impoſſible to clenſe his heart, from whence onely good life can come; it is moſt certaine and cleare, that all wicked men, while they abide ſo, are far off from this priuiledge, To be able to lead a godly life: and therefore that is peculiar onely to Gods children to doe ſo.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 5. Of a ſecond branch of the third priuiledge.
               
                  ANother branch of this priuiledge or honour, that Chriſtians haue aboue other men, (which though it neceſſarily accompanie the former, yet becauſe it beſt appeareth, when it is particularly laide open, and helpeth much to ſtrengthen the weake, and to comfort the beſt) is this:They may be kept from great fals. Pro. 19.23.
                   that they may be kept and preſerued  from great and reprochfull euils, that ſeldome or not at all (if it be expedient) they ſhall be ouercome of them: which the Apoſtle would neuer ſo often and earneſtly haue exhorted the godly vnto, ſaying: See that yee walke vnblameable and without rebuke; and in another place: Walke not offenſiuely towards them that are without; except he had ſeene, how they might haue attained thereunto. Therefore the prophet ſaith:Pſ. 119.10.11. 
                  I haue hid thy word in my heart that I might not ſinne against thee; and againe: Let me not wander from thy commandements; and againe: I ſwarued not from thy precepts:
                  Pſal. 119.110. 
                  they are the ioy of my heart. And the ſame ſpirit guiding Gods people, they are like minded to him; and would not wander nor ſwarue from his will. And the cauſe of this  muſt be conſidered, which is this: they count preciouſly of gods worde, and therefore lay it vp in their heart; and are perſwaded, that it is the greateſt gaine to folow the doctrine of it: and therefore they count it not tedious to abſteine from the ſinnes which other cannot be drawne from; but willingly forſake them, which other men with tooth and naile hold faſt, and continue in.
               
                  Enoch, Abraham, Moſes, Ioſua after Moſes death, Samuell, Daniell, Iob,
                  Examples thereof in the old Teſtament. with others many in the former ages of the world, how doe ſtories report of

them? After they had any neere acquaintance with God, they committed not  any ſuch heinous treſpaſſes as were common ſtaines and blots in the liues of others,Iob. 1.2. (I ſpeake not now of their vertues) but they departed and withdrew thēſelues from euil, euen as God had choſen them out of the world; to verifie that which is written:Heb. 11.13. 
                  All theſe liued and died in faith? The Apoſtles after they had receiued more fulneſſe and greater meaſure of the ſpirit, were farre from the ſcandals and offences, which before were vſuall, and daily rebuked in them, and committed of them. Yet to ſhew what need the beſt haue to be kept by God continually, ſometime the deuill preuailed, as to make breaches amongſt them; though we ſeldome finde any of them to haue beene thus  deceiued.
               
                  Examples in the new. Act. 16.1.
                  So, ſome of the churches haue beene commended to vs to haue beene ſo farre off from ſhamefull falles (as the Theſſalonians, the churches of Smirna and Pergamus) that they were good examples and lights to others. So, ſundry perſons in the new Teſtament, as Timothy, Demetrius, Priſcilla and Aquila, who were well reported of. All which with others, as they are ſet foorth for vs to follow: ſo who doubteth, but that they found in their liues more ſweetneſſe and delight then others,The freer from ſinne, the freer from puniſhment. who were alſo Gods children as well as they, but not ſo free from manifeſt crimes and open ſinnes as they? Now when they are thus kept from grieuous and ſhamefull falles, it followeth moſt neceſſarily, that euen thereby they be kept alſo from ſore and great puniſhments, as Pſal. 91.11. foraſmuch as theſe alwaies follow them.
               By this that hath beene ſaid, it may without any difficultie be gathered, what great liberties the true Chriſtian hath giuen him of God. But ſeeing ſuch as haue not experience of that which I ſay, do hardly thinke it to be true, it ſhall be neceſſarie for ſuch to know another thing; and that is this: That God hath made ſuch a way to the performing of all this that I haue ſpoken of,They may ſerue God with ioy and delight. that he ſheweth vs, how this may be done with delight (which, we know, putteth away tediouſneſſe:) both the practiſing of the Chriſtian life which I ſpake of before, and the renouncing of the contrary ſinnes which I now ſpeake of. And this maketh both the braunches of this priuiledge to be of exceeding value and excellencie:The want of delight makes godlineſſe weariſome. that whereas godlineſſe is ſo vnſauorie, yea weariſome to the moſt, yea euen vnto many ſuch as will talke much of it, and preach it alſo; in the meane while, this ſhould be inioied of any by the grace and goodneſſe of God: That they may turne from their old ſinnes; and contrarily, ſerue him with delight. And that the true Chriſtian may reioice in the doing of the will of God:Iohn 4.34. our Sauiour Chriſt, who in all obedience to the commandements was willing to be an example to vs, profeſſing to his diſciples that it was his meat and drinke to doe his fathers will, taught vs alſo who are his members and one with him, that we ſhould endeuour after the ſame, and may  obteine to make it our meat and drinke to doe that which is pleaſing to God. And although I am not ignorant, that we cannot haue the fulneſſe of reioiceing in doing good duties: yet if there were not much graunted vnto vs in that behalfe,Mat. 11.29. (for all our ſtrength of ſinne that remaineth in vs) the Lord would not haue ſaide, that he hath made his yoke, that is, obedience to his worde, eaſie for vs, and his burthen (as the fleſh counteth it) to be gentle and light to vs.

                   Which Saint Iohn interpreting ſheweth how; ſaying:1. Ioh. 4.5. 
                  All gain-ſaying power of the deuill himſelfe is reſiſted by faith; that is, while we beleeue, that God will giue vs ſtrength and victory againſt the ſame.
               Againe, if we might not be able to finde ſweetneſſe and pleaſure in this walking with God, why would the Lord himſelfe ſay in Deuteronomy:Deut. 12.18. 
                  Reioice before the Lord in all that thou ſhalt ſet thy hand vnto, that is, goe about throughout the day? and in another place: why would he reprooue Iſraell for not ſeruing him in ioyfulneſſe and gladneſſe?
                     Deu. 28.47.48. In all kindes of particular callings. whereby God teacheth that this grace ſhould be laboured after in our particular callings: that the huſbandman,  artificer, magiſtrate, and preacher ſhould and may walke in their vocation with chearefulneſſe; who yet, if they doe their duties as it behoueth them, ſhall moſt hardly doe it of all the reſt: and the ſame I ſay of the poore man, and the ſeruant and of all that walke in a lawfull calling, ſeeing they ſerue in Gods worke. Which would not a little repaire their liues and increaſe their comfort, ouer it is now with the moſt of them who goe to their worke as ſlaues, and as the horſe and oxe onely for their bellies ſake, and not ſeruing God in doing their worke to men. So that we knowing this,Col. 3.23. that we may be mery, and euen finde delight in the heauenly life, and in flying the corrupt behauiour and bad example that is in the world (and that, with much more contentation  and freedome from feare, then the carnall goſpeller in all that his eie coueteth, or his ſoule longeth after) what would we deſire more? Euen as the pſalmiſt ſaith, what greater pleaſure would we wiſh, or better thing deſire?Pſ. 119.14. All the pleaſures of the earth are not to be compared with this wiſdome,Luc. 1.75. to be perſwaded, that Gods ſeruice is perfect freedome, and that it is ſound pleaſure to walke with him. And to ſay the trueth, our life muſt needs be mopiſh and tedious, if it were not thus: and all that we doe ſhould goe vntowardly forward, as the froward ſeruant which is ſent againſt his will, goeth awkely about his buſineſſe. But God making it delight and pleaſure to vs, we may ſet our hearts thereupon, not by fits, but minde it wholly for the moſt part, and principally  aboue all other matters, which yet (when we knew no better) did wholly take vs vp and affect vs: for where the treaſure is, there is the heart;Mat. 6.21. and looke what a man delighteth in, that will oft and euery while come to remembrance and be thought vpon: and by that meanes it is no more tedious and weariſome, as ſometime it was, but the cheefeſt matter of al other that poſſeſſeth vs. Therefore the prophet of God when he would in a certaine place ſpeake of the delight that he had in the ſtatutes of God, he addeth this as a fruit thereof:Pſ. 119.16. That he had them continually in remembrance, and did not forget them.
               And thus it commeth to paſſe, that many of Gods ſervants may be ſeene to be drawen vp vnto God, and in their ſpeech, behauiour and whole courſe  to bend this way more then other, to minde heauenly things,Hebr. 11.6. in ſuch wiſe as other maruell thereat; the cauſe is this: They be reſolutely perſwaded, that their labour is not loſt that way, yea rather that it is the pleaſanteſt eſtate, and they finde delight therein. And therefore they need not be as others, whoſe hearts are ſtrongly carried after ſtrange deſires, but through Gods guiding of them they may be ſet on things heauenly, ſeeing they haue made them their delight and ioy.
               
                  Oh weigh what an exceeding priuiledge this is, that both praier and practiſe  of duty whereto we were ſometime not vntoward onely but euen rebellious againſt it, ſhould willingly be taken in hand now, and become pleaſure in ſtead of deadly toile? yea, what a freedome and liberty is it, that we ſhould make it our trade to aime at the ſeruing of God in all things, ſo farre as our knowledge ſerueth vs? And as the godly way is become eaſie to them and daily regarded of them, after that it once waxeth pleaſant to them: euen ſo their old delights, I meane the luſts of their ignorance, grow loathſome, which they once thought impoſſible. And yet concerning rebellion and contradiction,The Godly much troubled with rebellion, though they ſerue God with ioy. they are not void of them for all their liberty and inlargement; but  are holden captiues thereof in great part againſt their will, as ſhall be ſaid afterwards (for elſe they ſhould haue their heauen heere, which may not be:) but as they eſpy it, they giue it no reſt, but with hearty miſlike, they oppoſe themſelues and fight againſt it: and becauſe they haue ſweetneſſe and pleaſure in in the Chriſtian life, therefore the gaineſaying luſts, which rebell againſt that courſe, and ſtriue to hold them from it, are neither ſo forceable as they haue beene; neither doe ſo long time, as they were wont, hold them vnder.
               But this which I haue ſaid of the remainder of ſinne and of rebellion of nature abiding ſtill in the beſt of Gods ſeruants, I would haue well to be marked, for that many will be ready to take occaſion otherwiſe to cauill and quarrel  againſt that which I haue ſaid, namely, that God hath giuen this priuiledge and liberty to ſerue him with delight.Obiection. For thus they reaſon: If you can goe forward thus eaſily in a Chriſtian life that you can take pleaſure in it, which to ſo many Godly people is toile, it ſeemeth that you are not hindered, nor clogged with the rebellion of the old man, which is our corrupt nature, but that his force and ſtrength is extinguiſhed and killed: whereas the ſcriptures tell vs farre otherwiſe;Pſ. 51.5. Rom. 7.23.24. and the beſt men that euer were borne after the maner of men, felt it, ſmarted by it, and complained of it. Therefore (ſay they) you ſet before vs ſuch a Chriſtian as is no where to be found.
               
                  Anſwere.But to all this I anſwere ſomewhat more fully than I did before: that if it  were not for the ſtirring and rebellion of the old man, and the corruption and naughtineſſe that cleaueth faſt vnto vs, we ſhould by many degrees farre exceed the greateſt meaſure of holineſſe, which we can now poſſibly reach vnto; although we denie not, but that through the grace of God we haue attained to ſomwhat already. For as we ſerue God with delight now, and may (God be glorified) do ſo for the moſt part: ſo we ſhould (but for the ſinne that ſticketh faſt in vs) doe ſo, perfectly and continually without intermiſſion and contradiction,Ioh. 8. as the heauenly ſpirits do. And as our Sauior Chriſt, ſeeing he could neuer be conuicted of any ſinne when he was heere vpon earth (as his words prooue, Which of you can accuſe me of ſinne?) therefore when the Prince of this  world (namely, the Deuill) came, he found nothing in him which he looked for, namely, ſinne: euen ſo ſhould it likewiſe be with vs but for this fountaine of ſpirituall leproſie, whereas now we finde through the vncleanneſſe of our hearts, that there is imperfection and weakneſſe euen in our beſt actions, that I ſay nothing of thoſe which are common.
               And although with delight we goe forward in duty both to God and men;

                   yet through weake knowledge, faith, memorie, &c. through ſubiection to ſinne and Sathan, euen the beſt eſtate that we can attaine to, is with much infirmitie, and with iuſt cauſe of crying out as the Apoſtle by his example taught the perfecteſt in this world to doe, ſaying: O wretched man that I am,
                  Rom. 7.24. 
                  who ſhall deliuer me from the body of this death? So that the olde man is not killed, nor his ſtrength extinguiſhed: we ſay no ſuch thing, but abated indeed and weakned much, aſwell as pardoned, through the grace and power which wee receiue dailie from our Lord Ieſus Chriſt by faith. And this for anſwere vnto the former obiection: whereby it may clearely be ſeene, what I  meane, when I ſay, that God hath giuen power to vs, if we acknowledge and beleeue it, to leade a Chriſtian life with delighting in it: which though it be not without change, full and abſolute; yet, in that it is ſo great libertie as it is, it ceaſeth not to be worthily accounted a moſt great priuiledge, as I haue ſaid before. For is it a ſmall thing to finde pleaſure and the greateſt reioycing, in the ſubduing of our euill hearts, and in the forgoing of our vnlawfull liberties, which other men fight for with tooth and naile, and would count their life worſe than any death except they might inioy them?
               Nay, is it not an high degree of honour, that we may from day to day be admitted to reioyce before the Lord in the duties which we doe, euen all that  we ſhall ſet our hand vnto: when yet others are ſo farre off from it,Note. that they would chuſe to lie in priſon all the daies of their life, rather than they would be thus yoked, as they account of it? O therefore, praiſe the Lord, all ye ſeruants; the Lord I ſay, who doth ſo wonderfull things for his: for in this is that Scripture fulfilled, which ſaith: Honourable things are reported of thee, that is,Pſ. 87.3. which thy God hath done for thee, O thou citie, or people, of God. And if it were not ſo, that the Lord hath done ſo great good things for his people, how could that be true which is ſaid in another place, of their happie eſtate; that it is better to be a doore-keeper in Gods houſe,Pſ. 84.11. becauſe we are there in his ſeruice and vnder his gouernment, than to dwell in the tents of the vngodlie  whereſoeuer, yea though it were in the palace of Princes?
               If it be further demanded: Where are ſuch as inioy this prerogatiue in their liues? I ſay, I know no cauſe, why Gods people, which haue an acquittance and diſcharge againſt the day of iudgement and the wrath to come, and haue ſound knowledge and aſſurance of their ſaluation, and of Gods fatherly care ouer them while they liue here; I ſay, I know no cauſe why all they ſhould not haue ſome good and liuely reſemblance of ſuch perſons. For did they holde faſt this perſwaſion, that God hath giuen this libertie vnto them, the Deuill (who it is, which iniuriouſly deteineth it from them) ſhould deceiue and defeat them no longer in the groſſe ſort and maner that he doth. But this I muſt  adde (becauſe it is a common bait whereby they are ſnared:Note.) earthly pleaſures and profits (yea, though lawfull) muſt be in meaner reckoning with them. They are too eager and greedy in their dealings, and their hearts eſpecially muſt be pruned of much droſſe & rubbiſh: as, vnwillingneſſe, vntowardneſſe in the vſing of thoſe helps by the which men may wait vpon God with eaſe from time to time.
               Alſo men muſt thinke it the greateſt libertie, to haue their hearts readilie

framed and diſpoſed to their ſeuerall duties; and be perſwaded, that nothing  is better for them then thus to bridle the vnruly affections,Vnruly affections interrupt euery good courſe entred into. which are euery while ready to breake off the beſt courſe that can be entred into of them. And if we thinke it much to be inioined thus to curbe vp the old man which moſt hindreth from going forward with delight and readineſſe, conſider what iniury we offer to the Almighty,By not curbing the old man we offer wrong not to our ſelues onely, but alſo to the Maieſtie of God. that whereas nothing goeth forward well that is vnwillingly gone about: ſo neither ſhould this worke of the Lord doe in vs, except we ſhould prouide ſo, that much vntowardneſſe and awkeneſſe in Gods ſeruice (which is wont either to breake it off, or to be the greateſt hinderance therein) be remoued or at leaſt reſiſted. Which ſhall not be hard to doe, if we daily conſider, that he hath promiſed to make vs fitte for that which he ſets vs about; and that we beleeuing his ſaid promiſe, ſhall finde the trueth of it in vs, our hearts incouraged, our backewardneſſe and ſlougth repelled or much abated, as Ioſua and other his faithfull ſeruants haue done: which grace if it may be obtained of vs (and who doth not ſee cleerely that it may?) I meane, that all true Chriſtians may obtaine willingneſſe and cheerefulneſſe in their daily duties doing, and to be much freed from the contrary vntowardneſſe and vnfitneſſe, which is the greateſt let that can ſtand in their way: if (I ſaie) God haue prouided ſo mercifully for his, that they may with delight walke in his waies, ſet themſelues to watch againſt their infirmities, and ſo in their  common dealings and actions practiſe a godly and innocent life, and that they may doe earthly buſineſſe with heauenly minds,An vnualuable priuiledge, to forme earthly buſineſſe with: heauenly minds. (which the vnreformed cannot in the leaſt manner attaine vnto) I conclude this priuiledge as the former, that the Lord hath in giuing this gift vnto his children, beſtowed an vnualuable bleſſing and prerogatiue vpon them: and let vs waite for and inioy it; and when we faile moſt, acknowledge ſuch weakneſſe, that we may find releaſe of it from God: and if any of his finde it not, neither ſee it to be ſo, it is their vnbeleefe which depriueth them of ſuch a treaſure; but when they enter into Gods ſanctuary, they ſhall ſee it farre otherwiſe.
               This were worthy to be harkened after (ſome perhaps will ſay) if we might  indeed attaine heereto. But what triumph call ye this ouer ſathan and ſinne, when the beſt of vs are priuy to this, that we are carried by them both, to doe that which we know to be diſpleaſing vnto God? For beſides this that ſome perticular ſinnes doe draw vs through the deceitfull inticements thereof, (the diuill changing himſelfe into an angell of light to winde vs in the more ſubtilely) there are alſo ſtrong corruptions which breake out in vs, preuailing dangerouſly to the hindring of vs from many good duties, and that often times: as in the examples of Iob, Dauid and Peter it may appeare. Theſe two obiections (of great waight doubtleſſe) I muſt firſt anſwere, before I goe further. And firſt of the formoſt: though they, I meane the Godly, be not voide  of the ſinnes which I haue ſpoken of, yet that hindreth not the honour, which God hath ſet them in and giuen vnto them.The godly finde a ſtrife between the fleſh and the ſpirit for three cauſes. For there is left in the moſt holy a ſtrife betwixt the ſpirit and the fleſh, and that for this purpoſe, by the lord himſelfe euen in his elect, (as the Apoſtle teacheth by his owne example) not  that they ſhould periſh; but partly, leſt they ſhould looke to triumph before  the victory (which ſathan would moſt of all wiſh;) partly, that the beſt men

                   being priuy to their owne weaknes (and that throughout their life) might not reſt vpon their owne ſtrength, but alwaies depend vpon God: yea and further  alſo, for this cauſe he doth it, that the more hard the combat is and their ſtrife with ſathan & ſinne the more vehement, the more glorious might the victory appeare. And therefore as it is in warre and battels fought amongſt men, we doe not meaſure the victory by any thing done one either ſide whiles they are contending or skirmiſhing, for the vhemency of the one or the remiſſeneſſe of the other; neither will we count him a coward, who ſhall be grieuouſly wounded, no although he ſometime giue backe like one which is ouercome,  ſo as he doe afterwards take heart and courage to himſelfe againe: euen ſo in this ſpirituall fight & conflict,No Chriſtian while he fighteth with ſinne and ſatan, though he receiue many and great wounds, yet not giuing ouer, can be ſaid to be vanquiſhed. when we ſhal ſee the good Chriſtian to be ouer-matched, as it were, & for the time driuen to hard diſtreſſe by ſuſtaining the ſhame and reproch of ſome euill action committed, or ranke rebellion nouriſhed, which is no leſſe then if a man ſhould in war looſe ſome member of his body; yet muſt we not thinke that the ſpirit hath yeelded it ſelfe vnto the fleſh, neither hath beene ouercome of it, though ſore and greuiouſly wounded, if it ſhall by the feeling of the ſmart which it tooke by the ſinne committed, gather againe greater heart of deteſtation againſt it, and ſtrength and courage by ſpirituall armour to repell ſathans poiſoned dartes for heereafter.
               
                   Now of the examples: and firſt of Iob, yee will ſay:Examples. How could he cry out as he doeth in the third chapter againſt the day of his birth; crie out I ſay, yea howle, and charge God, but he muſt needs ſhew himſelfe to be ouercome of the fleſh? There is no doubt (I graunt) but that his aduerſary the deuill did now make full reckoning, that he ſhould fall into very loathſome blaſphemy, and vtter deſperation: and it cannot be denied, but that he was caried verie farre out of the way. But yet, as he is not to be freed from all fault; ſo he is not to be further charged then he gaue iuſt cauſe, foraſmuch as the Lord himſelfe doeth ſo determine the controuerſie in the end (whoſe ſentence no man doubteth, but that it was moſt righteous:) that although he reprooue him, yet  of his ſingular goodneſſe he doth not make his fault ſo heinous, but chargeth his three friends as the chiefe prouokers of him to that euill which he did, and crowneth him as it were, for that in ſo great a combat by his valiant wreſtling he had preuailed: yet for our further edification, let vs ſee ſomewhat more particularly into this action, directing our ſelues by that which the Lord hath ſaid of him. I ſay therefore, that Iob ſinned many waies, but yet through humane frailty.Iob ſinned of frailtie, not of ſet purpoſe. For his intemperate ſpeech proceeded not from a ſetled and conſtant purpoſe of the mide, but was wrung from the exceeding greatneſſe of his griefe and paine, which hindred for the time all ſenſe and light of faith & iudgement in him. For in that he thought, he could by no other meanes be  deliuered from thoſe ſo great euils which he ſuffered, but by death; it ſhewed that he did not throughly nor ſufficiently weigh the power and might of God. In that he wiſhed either that he had neuer beene borne, or together with his birth to haue died, it muſt needs be granted, that it was a ſpeech of a man little conſidering what he ſaid; but which had forgotten what great mercies he had receiued, yea what he himſelfe had ſometime vttered (.i. If we haue receiued proſperitie from the Lord, why ſhould we not ſuffer aduerſitie?) in that he

earneſtly wiſhed deliuerance from his ſuffrings, but asked it not of God, it bewraied  a minde in him ſore troubled. And laſtly, in that he had regard onely to his owne quiet and eaſe, and thought at that time, death to be the finiſher of his ſorrowes; it might haue ſeemed to giue him place among the Epicures (who take their pleaſure whiles they liue, looking for nothing after death) but that he declared himſelfe at other times, to be of a contrary minde. But all theſe (as I haue ſaid) proceeded from mans frailty, as we may afterwards heare Iob himſelfe to confeſſe. For who doth not maruell, in that ſo great trouble and anguiſh of his, that he vttered not one word either againſt his wife, or againſt his friends dealing ſo vnwiſely with him, and ſo ſore prouoking him, as furious and raging men are wont to doe in ſuch a caſe? So that we ſhould not ſo much maruell,The weightineſſe of Iobs affliction conſidered, argueth his patience to be greater then his impatience. that he could be moued to any impatience at all, being ſtricken downe with ſo many and weighty blowes of ſorrow; as that he could keepe any meaſure therein, that he neither brake out into rage againſt them which ſo vexed him, nor into blaſphemie againſt God (which ſathan laboured moſt eſpecially to haue brought him vnto.) Neither is he to be counted an impatient man, who doth not by and by reſiſt and ouercome all vexations of body and torments of minde, with ſuch ſtrength and conſtancie as were to be wiſhed; but he, who ſo goeth to worke, that the helliſh ſpirit in the end preuaileth ouer him and hath the vpper hand. Therefore, moſt wiſely and fitly  to this purpoſe,Iam. 5. doth the apoſtle Iames admoniſh: that in iudging about Iobs conflict, we conſider not ſo much, what came to paſſe in the combat and fight, as we marke the end of the battell, that is to ſay, that God did inwardly vphold his ſeruant, and pronounced him an happie man: and though he ſuffered him to be very grieuouſly tempted, yet neuer beyond his ſtrength, which he in moſt fit time and ſeaſon did ſupport him with. And what one among all the Saints of God hath not prooued and found this true, if we marke and conſider their words and their liues? Let thus much be granted therefore, that the fleſh raged in Iob, and ſo, that he offended grieuouſly; and no maruell, for he was a man: but yet (God himſelfe being iudge of this matter) he neuer  wholly gaue place to the fleſh: but (although it was not without manie wounds receiued in the battell) yet the ſpirit preuailed, and had the vpper hand in him.
               Of Peter likewiſe this is to be ſaid: As the Lord Ieſus had done much for him, and giuen him many priuiledges, euen as to other of the Apoſtles he had done; yet in that dangerous plunge of his, being the greateſt downefall (a man would think) that euer any good man might ſuſteine, he neither ſinned againſt the Holy Ghoſt, neither was wholly drawen from his holde, and ſubdued by Sathan.Peters deniall of Chriſt was onely in word, his heart not conſenting. The cauſes of it were two: Raſhneſſe and feare of danger. For although he denied in word, that he knew Chriſt, yea and that with a curſe called for vpon himſelfe, if he knew him; I ſay more, though his  conſcience did burne within him at the ſame time, yet did not his minde goe with his mouth, neither did he change his iudgement with his ſpeech: but he was brought vnto it, partly by that raſhneſſe of his, which was too readie at hand with him in many of his actions; and partly, by the feare of that danger which was at hand, if he had confeſſed Chriſt. But in the meane ſeaſon, that ſpirit which had taught him that Chriſt was the ſonne of the liuing God; and

                   ſo taught it him, that he loued nothing more dearely than his maſter: that ſpirit (I ſay) dwelling ſtill in him, was not caried to ſuch outrage, but either was ſilent in him not conſulted withall (as in heady and boiſterous affections it cōmeth to paſſe;) or els, it ſecretly rebuked the tongue, though no ſuch thing appeared. And ſo likewiſe the faith,Peters faith neuer loſt. for which Chriſt praied that it might not faile nor be ouercome, was not extinct in him, nor vtterly loſt. For if it had beene ſo, he would haue ioyned himſelfe in familiarity with the Iewes, and haue complained, that he had all that while beene deceiued of his maſter: whereas on the other ſide, he went forth and wept bitterly, and declared many  waies how deeply he was diſpleaſed with himſelfe for that his offence. Neither yet doe I ſpeake this of Peter, as though I went about to make his ſinne ſmall and light; which (ſurely) I am perſwaded, did deſerue eternall death a thouſand waies: but that if any haue ſinned of infirmity or in any ſuch maner, as Peter did, (and yet, beſides the vnpardonable ſinne, one would thinke that none could be greater) yet that they ſhould not caſt away all hope, and ſo deſpaire; but that they ſhould be perſwaded, that the way is open to ſaluation, if they haue the faith and repentance which Peter had.
               Of Dauid and others, the like may be ſaid; but I haue ſtaied too long in theſe examples. I will returne now to the priuiledges and liberties which the  ſeruants of God haue proper vnto themſelues from other men, that they may not coldly and vnwillingly deſpiſe the world, and cleaue to the Lord without fainting. I truſt, now the hardeſt obiection is anſwered which can be brought againſt their welfare and proſperitie, and that it cannot be taken from them by any ſubtiltie or malice of the adverſarie; as it is written:Matt. 16. 
                  The gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt them: and therefore I may be bold to affirme,Luc. 10. that they hauing their names written in heauen already, and this being teſtified of them by the Lord himſelfe, That they ſhalbe kept ſafe vnto the reſurrection day, & that none ſhall take them out of his hands; that they are in great account with him, and highly eſteemed of him, as was ſaid before. And howſoeuer the  world thinke and ſpeake of them, becauſe they know them not:They that are honored of God are moſt honourable. yet is their eſtate moſt honourable, becauſe they are honoured of the Almighty, and from the greateſt feare of danger they are deliuered. Is a valiant and noble gentleman in diſgrace, becauſe (whiles he goeth vnder great perils for his countrey, & hazardeth his life for his Prince, and goeth thorow many hard aduentures) he is reported of to be confederate with the enemie: when yet he is beloued and renowmed (and that for iuſt cauſe) of Prince and Peeres? No more is the ſeruant of God to be reputed vile, and his eſtate contemptible, for that (whiles he goeth about to honour his God, and in his life to expreſſe his exceeding kindneſſe) he is both then and therefore ſet againſt by the deuill and his miniſters,  and by their malice and ſubtiltie drawen into ſome action, which might cauſe ill report and breed a doubt of his godlineſſe, when yet his faithfulneſſe is approoued of the Lord his God. Was Paul, becauſe he was buffited by the meſſenger of Sathan, that is, after great exaltation and glory a little before, now immediatly not only depriued of the feeling of it, but brought to ſo contrarie an eſtate, that he was deeply aſhamed to thinke he had beene ſo high; was he therefore depriued of that which yet he was made to hope for? Nay,

therefore the Scripture putteth it out of all doubt, ſaying after: That he triumphed  ouer ſathan in token that he had found nothing in him to ouerthrow him,2. Tim. 4.7.8. as he ſaith himſelfe: I haue fought a good fight, I haue finiſhed my courſe, I haue kept the faith: from henceforth is laid vp for me a crowne of righteousneſſe. Therefore we ſee, how God keepeth his from ſhamefull euils, while they beleeue that he will do ſo, and maketh an holy and Chriſtian life their comfort. And yet all theſe and other ſuch excellent priuiledges which appertaine vnto them,This and all other priuiledges are no more, then euery Chriſtian hath need of to paſſe through this vale of teares. are no more then God did ſee they ſhould ſtand in need of (as I ſaid in the former priuiledge) to helpe them beare the burden of tribulation, reproch and other diſcouragements which heere meet with them: which would  ſhake them ſo, as they would make them to faint vtterly if they were not vpholden with props and ſtaies moſt mighty.
            
            
               CHAP. 6. Of the fourth priuiledge: How the godly may riſe againe when they are fallen.
               
                  The 1. point.
                  THe fourth priuiledge doth moſt fitly goe and agree with theſe  three former, although much differing from them: and therefore I doe adioine it, as the next in order thereto. And it is this: that if at any time his beloued ones doe by any occaſion fall from their ſetled courſe into any offence, whereby their conſciences are wounded and accuſe them, or be by ſtrong deluſion perſwaded that God is highly diſpleaſed with them;If any beleeuer be turned out of a good courſe, he may boldely returne. yet this liberty they haue giuen them of God, to returne to him, with certaine perſwaſion that he wil neuer caſt them off, but will receiue them into fauour againe, from which it ſeemed to them that they were debarred: whereas they, who were neuer conuerted vnto God, can haue no ſuch warrant, neither deſire it vnleſſe it be in their feare. And yet I ſpeake  not this, as though I went about to debar ſuch from imbracing Gods mercy offered them: who I exhort earneſtly, to ſeeke it ſpeedily. But as for the other, there is no iuſt cauſe why they ſhould caſt away their confidence, and doubt or feare that the Lord hath forſaken them, as the moſt of them through ignorance and vnbeleefe doe too readily conceiue and perſwade themſelues. For if any of them ſinne, they haue an Aduocate with the father, Ieſus Chriſt the righteous,1. Ioh. 2.2. who is a propitiation for their ſinnes, to the end they may be incouraged to riſe vp out of their falles againe.
               And if it were not thus, that they might be receiued againe after ſome grieuous offence, what incouragement were there to any Chriſtian, to ſtriue againſt  ſinne and ſeeke to liue godly, ſeeing one time or other, the frowardeſt may be ledde into that ſinne which he neuer thought he ſhould haue beene deceiued by? So that God would haue vs know, not onely that we may riſe vp from our falles,We offend him highly, if we doe not. and returne to him againe as to our father; but alſo, he commandeth vs ſo to do, and looketh for it at our hands, and is offended if we doe it not; as may plainely appeare by his owne wordes in the prophet Ieremy:

                      Doe men fall and not riſe againe? or goe out of the way and not returne?
                  Ier. 8.4.6. 
                  I waited and looked, and there was no man that ſaid: What haue I done?
                  Proofes of it. If God wait and looke for it, that ſuch as haue peruerſly offended, ſhould returne;The firſt. and taketh it ill at their hands that they doe not: is it to be doubted, whether they may or no? Yet more may be ſaid to this purpoſe. Me thinks that which our ſauiour Chriſt ſpeaketh to Peter, is admirable:The ſecond. who was not content to teach him this doctrine among other, Of the returne of a ſtraying ſheepe; but becauſe he would ſtrongly arme him againſt diſpaire, at the time when he ſhould fall into that deepe gulfe of denying him, he ſaith vnto him,; Simon, Simon,
                  Luc. 22.31.32. 
                  Sathan  hath deſired you to ſift you as it were wheat; but I haue praied for thee, that thy faith faile not: and when thou ſhalt be conuerted, ſtrengthen thy brethren. Wherein moſt louingly and wiſely, although couertly, hee forewarneth him, that though Sathan ſhould driue him farre from his ſtanding, and almoſt gleane him out from the reſt of his fellows, as an Apoſtate: yet for all that, he ſhould not remaine ſeparate from him, & through vnbeleefe afraide to come home to him againe, but in any wiſe thinke that he muſt returne: and for more ſure token thereof, he ſhould afterward cōuert others; ſeeing by his experience he ſhould be beſt able to perſwade them, as hauing moſt deeply fallen himſelf and therefore might hardlieſt of others haue beene raiſed vp againe and pardoned.  And to a ſingular end did the Lord Ieſus ſpeake thus to him, and in fit ſeaſon, leſt Peter after his fall ſhould haue beene affraid to ariſe: for which cauſe alſo, he did incourage him; when ſending to his diſciples to meet him in Galily, he expreſſely named Peter among the reſt, ſaying: Go tell the diſciples and Peter that I goe before them into Galily, leſt Peter ſhould elſe haue thought that he had not bin worthy to be counted a diſciple. Mar. 16.7.
               And if it were not ſo, that all weake ones falling by any occaſion, might be raiſed vp againe, and the poore wandring ſoules brought home, but muſt vtterly periſh and be loſt, to what end ſhould theſe and many other like Scriptures ſerue: Brethren, if any be fallen by infirmitie, thou that art ſpirituall, that is,Gal. 6.1. 
                   haſt more ſtrength of the ſpirit then they, helpe to hold them vp in the ſpirit of meekeneſſe; that ſo they may be faſt ſetled in their former faith and hope againe? And alſo, the parable of the ſtraying ſheepe vpon the mountaines,Mat. 18.22. which with all diligence was ſought vp againe till it were found, and not let goe and loſt for euer? Beſides, who knoweth not, that it is one vſe of the miniſtery of the word, as we reade in the prophet Ezekiel, to ſtrengthen,Ezech. 34.3. confirme and ſtabliſh thoſe, who hauing had a taſte of the life to come, yet are haled and caried from their ſtaied courſe by the deceitfulneſſe of ſinne and the world? alſo, to heale the ſicke and to binde vp the broken, &c? For the which cauſe, the Apoſtle deſired to come to the Theſſalonians often,1. Theſ. 3.13 to ſupplie  that which might be wanting in any of them: and if a man muſt oft and in great iniuries remit his brother, will not God who teacheth others to be mercifull, doe much more? Therefore this ought to be out of all queſtion, and controuerſie, that the brother who hath forſaken the good way which leadeth to life, and is intangled in the world, or ſnared in the falſe and deceiueable pleaſures of it, or any other way is turned aſide after ſathan; yet is not caſt off from being cared for of the Lord, but hath large liberty and great incouragement

to returne, contrary to that curſed opinion of the Nouatian heretikes.
               
               
                  What a benefit this is.Which if it be ſo, who doeth not ſee, what and how great a benefit and priuiledge it is to all that haue fallen into any grieuous crime, (at leaſt as they count it) and ſo haue their faith weakened, and their comfort appalled? For to a man in that caſe nothing is more comfortable, as by the words of Elihu in the booke of Iob,
                  Iob. 33 23. moſt liuely appeareth, ſaying: When a man ſhall be ſo wrought vpon by the word of God, that for feare and inward anguiſh he turne away from his owne worke, that is, his old ſinfull life, and refuſe his meat which was wont to be moſt pleaſant vnto him, and ſorrow take hold on him vpon his bed, &c: if then there be a meſſenger of God, one that can tell him  Gods minde, (who ſhall be as one of a thouſand vnto him) who can certifie him of the fauour of God that he ſhall not be forſaken of him; behold that man is reuiued, and he is comforted as in the daies of his youth, &c. And euery godly preacher hath experience of the ſame: both how many heauie hearted Chriſtians are raiſed out of their falles with much comfort; and how intolerable an eſtate it were for them to beare, if they had not good aſſurance from God about that matter.
               
                   But this which I ſay is wiſely and warily to be heard & receiued, I confeſſe: that is to ſay,This doctrine muſt wiſely be receiued. We may not be imboldned to ſinne by it, that euen as it is with all thankfulneſſe to be hearkned vnto of the afflicted in minde, and ſuch as mourne in Sion: ſo likewiſe, that in no wiſe it  be vſed as an occaſion to imbolden any to ſinne, or to gather hardneſſe of heart in them, that either they dare goe forward more readily to that ſinne which they delight in, becauſe they heare there is hope of forgiueneſſe to ſuch as haue runne from God;Nor ſleightly repent on it. or ſeeke pardon the more ſleightly and houerly, becauſe God receiueth ſuch ſinners to mercy.
               Both which reſpects becauſe they are woorthy to be regarded alwaies in this caſe, and for that an example very fit for this purpoſe commeth to my remembrance, I will in as few words as I can, lay foorth the ſame. In the booke of Ezra the prieſt,Ezra. 10.1.2. &c. we read, that he and many of the people of the captiuitie after their returne home, caſt themſelues downe before the houſe of the  Lord, praying and confeſſing their ſinnes with teares in aboundance, and chiefly this ſinne, in that they had taken to themſelues wiues of ſtrangers; which was a grieuous breach of the Lords commandement. Zechania the ſonne of Iehiel a godly man, anſwered and ſaid vnto Ezra: It is true; we haue committed a moſt heinous and wilfull offence, in ioining our ſelues to ſtrangers, and marying wiues out of them: but yet, that we caſt not our ſelues into deadly deſpaire,Two points are principally to be obſerued. (as ſuch a tranſgreſſion of Gods law might eaſily carie vs vnto) let vs know, that there is hope in Iſrael concerning this thing. Wherein, theſe two points I obſerue principally among many others:First, Gods mercies are not ſleightly to be ſought for. that as neither Ezra who had great knowledge in the law of God, nor Zechania, nor the people which  feared God, durſt in ſuch an offence lightly and in a looſe manner, heale vp their breach of Gods commandement,Secondly, when God is rightly ſought vnto, there ought to be no doubt of obteining mercy. although they knew that there was hope to be conceiued of pardon; but ſaw cauſe to humble themſelues before God in the confeſſion of their ſinne, and praied for the remiſſion of it with teares, and made a firme couenant to put away their ſtrange wiues: ſo yet, when they ſought vnto God after this holy and hearty manner, then did they

                   incourage one another to looke for mercy and forgiueneſſe, ſaying: There is hope?
               And ſo it ought to be with all gods children: that when they haue beene ſupplanted by the deuill (for all their care and watchfulneſſe,) then ought they to imbrace this ſweet remedy, and flie vnto it as to an anchor; That God will be intreated of them: and ſo with more thankfulneſſe and humbleneſſe to walke forward. If any therefore abuſe this liberty to licentiouſneſſe and boldneſſe in ſinning, they ſhall beare their puniſhment; and let them be ſure, that their ſinne will finde them out. Thus we hauing ſeene cleerely and plainly  the minde and will of God about this matter, let vs now conſider the greatnes of this libertie and benefit: that the poore ſeruants of God who haue beene much diſtreſſed for want of the certeine knowledge of it, may be helped and relieued.
               I remember the daies and times (as I ſtil ſee oft the experience of it) wherein this glad tidings would of heauie and afflicted conſciences haue beene eſteemed aboue gold, if it could haue beene fitly applied to their diſeaſe,Experience teacheth, how ſuch haue languiſhed who haue wanted this benefit. and if they ſtanding in need of it, might haue beene aſſured from God of ſuch welfare: I remember (I ſay) ſuch times, and the deſire of many therein; who yet for want of that, haue lien languiſhing, and beene filled with heauineſſe for  that they could not be raiſed vp and comforted: ſome, whole weeks and moneths: ſome others for not receiuing this meſſage in due time, haue bene caſt for many yeeres into ſuch diſtruſt of Gods fauour, that it hath beene a matter of great difficultie to recouer them at the length. And who doubteth, but that it was the eſtate of the people of Iſrael, and of many generations of them?Iudg. 2.4. and namely at Bochim, when they repented by the meſſage of the angell? and alſo an other generation after them, whom Samuel,
                  1. Sam. 7.4.6. after long ſtraying from God, brought home? and of ſome of the Churches in the Reuelation;Reu. 2.4. as namely, the church of Epheſus? that they ſtood in need of this incouragement, who hauing left their olde firſt loue, although good things were ſtill  found in them, were tolde by the Apoſtle Iohn from the Lord, that they were ſo farre gone, that it was time for them to conſider with themſelues from whence they were fallen, and to renounce their ſinnes, and repent of them, and do their former works; that ſo they might againe receiue ſound comfort? whoſe ſore, when it ſhould haue come to be felt, would haue turned to another maner of vexation, both longer continuing and more deeply pinching them, if by this counſell from God it had not beene preuented.
               And ſuch as in this age are ſubiect to the ſame weakneſſe,No greater comfort than this to a poore ſinner. as hauing ſometime laied holde on Gods fauour and mercie, yet haue afterward fallen into ſome ſinne againſt their conſcience, muſt holde this for a ſingular priuiledge:  that the Lord is willing to receiue them againe, to paſſe by their ſinne, and that they by the way that he hath taught them ſhould riſe vp to comfort.
               This doctrine where it is receiued, honoureth God highly,God is highly honoured by this doctrine. and cauſeth  many thanks to be giuen to him, for that poore ſinners ſee him ſo ready to forgiue them, and that, ſo often and ſo many and great offences as they themſelues durſt not looke for, or thinke that he would: and in that many who bare ſhew that they are troubled for their ſinnes ſometime, doe not magnifie God

for this trueth and doctrine with all their might, it is becauſe they are not they  whom they would be taken to be, that is, ſound-hearted. But then could it not be a priuiledge properly belonging to the children of God,The hard-hearted haue no benefit by it. if hard-hearted or double-minded perſons might be partakers of it. But they labouring to ſhake off godly ſorrow for their ſinne, and checke of conſcience, all that they can, and as long as they are able, by mirth and paſtime or in continuance of time to forget it; if for all their ſhifting & fencing it off, the Lord ſometime ſtrike them with terrour, and holde them vnder by ſtrong hand, and cauſe them to quake: yet they doe not ſeeke his face, but either bow themſelues onely for a day like a bul-ruſh, as Ahab; or els they are ſwallowed vp into vtter deſpaire, as  
                  Iudas. Neither can ſuch haue any releaſe at all. So much the greater fauour let others (I meane, Gods ſeruants) count it, that they may in their repentance for their ſinne, hope ſtedfaſtly for pardon; yea, and ought to ſay euery one vnto their ſoules:Pſ. 43.5. 
                  Turne vnto thy reſt, O my ſoule: for the Lord hath heard thy grones, and reiecteth not thy prayers. Why art thou caſt downe and diſquieted within me? wait on God, he is my preſent helpe: for he is more ready to grant, than we to aske. For if the ſonne of God make them free,Iohn. 8.36. then are they free indeed. An exceeding priuiledge is this to them: and therefore who ſeeth not, that they reſting thus perſwaded, may be of good comfort?
               
                  It is to be lamented, that the poore Chriſtians ſhould looſe this benefit.For indeed, this priuiledge is giuen of God as a remedie; and therefore  may and ought of all that haue need of it, to be receiued, and by all meanes to be imbraced; which if it be, forthwith the wound and ſore is healed, which yet without ſuch a medicine and helpe had beene deſperate and vncurable: a remedy farre vnlike to popiſh contrition, confeſſion auricular to a prieſt, and their blaſphemous ſatisfaction. Oh therefore, that this might enter deeply and were thorowly ſetled in the hearts of ſuch, as mourne and pine away for that they haue prouoked God to anger.Math. 18.10. Zach. 2.10. Oh that they knew, that their teares are put into the bottle of gods remembrance, and how ready he is to receiue them into fauour, and to blot out all their offences; who hath therefore ſaid: See that yee deſpiſe not one of theſe little ones: and againe, Reioice and be  glad, yee that mourne in Sion, &c. for I will dwell in the middeſt of you: and to his prophets and miniſters; Comfort my people, comfort them at the heart.
               
                  
                     The teacher is many times more in fault then the learner.
                     The want of ſeeing the bountifulneſſe of God, is the cauſe of great and continued heauineſſe. It is pittie that any doe arrogate it to themſelues vniustly, that which belongs not to them.
                  And further I ſay: Oh that ſuch had beene rightly grounded in faith at the firſt; which hath beene as much, or rather more, the fault of the vnskilfull builder and teacher of them, then their owne. For this may moſt truely be affirmed, that for want of well grounding them, they haue vpon euery light and ſmall occaſion beene ſhaken and vnſetled in their faith; as, in the leaſt accuſation of their conſcience, in any affliction, or in the feare of death. But if they could ſee the bountifulneſſe of gods loue towards them, how vnwoorthy ſoeuer  they ſeeme in their owne eies, they ſhould not goe ſo long heauy and diſquieted, ſuffering the enemie to oppreſſe them, and as though there were no hope for them in their God. But yet I ſay this on the other ſide: Oh that ſome did not looke too haſtily to be receiued into fauour, and vſe meanes too ſlightly for the ſame; yea, I ſay againe: Oh that ſome did not too prophanely, or blockiſhly and ceremoniouſly ſeeke to God, and returne to him in holowneſſe

                   of heart: which maner of abaſing themſelues, doeth hold them in a woorſe caſe then the other.
               And thus (to drawe to an end of this matter) I truſt it doth appeare what a ſingular priuiledge this is, that the Lord graunteth free acceſſe to thoſe, who after their conuerſion haue ſinned any way againſt their conſcience, to bewaile their ſinne before him, and to be perſwaded of forgiueneſſe of the ſame: which being knowen of them, they need not hold backe from him, as manie of his deare children for a long time haue done; but come home againe, and that earely, ſeeing God who hath ſmitten them, will heale them; and he,Exod. 34.7. who  hath called himſelfe a God of great compaſſion and mercy, would haue his poore people to feele and inioy it. The ſame I ſay likewiſe of dulneſſe, idleneſſe, vnprofitable barrenneſſe of the heart, and ſuch other corruptions which are wont to quench the worke of gods ſpirit in his children, and to be the ſeed of many curſed euils: the Lords will is, that they ſhould beleeue that he will giue them ſtrength to weaken them, as well as forgiue them; and that they ſhould thereby be incouraged to ſhake them off, and breake out of them: which if they were perſwaded that they might doe, would incourage them more heartily to reſiſt and ſtop them.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 7. Of the fifth priuiledge: namely, The gracious helpes by which he hath graunted them to grow in faith and godlineſſe.
               
                  ALl this that hath beene ſaid of theſe foure priuiledges laſt mentioned, will be graunted in generall to be true I doubt not, for all profeſſors are literall and ſpeculatiue Chriſtians: they ſay, and doe not. But when this doctrine ſhould be brought to vſe  of them in particulars, and when they are to be preſſed with the practiſe of it, then many will anſwer: They hope that it doeth not appertaine to them, neither are they able (they ſay) thus to hold ſtedfaſtly the certaintie of gods fauour by faith, and to ſubdue and ouercome their ſinnes, to lead a godly life, nor to riſe vp againe when they haue fallen dangerouſly: (thereby ſhewing, that they doe not looke to be ledde by the word in their actions:) but I go not about to perſwade ſuch, that they haue any part in theſe priuiledges. And they might ſpeake with good reaſon, obiecting thus of all other as well as of themſelues, if God had not appointed and taught them by what helpes and meanes, they may doe this. But therefore we are to know  that God hath beſtowed this priuiledge vpon his children, ouer and beſide the former, that by ſuch meanes and helpes as he hath acquainted them with,It is a great priuiledge, to vſe the helpes which God hath giuen to his. and taught them to vſe, they may be able to inioy the foreſaid liberties (which without them, and by their owne ſtrength they can not ſo much as go about) and to preuaile ſo farre by inioying them, that they may finde their liues more ſweet and comfortable, then other can in what eſtate or condition ſoeuer, if they haue not their part in them.
               
                  And that it may be ſeene that theſe helpes are priuiledges, (as I haue ſaid) behold it briefely in the particular helpes, and eſpecially ſuch are to be vſed daily;And namely praier: as for example: What a benefit is it, that by praier we may come vnto our God for whatſoeuer we haue need of that is good for vs, and may obtaine it? that we may come to him, (I ſay) breake our minde, lay open our griefe and commune familiarly with him as with a friend, when we will: he neuer being wearie of vs,Ioh 15.15. Mat. 7 7. nor taking ſcorne of vs or reiecting vs? when yet, to haue this acceſſe to an earthly prince but at ſome time & for ſome one pleaſure or other, is few mens caſes to obtaine, and hardly inioied. But this is yet more, that we know how to come before the Lord with confidence and reuerence,If we know how to pray. ſo as we  need not doubt but he will heare and regard vs, and ſo to come with delight; when yet praier is counted a cold helpe to men of the world to be vpholden by.
               Of watchfulneſſe to ſay a little alſo: what a treaſure is this, that whereas the diuill deceiueth thouſands,Alſo it is a goodly priuiledge to be watchfull. they being not wiſe & wary to eſcape his ſleights; yet he teacheth his, farre greater wiſdome and care to take heed to themſelues? for he draweth ſome to whoredome and vncleaneſſe: ſome to vaine and dangerous expence of the precious time in play and folly: ſome to hunt after the wealth of this world, with pined and hunger ſtarued ſouls: and vndoeth others after ſundry other waies; when yet we may by watchfulneſſe ſhift and ſhunne  them, and not be taken in the ſnare, as others are; and the oftener that we haue preuailed, we may be the better able to preuaile ſtill for heereafter: and that we thus reſiſting and ouercomming in the greateſt danger, we may much more auoide the ſmaller. But neither our gaine by it, nor their loſſe who are not acquainted with it, is greatly conſidered of them till they haue throughly ſmarted for the neglect of it.
               And ſo I may ſay of the viewing of, & looking backe vnto our whole courſe of life in the day,An other is, to view the day at our lying downe. when we are ready to lie downe at night: What a ſweet liberty is this, that whereas the moſt are either ſtung or wounded at night with the remembrance of their euill ſpending of the day or a great part of it, or ſome  euill that they haue done in it; or elſe, thinke not of it at al, but digeſt it merily and forget it (which, of the two, is farre more dangerous, as that which ſurfiteth them:) yet we may by this priuiledge of looking backe to our beſtowing of the day, auoid both the one and the other of theſe daily ſickneſſes; or if we remember any thing to haue eſcaped vs amiſſe, we are ready to bewaile and acknowledge it to our God, and to pray for pardon in faith, and renounce our ſinne: and yet who ſeeth not, that for the moſt part, we may be ſure to finde little to accuſe vs then at our lying downe, or to hinder our ſleepe, becauſe we were watchfull againſt it through the day, while we were awake? The ſame I may ſay of the reſt.
               
               For as he hath promiſed to bleſſe the vſing of theſe helpes, ſo he draweth our hearts to beleeue it that he will doe ſo indeed,For we beleeue that which God hath promiſed. Ioſ. 1.3.
                   and thereby to looke for the accompliſhing of his promiſe euen as certainly, as if it were already performed; as Ioſua did in all the Lords battels which he fought for the people of Iſraell, when God had ſaid of the whole land of Canaan: I haue, or (which is all one in God) I will giue it into thy hand; he beleeuing that he would doe ſo

                   indeed, was incouraged thereby to fight for it, and to goe againſt their enimies and make warre with them, in an other maner of proceeding, either in cheerefulneſſe or confidence, then they which came againſt him. And ſo (to ſay the ſame of the particulars) when the Lord ſaid: I haue giuen Iericho and Ai into thy hands, the king of Ieruſalem with his band of other kings and their men of warre, the king of Haſer with all the kings and people that came with him,
                  Ioſ. 11.6. 
                  whoſe multitude was as the ſande of the ſea ſhore; what was his munition or armour, but his faith? wherein lay his ſtrength but in this, that he beleeued, that the God of heauen and earth was ſtronger then all they; and that he which  had promiſed, would alſo doe the ſame although he was inuiſible? For the which cauſe, it is written in the ſcriptures,Hebr. 11.30. that by faith the walles of Iericho (a thing in reaſon moſt abſurd) yet by faith, and not by battery or ſtrength or pollicy, they fell downe. The ſame I might (but for auoiding tediouſneſſe) ſay of many other; who beleeuing, that God would bleſſe the ſame meanes, which he commanded them to vſe, haue with great courage interpriſed them:Gen. 6.22. Hebr. 11.17. as Noah in making the arke, Abraham in offering to kill his ſonne; who if they had not beleeued, that God would bleſſe their indeuours and turne them to their great good, would neuer haue attempted the ſame.
               And thus hauing made this matter plaine by examples, I will now proceed  in applying them to the preſent occaſion. Therefore, as Ioſua hauing promiſes giuen him of God, beleeued them and thereby preuailed againſt difficulties and diſcouragements: ſo Gods ſeruants hauing the like promiſes, are ſtrengthened by God to beleeue them, as he was, and by beleeuing them obtaine that which is promiſed. For God promiſeth,1. Ioh. 5.4. that by the helpes which he hath giuen, he will inable his people to get victory ouer their ſinnes, to leade a godly life: and when they fall by any infirmity,Mich. 7.8. not to ſuffer them either to faint and diſpaire of forgiueneſſe, on the one ſide; or to make light of their ſinne and to be careleſſe about it, one the other ſide.Dan. 9.5. 1. Sam. 12.19. Theſe promiſes therefore whoſoeuer beleeue, they by the helpes which they vſe, obtaine the  bleſſing, namely the thing that is promiſed. So that it is not the bare vſing of theſe helpes which effecteth, much leſſe meriteth any ſuch fruit or bleſſing; but that they are vſed in faith, and the parties who vſe them, looke conſtantly for bleſſing vpon the ſame, and power and ſtrength from God to helpe their weakeneſſe.
               This was neceſſary for me to ſay, how and in what caſe the meanes and helpes, which we vſe to the conſtant practiſing of a godly life, become effectuall vnto vs; namely, when we beleeue God that he will bleſſe them to vs.No fruit of the beſt helps, if we vſe them not in faith. Iam. 1.6.
                   And indeed otherwiſe, let not men looke to receiue any thing thereby; which the apoſtle Iames affirming of one eſpecial helpe, namely of praier, is as truly ſaid  of all the reſt: that he which doubteth and wauereth (when he ſhould beleeue) whether by thoſe helpes he ſhall be furthered and bettered or not; let not that man looke to receiue any thing. Therefore we muſt learne to be acquainted with faith, euen as we deſire to be acquainted with God (for by no other meanes can we know him, or haue acceſſe vnto him:) and thereby we receiue power and ſtrength through the helpes which we vſe, to liue well and godly. Theſe helpes what they are, and which ought to be vſed euery day, and which

by other occaſions, I haue before ſet downe in the third and fourth part of  this treatiſe.
               
                   Now, foraſmuch as God hath giuen this liberty, as a ſingular priuiledge to his people, to vſe theſe helpes conſtantly and continually, it is our part to ſee, whether we doe ſo or not;2. Pet. 3.17. or whether we ſuffer our ſelues to be plucked away with the errour of the wicked, and ſo fall from our ſtedfaſtneſſe. For if we finde not our liues, and our whole courſe in all dealings and affaires through the day, to be ſo paſſed as that we haue peace to God-ward throughout, and with peace lie downe at euen, it is our owne ſinne; God hath taught vs, and alſo prouided how it might haue beene otherwiſe with vs, if we had beene but  as carefull to finde it, as we were carefull about our liuing and maintenance, or to ſeeke vp a ſtraied beaſt which we had loſt, and to bring it into the paſture againe.
               And to ſpeake more plainely, if we doe not ſo begin the day with thankſgiuing,How the day is to be begun and continued. confeſſion of ſinne, and praier when we may doe it conueniently, and ſo arme our ſelues with the whole armour of a Chriſtian, ſo watch and pray after, ſo vſe Chriſtian exerciſe in family, and remember Gods bounty towards vs; and laſtly ſo looke backe to our paſſing of the day, that we may ſee by all theſe that we haue beene guided by God, and that we haue beene holden in our courſe without any iuſt cauſe to wound our conſcience: then it is the diuill, who hath detained and kept our right from vs, and depriued vs of ſo good a portion as our God hath bequeathed vs, when he ſhewed himſelfe willing to haue had it otherwiſe.
               And whither through ignorance, we know not how to be ſafely led through the day; or that which is little better, although we know, yet for ſlougth, or for that we loue darkeneſſe more then light,What it is to neglect duty, or to commit offences. we let paſſe many knowen duties, or ſuffer ſundry offences to paſſe from vs in the day: it is all one, as if we would ſuffer our ſelues to be depriued of our owne proper inheritance by ſome couſener, who ſhall tell vs that it belongeth not vnto vs, when yet we are able to ſhew cleare and ſufficient euidence for it. For when the Lord ſhall  ſay:Reuel. 3.11. Let no man take away your crowne; then the diuell ſheweth himſelfe manifeſtly in detaining it from vs. And therefore we muſt remember that to vſe theſe helpes rightly,The ſweeteſt liberties of a Chriſtian are wretched bondage to a man of the world. is no bondage nor ſeruitude, as men of the world count them, who ſtraine themſelues and ſtriue mightily to be deliuered from the holy and ſpirituall vſe of them, and not to be tied thereto: we muſt rather be perſwaded, that they are moſt precious liberties, peculiar to gods deereſt ſeruants; and a ſingular benefit of God, that in ſuch a dead world, and frozen age as we liue in, we may be counted meet, and made able to honour our God, (which to moſt men is tedious) and to haue peace with him throughout the day; and that we may be taught of him to vſe the helpes thereto, which  others are well content not to be acquainted with.
               And if we be throughly perſwaded of this, that it is a libertie, a benefit, and honour to vs, to hold our mindes willing from day to day to the reuerent vſe of them; and be reſolued, that we haue no worke more needfull to be done of vs any day then this: we ſhall not need to doubt of ſuch fruit heereof, as is not to be repented of; euen ſuch, as will cauſe vs to confeſſe that the meanes and

                   helps to grow in godlineſſe, and a minde to vſe them daily againſt the diſcouragements and hinderances of the day, are a ſingular prerogatiue to a Chriſtian. And otherwiſe, how precious ſoeuer they be in themſelues, yet if we thinke not ſo of them, but ſhall be well content,Note. by euerie light occaſion to omit and neglect them, or ſleightly and houerly to paſſe them ouer, I teſtifie,A ſleight and formall vſing of the meanes will not profit. that we ſhall get no good by them, no more than the common ſort do: but as they haue loſt their beautie with vs; ſo we ſhall loſe our fruit of them. Conſider what I ſay, and the Lord giue thee vnderſtanding.
               For be this knowen to the profaneſt and proudeſt contemner of God,The beautie of the worſhip of God is too glorious for the armeyes of prophane perſons to beholde. which  ſeldome, and onely for faſhion doth pray or heare a ſermon, that theſe helps, whereby we grow conſtant in a Chriſtian life, are not of little account becauſe they are ſo with him; but that they are ſo glorious that he is not woorthy of them, nor to reape the profit that commeth by them: his light eſteeming of them cauſeth me to ſet the more by them: his vnſauourineſſe that he findeth in them and wearineſſe of them, cauſeth me to commend them the more highly, and the more to admire the Lords kindneſſe to me, who maketh them ſo ſweet and gainfull to me, which are to him very gall and wormewood.That which is common to all, is no priuilege. For otherwiſe, how could they properly be called priuiledges, if they were a like precious to good and to bad? or were in as good reckoning with the one,Note. as  with the other? For, the euill ſort are not perſwaded thus of them, therefore they finde nothing. They either know not theſe helps, (which may truely be ſaid of the moſt of them) or if they doe, yet they know not how to vſe them in faith, eſpecially (I may ſay) not conſtantly, one day as another, or one of them aſwel as another, (that it may go better with their ſoules thereby:) but thinke, that though they vſe them not at all, it is no great matter; and if they doe vſe them, though it be but in ceremonie and neuer ſo houerly, then they thinke, that euen for that very cauſe they highly pleaſe God. Which maner of vſing them, is neuer able to proue to them, what fruit and benefit may be reaped by them.
               
                   But we who beleeue in him, may know them, and rightly practiſe them,Who they are, that are conſtant in the ſeruice of God. (though full weakly at ſome time we do it) and looke for fruit by them, and inioy it: and when we ſee what bleſſing he giueth vs therof, (as he doth, and that very great, to the end that we may haue the better experience how manie waies he keepeth promiſe with vs, and how he inricheth vs) then we waxe more conſtant therein, and are the more hardly withdrawen by any occaſions from holding out in the ſame. This (I ſay) we may do, although with griefe it may be ſpoken, that many euen of vs, are too farre off from inioying this libertie as we might do. But let all ſuch know, that it is their owne ſinne, who cannot therefore praiſe God for this ſweet helpe, while they be not the better  for it. Therefore to ſhut vp this point, let this be perſwaded to all Gods faithfull ſeruants, that he hath of ſingular fauour giuen the helps which ſettle them in a Chriſtian life, as a great prerogatiue and priuiledge: and therefore, when vnder colour of weakneſſe we yeeld to the waiwardneſſe of our hearts, which are ſoone vntoward to theſe gracious helps, and wearie of them, we muſt repent of ſuch vnthankfulneſſe, and of the nouriſhing of ſuch fleſhly libertie as ſhaketh off ſo needfull dueties. So ſhall we ſhew our ſelues wiſe, though the

world count vs fooles; and be in good ſaftie, when their danger ſhall be great.
               
               Now I would haue proceeded to lay foorth before the Chriſtian Reader an other priuiledge, which in this place would very fitly come in; and that is, that God hath ſurely prouided, that they who are thus farre beautified and bleſſed of him, ſhall thus continue vnto the end: but ſeeing it is the laſt that is inioyed in this life, it ſhall haue the laſt place among the temporall priuiledges. But yet I thought not amiſſe to mention ſuch a thing here, both to ſtay them which after the hearing of ſo bleſſed beginnings and proceedings, would be glad to heare of the end anſwerable to them both: and alſo that they may looke for it in the place aſſigned.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 8. Of the ſixth priuiledge: namely, of the right vſing of proſperitie.
               
                  NOw the next priuiledge that I thinke may moſt fitly be ioyned with the former, is: how the Lord hath taught his the right vſe of proſperitie and aduerſity, and how they may cary themſelues in peace, and be vpright in both eſtates: two of the moſt principall  parts of our life, ſeeing the greateſt part of it doth goe thorow them: for the moſt of it is accompanied with bleſſings or chaſticements. The right vſe of both, although in ſome ſort and in generall may be gathered out of the former diſcourſes, and namely, of the third priuiledge: yet becauſe they are diſtinct points, and it is hard to vſe them aright, and as precious as it is hard; I know it is very neceſſarie to make a particular Treatiſe thereof. And firſt, more clearely to ſpeake of the one, I ſay: God hath exceedingly declared his mercie and kindneſſe this way to his people, that although proſperitie be a ſlipperie path,Proſperitie a ſlipperie eſtate. and riches and honour, health and friends, with all the other lawfull pleaſures, profits and liberties of this life doe deceiue and vndoe  the greateſt part of the world which inioy and poſſeſſe them; yet the beloued of the Lord may be free from this danger,God teacheth his to ſtand in this ſlipperie way. and ſo directed that they need not be taken in theſe ſnares, nor make them their bane which are giuen them as bleſſings: this grace therefore if any ſhall be found to inioy, they may be worthely ſaid to be priuiledged aboue other men. Now to proue this, that Gods children may vſe the world rightly (which is impoſſible for any other to doe:The wicked cannot.) I doe not meane, that becauſe they haue right vnto earthly things through Chriſt, and are heires with him of the bleſſings of the world, that therefore they doe ſoberly and as they ought vſe the ſame; for many euen of them, are (I confeſſe) farre from it, and therefore that which they want I labour to helpe  them to: but as they are the perſons which may be perſwaded and brought to the right vſe of theſe outward liberties (and not the wicked;) ſo God draweth their hearts thereunto by his mighty power, whereby he is able to doe all things.
               
                  How he teacheth his to do it.For when he cauſeth this doctrine to be taught them: Of the contempt of the world, of contentation in their eſtate, of moderation and ſobriety in lawfull

                   pleaſures and profits &c. he imprinteth it in their hearts by the holy ghoſt: he maketh them able to beleeue that it is ſpoken to them,Firſt by the ſcriptures: and therefore to apply it to themſelues: he maketh them prooue how this doctrine worketh in them, and try themſelues by it, that where they ſee themſelues to haue gone beyond their bounds, they may returne and bring their feet backe into the way of his teſtimonies: he, through the ſame doctrine, ſeaſoneth their hearts, and wholly poſſeſſeth them with the loue of it, that ſo their wants may be ſupplied, and they thereby may grow better practiſed in this ſobriety. And although the inioying of earthly commodities be an alluring baite,Luc. 14.18.19. Dan. 4.27. Act. 12.22. and eaſy to  make a man forget his mortality; as we ſee in Nabucadnezzar, Herode, and others: yet the ſcripture giueth greater grace, as to Daniell, Iob, and others who determined not to ſet their hearts on them.
               But beſides this, through further benefit of the ſcripture, God cauſeth his,Alſo by experience and obſeruatiō of things: Dan. 1.8. Iob. 1 21.
                   to ſet oft before their eies, the daily changes of all things vnder the ſunne: Pſ. 102.26. the death of noble perſonages, friends and acquaintance; the moſt flouriſhing flowers to fade, and looſe their bewty, and nothing to continue in one eſtate: and by the oft and deepe conſidering of theſe, their harts are much apalled, & the pride of life greatly abated in them. And as they grow daily to ſee more cleerely their gaine heereby,By meditation alſo of their gaine heereby. and that without theſe meditations vpon  examples and doctrine of death and mortality, &c. they cannot keepe their heartes freed from infection by the world and earthly dealings: ſo doe they more reſolue with themſelues daily, to thinke of them ſtill; and to purge out their old and accuſtomed delightings in worldly things, their dreames of long life, deſire of eaſe, and increaſe of earthly commodities: with all which the diuill ſtuffeth and filleth their braines, that while they begin to giue themſelues ouer to theſe, they may be perſwaded ſtrongly that there is no other happineſſe to be attained vnto; and ſo therby, deſtruction may ſuddenly come vpon them.
               Thus (I ſay) the Lord frameth his, to the contempt of the world,The effect heereof. and to  temperance and contentation, to deſire no more then their moſt wiſe & prouident father thinketh meet for them, nor no longer to inioy any of their temporall liberties, then he ſhall ſee it to be expedient. Thus he teacheth them both in wanting, to thinke themſelues (yet) neuertheleſſe beloued of God; and in the inioying of aboundance, not to thinke themſelues the better for it nor to be proud of it: I ſay, he teacheth them; for neither bring they this grace with them from their cradle, but learne it; and ſtudy how to learne it ſo, as they may practiſe it: and yet they learne it not by their owne wiſdome, but by God, who is onely able to teach it them: who by the meanes that I haue ſhewed, doth bring to paſſe, that they ſo buy, as if they poſſeſſed not; and ſo vſe  the world, as that they abuſe it not; ſo vſe mariage, as they are not hurt nor hindered from godly life by it, more then if they were vnmaried, but much furthered and helped by it, neither neglect they thereby the caring for the things of the lord: but as two are better then one, ſo finde they (as God hath appointed) much helpe thereby vnto euery good worke. Neither, though they haue much in the world, do they therfore loue it much; but are glad to follow holy Iob in that, when he ſaid: If I haue made gold my hope,
                  Iob. 31.24. 
                  or haue ſaid to the wedge of

gold, Thou art my confidence: If I reioiced becauſe my ſubſtance was great, or becauſe  my hand had gotten much: this had beene an iniquitie to be condemned, for I had denied the God aboue. Therefore if theſe be great riches, liberties and priuiledges to inioy; I meane, to haue contentation in our eſtate, yea to be thankfull to God in all things, not puffed vp with proſperitie, to acknowledge the vncertainty of our commodities, and therefore not to reſt nor put confidence in them, nor to deſire the increaſing of them ſimply, much leſſe by any indirect means, but to let them ſerue for the neceſſities of our brethren as wel as for our owne vſes: now therefore, if theſe are the precious gifts of God, and yet that God frameth his ſeruants to indeuour, and in ſome ſort to do all theſe  and ſuch like; I hope it may truely be ſaid, that he doth honour them highly, and priuiledge them greatly in working thus graciouſly in them.
               But when all this is ſaid, me thinkes I heare diuers to obiect thus: We doubt nothing of the trueth of all this, but that there haue beene ſuch mentioned in the Scriptures: but what is that to vs? where are they in this our age who may be brought foorth for ſuch examples? I ſay, if the men could not eaſilie be found, yet that hindreth not the doctrine to be true: but further I ſay as the trueth ſaith, Ioſ. 1.5. As God hath done to others, ſo he will doe to vs; and his goodneſſe is not abated towards vs, more then it was in the ages paſt: yea rather,Eſa. 59.1. we haue more neere acquaintance with the will and minde of God, then  many of them who are highly commended in the Scriptures; and in this latter age,Heb. 8.11. Act. 2.17.18. God hath viſited his people in a moſt gracious maner, beſtowing his gifts and powring out the graces of his ſpirit vpon them aboundantly. All which laid together, what can be gathered leſſe then this, that when his children heare by the preaching of his word,Note. all things vnder the ſunne to be tranſitorie, vaine and ſoone flitting away, and themſelues alſo with them daily drawing vnto an end, riches vncertaine, beautie deceitfull, health euer changing, friends alwaies dying, &c. but that he cauſeth them to beleeue it, and therefore not to reſt vpon them?It is moſt falſe that ſome ſay: My goods are mine owne, and therefore I may do with them as I lift. So when they heare, that they may not vſe them as they liſt, (no not the lawfulleſt of their liberties, as poſſeſſions, recreations, friends, time, &c.) that is, to pride, wantonneſſe, idleneſſe, exceſſe, the wronging and hurting of others, but as helpes to themſelues and many others vnto godlineſſe; they are glad to heare their ſhepheards voice, and they know it and beleeue it and follow it, vſing theſe lawfull benefits of God accordingly: I ſay, when they know by Gods word, how they may vſe them which ſometime they did not know, and that God giueth ſuch grace to his, (and cauſeth the ſame to be publiſhed and preached) whereby they may be able to vſe all theſe outward bleſſings of God to their right ends, and ſo, as they become not baits and ſnares vnto them; they reioice and beleeue the ſame with thankfull hearts, and ſo are made able to doe the ſame, vſing their  praiers and watch with their other helpes, to practiſe this point of godlineſſe (namely, moderation and the true vſe of their lawfull liberties) as they indeuour after all the reſt.
               
                  The Chriſtian muſt be perſwaded that it is Gods worke which he goeth about: and alſo, that God will ſtrengthen him thereto.For when they once be reſolued, that it is the worke which God ſetteth them about, and that he will ſtrengthen and fit them for it, it doth mightily incourage them to take in hand and goe about it: euen as on the contrarie,

                   there is no ſtronger diſmaier of them, then when they ſet vpon either this, or any other part of Gods ſeruice by their owne ſtrength; that is, not knowing whether they may be bolde to beleeue and be perſwaded, that the Lord will giue them power and harten them vnto the right performance of it, (for of that point the moſt of Gods poore children are ignorant or not ſetled in faith about it) and therefore they doubt and feare, that they ſhall neuer come neere or attaine to that which they ſeeke: by occaſion of which weakneſſe, the diuell holdeth them in great diſcomfort; that although they would doe the will of God in that which they goe about, yet they ſtande at a ſtay, and are  holden vnder many heauy diſcouragements for a long time. And yet are theſe farre more faithfull and ſimple hearted, howſoeuer they are feared by their owne weakneſſe, then they who thinke they pleaſe God highly, if they doe any thing in their owne opinion more then others, how little warrant ſoeuer they haue for it.
               But to returne to that which I ſaid,How the godly doe rightly vſe their lawfull liberties. that the Lord inableth his to gouerne themſelues in the vſe of their goods and lawfull liberties (which is a great priuiledge:) that I be not vnderſtood amiſſe, I thinke good to expreſſe my mind more cleerely. If any ſhould gather or thinke, that I meane all Gods people do inioy this libertie and prerogatiue: I anſwere, that I am farre from that  iudgement. But as may be well ſeene by that which I haue ſaid,Who ſhall enioy this foreſaid priuiledge. they who beleeue it, that God will make them fit for it how vnfit ſoeuer they are of themſelues, they ſhall inioy it. I haue propounded to proue no other thing. For by this it may appeare, that ſeeing Gods children may be made partakers of ſuch a treaſure, which but few of them do inioy (and of the vnregenerate not one can:) therefore they beholding what he hath bequeathed them,They that attaine not to this benefit, prouide ill for themſelues. they ſhall ſhew, that they prouide ill for themſelues, if they attaine not to that, being ſo great a benefit which God hath ſo freely beſtowed vpon them. There ſhould need no more vnto ſuch, but this: that they may know, that he hath granted it out vnto them freelie, and calleth them euery where, to the  partaking of it: which being ſo, what ſhould holde them backe from inioying it? that whereas the moſt are as bruit beaſts, ſeruants to their luſts, yet theſe (of whom I ſpeake) may captiuate and ſubdue them: eſpecially, ſeeing it is greater honour to them, to ouercome their vnruely paſſions,Pro. 16.32. than to winne a citie.
               As for thoſe who count this honour, preciſeneſſe; and this imbondaging  of their vnruly affections to be more than Chriſtians need to be vrged vnto: what haue I to do with them? They are the enemies of the croſſe of Chriſt,
                  Phil. 3.18.19. they turne the grace of God into wantonneſſe, they make lawfull liberties to become vnlawfull through their ill vſing of them. Of whom this I ſay,The cauillers at this doctrine are vnder heauie and ſpeedy condemnation. which I  will only ſay: that they will bring vnto them the ſwifter damnation. To which kind of people, & to their like obiecting thus & demanding: What? do theſe whom you commend ſo highlie for their good gouernment and temperance in the vſe of lawfull things, alwaies keepe one and the ſame courſe? I ſay, they moſt of all indeauour after that; and how full of ſadneſſe ſoeuer it be and tedious to others, yet to them it is ſweet and pleaſant: inſomuch, that although they be ſometime deceiued by the deuill, and driuen from their holde, yet as

ſoone as they perceiue that they haue gone too farre, and haue paſſed their  bounds in their lawfull liberties, eating, drinking, recreation, vſe of mariage, pleaſuring in goods, truſting in friends, and making fleſh their arme; they returne ſpeedily as out of open and manifeſt ſinnes, and thereby become more carefull another time: and when they ſee how many buffets light vpon others, who haue ſmall regard of ſobrietie or meaſure keeping; they ſee their portion to be great in reſtreining themſelues from that exceſſe in lawfull things, which they keepe no meaſure in. And thus much be ſaid of the firſt part or branch of this priuiledge. Wherein may be ſeene, that the Lord hath offered great fauour to his children, (to ſo many as eſteeme of it) that the glorie of  preſent things and proſperitie in this world (which vndoe many) ſhal (yet) not bewitch nor deceiue them; but they ſhal be able to eſcape theſe ſnares by the ſpirituall wings that he hath giuen them for that purpoſe, to mount aboue them, as godly Ioſeph, Moſes & many of Gods deare ſeruants did before them.
               But if it be asked: Why hath he giuen them to one and not to another? I anſwere: Seeing one ſetteth more ſtore by it than another. I ſpeake it to the ſhame of thoſe who giue occaſion, though they be otherwiſe well to be hoped of. For the cuſtome and boldneſſe in this ſinne of intemperancie and worldlines which we ſee in the moſt men, doth draw after them and their example, ſome euen of thoſe which are religious; cauſing them to haue their teeth ſet  on edge, ſo eagerlie to follow them in their prophane courſe: and the abundance of iniquitie doth coole their feruencie in ſeeking to weane their hearts from ſuch poiſoned and deceitfull baits and dainties as they ſee them ſo greedily to deuoure. For otherwiſe, though they are fraile, yet hauing receiued a taſte of the heauenly doctrine, which is the onely mother and nouriſher of true ſobrietie, they ſhould not ſo eaſily forget themſelues and be ouercome of their vaine deſires. For if popiſh dreames and fantaſies without all ground of Gods word, haue ſo inchanted princes and other perſons of great poſſeſſions, that they haue drawen them from their pompe and many ſolemnities, into Monaſteries and Nunries for the deceiuable hope of ſaluation: ſhould not  the word of trueth much more preuaile with them who haue had a right taſte of it, to renounce dangerous and vnlawfull liberties? And although they were led from one errour to another; yet if errour might doe ſo much with them, ſhould not the trueth doe much more with the children of the trueth, to abide in it and be gouerned by it? It is pitie, that any of the Lords beloued ſhould offer ſuch diſhonour to the glorious word of God, as to refuſe the gouernment of it, and giue occaſion to the vnbeleeuers to ſay: That God dieteth his people ſo meanly in his owne houſe, that they be driuen to eat with the intemperate at their table (as it were) their poiſoned dainties. But let this reproofe make any ſuch of Gods ſeruants aſhamed, as haue giuen occaſion of  it: and let them not follow the exceſſe of ſuch as know no better. And when they ſhall finde this doctrine hard to be practiſed, that is, to vſe their proſperitie rightly and ſoberly; if then ſuch matter as this is, were read and well weighed of them, and the examples of thoſe which are contrarilie minded, what bondage they are in, I doubt not, but that the hardneſſe which they complaine of, ſhould in good meaſure be aſſwaged.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 9. Of the ſeuenth priuiledge: Concerning the afflictions of the godly; and namely, of the first branch of the ſame; that is, How they may be free from many of thoſe troubles, which do light on and meet with the vnreformed.
               
                  NOw followeth the prerogatiue that they haue about afflictions. Of the which although they are not void: yet if we diligently  marke Gods dealing with them heerein, we muſt needs confeſſe, that he ſheweth exceeding fauor vnto them. Which ſeeing it is not one way but many and ſundry, declared vnto them: I will in ſome order (as I can) lay them forth particularly. And they may all be referred to three kinds. For firſt, he holdeth many tribulations from them altogether in that they be his children, which others by their ſinnes do plucke vpon themſelues, Pſ. 32.10.11. Secondly, he deliuereth them out of manie, which otherwiſe would ſore oppreſſe them, when yet he leaueth others in them ſtill. And thirdly, he teacheth them, aright and well to beare them, when he thinketh it not meet to deliuer them. And of theſe three, I will handle  the firſt in this chapter.
               Concerning the which point, it may eaſily be gathered by that which hath beene ſaid of the former priuiledges, how true this is:The godly eſcape many troubles altogether. that many troubles neuer take hold of ſuch as walke after thoſe rules which I haue ſpoken of, and which inioy the ſaid priuiledges: and ſeeing all Gods children be ſuch as may doe ſo, therefore euen they may be deliuered from many troubles and afflictions (one as well as another) which yet the vngodly and vnregenerate cannot eſcape. For they whoſe hearts are cleanſed and ſanctified, ſo that they truely hate all maner of ſinne, and more ſpecially renounce in their liues the ſinne which they know; who indeauour to haue a good conſcience in all things,  and doe all this with delight; and with delight alſo doe daily vſe the meanes to grow forward in this courſe: how can the plagues and calamities take hold on them, which doe on other men who are ſtrangers to ſuch a courſe? For the greateſt and ſoreſt puniſhments and troubles that fall vpon any, are brought vpon them by their ſinne (contrary to the erronious opinion of them, who thinke that religion is the chiefe cauſe of troubles) & they are nothing els but the fruite thereof; and the greater ſinners that men are, the ſharper and heauier iudgements outward or inward doe meet with and take hold of them,The greateſt ſinnes bring the greateſt puniſhments. and the deepelier doth God drawe his bowe againſt them: and wherein is the ſcripture more plentifull, then in this argument and matter? For ſinne,  came the firſt puniſhment into the world, namely, death and Gods curſe,Gen. 3.17.24. which without ſinne had neuer beene knowen in all the world, with the caſting off our firſt parents and their poſteritie out of the fauour of God. Through ſinne, came all kindes of plagues and puniſhments vpon men;Deut. 28.44. as hunger, nakedneſſe, diſeaſes, the peſtilence, bondage to enemies and inuaſion of them, impriſonment, loſſe of goods, loſſe of life, and ſuch like. For ſinne, both perſon and place, whole cities and villages haue beene deſtroied:Gen. 19. from

the king to the begger, both Pharao and the raskall ſouldiers that peirced  Chriſt through and platted a crowne of thornes vpon his head, and Iudas the purſebearer who was alſo the traytour; euen all theſe did by ſinne purchaſe to themſelues the reward of iniquity. All which plagues, they which were voide of thoſe ſinnes and the like which they committed, were freed from.
               But I ſhall not need to ſay much of this matter which is cleere in all mens eies: and yet I muſt ſay that which I doe in this place, becauſe it is the ground of this diſcourſe. For if this be true, that troubles and puniſhments are the fruite of ſinne, and that they who decline and goe aſide from the way of ſinners,The freer from ſinne, the freer from trouble. ſhall not taſt of them; it followeth that the children of God who doe ſo, haue a ſingular prerogatiue aboue others, & may be free from many ſore vexations. Neither ſhould this ſeeme ſtrange or admirable, foraſmuch as they forſake many vnlawfull liberties and vaine pleaſures which others hunt after.
               
                   But as I haue ſaid in handling the former priuiledges, ſo I muſt ſay in this: that the ſeruants of God may inioy this liberty; but not, that all doe ſo. For experience prooueth the contrary:All the godly doe not avoid the ſorrowes which they might doe here. namely, that ſundry of Gods people doe draw vpon themſelues many troubles through their owne default, which they might haue beene voide of, and doe trouble themſelues when God doth not trouble them: and it is one cauſe why I did enter into this worke, to teach ſuch how they may liue more at eaſe and in ſafety and without many incumbrances  in this world, then they doe or many thinke they may poſſibly doe. For a great number,Note. euen of Gods children, do perſwade themſelues through ignorance of the ſcriptures (Math. 22.29) that foraſmuch as they heare, that we muſt goe through many tribulations to the kingdome of heauen,2. Tim. 3.12. therefore it can be no otherwiſe with vs, but that we muſt of neceſſity ſmart and be afflicted as oft and as many waies as we are; which is nothing ſo: for many troubles and dangers we might ſhun and avoide by taking heed to our ſelues, as Gods word teacheth vs, yea and as his ſpirit inableth vs alſo to doe; which yet through our folly, ſecurity, ſlougth and ſuch other faults of ours, too often doe vexe and diſquiet vs, and make our liues vtterly vnſavory and vnpleaſant  vnto vs. For who can deny this, that many honeſt Chriſtians as well as worſe perſons,Many trouble themſelues greatly by their corrupt affections: doe cauſe a great part of their liues to be filled with vnquietneſſe, anguiſh and irkeſomneſſe, (then the which what can be reckoned greater troubles) and that, through impatience, anger, fretting, raſhly medling in other mens matters, and intemperately folowing and dealing in their owne; which vnbridled affections others of their brethren wiſely and carefully ſeeking and labouring to reſiſt, preuent and gouerne, are not moleſted nor troubled with?
               Or who ſeeth not this: that, euen men who deſerue to be well thought of for many cauſes,And many other, with thoſe which ouerrule them another way. yet in ſome particular things refuſing to be directed aright, and following their owne will, and caried by their euill affections, take libertie  to themſelues to miſſpende the time in fooliſh ieſting, idle and harmefull talking, in lightneſſe, in wantonneſſe of the eie, euill companionſhip, &c. for the which ſweet meat they haue afterwards ſoure ſauce: and by thoſe meanes onely, raiſe vp in their hearts ſecret accuſations, checks of conſcience, horrour and feare of death and the iudgement day, quenching of the ſpirit of God, and ſuch like; and the better men they be, the ſooner and certainlier

                   they are thus rewarded. Are not theſe troubles? which if they had beene carefull to auoide, they might haue liued merily and with good contentation, as other good ſeruants of God haue done, and doe, who haue ſet more by true peace and quietneſſe with holineſſe, (without which no man ſhall ſee the Lord) then to looſe it for a little peece of their will,Heb. 12. and for the inioying of the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon.
               But theſe troubles becauſe they are inward, are not of ſo many nor ſo eaſily ſeene and diſcerned as were to be wiſhed, although too many, both godly and wicked, doe oft both finde and feele them.They bring alſo vpon themſelues outward troubles by their ſinnes. I will therefore ſhew this in  outward troubles; how many Chriſtians doe as well through their ſinne trouble and incomber their liues with them, as with the other kinde. For by their ſinne (as wilfull blindneſſe, careleſneſſe and vnbrideled affections) euen they as well as men vtterly vnreformed, doe bring vpon themſelues ſhame, ſutes in law, pouerty, debt, diſeaſes, impriſonment, loſſes, ill report, wicked poſteritie, &c. Theſe & ſuch like (I am ſure) the ignoranteſt and worſt ſort of people doe count troubles and miſeries, and crie out of them, till they doe ofttimes depriue themſelues of life to the end they may be ridde of them.It is prooued by many particulars. But to prooue that they trouble themſelues with all theſe by their ſinnes, is it not a ſhame to them, when they be found to haue beene deceiuers, liers, boaſters,  ſlaunderers, and in ſuch other behauiour offenſiue and ſcandalous? and doth not the ſame bring ill report with them alſo? doth not raſhneſſe, hot and haſty ſpeeches, prouoking one another cauſe ſutes and controuerſies which need neuer haue beene, and rendering like hard meaſure againe, as hath beene offered? doe not debt and pouertie ariſe of needleſſe and exceſſiue ſpendings, going aboue our abilitie in diet, apparell, purchaſing and building; and doth not he which loueth paſtime, prooue a poore man?Prou. 21.17. So by ſurfeiting come diſeaſes; and ill poſterity by ill education, with too much conniuencie and libertie giuing; and by raſh and vnequall marriages as haſtie repentings for their conceiued griefes, if not departings one from the other; and an haughty  minde cauſeth him that nouriſheth it, oft times to take vp his abode within the priſon walles. Theſe are a few of a great many which might as well be reckoned vp, but that I would ſay no more then I muſt needs.
               And what are the troubles of the world, if theſe be not? and yet who ſeeth not, that all theſe and their like are drawne vpon many Chriſtians by their ſin, as ſore corrections from God, ſeeing they do, & may eaſily, through want of care and watchfulneſſe, oft offend thus. And true it is, that they might be well auoided, if ſinne were taken heed of and reſiſted, and by labour and watchfulneſſe the vnruly heart ſubdued. Neither let any anſwer me, that this cannot be attained: for I affirme,God giueth grace to ouercome theſe ſinnes. that God giueth ſuch grace vnto fraile men  whereby it may be atteined to, and teacheth how; and many there are (God haue the glory thereof) which comfortably finde it, who becauſe they hate to be ſeruants to any ſinne (although they cannot walke without ſinne) receiue no ſuch wages of ſinne and iniquitie as others doe.Note.
               
               And by this which I ſay, let it be conſidered, what eaſe and peace and freedome from many troubles this ſort of men inioy in their liues, which others goe without; and what ſorrow and calamities ſome fill their daies with, which

both they themſelues, and many others might be voide of. So that it is not as  many haue ignorantly thought, that their troubles cannot be auoided; but (as I haue ſaid) many of them might be ſhunned,What quiet ſome finde in their liues more then other: and how. and their liues might be many waies and in ſundry reſpects more pleaſant and quiet then they be: which cauſeth ſome that ſee it to be thus with diuers Chriſtians, (and yet that theſe their troubles are not for well doing, but by their owne folly and procuring) cauſeth them (I ſay) to be ſo farre from the loue of true religion as they be: for whoſe ſake,Note. if we will not doe it to make our owne liues more comfortable, we ſhould abſtaine from offences; ſeeing the woe that is pronounced, will otherwiſe,Math. 18.7 certainly come vpon vpon vs: Woe to him that cauſeth another  to fall.
               
                  Obiection.But ſuch men are ready to excuſe and anſwere for themſelues, ſaying, that all cannot be alike, nor all cannot doe as ſome may: which obiection vnleſſe it be of pure ſimplicity, is a ſigne rather that they will goe forward, then ſeeke to recouer.Anſwere. But whatſouer, or whoſe ſoeuer it be, I anſwer, Let the weake indeauour  to follow the ſtronger: and if any haue attained to more then other, in knowledge and experience of the minde and will of God, of them let others learne and take ſuch for their example: but let none pleaſe themſelues in that which they doe, as though they could not attaine to any better, but aime at further ripeneſſe and meaſure of perfection, deadly diſliking their ſmalleſt  ſinnes, rather then excuſing and defending thoſe which are great: and then it ſhall be verified that is written, to their no ſmall comfort: To him that hath, it ſhall be giuen,
                  Luc. 8.18. 
                  and he ſhall haue aboundance: and he that ſeeketh in humility, ſhall finde and inioy plentiouſly: and he that reuerenceth the gifts and graces of other, ſhall haue a part in them himſelfe, and not enuy other for them.
               And as for the troubles which we ſpeake of, let no man thinke that we may reioice in them,Iam. 1.2. 1. Pet. 4.15. ſeeing we are dehorted frō them by the Apoſtle Peter, ſaying: Let no man ſuffer as an euil doer; ſeeing they are for iuſt cauſe vpon vs to vexe & diſquiet vs, rather then that they can be any matter of ioy and gladnes to vs, except by godly ſorrow they bring vs to repentance, which (alas) is the leaſt  part of their thought who commit them. The Lord taketh no pleaſure in ſeeing vs to trouble our ſelues, and by our ſinnes to bring vexation into our liues; but ſheweth vs in his worde how much it diſpleaſeth him, that we ſhould be ſo much our owne foes, and vnwiſe for our owne good, and that we ſhould by our ſinnes hold ſo many good things from vs.Ier. 5.25. For ſo doth the prophet tell vs, that our ſinnes keepe many bleſſings from vs. And if they be our ſinnes, that is, our knowen ſinnes, our wilfull ſinnes, and thoſe which are committed through our owne default and folly, then let vs thanke our ſelues, and let vs charge our ſinnes, and not the Lord; in that, while we ſuffer ſo great and many troubles by them, we haue reaped thereby the iuſt fruite of our owne  labours. And ſeeing the ſinne might and ought to haue bene auoided; therefore ſuch troubles as they haue cauſed, might alſo haue beene preuented.
               And this is that which I haue gone about to prooue, for the comfort of my bretheren: that many of vs who belong to the Lord, doe finde more troubles and afflictions then we neede to doe, and that through our owne ſinne. And therfore I conclude, ſeeing it is ſo: that the Lord who guideth his ſeruants in a

                   more holy courſe then many of the other ſort are content to be guided in, doth thereby grant them this priuiledge and liberty: that they doe eſcape and are deliuered from infinite troubles and calamities, which others who count godlineſſe to ſtrict and preciſe a courſe for them, doe oft ruſh and runne into.
               Oh that this might enter into them deepely and doe them good,To whom chiefly the comfort of this doctrine doth appertaine. for whoſe cauſe chiefely I haue ſpoken it; I meane, many of Gods people: who although they haue ſome loue to their brethren, and imbrace the goſpell heartely and reuerently, and haue many other good things in them, (it behooueth  me ſo to iudge of them) yea generally they propound to themſelues a good courſe, namely to liue after the goſpell: yet particularly, are ſuch in their liues as bring ſmall glory to the goſpell, but paſſe ouer many parts of their liues with very ſleight examination, as they doe alſo the gouernment of their hearts. Which faults notwithſtanding they be conuinced of, yet will they not yeeld, but goe forward in them ſtill: and as for thoſe things which they may lawfully doe, although they offend neuer ſo manifoldly in and about the ſame in maner of doing them,1. Sam. 8.19. compared with 12.19. yet will they by no meanes be counſelled to redreſſe that which is amiſſe: in whom it is no hard thing to ſee, how deare they pay for their liberties, which they will haue whatſoeuer they coſt them. They  would hold peace with God, and ſometimes finde comfort in good things; but when that faileth (as it doth very oft) their liues would become very irkeſome and tedious vnto them, if they made not themſelues mery in ſome earthly and tranſitory thing: and ſo they make fleſh their arme, which is to deny the Almighty.
               Their defence,Excuſes for mens ſinnes. for that they doe not more particularly direct their waies aright, is; that Ieſus Chriſt hath giuen them liberty and ſet them free; and that they haue no diſcretion, who vrge their bretheren ſo ſtrictly; and ſuch like: which all are but figge leaues to couer their nakedneſſe. For they ſee (though they would not) oftentimes, that thus liuing they pleaſe not God: neither (if  they aduiſedly marke it) doe they pleaſe themſelues. Their diſquietneſſes, checks of conſcience and ſecret accuſations they cannot but feele, and many outward troubles do meet with them, as hath beene ſaid: and while they ſeeke the cauſe afarre off, beholde, it is neere vnto them; yea at hand, euen within them: their will, their vntamed affections, the ſturdineſſe and vnrulineſſe of their hearts and this their ſinne hath found them out.
               Theſe therefore I exhort to conſider with no worſe minds than I haue written it, what hath beene ſaid: and the Lord giue them grace ſo to doe: yea, and let ſuch godly Chriſtians whoſe teeth yet do ſometime water at the dainties of thoſe, though they ſee what ſorrow and reproch they ſuſteine for them,  thanke God heartily that they taſte not of ſuch poiſoned dainties with them.
               But now that I haue ſhewed, how the Lord doth preſerue them from ſundrie, yea infinite troubles,Many ſhun to be truely religious, becauſe they would auoid trouble. Luc. 16.25.
                   who ſet their hearts to walke with him in one thing as in another, (beholde, ſuch honour and prerogatiues his ſeruants may haue) I cannot paſſe by the deuilliſh (and yet fooliſh) policie of ſome who do ſhun to be religious of purpoſe, becauſe they would be void of ſorrow and trouble. They ſing the ſong of the rich man in S. Luke, that in their life time they will

haue their pleaſure whatſoeuer it coſt them when their reckoning commeth  in:1. Cor. 15. and of the Epuicure; Let vs eat and drinke, &c. and ſay with the yoong man in Eccleſiaſtes:
                  Eccleſ. 11.9. 
                  They will reioyce in their youth, and inioy the delights of ſinne, though it be but for a ſeaſon. But they marke not that anſwere to him in the Goſpell: Thou in thy life time receiuedſt thy pleaſure, therefore now thou art tormented; nor to the yong man, by the Preacher, what was ſaid: Know, that for all theſe things, God will bring thee to iudgement. No ſuch thing (I ſay) they do conſider; but all that they obſerue, is this: How the better that men are for the moſt part, the leſſe they are ſet by, as it is ſaid: I haue ſeene the iuſt to periſh in his iuſtice: and the leſſe men faſhion themſelues after this preſent world, the  leſſe they may (they ſee) depart from a good conſcience, and be merrie after the common maner; which theſe obiecters count an irkeſome and tedious thing.
               Againe, they ſee that as the moſt part of men among whō the godlie liue, haue them in ſome indignation and vile acount; ſo that they doe by meanes thereof,The fooliſhneſſe of them that do ſo. ſuſtaine mocks, taunts, checks and complaints before their betters, with cruell threatnings, and in perſecution times that they are conuented, impriſoned, railed on, yea and oft times put to death. Theſe things (I ſay) they only looke at with carnall eyes, and therefore are eaſily brought to beware, that they come not neere their courſe: but they neither conſider, that they ſuffer  for righteouſneſſe ſake,Mat. 5.12. and therefore that they are bleſſed; neither, that they themſelues and ſuch as they are, liue in darkeneſſe and after the luſt of their eie and heart,Eccleſ. 7.8. Iob. 21.13. and that their pleaſures wanze away as the cracking of thornes vnder a pot, and afterward they muſt come to their heauie and vnwelcome account. Beſides this, though they haue ſorrow and vexation dailie in their liues, by meanes of their ſinne, vnleſſe they breake it off through fooliſh mirth and vanitie for a while: yet partly they ſee it not, neither count it any; as to be caſt into fretting, frowardneſſe, ſtrife, debate, &c. And if they doe purchaſe any trouble by their deſerts & ill doings, as ſhame, charge by the purſe, and other puniſhment; yet they will chuſe to ſuffer much this way, rather than  they will be driuen from their will, and the inioying of their fond liberties.
               And now let all wiſe men iudge, what theſe kinds of men haue gained by following their ſinfull courſe: let (I ſay) the vttermoſt of their gaine and pleaſure be conſidered, and what troubles they haue ſhunned in ſhunning to liue godly.Pſ. 32.10. But when they haue done, ſeeing the Lord hath ſufficiently confirmed this:Num. 32.23. that plagues abide the vngodly, & (that they may be ſure of it) that their ſin ſhall finde them out; let none looke to prouide well for himſelfe that way, namely, to ſhunne and be farre from the ſincere practiſe of a religious and godly life, to the end he may be free from troubles: for he can no other way more certainly and ſpeedily multiplie them. And whereas it is obiected, that  the beſt of Gods ſeruants are not free from troubles, but ſuffer much for their profeſſion and a good conſcience: it is granted. But their troubles for thoſe cauſes, are of another kinde, namely, fatherly chaſtiſements to holde them in from periſhing with the world; or trials of their patience, faith and other graces of God in them;1. Cor. 11.32. 1. Pet 1.7. Iohn 16.20. or ſuch as they ſuffer for good cauſes; and ſo weepe and lament, when the world is iocund and mery: and therefore they turne euer

                   to their profit,Rom. 8.28. Eccleſ. 8.12. as I ſhall haue occaſion to ſhew more plentifullie in another place more fit for that purpoſe. And to conclude, let all know this, that though a ſinner doe euill an hundred times, and God prolongeth his daies; yet that it ſhall be well with them that feare the Lord, and doe reuerence before them. And thus much of the firſt point in this ſecond branch of this priuiledge, that the godly may liue void of manie and great troubles: and therefore, that ſuch as doe not, may thanke themſelues for it, whether we vnderſtand inward diſtruſt and feare, or outward puniſhments that are fruits of ſinne.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 10. Of the ſecond branch of this priuiledge, concerning the afflictions of the faithfull: namely, That God deliuereth them out of manie, when the wicked ſtill remaine in theirs.
               
                  THe ſecond point is, that they may alſo aſſure themſelues, that the Lord will deliuer them (and that of very fauour) out of many troubles, though they ſee not how: euen as I haue ſhewed,  that ſome ſhall not touch them at all. For although they themſelues ſee not how, nor any other likelihood but that they ſhall long oppreſſe them, yea vtterly conſume them; yet euen then doth the Lord know how to deliuer them, and hath many waies, which we could not ſee, to rid them out of ſo great calamities: and ſo he doeth,God oft deliuereth his altogether: either before they haue long lien vpon them, or at leaſt, before they haue beene driuen to any extremitie by them, and before they haue had their courſe; as in the deliuerances of Dauid, mentioned 1. Sam. 19.20.23.24. & 26. chapters thorowout, is to be ſeene. And this he doth as oft as it is expedient:Ioh. 16.7. 2. Cor. 12.9. Prou. 11.8. And the wicked come in their roome.
                   when in the meane ſeaſon he dealeth not ſo with the vnbeleeuers, but when the other eſcape, they come  many times in their roome, as the wiſe man ſaith: The godly eſcape out of trouble by the Lords deliuering of them, and the wicked are come in their ſtead. Now for proofe of that which I ſaid [that God deliuereth them out of many] what is more plaine then that which the prophet ſaith:Pſal. 124.1. 
                  If the Lord had not beene on our ſide, (may Iſraell now ſay) if the Lord had not been on our ſide when men roſe vp against vs, they had then ſwallowed vs vp quicke, when their wrath was kindled against vs, &c. But praiſed be the Lord, who hath not giuen vs a prey vnto their teeth. Our ſoule is eſcaped as a bird out of the ſnare of the fouler, the ſnare is broken, and we are eſcaped. The Apoſtle prooueth it alſo in his words:2. Cor. 1.10. 
                  We would not haue you ignorant (brethren) of our affliction which came vnto vs in  Aſia, how we were preſſed out of meaſure, paſsing ſtrength, ſo that we altogither doubted euen of life: but God deliuered vs from ſo great a death, and doth deliuer vs; in whom we trust alſo that he will deliuer vs.
               
               The dangers of Gods people vnder the gouernment of king Ahaſhueroſh, who knoweth not? How had that wicked Haman by malice and ſubtiltie obtained of the king, commiſſion to take their goods and put them to death?Eſther. 3.13. &c. &. 7.10. The day was ſet, and all preparation made for the bringing of it to paſſe: and yet

before it could be effected, how did the Lord at the humble ſute of Mardocheus
                   and the Queene Heſter in prayer and faſting, ſeeking vnto him, turne away the plague from them, and deliuering them, bring their enemies and Haman the firſt of all the reſt (as he was the chiefeſt) into their roome? euen as Daniel was deliuered out of the lions denne (the Lord ſhutting their mouthes that they ſhould not hurt him:Dan. 6.23.) but his accuſers being throwne in after that he was deliuered, the lyons had the maſtery ouer them, and brake their bones or euer they came at the ground of the denne. The whole ſtory of the Bible is full of ſuch examples: wherein this is moſt cleerely to be ſeene, how God hath deliuered his, truſting in him, from and out of many and great dangers and  calamities. So that if God doe this for his, then his ſeruants may aſſuredly looke for it.
               And yet I would all ſhould know, that I doe not bring theſe, as I might many others to this end, onely that I might prooue that God hath deliuered his children out of troubles:Gen. 21.15. 1. Sam. 31.8.1. for ſo hath he done the wicked alſo (as Iſhmael in the wilderneſſe, and the Philiſtims from Saule:) neither is that the thing which either I intend; or if I did, were that any priuiledge or peculiar bleſſing to the godly, foraſmuch as the wicked may haue their part in it as well as they: But I bring theſe examples to prooue,The godly are deliuered in gods fauour. that Gods people may be ſure that he will of fatherly loue deliuer them from many, namely, when they haue ſought  vnto God in their troubles (to God, I ſay, and not to creatures;) aſſuring themſelues,Hoſ. 6.1. that as it is he that hath ſmitten them, ſo he ſhall heale them. And in that they haue vſed thoſe meanes for their deliuerance,Eſter. 4.16. 2. Chro. 20.3. which God hath taught them to vſe, namely, faſting and praier with confidence, as Mardocheus, Iehoſaphat,  and in that they haue reſted vpon God, as they did in the Pſalme 124.Hoſe 14.4. 8. & 20.7, and not on a bruſed reede, as oft-times Iſraell did; and in that when they doe looke for deliuerance certainly, they haue firſt a promiſe thereof from God,Ioſua 11.6. Iudg. 7.9.15. as Ioſua had againſt the king of Hazor and his company; and Gedeon againſt the Amalekites and the Midianites: when they doe (I ſay) obtaine deliuerance thus, and after this maner, this is a ſingular  priuiledge vnto them: for then they know that it commeth from God, and therefore they may haue great comfort therein, and receiue ſuch deliuerances as pledges of his fauour.
               
                  The wicked not ſo.And thus are Gods ſeruants onely deliuered out of their troubles: the vngodly haue no part with them in this fellowſhip. And yet I doe not ſay, that euen they are alwaies thus affected and furniſhed with this grace, alwaies to beleeue and looke for it,Yet the godly doe not alwaies beleeue this. as oft as God deliuereth them out of any daungers and troubles (that is it indeed which they ſhould daily aime at:) and yet they can haue no ſound comfort to their hearts more then other men haue, vnleſſe they doe thus waite vpon God by ſound hope, and ſeeke to him in their  neceſſities and diſtreſſes after this maner; but haue onely outward helpe and ſuccour, or an end of their troubles, as the wicked may haue; little conſidering from whence they come, or whether they haue them in Gods fauour or diſpleaſure.
               
                   But before I goe any further, I muſt heere anſwer an obiection. For it wil be demaunded of me:Obiection. What profit may we reape by the examples before

                   alleadged? (whereby I prooued,Obiection. that deliuerances out of aduerſities & dangers are not priuiledges, except they haue a promiſe thereof from God before,The fathers had particular promiſes, but ſo haue not we. and beleeue the ſame:) What is that to vs will theſe men ſay, foraſmuch as God doth not at any time ſpeake vnto vs, as he did in ages paſt vnto our fathers? Iehoſaphat indeed, they ſay, might well and eaſily be perſwaded,2. Chron. 20.17. that God would giue the Moabites (his enimies) into his hand, when he by his prophet had ſaid to him: To morrow goe out againſt them,Ioſ. 11.6. Iudg. 6.14. and the Lord will be with thee. So Ioſua, and in like maner Gedeon: but where hath God thus ſpoken to any of his faithfulleſt ſeruants in this laſt age of the world, parſonally or  particularly in trouble (ſay they) that he will deliuer him and remoue his afflictions from him? Therefore none of them can be certaine thereof, and therefore not ſo well ordered in their troubles as they were.
               I anſwere:Anſwer. That God doth not indeed ſpeake to vs after that maner that he did to our fathers, as we are certified in the epiſtle to the Ebrewes;2. Tim. 4.8. Hebr. 1.1. but hath left his whole minde to vs in his word, wherein he hath ſo fully declared his will in all things as is ſufficient, and in the weightieſt matters he hath ſpoken as plainely to vs as to them. And concerning this one thing, namely,God in the chiefeſt matters hath ſpoken as plainly to vs as to them. Rom. 7.25. Iam. 4.6.
                   of deliuering vs out of diſtreſſes and afflictions: if they be inward (as ſinnes and corruptions) he hath promiſed (if we beleeue the ſame) that he will giue  vs grace to mortifie our ſinne; and if we doe not ouercome and ſubdue the ſame as we would, yet that his grace ſhall be ſufficient for vs: and the beſt of our forfathers had no more. If they be outward viſitations, and croſſes, as ſickneſſes, pouerty. &c. he hath promiſed alſo, that if it be expedient and for the beſt to vs he will pull vs out of them;Iohn 14.13. & 15.16. Rom. 8.28. and howſoeuer he doe in our ſufferings, that which he doth, ſhall be the beſt for vs. And there was no other thing ſaid to the body of the church in the former 
                     •
                  g
                     •
                  s, but generall promiſes which were made to all the faithfull (excepting that for ſome eſpeciall cauſes ſome particular promiſe of deliuerence was made to ſome certaine perſons, and for waighty cauſes; and yet thoſe were not made for all times,2. Sam. 15.25. nor in all  troubles:) as may be ſeene by the anſwere of Dauid, who being driuen out of Ieruſalem by his ſonne Abſolon riſing vp againſt him moſt traiterouſly & vnnaturally, ſaid vnto Zadok the prieſt, Carry the arke of God againe into the city: If I ſhall finde fauour in the eies of the Lord, he will bring me againe, and ſhew me both it, and the tabernacle thereof: but if he thus ſay, I haue no delight in thee; behold heere am I, let him doe to me as ſeemeth good in his eies.
               
               It it cleare by this, that Dauid in his trouble did not know whether God would deliuer him or no; neither did he know what the end ſhould be; nor had any promiſe from God, that he ſhould returne againe to Ieruſalem in peace, and behold the arke and tabernacle any more: yet Dauid ſought to the Lord,  and humbled himſelfe, and was not ſo amaſed with the affliction (as ſtrange as it was) but that he remembred the Lord, and praied to him, and worſhipped in token that he had made God his ſtay and defence, whatſoeuer the iſſue of his ſore triall ſhould be. The like is to be ſeene in the example of Sidrach, Miſach and Abednego: who when they heard the ſtraight charge of king Nabucadnezar, That whoſoeuer ſhould not at the ſound of the inſtruments of muſicke fall downe and worſhip the image which he had ſet vp, ſhould be caſt

into the midſt of an hot fiery furnace immediately, anſwered the king and ſaid: 
                  O Nabuchadnezar,
                  Dan. 3.17. 
                  we are not carefull to anſwere thee in this matter. Behold, our God whom we ſerue, is able to deliuer vs from the hot fiery furnace, and he will deliuer vs out of thy hand, ô king; but if he do not, be it knowen vnto thee (ô king) that we wil not ſerue thy gods, nor worſhip the golden image which thou haſt ſet vp. We ſee they knew not whether God would deliuer them or no: but this they were perſwaded of, that he had a moſt tender & fatherly care ouer them, and would ſhew the ſame in the time of their need; and if it were for his glory he would deliuer them. &c.
               And now (to returne to our ſelues) if we in our tribulations be thus vpholden  by the generall promiſes of God, if we ſue and ſeeke to him with this condition to be deliuered [If it be expedient in his eies] indeauouring to be contented with that which ſhall fall out on either ſide,Note. we haue behaued our ſelues as it became vs, we haue ſought to him aright as his word teacheth vs: and if we after this obtaine deliuerance, God hath heard vs, he hath kept promiſe with vs, and we haue receiued good proofe of our faith. And who can deny, but that it is a great priuiledge when we obtaine deliuerance thus? and thus doing, although we be not deliuered, yet we reſt perſwaded (howſoeuer our weake nature hold backe) that the Lord hath done iuſtly and well; hoping with ſuch confidence, as of fraile fleſh may be obtained, for anſwerable  ſtrength and conſolation vnto the meaſure of our afflictions in our greateſt neede. And if men ſee no great matter in this, let them wade a little deeper, and weigh how they are vpholden by their faith that they fall not to ſhifts and vnlawfull meanes (when otherwiſe they ſee no way to eſcape) as the vnbeleeuers doe;1. Sam. 28.7. Iona. 2.8. 1. Sam. 25.37. Math. 27.5. Pſ. 73.13.14. Iona. 4.4. and namely, Saule with other, who waiting vpon lying vanities, forſooke Gods goodneſſe: neither are ſtriken with deadneſſe, as Nabal when he heard heauy tidings; nor with diſtruſt and diſpaire, as Iudas; neither with complaining and murmuring at God, as his owne children ſometime when they are not vpholden by faith, are forced to doe. And yet if we haue deliuerance any other way, as by carnall pollicie, ſubtill ſhifts, or the like, (as I doe  not deny, but by ſuch meanes it may come) it is ſo farre off that we ſhould count that a priuiledge or any matter of reioicing, that it maketh our affliction double, yea ten-fold thereby, which was in a maner none at all before.
               And thus I conclude this other point, affirming, that as it is a ſingular prerogatiue to vs, that we may be kept frō many troubles altogether, which other cannot be freed from: ſo it is no leſſe honour, priuiledge and fauour, that we may be deliuered out of many (which others ſhall not be deliuered from) as I haue ſhewed and prooued in this preſent point; but yet then onely it is a priuiledge (as I haue ſaid) that we may be deliuered, not when we vſe vnlawfull meanes for it, but when we looke for it thus: [If God will: if he ſee it good and  expedient] and therefore doe waite patiently vntill he ſend an iſſue: which grace the vnbeleeuers neuer haue, neither can haue: onely Gods children are capable of it; but for all that, few euen of them inioy it, as either neuer hauing learned it ſoundly and cleerely, or not beleeuing that they may poſſiblie attaine to it: which cauſeth ſo much vnchearefulneſſe, diſcontent, &c. in our troubles, as grudging againſt God, yea & indirect ſhifts to auoid them; and

                   much hollowneſſe, coldneſſe and negligence in the ſeruice of God and Chriſtian cariage of our ſelues before trouble commeth,Note. for feare that when it commeth we ſhall be inconſtant: whereas, if it were otherwiſe, much heauenly comfort might be reaped in our liues, which now is not.
            
            
               CHAP. 11. Of the third branch of this priuiledge: That we may haue  much good by our afflictions.
               
                  THe third point of this ſecond branch now followeth, which is no leſſe then a great priuiledge it ſelfe beſide the two former, and that is: that the Lord teacheth his children aright and well to beare thoſe afflictions, which he thinketh meet to try them with and to hold them vnder. So that they may not onely indure and goe vnder them patiently and contentedly,Pſ. 119.71. but alſo receiue much good by them, as they themſelues be conſtrained to confeſſe. And as the Lord teacheth his people to make this vſe of their afflictions:Iohn 16.6.7. 1. Pet. 1.5.6. ſo euery one of  his, may alſo learne the ſame, if they be wiſe enough to thinke ſo; that is, to be reſolued that for their exceeding benefite and profit he ſendeth them. For then and neuer till then, they frame and addreſſe themſelues to receiue them from God thankefully and meekely, when his word hath throughly ſetled this thought and perſwaſion in them: which wiſdome few haue or attaine vnto, thus to thinke, but their owne fooliſh reaſon; which (while they ſeeke nothing but eaſe and freedome from trouble) leadeth them a cleane contrary way, that is, to be vtterly vnwilling to beare them, euen diſcouraged and heauy hearted as oft as they thinke on them. This wiſdome therefore muſt be ſought for, euen of the good ſeruants of God:Luc. 9.23. that they looke for them  daily, and be ready to receiue them from God. This it is, that muſt ſuppreſſe and checke all contrary power of carnall reaſon, which will be otherwiſe in the way at all times to annoy them.
               It followeth therefore next and moſt conſequently to declare, how the poore people of God may come by this wiſdome: & then to ſhew, how it guideth them to make ſuch profitable and good vſe of their croſſes and chaſtiſements, as no other but they are able to doe the ſame. Saint Iames going about to perſwade the Chriſtians which were diſperſed by reaſon of perſecution, to receiue their afflictions meekely and ioyfully, (fearing that there were not many which could doe ſo) ſhewed them; that it was for want of this wiſdome  in them, whoſoeuer rebelled vnder the hand of God; and that they ought to be throughly perſwaded that God ſent them for their benefit and good. And then he goeth forward to teach them, how they might come by it; and that he teacheth them thus:Ia. 1.5.6. 
                  If any man want wiſdome let him aske it of God, who giueth to euery one plentifully, and caſteth no man in the teeth: but this watchword he giueth: That they muſt ſee, they aske in faith, and they ſhal obtaine it. Then for our inſtruction and edifying let vs know, that, if we deſire

to be partakers of this priuiledge,How we may take good by our afflictions: to welcome our afflictions, to beare them  chearefully, and to haue them turne to our great benefit (which the moſt doe thinke will turne to their vndoing:) then as we hold this principle of the Apoſtle to be a trueth:Rom. 8.28. that All things worke for the beſt to them which loue God; ſo we muſt be wiſe to thinke the ſame of our owne afflictions: and if we cannot eaſily be ſo perſwaded (as no man is for the moſt part) we muſt be earneſt with God,
                     Petit. 3. and that oft and from time to time, that our will may yeeld to Gods will, and we may thinke that good for vs which he thinketh good.
               And to the end we may bring our hearts to this, let vs weigh to and fro, what we can obiect againſt it why we need not ſubmit our ſelues vnto God: that when all our carnall reaſons ſhall be anſwered, as being to weake to preuaile with vs, we may referre the whole courſe of our liues to be gouerned by him: and what corrections ſoeuer he ſhall thinke meet for vs, and to try vs with and for our benefit,For God ſendeth them to that end. and to keepe vs from further hurt, (for he hath no worſe end in chaſtiſing of vs) that then we may remember, in all things to be thankefull, and take vp our croſſe readily and welcome it, ſeeing we know the end of it. And let it not be thought much that I ſay, He hath no worſe end in afflicting vs: for we ought to be perſwaded throughly of this, that the Lord our God louing vs, he cannot intend our hurt in the leaſt maner, howſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe him to exerciſe vs.Lam. 3.33. 1. Pet. 1.6 For we may be ſure, that he afflicteth not willingly, nor at any time but when it is meet and expedient for vs: and as our Sauiour ſaid to his beloued Apoſtles of his bodily departing from them, (which was the greateſt outward croſſe that could befall them:Iohn. 16.7.) It is expedient that I goe away from you, for otherwiſe the comforter cannot come vnto you: ſo would he haue vs to thinke, that if it were not for our troubles we ſhould neuer haue ſuch comfort as we haue,Heb. 12.11. which doth certainely follow the patient bearing of them.
               And heere conſider the cauſes why God ſendeth them to his beloued ones: which being knowen & rightly weighed,
                     Reaſons why God afflicteth his. Pſ. 34.17.19. & 2. Cor. 1.10. Rom. 5.4.5. Iam. 1.3. 1. Cor. 11.32. Pſ. 119.67. are of ſufficient force to worke their great benefit & comfort. Firſt, that they may haue experience frō how many  troubles he deliuereth thē; and know after, how to look for the like helpe in the like trouble: ſecondly, that they may haue proofe of their faith and patience, which worketh vnſpeakeable comfort: thirdly, that they may not be condemned with the world: fourthly, that by them, as the body by phyſicke, they may be purged from their ſinfull droſſe and feare him: and fiftly, that the Lord may thereby weane them from the world (to the which they are ſo glued) as a child is from the breſt (by bitter things) which would not otherwiſe leaue it. So that if we be thus taught of God & learne this wiſdome of him, to beleeue, that to theſe ends and of very loue and faithfulneſſe he afflicteth vs whenſoeuer he doth it,
                     2. Cor. 4.9. & 6.9. Gods children are neuer forgotten, though they may ſeeme for a time to be neglected. Pſ. 20.8. Ioh. 16.22. 1. Sam. 30.6.
                   we ſhall be ſure to finde it ſo, to our exceeding comfort.
               
               And although for a while we be tried, and therein may ſeeme to be neglected and forgotten of him; when others ſhake off the Lords yoke, and ſhunne the troubles by an euill conſcience, which he laieth vpon them: yet when they ſhall after be plunged into dangers without recouery, then ſhall ours be at an end, and our reioicing neuer ceaſe nor be taken from vs. Through this faith Dauid comforted himſelfe in his God, when wicked men conſulted to take

                   way his life. Through this wiſdome which I haue ſpoken of, (an inſeparable companion of faith) he ſaid when his troubles were ſore and great: I haue held my peace, becauſe thou (ô Lord) haddeſt done it:
                  Pſ. 73.1. 
                  and that God was moſt louing vnto him for all that. And ſo when by this wiſdome and faith he had waited patiently on God, he reaped experience and gladneſſe as the fruite thereof, which he himſelfe expreſſeth in theſe words, ſaying:Pſ. 119.71. 
                  It is good for me (ô Lord) that I haue beene afflicted. And the like ſpeeches he vttered at ſundry times in many of his pſalmes, which for breuity ſake I omit: whereby it may be gathered, that from time to time he was thus vpholden in his troubles; and therefore  that he inioied this liberty and priuiledge in his life, to finde his very croſſes profitable and good vnto him.
               The ſame may be ſaid of Abraham, both at many other times, and namely when he left his owne countrey and his fathers houſe, to goe to a place which God ſhould ſhew him: where he being a ſtranger & had not a foot of ground to poſſeſſe, yet hauing leaſure to returne, would not;Heb. 11.8. but waited vpon God to know his pleaſu
                     •••
                  : which he would neuer haue done, if he had not beene perſwaded, that the affliction was beſt for him, which God did trie him with.Pſ. 105.19. Pſ. 105.18. 
                  Ioſeph had no other thing to vpholde him when he was ſolde, put in priſon, and his feet pinned in the ſtocks.
               
                   And to be ſhort, if this trouble vs: that, although theſe woorthy ſeruants of God, and many other, had this wiſedome to take their troubles aright, and in ſuch meeke maner that they ſeemed not greatly to trouble them; yet we may not looke to do ſo: to this end, let the Apoſtles words direct and counſell vs; he ſaith: If any man want this wiſdome, let him aske it of God, and it ſhall be giuen. Loe, he excepteth none (which doe not except themſelues) of ſuch as know what faith is, and who are able to aske in faith (as all the Lords may be bolde to do;) for he addeth: But let him aske in faith. And:Act. 2.21. 
                  Whoſoeuer ſhall call on the name of the Lord, ſhall be ſaued: for, how can we call vpon him,
                  Rom. 10.14. 
                  on whom we haue not beleeued? So that if any ſuch be deſtitute of this wiſdome, they may  thanke themſelues, it is their owne fault.
               But to ſatisfie ſome, (who, I know, are many) which looking to the Apoſtles words [that all turneth to the beſt to ſuch as loue God] and looke no further: whereupon they conclude, if God will haue our troubles turne to our good, what need we take any further thought about the matter? I anſwere:Though God promiſe to turne our troubles to good, yet we muſt not be careleſſe vnder them. They which beleeue that, will not be careleſſe in their afflictions, how they be affected vnder them; whether they lie downe blockiſhly and ſenſeleſly vnder them, or whether they ſtorme and be impatient in them: but will do as Dauid did in all his troubles, (who laied them to heart, and praied for grace to beare them and for deliuerance out of them, though he was ſure God would giue a  good end of them: euen as Daniel alſo did.Dan. 9.5.) And if they behaue themſelues wilfully, careleſly or fooliſhly in them, they ſhall ſee them turne to their exceeding hurt and vexation: ſo farre is it off,Pſ. 18.26. that they ſhould reape good thereby, they know not how. For the Scripture, which teacheth that afflictions are ſent them for their good, doth not profit them, if it be not mixed with faith in them that heare it, Heb. 4.2.
               But if they beleeue that Scripture to be written for them, and applie it; then

they receiue their croſſes from God as ſent to them in his loue, they murmure  not againſt him,How they may profit by afflictions. neither refuſe to be chaſtiſed of him, but are thankfull, and therefore labour for patience, that it may haue her perfect worke: yea and further, if they can finde any ſinne in themſelues which might draw theſe corrections of the Lord vpon them, they heartily turne from it with all poſſible ſpeed, that ſo they may more confidently intreat the Lord to turne away all the tartneſſe of their affliction frō them. And they which after this maner behaue themſelues vnder the croſſe, although they performe theſe duties but in weakneſſe, ſhall finde their troubles, howſoeuer for the time irkeſome vnto the fleſh,Heb. 12.11. yet to be gainfull manie waies and in manie reſpects vnto their ſoules.
               
               
                  Vſes of afflictions.For they ſhall giue them a proofe of that grace, as meekneſſe, truſt and confidence,  which otherwiſe they could not know to be in them. They ſhall  teach them alſo experience of greater acknowledging Gods fatherly kindneſſe, which worketh and bringeth forth theſe ſweet graces in them, by as vnlikely occaſions, as the ſoft waters guſh out of the hard and ſtonie rocke: for in others, what doe afflictions cauſe for the moſt part that haue them, but rage  and fretting and ſuch like? Beſides, in thoſe who are rightly exerciſed in the bearing of them, they hold them from many ſinnes which others runne into:  they make them more humble and thankfull: they hearten them by cuſtome  therein to beare greater,Lam. 3.27. yea greater than they thought poſſible that euer  they ſhould haue gone vnder: and with all theſe commeth moſt ſound and exceeding comfort,Iam. 1.2. Col. 1.11. Rom. 5.4. in the end at leaſt, with hope in the middeſt of them, which ſhall not make them aſhamed.
               Therefore if the ſeruants of God may inioy theſe with many other ſuch commodities by their afflictions, and haue ſo good liking of the Chriſtian life that they will not forſake it for the greateſt of them, I conclude this third branch as the two former: That the Lord hath not left their afflictions vpon them to vexe them, and make their liues weariſome and vnpleaſant to them; but that they ſhould receiue much good and benefit by them. And although they be not without ſharpneſſe, yet the Chriſtian life hath ſo many ſweet  fruits of them therewith, that as men are not wearie of the pleaſant ſpring time though it be anoied with the flea: ſo we do not loath our afflicted eſtate being ſo many waies gainfull, for ſome bitterneſſe that accompanieth the ſame: for holy ſecuritie through the favour of God, a good conſcience, and confidence of our cauſe that it is good,Animi ſecuritas, conſcientia bona, cauſae fiducia, plurimùm valent ad ſuſtinendas afflictiones. maketh euen a hard ſtate eaſie, or at leaſt tolerable. And theſe priuiledges which I haue now ſpoken of, who can ſufficientlie maruell that our glorious God doth communicate to mortall men, yea vile ſinners, which were once without God in the world? I confeſſe in ſetting them downe, that I am much aſtoniſhed to thinke of his vnſpeakable kindneſſe; eſpecially becauſe I haue mentioned no vaine ſpeculations or dreames of mans  braine which vaniſh in the aire, but vndoubted truethes out of the word of God, and found true by experience of many good Chriſtians: ſo that we may worthily be prouoked to ſeeke a part therein amongſt them. And yet ſo much the greater they are, and better to be accounted of, inaſmuch as the longer they be inioyed, the more fruit and comfort they bring to him that hath his part in them. And when we finde not this doctrine ſauourie and ſweet to vs,

                   nor the vſe of it in our afflictions, let vs not charge and challenge the Lord for it, but conſider what we haue loſt through vnbeliefe.
            
            
               CHAP. 12. Of the eighth priuiledge: Of growing in grace.
               
                  NOw as it cannot be denied but that theſe forementioned graces are ſingular priuiledges: ſo (to paſſe the next) we are not to be  ignorant of this, that whatſoeuer good things Gods people already haue and inioy; yet God hath more in ſtore for them,
                     Eph. 3.19. The 1 point. God giueth to his, greater grace then they could aske: and will giue more grace and greater meaſure of his heauenly gifts, then they before they had them, could either aske or thinke. And this is woorthy to be conſidered with the former, as a further increaſe and higher degree of the fruits of his loue, that he doth ſo largely and bountifully reach out his hand vnto them, that thereby they may be inriched as farre beyond the beginnings of their true happines, as their beginnings were beyond their firſt condition before it in the iudgement of all men.
               For cleerer proofe heereof, we are to know,As in particular may be ſeene. that he maketh them to grow  in ſounder vnderſtanding of his wil, in more aſſurance of faith and ſtrength of hope, in more patience vnder the croſſe, more moderation in the vſe of their lawfull liberties and benefits of this life, he giueth them better rule ouer their hearts and affections, and that in more things then at the firſt,Note. and ofter & eaſilier; and ſo ouer their liues and actions, their tongues, their hands, their eies, their eares. The Lord giueth them farre more inlargement in praier, then in times paſt, and conſtantly to beſtow more time in all the helpes to godlineſſe, and to ſcoure off much ruſt and rubbiſh of the rebellious old man and their euill qualities, as they haue and ſee greater reaſon why they ſhould doe ſo: yea, he worketh more ſound comfort by the holy Ghoſt, and more conſtant  continuance thereof in them, then they were wont to be acquainted with. And (to comprehend much in few words) the whole courſe of their life is much better gouerned then it was wont to be, and the image of God more liuely and cleerely reſtored. And are not theſe (thinke we) priuiledges farre aboue their expectation, and greater then they could looke for?
               All which the Apoſtle, knowing that they were dainties prepared for the Lords beloued ones, and a great treaſure, (although hidden from the world) did daily wiſh and pray for, that they might be giuen to the church of Coloſſa, as he ſheweth in theſe words: After that I heard of your faith in Christ Ieſus, and loue towards all the Saints, I ceaſed not to pray for you,
                  Col. 1.9. &c. 
                  that you might  be filled with all knowledge of his will in all wiſdome and ſpirituall vnder ſtanding; that you might walke worthy the Lord and pleaſe him in all things, bringing foorth fruit in euery good worke, & increaſing in the acknowledging of God, ſtrengthened with all might (according to his glorious power) vnto all long ſuffering, and lenity of mind with ioy. What haue I ſaid concerning this priuilege, which the Apoſtle hath not fully conteined in theſe words? And yet what people are there (being but lately turned to God as the Coloſſians were) which might not thinke,

that the graces which he put them in hope of,Ioh. 16.13. and incouraged them to looke  for, were not more and farre greater then they might poſſibly be partakers of?
               
                  Examples.Which thing may liuely be ſeene in Moſes example, if we compare the time wherein God did firſt call him to goe to Pharao to bring away his people from the bondage and ſlauerie in the which he held them in Egypt, with the daies which came after, when he brought them from thence. For when he ſhould firſt goe, he ſhewed great weakneſſe to be in him; himſelfe an vnmeet perſon to go before a king;Exod. 4.11. and the burthen too great for him to go vnder; as by his owne words may appere when he ſaith: Who am I, that thou ſhouldeſt ſend me vnto Pharao, and that I ſhould bring the children of Iſraell out of Egypt? But  afterwards, how boldly did he his meſſage vnto the king, neither fearing his threats nor countenance:Exod. 10.17. but rather (as it plainly appeareth) Pharao was ſore afraid of him; as in that he confeſſed to him (in great anguiſh of heart) his ſin, and deſired that he would ſue vnto the Lord for him (acknowledging that he could much preuaile with him) that his plagues might ceaſe. Behold heerein one of the greateſt matters (as is the feare and face of princes:) he which was afraid to looke Pharao in the face at the firſt; was afterward, through ſtrength of faith by cleauing to the Lords commandement and promiſe, able to do his meſſage to him with exceeding courage & boldneſſe. And if in this one grace and gift of God he ſo increaſed, (which of all other ſeemeth the hardeſt) thereby  ouercomming that timorouſneſſe and faint heartedneſſe which would (if it had not beene by ſpirituall manhood and courage expelled) haue made him vtterly vnfit for the diſcharging of ſo weighty a duty; what doubt is there, but that in other graces of God he increaſed alſo proporcionably? Which doth further confirme that which I haue taken in hand to ſhew: that is, that the Lord giueth that grace vnto his beloued, from which they were moſt far off both in their owne ſight and in the iudgement of others, and therefore (as I haue ſaid) more then they ſometime could aske or looke for.
               And no other thing did our Sauiour Chriſt meane, when Nathaniell acknowledging him to be very God for that he ſaw a token thereof in him, he ſaid: Nathaniell, becauſe I ſaid: [I ſaw thee vnder a figge tree] beleeueſt thou? Behold,
                  Iohn. 1.52. 
                  thou ſhalt ſee greater things then theſe. For thou ſhalt ſee the Angels of God aſcending and deſcending vpon the ſonne of man: that is to ſay, thou ſhalt ſee farre more cleere ſignes of my Godhead; thou ſhalt ſee my father from heauen, vpon earth to witneſſe and teſtifie the ſame in moſt familiar manner: ſo that the light which now thou haſt thereof, and the faith by meanes of it, and thy loue to me, and the comfort which thy ſoule hath thereby with other graces, are in compariſon nothing to that they ſhall be; euen as a graine of muſtard ſeed is vnto a tree that hath boughes and branches.Math. 13.31. And what other thing would the Lord haue vs to learne but this, by theſe ſpeeches, that the prodigall  ſonne deſiring but to be receiued of his father into his houſe as one of his hired ſeruants,Luc. 15.17. Mat. 15.27. was taken againe as his naturall ſonne? and the woman of Canaan, which deſired but with the whelps to be refreſhed with the crums which fell from their maſters table, had graunted her, for her great faith, all that ſhe would, euen the childrens dainties? Euen ſo hath the Lord prouided wonderfull things for them that feare him; as it is ſaid in the Pſalme: Very glorious

                      things are reported of thee, ô thou citty of God. And as it is written: Who would haue ſaid, that Sarah ſhould giue ſucke? and that the barren ſhould be fruitfull? ſo who would ſay, that they which had in a manner nothing,Numb. 11.28. ſhould abound in many graces? What was Ioſua before he was choſen in the roome of Moſes his maſter, to be gouernor of ſuch a mighty people? but after he beleeued him which ſaid, Euen as I haue beene with Moſes, ſo will I be with thee; he found that  faith, courage, wiſdome, experience and neare acquaintance with God,Ioſ. 1.5. Ioſ. 24.15. &c. which he in no ſort was like before to haue beene partaker of. What was there in Salomon to diſcharge ſo great a prouince as he entred vpon in his father Dauids 
                   ſtead? but after that the Lord had granted him his wiſh and choiſe,1. King. 3.12. he obtained the gracious wiſdome which was maruelled at throughout the world.
               The Apoſtles themſelues the firſt three yeeres after they were called to follow Chriſt, had no great matter in them aboue other Chriſtians: but after that our Sauiour had ſent them greater meaſure of heauenly grace from aboue, who doth not ſee by the hiſtory of their actes, how vnlike they were vnto ſuch as they had beene? I doe not meane, in the viſible gifts of the holy Ghoſt which were extraordinary; but in faith, in ioy, in duties of their callings: as he told all the eleuen at his departure from them:Iohn 16.12. 
                  I haue many things to ſay to you, but you cannot receiue them now; yea rather, you hardly vnderſtand  me: but the day is at hand, when yee ſhall not need to aske any queſtions.
                  ver. 23.24.25. And Peter, after he feared God, yet was diſmaied at the words of a ſeely damſell:Luc. 22.57. but after greater grace receiued, was not afraid of the mighty, no not the high prieſt. So were ſundry of the churches: as that of Theſſalonica,
                  Act. 5.29. who for all that their beginnings were famous (as appeareth in the firſt epiſtle of Saint Paule, which he wrote to them) yet did they increaſe mightily,1. Theſſ. 3.7. as may be ſeene in the ſecond: for thus he writeth to them:2. Theſſ. 1.3.4. 
                  We ought to giue thankes to God alwaies for you (brethren) foraſmuch as your faith increaſeth exceedingly, and the loue of euery one of you each to other, aboundeth: ſo that we reioice yea we boaſt of you to other churches, becauſe of your patience and faith in all your perſecutions and tribulations  that yee ſuffer.
               
               And therefore from ſo many teſtimonies (which in this matter ſo hardly beleeued, haue beene alledged) I thinke I may boldly affirme: that this is another, yea and that a moſt worthie priuiledge, which the Lord granteth out vnto his children (and he that is wiſe wil regard it:) That they may grow and multiplie daily in the graces of his ſpirit; yea, that they may excell themſelues by manie degrees: except we will ſay,Eſay 59.1. that Gods hand is ſhortened in theſe latter daies more than in former times; or his promiſe vntrue.
               But I confeſſe I am glad to know this priuiledge for mine owne comfort,This priuiledge cauſeth much comfort, if it be duely conſidered. and to ſpeake of it to the ſtirring vp of many my good brethren in this colde  and frozen age: that we may take ſome triall of our ſelues, what part we haue in this ſo great a prerogatiue, which we may inioy aſwell as any other. And as well for their iuſt rebuke I ſpeake it, who thinke it madneſſe for men to contend and ſtriue to goe before others in godlineſſe, faith and the fruits thereof, (though we are commanded to excell one another:Epheſ. 4.1.) as alſo to awaken them who hauing made good and commendable beginnings long agone, yet haue taken diſcouragement from making anſwerable proceedings, although it be

written:1. Tim. 4.15. 
                  Let thy profiting be ſeene of all. And I denie not, but that the deuill  raiſeth occaſions enough of fainting, ſlouth, deadneſſe of ſpirit, of earthlie mindedneſſe, neglecting of meanes, &c. in ſuch as haue well begun in a Chriſtian life:Though there be many things to hinder it, yet there is alſo much to helpe to greater grace. but (God be thanked) they are not leaſt vnfurniſhed, nor vnprouided of all helps againſt the ſame, if they were acquainted with the will of God but as they might be. Such therefore as ſee themſelues faultie and weake this way, let them learne of them which haue better experience in the waies of God than themſelues, and which doe more chearefully go before them: that they by their example may more ſoundly and conſtantly goe forward. For why ſhould it not be with the Lords plants in his orchard, as it is in an huſbandmans? that as grafts and plants being ſet in good ground doe ſpread their branches and ſhoot foorth their boughes apparently in a few yeeres: ſo might the Lords plants doe?
               Moreouer, we ſee in all ſocieties one commeth awke and vntoward to an occupation, learning or any trade; yet in few yeeres is able to guide others: which plainly ſheweth how he hath profited himſelfe. And can any thing be truly ſaid, why he which is but a yong Chriſtian only, ſuch an one as is a liuely member of Chriſt, though as yet he be to be thorowly grounded in the principles of religion; yet can any thing (I ſay) be truly alledged, why he ſhould not in a few yeeres be well growen and increaſed himſelfe, and able alſo in thoſe  matters to inſtruct and guide others?Heb. 5.12.14. that as he was inexpert in the word of righteouſneſſe when he was a babe: ſo after experience he may be ſtabliſhed?
               For to what end are all thoſe goodly things reuealed in the Scriptures: How we may grow from faith to faith,Rom. 1.17. Pſ. 103.5. and from grace to grace; and that ſuch as are aged and well growen, ſhould haue their inward ſenſes of their minds exerciſed to diſcerne good and euill; and that we ſhould, whatſoeuer we haue attained vnto more than others,Pſ. 119.11.12. Rom. 15.4. yet ſeeke to increaſe daily more and more? To what end (I ſay) are ſuch Scriptures and many other of like ſort? Are they not written for our inſtruction and edifying?The Scriptures are plentifull in prouing this. Or els, do we thinke that they ſhould lie by vs vnknowen, and we not to meddle with them? Which if we will not  affirme, (as indeed no wiſe or well aduiſed perſon will) why ſhould we not looke to thriue and proſper in our ſpirituall husbandrie, and that with much more aſſurance than in the earthly (wherein yet many thouſands doe exceedingly increaſe;Note.) and the rather, for that our gaine and the bleſſing of God is farre more certeine in that, than in the other? Why (I ſay) ſhould not we of the miniſterie firſt and principally; and then the ſeuerall congregations and people which are taught and guided by vs,Prou. 4.1
                        •
                     . not only ſhine as lights in the darke world, but daily more and more, as the morning light doth vnto the perfect day? And to be ſo farre beyond our firſt beginnings in louing and obeying that which we know, that as we were then readie and forward in a little (when  we knew no more:) ſo we may now giue occaſion to many to praiſe God for vs, whiles they ſee the ſame readineſſe and forwardneſſe to continue in vs, as our knowledge is increaſed? And as we were then carefull ouer other for the good of their ſoules: ſo why ſhould we not be ſtill of the ſame minde, exhorting one another daily with comfort, & prouoking to loue & to good works, and not neglect that dutie for the care of our bodies and wealth? The which I

                   heartily wiſh were done but with that alacritie and cheerefulneſſe, which I my ſelfe haue ſeene many yeeres agone.
               But alas, how rare a thing is this to finde either in the one or in the other? which cauſeth this and ſuch other worthie prerogatiues of the faithfull, as are ſpoken of in the Scripture to be in ſmall account, ſeeing few examples are found of this practiſe. And by this it may be ſeene what is to be vnderſtood by growing, and what this priuiledge is, in the laying forth of the which I am now occupied: namely, that a true Chriſtian may be able to ſee and in trueth to affirme, that he inioieth farre better liking, greater freedome, much more  eaſe and ſweetneſſe in ſeruing God, and in the Chriſtian courſe, then ſometime he was able to doe or euer looked for. That he ſeeth farre greater light in the will and word of God, and bewty in the Godly life; and hath much more conqueſt ouer his rebellious heart in ſubduing the affections thereof, then euer he thought had beene poſſible for him; which who ſo inioieth not, is vniuſtly depriued of ſo great a commodity, as beſide the ſaluation of his ſoule, hath none like it vpon the earth: and yet cannot be ſeparated from that neither.
               And yet as great as it is,The Lord thinketh it not to great for his. I haue ſhewed that the Lord thinketh it neither too great nor too good for his children, but hath bequeathed it vnto them, and giuen  them free graunt of it; and ſo they may haue their part in it, although the greater the benefit is, the more ſtrongly the diuill keepeth men backe from poſſeſſing it, yea euen many of Gods deare children themſelues, whom he holdeth in the cordes of ſinne and baites of vanity: ſo that thereby they loſe and forgoe a great part in this heauenly priuiledge and liberty. But how he and they doe ſtop their proceedings in grace and Godlineſſe, may be ſeene in the former treatiſe of the lets. Yet I cannot omit here to put them in remembrance of this one let againe, that without great heed taking they ſhall weaken their loue to their brethren through conceites and taking of pritches one againſt an other, and that oft times without any iuſt cauſe: ſo that they ſhall be  much feebled therby from duties of loue, which (if it were well conſidered) had little need to be ſo, being ſufficient to hinder euery good enterpriſe, then the which their need be no greater.
               But if theſe and ſuch like be not their ſtops and ſtaies, let not any obiect and ſay: that they deſire with their hearts to be partakers of this priuiledge and benefit, if they knew how: for if they were willing to be perſwaded, to vſe thoſe meanes with that free and ready heart, conſtantly and daily, which they ſometimes are willing to doe, their deſire ſhould quickely be accompliſhed, and they made partakers of that which they wiſh; and that is, alwaies to make reckoning of that to be their chiefeſt treaſure, To grow in grace and in the knowledge  of Chriſt: and therefore without ceaſing to keepe their hearts vnto it,Note. and to thinke there is nothing more to be regarded, nor of greater weight and neceſſity, then to beſtow the day and the ſeuerall parts of it as they are directed, and as many of them alſo haue done ſometime, that they may ſee themſelues to goe forward.
               I appoint to them no new or ſtrange way; but faithfulneſſe and conſtancy in keeping of that which already hath beene ſhewed them; and the ſame or

like direction for the daily gouerning of themſelues, which hath already bene  ſet downe to them; aſſuring themſelues, that God will not be wanting from time to time in bleſſing the ſame, vnto them. Then as the corne rooted in good ground, through the bleſſing of God by ſeaſonable weather, becommeth farre vnlike that in few moneths, which it was at the new comming vp and appearing aboue the ground: ſo ſhall they by the ſame meanes daily continued reuerently and in faith, become farre vnlike themſelues, which they were at their firſt beginning; and they ſhall finde (as I haue ſaid) through the ſame ſhine and dew of Gods bleſſing, that increaſe, which before they neuer looked for.
               
               But ſeeing there are many of Gods deere ſeruants, who being by the malice of the diuill either altogether depriued of teaching, or ſeldome taught, or not ſo taught that they may grow; heere I am inforced to bewaile their eſtate, and mourne with them, exorting all ſuch, that as they ſee any further light and liberty then in times paſt:All muſt be ready to grow to that grace which they may attaine to. ſo they indeauour to goe forward, though they cannot attaine to that which others may. And withall I ſay vnto the other which may profit better, as hauing greater helpes, that they forſlow not the time, nor neglect to reape the benefit daily which thereby is offered them. For as in the glory of the kingdome of heauen the higheſt degree of happines ſhall be inioied, becauſe men ſhall then be wholly ſubiect vnto God, and obey  him willingly in all things: ſo the next is, to be more ſubiect to his will, and in more things and vpon better ground; and to be better acquainted with the minde of God and his ſecrets, then in times paſt: which may make them more forward, then when they firſt beleeued.
               As for them, which thinke there is no nearer fellowſhip to be inioied with God, while they are heere on earth, then they themſelues haue attained vnto; nor any greater meaſure of grace then they are partakers of: let them inioy their opinion alone, till they be aſhamed of it: let vs rather hope (to the further glorifying of God) to ſee that to be our ordinary diet,Note. which hath beene ſometimes our banquetting cheere; I meane, to be able better and better  to reioice in all things that we goe about through the day, whereas ſometime we could ſcarſely doe it at any time in the day; and in nothing be diſcouraged whiles we haue the Lord both in precept and promiſe to goe before vs. Little perſwaſion ſhould need heereunto, if mens hearts were ſet vpon this Chriſtian courſe, as they are vpon deceitfull vanities. It is not ſeene with bodily eie, and therefore ſlender credit is giuen to it. It is almoſt vnknowen, what bewty and contentation the beleeuing ſoule findeth in it, and therefore in ſmall requeſt, no not with many of the better ſort: and therefore few grow vp to that which they might. But ô earthly peace and proſperity! (an eſpeciall occaſion of this through the deceitfulneſſe of the heart) how haſt thou wounded many with thy outward and flattering looke, by meanes whereof they cannot loue that which ſhould be their greateſt glory? And of this priuiledge thus much.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 13. Of the ninth priuiledge: That the beleeuers ſhall perſeuere vnto the end.
               
                  NOw out of this proceedeth another as neceſſarily, as it ſelfe ariſeth out of the former; and that is, Perſeuerance vnto the end, and continuance in faith and repentance. For as he which groweth  to excell himſelfe in all goodneſſe, muſt firſt of neceſſitie make a beginning, & be rooted & wel ſetled therein▪ ſo he which increaſeth daily more and more, ſhall at length make a good end, proportionable at leaſt vnto his courſe of life. For the faithfull Chriſtian hauing obtained of the Lord a delight in his ſeruice,The godly ſhall continue to the end in a good courſe. Pſ. 37.37.
                   and by the ſame a proceeding from grace to grace; he maketh an eaſie way for him to perſeuerance, graunting this vnto him as another priuiledge: That he ſhall not reuolt and turne aſide with the workers of iniquitie, but ſhall holde out in this holy courſe vnto his end. This appeareth to be true by the Scripture which ſaith:Phil. 1.6. 
                  Hee which hath begun this good worke in his, will alſo finiſh and make an end of the ſame. 
                   Agreeable heerunto is that ſaying of our Sauior:Ioh. 6.39. & 10.28. 
                  This is the Fathers wil which hath ſent me, that of all which he hath giuen me, I ſhould loſe nothing, but ſhould raiſe it vp againe at the laſt day. And againe: None ſhall take them out of my hands. Therefore if God will finiſh the worke that he hath begun in his children, if he will keepe them ſafe vntill all danger be paſt; that is, to the day of the reſurrection; and if none ſhall take them out of his hands: it is manifeſt that all ſuch as are grafted into Chriſt by faith, and who haue beene effectually called into the number of Gods children through the preaching of the Goſpell vnto the ſure and certaine hope of eternall life, ſetting their faces daily toward the ſame; ſhall be ſafely conducted home, and abide in the ſame  eſtate vnto the end.
               But as great a benefit as it is, That they ſhall continue to the end;God letteth them know it that they ſhall: yet if the Lord would hide it from them, and keepe them from the knowledge of it, it ſhould be much leſſer: and therfore this is further to be added, that they which know themſelues to be the Lords; may alſo know, that they ſhall be preſerued and kept ſafe againſt all aduerſarie power of the deuill and his inſtruments, and ſo perſeuere vnto the end. For although it ſeeme to be a myſterie and a ſecret, that the determinate will and counſell of God concerning this matter ſhould be knowen;Though it be a ſecret to the world. 2. Cor. 4.3. Pſ. 25.14. Ioh. 15.15.
                   yet it is a ſecret vnto ſuch only as lie in darkeneſſe & in the ſhadow of death, which through vnbeleefe are not able to ſee into it becauſe it  is a myſtery: but the ſecret of the Lord is not hidden from his owne ſeruants, but ſhall in time be reuealed vnto them; whom becauſe he calleth his friends, therefore he ſheweth them his will and minde in the moſt precious ſecrets which it is expedient for them to know. For by often hearing the doctrine of perſeuerance plainly preached vnto them, God draweth their hearts to beleeue it: that as they heare the Lord will perfect the good worke which he hath begunne in his people, and withall doe know themſelues to be his people; ſo

they hold this in perſuaſion, though they ſee not how by any thing in themſelues,Reaſons why they ſhall know it: The firſt. 1. Pet. 1.4.5.
                  
                   that he will continue his fauour towards them vnto their end. For they which know that they ſhall haue eternall life, muſt needs alſo know that they ſhall be kept by God in this preſent world from all power of the diuell which might hinder them from it. But all beleeuers may and ought to know, that they ſhall haue eternall life,1. Iohn 5.13. 1. Theſſ. 5.9. as Saint Iohn teacheth: I write vnto you that beleeue, that ye may know that ye haue eternall life: therefore they may know, that they ſhall be kept to the end that they may alſo inioy the ſame.
               
                  The ſecond.Furthermore to perſwade this point more ſtrongly to Gods children, (of whom many are long held in doubting of the ſame) and for that it is by the  church of Rome flatly denied: we ought not to doubt of this, but that as God hath been with other of his ſeruants in all ages;Ioſ. 1.5. ſo he will be with vs which are his in this age, or which ſhall be his heerafter. And therefore as he hath giuen them a good end of their pilgrimage, although not without many combats and conflicts: ſo will he do alſo vnto vs which remaine, after we haue ſuffered a little,1. Pet. 5.9. as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh. Euen as Moſes, Caleb, and Ioſua with others, ſuffered many things after they firſt became faithfull vnto the Lord; yet becauſe he had choſen them, and had promiſed to be with them, therefore he alſo did gather them vp to their fathers, and they finiſhed their courſe in peace.
               
               
                  The third reaſon.Beſides this, all ſuch as in whom the Lord maketh his worde to take roote, framing their hearts to be good and honeſt to receiue the ſame into them, and ſo to be fit to all Chriſtian duties;Luc. 8.15. Heb. 3.6. they through patience continue and holde the confidence and reioicing of their hope vnto the end, (euen as the good ground yeeldeth her harueſt in due ſeaſon:) when in the meane while, ſundry giue ouer, recoile and faint, who ſeemed for a time to be as forward as the beſt. And to conclude theſe reaſons: what is he amongſt the people of God, who for any long time hath had proofe of Gods fatherly kindneſſe, in granting him increaſe of knowledge, faith, peace of conſcience, and the like, but in his firſt entrance into the Chriſtian courſe he thought it wonderfully  vnlike, that he ſhould euer attaine to any ſuch meaſure of the gifts of God as he now inioyeth? nay, it ſeemed vnto him vtterly impoſſible. And yet being nouriſhed vp by the Lord vnder a good diet,Note. and once learning to know by what helps and meanes he doth cauſe his to goe forward, he hath growen vp to ſetledneſſe and conſtancie, he hath found much libertie and eaſe (as I may ſay) in the true worſhipping of God: euen ſo, it ſeemeth not a ſmall matter (doubtleſſe) to any of Gods faithfull ſeruants when they deeplie conſider of it, to thinke that they ſhall paſſe ſafely thorow all temptations and tribulations, eſpecially ſeeing they finde within themſelues many wants and weakneſſes, many feares and likelihoods of fainting and giuing ouer; and doe  ſee without them, ſundrie diſcouragements, allurements, perſwaſions, threatnings, and both by the deuill and world, many hinderances from going ſtill forward: I ſay, it ſeemeth not an eaſie and ſmall matter to them, to thinke, that they ſhall ſee a good end of their conflicting daies; yea ſurely it may be truly affirmed, that they who are not troubled about this or haue not beene, neuer made any good beginning. But yet when Gods children ſet a deepe and due

                   conſideration of the mightie power of God againſt their owne timorouſnes and frailtie, and againſt the ſtrength of the deuill and world; againe,How they perſwade themſelues of a good end. when they weigh the force of Gods promiſe, who hath warranted a good end vnto them, and the many helps by which God hath prouided to bring them well home; they reſt quietlie, caſt their care vpon him, and truſt that he which hath ſaid it, will alſo do the ſame.
               The which perſwaſion when they haue once faſtened vpon,
                     4 The fruit of the knowledge of perſeuerance. (and the ofter they thinke on it, the more ſurely they ſhall hold it) it is hard to ſay, how it reuiueth and gladdeth their hearts: it is a treaſure inualuable, when they once  ſoundly know it (as they can beſt tell the price and value of it, who haue ſometimes doubted of it and haue felt extreame anguiſh thereby:) who, if they might haue been aſſured of it in ſome former feares and diſtreſſe, would haue preferred it before the greateſt commodities.
               Theſe therefore, when they once know and beleeue it, receiuing it with ſuch ioy as I haue ſaid, doe not (as carnall men imagine they will) abuſe this precious libertie to looſeneſſe and licentiouſneſſe, as not caring what they do, or how careleſly they looke to themſelues, ſeeing they haue a promiſe from God, that they ſhall perſeuere in his fauour and in a godly life vnto their end. They doe not (I ſay) by this occaſion waxe ſlouthfull, worldly, idle, vaine,The ſecond fruit of it. or  any other way ſeeke to ſhake off the Lords yoke, as weary of the ſame: (and yet I denie not, but that this doctrine is thus abuſed of many:) but as they know that perſeuerance commeth not but by daily good proceeding, ſo they gather ſtrength and incouragement from thence to goe forward more cheerefully; yea, they goe about all duties which they know to perteine to them, and the meanes alſo which helpe thereto much more willingly and readily, becauſe they are perſuaded they ſhall not loſe their labour, being aſſured that God hath ordeined the varietie of helps that they ſhould grow thereby. And indeed ſo they do: for the ſame meanes being daily continued with reuerence, by which they haue attained to any meaſure of Gods grace alreadie, they become  faſter ſetled in the Chriſtian life, and waxe more ſound and conſtant; as alſo more fruitfull in faith, loue, patience, obedience, &c. and withſtand all hinderances on the contrarie: and thus make an end of their life accordingly.
               It muſt needs the leſſe appeare (I grant) how glorious the death of manie good Chriſtians is,
                     5 We muſt not alwaies iudge of men by the maner of their death. becauſe they do not liue vnder the ordinarie preaching of the Goſpel; who, except God doe worke in them the more extraordinarilie, muſt needs die with leſſe ſignification of faith, patience and comfort: neither doth he grant to all a like ending of their daies, nor to ſhew the like tokens of an happie departure; neither ought we to iudge of men thereby. But this is more certaine and ſufficient to vphold vs; that of a good life commeth a good  death, according to the ſaying of the Pſalmiſt: Marke the end of the righteous,
                  Pſ. 37.37. 
                  and ye ſhall ſee that the end of them is peace. And ſo it ſhall goe well with the people of God, howſoeuer any of them may as a fatherly correction, and for the example of others, receiue ſuch a maner of death, as might breed queſtion and doubt of the fauour of God and of an happie end: as the Prophet of God which came from Iuda to Bethel to rebuke the idolatrie of king Ieroboam, for that he was not obedient to the commandement of the Lord, but did eat bread

in that place which was forbidden him; and therefore was ſlaine by a Lion in  the way.1. King. 13.24. And Ioſia the good king of Iuda, who for his raſh going out to fight with Pharaoh Nechoh king of Egypt,
                  2. King. 23.29. was ſlaine of him. So it may pleaſe God for cauſes beſt knowen to him (but yet alwaies iuſt and moſt certainely for his owne glory) to take away ſome of his good ſeruants ſuddenly: and to viſit ſome other of them with loſſe of their inward ſenſes, vnderſtanding, of the vſe of reaſon, memory, &c. for ſuch effects ſome kinde of deaſeaſes doth worke; ſo that, in that eſtate they ſhall ſpeake they wot not what. In the which condition it may be,A good Chriſtian may poſſibly offer violence to himſelfe, not knowing what he doth. that ſathan may (euen as he doth in the time of ſleepe occupy their braine, and delude them ſometime with fearefull dreames, ſometime  with filthy and deceitfull:) ſo (I ſay) he may when they are waking and whiles they walke about, draw them to that, which in good aduiſedneſſe they would not for the worlds good be brought vnto; namely, to lay violent hands vpon themſelues, by drowning, by knife, or any ſuch like way.
               Which I doe not ſpeake, as minding in the leaſt manner to mooue men to thinke, that it is but a light and ſmall matter to cut off vnnaturally the naturall life,He that doth ſo aduiſedly, is a murtherer in the higheſt degree. which God as a moſt ſingular earthly benefit hath giuen: for as it is fearefull ſo much as to heare it named; ſo all they that doe it, being in perfect remembrance and knowing what they doe, ſhall be ſure to ſmart for it, as for committing the higheſt degree of murther.
               
               But as no man blameth a yong infant, nor rateth it for caſting the hat or coat into the fire, as he would a childe of fiue or ſixe yeeres of age; the one hauing ſufficient diſcretion to know it doth euill, the other not: ſo it is with the two kindes of people, which may poſſibly depriue themſelues of life: the one knoweth what he doth, and therefore ſhall be ſure to pay deare for it; the other doth not: and hauing before that pange and diſtraction in times paſt witneſſed an holy and chriſtian heart by an vnrebukeable conuerſation, he is not to be iudged according to that one action, the which he alwaies abhorred when he had perfect and ſound remembrance; and when he did it, did he knew not what.
               
               And if we doe what we can to comfort him, which againſt his will and through the malice and tyranny of the diuill, was ſuddenly forced to vtter ſome blaſphemous word againſt the maieſty of God; and thinke that by good right we ought to doe ſo: how much more ought we to haue a charitable iudgement of him, who hauing euer ſince he firſt gaue profeſſion to the goſpell, beene well reported of the brethren and of the trueth it ſelfe; hath at one time when he wanted his right and ſound iudgement, fallen into this hainous treſpaſſe?
               And thus I hauing anſwered that which might ſeeme to breed greateſt queſtion of the perſeuerance of the godly in the fauour of God, (which caſe  through Gods goodneſſe doth not fall out very oft:) I may much more boldly affirme of any other of Gods children, that he will neuer forſake any of his: no, although he load them with ſome hard burden of ſorrow and paine, yet will he not forget them (they being deare vnto him;) neither doth he forget himſelfe in bringing a more ſore death vpon any of them, but theereafter he maketh their conſolations to increaſe alſo.2. Cor. 6.1. &c And whereas perſecution amongſt

                   all kindes of death is counted moſt grieuous, yet it is our weake faith that driueth vs to that opinion. For neither is any death more happy,Mat. 5.10. then to ſuffer for righteouſneſſe ſake: and the paine of body vpon the death bed hath beene found farre to exceed it.
               But if corrupt and ſlougthfull fleſh ſhould thinke it great gaine to accept of life in that danger through denying Chriſt and renouncing the trueth,No cauſe to deſire to liue, when we muſt needs diſhonor God. we ſhould conſider, what anguiſh we ſhould liue in and what a hell, when we haue depriued our ſelues of all comfort from God, as hauing renounced him; and when we could not liue but with thoſe, who ſuppreſſing and perſecuting godlineſſe,  muſt needs make our life more tedious and vncomfortable then any death: which being conſidered, what ioy (thinke we) is this to a godly ſoule, to ſee that day when an end of all miſeries is come? when he ſeeing that his departure is at hand, may ſay: This day is that,Eccleſ. 7.1. which is better to me then all that are paſt, ſeeing I am now going into euerlaſting glory?
               Laſtly it ought to be conſidered, that as the three children ſaid: We haue a God that can deliuer vs: but if he doe not, yet we will fall into his hands, and commit our ſelues vnto him, as vnto a faithfull keeper, not being vnmindefull of his promiſe, which is: Call vpon me in the time of need, and I will deliuer thee:Pſ. 50.15. And againe: When they ſhall draw you before rulers, for my ſake,
                  Mat. 10.19. 
                  beyce not  carefull what yee ſhall ſay; for it ſhall be giuen you in that moment, what ye ſhall ſpeake: And this which the Lord ſaith of his preſent helpe in our neceſſity, he will moſt certainly performe, we beleeuing his promiſe, and waiting for the accompliſhing and fulfilling of the ſame.
               So that in the partaking and inioying of all our priuiledges, we ſee, that this faith is required to be as the hand by which we ſhould receiue them, and whereby we hold and poſſeſſe them and all the comfort that commeth with them: and without it, we haue no part nor portion in any of them; neither thoſe which more eſpecially concerne the life to come, as the ſaluation of our ſoules; neither this preſent life, as the other fruites of the ſpirit, which I  haue already ſpoken of; ſeeing the word which propoundeth theſe from God vnto vs, muſt be mixed with faith: for we haue not more vſe of the aire,Heb. 4.2. fire nor water, then we haue of it.
               Heere therefore I thinke very meet to admoniſh the reader of this one thing: that ſeeing the diuill hath no greater aduantage againſt vs in our weakeneſſe, diſgrace and feare, then by ſetting before our eies the terrible conceit and cogitation of perſecution and cruell death thereby:Reaſon 1.
                   therefore ſtore and ſtuffe thy ſelfe with ſtrong munition, I mean, variety of thoſe ſcriptures which may animate thee, and which haue inabled the worthy and holy Martyrs of God to ſet light by the fearefulleſt torments; particularly theſe:Mat. 10.28. 
                  Feare not  them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the ſoule; but rather feare him which is able to deſtroy both body & ſoule in hell: And againe:2. King. 6. 
                  we haue more with vs then againſt vs: And: Greater is he that is in vs, then he that is in the world: And that in the epiſtle to the Corinthians: There hath no temptation taken you,
                  1. Cor. 10.13. 
                  but ſuch as appertaineth to man: and God is faithfull, which will not ſuffer you to be tempted aboue that yee be able, but will euen giue the iſſue with the temptation, that yee may be able to beare it. Theſe laid together doe mightily preuaile (we beleeuing

withall,1. Theſſ. 5.25. that he is faithfull who hath promiſed, and calleth vs heereto, who will alſo doe the ſame) to quicken vs to the bearing of the burden, though otherwiſe heauy and in it ſelfe intollerable.
               
                  2. Reaſon. Rom. 8.18. 2. Cor. 4.13.Alſo in another ſort theſe: The afflictions of this preſent life, are not worthy of the glory which ſhall be ſhewed vnto vs: And againe: Our light affliction which is but for a moment, cauſeth vnto vs a farre more excellent and eternall weight of glory, while we looke not on the things temporall which are ſeene, but on things not ſeene,
                  Rom. 8.17. 
                  which are eternall: Alſo: If we ſuffer with Chriſt, we ſhall alſo be glorified with him. All which duely conſidered, with the like, are able to make vs bow to the bearing of ſuch difficulties, as our mercifull father ſhall ſee meet to try  vs with.
               The examples of our Sauiour, his Apoſtles, and other holy martirs, whom we count bleſſed which haue ſuffered for a good conſcience, haue no ſmall force to perſwade vs. Of our Sauiour it is ſaid, when the holy Ghoſt wiſheth Chriſtians to run with patience the race that is ſet before them:Heb. 12.2. &. 3 Looke to Ieſus the author and finiſher of your faith: who for the ioy that was ſet before him, indured the croſſe, and deſpiſed the ſhame, and is ſet at the right hand of the throne of God. Conſider therefore him that indured ſuch ſpeaking againſt of ſinners, leſt yee ſhould be wearied and faint in your mindes. Of the Apoſtles, Paule writeth this: We are afflicted on euery ſide,
                  2. Cor. 4.8.9.10. 
                  yet are we not in diſtreſſe; we are perſecuted, but not  forſaken; caſt downe, but we periſh not; alwaies deliuered to death for Ieſus ſake, that the life of Ieſus may be made manifeſt in our mortall fleſh:2 Cor. 6.9. &. 10 And againe: Chaſtened, but not killed; ſorrowing yet alwaies reioicing; as poore, yet making many rich; as hauing nothing yet poſſeſsing all things.
                  Heb. 11.36.37 38. Of the Martyrs this is ſaid: They were tried with mockings and ſcourgings yea moreouer by bonds and impriſonment; they were ſtoned, they were hewen aſunder, they were ſlaine with the ſword, they wandred vp and downe in ſheepe skinnes and in goat skinnes, being deſtitute, afflicted and tormented: whom the world was not woorthy of; they wandred in wilderneſſes, and mountaines, and dennes and caues of the earth. Oh how ſhould  theſe glorious examples, with thoſe who ſuffred death ioifully in our remembrance for the goſpell: I ſay, how ſhould they draw our hearts, and incourage vs to ſet light by our liues, when the Lord will require them at our hands!
               
                   And to adde the fourth and laſt kind of perſwaſions, to ſet vs forward in this worke of the Lord, which is hindred in vs not a little, by thinking what we forgoe and leaue behinde vs, (if we ſhould be ready to ſuffer perſecution for Chriſts ſake) as our pleaſures, profits, preferments, friends: to this I anſwere: Beſides that our Sauiour ſaith (Whoſoeuer forſaketh houſe, or brethren, or ſiſters, or father,
                  Marc. 10.29. 
                  or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my ſake and the goſpels, ſhall receiue an hundredfold now at this preſent, and in the world to come life euerlaſting:) I ſay, beſide this, alas what a poore life is this that we lead heere? where few  haue any great ſtore of pleaſures and commodities if they be religoius: yet, if they haue, they haue them with much ſorrow, feare and vnquietneſſe, though they haue lawfully come by them. And yet, beſides the vncertainty of them and of life it ſelfe, with reproch, vnkindneſſes, malice, ill will and diſdaine of our betters, the lewd tongues of our inferiors, and the repining and emulation of our equals, and the wearyings of vs by all ſorts, vnto the which we are ſubiect;

                   why ſhould there be ſuch ſhrinking and going backe at the hearing of perſecution and death? I confeſſe, if it were not for the communion of Saints which we haue in this world with God and his church, there is nothing of any weight to mooue a Chriſtian to deſire to liue heere, eſpecially when the Lord calleth him hence: and yet the forgoing of Gods preſence in this world, is recompenced largely with the inioying of it in the life to come, which is alwaies to be preferred before the beſt eſtate that may be heere inioied. Oh, it is not the leaſt peece of our miſery, that we ſeeing what little good may be done of vs heere, but contrarily, how great cauſe of complaining we haue, for that we  are led by the law of our members ſo many waies to euill; that we be not for all this, able to ſay euery day, Come lord Ieſus, come quickely:
                  Reu. 22.20. 
                  we deſire to be diſſolued and to be with Chriſt.
               
               But to end this diſcourſe, ſeeing God hath taught his children to prouide for the hardeſt, and how they may perſeuer in a good courſe vnto the end, euen through great tribulations and perſecutions, and much more, when they haue an eaſier paſſage without them; let this be holden as the greateſt of all the reſt, that they haue this as a ſingular prerogatiue granted them of God,Ro. 8.38. and that thereby they may ſay in reuerence and confidence: Nothing ſhall ſeparate vs from God, neither life nor death, neither things preſent nor things to come. 
                   And let not this honor and liberty be loſt, which all the goods of the world cannot redeeme nor buy againe. And therefore let vs nouriſh daily the hope of this perſeuerance: Firſt by keeping in vs a willingneſſe to die, as ſometimes we doe, and ſo ſhall we be fit to liue.
               Secondly, that we vſe oft to meditate of the vanity of all things, and of the contempt of the world, and ſet our mindes on things heauenly;Col. 3.1. &. 2. that ſo we may preſerue and continue that liberty.
               Thirdly, that we hold faſt our reioicing in Chriſt daily.1. Cor. 5.31.
               
               Fourthly, that we mortifie all ſinne, and keepe it out of loue with vs:Col. 3.5. which is a plucking out of the ſting of ſinne.
               
                   Fiftly, that we inure our ſelues to beare ſmaller afflictions,Lam. 3. which is a part of denying our ſelues: ſo we ſhall welcome and goe vnder greater when they come, yea euen death it ſelfe. And let vs know, that he who indeauours not to hold faſt theſe, is like to finde any other eſtate harder and full of wearineſſe.
               And thus much be ſaid of this priuiledge, Of the perſeuerance of the godly vnto their end: and ſo of all the other which are inioied in this life. All which although they be of ſo ſingular price as I haue declared, yet if they had not other adioined vnto them which are immortall and perpetuall, and ſhould then be inioied, when theſe temporary prerogatiues ſhall be at an end; our liues  ſhould be but miſerable, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, when he ſaith:1. Cor. 15.19. 
                  If in this life onely we haue hope of Chriſt, we are of all men the moſt miſerable; and yet both together, vnmatchable.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 14. Of the tenth and laſt priuiledge, inioied perfectly in the life to come, but begunne heere.
               
                  SO that when we haue had our part in all theſe, then commeth the greateſt, and that which maketh all theſe great: and that is, the pleaſures at Gods right hand for euermore,What this priuiledge is. Pſ. 16.11. Math. 25.
                   and the glory, the vnſpeakeable glory, which was prepared and laid vp for vs before the beginning of the world. And amongſt all the other although this be by many degrees the chiefeſt, yet I confeſſe, that for the excellency thereof, and for that I cannot ſee into the bewty of it, as I doe ſomewhat into the other,It cannot be conceiued how great. whereof I haue ſome experience: I confeſſe (I ſay) that I cannot expreſſe to my contentation, my minde about the ſame; and do feare that in ſpeaking of it, I ſhall rather make it ſeeme leſſe, then if I ſaid nothing: yet ſomewhat, ſeeing this place doth ſo require.
               This eſtate therefore of the faithfull after this life, the ſcripture ſetteth out by earthly compariſons and ſimilitudes, to our capacity, for that we are not  able to conceiue the ſame,It is ſhadowed out by earthly compariſons. if in it owne nature, it were deſcribed vnto vs: and eſpecially, by the reſemblances of thoſe things which we doe moſt affect and delight in, as honour, treaſure, riches, bewty, friends, pleaſure, ioy, inheritance and poſſeſſion of our owne.Hebr. 13.14. 1. Pet. 1.18. Behold therefore heere prepared for thee (ô happy Chriſtian) an habitation, not made with hands, but euerlaſting in heauen: an inheritance immortall, vndefiled, &c. not purchaſed with gold and ſiluer, but with a farre more excellent price; for what is more deſired then to liue with our friends? But lift vp thine eies, and ſee how God hath prepared for thee the company of the celeſtiall ſpirits,With whom their fellowſhip ſhall be. namely, his holy angels, and elect people, to eat and drinke with at his table for euermore: I meane  to haue fellowſhip with them, and to dwell with Ieſus Chriſt and his bleſſed Apoſtles, Prophets, Martyrs, friends, kinred and acquaintance: which is the higheſt degree of the communion of Saints.What ioy they ſhall haue in heauen. Pleaſure and ioy how is it ſought after? yea, what is welcome without them? And that thou maiſt know, that the Lord hath liberally prouided for thee this way: know and vnderſtand, that the ioy which there is poſſeſſed, is ſuch, as it cauſeth a continuall ſinging and thankſgiuing.
               
                  Their honour.And what honour can be greater, then to be the kings ſonnes and daughters; yea to raigne triumphantly after we haue ouercome death, ſinne, hell & the deuill, the greateſt enemies that euer were conquered? The like I might  ſay of the reſt.
                     An amplifying of theſe prerogatiues.
                     A further commending of thē. 1. Cor. 2.9. Farre greater then princes.
                   And all theſe priuiledges are ſo much the greater, becauſe as their habitation it ſelfe is permanent and euerlaſting: ſo are all the treaſures which are inioied therein, euerlaſting alſo. And therefore the precious things of the kingdome of heauen are ſaid to be ſuch, as no eie hath ſeene, no eare hath heard, neither is the heart of man able to conceiue. The happineſſe of princes hath beene inioied, and therefore is knowen what and how great it is;

                   which prooueth, that it is in no ſort to be compared to this. Neither is it any maruell, ſeeing one day in the courts of the Lord, euen in this life, is better then a thouſand elſe-where, euen in a princes palace: therefore, in the eſtate of glory after this life how much more? And yet further, this is not to be neglected, that when the wicked ſhall be at their wits end, and ſmitten with horror, weeping, wailing and gnaſhing of teeth; euen then ſhall the faithfull inioy this infinite varietie of heauenly bleſſings, which (if it were poſſible for them to haue) a dreadfull feare and perſwaſion of loſing and forgoing, would be an exceding and intolerable torment vnto them.
               
                   Beſides, we that liue now in this corrupt eſtate of the world (for it was not  ſo in the beginning) and behold the varietie of Gods creatures repleniſhing the world, the beaſts of the field, the fiſhes of the ſea, the fowles of the aire, the Sunne, Moone and ſtarres furniſhing the vpper parts aboue vs; the trees, corne and graſſe, beautifying theſe inferiour parts of the earth beneath vs:The pure estate and vncorrupt of things in Adams innocency, but a ſhadow of heauen. if we might haue ſeene all theſe in their perfection with him which was made Lord of them, euen man when he was yet without ſinne in the world, what a glorious habitation ſhould it haue beene? And yet, but as a court-yard or entrie into a kings palace ſhould it haue beene, in reſpect of the heauenly manſion, which is the celeſtiall Ieruſalem: for this is called but his footſtoole,  but heauen is his throne.
               And therfore if the Lord did ſo adorne this earth, as that it is yet full of admiration to ſee but the prints of his glory, his power and wiſedome therein; and yet it is but for a ſeaſon, euen a while to be a place of refreſhing for vs: who can thinke how magnificent the kingdome of heauen is, which with all the infinite commodities he hath made to be a perpetuall habitation and dwelling place for all his beloued ones? And ſo likewiſe it is an high degree  of proſperitie, to be inlightned to ſee by faith but in this world the ſweet life of a Chriſtian; yet is this but a taſte of heauen, and a day there,
                  Pſ. 84.10. & 87.3. 
                  is better then a thouſand elſewhere: and the prerogatiues of a Chriſtian are admirable.  When Paule was wrapt into the third heauen, & had heard things that were not to be vttered; it is ſaid, that he was lift vp with the aboundance of reuelation:2. Cor. 12.5. Mat. 17.2. and, When Chriſt was but transformed, that his garments did ſhine as the ſunne, Peter was aſtoniſhed: how much more then with this glory? which in the former are but dimly repreſented?
               As for the further deſcribing of it by the particular kindes of pleaſures  and delights to the body and euery part of it and euery ſenſe partaining to it; and to the ſoule likewiſe: (which ſome haue taken vpon them to affirme and ſet out, the Lord hauing ſaid no ſuch thing himſelfe of the kinds of pleaſures which are to be inioied there:) I leaue it as a bold coniecture of mans braine:Of things vncertaine we may not ſpeake boldly. 
                   and fitter for the popiſh cleargy to teach to their ſuperſtious company: who as their whole forme of their worſhipping of God is outward, groſſe and carnall, with Sonnets and ſounds to pleaſe the eare, and praier-like ſights to delight the eie; but that worſhip which is in ſpirit and truth, is not in vſe with them: ſo they imagine as groſly of the delights which are in heauen; that part of them are in the exceeding ſweetneſſe to the ſenſe of ſmelling, maruellous pleaſure to the ſenſe of taſting, and ſo of handling they ſpeake anſwerably.

I will not (I ſay) wade further then I may wade ſafely; what the  kindes and varietie of pleaſures are particularly which the righteous are partakers of, the Lord hath not reuealed vnto me, and therefore I am not aſhamed to ſay,The ioyes of heauen cannot be conceiued. I know not: It is enough, that I am ſure they are ſo great and many, that they cannot be once thought of according to their woorthineſſe, no not of the wiſeſt, who can ſee furtheſt and enter moſt deepely into matters.
               Onely this I will ſay, and with this I will end: That the Lord ſhall there wipe away euery teare from the eies of his children; and they which ſowed in teares before heere on earth, ſhall there reape in ioy; death ſhall no more raigne, neither ſhall there be any more lamentation, nor crying, nor ſorrow: and for the glory, beautie, pleaſure and eternitie which ſhall be found there, it is compared vnto a goodly citie; whoſe ſhining is like vnto a ſtone, moſt precious as a Iaſper ſtone,Reu. 21.11. &c. cleere as chryſtall, &c. And after the ſoule in paradiſe ſhall in her kinde haue inioied the pleaſures there, then ſhall the bodie (for inioying the fulneſſe thereof) be adioined to it,Phil. 3.20. 1. Cor. 15.43. 1. Theſſ. 4.18. 2. Theſſ. 3.5. and made like to the glorious body of Ieſus Chriſt: and be glorious it ſelfe alſo. The vſe is comfort, and ſuch a waiting for the comming of the ſonne of God for our laſt and full deliuerance, that we may well teſtifie, that in theſe our houſes of clay we are but ſtrangers. So that if we lay this priuiledge with the reſt which I haue mentioned in this treatiſe, (all which are, and properly belong to the true beleeuers) who can deny but that their part and porcion is great? But oh, that it were ſo accounted of, euen among ſuch; and yet when I, or any haue ſaid what we can, we haue ſaid but a little: for it is farre greater then we can ſet it out to be. For as the Queene of Sheba ſaid to Salomon when ſhe had heard his wiſdome:It may be ſaid of the priuiledges, as the Queene of Sheba ſaid of Salomon. It was a true word that I heard in mine owne land of thine eſtate and wiſdome; howbeit I beleeued not this report, till I came and had ſeene it with mine eies: but loe, the one halfe was not tolde me; for thou haſt more wiſdome and and proſperity, then I haue heard by report: So it may be ſaid by Gods people (who haue already in heauen a taſte of the glory of the kingdome:) It was a true report which we heard by the mouth of his preachers, concerning the  tidings of ſaluation & their other prerogatiues; yet the one halfe of our proſperitie & happineſſe was not declared and made knowen: for we haue greater then was reported in their meſſage. And if they find it ſo great in heauen, can the taſte thereof chooſe but be ſweet and great which we haue heere on earth?Numb. 23.5. euen as Balaam by the ſpirit of God, prophecied of his people the Iſraelites, when he looked vpon them dwelling according to their tribes: How goodly are thy tents, ô Iacob; and thy habitations, ô Iſrael? as the valleies are they ſtretched foorth, and as gardens by the riuers ſide, &c.
               And as all theſe priuiledges are great, and we haue good proofe that God hath giuen his deare children liberty to inioy them: ſo this further commends  their happy condition, that they may know that all theſe belong to them, and they haue the word of God among them, and they may alſo approoue of, imbrace, and delight in the ſame; and be able to ſee thereby, how they are made partakers of them all by faith, and how thereby they haue moſt ſweet communion with him and with Chriſt by his ſpirit,Ioh. 14.17. (which the world cannot haue) and moſt heauenly comfort and peace thereby; and hauing learned experience

                   for the time to come, may get wiſdome to carry themſelues in euery eſtate and condition after the beſt maner of Chriſtians: all this (I ſay) they haue giuen them of God.
               And concerning the effectuall knowing of the will of God out of his word, to beleeue all the forementioned priuiledges, that it is a peculiar gift of God to his elect, and that no other (no, not the greateſt and moſt iudiciall clarkes & diuines) haue it; that ſaying of our Sauiour, is a plaine and cleere proofe to his diſciples: To you it is giuen to know the myſteries of the kingdome,
                  Mat. 13.11. & 11 25. 1. Cor 1.26. Eſai. 6.9. 
                  but vnto others not; that the prophecy of Eſay may be fulfilled, In hearing they ſhall  heare and not vnderſtand, and ſeeing they ſhall ſee and not perceiue; leſt they ſhould turne & I ſhould ſaue them. Whereby we may vnderſtand, that it is a ſingular prerogatiue to Gods children to haue the effectuall knowledge of the word of God, whereby they may ſee their liberties: which others cannot haue.
               And therefore the Lord ſaith in Ezekiell, that he will take away from his children their old hearts and giue them new; and write his law in them, that they may ſee the excellent things and wonderful which are contained therein: which others do not. So that, although the vnbeleeuers and vnregenerate may haue knowledge in the letter;Rom. 2.28. yet are they not led after it by the ſpirit which is  the life of it. For what will not hope of promotion, liuing and credite doe, euen with naturall men, in drawing them to take paines to ſeeke for knowledge; as experience in all ages hath and doth teach? when yet, for any great matter of ſound practiſe & comfort that many of them haue by the ſcriptures beſides, it is not worth the ſpeaking of. For when by ſtudy and learning they haue gotten the wealth and glory of this world, they haue that which they ſought: and as for the ſcriptures and the power of godlineſſe,Pſ. 50.16. 2. Tim. 3.5. though they haue a ſhew of it, their hearts tell them, that they are not the matters which take them vp in the delight of them, for they hate to be reformed by them; neither are they ſo precious in their eies, as that which they haue gotten by  them, though it be but baſe and temporary.
               Whereas the word of God that reuealeth his will about all theſe,Pſ. 19.10. Pſ. 119.35. is more  ſweet to his ſeruants, then the hony combe; yea, all the pleaſures of the world are not in their account to be compared to the wiſdome thereof:Pſ. 119. part 2. but that which is ſaid of the man of God, That he had more pleaſure in the word of god then in al maner of riches, and that they were the ioy of his hart, his matter of ſong and his companions to talke & ſolace himſelfe with; it is far from them.Pſ. 1.2. Rom. 7.22. Iob. 21.14. Therefore when the bleſſed of the Lord are ſet forth in the ſcriptures, to delight in the law of God: the wicked on the contrary, are deſcribed to ſpeake thus: Depart from vs (ô Lord); we deſire not, nor are delighted in the knowledge  of thy waies.
               
               And is not this a roiall gift then, that whereas mens hearts naturally can take no pleaſure in the heauenly Manna of Gods word, but ſoone loath and waxe weary of it; that Gods people who know the price of it,Pſ. 119 54. Pſ. 119.77. & Pſ. 16.3. may make the ſame their ſong, their ioy and their delight: that ſo they may draw out of it all good things as they haue opportunity? Which ſeeing others cannot doe, therefore they ſeeke vaine delights to pleaſure in, and that which miniſtreth

found delight indeed, they can in their greateſt need and heauineſſe haue no  benefit by it.
               And through this knowledge and delight that they haue in the ſcriptures, which certify them of all theſe heauenly prerogatiues, they get experience in themſelues of the things which they leame therein, what is the happieſt eſtate of life that heere can be inioied,1. Tim. 6.8. euen that, which hath the promiſes of this life and of that which is to come.Mat. 5.18. They grow wiſe in obſeruing, that God verifieth indeed all that he hath ſpoken in his word, and not a iotte thereof doth faile; and therefore they become more reſolute euery day againſt all euill and ſinne,Pſ. 119.101. becauſe they ſee that God will be reuenged vpon euery euill  way; and that it is certaine, if they ſinne as others doe, he ſmiteth: and they grow to ſee,Pſ. 89.31. that he keepeth promiſe towards his, who reſt on him, euen in  their greateſt ſtreights. Which how great a benefite it is, may be gathered by this, that it bringeth moſt neare communion with God by his ſpirit, which worketh in them (and which the world cannot receiue) as our Sauiour ſaith: He that loueth me,
                  Iohn. 14.21. 
                  ſhall be loued of my father, and I will loue him, and will ſhew my ſelfe vnto him:
                  Verſ. 23. 
                  He that keepeth my word, as he ſhall be loued of my father, ſo we will come to him, and abide with him: whereby he meaneth, that he will make knowen his minde and will to them as familiarly, as they which vſe to conuerſe one with another, and eate and drinke together: for the which cauſe alſo  he calleth them his friends, which doe the things which he commandeth them, as to whom he will open euen his ſecret, as men vſe to doe to their friends,Pſ. 87.2. and not to ſeruants. For he loueth Zion (his militant church which he hath choſen, and will dwell there and delight in her) more then all the habitations of Iacob, that is, then all other beſide it.
               And what fruite this neare communion with God doth bring, which his faithfull ſeruants haue offered them, it may eaſily be coniectured; becauſe, as Salomon ſaith:Prou. 18.24. 
                  The heart of a friend resteth in his friend; and a friend is neerer than a brother: and if the perfection of loue be ioy, there muſt needs be great ioy to Gods faithfull people, when they are ſo deare to the Lord and he  beloued of them ſo intirely. Therefore, as God giueth to his, many comforts, and that alſo he doth many waies,Luc. 10.20. Iohn. 16.24. 2. Cor. 1.12. and in many reſpects, through the hope of eternall life, through true praier, and by a good conſcience (as hath beene ſaid:) ſo, in that they know his will and haue proofe of his familiarity with them, (as it pleaſeth him to call it) their ioy is yet more increaſed, eſpecially after a longer continued acquaintance with the Lord in his word. And what is happineſſe (ſuch I meane as in this preſent life may be inioied) if this be not; namely, to partake all theſe with him? thus to goe in and out before the Lord, and to haue him thus the ſtaffe of our comfort in al eſtates? Which maketh ready to die and fit to liue, and giueth greater gaine in both, then in any  other condition or courſe can be found and inioied: yea this maketh the inioiers of it happy heere, and certaine, that afterwards they ſhall be happy for euer; and though ſathan doth much quaile this by occaſion of troubles and our frailties, yet it is certaine, that it ſhall be recouered againe.
               This in few words is that which I wiſh the true Chriſtian reader to meditate on and conſider, which all Gods people haue ſo great need to inioy and partake

                   by faith, as it muſt needs grieue all that doe vnderſtand and loue the excellency of it, to ſee ſo many to be void thereof, to whom yet the Lord hath graciouſly and freely bequeathed it. And I pray God in moſt feruent maner, to inlarge the hearts of all his good ſeruants, that ſeeing many mourne in Sion, and are holden downe with ſundry and ſore afflictions till they faint againe, (as though there were no comfort to be found for them, to the eaſing of their heauy hearts) that they may conſider what the Lord hath prouided for the eaſing of them, euen this: to beleeue, that all the forementioned priuiledges belong vnto them: that though their ſorrowes be many and great, yet  they may not driue them from hope in God, but ſend them more earneſtly to grone to him by praier, that they may receiue and take theſe things to their comfort, which he for that very cauſe hath committed to writing; that thoſe his children which are brought low, and into diſtreſſe, and almoſt to vtter deſpaire, may lift vp their heads, and reioice for ſo great hope of redemption and deliuerance at hand comming towards them.
               And this will recompence, aboundantly all the labour that hath beene taken, and need no more be loſt when it is once inioied. And therefore if the beleeuers may know by Gods word, that they haue a part in all the forementioned prerogatiues, and therefore delight in his word which bringeth ſuch tidings  to them; if they may thereby be made acquainted with that maner of conuerſation which pleaſeth God beſt, and maketh moſt for their owne comfort, and by his ſpirit may haue communion with him (which the world cannot haue:) I cōclude (I ſay) that the beleeuers haue great prerogatiues bequeathed them, and that the priuiledges which God hath granted out vnto his beloued, are moſt precious, and worthy all labour and trauell to be come by.
               And that I ſay no more of this, it is no hard matter to conceiue, what ſweet conſolation a beleeuing heart inioyeth which hath experience of this: for he beleeuing the promiſes of theſe things, from day to day, and hauing moſt ſweet peace of conſcience with confidence, as a fruite of beleeuing them already,  how great muſt his comfort needs be, which ariſeth from both, and eſpecially for the hope which he hath of that which is yet to come?
               Oh that all who feare God did beleeue this, as they may boldly and ought confidently to doe, that they might inrich themſelues by hauing their part in it from time to time.All theſe excellent priuiledges as they may, ſo they ſhould be knowen by experience. So that nothing is more to be lamented in the world then this: that God hauing called men to be partakers of ſo excellent priuiledges, and appointed for them ſuch varietie of bleſſings, (whereof I haue mentioned but ſome part) that they ſhould be ſo ignorant, as not to deſire to know them; ſo careleſſe as to reiect them; ſo obſtinate as to tread them vnder foote: and ſo to lead a life (I may truely ſay) full of miſery for want of them.
               
                   But whiles I ſet downe this, me thinkes I heare ſome obiecting thus:Obiection. How can we be perſwaded that God hath prouided this liberty for his in this world,Pſ. 126.5. when both Scripture calleth our life heere (when we be in greateſt proſperity) a wandring vp and downe heauily, as in a pilgrimage or wilderneſſe? and a ſowing in teares, that is to ſay, full of griefe? and Chriſt telleth his, that in the world they ſhall finde tribulation, and that by many afflictions and perſecutions we muſt enter into his kingdom? And experience alſo teacheth, that theſe

things are euen ſo?Anſwer. To the which I anſwer, affirming all that is ſaid to be moſt  true: and therefore ſeeing our troubles and ſorrowes are many and great, through the deuils malice, whiles we ſeeke to keepe our ſelues vnſtained in this wretched world, we haue the more need of the greater comfort: neither were it poſſible for any godly man to goe through them, if he were not fully reſolued, that God is with him to helpe him, and comfort his ſoule many waies,
                     Pſ. 34.19. Pſ. 130.7. Afflictions vnto the children of God, prooue the trueth of his promiſes when they are made to goe vnder them. and namely in this, wherein he feeleth his need greateſt. And therefore theſe afflictions which our gracious God hath appointed and promiſed to bring vs through, are a moſt ſure proofe of this which I ſay: namely, that he hath giuen moſt precious promiſes and prerogatiues to vs, by the which only  we can be able to goe vnder them. For all of vs muſt needs faint, if we did not confidently beleeue, that he ſetleth our hearts in moſt ſound ioy and gladneſſe; partly by the teſtimony of a good conſcience, which is a continuall feaſt, and an experience of his fatherly loue towards vs; and partly through the daily ſucceſſe and bleſſing which we looke for from him, the hope whereof maketh vs not aſhamed.
               Therefore ſeeing God of his vnſpeakable loue hath bequeathed to his children ſo large a portion, euen a taſte of the heauenly ioies in this life, which maketh his chaſtiſements ſweet, and the yoke of his commandements eaſie vnto them, and all difficulties to be ouercome of them, and poureth ſuch  great peace and comfort into their hearts that loue him, and this from day to day, reſtrayning them of it at no time (except it be more expedient for them to want it:) what ſhall I ſay more, but bewaile that ſo few finde it; and pray God to inlarge their hearts, that they may be able to comprehend, and ſo inioy it, and to giue all praiſe to his maieſtie, who hath thought no heauenly comfort too good for his, euen in this world, which is a vale of miſery?
               
                  Afflictions accompany the deare children of God, not that they can or doe extinguiſh this ioy, but to keepe them from all vaine and deceitfull reioicing.And as for ſuch as thinke, that it is weake reioicing, that is and may be accompanied with ſo many afflictions, as our life is ſubiect to: they muſt know, that ſuch corrections are ſeene by our heauenly father to be meete for vs, and to keepe vs from vaine and deceitfull reioicings; and that theſe fatherly chaſtiſements  doe not take away this heauenly comfort from vs, but they rather cauſe it to be ſeene a greater benefit, then without them we could eaſily be able to perceiue.
               Others obiect thus: Are there ſo many commodities in the chriſtian life? How commeth it to paſſe then,Obiection. that they ſhew it not foorth, and that the godly of all ſorts, poore and rich, one and other, doe not let their light ſo ſhine among men, that they may cauſe them by ſeeing ſuch admirable things in them as are not to be found commonly in the world beſide, to aske & haſte after them? For where are they (ſay theſe Obiecters) which haue ſo much grace appearing in them aboue other men? In their dealings we finde it not: in their  liues we ſee it not: neither are any parts that we behold in them ſuch, as deſerue ſo great cōmendation.Anſwer. To whom I anſwer, that al theſe things are true, which haue beene ſaid of the great priuiledges and prerogatiues of the people of God,Pſ. 87.3. and much more according to that which is written in the Pſalme: Wonderfull things are ſpoken of thee, ô thou city of God: but yet not ſo eaſily deſcried nor perceiued in the perſons who inioy them; and that for theſe cauſes:
               
                  
                   Firſt,Spirituall things are not eaſily diſcerned. Pſ. 45.14.
                   ſeeing their moſt precious gifts are ſpirituall and inward (according to that which is written; The kings daughter is all glorious within) and therefore not eaſily ſeene and beheld of ſuch as haue but outward and bodily eies: their comelineſſe and beauty is like the curtaines of the tabernacle, the outward and vpper couerings whereof were of goats haire, rammes skinnes,The beautie and happineſſe of Gods children is ſpecially inward. and badgers; but the inward were of fine twined linnen, blew ſilke, purple and ſcarlet, with the moſt exquiſite imbroidering of the Cherubins vpon them: So is the outward eſtate of Gods ſeruants in this world, ill fauoured and deformed in the eies of men; but inwardly, beautifull as the lilie,Note. and ſweet and  pleaſant as the roſe. Their graces therefore which God hath giuen them,What the inward beauty of a Chriſtian is. as faith, hope, confidence, a pure heart, a good conſcience, a well gouerning of themſelues; and with theſe, meekeneſſe, patience, mercifulneſſe, loue, &c. being not perceiued of them who neither know them, nor haue them, nor loue them: what maruell is it, though they aske for that in them, which yet is before their eies,Ioh. 18.5. (as the ſouldiers that ſought Chriſt euen when they ſpake to him) & though they ſay, They behold no ſuch grace in them; which they can not diſcerne? The ſame may be ſaid of the inward comfort and ioy in the holy Ghoſt, which is more worth than the world.
               The ſecond cauſe why theſe Obiecters ſee nothing worthy the following in  a maner, or commendable in them, is:The children of light contrarie to the children of darkneſſe, can not ſeeme louely in their eyes. becauſe the gifts of God which appeare outwardly in their liues, do the more prouoke them to wrath and rage, becauſe they ſee their courſe is not like their owne, but contrary vnto it: for they thinke themſelues diſgraced by them, ſeeing they walke not after the ſame exceſſe of riot that they themſelues do; and therefore ſpeake they euill of them.1. Pet. 4.4. Their innocency and harmeleſſe liuing in the world, and that they will haue no fellowſhip with the vnfruitfull works of darkneſſe, but rebuke them rather, and their Chriſtian carrying of themſelues in their waies with moderation, wiſdome and conſtancie; is charged to be hypocriſie, preciſeneſſe, and new-fangled ſingularitie.
               
                   Furthermore, the comfort which they haue in their liues,A third cauſe why the happineſſe of Chriſtians is not knowen. Pro. 14.9.
                   being rather felt in their owne hearts than ſeene of ſtrangers, and their reproch in the world great, and their condition counted vnfortunate: how can the happineſſe of them be knowen, as I haue ſaid, although it be no leſſe, yea rather farre greater, than I haue ſet it downe to be? No, no, they muſt haue eyes as cleere as chryſtall, who can ſee and beholde this.
               And that I may leaue no doubt in any mans minde about this matter,A fourth cauſe why the godly ſeeme not beautifull in the eies of the wicked, is becauſe of ſome infirmities which they eſpie in them. I muſt deſire them to thinke, that my meaning is not, that Gods children, for all the priuiledges wherewith God honoureth them, both heere, and eſpecially will do in the life to come, are therefore without their ſeuerall infirmities  and blots alſo, (ſome of them) vnto the which the reſt (through their owne corruption yet remaining in them, and the deuils malice) are ſubiect: which (though they debarre them not of the forenamed prerogatiues, ſeeing they are willingly brought to repent of them) is one great cauſe, why theſe obiecters ſee ſo little in the godly life, as either to commend it, or to be themſelues incouraged to imbrace it. But yet while theſe marke not theſe things, but only beholde the ſlips and blemiſhes in the men themſelues, though in ſome

more than other, and do not beleeue nor regard the doctrine of the Scripture, which teacheth the trueth more ſoundly than it can be ſeene in the holieſt perſons and perfecteſt patternes; therefore they grow to theſe abſurdities. And yet when their infirmities appeare, and afflictions take holde of them, God ſeeing it expedient that it be ſo for a ſeaſon;1. Pet. 1.6. euen then is their eſtate more to be deſired, than the other in their greateſt flouriſhing. For they are beloued of the Lord
                     Read I ſay 63.9. Cant. 1.4. Why the Lord ſuffereth the godly to fall. yet ſtill for all that, and moſt deare vnto him, as it is written: I am blacke, ye daughters of Ieruſalem, yet comly, &c. And of their falles and infirmities, I ſay, that therefore they departed from the good and perfect way for a moment, that they might thereby ſee and bewaile their vileneſſe, and ſo returne againe to ſtand more conſtantly after. Yet this watch-word I would giue to many which are of good hope, that diuers groſſe and ranke corruptions do ſo broadly appeare and ſo mightily preuaile in ſundry (as frowardneſſe, vncharitableneſſe, conceitedneſſe, raſh iudgements, breach of promiſe,The fruit of the infirmities of profeſſors, what it is. and other heat and intemperancy of heart, &c.) to the offence of many, that they do exceedingly abate the beautie & glorie of their profeſſion. And it muſt needs be confeſſed and granted, that few Chriſtians are as they might and ought to be: but goodneſſe is too ſparing, and grace is too ſore dimmed and darkened in moſt, euen of the beſt and forwardeſt: and few carie themſelues as they might and ought to doe in their courſe, by giuing good example. And this maketh the Goſpell to be leſſe honoured and imbraced of many:The fruit of the godly conuerſation of profeſſors, what it is. whereas if it were a more common thing, that the well-willers of the Goſpell were more faithfull, wiſe, watchfull, louing, harmeleſſe, fruitfull, &c. it would cut and wound the hearts and conſciences of the bad, and alſo incourage many of the weaker ſort vnto their duties. But yet ſhall the liues of them be glorious before God, and ſhining lights to ſuch as can ſee and diſcerne; whiles they that carpe at them, and ſeeke to diſgrace them, ſhall be as the miſts and clouds, that ſhine not but hinder the light rather. And whereas it may be ſaid, that ſome of them haue excellent gifts of God in them: yet the trueth is, where ſanctification, euen the ſalt of grace, is not  to ſeaſon them, they are but as a pleaſant and beautifull flower growing on a dunghill; and (as Salomon ſaith) like a ring in a ſwines ſnout. And thus much of the priuiledges of the true beleeuers.
            
            The end of the ſixth Treatiſe.
            
         
         
            
            
            THE SEVENTH TREATISE: OF THE OBIECTIONS  AND CAVILS WHICH may be brought againſt the doctrine before ſet downe; and an anſwere to them.
            
               CHAP. 1. Of the ſumme and order of this Treatiſe.
               
                  
                  NOw that I haue ſet downe the ſumme of the matter which I tooke in hand, and haue ſhewed how it behoueth the people of God to be directed and guided daily vnto the Chriſtian life, and what impediments are in the way to hinder from it, and priuiledges to incourage to it: I will now in the next and laſt place, as I appointed in the entrance, meet with the obiections and cauils which may ariſe from thence: that all the Lords inheritance may walke after that courſe more reſolutely and boldly; eſpecially when ſuch obiections as may trouble them, ſhall appeare to be but weake and vaine. As I  nothing doubt, but whatſoeuer ſhew of reaſon may come in the way againſt it, ſhall be ſeene to be but the froth of mans braine, and carnall. And I likewiſe hope, that ſuch as ſhall be acquainted with the doctrine before ſet downe, ſhal not onely be incouraged by theſe anſwers to practiſe it, but alſo inabled and perſwaded to continue therein till more light be giuen them for the well gouerning of themſelues, and that in a more perfect maner than I can ſet downe: in the meane ſeaſon, that this which I heere haue propounded, may helpe to direct the common ſort of Chriſtian people, as the godly learned haue bene taught of God to direct themſelues. For who knoweth not this, that euen many of Gods deare children doe and haue through ignorance and for want  of direction, very dimly ſeene into the beauty of a godly life, and vncomfortablely gone about it, and haue made a meere toile of the ſeruice of God, which ſhould be the greateſt pleaſure? Therefore as it is not to be doubted, but that numbers will rebell againſt the doctrine which rangeth them within holie compaſſe, and will refuſe to be ſubiect to it; and that they which doe ſo, will frame their iudgement to their practiſe, to excuſe and defend that to be good which they doe; and beſides, there is no doubt, but that queſtions will ariſe in

the weake beleeuers about it to trouble them: I will therefore (as I ſaid) in  this Treatiſe ſet my ſelfe againſt ſuch carnall reaſonings, anſwering the cauils and quarrels which they ſhall raiſe and bring for the defence of their euill liues againſt the former doctrine; and then remoue the obiections which weake (but yet teachable) Chriſtians would or ought to propound for their ſatisfying, before I end.
               
                  The order of this Treatiſe.And I will do it in this maner: Firſt, to anſwer them who obiect, that there is no need of any daily directing of vs, as long as we haue the Scriptures; and therefore, neither this which is before ſet downe by me, nor any other, is of any vſe, or to any purpoſe: this I will anſwer in the next chapter. Then I will  ſhew the obiections and cauils of them, who ſay, that neither this nor any other like it, can be obſerued, that is, daily; and ſet downe their reaſons; and ſhew what great inconueniences they thinke would follow: and to theſe I will anſwer in the three next chapters. After both, I will mention ſundrie of the particular doubts, which are like to riſe in the minds of ſuch as are teachable and well diſpoſed Chriſtians, and arme them againſt the ſame; to the tenth chapter. And laſt of all, I will ſhut vp this Treatiſe and the whole booke: exhorting all the faithfull to make vſe of it; and the vnreformed, to repentance.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 2. Of the firſt obiection: That their needs no direction daily beſides Gods word; and therefore this is needleſſe.
               
                  ANd firſt, if any doe maruell why I write any direction at all as though God had not ſet downe in the ſcripture a way for vs all to walke in: to this I anſwere, That if that were a good reaſon why no helpe for mens weakeneſſe ſhould be ſet forth in writing, becauſe it is the ſame which is in the ſcripture; then it  ſhould follow with as great reaſon, that nothing ſhould be preached, becauſe all that which is preached (if we preach in the name and by the authority of God) is out of the ſcripture. But ſeeing there can be no doubt made of that, & therfore that both preaching & writing are ſingular gifts of God for the building vp of his church; & that al helps are not enough to hold vs on ſtill in our Chriſtian courſe: therefore all men ſee that this doubt is ſoone anſwered, & will grant, that it is neceſſary to haue daily direction for our liues drawen out of the ſcriptures, though we haue them extant among vs. This being ſo, I will proceed to ſhew the cauſe, why I haue taken in hand any ſuch thing in this booke: and will anſwere particular queſtions and obiections afterwards. I  haue conſidered,The cauſe why this worke was taken in hand. being conuerſant among the people, of whom, many haue receiued the goſpell gladly, what great wants and infirmities are among them: and as diuerſe of them conceiue and vnderſtand that which is taught them with much adoe; ſo they as hardly keepe it in memory, and therefore make the leſſe vſe of it. So that, although all things neceſſary to ſaluation and godlineſſe, be taught one time or other, where an ordinary miniſtery is; yet, as I

                   haue good proofe, it muſt be a very long time to bring the moſt part, euen of the forwarder ſort, to be able to guide themſelues, and to lay together in one ſumme thoſe things, which haue beene taught them at many times: I did therefore indeauour my ſelfe, to lay before them a ſumme of that in one view, which they haue bene learning many yeeres: that they hauing the ſame brought into ſome eaſie and familiar kinde of order, may through the bleſſing of God finde helpe and eaſe by it.
               And beſides, I haue knowen many of great forwardneſſe and ready to receiue any profitable leſſons,2. Theſ. 3.4. (euen as the Theſſolonians were) who hauing  long wandered in ſorrowfulneſſe of heart, and found much vntowardneſſe in their life, haue complained bitterly; wiſhing moſt willingly,Many for want of direction, walke vnſetletly. that they might haue found ſome direction to lead them into their way, and to hold them conſtantly in the ſame. And this they haue done, for that they were ſo ſoone vnſetled and waxed looſe hearted in a ſmall time and ſhort ſpace, although a little before they felt themſelues in ſome good caſe, euen ready and willing to ſerue God: which men being directed how to keepe conſtant, ſhall not a little be eaſed. And if you will ſay, They may heare their preachers and ſo learne to ſtay themſelues: who doth not know, that they muſt proceed in their teaching as occaſion is offered by their text; which doth not fall out commonly ſuch or in  ſuch maner to be handled, that it ſatisfieth thoſe which be in this caſe, being parhaps but touched briefely? and though it doe ſomewhat comfort them which they heare, yet it abideth not by them, through forgetfulneſſe and other occaſions; and yet there are very many that neuer heare any ſuch thing taught them at all, or to very ſmall purpoſe: and therefore if ſuch may haue ſomewhat lying by them, to guide them in that their ſo great neceſſity, ſhall it not be (thinke we) great helpe and contentment to them?
               Now if you aske,Men loth to open their griefs. why they doe not open their caſe and make their griefe knowen to their teachers: I ſay, ſome of them are aſhamed, ſome are affraid to ſhew their eſtate to others, the diuell holding them in ignorance and diſtruſt.  Againe, many of their miniſters, to whom they may haue acceſſe, either for want of knowledge, or of experience, or both, are not able; and others of ill conſcience are not willing to reſolue them, nor ſtay their mindes, but wound and vex them with mocks & diſcouragements rather, (as the watchmen which Salomon ſpeaketh of (calling them fooles for medling with the ſcriptures: and this is the comfort which they finde at their hands. Theſe things when I haue weighed and thought vpon, what light, eaſe of heart,Cant. 5.7. &. 3.3. and conſolation many of Gods deare ſeruants haue beene depriued off for want of direction, and how many of them haue walked heauily and with hanging downe of the head; and all becauſe they haue ſeene their frailty great, felt their wants many and grieuous,  and vtterly vnable, by that which they had learned, to carry forward themſelues in their Chriſtian courſe by reaſon of their ſo many diſcouragements, and the ſame not prouided againſt: I wiſhed moſt earneſtly that ſome ſuch thing might come forth, as might ſettle men more firmely in a Chriſtian eſtate, that ſuch as are willing, may be able alſo to direct themſelues in their daily cariage: which how greatly it may benefit them that haue a minde to pleaſe God, and how much more fit it may make them to profit by the daily

teaching which is among them, (that I ſay nothing what good it may doe others) it is no hard thing to iudge and determine.
               
                  This direction may helpe others.Beſides this, ſuch as finde no want of it, becauſe they know not whether there be any eaſier way to guide them, then they already vnderſtand, there is no doubt but many of them, if there were any extant, would keepe a more ſound courſe in their liues then now they doe, hauing (I ſpeake of many of them) none other helpe then their publique teaching, which in many places is both ſeldome and ſlight.
               And to ſpeake plainly, (if it be expedient to ſpeake thus: for the loue of Gods people conſtraineth me) I haue my ſelfe languiſhed long,The Authors owne experience▪
                   (though not  without Chriſt in the world, and therefore not altogether without flitting comfort) ſometimes to ſee ſuch vnſetledneſſe in my life, ſuch vncertainty in my waies, ſo oft propoſing greater proceeding and more conſtancy in that which is good, more exerciſe of my faith in praier, ofter reioycing in the Lord for the priuiledges which he hath granted to vs. Many yeeres theſe and ſuch like haue beene my deſire, and longed after: but many alterations, diſapointments, vnſetlings of minde haue come, with no ſmall heauineſſe accompanying the ſame; vntill wofull experience draue me to tie vp mine affections ſhorter, and for better ſtay of my ſelfe, to draw ſomewhat according to my ſmall knowledge and experience out of my reading, to be a more certaine  maner of direction for me through the daie and weeke, which I may aime at: and if not ſo full and perfit, as it might be, and by ſome other might haue bene penned; at the leaſt, ſuch it is as Gods word doth lay out vnto vs, and ſuch as if men were as fit to profit by it, as it is fit to doe them good, it ſhould not be as it is with many well diſpoſed chriſtians. By the which whatſoeuer I haue attained vnto, I will not ſay, but I dare warrant the carefull and faithfull obſeruer of it (the Lord being true of his word,Great gaine of the direction. who bleſſeth the meanes, which are vſed in ſimplicity) that his labour in the practiſe of it, ſhall be plentifully recompenced, yea his gaine by many degrees ſhall be greater then his trauel. This I ſay now, ſeeing by the importunity of many I haue made it cōmon to  others which I collected and gathered for mine owne vſe: and therefore I may be bold alſo to ſay, that whiles men doe ſerue God with ſome care, & being called home to repentance, doe deſire to ſet forth his glory, yet when they ſhall not propound to themſelues for this purpoſe, ſome certaine courſe daily to walke in, but goe on vncertainly, that is, one day giuing themſelues carefully to good duties, but an other day neglecting them, and following the occaſions thereof rather then reſolutely armed againſt the ſame;Hurt and loſſe for want of it. it both cauſeth great diſtraction and vnſetledneſſe in them, though otherwiſe good men, and bringeth much barrennes of heart, giueth more ſtrength to their corruption and more aduantage to the aduerſary, and therewithall depriueth them  of much communion with the Lord and comfort thereby, and cauſeth that the godly life is not found and inioied of them in many points as it might be.
               I haue ſpoken much of the priuiledges of a godly life, though no tongue of Angels can ſufficiently ſet out the ſame: yet many (no doubt) of good hope haue not found it ſo,Priuiledges not inioied without ſuch direction. for that they haue had but weake helpes to ſet them forward, in hauing their part in them, but are ignorant rather of the variety of

                   the good things, which God hath prepared for them that loue him, and therefore their faith and comfort are weake, when yet their diſcouragements and hinderances haue beene ſtrong and many. Theſe at ſome time haue felt the fauor of God ſhed into their harts, that they might not turne from him altogether: but if they haue not attained to ſome good order and ſetled courſe to direct themſelues by, they muſt needs taſt the more of the corruption of the world, be the more in ſubiection to their rebellious affections, and therefore the leſſe feele the benefit of a Godly life.
               For from whence are there ſo many heauineſſes, complaints of vnſetlednes,  inconſtancy, yea & halting with God, but frō hence in great part, that they do quench the worke of Gods ſpirit in themſelues, & cannot tel how to quicken vp themſelues againe, nor to ariſe when they are fallen, & to return when they are gone out of the way, nor to guide themſelues from one duty to another?
               I know that it is not the vertue, nor the power of outward meanes vſing, nor of any direction that can bring our liues in frame: but yet for al that,Not the bare meanes haue ſuch vertue. when they are reuerently and confidently vſed, God hath promiſed that it ſhall not be in vaine, but they ſhall auaile much to our benefit. What meant the Lord Ieſus elſe, to charge vs to watch & pray, to heare and read? and the Apoſtle alſo, in the name of God to exhort vs, whiles we are in this warfare of the world to  haue alwaies our compleat & full armour, & not to walke naked & hang that vpon the wall, but that we ſhould daily gird it vnto vs, & ſuffer no day to paſſe in the which we ſhould walke without it? and to what other end tendeth this direction, which I am now occupied about? For if euery day & oft in the day we looke not carefully that we be armed with it, let vs looke for no other frō him who is our profeſſed enemy, (& as able to hurt vs, as willing and watching for it) let vs looke for no other (I ſay) but to be dangerouſly foiled,Foiled by ſathan without this armour. as many euē of the better ſort are, though ſome of them through ſpirituall ſlumber feele it not, neither perceiue it in a long time, till it pleaſe God to awake them.
               But to returne to perſwade,Order is in all other things, and ſhould be in christian life moſt of all. that it is neceſſarie that Gods people ſhould  be daily holden within holy bounds: is it not prepoſterous and lamentable that we can ſay, that where no order is in any thing that is taken in hand, there is confuſion and danger; and yet, although there be none taken for the daily gouerning of a Chriſtian mans life out of Gods word, which without daily direction is ſooneſt out of order; yet there we ſuſpect not, neither feare any confuſion and danger? The husbandman cannot yeeld his rent, nor reape his yearely harueſt without his daily and continued labour: neither can the captaine mainteine warre againſt his enemie except he renue his band, and cauſe daily attendance to be giuen by the ſame, and neceſſary prouiſion to be in a readineſſe; and ſo I may ſay of the reſt. In like maner, the Chriſtian cannot  looke to continue faithfull vnto the end, if he ſet not himſelfe of purpoſe to continue daily his diligence in reſiſting his ſinne, and if he gather not daily ſtrength, by the continuance of ſome good meanes againſt the euils thereof. Inſomuch, that if a man had all the knowledge that many men haue, and ſhould be ignorant of no neceſſarie point of dutie: yet if he ſhould not with a well ordered minde, prouide and carefully looke for the right vſe of his knowledge euery day, as he ſhall haue occaſion to practiſe it; he might quickly

be too farre gone out of the way in ſome groſſe diſhonouring of God: which though it doe not pricke and wound them by and by, yet a time will come, when he ſhall wiſh he had borne the yoke of Chriſt, and kept compaſſe; for the end of a thing is not like the beginning.
               If any ſhould thinke me vnaduiſed to call in this earneſt manner, for daily directing of men priuately,Though publike meanes be of an excellent vſe, yet priuate neceſſary. as though I ſet little by, or made ſmall account of the helpes which they haue in publike aſſemblies; I haue ſaid before, that I preferre theſe before the other: yet it may pleaſe them to vnderſtand, that beſides the benefit of them, which is very great and ſingular, euery man ſhall finde it more then neceſſarie, that they be not idle nor vnprofitable at home  about the well gouerning of themſelues in the ſeuerall and manifold affaires of the day; and yet ſhall not this be any derogating from the other, but the fruite of it, euen as neceſſary for the ſoule, as to haue a daily good diet and ordinary for the body although it haue a feaſt once in the weeke. This I haue ſpoken generally hitherto, to perſwade many that feare God, (and yet for want of knowledge doe ſerue God very vncerteinly, and ſee not therefore the excellency and price of the eſtate that he hath called them vnto) that he hath not left vs ſo deſolate and ſtranger-like from him heere on earth, that we ſhoulde but ſeldome thinke of or heare from him;We are not left as ſtrangers to heare ſeldome from God, but to walke with him. but ſhould haue daily recourſe to him, and throughout the day be with him, and not as the wandring man, who  hath loſt his way, ſo to be at any time out of his gouernment. And that it is not onely his pleaſure, but alſo his commandement, that we ſhould ſo liue in the world, and ſo haue to doe in it, that yet all the day long (as our frailtie doth permit) we may haue our meditation on him, and on our happineſſe in conuerſing and walking ſtill with him.
               If this ſtate be thought too preciſe by ſome; let them conſider the examples of thoſe who are commended in the Scriptures for their conſtant walking with God:
                     This is not too preciſe. 2. Theſſ. 1.3. 2. Theſſ. 3.4. how they were taken vp with the loue of him, and poſſeſſed of faith, &c. for ſo the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of the Theſſalonians; that they abounded in theſe, and were ready to doe whatſoeuer he commanded them: and Dauid praied that he might not wander from Gods commandements.Pſ. 119.10. What is heere commended in them, but that which theſe miſlike and ſpeake againſt at this day in vs, who labor for ſome meaſure of it? Is that il in vs, which was good in them? There want no proofes nor examples to teach what we ſhould doe in this behalfe; but the fleſh rocketh aſleepe euen many good Chriſtians. But whatſoeuer theſe Obiecters alledge, who haue not taſted of theſe dainties, let vs be moſt glad to heare, and more glad to learne; that the beloued of the Lord may dwell in ſafety vnder his protection all the day long.Deut. 33.12. And if we haue not knowen ſo much, as that God hath left vs ſuch direction to inioy his preſence in ſome continuall maner amongſt vs: then let vs now  learne, and beleeue it, that we may reape fruite of it accordingly; and not be ſo haled this way and that way in the world with cares and vexations, and ſnared and allured with earthly pleaſures and delights; neither vnſetled ſo with vnreaſonable and vngodly perſons, that we can hardly once in the day, (yea, ſometime through the weeke) haue liberty and abilitie, ſo much as one quarter of an houre to ſolace our ſelues with holy meditation and remembrance

                   of heauenly things: for thus it hath beene with many of the deare ſeruants of God, (of ſuch ſlauery they haue beene holden vnder) who yet I doubt not but they ſhall without neglecting any neceſſarie buſineſſe, ſhake off much needleſſe tediouſnes in their liues, and ſee their eſtate much altered to the contrary liberty and holy reioicing, if they will duely regard what God hath ſaid of this daily keeping of a good courſe, and not what carnall Obiectors ſay, to diſcourage them. And thus much of the firſt obiection.
            
            
               
                   CHAP. 3. Of anſwering this obiection: That no ſuch direction can be obſerued daily.
               
                  BVt I hauing thus ſhewed the cauſe why I tooke this in hand, and anſwered them, who may thinke that no direction for a Chriſtian through the day is of neceſſitie to be impoſed vpon him: now I will proceed to ſatisfie the reaſonable about this particular direction, or the like in effect, by anſwering ſuch obiections as may be brought againſt the ſame. Some perhaps  will obiect and ſay: It cannot be daily obſerued of any man,Second obiection: This direction can not be daily kept. neither haue they heard, that good men in other ages haue beene giuen to any ſuch ſpeculatiue life, except the monks and friers, and other of that rable: they will not deny but it is good, ſometime to giue our ſelues to praier and other good exerciſes; but euery day to doe it,Vniust cauils against this direction. and to be tied vnto them and to other duties before mentioned, were a toile intolerable which no man can like of, & a taking away of all delight from our liues. Againe, they ſay: What ſhould become of mens labour and buſineſſe in the world? how ſhould it go forward? Alſo they ſay: It were a ſtrange world to ſee men liue now after ſuch a ſort, and a bringing in of Monkery againe.
               
                   Theſe and ſuch like obiections although they proceed from very euill men, and are vttered of them with a ſcoffing ſpirit; yet for want of knowledge and due conſideration, they may be at the firſt, the thoughts of many ſimple well meaning men: for whoſe cauſe I will anſwere them, becauſe I would be loath to leaue ſuch in any doubts, which might trouble and hinder them. But they who obiect thus, might more iuſtly haue alledged other reaſons, why they thinke it ſo hard to keepe any ſuch daily direction: that is to ſay,The true lets which hinder many from this courſe. partly their owne ignorance, vnacquaintedneſſe with this courſe, & vnableneſſe: and partly the taunts, mocks and other diſcouragements, which prophane and vngodly men would perſue them with, who ſhould walke ſo vnlike other men of  the world, by the practiſing heereof. Firſt therefore I will anſwere their doubt in that they thinke it impoſſible: and then their reaſons why they thinke it cannot be without great inconuenience.Anſwer. If it were impoſſible to bring our ſelues to ſuch a courſe, (for heere is no perfection to be dreamed of by me,That it is poſſible to be thus guided. Pſ. 1.2.
                   but an holy directing of our ſelues daily towards the kingdome of heauen) why would the prophet Dauid haue ſaid: Bleſſed is the man that exerciſeth himſelfe and meditateth in Gods law day and night? Alſo why would he haue

ſaid it of himſelfe,Pſ. 119.97. 
                  That all the day long he was conſidering it in his minde, that  is to ſay, meditating on it? It is manifeſt (whatſoeuer particular maner or order he vſed heerein) that he did tie himſelfe daily to this courſe, that is to ſay, to ſee that he walked homeward; that he might not be carried aſide, or out of the way, either with the deceitfull inticements of this world, or any diſcouragements: but much hath beene ſaid in the former treatiſes to this purpoſe.
               And ſuch examples this preſent age of ours (God be praiſed) doth affoord, (he vouchſafe to multiply the number of them, for one an hundred) who do ſo paſſe through the affaires of this world, that the Chriſtian life is vnto thē not in word (as it is with many which deceiue themſelues) but indeed and ſenſible  account, daily their chiefe treaſure. And all that I require is no more, but that faith and godlineſſe may be continued & increaſed in the beleeuers: and that they prouide (for the ſame purpoſe) that though the malice of the diuill doth lay many lets in their way,1. Tim. 1.5. yet that they bridle & bring vnder their corruptiōs, to the maintaining of a pure hart, a good conſcience & vnfaigned faith which worketh by loue, to the praiſe of God, & their owne comfort. The which will not be brought to paſſe through ſecurity & negligence, but whiles they giue al poſſible diligence hereunto,Forwardeſt muſt be paternes to others. & ſet themſelues in ſome good order and daily direction for the preſeruing of the ſame. So that if there be any before others in this practiſe, who by experience haue found how mightily God hath bleſſed  them in this eſtate, (who is as ready to do the ſame to the reſt that deſire it) & haue prooued that it is poſſible, yea and eaſie (through God who maketh it ſo) to paſſe the day in well doing with peace (or when it is worſt with them, to be free from euill for the moſt part) rather then weariſomely and vnwillingly (as the moſt doe:) let ſuch be patterns and examples to thoſe which are not ſo forward. Let one learne of another in meekeneſſe of ſpirit, that which he hath not as yet attained vnto: and not hold this opinion, That none can doe more then they themſelues doe, nor goe beyond them; who yet haue ſcarcely at all, or very ſlightly gone about this practiſe, themſelues.
               There is no reaſon in it, that ſuch as ſerue God in the day (as it falleth out  at a venture) without any certaine purpoſe of care,The idle may not looke for ſuch gaine, as the painfull profeſſor. What experience we ſhould haue in our liues. Note. or vſing the meanes for the quickening of their faith, ſhould either finde the godly life ſo eaſie, or be able to iudge of the beſt way to it, as they who haue painfully trauelled in it, and ſpent much time about it. For they muſt be able to report what repulſes they haue had, and how they haue recouered their ſtrength againe: what temptations, and how they haue reſiſted them: what hinderances and diſcouragements whereby they haue beene long held backe, and how they haue ouercome them. They muſt be able to ſay what hardneſſe is in the godly life, and how it is made eaſie: how flitting and ſoone vaniſhing our faith is, and how it is ſtrengthened and confirmed: what comfort and vnſpeakeable peace God  giueth his, to incourage them to goe forward conſtantly: They muſt haue good proofe of their many infirmities, and how they ſend them the more earneſtly to God in their praiers, to ſtrengthen them againſt the ſame: to be ſhort, they muſt be acquainted with the ſubtile and malicious practiſes of the diuill in ſeducing them, and with the falſhood and deceiuableneſſe of their owne hearts, and how they haue withſtood them: and how deadly and loathſome

                   the broad way that the wicked walke in, is, though it onely ſeeme pleaſant. For ſuch honour haue his Saints: ſuch grace he beſtoweth vpon them which ſeeke it of him in trueth.Mat. 2.28. Pſ. 19.11. And when God hath thus trained and made them fit for his ſeruice, then ſhall they finde great eaſe and reward in ſeruing God, and finde by proofe the exceeding benefit of a daily direction for the well ordering of their liues; yea they ſhall count themſelues much vnſetled, when any day ſhall paſſe them, which is not conſecrated to God in that ſort. Of ſuch I wiſh them to learne the way,Weake ſhould learne of others. who would gladly pleaſe God (they ſay) as well as others, but yet all meanes are tedious to them to vſe, beſides  ſuch as they thinke good, that is, ſometimes to pray as it falleth out: but as for any further or certainer courſe to honour God in, they thinke it meerely impoſſible for them to be brought vnto, and therefore needleſſe.
               And as we are wont in our matters of law to reſort to them for counſell, which are beſt acquainted with the lawes, and beſt experienced in them; and in dangerous ſickneſſes to reſort to thoſe Phyſicians, who beſides their knowledge haue bene a long time practiſers, and haue done many great cures:Beſt practiſers be fitteſt teachers. ſo in the practiſe of the rules for a godly life (all which be grounded vpon the word of God) none can ſo well teach how, as they who haue taken greateſt paines in the practiſing of them by long experience, beſides their knowledge  which they haue in common with others. And therefore we are to reſort to them as being beſt able to perſwade vs, that as we ought, ſo we may poſſibly attaine to the daily practiſe of ſome certaine duties, and the reuerent vſing of the helps and meanes for the well paſſing of the day: wheerunto, if they who profeſſe, yea and preach, could ſubmit themſelues, to learne how to be ſetled by the furtherance of ſuch as haue gone before them, both in the ſearching out the way, and the practiſe of it; there need not be any doubt, but that many ſhould both finde it, and with much bleſſing giue heartie thanks to God for it.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 4. Of anſwer to this reaſon againſt the practiſe of daily direction: That it is toileſome and inconuenient, taking away all pleaſure from men, and hinders their labours.
               
                  BVt now I haue ſhewed that it is not impoſſible,Is not irkeſome to be thus guided, but greateſt pleaſure. I will further anſwer their reaſons, whereby they are led to thinke it a toile intolerable, & that which would bring exceeding inconuenience.  Firſt therefore, whereas they thinke it would make mans life irkeſome and a very toile, to bring our ſelues to this point, that our liues ſhould be ouerlooked and regarded thorowout the day, and that we ſhould obſerue certeine rules for the well ordering of the ſame: the trueth is,Gal. 6.16. Iam. 4.17. that there is no pleaſure nor comfort in the world like it; no, nor (to them who know it ſhould be ſo) without it, howſoeuer men thinke otherwiſe. Which if I can proue, I hope they will be far from this

minde, to account it toile or weariſomneſſe. And for proofe heereof, they  may vnderſtand, that the Holy Ghoſt giueth the very contrary ſentence and iudgement of this matter. For whereas this right ordering of our liues, or framing them to obey Gods commandements, is the greateſt wiſdome, euen greater then that of the aged,Pſ. 119.99.100. Prou. 8.11. experienced, or our teachers; yet of the ſame wiſdome Salomon ſaith: All pleaſures are not to be compared vnto her: therefore if thou deſireſt pleaſure, be wiſe, and prouide that thy ſoule be ſafely kept from euill in the day, and throughout. For if it muſt needs be graunted, that it is good at ſome time; then it followeth, that the oftner and more vſually it is kept ſo, it is ſo much the better. And if it be the greateſt pleaſure of all other, to haue our hearts and conuerſation with God ſome one houre in the day: then by many degrees is it the greateſt pleaſure, if we can by any good direction obtaine it for the moſt part,Deut. 12.18. & 19. or throughout the day. Agreeably to the which, that man of God, who was ſo well experienced in theſe matters, teſtifieth,Pſ. 119.14. not of ſome one time of his life, but of ſome whole part thereof: I haue had as much delight and pleaſure in thy testimonies, as in all maner of riches. But you wil ſay: What is this to proue, that he was thus minded through the day? He ſpeaketh (I ſay) of his daily courſe in ſuch places; as it is eaſie enough to ſee,Pſ. 119.97. ver. 23. & 10. according to that which I alleadged before: All the day long is my meditation in thy law, that is, (as he expoundeth himſelfe elſewhere) caſting and  pondering in his minde, how he might keepe and might not breake it, nor wander out of the way from the direction of it. And who ſo hath any practiſe of his knowledge and experience, what reward there is in ſeruing God, doth clearly iuſtifie this to be true.
               For wherefore doth the godly Chriſtian take order to haue his recourſe to God by praier, meditation, reading, when he can haue opportunitie? wherefore is he fearefull of ill company, and deſirous of good? why dareth he not faſhion himſelfe after the world in their common prophane delights? why is the holy aſſembly of Saints moſt deſired of him; but becauſe it is the pleaſure, which he ſeeketh aboue other? when no man doubteth, but that he hath both  leaſure as well as other, and occaſions enough offered him to the contrarie, if he found not greater delight in this courſe then any other, or if there were not pleaſure in the Chriſtian life;Pſal. 88. Heb. 10.33. & 11.24. and ſo the more Chriſtian-like, the more pleaſure. Why would the beſt Chriſtians in all ages, ſuffer mocks, reproches, diſpleaſure of their friends and betters, loſſe of their goods and other liberties: and in ſuch times and places as their profeſſion hath beene purſued with impriſonment,Heb. 11.24. baniſhment, yea, and death it ſelfe; goe vnder all with free choice, rather then to inioy all other pleaſures of ſinne, as other haue done?
               
                  This is not pleaſure to all:Indeed I graunt, that this is not pleaſure vnto all: neither is that to be proued  of me; but that it is a pleaſure to thoſe which loue the Lord, & no toile to be conuerſant with him in one part of their life or other all the day long; and that with delight it may be aimed at, as at a marke, that they may pleaſe God in the things which they goe about, euen throughout the day, and may haue an eie to their actions which they doe,But onely to the vpright in hart. that they may not offend him: This vnto the vpright in heart is ſuch a pleaſure, as without it there is none to

                   them; although I denie not, but that there is much reſiſtance againſt it, partly through corruption, and partly for want of the knowledge of it: who yet when they haue further vnderſtanding, are moſt of all grieued for this, that they wandred ſo long vncheerefully, becauſe they knew no better. And as for them which are not pure in heart, though indeed they pleaſe themſelues ſome way or other, yet their pleaſures are but paine: and though they follow a way that ſeemeth pleaſant; yet the iſſues thereof are the waies of death:
                  Prou. 14.12. & 9.17. Inſomuch that not onely ſtolne waters, which are commonly most ſweet, that is, vnlawfull liberties, are mixed with poiſon; but euen the pleaſures of wealth and mariage,  which are things not vnlawfull, doe hold them out of Gods kingdome.Math. 19.23. Luc. 14.20.
               
               Thus it may appeare, that it is no weariſome thing to be ſetled in ſuch a courſe (wherein we may pleaſe God) as frailty will permit: but the ſound and chiefeſt pleaſure rather, yea and beſides, it is that onely,Godlineſſe ſeaſoneth all earthly liberties. which ſo ſeaſoneth our earthly and temporall liberties, that ſo they become lawfull and pleaſant to vs alſo; and the duties and works of our callings, that they be not (as to others) burthenſome and tedious. If all finde it not ſo, yet let the trueth remaine, and let ſuch learne otherwiſe. And if by the vntowardneſſe and rebellion of the heart, there be ſometime found vnpleaſantneſſe and weariſomneſſe in good things, euen amongſt the beſt, ſo that they be ouercome thereof:  yet muſt not the vnruly heart, for all that, be yeelded vnto, but be the more ſtrongly maſtered, and all libertie which we finde to be an hinderance from the life of godlineſſe, remooued.
               But another reaſon why this courſe is alleadged to be abſurd,Godlineſſe no hinderance to our callings: and inconuenient, is this: that mens labours ſhould heereby be hindered, and their callings neglected; and ſo pouerty grow vpon the land, and many euils thereby: which where abſurd, and not to be ſuffered. To the which it may be anſwered, that godly thrift, and Chriſtian gaining, and lawfull proſpering in the world,But the best way to thriue. doe ariſe from hence: when a man doth ſo goe to worke in the world, and follow his dealings, that he be ſure, that he goeth about them with a minde  which is at peace with God, and well ordered, that is, guided by him;Note. and when he doth faithfully and deuoutly cōmend himſelfe and his affaires euery day to Gods prouidence, and reſt therein quietly; & when he doth as it were arme himſelfe with circumſpect heed-taking and wiſe regard, that he behaue not himſelfe prophanely in the world, nor after the maner of men, but according to that which is written: Whether we eate or drinke, or whatſoeuer we doe,
                  1. Cor. 10.31. 
                  doe all to the glory of God. And when for theſe purpoſes he ſhall reſolue with himſelfe, in the moſt conuenient ſort that he can, to begin the daie in ſome Chriſtian and godly maner, as I haue ſet downe in the daily direction, that all the reſt of the day following, he may ſauour of the ſame; he ſhall in his duties  doeing about the world, pleaſe God, and he ſhall alſo (as farre as God ſhall ſee it expedient) proſper in the ſame, as it is written:Math. 6.33. 
                  Firſt ſeeke the kingdome of God and his righteouſneſſe, and other things ſhall be caſt vpon you. And this is the labour, which ſhould goe with religion. This ought Chriſtians to indeauour to come vnto: wherein although all which feare God, haue not a like meaſure of wiſdome and grace, yet let them all, wherein they want and be behinde in any part of duty, therein be willing to ſee their failings and

ſlackneſſe; and ſo ſhall it goe well with them, and they ſhall daily come forward, and be better acquainted how to doe earthly buſineſſe with heauenly mindes. And thus carying themſelues, they ſhall haue much bleſſed experience of Gods promiſes, in remembring, viſiting and caring for them ſo graciouſly: whereas on the other ſide, ſuch as riſe early and goe late to bed, breake their ſleepe often, and fare hardly and barely, (which ſort vſe moſt meanes to be rich,Why many finde not Gods bleſſings on their labours. and are moſt like to get the ſame) yet not attempting theſe things through Gods helpe, not vſually and oft crauing his grace and direction, not hauing their mindes ſeaſoned with piety and the feare of God, not being patient, ſober-minded, and watchfull againſt the euils which will meet with them, but prophane, raſh and worldly; cannot finde Gods bleſſing in their courſe. If they gaine and gather, they may (I denie not) flouriſh and proſper in the world a while; yet is all but as Iudas his ſoppe, and the Iſraelites quailes, to become bane and poiſon vnto them: the Lord hath heaped hoat coales vpon their heads, and increaſeth their damnation thereby the more ſwiftly; and oftimes,Iam. 4.1 they are needy (that is, vnſatisfied) for all their ſhifts, & therefore neuer the richer: and many of them poore indeed, putting their mony into a bottomleſſe purſe, and that although they toile for much, yet inioy nothing. Which kind of men prouide ill for themſelues many other waies, in omitting the chiefe duties which appertaine to them; for they fill their liues with much  vnquietneſſe, frettings, impatience, quarrels, curſings and ſuch like: and when death commeth, (although they be little thought on in the meane ſeaſon) theſe things will grow to ſome hard reckoning: and in ſuch the prouerbe is verified, That though they be early vp, yet are they neuer the neare. For what pleaſure doth God take in their toiling, when they goe to it like ſwine, not beginning, proceeding and ending in him, that is, by his direction?
               And whereas they apply another prouerbe in reproch to them which will firſt ſee God ſerued thus throughout their courſe, namely this: That the furtheſt way about, is the neareſt way home, with thē; they need not be aſhamed of it. For as the neareſt way doth not alwaies bring a man ſooneſt to his iournies  end, when he muſt goe ouer hedge and ditch, through mire and water: ſo they who goe roundly and directly to their earthly affaires and worldly dealings,Labour without ſeeking firſt to God, is loſſe. as ſoone as they are vp, and (as they ſay) from their bed to their buſineſſe, refuſing or omitting the daily duty of renewing their praiers, their purpoſes and care to liue godly; they may (I deny not) goe a nearer way then the other, but they doe nothing leſſe then attaine that which they ſeeke. For as all to whom I direct my ſpeech, are ſuch as would faine pleaſe God, as well as be maintained in the world; ſo they muſt looke for their ſucceſſe and bleſſing from him, and not from their owne labour, induſtry and wiſdome: and therefore they muſt daily ſeeke it at his hands by harty praier; and as they muſt not  tempt him by neglecting paines and trauell, ſo they muſt not truſt to their labour alone: for ſo they declare, that to be all in all with them, whiles they make haſt to that, and let the principall goe.
               
                  The danger of ſuch a courſe.For while they do ſo, they are ſnared by the diuill: who ſetteth, not hedges and ditches in their way, (for by them yet they might haue paſſage, though more ſlow) but he pitcheth nets to intangle them, and lime twigs to hold

                   them; that at euening they ſhall feele and ſee with heauy cheare, that hauing left God behinde them, for all their haſt they are much more held backe in reſpect of the other, who were thought to goe a great way about. For though they haue outward ſucceſſe in the things they take in hand, yet through haſt & raſhneſſe, brawles and vexations, and mindes fraught with earthlineſſe, and ſuch like anoiances; and remembring that they haue toiled as hirelings and ſlaues, and not as ſeruants to God by walking Chriſtianly in their calling, (for ſuch may goe to their worke ioifully) they finde more ſorrow at night, then the profit of the day was worth, euen in the eſtimation of common perſons,  and more loſſe of grace then their worldly gaine can poſſibly recompence. But if they ſee not their danger, or ſeeing it, if they ſleep in their ſinnes which brought it, and repent not of them; that is worſt of all.Their caſe is worſt that ſee no danger. So that oft times it falleth out thereby, that they are conſtrained by the checke of their conſcience to ceaſe from their labours for a time, or loſe ſome piece of their bodily reſt, to recouer their inward peace againe with the Lord and the good minde which was in them before, (if they be ſuch as had any better at any time, for of ſuch I ſpeake:) whiles the other who goe to worke religiouſly, and take direction from God, breake not off their labours at all, but go forward, and that in quietneſſe alſo.
               
                   Who ſeeth not now, that ſuch are further ſet backe who thinke to be moſt forward, by ſeparating Chriſtian duties from their earthly buſineſſe?A ſimile. For as he riddeth not moſt worke, who goeth to it moſt early, when his inſtruments which he ſhould vſe in the performance of the ſame, be blunt and dull; ſeeing, beſides that he wearieth himſelfe, the worke is ſlacked and marred: ſo he that will not frame himſelfe, ſo to performe the duties of his outward calling, that his mind may ſtil attend vpon God by faith, goeth about it prepoſterouſly, & ſhal find his ſucceſſe anſwerable. And if it be thus with the better ſort, iudge in what caſe they be, who, ſo that the peny may come in, care not though they be as like the oxe and the aſſe in ſenſe of good things and vnderſtanding, as they  be like vnto them in ſeruile worke and drudgerie. And by this (I hope) it appeares, that godlineſſe hinders not mens labours, neither decaies the Common-wealth. Nay who ſeeth not, that ſuch labour were rather pleaſure without perill, which worldly men are not acquainted with: and the Commonwealth conſequently, ſhould flouriſh much more, hauing a certeine promiſe of bleſſing?
            
            
               CHAP. 5.  Of an anſwer to another reaſon againſt daily directing of vs: That it would breake off all ſocietie and fellowſhip amongst men.
               
                  ANother reaſon why men cannot follow any direction daily, as is required, is this: They ſay, that it would be no world, if all men ſhould be brought to ſuch a mopiſh life: they meane, there ſhould be no familiaritie nor good fellowſhip amongſt men; one ſhould haue no dealings with another; and ſo in

time,This courſe would not breake off any lawfull ſocieties. traffique and merchandiſe would faile: and by meanes hereof, leauing of  mens callings, diſobedience to prince and lawes, pouertie, complaints, and ſuch like would inſue and follow: and the leaſt euill which were like to come of this new deuiſed fantaſie (they ſay) would be very monkerie. This obiection I do not thinke to ariſe or proceed from ſuch as know what the godlie life meaneth: but leſt it being caſt in the teeth of ſome weake Chriſtians, that this is the fruit of theſe fantaſies and reuelations, which they call Godlineſſe, and ſo hereby ſome might be troubled, I wil anſwer it therfore. Whereas they ſay, it would be a ſtrange world, if men could be brought ſo farre from the corrupt and prophane faſhion of the common ſort, that they would ſubmit  themſelues to a daily direction of their liues after the word of God: it is true indeed, that it would ſeeme ſtrange to thoſe which are contrarily minded; but that would make it neuer the worſe: for ſuch count it a ſtrange thing (as the Apoſtle ſaith) that other men runne not after the ſame exceſſe of riot that they doe:
                  1. Pet. 4.4. 
                  and therefore ſpeake they euill of them. But though it would ſeeme ſtrange, yet would it not bring an ouerthrow nor confuſion in ſtates, in order, in lawes, neither breake off ſocieties and fellowſhips amongſt men: but euery man ſhould much better carie himſelfe in all theſe, and the things themſelues be ſtabliſhed more purely, and the euill that cleaueth to them, be the more eaſilie and ſooner purged. And as for the taking away and the breaking of ill cuſtomes, the cutting off of vngodly fellowſhips, the rooting out of diſſolute merie-makings,Good to breake off all ill fellowſhips. and the corrupt and euill faſhions and talke which do driue God from mens tables and companies, it were to be wiſhed, although it ſhould be with the murmuring and complaining of many, yet that we might once ſee it amongſt vs: yea I ſay, it were to be wiſhed hartily, that the notable ill practiſes, cuſtomes and faſhions in townes and companies of men, which vphold and mainteine the olde world and curſed fellowſhips in it, were ouerthrowen, and with the tables of the money changers caſt downe: as houſes of play and baudry, where they are knowen to be; ſtage-plaies, May-games, Lord of miſrule, Morice-dancings, flockings and meetings together at victualling houſes, Innes and tauernes vſually, needleſly and dangerouſly, with ſuperfluous drinkings and drunkenneſſe, ſwearings, quarrellings, ſwaggering, deriding and diſgracing of ſincere preaching of the word, railing on preachers themſelues, and mocking of ſuch as deſire to follow their doctrine; with many other ſuch abominations: alſo ieſters, flatterers, ſlanderers and prophaners of the Lords Sabbaths, in bargaining, gaining, worldly dealings and abſence from the houſe of God, &c. Are not theſe with ſuch other, the ſcum and kenell ſtuffe that poiſon many thouſands? and are not theſe for all that, the delights of infinite people? And is the remoouing and taking away of theſe, and changing of ſuch curſed faſhions and cuſtomes into ciuill and religious orders, the  breaking off of Chriſtian fellowſhip? And as for other than it, what may better be ſpared than they? And what trafficke and merchandize is hindered by the reforming of ſuch diſorders and abuſes? And were the abandoning of theſe, the leauings of mens callings and diſobedience to prince? when who ſeeth not, that it were the way to liue in obedience, and to follow mens callings diligently? And what complaints are occaſioned heereby, but by ſuch as being

                   called from their ſinnes are not to be pitied? Indeed daily care of well liuing doth chaſe away theſe, euen as a whirlewinde: and God in his good time remoue them: that as the holy man king Dauid ſaid of his ſeruants and ſubiects: A froward heart ſhall not dwell in my houſe,
                  Pſ. 101. 
                  him that priuily ſlandereth his neighbour will I deſtroy, him that hath a proud looke and an high heart,
                  Pſ. 101.5. 
                  I cannot ſuffer; and ſuch like: ſo we might once ſee and haue them, and all of like ſort, odious amongſt vs.Godlineſſe, no monkerie. And whereas they ſay that it is to ſet vp and bring in monkerie againe, to betake mens ſelues to any better courſe of liuing, than is commonlie practiſed, I anſwer: That I can not eaſilie ſay, whether the monks  in their hypocriſie, ſuperſtition and falſe worſhip of God, were greater ſinners than theſe obiecters in their prophaneneſſe and Atheiſme, who worſhip not God at all; vnleſſe we will call a mocking of God, a worſhipping of him. And this is the anſwer, which I will vouchſafe them.
            
            
               CHAP. 6. Of the doubts and obiections which weake Chriſtians ought to propound, vntill they be ſatiſfied; namely, how they may atteine to ſuch direction daily: and  anſwer thereto: and other like, namely, that they count it hard: and what ſuch ought to do.
               
                  BVt as I haue ſaid before, (to let theſe cauils goe, as not fit to trouble them who would do well) I thinke theſe and the like,Obiectiōs of honeſtly minded. the meeteſt obiections for ſuch as are willing to learne: firſt,How they may attaine and keepe this courſe. that they ſee not how they might be able to attaine to the practiſe of any good and Chriſtian direction, and conſtantly keepe the ſame: and ſecondly, how they may, becauſe they are vnacquainted with it, be armed with patience againſt the mocks and diſcouragements  of ſuch as might diſmay them from it. For the firſt, it is meet, that ſuch as ſhall learne and practiſe it, be willing and deſirous of it:Firſt, there muſt be a deſire. which they may eaſily ſee cauſe of, if they conſider what vnſetledneſſe is in their liues, and what vnfitneſſe of minde to ſerue God, when they haue not by ſome good order taking for the ſame, reſolued and accuſtomed themſelues thereunto, that is, to walke with God euery day; and how much they are the worſe, when they haue not done ſo, but neglected the ſame. Alſo it helpeth much hereto, that they make this account with themſelues, that they deale about nothing of ſuch value or importance in the world, as ought by right to hinder or draw them from it.
               
                   And yet when they be brought to this,Secondly, ſtrife againſt ſlouth. they muſt ſtriue much againſt vntowardneſſe and ſlouth, which hangeth in their members (as if a lion were in the way:) and withall, they muſt call backe and holde in,Moderate earthly affections. their earthly affections and carnall deſires from neſtling themſelues any way here below, ſo that they be not clogged thereby and made vnfit for this worke: and then a full perſwaſion they muſt haue, that their fruit ſhalbe farre aboue their labor.Beliefe of profit hereby. And to one thus prepared, I doubt not (God working by meanes) nay, I warrant it

from God, that the rules which I haue ſet downe, or the like, for ſafe conducting  a Chriſtian in his way, ſhal be found both poſſible in the beginning, and eaſie in time and pleaſant; and the gaine of the trauell ſuch, as he will not readily loſe or forgo againe.
               
                  Impart his doubts to others.And before he be throughly acquainted with the practiſe of this, let him impart his doubts to ſuch as may moſt conueniently ſatisfie him in the ſame, and ſo commend himſelfe to the grace of God in this new enterpriſe, betaking himſelfe vtterly from his former wandring and vncertaine ſeruing of God:Take view of his gaine. and let him after a weeke, and ſo after a moneth, take view of his doings, to ſee what is amiſſe, and what is wanting, that it may be helped: if anie  ſlouthfull deferring or omitting of any neceſſary part of dutie hath beene, that it may be reſtored: if any bleſſing be ſeene thereby, that it may be increaſed by procuring the continuance of it. And when he ſhall haue had experience of good ſucceſſe therein, he ſhall be paſt the danger or diſcouragement which Iſmaels progeny (I meane the generation of ſcorners and mockers) may raiſe vnto him. For as infinite ſwarmes of vaine and hurtfull thoughts doe occupie and fill the mindes of ſuch as haue not earneſtly ſet themſelues againſt them: ſo through Gods grace, after they haue accuſtomed themſelues to better cogitations, and weaned themſelues of purpoſe from their old conuerſation, they ſhall finde occaſions enough to honour God, in doing one good dutie or other; ſo that, they ſhall neither need to be idle nor vnprofitable. Which thing if many were perſwaded of, they would both taſte and trie it; which now they doe not, becauſe (as they ſay) if they ſhould not ſuffer their hearts to wander and roue euery where as they are caried, but reſtraine them, they know not how they could liue.
               But I will proceed with other obiections which are yet behinde: among which, this troubleth many of Gods poore children, that they feare they ſhal neuer bring their harts to a daily courſe of Chriſtian walking, ſeeing they are ſo weake and haue ſo much to do in ſubduing ſome one vnruly affection. The peruerſe ſort obiect the ſame, who ſay they could like well, that men ſhould be  taught a good order & courſe, but in no wiſe can abide that it ſhould be daily & continuall: and I haue in a maner anſwered it before. For what is that which they miſlike heerein? It is not the thing it ſelfe, nor the direction for their life in generall (they ſay:) but that continuall binding them to it, which is vrged, is a wearines that they cannot beare. But to leaue them as ſufficiently anſwered before, I turne to theſe in whoſe name this obiection is here propounded,To keepe this courſe daily, not tedious. to whom this I ſay: As God in the Scripture requireth perſeuerance in a good courſe to the end; euen ſo, they which will faithfully ſubmit themſelues vnto that doctrine, cānot but like alſo to be daily ſetled in ſuch an eſtate as leadeth thereto: (for otherwiſe, how ſhall they be ſure that their maſter when he  commeth, ſhall finde them occupied, Luc. 19.13?) and if they doe ſo, the hardneſſe of it wil ſoone be alaied, and they ſhal in ſhort time find it a ſweet & pleaſant way (as Chriſt calleth it,Luc. 12.37. 
                  Mat. 11.30.) to his kingdome: ſo that the tediouſneſſe (as they count it) being taken away in great part, there is no cauſe why they ſhould feare that, as too hard, which ſhall not hurt them; or ſeeke to ſhunne that as too vnpleaſant, the benefit whereof they haue not prooued.
               
                  
                   Some ſay, they like it well, and would with all their hearts that they could practiſe this direction, but they haue ſo many lets to holde them off and cut them from it, that they doe not ſee, how they ſhall in anie meane ſort performe the duties through the day, required in it. But ſuch are to know,Notwithſtanding all lets, this courſe may be followed. that the chiefeſt lets of all from a godlie life (which be, the intemperancie of the minde, and vnbridled luſts thereof) are by this direction beſt remedied and ſtaied: the moſt of other which are outward in the world (as prouocations, temptations, and other like occaſions) are heereby alſo, and by the well ordering of the affections preuented and auoided, or the eaſilier borne.Lawfull callings, no let. And as  for the third kind, which are, mens callings, dealings, labours, which (through ignorance) many doe meane when they complaine of hinderances; are none at all, but as they are made by the vnskilfulneſſe, careleſneſſe or other ſinne of the partie which ill vſeth them. And to this purpoſe I will tell thee what I haue heard a man of good account and long experience ſay: I neuer had ſuch lets, as farre as I can call to remembrance, but if my heart had beene held in good gouernment, I might haue ſerued God with peace, and gone forward in the courſe which I propounded. Which what differeth it from that in the Prouerbes: Keepe thine heart with all diligence,
                  Prou. 4.23. 
                  for from thence commeth life? So that yee ſee the chiefe hinderances are vnfaithfulneſſe, hardneſſe  of heart, frowardneſſe, licentiouſneſſe, and ſuch like euill diſtemperatures of the heart: by meanes whereof, outward occaſions of ſinning doe the eaſilier prouoke vs; and our lawfulleſt actions which we goe about, come vntowardly to paſſe.
               But perhaps they will reply thus: We would ſometime pray or read by our ſelues, or looke to ſome other duties which God requireth, for the well guiding of our liues, when we muſt needs goe about our owne worke, or the princes buſineſſe, or ſuch like lets of one ſort or other call vs away, ſo that we cannot performe them: whereas they which are free from theſe outward buſineſſes and ſeruices, may take their libertie in theſe ſpirituall duties. But I aske this  queſtion of them againe: Why they ſhould be moſt earneſtly bent to praier and reading at ſuch times, when they ſee other duties to be laid vpon them neceſſarily? Is it not becauſe they ſee they cannot doe them, that the deuill ſetteth them forward ſo hotly at ſuch a time to goe about them, that they may thinke themſelues to be godlier then they be, and ſo be deceiued?Many be letted by lawfull impediments: And why are they not but euen halfe ſo feruent in going about reading, praying and other heauenly ſeruing of God, when they haue time and leiſure? Which if they be, it is well: let them reſt with peace therein, ſo ſhall they be the fitter to outward duties; and ſo doing, they muſt not count thēſelues letted, when they do that which is their calling: If they do not, let them wiſely marke how they  be blind-folded on both ſides; and make conſcience ſo to doe the one dutie in his ſeaſon, that the other be not counted an hinderance of them from the ſeruing of God, but be performed alſo, and that with cheerefulneſſe, when it lieth vpon them. And that which I anſwer in this one, I would haue to be vnderſtood of all other of the like kinde of queſtions: and therefore heereof enough. Onely I thinke good to put them in minde,When two duties meet. that when two duties meet together at one time, both being of great waight, that they pray God to

giue them diſcretion to conſider, which is moſt neceſſarie (alwaies following  the light which God giueth them;) and in things indifferent, to do that which is moſt to Gods glorie, their owne peace and the benefit of their brethren.
               An other ſort there is, who are not troubled about this, yet haue another doubt which diſcourageth them very much from practiſing ſuch a Chriſtian courſe. For when they heare that there muſt not onely be appointed ſet times to pray and meditate, but alſo that in our going through the whole day, we muſt watch againſt euill, and euen in particular actions be circumſpect that we ſinne not againſt our knowledge, they aske whether they may not haue their mindes on their worke, while they are at it? If it be granted them, they  aske how they ſhall doe both?Holy exerciſes and lawfull buſineſſe may ſtand together. I ſay, no ſcruple is to be made of this, but that there ſhould be a minding, and that carefully, of thoſe things which we doe, though they be not ſpirituall: neither needed there be any queſtion made of this, but that they haue after the maner of carnall and worldly men, ſo fraught and ſtuffed their heads with earthly thoughts and worldly deſires, that they cannot vnburden themſelues of them, when they pray vnto God. And therefore when he doth afterward giue them conſcience thereof and of other ſinnes, they are ſo grieued to remember their long continued offence that way, in that they were woont to fill their hearts with all ſenſuality and worldlineſſe, that now they thinke they diſpeaſe God, when they haue them ſet  vpon their buſineſſe at all: euen as he that hath abuſed muſicke, myrth or meate dangerouſly, thinks afterward, that he may not vſe them in any ſort: whereas they may vnderſtand, that there is no ſuch diſagreement or contrarietie betwixt holy things and lawfull liberties, (neither therefore betwixt ſpirituall duties, and the workes of our calling) but that there maie be recourſe had from the one to the other, without quenching the gifts of Gods ſpirit in vs. And he that doth both of them in their ſeaſon, as becommeth him (I meane with a ſingle and honeſt heart) may worſhip God in praier, hearing his word, or any ſuch like, and not be diſtracted at the ſame time by earthly  thoughts and fantaſies, ſo as they ſhould interrupt and breake him off: and againe the ſame man may be occupied in his earthly affaires and buſineſſe in ſuch wiſe, that he comming to them with a religious and well ordered heart, need not be diſtracted, vnſetled, or made vnfit thereby to other duties of Chriſtianity afterwards, nor any thing more earthly minded while he is at them. For why? euen they are the worke which God hath ſet him about: and therefore obeying him therein, he may be quiet, yea and chearefull: which God alloweth vs freely, if we could be wiſe to ſee and vſe our liberties to our good.How the godly minde is occupied in earthly dealings. For a godly minded man, who hath taſted how precious and ſweet a thing it is, to keepe peace with God in all his waies, and hath experience how ſoone his heart is drawen into the world by the deceitfulneſſe of ſinne, will  with ſuch faithfulneſſe keepe his affection knit vnto goodneſſe, as he knoweth he ought to do, that he is not drowned in the world, ſo ſoone as he is occupied in it, nor made drunke with the commodities of it (as men of the world are) ſo ſoone as he medleth with them; & yet ſhal both thinke, talke & deale about his worldly affaires as far as becommeth him. This (I confeſſe) is a rare grace & a ſingular gift of God: but yet, it is beſtowed vpon them, which make account of

                   it aboue all that is tranſitory and earthly. And it requireth eſpeciall aſſiſtance of Gods ſpirit, that a Chriſtian may carry himſelfe after ſuch a maner among men, that both the duties be rightly performed:This wiſe ioining of both, is great grace. and that we ſo behaue our ſelues, that we may with fitneſſe of minde be ready (as it becommeth vs) to worſhip God, and alſo with ſobriety to vſe our lawfull liberties in the things of this life: & eſpecially ſo, as that we faile not in the maner of doing it, that is, by doing the ſame either negligently, or vnwiſely. But theſe things being regarded, a man may be conuerſant in both duties, as I haue ſaid, in ſuch ſort as God may be pleaſed, with attendance giuen to thē, (as, labour, bargain, talke of ſuch  things as be needfull in our calling, be occupied in the affaires of the world, liue in the maried eſtate, &c.) and yet keepe his heart in frame and good order ſtill: that ſo whether we eat or drinke, or whatſoeuer we doe elſe,
                  1. Cor. 10.31. 
                  we may doe all to the honour and praiſe of God.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 7. Of other obiections of the weake: as, That they cannot ſee how they ſhould walke thus, while they liue in ſuch an euill world: and of  other like obiections, with anſwers thereto.
               
                  BVt ſome cannot be ſatisfied in one thing which I ſaid before: namely, that the chiefe let, that holdeth vs from the faithfull & holy keeping of our liues in good order from time to time, is our diſtempered heart: for they are perſwaded, how well ſoeuer they looke to their hearts, yet as long as they liue in ſuch an euill world as this is, they muſt needs be caſt backe and hindered. For they ſay, that few giue themſelues to any ſuch deuotion, as through the day to make moſt account of the life to come, and to haue their hearts occupied  about ſuch deſires as eſtrange them from the earth; but rather prouokations to euill one way or other preuaile with them: and in few places examples of goodneſſe are to be ſeene. Beſides,Many diſcouragements by bad examples. though we be well taught by the word in the aſſembly; yet abroad, the doctrine which we heare is as much diſcredited againe by ſtrength and boldneſſe in ſinne among many, and ſo it is cauſed to be forgotten and of no force: which are great cauſes why Chriſtians are ſo cooled, as they be at this day, and in no commendable ſort, ſuffer their light to ſhine: eſpecially, we wil yeeld to them, they ſay, if we will weigh, how vnfit we are for ſuch heauenly conuerſation, through our long cuſtome in darkeneſſe and ſinne. To the which it muſt needs be anſwered: that much is  in theſe, but yet not ſo much, that they might thinke themſelues to haue iuſt excuſe for their earthly mindes and faint hearts, by theſe diſcouragements and occaſions. There is a farre more excellent vſe to be made of them, and cleane contrary. Did our Sauiour teach his diſciples & the beleeuers of his time,They ſhould ſet vs forward. Deutro. 8.23. Iohn. 16.33.
                   to make no other profit of the troubles, which they ſhould meet with in the world? did he foretell them, that they ſhould find, tribulation in the world, to the end they ſhould be diſcouraged? Nay, to be of good comfort, becauſe he

had ouercome the world. When he told them, that few ſhould ſo like of the  Chriſtian way,Ioh. 6.67. that they would walke in it, did he giue them leaue to ſtay their courſe alſo?Math. 7.13. yea rather he ſtirred them vp to be the more earneſt themſelues to enter in at the ſtraight gate. So when any of their owne weakeneſſe did appeare, as pride of heart, dreaming of worldly proſperity, great want of faith, and ſuch like; did he winke at them, becauſe they had long beene accuſtomed to them?Luc. 22.25.26. did he not rather the more take occaſion to pull them out of them, ſaying ſometime, O yee of little faith: at other times, The Lords of nations ſeeke after theſe things: but it ſhall not be ſo with you, but he that is greateſt among you, ſhall be leaſt? Euen ſo let vs do: the more iniquity we behold among men, the  more let vs eſtrange our ſelues from ſuch, and haue no fellowſhip with the vnfruitfull works of darkeneſſe, and take no occaſion to be any thing more backward by that: for then, we muſt neuer looke to doe good, ſeeing we ſhall alwaies haue ſuch among vs. For there ſhall alwaies be enmity betwixt the ſeed of the woman,Gen. 3.15. and the ſeed of the ſerpent: and the dragon ſhall make warre with them that keepe the commandements of God and the teſtimony of Ieſus, Reu. 12.17: and their dwelling is, as was the dwelling of the church of Pergamus, where Sathans throne is, Reu. 2.13. But let vs take occaſion therefore to ſettle our hearts more firmely by our liuing among ſuch, in the loue of goodneſſe, and ſet more ſtore by them whom God hath raiſed vp to be as  watchmen & good examples among vs:Pſ. 16.3. let vs loue the ſaints with a more perfit loue, euen ſuch as excell in vertue, and breake not of our fellowſhip with them when occaſions are offered, leſt we haue our acquaintance with deuils.
               If any obiect and ſay: Though all be not ſo zealous as you, nor ſhew it not after the ſame manner,They that diſlike this, let thē amend it. neither follow any ſuch direction; yet they may be as well occupied, and ſerue God as well as you, or any ſuch: I anſwere, if they haue peace to Godward, and can approoue their ſtate to be good by his word, I am glad: I enuy them not: I would the gifts of God were multiplied in them ten fold: I deſire the ſame my ſelfe: mine eie is not euill, to ſee them receiue good. And therefore let vs both ioine together, and not be diuided, ſeeing we both ſeeke to pleaſe God; and let vs communicate one with the other, that one may helpe another, & both helpe our weake bretheren: for there ſhould be nothing too much if all our wiſdome and diligence were vſed, and if all the perſwaſions that we both could bring forth for the guiding and directing of Gods people in their courſe, were laid together; yea, all would be litle enough to make our ſelues fit to honour our God, and to reſiſt the euill which we ſhall meet with and be allured vnto in the world. This therefore let vs doe and bind together, if there be vpright hearts in vs both: or he that refuſeth, let him goe for a vaine boaſter.This direction condemneth not any other good courſe, but agreeth. Neither is it my meaning to call in queſtion by this direction, mens ſeruing of God, as though either none practiſed a better, fuller and perfecter; or to tie any who know a better, vnto this: but to helpe ſuch as doe ſtand in need, and to teach them to gouerne themſelues in ſome good ſort, who for want of knowledge & experience cannot (though they be neuer ſo willing) direct themſelues. If any ſee further: my deſire is, that he would in commiſeration and pitty of the ignorance and wandring courſe of his poore bretheren, impart that which God hath giuen him, to their reliefe &

                   comfort: and let this which is weakely done of me and yet ſoundly, be corrected and bettered, rather then diſliked, vntil it be made more full and manifeſt. But if in ſecret pride of heart, any ſhould ſwell againſt this, as being readier to maligne and enuy it, then to correct it: I would deſire him not to hinder and hold backe ſuch as (I am ſure) for want of ſome certaine directing of them, are much vnſetled and inconſtant in their liues, and therefore liue with the more diſcomfort.
               There are yet others, who thinke the labour to be but vaine which is taken in perſwading men heereunto: becauſe the moſt receiue not our counſell;  and they which doe, take little good by it, onely they may in outward ſhew ſeeme to goe before others. To whom I anſwere: that as I looke not that the moſt men ſhould receiue it, ſeeing I direct it onely to the children of God,Though moſt receiue it not, yet is it not in vaine. who onely can vſe it, though others may repent and be aſhamed by it: ſo I doubt nothing, but that they which doe, ſhall be much helped forward by it to practiſe the godly life with more eaſe and readineſſe, vnleſſe they be ſuch as vſe it for faſhion and ceremoniouſly; as ſome which take themſelues to be the Lords, may do. I grant it may be more profitable to one then to another,Some vſe it for faſhion. according to the diuerſe meaſure of grace which euery one hath receiued of God: but he which is a faithfull vſer of it, hauing leaſt meaſure, ſhall not goe  without great bleſſing thereby. And if ſome who would doe well, hold not on in ſtedfaſt watching againſt euill through the day, ſo conſtantly and commendably as ſome others doe; but through ſtrength and ſuperfluity of naturall corruption in them, and by outward occaſions and for want of experience, doe breake out into wrath ſometime, or peeuiſhneſſe, anger and impatience, or lightneſſe of heart and vnſetledneſſe, or ſhould offend by euill ſpeaking or ill example in their life, &c: yet muſt we not by and by conclude,
                     All not vaine, though ſome ſlips.
                     If they offend that looke to their waies, much more they that doe not.
                   that al which they doe, is vaine, and that they had beene as good neuer to haue entred at all into the profeſſion and couenanting of ſuch a courſe. But thus they ought to thinke, that if they be turned out of the way, and maſtered of their affections,  when they haue had a good regard of their liues oft times, and haue taken order in the morning perhaps to keepe their hearts diligently throughout the day; they may well thinke and looke for it, that on other daies they ſhall much more groſſely offend, and haue their mindes more violently carried to the fulfilling of their luſts, when little or no helpe hath beene vſed againſt the ſame.
               Beſides this, we haue yet another benefit by bringing our ſelues daily to conſider our waies:Gaine by infirmities. that the infirmities and wants which we haue ſeene in our liues, doe both ſhew vs, that we haue ſtill matter ſufficient in our ſelues to humble vs, and to cauſe vs to be charitable rather then ſeuere iudges of our  bretheren; and alſo that we haue iuſt cauſe to continue our praiers to God, to pardon and weaken the ſame in vs more and more, reioicing that they pleaſe vs not, nor blindefold vs, ſo, as that we be made vnwilling to ſee them: and heereby we ſhall ſooner returne, if we haue broken off our courſe through ſome paſſion ouer-ruling vs for the time, then if we ſhould in a careleſſe and negligent eſtate, haue fallen after the ſame maner. And therefore although when we haue read & ſeene what this direction is, it may raiſe many thoughts in vs againſt it, not hauing as yet any experience or proofe of it;Not raſhly reiect it. yet let vs not

doe as many will, who if it like them not at the firſt hearing, they doe not wiſely  conſider further of it, but flatly reſolue not to meddle with it: who were to be requeſted rather, if the whole ſhould ſeeme more then they could be brought vnto, at the firſt to take in hand ſome part of it, till God ſhall let them ſee further into it, and the neceſſity of the whole: although I doe not ſay, that I would giue liberty of omitting any point of it (wittinly and willingly) to ſuch as haue learned to ſee all to be needfull and neceſſary.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 8. Of the obiection of weake Chriſtians who cannot read: and another, of them that are troubled through ſome ſcriptures: and anſwere to both.
               
                  Such as cannot reade.
                  IF ye will aske, what they ſhall doe, which cannot reade, and therfore can neither inioy the benefit of this nor ſuch other helps, in any ſuch ample maner as others may: I anſwere, that they muſt needs fare the worſe for want of that gift, (although I could wiſh that many which can read, vſed it more oft, and in purer and more reuerent maner then they doe.Muſt be more diligent in hearing. &c.
                  ) But if they be ſuch as are to be  counſelled, they muſt (as they are able) prouide, that they may with more diligence giuing both to preaching, and hearing other read, and prayer, ſupply that want of theirs, as farre as may be; and if they cannot hope for to obtaine a gift of praying according to their neceſſities, then to learne ſome forme of praier, as well in reſpect of the ſhortneſſe thereof fit for their memory, as in regard of the matter, meeteſt for their eſtate and condition, as it ſhall be ordinarily and for the moſt part: and when it alters by reaſon of ſome afliction or otherwiſe, then to learne to pray according to their preſent occaſions and neceſſity. How vnſauory ſoeuer theſe things may ſeeme to ſome, it ſhal be but to ſuch as iudge after the fleſh, and like too wel, & looke too nerely to the examples  of thē who neglect theſe duties very much or altogether, to follow them. And wheras they may obiect againe perhaps, that they cannot beſtow ſuch labor vpon theſe things: I ſay, theſe things are greater then they ſeeme to make them: but for their labor, let it be ſuch as may ſtand with their callings duly followed; but let them be teachable. But if a meane gaine and commodity might be reaped by greater labour and more time beſtowed of them, then the learning of praiers, or the attaining to the ability and gift of reading would require: I thinke that neither of them both would be counted hard to come by and attaine to. In few words let them take this for an anſwere, that if they benefit not themſelues by the publique meanes by all poſſible diligence, alſo if  they be not ready to profit by the helpe of other by all good occaſions and opportunity; they muſt needs come behinde in reaping profit or fruite, and ſhall hardly grow to direct themſelues ſafely and with holy peace,Otherwiſe they muſt looke to come behinde. as it were meet for them in ſuch a troubleſome world and many waies dangerous, as they liue in.
               Some (to draw towards an end) ſay: nothing troubleth them ſo much

                   in all that I haue ſaid, as the vrging of theſe ſpeeches:How ſhall we ſerue God all day long? Heb. 3.12.
                   
                  All the day long we muſt meditate on the law: and paſſe the whole time of our dwelling heere in feare: Alſo, Whatſoeuer we do, eat or drinke, &c. And, Take heed, lest at any time there be in any of you an euill heart, and vnfaithfull, to depart away from the liuing God. Theſe and ſuch like places they confeſſe, (in their iudgement) are vrged too ſore, and they could elſe be content with all their hearts to glorifie God ſometime, and in ſome parts of their liues as they are able: but what comfort ſhall it be (ſay they) when we haue done what we can, to thinke yet, that God is neuer the more pleaſed with vs; becauſe we know we haue omitted  many things which we ought to haue done, and committed the contrarie? I anſwer: The ſenſe of the places I cannot alter; and yet I will not leaue them ſtill in their doubt and perplexitie: but for their further ſatisfying, I will not refuſe to vnfold them more clearely, and helpe them to ſome ſtay and reſolution. And firſt let them be perſwaded of this, that there is nothing in theſe or any ſuch like ſcriptures, which may iuſtly diſmay him that ſeeketh the Lord in trueth; neither is anie lawfull libertie heereby denied to a Chriſtian in ſuch benefits, as God hath left vnto him to be inioied: onely vnto the fleſh,This doctrine is hard onely to the fleſh. No time to ſinne. whereto we are not debters, are we commanded to bidde battell, and that ſo farre as of vs fraile men (but yet indued with Gods ſpirit) may be performed. Yet  more particularly to ſpeake to them, I diſſemble not my meaning plainly to be this: that if any time of the daie, or part of our life, we thinke we may take any libertie to euill and ſinne, (no not then when we haue before beene beſt occupied;Note. for after ſuch times commonly doe men moſt giue themſelues the bridle:) this cannot be done without manifeſt contempt of theſe ſcriptures, & conſequently of the maieſtie of God, who knowing what is beſt for vs, hath thought good thus to direct vs. And yet (alas) how common this is in many which goe for good Chriſtians, we may ſee with griefe: who as though God had giuen them ſome times to offend in, and ſome liberties which in his worde are condemned, (which were to make him ſaie and vnſaie: and to denie  and affirme the ſame things) I ſay, as though it were thus, they do by euerie ſmall occaſion let looſe the raine to licentiouſneſſe: and yet I denie not but that they doe many things commendably. But what doth that auaile them? For as dead flies doe cauſe to ſtinke and putrifie the ointment of the Apothecarie:Eccleſ. 10.1. ſo ſome ill parts of life and dead fruites mixed with commendable vertues, do ſpoile them of their vertue and beautie, that they haue no fauour in the ſight of God, neither giue they any ſweet ſmell or ſauour vnto men: and as the leauen though it be but a little, doth ſower and leauen the whole lumpe of dough; ſo ſome ſtrong corruptions being ſuffered to beare ſway in the life, doe corrupt euen that which otherwiſe would be good. For as it is a bleamiſh  and deformitie in nature, to ſee in a mans body, one eie or legge ſmall and the other great: ſo if there be not proportion and agreeableneſſe in our liues betwixt one part of it and another, it is an vtter deformitie in the whole.
               They thinke it harde to be bound, (they ſaie) to bring particularities of their liues vnder examination, and themſelues to be held within the compaſſe of anie ſuch rules, as ſhould debarre them of anie libertie which they ſhall thinke good for them: and that it were too fooliſh for them to thinke neceſſarie,

and too ſeruile to obey & follow them. But let them remember what they  ſaid: that they are willing to do what duties they can; and then let them heare me:Liberty to ſinne, dangerous. what ſeruitude it is, I lately ſet down; that is, only a ſtopping of the courſe of fleſh and our owne corrupt will and affections: the which yet if we liue after,Rom. 8.13. we ſhall die, and be cut off from our inheritance with God and with Chriſt. Indeed by theſe meanes, we ſhould bridle many paſſions of pride, loftineſſe, ſwelling; and breake off many boiſterous outrages which riſe vp in vs, as wrath, frowardneſſe, heart-burning; and quench manie fierie darts of concupiſcence, vncleane luſts, and wantonneſſe; with other ſuch fonde and dangerous delights, which lead men to deſtruction; and cleare our liues, ſeaſon our tongues with Chriſtian talke, as well as clenſe our hearts. And is there any man which reioiceth in the name of a Chriſtian, who would haue his libertie in theſe euils? What did I ſay? libertie? nay, who would become a bondman (for to ſpeake properly and truely, that is bondage in the higheſt degree) to his owne intemperate affections and deſires? As for the varietie of good liberties,We may vſe all good liberties. which our moſt mercifull God hath betruſted vs with, which are both manie and comfortable in themſelues, we may vſe them all in the Lord, ſo that God haue his honour thereby: but whiles we take our part in them, the Lord may not loſe his part due to him; in a worde, whiles we vſe them ſoberly, and with care not to offend, and that nothing be done againſt  knowledge and peace therein. And is not this ſufficient and enough for all men which are the Lords? I am ſure when men cannot be content to keepe themſelues at this ſtaie, as they pay dearely for euery ſtolne libertie, ſo they muſt ſay, when they haue had their mindes ſatisfied, after all: The godly life excelleth; and ſing the dolefull ſong of them who haue learned it ſomewhat too late by their wofull experience; that Meaſure is a treaſure: when their mirth is at an end. For doe we not ſee, that when Chriſtians haue walked in a good courſe for a time; and after, haue begun to ſhake off the yoke of obedience, and haue againe ſought libertie to the fleſh, alledging this: What? muſt we be alwaies pent in, to looke to our waies? ſee we not (I ſay) that God hath  in ſome houre or day,Falles of good Chriſtians by boldneſſe. giuen them vp into their owne hands, in haſte and raſhneſſe to run with greedineſſe to the fulfilling of their hearts deſire which they haue ſought? and in that one houre to lay a foundation of ſorrow for many yeeres after? But haue they afterwards in like haſte and with eaſe returned againe? Nay, then they muſt haue ſhewed themſelues wiſer than ſome, who were wiſe: and more ſtrong than Sampſon the ſtrongeſt in his time; who after he had proſtituted & made himſelfe a ſot and ſlaue to a baſe miſtreſſe, recouered not himſelfe againe, vntill he had ground in the priſon like an horſe, both his eies being put out, and ſeruing to make the vncircumciſed paſtime, who had beene the ioy and glory of the people of God. But to returne from Sampſon: haue they not tried what it hath gained them, to be at their owne hand and libertie, whiles they haue thereby runne into ſhamefull ſinnes and offences? Thouſands with griefe may witneſſe this trueth with me, and can ſay by miſerable experience,True libertie. that all ſound comfort and libertie to be deſired and reſted in, is in this: that euery one ſeeke to be contented with the libertie which God giueth him,Prou. 15.15. remembring that which is written: A good conſcience is a

                      continuall banquet. We know, that through frailtie, forgetfulneſſe and the remainder of our corruption, the beſt ſhall too oft go out of the way: therefore they need not ſeeke occaſions to doe ſo, but to auoid them rather, and ſo obey the commandement of God: Put ye on the Lord Ieſus,
                  Rom. 13.14. 
                  and make no prouiſion for the fleſh, to fulfill the luſts thereof. This I truſt may ſuffice for the vnfolding of the forenamed Scriptures, and to anſwere any reaſonable man to his full contentation. And let ſuch (in the feare of God) ceaſe maruelling, why we ſhould be ſo carefull to pleaſe God, euen through the day, and one day aſwell as another; becauſe beſides other reaſons, which in their proper place I haue ſet  downe, this is to be weighed: that Chriſtianitie is like to a trade or occupation,Chriſtianitie muſt be followed, els no good will come. wherein no good will be done, nor profit ariſe, except it be thorowly followed and with great diligence, and eſpecially this point regarded: that one thing be not loſt or neglected, whiles another is followed, nor one duetie ſlacked whiles another is performed.Note. And thus I ſhut vp my anſwer to this laſt obiection, ſaying: That the fore-mentioned Scriptures & other like them, are not fearefull to Gods children, neither ſhall need to trouble any, who will take heed that they trouble not themſelues by wilfulneſſe and groſſe negligence; but do in the ſimplicity of their heart ſhew themſelues teachable to that which they know of the will of God, although they finde many wants in themſelues,  ſo as they groane vnder the burden of them, and be truely caſt downe for the ſins which they haue committed: for the beſt are vnder no better condition, although they may excell their brethren in ſome meaſure of grace; and therefore they confeſſe, that when they haue done all,Luc. 17.10. they are vnprofitable ſeruants.
            
            
               CHAP. 9. Of the obiection: That Miniſters may follow daily direction, but yet not therefore  the people: and of ſuch as obiect, That better counſell is giuen by the authour than he himſelfe will follow: with anſwer to both: and a larger anſwere to the first obiection in Chapter 2.
               
               
                  THe other obiections which remaine, are few, and ſhall in few words be anſwered. Of the which this is one: Though you that haue nothing to trouble you, but ſit quiet at your ſtudies and leade a ſcholars life, may be fit to guide your ſelues in ſuch a maner as heere hath beene ſet downe (as indeed it becommeth you well, and all doe looke for it at your hands, who ſhould be lights vnto others:)  yet it is not therefore to be vrged vpon vs.Not onely for miniſters. Yea theſe Obiecters do further alledge: If it be hard, euen for you ſcolars & miniſters, to obſerue it, who haue ſo many helps to ſet you forward ouer we haue; there is ſmall equitie in it, that we ſhould be inioined the ſame performance of duetie which is required of you: our hinderances and lets in the world being more and farre greater than yours, and our helps and furtherances fewer and weaker, as ye know. But to theſe I anſwer: As there are more helps to the learned and miniſterie,

and fewer lets (who for the moſt part haue their liuing prouided them, and  may be much more free (as they ought to be) from earthly intanglements, than others, except they loue to haue their hands and their heads ful of worldly dealings:) ſo they haue more dueties to performe beſides theſe, which are common to all priuate Chriſtians. For they ought not to reſt in the direction aforeſaid,Miniſters and ſuch like ſhould moſt tend this. which is common to euery priuate beleeuer: but according to their ſpeciall calling, as they are miniſters, they ought to performe the ſeuerall dueties thereof publickly and priuately, both by attendance to reading themſelues, and alſo as watchmen to looke vnto others diligently, in exhorting,Ezek. 34.3. admoniſhing, rebuking, comforting and inſtructing them, as occaſion  ſhalbe offered.
               
                  They ſhould keepe a regiſter of Gods mercies, &c.Further, it were meet for them to take a view of their weeks worke at the end of it, to keepe a regiſter of Gods ſpeciall mercies and deliuerances, and another of his chaſtiſements and afflictions; and how they goe vnder them, and profit by them: that by their experience they might the better bring on others. This (I ſay) and ſome other ſuch dueties ought to be looked to of ſuch: ſo that priuate perſons need not thinke themſelues ſo ſore preſſed in reſpect of them; who if they looke well to their charge, haue a double duetie to diſcharge in reſpect of others. Although I could wiſh, that they did in practiſe and in the courſe of their liues faithfully and carefully performe that, which is drawen out in common for euery Chriſtian: for with griefe it may be ſpoken,Not to ſtumble at bad miniſters. but too truely, that many of them liue as they liſt, very offenſiuely; and both in performing the duties of their calling, and example, come much behinde many of thoſe, who by good right ought to be guided by them: but none are to ſtumble at the bad liues of ſuch, foraſmuch as there will alwaies be in the miniſtery,Ioh. 10.4. offenſiue perſons, who though they ſhould goe before the flocke,1. Sam. 2.17. yet come far behind them, to their iuſt reproach; and (as Elies ſons) cauſe their holy calling to be had in contempt, and to be euill ſpoken of: from whom the people are not to fetch their light nor to take example. For though the calling it ſelfe be moſt glorious and fit to make and keepe them heauenly  minded, namely, ſeeing their labours and ſtudies may be helpers of them to godlineſſe, whereas other mens are full of toile, and occaſions (through their weakeneſſe) to draw them to worldlineſſe: yet except they be ſuch themſelues, as haue the vpper hand ouer their mindes and hearts, and can hold them in ſubiection, and teach themſelues when they teach the people, their ſtudies will not onely be full tedious vnto them, and yeeld ſmall profit to their flocke; but alſo they ſhall be as apt to be deepely plunged in the world, and in idleneſſe and vanity, as others: which will ſurely come to paſſe, till preaching, reading and godlineſſe be with a better conſcience regarded of them, and till it be their glory & crowne to ſeeke to gaine many to God.1. Theſ. 2.19.20. So that it is cleere, that many miniſters (as they handle the matter) find it not ſo eaſie aboue priuat perſons [to liue godly,] but are far off frō keeping of a good courſe daily both in their generall & particular calling: which yet is inioined the people to doe. And as for ſuch as are more painfull in their calling, & carefull in their life to pleaſe God, though it muſt be granted, that they haue many more helps in regard of their miniſtery, then priuate men; yet it is alſo to be conſidered,

                   that their troubles and croſſes are manie more & greater then other Chriſtians are for the moſt part;Good ministers many troubles. Luc. 22.31. 2. Cor. 6.9.
                   for they are more ſhot at by Sathan and his inſtruments, they haue many diſcouragements, vnkindeneſſes offered them, and hatred for their good will and for the doing of their duty, as vnknowen though knowen, beſides their continuall care ouer the flocke of Chriſt. So that their croſſes are manie and great, and they haue need of great grace to walke faithfully and fruitfully in their courſe. Therefore let none obiect, that the miniſters (except ſome few whom God doth more ſpecially priuiledge, for cauſes beſt knowen to him) becauſe of their calling may eaſily keepe a cōſtant courſe  in the feare of God, as though they had no lets nor diſcouragements: but let them knowe, that all haue hinderances enough: and therefore according to the helpes, which God hath giuen to euery one, both miniſter and hearer, let them grow thereby, and one not looke vpon another to be cooled and held backe; but all cheare vp their mindes, and truſſe vp their corrupt thoughts, which are euer haling and carrying them one way or other,1. Pet. 1.13. and clogging them ſo, that they cannot goe forward, but are ready to ſtumble one at the welfare and good report of another; as Peter did at the liberty of Iohn,
                  Ioh. 21. 21. which he thinking to be greater then his owne, ſaid. What ſhall this man doe?
               Now as for them which will not miſlike the counſell that is giuen them in  this direction, if they could follow it:Practiſe of this. but they thinke the writer heereof to haue wiſhed better to other, then he can follow himſelfe: let them yet weigh & take in good part his loue to them herein, whatſoeuer it haue profited himſelfe: and yet though he will ſay nothing of himſelfe, leſt any ſhould thinke of him otherwiſe then he ſeeth or knoweth to be in him, yet he can put them out of doubt, that this doctrine hath beene receiued, and conſcionably practiſed of ſome, euen priuate Chriſtians to their good contentation,This hath beene prooued profitable. and (as they are perſwaded) to the plentifull recompence of their labour therein beſtowed, euen already: who yet haue good hope, that the firſt attempting of it was, as the hardeſt to them, ſo the leaſt gainfull, in compariſon of that which is to be  looked for; and that the beſt is to come. And that the certaine fruit, which they haue reaped of the practiſing it, in ſuch weake maner as they could attaine vnto, in reſpect of the vncertaine profit and comfort, which they receiued of their vncertaine ſeruing of God, before they were acquainted with it; they confeſſe (as they be able to iudge) to haue beene very great. This I ſay for their better incouragement, into whoſe hands this booke ſhall come, that they may not feare, that this is thruſt forth at aduenture amongſt men, when no proofe hath beene taken, how it hath wrought vpon any before.
               And yet this is no ſmall benefit,Singular commodities of this courſe. (whatſoeuer others haue done) that a man which deſireth to pleaſe God, may know how to behaue himſelfe in this pilgrimage  both towards God and men: how to proceed when he hath begunne: how to comfort himſelfe when he is heauy: how to raiſe vp himſelfe, when he is fallen: how to returne when he hath gone out of the way: which (through Gods bleſſing) with many ſuch fruits, he may finde heere, and inioy daily to his comfort: I ſay, heere; (yet without any arrogancy) becauſe though many good things may be reaped of many worthy mens labours, yet they haue not driuen at this one particular, Of daily directing a Chriſtian, as I haue done.

And this for the ſatisfying of thy demand concerning the practiſe of this  doctrine: and therefore feare not thou, that the Lord will leaue thee in the middle way, when he hath bleſſed thee in the beginning thereof, if thou withdraweſt not thy ſelfe from his gouernment; but he will ſhew himſelfe farre more gracious to thee, according to the praier which Dauid made in faith to him,Pſ. 71.9. and obtained the fruite of it: O Lord thou haſt beene my hope euer ſince my youth: Caſt me not away in the time of mine old age: when my ſtrength ſhall faile, leaue me not. And as this holy man of God (we ſee) diſtruſted his owne weakeneſſe, yet through his long experience of Gods fauour and kindeneſſe, conceiued aſſured hope thereof vnto his end: ſo the beſt of vs might iuſtly  feare (knowing the malice and ſubtilty of our enemy, beſides our owne exceeding frailties) that we ſhould neuer be brought in ſafety to our end; and crie out daily againſt the vnlikelihoods of continuance, which we ſee both in our owne liues,Faith ouercomes all doubts and lets. and other mens. But aboue all theſe, either temptations & afflictions, or the doubts & feares which come thereby, our faith carrieth vs to ſee into Gods minde and purpoſe, and to waite through patience for the acompliſhing of his promiſes,1. Pet. 1.5. 1. Ioh. 5.4. 1. Ioh. 4.4. accordingly as it is written: We are kept by the power of God through faith vnto ſaluation: And again: This is the victory that ouercommeth the world, euen your faith: And, Greater his hee that is in vs, then he that is in the world.
                  
               
               But yet one thing (ſeeing I ſpeaking of it before, did ſhut it vp too briefely) remaines neceſſarie to be anſwered more fully. For when they heare the name of direction (though they who read the whole, may eaſily ſee what I meane thereby) they demaund thus: What? is there any other direction, then the word of God? And is that now at the firſt made our direction? But what Chriſtian hath not laboured to follow that in all ages, when no ſuch inuention as this, nor no ſuch new found out direction, as yee mention, was knowen? vnleſſe perhaps yee haue found out any new thing beſide the ſcripture; or, you ſee that in the Scripture, which none before you ſaw. I anſwer, that neither doe I vrge any other then the word commands,No other direction then Gods word. nor arrogate no  skill, to teach and guide mens liues, then other of my brethren, who do ſoundly and conſcionably obſerue in reading the Scriptures, haue found out and do teach: and that is, That euery day the ſubſtance of godlineſſe ought to be practiſed of euery true Chriſtian; and that according to his knowledge, hee ſhould holily and religiouſly indeuour to make the ſame conſcience of his thoughts, words and deeds euerie day, which at any time or any day he hath done, when he looked beſt vnto them. And becauſe the rules of Gods word, & practiſes of mens liues do not ſo commonly & eaſily meet together; but euen among the godly it is much complained of, that they moſt hardly can faſten vpon a good courſe, and that euen the very knowledge of it, for want of plaine  and daily teaching, is in many places much wanting: therefore I ſay further, that the frailtie and weakneſſe of ſuch doth require, that there be ſome helpe miniſtred to them by ſuch as haue experience: and that which is ſufficiently taught in the Canonical Scripture, heere and there for the directing of them, had need to be gathered together both plainly and plentifully in one Treatiſe for them, to haue it at hand by them, and to read oft, as they ſhall be able, and

                   ſhall ſee it neceſſarie: and not to ſend honeſt and well diſpoſed Chriſtians, to ſeeke for euerie inſtruction which they ſhall haue need of, to euerie booke and chapter of the Bible: which neither God doth inioine them, neither they could poſſibly finde, though they had leiſure, no not one of a thouſand, but are to be helped by the ſermons and writings of their teachers. For as no man will ſay, there is no vſe of the Apothecaries ſhoppe to fetch thence roots and hearbs for neceſſarie vſe, becauſe they grow in fields and gardens: ſo neither is the writing of particular treatiſes needleſſe, although all neceſſarie points of inſtruction are to be found in the Canonicall Sciptures.
               
                   And as the ſermons of many haue bene penned to good purpoſe,Chiefeſcope: How to liue holily alwaies. to helpe ſuch as are well diſpoſed; ſome directing particularly how to praie; ſome how to receiue the holy communion; ſome how to faſt, &c. ſo I haue laboured in this treatiſe to direct men how to liue in this preſent world, ſo as they may walke with God: euen by bringing them from a generall & confuſed thought of Chriſtianitie to a daily and particular care of godlineſſe throughout their whole courſe. And ſeeing (as our Sauiour ſaith) The light of the body is the eie; ſo the light of the whole life, is the effectuall and powerfull knowledge of Gods will, and a well ordered heart, and gouerning of the vnruly affections: therefore I haue heerein declared how ſuch knowledge muſt be ſought, and  the heart of a Chriſtian be daily gouerned in the cogitations and deſires of it, that they may draw the life in the ſeuerall actions and parts thereof vnto the obedience of Chriſt. Yet I denie not, but that men of experience, who haue long accuſtomed themſelues to the daily and true feare of God, may direct themſelues better, then that ſuch ſhould need to tie themſelues to theſe rules or ſuch like of another mans drawing; who if they haue learning, and doe keepe a daily obſeruing of their waies and affections, ſhall be beſt able thereby to gouerne and guide themſelues: of which ſort, I wiſh there were many, who could helpe forward other, rather then ſtand in need of helpe themſelues. But too few there are of them: for although many for their knowledge  might, yet they doe not ſo narrowly looke to themſelues, how they obey that which they know, but that a direction drawne out of the worde of God by another mans labor & induſtry, may do them good. Among whom, if there ſhould be ſome, who ſhall condemne this my writing as curious, (as there are many who cannot thinke any ſuch doctrine neceſſarie) I reſt in that which hath mooued me to take it in hand.
               The obiections which remaine, are in regard of the perſons and ſtates of men: as, the mightie and the meane, the ruler or magiſtrate, the poore ſeruant, labourer and workman, the traueller, or whoſoeuer he be, or in what ſtate ſoeuer, hauing his hands full of buſineſſe,Lawfull calling and buſineſſe hindreth not this direction. (ſo as his calling be allowed of  God, and profitable to men) that which hath beene anſwered to the former obiections, may fitly ſerue for them: Namely, that all being teachable, and ready to heare what the Lord hath to ſay to them, may ſerue God daily by walking diligently in their calling, and minding their worke whiles they be about it: ſo as they remember & keepe this in firme perſwaſion,Be perſwaded that thou pleaſeſt God in that which thou doſt. that they labor & take paine therein, becauſe it pleaſeth God they ſhould do ſo: and withall, that they be watchfull to practiſe in their labours, all vertues, and bring

foorth the fruits of the ſpirit,Be watchfull to practiſe the vertues of patience, &c. as occaſion ſhall be offred. as occaſion ſhall be offered; that is to ſay, patience, when they be prouoked to the contrarie, with long ſufferance, meekeneſſe and humbleneſſe to hold vnder their proud, boiſterous and rebellious hearts; and contentation in the bleſſing and ſucceſſe that God giueth them, with the like; as faith, hope, loue, peace, &c.
               To be ſhort, euery true Chriſtian may as he ought, keepe a daily courſe of liuing holily, righteouſly and ſoberly, though not all in a like meaſure and degree, yet ſo, as God may be pleaſed, his owne heart quieted, and others by his example not iuſtly offended, but edified: which is the thing that we ought all to propound to our ſelues, and aime at. And laſt of all, whereas it may be  demaunded, what ſicke perſons ſhall doe, and whether their conſciences ſhall be tied to ſuch rules, when paines and diſeaſes giue no libertie to the minde to thinke of anie thing but the greatneſſe & extremitie thereof; and when praier it ſelfe, eſpecially long continued, cannot be admitted, no not of them who haue yet in their health praied oft and feruently, and with delight: to them I anſwer;Direction for ſicke perſons. That if the diſeaſes and kindes of paine be ſuch, (as there are manie ſuch) then know we that the direction fit for ſuch, is to keepe faith, hope, peace with God, and patience, with meekeneſſe and thankfulneſſe: to watch for this,1. Cor. 10.13 and lift vp the hart as oft (though briefly) as they can, by praier for this grace, and to hold out contrarie rebellion (euen as the martyrs did in their  extremities) the Lord hauing promiſed that he will lay no more vpon them, then they ſhal be able to beare: and yet euen this poore watch keeping (for ſo it will ſeeme to them) ſhal be a practiſing of that direction daily, which I haue made mention of, though it is not to be looked for, that the ſicke and diſeaſed can affoord that liberal ſeruice to God, that others may, who are in health. As for thoſe who are diſtracted and bereaued of their ſences and vnderſtanding, (which may be the caſe of the deareſt ſeruants of God) there is no queſtion to be mooued about them: In the faith wherein they liued, they ſhal die & be accepted. And for other, whoſe ſickneſſe and diſeaſes ſhall not be ſo painful as theirs before mentioned, they beſides that which hath bene preſcribed  to the other, are to take the benefit of reading by the helpe of others, with conference, and of meditation alſo, and more long continued praiers. Which grace with that which is meete for euerie other in his eſtate,Iam. 1.5. God, who giueth plentifully and caſteth none in the teeth, vouchſafe to graunt to all that deſire it, for his ſake in whom he is well pleaſed, Ieſus Chriſt the righteous.
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. 10. The concluſion of the whole Booke: containing an exhortation to good and bad.
               
                  ANd thus much I haue thought good to ſay of the doubts, obiections and cauils which may be raiſed from or by occaſion of the former doctrine, as alſo of the anſwers therto. And now  to ſhut vp this Treatiſe and the whole Booke, for concluſion, a few words in the way of exhortation I adde both to the godly and godleſſe: and ſo I end. To them I ſay this:Exhortation to the godly. Seeing you haue ſome experience already, that it is no loſt labour to liue vnder gods protection and gouernment, but that in ſeruing him deuoutly there is great reward, beware yee waxe not ſlacke and colde in the courſe wherein yee haue begunne. And ſuch of you, as haue knowen this point of trueth, and made conſcience of the ſame to practiſe it, I meane euery day, and throughout the ſame, to ſet your ſelues to walke with God, (which many and thoſe alſo well minded haue not done,) holde on your courſe and be not wearie of well doing; for yee ſhall  reape the fruite thereof without wearineſſe:Gal. 6. yee haue borne the greateſt brunt already, while liuing among many Atheiſts, papiſts and carnall Goſpellers, yee haue receiued their liuerie and cenſure, and with all diſgrace that might be, (vnder the Goſpell) haue reprochfully had the odious names of Preciſians and Puritanes, Hypocrites and ſedicious perſons, giuen vnto you: but if taunts, mocks, reproches and diſcouragements haue not turned you out of the way, nor cauſed you to waxe faint in your Chriſtian courſe, neither let any other thing heereafter vnſettle you, but holde out the confidence of your faith, and reioicing of your hope vnto the end: and ſo doing, I pray God,Heb. 3.6. 3. ep. Ioh. 2. that yee may proſper and fare well, as your ſoules ſhall proſper.
               
                   And whatſoeuer knowledge of gods will yee haue found by diligent ſeeking of it, and hidden the ſame in your hearts, as treaſure in the ſafeſt place,Pſ. 119.10.11. to the end yee might not ſo m
                     •
                  ch as wander from Gods commandements, praiſing him for the ſame; yet pray ſtill to God, as the bleſſed of the Lord haue done,2. Pet. 3.18. ô teach vs ſtil thy ſtatutes: and grow in grace & in the knowledge of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. The blinde world ſeeth not the happie end of that to you, which ſeemeth to them to be the greateſt miſerie, whiles yee arme and ſettle your ſelues to walke on conſtantly in the courſe ye haue begun. And God knoweth whether he hath giuen that grace vnto you, to a further end then they once thinke of: that is to ſay, that when they ſhall ſee God to bleſſe you therein,  many of them which are as yet of the ſynagogue of Sathan,Reu. 3.9. which call themſelues Iewes, and are not, but doe lie, may come and worſhip before your feet, and know that he hath loued you: yea, it may come to paſſe, that when they ſhall after better and more mature deliberation, ſee and be conſtreined to ſay, God is with you of a trueth, that tenne of them may take one of you by the skirt and ſay: We will goe with you, for we haue heard that God is with you:Zach. 8.23. Nay it is certaine, that your light ſo ſhining as hath beene ſaid,Math. 5.16. 
                  many ſhall ſee

your good works and glorifie your Father which is in heauen. More I will not  ſay to you.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     uch as looke 
                        •
                     ot to their 
                        •
                     aies daily,But to proceed: ſuch of you as haue not extended your care of liuing godly to euery day nor throughout the ſame; but haue taken more liberty to your ſelues then God alloweth, this I ſay to all ſuch: If you haue done ſo through ignorance,Either through 
                        •
                     gnorance, and that God hath reuealed no further light vnto you, who yet were ready to do whatſoeuer you ſhould heare to be commanded you of him; be not diſcouraged, your ſinne hath beene the leſſer, and God will not impute it to you, nor lay it to your charge. Onely ſhew that ye did it ignorantly, heereby, that now yee know God requireth it of you, that your care ſhould  continue one day as well as an other to looke to your liues and particularly to obſerue them, that now (I ſay) yee doe ſo, and follow conſcionably that, which yee ſee to be your dutie, as yee did before in that which he knew. And ſo ioine your ſelues in your practiſe with your bretheren before mentioned: and all that is ſaid to them,Or an ill conſcience, when they doe or might know their duty; take it as ſpoken vnto you. But to others of you, who feare God and know it to be your dutie to make conſcience of your waies one day as well as another, and yet did it not; or if you were ignorant of it, yet yee made no haſt to know more then yee did, leſt yee ſhould anſwere for more then yee were willing to doe:Their ſinne is great. the ſinne of both ſorts of you is great, and doth crie to God for puniſhing it, and he hath hard the crie of it againſt you, and  hath a controuerſie with you for it; as he ſaid in the ſame caſe to the church of Epheſus,
                  Reu. 2.4. (though yet God was worſhipped truely of it, but not indeed with zeale, and feruently) I haue ſomewhat against thee. And that which Saint Iohn ſaid to them,Therefore repent. I ſay vnto you: Remember from whence yee are fallen, and repent, and doe your former workes, or elſe God will come againſt you ſhortly.
               
               For indeed it is not meet, that ſuch as at the firſt inlightning of them by faith through the preaching of the goſpell,To forſake our firſt loue, what. could not ſatisfy themſelues in being thankefull to God for their deliuerance which they ſaw: ſhould after, make a common matter of Gods loue, and leaue their feruency in honouring him, and their firſt loue to him, which they thought ſometime could neuer be  enough.They ſmart who doe ſo. And therefore it is not to be doubted, but that ſuch haue manie complainings of their looſeneſſe and ſecurity, and manie accuſings of themſelues, when they ſmart for ſuch negligence and boldneſſe in ſinning againſt God, by ſuch corrections as he doth inflict vpon them. And to omit all other (for there is now no time to mention manie) euen this is one: that whereas manie of them, who while they walked vprightly, walked ſafely, yet ſince they waxed more wearie of Gods ſeruice, they were driuen manie times to contrarie ſtreights, complaining that they could not finde the comforts in Gods word and promiſes, which they were wont to inioy. And who doubteth, but that it muſt needs be ſo? For although ſome take diſcomfort without any iuſt  cauſe, either when they cannot doe the good they would, or when Gods hand is vpon them by ſome ſore afflictions; in which caſes their griefe ought not to exceed: yet that it doth ſo, when men walke not ſoundly with God, and follow not that which they know they ſhould, what maruell is it?
               
                  Amend, and that ſpeedily.It is their wiſdome for both to amend, and that ſpeedily: the one, his error, that he knew not; but both of them, their careleſſe halfe-ſeruing of God which

                   they had offered him, and to bring themſelues to this, that they hold and account it their greateſt worke they haue to doe, and the chiefeſt care, that they be affraid to offend continually and euery day: yea and for this cauſe, that euen their reioicings be in trembling. This is that, which they muſt indeauour after. And to conclude my ſpeech to them,More cauſe to looke to our ſelues then heretofore. let this that I ſay be regarded the more, by how much they are in greater danger of the diuils deceiuable allurements, which now in this our renued peace and longer hope of the continuance of it, they lie open vnto. Seeing it will be plauſible, not onely to the bad, but alſo to the better ſort, that now we haue eſcaped the perill which we feared  when the yeares of our late deceaſed Soueraigne the Queenes Maieſty grew full, and therefore not like long to continue: now (I ſay) we hauing obtained of the Lord this mercie, to haue a religious and godly king to ſit vpon the throne, and to defend vs, it will ſeeme a needleſſe matter to looke ſo narrowly to our ſelues as then we did. But let all ſuch know (howſoeuer others haue no eares to heare it) that if, now our feare of earthly danger is taken away in ſome ſort, we increaſe not and double our feare of offending God;Duble our care & thankefulneſſe: and alſo if with more inlarged hearts we ſet not our ſelues daily (as we haue good cauſe) to teſtifie our thankſgiuing, by all poſſible fruites thereof, with honeſt and blameleſſe conuerſation: I doe them to vnderſtand,Or elſe the end ſhall be worſe then the beginning. Amos. 3.2.
                   that the laſt end of theſe bleſſed  times will be worſe to them, then the beginnings of them were, when they had not yet ſo deepely ſinned: And it will be verified in them, which was ſpoken in the daies of the prophet Amos to the children of Iſraell: You onely haue I knowen of all the families of the earth, and therefore I will viſit you for all your iniquities.
               
               Now I haue ſpoken to the Godly, I turne to the other, who either haue onely a falſe perſwaſion of their ſaluation; or elſe, confeſſe that they haue no knowledge what ſhall become of them after this life. Both ſorts are earneſtly to be deſired, to conſider in what fearfull eſtate they be, who hauing not made ſo much as a beginning in the practiſe of a godly life (for ſo it may truely be  ſaid, if they haue not true and vnfaigned faith) are farre off from this daily walking with God, which I haue ſhewed to be required by him of all his faithfull ſeruants. They are alſo to weigh, how they can anſwere this ſaying of the Lord Ieſus: Except yee repent, yee ſhall all periſh: And that of Saint Peter: If the righteous be ſcarcely ſaued, where ſhal the wicked & vngodly appeare? For beſides that their eſtate ſhall be in the world to come, eaſeleſſe and remedileſſe, what is it that they deſire heere, for the which they can be content to debarre themſelues of the bleſſed immortality of the ſoule, and the glorious reſurrection of the body, and to goe to the place of torment? doe they not ſee the ſlippery and vncertaine condition of all things heere below? and that they cannot promiſe  themſelues continuance in one eſtate till the next morning? and that they are (whatſoeuer they imagine) without God in the world, the vileſt of all creatures, the moſt curſed, except the diuils, and yet diuels incarnate themſelues? And if they thinke they may repent when they wil, (beſide that late repentance is dangerous, if they might attaine to it) doe they not ſee, that they ſhut vp the way thereto from themſelues, whiles they may heare the lord ſpeaking thus to them: Becauſe when I called vpon you, yee would not heare, you ſhall

cry your ſelues, and I will not heare ſaith the Lord? And if they ſhould perſwade  themſelues, that their ſinnes are not ſo great: what is more ridiculous? And what ſhould I ſay more? For if it were but the depriuing themſelues of the infinite good things which are to be inioied euen in this life, they are worthily to be reprooued and chalenged by that ſpeech of Salomon,Prou. 1.28. 
                  O yee fooles, how long will yee loue fooliſhneſſe, and yee ſcorners delight in ſcorning, and yee vnwiſe hate wiſdome?
               
               And as great folly it is, to hope that puniſhments and fearefull and troubleſome times heere, ſhall paſſe as they haue done, euen like vnto a ſhower of raine. But as Noah told the people of the old world, that when God meant to  bring the flood that ſhould couer the earth, it ſhould raine without intermiſſion forty daies and forty nights; which the people thought would not haue beene ſo,Deſtruction commeth ſpeedily. but it did come to paſſe: euen ſo, when God will bring their deſtruction, it ſhall come ſwiftly as a whirlewinde, and conſume them vtterly, as the fire doth the ſtuble, before it make an end. And as Nabuchadnezzar had twelue moneths granted him to repent in, but at the end of them, when he went forward in his ſinne, euen while he was priding himſelfe in his great Babel, the ſame houre he heard Gods ſentence on him, and had it executed; that he was driuen from men, and did eate graſſe as the oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heauen, till his haires were growen as eagles feathers, and his  nailes as birds clawes: ſo God will ſurely come and not delay, at his appointed time, and doe as he hath ſaid, to the ſonnes of men who are workers of iniquity, and they ſhall not eſcape: and in the meane ſeaſon their damnation ſleepeth not.
               
                  Why God dealeth ſo.And why will God deale thus with them? Verily becauſe they by continuing in their ſin, put him in minde of the iudgement threatned againſt them, to execute it: whereas a man would thinke, that ſo many examples both in ſcripture and in their owne experience, wherein they haue ſeene the fearefull execution of his threatnings after mens ſin hath growen to ripeneſſe, ſhould  driue them to preuent their owne deſtruction. And as none are without warnings one time or other, and thoſe alſo feareful ones for the time, by ſickneſſe, diſeaſes, feare of death, wounded conſciences and other ſuch accuſations: ſo a man would thinke, in the time wherein they are ſent, that they would remember ſuch warnings while they liue,Gods warnings ſoone forgotten. and neuer forget them: but like a wonder that laſteth but nine daies, ſo is there repentance, which vaniſheth awaie as the dew of the morning by the heate of the day. I would haue thought my ſelfe, that many monſtrous perſons whom I haue viſited, when Gods wrath vpon them cauſed them to cry out, and promiſe amendment, would haue proued rare examples to others, of true conuerſion to God; but to my great griefe, and to teach me experience what becommeth of ſuch vntimely fruites  they haue turned backe againe, as an arrow from the ſtone wall, and as the dog to his owne vomite: which cauſeth me to write that, which I haue often vttered with an heauy hart, That we had need to haue the doctrine of repentance ofter then any thing elſe, for that ſinne being rooted ſticketh ſo faſt. If we be warned of any thing but ſinne, one warning will ſerue: but many hundred ſermons cannot purge that out. For when they heare that which ſometime caſteth

                   them downe, yet as though they had beene beſide themſelues while they were in ſuch good moodes, they come to themſelues againe, that is, to their old courſe, and ſay: Shall we forgoe our pleaſant life, our mery companie, our braue ſtomacks which make vs famous, and to be ſpoken of? yea the meaneſt haue ſomewhat to hold themſelues in, as it were in chaines, that they may not returne to God leſt he ſhould ſaue them.
               But now I haue ſhewed them their eſtate, euen their ſhame, and the woe which they are in, and what variety of ſpirituall and heauenly delights they haue forgone by refuſing to walke within the compaſſe of Chriſtian duty from  daie to daie, (which ſweetneſſe of holy delights God giueth his ſeruants as a taſte of heauen in this life) what remaineth but this: that all (which will not ſhew themſelues deſperate, & wilfully to ſeeke their owne confuſion) conſider this, though they haue long forgot God, and lay it to heart: namely,Lay it to heart. that they ſay with the apoſtles euerie one ſeuerallie, when Chriſt their maſter told them that one among the reſt ſhould betraie him: Is it I maſter? and with Paule,
                  Math. 26.22. when he was ſmitten downe at the gates of Damaſcus: Lord, what wilt thou haue me to doe? yea and let them doe as the ſeruants of Benhadad:
                  Act. 9.5. when they were in great feare of their liues by the king of Iſraell, They put halters about their necks, and came and humbled themſelues before him,
                  1. King. 20.32. and ſaid they were  his ſeruants, to the end they might finde fauour at his hands: Thus (I ſay) let them ſeeke the Lord while he may be found, and ſay: Spare thy people, ô Lord, and be no longer angry with the ſheepe of thy paſture. But let them doe it in trueth, till the promiſes of God be beleeued of them, and applied to them, piercing to the heart, and taking hold of the affections, ſo that they may ſee themſelues to be of the number of Gods people, and to goe beyond all reprobates; and till the ſame word of God which they haue heard preached, hauing beene the ſeed of ſaluation to them, may be the mould of their conuerſation alſo, which they being caſt into, may be faſhioned after the doctrine of it: And the rather, for the renued peace and defence of the goſpell, by the happy  ſucceſſion of our moſt gracious Soueraigne the kings Maieſtie, as well as the hope we haue for the time to come, of liuing ſafely vnder our vine & figgetree:Deutr. 28.46. leſt if they ſerue not the Lord with ioy and a good heart for all ſuch good things, they doe procure ſuch plagues, as ſhall manifeſtly ſhew that he is angry with them. Now to ſhut vp all: if it be ſaid to me, that I haue ſhewed, how men may liue happily, but nothing hath beene ſaid about happie dying;Pſ. 37.37. be this for anſwere: An happy life bringeth an anſwerable death, and the learning and accuſtoming of our ſelues to die & contemne the world while we liue, ſhall lead vs the way to eternall and bleſſed life when we muſt die. For that knowledge, faith, hope and other grace is  to vphold and guide vs at death, which was the ſtaffe and ſtay of vs in our life: which God ſhed plentifully into our hearts both in our life, and at our death, to make vs bleſſed in both. And of this Treatiſe, and of the whole booke thus much.
            
         
         
            
            A SWEET MEDITATION OF THE AVTHORS, (LONG AGOE) of the benefit of reading, conference, muſing on holy things, and praier: conteining a complaint, that theſe holy exerciſes are neglected for that which is worſe than nothing, euen mens ſinfull will.
            
               1
               OH, what a bleſſed thing it is
               with godly learn'd to talke,
               By reading and by conference,
               both as we ſit and walke!
            
            
               2
               And oft to thinke vpon the ioy
               by God for his prepar'd,
               And eke to pray with groanes to him!
               the like hath not beene hard.
            
            
               3
               It doth reuiue our hearts moſt dull,
               and bring our mindes in frame:
               It doth indue our ſoules with light,
               made fit to praiſe Gods name.
            
            
               4
               It cauſeth vs our time to ſpend
               in fruit, and heauenly ſort:
               It keeps from euery euill way,
               and ſo from ill report.
            
            
               5
               It holds our minds frō earthly thoghts
               and vanities moſt vaine:
               It doth become pleaſant and ſweet,
               inſtead of irkeſome paine.
            
            
               6
               By this, ill tidings are not fear'd,
               afflictions are not heard:
               But from impatience and ire,
               hereby we are preſeru'd.
            
            
               7
               By meditation and reading,
               with prayer annext thereto,
               We make our gaine of that which we
               are loth once to forgo.
            
            
               8
               It maketh vs a ſauour ſweet
               in places where we come;
               That ſome are gain'd to God thereby,
               and folly hath no roome.
            
            
               9
               Bleſſed is he whoſe portion this,
               in ſtead of toile is giuen
               Whereby ſome cannot read a line
               from morning vnto euen.
            
            
               10
               And as his lot in fairer ground
               is caſt whom this behighteth,
               In reading and in ſtudie ſweet
               that ioyfully delighteth:
            
            
               11
               So he that ſeeth not this grace
               and priuiledge moſt great,
               Sorrow and ſhame ſhall him purſue,
               and folly be his meat.
            
            
               12
               I ſpeake of thoſe whoſe calling is
               by learning for to liue:
               Whom God would haue be free from world,
               and good example giue.
            
            
               13
               And ſo of euery one, as he
               hath liberty and leaue,
               That he do not for fond delight
                     •
                  
               
               himſelfe hereof bereaue.
            
            
               14
               But Lord, what griefe it is to thinke
               that this ſo happie a lot
               Should be trod downe, as pearles of ſwine,
               of many a drunken ſot!
            
            
               
               15
               That this deceitfull merchandiſe
               of profit and of gaine,
               Should darken ſo & blinde mens eies,
               that they ſhould loath this paine:
            
            
               16
               That ſome ſhould dreame of honour high,
               and of promotion, ſo
               That this ſweet ſtate with all her fruits,
               they ſhould gladly forgo:
            
            
               17
               That neither Scripture giuē by God,
               nor books by learned made,
               Can cauſe them be in loue with them,
               and ſo forſake their trade.
            
            
               18
               Indeed it doth require the heart
               from euill to be brought,
               That louers of pleaſures more than God,
               may come to better thought:
            
            
               19
               I meane, that they may ſin abhorre
               of euery loathſome kind:
               And that their chiefeſt ioy may be,
               from thence to weane their mind:
            
            
               19
               And with no leſſe delight of heart
               they wiſdome may imbrace,
               Till godlineſſe hath got in them
               a roome and ſetled place.
            
            
               20
               Such ſhall it finde a pleaſure ſweet,
               their yeeres and time to ſpend
               In authours holy and diuine,
               vntill their life do end.
            
            
               21
               And ſuch therefore may be full ſure
               the forenam'd fruites to reape:
               And to inioy all good delights,
               in meaſure and in heape.
            
            
               22
               If any thinke this too great toile,
               and ſtate of life to hard:
               Let him againe thinke, that full great
               and ſweet is the reward.
            
            
               23
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   for my ſelfe, with Salomon
               
               this one thing I may ſay:
               Tha
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   haue had experience
               of 
                     〈◊〉
                   a happy day:
            
            
               24
               Such as deceitfull world doth yeeld
               to ſuch as it imbrace;
               Yet neuer ſaw I pleaſure like
               vnto this heauenly grace.
            
            
               25
               What did I ſay, Not like to it?
               no, nor to be compar'd:
               For one it yeeldeth twenty fold
               in pleaſure and reward.
            
            
               26
               And leſt I ſhould be thought to ſay
               (like to the Poets vaine)
               More then the truth in praiſe therof,
               and ſo ſhould ſeeme to faine:
            
            
               27
               Full many a thouſand, euen of them
               who haue their time ill ſpent,
               And vnto vaine delights their yeres
               and all their ſtrength haue lent:
            
            
               28
               And haue not choſe the better part
               in wiſdome for to grow;
               Haue cri'd out fearefully at length,
               and ſaid: It hath beene ſo.
            
            
               29
               All pleaſure, Folly they did call,
               which heeretofore they found:
               And ſorrow'd, that they had no part
               in that which was moſt ſound.
            
            
               30
               They haue cried out of idle life
               and of their youth miſpent:
               That to the reading of good bookes
               their hearts they haue not bent.
            
            
               31
               For what though men ſhould ſet themſelues
               to ſeeke a pleaſant life:
               In all things, eaſe and peace to finde,
               and to be voide of ſtrife?
            
            
               
               32.
               Full true it is, that without this
               their pleaſure is but paine:
               Right ſoone it ſhall depart from them
               and ſorrow come againe.
            
            
               33
               Where are the mighty and the proud
               and flanting ones become?
               Some 100 yeeres agone they died,
               and ſuch as had their roome.
            
            
               34
               The rolls of kings and princes great
               and chronicles of late,
               Record to vs full many a one
               who liu'd in pompe and ſtate.
            
            
               35
               A time they had, their time is gone,
               their glory is decaied:
               And ſinne to ſuch as died not well,
               a wofull hire is paide.
            
            
               36
               And as for men of lower place,
               whom better we did know,
               Whoſe crowne was beauty, eaſe and wealth
               and did in dainties flow:
            
            
               37
               Behold it is with them, as if
               they neuer heere had beene,
               As if no pleaſure or no pompe
               of theirs had once beene ſeene.
            
            
               38
               And ſuch as doe remaine as yet,
               and liue as they haue done,
               Shalt finde the ſame which they haue found
               when once their race is run.
            
            
               39
               So that ſmall cauſe there is, we ſee,
               this kinde of life to chooſe,
               And for the ſame the ſauour ſweet
               of heauenly life to looſe.
            
            
               40
               But ſuch as doe in wiſdome ioy
               and take delight therein,
               Shall haue with peace a place on earth
               and greater gaine ſhal win.
            
            
               41
               Therefore mine owne deſire ſhall be,
               to take this for my part,
               The water ſtreames and paſtures ſweet
               of Gods word, with my heart.
            
            
               42
               And ſuch as theſe few reaſons may
               perſwade vnto the ſame,
               I wiſh them that which to my ſelfe:
               at this that they may aime.
            
            
               43
               Then happy we throughout our life
               what euer vs befall:
               Thrice happy eke, when we go hence
               and God vs home ſhall call.
            
            
               44
               Let the words of my mouth pleaſe thee
               and thoughts of heart, ô God:
               And in the ſame continually
               let me make mine abode.
            
            
               45
               As haue the daies of ſorrow beene,
               ſo may our comfort be:
               That as we did not praiſe thee then,
               ſo may we now praiſe thee.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TABLE CONTEINING the ſumme and ſubſtance of the whole boooke in the principall points of it.
            
               The firſt Treatiſe.
               
                  
                     CHAP. 1.
                     
                        ASſurance of Saluation, the ground of all. 
                     
                     Moſt men are deceiued about it. 
                     
                     Papiſts thinke it impoſſible. 
                     
                     Carnall Proteſtants thinke it eaſie. 
                     
                     Weake Chriſtians full of doubting. 
                     
                     Three generall heads or parts of this Treatiſe. 
                     
                     Three branches of the firſt head. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 2.
                     MAn created happie, fell into miſerie. 
                     
                     Two parts of mans miſerie. 
                     The firſt: His ſinne. 
                     
                     Mans ſinne what. 
                     Euery part corrupted. 
                     
                     Vnderſtanding, conſcience, will. 
                     Affections. 
                     
                     Conuerſation. 
                     
                     Thoughts, deſires, outward behauiour. 
                     
                     Mans beſt actions abhominable. 
                     
                     Few thinke it thus. 
                     The ſecond part of mans miſery: The curſe. 
                     
                     Which bringeth all plagues. 
                     After this life. 
                     In this life. 
                     The creatures curſed for mans cauſe: 
                     Much more himſelfe. 
                     
                     In all he takes in hand. 
                     In his body, diſeaſes, &c. 
                     In his ſenſes, deafneſſe. 
                     
                     In his friends and kindred, &c. 
                     He hath no right to any thing that he inioieth, and ſhall be called to iudgement for it. 
                     Men ſhift off this. 
                     
                     This curſe is to all. 
                     To harden the heart againſt it, dangerous. 
                     
                     The curſe vpon the ſoule. 
                     
                     To be giuen vp to vile luſts. 
                     To be darkened in his vnderſtanding. 
                     Haſtening to endleſſe woe, and not ſee it. 
                     Hardneſſe of heart. 
                     
                     Deſperation, madneſſe, &c. 
                     Remedileſſe feares, &c. 
                     Hell paines, extreame, eaſeleſſe & endleſſe. 
                     
                     The neceſſitie of this knowledge of mans miſerie. 
                     
                     If this doctrine diſpleaſe men, they may thanke themſelues. 
                     
                     The doctrine of the Goſpel muſt go with this. 
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 3.
                     OF the knowledge of redemption and deliuerance. 
                     It muſt be knowen as well as our miſery. 
                     
                     Foure things to be conſidered in it. 
                     
                     
                        1. What it is, and wherein it conſiſteth. 
                     Merit ouerthrowne. 
                     
                     
                        2. By whom it is wrought. 
                     
                     
                        3. How it is reueiled. 
                     
                     
                        4. How it is receiued and imbraced. 
                     
                     Faith what. 
                     How it is wrought. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 4.
                     KNowledge of our miſerie and redemption, neceſſarie to ſaluation. 
                     
                     They are moſt light, who haue moſt cauſe to mourne. 
                     The perſon that ſhall be ſaued, beleeueth and applieth generall things particularly to himſelfe. 
                     
                     Heereby the heart is troubled. 
                     
                     Few, hearing the doctrine of miſerie, thinke it to be their owne caſe. 
                     
                     They are hardned, and make it cōmon. 
                     
                     Their woe at the time of death. 
                     
                     
                        Anſwer to ſuch as would not haue the law preached. 
                     
                     The law is to be preached. 
                     But not without the Goſpell. 
                     
                     Effects and fruits of the law preached, in the faithfull. 
                     
                     The ignorance of the law, how dangerous. 
                     
                     Great fault in the miniſter that teacheth not the law. 
                     
                     Conſultation: the ſecond worke. 
                     
                     Conſultation neceſſarie. 
                     
                     Prooued. 
                     
                     Without it, ſorrow for ſinne profiteth little. 
                     
                     They that cannot counſell themſelues, must aske. 
                     
                     The complaint of the penitent ſinner. 
                     What his thoughts are. 
                     
                        1. About his owne eſtate. 
                     
                        2. Concerning the minde of God towards him. 
                     
                     He is ſecretly vpholden by the promiſe. 
                     Humiliation: the third worke. 
                     
                     How neceſſarie it is. 
                     
                     What great fruit it brings. 
                     
                     A ſecret deſire of forgiueneſſe: the fourth worke. 
                     
                     From what ground this ariſeth: 
                     Or, what breedeth this deſire. 
                     Many are long ere they come to this point: and the cauſe why. 
                     
                     How feruent this deſire ought to be. 
                     
                     To the humbled ſoule the tidings of ſaluation moſt welcome, & til then little ſet by. 
                     
                     This deſire continueth till the thing be obteined. 
                     
                     What ſtaieth and vpholdeth him in this caſe. 
                     
                     He reſolueth neuer to walke in his former eſtate, and why. 
                     
                     How Sathan laboureth that men ſhould not come to this point, and by what meanes. 
                     
                     What hee is the better for this reſoluing. 
                     
                     Confeſſion and crauing of pardon: the fifth worke. 
                     
                     How this is done. 
                     How great a matter this is. 
                     
                     To forſake all for it, and highly to price it: the ſixth worke. 
                     
                     
                        Obiect. 1. Can theſe or any thing that man doth, be accepted without faith? 
                     
                     
                        Anſw. Although none of theſe things be faith, yet they are not without it. 
                     
                     We cannot diſcerne the very moment when faith is wrought. 
                     
                        Obiect. 2. Muſt we thus prepare our ſelues to receiue faith? 
                     
                     
                        Anſw. It is not in our power. 
                     
                     It is gods onely worke to doe it. 
                     
                     To apply Chriſt and his promiſe: the ſeuenth worke. 
                     
                     God ſealeth vp his promiſes to the beleeuer. 
                     
                     How the beleeuer reaſoneth with himſelfe 
                     
                     He weigheth all things heereto belonging. 
                     
                     He ſeekes helpe of others. 
                     
                     How he groweth ſetled in beleeuing. 
                     
                     What will follow of applying Chriſt. 
                     
                     Faith though weake, yet ſound, after experience in a godly life ſhall be confirmed, and bring reſt to the ſoule. 
                     
                     Faith is rather diſcerned by the graces that goe with it, then by it ſelfe. 
                     
                     A deſcription of the ſmalleſt meaſure of faith. 
                     
                     Some attaine aſſurance in one day, others labour long for it. 
                     
                     Faith vniteth to Chriſt. 
                     Common profeſſors haue not this faith. 
                     
                     By what meanes it is wrought. 
                     
                     Why many want it. 
                     
                     The concluſion of this third part. 
                     
                     Markes of faith. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 5.
                     THe ſecond head generall of the treatiſe. 
                     Lets of faith. 
                     
                     Many deceiued in faith. 
                     
                     A generall let of faith, the diuels bewitching. 
                     
                     The miniſter is the watchman to giue warning. 
                     Fault of not beleeuing, in the miniſter and people. 
                     
                     In the miniſter. 
                     
                        1. Not teaching. 
                     
                        2. Seldome teaching. 
                     
                     Neceſſitie of often teaching. 
                     
                     
                        3. Not plaine teaching. 
                     
                     
                        4. Want of catechiſing. 
                     
                     The people ſhould be examined how they profite. 
                     
                     The Miniſter ſhould haue authoritie to doe it. 
                     What good would come of it. 
                     
                     
                        Commendati
                           •
                        n and neceſſitie of catechiſing. 
                     
                     Good life of miniſters. 
                     
                     Priuate conference. 
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 6.
                     LEts of faith in the people. 
                     
                     Light eſteeming the Goſpell. 
                     
                     Fewe that receiue the doctrine, haue faith. 
                     
                     Practiſe of true Chriſtians. 
                     
                     None beguiled by Sathan but wilfull and fooliſh. 
                     
                     Particular lets of faith. 
                     
                     
                        1. Some thinke it impoſſible. 
                     
                        2. Not neceſſarie. 
                     
                        3. Too hard. 
                     
                        4. Others are careleſſe. 
                     
                     
                        5. Feare loſſe. 
                     
                        6. Preſume. 
                     
                     
                        7. Neuer broken hearted. 
                     
                        8. Feare continuance. 
                     
                     
                        9. Too ſlightly ſeeke it. 
                     
                        10 Sudden flaſhes ſoone out. 
                     
                     An exhortation to the miniſters. 
                     
                     The titles of miniſters. 
                     Their charge. 
                     
                     What their practiſe ſhould be. 
                     
                     Incouragements to the miniſter to doe their duties. 
                     
                     
                        1. From their honour. 
                     
                        2. From their comfort. 
                     
                        3. The peoples benefit. 
                     
                     
                        4. From their owne reward. 
                     
                     How to anſwer the obiections which might diſcourage vs. 
                     
                     An exhortation to the people to imbrace the miniſterie. 
                     
                     The 1. reaſon: they are meſſengers of reconciliation. 
                     
                     The 2. reaſon: from the benefit reaped thereby. 
                     
                     The peoples ſinne. 
                     How the people hinder themſelues. 
                     
                     There are fit remedies to theſe lets. 
                     
                     Euery deſire of ſaluation, is not faith. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 7.
                     TRue deſire giues not ouer. 
                     
                     It muſt be feruent and conſtant. 
                     
                     It is ſtrengthened by an high account of the the thing deſired. 
                     No paines and labour in ſeeking it, thought needleſſe. 
                     
                     Difference betwixt ſound and vaine deſire. 
                     
                     The heart is ſet vpon Gods promiſes, if the deſire be ſound. 
                     
                     Gods will we ſhould beleeue. 
                     Aduiſe for the weake Chriſtian. 
                     
                     If any doubting ariſe. 
                     
                     Not to harken to any contrary voice. 
                     
                     The danger of it. 
                     
                     Remedie againſt feare of continuance. 
                     
                     Concluſion of the former. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 8.
                     HOw the weake in faith ſhould be establiſhed. 
                     
                     Two ſorts of weake ones. 
                     
                     The firſt ſort deſcribed. 
                     The firſt perſwaſion to vphold a weake faith. 
                     
                     The ſecond. 
                     
                     The third. 
                     
                     He that is new borne, can neuer die. 
                     
                     The fourth. 
                     
                     The ſecond ſort more weake in faith then the former. 
                     
                     They are deſcribed. 
                     
                     How melancholie worketh in ſuch. 
                     
                     Perſwaſions to vphold ſuch weake ones. 
                     
                     Sathan worketh vpon vs by ſuggeſtions, and by outward occaſions. 
                     
                     He conceiueth our intents and purpoſes: and how. 
                     
                     His properties. 
                     He perſwadeth and tempteth to ſinne, which we delight not in. 
                     
                     He laboureth to dimme our knowledge, and and the ſight of Gods grace in vs. 
                     
                     He troubleth much by outward obiects. 
                     
                     The obiections of the weake, in temptation. 
                     
                     The Lords eie watcheth ouer theſe weake ones. 
                     
                     Remedies againſt Sathans temptations. 
                     
                     Further remedies. 
                     
                     What we ſhould doe, when we feele not the ſweete taſte of Gods mercies. 
                     
                     A fifth perſwaſion to vphold weake faith. 
                     
                     A ſixth perſwaſion. 
                     
                     A ſeuenth perſwaſion. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 9.
                     HOw farre an vnbeleeuer may go in the profeſſion of Chriſtianitie. 
                     
                     What vſe is to be made of this doctrine. 
                     
                     Forwardneſſe in religion was ſometime in many. 
                     
                     
                        Apoſtataes. 
                     
                     The falles of many profeſſors haue made them vile. 
                     
                     Some haue fallen away before trouble come. 
                     
                     Let ſuch repent. 
                     
                     What is required in effectuall calling: and how men are deceiued about it. 
                     
                     The lawe is not to be preached without the Goſpell. 
                     
                     Why the lawe is preached. 
                     How men abuſe their afflictions through ſathans wiles. 
                     
                     Men content themſelues with a ſhadow of of religion. 
                     
                     Looke to that which is principall. 
                     
                     Troubles inward or outward, commend not a man to God. 
                     
                     When a man is none of the woorſt, he may be farre from being good. 
                     
                     How men ſhould trie themſelues. 
                     
                     Vnſtaied ones muſt vſe all meanes to be conuerted. 
                     
                     Men are careleſſe in the weightieſt matter. 
                     
                     How they deceiue themſelues: or, what weake foundations they build vpon. 
                     
                     Some heare willingly, but will not be warned by it. 
                     
                     Why men are ſo loth to come to triall. 
                     
                     
                        1. Becauſe they haue no good euidence to ſhew. 
                     
                     
                        2. Their hearts are not vpright: they keepe ſome ſinne. 
                     
                     The maine cauſe why men loue not to examine. 
                     
                     Other cauſes. 
                     
                     Gods children do not ſo. 
                     
                     The ſinne of ſuch as mocke at them that are forwardeſt. 
                     
                     Exhortation to euery one to try his ſtate. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 10.
                     THe third generall head of this treatiſe. 
                     
                     Eight companions of faith. 
                     
                     
                        1. Ioy. 
                        
                           This doth not alwaies appeare outwardly. 
                           
                           How this ioy is felt in afflictions. 
                           
                           The want of it argueth weake faith. 
                           
                           
                              Obiect. You zealous folke, ſome of you are euer ſad. 
                           
                              Anſwer. Some are weake in faith: they muſt mourne till they be 
                                 ••
                              mforted. 
                           
                           What mourning is good. 
                           
                           Anſwere to ſuch as take offence at the heauineſſe of Gods children. 
                           
                           
                              Obiect. The ſadneſſe of ſome profeſſors, makes many ſhun religion. 
                           
                           
                              Anſwer. All mirth is madnes, that proceeds not from faith. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        2. Holy admiration. 
                        
                        
                           This is not in a Chriſtian at his firſt calling onely, but is after continued and increaſed. 
                           
                           Anſwere to ſuch as thinke we must not wonder alwaies. 
                           
                           What letteth this grace. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        3. Loue. 
                        
                        
                           None haue this but they that are loued firſt. 
                           The true beleeuers feele ſenſibly the loue of God to ſhadow the loue of other things. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        4. Thankefulneſſe. 
                        
                        
                           It muſt be daily. 
                           
                           Euen in afflictions. 
                           Praiſe God alone, aſwell as in the aſſemblie. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        5. A deſire of an holy communion with God. 
                        
                        
                           Gods preſence in heauen to be preferred before it on earth. 
                           
                           The eſtate of them that cannot abide to heare of death. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        6. To forſake the world. 
                        
                        
                           A great grace, not to be tied to the world. 
                           
                           Great folly to ſet our hearts on things below. 
                           Make much of them, til God ſhew vs better. 
                           
                           A great libertie to be willing to die: ſuch onely are fit to liue. 
                           The forſaking of the world is not, to leaue neceſſary duties. 
                           
                           For what reſpects we may deſire to liue. 
                           
                           Cloiſtering and ſuch like, no point of godlineſſe. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        7. Shame for our former vnkindneſſe vnto God. 
                        
                        
                           The beleeuers reuenge themſelues for their former ſinnes. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        8. To conuert & bring on others. 
                        
                        
                           Edifying talke, good for our ſelues and others. 
                           
                           
                              Vſe it a
                                 •
                               it may be, though we ſee not preſent fruit of it. 
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 11.
                     HOw weake faith is confirmed. 
                     
                     
                        The firſt meane: To account it chiefe. 
                     
                     The beſt things muſt beſt be regarded. 
                     
                     Euill muſt be auoided, and lawfull liberties ſoberly vſed. 
                     
                     
                        The ſecond: Earneſt prayer, with meditation, &c. 
                     
                     True beleeuers ſoone faint and are fearefull. 
                     
                     They muſt much helpe their weakneſſe, and oft. 
                     
                     Obſerue how God keepeth promiſe in ſmaller things, that they may beleeue him in greater. 
                     
                     
                        The third meane: The word and ſacraments. 
                     
                     
                        The fourth: A daily humiliation for ſinne. 
                     
                     
                        The fifth: Their former experience. 
                     The faithfull haue neere acquaintance with God. 
                     
                     They are called his friends. 
                     
                     Let no place be giuen to doubting. 
                     
                     How faith is weakned. 
                     
                     Thinke of this as the weightieſt matter, in the morning, if it may be. 
                     
                     
                        The ſixth: The example of others, who of weake become ſtrong. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 12.
                     THe ſweet fruit and benefit of preſeruing and confirming our faith. 
                     
                     No outward meanes confirme faith, if we price it not the beſt of all things. 
                     
                     A pithy ſpeech of a worthy perſon. 
                     
                     The chiefeſt thing euery morning, is to remember Gods loue. 
                     
                     Gods children not ſo wiſe for their good, as the bad for theirs. 
                     
                     Many good Chriſtians haue not halfe the comfort they might haue. 
                     
                     Their example hurteth others. 
                     
                     Vnſetling of our ſelues from nouriſhing faith, is full of dangers. 
                     
                     The longer we liue, the better we ſhould be. 
                     
                     Many haue found ſmall comfort through their life. 
                     Three degrees of faith. 
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The ſecond Treatiſe.
               
                  
                     CHAP. 1.
                     OF the life of a beleeuer. 
                     
                     The ſumme and order of this treatiſe. 
                     
                     Why godlines ſhould be ioyned with faith. 
                     
                     Diuers opinions about godlineſſe. 
                     
                     It is neceſſary to vnderſtand wherein a godly life conſiſteth. 
                     
                     The neceſſary connexion of this treatiſe with the former. 
                     
                     Faith and godly life are as twinnes, and go together. 
                     The heads of this treatiſe are foure. 
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 2.
                     THe firſt point of the firſt head of this treatiſe. 
                     
                     Where true faith is not, there is no good life. 
                     
                     No good thing in the vnbeleeuer that pleaſeth God. 
                     
                     Men are dangerouſly deceiued about this point. 
                     
                     This is no new doctrine. 
                     
                     It is hard only to the obſtinate. 
                     None that haue faith, can liue wickedly. 
                     
                     Proofes of it. 
                     
                     Faith is not content with a wandring deſire of godlines. 
                     
                     The Goſpel deſpiſed, becauſe it is not knowen. 
                     
                     Many would be thought beleeuers, who liue not a godly life. 
                     
                     Too haſty repentance, ſeldome ſound. 
                     
                     Change of life without faith, vaine. 
                     
                     A ſimile. 
                     
                     It is vaine to thinke we haue faith, without a new life. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 3.
                     THe ſecond point of the firſt head of this treatiſe. 
                     
                     The beleeuer muſt beleeue other promiſes beſide that of ſaluation. 
                     
                     Alſo the commandements and threats. 
                     
                     The beleeuers do not thus. 
                     
                     The cauſe why. 
                     
                     Another cauſe. 
                     
                     Want of this faith worketh much inconuenience. 
                     
                     
                        The beleeuer muſt beleeue that he ſhall be ſanctified. 
                     
                     And particular promiſes of benefits and deliuerance. 
                     
                     And precepts and threats, euen the word it ſelfe. 
                     
                     Examples of ſuch as did ſo. 
                     
                     This doctrine little ſeene into and practiſed. 
                     
                     This kinde of faith not oft beat vpon by teachers. 
                     
                     The leſſe conceiued and in vſe with the better kinde of hearers. 
                     What cauſeth tedious troubles to many Chriſtians. 
                     
                     The teſtimony of good Chriſtians touching this matter. 
                     
                     An exhortation to the miniſters. 
                     
                     A miniſter muſt haue experience in himſelfe of that which he teacheth others. 
                     
                     Anſwere to ſuch as thinke otherwiſe. 
                     
                     Let faith and godlineſſe be oft taught. 
                     
                     The ſame things without vaine repetition and barbarouſneſſe. 
                     
                     The peoples wants require it. 
                     
                     Want of this kinde of faith makes the godly life difficult. 
                     
                     A ſimile. 
                     Where it is inioied, the practiſe of godlineſſe becoms eaſie. 
                     
                     The want of a good foundation is the ruine of many. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 4.
                     THe ſecond general head of this treatiſe. 
                     Of the heart. 
                     
                     The heart the fountaine of godly life, must firſt be purged. 
                     
                     Like heart, like life. 
                     
                     The heart is a dungeon of iniquity. 
                     
                     A ſimile. 
                     
                     A view of the filthineſſe of the heart. 
                     Men ſee it not, and therefore ſuſpect no danger. 
                     
                     What the purging of the heart is. 
                     
                     He that dieth in a weake eſtate ſhalbe ſaued. 
                     
                     Holy deſires be oft times quenched in the beleeuer. 
                     How to reuiue them. 
                     
                     How the heart is purged. 
                     
                     By the power of the holy ghoſt. 
                     This is at the firſt turning of a ſinner to God. 
                     
                     Euen this is a gracious worke. 
                     
                     We muſt not ſtand at a ſtay in this. 
                     
                     The heart is purged by faith. 
                     
                     Worldly delights ſo ſought for becauſe the heauenly are not felt. 
                     
                     So ſoone as any are aſſured of Gods fauour, ſo ſoone are their hearts changed. 
                     
                     Faith purgeth onely as the inſtrument. 
                     
                     True repentance what. 
                     
                     Without the change of the heart there is no amendment of life. 
                     
                     The ſimpleſt Chriſtian findes ſome meaſure of theſe. 
                     Proofes that this change is wrought by faith. 
                     
                     By this change the beleeuer ſenſibly deſcerneth his preſent eſtate from his former. 
                     
                     The weake troubled, that this change is ſo ſmall. 
                     Yet this is a note that their ſtate is good. 
                     
                     This change of the heart is the foundation of a godly life. 
                     
                     If men at the firſt gaue God their hearts, then ſhould their whole life be better. 
                     
                     Not a peece of the heart. 
                     
                     Many hardly brought to giue their whole heart, therefore giue ouer. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 5.
                     OF the renouncing of all ſinne: which is the firſt effect of a renued heart in the true beleeuer. 
                     
                     We muſt be changed before our liues can be amended. 
                     What the life of the beleeuer is. 
                     
                     All vngodlineſſe, not ſome onely, is to be renounced. 
                     
                     The beleeuer loatheth his former filthy life. 
                     
                     The power of faith, and gaine thereby. 
                     
                     The vanity of worldly ioies. 
                     
                     The beleeuer renounceth ſinne in good aduiſedneſſe, and not in ſome good moode onely. 
                     
                     For want of this ſetled denying of our ſelues diuers neuer attaine to true godlineſſe. 
                     
                     Worſt ſort of proteſtants, who hate this doctrine. 
                     
                     Gods ſeruants are at vtter defiance with the world. 
                     
                     They leaue not ſinne for a time, nor by conſtraint, or for company, feare. &c. 
                     
                     
                        They vow and performe. 
                     
                     Not by their owne ſtrength. 
                     
                     Their helpe is from God, attained by faith, waited for by hope. 
                     It is got with much ſtriuing. 
                     
                     Which ought to be no diſcouragement. 
                     
                     The faithfull alwaies preuaile not. 
                     Yet finde comfort. 
                     
                     No hurt by abaſing. 
                     
                     Gaine of our falles, to purge vs. 
                     
                     This gaine is onely to the beleeuer. 
                     
                     Beleeuers can renounce all. 
                     Vnbeleeuers cannot. 
                     
                     No dram of goodneſſe in a naturall man. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 6.
                     DIuers kindes of euill to be renounced. 
                     
                     Firſt, inward luſts. 
                     
                     All doe not hold them vnder in like meaſure. 
                     
                     The effects of our naturall corruption be heere meant. 
                     The roote of them all, is vnbeleefe. 
                     
                     Three ſorts of inward luſts. 
                     
                     
                        1. againſt God, and his honor and worſhip: in the firſt table. 
                     Ignorance of God, and no minde to come out of it. 
                     
                     Diſtruſt. 
                     In aduerſity, impatient, obſtinate. &c. 
                     
                     In proſperity, no thankefulneſſe, carnall reioicing, drunke with pleaſures. 
                     
                     No pleaſure in Gods true worſhip. 
                     
                     Superſtition and blinde deuotion. 
                     
                     Prophaneſſe, diſſoluteneſſe. &c. 
                     
                     Abuſe of peace. 
                     Loathing the Lords Sabbath. 
                     
                     
                        2. Wicked luſts towards man: in the ſecond table. 
                     
                     Com. 5. contempt of betters, vnthankefulneſſe, ſaucineſſe in youth. 
                     
                     Com. 6. reioicing in euell, wrath, no bearing reuenge, no fellow feeling. &c. 
                     
                     Com. 7. vncleane luſts, E. Feeding of them, 106. F. Eies full of adultery: the minde made a nurſery of filthineſſe. 
                     
                     Not onely the worſt ſort deceiued this way. 
                     Com. 8. coueteouſneſſe. &c. 
                     
                     Com. 9. luſt againſt our neighbours name. 
                     
                     Surmiſes, deuiſing of libels. &c. 
                     
                     Things not alwaies, yet theſe be common. 
                     
                     Com. 10. the heart is taken vp with dreames and hurtfull thoughts. 
                     
                     Theſe luſts be cauſes of all woe. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 7.
                     
                        3. EVill luſts concerning our ſelues. 
                     
                     Fretting when we be croſſed of our will. 
                     
                     Exceſſiue delight in aboundance. 
                     
                     Pride of life. 
                     
                     Frowardneſſe. 
                     
                     Selfe-loue. &c. 
                     
                     The word of God maketh his Children wary againſt theſe. 
                     
                     A ſpeciall part of a godly life, to renounce theſe. 
                     
                     It is not done without daily ſtriuing. 
                     
                     Luſts marre all. 
                     
                     Weake ſeruice accepted, if it be ſound. 
                     
                     He that obſerues theſe luſts and reſiſts them, is occupied in a godly life. 
                     
                     All ouercome not theſe alike. 
                     
                     The better ſort how farre they come, and how. 
                     
                     Examples of ſuch. 
                     
                     The weaker are not to diſtruſt for not matching the beſt. 
                     
                     Theſe luſts are reſiſted of all beleeuers in their meaſure. 
                     
                     They who be ruled by their luſts, can claime no part in a godly life. 
                     
                     The weake may ſtay their comfort in theſe three ſpeciall graces. 
                     
                     
                        1. That they haue a cleere knowledge of their ſaluation. 
                     
                        2. That they account it as their chiefe treaſure. 
                     
                        3. That they be ſet forward in ſome good courſe, whereby they may grow in faith and obedience. 
                     Theſe three muſt be earneſtly laboured for. 
                     
                     The chiefe end of this booke, is to ſet forward a weake Chriſtian. 
                     
                     How to make godlineſſe, a pleaſure. 
                     
                     The gaine of ſuch a courſe. 
                     
                     Why God witholds ſome grace from his. 
                     
                     Cauſes in our ſelues of not growing. 
                     
                     Ignorance. 
                     Slouth. 
                     Fauouring ſinne. 
                     Timorouſneſſe and vnbeleefe. 
                     Remedy of our vnbeleefe. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     CHAP. 8.
                     HOw the minds of the godly are occupied. 
                     
                     Three ages of Gods children. 
                     
                     
                        1. Childhood. 
                     
                        2. Middle age. 
                     
                        3. Old age. 
                     The higheſt degree of Chriſtians. 
                     
                     How the mindes of ſuch are vſually taken vp. 
                     
                     The beſt are moleſted ſometimes with luſts. 
                     
                     They are not comparable to the Apoſtles. 
                     
                     Paule had ſpeciall priuiledges. 
                     Theſe are called fathers. 
                     
                     The ſecond ſort of the godly, in battell. 
                     
                     The practiſe of ſuch. 
                     
                     Sinne is odious to them, though not euer ouercome ef them. 
                     
                     Theſe are ſometime diſcouraged. 
                     
                     Glad to vſe all helps. 
                     
                     Set againſt ſmaller ſinnes. 
                     
                     They are held vnder their infirmities for their good. 
                     
                     The third ſort of the godly. 
                     
                     About what their thoughts are chiefely occupied. 
                     
                     The dangers that theſe are ſubiect vnto. 
                     
                     
                        1. Danger in comfort. 
                     
                     
                        2. Danger when they feele want of comfort. 
                     
                     Many defects are in theſe. 
                     
                     Yoong Chriſtians compared to children. 
                     
                     Theſe muſt grow. 
                     
                     Their duty. 
                     
                     Gods children are in danger ſometimes to be dazeled and without feeling. 
                     
                     Yet euen in this eſtate they differ from hypocrites and vnregenerate. 
                     
                     How they differ. 
                     
                     Theſe degrees may in ſome reſpect fall one into another. 
                     
                     Examples of theſe three ſorts of Gods people. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 9.
                     OVtward wickedneſſe muſt be renounced. 
                     
                     Prooued, 
                           
                              1. by doctrine of the ſcriptures. 
                           
                           
                              2. by examples. 
                           
                        
                     
                     The ſinnes that he loued beſt, are renounced of the beleeuer. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 10.
                     FOure ſorts of men which hope for ſaluation, and yet renounce not open ſinnes. 
                     
                     
                        1. Groſſe offenders. 
                        
                           The vngodly will ſcorne profeſſours, if their liues be faulty. 
                           Such are ſeldome reclaimed. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        2. Sort of bad profeſſors, ignorant and careleſſe. 
                        
                           The wofull eſtate of ſuch. 
                           
                           Yet there want not ſuch as flatter them in it. 
                           
                           Many laugh at the rude for their homely ſpeeches, who yet are like them in qualities. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        3. ſort: Ciuill profeſſors. 
                        
                           Some of all theſe three ſorts are ſometimes prickt in conſcience. 
                           
                           Notes of their hypocriſie. 
                           
                           Sudden flaſhes of grace. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        4. ſort: Schiſmatickes. 
                        
                           They are taunters, railers, and ſlanderers of their bretheren. 
                           
                           Cenſurers of others. 
                           
                           Soone ripe in their owne conceit. 
                           
                           Inordinate liuers. 
                           
                           Worſe in dealing then men who profeſſe no religion. 
                           
                        
                     
                     Theſe with the former are farre from a godly life. 
                        
                           Other diſorders of ſuch profeſſors. 
                           
                           Earthlineſſe. 
                           Vnquietneſſe. 
                           
                           Vnprofitableneſſe. 
                           
                           Pride of life. 
                           
                           Ill educating their children. 
                           
                           Vncharitable ſurmiſes. 
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 11.
                     
                        OBiect. Are all ſuch damned? 
                     
                        Anſwere. No, if they repent. 
                     
                     God ſhoales out ſome from others. h. Infirmities in all. 
                     
                     The godly ſomewhat infected with common corruptions. 
                     
                     Difference betweene the falles of the godly and the wicked. 
                     
                     The godly fall not, but when they are ſecure and take liberty. 
                     
                     How we may be fenced. 
                     
                     No warrant of not falling dangerouſly. 
                     
                     We may be preſerued from ſoule falles. 
                     
                     
                        The ends, why God ſuffers ſome to fall ſo. 
                     
                     
                        1. To humble men. 
                     
                     
                        2. To magnifie his mercy in forgiuing great ſinnes. 
                     
                        3. In regard of others. 
                     
                     Otherwiſe, no feare of falling. 
                     
                     Gods tenderneſſe ouer his. 
                     Sweet comfort to the weake. 
                     
                     What infirmities the godly be ſubiect to. 
                     
                     The ſtate of weaker Chriſtians. 
                     
                     Theſe differ much from all wicked. 
                     
                     What the ſinne of infirmitie is. 
                     
                     The wicked ſinne boldely. 
                     
                     Their ſorrow is carnall. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 12.
                     THe heart purged, muſt ſo be kept. 
                     
                     How the heart is kept. 
                     
                     What danger growes when the heart is not kept. 
                     
                     Great labour, thus to keepe the heart. 
                     
                     With this heart it is eaſie to renounce euill. 
                     
                     An ill gouerned heart, the cauſe of all diſorder. 
                     
                     Little acquaintance with our hearts, brings great bondage. 
                     
                     An high grace, to liue well without the whip. 
                     
                     The faithfull in part, thus kept downe. 
                     
                     Sinne is not ſhaken off as a burre. 
                     
                     Grace to vanquiſh ſinne, may be attained: and more and more from day to day. 
                     
                     The good treaſurie of the heart, being kept, bringeth forth good things. 
                     
                     A peece of heauen, to liue with ſuch as keepe their hearts well. 
                     
                     Without it, nothing ſauoury. 
                     
                     The fruite of a well ordered heart. 
                     
                     The looking to the heart in a good moode onely, dangerous. 
                     
                     The heart may alwaies be lookt to. 
                     
                     An other cauſe why the heart ſhould be lookt to: otherwiſe, it will not be ready to any duty. 
                     
                     How we may be fitte to pray and meditate. 
                     
                     The onely way to curbe vp our luſts, is to looke to our hearts. 
                     
                     Without this, ſmall fruite or comfort. 
                     This clenſing of the heart is not perfect. 
                     
                     This clenſing, though weake, is a great priuiledge. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 13.
                     THe ſecond generall branch of the life of a beleeuer. 
                     
                     More hard and excellent to doe good, then to eſchew euill. 
                     
                     Not to reſt in eſchewing euill. 
                     
                     Three branches of this ſecond part of this treatiſe. 
                        
                           
                              1. Setteth downe rules to direct to the practiſe of duties. 
                           
                              2. Sheweth wherein this part of godlineſſe conſiſteth. 
                           
                              3. Anſwereth obiections. 
                        
                     
                     Neceſſity of rules to liue well by. 
                     The firſt rule to liue well, is Knowledge. 
                     
                     Knowledge what. 
                     
                     To grow in this knowledge. 
                     
                     With this knowledge muſt goe Delight in it. 
                     
                     Without this delight no fruite of knowledge. 
                     Knowledge an excellent gift: 
                     
                     But without the ſalt of grace, vnſauory. 
                     
                     The ſecond rule, Practiſe. 
                     
                     Practiſe is firſt in an hearty deſire. 
                     
                     Our affections muſt be ſtronger, as the good is greater. 
                     
                     As we deſire, ſo muſt we indeauour to doe good. 
                     
                     All parts of our bodies muſt be giuen to ſerue God. 
                     
                     Make a trade of godlineſſe. 
                     
                     Vertues that further vs to the former rules. 
                        
                           
                              1. Vprightneſſe, 
                           
                              2. Diligence. 
                           
                              3. Conſtancie or perſeuerance. 
                        
                     
                     Vprightneſſe, what. 
                     Pretences in good actions. 
                     
                     Neceſſity of theſe rules and vertues. 
                     
                     Vnarmed venturing abroad, is cauſe of ſore wounds. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 14.
                     
                        OBiect. We cannot doe as we deſire. 
                     
                     
                        Anſ. 
                        
                           
                              1. Gods grace ſhall be ſufficient. 
                           
                           
                              2. The beſt deſire without looking for Gods helpe, is vaine. 
                           
                        
                     
                     Why Paul ouercame not all rebellion. 
                     
                     
                        Paul was not caried into groſſe iniquitie. 
                     
                     
                        We may looke for the like grace that Paul had, in our meaſure. 
                     
                     Many weake, diſcouraged for want of this victorie. 
                     
                     Many know not their libertie. 
                     
                     The two next vertues, Diligence and Conſtancie. 
                     
                     Diligence and Conſtancie bring great matters to paſſe. 
                     
                     What diligence is required. 
                     
                     What conſtancie. 
                     The gaine of theſe. 
                     
                     Many pay deare for their liberties. 
                     
                     Want of theſe vertues, dangerous. 
                     Other two vertues, Humilitie and Meekeneſſe. 
                     
                     Theſe alwayes neceſſarie. 
                     
                     The Chriſtian life, no idle nor vnſetled life. 
                     
                     The end of one worke, the beginning of another: yet without toile. 
                     
                     Keepe alwaies an appetite to ſome new dutie. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. 15.
                     COm. 1. Duties to Gods perſon. 
                     
                     Knowledge of God. 
                     Truſt, hope, patience. 
                     
                     Ioy, thankefulneſſe. 
                     
                     Requeſt, loue. 
                     
                     Deſire of God preſence, reuerence, feare. 
                     
                     Com. 2. Gods worſhip, miniſtery, ſacraments. 
                     
                     Publike prayers, Cenſures. 
                     
                     Publike fasts. 
                     
                     Extraordinary thanks. 
                     Priuate worſhip. 
                     
                     Maner of Gods worſhip, ſpirituall. 
                     
                     How Gods worſhip is to be vſed. 
                     
                     The word. 
                           
                              1. Preparation. 
                           
                              2. In hearing. 
                           
                              3. Hauing heard. 
                           
                        
                     
                     How conference and reading ſhould be vſed. 
                     
                     How the Lords ſupper ſhould be receiued. 
                     How prayer ſhould be made. 
                     
                     Com. 3. In all things to glorifie God. 
                     
                     In an oath. 
                        
                           
                              1. Trueth. 
                           
                              2. Righteouſneſſe. 
                           
                              3. Iudgement. 
                        
                     
                     In beholding Gods works. 
                     
                     Com. 4. Keeping holy of the ſeuenth day. 
                     
                     Varietie of holy exerciſes. 
                     
                     Publike duties. 
                     
                     Priuate: 
                           
                              1. By our ſelues. 
                           
                           
                              2. With others. 
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CAAP. 16.
                     SEcond Table. 
                     
                     Dueties to God and man, are not to be ſeparated. 
                     
                     Beare loue to all. 
                     
                     Brotherly kindneſſe to Chriſtians. 
                     
                     Many duties to our neighbour. 
                     
                     Com. 5. Duties of inferiors. 
                     
                     Common to all inferiors. 
                     
                     Subiection. 
                     Reuerence. 
                     
                     Superiors duty. 
                     
                     Diuers kinds of ſuperiors. 
                     Duties of ſubiects and ſeruants. 
                     
                     Duties of all in authority: as, Princes. 
                     
                     Maſters. 
                     
                     Childrens duty. 
                     
                     Parents. 
                     
                     Miniſters. 
                     
                     Hearers. 
                     
                     Strong Chriſtians: 
                     Weaker. 
                     
                     Others excelling in gifts. 
                     
                     Ancient in yeeres. 
                     
                     Duties towards our equals. 
                     
                     By examining, ſee our wants and need of Chriſt. 
                     Maintaine our owne reuerence. 
                     
                     Com. 6. Duties towards the life of our nighbour. 
                     
                     Bodily life and health. To hurt none. 
                     By mildneſſe of ſpirit to beare much. 
                     
                     Cut off all occaſions of diſcord. 
                     
                     To do good to their liues. 
                     
                     In their miſeries. 
                     
                     To pitty them. 
                     To ſhew mercy. 
                     To ſeruants diſtreſſed. 
                     
                     To the ſicke in viſiting them. 
                     
                     Helpfulneſſe and harmleſneſſe, vertues of ſingular price. 
                     
                     What vertues accompany them. 
                     
                     Pittie to the ſoule of our neighbour. 
                     
                     Good example. 
                     To winne and confirme others. 
                     
                     Helpe the poore. 
                     
                  
               
            
            
         
      
   