
      
         
            
            THE
GLORY AND
Happines of a true
CHRISTIAN.
            
               A SERMON PREACHED BY
Master Rogers at Needham in
Norfolke the 28 of Iune. 1617.
            
               
                  ✚ THOV · SHALT · LABOR · TILL · THOV · RETVRNE · TO · DVSTE ·
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON
Printed by W. I. for T. P. dwelling
in Iuie laine. 1618.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
GLORY AND HAPPINES
of a true Christian.
            
               Reuelation: 3. verse: 4.
               NOtwithstanding thou hast a few
names yet in Sardis, which haue not
defiled then garments, and they shall
walke with me in white: &c.
            
            
               IN this Booke there is a
description of the state of
the Church, First, as it
was present when Iohn
writt this Booke of the Reuelation:
and this is in the three first Chapters
set forth together with a description
of Christ that reuealed this. The first
is a propheticall prediction or description
of the state of the Church
as it should be from that time euen
vnto the end of the world.
            The Lord Iesus appearing vnto
Iohn in the Ile Pathmos, did command
him to write seuen Epistles vnto the
seuen Churches in Asia: and here in
the begining of this third Chapter

he is commaunded to write vnto the
Angell of the Church of Sardie; and
this Epistle being the first in order
reacheth from the first verse to the
eighth verse. In which obserue a commaundement
giuen to write: In the
Epistle there be three things to be
noted. The preface or entrance into
the same, wherein Christ himselfe is
described by certaine roialties. The
matter or substance of the Epistle.
The Conclusion thereof.ver. 1. 2. 3. 
               Verses. 5. 6.
In the preface there be two great royalties
giuen to Christ, the first, that he
had the seuen spirits of God. The second,
that he held the seuen starres,
and this was a fit Preface for the matter
ensuing, for by hauing the seuen
spirits of God, is to be vnderstood,
that he hath the manifold graces of
the spirit; and it was meete this
drowsie Church of Sardie should take
knowdge thereof; that had formerly
so ill husbanded the graces of God
which they had receiued, that they

were in a manner lost, to the end they
might know when they might restore
them againe. And secondly hee
is said to haue the seuen starres in his
hand. as in the first Chapter, 26. 20.
verses, which stars are the Ministers
of the Churches, whome Christ vseth
as his instruments & tooles to worke
withall, yea he hath them so, that he
can punnish them if they become vnfaithfull.
            Touching the matter or substance
of the Epistle, it containeth a reprehension
of the Minister and people
of Sardie; for that hauing formerly
receiued some grace and life from
God, they were growen to that passe
that Christ accounted them little better
then starke dead: First, telling
them, I know thy workes, that is, thy
deadnesse in Gods seruice. Now little
ioy might they haue that Christ
knoweth this by them, that they
were no better
            And so now many a man may take

little ioy to remember that Christ
knoweth his workes; he being a Blasphemer,
a Sabboth-breaker, a drunkard,
or a worldling &c. And little ioy
let them haue for me till they be ashamed
of these their workes, and til
they goe to make complaint to God
against themselues for their sinnes,
and seeke to haue their euill conuersation
reformed.
            As for the Church of Smirna mentioned
in the second chapter and
verse. 9. that had a name to be poore,
but indeed was rich, it might be a
ioy to it that Christ knew their works:
for though they were reproched and
accounted to be Hippocrites, yet sith
they did endeauour to walke Godly
though in much weakenesse; yet this
is their comfort, that Christ knoweth
them, and also loueth and alloweth
of them, though wicked men doe
both scorne and hate them.
            This Church of Sardie is reproued
for that they had a name to be aliue,

but yet were dead:1. Cor. 3. Euen as Paul saith,
That he could not write vnto them as spirituall,
but as carnall, for that th
                     •
                  y were
more carnall then spirituall. So as this
Church of Sardie languishing and
decaying in grace.
            After this reprehension in the second
verse,verse. 2. he shewed them the remedy
how to recouer themselues
from this their euill estate, and that
is, by Awaking. Secondly, by watching
and prouoking themselues to
greater zeale in Gods seruice.verse. 4. Otherwise,
He will come sodenly as a theife vpon
them, and that in such a sort, that
they would be loath, and also to their
cost vnlesse they repent.
            The Second part of the matter or
substance of the Epistle is a commendation
of the better sort of Christians
in this Church, which is in the fourth
verse. For he saith yet thou hast a fewe
names in Sardie that had not defiled their
garments, as hard as the world goeth.
And though he could tell them by

name (they were but few) yet he
knew them, and how they had not
defiled their garments, but had held
out in a Godly and zealous course
of religion answerable to their profession.
Now vnto these he maketh a
promise in the next word, that they
shall walke with him in white, that is, in
glorie and happinesse, for they are worthy,
that is, in his account, in regard
of the righteousnesse of Christ.
            
            Now of this verse I would speake
at this time, but yet because I am a
man that peraduenture shall speake
to you but once in my life time; yet
my intent and desire is to speake vnto
all sorts of professors here present, for
as it was in Sardie, so I suppose it is in
this assembly, that there are some
that walke godly, yet there be many
moe that haue either a name to liue,
and yet are dead, or else dying.
            Heere be then three sorts of persons
to be spoken of: and first of
those who onely haue a name to liue,

that is, an opinion in themselues,
and so may be in some others, (as ignorant
as themselues) that they be aliue,
yet in truth are dead, yea stone
dead.
            The second sort are such as hauing
receiued and had some graces
of the spirit heeretofore, they are
now decayed in grace, and those are
heere called a company of dead ones:
these were not quite dead, for Christ
doth bid them afterward to awake
and strengthen themselues in the things
that were readie to die;
               verse. 2. they had some
graces decayed, and some languishing
and dying in them.
            The Third sort of persons heere
mentioned were such as hold vp their
holy profession with a godly conuersation.
The first sort were dead Christians.
The second cold Christians;
and the third sort were godly & zealous
Christians. And euerie one of
vs here present are one of these three
sorts of persons. The first sort be in a

damnable state & condition, yet these
make the greatest shew, and of it be
the greatest multitude. The second
sort are entred into a drowsie course
and they be dying, but not dead:
and being growen cold in religion
and fallen from their first loue, these
be in a dangerous case, and such the
Lord will whippe and scourge, and
by one meanes or other to driue
home these stragling Christians.
            The third sort are happie and blessed,
euen such as haue not defiled
their garments, such shalbe with Christ
in white, that is in glory heereafter,
for they are worthy.
            
            Oh that I had an heart and tongue
that I might so speake and you so
heare; that such of you that be naught
become good, and those that be decayed
and cold, may become better.
            Touching the first sort of men to
be spoken of; they haue a name to
liue, but indeede are starke deade,
that is, they boast and bragge that

they haue that which they haue not,
and are that which they are not,Esa. 58. such
wee haue now,verse 3. and such were in the
Prophet Esaie his time,verse. 4. there were
many that complained that they had

                  •
               asted, and that they had sacrificed
to him, but it was not regarded. But
they were told by him that they had
fasted to strife &c. & their sacrifice was
as much esteemed of God as if they
had cut of a doggs necke. So likewise
in Ieremie they did much boast of the
temple of the Lord,Ier. 7. verse. 58. 9. & 20. and of their seruice
done there, but yet saith the
Prophet, will yee lie, steale, Murther, comit
adultery, sweare, & yet stand before
the Lord in his house. Also Iohn Baptist,Mat. 3. Ioh. 8. r. 44
he told such as boasted that Abraham
was their father, that they were a generation
of Vipers. And our Sauiour told
those that bragged they were free borne
and Abraham his sonnes, that they were
of their father the diuell, for his workes
they did, and did so much resemble
him in their cōditions, & were so like

him, as if they had beene spued out
of his mouth. So likewise the Church
of Laodicea did boast that shee was rich
and needed nothing, yet they were wretched,
miserable,
               Reue. 371. 
               poore, blinde and naked.
They deceiued their owne hearts
through pride and ignorance as many
others doe, saying, they were
rich, and did not knowe indeede they
were poore. Now besides these, the
diuell he commeth & tels such kinde
of persons that their state and case is
well inough, and would perswade
some of the sorwarder sort, that their
condition is starke nought.
            But be not deceiued for flesh and
blood shall not inherit the Kingdome of
God.
               2. Cor. 15. Againe, be not deceiued, for no
fornicator &c. 2 Cor. 6. 9. Againe,
Be not deceiued, saith Iames the Apostle,
in seeming to be religious, and yet
canst not refraine thy tongue,
               Iam. 1. 16. 
               this man
his religion is in vaine. So I say, be
not deceiued, for though a man refraine
many sinnes, and yet retaine

one knowne sinne which he is loath
to forsake, that man cannot be saued,
till hee hath repented of it also.
            But now to come to particulars:
there be diuers sorts of men that haue
a name to liue, who in truth are but
dead.
            The first sort, are ignorant persons
that want knowledg of God, and of
religion: and of this kinde are many
of the poorer sort, but yet you shall
neuer heare them complaine of this
their wretched estate, but will rather
say they hope to be saued. But how?
euen by their good meaning, and
good prayers, and good seruing of
God &c. These men in their owne
account are fish whole.
            The second sort, are such as liue
in some grosse sinnes as Swearing, Lying,
Cursing and banning, Drunkennesse
and Vncleannesse, Pride, Vsury
and Couetuousnesse, and such like
damnable sinnes: yet they thinke
their estate good enough, but if they

be rebuked for their sinnes, and told
of Gods condemning of them, then
they hope they be not so great sinners
but God can pardon them, and
doe make account to dispatch all in
the end with a Lord haue mercie vpon
mee.
            The third sort of dead persons,
are the worldlings, and such as d
                  ••
                nothing else but busie th
                  〈8 letters〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
worldly busines, not respect
                  ••
               g 
                  •••
               
               gion:
These men are like vn
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
               
               les that run in the earth, and are cunning
to know euery muse in the
ground, but if they be taken out of it
they are at their wits end: and they be
also like vnto fishes when they are taken
out of the water.
            The fourth sort, bee ciuill men,
who hauing some restraining grace
doe liue in a ciuill manner among
men, abstaining from common grosse
sinnes, which are breaches of the
second table, and can say with the
old phrase, I thanke God I am not as

ther men. But yet these men make
no conscience to performe the duties
of the first Table, and yet are taken
among their neighbours to be very
honest men, but yet for hearing of
the word, praying with their families
they care not. Notwithstanding
such men doe not thinke that they
haue any neede of Christ, and indeed
Christ hath no neede of them. Now
such miserable persons which thinke
a ciuill life can bring them to heauen
although ignorant of the grounds
of religion; these men are in a miserable
condition, howsoeuer their
neighbours haue dubbed them to be
faire conditioned men, yet they are
farre of as yet from the state of saluation,Mat. 21. 31
yea Many Publicans and sinners
may goe to heauen before them.
            
            The fifth sort of dead Christians,
are such as though they doe heare
the word of God diligently, and
thereby get knowledge, and make
much of their ministers, yea, are able

sometime to beare checks for
their profession of the Gospell, yet
bee like the thorny ground, and
doe retaine some vile sinne, as Pride,
Vncleannesse, Couetuousnesse &c.
They being neuer truely humbled,
and not hauing the gift of sauing
faith, such men may fall away from
their former profession, some sooner
and some later, and may be without
true sauing grace to doe them any
good.
            All these fiue sorts before described
shall not be seuered in their seuerall
estates as sure as the Lord is in
heauen, and why, because they are
all borne dead in trespasses and sins,
and vntill they be ioyned to Christ
(who is the fountaine of spirituall life
for there is no life but in him) they
be starke dead euen as the diuell, sauing
onely their possibilitie to be saued:
Thou art as a Toad, yea, as a
rotten carrion, and till thou hast
true faith, thou art starke deade.

Many haue common gifts, others
knowledge, which may afterwards
proue persecutors and fall away I can
tell thee, thou wert once dead, now
if thou canst tell me when thou wert
made aliue: If thou canst truely say
thou liuest the life of grace, and art
dead to sinne, and not in sinne, then
being dead, aliue; take heede this
life of grace doe not decay in thee,
nor goe out like a Candle; then
shalt thou goe to heauen as sure as
God is in heauen.
            Thou Ignorant man, prophane
worldling, ciuill person, or Hyppocrite,
thou not hauing true faith and
the spirit of sanctification, learne to
know as yet thou art in the state of
damnation, and if thou dyest in this
condition, thou must goe from this
first death to the second death, which
is endlesse. Now when you haue
taken these fiue sorts of dead Christians
out of your congregations, I can
tell you there will be but a few left

behinde. But some man may say, why
doe you thus search into vs of our estates
and of the danger of them?
Why, because wee must fanne the
chaffe from the wheate:2 Cor. 13. 5. And Paule
doth bid you try and proue your selues
whether you be in the faith or no, and
if yee be not in the faith, yee are no better
then Reprobates, for ought as yet
yee know, or wee either. But wee
see among men how much the backe
and the belly is cared for, as for the
poore soule that is little cared for.
Wee are combred about many things,
but few are carefull for that one needfull
thing, the reason is, for few are
elected.
            Such as come to heare Gods word
should pray that the Lord would raise
them from the death of sinne, for
man nor Angell cannot doe it. In
the 5 of Iohn,Ioh. 5. 25. 
               The dead shall heare
the voyce of the Sonne of God and they
that heare it shall liue. There be many
which liue in the visible Church

which shall be damned. Desire that
thou which art dead in the graue of
sinne (euen as dead as Lazarus) that
the Lord would speake powerfully by
his word, and call thee out of this
graue. Seeke for the power of sauing
grace; for it is possible that thou which
wert dead, maist become aliue,
               Acts. 26. 14. 34. and thou
that wert a Persecutor & as cruel as the
Iayler, maist becōe humble.Lidea and the Iailor. Thou that
wert couetuous (as Zacheus) maist become
liberall. Thou that art an Hyppocrite
& but halfe a Christian (as Agrippa
maist become a whole Christiā.
And why not, we all of vs once were
dead, & the best of vs drawne from among
such as you be. Let this then be
the day of your rising, if ye liue the life
of grace yee shall liue the life of glory,
but if yee go on in that natural course,
yee shall misse of that glorious life.
            And I speake it from my heart: I call
heauen and earth to witnesse, yee
shall be surely damned, and the greater
shall your condemnation be, because

the Ministers of God doe now
rowse you vp, and woe be to the Ministers
that daube vp your consciences:
If you goe on in your ignorance
prophane, ciuill, or hipocriticall courses,
yee shall surely be damned, and
this that is spoken this day shall be for
your further condemnation because
yee were fairely warned, but would
not take heede, or take a faire warning
            Now touching the second sort of
Christians, namely such as had receiued
from the Lord sauing grace, but
they were much abated of that they
were at the first calling, or else sluggish:
these may be said to be of the
second sorts also, whereof the first
are such as had beene very zealous and
forward, but now decayed. The second
sort are those that be drowsie
Christians, and were neuer much better,
but stand at a stay.
            Concerning the first sort, there
be many men that haue beene very

zealous in the profession of the Gospell,
and carefull of good things,
which be now falne in tempering
with the world, and into much worldly
businesse, and follow the fashions
and courses of worldlings, are much
decayed in grace, and shamefully falne
from their first loue. yet this, many
of these at their first calling were so
forward as they could not tell how to
be thankefull enough and zealous enough,
but soone after they grew to
be cold in zeale, and very carelesse
and remisse in the practise of godlines:
such men in regard of Gods vnchangeable
loue cannot quite fall away
from the grace they haue receiued,
yet they doe shamefully dishoner
God, and giue occasion of scandall
and offence to others, and bring
sorrow and smart to their owne soules,
and great shame & reproach to themselues
& to other Professors▪ For as a
man that hath borne skot and lott (as
wee say) in a towne, if he be brought

to such a poore estate, as that hee is
constrayed to take almes of his neighbours,
it must needes be a great griefe
and shame vnto him: so is it with
these kinde of Christians, whereas
they should grow forward in the loue
of God: as the light doth increase
after the Sunne newly risen, they on
the other side grow backeward, and
this must needes be grieuous vnto
God; and it openeth the mouth of
the wicked to the reproach of their
profession; and they will say, seeing
these forward men make a stay of their
forwardnesse in their course. what
neede wee set forward and be so hott
in the spirit, and they bring a slander
vppon the land of Canaan. Thus
many men when they were young
were very zealous in religion, and being
come to temper and deale in the
world, then they make a stay of their
forwardnesse; like vnto a dogge that
at the first setting forth runneth swiftly
after the game or chase till he meete

with a peece of carrion, then he standeth
and goeth no further: And this
befalleth vnto these men, either because
they neglect the meanes, as
prayer, hearing of the word and meditating
vpon the same, if done, yet
very carelesly, so that their zeale is
decayed as fire goeth out for want of
tending it, or putting fit matter to
it to cherish it. But indeed the chiefe
cause of all this decaying grace is the
loue of this vild world which eateth
vp all, and hindreth greatly the
growth of godlinesse: Euen as a
great high Ash will suffer nothing to
thriue that groweth vnder it: And
this commeth by reason of our plentie
caused by our long peace. For euerie
man almost now layeth about him
how to make or feather his owne
nest, and to prouide store of riches
for him and his posteritie. And
Christians liuing among these worldlings,
they learne to doe as they doe:
but if wee had warres euery three or

foure yeares and put in feare of the
enemie, wee would then say, what
should wee gather so much goods for
the enemie to spoyle vs and them.
            But oh what a shame is it for a man
once to make heauen his chiefe treasure,
shall now fall to seeking so greedily
after the earth. Can God take
this well at our hands? NO, such as
doe see▪ are like vnto a man yet hauing
a comely woman to his wife, shall
forsake her, and seeke after the company
of some vild blouze or base harlot.
Such cold Christians may well
be ashamed when they doe seriously
consider what they once were, and
now what they are fallen into.
            Now for the second sort of Christians
which need to be awaked they
are such as were euill, dull, and sluggish
in the practise of the duties of
godlinesse, they hang as it were by
the eye lids, for they hauing receiued
of God a little measure of faith, and
of sanctifiing grace, are content to

ioyne with others in good things
and company with some of the forwarder
sort. But their seruice to God
is so poore and so cold, as it is little
worth, and indeed the vilde loue of
the world eateth vp these two, they
heare the word, but vse no meditation,
good conference and harty
prayer &c.
            Alas, If it were not for the world,
many would be far better then they
are. Many Christians are like Vrchings
that grow not, they increase
not in grace. Wee call such Children
as doe not growe and thriue,
Changelings, and so are many Christians
that stand at a stay, and say they
hope yet Christ dyed for them. Doe
they say so? Why doe they not run
on chearefully in their race, and say,
what shall they render to God for
their redemption? Thou art deliuered
as it were from the Red Sea,
and seest so many behinde thee scramling
and scrawling in the same. Doth

this deserue no better seruice to God
and thanks? If thou hopest for saluation,
is it so little a mercie that thou
giuest him so cold and lazie seruice?
I would saith Christ &c, The Lord loueth
not the lazie seruice of Christiās,
nor their cold hearing of his word,
or cold praying. If wee serue him
chearefully heere, we shall haue some
present blessing, and a farre greater
heereafter, but otherwise let vs be
assured we shall finde little comfort in
cold seruice.
            Hitherto of the reprehension of
the two former sorts of Christians,
whereof the first were stone dead.
            The second decayed and drowsie
ones.
            
               Be awake or be watchfull, and strengthen
the things which remaine, that are readie
to dye: for I haue not found thy workes
perfect before God.
            
            After the reprehension for their
deadnes and sleepines, he commeth
now to shew them the remedie that

they may recouer their dangerous estate,
which is, by bidding them
Awake, and strengthen the things that
are ready to dye. Wee know that such
as cast behinde their company in a
Iorney, had neede ride faster then others:
And they that are cast behinde
hand in the world had neede also rise
earlier and worke harder then their
neighbours: Euen so, these drowsie
and dead harted Christiās had neede
now awake betimes, and rise sooner
then they were wont, and fall harder
to worke, and vse all good meanes for
their good, and to recouer their estate
which once they had, or should
haue had: And being awaked in
this sort, let them consider what it
was that cast them behinde hand,
and rowsing vp themselues by earnest
prayer, let them call to minde
what was the hinderance of their
zeale; whether it was the neglect of
the meanes; as Prayer, hearing of the
word, or else this vilde worlde: and

hauing found the causes thereof let
them euer after shake and cast them
off.
            
               Awake, God will not haue men
that professe religion to lie snorting
in sinne: Is this a time for Christians
to sleepe euen in the midday of
the Gospell? He that sleepeth in
haruest time is the sonne of confusion.
When will men be zealous for God,
if not now when wee haue so many
meanes to incite vs thereunto, as
the preaching of the Gospell, peace
in our land &c. Are not they very lazie
that will lie and sleepe till ten or a
leuen of the clocke? Is this a time of
sleeping when the Lord doth shoote
off so many warning peeces by our
eares? As namely, so many strange
sicknesses and diseases; fearefull fiers,
and invndations of waters, vnseasonable
weather both in winter and
sommer. The Lord doth not so
much looke at the prophanes of the
world, as at the deadnesse, coldnesse

and drowsinesse of Professors. This
moueth him to anger, that they be
no better, although by the Ministers
of his word, and by his Iudgments
he doth cry aloud vnto vs, yet most
men are still a sleepe. Awake for
shame thou that now sleepest.
            The Lord seeketh to rowze vs vp
out of this greedy loue of the world,
for why doth he else take away so many
of our neighbour; goods; some by
fire, some by water. Hee pincheth vs
of our former allowance, but not to
the end wee should esteeme of this
world. Our long peace hath brought
in riches, and that hath eaten vp religion.
Many haue a desire to be doing
some good dutie, but alas it is dōe
very poorely. They pray, but it is
very coldly and faintly. They heare
the word, but without meditation,
and so it becommeth as it were in a
manner vnprofitable.
            
               And strengthen the things that are ready
to dye. Here is still more good counsell.

Wee must strengthen then our selues
in graces receiued, and grow stronger
therein, then when wee first receiued
them. Euen as children, the older
they grow, the stronger and taller,
euen so must Christians grow, stronger
and taller in grace. The Apostle
Peter wisheth vs to ioyne Vertue with
Faith,
               2 Pet. 1. 5. & 6. 
               and with Vertue Knowledge: and
with Knowledge Temperance. &c. And
the Apostle Paule also sayeth, Couet
after spirituall giftes. 1 Corin. 14. 1.
We should be couetuous after grace.
As men are not content to haue a little
poore Cottage to hide their heads
in, and so much as may keepe them
poorely to keepe life and soule together,
but they are more desirous to
grow more wealthy, so as they may
well maintaine themselues and their
familie, yea, to haue also somewhat
more to releeue and helpe others (if
neede be) when they come vnto
them: So ought Christians to grow
so in graces of the spirit, as they may

haue not onely sufficient for their
owne store and necessitie, but also so
much as may helpe to further others
in godlinesse, that they may as it were
keepe open house for their friends.
If wee haue much grace, wee shall
the more glorifie God, and draw on
others towards saluation, but hee
that hath little grace, God shall haue
little glory by him. Where God
vouchsafeth the meanes of attaining
to grace abundantly, God thereby
expecteth that wee should grow
strong and wealthy Christians.
            But some man may say, they hope
they be Gods children? but they
cannot very well tell. There are a
number of Christiās that are so poore
in grace, that if they had any lesse;
they should haue none at all. If thou
hast beene sicke, art thou content
that thou art aliue, and canst onely
crawle vp and downe thy chamber?
No but thou wouldst faine be so strōg
as thou maist goe abroad about thy

worke, So likewise i
                  •
                wee haue got
ten a little wealth in our soules, wee
should desire to become strongmen,
like Dauids worthies. But there
are many poore Christians who would
doe some good thing but they know
not how to goe about it. They haue a
little faith, and a little zeale. Now
if persecution shonld arise in the
Church these men would be ready to
runne away for all this. That being
so, let vs blow vp the fier of our zeale,
as a maide seruant in the morning finding
but a little fire in the hearth,
doth put fit matter vnto it & cherish
it till it be much increased: So seeing
the Lord giueth vs his word,
which is the meanes to kindle; to
cherish and increase grace in vs, as
his word, Sacraments godly companie.
&c, Let vs labour to blow vp
the fier of zeale and of godlinesse
which was languishing and decaying
in vs. Many a one that commeth to
a sermon being weake; becommeth

stronger when he goeth from it.1. Kin. 19. 8. As
Elias being fed from God walked in the
strength thereof forty dayes. Let vs so
profit and increase in knowledge and
in other graces of the spirit, that others
also may be able to drinke of
our cup. But alacke, alacke, after
many yeares preaching the gospell,
there are many that haue fat bodies,
but leane soules. They are rich in
estate, but very poore in grace.
            That are ready to dye.
            Christians must labour to recouer
themselues being fallen, and to cherish
the graces languishing in them,
for although they haue beene truely
called, euen these feeble ones, and
although wee grant they may also get
into heauen, yet surely it will be with
them, as it was with those that got
with a broken and crased vessell to the
hauen, but before they come there,
they shall vndergoe much shame, disgrace,
sorrow, and griefe: whereas
the Barke that is strong sayleth with

full sayle merrily into the hauen:
and the strong couragious Christian
attaineth to more happinesse with
more ease. They can on their death
beds speake very cōfortably to their
friends about them, the other sort
cannot doe so. The strong and zealous
Christian shall pertake of greater
glory then the other. Now then
good languishing soule, that hast professed
the gospell twenty yeares, yea
forty, and yet the most thou canst
doe, or say, is, thou hopest to goe
to heauen. Fie for shame of this hope,
what hast thou yet no more strength
of faith and other graces? Oh this
vilde world, that hath eate vp all,
and maketh so many to neglect these
best things.
            
               It followeth: For I haue not found
thy workes perfect before mee.
            Considering the words, they be as
a reason to strengthen the former exhortation,
God looketh vpon thy
workes. As for our workes, if wee

haue no faith in vs, all that wee doe
is abhominable, and if the workes
wee doe, proceede from weake faith,
they are but lame. Now the workes
of this Church heere spoken vnto,
were not perfect, for they were but
faint in truth. God said, this is the
Law, doe this and liue. But now seeing
we are eased of this yoake of the Law,
shall we doe as wee list? Indeede if the
Children of God do their best endeauour
to please him, the Lord will accept
of their works & seruice, and will
pardon their imperfections & infirmities.
But yet he cannot abide that men
should do such imperfect works, as to
serue him by halfes as some do, which
will perhaps pray at Church, and whē
they are abroade, but not at home.
They will pray at night, but not in the
morning.
            Not perfect before God:
If our works be not perfect, what doe
we heere? If God doth not accept of
our works there is then no comfort: If

he doth then there is cōfort, & if wee
striue in our hearts to obey him, hee
will accept both of vs, & of our works.
But hee doth not accept of the seruice
of such men, as hearing of the word
of God, as soone as they are gone
out of the Church, fall to prating of
the world. Such mens workes howsoeuer
they seeme to be before men
yet are not perfect before God.verse. 3.
            
            Remember therefore how thou hast receiued
and heard.
            Heere in this verse the Lord Iesus
doth still goe on to shew them
that are cold and drowsie Christians
how to recouer themselues. First, he
biddeth them remember how and
what they had heard and receiued▪
inferring thereby, they had meerely
forgotten the same. From whence
wee may obserue, that the forgetting
of that which Gods word hath
taught vs, is oft times a chiefe cause of
our staggering and going backward
in religion and godlinesse. Examples

whereof wee haue in Peter. who hauing
forgotten what Christ had told
him,Math. 26. 70. did fall to that fearefull denying
of him. Also Dauid,Psal. 73. 13. who said, He
had washed or clensed his heart in vaine,
&c. The Prophet had forgotten
himselfe, till he had entred againe into
the Sanctuarie of the Lord. Ver. 17.
Many hearers are like riuen dishes,
which though th
                  •
               y heare much and
often, they doe hold or receiue but
little. And why doe so many fall
back to the world, is it because they
neuer heard the word against it?
            No, but it is because they had forgotten
that which they had heard. Be
not (saith Iames) forgetfull hearers
of the wo
                     •
                  d.
               Iam. 1. 25. Heb. 2. 1. Also the Apostle to the
Hebrues saith, Take heede least at any
time the world that you haue heard, bee
l
                     •
                  t slippe, or runne out. Euen as Aqua-uitae
put into a crackt bottle, and
is to be kept till one be sicke, the party
may dye for all this, if the Aquauitae
be run out at such time as he hath

most neede of it. The Apostle Paule
wisheth vs to try all things, and keepe
that which is good, keepe it euer, as one
would doe a peece of siluer, or gold,
or pretious Iewell.1 Thes. 5. 21. Now that wee may
the better keepe and retaine that wee
haue heard out of Gods word, wee
ought first to delight therein: For
that which a man delighteth in, hee
will alwaies be talking, and thinking
of it; as the Huntsman will be talking
of his sporte and game, and hee
knoweth all the turnes of the Hare.
            The second meanes to keepe that
wee heare, is oftentimes to meditate
thereon. Why doe yee remember
tales that yee haue heard when yee
were children? Because you haue
told them ouer a great many times.
And why doe many forget the Sermon
they heard but yesterday? It
is because they did not meditate, nor
consider vppon it. Oh, saith one, it
is because I haue an euill memorie.
            Nay friend, that will not goe for

payment; this is but to blame God
himselfe that he gaue thee no better
memorie. Thou hast memory good
enough for thy worldly busines etc.
Besides, many a one doe rather destroy
and hurt their memories by
talking presently on the world after
they haue heard the word, and so on
peg doth driue out another. There
is nothing which wee heare at a sermon
but it may stand vs in stead at on
time or other, either in adversitie or
in prosperitie; and one sermon well
kept doth you more good, then ten
that haue beene ill and negligently
heard.
            
               Hold fast, or recover thy selfe. Heere
is another duetie for the drowsie and
back-sliding Christians to performe,
even by repentance to labour and recouer
themselues from their decaying
estate; whereby we may consider
what a great deale of worke many a
man maketh for himselfe by reason of
his sinne. For hauing taken liberty

to fall into any grosse sinne: as into
worldlinesse, impatiencie, frowardnesse,
and such like, he must repent of
it. But by the practising of godlinesse
there commeth no such worke
of it. Particularly, what a great deale
of worke did Dauid make for his two
sinnes, Adultery and Murther. And
so likewise Peter by denying his maister
and a man would not haue the
like sorrow, griefe and shame, for a
kingdome. But of well doing, and
faithfull seruing of the Lord, there
is nothing but ioy and thankefulnesse
that doth arise from the same. If men
will take liberty to themselues to sin,
and run out after their lusts, it will
in the end cost them many teares,
much shame and sorrow, but if it doth
not make this worke in them, why
then they haue made worke for the
diuell himselfe to torment them.
            Many a Blasphemer and prophane
wretch shalbe constrayned in the end
to cry out against themselues, to roare

and to teare their hayre, and would
faine vomit vp their filthy sinnes, as
euer did Iudas desire to be ridd of the
thirty peeces of siluer which he had
taken of the Priests to betray his Maister.
               Math. 27. 3.
               Hold fast and repent.
            
            It is an excellent thing to holdfast,
and to keepe our selues close vnto
God. Dauid prayed, saying, Oh, be
mercifull vnto thy seruant,
               Psal. 119. 17. 
               that I may
liue and keepe thy word. It is the way
to keepe our selues from much sorrow,
afflictions, and other grieuous
trouble, to keepe close to the Lord,
and to keepe his word, otherwise if
wee straggle from him, wee shall
finde it to bee bitternesse in the
end.
            Secondly, obserue that it is an excellent
poynt of wisedome to take
heede by our former falls and back-slidings.
But there are many which
for want of care and circumspection
are very often ouertaken with one
and the selfe same sinne: And why

is this? because they being recouered
did not hold fast, neither had they
any resolute purpose quite to forsake
that sinne, not but Gods Children
may commit the same sinnes againe
which they had repented of. Yet
surely hauing once smarted for it, we
should learne to be more carefull euer
after to auoide it.
            And repent.Text.
            
            This is an other cheife meanes of
their recouering themselues being
fallen either asleepe or decayed in
grace, that they should repent. It was
not so much said wo vnto thee Corazin
for any sinne they had committed,Mat. 11. 21
as for that they hauing the meanes
of conuersion offered them, did not
repent. So now though many doe
heare the word of God with ioy, yet
vntill the same hath drawne them to
repentance, all is in vaine. Our Preaching
and labour is in vaine, & their
hearing is in vaine, vnlesse (as before
is said) men be thereby brought to

faith and repentance, to become new
creatures, and turned from all their
sinnes. But happy are they that haue
profited so far by the word preached,
and till wee haue repented wee haue
as yet done nothing to further our saluation.
Dauid no doubt after committing
of his two great sinnes (before
mentioned) went to Church as
hee did before, and did sacrifice, but
yet he could haue no sound peace of
conscience till he was rowsed vp by
Nathan the Prophet,
               2 Sam. and so brought
vnto true repentance for those his
great offences. After sinnes be committed,
nothing doth make a mends,
till we be penitent, and if grace be in
vs, then shall we be forgiven.
            But if thou wilt not watch, I will come
vpon thee as a Theife, and thou shalt not
know what hower, I will come vpon thee.
            In these words the Lord Iesus doth
annex a threatning or comination to
the former exhortation vnto watchfulnes:
so that you heare he vrgeth

to be watchfull, or else he will come
upon them sodenly, and that to their
cost.
            This is a very necessary duty even
to be watchfull over our wayes, and
to be carefull that we be not overcome
either by Sathans temptations,
or the worlds baites, thereby to be
drawne either by action or speach to
offend the maiestie of God. And this
watch must be set and kept euen from
morning vntill night, as well when
wee are in company, as when wee
are alone, euen all the day long, and
then at night wee should call to our
selues to know how wee haue spent
the day, and what hath beene done amisse
therein by vs, and therevpon
wee ought to pinch our hearts with
griefe for those sinnes our conscience
doth informe vs of, and to confesse
to the Lord, and seeke reconciliation
in Christ Iesus, and so to lye downe
to our rest in peace.
            The Lord Iesus saith three times

in one Chapter, Watch. And vnto
Peter, Iames,
               Math. 24. Math. 26. 41. 
               and Iohn, watch and pray
least yee fall into temptation. And the
Apostle Peter bids vs be sober and watchfull
in prayer.
               1. Pet. 4. 7.
            
            Many doe know what it is to pray,
but few how to vvatch. Let vs be
carefull ouer our particular actions;
and not onely in the grosse, but
to haue an eye also to our lesser slippes
and infirmities.
            And although some will say, this is
to imprison men and to binde their
hands as it were behinde them. No, it
is not so irkesome if we were once acquainted
therewith: but it would be
an excellent meanes to keepe and restraine
vs from committing of much
sinne, and so from falling into much
sorrow and greife. This is a peece of
good counsell which I would further
commend vnto you, if time would
haue serued. Let vs then know this,
that if we keepe Gods watch ouer our
hearts, we shall find much comfort
by it.
            
               
               I will come vpon thee as a theife &c.
This is an heauy threatning, to say, I
will come vpō thee sodenly as a theife
and vnexpected vpon such as be secure
and carelesse, to take vengeance
vpon them. This is to rowse them vp
the more. We may consider that the
Lord hath many voices: for sometime
he speaketh to vs by his word, at other
times by his Iudgements. In this Land
many are quite dead, and many are
drowsie: he hath spoken vnto vs many
wayes, and he hath as many, or moe
waies to come vpon vs with one
Iudgement or other, and all iustly for
our sinnes. Therefore let vs in time repent
and be watchfull, least the Lord
come shortly as a theife vpon vs, and
take away our peace, yea, take away
likewise this Candelsticke, that is, the
ministrie & preaching of the Gospell.
            And indeede all this and more wee
may feare may befall, and that ere it
belong, for we haue seene him comming
vpon vs in euerie yeare of late

by smaller punishments, and of those
wee haue made little vse hitherto, so
that hereafter we may iustly feare he
wil come vpon vs as a theife, that is, sodenly
and we know a theife neuer
comes but to doe hurt. And as this
may befall our kingdome and state in
generall, so to our selues, it is to be taken
in perticular, God may come vpon
vs sodainely, and take vs in our
sinnes and in our securitie: The drowsie
Christian God will awake him by
his corrections, and cast sorrow and
shame vpon him Let euery one then
be watchfull, least he be taken vnawares,
and swept away with the common
Iudgement which the Lord may
send vpon this land for the Common
and generall sinnes of the same.
            
               Yet thou hast a few names in Sardie,
               verse 4. Text.
               which haue not defiled their garments &c.
Hitherto of the first part of the matter
or substance of this Epistle; wherein
he hath spoken to the worser sort of
Christians; there first, rebuking them.

secondly, exhorting and threatning
them in the second and third verses.
            Now he speakes to them of the better
sort in Sardis, euen to such as were
neither dead nor drowsie as the former,
and those he doth first commend
for their integritie. Secondly, he doth
promise them most excellent things,
whereof the first is, That they walke
with him in white, that is, partake with
him in ioy & happinesse. The second,
for they are worthy, that is, in the righteousnesse
of Christ and not in their
merits. Thou hast a few names. In these
words obserue, that howsoeuer the
greatest number of these professours
were verie drovvsie and dead hearted,
yet they had some godly and zealous
Christians among them, vvhich might
haue beene as lights vnto the rest. And
so he vvill haue some euer to shine in
the vvorld, such that the vvorld may
take example by them, or else be condemned
by them, and left vvithout
excuse. Examples vve haue hereof, first

in the old world, ther was a righteous
Noah. In Sodome, there was a godly Lot:
In Achabs time, though Elias thought
he was left alone, yet the Lord said
be had seauen thou and that did not
follow Baall, but worshipped him. So
no doubt the Lord hath some among
vs that doe hold their owne, and such
If we be such, happy are we; and such
as be godly & zealous christians▪ doth
the Lord accept. Even as one that
hath a great harvest, and hath but few
to helpe him in with it, yet working
chearefully, they be very welcome to
the owner of the field, so much the rather,
because they be but fewe. So
doth the Lord well esteeme of his
cheareful seruants, though their name
be but fewe. Againe, let other christians,
if they see such as be forward, zealous
& godly learne to imitate them,
whether they be Preachers or other
professors. If they doe not endeavour
to follow them, then shall those fewe
serue one day to condemne them, as

               Noah did the old world. But we see
the world doth laugh, and deride at
such as be zealous forward christians,
as they goe by their doores to heare
sermōs, or else, for that they haue prayer
in their houses, are least accounted
and most in contempt. But let those
mockers knowe, that those others
whom they despise, shall one day be
brought forth to condemne them.
            Secondly, obserue that Gods number
is but few and small, and the multitude
commonly follow the worst
course. For when there was a voice to
be given,Exod. 32. 
               whither the golden Calfe should
be erected, yea or no; the multitude consented
to it. So when there was a question
propounded,Mat. 27. 21 
               whether the Lord Iesus
or Barrabas the theife should be let
goe from death,
               Hosea. 2. 2 the multitude gaue
their voyce to let goe Barrabas. Israel
was but a handfull of people in respect of
other Nations, yet but a few of that
handfull were saved. Though Israell
were as the sand in the sea,
               Isay. 10. 2 
               yet there should

be but a remnant saved. God hath but
a few names, even in the world now
at this time, for the greatest part therof
consists of Idolators, Gentiles, Turks,
and Iewes, and as for the Papists they
be iustly excluded for their Idolatry
and superstition. And then amongst
those which be called christians, they
be but a few of them that be aliue,
that is, are sanctified. Luke 12. and beleeuing
persons. Christ his flocke is
but small, as he saith in the said chapter
verse 32. feare not little flocke.
               verse 32. Most
of those which be even christians in
name doe goe the broad way which leadeath
to destruction. Many finde the
broad gate that leadeth to hell.Mat. 7. 13. Now
if thou beest one of those that haue
found the narrow way, and art passing
through the straight gate that leadeth to
heaven and happines,
               verse. 14. how then, what
thankefulnes doest thou owe vnto the
Lord? But if thou beest as yet not
truely called and converted, oh how
greatly shouldst thon desire to tatayne

vnto it? The number of them that
shall be saued is but small in respect of
the other. For Christ is as it were dividing
his owne auditors into foure
partes, resembling his heires to foure
kindes of groundes, he saith, there is
but one sort that brings forth fruite
to their owne comfort. Againe, he
saith, how hardly shall a rich man be saved.
Let vs pray that we may be of
those small number that shalbe saved.
Yet if we looke vpon the course of
the world, and consider what little
paynes most men take to attayne vnto
salvation, a man may thinke by thē
the way were very easie & ready, but
the world is herein deceiued. Labour
to be in the number of those few that
shall be saved. But if you shall tell
some of their faults, they will answer,
they doe no otherwise then their
neighbours doe. Oh, but if thou wilt
goe to heaven, thou must doe as the
fewest and the smallest number doe,
even as those fewe doe, so much despised.

If thou beest a Magistrate, thou
must not so execute thy calling as
most doe, but as the fewest do that be
godly and faithfull indeed. So Ministers
that will be saved, must not doe
as the most doe in that function,
whose courses are very lamentable for
the most part, either not feeding their
flockes at all, or negligently, or very
scandolous in their liues. No, thou
must boe as the fewest Ministers doe,
even as those that are conscionable
doe, and are painefull, and of a godly
conversation, the like to fathers of families,
and to other particular christians.
            Christ saith, that in Sardis there
were but a fewe names that should walke
in white, yet his partake with him in
glory, as they had done in holinesse.
This might make many mens haires
to stand vpright on their heads; considering
Christs number euen among
such as bee called Christians, is fewe.
Yet I would to God that you which

heare me this day might be saued. As
for those few names, or persons that
be godly and zealous, the world doth
account of them as a company of
fooles, and say, that they be but a few
Puritans. Now herein they doe grace
them very much to say they bee but
few: for so indeede the number of
Gods children be but small. Well seeing
the way to heauen is so straight,
and the enemies of our soules bee so
strong and mighty, as namely Sathan,
the world, and our owne flesh: it is a
wonder that any are saued, and it is to
be attributed to Gods exceeding mercy
that any of vs escape and get to heauen,
hauing so many lets and hinderances.
But yet if a man did looke
from the Chancel to the Belfree, there
is not one but thinketh he shall be saued:
but yet I tell thee, there must be
a striuing, if euer thou beest saued: &
lazie & drowsie Christians shal hardly
be saued. Men must take paines to
heare Gods word, and yet their particular

callings in the would must not
bee neglected, so that the one needefull
thing be principally followed.
            Thirdly, obserue from these words,
(but a few names) that God taketh particular
note of the godly and zealous
Christians by name, and one of them
bee better then an hundred drowsie
Christians. Hee knoweth them by
name,Ezec. 9. 4 as he did Noah and Lot. Before
the destroyer went, the Lord caused them
all to bee marked on the forehead in Ierusalem
that mourned for the iniquitie of
the time. Now good people labour
to bee vpright in heart: and though
thou be neuer so poore, yet if thou art
godly, the Lord surely hath a speciall
care of thee, and hee will in the ende
take thee vnto himselfe: therefore
comfort thy selfe in this, that God and
his holy Angels doe loue and respect
thee.
            What though the world and the
prophane sort hate thee, scoffe and
deride thee, thou needest not care for

it. If a man bee loued and gratiously
respected of the King and Nobles of
the Court: what neede he care for the
skullery in the kitchin though they
mocke and hate him? Euen so thou
mayest acccunt and esteeme of these
vngodly mockers of Gods children:
though they weare a veluet coate, yet
they are but as the skullians, and in
base account before God.
            
               That haue kept their garments from defiling
&c. In this the Lord commendeth
these few godlie ones in Sardis,
namely, for that they had not defiled
their garments, which indeede is a borrowed
speech. For heere is meant that
either they had not spotted their
soules with contagious sinnes▪ or else
stayned and blotted their profession
of the Gospell by an vngodly conuersation,
and of this thing also we ought
to be very wary and carefull to bemering,
or polluting of our garments.
We know, we are to blame yong children,
if they defile their new clothes.
            
               
Let not vs then which professe
the Gospell, and thereby to be the
children of God: let vs not I say, staine
and blot our holy profession by a wicked
conuersation. But alack, alack,
there be many who though they haue
some goodnesse in them, and haue receiued
some graces from God, yet
now and then defile their garment:
few walke as Zacharie did, iustly, without
reproofe. Many heereby giue
occasion to the profane to speake euill
of the profession of the gospell. But
let vs consider this, God hath giuen
vs new garments which wee should
not defile. If a man had the Kings
liuery, he would keepe it well and
cleane, if it were but for the Kings sake
that gaue it vnto him. It cannot be
denied, but that a true christian his
garments may (as it were) catch lint,
that is be soyled with some infirmity,
but let vs take heede that our garmēts
be not defiled, that is, our profession
stained with grosse sinnes, as Pride,

Worldlinesse, Impudencie, and such
like. It is a comely thing as can be
seene on Gods earth, to see a Christian
walke answerably to his calling. I
graunt that many haue slanderous reports
raised against them, but yet let
vs be carefull to giue no iust offence, or
occasion to the wicked to reproach
our profession; and to say, loe such a
one for all his profession, he is as much
giuen to the world as others, or bringeth
vp his children as proudly as others.
            And they shall walke with him in
white, for they are worthy.
            Heere now he commeth to make an
excellent promise to sincere and good
Christians, whom before he had commended,
which is this, that they shall
walke with him, that is, liue with Christ
Iesus in ioy and happinesse heereafter,
which is to be vnderstoode by this
borrowed speech of walking with him
in white: a fit promise to those which
in their life time had care to keepe

their garments from defiling. Such
as walke after Christ in holinesse, shall
walke with him in glory and happinesse.
This is an excellent promise
to them which hold out to the end,
and an argument to encourage vs vnto
this chearefull keeping our garments
cleane in this life, though it be
somewhat painefull and troublesome.
Who will not be content to indure
some crosses & take some paines heere
to liue godly? Seeing such may be
assured they shall one day raigne with
Christ in glory. Let not all the profits
of the world, or flesh, or diuell,
make vs loose our white garments in
heauen, that is, eternall glory, holines,
& happinesse with Iesus Christ, there
wee shall be paid for all our paines.
            As for those which are vngodly,
they shall not vvalke in white, but in
blacke, yea, they shall goe to the blacknesse
of darknesse, for that they liued
heere to commit the workes of darkenesse:
they shall partake of the tormēts

in the lake of vtter darkenesse, where
shall be weeping for euer; where as
they on the other side are blessed,
that hauing cleane garmēts doe make
conscience to keepe them cleane still,
such shall be sure that their labour shall
not be in vaine in the Lord. But let
not lazie Christians thinke to haue the
like portion of eternall ioy and happinesse,
as the other sort that be zealous
Christiansas, before said. And as for
such as are wholly giuen to walke after
their lusts, they shall not walke
with Christ in white, but with the diuell
in darkenesse and torment.
            
               For they are worthy. This worthinesse
is in regard that they are cloathed
with the righteousnes of Christ Iesus.
But as for the Papists, heere is nothing
that will make for their meriting by
workes, for no workes can merit, vnlesse,
first they be our owne, secondly,
they must be perfect in themselues.
Indeede the wicked they shall haue
torments giuen them, so they are worthy,
               
because their workes are perfectly
wicked. As for the godly their
worthines is onely in regard of Christ
his righteousnesse. There be many
poore afflicted Christiās which thinke
they be not worthy to walke vpon the
ground, yet indeede they are worthy
of greater things, because they are
ioyned vnto Christ, and accepted in,
and for him. As for the former fiue
sorts of dead ones, they are worthy of
all paines and plagues: yet there is a
way for them also to bee freed from
that their estate, and to become partakers
of mercy: for if either thou art ignorant,
or a liuer stil in some grosse sin,
or a worldling, or but a meere ciuill
person, or an Hyppocrite, canst yet bewaile
thy sinnes, loath them, and craue
pardon for them in Christ, & by faith
apprehend his righteousnesse, then
thou maiest bee saued. But if the ciuill
man, or any other stand vpon his own
righteousnesse, then wilt thou be confounded:
for such can no more stand

before the flaming fire. Oh, that
many men had grace to see into
their vildenesse, and how wretched
they are, if they be not cloathed with
Christs righteousnesse.
            First obserue, if Gods children bee
counted worthy of heauen, what then
shall become of this vilde world? that
doe iustle Gods children vp in corners
or against the wals, and hate & scorne
them?Psal. 15. 3. 
               A good man loueth them that
feare the Lord, but in the wicked, vilde
persons are most regarded, and the godly
d
                     •
                  spised. Such men are of Caine his
mind that hated his brother, or of Chams
minde that mocked his father.
               Gen. 4. 8. 
               Gen. 9.
22.2 Sam. 6. 20. or of Michol her minde that scoffed
her husband Dauid for his zeale. Oh
say some, these hypocriticall Puritans
are worse then the Papists. Indeed
this great and common sinne of this
land seemeth not as yet to bee reuenged,
but no doubt it wilbe ere it bee
long with some vniuersall iudgement:
for now euen the basest seruant, and

vildest Ruffian can mocke and scoffe
at those that are professors and zealous
Christians. But such doe carry euen
the marke of the malignant
Church. I would neuer wish a worser
signe of a wicked man, then to bee a
mocker of professors and of Gods
children. The Apostle Iohn saith, Hee
that loueth him that doeth beget,
               1 Ioh. 5. 1. 
               loueth
them also that are begotten of him. Take,
heede of crossing the Lord in mocking
those vpon whom he bestoweth
his owne image.Mat. 25. 41. 42. & 43. For if they shall bee
cursed that did not feede and cloath such
as beleeued in Christ, what shall become
of those which mocke and persecute
them? They shall in the day of iudgment
stand quaking & knocking their
knees together like Belthazar.
               Dan 5. 6. Oh nay
more, they shall desire that the hilles
might fall and couer them; and hide
them from the presence of the iudge.
These men doe take a very heauy
peece of worke in hand, that doe so
deride the godly.Acts. 9. 4. 
               Saul, Saul, why doest

thou persecute me?
               Acts 9, 4. I neuer knew but
that without speedy repentance the
iudgements of God did take hold on
such persons euen in this life, if not,
then after this life they shal haue their
reward.
            Well then, let vs make some repetition
of that which hath beene spoken.
Yee haue heard of three sortts
of Christians: whereof one sort are
starke dead, as the ignorant person,
one liuing and louing any one sinne,
worldling, ciuill person, Hyppocrite:
these are to desire the Lord that they
may come out of their graues.
            The second sort were renewed, but
yet lazie Christians: let these consider
how God hath and doeth often times
crosse them, to make them leaue their
worldlinesse, coldnesse, and securitie.
As for the world let them leaue it in
affection, and let those studie and
looke wholly after it, which haue and
can looke for no other portion but in
this world. And I am afraide if sicknesse

or death should suddenly take
these drowsie christians, it would take
them euen as a thiefe vnlooked for:
whereas the godly zealous Christian
that hath his loynes girt vp, and is
waiting for his maisters comming, and
watchfull like the wise Virgins,
               Mat. 25. 4 he hath
but one daies sins to reckon for. When
death comes he can bid him welcome,
and say, I looked for you before this
day: He is not to seeke for his oyle to
put in his lampe, at that time as were
the foolishvirgins spoken of in the parable.
Now for the third sort of Christians
which indeed be aliue, and haue
kept their garments cleane and vndefiled:
to them wee say, let them
that are righteous, bee righteous
still, such shall walke with the Lord
Iesus hereafter in white, that is, in
perfect glory and felicitie: whereas
the vngodly shall walke with the diuell
in blacke torments. God grant
we may with Mary choose the better
part, which shall neuer be taken away
from vs.
            FINIS.
         
      
   