
      
         
            
            The Summe of Christianitie,
reduced vnto eight propositions,
briefly and plainly
confirmed out of the
holy worde of
God.
            Iohn. 1. 17.
            The lawe was giuen by Moses: but
grace and trueth came
by Iesus Christ.
         
         
            
            Eight Propositions conteining
the summe of this
Treatise.
            
               1. All men haue sinned, and haue fasted of the
glorie of God. Rom. 3. 23.
               2. There is no name vnder Heauen giuen vnto
men, whereby we must be saued, but onely by
the name of Jesus. Act. 4. 12.
               3. Saluation by Christ apperteineth onely vnto
them that beleeue in him.
               4. Fayth commeth by bearing, and hearing by
the worde of God. Rom. 10. 17.
               5. Let him depart from iniquitie, whosoeuer nameth
the name of Christ 2. Tim. 19. Who so is
in Christ Jesus, is a new creature. 2. Cor. 5. 17.
               6. Thy worde is the lanterne vnto my feete, and
the light vnto my pathe. Psa. 119. 105. The
commandement is a lanterne, and the lawe a
light, and reprehensions for instruction are the
way of life. Pro. 6. 23.
               7. The lawe is spirituall, but wee are carnall,
euen solde to bee subiect vnto sinne. Rom. 7. 14
The fleshe lusteth against the spirite, and the
spirit against the flesh: and these are contrarie
the one to the other, so that we can not doe the
things that we would. Gal. 5. 17.
               8. What other helpes there are vnto godlinesse
and well doing, commended vnto vs in the
worde of God▪
               
            
         
      
      
         
            The summe of Christianitie,
reduced vnto eight propositions,
briefly and plainly confirmed out of the
holy worde of God.
         
            The first proposition.
            
               All men haue sinned, and haue failed of
the glorie of God. 
               Rom. 3. 23.
            
            THere is none that is righteous,Rom. 3. 10. no
not one.1. Iohn. 1, 8. 10 If we say we haue no sin,
we deceiue our selues, & the truth
is not in vs. If we say wee haue
not sinned, we make God a lier, and his
worde is not in vs. For proofe whereof,
there are two witnesses against vs. First
the testimony of our owne consciences,Rom. 15. wc
euen by the light of nature accuseth vs,
both of leauing vndon many good things
we ought to haue done: and of committing
many euill things, in deede, worde,
and thought. Secondly, the Lorde God
himselfe, who is greater than our consciences,
whose wrath from heauen isRom. 1. 18.
manifest against al the vngodlinesse, and
vnrighteousnesse of men, as well in that
generall curse,Gen. 3. 17. which is come vppon all

creatures: as by particular iudgements
executed against sinne, from the beginning
of the world. But especially, he hath
most manifestly penned our inditement
in his worde: where first we are charged
with the sinne and fall of Adam,Rom. 5. 16. 18. as guiltie
thereof vnto condemnation. Secondly,
that wee are borne in sinne,Psal. 51. 5. and conceiued
in iniquitie, and therefore by nature
the children of Gods wrath:Ephesi. 2. 3. being
such,Rom. 8. 7. 8. as whose natural disposition is enimitie
against God, and whose cursed spirit
lusteth after enuie.Iam. 4. 5. Thirdly, that this
corruption of our nature, hath bene most
plentifull,Gal. 5. 19. in bringing foorth all maner
fruites of disobedience,Rom. 5. causing vs to
transgresse all-the commandementes of
God,Rom. 3. 20. as shal most plainly appeare, if we
examine our selues, and our liues, by the
seuerall precepts of his lawe, which teacheth
vs, both what dueties we owe vnto
his Maiestie for his worshippe, and also
what vnto our brethren for their profite:
so that wee may conclude with the Apostle,
that all mouthes are stopped, and
that all men are come vnder the condemnationRom. 3. 19.
of God. We must so meditate vpon

these things, as we may also be affected
and touched with them. Which we
shall the rather performe, if vnto the vnfeigned
confession that wee are sinners,
we shal in the presence of Gods maiestie
consider, first the filthinesse and vncleannesse
of our sinnes, by comparing them
with that holinesse, righteousnesse, and
innocencie, which is described vnto vs in
the Lawe. Then the greatnesse of our
offences as committed against the most
glorious excellencie of the Maiestie of
God. Further, the multitude of our transgressions,
which are mo in number than
the heares of our head,Psal. 40. 12 and as a mightie
water ouerflowing vs vnto destruction.
Also ye punishmēt deserued by our sinnes,
and set downe in the worde of God. First
the curse of God, entring and remaining
vpon all his creatures,Rom. 8. 20. subduing them
vnder vanitie for our sakes. Secondly,
all the aduersities and afflictions of this
life, with the diseases of our bodies, and
griefes of our mindes. Also death it selfe
which is the dissolution of the soule and
the bodie. Last of all,Leuit. 27. 26. the curse of God
pronounced in his lawe, vnto euerlasting

damnation both of bodie and soule, with
Satan and his Angels in hell fire, the
flame whereof being kindled from the
breath of the wrath of the Lord shall neuerEsai. 30. 33.
be quenched. The miserie of him that
is in such a case, must needs be exceeding
great, & offereth him iust occasiō wt feare
and trembling,Matth. 3. 7. to inquire what maye be
his remedie against so lamentable estate.Act. 2. 37.
            
         
         
            The second Proposition.
            
               There is no name vnder heauen giuen vnto
men, whereby we must be saued, but
onely by the name of Iesus. 
               Act. 4. 12.
            
            THe holye Angels of God can not
saue vs: yea they are iustly our enimies
for sinne, and the armed souldiers of
the Lord to our destruction.Luke. 1. 47. The saintes
haue neede themselues of a Sauiour, and
therefore can stand vs in no stead. As for
our selues, if we coulde (which is vnpossible)
doe all the good thinges commanded
vs in the lawe, it were sufficient, if
we were not condemned for them: it were
no reason that by them we should be discharged

of that other bonde of our guiltinesse,
which is against vs, in committing
of euill. If wee say we will giue all that
we haue vnto the Lorde,Psal. 16. 2. it is nothing vnto
him:1. Iohn. 1. 7. If vnto the poore, it is no sacrifice
for sinne: If we should suffer all torments
of bodie and soule during this life, wee
cannot so satisfie the iustice of God, for
the least of our sinnes, which deserueth
infinite punishment. There is no helpe
in outwarde and feigned holinesse,Esai. 66. 3. bee it
neuer so glorious in the eyes of men, seeing
it is abhomination in the sight of the
Lord, how much lesse shal it auaile vs, to
rest for saluation vpō any of the foolish superstitionsEsay. 29. 13.
& wicked idolatries inuented
by man. Standing therefore before Gods
iudgement seate, condemned for our
sinnes,Rom. 5. 1. we finde no peace with his Maiestie,
but onely in Jesus Christ, of whome
he said from heauen,Matth. 3 17. this is my welbeloued
sonne, in whome I am well pleased.
And who witnesseth of himselfe, saying.
So God loued the worlde,Iohn. 3. 16. that he gaue
his onely begotten Sonne, to the ende
that all that beleeue in him should not perish,
but haue euerlasting life, who also

calleth vs vnto himselfe, saying: Come
vnto me,Matth. 9. 11. al ye that trauell, and be heauy
laden, and I will refresh you. The name
JesusJesus. signifieth a Sauiour,Matth. 1. 21. and is expounded
by the Angel Gabriel: For he
shall saue his people from their sinnes.Christ.
Christ in Greeke, and Messiah in Hebrue,
signifieth anointed, giuing vs to vnderstand,
that this is he, whom the father
hath chosen,Iohn. 6. 27. sealed, and anointed with his
spirit, to be our Prophet, Priest, & King,
and is made vnto vs from God, wisedome,
righteousnesse,1. Cor. 1. 30. sanctification, & redemptiō,
that no flesh might glory before
his Maiestie, but yt whosoeuer glorieth,
might glorie in the Lord. Christ,Christ our wisedome. the eternall
wisdome of his Father from the beginning,
was the onely Pastor and teacher
of his Church,1. Pet. 1. 11. reuealing by his spirit
vnto the holy Fathers and Prophets,
the doctrine of saluation: But in the fulnesse
of time, taking vpon him our nature,
he came into the world, our wisdome
from God: in his owne person, out of the
bosome of his father,Iohn. 1. 18. 15. 15. declaring vnto vs
all the councels of God, concerning our
redemptiō, and that in greater measure,

and clearenes of vnderstanding,2. Cor. 3. 18. then euer
before from the beginning. Further as he
is the chiefe pastour and shephearde of
the flocke, so is it he in whom all the promises
of God are,2. Cor. 1. 20. yea and Amen.
            Who is also al,Col. 3. 11. and in all,Math. 17. 5. & of whom
we haue receiued commaundement from
heauen, that we shoulde heare him. He is
therefore both the teacher and the thing
that is taught. He is made our righteousnesse,Christ our righteousnes.
first in that he hath fully satisfied the
iustice of GOD, borne the stripes of our
correction,Esay. 53. 5. and the chastisement of our
peace:Gal. 3. 10 taking vpon him the curse of the
lawe due vnto vs for our sinnes, and by
bearing and ouercomming the same, hath
deliuered vs from the power of sinne, Satan,Heb. 9. 12.
hell, and the wrath of GOD, and
made an euerlasting attonement vppon
the altar of his Crosse:Ephes. 5. 2. offering vp himselfe
an oblation and sacrifice of moste
sweete sauour vnto the Lord. Secondly,
in that he hath accomplished all the righteousnesse
of the law, that we in his obedience,
hauing the same imputed vnto vs, &
might be iustified before God,Rom. 5. 19. and obtaine
the blessing of the lawe,Gal. 3. 12. which is eternall

life.
            He is made our holines or sanctification,
because in him is found the lawe of
ye spirite of life, which deliuereth vs from
the law of sinne and of death.Rom. 8. 3. For it is he
onely that hath condemned sinne in the
fleshe, that is to say, hath perfectly purged
& cleared our nature of sinne in his owne
person, by ioyning it vnseparably vnto
his deietie: that wee beyng clothed with
his most pure and vnspotted humanitie,Ephe. 1. 4.
might in all respectes appeare acceptable
and well pleasing in the sighte of the
Lorde.
            He is made our redemption not nowe
to offer vp anie newe sacrifice for sinne,Heb. 9. 28.
which hee hath already done once for al:
But that hauing all power geuen to him,
both ouer thinges in heauen and thinges
in earth,Mat. 28. 19. he mighte rule and gouerne his
Churche, by his worde and by his spirit,
guyding and defending the same in the
Pilgrimage and warfarre of this life, vntill
the day of our adoption shall appeare,Rom. 8. 23.
euen the deliuerance of our bodies; what
time he shall returne our redeemer from
heanen, and shall change our vile bodies,Phil. 3. 21.
               
that they may be made like vnto his glorious
bodie, according vnto that power,
whereby he is able to subdue all thinges
vnto himselfe. In the meane time sitting
at the right hand of GOD our aduocate
and intercessour with the father,Rom. 8. 34. not only
to make intercession for vs, but also to
presente vnto the Lorde our selues, our
soules and bodies and all that wee haue,Rom. 12. 1.
and do,Heb. 13. 15. our prayers and obedience, an holie
and acceptable Sacrifice vnto his
Maiestie.
         
         
            The thirde proposition.
            Saluation by Christ appertaineth only
vnto them that beleeue
in him.
            HE that beleeueth in the sonne is not
condemned,Iohn. 3. 18. 36. but hath eternall life:
and he that beleueth not the sonne, is alredy
condemned, neither shall he see life, but
the wrath of GOD remayneth vppon
him, because hee hath not beleeued in the
name the onely begottē sonne of GOD.
Faith therfore is the only meanes wherby

we possesse Jesus Christ, and in him
althe mercies of God vnto our saluation:
For by faith Christ dwelleth in our harts,Ephes. 3. 17. 18.
that beyng rooted and grounded in the
loue of God, wee might bee able to comprehend
with all Saintes, what is that
breadth, & length, and depth, and height,
and to knowe that loue of Christ, which
passeth all knowledge, and to bee filled
with all that fulnes of God. Faith is that
testimonie of our consciences, wherby we
are assured from the witnesse of the Spirite
of God,Rom. 8. 15. 16. that all our sinnes are pardoned
and forgeuen vnto vs, in the merite
of the Sacrifice and death of Christ, and
that we stande iustified as righteous before
God, in the perfection of his obedience:
and through him are nowe the adopted
childrē of his father, and heires of
his euerlasting kingdome,Rom. 8. 17. in that we are
made mēbers of his bodie,Ephe. 5. 30. euen bone of
his bone,1. Cor. 6. 17. and flesh of his flesh,Ephe. 2. 22. to become
with him one spirit,1. Pet. 2. 5. and spiritual temple
vnto God.
         
         
            The fourth proposition, of the causes
of faith, in the worde preached
and sacraments ministred.
            
               Faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by
the worde of God. 
               Rom. 10. 17.
            
            
            THis faith is not borne with vs, neither
groweth it out of our corrupt
nature,Ephe. 2. 8. nor is bought with earthly treasure,
nor attained vnto by the labour and
industrie of man: but is the free and gracious
gifte of GOD vnto his children,
whom he loued frō before al beginnings,
wrought in their heartes by his spirite,
through the preaching of the Gospel.
Which spirit is therefore called the spirit
of adoption,Rom. 8. 15. because it beareth witnes
vnto our spirits, that we are the children
of God, and heires of his kingdome,
teaching vs with boldenes & confidence
to crie Abba father: and the Gospel preached,
is called the arme of the Lorde,Esai. 53. 1.
and the mightie power of God vnto saluation.
The grounde and foundation of
our faith is the worde of God,Rom. 1. 16. especially
that part thereof, which contayneth his
moste louing promises made vnto vs in
Jesus Christe. This woorde was geuen
vnto man from heauen, firste by the Lord
himselfe, speaking vnto the Fathers in

his owne person, then by the ministery of
his holy angels, after by his seruauntes
the Prophetes.Hebr. 1. 1. Last of all by his owne
Sonne,Col. 2. 3. in whome are all the treasures of
wisedome and knowledge hidde. This
worlde remaineth vnto vs in the recordes
ofthe olde and newe Testament which
bookes were written by the holie men2. Pet. 1. 21.
of GOD his Prophetes and Apostles,2. Tim. 3. 16.
inspired by the holy Ghost, & is profitable,
to teach, to confute, to reprooue,
to instructe in all righteousnesse, that the
man of God may be perfect, and perfectly
instructed vnto euerie good woorke:
contayning all thinges necessarie for vs
to knowe vnto eternall life,Prou. 30. 6. from whiche
we may not take any thing,Deut. 4. 2. neither put anie
thing vnto it. This worde is plaine
and easie to bee vnderstood of them that
desire to doe the will of God,Iohn. 7. 17. and seeke
after wisedome in humilitie,Prou. 6. 23. 8. 9. with calling
vppon the name of the Lorde.Ephe. 6. 18. And
that the worde might be made yet more
profitable vnto vs, it hath pleased ye Lord,
vnto that libertie wee haue of reading,
hearing read, studying and meditation of
his holy scriptures, knowing the weakenes

of our capacitie, dulnes of vnderstanding,
hardnesse and vntowardenesse of
our corruption, in great wisedome and
mercie to ordeine, that the same woorde
might be applied vnto vs, by the holy ministrie
of preaching, wherevnto he sanctifieth
and annointeth by the giftes of
his spirit, such as he hath chosen, and
doeth sende foorth into the labour of his
haruest.Matt. 9. 28. Of which S. Paule speaketh,
when he saith,Ephes. 4. 8. that Christ ascending vp
into heauen, and leading captiuitie captiue,
gaue giftes vnto men, and filled al
things, that there might be in his church
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Euangelistes,
some Pastors and teachers,
to the knitting together of the Saintes,
to the woorke of the ministerie, and building
vp of the bodie of Christ, vntill wee
all come vnto the vnitie of faith, and of
the knowledge of the sonne of God, vnto
a perfit man, euen vnto the perfect grouth
of the stature of Christ: & that we might
not be tossed and carried with anie blast
of doctrine, either by the declining frailtie
of our owne corruption, or by the exercised
subtiltie of our aduersarie. This ministerie

is called the ministerie,2. Cor. 18. 19. and ambassage
of peace & reconciliation, which
the Lord hath put in ye mouthes of all his
ministers, that being Legates and Ambassadours
insteade of Christ, as if God
himselfe intreated vs by them, it might
be saide vnto vs in the name of Christ, be
yee reconciled vnto God.Math. 5. 13. 14. These are the
salt of the earth and the light of the world.
For the same God, which in the beginning,2. Cor. 4. 6.
commaunded light to shyne out of
darknes, is he that shineth in the heartes
of his seruauntes, that they might giue
foorth the light of the knowledge of the
glorie of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.
Who him selfe saieth, that as Moses
lift vp the serpent in the deserte,Iohn. 3. 14. so must
the Sonne of man be lift vp, that all that
beleeue in him should not perish, but haue
euerlasting life. And S. Paule saith,
that the Gospel preached,Gal. 3. 1. is a most liuelye
painting out of Christe before
our eyes,1. Cor. 2. 23. and a visible crucifying of
him in our sight. And though it be counted
of the worlde foolishnesse, and esteemed
as ouer weake a meanes to so great
a woorke,Rom. 1. 16. yet is it the mightie power
of GOD vnto saluation,1. Cor. 1. 21. and the highe

wisedome of the Lorde, by the foolishnes
whereof,1. Cor. 1. those shalbe saued that beleeue.
It is the Gospel of Christ, and the same
preached, wherewith it pleaseth the Father,
to beget vs againe vnto himselfe,Iac. 1. 18.
that we might be ye first fruites of his creatures:
being borne a newe,1. Pet. 1. 23. 25. not of mortal
seede, but of immortall, by the woorde of
God, which woorde abideth for euer: and
the same is it, saith S. Peter, which is
preached. This is that moste excellent
forme of Doctrine, wherevnto the Lorde
hath committed vs to be taught,Rom. 6. 17. that being
obedient thervnto, we might be deliuered,
not onely from the guiltines of
sinne, but also from the seruitude and bondage
of the same. As the Spirit of God,
first beginneth to work faith in our hearts
by the woord of the Gospell preached, so
doeth he continue, nourish, confirme, & encrease
faith in vs, by the self same meanes.
Wherfore S. Peter exhorteth vs, that as
newe borne babes wee shoulde long after,
that sincere milke of the woord, that by it
wee may growe vp: and comming vnto
Christ, which is the liuely stone,1. Pet. 2. 2. 5. our selues
also, as liuing stones, may be builte vp a

spirituall house vnto God,1. Pet. 2. 2. 5. and made an
holy priesthoode, to offer vp spirituall sacrifices,
acceptable vnto God through
Jesus Christ. And when wee are passed
the age of our infancie in Christ, the same
word preached is our sound & fast meate,
wherwith the Lord still feedeth vs in his
familie,1. Cor. 3. 2. vntill that,Heb. 5. 13. 14. hauing finished the
course of this life, and ended the daies
of our pilgrimage and warrefare in this
worlde, hee take vs home into his owne
kingdome.
            Unto the worde of the Gospell preached,Sacraments.
for the more strengthening & confirming
of our faith, in the assurāce of our
saluatiō by Christ, it hath pleased God, in
like wisedom and goodnesse towards vs,
knowing our weakenes, and pittying our
infirmitie, to adde the vse of two holy Sacramentes,
Baptisme, and the Supper
of the Lord, The Sacramēt of Baptisme,Babtisme.
is an holy signe & seale,Iohn. 1. 33. annexed by God
himself, vnto the promises of the Gospel,
to witnesse and pledge vnto vs, the forgiuenes
and washing away of our sinnes
in the sacrifice of the death of Christ:Act. 2. 38. and
our iustification before the Maiestie ofGal. 3. 27.
               
God, in the perfection of his obedience:
also our ingrafting into that bodie, wherof
Christ is the head,Ephesi. 4. 16. from whom streameth
the fountaines of life and grace, into
all his members. Further that being
baptized into his death,Rom. 6. 3. wee shall by the
power thereof die vnto sinne, and by the
power of his rising againe, be our selues
raised vp in a newe creature, to walke before
him in true holinesse and righteousnesse
all the dayes of our life,Luke. 1. 75. and that we
shall be raised vp in the last day out of the
dust of earth,1. Cor. 15. 29. 23. and meete the Lorde in the
aire, and dwell with him for euer. In the
meane time, that as we are by one Sacrament
of Baptisme,Ephe. 4. 4. coupled vnto one
heade: so we should consent together, in vnitie
of spirite, preseruing the same by the
bond of peace, endeuouring those things
which first appertaine vnto the glorie of
God, and then not seeking euery one his
owne in priuate,1. Cor. 10. 24. but as members of
one body, mutually the edifying and
profite one of another.
            The Supper of the Lorde,The Supper of our Lord. being a
seale of the same promises,Iohn 6. 51. further witnesseth
and sealeth vnto our consciences,

that Christ is that breade of life,Iohn. 6. 51. which
came downe from Heauen, and fountaine
of saluation, of which, who so tasteth shall
liue for euer. And that as truely as our
bodies by natural meanes, are made partakers
of the creatures of bread & wine,
vnto the nourishment of this present life:
so our soules, by the hande and mouth of
faith, through the power of the spirite of
God, are made partakers of the body and
blood of Christ, that, he dwelling in our
hearts by fayth,Ephesi. 2. wee might become bone
of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, vnto the
assured hope of euerlasting saluation.Ephesi. 5. 30.
            
            Also in this Sacrament, is not onely
confirmed vnto vs, the misticall vnion betwene
Christ and his Church, but also
taught vs,1. Cor. 10. 17. what vnitie and loue ought to
be amongst vs, which being all partakers
of one bread, and one wine, are first
coupled vnto one head Jesus Christ, as
members of his bodie, and then mutually
made members one of another.
            Unto the worthie receiuing of this
holy Sacrament, it is required that wee
should examine our selues,1. Cor. 11. 28. first howe wee
haue profited vnder the word in the knowledge

of the misteries of our redemption.
Secondly, what comfort we haue receiued,
by applying the same vnto our owne
consciences. Thirdly, what griefe wee
haue conceiued in heart, for our sinnes
past, and what hatred and detestation of
all that is contrarie vnto the will of God:
what purpose wee haue, the rest of our
life to cease from sinne, and to follow after
righteousnesse,2. Th
                     •
                  s. 3. 1. that the Gospel maye
bee glorified in vs which doe professe it.
Last of all, whether as wee assure our
selues of peace with God in Jesus christ,Rom. 5. 1.
so we be at peace with our brethren,Matth. 5. 23. reconciling
our selues vnto those whom we
haue offended: and forgiuing vnto others
the offences, they haue cōmitted against
vs,Ephe. 4. 32. euen as freely as we would the Lord
should forgiue vs.
         
         
            The fifth proposition, of the
effectes of fayth.
            
               Let him depart from iniquitie, whosoeuer
nameth the name of Christ. 
               2. Tim. 2. 19.
               Who so is in Christ Iesus, is a newe creature.
               2. Cor. 5. 17.
            
            
            ALbeit the whole worke of our saluation
stand sound and perfect vnto vs
in all respectes, without our selues in Jesus
Christ, so that we may boldly say with
Saint Paule, being then iustified by
fayth, we haue peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ,Rom. 5. 1. and doe glorie in
hope of the glorie of God: Yet is not
Christ the minister of sinne,Gal. 1. 17. nor the Gospel
a doctrine,Rom. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. that giueth libertie vnto
euil: but contrariwise the death of Christ,
is of power in those that beleeue in him,
to cause them to die vnto sinne, and to be
mortified in the olde Adam of this fleshe,
with the lustes and concupiscences of the
same. And the Gospel teacheth vs, that
the true members of Christ,Rom. 8. 1. must and do
walke, not after the fleshe, but after the
spirit,1. Cor. 6. 20. offring vp themselues,Rom. 12. their soules
and bodies, and all that they haue, an holy
and acceptable sacrifice of spiritual worship
vnto God: inquiring to knowe, and
labouring to performe, that good perfect
and acceptable will of God, reuealed in
his worde. Also the same spirit, which is
called the spirit of adoption, because it
teacheth vs to crie, Abba father, and beareth

witnesse vnto our spirites, that we
are the children of God, and heires of his
kingdom, being the seale,Ephe. 1. 13. wherewith hee
hath sealed vs, and the gage, whereby he
hath pledged vnto vs all his promises of
mercie in Christ, is also the spirit of mortification,
whereby is mortified in vs the
workes of the flesh, our olde Adam being
crucified with Christ in his Crosse:Rom. 6. 6. and
the spirit of sanctification, and of our new
birth, quickening in vs a newe creature,
and fashioning vs againe after image
of God,Luke. 1. 70. to walke before him in righteousnes
and true holinesse all the dayes of our
life. Also this doctrine is both taught
and sealed vnto vs, yea the trueth and effect
thereof exhibited and perfourmed, in
the vse of the holy Sacraments,Rom. 6. which
both of them teache vs to die vnto sinne,
and liue vnto righteousnesse, & assure vs,
that as the Gospel was preached vnto the
fathers, with this effect, that they might
be cōdemned according vnto mē, that is,
in the flesh,1. Pet. 4. 6. but liue according vnto God,
that is, in the spirit: so the same shal be accōplished,
in al the true mēbers of Christ,Rom. 6. 3.
the one by ye power of his death, the other

by the power of his resurrection: which
thing ought not a little to comfort and
incourage vs, in that great and daungerous
conflict, with the flesh, the worlde,
and the diuell: when we knowe that our
victorie stādeth not in our owne strength,
which is none, but in the inuincible power
of him, which came to destroy the
works of Satan, and in whose crosse our
olde man is so mortified,Rom. 6. 6. as the bodie of
sinne is weakned in vs, which do beleeue.
Unto whom also he hath giuen that spirit
to dwell in vs, whereby he hath promised
to quicken our mortal bodies,Rom. 8. 11. which now
in part are subdued vnder sinne.
         
         
            The sixth proposition, of the rule
of righteousnes.
            
               Thy worde is a lanterne vnto my feete, and
a light vnto my pathes. 
               Psal. 119. 105.
               The commaundement is a lanterne, and
the lawe a light▪ and reprehensions for
instruction are the way of life. 
               Prou.
6. 23.
            
            THe rule of holines and obedience, is
not our owne will, nor lustes and affections

of our corrupt and cursed nature,
which euermore rebelleth against God:Rom. 7. 7.
nor the examples and manners of men,
or customes and fashions of the worlde:
but onely that most good, perfect and
accepable will of God,Rom. 12. 3. commended and
commaunded vnto vs in his lawe: which
must in all thinges be the light vnto our
feete,Psal. 119. 105. and the lanterne vnto our pathes,Heb. 12. to
directe vs to walke with him, and before
his maiestie, so as we may please him
with reuerence and carefulnesse: which is
the seconde vse of the lawe of God.
            This lawe of GOD requireth at our
handes, that we honour, loue, feare, and obey
him in al thinges, and aboue all, that
wee trust in him,The first commaundement. flee vnto him in all our
needes, calling vpon him onely, and acknowledging
him to be the creatour and
gouernour of all things. That wee woorshippe
him,The second cō
                  maundement. not with our owne inuentions,
or blinde deuotions, nor with the doctrines
of men, or after the example of others:
but onely with that worship, which
he himselfe hath prescribed vnto vs in his
worde,1. Thes. 4. 4. without adding therevnto or taking
from it.
            
               
That we haue,The third commaundement. and vse in most highe
reuerence his holie name, woorde and
workes, & whatsoeuer else he is knowen
vnto vs by, that we know him to be the
searcher of all hartes, the rewarder of all
sinceritie and truth, and the reuenger of
all hypocrisie, blasphemie, false and vaine
swearing, with all other prophaninges
and abusinges of his most blessed name
and religion.
            That we sanctifie the Lordes Sabboth,The fourth commaundement.
not doing therein our owne wil, nor
walking our owne wayes,Esai. 58. 13. nor speaking
our own wordes, but ceasing from the honest
labours of our lawful callings (much
more from vayne and hurtfull pastimes,
Stage playes, Dicing, carding, &c.) that
with all libertie, and quietnesse, both of
mind & bodie, we may with our families
attend vpō those publique exercises of religion,
which the Lord hath in wisedome
and mercie, appointed for his owne worshippe,
and for our edifying: Assembling
our selues together, to heare his holy
woorde, learne and lay vp the same in our
hearts, for the ordering of our liues, celebrate
his holy sacraments, and with one

heart and one voice, call vpon his name,
rendring vnto his maiestie, most humble
and hartie thankes, for al mercies hitherto
bestowed vppon vs, and crauing new
benefites and blessinges at his handes necessarie
for vs and his whole Churche,1. Tim. 4. 8
both for this present life, and also for the
life to come.
            The seconde table of the lawe requireth,
that wee should loue our neighbours
as our selues. The fifth commaundement
containeth those dueties,The fifth commandement. which apperteine
vnto our seuerall callings, commaunding
children, that they honor, loue,Children.
obey, and relieue their parentes, remembring
that the Lorde hath made them instrumentes
of great mercies vnto their
children. Parentes,Parents. that beside naturall
dueties of nourishment, and prouiding for
them in earthly things, they bring them
vp, not in idlenes, wantonnes, and vanitie,
but in the feare and nurture of the
Lord,Ephe. 6. 4. teaching them his wayes in their
youth,Prou. 22. 6. that they may not forsake them in
their age, & training thē in such honest exercises
of labour, or studie, as whereby
they may be prepared, to serue the Lorde

in his Church, or in the common weale,
for his glorie, and the profite of his people:
Chastising them with the rod of
correction,Prou. 22. 15. that both foolishnes may be
chased out of their heartes,Pro. 23. 13. 14. and their
soules preserued from death: Also in wisedome
when necessitie shall require, prouide
for them the remedie of their incontinencie,
commaunded of the Lord, which
is Mariage.1. Cor. 7. 36.
            
            Seruauntes,Seruantes. that they be humbly subiect
vnto their bodily maisters in all things,Ephe. 6. 5. in
the Lord,Col. 3. 22. seruing them with all quietnesse
diligence and faithfulnesse,Ios. 24. 15. as in the sight
of God. Maisters,Maisters. yt they with their families
serue the Lord, teaching & instructing
them in all the will of God, and knowledge
of their saluation.
                  
                     •
                  en. 18. 19. Ministring vnto
them all necessarie and iust thinges, for
their honest maintenance, correcting in
them,Col. 4. 1. as well the offences committed against
God, as those committed against
themselues.
            Wiues,Wiues. that they beare themselues
reuerently, and obediently, towardes their
husbandes, in all things, adorning themselues,
not outwardly in the bodie, with

golde and precious attire, but in the inwarde
man of the minde, with humilitie,1. Pet. 3. 4.
modestie, quietnes of spirite, sobernes,
chastitie, &c. Husbandes, that they loue
their wiues, as their owne bodies,Husbandes. dwelling
with them according vnto knowledge:
geuing honour vnto the woman,Ephe. 5. 28. as
vnto the weaker vessell,1. Pet. 3. 7. seeyng they are
heires together of the grace of life, that
their prayers bee not hindred. Subiectes,
that they yeelde all honour,Subiectes. obedience
and tribute, vnto their magistrates,
not onely for feare, but also for conscience,
as vnto the ministers of God,Rom. 13. 4. whom he
hath set ouer them, for their greate and
singuler benefite. Magistrates,Magistrates. that their
songues be continually of mercie and
iudgement,Psal. 101. 1. ruling the Lordes people
committed vnto their charge in all peace,
godlinesse and honestie, punishing the
wicked and rewarding the weldoer,1. Tim. 2. 2. defending
the innocent, straunger, fatherlesse,
widowe, and him that hath none
to helpe him,Iob. 29. 12. breaking the iawe of the
vnrighteous man,Leuit. 17. 19. 15. and taking the pray
out of his mouth: fiinally, not respecting
any mans person, without all corruption

to administer iustice,2. Cron. 19. 6. remembring that
iudgement is the Lordes. The people,People.
that they bee obedient vnto their Pastoures
and Teachers,Heb. 13. 17. submitting themselues
firste vnto the Lorde, and then
also vnto them, which watch for their
soules,Ezech. 3. 18. and shall render an accompt for
their bloode: that they may labour the
woorke of the Lordes Uineyarde, with
ioy, and not with mourning,Gal. 6 6. for that is
vnprofitable: communicating also with
them, all good thinges, sowing by this
meanes vnto the spirit, that thence they
may reape eternall life.Gal. 6. 8. Ministers,Ministers. that
they be faithful disposers of the mysteries
of God,1. Cor. 4. 1. euen the treasures of his kingdome
committed vnto their trust; carefull,
and painefull in the labour of the
Lordes haruest, setting alwayes before
their eies, that terrible day of Gods iudgment:
and thereby, as also by the loue of
Christ,2. Cor. 5. 11. 14. to be constrained, to bring men
vnto the faith: not seeking them selues
and their owne, but Jesus Christ, and
then those that be his, that they may be
saued: feeding the Church of Christ, not
with the doctrines of men, but wt the pure

and sincere milke of the Gospel of God.
Not in ostentation of any gift,1. Pet. 2. nor desiring
to please men,1. Cor. but to approoue them
selues vnto euerie conscience,2. Cor. in the sight
of God, with all singlenes of heart, and
simplicitie of speach,1. Cor. deliuering the word
of life, ioyning spiritual thinges with spirituall
thinges, as becommeth. Finally,
all estates and conditions of men, that
learning their seuerall dueties out of the
woorde of God, they reuerently humble
thēselues vnto the obedience of the same.
            The sixth commaundement forbiddethThe sixth commandement.
all murder and shedding of innocent
bloode, all fighting, quarreling, and
prouoking one an other, all hatred, malice,
enuie, and desire of reuenge: Also,Rom. 12. 19. it
commandeth all the dueties of cōpassion,
in sauing, defending, and releeuing the
person, life, and health of our neighbour.
            The seuenth, forbiddeth all vncleannesse,
both of bodie and minde,The seuenth commaundement. in
deede, woorde, gesture, or behauiour
whatsoeuer: that we assault not the chastitie
of anie, nor be accessarie vnto their
filthines:1. Thes. 4. 4. It commaundeth vs to kepe our
vesselles in honour,1. Cor. 6. 15. 19. as the members of

Christ, and temples of the holy Ghost,
that we may sāctifie the Lord,1. Cor. 6. 15. 19 both in our
soules and in our bodies, which are the
Lordes: and for the reliefe of our incontinencie,
to marie, onely in the Lord.
            The eight, forbiddeth al robbing & stealing,The eight commaundements.
al oppression & hard dealing, al iniurie
and wrong,Ephes. 4. howsoeuer it be colloured
with Lawe: all withdrawing and withholding
of that appertaineth to another:
all fraude, deceit, and cosinage in woorde,
weight, measure, ware, all couetousnes
and greedines of earthly thinges, commaundeth
vs to acknowledge and reuerence
the wisedome and goodnes of God,
in dispensing and bestowing these outwarde
thinges: to be content the Lord distribute
his blessing as liketh him selfe,
to walke faithfully and diligently in our
callings,Ephe. 4. 28. laboring with our handes the
thing that is good, to be instructed how to
want and how to abound,Phil. 4. 11. 12. and in all things
to be content with our present estate, waiting
with patience vpon the good prouidence
of God, in all our necessities. And
according vnto the measure wee haue receiued,
to beare our selues faithfull stewardes

and distributers of the seueral graces
of God,1. Pet. 4. 10. for his glorie, & the benefite of
our brethren. The nienth forbiddeth all
false witnes bearing in iudgement or otherwise,
all sclaundering,The nienth commaundement. backebyting
talecarying, discrediting, and dishonoring
of others, all lying, scoffing, iesting,
vaine, & vnsauorie speaches, flattering,
dissembling and feining, all vncouering
the secreates of our brethren. All
bosting, vaunting of our selues or others.
It commaundeth vs, to maintaine honour
and credit of all, and those especially, to
whome the Lorde hath committed anie
part of gouernment, either in his church
or in the common wealth: In al our speaches
to be iust, simple, modest, and louing.
&c.
            The tenth forbiddeth the verie motions
of sinne,The tenth commaundement. euen the lustes and concupiscences
of our cursed nature, that they
neuer rise vp against the Lorde, but
that we subdue them in their first assault,
least if we receiue the temptation with
delight, we be further seduced, by the
subtiltie of sinne, both to consent vnto the
euill, and to attempt and accomplish the
same.
         
         
            
            The seuenth proposition
            
               Rom. 7. 14.
                The Law is spirituall, but we
are carnall, euen solde to bee subiect
vnto sinne.
               Gal. 5. 17.
                The flesh lusteth against the
spirit, and the spirit, against the flesh. &c.
            
            TRue it is, that we are not able of our
selues,Rom 6. 14. so much as to thinke anie
good thought,Iacob. 4. 5 much lesse to perfourme
anie part of that righteousnesse, which
the Law requireth. But this is our comfort,
that we are not now vnder the Law,
but vnder grace, & although the Scripture
saith not in vaine, that the Spirit,
which is in vs, lusteth after enuie, yet it
offereth greater grace, because it saith:
God resisteth the proud, but giueth grace
vnto the humble. This grace woorketh
first, that we knowe the will of God, and
discerne that which is contrary thervnto.
Secondly, that we haue a will desirous
and studious of Gods glorie and profit of
our brethren in the accomplishing of his
commaundementes:Rom. 2. 18. Thirdly also some
power through the spirit,Rom. 7. 18. to hate and forsake
that,Tit. 3. 8. 14. which is euill, and to loue and

follow that, which is good, that our faith
may become fruitfull, our loue laborious,
and our hope pacient,1. Thes. 1. 3. through that communion,
which we haue with Christ, in
the power of his death,Rom. 7. 4. and of his rising
againe. For if we be truely come vnto
Christ, and coupled with him, the old husband
of our corruption by whome wee
brought foorth fruit vnto death, is crucified
with Christ in his crosse, that wee
might be espoused vnto an other, euen
the newe man, which is raised vp from
the dead, to bring foorth fruite vnto God.
Neither haue we now onely a commaundement
vnto righteousnes and holinesse
of life: but there is giuen vs a newe spirit,
by which we are regenerated and renued
in the spirit of our mindes, to offer
vp our selues in soule and bodie, an holy,
acceptable, & liuely sacrifice vnto God.
And wheras the flesh euermore rebelleth
against the spirit,Rom. 12. 1
                     •
                  
                euen in the children of
God, we haue receiued promises of ayde
& assistance in this conflict, yea of victorie
and triumph ouer all our enemies. And
that we might with boldenes come vnto
our God for ayde and defence, wee haue
entrance by Christ, euen vnto his mercie

seate, and haue receiued that spirit,Rom. 8. 26. which
in this part helpeth our infirmitie, and
stirreth vp in vs those groninges, which
no tongue is able to expresse, teaching vs
to crie Abba father, and to call vpon him
in all our necessities, and to aske all good
thinges at his handes,1. Tim. 4. 8. who hath made
vs promises, both of this life, and of the
life to come: knowing this, that he, that
hath not spared to giue vnto vs his onely
begotten Sonne,Rom. 8. 32. will also with him giue
vs all things, which in his wisedome he
seeth to be needefull for vs. Our helpe
therefore is in the name of the Lorde,
Which is as an inuincible towre,Prou. 18. 10. wherevnto
the righteous fleeth, & is deliuered.
Also we know, who it is, that hath said:
aske, and ye shall receiue: seeke, & ye shall
finde:Matth. 7. 7. knocke and it shall be opened vnto
you: euen he, which sitteth at the right
hand of his father, and maketh intercession
for vs. When wee pray,Rom. 8. 34. wee must
pray onely vnto God, onely in the name
of Jesus Christ, onely for good thinges,
onely to a good ende, with our heartes,
and not onely with lippes: disposing our
selues reuerently and religiously, as in
the presence of Gods maiestie: touched

with the want of that we aske: and grieued
with the burthen and feare of that we
pray against: being assured that the Lord
heareth our praiers & wil in his own good
appointed time graunt our requestes, as
in his wisedome he knoweth to be expedient
for his owne glorie and for our saluation.
            There are many notable examples of
this manner of praying, in the holy scriptures,
especially in the booke of the
Psalmes, framed according to the diuers
estates and affections of the Seruauntes
of GOD. Let vs therefore after
their example, examining our selues
before the Lord, in minde, body, and
outwarde conditions of this life, according
to our present feeling & sence thereof,
make our humble and vnfeined supplications
in his presence, for our selues, and
for all men,Gal. 6. 10. especially them that are of
the housholde of faith, concluding & sealing
vp all our prayers with that forme of
peticion, which our sauiour Christ him
self hath taught. Our father which art inMat. 6. 9.
Heauen, hallowed be thy name: thy kingdome
come: thy will be done in earth, as
it is in heauen: giue vs this day our dayly

bread, and forgiue vs our trespasses, as
we forgiue thē, that trespasse against vs:
and leade vs not into temptation, but deliuer
vs from euell: for thine is the kingdome,
the power, and the glory, for euer
and euer. Amen.
         
         
            The eight proposition.
            What other helpes there are vnto
godlines and weldoing commended
vnto vs in
the woorde.
            THe Lorde our GOD knowing the
frailtie of our corrupt and cursed nature,
the deceitfulnesse of sinne, the power,
rage and subtilties of Satan, hath in
wisedome and mercie for their further
helpe appointed in his woord two kindes
of discipline vnto his seruantes. The
one priuate, the other publique, vnto the
first appertaineth all the exercises of repentance,
and godlines commended vnto
vs either in precept or example of the
holy scriptures. As our daily consulting
with the worde and lawes of God,
which to be vnto vs, as they were vnto

Dauid the men of our counsell the continuall
examining of our waies,Psal. 119. 56. 60. & turning
our feete vnto the Lordes testimonyes,
our carefull and diligent hasting,2. Cor. 7. 11. and not
delaying to keepe his commaundements
The grieuing of our selues with our sins
past,Heb. 12. 1. the feare of sinne present, which is
readie to intrapp vs, the wise & circumspect
preuenting of sinne to come, the subduing
of the flesh, and bring it in subiection,
after the maner of the Apostle wt reuenge1. Cor. 9. 27.
taken vpon our corruption for the
mortifying of the same, by wtdrawing the
baites, prouocations, and occasions of
euill, sobrietie and the pure and chast
vse of all the good blessings of God: abstenence,
euen from lawful pleasures and
profites, when they are either offensiue
vnto others, or hurtfull vnto our selues,
as otherwise, so by bringing vs vnder
the bondage & seruitud of earthly things,
which all of them are ordained vnto corruption.1. Cor. 6. 12.
Fasting, which the Scripture
calleth the afflicting of the soule,Psal. 39. 2. ioyned
with continuall and earnest prayer vnto
God.Iob. 31. 1. Making couenant with our mouths,
that they shall not speake euil, and with
our eyes, that they shall not beholde vanitie,

imitating the vertues and godlines
of the faithfull, vsing holie company
and conference with them. Hating
detesting and abhorring the wayes of
the wicked, shunning and eschewing
all consulting and conuersation with
them. Not ceasing our conflict against
sinne,Heb. 12. 4. euen vntill blood, but casting of the
olde man,Rom. 8. 13. and mortifying the woorkes of
the flesh by the spirit,Ephe. 5. 8. and 11. 9. to put on the newe
man with the woorkes and armour of
light, to serue the Lord according to his
woorde.
            They which through want of knowledge,
or weakenes of the minde, are not
sufficient vnto the well gouerning and
brideiing of them selues, must as the
Lord hath commanded be instructed, and
strengthened by others: that either by
mercifull admonition and exhortation,
they may bee recouered from sinne: or
else may be saued by terrors and threats
of the iudgements of God, beeing thereby
as it were by violence, taken out of
the fire of destruction. Unto this appertayneth
that notable exhortation of the
Apostle:Iud. 22. Let vs obserue and marke one
another (not vnto enuy or occasion of sin)

but to stirre vp our selues mutually,Heb. 10. 24. and
euen to whet one an other, vnto the duties
of charitie, and to all good workes.
            The other kinde of discipline is publike,
consisting of three partes. First of
the preaching of the lawe, which is as a
two edged sworde in the hande of Gods
ministers, to offer vp his people an holie
and blameles sacrifice vnto his maiestie,
not onely opening our eyes, that we may
see and knowe,Psal. 90. what is that good perfect
and acceptable will of the Lorde, but also
through the working of the holy Ghost
conuerting our soules and fashioning
them after the image & similitude of him
that made thē. Secondly, admonitions,
exhortations and counsels ministred by
such persons, as the Lord hath appointed
for the ouersight of their brethren. Thirdly,
of conuenting of the offendours before
the Churche in open congregation to bee
iudicially admonished, or according vnto
the qualitie and degree of their offence,
forbidden the Supper of the Lord, or cut
of from the Churche, vntill by remorse
of sinne with smart and shame of punishment
laide vpon them for the same, they
shal with certaine testimonies of true and

vnfeigned repentance, humbly desire to
be restored vnto their former estate, amongest
the people of God.
            The weakenes of conscience must often
times be holpen by ciuil punishment
publikely or priuately, to be executed by
magistrates, parentes, maisters, and others,
whom the Lorde God hath authorized
and armed with the swoorde of iustice,
and rodde of correction, not for the
profite onely of suche as offende, but also
for the example & terrour of others, that
at least by awe of punishment, they may
feare to doe euill. For as indulgence and
impunitie nourisheth & increaseth wickednesse
(as Salomon saith) and wicked
men:Eccle. 8. 11. so godly seuerity of punishment
chaseth away sin, and lessoneth the number
of offendours. In punishing it must
be remembred, that it be not dumme and
silent, but ioyned with doctrin, admonition,
& exhortation, that the force thereof
may work the more in the hart of the offenders.
It may not be the reuenge of our
priuate griefe, but of the dishonour of the
name of God, & of the breach of his holy
commaundementes. It must be ioyned
with calling vpon the name of the Lord,

that as it is his good ordinance, so it may
be both giuen and receiued according to
his wil, and blessed by his spirit, to the reforming
of those, that haue done amisse,
and forwarnings of others.Ios. 7. 19. Finally all
meanes are to be vsed, that the conscience
of the offender may be touched with the
horror of his sinne and feare of Gods iustice:
that we may cleere our selues of all
corruption,2. Cor. 7. 11. by directing the punishment
not against the person, but against the
sinne: beeing greeued, that we are compelled
to flye to that extreme remedy,Iosu. 7. 25. and
yet to doe it, with á godly courage and
zeale, as caryed with most iust hatred and
indignation against sinne,
            Unto the abating of the rage of our
corrupt and degenerate nature,2. Cor. 4. 16. the Lord
yeeldeth vs no small helpe by afflictions
and aduersities, which therefore are called
chastisementes and corrections, because
we are thereby reformed: as the
Prophet saith: before I was corrected,
I went astray, but now I haue kept thy
commaundements. In so much as he professeth,
that it was good for him, that hee
had beene afflicted, and acknowledgeth,
that of very trueth the Lorde had chastened

him: meaning thereby, that as the
Lord hath couenaunted with his people
all good things, so is it also a parte of his
couenaunt,Heb. 12. 6. to punish and correct his children,
as he knoweth to be expedient for
them:1. Cor. 11. 31. the reason whereof is rendred by
the Apostle, For if wee iudged our
selues, we should not be punished: but
when we are punished, we are nurtured
of the Lorde, that we might not be condemned
with the world.
            The ende of all is, that the workes of
Satan in the corruption of our nature,
with the fruites of the same, might vtterly
be abolished, and▪ that the image of
God, not blemished onely, but euen cancelled
and defaced by the fall of Adam,
might be renued and repaired in vs. The
first happeneth vnto vs in the dissolution
of this earthly tabernacle, from which
time we sinne no more, as appeareth by
that vehement and lamentable exclamation
of Saint Paule: Miserable man that
I am,Rom. 7. 24. would God I were deliuered from
this bodie of death. The second, though
begon & increased in this life, shal not be
fully accomplished, vntill our Sauiour
Christ returne from heauen,Th
                     ••
                   1. 10. be made glorious

in his Saints. For albeit we are
now the childrē of God,1. Iohn. 3. 2. it hath not yet appeared,
what we shall bee, but our life is
hid with Christ in God, and we knowe,
that whē Christ, which is our life, shal be
made manifest, we also shal be made manifest
with him in glorie.Colos. 3. 3. 4. Then shall we
be clothed with that glorious tabernacle,
not made with handes, eternall in heauen:
then shall mortalitie be deuoured of
immortalitie:2. Cor. 5. 1. 4. then shall Christ, who alreadie
is crowned with glorie and honor,Heb. 2. 9.
returne our redemer from heauen, and
chaunge our vile bodies,Phil. 3. 20. 21. that they maye
be made like vnto his glorious bodie, according
vnto that power, whereby he is
able to subdue all thinges vnto him selfe.
Then shall it be accomplished, which is
written,1. Cor. 15. 54. death is swallowed vp in victorie,
O death, where is thy sting? O
graue where is thy victorie? For the
strēgth of death is sinne, and the strength
of sinne is the lawe. But thankes be vnto
God, who hath giuen vs victorie by
Jesus Christ our Lord. Therefore let vs
be strong and immoueable in the trueth,
abounding alwayes in the worke of the
Lord, seeing we know, that our labour is

not in vaine in the Lorde: But the day of
our redemption shall once appeare, wherin
the trumpets shal blow, and the deade
shall rise, those that are found aliue shall
be changed,1. Thes. 4. 16. and wee all which beleeue,
shall meete the Lorde in the ayre, and so
reigne with him in glorie for euer, which
time shoulde long since haue come vpon
the worlde,2. Pet 3. 9. sauing that the Lord is pacient
to vswarde, and will not that anie
of vs should perishe, and not of vs onely,
which now liue, but of those also, which
shalbe raised vp in posteritie after vs,
whom he hath likewise appointed vnto
saluation,Heb. 11. 40. and will in his good time call
by the ministerie of his Gospell, least we
without them shoulde be consecrated in
that glorie, wherevnto he hath redeemed
vs. The Lord therefore in mercie hasten
the fulfiling of the number of his elect,
that the daies of sinne may cease, and that
our sauiour Christ, as he appeared in the
fulnes of time with a sacrifice for sinne,
so may now againe,Heb. 9. 28. when al things shall
be accomplished, appeare without sacrifice
vnto the saluatiō of al those, that wait
for his returne to iudge the quick and the
deade.1. Cor. 15. 24. 18. That rendring vp the kingdome

vnto his father God may be all in al. And
that we in ye meane time walking as Pilgrimes
& strāgers in this world holding
foorth the light of the holy woord of God
and bearing our selues as heauenly Citizens,Phil. 3. 20.
may haue a safe and ioyfull passage
euer lifting vp our heades with the rest
of his creatures,Rom. 8. and with ioy and gladnes
looke for the glorious returne of that
great God our Sauiour Christ,Tit. 2. vnto our
full and perfect redemption. And in all
temptations & trialles whatsoeuer, may
finde the present hand of the Lord,1. Pet. 1. 4. ready
for our deliuerance, to preserue vs by his
power vnto that inheritance, which cannot
perish, nor be defiled, nor fade away
reserued for vs in heauen,Actes 3. 21 which also
waiteth as readie to be reuealed
vpon vs in the last
time, when all things
shalbe restored.
         
      
      
         
            
            To the Reader.
            If happely this litle treatise shal seeme
needlesse, amongest so many of like
argument: yt may please thee (gentle
reader) to vnderstand, that the purpose
of the author in publishing hereof,
was especially to helpe the memorie,
meditation, and practise of those, to
whome the doctrine heerein contained,
hath bene by the ministery
of preaching, in the
same order more at
large declared.
            
         
      
   