
      
         
            
            
            A liuing remembrance of Maſter Robert Rogers, Marchant aduenturer &
Leatherſeller of London deceaſed, who declared the fruites of his faith, by his moſt chriſtian & charitable workes.
And left this life at his houſe in Baſſings-hill the 22. of September. And was buried in Chriſt-church
on Thurſday the 1. of October. 1601.
            
            
               WHen bad men dye, the memorie remaines
               Of their corruptions and vngodly wayes,
               As merit to their miſapplyed paines,
               Out of ill actions, forming as ill praiſe.
               for vertue wounded by their deepe diſgrace,
               Leaues ſhame to their poſteritie and race.
            
            
               When good men dye, the memorie remaines,
               Of their true vertues, and moſt chriſtian wayes:
               As a due guerdon to their godly paines,
               Out of good actions, forming as good praiſe.
               for vertue cheriſh'd by their deedes of grace,
               Leaues fame to their poſteritie and race.
            
            
               Among thoſe good (if goodnes may be ſaid,
               To be among the ſeede of mortall men:
               In vpright ballaunce of true merit wayed)
               This worthy Batcheler eſteeme we then.
               In whome, as in a mirrour doth appeare,
               That faith and workes did ſhine in him moſt cleere.
            
            
               Now let vs not, as is our common vſe,
               Meaſure him by a many other more:
               In death, to couer their lifes bad abuſe,
               That then flyes out ſome bounty of their ſtore,
               No Rogers was none ſuch, as may appeare,
               By theſe true witneſſes annexed heere.
            
            
               Firſt, as God bleſt him with aboundant wealth,
               Like to a carefull Steward he imployde it:
               Squaring his guifts out in his beſt of health,
               As glad to leaue it, as when he inioyde it.
               Himſelfe prepared euery houre to die:
               And all in order pointed chriſtianly.
            
            
               In ſundry callings and vocations,
               Where he could heare of them were rightly poore:
               As men decayed by their occupations,
               Yet held by ſhame from begging at the doore,
               Such ſuccourd he, as knowing that their need,
               Stopt vp their mouthes, though made their hearts to bleede.
            
            
               What ſhould I ſay? to what poore wanting heart,
               Was he not liberall in the largeſt kinde?
               Such as were hopefull, and had any parte
               Of chriſtian zeale, felt freely his good minde.
               Preachers, poore handy-crafts, and pariſhes:
               From Rogers purſe haue liberall Legacies.
            
            
               In Abrahams boſome ſleepes he with the bleſt,
               His workes do follow him, his worth ſuruiues:
               The Angels guide him to eternall reſt,
               Where is no date of time, for yeares or liues.
               You that are rich, doe you as he hath done:
               and ſo aſſure the Crowne that Chriſt hath wonne.
            
         
         
            Leagacies bequeathed to charitable vſes by Maſter Robert Rogers deceaſed.
            
               
                  IN primis, to the two Counters, Ludgate, Newgate, Bedlam and the Clinke. xii.l.
               Money to be preſently diſtributed to the poore, in the Pariſh he dwelt in. x.l.
               To prouide two dozen of bread euery Sunday for euer, to be giuen to the poore of the ſaid Pariſh. C.l.
               To the Pariſh of Chriſt-church, to buy Coales at the beſt hand for the poore yearely, to continue a ſtocke
for euer to that vſe: x.l.
               And money preſently to be diſtriubted to the poore in that Pariſh. v.l.
               To the poor of S. George Pariſh in Southwarke, the poor without Newgate, the poor without Cripplegate,
& the poore without Buſhops gate, to each Pariſh xx. Nobles to be diſtributed in money. xxvj.l.xiij.s.iiij.d.
               To the poore of two Townes in the Weſt Country. xiij.l.vj.s.viij.d.
               To the poore of the towne of Poole where he was borne, to be preſently diſtributed in money: x.l.
               More, to build almes houſes in the ſaid towne, CCCxxxiij. 
                     〈…〉
                   vj.s.viij.d.
               With exebition for twelue poore people weekely for euer.
               To releeue poore Priſoners ſuch as may be ſet free for xx. Nobles a man, or vnder, ſo that no Papiſt nor Athiſt
haue any benefit thereof. CL.l.
               To releeue poore Preachers of the word of God, not exceeding to any one man, aboue ten pound. C.l.
               To ten poore decayed Artifficers that haue charge of wife and Children ten pound a man. C.l.
               To the company of Marchant aduentureres, for the reliefe of decayed people by him nominated during their
liues, and after their deceaſe, to the vſe of young men free of the ſaid company. CCCC.l.
               To the Company of Leatherſellers, to giue exebition at the Vnyuerſities, to foure Schollers ſtudents in Deuinitie
for euer viz. Two in Oxford and Two in Cambridge. CCCC.l.
               To Saint George Pariſh in Sowthwarke. xxx.l.
               To Saint Sepulchers Pariſh. xxx.l.
               To Saint Oliffes Pariſh in Sowthwarke. xxx.l.
               To Saint Gyles without Cripplegate. xxx.l.
               To Saint Leonards in Shorditch, xxx.l.
               To Saint Buttolphes without Allgate. xx.l.
               To Saint Buttolphes without Biſhopsgate. xx.l.

                     Amounting to 190.l. in all, to make ſtocks to buy ſea-coale or other fuell in ſummer at the beſt hand, for the vſe of
the poore, and to continue for euer in that manner, leauing ſtocks in thoſe ſeuerall Pariſhes.
                  
               
               To Chriſts Hoſpitall (of which he was a gouernour) to purchaſe land to the reliefe of that houſe. CCCCC.l.
               To erect Almes houſes within the Cittie of London, and for exebition weekely for xij poore people to be placed
in them. CCCCCC.l.
               The whole ſumme giuen by Maſter Rogers laſt Will to charitable vſes. 2960. l. 6. s. 8. d.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London for M. Allde, and are to be ſolde at her ſhop vnder Saint Mildreds Church in the Poultry.
         
      
   