
      
         
            
            
            
            
            A
STRANGE
VINEYARD IN
PALAESTINA:
IN AN EXPOSITION
OF ISAIAHS PARABOLICAL
Song of the Beloued, diſcouered:
To which Gods Vineyard in this our
Land is Paralleld.
            By NEHEMIAH ROGERS, Maſter
in Arts, and Paſtor of the Congregation
at Meſsing in Eſſex.
            
            IEREM. 2. 21.
            Yet I had planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right ſeed: How
then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of A STRANGE
Vine vnto me?
            LONDON,
Printed by Iohn Hauiland for EDWARD BREWSTER, and
are to be ſold at his Shop at the Signe of the Starre at
the West-end of Pauls. 1623.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO
The Right Honourable
and truly
Noble Lord, ROBERT
Earle of Warwick, Lord
RICH, Baron of
Leeze, &c.
            Encreaſe of Honour here, and euerlasting
Glory hereafter.
            
               Right Honorable Lord;
            
            
               MAy it pleaſe you
to take in good
worth this my
bold attempt, in
that vpon ſo little knowledge
and far leſſe deſerts,
I haue aduentured ſo far,
as to grace theſe my weake
labours with your Noble
name.
            Beſides ſome perſonall

and particular reſpects
which I here let paſſe; I
haue had ſome generall inducements
hereunto; and
this aboue the reſt, Your
Honours loue vnto the
Truth, and great regard of
the Miniſterie thereof;
which your more than ordinarie
paines taking to
heare holy Inſtructions,
together with the great reſpect
your Honour giues
to ſuch as bring glad tidings
of peace (whoſe feet
(and much more their
face) are eſteemed by you
as beautifull) are ſufficient
arguments to euince.Rom. 10. 15. By
which and other fruits of
pietie you ſtill merit renowne
to your Noble
Name, and are zealouſly
honoured of al that know
you and loue goodneſſe.
into which number (I
hopefully preſuming) haue
thruſt my ſelfe, as being
loth to bee hindmoſt in
that acknowledgement
which is ſo nobly deſerued,
and ioyfully rendered
of all; deſiring (as far as in

me lieth) to make knowne
vnto the world that grace
which lies lodged in your
noble breſt, which being
vnited to your greatneſſe,
maketh ſo happie
a compoſition, as that
they who had no more
than Natures light, eſteemed
it only for trueNobilitas ſola eſt at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   unica virtus. Iuven. Nobilitie.
            For whereas greatneſſe
makes ſome men
ſcornefull and imperious:
yet whatNec quicquam in te mutavit ſertunae amplitudo niſi ut prodeſſe tantundem poſſes & velles Plin. epiſt. ad Veſpaſ. 
               Plinius reports
of Veſpaſian, may
be truly ſaid of you; It
hath changed nothing in
you but this, that your
power to doe good ſhould
bee anſwerable to your
will.
            Yea, it may be iuſtly
thought, that your Honour
would teach men to
take the meaſure of your
greatneſſe, by your goodneſſe;
of ſo euen a length
and equall pace are they.
And indeed ſo it muſt be,
for ſhould Honour outrunne
Honeſtie, it would
hardly bee ouertaken.
            
               
But I muſt remember
to whom I ſpeake, euen to
ſuch a one as careth not
for long ſalutations in the
Markets: I haue done
when I haue once againe
craued pardon for my
boldneſſe, and humbly
requeſted at your Honours
hands (whoſe
goodneſſe hath not wont
to magnifie it ſelfe more
in giuing, than in receiuing
ſuch like holy preſents)
acceptation and
countenance to what is
here offered by a thankfull
heart.
            As for the Matter herein
handled, I will not
feare to ſay it deſerues
it: And for the Manner
I muſt ſay it needs it;
whatſoeuer it bee, bee it
not as it ſhould be, yet my
will wiſheth it to be well;
but as it is
            
               I humbly betake it to you Hounours fauourable protection:
and ſo your Hounour to the protection
of the Highest.
            
            
               Your Hounours humbly and officiouſly
deuoted in all dutie, 
NEHEMIAH ROGERS.
            
         
         
            
            TO
The right vertuous
and truly zealous Ladie
FRANCIS, Counteſſe
of Warwicke, and
wife to the Right Honorable
Lord, ROBERT
Earle of Warwick,
&c.
            
               Right Noble Lady;
            
            
               MY attempt may
ſeeme a wonder,
but where
IVDGEMENT
ſearcheth out the cauſe,
and Prudence guideth
Wiſdome to weigh the circumſtance,
the conceit of
wondermēt ceaſeth. What
hath induced mee to ioyne
you with your Honourable

Lord, needs no long relation:
God hath cemented
and combined you together
with the neereſt & ſtrongeſt
bands, and therefore I
in my due honoring of both,
preſume to conioyne you
both in this one Dedication.
            What is conceiued and
reported of your Honours
worth, thorow all our
Countrey, I must paſſe
ouer in ſilence, for well I
know your excellent modestie
will not ſuffer ſuch
(though deſerued) a relation:
Your Honour rather
affecting to doe things deſeruing
Fame, than Fame
it ſelfe: And like the fixed
ſtarres, the higher God
hath ſet you, the leſſe you
deſire to ſeeme.
            I confeſſe I am (as yet)
but a Stranger in theſe
parts, yet must he be more
ſtrange that meeteth not
with the report of your
Honours vertues: whoſe
diligent paines in gaining
knowledge of holy things,
and conſcionable practiſe
of what you know: whoſe

humble, ſober, wiſe, courteous,
and modest cariage
(rare vertues to be found
in Ladies of ſo high a place
and ranke) are ſo many
tongues, and mouthes, and
pens, without mine, to publiſh
your due praiſes.
            And though through the
corruption of theſe times,
this age is growne ſo baſe,
as that one cannot thinke
any to be the better or the
worſe for the report that
flies of them, vnleſſe they
be eye-witneſſes either of
their good or ill; yet where
the ſound is all ſo honourable,
I dare be confident of
an holy inclination, & gratious
diſpoſition; which
hath giuen me ſuch encouragement,
as that I haue
little need to miſdoubt either
your Honours acceptation
of this Treatiſe, or
to aduiſe your vſe: for I
perſwade my ſelfe that you
wil not only view the title
and Epiſtle (as the faſhion
of moſt Patrons is) but the
whole book alſo in ſome of
thoſe houres which your

Honour redeemes (I dare
ſay) for ſoule employments,
from thoſe idle and
exceſsiue cuſtomes wherein
too many Ladies pleaſe
themſelues and none elſe.
            But I know that your
Honor will be better pleaſed,
if I turne praiſes into
praiers: therefore I will
endeuour to ſupply that
want, this way; beſeeching
the God of Maieſtie and
mercy, to ſanctifie your
heart, yet more and more;
who with the New-yeere
giue you new ſupplies of
the graces of his Spirit,
and gratiouſly to encreaſe
in you the ground of all
true Honor, Goodneſſe.
            
            Let me not offend in offering
ſo meane a worke to
ſo worthy a Perſonage: the
weaker it is, the more need
hath it of a worthy Patron,
therefore
            
               I humbly betake it to your Honours fauourable protection:
And ſo your Honour to the protection
of the Highest.
            
            
               Your Honours humbly and officiouſly
deuoted in all dutie,
NEHEMIAH ROGERS.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               HE that feaſts high Eſtates, muſt ſeeke
out for forraine Cookeries, and fantaſticall
diſhes to pleaſe their pallats;
but hee that in true charitie inuites
home his plaine honeſt neighbours,
doth well enough if he prouide ſuch homely fare
as ſhall be competent and befitting men of meaner
qualitie: It is the plaine Country-man I feaſt, commonly
called the Good-man; And therefore for
thee Reader to expect any curious Diuiſion, rare Inuention,
or Rhetoricall compoſition in this Treatiſe,
would be as vaine and idle, as to hope to
meet with puft paſte at a Plow-mans table.
            As for thoſe who driue their flockes vpon the
mountain tops, for euery ſpeare of graſſe they there
ſpie growing,Qui ſua metitur pondera ferre poteſt. Martial. I neither enuie them, nor dare follow
them, for I confeſſe ingenuouſly my abilitie
and gifts will not ſuffer me: Or if they would, yet
I would forbeare, and rather chuſe to feed my ſheep
in the valleyes where is graſſe enough, handling
the Doctrine of Faith and Good life, than to trauell
in the controuerted points of Predeſtination, Freewill,
Church-gouernments, &c. for hee is blinde
who ſees not that mens braines are full, but their

hearts are emptie. Our tongues runne ouer, but for
twentie good words, we haue not one good work;
which is our ſhame.
            If then thou loueſt not plainneſſe, lay this booke
by, for ſuch as loue it; for though ſuch diet be not
for thy tooth, yet there are thouſands of good
ſoules, who like better with ſuch pulſe, than with
daintier fare, growing faſter in knowledge, and
ſtronger in the Faith, with ſuch plaine Inſtructions,
than by more learned Treatiſes. But if thou be ſuch
a one as deſireſt rather to haue thy conſcience, than
thy curioſitie ſatisfied; thy heart ſeaſoned, and
ſoule profited, than thy eares tickled with pleaſingneſſe
of words; thou art hee for whom this
was penned: And thou art welcome. I haue ſaid;
doe thou reade; God bleſſe thy reading. And doe
thou remaine mine, as I am
            
               Thine in Christ,
N. ROGERS.
            
         
         
            
            A
TABLE OF THE
DOCTRINES collected out of
the ſeuerall Verſes of this Parabolicall
Song of the
BELOVED.
            
               VERSE 1.
               Doctrine 1 GOD ſeeketh to draw vs to himſelfe
with ſuch baits as wee moſt affect.
pag. 4
               2 Gods Miniſters both for matter
and method muſt fit themſelues
vnto their hearers. 10
               3 It is no disparagement to greatneſſe to be the
Lords Prophet. 17
               4 Poetry is an Art antient and praiſe-worthy. 23
               5 Songs and Poems artificially modulated, may lawfully
be ſung for the ſettingforth of Gods praiſe. 26
               6 All our labours ſhould bee dedicated to the Lord. 32
               
                  
7 Euery true member of the Church doth, and ſo
ought, to loue the Lord entirely. pag 40
               8 Miniſters are Chriſts Paranymphs. 57
               9 Miniſters ſhould deliuer nothing for Doctrine,
but what they are able to ſhew warrant for the deliuerie
of. 63
               10 Miniſters ſhould ſpend their paines eſpecially for
the Churches good. 66
               11 It is lawfull to make reſemblances betwixt things
earthly, and things heauenly. 82
               12 There is no earthly thing which may not be applied
to ſome ſpeciall vſe for our edification in grace. 83
               13 God is the Husbandman of his Church. 89
               14 The Church is Gods inheritance. 93
               15 A true Church may be corrupted with error and
idolatrie. 95
               16 The Church of God is but one. 99
               17 God is no way wanting in any point of good husbandry
for his Churches profit. 103
               18 The fat of the earth is ſometimes giuen by God to
his people for a poſſeſſion. 108
            
            
               VERSE 2.
               Doctrine 1 GOds Church hath a ſtrong ſence about it,
whereby it is preſerued from the furie of
their enemies. 111
               2 It is not ſafe for the Church to ſuffer Idolaters or
other obſtinate ſinners to remaine within her. 113
               3 The godly and their ſeed are the choiſeſt plants and
nobleſt perſons. 119
               4 The beauty and bulwarke of a place is the ſeruice and
worſhip of God in that place. 127
               5 God hath his Wine-preſſe for the preſſing and diſcouering

of his Vineyards fruit. pag. 131
               6 Where God hath taken paines in husbanding, there
he expects fruit ſomewhat anſwerable to his paines. 135
               7 The wicked make an vngratefull returne to God for
all his fauours. 162
               8 The wicked diuert the meanes of their ſaluation to
their confuſion. 164
               9 The fruit of ſinne and diſobedience is a ſtinking
fruit. 168
            
            
               VERSE 3.
               Doctrine 1 GOd doth proceed againſt ſinners in much meekneſſe.
174
               2 God is content to ſubmit his courſes vnto ſcanning.
179
               3 God will fetch witneſſe from the conſciences of his
enemies for the iuſtifying of his proceedings. 181
               4 Sinne is the make-bate betweene God and his
people. 186
            
            
               VERSE 4.
               Doctrine 1 GOd cannot any way be charged with the ſinfulneſſe
and barrenneſſe of mens hearts and
liues. 192
               2 Though God vſe all meanes to make the wicked good,
yet notwithſtanding they will ſtill continue wicked. 197
               3 God grieues when man contemnes the meanes of his
ſaluation. 200
            
            
               
               VERSE 5.
               Doctrine 1 GOd doth warne before he ſmite. pag. 209
               2 He is of a patient and forbearing nature. 217
               3 Gods holy hand hath a ſpeciall ſtroke in all thoſe afflictions
which are laid vpon his Church. 223
               4 God will not ſpare his owne people if they ſinne againſt
him. 231
               5 The vngratefull abuſe of Gods bleſſings cauſeth the
Lord to depriue vs of them, and to bring vpon vs the contrary
wants. 238
               6 Sinne depriueth man of Gods protection. 240
               7 The wicked cannot hurt vs vntill God leaue vs. 246
               8 The enemies of Gods Church are more raging and
rauenous than the very beaſts. 254
            
            
               VERSE 6.
               Doctrine 1 WArre is the fore-runner of deſolation. 258
               2 Such as neglect the meanes ſhall be in the
end depriued of the meanes. 266
               3 Miniſters haue no power, nor abilitie of themſelues,
to performe their miniſteriall function 271
            
            
               VERSE 7.
               Doctrine 1 GEnerall Doctrines muſt haue particular applications.
278
               2 God is an abſolute Lord ouer all creatures. 282
               
                  
3 God is a God of power, and hath all creatures for his
hoaſts. 286
               4 Good Progenitors may haue a degenerate off-ſpring.
288
               5 Good names and titles are nothing worth without
grace. 291
               6 Good Parents are great ornaments to their poſteritie.
293
               7 Rhetoricke is an Art ſanctified by Gods Spirit, and
may lawfully be vſed in the handling of Gods word. 296
               8 The duties of the ſecond Table God eſpecially reſpects.
297
               9 Oppreſſion of the poore, eſpecially by ſuch as ſhould
be defenders of the poore, is a hainous ſinne. 300
               10 The cries of the oppreſſed aſcend vp into the eares
of the Almighty. 315
            
         
         
            
            ESAY 5. verſ. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
            1 Now will I ſing to my welbeloued, a ſong of my beloued
touching his Vineyard: my welbeloued hath a Vineyard
in a very fruitfull hill.
            2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the ſtones thereof,
and planted it with the choiſeſt vine, and built a tower in
the midſt of it, and alſo made a winepreſſe therein: and he
looked that it ſhould bring forth grapes, and it brought
forth wilde grapes.
            3 And now, O inhabitants of Ieruſalem, and men of
Iudah, Iudge, I pray you, betwixt me and my Vineyard.
            4 What could haue beene done more to my Vineyard,
that I haue not done in it? wherefore when I looked that it
ſhould bring forth grapes, brought it forth wilde grapes?
            5 And now goe to; I will tell you what I will doe to my
Vineyard, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it ſhall be
eaten vp; and breake downe the wall thereof, and it ſhall be
trodden downe.
            6 And I will lay it waſte, it ſhall not be pruned, nor
digged, but there ſhall come vp briers and thornes: I will
alſo command the clouds that they raine no raine vpon it.
            7 For the Vineyard of the LORD of Hoſtes is the
houſe of Iſrael, and the men of Iudah his pleaſant plant:
and he looked for iudgement, but behold oppreſſion; for
righteouſneſſe, but behold a cry.
         
         
            
            
            A Table of the Method of the whole Parabolicall Song of the BELOVED followed
in this EXPOSITION.
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   this Song

                     〈◊〉
                   the Belo
                  
                     ••
                  d,
we haue

                     ••
                  nſiderable,

                     The Prooem or Preface to it, where are remarkable,

                           1 The Inditer inſtrumentall or penman of it, [I.]
                           
                           2 The Nature or kinde of Treatiſe indited, [A Song.]
                           
                           3 The Manner of the Authors deliuerie of it, [Will ſing.]
                           
                           4 The Perſon to whom he dedicates it, [To my welbeloued.]
                           
                           5 The Authoritie whereby he publiſhed it, [Of his beloued.]
                           
                           6 The Subiect Matter contained in it, [Touching his Vineyard.]
                           
                        
                     
                     The Poem it ſelfe
or body of it
                           •
                        
and therein is
obſeruable,

                           A Parable, wch is

                                 
                                    Briefly propounded, verſ. 1. wherein take we notice of

                                       1 The Husbandman, [My welbeloued.]
                                       
                                       2 His Poſſeſſion, [Had a Vineyard.]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Largely proſecuted,
verſ. 2-7.
and therin the
Vineyards

                                       
                                          Plantation, where
wee haue

                                             The Vinitors care
and paines manifeſted,

                                                   1 In its Situation, for it was

                                                         1 On a hill.
                                                         2 A fruitfull hill.
                                                         3 A very fruitfull hill.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   2 In its Protection [He fenced it in.]
                                                   3 In its Elapidation [He gathered out the ſtones.]
                                                   4 In the Plants election [He planted it with the choiſeſt vine.]
                                                   5 In its Fortification [He built a Tower in the midſt of it.]
                                                   6 In the Wine-preſſes erection [He made a wine-preſſe therein.]
                                                
                                             
                                             And the ſucceſſe, where is declared

                                                   1 What he expected [He locked for grapes.]
                                                   2 What it returned [It brought forth wilde grapes.]
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          Supplantation, and
there obſerue

                                             His Plea with
them, & in it

                                                   1 His Appeale to them,
and there note

                                                         1 The Manner of it [I pray you.]
                                                         2 The Matter of it [Iudge.]
                                                         
                                                         3 The Iudges of the cauſe,

                                                               1 Inhabitants of Ieruſalem.
                                                               2 Men of Iudah.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         4 The Parties at variance,

                                                               Mee.
                                                               My Vineyard.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   2 The Inditement againſt
them, where marke

                                                         1. He acquitteth himſelfe [
                                                               •
                                                            hat could I haue done, &c.]
                                                         
                                                         2. Accuſeth them, which accuſation
is amplified by Antitheſis from

                                                               His iuſt demand, Wherefore
when I locked, &c.
                                                               
                                                                  Their vniuſt demeanour,
brought it forth wilde grapes?
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                Sentence vpon
them, and in it

                                                   1 A gratious premonition, demonſtrating Gods mercy

                                                         1 In foretelling it [I will tell you.]
                                                         2 In prolonging it [What I will doe.]
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   2 A terrible execution, manifeſting
Gods iuſtice, where

                                                         1 The puniſher [I.]
                                                         2 The puniſhed [My Ʋineyard.]
                                                         3. The puniſhment,
which conſiſteth

                                                               1 In the euill of leſſe, [I will take
away the hedge: breake downe the
wall, &c.
                                                               
                                                               2 In the euill of ſenſe [It ſhall be eaten
vp, trodden downe, &c.
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           The Application, where is ſhewed, verſ. 8.

                                 Who this Vinitor is,

                                       The Lord.
                                       The Lord of Hoaſts.
                                    
                                 
                                 Which the Vineyard was,
                                    
                                       The houſe of Iſrael.
                                       The men of Iudah.
                                    
                                 
                                 What the grapes were

                                       Which he expected,

                                             Iudgement,
                                             Righteouſneſſe.
                                          
                                       
                                       Which they returned,

                                             Oppreſſion,
                                             A cry.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A
Strange Vineyard
in PALAESTINA,
IN
An expoſition of Iſaiahs parabolicall
Song of the Beloued, diſcouered:
To which Gods Vineyard in this our
Land is Paralleld.
            
               ISAIAH 5. 1. 8.
               Now will I ſing to my well-beloued a Song of my Text.
beloued touching his Vineyard.
            
            
               IT was a practice vſuall with the
Prophets in former times,Calu. in praeſat. ad hunc lib. after
that they had propheſied to the
people, toIſai. 8. 1. 2. & 30. 8. gather a compendious
ſumme of what they had
taught,Hab▪ 2. 2. and affixe it to the gate
of the Temple, that the propheſie
might be the better viewed
and learned of all; and after it had there remained for
certaine daies, it was then taken downe and put into the

treaſurie of the Temple, that the memory thereof might
continue for euer. And thus by Gods ſpeciall prouidence
it came to paſſe, that (if not all, yet) moſt of the
bookes of the Prophets were gathered, and preſerued,
and now as rich treaſures are enioyed by vs: wherein
we haue the Sermons of the holy Prophets not ſo largely
penned as they were preached,Muſ
                     •
                  ul. in Iſai. but only ſuch generall
heads collected as were by them deliuered. Now
as before in the former Chapters, ſo heere in this we
haue ſome ſuch Sermon notes, preached by an excellent
and incomparable Prophet, by name Iſaiah: A
man of noble birth, and of as noble a ſpirit; trace him
and you ſhall ſtill finde him like his noble ſelfe, pithy,
powerfull, and (as Saint Paul witneſſeth)Rom. 10. 20. 
               very bold in
deliuering of his meſſage, fearing no cruelty nor danger,
albeit for his boldneſſe he loſt his life, being by
the commandement of Manaſſes ſawne aſunder with
a woodden ſaw,Hierom. lib. 15. in Iſai. in ſine. if Hiſtorie ſpeakes true.
            He was a Courtier and a Maſter of ſpeech, being (ſaith
one of the AntientHierom. epiſt. ad Paulinum.) the eloquenteſt Prophet for Hebrew
in the Old Teſtament, as Saint Paul was the eleganteſt
Apoſtle for Greeke in the New: To whoſe elegancies
the rowlings of Demoſthenes doe no more anſwer
than that confuſed noiſe of waters, doth to that
ſweet noiſe of Harpes ſpoken of in Saint Iohns Reuelation
Reuel. 14. 2. Bulling. Praef. in Iſac.. In all his writings he rather ſeemeth to be an
Euangeliſt than a Prophet, moſt liuely deſcribing and
ſetting forth the Natiuitie, Preaching, Perſecution,
Apprehenſion, Death, Reſurrection, Aſcenſion, yea,
and latter comming to Iudgement of our Lord and Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſt: ſo that no Euangeliſt ſeemes to goe
beyond him. His Auditorie was Iudah and Ieruſalem,
a ſtubborne and diſobedient people; more brutiſh than
the Oxe and AſſeCap. 1. 18.: whoſe ſinnes were crimſon, receiuing
a double dye, or admitting a two-fold aggrauation,
one from Gods vnutterable kindneſſe vnto them, in
nouriſhing, bringing of them vp, and chooſing them

for his: The other from the qualitie and multitude of
their tranſgreſſions againſt him, whoſe ſinnes were for
number many; for nature heauie.
            To theſe is Iſaiah (Gods Health) ſent that he might
heale their ſickneſſe;Etym. nom. Prophet. with theſe he deales, and firſt diſcouers
their diſeaſe, and then labours for their recouerie:
He proues that theyCap. 1. Verſ. 4. are a ſinfull nation, a people full
of iniquitie, a ſeede of euill doers, corrupt children, whoſe
whole head was ſicke, and whole heart heauie; ſo that from
the ſole of the foot to the crowne of the head, there was no
ſoundneſſe, but wounds, and bruiſes, and putrifying ſores,
&c. And that of a faithfull citie it was now become a harlot,
whoſe ſiluer was become droſſe, and wine mixt with water,
&c. For all which, Gods anger was conceiued
againſt them, and yet withall he ſignifies his mercy, if
it were receiued by them; vſing his beſt Oratorie, in
Inuiting thoſe that did rebell, Inciting thoſe that did
neglect, haſtening thoſe that did linger, and recalling
thoſe that did wander, to ſue out their pardons and
make peace with their Maker: And thus he ſpends the
foure fore-going Chapters. All which to haue heard
this Orator himſelfe preſſe in his owne words and with
his owne affections, whoſe bowels would not haue yerned
and heart melted within their breaſts? And yet ah
Lord! what heare I? Iſrael is not gatheredEſay 53. 1., thy ſeruants
report is not beleeued, euen Iſaiah himſelfe labours
in vaine, and ſpends his ſtrength for noughtCap. 49. 4.:
no better fared it with him in his miniſterie, than it fareth
with vs the Miniſters of thy Goſpell: Scarce
a tenth is gathered. And yet we cannot wonder that it
fareth ſo with vs: For can we (who are but rude in
ſpeech, and of a ſlow tongue) hope for that which ſo
rare a Rhetorician found not? little or no fruit could he
ſee of all his trauels; and yet he doth not faint, but
with an inuincible conſtancy goes on in performing his
propheticall function.
            Oh! how ſorts the humour of many with this his

practiſe? ſuch is the impatiencie of our hearts, that
except we ſee preſent reformation in thoſe we haue to
deale withall, we are ready with Ieremiah
               Ier. 20. 9. to reſolue to
ſpeake no more in the name of God. It is noted as his
blemiſh, and the word of God giues him no reſt vntill
he had altered his reſolution.
            But what courſe wilt thou now take, oh thou man
of God with this obdurate people? Their hearts are
fully ſet in them to doe euill, they will not obey: nay,
which is worſe, they will not heare thee: would they
liſten to thy Sermons, there were ſome hope they might
be wrought vpon: but turning away the eare, what
hope is left? Tell vs then, oh noble Prophet, what wilt
thou doe? let vs be ſo bold with thee as to aske the queſtion;
and be ſo fauourable as to acquaint vs with thy
purpoſe.
            
               Now will I ſing to my well-beloued a ſong of my beloued
touching his vineyard,
               Text. Verſ. 1. 
               &c. q. d. I ſee indeed they lightly
ſet by my ordinary Sermons: and therefore I purpoſe
to leaue my accuſtomed manner of propheſying,
and fall to ſinging, being vnto them rather as a Poet
               Ezek. 33. 32.,
than as a Prophet, that ſo by their owne delights they
may be allured.Obſer. Thus God ſeekes to draw vs to himſelfe
with thoſe baits which are ſomewhat agreeable to
our pallar, he doth compoſe himſelfe to our diſpoſition;
and euen as face anſwereth face in a glaſſe, ſo doth he apply
himſelfe to fit the humors of mortall men. Doe the
Sages loue ſtarres, and dreames?Matth. 2. a bright ſhining ſtarre
and a dreame ſhall inſtruct them in the truth of God,
and direct them vnto Chriſt. Doth Saint Peter loue
fiſhing?Luke 5. he ſhall be wonne by a great draught of fiſhes.
Doth Auguſtin loue eloquence? Ambroſe by his eloquence
ſhall catch him at a Sermon. What is it that can
win vs? which way ſoeuer our deſires ſtand (that is not
ſinfull) God doth in his word allure vs: The beſt
things in earth and heauen are made our bait: Let vs
yeeld our ſelues therefore to be caught, for with theſe

doth the Lord ſeeke vs, not for any need that he hath
of vs, but for our owne ſaluation.
            In which Song we haue a Parable propoſed of a
fruitleſſe Vineyard, which after great care and coſt of the
painfull Husbandman beſtowed on it, is left deſolate
and forſaken for its barrenneſſe.
            The Argument of it ſeemeth not to differ from that
of the fore-going Chapters;Argument of the Song. here being nothing ſaid,
that for ſubſtance was not before taught:Luther. The difference
that is, is only in circumſtance, the ſtile and method
only being altered and changed.
            The Scope and drift of the Prophet is,The ſcope is three-fold. firſt to get audience
and attention: And therefore he chooſeth to
deliuer his meſſage in the ſweetneſſe of verſe, rather 
than in proſe, that ſo the eare hauing that which delighted
it, might without tediouſneſſe liſten to that which
was taught, which being liſtened vnto, might the better
and more kindlier worke vpon them. And queſtionleſſe,
by this courſe he got him hearers; for many
would flocke to heare him ſing, who would not ſtep
ouer the threſhold to heare him in his wonted veine.
            Secondly, that they might the ſooner learne, and better 
retaine what he did teach them: For Verſe being
compoſed of certaine Muſicall proportions, both in the
number and meaſure of feet and ſyllables, are ſooner
and with greater delight learned; and once being learned,
are longer retained; as by experience we finde, that
our common people haue many vnwritten ſongs,
which are older than their great Grand-fathers Father,
thoſe they learnt being children, and neuer forget
againe vntill their death; yea by this meanes, the remembrance
of ſome things haue beene kept from many
ages paſt, which both Hiſtorie and Tradition had
elſe for euer left neglected and forgotten.
            Thirdly, that he might bring them to a ſight of their 
ingratitude, and draw from them an impartiall ſentence
againſt themſelues: For looke as it is with the eie which

both ſeeth and correcteth all other things ſaue it ſelfe;
ſo is it with the ſinner, when his owne caſe is propoſed
to him, not as his owne, but in the perſon of another,
he will ſoone ſee the fault and paſſe a iuſt ſentence on it,
but elſe it cannot be eſpied. Whiles2 Sam. 12. wiſe Nathan was
querulouſly diſcourſing of the cruell rich man, that had
forcibly taken away the only Lambe of his poore neighbour,
how willingly doth Dauid liſten to the ſtorie, and
how ſharply (euen aboue law) doth he cenſure the fact?
Verſ. 5. 
               As the Lord liueth, the man that hath done this thing ſhall
ſurely die. See how Iuſticers we can be to our very
owne crimes in others perſons? Had he knowne on
whom the ſentence would haue light, it ſhould not haue
beene ſo heauie; but now he is ſelfe-condemned. The
like was our Sauiours practiſe with the Scribes and
Phariſes, in propoundingMatth. 21. that Parable of perfidious
Husbandmen, who beat the Seruants that were ſent to
receiue the fruits of the Vineyard, and ſlew the heire;
and not without the like ſucceſſe: For beingVerſ. 40. asked
what the Lord of the Vineyard would doe to ſuch;
they anſwer,41. 
               He will cruelly deſtroy them, and let out the
Vineyard to others.
               43. Then Chriſt infers, Therefore I ſay
vnto you, the Kingdome of God ſhall be taken from you,
and giuen to a Nation that will bring forth the fruits
thereof. And this is the reaſon why our Prophet doth
not only ſing, but ſings a Parabolicall ſong, propounding
the truth in ſuch an obſcure manner, vnder a continued
ſimilitude or allegorie; like ſome expert Phyſitian,
who ſo cunningly wraps vp his pils and conueyes
his doſe, that it begins to worke ere it be taſted.
            And ſurely, there is no one thing, wherein is more
vſe of wiſdome than in the due contriuing of a reprehenſion,
which in a diſcreet deliuery, helps the diſeaſe;
in an vnwiſe, deſtroies nature.
            In which Song conſider we:Diuiſion. Firſt, the Prooem or Preface
to it, verſe 1.
            Secondly, the Poem it ſelfe, or body of it, verſe 1.-8.
            
               
               The Prooem in theſe words, Now will I ſing to my well-beloued
a ſong of my beloued touching his Vineyard: wherein,
theſe particulars are obſeruable:
            
            Firſt, the Inditer or Author Inſtrumentall, intimated
in this particle [I.]
            
            
               Secondly, the kinde of Treatiſe indited [A Song.]
            Thirdly, the manner of the Prophets publiſhing and
deliuering it [Will ſing.]
            
            
               Fourthly, the Dedication of it [To his well-beloued.]
            Fifthly, the warrant and authoritie for the publiſhing
of it [Of my well-beloued.]
            
            
               Sixtly, the Subiect matter thereof [Touching his
Vineyard.]
            Theſe in the Prooem. As for the Poem, we will then
limb and branch it forth, when we come to the handling
of it. Let vs now goe to the ſickle of the Sanctuary,
and there weigh thoſe words which we haue already
numbred.
            
               Now] Some reade it Goe to,
               Expoſition. or Goe to yet: As if the
Prophet ſhould ſtirre vp himſelfe to ſing;Muſcul. and like the
watchfull Cocke,Moller. firſt clap his wings to awake himſelfe,
before he crowes to awaken others. Others reade it as
we haue it Now, or Now I pray; hereby ſtirring vp his
people to attention; which reading is the beſt: for
the Hebrew particle Na noteth the motion of the
minde to perſwade or intreat.
            
               Will I ſing] id eſt, I will lift vp my voice and make
a melodious ſound, modulating and ſinging the Song
I haue compoſed.
            
               To my well-beloued] id eſt, To the grace or praiſe of
his well-beloued,Calu. & Vrſin. in loc. or (as ſome) in his defence.
            
               Well-beloued] Some there are who would haue Gods
Iſrael to be meant hereby: He ſo terming them in regard
of the great loue he bare towards them, and great
care he had ouer them, they being dearely beloued of
him: But the Prophet explaineth his owne meaning,
when he ſaith, My well-beloued hath a Vineyard. Now

               the Vineyard of the Lord of Hoaſts, is the houſe of Iſrael,
verſ. 7. By well-beloued then he vnderſtandeth, not
the people of God, but God himſelfe. And he cals him
ſo in a two-fold reſpect.
            More Generally;
               1. as he himſelfe was a member of the
Church, and in the behalfe of it, and thus ſaid Solomon,
               Cant. 2. 16. & 6. 3. 7. 10. 
               My well-beloued is mine, and I am his.
            
            Or more Specially;
               2. as he was a Prophet, and ſo one
of the Bridegroomes friends, to whom the charge of
the Church was committed; according to that of Saint
Iohn,
               Iohn 3. 29. 
               He that hath the Bride is the Bridegroome: but
the friend of the Bridegroome which ſtandeth and heareth
him, reioyceth greatly becauſe of the Bridegroomes voice.
            
            
               A Song] Three kindes of Songs were in vſe eſpecially
amongſt the Iewes:Mizmor, Tehillah, Shir. Some they called Pſalmes;
otherſome Hymnes; and another ſort they had which
they called Songs or Odes: All which kindes Saint Paul
mentioneth, when he willeth vs to ſpeake to our ſelues
with Pſalmes, and Hymnes, and Spirituall SongsEpheſ. 5. 19. Coloſſ. 3. 16..
The firſt of theſe were ſuch as were artificially framed
in a certaine full number of words and meaſure, as the
originall word noteth; it comming of a wordZamar. which
ſignifieth to prune or cut off ſuperfluous twigs: and
containeth in it holy matter, of what argument ſoeuer:
whether Precatorie; Praiers for benefits to be receiued:
or Deprecatorie; Petitions againſt aduerſities: or Conſolatorie;
Matter of comfort and conſolation. Theſe
were wont to be ſung both with Inſtrument and voice.
            
            The ſecond ſort, were ſpeciall ſongs of praiſe and
thankſgiuing, and come of a wordHalal. which ſignifieth
the lifting vp or exaltation of the voice, in extolling
and magnifying either the worthy perſon or his noble
action; and theſe are properly thoſe that ſet forth the
Almighties praiſe:Hymnus Pſalmo ſanctior. therefore ſaith Chryſoſtome; A
Hymne is more diuine than a Pſalme.
               Chryſ. in Coloſ. Theſe were wont
to be ſung either with the Inſtrument,
               4. Hom. 9. or without.
            The third kinde contained in them doctrine of the

chiefe good, or mans eternall felicitie, with other ſuch
like Spirituall matter, and were artificially made, and after
a more maieſticall forme than ordinary. Theſe were
ſung only with the voice, without any Inſtrument.
            A learned writerZanch. in Coloſ. cap. 3. verſ. 16. ſheweth diuers other differences,
and diſtinctions giuen of theſe by diuers of the Ancients:
but that I haue named, is the moſt receiued. Let
this ſuffice, there were and are varietie, and all allowable
by the Lord.
            As for this Song of our ProphetCalu. in loc. it is of this latter
kinde, and was moſt artificially compoſed, and ſet out
with the moſt exquiſite skill that might be. It is of the
like nature and kinde with that of Solomons,
               Oecolamp. which is
called the Song of Songs: For here the great loue of
God towards his Church, with the fruit of that his loue
is ſet forth vnto vs. In this indeed they differ (as ſome
haue well obſerued) that is Comicall, but this is Tragicall;
for though our Prophet beginneth merrily, yet
he endeth heauily.
            
               Of my beloued] Here the Prophet vſeth the ſame
word that he did before,D
                     •
                  dho. though with ſome little alteration:
and ſomeMoller. & Hector. Pint. in loc. tranſlate it Vncle; others Couzen;
(For ſo it ſignifieth as well as friend or beloued) and
would by it note out the Meſſiah, and his humanitie in
a ſpeciall manner: For Iſaiah deſcended from Dauid,
and ſo was of Chriſts kindred; in which regard (ſay
they) he calleth him his Vncle or his Couzen. But this
expoſition is reiected by other of the learnedCaluin. Vrſin. as conſtrained:
And they take the word here vſed to be the
ſame in ſignification with the former, holding the addition
to be but a garniſhing of the Prophets ſpeech,
which liberty Poets haue aboue other writers, to the
end that by the rime and running of the verſe, the Memorie
might be the better helped, and the Vnderſtanding
quickned.
            Now, in that he ſaith it was [Of] his beloued, he
hereby noteth out his Warrant and Authoritie: It

was the Song which his Beloued put into his mouth,
and which he had in charge from him to publiſh. It
was of him and from him, as well as for him.
            
               Touching his Vineyard] Some reade it, to his Vineyard;
others, for his Vineyard. The word may be read
both waies, both in the Genitiue and Datiue caſe (as
Muſcul. one obſerues.) By this Vineyard we are to vnderſtand
the Church, as appeareth, verſ. 7. The reaſons why it
is compared to a Vineyard we ſhall hereafter ſee. And
thus much for Explanation. Come we now to matter of
Obſeruation.
            
            
               And firſt in generall from the Prophets method and
manner of proceeding, which we ſee was not as vſually
it was;
               Doct. Miniſters both for matter and method to fit themſelues to their hearers. 
               note we, What wiſdome is requiſite for Gods Miniſters,
that they may be able to apply themſelues to the ſeuerall affections
(if not ſinfull) of their hearers: becomming
all things to all men, ſeeking by all poſſible meanes to
winne or gaine any vnto Chriſt.
            
               To the Iew
               1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22. (ſaith Saint Paul) I became as a Iew, that
I might gaine the Iewes; to them that are vnder the Law,
as vnder the Law, that I might gaine them which are vnder
the Law. To the weake became I as weake, that I
might gaine the weake. I am made all things to all men,
that I might by all meanes ſaue ſome. Then followes
that generall exhortation:
                  Ʋerſ. 24. 
               So run that you may obtaine.
This courſe likewiſe tooke our bleſſed Sauiour; ſometimes
he taught by Explication; otherwhiles by Application:
ſometimes Propounding doctrines; othertimes
Expounding them: ſometimes he deliuereth plaine
Principles, at other times Parables and darke ſentences,
and not ſeldome by exemplarie ſimilitudes. The rich
man he teacheth by the rich mans care and greedy gathering:
The Vine-dreſſer by the Vinitors digging and
hedging: The Labourer by the Labourers hire and
working: The Builder by the builders laying of a good
foundation: The Huſband-man by the Husbandmans
ſowing and reaping: The Fiſher-man by the Fiſher-mans

caſting in nets and drawing. By all which the Miniſters
of the Goſpell are admoniſhed to become all
vnto all,Muſcul. in Matth. 4. that they may winne the more, according to
our propounded point.
            Let vs not then be diſcouraged,Vſſe 1. though we haue to
deale with a ſtubborne and refractarie people, ſo as to
ſurceaſe our paines. The Phyſitian omits no point of
his Art, though the recouerie of his Patient ſeeme deſperate;
he will vſe his beſt skill before he giues him
ouer. What is this diuine trade of ours, but a ſpirituall
Piſcation? Now how much skill, and toyle, and patience
is requiſite in this Art, who knowes not? The
world is the Sea; Soules like fiſhes ſwim at liberty in this
deepe, ranging vp and downe after their owne diſpoſition,
vncaught: Miniſters are the Fiſhers in this Sea,
who muſt be euer buſied, ſometimes in preparing,
ſometimes in mending, ſometimes in caſting abroad,
ſometimes in drawing in their nets. The Net to take
men with, is the preaching of the Goſpell, which Net is
oftentimes let downe, and many a draught made by the
poore Fiſherman, yet nothing taken. For ſome are
craftie, and will not; as the worldling, who is ſo wiſe (at
leaſt in his generationLuke 16.) that he no ſooner ſpies the
Net laid, but he ſhuns it. Some are ſlippery, and cannot;
as the Hypocrite,
               Qui capit anguillam per caudam non capit illam. who like an Eele ſlips thorow when
he is encloſed. Some are great, and may not;
               Amos 7. 13. 
               Propheſie
not at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chappell, and it is the
Kings Court: So ſheweth Ieremiah, when hee ſaith,
Ier. 5. 5. read Pſal. 2. 3. 
               I will get me to the great men, and ſpeake to them, but
theſe haue broken the yoke, and burſt the bonds. And therefore
Paul though he had caught many a ſoule in his
Nets, yet he could catch but a peece of King Agrippa:
So ſheweth the Text,Acts 26. 28. 
               Almoſt thou perſwadeſt me to become
a Chriſtian. And laſtly; Some are little, and dare
not: Our Peter-like profeſſors, whom the voyce of a
ſilly damſell, crying, Thou art a Galilean, terrifies. So
that the ſumme of the paines of many is,Luke 5. 5. 
               We haue laboured

all night and taken nothing. Thus it pleaſeth God
to exerciſe the patience of his ſeruants. But howſoeuer
ſome fiſhes are too great, and ſome too little, ſome too
ſilly, and ſome too ſubtle, yet let vs launch out into the
deepe, and once againe let ſlip our new-waſhen Nets at
our Maſters bidding: What though there be no likelihood
of ſucceſſe? yet the laſt throw may draw vp ſome
to grace and glory: Say then with Simon, Maſter,
though we haue trauelled all night, and taken nothing, yet
at thy word we will let downe the net, and make one caſt
more. In ſo doing certainly, we at laſt ſhall finde, that
our humble and penitent obedience ſhall come home
laden with bleſſings as theirs did, for when they had ſo
done (ſaith the Text)Vſerſ. 6. 
               they encloſed a great multitude
of fiſhes, ſo that their nets brake; and they filled their ſhips,
ſo that they began to ſinke. O happy complaint of too
large a capture! Who would not obey thee, oh Chriſt,
ſince thou ſo bountifully requiteſt mans weakeſt ſeruices?
Their nets breake, their ſhips ſinke with the burden
of that which they haue taken: O bleſſed Sauiour, if
thoſe Apoſtolicall veſſels of thy firſt rigging were thus ouerlaid,
ours flote and totter with an vnballaſt lightneſſe:
Thou who art no leſſe preſent in theſe bottomes of ours,
lade them with an equall fraight of conuerted ſouler; giue
vs abilitie to take; giue men will, and grace, to be taken,
and let vs praiſe thee for thus ſinking. Howeuer, let thy
worke be followed, and thy leiſure waited for: Aſſure vs
of this, that that paines cannot be loſt, which we reſolue to
loſe for thee. ForIſay 49. 5. 
               Though Iſrael be not gathered, yet
ſhall we be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and our God
ſhall be our ſtrength. Though our preaching be not a
ſweet ſauour to them that heare vs; yet euen in them
we ſhall be a ſweet ſauour vnto the Lord2 Cor. 2. 15.. If then we
preach, and men repent not, let it neuer repent vs of our
preaching; for they are the loſers and not we:2 Chron. 15. 7. 
               Be yee
ſtrong therefore, and let not your hands be weake, for your
works ſhall be rewarded.
            
            
               
Let Hearers hence likewiſe be admoniſhed,
                  Ʋſe 2. not raſhly
to condemne their Teachers for their ſometimes
vſing a differing method from that they were wont to
vſe. It is the wiſdome of a Miniſter (as we ſee) ſometimes
to change his note, as occaſion ſhall require.
While he hath to deale with a people of a tractable
diſpoſition, he comes in a ſtill ſmall voyce, as God appeared
to Elijah
               1 King. 19. 12., and is a Barnabas, the ſonne of conſolation:
When with the ſtubborne and refractarie,
then he lifts vp his voyce a ſtraine higher, heIſay 58. 1. 
               cryes
aloud and ſpares not, being a Boanerges, the ſonne of
thunder. Blame him not for this: for ſome mens hearts
are like nettles, touch them but gently, and they will
ſting, when rough handling is without preiudice: And
others are like bryars, that wound the graſping hand of
reproofe, but yeeld willingly to them that ſoftly touch
them with that Lady-like hand of Exhortation.
            
            
               Aarons bells muſt be wiſely rung; ſometimes the Treble
of mercy ſounds well, at other times the Tenor of
Iudgement, or Countertenor of Reproofe ſounds better:
and it often happens, that the Meane of Exhortation
ſounds beſt of all. It is his wiſdome to obſerue circumſtances,
and know how to curſe as well as bleſſe;
chide as well as comfort, and ſpeake warre to a rebell, as
well as peace to a friend. And herein indeed lies the
wiſdome and faithfulneſſe of a Teacher: Then and
only then ſhall he proue himſelfe ſincere and vnpartiall,
when he holds this courſe.
            Againe, when he hath to deale with a people of a
ſhallow capacitie and vnderſtanding, he ſo ſpeakes both
for matter and manner of deliuerie, as they are beſt able
to receiue it. Should hee vſe the Latine or Greeke
tongues to ſuch as can only vnderſtand the Engliſh: Or
ſuch a Roman-Engliſh, or ſoaring ſublimitie of phraſe,
as plaine Engliſhmen know not what to make of: He
knoweth full well he ſhould be as a Barbarian to thoſe
which heare him. Or ſhould he tell the vulgar of Fathers

and Hiſtorians; of Ambroſe, Auſtin, Gregory, Cyprian,
Chryſoſtome, with the reſt; and of their Homilies,
it would little elſe than amaze his Auditors. Wherefore
here he vſeth a plainer method, and more familiar ſtile,
ſtooping to the vnderſtanding of the ſimpleſt, daily
beating vpon thoſe high-way points of Faith and Repentance:
               Tene & deuoie accipe aperta, vt tibi pandantur obſcura. Quomodo cris penetrator obſcurorum, contemptor manifeſtorū? Aug. Hom. de Paſtor.
for which his plainneſſe let him not be deſpiſed;
but reuerently and deuoutly ſee that his doctrine
be receiued, that obſcure things may afterwards be
more profitably opened. At another time it ſo falls out,
that he is to ſpeake to a more learned and intelligent
Auditorie, and then he takes more ſcope to vſe the liberty
of his liberall education, in quoting the Fathers,
and alledging humane teſtimonies: Sometimes in caſe
of Grammar, that the true ſenſe and meaning of a word,
or ſentence, may be the clearer: Sometimes in caſe of
controuerſie, by ſhewing the conſent of the ancient
Church, that he may free the truth from Noueltie (eſpecially
dealing with an Aduerſarie that would claime all
Antiquitie from him:) Or ſometimes for conuiction
of Atheiſts; Heathens, and the like, who care not for the
authoritie of Scriptures.
            And thus did S. Paul himſelfe, when he had to deale
with the Athenians, Epicures, and Cretians, alledge the
ſayings ofActs 17. 28. 
               Menander,
               Titus 1. 12. 
               Aratas, andIam. 1. 17. 
               Epimenides,
whereby he did conuince their wickedneſſe. And this
is an excellent way to ſtop the mouths of Aduerſaries,
which Iulian a wiſe, but wicked Emperor ſaw; Behold
(ſaith he) we are wounded with our owne quills
               Propr
                     •
                  js pennis con
                     •
                  i
                     ••••
                  ui. Theodor. 3. 8., out of our
bookes they take armour which in fight they vſe against vs.
And therefore he made a law, that the children of the
Galileans ſhould not reade Philoſophers nor Poets. In
theſe and ſuch like caſes, and vpon theſe and ſuch like
occaſions, for a MiniſterPrudenter & ſobrie. Zanch. 
               wiſely and ſoberly, hauing reſpect
to times and places, to alledge the ſavings of
ancient Writers in their owne termes and language
(not ſeeking themſelues, nor affecting their owne

glory therein) let it not be thought vnlawfull nor
vnfitting.
            Such alſo may be here leſſon'd, who would haue all
Miniſters vſe one method in their teaching, and that
ſuch as they beſt like of. This mans method is excellent
(ſaith one) I like this kinde of teaching well. Such
a ones I like better (ſaith a ſecond) and it is more profitable.
Would all had this mans veine in preaching (ſaith
a third:) He goes for my money; of all that euer I
heard I like him beſt. And thus like fooliſh frampole
children we care not for the meat, except we chuſe the
ſpoone: Or like thoſe Germanes, who meeting together
at a Tauerne, fell into diſcourſe of their profeſſion and
religion: One proteſted himſelfe to be of Dr. Martins
religion; and the other vowed, he was of Dr. Luthers
profeſſion: whereas Martin Luther was one and the
ſame man: Such is the folly of many of our followers,
who hold with this Preacher, and with that; when as
though1 Cor. 12. 
               we haue diuerſitie of gifts, yet but one and the
ſame ſpirit. S. Paul ſpends well-neere a whole Chapter
about this argument in the firſt of thoſe Epiſtles which
he wrote to the Corinthians, who as it ſeemes were troubled
with this diſeaſe: for hauing three famous Preachers,
Paul, Cephas, and Apollos, ſome profeſſed themſelues
the followers only of Paul, deſpiſing Cephas and
Apollos; and other of Cephas, deſpiſing Paul and Apollos;
and laſtly, others held themſelues to Apollos, deſpiſing
Paul and Cephas. This itch of mens wits and eares, is
fatall to theſe times, and (in the iudgement of a great
PhyſitianFatalis haec ingeni
                     •
                  rum ſcabies. Lipſ. ciu. doct. lib. 4. c. 3. Galen. cit. à Lipſio lib. aduerſ. Dialog. cap. 3.) almoſt incurable; for he auoucheth, that
there is no ſcab nor itch more dangerous, than the ambition
of ſects and new opinions. Oh that we could ſee
the richneſſe of Gods mercy towards his Church in this
particular, who hath giuen ſuch diuerſitie of gifts to diuers
men; to one in giuen the word of wiſdome, to
another the words of knowledge, to another the gifts
of healing, to another diuerſitie of tongues. Some haue

a more excellent gift of conference, ſome of prayer,
ſome in opening of a Text, ſome in application of his
Text, &c. And all (not for the making of a rent in the
Church, or breeding of a ſchiſme) butEpheſ. 4. 11, 12. 
               for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the worke of the Miniſterie, for the
edifying of the body of Chriſt. This is that ſame 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               manifold
wiſdome of God, that liking not one we might like another;
and that the varietie of mens affections might be
ſatisfied with the varietie of his gifts. Let vs then make
the true vſe of this mercy, and by ſome ones gift or other,
be brought neerer to the Lord: Not being like the
Iewes, of whom Chriſt thus complaines;Math. 11. 16. 
               Whereunto
ſhall I liken this generation? It is like vnto children ſitting
in the markets ſinging vnto their fellowes, and ſaying, We
haue pip
                     •
                  d vnto you, and you haue not danced; we haue
mourned vnto you, and you haue not lamented. For Iohn
came neither eating nor drinking, and they ſay he hath a
Deuill; the Sonne of man came eating and drinking, and
they ſay, Behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a
friend of Publicans and ſinners. Thus Iohn came in one
ſort, Chriſt came in another, yet neither Iohns veine,
nor Chriſts veine could like them. If it be ſo with vs, oh
then, how inexcuſable are we? Art thou a daily hearer,
and heareſt thou diuers men, and yet doth no mans gift
like thee? Can none of them ſo farre preuaile with
thee, as to make thee leaue thy lying, deceit, cozenage,
drunkenneſſe, prophaneneneſſe, &c? Alas for thee! Woe
worth the time that euer thou wert borne: Thy damnation
is iuſt.
            This in generall: The particulars follow. And firſt
of the Inditer, or Author inſtrumentall [Iſaiah.]
            
            Who this Iſaiah was, we finde in the beginning of
this propheſie, where we haue him deſcribed by his parentage,Cap. 1. 1. 
               Iſaiah the ſonne of Amoz. Not of that Amos
who is numbred amongſt the ſmaller Prophets, as
Epiphan. & 
                     〈◊〉
                   in proph. min. pr
                     ••
                  ud. & Graeci plerique. ſome haue thought: For beſides the great difference
that is found in the Originall, both in the writing and

ſignification of their names, (the Prophets name beginning
with Gnajin, and ending with Samech, and is
by interpretation,Onuſtus, vel Avulſus. 
               A man burdened and loaden; or one
that is ſeparated from others: But Iſaiah his fathers
name beginneth with Aleph, and endeth with Tzadi,
and ſignifiethFortis & robuſtus. Hier. in Amos. 
               Stout, or valiant.) there is great difference
alſo in their race and deſcents. For that Amoz
who was father to this our Prophet, was of the Race
Royall, being brother of Amaziah King of Iudah; (as
moſt of the Ancients hold, and the Iewiſh Rabbines report)
when as that other Amos was of meane parentage,
and (as himſelfe confeſſeth)Amos 7. 14. 
               neither a Prophet, nor
the ſonne of a Prophet (vntill it pleaſed God extraordinarily
to call him to that office) but an Herdman,
               Cap. 1. 1. 
               and a
gatherer of Sycamore fruit, keeping amongſt the Herdmen
of Tekoa.
            
            Thus it appeareth that this our Prophet was of the
Race Royall: And being ſo, we thence inferre,
            
               It is no diſparagement to greatneſſe to be the Lords Prophet.
               Doctr. It is no diſparagement to any ones greatneſſe to be the Lords Prophet.
Though Iſaiah was of the bloud Royall, yet hee
counted it no impeachment to his birth or breeding;
nothing derogatorie to his reputation to be employed
in the meaneſt peece of ſeruice (though it be in compoſing
Songs or Poems) for the ſetting forth Gods praiſe,
and the publike good of his Church.
            It was S. Iohns honour to be calledLuke 1. 76. 
               a Prophet of the
moſt High, and therefore it cannot be a diſparagement
to any to ſerue the ſame Maſter. The bleſſed Apoſtles
S. Paul, S. Peter, S. Iames, S. Iude, &c. amongſt all their
titles count this to be the moſt honourable, that they are
theRom. 1. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 1. Iames 1. 1. Iude 1. 
               Seruants of Ieſus Chriſt, and therefore the two former
ſet that firſt, and then Apoſtles after.
            What ſhall we ſay to Noah? He was a Prince of the
world, and yet a2 Pet. 2. 5. 
               Preacher of righteouſneſſe. ToHeb. 7. 1. 
               Melchiſedech,
who was King of Salem, and yet a Prieſt vnto
the Lord? To Samuel a Iudge; To Dauid a King; and
yet1 Sam. 3. 20. & 7. 15. 1 King. 3. 12. Prophets both? And to wiſe Solomon his ſonne

(before whom there was none like him, neither after him
ſhall euer any riſe like vnto him) who amongſt all his
titles, and that in his wiſeſt and beſt dayes, did count
this to be the moſt honourable, to be calledEccleſ. 1. 1. Luk. 2. 9, 10. Phil. 2. 6. a Preacher?
And to the glorious Angels of heauen, who haue
not refuſed to be publiſhers of the glad tidings of peace?
And to Chriſt himſelfe, who (though equall in glory with
the Father) diſdained not the title of aRom. 15. 8. Miniſter▪ How
then can it be thought a thing not beſeeming the worth
of any to be the Lords Prophet? Beſides theſe examples,
weigh the Reaſons.
            Such ſerue the King of Kings,Reaſ. 1. and Lord of Lords;
who is higher than the higheſt; greater than the greateſt;
richer than the richeſt; nobler than the nobleſt:
and can it be any diſgrace to ſerue ſuch a Maſter? If it
were ſuch a noble priuiledge to be a ſubiect vnto Ceſar
               Acts 22. 25, 28. 1 King. 10. 8. Pſal. 107. 40.: And ſo happy a thing to be a ſeruant vnto Solomon:
How much greater is their priuiledge, and how
much happier are thoſe. ſeruants, who ſerue ſuch a
Lord, as doth at his pleaſure pull downe one, and ſet vp
another vpon the throne.
            Such are employed about that worke which is the
higheſt,2. holieſt, the heauenlieſt and greateſt of all other
workes, viz. the ſaluation of mens ſoules. By Miniſters
God worketh ſaith
               Rom. 10. 14. 1 Cor. 3. 5. 1 Tim. 4. 16.; by them he conuerts; by them he
comforteth, ſanctifieth, ſaueth: By them he declareth to
men their righteouſneſſe; preacheth repentance, free forgiueneſſe,
and perfect ſaluation, to all that truly beleeue
in Ieſus Chriſt. In which reſpect, ſaith Iob, A good Miniſter
isIob 33. 23. 
               one of a thouſand. A good Lawyer may be
one of ten; A good Phyſitian, one of twenty; A good man,
one of a hundred:
               
                  Perk. dutie and dignitie of Miniſters. But (ſaith a Reuerend Diuine) a good
Miniſter exceeds all, for he is one of a thouſand. A good
Lawyer may declare vnto thee the true ſtate of thy cauſe:
A good Phyſitian may declare vnto thee the true ſtate
of thy bodie: But no man can declare vnto thee thy righteouſneſſe, but a true and faithfull Miniſter: The Lawyer
               
then in caring for thy cauſe, and the Phyſitian in caring
for thy bodie, are both inferiour to the Miniſter, who
careth for thy ſoules ſaluation. No maruell then, if the
Apoſtle requires, that they ſhould be
               1 Theſſ. 5. 12. 
               eſteemed highly
euen for their workes ſake.
            
            Such ſhall haue the greateſt wages of any other: for 
               Dan. 12. 3. 
               They that be wiſe ſhall ſhine as the brightneſſe of the firmament:
but they that turne many to righteouſneſſe, as the
ſtarres for euer and euer. All good men ſhall haue glory,
yea great glory, They ſhall ſhine as the firmament: But
ſuch as labour in the word and doctrine ſhall ſhine, and
that with no ordinarie glory, but as the ſtarres, which
haue a brighter glory than the firmament. Seeing then
the Maſter which they ſerue is the higheſt: The worke
which they doe is the holieſt: The wages which they
haue is the greateſt: It may beſeeme the worth of any
to be the Lords Prophet.
            How guilty then are ſuch as thinke baſely of ſo honourable
an office and function,
                  Ʋſe 1. as the Miniſterie is?
Oh curſed times! wherein prophane liuers doe account
no mens perſons, no mens callings, ſo baſe and vile as
ours. The name it ſelfe of Prieſt and Miniſter by ſuch
is caſt in our faces, as termes of infamie and reproach,
and vſed no otherwiſe amongſt vs, than the name of
Chriſtian is amongſt the Barbarians in Ruſſia by way of
diſgrace: And the very weed and garment of a Miniſter
is enough to procure contempt, though otherwiſe he
himſelfe be free enough from all contempt. This is one
of the blots of this our Nation, that a Miniſter is ſeldome
ſpoken of but with diminution: And the ſimpleſt
in a multitude, though he be not able to giue the meaning
of one petition in the Lords prayer, yet hath eloquence
enough to diſgrace their perſons and their callings.
A horrible confuſion it was, that was foretold
by this our Prophet, which ſhould come on Iſrael:Iſay 3. 5. 
               The
childe ſhould behaue himſelfe proudly againſt the Ancient,
and the baſe againſt the honourable. Who ſees not that

this confuſion is befallen this generation? Who almoſt
ſo vile, but thinks himſelfe a better man than the ableſt
Miniſter? What Gentleman ſo meane, but thinks his
childe too good for this Prieſtly trade? Yea his whole
houſe diſgraced, his bloud and familie diſparaged, if either
his daughter be matched with a Preacher, or his
ſonne entred into that calling? But be it knowne vnto
thee, who thus baſely iudgeſt, That God hath honoured
the pooreſt Miniſter farre aboue thy ſelfe; and taken
him to ſerue at his owne table, when he hath reiected
thee and thy fathers houſe. Be not then any more
ſo much deceiued, as to thinke the calling of the Miniſterie
to be baſe and beggerly, and not meet for any, but
the poore to liue by; fit only for the lame, and ſuch as
are disfigured; for younger brothers, blunt-headed
ſchollers, and ſuch as are good for no Trade elſe; when
Princes, Peeres, and Nobles, and ſuch as haue beene of
the royall bloud, haue held it as an honour to be employed
in the ſeruice of the Lord.Dan. 1. 3. 
               Nebuchadnezzar
would haue only ſuch to wait vpon him as were of the
Kings ſtocke; and comely, witty, and euery way well
qualified, both for lineaments of body; and ornaments
of minde; none of the refuſe muſt come into his preſence:
And ſhall they that come before the Lord, to adminiſter
in his preſence, be the ſcum and off-ſcowring
of the people? What is this but to ſerue the Lord with
theMal. 1. 8. 
               blinde and lame, which he abhorres? Certainly
this diſhonour of the Miniſterie threatneth the departure
of the word, and therefore let vs pray hard, that
this ſinne of contempt and baſe eſteeme of Gods Miniſters▪
and their callings may not be laid vnto our
charge.
            And ſo (to fall from reprouing to perſwading and exhorting)
let euery one beware how they refuſe or reiect
the Miniſterie,
                  Ʋſe 2. as thinking themſelues, their friends or
children too high for it, and it too low for them: No
man may be thought to be too good to ſerue God at his

Altar, and to adminiſter at his Table: If any ſo thinke,
he deceiueth himſelfe and ouer-valueth his owne condition.
Amongſt the Iewes theIoſeph. Antiq. 11 hiſt. tripart. lib. 9. Prieſts were ſometimes
matched into the bloud Royall; Numa Pompilius
would be a Prieſt amongſt the Romanes:Euſch. hiſt. 10. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 8. And the
Aegyptians choſe their Kings from amongſt their
Prieſts: and ſhall we then thinke baſely of them? our
fore-fathers counted it an honour to haue one of their
children an Abbot, or a Biſhop, in which callings then
they liued like Epicures; hauing nothing of a good
Chriſtian ſaue the title only. Yea Princes of this Land
haue renounced their Crownes and Kingdomes, and
entered into Monaſteries; and haue put their ſonnes
and daughters into Cloyſters. Shall not theſe condemne
vs? Nay, will not the very heathen riſe vp one day in
iudgement againſt vs? who haue giuen their ſonnes
2 Chron. 33. 6. for ſacrifice vnto their Idols, and cauſed them to paſſe
through the fire; thinking them not too deare to be offered
to their gods. Let vs looke on theſe and be aſhamed
of our ſelues: For certainly the beſt and nobleſt
amongſt the ſonnes of men are a thouſand-fold more
vnfit for that high place, than that calling is or can be
thought vnworthy of them.
            And as for ſuch as are already called to this high
place, let all beware of deſpiſing of them. It is the Apoſtles
rule1 Tim. 5. 17., that they which rule well ſhould haue double
honour: Firſt, honour of countenance, and then of maintenance;
one of theſe is not enough without the other:
for it muſt be double.
               Iſai. 52. 7. 
               Beautifull are the feet (ſaith this
our Prophet Iſaiah) of them that bring good tidings,
that publiſheth ſaluation, &c. If their feet be beautifull,
how beautifull ſhould their face be? who ſhould be ſo
welcome to vs as theſe, who more eſteemed or reuerenced?
Remember how the Lord hath euery way endeuoured
to make them ſo; as by giuing them titles of
higheſt reſpect; as2 Cor. 5. 20. 
               Embaſſadors for Chriſt; andMal. 2. 7. 
               Meſſengers
for the Lord of Hoaſts;2 King. 13. 14. 
               Fathers (the firſt title of

honour that was in the world)Reuel. 1. 20. 
               Angels, which are the
nobleſt of the creatures. Beſides, he hath giuen them
wonderfull authoritie. He hath put theMatth. 16. 19. Keyes of the
Kingdome of heauen into their hands to open and to
ſhut.Iohn 20. 23. Power to remit and retaine ſinnes. Thus the
Lord is pleaſed to ratifie their regular proceedings in
the Court of Heauen. Likewiſe he hath giuen them
Epheſ. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. extraordinary gifts aboue the common rate, as Knowledge,
Experience, Comfort, and the like. Is it ſafe deſpiſing
theſe whom God hath thus highly dignified?
            A laſt vſe may be for comfort vnto vs who wait at
Gods Altar.
                  Ʋſe 3. Let vs count it our honour to be called
hereunto, and preferre it before all other callings whatſoeuer:
not giuing way to any thoughts of diſcontentment
in reſpect of the many ignominies or perſecutions
that we daily doe or are like to vndergoe, ſo as to be
grieued at the Lords leading of vs to ſo toileſome, and
(in mans iudgement) diſgracefull a vocation; or to be
moued to leaue and giue ouer our function in that reſpect;
As ſometimes that Cardinall of Loraine did, who
after he had preached once vnto the people, and was
therefore derided by the Prelates of his Order, left off
vtterly the Office of preaching, as a calling too baſe for
his Cardinals Hat-ſhip. Let this be farre from vs. If we
doe our duty, the world will hate vs: True, But if we
doe it not, God will curſe vs: By the firſt we are in danger
to loſe our goods, our names, our liues: by the ſecond
our ſoule, our heauen, our God: Now whether it
be better to pelaſe God or man, iudge ye.
            Let euery Miniſter therefore doe his dutie; and albeit
moſt in the world contemne vs, yet we ſhall finde ſome
in the world, who are not of the world, that will reuerence
and reſpect vs. So long as the1 King. 17. 9. widow of Sarepta
hath any oile we ſhall not want. Howeuer, though here
we haue troubles to weary vs, yet in the end we ſhall
haue heauens ioy to refreſh and comfort vs. It is enough
we haue deſerued; our worke ſhall haue a reward.
            
            
               
And thus much for the firſt particular to be conſidered
in this Preface: the ſecond followes; And that is the
nature and kinde of the Treatiſe indited, and is
            
               A Song] or Poem. And here occaſion is offered to
ſpeake ſomewhat in the defence of Poetric and Verſe.
The Poſition is:Doctr. Poetry is an Art ancient and commendable. 
               Poeſie and Poetrie is an Art and exerciſe
ancient, lawfull, and praiſe-worthy.
            
            The practiſes of the ſeruants of God make this good▪
               Moſes that man of God was excellent herein, as appeareth
by that ſameExod. 15. 1. Canticle which he made in commemoration
of Gods goodneſſe for his peoples deliuerance
out of Egypt, and for the deſtruction of their enemies:
Ioſephus de Antiqu. lib. 7. which Song is held to be the moſt ancient Song
that euer was (I am ſure it is that we reade of in Scripture)
and is thought to be firſt compoſed in Hexameter
verſe, though it is not certaine; (For it is no eaſie matter
to finde out the Scanſion of verſe vſed amongſt the Hebrewes;
ſuch was the varietie of their Meaſures) As alſo
by that which he madeDeut. 32. a little before his death,
which he commanded ſhould be taught the Children
of Iſrael: yea, the text ſaithCap. 31. 19. verſ. 22. he himſelfe wrote it
and taught it them. ThusIudg. 9. 1. 
               Deborah and Barak alſo
compoſed a Song and ſang it to the Lord. So Dauid
(that ſame2 Sam. 23. 1. Qui noſter Orpheus est. Euthy. ſweet ſinger of Iſrael) had an excellent gift
this way, as is euident by that ſame2 Sam. 1. 17. Ioſeph. de Antiq. lib. 7. cap. 10. funerall Song or
Epitaph which he made for Saul and Ionathan after
their deaths: Beſides diuers Odes and Hymnes which
he compoſed, to the honour of God in various kindes
of Verſe. This likewiſe was the practiſe of Chriſtians
in the Primitiue Church, asEccleſ. Hiſt. lib. 2. cap. 16. 
               Euſebius reporteth out of
Philo Iudaeus; They contemplate (ſaith he) not only diuine
things, but they make graue Canticles and Hymnes
vnto God in a more ſacred ryme of euery kinde of metre
and verſe. If any doubt remaine (notwithſtanding
what hath beene ſhewed) of the truth of our propounded
point; let then this be conſidered of, how Verſe
is the forme of ſpeech which it hath pleaſed that wiſe

and all-knowing Spirit to chooſe, to reueale a great part
of his reuealed will in: for beſides thoſe ſpeciall
Pſalmes and Canticles before mentioned, there are ſundry
parts and bookes of holy Scripture Poetically pend,
as the booke of Iob, the booke of the Pſalmes, the
booke of the Prouerbs, with Solomons Eccleſiaſtes and
Canticles; as the moſt learned Fathers of the Church
haue teſtified. And many other parcels of holy Scripture,
which we haue meerely tranſlated into Proſe, are
Verſe in the Originall. This me thinkes ſhould put all
out of doubt: (For who can be ſo irreligious as to think
or imagine that the Holy Ghoſt would euer haue vſed
any vndecent or vnlawfull manner of expreſſion of his
holy Myſteries?) and cauſe vs to giue credence to this
truth, viz. Poetrie and Poeſie is an Art and exerciſe
lawfull and praiſe-worthy.
            
            The commendable properties of which Art appeare
in theſe two ancient Verſes:Reaſon.
               
                  Metra parant animos: Comprêndunt plurima paucis:
                  Aures delectant: priſtina commemorant.
               
Which I finde by
                  Withers preparation to the Pſalter, pag. 64. one thus Engliſhed to my hand:

                  Verſe doth the ſoule prepare, and much in briefe affords:
                  It rauiſheth the eare, and things long paſt records.
               
                There is Ryme & Reaſon: or Reaſon for Ryme. Firſt it prepares
& fits the ſoule for holy duties, & therfore we vſe

               Pſalmes before our Sermons. 2. It comprehends much
in a little, as we ſee in the Pſalmes: For what are they
 but a Compendium of both Teſtaments? 3. It delighteth
the eare, and cauſeth it to hearken more attentiuely, as
 we haue before ſeene in the beginning. 4. And laſtly,
it is a great helpe to memorie, and cauſeth things (once
learned) long to be retained: as we finde by experience
in children and others; what they learne in Ryme, they
neuer forget againe to their dying day. Now to apply
the point.
            This may ſerue firſt to informe our iudgements concerning
the lawfulneſſe hereof,Vſe 1. that ſo this exerciſe and

Art which is by ſome wrongfully held in contempt,
may be brought into a more reuerend eſteeme: for what
is the maine cauſe ſo many ſpeake againſt Poetrie, but an
ignorant miſconceit they haue thereof? imagining
it to be but a vaine inuention of man, and an vnfitting
language for to expreſſe holy and ſacred matters and
myſteries by. But that which hath beene ſaid before
ſerues for the diſcouery (and I truſt ſhall alſo for the recouerie)
of this error. God hath vſed Verſe to expreſſe a
great part of his reuealed will vnto vs: and hath mingled
many of his heauenly precepts with the ſweet and
pleaſing ſtraines of Poeſie and Numbers. And therefore
let it neither be thought a vaine and vnneceſſary
curioſitie, nor yet (as ſome others doe) a horrible and
damnable impietie. True it is, in theſe wretched daies,
for the moſt part we ſhall finde, that the ſubiect of Poeſie
is wantonneſſe and laſciuiouſneſſe, wherewith the
mindes of youth are wonderouſly bewitched: But yet
asPlut. de Muſic. one ſaid of Muſicke we may ſay of it: The proper
and principall ſubiect of it is the Almighties praiſe.
Shall we then condemne the lawfull vſe with the vnlawfull
abuſe? That may not be. Let vs caſt away the
faſhion, but keepe ſtill the ſtuffe. Let not the exerciſe
it ſelfe be abhorred, nor the vſe thereof condemned;
but the corruption thereof: For certainly, there is no
Art that doth ſet forth the glory of God (which is the
chiefe end of mans creation) with ſo much excitation
and expreſſion as this Art doth. And therefore by
Spondanus. ſome it is preferred to all Arts and Sciences. To conclude
this vſe; if euery Art be the gift of God; and if
it be of himExod. 31. 3, 4, 5, 6. to inuent and finde out curious workes,
to worke in gold, and ſiluer, and in braſſe, &c. Then
muſt it likewiſe be of him to guide the pen, and giue
the tongue for ſpeaking ſuch excellent things, and after
ſo elegant a manner. The like might be ſaid for her ſiſter
Muſicke.
            
            This may likewiſe ſerue for a Reprehenſion of ſuchVſe 2.
               
as abuſe this Art which in it ſelfe is ſo lawfull and commendable,
and by their wantonneſſe cauſe it to grow
contemptible.
            And thus doe vainer Poets, who by their laſciuious
rymes, luftfull Sonnets, Plaies and Enterſudes, bring
ſhame vnto the Art, diſgrace to Poeſie, and diſhonour to
the giuer. The like is the practiſe of wicked Fidlers and
Baladmongers, who make it their profeſſion, and get
their liuing by poiſoning many a ſoule, in alluring their
mindes vnto vanitie with their bewitching harmonie,
and tempting charmes of laſciuious Muſicke.
            A ſhame it is that ſuch Vermine ſhould be ſuffered in
ſo well a gouerned Common-wealth as this is. And the
greater is our ſhame, in that our Magiſtrates haue no
more care for the putting ſuch good Lawes in execution
as are already enacted for the puniſhment of theſe.
            Come we now to the third circumſtance propounded
in this Preface to our conſideration, and that is the
manner of the Prophets publiſhing this Poem which
he did indite.
            
               I will ſing] As the former particular gaue occaſion
to ſpeake of the lawfulneſſe of Poeſie and verſifying:
ſo doth this for the authoritie and lawfulneſſe of Voice-Melodie
and Singing. Let the point be this:
            Songs and Poems artificially modulated,Doct. Songs and Poems artificially modulated may lawfully be ſung. may lawfully
be ſung for the ſetting forth of Gods praiſe.
            This I will make good both by precept and practice
out of the Old and New Teſtament. Out of the Old:
               Pſal. 95. 1, 2. 
               Come let vs ſing vnto the Lord; let vs make a ioyfull
noiſe to the rocke of our ſaluation. Let vs come before this
preſence with thanksgiuing, and make a ioyfull noiſe vnto
him with Pſalmes. And againe,Pſal 66. 1, 2. & 135. 3. 
               Make a ioyfull noiſe
vnto God all ye Lands, ſing forth the honour of his name:
Praiſe the Lord, for he is good; ſing praiſes vnto his name,
for it is pleaſant. As in theſe and many other places it is
commanded: So by many of Gods faithfull ſeruants
we may finde it hath beene practiſed. ForNumb. 21. 17 
               Iſrael. ſang

this ſong: Spring vp oh well; Sing you vnto it.
               1 Chron. 15. 
               Dauid
and2 Chron. 5. 
               Solomon did likewiſe vſe it, and gaue appointment
how the Iewes ſhould ſing Pſalmes in their Temple. So
didExod. 15. 1. 
               Moſes,
               Iud. 5. 1. 
               Deborah and Barak, with others more, as
in the proofe of the former Doctrine appeared. In the
New Teſtament it is commanded in theſe expreſſe
words,Epheſ. 5. 19. Coloſſ. 3. 16. 
               Speak to your ſelues in Pſalmes, and Hymnes, and
ſpirituall Songs, ſinging and making melodie in your hearts
vnto the Lord. And againe;Iam. 5. 13. 
               Is any amongst you afflicted?
let him pray. Is any merry? let him ſing Pſalmes. And
there alſo we finde it vſed byActs 16. 25. 
               Paul and Silas, who at
midnight prayed and ſang praiſes to the Lord: and by
Mat. 26, 30. 
               Chriſt and his Apoſtles (whoſe example is without
exception) who ſang a Pſalme together (as at other
times) ſo that night in which our Sauiour was betrayed.
Thus out of holy writ we haue proued the point. Much
might be brought likewiſe for the further confirming of
it our of Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorie (if it were as needfull as
eaſie ſo to doe) of the practiſe of Chriſtians ſince
Chriſts time;Vide Eccleſ. hiſt. Theod. lib. 2. cap. 24. & Clem. Alex. lib. 2. Paedagog. cap. 4. Euſeb. Eccleſ. hiſt. lib. 2. cap. 17. &. but of that much, I will alledge only at
this time that teſtimonie whichLib. 3. cap. 33. & lib. 8. cap. 9. &. lib. 10. cap. 4. 
               Plinius ſecundus (a
Heathen, who liued about 200 yeares after Chriſt) gaue
vnto the Emperour Traian in the behalfe of Chriſtians:
They vſe (ſaith he) to riſe before day, to celebrate Chriſt
in Pſalmes as God: And as Socrates reports; neither
Conſtantine nor Theodoſius euer began a battell,Socrat. Schol. Eccleſ. hiſt. lib. 7. cap. 22. but firſt
they and their ſouldiers ſung Pſalmes, and made ſupplications
to the Lord. Let vs now come to ſome profitable
vſe.
            And firſt it ſerueth ſoundly to leſſon ſuch as condemne
this exerciſe;Vſe 1. or deride ſuch as vſe it either in
publike or in priuate. Such mockers are euery where
to be found, who as they deride all other parts of Gods
ſeruice, ſo amongſt the reſt, this. But if it be a worke of
Gods ſpirit to ſing; and if Gods children1 Cor. 14. 15. ſing with the
ſpirit, as S. Paul auoucheth; then againſt whom doe
theſe open their mouthes? whom doe they blaſpheme?

A lamentable thing it is, that in a Land profeſſing the
Goſpell, and after the continuance of the publike
preaching thereof ſo many yeares; ſuch an ancient,
laudable, and holy exerciſe, ſhould be made a matter of
ſcorne in the ſeeming of any. The Lord lay not this
ſinne vnto our charge.
            Secondly,Vſe 2. let vs be ſtirred vp on all ſides to a conſcionable
performance of this Chriſtian dutie. We haue
ſeene it commended to vs by the practiſe of Gods Saints,
and by Chriſt himſelfe: And not only ſo, but commanded
likewiſe in expreſſe termes; ſo that wee may not
thinke it as a thing indifferent, whether we ſing or no;
but euery man to whom God hath giuen the facultie of
ſinging, ought as well this way as any other, to ſet forth
his Makers praiſe.Motiues to ſinging. Now the better to ſtirre vs vp to the
performance hereof (for we ſhall finde our fleſh backward
enough as well in this as in any other good exerciſe)
I might vſe many motiues: One taken from the
admirable effects and vertues of the Pſalmes; there being
in them a pretious balme for euery preſent ſore; ſo
as that there is no temptation nor affliction which can
befall a Chriſtian, but in the Pſalmes he may finde both
the formes of expreſſing them, and their meanes of remedie.
Another might be drawne from the practiſe
of the dumbe creatures: As the Larke, and other birds,
which ſhut vp the light with a ſweet dittie, and againe
ſaluteth the Sunne when it begins to peepe the next
morning, with ſuch ſweet ſtraines as God hath naturally
giuen to it. ThisAmbroſ. Hexa.̄ lib. 5. cap. 12. one of the Ancients vſeth as a motiue
to draw vs to the exerciſe of ſinging: For how can
men but bluſh, ſaith he, to remember that they haue begun
or ended a day without a Pſalme, when they ſee the
birds, thoſe wilde quiriſters of the wood, conſtant in their
deuotions, beginning and ending the day with variety
of ſong? But I loue not to be tedious: Remember
only what Dauid ſaith;Pſal. 147. 1. 
               It is a good thing to ſing praiſes
to our God: It is pleaſant, and praiſe is comely. There

are ſome things good but not pleaſant, as afflictions:
Some things are pleaſant but not good, as ſinne: And
ſome things may be both good and pleaſant, yet not
comely. But this is all. It is good, becauſe commanded
of God, and agreeable to his will, as before hath beene
proued: It is pleaſant, as the children of God experimentally
haue witneſſed; who in time of tribulation
haue vſed them as a great meanes of conſolation, and as
a ſweetning to their tortoures. So did Theodorus, a man
young in yeares, though not in grace, of whō we reade,
Auguſt. de Ciu. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 52. & Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 35. that being cruelly tortured with vnheard of torments
from the breake of the day vntill the tenth houre without
intermiſſion; and then ſet on horſebacke, & on both
ſides tortured by the executioners, ſang with a cheerefull
countenance the 96 Pſalme. Which vndaunted
conſtancie the Officer perceiuing; ſent him backe
againe to priſon; reporting to the Emperor, what was
done, and withall told him, that vnleſſe he forbare to exerciſe
ſuch cruelty; it would redound to their glory and
his ſhame. It is comely; for it is the exerciſe of the Angels
in heauen to ſing praiſes and Halleluiahs to the
Lord. Wouldſt thou then exerciſe thy ſelfe in that
which is both good, pleaſant, and comely? then ſing
Pſalmes, for all theſe are met in that one dutie.
            Now for as much as many a good duty is mard in
the making,
                  Ʋſe. 3. and ſpoyld in the performance, let me adde
a third vſe for our direction, and therein ſhew what is
required of vs in our ſinging that God may haue the
glory. The rules that concerne this exerciſe are ſummarily
comprehended in theſe words of the Apoſtle to
the Coloſſians,Coloſſ. 3. 16. 
               Teaching and admoniſhing your ſelues
in Pſalmes and Hymnes and ſpirituall ſongs, ſinging with
grace in your hearts vnto the Lord. Here we haue directions
both for Matter, Manner, and End.
            
            Concerning the matter of our ſongs: It muſt be firſt
good and wholſome; ſpirituall and heauenly: Such
ſongs we muſt ſing as are either already in the word, or

elſe compoſed according to the word. 2. It muſt be
ſitting, that it may edifie: It muſt teach and admoniſh: and
therefore wiſdome is required euen in chuſing of a
Pſalme, that it may be fitting the occaſion.
            Concerning the manner of our ſinging, theſe are the
things required. Firſt, it muſt be with the heart. Now
to ſing with the heart is to ſing with vnderſtanding, and
with feeling. For he that ſingeth and vnderſtandeth
not what he ſingeth, what is he better than a ſounding
braſſe, or a tinckling cymball? And therefore ſaith the
Apoſtle,1 Cor. 14. 15. 
               I will ſing, but I will ſing with the vnderſtanding.
Our hearts muſt goe with our voyces; the one
muſt be lift vp as well as the other: For God is a ſpirit,
and will be worſhipped with the ſpirit. Looke then to
prepare thy heart before thou ſingeſt, and awake thy
tongue withPſal. 57. 7, 8. 
               Dauid before thou ſpeakeſt. For when the
mouth ſingeth,Plus valet conſonantia voluntati
                     •
                   quàm vocum. Bernard. man hath muſicke; but when the heart
ſings, we make God melodie: that is the beſt Organ,
tune that, and all is well; God heares not words without
it.
            
               Non vox ſed votum, non Chordula Muſica ſed cor;
               Non cantans ſed amans, cantat in aure Dei.
               Not voice, but will he brings; no Harp but Heart prepares;
               No ſongs, but Loue he ſings, whom the Almighty heares.
            
            As it muſt be with the heart, ſo ſecondly with grace in
the heart, i. we muſt exerciſe the graces of Gods holy
ſpirit in ſinging, as well as in praying, or in performing
any other of Gods ordinances. The diſpoſition of the
heart muſt be ſuited to the nature and qualitie of the
ſong: If it be a Pſalme of praiſe, then are our affections
to be ſutable; our ſpirits muſt be cheerefull: If of promiſes,
then muſt we ſtirre vp our faith and trust in Gods
mercies: If of threatnings, then muſt our hearts be
ſtrucke with an awe and feare of Gods greatneſſe: If of
petition, then muſt our affections be feruent: If of confeſſion,
               
then the Soule muſt be humbled. And this doth
the Apoſtle meane by Grace in the heart. Thus for the
Manner.
            
            The End is now to be conſidered; which is 1. Gods
glory. 2. The edification of our ſelues and others. Firſt,
we muſt direct our Songs to God: for ſinging Pſalmes
is a part of his worſhip, and his glory he will not giue
vnto another. The Papiſts then are much to blame, who
rob God of this his right, and giue it to the Virgin
Mary, in ſinging ſongs of praiſe to her. And as much
to blame are they, who ſing to their owne glory, delighting
moſt in ſweet voyce, cleare throat, &c. This is
ſinging to our owne ſelues, and ſenſes; not to our Makers
praiſe.
            Secondly, in our ſinging, our owne and others edification
and profit is to be reſpected.2 Tim. 3. 16. 
               All Scripture is
profitable for our inſtruction; and whatſoeuer is written,
is written for our learning: The booke of Pſalmes then
muſt needs be profitable for this purpoſe. Thus edifie
thy ſelfe by applying the matter ſung to thy owne heart,
and examine thy ſelfe after the Pſalme is ended, what
thou haſt thereby profited, as well as after thy hearing of
the word preached. Here likewiſe that manner of ſinging
vſed amongſt the Papiſts in a ſtrange and vnknowne
tongue; as alſo that kinde of ſinging Pſalmes, wherein
the words and ſentences are broken and diuided,
which hinders the edification of the hearers, is not
iuſtifiable.
            Thus we haue ſeene the rules propounded to vs:
What now remaines, but that a watchfull care be had
that they be put in practiſe by vs; and the rather for that
amongſt all the exerciſes belonging to a Chriſtian, God
is moſt diſhonoured by this: For few ſing, but (as it
may well be feared) take Gods name in vaine in ſinging,
becauſe they doe not ſo performe it as Gods word enioynes.
The more ſubiect then this dutie is to be performed
amiſſe, the more cauſe haue we of care for the

right performance of it, when euer we ſet vpon this
holy exerciſe.
            
               To my well-beloued] Here is the Dedication of the
Prophets Poem:
               Text. From whoſe practiſe learne we our
dutie,Doctr. All our labours are to be dedicated to the Lord. viz. To conſecrate all our labours vnto God. Thus
Moſes and the children of Iſrael write a ſong and ſing
itExod. 15. 1. 
               vnto the Lord. And in that ſweet Swan-like ſong,
which that man of God ſang a little before his death.
Deut. 32. 3. He will publiſh the name of the Lord: So Dauid ſpake
vnto the Lord in that ſame Pſalme of Thanks-giuing
               2 Sam. 22. 1.,
which he made for Gods powerfull deliuerance of him
out of the hands of all his enemies. The like did Solomon,
Hannah, Hezekiah, Mary, Zachary, Simeon, with
other of Gods Saints dedicate their labours in this
kinde, to Gods eternall praiſe: And ſo the Apoſtles, as
euidently appeares by that doxologie, or forme of praiſe
which they continually vſe in their Epiſtles;Rom. 16. 27. Epheſ. 3. 21. 1 Tim. 1. 17. & 6. 16. Iude 25. 
               To God
only wiſe be glory, &c. 
                  Ʋnto him be glory in the Church
by Christ Ieſus: Vnto the King immortall, inuiſible, the
only wiſe God, be honour and glory: To God only wiſe our
Sauiour be all glory, &c. And hereunto tend thoſe generall
exhortations;1 Cor. 10. 31. 
               Whether you eat or drinke, or whatſoeuer
you doe, doe all to the glory of God: And
againe,Coloſſ. 3. 17. 
               Whatſoeuer you doe in word or deed, doe all in
the name of the Lord Ieſus. And thus this truth is
ſtrengthned.
            Beſides there is good Reaſon for it.Reaſon. For the firſt
thing in Gods intention ſhould be the firſt in ours. But
this is the firſt in his: He predeſtinated vs (ſaith the
Epheſ. 1. 5, 6. Apoſtle) to the praiſe of the glory of his grace.
               Prou. 16. 4. 
               He
hath made all things for himſelfe (ſaith the Wiſe-man)
yea euen the wicked for the day of iudgemenmt.
               Iſay 43. 6, 7. 
               Bring my
ſonnes from farre, and my daughters from the ends of the
earth: euen euery one that is called by my name: for I haue
created him for my glory. And againe we reade,Coloſſ. 1. 16. 
               All
things were created by him and for him. Seeing then God
himſelfe propoſeth his owne glory to himſelfe, for the

end of all his works, man ſhould make the glory of God
the end of all he doth.
            But ah!Vſe. Lord God how little is thy glory thought
vpon? How few make it the ſupreme end of all their
labours? Shouldſt thouPſal. 14. 2. 
               looke downe from heauen vpon
the ſonnes of men to ſee if there were any that would vnderſtand
and ſeeke after thee to honour thee; wouldſt thou
finde one amongſt a thouſand that did truly doe it? We
all can ſay with Saul,
               1. Sam. 15. 30. 
               Honour me, I pray thee, before the
Elders of my people: when notwithſtanding we turne
thy glory into ſhame,
               Pſal. 4. louing vanitie, ſeeking after lyes.
            
            Oh that we could once be brought to learne this
leſſon!
                  Ʋſe 2. That we would not ſuffer any part of the repute
or honour of any of our acts or labours to reſt
vpon our owne heads, but repell it forcibly from our
ſelues, and reflect it carefully vpon our Lord and Maſter.
It is theMatth. 6. 9. firſt grace which Chriſt teacheth vs to begge
of God, and it ought to be the chiefeſt ayme of our
whole liues; yea we ſhould prefer it before our liues, or
the ſaluation of our ſoules; wherefore it is made the
firſt petition, and ſet before the deſire of daily bread,
and the petition that is made for remiſſion of our ſinnes.
Now at length then learne to prefer it before all the
world, and promote it by our beſt meanes. Conſider
we for this end:
            All creatures in their kinde glorifie their Maker,Motiues to ſeeke after Gods glory. and
employ themſelues in the ſetting forth of his praiſe:
Pſal. 19. 1. 
               The heauens, declare the glory of God, and the firmament
ſheweth his handy worke: by their admirable ſtructure,
motions, and influence, they preach his praiſe, and that
1. All the night, and all the day without intermiſſion;
forverſ. 2. 
               one day telleth another, and one night certifieth another:
2. In euery kinde of language; forverſ. 3. 
               there is no
ſpeech nor language where their voyce is not heard: and
3. In euery part of the world, in euery Country, Citie,
Towne, Village, Pariſh; for1 verſ. 4. 
               Their ſound is gone out
through all the earth, and their words to the end of the

world. Thus (Bellarm. in Pſal. 19. ſaith one) they be diligent Paſtors,
preaching at all times: And learned Paſtors, as preaching
in all tongues: And Catholike Paſtors, preaching in
all Townes. And the ſubiect of all their preaching is
no other than the glory of God. And as the Heauens;
ſo doe the Fowles of the Heauens, as theIer. 8. 7. 
               Storke,
Crane, Turtle, Swallow. And ſo alſo the beaſts of the
field: forIſay 1. 3. 
               the Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Aſſe his
maſters crib, as I ſay ſheweth.
            
                Remember againe how little glory God getteth at
the hands of moſt in the world, which I thus make euident:
Put caſe the whole world ſhould be diuided into
foure parts; three of the foure we ſhall finde to be ouerſpread
with Turciſme, Paganiſme, &c. they not ſo much
as profeſſing the true God in Chriſt; and therefore
amongſt them God can get no glory, but is continually
diſhonoured, by their liues and actions: ſo that there
is but a fourth part of the world (if that) which doth
profeſſe him in his Sonne; and amongſt thoſe (though
all profeſſe him in word) how many are there which
denie him by their workes? Should we make a ſubdiuiſion,
and againe diuide that fourth and leaſt part into
foure parts more, we ſhall finde the leaſt part truly to
ſeeke his honour. One part we ſhall finde are Hereticks,
who rob him of his glory by their ſuperſtition and Idolatrie:
A ſecond part are Atheiſts and notorious euill
liuers, who are ſo farre from honouring him, as that they
daily belch out blaſphemies againſt him. A third part
are Hypocrites and carnall Proteſtants; backſliders, and
luke-warme Chriſtians, whoIſay 29. 13. 
               honour him with their
lips, but haue their hearts farre from him. Now there is
but a fourth part, and hardly that, who are ſincere and
faithfull; and if they ſhould not bend themſelues with
all their might, to maintaine and aduance Gods glory,
it would be trodden vnder foot of all. Should not this
conſideration be a ſpurre in our ſides to make vs forward
in this dutie?
            
               
Call to minde the practices of Gods Saints. Moſes,
               
that man of God,Exod. 32. 32. preferred it before his own ſaluation,
no maruell then if he preferred it beforeHeb. 11. 24. the honours
and treaſures of Egypt: the like did bleſſed Paul
               Rom. 9. 2., who
profeſſeth that for Gods glory in the ſaluation of the
Iewes, he could wiſh himſelfe accurſed or ſeparated from
Chriſt. Remarkable alſo is the Apoſtles care in the cure
of the CreepleActs 14. 11., that the leaſt part of Gods praiſe might
not cleaue to their fingers, but all might be aſcribed to
the Lord. The 24. EldersReuel. 4. 10. caſt their Crownes before
the Throne; they emptie themſelues of all glory, merit
and worthineſſe whatſoeuer, that they may giue all
praiſe vnto the Lord. And laſtly, haue we not our Sauiours
owne example for our imitation, who both by
praier and practice ſought his Fathers glory, and only
it?Iohn 12. 28. 
               Father (ſaith he) glorifie thy name: and againe,
8. 49, 50. 
               I honour my Father, and ſeeke not my owne glorie. And
in that ſweet praier of his,Iohn 17. 4. 
               I haue glorified thee on earth,
I haue finiſhed the worke which thou gaueſt me to doe.
Wherefore ſeeing we are compaſſed about with ſo great
a cloud of witneſſes, and haue ſo many examples before
vs for our encouragement, let vs lay aſide all pride of
heart, ſelfe-loue, vaine-glorie, and euery ſuch like weight
and ſinne which doth ſo eaſily beſet vs, and in ſimplicitie
of heart aime at our maſters praiſe, in all we vndertake.
Euery dull iade will follow, though he will not
leade the way; we are but iades in Chriſtianitie and
godlineſſe, if we continue careleſſe, when ſo many haue
gone before vs in this dutie.
            Remember further, how we pray: Doe we not deſire 
daily the hallowing of Gods name? now to ſay it
with our mouthes and not ſeeke it in our liues, is damnable
hypocriſie; a ſinne that God abhorres. Doe we
not likewiſe pray, that Gods will may be done in earth
as it is in heauen? Now tell me how doe the Angels
ſpend their time? doe not they cry continually one vnto
another,Iſay 6. 3. 
               Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Hoaſts,

the whole earth is full of his glory? Oh take heed leſt
thou multiplieſt lies as thou multiplieſt praiers; ſee
that thy heart and tongue be not at variance; what thou
praieſt for with thy lips, ſee thou practiſeſt in thy life:
Let not your workes giue your tongues the lye.
            
                Againe, for our further encouragement hereto; conſider
we the benefit that comes hereby: For by glorifying
God we bring glory to our ſelues; the greateſt fruit
thereof redounds to vs; His glory is as himſelfe, eternall,
infinite; and ſo abides in it ſelfe not capable of our
addition to it or detraction from it. As the Sunne which
would ſhine in its owne brightneſſe and glory though
all the world were blinde, and did wilfully ſhut their eies
againſt it: ſo God will euer be moſt glorious, let men be
neuer ſo obſtinate or rebellious. Yea, God will haue
glory by Reprobates, though it be nothing to their eaſe,
and though he be not glorified of them, yet he will glorifie
himſelfe in them: Yet notwithſtanding this, he
will trie how we prize his glory, and how induſtrious
we are to magnifie and exalt it; wherein if he finde vs
painfull, he will plentifully reward it, and returne glory
for glory, according to his promiſe,1 Sam. 2. 30. 
               Them that honour
me will I honour.
            
            
                Laſtly, if all that hath beene ſaid worke not vpon vs,
yet let the danger that followes vpon the neglect of this
dutie moue vs. How many examples are recorded in
Scripture of Gods iudgements vpon ſuch, as did either
derogate from God, or arrogate to themſelues any part
of that praiſe which was due vnto his name? Moſes and
Aaron (yet his owne deare ſeruants)Numb. 20. 12. were debarred
out of the Land of Promiſe, becauſe they glorified him
not at the waters of ſtrife: The high-Prieſthood1 Sam. 2. 29, 31. & 3. 13. was
remoued from the houſe of Ely, and the wrath of God
was kindled againſt him for the iniquitie of his ſonnes
which he ſaw in them, and ſtaied them not, and ſo honoured
them aboue the Lord. When Nebuchadnezzar
               Dan. 4. 30, 31. vaunted vainegloriouſly of that great Babel which he

had built, by the might of his power, and to the honour
of his Maieſtie; how was he debaſed? his kingdome
was taken from him; he was driuen from
amongſt men, and ſent to graſſe with the beaſts of the
field for ſeuen yeares ſpace, vntill he was made to know
that the moſt high God ruleth in the kingdome of men.
And laſtly, remember Gods hand on Herod
               Acts 12. 22, 23., who taking
to himſelfe the glory which was due vnto the
Lord when the people applauded his eloquent oration,
was immediatly ſmitten by the Angell of God, and was
eaten vp of wormes, and ſo gaue vp the Ghoſt.1 Cor. 10. 11. 
               Now
all theſe things happened vnto them for enſamples vnto vs:
and they are written for our admonition, vpon whom the
ends of the world are come, to the intent that we ſhould
not doe as they haue done, leſt1 Sam. 2. 30. 
               deſpiſing him we be deſpiſed
as they were.
            Let theſe things be laid to heart, and kindly worke
vpon vs; ſo as that whatſoeuer we are, we may be itRom. 11. 36. 
               In
him,
               A loue principium. Virg. Eglog. 3. 
               through him, and for him. Begin all your workes
in God, and end in God; yea, dedicate your ſelues vnto
him. No Tradeſman can endure to haue any of his
chiefe tooles, which he hath made or wherewith he
worketh, vſed to a wrong end: Man is one of Gods
chiefe inſtruments, whom he hath made for his owne
honour, and therefore cannot endure that he or any of
his members ſhould be inſtruments of wickedneſſe to
his diſhonour. And let all good Chriſtians take heed
leſt they doe any thing which may cauſe God or his
Goſpell to be blaſphemed.
            The lewd life of one profeſſor doth more harme, and
tends more to Gods diſhonour, than the lewd life of an
hundred Atheiſts, as daily experience maketh good.
Let a prophane wretch, that neither feareth God nor reuerenceth
man, liue in the groſſeſt ſinnes that can be
thought of, there is hardly one word of reproofe or
diſlike vttered: Let another that profeſſeth religion be
ouertaken, through infirmitie, and that but once in all

his life, then are the mouthes of all the prophane multitude
opened againſt the very truth and profeſſion it
ſelfe. Theſe are your Bible-bearers; your profeſſors;
your men of the holy houſe; ſee their fruits. Thus euery
little aberration in a Profeſſor is noted, when outragious
wickedneſſes of prophane wretches is nothing at all regarded.
When the leſſer ſtarres be eclipſed, none takes
knowledge of it; but if the Sunne be once, then euery
one obſerues it: what cauſe therefore haue all ſuch to be
carefull of their cariage? Looke to thy ſelfe therefore
thou that art a profeſſor of the Goſpell; thou dippeſt in
the ſame diſh with Chriſt, and therefore thou of all
other ſhouldſt be fartheſt off from diſhonouring his
name. Dauid tooke it more to heart, that thoſe who did
eat bread at his table did deſpiſe him, than that others
did; 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . that Abſolom ſhould ſeeke his life, than that Shemei
ſhould rayle vpon him. And thou my ſonne Brutus,
art thou one of them, ſaid Iulius Caeſar to his ſon, when
he ſaw him to be amongſt them that murdered him:
this pierced deeper into his ſoule than the ſwords of all
his enemies did or could. So the ſinnes of ſuch as come
neere vnto the Lord in a holy profeſſion, of whom he
looketh to be ſanctified, is more grieuous to him than
the groſſer ſinnes of other men: To ſuch he will one
day ſay, as Caeſar to his ſonne, Art thou one of them?
What in the habit of a profeſſor, and liue like a beaſt?
One in ſhew that loues me, and yet a worldling, a drunkard,
or the like? Oh how wilt thou anſwer it? Thou
that glorieſt in the name of a Profeſſor, and yet liueſt like
a Pagan,Vt nemo de nobia male loqui abſque mendacio poſſit. Hier. can God endure it? Surely no. See then thou
ſo liueſt, as that none may ſpeake euill of thee, but that
all the world may ſee he lieth. Yet further; this would
be preſſed to all callings and conditions. Let Magiſtrates
minde this; and doe what lyes in them to eſtabliſh
the Churches peace and continuance of the Goſpell;
let godlineſſe be countenanced; ſinne puniſhed;
and the faithfull be by them incouraged:Deut. 4. 6. 
               It ſhall be

their wiſdome and glory in the ſight of the people thus to
doe. Let Miniſters be carefull in a ſpeciall manner of
this: Oh! how difficult a thing is it for vs not to lurch
away ſome part of our Maſters praiſe? A glorious and
comfortable thing it is indeed, for a Miniſter to be able
to ſay that he hath beene Gods inſtrument to bring one
ſoule to the obedience of Chriſt; yet for him to ayme at
his owne vaine-glory, euen in gaining of ſoules to Gods
kingdome, ſuits not with that ſincere affection which
ought to be in him, to promote not his owne, but the
praiſe & glory of him that ſent him. Let vs then not ſuffer
any part of the repute or honour of any of our labors
to reſt vpon our own heads, but repell it forcibly frō our
ſelues, and reflect it carefully vpon the Lord Ieſus, ſaying
with S. Paul, Not I, not I, but the grace of God in me.
Yea let euery one, of what calling or condition ſoeuer, ſo
carry his courſe of life, as that God may be honoured in
all things. And here let me bring to minde Ioabs commendable
cariage in taking of the Citie Rabbah (with
which I will conclude the point:) for when he had
fought againſt it, and tooke the Citie of waters (that is,
the waters of the Citie) (ſo called by a figure) and cut
off the conduits,Hypallage. by which his policie he brought the
people into ſuch diſtreſſe,Praeciſis aquae ductibus. Ioſeph. as that they could no way
eſcape, he ſends this meſſage vnto Dauid;
               2 Sam. 12. 28. 
               Gather the
rest of the people together, and encampe against the Citie,
and take it, leſt I take the Citie, and it be called by my name:
i. leſt it redound to my honour, and that victorie be
aſcribed vnto me. Doubtleſſe this was his great praiſe
ſo to order the battell, as that his Lord and King might
haue the glory of the day, and not himſelfe: Should
not we doe thus? Are not we more bound to God than
Ioab was to Dauid? Ought not we more to reſpect our
God than he his King? What good thing therefore ſoeuer
we doe or haue, giue him the glory of it, ſaying
with the Pſalmiſt,Pſal. 115. 1. 
               Not vnto vs, O Lord, not vnto vs, but
vnto thy name be the praiſe.
            
            
               
               Welbeloued] We haue before ſeene whom the Prophet
meaneth by his welbeloued,Text. together with the
Reaſons: By welbeloued, God is meant. One Reaſon
for that Appellation was becauſe he is the Churches wellbeloud;
ſhee being his ſpouſe, and he her huſband. In
which reſpect as he was a member of the Church, and
in the behalfe of the Church he ſo termeth him, for he
did loue him well. So then
            The Church and euery true member of the Church doth
and ſo ought,Doctr. Euery one ought to loue the Lord. to loue the Lord entirely.
            This we finde commanded;Deut. 6. 5. & 10. 12. 
               Thou ſhalt loue the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy ſoule, and
with all thy might.
               Pſal. 31. 13. 
               Loue yee the Lord all his Saints, for
the Lord preſerueth the faithfull, and plentifully rewardeth
the proud doer. If any man loue not the Lord Ieſus,
               1 Cor. 16. 22. 
               let
him be Anathema Maranatha, had in execration, or excommunicated
to death. This we ſhall likewiſe finde
practiſed by Gods Saints:Pſal. 18. 1. 
               I will loue thee, O Lord my
ſtrength, ſaith Dauid. And againe,& 16. 1. 
               I loue the Lord,
becauſe he hath heard my voyce. Thus S. Peter,
               Iohn 21. 25. 
               Lord
thou knoweſt that I loue thee. And Mary had many
ſinnes forgiuen her,Luke 7. 47. 
               for ſhee loued much. The Church
in the Canticles likewiſe plentifully,Cant. 1. 7. 
               Tell me ô thou
whom my ſoule loueth (ſaith ſhee to Chriſt.) And againe,
2. 1. 3. 
               By night on my bed I ſought him whom my ſoule loueth.
And what word more common in that ſong, than Loue
and welbeloued? I muſt bring Ignatius alſo to be of the
Quorum,
               Epiſt. 12. quae eſt ad Romanos. 
               My Loue Chriſt (ſaith he) was crucified.
And thus hath this truth beene proued, That the
Church and euery true member thereof both doth and
ought to loue the Lord entirely.
            And Reaſon good:Reaſon. For firſt he loued vs not exiſting,
yea reſiſting.Dilexit enim non exiſtentes, imò reſiſtentes. Bernard. ForRom. 5. 8. 1 Iohn 4. 19. while we were yet ſinners he loued
vs. This Reaſon is giuen by S. Iohn; We loue him becauſe
he loued vs firſt. And ſurely if God preuent vs
with loue, we can doe no leſſe than anſwer him in the
ſame nature, though not (for that is impoſſible) in the

ſame meaſure. Doe not Publicanes
               Mat. 5. 46. Luke. 6. 32. Si tardi ſumus ad amandum, non tardi ſimus ad redamandum. 
               loue thoſe that
loue them? Sinners doe the ſame. Though then we haue
not beene forward to loue firſt, yet let vs not be backward
to returne loue at laſt.
            Againe, we are tyed to him by all the bonds of loue
and duty:Reaſ. 2. we are his creatures.
               Pſal. 100. 3. he our maker; we his
Seruants, heMal. 1. 6. our Lord; we his Children,
               2 Cor. 6. 18. he our Father;
we hisHoſ. 2. 19. 
               Spouſe, he our Husband. Yea ſo ſtrait is
the vnion betwixt him and vs, and that he is ſaid to bee
the Foundation
               Epheſ. 2. 20., we the building; He theIohn 15. 1. 
               root, we the
branches; He theEpheſ. 5. 23. 
               Head, we the body, &c. Being bound
by ſo many and ſo neere bonds, how can wee but acknowledge
it is our duty intirely to loue him?
            Beſides,Reaſ. 3. he only is loue-worthy, beingCant. 5. 10. Splondor ſummi illius boni pulchrii Coelum, pulchra terra, ſed pulchrior qui fecit illa. 
               the chiefeſt amongst
ten thouſands. What it is there to be compared with
him? The moſt excellenteſt creatures are but as the
beames of his beauty; That glory or goodneſſe which
is in any of them is but as a ſhadow in reſpect of that
infinite good which is in him, who is the maker of
them. Thus this threefold cord may hold vs,Eccleſ. 4. 12. it will
not eaſily bee broken, as ſpeakes wiſe King Solomon.
And now Triplex ex arbore fructus; A three-fold vſe
this point affords.
            For triall:
                  Ʋſe 1. And indeed what better vſe can we make
of it? There was neuer any Senacherib nor Ieſabel but
ſaid they loued God; and who boaſts more they loue
him, than the prophaneſt wretch that daily doth contemne
him? It is a thing counted both common and
eaſie to performe this duty, and no man doubts hee is
herein to ſeeke; when notwithſtanding this is as true as
God is true (who is Truth it ſelfe) that no more doe truly
loue God than are from all eternity elected by God
to ſaluation; And wee know, or may know (for
Scripture ſaies it) that the number of them is ſmallEſay 1. 9. Luke 12. 32.,
yea very ſmall (comparatiuely conſidered) their account
will ſoone be made,Rom. 9. 28. it is but a ſhort worke, into a ſhort
ſumme ſhall they be gathered.
            
            
               
Seeing then,Rules of triall for the diſcouery of our loue to God. it is as narrow as Gods election (and
that is very narrow) let each one ſearch narrowly his
boſome for this grace. A rule of three, (1. our Affections,
2. our Words, 3. our Actions) will ſufficiently diſcouer
it.
            By our affections will it ſoone bee ſeene,By our Affections. what loue
we beare to God: For Loue, as the greateſt wheele ſets
all the reſt a worke; It is the ſtrongeſt affection, and to it
doe all the reſt giue place:Deſire. where that goes before, Deſire
followes after: What I loue I deſire to enioy, and it is
not where it begets not a deſire of ſociety.2 Sam. 13. 2. 
               Ammon
was very ſicke through loue, his fleſh did pine and waſte
away becauſe he could not enioy his ſiſter Thamar. Dauid
and Ionathan did loue intirely,1 Sam. 18. 1. and as the Text
ſaith, their ſoules were knit together, whence it was that
they tooke ſuch pleaſure and contentment each in other;
Cap. 20. 18, 19, 41, 42. the ſtory ſhewes what ſhifts they made to meet,
what weeping and heart-ſorrow there was when they
were to part, and all becauſe they loued. Thus hee that
loues the Lord muſt needs deſire to haue ſociety with
the Lord: A ioy it is to his ſoule to meet him; and nothing
doth he deſire ſo much as to enioy him. And ſo
Dauid was affected, as appeares by thoſe many patheticall
deſires of his:Pſal. 73. 25. 
               Whom haue I in Heauen but thee?
and there is none vpon the earth that I deſire beſides
thee.
               Pſal. 42. 1. 
               As the Hart panteth after the water-brookes, ſo
panteth my ſoule after thee O God.
               Pſal. 146. 6. 
               My ſoule thirſteth
after thee as a thirſty land.
               Pſal. 130. 6. 
               My ſoule waiteth for the
Lord, more than they that watch for the morning: I ſay,
more than they that watch for the morning. Theſe and
many other ſuch like ſayings ſhew the affection of his
ſoule. And whereas in ſome places God is pleaſed graciouſly
to manifeſt his preſence after a ſpeciall manner,
and in ſome exerciſes there is an eſpeciall kinde of fellowſhip
had with him, we ſhall finde what a great deſire
the godly haue had to ſuch places, and what great loue
they haue borne to thoſe duties.Pſal. 26. 8. 
               I haue loued (ſaith

               Dauid) the habitation of thy houſe, and the place where
thine honour dwelleth. And elſe-where thus:Pſal. 27. 4. 
               One thing
haue I deſired of the Lord, that I will ſeeke after, that I
may dwell in the houſe of the Lord all the dayes of my life,
to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple. And againe;Pſal. 84. 1, 2. 
               How amiable are thy Tabernacles,
O Lord of Hoſts! my ſoule longeth, yea euen fainteth
for the Courts of the Lord.
               verſ. 4. 
               Bleſſed are they that dwell in
thy houſe.
               verſ. 10. 
               A day in thy Courts is better than a thouſand:
I had rather be a doore-keeper in the houſe of my God, than
to dwell in the Tents of wickedneſſe. The like is his deſire
after the meanes and exerciſes of Religion.Pſal. 119. 97. 
               Oh how
loue I thy Law! it is my meditation all the day.
               verſe 127. 
               I loue
thy Commandements aboue gold, yea aboue fine gold.
               Pſal. 55. 17. 
               Euening
and morning, and at noone will I pray, and cry aloud.
               Pſal. 119. 164. 
               Yea ſeuen times a day doe I praiſe thee becauſe of
thy righteous iudgements. This hath beene the deſire of
ſuch (whoſe hearts haue beene enflamed with the loue
of God) after his preſence of grace here; and as deſirous
haue they bin after Gods preſence of glory hereafter, with
Paul deſiring to bee looſed that hee might bee with
Chriſt,Phil. 1. 25. 
               which they count beſt of all: and with the Bride
and Spirit in the Reuelation ſay, Come
               Reu. 22. 17. verſ. 20.. Amen; euen ſo,
come Lord Ieſus.
            
            Againe,Ioy. our Ioy will make knowne our loue. For where
loue is, there ioy will ſhew it ſelfe, 1. In the Preſence
or enioyment of the party beloued: 2. In his Image or
picture: 3. In ſuch things as tend to the ſetting forth of
his Honour. As loue cauſeth vs to deſire ſociety with the
beloued party, ſo it maketh vs to reioyce in it greatly,
when it is obtained and had, euen as a louing wife reioyceth
in the company of her Husband aboue the company
of any other whatſoeuer: ſo ſaith the Church,Iſay 61. 10. 
               I will
greatly reioyce in the Lord, my ſoule ſhall be ioyfull in my
God. The Apoſtle Paul calleth Chriſt his reioycing;1 Cor. 15. 31. 
               By
our reioycing which I haue in Chriſt Ieſus. Thus do Gods
children reioyce in Gods preſence, yeaIſay 9. 3. 
               their ioy before

him is according to the ioy in harueſt, and as men reioyce
when they diuide the ſpoyle.
            
            As they ioy in his Preſence, ſo doe they reioyce in his
Image. The very picture of a friend whom we entirely
loue we eſteeme highly of, and often ſolace our ſelues in
the beholding it: SoI Iohn 5. 1. 
               If we loue him that begat, we
loue him alſo that is begotten: If we loue God, it cannot
be, but we muſt needs reioyce in the Image of God,
which appeares in his children, conſiſting inEpheſ. 4. 24. 
               righteouſneſſe
and true holineſſe. And thus did Dauid,
               Pſal. 16. 2, 3. 
               My
goodneſſe extendeth not to thee, but to the Saints that are
in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight.
Where marke, 1. His delight was In the Saints. 2. In
all the Saints. 3. All his delight was in them. The
mother of Darius (as I haue read) ſaluting Hepheſtion in
ſtead of Alexander, who was but Alexanders fauourite,
bluſhed and was much aſhamed vpon notice of
her miſtake: which Alexander perceiuing, bid her not
be troubled, for ſaid he, he is alſo Alexander. Doeſt
thou reioyce in Chriſt, thou muſt then reioyce in the
godly, for they alſo are1 Cor. 12. 12. 
               Chriſt.
            
            And as in the Image, ſo Loue cauſeth vs to reioyce in
euery thing that ſerueth to the praiſe or profit of the beloued
party; So here: As 1. generally; in the Churches
welfare; IeruſalemPſal. 137. 6. 
               ſhall be preferred to our chiefeſt
ioy: thus the godly in Iſayes dayes,Iſay 66. 10. 
               Reioyce yee with
Ieruſalem, and be glad with her, all yee that loue her, reioyce
for ioy with her all you that mourne for her. 2. More
particularly; The readineſſe of the people to doe God
ſeruice, will ſtirre vp Ioy: as in Dauids time,1 Chro. 29. 9. 
               The people
reioyced for that they offered willingly; And in Aſa's
time,2 Chro. 15. 15. 
               All Iudah reioyced at the oath of the couenant
which they had made vnto the Lord, for they had ſworne
(ſaith the text) with all their heart. So likewiſe will the
conuerſion of ſinners: Thus when the Iewes heard of
the conuerſion of the Gentiles, and that the Holy Ghoſt
was fallen vpon them as vpon themſelues at the beginning,

               they glorified God, ſaying,
               Acts 11. 18. 
               Then hath God alſo vnto
the Gentiles granted repentance vnto life. It maketh vs
likewiſe to reioyce at our owne well-doing, becauſe honour
thereby redounds to the name of God; ſo ſaith
Solomon,
               Pro. 21. 15. 
               It is ioy to the iuſt to doe iudgement. And laſtly,
in our owne ſaluation,Luke 10. 20. 
               that our names are written in
the booke of life. Thus in theſe, and in all things elſe,
which tend (and ſo farre forth as they tend) to the ſetting
forth of the Almighties praiſe, doth Loue cauſe vs
to reioyce.
            Further,Feare. our Loue (if ſound) will be diſcerned by
our Feare. How afraid are we to offend, or any way
diſpleaſe, thoſe whom we entirely affect? And therefore
theſe two are ioyned together byDeut. 10. 12. 
               Moſes as ſiſters,
for where one is there is the other. True it is, that
perfect Loue caſteth out Feare
               1 Iohn 4. 18., as S. Iohn ſpeaketh; but
that is meant of a ſlauiſh and ſeruile feare, not of this
ſonne-like and filiall feare, for it doth eſtabliſh it. Moſes
in one verſe ſheweth both theſe kindes of feares:Exod. 20. 20.. Feare
not (ſaith he to Iſrael) for God is come to proue you, and
that his feare may be before your faces, that you ſinne not.
He bids them not to feare, viz. with that ſlauiſh-feare;
and yet chargeth them to feare, viz. with this godly and
child-like feare. By this latter feare then, we need not
feare to try our loue: For without queſtion, he that
truly loues God is afraid to diſpleaſe God by committing
of the leaſt ſinne, for feare leſt it ſhould make a
diuorce betweene him and his God, whom his ſoule
loueth.
            Moreouer Loue cauſeth Sorrow and Griefe;
               Griefe. 1. For
our beloueds abſence: 2. For any wrong or iniurie
offered vnto him. Doe we not ſee what diſcontentment,
beaſts (which out of naturall inſtinct loue their
young) doe ſhew when they haue loſt them? And how
grieuouſly doe Parents take the death or abſence of
their children? In humane loue amongſt friends it fareth
after the ſame manner as it doth in naturall; what a

heauy parting was there betweene Ionathan and Dauid
               1 Sam. 20. 41.? And is not this the nature of religious loue?
The Spouſe hauing loſt her welbeloued, inquires
through the ſtreets as vndone without him,Cant. 5. 6. Cap. 3. 2. 3. 
               Saw yee
him whom my ſoule loueth? And ſo doth euery faithfull
ſoule when through their misbehauiour they cauſe the
Lord for a while to leaue them, and withdraw his fauourable
preſence from them.
            In caſe of wrong; we haue an excellent example in
Ionathan; how grieuouſly did he take it, that his beloued
friend Dauid ſhould be iniured, though it were his
owne father who offered it? For ſo ſaith the text,1 Sam. 20. 34. 
               He
was grieued for Dauid becauſe his father had done him
ſhame: So loue to God cauſeth a man to take to heart
things done againſt his name and honour, be it done
either by himſelfe or other; If by himſelfe, he goeth
outMatth. 26. 75. with Peter and weepeth bitterly; and (as it is ſaid
of the people of God in the day of their repentance)
drawes water1 Sam. 7. 6., to powre it out before the Lord. And
ſo was Dauid affected, as appeares in thatPſal. 51. 
               poenitentiall
Pſalme, which he made vpon occaſion of his foule fall
into adulterie and murther: If by others; he laments
it heartily with Lot,
               2 Pet. 2. 8. 
               who dwelling amongst the wicked in
ſeeing and hearing vexed his righteous ſoule from day to
day with their vnlawfull deeds. And thus did Dauid,
               Pſal. 119. 158. 
               I beheld the tranſgreſſors and was grieued, becauſe they
kept not thy word.
               Verſ. 136. 
               Riuers of teares runne downe mine
eyes, becauſe they keepe not thy law. So Ezra; who when
he heard how the people had ſinned, and diſhonoured
God by taking ſtrange wiues vnto them,Ezra 9. 3. 
               He rent his
garment and his mantle, and pluckt the haire from off his
head and beard, and ſate downe aſtonied. Ieremiah likewiſe
when he ſaw the people would not giue glory to
the Lord, neither would heare, he telleth them,Ier. 13. 17. 
               his
ſoule ſhould weepe in ſecret for their pride, and his eye
ſhould weepe ſore and runne downe with teares for their
diſobedience. And thus did thoſe mourners marked

with Gods owne marke for his,Ezek. 9. 4. 
               mourne for the abominations
committed in Ieruſalem, whereby they teſtified
the ſoundneſſe of this grace of Loue.
            As Griefe,
               Patience. ſo Patience, in ſuffering and vndergoing
of trouble, labour, paine, will manifeſt how great our
loue is which we beare to God. What infinite paines
will men that loue the world take for a handfull of it?
Hunters, Hawkers, how doe they toyle and moyle, yet
neuer complaine?Voi amor eſt non eſt labor, ſed ſapor. And why? They loue the ſport.
Hard things, loue makes eaſie; great paines to it ſeemes
pleaſure;Bernard. ſer. 85. in Cant. no taske ſo hard which loue refuſes to gratifie
the beloued partie. For the loue that Iacob did beare to
Rachel,
               Gen. 29. 20. he was content to vndergoe ſeuen yeares hard
ſeruice, and they ſeemed vnto him but as a few dayes:
the reaſon is giuen in the text; For the loue he had
to her. If Shechem will marry Dinah, it muſt be on condition
of Circumciſion, he muſt firſt ſuffer the cutting
of his tender fleſh, though it be (as queſtionleſſe it
would be) very painfull:Gen. 34. 19. 
               Now the young man deferred
not to doe the thing, becauſe he had delight in Iacobs
daughter. The like patience will be found in vndergoing
any paine or trouble for Gods cauſe if we truly loue him.
The Apoſtles depart from the preſence of the Councell,
Acts 5. 40. 
               reioycing that they were counted worthy to ſuffer ſhame
for the name of Chriſt. Ignatius that bleſſed Martyr of
Chriſt Ieſus thus teſtified his loue, as appearethEccleſ. Hiſt. Euſeb. li. 3. ca. 36. by his
Epiſtle which he wrote vnto the Church of Rome,
where he profeſſeth, that the more he was exerciſed
with the iniuries of his oppreſſors, the more he was inſtructed:
and that he weighed neither viſible nor inuiſible
things for the loue of Chriſt. And addeth further:
Come fire, croſſe, wilde beaſts, ſlaughter, tearing of bones,
diſmembring of the parts of my bodie, yea let all the torments
of the deuill ruſh vpon me, ſo I may enioy Chriſt:
better for me to be a Martyr than a Monarch;
               Ex narratione hiſtorica de condem. Ioh. Huſſi in Concil. Const. 
               my Loue is
crucified, &c. And ſo Iohn Hus who being led forth to
the place of execution (after he was condemned in the

Councell of Conſtance to be burned) hauing a cap of
paper ſet vpon his head, in which were painted three
deuils of an vgly ſhape, and this inſcription added,
This is an Arch-heretique: when he beheld it, ſaid very
mildly, My Lord Ieſus Chriſt who was innocent, vouchſafed
to weare a ſharpe crowne of thornes for me wretched
ſinner; and therefore I will beare this though impoſed as a
ſcorne for his names ſake. And in that (truly named)
Golden Legend
               Heb. 11. 36. of how many doe we reade, who were
tryed by mockings, ſcourgings, bonds, impriſonments;
who were ſtoned, ſawen aſunder, tempted, ſlaine with
the ſword; who wandered about in ſheeps skins and
goat skins, being deſtiture, afflicted, tormented, &c.
Thus Gods ſeruants, whoſe hearts haue beene inflamed
with a loue vnto him, haue reioyced in their ſufferings,
and patiently vnderwent the heauieſt trials, eſpecially
when it hath beene for their Sauiours ſake, taking greater
pleaſure in their iron fetters, than the proudeſt
Courtier doth of his golden chaine. It was Hardings
inuectiue againſt our reuerend and pretious Iewell, that
we Proteſtants were worſe than the very deuils: For
whereas bread, and water, and the Croſſe could ſcar
them away; Princes could be rid of vs by no meanes
but fire: To whom that excellent Biſhop anſwered, that
though it pleaſed his malitious humour, to make but a
ieſt of the bloud of Gods Saints; yet it was no more
ignominie for Lambes to ſuffer what Chriſt ſuffered,
than it was praiſe and credit for Wolues to betray him as
Iudas did.
            By our Zeale laſtly may our loue be tried:Zeale. For whether
it be an intention of loue as ſome would haue it; or a
compound of loue and anger, as other deſcribe it; Certainly
it is a ſpirituall heat wrought in the heart of man by
the Holy Ghoſt improuing this good affection of loue, as one
of late hath well defined it. By this Moyſes diſcouered
his loue, for though hee were the meekeſt man vpon
the earth, yet he was not only grieued, but wonderfully

angryExod. 32. 19. when he ſaw God to be diſhonoured. So Elijah,
Phineas, Samuel, Dauid, Nehemiah, and many others
did the like, as largely appeareth in their ſtories. And
ſurely, if we loued the Lord, it could not bee, but wee
would be zealous for the Lord. It is a cold loue that is
not heated with this fire. When men can diſgeſt oathes
and blaſphemies as eaſie as the Oſtridge iron; and ſee
God to be diſhonoured without indignation; let them
conclude, loue is wanting. That ſame Spirit that deſcended
firſt vpon the Lord IeſusMatth. 3. 16. in the ſimilitude of a
Doue, deſcended afterwards vpon his ApoſtlesActs 2. 3. in the
ſimilitude of fire. As in ſomethings we ſhould be meeke
and patient, ſo in other things hot and earneſt: Meekneſſe
in our owne cauſes; but in Gods, zeale and feruencie
doth well. And thus wee haue ſeene the firſt rule of
triall, wherein I haue beene ſomewhat large (though I
hope not ouer-large) forgiue all good faults: breuity in
the next ſhall make amends.
            The ſecond way for the diſcouery of our loue is by
our Speeches:
               2. By our ſpeeches. ForMat. 12. 34. 
               out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth ſpeaketh. Experience makes this good.Iſay 32. 6. 
               The niggard
will be talking of his niggardneſſe; the worldling of his
wealth; the voluptuous of his pleaſures; the ambitious
one of his honours and preferments. And whatſoeuer a
man loueth moſt, that will hee take his greateſt ioy in
talking of.Nauita de. ventis, de tauris narrat arator, &c. What commendation ſhall you heare the
Huntſman giue of his Dogge? The Faulkner of his
Hawke? How large are theſe in praiſing of their ſport?
Thus is the tongue the Interpreter of the mind,Lingua eſt animi Mercurius. and by
its language you may eaſily gheſſe at the hearts meaning.
If the loue of God be there, thy tongue will be the telltale
and bewray it, either in ſpeaking of the Lord, or
for the Lord. Of him, in commending or admiring him.
It was the loue of GodPſal. 119. 164. in Dauids heart that fild his
mouth with often praiſes: The Spouſe in the Canticles,
ſhe loued much and praiſed much:Cant. 5. 10. 
               My welbeloued
is white and ruddy, the chiefeſt of ten thouſands, his

head is as the moſt ſine gold, his lockes are buſhie and blacke
as a Rauen, his eyes are as the eyes of Doues, &c. So ſhee
goes on, her tongue beingPſal. 45. 1. 
               as the Pen of a ready Writer,
hauing words at will to praiſe and admire euery
thing that was in him. So likewiſe for him the tongue
will be imployed, if loue bee in the heart. Dauid will
ſpeake for God and for his truth,Pſal. 119. 46. 
               euen before Kings, and
will not be aſhamed. To heare God to bee diſhonoured,
his Word blaſphemed, his Goſpell ſcorned, his Children
reuiled; Loue cannot brooke: It will worke
within vs, as Nature wrought in the ſonne of Craeſſus,
of whom it is recorded,Herodotus. that though he had beene alwaies
dumbe, yet ſeeing one come to kill his father, the
impediments and ſtrings of his tongue were violently
broken, through the force of naturall affection, ſo that
he cried out, Oh man kill not Craeſſus. And ſurely wee
may in this caſe ſay as that heroicall Luther ſaid in the
like;Maledictum ſilentium quod hic conniuet. 
               Curſed be that ſilence that here forbeareth. Thus
may we make our tongues the touchſtone of our hearts.
For as the doore-keeper ſaid to Peter, ſo ſay I,Mat. 26. 73. 
               Thy
ſpeech bewraieth thee.
            
            The third and laſt way is by our workes and actions.
               3. By our Actions. Loue is full of operation, ſo ſhewes Saint Paul,
               1 Cor. 13. and
hardly can it deny any worke which the party beloued
doth enioyne: Hence ſaid Dalilah to Sampſon;
               Iudg. 16. 15. 
               How
canſt thou ſay. I loue thee, when thy heart is not with mee?
Thou haſt mocked me theſe three times, & haſt not told me
wherein thy great ſtrength lieth. Our bleſſed Sauiour
makes this a rule of triall:Iohn 14. 15. 
               If you loue mee (ſaith hee)
keepe my Commandements. And againe thus;verſ. 21. 
               Hee
that hath my Commandements and keepeth them, hee it
is that loueth me. And elſewhere thus;Cap. 15. 14. 
               You are my
friends if you doe whatſoeuer I command you. Thus Abraham
made good his loueGen. 12. & 22. by his ready obedience to
Gods command in offring vp his ſonne, and in leauing
his owne Country to goe to that place whither God
ſhould ſend him.
            
               
And as loue maketh vs thus obedient and dutifull,
ſo it cauſeth vs to be bountifull and liberall,1 Cor. 13. 4. as the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh: For where the heart is inlarged, the
hand cannot bee ſtraightned; where the bowels are
open, the purſe is neuer ſhut. So that Herod may
haue his pleaſure which hee affects,Marke 6. 23. what cares hee
though hee part with halfe his Kingdome? What
will a man ſpare from his ſpeciall friend that may bee
for his good? All I haue is at his command to whom
I haue giuen my ſelfe: So ſaid Iehoſaphat to Ahab,
               2. Chron. 18. 3. 
               I am as thou art, and my people are as thy people. Ionathan
loues Dauid as his ſoule, and he will ſhew it1 Sam. 18. 3, 4. by
ſtripping himſelfe euen to his ſword and to his bow,
for the ſupporting and helping of his deareſt Dauid.
Of ſo franke a diſpoſition is loue, that it will bee prodigall
of its neereſt and deareſt things. If Maries teares
will waſh her Sauiours feet,Luke. 7. 38. ſhe will powre them out,
and not thinke her haire too good to bee the towell.
No SpikenardIohn 12. 3. ſhall bee too coſtly for his head whom
her ſoule affects: what though that vnguent might
haue beene ſold for ſome great ſumme of mony, wherewith
ſhee might haue done her ſelfe much good? Yet
ſhee had rather beſtow it on her Sauiour than on her
ſelfe, becauſe ſhee loued her Sauiour more than her
ſelfe. Thus loue will bee content to bee at coſt for
Chriſt, and thinkes nothing too much that is done to
him or for him.
            As that renowned Maſter Fox, of whom it is reported,
that hee would neuer deny Beggar that asked in
Gods name: Thus by our obeying of him, and coſt for
him, our loue may ſoone be ſeene: our workes indeed
doe not iuſtifie, yet they teſtifie. As in a clocke, though
the ſinger of the Dyall makes not the clocke to goe, but
the clocke it, yet the finger without ſhewes how the
clocke within doth ſtirre; ſo here. And therefore what
Saint Iames ſpeakes of Faith,Iames 2. 18. 
               Shew mee thy Faith by
thy workes, for that Faith that is without workes is dead;
               
So ſay I by loue: Shew mee thy loue by thy workes, for
that loue that is without workes is dead. Ye loue your
backes, and ſpare not to cloathe them; you loue your
children, and therefore doe much for them; you loue
your beaſts, and therefore beſtow largely on them: and
can you ſay you loue the Lord, and deale ſo pinchingly
and illiberally with him? It cannot be: For looke
as the loue of God is the fountaine of all his benefits extended
vnto man; ſo is loue in man the cauſe of his obedience
and ſeruice to his God. God hath loued vs firſt to
doe vs good; and we loue him next that wee may doe
him ſeruice.
            
               And thus wee haue done with the markes of triall,
whereby (if wee take any tolerable paines in the examination
of our ſelues) it would ſoone be ſeene what
loue to God we beare, and (as I feare) it would appeare,
that albeit the greateſt number profeſſe they loue the
Lord, yet the feweſt number would bee found to loue
him in ſincerity. And Lord thou ſeeſt and knoweſt it:
For how little art thou deſired or ſought for? How ſmall
is that Ioy which men take in thee or thine? Who ſets thy
feare before their eyes, and when thou hideſt thy face what
man is troubled? Where is our patience in ſuffring for thy
ſake, when one houre in thy houſe of praiſe cannot be endured
without an ache in our bones? and of what are we ſo ſoone
weary as of well-doing? As for our zeale, where is it,
while we ſit ſtill and ſee thee diſhonoured, hauing no courage
for thy truth? And doe not our tongues condemne
vs while they are for all purpoſes except thy glory? If
they ſhould iuſtifie vs, would not our workes and actions
teſtifie againſt vs? We call thee Lord, but wheres thine
honour? The title onely, and no more thou getteſt of vs▪
Or if thou doeſt, it is but the dregs and off all, the very
worſt of all; and yet we grudge when wee haue not the beſt
from thee. O bleſſed Sauiour, ſhed abroad thy loue in our
hearts, that we may loue thee better.
            And this is the firſt vſe which I would haue made of

this: let our ſecond be for Exhortation, that we would
loue the Lord,Vſe 2. yea preferre him in our loue aboue all
other welbeloueds. Let our Affections be ſet vpon him
and be enflamed towards him. Let our tongues be mute
to all vanities, and eloquent only vnto him and for him,
who gaue man his tongue and ſpeech; and whileſt other
mens diſcourſes are taken vp about trifles, let ours be
ſpent in ſetting forth his praiſes. Let our Actions bee
ſuch as may be pleaſing to him, and let vs not dare to
venture vpon any thing that may offend him. And how
euer we cannot perfectly, yet let vs all pray for grace,
that we may loue him yet more feruently, and leſſe fainedly,
               Helpes to attaine to the loue of God. only for himſelfe and his mercy. For this end
vſe theſe helpes. Get a true knowledge of him and of his
name
               Pſal. 9. 16. Ignotinulla cupido.: For they that know him loue him, and as our
knowledge is, ſuch is our loue. The Heathen man obſerued 
that vnknowne things were not deſired, though
in themſelues they were neuer ſo excellent or deſirable.
And what a helpe this is for the attainment of this
grace, appeares by that ſpeech of the Church vnto her
Spouſe;Cant. 1. 2. 
               Thy name is as ointment powred forth, therefore
doe the Virgins loue thee. His name, fame, glory,
and renowne, was by many meanes made knowne
(eſpecially by his Word) vnto the world, and hence it
was, the Church did carry ſuch an inward affection
and hearty deſire to him, which ſhe teſtified by an outward
approuing and liking of him. Thou then that deſireſt
to loue God, ſee thou get the true and ſound knowledge
of God; labour firſt for that, by vſing all good
meanes tending thereunto, eſpecially diligent reading
and conſcionable attending to the preaching of the
Word.Iohn 5. 39. 
               Search the Scriptures (ſaith our Sauiour) for in
them ye thinke to haue eternall life, and they are they which
teſtifie of me.
            
            
               Seriouſly meditate of Gods loue to thee in Chriſt, before
               
               all worlds were, and of his rich mercy which he offers thee
through Chriſt. Conſider what a difference hee hath

made betweene thee and many other that are reprobates,
which onely came from the riches of his loue:
for by nature thou wert as vile as they, as miſerable as
they, a childe of wrath as well as any of them, not a
haire to chooſe betweene them and thee. Conſider of it
likewiſe in other particulars, as thou ſhalt haue occaſion,
and it will worke thy heart to loue him. Loue is
loues load-ſtone; ſo ſheweth the Apoſtle,2 Cor. 5. 14. 
               The loue of
Chriſt conſtraineth vs. Labour then to loue God a little,
who hath loued vs exceeding much: and indeed (as
Ser. 83. In Cant. 
               Bernard ſpeaketh) we cannot anſwer God well in
any thing but in loue: For if he be angry with vs, wee
may not anſwer him againe in anger; if he iudge vs,
we may not againe iudge him; if he chide vs, we muſt
be patient; if he command, we muſt obey: But in that
he loueth, we may, yea muſt returne loue for loue, for
he loueth to be loued.
            
               
               Remember often his holy preſence; and doe not dare
to goe whole weekes, nor daies, nor houres, without
thinking of him; for that will eſtrange our Affections
more and more from him. We ſee how it often happens
with new maried couples, who though at firſt
they ſeeme ſomewhat ſtrange, and hardly can affect
each one the other, yet through daily familiarity and
communion, they come at length entirely to loue.
            
                Withdraw your hearts from the loue of the world, if you
would loue the Lord; For the loue of God and it, cannot
ſtand together; ſo witneſſeth S. Iohn,1 Ioh. 2. 15. If any man
loue the world, the loue of the Father is not in him. And ſo
S. Iames,Iam. 4. 4. The friendſhip of the world is enmity with
God; whoſoeuer therefore will be the friend of the world,
is the enemy of God. And thus our bleſſed Sauiour,
               Matt. 6. 24. Yee cannot ſerue God and Mammon. We muſt therefore
either renounce the world, or our part in Chriſt:
for worldlines and Chriſtianity (as we ſee) are two ſuch
ends as will neuer meet. Thy loue to the world muſt
abate, if thou would eſt haue thy loue to Chriſt encreaſe.
            
            
               
               See thou frequent the company of the godly. Thou 
muſtCant. 1. 8. 
               walke in the ſteps of the flocke, and feed thy kids
neere the tents of the ſhepheards. Thou muſt conuerſe
with holy Chriſtians, who areCap. 2. 5. 
               ſicke of loue, and
abound in holy affections. When thoſe daughters of
Ieruſalem, who at firſt deſpiſed Chriſt, and wondered
why the Church ſhould make ſo much adoe for him,
had a while conuerſed with the Church about him, and
heard her ſpeake with ſuch affection, admiring and extolling
him; then they alſo fall in loue with that beloued,
and offer their ſeruice to the Church, in ioyning
with her to ſeeke him out.Cant. 6. 1. 
               Whither is thy beloued gone
(ſay they) O thou faireſt amongst women, whither is thy
beloued turned aſide, that we may ſeeke him with thee?
Thus holy conference with ſuch as loue Chriſt, is an
excellent meanes to enflame our hearts alſo with a loue
to him.
            The laſt helpe is Praier: For,Iam. 1. 17. 
               Euery good and perfect 
gift commeth from aboue. Aske it therefore at Gods
hands, forVerſ. 5. 
               he giueth liberally to all men, and vpbraideth
no man. Theſe are ſome helps for the attainment of this
grace, which if we conſcionably practiſe, I doubt not
but we ſhall ſoone finde kindled in our boſomes, to
our endleſſe comfort. And that is our ſecond vſe.
            A third we now inferre,Vſe 3. but briefly; and that for
Conſolation of ſuch as loue the Lord; eſteeming him as
their beſt beloued, ſetting their whole hearts and ſoules
vpon him: In ſo doing they haue performed a worthy
worke, and ſuch a worke as in the end brings peace.
Oh the priuileges! the ſuperexcellent priuileges that
belong to ſuch a one!Ioh. 14. 21. 
               He that loueth me, ſhall be
loued of my Father, and I will loue him, and manifeſt my
ſelfe vnto him (ſaith our Sauiour.) So that we ſee here
is no loue loſt: Chriſt will reſpect them moſt graciouſly
for euermore, and alwaies doe them good. Yea
euerything ſhall further their good and welfare: and
ſo ſaith the Apoſtle,Rom. 8. 28. 
               All things worke together for

good to them that loue God. Euery thing, the leaſt ens
and being, any thing that can be named or conceiued,
ſhall worke thy good; thy good of grace here, and
glory hereafter: ſo that the Deuill in the end ſhall get
nothing by tempting thee to ſinne, but the greater
ouerthrow of his owne kingdome, and thou thereby
ſhalt grow the better; it ſhall make thee more humble,
lowly, watchfull, carefull, &c. Thus, blow what winde
can blow, the illeſt winde ſhall blow thee good; hap
what happen may, it cannot make thee miſerable.
Thou ſtandeſt in a Center, the Circumference is mercie;
whatſoeuer commeth to thee, be it loſſe, croſſe, paine,
ſickneſſe, death, it muſt firſt come through the circumference
of mercy, and ſo taſte and reliſh of mercy before
it come at thee, or touch thee. Oh! what a priuilege
is this? how excellent, how admirable? This is thy
priuilege who loueſt God, for to thee it is made, and to
none elſe beſides.
            Can we maruell now at the Apoſtles words;1 Cor. 2. 9. 
               Eie
hath not ſeene, nor eare heard, neither hath entred into
the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for
them that loue him. Many excellent and beautifull obiects
hath the eie beheld; and the eare hath heard relation
made of things farre ſurpaſſing thoſe which the
eie hath ſeene; but the heart is able to conceiue of
things more excellent than either eie hath ſeene, or
eare hath heard: yet neither eie hath ſeene, nor eare
heard, nor yet can the heart conceiue (ſaith he) the
things that God hath prepared for ſuch as are louers of
him. He hath promiſed, ſaith S. Iames,
               Iam. 2. 5. 
               a kingdome
vnto ſuch, andCap. 1. 12. 
               a crowne of life, which they ſhall receiue.
Let then the loue-ſicke hearts of the godly be
cheared vp, for God doth not forget their labour and
loue, but he will recompence it with an euerlaſting
loue. Let it ſerue likewiſe to enkindle our loue, ſo that
where it is now but in the ſparke, it may breake out into
the flame, louing him with all our ſoule, ſtrength, and

might, deſiring nothing aboue him, equally with him,
or without him; louing him for himſelfe, and all things
elſe for him. And ſo (to end the point and vſe with
that ſweet meditation of Auſtine)
               Auguſt. 4. Confeſſ. 
               Bleſſed is he, O
Lord, who thus loueth thee, and his friend in thee, and
his enemie for thee; for onely that man cannot loſe any
thing which he loueth, who loueth nothing but in thee who
cannot be loſt.
            
            And thus much for the firſt reaſon that is giuen for
this Title or Appellation: come we now to the ſecond,
and ſee whether we can be briefer there.
            In a more particular reſpect alſo might the Prophet
call the Lord his welbeloued, viz. in reſpect of his office
and calling as he was a Prophet, to whom the charge of
Chriſts Queene the Church was committed. And in regard
of this, Miniſters are called Chriſts friends, according
to that ſaying of S. Iohn,
               John 3. 29. 
               He that hath the Bride is
the Bridegroome, but the friend of the Bridegroome, which
ſtandeth and heareth him, reioyceth greatly becauſe of the
Bridegroomes voyce: where by friend he vnderſtands
himſelfe, and in himſelfe all other Miniſters, both Prophets
and Apoſtles; and that both becauſe they labour
to make the mariage betweene the Church and Chriſt,
as alſo endeuour to hold faſt the Church vnto Chriſt,
being iealous ouer her for his ſake, leſt ſhee ſhould be
ſeduced.Calu. Vrſin. Moller. Trem. & Iun. Taking this as a reaſon (which indeed is the
vſuall reaſon rendred by our Expoſitors) for this Appellation;
by good conſequence it will follow, that
            
               Miniſters are Chriſt Paranymphs.
               Doctr. Miniſters are Chriſts Paranymphs. In a ſpeciall
manner they are his friends to wooe the Church and
winne the Church vnto himſelfe, to fit it and prepare it
for himſelfe.
            So witneſſeth the Apoſtle when he ſaith,Coloſſ. 1. 28, 29. 
               We warne
euery man, and teach euery man in all wiſdome, that we
may preſent euery man perfect in Chriſt Ieſus, whereunto
(ſaith he) I alſo labour. And writing to the Corinthians
he thus ſpeaketh;2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. 
               I am iealous ouer you with a godly

iealouſie, for I haue eſpouſed you to one huſband, that I may
preſent you as a chaſte virgin vnto Chriſt. By whoſe practiſe
we ſee the Miniſters dutie, dignitie, and office;
both to fit and prepare the Church for Chriſt; as alſo
to hold faſt the Church vnto Chriſt, that ſhee breake
not her mariage-couenant with him. I haſten to the
Vſes, for in this I haue promiſed breuitie.
            Let vs Miniſters hence learne our duties.
                  Ʋſe 1. And ſeeing
we haue the Church committed to our care, and are ſo
farre honoured as to be betruſted with Chriſts Queene,
let vs vſe all poſſible meanes that we may deliuer vnto
the Bridegroome a pure and chaſte virgin. When
Gen. 24. 
               Abraham ſent his ſeruant to ſetch a wife for his ſonne
Iſaac, he brought him godly and beautifull Rebeccah:
We are the Lords ſeruants, ſent to fetch a wife for Ieſus
Chriſt the Sonne of God; O let vs be as faithfull to
God the Father and to Ieſus Chriſt his Sonne, as that
good ſeruant was to Abraham and Iſaac: Let vs doe
our meſſage with diligence, and execute our charge
with faithfulneſſe and prayer: Let vs ſpeake of Chriſt,
and only of Chriſt, making him the ſcope and ſubiect
of all our preaching: And (as is the old Embleme of
S. Chriſtopher, vnder which our ancient Mythologiſts
haue deſcribed the good Paſtor) wade through the ſea
of this world, ſtaying on the ſtaffe of faith and lifting vp
Chriſt aloft to be ſeene of men,Iohn 3. 14. as the brazen ſerpent
was on a pole to be ſeene of the Iſraelites who were
ſtung. Let vs ſo ſpeake of him, as that the daughters of
Ieruſalem may fall in loue with him: working firſt vpon
the vnderſtanding of our people, bringing them to a
through knowledge of this Chriſt, whom we tender
vnto them as an husband; for this is requiſite in mariage:
Error perſonae makes a nullitie. And then ſecondly
vpon their affections, that they may take liking of him.
To further which, we muſt ſpeake earneſtly and ſeriouſly,
not coldly, careleſly; vſing the beſt of our skill
with arguments and motiues to winne them to his loue.

What a ſhame then is it for a Miniſter either to be ignorant
of this Chriſt, whom he ſhould commend for a
husband to the Church (for what wiſe man will ſpeake
for a ſtranger, of whom he hath no knowledge?) Or
knowing him, yet be dumbe or ſilent, neuer ſpeaking
to the Church in his praiſe and commendations. Or if
he doth, yet then to ſpeake either idly and fooliſhly (as
alas too many doe) whereby many are diſcouraged and
driuen further off from Chriſt; or elſe vnfaithfully
ſpeaking two words for themſelues, and one for him,
deſiringActs 20. 30. to draw diſciples rather after them, than
winne ſoules to God. Oh let not theſe things, my
brethren, be found in any of vs, but ſeeing we are called
to ſuch honour, let vs be inſtant in preaching, holy in
liuing, earneſt in perſwading, carefull in admoniſhing,
giuing to Gods people the golden bracelets of Gods
truth; that ſo asGen. 32. 10. 
               Iacob returned with many more
ſoules out of Syria into Canaan than he brought; ſo
we may goe out of this world with many ſoules conuerted
and wonne by vs to Chriſts loue into the world
to come.
            Let Hearers hence alſo be exhorted:
                  Ʋſe 2. For ſeeing Miniſters
are Chriſts, ſeruants to offer and perſwade mariage
betwixt the Church and him; let them be bid welcome,
and harkned vnto. What maid will not marke
and giue good attention, when matter of mariage is broken
to her? eſpecially if the offer be of ſome great heire,
nobly borne, well deſcended, &c. and ſhee her ſelfe but
meane and of low degree: Should ſhee turne away her
eare from harkning to ſuch a motion, and ſay nay to
ſuch a perſonage ſeeking and ſuing to her, would ſhee
not be iudged (and that iuſtly) to be a fooliſh woman?
And yet thus it is with vs: the Sonne and heire of the
great King of heauen ſends his Embaſſadors to treat
with vs poore beggars (yea worſe than beggars) concerning
mariage; and yet good Lord how coy are we,
we cannot be ſpoken withall, forſooth; we be not at

leiſure. And when our leiſure ſerues vs, what a deale of
wooing needs there? A man indeed would thinke it
would be but an eaſie ſuit, and that Gods Miniſters
ſhould not need to ſpend much breath before they haue
obtained; and yet they with all their perſwaſions and
intreaties cannot ſo farre preuaile with vs, as to make vs
hearken to it: Euery ſuitor ſhall haue hearing, yea and
ſpeeding too before Chriſt Ieſus. The Deuill though he
comes euer maſqu'd, and neuer dares ſhew his face (as
well knowing if he did appeare in his owne colours, no
ſoule could then affect him) yet becauſe his promiſes are
great and large (asMatth. 4. 9. they were to our bleſſed Sauiour,
when he offered to ioynture him in many kingdomes,
if he would loue him, and fall downe and worſhip him)
is ſoone heard and anſwered. The World though it be
a warped, aged and decrepit ſuitor; exceeding old,
blinde and lame; hauing ſore eyes, bleare and raw with
cares; ſwolne leggs diſeaſed with ſurfets, and but a few
minutes more to liue (all as bad qualities in a ſuitor as
may be) yet promiſing large ioynture, good maintenance,
wealth at will, honours and preferments, with
the like; this old dotard ſpeeds. And for the Fleſh,
though asIude 23. 
               S. Iude ſpeaketh, it be ſpotted all ouer like
an vncleane Leper, or vlcerous Moore, yet becauſe it is
(as it were) a homebred childe, and pleads more than
familiaritie with vs, promiſing all pleaſure and content
vnto vs, as ſoone ſpeeds as either of the former: But as
for Chriſt who is beſt worthy, he hath but a cold ſuit of
it. But beloued be more wiſe; giue not, oh giue not, thy
conſent to any other ſaue Chriſt alone; if thou doſt thou
art vndone for euer. The deuill he is large in promiſes,
his words drop Nectar; but he isIohn 8. a lyer and a murderer,
and ſo thou wilt finde him in the end if thou doſt
truſt him. And for the world; it hath but a weake tenure
of all that it poſſeſſeth, and can aſſure thee of no
other dowry than vanitie and vexation; asEccleſ. 1. 
               Solomon witneſſeth,
who proued it: if then thou beſtoweſt thy ſelfe

on it, be thou aſſured that in the end thou muſt be left
without being ſatisfied. As for that other ſuiter the
Fleſh, he is leaſt worthy the hearkning to of any. Remember
he is an ill wooer that wanteth words, they are
the cheapeſt chaffer a man can part withall, and therefore
no wonder if he doth ſeeke to inſinuate himſelfe by
promiſes; but paſſe not for them, nay ſtop your eares
againſt them, and in this point be like the Adder,
               Pſal. 58. 4, 5. 
               which
will not heare the charmer, charme he neuer ſo ſweetly. For
be you well aſſured, if you make him your head and
lord of all, he will ſoone conſume all, to your finall vndoing.
Giue entertainment therefore I beſeech you to
the Lord of glory: For him I am a deputed wooer at
this time; my ſuit vnto you is for your loues for
Chriſt my Maſter (For2 Cor. 5. 20. 
               as though God did beſeech you
through vs, we pray you in Chriſts ſtead that yee be reconciled
vnto God.) Were he euill-fauoured or deformed,
then you might haue ſome cauſe to refuſe to loue him:
but he is not;Cant. 5. 9. 
               He is white and ruddie, the chiefeſt
amongst ten thouſands, infinitely fairer than all the ſons
of men,Heb. 1. 3. 
               being the brightneſſe of the glory of his Father,
and the expreſſe image of his perſon. Or were he poore like
Lazarus, you might haue ſome reaſon to diſ-affect him:
but he is not; for he is rich and wealthy, being the greateſt
heire that euer was, euenHeb. 1. 2. 
               heire of all things. Or
could you alledge that his ſtocke is meane, his birth ignoble,
it were ſomewhat: but that you cannot; for he
isReuel. 19. 16. & 17. 14. 
               King of Kings and Lord of Lords, which dignitie is
his by birth. Or could you obiect againſt his wiſdome,
it might be ſome excuſe for your refuſall: but neither
can you here except;Coloſſ. 2. 3. 
               For in him are hid all the treaſures
of wiſdome and of knowledge. Seeing then he is the
faireſt, wealthieſt, nobleſt, and wiſeſt of any other whatſoeuer,
ſet thy heart vpon him, and loue him vntill
thou be ſicke of loue for him. We ſee how many in
this world marry; ſome only for beauties ſake; many
againe for riches ſake; other ſome for Nobilitie and

               Gentry ſake, and not a few for wiſdomes ſake; but where
all theſe meet, it is iudged a match vnmatchable. Why,
ſee all theſe are abundantly in him, and therefore ſeeke
no further, for thou wilt aſſuredly ſpeed worſe. Standſt
thou vpon dowry? Alas! Thou haſt little cauſe, for
what bringeſt thou but ſinne and beggery? And yet he
will enſtate thee into a kingdome of incomprehenſible
glory. Ahaſhueroſh promiſes Eſther halfe his kingdome;
but Chriſts performances outſtrip his promiſes, hee
giues his a whole one:Pſal. 45. 15. 
               With ioy and gladneſſe ſhall they
be brought, they ſhall enter into the Kings Palace (ſaith
the Pſalmiſt, ſpeaking of the Church Chriſts ſpouſe.)
He hath a glorious houſe, a Citie of gold, to entertaine
thee, the foundations of whoſe wall are garniſhed with
pretious ſtones. S. Iohn in hisReuel. 21. 
               Reuelation ſets downe
a full deſcription of it; who ſo will, let him reade it and
regard it; though it paſſeth the meaſures of Geometrie
to meaſure it; the skill of Logicke to define it; and the
eloquence of Rhetoricke to expreſſe it. But thus conceiue;
If the houſe of this world be ſo excellent, as
that it deſerues to be ſo eſteemed by vs, wherein God
lets his enemies dwell; and if the loweſt pauement of
that heauenly manſion be ſo gloriouſly beſpangled with
the Sunne, Moone, and twinckling Starres, as we ſee it
is; what then is the Manſion it ſelfe? how glorious
muſt the ſides and 
                  •
               eeling of that eternall Tabernacle be,
which God hath ſequeſtred for himſelfe and Spouſe?
Theſe things being well conſidered, I hope thou wilt
forbeare to ſet thy loue vpon any other Suiter, and now
at length ſuffer thy ſelfe to be wrought vpon by our
Miniſterie, not to gaineſay; that we with all ſpeed and
haſte (as Abrahams ſeruant did) may returne againe to
him that ſent vs. And thus much for the Appellation,
which I could not paſſe ouer without ſome vſefull obſeruation.
His warrant is next to be conſidered, which
he brings for the publiſhing of this his Song, and is
implied in theſe words,
            
               
               Of my beloued] i.
               Text. The ſong which his beloued put
into his mouth, and which he had in charge from him
to publiſh: for albeit Iſay was the Author inſtrumentall,
and Pen-man of it, yet God was the Author principall.
We ſee then he ſet it forth, Cum gratia & priuilegio
Regiae Maieſtatis.
               Doctr. Miniſters are to deliuer nothing for Doctrine but what they haue warrant for the deliuery of. And hence let Miniſters learne, To
deliuer nothing for Doctrine, but what they are able to
ſhew warrant and commiſſion for the deliuery of. Good
warrant we muſt haue for what wee teach our people,
whether it tend to the enforming of their iudgements,
or rectifying of their affections, and be able to ſhew that
we deliuer nothing but what we haue receiued in charge
from God to deliuer.
            It was the vſuall manner of the Prophets (preaching
vnto the people) to prefixe before their meſſage theſe
and ſuch like prefaces,Ezek. 2. 4. Hoſ. 4. 1.
               Ioel 1. 1. & alibi. 
               Thus ſaith the Lord; Heare the
Word of the Lord; The Word of the Lord which came, &c.
Whereby they ſhewed they had authority from God.
And thus doth Saint Paul ground his Doctrine as vpon
a ſure and certaine foundation:1 Cor. 11 23. 
               I haue receiued of
the Lord (ſaith he) that which I alſo haue deliuered vnto
you. And againe elſewhere thus;1 Cor. 15. 3. 
               Firſt of all I deliuered
vnto you that which I receiued, &c. This the Lord himſelfe
enioynes his ſeruants:Ier. 1. 7. 
               Thou ſhalt goe to all that I
will ſend thee, and whatſoeuer I command thee thou ſhalt
ſpeake, ſaid the Lord to Ieremiah. And to Ezechiel was
this charge giuen;Ezek. 3. 17. 
               Thou ſhalt heare the Word at my
mouth, and giue them warning from mee. So likewiſe
when our Sauiour ſent out his Apoſtles into the world
to teach all Nations, he willeth that they ſhouldMat. 28. 20. 
               teach
them to obſerue all things whatſoeuer (ſaith hee) I haue
commanded you. Yea, our bleſſed Sauiour himſelfe profeſſeth,
Ioh. 7. 16. & 8. 28. 
               My Doctrine is not mine, but his that ſent me.
And againe, The things that I haue heard of him, thoſe
ſpeake I to the world.
            
            And the reaſon of this is good:Reaſon. 
               viz. that the faith
of our hearers ſhould not bee in the wiſdome of men,

but in the power of God: which reaſon the Apoſtle
himſelfe renders1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. why he came not with excellency of
ſpeech, nor entiſing words of mans wiſdome, but in
demonſtration of ſpirit and power.
            The vſe is two-fold:Vſe 1. Firſt, it concernes vs Miniſters,
that we be carefull of our Doctrine, and ſee that
it be warrantable, ſound and good; not ours but Gods.
The Lawyer (ſaith one) beginnes with Reaſon, and ſo
deſcends to common Experience and Authority: The Phyſitian
he beginnes with Experience, and ſo comes to
Reaſon and Authority: But wee Diuines muſt beginne
with Authority, and ſo proceede to Reaſon and Experience.
We are Chriſts Embaſſadors, and in his ſtead, ſaith
the Apoſtle2. Cor. 5. 20.: Now wee know an Embaſſador is to
ſpeake nothing but what is giuen him in Commiſſion:
He may not adde nor alter, chop and change, inuent
or deuiſe any thing of his owne: No way is hee to depart
from what is giuen in charge, but he muſt be found
faithfull in the execution of his office: and ſo ſee we be.
Beware wee, oh beware wee of propounding any ſuch
Doctrine as tendeth either to the infecting of the iudgement
with error, or tainting the life with vncleanneſſe.
Take heed how wee dare to broach any new conceit
or vnneceſſary quiddite fitter to breed iangling than
godly edifying; ſtill remembring, that it is the conuiction
of the conſcience, the information of the vnderſtanding,
the reſolution of the iudgement, the gaining
of the affections, the redreſſe of the life that ſhould
be our aime in diſpenſing of the Word. Now as for
trickes and crankles, Grammaticall and Rhetoricall deſcant,
ends of gold and ſiluer, what helpe they to this
buſineſſe? Aarons bels muſt bee golden bels; not braſſe
nor copper, nor any ſuch like metall, but pure gold.
Doctrines proceeding from our owne braine, coyned
on the Anuill of our owne inuentions, are not Cum gratia
& priuilegio. Gods pure truth muſt be diſpenſed, and
all the truth, and nothing but the truth. So helpe vs God.
            
            
               
Secondly,Vſe 2. this neerely concernes all Hearers, that
they receiue nothing into their heads and hearts but
what they find Seene and allowed, and publiſhed by Authority.
To the Law and to the Teſtimony
               Iſay 8. 20., (ſaid the Oracle
of God of old) If they ſpeake not according to this
Word, it is becauſe there is no light in them. This is the
touch by which all Doctrine muſt be tried. If we haue
authority of Scripture for our propounded points (it
being rightly vnderſtood) then we haue authority from
God himſelfe for the deliuery of it, elſe not. Too to
blame then are our ouer-credulous multitude, who
hand ouer head admit and receiue for Orthodoxe whatſoeuer
is propounded vnto them by their teachers; and
thinke this is a ſufficient warrant for any point they
hold; Our Miniſter ſaid it, or ſuch a Preacher deliuered
it in a Pulpit.Ier. 23. 16. As if there were not ſome who runne
before they are ſent, and publiſh the viſions of their
owne braine, propheſying that which God neuer ſpake.
In matters ciuill we are more cautelous and wary; no
gold (almoſt) we take before wee haue tried it by the
touch, or weighed it in the ballance; and whats the reaſon?
becauſe there is much of it light and naught; yea
hardly we will take a groat without bowing, bending,
rubbing it, and the like, being therein oftentimes ouer-curious:
But in religious matters which concerne our
ſaith and ſoules ſaluation, wee are ouer-careleſſe, albeit
we are forewarned1 Iohn 4. 1. of many falſe Prophets that
are gone into the world, and therefore willd not to beleeue
euery ſpirit, but to try the ſpirits whether they be
of God. This is a great, yet common fault amongſt vs.
Were heGal. 1. 8. 
               an Angell from heauen that preacheth to thee,
yet art thou bound to looke into his Doctrine and examine
it, and not to take it vpon credit without hee
bring ſufficient proofe and warrant for it. By vertue
of our place we challenge Audience; hearken to a matter
you muſt becauſe we ſay it; but we cannot by and by
challenge Credence; for you may not beleeue it vntill

you know vpon what ground we ſpeake it. And therefore
like good Beraeans ſee you ſearch the Scriptures
whether theſe things be ſo.Acts 17. 11.
            
            The Matter Subiect of this Song is the laſt thing to
be conſidered in the Prooem: the text ſaith it is
            
               Touching his Vineyard] Of which Vineyard we ſhall
hereafter ſpeake more largely.Text. In the meane time this
obſerue we:
            
               The good of Gods Church is the ſubiect of a Preachers
labours;
               Doctr. Miniſters ought to ſpend their paines eſpecially for the Churches good. that is it whereupon he muſt eſpecially attend,
as did our Prophet, whoſe Art, wit, learning, time, and
paines, was eſpecially ſpent about that which might
make for the welfare of Gods Vineyard.
            Hereunto tends that exhortation of the Apoſtle,Rom. 12. 7, 8. 
               Let
vs wait on our miniſtring: he that teacheth, on teaching:
or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: with which dutie
he ſtraightly chargeth Timothie, and vs in him,1 Tim. 4. 13, 14, 15. 
               Giue
attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Neglect
not the gift that is in thee: Meditate vpon theſe
things: giue thy ſelfe wholly to them. Preach the word,
be inſtant in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, &c. And according
to this Doctrine was his and the other Apoſtles
practice, who would not admit any other charge to be
ioined to their Miniſterie, no not the Office of Deacons,
but laid the charge of prouiding for the poore on
others;Acts 6. 2. thinking it not fit to leaue the word of God to
ſerue tables.
            And did we but conſider the weightineſſe of the calling,
Reaſ. we would ſoon confeſſe a Miniſter had little need to
employ himſelfe in any by-affaires: For as it is an honor,
ſo it is a burden, and ſuch a burden as is too much for
halfe a man,
                  
                     ••
                  umeris angelorum formidandum. it requires the whole man, yea the ſtrength
and abilitie of Angels to ſtand vnder it; and therefore
ſaith the Apoſtle,2 Cor. 2. 16. 
               who is ſufficient for theſe things?
            
            But Saint Paul exerciſed a manuall occupation and
became a Tent-maker,Obiect. labouring with his hands, and
that after he was called to his Apoſtleſhip. And ſo

Saint Peter and others were fiſhers and followed
fiſhing.
            I grant,Anſw. the Apoſtles did ſo, but it was only in caſe of
neceſſitie, in time of the Churches wants and pouertie,
to the end they might ſupport the need and neceſſitie
of it, as alſo, that they might cut away all occaſion
from them who watched for an occaſion, whereby they
might diſgrace them and winne credit to themſelues.
And thus for a Miniſter to ioine another calling to his
calling, when he is not able to maintaine his charge, and
in the generall want and pouertie of the Church, it not
being able to maintaine him and his, cannot be thought
vnlawfull: But where there is a Church well eſtabliſhed
and reformed, this cannot be allowable.
            This Doctrine likewiſe (like Rebeckaes wombe) doth
twinne:Vſe 1. it affords a double vſe, one to vs who are the
Lords warriers, that
               2 Tim. 2. 4. 
               we entangle not our ſelues with the
things of this life. The Lord hath laid a heauy burden
vpon thy ſhoulders, couch not downe with Iſachars
Aſſe to receiue any other load. What aſhame is it for
to ſee a Miniſter to turne Farmer▪ Graſier, Phyſitian, or
the like, and all for a little pelfe? ſo loading his minde
with the burden of cares and couetouſneſſe, as if he were
exonerated of the burden of the Goſpell? May we not
well wonder with Syneſius how he comes to gaine ſo
much leiſure as to ſerue two Maſters,Epiſt. 57. 
               God in Choro, and
Mammon in Foro? I know there is a care of ſecular affaires
belonging to vs: For a1 Tim. 3. 4, 5.
               1 Tim. 5. 8. 
               Biſhop muſt be able to
rule his owne houſe honeſtly. And againe, if there be
any (without exception) that prouideth not for his family,
he denieth the faith, and is worſe than an Infidell.
But theſe things muſt not hinder our conſtant care for
the welfare of Gods Vineyard. Neither doe I thinke
it a thing vnlawfull for a Miniſter to ſtudie Phyſicke, or
haue to doe with ſome other calling; for (beſides in
the forenamed caſes) ſo it be at ſpare houres,Horis ſucciſiuis. and vſed
rather as a recreation than occupation, it is allowable:

yet ſtill Diuinitie muſt be our moſt and maineſt ſtudie,Maior pars vitae atque ingenij huc ſtet.
that we may ſaue and winne ſoules to God. Let vs then
that are Miniſters of Gods word, neither be idle nor ill
occupied: and when we are about any thing which
belongs not to our calling, then remember we the
checke that Chriſt gaue to Peter,
               Iohn 21. 21.
               Clericus in oppido, Piſcis in arido: Age quod tui muneris eſt: verbi es Miniſter, hoc age. 
               What is that to thee?
The Church is thy proper element, and the Pulpit thy
right vbi: the Temple ſhould be the center of all thy
circumference. Doe that which belongs vnto thy Office,
as 
                  Ʋalentinian ſaid to Ambroſe; Thou art a Miniſter,
minde thou that.
            
            And now for our people,Vſe 2. this vſe concerneth them.
I doubt not but you will ſubſcribe to what hath now
beene taught, and ſay, Thou haſt well ſaid in all that thou
haſt ſpoken: but now marke your duties; for if this be
ſo, then ought you ſo to prouide for your Miniſters and
their families, as that they may haue no cauſe to diuert
their ſtudies.In 1. ad Tim. A neceſſary liuing (ſaith Chryſoſtome) ought
plentifully to be miniſtred vnto your Teachers, leſt they
ſhould be diſcomfited, and that they might not depriue
themſelues and you of great things, while they be buſied
about the ſmalleſt. And ſurely this is one of the
blemiſhes of our Church, that many well-deſeruing Miniſters
are of neceſſitie compelled to leaue ſtudying of
Sermons, and ſtudie for bread to put in their owne and
childrens mouthes. What Vocation is there in this land
(honeſt in it ſelfe, and induſtriouſly followed by the
profeſſors of it) wherein a man may not liue, and leaue
well behinde him for the maintenance of ſuch as ſhall
ſome after,Dat Galenus opes, dat Iuſtinianus honores. except only in the Miniſterie? Phyſicke and
Law bring wealth and honour, but Learning followes
Homer with a ſtaffe and wallet; the ſtudie of Diuinitie
brings contempt and beggerie. Looke how it was with
the Iewes vnder the tyrannie of Egypt,
               Exod. 5. ſo is it now with
vs; when we ſhould make bricke, worke in our profeſſion,
we are enforced to gather ſtraw, ſeeke out for ſuſtenance;
and yet if our tale of bricke be not made vp, we

are cried out vpon for being idle. But God heares our
cries, and will one day plead our cauſe. In the meane
time let ſuch places and Pariſhes as would haue their
Miniſters thus to follow cloſe their callings, ſee that they
ſo prouide for their certaine maintenance, as that they
may without diſtraction follow it.
            We haue done with the Prooem: Now we come to
the Poem or Song it ſelfe.
            
               My welbeloued hath a Vineyard in a very fruitfull hill,
               Text.
               &c. Wherein is ſet forth Gods great loue towards his
people Iſrael and Iudah; and their horrible ingratitude
and diſobedience towards him; together with their
fearefull and finall ruine, for that their diſobedience:
All which is darkly and obſcurely propounded vnder
a continued ſimilitude or allegorie of an vnprofitable
Vineyard which did not anſwer the coſt and expectation
of the Vinitor by bringing forth of fruitHeb. 6. 7. meet for
him that dreſſed it.
            In opening whereof we need not doubt of finding
out the true and proper ſenſe and meaning in the Generall;
as who this Vinitor is, and who the 
                  Ʋineyard,
and what the fruit; theſe being explained and expounded
by our Prophet, verſ. 7. But in the Particulars
there is queſtion: As, what is meant by Hill, Fence,
Stones, Plant, Tower, Winepreſſe: foraſmuch as theſe
parts are not followed by him, and are diuerſly interpreted
by Expoſitors. By Hill ſome vnderſtanding the
field of this world: others, the citie of Ieruſalem, which
was higher than all other Cities and the Countrie
thereabouts: And others, the Land of Canaan, a land
flowing with milke and hony.
            By Fence or Hedge, ſome vnderſtand the Law which
was giuen by Moſes, whereby the people of Iſrael were
fenced in and kept within compaſſe: Others, the Couenant
which God made with his people the Iewes, wherwith
he did hedge them in vnto himſelfe to be his peculiar
people: And others vnderſtand thereby the Diuine

protection; by which as by an hedge the Lord did
continually protect his people.
            By Stones, ſome vnderſtand their wicked Kings;
(Saul, Ahab, and the reſt) who by their wicked practiſes
did hinder the growth of Gods Church: Others
the Gentiles and Heathen people (the Canaanites, and
Hittites, with the reſt) whom the Lord caſt out before
the people of Iſrael: Others vnderſtand thereby,
all kinde of Idolatrie, Errors, Abominations, which the
Lord purged his people from: And there are ſome
others, who by ſtones, vnderſtand the Wall wherewith
the Lord did make the fence or hedge, and that becauſe
theSakal] in Piol. word here vſed, ſignifieth as well to build with
ſtones, and gather them together for that end, as to remoue
ſtones.
            By the choice Plant, ſome would haue the Lord
Ieſus to be meant, and that becauſe the Prophet ſpeaketh
in the ſingular number, both in the Parable and
in the expoſition of it. He ſaith not, Vines or Plants,
               Sorec Ifch Iehudah. but a Vine or Plant; and the man of Iudah, not the
men of Iudah: Others vnderſtand thereby, the beſt
and choiſeſt perſons amongſt that people, eſpecially
them of the houſe of Iudah (as Dauid, Solomon, and
the reſt) whom God had choſen and endued with an
excellent meaſure of his Spirit, for rule and gouernment:
and others vnderſtand it more largely, for the
whole body of that people, the ſtems, and branches, of
Abraham, Iſaak, Iacob, thoſe honourable Plants.
            
            By Tower, ſome vnderſtand their Prophets, Prieſts,
and Princes, whom the Lord gaue vnto them, to
watch (as out of a tower) ouer them for their good:
Others would haue vs vnderſtand thereby Ieruſalem,
that great Metropolitan Citie of the Iewes: And others,
the Temple which was built therein.
            By Wine-preſſe that was therein, ſome doe vnderſtand
the Doctrine of the Prophets, their exhortations
and reprehenſions, whereby they did labour to bring

the people to repentance: Others, Paſſions and Afflictions,
which the Lord laid vpon them for their ſinnes:
And others vnderſtand thereby, the Altar in the Temple,
vpon which they did offer vp their ſacrifices and
oblations. Thus we ſee the diuerſitie of opinions concerning
theſe particulars, and the variety of paths
wherein our Interpreters walke; ſo that it is no eaſie
matter to take the right: yet amongſt all, I had rather
follow them, who by this fruitfull Hill, vnderſtand the
Land of Canaan: For of it the Scripture thus ſpeaketh;
Deut. 11. 9, 11, 12. 
               The Land whither you goe to poſſeſſe it, is a land of
hils and vallies, and drinketh water of the raine of heauen:
A land which the Lord thy God careth for: the
eies of the Lord thy God are alwaies vpon it, from the beginning
of the yeere euen vnto the end of the yeere. A
good land and large, flowing with milke and honie.
            
            By Fence or Hedge, his mightie protection, whereby
he defended and preſerued his people from all their
enemies. This was that hedge which the Lord made
aboutIob 1. 9. 
               Iob, and about his houſe, and about all that he
had on euery ſide. And this hedge did the Lord promiſe
to make aboutZach. 2. 5. 
               Ieruſalem, ſo that none ſhould
hurt it.Pſal. 90. Of which Fence reade at large, Pſal. 90.
            
               By Stones, the Canaanites, and Hittites, of whom
Dauid thus ſpeaketh:
               Pſal. 44. 2. Thou didſt driue out the Heathen
with thy hand, and plantedſt them, thou didſt afflict
the people and caſt them out. Of which Stones (Alphonſ. Salm. in parab. vin
                     •
                  ae. Matth. 21. 
               ſay
ſome) Iohn Baptiſt ſpeaketh, when he telleth the Iewes
(bragging they had Abraham to their father)
               Matth. 3. 9. that
God is able of theſe ſtones to raiſe vp children vnto Abraham.
(But that I deliuer not for doctrine.)
            
            
               By choiſe Plant, the ſeed of Abraham, Iſaak, Iacob,
the men of Iſrael, and Iudah, as appeares verſe 7.
One number there being put for another,
               Per Synecdochen. 
               the ſingular
for the plurall; a thing vſuall in Scripture. And thus
we reade:
               Pſal. 80. 8,-12. Thou haſt brought a Vine out of Aegypt,
thou haſt caſt out the Heathen and planted it. Thou preparedſt

roome before it, and didſt cauſe it to take deepe
root, and it filled the land. The hils were couered with
the ſhadow of it, and the boughes thereof were like the
goodly Cedars. She ſent out her boughes vnto the Sea,
and her branches vnto the riuer. And elſe-where thus:
               Ier. 2. 21. I had planted thee a noble Vine wholly, a right ſeed:
How then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a
ſtrange Vine vnto me? In both which places the people
of Iſrael are meant.
            
            
               By Tower, the glorious Temple that was in Ieruſalem,
that ſtately edifice or building; according to that
of the Prophet;
               Pſal. 78. 69. He built his Sanctuary like high Palaces,
like the earth which he hath eſtabliſhed for euer. And
ſo is it termed elſe-where,
               Mic. 4. 8. A Tower of the flocke, the
ſtrong hold of the daughter of Sion.
            By Wine-preſſe, the miniſterie of the Prophets, and
the diſcipline of the Church, whereby the fruits of true
repentance were preſſed forth; and they cauſed to bring
fruits of new obedience to the glory of God, and their
owne ſoules good.
            And this is the ſenſe (amongſt all the former) I approue
and faſten on, as iudging it to be the beſt, and
leaſt dangerous; it being conſonant to other Scriptures,
as I haue before ſhewed Howeuer I intend not to dwell
on it, nor largely to inſiſt on euery one of theſe particulars,
but will content my ſelfe with pointing at ſome
generall obſeruations, ariſing moſt naturally and clearely,
when I come to the handling of them. Now for
the Parts.
            In this Song or Poem there is conſiderable,Diuiſion of the ſecond general part. firſt, a Parable,
verſ. 1.-7. Secondly, the application of it, verſ. 7.
            The Parable is briefly propounded, verſ. 1. and then
more largely proſecuted from the ſecond verſe vnto the
ſeuenth.
            In the Propoſition of it we haue, 1. The Vinitor, 2. and
his Vineyard, generally to ſpeake of.
            
               My welbeloued hath a Vineyard]
               Text. By welbeloued he

meaneth God himſelfe, as before we haue ſeene: And
by vineyard he meaneth the Church viſible, as in the
application, verſ. 7. we may ſee. By which ſimilitude the
nature and condition of the Church isPſal. 80. 8. vſually ſet forth
in Scripture,Ier. 2. 21. and by none more:Matth. 21. For indeed there is no
earthly thing that doth better reſemble it,Iohn 15. 1. than a vineyard
doth; as will appeare if we compare the one with
the other, either in generall, or more ſpeciall reſpects.
And firſt more generally.
            A Vineyard we know is a place ſeuered and hedged 
in from the open champaine or common. It doth not
of it ſelfe ſpring vp, or naturally grow; but it is planted
by hand and Art, and ſo it is made a Vineyard: And
thus the Church is called and ſeparated from the reſt of
the world both in life and conuerſation, and is gathered
by the word.Deut. 14. 2. 
               Thou art an holy people vnto the Lord thy
God (ſaith Moſes) and he hath choſen thee to be a peculiar
people vnto himſelfe aboue all Nations that are vpon the
earth. And againe;Leuit. 20. 24, 26. 
               I am the Lord your God which haue
ſeparated you from other people. This is that Solomon
ſaith,Cant. 4. 12. 
               A garden encloſed is my ſiſter (whereby he vnderſtands
the Church) my ſpouſe: A ſpring ſhut vp, a fountaine
ſealed. And this our Sauiour telleth his Diſciples,
Iohn 15. 19. 
               Yee are not of the world: I haue choſen you out of the
world. Thus we ſee God hath taken it in out of the
vaſt wilderneſſe of this wretched world, and hath imparked
it with the pales of his mercy, and ſeparated it
from all other grounds whatſoeuer, to be a Vineyard for
himſelfe.
            Secondly, a Vineyard requires great paines and diligence 
after it is once planted; and ſtands in need of
daily husbanding and dreſſing; no field more: And
thus the Church of God requires daily looking to;
there muſt be pruning, propping, weeding, ſtoning, and
continuall watering by the preaching of the word, elſe
all will runne to ruine. And therefore when our bleſſed
Sauiour aſcended vp on high,
               Epheſ. 4. 11, 12. 
               he gaue ſome to be Apoſtles,

and ſome to be Prophets, and ſome Euangeliſts, and
ſome Paſtors, and others Teachers; and all was to huſband
his Church, that it might be brought vnto perfection,
to which it cannot very ſuddenly be brought.
The hardneſſe of our hearts, the flintineſſe of our affections,
and the ſtinking weeds of wickedneſſe, are not
at one inſtant, but by degrees remoued: Should then
the husbanding of it be neglected, it would ſoone decay;
and the eſtate of the Church would proue worſe
than the eſtate of a No-Church.
            
                A Vineyard of any other field is moſt ſubiect to be waſted
by wilde beaſts; and lieth open to the prey of many
kindes of ſpoyles, and that in regard of its pleaſant ſhadow
and ſweet fruit: So the Church of God of all other
places and ſocieties, is expoſed to greateſt dangers.
TheCant. 2. 15. 
               old Fox and his young Cubs ſtudie to deſtroy the
Vines, and lay this Vineyard waſte. It is likeCap. 2. 2. 
               a Lillie
amongst thornes, aſſaulted on the one ſide by vnbeleeuers,
and on the other ſide by misbeleeuers: On the
right hand by the contentious oppoſitions of Schiſmatikes,
and on the left hand by the blaſphemous propoſitions of
Heretikes: openly wronged by cruell Tyrants; ſecretly
wringed by backbiting hypocrites.
               Pſal. 94. 5. 
               Theſe breake in peeces
thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage. Would any
man take the Churches picture? then let him, ſaith Luther,
               Loc. com. tit. de perſec. verae Eccl. paint a ſilly poore maid, ſitting in a wood or wilderneſſe
compaſſed about on euery ſide with hungry
Lions, Wolues, Bores, and Beares, and with all manner of
cruell and hurtfull beaſts, and in the midſt of a great many
furious men, aſſaulting her euery moment and minute:
for this is her condition in the world. And what
is the cauſe of this her trouble and moleſtation?Pſal. 11. 3. 
               What
hath the righteous done? Surely godlineſſe and grace is
that which breeds the quarrell.Iuſtin quia iuſtus, Chriſtianus quia Chriſtianus. 
               Ariſtides muſt be baniſhed
out of Athens becauſe he is iuſt, and Chriſtians
muſt be throwne to the Lions becauſe they are Chriſtians:
Reuel. 12. 17. 
               The Dragon is wrath with the woman, and makes

warre with the remnant of her ſeede (marke now the reaſon)
becauſe they kept the Commandements of God, and
had the Teſtimony of Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            A Vineyard of any other poſſeſſion is moſt deare to 
him that holds it; that he will not part withall on any
tearmes. The Lord forbid it me
               1 Kings 21. 3. (ſaid Naboth to Ahab)
that I ſhould giue the inheritance of my fathers vnto thee.
Thus is the Church more deare and precious to the
Lord, than all other ſocieties in the world.Pſal. 87. 2. 
               Hee loueth
the gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Iacob. It
               Iſay 43. 4. 
               is precious in his ſight: He will giue men and people for
her life:
               Cap. 62. 3. 
               It is a Crowne of glory in the hand of the Lord,
and a royall Diadem in the hand of her God. Hence it is
called,Iſay 49. 22. 
               The beauty of the earth; The ſtandard of the Nations;
               Matth. 4. 
               The holy Citie;
               Reu. 21. 2. 19. 
               A citie whoſe walles and gates
are of precious ſtones, and the ſtreets of gold.
               Cant. 2. 1. 
               The roſe of
the field: The Lilly of the Vallies:
               and 4. 13, 15. 
               The faireſt amongst
women: An Orchard of Pomgranats: A Fountaine of
Gardens: A well of ſpringing waters. And being compared
with other ſocieties,Cap. 2. 2, 3. 
               As a Lilly amongst thornes,
and like the Apple-tree amongst the trees of the Foreſt.
So then by all theſe compariſons it is euident, that there
is no ſociety in the world ſo excellent, none ſo worthy,
none ſo amiable, none ſo louely, none ſo deare, none ſo
precious vnto the Lord, as is his Church. And thus in
generall we haue ſeene what excellent proportion and
congruity there is between them, and how liuely by a
Vine-yard the nature and condition of the Church viſible
is ſet forth. Now (more particularly) if we compare
the Church and the Vine it ſelfe together, we ſhall finde
the reſemblances manifold, either in reſpect of the Root,
or of the Branches, or of the Barke, or of the Wood, or
of the Leaues, or of the Fruit, there being no property
in the one, which is not (in a ſort) anſwered in the
other.
            For the Root;
               Qui viret inſolijs venit à ra
                     •
                  icibus humor. that we know ſendeth ſappe to euery 
               Stem and Branch, whereby they flouriſh and bring

forth fruit, and vnleſſe they continue in the root, they
can neuer thriue nor proſper, for thence it is whence
they haue their moiſture: Thus the Church and euery
true member of it receiueth the life and ſappe of grace
from Ieſus Chriſt, who is the root, and into whom the
multitude of true beleeuers are engrafted, whereby they
grow and bring forth fruit to God. So that vnleſſe they
continue in him they cannot proſper, but muſt needs
fade and wither, according to our Sauiours ſpeech:
Iohn 15. 4. 
               As the branch cannot beare fruit of it ſelfe except it abide
in the Vine;
               Verſ. 5. 
               no more can ye except ye abide in mee. I am
the Vine, ye are the branches; he that abideth in me, and I
in him, the ſame bringeth forth much fruit: for without
mee you can doe nothing.
               Verſ. 6. 
               If a man abide not in me, hee
is caſt forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather
them vp and caſt them into the fire, and they are
burned.
            
            In the Branches there is great reſemblance diuers
wayes.
            1. There are many branches in the root, yet all
make but one Vine: ſo all the faithfull in the congregation,
and all the congregations of the faithfull in the
whole world make but one only Church. And albeit
there areCant. 6. 8, 9. 
               threeſcore Queenes and foureſcore Concubines,
and Virgins without number, yet (ſaith Solomon, ſpeaking
in the perſon of Chriſt) my do
                     •
                  e my vndefiled is but one.
And ſo witneſſeth S. Paul,
               1 Cor. 12. 20. 
               Now are they many members,
yet but one bodie: One, as ſucking ſap from one and
the ſame root; liuing by one and the ſame ſpirit
               Epheſ. 4. 4., and
ruled by one and the ſame head, Chriſt, bleſſed for euer.
But of this more hereafter.
            2. All the branches of a Vine (though they ſeeme to
ſtand alike in the ſtocke) are not alike fruitfull, neither
doe they all draw ſap and moyſture from the root; for
as ſome are fruitfull and flouriſh, ſo ſome againe are
barren and wither, which are cut off and caſt into the
fire: Thus is it in the Church viſible; all the members

thereof are not alike incorporated into the root, through
the inuiſible bonds of the ſpirit, neither doe theyIohn 15. 
               bring
forth fruit in him. Some there are who are onely externally
engrafted; others there are who are alſo internally.
The former ſort are ſuch members of the Church viſible,
who by externall baptiſme haue giuen their names
to Chriſt, and ſo entred into the profeſſion; yet indeed
are not Chriſts, becauſe they haue not the Spirit of
Chriſt: for though they are baptized with water, yet
they are not with the holy Ghoſt. They haue Iohns baptiſme,
but not Chriſts baptiſme. This kinde of Sacramentall
engrafting will ſuffer a cutting offIohn 15. 2., becauſe
they haue not the ſap of grace miniſtred vnto them from
the ſtocke of life, but are as dead trees and branches.
The other ſort are they who beſides the outward engrafting
are alſo inwardly engrafted by the holy Ghoſt
into the ſtocke Chriſt Ieſus, and doe liue in him, and
grow in him, and bring forth fruit to the praiſe of his
name. Notwithſtanding both theſe ſorts as they communicate
together in the outward bonds of one profeſſion,
as they viſibly continue together like one viſible
body vpon that one root Chriſt Ieſus, on whom
they all outwardly profeſſe that they depend, as on the
fountaine of their ſap and life, ſo they both together
make this viſible Vineyard and Church on earth.
            3. There is no branch of any tree that exceedeth it,Sine modo creſcunt.
in growing and ſpreading forth it ſelfe: in one weeke, yea
night,Plinie. how exceedingly is it ſhot? So the true members
of the Church exceed all others in growth, in grace;
they are ſtill ſpreading forth their branches, growing
from one degree of grace vnto another. They are all
for Addition and Multiplication, nothing for Diuiſion or
Subſtraction (except in euill.)Virtutes Chriſtianae ſunt copulatiuae. They ſing the ſong
of degrees, adding to2 Pet. 1. 5. 
               Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue,
Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance,
Patience; and to Patience, Godlineſſe; and to Godlineſſe,
Brotherly-kindneſſe; and to Brotherly-kindneſſe,

Charitie. They be not like the old Moone in the wane,
but like the new euer in her increaſings.
            
            4. The branches of the Vine grow the better for
their pr
                  •
               ning, and not the worſe; bringing forth (after
it is cut) more and better grapes, not worſe nor 
                  •
               ewer:
Thus the Church, and true members of the Church,
the more they bee afflicted the more they flouriſh, as
Exod. 1. 2. the people of Iſrael vnder Pharaohs tyranny, the more
they were oppreſſed, the more they multiplied and
grew. Thus the Church of God euer riſeth in its
ruine,Sanguis martyrum eſt ſemen Eccleſiae. proſpereth in its perſecution. The bloud of
Martyrs is but the ſeed of it, and the chopping off their
heads but as the pruning of this Vine. And as Ioſeph
ſaid, ſo may euery true Chriſtian ſay; The Lord hath
made me fruitfull in the Land of my affliction.
               Rom. 5. 4, 5. 
               Their tribulation
worketh patience; and patience experience; and
experience hope; and that maketh not aſhamed. And thus
for the reſemblance in the branches.
            
                Now in the Barke or Rinde let vs compare them: we
ſee that the Barke of the Vine ſeemeth more withered &
dry than the Rinde or Barke of any other Tree whateuer:
yet it hath plenty of ſap and abundance of moiſture
vnder it. Thus the Church of God ſeemes blacke and
deformed outwardly to the worlds eye (which onely
beholdeth and iudgeth the Rinde) by reaſon of the ſcorching
heat of perſecution; yet ſhe is inwardly glorious
and beautifull, for there the inuiſible graces of
Faith, Feare, Hope, Loue, Patience, Holineſſe, are hid.
This ſhewes the Pſalmiſt:Pſal. 45. 13. 
               The Kings Daughter is all
glorious within: and the Church maketh this confeſſion
of her ſelfe;Cant. 1. 5, 6. 
               I am blacke but comely, oh ye Daughters
of Ieruſalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtaines of Soloman.
And this is the cauſe that her mothers children
looke vpon her and are angry with her.
            
                In the Wood, let vs ſee what likeneſſe we can finde:
1. That we know is the weakeſt and feebleſt wood of any
other. The trees of the Foreſt are ſtrong and tall,

but the Vine ſo weake that it cannot beare vp it ſelfe
without a ſtay or prop. Thus the Church of any ſociety
is leaſt able to helpe it ſelfe, it cannot ſtand againſt a
ſtorme without the prop of Gods protection, by reaſon
of her naturall weakneſſe. It isIſay 33. 
               a weake tent in it ſelfe
not fortified with any wals: A ſmall flocke of ſheepe
very impotent and feeble.Zeph. 3. 12. 
               An humble and poore people;
yea a very worme, for ſo the Lord calleth her,
Iſay 41. 14. 
               Feare not thou worme Iacob, and ye men of Iſrael: I
will helpe thee,
               Verſ. 10. 
               ſaith the Lord: Feare thou not, for I am
with thee; bee not diſmaied, for I am thy God: I will
ſtrengthen thee, yea I will helpe thee, yea I will vphold
thee, &c. Thus Gods2 Cor. 12. 9. ſtrength is made perfect in the
Churches weakneſſe, by his power is it ſuſtained, on
her beloued ſhe isCant. 8. 5. faine to leane, comming out of the
wilderneſſe of this world. The Altar of the Sanctuary,
which at the baſe had Lions of braſſe for ſupporters
of it, we may well thinke was a type of this. Secondly,
vnleſſe it beare grapes it is the vnprofitableſt wood of
any:Ezek. 15. 3. 
               Sonne of man (ſaith God to Ezechiel) what is
the Vine-tree more than any tree, or than a branch which
is amongst the trees of the Foreſt? Shall wood bee taken
thereof to doe any worke? Or will men take a pinne of it to
hang any veſſell thereon?
               Verſ. 5. 
               Behold when it was whole it was
meet for no worke, &c. Thus the wood of this plant is
meet for no vſe (being cut downe or taken from the
root) it is only fit fewell for the fire. This is the condition
likewiſe of all barren and fruitleſſe profeſſors, they
are good for nothing but to be fewell of Gods wrath.
But of this hereafter.
            In the Leaues likewiſe the reſemblance is excellent:
1. the leaues of the Vine are good for ſhadow
               Hoſ. 4. 13., euery
thing delights in the heat of Summer to harbour vnder
their ſhade: And thus howeuer the Church and members
of the Church are perſecuted and afflicted by the
wicked, and well cudgeled, as fruit trees are in Summer;
yet in the day of trouble their ſhadow is good,

then can the wicked runne to them for ſhelter. Thus
Pharaoh and his Courtiers in the euill day can ſend for
Moſes and Aaron
               Exod. 9. 27., and deſire them to pray vnto
the Lord that there bee no more mighty thunders
and haile, &c. So1 Sam. 24. 21. 
               Saul in foule weather runnes
to Dauid; and Ieroboam
               1 King. 13. 6. to the man of God; Belteſhazzer
               Dan. 5. 12, 13. to Daniel; Zedekiah
               Ier. 37. 3. to Ieremiah; the
fooliſh
               Mat. 25. 8. 
               Virgins to the wiſe. Theſe beſides many more
that might be reckoned, haue found the beſt harbouring
to be vnder their ſhade, and that no leaues could
ſo well keepe off a ſtorme of vengeance as theſe leaues
could. Themiſtocles though he were baniſhed in peace,
yet he was ſent for home in warre. And ſo the godly,
though they bee paſſed ouer in the dayes of pride, yet
when the ſhowres of Gods wrath ſhall fall, then they
and their ſhadow ſhall be more regarded.
            2. The leaues of the Vine are good for medicine, they
are very profitable and of excellent vſe, for healing
wounds, cleanſing ſores, if they be taken and applied.
The fruit thereof ſhall be for meat, (ſaith Ezechiel ſpeaking
of the Church)Ezek. 47. 12. 
               and the leafe thereof for medicine.
Thus the very outward profeſſion of a Chriſtian, the
very leaues and outward carriage of the godly is for medicinable
vſe; hereby many haue beene healed, thouſands
haue beene wonne to1 Pet. 2. 12. a loue and liking of the
truth. Thus Lucianus an ancient Martyr, perſwaded
many Gentiles vnto the faith by his graue countenance
and modeſt diſpoſition, inſomuch that (as it is recorded)
Maximinus that perſecuting Emperour durſt not
looke him in the face for feare he ſhould turne Chriſtian.
And ſo mention is made by Beda
               Eng. Hiſt. lib. 1. cap. 7., of one Albane, who
receiuing a poore perſecuted Chriſtian into his houſe,
and ſeeing his holy deuotion and ſweet carriage, was
ſo much affected with the ſame, as that hee became an
earneſt profeſſor of the faith, and in the end a glorious
Martyr for the faith. And ſo their words, they haue a
healing quality with them if they were applied, they

tend to theEpheſ. 4. 29. 
               edification andPro. 10. 21. 
               feeding of many, and miniſter
               Coloſ. 4. 6. 
               grace vnto the hearers, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh.
Pſal. 37. 30. 
               The mouth of the righteous will ſpeake of wiſdome (ſaith
Dauid) and his tongue talketh of iudgement: They
are ſometimes perſwading▪
                ſometimes inſtructing, ſometimes
admoniſhing, ſometimes comforting, other whiles
praying all tending to the healing of wounded and diſtreſſed
conſciences. And thus in this we ſee a good agreement.
            Now laſtly for their fruits; and firſt for the quantity,
then for the quality of it: The Vine we know beareth
firſt plenty of fruit; it beareth in bunches and cluſters
many Grapes together: So the Church aboundeth in
good workes
               1 Cor. 15. 58., bring filled with the fruits of righteouſneſſe
               Phil. 1. 11.,
as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh to the Philippians,
               Iohn 15. 5. 
               bringing
forth much fruit, as our Sauiour teſtifieth of his Diſciples.
Full of mercy and good workes,
               Iam. 3. 17, 18. 
               without partiality
and without hypocriſie (as Saint Iames ſaith) which fruit
of righteouſneſſe (as he further ſpeaketh) is ſowne in peace
of them that make peace. Thus they bring forth Grapes
in cluſters, vnited in the bond of peace and loue.
            2. The Vine beareth Pleaſant fruit: no fruit more
delectable to the taſte, than is the Grape; nor more comfortable
to the heart, than is the Wine made of the
Grape:Iudg. 9. 13. 
               Should I leaue my Wine which cheereth God and
man (ſaith the Vine to other trees in the Parable.) And
ſo the fruit of Chriſtians: How doe their workes of
loue and mercy refreſh the bowels of the Saints diſtreſſed,
brethren afflicted? How doe their fruits of iuſtice
and equity eaſe and releeue the oppreſſed ſoule? How
is God glorified;Iohn 15. 8. Angels and men reioyced by the
fruitfulneſſe of theſe trees of righteouſneſſe? when as
the fruit of other trees and plants is but bitter fruit, fruit
vnto death,Rom. 7. 21. as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh.
            In diuers other particulars the compariſon might be
followed; but I deſire not to be more curious than profitable.
By this that hath beene ſaid, wee cannot but ſee

the aptneſſe of the ſimilitude. Now to ſome profitable
obſeruations. And firſt ſomething may be noted in generall,
in that the Prophet vſeth a Parable or Similitude,
and that from a Vine or 
                  Ʋineyard (a thing earthly and
temporall) whereby he doth ſet out the eſtate and nature
of the Church, together with Gods care and coſt for
the welfare of the Church (things heauenly and ſpirituall.)
            
               As firſt:
               Doctr. It is lawfull to make reſemblances betweene things earthly and heauenly. It is lawfull to make reſemblances and likeneſſes
between corporall and ſpirituall, earthly and heauenly
things for our better inſtruction.
            The Prophets and Apoſtles, and Chriſt himſelfe
that chiefe Shepheard of the Sheepe, haue vſed thus to
teach. For proofe reade theſe places, amongſt multitudes
that might be brought: Pſal. 92. 12. Mat. 13. 3. 24.
31. 33. 44. 45. 47. Luke 13. 6. & 15. & 18.
            Let Miniſters wiſely and ſoberly vſe this their libertie
in teaching,Vſe. for the edification of their hearers,
whom (if they be of the weaker ſort) let them not trouble
with profound matters which they are not able to
vnderſtand, but let vs be content to vſe plaine ſimilitudes
and home-bred compariſons, fetcht from leauen;
from the meale-tub; or other domeſticall buſineſſe; knowing
therein wee doe no other than Ieſus Chriſt our
great Doctor and Maſter himſelfe did. We are called
Nurſes
               1 Theſſ. 2.: Now nurſes are not aſhamed (nay they rather
delight in it) to condeſcend to the balbutient infancie
of their nurcelings: And ſo let vs; becomming (in this
ſenſe) Barbarians vnto Barbarians. Thus learned Auſtin
(as himſelfe ſpeaketh) choſe rather to ſpeake barbarouſly
than finely,Habeo in abſcondito quoddam oſſum. Sic enim potius lequamur. Melius eſt vt reprehendant nos Grammatici, quam non intelligant popul. Aug. in Pſ. 138. and to vſe the barbarous word oſſum
in his expoſition, rather than the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (though he
allow it in the text, and ſo reads it) becauſe (though it
were not ſo Grammaticall, yet) it was the more intelligible
word, and he deſired his peoples profit, aboue his
owne credit; holding it better that the learned ſhould
reproue him, than that the ignorant ſhould not vnderſtand

him. So then let vs preach (not as we are able to
ſpeake, but) as our people are able to heare
               Mark. 4. 33.
               Iohn 16. 12., and as they
can beare; remembring ſtill that we muſt rather ſeeke
to make our people ſchollers, than to ſhew our ſelues
ſchollers vnto our people.
            Now in vſing of Parables, Similitudes, Allegories,
&c.See my expoſition on the Parable of the Prodigall, pag. 13, 14. theſe rules (as I haue elſe-where ſhewed) are to be
followed.
            1. That they be not farre fetcht, but ſitting for the
matter in hand.
            2. That they be borrowed from things well knowne,
and eaſie to be conceiued.
            3. That we ſtill haue a care of the maieſtie of Scripture,
auoiding all ridiculous and baſe ſtuffe.
            4. That we vſe them rather for inſtructing of life,
than for prouing any point of faith.
            5. That we turne not all into Allegories to the deſtroying
of the letter, which was Origens fault.
            6. That they be quickly diſpatched, and not too
much inſiſted on.
            Let Hearers learne,
                  Ʋſe 2. not to deſpiſe their Miniſters for
their plainneſſe, but (if any) themſelues for their childiſhneſſe,
who muſt be thus liſped to. Seeke not ſo
much to haue thy eare tickled, as thy vnderſtanding enlightned.
The painfull Bee paſſeth by Roſes and Violets,
and ſits vpon Time; ſo ſhouldſt thou rather chuſe
to feed on plaine and wholſome doctrine (though hot
and biting) than on the quirkes and flowers of mans inuention.
In a word, learne euermore to iudge that
Sermon beſt (though plaine) whereby thou vnderſtandeſt
moſt. And ſo much for this firſt point. Now heare
a ſecond.
            There is no earthly thing which may not be applied to
ſome ſpeciall vſe for our edification in grace.Doct. Things earthly ſhould teach vs things heauenly. 
               Things
earthly may put vs in minde of things heauenly; things
naturall of ſpirituall.
            
            What is there in this world that hath any being, but

may reade to man a Diuinity Lecture? From the higheſt
Angell to the loweſt worme, all teach vs ſomewhat. The
Sun, Moone, Starres, are good Schoolemaſters:Pſal. 8. 3, 4. 
               When I
behold thy Heauens, the workes of thy fingers, the Moone
and the Starres which thou haſt ordained: What is man,
ſay I then, that thou art mindfull of him, or the ſonne of
man that thou ſo vi
                     ••
                  teſt him? ThusPſal. 19. 1. the Heauens preach
the glory of God, and the Firmament ſheweth his handy
worke. So the Fowles of the Heauens;Ier. 8. 7. 
               The Storke
knoweth her appointed times, & the Turtle, and the Crane,
and the Swallow obſerue the time of their comming. Theſe
may teach vs to know the day of our viſitation, and the
iudgement of the Lord. The beaſts of the field likewiſe
may inſtruct vs:Iſay 1. 2. 
               The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the
Aſſe his maſters Crib. By them may Iſrael be ſchooled
and learne obedience. Yea of the little Ant or Emmet
may man be taught prouidence.Pro. 6. 6. 
               Goe to the Ant thou
ſluggard▪ conſider her wayes▪ and bee wiſe, which hauing no
guide, ouerſoer or ruler, prouideth her meat in the Summer,
& gathereth her food in the harueſt. And as the creatures,
ſo may euery action and ordinary occaſion bee applied
to good purpoſe. The Husbandman breaking vp his
ground, theacheth vs the neceſſity of Repentance, & calleth
vpon vs for theIer. 14. 4. 
               breaking vp the fa
                     •
                  low 
                     〈◊〉
                   our
hearts: HisMat. 13. 3. 
               caſting in his ſeed, and ſowing of his field,
ſheweth vs the nature of the w
                     ••
                  d; the neceſſity and
vtility of the ſame. The1 Cor. 15. 37. 
               Corne dying and fructifying,
preacheth to vs that Article of our faith, The reſurrection
of the body. The beholding ofMat. 13. 25. 
               
                  
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  es and weeds in
the field, may inſtruct vs of the ſtate and condition of
the Church militant. The Merchant ſearching for
pearles,Verſ. 45. and paying dearely for that of price▪ ſhould remember
vs of a farre more precious pearle. The Goſpell,
of the Kingdome which we ſhould highly rate, and
ſell all to buy.Mat. 7. 9, 10. 
               Childrens asking for bread or meat at
their fathers hands, and the Fathers readineſſe to giue
them what they aske, may teach vs our duties towards

God, and ſet forth the readineſſe of Gods loue to vs.
Pſal. 123. 2. 
               Seruants waiting vpon their Maſters, and Maids attending
vpon their Miſtreſſes, ſhould teach vs to
wait vpon the Lord our God vntill he haue mercy on
vs. Thus Gods wiſdome is in this kinde remarkable;
directing vs by all things that may runne into our ſenſes,
to raiſe vs furtherances in ſpirituall things. Yea
not only things lawfull, but we ſhall finde likewiſe that
things ſinfull and vnlawfull afford reſemblances to admoniſh
of dutie. The employment of our gifts to the glory
of the beſtower, we haue preſſed by reſemblance of
theMatth. 25. 27. 
               
                  Ʋſurers curſed courſes: Wiſdome to prouide for
euerlaſting Tabernacles, by liberalitie to the poore Saints
is taught vs,Luk. 16. 8, 9. by the vniuſt policie of the deceitfull
Steward.
               Matth. 24. 43. 
               Watchfulneſſe for the ſudden comming of
Chriſt, by the vnexpected comming of a theefe to his
prey. In a word, there was nothing which our Sauiour
could heare, or ſee, or doe, but he made ſpirituall vſe of
it, and tooke occaſion thereby to adminiſter heauenly
inſtructions vnto his followers. Thus we haue ſeene
this truth proued: now let vs heare it further applied.
            This may ſerue for our Humiliation,
               Vſe 1. ſeeing that by
our ſinne and apoſtaſie wee are degraded beneath the
beaſts and become their ſchollers. Our father Adam
was made Lord of the creatures, and by the knowledge
wherewith God endued him, he knew the Lord and
the creature alſo.Gen. 2. 19, 20. At one Court he impoſed names to
them all, according to their kindes, as knowing them
better in their nature and vertue, than they did themſelues.
The knowledge which he had of God, led him
to this knowledge of the creature, and it was not by
the creature that hee learned the knowledge of the
Creator. But by ſinne man falling away from God, he
hath ſo far degenerated from his owne kinde, as that he
is now become inferiour vnto them, and they (as Balaams
Aſſe) can teach their maſter.Numb. 22. 28. To the ſchoole of
the creature is man now ſent, and put backe (like an

idle truant) to his A. B. C. to learne the glory, goodneſſe,
and prouidence of the Creator, by looking vpon
it; neither are we able to learne ſo much as the creature
can teach vs when we ply our leſſon hardeſt.Nos aper auditu praecellit, aranea tactu, Vultur odoratu, lynx viſu, ſimia guſtu. Conſider
we how farre the creature doth excell man; and
that not only in naturall faculties, as the Ape in taſting,
the Spider in touching, the Lynx in ſeeing, the
Boare in hearing, the 
                  Ʋulture in ſmelling, &c. (wherein
we come not nigh them) nor yet only in naturall gifts
and qualities of the body; as the Horſe in ſtrength,
the Roe in ſwiftneſſe, the Lion in courage, &c. (wherein
wee are not able to compare with them) but alſo they
farre excell vs in many vertues; as the Doue in ſimplicitie,
the Storke in kindneſſe, the Dog in fidelitie, the
Oxe and the Aſſe in thankefulneſſe and obedience; in all
which we come farre ſhort, and wherein they may become
our Tutors. Not to ſpeake of the Spider, which
(ſay ſome) taught man firſt to weaue; nor of the Eagle,
which (ſay others) taught man firſt to build; nor of that
ſame Aegyptian bird Ibis, which (as others hold) gaue
knowledge to Phyſitians how to vſe the gliſter (for
theſe are but coniectures.) We haue ſeene enough to
humble vs, yea euen the proudeſt of vs, ſeeing in many
good things they now excell vs, though indeed in vice
and euill wee excell them all, being by our ſinne become
more cruell than the Wolfe, more craftie than the
Fox, more enuious than the Serpent, more venomous
than the Adder, more proud than the Peacocke; yea
all vices which are but ſeuerall in beaſts, are muſtered
and troopt together in vs. And this is our naturall
condition.
            It may ſerue likewiſe for reprehenſion,
               Vſe 2. in that wee
haue ſuch emptie hearts, and heads, when in euery corner
we haue ſo many teachers to informe vs and inſtruct
vs. The plea of ignorance is a common plea and goeth
for currant: Alas Sir we are ignorant and not booke-learned,
we want teachers, &c. And this is the ſtrongeſt

pillar and prop that many haue. But how is this
poſſible? Doth not the great booke of the creatures
(tearmed aptly by ſome,Du Bartas, 1. the Shepeards Kalender,
               Day 1. Weeke. and
Ploughmans Alphabet) lie open,Hab. 2. 2. in which euen the
moſt ignorant may runne and reade? Doe not the Heauens
and thoſe celeſtiall Orbs that are placed therein,
plainly catechize thee in the firſt elements of religion,
and teach thee that there is a God,
               Rom. 1. 20. and that this God
is but one, and that this one God excelleth all other
things both in might and maieſtie,
               Vniuerſus mundus nihil aliud eſt quàm Deus explicatus. Cuſan. Iob 12. 7, 8. and that hee will be
worſhipped, &c. And indeed, the whole world is nothing
elſe but God expreſt. Can men then plead ignorance?
Aske now the beaſts (ſaith Iob) and they ſhall
teach thee, and the fowles of the aire, and they ſhall tell
thee: Or ſpeake to the earth, and it ſhall teach thee, and
the fiſhes of the Sea ſhall declare vnto thee. Looke
aboue thy head, below thy feet, on thy right hand,
and on thy left hand; all thou feeſt would enforce thee,
if thou hadſt a heart to learne. The rudeſt ruſticke hath
his horſe and plow, his earth and ſeed, to inſtruct him
in his duty: All which leaue not God without witneſſe,
leaue men without excuſe,Rom. 1. 20, -28. as they did the Gentiles,
who becauſe they knew not God according to
thoſe meanes, neither honoured they him according to
that naturall knowledge gotten by thoſe meanes, were
giuen vp to vile ſinnes and grieuous puniſhments. Oh
then! that we were as ready to learne good leſſons,Iſay 1. 5.
               Oneramus Aſinum & non curat quia Aſinus eſt. At ſi in ignem impellere, ſi in foucam praecipitare velis, cauet quantum poteſt, quia vitam amat & mortem timet. Bern. de diuerſ. 12. as
theſe kinde of tutors are to teach vs them, how much
better ſhould wee be than now wee are? They will
leaue when they are corrected, but man waxeth worſe
and worſe when hee is reproued. Wee lay load vpon
an Aſſe (ſaith Bernard) and he careth not becauſe he is
an Aſſe; but if you offer to thruſt him downe ſome
ſteepe hill, or to driue him into the fire, hee holdeth
backe and ſhuns it all he can, becauſe he loueth life and
feareth death: whereas wretched man, more blockiſh
and ſenſleſſe than the very Aſſe, more brutiſh than the

brutiſheſt of beaſts, hath no feare nor dread of that
which will be his eternall bane, and bring euerlaſting
damnation vpon him. And if ſuch as doe not further
their ſaluation by the creatures are iuſtly to be taxed;
then much more cauſe haue wee to condemne ſuch, as
haſten their perdition by them, vſing or rather abuſing
them to exceſſe and riot, eating to gluttonie; drinking
to drunkenneſſe; ſpending their wealth to the maintenance
of pride and wantonneſſe. Surely the damnation
of ſuch ſleepes not.
            A third vſe is for Inſtruction,
               Vſe 3. that we ſo vſe and behold
things earthly, as that thereout we draw ſome heauenly
leſſon: for there is a double vſe of euery creature:
the one is naturall, the other ſpirituall: if we content
our ſelues with the naturall vſe without the ſpirituall,
we doe not take the one halfe of that comfort in the creature
which God gaue it for. And indeed what doe we
more than the bruit beaſt, which hath a carnall and naturall
vſe of the creature as well as we? Let vs then no
longer be like children who looke vpon the pictures
and babies in their bookes, and gaze vpon the gilded
leaues and couer, neuer looking to their leſſon which
they ſhould learne therein: But let vs doe as Trauellers
in a forraine countrie, make euery thing we ſee a good
inſtruction, and euery action a ſtirrop to heauenly meditation;
tranſlating the booke of nature into the vſe
of grace: which vnleſſe we doe, how can we comfortably
thanke God for the vſe of his creatures? they being by
vs but abuſed when they are halfe loſt: Yea, God is wronged,
and our owne ſoules moſt of all iniured when the
creatures are ſo neglected. And therefore now at length
(for better late than neuer) learne to picke your bones
cleaner, and ſucke more ſweetneſſe out of the creatures
than heretofore you haue done.
            
               My welbeloued.]
               Text. We ſee then who was the Vinitor
or Huſbandman; and he was no other than this welbeloued,
God himſelfe. So then the point is euident:
            
               
               God is the Huſbandman of his Church:
               Doctr. God is the Churches Huſbandman. He it is that
husbands it;Iſay 27. 3. 
               I the Lord doe keepe it, I will water it euery
moment (ſaith God) leſt any hurt it, I will keepe it night
and day. And ſo S. Paul telleth the Church of Corinth,
1 Cor. 3. 9. that they were Gods tillage or huſbandrie. This our
bleſſed Sauiour doth there intimate when he ſaith,Matth. 15 3. 
               Euery
plant that my Father hath not planted ſhall be rooted
vp: and elſewhere in plain termes auouch,Iohn 15. 1. 
               I am the true
Vine, and my Father is the Huſbandman. Thus the point
is proued: & yet that it may be further cleared, a queſtion
would be anſwered; for ſome may demand, whether
Gods Miniſters are not husbandmen?Queſt. Are not they to
Ier. 1. 10. ſet, ſowe, plant, pluck vp; andLuke 13. 7.
               Reſp. to dreſſe this Vineyard?
How then can God be ſaid to be the husbandman therof?
            I anſwer, God is the principall, they are but ſubordinate
and inferiour, being called of him and ſet a
worke by him: they are not1 Pet. 5. 3. 
               Lords of the heritage of
God, but ſeruants and vnder-workmen, being taken in
as1 Cor. 3. 9. 
               Labourers, who (when the euen is come) ſhall from
this Lord of the VineyardMatth. 20. 8. receiue their hire. God is
the chiefe Lord and owner; he directs and rules the
other, and proſpers their worke as it pleaſeth him. So
then the former point ſtill remaines good, God is the
Huſbandman of his Church.
            
            Now here me thinkes I haue a good occaſion to
ſpeake ſomething in commendation of this Vocation
of Husbandrie;
                  Ʋſe 1. ſeeing God ſingleth out this calling
to ſet forth his owne care and paines by: what exception
can be taken againſt it, when God himſelf ſo highly
honours it? Mercers, Goldſmiths, Iewellers, and others
of the like ranke, are not ſo often mentioned in
Scriptures as theſe are: neither doth God ſo much credit
them, in ſo often reſembling himſelf vnto them. And
yet alas! how is this profeſſion diſdained? and how are
ſuch contemned as hindes and clownes, &c. who are profeſſors
of it? And what man almoſt ſo meane, but he
ſcornes to be of it or put his childe vnto it? and yet

God himſelfe aſſigned it toGen. 2. 8. 
               Adam; and& 4. 2. 
               Adam made
a choice of it for his eldeſt ſonne. Surely it is righteous
with God (asDod on Prou. 12. verſ. 11. one ſaith well) that tillage is ſo much decaied,
when it is no more regarded: and that there
ſhould be ſo much daily detracted from the imploiment
of men, becauſe there are ſo few men that are willing to
be imploied in it. But I am loth to ſtep too farre out
of my way to ſalute a friend.
            This point ſets forth vnto vs the excellent priuiledge
and prerogatiue of the Church;Vſe 2. foraſmuch as it hath
ſuch a keeper and dreſſer as the Lord himſelfe is, to
watch ouer it and husband it: this is the Churches royaltie,
and who can compare with her herein? Neither
is this prerogatiue meerely titular, but very commodious
and profitable: For he is not non-reſident vpon
his garden, but heCant. 8. 13. dwelleth in it to preſerue and guard
it by his power. Great was Gods care for Iſraels ſafetie,
as Moſes ſheweth, forDeut. 32. 10, 11, 12. 
               He led him about, he inſtructed
him, he kept him as the apple of his eye. As an Eagle ſtirreth
vp the neſt, fluttereth ouer her young, ſpreadeth abroad
her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
So the Lord alone did leade him: But the ground of all
was, The Lords portion is his people, Iacob is the lot of his
inheritance. How bleſſed a thing then is it to be within
the hedge and pale of Gods Church? For then we ſee
God becomes our husbandman; he protects vs and
defends vs from all euils and dangers, and prouides for
vs whatſoeuer ſhall be needfull, as hereafter we ſhall ſee
more largely and particularly.
            And ſecondly,Vſe 2. hence we may haue a ground of triall
whether we be true members of the Church of God
or no: We may thus know it; if Gods husbandry appeareth
in our ſoules: And for this purpoſe heare a Parable,
Prou. 24. 30, 31. 
               I went by the field of the ſlothfull, and by the
Vineyard of the man void of vnderſtanding: And loe it
was all growne ouer with thornes, and nettles had couered
the face thereof, and the ſtone wall thereof was broken

downe. Thy heart is this field; examine now what
growes in it: Doe thiſtles grow in ſtead of wheat, and
               Iob 31. 40. 
               cockle in ſtead of barley? (as Iob ſpeaketh) Doe the
thornes and nettles of hard-heartedneſſe and hypocriſie,
pride and blaſphemie, profaneneſſe and impietie?
doth beaſtly drunkenneſſe, filthy whoring and vncleanneſſe,
chambering and wantonneſſe, or the like to theſe,
couer the face thereof? why then be thou aſſured, an ill
husbandman owes this ground; it is the enuious man
the deuill that ſowes theſe ſeeds, and husbands ſuch
plats as theſe. But on the contrary, is the fallow ground
of thy heart turned vp; and is the ſtonineſſe thereof taken
away? Are thoſe brambles and bryars, (noyſome
luſts, and ſtrong corruptions) which formerly grew
therein, now weeded vp, and caſt out? And art thou
fenced in with good purpoſes and reſolutions for time
to come? and doth this wall ſtand firme and ſure? why
then aſſure thy ſelfe thou art one of Gods choſen cloſe
                  •
               ;
a true member of that Church whereof he is the
husbandman; for he husbands it, and only it. And in
that his tillage and husbandry is ſo effectuall in thee,
queſtionleſſe, thou art not only in it as many are; but
of it as few are. Sticke this as a noſegay in thy boſome.
            Thirdly,
                  Ʋſe 3. this may admoniſh euery one that liues in
the Church, and profeſſe themſelues to be members of
the Church, patiently to ſuffer themſelues to be husbanded
by the Lord; enduring all things with much meekneſſe
and quietneſſe, which he in his wiſdome hath ordained
to breake vs vp withall, and to make vs faire and
fruitfull. The earth we ſee is cut and wounded with
ſhares and cultures (and therefore called earth) yet is patient
to ſuffer it, and returnes fruit to thoſe that plowed
it.Terra quia teritur. Let Earth teach Earth: Terra quam terimus, the
Earth we teare, may inſtruct terram quam gerimus, the
Earth we beare, this leſſon of contentedneſſe. And let
none thinke it is better to haue their hearts lie waſte
than to be thus broken vp; for a barren eſtate is a wofull

and curſed eſtate, and there can be no comfort in it.
Doth God then come vnto thee himſelfe with his pruning
hooke in his hand, and cut thee neere, yea ſo
neere that in thy ſenſe and iudgement there is no hope
of euer after flouriſhing? well, yet be content: for thus
deales the Vinitor with the moſt generous plant; he oftentimes
prunes it ſo cloſe, as that in ſenſe and reaſon it
were vtterly dead, and cleane kild; yet it reuiues againe,
and after this, is more richly laden than euer it was before.
And ſo, albeitHeb. 12. 11. 
               no chaſtiſement ſeemeth ioyous for
the preſent, but grieuous; yet it afterwards bringeth
with it the pleaſant fruit of righteouſneſſe. Or doth he
ſend his deputies the Prophets to thee with the plow
and harrow of the Law, to breake vp that heathy
ground of thy heart, and turne vp the weeds of ſinne
by the very roots, that they may neuer more reuiue?
why then ſubiect your ſelues to be directed by their
care and paines without repining; remembring ſtill
your hearts as of themſelues will neuer yeeld any other
fruit than weeds, or graſſe at the beſt: needs then muſt
they be accurſed, if you refuſe to haue them by theſe
husbanded that they may grow fruitfull.
            
               Laſtly,
               Vſe 4. 
               this may ſerue for a direction to vs, to whom
to goe and make complaint when the Vineyard is waſted,
or any way annoyed by the Boare of the foreſt▪ 
               or
wilde beaſts of the field; Make God acquainted with it,
and tell the Vine-dreſſers, Gods Miniſters, thereof, and
will them tell their Maſter, that he may take ſome order
for his Vineyards ſafetie. Yea doſt thou or any other
member of the Church need husbanding? Then goe
to God and tell him of the barrenneſſe of thy heart, and
with a holy boldneſſe vrge him with his care and paines:
Say thus, or in this manner to him; Ah Lord, how barren
is my ſoule of what is good? How fruitfull is it in what
is bad and naught? What ignorance, pride, ſenſeleſneſſe, ſecuritie,
growes there, where knowledge, humilitie, zeale,
patience, and other ſuch like graces ought to grow? Now

ſince thou haſt taken the charge vpon thee to be the
Huſbandman of thy Church and people, huſband thou this
heart of mine, and be mindfull of me, oh my God: Let it
not be thought an ill huſband owes it, or one that is negligent
and ſlothfull in his buſineſſe; but let thy care appeare
in dreſſing of it, that the fruits of all heauenly graces may
abundantly ſpring forth and grow to the praiſe and glory of
thy name.
            And ſo much of the Huſbandman: A word or two
of his Poſſeſſion.
            
            
               Hath a Vineyard] This Vineyard is the Church,
               Text. as we
haue ſeene before, together with the reaſons of the ſimilitude:
The obſeru
                  •
               tion is,
            The Church is Gods heritage.Doct. The Church is Gods inheritance. 
               For the further proofe
thus we reade;
               Deut. 9. 26, 29. Deſtroy not thy people and thine inheritance
which thou haſt redeemed: Yet they are thy people
and thine inheritance which thou broughteſt out.Cap. 32. 9. The
Lords portion is his people, Iacob is the lot of his inheritance.
1 Sam. 10. 1. The Lord hath anointed thee to be Captaine of his
inheritance (ſaid Samuel to Saul.)1 Sam. 26. 19. They haue driuen me
this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord (ſaith
Dauid.)2 Sam. 20. 19. Why wilt thou ſwallow vp the inheritance of the
Lord (ſaid that ſame wiſe woman vnto Ioab when he
battered the walls of Abel.)
               Pſal. 74. 2. Remember thy congregation
which thou haſt purchaſed of old, the rod of thine inheritance,
this Mount Sion wherein thou haſt dwelt (ſaith
the Pſalmiſt.) And againe,
               Pſal. 28. 9. Saue thy people and bleſſe
thine inheritance, feed them alſo, and li
                  •
               t them vp for euer.
Yea the Lord of Hoaſts ſhall bleſſe ſaying,
               Iſai. 19. 25. Reade Pſal. 33. 12. & 78 70, 71. & 79. 1, 13. & 94. 5. & 106. 5, 40. Iſ. 47. 6. Ier. 2. 7. & 3. 19. & 12. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Bleſſed be
Aegypt my people, and Iſrael my inheritance.
            Now for Vſe;
                  Ʋſe 1. let vs hence take notice, whence it is
that the deuill doth ſo moleſt the Church; and ſee the
reaſon why the wicked doe ſo afflict her: It is not ſo
properly for their owne ſake as for the owners: They
maligne and ſpight it, becauſe God doth countenance
and grace it, as being the Lord and poſſeſſor of it. An
enuious man we know will miſchiefe the bruit beaſt of

him he beares a ſpleene vnto; and will not ſticke to
wrong his very dogge, and all to deſpight the owner.
Doſt thou then perſecute the Church, or any member
of the Church? The more wretch thou, for let me tell
thee, thy hate is not originally and properly to them,
(pretend what thou wilt pretend) but to God himſelfe,
whoſe inheritance they are.
            And ſecondly,
                  Ʋſe 2. ſeeing the Church is Gods inheritance
and peculiar poſſeſſion, let none that profeſſe
themſelues to be of the Church, giue themſelues from
him to any other; but let vs liue to him, and die to him,
for whoſe vſe we are encloſed.1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. 
               Yee are not your owne,
therefore glorifie God in your ſoules and bodies (ſaith the
Apoſtle) for they are his. If his; then not the worlds;
nor the fleſhes; nor the deuils. Why then doe we ſuffer
theſe or any of theſe to ſowe tares and corrupt ſeed in
Gods cloſures? Why doe wee endure the plants of
wickedneſſe to be ſet in his field? And why doe wee
bring forth fruit vnto our ſelues or any other, rather than
vnto him? Remember whoſe thou art, or at leaſtwiſe
doſt profeſſe thy ſelfe to be; and be no longer for the
weeds of ſinne; nor for voluptuous pleaſures to feed
on, as bullocks doe on paſture land; but be thou Gods
garden of ſweet flowers; his Vineyard of fruitfull
grapes; and bring all vnto him for firſt fruits and
tenths, that thou maiſt be his bleſſed land and poſſeſſion
for euermore.
            Laſtly,Vſe 3. this may aſſure vs for our comfort, that ſeeing
we are his heritage, he will not eaſily leaue vs nor forſake
vs, if we bring forth fruit vnto him.1 King. 21. 2, 3. 
               Naboth could
not be drawne to part with the inheritance of his Fathers,
though Ahab made him neuer ſo large proffers
for it; and much leſſe will God who gaue it for a law
and ordinance,Leuit. 25. 25. that none ſhould ſell away their inheritance
for euer; but if in caſe that any of his people had
ſold away any part thereof, then he or his kinne ſhould
redeeme it againe if they were able: And in caſe of

inabilitie, that which was ſold ſhould remaine in the
hand of him that bought it vntill the yeere of Iubile;
in which yeere it ſhould goe out, and then euery man
ſhould returne againe vnto his owne poſſeſſion. Surely
he that made this law will bee mindfull of it, and will
not eaſily be driuen to giue ouer his owne inheritance
which he hath choſen: And if in caſe (for the barrenneſſe
thereof) he ſhould forſake it for a time (as hee did
this people Iſrael) yet it would bee but for a time, and
not perpetuall: in the end he will returne againe vnto
his owne. And thus much briefly for this point.
            Now further, in that the Prophet ſpeaketh in the
Preſent tenſe, My beloued [hath] a Vineyard: Albeit
the whole Church of Iſrael and Iudah was at
this time ſo generally corrupted, as that from the
Crowne of the head to the ſole of the foot, there was
nothing found but wounds, ſwellings and ſores, full of
corruption (Cap. 1. ver. 5. as he had before teſtified) wee doe obſerue,
that
            Albeit a Church bee corrupted with error and idolatry,Doct. A true Church may be corrupted with error & idolatry.
yet it is ſtill to be accounted Gods Church, till he haue diuorced
and forſaken her.
            Thus in the daies of Ely
               1 Sam. 2. 24. 29. Iſrael was called Gods people;
and ſo his Church, albeit they were not then ſeparated
from all falſe waies, and Elyes ſonnes (ſons of Belial▪
               
ſaith the text,Ver. 12. who knew not the Lord) remained amongſt
them. So Moſes calleth Iſrael Gods people
Exod. 32. 11. when he was vpon the Mount, & yet at that time they
were in the very act of their Idolatry, which was not
vnknowne to Moſes,
               Verſ. 7, 8. for God himſelfe enformed him
thereof. So in this our Prophets time,Iſay 1. 21, 22, 29. & 2. 6, 8. & 65. 11. Cap. 1. 3. albeit this people
were ſunke deepe in rebellion and idolatry, yet for
all that God himſelfe doth call them his people, Iſrael
doth not know, My people doth not conſider. Turne wee
our eyes from the eſtate of the Church in theſe times to
after times, as it was vnder the Goſpell, and we ſhall ſee
the truth of the point propounded. Looke vpon Ieruſalem

in our Sauiour Chriſts timeMat. 23. 37., and we ſhall ſee the
eleuen Tribes were become Apoſtates, and the Church
amongſt them was wonderfully corrupted both in Doctrine
and manners, as appearethMat. 5. 21. by our Sauiour
Chriſts ſeuere reproofe of both; yea the Temple it ſelfe
Iohn 2. 14. was almoſt become a den of theeues, full of buyers
and ſellers. Yet at this time it was the true Church of
God, elſe the Euangeliſt would neuer haue called it
                  Mat. 4. 5. & 27. 53. the
Holy City. In Saint Pauls time1 Cor. 1. 1, 2. Cap. 5. 1. the Corinthians were
called the Church of God, and yet at that very inſtant
ſome of them were in an hereſie;2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. others in inceſt, and
otherſome that had not repented of their filthineſſe.
Such was the eſtate of the Churches of Aſia
               
                  Reuel. 2. & 3., yet the
title of true Churches were giuen to them.
            Thoſe therefore that condemne the Church of England
for a No-church,Vſe 1. and make a ſeparation from it in
regard of the errours and corruptions that are in it, are
farre from the ſpirit of Chriſt, and the Prophets and Apoſtles,
who neuer made any ſchiſmaticall and bodily
ſeparation from any true Church, for the corruptions
(though groſſe) that were therein found. I deny
not but blemiſhes are in euery Church; (for what
Church euer breathed in ſo pure an aire, as that it might
not iuſtly complaine of ſome thicke and vnwholſome
euaporations of error and ſinne?) but becauſe our Mother
wants ſome beauty, hath ſhe loſt her face? Becauſe
ſhe is blacke, hath ſhe no comelineſſe at all? What is
it they charge vs with, butSee a little booke ſet forth by the Separatiſts of the confeſſion of their faith. with corruptions? (for fundamentall
error they can diſcouer none.) Now doe corruptions
in a man make a falſe man; or a corrupt man?
So that though they make the worſt they can of our
Church, they can make it but a corrupt Church, and
not a falſe Church. We haue the true Word of God preached.
the true Sacraments of Chriſt Ieſus adminiſtred,
which all DiuinesBucer. Martyr. Fag
                     •••
                  . Caluin. Beza. Bullinger. Zanchius. Iunius. Rollock. in all the reformed Churches in
Chriſtendom, which noware or haue bin, do hold to be
the infallible tokens of a true Church, and are reciprocally

conuerted with the true Church: wee maintaine
euery point of the moſt ancient Creeds: we ouerthrow
not the foundation by any conſequence. And as yet we
haue not receiued a bill of diuorcement. As for Diſcipline
(the want whereof they charge vs with) our
Church is not deſtitute of it altogether: I would wee
had the execution of ſo much as our Church alloweth.
Neither doe we deny but therein there may be ſome defects
and wants, as appeares by thoſe words in the
Booke of common Prayer:In the commination. 
               vntill the ſaid diſcipline may
be reſtored. But doth it follow hereupon, that becauſe
Diſcipline is wanting, the Church is fading, and that
the infirmity of the one maketh a nullity of the other?
That this is neceſſary for the well-being of a Church
I grant; that it is neceſſary to the eſſence and being
of a Church I vtterly deny: Neither will they
euer be able to proue it by euidence of Gods Word.
The Church of the Iewes thus ſaith of the Church
of the Gentiles:Cant. 8. 9. 
               If ſhe be a wall, wee will build vpon her
a Palace of ſiluer; and if ſhe be a doore, we will encloſe her
with boords of Cedar. She calleth her a ſiſter, becauſe ſhe
had a wall though not of ſiluer, and a doore though not
of Cedar. So is our Church a ſiſter to all reformed Churches,
though ſhe may haue ſome ſpots in externall matters:
And our hope is, that her wall ſhall be made more
coſtly, and ſiluer-like, and her doore of Cedar, in Gods
good time. In the Interim,Heb. 
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               Forſake not the aſſembling
of your ſelues together, as the manner of ſome is: but exhort
one another, and ſo much the more as you ſee the day
approaching. Whom thou canſt, amend; whom thou
canſt not, tolerate; in any caſe beware of offring thy
mother ſo great an iniury as to flye from her. Say ſhee
were poore, ragged, weake; ſay ſhe were deformed; yet
ſhe is not infectious: Or if ſhee were, yet ſhee is thine,
which ſhould be motiue enough for thee to pitty her,
to pray for her, to labour for her redreſſe, not to auoid
her.
            
               
Before I end this point,Queſt. ſome haply may demand,
what may be thought of the Church of Rome; whether
is it to be accounted Gods Church, it being ſo corrupted
with Idolatry as it is?
            For anſwer whereto a diſtinction muſt be made:Anſw.
Errors and corruptions in a Church are of two ſorts;
either ſuch as concernes Manners, or ſuch as concerne
Doctrine: As for corruption in Manners, they make
not no Church, but a bad Church; and therefore in reſpect
of them, they are not to be forſaken by vs, neither
to be accounted of, as no Church of God. For corruptions
in Doctrine; they are either ſuch as are citra fundamentum,
beſides the foundation; and theſe trouble: or
circa fundamentum, about the foundation; and theſe
ſhake: or contra fundamentum, againſt the foundation;
and theſe ouerturne all. The two former are weakning
errors, and doe not debarre them from being the true
Church of God; being but the1 Cor. 3. 12. building of hay and
ſtubble on the foundation; the ſtubble burnt (I meane
not in their fire of Purgatorie) their ſoules may be ſaued.
The latter are deſtroying errors; and in theſe, conſideration
muſt be had, whether a Church erreth of
weakneſſe, or of malice: If it be of weakneſſe, then are we
not peremptorily to conclude againſt ſuch a Church;
for S. Paul
               Gal. 1. 2. writes to the Galatians as a Church of God,
though they were peruerted to another doctrine, embracing
a fundamentall errour of iuſtification by works.
But if it be of malice or affected ignorance, like2 Tim. 3. 8. 
               Iannes
and Iambres that withſtood Moſes▪ reſiſting the truth;
then doth ſuch a Church ceaſe to be a Church, neither
is it any longer to be reputed as a Church. Thus the
Church of Rome doth wilfully and obſtinately deſtroy
the foundation it ſelfe, and therefore may be concluded
for no Church of God. And ſo much briefly for the Anſwer
to the Queſtion, with which anſwer we end this
point, and come vnto another.
            The Prophet doth not only ſpeake in the preſent

tenſe [hath] but he alſo ſpeaketh in the ſingular number
[Vineyard] not Vineyards: and thence we note,
            The Church and Vineyard of God is but one.Doctr. The Church of God is but one. 
               There are
indeed
               Cant. 6. 8. threeſcore Queenes, and foureſcore Concubines,
and Virgins without number: but my Doue, my vndefiled
is but one: She is the only one of her mother. Thus teſtifieth
S. Paul;1 Cor. 12. 12. As the bodie is one, and hath many members,
and all the members of that one bodie being many, are one
bodie; ſo alſo is Chriſt (that is, the Church.) Hitherto
likewiſe tends that ſaying of our bleſſed Sauiour;
               Iohn 10. 16. Other
ſheepe I haue which are not of this fold; them alſo muſt I
bring, and they ſhall heare my voice; and there ſhall be one
fold and one ſhepherd.
            True it is, this one Church may haue many parts:
As the Ocean Sea is but one, yet diſtinguiſhed according
to the Regions vpon which it lies: And ſo there is
the Germane Ocean; the Spaniſh Ocean; the Engliſh
Ocean; the Iriſh Ocean; and the like: And thus there
is a Church in Geneua; a Church in France; a Church
in Scotland; a Church in England; and yet but one
militant Church vpon the earth.
            For as a Kingdome diuided into many Shires,Reaſon. and
more Townes and Villages, is called one, becauſe it hath
one and the ſame King, one and the ſame Law: So the
Church is one, becauſe it liueth by one and the ſame
Spirit; and is ruled by one and the ſame Lord; and profeſſeth
one and the ſame faith; hath one and the ſame
hope, and hath beene baptized with one and the ſame
baptiſme, asEpheſ. 4. 4, 5. 
               S. Paul writing to the Epheſians declareth.
And not one as tied to any one place; much leſſe to any
one perſon, as the Popiſh Antichriſtian crew, who
though they haue nothing in their mouths, ſo much as,
The Church, the Church (and therein (like Oiſter wiues)
doe outcry vs) yet exceedingly infringe the liberties of
the Church: for all of them haue made the Catholique
Church to be nothing elſe but the Romane Church,
andHaruaeus de poteſt. Papae cap. 23. See B. Iewels defence of Apolog. fol. 610. ſome of them haue made the Romane Church to

be nothing elſe but the Pope: And this is their One. But
now for Vſe.
            This vnitie or oneneſſe of Gods Vineyard ſhould teach
vs all,
                  Ʋſe. 
               vnitie and concord, that profeſſe our ſelues to be of
this Vineyard. And as in the naturall bodie there is a
perpetuall ſympathie betweene all the parts, ſo ought
there to be in this bodie myſticall;1 Cor. 12. 26. 
               If one member ſuffer,
all ſhould ſuffer with it; if one member be had in honour,
all ſhould reioyce thereat. The eye muſt not ſay to the
hand, I haue no need of thee; nor the head againe
vnto the feet, I haue no need of you; but euery member
ought to be helpfull to its fellow-members, & willingly
yeeld to euery one that which belongeth to them; and
according to that of S. Peter,
               1 Pet. 4. 10. 
               As euery man hath receiued
the gift, euen ſo miniſter the ſame one vnto another, as
good ſtewards of the manifold grace of God. For as the
incolumitie of the bodie depends vpon the concord of
the parts, in the mutuall performance of their duties; ſo
the welfare of the Church, when we thus ſhew ourſelues
to be members one of another: And therefore as God
hath called vs, ſo let vs walke; whether we be Magiſtrates,
Miniſters, or others. Art thou a Magiſtrate?
Then thou as the head ſhouldſt rule and gouerne wiſely:
woe be to the bodie, when the head is phrenzie, drunken,
idle, or the like: ſee thou be not ſo; but as the head
doth heare and ſee, taſte and ſmell for the good of the
inferiour members; ſo ſhouldſt thou in that place wherein
God hath ſet thee. Art thou a Miniſter? Then as
the Heart thou ſhouldſt be the fountaine of life and vitall
ſpirits; doctrine like dew ſhould diſtill from thy
lips. Little ioy haue the other members, when the heart
is ſicke or heauy. Art thou in meaner place; a Tradesman,
Husbandman, or the like? then as the foot, ſee thou
be ſound and ſeruiceable; being ready to goe or runne
for the leaſt good that may betide the bodie. And that
vnitie and loue may the better be continued and maintained,
let theſe euils be auoided.
            
               
Firſt, Enuie or repining at the gifts of others; a ſinne 
too common, and yet vnnaturall: for doth the foot enuie
at the head, becauſe it is preferd before it, as more
honourable? Or is it diſcontented, becauſe it is clad
in leather, when it may be there is a chaine of gold
about the necke, or a pretious ſtone vpon the finger?
Each member is apparelled and decked with ſuch ornaments
and veſtures as are moſt ſeemely for it: A garter
is vnſeemely about the necke; and ſo is a chaine about
the leg. A foule fault then it muſt needs be, to enuie any
in higher place, for that credit, honour, and reſpect
which they haue aboue vs.
            Secondly, arrogancie and highmindedneſſe for any 
gift that is in vs aboue our brethren. The eie is honoured
with that neceſſary and noble ſenſe of ſeeing; and
ſo is the eare with that worthy and needfull ſenſe of
hearing; and the noſe is preferred before them both,
in that profitable and vſefull ſenſe of ſmelling: Thus
he that taketh place before all in ſome things, muſt be
content to giue place and come behinde others in ſome
things elſe. Let this cauſe thee to contemne none that
are inferiour to thy ſelfe in ſhew.
            Thirdly, curioſity or buſie medling with things belonging 
not vnto vs. The eie meddles not with hearing,
nor the eare with ſeeing, nor the foot with either
of them both, but each member knowes its owne office,
and that it lookes to: So arrogate not to thy ſelfe
any thing out of thy owne calling, but containe thy
ſelfe within thy owne bounds and limits. If a more
ſhould fall into the eie, were the foot a fit member to
be thruſt into the eie to plucke it out? No, for though
the foot be ſenſible of the trouble, yet it leaues the helping
of it to the hand. It is neither fit nor comely for
the people to meddle with the office of Magiſtrates,
directing them how to gouerne; nor with the calling
of Miniſters, teaching them how to preach. And therefore
let all take the Apoſtles counſell, and1 Theſſ. 4. 11. 
               ſtudy to be

quiet, medling with our owne buſineſſe, leauing other
things to whom they doe concerne.
            For a ſecond vſe;Vſe 2. Is the Church but one? Then woe
to ſuch as are authors or fautors of any diuiſion or ſeparation,
and ſo breake the vnity of the Church. Such
ſinne grieuouſly, as S. Paul ſheweth,1 Cor. 3. 3. writing to the
Corinthians, and auoucheth that ſuch are carnall, and
walke as men. What anſwer will Browniſts and Separatiſts
make to God at the laſt day? Oh they were wicked
Magiſtrates, vngodly Miniſters, &c. But if the
head ake, doth the foot refuſe to beare it? Or if the
eie be blemiſhed, doth the reſt of the members diſdaine
it or contemne it? or whileſt it remaineth in the
body, refuſe to haue fellowſhip with it? and renounce
their owne part in the body becauſe of it? Me thinks
this being well conſidered muſt needs conuince them.
But of theſe before.
            Hitherto I haue beene in the Propoſition of the Parable:
The proſequution, explication, or narration of it
followeth now to be handled, which beginneth at the
latter end of the firſt verſe, and continueth to the end
of the ſixth.
            Wherein we haue laid downe to be conſidered; firſt,
the Vineyards Plantation, in the latter part of the firſt
and in the ſecond verſes; ſecondly, the Supplantation
thereof, in the foure next.
            In the firſt of theſe we haue two things to intreat of;
as firſt, of the Vinitors great paines and coſt, which he
beſtowed vpon it; and ſecondly, of his iuſt expectation
which he made, to receiue fruit from it.
            His paines, coſt, and care, for this his Vineyards
good, appeares in ſix ſundry particulars: Firſt, in the
ſituation of it; for it grew, 1. vpon a Hill, 2. vpon a
very fruitfull Hill, In an horne of the ſonne of oile (for
ſo the words are) by which Hebraiſme is ſet forth the
fatneſſe and fruitfulneſſe of the place: For by an horne
is noted2 Sam. 22. 3. Pſal. 75. 4, 5. Luk. 1. 69. ſtrength, power, and height, vſually in

Scripture; and by oileIob 29. 6. fatneſſe, and plenty; and by
the ſonne of oile is meant, that which commeth of the
oile, and is of it: A phraſe vſuall amongſt the Hebrewes.
And ſo wee reade of the ſonne of daies; of the
ſonne of death; of the ſonne of plenty, and the like. By
this phraſe then is noted thus much, that they were excellendy
ſeated,Muſcul. in loc. both for pleaſure and profit; and in ſo
fruitfull a place as if it had beene the ſonne of oile, and
borne of it.
            Secondly, in the Protection of it, for hee fenced and
encloſed it in ſtrongly, that it might not be waſted nor
any way annoied.
            Thirdly, in the Elapidation or Cleanſing of it: caſting
out the ſtones, and preparing of the ſoile by purging it
from all noiſome things.
            Fourthly, in the Election or Chuſing of choice and nobleſt
Plants; ſuch as were of the beſt kinde to ſet it
with.
            Fiftly, in the Fortification and further ſtrengthening
it: for he built a Tower in the midſt thereof for the preſeruation of it.
            Sixtly and laſtly, in the erection and ſetting vp a Winepreſſe
in it, as being deſirous to ſupply all things that
might be vſefull for it: So that by all theſe he teſtified,
that his care for its good was very great. Before I come
to ſpeake of theſe particulars, in generall obſerue we,
            God is no way wanting or defectiue in any one point of good
huſbandry towards his Church and Vineyard.Doctr. God is no way wanting in any point of good husbandrie for his Churches good.
            
            Is any thing wanting in it? that he ſupplies: Is any
thing hurtfull in it? that he remoues: Is any violence
offered to it? that he withſtands: No husbandman ſhall
ſo labour his ground as God will doe it.
            And thus doth God ſpeake of himſelfe, profeſſing
his prouident care for the good of it;Iſay 27. 2, 3. 
               In that day ſing ye
vnto her a Vineyard of redwine. I the Lord doe keepe it;
I will water it euery moment,
               Calu. & Muſc. in loc. 
               leſt any hurt it: I will keepe
it night and day. Where by watering of it, he comprehends

whatſoeuer belongs to the dreſſing and manuring
of it; ſo that no dutie ſhall be left vnperformed,
whereby the good thereof might be procured. And vnto
this he addeth vigilancie: for what would it auaile
to husband a Vine with great paines and labour, if afterwards
it ſhould be left open for theeues and beaſts to enter
in and waſte it at their pleaſures? therefore he promiſeth
withall, that he will keepe it ſo that no hurt ſhall
be done vnto it, but the fruits ſhal haue time to ripen, ſo
that afterwards they may be reaped in their ſeaſon. So
our SauiourIohn 15. 2. hauing compared his Father to an huſbandman,
ſets out his great care in trimming and dreſſing
of his Vine, by taking away thoſe branches which
were barren, and purging thoſe which were fruitfull,
ſo that they might become more fruitfull; omitting no
part of his skill, neither to the one or other. The like
care isLuke 13. 8. ſhewed in that Parable propounded by our Sauiour
of the fruitleſſe figge tree; And in that which the
Apoſtle propoundsHeb. 6. 7. of the good and bad ſoile; in both
which the great and conſtant paines of this husbandman
is declared.
            And no wonder:Reaſ. 1. For firſt God loues his Vineyard
dearely, as hath beene before ſhewed: now we ſee, that
field which a man takes moſt pleaſure in, he takes moſt
paines about: no man will beſtow ſuch coſt and labour
vpon a tenement he holds but from yeare to yeare, as
he will vpon his owne inheritance. This may be one
reaſon why he ſo husbands it, to make it pleaſant and
fruitfull, becauſe his loue is ſet vpon it, and his delight
is in it.
            Secondly,Reaſ. 2. the Churches fructifying, is Gods glorifiing,
as our Sauiour telleth his Diſciples,Iohn 15. 8. 
               Herein is my
Father glorified, that you beare much fruit: For looke as
it tendsMatth. 5. 16. to that husbandmans praiſe, whoſe field exceed
the fields of other men in fruitfull crops; So we
being Gods Vineyard, ſet and planted by his right
hand, doe then commend his husbandrie, and ſet forth

his praiſe, when we are laden with the fruits of righteouſneſſe,
Phil. 1. 11. as the Apoſtle ſheweth. No wonder then if
God be ſo diligent in his husbanding of his Church,
ſeeing the fruitfulneſſe of the Church brings praiſe and
honour to his name; which is the maine end he propoſeth
to himſelfe in all his actions (as hath beene before
proued.)
            And is God ſo carefull a husband man of his Church?
                  Ʋſe 1.
hath he ſo prouident a care for the good of it, as that if
any thing be wanting he ſupplies it; or if any thing be
hurtfull in it he remoues it? Then may all wicked ones
hence take out a leſſon, to their griefe and terror: For
woe to them who are in the Church of God but as
thornes and briars: hurtfull and noxious to theCant. 2. 2. Lillies.
God is a better husbandman than to ſuffer theſe
for euer: A day will come when he will view his field
and ſtub vp all winding and wounding briars; all renting
and ranckling thornes that fetch away the clothes,
yea skinne and fleſh too from off the Lambs of Chriſt
with their entanglements. It may be God may ſuffer
theſe for a while as he did the Canaanites in Iſrael, leſt
the wilde beaſts ſhould breake in vpon them: and as a
wiſe husbandman permits ſuch to lie in the hedge for
a yeare or two, and makes them ſeruiceable for the ſtopping
of a gap or ſome ſuch purpoſe: but in the end
when they are feare and rotten in their ſinnes, then he
will haue them to the fire, for thats their portion.
            Secondly,Vſe 2. it ſhould admoniſh all to looke vnto their
growth that it be good and kindly: if the roots of trees
run too deepe into the earth, they muſt be cut off ſhorter;
if the branches of a Vine ſpread too farre, they muſt
be pruned neere; and if the canker once eat into, or
cleaue vnto our trees we ſet, we burne them, ſmoake
them, or the like: And ſo if we be too much rooted by
our affections in things below, or ſuffer them to ſpread
abroad too farre; or let the canker of ſin to eat into our
ſoules (be we what we wil be) God will giue vs many a

cutting, pruning, ſmoaking, that if it be poſſible we
may be brought into better caſe.
            Thirdly,
                  Ʋſe 3. this may comfort ſuch as are euermore bewailing
their little growth in grace; maruellous defectiue
they are in virtues of all kindes; as in faith, meekneſſe,
patience, thankefulneſſe, heauenly-mindedneſſe, and
the like; and albeit they haue ſome good deſires and
vnfained purpoſes and reſolutions to bring forth fruit
to God; yet withall they finde ſuch ſtrong corruptions
in themſelues, as pride, vaine-glory, worldlineſſe, lust,
paſſion, reuengefulneſſe, with ſuch like; as that they be
euen out of hope, and know not what to iudge of their
owne eſtate, but feare they belong not vnto God, becauſe
they are no better husbanded: Now let me ſpeake
a word to the ſoules of theſe, and let my words be to
them asDeut. 32. 2. 
               the raine to the new-mowen graſſe: Doſt thou
not ſee the Husbandman ſuffer his ground to lie as
though he had forſaken it? and for a time to endure to
haue weeds and thiſtles grow thereon, euen when he
hath a purpoſe to breake it vp with his plough, and beſtow
much coſt thereon? yea and after he hath turned
it vp, to let it lie, as if he were a weary of his paines;
when notwithſtanding he comes with his plow againe,
and giues it another tilth or two, & then ſowes his ſeed;
being all the while before but a preparing of the ſoyle
for the receiuing of it. The like is Gods dealing with his
deareſt ſeruants; he many times ſuffers them to bring
forth the weedes of ſinne, and to lie in their wickedneſſe
for a time (as we ſee in Dauid, Peter, and ſome
others) as if he had caſt them off; but it is for no other
end but to mellow their hard hearts by humiliation and
godly ſorrow, and to teach them to diſtaſte their pride,
and not to truſt to their owne ſtrength hereafter: But
notwithſtanding, in due ſeaſon he doth returne, reſtore,
and lift them vp againe. And therefore wait thou a
while. Is thy heart hard and ſtonie? why in his due time
he will mollifie and mellow it, and make it fit for the ſeed

of grace, by bringing downe all high hils of preſumption,
and making deepe and long furrowes of mortification
in it: Hath he begun to ſcatter the ſeeds of grace
within thy ſoule? Why then he will follow thee, and
ſo husband the leaſt dram thereof, be it butMat. 13. 31, 32. a graine
of muſtard ſeed, as that it ſhall ſhoot vp to ripeneſſe, and
become as a mighty tree, ſo that the birds of the aire
ſhall come and lodge in the branches of it. And foraſmuch
as thy heart is as apt to bring forth ſinne vpon
the leaſt temptation, as the beſt and fatteſt ground is to
bring forth weeds vpon the ſweeteſt Aprill ſhowre;
God will daily looke vnto thee, and no ſooner ſhall a
weed peepe out, but he will with his weeding hooke
haue it vp; nor a ſuperfluous twig ſprout forth, but he
will with his pruning knife cut it off; according to that
which our Sauiour teacheth,Iohn 15. 2. 
               Euery branch that bringeth
forth fruit he purgeth, that it may bring forth more
fruit. And therefore diſcourage not thy ſelfe, for thy
ſoule is the field not of the ſluggard, but of a carefull
husbandman, who will ſo follow thee, as that
thou ſhalt euery day grow more fruitfull in grace and
goodneſſe.
            And laſtly,Vſe 4. hence let good Miniſters (who are Gods
Deputies to husband this his Vineyard) learne diligently
to follow their vocation, omitting no manner of
paines that may tend to the fructifying of the Church,
ſeeing God himſelfe omits none. Let vs obſerue our
times and ſeaſons, and ſometimes plant, and at other
times water, with exhortations, perſwaſions, and the
like: and as occaſion ſerues, let vs ſometimes prune
with reprehenſions, obiurgations; and if need require,
with the knife of diſcipline: euermore being occupied
about ſome thing that may make for the good thereof;
remembring that it is Gods Vineyard wee labour in,
and not mans; and he is able to recompence the faithfull
and puniſh the vnfaithfull: which ſhould make vs
to be the more circumſpect and laborious in our calling,

taking heed to what ſeed wee ſow, and to what plants
we ſet. Alas for ſuch as are idle, negligent and regardleſſe
of the Vineyard of the Lord;Damaſc. Papa, epiſt. 4. Diſt. 78. who like Harlots,
ſo ſoone as they be brought to bed put forth their children
to other nurſes, that themſelues might haue the
better leiſure to take their pleaſure and ſatisfie their luſt:
how will God alledge his owne example againſt ſuch
for their conuiction, and ſtrike their eares with that
chiding and vnpleaſant voice; Away thou diſloyall and
vnprofitable ſeruant into vtter darkneſſe?
            This in generall: Come we now to the particulars,
wherein this good Husbandman ſhewed his great care
for his Vineyards good. In handling of which I would
be loth to be found too curious: I confeſſe I am of their
iudgement,Caluin. & Vrſia. in loc. Theologia ſymbolica non eſt argumentatina. who thinke it not ſo fit, to ſift euery
branch too exquiſitely or exactly; for euery ſtring of a
Parable is not to be ſtrained, nor too curiouſly to be
preſſed, leſt in ſtead of milke we fetch bloud. The principall
ſcope is eſpecially to be regarded, beyond which
nothing is to be vrged. I intend therefore to gather from
theſe branches ſuch fruit as hang loweſt for my reach,
and as will readily and naturally, and (as it were) of it
owne accord fall into our hands: I hope I ſhall offend
no reaſonable hearer nor reader in ſo doing.
            The firſt particular wherein God commends his loue
and care to this his Vineyard, is in the ſituation of it:
He choſe for it ſuch a place and plat as was, Firſt, commodious;
for it was a Hill (which place vines loue well
and beſt proſper on.) Secondly, fertile and plenteous;
for it was A very fruitfull Hill,
               Bacchus amat colles, Aqu
                     •••
                  em & 
                     ••
                  igora ſylua. or the horne of the ſon
of oyle; by which Hebraiſime the fatneſſe and fruitfulneſſe
of the place is ſet forth, as wee haue ſeene before.
Put both together, and thence we learne,
            The fat of the earth is often giuen by God to his Church
and people for their poſſeſſion.Doctr. God often giueth the fat of the earth to his Church for a poſſeſſion.
            
            God often giues abundance of temporall good
things and earthly bleſſings to his owne people, as well

as to the wicked; and as Dauid ſhewethPſal. 23. 5., hee prepareth
a table for them euen in the preſence of their enemies,
and doth anoint their heads with oyle, and ſo fill
their cup as that it runneth ouer. A cloud of witneſſes
might be brought to iuſtifie as much, both out of the
old Teſtament and new. Out of the old theſe;Gen. 13. 7. & 24. 35. Iob 1. 1, 2, 3. & 31. 24, 25. 
               Abraham,
Lot, Iſaak, Iacob, Iob, Dauid, Solomon, Hezekiah,
Iehoſhaphat, Ioſiah, beſides others: All good and rich.
Out of the new Teſtament theſe;Matth. 27. 57. Marke 15. 43. Luke 23. 50. Luke 8. 3. 
               Ioſeph of Arimathea,
a rich man, an honourable Councellor; and he was a
good man and iuſt: Ioanna the wife of Chuza, Herods
Steward, and Suſanna, both the diſciples and followers
of Chriſt, with many other of all eſtates;1 Cor. 1. 26. 
               Some rich,
ſome noble, ſome wiſe, ſome mightie and of great account,
as the Apoſtle ſheweth. Agreeable hereunto is that promiſe,
thatEſal. 112. 1. 3. 
               Riches and treaſures ſhall be in his houſe that
feareth the Lord: And that Propheſie, that theEſay 60. 11. 
               Rich
ſhould come to the people of God, and ioyne with the
Church.
            
            Reaſons may be rendred;Reaſ. 1. 2. as theſe: Firſt, that the
wicked might not altogether trample on them. Or ſecondly,
ſay God could not inrich them. And therefore
God will giue to ſome, that they may ſee he could inrich
all the reſt if hee ſaw good, and that it would make for
their good. Or thirdly, that neither they nor theirs3.
may ſtand to the wickeds finding, who are hard hearted,
and would giue them but ſhort allowance, if they
were at their prouiding.
            This may ſerue,Vſe 1. firſt, to reſtraine men from raſh cenſuring
of the rich, as if wickedneſſe were of neceſſitie
bound to wealthineſſe, as heat is to the fire, when wee
ſee, A rich man may be a good man: We
                  •
               lth and wiſdome
may dwell together; righteouſneſſe and riches
may kiſſe each other.Matth. 6. 24. Chryſoſt. Aret. in loc. 
               Yee cannot ſerue God and Mammon,
ſaith our Sauiour; he doth not ſay (as it is well obſerued)
Yee cannot haue God and Mammon; but, Yee
cannot ſerue God and Mammon: for he that is the ſeruant

of God muſt be the maſter of his money: And ſo
he may haue both the one and the other.Aug. in Pſal. 9. Ser. 1. tom. 10. Poore Lazarus
indeed attained vnto euerlaſting life, and the rich
Glutton was tormented; but yet it was rich Abraham
which did hold poore Lazarus in his boſome. And
therefore conclude we, It is not wealth, but vice that excludes
out of Gods kingdome: A man may be wealthy
and wiſe; great and gratious. In heauen you may finde
ſuch, though they be rarities there.
            Secondly,Vſe 2. this may teach vs not to contemne theſe
outward things, but to eſteeme of them as good bleſſings
in themſelues, and be thankfull for them, when
we haue them giuen vs.Prou. 3. 16. Sunt Dei dona, ergo in ſe bona, Aug. epiſt. 70. ad Bonif. Ne putentur mala, dantur & bonis; ne putentur ſumma bona, dantur & malis. 
               Length of daies is in her right
hand; and in her left hand riches and honour. They are
the gifts of God then, and therefore good: indeed they
are but gifts of the left hand, and therefore not the chiefeſt
good. They are giuen to the good, that wee may
not vnderualue them; and they are giuen to the bad, that
we may not too highly prize them It was then but a
fooliſh part of Crates, a man of great riches and a Philoſopher
at Thebes, to caſt his wealth into the ſea, ſaying
he would deſtroy it, leſt it ſhould deſtroy him: for neither
needed. And as great folly for Friers, Heremit
                     ••
                  ,
and Anchoriſts, to vow and profeſſe voluntary pouer
                  •
               ie
vpon the like ground. I haue ſeene a rotten logge yeeld
as much ſaw-duſt, as a peece of good timber: And Ierome
               Quid facit ſub tunica poenitentis regius animus? Hier. eſpied a proud heart vnder a Monkes Cowle.
            If any doe obiect that our bleſſed Sauiour calleth riches
Luke 16. 9. the Mammon of vnrighteouſnes,
               Obiect. andMatth. 13. 22. Reſp. Crimen non eſt in rebus, ſed in vſu agentis. Bern. 
               thornes and
ſnares to choake and catch the ſoule: They are to know
that our Sauiour therein aimeth not at riches as they are
in their owne nature; nor as they are vſed and poſſeſſed
by the faithfull; but as they are abuſed by the wicked
vnto ſinne, either in their vnlawfull getting or poſſeſſing;
and ſo they are as a ſword in a mad-mans hand:
The abuſe, and not themſelues, is to be reiected.
            The ſecond Particular that manifeſts Gods care, is his

               Protecting of it in building a Fence about it: and that
teacheth vs,
            Gods Church and people are ſtrongly fenced in and protected
from the rage and fury of their enemies.Doct. Gods Church is ſtrongly fenced from the rage of their enemies.
            
            What the Deuill confeſſeth of Iob, is true of all Gods
people;Iob 1. 10. 
               Thou haſt made a hedge about him, and about
his houſe, and about all that hee hath on euery ſide. The
truth of this I will endeuour to ſhew in ſundrie particulars.
            For firſt; the vnreaſonable creatures are as a hedge
and defence vnto them; God many times ſends armies
of them as a valiant gariſon to defend his Iſrael. Yea
Exod. 14. 22. the very waters ſhall bee as a wall of defence vnto
them, as well on their right hand as on their left.
The cruelleſt of theſe creatures God often makes both
their Friends and Patrons.
            
            Secondly, they are oftentimes fenced and protected
by the very wicked. Chaffe and ſtraw is good to preſerue
the corne, though otherwiſe it be good for little but to
burne. Thus the curſed Canaanites ſhall remaine a
while amongſt the Iſraelites (as before was ſhewed) and
not bee deſtroyed at once, but by little and little; as
Gods people got more and more ſtrength, that the wild
beaſts of the field might not breake in vpon them or
moleſt them.
            Thirdly, the godly as an holy armie doe riſe vp in
their defence to helpe them; ſometimes by making
Apologie for them; otherwhiles by ſending aid and
ſuccour to them; and continually by their praiers
which they put vp to God for their preſeruation and
ſafety.
            Fourthly, the glorious Angels
               Pſal. 103. 20. that excell in
ſtrength doePſal. 34. 7. pitch their tents about them, andPſal. 91. 11. keepe
them in all their waies. Theſe are theEſay 62. watchmen ouer
the wals of the new Ieruſalem, and of the mountaines
about the ſame.
            And laſtly, in all theſe and aboue all theſe, the Lord

himſelfe is the defence and protection of his people:
He is vnto themZach. 2. 5. 
               a wall of fire round about: Hee is
Iſay 4. 6. their couert, their ſhadow, and their place of refuge. He
isPſal. 18. 2. their Rocke; their fortreſſe; their ſtrength; their
buckler; their high tower, and their deliuerer.
            Deſire we to know the reaſon why the godly are ſo
hedged about and ſo ſtrongly fenced?Reaſon. then take it in a
word. There is a neere bond & coniunction betweene
God and them; they are his friends; they are his ſubiects;
they are his ſeruants; they are his children; they
are his Spouſe; yea the members of his owne body, according
to that ſaying;Zach. 2. 8. 
               He that toucheth you, toucheth the
apple of mine eie.
            
            Which being ſo,Vſe 1. let none thinke to preuaile againſt
them or ouercome them. True it is, the Church is a
weake tent in it ſelfe; and the godly are like a ſmall
flocke of ſheepe, for the moſt part very impotent and
feeble in regard of outward ſtrength: when their enemies
are like raging Lions; and beſides for multitude
very many, who vſe all their wit and wealth, power and
ſtrength that poſſible they can vſe or deuiſe, for the razing
and ouerthrowing of Gods Church and people.
Yet the flocke of Chriſt ſtill remaines, and euer ſhall remaine;
all the power and policy of men and deuils
ſhall neuer be able to ſubdue them. For albeit wee are
harder aſſaulted, yet not any are better protected; their
gariſon is ſtrong and mighty; God himſelfe is their
rocke and fortreſſe, their ſhield and bucler: and vntill
that be broken or ſmitten thorow, they ſhall neuer be
wounded. Let then all Atheiſts, Papiſts, and all other,
ceaſe plotting and deuiſing any thing, which may bee
hurtfull or pernicious to any of Gods children; for if
they doe, let them be well aſſured their labour will bee
Pſal. 2. 1. in vaine. And he is a very foole that will attempt any
thing which he knowes for certainty will neuer come to
good, but proue his bane and ruine; as all their wicked
plots and proiects will moſt aſſuredly in the end.
            
               
Hence alſo ariſeth much comfort to Gods people;Vſe 2.
for they are ſafe and ſure vnder the wings of the Almighty:
they are ſtrongly fenced about and preſerued
with a continuall guard. That2 King. 6. 17. which Eliſha and his
man ſaw with bodily eies, euery beleeuer may be aſſured
of by faith.
            No Monarch on the earth hath a ſtronger gariſon
than the meaneſt Chriſtian, neither is any mans ſafetie
better prouided for than is the godly mans. So that he
may be bold and confident at all times, in all places,
and in the midſt of the greateſt dangers. Whether hee
walke abroad or ſtay at home; whether he be in company
or alone; whether it bee in the day or in the
night; whether he wake or ſleepe; he may ſing and ſay
with Dauid,
               Pſal. 23. 4. 
               I will feare no euill. Let the enemies of
the Church band themſelues together againſt it, to moleſt
it: let Pharaoh and his hoaſt purſue Gods Iſrael:
God will ſuddenly ſtep forth and cauſe the cloudy pillar
Exod. 14. 19. to remoue behind is people, and to be betwixt
their enemies and them; As if God ſhould ſay, before
they touch thee they ſhall ouercome mee ô Iſrael. Let
vs then goe on as God commanded them, and keepe
our ſelues in our waies,Verſ. 14. and then feare nothing, for
God will fight for vs, let vs hold our peace.
            The third particular here mentioned is its Elapidation
or cleanſing: He gathered out the ſtones thereof I
whereby is meant (as before was ſhewed) the Idolatrous
heathen, whom GodPſal. 44. 2. 
               droue out before his Iſrael,
that they might not hinder this his Vineyards growth.
Hence we inferre;
            It is not ſafe nor profitable for the Church to ſuffer wicked
Idolaters,Doct. Toleration of Idolatry, is not for the Churches ſafety. or other obſtinate ſinners to remaine within
the Church Of ſuch Gods Vineyard muſt be rid, and
his Church purged.
            Will you heare in a few words what the Scriptures
ſay for confirmation hereof? It is commanded in the
law,Deut. 13. & ſeq. that the falſe Prophet, and ſeducing Idolater, whether

he be brother, or ſonne, or daughter, or wife, or friend,
ſhould bee taken away and ſlaine without mercie or pitie,
that all Iſrael may heare and ſee and feare, and not dare
to commit the like. And againe,Deut. 29. 18. 
               There ſhall not bee
amongst you man, nor woman, nor family, nor tribe,
which ſhall turne away his heart from the Lord our God,
to goe and ſerue the gods of theſe Nations. Beſides, it
forbadLeuit. 19. 19. ſowing of the field with mingled ſeed;Deut. 22. 10. plowing
with an Oxe and an Aſſe together; the wearing of
a garment of diuers things, as linnen and woollen mixt
together. Now theſe lawes according to the letter
ſeeme ridiculous,Haec ad literam videntur eſſe ridicula. Ordm. gloſſ. in Leuit. (ſaith the gloſſe) but the thing that
God intends hereby to ſhew is, that he cannot away with
a mixt Religion. The Church of Epheſus
               Reuel. 2. 6. was commended
for hating the workes of the Nicolaitans: but
Pergamus
               Reuel. 2. 14. was reproued, for ſuffering them that maintained
the Doctrine of Bulaam: and Thyatira
               Reuel. 2. 20. blamed,
for ſuffering Ieſabel to teach and deceiue Gods
ſeruants. And why in Scripture are Idolaters called,
Ioſ. 23. 13. Iudg. 2. 1. 
               ſtumbling-blocks, ſnares, thornes, traps, whips, and
deſtruction, but becauſe they proue ſo to the people
amongſt whom they liue? Iſrael found them ſo, and
England did no leſſe in Queene Maries daies: and
France doth ſo. For, from whence ſpring theſe commotions,
tumults, horrible maſſacres, and bloudy tragedies,
but from the diuerſity of Religion amongſt them?
            And indeed,Reaſon 1. what agreement hath light with darkneſſe,
or God with Belial? The Lord can neuer digeſt
two contraries, though neuer ſo well mixed or wiſely
tempered in matters of religion, as the Church of Laodicea
               Reuel. 3. 16. ſheweth. Hereupon zealous Elijah exhorteth
the people after this manner;1 King. 18. 21. 
               If the Lord be God, follow
him; and if Ba
                     •
                  l be God, goe after him.
            
            Beſides,Reaſon 2.
               Cor. 5. 6. 
               Doe yee not know that a little leauen leaueneth
the whole l
                     •
                  mpe? Sinne therefore being infectious,
the ſinner is not to bee tolerated in the aſſembly of the
righteous.
            
               
Take wee occaſion hence to magnifie Gods name,Vſe 1.
who hath beene ſo gracious to this his Vineyard, which
his owne right hand hath planted in this Land, as to
cleanſe it of all ſuch ſtones as might any way hinder the
proſperity or flouriſhing eſtate of it. Our ſtreets are
well ſwept and rid of that Popiſh rubbiſh, wherewith
formerly they haue beene much annoied: Thoſe dens
of theeues are diſperſed; thoſe buyers and ſellers of Popiſh
traſh, Monks, Friers, Maſſemougers, and Ieſuits,
are whipt out of the Temple, and driuen from amongſt
vs: He hath pulled downe that great Idoll of the Maſſe,
with other Idols that were ſet vp to bee adored, and
hath aboliſhed the manifold hereſies and corruptions
of falſe doctrine: And withall hath bleſſed vs with ſo
religious and prudent a King, as is a conſtant Defender
of the Faith, and an open aduerſary to ſuperſtition
and Idolatry. What ſhall we now render to the Lord for
all theſe teſtimonies and tokens of his loue towards vs,
but take the cup of Saluation, and praiſe with tongue
and heart the name of God? acknowledging his
goodneſſe in deliuering vs from the Romiſh bondage,
labouring to bring forth the fruits of the Goſpell, to
the glorie of his name and our owne endleſſe ſaluation.
            This likewiſe ſerueth for the Admonition,
               
                  Ʋſe 2. 1. Of
Miniſters, whom God hath repoſed ſuch great truſt
and confidence in, as to be the dreſſers and keepers of
his Vineyard; that wee be found faithfull, and (what
lies in vs) remoue whatſoeuer may any way annoy it:
For which end, Chriſt hath not only committed vnto
vsEpheſ. 6. 
               the ſword of the ſpirit, which is the word of God,
wherewith we mayTit. 1. 
               conuince gainſayers, but alſoMatth. 16. 19. 
               the
keies of the kingdome, that men being conuicted and
not conuerted, nor reclaimed, they may be caſt out and
expelled, either for a time as the inceſtuous1 Cor. 5. 5. 
               Corinthian
was, or for euer euen vnto the comming of the Lord:
Which kinde of excommunication, the Apoſtle cals
1 Cor. 16. 22. 
               Maran-atha (of Mara) the Lord, (and Atha) he

commeth, 
                  •
                being interpoſed for ſound ſake. Which
cenſure being ſo grieuous as it is, (for it is a deliuering
               1 Cor. 5. 5. 
               vp to Satan) ought not to be inflicted raſhly for euery
trifle, but deliberatly in matters of weight and moment,
and in ſuch caſes as expreſly ſhut out of the
kingdome of heauen, ſuch as thoſe the Apoſtle mentioneth,
1 Corinth. 6. becauſe it is a declaration of that
which is by God done in heauen. In the execution
whereof, let all ſuch as it doth concerne, beware of filthy
lucre, and faithfully diſcharge what is committed to
them, not ſuffering the notoriouſly prophane to remaine
within the Church, leſt others bee endangered
and infected by their ſociety; for2 Tim. 2. 17. 
               their very words
(and much more their conuerſation) creepeth and corrupteth
as a gangreene.
            
            2. Magiſtrates,
               Verbum informans, virga reformans. who muſt ſecond the word of information,
with the rod of reformation, and backe the Miniſters
of the Word, by the vſe of the temporall ſword,
which they muſt notRom. 13. 4. 
               beare for nought, but as the Miniſters
of God, take vengeance on them that doe euill.
Theſe are Gods Surrogates and the Preachers hopes:
Our words are thought aire, where their hands doe
not compell. Good lawes are made againſt the wicked
and prophane; but what are wee the better for Gods
owne lawes without execution? If thoſe who haue
the charge impoſed, and the ſword put in their hands,
ſtand like the picture of S. George, with his hand vp,
yet neuer ſtrike, it will fare full ill with the Vineyard
of the Lord. Let it bee their care with Dauid,
               Pſal. 101. 8. 
               earely
to deſtroy the wicked of the Land, and to cut off all wicked
doers from the City of the Lord.
               Cant. 2. 15. 
               Take vs the foxes,
the little foxes, that ſpoile the vines; for our vines haue
tender grapes: Let neither young nor old bee ſpared.
And of all other, let that Romiſh Reinard and his
Cubs (extrauagant Prieſts and Ieſuits, with other obſtinate
Recuſants) bee hunted, as moſt hurtfull to our
Vineyard.
            
               
               For what thinke you of theſe Poſitions: 1.Decret. Papal. apud Grat. cauſ. 15. Gloſſ. Neighbours
if Heretikes (meaning thereby Proteſtants) may
lawfully be ſpoiled of their goods, though indeed it were better
(ſay they) to doe it by the authoritie of the Iudge.
            2.Alanus Cardi. & Parſonus. It is lawfull for Pariſhioners to defraud Proteſtant
Miniſters of their Tithes, and of this, Non eſt dubium,
ſay they, there is no doubt to be made.
            3.Simancha Epiſ. Pacens. Inſtit. Cath. tit. 46. §. 73. Men are not bound to reſtore that which they
haue receiued, or to ſatisfie their creditours, who are tainted
with hereſie.
            4.Simanch. Inſtit. Gregor. 13. A Catholike wife is not bound to giue due beneuolence
to her huſband, being a Proceſtant.
            5.Simanch. quo ſup. tit. 46. §. 74. & Alan. Card. By the hereſie of the father a childe is freed from
his obedience: So that if a Prieſt returning into England,
findeth his father to be a Proteſtant, he may deny him to
be his father, meaning that he is not ſuch a one as he ought
to acknowledge for his father.
            6.Apud Grat. gloſſ. in Decret. lib. 5. ex Decret. Greg. 9. Cauſ. 23. q. 8. That Heretikes may not be tearmed either children
or kindred; but according to the old Law, thy hand
muſt be vpon them to ſpill their bloud.
            7.Bellar. lib. 5. de Rom. Pontif. cap. 6. 7. & 4. That it is not lawfull for Chriſtians to tolerate an
hereticall King: they may expell him, depoſe him, yea murther
him. And this (they ſay) is agreeable to the Apoſtolique
doctrine.
            8.Simanch. Inſtit. Cathol. cap. 45. Sect. 13. If warre be once proclaimed by them against Sectaries
(that is, in their language, vs Proteſtants)
then it is lawfull for any priuate man, to take, ſpoile, kill
ſuch Sectaries, and burne their houſes ouer their heads.
            9.Paulus Windebek in deli
                     •
                  . de haeret. extirp. pag. 414. It is lawfull for Catholike Princes to make league
with Proteſtants, only for their owne aduantage: as for example,
to diſpatch ſome buſineſſes which hinder them from
falling vpon Proteſtants with their whole forces.
            10.Card. Tol. lib. 4. 
                     〈…〉
                   cap. 21. 
               And that one may ſweare with Equiuocation
and ment all reſeruation, is good poſitiue Diuinitie with
them.
            
            By theſe and the like Poſitions, which they maintaine,
we plainly ſee, how they diſſolue all bands of humane

fellowſhip, and ſtrangle the vitall ſpirits of humane ſocietie.
Whether it be ſafe then to ſuffer ſuch, iudge yee.
Beſides, as is their doctrine, ſuch is their practiſe, in depoſing
Kings and Emperours, practiſing helliſh treaſons,
iuſtifying the murdering of Princes, making
leagues only for their owne ends; breaking their promiſes,
oathes, vowes, at their pleaſure. Can it then be
well with the Vineyard, if theſe Foxes be at libertie?
Can it be well with the Lambes of Chriſt, if theſe
Wolues be ſuffered to range about? Can Iſrael enioy
the Land of Canaan in quiet, if theſe Canaanites be not
ſubdued as ſeruants to the Congregation, or ſubuerted
as enemies? Let therefore all ſuch Magiſtrates as tender
the good of their King and Crowne, Land and State,
doe their beſt to watch and catch theſe Foxes: lenitie
and mildneſſe hath long beene vſed. NowDoct. Kings Sermon at White-Hall, Nouemb. 5. Anno. 1608. (to vſe
the words of a late worthy Prelate) ſome iuſtice with
mercie would doe well: ſome froſts with the fire that
warmes theſe Snakes in the bowels of our Land: ſome
pluckes at theſe thornes and prickles in our eyes (the
mean time) and will be hereafter in our ſides and hearts;
leſt if luſtice goe on to ſleepe as it were her dead ſleepe,
the tares of diſloyaltie, treaſons and ſeditions, be ſo thick
ſowen in the field of this Kingdome, by thoſe enuious
ones, the Seedeſmen of Rome, that it will be difficultie
and maſtrie afterwards to remoue them.
            3 And let all good Chriſtians, of what eſtate or degree
ſoeuer, beware of hauing any inward ſocietie or familiaritie
with Idolaters, or other obſtinate ſinners and
offenders. It is worthy our remembring, howZozom. lib. 7. cap. 7. when
the Emperour Theodoſius ſenior was deſirous to confer
with Eunomius the Arrian Biſhop, his wife, Pla
                     •••
                  a the
Empreſſe, very earneſtly diſſwaded him, leſt hee being
peruerted by his ſpeeches, ſhould beginne to like of his
hereſie; and ſurely there is more danger of being infected
by them, than of doing good vpon them: Eaſier
is it to draw a prophane perſon from hell gates, than to

remoue an opinion from a wilfull minde. Let vs all
withGen. 35. 2. 
               Iacob cleanſe and purge our families of theſe and
ſuch like baggage, not ſuffering anyPſal. 101. vngodly perſon
to dwell with vs. We ſee how it is in the bodie; when
nature hath any euill or vnprofitable humours that oppreſſe
the ſtomacke, it is forced to caſt them out for the
preſeruation of the health of other parts. So ſhould it
be with vs; if wee perceiue our families to be endangered
by obſtinate and obdurate ſinners, it ſhould vomit
them out as raw and vndigeſted humours by timely
election, leſt the whole head wax heauie, and the whole
bodie ſickly, and ſo the vitall parts languiſh. To conclude,
let vs all pray, and pray heartily for this Vineyard
in this Land, as all are directed by authoritie:Prayers appointed for the firſt of Nouember, the firſt after the ſecond Leſſon. 
               Lord
ſtrengthen the hands of our gratious King, the Nobles and
Magistrates of the Land, that with iudgement and iuſtice,
they may cut off and root out that Babyloniſh and Antichriſtian
Sect, out of the Confines and limits of this Kingdome,
that they may neuer preuaile againſt vs, nor triumph
in the ruines of this Church. And with our Prayer let all
protest with one ioynt voice to God;Pſal. 16. 2. 4. 
               Thou art my
Lord, &c. their ſorrowes ſhall be multiplied that haſten after
another god: their drinke-offering of bloud will I not
offer, nor take vp their names into my lips.
            
            Now in the next place conſider we of Gods great loue
to this his Vineyard, in regard of the Choice Vine wherewith
he planted it. It was not of an ordinary, but of the
beſt and nobleſt kinde. Which whether it be meant of
all the ſeed of Abraham in generall (as ſome would haue
it) or of ſome of the choiſeſt perſons of the houſe of
Iudah in particular (as of Dauid, Solomon, and other
ſuch godly Kings) (as ſome other take it) yet this will
follow,
            The godly and their ſeed are the nobleſt plants and
choiſeſt perſons.Doctr. The godly are the 
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               Such as are godly, ſuch are moſt excellent.
            
            
               Pſal. 
                     〈…〉
                  . 
               My goodneſſe (ſaith Dauid) extendeth not to thee,

but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent
in whom is all my delight. Where ſee how that Kingly
Prophet honoureth ſuch as are Saints, with the name of
Excellent, and Worthies of the earth. And Solomon his
ſonne affirmeth as much, when he telleth vs,Prou. 12. 26. 
               The righteous
is more excellent than his neighbour; i. he is better
beloued and graced of God, and hath that in him, which
maketh him more honourable, than any other who is
vnrighteous and ſinfull. And our Prophet Iſaiah calleth
the godly in plaine termes,Iſay 4. 5. 
               The glory: Ʋpon all the
glory (ſaith he) ſhall be a defence. Thus as the godly goe
before all other in virtue, ſo they goe before them in
honour; and as they exceed others in pietie, ſo they ſurmount
them in excellencie.
            And that this is truth,Reaſon. viz. That the godly are the nobleſt
and choiſeſt perſons, may appeare further, if we
conſider,
            1. Their Race and Pedigree: for they are deſcended
               1 Pet. 2. 9. 
               of the bloud royall, they
               1 Iohn 3. 9. are borne of God, being
               2 Cor. 6. 18. ſonnes and daughters of the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords. And whereas other men are called, children of
the earth; or
               Coloſſ. 3. 6. children of diſobedience; or
               Hoſ. 10. 9. children of
iniquitie; or
               Epheſ. 2. 3. children of wrath; or
               1 Sam. 26. 16. children of death;
or
               Iohn 8. 44. & children of the Deuill; or
               17. 2. children of perdition; or
               Matth. 23. 15. children of Hell; we ſhall finde that all the godly are
called, either
               Iohn 12. 36. children of light; or
               Acts 3. 25. children of
the Prophets; or
               Rom. 9. 8. children of the Promiſe; or
               Mark. 2. 19. children of
the wedding chamber; or
               Matth. 8. 12. children of the Kingdome.
Thus for birth and bloud they exceed all other of the
earth beſides.
            
            2. Their kindred are vere rich and noble; For their
Father they haue him
               Pſal. 95. 3. in whoſe hands are all the corners
of the earth, and the ſtrength of all hills is his alſo.4. 5. The
Sea is his, for he made it; and his hands prepared the dry
land. A great God is he, and a great King aboue all
gods. For their Mother they haue a great
               Pſal. 45. 9. Queene,
who hath Kings daughters and honourable women for

her attendants,
               verſ. 13. 
               being clothed in rayment of gold and
needle worke. For their Brethren, they haue Chriſt, the
great heire of the world,
               Heb. 2. 11. who is not aſhamed to call them
Brethren: and all Saints vpon the earth beſides. Now
               1 Sam. 18. 23. ſeemeth this a light thing vnto you?
            3. Their Place and Dignitie is very great; they are
in high place and office, being made by ChriſtReuel. 1. 6. 
               Kings
and Prieſts vnto God his Father: They are in high authoritie
to command and rule, like Kings and Prieſts,
who haue the chiefeſt roomes of all.
            4. Their Attendants are honourable. The
               Pſal. 34. 7. & 91. 11. 
               glorious
Angels that are aboue, and which excell in ſtrength, doe
euermore wait vpon them, and are becomeHeb. 1. 14. miniſtring
ſpirits ſent forth to miniſter for thoſe who are heires of
ſaluation. Yea Kings and QueenesIſay 49. 23. 
               are but as nurſes to
them, and they muſt doe them homage, worſhipping with
their faces towards the earth, and licking vp the duſt vnder
their feet.
            What ſhall we need to ſpeake of other things, wherein
one man is wont to excell another, and thereby wax
glorious and become renowned? Who are wiſe beſides
theſe? Are not theſe onlyDeut. 4. 6. 
               A wiſe prudent and
vnderſtanding people? Who are valiant but theſe? Are
not theſe the2 King. 2. 12. & 13. 14. 
               Chariots and horſemen of Iſrael? Who
goe fine but theſe? Are not theſe theyReuel. 3. 5. & 19. 8. 
               who are arrayed
with pure ſine linnen and ſhining? Doe not theſe goe
clothed with the golden and ſilken robes of Ieſus
Chriſt,Reuel. 2. 17. and of his Spirit? Who fare ſo well as theſe?
Are not theſe fedIohn 6. 33. with Manna, the bread of life? Haue
not theſe prepared for them,Iſay 25. 6. 
               A feaſt of fat things, euen
a feaſt of fined wines, of fat things full of marrow, of
wines fined and purified? Who are out of debt but theſe?
Hath not Chriſt diſcharged them of all theirMatth. 6. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 24. ſinnes
(which are called debts) andColoſſ. 2. 14. cancelled the bonds?
Who haue peace within and without but theſe?Rom. 5. 1. God is
now reconciled with them,Phil. 4. 7. ſo that they haue peace not
only with God himſelfe,2 Cor. 5. 19. and his creatures; but alſo

with themſelues in their owne ſoules and conſciences.
Who enioy health but theſe? Their ſoules are found
and well; and daily they goe onPſal. 84. 7. 
               from ſtrength to
ſtrength, till they appeare perfect in Sion. Who ſpeakes ſo
pure a language as theſe? Their language is theIſay 
               language
of Canaan; out of their mouthsColoſſ. 4. 6. 
               no filthy, vnſauoury,
nor rotten communication doth proceed. What ſhall I ſa
                  •
               
more? Who can compare with theſe, who haue the
heauens for their1 Pet. 1. 4. 
               inheritance; the Scriptures for then
euidences; the Sacraments for their ſ
                     •
                  ales, and the Holy
Ghoſt for their aſſurer:
               1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. 
               Who haue all things theirs, and
they are Chriſts and Chriſt is Gods?
            
            Now if this be ſo,Vſe 1. that The godly are the choiſeſt plants
and chiefeſt perſonages; why then are ſuch moſt contemned,
and accounted according to S. Pauls ſaying,1 Cor. 4. 13. 
               as 
the filth of the world, and off-ſcowring of all thi
                     •
                  g
                     •
                  ? But
let me ſay to worldlings, as the Apoſtle of thoſe great
ones who put the Lord of life to death▪
               1 Cor. 2. 8. 
               If they ha
                     ••
                  
knowne, they would not haue crucified the Lord of life and
glory. So didſt thou but know who theſe are, and what
manner of perſons they are, whom thou thus deſpiſeſt,
thou wouldſt more reſpect them; yea loue and reuerence
them; nay, kiſſe the very ground they goe vpon
Indeed they ſeeme outwardly blacke and weather-beaten;
but what then? Yet vnder that baleneſſe and
blackneſſe is hid great honour and beauty. Within
that leather purſe is a pretious pearle: In thoſe earthen
pots is abundance of golden treaſure. As meane and
baſe as they ſeeme in thy eyes, they are children of God;
great Heires and Princes, and ſhall one day reigne with
Chriſt in glory. Be therefore well aduiſed; and diſdame
them not. Had2 Sam. 16. 
               Shemei euer thought that Daui
                     •
                  
               
ſhould euer haue recouered againe the Crowne and
Kingdome, and ſo Soueraigntie ouer him, he would
haue ſpared his curſed ſpeeches vſed againſt him, and
haue beene more temperate. Or had Ioſephs brethren as
much beleeued his dreams,Gen. 37. 11. that they ſhould come and

bowe to him, as they enuied him for them, they would
haue vſed him with more mildnes; but they when they
ſold him thought neuer to haue ſeene him more, much
leſſe did they expect to haue beene told of their crueltie
from his mouth. And yet (what ere they thought) it ſo
fell out contrary to all their expectations. Now when
they heare him which was a Ruler in Aegypt ſay,Gen. 45. 4. 
               I am
Ieſeph your brother whom you ſold; how amazedly doe
you thinke they lookt one vpon another? with what
paleneſſe and ſilence doe they ſtand before him? Wonder▪
               
Doubt, Reuerence, Feare, Hope, Guiltineſſe, ſtrooke
them at once; the more they conſidered, they wondred
the more; and the more they beleeued, the more they
feared: for thoſe words, I am Ioſeph whom you ſold▪
                ſeemed
to ſound thus much to their guilty thoughts; You
are murtherers, and I am a Prince in ſpight of you; my
power and this place giue me all opportunities of reuenge;
my glory is your ſhame, my life your danger,
&c. Euen thus it is and ſhall be with all wicked ones:
When they reuile and mocke Gods children, doe they
thinke they ſhall euer ſee Ioſeph more? or euer come
and bowe before him and doe him reuerence? Alas,
they haue no ſuch thought: and yet they muſt and ſhall,
for Ioſeph will appeare, though not in Aegypt, yet in
Heauen, to their confuſion and ſhame: Then will they
be vexed and amazed, who now ſet Gods children at
nought; then will they change their mindes, and ſob
and ſighs or griefe of ſpirit, and ſay within themſelues;
Theſe are the men and women whom we diſdained and
contemned, and called Puritanicall fooles, and preciſe
fellowes: Theſe are they whom we ſlandered and moleſted:
But now we ſee now highly they are aduanced,
being counted amongſt the children of God, hauing
their portion with the Saints. Oh that ſuch as vex and
moleſt the righteous, either with virulent tongues, as
Shemei
               2 Sam. 16. or with violent hands, as Herod
               Acts 12.; or with
both, as Iulian▪
                the Apoſtata; whether by themſelues.
               
as Diotrephes
               3 Iohn 9.; or by other, as the Scribes and Phariſies
               Matth. 26. 3.; whether cloſely, like Iezabel
               1 King. 21.; or openly, like
Pharaoh
               Exod. 5., would thinke of this change and alteration:
And how ſoone it may come, who knoweth? But certainly
it will come, and then what the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh
ſhall infallibly be verified,Pſal. 112. 9, 10. 
               Their horne ſhall be exalted
with glory: The wicked ſhall ſ
                     •
                  e it, and be angry: he ſhall
gnaſh with his teeth, and conſume away: the deſire of the
wicked ſhall periſh.
            
            And therefore let this ſerue further for our Inſtruction,
               Vſe 2.
that we learne highly to eſteeme of ſuch as be truly godly,
ſeeme they neuer ſo meane or baſe in the worlds eye.
Thus did S. Lawrence,
               Euſeb. that bleſſed Martyr of Chriſt
Ieſus, who being demanded of the Tyrant, where the
riches of the Church lay (looking for ſtore of gold, and
ſuch like treaſure) he gathered together a multitude of
poore Chriſtians, telling the Tyrant that there was the
riches and beauty of the Church, and albeit they were
now ragged and vnſeemly in the eyes of men, yet they
ſhould one day be clad in white robes, and ſhine in maieſtie
and glory before the throne of God.Aeneas Syluius. cap. 20. The like (as
I haue read) was the practiſe of Ingo an ancient King
of the Draues and Veneds, who making vpon a time
a ſtately feaſt, inuited thereunto all his Nobles; (who
were at that time Pagans, and vnconuerted to the Chriſtian
faith) and a multitude of poore Chriſtians: His
Nobles he ſet in his Hall below, and thoſe poore Chriſtians
with himſelfe in his preſence chamber, entertaining
them with the royalleſt cheere, and kinglieſt attendance
that might be. At which when his Nobles wondered,
he told them this he did not as hee was king of
the Drau
                     •
                  s, but as king of another world, wherein theſe
ſhould bee his companions and fellow Princes: To
them he would giue ciuill due in the gouernment of
the Commonwealth, but theſe hee muſt loue and honour
in his heart, as moſt honoured and beſt beloued
of God. Reade this to thy ſhame who knoweſt not

how to ſhew the leaſt reſpect vnto a Chriſtian: and if
thou wouldſt not haue it to condemne thee, let it mend
thee; cauſing thee to be more reſpectiue in thy cariage
towards ſuch as ſerue the Lord: So ſhalt thou imitate
God like a good childe herein, and get a teſtimonie to
thy owne conſcience, that thou art GodsIohn 3. 2. becauſe thou
loueſt his image: which marke of a childe of God may
comfort thee when all others in the time of temptation
may faile thee.
            Hence alſo we may haue Direction how to become
excellent and famous,Vſe 3. namely by becomming gracious:
This way will not faile to effect it, and no other courſe
can be auaileable without it. Men may be wealthy and
ignominious; they may haue gorgeous apparell, and
yet be contemptible.Cant. 1. 8. 
               Pharaohs horſes had coſtly trappings,
and the Midianites Camels
               Iudg. 8. 26. had chaines of
gold about their necks: Grace and goodneſſe doe
more decke and adorne than all theſe doe or can. This
is that which the Apoſtle callethRom. 2. 7. 
               Seeking glory and honour
by well-doing: and only is that wherebyHeb. 11. 12. 
               Abel, Noah,
Abraham, and the reſt obtained a good report.
How groſly then are ſuch deceiued as thinke godlineſſe
doth cauſe contempt, and the way to become honourable
is to grow graceleſſe and ſinfull? For, can any
wiſe man thinke that the dunghill of wickedneſſe is a
fit Mine to digge out a good eſtimation; or that the
puddle water of vanity will make a man ſeeme beautifull
and faire? or that the onely way to make a man
ſweet is to tumble in a iakes? Certainly figgs grow not
vpon thornes; neither is the ſweet oyntment of a good
name, compounded of thoſe ſtinking ingredients,
Pride, Drunkenneſſe, Whoredome, Profaneneſſe, or the
like:Famam extendere factis hoc virtutis opus. A good name ariſeth out of honeſt things (as the
Poet could ſay) and not from actions ſinfull and diſhoneſt.
Cain and Eſau we know were wicked men, and
dead many hundred yeeres agoe; yet the Scripture neuer
ſpeaketh of them but with great reproach, as Prophane

Eſau:
               Heb. 12. 16. 
               Cain who was of that wicked one, and ſlow his
brother:
               1 Iohn 3. 12. And ſo Iudas who is neuer almoſt ſpoken of
but he is called by the name of traitor. The Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apoſtles, haue likewiſe beene a long time
dead, and yet how louely are their names▪ Scripture neuer
ſpeakes of them but with great reſpect;Rom. 4. as, Abraham
the Father of the faithfull:
               Pſal. 90. title. 
               Moſes the ſeruant of God: Dauid
the ſweet ſinger of Iſrael:
               2 Sam. 23. 1. And S. Peter, S. Paul,
S. Iohn, and ſo the reſt. Thus the wicked leaue a filthy
ſauour behinde them as a greaſie ſnuffe, when it goeth
out, which euery one that paſſeth by ſtops his noſe at:
but the godly leaue their names behinde them for a
bleſſing; the very remembrance of them is ſweet; and
like the end of ſome ſweet wax candle, which euery
one loues to haue the ſent of, euen after it hath left burning.
Wouldſt thou then bee counted excellent? See
that thou doe
               Ruth 4. 11. 
               worthily in Ephratha and ſo be famous in
Bethlehem. It is vertue onely that can emblazon thy
name, and that will doe it. A field of ſinceritie charged
with deeds of pietie, cannot but be accompliſht with a creſt
of glorie. But if thou liueſt licentiouſly and prophanely,
ſo loathſome will thy abominable life make thee, as
that thou ſhalt ſcarce euer come into mention of Gods
people, but with a ſtile like that of Ieroboam the ſonne
of Nebat
               King. 10. 29. 
               that made Iſrael to ſinne.
            
            And laſtly for Conſolation,
               Vſe 4. let this ſerue, to the godly
poore deſpiſed by the rich and worldly wiſe. Know
thou for thy comfort, thou art a choiſe plant in Gods account,
and hee that knowes the true worth of things
eſteemes thee precious, and holds thee for one of his
iewels of great price (whateuer men doe deeme.)Malach. 3. 17. And
when that day of ſeparation ſhall come, hee will then
make it known to all the world, Firſt by his ſetting thee
on his right hand as one of his darlings,Matth. 25. whom he purpoſeth
to aduance and honour, when all other ſhall be
turned to the left hand as baſe and contemptible. Secondly,
by that his gracious call and ſweet ſentence,

               Come thou bleſſed, &c. The proſecuting of this point
would bee very comfortable: but I haſten; and now
come to the fift Particular heere mentioned; whereby
Gods loue to this his Vineyard was manifeſted in theſe
words:
            
               He built a Tower in the midſt of it] which was as well
for the beautifying and adorning it,Text. as for the further
ſtrengthning of it. By which Tower whether wee vnderſtand
the glorious Temple in Ieruſalem, that ſtately
edifice and building; or Ieruſalem it ſelfe whereunto
all the Tribes reſorted,Pſal. 122. 4. and the nations came to worſhip;
it will leade vs to this Obſeruation: that
            
               The Beautie and Bulwarke of a place is Gods ſeruice
and worſhip erected and ſet vp in that place.
               Doctr. Gods worſhip beautifies and ſtrengthens that place where it is ſet vp. For neither
is Ieruſalem nor Zion here compared to a Tower (eſpecially)
in regard of the ſtately buildings, multiplicity
of Turrets, aſpiring Towers, or the like: but in regard
of Religion that was found in it. In Ieruſalem was the
continuall worſhip of God; In the Temple the continued
ſeruice of God; and this was it which gaue the
grace and countenance; this made it the golden head of
the picture; Ladie of the world; ſeat of the Monarchie;
and as Micah (agreeing with this of our Prophet)
cals it, theMich. 4. 8. 
               Tower of the flocke, and the ſtrong hold of the
daughter of Gods people.
            
            We reade1 Sam. 4. 20, 21. how that good woman the wife of Phinehas,
vpon hearing tidings of taking of the Arke, with
very griefe fell in trauell, and gaue vp the ghoſt: before
whoſe death neither could the birth of a manchild, nor
the kinde and comfortable ſpeeches of thoſe women
then preſent with her, any whit comfort or content her;
but ſhe cries out, The glory is departed from Iſrael, becauſe
the Arke of God was taken; yea ſhee doubles her
paſſionate complaint, and againe with her laſt breath
ſaies, The glory is departed from Iſrael, for the Arke of
God is taken: And thereupon ſhee giues her ſonne a
name, and calls him Ichabod, as much as to ſay, where

is the glory, or rather No glory: and all becauſe the
Arke of God was taken. And thus not State, not
wealth, not outward magnificence, but the preſence of
God in his Ordinances was euer accounted to be the
glory of that people.
            And ſo the Apoſtle in reckoning vp the priuiledges
and prerogatiues of the Iewes, telleth vs,Rom. 9. 4, 5. 
               That
to them belonged the Adoption and the [Glory] meaning
thereby the Arke which was a token of Gods
preſence, whence God alſo heard the praiers and praiſes
of his people, and gaue forth Oracles vnto ſuch as
ſought him.
            As it was their glorie, ſo it was their Strength. By it
great things had beene for them wrought. Before it the
waters of Iordan were diuided;Ioſ. 3. 14. The Idoll Dagon was
laid flat vpon the floore;Ioſ. 6. 11. The ſtrong wals of Iericho
were demoliſhed by the preſence of it; before it their
enemies cannot ſtand. And this cauſed Iſrael too ſuperſtitiouſly
to truſt in the Arke of wood, when they had
God their enemie: for when they fell before their enemies,
they thus aduiſe;1 Sam. 4. 3. 
               Let vs fetch the Arke of the Couenant
of the Lord out of Shiloh vnto vs, that when it commeth
amongst vs it may ſaue vs out of the hands of our
enemies. Beſides this that hath beene ſaid and ſhewed
of the Arke, for making good this point, that of the
Prophet Iſaiah might be brought,Iſaiah 26. 1. 
               In that day ſhall this
Song be ſung in the land of Iudah; We haue a ſtrong citie,
ſaluation will God appoint for wals and bulwarkes, &c.
But I haſten to the vſe.
            See here what enemies all irreligious perſons are to
this State and Kingdome;
                  Ʋſe 1. As likewiſe ſuch as ſeeke to
ſuppreſſe and ouerthrow Gods worſhip and true Religion.
Theſe are the capitall enemies of our nation; in
as much as they labour to the vtmoſt to pull away that
which is the Stay and Pillar of our Land. Satan and
his inſtruments haue euer charged true Religion and
the profeſſors of it to be the authors of all contentions,

tumults and inſurrections, and the greateſt enemies of
States and Kingdomes: which imputation the father of
lies hath laid before the eies of great ones to alienate the
mindes of Princes both from it and them. Thus was
Heſt. 3. 8. 
               Ahaſhueroſh incenſed againſt the Iewes;
               Dan. 3. 12. and Nebuchadnezar
againſt the three companions of Daniel, as if
they had beene diſobeyers of the kings lawes and contemners
of his edicts.Acts 17. 18. 19. 26. 24. 5. So S. Paul was often accuſed by
the Stoicks in Athens, by Demetrius, by Tertullus, that
he was a peſtilent fellow, a mouer of ſedition amongſt
the Iewes thorow the world, and a ſect-maſter. And
in the time of the tenne firſt perſecutions, if there were
any publike plague or calamitie fallen on citie or countrie,
the heathen would ſtraight cry out vpon the Chriſtians,
accuſing them to be the authors and cauſers of it:
If Nilus ouer-flowed not her bankes; if the clouds
with-held their raine; if the earth quaked; if famine encreaſed;
if the ſword ſpoiled; if peſtilence continued;
by and by the poore Chriſtians, as the ſheepe of Chriſt,
were caſt vnto the Lions: They were charged to make
priuie conſpiracies; to deuiſe ſecret counſels againſt the
Common-wealth; with the murdering of children, and
eating mans fleſh,Eccleſ. Hiſt. as Euſebius doth record. Thus Nero
when he ſet Rome on fire, laid the fault on them. And
where would the Papiſts haue laid the gunpowder treaſon,
had the blow beene giuen, but vpon the Puritans?
But as the Wolfe in the fable (oh that it were but a fable)
when he ſees the Lambe drinking at the poole, comes
blundring into the water and troubles it, then quarrels
with the Lambe for troubling the water; Sic nocet innocuo
nocuus, cauſamque nocendi Quaerit: So though Ahab
the Wolfe troubles all Iſrael,
               1 King. 18. 17, 18. yet Eliah the Lambe ſhall
be accuſed for it. And herein the wicked plaies Athaliahs
part, who cried out; Treaſon, treaſon, when ſhe was
the traitor and none elſe. Therefore as Eliah anſwered
the crime obiected and reiected the ſame backe, that it
rebounded at him that gaue the charge, ſo doe I. It is

not the godly and religious, but you irreligious and profane,
who are the troublers of this Kingdome.
            Hence let all be exhorted to vſe all good meanes to
their vtmoſt,Vſe 2. that true Religion may be eſtabliſhed: for
looke as Sampſons ſtrength lay in his haire,Iudg. 16. 19. ſo doth the
ſtrength of our land conſiſt herein: which if it ſhould
be ſhaued and depriued of (which we truſt ſhall neuer
be) though euery ſhowre were a ſhowre of gold, euery
ſtone in the land a pearle, euery begger an honorable
Senator, euery foole as wiſe as Solomon, euery weakling
as ſtrong as Sampſon; yet our wealth, honour, ſtrength,
wiſdome, and glory are gone, and we ſhall ſing a dolefull
Miſerere with1 Sam. 4. 21. 
               Phineas his wife, Ichabod; The glory
of England is gone; for Religion is gone: And therefore
let euery one both Magiſtrates and others, as they loue
their ſoules, their bodies, their King, their Country,
their peace and proſperitie, pray heartily; and pray continually
for the eſtabliſhing of it: eſteeming it for Gods
beſt friend, the Kings beſt friend, the Courts beſt friend,
the Cities beſt friend, and the Countries beſt friend, and
beſt friend to vs all:Prou. 4. 8. 
               Exalt her therefore, and ſhe ſhall promote
thee; ſhe ſhall bring thee (oh England) to honour, if
thou doſt ſtill embrace her.
            
            The ſixt and laſt particular followes, and that is the
erection and ſetting vp of a Winepreſſe in it, for the
preſſing of the grapes and ſauing of the Wine. And
this (ſaith one) ſhewes what hope the Vinitor conceiued
of the fertilitie of his Vineyard: as if the Prophet
ſhould ſay; He nothing doubting of the fruitfulneſſe
thereof, made a Winepreſſe therein.
            About which Winepreſſe our Expoſitors are very
various in their iudgements: and yet the opinions of
the moſt of them haue ſome probable ground: amongſt
all, theirs ſeemeth probableſt who vnderſtand thereby
the Word and diſcipline. But for as much as we haue
not here ſo ſure footing as we haue had in the former (in
that we want Scripture for the ſeconding ſuch an expoſition)

I will content my ſelfe with this generall obſeruation:
            God hath his Winepreſſe for the preſſing,Doct. God hath his Winepreſſe for the preſſing of his Ʋineyards grapes. pruning and
diſcouering of his Vineyards fruit.
            The truth of this I will endeuour to proue by an induction
of particulars.
            Firſt, the Word preached is an excellent Winepreſſe
for this end: This diſcouers what is in a man; and therefore
it is compared to anMatth. 3. 10. 
               Axe put to the root of the tree,
becauſe it diſcouers who are ſound and vnſound, as the
Axe doth: For albeit by the eie it is not ſo ſoone perceiued
what trees are good and what naught (for many a
one there may be which is ſtrait without, hauing a
goodly top, and faire rinde, and yet rotten and hollow
within) yet when the Axe is brought and laid to the
root, and it felled, then what was before vnknowne, is
manifeſtly ſeene. In the ſame reſpect it is compared to
aVerſ. 12. 
               Fanne in Chriſts hand, whereby he doth purge his
floore. Chaffe and Corne, good and bad, lie together
vpon an heape a while; but when the Goſpell comes (it
being preached with power and a good conſcience) it
blowes ſo mightily, as with the guſt thereof hypocrites
are ſcattered, and the faithfulneſſe of ſuch, as with honeſt
and good hearts embrace it, is reuealed and made
knowne. After the ſame manner is the Word compared
vntoIerem. 23. 29. 
               fire, which hath a double effect; to waſte ſtubble
and droſſe, and to purifie that which is refineable,
as gold and ſiluer: It enflames ſome mens hearts with a
zealous loue to God and his glory; and ſetteth others
on fire to perſecute and impugne it: And to aHeb. 4. 12. 
               Sword
with two edges, which cutteth both waies, and diuides
betweene the ioints and the ſinewes, and the marrow
and the bones; it doth anatomize the hearts of men,
and diſcouer the ſoundneſſe or vnſoundneſſe of them:
And toEpheſ. 5. 13. 
               Light, which maketh all things cleare and manifeſt,
which before lying in the darke could not be diſcerned
nor diſcouered. Thus we ſee the nature of the

Word, which like a Winepreſſe will make knowne what
is within; laying open the poiſon that lurked in the
wicked, and the grace and goodneſſe that lay hid in the
boſome of the godly.
            Secondly, Croſſes and Afflictions wherewith God
exerciſeth his Church, are as Gods Winepreſſe, By theſe
he doth diſcouer what is in his people that profeſſe his
name. Thus Moſes ſaidDeut. 8. 2. he led his people Iſrael fortie
yeares in the Wilderneſſe, For to humble them, and proue
them, to know (that is, to make knowne) what was in
their hearts. And ſo God ſpeaking of the remainder
of his people, whom he did not vtterly cut off in iudgement,
ſaith thus:Zach. 13. 9. 
               I will bring the third part thorow the
fire, and will refine them as ſiluer is refined, and will try them
as gold is tried: And S. Peter comforting the faithfull
in their afflictions, ſpeaketh after this manner;1 Pet. 4. 12, 13. 
               Dearely
beloued, thinke it not ſtrange concerning the fierie triall
which is amongst you to proue you, as though ſome ſtrange
thing were come vnto you, &c. And Saint Iames after the
ſame manner calleth afflictions trials, andIames 1. 3. 
               temptations,
becauſe they ſerue to trie vs what is in vs, and make it
knowne. And indeed afflictions are blabs and tell-tales
(as one faith well) they will not conceale the truth, but
make it knowne: they preſſe out of the godly that ſap
and iuice of grace which is within them; yea the more
they are preſſed, the more the liquor of grace diſtilleth
from them; the more abundant they are in praier, confeſſior,
humiliation, &c. But from the wicked they can
preſſe nothing but noiſome, ſtinking putrifaction; all
they ſend forth in the day of trouble, is railing, murmuring,
and impatiencie.
            Thirdly, Diſcipline or the Spirituall cenſures of the
Church, executed againſt ſuch members of the Church
as haue fallen into any ſcandalous offence, the higheſt
degree whereof is Excommunication, and debarring
from the publike ordinances of God, and ſocietie of the
faithfull, both publike and priuate, are as a Winepreſſe.
               
And though it be not abſolutely of the eſſence of the
Church, no more than the Winepreſſe is eſſentiall to the
Vineyard, yet it cannot well be wanting in the Church,
no more than a Winepreſſe can be wanting in a Vineyard.
By and in the true vſe whereof, the ſinner becomes
humbled and reformed1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Theſſ. 3. 14.: Others are terrified and made
afraid1 Tim. 5. 20.: And the ordinances of God are kept in reuerence1 Cor. 5. 6, 7.. The ſweet iuice that this ordinance of God
wringeth forth, S. Paul ſheweth in his ſecond Epiſtle to
the Corinthians:
               2 Cor. 7. 11. 
               For behold (ſaith he) this ſelfe-ſame
thing that you ſorrowed after a godly ſort, what carefulneſſe
it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your ſelues, yea
what indignation, yea what feare, yea what vehement deſire,
yea what zeale, yea what reuenge; In all things ye
haue approued your ſelues to be cleare in this matter.
            
            All this may ſerue to ſtirre vp euery one to looke that
their hearts be vpright and ſincere;
                  Ʋſe. and our graces
ſound and ſauing: for God will in time diſcouer vs. His
Wine-preſſe is for ſome vſe and end: we muſt aſſuredly
be brought vnto the triall; firſt or laſt, he will preſſe vs
to the purpoſe; and then what will become of faire
ſhewes and flouriſhes? The houſe that is built vpon
the ſands makes as goodly a ſhew as any other in a faire
Sun-ſhine day; and ſtands as well while the weather is
calme: but when the windes ariſe, and the raine beats,
then it falls, and is not able to ſtand out the triall:Matth. 7. 27. 
               And
the fall of that houſe is great (ſaith our bleſſed Sauiour.)
If thou beeſt not ſound at the core, thy falſe-heartedneſſe
will appeare; when thou commeſt vnto the Preſſe,
it cannot be hid. Haply the word and diſcipline hath
diſcouered abundance of corruption in thee, and cauſed
thee to murmur, repine, and grudge, &c. Well, aſſure
thy ſelfe, the Wine-preſſe of affliction will diſcouer farre
more, when thou ſhalt be brought vnto it: (and how
ſoone we may be tried therewith, God only knowes.)
Leſſer and lighter afflictions make thee as the raging
Sea,Iſay 57. 20, 21. 
               foming out mire and dirt: what then will common

afflictions and heauier perſecutions, which may befall
the Church, cauſe thee to doe? And yet as S. Paul ſaith
concerning hereſies, ſo ſay I of theſe,1 Cor. 11. 19. 
               they muſt needs be,
that the approued may be knowne. Wouldſt thou then be
able to endure the preſſe? Looke well vnto thy inſide;
thy ſaith muſt be1 Tim. 1. 5. 
               vnfained; thy loue vnfained,
               1 Iohn 3. 18. in deed
and truth; thy repentance an vnfainedIoel 2. 
               renting of the
heart; and thy wiſdome
               Iam. 5. 17. without diſſimulation: and then
thou needeſt not feare it; for as good grapes, thou art
preſſed to be preſerued & not ſpoiled. A childe or afoole
indeed, would thinke a goodly cluſter of grapes ſpoyled,
when it is caſt into the preſſe: but a wiſe man knoweth,
if it be not caſt in, it will periſh within a few daies. If it
had not beene ſo, we had wanted the Vine we now haue.
Thus the pretious liquor diſtilled from thee,De hoc liquore ſaecla futura bibent. ſhall be
kept to refreſh the heartIudg. 9. 13. both of God and man; out of
that gratious and ſweet iuyce, God will glorifie himſelfe
and comfort others. And thus much of theſe particulars,
wherein the great care & diligence of this Vinitor did
appeare for his Vineyards good. Now ſee the ſucceſſe.
            
               Hee looked that it ſhould bring forth grapes,
               Text. 
               and it
brought forth wilde grapes.]
            
            His hope and expectation was to finde grapes in the
vine, or cluſters of grapes, as the word noteth: But it
deceiued the hope and expectation of the Lord, and
(like a degenerated plant) brought forth wilde grapes:
Not leaues or no fruit, but (as the word ſignifieth)
ſtinking and bitter fruit; ſuch a kinde of fruit, as in ſmell
was moſt odious and ſtinking, and in taſte moſt loathſome
and vnſauoury, being neither anſwerable to the
nature and kinde of the noble plant, nor yet to the care
and coſt of the good and painfull husbandman.
            Two things then are here to bee conſidered:Part 1. Firſt,
What God expected, for his coſt and paines, [He looked
for grapes.]
            
            Secondly, What it returned, and how it anſwered
the hope and expectation of the 
                  Ʋine-dreſſer,

[It brought forth wilde grapes.]
            
            Before I come to any obſeruation,Queſt. let me make anſwer
to a queſtion. Some may demand, whether God
can faile of his end in any of his actions, or be deceiued
of his hope and expectation?
            The anſwer is,Anſwer. Zanch. de natura Dei. c. 2. quaeſt. 13. Gods knowledge is abſolute and perfect,
knowing all things from all eternity at one inſtant;
and it is moſt certaine, and cannot any way bee deceiued,
all things being knowne of him as they are, and
all things are as they are knowne of him. The future
degeneration and ingratitude of this people, the Lord
foreſaw euen from the beginning, and knew full well
what he ſhould receiue from them; and cauſeth his ſeruant
Moſes to ſing and write thereof, euen before they
came into the Land ofDeut. 31. 20, 29. 
               Canaan; and ſo he telleth them
by this our Prophet, that hee knew they would deale
very treacherouſly with himIſay 48. 8. This then is not ſpoken,
as if Gods hope and expectation were vncertaine, or
could bee fruſtrate, or as if hee were doubtfull what
would follow, but by a 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . figure hee thus ſpeaketh:
Shewing thereby; 1. What they ought to haue done;
2. How acceptable and pleaſing it would haue beene
to him, if they had ſo done.
            Now to ſome Inſtructions: and firſt from Gods expectation,
this we note:
            Where God hath taken paines in planting and husbanding,
Doctr. Where God hath taken paines, hee expects fruit. there he iuſtlie expects fruit ſomewhat anſwerable
to his paines.
            He lookes for the fruits of his trauels, from them on
whom hee hath beſtowed it.Cant. 6. 11. 
               I went downe into the
garden of nuts (ſaith the Welbeloued) to ſee the fruits
of the valley, and to ſee whether the vine flouriſhed, and
the pomegranats budded. He hauing purged and dreſſed
his garden, came to ſee how his handy-worke did
thriue and proſper, expecting in conuenient time ſome
anſwerable returne. That Parable which our Sauiour
doth propoundMatth. 21. 34. of the Vineyard let out to vnthankfull

husbandmen, is a pregnant proofe: for when the ſeaſon
came and time of fruit drew neere, that great
Houſholder ſends out his ſeruants to thoſe husbandmen,
that they might receiue the fruits: And in the
application of that Parable wee reade, that Hee will let
out his Vineyard to other husbandmen, who ſhould render
him [fruits] in due ſeaſon. And when our Sauiour telleth
vsIohn 15. 2. of his Fathers purging and pruning of the Vine,
he withall ſheweth vs what is his aime and ſcope therein;
namely, that Chriſtians ſhould bee abundant in
bringing forth of fruits beſeeming their profeſſion.
            There is good Reaſon for it:Reaſon. For1 Cor. 9. 7. 
               who planteth a
Vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth
a flocke, and eateth not of the milke of the flocke?
What husbandman beſtowes his ſeed and paines vpon
his land, and doth not expect a good crop therefrom?
And is it not then iuſt and equall, that the Lord ſhould
looke for ſome anſwerable returne for all his paines?
            Let this then ſerue for our Inſtruction,
               
                  Ʋſe 1. that wee anſwer
this Husbandmans hopes in ſome good meaſure.
Let vs remember the end of all his coſt and labour, and
conſider with our ſelues, the reaſon why we haue receiued
ſo many bleſſings from him: Let vs ſet before our
eies his many fauours, ſpirituall and temporall, and
then ſay, whether hee hath not beene as carefull a Huſbandman
for England, as euer he was for Iſrael. Hath
hee not taken vs out of the Romiſh Aegypt, where wee
grew not well, and planted vs in a very fruitfull
Hill; in a Land flowing with milke and hony?
Hath he not fenced vs about with his mighty protection,
Remember 88. and 1605. and defended vs from many dangers and deuilliſh
plots, deuiſed againſt vs by the enemies of the truth:
So that neither Boare nor Beare, Wolfe nor Foxe, Turke
nor Pope, could yet inuade vs, or preuaile againſt vs?
Hath hee not rooted out and expelled, thoſe ranckling
thornes and renting brambles, (I meane the Papiſts)
and caſt out of this his Vineyard, the ſtumbling ſtones
               
of ſuperſtition, and baggage of mans traditions, with
the relikes of Idolatry, hammering and beating downe
the Popiſh Dagon? And hath hee not planted choiſe
plants in this his Vineyard, giuing vs ſuch Princes as
may bee compared with the beſt Princes of Iſrael and
Iudah, vnder whom wee haue a long time enioyed the
Goſpell, with the fruits of the Goſpell, Peace and Plentie;
ſo that wee may ſit vnder our owne Vines and Figtrees,
conferring of the waies of God, and quietly enioying
our goods and earthly happineſſe? No Church
vnder heauen more enriched with treaſures and gifts
from God than ours is. What could he haue done more
for this his Vineyard than hee hath done? And what
can he expect leſſe from this his Vineyard than he now
doth, abundance of ſweet grapes and good fruits?
Yea, in particular let euery one conſider this, and make
application of it to himſelfe. Hath not the Lord choſen
thee aboue many thouſands in the world, and afforded
vnto thee ſuch meanes, as hee hath not granted
vnto many, who by nature are as good as thy ſelfe art?
Hath he not ſent his ſeruants vnto thee earely and late
to call vpon thee, that thou ſhouldeſt bring forth fruit
worthy amendment of life? Hath hee not often trimmed
thee with his pruning-hooke of afflictions and
croſſes; ſometimes in thy friends, at other times in thy
goods; ſometimes one way, at other times another?
and to what end hath all this beene, but that thou
ſhouldeſt bee fruitfull? Thus ſhould euery one commune
with his ſoule, and put the queſtion to himſelfe,
what God meant in being at ſuch paines and coſt with
him; that ſo thoſe fruits may be ſound in vs, which the
hand of God lookes to gather from vs: For to whom
much is giuen of them much ſhall bee required. Oh! beware
then that thou deceiueſt not Gods hope; he expecteth
fruit of thee, let him finde it in thee.
            This point (though plaine) I finde ſo needfull to be
preſſed in this barren age, as that I muſt be bold to purſue

it, and ſhew, Firſt, the Motiues or Reaſons inducing
vs to fruitfulneſſe: And ſecondly, acquaint you with
ſome profitable meanes that muſt be vſed to make vs
grow more fruitfull: And thirdly, acquaint you with
the nature and quality of that fruit which we muſt bring
forth, that God may accept of it, and take pleaſure in it:
All which are neceſſary points to be handled in the proſecuting
and following of this Vſe.
            To begin with the Motiues:
               Motiues to fruitfulneſſe. beſides what hath alreadie
beene ſaid and ſhewed of Gods deſeruing it, by reaſon
of his paines and coſt (which ſtrongly bindeth vs
to obedience) ſundrie other Reaſons may be brought:
1 As firſt; Euery creature in it kinde is fruitfull: The pooreſt
creature that God hath made, is enabled with ſome
gift to imitate the goodneſſe and bountie of the Creator;
and to yeeld ſomething from it ſelfe to the vſe and
benefit of others. The Sunne, Moone and Starres, as
they are endued with light, ſo they reſtleſly moue to
impart their light and influence, to the enlightning of
this inferiour world. The Clouds flie vp and downe
emptying themſelues to enrich the earth, from which
notwithſtanding they reape no harueſt. The Earth liberally
yeelds her riches, and brings forth food for the
maintenance of thoſe innumerable armies of creatures
that liue thereon; Greene herbe for the cattell, and oile
and wine for man: The valleyes ſtand thicke with corne;
the Mower filleth his Sythe, and the binder vp of ſheaues
his boſome: Thus it returnes fruits in abundance to the
painfull tiller and dreſſer of it. Yea, what Herbe, Plant
or Tree growes vpon the earth, which is not in its kind
fruitfull; ſpending it ſelfe and the principall part of its
ſap and moiſture in bringing forth ſome pleaſant berrie
or other ſuch like fruit; which being ripe and perfect,
ſuffers to haue plucked from it for the good of man, and
voluntarily lets drop downe before his feet? And doth
not euery one diſlike ſterilitie in his grounds and barrenneſſe
in his cattell, expecting fruitfulneſſe in all that

belongs vnto him? Now then, how can it be allowable,
when heauen and earth are fruitfull in their kinde;
and neither bird, beaſt, nor plant are idle, but are euer
bringing forth for the good of their Lords and owners,
that only man ſhould remaine vnfruitfull; his faculties
and graces idle, and he himſelfe a burden to the earth?
Shall not euery creature be a witneſſe againſt man, and
riſe vp in iudgement to condemne him, if he be barren;
fruitleſſe? And therefore as the Earth to Man; ſo let
Man to God, returne a bleſſed vſury; ten for one; nay,
thirtie, ſixtie, an hundred fold.
            Secondly,2 the fruitfulneſſe of a Chriſtian is the groundworke
of all true proſperitie: ſo thatPſal. 1. 3. 
               whatſoeuer he doth
ſhall proſper. Oh! what a large extent is here of Gods
goodneſſe towards ſuch a one; He ſhall proſper, not in
ſome things, but in all things whatſoeuer he vndertakes
or goes about:Deut. 28. 2-10 
               Bleſſed ſhall hee be in the City, and bleſſed
in the field: bleſſed in the fruit of his body, and in the
fruit of his ground, and in the fruit of his cattell, and in
the encreaſe of his kine, and in the flockes of his ſheepe:
Bleſſed in his basket, and in his ſtore: In his comming in,
and going out; yea, the Lord ſhall bleſſe him in all that he
ſhall ſet his hand vnto. And thus it was with Ioſeph, that
Gen. 49. 22. 
               fruitfull bough:
               Cap. 39. 23. 
               The Lord was with him, ſaith the
Text, and that which he did, the Lord made it to proſper.
As it is thus with him in whatſoeuer he vndertaketh by
action; ſo ſhall it be with him in whatſoeuer he vndergoeth
by paſſion or by ſuffering: His loſſes, croſſes, troubles,
perſecutions, or what elſe betides him ſhall beRom. 8. 28. for
his good, as the Apoſtle witneſſeth, and tend to the
furthering him with that eternall weight of glory. Let
tortures, torments, fire, gallowes,Verſe 35. 
               tribulation, perſecution,
famine, nakedneſſe, perill, ſword, or any ſuch like befall
him, yet they ſhall neuer wrong him, but proue an
aduantage vnto him; and he at length ſhall proue a noble
and a worthy conquerour ouer them: they will but
helpe him ſooner to that crowne which he hath ſo long

ſtriued for: And (to vſe the words of bleſſed Bradford
               
                  Fox Martyr. Fol. 1492.) If there be any way to heauen on horſe-backe, this
is the way: So that theſe ſhall neuer hinder him in his
iourney. Me thinkes this conſideration ſhould worke
effectually with vs, and vpon vs all; and if I ſhould ſay
no more, this were enough to make euery one that is
not ſetled on his lees, to reſolue to become fruitfull: for
who would not doe any thing to haue ſuch a priuiledge
as this is? What man would not himſelfe follow, and
ſet his childe vnto ſuch a vocation, in the which euery
action would bring profit and great commoditie?
            
                Againe, if wee be fruitfull, bringing forth fruits of
the Spirit,Gal. 5. 22, 23. 
               There is no law againſt vs; for ſo witneſſeth
the Apoſtle. An excellent priuiledge this is indeed,
there is no law to condemne ſuch, nor domineere ouer ſuch:
Though there is a law for them, which is as a rule vnto
them of obedience; yet there is no law againſt them; for
ſuch are freed: Firſt, from the obligation and rigour of
it, as it bindeth vs to perfect obedience in our ſelues and
by our ſelues, for the obtaining of eternall life, according
to the tenour thereof, Doe this, and thou ſhalt liue.
And ſecondly, from the curſe of the Law, for any breach
thereof, either in thought, word or deed; ſoRom. 8. 1. that there
is no condemnation belongs vnto them: though the beſt
doe things worthy of condemnation, and haue need to
vſe Dauids Prayer,Pſal. 143. 2. 
               Enter not into iudgement with thy
ſeruant, O Lord; yet they ſhall neuer be condemned.
            Stay Chriſtian, meditate a while of this priuiledge
before thou proceedeſt further; ponder it well in thy
minde, and conſider the excellencie hereof. Art thou a
fruitfull branch? Why then thou haſt libertie to liue
and ſerue God without feare of damnation;Luke 1. 74. when as otherwiſe,
thou canſt not but quake and feare vpon the
thought of hell and iudgement; and as the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh,Heb. 2. 15. 
               All thy life-time muſt needs be ſubiect to feare
and bondage. Hence likewiſe thou maiſt comfort thy
ſelfe in thy deſires and weake endeuours to obey,

               Iſay 1. 19. which God will accept at thy hands for obedience it
ſelfe, becauſe thou art freed from the rigour of the Law;
ſo that thy many weakneſſes and imperfections in doing
good duties need not diſcourage thee: for the Lord
will not examine thy actions according to the ſtrict rule
of his Law, but according to the purpoſe, deſire and
endeuour of thy ſoule will he reward thee, and
               Mal. 3. 17. 
               ſpare
thee, as a man ſpareth his owne ſonne that ſerueth him.
But on the other ſide, ſo long as thou continueſt fruitleſſe,
the Law hath power ouer thee to require exact and
perſonall obedience at thy hands vnto it; and to accuſe
and condemne thee for the leaſt breach of it. Thy deſires,
thy endeuours, thy meanings, thy purpoſes, cannot
ſtand thee in ſtead, nor defend thee from the wrath of a
reuenging God: no whither canſt thou flie for ſuccour
or releefe, thy caſe is fearefull. Againe, thou maiſtRom. 5. 3. 
               reioyce
in tribulation, and ſing in the very ſtockesAct. 16. 25. with
Paul and Silas: though thou be perſecuted and afflicted,
railed vpon and reuiled, by euill men, yet ſeeing
there is no law againſt thee, and the curſe (which maketh
theſe things bitter) is remoued from thee, thou
needeſt not feare them before they come, nor be diſcouraged
when they are come: but, è contra, if thou bring
not forth the fruits of the Spirit, then aſſure thy ſelfe,
that whatſoeuer loſſe or croſſe befals thee, they fall vpon
thee with a curſe; the venome and ſting is in the taile of
them, they tend 
                  •
               o thy perdition. Were theſe things
well weighed by vs, how could we then but labour to
be filled with the fruits of righteouſneſſe? Men of this
world commonly comfort themſelues with this; that
how euer they faile, yet the Law cannot take hold vpon
them. Be thou a fruitfull branch, and this comfort
thou maiſt haue, for the Law Morall is no killing letter
to thee.
            Fourthly, The circumſtance of time cals vpon vs to
bring forth the fruits of obedience. Our Maſter hath
ſuffered vs our firſt yeare already, yea our ſecond,Luke 13. 7. nay

our third, or rather our third ſcore yeare; for is it not
rather three times twentie yeares, than three yeares ſince
the Lord hath ſpared vs, as he ſpared the Fig-tree? For
as much then as he hath yeare by yeare, for ſo long ſucceſſion
of yeares, ſought for fruit of vs, and found none;
it is now high time to looke about vs, and bring forth
plentie, or elſe with feare and trembling, it is to be expected
that we ſhall ſtand no longer, but be ſtubbed vp,
and haue that ſentence paſſed againſt vs, which was
ſometimes paſſed againſt the Fig-tree, Cut it downe, why
cumbereth it the ground? Beſides theſe Motiues, our
bleſſed Sauiour vſeth many more in that ſame ſweet
SermonIohn 15., which he preached to his Diſciples a little
before his departure from them; and as ſome thinke, in
the way betweene the place where he did eat the Paſſeouer,
and the Garden wherein he was betrayed: Herein
(ſaithVerſ. 8. he) is my Father glorified, that you beare much
fruit.
            
            
                Our fruit-bearing tends much to Gods glorifying; and
in glorifying him, our glory doth conſiſt; for the glory
of man without glorifying his Maker, is but dung and
wormes; but this dung and wormes by glorifying God
ſhall be made glorious. Now the only way to bring glorie
to his name, is by bringing forth the fruit of our
planting.
            
                Againe he ſaith, By this we ſhall be his Diſciples, that
is, know, and haue a teſtimony that we are ſo: and indeed
without fruit none can haue his vocation, adoption,
or engrafting into Chriſt, ſealed vp vnto his ſoule.
He then that is vnfruitfull, wants this teſtimony which
euery one deſires to haue, and none to be without.
            
               
               Againe he telleth them, this was the end of their election
before time, and ſpeciall vocation in time;
               Verſ. 16. Yee
haue not choſen me, but I haue choſen you, and ordained you
that you ſhould goe and bring forth fruit.
            
                Beſides, if a man endeuour to bring forth fruit, he is
ſure to ſpeed when he hath any ſuit to God; and therefore

in the ſame verſe he addeth this as a reaſon to his
exhortation, That whatſoeuer they ſhould aske of his Father
in his name he might giue it them.
            
            If all this will not ſerue to make vs fruitfull, that 
which our Sauiour ſaith in the beginning of that chapter,
Verſ. 2. me thinks ſhould awaken vs: for Euery branch that
beareth not fruit, he taketh away: and preſently after,
If a man abide not in me (viz. to bring forth fruit) he is
caſt forth as a branch and is withered, and men gather
them, and caſt them into the fire, and they are burned.
Much more might be ſaid for the preſſing of this ſo neceſſarie
a dutie. My deſire is to ſay enough, and but
enough: now what hath beene ſpoken is enough, if
God ſhall pleaſe to accompanie it with his grace, and
operation of his bleſſed Spirit, without which neither
this, nor all that can be ſaid, will be enough to worke
vs hereunto.
            By this time haply thy heart may ſmite thee for thy
barrenneſſe, and the Spirit may begin to worke within
thee a deſire after the fruits of holy life; inſomuch that
out of the longing deſire of thy ſoule, which thou haſt
of fruitfulneſſe, thou wilt now come to me, as thoſe
Publicans and ſouldiers came to Iohn, ſaying,Luke 3. 10. 
               What ſhall
we doe?
               Cap. 10. 25. Or as that Lawyer came to Chriſt, with Maſter,
what ſhall I doe? If this be thy next queſtion, what thou
ſhouldſt doe to become fruitfull, I would aduiſe thee to
follow theſe directions.
            
               See thou be remoued out of thy naturall ſoile,
               Directions how to grow fruitfull. 
               and be
engrafted into another ſtocke. For that thou maiſt be
fruitfull, thou muſt be, as it is ſaid of the godly man in
the firſt Pſalme,Pſal. 1. 3. 
               A tree planted, becauſe by nature the 
beſt of vs are but as wilde Oliue; and if euer we become
fruitfull trees, we muſt of neceſſitie be tranſplanted from
the first Adam into the ſecond. The tree muſt be good
before the fruit can be:Mat. 12. 33. 
               Either make the tree good, and
the fruit good; or the tree euill, and the fruit euill, ſaith
our Sauiour: for menCap. 7. 16. 
               gather not grapes of thorns, nor figs

of thiſtles.
               Verſ. 18. 
               As a good tree cannot bring forth euill fruit;
ſo neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Vntill
thou be a plant planted in the houſe of the Lord, and
engrafted into Chriſt by a true faith, and made a new
creature by Regeneration, hauing a beleeuing heart, and
a good conſcience; thy fruit can neuer be good: all thy
workes are as ſo many ſinnes, yea thy beſt works are but
as rotten weeds: Thornes and Thiſtles thou bringeſt
forth, and therefore artHeb. 6. 8. 
               nigh vnto curſing, whoſe end is to
be burned: but being once engrafted into this ſtocke
Ieſus Chriſt, thou canſt not but bring forth fruit incontinent
(though not ſuch plenty and ſtore of fruit as afterwards)
for ſuch a liuely power of life is in it, that wert
thou as dry as Aarons withered rod, yet thou ſhalt preſently
be changed into a flouriſhing and fruitfull tree.
As the Theefe vpon the Croſſe,Luke 23. 39. who no ſooner was
ſet into it, but he beares fruit in an inſtant: 1. Reprouing
his fellow theefe, for his ſinne in railing vpon
Chriſt. 2. Iuſtifying Chriſt, and pleading his innocencie;
giuing a good teſtimonie of him. 3. Condemning
himſelfe, acknowledging Gods righteouſneſſe in
laying that puniſhment vpon him. 4. Crauing mercy
and forgiueneſſe from his Sauiour, deſiring him to remember
him when he came into his kingdome: ſo
thou being ioyned vnto him, that is, raiſed from the
dead,Rom. 7. 4. 
               ſhalt bring forth fruit vnto God. Labour therefore
to be engrafted: The ordinarie meanes is the word
preached: for as in grafting, ſo here, God is the huſbandman;
Christ the ſtocke; Beleeuers the imps; the Spirit
the ſap; the word the ſawe; the Sacraments the ligatures:
As therefore without a knife or ſawe to open and
riue the ſtocke, and let in the imps, no man can graft;
ſo without the word no hope of this benefit. And this
that hath beene ſaid ouerthrowes a point of naturall and
Popiſh religion, viz. That a man may be iuſtified and ſaued
by his good workes, when by this that hath beene
ſaid, we ſee that good workes can only be the fruits of

perſons already iuſtified;Non praecedunt iuſtificandum, ſed ſequuntur iuſtificatum. Auguſt. and that which followes cannot
be the cauſe of that which went before. The fruit
cannot make the tree to be good, it doth only declare
and manifeſt that it is good, according to that ſpeech of
our Sauiour,Matth. 7. 
               The tree is knowne by his fruit.
            
            In the ſecond place, that thou maiſt be fruitfull, ſee 
thou plant thy ſelfe by the running brookes: Seat thy
ſelfe vnder a powerfull Miniſterie, that ſo thou maiſt be
partaker of thoſe waters,Ezek. 47. 12. which flow from vnder the
threſhold of the Sanctuarie. Water we know cauſeth
fruitfulneſſe, as drought doth famine. The inundations
of the riuer Nilus cauſed Aegypt to be ſo fruitfull: So
theſe ſpirituall waters will cauſe vs mightily to fructifie
and increaſe, and make vsIſay 44. 4. 
               ſpring vp as amongst the
graſſe, and as willow by the water courſes. Thus the
Church as it was planted in a fruitfull field; ſo was it
likewiſe placed byEzek. 17. 5. 
               great waters, inſomuch that it grew
and became a ſpreading vine. And the godly man being
planted by the riuers of waters,Pſal. 1. 3. 
               brought forth his
fruit in due ſeaſon. Is it then the true deſire of thy ſoule
to fructifie and bring forth fruit? See then that thou
frequent the Sanctuarie of the Lord.Iob 8. 11. 
               Can the ruſh grow
vp without mire? or can the flag grow vp without water?
Is it poſſible that thou ſhouldſt increaſe in grace and
goodneſſe, and yet neuer drinke of the waters of Shiloah?
It cannot be. If therefore thou haſt not in thy
owne fountaine, ſeeke to thy neighbours, and carry thy
pitcher with thee; for nothing can more dangerouſly
or vncomfortably be wanting to thy ſoule.
            Beſides, ſee thou labour for humilitie and tenderneſſe
               
               of heart. The ground which is hard and ſtonie is vnfit
for fruit, as our Sauiour hath manifeſted in that parable
of the ſeedLuke 8. 6.. For neither can the ſeed ſowen take any
root, neither will it drinke in the raine that the heart of
it might be moiſtned. It may be the outſide may be a
little waſhie, but it gets not in to prepare it to fruitfulneſſe.
Thus hardneſſe of heart keeps the ſoule dry and

barren. And ſurely here is the reaſon, why after ſo long
time of preaching, there doth ſo little fruit appeare:
Much water hath beene powred on vs, many a gratious
Sermon hath beene preached to vs, but what are we the
better? The inuincible hardneſſe of our hearts will not
ſuffer one drop of theſe heauenly deawes to ſinke into
our ſoules. How many handfuls of good ſeed doe Gods
Seeds-men daily caſt amongſt vs; and can they ſay with
Iſaac, that they haue reaped an hundred fold, as he did
in the land? Alas! So farre are they from ſeeing ſuch
an increaſe, as that they would be heart-glad of thirty;
nay of ten: Yea, let me tell you, many Miniſters would
be glad, if they could ſee their ſeed againe: and what
is the reaſon but this, that mens hearts are ſo ſtonie,
flintie? Labour then for greater tenderneſſe of heart,
if thou wouldſt bring forth more fruit in thy life; and
ſee thou retaine the waters,Heb. 6. 7. and drinke in the raine:
hold faſt what thou heareſt by conſcionable meditation.
            
                Fourthly, thou must beware of ouerſhadowing thy
heart by any ſinfull lust, whereby the warme beames
of the Sunne of righteouſneſſe is kept from it. Huſbandmen
haue euermore a great care of this, and will
not by any meanes endure to haue their young nurſeries
ouerſhadowed by any bough or tree; but ſo plant
them, as that they may enioy the benefit of the Sunne-beames:
for no ground or plant will euer proue good,
which hath not a fauourable aſpect from the heauens:
And thus our hearts are made fruitfull▪ by the heauens
anſwering the earth,Hoſ. 2. 21. as Hoſea ſpeaketh (though in
another ſenſe) I meane, when Chriſt the Sunne of righteouſneſſe
darteth the beames of his gratious countenance
and fauour vpon our ſoules; warming and cheriſhing
Pauls planting, and Apolloes watering, with the influence
of his grace: for without him we can doe nothing
Iohn 15. 5., nor haue any life in vs. And therefore beware
leſt through ſuperfluitie of luſts, or inordinate deſires;
               
through worldlineſſe and couetouſneſſe, or any other ſuch
like ſinne, thy ſoule be ſo ſhaded, as that this Sunne of
righteouſneſſe cannot ſhine vpon it, if thou wouldſt
grow fruitfull.
            Fiftly, a ſpeciall care must be had to the root, that that
               
               grow well, if we would bring forth fruit abundantly.
Now faith is that ſame radicall grace, which muſt eſpecially
be regarded: if that thriue not, no other grace
can proſper. Fooliſh then and prepoſterous is their care,
who ſeeke and ſtudie how to be laden with the other
fruits of Gods bleſſed Spirit, as with Loue, Ioy, Peace,
Long-ſuffering, Gentleneſſe, Goodneſſe, Meekneſſe, Temperance,
and the like, and yet neglect the looking to this
grace of faith. This is no otherwiſe (ſaith one
                  Wards Life of Faith.) than
if a man ſhould water all the branches of a tree, and not
the root.
            Sixtly and laſtly, we muſt be earneſt with the Lord, that
               
               he would make vs fruitfull, and giue vs wiſdome from
aboue,Iames 1. 5. 3. 17. which wiſdome, ſaith S. Iames, is full of good
fruits. Call vpon him earneſtly and frequently for grace:
and not only ſo, but withall ſeeke the prayers of Gods
Vine-dreſſers his Miniſters; and deſire them to be earneſt
with God for you, that you may be fruitfull: for
how euer this vngratefull world contemneth and deſpiſeth
theſe; yet the truth is, they can preuaile much
with GodLuke 13. 6, 7., and if they ſhould not oftentimes riſe vp
and ſtand in the gap, woe would be to thouſands for the
barrenneſſe of their liues.
            And thus I haue ſhewed you the way, how of barren
you may become fruitfull. If then any amongſt you,
that heare me this day, doe hereafter continue barren
and fruitleſſe, it muſt needs be becauſe they are wilfull,
or ſlothfull, or both: for put in practiſe what now you
haue been taught, and I dare paſſe my word and pawne
my credit, that in a ſhort time, the barrenneſt profeſſor
in this congregation, will bud, and bloſſome, and bring
forth fruit abundantly. For what ſhould hinder? Is

there any fault in the Husbandman to be found? Surely
no: for we haue heard it before proued, that he is no
way wanting, nor defectiue; and therefore cannot iuſtly
be charged with the barrenneſſe of any mans heart or
life, as hereafter ſhall be cleared. Where then lies the
fault? Is it in the ſtocke or root? No neither: for we
haue lately heard how liuely and full of iuyce it is; inſomuch
that whoſoeuer is ſet into it, doth incontinently
fructifie and bring forth fruit. If then there be any want,
it muſt be in thy ſelfe, in not vſing the meanes that hath
beene now preſcribed. Oh that men would now at
length be brought to looke about them; and ſuffer
themſelues to be ſo farre preuailed with, as to make
tryall of theſe meanes in vprightneſſe and ſinceritie of
heart. Conſider, I beſeech thee, with thy ſelfe, how
exceedingly hitherto thou haſt fruſtrated the Lords
hopes and expectations: as likewiſe in what a wofull
eſtate and condition thou haſt liued; and ſtill liueſt in,
whilſt thou art vnder that ſame curſe, that heauy curſe
which is neuer farre from thee,Luke 13. 
               Cut it downe, why cumbers
it the ground? Vrge therefore and preſſe thy ſoule
vnto this fruitfulneſſe, and in ſome good meaſure anſwer
the Lords hopes hereafter: and content not thy
ſelfe with ſhewes and leaues; but as a tree of righteouſneſſe,
do thou ſhew forth thy grapes, and figs, and ſweet
fruits, for that is it which God expects.
            But we are fruitfull members of the Church;Obiect. we
heare the word, receiue the Sacraments, and delight
therein: we keepe good orders in our families; ſpeake
againſt common abuſes; and reforme euils in our ſelues
and ours; what would you more?
            Yet ſomething may be wanting:Anſw. The fig tree had
leaues enow, and by▪ the flouriſhing greeneſſe ſeemed
to promiſe great ſtore of fruit; no wonder then,
if ſuch faire greene leaues as theſe cauſe many a ſoule to
deceiue himſelfe and others alſo; when alas all this, and
more than this, may be, and is, in many, who are like to

haue the doome that figge-tree had,Matth. 21. 19. 
               Neuer fruit grow on
thee more. And therefore before thou boaſteſt, ſee thy
fruits haue theſe properties.
            Firſt,Properties of good fruit. looke that the fruit thou boaſteſt of be proper
fruit: It muſt be thy owne, done by thy ſelfe; not by a
Deputie nor Atturney. Thus the godly man is compared 
to a tree that bringeth forthPſal. 1. 3. 
               her fruit in due ſeaſon.
It muſt not then be borrowed fruit (for ſo an heart as
ſtonie and barren as Cheapſide it ſelfe, may be made a far
richer garden than ſome of thoſe are where thoſe herbes
brought thither naturally grew.) The Papiſts indeed
would faine make vs to beleeue that if our owne lampes
be without oile, we may goe and borrow of our neighbours
to ſupply our wants: For holy men of God, ſay
the Rhemiſts
               Supererogatio quaſi ſuper id quod erogatur. Rhem. Annot. on Luke 10. 35. 2. Cor. 8. 14. 1 Cor. 9. 16., haue done not only that which they
ought to doe, but more than was required at their
hands: as for example, Iohn Baptiſt faſted more than
he was commanded; and Mary liued more ſtrictly
than ſhe was required: now theſe ſuperabundant works,
as a Church treaſurie, becommeth an aduantage to
others who are more defectiue; and indeed hang as it
were vpon the Popes tally, for who giues moſt. But
theſe workes of ſupererogation, are workes of ſuperarrogation:
our Sauiour hath taught vs this leſſon,Luke 17. 10. 
               When
we haue done all we can, we are but vnprofitable ſeruants.
And therefore let none build their hope vpon ſuch a
ſandy foundation as the good workes of others: another
mans meat cannot nouriſh me; another mans garment
cannot warme me; another mans eie cannot guide
me; neither can another mans workes ſaue me. You call
vpon your Miniſter to preach for himſelfe; vpon your
ſeruants to doe their worke for themſelues; and vpon
your Captaine to leade his company for himſelfe: and
therefore let me call vpon you to doe good duties by
your ſelues, and for your ſelues: Let not great men
thinke to goe to heauen by their Chaplaines, nor Wiues
by their Huſbands, nor Parents by their Children, nor

               ſeruants by their Maſters; by whom (vſually) they are
religious here, and thinke to be glorious hereafter. Let
me craue your patience a little in hearing a Storie, which
though in it ſelfe it be idle and fained, yet may be of
good vſe to ſet forth a truth vnfained: There was a certaine
man (ſaith the Legend) which would neuer goe
to Church himſelfe; but euer when he heard the Saints
bell ring, would ſay to his wife, Goe thou to Church and
pray for thee and me: one night he dreamt that both he &
his wife were dead, & that they knocked together at heauen
gate for entrance; Peter (being the imagined and
ſuppoſed Porter) lets in the wife, but keepes out the huſband,
Illa intrauit pro ſe, & 
                     ••
                  . telling him thus; She is entered in both for her ſelfe
& thee: For as ſhe went to Church for thee, ſo ſhe is gone to
heauen for thee: This is the Fable. The Morall is good,
and inſtructs euery one to haue a perſonality of faith,
and proprietie of fruit; that himſelfe ſeruing God, himſelfe
may be bleſſed of God: So willeth the Apoſtle,
Gal. 6. 4. 
               Haue reioicing in thy ſelfe alone, and not in another. It is
hisHab. 2. 4. owne faith the iuſt ſhall liue by; and a mans2 Cor. 5. 10. Luke 16. 2. owne
workes that he muſt giue an account of: For at the laſt
day the queſtion will not be, what hath he done? but,
what haſt thou done? And therefore let thy grand care
be to prouide an Anſwer to that Queſtion which will put
the greateſt part of the world to a Nonplus. See then that
thou preach for thy ſelf (if thou haue a calling thereunto)
pray for thy ſelfe, giue thankes for thy ſelfe, ſerue God for
thy ſelfe, and thus make the Prouerbe good (which otherwiſe
is deuilliſh) Euery man for himſelf, & God for al.
            
            And yet to auoid all ſcruples,Preuention. I would not ſo be vnderſtood,
as if we might not ioine with others in holy
duties; for that we may, yea muſt: or that we are not to
pray for others, or haue others pray for vs; for this
ought to be: only we are not to content our ſelues with
what is done by them, vnleſſe we ioine in heart, and
doe the like our ſelues: Neither doe I thinke it a thing
vnlawfull, but fitting, if a Samuel be in preſence, that

he ſhould performe theſe holy duties, be it in any family,
and bleſſe the meat be it at any mans table (for at
ſuch a time, the Lord and Maſter of that houſe or family
(how great ſoeuer) ſhould giue way) But as for
children to giue thankes at their Fathers board (except
in caſe before that they are Prophets) I thinke it not expedient.
Sure I am, Chriſt neuer put his Diſciples to it,
though they were men growne vp, and of ripe yeares,
but euer gaue thankes himſelfe. And therefore the practiſe
of many parents is too too childiſh, who make
their children their chaplaines; and if they be out of the
houſe, grace ſhall be out of the parlour, as if it were vnbeſeeming
their worthineſſe, to call vpon God for a
bleſſing vpon what they eat.
            Secondly, our fruit it muſt be kindly fruit: For no 
man gathereth grapes of thornes, nor figges of thiſtlesMatth. 7..
Good ground we know bringeth forth fruit of the ſame
kinde and nature, with the ſeed that it was ſowed withall;
and not tares when wheat was ſowne, nor cockle
when barley was caſt into the ground: Thus a Chriſtian
mans fruit muſt be, ſuch a conuerſation as may beſeeme
the Goſpell
               Phil. 1. 27.; thy fruits may not be fruits of the
fleſh, which are ſo rife, ſo ripe, yea rotten: No nor fruits
of ciuill righteouſneſſe, wherewith many content themſelues;
concluding they are trees of righteouſneſſe, becauſe
they pay euery man his owne, deale iuſtly, truly,
and ſo carry themſelues, as that no man can ſay blacke is
their eie; when notwithſtanding, they are void of all
true pietie and ſanctitie: No nor fruits of externall
profeſſion of Religion, or outward reformation. But
the fruit God expecteth from thee, muſt be kindly, reſembling
the Author, which is the Spirit of grace; and
that holy and pure ſeed which is the word of grace. Such
fruits as thoſe reckoned vp by the ApoſtleGal. 5. 22, 23., Loue, Ioy,
Peace, Long-ſuffering, Gentleneſſe, Goodneſſe, Faith, &c.
other fruits than theſe, or the like to theſe, beſeeme not
Chriſtians:Epheſ. 5. 3, 4. 
               As for fornication, vncleanneſſe, couetouſneſſe,

let it not be once named amongst you (ſaith the ſame Apoſtle)
as becommeth Saints: Neither filthineſſe, nor fooliſh
talking, nor ieſting, which are not conuenient. If it becommeth
not a Saint once to name theſe things; much
leſſe to beare them and bring them forth. Muddie water
is leſſe offenſiue in a puddle than in a fountaine: Brambles
and briars doe a great deale better in a hedge or
thicket than in a garden knot: Let one worldling doe
as another worldling does; but let no worldlings practice
be a preſident to thee. What if my Lady Ieſabel
and other gentlewomen in Court and Citie haue ſuch a
complexion, ſuch haire, not as God hath made, but as
the deuill hath beene the dyer of (Non quos Deus feeit, ſed quos diabolus infecit. Cypri. as one of the Ancient
ſpeaketh) what if they diſguiſe themſelues like
harlots, more like than attiring themſelues as chaſte Matrons?
what is that to thee? And what if many (it may
be the greateſt in your countrie, Maſter Iuſtice, or thy
Land-lord) will drinke till they be drunken; ſweare,
lye, and breake Gods Sabbaths? wilt thou imitate and
follow them in their lewdneſſe? It beſeemes thee not:
learne more manners than to doe as ſuch great ones
doe. The conſideration of whom I am ſhould teach me
what a one I ſhould be. Thinke then thus with thy ſelfe;
I am a tree of righteouſneſſe; a branch of the true Vine;
the planting of the Lord, whoſe heart hath beene ſowed
with pure ſeed; and ſhall I bring forth ſuch fruit?
will ſuch workes become me? Good Nehemiah
               Nehem. 6. 11. being
perſwaded to flie and ſaue his life, would not, but
ſaid to him that perſwaded him vnto it, Should ſuch
a man as I flie? and who is there that being as I am
would goe into the Temple to ſaue his life? I will not goe
in:
               Verſ 9. 
               Now therefore O God ſtrengthen my hands. So ſay
thou when thou art entiſed vnto lewdneſſe; Should
ſuch a one as I doe thus? Shall I ſweare, ſwagger, drinke
to be drunke, or the like? I will not doe it: For who is
there being as I am; what heart hauing been ſowed with
ſuch ſeed as mine hath beene, would bring forth ſuch

fruit ſo vnanſwerable thereunto? Now therefore O Lord
ſtrengthen my hands; giue grace to withſtand, for I will
not doe thus.
            Thirdly, our fruit if acceptable, muſt be timely and
               
               ſeaſonable. This is a commendable property in our
grounds, trees, plants, that they bring forth their fruit
in due ſeaſon, as it is ſaid of that tree which was planted
by the riuers of waterPſal. 1. 3., whereto the godly bleſſed man
was reſembled. If our corne ſhould not eare vntill harueſt
was paſt; nor our trees bud vntill after Midſummer;
men might looke to haue but ſmall ſtore of
fruit, and to reape but a ſorrie and ſlender crop. Thus
the grace of our fruit is the ſeaſonableneſſe of it. God
himſelfe for our example hathEccleſ. 3. 1. an appointed time and
fit ſeaſon for all his workes.
            But is any time vnſeaſonable for the bringing forth
of fruit?Queſt.
            
            I anſwer,Anſwer. Yes: A good worke may be vnſeaſonable,
as well as fiſh or fleſh. For the clearing this wee are
to know, there is a difference of good things to bee
performed by vs: Some good things are as continuall
acts to be performed by all perſons, at all times, and in
all places; from the doing whereof no part of our life
is exempted, becauſe they reach to all times of this life
(and yet only to this life.) As for example, the exerciſe of
Faith, Repentance, Mortification, Amendment of life,
working out our ſaluation with feare and trembling, ſeeking
reconciliation with God (and ſuch like;) theſe are
daily and hourely to be performed by euery of vs: and
yet for theſe there are ſometimes and ſeaſons more fit,
(though all be fit) wherein if they be done they will
be more acceptable: As to repent in the day of our
youth, and to remember our Creator before our old
yeeres comeEccleſ. 12. 1.. Who will not confeſſe that young age
is a fitter time to learne the Horne-booke or Primmer in,
than old? yet it is better for a man of three ſcore to
learne his A. B. C. than die a dunſe: ſo for repentance.

God takes no delight to pledge the deuill, and drinke
thoſe ſnuffes and dregs that he hath left.
            Other good duties we are bound to doe, that reach
not to all times and places, but are limited to ſome particular
place, time, and ſeaſon. As hearing, reading, ſet
and ſolemne Prayer, Singing, Conference, Almes-deeds,
and the like: and theſe are they that may vnſeaſonably
be performed. Take an inſtance. In time of publike exerciſe
while the Miniſter is preaching, here is not fit time
for any perſon to fall a praying, otherwiſe than by eiaculation
or lifting vp the ſoule to God: for hee is now
Gods mouth, and by him the Lord is ſpeaking vnto vs;
now it is no point of good manners to ſpeake to our
betters before they haue made an end of ſpeaking. And
ſo while the Miniſter is praying, for a man then to fall a
reading is vnſeaſonable: for he is now the voice of the
people to the Lord, and all muſt ioyne with the congregation
in that dutie. And let not this ſeeme ſtrange to
any: for it is an old policie that the deuill hath, to iuſtle
out a greater good by a leſſe. He can be well content,
that we ſhould doe duties for matter good, ſo we diſhonour
God in the ſinfull manner of performance of them.
Neither let any thinke I ſpeake againſt theſe duties (for
my deſire is that men would pray more, reade oftner,
&c.) but only againſt the vnſeaſonableneſſe in the performance
of them, which maketh our beſt ſeruice in
Gods eſteeme, no better than the ſacrifice of fooles
               Eccleſ. 5. 1..
Wiſely then obſerue thy time, and bring forth fruit in
the right Quando, in the due ſeaſon: For know it for
a truth, all duties done vnſeaſonably are hopeleſſe,
fruitleſſe.
            
            
                Fourthly, our fruit muſt be ripe fruit, if commendable.
Would a husbandman reſpect that tree which euery
yeare doth bud and bloſſome (like many of our outlandiſh
plants) but neuer bring any fruit to its perfection?
And yet if haply he ſhould delight in it and nouriſh
it in his Orchard, becauſe of the ſweetneſſe of the bloſſome,

or faireneſſe of the leafe, or flower, which may
yeeld a comfortable ſhade in the heat of Summer: yet
God will neuer. He knowes not how to intreat ſuch
whoſe goodneſſe is but as the morning dew
               Hoſ. 6. 4., and whoſe
righteouſneſſe is but as a cake not turned
               7. 8.: who haue ſome
good purpoſes and motions in their minds, and ſo
begin to bloſſome; but within a ſhort ſpace ſuffer all to
fade. See then thou bring thy actions to perfection; let
thy reſolutions bee brought to execution, and ſuffer
them not to periſh like an abortiue birth. Thou haſt a
purpoſe to leaue thy vngodly courſe of life and ſinfull
trade, and take a new courſe, &c. Thou bloſſomeſt very
faire, what a pitty is it if the froſt ſhould nip theſe in the
head?
            Many make their purpoſes like our Eeues, and their
performances like our Holy-daies: Seruants worke hard
vpon the one, that they may haue the more liberty to
play vpon the other: So doe they labour hard vpon
their purpoſes, but are idle and play vpon their performances.
But purpoſe without performance is like a
Cloud without Raine; and not vnlike to Hereules club
in the tragedie, of a great bulke, but the ſtuffing is moſſe
and rubbiſh. Would ſuch bloſſomes bring a man to heauen,
Baalam and many other wicked wretches (who
are now in torments) would haue gotten thither long
agoe. The fiue fooliſh Virgins intended to goe in
with the bridegroome; but before the time their lights
dropt out. If a bare Intention would ſerue the turne,
Gods Church on earth would be fuller of Saints, and his
Court in heauen fuller of Soules. Good motions and
reſolutions are to be reſpected, but thou muſt vp and be
doing, elſe God diſtaſts them.
            A fift property of good fruit is vniuerſalitie; It muſt 
beEſay 27. 9. 
               All fruit, as Iſaiah ſpeaketh: fruits of the firſt and
ſecond table; of holineſſe towards God, and righteouſneſſe
towards man; for what God hath ioyned may
not be diuorced. Particulars were infinite. Fruits inward;
               
as, good Thoughts, motions, purpoſes: good Deſires,
longings, faintings after God and his graces: good
Affections; as Loue, Ioy, Feare, Sorrow, Patience,
Compaſſion, &c. Fruits outward, as, Good words; ſauourie
ſpeech, pure and wholeſome language: And
good workes; ſuch as we are bound to performe within
the compaſſe of our calling, whether Generall or Speciall.
In a word,Phil. 4. 8. 
               Whatſoeuer things are honeſt, whatſoeuer
things are true, whatſoeuer things are iuſt, whatſoeuer
things are pure, whatſoeuer things are louely, whatſoeuer
things are of good report; thoſe things muſt we thinke on to
doe: and as Mary ſaid to the ſeruants,John 2. 5. 
               Whatſoeuer hee
ſaith doe it, ſo ſay I, Whatſoeuer the Lord commands
that muſt be done: wee may not picke and chuſe, and
doe what beſt likes vs, but as once Iſrael ſaid, ſo muſt
we alwaies,Exod. 19. 8. & 24. 3. 7. 
               Whatſoeuer the Lord commandeth that will
we doe. True it is, many points of our Maſters will wee
know not; but our deſire muſt be to know: And many
things we doe not; but our deſire muſt bee to doe: for
our obedience muſt reach to Gods whole reuealed will.
Euery Chriſtian duty thou muſt make account belongs
to thee as well as to any other: and therefore as a man
that is to plant an Orchard, will be ſure to get of euery
good fruit ſome: ſo, doe not heare of any fruit that good
is, but carry it home and ſet thy heart therewith. Memorable
was the practiſe of bleſſed Bradford: (who was
content to ſacrifice his life in Gods cauſe)See Maſter Sampſons Preface to Bradfords Sermon of repentance. He vſed to
make vnto himſelfe a Iournall or day-booke wherein he
vſed to ſet downe all ſuch notable things as either hee
did ſee or heare each day that paſſed: If he did heare or
ſee any good in any man, by that ſight he found and
noted the want thereof in himſelfe, and added a ſhort
prayer wherein hee craued grace and mercy that hee
might amend: If he did heare or ſee any plague or
miſery, hee noted it as a thing procured by his owne
ſinnes, and ſtill added, Lord haue mercie vpon me.
Oh that wee would tread in this Saints ſteps! how

much more fruitfull ſhould we then bee, than now
wee are?
            Laſtly, our fruit muſt bee conſtant fruit. Conſtancy 
crownes all. Thus it is ſaid of the bleſſed ground,Luke 8▪ 15. 
               It
bringeth forth fruit with patience. And herein wee may
not bee like to other trees, wihch grow barren with
their age; but we muſt bring forth fruit in our old age
Pſal. 92. 14. and continue fat and flouriſhing: nay not ſo much as a
leafe muſt fade or failePſal. 1. 3.: there muſt not be any appearance
of being out of the ſtate of graceHeb. 4. 1.: none of vs
muſt ſeeme to be depriued or come ſhort of entering into
Gods reſt. Alas for ſuch! who haue left bearing, yea
loſt their very leaues and ſhewes of profeſſion, which
formerly they haue made; being now worſe than that
curſed fig-tree which was greene: what hope haue theſe,
who come ſhort of thoſe that come ſhort of heauen?
Shall the former fruitfulneſſe of ſuch profeſſors be regarded,
or rewarded? Surely no;Ezek. 18. 24. 
               All their righteouſneſſe
which they haue done, ſhall neuer be mentioned, but in their
treſpaſſe that they haue treſpaſſed and in their ſinne that
they haue ſinned, in them they ſhall die. And if euery man
ſhall receiue according to his fruits; then ſuch ſhall one
day feed vpon the bitter fruit of their Apoſtacie and
Back-ſliding; and finde how bitter a thing it is to forſake
the Lord; and feele what they will not now be brought
to beleeue;2 Pet. 2. 21. 
               That it had beene better for them neuer to
haue knowne the way of truth, than thus to haue departed
from the holy commandement. Looke then thou walke
not in a good courſe for a fit, but bee conſtant to the
death,Reuel. 2. 10. and ſo receiue the crowne of life: ForRom. 2. 7. 
               glory and
immortalitie is the part and portion only of ſuch as by
conſtancie in well-doing ſeeke it. To you
               Luke 22. 24. (ſaith our Sauiour)
which haue continued with mee in tentations, haue
I appointed a kingdome, as my Father hath appointed me
a kingdome.
            
            And thus we haue ſeene what is neceſſarily required,
that our fruit may be acceptable and pleaſing vnto God.

Now then thou that braggeſt of thy faithfulneſſe and
fruitfulneſſe, tell me, dareſt thou abide the triall? Why
then anſwer me to theſe Interrogatories which I propound
vnto thee: Is thy fruit thy owne▪
                Is it done by
thy owne ſelfe, and in thy owne perſon? Doſt thou reſt
and rely vpon thy owne faith, and liue by it, and by no
mans elſe? Againe tell me, is thy fruit kindly, anſwerable
to the good ſeed that hath oftentimes beene caſt
into thy heart, and beſeeming the ſtocke wherein thou
ſaiſt thou art engrafted? Is not ſwearing, lying, cogging,
and diſſembling, and ſuch ſtinking fruit as this,
the fruit thou beareſt? I demand againe, doſt thou obſerue
the time and ſeaſon; not contenting thy ſelfe in
doing good for matter, vnleſſe alſo thou doe it then
when God may haue moſt glory by the doing of it?
Anſwer me yet further; Doſt thou labour that thy fruit
may come to ſome perfection? Not reſting thy ſelfe in
this, that thou bloomeſt, bloſſommeſt, but ſtill art ſtriuing
that euery bud may bee brought to maturity and
ripeneſſe? Beſides all this, doſt thou truly and vnfainedly
deſire and endeuour to bee fruitfull in all good
workes, making no exceptions, like a lazie ſeruant,
at any of Gods Commands, ſeeme they neuer ſo
hard or harſh, ſo meane or baſe? And laſtly, tell mee,
doſt thou continue conſtant in bearing fruit, not giuing
ouer in the yeere of drought? but euen then continueſt
freſh and flouriſhing? What anſwereſt thou? Canſt
thou ſtand out this triall? And doth thy conſcience witneſſe
that theſe things are ſo? Why then indeed thou
art a fruitfull branch, and haſt whereof to reioice, in as
much as thou beareſt fruit to God; who doth ſo accept
it, that he will reward it.Hebr. 6. 7. 
               For the earth that drinketh
in the raine that commeth oft vpon it, and bringeth forth
hearbs meet for him by whom it is dreſſed, receiueth bleſſing
from God. But if thou findeſt it otherwiſe with
thee, and art not able to endure the triall, then let mee
tell thee; Thou deludeſt thy owne ſoule, in thinking

that thy leaues and ſhewes, will, or can, anſwer Gods
hopes and expectations: neither canſt thou comfort
thy ſelfe in thy eſtate, for it is wretched, fearefull: All
ſuch barren, or rather euill-fruited ground, isVerſ. 8. 
               nigh
vnto curſing, whoſe end is to be burned.
            
            And ſo I am fallen into a vſe of Reprehenſion of thouſand
thouſands in the world,Vſe. 2. who fruſtrate the Lords
hopes, and neuer thinke of making any returne vnto
the Lord for his many mercies; reſting onely in the
meanes of fruitfulneſſe, thinking that enough. What
abundance of dead ground is there in the world, which
brings forth iuſt nothing? They thinke it will proue
ſomewhat a troubleſome iourney to goe towards heauen,
and therefore they ſit them downe, and fall faſt
aſleepe. Let theſe idle wretches know, that though
they ſleepe out their time, their2 Pet. 2. 3. 
               damnation ſleepe not.
And what abundance of ground is there, that for all
Gods care and paines, returne but leaues, which are as
good as nothing? Numbers of carnall goſpellers, who
content themſelues with the forme of godlineſſe, denying
the power thereof; boaſting much of this, that
they are harmeleſſe men, and no drunkards, whoremaſters,
theeues, vſurers, extortioners, and the like.
All this is well; and I would to God, all you that heare
me this day could ſo boaſt Oh! how would it beautifie
this Aſſembly? But all this is not enough. Negatiue
Diuinitie and Chriſtianitic which is ſo riſe, and
growes almoſt in euery hedge, is not the fruit that muſt
anſwer Gods hopes. The ParableMatth. 25. dams the euill ſeruant,
for not doing good with his talent, though hee
miſ-ſpent it not: and Diues for not helping Lazarus,
though hee hurt him not. It is not enough that thou
canſt ſay, I bring forth no euill fruit, I beare faire leaues,
&c. For thou deceiueſt Gods expectation, if thou
bringeſt forth no good; and what euer thou thinkeſt
of thy ſelfe, or others thinke of thee, thou canſt not
eſcape the fire: ForMatth. 3. 10. 
               Euery tree that bringeth not

forth good fruit, is hewen downe and caſt into the fire.
And therefore, be more wiſe than to truſt to theſe faire
leaues and ſhewes, wherewith thou art richly decked,
and makeſt a goodly ſhew, as the figge-tree did; for
they cannot ſaue thee from the curſe. And yet a worſe
kinde of ground than either of theſe. Such ground as
my Text ſpeakes of, which in ſtead of grapes brings
forth wilde grapes; that brings forth hedge fruit like
the Heathen, nay not ſo good, but like thoſe figges the
Prophet Ieremie ſpeaketh of: They are euill, very euill,
they cannot be eaten they are ſo euill.
               Deut. 32. 32. 
               Their grapes are
grapes of gall, their cluſters are bitter. Their wine is the
poiſon of Dragons, and the cruell venome of Aſpes. O
Beloued I weigh it; if barrenneſſe and leaues will not,
cannot eſcape the axe and fire, how ſhall the euill-fruited
tree? If the barren Vine fare ſo bad, the wilde
Vine muſt fare farre worſe. What hell, and how many
torments, are prepared for oppreſſing Diues, when Diues
that but denied his owne, ſhall bee ſo tortured and
tormented in endleſſe flames? Shall he that giues not,
wring his hands? then certainly hee that takes away,
ſhall rend his heart.Matth. 24. 38. 
               The old world did but eat and
drinke, plant and build, mary and be merry, (things
lawfull in themſelues) and yet were ſwept away with
the beſome of deſtruction: And ſhall we thinke, that
liers, ſwearers, whoremongers, malicious, monſtrous,
ſcandalous, offenders, (whoſe workes are in themſelues
ſimply vnlawfull) will euer eſcape vnpuniſhed?
Certainly, if omiſſion of good workes be whipped with
rods, commiſſion of impieties ſhall bee ſcourged with
Scorpions. At the hands of theſe, and euery one of
theſe, will the Lord of the Vineyard require fruit, and
iudge them according to their workes.
            And now before I leaue this point,
                  Ʋſe 3. let mee giue a
word of comfort, to all ſuch as finde themſelues ſo qualified
in ſome good meaſure, as is neceſſarily required
he ſhould bee, whoſe fruit God accepteth, (as wee haue

before ſhewed.) Howeuer theſe haue in them many
weakneſſes and corruptions, yet allowing and maintaining none, let them aſſure, and ſecure themſelues,
againſt all the feares of their owne hearts, and cauils of
Satan, or this wicked world, that they are truly fruitfull,
and in ſome good meaſure anſwer the Lords hopes
and expectation. The husbandman (as we ſee) though
hee receiue not a crop of an hundred fold, yet hee will
thinke it well, and count his ground for good, and his
labour well beſtowed, if he might receiue ſixty or thirty
fold: So though wee be not the beſt ground, yet wee
may be good ground; as he may be a good ſeruant, that
is not beſt of all. And it is not good ground that is reiected:
it is onely the bad and barren, that God accepteth
notHebr. 6. 7.. Let not then the littleneſſe of thy fruit diſcourage
thee, though it humble thee. It is not, How
much, but, How good, that God doth eſpecially regard.
We ſee the fruitfulleſt tree that groweth, loſeth many
of her buds and bloſſomes; ſome are ſmitten with
blaſting; ſome are nipped with froſts, and bitten with
the cold and dry Eaſt-winde; and ſome againe are eaten
vp with wormes and caterpillers; and if the tithe thereof
come to perfection, wee thinke it well. Thus our
buds and bloſſomes, holy purpoſes and reſolutions often
periſh, ſometimes in the very thought, and goe no
further; ſometimes they come to words; we talke and
tell what our purpoſe is, and there it reſts: much adoe
there is to bring them into workes; the Deuill, the
world, and fleſh, ſo nip vs with their temptations; and
if we (when wee haue done all wee can) can ſaue the
tithe, nay the tithe of the tithe of our reſolutions, and
bring them to execution, wee haue done well. Looke
more therefore to the quality than to the quantity of
thy fruit, (though looke to both) and ſee it bee not
counterfait nor fained; let that bee thy chiefeſt care:
that as men ſay of their plums, and peares, &c. Here is
but little, but it is good; I haue not many of them, but

them that be are very dainty, they are right of ſuch and
ſuch a kinde, I dare aſſure you: So thou maiſt ſay of thy
Faith, Repentance, and Obedience; Though it be very
little, and not ſo much as I could wiſh it were, yet I
aſſure my ſelfe it is of the right kinde, true and good,
what is of it: And then aſſure thy ſelfe, to thy endleſſe
comfort and more cheerefull vndergoing of holy duties,
that thou art a fruitfull Chriſtian, and ſhalt euery
day grow fruitfuller than other.Eccleſ. 9. 7. 
               Goe then and eat
thy bread with ioy, and drinke thy wine with a cheerefull
heart, for God accepteth of thy workes.
            
            
               And it brought forth wilde grapes.]
               Text. This was the returne
it made to God for all his coſt and paines. He doth
not ſay it was barren and brought forth no grapes, (for
that had beene more tolerable) but it was fruitfull: It
brought forth; but what? wilde grapes, ſaith the Text:
ſuch grapes as we finde after mentioned in this Chapter
by the Prophet; Iniustice, Oppreſſion, Couetouſneſſe, Auarice,
and the like; which fruit was loathſome and vnſauoury
to Gods ſmell and taſte, and nothing anſwerable
to the kinde and nature of the root.
            Here then we haue taxed in them, a reall, actuall, ſenſuall,
ſenſeleſſe ingratitude and vnthankefulneſſe. And
yet this doth not ſufficiently expreſſe it; it goeth a degree
beyond it. Meere ingratitude returnes nothing for
good; but here wee haue euill returned for good: and
therefore we may rather call it a contumacious and contumelious
retribution.
            
            Thus the wicked anſwer heauens kindneſſe with an vngratefull
wickedneſſe:
               
                  Doct. The wicked make an vngratefull returne to God for his ſauours. for many bleſſings which they
haue from God receiued, they returne horrible, and
more than brutiſh ingratitude.
            
               Great and many were the fauours which this people
had receiued from God; for he choſe them (ſaith Moſes)Deut. 32. 10-18 for his owne inheritance: he kept them in the wilderneſſe
as the apple of his eye: hee bore them on his
wings, as the Eagle her young ones: he fed them with the

beſt, and gaue them plentie of all things; hony out of the
rocke, and oyle out of the flinty rocke: butter of kine, milke
of ſheepe, fat of lambes, and rammes of the breed of Baſhan,
and goats, with the fat of kidneyes of wheat: yea, they did
drinke the pure bloud of the grape. But Ieſu run waxed ſat
and kicked: when he was waxen fat, and growen thicke,
and couered with fatneſſe, then he forſooke God that made
him, and lightly eſteemed the rocke of his ſaluation. They
prouoked him to iealouſie with ſtrange gods; with abominations
prouoked they him to anger. They ſacrificed to Deuils,
and not to God: to gods whom they knew not, to new
gods that came newly vp, whom their Fathers feared not,
Hence was that complaint which the Prophet made;
               
                  Ʋerſe 6. Doe yee thus requite the Lord, O fooliſh people and vnwiſe?
The like complaint makes God himſelfe in the
firſt Chapter of this Propheſie,
               Iſay 1. 2, 3, 4. Heare O Heauens,
and giue eare O Earth, for the Lord hath ſpoken: I haue
nouriſhed and brought vp children, and they haue rebelled
againſt me. The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Aſſe his
maſters crib: But Iſrael doth not know, my people doth not
conſider. Ah ſinfull Nation, a people laden with iniquitie,
a ſeed of euill doers, children that are corrupters: they
haue forſaken the Lord, they haue prouoked the holy one of
Iſrael to anger, they are gone away backward. O piercing
words! woe vnto ſuch as occaſion God thus to complaine.
            
            Beware we then;
                  Ʋſe. oh! beware wee of it. Be not ſo
vngratefull, as to conceale the many fauours thou haſt
receiued from the Lord; and much leſſe ſo vnthankfull,
as to make ſo wicked a retribution. To returne euill for
euill, and that to man, is damnable; but to returne euill
for good receiued, is farre more inexcuſable. If it be
thus betweene man and man, then is the caſe more grieuous
betweene God and vs. How doe we prouoke him
euery day? yet he to winne vs, beſtowes abundance of
bleſſings on vs; giuing vs life, health, food, raiment,
libertie, peace, plentie, comfortable ſeaſons, &c. But

the more he followeth vs with his fauours, the further
are we off: the more he ladeth vs with his bleſſings, the
more we oppreſſe him with our ſinnes: and the better
he is to vs, the worſe we be to him; like Springs of water,
which are then coldeſt, when the Sunne is hotteſt;
and like the Thracian flint, whereof I haue read, that it
burnes with water, and is quenched with oyle: or like
the nature of that Countrey,Siccitas dat lutum, imbres puluerem. Plin. (which if true, is wonderfull)
wherein a great drought and heat makes abundance
of mire and dirt; but ſtore of raine cauſeth duſt:
So is it with vs; experience makes it good: The plentifull
ſhowers of Gods bleſſings rained downe vpon vs,
is anſwered with the duſtie and ſandie barrenneſſe of
our liues: The ſweet dewes of Hermon haue made the
hill of Sion more barren. Oh! how inexcuſable ſhall
we be? How can ſuch a generation as this eſcape the
damnation of hell? Needs moſt we periſh and be conſumed
in the indignation of the Lord, if we amend not.
            And let this be a ground of patience to vs,Vſe 2. when we
haue vnkindneſſe returned, for kindneſſe ſhewed. They
rewarded me euill for good (ſaith Dauid)
               Pſal 35. 12. 
               to the ſpoiling
of my ſoule. Well Dauid be content, for the like meaſure
God himſelfe hath found, and daily doth finde at
the hands of ſinfull men, and the ſeruant muſt not think
to fare better than his Lord and Maſter.
            Againe,Doct. The wicked diuert the means of their ſaluation to their confuſion. obſerue we hence, how The wicked diuert the
meanes of their ſaluation to their confuſion. God plants
and ſets, prunes and waters, to make this Vineyard
fruitfull; and this his paines engenders nothing in their
wicked hearts but noyſome and ſtenchfull fruits. Inſtead
of grapes, they bring forth wilde grapes.
            
            Thus the Goſpell was giuen for the bringing of men
to Chriſt, and therefore the Apoſtle cals itR
                     ••
                  . 1. 16. 
               The power
of God to ſaluation: and yet it is found to be to ſome2 Cor. 2. 16. 
               a
ſauour of death vnto death, and a ſwift furtherer of their
perdition. So the Sacraments were ordained (in their
true and proper vſe) as a meanes to increaſe faith: But

the matter by many is ſo handled, that they ſerue for no
other end than to increaſe their1 Cor. 11. 29. iudgement: yea Chriſt
himſelfe, who was laid in
               1 Pet. 2. 6. 
               Sion as a chiefe corner ſtone
elect and pretious, on whom whoſoeuer beleeueth ſhall
neuer be confounded, becomesVerſe 8. 1 Cor. 1. 23. a ſtone of ſtumbling,
and a rocke of offence to diſobedient ones. And thus
is it with euery other good bleſſing and ordinance of
God.
            For as it fares with him that hath a ſurfetted ſtomack,Reaſon.
the more good meat he eats, the more he increaſeth his
corruption: (the former crudities vndigeſted hauing
the greater force, turne the good nutriment into themſelues:)
ſo is it with the wicked, whoſe hearts are full of
poiſonfull corruption, and ſurfetted with ſinne; and ſo
Tit. 1. 16. corrupt euery thing that they haue or doe receiue.
Yea, ſuch an Antipathie there is betwixt Gods grace and
mans bad heart, that the more it wraſtles with him, to
bring him to ſaluation, the more he wraſtles againſt it
for his owne confuſion.
            Hence then we may take notice,Vſe 1. firſt, of the poiſonfull
nature of ſinne, which corrupteth and altereth the
nature of all things, be they neuer ſo good, ſo excellent;
making that hurtfull, which in it ſelfe is healthfull.
Chriſt, the Word, the Sacraments, the Creatures, yea
God himſelfe, are by it made occaſions of euill. Yea
looke as Gods wiſdome and goodneſſe can draw good
out of the greateſt euill (as out of mans fall, Iudas his
treaſon, the Iewes abiection, &c.) So mans ſinne can
draw euill out of the greateſt good, and make it hurtfull
and pernitious to his ſoule: Should wee not then hate
it and abhorre it?
            And ſecondly, of the wretched eſtate of the ſinner,
who is poiſoned by ſinne. Needs muſt his condition be
fearefull, who brings ſwift damnation on himſelfe, not
only by foule groſſe ſinnes, but euen by the moſt holy
things of God, as the wicked doth: For asRom. 8. 28. 
               all things
worke together for the beſt vnto them that loue God, euen

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
to them that are called of his purpoſe (as witneſſeth the
Apoſtle:) So by a rule of contraries, to them who are
vnregenerated, all things worke together for the worſt.
They corrupt all things, they defile all things. Their
tongues are Adders ſpeares, their lips are inſtruments of
guile, their hands worke iniquitie, and their feet are
ſwift to the ſhedding of bloud. Their wits they abuſe
to cauill with; their wealth to oppreſſe; their ſtrength
to ſteale; their friends to bolſter them out in all: with
their knowledge they beguile and deceiue the ſimple
and vnſtable ſoule. The Scripture they make a couer
for their prophaneneſſe; for when they be eſpied or reproued,
they will tell you they doe no more than what
they can iuſtifie by holy warrant. Their mariage they
abuſe for luſt, their children for couetouſneſſe, the day
for open euill, and the night for ſecret ſhame. How neere
muſt their damnation be, when euery thing doth further
it? Euery word, euery action, yea euery thought doth
haſten it. Oh! the miſery of the wicked, who in the
top of their happineſſe, and in the midſt of their ſtore
and plentie are haſtening to death, to Hell.
            
            Againe,
                  Ʋſe 2. let this admoniſh vs, not to content our ſelues
with the enioyment of things, in themſelues good, vnleſſe
we haue a ſanctified vſe thereof. And ſurely herein
many doe delude themſelues in thinking all is well, and
they are the bleſſed of the Lord, in that they haue ſo
many good things, and ſuch plenty of Gods good bleſſings
ſhowred downe vpon their Tabernacles; when
alas! (as we haue ſeene) many haue as much, whoſe
               Rom. 11. 10. 
               table
becomes a ſnare vnto them, and their proſperitie their
ruine. Doe not then content thy ſelfe in the ſimple enioyment
of things good, vnleſſe they be good to thee:
Better be as poore as Lazarus, than with Diues to haue
much wealth, and haue no grace to vſe it.Eccleſ. 7. 11. 
               Wiſdome is
good (ſaith wiſe King Solomon) with an inheritance; but
an inheritance without wiſdome is paſſing hurtfull.
            Laſtly,
                  Ʋſe 3. learne that the meanes which God affordeth

for mans good, ſhall neuer returne in vaine: for if they
further not mans ſaluation, they will haſten his deſtruction
and confuſion. If wee will not be the better for
his mercies, we ſhall be a great deale worſe: Some effect
will follow thereupon; if they produce not ſweet
grapes, they will ſowre. ForEſay 55. 10, 11. 
               as the raine commeth
downe, and the ſnow from heauen, and returneth not thither,
but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth
and bud, that it may giue ſeed to the ſower, and bread vnto
the eater: So ſhall my word be that goeth forth out of
my mouth; it ſhall not returne vnto me void, but it ſhall
accompliſh that which I pleaſe, and it ſhall proſper in the
thing whereto I ſent it (ſaith the Lord.) The preaching
of Gods word (and all other of his ordinances) is ſuch
phyſicke as will either cure or kill; none euer heard the
one, or vſed the other, but was thereby made either
much better or much worſe; they became either more
barren or more fruitfull. The Word in Scripture is called
Hebr. 4. 12. 
               a two edged ſword, that cuts both waies; it is either
a conuerting or a conuincing power: A ſauour it hath
to all, either of death or life. And looke as fire hath a
double operation vpon the ſeuerall ſubiects it workes
vpon; it fires ſtubble, but refines the gold: So hath the
Word; ſome hearts (as we haue heard) it enflames with
zeale and loue vnto it; other hearts it ſets on fire to perſecute
and moleſt it, and the bringers of it. At one Sermon
Act. 13. 7, 8. 
               Sergius Paulus was conuerted, and Elimas obdurated:
at another SermonAct. 17. 4, 5. 
               ſome beleeued, and ſome
beleeued not. And vpon our Sauiours preaching we may
reade howIohn 6. 66. ſome went backe, and walked no more with
him; but others ſtuck more faſt & cloſe vnto him, knowing
full well that he had the
                  Ʋerſe 68. 
               words of eternall life, and
therefore whither ſhould they goe? Thus is it to conuerſion,
if beleeued; to confuſion, if deſpiſed. How ſhould
this ſtirre vs vp to a zealous preparation before wee
come to the houſe of God? Wee returne not to our
owne homes as we came from thence, but wee are one

ſtep neerer to heauen or to hell. Oh! what a griefe and
heart-breake will it be vnto thee at the laſt day, to ſee
many who haue heard the Word with thee, beene of the
ſame Pariſh, vnder the ſame Miniſtery, ſate in the ſame
ſtoole; to be receiued into heauen, becauſe they beleeued
and repented; and thou thy ſelfe thruſt downe to
hell, for thy infidelitie and hard-heartedneſſe? Looke
therfore well about thee, and regard the means.Exod. 4. 3. When
Moſes threw the Rod out of his hand, it became a Serpent;
but when he laid hold of it, and tooke it to him,
it became that Rod wherewith he wrought thoſe many
and mighty miracles. Thus if thou caſteſt the word thou
heareſt from thee, looke to finde it as a Serpent that will
ſting thee to the heart; but lay hold of it, and take it
vp, obey it, and apply it, and thou ſhalt haue the great
worke of thy ſaluation wrought thereby.
            Before we leaue this verſe, one thing more I would
haue obſerued: The fruit that it brought forth is ſaid to
be wilde fruit. The word (as was before noted) ſignifieth

                  Baaſchim, Vuas putridas, ſeu foetidas. Moller. in loc. Acerbas ac inſuaues. Vatab. ſuch a kind of fruit, which in ſmell is moſt odious
and ſtinking; and in taſte moſt loathſome and vnſauourie.
And this teacheth vs thus much:
            
               The fruit of diſobedience and ſinne is a ſtinking and vnſauourie
fruit.
               Doctr. The fruit of diſobedience is a wilde and ſtinking fruit. It is ſuch a fruit as is odious and vnſauoury
in Gods noſtrils; bitter and vnpleaſant to his
taſte.
            
               Moſes in his laſt ſong ſpeaking of the wicked and
vngodly enemies of the Church, ſaith thus:Deut. 32. 32, 33. 
               Their vine
is of the vine of Sodome, and of the fields of Gomorrah:
their grapes are grapes of gall, their cluſters are bitter.
Their wine is the poyſon of Dragons, and the cruell venome
of Aſpes. For the better vnderſtanding of which words,
we are to know, that the Vale of Iordan, where Sodome
and her ſiſters ſtood, was before the deſtruction thereof,
one of the goodlieſt, pleaſanteſt, and fruitfulleſt places
in the world, euenGen. 13. 10. like Eden the garden of the Lord;
or like the land of Egypt: But after the deſtruction and

ouerthrow thereof, it became theZeph. 2. 9. 
               breeding place of nettles
and ſalt pits; yea, it was turned into a moſt vgly
and loathſome Lake, which is called to this day, the
Lake of Sodome, or the ſalt, or dead Sea; wherein there
is not any fiſh, or other liuing creature, (though it be
more than twenty miles of length) neither will it admit
any thing into it that hath life, as Ioſephus a Iew borne,
relatesIoſeph. de bello Iudaic.; which relation is ſeconded by ſome of the
Auguſt. de Civ. Dei. Hieron. in Ezech. Fathers, and by all ſuch as haue trauelled in thoſe
parts. The report whereof ſeemed ſo ſtrange vnto the
Romanes, that when Vespaſian beſieged Ieruſalem, he
would needs goe thither to make a triall; and taking
ſix men that could not ſwim, he bound their hands and
feet, and caſt them all into the water; and not one ſunke,
but all ſwam like leaues. This Ioſephus witneſſeth he
was an eye-witneſſe of; who liued there, and went with
him. Round about the brinkes of this Lake there grow
ſtore of vines, and fruit trees of all ſorts, which beare
grapes and fruit moſt pleaſant to the eye, as euidences
of the former fertilitie and fruitfulneſſe of that place; but
take thoſe grapes and fruits, and breake or bruiſe them
to be eaten; and there is nothing but filthy and ſtinking
aſhes, as though ſome vile matter had beene newly
burnt. By this then it doth appeare what Moſes meanes
in the former words, Their vine is as the vine of Sodome,
&c. that is, faire and pleaſant to the outward ſhew, but
within filthy, ſtinking, and vnſauourie. And that ſuch
is the fruit of ſinne, appeares yet plainer in ſundry places
of holy Scripture: In the firſt chapter of this propheſie,
God tells theſe Iſraelites, thatIſay 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. 
               he delighted not
in the bloud of bullocks, nor of lambes, nor of he-goats:
their Incenſe was an abomination vnto him; their new
Moones, and Sabbaths, and calling of Aſſemblies, he
could not away with; for it is iniquitie euen their ſolemne
meetings. Their new Moones and appointed Feaſts his
ſoule hated; they were a trouble to him; he was weary to
beare them. And when they ſpread forth their hands, he

would hide his eyes; and when they make many prayers, he
would not heare; for their hands were full of bloud. The
Scripture for our vnderſtanding aſcribes ſenſes to God:
and here wee finde euery ſenſe diſpleaſed with their
ſinnes.
            1. They were offenſiue to his Taſting: for their burnt
offerings of Rams, with the fat of Lambes, &c. he could
not reliſh; they delighted him not, they were ſowre to
his palate.
            2. They were offenſiue to his Smelling: for he tells
them that their Incenſe was an abomination vnto him;
that pretious perfumeExo. 30. 34, 35. which was made with ſo many
ſweet ſpices and pure frankincenſe, did ſtinke in his noſtrils,
the ſent thereof he could not abide.
            3. They were offenſiue to his Feeling: for their new
Moones and appointed Feaſts were a burden vnto him;
he was a weary to beare them: And though he be not
weary of bearing the whole world, yet he is a weary of
this burden; ſo heauy is it to his ſenſe, that he complaines
Amos 2. 13. he is preſſed vnder it as a cart is preſſed that is
full of ſheaues.
            
            4. They were offenſiue to his Seeing; and therefore
he tells them, though they ſpread forth their hands, he
will hide his eyes. His pure eyes cannotHab. 2. 13. 
               behold euill.
nor endure to looke vpon iniquitie, and therefore he
muſt turne away his face from them.
            5. They were offenſiue to his Hearing: for when
they make many prayers he will not heare. Their prayers
were as iarring in his eares, as if diuers diſtracted Muſitians
ſhould play vpon diuers bad inſtruments, ſo many
ſeuerall tunes at one time.
            Neither were their ſinnes only diſpleaſing to his ſenſes,
but alſo grieuous to his minde, and therefore he tells
them, Their new Moones and appointed Feaſts his ſoule
did hate; which is an Emphaticall ſpeech, and an argument
of Gods hearty deteſtation. NowIſay 7. 13. 
               is it a ſmall
thing for you to grieue men, but you must grieue God alſo?
            
            
               
Beſides this, the diuers names giuen to ſinne in Scripture,
and the compariſons vſed to ſet it forth, may ſhew
vnto vs the odiouſneſſe of it. It is called a pollution, a leproſie,
a contagion, the vomit of a dog, and wallowing of
a ſwine in the mire. Againe, it is called vncleanneſſe, filthineſſe,
the execrable thing; and euery where it is ſaid
to be abomination. From all which we may ſafely conclude,
that Sinne and the fruits thereof are odious and
loathſome to the Lord.
            
            Take the Reaſon in a word:Reaſ. God is light and puritie,
and perfection it ſelfe; and therefore cannot but he muſt
deteſt and abhorre that which is his contrary.
            Hence then we ſee what the Apoſtle teacheth,Vſe 1.
               Rom. 8. 8. 
               They
that are in the fleſh cannot pleaſe God; the very oblations
of their defiled hands ſtinke in his preſence. Their
hearts are like to ſome Fen or Bogge; and euery action
they doe, is as an euil vapour aſcending thence. Of all the
ſacrifice and ſeruice of wicked men, Solomon ſaith,Prou. 15. 8. 
               It
is an abomination to the Lord: And of theirVerſ. 9. 
               whole way,
he ſaith as much; euery action of their liues God abhorres:
Their actionsſpirituall, as prayer, reading, hearing,
ſinging, &c. God takes no pleaſure in:Eſay 66. 3. 
               He that
ſacrificeth a Lambe, is as if he cut off a dogs necke, &c.
Their actions ciuill, as buying, ſelling, giuing, lending,
honeſt dealing, &c. ſhall haue no better acceptance with
him. Their actions naturall, as eating, drinking, ſleeping,
recreation, &c. all are ſtinking, loathſome. Alas, for the
fearefull eſtate of ſuch! Oh that the eyes of theſe were
open, that they might ſee their miſerie!
            Secondly,
                  Ʋſe 2. let vs be admoniſhed to take heed of
ſinne,Omnis malitia eructat ſumum. yea of euery ſinne: for all wickedneſſe belcheth
forth an euill ſauour, which God cannot endure, nor
abide. Shall we delight in that which God abhorres?
or take pleaſure in that which makes vs loathſome to
him? Be it farre from vs ſo to doe. True it is; while
we liue here vpon the earth, we cannot but we ſhall fall,
and that often; yet let vs not lie ſtill and wallow in vncleanneſſe.

For caſuall defilements there is hope; but
for wilfull pollutions there is little. How can God dwell
or abide with vs, if we be ſwearers, drunkards, vſurers,
oppreſſors, or the like? Aſſuredly he neither can nor
will; for theſe impieties, and ſuch like, are more odious
to him, than any carion is or can be to vs; nay the Deuill
himſelfe is not ſo hatefull to him as ſinne is;Non odit peccatū diaboli cauſa, ſed diabolum peccati cauſa. for he
hates not ſinne for the Deuils ſake, but the Deuill for
ſinnes ſake. And therefore (to ſhut vp all with that exhortation
of the Apoſtle)2 Cor. 7. 1. 
               Dearely beloued, let vs cleanſe
our ſelues from all filthineſſe of the fleſh and ſpirit, perfecting
holineſſe in the feare of God.
            
            Hitherto we haue intreated of the Vineyards plantation:
The ſupplantation of it followes next to be handled,
which is contained in the 3, 4, 5, 6 verſes: wherein
we haue,
            Firſt, the Lords Plea with them, verſ. 3, 4.
            Secondly, the Verdict or Iudgement paſt vpon them,
verſ. 5, 6.
            In the Plea, we haue firſt an Appeale made to them,
verſ. 3. And ſecondly an Inditement againſt them,
verſ. 4.
            In the Appeale diuers circumſtances are conſiderable:
As
            1. The Manner of it, which is not in commandingwiſe
(as it might haue beene) but by way of intreaty and
request [I pray you.]
            
            2. The Matter requeſted, and for which this Appeale
was made, and that is, that they would diſcerne
wiſely of the matter, and accordingly paſſe ſentence,
[Iudge.]
            
            3. Who they be which are made Iudges of the cauſe;
and they are the men of Iudah, and inhabitants of Ieruſalem;
euen the whole multitude.
            4. The Parties betweene whom the controuerſie and
variance is, and they are God and his Vineyard: God
being the Plaintiffe, and Iſrael the Defendant.
            
            
               
And now,Text. ô inhabitants of Ieruſalem,Verſ. 3. iudge, I pray you,
betwixt me and my Vineyard, &c.
            
            
               And now]
               Expoſ. or, Now therefore. Theſe are the words
of God himſelfe: q▪ d. Seeing it is thus that my Vineyard
hath ſo fruſtrated my hopes, therefore now &c.
            
               O inhabitants—And men—] The words are in the
Originall read in the ſingular, not in the plurall number:
O inhabitant; and man. By whom ſome would
haue the Lord Ieſus to be meant (as before was ſhewed:)
but it is euident, that here the Lord appealeth to the
Iewes themſelues, and makes them Iudges in their owne
cauſe; referring the matter betweene him and them to
their owne conſciences: And we know it is no rare
thing in Scripture to finde one number put for another;
the plurall for the ſingular, and the ſingular for the plurall.
Singulariter loquitur, poſtulans non ſimpliciter omnes, ſed & vnumquemque. Muſcul. Now the reaſon why the Lord ſpeaketh to one man
(as it were) rather than to all; or to them all, as if they
were but one, may be this, becauſe he would haue iudgement,
not as ſimply of them all together, but particularly
of euery one; willing euery ſingular perſon of Iudah
and Ieruſalem, to commune with their owne hearts,
and accordingly giue ſentence.Imò viri Iebudae ſinguli. And therefore Tremillius
and Iunius, with diuers others, reade as the Originall
hath it.
            
               Ieruſalem; Iudah] Iudah was the Country; Ieruſalem
was the chiefe Citie in that Country; and indeed one
of the moſt famous Cities of the world; full of people;
great amongſt the Nations; Princeſſe amongſt the Prouinces,
and in one reſpect exceeded all other Cities in
the world beſides; for therin was Mount Zion, the
place of Gods ſeruice and worſhip, and therefore it was
called thePſal. 48. 1, 8. 
               Citie of the Lord of Hoaſts: The Citie
of God.
            
            
               Iudge] To iudge ſometimes ſignifieth to paſſe an vpright
or vnpartiall ſentence againſt any, true or falſe: ſo
Chriſt willeth the Iewes toIohn 7. 24. 
               iudge righteous iudgement:
               
and ſometimes it is only taken for the vnderſtanding
and diſcerning of all things; ſo meaneth the Apoſtle
when he ſaith,1 Cor. 14. 29. 
               Let two or three ſpeake, and let the other
iudge, i. diſcerne what is ſpoken. This latter ſome
would haue only here meant; as if the Lord did not require
ſentence, but only an inſpection into the cauſe. But
it may rather ſeeme the Lord requires not only that
they ſhould conſider and diſcerne, but alſo that they
ſhould ſpeake their minde, and giue ſentence againſt
ſuch a Vineyard.
            
            We ſhall not need to ſtand longer vpon Interpretation;
the other words are cleare: we come now to Doctrine,
with the Vſes and duties which we are to learne
from each of the particulars. And firſt from the Manner
of this Appeale [I pray you] learne that
            
               With much meekneſſe and mildneſſe doth God proceed
againſt ſinners.
               Doctr. Gods proceedings againſt ſinners is with meekenſſe and much mildneſſe. When he hath to deale with them, he
doth not come in furie and rage, but in milde and
peaceable termes, with kinde intreaties: He doth not,
as we ſee, imperiouſly command them with Sic volo, ſic
jubeo, &c. but vouchſafeth kindly to requeſt them: Iudicate
quaeſo; I pray yee iudge.
            
            The like was Gods manner of proceeding with Adam
after his tranſgreſſion;Gen. 3. 9, 11. 
               Adam where art thou? Who
told thee thou wert naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree
whereof I told thee thou ſhouldſt not eat? In the like manner
he comes to Cain;
               Gen. 4. 9. 
               Where is thy brother Abel? What
haſt thou done? And ſo our bleſſed Sauiour, how mildly
did he deale with him that ſmote him vniuſtly?Iohn 18. 23. 
               If I
haue ſpoken euill, beare witneſſe of the euill; but if well,
why ſmiteſt thou me? And what mildneſſe and meekneſſe
did he ſhew to Iudas, when he came to betray him,
euen at that time calling him friend;Matth. 26. 50. 
               Friend, betrayeſt
thou the Sonne of man with a kiſſe? In that parable of
the mariage of the Kings ſonneMatth. 22. 11., (wherein Gods proceeding
againſt wicked and vngodly profeſſors, who
repent not of ſinne, neither doe beleeue in Chriſt, is ſet

forth) this point may haue further confirmation; for to
him that hath not on a wedding garment, the King
ſaith thus; Friend, how cameſt thou in hither, &c. quietly
and peaceably examining and conuincing him.
            And this the Lord doth,Reaſon. that he may the ſooner and
the better bring the ſinner to a ſight and ſenſe of his
ſinne and fault, and that he might (if it were poſſible)
be pricked in his heart, and be brought to ſee that it is
out of loue which the Lord beareth to him, as he is his
creature; and that he deſireth not his death, but his repentance
that he might liue. And certainly this milde
and gentle kinde of dealing, doth much ſooner cauſe
the offender to ſee his fault, than a haſtie and paſſionate
proceeding doth, or can: So that vnworthy gueſt, when
he was ſo friendly dealt withall, had nothing to anſwer,
but was ſpeechleſſeMatth. 22. 12. Ʋſe 1..
            Herein let vs be followers of God, as deare children,
in manifeſting this notable fruit of the Spirit, when we
haue to deale with ſinners; which hath in it the very
pith of loue, which when it accompanieth a reprehenſion
or obiurgation, it is as that ſame pretious oile
               Pſal. 141. 5. 
               which
ſhall not breake the head. Let Miniſters here learne how
to deale with their hearers; intreating, exhorting, beſeeching,
euen then when they may lawfully command.
In things of this life, ſee how men are faine to intreat
and ſue hard for that which is their owne; and heart-glad
they are if by any ſuch courſe they can gather vp
their debts. How glad then may we be, if by any earneſt
perſwaſion or faire intreatie we can gather vp the
debt of obedience, which our people owe vnto the
Lord? I will neuer thinke much to ſpeake faire and
friendly, ſo that may follow thereupon. And thus the
Apoſtle Paul doth come vnto his hearers, withRom. 12. 1. 
               I beſeech
you brethren, by the mercies of God. And,2 Cor. 5. 20. 
               We beſeech
you that you would be reconciled vnto God. And
againe,2 Cor. 10. 1. 
               I Paul my ſelfe beſeech you by the meekneſſe and
gentleneſſe of Chriſt: Theſe are his vſuall exhortations.

And ſurely when Miniſters ſpeake thus to ſinfull men,
and proceed after this manner with them, I beſeech thee
by the mercies of God; I pray thee that thou wouldeſt
leaue thy drunkenneſſe, profanation of Gods Sabbaths,
ſwearing, &c. and be reconciled vnto God; it muſt needs
ſtrike deep into their hearts, if they be not ſealed vp with
hardneſſe & vnbeleefe. Let Magiſtrates hence learne to
ſhew mercy & compaſſion, and all tokens & teſtimonies
of loue towards malefactors, euen then when Iuſtice is
to be executed, and puniſhment inflicted, that offenders
may ſee it is not malice, but Iuſtice that inflicteth that
puniſhment vpon them: and that it is not their bloud,
but their good and the good of others which is ſought.
And thus dealt Ioſhua with Achan after he was apprehended
for that execrable wickedneſſe which he had
committed, and whereby all Iſrael was troubled.Ioſu. 7. 19. 
               My
ſonne (ſaith he) I beſeech thee giue glory vnto the Lord
God of Iſrael, and make confeſſion vnto him, and tell me
now what thou haſt done, hide it not from me. For want
of this, Iehu the king of Iſrael is threatned to be puniſhed:
For albeit he executed the iudgements of the
Lord againſt the houſe of Ahab, according to Gods
command; yet doing it with a cruell and reuengefull
minde, without all pittie and compaſſion, God was diſpleaſed,
and ſaith he will reuenge theHoſ. 1. 4. 
               bloud of Iezreel
vpon the houſe of Iehu. Let all Chriſtians in generall take
out this leſſon which the Lord himſelfe doth here and
elſwhere teach vs by his practice: and in informing or reforming
offending perſons, let vs vſe all moderation and
meekneſſe, endeuouring in the quieteſt & mildeſt manner
to conuince them of their ſins: In ſo doing we ſhall
firſt, tread in the ſteps of God himſelfe: Secondly, giue
obedience to Gods commands, which require vsGal. 6. 1. to
Reſtore ſuch as are fallen with the Spirit of meekneſſe:
Thirdly, manifeſt we haue the Spirit of God in vs by the
fruits, whereof this is oneCap. 5. 23.: Fourthly, haue ſome hope
that our reproofes, admonitions, exhortations, &c.

ſhall be profitable: for if euer we doe good, it muſt be by
weight of good Arguments preſſed in meekneſſe of wiſdome
with mildneſſe of ſpirit, that muſt be as ſugar, without
which the bitter pils of reproofe will not be ſwallowed.
But alas! we cannot hit of thoſe ſteps which our
heauenly Father hath trodden in, and wherein our bleſſed
Sauiour hath gone before vs. How doth that haſtineſſe
in many of vs Miniſters, who becauſe we ſee not
preſent ſucceſſe of our labours, are ready to ſurceaſe our
pains, & forgoe all, ſort with this truth, or that Iniunction
which S. Paul giueth to Timothie and in him, to all other
Miniſters,2 Tim. 2. 29. 
               In meekeneſſe inſtruct thoſe that oppoſe themſelues,
if God peraduenture will giue them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth? How doe thoſe bitter ieſts,
taunts and reproches caſt out againſt ſuch as are in miſerie
(what though they be euill doers, ſtanding at the bar
to be iudged and arraigned) vſually to be heard in the
places of Iuſtice & Iudgement, by ſuch as are in place of
authoritie, come nigh this copy which God hath ſet?
How can we ſee we imitate God like good childrē, when
hauing to deale with friend or foe, we grow hot and boiſterous,
if we be alittle moued? Alas for vs! oh that we
could but remember Gods peaceable proceeding, euen
with the veſſels of his wrath, & learne more mildneſſe.
            But are we to deale thus mildly with all,Queſt. may ſome
demand? is there no time when, nor no perſon to
whom, rigour and ſeueritie muſt be ſhewed?
            Surely,Anſw. much patience and lenitie muſt be vſed euen
vnto the very worſt, vntill it be deſpiſed and wilfully
contemned: and then if it be cleare no meekneſſe will
ſerue to winne men, it is high time to vſe ſeueritie toward
ſuch, who by milde intreaties will not be perſwaded:
And thus our bleſſed Sauiour, though in his firſt
Sermon he pronouncethMatth. 5. 
               Bleſſings, yet in his other he
denouncethMatth. 23. 
               Woes & curſes againſt the Scribes and Phariſees,
when as the former did not worke vpon them.
            Let this teach vs likewiſe to admire the great goodneſſeVſe 2.
               
and vnſpeakable mercy of the Lord. Men commonly
are intreaters for thoſe things which are profitable
to themſelues; but who is he that is earneſt with another
to doe that which tends only to the profit of him
with whom he dealeth? If a man of himſelfe cannot ſee
what maketh for his owne good, and doe it of his owne
accord, we thinke him well worthy to ſmart for his
owne folly. But here ſee Gods dealing with vs the ſons
of men, who deſireth and intreateth vs to ſit in iudgement
againſt our ſelues; and why? ſurely for this end,
that he might not iudge vs: for as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh,
1 Cor. 11. 31. 
               If we would iudge our ſelues, we ſhould not be iudged of the
Lord; ſo that the profit hereof would be our owne. How
ſhould our hearts relent? how ſhould we be ouercome
with this kindneſſe of the Lord, who ſo graciouſly & mercifully
requeſteth & intreateth vs for our own welfare?
            And laſtly,Vſe 3. is God ſo milde euen when he hath to
deale with ſinners? and doth he proceed in ſuch quiet
and peaceable termes, euen with wicked and vngodly
ones? then let this ſtay the hearts of Gods people; for
aſſuredly with them he will not be rigorous nor extreme:
If theſe fare ſo well, certainly Gods children
ſhall fare farre better. Lift vp then thy deiected ſpirit,
and cheare vp thy diſquieted and perplexed conſcience,
thou poore one who trembleſt vnder Gods hand for
thy manifold infirmities, as the childe doth vnder the
rod, and be not out of heart or hope.Pſal. 103. 8. 
               The Lord is mercifull
and gracious, ſlow to anger, and plenteous in mercy, who
will not alwaies childe; neither will he keepe his anger for
euermore: He beareth patiently with the wicked, his
ſlaues, his vaſſals: and will he not with thee, who art
his childe, his darling? Is it poſſible that he ſhould be
worſer towards thee who ſeekeſt his face, than he is
with them who ſeeke it not at all? That cannot be.
And thus much for the Manner, how he maketh his
Appeale: Now for the Matter, or thing it ſelfe for
which he doth Appeale, and that is Iudgement.
            
               
               Iudge I pray you.]
               Text. He doth not ſay, condemne theſe,
or iuſtifie my procedings, but iudge, aduiſe, take counſell,
and accordingly paſſe ſentence. Thus
            God is content to ſubmit his courſes vnto ſcanning;Doctr. God is content to ſubmit his courſes vnto ſcanning, &c. and
to bring his proceedings with the ſonnes of men vnto a triall
before he proceed to iudgement.
            In the firſt Chapter of this Propheſie, we reade how
the Lord doth as it were prouoke the people to a pleading
with him,Iſay 1. 18. 
               Come now and let vs reaſon together,
ſaith the Lord, &c. as if he ſhould ſay, If you are ſo well
perſwaded of the goodneſſe of your cauſe, and are ſo
ready to accuſe me, and excuſe your ſelues (which is the
propertie of all hypocrites) let vs reaſon about the buſineſſe,
and bring the matter vnto a triall, that ſo it may
appeare whether I or your ſelues be moſt in fault. The
like Plea he offers his people by the Prophet Ieremiah;
               Ier. 2. 9. 
               Wherefore I will yet plead with you, ſaith the Lord, and
with your childrens children I will plead. And by the
Prophet Micah he ſummons them to the like buſineſſe,
willing them to plead the cauſe with him, as it were at
euen hand, offering to make anſwer to whatſoeuer they
could obiect or lay vnto his charge; and he cals vpon
the hils and mountaines to be witneſſes, yea Iudges of
the cauſe;Mich. 6. 1, 2. 
               Heare O ye mountaines (ſaith he) the Lords
controuerſie, and ye ſtrong foundations of the earth, for the
Lord hath a controuerſie with his people, and he will plead
with Iſrael: O my people, what haue I done vnto thee?
and wherein haue I wearied thee? teſtifie againſt me, &c.
            
            And the maine reaſon hereof is,Reaſ. that the Iuſtice of
God might hereby be cleared, and euery mans mouth
ſtopped;Pſ. 51. 4. 
               That he might be iuſtified when he ſpeaketh,
and cleared when he iudgeth.
            
            
               But the Apoſtle reproueth ſuch as dare word it with
the Lord,
               Obiect. 
               and diſpute with him about his proceedings;
               Rom. 9. 10. Who art thou O man, ſaith he, that pleadeſt againſt God?
Shall the thing formed ſay to him that formed it, Why haſt
thou made me thus? &c.
            
               
True;Anſwer. for though God be content to offer it, for the
clearing of his iuſtice, and conuiction of the ſinner,
yet it is ouer-great-boldneſſe and ſawcineſſe, for any
man to require and demand it: Here was Iobs failing,
Ieremiahs weakneſſe, and Dauids infirmity.
            Make theſe vſes of this point.
            Firſt,Vſe 1. let it ſerue for our Inſtruction, that wee admire
the rich mercy and great goodneſſe of the Lord, who
is content ſo to abaſe himſelfe, as to put his holy actions
and proceedings to our ſcanning; and plead with
vs Clay and Dart, Dung and Wormes-meat, about his
iuſt and righteous proceedings. Should he vſe Martiall
law againſt vs, and as ſoone as euer we offend, (like
Draco) write his lawes in bloud vpon vs, it were but
iuſt and right: Now for him to come and reaſon with
vs, and plead about the iuſtice of his cauſe, before hee
proceeds to iudgement, this deſerues acknowledgement
and admiration in the higheſt degree. Should
the wood quarrell with the Carpenter? or the Iron
with the Smith? or the clay with the Potter? Would
they doe thus? And yet there is more difference betweene
God and vs, than is or can be betweene the Carpenter
and his wood; the Smith and his Iron; the
Potter (though he were a King) and his pot, (though
it were of the worſt faſhion, or for the baſeſt vſe.)
Rom. 11. 33. 
               O the depth of the riches, both of the wiſdome, and louing
kindneſſe of our God! How vnſearchable is his goodneſſe,
and his mercies paſt finding out!
            
            Secondly,Vſe 2. let it bee for Admonition vnto vs; that
we beware how we taxe God of the leaſt iniuſtice in any
of his proceedings, for he is ſo aſſured of the equity of
his actions, as that he feares not the ſcanning of them
by his very enemies: yea, ſo farre is he from fearing it,
as that hee will prouoke them to a pleading with him
that doe accuſe him: Now we know, none call for a day
of triall, but ſuch as are well perſwaded they are of the
ſurer ſide; as for thoſe that doe euill, theyIohn 3. 20. 
               hate the

light, as our Sauiour ſpeaketh, leſt their deeds ſhould bee
reproued. Bee thou then contented with his will; hee
hath reaſon for his actions, though thou knoweſt it not.
This is a leſſon wee cannot hit on; the beſt of vs are
much wanting in it: Wee can all ſay, It is a ſhame to
contend with the Almighty; yet when his hand lies
any way vpon vs, then, Oh that I might ſpeake with
the Almighty. Holy Iob while he was himſelfe,Iob 9. 1, 2, 3. acknowledgeth
this; but being tried with affliction, then
Cap. 23. 3, 4. he forgat himſelfe; for which God ſharplyCap. 40. 2. reproues
him; and thenCap. 42. 1, 2. 
               Iob cries peccaui, and acknowledgeth
his owne vileneſſe, and promiſeth amendment.
Whatſoeuer God doth, acknowledge to bee moſt iuſt:
Say not, what a hard caſe is this; or how can this ſtand
with iuſtice? But learne thou better things, and with
Ely ſay;1 Sam. 3. 18. 
               It is the Lord, let him doe what ſeemeth him
good. And with Mauritius, remember that of Dauid,
               Pſal. 119. 
               Righteous art thou, O Lord, and iuſt are thy iudgements.
What thou canſt not vnderſtand, inquire not a
reaſon of, but reuerence it: Couldſt thou vnderſtand it,
thou ſhouldſt much more vnderſtand that thou haſt
no reaſon to complaine, though it were for the reprobation
of thy husbands, wiues, childes, or owne
ſoule.
            The Parties, who are appointed Iudges in the
cauſe, are in the next place to be conſidered; and they
are themſelues.
            
               You inhabitants of Ieruſalem,
               Text. 
               and men of Iudah] He
doth not put the buſineſſe to this or that friend to arbitrate,
neither doth he call vponIſay 1. 2. 
               heauen and earth, nor
on theMica. 6. 1, 2. 
               mountaines and ſtrong foundations, (as he doth
elſewhere) to heare the quarrell: (for it might haue
beene thought theſe would haue beene partiall) But he
makes his aduerſaries themſelues the Iudges of the
cauſe:Doctr. God will fetch witneſſe from his aduerſaries owne conſciences, for the iuſtifying his proceedings. Whence note we;
            God will fetch witneſſe from his aduerſaries owne
conſciences, for the iuſtifying and condemning themſelues.

God will neither chuſe nor vſe any other Iudge
to condemne man, than man himſelfe.
            Thus the Lord after hee had vſed all good meanes,
for the conuerting of Ephraim and Iudah, demands of
no other than of themſelues,Hoſ. 6. 4. what hee ſhould doe
more: And ſo our Sauiour, after hee had propounded
that Parable of the Vineyard,Matth. 21. 40. let out to wicked huſbandmen,
requires of the Prieſts and Rulers their
iudgement: and they ſentence them; and in them,
themſelues thus: That they were worthy to be deſtroied,
and to haue the Vineyard taken from them, and let
out to others, who ſhould render the fruits in their ſeaſons.
The like I might ſhew of Pharaoh,
               Exod. 9 27. who by
force of conſcience, was made to iuſtifie the Lord to his
owne confuſion: And of Adonibezek,
               Iudg. 1. 7. who acknowledged,
(when Iudah had taken him and cut off his
thumbs and toes) that as he had done by others, ſo had
God required him: And of Iudas,
               Matth. 27. 4. who read the ſentence
againſt himſelfe, there being none elſe to doe it:
Beſides many other, of whom mention is made in
Scripture, whoſe mouthes, haue beene opened to reade
their owne doome, to the iuſtifying of the Lord, and
condemning of themſelues. Hereunto tends the Apoſtles
ſpeech when hee telleth vs, that the ſinner is ſubuerted
and ſinneth,Tit. 3. 11. being ſelfe-condemned. Thus,
God loues to haue a ſinner accuſe himſelfe, before hee
accuſe him; condemne himſelfe, before hee condemne
him.
            See then here the vſe of conſcience,Vſe 1. and what good
ſeruice it will doe: The Lord God hath ſet it as his deputy
in the breſt of man; which though it bee oftentimes
a neuter, when the act is doing, and while ſinne
is a commiting; yet afterwards it will proue a friend
and faithfull witneſſe for the Lord, but an aduerſary
againſt man. Oh that the wicked would thinke of this!
who ſinne in hope of ſecrecie; why who ſees them?
who can witneſſe any thing againſt them? who can

condemne them, for ſuch or ſuch an action? Alas
poore ſoule! There is a conſcience within thee that
ſees thee, and will condemne thee; thy ſelfe ſhall paſſe
ſentence againſt thy ſelfe: Now thou canſt hide, couer,
and cloake thy ſinne, and plead in the defenſe thereof;
but when God ſhall cite thy conſcience to giue in euidence,
Conſcientia mille teſtes. that ſhall bee as a thouſand witneſſes, and condemne
thee for thy moſt ſecret ſinnes. Though thou
doe eſcape all apprehenſion and accuſation in this
world, yet thy owne conſcience will arreſt thee and
hale thee vnto iudgement: And albeit thou eſcape
mans iudgement, yet the iudgement of thy owne
conſcience thou ſhalt neuer eſcape. Neither thinke, that
what thou thy ſelfe knoweſt ſhall euer bee concealed:
thou art priuy to thy owne lewdneſſe, and knoweſt of
thy drunkenneſſe,
               Quid tibi prodeſt non habere conſcium habenti conſcientiam? 
               adultery, theft, &c. What art thou
the better then, in that no body elſe is priuy to them, ſo
long as thou haſt a conſcience within thee? Neither
thinke thou, that becauſe thy conſcience is now aſleepe,
or feared, and benummed, through a continuance in
the cuſtome of ſinne, that it will neuer be awakened, or
that this is nothing ſo: For as the poize of a clocke being
downe, all motion ceaſeth; the wheeles ſtirre not;
but being would vp, all is ſet on going: So albeit now,
while thy conſcience is downe, there is no noiſe nor
mouing in thy heart, all is quiet; yet when it is wound
vp by the iuſtice of God, (as one day aſſuredly it ſhall)
it will ſet all the wheeles on working; thy tongue, to
confeſſe and ſay, guilty, Lord, guilty, thy eies, to weepe;
thy hands, to wring; thy voice, to cry; thy heart, to ake;
and yet all in vaine. Bee watchfull therefore, and euer
remember Conſcience: Beware of hypocriſie, and ſecret
ſinnes, for though thou canſt hide them from men and
Deuils, yet not from it: And looke thou neglect not
the checks of conſcience. Doth it now checke thee,
and reproue thee, for thy waies? know the time
commeth, when that conſcience which doth now

checke thee, ſhall iudge thee and condemne thee; and
that which doth now reproue thee, ſhall hereafter torment
thee in endleſſe woe, if thou repent not.
            Secondly,Vſe 2. ſeeing this is ſo that Man ſhall iudge himſelfe
and iuſtifie the Lord; then let it teach vs this point
of wiſdome, to beginne betimes, and now1 Cor. 11. 31. 
               iudge our
ſelues that we may not be iudged. Selfe-condemning is
an eſpeciall meanes to preuent future condemnation;
and the more ſpeedily we ſet vpon the worke, the more
mercifully will the Lord deale with vs. It is recorded
of Edward the firſt, ſometimes King of this land,Acts and Monum. that
being croſſed by a ſeruant of his in the ſport of Hawking,
and further incenſed by a ſawcie anſwer which he
made vnto the Kings threatnings (telling him it was
well there was a riuer betweene them) ſpurd his horſe
into the depth of the riuer, not without great danger
of his life (the water being deepe, and the bankes too
high and ſteepe for his aſcending) Yet at laſt recouering
land, purſues his ſeruant with his drawne ſword. The
ſeruant finding himſelfe too ill horſed to outride the
King, and ſeeing no way to eſcape his fury, lights from
his horſe, and on his knees expoſed his necke to the
blow of the Kings ſword: The King ſeeing this, puts vp
his ſword, and would not touch him. Behold how
humble ſubmiſſion and ſelfe-iudging ſoone pacifles
him, whom a dangerous water could not with-hold
from violence.
            Whiles men ſtand out againſt God, iuſt fying themſelues,
ſtubbornly flying from him, he that rides vpon
the wings of the winde poſts after, with the ſword of
vengeance drawne; but when we condemne our ſelues,
and caſt our ſelues downe at the foot of his mercie,
then will his wrath be ſoone appeaſed towards vs.
            Thirdly,Vſe 3. here we haue a patterne for our imitation,
and a coppy ſet to write after: Let vs herein alſo be
followers of GodEpheſ. 5. 1. as deare Children, and be ſo vpright
and iuſt in our proceedings, as that wee may dare to appeale

to the conſciences of our aduerſaries for witneſſe
and teſtimonie of our innocency: And (as the Apoſtle
willeth)2 Cor. 4. 2. let vs approue our ſelues to euery mans conſcience
in the ſight of God. Such was Dauids cariage towards
Saul
               1 Sam. 24. 18. & 26. 21., as that he was conſtrained twice to teſtifie
of him, Thou art more righteous than I. The innocencie
of Shadrach, Meſhach and Abedaego,
               Dan. 3. 26. cauſed Nebuchadnezzar
to pronounce with his owne mouth, they
were the ſeruants of the high God. Though Plinius Secundus
be an enemie to Chriſtians, and a perſecutor of
them, yet their holy and godly conuerſation ſhall make
him to certifie the Emperour his Maſter, Traian, that
they are harmeleſſe perſons. Thus let thy life bee holy
and innocent, and then thou maiſt fetch a teſtimony
from the conſcience of the very enemie. And as Dauid
ſaid ſometimes to Micol (obiecting vnto him that euen
his owne ſeruants contemned him for his dancing before
the Arke)2 Sam. 6. 22. 
               Of the ſeruants which thou haſt ſpoken
of, of them ſhall I be had in honour: So ſay I; euen thoſe
wicked ones that outwardly traduce thee and reuile thee,
cannot, but inwardly they muſt acquit thee and commend
thee; their heart and conſcience ſhall ſpeake for
thee euen then, when their tongue and lips doe ſpeake
againſt thee. And when euer it ſhall pleaſe the Lord to
ſet their conſciences on the racke, or to compaſſe them
about with the ſnares of death, then ſhall their tongue
be conſtrained, will they, nill they, to diſcouer what
now lies hidden for the iuſtification of thy righteouſneſſe.
Then they crie out, oh ſend for ſuch a man, or
ſuch a woman, they will pray for me and doe me good,
and giue me comfort: and doe we not ſee daily that they
ſooner truſt (for all their talke) ſuch as they terme Hypocrites,
Diſſemblers, and Preciſians, with their goods
and with their children, and with their portions, yea,
and with their ſoules alſo, before any other?
            The laſt thing propounded to our conſideration
in this Appeale, is the Parties betweene whom the variance

is, and they are the Lord and Iſrael, God and his
Vineyard; God being the Plaintiffe, and the whole body
of the people, euen all Iſrael and Iudah, the Defendants:
As vnequally matched as euer were Earth and
Heauen, Strength and Weakneſſe, or the great Beemoth
and the ſillieſt worme that creepes in the chinkes
and crannies of the earth. God contends with man; he
that is excellent, with them that are but duſt: who then
is like to haue the day?
            
               Betweene mee and my Vineyard.]
               Text. And is it poſſible
that there ſhould be a controuerſie betweene God and
his Vine, which he planted with his owne right hand?
Betweene him and that people whom he had ſo highly
honoured? Then it will follow, that
            Sinne will make bate and ſtirre vp ſtrife betweene God
and his deareſt people.Doct. Sin is a make-bate betweene God and man.
            
            There is no Citie, no not Ieruſalem; no people, no
not Iſrael nor Iudah, be they graced with neuer ſo many
priuileges, crowned with neuer ſo many bleſſings,
but ſinne will ſet the Lord and them at variance: The
Lord hath a controuerſie with the Inhabitants of the Land
(ſaith Hoſeah)
               Hoſea 4. 1, 2. 
               becauſe there is no truth, nor mercy, nor
knowledge of God in the Land, &c. Sinne was the breeder
of it. BabylonIſay 13. 19. 
               the glory of the Kingdomes, the
beautie of the Caldees excellencie: yet her pride ſet her
and God at variance, ſo that her Palaces were made dens
of Dragons; wilde beaſts of the field did lie there; their
houſes were cages for vncleane birds; Owles did dwell
there; Satyres did dance there; with dolefull creatures
were they filled. And thus Sodome,Gen. 19. 24. ſometimes as faire
and beautifull as Paradiſe it ſelfe, was ſet at variance
with the Lord by reaſon of her ſinnes:Ezek. 16. 49. 
               Pride, Idleneſſe,
and Fulneſſe of bread, &c. bred the quarrell, and was the
cauſe that ſhee was madeZeph. 2. 9. a perpetuall deſolation. And
will not thoſe ſeuen famous Churches of Aſia,
               Reuel. 1. & 2. & 3. 
               Epheſus,
Smyrna, Pergamus, Laodicea, Philadelphia, Sardis,
(in the midſt whereof God is ſaid to haue his walke)

witneſſe as much? Did not their ſinnes cauſe the Lord
to contend with them a long time; and in the end make
him to giue vp their Land to be inhabited by Zijm and
Ochim; Turkes and Infidels? What ſhall I need to ſay
more? Such a variance it made betweene God and the
Angels,
               Iude 6. as that they were turned out of Heauen: Betweene
God and our great Grand-father, asGen. 3. 22. that he was
droue out of Paradiſe: Betweene the Lord and Moſes,
               Deut. 32. 51, 52. as that it kept him from Canaan: And ſuch a contention
daily it breeds betweene God and men, as that infinite
thouſands are thereby kept1 Cor. 6. 9. 
               out of the Kingdome
of Heauen.
            
            Let all wicked ones hence take notice of their eſtates,Reuel. 21.
               Vſe 1.
which by this Doctrine they may as clearely ſee as in a
glaſſe: For doth ſinne ſet God and man at oddes? and
is it a make-bate betweene them? Then certainly ſuch
as liue in it, and harbour it, cannot be at peace with God.
What peace (ſaith Iehu to Ioram)
               2 King 9. 22. 
               ſo long as the whoredomes
of thy mother Iezebel, and her witchcrafts are ſo
man0y? So ſay I, What peace ſo long as that make-bate is
harboured in thy breſt? Nay,Iſay 57. 21. 
               There is no peace to the
wicked, ſaith my God. For what
               2 Cor. 6. 14. 
               fellowſhip hath righteouſneſſe
with vnrighteouſneſſe? What communion hath
light with darkneſſe? What concord hath Chriſt with Belial?
God is thy enemie, andMatth. 5. 25. 
               hath againſt thee, and
therefore ſee thou agree quickly with thy aduerſarie.
We ſay in a prouerbe, He is poore that God hates: true,
none ſo poore as the wicked are; for what though they
haue riches, honours, friends, &c. when there is a controuerſie
betweene God and them?1 Sam. 2. 25. 
               If one man ſinne
againſt another, the Iudge ſhall iudge for him, (ſaid old
Ely to his ſonnes) but if a man ſinne againſt the Lord
who ſhall intreat for him? Seeke therefore reconciliation;
caſt that make-bate out of thy boſome, which ſtirs
vp all this ſtrife. Sinne is thy owne creature; deſtroy
that, and God muſt needs loue thee, who art his creature:
but if thou wilt not, then expect no peace, but

contention and deſtruction. If the Pot will needs contend
with the Potter, it cannot be, but it muſt be broken:
Thou art but an earthen Pitcher in the hand of thy
Maker, and he can full eaſily daſh thee againſt the wall,
and ſtampe thee into powder. It is good counſell that
the Wiſe-man giues thee,Eccleſ. 6. 10. 
               Contend not with him who
is mightier than thy ſelfe: and if thou beeſt not a
foole, I aduiſe thee to follow it, leſt Woe and Alas come
too late.
            And ſecondly;
                  Ʋſe 2. See here the reaſon why the Lord
doth ſo often bend his browes, and turne away his face
from his owne people in diſpleaſure: Sinne is it, that
bred the quarrell; that was it, which cauſeth it. The faſhion
of many in the day of affliction, is, to crie out of
euill tongues, that haue for ſpoken them; and ſurely, ſay
they, we are bewitched: but if we looke well about vs,
we ſhall finde the grand-witch to lie lurking in our own
boſomes. It is ſinne that hales downe thoſe iudgements
on vs and ours.Ioſua 7. 8-13. 
               What ſhall I ſay, O Lord, when Iſrael
turnes their backes before their enemies? (ſaid Ioſua to
God:) now marke Gods anſwer: Get thee vp; wherefore
lieſt thou thus vpon thy face? Iſrael hath ſinned, they
haue tranſgreſſed my Couenant which I haue commanded
them, for they haue euen taken of the accurſed thing, and
haue alſo ſtollen, and diſſembled alſo, and they haue put it
euen amongst their owne ſtuffe. Therefore the children of
Iſrael could not ſtand before their enemies, becauſe they
were accurſed: neither will I be with you any more, except
you deſtroy the accurſed thing from amongst you. This
anſwer may we giue to the like demand; Why are wee
ſo often puniſhed, afflicted, plagued? Surely wee haue
taken of that execrable thing, and broken the Couenant
of the Lord; and vntill that accurſed thing (Sinne)
be ſearched out and caſt away, neuer hope for any fauour
to be ſhewed from the Lord:Ionah 1. 15. 
               Ionah muſt be caſt
ouer-boord before the ſtorme ceaſe.
            Laſtly,
                  Ʋſe 3. ſeeing ſinne ſets God and his deareſt people

at variance, be they graced with neuer ſo many excellencies
or priuiledges: thenRom. 11. 20. 
               be not high minded, but
feare: for whatſoeuer thou art that ſinneſt againſt the
Lord, be thy priuiledges neuer ſo many or excellent,
Ierem. 22. 24. 
               wert thou as a ſignet vpon Gods right hand, or as the apple
of his eye; yet he will haue a controuerſie with thee.
And ſo for our Land in generall, which may ſeeme to
out vie the felicitie of all other Nations in high and rich
prerogatiues. Of all the trees in the Garden, wee may
ſeeme to be the Vine that God hath ſet his heart vpon;
amongſt all the varietie of Flowers. England is the Lilly
and the Roſe; amongſt all the Princes we haue had a
Deborah, and haue a Dauid; amongſt all the Prophets
of the Lord, wee haue the moſt reuerend Eliſhaes; amongſt
all the Nurſeries and Springs of learning, wee
haue the moſt famous Nai
                     •
                  ths; amongſt all Lands, we
haue that Canaan which abounds with plentie of all
good things; and amongſt all Cities, wee haue Ieruſalem.
But will theſe priuiledges beare vs out if wee take
libertie to ſinne againſt the Lord? Alas! they cannot;
nay, ſo farre are they from ſtopping Gods wrath, as that
they will rather make way for it. As a man is more offended
with the euill behauiour of a ſeruant that hath
beene aduanced by him; ſo the Lord with vs. When
Saul behaued himſelfe not ſo well in his Kingdome as
he ought, it was taken from him and giuen vnto Dauid.
Hold that thou haſt, O England, leſt miſery come vpon
thee.
            
               And thus much for the Appeale, which was the firſt
thing wee conſidered in the Plea. The Indictment followes
in theſe words:
               Text. What could haue beene dore more
to my Vineyard, that I haue not done in it? Wherefore when
I looked that it ſhould bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wilde grapes?
            Wherein wee haue an Action commenced againſt
them of Ingratitude, which is proſecuted and proued
to their faces, and therein,
            
               
More particularly we ſee; firſt, how the Lord excuſeth
himſelfe from being in any fault for that their barrenneſſe:
No way was he defectiue; he had done as much
as might be done to make it fruitfull: What could haue
beene done more to my Vineyard (ſaith he) that I haue not
done in it?
            
            And ſecondly, hee accuſeth them for horrible vnthankfulneſſe
in making ſo vngratefull a returne; which
accuſation is amplified by an Antitheſis betweene his
iuſt demand, He looked that it ſhould bring forth grapes,
and their vniuſt demeanure, for it brought forth wilde
grapes.
            
            The forme of the words, as we ſee, is Interrogatorie;
What could haue beene done? Wherefore when I looked,
&c. And it is obſerued by ſome, that before man fell to
ſinning, God fell not to queſtioning; all his ſpeeches to
him were either commendatory or commandatory. But
when man turned his heart to another obiect, then God
turned his voice to another accent; and the firſt word he
ſpeakes to him after his tranſgreſſion was a queſtion,
Gen. 3. 9. 
               Adam where art thou? and with the ſame forme and
method of ſpeech hee goeth on;Verſe 11. 
               Who told thee thou
waſt naked? Haſt thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded
thee thou ſhouldeſt not eat! And euer ſince it is
vſuall with the Lord to diſcuſſe with man after the ſame
manner; ſometimes to teach him; ſometimes to reproue
him; ſometimes to confirme him; and oftentimes
to conuince him: For albeit mans queſtions are for the
moſt part effects of dubitation (doubting being the
mother of them that breedeth them and cauſeth them)
yet Gods queſtions are of another nature, and haue another
vſe; for they for the moſt part tend to conuince
the conſcience, and bring it to a ſenſe and ſcience of
ſinne: And ſo here; God doth Appeale to the conſciences
of theſe Iſraelites, and fetch euidence againſt them,
from the impartiall euidence of their owne hearts, What
could haue beene done more? q. d. Is there any thing that

could haue beene deſired of a Husbandman, wherein I
haue been wanting? Shew me wherein I haue failed
of my dutie; alledge what you can againſt me; let your
conſciences ſpeake.
            
               Wherefore when I looked, &c.] Some reade it, Why
haue I looked
               Moller. in loc.: as if God ſhould expoſtulate with himſelfe,
why he expected any good fruit from ſo naughty
and peruerſe a people; and that he doth after the manner
of men, who oftentimes complaine of themſelues,
and are offended with themſelues, when the euent of a
thing doth not anſwer their hope and expectation; for
that they haue beſtowed ſuch coſt and paines to ſo little
purpoſe. But others thinke this ſenſe to be the plainer;
Calu. in loc. 
               Seeing I haue fully diſcharged my dutie, and haue done
aboue all that could haue beene expected in huſbanding my
Vine; whence comes it, that it yeelds me ſo euill recompence?
            
            Now haply ſome may obiect,Obiect. that albeit God had
thus planted and watered his Church, and vſed all outward
meanes for the fertilitie thereof, yet ſeeing (as the
Apoſtle ſheweth)1 Cor. 3. 
               Pauls planting is nothing, nor Apolloes
watering, without Gods bleſſing; how could God
ſay, he had done all that could be done, when he withheld
a bleſſing, and ſoftned not their hearts, that the
meanes might become profitable? Might not this man
of Iudah,Reſp. 1. and in habitant of Ieruſalem haue had replied
in the words of the Leper,Loquitur de ſufficientia externorū mediorum, non internae gratiae. Hieron. & Vrſin. Simul pluit Dominus ſuper ſegetes & ſuper ſpinas: ſed ſegeti pluit ad horreum, ſpinis ad ignem; & tamen vna est pluvia. August. de benedict. Eſau & Iacob.
               Matth. 8. 2. 
               Why Lord, if thou wilt, thou
canſt make vs cleane?
            
            For anſwer hereunto: Firſt, we are to know, that God
here ſpeaketh of the ſufficiencie of the outward meanes,
and not of inward grace: That was done to this wicked
Vineyard, which if it had beene good, would haue
brought forth the fruit of repentance and new obedience.
The Raine fals, the Sunne ſhines vpon the earth;
the garden hereupon brings forth herbes, the deſart
thornes; whence is this, but from the nature of the
ground? there is as much done to make one fruitfull
as the other. Thus God had done enough, the meanes

he vſed were ſufficient, had not this people been of ſuch
a peeuiſh and froward diſpoſition.
            And ſecondly,Resp. 2. God ſpeaketh not here of his abſolute
power, whereby he can doe whatſoeuer pleaſeth him:
(he could make iron ſwim, and cauſe ſtonie rocks to
yeeld forth ſtreames of water: he could raiſe vp of ſtones
children vnto Abraham; and giue Chriſt more than
twelue Legions of Angels to deliuer him) but he denies
that he was bound to doe any more for them than he
did. And therefore that cauill would haue beene but
friuolous (ſaith Caluin) for their conſciences pricked
them in ſuch wiſe, as that they could not eſcape by laying
the fault vpon another. For albeit God doe not
pierce with efficacie into the hearts of men by his holy
Spirit to make them teachable; yet it will be in vaine
for any notwithſtanding to mutter that this was wanting
to them, ſeeing that their externall vocation
doth ſufficiently cut off all pretext and ſhew of ignorance
whatſoeuer. And now let vs come to ſome ſuch
Inſtructions as the text will naturally afford: And firſt
we ſee how
            God is altogether out of fault,Doctr. God cannot any way be charged with mans barrenneſſe. and can no way be charged
with the ſinfulneſſe and barrenneſſe of mens hearts
and liues.
            In another place of this propheſie we finde the Lord
complaining,Iſai. 65. 2. that he had held out his hands all the day
long to a gainſaying and rebellious people. His armes were
ſtretched out, he ready to receiue, but they did gaineſay
and rebell, and refuſed to come into his armes. And by
the Prophet Ieremiah he telleth the people, howIer. 44. 4, 5. he
ſent all his ſeruants the Prophets vnto them, riſing early,
and ſending them, ſaying, Oh doe not ſuch abominable
things which I hate. But they harkned not, nor enclined
their eares to turne from their wickedneſſe. And by the
Prophet Hoſea he thus ſpeaketh;Hoſ. 12. 10. 
               I haue ſpoken vnto
them by the Prophets, and I haue multiplied viſions, and
vſed ſimilitudes by the miniſterie of the Prophets. The

meaning is, that he had declared his will, and made
knowne his minde vnto them ſo plainly, as that they
could not plead ignorance, or any way charge him with
fault. And our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt complaines thus;
Matth. 23. 37. 
               O Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem, thou that killeſt the Prophets,
and ſtoneſt them which are ſent vnto thee; how often
would I haue gathered thy children together, euen as a
Hen gathereth her chickens, and yee would not. Where
we ſee clearely how God would their conuerſion (vnderſtand
it of his
                  Ʋoluntas ſigni, not voluntas beneplaciti. ſignifying will) and therefore gaue
them the outward meanes, ſending vnto themVerſ. 34. 
               Prophets,
Wiſemen, and Scribes; meſſengers endued with
all varietie of gifts, adminiſtrations, and operations; and
that not once. but often; How often would I haue gathered?
Often by the mouth of his ſeruants; often by his
owne ſelfe; as the louing Hen is alwaies caring for her
chickens; alwaies clucking and calling them, if they
wander out of her ſight neuer ſo little, that ſhee may
gather them and guard them from the miſchiefe of all
vermine: But they would not; they themſelues gaineſaid.
Where then lay the fault? And ſo S. Stephen complaineth
of the Iewes; yea telleth them to their faces,
that they wereActs 7. 51. 
               ſtiffe-necked, and of vncircumciſed hearts
and eares, and did alwaies reſiſt the Holy Ghoſt; that is,
the worke of the Holy Ghoſt in the miniſterie of the
word, and would not be wrought vpon.
            But the Scripture ſpeaketh of Gods hardningExod. 7. 3. & 10. 27. 
               Pharaohs
heart,Obiect. ſo that the meanes ſhould not be profitable
vnto him: And God himſelf commandeth Iſaiah, to
preach vnto the people, that they may be hardnedIſai. 6. 10. & 63. 17., and
ſo not conuerted.
            True;Resp. 1. and yet in all this God cannot be charged
with any fault or blame. For it is a iuſt and righteous
thing with God to puniſh ſinne with ſinne:Pſal. 81. 12. 
               My people
would not hearken to my voice, and Iſrael would none
of me: ſo I gaue them vp vnto their owne hearts luſts,
and they walked in their owne counſels. Thus then God

doth this for a puniſhment of ſuch as withſtand and
contemne thoſe gratious meanes hee offers them for
their good.Pharaoh ſeipſum indurauit libero arbitrio: Deus indurauit Pharaonem iuſto iudicio. Aug. If Pharaoh harden his heart againſt the
meanes, God will harden his heart that he ſhall not profit
by the meanes. So then though Sathan hardneth as
a malitious Author; and man hardneth himſelfe as a voluntarie
inſtrument; yet God hardneth no otherwiſe,
than as he is a iuſt Iudge and righteous auenger of ſinne.
            
                And ſecondly, God doth not hardenNon inducendo malitiam, ſed ſubtrahendo gratiam. Aquin. by infuſing
euill, but by with-holding of his grace, and forſaking of
his creature, which Diuines call ſpirituall deſertion. As
the Sunne freezeth the water, not by adding coldneſſe
to it, but by keeping backe his heat: ſo is God a deficient
cauſe of hardneſſe, but no efficient thereof. And this
muſt be marked, that we erre not in this point. Now let
vs make the Vſe.
            And firſt,
                  Ʋſe 1. this frees vs from a ſlander that the Papiſts
haue laid vpon vs, in giuing out that we teach directly
or by conſequence, that God is the author of ſinne, and
only cauſe thereof. Now whether this be true or no,
iudge you. You now heare it taught, that he is out of
fault, and may no way be charged with the leaſt ſpot of
ſinne; he is moſt holy, iuſt, and pure in all his waies and
workes. Now therefore the Lord be Iudge betweene
them and vs.
            And ſecondly,Vſe 2. ſee how damnable and excuſeleſſe
ſhall the careleſneſſe of the moſt be in the matter of their
ſaluation: to excuſe and leſſen their owne ſinne, they
will not ſticke to lay the fault on God himſelfe; and
charge their Maker with their damnation: They ſweare,
ſwagger, drinke to drunkenneſſe, defile forbidden beds,
ſhoot at heauen with their blaſphemous oathes, and
then fetch from Gods decree and purpoſe excuſes for
theſe their outragious wickedneſſes. And why ſhould
fault be found with them? If God would it ſhould
be otherwiſe;Rom. 9. 19. 
               Who hath euer reſisted his will? and why
doth he yet finde fault? He hath decreed it, and his

decree muſt ſtand: If the Deuils in hell ſhould ſpeake,
what could they ſay more? We haue fallen, and God cauſed
it. Wicked and fearefull thoughts! When Adam ſinned,
Gen. 3. 12. he blamed his wife; and ſhee, God himſelfe; and
we haue ſucked the ſame milke: but as it would not
ſerue Adams turne, no more will it ſerue ours. Ceaſe
then thou fooliſh one from charging God, or drawing
him in as an acceſſarie to thy prophaneneſſe; God would
haue thee ſaued, but thou wilt not: He labours to make
thee good, and dareſt thou lay to his charge thy owne
voluntarie badneſſe? Behold, God is ſo farre from being
guilty of thy miſerie, as that he giueth thee his
Word, his Sacraments, and affordeth thee all good helps
to mollifie thy heart, iuſtifying himſelfe by theſe proferd
meanes of thy ſaluation, that he hath no deſire
nor delight in thy deſtruction; and dareſt thou charge
him with thy damnation?
            Thou ſaiſt,Obiect. 1. 
               If God would, it ſhould be otherwiſe: if he
pleaſe, he could ſaue without theſe meanes.
            True;Reſp. if we ſpeake of his abſolute power (as was
before ſhewed) but it is his actuall power that thou muſt
looke vnto; and ſo he (hauing tied the end and the
meanes together) cannot, becauſe he will not bring
thee to the end without thy vſing of thoſe meanes
which tend vnto the end: for that is the ordinarie
courſe which he hath decreed to vſe, and which he will
not alter but vpon ſpeciall occaſion, as our Sauiour noteth
Luke 4. 26, 27. in the cure of Naaman, and in the feeding of the
widow of Sarepta. God hath ordained that a mans
bodie ſhould liue by the meanes of meat, drinke, ſleep,
&c. ſhouldſt thou now neglect theſe meanes for the
preſeruation thereof, and yet accuſe God if thou groweſt
ſicke, and weake, &c. becauſe if he would he could continue
health and ſtrength vnto thee without theſe helps;
I am ſure that all men would condemne thee; nay that
thou wouldſt condemne thy ſelfe of ſolly and preſumption.
            
               
Thou pleadeſt further Gods decree;
               Obiect. 2. for albeit thou
vſe the meanes, yet the end is already decreed, and who
can alter it?
            But ſecret things belong vnto the Lord;Resp. leaue them
to him: It is not for thee to pry into that Arke which is
couered with a curtaine of holy ſecrecie; not to be
drawne aſide vntill that day comes, wherein we ſhall
know as we are knowne. That ſigned and reuealed will,
written in Tables, publiſhed with trumpets, is it to
which thou ſtandeſt bound. Neither doth the neceſſitie
of this Decree excuſe: for God doth not by his Decree
force thee vnto euill; but he findes thee euill, and prone
only vnto it of thy ſelfe: He decrees that thou ſhalt be
ſo or ſo; and knoweth that thou wouldſt be ſo, had he
neuer decreed it: but ſeeing thou knoweſt not what this
his decree is, vſe the meanes, and condemne not God.
            Thus learne to chamber thy tongue, vaine man: for
God cannot be charged, nor any way blamed with thy
ſinfulneſſe and barrenneſſe. Lay thy hand vpon thy
mouth, and condemne thy ſelfe: forHoſ. 13. 
               Thy deſtruction
is of thy ſelfe, oh Iſrael. Say not, what can I remedie
it, if God will not ſaue me; for what can God doe more
than he hath done for thee? God raines vpon thee his
holy deawes, and is not wanting in his purging and
pruning thee with his corrections. He hath giuen thee
ſtrange and excellent meanes; ſo that it is only thou
that art wanting to thy ſelfe: Heauen is good, but thy
ground is naught. A cunning Caruer can cut the ſimilitude
of any creature; yet not on a rotten ſticke: where
lies the fault? Surely in the rottenneſſe of the wood, and
not in the Caruers cunning: that thou art not wrought
vpon, the fault is thy owne, and not the Lords. Thy caſe
is that of Ieruſalem; How often would I haue gathered
thee, and thou wouldſt not. If then thou ſmarteſt for
thy ſinfull and barren life, thanke thy ſelfe; for thou
art the cauſe, God only the auenger; thy bloud then be
vpon thy owne head, that which will die let it die. And

thus much for the firſt point. A ſecond followes: and I
propound it thus:
            The wicked will ſtill continue wicked,Doct. The wicked will ſtill continue wicked, notwithſtanding all means to the contrarie. although God vſe
all good meanes that can be vſed to bring them vnto good,
and make them better. God had done what might be
done, and yet his Vineyard is as bad, nay worſe than
euer: A pregnant proofe this our Prophet giues vs,
when he ſaith,
               Iſay 26. 10. Let fauour be ſhewed to the wicked, yet
will he not learne righteouſneſſe: in the land of vprightneſſe
will he deale vniuſtly, and will not behold the Maieſtie
of the Lord. Such is the vile and curſed nature of them,
as that no mercy nor fauour can worke with them to
doe well; nay in the land of vprightneſſe, amongſt many
occaſions and meanes of good, they will doe wickedly.
And thus Ieremiah to the ſame purpoſe;
               Ier. 2. 30, 31. In vain
I haue ſmitten your children, they receiued no correction,
&c. O Generation, ſee ye the word of the Lord: haue I been
a wilderneſſe vnto Iſrael,? a land of darkneſſe? wherefore
ſay my people, We are Lords, we will come no more vnto
thee? And againe,
               Cap. 5. 3. O Lord, are not thine eies vpon the
truth? thou haſt ſtricken them, but they haue not grieued;
thou haſt conſumed them, but they haue refuſed to receiue
correction, they haue made their faces harder than a rocke,
they haue refuſed to returne. And ſo AmosAmos 4. 6. 
               ſheweth
how incorrigible the wicked of his time were; no correction
that the Lord could vſe, would better them.
Many are the examples likewiſe that might be brought
for the further ſtrengthening of this truth, as of Pharaoh,
Ahaz, and others; but I purpoſely forbeare, inaſmuch
as ſomething hath formerly beene ſpoken to this
purpoſe. Now briefly for the vſe, which is,
            
            For Admonition,
               Vſe. that we beware of this ſinne which
hath an aggrauating circumſtance with it: for then is
ſinne moſt vile and filthie when it breakes out againſt
thoſe meanes that ſhould haue kept it in:Meanes that ſhould keepe vs from ſinne. Amongſt many
of which meanes, theſe are ſome; which let vs all
take eſpeciall notice of.
            
               
Firſt,1. Ʋowes. our Vowes and promiſes which we haue often
made vnto the Lord both in health and ſickneſſe, that
we would doe ſuch or ſuch a holy dutie, and refraine
from ſuch or ſuch an euill action: let vs beware of ſinning
againſt theſe: our vowes are Gods debts, and they
muſt be paid; and therefore ſaith Solomon,
               Eccleſ. 5. 4, 5. 
               When thou
voweſt a vow to God, deferre not to pay it; for he hath no
pleaſure in fooles: pay that which thou haſt vowed. Better
is it that thou ſhouldeſt not vow, than that thou ſhouldeſt
vow and not pay. And indeedIuſte exigitur ad ſoluendum, qui non cogitur ad vouendum. Bern. he is iuſtly required to
pay, that was not compelled to vow. And amongſt all
other vowes, be mindfull of that ſolemne vow which
thou madeſt to God in thy Baptiſme, and haſt often
ſince renued in thy comming to the Supper of the Lord.
Oh! what a fearefull thing is it, if we wittingly and
wilfully breake couenant with God, when ciuill honeſty
maketh ſome conſcience of keeping promiſe made
with man.
            Secondly,2. Checke of Conſcience. 
               checke of Conſcience. God hath ſet conſcience
within vs as a Monitor to giue vs an Item when we
doe amiſſe, and to forewarne vs of euill; this oftentimes
tels vs we may not doe ſuch or ſuch an action, or
when we haue done it, that it is not well: now beware
we of ſinning againſt conſcience; neglect not the
checkes thereof reprouing vs of our waies, but heedfully
minde it watch-word; for elſe know aſſuredly,
that the conſcience which now checkes thee, ſhall hereafter
iudge thee, and that which now reproueth thee,
will hereafter vexe thee and torment thee for thy neglect.
Beware alſo how thou ſuppreſſeſt any good motion
ſuggeſted by conſcience; for in ſo doing, thou wilt
in the end cleane ſilence conſcience, and quite kill it, ſo
that the groſſeſt ſinnes ſhall be practiſed withoutEpheſ. 4. 18, 19. any
checke or remorſe. Fearefull is this ſinne, and ſuch as
is the forerunner ofRom. 1. 21, 26. a reprobate minde.
            Thirdly,3. Corrections. 
               Corrections and Afflictions. Theſe are the
Hoſ. 2. 6. 
               thornes wherewith God doth hedge vs in; and ſerue to

keepe vs from leaping out of Gods paſtures into the paſture
of wickedneſſe and ſinne. Beware we then of leaping
ouer this hedge: take we heede of ſinning againſt
theſe meanes: let it not be ſaid of vs as it was of Ahaz,
               2 Chron. 28. 22. 
               This is that King Ahaz, who in the time of his diſtreſſe
did treſpaſſe yet more and more againſt the Lord. To be
afflicted, and not to be purged by affliction; to be ſtricken
with the rods of God, and to haue no correction
nor reformation follow, is a ſigne of a fearefull induration.
Ier. 6. 29, 30. 
               The bellowes are burnt, the lead is conſumed with
the fire: the founder melteth in vaine; for the wicked are
not plucked away. Reprobate ſiluer ſhall men call them,
becauſe the Lord hath reiected them.
            
            Fourthly,4. The Word. 
               Gods many and great mercies; eſpecially
the Word, and the light of the Goſpell: take we heed how
we withhold theRom. 1. 18. 
               Truth of God in vnrighteouſneſſe,
               Pſal. 50. 16. 
               hating
to be reformed, caſting it behinde our backes. Such a
ſinne is this, as brings condemnation with a witneſſe,
with a vengeance; ſore and heauie condemnation:
Iohn 3. 19. 
               This is that condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loue darkneſſe rather than light, becauſe
their deeds are euill. The cleare light of the truth ſhining,
hath diſcouered to vs, that Swearing is a ſinne;
Drunkenneſſe is a ſinne; Sabbath breaking is a ſinne,
&c. what now will ſuch plead for themſelues that liue
therein? Surely they haue nowIohn 15. 22. 
               no cloake for their ſins.
S. Paul would haue the word of GodColoſſ. 3. 16. 
               to dwell plentifully
in our hearts; to haue full ſcope and the whole
ſway in the heart of a Chriſtian: And ſo be it. Theſe
and the like meanes which God affordeth vs for our
good, let vs profit by, and by no meanes ſinne againſt
them; for if we doe, aſſuredly God will require it of vs;
for good turnes aggrauate vnkindneſſes, and our offences
are increaſed with out obligations: Of all the gracious
meanes he affords vs, he keepes a reckoning.
The ſundry afflictionsAmos 4. 6. 11. wherewith his people were afflicted,
are by him remembred; and ſo the Sermons

and Propheſies of his ſeruants,Iſay 1. 1. with the circumſtances
of time and place,Ier. 1. 1. and vnder what Kings reigne,Hoſ. 1. 1. are
likewiſe by him recorded. Since therefore God keepes
ſuch a preciſe account of the meanes he vouchſafeth to
vs, let it ſtir vp all to make better account & vſe of thoſe
meanes: for otherwiſe they will be reckoned for no
other end, but to make our reckoning the heauier. So
many meanes will the Lord one day ſay I haue afforded
you; ſo many Miniſters haue liued amongſt you, and
warned you; ſo many hundred Sermons you haue
heard, and loſt. We reade that he tooke account of how
many men were won by aActs 2. 41. Sermon; and ſhall we then
thinke he doth not take an account of how many Sermons
are loſt by men? Oh! how ſhould this make euery
one ſee that they profit by the meanes which God
affords?
            Wherefore when I looked that it ſhould bring forth grapes,Text.
brought it forth wild grapes?
            Whether we take this ſecond member, as a complaint
made by God againſt himſelfe, for that he expected
fruit from ſo bad a Vineyard, as (we noted before)
ſome doe: or elſe as a complaint made by him againſt
them, for nor profiting by the meanes; it is not much
materiall. From either of them both we may collect,
            
               God takes it grieuouſly,
               Doct. God grieues when the meanes of mans good is deſpiſed. 
               that the meanes which he vſeth
for mans good ſhould be contamned. For this is a complaint,
and proceedeth (as it were) from a grieued heart and
troubled minde.
            To proue this point, remember what is ſaid of the
old world: after Gods SpiritGen. 6. 3. had ſtriued with them a
long time by admonition, reprehenſion, threating, &
expectatiō (for that is there meant by his ſpirits ſtriuing)
labouring (in vain) to bring them to repentance,Verſ. 6. 
               It repented
the Lord he had made man on the earth, & it grieued
him at the heart. This cauſed the Lord to take vp
that pitifull complaint againſt Iſrael and Iudah;Hoſ. 6. 4. 
               Ephraim,
what ſhall I doe vnto thee? O Iudah, how ſhall intreat

thee? for your goodneſſe is as a morning cloud, & as the
morning dew it goeth away: As if he ſhould haue ſaid, Hitherto
I haue vſed al means that poſſible I can, to humble
you for your ſins and to do you good, ſo that I know not
what I ſhall doe more for you; and yet I can bring you
to no good paſſe: therefore it grieues me for you, and
I cannot but mourne to ſee you ſo rebellious. And thus
our bleſſed Sauiour beheld Ieruſalem and wept ouer it,
ſaying;Luke 19. 42. 
               If thou hadſt knowne, euen thou, at leaſt in this
thy day, the things which belong vnto thy peace, &c.
Hee conſidering the obſtinacie and ſtubbornneſſe of
this people, deſpiſing his Word, reproching his miracles,
and reiecting his grace, could not refraine, but hee
muſt burſt forth into teares. By theſe Scriptures it is
euident, that it is grieuous vnto God, to ſee men neglect
the good meanes ordained and afforded for their
good and welfare.
            And indeed,Reaſon. a little vnkindneſſe at their hands of
whom we haue deſerued well, muſt needs be grieuous;
when much indignity receiued from an enemy, ſhall neuer
bee regarded.
            Whoſe example may be for our Inſtruction:
               
                  Ʋſe 1. When
we ſee the froward and peruerſe diſpoſition of wicked
ones, who will not be reclaimed by any meanes that is,
or can bee vſed; let vs grieue and mourne for the hardneſſe
of their hearts:Iſay 24. 16. 
               My leanneſſe, my leanneſſe,
(crieth out this our Prophet Iſaiah) woe is mee: the
treacherous dealers haue dealt very treacherouſly, yea the
treacherous dealers haue dealt very treacherouſly. Hee
did ſo grieue at the tranſgreſſions of the people, that
hee became exceeding leane therewith, as the doubling
of the word importeth. The Prophet Ieremiah likewiſe
is full of paſſion in this behalfe, and cries out;
Ier. 4. 19. 
               My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart;
my heart maketh a noiſe in mee, I cannot hold my peace:
Yea he wiſheth, that his head were full of water,
               Cap. 9. 1. and
his eies a fountaine of teares, that hee might weepe day

and night, for the ſinnes of the people: And alſo tels
them,Cap. 13. 17. That if they ſtill contemne the meanes, and
turne away the eare refuſing to heare, his ſoule ſhould
weepe in ſecret places for them, and his eies ſhould weepe
ſore and runne downe with teares. Thus did righteous
Lot
               2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. 
               vex his ſoule with the vncleane conuerſation of
the wicked: And thus did Samuel
               1 Sam. 16. 2. weepe for the
ſinnes of Saul: And ſo did Dauids
               Pſal. 119. 139. 
               eies guſh out
with teares, becauſe men kept not Gods Law. Thus did
Ezra
               Ezra 10. 1. 
               weepe for the ſinnes of the people in his time:
And Paul
               Phil. 3. 18. 
               weepe for them that did walke inordinately
amongſt the Philippians. Did Gods children ſo weepe
in thoſe daies, for the obſtinacy and hard-heartedneſſe
of the wicked? How comes it to paſſe then in theſe
daies, that wee are ſo dried? Is it becauſe the men of
this generation are not ſo bad? or rather (as the truth
is) wee that profeſſe our ſelues Chriſtians are not ſo
good? Soone may we gueſſe then, of what ſtampe they
are of, who are ſo farre from mourning and grieuing at
the ſinfulneſſe and hard-heartedneſſe of this age, as that
they make themſelues merry therewith, and reioice
thereat: In Theaters, Play-houſes, and ſuch like meetings,
not onely with patience, but with content, and
delight, heare blaſphemy, and behold vncleanneſſe:
Blaſphemy, Pride, Drunkenneſſe, and ſuch like prophaneneſſe,
they can ſee & heare without remorſe, yea
laught at: What monſters are theſe?Iudg. 5. 
               Meroz muſt be
curſed bitterly, for not helping the Lord againſt the
mighty: and can ſuch looke to be bleſſed, that laugh
with thoſe that fight againſt him? When thou ſeeſt the
iniquity of the people, remember God grieues for it;
and wilt thou reioice at it? If thoſe infernall and helliſh
ſpirits haue any delight, this is their delight, to ſee men
ſinne and offend their God: And wilt thou make the
Deuils delight, thine? Doe not ſo; but bee thou contrary
to him, and grieue at that which he takes pleaſure
in. Wouldeſt thou in ſtead of a ſmile afford a teare,

when thou ſeeſt ſinners to tranſgreſſe, it might ſo come
to paſſe, that thy griefe might worke alſo a griefe in
them; and thy tears cauſe them to relent, (as many
times we ſee, the ſeeing others fall heartily to their meat
brings on their ſtomacke) when thy ſmile confirmes
them in their wickedneſſe.
            And ſecondly;Vſe 2. ſeeing this is ſo, that God takes it
grieuouſly when the meanes hee vſeth for our good, is
contemned by vs; let this ſerue to preſſe that vſe which
we lately heard, and cauſe vs to profit by all the gratious
meanes that God affords. Thou art afflicted and
lieſt vnder Gods correcting hand; oh! how grieuous
will it bee to God, if thou commeſt out of this fire not
refined? Thou commeſt to his houſe, and ſitteſt
downe at his Table, and departeſt againe away leſſe iuſtified
than thou cameſt thither: Oh! how doth this
cauſe God to mourne? Haue you no regard of this
his ſorrow?Lament. 1. 12. Is it nothing to you, all you that paſſe by?
What creature is there that God hath made in heauen,
earth, ſeas, or all depths, brings heauineſſe into the
Courts of happineſſe, except man? It is he, and onely
he, that doth it. Thou mockeſt at thy oppreſſions,
oathes, ſacriledges, luſts, frauds; for theſe hee grieues.
Thou ſcorneſt his Goſpell preached; hee bewailes thy
ſcorne. That which is ſorrow to his ſoule, is butProu. 14. 9. a
paſtime vnto thee. Oh doe no more ſo wickedly, my
brethren; bewaile ſinne paſt, and amend for time to
come.
            And laſtly;
                  Ʋſe 3. hence may the humbled and contrite
ſoule ſucke forth much ſweetneſſe: For doth he grieue
when we profit not by the meanes? Then queſtionleſſe
his eares muſt needs bee open to the ſighs and groanes,
to the praiers and ſupplications, of ſuch as are wrought
vpon by the meanes, to turne vnto him with true contrition
and godly ſorrow, and call vpon him with a
liuely faith. How ſhould this encourage ſuch as are
comming on, to come on with cheerefulneſſe? But if

we will not, then aſſuredly he will deſtroy vs, though
with griefe. As the Iudge paſſing ſentence on a malefactor,
though hee be moued with indignation againſt
him, as he is a theefe, or murtherer, &c. yet with compaſſion
as he is a man. And if we be condemned, whether
it bee with the will or againſt the will, all commeth to
one end; our paines and plagues ſhall bee neuer the
leſſe, nor lighter.
            And now goe to;Text. I will tell you what I will doe to my
Vineyard:Verſ. 5. I will take away the hedge thereof, and it
ſhall bee eaten vp; and breake downe the wall thereof, and
it ſhall be trodden downe.
            
                And I will lay it waſte, it ſhall not be pruned nor digged,
but there ſhall come vp briers and thornes: I will
alſo command the clouds, that they raine no raine vpon it.
            Looke as in Courts of Iuſtice, and ſeats of Iudgement,
after Conuiction followes ſentence of Condemnation;
ſo here wee haue the like proceeding: They being
conuicted by their owne conſciences, and as condemned
perſons by their owne mouthes, ſentence paſſeth
againſt them on the plaintifes ſide; and that moſt
fearefull: for it is a ſentence of deſtruction and deſolation,
euen of the whole Land and People. Hee will
take from them thoſe many belſſings and fauours,
which hee had beſtowed on them. And that is not all:
for he will alſo lay them open, and giue them vp to the
ſpoile of their enemies, ſo that they ſhall bee trodden
downe and made deſolate.
            In which ſentence is conſiderable:Diuiſion. Firſt, A gracious
Premonition, in the beginning of the fift verſe.
            Secondly, A terrible Executions of the iudgement
threatned, from the middle of the fift verſe, to the end
of the ſixt.
            In the Premonition, obſerue we Gods mercifull goodneſſe:
Firſt, in foretelling them of the Iudgement; And
now goe to, I will tell you. Secondly, In prolonging it;
for hee doth not by and by puniſh them, but a while

deferres, and therefore he ſpeaketh in the future tenſe,
what I will doe.
            
            In the execution, conſider we theſe three circumſtances:
1. The partie puniſhing, and that is the Lord himſelfe
[I] will take away, [I] will breake, &c. 2. The
parties puniſhed, and they are Gods owne people, his choſen
vineyard, his owne inheritance [It] ſhall be trodden
downe, the hedge [thereof] &c. 3. The puniſhment it
ſelfe, and that conſiſts both in the paine of loſſe and
paine of ſenſe: good things ſhall be remoued, and euill
things inflicted. For firſt he will take away the hedge,
and breake downe the wall; whereupon ſhall follow eating
vp, treading downe, laying waſte: and then ſecondly,
he will withdraw his paines in pruning and
digging of it, and with-hold the clouds from raining
raine vpon it; and thereupon ſhall follow the barrenneſſe
of it: for it ſhall bring forth nothing, or worſe
than nothing; briers and thornes ſhall grow vpon it.
            
            Hauing now ſeene the ſumme; let vs ſpend a little
time in the opening of the words, that ſo hauing found
out the ſenſe and meaning, we may the better raiſe ſome
profitable obſeruation.
            
            
               And now goe to] The Lord ſeeme here to excite and
ſtirre vp himſelfe after the manner of men to proceed in
iudgement.Expoſition.
            
            I will ſhew you what I will doe to my Vineyard] or, I
will giue you to vnderſtand, or, make knowne vnto you (as
ſome reade it) q. d. Seeing that you are condemned in your
conſciences, and yet will not pronounce ſentence with your
mouthes, therefore goe to now, I my ſelfe will tell you what
I will doe.
            
               I will take away the hedge thereof] By hedge, as before
verſ. 2. we haue ſeene ſundry things may be vnderſtood:
but not to trouble you with repetition of what
was before taught, we are eſpecially (as I take it) to vnderſtand
thereby Gods diuine protection, which was as a
hedge or wall about them, and whereof they ſhould be

now depriued. As if he ſhould haue ſaid; Hitherto
you haue had my mercifull protection, which hath miniſtred
vnto you ſafetie and defence from all your enemies;
but now I will leaue off to helpe, ſuccour, or defend you any
more. This was that for want whereof the Church did
complaine;Pſal. 80. 12. 
               Why hast thou broken downe her hedges, ſo
that all they that doe paſſe by the way doe plucke her?
            
            And it ſhall be eaten vp] or, That it may be eaten
vp, and deuoured; to wit, by the beaſts of the field, the
enemies of the Church. Not only their neighbours nigh
about them, but alſo their enemies farre off ſhould moleſt
and trouble them, according to that threatning,
               Deut. 31. 17. Mine anger ſhall be kindled against them in that day,
and I will forſake them, and hide my face from them,
and they ſhall be deuoured, and many euils and troubles
ſhall be fall them, &c. This alſo doth the Church complaine
of in the place before quoted;
               Pſal. 80. 13. The Boare out of
the wood doth waſte it, and the wilde beaſt of the field doth
deuoure it.
            
               And breake downe the wall thereof] or, as ſome reade
it, teare downe the wall thereof: and ſo indeed the word
ſignifieth, to teare downe a thing with violence; which
noteth out the vehemencie of Gods wrath: for it ſhall
not fall downe of it ſelfe, but be violently torne or broken
downe. Now by this wall many vnderſtand the
Tower which he ſpake of before, verſ. 2. that was built
in the midſt of the Vineyard, whereby, as we ſaw (after
the iudgement of many of the learned) the Temple was
to be vnderſtood. But what need we be ſo exact in each
of theſe particulars?Idem alijs atque alijs verbis his dicit. Muſ. in. loc. For if by wall we vnderſtand no
other thing, than that before was meant by hedge, we
ſhould not fall into any great abſurditie.
            
               And it ſhall be trodden downe] or, for a treading. He
here alludeth to the manner of wilde beaſts breaking
into a Vineyard, which doe not only eat and deuoure,
but tread downe and ſpoile. And this notes a higher
degree of wrath than the former did. The enemies of

this people ſhould not only trouble them and afflict
them, but ouercome them and enter into their poſſeſſions;
and not only carry away, but alſo make ſtrip and
waſte; hauocke and ſpoile what they leaue behinde.
This alſo ſets out vnto vs the rage and furie of the
wicked againſt Gods Church.
            
               And I will lay it waſte] or, make it a deſolation; ſo
that it ſhall become as a vaſt deſart without any to inhabit
it. And here we haue a higher degree than either
of the former: for though the enemie might ouercome
them and ſpoile their country, yet there might remaine
ſome Citie: and albeit ſome Cities might be aſſailed
and deſtroyed; yet ſome houſes in thoſe Cities might
ſtill continue: Or ſay it ſhould ſo fall out, that all their
Cities, and houſes in their Cities ſhould be laid leuell
with the ground; yet ſome men might haply eſcape by
flight, and afterwards returne, and build new houſes,
Cities, and erect new lawes and gouernment. But in
that he threatens to lay it waſte, and make it a deſolation,
all hope is gone. This is that which the Lord ſpeaketh
in the next chapter, where he ſeemeth to comment vpon
theſe words,Iſa. 6. 11, 12. 
               The Cities ſhall be waſted without inhabitant;
and the houſes without man, and the land be vtterly
deſolate. And the Lord will remoue men farre away, and
there ſhall be a great forſaking in the midſt of the land.
All which befell this people at their carrying away into
Babylon: and much more fully and compleatly was it
fulfilled after Chriſts time, when Ieruſalem was vtterly
deſtroyed, ſo that one ſtone was not left vpon another. To
which time ſome referre it.
            
               It ſhall not be pruned nor digged] By cutting or pruning,
he ſeemeth to vnderſtand fatherly diſcipline and
correction, which now he would with-hold from them,
according to that in the firſt of this propheſie;Iſai. 1. 5. 
               Why
ſhould you be ſtricken any more? As if he ſhould haue
ſaid: I ſee it is but loſt labour to ſmite you; for the more
I correct you, the worſe you proue. And by digging he

vnderſtandeth that point of husbandry,Moller. in loc. whereby the
earth is drawne into ridges, or heapes, chiefly about the
vines; which is ſo conuenient and neceſſarie in ſuch
places where vintages are, as that without it, the vines
will neuer proſper. And here hee alludeth vnto ſuch
husbandmen, as hauing barren vineyards and fruitleſſe
trees, doe neglect to prune or cut them, dung or digge
about them, becauſe they take no pleaſure nor delight
in them.
            
               But there ſhall come vp briers and thornes] By briers
and thornes ſome here vnderſtand the Gentiles,
               Muſculus in loc. according
to that of our Sauiour;Luke 21. 24. 
               Ieruſalem ſhall be trodden
downe of the Gentiles, vntill the time of the Gentiles be
fulfilled. But we may better vnderſtand thereby, Idolatry
and ſuperſtition, with other errors and abominations,
that for want of Gods husbandry ſhould (as afterwards
there did) grow vp amongſt them. And thus ſinnes and
tranſgreſſions are compared to thornes and briers
               Heb. 6. 8. elſewhere
in Scripture. And that fi
                  •
               ly: 1 For their wounding
and pricking thoſe that handle them; for whom
doth not ſinne wound? whom hath it not ſtung that
euer dealt with it? 2. For their holding together, and
twining one within another. Sinnes grow in heapes, and
where you finde any, you may finde many. And therefore
when the Apoſtle ſpeakes of them, hee couples
them,Rom. 13. 13. 
               Chambering and wantonneſſe, gluttonie and drunkenneſſe,
ſtrife and enuying: thus they grow like thornes
in hedges, by companies. 3. Becauſe they choake the
plants, and hinder them from the Sunnes hear and influence
of heauen: thus the ſeed is choaked by theſe
thornes,Matth. 13. as our Sauiour teacheth: And therefore S. Peter
willeth to1 Pet. 1. 1. 
               lay aſide all malice, and all guile, and
hypocriſie, and enuies, and euill ſpeakings (thoſe curſed
thornes and briers) and then As new borne babes deſire
the ſincere milke of the word to grow thereby.
               Verſ. 2.
            
            I will alſo command the clouds that they raine no raine
vpon it] By clouds vnderſtand we the Prophets;Cald. Paraph. & Hect. Pint. 
               and by
               
raine the Word. The Metaphor is vſuall: Moſes thus
begins his Song;
               Deut. 32. 2. My doctrine ſhall drop as the raine,
my ſpeech ſhall diſtill as the dew; as the ſmall raine
vpon the tender herbe, and as the ſhowres vpon the graſſe.
And ſo the word of the Lord came to Ezechiel, and ſaid,
               Ezek. 21. 2. Sonne of man, ſet thy face towards Ieruſalem, and drop
thy word towards the holy places, and propheſie againſt the
land of Iſrael. And thus Amos ſpeaketh to Amaziah;
Amos 7. 16. Thou ſaieſt, Propheſie not againſt Iſrael, and drop not
thy word againſt the houſe of Iſaac. In which places it
is apparant, that Gods Prophets are as clouds, and their
words or propheſies like drops of raine. Now in comparing
the raine and the word, we ſhall finde good reſemblance
in ſundry particulars: as, 1. In regard of cooling
heat: 2. quenching thirſt: 3. cleanſing the aire: 4. allaying
the windes: 5. mollifying and mellowing the parched and
heat-hardned earth. In each one of which, if wee
ſhould ſpend time, we ſhould finde an excellent agreement:
but eſpecially in a ſixth reſpect; It is a principall
meanes and ſubordinate cauſe that all things fructifie and
grow. And therefore this muſt needs be a heauy iudgement,
and argue Gods hot diſpleaſure againſt his Vineyard,
in commanding the clouds to raine no more raine
vpon it, according to that charge giuen to Micah,Mic. 2. 6. Propheſie
ye not vnto them; ſeeing that without it, it was impoſſible
the Vine ſhould grow or flouriſh. Thus we ſee
that as by briers and thornes the Plants ſhould be
choaked; ſo for want of raine their very roots ſhould
wither.
            
            And thus much for the literall expoſition. Now to
come to ſome particular obſeruation.
            
               And now goe to,
               Text. 
               I will tell you] This is the vſuall manner
of Gods dealing,Doct. God doth warne before he ſmite. 
               To warne before he ſtrikes, and foretell
the iudgement before he inflicteth it. He puniſheth
none before he hath admoniſhed them; ſmiteth none
before he hath forewarned them.
            That of the Prophet Amos makes this good,Amos 3. 7. 
               Surely

the Lord God will doe nothing, but he reuealeth his ſecrets
vnto his ſeruants the Prophets. He ſendeth his Heralds
to proclaime warre before he makes it, and foretels them
of ſuch iudgements as he is purpoſed to inflict, that
they may forewarne others. Take the old world, my brethren,
for an enſample: did hee not foretell the deſtruction
of it vntoHeb. 11. 7. 
               Noah, before he brought that great
Deluge vpon the earth? And was not Noah
               2 Pet. 2. 5. 
               a Preacher
of righteouſneſſe vnto them, whoſe hand taught them
as much as his tongue? His buſineſſe in building the
Arke was a reall Sermon to the world, wherein at once
were taught mercy and life to the belieuer, and to the rebellious
deſtruction. And did he not the like by Sodome
and Gomorrah, vnto whom hee ſent his ſeruant Lot,
               2 Pet. 2. 8. 
               whoſe righteous ſoule was vexed from day to day with
their vnlawfull deeds? Was not this likewiſe his dealing
with Pharaoh and his people? did he notExod. 8. 2. 21. & 9. 3. 14. 19. & 10. 4. againe
and againe admoniſh them, and threaten them by his
ſeruants Moſes and Aaron, that if they would not let
his people goe, he would doe thus and thus vnto them?
And ſo with the Niniuites, vnto whom he ſent Ionah
with this erie,Ionah 3. 4. 
               Yet fortie daies and Niniuie ſhall be ouerthrowne?
And with Ieruſalem
               Matth. 23. 37. which was often
forewarned by his Prophets, and by our Lord himſelfe
of her deſtruction before it fell?
            Two reaſons may be rendered for this truth;Reaſon 1. the one
is in regard of the godly, and ſuch as feare the Lord, that
they may not be taken at vnawares; but may be awakened
out of their ſecuritie, and timely preuent thoſe
iudgements threatned, as thoſe did, who vpon the hearing
of that plague of haile which Moſes foretold would
fall on Egypt,Exo. 19. 20. ſent their ſeruants to fetch their cattell
into their houſes.
            The other is,Reaſon 2. that the wicked may be left without excuſe
in the day of wrath;Iohn 15. 22. 
               If I had not come and ſpoken
vnto them, they had had no ſinne; but now they haue no
cloake for their ſinne (ſaith our bleſſed Sauiour.) Theſe

may be ſome reaſons why God giues a Caueat before
his Capias, and doth warne before he wound.
            And is this Gods vſuall dealing?
                  Ʋſe 1. why then are wee
ſmitten, plagued, puniſhed? Were we not forewarned
of iudgement? Oh our wilfulneſſe and folly! Oh whom,
oh man, canſt thou lay the fault? whom wilt thou charge
with thy ſmart? Canſt thou iuſtly ſay Gods ſilence was
any cauſe thereof? Hath not he ſhot off many a warning
peece, and ſounded many an alarum before he ſet himſelfe
in battell-array againſt thee? In the ſecret of thy
ſoule thou knoweſt he hath done thus: Often and often
he hath by his ſeruants, the Miniſters, warned thee
of danger at the doore; and by thy owne conſcience
many a time reproued thee, and premoniſhed thee of
future vengeance: He hath not played the part of a ſubtill
enemie, and ſtollen vpon thee at vnawares, but (as
Tamberlane that warlike Scythian) diſplayed firſt a
white Flagge, in token of mercie, and then a red, menacing
and threatning bloud, before that blacke Flagge,
the meſſenger and enſigne of death, was hung abroad.
Accuſe not the Lord then of any hard dealing, but the
hardneſſe of thy owne heart which will take no warning.
Hee need not to giue thee any warning of his
iudgements; thou gaueſt him no warning of thy ſinnes,
no reſpit: yet that God might approue his mercies to
thee, he giues thee warning, and reſpit of repenting.
How loth art thou, oh bleſſed God, to ſtrike, that
threats before! He that delights in reuenge, ſurpriſes his
aduerſarie, whereas he that giues warning, deſires to be
preuented: Were we not wilfull, what need wee euer feele
ſmart?
            
            Oh that this might teach vs wiſdome to ſee the euill
and flie from it!
                  Vſe 2. which that we may the better doe,Diuers waies God forewarneth vs of vengeance. let
vs diligently obſerue the vſual waies whereby the Lord
premoniſheth, and they are ſundrie: As firſt, By the miniſerie
of his ſeruants the Prophets▪
                whereby he foretelleth
when wrath is readie to fall vpon vs for our ſinnes:1. By the miniſtery of his ſeruants.
               
By them he foretold2 Chron. 36. 15, 16. the Iſraelites of the King of the
Caldeans comming vp againſt them, whom they
laughed to ſcorne and contemned: and by them Ieruſalem
was fore-warned (as was before noted.) Their
threatnings therefore and menaces ſhould not bee
lightly deſpiſed, but feared; not paſſed ouer, but preuented;
not derided, but applied to our conſciences.
For though they die,Zach. 1. 5. yet Gods word ſhall liue, and
his iudgements they denounced ſeize vpon vs except
we die to ſinne.
            By ſignes and wonders;2. By ſignes in the heauens. of which ſort was that
Earthquake which happenedAmos 1. 1. in Vzziahs daies in the
whole Countrey:Zach. 14. 5. And thoſe ſtrange apparitions ſeene
in the heauens a little before the deſtruction of Ieruſalem;
as that Blazing ſtarre like a ſword, which hung ouer
the Citie a whole yeeres ſpace; Horſes and Chariots
with armed troopes of men ſeene in the aire; the Eclipſe
of the Moone for twelue nights together, with many other
wonders,Ioſeph. de Bell. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 12. whereof Ioſephus hath at large written, as
that voice heard in the Temple the night before the
Feaſt of Pentecoſt; Let vs depart from hence: And the
conſtant crying of one about the walles for a long ſpace,
Woe,
               Matth. 24. 32. 
               woe, woe to Ieruſalem, and the like. And thus doth
God forewarne vs of the end of the world, as our bleſſed
Sauiour ſheweth.
            3 By leſſer and lighter iudgements;
               3. By leſſer iudgements. by gentle and fatherly
corrections, that by them we may be brought to
turne vnto him, and ſo eſcape further vengeance. Thus
were the Iſraelites often warned from the Lord: ſometimes
Amos 4. 8. he ſmote them with Blaſtings and Mildewes;
and at other times by giuing their Gardens, Vineyards,
Fig-trees, and Oliue-trees to the Palmer-worme to deuoure:
and when theſe warnings would not ſerue, then
he ſent amongſt them the Peſtilence, after the manner of
Egypt, and ſlew their young men with the ſword, and
tooke away their horſes, &c. And when nothing would
ſerue, he ouerthrew them as he ouerthrew Sodome and

Gomorrah. And ſo our Sauiour hauing foretold many
euils that ſhould come vpon Ieruſalem for their contempt
of the Goſpell, and refuſing of grace offered, addeth,
Matth. 24. 6. 8. 
               All theſe are but the beginnings of ſorrowes, the
end is not yet. There were more in number and greater
in weight to follow after theſe. Thus leſſer iudgements
are as it were the prints of Gods foot, whereby
we may trace him, if he be come out againſt vs.
            4 By the death of the godly,
               4. By the death of the godly. and ſuch as feare his
name, are future iudgements forewarned: eſpecially if
they be ſuch as are great and eminent, whether in Church
or Common-wealth: If theſe be taken away, it is a fearefull
ſigne that ſome grieuous iudgement will ouertake
the remnant of the people. This is that wherof our Prophet
Eſay ſpeaketh,Iſay 3. 1, 2, 3. 
               Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hoſts
doth take away from Ieruſalem the mightie man, and the
man of warre, the Iudge, and the Prophet, and the prudent,
and the ancient: The Captains of fiftie, and the honourable
man, and the Counſellor, &c. And elſewhere, thus;
Cap. 57. 1. 
               The righteous periſheth, and no man layeth it to his heart,
and mercifull men are taken away, none conſidering that
the righteous is taken away from the euill to come. Thus
was that good King Ioſiah dealt withall,2 King. 22. 20. not long after
whoſe death followed the Captiuitie of Babel: In
that graue wherein he was interred, the libertie, glory,
and peace of Iewrie lay alſo buried. And ſo Luther,
after whoſe death preſently followed that miſerable calamitie
vpon Germany, which hee had often foretold
would come vpon them for their contempt of the
Word, and which he deſired he might neuer liue to ſee
(as Caluin obſerues in his Comment vpon that place
of Iſay laſt quoted▪)Cap. 57. 1.
            
            Theſe are ſome wayes whereby the Lord fore-warneth
vs that euill is at hand, and therefore it behoueth
vs when by any of theſe he premoniſheth vs of danger
nigh, weAmos 4. 
               prepare to meet him, and preuent it. And
ſurely if euer there was cauſe, then now there is, why we

ſhould humble our ſelues before him in ſackcloth and
aſhes: for who can be ignorant of the many warnings
we haue had in each particular kinde? The Turtles of
this Land haue groaned out the ſad tunes of woe and
miſery; God hath ſo guided the hearts and tongues of
his Miniſters, as that they all, euen as one man, doe conſtantly
crie out, (with that Ieſus the ſonne of Anani a little
before the deſtruction of Ieruſalem) Woe to England,
and to the inhabitants thereof, by reaſon of ſuch outragious
wickedneſſe as euery where aboundeth; which
thing is not lightly to be paſſed by, but deſerues pondering
on. For certainly, if wee be not perſwaded to
feare their threatnings, we ſhall in the end be conſtrained
to feele them, whether wee will or no. Beſides,
what ſtrange ſignes and wonders, and what varietie of
them haue we lately ſeene, both in the heauens and vpon
the earth? What wonderfull and mightie tempeſts,
fearefull thundring and lightning hath lately happened,This preſent yeere 1622. on Auguſt 19.
whereby much hurt hath beene done at Sea. many ſhips
and barkes caſt away, and that in the ſafeſt Rodes and
Harbours of this land▪
               As appeares in that relation of the tempeſt which hapned in Deuon; the yeere and moneth aforeſaid, which is in Print. beſides the almoſt incredible
hurt done by land, throughout this Kingdome; the
violence of the winde, thunder, and lightning, being
ſuch, as that in many places Weſt-ward whole fields of
Corne haue beene blaſted, ſtackes of Corne ſcorched,
and here with vs the Corne hath beene ſo diſperſed and
ſcattered, as if it had beene ſowen againe, and ſo beaten
out of the eares, as if it had beene threſhed on the floore;
ſo that with the Mildew and blaſting which was ſent vpon
our Corne in generall before our harueſt, and now
with this ſudden iudgement of winde, vpon that little
ſtore of Corne remaining in harueſt, God hath taken
from vs our ſtay and ſtaffe of bread. What ſhall I need
to ſpeake of thoſe many Earthquakes, mightie inundations
of waters, great haileſtones, ſtrange Eclipſes, monſtrous
births, which euery yeere brings forth? Certainly
if the Sorcerers of Egypt were now amongſt vs, they

would confeſſe theſe to be the finger of God: But fooles
and blind, that we are, who haue no eies to ſee, nor harts
to vnderſtand theſe things, or at moſt make of them
but a nine daies wonderment, and ſo paſſe them ouer.
            And againe, hath not God often warned vs by leſſer
and lighter iudgements; hath hee not viſited vs with
Famines, Poſtilence, and other ſuch like infection of
ſickneſſe? Theſe are but as warning-peeces ſhot off in
our eares, and aſſured fore-runners of greater iudgements,

                  Perk. Exhort. to Repent. vnleſſe repentance cut off their courſe. For looke
as one cloud followeth another till the Sunne conſume
them; ſo one iudgement haſtens after another, and Repentance
only is the Sunne that muſt diſpell them. And
laſtly, that the righteous periſh, who ſeeth not? and yet
alas! who ſeeth it ſo, as to conſider it in his heart? The
Lords hand hath beene vpon vs theſe many yeeres, and
hath come, not in fauour to weed out the worſt, but in
diſpleaſure to gather the beſt and ripeſt. Amongſt our
Princes he hath ſmitten at our chiefeſt: Amongſt our
Nobles, he hath taken of our nobleſt: Amongſt our Magiſtrates
he hath fetched away of our vprighteſt. Surely,
ſurely, God neuer thus beheads a State or Countrey,
but for ſome treaſon. The Shepherds are ſmitten for
the ſheepes vnthankefulneſſe, vnfruitfulneſſe. What ſhall
I ſay more? Death hath beene at the Citie, as well as
at the Court; and in the Countrey, as well as in the Citie,
and hath fetched away of all ſorts almoſt the beſt.
And can this be any other than a plaine prognoſtication
of ſome euill nigh at hand? which euils they haue preuented
by their death: God grant we likewiſe may preuent
them by our Repentance.
            To draw towards a concluſion of this point; let euery
one in particular, yea thou that heareſt and readeſt
this, goe home to thy ſelfe and make application hereof
to thy owne ſoule, for God ſpeaketh in particular to
thee, as well as to any other, and demandeth of thee
how thou haſt profited by theſe or the like warnings.

For hath he not often by the miniſtery of his ſeruants
come ſo home vnto thy conſcience, as that thou haſt
beene perſwaded and enforced to confeſſe thou art the
man he meaneth, and at whom he aimeth. And what
drunkard, or prophane Eſau is there here amongſt vs,
who hath not been at ſometimes or other told by them,
that if they repent not they ſhall be damned? Beſides,
haue not thine eies ſeene his ſignes and wonders in the
heauens, vpon the earth, &c. Thou haſt heard, and haſt
beene told of ſuch a childe, borne without a mouth, or
with two heads, or with one eye, &c. why; take thou
warning, this is meant to thee, as well as to any other.
And hath not the Lord ſmote thee (hitherto) with a little
rod? afflicted thee with light loſſes, croſſes, &c. ſee
then thouMich. 6. 9. 
               heareſt the rod, and who hath appointed it.
And once againe I will demand of thee; anſwer mee:
Haſt thou not beene depriued of ſome faithfull friend;
it may be of a godly husband, a religious wife, a Chriſtian
and carefull parent, a gratious childe, a faithfull
Shepherd, or a true hearted brother? If it be ſo, take it
as the ſhaking of the rod, and as a warning from God
vnto thee, that thou mend thy manners. Remember
Solomons Prouerbe,Prou. 22. 3. 
               A prudent man foreſeeth the euill
and hideth himſelfe, but the ſimple paſſeon and are puniſhed.
Be thou that wiſeman, not this foole, but foreſee the
danger, and preuent it before it fall. Oh happie man,
to heare this word, before it fall, ſound in thine eares.
As for many thouſands, it is fallen irrecouerably vpon
them alreadie; to thoſe poore ſoules it cannot be ſaid,
as now it is to thee, Preuent it by repentance before it
fall: for iudgement hath alreadie ſeized vpon them; but
how happie art thou, if thou kneweſt thy happineſſe in
that thy day is yet to come? And therefore I ſay to thee,
take warning by theſe things, and preuent the euill before
it fall; for when it is fallen, there is no preuenting of
it.Luke 19. 41. 
               Oh that thou kneweſt at the leaſt in this thy day thoſe
things which belong vnto thy peace, and that they were not

hidden from thine eies! My praier ſhall be for thee, my
ſelfe, and the whole land in generall, that we may ſo doe.
Euen ſo, O Lord open our eies, that we may ſo ſee
thee warning, as that we may feare thee threatning; and
obey thee teaching, and patiently ſuffer thee chaſtiſing,
and at laſt be by thee made partakers of thoſe good
things, Which
               2 Cor. 2. 9. 
               neither eie hath ſeene, nor eare heard, nor
can enter into the heart of man. Amen, Amen.
            
            
               What I will doe] Great was Gods mercy towards this
his people in foretelling and premoniſhing them of vengeance.
Text. And this makes it greater in his prolonging of
it. He doth not by and by inflict, but will a while deferre.
There ſhall be ſome delay and pauſe, ſome lucida
interualla miſericordiae; A breathing time and mercifull
ſpace is granted betweene the fault and puniſhment.
And therefore he ſpeakes not in the preſent tenſe, but in
the future; What I will doe: where we ſee, and whence
we learne,
            God is of a patient and forbearing nature,Doctr. God is of a patient and forbearing nature. of much
gentleneſſe and long ſufferance, forbearing ſinners for
ſome ſpace after they haue tranſgreſſed before he proceed
to puniſh.
            Many examples might be brought for proofe.Iſay 65. 2. 
               All
the day long he did wait vpon the Iſraelites, ſtretching
out his hand to that diſobedient and rebellious people.
Gen. 19. 1. 23. 
               A whole night did he forbeare deſtroying Sodome after
he had told Abraham thereof, and forewarned them
by Lot.
               Ion. 3. 4. 
               Fortie daies did the Lord allot vnto Niniuie
for then Repentance; Yet fortie daies and Niniuie ſhall
be deſtroied.
               Luke 13. 7. 
               Three yeeres did he beare with the barren
figge tree before he would cut it downe with the Axe
of his iudgements. He ſuffered the ill manners (the
word is very ſignificant) of the Iſraelites,Act. 13. 18. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Fortie yeares
in the Wilderneſſe before he did deſtroy them.Gen. 6. 3. 
               One
hundred and twentie yeares reſpit of repenting God gaue
the old World,1 Pet. 3. 20. euen all the while the Arke was a preparing.
Gen. 15. 16. For the ſpace of foure hundred yeeres he ſpared the

               Canaanites and Amorites. Yea he ſuffered the Gentiles
to wander in their owne waies, and in the vanitie of
their mindes almoſt forActs 14. 16. 
               three thouſand yeares together.
Thus, 1. Al a day, 2. A whole night, 3. Fortie daies, 4. Three
whole yeeres, 5. Fortie yeeres, 6. One hundred and twenty
yeeres, 7. Foure hundred yeeres, 8. Three thouſand
yeeres breathing time is giuen man between the threatning
and execution. Oh! how loth is God to ſtrike, that
threats ſo long? In a word haue we not all experience
of this truth? Are there not ſo many thouſand witneſſes
as there are conſciences in this congregation to confirme
this point? Had not this beene true, where ſhould
euery one of vs haue beene at this preſent? Surely
I ſhould neither haue beene here to ſpeake, nor thou
to heare; but long before this houre we ſhould haue
beene ſwept from off the earth like dung, had there not
beene this Patience and long animitie in God. Thus ſundry
waies hath God made good his name, which all of
vs muſt needs feelingly ſubſcribe vnto:Exod. 34. 6. 
               The Lord, the
Lord ſtrong, mercifull, and gracious, ſlow to anger, abundant
in goodneſſe and in truth, &c.
            
            And no maruell,Reaſon 1. if we conſider, Firſt, that he is God:
were he not God, it were impoſſible for him ſo long
together to hold his hands; but he is God and not man,
therefore he forbeares. This reaſon ſeemes ſecretly to
be implied in thoſe words of the Chronicles,2 Chron. 36. 14, 15. 
               The
Lord God of their fathers ſent to them his meſſengers,
&c.
            
            2. He knoweth our weakneſſe,Reaſ. 2. our frame, and remembreth
that we are but duſt;Pſal. 103. 10, 14. he therefore dealeth not with
vs after our ſinnes, nor rewardeth vs after our iniquities.
This reaſon is rendered by the Pſalmiſt, why he pitieth,
ſpareth.
            
            3.2 Pet. 3. 9. 
               t He is not ſlacke concerning his promiſe,Reaſ. 3. as ſome men
count ſlackneſſe, but is long ſuffering to vs-ward, not willing
that any ſhould periſh, but that all ſhould come to repentance.
He deſires our conuerſion, not deſtruction,

and therefore beares ſo long. And this is the reaſon
that Saint Peter giues.
            
            4. He beareth a long time with the veſſels of his
wrath,Reaſ. 4. to the end that they mayGen. 15. 16. 
               fill vp the meaſure of
their ſinnes. And this is the reaſon the Holy Ghoſt
makes why the Amorites were forborne ſo long, before
puniſhment was executed on them for their wickedneſſe.
Let vs now apply theſe things vnto our ſelues: And
            Firſt,Vſe 1. this ſerues for Information of our Iudgements,
whence it comes, that wicked men are ſo long ſpared
and ſuffered to run on in ſin. We ſee how wretched and
prophane many are, being blaſphemers of Gods name,
prophaners of his Sabbaths, contemners of his word,
and giuen ouer to the committing of all ſinne with greedineſſe,
and yet are ſuffered to runne on without puniſhment,
which cauſeth matter of wonderment oftentimes
Ierem. 12. 1. in the hearts of Gods children. But ſee here the
reaſon;Non ille amiſit prouidentiam, aut amiſit potentiam, ſed patentiam exercet ſuam, dum poenitentiam expectat tuam. Auguſt. 
               God is of a patient and forbearing nature: the wicked
thinke it isPſal. 50. becauſe God is like them, a louer and liker
of ſinne: but be not thou deluded, learne the cauſe.
            2. Admire the richneſſe of Gods grace in bearing ſo
long with rebellious ſinners. For God to beare
with his owne children when they prouoke him
is very much; but to ſuffer his enemies, and beare ſo
long with the veſſels of his wrath;Vſe 2. to ſuffer drunkards,
whoremongers, Sabbath-breakers, to runne on in a
courſe of ſinne, liuing day after day, weeke after weeke,
yeere after yeere, and neuer in all that time to ſeeke his
fauour, but to waxe the worſe becauſe they are forborne,
this muſt needes argue an infinite perfection.
Oh, how can we ſufficiently magnifie ſuch a God as this!
how can we enough admire his goodneſſe, or ſet forth
his praiſe? Here is mercy, patience, goodneſſe, paſt the
comprehenſion of all finite ſpirits, and only to be conceiued
by him whoſe it is.
            And thirdly,Vſe 3. if this bee ſo, that God is of ſuch a patient
and forbearing nature, ſee what an odious contempt

of Gods grace it is to take occaſion by this patience, to
continue and increaſe in ſinne. In things of this life,
we hold it deteſtable if a ſeruant ſhould thus reaſon from
his maſters bounty; Hee dealeth thus and thus gratiouſlie
with me, therefore I care not how I prouoke him
and diſpleaſe him. And yet this is the reaſoning of
thouſands in the world: for thus ſay ſome (and farre
more thinke) I haue liued in ſuch or ſuch a courſe (as
I heare Preachers ſay of ſinning) for many yeeres, but I
ſee that God hath bleſſed me as well as the preciſeſt of them
all; I liue ſtill and thriue well (God I thanke thee) and
therefore I purpoſe to hold on as I haue begunne, talke theſ.
Preachers what they pleaſe, I paſſe not. And thus,Eccleſ. 8. 11. 
               becauſe
ſentence is not ſpeedily executed, vngodly men take
courage to offend: Dealing with God as birds doe with
the ſcarcrow, at firſt they are afraid; but ſeeing it not to
ſtirre, at length they come neere it and ſit vpon it: So
theſe, at firſt they are ſomewhat fearefull to offend, but
through impunity they harden themſelues to commit
iniquity: And yet (ſaith Solomon)
               Verſe 12, 13. 
               Though a ſinner
doe euill an hundred times and God prolong his daies, yet
ſurely I know that it ſhall be well with them that feare the
Lord, which feare before him. But it ſhall not be well with
the wicked, neither ſhall he prolong his daies which are as
a ſhadow, becauſe he feareth not before God. Vnderſtand
therefore, oh yee vnwiſe amongſt the people; all is not
well becauſe God forbeares to puniſh: His patience
and longanimity, is no good argument of mans innocency.
It may bee by the praiers of the Vinedreſſers
Luke 13. 6. reſpit hath beene obtained for thee for a while before
thy cutting downe, as was for that barren figge-tree:
Or elſe it may bee thy ſinnes (though hainous enough
amongſt vs)Gen. 15. 16. are not come as yet to their full ripeneſſe:
Or haply, God thus forbeares thee, to ſhew his lothneſſe
to deſtroy. How euer his patience alwaies tends
not to countenance receiued courſes, but to giue occaſion
to alter our accuſtomed euils. And what though

his wrath comes ſlowly, yet in the end hee will make
amends for his delay with the weight of vengeance.Lento gradu ad vindictam ſui.
His mill grindes ſlow, but yet ſure and ſmall. And this
while he beares, he is but a fetching of the blow; and
the higher he lifts, the heauier it lights. Now hee is
preparing his deadly arrowes, this time he takes to fit
them to the ſtring, and becauſe hee meanes not to miſſe
the marke, he ſtands long at leuell, and drawes far, euen
to the head, that his arrowes may pierce deepe euen to
the ſoule. Take Ieruſalem for an enſample, and ſet that
famous Citie before thine eyes; Did euer any people
taſte more of Gods patience, or drinke deeper of the cup
of his mercifull forbearance, than Ieruſalem, famous
Ieruſalem did? How long did he ſpare them? how
many wayes did he forewarne them? And when nothing
would ſerue, how was his patience turned into furie?
Matth. 24. 2. 
               Not one ſtone left vpon another; and the inhabitants
and their poſteritie made ſlaues and vagabonds for this
1600 yeeres. Say not then with Agag,
               1 Sam. 15. 32. 
               Surely the bitterneſſe
of death is paſt, becauſe thou art a while forborne:
No, no; the longer before the reckoning, the
greater the account will be.Patientia laeſa 
                     •
                  it faeror. And euermore remember,
that there is no wrath ſo furiouſly outragious, as that
which ariſeth from patience long & obſtinately abuſed.
            See therefore in the next place thou beeſt admoniſhed,
               Vſe 4.
to beware how thou abuſeſt this patience and long-ſuffering
of the Lord: And ſee thou follow the Apoſtles
direction;Rom. 2. 4. 
               Let it leade thee to repentance. Happy
thou, if thou doe thus vſe it. And indeed, except thou
doſt ſo, thou neuer makeſt the true and proper vſe thereof:
Pſal. 130. 4. 
               There is mercy with thee, that thou maieſt bee feared
(ſaith that Kingly Prophet.) Gods children doe
feare God
               Hoſ. 3. 5. 
               and his goodneſſe, and feare to offend God
in regard of his goodneſſe. Ioſeph reaſons thus,Gen. 39. 8. 
               My
Maſter hath dealt thus kindly with mee, &c. how then
can I commit this great wickedneſſe? So muſt all Gods
children reaſon.
            
               
Againe,Vſe 5. this may be for Imitation: As God is and
hath beene towards vs patient and long-ſuffering, ſo
let vs bee towards others. That haſtie ſpirit of calling
for fire from heauen for euery diſobedience, was ſharply
Luke 9. 54. reproued by our bleſſed Sauiour. Let vs learne to
haue an eie to the rich patience of our God, who is
daily by vs prouoked; and (after his example) tolerate
the froward infirmities of our ignorant brethren,
2 Tim. 2. 25. 
               with meekneſſe inſtructing them rather, than with
raſhneſſe of zeale reiecting them; and in caſe of wrong,
ſay not, I will recompence euill. It was a good ſpeech
(and comming out of a Heathens mouth, deſerues the
more regard)Socrates. 
               I will willingly neither ſuffer wrong nor
doe it; but if I muſt chuſe one, I will rather chuſe to ſuffer
than to doe. But why ſpeake I of the Heathen (vnleſſe
to ſhame vs) when we haue God himſelfe to imitate?
How patient is he towards reprobates and veſſels
of his wrath? If thou putteſt vp an iniury patiently
once or twice, thou haſt thy ſelfe highly in admiration,
and (in thy owne conceit) deſerueſt to bee
chronicled, for a rare patterne of patience. But God
doth beare with thee and other, many thouſand times
in a day; write after that copy, and forgiueMatth. 18. 22. 
               not ſeuen
times, but ſeuenty times ſeuen times, if thou beeſt ſo often
wronged: And be thou transformed into the ſame
image of God, from glory to glory.
            
            Laſtly,Vſe 6. hence may perplexed and diſquietted conſciences,
who tremble vnder Gods hand, fearing the power
of his wrath by reaſon of their ſinnes, haue a vſe
of Comfort, for the lifting of them vp. It is Gods nature
to be patient, be not therefore out of hope. Hee is
long ere he be prouoked, and when he is prouoked, eaſie
to be appeaſed. An earthly father will not take euery
aduantage againſt his childe; hee will tell him and forewarne
him, before hee doth correct and puniſh him:
And why ſhould we thinke God harder than our ſelues?
How long beares he with ſuch as neuer grieue, mourne,

nor complaine of ſinne? will he then be haſty to marke
what is done amiſſe by ſuch as grone vnder the burden
of their corruptions? He ſpareth ſuch as neuer ſo much
as ſay,Ier. 
               What haue I done; and is it poſſible that he ſhould
not ſpare ſuch as with the Prodigall crie out,Luke 15. 
               Father I
haue ſinned? Certainly if the wicked fare ſo wel, the godly
ſhall fare much better: and be thou perſwaded ſo. And
thus much for the Premonition: the Execution followes.
            I will take away the hedge thereof,Text. and it ſhall bee eaten
vp; and breake downe the wall thereof, and it ſhall be trodden
downe, &c.
            Here (according to our propounded method) conſider
we firſt the Party puniſhing; and who it is that doth
inflict this iudgement on them: and that is the Lord
himſelfe, [I] will take away, &c. Thence obſerue:
            Gods holy hand hath a ſpeciall ſtroake in thoſe afflictions
and viſitations which are laid vpon his Church and befall
his people,Doctr. Gods hand is in all afflictions that doe befall vs. whoſoeuer be the inſtrument.
            
               What truth more ſtrongly confirmed in holy Writ
than this? Doe wee not there reade thus;
               Iob 5. 6. Affliction
commeth not forth of the duſt, neither doth trouble ſpring
out of the ground.Eſay 45. 7. I forme the light and create darkneſſe,
I make peace and create euill: I the Lord doe all
theſe things.Eſay 28. 21. The Lord ſhall riſe vp as in mount Perazim,
he ſhall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that hee
may doe his worke, his ſtrange worke, and bring to paſſe his
act, his ſtrange act.1 Sam. 2. 6, 7. The Lord killeth and maketh
aliue, hee bringeth downe: to the graue, and bringeth
vp. The Lord maketh poore and maketh rich: he
bringeth low and lifteth vp.Deut. 32. 39. I, euen I am hee, and
there is no god with me: I kill and I make aliue, I wound
and I heale, neither is there any that can deliuer out of my
hand. And,
               Amos 3. 6. What euill is there in the City (vnderſtand
it of the euill of puniſhment) that I haue not done?
Hereupon doth the Church
               Hoſ 6. 1. 
               mutually exhort one
another, to returne vnto the Lord, becauſe he hath torne
and hee will heale, hee hath ſmitten and hee will binde vp.

               And by S. Peter wee are inſtructed, to
               1 Pet. 5. 6. Humble our
ſelues vnder the mighty hand of God, that hee may exalt
vs in due time. And hereupon Ioſeph, though of his
enuious brethren ſold into Aegypt, ſaith;
               Gen. 45. 8. God hath
ſent mee hither: And Dauid being curſed by Shemei,
ſaid;
               2 Sam. 16. 10. God had bid him curſe: And Iob robbed by the
Sabaeans ſaith;
               Iob 1. 21. God hath taken away.
            And how can it otherwiſe be,Reaſ. ſeeing thatMatth. 10. 29. 
               a ſparrow
falleth not to the ground, nor a haire from off our heads,
without the prouidence of the Almighty, as our Sauiour
hath taught vs? If then Gods prouidence reacheth to
matters of ſuch ſmall weight, it muſt needs reach to matters
of greater moment.
            If any now obiect,Obiect. That wicked and bad men, yea
the Deuill himſelfe, doth perſecute Gods Church, and
ſorely afflict his people, and that the moſt euils which
befall Gods children come from them, how then can it
be ſaid, they are of God?
            I anſwer;Resp. Wee are to know that theſe are but as the
executioners, God employing them no otherwiſe than
as a Iudge doth ſome baſe ſlaue in making him the
hangman.God hath a hand in thoſe euils which are inflicted by wicked inſtruments. Still hath God a hand in thoſe puniſhments
inflicted on his by thoſe euill ones; which ſhewes it
ſelfe in theſe actions:
            Firſt, in ordaining and appointing them euen from all
eternitie to doeActs 2. 28. whatſoeuer thine hand and counſell
hath appointed to be done.1. In ordaining them.
            
            2. In ordering and dispoſing them; firſt, in regard of
the time when they ſhall both begin and end;2. In ordering them: as ſo as that
all the furie and malice of the wicked cannot any iot haſten,
1. In regard of the time. lengthen, or prolong them. There is an houre appointed
for the powers of darkneſſe to worke in, and till
that houre be come, an haire ſhall not fall from the heads
of any of the godly. Let the Iewes take vp neuer ſo
many ſtones againſt Chriſt Ieſus, yet he ſhall eſcape: let
them ſeeke to take him, yet none ſhall dare to lay hold
vpon him, becauſeIohn 7. 30. 
               his houre is not yet come. And when

that houre is come, they ſhall not be able to lengthen it
one moment; as we may ſee in the 400 yeeres appointed
to the Iſraelites in the Egyptian ſeruitude, which being
once expired, they came out (maugre all the malice
of their enemies)Exod. 12. 41. 
               euen the ſelfe-ſame day: and in the
Dan. 9. 2. 21, 23. 70 yeeres of the Babyloniſh captiuitie; as alſo in the
afflictions and perſecutions of the Church of Smyrna,
               Reuel. 2. 10. raiſed vp by Sathan, which is reſtrained to a determinate
time of ten dayes.
               2. For meaſure. Secondly, in regard of the meaſure,
which is alſo appointed in ſuch an exact and ſtrict
manner, as that it is alike impoſſible, for all the powers
of men or deuils to adde one dram vnto the weight, as
we ſee inIob 1. 12. 
               Iobs example. For as Sathan at firſt could not
touch him, vntill he had receiued a commiſſion from
God; ſo neither could he adde& 2. 6. any thing to his firſt afflictions,
vntill his commiſſion was renued. To this
purpoſe ſpeaketh the Pſalmiſt thus;Pſal. 80. 5. 
               Thou feedeſt them
with the bread of teares, and giueſt them teares to drinke in
great meaſure.
               3. Of their ends. And thirdly, in regard of their ends &
iſſues, turning them to his owne glory and Churches
good;Rom. 8. 28. 
               All things working together for their beſt.
Thus Ioſeph ſaid of his ſelling into Egypt,Gen. 50. 20. 
               God dispoſed
it to good, though it was euill which his brethren intended
againſt him. Thus the Caldeans ſteale Iobs
wealth to enrich themſelues; the Deuill afflicts his bodie
in his hatred to mankinde; God ſuffers all this for
the triall of his patience: Man for couetouſneſſe; the
Deuill for malice; God for the probation of the afflicteds
conſtancie, and aduancing his owne glory. The
couetous Extortioner, or griping Vſurer, ſpoiles thee of
thy goods; God in wiſdome raiſeth profit from it, and
by thy pouertie in purſe, helps thee to the riches of his
grace, and ſuffers theſe ſnares to be taken from thee to
ſaue thy ſoule; yet no thanks to them. Thus we haue
ſeene how God hath a hand in ſuch euils as are inflicted
on vs by wicked inſtruments.
            Now hence againe it may be queſtioned,Queſt. 1. why God

doth not rather correct his ſeruants by his owne hand,
and let his chaſtiſements come purely from himſelfe,
or by the meanes of righteous and iuſt men, than by
ſuch wicked inſtruments, who infuſe into thoſe afflictions
the poyſon of their malitiouſneſſe and ſpleene.
            The execution of puniſhment,Anſwer. in it ſelfe, is a baſe and
ſeruile thing, and doth not ſo fitly agree with the nature
of the moſt High, who being the chiefe goodneſſe,
taketh his chiefe delight in doing good. Now becauſe it
is not familiar and delightfull to his nature, he doth it
not by himſelfe, nor yet by the godly, but commonly
allotteth it to the Deuill and wicked ones, as being fitteſt
for ſuch a ſeruice. For doe we not ſee a Carpenter
hath diuers kindes of tooles? ſome are courſe, which
he vſeth about ſtones or grauell; others are choiſe,
which he vſeth about finer worke. Thus when God
hath ſome baſe worke to effect, he hath ſome reprobate
at hand, about which he is employed: but if a more
honourable peece of ſeruice, then he vſually fetcheth a
toole of a purer metall and finer making, one of his children
ſhall be ſent for. He will not vſe the Virgin Mary,
or ſuch choice peeces, but a Iudas, a Caiphas, a Pilate,
and ſuch like as they, if Chriſt is to be crucified.
            But how can it ſtand with Gods iuſtice,Queſt. 2. to puniſh the
wicked for afflicting of his Church and people, ſeeing
they are but his inſtruments in executing of his iudgements,
and doe no other than that whereabout he ſets
them?
            Know we that the will of God is ſecret or reuealed.
               Anſw. 1.
The former was neuer propounded as a rule for vs to
conforme our actions vnto; but the latter, which wee
finde written in his Law, vnto which he requireth conformitie
and obedience; and by it we are enioyned to
loue our neighbour as our ſelues, and by all good meanes
to ſeeke the good and aduancement of our brethren:
now thoug they doe the ſecret will of God (which the
Deuill and all reprobates doe, and cannot otherwiſe

chuſe but muſt doe, will they nill they) yet becauſe they
runnefull butt againſt Gods reuealed will, the rule and
ſquare of all their actions, their condemnation is
moſt iuſt.
            Againe, they aime not therein at the glory of God,
and neuer thinke of the effecting of his counſels and ſecret
will, but only aime at, and labour for the accompliſhing
of their owne hearts luſts, deſiring to glut their
crueltie, and to aduance themſelues out of the ruine of
Gods ſeruants. See an excellent example hereof in that
Aſſyrian King, whom God ſent in his ſecret counſell
againſt his people to afflict them for their ſinnes:Iſai. 10. 7. 
               Howbeit
(ſaith the text) he meaneth not ſo, neither doth his
heart thinke ſo. His intent and purpoſe was to deſtroy
and cut off not a few Nations; that he might make all
his Princes Kings, and ſo himſelfe a mighty Monarch.
This then ſerueth not for their excuſe, that they are but
inſtruments, ſeeing they are ſuch inſtruments. Now we
come to apply the point vnto our ſelues. And firſt.
            Seeing it is ſo,Vſe 1. that all afflictions and viſitations that
befall vs come from God, and are inflicted by him; it
confuteth and taxeth vs for a vanitie at leaſt (I had
almoſt ſaid a blaſphemie) deeply rooted and ſetled
amongſt vs: when any calamitie doth befall vs, wee
ſtraight cry out, Bad lucke, bad fortune. If any loſſe or
croſſe betide vs, oh (ſay we) what lucke and fortune was
this. In euery miſery, blinde fortune is complained of:
And ſo è contra, when any good thing happens, Lucke
and Fortune muſt be thanked for it; thus walking after
the luſts of the Gentiles,Te facinius, Fortuna, Deam, coelo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   locamus. Iuuen. Satyr. 10. who held Fortune as a Goddeſſe,
and aſſigned her a place in heauen; repreſenting
her by a woman ſitting vpon a ball; as if the whole
world were at her command; hauing with her a raſor,
as if ſhee could at her pleaſure cut off and end mans happineſſe;
bearing in her right hand the ſterne of a ſhip,
as if ſhee could turne about all things at her pleaſure;
and in her left hand, the horne of abundance, as though

all plenty came from her. Which palpable Idolatry that
was amongſt them, ſhould be renounced and abhorred
by vs Chriſtians. Yea ſo farre ſhould it be had in deteſtation,
that the very name of Fortune ſhould not once be
named amongſt vs, and much leſſe any thing aſcribed to
it, whereof we ſee not an apparent cauſe.
            Secondly,Vſe 2. ſeeing afflictions are inflicted by the hand
of God, this ſhould teach vs patience, as it did Dauid
when Abſolon roſe vp againſt him;Pſal. 39. 10. 
               I was dumbe, I
opened not my mouth, becauſe thou diddeſt it. It muſt
needs be a bold audacious impudencie to murmur in
afflictions, conſidering God is the author and inflicter.
If our inferiour ſtrike vs, we reuenge it treble: if an
equall, we requite it: if a ſuperiour, we haue learned
this wiſdome not to repine; or if we mutter, yet not to
vtter our diſcontent. Thinke whoſe hand ſtrikes: It is
Gods, who-euer be the inſtrument; the blow was his,
whatſoeuer was the weapon. It is vſually ſeene, that in
corrections comming immediatly from Gods hand, we
are not ordinarily ſo impatient, as in thoſe which come
by meanes of wicked inſtruments; and what is the
cauſe but this? we doe not ſo apparently behold Gods
holy hand ſtriking vs in theſe latter as in the former:
Did we but ſeriouſly conſider, that it is God that ſcourgeth
vs by them, we would be then aſhamed of our folly
in being angry at the rod without any regard of the ſmiter;
in ſnarling like dogs at the ſtone, neuer conſidering
the flinger. Doe we not ſee how patiently Lords
and Nobles condemned to die, ſuffer the ſtroke of death
at the hands of the baſe hangman, ſhewing therein their
ſubiection and obedience to their Prince? Euen ſo
ſhould we, quietly and patiently endure all the indignities
that are offered vnto vs by wicked worldly men,
therein giuing teſtimonie of our obedience to God, who
vſeth them as inſtruments of his iuſtice to correct vs.
See then that thou doſt ſo: neuer ſeuer the croſſe from
Gods hand, though there be neuer ſo many inſtruments;

but Heare the rod, & who hath appointed it; ſo ſhalt
thou with patience and meekneſſe beare that affliction
that is inflicted. But if otherwiſe; if when the croſſe
comes, thou art willing to ſee any thing rather than
God, running vpon inferiour cauſes, gazing on men, or
meanes, regarding more the ſtaffe wherewith thou art
ſmitten, than the hand mouing and ruling it; it will then
be intolerable, and thou muſt needs breake the bounds
of patience.
            But may we not haue an eye vpon ſecond cauſes?Queſt. Are
we vtterly to neglect the inſtruments of our afflictions?
            In all afflictions,Anſw. we are to conſider not only the action
and worke, as it is ſimply naturall, and the diſpoſition of
them to the manifeſtation of Gods glory and our good,
in which reſpect God is the chiefe author of them; but
alſo an accidentall confuſion and malignitie of the action,
which is wholly to be aſcribed to mans corruption, by
whom it is performed; in regard of which malignitie
and ſinne, we are to haue ſome reſpect vnto them, that
we may hate and flie that euill and iniuſtice that is in
them, and vſe all good and lawfull meanes whereby we
may croſſe them in their wicked purpoſes, and free our
ſelues from their iniuries and oppreſſions; hauing herein
the word of God for warrant, which enioyneth vs to
vſe all honeſt courſes, that ſpirituall wiſdome can ſuggeſt
vnto vs for our preſeruation and ſafetie.
            Thirdly,Vſe 3. if God be the author of affliction, this may
ſerue for direction vnto vs, what courſe to take in time
of danger, euen that which is giuen vs by the Prophet
Hoſea, toHoſ. 6. 1. 
               come and returne vnto the Lord; for it is he
that ſpoiles, and he muſt heale; it is he that wounds,
and he muſt binde vp; there is none that canIob 10. 7. take off
Gods hand but himſelfe. He is a fooliſh malefactor that
ſeekes to the executioner and not vnto the Iudge: & yet
as fooliſh are we, who in the day of trouble reſt vpon
vaine helps that cannot profit, hoping to haue releefe
from ſome Saint or Angell in heauen, or which is

worſe, from Coniurers and Witches here vpon the
earth:Flectere ſi nequeo Superos, Acheronta mouebo. As ſometimes the Heathen man ſaid; If I cannot
intreat the gods, I will goe vnto the deuils: and as
King Ahaziah did, who being ſicke, ſent to inquire of
Baalzebub the god of Ekron
               2 King. 1. whether he ſhould recouer
of his diſeaſe or no. Wofull is that cure which is
wrought by ſuch Phyſitians. We haue learned better
things. The generall rule for all troubles is;Pſal. 50. 15. 
               Call vpon
me in the day of trouble, and I will deliuer thee, and thou
ſhalt glorifie me.
               Pſal. 123. 2. 
               As the eyes of ſeruants therefore looke
vnto the hands of their Maſters, and as the eyes of a maidon
vnto the hand of her Miſtreſſe; ſo our eyes ſhall wait
vpon thee our God, vntill that thou haue mercy on vs.
            
            And laſtly,Vſe 4. ſeeing God hath a hand in all afflictions
that befall, this may afford great comfort to the godly,
in that they are not left into the hands of their cruell
and crafty enemies, but are in the hands of ſo gratious
and mercifull a God and louing Father; through whoſe
ſweet hand the ſharpeſt and bittereſt afflictions doe
paſſe. As for our aduerſaries, they are but as the rod in
the hand of him that ſmites: As therefore the rod can
of it ſelfe doe nothing, further than the force of the
hand vſing it, giues ſtrength vnto it; no more can they
doe any thing vnto vs further than they haueIohn 19. 
               power giuen
them from aboue. Boiſterous Tubeco may haply diſmay
vs with his thundering ſpeeches; but let vs know
there is an ouer-ruling hand to moderate and reſtraine
him. The ſwinging rod the childe ſees in his fathers
hand, may ſomewhat terrifie him; yet the childe may
certainly perſwade himſelfe, his father will ſo vſe it, as it
ſhall doe him no more harme than a ſmaller one would
doe. Let the wicked ſtorme, and fiet, and breathe out
threatnings againſt Gods Church and people; this we
know aſſuredly, they may doe what they can, but they
cannot doe what they would. And thus much for the
firſt circumſtance which concerneth the Auther or inflicter
of the iudgement: Now followeth the ſecond,

which concernes the puniſhed, or the parties on whom it
is inflicted, and they are Gods owne people, a people
whom hee choſe for his peculiar, before any other people
in the world beſide; it was his Vineyard, his owne
encloſure, as theſe words [thereof] and [it] doe note
vnto vs.
            
               Let this then be our obſeruation hence:
               
                  Doct. God will not ſpare his owne people if they ſinne againſt him. 
               That God
will not ſpare his owne people, if they ſinne againſt him, but
will viſit their tranſgreſſions with the rod, and their iniquities
with ſtrokes.
            
               The Scriptures propoſe many examples; our eares
haue heard many reports, our eyes behold daily many
preſidents, which may confirme this Doctrine. What
dolefull complaints doe we reade that the Church maketh
euery where in the Lamentations,
               
                  Lament. 1. 18. 20. & 2. 1. &c. Behold oh Lord
how I am troubled, my bowels ſwell, my heart is turned
within me, for I am full of heauineſſe: The ſword ſpoileth
abroad, as death doth at home, &c. How lamentably
doe the godly bemoane themſelues and the eſtate of the
Church in the Propheſie of Iſay,Iſay 64. 9, 10, 11. Be not angry, O
Lord, aboue meaſure, neither remember iniquitie for euer:
behold, ſee we beſeeth thee, we are thy people. Thy holy cities
axe a wilderneſſe, Zion is a wilderneſſe, Ieruſalem a deſolation:
Our holy and our beautifull houſe where our Fathers
praiſed thee, is burnt vp with fire, and all our pleaſant
things are laid waſte. And how doth the Prophet
Dauid expreſſe the burden of his afflictions, wherewith
he was afflicted, in the
               
                  Pſal. 6. 3. & 32. 4. 
               Booke of the Pſalmes?
               Pſal. 38. 2, 3. Thine arrowes (ſaith he) ſticke fast in me, and thy hand
preſſeth me ſore. There is no ſoundneſſe in my fleſh, becauſe
of thine anger, neither is there any reſt in my bones, becauſe
of my ſinne. And againe thus;
               Pſal. 116. 3. The ſorrowes of death
compaſſed mee, and the paines of hell gat hold vpon me: I
found trouble and ſorrow: and many ſuch like patheticall
complaints he makes. The whole Booke of the Iudges
may be a proofe for this truth, wherein wee ſee how
the people of Iſrael proceeding to doe euill in the ſight

of the Lord, he ſold them into the hand of his and their
enemies. We might further inſtance in Solomon, Aſa,
Iehoſhaphat, Ioſiah, Hezekiah, and others; all which
make this good, that God ſpareth not his owne people
when they ſinne againſt him.
            Two Reaſons may be giuen hereof:Reaſon 1. Firſt, That the
Lord might declare himſelfe to be un aduerſary to ſinne in
all men,
               Pſal. 51. 4. and that the wicked may ſee he is not partiall
to any when his commandements are not regarded.
            
               Secondly,
               Reaſ. 2. 
               That he may reduce his ſeruants from running
on headlong with the wicked to perdition. For were
wee altogether exempted from the rod, how wanton
and froward would we grow, and into how many perils
would wee caſt our ſelues? And ſo ſaith Saint Paul,
1 Cor. 11. 32. When we are iudged, we are chaſtened of the Lord, that
we might not be condemned with the world.
            But did not Chriſt giue himſelfe for his Church,Obiect. and
ſhed his bloud for their redemption? was not their ſins
puniſhed in him? How comes it then to paſſe they are
ſtill ſubiect to Gods heauie viſitations?
            True it is that Chriſt did beare away all our puniſhments,
Resp. but he hath not freed vs from fatherly corrections:
Now when God afflicteth his in this world, it is
more for medicine than for puniſhment; more for a correction,
than for a penaltie. Loſſes, croſſes, pouertie, impriſonmeent,
ſickneſſe, yea death it ſelfe, are not to vs
puniſhments nor curſes properly, but fatherly chaſtiſements,
being inflicted as furtherances of ſanctification,
not as meanes of ſatisfaction. And thus you haue this
obiection anſwered, and my doctrine confirmed, viz.
God will not ſpare any, no not his owne people when they ſin
againſt him.
            
            Which being ſo,Vſe 1. this may terrifie wicked and vngodly
ones, who make a trade of ſinne, driuing after it
(as it was ſaid of Iehu in another caſe) as if they were
made; and yet imagine, becauſe God for a timePſal. 50. 21. holdeth
his peace and keepes ſilence, that hee is ſuch a one as

themſelues, a louer and approuer of their wicked waies.
But oh you fooles, how long will you loue folly? and
when will you grow wiſe? Doth God correct the flock
of his owne paſture, the children of his owne houſhold,
and ſhall you goe ſcot-free? Doth the Lord chaſtiſe
them ſo heauily, the burden of whoſe ſins Chriſt
hath borne in his bodie on the croſſe, and ſhall ſuch as
Chriſt neuer died for, no nor yetIohn 17. 9. prayed for, eſcape?
ſhall not many prayers and teares, ſighes and groanes,
petitions of Gods Saints, requeſts of the Spirit, together
with the daily interceſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, Gods
only and welbeloued, in whom he is well pleaſed, keepe
off ſuch bitter things from them, who but now and then
breake out? Woe and alas then! what ſhall become of
you, who neuer pray, ſigh, nor ſhed teare for ſinne, for
whom Gods bleſſed Spirit makes no requeſt, and who
haue no intereſt in the mediation and interceſſion of
that iuſt and righteous Aduocate; who ſinne not of infirmitie
and weakneſſe, but boldly and preſumptuouſly
with a high hand againſt the Lord? Thinke of an anſwer
to thoſe interrogatories which the Spirit of God
propoundeth to thee in holy Writ:Ier. 25. 29. 
               Loe I beginne to
bring euill on the Citie which is called by my name, and ſhal
you goe vtterly vnpuniſhed? And againe,Cap. 49. 12. 
               Behold, they
whoſe iudgement was not to drinke of the cup, haue aſſuredly
drunken; and art thou he that ſhalt eſcape? And
againe,Luke 23. 31. 
               If theſe things be done to the greene tree, to
them who haue in them the ſap of grace, what ſhall be
done to the drie, to them who haue no moiſture of goodneſſe?
And againe,1 Pet. 4. 17, 18 
               If iudgement firſt beginne at vs
who are the houſe of God, what ſhall the end be of them that
obey not the Goſpell of God? And if the righteous ſcarcely
be ſaued, where ſhall the vngodly and ſinner appeare? What
anſwereſt thou to theſe, why ſpeakeſt thou not? And
now, O my God, behold how I am troubled, my bowels
ſwell, my heart is turned within me; for I heare an
anſwer, true, but terrible;Pſal. 11. 5, 6. 
               The Lord indeed will trie the

righteous in his furnace, but the wicked and ſuch as loue
iniquitie doth his ſoule hate: vpon the wicked ſhall he raine
ſnares, fire and brimſtone, and ſtormie tempeſt; this is the
portion of their cup. He will indeed iudge the iuſt man
for his tranſgreſſions in his life; butPſal. 68. 21. 
               hee will wound
the head of his enemies, and the hairy pate of him that walketh
on on his treſpaſſes. Yea in2 Theſſ. 1. 8, 9. 
               flaming fire ſhall God
come, taking vengeance on them that know him not, and
that obey not the Goſpell of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and
they ſhall be puniſhed with euerlaſting perdition from the
preſence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.
               Reuel. 6. 15, 16 
               Then ſhall the Kings of the earth, and the great men,
and the rich men, and the chiefe Captaines, and the mightie
men, and euery bond-man, and euery free-man, (whoſe
names are not written in the Lambes Booke) hide themſelues
in dens, and in the rockes of the mountaines: And
ſay to the mountaines and rockes, Fall on vs and hide vs
from the face of him that ſitteth on the Throne, and from
the wrath of the Lambe. But as it was with the old
world, when God rained from heauen the greateſt
ſhowre that euer the earth did or ſhall ſuſtaine, their
ſhifts were bootleſſe; ſo will it now be: They then
thought to ouer-climbe the iudgement, and haſte vp to
the higheſt mountaines, and being there, with ſome
hope looke downe on the ſwimming valleyes: But
alas! the water begins to aſcend to their refuged hilles,
and within a ſmall time the place of their hopes becomes
an Iland; now they hitch vp higher to the tops of
the talleſt trees; but ſoone after the waters following,
ouertake them halfe dead with hunger and with horror.
Thus thoſe mountaines could not ſaue thoſe in that day
of water, nor theſe mountaines theſe, in this day of fire:
for the very heauenVerſ 14. 
               ſhall depart as a ſcrowle that is rolled
vp together, and euery mountaine and Iland ſhall be
moued out of their places: and what hope then remaines
in them of ſecuritie or refuge? Tremble, tremble at this,
all you vngodly ones:Pſal. 4. 
               Stand in awe and ſinne no more.
               
A iudgement is reſerued for you, deceiue your ſelues no
longer. Weakneſſe in Gods children muſt be corrected,
and ſhall wickedneſſe in you eſcape vnpuniſhed? Is it
poſſible you ſhould thinke it? Mee thinkes it is a thing
impoſſible you ſhould be ſo ſenſeleſſe. No, no, if God
thus afflict his children, he will neuer ſuffer diſobedient
baſtards to goe free: hee whips the one with rods; hee
will ſcourge the other with Scorpions. For,Prou. 11. 31. 
               Behold
the righteous ſhall be recompenced in the earth, and therefore
much more the wicked and the ſinner. And this for
the firſt vſe. A ſecond followes.
            This ſerues for admonition to the beſt,Vſe 2. that they beware
of ſinne; for if they will take libertie to breake
Gods lawes, let them looke for ſtripes. God loueth his
like a wiſe Father, aiming at their good; and chuſeth
rather to profit, than to pleaſe: and not fondly and effeminatly
like ſome fooliſh mother, who giues her ſelfe
to follow the fooliſh luſts and appetite of her childe: he
hath his rod lie by him, and will diſcipline vs; and if we
enter into a courſe of ſinning, he will reclaime vs by his
chaſtiſements. And therefore let no man thinke nor ſay
he is ſafe, becauſe he hath ſome aſſurance of his election,
and therefore cannot be depriued of ſaluation. For
though thou beeſt in the ſtate of happineſſe for the life
to come, yet thou maiſt fall into great miſery in this life
preſent. Dauid was as well elected as thy ſelfe, and as
ſafe from being condemned as thou art, or canſt be; and
yet ſuch calamities befell him, as made himPſal. 30. 4. 
               groane and
crie, yea roare, ſo that his bloud was dried vp, and his moiſture
was like vnto the drought in Summer: yea he felt as
great anguiſh, as if his bones had beene broken, or all
out of ioynt: and therefore be not high minded, but
feare. For it is not the vertues that thou haſt, that can be
a warrant to thee to fall in vice, nor yet thy profeſſion or
religion, no nor yet election that will keepe the rod
from off thy backe, if thou paly the foole in committing
folly. I confeſſe God will not wipe out thoſe, whoſe

names he hath written in the booke of life, nor damne
any of his elect which are in Chriſt; yet if they or any
of them wax wanton, hee will whip them to the purpoſe
and make them tame. The Magiſtrate wee know
hath many puniſhments for offenders, beſides death▪
               
and gallowes: hee hath the ſtocks, the whipping-poſt, the
pillory, the gaole: And ſo hath God more iudgemnts
beſides damnation; hee hath his ſtocks, his whip, his
little-eaſe, his purgatory, for his owne in this world:
though hee doe not reprobate them, yet hee may ſo
hide his face and coneale their pardon from them, as
that they may finde little difference betwixt a reprobate
and themſelues.Pſal. 2. 10, 11, 12. 
               Be wiſe now therefore, oh yee Chriſtians,
bee inſtructed all yee godly of the earth: Serue
the Lord with feare, and reioice with trembling: Kiſſe
the ſonne, leſt hee bee angry and yee periſh from the way,
when his wrath is kindled but a little: Bleſſed are all they
that put their truſt in him.
            
            And laſtly,Vſe 3. from hence much Comfort may bee gathered,
in as much as afflictions doe not diſable vs from
being Gods. It was Gedeons weakneſſe to argue Gods
abſence by them.Iudg. 6. 13. 
               If the Lord be with vs, why then is all
this befallen vs (ſaith he?) Fond nature thinkes, God
ſhould not ſuffer the winde to blow vpon his deare
ones, becauſe her ſelfe makes this vſe of her owne indulgence.
But wee ſhall reade,Heb. 11. 36, 37. that none out of the
place of torment, haue ſuffered ſuch or ſo many afflictions
as his deareſt children. There is no reaſon then
why we ſhould imagine that Gods fauour is the leſſe towards
vs, when we are exerciſed though with great and
heauy afflictions: forProu. 3. 10. 
               whom he loueth he doth chaſtiſe;
and neereſt to God, fulleſt of ſorrowes, as one ſaithClem. Alexand.
well. Hence is it, that the Apoſtle enformeth vs after
this ſort;Heb. 12. 5,—13. 
               My ſonne deſpiſe not the chaſtening of the
Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. For
whom the Lord loueth he chaſteneth, and ſcourgeth euery
ſonne whom he receiueth. If you endure chaſtening, God

dealeth with you as with ſonnes: For what ſonne is hee
whom the father chaſteneth not? But if you be without
chaſtiſement, whereof all are partakers, then are you baſtards
and not ſonnes. Furthermore, we haue had fathers
of our fleſh which corrected vs, and wee gaue them reuerence:
ſhall we not much rather be in ſubiection vnto the
Father of ſpirits and liue? For they verily for a few daies
chaſtened vs after their owne pleaſure; but he for our profit,
that wee might be partakers of his holineſſe. Now no
chaſtening for the preſent ſeemth to bee ioyous, but grieuous:
neuertheleſſe afterwards it yeeldeth the peaceable
fruit of righteouſneſſe, vnto them which are exerciſed
thereby. Wherefore lift vp the hands which hang downe,
and the feeble knees. See how large our Apoſtle is in
his comfortable exhortation: Surely hee full well
knew how hardly the very beſt are perſwaded that God
is with them in the day of trouble, and how apt the
godly are to make hard concluſions againſt themſelues
in the day of their calamity, and therefore is he ſo large
in his comforts. Faine would the DeuillMatth. 4. 6. haue had perſwaded
Chriſt that hee was none of Gods becauſe hee
was afflicted with hunger; and the ſame would hee willingly
perſwade thee of: but remember thou the former
conſolation, and relinquiſh not thy hope of happineſſe
in heauen, becauſe thou art recompenced with
iudgements here on earth; for in ſo doing thou wilt
but adde to thy owne ſorrow, and needleſly encreaſe
the weight of thy owne burden. And thus much for
this vſe, as alſo for this ſecond circumſtance: The third
followes, which concernes the puniſhment inflicted, and
what it is.
            
            The hedge thereof ſhall be taken away,Text. and it ſhall bee
eaten vp; and breake downe the wall thereof, and it ſhall
be trodden downe. And I will lay it waſte, &c.
            The iudgement here inflicted, as we ſee, conſiſts in
the paine of loſſe. and paine of ſenſe. Firſt, Good things
ſhall be remoued and taken from them, as the hedge and

               wall ſhall bee broken downe; his paines in digging and
pruning, he will withdraw: And he will with-hold the
clouds from raining any more raine vpon it. Secondly,
Euill things ſhall be impoſed and inflicted on them; for
it ſhall bee eaten vp, trodden downe, and laid waſte, by
their enemies. Moreouer it ſhall be curſt with barrenneſſe;
for thornes and briers ſhall bee the beſt crop that
will grow therein; fit fuell for the fire.
            Before wee come to the particulars let vs obſerue in
generall:
            The vngratefull abuſe of Gods bleſſings and fauours,
                  Doctr. The vngratefull abuſe of Gods bleſſings cauſeth him to bring the contrary wants.
cauſeth the Lord to depriue a people of them, and to bring
vpon them the contrary euils.
            This is that which is here threatned to this people,
becauſe in ſtead of the ſweet grapes of righteouſneſſe,
it brought forth nothing but the ſowre grapes of ſinne,
after all his paines beſtowed about it, he would not only
abandon and let it alone, but pull downe the hedge,
breake downe the wall, and lay it waſte, ſo that the
beaſts of the field ſhould deuoure it; and it ſhould become
as a barren heath and forſaken wilderneſſe.
            This is that which is threatned by Moſes, the ſeruant
of God, againſt Iſrael:
               Deut. 28. 47, 48. 
               Becauſe thou ſeruedſt
not the Lord thy God with ioyfulneſſe, and with gladneſſe
of heart, for the abundance of all things: Therefore ſhalt
thou ſerue thine enemies which the Lord ſhall ſend againſt
thee, in hunger, and in thirſt, and in nakedneſſe, and in
want of all things: and hee ſhall put a yoke of iron vpon
thy necke vntill he haue deſtroied thee. This is that alſo
which is threatned by Hoſea,
               Hoſ. 4. 7. againſt thoſe Prieſts
who vngratefully abuſed all thoſe benefits and prerogatiues
wherewith they were endowed aboue the reſt
of the people to Gods diſhonour. For as they were increaſed,
ſo they ſinned againſt me (ſaith the Lord) therefore
I will turne their glory into ſhame. Hee would not
only take from them their honour and aduancement
which they ſo abuſed, but he will bring vpon them the

contrary euils, viz. ſhame and reproach. The like we
may finde threatned by the Prophet Ioel,
               Ioel 1. 4, 9, 10, 11, 12. againſt
the people, for their abuſe of Gods creatures by gluttony
and drunkenneſſe; their condition ſhould be ſo
farre changed, that the new wine ſhould be cut from their
mouthes; that is, they ſhall not haue any taſte of it at all.
The field and the corne ſhould be waſted, the new wine dried
vp, the oile ſhall languiſh. So that their husbandmen
ſhould bee aſhamed, their vine-dreſſers ſhould howle, for
the wheat and for the barley, becauſe the harueſt of the
field is periſhed. A maruellous and great change if it be
well conſidered; that they who had ſo great plenty
ſhould now fall into ſuch exceeding penury: But herein
we may ſee the iuſt iudgement of God, againſt ſuch
as abuſe his fauours to licentiouſneſſe. Wee might further
confirme this truth by the Prodigals example,Luke 15. 16. of
whom it is ſaid; that after hee had lauiſhed out his patrimony
vpon whores, and riotous company, he came
vnto ſuch exceeding miſery, that he would gladly haue
fedde vpon the husks that the ſwine eat, but none gaue
them vnto him: Vpon which Parable reade my expoſition
True Conuert if you deſire more of this doctrine, where you
ſhall finde this truth handled at large in ſundry obſeruations,
to which I referre thee; for now I will content
my ſelfe with a word of exhortation for the vſe, and ſo
proceed.
            This being ſo,
                  Ʋſe. how ſhould it ſtirre vs vp on all hands
to returne thankfulneſſe to God for his benefits, who
hath with ſuch a liberall hand ſowen the ſeed of his fauours
amongſt vs, and cauſe vs to beware that we abuſe
not his good bleſſings vnto ſinne, leſt the contrary euils
doe beſide vs. When a childe beginneth to play with
his meat, a wiſe father will take it from him; if wee
wax wanton by reaſon of Gods good fauours, he will
withdraw them, and turne our peace into warre, our
health into ſickneſſe, our liberty into thraldome, our
plenty into penury; or (which is worſe) if they bee

continued to vs, he will cauſe them of bleſſings to become
curſes; ſo thatPſal. 69. 22. 
               our table ſhall be made our ſnare,
and our proſperitie our ruine.
            
            
               I will take away the hedge,
               Text. 
               and breake downe the wall]
We haue ſeene before in the expoſition, what is meant
by this hedge and wall; namely, the diuine protection of
the Almighty, wherewith they were compaſſed about,
ſo that their enemies could not once touch them to hurt
them; of this they ſhould be now depriued, ſo that
there ſhould be a gap made for their enemies to enter in
vpon them. Hence we inferre:
            Sinne depriueth man of the protection of the Almightie,

                  Doctr. Sinne depriueth man of Gods protection. and laieth him open to the rage and furie of the
enemie.
            When the people of Iſrael had committed Idolatry,
in making them gods to goe before them, the text ſaith,
Exod. 32. 25. 
               they were naked amongst their enemies; whereby hee
meanes that they wanted Gods fauour and protection,
which is as the cloathing of his children. So when Rehoboam
the ſonne of Solomon, and all Iſrael with him,
had forſaken the Lord, the Prophet is ſent vnto him
with this meſſage,2 Chro. 12. 5. 
               Thus ſaith the Lord, Yee haue forſaken
me, therefore haue I left you in the hands of Shiſhak.
The like we reade in the booke of Iudges; no ſooner
had Iſrael fell to Idolatry, in worſhipping Baal and
Aſhtaroth, and ſuch other Idols as the Nations ſerued
who dwelt about them;Iudg. 2. 13, 14. & 10. 6. but God as ſoone left them,
and deliuered them into the hands of ſpoilers that ſpoiled
them, and ſold them into the hands of their enemies
round about, ſo that they could not any longer ſtand
before their enemies. In the booke of Ioſua likewiſe we
reade, thatIoſ. 7. 12. when Achan had taken of the accurſed
thing, and tranſgreſſed Gods couenant, in ſtealing that
Babyloniſh garment, the ſhekels of ſiluer, and the
wedge of gold, they could not ſtand before their enemies,
but turned their backs before them, and all becauſe
God was not with them with his protection, by reaſon

of that offence committed, neither would God be with
them any more, except that accurſed thing were deſtroyed
from amongſt them. Hitherto tends that alſo
of this our Prophet,Eſay 59. 1. 
               Behold the Lords hand is not ſhortned,
that it cannot ſaue; neither is his eare heauy, that it
cannot heare; but your ſinnes haue ſeparated betwixt you
and your God; and your ſinnes haue hid his face from you,
that he will not heare. And thus is the point made good,
that Sinne depriueth a people of Gods protection: It
breaketh downe the hedge and wall of their defence,
and layeth them open to the furie of their enemies.
            And no wonder,Reaſon. ſeeing ſinne is a breach of the couenant
made betwixt God and vs.
               Gen. 17. 1. 
               I am God all-ſufficient;
walke before me and be vpright. Where the promiſe on
Gods part is to be an all-ſufficient God, to bleſſe, ſaue,
protect and defend vs; the condition required on our
part, is vpright walking before the Lord, in all faithfull,
conſtant, cheerefull, and vniuerſall obedience: if then
the latter be not performed, the former cannot be expected;
for God is not bound vnto vs further than wee
keepe the promiſe which hath beene made by vs. And
this is the ground of my propounded point, why ſinne
ſhould depriue vs of Gods protection.
            And this may ſerue firſt for Information.
               
                  Ʋſe 1. See here
what it is, and who they are that doth weaken a kingdome;
ſurely ſinne and ſinners. This, and Theſe, open
the gates, throw downe the walls, and let in the enemy:
Were our Armies neuer ſo ſtrong, our Cities neuer ſo
ſure blocked, our walls neuer ſo well fortified, that we
feared not to haue them ſcaled; yet ſo long as our
Chams continue their ſcoffing; our Eſaus their prophaning;
our Senacheribs their blaſpheming; our Achans
their theeuing; our Nabals their coueting; our Iezabels
their whoring; and all of vs our ſinning▪
                and rebelling,
we deceiue our ſelues if we thinke we be ſtrong, for we
are weake. How can God be with vs, when theſe accurſed
things are found ſo riſe amongſt vs? And how ſhall

we ſtand before our enemies, when the moſt high God
hath forſaken vs? Oh the weakneſſe of this Land,
wherein ſinne doth ſo abound! This is it which will
weaken our forces, ouerthrow our Caſtles, break downe
our towers, batter our bulwarks, and make fruſtrate all
our deuices. When Phocas had built a mighty wall
about his Palace for his ſecuritie in the night, he heard
a voice thus ſpeaking:Cedren. hiſt. pag. 542. Though thou build as high as
the clouds, O King, yet the Citie will eaſily be taken;
for the ſinne within will marre all. True it is, we haue
no enemies without, but are at peace with all about vs;
but what are we the better, when our chiefe enemies are
within; ſinne is harboured within our walls and gates;
our wicked manners are ſtronger than armed men.Grauiores ſunt inimici mores praui, quàm ho
                  
                     ••
                  es infeſti. Ambroſ. ſer. 87. This
is enough to bring vpon vs thoſe daies of deſolation,
the daies of darkneſſe and gloomineſſe, the daies of
waſtneſſe and confuſion. What hath beene the ruine
and ouerthrow of the moſt famous kingdomes in the
world but it? What hath turned the nobleſt Cities into
duſt but it? What hath brought thoſe infinite calamities
of famine, ſword, peſtilence, fire, ſlauerie and bondage
but it? From this commeth the ruine of Countries,
Cities, Families, yea and of particular perſons. Doe
not many ruined Monuments and Monaſteries, ſeeme
to tell paſſengers, Hîc fuit hoſtilitas, Warre hath beene
here? And may we not alſo there reade in thoſe rude
heapes, Hîc fuit iniquitas, Sinne hath beene here; Idolatry
rather than warre pulled downe thoſe walls. For
had there beene no enemie to raze them, they would
haue fallen alone, rather than hide ſo much ſuperſtition
and impietie vnder their guilty roofes. Oh that
we could once ſee this! Oh that we would be once perſwaded
of it; then would there be ſome hope that that
accurſed thing would be caſt out from amongſt vs, that
ſo God might be our defence and fortreſſe. And let vs
aſſure our ſelues, that vntill repentance make vp our
breaches, we lie open to the furie of our aduerſaries.

Wickedneſſe hath ſtrucke vp the drum, and wee may
euery day expect for deſtruction to come marching on.
            Secondly,
                  Ʋſe 2. this may ſerue for our Inſtruction: When
we goe about any enterpriſe of God, let vs ſee that our
hearts be cleare from any pollution of ſinne: and when
we be thwarted in our hopes, or croſſed in iuſt and holy
quarrels; let vs then ranſacke our ſelues, and ſearch our
hearts for ſome lurking ſinne: For we may almoſt, nay
altogether perſwade our ſelues, there is ſome ſecret euill
vnrepented of; and then no wonder, if the Lord doe as
it were tumble downe the wall of our protection, and
ſeeme to leaue vs to our ſelues. Our great iniquities
hearten our aduerſaries: they profeſſe to build all their
wickedneſſe againſt vs, vpon our wickedneſſe againſt
God. Let vs therefore now at laſt preuaile againſt our
owne euils, and we ſhall certainly preuaile againſt all our
enemies. The powers of Rome, the powers of hell it
ſelfe, can neuer hurt vs, if we hurt not our ſelues. Let vs
caſt downe our Iezabels, that bewitch vs; and plucke
away ſinne, which like Iuie weakens the wall of our
protection, and feare nothing, for wee ſhall ſtand immoueable.
            Thirdly,
                  Ʋſe 3. here is a commination againſt the wicked:
For if this be ſo, that ſinne depriues man of the protection
of the Almighty, then woe to them who harbour
ſinne: How open doe they lie in euery part to the rage
and furie of their aduerſaries, Satan, Death, and Hell?
yea euery creature is aduerſarie to them, whom God
hath forſaken; and therefore they are not ſafe from the
rage of any. Oh the wofull and fearefull condition of
ſuch as theſe, who haue not God for their defence! In
what perpetuall perill and danger of deſtruction liue
they in! Can they ſay, they are ſafe in any Fort, in any
Caſtle, in any Tower? Can any place or any power
vpon the earth, or in the earth, or aboue the earth, keep
backe the ſtroke of death and deſtruction, hell and damnation?
Can any wicked man ſay with warrant, I am

here free from the dart of death: I ſhall ſurely carry my
ſelfe from hence; iudgement ſhall not ſeize on me in
this place? Can any of them ſay at any repaſt or recreation;
I ſhall continue out this feaſt, or game, or ſport, to
the end, before my fall or ruine? This delight ſhall not
be interrupted and broken off by feare and torment
before it be fully finiſhed? Alas they cannot: for euill
ſhallPſal. 140. 11. hunt the wicked to deſtruction, andProu. 13. 21. purſue
him, and in the endDeut. 28. 45. ouertake him, and ſeize vpon him.
So that as the Hare runneth in hazard and ieopardie before
the Greyhound, and is at laſt ſnatcht vp; ſo is it
with the wicked whoſe damnation ſleepeth not.
            True it is, no mens eſtates ſeeme to be more happie,
nor no mens ſtayes more ſtrong; and who more ſecure
than theſe men are? But all is not gold that gliſters:
Their hope is as the Spiders web, their ſtaffe they leane
on, is but an Egyptian reed, that will in the end breake,
runne into their ſhoulders, and lay them flat along the
earth. Their ſecuritie is but ſenſeleſneſſe and blockiſh
ſtupiditie, and well compared to that of Ionahs,
               Ionah 1. who
ſlept moſt ſoundly when hee had moſt cauſe to watch
and pray. The Lord is purſuing him as a vagrant and
fugitue: The officers of God are about him to apprehend
him; the winde rageth, the waues of the ſea roare
and beat againſt the ſhip, wherein he was, and roule with
violence againſt the Barke, refuſing all other ſatisfaction
offered by the Mariners; ſo that all the company that
be with him are afraid, and compelled to crie euery man
vnto his god; yet Ionah is ſtill ſleeping vnder hatches:
Thus fareth it with the wicked. The Lord ſtands offended
with them; the heauens aboue are cloſed vpon
them; Hell beneath is open to receiue them; Gods
fearefull iudgements are ready to lay hands vpon them;
the Deuill is at hand waiting when they ſhall be deliuered
to him; yet they lie ſnorting in their ſinnes ſleeping
betweene Death and Hell, as Peter didActs 12. 6. betweene the
two ſouldiers, being faſt bound with chaines; or to vſe

               Solomons Prouerbe, As a Sailer vpon the top-maſt in
the midſt of a ſtorme, there being but a haires bredth
betweene them and their deſtruction. See then thy eſtate,
thou who art from vnder Gods protection, liuing in
thy ſinnes, thou liueſt in perpetuall perill: thou maiſt
eat and drinke, make merry and be iocund, but thou haſt
little reaſon. Belſhazzar
               Dan. 5. 2. 5. may carowſe it in golden
and ſiluer veſſels, but hee had little cauſe, when his
doome was written on the wall,2 Sam. 13. 28. 
               Amnons heart may
cheere him, but as little reaſon had he, Death being ſo
nigh at hand. Be then as merry as you will, you wicked
ones; this I am ſure of, your wretched eſtate giues
you no leaue.
            Laſtly,
                  Ʋſe. 4. here is a ground of encouragement for the
faithfull, when they haue iuſt cauſe to band themſelues
againſt the wicked, and are conſtrained to meddle with
euill men,Pax populi, patriaeque ſalus, & gloria Regni. or to vndertake warre againſt the enemies of
the Church, either for the defence of true Religion, or
for the releeuing and deliuering of ſuch as are oppreſſed
for religion, or for the ſafetie and defence of Land
and people, or for other ſuch like iuſt cauſes; that wee
lift vp our heads and hearts with hope of victory, becauſe
we haue to doe with weake and naked men. Thus
Ioſua and Caleb comforted the people againſt the Canaanites,
ſaying,Num. 14. 9. 
               Rebell yee not againſt the Lord, neither
feare ye the people of the Land, for they are but bread
for vs: their ſhield is departed from them, and the Lord
is with vs, feare them not. This was that alſo wherewith
Abijah, the King of Iudah,2 Chro. 13. 10, 11, 12. comforted himſelfe, going
againſt the mightie armie of Ieroboam: with this let
vs and all Gods people comfort our ſelues, when we are
to goe out againſt our aduerſaries, for they come out into
the field as ſouldiers without weapons, they haue neither
ſhield, nor buckler, nor breaſt-plate, nor helmet,
nor ſword, nor ſpeare; their loines are vngirt, their feet
vnſhod, their heads are vncouered in the day of bartell;
they lie open as naked men to be wounded and deſtroyed,

and therefore2 Chron. 32. 7. Be ſtrong and couragious: feare
not, neither be afraid for the wicked nor all their multitude,
for there is more with vs than is with them; with
them is an arme of fleſh, but with vs is the Lord our God,
for to helpe vs, and to fight our battles. And ſo much for
this. Now we goe on.
            
               It ſhall be eaten vp and trodden downe.]
               Text. This followes
vpon the former: The hedge and wall being pluckt vp
and broken downe, way is made whereby the beaſts of
the field, (that is, the enemies of the Church) ſhall haue
free egreſſe and regreſſe to eat and deuoure; and not only
ſo, but to tread downe and ſpoile; they ſhould not
only trouble and afflict them, but alſo ouercome them,
and enter into their poſſeſſions, carrying away what
they liſt, making ſtrip and waſte of the reſt.
            The firſt point hence to be obſerued,Doctr. The wicked cannot hurt vntill God forſake. is, 
                  Ʋntill God
breake downe the wall, and plucke vp the hedge of his protection,
wherewith his people are encompaſſed, the wicked
and vngodly cannot hurt them or any way harme them:
God muſt giue, yea make way, before they can come in
vpon them to afflict them.Deut. 32. 30. 
               How ſhould one chaſe a
thouſand,
               Id eſt, Qui ſieri potuiſſet vt hoſtis vni
                     •
                  us perſequeretur mille Iſraelita
                     •
                  , niſi quòd, &c. 
               and two put ten thouſand to flight (ſaith Moſes
in that ſame ſweet ſong which he ſang a little before his
death) except their rocke had ſold them, and the Lord had
ſhut them vp? This was a thing impoſſible that one
enemie ſhould chaſe a thouſand Iſraelites, and two Gentiles
put a thouſand Iewes to flight;Vatab. in loc. had not that God,
who had beene before their rocke, deliuered them vp
into the hands of thoſe their enemies. The Deuill himſelfe,
who is the greateſt of all their enemies, and
ſtrongeſt of that helliſh band, being the great Goliah
in that armie of Philiſtines, can doe nothing without
permiſſion, hee muſt haue a commiſſion to goe forth
and be a lying ſpirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets,
1 King. 22. verſ. 22. that he and his people may fall at Ramoth Gilead. He
muſt beg leaue at Gods hands to touch Iob,
               Iob 1. 11. ſuch a
hedge being made about him, and all he had, on euery

ſide, that there was no comming at him, except God
leaue open ſome gap for this ſoule beaſt to enter. The
like protection haue all Gods people, whereby they are
ſo fenced, that neither the Deuill nor any of his limbes
can hurt any of them without ſpeciall warrant and commiſſion
from the Lord. Hitherto tends that which wee
reade of in the Acts,Acts. 4. 27. 
               Doubtleſſe againſt thy holy Sonne
Ieſus, whom thou haſt anointed, both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Iſrael, gathered
themſelues together, to doe whatſoeuer thy hand and thy
counſel hath determined before to be done. And that anſwer
of our Sauiour vnto Pilate,
               Iohn 19. 11. 
               Thou couldeſt haue no power
at all againſt me, except it were giuen thee from aboue.
            
            For as our Sauiour ſaith elſewhere,Iohn 10. 29. 
               My Father is
ſtronger than all;
               Reaſ. all power and ſtrength is of him and
from him originally, according to that in Daniel,
               Dan. 2. 20. 
               Wiſdome and might are Gods. He can giue and take away
at his pleaſure.
            Which being ſo,
                  Ʋſe 1. this diſcouers vnto vs a notable deluſion
of the Deuill, in that he perſwadeth Witches and
Wizards that he can do all things,The Deuil cannot doe harme to any, to gratifie a Witch, vnleſſe God permit. and at their requeſt or
command will lame and kill men or beaſts, and whatſoeuer
they bid him doe, or hire him to doe, that ſhall
be done: with which conceit alſo many of our people
are poſſeſſed, which cauſeth them to be ſo afraid of Witches,
as that they dare not any way diſpleaſe them, or
giue them a foule word, for feare they ſhould ſend their
ſpirits to torment their bodies, deſtroy their goods,
lame their cattell, or doe them ſome other miſchiefe.
And thus are thouſands deluded by the Deuill, yea
and bewitched before they be aware, and led into all
manner of error and of falſhood.
            That there are Witches, by whom the Deuill worketh,
I deny not; Scriptures and experience doth make
it euident; but that theſe Witches can ſend the Deuill
to kill or lame either men or beaſts, when they liſt, and
where they liſt, I vtterly deny.
            
               
For firſt we are to know,Reaſons. 1 that the Deuill hath of himſelfe
no power ouer the leaſt flie; the high prouidence
of the Almightie hath ſo chained and bridled him vp,
as that he cannot plucke off a fether from the wing of a
little Wren or Sparrow, without leaue and power giuen
him from God. It followes then, that he at his pleaſure
cannot doe the leaſt harme to man or beaſt to gratifie a
Witch: neither doth the ſending of the Deuill by a
Witch giue him any power and commiſſion to doe any
thing; for God muſt giue way before any euill can befall,
according to our doctrine deliuered.
            Secondly,2 The Deuill is more forward and readie to
doe euill, than any Witch can be, for he is like1 Pet. 5. 
               a roaring
Lion, going about ſeeking whom he may deuoure: and
likeReuel. 12. 3. 
               a red or fiery Dragon, burning in malice againſt
Gods Church and people; ſo that hee needs not to be
ſtirred vp or ſent by a Witch, hee being ſo forward and
watchfull of himſelfe to doe miſchiefe. Whence it followes
there is no more, nor leſſe hurt done than would
be done, if there were no Witches: for as the Deuill can
doe nothing to hurt the pooreſt creature, before he haue
power granted vnto him from the Lord; ſo when he is
permitted and hath his power granted, he is not ſo ſottiſh
as not to execute his power, except ſome Witch doe
ſend him: true it is, if he can, he will doe it, as intreated
and ſent by Witches (ſo cunning and craftie is hee) that
hee may doe the more harme, vſing them but for a colour
to drawon worſer matters.
            Thirdly,3 the Deuill is the commander, the Witch is
but his drudge and ſeruant. He is the god of this world,
and ruleth with power in the hearts of the children of
diſobedience, ſhee is but his ſlaue and ſubiect, to ſerue
him, and not command him; and vſing her as his inſtrument,
hee wholly directeth her heart vnto the wickedneſſe.
And therefore, whereas there be many naturall
cauſes in the bodies of men and beaſts, of tortures,
lameneſſe, and of death it ſelfe; which though the learnedſt

and moſt expert Phyſitian cannot eſpie; yet hee
can ſee and know, and can coniecture very neere the
time when they will take effect; he plyeth it with the
Witch and enflameth her minde with malice, and moueth
her to ſend him againſt that partie, vpon which
ſending, the man or beaſt ſuddenly and ſtrangely are
tormented, fall lame and die; and then hee telleth her
that he did it vpon her ſending and command; when
indeed ſhee obeyeth him, being led by his ſuggeſtion,
and not he her. The like is his practiſe when God giues
him libertie to ſtrike with bodily plagues any of the
godly, for the triall of their faith and patience; hee couets,
if hee can, to bring it thus about: So that wee ſee
ſhee is but his drudge, and not he her ſeruant. Let vs
not then bee ſo deluded by this deceiuer, neither ſtand
in feare of any witch or ſorcerer, but of God alone; for
neither one or other can any way moleſt or hurt vs, vntill
God pleaſe to giue way and ſuffer them.
            
               For a ſecond vſe;
               
                  Ʋſe 2. 
               ſeeing none can hurt vs vntill God
giue way, let this ſerue for Admonition vnto vs all, that
would liue in ſafety, that we keepe in with God; for if
he be our friend, what need wee care who be our enemies?
               Rom. 8. 31. If he be with vs, who can be againſt vs? Be then
of Dauids reſolution, to make
               
                  Pſal. 3. 3. and 91. 2. God thy ſhield and buckler,
thy refuge and thy fortreſſe; and thus being in Dauids
taking, thou maieſt be in Dauids tune.
               Pſalm. 27. 1. The Lord
is my light and my ſaluation, whom ſhall I feare? The
Lord is the ſtrength of my life, of whom ſhall I be afraid?
Pſal. 3. 5. I will not bee afraid of ten thouſands of people that haue
ſet themſelues againſt me round about.Pſal. 27. 3. 5. Though an hoaſt
ſhould encampe againſt me, my heart ſhall not be troubled:
though warre ſhould riſe againſt me, in this I will be confident.
For in the time of trouble he ſhall hide me in his pauilion:
in the ſecret of his tabernacle ſhall he hide me, hee
ſhall ſet mee vp vpon a rocke. I end this vſe as Dauid
ends that Pſalme,
               
                  Ʋerſ. 14. Wait on the Lord: be of good courage
and he ſhall ſtrengthen thine heart: wait I ſay on the Lord.
            
               
Thirdly,
                  Ʋſe 3. this may ſerue to daunt the hearts and proud
ſpirits of the wicked, who inſult ouer the godly becauſe
they are ſo few, ſo meane, ſo ſimple, and ſo weake; and
pride themſelues oftentimes in the conceit of their
owne geeatneſſe, power, policy, and malicious intendments
againſt the godly: But theſe groſly deceiue
themſelues, for let them know their rage and power
is limited by the Lord, ſo that they cannot doe what
they liſt, but what God will; they cannot execute
what they pleaſe, but what pleaſeth him. Let Atheiſts,
Papiſts, and all other prophane perſons, deſiſt from
deuiſing euill againſt Gods Sion. ANumb. 23. 8. Prophet of their
owne ſide will teach them it is in vaine to curſe whom
God hath bleſſed.
            Laſtly,
                  Ʋſe 4. as Noahs
               Gen. 8. 11. Doue brought in her mouth an
oliue leafe, ſo doth this doctrine bring with it tidings
of peace and comfort to ſuch as are in Chriſt. For if it
be ſo, that man cannot hurt vntill God giue way, then
Pſalm. 5. 11, 12. 
               Let all thoſe that put their truſt in thee reioice: let them
euer ſhout for ioy, becauſe thou defendeſt them: let them
alſo that loue thy name, bee ioyfull in thee. For thou Lord
wilt bleſſe the righteous: with fauour wilt thou compaſſe
him as with a ſhield. What the Apoſtle ſpeakes in caſe
of damnation, may bee ſpoken alſo in caſe of danger,
Rom. 8. 1. 
               There is none vnto them. They are alike ſafe in euery
place, euen in the midſt of their mortall enemies, as
amongſt their kindeſt friends: and ſo likewiſe at all ſeaſons;
for whereas the wicked who are without God,
are like a bird without a neſt, or a beaſt without a den,
liable to any ſtorme that ariſeth and danger that befals;
yet it is otherwiſe with the godly, they know whither
to goe to bee hid from the ſtrife of tongues, and violence
of Tyrants. Gods fauour ioyned with his mighty
power and faithfulneſſe, is aProu. 18. 10. 
               ſtrong tower, thither
the righteous runne and are exalted; which fort and caſtle
of defence is euery where, and no time is vnſeaſonable
to repaire vnto it; no place an impediment to hinder

them from it; no bodily weakneſſe can diſable
them of it: their iourney may be vndertaken at midnight
as well as at mid-day, and they may runne apace
as they ſit in their houſes, or lie in their beds; and the
feebleſt creeple may make as good ſpeed as the ſwifteſt
footman: the wals thereof can no enemy ſcale; the
forts thereof can no aduerſary batter: well may our
enemies aſſault vs, but no multitude nor power can
preuaile againſt vs, becauſe2 King. 6. 16. 
               he that is with vs is ſtronger
than they that are againſt vs;Pſalm. 32. 6. ſo that the flouds of
great waters can neuer come nigh vs. Oh the ſecurity
and felicity of the faithfull! maruellous great it is;
who haue ſuch a tower to flie vnto, and ſuch a ſhield to
couer and compaſſe them round about as is impenetrable;
no ſword, no dart, nor ſhot, can poſſibly ſtrike
them vntill it pierce him: ſo fenced are they in their
goods, in their cattell, and in all that belongs vnto them,
that no wicked ſpirit by any art can come neere to touch
them, without a ſpeciall commiſſion from the Almighty.
When Philip King of Macedon had ſlept a ſound
ſleepe, and at length waking, ſpying Antipater by him,
he vſed theſe words (as the ſtory ſaithPlutarch.) No maruell I
ſlept ſo ſoundly, ſeeing Antipater was by and watched.
It would not haue fallen out ſo well with this Land in
generall, and many, no nor any of vs in particular, had
not this Ante-pater, our gracious Father, (who was
before all worlds) beene our mercifull keeper. In 88.
fierce enemies intended the inuaſion of this Land, but
they were foiled, and England triumphed; for the Lord
of Hoaſts was our defender. Many enterpriſes haue
beene vndertaken againſt our moſt gracious Soueraigne,
eſpecially that helliſh attempt of popiſh monſters
in that infernall Powder-plot; yet King Iames is
waked (and long may he wake) for Ante-pater ſtood
by and watched, (O ſtill ſtand by and watch) but as
for his enemies they are executed as traitors, and haue
ſlept their laſt: And ſo lot them periſh oh Lord.
            
               
But doe wee not ſee how the godly are wronged,Obiect.
ſpoiled, yea and ſometimes killed by their aduerſaries?
            True,Resp. yet this commeth not to paſſe through the
force of their aduerſaries might, but by the will and
permiſſion of the Lord; neither doth hee ſuffer it to ſatisfie
their foes, but to increaſe their felicity, and for
their good: For it is with the godly as with the beaſt in
the field, which is ſafer in a ſtorme than in the faireſt ſeaſons;
the ſtorme driueth him to his den and harbour,
but when it is ouer hee commeth forth, and is in danger
to bee taken of the hunter. Thus in trouble the godly
flie vnto the clefts of their Rocke, and get vnder the
wing of their Protector; but when troubles are ouer
they are in greater danger to be enſnared. Wee know
raine and thunder are many times better for corne and
graſſe than faire ſunne-ſhine: ſo here.
            Againe, God hath promiſed not to defend vs from
troubles, but preſerue vs in troubles. OurFormido ſublata eſt, non pugna. Leo. 
               Feare ſhall be
taken away, not our Fight: And ſo though we be perſecuted,
yet we be not forſaken; though ſlaine, yet not
ouercome: nay when we ſeeme to be ouercome, then
doe we ouercome our enemies. Though we beare away
the blowes, and are ſlaine by them, yet God ſtill preſerues
vs, and we obtaine a noble victorieRom. 8. 37.. Excellent
was that ſpeech, which ſometimes Anaxarchus vſed,
when as Nicocreon the tyrant commanded he ſhould be
beaten to death in a morter: Beat and bray, ſaid he to
the executioner, as long as thou wilt Anaxarchus his
ſachell, (meaning his body) but Anaxarchus thou canſt
not touch. Thus are the godly preſerued by God, who
putteth his right hand vnder their heads, and giues
them grace ſufficient, proportioning their ſtrength to
the burden; mitigating their ſorrowes, making them
poſſeſſe their ſoules in patience, yea to reioyce in
their tribulation, as appeareth not only in the examples
Acts 5. 41. & Cap. 16. of the Apoſtles in the Acts, but alſo by the practiſe
of ſome in our owne Nation in the time of perſecution,

as Glouer,
               Reade their ſtories in the Act. and Mon. 
               Farrar, Hawkes, with diuers other: the later
of which three (being deſired by ſome of his godly
friends, to giue ſome token when hee was in the flames,
whether the paine were tolerable or no, for their further
confirmation) after his eies were ſtarted out of his head,
his fingers conſumed with the fire, and when euery one
thought him dead, and did expect the fall of his body,
ſuddenly lifts vp his ſtumps, and thrice (as a famous
conquerer) claps them ouer his head in token of victory.
Thus the faithfull famouſly conquer when they
ſeeme to be conquered by their enemies. I remember
what one ſaithRupertus. of S. Laurence his patience and conſtancy,
when hee was broiled on the gridiron; That
God was more glorified by it, than if hee had ſaued his
body from burning by a miracle. So vndoubtedly it is
as much for Gods glory to preſerue vs in our ſuffering,
as to preſerue vs altogether from ſuffering.
            Thus then we ſee that our enemies could not ſo farre
preuaile, did not God permit them: neither would he
ſuffer them ſo farre to preuaile, did it any way tend to
his diſhonour or our dammage. Our God is omnipotent,
doing what he will, and ſuffering no reſiſtance
in that he will not;Nemo nos 
                     〈◊〉
                   qui Deum 
                     〈◊〉
                  . ſo that only he which can ouercome
him can hurt vs. That godly gloriation then
which the Apoſtle vſeth againſt the enemies of our
ſoules, may fitly be vſed by vs againſt the enemies of our
bodies;Rom. 8. 31. 
               What ſhall we then ſay to theſe things? If God
be for vs, who can be against vs? And then a little after,

                  Ʋerſ. 35, 37. 
               Who ſhall ſeparate vs from the loue of Christ? Shall
tribulation, or diſtreſſe, or perſecution, or famine, or nakedneſſe,
or perill, or ſword? Nay in all theſe things we are
more than conquerors through him that loued vs. Thus as if
all theſe had been but flea-bitings he doth triumph ouer
them. And then in a ſtraine beyond all admiration, hee
goeth on thus;
                  Ʋerſ. 38, 39. 
               For I am perſwaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
preſent, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any

other creature, ſhall be able to ſeparate vs from the loue of
God which is in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord. If then we be
Gods, though Satan and ſinners would, yet they can
doe nothing againſt vs, that ſhall be for our hurt; and
though God himſelfe can, yet he will doe nothing to
vs, that ſhall not turne to our endleſſe and euerlaſting
good.
            Further, in that it is ſaid; The wall ſhall not only be
broken, but that it ſhall likewiſe be trodden downe; we
may ſee as in a glaſſe, the beaſtly and brutiſh diſpoſition
of the enemies of the Church.
            
               No beaſt of the field doth ſhew it ſelfe more raging or
rauenous,
               
                  Doct. No beaſt is more ſauage than the enemies of Gods Church. 
               than doe the wicked, when God ſuffers them to
breake into his Vineyard for the afflicting of it. Looke as
it is with beaſts, who doe not only eat and deuoure, but
tread downe and ſpoile (when they come into good
paſtures) more than they eat: ſo is it with them; and
therefore Scripture giues them names agreeing with
their natues; they are calledPſal. 124. 7. 
               Fowlers,
               Mic. 7. 2. 
               Hunters,
               Pſal. 53. 4. 
               Canibals
and men-eaters. They are alſo named2 Tim. 4. 17. 
               Lions; and
this was Neroes ſtile, who was the firſt that ſtained his
ſword with the bloud of Chriſtians,Pſal. 58. 6. as Euſebius ſheweth
in his Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorie. They are likewiſe called
Pſal. 80. 13. 
               Boares; The Boare out of the wood doth waſte it:
and Buls; yea ſtrongPſal. 22. 12. buls of Baſhan. They are alſo
compared to21. Vnicornes,Pſal. 58. 4. Beares, Leopards,Pſal. 74. 13, 14. Dragons,
Serpents, Aſpes, Adders: and they haue their
hornes, tusks, teeth, talants, mouthes, iawes, pawes,
checkbones,Prou. 17. 12. giuen to them. Theſe names they haue
made good in all ages.Pſal. 3. 7. If we ſhould view the Scriptures,
or reade ouer the Hiſtories of the Primitiue Church, we
ſhould finde plenty of examples for the confirming
hereof. Such and ſo great cruelty hath beene practiſed
by them towards Gods people, that as Euſebius affirmeth
Eccleſ. Hiſt. lib. 8. cap. 3. 10. 11., it farre exceedeth the credit of any relation. If
we come to our owne times; we ſhall not want examples
of their cruelty for the prouing this truth. What vnnaturall

cruelty was it to take the infantActs and Mon. pag. 1864. iſſuing out of the
mothers wombe in the midſt of the flame, and caſt it in
againe with their forkes, that as the off-ſpring of an heretike,
it might burne together with her? O bleſſed
babe! to be no ſooner borne, but as ſoone baptized
with fire; before thou art lapped in ſwadling clothes,
to be crowned with martyrdome; and before thou fully
breatheſt in the breath of life, thou happily breatheſt
out thine owne innocent ſoule to God. But out vpon
ſuch cruelty; ſuch tranſcendent outragious cruelty. Are
theſe Catholikes? Are theſe they that hold it for an article
of their faith, that all children dying vnbaptized are
damned, and yet would wittingly put this innocent
childe to death before it had receiued baptiſme? Can
any iudge otherwiſe but that they purpoſed to haue
flung this infant both bodie and ſoule into a fire on
earth and the fire in hell both at once? Curſed be their
wrath, for it was cruell. And is it not yet freſh in the
memorie of our fathers, how cruelly they dealt, not only
with the quicke in burying them aliue, as Marion at
Burges
               Pag. 816.; but alſo with the dead in vnburying them;
as they dealt by Wickliffe
               Pag. 1780., digging vp his bones one
and forty yeeres after his death, and burning them: and
ſo by Peter Martyrs wife at Oxford
               Pag. 1785., and Mr. Bucer and
Phagius at Cambridge; beſides others. And herein their
cruelty exceeds that which is in ſome beaſts,
                  Ʋ ſi non ſaeuiunt in cadauera. which extends
it ſelfe only to the liuing, and not vnto the dead.
But the rage and cruelty of Sions enemies extendeth it
ſelfe, euen as the kindneſſe of her friends dothRuth 2. 20., both
to the liuing and the dead, to the one as well as to
the other.
            We finde in Hiſtorie, that the firſt founders of Rome
were nouriſhed by a Wolfe: certaine it is, that the offſpring
of that people haue the hearts of Wolues, being
ſauage and cruell. Their Citie it was firſt founded in
bloudAug. de Ciu. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 5., the bloud of a naturall germane brother, Romulus
ſlaying his brother Rhemus to ſettle the kingdome

in his owne perſon. And as it was with the Citie, ſo was
it with the Papacie, for the foundation of that See was
laid in bloud,Suffocas Phoca imperium, ſtabi iſque papatum. Gud. Stamph. when Phocas ſlew his ſiege Lord and Emperour.
And cruelty and bloudſhed is at this day the
enſigne and badge of that Church. The habit of that
harlot is according to her heart,Reu. 17. 6. 
               purple and ſcarlet;
and her diet is the diet of the Canibals: I ſaw her drunken
with the bloud of the Saints. Can we thinke this to be
the religion that God doth take delight in, which vpſetteth
and vpholdeth it ſelfe by ſuch cruelty?
            But whats the reaſon why the enemies of the Church
are ſo outragious?Reaſon. Surely it may ſoone be giuen; they
are led by the ſpirit of the deuill, and he doth participate
of his nature vnto them; he is1 Pet. 5. 8. 
               a roaring lion, aReuel. 12. 
               cruell
dragon, a ſubtle ſerpent, a falſe accuſer of the brethren,
and he labours to haue his like him in cruelty and miſchiefe.
We haſten to the Vſes.
            And firſt let vs all be admoniſhed not to truſt thoſe
too farre who are irreligious;
                  Ʋſe 1. a Lion is a Lion though
he be chained: it is good not comming within his reach,
though he ſeeme to ſawne: a Wolfe is a Wolfe though
he be in ſheeps clothing, and at length will ſhew his
woluiſh diſpoſition: they haue the voice of Iacob, but
the hands of Eſau; words of a brother, but hands of an
enemie: they can ſalute with a kiſſe, but perſecute with
the ſword. The Fiſher baits the hooke, when he would
deceiue the fiſh; and the Fowler ſings ſweetly, when
hee would deceiue the bird: So the enemies of the
Church when they pretend greateſt curteſie, then
they intend greateſt villanie: when they offer treaties
of peace, leagues of mariages, and ſuch like confederacies,
then is it to be feared the net is a ſpreading, and
the ſnare a laying. It is wiſdome therefore not to truſt
them. No faith (ſaith the Papiſt) is to be kept with heretikes;
and we are ranke ones, as they ſay; therefore no
faith to be kept with vs. Take heed therefore of them,
and though they ſeeme now to be Foxes paſſant, and

               Dogs couchant, yet were time and opportunitie offered
(which Lord for thy mercy ſake neuer ſuffer) they would
ſhew themſelues to be Lions rampant, ſeeking only our
ruine and deſolation.
            And ſecondly,
                  Ʋſe 2. ſeeing the enemies of the Church are
ſo outragious, when they are ſuffered to enter into Gods
vineyard, making ſtrip and waſte of all: oh then, let
vs all ſtriue with God by earneſt prayer, that we may be
deliuered and preſerued from ſuch2 Theſſ. 3. 2. 
               vnreaſonable men,
whoſe wrath and malice knoweth no end nor meaſure;
being of Hannibals minde, in whoſe eyes no ſight was
more pleaſing, than a ditch ſwimming ouer with mans
bloud. And ſeeing that by reaſon of our ſinnes, we haue
deſerued great plagues, which we may daily looke for
and expect; let vs pray with Dauid
               2 Sam. 24. 14., that we may rather
fall into the hands of God than of man, becauſe with
him is mercy; yea in his very correctionHab. 3. 2. 
               he remembreth
mercy. But if we be giuen ouer into the hands of
the wicked, there is no mercy to be looked for, no
moderation to be expected. They can neuer finde in
their hearts to ſay that to themſelues, which God did to
his deſtroying Angell;2 Sam. 24. 16. 
               It is enough, put vp thy ſword.
Hitherto God hath taken the rod into his owne hand,
and ſmitten vs himſelfe, by famines, peſtilence, inundations
of waters, and the like; but if he ſhould deliuer vs
into the hands of our bloudy enemies, the Papiſts, we
ſhould then ſoone diſcerne the difference betwixt the
louing chaſtiſements of a father, and the bloudy ſtrokes
of an enemie. Let vs therefore turne to God with Iſrael,
and pray with their words:Iudg. 10. 15. 
               We haue ſinned, O Lord,
we haue ſinned, doe thou vnto vs whatſoeuer ſeemeth good
to thee, deliuer vs only we pray thee this day: Why ſhouldſt
thou ſell vs into the hands of idolatrous Papiſts, who will
giue thine honour to ſtocks and ſtones, and not vnto thy
maieſtie, who giueth them the victorie. For thy names
ſake be mercifull to vs our God, and if we muſt fall by reaſon
of our fearefull ſinnes, let thine owne hand caſt vs

downe, not theirs, for there is mercy in thy blowes. Doe
thou then take vs to doe, O God, and ſhew thy ſelfe a
tender and indulgent father towards vs, by correcting
vs thy ſelfe, as hitherto thou haſt done, and deliuer vs
not to that mercileſſe generation, whoſePſal. 30. 14. & 57. 4. 
               teeth are
ſwords, and their iawes as kniues: who know no end of
ſcourging vs, till they haue alſo made an end of vs
whom they ſcourge. So ſhall wee ſing praiſes to thy
name, and ſay,Pſal. 124. 6. 
               Bleſſed be the Lord, who hath not giuen
vs as a prey vnto their teeth.
            
            
               And I will lay it waſte.]
               Text. Or, I will make it a deſolation,
ſo that it ſhall haue none to inhabit it. The people of
the land ſhall be ſwept away with the ſword, and the
earth ſhall be robbed of all her goodly ornaments: It
ſhall neither be inhabited by men, nor adorned with her
beautifull fruits, as it were with her princely coat of diuers
colours, but become as a deſolate and forſaken wilderneſſe:
This is the meaning. And hence note we
the miſerie of warre.
            
               War is that miſerable deſolation,
               
                  Doct. Warre is the forerunner of deſolation. 
               which findes a land before
it like Eden; and leaues it behinde like Sodome, a deſolate
and forſaken wilderneſſe. The fierceneſſe & rage of it
Moſes expreſſeth and deſcribeth, when he telleth the
IſraelitesDeut. 28. 49—58. of a Nation that ſhould come from farre, as
ſwift as the Eagle fleeth; and of fierce countenance, who
ſhould not regard the perſon of the old, nor ſhew fauour
to the young; who ſhould eat the fruit of their
cattell, and the fruit of their land vntill they were deſtroied;
who ſhould not leaue them either corne, wine,
or oile; nor-increaſe of Kine, nor flockes of Sheepe;
but ſhould beſiege them in their gates, vntill their high
and fenced walls came downe wherein they truſted
throughout all their land: by reaſon whereof they
ſhould be driuen to eat the fruit of their owne bodie,
the fleſh of their ſonnes and of their daughters, which
the Lord their God had giuen them, in the ſiege, and in
the ſtraitneſſe wherewith their enemies ſhould diſtreſſe

them. So that men ſhould haue euill or couetous eyes
towards their brethren, and wiues of their boſomes, and
their children which they ſhould leaue, in not giuing to
any of them of the fleſh of their children, which they
ſhould eat for feare leſt they ſhould haue none left for
themſelues in the ſtraitneſſe of the ſiege. And the tender
and delicate women, who would not aduenture to
ſet the ſole of their feet vpon the ground for delicateneſſe,
ſhall be as niggardly towards their husbands, and
towards their ſonnes and daughters, and towards their
young ones: For they ſhall eat their children ſecretly
and in corners, that none might get any part away from
them, becauſe of the ſiege wherewith their enemie
ſhould diſtreſſe them. Fearefull threatnings. But is it
poſſible, that the miſerie or miſchiefe of warre ſhould
be ſo great? Were not theſe threatnings made to keepe
them in obedience only? Surely, nothing is there threatned,
but warre hath brought forth. To inſtance in that
vnmatchable inſtance of the deſtruction of Ieruſalem by
Titus and Veſpaſian, who beſieged it for the ſpace of
fiue months; threeſcore and eleuen yeeres after Chriſts
incarnation, or thereabouts. In which time there paſſed
many aſſaults and skirmiſhes, much ſlaughter and
bloudſhed being made both on the one ſide, and other.
The famine meane while afflicting the City was ſuch, as
no Hiſtorie can parallel:Fame impellebantur vt vel equorum lora, & ſuos balthcos, & calceos, & coria comederent. Tontan. Bibl. conc. To. 4. ad Dom. 10. Trinit. 
               Horſes, Aſſes, Dogs, Cats,
Rats, were good vnto their taſtes. But this food failing,
they were driuen to eat courſer fare, yea thoſe things
which vnreaſonable creatures would not eat; as the leather
of their ſhooes, and of their targets, of their bridles,
and of their girdles, and the like: Oxe dung was a pretious
diſh vnto them, and the ſhreddings of pot-herbes
caſt out, and trodden vnder foot, and withered, were
taken vp againe for nouriſhment. What miſerable meat
was this? And yet as miſerable as it was, the childe
would ſnatch it from his parentRapiebant parentibus filij, parentes ſilijs, & de ipſis faucibus cibus proferebatur. Egeſip. de excid. Hieroſ. l. 5. c. 18., and the parent from
his childe, euen from out his iawes. Yea ſome to prolong

their liues, would not ſticke to eat vp that, that
others had vomited and caſt vp. And yet harken to a far
more lamentable accident than all this yet: The mother
takes her owne childe from her breſts; a harmeleſſe
ſuckling, ſilly infant, and thus ſpeakes to it;Ioſeph. de bell. Iudaico lib. 7. cap. 18. 
               Little infant,
poore wretch, in war, in famine, in ſedition, for whom
ſhall I preſerue thee? for whom ſhall I ſaue thee aliue?
If thou liue, thou muſt be a ſlaue vnto the Romanes; but
famine preuents thy ſeruitude: yea and the mutinous
Iewes are more cruell, than either the Romans, or the famine.
Be thou therefore meat to me; a furie to the mutinous,
and euen a mocke of the life of man. And when ſhee
had thus ſpoken, ſhee kild it, and boyled the dead bodie
of it, and eat the one halfe, and reſerued the other
for another time.
            The mutinous Iewes drawne by the ſent and ſauour
of this meat, brake into this womans houſe, and threaten
to ſlay her, if ſhee bring it not forth vnto them. Shee
tels them ſhee hath meat indeed, but ſhee had reſerued it
for her ſelfe, neuertheleſſe ſeeing they did ſo vrge her,
ſhee would bring it to them. So ſhee brings them the
reliques of her ſonne; at which ſight they ſtanding
amazed, and ſhrinking backe with feare and horrour;
the mother ſaid thus vnto them: This meat you ſee is
indeed part of my owne ſonne; it was my deed to kill it; eat
yee of it, for I haue eaten. Will you be more tender than a
woman? more pitifull than a mother? Eat, I ſay, for
I haue eaten. If you will not eat, it ſhall remaine for me
his mother. Oh fearefull, horrid, inhumane act!
            The famine ſtill continuing, they are compelled to
begin to iſſue out of their Citie gates, and no ſooner
were they out, but they were ſtill taken and crucified
vpon Croſſes and Gibbets ſet vp before the walls, that
they who were within might by beholding of this ſpectacle,
be moued to giue ouer; but yet they continued
obſtinate and would not. Fiue hundred a day were thus
hanged vp, till there were neither trees to be gotten,

nor any more ſpace left to ſet them in: and deſire being
made to know the number of dead carkaſſes which were
carried out of the Citie for want of buriall to bee
throwne in ditches as dung vpon the earth, they found
the number to be numberleſſe, ſo that no way could it
certainly be knowne; but out of one Gate the keeper
had noted an hundred and fifty thouſand dead bodies
to be carried out. And thus what with the extremitie of
the famine, what with the furie of the ſword, and what
with ſickneſſe during the time of this warre, there periſhed
in Ieruſalem, and the Prouince adioyning, as ſome
credibleEuſeb. in Chro. Oroſius lib. 7. Authors affirme, about ſix hundred thouſand
able men to beare armes: or as others hold,Ioſeph. de bell. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 17. who were
preſent at the warre, there died eleuen hundred thouſand;
beſides others taken captiue to the number of
ninety ſeuen thouſand.
            The Iewes thus dead and ſcattered, what became now
of their glorious Citie? Their holy Temple it was
burnt; their ſtrong and high walls were throwne
downe; all the Citie became waſte and deſolate, and ſo
it remaines to this day. And thus we ſee what Moſes
there threatned, is here fulfilled to the vtmoſt: both
which proue my doctrine and make it good, That albeit
warre finde a land like Eden, it will leaue it like a Sodome,
a deſolate and forſaken wilderneſſe. If theſe be not
ſufficient,Lament. reade the whole booke of Ieremiahs Lamentations,
and there we ſhall finde that the mercies of warre
are cruell. As alſo what this our Prophet Iſaiah ſaith
in the ninth of this his propheſie, where ſpeaking of the
troubles that ſhould befall the people for their ſinnes,
ſaith,Iſai. 9. 19, 20. 
               The people ſhall be as the fuell of the fire: no man
ſhall ſpare his brother. And he ſhall ſnatch on the right
hand and be hungry, and he ſhal eat on the left hand and not
be ſatisfied; they ſhall eat euery man the fleſh of his owne
arme. Where we ſee warre is compared to the fire, and
it feedeth vpon and deſtroyeth the people, as the fire
conſumeth ſtraw or wood: or like as an hungry man,

who ſnatcheth at the right hand and at the left, and is
not ſatisfied, ſuch is the vnſatiable hungrie deſire of
warre; there is no meaſure nor ſatietie of bloud. Let
vs thus apply this point.
            Firſt for Admonition vnto vs all,Vſe 1. that wee be heartily
and vnfainedly thankfull for the long peace and proſperitie
that we haue enioyed vnder the conduct of our
worthy Deborah, our late Soueraigne Queene Elizabeth,
and ſtill doe enioy vnder the gouernment of our
peaceable Solomon, and Princely Eccleſiastes, who came
vnto vs like Noahs Doue,Gen. 8. 11. with an Oliue branch of
peace; and hath ſhut the iron gates of warre, and ſetled
peace amongſt vs; ſo that we may ſit2 Sam. 7. 1. euery one vnder
our owne Vines and Fig-trees, and there is none to
make vs afraid. Which bleſſing is no common bleſſing
that we of this little Iland at this day doe enioy. Our
neighbours round about vs are at this day whirled about
in tumultuous broiles, while our Britaine, like the
Center, ſtandeth ſtill vnmouable; in ſo much that it is
hard to ſay whether other Nations more enuie or admire
vs. In peace our Merchants trade abroad, and
bring homePſal. 104. 15. 
               Wines to make glad the heart of man, and
Oyle to make his face to ſhine. In peace our Magiſtrates ſit
at home,2 King. 7. and giue iudgement in the gates of Iſrael, for
maintaining of peace. In peace the Meſſengers of peace
Iſay 52. 7. 
               preach vnto vs the ſweet tidings of the Goſpell. In peace
our HusbandmenIames 5. 7. 
               ſow their corne in hope, and reape
with ioy. In peacePſal. 144. 12, 13, 14. our ſonnes as plants grow vp in their
youth, and our daughters are as corner ſtones, poliſhed after
the ſimilitude of a Palace. Our garners are full, affording
all manner of ſtore: our ſheepe bring forth thouſands,
and ten thouſands in our ſtreets. Our Oxen are
ſtrong to labour: there is no breaking in, nor going out;
there is no complaining in our ſtreets. In a word, all honeſt
Occupations and honourable Profeſſions thriue vnder
the peace that wee enioy. For which Peace what cauſe
haue we to be thankfull to the God of Peace? Eſpecially

conſidering how often by our ſinnes wee haue broken
our truce with God, and giuen an Alarum to the
King of heauen, by our Pride
               Iſay 3. 16., and contempt of the Goſpell
               2 Chro. 36. 16, 17., two vſuall fore-runners of the Sword. And therefore
in the midſt of this our peace, let vs not grow ſecure:
we haue not ſo many bleſſings, but we may forfeit
them all by our diſobedience. When wee moſt feared
warre, God ſene vs peace: Now we moſt bragge of our
peace, we may well feare that God will ſend vs warre.
            Secondly,
                  Ʋſe 2. for Reprehenſion of ſuch as grudge their
owne peace and well-fare; and both wiſh and pray for
warres. Neuer good daies ſince ſo much peace, ſay ſome;
and would we had warres againe, ſay others. Fooles that
we are, that know no better how to vſe our peace, and
teſtifie ſo great vnthankfulnes for ſo great a mercy. Had
we beene in the coats of our fore-fathers, or did we feele
the ſcourge of warre, as our neighbours doe, we would
better know how to eſteeme this bleſſing, and prize this
garland of Peace. We neuer ſaw our Townes and Cities
burning, whiles the flame gaue light to the ſouldiers
to carry away our goods: we neuer ſaw our houſes
rifled, our Temples ſpoiled, our wiues rauiſhed, our
children bleeding dead on the pauements, or ſprawling
on the mercileſſe pikes: we heare not the confuſed cries
of men ſounding in our diſtracted eares; ſome dying,
others killing; other inſulting; others reſiſting: we ſee
not our high-waies ſtrawed with breathleſſe carkaſſes;
men and horſes wallowing in their bloud, and the gaſtly
viſages of wounds and death in euery corner: theſe
things wee can only iudge of by report and heare-ſay;
did we know them by experience, wee would not ſo repine
at the peace wee now enioy. Were it not a wofull
and lamentable thing to ſee fire without mercie, and
without quenching, conſuming houſes, and eating vp
all things, making ſpare of nothing? How much more
to heare, and ſee, and feele the affliction of warre, when
all things are in confuſion and combuſtion? When

               2 Chro. 15. 5, 6. 
               there is no peace to him that goeth out or in, but great
troubles to all the inhabitants: when Nation is deſtroyed
of Nation, and Citie of Citie, and all are troubled with
aduerſitie. Alas! what good, what profit, what ſweetneſſe
can we finde in theſe things?
            And as theſe are to be reproued, ſo me thinks I finde
another ſort of people to be ſharply cenſured, who goe
a degree further than the former, counting of warre but
as a matter of ſport and play. So ſpeaketh Abner, Captaine
of the Hoſt,2 Sam. 2. 14. 
               Let the young men now riſe and play
before vs. His meaning was that they ſhould come forth
and trie their valour, one in hewing and cutting of another,
and ſo ſhew themValab. & Iun. in loc. a bloudie play. Such were
thoſe ſword-plaies, in vſe amongſt the Romanes, wherein
cruell ſpectacles were exhibited on each ſide in the
ſhedding of humane bloud Such alſo are our challenges
made and performed by Fencers vpon the ſtage
now in vſe amongſt vs, whereby Gods Image is oftentimes
defaced, and bloud ſpilt as water vpon the ground:
and yet what running and thronging to ſee ſuch bloudie
ſights; being counted by many but a ſport, or matter
of recreation. Which kinde of ſauage and beaſtly
ſpectacles, Theodoſius the Emperour abhorred, and
would neuer behold. And one Demonax among the
Athenians, hearing the people conſult about ſuch plaies,
told them they muſt firſt breake downe the Altar of
Mercie; becauſe ſuch ſights were ſo mercileſſe and
cruell. Let all ſuch as feare the Lord beware of countenancing
ſuch by our preſence, leſt wee make our ſelues
guiltie of their ſinnes, and ſtand as guiltie before the
Lord of ſhedding that bloud which they doe ſhed.
            Thirdly, for our Inſtruction this ſerues; Seeing there
is ſuch crueltie in warre, and fearefulneſſe and deuouring
in the ſword; let vs take heed of the beginnings
thereof, and cut the cords of all contention and debate,
liuing peaceably one with another, as brethren ought
to doe.Iames 4. 1. 
               From whence come warres and contentions amongst

you (ſaith Saint Iames) are they not hence, euen of
your luſts that fight in your members? Theſe diſtempered
luſts are the cauſe of all ſtrife and contention, cauſing
a continuall warre within a man, and oftentimes
warres with other men, to the ruinating not onely of
priuate perſons, but of whole Families, Cities, Kingdomes.
The greateſt warres haue beene kindled by
priuate diſcords, as Hiſtories declare. Let euery one
then beware of ſowing the ſeeds of diuiſion, for in time
they may come to yeeld a comfortleſſe crop of cares and
confuſions. Brawle not, chide not one with another;
and a Saint Iames ſaith,Iames 5. 9. 
               Grudge not one againſt another:
for theſe are the foundations of warre, and therefore
have no hand in laying them. Ciuill diſſentions
ruinate a Common-wealth, more than open warre,
as Ieruſalem and Rome can teſtifie, both which by priuate
factions made themſelues a prey to the common
enemie. The French and wee Engliſh alſo haue ſome
experience hereof in thoſe home-bred garboyles which
were betweene the houſe of Lancaſter and Yorke before
they were vnited; in which vnhappie quarrell there
were cruelly butchered foureſcore Princes of the
bloud royall (as one witneſſethCominaeus.) beſides an infinite
number of the comminaltie that were ſlaine. And thus
we ſee Saint Iames his ſaying true:Cap. 3. 16. 
               Where enuying and
ſtrife is, there is ſedition and all manner of euill workes.
            
            
               Laſtly,
               Vſe 4. 
               ſeeing there is miſery and miſchiefe in warre,
let this ſerue for exhortation, that we
               Rom. 12. 10. 15▪
                mourne with them
that mourne, and weepe with them that weepe. Our brethren
in France and Germany are whirled about in theſe
bloudie tumults; they heare the diſmall cries of cruell
aduerſaries, crying kill▪ kill; the ſhrikes of women and
infants; the thundering of thoſe murdering peeces in
their eares; while we lyeAmos 6. 4. 6. vpon beds of Iuory, and ſtretch
our ſelues vpon our couches, and eat the lambes out of the
flocke, and the calues out of the midſt of the ſtall; while wee
drinke wine in bowles, and anoint our ſelues with the chiefe

ointments. We are ſtrangers to thoſe miſeries they vndergoe,
in paſſion: I pray God we be not ſtrangers to
their miſeries in compaſſion, which I feare, I feare, wee
are. Let vs thinke we ſee the calamities of warre with our
neighbours eyes, and feele them thorow their ſides, and
let not the afflictions of poore Ioſeph be forgotten. And
ſeeing they are in the valleyes fighting againſt the Amalekites,
the curſed enemies of Gods Church and people;
               Exod. 17. 8. 
               let vs be vpon the mountaines lifting vp our
hands for their victory and deliuerance; praying with
the words of Dauid, ſaying,
               Pſal. 74. 2. 19, 20, 21. Remember, O Lord, thy
congregation which thou haſt purchaſed of old: the rod of
thine inheritance which thou haſt redeemed. O deliuer not
the ſoule of thy Turtle Doue vnto the multitude of the
wicked: forget not the congregation of thy poore for euer.
Haue reſpect vnto the couenant: for the darke places of the
earth are full of the habitations of crueltie. O let not the
oppreſſed returne aſhamed: let the poore and needie praiſe
thy name.Pſal. 79. 11, 12, 13. Let the ſighing of the priſoner come before
thee, according to the greatneſſe of thy power preſerue thou
thoſe that are appointed to die. And render vnto our
neighbours ſeuenfold into their boſome, their reproach
wherewith they haue reproached thee, O Lord. So we thy
people and ſheepe of thy paſture, will giue thee thankes for
euer: we will ſhew forth thy praiſe to all generations.
            
               It ſhall not be pruned nor digged.]
               Text. Looke as Husbandmen
neglect to prune, cut, digge or dreſſe ſuch grounds
and plants as they deſpaire of and haue not pleaſure in:
ſo God here deſpairing as it were of this his Vineyard,
tels them, he will husband them no more, but he would
withhold ſuch meanes from them, as formerly hee had
vſed for their fructifying. Whence learne we:
            
               When the Lord hath vſed all meanes both by his word
and workes to bring a people to good,
               
                  Doctr. Such as neglect the means, ſhall be depriued of the meanes. 
               and they neuertheleſſe
neglect and contemne thoſe meanes of their good; continuing
ſtill in carnall ſecuritie, groſſe infidelitie, and impenitencie;
then will the Lord depriue ſuch a people of thoſe

meanes of their good, and giue them ouer to their owne
wicked courſes, and hearts luſts, and ſuffer them to fall
headlong, as well into the euill of ſinne, as into the euill of
puniſhment. So wee ſee here dealt he with this people:
he depriueth them of the meanes, with-holding
his paines, in pruning, digging, and the like: as alſo the
raine from falling on them any more, and ſo ſuffers
them to bring forth thornes and briers; noyſome ſinnes
and luſts, euen to their owne ruine and perdition. Thus
in the firſt chapter of this propheſie we may reade, how
that after God had beſtowed many and great fauours
vpon his people, notwithſtanding all which they continued
obſtinate and rebellious, and neither by mercy
nor miſery would be reclaimed nor reformed, but
would ſtill deſperately perſeuere in their defection; he
tels them plainly he would ſmite them no more, ſeeing
it was ſo that they were ſet vpon euill, and had as it were
ſold themſelues to worke wickedneſſe;Iſai. 1. 5. 
               Wherefore
(ſaith he) ſhould you be ſtricken any more; ſeeing you will
reuolt more and more? q. d. To what end ſhould I any
more correct you? for full well I ſee that you become
worſe after you are afflicted than you were before; and
therefore I will with-hold my hand, and leaue you to
your ſelues. The like iudgement we finde threatned in
Hoſeas propheſie againſt the apoſtate Iſraelites:Hoſ. 4. 14. 
               I will
not puniſh your daughters when they commit whoredome,
nor your ſpouſes when they commit adulterie; ſeeing they
would not be amended, he would lay the reines vpon
their necks, and with-hold the meanes whereby they
might haue beene reclaimed. And thus when the Gentiles
would not ſerue God according to that light of nature
which he had giuen vnto them,Rom. 1. 28. hee gaue them
vp to their owne vile affection, and to a reprobate
minde. And vpon ſuch as hauing long had the meanes
of knowledge, and regeneration, and yet continue ſtill
in their vnrighteouſneſſe and corruption, he paſſeth
that definitiue ſentence,Reuel. 22. 11. 
               He that is vniuſt, let him be

vniuſt ſtill,
               
                  It is ſpoken, Prophetando non optande. Coelius. 
               and he that is filthy let him be filthy ſtill. And
thus wee ſee it to bee true, That God will remoue and
deny meanes of reclaiming, when hauing long enioyed
them, wee make no good vſe of them, neither are reclaimed
by them.
            And why ſo?Reaſ. Becauſe it is but loſt labour and coſt
caſt away, to adminiſter phyſicke to ſuch Patients whoſe
diſeaſes are deſperate. Now God is a moſt wiſe Phyſitian,
and knowes with whom he hath to deale; and
therefore when hee ſees men rend in peeces his preſcripts,
and pull off his plaiſters, and reiect thoſe wholeſome
potions which he miniſtereth to purge men from
their corruptions, hee giueth them ouer to themſelues
to ſinke or ſwim, and ſuffers them to die and
periſh in their ſinnes, and in the ſickneſſe of their
ſoules.
            But is it iuſt with God to ſuffer ſuch as are growne
deſperate in ſinne and become incorrigible,Queſt. to runne on
without puniſhment?
            I anſwer firſt,Resp. 1. wee are not to vnderſtand what hath
formerly beene ſpoken, generally and abſolute, as
though he would inflict vpon ſuch no kinde of puniſhment;
but more ſpecially he would not lay vpon them
that kinde of puniſhment which is called chaſtiſement
and correction. Hee will not in puniſhing them play
the part of a Phyſitian,2. but rather of a Chirurgion, cutting
that cleane off,Inſignis poena eſt & vindicta impietatis conniuere Deum a
                     •
                   indulgere peccantibus, & vindicta impunitatem ſed & longam concedere proſperitatem. which he hath no hope to cure.
            Secondly I anſwer, They are puniſhed euen while
they are ſpared, and that moſt fearefully: For what
greater puniſhment can bee inflicted, than to bee giuen
vp to ones owne hearts luſts, and ſo to haue ſinne puniſhed
with ſinne; ſinne fore-going, with ſinne following?
            And thirdly,Philo. lib. de confuſ. ling. wee are to know, that this world is
more properly the place of doing, than of ſuffering;
and therefore though God ſuffer them to heape ſinne
vpon ſinne,3. ſeeing thereby they doe butRom. 2. 5. 
               treaſure vp

vnto themſelues wrath, againſt that day of wrath, wherein
Eccleſ. 12. 14. euery tranſgreſſion of theirs ſhall receiue its recompence,
God may not be thought to be vniuſt. Some
ſinnes are here puniſhed, that wee may know there is a
prouidence in God; others eſcape here vnpuniſhed,
to aſſure vs that there is a iudgement reſerued, and a
day of wrath appointed.
            Thus is the point proued, and cleared; heare it now
applied.
            This concernes this our Land and people very neerly;
Vſe 1. who in regard of the meanes, withMatth. 11. 23. 
               Capernaum
haue beene lift vp to heauen, and yet are ſo little bettered
by the meanes. Wherein hath God beene wanting
to vs either in word or deed? What meanes can be deuiſed
to doe vs good, that God hath not vſed? Is there
any way by which a man may learne, but by the ſame
the Lord hath taught vs? By his Precepts hee hath inſtructed
vs; by Requeſts he hath exhorted vs; by his
Mercies (great and many) he hath allured vs; and by
his Iudgements he hath terrified vs. He hath ſent his ſeruants
of ſundry qualities according to their ſeuerall gifts
earely and late vnto vs: Some like Moſes to teach vs;
ſome like Iſaiah to comfort vs; ſome like Ieremiah to
mourne for vs; ſome like Dauid to ſing to vs; all
labouring
to win vs to repentance, that we might be ſaued
But where is our repentance? where our reformation?
If wee looke with an impartiall eie, wee ſhall
ſoone ſee all manner of ſinne to abound in ſtead of theſe.
Doth not Pride, Gluttony, Drunkenneſſe, &c. abound
here? When I ſee and heare, I muſt needs ſay vnto my
ſoule:Ier. 5. 7. 
               How ſhould God ſpare vs for theſe? I pray
God, that, that wee take to be an argument of his fauour,
viz. Peace and outward Proſperity, doe not rather
ſtrongly argue his fierie and hot diſpleaſure.
            More particulary,Vſe 2. this may be for Admonition to
all and euery of vs, that with all carefull diligence, wee
make profitable vſe of the meanes which the Lord hath

giuen vs, of what ſort and kinde ſoeuer they haue beene;
remembring alwaies, that to whom much is committed,
of him much ſhall bee required; the longer our
day of learning hath beene and the lighter, the more
worke and ſeruice will God expect at our hands, and
the better. We doe not looke for nor expect ſo much
fruit of a tree that hath growen but a few yeeres in a
ground that is barren, as of that which hath growen
many yeeres in a ſoile that is fertile: and therefore it
concerneth ſuch as haue beene moſt and longeſt taught,
to ſhew themſelues moſt zealous, righteous, and
deuout.
            In regard of the meanes, you in this famous Citie
ſhould bee like Saul,
               1 Sam. 10. 23. higher than others by the ſhoulders.
A ſinne and ſhame then it would bee for you to
come behinde others in your obedience. Looke then
to it, for aſſure your ſelues a leſſer and ſmaller meaſure
of knowledge, faith, obedience, &c. will be accepted in
others, than will or can be in you, becauſe your meanes
are more. In this reſpect, ChriſtMatth. 11. 21, 22. deemeth the damnation
of the Capernaits to be more horrible and fearefull
than that of the Sodomits, becauſe the one had
more meanes to make them good than the other had:
And ſo it will bee with you; for if you bring forth no
better fruit, anſwerable in ſome ſort to the meanes
which God hath beſtowed on you, the time will come
aſſuredly that you ſhall wiſh, oh that I were a Sodomite,
oh that I were a Gomorean; yea you will enuy their
happineſſe in regard of your owne miſery: and in the
meane time you will be left of God as a deſperate cure,
and bee ſuffered to runne on in a courſe of ſinning, vntill
you fall into that bottomleſſe pit of deſtruction, and
gulfe of condemnation.
            I will alſo command the clouds that they raine no raine
vpon it.]Text.
            
            Wee haue ſeene before what is meant by clouds and
raine: The Prophets and Miniſters of Gods Word,

are meant by the former, and the word they preach is
meant by the latter. I intend not to follow the Metaphors
in the particular reſemblances wherein they may
bee compared, they hauing beene toucht afore in the
Expoſition. From hence I will only obſerue one point
of Doctrine. And take it thus briefly:
            Miniſters haue no power nor ability of themſelues to
performe their Miniſteriall function.
                  Doctr. Miniſters of themſelues haue no power to diſcharge their Miniſteriall function.
            
            It is of God and from God. It is God that will withhold
theſe clouds (his Prophets and Preachers) from
dropping the ſhowres of his word into the eares of this
people. Hee will command and they muſt obey. It is
he that makes the heart of the Prieſt fat, andIſay 57. 19. 
               creates
the fruit of the lips to bee at peace. It is hee thatReuel. 3. 7. 
               openeth
and no man ſhutteth, and ſhutteth and no man openeth.
This S. Paul acknowledgeth, that2 Cor. 3. 5, 6. 
               we are not
ſufficient of 
                     •
                  our ſelues to thinke any thing as of our ſelues,
our ſufficiency is of God, who hath made vs able Miniſters:
and further confeſſeth, that though1 Cor. 15. 10. he had laboured
more abundantly than the reſt, yet it was not hee, but
the grace of God which was in him. And of all Miniſters
whatſoeuer he ſaith indefinitely,1 Cor. 3. 7. 
               That neither he which
planteth is any thing, nor hee which watereth, but God is
all in all. Thus Chriſt is ſaid to haue the Miniſters as
Reuel. 1. 16. 
               Starres in his right hand; not onely for their defence,
but alſo to make them riſe or ſet, when and where hee
pleaſeth. Hence it is that the raine of the Goſpell, like
the raine of the clouds, hath ſometimes gone by
coaſts,Amos 4. 7. 
               raining ſometimes vpon one Citie and not vpon
another.
               Iudg. 6. 37. 
               Gedeons fleece hath beene wet, and no place
elſe; and euery place elſe, and not Gedeons fleece.
            Which being ſo,Vſe 1. me thinkes this ſhould teach many
of our hearers better things, than to impute euery diſability
that is ſeene in Miniſters, (yea ſometimes in
ſuch Miniſters as at other times are able and ſufficient
enough through God that ſtrengthens them) to their
owne idleneſſe and negligence. It often happens that

the faithfulleſt labourers, and workemen, are often
tongue-tied; and though they be Clouds thicke and
full, and likely enough to drop downe ſhowres: yet
when they come to the place of exerciſing this their
Miniſteriall function, they are ſo withheld, that they
cannot be as a Reprouer vnto their people. Now how
doe our people cenſure theſe for their ignorance, negligence,
feare, pride, vnfaithfulneſſe, and the like? I denie
not but theſe1 Cor. 16. 9, 10. Heb. 13. 17., and euery one of theſe doe often
ſtop the mouthes of Gods Miniſters. ForIſay 6. 5. 
               polluted lips
are no lips of vtterance. The lips of the Miniſter muſt
be touched with the eoales of knowledge, zeale, and
mortification. But certaine I am, that it is the ſinnes of
the people that moſt vſually puts their Miniſters to ſilence:
Ezek. 3. 26, 27. Hoſ. 9. 7. 
               Sonne of man, I will make thy tongue cleaue to the
roofe of thy mouth, and thou ſhalt be dumbe, and thou ſhalt
not be to them a reprouer. Marke the reaſon; For they
are a rebellious houſe. You ſee then it was the rebellion
of the houſe of Iſrael that made Ezechiel dumbe. When
ſuch an accident fals out, condemne more thy owne
ſinnes than thy Teachers negligence or ignorance; this
is thy beſt and ſafeſt courſe.
            And ſecondly,Vſe 2. how ſhould this ſtirre vp people to
Pray for vs
               Epheſ. 6. 19. Coloſſ. 4. 3. Crura thymo plena., that God would open vnto vs a doore of vtterance,
that we may open our mouthes boldly to make
knowne the myſterie of the Goſpell of Ieſus Christ. What
is it for vs to come vnto you richly laden, and to be as
full of good matter as euer Elihu wasIob 32. 18., if God be not
with our mouthes, as he promiſed Moſes
               Exod. 4. 12., and teach
vs what to ſay? Pray therefore, oh pray earneſtly to
God for vs, that he would excite vs, ſtirre vs vp, and
enable vs to vtter ſuch holy things as we haue ſtudied
and thought vpon: ForPro. 16. 1. 
               the preparations of the heart
are in man, but the anſwer of the tongue is from the Lord;
and therefore except he doe to vs as he did to Ieremiah,
               Ier. 1. 9. ſtretch out his hand and touch our mouth, and put
his words into it, there is ſmall hope that our tongues

ſhould ſo ſet out thoſe wonderfull workes of God, and
thoſe great things of his LawHoſ. 8. 12., as that the ſoules of
Gods people may haue any cauſe to bleſſe God that euer
they did heare vs.
            Thirdly,Vſe 3. what cauſe haue ſuch to bleſſe God as are
vnder ſuch clouds, and liue vnder ſuch Miniſters,
whoſe Doctrine drops as the raine,
               Deut. 32. 2. 
               and whoſe ſpeech diſtils
as the dew; as the ſmall raine vpon the tender herbe, and
as the ſhowres vpon the graſſe. Oh that men knew but
this gift of God, and were anſwerably thankfull for ſo
great a gift! Satan grudges, yea enuies the Church this
gift, and ſets himſelfe by all meanes to withhold theſe
clouds from dropping, as knowing full well what a
great diſaduantage they are vnto his kingdome: hence
is it that all Epheſus is in an vp-roare vpon Pauls teaching;
and hence is that out-cry of our people, Neuer was
merry world ſince ſo much Preaching: Oh! how curſed a
generation are we fallen into? who repine at that, as
if it were ſome heauie plague, for which we are bound
to bleſſe God for, as a ſpeciall bleſſing: A day will ſurely
come when ſuch will wiſh to haue but one drop fall
from theſe clouds to coole the heat and horror of
their conſciences, and to eaſe the agonies they are perplexed
withall, but ſhall not obtaine it.
            And laſtly,Vſe 4. this may teach vs who are Miniſters of
the word, to ſeeke abilitie and libertie from the hands of
God, that we may be enabled to deliuer vnto our people
what we haue thought vpon and meditated on before:
for if he will giue libertie, who can reſtraine it? and if
he will ſilence, who can enlarge it? Let vs then not be
ouer-confident of our owne abilitie, but if we be to
ſpeake of matters of moment, be more carefull to craue
Gods aid and direction, than truſt to our owne readineſſe
or preparation. And ſo much for this: I hope a
word to the wiſe will be ſufficient. We haue done with
the Parable. The Application followes.
            The Vineyard of the Lord of Hoaſts,Text. is the houſe of Iſrael,

and the men of Iudah his pleaſant plant:Verſe 7. and he looked
for iudgement, but behold oppreſſion; for righteouſneſſe,
but behold a cry.
            Here we haue the Allegory explained and applied
by ſhewing▪
               Diuiſion.
            
            Firſt, who this Vinitor is; and he is God himſelfe, who
is here deſcribed by his Titles and Epithites; firſt, Lord:
ſecondly, Lord of Hoaſts.
            
            Secondly, who this Vineyard was; and they are, firſt,
the houſe of Iſrael: ſecondly, the men of Iudah, euen all
the whole body of them.
            Thirdly, what were the fruits; firſt, which he expected,
and they were iudgement and righteouſneſſe: ſecondly,
which they returned, and they were Oppreſſion, and a
crie.
            
            
               The Vineyard] We haue ſeene before in the beginning
of the Parable,Expoſ. the reaſon why the Church is compared
to a Vineyard, with the ſeuerall concurrences
wherein the compariſon ſtands, which is needleſſe here
againe to recite: therefore thither I referre you.
            
               Of the Lord] God is called a Lord, becauſe of his abſolute
power, dominion, and authoritie that he hath ouer
all creatures: for (as we know) he is properly called
the Lord of any thing, that hath intereſt, authoritie, and
gouernment ouer the ſame: Now ſeeing God hath an
abſolute, free, and eternall right, to all things both in
heauen and in earth, this title of Lord is truly and properly
giuen to him.
            
               Of Hoaſts.] He is called not only a Lord, but Lord
of Hoaſts: Firſt, becauſe his creatures are many and a
multitude, as an armie conſiſts of many troupes: Secondly,
in regard of their order, which is admirable;
as order makes an armie beautifull: Thirdly, and eſpecially,
in regard of their obedience; for no ſouldier is ſo
ready preſt at the command of his Captaine, as all creatures
are ready to fulfill the will of God.
            
               Is the houſe of Iſrael.] This name Iſrael God for honours

ſake gaue to Iacob
               Gen. 33. 38. vpon a ſpeciall occaſion mentioned
in his ſtorie; and it ſignifieth a Prince or preuailer
with God. And he thought it an excellent bleſſing to
haue his children called by his name (Iſrael) as we may
ſee in that his praier made for Ioſephs two ſonnes Ephraim
and Manaſſeh
               Gen. 48. 16. 
               The Angell which redeemed me from
all euill bleſſe the lads, and let my name be named on them,
&c. And this name was giuen to Iacobs ſeed as a title
of honour. See Rom. 9. 4. So that by the houſe of Iſrael
is meant the ſeed and poſteritie of Iſrael, they who
came of that houſe, and iſſued from his loines.
            
               And the men of Iudah.] Though Iſrael was a common
name to the twelue Tribes, while they were but
one kingdome; which was from the beginning of Sauls
reigne to the end of Solomons: yet after they were diuided
into two kingdomes, they were called by theſe two
names Iſrael and Iudah. When and how this rent was
made, we finde expreſly deliuered both in the bookes
of the1 Kings 12. 
               Kings and2 Chron. 10. 
               Chronicles. For the time, it was after
the death of king Solomon, and not before. And for
the Manner thus:
            
               Rehoboam king Solomons ſonne (cenſured by Ieſus
the ſonne of Sirach
               Eccleſ. 47. 23. to be euen the fooliſhneſſe of the
people, and one that had no vnderſtanding) ſucceeding
in his fathers throne, did, vpon aduice giuen him by his
young councellors, threaten ſharpe vſage and hard meaſure
vnto his people, ſo that his little finger ſhould be
heauier than his fathers loines: and whereas his father
did burden them with a grieuous yoake, he would make
it heauier▪ his father did chaſtize them with rods, but he
would correct them with ſcourges. Which vnkinde intreating
of his people cauſed a rebellion and reuolt:
Tenne of the twelue Tribes much diſcontented, breake
forth into ſpeeches of impatiencie; What portion haue
we in Dauid? we haue no inheritance in the ſonne of Ieſſe:
To your tents O Iſrael. Now ſee to thine owne houſe Dauid.
So they forſooke Rehoboam their rightfull Lord,

and ſet vp Ieroboam ſonne of Nebat to be king ouer
them. Two Tribes, viz. the Tribes of Iudah and
Beniamin, only continuing their obedience. Thus was
Iſrael diuided from Iſrael: tenne Tribes from the other
two, which made both the ten and the two miſerable.
            The ten reuolted Tribes haue diuers appellations in
the ſanctified writings of the holy Prophets, asHoſ. 10. 15. 
               Bethel,
               Hoſ. 10. 5. 
               Bethauen,
               Mich. 1. 1. 
               Samaria,
               Amos 5. 6. 
               Ioſeph,
               Hoſ. 2. 22. 
               Ieſreel,
               Hoſ. 4. 17. 
               Ephraim,
               Hoſ. 10. 11. 
               Iacob; but none more vſuall than this of Iſrael.
            The two other Tribes Iudah and Beniamin (called in
Scripture but one Tribe, becauſe of the mixture of their
poſſeſſions, as 1 Kings 11. 13.) haue in like ſort their diuers
appellations, as ſometimes they are calledIer. 6. 1. 
               Beniamin,
othertimesMich. 1. 1. 
               Ieruſalem, and otherwhilesAmos 6. 1. 
               Sion,
and ſometimes againe we may finde them calledZach. 12. 7. 
               the
houſe of Dauid. But moſt commonly they are knowne
by the name of Iuda, as here. And thus we ſee, the reaſon
of theſe different names giuen to one and the ſame
people; for all came of Iacob, and iſſued out of his
loines.
            
               His pleaſant plant.] That is, the plant which he tooke
delight in. Now this is not ſpoken, as if they of the
Tribe of Iudah were more approued of than were the
other Iſraelites, but rather to aggrauate their ſinne, in
that God hauing ſo many waies aduanced that Tribe
aboue the reſt, and according to Iacobs propheticall
bleſſingGen. 49. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12., made it Lord and king ouer the other Tribes,
ſo that the right of the kingdome belonged to it, and
was to continue in Iudahs line vntill Shiloh came: yea,
and out of that Tribe ſhould the Shiloh and Meſſiah
come, which was a ſpeciall prerogatiue that that Tribe
had aboue the reſt: yet notwithſtanding all this, Iudah
ſhould deale ſo vngratefully with God, as in ſtead of
ſweet grapes to bring forth wilde grapes.
            
               He looked for iudgement, but behold oppreſſion.] The
Prophet here as well as in other places of this his Propheſie
ſheweth his Rhetorick,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . vſing a figure, wherby he doth

excellently adorne his ſpeech; for we haue here a meeting
together of words, which hath a very good grace
with it, and yet cannot be ſo well expreſt in any other
tongue, as in the originall: in ſound the words ſeeme
to be almoſt the ſame, and yet are of contrary ſignifications,
and differing much in ſenſe by the changing of a
letter: the one ſignifyingMiſhpat. Iudgement, the otherMiſpach. Oppreſſion:
the oneTzedakah. Iuſtice, the other aTzehhakah. Crie.
            Theſe words eſpecially reſpect Magiſtrates and their
office; and may ſeeme to ſhew vnto vs the well-ſpring
of all that wickedneſſe which was amongſt them: It
came from the head, and ſo diſperſed it ſelfe to the
members.
            
               He looked for Iudgement.] That is, this he expected
for all his many fauours, that Iudgement and Iuſtice
ſhould be adminiſtred, the cauſe of the innocent ſhould
be heard and pleaded, the quarrell of the poore reuenged,
and the wicked and vngodly ſharply cenſured, and
ſeuerely puniſhed.
            
               But behold Oppreſſion.] Or, as ſome expound it, a
Conſpiracie: the Magiſtrates themſelues conſpiring together
with the wicked to oppreſſe the poore, according
to that in the firſt Chapter, verſ. 23.Iſay 1. 23. 
               Thy Princes
are rebellious and companions of theeues, &c. So here,
while theſe Iudges and Magiſtrates ſhould puniſh ſuch
as did oppreſſe the poore, they themſelues did conſpire
with the wicked, while they did accompany them in
dealing extremely and cruelly with them.
            
               For Righteouſneſſe.] That is, that euery one might
haue their due, and no man wronged nor iniured. And
this hath a larger extent than the former, comprehending
vnder it all the duties of loue and charitie which
ought to be ſhewed vnto our neighbour.
            
               A crie] or clamour, to wit, of ſuch as were vniuſtly
oppreſſed by thoſe corrupt Magiſtrates; the cries of the
widowes and fatherleſſe came into the eares of the moſt
high God. And this was wickedneſſe with an Eccè

Behold it; yea, and againe, behold it, for it is twice vſed,
Behold oppreſſion, Behold a crie; which particle hath a
great emphaſis with it, and being double, the greater.
It is as a watch-word to awake vs to the conſideration of
what is ſaid; we ſhould not lightly paſſe this ouer, that
there ſhould be ſuch wickedneſſe, to be beheld amongſt
them, beyond hope or expectation of God or men.
Thus much for Explication. Now come wee to Obſeruation.
And firſt from the Prophets practiſe, learne we
in generall, that
            Preachers are to apply their Doctrines in particular to
their hearers.
                  Doctr. Application is to be made of Doctrine. 
               This courſe tooke Nathan when hee had
to deal with Dauid: Hee did not onely in a Parable
make him condemne the ſinne,
               2 Sam. 12. 7. He ſhall dye that hath
done this thing: but by particular application comes
home vnto him,
               Vid. Dr. Hall on Nathan. Thou art the man; and ſo makes him
condemne himſelfe. And thus did Saint Peter in that
Sermon, wherein he conuerted three thouſand ſoules:
               Acts 2. 23. Whom yee haue taken, and by wicked hands haue crucified
and ſlaine.Verſ 36. Therefore let all the houſe of Iſrael know
aſſuredly, that God hath made that ſame Ieſus, whom yee
haue crucified, both Lord and Chriſt. Such was his dealing
with Simon Magus;Acts 8. 22. Thy money periſh with thee:
repent of this thy malice, thou art in the gall of bitterneſſe:
It may be thy ſinne may be done away. The like
was our Sauiours practiſe (whoſe example is without all
exception.)
               Luke 13. 3. 5. I tell you nay, but except yee repent, you
ſhall all likewiſe periſh.Cap. 11. 44. 46. Woe vnto you Scribes and Phariſies,
hypocrites. Woe vnto you alſo you Lawyers. And
Iohn to the Iewes thus;
               Matth. 3. 7. O generation of vipers, who
hath forewarned you to ſlie from the wrath to come?
            And there is good reaſon for this courſe;Reaſon 1. 
               becauſe application
is the life of doctrine. This leade it to the thoughts
and intents of the heart to diſcerne them; if ſinfull, to
captiuate them; if right, to enflame them. This makes
the word become ours, & cauſeth vs to taſte the ſweetneſſe
of it. Without this no fruit in the threatnings for

our humiliation: no fruit in the promiſes for our reſtitution:
No true vnderſtanding of either, without our
owne faith mingling and truly applying both. That
which is ſpoken to all, is as good as ſpoken to none
at all.
            Secondly,Reaſon 2. Gods Ministers are compared vnto Builders,
and therefore are not only to lay the foundation, but
alſo to erect vp the building. Now Doctrine is but the
laying of a ground, and Application is the rearing vp
of the walles, and as the building vp of a Chriſtian in
grace and goodneſſe.
            The Vſes concerne, firſt, vs Miniſters; ſecondly, you
our Hearers.
            
            We that are Miniſters muſt labour herein,Vſe 1. and not
content our ſelues with idle or intricate diſcourſes, further
than to lay them as grounds for exhortation. A leſſon
without vſe,
                  Bernards Faith. Sheph. ſaith one, is as a deuiſed thing idly
without end. And it is leſſe cunning to giue a precept,
than to ſhew aptly the vſe thereof. Wee are Stewards;
now, ſaith the Apoſtle,1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. 
               It is required in ſtewards that
a man be found faithfull Faithfull firſt, in prouiding wholeſome
food for the whole family: and ſecondly, in a wiſe
diſtribution of the prouiſion; giuing to euery one in the
houſe their portion. Thus muſt we, firſt ſee our prouiſion
be good and ſeaſonable, deliuering not for Doctrine
mens precepts, nor the fancies and inuentions of our
owne braines, which fill full of winde and not ſound
nouriſhment: And ſecondly, giue euery one their part
out of the wholeſome word of life; Comfort to whom
comfort belongs, and Iudgement to whom iudgement
belongs; making difference: not ſeruing all alike, nor
ſending that to the Maſters board, which was prouided
for the men (for there is no faithfulneſſe in this) but ſetting
before euery one what is fitteſt for him; giuing the
bread of conſolation to the childe, and the whip and
ſtaffe of reprehenſion to the dog. This is the courſe
whereby holy doctrine is faſtened, as with nailes, by the

Maſters of Aſſemblies. And the want of this is the
cauſe why many mens paines are ſo liueleſſe, fruitleſſe:
for as a rich man diſcourſing of bread to a hungrie begger;
or a Phyſitian deſcribing his Patients diſeaſe, and
leauing him to himſelfe; ſo is a Preacher not applying.
Or as a whole loafe ſet before children would doe them
no good; for they might ſtarue well enough vnleſſe it
be diuided: So is a generall Doctrine amongſt our
auditores. In it ſelfe indeed it is nouriſhable, but being
not applied, it ſeldome is ſo to them. I end this Vſe with
a Meditation of a Worthy of our times:Dr. Halls Vowes and Meditation, third Cent. Med. 35. 
               Thoſe that
are all in Exhertation, no whit in Doctrine, are like to
them that ſnuffe the candle, but powre not in oyle. Thoſe
that are all in Doctrine, and nothing in Exhortation,
drowne the wike in oile, but light it not, making it fit for
vſe, if it had fire put to it; but as it is rather capable of
good, than profitable in preſent. Doctrine without Exhortation,
makes men all braine, no heart. Exhortation without
Doctrine, makes the heart full, but leaues the braine
emptie. Both together makes a man: One makes him
wiſe, the other good: One ſerues that we may know our dutie;
the other that we may performe it. In both which wee
muſt labour, and who can ſay in whether moſt? Men cannot
practiſe vnleſſe they know; and in vaine they know, if
they practiſe not. Let none thinke I take vpon mee to
taske or cenſure any: I only, as my dutie is, and occaſion
giuen mee by this our Prophets practiſe, labour to
ſhew what we ought to doe.
            And now for Hearers,
               Vſe 2. let them learne to ſuffer with
meekneſſe the word to be brought home, and applied
cloſe vnto their conſciences, and quietly to receiue that
which is their appointment. In theſe miſiudging daies
(ſaith one) it is a hard matter to ouerreach the Deuill:
if we let ſinne alone, his kingdome flouriſheth; if wee
ſtrike at him, and hit not the bough he ſits on, we moue
him not: if we hit him, by taking the very ſinne on the
head, then we are iudged partial, perſonall, and wreakers

of our owne ſpleene. Hence growes the quarrell betwixt
vs and you; for were it not for ſpeciall application,
we ſhould pleaſe you well enough; but becauſe we
tell you the truth, we are become your enemies. Beloued,
if it were profitable for you, it were peaceable for
vs to ſhoot at Rouers, and ſpeake at randome; but both
our dutie and your neceſſitie cals for particular application.
Art thou a blaſphemer, a Sabbath-breaker, an vngodly
vſurer, or ſuch like? Why then thou haſt thy portion
appointed thee, and that is brimſtone and fire: it is
ſomewhat hot indeed; but this is the portion of thy
cupPſal. 11. 6., as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh; this is appointed for thee
to drinke. Art thou angry with thy Miniſter for telling
thee this? If thou beeſt, thou haſt little reaſon for it:
For where is the fault, in thee or him? I pray thee heartily
repent, and amend thy life, and ſuch things ſhall
not be ſpoken to thee: become a childe, and thou ſhalt
haue a childs part, the bread of conſolation. But while
thou continueſt thus profane and diſſolute, looke for no
other than the whip of reprehenſion; and content thy
ſelfe therewith, if thou wilt become no better.
            Yea let euery one helpe the Miniſter in this his labour;
and learne to apply what is taught, to their owne
conſciences, accuſing or excuſing. We vſually heare the
word, as we doe newes out of forraigne Countries, as
not pertaining to our ſelues; and come to heare Sermons,
as women come to coſtly banquets, to pocket vp
and carry away for others that are at home, more than
for themſelues: or as they doe at Feaſts, laying liberally
on their neighbours trenchers, letting their owne
lie empty. Thus when we heare any ſinne threatned,
or diſgraced, we can poſt it off to others; Oh ſuch a
one is met withall, and that is for him. But heare not ſo
idly: the Lord ſpeakes to thee, and intends that exhortation
or reprehenſion to thy ſoule; take it then as ſpoken
to thy ſelfe. Is it comfort? Repent and beleeue, and it
is meant to thee. Is it Iudgement? If thou repenteſt not,
               
it is to thee as ſurely as if he had named thee. And this is
the way to heare ſauingly. So much in generall.
            
               The Ʋineyard of the Lord of Hoaſts is the houſe of
Iſrael] God himſelfe,Text. as we ſee here, is the owner of
this Vineyard, who is called, A Lord, and, A Lord of
Hoaſts. From the firſt of theſe we learne,
            God is an abſolute Lord ouer all creatures:
                  Doctr. God is an abſolute Lord ouer all creatures. 
               He it is
that hath all abſolute dominion, power, authoritie, and
ſoueraigntie ouer all. This Nebucadnezzar, after he was
himſelfe, acknowledged,
               Dan. 4. 3. & 2. 47. Whoſe dominion is an euerlaſting
dominion, and his kingdome is from generation to generation.
Dauid in his prayer makes an ample confeſſion
of it:
               1 Chron. 29. 11, 12. Thine (O Lord) is the greatneſſe, and the power, and
the glory, and the victorie, and the maieſtie: for all that is
in the heauen and in the earth is thine: thine is the kingdome,
O Lord, and thou art exalted as head aboue all. Both
riches and honour come of thee, and thou reigueſt ouer all,
and in thy hand is power and might, and in thy hand it is to
make great, and to giue ſtrength vnto all. And in that
forme of prayer, which our bleſſed Sauiour hath giuen
vs, wee are taught to acknowledge,
               Matth. 6. 13. that kingdome,
power, and glory is Gods.
            And no maruell,Reaſon. ſeeing he alone made all,
               Coloſſ. 1. 16. 
               without
any helpe: Yea he it is that doth preſerue and vphold
Acts 17. 24. Reuel. 4. 11. all things that are made: and therefore he muſt needs
haue abſolute ſoueraigntie and authoritie ouer all.
            But Sathan is called2 Cor. 4. 4. the God of this world,
               Obiect. and moſt
obey him: How then is God ſo abſolute a Lord?
            Sathan is ſo called;Resp. 1. Firſt, becauſe he challengeth it
to himſelfe, and not that he is ſo; forPſal. 24. 1. 
               The earth is the
Lords and the fulneſſe thereof; the world and they that
dwell therein. He only vſurps it, as he did when he told
our bleſſed Sauiour,Matth. 4. 8. 
               All the kingdomes of the world he
would giue him, if he would fall downe and worſhip him.
And thus the Deuill is called the God of this world, as
Abſolom was called King, by vſurpation.
            
                Secondly, and eſpecially, he is called a God, becauſe

the wicked make him ſo, ſuffering him to rule ouer
them, and reigne in them; giuing him that honour and
worſhip which indeed belongs to God. It is not then
Satans power that makes him a God, but mans weakneſſe
in yeelding to his ſuggeſtions. Neither doth this
obedience, which moſt giue him, make againſt what is
now taught: for we may not meaſure and eſteeme of
ſoueraigntie and authoritie by the obedience or diſobedience
of ſubiects, but by the right of authoritie which
any hath ouer a land or people. What if moſt men ſhould
not obey their Prince, but his enemie; would it follow
hereupon, that he ſhould not be their Lord, but that
other whom they ſerue? Nothing leſſe: So here. And
againe, Satan himſelfe is but Gods ſlaue, ſeruing as an
executioner or tormenter of the wicked: now we know
Princes are as well Lords ouer ſuch, as they are ouer the
very beſt. Now we come to ſee what Vſes will follow
hereupon.
            And firſt,Vſe 1. ſeeing God is abſolute Lord ouer all that is
or euer was; let wicked men be admoniſhed aduiſedly
to conſider from whom they haue had what now they
doe enioy, and whether they hold their lands and their
poſſeſſions, as we ſay, in Capite. All (as we ſee) is Gods, &
if wee hold not what we haue from him, we are but as
theeues, robbers, & vſurpers. Tell me then, thou worldly,
wealthy, wiſe one; canſt thou ſay of thy lands, poſſeſſions,
leaſes, moneys, as Iacob didGen. 32. 10., that God hath giuen
them thee? I feare me nay: the bad meanes thou vſedſt
for the attainment of them will gainſay it: God giues
what hee giues by lawfull meanes; thy courſes were
ſinfull and vnlawfull, as lying, couzenage, oppreſſion,
vſury, extortion, or the like, whereby theſe were gotten.
Whence is it that Trades are called crafts and myſteries,
but from hence, in that more liue by the craft and ſinne
of their Trades, than by the Trade it ſelfe? Hence alſo
is it, that men are faine to bee as warie in buying
and bargaining with moſt Tradeſmen in theſe ſinfull

daies, as if they were fallen into the hands of theeues
and cut-purſes. Will not theſe things witneſſe againſt
many, at the laſt day, that they haue not lawfully what
they haue? Will not theſe ſinfull courſes conuict thouſands
of theft before the Lord? Yes queſtionleſſe. Happy
were it for theſe, if they could in time ſee it, and repent
thereof, and make reſtitution of what they haue thus
vniuſtly gotten, while there is helpe and hope; otherwiſe
let ſuch be aſſured, a day will come, when as they
ſhall be compelled to reſtore, and ſay to Satan and the
world, as Iudas did to the High Prieſts, Take your ſiluer,
your gold, your wealth againe;Math. 27. 3, 4. 
               It is the price of
bloud: but ſhall finde no better anſwer than that they
gaue him, What is that to vs? thou ſhouldſt haue looked
to it.
            Secondly,Vſe 2. is God ſuch an abſolute Lord, hauing
power and domnion ouer all;Particulars wherein we are to ſhew our obedience to the Lord. let this ſerue for our Inſtruction,
and teach vs all to ſhew our alleageance to him
in the practiſe of theſe duties.
            
               Firſt, in carrying in our hearts a feare and reuerence
 of his maieſtie, euen ſuch a feare as doth proceed from
loue: this God requireth:
               Mal. 1. 6. A ſonne honoureth his father,
and a ſeruant his maſter: If then I be a father, where
is my honour? and if I be a maſter, where is my feare,
ſaith the Lord Almighty.
            
                Secondly, by an open profeſſion and acknowledgement
that he is our Lord. Euen as ſeruants by their liuerie
make knowne to all men whoſe they are and whom
they ſerue: So doe thou, both by words and deeds
make knowne to whom thou doſt belong; and be not
aſhamed of thy maſter, thou haſt no cauſe. He is farre
from being a faithfull ſeruant, that can ſtand by and be
dumbe, in caſe his maſter be diſhonoured.
            
                Thirdly, in giuing him abſolute and vniuerſall obedience,
cheerefully ſubiecting our ſelues in all things, and
at all times to his commands. Here muſt be no reaſoning
about, no inquiring into his commandements, as

may be into mens: for they muſt be obeyed in him, yea
diſobeyed for him, if they command any thing contrary
to his will; but he muſt be obeyed abſolutely in all the
parts of his will reuealed. His ſayings muſt be our doings:
Ipſe dixit, muſt be ſufficient.
            Fourthly, by acknowledging our ſelues to be accountable
               
               vnto him for all our waies and workes: Still remembring
the goods we vſe are none of ours, they are our
Lords, and we are but ſtewards,Luke 16. 2. who muſt ſhortly be
called to a reckoning: He that ſpendeth his owne, need
care the leſſe; but he that hath a matter of truſt committed
into his hands, and cannot ſpend but out of anothers
ſtocke, had need to looke about him, becauſe he
muſt be countable, and ſo enforced to make good whatſoeuer
he commeth ſhort in, in his reckonings. Aske
then thy ſelfe, what haue I that I haue not receiued of my
Lord and Maſter? Whence had I theſe gifts of bodie,
minde, health, wealth, &c. but of him? And ſo carry
thy ſelfe in the vſing of theſe, as that thou maiſt be able
to hold vp thy head before the Lord in that day of
reckoning. And thus we ſee ſome particulars, wherein
we are to teſtifie our loyalty and obedience.
            Laſtly,Vſe 3. this may be a ground of moderation and meekneſſe
for all ſuperiours in their dealings with their inferiours,
and ſuch as are vnder their gouernment; ſeeing
as they are Lords ouer others, ſo they haue a Lord aboue
them. This the Apoſtle putteth Maſters in minde of,
and on this very ground ſtirres them vp to iuſt and
equall dealing with their ſeruants, becauſe they alſo
Epheſ. 6. 9. Coloſſ. 4. 1. haue a maſter in heauen. As if he ſhould ſay: Beware
that you abuſe not your authoritie; for know that you
haue a ſupreme Lord and Maſter aboue you, as you are
aboue theſe, who hath more power ouer you than you
haue ouer them, and therefore looke vnto your cariage.
            The ſecond attribute giuen to him is Lord of Hoaſts.
The reaſons haue beene before rendred, and this one
of the principall, becauſe all creatures are as his Hoaſts,

executing his will and pleaſure. Whence learne wee:
            
               God is a God of power.
               
                  Doct. God is a God of power. He hath all creatures for his
Hoaſts, ready preſſed to fight his battels and reuenge
his quarrels.
            
               Moſes ſings this forth and proclaimes it abroad, that
Exod. 15. 3. 
               The Lord is a man of warre, his name is Iehouah. Yea
and that we might the better obſerue it, Almighty God
hath ſpoken once and twice
               Pſalm. 62. 11. 
               that power belongeth vnto
him.
               
                  Ʋerba toties inculcata, vera ſunt, viua ſunt, ſana ſunt, plana ſunt. Aug. One text repeated twice, preſſed againe and
againe, muſt needs bee plaine and peremptory; and
therefore wee will make no doubt of this truth, for if
we ſhould, his mighty workes of creation, gubernation,
and redemption, would conuince vs.
            Which being ſo,Vſe 1. how ſhould this teach vs to feare this
mighty God, who hath ſuch mighty armies and ſo many
hoaſts to deſtroy his enemies withall? Hee need not
arme himſelfe with any weapons either offenſiue or defenſiue;
it is enough if hee butPſal. 68. 1. Cal. in loc. 
               ariſe, for then his enemies
ſhall be ſcattered. His ſouldiers are in a readineſſe,
and if he doe but moue his little finger it is enough. If
hee ſay but to an hoaſt of frogs, or flies, or lice, or
graſhoppers, or caterpillers, to all or any of them, Goe,
they goe immediately, and Pharaoh nor all his hoaſt
ſhall euer bee able to withſtand them. Oh beware then
of offending this mighty God, for hee hath his armies
in the heauens, in the earth, in the aire, in the ſea, yea
in hell it ſelfe. A thouſand waies he hath to reuenge
himſelfe vpon vs if we rebell.
            Secondly,Vſe 2. if this bee ſo, let the vngodly tremble;
for what greater corraſiue can come to the heart of a
wicked man, than the hearing of this truth, that God
is ſo ſtrong, ſo powerfull? Haſt thou found mee, oh my
enemie? ſaid wicked Ahab to good Eliah: ſo may they
ſay to euery creature they meet withall, who haue God
againſt them. The number of the ſtarres in the skie,
fowles flying in the aire, beaſts feeding in the field,
are numberleſſe; how infinitely infinite then is the

number of thy enemies, who art enemy to God? In
what a wofull and fearefull eſtate art thou, when all
that is within thee, without thee; aboue thee, about
thee; God and man; Angels, Saints; fiſh and fowles;
birds and beaſts; and all creeping things, are vp in
armes againſt thee, to reuenge the Lords moſt iuſt and
righteous quarrell? What hope of heauen? what hope
of hauing acceſſe into Gods gratious preſence in time
of need? Shouldeſt thou come with a petition to an
earthly Prince, and finde all his officers and attendants
to oppoſe thee, thou couldeſt haue but cold comfort of
euer ſpeeding in thy ſuit. This is thy caſe, yea far more
wofull. Bee not then ſecure, for thy caſe is wretched:
What Cain ſometimes ſaid thou haſt iuſt cauſe to feare;
Gen. 4. 14. 
               Euery creature that meeteth me ſhall ſtay mee. Thou
walkeſt all day long as it were vpon a mine of gunpowder;
either by force or ſtratagem thou wilt bee ſurpriſed
and taken. Oh that men would once learne to
meddle with their match, and beware of contending
with him that is ſtronger than themſelues, leſt they be
conſumed in the end.
            And laſtly,Vſe 3. let the godly reioice, yea let them ſing for
ioy, ſeeing they haue ſuch a God, euen the Lord of
hoaſts,
               Pſal. 24. 
               the Lord mighty in battell. on their ſides to preſerue
and keepe them. It is a comfort to ſerue a Maſter
that will take ones part in caſe of need; but to ſerue
ſuch a Maſter as is able to defend one, is a farre greater
comfort. Such a one isDan. 3. 17. that God whom wee ſerue, he
is able to deliuer vs. England was ſometimes ſaid to
haue a warlike George, but the Papiſts being offended
with vs (to doe vs, as they ſuppoſe, a miſchiefe) haue
robbed vs of our George: And though to other Countries
they allot a ſeuerall Saint, (imitating therein the
Gentiles, who going to warre had their ſeuerall gods
for their Protectors) as to Spaine, S. Iames; to France,
S. Dennis; to Ireland, S. Patricke; to Rome, S. Peter
and S. Paul, and the like; yet England ſhall goe without.

They will leaue vs God alone to fight our battels,
and reuenge our quarrell:
                  Dr. Boys Spr. part. p. 227. For which honour and fauour
all Engliſh hearts are bound heartily to thanke
them. Let them keepe their George and giue vs this
man of warre, whoſe name is the Lord of hoaſts; in
hauing him we haue enough. If he be with vs, we feare
neither their Hee-Saints, nor Shee-Saints, not a thouſand
more of them, though they bee againſt vs: And
thereforeas our Church hath taught vs in her Liturgy
to pray, ſo let vs pray continually; O Lord ſaue thy
people and bleſſe thine inheritance. Giue peace in our time
O Lord, becauſe there is no other that fighteth for vs, but
only thou O God.
            
            Is the houſe of Iſrael and the men of Iudah his pleaſant
plant.Text.
            
            Hauing ſpoken of the 
                  Ʋinitor and who hee was, it
followeth now to ſpeake of the 
                  Ʋineyard and who it is:
The houſe of Iſrael and the men of Iudah, ſaith my Text,
is it; that is, the whole body of the Iewes, both Iſrael
and Iudah, euen both the Kingdomes. Of both which
we will ſpeake iointly, ſeeing they were but one body.
The houſe of Iſrael and the men of Iudah, that is, the
ſeed and poſterity of Iſrael and Iudah, thoſe people
who iſſued out of their loines. Whence note we:
            Good progenitors may haue a degenerate and vnregenerate
ofſpring.
                  Doctr. Good progenitors may haue a bad ofspring.
            
            
               Iſrael was good, but his poſterity naught.
            Of the firſt brace of ſonnes which the worlds eie did
ſee,Gen. 4. 14. one was a branded runnagate vpon the face of
the earth; ſuch a one as was vndutifull to his father,
vnnaturall to his brother, hereticall towards his God,
damnable to his owne ſoule. From Adam come wee to
Noah, and of his leaſe of ſonnesGen. 9. 22. 25. one was a Cham,
who takes an aduantage by his fathers weakneſſe, diſcouers
his nakedneſſe, and makes him the argument of
his ſport. Come wee from him to faithfull Abraham,
of whoſe great care in the well nurtering and training

vp of his childrenGen. 18. 19., God himſelfe doth witneſſe: yet
his condition is no better; for of his two ſonnes, Iſmael
was a ſcofferCap. 21. 9.. And as it was thus with the father, ſo it
happened to be no better with his ſonne. Vnto Iſaac is
borne not only Iacob (who was this Iſrael) but alſo
prophane Eſau
               Gen. 25. 32., ſo branded as it were in the forehead
by the Spirit of GodHeb. 12. 16., for ſelling away his birth-right
for a meſſe of pottage. And what ſhall I more ſay? for
the time would faile me to tell of1 Sam. 2. 12. 
               Ely, and of2 Sam. 13. 14. 
               Samuel; of
and 15. 16. 
               Dauid,
               1 Kings 1. 5. 
               Ioſiah, and2 Kings 23. 32. 
               Ezechiah, with other men of God,
whoſe ſonnes haue beene ſonnes of Belial, that knew
not the Lord.
            The Reaſon is;Reaſon. becauſe that goodneſſe which is in man,
he hath it not by nature,
               Homo liberos gignit ex carne vetuſta & peccatrice, non ex ſpiritu: quocirca minime mirum ſi iuſtus iuſtos non gignat ſicut peccator peccatorem: Aug. con. Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 9. 
               but by grace. Now man communicates
to his children that which he hath of nature,
in begetting children according vnto nature, and not
that which he hath aboue nature, by the grace of regeneration.
The graines of wheat which are ſowed in the
earth, though they be neuer ſo well purged from all
their ſuperfluities, hauing neither ſtalke, nor cares, nor
chaffe; yet when they ſpring vp againe, bring all theſe
with them, becauſe as one of the Fathers ſaith, that purgation
of the corne is not made by nature, but by the
art of man. So here in this.
            Which being ſo,Vſe 1. let none thinke to be ſaued by their
forefathers faith or goodneſſeHab. 2. 4.: The iuſt ſhall liue by his
owne faith, ſaith Habakuk; not by the faith of the father,
no nor of his fathers father. How groſly then doe
ſuch deceiue themſelues, that runne into all exceſſe of
riot, and thinke to haue mercy ſhewed vnto them, becauſe
of the godlineſſe of their parents?
            But we reade that the promiſe of remiſſion of ſinnes
and the gift of the holy Ghoſt is made to vs and to our
childrenActs 2. 39..Obiect. 1.
            
            True,Resp. yet not to all of them, but only to ſo many of
them as the Lord our God ſhall call: for ſo it followeth in
the words immediatly following.
            
               
               1 Cor. 7. 14. The vnbeleeuing husband is ſanctified by the wife,Obiect. 2. and
the vnbeleeuing wife is ſanctified by the husband; elſe were
your children vncleane, but now they are holy. Now if they
be cleane and holy, then are they vnder the election of
grace.
            
            There is a double holineſſe:Reſp. Firſt, of Regeneration:
Secondly, of the Couenant. In regard of the firſt they
are rebellious; but in regard of the ſecond they are holy,
whereby they are receiued into the Church viſible, and
made partakers of the outward priuiledges thereof, as
of the Word and Sacraments.
            So then though thou be borne of godly parents, this
will not profit thee to ſaluation, except thou beleeueſt
and repenteſt: for as the ſinne of the father preiudiceth
not the beleeuing childe; no more doth the righteouſneſſe
of the father ſaue the vnbeleeuing.
            Secondly,Vſe 2. let not parents be too much diſcouraged,
if it ſo happen that their ſeed be vntoward and vngracious,
ſeeing (as we haue ſeene) it hath beene the condition
of the beſt and faithfulleſt: yea God who is the Father
of vs all, complaines that
               Iſay 1. 2. 
               he had nouriſhed and
brought vp children, but they had rebelled againſt him.
Grace is no inheritance, it cannot be conueied by vs to
our children as our land and houſes can; neither can we
leaue it to them as we leaue them a poſſeſſion to deſcend
by a continued ſucceſſion, from the father to the
ſonne, and ſo to the ſonnes ſonne in one race and generation.
It is Gods free gift, and he giueth it where he
pleaſeth, and to whom he pleaſeth: Only let vs vſe the
meanes to bring them vnto God (for that we are bound
to doe) and then commit the ſucceſſe to him with patience.
A three-fold dutie of Parents towards their children. There is a threefold dutie that we owe vnto them,
which we muſt looke we faithfully diſcharge. Firſt, that
we haue a care of their education, to bring them vp in
 the informationEpheſ. 6. 4. of the Lord, as Saint Paul requireth
vs. Secondly, that by a godly life we giue them good
 example: For it is an euill great enough, that we haue

deriued ſinne vnto them by propagation, let them not
draw it alſo from vs by imitation. Thirdly, that we be 
earneſt in the Lord by praier for them,A childe of ſo many praiers and teares cannot be loſt, as one ſaid concerning Auguſtine the ſonne of Monica.
                that he would be
pleaſed to giue them a new nature, and to take away the
corruption of the old, which in their firſt generation we
communicated to them: which duties if we neglect, we
ſhall be guiltie of their blood; but if we performe faithfully
and conſcionably, we are free, and haue deliuered
our ſoules, and may comfort our ſelues in the teſtimonie
of a good conſcience, knowing that we only can vſe
the meanes, it is God only that muſt giue the bleſſing
thereupon.
            Laſtly,Vſe 3. hence let me giue a caution to euery one, that
they beware of ouer-raſh cenſuring of parents, for the
looſe cariage of their children; we haue ſeene it cleared
by a cloud of witneſſes, that reformed men haue had vnreformed
children, as circumciſed parents begot children
which were vncircumciſed. And though it be true
amongſt irrationall creatures, that they euer bring forth
their like; Eagles haue Eagles; and Doues Doues: yet in
mans progenie there is often found not ſo like a proportion,
as vnlike a diſpoſition. To condemne then the parent
vpon this ground, for that the childe is diſſolute, is
too too raſh; for in ſo doing we may condemne the generation
of the iuſt. And thus much for this firſt point:
now a ſecond followes.
            Theſe people, as we ſee, were called by the name of
Iſrael and Iudah; good names both, and honourable:
one ſignifieth a Prince, or Preuailer with God; and the
other ſignifieth Confeſſion or Praiſe: and yet this people
were retchleſſe, diſſolute. Hence learne we,
            Good names and titles profit nothing at all,
                  Doctr. Good names and titles nothing worth without grace. if our liues
be not conformable to thoſe names and titles that are giuen
vs.
            
               Caine, a good name, ſignifying a poſſeſſion; but what
is he the better for it, when he is a Murderer
               Gen. 4. 8.? So Abſolom
which made warre againſt his father, had the name

and made goodlieſt ſhew to be his fathers peace, and yet
he proued to be his greateſt2 Sam. 18. 33. heart ſmart. Iudas his
name was good, and proclaimed him to be a Profeſſor,
but what doth that auaile him, when by his deeds he
ſhewed himſelfe a deuillIohn 6. 70.? Thus the Iewes bragged,
they wereIohn 8. 33. 
               Abrahams ſeed; but alas, will it profit them
when they are the ſeruants of ſinne? ſurely it cannot
profit them at all.
            And no wonder,Reaſon. for God reſpecteth truth in the inward
parts, and not outward titles; he regardeth ſubſtance
more than ſhadowes.
            This being ſo;Vſe. let none content themſelues with
their good names, or outward titles of honour that are
giuen them; but let them vſe them as a ſpurre, to ſtirre
them vp to imitate ſuch good men as haue beene before
ſo named; and ſurely this was one reaſon why this people
were thus called by the name of Iſrael, that they
might hereby be put in minde of their pedegree, and ſo
of their predeceſſors pietie; and conſequently to make
them aſhamed of their owne apoſtacie; who were ſo far
degenerated from thoſe religious men of whom they
were deſcended. Neither content thy ſelfe with that
honorable title of a Chriſtian, or of a Profeſſor, or of a
Proteſtant, vnleſſe thou makeſt good thoſe names by a
holy and godly life. Tell me then thou that art thus
called; haſt thou thoſe gifts and graces which thoſe
names import? haſt thou receiued an ointment from
that holy one? hath he opened thy eies, quickened thy
dead heart, ſanctified thy vncleane affections? If it be
thus, then indeed theſe names and titles are well befitting
thee: but if it be otherwiſe with thee; if thou liueſt
looſely and prophanely, thou maiſt bluſh ſo often as
thou heareſt thy ſelfe called Chriſtian or Profeſſor, or the
like: for thou art nick-named and miſcalled: It is as if
a Cobler ſhould be called worſhipfull; or a Carr-man, honourable:
and who could away with that? Nay more,
it is a kinde of ſacriledge, vnder thoſe holy names to

liue an vnholy life. Belſhazzar ſinned againſt God by
exceſſe and intemperancie in his eating and drinking:
but in that he abuſed the holy veſſels of the houſe of
God, to ſerue him to ſuch prophane and vnholy vſes,
was a ſinne more fearefull, and ſacriledge moſt horrible.
Thus for thee, as thou art a man, to ſinne, prouokes Gods
wrath, and deſerues damnation: but to ſinne vnder the
Chriſtian name, and commit wickedneſſe, as thou art a
Goſpeller, it is with Belſhazzar to abuſe and prophane
the holy veſſels of Gods houſe; and this muſt needs
plunge thee into the hotteſt fire of hell.Mountaignes To conclude
this vſe,Eſſaies. let me tell you what I haue read of a libidinous
Gentleman; who ſporting with a Curtezan in a houſe
of ſinne, happened to aske her name, which ſhe ſaid was
Mary: whereat he was ſtricken with ſuch a remorſe and
reuerence, that he inſtantly, not only caſt off the harlot,
but amended his future life. Art thou called a Chriſtian,
and yet followeſt drunkenneſſe, ſwearing, &c. let
that very name cauſe thee to be aſhamed of thy folly.
Let all apply what I forbeare to amplifie.
            Further, in that theſe people haue theſe titles, Iſrael,
Iudah, (the names of their forefathers) giuen them as
titles of honour, and names of excellency, we learne
a third leſſon: And obſerue another note, viz.
            
            
               Good Parents and Progenitors are great ornaments to
their poſteritie.
               
                  Doctr. Good Parents are ornaments to their poſteritie. Parents that are godly and religious doe
no whit at all diſgrace their children by their pietie and
godlineſſe, but much countenance and grace them by it,
inſomuch that it is an honour for poſteritie to deſcend
from ſuch worthie Anceſtors.
            
               Solomons Prouerbe may be a ſufficient proofe hereof:
Pro. 17. 6. 
               Childrens children are the crowne of the elders, and the
glory of the children are their fathers: to wit, if they be
godly and pious. Beſides ſundrie inſtances and examples
that might be brought, for the confirming of this
truth; as of Abraham, what an honourable title was it
accounted to be called the ſon of Abraham, and childe

of Abraham? The Iewes brag and boaſt therefore,
Iohn 8. 33. Matth. 3. 9. 
               They were Abrahams ſeed, and they had Abraham to
their Father. And ſo it was indeed to them that walked
in his ſteps, and were like him in grace. And ſo afterwards
in Dauid, what an excellent prerogatiue was it
accounted to be, to deſcend from him and be of his
Family?
            For ſuch are the ſeed of Princes and linage of Kings;Reaſ.
for thus hath God aduanced the godly to beReuel. 1. 6. 
               Kings,
Prieſts and Prophets vnto himſelfe: they come of the
nobleſt Houſe and Family that is, whoſe originall commeth
not out of ſome corner of the earth; but they
ſpring of Chriſt, of whom all the Families in heauen and
earth are called. And this is right and proper Nobilitie
indeed.
            This being ſo,Vſe 1. it firſt reproueth ſuch Parents, as hope
to bring credit and renowne to their poſterities, by their
lewd and ſinfull courſes; they liue miſerably and deale
vniuſtly, and open the mouths of all to crie out vpon
their falſhood and deceit, their couetouſneſſe and extortion;
and yet thinke to raiſe vp their houſes, and aduance
their names, and adorne their children with glorie
and eſtimation. But this truth may diſcouer vnto
ſuch parents, their folly and great madneſſe; for, this is
not the way to bring credit, but diſgrace to their poſterities;
yea when they are dead and rotten, their euill
courſes will be caſt as dung in the faces of ſuch as they
leaue behinde, as experience makes good: Such a man
(ſaith one) was this childes father; What, that Vſurer,
that Worldling, that Extortioner, that Drunkard, that
Whore-maſter, ſaith another? How can thy childe ſtand
by and heare this without red cheekes?Firſt ſtep to Heauen. 42. it muſt needs
be matter of ſhame and griefe vnto him. Wouldſt thou
indeed be an ornament to thy childe, and childs childe
after thee? then ſee thou be righteous and religious,
and ſo thy name ſhal be remembred in them when thou
art dead. Oh what a credit is it now accounted, to be of

the poſteritie of Latimer, Bradford, Ridley, and other of
thoſe men of God, who ſuffered for the truth? How are
ſuch eſteemed and accounted of amongſt all? Let experience
make thee wiſe: and ſo liue thou, that thy children
alſo may account it their honour, not their ſhame,
to name thee when thou attraked vp in the duſt.
            Secondly,
                  Ʋſe 2. let Children who haue had, or haue, godly
and religious parents, be thankfull for them, and repoſe
their Gentry more in their forefathers vertues that
they had, than in their great lands and reuenewes that
they poſſeſſed; eſteeming them the worthieſt of all
their Anceſtors, who were the godlieſt, rather than they
who were the wealthieſt. And withall, let ſuch be ſtirred
vp to tread in their fathers ſteps: for all that hath
beene ſaid is with this prouiſo, that we their children be
adorned with their gifts and vertues. For though wee
deſcend from godly and worthy Anceſtors, yet if wee
Ezek. 18. 10. 13. degenerate from them, as a baſe and baſtard brood, it
can be no honour, credit, comfort nor commendation
to vs. Put caſe a man haue a thouſand pound land a
yeere left him by his friends, and he ſpend it all (like the
Prodigall)Luke 15. in riotous and voluptuous liuing; what
credit is it for him to brag that ſuch an eſtate was left
him? nay is it not a ſhame? So if the vertues of thy
parents liue in thee, it is then a grace vnto thee, that
thou deſcendedſt from their loynes; otherwiſe the contrary.
The very HeathenOuid. Metam. lib. 13. haue rather chooſe to deſcend
of vnnoble parents,Juuenal. Sat. 8. ſo themſelues were noble and
renowned through vertue, than to come of worthy parents
and progenitors, and themſelues to grow baſe
and degenerate out of kinde. So it is better to be religious,
and the ſonne of wicked parents, than being the
ſonne of godly parents to be wicked. Cain, Cham, Iſmael
and Eſau might boaſt of Adam, Noah, Abraham,
Iſaac, the nobleſt parents; who on the other ſide might
bluſh and grieue at ſuch degenerate iſſues. Walke then
in the ſteps of thy godly parents, and ſpeake not of thy

bloud,Non genus, ſed genius: non gens, ſed mens. but of thy good; not of thy parents vertues, but
of thy owne (for what hath a coward to doe to glorie
in the valour of his father?) And I would that Papiſts
would conſider of this, who brag that their Pope and
Biſhops are the Succeſſours of Peter, and the reſt of the
Apoſtles: Well, admit this to be true, yet can they ſhew
vs how they ſucceed them in their gifts and graces? If
they cannot (as all the world may ſee they cannot) their
perſonall ſucceſſion is nothing worth, and they brag of
an emptie title without honour.
            It remaines now that we come to take a view of the
fruits which this Vineyard brought forth: which is the
third and laſt thing I propounded to be conſidered.
            
               Hee looked for iudgement,
               Text. 
               but behold oppreſſion; for
righteouſneſſe, but behold a crie.] Here we ſee, firſt, what
fruits they were which God eſpecially expected, and
they were fruits of the ſecond Table,

                  Iudgement,
                  Righteouſneſſe.
               
And ſecondly, what were the fruits
which they returned, namely,

                  Oppreſſion,
                  A crie.
               
            
            I might obſerue hence from the Prophets elegancie,
adorning of his ſpeech Rhetorically by a figure, thus
much, that
            
               Rhetoricke is an Art ſanctified by Gods Spirit,
               
                  Doctr. Rhetorick may lawfully be vſed in the handling of Gods word. 
               and may
lawfully be vſed in handling of Gods word. There might
be brought diuers inſtances out of holy Scripture,
wherein all the parts of Rhetoricke are vſed, and euery
approued rule of it practiſed, yea euen in this very Propheſie.
Vſe. But I haſten towards a concluſion, and therefore
paſſe from this with a word of admonition to all, that
we beware how we condemne the lawfull vſe with the
abuſe. For the Art it ſelfe is to be approued, and onely
the abuſe thereof to be condemned. But I come to the
particulars in my Text.
            
               He looked for iudgement, righteouſneſſe.] He doth not
ſay he expected Oblations and Sacrifices which this people
were abundant in, as Chap. 1. 11. but he expected

that Iudgement and Iuſtice ſhould be adminiſtred; the
cauſe of the poore pleaded; and all good duties and offices
of loue ſhould be ſhewed towards our brethren,
and thoſe who were in need. Sundrie points might
hence be raiſed; but I will only obſerue this one, which
is as the ſumme of all.
            
               The works and duties of the ſecond Table are in ſpeciall
manner expected and reſpected by God.
               
                  Doctr. The duties of the ſecond Table God eſpecially reſpects. In the firſt Chapter
of this Propheſie wee may reade how forward this
people were in the outward duties of the firſt Table,Iſay 1. 11. offering multitude of ſacrifices and burnt offerings of
Rammes, and the fat of fed beaſts, &c. But God he cals
them off, and tels them he would none, becauſe they
had no regard of the duties of the ſecond Table:
                  Ʋerſe 15. 16. 
               for
their hands were full of bloud. Then exhorting them to
repentance, hee wils them to teſtifie the truth thereof,
by bringing forth fruits meet for repentance. And for
their better direction he inſtanceth in ſome particulars,
making choice not of ſuch duties as immediately concerne
himſelfe, but of ſuch as eſpecially concerne our
neighbour:Verſe 17. 
               Seeke iudgement, releeue the oppreſſed,
iudge the fatherleſſe, pleade for the widow. As if he had
ſaid vnto them; You offer multitudes of ſacrifices, and
obſerue ſolemne daies and Feaſts; the new Moones and
Sabbaths, and the like, and are not wanting in the outward
duties of the firſt Table: But I eſpecially reſpect
the duties of the ſecond; wherein you haue beene wanting:
and therefore labour to finde out what is right,
and ſeeke after that iuſtice that God requires in his Law,
dealing with others, as you would be dealt withall: giue
ouer your crueltie, exerciſe mercie, and ſtretch forth
your helping hand for the releeuing and defending of
ſuch as are in need. And in the 58. of this Propheſie, we
may reade how God reiects theirIſay 58. 6, 7. prayers and faſtings,
becauſe they regarded not to ſhew mercy and kindneſſe
vnto the poore and needie: and withall ſhewes them
what manner of Faſt it was that he required, namely, to

               looſe the bands of wickedneſſe, to vndoe the heauie burdens,
and to let the ppreſſed goe free. To deale bread vnto
the hungrie; to bring the poore that are caſt out vnto their
houſes; to cloath the naked, and the like. This was the
Faſt that God did eſpecially reſpect. In the Propheſie
of Micah we may reade what large proffers the wicked
make:Micah 6. 6, 7. 
               They will come with burnt offerings and calues
of a yeere old; they will offer thouſands of Rammes, and ten
thouſand riuers of oile; they would giue their firſt borne for
their tranſgreſſion, the fruit of their bodie for the ſinne of
their ſoule; ſo that God would be pleaſed herewith.
But yet all this would not pleaſe him:
                  Ʋerſe 8. 
               He hath ſhewed
thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require
of thee, but to doe iuſtly, and to loue mercy, and to walke
humbly with thy God? without this all the former is nothing
worth. Thus we ſee verified what we finde recorded
by the Prophet Hoſea, I deſire Mercie, and not Sacrifice
               Hoſ. 6. 6.. It is better pleaſing vnto God to ſee the duties of
Iuſtice and Righteouſneſſe, of Mercie and louing kindneſſe
performed to our neighbour, than to haue Sacrifices
neuer ſo many or great ſeuered from theſe done
vnto himſelfe. The workes and duties that the ſecond
Table requires to be performed of vs are moſt expected
and reſpected by him.
            For the touchſtone of piety and true religion towards
God,Reaſ. is our iuſt and righteous dealing with our
brethren.1 Ioh. 3. 10. 
               Herein are the children of God knowne, and
the children of the Deuill: whoſoeuer doth not righteouſneſſe
is not of God, neither hee that loueth not his brother.
True faith is operatiue,Iam. 2. 18, 26. and worketh by loue, and is to
be manifeſted by our workes, without which it is to be
iudged dead, as S. Iames ſpeaketh. No maruell then if
God doe ſo much ſet by the practiſe of theſe duties.
            Which ſerueth to reproue ſuch as bring forth faire
leaues of profeſſion in the firſt Table,Vſe. but are little or nothing
at all in the duties of the ſecond Table. In the outward
and publike exerciſes of religion they are very diligent;

as in repairing to the Congregation, hearing the
Word, receiuing of the Sacraments, and the like: But
looke on them in thoſe things which concerne men,
and there you ſhall finde them exceedingly faulty; being
vnmercifull, vniuſt, and vnrighteous, in their dealings.
Certainly the religion of theſe men is in vaine; their
beſt ſeruices doe ſtinke in Gods noſtrils, when righteouſneſſe
towards man is wanting. Let all ſuch as are
in the place of iuſtice (for to them this is eſpecially intended)
aduiſedly conſider of this, and beware how
Amos 5. 7. and 6. 12. 
               they turne iudgement into gall and wormewood (as Amos
ſpeakes) and the fruit of righteouſneſſe into hemlocke.
I would ſuch would often put Iobs queſtion to their
ſoule:Iob 31. 14. 
               What ſhall I doe when God riſeth vp? and when
he viſiteth, what ſhall I anſwer him? It would be a good
meanes to make them take vp his practiſe;Verſe 16. 
               Not to
with-hold from the poore his deſire, nor cauſe the eies of
the widow to faile:
               Verſe 21. 
               not to lift vp their hand againſt the fatherleſſe,
though they ſaw their helpe in the gate, and
might doe it vndiſcerned. Yea let vs all conſider this,
and endeuour to bee conſcionably iuſt and vpright in
our dealings betweene man and man. When the queſtion
is made to God, what manner of men ſhould dwell
in his Tabernacle and reſt in his holy Mountaine,
i. which ſhould haue a good eſtate here, and an habitation
in heauen for euermore; he deſcribeth them by their
innocent and harmleſſe behauiour towards their brethren:
Pſal. 15. 2, 3. 
               He that walketh vprightly, and worketh righteouſneſſe,
and ſpeaketh the truth in his heart. Certainly
hee regardeth that worke very much which hee rewardeth
with ſuch and ſo great wages: And hee is well
pleaſed with that perſon in this life, whom hee will receiue
to dwell with him in euerlaſting life. But I will
be ſparing in proſecuting this, in regard of the neere
affinity which it hath with the ſucceeding Doctrine, to
which I haſten.
            
               But behold oppreſſion]
               Text. The cleane contrary was

found to that which God expected. He looked to haue
the poore defended and their cauſes heard by ſuch as
were in place, but by none ſo much as they were they
iniured and oppreſſed. A ſinne beyond thought or
expectation, and therefore ſet out with a note of admiration,
Behold oppreſſion, &c. Hence our note
ſhall be:
            Oppreſſion of the poore,
                  Doct. Oppreſſion is a crying ſinne. eſpecially by ſuch as ought to be
defenders and releeuers of the poore, is a ſinne hainous,
grieuous.
            
               In the firſt Chapter of this Booke we finde it to be
of a bloudy nature:
               Iſay 1. 15. Your hands are full of bloud. And
in the third Chapter to make the former good, we ſhall
finde oppreſſors charged with
               Cap. 3. 15. beating the people to
pieces and grinding the faces of the poore. And in the
fourteenth Pſalme,
               Pſal. 14. 4. with eating them vp as one would
eat vp bread. The Prophet AmosAmos 8. 4. 
               chargeth oppreſſors,
with ſwallowing of them vp. And Micah chargeth
Princes and Magiſtrates yet further, to wit,
               Micah 3. 3. 
               with
eating the very fleſh of his people, and flaying their skins
from off them, and breaking of their bones, and chopping
them in peeces as for the pot, and as fleſh within the cauldron.
How fearefully was Iehoiakim threatned for this
ſinne?
               Ier. 22. 13,-20. Woe vnto him that buildeth his houſe by vnrighteouſneſſe,
and his chambers by wrong: that vſeth his
neighbours ſeruice without wages, and giueth him not for
his worke, &c. Shalt thou reigne becauſe thou clotheſt thy
ſelfe in Cedar? Did not thy father eat and drinke and doe
iudgement and iuſtice, and then it was well with him?
He iudged the cauſe of the poore and needy, then it was
well with him: But thine eies and thy heart are not but
for thy couetouſneſſe, and for to ſhed innocent bloud, and
for oppreſſion, and for violence, to doe it. Therefore thus
ſaith the Lord concerning Iehoiakim the ſonne of Ioſiah
King of Iudah, They ſhall not lament for him ſaying, ah
my brother, or ah my ſiſter; they ſhall not lament for
him ſaying, ah Lord, or ah his glory. He ſhall be buried

with the buriall of an Aſſe drawen and caſt forth beyond
the gates of Ieruſalem. Theſe are proofes ſufficient
for my Doctrine, ſtrongly confirming what I haue now
taught; viz. Oppreſſion of the poore, eſpecially by ſuch
as ought to defend and releeue the poore, is a hainous and
grieuous ſinne.
            For firſt,Reaſ. 1. Saeuis inter ſe conuenit vrſis. it is a ſinne againſt Nature and Race. Beaſts
wee ſee moleſt not their owne kinde; Lions fight not
with Lions; Serpents ſpend not their venome vpon
Serpents; and therefore it is more than brutiſh for man
to deuoure man by this ſinne of oppreſſion. This made
Cyprian (ſeeing it practiſed by ſome) to cry out with
wonderment and admiration:Ferae parcunt, Aues paſcunt, Homines ſaeuiunt. Cypr. ſer. 6. Oh the deteſtable cruelty
of mans malice! The fierce Lions ſpare Daniel
in the Den; the rauenous birds doe feed Eliah in the
Wilderneſſe; but one man exerciſeth cruelty vpon another,
and only man to man is become pernicious.
            
               Secondly,
               Reaſ. 2. 
               it is a ſinne againſt Religion and Grace:
For
               Tit. 2. 11, 12. the grace of God that bringeth ſaluation hath appeared
vnto all men, teaching vs, that denying vngodlineſſe
and worldly luſts, we ſhould liue ſoberly, righteouſly,
and godly, in this preſent world. And this was propheſied
of long ſince, that in the time of the Goſpell
               Iſay 11. 6. the
Wolfe ſhould dwell with the Lambe, and the Leopard ſhould
lie with the Kid, &c. and that none ſhould hurt and deſtroy
in all the mountaine of the Lords holineſſe.
            
            Thirdly,Reaſ. 3. (when it is practiſed by great men) it is a
ſinne againſt Place. Now as there is no impiety to that
impiety which is committedIer. 7. 11. 2. Chron. 36. 14. Inter leges ipſas contra leges delinquitur. Cyp. ad Donat. lib. 2. epiſt. 2. in God Sanctuary; ſo
there is no iniuſtice to that iniuſtice which is committed
and practiſed in the very ſeat and ſanctuary of iuſtice,
and whereby men amidſt the Law, ſinne againſt
the Law; as Ananias the High Prieſt did,Acts 23. 3. in commanding
Paul to bee ſmitten contrary to the Law. It
therefore being a ſinne againſt Race, Grace, and Place;
I doubt not but on all ſides it will be confeſt to be moſt
hainous.
            
               
Which doctrine ſerues firſt for Reprehenſion,
               Vſe 1. euen of
all thoſe who vſe any kinde of iniuſtice either by violence,
or by colour of law, or by any other cunning dealing
whatſoeuer, againſt ſuch as are not able to withſtand
them (for that I call oppreſſion) whoſe teeth are as
ſwords, and their iawes as kniues, to deuoure the poore
from off the earth, and the needy from amongſt men:
who are Lions, Wolues, Kine, Buls, Beaſts, yea monſters
in the ſhape of men: with which beaſts or monſters
many Countries ſwarme, as Egypt did with Frogs and
Locuſts. They abound both in Foro, and in Choro; in
Change and Chancell; Church and Common-wealth. To
rip vp all the ſorts of them were infinite: with ſome of
the principall I will only deale. And firſt to begin with
them whom I haue not leaſt cauſe to thinke vpon, our
Church oppreſſors, thoſe greedy and Harpie-like deuourers
of ſacred things, who prey vpon their patrimonie
who pray for them; and vniuſtly turne the reuenues of
the Church vnto their owne proper vſe: Againſt whom
that kingly Prophet Dauid beſtowes a whole Pſalme,
Pſal. 83. 2, 3. and cals them Gods enemies, tumultuous, proud, Godhaters,
craftie enemies, confederate enemies, who combine
themſelues together to annihilate a Church. And that
we might not be deceiued in the perſons, he deſcribes
them to vs by their words:Verſ. 12. They are thoſe that ſay,
Let vs take to our ſelues the houſes of God in poſſeſſion;
they beat their braines, and ſpend their wits how to appropriate
that to them and theirs, which the Almighty
is inueſted in. And that they haue, and hold; but by
what right or title the very name of Impropriations doth
ſhew, as being altogether improper for them that haue
them, and held by an vnproper title. For tithes are due
only to the Church, and cannot be alienated to any other
vſe, they hauing once beene paſſed ouer to God, and dedicated
to the Church; neither haue the Laitie ought
to doe herewith: for where tithes are paid, there muſt
be a matter of giuing and receiuing; the Miniſter giueth

               Phil. 4. 15. 1 Cor. 9. 11. ſpirituall things, ſaith the Apoſtle, and receiueth carnall
things. Now becauſe Lay-men cannot performe
the one, they haue not to meddle with the other: for
not keeping the condition, they cannot claime the couenant.
I doe not denie but it may be in the power of Ciuill
Magiſtrates to allow any other maintenance vnto
the Miniſter, ſo it be competent: but ſeeing tithes are by
law eſtabliſhed amongſt vs for this purpoſe, to be the
hire of the Lords labourers, and the wages of his workmen,
it is a great a ſinne to defraud the Miniſter of his
portion, as to keepe backe the meat or wages from an
ordinarie labourer; yea farre greater: and yet S. Iames
ſaith, that is a ſinneIam. 5. 4. that cryeth loud in the eares of
God for vengeance. How many thouſands then in this
Land ſtand obnoxious in an high degree to the iudgements
of God for this ſame ſinne, which is the bane of
our people, and blemiſh of our Church. Some there are
who rob God of his maine tithes, yet are content to
leaue him ſtill the leſſer; they plucke our fleeces, and
leaue vs the taglocks, poore Vicaridge tithes, whilſt
themſelues and children are kept warme in our wooll,
the Parſonage. And others yet more iniurious, who
thinke that too much, would the law but allow them a
paire of ſheeres, they would clip the very taglocks off.
Theſe (with the deceitfull Taylor) are not content to
ſhrinke the whole and faire broad-cloth of the Church
to a dozen of buttons; but they muſt likewiſe take part
of them away, and nimme the very ſhreds, which only
we haue left. After they haue full gorged themſelues
with the Parſonage graines, they can finde meanes, either
by vnconſcionable leaſes, or compoſitions, to picke
the Vicaridge bones.Aelian. var. hiſt. lib. 1. cap. 20. And thus as Dionyſius dealt with
Iupiter Olympius, who tooke from him a maſſie garment
of gold, which Hiero had dedicated to him of the ſpoiles
of Carthage, and gaue him a woollen cloake, ſaying that
the other was too heauy for ſummer, and too cold for
winter, but this was fit for both ſeaſons: euen ſo (I ſay)

we are dealt withall. And now our pouertie is flouted
at by them that haue our liuings, as the Iewes, who hauing
ſpoyled Chriſt of his veſtments, then mocked him
with baſeneſſe. Euery Gentleman thinks Miniſters
meane, and yet all the world ſees that our meanes haue
made them Gentlemen. But let all ſuch perſons know,
as haue any way intruded vpon Church rights, God
hath a Quare impedit againſt them, which one day they
muſt make anſwer to.
            You ſay they were taken away from idle drones and
fat-bellied Monkes.Obiect. 1.
            
            True,Resp. Poſſidebant Papiſtae, poſſident Rapiſtae. from the vnworthy they were taken, and from
the worthy they are detained. Wicked Papiſts had
them; vngodly robbers haue them. And as one obſerues
vpon the battell of Montlecherye,
               Cominaeus lib. 1. cap. 4. ſome loſt their
liuings for running away, and they were giuen to thoſe
who ranne ten miles further. Idleneſſe hath loſt, and oppreſſion
hath gained.
            You obiect againe,Obiect. 2. that they were giuen by our forefathers,
not to vs, but to Romiſh Prieſts and Biſhops,
who are depriued of them, and therefore you haue as
much right to them, as any of our Clergy.
            Thus is this Obiection anſwered;Resp. Theſe were giuen
to religious vſes, and for the encreaſe of true Religion
and Learning. Now if they (by iniurie of
the time) through ignorance miſtooke the truth, it
is not wrong, nay, it is great right, to keepe their
generall purpoſe with amendment of their particular
error.
            Againe,Obiect. 3. you plead they are your inheritances, left
you by your Fathers, and if they haue beene taken from
the Church, you tooke them not. But learne what that
meaneth:
            
               Ezek. 18. 14—19. If a Father that hath oppreſſed the poore and needie,Resp.
and ſpoiled by violence, &c. beget a ſonne that ſeeth all his
fathers ſinnes which he hath done, and conſidereth, and doth
not the like, &c. he ſhall not die for the iniquitie of his father,

he ſhall ſurely liue, &c. And then that Obiection is
anſwered.
            
            Yet Law is on your ſide,Obiect. 4. and you doe no more than
that allowes.
            Though the Lawes of men are for you,Reſp. In iure fori, non in iure coeli. Aug. de vit. & morib. Cler. yet the Lawes
of God, by which you muſt one day ſtand or fall, are
plaine againſt you: And albeit it holds in the courts of
men, yet it will neuer hold in the Court of Heauen.
Beſides, the Ciuill Lawes are not on your ſide; for they
hold, that the things of God (ſuch as are our tithes and
reuenues of the Church) ought not to belong to Lay
perſons. But ſay they were; yet what are you the better
that the lawes of men doe patronize you in it, when the
Law of God condemnes you for it? Oh that all ſuch as
are any way guiltie of this ſinne, would in time bethinke
them, and call to minde the horrible examples of
Gods iudgements in former ages for it.Dan. 32. 7. 
               Belſhazzar
king of Babylon, abuſing the holy veſſels of the Temple
to prophane vſes, was firſt wounded inwardly with
terror of conſcience, and afterwards was cruelly murdered.
In both the bookes of the Maccabees, we reade of
Alcymus
               1 Mac. 9. 54, 55, 56., Heliodorus
               2 Mac. 3. 24, 25., Lyſimachus
               & 4. 39, 41, 42., Antiochus
               & 5. 15, 16. cum 95.-11.,
Menelaus
               & 13. 4.-8., and Nicanor
               & 15. 30.-34., all notorious Church-robbers,
and all came to fearefull ends. The example likewiſe
of Ananias and Saphira
               Acts 5. 2. is not to be forgotten,
who for withholding part of that money which was
conſecrated to God by their own gift, were by the ſeueritie
of Gods iuſtice ſtrooke dead, as inuaders of Gods
right: thus according to Solomons prouerb,Prou. 20. 25. 
               It is a ſnare
to a man that deuoureth holy things: and as a ſnare, firſt,
it catcheth ſuddenly: ſecondly, it holdeth ſurely: and
thirdly, it deſtroieth certainly. Let our Improprietaries
apply it, and learne to be wiſe by others harmes. Let
them beware how they Iewiſhly with the ſpoiles of
Chriſt purchaſe fields of bloud for themſelues and
theirs: For queſtionleſſe the Churches goods haue proued
more vnfortunate to the Gentrie of this land than

euer did the gold of the Temple of Tholoſſa to the followers
of Scipio, of which whoeuer caried any part away,
neuer proſpered after. This hath beene as that
cole which hung at the peece of meat which the Eagle
ſtole from the Altar, wherewith ſhe fired her neſt, and
burnt vp her ſelfe and young ones. Had it not beene
for this, it may be thought many a faire Family had at
this day ſtood, which is now ruinated. God is as iuſt as
euer, and deteſteth this ſinne as much as euer he did: and
therefore, let ſuch as will not leaue it and repent of it,
aſſure themſelues, that they ſhall ſpeed as others haue
done before them. To you then that haue any Impropriations
in your hands, I ſay as Daniel did in the like caſe
to Nebuchadnezzar,
               Dan. 3. 
               Let my counſell be acceptable to
you, breake off this your ſinne by righteouſneſſe: Make reſtitution
of that which moſt vniuſtly you haue ſo long
deteined, that ſo there may be a healing of your error.
Thou haſt taken away the Churches dowrie, and ſpoiled
her of it; now it were but reaſon, if thou ſhouldeſt
make her a iointer to recompence the wrong offered,
and the loſſe ſhe hath ſuſtained.Moneo vt reddatis Deo ſua, vt Deus reſtituat vobis veſtra. Chryſ. in Matt. 3. But howeuer reſtore to
God his owne, that God may reſtore to you your owne.
For with what face canſt thou expect an inheritance
from Chriſt in heauen, who deteineſt away from Chriſt
his inheritance vpon earth? what you get by ſuch a detiny
ſhall be your fatall deſtinie; you ſhall leaue the
gold behinde you,Multi in hac vita manducant quod poſtea apud inferos digerunt. Aug. but carry the guilt with you to euerlaſting
fire. And that which you deuoure here, you are
like to diſgeſt in hell hereafter, except by Reſtitution you
vomit it vp before. We doe not craue that you would
with Zacheus reſtore foure-fold (though it is apparant,
that the tenths were got in old time from vs by moſt
falſe and forged cauillations) we only craue our owne,Mr. Craſh epiſt. Dedic. to Perk. treat. of the dutie and dig. of Min.
we would aske no more, nor willingly take leſſe: for our
whole dutie is ſtill required, then why ſhould not our
whole due be paid? And yet that the world may learne
of vs contentedneſſe, as well by our practiſe as our doctrine,

we would for the preſent take in good part, and
reſt contented with a part of our owne: And ſome competent
portions out of the Impropriations (proportioned
to the quantitie of the charge impoſed, and the gifts
and paines required) would for a time be a reaſonable
ſatisfaction in our Miniſterie, vntill our ſtate found it
ſelfe, either better enabled or more ſtraitly tied in conſcience
to full reſtitution. And therefore let all ſuch as
haue Impropriations in their hands be hereby moued
to make ſome reſtitution, in whole or part, as their
eſtates may beare, as ſome already haue done to the diſburdening
of their conſciences, and good example of
others. But here I looke to haue that counſell giuen me
which one did once giue Luther, when he firſt began to
preach againſt the Popes vſurpation and tyrannie; You
had as good hold your peace: this wickedneſſe is ſo powerfull,
that you will neuer preuaile againſt it: Get you to
your ſtudie, and ſay, Lord haue mercy on vs, and procure
to your ſelfe no ill will. Well; if the worſt come, I can
but ſpeed as others haue done before me. I feare indeed
I doe but beat the aire; for his deuill is not eaſily caſt
forth. The ſonnes of Zeruiah are too hard for vs, vnleſſe
Chriſtian Magiſtrates, who areIſay 49. 23. 
               nurſing fathers to
the Church, doe by their power, with goodNeh. 13. 11, 12. 
               Nehemiah,
worke a reformation, and compell them to bring their
tithes againe into the houſe of God. It is the Kings euill,
no hand but his can heale it. But as the Prophet ſaid in
another caſe,Iſay 62. 1. 
               For Zions ſake I cannot hold my tongue,
and for Ieruſalems ſake, for the poore Churches ſake,
I cannot ceaſe: and I would to God that Gods Miniſters
were here Boanerges ſonnes of thunder, to thunder out
Gods iudgements againſt this horrible ſinne of ſacriledge:
And that all we who haue any thing to doe with
any of theſe perſons (how great ſoeuer) wouldIſay 58. 1. 
               cry aloud
againſt them, and not ſpare, that if it be poſſible
they might be rowſed and awakened out of this ſame
ſinne, which in many places cauſeth propheſying

to faile, and conſequentlyProu. 29. 18. the people periſh.
            Leaue we now the Church, and come we to the Common-wealth,
and there we ſhall meet with more of this
bloudy generation. Firſt, ſuch as my text here eſpecially
ſpeakes of, corrupt Iudges and Magiſtrates,Iſay 1. 23. 
               Who
iudge not the fatherleſſe, neither doth the widowes cauſe
come before them; (as Amos ſpeaketh) whoAmos 5. 7, 12. & 6. 12. 
               turne iudgement
into wormwood and gall, and the fruit of righteouſneſſe
into Hemlocke: who afflict the iuſt, take a bribe and
turne aſide the poore in the gate from their right. Theſe
the Prophet Zephaniah is not afraid to callZeph. 3. 3. 
               roaring Lions,
and rauening Wolues. And our Prophet Iſaiah being
Rom. 10. 20. 
               very bold, calleth them companions of theeues
               Iſay 1. 23.; and
why ſo? did they take purſes by the highwaies? No, but
they tooke bribes in their chambers: Euery one loued
gifts, and followed after rewards, &c. And (as the Prophet
Hoſea ſpeaketh) they loued to ſay with ſhame,
Hoſ. 4. 18. 
               Giue yee. Now I pray you, what difference is there
betweene Giue yee, and Deliuer yee, except it be this;
Giue yee goeth often in chaines of gold, whilſt Deliuer ye
lieth in fetters of iron: before God there is no difference
betweene the euery and briberie. I doubt not but this
kingdome will afford as worthie Iudges and Magiſtrates
as any Land or people in the world: And as Iuſtinian
ſaid, ſo with a ſafe conſcience many of our Rulers
may, They can lift vp their hands cleane to God; to
the King; and to the Law: and make proteſtation with
iuſt and vncorrupt Samuel
               1 Sam. 12. 3., They haue defrauded none,
they haue oppreſſed none. Yet I wiſh (and therein (I hope)
doe no man harme) that all could ſay ſo. Then would
not Iuſtice be made a hackney to be backed for money,
neither could a golden ſpurre doe any thing to bring
her to the deſired iournies end of iniury and wrong.
            But oh the wickedneſſe of theſe times! wherein with
Solomon we may obſerueEccleſ. 7. 15. 
               many a iuſt man to periſh in his
righteouſneſſe, and the wicked to proſper in their wickedneſſe. Is a man well monied? then (ſaith the Prouerbe)

he is too heauie to be caſt:Pecuntoſus damnari non poteſt. for what is wanting in
the goodneſſe of his cauſe, the greatneſſe of the Fees
will make vp:Cui vis eſt ius non metuit, ius obruitur vt. So that the rich may ſay vnto the poore,
as Aeſops Wolfe vnto the Sheepe, when they were in
contention together; Thou haſt a better cauſe than I, but
I haue ſtronger teeth than thou. Gaine and rewards be
the Remora to the ſhip of Iuſtice: Shee cannot now be
called the Speed, but the Delay. A Motion this Terme,
an Order next; and inſtantly all is croſſed. A writ of
Error puts all out of courſe. Iethro was not pleaſed (as
it ſeemes) to ſee cauſes hang fromExod. 18. 14. morning to euening:
had he liued in theſe daies, how would it haue
grudged him to ſee them hang from Terme to Terme,
from yeare to yeare? And the beſt cauſes to be vſed as
fore legges are by vnconſcionable Chirurgions, held
long in hand, not for the difficultie of the cure, but for
the gaine thereof. The poore Client is faine to trudge
vp this Terme, and next; emptying his purſe with paying
Fees to one and to another, and ſtill the web of his
ſuit is drawne out of a greater length, till he want
weft to proſecute it; and ſo after all his paines and coſt, is
in the end enforced to let it fall:Maior eſt expenſarum ſumptus quàm fententiae ſructus. Aelian. lib. 9. cap. 18. Or ſay he haue the day,
yet he makes no ſauing match, by reaſon the charges of
his ſuit are greater than the coſts that ſhall be awarded.
Oh the vncertaine euents of ſuits, beſides the trouble!
I hope to ſee an end this Terme of my ſuit, ſaith the
poore bloud-drawne wretch; when alas, he ſees no end
the next Terme, nor next after that; yea oftentimes,
the next and next yeare is paſt firſt: His ſuit is a ſuit of
Durance, almoſt an euerlaſting ſuit. And thus while
the poore oppreſſed runnes to them, who ſhould be as
aIſay 32. 2. 
               ſhelter from the winde, and a couert from the tempeſt:
it oftentimes fals out, that (with the ſilly ſheepe running
in a ſtorme to the hedge or thicket) they are ſo enſnared
amongſt the thornes and briers, as that they can
hardly winde and wreſt themſelues out without loſſe of
wooll and coat: what with delaies, demurres, and a

thouſand trickes which money will finde out; they
loſe their fleece, and carry away their fleſh whole vpon
their backes with much adoe. If this weather hold, many
men will goe nigh to be of the minde that Themiſtocles
was ſometimes of, who profeſſed that if two waies
were ſhewed him, one to hell, and the other to the Bar;
he would chooſe that which went to hell, and forſake
the other. See then all you that are in place of Iuſtice,
that you keepe your ſelues vntainted of this ſin.Iſay 33. 15. 
               Walke
righteouſly, ſpeake vprightly, deſpiſe the gaine of oppreſſion,
ſhake your hands from holding of bribes, ſtop your eares
from hearing of bloud, and ſhut your eies from ſeeing euill.
            
            2. Mercileſſe and cruell Landlords: who partly by
racking and improuing of old rents, and that without
the old minds of our forefathers (I meane their charitie)
(for ſo it is lawfull to improue them) partly by encloſing
of Greenes, Commons, Woods, (or other of the
like) which appertaine of right vnto their tenants:
partly by burdening them with cariages, and ſuch like
ſeruices more than was couenanted or agreed vpon:
and partly by making their leaſes void, when it pleaſeth
them;Pactū non pactū eſt, non pactum pactum eſt quod illis lubet. Plaut. ſo that a Couenant to day, ſhall be none to
morrow; and that which is none now, ſhall be one anon;
they oppreſſe their tenants, grinde their faces, and
ſucke their blouds. The poore Farmer he is ſaine to endure
the heat and burden of the day: he riſeth early, goeth
late to bed, eateth the bread of carefulneſſe, and
ſitteth with many a hungrie meale, not being able to
ſpare a morſell of bread to others, nay hardly able to
giue food vnto his family; and all that he does or can
doe, is but as a prey to his greedie Landlord. Good words,
it may be, praiers, they ſhall ſometimes haue returned, as
God helpe you; bleſſe you; and giue you good of it, &c. but
if their praiers were worth a penny they would keepe
them to themſelues; their tenants ſhould not be troubled
with them.
            And herein they are like Darius, who praied for Daniel
               
               Dan. 6. 16. that God would deliuer him, when he himſelfe
ſends him to the Lions denne. Theſe are Oppreſſors,
and ſuch ones as God hath ſworneAmos 4. 2. to take away with
hookes, and their poſteritie with fiſh-hookes.
            3. Ingroſſers; whoſe practiſe is to compaſſe ſea and
land to get a commoditie into their hands; which hauing
once obtained, they ſet a price vpon it as large as
their owne conſciences: Or elſe hoard it vp only to
make a dearth without a ſcarcitie. I deny not but it is
lawfull to buy the ouerplus of any commoditie, and
when mens turnes are ſerued in times of plentie, to take
the reſidue (as Ioſeph did) that in time of dearth he may
haue to helpe the Common-wealth, with ſome good
and moderate gaine to himſelfe alſo: But theſe in ſtead of
laying vp to preuent a dearth, doe hoard vp to procure
one; which time is the Ingroſſers day, wherein he doth
enrich himſelfe with the ſpoile of the poore. Againſt
theſe very perſons Amos thus propheſieth;Amos 8. 4, 5, 6. 
               Heare this
oh you that ſwallow vp the poore, that you may make the
needie of the land to faile; ſaying, when will the new
moone be gone that we may ſell corne? and the Sabbath,
that we may ſet forth wheat, and make the Epha ſmall,
and the ſhekell great, and falſifie the waights by deceit?
and buy the poore for ſiluer, and the needie for ſhooes; yea
and ſell the refuſe of the wheat? They had long (as
it may ſeeme) kept vp the come for this purpoſe, that
it might grow deare; and now they had a time to ſerue
their turne in, and they muſt ſet it to ſale in all haſte, ſo
that they thought the new moone and the Sabbath
daies appointed for Gods owne ſeruice, too long vntill
they were a ſelling: And now they intend to prey vpon
the poore, for they will ſell little for much; leſſening
the meaſure, and enhancing the price. The poore ſhall
buy the refuſe deare, which is little worth, and ſell
themſelues cheape, euen in a manner for old ſhooes to
pay for it. Here God ſent corne, and the deuill ſent garners:
Nay, in ſome ſort they were worſe than the very

Deuill himſelfe: for he ſeemed to haue ſome charitie in
him, when he would haue had ChriſtMatth 4. to turne ſtones
into bread, and ſo make a plentie in time of ſcarcitie: but
theſe endeuoured, what in them lay, to make a ſcarcitie
in the midſt of plentie, turning bread into ſtones, a
tricke beyond the Deuill. Are not theſe Oppreſſors?
            4. 
                  Ʋſurers, who may well be compared to the Timber-worme,
which to touch is as ſoft as ſilke, but hath
teeth ſo hard, as that it eats the Oake: Or like the Beuer,
               Iul. Solin. cap. 23. which biteth ſo ſore, as that hee neuer looſeth his
teeth vntill hee haue broken the bones. It may be truly
ſaid of theſe,Iſay 59. 7. 
               Deſolation and deſtruction is in their path:
whereſoeuer they ſet foot, they make hauocke of all.
The Prophet Ezekiel doth hedge in this ſinne betweene
Bribery and Extortion:Ezek 22. 12. 
               In thee haue they taken
giftes to ſhed bloud. Thou haſt taken vſury and increaſe,
and thou haſt greedily gained of thy neighbours by Extortion,
and haſt forgotten me, ſaith the Lord: therefore I
haue ſmitten my hands at thy diſhoneſt gaine, And in another
place we ſhall finde, that, It and Oppreſſion is made
both one;Exod. 22. 25. 
               If thou lend money to my people with thee,
thou ſhalt not be an Vſurer thou ſhalt not oppreſſe him.
Thus by Gods owne teſtimonie theſe are Oppreſſors. Not
vnaptly may we compare the Vſurer to the nether Milſtone,
which is ſlow and ſtirres not; he ſits at home and
ſpends his time in a deuilliſh Arithmeticke, in Numeration
of houres, daies, and moneyes, in Subſtraction from
other mens eſtates, and Multiplication of his owne,
vntill hee haue made Diuiſion betweene his ſoule and
heauen, and diuided the earth to himſelfe, and himſelfe
to hell. His Broker we may compare to the vpper Milſtone,
(without which the nether Milſtone may ſeeme
vnprofitable) that is quicke and ſtirring, and runnes
round: The Poore (like corne) who betweene both
theſe is grinded vnto powder. Surely it is for our ſins
that God ſuffers Vſurers amongſt vs: It may be he ſuffers
theſe a while, as he did the Canaanites in Iſrael, leſt

the wilde beaſts ſhould breake in vpon them; leſt pride
and a full eſtate ſhould ſpill mens ſoules: yet wee may
ſafely ſay of theſe, as Ioſua did of thoſe, they are prickes
in our ſides, and thornes in our eyes. Now the mercie of
God rid vs of them. Let them bring what Excuſes, Apologies,
Mitigations, Euaſions, or Diſtinctions they poſſibly
can inuent: let them reply, Vſury is no ſinne, many
learned men are of this opinion: yet what are they the
better, if God himſelfe be not of the ſame minde thoſe
learned men are of? And let them tell me if their conſciences
can be ſo ſatisfied. Would not the greateſt Vſurer
willingly giue an hundred pound bag to be ſecured
in this point? It is not ſafe wading farre in a queſtionable
water. Oh yet that there were hope with any ſayings
to moue, then I would ſpend ſome time, and take ſome
paines in perſwading theſe men, who deale altogether
in letting out their money to men; their time to Mimmon;
their body to pining; their minde to repining;
their ſoule to Satan: that they would fall to reſtoring,
becauſe the ſinne is retained vntill the gaines of Vſury
be returned.Non remittitur peccatum, niſi reſtituatur abtatum, Aug. Which ſaying though it ſeeme hard,
yet it is moſt true. And what though they ſhould
in ſo doing reſtore all they haue? I would tell them
as the Prophet did Amaſiah,
               2 Chron. 25. 9. 
               The Lord is able to
giue thee more than this. A manſion in Gods kingdome
is worth all thy caſh. But I ſpeake to the belly that hath
no eares. Shew me the Vſurer (except Zacheus) that
euer repented truly: for as Humilitie is the repentance
of Pride; ſo is Reſtitution, of this ſinne. I doubt not but
there are ſome, but they will be as daintie diſhes in heauen,
as Veniſon is on a Plowmans table. Wherefore I
will forbeare any further dealing with theſe, and rather
ſpeake in generall to all Oppreſſors of what kinde ſoeuer;
(and ſo haſten to an end) Let all ſuch know as vſe
any kinde of iniuſtice, vi or dolo, by force or fraud, againſt
the poore and needie, who are no way able to
withſtand them, that they flay their skins off, they

grinde their faces; yea eat their very fleſh, as ſometimes that
poore leane widow told Baldwin an Archbiſhop of Canterbury
(when ſhe heard him boaſting that he had neuer
eat fleſh in all his daies) that he had eat vp hers in taking
away her Cow,Acts and Mon. pag. 233. whereby ſhee liued. And let them call
to minde the fearefull woes that are thundered out againſt
them for this ſinne. There is aIſay 3. 14, 15. 
               Woe from Iſaiah:
aIer. 22. 13. 
               Woe from Ieremiah: aMicah. 2. 1, 2. 
               Woe from Micah: aHab. 2. 12. 
               Woe
from Habbakkuk. Woe and alas then, that ſuch can be
ſecure. Oh that ſuch would now at length call themſelues
to account for their oppreſſions, that ſome remorſe
might be wrought in their hearts, if it were poſſible!
Such as theſe in former times haue beene executed,

                  Stow in his Summary. as theeues are now amongſt vs. Catillus, a Britiſh
King, hung vp all oppreſſors of the poore: And after
him King Edward (commonly called good King Edward)
baniſhed ſuch the Land:Glanuil. lib. 7. de leg. & conſu. Angl. cap. 37. Extra de Vſur. cap. Quia in om. And by the ancient
Lawes of England the goods of oppreſſors, dying without
reſtitution, were forfeit to the King, and all his lands
vnto the Lord of the Towne. And it is apparant by
the Canon-law, that heretofore they haue beene denied
Chriſtian burial. Were the ſame lawes ſtill in force,
vndoubtedly it would be a good reſtraint And yet
what is all this to expulſion out of Gods Kingdome?
Oh that theſe would bethinke them of that dreadfull
day of reckoning, and of that terrible ſentence which
ſhall be then denounced;Matth. 25. 41. 
               Depart you curſed into euerlaſting
fire, prepared for the Deuill and his angels. There
is the Reiection.
               Verſe 42. For, I was an hungrie, and you gaue mee
no meat: I was thirſtie, and you gaue me no d
                     •
                  inke: I was
a ſtranger, and yee tooke me not in: naked, and yee clothed
me not: ſicke and in priſon, and yee did not releeue mee.
There is a Reaſon of their Reiection. Oh then how fearefull
will their caſe be, againſt whom the Iudge may thus
proceed in ſentence? Depart from mee you curſed into
euerlaſting fire, prepared for the Deuill and his angels: for
I had meat, and by force you tooke it from mee: I had

drinke, and you ſpoiled mee of it: I had a houſe, and you
thruſt mee out of doores: I had clothes, and you pulled
them from my backe: I was in health, and you made mee
ſicke: I was at libertie, and you impriſoned me. For if by
that ſentence they be damned, who haue not done the
workes of mercie; much more ſhall they be damned, who
haue acted the workes of crueltie. If by that ſentence
they be damned, who haue not ſuccoured nor releeued
the poore; much more ſhall they be damned, who haue
oppreſſed and cruſhed the poore. To winde vp all in a
word (and ſo to turne the vſe from Reprehenſion to Exhortation)
               1 Theſſ. 4. 6. 
               Let no man from hence forth oppreſſe nor defraud
his brother; for the Lord is the auenger of all ſuch
things. Let vs all ſo carry our ſelues, as that with bleſſed
Paul we may glory as he did:2 Cor. 7. 2. 
               We haue wronged no
man; wee haue conſumed no man; wee haue defrauded no
man. And ſo I leaue this (which eſpecially reſpects the
Agent) and come to what remaines, which eſpecially reſpects
the Patient.
            
            
               Behold a cry] i. of the poore and needy;Text. of the fatherleſſe
and widow, and ſuch as were oppreſſed.
Here we ſee,
            The cryes of the oppreſſed aſcend vp into the Almighties
eares.
                  Doctr. God heares the cries of the oppreſſed. He heares their groanes, and beholds their
grieuances.
            
               The Lord told Moſes as much when he called him to
be the deliuerer of his people Iſrael;
               Exod. 3. 7. I haue ſurely
ſeene the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and
haue heard their cry by reaſon of their taske-maſters, for I
know their ſorrowes.Verſe 9. and Cap. 2. 23, 24 Now therefore behold, the cry of the
children of Iſrael is come vnto me: and I haue alſo ſeene
the oppreſſion wherewith the Egyptians oppreſſe them. Afterwards
when God forbad his people to oppreſſe the
ſtranger, fatherleſſe, and widow, he addeth this as a reaſon,
               Exod. 22. 23. I will ſurely heare their cry. Iob auoucheth as much
as I haue deliuered,
               Iob 34. 28. They cauſe the cry of the poore to
come vnto him, and he heareth the cry of the afflicted. So
               
doth the Pſalmiſt,Pſal. 34. 17. The righteous cry, when he is thus
oppreſſed, and God heareth him. S. Iames likewiſe
confirmeth it;
               Iam. 5. 4. Behold the hire of the labourers which
haue reaped downe your fields, which is of you kept backe
by fraud, crieth: and the cries of them which haue reaped
are entred into the cares of the Lord of Sabbath.
            
               And how can it be otherwiſe?
               Reaſ. 1. 
               For marke our bleſſed
Sauiours owne argument,
               Luke 18. 4. If importunate clamour preuaile
with the vniust Iudge, who neither regardeth man
nor feareth God: ſhall not God much more auenge his
owne elect ones that cry day and night vnto him, for the
wrong that is done vnto them, through the oppreſſion of
the mighty: I tell you (ſaith our Sauiour) though he forbeare
long, yet at length he will doe it.
            
               Dauid furniſheth vs with another Reaſon:Reaſ. 2.
               Pſal. 68. 5. 
               A father
of the fatherleſſe, and a Iudge of the widow is God in
his holy habitation. Theſe are his Clients, he hath taken
them into his protection; he is become their Iudge;
andGen. 18. 25. 
               ſhall not the Iudge of all the world doe right?
            
            This neerely concernes both oppreſſors,
               Vſe 1. and the oppreſſed.
As for oppreſſors, they had need be well aduiſed
what they doe: for if they continue in their cruelty,
the poore muſt needs ſigh and cry, and God will heare
them; which if he doe, he will cauſe their oppreſſors to
heare of him:Pſal. 10. 17. 
               He will iudge the fatherleſſe, and the oppreſſed,
that the man of earth may no more oppreſſe. Or
ſuppoſe that they themſelues cry not, butLament. 3. 27, 28, 29. 
               ſit downe by it,
and thruſt their mouthes in the dust,
               Pſal. 39. 9. 
               ſwallowing their
griefe with ſilence, yea praying for them,Pſal. 109. 4. Acts 7. 60. Luke 23. 34. who perſecute
and oppreſſe them, rather than putting vp any bill
of complaint to God againſt them; yet the ſinne it ſelfe
will cry, though they be ſilent.

                  Clamitat in coelum vox ſanguinis & Sodomorum,
                  Vox oppreſſorum, merces retent a laborum.
               
Euery ſinne indeed hath its voice to diſcouer it ſelfe to
God (ſaith oneOmnis namque iniquitas apud ſecreta Dei iudicia habet voces ſuas. Greg. Mor. 5. cap. 8.:) and not a voice only, but feet alſo,
yea and wings too, to make way and ſpeed into heauen

for vengeance: but yet there are foure ſinnes, and but
foure (as is obſeruedAquin. in Iac. 5. 4.) mentioned in Scripture, that are
ſaid to cry. The firſt is Homicide, murther or manſlaughter,
whereof Almighty God thus ſpeaketh vnto
Cain,
               Gen. 4. 10. 
               The voice of thy brothers bloud crieth vnto mee
from off the earth. The ſecond is Sodomie, a ſinne againſt
nature, whereof the Lord ſpeaketh thus vnto Abraham,
               Gen. 18. 20. 
               Becauſe the cry of Sodome and Gomorrha is great,
and becauſe their ſinne is exceeding grieuous, I will goe
downe now and ſee whether they haue done altogether according
to the cry which is come vnto me. The third is this
of Oppreſſion, as the places before quoted ſhew; as alſo
that of Habakkuk
               Hab. 2. 11, 12. where the very timber and ſtone
from the building that is founded vpon falſhood and
oppreſſion, is ſaid to cry for vengeance from heauen.
The fourth is, The keeping backe of the labourers hire,
as that place euen now brought out of S. Iames
               Iam. 5. 4. for the
proofe of our point, witneſſeth. Theſe ſinnes are not
only vocall, but importunate, they will haue no nay, but
hale downe iudgements vpon the heads of the miſerable
authors, and wretched actors of them. So then it is
impoſſible for oppreſſors to eſcape vnpuniſhed: and
howeuer vengeance may ſeeme limpingly to purſue
them, yet it will ouertake them in the end without repentance
hinder.
            As for the poore oppreſſed,Vſe 2. this may ſerue for their
comfort; and it may teach them patience. He that is
ouerſwayed with might againſt equitie & right in ſome
one Court, yet is not out of heart nor hope ſo long as he
may appeale to ſome other that is higher; eſpecially if
he be perſwaded of the integritie and vprightneſſe of
that Iudge to whom he makes Appeale. Art thou then
wronged and iniured by the mighty? yet be not diſcouraged,
for though thou canſt haue no helpe at mans
hand, yet there is a higher to whom thou maiſt appeale,
euen God in his holy habitation, who beholds thy troubles,
heares thy ſighes, bottles vp thy teares, is acquainted

with all thy griefes, and will right thy wrongs:Pſal. 12. 5. 
               For
the oppreſſion of the poore, for the ſighing of the needy,
now will I ariſe, ſaith the Lord, I will ſet him at libertie
from him that puffeth at him. Heare this you fatherleſſe
and widowes, you poore and needy ones: and albeit
theſe mighty Nimrods ride ouer your heads,
               Pſal. 66. 12. and plow
vpon your backs, making long furrowes there, and thus
wound your fleſh, yet let them not wound your patience;
butIſai. 35. 3. 
               let your weake hands be ſtrengthned, and
your feeble knees confirmed: for behold your God will
come with vengeance, your God will come with recompence.
Commit therefore your cauſe to him who iudgeth righteouſly;
and ſee you aſſwage your griefe and ſorrow
when you are thus oppreſſed. He will come, he will
come aſſuredly in due time; he will come and deliuer
you from out the pawes of the bloud-thirſtie and cruell
man. Though Paſſion therefore poſſeſſe your bodies,
yet letLuke 21. 
               Patience poſſeſſe your ſoules.
            
            And now for the Ecce, which is here twice vſed,
Behold oppreſſion, Behold a cry: once vſing it is not
enough;Bernard. Vega. 
               Behold, and behold againe. One cals this a ſtarrie
note. Another compares it to a hand in the margent of
a booke pointing to ſome thing of great ſucceeding
conſequence.Pontan. Another compares it to the ſounding of
a trumpet before ſome proclamation. Another to the
ringing of a bell before the Sermon of ſome famous
Preacher. And indeed as often as it is vſed (for it is vſed
ſix hundred times in Scripture) it is neuer vſed but in
matters of great moment, worthy of our deepeſt and
moſt ſerious obſeruation, being ſtill put for a word of
wonder and note of admiration. So here; Behold the
wonderfull and vnſpeakable mercy and goodneſſe of the
Lord towards this his Vineyard: how great things he
had done for it, and what meanes he vſed for the proſperitie
and welfare of it; yea in euery one of the former
particulars behold it. Againe, behold the horrible
ingratitude of this his Vineyard: Ingratitude in its full

proportion, with all the dimenſions of its vgly ſtigmaticke
forme, in it behold. Yea we may moue attention
from this word to all that hath beene ſaid: For there
is nothing in this Song, but deſerues to haue this Character
Behold to be ſtamped on it. Conſider well of all
this Scripture; examine euery parcell; let not one iod
or tittle paſſe away vnregarded. God hath commended,
yea recommended what is here taught vnto vs with this
remarkable note, Behold, yea behold againe. See therefore
that you haue beene here preſent with your minds,
as well as with your bodies. And all you that are here
preſent, behold from the higheſt to the loweſt, for it
deſerues deepe pondering vpon.Matth. 13. 9. 
               Let him that hath
eares to heare, heare: And& 24. 15. 
               let him that readeth conſider.
Euen ſo2 Tim. 2. 7. 
               conſider we what hath beene
ſaid, and the Lord giue vs vnderſtanding
in all things.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            AN ALPHABETICALL
Table, for the readier finding out the
chiefe and moſt materiall things contained
in this BOOKE.
            
               A
               
                  GOd cannot faile of his end in
any of his Actions. Pag. 139
               
                  Affections of people muſt be
wrought vpon by Gods
Miniſters. 58
               
                  Afflictions are Gods Winepreſſe. 132
               Not to bee bettered by our Afflictions is
dangerous. 199
               Gods holy hand is in all Afflictions. 223
               Both the time, meaſure, and end of our
Afflictions are ordered by God. 224
               Why God doth vſe wicked inſtruments in
the Afflicting of his people. 225
               How we may looke vpon ſecond cauſes in
our Afflictions. 229
               God is to be ſought vnto when wee are
Afflicted. 230
               They doe not diſable vs from being Gods
children. 236
               
                  Amoz the father of Iſaiah, and Amos in the
number of the ſmall Prophets, not both
one. 16
               The Angels watch for the godly mans
ſafety. 111
               
                  Application, is the life of Doctrine. 278
               
                  Arrogancy, a ſinne to be auoided. 101
               
                  Attendants of the godly honourable. 121
               
                  Authority muſt bee ſhewed for what Gods
Miniſters doe deliuer. 64
            
            
               B
               
                  BArren Profeſſors are good for nothing.
79
               The world is full of ſuch. 159
               Man degraded beneath the Beaſts. 85
               Names of Beaſts giuen to the wicked. 254
               
                  Behold, how often vſed in the Scriptures.
318
               It is euer vſed in matters of importance.
ibid.
               
               The abuſe of Gods Bleſſings cauſeth the
Lord to depriue vs of them. 238
               Pray for a ſanctified vſe of them. 166
               
                  Bribery is no better than theeuery. 308
               
                  Buſie-medling dangerous. 101
            
            
               C
               
                  CHildren are not ſaued by the faith of
their parents. 289
               
                  
They ſhould bee thankfull for religious
Parents. 295
               Gods owne Children chaſtiſed. 231
               The Church weake in it ſelfe. 79, 112
               She is a Garden encloſed. 73
               It ſtands in need of daily looking to. ibid.
               
               She is expoſed to many dangers. 74
               She is deare vnto the Lord. 75, 93
               She is but one. 76, 99
               The more the Church is afflicted, the more
ſhe flouriſheth. 78
               She is outwardly blacke, but inwardly glorious.
ibid.
               
               It is her priuiledge, that God is her keeper.
89
               Why the Deuill ſeekes to perſecute her. 93
               She may be corrupted with Idolatry. 95
               
                  Church in England not to be forſaken for
ſome wants. 97
               Which the Papiſts make to bee the Catholike
Church. 99
               Her enemies are but weake. 245
               The miſeries of the Church ſhould moue
vs to pitty her. 265
               
                  Chriſt only deſerues our loue. 61
               Members of the Church receiue the ſap of
grace from him. 76
               All that are in the Church are not truly incorporated
into Chriſt. 77
               
                  Compariſons may lawfully be vſed. 82
               
                  Company of the godly to be frequented. 55
               Mans Conſcience ſhall iuſtifie Gods proceedings.
182
               The Conſcience ſhal one day be awakned. 183
               The Cheeks of it not to be neglected. 183, 198
               
                  Contention and diſcord, the beginnings of
warre. 264
               
                  Conuerſation of Chriſtians ſhould bee ſuch
as that our aduerſaries may iuſtifie it.
185
               The Creature is become mans Schoolemaſter.
86
               A double vſe to be made of them. 88
               They are a defence for the godly. 111
               They are Gods hoaſts. 286
               All of them are againſt the wicked. 287
               The godly Conquer when they ſeeme conquered.
253
               God remembreth mercy in his Corrections.
257
            
            
               D
               
                  DEath of the godly, a forerunner of
Iudgement. 213
               Neceſſity of Gods Decree, no excuſe for
wickedneſſe. 196
               
                  Diſcipline not wanting in our Church. 97
               It is not of the eſſence of the Church. 133
               
                  Dignity of the godly very great. 121
               The Deuill hath not power ouer any creature
but by Gods permiſſion. 246
               How he is the God of this world. 282
               Authors of Diuiſion in the Church, ſinne
fearefully. 102
               We muſt receiue nothing for Doctrine but
what is grounded on Scripture. 165
               
                  Dowry, great, giuen by Chriſt to his
Spouſe. 62
               
                  Diuerſity of gifts giuen by God for the
good of the Church. 16
            
            
               E
               
                  EArthly things afford heauenly inſtructions.
83
               Wee may make reſemblances betwixt
things Earthly and heauenly. 82
               What Errors make a Church to bee no
Church. 98
               
                  Enuy, a ſinne vnnaturall. 101
               The way how to become Excellent. 125
               The wicked Excuſeleſſe. 194
               
                  Excommunication a grieuous cenſure. 115
               Not to paſſe for ſmall trifles. 116
            
            
               F
               
                  FAith is the root of other graces. 147
               Perſonality of Faith needfull. 149
               
                  
                  Families to be purged of prophane perſons.
119
               
                  Famine, how grieuous at the deſtruction
of Ieruſalem. 259
               Our owne Faults propounded in anothers
perſon ſoone eſpied. 6
               Nothing to be attributed vnto Fortune. 227
               
                  Fruit, bring forth to God. 94
               By bearing Fruit we glorifie God. 104, 142
               Such as are Fruitfull, ſhall grow more fruitfull.
106
               Gods coſt on vs ſhould moue to Fruitfulneſſe.
136
               Euery creature is in it kind Fruitfull. 138
               
                  Fruitfulneſſe of a Chriſtian the ground-worke
of proſperity. 139
               If we be Fruitfull, there is no Law againſt
vs. 140
               It is high time we ſhould bring forth Fruit.
141
               We muſt firſt be tranſplanted and ſet into
Chriſt before we can beare Fruit. 143
               Such as are in Chriſt bring forth Fruit incontinent.
144
               The properties of good Fruit. 149
            
            
               G
               
                  GAriſon, ſtrong about the godly. 112
               The Godly are runne to in the day of
trouble. 80
               
                  God is the Protector of his people. 111
               He is the husbandman of his Church. 89
               
                  God is not the Author of ſinne. 194
               The Godly to bee eſteemed aboue others.
124
               The exceed all others in growth in grace.
77
               God hath little Glory in the world. 34
               Gods Glory ſhould be our aime in all our
actions. 32
               The Godly preferre it before their owne
ſaluation. 35
               By Glorifying God we bring glory to our
ſelues. 36
               Iudgements fearefull on ſuch as rob God
of his Glory. 36
               We ought to Grow in grace. 105
            
            
               H
               HOw God Hardens. 194
               The godly Hated, and why. 93
               
                  Hearers muſt be carefull what they receiue
for Goſpell. 65
               They may not raſhly cenſure their Teachers
for ſome diſabilities. 271
               They muſt pray for them. 272
               
                  Hearers muſt ſuffer the word of application
as well as of doctrine. 280
               They may not finde fault with their teachers
for their plainneſſe. 83
               
                  Heauens are diligent, learned, and Catholike
Paſtors. 34
               
                  Humane teſtimonies may lawfully be alledged
in Sermons. 14
               God Husbands his people. 89
               
                  Husbandry a commendable vocation. ibid.
               
               Submit our ſelues to Gods Husbandry. 91
               How to know whether God hath Husbanded
the heart. 90
               
                  Hypocriſie in the end ſhal be diſcouered. 133
               
                  Humility and tenderneſſe of heart to bee
laboured for. 145
            
            
               I
               
                  I Dolaters, not to be familiar withall. 118
               
                  Ignorance, no good plea. 86
               
                  Impropriations held by an improper title,
where ſome obiections anſwered. 304
               
                  Ingroſſers are oppreſſors. 311
               
                  Irreligious perſons enemies to King and
State. 118
               
                  Iſaiah a noble Prophet, and eloquent, together
with his death. 2
               He fainted not in his function. 3
               He was of Chriſts kindred. 9
               
                  Iudgements of God diuers waies foretold.
212
               
                  
The way to preuent Gods Iudgements, is
to Iudge our ſelues. 184
               
                  Iuſtice in our dealings, the touchſtone of
true Religion. 298
            
            
               K
               
                  KIndred of the godly, noble. 120
               
                  Kingdome weakned by ſinne. 242
               
                  Knowledge of God, a meanes to loue God.
53
               Sinnes againſt Knowledge, fearefull. 199
            
            
               L
               
                  LAndlords, many are oppreſſors. 310
               
                  Law-ſuits are durable. 309
               No Law againſt the godly. 140
               
                  Leaues of profeſſion, not enough. 146
               
                  Loue God before all. 53
               Chriſt only deſerues our Loue. 61
               How our Loue to God may be diſcouered. 42
               The way to bring our hearts to Loue the
Lord. 53
               We may not anſwer God in any thing except
in Loue. 54
               
                  Lewd Life of a Profeſſor diſhonours God.
37
               Sinfull Luſts ouerſhadow the ſoule. 146
               God is the abſolute Lord ouer all. 282
            
            
               M
               
                  MAgiſtrates, as the head, ſhould gouerne
wiſely. 100
               Priuate perſons may not meddle with the
office of Magiſtrates. 101
               
                  Magiſtrates ſhould back the Miniſters of
the Word with the vſe of the temporall
ſword. 116
               
                  Meekneſſe to be ſhewed in our dealing with
ſinners. 175
               Sinnes againſt the Meanes, fearefull. 197
               The more Meanes, the more obedience
doth God expect. 270
               To contemne the Meanes, grieues the
Lord. 200
               No Meanes can reclaime the wicked. 201
               
                  Meanes contemned, cauſeth the Lord to
depriue vs of them. 267
               
                  Meanes to bring our hearts to loue God.
53
               
                  Meanes to make vs fruitfull. 143
               It is fearefull to make our ſelues Merry
with others ſinnes. 202
               
                  Miniſters are builders, ſtewards. 279
               Wherein they muſt ſhew themſelues faithfull.
ibid.
               
               They muſt bee painfull in their function.
109
               They muſt wooe for Chriſt. 58
               They muſt deliuer nothing but by warrant
from God. 64
               They muſt attend their callings. 67
               They ſhould be well prouided for. 68
               They are the ſubordinate Husbandmen of
the Church. 89
               Idle Miniſters like Harlots. 108
               
                  Miniſters muſt ſeeke to God for ability to
diſcharge their function. 273
               They may not be diſcouraged ſo as to ſurceaſe
their paines. 11
               Their life is a ſpirituall piſcation. 11
               They are not to bee blamed though they
ſometimes alter their method. 13
               They ſerue the greateſt Maſter, and are
imploied in the greateſt worke, and ſhall
haue the greateſt wages. 18
               
                  Motiues to fruitfulneſſe. 138
               
                  Motiues to ſinging. 28
               
                  Motiues to ſeeke after Gods glory. 33
            
            
               N
               A Good Name how to get. 125
               Good Names profit not without
grace. 292
               They ſhould be a ſput to goodneſſe. ibid.
               
               Vnder a holy Name to lead an vnholy life,
is a kind of ſacriledge. 293
               
                  
                  Negatiue diuinitie not enough. 159
               No goodneſſe comes from Nature. 289
            
            
               O
               
                  OBedience is to be giuen to all Gods
precepts. 156
               Particulars wherein wee are to ſhew our
Obedience vnto God. 284
               
                  Omiſſion of good duties, damnable. 159
               
                  Oppreſſion, a ſinne againſt Race, Grace,
and Place. 301
               
                  Oppreſſors, how heretofore puniſhed.
314
               God heares the grones of the Oppreſſed.
315
            
            
               P
               
                  PArents, to giue thankes at meat, and
not their children for them. 151
               Good Parents may haue lewd children.
288
               Their duties towards their children. 290
               
                  Parents are not too raſhly to be cenſured
for the looſe cariage of children. 291
               Wicked Parents diſgrace their children.
294
               
                  Papiſts, their poſitions diſſolue all bands of
humane fellowſhip. 117
               Their practiſes agreeable to their poſitions.
118
               Their bloudy crueltie. 255
               A fearefull ſinne to abuſe Gods Patience.
220
               Gods Patience ſhould teach vs Patience. 222
               Our Peace ſo long enioyed a great bleſſing. 262
               Our workes are to be brought to Perfection.
154
               
                  Perſeuerance in good, needfull. 157
               
                  Preſence of God ſtill to be remembred. 54
               Gods Proceedings are all iuſt. 180
               No Priuiledge will beare vs out, if we take
libertie to ſinne. 189, 235
               
                  Priuiledges of thoſe who loue God. 56
               
                  Poeſie is a commendable Art. 23
               
                  Profeſſors outward cariage, if holy, doth
much good. 80
               The lewd life of a Profeſſor doth highly diſhonour
God. 37
               
                  Propheſies of the Prophets, how kept. 1
               Before God doth Puniſh he giueth warning.
211
               Why God ſuffers the wicked to runne on
without Puniſhment. 268
               Why God Puniſheth the wicked, for doing
that worke he emploies them in. 226
               
                  Purpoſes made (for the moſt part) like our
Holiday Eeues. 155
            
            
               Q
               GOd fell not to Queſtioning vntill man
fell to ſinning. 190
               Gods Queſtions tend for the moſt part to
conuince the conſcience. ibid.
               
            
            
               R
               THe godly come of noble Race. 120
               
                  Rage of the wicked limited. 250
               Diuerſitie of Religion dangerous in a kingdome.
114
               
                  Religion is the ſtrength of our Land. 130
               
                  Rhetoricke lawfull to be vſed. 296
               
                  Rich men rarities in heauen. 110
               
                  Riches, to be eſteemed in themſelues as
bleſſings. ibid.
               
               Why they are called the Mammon of vnrighteouſneſſe. ibid.
               
               
                  Rome, her firſt foundation laid in bloud.
255
               Whether it be a true Church. 98
               
                  Rules to be followed in vſing Parables and
Allegories. 83
            
            
               
               S
               
                  SAfetie of the godly very great. 250
               To liue in Safety, keep in with God. 249
               
                  Saints allotted by Papiſts to all countries,
except England. 287
               
                  Security of the wicked, blockiſh ſtupidity.
244
               
                  Separation not to be made from our
Church for ſome blemiſhes. 96
               
                  Senſes of God troubled with mans ſin. 170
               
                  Sinne corrupteth all things. 165
               Euery Sin belcheth forth an euill ſauor. 171
               It is a make-bate. 186
               It breakes our Couenant with God. 241
               It depriues vs of Gods protection. 240
               It weakens a Kingdome. 242
               It hath both voice, feet, and wings, to haſten
iudgement. 316
               Foure Sinnes in Scripture ſaid to be crying
ſinnes. 317
               
                  Sinnes of weakneſſe puniſhed, much more
ſhall ſinnes of wickedneſſe. 235
               Things ſinfull afford reſemblances to admoniſh
of duty. 85
               
                  Singing Pſalmes or other holy ſongs lawfull.
26
               Directions how to Sing. 29
               Few Sing but they take Gods name in
vaine by their ſinging. 31
               Three kinds of Songs in vſe amongſt the
Iewes. 8
               
                  Sodome what it was, and what it is. 169
               By our Speeches our loue we beare to God
will be diſcovered. 49
               Foure Suters that ſeeke to get the ſoule. 59
               No Suter ſhould ſpeed but Chriſt. 60
               
                  Superiours muſt remember they haue a Superiour.
285
            
            
               T
               DVties of the ſecond Table to be eſpecially
regarded. 298
               
                  Time is to be obſerued for doing good. 153
               Some good duties are at ſome times vnſeaſonable.
154
               
                  Tongue, the Interpreter of the mind. 49
               
                  Toleration of Idolaters, vnlawfull. 113
               The godly, though not preſerued from
Troubles, yet preſerued in them. 252
               Why Trades are called Crafts and Myſteries.
283
               
                  Truth of God with-hold not in vnrighteouſneſſe.
199
            
            
               V
               THe Church compared to a Vineyard in
diuets reſpects. 73
               
                  Verſe, comprehends much in a little. 24
               
                  Verſe better remembred than proſe. 5
               
                  Vnity ought to be in the Church. 100
               That Vnity be maintained, what muſt bee
auoided. 101
               The wicked are Vnthinkefull to God. 162
               
                  Vowes, not to be broken. 198
               
                  Vſurers like the Timber-worme, and like
the nether Milſtone, and their Broakers
like the vpper. 312
               They will be 
                     Ʋeniſon in Heauen. 313
            
            
               W
               
                  WArre, a heauy iudgement. 263
               
                  Waters of the Sanctuary needfull
to further our growth in grace. 145
               
                  Weakneſſe of grace ſhould not diſcourage, if
there be true grace. 161
               
                  Wealthineſſe and Wickedneſſe not euer conioind.
109
               
                  Wicked, they ſhall not euer remaine within
the Church. 105
               
                  Wicked preſerue the godly, as chaffe doth
the Corne. 111
               They charge the godly to be the troublers
of the State when it is themſelues. 129
               The turne Gods beſt bleſſings into poiſon.
165
               
                  
They cannot pleaſe God. 171
               The haue no peace with him. 187
               They ſhall not eſcape Gods wrath. 233
               They lie open to all dangers. 243
               
                  Witches are the Deuils drudges. 248
               The Deuill cannot doe harme to any, to
gratifie a Witch. 247
               
                  Workes teſtifie, though not iuſtifie. 51
               The godly abound in good Workes. 81
               
                  Words of a Chriſtian are of a healing nature.
80
               
                  Word preached is a Winepreſſe, and doth
diſcouer what is within the heart. 131
               
                  Word neuer preached in vaine. 167
               Our Workes ſhould be workes of the Spirit.
152
               The beſt Workes of the wicked are offenſiue
to God. 170
               
                  World not to bee loued if wee would loue
God. 55
               
                  Worſhip of God is the glory and ſtrength of
our Land. 128
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   